Helen 


Illustrated  hy 

Chris.HaminQnd 


BOUGHT  WITH  THE  INCOME 
FROM  THE 

SAGE  ENDOWMENT  FUND 

THE  GIFT  OF 

Henirg  m.  Sag* . 

1891 


AxIMfJi-X Cs>./.r^.L.q..a.3.. 


5474 


Cornell  University  Library 
PR  4644.H4  1896 


Helen, 


3   1924  013  454  552 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  tliis  book  is  in 
tine  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924013454552 


HELEN 


^^'q^   '        ''''*V^ 


She  turned  away,  to  raise  ike  hranches  of  some  shrub,  which  were  droopingfro^n 
the  weight  of  their Jlowers.—V .  49. 


HELEN 


MARIA   EDGEWORTH 


ILLUSTRATED    BY    CHRIS    HAMMOND 

WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  BY 
ANNE    THACKERAY    RITCHIE 


MACMILLAN    AND    CO,  Ltd. 

NEW  YORK  :    THE  MACMILLAN  CO. 
1896 


All  rights  reserzied 

CO 


INTRODUCTION 

Helen — a  story  which  Mrs.  Gaskell  used  to  say  she 
thought  one  of  the  best  of  all  English  novels — is  remark- 
able as  a  piece  of  admirable  writing.  There  is  an  extra- 
ordinary grip  of  life  in  its  pages,  a  brilliant  description  of 
some  of  the  best  society  in  England,  a  deliberate  vivacity ; 
if  one  may  so  speak,  age  had  not  dimmed  the  author's 
brightness  of  intellect  nor  divided  her  from  the  interests 
of  the  generations  which  had  followed  upon  her  own. 
When  Miss  Edgeworth  was  getting  to  be  quite  an  old 
woman,  long  after  her  father's  death,  after  ten  years 
of  silence  she  once  more  began  to  write  a  novel.  It  was 
partly  to  distract  herself  from  another  sorrow,  the  death 
of  her  brother  William,  a  charming  and  promising  young 
man  who  was  a  victim  to  consumption,  as  so  many  of  his 
family  had  been  before  him. 

William  died  in  1829.  '  I  would  have  written  to  prepare 
you  for  the  shock,'  says  Miss  Edgeworth  in  a  touching 
letter  to  her  kind  friend,  Mr.  Strutt — 'a  shock  I  know  it 
was  to  your  kind  heart,  which  has  loved  father  and  son 
and  all  his  family  many  a  long  and  many  a  happy  year; 
but  years  must  grow  sad  even  to  the  most  cheerful  tempers 
as  friends  drop  off.  What  is  there  left  in  this  world.?  I 
was  going  to  say  that  had  we  had  any  warning  ourselves 
you  should  have  heard  from  me,  but  it  was  so  sudden, 

vii 


HELEN 

and  we  were  so  deceived  by  hope.  He  came  home  to  us 
from  the  county  of  Armagh  the  7th  of  last  month :  he  had 
then  the  appearance  of  a  cold  and  cough,  but  not  more 
violent  nor  so  violent  as  he  had  often  had,  and  been 
apparently  cured  of  in  a  few  days.  He  augured  ill  of 
himself  He  said  to  Mrs.  Edgeworth  :  "  It  was  on  the  7th 
of  April  that  my  sister  Charlotte  died ;  don't  be  surprised 
if  I  am  dead  on  the  7th  of  May."  His  cough  increased  and 
an  inflammation  of  the  lungs  set  in.  We  had  all  that 
medical  skill  could  do  for  him,  and  we  alternately  hoped 
and  feared,  but  could  not  believe  that  he  whom  we  saw 
so  full  of  life  and  genius  and  high  thought  and  noble 
purpose  was  so  soon,  so  dreadfully  soon,  to  be  no  more. 
After  violent  fever  his  strength  most  rapidly,  in  the  course 
of  a  few  hours,  sank.  Early  in  the  morning  of  the  7  th  of 
May  he  expired  in  the  arms  of  his  mother-in-law,  who,  as 
he  most  justly  said  in  his  will,  was  to  him  from  the  time 
he  could  first  remember  the  best  of  mothers.  He  preserved 
his  faculties  to  the  last,  perfectly  clear  and  calm.  He  was 
so  happy  to  be  at  home  with  his  friends.'  Kind  Mr. 
Strutt  tried  to  comfort  and  to  distract.  He  seems  to  have 
sent  the  mourners  a  clock,  for  which  Miss  Edgeworth 
writes  to  thank  him.  '  Every  way  interesting  it  will  be  to 
me,'  she  says,  '  as  yours,  as  a  subject  on  which  Dr.  Darwin 
and  my  own  dear  father's  minds  have  been  intent,  and  as  one 
on  which  dear  William  had  thought  also ' ;  she  promises  to 
make  herself  mistress  not  only  of  the  body  but  of  the  soul 
of  the  gift.  Her  father's  clocks,  she  says,  require  very 
particular  winding ;  she  thinks  of  describing  one  in  a  Paper 
for  the  Royal  Society.  There  is  another  touching  mention 
of  William,  and  of  the  feeling  of  aifection  he  had  inspired  in 
the  minds  of  all  those  who  knew  him.  '  This  is  better  than 
fame  or  wealth,'  Maria  says. 

viii 


INTRODUCTION 

We  read  that  the  grief  for  her  young  brother's  loss  told 
upon  her  own  health.  She  was  often  confined  to  the  sofa, 
and  forbidden  to  use  her  pen ;  her  idle  fancy  began  once 
more  to  weave  romances,  and  so  it  was  that  she  planned 
the  story  of  Helen  and  made  her  notes  for  it.  The  work 
progressed  slowly.  As  she  herself  recovered  she  was 
absorbed  in  other  work  and  daily  preoccupation.  There 
were  difficulties  in  Ireland  then  as  now.  Rents,  repairs, 
and  tenants  to  be  attended  to.  We  are  told  that  she 
herself  looked  after  all  these :  '  the  letting  of  the  village 
houses,  the  drains,  gutters,  and  pathways,  the  employment 
of  the  poor ;  in  short,  all  the  hundred  and  one  duties  that 
devolve  upon  the  steward  of  landed  property.'  She  went 
straight  from  the  rent-book  to  her  little  desk  and  to  the 
MS.  of  Helen.  '  And  yet,'  says  her  stepmother,  '  she  never 
wrote  fiction  with  more  life  and  spirit  than  when  she  had 
been  for  some  time  with  the  hard  realities  of  life,'  com- 
bining, as  she  says  herself,  with  all  these  practical  and 
necessary  occupations,  'thinking  three  hours  a  day  of 
Helen  to  what  purpose  I  dare  not  say.'  One  of  her 
sisters,  Mrs.  Butler,  specially  encouraged  her  to  go  on  at 
a  time  when  she  had  nearly  thrust  the  work  aside  in 
despair.  '  I  am  afraid  you  will  be  tired  of  Helen  before 
you  become  acquainted  with  her,'  she  writes. 

In  1832  Miss  Edgeworth  was  still  at  work  upon  the 
book  which  was  at  last  approaching  completion ;  her  only 
complaint  was  that  she  could  never  do  in  any  day  as  much 
as  she  intended.  It  had  taken  her  four  years  to  finish  the 
story.  Miss  Edgeworth  had  so  long  accustomed  herself  to 
depend  on  her  father's  judgment  that  she  dreaded  the 
attempt,  which  she  was  urged  by  her  friends  to  make. 
'  The  doubts  with  which  she  wrote  had  given  her  less  desire 
to  concentrate  her  energy,'  says  her  stepmother.     There  is 


HELEN 

an  affecting  account,  not  quoted  by  Mr.  Hare,  of  the  family 
once  more  assembled  in  the  library  at  Edgeworthstown  to 
listen  to  the  reading  of  Helen,  just  as  on  that  sad  occasion 
when  Ormond  was  read  so  shortly  before  Mr.  Edgeworth's 
death. 

The  many  gaps  in  the  circle,  the  diffidence  of  the  author, 
the  anxiety  of  those  warmly-attached  brothers  and  sisters  as 
to  her  success,  must  have  made  the  meeting  a  trying  one 
at  first,  but  the  brightness  and  brilliance  of  the  story  itself 
soon  cheered  them  all  up ;  and  certainly,  with  the  exception 
perhaps  of  the  Absentee  and  Castle  Rackrent,  not  one  of 
her  many  books  flows  on  with  more  life  and  spirit.  It  was 
a  feat  indeed  at  her  age  to  be  writing,  better  than  ever,  and 
with  more  point  and  more  grip  of  her  materials.  She  had 
been  at  work  for  forty  years,  but  the  flame  was  burning 
still.  Her  favourite  Lady  Davenant,  moralising  upon  the 
characteristic  faults  of  youth  and  age,  exclaims  upon  the 
too  much  of  the  one  and  the  too  little  of  the  other.  In 
youth,  the  too  much  of  confidence  in  others,  and  in  them- 
selves :  the  too  much  of  enthusiasm,  too  much  of  benevo- 
lence ;  in  age,  alas  !  too  little.  But  to  Maria  herself  Lady 
Davenant's  stricture  certainly  did  not  apply. 

The  old  woman,  with  all  her  family  round  about  her, 
sat  there,  animated  and  animating,  once  more  holding 
them  all  enthralled  as  she  span  out  the  web  of  her  fancy. 
'  Oddly  enough,'  as  one  of  her  biographers  remarks,  '  Helen 
is  the  first  of  Miss  Edgeworth's  books  in  which  anything 
to  be  called  love-making  really  exists.'  Until  now  she  had 
almost  entirely  denied  the  existence  of  romantic  love,  and 
used  to  quote  her  father's  definition  :  '  Propinquity,  pro- 
pinquity ' ;  '  and  he  was  married  five  times,  and  twice  to 
heiresses.'  But  in  Helen  the  characters  fall  in  love  because 
they  cannot  help  it,  and  feel  and  speak  for  themselves,  and 


INTRODUCTION 

not  altogether  by  rote;  absence  does  not  divide  their 
constant  hearts.  How  pretty  are  the  opening  lines  of  the 
book,  and  how  well  this  overture  suggests  the  story  that 
is  to  come. 

"  '  There  is  Helen  in  the  Lime  Walk,'  said  Mrs.  Colling- 
wood  to  her  husband  as  she  looked  out  of  the  window. 
The  slight  figure  of  a  young  person  in  deep  mourning 
appeared  between  the  trees.  '  How  slowly  she  walks  !  she 
looks  very  unhappy.' 

"  'Yes,'  said  Mr.  Collingwood  with  a  sigh,  'she  is  young 
to  know  sorrow  and  to  struggle  with  difficulties  to  which 
she  is  quite  unsuited,  both  by  nature  and  by  education, 
difficulties  which  no  one  could  ever  have  foreseen.  How 
changed  are  all  her  prospects.' 

" '  Changed  indeed,'  said  Mrs.  Collingwood,  'pretty  young 
creature.  Do  you  remember  how  gay  she  was  when  first 
we  came  to  Cecilhurst  ? ' " 

A  kindly  critic,  who  has  inherited  from  her  mother  a 
love  for  Miss  Edgeworth's  writings,  asserts  that  she  knows 
a  case  in  which  a  conscientious  young  reader  of  Helen 
followed  this  heroine's  example,  and  refused  a  young  man 
before  he  had  actually  proposed  to  her. 

Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall's  description  of  Miss  Edgeworth  in  the 
latter  years  of  her  life  is  so  vivid  and  characteristic  that  I  can- 
not do  better  than  quote  it  here,  as,  not  without  some  regret, 
I  draw  to  the  close  of  my  little  series  of  introductions  : — 

In  person  she  was  very  small, — smaller  than  Hannah  More, 
and  with  more  than  Hannah  Mora's  vivacity  of  manners  ; 
her  face  was  pale  and  thin,  her  features  irregular,  they  may 
have  been  considered  plain  even  in  youth,  but  her  expression 
was  so  benevolent,  her  manners  so  entirely  well  bred,  partaking 
of  English  dignity  and  Irish  frankness,  that  you  never  thought 
of  her  in  reference  either  to  plainness  or  beauty — she  was  all  in 
all ;  she  occupied,  without  fatiguing,  the  attention,  charmed  by 

xi 


HELEN 

her  pleasant  voice,  while  the  earnestness  and  truth  that  beamed 
in  her  bright  blue — very  blue — eyes  made  of  value  every  word 
she  uttered.  Her  words  were  always  well  chosen,  her  manner 
of  expression  was  graceful  and  natural,  her  sentences  were 
frequently  epigrammatical. — Extract  from  the  Art  Journal. 


HELEN 


CHAPTER   I 

'  There  is  Helen  in  the  lime-walk,'  said  Mrs.  Collingwood  to 
her  husband,  as  she  looked  out  of  the  window.  The  slight 
figure  of  a  young  person  in  deep  mourning  appeared  between 
the  trees.  '  How  slowly  she  walks !  She  looks  very  un- 
happy ! ' 

'  Yes,'  said  Mr.  Collingwood,  with  a  sigh,  '  she  is  young 
to  know  sorrow,  and  to  struggle  with  difficulties  to  which  she 
is  quite  unsuited  both  by  nature  and  by  education,  difficulties 
which  no  one  could  ever  have  foreseen.  How  changed  are  all 
her  prospects  ! ' 

'  Changed  indeed  ! '  said  Mrs.  Collingwood,  '  pretty  young 
creature  !  Do  you  recollect  how  gay  she  was  when  first  we 
came  to  Cecilhurst  ?  and  even  last  year,  when  she  had  hopes 
of  her  uncle's  recovery,  and  when  he  talked  of  taking  her  to 
London,  how  she  enjoyed  the  thoughts  of  going  there  !  The 
world  was  bright  before  her  then.  How  cruel  of  that  uncle, 
with  all  his  fondness  for  her,  never  to  think  what  was  to 
become  of  her  the  moment  he  was  dead :  to  breed  her  up  as 
an  heiress,  and  leave  her  a  beggar  ! ' 

'  But  what  is  to  be  done,  my  dear  ? '  said  her  husband. 

'  I  am  sure  I  do  not  know  ;  I  can  only  feel  for  her,  you 
must  think  for  her.' 

'  Then  I  think  I  must  tell  her  directly  of  the  state  in  which 
her  uncle's  affiiirs  are  left,  and  that  there  is  no  provision  for 
her.' 

'  Not  yet,  my  dear,'  said  Mrs.  Colhngwood  :  '  I  don't  mean 
about  there  being  no  provision  for  herself,  that  would  not 
B  I  % 


HELEN 

strike  her,  but  her  uncle's  debts, — there  is  the  point :  she 
would  feel  dreadfully  the  disgrace  to  his  memory — she  loved 
him  so  tenderly  ! ' 

'  Yet  it  must  be  told,'  said  Mr.  Collingwood,  resolutely  ;  '  and 
perhaps  it  will  be  better  now  :  she  will  feel  it  less,  while  her 
mind  is  absorbed  by  grief  for  him.' 

Helen  was  the  only  daughter  of  Colonel  and  Lady  Anne 
Stanley  ;  her  parents  had  both  died  when  she  was  too  young 
to  know  her  loss,  nor  had  she  ever  felt  till  now  that  she  was 
an  orphan,  for  she  had  been  adopted  and  brought  up  with  the 
greatest  tenderness  by  her  uncle,  Dean  Stanley,  a  man  of 
genius,  learning,  and  sincere  piety,  with  the  most  affectionate 
heart,  and  a  highly- cultivated  understanding.  But  on  one 
subject  he  really  had  not  common  sense  :  in  money  matters  he 
was  inconceivably  imprudent  and  extravagant — extravagant  from 
charity,  from  taste,  from  habit.  He  possessed  rich  benefices 
in  the  church  and  an  ample  private  fortune,  and  it  was 
expected  that  his  niece  would  be  a  great  heiress — he  had 
often  said  so  himself,  and  his  fondness  for  her  confirmed 
every  one  in  this  belief.  But  the  Dean's  taste  warred  against 
his  affection  :  his  too  hospitable,  magnificent  establishment  had 
exceeded  his  income  ;  he  had  too  much  indulged  his  passion 
for  all  the  fine  arts,  of  which  he  was  a  liberal  patron  :  he  had 
collected  a  magnificent  library,  and  had  lavished  immense  sums 
of  money  on  architectural  embellishments.  Cursed  with  too 
fine  a  taste,  and  with  too  soft  a  heart — a.  heart  too  well  know- 
ing how  to  yield — never  could  he  deny  himself,  much  less  any 
other  human  being,  any  gratification  which  money  could 
command ;  and  soon  the  necessary  consequence  was,  that  he 
had  no  money  to  command,  his  affairs  fell  into  embarrassment 
— his  estate  was  sold ;  but,  as  he  continued  to  live  with  his 
accustomed  hospitality  and  splendour,  the  world  believed  him 
to  be  as  rich  as  ever. 

Some  rise  superior  from  the  pressure  of  pecuniary  diffi- 
culties, but  that  was  not  the  case  with  Dean  Stanley  ;  not  from 
want  of  elasticity  of  mind,  but  perhaps  because  his  ingenuity 
continually  suggested  resources,  and  his  sanguine  character  led 
him  to  plunge  into  speculat'ons  :  they  failed,  and  in  the 
anxiety  and  agitation  which  his  embarrassments  occasioned 
him,  he  fell  into  bad  health,  his  physicians  ordered  him  to 
Italy.      Helen,  his  devoted  nurse,  the  object  upon  which  all  his 

2 


HELEN 

affections  centred,  accompanied  him  to  Florence.  There  his 
health  and  spirits  seemed  at  first,  by  the  change  of  climate,  to 
be  renovated ;  but  in  Italy  he  found  fresh  temptations  to 
extravagance,  his  learning  and  his  fancy  combined  to  lead  him 
on  from  day  to  day  to  new  expense,  and  he  satisfied  his  con- 
science by  saying  to  himself  that  all  the  purchases  which  he 
now  made  were  only  so  much  capital,  which  would,  when  sold 
in  England,  bring  more  than  their  original  price,  and  would, 
he  flattered  himself,  increase  the  fortune  he  intended  for  his 
niece.  But  one  day,  while  he  was  actually  bargaining  for  an 
antique,  he  was  seized  with  a  fit  of  apoplexy.  From  this  fit 
he  recovered,  and  was  able  to  return  to  England  with  his 
niece.  Here  he  found  his  debts  and  difficulties  had  been  in- 
creasing ;  he  was  harassed  with  doubts  as  to  the  monied  value 
of  his  last-chosen  chef-d'osuvres  ;  his  mind  preyed  upon  his 
weakened  frame,  he  was  seized  with  another  fit,  lost  his  speech, 
and,  after  struggles  the  most  melancholy  for  Helen  to  see, 
conscious  as  she  was  that  she  could  do  nothing  for  him,  he 
expired — his  eyes  fixed  on  her  face,  and  his  powerless  hand 
held  between  both  hers. 

All  was  desolation  and  dismay  at  the  deanery  ;  Helen  was 
removed  to  the  vicarage  by  the  kindness  of  the  good  vicar  and 
his  wife,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  CoUingwood. 

It  was  found  that  the  Dean,  instead  of  leaving  a  large  for- 
tune, had  nothing  to  leave.  All  he  had  laid  out  at  the  deanery 
was  sunk  and  gone  ;  his  real  property  all  sold ;  his  imaginary 
wealth,  his  pictures,  statues — his  whole  collection,  even  his 
books,  his  immense  library,  shrunk  so  much  in  value  when 
estimated  after  his  death,  that  the  demands  of  the  creditors 
could  not  be  nearly  answered  ;  as  to  any  provision  for  Miss 
Stanley,  that  was  out  of  the  question. 

These  were  the  circumstances  which  Mrs.  CoUingwood 
feared  to  reveal,  and  which  Mr.  CoUingwood  thought  should 
be  told  immediately  to  Helen  ;  but  hitherto  she  had  been  so 
much  absorbed  in  sorrow  for  the  uncle  she  had  loved,  that  no 
one  had  ventured  on  the  task. 

Though  Mr.  and  Mrs.  CoUingwood  had  not  known  her  long 
(for  they  had  but  lately  come  to"  the  neighbourhood),  they  had 
the  greatest  sympathy  for  her  orphan  state  ;  and  they  had 
seen  enough  of  her  during  her  uncle's  illness  to  make  them 
warmly  attached  to  her.      Everybody  loved  her  that  knew  her, 

3 


HELEN 

rich  or  poor,  for  in  her  young  prosperity,  from  her  earliest 
childhood,  she  had  been  always  sweet-tempered  and  kind- 
hearted  ;  for  though  she  had  been  bred  up  in  the  greatest  luxury, 
educated  as  heiress  to  a  large  fortune,  taught  every  accomplish- 
ment, used  to  every  fashionable  refinement,  she  was  not  spoiled 
— she  was  not  in  the  least  selfish.  Indeed,  her  uncle's  indul- 
gence, excessive  though  it  was,  had  been  always  joined  with  so 
much  affection,  that  it  had  early  touched  her  heart,  and  filled 
her  whole  soul  with  ardent  gratitude. 

It  is  said  that  the  ill  men  do  lives  after  them — the  good 
is  oft  interred  with  their  bones.  It  was  not  so  with  Dean 
Stanley  ;  the  good  he  had  intended  for  Helen,  his  large  fortune, 
was  lost  and  gone ;  but  the  real  good  he  had  done  for  his 
niece  remained  in  full  force,  and  to  the  honour  of  his  memory  : 
the  excellent  education  he  had  given  her — it  was  excellent 
not  merely  in  the  worldly  meaning  of  the  word,  as  regards 
accomplishments  and  elegance  of  manners,  but  excellent  in 
having  given  her  a  firm  sense  of  duty,  as  the  great  principle 
of  action,  and  as  the  guide  of  her  naturally  warm,  generous 
affections. 

And  now,  when  Helen  returned  from  her  walk,  Mr. 
Collingwood,  in  the  gentlest  and  kindest  manner  he  was  able, 
informed  her  of  the  confusion  in  her  uncle's  affairs,  the  debts, 
the  impossibility  of  paying  the  creditors,  the  total  loss  of  all 
fortune  for  herself. 

Mrs.  Collingwood  had  well  foreseen  the  effect  this  intelli- 
gence would  have  on  Helen.  At  first,  with  fixed  incredulous 
eyes,  she  could  not  believe  that  her  uncle  could  have  been  in 
any  way  to  blame.  Twice  she  asked — '  Are  you  sure — are 
you  certain — is  there  no  mistake?'  And  when  the  convic- 
tion was  forced  upon  her,  still  her  mind  did  not  take  in  any 
part  of  the  facts,  as  they  regarded  herself.  Astonished  and 
shocked,  she  could  feel  nothing  but  the  disgrace  that  would 
fall  upon  the  memory  of  her  beloved  uncle. 

Then  she  exclaimed — '  One  part  of  it  is  not  true,  I  am 
certain '  ;  and  hastily  leaving  the  room,  she  returned  imme- 
diately with  a  letter  in  her  hand,  which,  without  speaking,  she 
laid  before  Mr.  Collingwood,  who  wiped  his  spectacles  quickly 
and  read. 

It  was  addressed  to  the  poor  Dean,  and  was  from  an  old 
friend  of  his,  Colonel  Munro,  stating  that  he  had  been  suddenly 

4 


HELEN 

ordered  to  India,  and  was  obliged  to  return  a  sum  of  money 
which  the  Dean  had  many  years  before  placed  in  his  hands,  to 
secure  a  provision  for  his  niece  Miss  Stanley. 

This  letter  had  arrived  when  the  Dean  was  extremely  ill. 
Helen  had  been  afraid  to  give  it  to  him,  and  yet  thought  it 
right  to  do  so.  The  moment  her  uncle  had  read  the  letter, 
which  he  was  still  able  to  do,  and  to  comprehend,  though  he 
was  unable  to  speak,  he  wrote  on  the  back  with  difficulty, 
in  a  sadly  trembling  hand,  yet  quite  distinctly,  these  words  : — 
'  That  money  is  yours,  Helen  Stanley :  no  one  has  any  claim 
upon  it.  When  I  am  gone  consult  Mr.  CoUingwood  ;  consider 
him  as  your  guardian.' 

Mr.  CoUingwood  perceived  that  this  provision  had  been 
made  by  the  Dean  for  his  niece  before  he  had  contracted  his 
present  debts — many  years  before,  when  he  had  sold  his 
paternal  estate — and  that,  knowing  his  own  disposition  to  extra- 
vagance, he  had  put  this  sum  out  of  his  own  power. 

'  Right — all  right,  my  dear  Miss  Stanley,'  said  the  vicar  ; 
'  I  am  very  glad — it  is  all  justly  yours.' 

'  No,'  said  Helen,  '  I  shall  never  touch  it :  take  it,  my  dear 
Mr.  Collingwood,  take  it,  and  pay  all  the  debts  before  any  one 
can  complain.' 

Mr.  Collingwood  pressed  her  to  him  without  speaking  ;  but 
after  a  moment's  recollection  he  replied — '  No,  no,  my  dear 
child,  I  cannot  let  you  do  this  :  as  your  guardian,  I  cannot 
allow  such  a  young  creature  as  you  are,  in  a  moment  of 
feeling,  thus  to  give  away  your  whole  earthly  fortune — it  must 
not  be.' 

'  It  must,  indeed  it  must,  my  dear  sir.  Oh,  pay  everybody 
at  once — directly.' 

'  No,  not  directly,  at  all  events,'  said  Mr.  Collingwood — 
'  certainly  not  directly  :  the  law  allows  a  year.' 

'  But  if  the  money  is  ready,'  said  Helen,  '  I  cannot  under- 
stand why  the  debt  should  not  be  paid  at  once.  Is  there  any 
law  against  paying  people  immediately  ? ' 

Mr.  Collingwood  half  smiled,  and  on  the  strength  of  that 
half  smile  Helen  concluded  that  he  wholly  yielded.  'Yes, 
do,'  cried  she,  '  send  this  money  this  instant  to  Mr.  James,  the 
solicitor:  he  knows  all  about  it,  you  say,  and  he  will  see 
everybody  paid. ' 

'Stay,  my  dear  Miss  Stanley,'  said   the  vicar;  'I  cannot 

S 


'  Take  it,  my  dear  Mr.  Coiling^uood,  fake  it,  and  pay  all  the  debts  be/ore  any  one 
can  complain.' 


HELEN 

consent  to  this,  and  you  should  be  thankful  that  I  am  steady. 
If  I  were  at  this  minute  to  consent,  and  to  do  what  you  desire 
— pay  away  your  whole  fortune,  you  would  repent,  and  re- 
proach me  with  my  folly  before  the  end  of  the  year — before 
six  months  were  over.' 

'  Never,  never,'  said  Helen. 

Mrs.  CoUingwood  strongly  took  her  husband's  side  of  the 
question.  Helen  could  have  no  idea,  she  said,  how  necessary 
money  would  be  to  her.  It  was  quite  absurd  to  think  of  living 
upon  air  ;  could  Miss  Stanley  think  she  was  to  go  on  in  this 
world  without  money  ? 

Helen  said  she  was  not  so  absurd ;  she  reminded  Mrs. 
CoUingwood  that  she  should  still  have  what  had  been  her 
mother's  fortune.  Before  Helen  had  well  got  out  the  words, 
Mrs.  CoUingwood  replied — 

'  That  will  never  do,  you  will  never  be  able  to  live  upon 
that ;  the  interest  of  Lady  Anne  Stanley's  fortune,  I  know 
what  it  was,  would  just  do  for  pocket-money  for  you  in  the 
style  of  life  for  which  you  have  been  educated.  Some  of  your 
uncle's  great  friends  willy  of  course,  invite  you  presently,  and 
then  you  will  find  what  is  requisite  with  that  set  of  people.' 

'  Some  of  my  uncle's  friends  perhaps  will,'  said  Helen  ; 
'  but  I  am  not  obliged  to  go  to  great  or  fine  people,  and  if  I 
cannot  afford  it  I  will  not,  for  I  can  live  independently  on 
what  I  have,  be  it  ever  so  little.' 

Mrs.  CoUingwood  allowed  that  if  Helen  were  to  live  always 
in  the  country  in  retirement,  she  might  do  upon  her  mother's 
fortune. 

'  Wherever  I  live — whatever  becomes  of  me,  the  debts 
must  be  paid — I  will  do  it  myself  ;  and  she  took  up  a  pen 
as  she  spoke — '  I  will  write  to  Mr.  James  by  this  day's  post.' 

Surprised  at  her  decision  of  manner  and  the  firmness  of  one 
in  general  so  gentle,  yielding,  and  retired,  and  feeling  that  he 
had  no  legal  power  to  resist,  Mr.  CoUingwood  at  last  gave  way, 
so  far  as  to  agree  that  he  would  in  due  time  use  this  money  in 
satisfying  her  uncle's  creditors  ;  provided  she  lived  for  the  next 
six  months  within  her  income. 

Helen  smiled,  as  if  that  were  a  needless  proviso. 

'  I  warn  you,'  continued  Mr.  CoUingwood,  '  that  you  will 
most  probably  find  before  six  months  are  over  that  you  will 
want  some  of  this  money  to  pay  debts  of  your  own. 

7 


HELEN 

'  No,  no,  no,'  cried  she  ;  '  of  that  there  is  not  the  shghtest 
chance.' 

'And  now,  my  dear  child,'  said  Mrs.  Collingwood,  'now 
that  Mr.  Collingwood  has  promised  to  do  what  you  wish,  will 
you  do  what  we  wish  ?  Will  you  promise  to  remain  with  us  .' 
to  live  here  with  us,  for  the  present  at  least ;  we  will  resign 
you  whenever  better  friends  may  claim  you,  but  for  the  present 
will  you  try  us  ? ' 

'  Try  ! '  in  a  transport  of  gratitude  and  affection  she  could 
only  repeat  the  words.  '  Try  !  oh,  my  dear  friends,  how  happy 
I  am,  an  orphan,  without  a  relation,  to  have  such  a  home.' 

But  though  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Collingwood,  childless  as  they 
were,  felt  real  happiness  in  having  such  a  companion,  such 
an  adopted  daughter,  yet  they  were  sure  that  some  of  Dean 
Stanley's  great  friends  and  acquaintance  in  high  life  would  ask 
his  niece  to  spend  the  spring  in  town,  or  the  summer  in  the 
country,  with  them  ;  and  post  after  post  came  letters  of  condo- 
lence to  Miss  Stanley  from  all  these  personages  of  high  degree, 
professing  the  greatest  regard  for  their  dear,  amiable  friend's 
memory,  and  for  Miss  Stanley,  his  and  their  dear  Helen  ;  and 
these  polite  and  kind  expressions  were  probably  sincere  at  the 
moment,  but  none  of  these  dear  friends  seemed  to  think  of 
taking  any  trouble  on  her  account,  or  to  be  in  the  least  dis- 
turbed by  the  idea  of  never  seeing  their  dear  Helen  again  in 
the  course  of  their  lives. 

Helen,  quite  touched  by  what  was  said  of  her  uncle,  thought 
only  of  him  ;  but  when  she  showed  the  letters  to  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Collingwood,  they  marked  the  oversight,  and  looked  signifi- 
cantly as  they  read,  folded  the  letters  up  and  returned  them 
to  Helen  in  silence.  Afterwards,  between  themselves,  they 
indulged  in  certain  comments. 

'  Lady  C does  not  invite  her,  for  she  has  too  many 

daughters,  and  they  are  too  ugly,  and  Helen  is  too  beautiful,' 
said  Mrs.  Collingwood. 

'  Lady  L has  too  many  sons,'   said  Mr.   Collingwood, 

'  and  they  are  too  poor,  and  Helen  is  not  an  heiress  now.' 

'  But  old  Lady  Margaret  Dawe,  who  has  neither  sons  nor 
daughters,  what  stands  in  the  way  there  ?  Oh  !  her  delicate 
health — delicate  health  is  a  blessing  to  some  people — excuses 
them  always  from  doing  anything  for  anybody.' 

Then    came    many  who   hoped,  in    general,   to    see    Miss 


HELEN 

Stanley  as  soon  as  possible  ;  and  some  who  were  '  very  anxious 
indeed '  to  have  their  dear  Helen  with  them  ;  but  when  or 
where  never  specified — and  a  general  invitation,  as  everybody 
knows,  means  nothing  but  '  Good  morning  to  you.' 

'  Mrs.  Coldstream  ends  with,  "  I  forbear  to  say  more  at 
present,"  without  giving  any  reason.' 

'  And  here  is  the  Dean's  dear  duchess,  always  in  the  greatest 
haste,  with  "You  know  my  heart,"  in  a  parenthesis,  "ever  and 
ever  most  sincerely  and  affec' — yours."  ' 

•And  the  Davenants,'  continued  Mrs.  CoUingwood,  who 
were  such  near  neighbours,  and  who  were  so  kind  to  the  Dean 
at  Florence  ;  they  have  not  even  written  ! ' 

'  But  they  are  at  Florence  still,'  said  Mr.  CoUingwood ; 
'  they  can  hardly  have  heard  of  the  poor  Dean's  death.' 

The  Davenants  were  the  great  people  of  this  part  of  the 
country ;  their  place,  Cecilhurst,  was  close  to  the  deanery  and 
to  the  vicarage,  but  they  were  not  known  to  the  CoUingwoods, 
who  had  come  to  Cecilhurst  during  the  Dean's  absence  abroad. 

'And  here  is  Mrs.  Wilmot  too,'  continued  Mrs.  CoUing- 
wood, '  wondering,  as  usual,  at  everybody  else  :  wondering 
that  Lady  Barker  has  not  invited  Miss  Stanley  to  Castleport ; 
and  it  never  enters  into  Mrs.  Wilmot's  head  that  she  might 
invite  her  to  Wilmot's  Fort.  And  this  is  friendship,  as  the 
world  goes  ! ' 

'  And  as  it  has  been  ever  since  the  beginning  of  the  world, 
and  will  be  to  the  end,'  replied  Mr.  CoUingwood.  '  Only  I 
thought  in  Dean  Stanley's  case — however,  I  am  glad  his  niece 
does  not  see  it  as  we  do.' 

No — with  all  Helen's  natural  quickness  of  sensibility,  she 
suspected  nothing,  saw  nothing  in  each  excuse  but  what  was 
perfectly  reasonable  and  kind ;  she  was  sure  that  her  uncle's 
friends  could  not  mean  to  neglect  her.  In  short,  she  had  an 
undoubting  belief  in  those  she  loved,  and  she  loved  all  those 
who  she  thought  had  loved  her  uncle,  or  who  had  ever  shown 
her  kindness.  Helen  had  never  yet  experienced  neglect  or 
detected  insincerity,  and  nothing  in  her  own  true  and  warm 
heart  could  suggest  the  possibility  of  double-dealing,  or  even 
of  coldness  in  friendship.     She  had  yet  to  learn  that 

No  after-friendship  e'er  can  raze 
Th'  endearments  of  our  early  days. 
And  ne'er  the  heart  such  fondness  prove, 

9 


HELEN 

As  when  it  first  began  to  love  ; 
Ere  lovely  nature  is  expelled, 
And  friendship  is  romantic  held. 

But  prudence  comes  with  hundred  eyes, 
The  veil  is  rent,  the  vision  flies, 
The  dear  illusions  will  not  last, 
The  era  of  enchantment's  past : 
The  wild  romance  of  life  is  done, 
The  real  history  begun  ! 


CHAPTER    II 

Some  time  after  this,  Mr.  Collingwood,  rising  from  the  break- 
fast-table, threw  down  the  day's  paper,  saying  there  was 
nothing  in  it ;  Mrs.  Collingwood  glancing  her  eye  over  it 
exclaimed — 

'  Do  you  call  this  nothing  ?      Helen,  hear  this  ! 

'  "Marriage  in  high  life. — At  the  Ambassador's  chapel,  Paris, 
on  the  1 6th  instant,  General  Clarendon  to  Lady  CeciUa 
Davenant,  only  daughter  of  Earl  and  Countess  Davenant."  ' 

'  Married  !  absolutely  married  !  '  exclaimed  Helen  :  '  I 
knew  it  was  to  be,  but  so  soon  I  did  not  expect.  Ambassa- 
dor's chapel — where  did  you  say  ? — Paris  ?  No,  that  must  be 
a  mistake,  they  are  all  at  Florence — settled  there,  I  thought 
their  letters  said.' 

Mrs.  Collingwood  pointed  to  the  paragraph,  and  Helen  saw 
it  was  certainly  Paris — there  could  be  no  mistake.  Here  was 
a  full  account  of  the  marriage,  and  a  list  of  all  '  the  fashion- 
ables who  attended  the  fair  bride  to  the  hymeneal  altar.  Her 
father  gave  her  away.' 

'  Then  certainly  it  is  so,'  said  Helen  ;  and  she  came  to  the 
joyful  conclusion  that  they  must  all  be  on  their  way  home  : — 
'  Dear  Lady  Davenant  coming  to  Cecilhurst  again  ! ' 

Lady  CeciUa,  '  the  fair  bride,'  had  been  Helen's  most  in- 
timate friend ;  they  had  been  when  children  much  together, 
for  the  deanery  was  so  close  to  Cecilhurst  that  the  shrubbery 
opened  into  the  park. 

'But  is  it  not  rather  extraordinary,  my  dear  Helen,'  said 
Mrs.   Collingwood,   '  that  you  should  see  this  account  of  your 

lo 


HELEN 

dear  Lady  Cecilia's  marriage  in  the  public  papers  only,  without 
having  heard  of  it  from  any  of  your  friends  themselves — not 
one  letter,  not  one  line  from  any  of  them  ? ' 

A  cloud  came  over  Helen's  face,  but  it  passed  quickly,  and 
she  was  sure  they  had  written — something  had  delayed  their 
letters.  She  was  certain  Lady  Davenant  or  Lady  Ceciha  had 
written ;  or,  if  they  had  not,  it  was  because  they  could  not 
possibly,  in  such  a  hurry,  such  agitation  as  they  must  have 
been  in.  At  all  events,  whether  they  had  written  or  not,  she 
was  certain  they  could  not  mean  anything  unkind ;  she  could 
not  change  her  opinion  of  her  friend  for  a  letter  more  or  less. 

'  Indeed  ! '  said  Mrs.  Collingwood ;  '  how  long  is  it  since 
you  have  seen  them  ? ' 

'  About  two  years ;  just  two  years  it  is  since  I  parted  from 
them  at  Florence.' 

'  And  you  have  corresponded  with  Lady  Cecilia  constantly 
ever  since  ?  '  asked  Mrs.  Collingwood. 

'  Not  constantly.' 

'  Not  constantly — oh  ! '  said  Mrs.  Collingwood,  in  a  pro- 
longed and  somewhat  sarcastic  tone. 

'  Not  constantly — so  much  the  better,'  said  her  husband  : 
'a  constant  correspondence  is  always  a  great  burthen,  and 
moreover,  sometimes  a  great  evil,  between  young  ladies  especi- 
ally— I  hate  the  sight  of  ladies'  long  cross-barred  letters.' 

Helen  said  that  Lady  Cecilia's  letters  were  never  cross-barred, 
always  short  and  far  between. 

'You  seem  wonderfully  fond  of  Lady  Cecilia,'  said  Mrs. 
Collingwood. 

'  Not  wonderfully,'  replied  Helen,  '  but  very  fond,  and  no 
wonder,  we  were  bred  up  together.  And,'  continued  she,  after 
a  little  pause — '  and  if  Lady  Cecilia  had  not  been  so  generous 
as  she  is,  she  might  have  been — she  must  have  been,  jealous 
of  the  partiality,  the  fondness,  which  her  mother  always 
showed  me.' 

'  But  was  not  Lady  Davenant's  heart  large  enough  to  hold 
two  ? '  asked  Mrs.  Collingwood.  '  Was  not  she  fond  of  her 
daughter  ? ' 

'  Yes,  as  far  as  she  knew  her,  but  she  did  not  know  Lady 
Cecilia.' 

'  Not  know  her  own  daughter  ! '  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Collingwood 
both  at  once  exclaimed.     '  How  could  that  possibly  be  ? ' 


HELEN 

'Very  easily,'  Helen  said,  'because  she  saw  so  little  of  her.' 

'  Was  not  Lady  Cecilia  educated  at  home  ?  ' 

'  Yes,  but  still  Lady  Cecilia,  when  a  child,  was  all  day  long 
with  her  governess,  and  at  Cecilhurst  the  governess's  apartments 
were  quite  out  of  the  way,  in  one  of  the  wings  at  the  end  of  a 
long  corridor,  with  a  separate  staircase ;  she  might  as  well 
have  been  in  another  house.' 

'  Bad  arrangement,'  said  Mr.  Collingwood,  speaking  to 
himself  as  he  stood  on  the  hearth.  '  Bad  arrangement  which 
separates  mother  and  daughter.' 

'  At  that  time,'  continued  Helen,  '  there  was  always  a  great 
deal  of  company  at  Cecilhurst.  Lord  Davenant  was  one  of  the 
ministers  then.  I  believe — I  know  he  saw  a  great  many 
political  people,  and  Lady  Davenant  was  forced  to  be  always 
with  them  talking.' 

'  Talking  !  yes,  yes  ! '  said  Mr.  Collingwood,  '  I  understand 
it  all.  Lady  Davenant  is  a  great  politician,  and  female 
politicians,  with  their  heads  full  of  the  affairs  of  Europe,  cannot 
have  time  to  think  of  the  affairs  of  their  families.' 

'  What  is  the  matter,  my  dear  Helen  ? '  said  Mrs.  Colling- 
wood, taking  her  hand.  Helen  had  tears  in  her  eyes  and 
looked  unhappy. 

'  I  have  done  very  wrong,'  said  she  :  '  I  have  said  something 
that  has  given  you  a  bad,  a  false  opinion  of  one  for  whom  I 
have  the  greatest  admiration  and  love — of  Lady  Davenant.  I 
am  excessively  sorry  ;   I  have  done  very  wrong.' 

'  Not  the  least,  my  dear  child  ;  you  told  us  nothing  but 
what  everybody  knows  —  that  she  is  a  great  politician  ;  you 
told  us  no  more.' 

'  But  I  should  have  told  you  more,  and  what  nobody  knows 
better  than  I  do,'  cried  Helen,  '  that  Lady  Davenant  is  a  great 
deal  more,  and  a  great  deal  better,  than  a  politician.  I  was 
too  young'  to  judge,  you  may  think,  but,  young  as  I  was,  I 
could  see  and  feel,  and  children  can  and  do  often  see  a  great 
deal  into  character,  and  I  assure  you  Lady  Davenant's  is  a  sort 
of  deep,  high  character  that  you  would  admire.' 

Mrs.  Collingwood  observed  with  surprise  that  Helen  spoke 
of  her  with  even  more  enthusiasm  than  of  her  dear  Lady 
Cecilia. 

'  Yes,  because  she  is  a  person  more  likely  to  excite  enthu- 
siasm.' 


HELEN 

'  You^did  not  feel  afraid  of  her,  then  ? ' 

'  I  do  not  say  that,'  rephed-  Helen ;  '  yet  it  was  not  fear 
exactly,  it  was  more  a  sort  of  aWe,  but  still  I  liked  it.  It  is  so 
delightful  to  have  something  to  look  up  to.  I  love  Lady 
Davenant  all  the  better,  even  for  that  awe  I  felt  of  her.' 

'And  I  like  you  all  the  better  for  everything  you  feel, 
think,  and  say  about  your  friends,'  cried  Mrs.  Collingwood ; 
'  but  let  us  see  what  they  will  do ;  when  I  see  whether  they 
can  write,  and  what  they  write  to  you,  I  will  tell  you  more  of 
my  mind — if  any  letters  come.' 

'  If — ! '  Helen  repeated,  but  would  say  no  more — and  there 
it  rested,  or  at  least  stopped.  By  common  consent  the  subject 
was  not  recurred  to  for  several  days.  Every  morning  at  post- 
time  Helen's  colour  rose  with  expectation,  and  then  faded  with 
disappointment ;  still,  with  the  same  confiding  look,  she  said, 
'  I  am  sure  it  is  not  their  fault.' 

'  Time  will  show,'  said  Mrs.  Collingwood. 

At  length,  one  morning  when  she  came  down  to  breakfast, 
'  Triumph,  my  dear  Helen  ! '  cried  Mrs.  Collingwood,  holding 
up  two  large  letters,  all  scribbled  over  with  '  Try  this  place  and 
try  that,  missent  to  Cross-keys — Over  moor,  and  Heaven 
knows  where — and — no  matter.' 

Helen  seized  the  packets  and  tore  them  open  ;  one  was 
from  Paris,  written  immediately  after  the  news  of  Dean 
Stanley's  death ;  it  contained  two  letters,  one  from  Lady 
Davenant,  the  other  from  Lady  Cecilia — '  written,  only  think  ! ' 
cried  she,  '  how  kind ! — the  very  day  before  her  marriage  : 
signed  "  Cecilia  Davenant,  for  the  last  time," — and  Lady 
Davenant,  too — to  think  of  me  in  all  their  happiness.' 

She  opened  the  other  letters,  written  since  their  arrival  in 
England,  she  read  eagerly  on,- — then  stopped,  and  her  looks 
changed. 

'  Lady  Davenant  is  not  coming  to  Cecilhurst.  Lord 
Davenant  is  to  be  sent  ambassador  to  Petersburg,  and  Lady 
Davenant  will  go  along  with  him  !  Oh  !  there  is  an  end  of 
everything,  I  shall  never  see  her  again  !  Stay — she  is  to  be 
first  with  Lady  Cecilia  at  Clarendon  Park,  wherever  that  is, 
for  some  time — she  does  not  know  how  long — she  hopes  to 
see  me  there — oh  !  how  kind,  how  delightful ! ' 

Helen  put  Lady  Davenant's  letter  proudly  into  Mrs.  Col- 
lingwood's  hand,  and  eagerly  opened  Lady  Cecilia's. 

13 


HELEN 

'  So  like  herself !  so  like  Cecilia,'  cried  she.  Mrs.  CoUing- 
wood  read,  and  acknowledged  that  nothing  could  be  kinder,  for 
here  was  an  invitation,  not  vague  or  general,  but  particular, 
and  pressing  as  heart  could  wish  or  heart  could  make  it. 
'  We  shall  be  at  Clarendon  Park  on  Thursday,  and  shall 
expect  you,  dearest  Helen,  on  Monday — just  time,  the  General 
says,  for  an  answer ;  so  write  and  say  where  horses  shall  meet 
you,'  etc.  etc. 

'  Upon  my  word,  this  is  being  in  earnest,  when  it  comes  to 
horses  meeting,'  cried  Mr.  Collingwood.  '  Of  course  you  will 
go  directly  ? ' 

Helen  was  in  great  agitation. 

'  Write — write — my  dear,  directly,'  said  Mrs.  Collingwood, 
'for  the  post-boy  waits.' 

And  before  she  had  written  many  lines  the  Cross-post  boy 
sent  up  word  that  he  could  wait  no  longer. 

Helen  wrote  she  scarcely  knew  what,  but  in  short  an  accept- 
ance, signed,  sealed,  delivered,  and  then  she  took  breath.  Off 
cantered  the  boy  with  the  letters  bagged,  and  scarcely  was  he 
out  of  sight,  when  Helen  saw  under  the  table  the  cover  of  the 
packet,  in  which  were  some  lines  that  had  not  yet  been  read. 
They  were  in  Lady  Cecilia's  handwriting — a  postscript. 

'  I  forgot,  dear  Helen,  the  thing  that  is  most  essential  (you 
remember  our  friend  Dumont's  definition  of  une  betise :  c'est 
d'oudlier  la  chose  essentiellc) — I  forgot  to  tell  you  that  the 
General  declares  he  will  not  hear  of  a  mere  visit  from  you.  He 
bids  me  tell  you  that  it  must  be  "  till  death  or  marriage."  So, 
my  dear  friend,  you  must  make  up  your  mind  in  short  to  live 
with  us  till  you  find  a  General  Clarendon  of  your  own.  To  this 
postscript  no  reply — silence  gives  consent.' 

'  If  I  had  seen  this  ! '  said  Helen,  as  she  laid  it  before 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Collingwood  ;  '  I  ought  to  have  answered,  but, 
indeed,  I  never  saw  it ' ;  she  sprang  forward  instantly  to  ring 
the  bell,  exclaiming,  '  It  is  time  yet — stop  the  boy — "  silence 
gives  consent."  I  must  write.  I  cannot  leave  you,  my  dear 
friends,  in  this  way.  I  did  not  see  that  postscript,  believe  me 
I  did  not.' 

They  believed  her,  they  thanked  her,  but  they  would  not 
let  her  ring  the  bell ;  they  said  she  had  better  not  bind  herself 
in  any  way  either  to  themselves  or  to  Lady  Cecilia.  Accept 
of  the  present  invitation  she  must — she  must  go  to  see  her 

14 


I '  E  J "     II     iS 

ll'llir  w  "'■  ■'!  "i 


■^ 


^^r 


j-^(7^  the  hoy.' 


HELEN 

friend  on  her  marriage  ;  she  must  take  leave  of  her  dear  Lady 
Davenant  before  her  departure. 

'  They  are  older  friends  than  we  are,'  said  Mr.  CoUingwood, 
'  they  have  the  first  claim  upon  you  ;  but  let  us  think  of  it  as 
only  a  visit  now.  As  to  a  residence  for  life,  that  you  can  best 
judge  of  for  yourself  after  you  have  been  some  time  at  Clarendon 
Park ;  if  you  do  not  like  to  remain  there,  you  know  how 
gladly  we  shall  welcome  you  here  again,  my  child  ;  or,  if  you 
decide  to  live  with  those  you  have  known  so  long  and  loved  so 
much,  we  cannot  be  offended  at  your  choice.' 

This  generous  kindness,  this  freedom  from  jealous  suscepti- 
bility, touched  Helen's  heart  and  increased  her  agitation.  She 
could  not  bear  the  thoughts  of  either  the  reality  or  appearance 
of  neglecting  these  kind  good  people  the  moment  she  had 
other  prospects,  and  frequently,  in  all  the  hurry  of  her  prepara- 
tions, she  repeated,  '  It  will  only  be  a  visit  at  Clarendon  Park. 
I  will  return  to  you  ;  I  shall  write  to  you,  my  dear  Mrs.  CoUing- 
wood, at  all  events,  constantly.' 

When  Mr.  CoUingwood  gave  her  his  parting  blessing  he 
reminded  her  of  his  warning  about  her  fortune.  Mrs.  CoUing- 
wood reminded  her  of  her  promise  to  write.  The  carriage 
drove  from  the  door.  Helen's  heart  was  full  of  the  friends 
she  was  leaving,  but  by  degrees  the  agitation  of  the  parting 
subsided,  her  tears  ceased,  her  heart  grew  lighter,  and  the 
hopes  of  seeing  her  friends  at  Clarendon  Park  arose  bright  in 
her  mind,  and  her  thoughts  all  turned  upon  Cecilia  and  Lady 
Davenant. 


CHAPTER    III 

Helen  looked  eagerly  out  of  the  carriage  window  for  the 
first  view  of  Clarendon  Park.  It  satisfied — it  surpassed  her 
expectations.  It  was  a  fine,  aristocrp,tic  place  :  ancestral 
trees,  and  a  vast  expanse  of  park ;  herds  of  deer,  yellow  and 
dark,  or  spotted,  their  heads  appearing  in  the  distance  just 
above  the  fern,  or  grazing  near,  startled  as  the  carriage  passed. 
Through  the  long  approach  she  caught  various  views  of  the 
house,  partly  gothic,  partly  of  modern  architecture  ;  it  seemed 
of  great  extent  and  magnificence. 

i6 


HELEN 

All  delightful  so  far ;  but  now  for  her  own  reception.  Her 
breath  grew  quick  and  quicker  as  she  came  near  and  nearer  to 
the  house.  Some  one  was  standing  on  the  steps.  Was  it 
General  Clarendon  ?  No ;  only  a  servant.  The  carriage 
stopped,  more  servants  appeared,  and  as  Helen  got  out,  a  very 
sublime-looking  personage  informed  her  that  '  Lady  Cecilia 
and  the  General  were  out  riding — only  in  the  park — would 
be  in  immediately.' 

And  as  she  crossed  the  great  hall,  the  same  sublime  person 
informed  her  that  there  would  be  still  an  hour  before  dinner- 
time, and  inquired  whether  she  would  be  pleased  to  be  shown 
to  her  own  apartment,  or  to  the  library.  Helen  felt  chilled 
and  disappointed,  because  this  was  not  exactly  the  way  she 
had  expected  things  would  be  upon  her  arrival.  She  had 
pictured  to  herself  Cecilia  running  to  meet  her  in  the  hall. 

Without  answering  the  groom  of  the  chambers,  she  asked, 
'  Is  Lady  Davenant  out  too  ? ' 

'  No  ;  her  ladyship  is  in  the  library.' 

'  To  the  library  then.' 

And  through  the  antechamber  she  passed  rapidly,  impatient 
of  a  momentary  stop  of  her  conductor  to  open  the  folding-doors, 
while  a  man,  with  a  letter-box  in  hand,  equally  impatient, 
begged  that  Lady  Davenant  might  be  told  'the  General's 
express  was  waiting.' 

Lady  Davenant  was  sealing  letters  in  great  haste  for  this 
express,  but  when  the  door  opened,  and  she  saw  Helen,  she 
threw  wax  and  letter  from  her,  and  pushing  aside  the  sofa- 
table,  came  forward  to  receive  her  with  open  arms. 

All  was  in  an  instant  happy  in  Helen's  heart ;  but  there 
was  the  man  of  the  letter-box  :  he  must  be  attended  to.  '  Beg 
your  pardon,  Helen,  my  dear — one  moment.  Letters  of  con- 
sequence— must  not  be  delayed.' 

By  the  time  the  letters  were  finished,  before  they  were  gone. 
Lady  Cecilia  came  in.  The  same  as  ever,  with  affectionate 
delight  in  her  eyes — ^her  beautiful  eyes.  The  same,  yes,  the 
same  Cecilia  as  ever  ;  yet  different :  less  of  a  girl,  less  lively, 
but  more  happy.  The  moment  she  had  embraced  her,  Lady 
Cecilia  turned  quick  to  present  General  Clarendon,  thinking  he 
had  followed,  but  he  had  stopped  in  the  hall. 

'  Send  off  the  letters,'  were  the  first  words  of  his  which 
Helen  heard.     The  tone  commanding,  the  voice  remarkably 

C  17 


HELEN 

gentlemanlike.  An  instant  afterwards  he  came  in.  A  fine 
figure,  a  handsome  man ;  in  the  prime  of  life ;  with  a  high- 
born, high-bred  military  air.  English  decidedly — ^proudly 
English.  Something  of  the  old  school — composed  self-posses- 
sion, with  voluntary  deference  to  others — rather  distant.  Helen 
felt  that  his  manner  of  welcoming  her  to  Clarendon  Park  was 
perfectly  polite,  yet  she  would  have  liked  it  better  had  it  been 
less  polite  —  more  cordial.  Lady  Cecilia,  whose  eyes  were 
anxiously  upon  her,  drew  her  arm  within  hers,  and  hurried 
her  out  of  the  room.  She  stopped  at  the  foot  of  the  stairs, 
gathered  up  the  folds  of  her  riding-dress,  and  turning  suddenly 
to  Helen,  said — 

'  Helen,  my  dear,  you  must  not  think  that ' 

'  Think  what  ?  '  said  Helen. 

'  Think  that — for  which  you  are  now  blushing.  Oh,  you 
know  what  I  mean  !  Helen,  your  thoughts  are  just  as  legible 
in  your  face  as  they  always  were  to  me.  His  manner  is 
reserved — cold,  maybe — but  not  his  heart.  Understand  this, 
pray — once  for  all.      Do  you  ?  will  you,  dearest  Helen  ? ' 

'  I  do,  I  will,'  cried  Helen  ;  and  every  minute  she  felt  that 
she  better  understood  and  was  more  perfectly  pleased  with 
her  friend.  Lady  Cecilia  showed  her  through  the  apartment 
destined  for  her,  which  she  had  taken  the  greatest  pleasure  in 
arranging :  everything  there  was  not  only  most  comfortable, 
but  particularly  to  her  taste  ;  and  some  little  delicate  proofs 
of  affection,  recollections  of  childhood,  were  there, — keepsakes, 
early  drawings,  nonsensical  things,  not  worth  preserving,  but 
still  preserved. 

'  Look  how  near  we  are  together,'  said  Cecilia,  opening  a 
door  into  her  own  dressing-room.  'You  may  shut  this  up 
whenever  you  please,  but  I  hope  you  will  never  please  to  do 
so.  You  see  how  1  leave  you  your  own  free  will,  as  friends 
usually  do,  with  a  proviso,  a  hope  at  least,  that  you  are  never 
to  use  it  on  any  account — like  the  child's  half-guinea  pocket- 
money,  never  to  be  changed.' 

Her  playful  tone  relieved,  as  she  intended  it  should,  Helen's 
too  keen  emotion  ;  and  this  too  was  felt  with  the  quickness 
with  which  every  touch  of  kindness  ever  was  felt  by  her.  Helen 
pressed  her  friend's  hand,  and  smiled  without  speaking. 

They  were  to  be  some  time  alone  before  the  commence- 
ment of  bridal  visits,  and  an  expected  succession  of  troops  of 

i8 


HELEN 

friends.  This  was  a  time  of  peculiar  enjoyment  to  Helen  : 
she  had  leisure  to  grow  happy  in  the  feeling  of  reviving  hopes 
from  old  associations. 

She  did  not  forget  her  promise  to  write  to  Mrs.  CoUing- 
wood  ;  nor  afterwards  (to  her  credit  be  it  here  marked) — 
even  when  the  house  was  full  of  company,  and  when,  by 
amusement  or  by  feeling,  she  was  most  pressed  for  time — did 
she  ever  omit  to  write  to  those  excellent  friends.  Those  who 
best  know  the  difficulty  will  best  appreciate  this  proof  of  the 
reality  of  her  gratitude. 

As  Lady  Cecilia  was  a  great  deal  with  her  husband  riding 
or  walking,  Helen  had  opportunities  of  being  much  alone  with 
Lady  Davenant,  who  now  gave  her  a  privilege  that  she  had 
enjoyed  in  former  times  at  Cecilhurst,  that  of  entering  her 
apartment  in  the  morning  at  all  hours  without  fear  of  being 
considered  an  intruder. 

The  first  morning,  however,  on  seeing  her  ladyship  immersed 
in  papers  with  a  brow  of  care,  deeply  intent,  Helen  paused 
on  the  threshold,  'I  am  afraid  I  interrupt — I  am  afraid  I 
disturb  you.' 

'  Come  in,  Helen,  come  in,'  cried  Lady  Davenant,  looking 
up,  and  the  face  of  care  was  cleared,  and  there  was  a  radiance 
of  pleasure.  '  Interrupt — yes  ;  disturb — no.  Often  in  your 
little  life,  Helen,  you  have  interrupted — never  disturbed  me. 
From  the  time  you  were  a  child  till  this  moment,  never  did  I 
see  you  come  into  my  room  without  pleasure.' 

Then  sweeping  away  heaps  of  papers,  she  made  room  for 
Helen  on  the  sofa  beside  her. 

'  Now  tell  me  how  things  are  with  you — somewhat  I  have 
heard  reported  of  my  friend  the  Dean's  affairs — tell  me  all.' 

Helen  told  all  as  briefly  as  possible  ;  she  hurried  on  through 
her  uncle's  affairs  with  a  tremulous  voice,  and  before  she  could 
come  to  a  conclusion  Lady  Davenant  exclaimed — 

'  I  foresaw  it  long  since :  with  all  my  friend's  virtues,  all 
his  talents — but  we  will  not  go  back  upon  the  painful  past. 
You,  my  dear  Helen,  have  done  just  what  I  should  have 
expected  from  you, — right; — right,  too,  the  condition  Mr. 
Collingwood  has  made — very  right.  And  now  to  the  next 
point : — where  are  you  to  live,  Helen  ?  or  rather  with  whom  ? ' 

Helen  was  not  quite  sure  yet ;  she  said  she  had  not  quite 
determined. 

19 


HELEN 

'Am  I  to  understand  that  your  doubt  lies  between  the 
Collingwoods  and  my  daughter  ? ' 

'  Yes ;  Ceciha  most  kindly  invited  me,  but  1  do  not  know 
General  Clarendon  yet,  and  he  does  not  know  me  yet. 
Cecilia  might  wish  most  sincerely  that  I  should  live  with  her, 
and  I  am  convinced  she  does ;  but  her  husband  must  be 
considered.' 

'  True,'  said  Lady  Davenant  — '  true  ;  a  husband  is 
certainly  a  thing  to  be  cared  for — in  Scottish  phrase,  and 
General  Clarendon  is  no  doubt  a  person  to  be  considered, — 
but  it  seems  that  I  am  not  a  person  to  be  considered  in  your 
arrangements.' 

Even  the  altered,  dry,  and  almost  acrid  tone  in  which  Lady 
Davenant  spoke,  and  the  expression  of  disappointment  in  her 
countenance,  were,  as  marks  of  strong  affection,  deeply  grati- 
fying to  Helen.     Lady  Davenant  went  on — 

'Was  not  Cecilhurst  always  a  home  to  you,  Helen 
Stanley  ? ' 

'  Yes,  yes, — always  a  most  happy  home  ! ' 

'  Then  why  is  not  Cecilhurst  to  be  your  home  ? ' 

'My  dear  Lady  Davenant!    how  kind! — how  very,  very 

kind  of  you  to  wish  it — but  I  never  thought  of ' 

'  And  why  did  you  not  think  of  it,  Helen  ?  ' 
'  I  mean — I  thought  you  were  going  to  Russia.' 
'  And  have  you  settled,  my  dear  Helen,'  said  Lady  Davenant, 
smiling — '  have  you  settled  that  I  am  never  to  come  back  from 
Russia  ?  Do  not  you  know  that  you  are — that  you  ever  were 
— you  ever  will  be  to  me  a  daughter?'  and  drawing  Helen 
fondly  towards  her,  she  added,  '  as  my  own  very  dear — I  must 
not  say  dear^rf  child, — must  not,  because  as  I  well  remember 
once — little  creature  as  you  were  then — you  whispered  to  me, 
"  Never  call  me  dear^j/," — generous-hearted  child  ! '  And 
tears  started  into  her  eyes  as  she  spoke  ;  but  at  that  moment 
came  a  knock  at  the  door.  '  A  packet  from  Lord  Davenant, 
by  Mr.  Mapletoffi,  my  lady.' 

Helen  rose  to  leave  the  room,  but  Lady  Davenant  laid  a 
detaining  hand  upon  her,  saying,  '  You  will  not  be  in  my  way 
in  the  least '  ;  and  she  opened  her  packet,  adding  that  while 
she  read  Helen  might  amuse  herself  '  with  arranging  the 
books  on  that  table,  or  in  looking  over  the  letters  in  that 
portfolio.' 


HELEN 

Helen  had  hitherto  seen  Lady  Davenant  only  with  the  eyes 
of  very  early  youth ;  but  now,  after  an  absence  of  two  years 
— a  great  space  in  her  existence — it  seemed  as  if  she  looked 
upon  her  with  new  eyes,  and  every  hour  made  fresh  discoveries 
in  her  character.  Contrary  to  what  too  often  happens  when 
we  again  see  and  judge  of  those  whom  we  have  early  known. 
Lady  Davenant's  character  and  abilities,  instead  of  sinking 
and  diminishing,  appeared  to  rise  and  enlarge,  to  expand  and 
be  ennobled  to  Helen's  view.  Strong  lights  and  shades  there 
were,  but  these  only  excited  and  fixed  her  attention.  Even  her 
defects — those  inequalities  of  temper  of  which  she  had  already 
had  some  example,  were  interesting' as  evidences  of  the  power 
and  warmth  of  her  affections. 

The  books  on  the  table  were  those  which  Lady  Davenant 
had  had  in  her  travelling  carriage.  They  gave  Helen  an  idea 
of  the  range  and  variety  of  the  reader's  mind.  Some  of  them 
were  presentation  copies,  as  they  are  called,  from  several  of 
the  first  authors  of  our  own  and  foreign  countries ;  some 
with  dedications  to  Lady  Davenant ;  others  with  inscriptions 
expressing  respect  or  propitiating  favour,  or  anxious  for 
judgment. 

The  portfolio  contained  letters  whose  very  signatures  would 
have  driven  the  first  of  modern  autograph-collectors  distracted 
with  joy — whose  meanest  scrap  would  make  a  scrap-book  the 
envy  of  the  world. 

But  among  the  letters  in  this  portfolio  there  were  none  of 
those  nauseous  notes  of  compliment,  none  of  those  epistles 
adulatory,  degrading  to  those  who  write,  and  equally  degrading 
to  those  to  whom  they  are  written  :  letters  which  are,  how- 
ever cleverly  turned,  inexpressibly  wearisome  to  all  but  the 
parties  concerned. 

After  opening  and  looking  at  the  signature  of  several  of 
these  letters,  Helen  sat  in  a  delightful  embarras  de  richesse. 
To  read  them  all — all  at  once,  was  impossible  ;  with  which  to 
begin  she  could  not  determine.  One  after  another  was  laid 
aside  as  too  good  to  be  read  first,  and  after  glancing  at  the 
contents  of  each,  she  began  to  deal  them  round  alphabetically 
till  she  was  struck  by  a  passage  in  one  of  them — she  looked  to 
the  signature,  it  was  unknown  to  fame — she  read  the  whole, 
it  was  striking  and  interesting.  There  were  several  letters 
in  the  same   hand,  and   Helen  was  surprised   to  find  them 

21 


HELEN 

arranged  according  to  their  dates,  in  Lady  Davenant's  own 
writing — preserved  with  those  of  persons  of  illustrious  reputa- 
tion !  These  she  read  on  without  further  hesitation.  There 
was  no  sort  of  affectation  in  them — quite  easy  and  natural, 
'  real  feeling,  and  genius,'  certainly  genius,  she  thought ! — 
and  there  seemed  something  romantic  and  uncommon  in 
the  character  of  the  writer.  They  were  signed  '  Granville 
Beauclerc  ! ' 

Who  could  he  be,  this  Granville  Beauclerc  ?  She  read  on 
till  Lady  Davenant,  having  finished  her  packet,  rang  a  silver 
handbell,  as  was  her  custom,  to  summon  her  page.  At  the 
first  tinkle  of  the  bell  Helen  started,  and  Lady  Davenant 
asked,  '  Whose  letter,  my  dear,  has  so  completely  abstracted 
you  ? ' 

Carlos,  the  page,  came  in  at  this  instant,  and  after  a  quick 
glance  at  the  handwriting  of  the  letters,  Lady  Davenant  gave 
her  orders  in  Portuguese  to  Carlos,  and  then  returning  to 
Helen,  took  no  further  notice  of  the  letters,  but  went  on  just 
where  she  had  left  off.  '  Helen,  I  remember  when  you  were 
about  nine  years  old,  timid  as  you  usually  were,  your  coming 
forward,  bold  as  a  little  lion,  to  attack  me  in  Cecilia's  defence  ; 
I  forget  the  particulars,  but  I  recollect  that  you  said  I  was 
unjust,  and  that  I  did  not  know  Cecilia,  and  there  you  were 
right ;  so,  to  reward  you,  you  shall  see  that  now  I  do  her 
perfect  justice,  and  that  I  am  as  fond  of  her  as  your  heart 
can  wish.  I  really  never  did  know  Cecilia  till  I  saw  her 
heartily  in  love  :  I  had  imagined  her  incapable  of  real  love ; 
I  thought  the  desire  of  pleasing  universally  had  been  her 
ruling  passion — the  ruling  passion  that  of  a  little  mind  and  a 
cold  heart  ;  but  I  did  her  wrong.  In  another  more  material 
point,  too,  I  was  mistaken.' 

Lady  Davenant  paused  and  looked  earnestly  at  Helen, 
whose  eyes  said,  '  I  am  glad,'  and  yet  she  was  not  quite 
certain  she  knew  to  what  she  alluded. 

'  Cecilia  righted  herself,  and  won  my  good  opinion,  by  the 
openness  with  which  she  treated  me  from  the  very  commence- 
ment of  her  attachment  to  General  Clarendon.' 

Lady  Davenant  again  paused  to  reflect,  and  played  for 
some  moments  with  the  tablets  in  her  hand. 

'  Some  one  says  that  we  are  apt  to  flatter  ourselves  that 
we  leave  our  faults  when  our  faults  leave  us,  from  change  of 

22 


HELEN 

situation,  age,  and  so  forth  ;  and  perhaps  it  does  not  signify 
much  which  it  is,  if  the  faults  are  fairly  gone,  and  if  there  be 
no  danger  of  their  returning  :  all  our  former  misunderstandings 
arose  on  CeciHa's  part  from  cowardice  of  character ;  on  mine 
from — no  matter  what — no  matter  which  of  us  was  most 
wrong.' 

'  True,  true,'  cried  Helen  eagerly ;  and,  anxious  to  prevent 
recurrence  to  painful  recollections,  she  went  on  to  ask  rapidly 
several  questions  about  Cecilia's  marriage. 

Lady  Davenant  smiled,  and  promised  that  she  should  have 
the  whole  history  of  the  marriage  in  true  gossip  detail. 

'  When  I  wrote  to  you,  I  gave  you  some  general  ideas  on 
the  subject,  but  there  are  little  things  which  could  not  well  be 
written,  even  to  so  safe  a  young  friend  as  you  are,  for  what  is 
written  remains,  and  often  for  those  by  whom  it  was  never 
intended  to  be  seen  :  the  dessoux  des  cartes  can  seldom  be 
either  safely  or  satisfactorily  shown  on  paper ;  so  give  me  my 
embroidery-frame,  I  never  can  tell  well  without  having  some- 
thing to  do  with  my  hands.' 

And  as  Helen  set  the  embroidery-frame.  Lady  Davenant 
searched  for  some  skeins  of  silk  and  silk  winders. 

'  Take  these,  my  dear,  and  wind  this  silk  for  me,  for  I  must 
have  my  hearer  comfortably  established,  not  like  the  agonised 
listener  in  the  World  leaning  against  a  table,  with  the  corner 
running  into  him  all  the  time.' 


CHAPTER    IV 

'  I  MUST  go  back,'  continued  Lady  Davenant,  '  quite  to  the 
dark  ages,  the  time  when  I  knew  nothing  of  my  daughter's 
character  but  by  the  accidental  lights  which  you  afforded  me. 
I  will  take  up  my  story  before  the  reformation,  in  the  middle 
ages,  when  you  and  your  dear  uncle  left  us  at  Florence ;  about 
two  years  ago,  when  Cecilia  was  in  the  height  of  her  conquests, 
about  the  time  when  a  certain  Colonel  D'Aubigny  flourished, 
— you  remember  him  ? ' 

Helen  answered  '  Yes,'  in  rather  a  constrained  voice,  which 
caused  Lady  Davenant  to  look  up,  and  on  seeing  that  look  of 

23 


HELEN 

inquiry,  Helen  coloured,  though  she  would  have  given  the 
world  not  to  be  so  foolish.  The  affair  was  Cecilia's,  and 
Helen  only  wished  not  to  have  it  recurred  to,  and  yet  she  had 
now,  by  colouring,  done  the  very  thing  to  fix  Lady  Davenant's 
attention,  and  as  the  look  was  prolonged,  she  coloured  more 
and  more. 

'  I  see  1  was  wrong,'  said  Lady  Davenant :  '  1  had  thought 
Colonel  D'Aubigny's  ecstasy  about  that  miniature  of  you  was  only 
a  feint ;  but  1  see  he  really  was  an  admirer  of  yours,  Helen  ?' 

'  Of  mine  !  oh  no,  never  ! '  Still  from  her  fear  of  saying 
something  that  should  implicate  Cecilia,  her  tone,  though  she 
spoke  exactly  the  truth,  was  not  to  Lady  Davenant's  discrimi- 
native ear  quite  natural.     Helen,  seeing  doubt,  added — 

'  Impossible,  my  dear  Lady  Davenant !  you  know  I  was 
then  so  young,  quite  a  child  ! ' 

'  No,  no,  not  quite  ;  two  from  eighteen  and  sixteen  remain, 
1  think,  and  in  our  days  sixteen  is  not  absolutely  a  child.' 

Helen  made  no  answer  ;  her  thoughts  had  gone  back  to  the 
time  when  Colonel  D'Aubigny  was  first  introduced  to  her, 
which  was  just  before  her  uncle's  illness,  and  when  her  mind 
had  been  so  engrossed  by  him,  that  she  had  but  a  confused 
recollection  of  all  the  rest. 

'  Now  you  are  right,  my  dear,'  said  Lady  Davenant ; 
'  right  to  be  absolutely  silent.  In  difficult  cases  say  nothing  ; 
but  still  you  are  wrong  in  sitting  so  uneasily  under  it,  for  that 
seems  as  if  there  was  something.' 

'  Nothing  upon  earth  ! '  cried  Helen,  '  if  you  would  not  look 
at  me  so,  my  dear  Lady  Davenant.' 

'  Then,  my  dear  Helen,  do  not  break  my  embroidery  silk  ; 
that  jerk  was  imprudent,  and  trust  me,  my  dear,  the  screw  of 
that  silk  winder  is  not  so  much  to  blame  as  you  would  have 
me  think  ;  take  patience  vnth  yourself  and  with  me.  There 
is  no  great  harm  done,  no  unbearable  imputation,  you  are  not 
accused  of  loving  or  liking,  only  of  having  been  admired.' 

'  Never  ! '  cried  Helen. 

'  Well,  well !  it  does  not  signify  in  the  least  novif :  the  man 
is  either  dying  or  dead.' 

'  I  am  glad  of  it,'  cried  Helen. 

'  How  barbarous  ! '  said  Lady  Davenant ;  '  but  let  it  pass, 
I  am  neither  glad  nor  sorry  :  contempt  is  more  dignified  and 
safer  than  hatred,  my  dear. 

24 


HELEN 

'  Now  to  return  to  Cecilia ;  soon  after,  I  will  not  say  the 
D'Aubigny  era,  but  soon  after  you  left  us,  I  fell  sick, — Cecilia 
was  excessively  kind  to  me.  In  kindness  her  affectionate  heart 
never  failed,  and  I  felt  this  the  more,  from  a  consciousness 
that  I  had  been  a  little  harsh  to  her.  I  recovered  but  slowly  ; 
I  could  not  bear  to  have  her  confined  so  long  in  a  sick-room, 
and  yet  I  did  not  much  like  either  of  the  chaperons  with  whom 
she  went  out,  though  they  were  both  of  rank,  and  of  unim- 
peachable character — the  one  English,  one  of  the  best  women 
in  the  world,  but  the  most  stupid  ;  the  other  a  foreigner,  one 
of  the  most  agreeable  women  in  the  world,  but  the  most  false. 
I  prevailed  on  Cecilia  to  break  off  that — I  do  not  know  what 
to  call  it,  friendship  it  was  not — and  my  daughter  and  I  drew 
nearer  together.  Better  times  began  to  dawn  ;  but  still  there 
was  little  sympathy  between  us  :  my  mind  was  intent  on  Lord 
Davenant's  interests,  hers  on  amusement  and  admiration.  Her 
conquests  were  numerous,  and  she  gloried  in  their  number, 
for,  between  you  and  me,  Cecilia  was,  before  the  reformation, 
not  a  little  of  a  coquette.  You  will  not  allow  it,  you  did  not 
see  it,  you  did  not  go  out  with  her,  and  being  three  or  four 
years  younger,  you  could  not  be  a  very  good  critic  of  Cecilia's 
conduct ;  and  depend  upon  it  I  am  right,  she  was  not  a  little 
of  a  coquette.  She  did  not  know,  and  I  am  sure  I  did  not 
know,  that  she  had  a  heart,  till  she  became  acquainted  with 
General  Clarendon. 

'  The  first  time  we  met  him,' — observing  a  quickening  of 
attention  in  Helen's  eyes.  Lady  Davenant  smiled,  and  said, 
'  Young  ladies  always  like  to  hear  of  "  the  first  time  we  saw 
him." — -The  first  time  we  saw  General  Clarendon  was — for- 
give me  the  day  of  the  month — in  the  gallery  at  Florence. 
I  forget  how  it  happened  that  he  had  not  been  presented  to 
me — to  Lord  Davenant  he  must  have  been.  But  so  it  was, 
and  it  was  new  to  Cecilia  to  see  a  man  of  his  appearance  who 
had  not  on  his  first  arrival  shown  himself  ambitious  to  be  made 
known  to  her.  He  was  admiring  a  beautiful  Magdalene,  and 
he  was  standing  with  his  back  towards  us.  I  recollect  that 
his  appearance  when  I  saw  him  as  a  stranger — the  time  when 
one  can  best  judge  of  appearance — struck  me  as  that  of  a  dis- 
tinguished person ;  but  little  did  I  think  that  there  stood 
Cecilia's  husband  !  so  little  did  my  maternal  instinct  guide  me. 

'  As  we  approached,  he  turned  and  gave  one  look  at  Cecilia  ; 

25 


HELEN 

she  gave  one  look  at  him.  He  passed  on  ;  she  stopped  me  to 
examine  the  picture  which  he  had  been  admiring. 

'  Every  Enghsh  mother  at  Florence,  except  myself,  had 
their  eyes  fixed  upon  General  Clarendon  from  the  moment  of 
his  arrival.  But  whatever  I  may  have  been,  or  may  have 
been  supposed  to  be,  on  the  great  squares  of  politics,  I  believe 
I  never  have  been  accused  or  even  suspected  of  being  a 
manceuvrer  on  the  small  domestic  scale. 

'  My  reputation  for  imbecility  in  these  matters  was  perhaps 
advantageous.  He  did  not  shun  me  as  he  did  the  tribe  of 
knowing  ones  ;  a  hundred  reports  flew  about  concerning  him, 
settling  in  one,  that  he  was  resolved  never  to  marry.  Yet  he 
was  a  passionate  admirer  of  beauty  and  grace,  and  it  was  said 
that  he  had  never  been  unsuccessful  where  he  had  wished  to 
please.  The  secret  of  his  resolution  against  marriage  was 
accounted  for  by  the  gossiping  public  in  many  ways  variously 
absurd.  The  fact  was,  that  in  his  own  family,  and  in  that  of 
a  particular  friend,  there  had  been  about  this  time  two  or  three 
scandalous  intrigues,  followed  by  "  the  public  brand  of  shameful 
life."  One  of  these  "  sad  affairs,"  as  they  are  styled,  was 
marked  with  premeditated  treachery  and  turpitude.  The  lady 
had  been,  or  had  seemed  to  be,  for  years  a  pattern  wife,  the 
mother  of  several  children  ;  yet  she  had  long  betrayed,  and  at 
last  abandoned,  a  most  amiable  and  confiding  husband,  and 
went  off  with  a  man  who  did  not  love  her,  who  cared  for 
nought  but  himself,  a  disgusting  monster  of  selfishness,  vanity, 
and  vice  !  This  woman  was  said  to  have  been  once  good,  but 
to  have  been  corrupted  and  depraved  by  residence  abroad — by 
the  contagion  of  foreign  profligacy.  In  the  other  instance, 
the  seduced  wife  had  been  originally  most  amiable,  pure- 
minded,  uncommonly  beautiful,  loved  to  idolatry  by  her 
husband,  Clarendon's  particular  friend,  a  man  high  in  public 
estimation.  The  husband  shot  himself.  The  seducer  was,  it 
is  said,  the  lady's  first  love.  That  these  circumstances  should 
have  made  a  deep  impression  on  Clarendon  is  natural ;  the 
more  feeling — the  stronger  the  mind,  the  more  deep  and  last- 
ing it  was  likely  to  be.  Besides  his  resolution  against  marriage 
in  general,  we  heard  that  he  had  specially  resolved  against 
marrying  any  travelled  lady,  and  most  especially  against  any 
woman  with  whom  there  was  danger  of  a  first  love.  How 
this  danger  was   to   be    avoided   or  ascertained  mothers  and 

26 


'  As  we  approaclwd,  he  turned  and  gave  one  look  at  Cecilia; 
she  gave  one  look  at  him,.' 


HELEN 

daughters  looked  at  one  another,  and  did  not  ask,  or  at  least 
did  not  answer. 

'  Cecilia,  apparently  unconcerned,  heard  and  laughed  at 
these  high  resolves,  after  her  gay  fashion,  with  her  young  com- 
panions, and  marvelled  how  long  the  resolution  would  be  kept. 
General  Clarendon,  of  course,  could  not  but  be  introduced  to  us, 
could  not  but  attend  our  assemblies,  nor  could  he  avoid  meeting 
us  in  all  the  good  English  and  foreign  society  at  Florence  ;  but 
whenever  he  met  us,  he  always  kept  at  a  safe  distance  :  this 
caution  marked  his  sense  of  danger.  To  avoid  its  being  so 
construed,  perhaps,  he  made  approaches  to  me,  politely  cold  ; 
we  talked  very  wisely  on  the  state  of  the  Continent  and  the 
affairs  of  Europe  ;  I  did  not,  however,  confine  myself  or  him 
to  politics,  I  gave  him  many  unconscious  opportunities  of 
showing  in  conversation,  not  his  abilities,  for  they  are  nothing 
extraordinary  ;  but  his  character,  which  is  first-rate.  Gleams 
came  out  of  a  character  born  to  subjugate,  to  captivate,  to 
attach  for  life.  It  worked  first  on  Cecilia's  curiosity ;  she 
thought  she  was  only  curious,  and  she  listened  at  first,  hum- 
ming an  opera  air  between  times,  with  the  least  concerned 
look  conceivable.  But  her  imagination  was  caught,  and 
thenceforward  through  everything  that  everybody  else  might 
be  saying,  and  through  all  she  said  herself,  she  heard  every 
word  that  fell  from  our  General,  and  even  all  that  was  repeated 
of  his  saying  at  second  or  third  hand.  So  she  learned  in  due 
season  that  he  had  seen  women  as  handsome,  handsomer  than 
Lady  Cecilia  Davenant ;  but  that  there  was  something  in  her 
manner  peculiarly  suited  to  his  taste — his  fastidious  taste  !  so 
free  from  coquetry,  he  said  she  was.  And  true,  perfectly  true, 
from  the  time  he  became  acquainted  with  her :  no  hypocrisy 
on  her  part,  no  mistake  on  his  ;  at  the  first  touch  of  a  real 
love,  there  was  an  end  of  vanity  and  coquetry.  Then  her 
deference — her  affection  for  her  mother,  was  so  charming,  he 
thought ;  such  perfect  confidence — such  quick  intelligence 
between  us.  No  deceit  here  either,  only  a  little  self-deception 
on  Cecilia's  part.  She  had  really  grown  suddenly  fonder  of 
me  ;  what  had  become  of  her  fear  she  did  not  know.  But  I 
knew  full  well  my  new  charm  and  my  real  merit :  I  was  a 
good  and  safe  conductor  of  the  electric  shock. 

'  It  chanced  one  day,   when    I  was   listening  only  as  one 
listens  to  a  man  who  is  talking  at  another  through  oneself,  I 

28 


HELEN 

did  not  immediately  catch  the  meaning,  or  I  believe  hear 
what  the  General  said.  Cecilia,  unawares,  answered  for  me, 
and  showed  that  she  perfectly  understood  : — he  bowed — she 
blushed. 

'  Man  is  usually  quick-sighted  to  woman's  blushes.  But  our 
General  was  not  vain,  only  proud ;  the  blush  he  did  not  set 
down  to  his  own  account,  but  very  much  to  hers.  It  was  a 
proof,  he  thought,  of  so  much  simplicity  of  heart,  so  unspoiled 
by  the  world,  so  unlike — in  short,  so  like  the  very  woman  he 

had   painted    in    his   fancy,    before   he    knew   too   much 

Lady  Cecilia  was  now  a  perfect  angel.  Not  one  word  of  all 
this  did  he  say,  but  it  was  understood  quite  as  well  as  if  it  had 
been  spoken  :  his  lips  were  firm  compressed,  and  the  whole 
outer  man  composed — frigidly  cold  ; — yet  through  all  this 
Cecilia  saw — such  is  woman's  penetration  in  certain  cases — 
Cecilia  saw  what  must  sooner  or  later  happen.  He,  still  proud 
of  his  prudence,  refrained  from  word,  look,  or  sigh,  resolved  to 
be  impassive  till  his  judgment  should  be  perfectly  satisfied. 
At  last  this  judgment  was  perfectly  satisfied ;  that  is,  he  was 
passionately  in  love — fairly  "  caught,"  my  dear,  "  in  the  strong 
toils  of  grace,"  and  he  threw  himself  at  Cecilia's  feet.  She 
was  not  quite  so  much  surprised  as  he  expected,  but  more 
pleased  than  he  had  ventured  to  hope.  There  was  that,  how- 
ever, in  his  proud  humility,  which  told  Cecilia  there  must  be 
no  trifling. 

He  either  fears  his  fate  too  much. 
Or  his  deserts  are  small, 

Who  dare  not  put  it  to  the  touch, 
To  win  or  lose  it  all. 

He  put  it  to  the  test,  and  won  it  all.  General  Clarendon, 
indeed,  is  a  man  likely  to  win  and  keep  the  love  of  woman,  for 
this,  among  other  good  reasons,  that  love  and  honour  being 
vnth  him  inseparable,  the  idol  he  adores  must  keep  herself  at 
the  height  to  which  he  has  raised  her,  or  cease  to  receive  his 
adoration.  She  must  be  no  common  vulgar  idol  for  every 
passing  worshipper.' 

As  Lady  Davenant  paused,  Helen  looked  up,  hesitated, 
and  said,  '  I  hope  that  General  Clarendon  is  not  disposed  to 
jealousy.' 

'  No  ;  he's  too  proud  to  be  jealous,'  replied  Lady  Davenant. 

Are  proud  men  never  jealous  ?  thought  Helen. 
29 


HELEN 

'  I  mean,'  continued  Lady  Davenant,  '  that  General  Claren- 
don is  too  proud  to  be  jealous  of  his  wife.  For  aught  I  know, 
he  might  have  felt  jealousy  of  Cecilia  before  she  was  his,  for 
then  she  was  but  a  woman,  like  another  ;  but  once  HIS — once 
having  set  his  judgment  on  the  cast,  both  the  virtues  and  the 
defects  of  his  character  join  in  security  for  his  perfect  confidence 
in  the  wife  "his  choice  and  passion  both  approve."  From 
temper  and  principle  he  is  unchangeable.  I  acknowledge  that 
I  think  the  General  is  a  little  inclined  perhaps  to  obstinacy ; 
but,  as  Burke  says,  though  obstinacy  is  certainly  a  vice,  it 
happens  that  the  whole  line  of  the  great  and  masculine  virtues, 
constancy,  fidelity,  fortitude,  magnanimity,  are  closely  allied 
to  this  disagreeable  quality,  of  which  we  have  so  just  an 
abhorrence. 

'  It  is  most  peculiarly  happy  for  Cecilia  that  she  has  a 
husband  of  this  firm  character,  one  on  whom  she  can  rely — 
one  to  whom  she  may,  she  must,  look  up,  if  not  always,  yet 
upon  all  important  occasions  where  decision  is  necessary,  or 
integrity  required.  It  is  between  her  and  her  General  as  it 
should  be  in  marriage,  each  has  the  compensating  qualities  to 
those  which  the  other  possesses  :  General  Clarendon  is  inferior 
to  Cecilia  in  wit,  but  superior  in  judgment  ;  inferior  in  litera- 
ture, superior  in  knowledge  of  the  world ;  inferior  to  my 
daughter  altogether  in  abilities,  in  what  is  called  genius,  but 
far  superior  in  that  ruling  power,  strength  of  mind.  Strength 
of  mind  is  an  attaching  as  well  as  a  ruling  power :  all  human 
creatures,  women  especially,  become  attached  to  those  who 
have  power  over  their  minds.  Yes,  Helen,  I  am  satisfied  with 
their  marriage,  and  with  your  congratulations  :  yours  are  the 
sort  I  like.  Vulgar  people — by  vulgar  people  I  mean  all  who 
think  vulgarly — very  great  vulgar  people  have  congratulated 
me  upon  this  establishment  of  my  daughter's  fortune  and  future 
rank  (a  dukedom  in  view),  all  that  could  be  wished  in  worldly 
estimation.  But  I  rejoice  in  it  as  the  security  for  my  daughter's 
character  and  happiness.  Thank  you  again,  my  dear  young 
friend,  for  your  sympathy ;  you  can  understand  me,  you  can 
feel  with  me.' 

Sympathy,  intelligent,  quick,  warm,  unwearied,  unweariable, 
such  as  Helen's,  is  really  a  charming  accomplishment  in  a 
friend  ;  the  only  obligation  a  proud  person  is  never  too  proud 
to  receive  ;  and  it  was  most  gratifying  to  Helen  to  be  allowed 

3° 


HELEN 

to  sympathise  with  Lady  Davenant — one  who,  in  general, 
never  spoke  of  herself,  or  unveiled  her  private  feelings,  even  to 
those  who  lived  with  her  on  terms  of  intimacy.  Helen  felt 
responsible  for  the  confidence  granted  to  her  thus  upon  credit, 
and  a  strong  ambition  was  excited  in  her  mind  to  justify  the 
high  opinion  her  superior  friend  had  formed  of  her.  She 
determined  to  become  all  that  she  was  believed  to  be ;  as  the 
flame  of  a  taper  suddenly  rises  towards  what  is  held  over  it, 
her  spirit  mounted  to  the  point  to  which  her  friend  pointed. 


CHAPTER   V 

Helen's  perfect  happiness  at  Clarendon  Park  was  not  of  long 
duration.  People  who  have  not  been  by  nature  blessed  or 
cursed  with  nice  feelings,  or  who  have  well  rubbed  off  their 
delicacy  in  roughing  through  the  world,  can  be  quite  happy, 
or  at  least  happy  enough,  without  ascertaining  whether  they  are 
really  esteemed  or  liked  by  those  with  whom  they  live.  Many, 
and  some  of  high  degree,  when  well  sheltered  and  fed,  and 
provided  with  all  the  necessaries,  and  surrounded  by  all  the 
luxuries  of  life,  and  with  appearances  tolerably  well  kept  up 
by  outward  manner,  care  little  or  nought  about  the  inside 
sentiments. 

But  Helen  was  neither  of  the  case-hardened  philosophic  nor 
the  naturally  obtuse-feeling  class  ;  she  belonged  to  the  over- 
anxious. Surrounded  at  Clarendon  Park  with  all  the  splendour 
of  life,  and  with  the  immediate  expectation  of  seeing  and  being 
seen  by  the  first  society  in  England  ;  with  the  certainty  also 
of  being  tenderly  loved  and  highly  esteemed  by  two  of  the 
persons  she  was  living  with,  yet  a  doubt  about  the  third  began 
to  make  her  miserable.  Whether  General  Clarendon  really 
liked  her  or  not,  was  a  question  that  hung  upon  her  mind 
sometimes  as  a  dead  weight ;  then  vibrating  backwards  and 
forwards,  she  often  called  to  mind,  and  endeavoured  to  believe, 
what  Cecilia  the  first  day  told  her,  that  this  reserved  manner 
was  natural  to  him  with  strangers,  and  would  wear  off.  But 
to  her  the  icy  coldness  did  not  thaw.  So  she  felt,  or  so  she 
fancied,  and  which   it  was   she  could  not  decide.      She  had 

31 


HELEN 

never  before  lived  with  any  one  about  whose  hking  for  her 
she  could  doubt,  therefore,  as  she  said  to  herself,  '  I  know  I 
am  a  bad  judge.'  She  feared  to  open  her  mind  to  Cecilia. 
Lady  Davenant  would  be  the  safest  person  to  consult ;  yet 
Helen,  with  all  her  young  delicacy  fresh  about  her,  scrupled, 
and  could  not  screw  her  courage  to  the  sticking-place.  Every 
morning,  going  to  Lady  Davenant's  room,  she  half  resolved, 
and  yet  came  away  without  speaking.  At  last,  one  morning, 
she  began — 

'  You  said  something  the  other  day,  my  dear  Lady  Davenant, 
about  a  visit  from  Miss  Clarendon.  Perhaps — I  am  afraid — ■ 
in  short  I  think, — I  fear,  the  General  does  not  like  my  being 
here  ;  and  I  thought,  perhaps,  he  was  displeased  at  his  sister's 
not  being  here, — that  he  thought  Cecilia's  having  asked  me 
prevented  his  sister's  coming ;  but  then  you  told  me  he  was 
not  of  a  jealous  temper,  did  not  you  ? ' 

'  Disttnguez,'  said  Lady  Davenant ;  '  distinguons,  as  the  old 
French  metaphysicians  used  to  say,  disiinguons,  there  be 
various  kinds  of  jealousy,  as  of  love.  The  old  romancers 
make  a  distinction  between  amour  and  amour  par  amours. 
Whatever  that  mean,  I  beg  leave  to  take  a  distinction  full  as  in- 
telligible, I  trust,  he:ivi&&!\  jalousie  par  amour  3mA  jalousie  par 
amitid.  Now,  to  apply  ;  when  I  told  you  that  our  General 
was  not  subject  to  jealousy,  I  should  have  distinguished,  and 
said,  jalousie  par  amoiir — jealousy  in  love,  but  I  will  not 
ensure  him  against  jalousie  par  amitie — ^jealousy  in  friendship 
— of  friends  and  relations,  I  mean.  Methinks  1  have  seen 
symptoms  of  this  in  the  General :  he  does  not  like  my  influence 
over  Cecilia,  nor  yours,  my  dear.' 

'  I  understand  it  all,'  exclaimed  Helen,  '  and  I  was  right 
from  the  very  first ;  I  saw  he  disliked  me,  and  he  ever  will 
and  must  dislike  and  detest  me — I  see  it  in  every  look,  hear  it 
in  every  word,  in  every  tone.' 

'  Now,  my  dear  Helen,  if  you  are  riding  off  on  your 
imagination,  I  wish  you  a  pleasant  ride,  and  till  you  come 
back  again  I  will  write  my  letter,'  said  Lady  Davenant,  taking 
up  a  pen. 

Helen  begged  pardon,  and  protested  she  was  not  going  to 
ride  off  upon  any  imagination, — she  had  no  imagination  now 
— she  entreated  Lady  Davenant  to  go  on,  for  she  was  very 
anxious  to  know  the  whole  truth,  whatever  it  might  be.     Lady 

32 


HELEN 

Davenant  laid  down  her  pen,  and  told  her  all  she  knew.  In 
the  first  place,  that  Cecilia  did  not  like  Miss  Clarendon,  who, 
though  a  very  estimable  person,  had  a  sort  of  uncompromising 
sincerity,  joined  with  a  brusquerie  of  manner  which  Cecilia 
could  not  endure.  How  her  daughter  had  managed  matters 
to  refuse  the  sister  without  offending  the  brother.  Lady  Dave- 
nant said  she  did  not  know ;  that  was  Cecilia's  secret,  and 
probably  it  lay  in  her  own  charming  manner  of  doing  things, 
aided  by  the  whole  affair  having  occurred  a  few  days  before 
marriage,  when  nothing  could  be  taken  ill  of  the  bride-elect. 
'  The  General,  as  Cecilia  told  me,  desired  that  she  would  write 
to  invite  you,  Helen  ;  she  did  so,  and  I  am  very  glad  of  it. 
This  is  all  I  know  of  this  mighty  matter.' 

But  Helen  could  not  endure  the  idea  of  being  there, 
contrary  to  the  General's  wishes,  in  the  place  of  the  sister  he 
loved.  Oh,  how  very,  very  unfortunate  she  was  to  have  all 
her  hopes  blighted,  destroyed — and  Cecilia's  kindness  all  in 
vain.  Dear,  dear  Cecilia  ! — but  for  the  whole  world  Helen 
would  not  be  so  selfish — she  would  not  run  the  hazard  of  mak- 
ing mischief.  She  would  never  use  her  influence  over  Cecilia 
in  opposition  to  the  General.  Oh,  how  little  he  knew  of  her 
character,  if  he  thought  it  possible. 

Helen  had  now  come  to  tears.  Then  the  keen  sense  of 
injustice  turned  to  indignation  ;  and  the  tears  wiped  away, 
and  pride  prevailing,  colouring  she  exclaimed,  '  That  she 
knew  what  she  ought  to  do,  she  knew  what  she  would  do — 
she  would  not  stay  where  the  master  of  the  house  did  not 
wish  for  her.  Orphan  though  she  was,  she  could  not  accept 
of  protection  or  obligation  from  any  human  being  who  neither 
liked  nor  esteemed  her.  She  would  shorten  her  visit  at 
Clarendon  Park — make  it  as  short  as  his  heart  could  desire — 
she  would  never  be  the  cause  of  any  disagreement — poor, 
dear,  kind  Cecilia  !  She  would  write  directly  to  Mrs.  Colling- 
wood.' 

At  the  close  of  these  last  incoherent  sentences,  Helen  was 
awestruck  by  the  absolute  composed  immovability  and  silence 
of  Lady  Davenant.     Helen  stood  rebuked  before  her. 

'  Instead  of  writing  to  Mrs.  Collingwood,  had  not  you  better 
go  at  once  ? '  said  her  ladyship,  speaking  in  a  voice  so  calm, 
and  in  a  tone  so  slightly  ironical,  that  it  might  have  passed  for 
earnest  on  any  but  an  acutely-feeling  ear — '  Shall  I  ring,  and 

D  33 


HELEN 

order  your  carriage  ? '  putting  her  hand  on  the  bell  as  she 
spoke,  and  resting  it  there,  she  continued — '  It  would  be  so 
spirited  to  be  off  instantly  ;  so  wise,  so  polite,  so  considerate 
towards  dear  Cecilia — so  dignified  towards  the  General,  and  so 
kind  towards  me,  who  am  going  to  a  far  country,  Helen,  and 
may  perhaps  not  see  you  ever  again.' 

'  Forgive  me  !  '  cried  Helen  ;  '  1  never  could  go  while  you 
were  here.' 

'  I  did  not  know  what  you  might  think  proper  when  you 
seemed  to  have  lost  your  senses.' 

'  I  have  recovered  them,'  said  Helen  ;  '  I  will  do  whatever 
you  please — whatever  you  think  best.' 

'  It  must  not  be  what  I  please,  my  dear  child,  nor  what  I 
think  best,  but  what  you  judge  for  yourself  to  be  best ;  else 
what  will  become  of  you  when  I  am  in  Russia  ?  It  must  be 
some  higher  and  more  stable  principle  of  action  that  must 
govern  you.  It  must  not  be  the  mere  wish  to  please  this  or 
that  friend  ; — the  defect  of  your  character,  Helen,  remember  I 
tell  you,  is  this — inordinate  desire  to  be  loved,  this  impatience 
of  not  being  loved — that  which  but  a  moment  ago  made  you 
ready  to  abandon  two  of  the  best  friends  you  have  upon  earth, 
because  you  imagine,  or  you  suspect,  or  you  fear,  that  a  third 
person,  almost  a  stranger,  does  not  like  before  he  has  had  time 
to  know  you.' 

'  I  was  very  foolish,'  said  Helen  ;  '  but  now  I  will  be  wise, 
I  will  do  whatever  is — right.  Surely  you  would  not  have  me 
live  here  if  I  were  convinced  that  the  master  of  the  house  did 
not  wish  it  ?' 

'  Certainly  not  —  certainly  not,'  repeated  Lady  Davenant ; 
'  but  let  us  see  our  way  before  us  ;  never  gallop,  my  dear, 
much  less  leap ;  never  move,  till  you  see  your  way  ; — once  it 
is  ascertained  that  General  Clarendon  does  not  wish  you  to  be 
here,  nor  approve  of  you  for  the  chosen  companion  of  his  wife, 
I,  as  your  best  friend,  would  say,  begone,  and  speed  you  on 
your  way  ;  then  as  much  pride,  as  much  spirit,  as  you  will  ; 
but  those  who  are  conscious  of  possessing  real  spirit  should 
never  be — seldom  are — in  a  hurry  to  show  it ;  that  kind  of 
ostentatious  haste  is  undignified  in  man,  and  ungraceful  in 
woman.' 

Helen  promised  that  she  would  be  patience  itself  '  But 
tell  me  exactly,'  said  she,  '  what  you  would  have  me  do.' 

34 


HELEN 

'  Nothing,'  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'  Nothing !  that  is  easy  at  least,'  said  Helen,  smiling. 

'  No,  not  so  easy  as  you  imagine  ;  it  requires  sometimes  no 
small  share  of  strength  of  mind.' 

'  Strength  of  mind  ! '  said  Helen,  '  1  am  afraid  I  have  not 
any.' 

'  Acquire  it  then,  my  dear,'  said  her  friend. 

'  But  can  I .? ' 

'  Certainly ;  strength  of  mind,  like  strength  of  body,  is 
improved  by  exercise.' 

'  If  I  had  any  to  begin  with '  said  Helen. 

'  You  have  some,  Helen,  a  great  deal  in  one  particular,  else 
why  should  I  have  any  more  regard  for  you,  or  more  hope  of 
you,  than  of  any  other  well-dressed,  well-taught  beauty,  any  of 
the  tribe  of  young  ladies  who  pass  before  me  without  ever 
fixing  my  mind's  eye  for  one  moment  ? ' 

'  But  in  what  particular,  my  dear  Lady  Davenant,  do  you 
mean  ? '  said  Helen,  anxiously  ;  '  I  am  afraid  you  are  mistaken  ; 
in  what  do  you  think  I  ever  showed  strength  of  mind  ?  Tell 
me,  and  I  will  tell  you  the  truth.' 

'  That  you  will,  and  there  is  the  point  that  I  mean.  Ever 
since  I  have  known  you,  you  have  always,  as  at  this  moment, 
coward  as  you  are,  been  brave  enough  to  speak  the  truth  ;  and 
truth  I  believe  to  be  the  only  real  lasting  foundation  for 
friendship ;  in  all  but  truth  there  is  a  principle  of  decay  and 
dissolution.  Now  good-bye,  my  dear ; — stay,  one  word  more 
— there  is  a  line  in  some  classic  poet,  which  says  "  the  suspicion 
of  ill-will  never  fails  to  produce  it." — Remember  this  in  your 
intercourse  with  General  Clarendon  ;  show  no  suspicion  of  his 
bearing  you  ill-will,  and  to  show  none,  you  must  feel  none. 
Put  absolutely  out  of  your  head  all  that  you  may  have  heard 
or  imagined  about  Miss  Clarendon,  or  her  brother's  prejudices 
on  her  account.' 

'  I  will — I  will  indeed,'  said  Helen,  and  so  they  parted. 

A  few  words  have  sometimes  a  material  influence  on  events 
in  human  life.  Perhaps  even  among  those  who  hold  in  general 
that  advice  never  does  good,  there  is  no  individual  who  cannot 
recollect  some  few  words — some  conversation  which  has  altered 
the  future  colour  of  their  lives. 

Helen's  over-anxiety  concerning  General  Clarendon's  opinion 
of  her  being  now  balanced  by  the  higher  interest  Lady  Dave- 

35 


HELEN 

nant  had  excited,  she  met  him  with  new-born  courage  ;  and 
Lady  CeciUa,  not  that  she  suspected  it  was  necessary,  but 
merely  by  way  of  prevention,  threw  in  httle  douceurs  of  flat- 
tery, on  the  General's  part,  repeated  sundry  pretty  compliments, 
and  really  kind  things  which  he  had  said  to  her  of  Helen. 
These  always  pleased  Helen  at  the  moment,  but  she  could 
never  make  what  she  was  told  he  said  of  her  quite  agree  with 
what  he  said  to  her ;  indeed,  he  said  so  very  little,  that  no 
absolute  discrepancy  could  be  detected  between  the  words 
spoken  and  the  words  reported  to  have  been  said  ;  but  still  the 
looks  did  not  agree  with  the  opinions  or  the  cordiality  implied. 

One  morning  Lady  Cecilia  told  her  that  the  General  wished 
that  she  would  ride  out  with  them ;  '  and  you  must  come,  indeed 
you  must,  and  try  his  pretty  Zelica  ;  he  wishes  it  of  all  things, 
he  told  me  so  last  night.' 

The  General  chancing  to  come  in  as  she  spoke,  Lady  Cecilia 
appealed  to  him  with  a  look  that  almost  called  upon  him  to 
enforce  her  request ;  but  he  only  said  that  if  Miss  Stanley 
would  do  him  the  honour,  he  should  certainly  be  happy,  if 
Zelica  would  not  be  too  much  for  her ;  but  he  could  not  take  it 
upon  him  to  advise.  Then  looking  for  some  paper  of  which  he 
came  in  search,  and  passing  her  with  the  most  polite  and 
deferential  manner  possible,  he  left  the  room. 

Half  vexed,  half  smiling,  Helen  looked  at  Cecilia,  and  asked 
whether  all  she  had  told  her  was  not  a  little  ^ plus  belle  que 
la  vMtd.' 

Lady  Cecilia,  blushing  slightly,  poured  out  rapid  protesta- 
tions that  all  she  had  ever  repeated  to  Helen  of  the  General's 
sayings  was  perfect  truth — '  I  will  not  swear  to  the  words — 
because  in  the  first  place  it  is  not  pretty  to  swear,  and  next, 
because  I  can  never  recollect  anybody's  words,  or  my  own, 
five  minutes  after  they  have  been  said.' 

Partly  by  playfulness,  and  partly  by  protestations.  Lady 
Cecilia  half  convinced  Helen  ;  but  from  this  time  she  refrained 
from  repeating  compliments  which,  true  or  false,  did  no  good, 
and  things  went  on  better ;  observing  this,  she  left  them  to 
their  natural  course,  upon  all  such  occasions  the  best  way. 

And  now  visitors  began  to  appear,  and  some  officers  of  the 
General's  staff  arrived.  Clarendon  Park  happened  to  be  in 
the  district  which  General  Clarendon  commanded,  so  that  he 
was  able  usually  to  reside  there.     It  was  in  what  is  called  a 

36 


HELEN 

good  neighbourhood,  and  there  was  much  visiting,  and  many 
entertainments. 

One  day  at  dinner,  Helen  was  seated  between  the  General 
and  a  fine  young  guardsman,  who,  as  far  as  his  deep  sense  of 
his  own  merit  and  his  fashionable  indifference  to  young  ladies 
would  permit,  had  made  some  demonstrations  of  a  desire  to 
attract  her  notice.  He  was  piqued  when,  in  the  midst  of  some- 
thing he  had  wonderfully  exerted  himself  to  say,  he  observed 
that  her  attention  was  distracted  by  a  gentleman  opposite,  who 
had  just  returned  from  the  Continent,  and  who,  among  other 
pieces  of  news,  marriages  and  deaths  of  English  abroad, 
mentioned  that  '  poor  D'Aubigny '  was  at  last  dead. 

Helen  looked  first  at  Cecilia,  who,  as  she  saw,  heard  what 
was  said  with  perfect  composure  ;  and  then  at  Lady  Davenant, 
who  had  meantime  glanced  imperceptibly  at  her  daughter,  and 
then  upon  Helen,  whose  eyes  she  met — and  Helen  coloured 
merely  from  association,  because  she  had  coloured  before — 
provoking  !  yet  impossible  to  help  it.  All  passed  in  less  time 
than  it  can  be  told,  and  Helen  had  left  the  guardsman  in  the 
midst  of  his  sentence,  discomfited,  and  his  eyes  were  now  upon 
her ;  and  in  confusion  she  turned  from  him,  and  there  were 
the  General's  eyes  ;  but  he  was  only  inviting  her  to  taste  some 
particular  wine,  which  he  thought  she  would  like,  and  which 
she  willingly  accepted,  and  praised,  though  she  assuredly  did 
not  know  in  the  least  what  manner  of  taste  it  had.  The 
General  now  exerted  himself  to  occupy  the  gfuardsman  in  a  con- 
versation about  promotion,  and  drew  all  observation  from  Helen. 
Yet  not  the  slightest  indication  of  having  seen,  heard,  or 
understood  appeared  in  his  countenance,  not  the  least  curiosity 
or  interest  about  Colonel  D'Aubigny.  Of  one  point  Helen 
was,  however,  intuitively  certain,  that  he  had  noticed  that  con- 
fusion which  he  had  so  ably,  so  coolly  covered.  One  ingenuous 
look  from  her  thanked  him,  and  his  look  in  return  was  most 
gratifying ;  she  could  not  tell  how  it  was,  but  it  appeared 
more  as  if  he  understood  and  liked  her  than  any  look  she  had 
ever  seen  from  him  before.  They  were  both  more  at  their 
ease.  Next  day,  he  certainly  justified  all  Cecilia's  former 
assurances,  by  the  urgency  with  which  he  desired  to  have  her 
of  the  riding-party.  He  put  her  on  horseback  himself,  bade 
the  aide-de-camp  ride  on  with  Lady  Cecilia — three  several 
times  set  the  bridle  right  in  Miss  Stanley's  hand,  assuring  her 

37 


HELEN 

that  she  need  not  be  afraid,  that  ZeUca  was  the  gentlest 
creature  possible,  and  he  kept  his  fiery  horse,  Fleetfoot,  to  a 
pace  that  suited  her  during  the  whole  time  they  were  out. 
Helen  took  courage,  and  her  ride  did  her  a  vast  deal  of  good. 

The  rides  were  repeated,  the  General  evidently  became  more 
and  more  interested  about  Miss  Stanley ;  he  appealed  continu- 
ally to  her  taste,  and  marked  that  he  considered  her  as  part 
of  his  family;  but,  as  Helen  told  Lady  Davenant,  it  was 
difficult,  with  a  person  of  his  high-bred  manners  and  reserved 
temper,  to  ascertain  what  was  to  be  attributed  to  general  defer- 
ence to  her  sex,  what  to  particular  regard  for  the  individual, 
how  much  to  hospitality  to  his  guest,  or  attention  to  his  wife's 
friend,  and  what  might  be  considered  as  proof  of  his  own 
desire  to  share  that  friendship,  and  of  a  real  wish  that  she 
should  continue  to  live  with  them. 

While  she  was  in  this  uncertainty.  Lord  Davenant  arrived 
from  London  ;  he  had  always  been  fond  of  Helen,  and  now 
the  first  sight  of  her  youthful  figure  in  deep  mourning,  the 
recollection  of  the  great  changes  that  had  taken  place  since 
they  had  last  met,  touched  him  to  the  heart — he  folded  her  in 
his  arms,  and  was  unable  to  speak.  He  !  a  great  bulky  man, 
with  a  face  of  constitutional  joy — but  so  it  was  ;  he  had  a 
tender  heart,  deep  feelings  of  all  kinds  under  an  appearance  of 
insouciance  which  deceived  the  world.  He  was  distinguished 
as  a  political  leader — but,  as  he  said  of  himself,  he  had  been 
three  times  inoculated  with  ambition  —  once  by  his  mother, 
once  by  his  brother,  and  once  by  his  wife  ;  but  it  had  never 
taken  well ;  the  last  the  best,  however, — it  had  shown  at  least 
sufficiently  to  satisfy  his  friends,  and  he  was  happy  to  be  no 
more  tormented.  With  talents  of  the  first  order,  and  integrity 
unblenching,  his  character  was  not  of  that  stern  stuff — no,  not 
of  that  corrupt  stuff — of  which  modern  ambition  should  be 
made. 

He  had  now  something  to  tell  Helen,  which  he  would  say 
even  before  he  opened  his  London  budget  of  news.  He  told 
her,  with  a  congratulatory  smile,  that  he  had  had  an  oppor- 
tunity of  showing  his  sense  of  Mr.  CoUingwood's  merits  ;  and 
as  he  spoke  he  put  a  letter  into  her  hand. 

The  letter  was  from  her  good  friend  Mr.  Collingwood, 
accepting  a  bishopric  in  the  West  Indies,  which  had  been 
offered  to  him  by  Lord  Davenant.     It  enclosed  a  letter  for 

38 


HELEN 

Helen,  desiring  in  the  most  kind  manner  that  she  would  let 
him  know  immediately  and  decidedly  where  and  with  whom 
she  intended  to  live  ;  and  there  was  a  postscript  from  Mrs. 
CoUingwood  full  of  affection,  and  doubts,  and  hopes,  and  fears. 

The  moment  Helen  had  finished  this  letter,  without  seeming 
to  regard  the  inquiring  looks  of  all  present,  and  without  once 
looking  towards  any  one  else,  she  walked  deliberately  up  to 
General  Clarendon,  and  begged  to  speak  to  him  alone.  Never 
was  general  more  surprised,  but  of  course  he  was  too  much  of 
a  general  to  let  that  appear.  Without  a  word,  he  offered  his 
arm,  and  led  her  to  his  study ;  he  drew  a  chair  towards  her — 

'No  misfortune,  I  hope.  Miss  Stanley?  If  I  can  in  any 
way  be  of  service ' 

'  The  only  service,  General  Clarendon,'  said  Helen,  her 
manner  becoming  composed,  and  her  voice  steadying  as  she 
went  on — 'the  only  service  you  can  do  me  now  is  to  tell  me 
the  plain  truth,  and  this  will  prevent  what  would  certainly  be  a 
misfortune  to  me — perhaps  to  all  of  us.  Will  you  read  this 
letter  ? ' 

He  received  it  with  an  air  of  great  interest,  and  again  moved 
the  chair  to  her.     Before  she  sat  down,  she  added — 

'  I  am  unused  to  the  world,  you  see.  General  Clarendon. 
I  have  been  accustomed  to  live  with  one  who  always  told  me 
his  mind  sincerely,  so  that  I  could  judge  always  what  I  ought 
to  do.  Will  you  do  so  now  ?  It  is  the  greatest  service,  as 
well  as  favour,  you  can  do  me.' 

'  Depend  upon  it,  I  will,'  said  General  Clarendon. 

'  I  should  not  ask  you  to  tell  me  in  words — that  might  be 
painful  to  your  politeness  ;  only  let  me  see  it,'  said  Helen, 
and  she  sat  down. 

The  General  read  on  without  speaking,  till  he  came  to  the 
mention  of  Helen's  original  promise  of  living  with  the  Colling- 
woods.  He  did  not  comprehend  that  passage,  he  said,  showing 
it  to  her.  He  had  always,  on  the  contrary,  understood  that  it 
had  been  a  long  settled  thing,  a  promise  between  Miss  Stanley 
and  Lady  Cecilia,  that  Helen  should  live  with  Lady  Cecilia 
when  she  married. 

'  No  such  thing  ! '  Helen  said.  '  No  such  agreement  had 
ever  been  made.' 

So  the  General  now  perceived  ;  but  this  was  a  mistake  of 
his  which  he  hoped  would  make  no  difference  in  her  arrange- 

39 


HELEN 

ments,  he  said :  '  Why  should  it  ? — unless  Miss  Stanley  felt 
unhappy  at  Clarendon  Park  ?  ' 

He  paused,  and  Helen  was  silent  ;  then,  taking  desperate 
resolution,  she  answered — 

'  I  should  be  perfectly  happy  here,  if  I  were  sure  of  your 
wishes,  your  feelings  about  me — about  it.' 

'  Is  it  possible  that  there  has  been  anything  in  my  manner,' 
said  he,  '  that  could  give  Miss  Stanley  pain  ?  What  could 
have  put  a  doubt  into  her  mind  ?  ' 

'  There  might  be  some  other  person  nearer,  and  naturally 
dearer  to  you,'  said  Helen,  looking  up  in  his  face  ingenuously 
— '  one  whom  you  might  have  desired  to  have  in  my  place  : — 
your  sister.  Miss  Clarendon,  in  short.' 

'  Did  Cecilia  tell  you  of  this  1 ' 

'  No,  Lady  Davenant  did ;  and  since  I  heard  it  I  never 
could  be  happy — I  never  can  be  iiappy  till  I  know  your 
feeling.' 

His  manner  instantly  changed. 

'  You  shall  know  my  feelings,  then,'  said  he.  '  Till  I  knew 
you,  Helen,  my  wish  was  that  my  sister  should  live  with  my 
wife  ;  now  I  know  you,  my  wish  is  that  you  should  live  with 
us.  You  will  suit  Ceciha  better  than  my  sister  could — will 
suit  us  both  better,  having  the  same  truth  of  character,  and 
more  gentleness  of  manner.  I  have  answered  you  with  frank- 
ness equal  to  your  own.  And  now,'  said  he,  taking  her  hand, 
'  you  know  Cecilia  has  always  considered  you  as  her  sister — 
allow  me  to  do  the  same  :  consider  me  as  a  brother — such  you 
shall  find  me.  Thank  you.  This  is  settled  for  life,'  added  he, 
drawing  her  arm  through  his,  and  taking  up  her  letters,  he  led 
her  back  towards  the  library. 

But  her  emotion,  the  stronger  for  being  suppressed,  was  too 
great  for  reappearing  in  company  :  she  withdrew  her  arm  from 
his  when  they  were  passing  through  the  hall,  and  turning  her 
face  away,  she  had  just  voice  enough  to  beg  he  would  show 
her  letters  to 

He  understood.  She  ran  upstairs  to  her  own  room,  glad 
to  be  alone  ;  a  flood  of  joy  came  over  her. 

'  A  brother  in  Cecilia's  husband  ! — a  brother  ! ' 

The  word  had  a  magical  charm,  and  she  could  not  help  re- 
peating it  aloud — she  wept  like  a  child.  Lady  Cecilia  soon 
came  flying  in,  all  delight  and  affection,  reproaches  and  wonder 

40 


f\  -^   I 


'  You  know  Cecilia  has  always  considered  you  as  her  sisier^allow  me  to  do  the 
savie :  consider  7ne  as  a  brother* 


HELEN 

alternately,  in  the  quickest  conceivable  succession.  '  De- 
lighted it  is  settled  and  for  ever  !  my  dear,  dear  Helen  !  But 
how  could  you  ever  think  of  leaving  us,  you  wicked  Helen  ! 
Well  !  now  you  see  what  Clarendon  really  is  !  But,  my  dear, 
I  was  so  terrified  when  I  heard  it  all.  You  are,  and  ever 
were,  the  oddest  mixture  of  cowardice  and  courage.  I — do 
you  know  I,  brave  / — never  should  have  advised — never 
should  have  ventured  as  you  have  ?  But  he  is  delighted  at  it 
all,  and  so  am  I  now  it  has  all  ended  so  charmingly,  now  I 
have  you  safe.  I  will  write  to  the  Collingwoods  ;  you  shall 
not  have  a  moment's  pain  ;  I  will  settle  it  all,  and  invite  them 
here  before  they  leave  England  ;  Clarendon  desired  I  would 
— oh,  he  is  ! — now  you  will  believe  me  !  The  Collingwoods, 
too,  will  be  glad  to  be  asked  here  to  take  leave  of  you,  and  all 
will  be  right  ;  I  love,  as  you  do,  dear  Helen,  that  everybody 
should  be  pleased  when  I  am  happy.' 

When  Lady  Davenant  heard  all  that  had  passed,  she  did 
not  express  that  prompt  unmixed  delight  which  Helen  ex- 
pected :  a  cloud  come  over  her  brow,  something  painful  re- 
garding her  daughter  seemed  to  strike  her,  for  her  eyes  fixed 
on  Cecilia,  and  her  emotion  was  visible  in  her  countenance  ; 
but  pleasure  unmixed  appeared  as  she  turned  to  Helen,  and  to 
her  she  gave,  what  was  unusual,  unqualified  approbation. 

'  My  dear  Helen,  I  admire  your  plain  straightforward 
truth  ;  I  am  satisfied  with  this  first  essay  of  your  strength  of 
mind  and  courage.' 

'  Courage  ! '  said  Helen,  smiling. 

'  Not  such  as  is  required  to  take  a  lion  by  the  beard,  or  a 
bull  by  the  horns,'  replied  Lady  Davenant  ;  '  but  there  are 
many  persons  in  this  world  who,  brave  though  they  be,  would 
rather  beard  a  lion,  sooner  seize  a  bull  by  the  horns,  than, 
when  they  get  into  a  dilemma,  dare  to  ask  a  direct  question 
and  tell  plainly  what  passes  in  their  own  minds.  Moral 
courage  is,  believe  me,  uncommon  in  both  sexes,  and  yet  in 
going  through  the  world  it  is  equally  necessary  to  the  virtue  of 
both  men  and  women.' 

'  But  do  you  really  think,'  said  Helen,  '  that  strength  of 
mind,  or  what  you  call  moral  courage,  is  as  necessary  to 
women  as  it  is  to  men  ? ' 

'  Certainly,  show  me  a  virtue,  male  or  female — if  virtues 
admit  of  grammatical  distinctions,  if  virtues  acknowledge  the 

42 


HELEN 

more  worthy  gender  and  the  less  worthy  of  the  grammar,  show 
me  a  virtue  male  or  female  that  can  long  exist  without  truth. 
Even  that  emphatically  termed  the  virtue  of  our  sex,  Helen,  on 
which  social  happiness  rests,  society  depends,  on  what  is  it 
based  ?  is  it  not  on  that  single-hearted  virtue  truth  ? — and 
truth  on  what  ?  on  courage  of  the  mind.  They  who  dare  to 
speak  the  truth  will  not  ever  dare  to  go  irretrievably  wrong. 
Then  what  is  falsehood  but  cowardice  ? — and  a  false  woman  ! — 
does  not  that  say  all  in  one  word  ? 

'  But  whence  arose  all  this  ?  you  wonder,  perhaps,'  said 
Lady  Davenant ;  '  and  I  have  not  inclination  to  explain. 
Here  comes  Lord  Davenant.  Now  for  politics — farewell 
morality,  a  long  farewell.  Now  for  the  London  budget,  and 
"what  news  from  Constantinople?  Grand  Vizier  certainly 
strangled,  or  not  ? '" 


CHAPTER    VI 

The  London  budget  of  news  was  now  opened,  and  gone 
through  by  Lord  Davenant,  including  quarrels  in  the  Cabinet 
and  all  that  with  fear  of  change  perplexes  politicians.  But 
the  fears  and  hopes  of  different  ages  are  attached  to  such 
different  subjects,  that  Helen  heard  all'  this  as  though  she 
heard  it  not,  and  went  on  with  her  drawing,  touching  and 
retouching  it,  without  ever  looking  up,  till  her  attention  was 
wakened  by  the  name  of  Granville  Beauclerc  ;  this  was  the 
name  of  the  person  who  had  written  those  interesting  letters 
which  she  had  met  with  in  Lady  Davenant's  portfolio. 

'  What  is  he  doing  in  town  ? '  asked  the  General. 

'  Amusing  himself,  I  suppose,'  replied  Lord  Davenant. 

'  I  believe  he  forgets  that  I  am  his  guardian,'  said  the 
General. 

'  I  am  sure  he  cannot  forget  that  you  are  his  friend,'  said 
Lady  Cecilia  ;  'for  he  has  the  best  heart  in  the  world.' 

'  And  the  worst  head  for  anything  useful,'  said  the  General. 

'  He  is  a  man  of  genius,'  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'  Did  you  speak  to  him,  my  lord,'  pursued  the  General, 
'  about  standing  for  the  county  ? ' 

43 


HELEN 

'  Yes.' 

'  And  he  said  what  ? ' 

'  That  he  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.' 

'  Why  ? ' 

'  Something  about  not  being  tied  to  party,  and  somewhat 
he  said  about  patriotism,'  replied  Lord  Davenant. 

'  Nonsense  ! '  said  the  General,  'he  is  a  fool.' 

'  Only  young,'  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'  Men  are  not  so  very  young  in  these  days  at  two-and- 
twenty,'  said  the  General. 

'In  some,'  said  Lady  Davenant,  'the  classical  touch,  the 
romance  of  pohtical  virtue,  lasts  for  months,  if  not  years,  after 
they  leave  college  ;  even  those  who,  like  Granville,  go  into  high 
life  in  London,  do  not  sometimes,  for  a  season  or  two,  lose  their 
first  enthusiasm  of  patriotism.' 

The  General's  lips  became  compressed.  Lord  Davenant, 
throwing  himself  back  in  his  easy-chair,  repeated  '  Patriotism  ! 
yes,  every  young  man  of  talent  is  apt  to  begin  with  a  fit  of 
that  sort.' 

'  My  dear  lord,'  cried  Lady  Davenant,  '  you,  of  all  men,  to 
speak  of  patriotism  as  a  disease  !  ' 

'  And  a  disease  that  can  be  had  but  once  in  hfe,  I  am 
afraid,'  replied  her  lord  laughing  ;  '  and  yet,'  as  if  believing  in 
that  at  which  he  laughed,  '  it  evaporates  in  most  men  in  words, 
written  or  spoken,  lasts  till  the  first  pamphlet  is  published,  or 
till  the  maiden-speecfi  in  Parliament  is  fairly  made,  and  fairly 
paid  for — in  all  honour — all  honourable  men.' 

Lady  Davenant  passed  over  these  satirical  observations, 
and  somewhat  abruptly  asked  Lord  Davenant  if  he  recollected 
the  late  Mr.  Windham. 

'  Certainly,  he  was  not  a  man  to  be  easily  forgotten  ;  but 
what  in  particular  ?  ' 

'  The  scales  of  his  mind  were  too  fine,'  said  Lady  Davenant, 
'  too  nicely  adjusted  for  common  purposes  :  diamond  scales 
will  not  do  for  Aveighing  wool.  Very  refined,  very  ingenious, 
very  philosophical  minds,  such  as  Windham,  Burke,  Bacon, 
were  all  too  scrupulous  weighers ;  their  scales  turned  with 
the  millionth  of  a  grain,  and  all  from  the  same  cause,  subject 
to  the  same  defect,  indecision.  They  saw  too  well  how  much 
can  be  said  on  both  sides  of  the  question.  There  is  a  sort 
of   philosophical    doubt,  arising  from    enlargement  of  under- 

44 


HELEN 

standing,  quite  different  from  that  irresolution  of  character 
which  is  caused  by  infirinity  of  will ;  and  I  have  observed,' 
continued  Lady  Davenant,  '  in  some  of  these  over-scrupulous 
weighers,  that  when  once  they  come  to  a  balance,  that  instant 
they  become  most  wilful ;  so  it  will  be,  you  will  see,  with 
Beauclerc.  After  excessive  indecision,  you  will  see  him  start 
perhaps  at  once  to  rash  action.' 

'  Rash  of  wrong,  resolute  of  right,'  said  Lord  Davenant. 

'  He  is  constitutionally  wilful,  and  metaphysically  vacillating,' 
said  Lady  Davenant. 

The  General  waited  till  the  metaphysics  were  over,  and  then 
said  to  Lord  Davenant  that  he  suspected  there  was  something 
more  than  mere  want  of  ambition  in  Beauclerc's  refusal  to  go 
into  Parliament.  Some  words  were  here  inaudible  to  Helen, 
and  the  General  began  to  walk  up  and  down  the  room  with  so 
strong  a  tread,  that  at  every  step  the  china  shook  on  the  table 
near  which  Helen  sat,  so  that  she  lost  most  part  of  what 
followed,  and  yet  it  seemed  interesting,  about  some  Lord 
Beltravers,  and  a  Comtesse  de  Saint — something,  or  a  Lady 
Blanche — somebody. 

Lady  Davenant  looked  anxious,  the  General's  steps  became 
more  deliberately,  more  ominously  firm  ;  till  Lady  Cecilia  came 
up  to  him,  and  playfully  linking  her  arm  in  his,  the  steps 
were  moderated,  and  when  a  soothing  hand  came  upon  his 
shoulder,  the  compressed  lips  were  relaxed — she  spoke  in  a  low 
voice — he  answered  aloud. 

'  By  all  means  !  write  to  him  yourself,  my  love  ;  get  him 
down  here  and  he  will  be  safe  ;  he  cannot  refuse  you.' 

'  Tuesday,  then  ? '  she  would  name  the  earliest  day  if  the 
General  approved. 

He  approved  of  everything  she  said  :  '  Tuesday  let  it  be.' 
Following  him  to  the  door,  Lady  Ceciha  added  something 
which  seemed  to  fill  the  measure  of  his  contentment. 

'  Always  good  and  kind,'  said  he  ;  'so  let  it  be.' 

'  Then  shall  I  write  to  your  sister,  or  will  you  ?  ' 

'You,'  said  the  General ;  'let  the  kindness  come  from  you, 
as  it  always  does.' 

Lady  Cecilia,  in  a  moment  at  the  writing-table,  ran  off,  as 
fast  as  pen  could  go,  two  notes,  which  she  put  into  her 
mother's  hand,  who  gave  an  approving  nod  ;  and,  leaving  them 
with  her  to  seal  and  have  franked,  Cecilia  darted  out  on  the 

45 


HELEN 

terrace,  carrying  Helen  along  with  her,  to  see  some  Italian 
garden  she  was  projecting. 

And  as  she  went,  and  as  she  stood  directing  the  workmen, 
at  every  close  of  her  directions  she  spoke  to  Helen.  She 
said  she  was  very  glad  that  she  had  settled  that  Beauclerc 
was  to  come  to  them  immediately.  He  was  a  great  favourite 
of  hers. 

'  Not  for  any  of  those  grandissimo  qualities  which  my 
mother  sees  in  him,  and  which  I  am  not  quite  clear  exist  ; 
but  just  because  he  is  the  most  agreeable  person  in  nature, 
and  really  natural ;  though  he  is  a  man  of  the  world,  yet  not 
the  least  affected.      Quite  fashionable,  of  course,  but  with  true 

feeling.      Oh!  he  is  delightful,  just '  then  she  interrupted 

herself  to  give  directions  to  the  workmen  about  her  Italian 
garden — 

'  Oleander  in  the  middle  of  that  bed  ;  vases  nearer  to  the 
balustrade ■ 

'  Beauclerc  has  a  very  good  taste,  and  a  beautiful  place  he 
has,  Thorndale.  He  will  be  very  rich.  Few  very  rich  young 
men  are  agreeable  now,  women  spoil  them  so. — ["  Border  that 
bed  with  something  pretty."] — Still  he  is,  and  I  long  to  know 
what  you  will  think  of  him  ;  I  know  what  I  think  he  will 
think,  but,  however,  I  will  say  no  more ;  people  are  always 
sure  to  get  into  scrapes  in  this  world,  when  they  say  what 
they  think. — ["  That  fountain  looks  beautiful."] — I  forgot  to 
tell  you  he  is  very  handsome.  The  General  is  very  fond  of 
him,  and  he  of  the  General,  except  when  he  considers  him  as 
his  guardian,  for  Granville  Beauclerc  does  not  particularly 
like  to  be  controlled — who  does  ?  It  is  a'  curious  story. — 
["  Unpack  those  vases,  and  by  the  time  that  is  done  I  will  be 
back."] — Take  a  turn  with  me,  Helen,  this  way.  It  is  a 
curious  story  :  Granville  Beauclerc's  father — but  I  don't  know 
it  perfectly,  I  only  know  that  he  was  a  very  odd  man,  and  left 
the  General,  though  he  was  so  much  younger  than  himself, 
guardian  to  Granville,  and  settled  that  he  was  not  to  be  of 
age,  I  mean  not  to  come  into  possession  of  his  large  estates, 
till  he  is  five-and-twenty  :  shockingly  hard  on  poor  Granville, 
and  enough  to  make  him  hate  Clarendon,  but  he  does  not, 
and  that  is  charming,  that  is  one  reason  I  like  him !  So 
amazingly  respectful  to  his  guardian  always,  considering  how 
impetuous  he  is — amazingly  respectful,  though   I   cannot  say 

46 


HELEN 

I  think  he  is  what  the  gardening  books  call  ■patient  of  the 
knife — I  don't  think  he  likes  his  fancies  to  be  lopped  ;  but  then 
he  is  so  clever.  Much  more  what  you  would  call  a  reading 
man  than  the  General,  distinguished  at  college,  and  all  that 
which  usually  makes  a  young  man  conceited  ;  but  Beauclerc  is 
only  a  little  headstrong — all  the  more  agreeable,  it  keeps  one 
in  agitation ;  one  never  knows  how  it  will  end,  but  I  am  sure 
it  will  all  go  on  well  now.  It  is  curious,  too,  that  mamma 
knew  him  also  when  he  was  at  Eton,  I  believe — I  don't 
know  how,  but  long  before  we  ever  heard  of  Clarendon,  and 
she  corresponded  with  him,  but  I  never  knew  him  till  he 
came  to  Florence,  just  after  it  was  all  settled  with  me  and  the 
General ;  and  he  was  with  us  there  and  at  Paris,  and  travelled 
home  with  us,  and  I  like  him.  Now  you  know  all,  except  what 
I  do  not  choose  to  tell  you,  so  come  back  to  the  workmen. — 
"  That  vase  will  not  do  there,  move  it  in  front  of  these  ever- 
greens ;  that  will  do."  ' 

Then  returning  to  Helen — 'After  all,  I  did  so  right,  and 
I  am  so  glad  I  thought  in  time  of  inviting  Esther,  now  Mr. 
Beauclerc  is  coming — the  General's  sister — half-sister.  Oh, 
so  unhke  him  !  you  would  never  guess  that  Miss  Clarendon 
was  his  sister,  except  from  her  pride.  But  she  is  so  different 
from  other  people  ;  she  knows  nothing,  and  wishes  to  know 
nothing,  of  the  world.  She  lives  always  at  an  old  castle  in 
Wales,  Llan —  something,  which  she  inherited  from  her 
mother,  and  she  has  always  been  her  own  mistress,  living 
with  her  aunt  in  melancholy  grandeur  there,  till  her  brother 
brought  her  to  Florence,  where — oh,  how  she  was  out  of  her 
element !  Come  this  way  and  I  will  tell  you  more.  The 
fact  is,  I  do  not  much  like  Miss  Clarendon,  and  I  will  tell  you 
why — I  will  describe  her  to  you.' 

'  No,  no,  do  not,'  said  Helen  ;  '  do  not,  my  dear  Cecilia, 
and  I  will  tell  you  why.' 

'  Why — why  ?  '  cried  Cecilia. 

'  Do  you  recollect  the  story  my  uncle  told  us  about  the  young 
bride  and  her  old  friend,  and  the  bit  of  advice  ? ' 

No,  Cecilia  did  not  recollect  anything  of  it.  She  should 
be  very  glad  to  hear  the  anecdote,  but  as  to  the  advice,  she 
hated  advice. 

'  Still,  if  you  knew  who  gave  it — it  was  given  by  a  very 
great  man.' 

47 


HELEN 

'  A  very  great  man  !  now  you  make  me  curious.  Well, 
what  is  it  ?  '  said  Lady  Cecilia. 

'  That  for  one  year  after  her  marriage  she  would  not  tell 
to  her  friends  the  opinion  she  had  formed,  if  unfavourable,  of 
any  of  her  husband's  relations,  as  it  was  probable  she  might 
change  that  opinion  on  knowing  them  better,  and  would  after- 
wards be  sorry  for  having  told  her  first  hasty  judgment. 
Long  afterwards  the  lady  told  her  friend  that  she  owed  to  this 
advice  a  great  part  of  the  happiness  of  her  life,  for  she  really 
had,  in  the  course  of  the  year,  completely  changed  her  first 
notions  of  some  of  her  husband's  family,  and  would  have  had 
sorely  to  repent  if  she  had  told  her  first  thoughts.' 

Cecilia  listened,  and  said  it  was  all  '  vastly  well !  excellent. 
But  I  had  nothing  in  the  world  to  say  of  Miss  Clarendon,  but 
that  she  was  too  good — too  sincere  for  the  world  we  live  in. 
For  instance,  at  Paris,  one  day  a  charming  Frenchwoman  was 
telling  some  anecdote  of  the  day  in  the  most  amusing  manner. 
Esther  Clarendon  all  the  while  stood  by,  grave  and  black 
as  night,  and  at  last  turning  upon  our  charmer  at  the  end 
of  the  story,  pronounced,  "  There  is  not  one  word  of  truth  in 
all  you  have  been  saying  ! "  Conceive  it,  in  full  salon  !  The 
French  were  in  such  amazement.  "  Inconceivable  ! "  as 
they  might  well  say  to  me,  as  she  walked  off  with  her  tragedy- 
queen  air  ;  "  Inconcevable — mats,  vraimcnt  inconcevable  "  ;  and 
"  Bien  Anglaise"  they  would  have  added,  no  doubt,  if  I  had 
not  been  by.' 

'  But  there  must  surely  have  been  some  particular  reason,' 
said  Helen. 

<  None  in  the  world,  only  the  story  was  not  true,  I  believe. 
And  then  another  time,  when  she  was  with  her  cousin,  the 
Duchess  of  Lisle,  at  Lisle-Royal,  and  was  to  have  gone  out 
the  next  season  in  London  with  the  Duchess,  she  came  down 
one  morning,  just  before  they  were  to  set  off  for  town,  and 
declared  that  she  had  heard  such  a  quantity  of  scandal  since 
she  had  been  there,  and  such  shocking  things  of  London 
society,  that  she  had  resolved  not  to  go  out  with  the  Duchess, 
and  not  to  go  to  town  at  all  !      So  absurd — so  prudish  ! ' 

Helen  felt  some  sympathy  in  this,  and  was  going  to  have 
said  so,  but  Cecilia  went  on  with — 

'  And  then  to  expect  that  Granville  Beauclerc — should ' 

Here  Cecilia  paused,  and  Helen  felt  curious,  and  ashamed 
48 


HELEN 

of  her  curiosity  ;  she  turned  away,  to  raise  the  branches  of 
some  shrub,  which  were  drooping  from  the  weight  of  their 
flowers. 

'  I  know  something  has  been  thought  of,'  said  Cecilia.  '  A 
match  has  been  in  contemplation — do  you  comprehend  me, 
Helen  ? ' 

'  You  mean  that  Mr.  Beauclerc  is  to  marry  Miss  Clarendon,' 
said  Helen,  compelled  to  speak. 

'  I  only  say  it  has  been  thought  of,'  replied  Lady  Cecilia  ; 
'  that  is,  as  everything  in  this  way  is  thought  of  about  every 
couple  not  within  the  prohibited  degrees,  one's  grandmother 
inclusive.  And  the  plainer  the  woman,  the  more  sure  she  is 
to  contemplate  such  things  for  herself,  lest  no  one  else  should 
think  of  them  for  her.  But,  my  dear  Helen,  if  you  mean  to 
ask ' 

'  Oh,  I  don't  mean  to  ask  anything,'  cried  Helen. 

'  But,  whether  you  ask  or  not,  I  must  tell  you  that  the 
General  is  too  proud  to  own,  even  to  himself,  that  he  could  ever 
think  of  any  man  for  his  sister  who  had  not  first  proposed 
for  her.' 

There  was  a  pause  for  some  minutes. 

'  But,'  resumed  Lady  Cecilia,  '  I  could  not  do  less  than  ask 
her  here  for  Clarendon's  sake,  when  I  know  it  pleases  him  ; 
and  she  is  very — estimable,  and  so  I  wish  to  make  her  love 
me  if  I  could  I  But  I  do  not  think  she  will  be  nearer  her 
point  with  Mr.  Beauclerc,  if  it  is  her  point,  by  coming  here 
just  now.  Granville  has  eyes  as  well  as  ears,  and  contrasts 
will  strike.  I  know  who  I  wish  should  strike  him,  as  she 
strikes  me — and  I  think — I  hope ' 

Helen  looked  distressed. 

'  I  am  as  innocent  as  a  dove,'  pursued  Lady  Cecilia  ;  '  but  I 
suppose  even  doves  may  have  their  own  private  little  thoughts 
and  wishes.' 

Helen  was  sure  Cecilia  had  meant  all  this  most  kindly,  but 
she  was  sorry  that  some  things  had  been  said.  She  was  con- 
scious of  having  been  interested  by  those  letters  of  Mr.  Beau- 
clerc's  ;  but  a  particular  thought  had  now  been  put  into  her 
mind,  and  she  could  never  more  say,  never  more  feel,  that  such 
a  thought  had  not  come  into  her  head.  She  was  very  sorry  ; 
it  seemed  as  if  somewhat  of  the  freshness,  the  innocence,  of 
her  mind  was  gone  from  her.     She  was  sorry,  too,  that  she 

E  49 


HELEN 

had  heard  all  that  Cecilia  had  said  about  Miss  Clarendon  ;  it 
appeared  as  if  she  was  actually  doomed  to  get  into  some  diffi- 
culty with  the  General  about  his  sister ;  she  felt  as  if  thrown 
back  into  a  sea  of  doubts,  and  she  was  not  clear  that  she  could, 
even  by  opposing,  end  them. 

On  the  appointed  Tuesday,  late,  Miss  Clarendon  arrived  ; 
a  fine  figure,  but  ungraceful,  as  Helen  observed,  from  the  first 
moment  when  she  turned  sharply  away  from  Lady  Cecilia's 
embrace  to  a  great  dog  of  her  brother's — '  Ah,  old  Neptune  ! 
I'm  glad  you're  here  still.' 

And  when  Lady  Cecilia  would  have  put  down  his  paws — 
'  Let  him  alone,  let  him  alone,  dear,  honest,  old  fellow.' 

'  But  the  dear,  honest,  old  fellow's  paws  are  wet,  and  will 
ruin  your  pretty  new  pelisse.' 

'  It  may  be  new,  but  you  know  it  is  not  pretty,'  said  Miss 
Clarendon,  continuing  to  pat  Neptune's  head  as  he  jumped  up 
with  his  paws  on  her  shoulders. 

'  Oh,  my  dear  Esther,  how  can  you  bear  him  ?  he  is  so  rough 
in  his  love  ! ' 

'  I  like  rough  better  than  smooth.'  The  rough  paw  caught 
in  her  lace  frill,  and  it  was  torn  to  pieces  before  '  down  !  down  ! ' 
and  the  united  efforts  of  Lady  Cecilia  and  Helen  could  extricate 
it.  '  Don't  distress  yourselves  about  it,  pray ;  it  does  not 
signify  in  the  least.  Poor  Neptune,  how  really  sorry  he  looks 
— there,  there,  wag  your  tail  again — no  one  shall  come  between 
us  two  old  friends.' 

Her  brother  came  in  and,  starting  up,  her  arms  were 
thrown  round  his  neck,  and  her  bonnet  falling  back,  Helen, 
who  had  thought  her  quite  plain  before,  was  surprised  to  see 
that,  now  her  colour  was  raised,  and  there  was  life  in  her  eyes, 
she  was  really  handsome. 

Gone  again  that  expression  when  Cecilia  spoke  to  her ; 
whatever  she  said.  Miss  Clarendon  differed  from  ;  if  it  was  a 
matter  of  taste,  she  was  always  of  the  contrary  opinion  ;  if 
narrative  or  assertion,  she  questioned,  doubted,  seemed  as  if 
she  could  not  believe.  Her  conversation,  if  con\ersation  it 
could  be  called,  was  a  perpetual  rebating  and  regrating,  espe- 
cially with  her  sister-in-law  ;  if  Lady  Cecilia  did  but  say  there 
were  three  instead  of  four,  it  was  taken  up  as  '  quite  a  mistake,' 
and  marked  not  only  as  a  mistake,  but  as  '  not  true.'  Every, 
the  slightest  error,  became  a  crime  against  majesty,  and  the 

5° 


HELEN 

first  day  ended  with  Helen's  thinking  her  really  the  most  dis- 
agreeable, intolerable  person  she  had  ever  seen. 

And  the  second  day  went  on  a  little  worse.  Helen  thought 
Ceciha  took  too  much  pains  to  please,  and  said  it  would  be 
better  to  let  her  quite  alone.  Helen  did  so  completely,  but 
Miss  Clarendon  did  not  let  Helen  alone  ;  but  watched  her  with 
penetrating  eyes  continually,  listened  to  every  word  she  said, 
and  seeming  to  weigh  every  syllable, — '  Oh,  my  words  are  not 
worth  your  weighing,'  said  Helen,  laughing. 

'  Yes  they  are,  to  settle  my  mind.' 

The  first  thing  that  seemed  at  all  to  settle  it  was  Helen's 
not  agreeing  with  Cecilia  about  the  colour  of  two  ribands  which 
Helen  said  she  could  not  flatter  her  were  good  matches.  The 
next  was  about  a  drawing  of  Miss  Clarendon's,  of  Llansillan, 
her  place  in  Wales  ;  a  beautiful  drawing  indeed,  which  she  had 
brought  for  her  brother,  but  one  of  the  towers  certainly  was 
out  of  the  perpendicular.  Helen  was  appealed  to,  and  could 
not  say  it  was  upright  ;  Miss  Clarendon  instantly  took  up  a 
knife,  cut  the  paper  at  the  back  of  the  frame,  and,  taking  out 
the  drawing,  set  the  tower  to  rights. 

'There's  the  use  of  telling  the  truth.' 

'  Of  listening  to  it,'  said  Helen. 

'We  shall  get  on,  I  see.  Miss  Stanley,  if  you  can  get  over 
the  first  bitter  outside  of  me — a  hard  outside,  difficult  to  crack 
— stains  delicate  fingers,  may  be,'  she  continued,  as  she  replaced 
her  drawing  in  its  frame — '  stains  delicate  fingers,  may  be,  in 
the  opening,  but  a  good  walnut  you  will  find  it,  taken  with  a 
grain  of  salt.' 

Many  a  grain  seemed  necessary,  and  very  strong  nut- 
crackers in  very  strong  hands.  Lady  Cecilia's  evidently  were 
not  strong  enough,  though  she  strained  hard.  Helen  did  not 
feel  inclined  to  try. 

Cecilia  invited  Miss  Clarendon  to  walk  out  and  see  some  of 
the  alterations  her  brother  had  made.  As  they  passed  the  new 
Italian  garden,  Miss  Clarendon  asked,  '  What's  all  this  ? — 
I  don't  like  this— how  I  regret  the  Old  English  garden,  and 
the  high  beech  hedges.  Everything  is  to  be  changed  here, 
I  suppose, — pray  do  not  ask  my  opinion  about  any  of  the 
alterations.' 

'  I  do  not  wonder,'  said  Cecilia,  '  that  you  should  prefer  the 
old  garden,  with  all   your  early  associations  ;   warm-hearted, 

.■51 


HELEN 

amiable  people  must  always  be  so  fond  of  what  they  have  loved 
in  childhood.' 

'  I  never  was  here  when  I  was  a  child,  and  I  am  not  one  of 
your  amiable  people.' 

'  Very  true,  indeed,'  thought  Helen. 

'  Miss  Stanley  looks  at  me  as  if  I  had  seven  heads,'  said 
Miss  Clarendon,  laughing ;  and,  a  minute  after,  overtaking 
Helen  as  she  walked  on,  she  looked  full  in  her  face,  and  added, 
'  Do  acknowledge  that  you  think  me  a  savage.'  Helen  did  not 
deny  it,  and  from  that  moment  Miss  Clarendon  looked  less 
savagely  upon  her.  She  laughed  and  said,  '  I  am  not  quite 
such  a  bear  as  I  seem,  you'll  find ;  at  least  I  never  hug  people 
to  death.  My  growl  is  worse  than  my  bite,  unless  some  one 
should  flatter  my  classical,  bearish  passion,  and  offer  to  feed 
me  with  honey,  and  when  I  find  it  all  comb  and  no  honey, 
who  would  not  growl  then  ?  ' 

Lady  Cecilia  now  came  up,  and  pointed  out  views  to  which 
the  General  had  opened.  'Yes,  it's  well,  he  has  done  very 
well,  but  pray  don't  stand  on  ceremony  with  me.  I  can  walk 
alone,  you  may  leave  me  to  my  own  cogitations,  as  I  like 
best.' 

'  Surely,  as  you  like  best,'  said  Lady  Cecilia ;  '  pray  consider 
yourself,  as  you  know  you  are,  at  home  here.' 

'  No,  I  never  shall  be  at  home  here,'  said  Esther. 

'  Oh  !  don't  say  that,  let  me  hope — let  me  hope '  and  she 

withdrew.  Helen  just  stayed  to  unlock  a  gate  for  Miss 
Clarendon's  '  rambles  further,'  and,  as  she  unlocked  it,  she 
heard  Miss  Clarendon  sigh  as  she  repeated  the  word,  '  Hope, 
I  do  not  like  to  hope,  hope  has  so  often  deceived  me.' 

'  You  will  never  be  deceived  in  Cecilia,'  said  Helen. 

'  Take  care — stay  till  you  try.' 

'  I  have  tried,'  said  Helen,  '  I  know  her.' 

'  How  long  ? ' 

'  From  childhood  ! ' 

'  You're  scarcely  out  of  childhood  yet.' 

'  I  am  not  so  very  young.  I  have  had  trials  of  my  friends 
— of  Cecilia  particularly,  much  more  than  you  could  ever  have 
had.' 

'  Well,  this  is  the  best  thing  I  ever  heard  of  her,  and  from 
good  authority  too  ;  her  friends  abroad  were  all  false,'  said 
Miss  Clarendon. 

52 


HELEN 

'  It  is  very  extraordinary,'  said  Helen,  '  to  hear  such  a 
young  person  as  you  are  talk  so ' 

'  So — how  ? ' 

'  Of  false  friends — you  must  have  been  very  unfortunate.' 

'Pardon  me — very  fortunate — to  find  them  out  in  time.' 
She  looked  at  the  prospect,  and  liked  all  that  her  brother  was 
doing,  and  disliked  all  that  she  even  guessed  Lady  Cecilia  had 
done.  Helen  showed  her  that  she  guessed  wrong  here  and 
there,  and  smiled  at  her  prejudices ;  and  Miss  Clarendon 
smiled  again,  and  admitted  that  she  was  prejudiced,  '  but  every- 
body is  ;  only  some  show  and  tell,  and  others  smile  and  fib.  I 
wish  that  word  fib  was  banished  from  the  English  language,  and 
white  lie  drummed  out  after  it.  Things  by  their  right  names 
and  we  should  all  do  much  better.  Truth  must  be  told, 
whether  agreeable  or  not.' 

'  But  whoever  makes  truth  disagreeable  commits  high 
treason  against  virtue,'  said  Helen. 

'  Is  that  yours  ? '  cried  Miss  Clarendon,  stopping  short. 

'No,'  said  Helen. 

'  It  is  excellent  whoever  said  it.' 

'  It  was  fi-om  my  uncle  Stanley  I  heard  it,'  said  Helen. 

'  Superior  man  that  uncle  must  have  been.' 

'  I  will  leave  you  now,'  said  Helen. 

'  Do  ;  I  see  we  shall  like  one  another  in  time,  Miss  Stanley  ; 
in  time, — I  hate  sudden  friendships.' 

That  evening  Miss  Clarendon  questioned  Helen  more  about 
her  friendship  with  Cecilia,  and  how  it  was  she  came  to  live 
with  her.     Helen  plainly  told  her. 

'  Then  it  was  not  an  original  promise  between  you  ? ' 

'  Not  at  all,'  said  Helen. 

'  Lady  Cecilia  told  me  it  was.  Just  like  her, — I  knew  all 
the  time  it  was  a  lie.' 

Shocked  and  startled  at  the  word,  and  at  the  idea,  Helen 
exclaimed,  '  Oh,  Miss  Clarendon,  how  can  you  say  so  ?  any- 
body may  be  mistaken.     Cecilia  mistook ' 

Lady  Cecilia  joined  them  at  this  moment.  Miss  Clarendon's 
face  was  flushed.  '  This  room  is  insufferably  hot.  What  can 
be  the  use  of  a  fire  at  this  time  of  year  ? ' 

Cecilia  said  it  was  for  her  mother,  who  was  apt  to  be  chilly 
in  the  evenings  ;  and  as  she  spoke,  she  put  a  screen  between 
the  flushed  cheek  and  the  fire.      Miss    Clarendon   pushed   it 

S3 


HELEN 

away,  saying,  '  I  can't  talk,  I  can't  hear,  I  can't  understand 
with  a  screen  before  me.  What  did  you  say,  Lady  Ceciha,  to 
Lady  Davenant,  as  we  came  out  from  dinner,  about  Mr. 
Beauclerc  ? ' 

'  That  we  expect  him  to-morrow.' 

'  You  did  not  tell  me  so  when  you  wrote.' 

'  No,  my  dear.' 

'  Why,  pray  ? ' 

'  I  don't  know.' 

'  You  don't  know.  Lady  Cecilia !  why  should  people  say 
they  do  not  know,  when  they  do  know  perfectly  well  ? ' 

'  If  I  had  thought  it  was  of  any  consequence  to  you,  Esther,' 
said  Cecilia,  with  an  arch  look. 

'  Now  you  expect  me  to  answer  that  it  was  not  of  tlie  least 
consequence  to  me — that  is  the  answer  you  would  make  ;  but 
my  answer  is,  that  it  was  of  consequence  to  me,  and  you  knew 
it  was.' 

'  And  if  I  did  ?  ' 

'  If  you  did,  why  say  "  If  I  had  thought  it  of  any  conse- 
quence to  you  ?  " — why  say  so  ?  answer  me  truly.' 

'  Answer  me  truly  ! '  repeated  Lady  Cecilia,  laughing.  '  Oh, 
my  dear  Esther,  we  are  not  in  a  court  of  justice.' 

'  Nor  in  a  court  of  honour,'  pursued  Miss  Clarendon. 

'  Well,  well !  let  it  be  a  court  of  love  at  least,'  said  Lady 
Cecilia.  '  What  a  pretty  proverb  that  was,  Helen,  that  we  met 
with  the  other  day  in  that  book  of  old  English  proverbs — "  Love 
rules  his  kingdom  without  a  sword." ' 

'  Very  likely  ;  but  to  the  point,'  said  Miss  Clarendon,  '  when 
do  you  expect  Mr.  Beauclerc  ? ' 

'  To-morrow.' 

'  Then  I  shall  go  to-morrow.' 

'  My  dear  Esther,  why  ?  ' 

'  You  know  why  ;  you  know  what  reports  have  been  spread  ; 
it  suits  neither  my  character  nor  my  brother's  to  give  any 
foundation  for  such  reports.  Let  me  ring  the  bell,  and  I  will 
give  my  own  orders.' 

'  My  dear  Esther,  but  your  brother  will  be  so  vexed — so 
surprised.' 

'  My  brother  is  the  best  judge  of  his  own  conduct,  he  will 
do  what  he  pleases,  or  what  you  please.  I  am  the  judge  of 
mine,  and  certainly  shall  do  what  I  think  right.' 

54 


HELEN 

She  rang  accordingly,  and  ordered  that  her  carriage  should 
be  at  the  door  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning. 

'  Nay,  my  dear  Esther,'  persisted  Cecilia,  '  I  wish  you 
would  not  decide  so  suddenly  ;  we  were  so  glad  to  have  you 
come  to  us ' 

'  Glad  !  why,  you  know ' 

'  I  know,'  interrupted  Lady  Cecilia,  colouring,  and  she 
began  as  fast  as  possible  to  urge  every  argument  she  could 
think  of  to  persuade  Miss  Clarendon  :  but  no  arguments,  no 
entreaties  of  hers  or  the  General's,  public  or  private,  were  of 
any  avail, — go  she  would,  and  go  she  did,  at  six  o'clock. 

'  I  suppose,'  said  Helen  to  Lady  Davenant,  '  that  Miss 
Clarendon  is  very  estimable,  and  she  seems  to  be  very  clever ; 
but  I  wonder  that  with  all  her  abilities  she  does  not  learn  to 
make  her  manners  more  agreeable.' 

'  My  dear,'  said  Lady  Davenant,  '  we  must  take  people  as 
they  are  ;  you  may  graft  a  rose  upon  an  oak,  but  those  who 
have  tried  the  experiment  tell  us  the  graft  will  last  but  a  short 
time,  and  the  operation  ends  in  the  destruction  of  both  ;  where 
the  stocks  have  no  common  nature,  there  is  ever  a  want  of 
conformity  which  sooner  or  later  proves  fatal  to  both.' 

But  Beauclerc,  what  was  become  of  him  ? — that  d3.y  passed, 
and  no  Beauclerc  ;  another  and  another  came,  and  on  the 
third  day,  only  a  letter  from  him,  which  ought  to  have  come 
on  Tuesday. — But  '  iao  iaie,'  the  shameful  brand  of  procras- 
tination, was  upon  it — and  it  contained  only  a  few  lines  blotted 
in  the  folding,  to  say  that  he  could  not  possibly  be  at  Clarendon 
Park  on  Tuesday,  but  would  on  Wednesday  or  Thursday  if 
possible. 

Good-natured  Lord  Davenant  observed,  'When  a  young 
man  in  London,  writing  to  his  friends  in  the  country,  names 
two  days  for  leaving  town,  and  adds  an  "  if  possible"  his  friends 
should  never  expect  him  till  the  last  of  the  two  named.' 

The  last  of  the  two  days  arrived — Thursday.  The  aide- 
de-camp  asked  if  Mr.  Beauclerc  was  expected  to-day. 

'  Yes,  I  expect  to  see  him  to-day,'  the  General  answered. 

'  I  hope,  but  do  not  expect,'  said  Lady  Davenant,  '  for,  as 
learned  authority  tells  me,  "  to-'>expect  is  to  hope  with  some 
degree  of  certainty  " ' 

The  General  left  the  room  repeating,  '  I  expect  him  to-day, 
Ceciha.' 

55 


HELEN 

The  day  passed,  however,  and  he  came  not — the  night 
came.  The  General  ordered  that  the  gate  should  be  kept 
open,  and  that  a  servant  should  sit  up.  The  servant  sat  up  all 
night,  cursing  Mr.  Beauclerc.  And  in  the  morning  he  replied 
with  maUcious  alacrity  to  the  first  question  his  master  asked, 
'  No,  sir,  Mr.  Beauclerc  is  not  come.' 

At  breakfast,  the  General,  after  buttering  his  bread  in 
silence  for  some  minutes,  confessed  that  he  loved  punctuality. 
It  might  be  a  military  prejudice, — it  might  be  too  professional, 
martinet  perhaps, — but  still  he  owned  he  did  love  punctuality. 
He  considered  it  as  a  part  of  politeness,  a  proper  attention  to 
the  convenience  and  feelings  of  others  ;  indispensable  between 
strangers  it  is  usually  felt  to  be,  and  he  did  not  know  why 
intimate  friends  should  deem  themselves  privileged  to  dispense 
with  it. 

His  eyes  met  Helen's  as  he  finished  these  words,  and 
smiling,  he  complimented  her  upon  her  constant  punctuality. 
It  was  a  voluntary  grace  in  a  lady,  but  an  imperative  duty  in  a 
man — and  a  young  man. 

'  You  are  fond  of  this  young  man,  I  see.  General,'  said  Lord 
Davenant. 

'  But  not  of  his  fault' 

Lady  Cecilia  said  something  about  forgiving  a  first  fault. 

'  Never  ! '  said  Lady  Davenant.  '  Lord  Collingwood's  rule 
was — never  forgive  a  first  fault,  and  you  will  not  have 
a  second.      You  love  Beauclerc,  I  see,  as  Lord  Davenant  says.' 

'  Love  him  ! '  resumed  the  General ;  '  with  all  his  faults  and 
folHes,  I  love  him  as  if  he  were  my  brother.' 

At  which  words  Lady  Cecilia,  with  a  scarcely  perceptible 
smile,  cast  a  furtive  glance  at  Helen. 

The  General  called  for  his  horses,  and,  followed  by  his  aide- 
de-camp,  departed,  saying  that  he  should  be  back  at  luncheon- 
time,  when  he  hoped  to  find  Beauclerc.  In  the  same  hope. 
Lady  Davenant  ordered  her  pony-phaeton  earlier  than  usual  ; 
Lady  Cecilia  further  hoped  most  earnestly  that  Beauclerc  would 
come  this  day,  for  the  next  the  house  would  be  full  of  company, 
and  she  really  wished  to  have  him  one  day  at  least  to  themselves, 
and  she  gave  a  most  significant  glance  at  Helen. 

'  The  first  move  often  secures  the  game  against  the  best 
players,'  said  she. 

Helen  blushed,  because  she  could  not  help  understanding  ; 

56 


HELEN 

she  was  ashamed,  vexed  with  Ceciha,  yet  pleased  by  her  kind- 
ness, and  half  amused  by  her  arch  look  and  tone. 

They  were  neither  of  them  aware  that  Lady  Davenant  had 
heard  the  words  that  passed,  or  seen  the  looks  ;  but  imme- 
diately afterwards,  when  they  were  leaving  the  breakfast-room. 
Lady  Davenant  came  between  the  two  friends,  laid  her  hand 
upon  her  daughter's  arm,  and  said, 

'  Before  you  make  any  move  in  a  dangerous  game,  listen  to 
the  voice  of  old  experience.' 

Lady  Cecilia,  startled,  looked  up,  but  as  if  she  did  not 
comprehend. 

'  Cupid's  bow,  my  dear,'  continued  her  mother,  '  is,  as  the 
Asiatics  tell  us,  strung  with  bees,  which  are  apt  to  sting — 
sometimes  fatally — those  who  meddle  with  it.' 

Lady  Cecilia  still  looked  with  an  innocent  air,  and  still  as  if 
she  could  not  comprehend. 

'  To  speak  more  plainly,  then,  Cecilia,'  said  her  mother, 
'  build  no  matrimonial  castles  in  the  air  ;  standing  or  falling 
they  do  mischief — mischief  either  to  the  builder,  or  to  those 
for  whom  they  may  be  built.' 

'Certainly  if  they  fall  they  disappoint  one,'  said  Lady 
Cecilia,  '  but  if  they  stand  ? ' 

Seeing  that  she  made  no  impression  on  her  daughter.  Lady 
Davenant  turned  to  Helen,  and  gravely  said, 

'  My  dear  Helen,  do  not  let  my  daughter  inspire  you  with 
false,  and  perhaps  vain  imaginations,  ceitainly  premature, 
therefore  unbecoming.' 

Helen  shrank  back,  yet  instantly  looked  up,  and  her  look 
was  ingenuously  grateful. 

'  But,  mamma,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  '  I  declare  I  do  not 
understand  what  all  this  is  about.' 

'  About  Mr.  Granville  Beauclerc,'  said  her  mother. 

'  How  can  you,  dear  mamma,  pronounce  his  name  so  tout 
au  longf 

'  Pardon  my  indelicacy,  my  dear  ;  delicacy  is  a  good  thing, 
but  truth  a  better.  I  have  seen  the  happiness  of  many  young 
women  sacrificed  by  such  false  delicacy,  and  by  the  fear  of 
giving  a  moment's  present  pain,  which  it  is  sometimes  the  duty 
of  a  true  friend  to  give.' 

'  Certainly,  certainly,  mamma,  only  not  necessary  now ; 
and  I  am  so  sorry  you  have  said  all  this  to  poor  dear  Helen.' 

57 


HELEN 

'  If  you  have  said  nothing  to  her,  Cecilia,  I  acknowledge  1 
have  said  too  much.' 

'  I  said — I  did  nothing,'  cried  Lady  Cecilia  ;  '  I  built  no 
castles — never  built  a  regular  castle  in  my  life  ;  never  had  a 
regular  plan  in  my  existence ;  never  mentioned  his  name, 
except  about  another  person ' 

An  appealing  look  to  Helen  was  however  protested. 

'To  the  best  of  my  recollection,  at  least,'  Lady  Cecilia 
immediately  added. 

'  Helen  seems  to  be  blushing  for  your  want  of  recollection, 
Cecilia.' 

'  I  am  sure  I  do  not  know  why  you  blush,  Helen.  I  am 
certain  I  never  did  say  a  word  distinctly.' 

'  Not  disti7ictly  certainly,'  said  Helen  in  a  low  voice.  '  It 
was  my  fault  if  I  understood ' 

'  Always  true,  you  are,'  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'  I  protest  I  said  nothing  but  the  truth,'  cried  Lady  Cecilia 
hastily. 

'  But  not  the  whole  truth,  Cecilia,'  said  her  mother. 

'  I  did,  upon  my  word,  mamma,'  persisted  Lady  Cecilia, 
repeating  '  upon  my  word.' 

'  Upon  your  word,  Cecilia  !  that  is  either  a  vulgar  expletive 
or  a  most  serious  asseveration.' 

She  spoke  with  a  grave  tone,  and  with  her  severe  look,  and 
Helen  dared  not  raise  her  eyes  ;  Lady  Cecilia  now  coloured 
deeply. 

'  Shame  !  Nature's  hasty  conscience,'  said  Lady  Davenant. 
'  Heaven  preserve  it ! ' 

'  Oh,  mother ! '  cried  Lady  Cecilia,  laying  her  hand  on  her 
mother's,  '  surely  you  do  not  think  seriously — surely  you  are 
not  angry — I  cannot  bear  to  see  you  displeased,'  said  she, 
looking  up  imploringly  in  her  mother's  face,  and  softly,  urgently 
pressing  her  hand.  No  pressure  was  returned  ;  that  hand 
was  slowly  and  with  austere  composure  withdrawn,  and  her 
mother  walked  away  down  the  corridor  to  her  own  room. 

Lady  CeciUa  stood  still,  and  the  tears  came  into  her  eyes. 

'  My  dear  friend,  I  am  exceedingly  sorry,'  said  Helen.  She 
could  not  believe  that  Cecilia  meant  to  say  what  was  not  true, 
yet  she  felt  that  she  had  been  to  blame  in  not  telling  all,  and 
her  mother  in  saying  too  much. 

Lady   Cecilia,    her   tears   dispersed,    stood   looking   at    the 

58 


HELEN 

impression  which  her  mother's  signet-ring  had  left  in  the  palm 
of  her  hand.  It  was  at  that  moment  a  disagreeable  recollec- 
tion that  the  motto  of  that  ring  was  'Truth.'  Rubbing  the 
impress  from  her  hand,  she  said,  half  speaking  to  herself,  and 
half  to  Helen — '  I  am  sure  I  did  not  mean  anything  wrong ; 
and  I  am  sure  nothing  can  be  more  true  than  that  I  never 
formed  a  regular  plan  in  my  life.  After  all,  I  am  sure  that  so 
much  has  been  said  about  nothing,  that  I  do  not  understand 
anything :  I  never  do,  when  mamma  goes  on  in  that  way, 
making  mountains  of  molehills,  which  she  always  does  with 
me,  and  did  ever  since  I  was  a  child ;  but  she  really  forgets 
that  I  am  not  a  child.  Now,  it  is  well  the  General  was  not 
by ;  he  would  never  have  borne  to  see  his  wife  so  treated. 
But  I  would  not,  for  the  world,  be  the  cause  of  any  disagree- 
ment. O  Helen,  my  mother  does  not  know  how  I  love  her, 
let  her  be  ever  so  severe  to  me  !  But  she  never  loved  me  ;  she 
cannot  help  it.  I  believe  she  does  her  best  to  love  me — my 
poor,  dear  mother  ! ' 

Helen  seized  this  opportunity  to  repeat  the  warm  expressions 
she  had  heard  so  lately  from  Lady  Davenant,  and  melting  they 
sank  into  Cecilia's  heart.  She  kissed  Helen  again  and  again, 
for  a  dear,  good  peacemaker,  as  she  always  was — and  '  I'm 
resolved ' — but  in  the  midst  of  her  good  resolves  she  caught  a 
glimpse,  through  the  glass  door  opening  on  the  park,  of  the 
General,  and  a  fine  horse  they  were  ringing,  and  she  hurried 
out ;  all  light  of  heart  she  went,  as  though 

Her  treading  would  not  bend  a  blade  of  grass, 
Or  shake  the  downy  blowball  from  her  stalk. 


CHAPTER    VII 

Since  Lord  Davenant's  arrival.  Lady  Davenant's  time  was  so 
much  taken  up  with  him,  that  Helen  could  not  have  many 
opportunities  of  conversing  with  her,  and  she  was  the  more 
anxious  to  seize  every  one  that  occurred.  She  always  watched 
for  the  time  when  Lady  Davenant  went  out  in  her  pony 
phaeton,  for  then  she  had  her  delightfully  to  herself,  the 
carriage  holding  only  two. 

59 


HELEN 

It  was  at  the  door,  and  Lady  Davenant  was  crossing  the 
hall  followed  by  Helen,  when  Cecilia  came  in  with  a  look, 
unusual  in  her,  of  being  much  discomfited. 

'  Another  put-off  from  Mr.  Beauclerc  !  He  will  not  be  here 
to-day.      I  give  him  up.' 

Lady  Davenant  stopped  short,  and  asked  whether  Cecilia 
had  told  him  that  probably  she  should  soon  be  gone  ? 

'  To  be  sure  I  did,  mamma.' 

'  And  what  reason  does  he  give  for  his  delay  ? ' 

'  None,  mamma,  none — not  the  least  apology.  He  says, 
very  cavalierly  indeed,  that  he  is  the  worst  man  in  the  world 
at  making  excuses— shall  attempt  none.' 

'  There  he  is  right,'  said  Lady  Davenant.  '  Those  who  are 
good  at  excuses,  as  Franklin  justly  observed,  are  apt  to  be 
good  for  nothing  else.' 

'  The  General  came  up  the  steps  at  this  moment,  rolling  a 
note  between  his  fingers,  and  looking  displeased.  Lady 
Davenant  inquired  if  he  could  tell  her  the  cause  of  Mr. 
Beauclerc's  delay.      He  could  not. 

Lady  Cecilia  exclaimed — '  Very  extraordinary  !  Provoking  ! 
Insufferable  !   Intolerable  ! ' 

'  It  is  Mr.  Beauclerc's  own  affair,'  said  Lady  Davenant, 
wrapping  her  shawl  round  her  ;  and,  taking  the  General's  arm, 
she  walked  on  to  her  carriage.  Seating  herself,  and  gathering 
up  the  reins,  she  repeated  —  'Mr.  Beauclerc's  own  affair, 
completely.' 

The  lash  of  her  whip  was  caught  somewhere,  and,  while  the 
groom  was  disentangling  it,  she  reiterated  '  That  will  do  ;  let 
the  horses  go '  ;  and  with  half-suppressed  impatience  thanked 
Helen,  who  was  endeavouring'  to  arrange  some  ill-disposed 
cloak — '  Thank  you,  thank  you,  my  dear ;  it's  all  very  well. 
Sit  down,  Helen.' 

She  drove  off  rapidly,  through  the  beautiful  park  scenery. 
But  the  ancient  oaks,  standing  alone,  casting  vast  shadows, 
the  distant  massive  woods  of  magnificent  extent  and  of  soft  and 
varied  foliage,  the  secluded  glades,  all  were  lost  upon  her. 
Looking  straight  between  her  horses'  ears,  she  drove  on  in 
absolute  silence. 

Helen's  idea  of  Mr.  Beauclerc's  importance  increased 
wonderfully.  What  must  he  be  whose  coming  or  not  coming 
could  so  move  all  the  world,  or  those  who  were  all  the  world 

60 


HELEN 

to  her  ?  And,  left  to  her  own  cogitations,  she  was  picturing 
to  herself  what  manner  of  man  he  might  be,  when  suddenly 
Lady  Davenant  turned,  and  asked  what  she  was  thinking  of  ? 
'  I  beg  your  pardon  for  startling  you  so,  my  dear ;  I  am  aware 
that  it  is  a  dreadfully  imprudent,  impertinent  question — one 
which,  indeed,  I  seldom  ask.  Few  interest  me  sufficiently  to 
make  me  care  of  what  they  think  :  from  fewer  still  could  I 
expect  to  hear  the  truth.  Nay — nothing  upon  compulsion, 
Helen.  Only  say  plainly,  if  you  would  rather  not  tell  me. 
That  answer  I  should  prefer  to  the  ingenious  formula  of  evasion, 
the  solecism  in  metaphysics,  which  Cecilia  used  the  other  day, 
when  unwittingly  I  asked  her  of  what  she  was  thinking — "  Of 
a  great  many  different  things,  mamma." ' 

Helen,  still  more  alarmed  by  Lady  Davenant's  speech  than 
by  her  question,  and  aware  of  the  conclusions  which  might  be 
drawn  from  her  answer,  nevertheless  bravely  replied  that  she 
had  been  thinking  of  Mr.  Beauclerc,  of  what  he  might  be  whose 
coming  or  not  coming  was  of  such  consequence.  As  she  spoke, 
the  expression  of  Lady  Davenant's  countenance  changed. 

'  Thank  you,  my  dear  child,  you  are  truth  itself,  and  truly 
do  I  love  you  therefore.  It's  well  that  you  did  not  ask  me  of 
what  I  was  thinking,  for  I  am  not  sure  that  I  could  have 
answered  so  directly.' 

'  But  I  could  never  have  presumed  to  ask  such  a  question 
of  you,'  said  Helen,  '  there  is  such  a  difference.' 

'  Yes,'  replied  Lady  Davenant ;  '  there  is  such  a  difference 
as  age  and  authority  require  to  be  made,  but  nevertheless,  such 
as  is  not  quite  consistent  with  the  equal  rights  of  friendship. 
You  have  told  me  the  subject  of  your  day-dream,  my  love,  and 
if  you  please,  I  will  tell  you  the  subject  of  mine.  I  was  rapt 
into  times  long  past :  I  was  living  over  again  some  early 
scenes — some  which  are  connected,  and  which  connect  me,  in 
a  curious  manner,  with  this  young  man,  Mr.  Granville  Beauclerc' 

She  seemed  to  speak  with  some  difficulty,  and  yet  to  be 
resolved  to  go  on. 

'  Helen,  I  have  a  mind,'  continued  she,  '  to  tell  you  what, 
in  the  language  of  affected  autobiographers,  I  might  call 
"  some  passages  of  my  life." ' 

Helen's  eyes  brightened,  as  she  eagerly  thanked  her :  but 
hearing  a  half-suppressed  sigh,  she  added — '  Not  if  it  is  pain- 
ful to  you  though,  my  dear  Lady  Davenant.' 

6i 


HELEN 

'  Painful  it  must  be,'  she  replied,  '  but  it  may  be  useful  to 
you ;  and  a  weak  friend  is  that  who  can  do  only  what  is 
pleasurable.  You  have  often  trusted  me  with  those  little 
inmost  feelings  of  the  heart,  which,  however  innocent,  we 
shrink  from  exposing  to  any  but  the  friends  we  most  love  ;  it 
is  unjust  and  absurd  of  those  advancing  in  years  to  expect  of 
the  young  that  confidence  should  come  all  and  only  on  their 
side :  the  human  heart,  at  whatever  age,  opens  only  to  the 
heart  that  opens  in  return.' 

Lady  Davenant  paused  again,  and  then  said,  'It  is  a 
general  opinion  that  nobody  is  the  better  for  advice.' 

'  I  am  sure  I  do  not  think  so,'  said  Helen. 

'  I  am  glad  you  do  not ;  nor  do  L  Much  depends  upon 
the  way  in  which  it  is  offered.  General  maxims,  dra\vn  from 
experience,  are,  to  the  young  at  least,  but  as  remarks — moral 
sentences — mere,  dead  letter,  and  take  no  hold  of  the  mind. 
"  I  have  felt "  must  come  before  "  I  think,"  especially  in  speak- 
ing to  a  young  friend  ;  and,  though  I  am  accused  of  being  so 
fond  of  generalising  that  I  never  come  to  particulars,  I  can  and 
will  :  therefore,  my  dear,  I  will  tell  you  some  particulars  of  my 
life,  in  which,  take  notice,  there  are  no  adventures.  Mine  has 
been  a  hfe  of  passion — of  feeling,  at  least, — not  of  incidents  : 
nothing,  my  dear,  to  excite  or  to  gratify  curiosity.' 

'  But,  independent  of  all  curiosity  about  events,'  said  Helen, 
'  there  is  such  an  interest  in  knowing  what  has  been  really  felt 
and  thought  in  their  former  lives  by  those  we  know  and  love.' 

'  I  shall  sink  in  your  esteem,'  said  Lady  Davenant — '  so 
be  it. 

'  I  need  not  begin,  as  most  people  do,  with  "  I  was  born  " 

'  but,  interrupting  herself,  she  said,  '  this  heat  is  too  much 

for  me.' 

They  turned  into  a  long  shady  drive  through  the  woods. 
Lady  Davenant  drew  up  the  reins,  and  her  ponies  walked 
slowly  on  the  grassy  road;  then,  turning  to  Helen,  she 
said, — 

'  It  would  have  been  well  for  me  if  any  friend  had,  when  I 
was  of  your  age,  put  me  on  my  guard  against  my  own  heart : 
but  my  too  indulgent,  too  sanguine  mother  led  me  into  the 

very  danger  against  which  she  should  have  warned  me she 

misled  me,  though  without  being  aware  of  it.     Our  minds,  our 
very  natures,  differed  strangely. 

62 


HELEN 

'  She  was  a  castle-builder — yes,  now  you  know,  my  dear, 
why  I  spoke  so  strongly,  and,  as  you  thought,  so  severely,  this 
morning.  My  mother  was  a  castle-builder  of  the  ordinary 
sort :  a  worldly  plan  of  a  castle  was  hers,  and  little  care  had 
she  about  the  knight  within ;  yet  she  had  sufficient  tact  to 
know  that  it  must  be  the  idea  of  the  preux  chevalier  that 
would  lure  her  daughter  into  the  castle.  Prudent  for  herself, 
imprudent  for  me,  and  yet  she  loved  me — all  she  did  was  for 
love  of  me.  She  managed  with  so  much  address,  that  I  had 
no  suspicion  of  my  being  the  subject  of  any  speculation — other- 
wise, probably,  my  imagination  might  have  revolted,  my  self- 
will  have  struggled,  my  pride  have  interfered,  or  my  delicacy 
might  have  been  alarmed,  but  nothing  of  all  that  happened  ;  I 
was  only  too  ready,  too  glad,  to  believe  all  that  I  was  told,  all 
that  appeared  in  that  spring-time  of  hope  and  love.  I  was 
very  romantic,  not  in  the  modern  fashionable  young-lady  sense 
of  the  word,  with  the  mixed  ideas  of  a  shepherdess's  hat  and 
the  paraphernalia  of  a  peeress — love  in  a  cottage,  and  a 
fashionable  house  in  town.  No  ;  mine  was  honest,  pure,  real 
romantic  love — ^ absurd  if  you  will;  it  was  love  nursed  by 
imagination  more  than  by  hope.  I  had  early,  in  my  secret 
soul,  as  perhaps  you  have  at  this  instant  in  yours,  a  pattern  of 
perfection — something  chivalrous,  noble,  something  that  is  no 
longer  to  be  seen  nowadays — the  more  delightful  to  imagine, 
the  moral  sublime  and  beautiful ;  more  than  human,  yet  with 
the  extreme  of  human  tenderness.  Mine  was  to  be  a  demigod 
whom  I  could  worship,  a  husband  to  whom  I  could  always 
look  up,  with  whom  I  could  always  sympathise,  and  to  whom 
I  could  devote  myself  with  all  a  woman's  self-devotion.  I  had 
then  a  vast  idea— as  I  think  you  have  now,  Helen — of  self- 
devotion  ;  you  would  devote  yourself  to  your  friends,  but  I 
could  not  shape  any  of  my  friends  into  a  fit  object.  So  after 
my  own  imagination  I  made  one,  dwelt  upon  it,  doated  on  it, 
and  at  last  threw  this  bright  image  of  my  own  fancy  full  upon 
the  being  to  whom  I  thought  I  was  most  happily  destined — 
destined  by  duty,  chosen  by  affection.  The  words  '  I  love 
you '  once  pronounced,  I  gave  my  whole  heart  in  return,  gave 
it,  sanctified,  as  I  felt,  by  religion.  I  had  high  religious 
sentiments  ;  a  vow  once  past  the  lips,  a  look,  a  single  look 
of  appeal  to  Heaven,  was  as  much  for  me  as  if  pronounced  at 
the  altar,  and  before  thousands  to  witness.     Some  time  was  to 

63 


HELEN 

elapse  before  the  celebration  of  our  marriage.  Protracted 
engagements  are  unwise,  yet  I  should  not  say  so  ;  this  gave 
me  time  to  open  my  eyes — my  bewitched  eyes  :  still,  some 
months  I  passed  in  a  trance  of  beatification,  with  visions  of 
duties  all  performed — benevolence  universal,  and  gratitude, 
and  high  success,  and  crowns  of  laurel,  for  my  hero,  for  he  was 
military  ;  it  all  joined  well  in  my  fancy.  All  the  pictured  tales 
of  vast  heroic  deeds  were  to  be  his.  Living,  I  was  to  live  in 
the  radiance  of  his  honour ;  or  dying,  to  die  with  him,  and 
then  to  be  most  blessed. 

'  It  is  all  to  me  now  as  a  dream,  long  past,  and  never 
told ;  no,  never,  except  to  him  who  had  a  right  to  know  it — 
my  husband,  and  now  to  you,  Helen.  From  my  dream  I  was 
awakened  by  a  rude  shock — I  saw,  I  thank  Heaven  I  first,  and 
I  alone,  saw  that  his  heart  was  gone  from  me — that  his  heart 
had  never  been  mine — that  it  was  unworthy  of  me.  No,  I 
will  not  say  that  ;  I  will  not  think  so.  Still  I  trust  he  had 
deceived  himself,  though  not  so  much  as  he  deceived  me.  I 
am  willing  to  believe  he  did  not  know  that  what  he  professed 
for  me  was  not   love  till   he  was  seized   by  that   passion  for 

another,  a  younger,  fairer Oh !  how  much  fairer.      Beauty 

is  a  great  gift  of  Heaven — not  for  the  purposes  of  female 
vanity ;  but  a  great  gift  for  one  who  loves,  and  wishes  to  be 
loved.      But  beauty  I  had  not.' 

'  Had  not ! '  interrupted  Helen,  '  I  always  heard ' 

'  He  did  not  think  so,  my  dear ;  no  matter  what  others 
thought,  at  least  so  I  felt  at  that  time.  My  identity  is  so 
much  changed  that  I  can  look  back  upon  this  now,  and  tell  it 
all  to  you  calmly. 

'  It  was  at  a  rehearsal  of  ancient  music ;  I  went  there 
accidentally  one  morning  without  my  mother,  with  a  certain 
old  duchess  and  her  daughters ;  the  dowager  full  of  some 
Indian  screen  which  she  was  going  to  buy ;  the  daughters, 
intent,  one  of  them,  on  a  quarrel  between  two  of  the  singers  ; 
the  other  upon  loves  and  hates  of  her  own.  I  was  the  only 
one  of  the  party  who  had  any  real  taste  for  music.  I  was  then 
particularly  fond  of  it. 

'Well,  my  dear,  I  must  come  to  the  point,'  her  \'oice 
changing  as  she  spoke. — '  After  such  a  lapse  of  time,  during 
which  my  mind,  my  whole  self,  has  so  changed,  I  could  not 
have  believed  before  I  began  to  speak    on   this  subject  that 

64 


HELEN 

these  reminiscences  could  have  so  moved  me  ;  but  it  is  merely 
this  sudden  wakening  of  ideas  long  dormant,  for  years  not 
called  up,  never  put  into  words. 

'  I  was  sitting,  rapt  in  a  silent  ecstasy  of  pleasure,  leaning 
back  behind  the  whispering  party,  when  I  saw  him  come  in, 
and,  thinking  only  of  his  sharing  my  delight,  I  made  an  effort 
to  catch  his  attention,  but  he  did  not  see  me — his  eye  was 
fixed  on  another ;  I  followed  that  eye,  and  saw  that  most 
beautiful  creature  on  which  it  fixed ;  I  saw  him  seat  himself 
beside  her — one  look  was  enough — it  was  conviction.  A 
pang  went  through  me  ;  I  grew  cold,  but  made  no  sound  nor 
motion  ;  I  gasped  for  breath,  I  believe,  but  I  did  not  faint. 
None  cared  for  me  ;  I  was  unnoticed — saved  from  the  abase- 
ment of  pity.  I  struggled  to  retain  my  self-command,  and  was 
enabled  to  complete  the  purpose  on  which  I  then,  even  then, 
resolved.     That  resolve  gave  me  force. 

<  In  any  great  emotion  we  can  speak  better  to  those  who 
do  not  care  for  us  than  to  those  who  feel  for  us.  More  calmly 
than  I  now  speak  to  you,  I  turned  to  the  person  who  then  sat 
beside  me,  to  the  dowager  whose  heart  was  in  the  Indian 
screen,  and  begged  that  I  might  not  longer  detain  her,  as  I 
wished  that  she  would  carry  me  home — she  readily  complied  : 
I  had  presence  of  mind  enough  to  move  when  we  could 
do  so  without  attracting  attention.  It  was  well  that  woman 
talked  as  she  did  all  the  way  home  :  she  never  saw,  never 
suspected,  the  agony  of  her  to  whom  she  spoke.  I  ran  up  to 
my  own  room,  bolted  the  door,  and  threw  myself  into  a  chair ; 
that  is  the  last  thing  I  remember,  till  I  found  myself  lying 
on  the  floor,  wakening  from  a  state  of  insensibihty.  I  know 
not  what  time  had  elapsed  :  so  as  soon  as  I  could  I  rang  for  my 
maid  ;  she  had  knocked  at  my  door,  and,  supposing  I  slept,  had 
not  disturbed  me — my  mother,  I  found,  had  not  yet  returned. 

'  I  dressed  for  dinner ;  he  was  to  dine  with  us.  It  was 
my  custom  to  see  him  for  a  few  minutes  before  the  rest  of  the 
company  arrived.  No  time  ever  appeared  to  me  so  dreadfully 
long  as  the  interval  between  my  being  dressed  that  day  and 
his  arrival. 

'  I  heard  him  coming  upstairs  :  my  heart  beat  so  violently 
that  I  feared  I  should  not  be  able  to  speak  with  dignity  and 
composure,  but  the  motive  was  sufficient. 

'  What  I  said  I  know  not ;  I  am  certain  only  that  it  was 
F  65 


HELEN 

without  one  word  of  reproach.  What  I  had  at  one  glance 
foreboded  was  true — he  acknowledged  it.  I  released  him  from 
all  engagement  to  me.  I  saw  he  was  evidently  relieved  by  the 
determined  tone  of  my  refusal — at  what  expense  to  my  heart 
he  was  set  free,  he  saw  not — never  knew — never  suspected. 
But  after  that  first  involuntary  expression  of  the  pleasure  of 
relief,  I  saw  in  his  countenance  surprise,  a  sort  of  mortified 
astonishment  at  my  self-possession.  I  own  my  woman's  pride 
enjoyed  this  ;  it  was  something  better  than  pride — the  sense 
of  the  preservation  of  my  dignity.  I  felt  that  in  this  shipwreck 
of  my  happiness  I  made  no  cowardly  exposure  of  my  feelings, 
but  he  did  not  understand  me.  Our  minds,  as  I  now  found, 
moved  in  different  orbits.  We  could  not  comprehend  each 
other.  Instead  of  feeling,  as  the  instinct  of  generosity  would 
have  taught  him  to  feel,  that  I  was  sacrificing  my  happiness  to 
his,  he  told  me  that  he  now  believed  I  had  never  loved  him. 
My  eyes  were  opened — I  saw  him  at  once  as  he  really  was. 
The  ungenerous  look  upon  self-devotion  as  madness,  folly,  or 
art :  he  could  not  think  me  a  fool,  he  did  not  think  me  mad, 
artful  I  believe  he  did  suspect  me  to  be ;  he  concluded  that  I 
made  the  discovery  of  his  inconstancy  an  excuse  for  my  own  ; 
he  thought  me,  perhaps,  worse  than  capricious,  interested — for, 
our  engagement  being  unknown,  a  lover  of  higher  rank  had, 
in  the  interval,  presented  himself  My  perception  of  this  base 
suspicion  was  useful  to  me  at  the  moment,  as  it  roused  my 
spirit,  and  I  went  through  the  better,  and  without  relapse  of 
tenderness,  with  that  which  I  had  undertaken.  One  condition 
only  I  made  ;  I  insisted  that  this  explanation  should  rest 
between  us  two  ;  that,  in  fact,  and  in  manner,  the  breaking  off 
the  match  should  be  left  entirely  to  me.  And  to  this  part  of 
the  business  I  now  look  back  with  satisfaction,  and  I  have 
honest  pride  in  telling  you,  who  will  feel  the  same  for  me,  that 
I  practised  in  the  whole  conduct  of  the  affair  no  deceit  of  any 
kind,  not  one  falsehood  was  told.  The  world  knew  nothing ; 
there  my  mother  had  been  prudent.  She  was  the  only  person 
to  whom  1  was  bound  to  explain — to  speak,  I  mean,  for  I  did 
not  feel  myself  bound  to  explain.  Perfect  confidence  only  can 
command  perfect  confidence  in  whatever  relation  of  life.  I 
told  her  all  that  she  had  a  right  to  know.  I  announced  to  her 
that  the  intended  marriage  could  never  be — that  I  objected  to 
it ;    that  both  our  minds  were  changed ;    that  we  were  both 

66 


/  released  him  from  all  engagement  to  me. 


HELEN 

satisfied  in  having  released  each  other  from  our  mutual  engage- 
ment. I  had,  as  I  foresaw,  to  endure  my  mother's  anger,  her 
entreaties,  her  endless  surprise,  her  bitter  disappointment ; 
but  she  exhausted  all  these,  and  her  mind  turned  sooner  than 
I  had  expected  to  that  hope  of  higher  establishment  which 
amused  her  during  the  rest  of  the  season  in  London.  Two 
months  of  it  were  still  to  be  passed — to  me  the  two  most 
painful  months  of  my  existence.  The  daily,  nightly,  effort  of 
appearing  in  public,  while  I  was  thus  wretched,  in  the  full  gala 
of  life  in  the  midst  of  the  young,  the  gay,  the  happy — broken- 
hearted as  I  felt — it  was  an  effort  beyond  my  strength.  That 
summer  was,  I  remember,  intolerably  hot.  Whenever  my 
mother  observed  that  I  looked  pale,  and  that  my  spirits  were 
not  so  good  as  formerly,  I  exerted  myself  more  and  more  ; 
accepted  every  invitation  because  I  dared  not  refuse  ;  I  danced 
at  this  ball,  and  the  next,  and  the  next ;  urged  on,  I  finished  to 
the  dregs  the  dissipation  of  the  season. 

'  My  mother  certainly  made  me  do  dreadfully  too  much. 
But  I  blame  others,  as  we  usually  do  when  we  are  ourselves 
the  most  to  blame — I  had  attempted  that  which  could  not  be 
done.  By  suppressing  all  outward  sign  of  suffering,  allowing 
no  vent  for  sorrow  in  words  or  tears — by  actual  force  of  com- 
pression— I  thought  at  once  to  extinguish  my  feelings.  Little 
did  I  know  of  the  human  heart  when  I  thought  this  !  The  weak 
are  wise  in  yielding  to  the  first  shock.  They  cannot  be  struck 
to  the  earth  who  sink  prostrate  ;  sorrow  has  little  power  where 
there  is  no  resistance.  —  "The  flesh  will  follow  where  the 
pincers  tear."  Mine  was  a  presumptuous — it  had  nearly  been 
a  fatal  struggle.  That  London  season  at  last  over,  we  got 
into  the  country ;  I  expected  rest,  but  found  none.  The 
pressing  necessity  for  exertion  over,  the  stimulus  ceasing,  I 
sank — sank  into  a  state  of  apathy. 

'  Time  enough  had  elapsed  between  the  breaking  off  of  my 
marriage  and  the  appearance  of  this  illness  to  prevent  any 
ideas  on  my  mother's  part  of  cause  and  effect,  ideas  indeed 
which  were  never  much  looked  for,  or  well  joined  in  her  mind. 
The  world  knew  nothing  of  the  matter.  My  illness  went  under 
the  convenient  head  "  nervous."  I  heard  all  the  opinions 
pronounced  on  my  case,  and  knew  they  were  all  mistaken,  but 
I  swallowed  whatever  they  pleased.  No  physician,  I  repeated 
to  myself,  can  "minister  to  a  mind  diseased." 

68 


HELEN 

'  I  tried  to  call  religion  to  my  aid ;  but  my  religious  senti- 
ments were  at  that  time  tinctured  with  the  enthusiasm  of 
my  early  character.  Had  I  been  a  Catholic,  I  should  have 
escaped  from  my  friends  and  thrown  myself  into  a  cloister ;  as 
it  was,  I  had  formed  a  strong  wish  to  retire  from  that  world  which 
was  no  longer  anything  to  me  :  the  spring  of  passion,  which 
I  then  thought  the  spring  of  life,  being  broken,  I  meditated  my 
resolution  secretly  and  perpetually  as  I  lay  on  my  bed.  They 
used  to  read  to  me,  and,  among  other  things  some  papers 
of  The  Ratnbler,  which  I  liked  not  at  all ;  its  tripod  sentences 
tired  my  ear,  but  I  let  them  go  on — as  well  one  sound  as 
another. 

'  It  chanced  that  one  night,  as  I  was  going  to  sleep,  an 
eastern  story  in  The  Rambler  was  read  to  me,  about  some 
man,  aweary  of  the  world,  who  took  to  the  peaceful  her- 
mitage. There  was  a  regular  moral  tagged  to  the  end  of  it, 
a  thing  I  hate  ;  the  words  were,  "No  life  pleasing  to  God  that 
is  not  useful  to  man."  When  I  wakened  in  the  middle  of 
that  night,  this  sentence  was  before  my  eyes,  and  the  words 
seemed  to  repeat  themselves  over  and  over  again  to  my  ears 
when  I  was  sinking  to  sleep.  The  impression  remained  in 
my  mind,  and  though  I  never  voluntarily  recurred  to  it,  came 
out  long  afterwards,  perfectly  fresh,  and  became  a  motive  of 
action. 

'  Strange,  mysterious  connection  between  mind  and  body  ; 
in  mere  animal  nature  we  see  the  same.  The  bird  wakened 
from  his  sleep  to  be  taught  a  tune  sung  to  him  in  the  dark, 
and  left  to  sleep  again, — the  impression  rests  buried  within 
him,  and  weeks  afterward  he  comes  out  with  the  tune  perfect. 
But  these  are  only  phenomena  of  memory — mine  was  more 
extraordinary.  I  am  not  sure  that  I  can  explain  it  to  you. 
In  my  weak  state,  my  understanding  enfeebled  as  much  as 
my  body — my  reason  weaker  than  my  memory,  I  could  not 
help  allowing  myself  to  think  that  the  constant  repetition  of 
that  sentence  was  a  warning  sent  to  me  from  above.  As  I  grew 
stronger,  the  superstition  died  away,  but  the  sense  of  the  thing 
still  remained  with  me.  It  led  me  to  examine  and  reflect.  It 
did  more  than  all  my  mother's  entreaties  could  effect.  I  had 
refused  to  see  any  human  creature,  but  I  now  consented  to 
admit  a  few.  The  charm  was  broken.  I  gave  up  my  longing 
for  solitude,  my  plan  of  retreat  from  the  world  ;  suffered  myself 

69 


HELEN 

to  be  carried  where  they  pleased — to  Brighton  it  was — to  my 
mother's  satisfaction.  I  was  ready  to  appear  in  the  ranks  of 
fashion  at  the  opening  of  the  next  London  campaign.  Auto- 
matically I  "ran  my  female  exercises  o'er"  with  as  good  grace 
as  ever.  I  had  followers  and  proposals  ;  but  my  mother 
was  again  thrown  into  despair  by  what  she  called  the  short 
work  I  made  with  my  admirers,  scarcely  allowing  decent  time 
for  their  turning  into  lovers,  before  I  warned  them  not  to 
think  of  me.  I  have  heard  that  women  who  have  suffered 
from  man's  inconstancy  are  disposed  afterwards  to  revenge 
themselves  by  inflicting  pain  such  as  they  have  themselves 
endured,  and  delight  in  all  the  cruelty  of  coquetry.  It  was  not 
so  with  me.  Mine  was  too  deep  a  wound — skinned  over — not 
callous,  and  all  danger  of  its  opening  again  I  dreaded.  I  had 
lovers  the  more,  perhaps,  because  I  cared  not  for  them  ;  till 
amongst  them  there  came  one  who,  as  I  saw,  appreciated 
my  character,  and,  as  I  perceived,  was  becoming  seriously 
attached.  To  prevent  danger  to  his  happiness,  as  he  would 
take  no  other  warning,  I  revealed  to  him  the  state  of  my  mind. 
However  humiliating  the  confession,  I  thought  it  due  to  him. 
I  told  him  that  I  had  no  heart  to  give — that  I  had  received 
none  in  return  for  that  with  which  1  had  parted,  and  that  love 
was  over  with  me. 

'"As  a  passion,  it  may  be  so,  not  as  an  affection,"  was 
his  reply. 

'  The  words  opened  to  me  a  view  of  his  character.  I  saw, 
too,  by  his  love  increasing  with  his  esteem,  the  solidity  of  his 
understanding  and  the  nobleness  of  his  nature.  He  went 
deeper  and  deeper  into  my  mind,  till  he  came  to  a  spring  of 
gratitude,  which  rose  and  overflowed,  vivifying  and  fertilising 
the  seemingly  barren  waste.  I  believe  it  to  be  true  that, 
after  the  first  great  misfortune,  persons  never  return  to  be  the 
same  that  they  were  before,  but  this  I  know — and  this  it  is 
important  you  should  be  convinced  of,  my  dear  Helen — that 
the  mind,  though  sorely  smitten,  can  recover  its  powers.  A 
mind,  I  mean,  sustained  by  good  principles,  and  by  them 
made  capable  of  persevering  efforts  for  its  own  recovery.  It 
may  be  sure  of  regaining,  in  time — observe,  I  say  in  time — its 
healthful  tone. 

'  Time  was  given  to  me  by  that  kind,  that  noble  being,  who 
devoted  himself  to  me  with  a  passion  which  I  could  not  return 

70 


HELEN 

• — but,  with  such  affection  as  I  could  give,  and  which  he 
assured  me  would  make  his  happiness,  I  determined  to  devote 
to  him  the  whole  of  my  future  existence.  Happiness  for  me,  I 
thought,  was  gone,  except  in  so  far  as  I  could  make  him  happy. 
'  I  married  Lord  Davenant — much  against  my  mother's 
wish,  for  he  was  then  the  younger  of  three  brothers,  and  with 
a  younger  brother's  very  small  portion.  Had  it  been  a  more 
splendid  match,  I  do  not  think  I  could  have  been  prevailed  on 
to  give  my  consent.  I  could  not  have  been  sure  of  my  own 
motives,  or  rather  my  pride  would  not  have  been  clear  as  to 
the  opinion  which  others  might  form.  This  was  a  weakness, 
for  in  acting  we  ought  to  depend  upon  ourselves,  and  not  to 
look  for  the  praise  or  blame  of  others  ;  but  I  let  you  see  me  as 
I  am,  or  as  I  was  :  I  do  not  insist,  like  Queen  Elizabeth,  in 
having  my  portrait  without  shade. 


CHAPTER    VIII 

'  I  AM  proud  to  tell  you  that  at  the  time  I  married  we  were 
so  poor  that  I  was  obliged  to  give  up  many  of  those  luxuries 
to  which  I  was  entitled,  and  to  which  I  had  been  so  accustomed 
that  the  doing  without  them  had  till  then  hardly  come  within 
my  idea  of  possibility.  Our  whole  estabUshment  was  on  the 
most  humble  scale. 

'  I  look  back  to  this  period  of  my  hfe  with  the  greatest 
satisfaction.  I  had  exquisite  pleasure,  like  all  young  people  of 
sanguine  temperament  and  generous  disposition,  in  the  con- 
sciousness of  the  capabihty  of  making  sacrifices.  This  notion 
was  my  idol,  the  idol  of  the  inmost  sanctuary  of  my  mind,  and 
I  worshipped  it  with  all  the  energies  of  body  and  soul. 

'  In  the  course  of  a  few  years,  my  husband's  two  elder 
brothers  died.  If  you  have  any  curiosity  to  know  how,  I  will 
tell  you,  though  indeed  it  is  as  little  to  the  purpose  as  half  the 
things  people  tell  in  their  histories.  The  eldest,  a  home-bred 
lordling,  who,  from  the  moment  he  slipped  his  mother's  apron- 
strings,  had  fallen  into  folly,  and  then,  to  show  himself  manly, 
run  into  vice,  lost  his  life  in  a  duel  about  some  lady's  crooked 
thumb,  or  more  crooked  mind. 

'  The  second  brother  distinguished  himself  in  the  navy  ;  he 

71 


HELEN 

died  the  death  of  honour  ;  he  fell  gloriously,  and  was  by  his 
country  honoured — by  his  country  mourned. 

'  After  the  death  of  this  young  man,  the  inheritance  came 
to  my  husband.  Fortune  soon  after  poured  in  upon  us  a  tide 
of  wealth,  swelled  by  collateral  streams. 

'  You  will  wish  to  know  what  effect  this  change  of  circum- 
stances produced  upon  my  mind,  and  you  shall,  as  far  as  1 
know  it  myself  I  fancied  that  it  ^^'Ould  have  made  none, 
because  I  had  been  before  accustomed  to  all  the  trappings  of 
wealth  ;  yet  it  did  make  a  greater  change  in  my  feelings  than 
you  could  have  imagined,  or  I  could  have  conceived.  The 
possibility  of  producing  a  great  effect  in  society,  of  playing  a 
distinguished  part,  and  attaining  an  eminence  which  pleased 
my  fancy,  had  never  till  now  been  within  my  reach.  The 
incense  of  fame  had  been  wafted  near  me,  but  not  to  me — near 
my  husband  I  mean,  yet  not  to  him  ;  I  had  heard  his  brother's 
name  from  the  trumpet  of  fame,  I  longed  to  hear  his  own.  I 
knew,  what  to  the  world  was  then  unknown,  his  great  talents 
for  civil  business,  which,  if  urged  into  action,  might  make  him 
distinguished  as  a  statesman  even  beyond  his  hero  brother, 
but  I  knew  that  in  him  ambition,  if  it  ever  awoke,  must  be 
awakened  by  love.  Conscious  of  my  influence,  I  determined 
to  use  it  to  the  utmost. 

'  Lord  Davenant  had  not  at  that  time  taken  any  part  in 
politics,  but  from  his  connections  he  could  ask  and  obtain  ; 
and  there  was  one  in  the  world  for  whom  I  desired  to  obtain 
a  favour  of  importance.  It  chanced  that  he,  whom  I  have 
mentioned  to  you  as  my  inconstant  lover,  now  married  to  my 
lovely  rival,  was  at  this  time  in  some  difficulty  about  a  com- 
mand abroad.  His  connections,  though  of  very  high  rank, 
were  not  now  in  power.  He  had  failed  in  some  military 
exploit  which  had  formerly  been  entrusted  to  him.  He  was 
anxious  to  retrieve  his  character  ;  his  credit,  his  whole  fate  in 
life,  depended  on  his  obtaining  this  appointment,  which,  at  my 
request,  was  secured  to  him  by  Lord  Davenant.  The  day  it 
was  obtained  was,  I  think,  the  proudest  of  my  life.  I  was 
proud  of  returning  good  for  evil  ;  that  was  a  Christian  pride, 
if  pride  can  be  Christian.  I  was  proud  of  showing  that  in  me 
there  was  none  of  the  fury  of  a  woman  scorned — no  sense  of 
the  injury  of  charms  despised. 

'  But  it  was  not  yet  the  fulness  of  success  ;  it  had  pained 

1- 


HELEN 

me  in  the  midst  of  my  internal  triumph,  that  my  husband  had 
been  obliged  to  use  intermediate  powers  to  obtain  that  which  I 
should  have  desired  should  have  been  obtained  by  his  own. 
Why  should  not  he  be  in  that  first  place  of  rule  ?  He  could 
hold  the  balance  with  a  hand  as  firm,  an  eye  as  just.  That 
he  should  be  in  the  House  of  Peers  was  little  satisfaction  to 
me,  unless  distinguished  among  his  peers.  It  was  this 
distinction  that  I  burned  to  see  obtained  by  Lord  Davenant ;  I 
urged  him  forward  then  by  all  the  motives  which  make 
ambition  virtue.  He  was  averse  from  public  life,  partly  from 
indolence  of  temper,  partly  from  sound  philosophy  :  power  was 
low  in  the  scale  in  his  estimate  of  human  happiness  ;  he  saw 
how  little  can  be  effected  of  real  good  in  pubhc  by  any 
individual ;  he  felt  it  scarcely  worth  his  while  to  stir  from  his 
easy  chair  of  domestic  happiness.  ,  However,  love  urged  him 
on,  and  inspired  him,  if  not  with  ambition,  at  least  with  what 
looked  like  it  in  public.  He  entered  the  lists,  and  in  the 
political  tournament  tilted  successfully.  Many  were  astonished, 
for,  till  they  came  against  him  in  the  joust,  they  had  no  notion 
of  his  weight,  or  of  his  skill  in  arms ;  and  many  seriously 
inclined  to  believe  that  Lord  Davenant  was  only  Lady  Davenant 
in  disguise,  and  all  he  said,  wrote,  and  did,  was  attributed  to 
me.  Envy  gratifies  herself  continually  by  thus  shifting  the 
merit  from  one  person  to  another ;  in  hopes  that  the  actual 
quantity  may  be  diminished,  she  tries  to  make  out  that  it  is 
never  the  real  person,  but  somebody  else,  who  does  that  which 
is  good.  This  silly,  base  propensity  might  have  cost  me  dear, 
would  have  cost  me  my  husband's  affections,  had  he  not  been 
a  man,  as  there  are  few,  above  all  jealousy  of  female  influence 
or  female  talent ;  in  short,  he  knew  his  own  superiority,  and 
needed  not  to  measure  himself  to  prove  his  height.  He  is 
quite  content,  rather  glad,  that  everybody  should  set  him  down 
as  a  commonplace  character.  Far  from  being  jealous  of  his 
wife's  ruling  him,  he  was  amused  by  the  notion  :  it  flattered  his 
pride,  and  it  was  convenient  to  his  indolence ;  it  fell  in,  too, 
with  his  pecuUar  humour.  The  more  I  retired,  the  more  I  was 
put  forward,  he,  laughing  behind  me,  prompted  and  forbade 
me  to  look  back. 

'  Now,  Helen,  I  am  come  to  a  point  where  ambition  ceased 
to  be  virtue.  But  why  should  I  tell  you  all  this  ?  no  one  is 
ever  the  better  for  the  experience  of  another,' 

73 


HELEN 

'  Oh  !  I  cannot  believe  that,'  cried  Helen ;  '  pray,  pray 
go  on.' 

'  Ambition  first  rose  in  my  mind  from  the  ashes  of  another 
passion.  Fresh  materials,  of  heterogeneous  kinds,  altered  the 
colour  and  changed  the  nature  of  the  flame  :  I  should  have 
told  you,  but  narrative  is  not  my  forte — I  never  can  remember 
to  tell  things  in  their  right  order.  I  forgot  to  tell  you  that 
when  Madame  de  Stael's  book,  Sur  la  Revolution  Frangaise, 
came  out,  it  made  an  extraordinary  impression  upon  me.  I 
turned,  in  the  first  place,  as  everybody  did,  eagerly  to  the 
chapter  on  England,  but,  though  my  national  feelings  were 
gratified,  my  female  pride  was  dreadfully  mortified  by  what 
she  says  of  the  ladies  of  England  ;  in  fact,  she  could  not  judge 
of  them.  They  were  afraid  of  her.  They  would  not  come 
out  of  their  shells.  What  she  called  timidity,  and  what  I  am 
sure  she  longed  to  call  stupidity,  was  the  silence  of  overawed 
admiration,  or  mixed  curiosity  and  discretion.  Those  who 
did  venture  had  not  full  possession  of  their  powers,  or  in  a 
hurry  showed  them  in  a  wrong  direction.  She  saw  none  of 
them  in  their  natural  state.  She  asserts  that  though  there 
may  be  women  distinguished  as  writers  in  England,  there  are 
no  ladies  who  have  any  great  conversational  and  political 
influence  in  society,  of  that  kind  which,  during  Vancien  regime, 
was  obtained  in  France  by  what  they  would  call  their  femtnes 
marquantes,  such  as  Madame  de  Tencin,  Madame  du  Deffand, 
Mademoiselle  de  I'Espinasse.  This  remark  stung  me  to  the 
quick,  for  my  country  and  for  myself,  and  raised  in  me  a 
foolish,  vainglorious  emulation,  an  ambition  false  in  its  objects, 
and  unsuited  to  the  manners,  domestic  habits,  and  public 
virtue  of  our  country.  I  ought  to  have  been  gratified  by  her 
observing  that  a  lady  is  never  to  be  met  with  in  England,  as 
formerly  in  France,  at  the  Bureau  du  Ministre  ;  and  that  in 
England  there  has  never  been  any  example  of  a  woman's 
having  known  in  public  affairs,  or  at  least  told,  what  ought  to 
have  been  kept  secret.  Between  ourselves,  I  suspect  she  was 
a  little  mistaken  in  some  of  these  assertions  ;  but,  be  that  as 
it  may,  I  determined  to  prove  that  she  was  mistaken  ;  I  was 
conscious  that  I  had  more  within  me  than  I  had  yet  brought 
out ;  I  did  not  doubt  that  I  had  eloquence,  if  I  had  but 
courage  to  produce  it.  It  is  really  astonishing  what  a  mis- 
chievous effect  those  few  passages  produced  on  my  mind.     In 

74 


HELEN 

London,  one  book  drives  out  another,  one  impression,  however 
deep,  is  effaced  by  the  next  shaking  of  the  sand  ;  but  I  was 
then  in  the  country,  for,  unluckily  for  me,  Lord  Davenant  had 
been  sent  away  on  some  special  embassy.  Left  alone  with  my 
nonsense,  I  set  about,  as  soon  as  I  was  able,  to  assemble  an 
audience  round  me,  to  exhibit  myself  in  the  character  of  a 
female  politician,  and  I  believe  I  had  a  notion  at  the  same  time 
of  being  the  English  Corinne.  Rochefoucault,  the  dexterous 
anatomist  of  self-love,  says  that  we  confess  our  small  faults,  to 
persuade  the  world  that  we  have  no  large  ones.  But,  for  my  part, 
I  feel  that  there  are  some  small  faults  more  difficult  to  me  to 
confess  than  any  large  ones.  Affectation,  for  instance ;  it  is 
something  so  little,  so  paltry,  it  is  more  than  a  crime,  it  is  a 
ridicule  :  I  believe  I  did  make  myself  completely  ridiculous  :  I 
am  glad  Lord  Davenant  was  not  by,  it  lasted  but  a  short  time. 
Our  dear  good  friend  Dumont  (you  knew  Dumont  at  Florence  ?) 
could  not  bear  to  see  it ;  his  regard  for  Lord  Davenant  urged 
him  the  more  to  disenchant  me,  and  bring  me  back,  before 
his  return,  to  my  natural  form.  The  disenchantment  was 
rather  rude. 

'  One  evening,  after  I  had  been  snuffing  up  incense  till  I 
was  quite  intoxicated,  when  my  votaries  had  departed,  and  we 
were  alone  together,  I  said  to  him,  "Allow  that  this  is  what 
would  be  called  at  Paris  un  grand  succh.'' 

'  Dumont  made  no  reply,  but  stood  opposite  to  me  playing 
in  his  peculiar  manner  with  his  great  snuff-box,  slowly  swaying 
the  snuff  from  side  to  side.  Knowing  this  to  be  a  sign  that 
he  was  in  some  great  dilemma,  I  asked  of  what  he  was  think- 
ing. "Of  you,"  said  he.  "And  what  of  me?"  In  his 
French  accent  he  repeated  those  two  provoking  lines^ — 

•  New  wit,  like  wine,  intoxicates  the  brain, 
Too  strong  for  feeble  women  to  sustain.' 

'  "  To  my  face  ? "  said  I,  smiling,  for  I  tried  to  command 
my  temper. 

'  "  Better  than  behind  your  back,  as  others  do,"  said  he. 

'  "  Behind  my  back  !  "  said  I  ;  "  impossible." 

' "  Perfectly  possible,"  said  he,  "  as  I  could  prove  if  you 
were  strong  enough  to  bear  it." 

' "  Quite  strong  enough,"  I  said,  and  bade  him  speak  on. 

'  "  Suppose  you  were  offered,"  said  he,  "  the  fairy-ring  that 

75 


HELEN 

rendered  the  possessor  invisible,  and  enabled  him  to  hear 
everything  that  was  said,  and  all  that  was  thought  of  him, 
would  you  throw  it  away,  or  put  it  on  your  finger  ?" 

'  "  Put  it  on  my  finger,''  I  replied  ;  "  and  this  instant,  for  a 
true  friend  is  better  than  a  magic  ring,  I  put  it  on." 

'  "  You  are  very  brave,"  said  he,  "  then  you  shall  hear  the 
lines  1  heard  in  a  rival  salon,  repeated  by  him  who  last  wafted 
the  censer  to  you  to-night."  He  repeated  a  kind  of  doggrel 
pasquinade,  beginning  with 


'  Tell  me,  gentles,  have  you  seen 
The  prating  she,  the  mock  Corinne  ? 


'  Dumont,  who  had  the  courage  for  my  good  to  inflict  the 
blow,  could  not  stay  to  see  its  effect,  and  this  time  I  was  left 
alone,  not  with  my  nonsense,  but  with  my  reason.  It  was 
quite  sufficient.  I  was  cured.  My  only  consolation  in  my 
disgrace  was  that  I  honourably  kept  Dumont's  counsel.  The 
friend  who  composed  the  lampoon,  from  that  day  to  this,  never 
knew  that  I  had  heard  it ;  though  I  must  own  I  often  longed 
to  tell  him,  when  he  was  offering  his  incense  again,  that  I 
wished  he  would  reverse  his  practice,  and  let  us  have  the 
satire  in  my  presence,  and  keep  the  flattery  for  my  absence. 
The  graft  of  affectation,  which  was  but  a  poor  weak  thing, 
fell  off  at  once,  but  the  root  of  the  evil  had  not  yet  been 
reached.  My  friend  Dumont  had  not  cut  deep  enough,  or 
perhaps  feared  to  cut  away  too  much  that  was  sound  and 
essential  to  life  :  my  political  ambition  remained,  and  on  Lord 
Davenant's  return  sprang  up  in  full  vigour. 

'  Now  it  is  all  over  I  can  analyse  and  understand  my  own 
motives  :  when  I  first  began  my  political  course,  I  really  and 
truly  had  no  love  for  power  ;  full  of  other  feelings,  I  was 
averse  from  it  ;  it  was  absolutely  disagreeable  to  me  ;  but  as 
people  acquire  a  taste  for  drams  after  making  faces  at  first 
swallowing,  so  1,  from  experience  of  the  excitation,  acquired 
the  habit,  the  love,  of  this  mental  dram-drinking  ;  besides,  I 
had  such  delightful  excuses  for  myself:  I  didn't  love  power 
for  its  own  sake,  it  was  never  used  for  myself,  always  for 
others  ;  ever  with  my  old  principle  of  sacrifice  in  full  play : 
this  flattering  unction  I  laid  to  my  soul,  and  it  long  hid  from 
me  its  weakness,  its  gradual  corruption. 

'  The  first  instance  in  which  I  used  my  influence,  and  by 
76 


HELEN 

my  husband's  intervention  obtained  a  favour  of  some  import- 
ance, the  thing  done,  though  actually  obtained  by  private 
favour,  was  in  a  public  point  of  vievif  vi^ell  done  and  fit  to  be 
done ;  but  when  in  time  Lord  Davenant  had  reached  that 
eminence  which  had  been  the  summit  of  my  ambition,  and 
when  once  it  was  known  that  I  had  influence  (and  in  making 
it  known  between  jest  and  earnest  Lord  Davenant  was 
certainly  to  blame),  numbers  of  course  were  eager  to  avail 
themselves  of  the  discovery,  swarms  bom  in  the  noontide  ray, 
or  such  as  salute  the  rising  morn,  buzzed  round  me.  I  was 
good-natured  and  glad  to  do  the  service,  and  proud  to  show 
that  I  could  do  it.  I  thought  I  had  some  right  to  share  with 
Lord  Davenant,  at  least,  the  honours  and  pleasures  of  patron- 
age, and  so  he  willingly  allowed  it  to  be,  as  long  as  my  objects 
were  well  chosen,  though  he  said  to  me  once  with  a  serious 
smile,  "  The  patronage  of  Europe  would  not  satisfy  you  ;  you 
would  want  India,  and  if  you  had  India,  you  would  sigh  for 
the  New  World."  I  only  laughed,  and  said,  "The  same 
thought  as  Lord  Chesterfield's,  only  more  neatly  put."  "  If  all 
Ireland  were  given  to  such  a  one  for  his  patrimony,  he'd  ask 
for  the  Isle  of  Man  for  his  cabbage-garden."  Lord  Davenant 
did  not  smile.  I  felt  a  little  alarmed,  and  a  feeling  of 
estrangement  began  between  us. 

'  I  recollect  one  day  his  seeing  a  note  on  my  table  from  one 
of  my  firotegh,  thanking  me  outrageously,  and  extolling  my 
very  obliging  disposition.  He  read,  and  threw  it  down,  and 
with  one  of  his  dry-humour  smiles  repeated,  half  to  himself, 

'  By  flatterers  besieged, 

And  so  obliging  that  she  ne'er  obliged.' 

'  I  thought  these  lines  were  in  the  Characters  of  Women, 
and  I  hunted  all  through  them  in  vain  ;  at  last  I  found  them 
in  the  character  of  a  man,  which  could  not  suit  me,  and  I  was 
pacified,  and,  what  is  extraordinary,  my  conscience  quite  put 
at  ease. 

'  The  week  afterwards  I  went  to  make  some  request  for  a 
friend  :  my  little  boy — for  I  had  a  dear  little  boy  then — had 
come  in  along  with  mamma.  Lord  Davenant  complied  with 
my  request,  but  unwillingly  I  saw,  and  as  if  he  felt  it  a  weak- 
ness ;  and,  putting  his  hand  upon  the  curly-pated  little  fellow's 
head,  he  said,  "  This  boy  rules  Greece,  I  see."     The  child  was 

77 


HELEN 

sent  for  the  Grecian  history,  his  father  took  him  on  his  knee, 
while  he  read  the  anecdote,  and  as  he  ended  he  whispered  in 
the  child's  ear,  "  Tell  mamma  this  must  not  be  ;  papa  should 
be  ruled  only  by  justice."  He  really  had  public  virtue,  I  only 
talked  of  it. 

'  After  this  you  will  wonder  that  I  could  go  on,  but  I  did. 

'  I  had  at  that  time  a  friend,  who  talked  always  most 
romantically,  and  acted  most  selfishly,  and  for  some  time  I 
never  noticed  the  inconsistency  between  her  words  and  actions. 
In  fact  she  had  two  currents  in  her  mind,  two  selves,  one 
romantic  from  books,  the  other  selfish  from  worldly  education 
and  love  of  fashion,  and  of  the  goods  of  this  world.  She  had 
charming  manners,  which  I  thought  went  for  nothing  with 
me,  but  which  I  found  stood  for  everything.  In  short,  she 
was  as  caressing,  as  graceful,  in  her  little  ways,  and  as  selfish 
as  a  cat.      She  had  claws  too,  but  at  first  I  only  felt  the  velvet. 

'  It  was  for  this  woman  that  I  hazarded  my  highest  happi- 
ness— my  husband's  esteem — and  for  the  most  paltry  object 
imaginable.  She  wanted  some  petty  place  for  some  man  who 
was  to  marry  her  favourite  maid.  When  I  first  mentioned  it 
to  him.  Lord  Davenant  coldly  said,  "  It  can't  be  done,"  and  his 
pen  went  on  very  quickly  with  the  letter  he  was  writing. 
Vexed  and  ashamed,  and  the  more  vexed  because  ashamed,  I 
persisted.  "  Cannot  be  done  for  me  V  said  I.  "  Not  for  any- 
body," said  he — "  by  me,  at  least." — I  thought- — Helen,  I  am 
ashamed  to  tell  you  what  I  thought ;  but  I  will  tell  it  you, 
because  it  will  show  you  how  a  mind  may  be  debased  by  the 
love  of  power,  or  rather  by  the  consequence  which  its  posses- 
sion bestows.  I  thought  he  meant  to  point  out  to  me  that, 
although  he  would  not  do  it,  I  might  get  it  done.  And,  speak- 
ing as  if  to  myself,  I  said,  "Then  I'll  go  to  such  a  person  ; 
then  I'll  use  such  and  such  ways  and  means." 

'  Looking  up  from  his  writing  at  me,  with  a  look  such  as  I 
had  never  seen  from  him  before,  he  replied,  in  the  words  of  a 
celebrated  minister,  "  C est  facile  de  se  seniir  dc  pareih  moyens, 
dest  difficile  de  ^y  resoudre." 

'  I  admired  him,  despised  myself,  left  the  room,  and  went 
and  told  my  friend  decidedly  it  could  not  be  done.  That 
instant  she  became  my  enemy,  and  I  felt  her  claws.  I  was 
proud  of  the  wounds,  and  showed  them  to  my  husband.  Now, 
Helen,  you  think  I   am  cured  for  ever,  and  safe.     Alas  !  no, 

78 


HELEN 

my  dear,  it  is  not  so  easy  to  cure  habit.  I  have,  however, 
some  excuse — let  me  put  it  forward ;  the  person  for  whom  I 
again  transgressed  was  my  mother,  and  for  her  I  was  proud  of 
doing  the  utmost  because  she  had,  as  I  could  not  forget,  been 
ready  to  sacrifice  my  happiness  to  her  speculations.  She  had 
left  off  building  castles  in  the  air,  but  she  had  outbuilt  herself 
on  earth.  She  had  often  recourse  to  me  in  her  difficulties, 
and  I  supplied  funds,  as  well  I  might,  for  I  had  a  most  liberal 
allowance  from  my  most  liberal  lord ;  but  schemes  of  my 
own,  very  patriotic  but  not  overwise,  had  in  process  of  time 
drained  my  purse.  I  had  a  school  at  Cecilhurst,  and  a  lace- 
manufactory  ;  and  to  teach  my  little  girls  I  must  needs  bring 
over  lace-makers  from  Flanders,  and  Lisle  thread,  at  an 
enormous  expense :  I  shut  my  lace-makers  up  in  a  room  (for 
secrecy  was  necessary),  where,  like  spiders,  they  quarrelled 
with  each  other  and  fought,  and  the  whole  failed. 

'  Another  scheme,  very  patriotic  too,  cost  me  an  immensity  : 
trying  to  make  Indian  cachemires  in  England,  very  beautiful 
they  were,  but  they  left  not  the  tenth  part  of  a  penny  in  my 
private  purse,  and  then  my  mother  wanted  some  thousands 
for  a  new  dairy ;  dairies  were  then  the  fashion,  and  hers  was 
to  be  floored  with  the  finest  Dutch  tiles,  furnished  with  Sevres 
china,  with  plate  glass  windows,  and  a  porch  hung  with  French 
mirrors  ;  so  she  set  me  to  represent  to  Lord  Davenant  her  very 
distressed  situation,  and  to  present  a  petition  from  her  for  a 
pension.  The  first  time  I  urged  my  mother's  request.  Lord 
Davenant  said,  "  I  am  sure,  Anne,  that  you  do  not  know  what 
you  are  asking.''  I  desisted.  I  did  not  indeed  well  under- 
stand the  business,  nor  at  all  comprehend  that  I  was  assisting 
a  fraudulent  attempt  to  obtain  public  money  for  a  private 
purpose,  but  I  wished  to  have  the  triumph  of  success,  I  wished 
to  feel  my  own  influence. 

'  Had  it  been  foretold  to  me  that  I  could  so  forget  myself 
in  the  intoxication  of  political  power,  how  I  should  have  dis- 
dained the  prophecy — "  Lord,  is  thy  servant  a  dog  that  he 
should  do  this  thing  ? "  There  is  a  fine  sermon  of  Blair's  on 
this  subject ;  it  had  early  made  a  great  impression  upon  me  ; 
but  what  are  good  impressions,  good  feelings,  good  impulses, 
good  intentions,  good  any  thing,  without  principle  ? 

'  My  mother  wondered  how  I  could  so  easily  take  a  refusal ; 
she  piqued  my  pride  by  observing  that  she  was  sorry  my  influ- 

79 


HELEN 

ence  had  declined  ;  her  pity,  so  near  contempt,  wounded  me, 
and  I  unadvisedly  exclaimed  that  my  influence  had  in  no  way 
declined.  Scarcely  had  I  uttered  the  words,  when  I  saw  the 
inference  to  which  they  laid  me  open,  that  I  had  not  used  my 
influence  to  the  utmost  for  her.  My  mother  had  quite  sense 
and  just  feeling  enough  to  refrain  from  marking  this  in  words. 
She  noted  it  only  by  an  observing  look,  followed  by  a  sigh. 
She  confessed  that  I  had  always  been  so  kind,  so  much  kinder 
than  she  could  have  expected,  that  she  would  say  no  more. 
This  was  more  to  the  purpose  with  me  than  if  she  had  talked 
for  hours.  I  heard  fresh  sighs,  and  saw  tears  begin  to  flow — 
a  mother's  sighs  and  tears  it  is  difiicult,  and  I  felt  it  was 
shameful,  to  bear.  I  was  partly  melted,  much  confused,  and 
hurried,  too,  by  visitors  coming  in,  and  I  hastily  promised 
that  I  would  try  once  more  what  I  could  do.  The  moment  I 
had  time  for  reflection  I  repented  of  what  I  had  promised. 
But  the  words  were  past  recall.  It  was  so  disagreeable  to  me 
to  speak  about  the  affair  to  my  husband,  that  I  wanted  to  get 
it  ofi^  my  mind  as  soon  as  possible,  but  the  day  passed  without 
my  being  able  to  find  a  moment  when  I  could  speak  to  Lord 
Davenant  in  private.  Company  stayed  till  late,  my  mother 
the  latest.  At  parting,  as  she  kissed  me,  calling  me  her  dearest 
Anne,  she  said  she  was  convinced  I  could  do  whatever  I 
pleased  with  Lord  Davenant,  and  as  she  was  going  down- 
stairs, added  she  was  sure  the  first  words  she  should  hear 
from  me  in  the  morning  would  be  "  Victory,  victory  ! " 

'  I  hated  myself  for  admitting  the  thought,  and  yet  there 
it  was  ;  I  let  it  in,  and  could  not  get  it  out.  From  what  an 
indescribable  mixture  of  weak  motives  or  impulses,  and  often 
without  one  reasonable  principle,  do  we  act  in  the  most 
important  moments  of  life.  Even  as  I  opened  the  door  of  his 
room  I  hesitated,  my  heart  beat  forebodingly,  but  I  thought  I 
could  not  retreat,  and  I  went  in. 

'  He  was  standing  on  the  hearth  looking  weary,  but  a 
reviving  smile  came  on  seeing  me,  and  he  held  out  his  hand — 
"  My  comfort  always,"  said  he. 

'  1  took  his  hand,  and,  hesitating,  was  again  my  better 
self;  but  1  would  not  go  back,  nor  could  I  begin  with  any 
preface. — Thank  Heaven  that  was  impossible.      I  began  : 

' "  Davenant,  I  am  come  to  ask  you  a  favour,  and  you 
must  do  it  for  me." 

80 


HELEN 

'  "  I  hope  it  is  in  my  power,  my  dear,"  said  he  ;  "I  am 
sure  you  would  not  ask "  and  there  he  stopped. 

'  I  told  him  it  was  in  his  power,  and  that  I  would  not  ask  it 

for  any  creature  living,  but He  put  his  hand  upon  my 

lips,  told  me  he  knew  what  I  was  going  to  say,  and  begged  me 
not  to  say  it ;  but  I,  hoping  to  carry  it  off  playfully,  kissed  his 
hand,  and  putting  it  aside  said,  "  I  must  ask,  and  you  must 
grant  this  to  my  mother."  He  replied,  "  It  cannot  be,  Anne, 
consistently  with  public  justice,  and  with  my  public  duty. 
I " 

' "  Nonsense,  nonsense,"  I  said,  "  such  words  are  only  to 
mask  a  refusal."  Mask,  I  remember,  was  the  word  that  hurt 
him.  Of  all  I  could  have  used,  it  was  the  worst :  I  knew  it 
the  instant  I  had  said  it.  Lord  Davenant  stepped  back,  and 
with  such  a  look !  You,  Helen,  who  have  seen  only  his 
benign  countenance,  his  smiling  eyes,  cannot  conceive  it.  I 
am  sure  he  must  have  seen  how  much  it  alarmed  me,  for 
suddenly  it  changed,  and  I  saw  all  the  melting  softness  of  love. 

'  O  fool !  vain  wicked  fool  that  I  was !  I  thought  of 
"victory,"  and  pursued  it.  My  utmost  power  of  persuasion — 
words — smiles — and  tears  I  tried — and  tried  in  vain  ;  and 
then  I  could  not  bear  to  feel  that  I  had  in  vain  made  this  trial 
of  power  and  love.  Shame  and  pride  and  anger  seized  me  by 
turns,  and  raised  such  a  storm  within  me — such  confusion — 
that  I  knew  not  what  I  did  or  said.  And  he  was  so  calm  ! 
looked  so  at  least,  though  I  am  sure  he  was  not.  His  self- 
possession  piqued  and  provoked  me  past  all  bearing.  I  cannot 
tell  you  exactly  how  it  was — it  was  so  dreadfully  interesting  to 
me  that  I  am  unable  to  recall  the  exact  words  ;  but  I  remember 
at  last  hearing  him  say,  in  a  voice  I  had  never  before  heard, 
"  Lady  Davenant ! " — He  had  never  called  me  so  before  ;  he 
had  always  called  me  •'  Anne "  :  it  seemed  as  if  he  had  dis- 
missed me  from  his  heart. 

'  "  Call  me  Anne  !     Oh,  call  me  Anne  !  " 

'  And  he  yielded  instantly,  he  called  me  Anne,  and  caressing 
me,  "his  Anne." 

'O  Helen!  never  do  as  I  did.  I  whispered,  "Then,  my 
love,  you  will  do  this  for  me — for  me,  your  own  Anne  ?  " 

'  He  put  me  gently  away,  and  leaned  against  the  chimney- 
piece  in  silence.  Then  turning  to  me,  in  a  low  suppressed 
voice,  he  said, 

G  8i 


HELEN 

'  "  I  have  loved  you^love  you  as  much  as  man  can  love 
woman,  there  is  nothing  I  would  not  sacrifice  for  you 
except ' 

'  "  No  exceptions  ! '  cried  I,  in  an  affected  tone  of  gaiety. 

'  "  Except  honour,'  he  repeated  firmly. — Helen,  my  dear, 
you  are  of  a  generous  nature,  so  am  I,  but  the  demon  of  pride 
was  within  me,  it  made  me  long  to  try  the  extent  of  my  power. 
Disappointed,  I  sank  to  meanness  ;  never,  never,  however 
tempted,  however  provoked,  never  do  as  1  did,  never  reproach 
a  friend  with  any  sacrifice  you  have  made  for  them  ;  this  is  a 
meanness  which  your  friend  may  forgive,  but  which  you  can 
never  forgive  yourself 

'  I  reproached  him  with  the  sacrifice  of  my  feelings,  which 
I  had  made  in  marrying  him  !  His  answer  was,  "  I  feel  that 
what  you  say  is  true  :  I  am  now  convinced  you  are  incapable  of 
loving  me ;  and  since  I  cannot  make  you  happy,  we  had 
better part. " 

'  These  were  the  last  words  I  heard.  The  blow  was  wholly 
unexpected. 

'  Whether  I  sank  down,  or  threw  myself  at  his  feet,  I  know 
not  ;  but  when  1  came  to  myself  he  was  standing  beside  me. 
There  were  other  faces,  but  my  eyes  saw  only  his  :  I  felt  his 
hand  holding  mine  ;  I  pressed  it,  and  said,  "  Forget."  He 
stooped  down  and  whispered,  "  It  is  forgotten." 

'  I  believe  there  is  nothing  can  touch  a  generous  mind  so 
much  as  the  being  treated  with  perfect  generosity — nothing 
makes  us  so  deeply  feel  our  own  fault' 

Lady  Davenant  was  here  so  much  moved  that  she  could 
say  no  more.  By  an  involuntary  motion,  she  checked  the 
reins,  and  the  horses  stopped,  and  she  continued  quite  silent 
for  a  few  minutes  :  at  length  two  or  three  deeply-drawn  sighs 
seemed  to  relieve  her  ;  she  looked  up,  and  her  attention  seemed 
to  be  caught  by  a  bird  that  was  singing  sweetly  on  a  branch 
over  their  heads.  She  asked  what  bird  it  was.  Helen 
showed  it  to  her  where  it  sat :  she  looked  up  and  smiled, 
touched  the  horses  with  her  whip,  and  went  on  where  she  had 
left  off— 

'  The  next  thing  was  the  meeting  my  mother  in  the  morn- 
ing ;  I  prepared  myself  for  it,  and  thought  I  was  now  armed 
so  strong  in  honesty  that  I  could  go  through  with  it  well :  my 
morality,  however,  was  a  little  nervous,  was  fluttered  by  the 

82 


I  felt  his  hand  holding  mine ;  I  pressed  it,  and  said, '  Forget.' 


HELEN 

knock  at  the  door,  and,  when  I  heard  her  voice  as  she  came 
towards  my  room,  asking  eagerly  if  I  was  alone,  I  felt  a  sick- 
ness at  the  certainty  that  I  must  at  once  crush  her  hopes. 
But  I  stood  resolved  ;  my  eyes  fixed  on  the  door  through  which 
she  was  to  enter.  She  came  in,  to  my  astonishment,  with  a 
face  radiant  with  joy,  and  hastening  to  me  she  embraced  me 
with  the  warmest  expression  of  fondness  and  gratitude. — I 
stood  petrified  as  I  heard  her  talk  of  my  kindness — my  gener- 
osity. I  asked  what  she  could  mean,  said  there  must  be  some 
mistake.  But  holding  before  my  eyes  a  note,  "  Can  there  be 
any  mistake  in  this  ? "  said  she.  That  note,  for  I  can  never 
forget  it,  I  will  repeat  to  you. 

' "  What  you  wish  can  be  done  in  a  better  manner  than  you 
proposed.  The  public  must  have  no  concern  with  it ;  Lady 
Davenant  must  have  the  pleasure  of  doing  it  her  own  way  ;  an 
annuity  to  the  amount  required  shall  be  punctually  paid  to 
your  banker.  The  first  instalment  will  be  in  his  hands  by  the 
time  you  receive  this. — Davenant." 

'  When  I  had  been  formerly  disenchanted  from  my  trance 
of  love,  the  rudeness  of  the  shock  had  benumbed  all  my 
faculties,  and  left  me  scarcely  power  to  think  ;  but  now,  when 
thus  recovered  from  the  delirium  of  power,  I  was  immediately 
in  perfect  possession  of  my  understanding,  and  when  I  was 
made  to  comprehend  the  despicable  use  I  would  have  made  of 
my  influence,  or  the  influence  my  husband  possessed,  I  was 
so  shocked  that  I  have  ever  since,  I  am  conscious,  in  speaking 
of  any  political  corruption,  rather  exaggerated  my  natural 
abhorrence  of  it.  Not  from  the  mean  and  weak  idea  of  con- 
vincing the  world  how  foreign  all  such  wrong  was  to  my  soul, 
but  because  it  really  is  foreign  to  it,  because  I  know  how  it  can 
debase  the  most  honourable  characters  ;  I  feel  as  much  shocked 
at  the  criminal  as  at  the  crime,  because  I  saw  it  once  in  all  its 
hideousness  so  near  myself. 

'  A  change  in  the  ministry  took  place  this  year.  Lord  Dave- 
nant's  resignation  was  sent  in  and  accepted,  and  in  retire- 
ment I  had  not  only  leisure  to  be  good,  but  also  leisure  to 
cultivate  my  mind.  Of  course  I  had  read  all  such  reading  as 
ladies  read,  but  this  was  very  different  from  the  kind  of  study 
that  would  enable  me  to  keep  pace  with  Lord  Davenant  and 
his  highly -informed  friends.  Many  of  these,  more  men  of 
thought  than  of  show,  visited  us   from   time   to   time   in   the 

84 


HELEN 

country.  Though  I  had  passed  very  well  in  London  society, 
blue,  red,  and  green,  literary,  fashionable,  and  political,  and 
had  been  extolled  as  both  witty  and  wise,  especially  when  my 
husband  was  in  place ;  yet  when  I  came  into  close  contact 
with  minds  of  a  higher  order,  I  felt  my  own  deficiencies.  Lord 
Davenant's  superiority  I  particularly  perceived  in  the  solidity 
of  the  ground  he  uniformly  took  and  held  in  reasoning.  And 
when  I,  too  confident,  used  to  venture  rashly,  and  often  found 
myself  surrounded,  and  in  imminent  danger  in  argument,  he 
used  to  bring  me  off  and  ably  cover  my  retreat,  and  looked  so 
pleased,  so  proud,  when  I  made  a  happy  hit,  or  jumped  to  a 
right  conclusion. 

'  But  what  I  most  liked,  most  admired,  in  him  was,  that  he 
never  triumphed  or  took  unfair  advantages  on  the  strength  of 
his  learning,  of  his  acquirements,  or  of  what  I  may  call  his 
logical  training. 

'  I  mention  these  seeming  trifles  because  it  is  not  always  in 
the  great  occasions  of  life  that  a  generous  disposition  shows 
itself  in  the  way  which  we  most  feel.  Little  instances  of 
generosity  shown  in  this  way,  unperceived  by  others,  have  gone 
most  deeply  into  my  mind  ;  and  have  most  raised  my  opinion 
of  his  character.  The  sense  that  I  was  over  rather  than  under 
valued  made  me  the  more  ready  to  acknowledge  and  feel  my 
own  deficiencies.  I  felt  the  truth  of  an  aphorism  of  Lord 
Verulam's,  which  is  now  come  down  to  the  copy-books  ;  that 
"  knowledge  is  power."  Having  made  this  notable  discovery, 
I  set  about  with  all  my  might  to  acquire  knowledge.  You 
may  smile,  and  think  that  this  was  only  in  a  new  form  the 
passion  for  power  ;  no,  it  was  something  better.  Not  to  do 
myself  injustice,  I  now  felt  the  pure  desire  of  knowledge,  and 
enjoyed  the  pure  pleasure  of  obtaining  it ;  assisted,  supported, 
and  delighted,  by  the  sympathy  of  a  superior  mind. 

'  As  to  intellectual  happinesSj  this  was  the  happiest  time  of 
my  life.  As  if  my  eyes  had  been  rubbed  by  your  favourite 
dervise  in  the  Arabian  tales  with  his  charmed  ointment,  which 
opened  at  once  to  view  all  the  treasures  of  the  earth,  I  saw 
and  craved  the  boundless  treasures  opened  to  my  view.  I 
now  wanted  to  read  all  that  Lord  Davenant  was  reading,  that 
I  might  be  up  to  his  ideas,  but  this  was  not  to  be  done  in  an 
instant.  There  was  a  Frenchwoman  who  complained  that  she 
never  could  learn  anything,  because  she  could  not  find  anybody 

8S 


HELEN 

to  teach  her  all  she  wanted  to  know  in  two  words.  I  was  not 
quite  so  exigeante  as  this  lady  ;  but,  after  having  skated  on 
easily  and  rapidly,  far  on  the  superficies  of  knowledge,  it  was 
difficult  and  rather  mortifying  to  have  to  go  back  and  begin  at 
the  beginning.  Yet,  when  I  wanted  to  go  a  little  deeper,  and 
really  to  understand  what  I  was  about,  this  was  essentially 
necessary.  I  could  not  have  got  through  without  the  assist- 
ance of  one  who  showed  me  what  I  might  safely  leave 
unlearned,  and  who  pointed  out  what  fruit  was  worth  climbing 
for,  what  would  only  turn  to  ashes. 

'  This  happy  time  of  my  life  too  quickly  passed  away.  It 
was  interrupted,  however,  not  by  any  fault  or  folly  of  my  own, 
but  by  an  infliction  from  the  hand  of  Providence,  to  which  I 
trust  I  submitted  with  resignation — we  lost  our  dear  little  boy  ; 
my  second  boy  was  born  dead,  and  my  confinement  was 
followed  by  long  and  severe  illness.  I  was  ordered  to  try 
the  air  of  Devonshire. 

'  One  night  — now,  my  dear,  I  have  kept  for  the  last  the 
only  romantic  incident  in  my  life — one  night,  a  vessel  was 
wrecked  upon  our  coast ;  one  of  the  passengers,  a  lady,  an 
invalid,  was  brought  to  our  house  :  I  hastened  to  her  assist- 
ance— it  was  my  beautiful  rival ! 

'  She  was  in  a  deep  decline,  and  had  been  at  Lisbon  for 
some  time,  but  she  was  now  sent  home  by  the  physicians,  as 
they  send  people  from  one  country  to  another,  to  die.  The 
captain  of  the  ship  in  which  she  was  mistook  the  lights  upon 
the  coast,  and  ran  the  ship  ashore  near  to  our  house. 

'  Of  course  we  did  for  her  all  we  could,  but  she  was  dying  : 
she  knew  nothing  of  my  history,  and  I  trust  I  soothed  her  last 
moments — she  died  in  my  arms. 

'  She  had  one  child,  a  son,  then  at  Eton  :  we  sent  for  him  ; 
he  arrived  too  late  ;  the  feeling  he  showed  interested  us  deeply  ; 
we  kept  him  with  us  some  time  ;  he  was  grateful ;  and  after- 
wards as  he  grew  up  he  often  wrote  to  me.  His  letters  you 
have  read.' 

'  Mr.  Beauclerc  ! '  said  Helen. 

'  Mr.  Beauclerc. — I  had  not  seen  him  for  some  time,  when 
General  Clarendon  presented  him  to  me  as  his  ward  at 
Florence,  where  I  had  opportunities  of  essentially  serving  him. 

'  You  may  now  understand,  my  dear,  why  I  had  expected 
that  Mr.  Granville  Beauclerc  might  have  preferred  coming  to 

86 


HELEN 

Clarendon  Park  this  last  month  of  my  stay  in  England  to 
the  pleasures  of  London.  I  was  angry,  I  own,  but  after  five 
minutes'  grace  I  cooled,  saw  that  I  must  be  mistaken,  and  came 
to  the  just  conclusion  of  the  old  poet,  that  no  one  sinks  at 
once  to  the  depth  of  ill,  and  ingratitude  I  consider  as  the 
depth  of  ill.  I  opine,  therefore,  that  some  stronger  feeling 
than  friendship  now  operates  to  detain  Granville  Beauclerc. 
In  that  case  I  forgive  him,  but,  for  his  own  sake,  and  with 
such  a  young  man  I  should  say  for  the  sake  of  society — of  the 
public  good — for  he  will  end  in  public  hfe,  I  hope  the  present 
object  is  worthy  of  him,  whoever  she  may  be. 

'  Have  I  anything  more  to  tell  you  ?  Yes,  I  should  say 
that,  when  by  changes  in  the  political  world  Lord  Davenant 
was  again  in  power,  I  had  learned,  if  not  to  be  less  ambitious, 

at  least  to  show  it  less.     D ,  who  knew  always  how  to  put 

sense  into  my  mind,  so  that  I  found  it  there,  and  thought  it 
completely  my  own,  had  once  said  that  "  every  public  man 
who  has  a  cultivated  and  high-minded  wife  has  in  fact  two 
selves,  each  holding  watch  and  ward  for  the  other."  The 
notion  pleased  me — pleased  both  my  fancy  and  my  reason  ;  I 
acted  on  it,  and  Lord  Davenant  assures  me  that  I  have  been 
this  second  self  to  him,  and  I  am  willing  to  believe  it,  first 
because  he  is  a  man  of  strict  truth,  and  secondly,  because 
every  woman  is  willing  to  believe  what  she  wishes.' 

Lady  Davenant  paused,  and  after  some  minutes  of  reflection 
said,  '  I  confess,  however,  that  I  have  not  reason  to  be  quite 
satisfied  with  myself  as  a  mother  ;  I  did  not  attend  suflSciently 
to  Cecilia's  early  education  :  engrossed  with  politics,  I  left  her 
too  much  to  governesses,  at  one  period  to  a  very  bad  one.  I 
have  done  what  I  can  to  remedy  this,  and  you  have  done  more 
perhaps  ;  but  I  much  fear  that  the  early  neglect  can  never  be 
completely  repaired ;  she  is,  however,  married  to  a  man  of 
sense,  and  when  I  go  to  Russia  I  shall  think  with  satisfaction 
that  I  leave  you  with  her.' 

After  expressing  how  deeply  she  had  been  interested  in  all 
that  she  had  heard,  and  how  grateful  she  felt  for  the  confidence 
reposed  in  her,  Helen  said  she  could  not  help  wishing  that 
Ceciha  knew  all  that  had  been  just  told  her  of  Lady  Davenant's 
history.  If  Cecilia  could  but  know  all  the  tenderness  of  her 
mother's  heart,  how  much  less  would  she  fear,  how  much  more 
would  she  love  her  ! 

87 


HELEN 

'  It  would  answer  no  purpose,'  replied  Lady  Davenant ; 
'  there  are  persons  with  intrinsic  differences  of  character,  who, 
explain  as  you  will,  can  never  understand  one  another  beyond 
a  certain  point.  Nature  and  art  forbid — no  spectacles  you 
can  furnish  will  remedy  certain  defects  of  vision.  Cecilia  sees 
as  much  as  she  can  ever  see  of  my  character,  and  I  see,  in  the 
best  light,  the  whole  of  hers.  So  Helen,  my  dear,  take  the 
advice  of  a  Scotch  proverb — proverbs  are  vulgar  because  they 
usually  contain  common  sense — "  Let  well  alone." 

'  You  are  really  a  very  good  little  friend,'  added  she,  '  but 
keep  my  personal  narrative  for  your  own  use.' 


CHAPTER    IX 

It  was  late  before  they  reached  home,  and  Helen  dressed  as 
fast  as  possible,  for  the  General's  punctual  habits  required  that 
all  should  assemble  in  the  drawing-room  five  minutes  at  least 
before  dinner.  She  was  coming  down  the  private  turret  stair- 
case, which  led  from  the  family  apartments  to  the  great  hall, 
when,  just  at  the  turn,  and  in  the  most  awkward  way  possible, 
she  met  a  gentleman,  a  stranger,  where  never  stranger  had 
been  seen  by  her  before,  running  up  full  speed,  so  that  they 
had  but  barely  space  and  time  to  clear  out  of  each  other's  way. 
Pardons  were  begged  of  course.  The  manner  and  voice  of 
the  stranger  were  particularly  gentlemanlike.  A  servant 
followed  with  his  portmanteau,  inquiring  into  which  room  Mr. 
Beauclerc  was  to  go. 

'  Mr.  Beauclerc  ! ' — When  Helen  got  to  the  dravnng-room, 
and  found  that  not  even  the  General  was  there,  she  thought 
she  could  have  time  to  run  up  the  great  staircase  to  Lady 
Davenant's  room,  and  tell  her  that  Mr.  Beauclerc  was  come. 

'My  dear  Lady  Davenant,  Mr.  Beauclerc!'  —  He  was 
there  !  and  she  made  her  retreat  as  quickly  as  possible.  The 
quantity  that  had  been  said  about  him,  and  the  awkward  way 
in  which  they  had  thus  accidentally  met,  made  her  feel  much 
embarrassed  when  they  were  regularly  introduced. 

At  the  beginning  of  dinner  Helen  fancied  that  there  was 
unusual  silence  and  constraint ;  perhaps  this  might  be  so,  or 


Just  at  the  turn  she  met  a  gentleman^  a  strcmgct. 


HELEN 

perhaps  people  were  really  hungry,  or  perhaps  Mr.  Beauclerc 
had  not  yet  satisfied  the  General  and  Lady  Davenant :  how- 
ever, towards  the  end  of  dinner,  and  at  the  dessert,  he  was 
certainly  entertaining ;  and  Lady  Cecilia  appeared  particularly 
amused  by  an  account  which  he  was  giving  of  a  little  French 
piece  he  had  seen  just  before  he  left  London,  called  "  Les 
Premieres  Amours,"  and  Helen  might  have  been  amused  too, 
but  that  Lady  Cecilia  called  upon  her  to  listen,  and,  Mr. 
Beauclerc  turning  his  eyes  upon  her,  she  saw,  or  fancied,  that 
he  was  put  out  in  his  story,  and  though  he  went  on  with 
perfect  good  breeding,  yet  it  was  evidently  with  diminished 
spirit.  As  soon  as  politeness  permitted,  at  the  close  of  the 
story,  she,  to  relieve  him  and  herself,  turned  to  the  aide-de-camp 
on  her  other  side,  and  devoted,  or  seemed  to  devote,  to  him 
her  exclusive  attention.  He  was  always  tiresome  to  her,  but 
now  more  than  ever  ;  he  went  on,  when  once  set  a-going,  about 
his  horses  and  his  dogs,  while  she  had  the  mortification  of 
hearing,  almost  immediately  after  her  seceding,  that  Mr. 
Beauclerc  recovered  the  life  and  spirit  of  his  tone,  and  was  in 
full  and  delightful  enjoyment  of  conversation  with  Lady  Cecilia. 
Something  very  entertaining  caught  her  ear  every  now  and 
then  ;  but,  with  her  eyes  fixed  in  the  necessary  direction,  it 
was  impossible  to  make  it  out,  through  the  aide-de-camp's 
never-ending  tediousness.  She  thought  the  sitting  after  dinner 
never  would  terminate,  though  it  was  in  fact  rather  shorter 
than  usual. 

As  soon  as  they  reached  the  drawing-room,  Lady  Cecilia 
asked  her  mother  what  was  the  cause  of  Granville's  delay  in 
town,  and  why  he  had  come  to-day,  after  he  had  written  it 
was  impossible. 

Lady  Davenant  answered  that  he  had  '  trampled,'  as  Lord 
Chatham  did,  '  on  impossibilities.'  '  It  was  not  a  physical 
impossibility,  it  seems.' 

'  I'm  sure — I  hope,'  continued  Cecilia,  '  that  none  of  the 
Beltravers  set  had  anything  to  do  with  his  delay,  yet  from  a 
word  or  two  the  General  let  fall,    I'm  almost  sure  that  they 

have — Lady   Blanche,   I'm  afraid '     There   she   stopped. 

'  If  it  were  only  a  money  difficulty  with  Lord  Beltravers,' 
resumed  she,  '  that  might  be  easily  settled,  for  Beauclerc  is 
rich  enough.' 

'  Yes,'  said  Lady  Davenant,  '  but  rashly  generous  ;  an 
90 


HELEN 

uncommon  fault  in  these  days,  when  young  men  are  in  general 
selfishly  prudent  or  selfishly  extravagant.' 

'  I  hope,'  said  Cecilia, — '  I  hope  Lady  Blanche  Forrester 

will  not '  there  she  paused,  and  consulted  her  mother's 

countenance ;  her  mother  answered  that  Beauclerc  had  not 
spoken  to  her  of  Lady  Blanche.  After  putting  her  hopes  and 
fears,  questions  and  conjectures,  into  every  possible  form  and 
direction.  Lady  Cecilia  was  satisfied  that  her  mother  knew  no 
more  than  herself,  and  this  was  a  great  comfort. 

When  Mr.  Beauclerc  reappeared,  Helen  was  glad  that  she 
was  settled  at  an  embroidery  frame,  at  the  farthest  end  of  the 
room,  as  there,  apart  from  the  world,  she  felt  safe  from  all 
cause  for  embarrassment,  and  there  she  continued  happy  till 
some  one  came  to  raise  the  light  of  the  lamp  over  her  head. 
It  was  Mr.  Beauclerc,  and,  as  she  looked  up,  she  gave  a 
foolish  little  start  of  surprise,  and  then  all  her  confusion 
returning,  with  thanks  scarce  audible,  her  eyes  were  instantly 
fixed  on  the  vine-leaf  she  was  embroidering.  He  asked  how 
she  could  by  lamplight  distinguish  blue  from  green  ?  a  simple 
and  not  very  alarming  question,  but  she  did  not  hear  the  words 
rightly,  and  thinking  he  asked  whether  she  wished  for  a  screen, 
she  answered,  '  No,  thank  you.' 

Lady  Cecilia  laughed,  and  covering  Helen's  want  of  hearing 
by  Beauclerc's  want  of  sight,  explained — 'Do  not  you  see, 
Granville,  the  silk-cards  are  written  upon,  "  blue  "  and  "green"  ? 
there  can  be  no  mistake.' 

Mr.  Beauclerc  made  a  few  more  laudable  attempts  at  con- 
versation with  Miss  Stanley,  but  she,  still  imagining  that  this 
was  forced,  could  not  in  return  say  anything  but  what  seemed 
forced  and  unnatural,  and  as  unlike  her  usual  self  as  possible. 
Lady  Cecilia  tried  to  relieve  her ;  she  would  have  done  better 
to  have  let  it  alone,  for  Beauclerc  was  not  of  the  French  wit's 
opinion  that  La  modestie  n'est  bonne  gu'd  quinze  ans,  and  to 
him  it  appeared  only  a  graceful  timidity.  Helen  retired 
earlier  than  any  one  else,  and,  when  she  thought  over  her 
foolish  awkwardness,  felt  as  much  ashamed  as  if  Mr.  Beauclerc 
had  actually  heard  all  that  Lady  Cecilia  had  said  about  him — 
had  seen  all  her  thoughts,  and  understood  the  reason  of  her 
confusion.  At  last,  when  Lady  Cecilia  came  into  her  room 
before  she  went  to  bed,  she  began  with — -^  I  am  sure  you  are 
going  to  scold  me,  and  I  deserve  it,  I  am  so  provoked  with 

91 


HELEN 

myself)  and  the  worst  of  it  is,  that  I  do  not  think  I  shall  ever 
get  over  it — I  am  afraid  I  shall  be  just  as  foolish  again  to- 
morrow.' 

'  I  could  find  it  in  my  heart  to  scold  you  to  death,'  said 
Lady  Cecilia,  '  but  that  I  am  vexed  myself 

Then  hesitating,  and  studying  Helen's  countenance,  she 
seemed  doubtful  how  to  proceed.  Either  she  was  playing  with 
Helen's  curiosity,  or  she  was  really  herself  perplexed.  She 
made  two  or  three  beginnings,  each  a  little  inconsistent  with 
the  other. 

'Mamma  is  always  right;  with  her — "coming  events" 
really  and  truly  "  cast  their  shadows  before."  I  do  believe  she 
has  the  fatal  gift,  the  coming  ill  to  know ! ' 

'  111  ! '  said  Helen  ;   '  what  ill  is  coming  ? ' 

'  After  all,  however,  it  may  not  be  an  ill,'  said  Lady  Cecilia  ; 
'  it  may  be  all  for  the  best ;  yet  I  am  shockingly  disappointed, 
though  I  declare  I  never  formed  any ' 

'  Oh,  my  dear  Cecilia,  do  tell  me  at  once  what  it  is  you 
mean.' 

'  I  mean  that  Granville  Beauclerc,  like  all  men  of  genius, 
has  acted  like  the  greatest  fool.' 

'  What  has  he  done  ? ' 

'  He  is  absolutely — you  must  look  upon  him  in  future — as 
a  married  man.' 

Helen  was  delighted.  Cecilia  could  form  no  further 
schemes  on  her  account,  and  she  felt  relieved  from  all  her 
awkwardness. 

'  Dearest  Helen,  this  is  well  at  all  events,'  cried  Cecilia, 
seeing  her  cleared  countenance.  '  This  comforts  me ;  you 
are  at  ease ;  and,  if  I  have  caused  you  one  uncomfortable 
evening,  I  am  sure  you  are  consoled  for  it  by  the  reflection 
that  my  mother  was  right,  and  1,  as  usual,  wrong.  But, 
Helen,'  continued  she  earnestly,  '  remember  that  this  is  not  to 
be  known  ;  remember  you  must  not  breathe  the  least  hint  of 
what  I  have  told  you  to  mamma  or  the  General.' 

Something  more  than  astonishment  appeared  in  Helen's 
countenance.  '  And  is  it  possible  that  Mr.  Beauclerc  does  not 
tell  them, — does  not  trust  his  guardian  and  such  a  friend  as 
your  mother  ? '  said  Helen. 

'  He  will  tell  them,  he  will  tell  them — but  not  yet ;  perhaps 
not  till — he  is  not   to  see  his  fiancee — they  have  for  some 

92 


HELEN 

reason  agreed  to  be  separated  for  some  time — I  do  not  know 
exactly,  but  surely  everybody  may  choose  their  own  oppor- 
tunity for  telling  their  own  secrets.  In  fact,  Helen,  the  lady, 
I  understand,  made  it  a  point  with  him  that  nothing  should  be 
said  of  it  yet — to  any  one.' 

'  But  he  told  it  to  you  ? ' 

'  No,  indeed,  he  did  not  tell  it :  I  found  it  out,  and  he  could 
not  deny  it ;  but  he  charged  me  to  keep  it  secret,  and  I 
would  not  have  told  it  to  anybody  living  but  yourself;  and 
to  you,  after  all  I  said  about  him,  I  felt  it  was  necessary — I 
thought  I  was  bound — in  short,  I  thought  it  would  set  things 
to  rights,  and  put  you  at  your  ease  at  once.' 

And  then,  with  more  earnestness,  she  again  pressed  upon 
Helen  a  promise  of  secrecy,  especially  towards  Lady  Davenant. 
Helen  submitted.  Cecilia  embraced  her  affectionately,  and 
left  the  room.  Quite  tired,  and  quite  happy,  Helen  was  in 
bed  and  asleep  in  a  few  minutes. 

Not  the  slightest  suspicion  crossed  her  mind  that  all  her 
friend  had  been  telling  her  was  not  perfectly  true.  To  a  more 
practised,  a  less  confiding,  person  the  perplexity  of  Lady 
Cecilia's  prefaces,  and  some  contradictions  or  inconsistencies, 
might  have  suggested  doubts  ;  but  Helen's  general  confidence 
in  her  friend's  truth  had  never  yet  been  seriously  shaken. 
Lady  Davenant  she  had  always  thought  prejudiced  on  this 
point,  and  too  severe.  If  there  had  been  in  early  childhood  a 
bad  habit  of  inaccuracy  in  Cecilia,  Helen  thought  it  long  since 
cured ;  and  so  perhaps  it  was,  till  she  formed  a  friendship  abroad 
with  one  who  had  no  respect  for  truth. 

But  of  this  Helen  knew  nothing ;  and,  in  fact,  till  now 
Lady  Cecilia's  aberrations  had  been  always  trifling,  almost 
imperceptible,  errors,  such  as  only  her  mother's  strictness  or 
Miss  Clarendon's  scrupulosity  could  detect.  Nor  would 
Cecilia  have  ventured  upon  a  decided,  an  important,  false 
assertion,  except  for  a  kind  purpose.  Never  in  her  life  had 
she  told  a  falsehood  to  injure  any  human  creature,  or  one  that 
she  could  foresee  might,  by  any  possibiUty,  do  harm  to  any  living 
being.  But  here  was  a  friend,  a  very  dear  friend,  in  an 
awkward  embarrassment,  and  brought  into  it  by  her  means  ; 
and  by  a  little  innocent  stretching  of  the  truth  she  could  at 
once,  she  fancied,  set  all  to  rights.  The  moment  the  idea 
came  into  her  head,  upon  the  spur  of  the  occasion,  she  resolved 

93 


HELEN 

to  execute  it  directly.  It  was  settled  between  the  drawing- 
room  door  and  her  dressing-room.  And  when  thus  executed 
successfully,  with  happy  sophistry  she  justified  it  to  herself. 
'  After  all,'  said  she  to  herself,  '  though  it  was  not  absolutely 
true,  it  was  ben  trovato,  it  was  as  near  the  truth,  perhaps,  as 
possible.  Beauclerc's  best  friends  really  feared  that  he  was 
faUing  in  love  with  the  lady  in  question.  It  was  very  likely, 
and  too  likely,  it  might  end  in  his  marrying  this  Lady  Blanche 
Forrester.  And,  on  every  account,  and  every  way,  it  was  far 
the  best  that  Helen  should  consider  him  as  a  married  man. 
This  would  restore  Helen  by  one  magical  stroke  to  herself, 
and  release  her  from  that  wretched  state  in  which  she  could 
neither  please  nor  be  pleased.'  And  as  far  as  this  good  effect 
upon  Helen  was  concerned,  Lady  Cecilia's  plan  was  judicious  ; 
it  succeeded  admirably. 

Wonderful !  how  a  few  words  spoken,  a  single  idea  taken 
out  of  or  put  into  the  mind,  can  make  such  a  difference,  not 
only  in  the  mental  feelings,  but  in  the  whole  bodily  appear- 
ance, and  in  the  actual  powers  of  perception  and  use  of  our 
senses. 

When  Helen  entered  the  breakfast-room  the  next  morning, 
she  looked,  and  moved,  and  felt,  quite  a  different  creature 
from  what  she  had  been  the  preceding  day.  She  had 
recovered  the  use  of  her  understanding,  and  she  could  hear 
and  see  quite  distinctly  ;  and  the  first  thing  she  saw  was,  that 
nobody  was  thinking  particularly  about  her ;  and  now  she  for 
the  first  time  actually  saw  Mr.  Beauclerc.  She  had  before 
looked  at  him  without  seeing  him,  and  really  did  not  know 
what  sort  of  looking  person  he  was,  except  that  he  was  like  a 
gentleman  ;  of  that  she  had  a  sort  of  intuitive  perception  ; — as 
Cuvier  could  tell  from  the  first  sight  of  a  single  bone  what  the 
animal  was,  what  were  its  habits,  and  to  what  class  it  belonged, 
so  any  person  early  used  to  good  company  can,  by  the  first 
gesture,  the  first  general  manner  of  being,  passive  or  active, 
tell  whether  a  stranger,  even  scarcely  seen,  is  or  is  not  a 
gentleman. 

At  the  beginning  of  breakfast  Mr.  Beauclerc  had  all  the 
perfect  English  quiet  of  look  and  manners,  with  somewhat  of  a 
high-bred  air  of  indifference  to  all  sublunary  things,  yet  saying 
and  doing  whatever  was  proper  for  the  present  company ;  yet 
it  was  done  and  said  like  one  in  a  dream,  performed   like  a 

94 


HELEN 

somnambulist,  correctly  from  habit,  but  all  unconsciously.  He 
awakened  from  his  reverie  the  moment  General  Clarendon 
came  in,  and  he  asked  eagerly, 

'  General,  how  far  is  it  to  Old  Forest  ? '  These  were  the 
first  words  which  he  pronounced  like  one  wide  awake.  '  I 
must  ride  there  this  morning ;  it's  absolutely  necessary.' 

The  General  replied  that  he  did  not  see  the  necessity. 

'  But  when  I  do,  sir,'  cried  Beauclerc  ;  the  natural  vivacity 
of  the  young  man  breaking  through  the  conventional  manner. 
Next  moment,  with  a  humble  look,  he  hoped  that  the  General 
would  accompany  him,  and  the  look  of  proud  humility  vanished 
from  his  countenance  the  next  instant,  because  the  General 
demurred,  and  Beauclerc  added,  'Will  not  you  oblige  me  so 
far?     Then  I  must  go  by  myself 

The  General,  seeming  to  go  on  with  his  own  thoughts,  and 
not  to  be  moved  by  his  ward's  impatience,  talked  of  a  review 
that  was  to  be  put  off,  and  at  length  found  that  he  could 
accompany  him.  Beauclerc  then,  delighted,  thanked  him 
warmly. 

'What  is  the  object  of  this  essential  visit  to  Old  Forest, 
may  I  ask  ? '  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'  To  see  a  dilapidated  house,'  said  the  General. 

'  To  save  a  whole  family  from  ruin,'  cried  Beauclerc  ;  '  to 
restore  a  man  of  first-rate  talents  to  his  place  in  society.' 

'  Pshaw  ! '  said  the  General. 

'  Why  that  contemptuous  exclamation,  my  dear  General  ? ' 
said  Beauclerc. 

'  I  have  told  you,  and  again  I  tell  you,  the  thing  is  impos- 
sible ! '  said  the  General. 

'  So  I  hear  you  say,  sir,'  replied  his  ward  ;  '  but  till  I  am 
convinced,  I  hold  to  my  project.' 

'  And  what  is  your  project,  Granville  ? '  said  Lady 
Davenant. 

'  I  will  explain  it  to  you  when  we  are  alone,'  said  Beauclerc. 

'  I  beg  your  pardon,  I  was  not  aware  that  there  was  any 
mystery,'  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'  No  mystery,'  said  Beauclerc,  '  only  about  lending  some 
money  to  a  friend.' 

'  To  which  I  will  not  consent,'  said  the  General. 

'Why  not,  sir?'  said  Beauclerc,  throwing  back  his  head 
with  an  air  of  defiance  in  his  countenance  ;  there  was  as  he 

95 


HELEN 

looked  at  his  guardian  a  quick,  mutable  succession  of  feelings, 
in  striking  contrast  with  the  fixity  of  the  General's  appearance. 

'  I  have  given  you  my  reasons,  Beauclerc,'  said  the  General. 
'  It  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  what  I  have  said,  you  will  do  no 
good.' 

'No  good,  General?  When  I  tell  you  that  if  I  lend 
Beltravers  the  money,  to  put  his  place  in  repair,  to  put  it  in 
such  a  state  that  his  sisters  could  live  in  it,  he  would  no 
longer  be  a  banished  man,  a  useless  absentee,  a  wanderer 
abroad,  but  he  would  come  and  settle  at  Old  Forest,  re- 
establish the  fortune  and  respectability  of  his  family,  and 
above  all,  save  his  own  character  and  happiness.  Oh,  my 
dear  General ! ' 

General  Clarendon,  evidently  moved  by  his  ward's  benevolent 
enthusiasm,  paused  and  said  that  there  were  many  recollections 
which  made  it  rather  painful  to  him  to  revisit  Old  Forest. 
Still  he  would  do  it  for  Beauclerc,  since  nothing  but  seeing  the 
place  would  convince  him  of  the  impracticability  of  his  scheme. 
'  I  have  not  been  at  Old  Forest,'  continued  the  General,  '  since 
I  was  a  boy — since  it  was  deserted  by  the  owners,  and  sadly 
changed  I  shall  find  it. 

'  In  former  times  these  Forresters  were  a  respectable,  good 
old  English  family,  till  the  second  wife,  pretty  and  silly,  took 
a  fancy  for  figuring  in  London,  where  of  course  she  was 
nobody.  Then,  to  make  herself  somebody,  she  forced  her 
husband  to  stand  for  the  county.  A  contested  election — 
bribery  —  a  petition  —  another  election  —  ruinous  expense. 
Then  that  Beltravers  title  coming  to  them  :  and  they  were  to 
live  up  to  it, — and  beyond  their  income.  The  old  story — 
over  head  and  shoulders  in  debt.  Then  the  new  story, — that 
they  must  go  abroad  for  economy  ! ' 

'  Economy  !  The  cant  of  all  those  who  have  not  courage  to 
retrench  at  home,'  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'  They  must,'  they  said,  '  live  abroad,  it  is  so  cheap,' 
continued  the  General.  '  So  cheap  to  leave  their  house  to  go 
to  ruin  !  Cheap  education  too  !  and  so  good — and  what  does 
it  come  to  ? ' 

'  A  cheap  provision  it  is  for  a  family  in  many  cases,'  said 
Lord  Davenant.  '  Wife,  son,  and  daughter,  Satan,  are  thy 
own.' 

'Not  in  this  case,'  cried  Beauclerc ;  'you  cannot  mean,  I  hope.' 
96 


HELEN 

'  I  can  answer  for  one,  the  daughter  at  least,'  said  Lady 
Davenant ;  '  that  Mad.  de  St.  Cimon,  whom  we  saw  abroad, 
at  Florence,  you  know,  Cecilia,  with  whom  I  would  not  let  you 
form  an  acquaintance.' 

'  Your  ladyship  was  quite  right,'  said  the  General. 

Beauclerc  could  not  say,  '  Quite  wrong,' — and  he  looked — 
suffering. 

'  I  know  nothing  of  the  son,'  pursued  Lady  Davenant. 

'  I  do,'  said  Beauclerc,  'he  is  my  friend.' 

'  I  thought  he  had  been  a  very  distressed  man,  that  young 
Beltravers,'  said  the  aide-de-camp. 

'  And  if  he  were,  that  would  not  prevent  my  being  his 
friend,  sir,'  said  Beauclerc. 

'  Of  course,'  said  the  aide-de-camp,  '  1  only  asked.' 

'  He  is  a  man  of  genius  and  feeling,'  continued  Beauclerc, 
turning  to  Lady  Davenant. 

'  But  I  never  heard  you  mention  Lord  Beltravers  before. 
How  long  has  he  been  your  friend  ? '  said  Lady  Davenant. 

Beauclerc  hesitated.  The  General  without  hesitation 
answered,  '  Three  weeks  and  one  day.' 

'  I  do  not  count  my  friendship  by  days  or  weeks,'  said 
Beauclerc. 

'  No,  my  dear  Beauclerc,'  said  the  General :  '  well  would 
it  be  for  you  if  you  would  condescend  to  any  such  common- 
sense  measure.'  He  rose  from  the  breakfast-table  as  he  spoke, 
and  rang  the  bell  to  order  the  horses. 

'  You  are  prejudiced  against  Beltravers,  General ;  but  you 
will  think  better  of  him,  I  am  sure,  when  you  know  him.' 

'  You  will  think  worse  of  him  when  you  know  him,  I 
suspect,'  replied  the  General. 

'  Suspect !  But  since  you  only  suspect^  said  Beauclerc, 
'  we  English  do  not  condemn  on  suspicion,  unheard,  unseen.' 

'  Not  unheard,'  said  the  General ;  '  I  have  heard  enough 
of  him.' 

'  From  the  reports  of  his  enemies,'  said  Beauclerc. 
'  I  do  not  usually  form  my  judgment,'  replied  the  General, 
'  from  reports  either  of  friends  or  enemies  ;    I   have  not   the 
honour  of  knowing  any  of  Lord  Beltravers's  enemies.' 

'  Enemies  of  Lord  Beltravers  ! '  exclaimed  Lady  Davenant. 
'  What  right  has  he  to  enemies  as  if  he  were  a  great  man  ? 
— a  person  of  whom  nobody  ever  heard,  setting  up  to  have 

H  97 


HELEN 

enemies  !  But  nowadays,  these  candidates  for  fame,  these 
would-be  celebrated,  set  up  their  enemies  as  they  would  their 
equipages,  on  credit — then,  by  an  easy  process  of  logic,  make 
out  the  syllogism  thus  :  —  Every  great  man  has  enemies, 
therefore,  every  man  who  has  enemies  must  be  great — hey, 
Beauclerc  ? ' 

Beauclerc  vouchsafed  only  a  faint,  absent  smile,  and,  turning 
to  his  guardian,  asked — '  Since  Lord  Beltravers  was  not  to  be 
allowed  the  honour  of  enemies,  or  the  benefit  of  pleading 
prejudice,  on  what  did  the  General  form  his  judgment  ? ' 

'  From  his  own  words.' 

'  Stay  judgment,  my  dear  General,'  cried  Beauclerc  ;  '  words 
repeated  !  by  whom  ?  ' 

'  Repeated  by  no  one — heard  from  himself,  by  myself 

'  Yourself  1  I  was  not  aware  you  had  ever  met  ; — when  ? 
where  ? '  Beauclerc  started  forward  on  his  chair,  and  listened 
eagerly  for  the  answer. 

'Pity,'  said  Lady  Davenant,  speaking  to  herself, — 'pity 
that  "  with  such  quick  affections  kindling  into  flame,"  they 
should  burn  to  waste.' 

'  When,  where  ? '  repeated  Beauclerc,  with  his  eyes  fixed  on 
his  guardian,  and  his  soul  in  his  eyes. 

Soberly  and  slowly  his  guardian  answered,  and  categorically, 
— '  When  did  I  meet  Lord  Beltravers  ?  A  short  time  before 
his  father's  death.      Where  ?     At  Lady  Grace  Bland's.' 

'  At  Lady  Grace  Bland's  ! — where  he  could  not  possibly 
appear  to  advantage  !     Well,  go  on,  sir.' 

'  One  moment — pardon  me,  Beauclerc  ;  I  have  curiosity  as 
well  as  yourself  May  I  ask  why  Lord  Beltravers  could  not 
possibly  have  appeared  to  advantage  at  Lady  Grace  Bland's  ? ' 

'  Because  I  know  he  cannot  endure  her  ;  I  have  heard  him, 
speaking  of  her,  quote  what  Johnson  or  somebody  says  of 
Clariss — "  a  prating,  preaching,  frail  creature."  ' 

'  Good  ! '  said  the  General,  '  he  said  this  of  his  own 
aunt  ! ' 

'  Aunt !  You  cannot  mean  that  Lady  Grace  is  his  aunt  ? ' 
cried  Beauclerc. 

'  She  is  his  mother's  sister,'  rephed  the  General,  '  and 
therefore  is,  I  conceive,  his  aunt.' 

'  Be  it  so,'  cried  Beauclerc  ;  '  people  must  tell  the  truth 
sometimes,  even   of  their   own  relations  ;   they  must  know  it 

98 


HELEN 

best,  and  therefore  I  conclude  that  what  Beltravers  said  of 
Lady  Grace  is  true.' 

'  Bravo  !  well  jumped  to  a  conclusion,  Granville,  as  usual,' 
said  Lady  Davenant.  '  But  go  on.  General,  tell  us  what  you 
have  heard  from  this  precious  lord ;  can  you  have  better  than 
what  Beauclerc,  his  own  witness,  gives  in  evidence  ? ' 

'  Better,  I  think,  and  in  the  same  line,'  said  the  General ; 
'  his  lordship  has  the  merit  of  consistency.  At  table,  servants 
of  course  present,  and  myself  a  stranger,  I  heard  Lord 
Beltravers  begin  by  cursing  England  and  all  that  inhabit  it. 
"  But  your  country ! "  remonstrated  his  aunt.  He  abjured 
England  ;  he  had  no  country,  he  said,  no  liberal  man  ever 
has  ;  he  had  no  relations — what  nature  gave  him  without  his 
consent  he  had  a  right  to  disclaim,  I  think  he  argued.  But  I 
can  swear  to  these  words,  with  which  he  concluded — "My 
father  is  an  idiot,  my  mother  a  brute,  and  my  sister  may  go  to 
the  devil  her  own  way."  ' 

'  Such  bad  taste  ! '  said  the  aide-de-camp. 

Lady  Davenant  smiled  at  the  unspeakable  astonishment  in 
Helen's  face.  '  When  you  have  lived  one  season  in  the  world, 
my  dear  child,  this  power  of  surprise  will  be  worn  out.' 

'  But  even  to  those  who  have  seen  the  world,'  said  the 
aide-de-camp,  who  had  seen  the  world,  '  as  it  strikes  me,  really 
it  is  such  extraordinary  bad  taste  ! ' 

'  Such  ordinary  bad  taste !  as  it  strikes  me,'  said  Lady 
Davenant ;  '  base  imitation,  and  imitation  is  always  a  confession 
of  poverty,  a  want  of  original  genius.  But  then  there  are 
degrees  among  the  race  of  imitators.  Some  choose  their 
originals  well,  some  come  near  them  tolerably ;  but  here,  all 
seems  equally  bad,  clumsy,  Birmingham  counterfeit ;  don't 
you  think  so,  Beauclerc  .■'  a  counterfeit  that  falls  and  makes  no 
noise.  There  is  the  worst  of  it  for  your  p/'oteg^,  whose  great 
ambition  I  am  sure  it  is  to  make  a  noise  in  the  world.  How- 
ever, I  may  spare  my  remonstrances,'  for  I  am  quite  aware  that 
you  would  never  let  drop  a  friend.' 

'  Never,  never  ! '  cried  Beauclerc. 

'  Then,  my  dear  Granville,  do  not  take  up  this  man,  this 
Lord  Beltravers,  for,  depend  upon  it,  he  will  never  do.  If  he 
had  made  a  bold  stroke  for  a  reputation,  like  a  great  original, 
and  sported  some  deed  without  a  name,  to  work  upon  the 
wonder-loving  imagination  of  the  credulous  English  public,  one 

99 


HELEN 

might  have  thought  something  of  him.  But  this  cowardly, 
negative  sin,  not  honouring  his  father  and  mother  !  so  common- 
place, too,  neutral  tint — no  effect.  Quite  a  failure,  one  cannot 
even  stare,  and  you  know,  Granville,  the  object  of  all  these 
strange  speeches  is  merely  to  make  fools  stare.  To  be  the 
wonder  of  the  London  world  for  a  single  day  is  the  great 
ambition  of  these  ephemeral  fame-hunters,  "  insects  that  shine, 
buzz,  and  fly-blow  in  the  setting  sun."  ' 

Beauclerc  pushed  away  his  tea-cup  half  across  the  table,  ex- 
claiming, '  How  unjust  !  to  class  him  among  a  tribe  he  detests 
and  despises  as  much  as  you  can,  Lady  Davenant.  And  all  for 
that  one  unfortunate  speech. — Not  quite  fair,  General,  not  quite 
philosophical.  Lady  Davenant,  to  decide  on  a  man's  character 
from  the  specimen  of  a  single  speech  :  this  is  like  judging  of  a 
house  from  the  sample  of  a  single  brick.  All  this  time  I  know 
how  Beltravers  came  to  make  that  speech — I  know  how  it  vvfas, 
as  well  as  if  I  had  been  present — better  ! ' 

'  Better  ! '  cried  Lady  Cecilia. 

'  Ladies  and  gentlemen  may  laugh,'  resumed  Beauclerc, 
'  but  I  seriously  maintain — better  ! ' 

'  How  better  than  the  General,  who  was  present,  and  heard 
and  saw  the  whole  ? '  said  Lady  Cecilia. 

'  Yes,  better,  for  he  saw  only  effects,  and  I  know  causes  ; 
and  I  appeal  to  Lady  Davenant,  —  from  Lady  Davenant 
sarcastic  to  Lady  Davenant  philosophic  I  appeal — may  not  the 
man  who  discovers  causes  say  he  knows  more  than  he  who 
merely  sees  effects  ? ' 

'  He  may  say  he  knows  more,  at  all  events,'  replied  Lady 
Davenant ;  '  but  now  for  the  discovery  of  causes,  metaphysical 
sir.' 

'  I  have  done,'  cried  the  General,  turning  to  leave  the 
breakfast-room  ;  '  v-'hen  Beauclerc  goes  to  metaphysics  I  gi^e 
it  up.' 

'  No,  no,  do  not  give  it  up,  my  dear  General,'  cried  Lady 
Cecilia  ;  '  do  not  stir  till  we  have  heard  what  will  come  next, 
for  I  am  sure  it  will  be  something  delightfully  absurd.' 

Beauclerc  bowed,  and  feared  he  should  not  justify  her  lady- 
ship's good  opinion,  for  he  had  nothing  dehghtfully  absurd  to 
say,  adding  that  the  cause  of  his  friend's  appearing  like  a  brute 
was,  that  he  feared  to  be  a  hypocrite  among  hypocrites. 

'  Lord   Beltravers  was   in   company   with  a   set   who   were 

100 


HELEN 

striving,  with  all  their  might  of  dissimulation,  to  appear  better 
than  they  are,  and  he,  as  he  always  does,  strove  to  make 
himself  appear  worse  than  he  really  is.' 

'  Unnecessary,  I  should  think,'  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'  Impossible,  I  should  think,'  said  the  General. 

'  Impossible  I  know  it  is  to  change  your  opinion,  General,  of 
any  one,'  said  Beauclerc. 

'  For  my  own  part,  I  am  glad  of  that,'  said  Lady  Cecilia, 
rising ;  '  and  I  advise  you,  Granville,  to  rest  content  with  the 
General's  opinion  of  yourself,  and  say  no  more.' 

'  But,'  said  Beauclerc ;  '  one  cannot  be  content  to  think 
only  of  oneself  always.' 

'Say  no  more,  say  no  more,'  repeated  Lady  Cecilia, 
smiling  as  she  looked  back  from  the  door,  where  she  had 
stopped  the  General.  '  For  my  sake  say  no  more,  I  entreat ;  I 
do  dislike  to  hear  so  much  said  about  anything  or  anybody. 
What  sort  of  a  road  is  it  to  Old  Forest  ? '  continued  she  ;  '  why 
should  not  we  ladies  go  with  you,  my  dear  Clarendon,  to 
enliven  the  way  ? ' 

Clarendon's  countenance  brightened  at  this  proposal.  The 
road  was  certainly  beautiful,  he  said,  by  the  banks  of  the 
Thames.  Lady  Cecilia  and  the  General  left  the  room,  but 
Beauclerc  remained  sitting  at  the  breakfast-table,  apparently 
intently  occupied  in  forming  a  tripod  of  three  tea-spoons ; 
Lady  Davenant  opposite  to  him,  looking  at  him  earnestly. 
'  Granville  ! '  said  she.  He  started.  '  Granville  !  set  my  mind 
at  ease  by  one  word,  tell  me  the  mot  cPMgme  of  this  sudden 
friendship.' 

'  Not  what  you  suppose,'  said  he  steadily,  yet  colouring 
deeply.  '  The  fact  is,  that  Beltravers  and  I  were  school- 
fellows ;  a  generous  little  fellow  he  was  as  ever  was  born  ;  he 
got  me  out  of  a  sad  scrape  once  at  his  own  expense,  and  I  can 
never  forget  it.  We  had  never  met  since  we  left  Eton,  till 
about  three  weeks  ago  in  town,  when  I  found  him  in  great 
difficulties,  persecuted  too,  by  a  party — I  could  not  turn  my 
back  on  him — I  would  rather  be  shot ! ' 

'  No  immediate  necessity  for  being  shot,  my  dear  Granville, 
I  hope,'  said  Lady  Davenant.  'But  if  this  be  indeed  all,  I 
will  never  say  another  word  against  your  Lord  Beltravers  ;  I 
will  leave  it  to  you  to  find  out  his  character,  or  to  time  to  show 
it.     I  shall  be  quite  satisfied  that  you  throw  away  your  money. 


HELEN 

if  it  be  only  money  that  is  in  the  question  ;  be  this  Lord 
Beltravers  what  he  may.  Let  him  say,  "  or  let  them  do,  it  is 
all  one  to  me,"  provided  that  he  does  not  marry  you  to  his 
sister.' 

'  He  has  not  a  thought  of  it,'  cried  Beauclerc  ;  '  and  if  he 
had,  do  you  conceive.  Lady  Davenant,  that  any  man  on  earth 
could  dispose  of  me  in  marriage,  at  his  pleasure  ? ' 

'  I  hope  not,'  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'  Be  assured  not ;  my  own  will,  my  own  heart  alone,  must 
decide  that  matter.' 

'  The  horses  are  at  the  door  ! '  cried  Cecilia,  as  she  entered  ; 
'  but  Where's  Helen  ? ' 

Helen  had  made  her  escape  out  of  the  room  when  Lady 
Davenant  had  pronounced  the  words,  '  Set  my  mind  at  rest, 
Granville,'  as  she  felt  it  must  then  be  embarrassing  to  him  to 
speak,  and  to  herself  to  hear.  Her  retreat  had  not,  however, 
been  effected  without  considerable  loss,  she  had  been  compelled 
to  leave  a  large  piece  of  the  crape-trimming  of  her  gown  under 
the  foot  of  Lady  Davenant's  inexorable  chair. 

'  Here  is  something  that  belongs  to  Miss  Stanley,  if  I 
mistake  not,'  said  the  General,  who  first  spied  the  fragment. 
The  aide-de-camp  stooped  for  it — Lady  Cecilia  pitied  it — 
Lady  Davenant  pronounced  it  to  be  Helen's  own  fault — 
Beauclerc  understood  how  it  happened,  and  said  nothing. 
'  But,  Helen,'  cried  Lady  Cecilia,  as  she  reappeared, — '  but, 
Helen,  are  you  not  coming  with  us  ? ' 

Helen  had  intended  to  have  gone  in  the  pony-carriage  with 
Lady  Davenant  but  her  ladyship  now  declared  that  she  had 
business  to  do  at  home  ;  it  was  settled  therefore  that  Helen 
was  to  be  of  the  riding  party,  and  that  party  consisted  of  Lady 
Cecilia  and  the  General,  Beauclerc  and  herself. 


CHAPTER    X 

It  was  a  delightful  day,  sun  shining,  not  too  hot,  air  balmy, 
birds  singing,  all  nature  gay  ;  and  the  happy  influence  was 
quickly  felt  by  the  riding  party.  Unpleasant  thoughts  of  the 
past  or  future,  if  any  such  had  been,  were  now  lost  in  present 

103 


HELEN 

enjoyment.  The  General,  twice  a  man  on  horseback,  as  he 
always  felt  himself,  managed  his  own  and  Helen's  horse  to 
admiration,  and  Cecilia,  riding  on  with  Beauclerc,  was  well 
pleased  to  hear  his  first  observation,  that  he  had  been  quite 
wrong  last  night,  in  not  acknowledging  that  Miss  Stanley  was 
beautiful.  '  People  look  so  different  by  daylight  and  by 
candlelight,'  said  he  ;  '  and  so  different  when  one  does  not 
know  them  at  all,  and  when  one  begins  to  know  something  of 
them.' 

'  But  what  can  you  know  yet  of  Helen  ? ' 
'  One  forms  some  idea  of  character  from  trifles  light  as  air. 
How  delightful  this  day  is  ! ' 

'  And  now  you  really  allow  she  may  be  called  beautiful  ? ' 
'  Yes,  that  is,  with   some   expression   of  mind,   heart,   soul, 
which  is  what  I  look  for  in  general,'  said  Beauclerc. 
'  In  general,  what  can  you  mean  by  in  general  ? ' 
'  Not  in  particular  ;  in  particular    cases    I   might    think — I 
might  feel — otherwise.' 

'  In  particular,  then,  do  you  like  fools  that  have  no  mind, 
heart,  or  soul,  Granville  ?     Answer  me.' 

'  Take  care,'  said  he,  '  that  horse  is  too  spirited  for  a  lady.' 
'Not  for  me,'  said  Lady  Cecilia;  'but  do  not  think  you 
shall  get  ofif  so  ;  what  did  you  mean  ? ' 

'  My  meaning  lies  too  deep  for  the  present  occasion.' 
'  For  the  present  company^eh  ? ' 

Beauclerc  half  smiled  and  answered — '  You  know  you  used 
to  tell  me  that  you  hated  long  discussions  on  words  and  nice 
distinctions.' 

'  Well,  well,  but  let  me  have  the  nice  distinction  now.' 
'  Between  love  and  friendship,  then,  there  is  a  vast  differ- 
ence in  what  one   wishes   for  in   a  woman's   face ;    there   are 
"  faces  which  pale  passion  loves."  ' 

'  To  the  right,  turn,'  the  General's  voice  far  behind  was 
heard  to  say. 

To  the  right  they  turned,  into  a  glade  of  the  park,  which 
opened  to  a  favourite  view  of  the  General's,  to  which  Cecilia 
knew  that  all  attention  must  be  paid.  He  came  up,  and  they 
proceeded  through  a  wood  which  had  been  planted  by  his 
father,  and  which  seemed  destined  to  stand  for  ever  secure 
from  sacrilegious  axe.  The  road  led  them  next  into  a  village, 
one  of  the  prettiest  of  that  sort  of  scattered  English  villages, 

103 


HELEN 

where  each  habitation  seems  to  have  been  suited  to  the  fancy 
as  well  as  to  the  convenience  of  each  proprietor ;  giving  an 
idea  at  once  of  comfort  and  liberty,  such  as  can  be  seen  only 
in  England.  Happy  England,  how  blest,  would  she  but  know 
her  bliss  ! 

This  village  was  inhabited  by  the  General's  tenants.  His 
countenance  brightened  and  expanded,  as  did  theirs,  whenever 
he  came  amongst  them  ;  he  saw  them  happy,  and  they  knew 
that  they  owed  their  happiness  in  just  proportion  to  their 
landlord  and  themselves  ;  therefore  there  was  a  comfortable 
mixture  in  their  feelings  of  gratitude  and  self-respect.  Some 
old  people  who  were  sitting  on  the  stone  benches,  sunning 
themselves  at  their  doors,  rose  as  he  passed,  cap  in  hand,  with 
cordial  greeting.  The  oldest  man,  the  father  of  the  village, 
forgot  his  crutch  as  he  came  forward  to  see  his  landlord's 
bride,  and  to  give  him  joy.  At  every  house  where  they 
stopped,  out  came  husband,  wife,  and  children,  even  '  wee 
toddling  things '  ;  one  of  these,  while  the  General  was  speak- 
ing to  its  mother,  made  its  way  frightfully  close  to  his  horse's 
heels  :  Helen  saw  it,  and  called  to  the  mother.  The  General, 
turning  and  leaning  back  on  his  horse,  said  to  the  bold  little 
urchin  as  the  mother  snatched  him  up,  '  My  boy,  as  long  as 
you  live  never  again  go  behind  a  horse's  heels.' 

'  And  remember,  it  was  General  Clarendon  gave  you  this 
advice,'  added  Beauclerc,  and  turning  to  Lady  Cecilia — 
'  "  Et  souTjenez  vous  que  c'est  Marcchal  Turenne  qui  vous 
ta  dit." ' 

While  the  General  searched  for  that  Enghsh  memento,  six- 
pence, Lady  Cecilia  repeated,  '  Marshal  Turenne  !  I  do  not 
understand.' 

'  Yes,  if  you  recollect,'  said  Helen,  '  you  do.' 

'  I  daresay  I  know,  but  I  don't  remember,'  said  Cecilia. 

'  It  was  only,'  said  Helen,  '  that  the  same  thing  had  hap- 
pened to  Marshal  Turenne,  that  he  gave  the  same  advice  to  a 
little  child.' 

Lady  Cecilia  said  she  owed  Beauclerc  an  acknowledgment 
down  to  her  saddle-bow,  for  the  compliment  to  her  General,  and 
a  bow  at  least  as  low  to  Helen,  for  making  her  comprehend  it  ; 
and,  having  paid  both  debts  with  graceful  promptitude,  she 
observed,  in  an  aside  to  Beauclerc,  that  she  quite  agreed  with 
him,  that  '  In  friendship  it  was  good  not  to  have  to  do  with  fools.' 

104 


HELEN 

He  smiled. 

'  It  is  always  permitted,'  continued  Cecilia,  '  to  woman  to 
use  her  intellects  so  far  as  to  comprehend  what  man  says  ;  her 
knowledge,  of  whatever  sort,  never  comes  amiss  when  it  serv,es 
only  to  illustrate  what  is  said  by  one  of  the  lords  of  the  creation. 
Let  us  note  this,  my  dear  Helen,  as  a  general  maxim,  for 
future  use,  and  pray,  since  you  have  so  good  a  memory,  re- 
member to  tell  mamma,  who  says  I  never  generalise,  that  this 
morning  I  have  actually  made  and  established  a  philosophical 
maxim,  one  that  may  be  of  some  use  too,  which  cannot  be 
said  of  all  reflections,  general  or  particular.' 

They  rode  on  through  a  lane  bright  and  fragrant  with  prim- 
roses and  violets  ;  gradually  winding,  this  lane  opened  at  last 
upon  the  beautiful  banks  of  the  Thames,  whose  'silver  bosom' 
appeared  at  once  before  them  in  the  bright  sunshine,  silent, 
flowing  on,  seeming,  as  Beauclerc  said,  as  if  it  would  for  ever 
flow  on  unaltered  in  full,  broad,  placid  dignity.  '  Here,'  he 
exclaimed,  as  they  paused  to  contemplate  the  view,  'the 
throng  of  commerce,  the  ponderous  barge,  the  black  steam- 
boat, the  hum  and  din  of  business,  never  have  violated  the 
mighty  current.  No  lofty  bridge  insultingly  overarches  it, 
no  stone-built  wharf  confines  it ;  nothing  but  its  own  banks, 
coeval  with  itself,  and,  like  itself,  uncontaminated  by  the  petty 
uses  of  mankind  ! — they  spread  into  large  parks,  or  are  hung 
with  thick  woods,  as  nature  wills.  No  citizen's  box,  no  chi- 
mera villa  destroys  the  idea  of  repose  ;  but  nature,  uninter- 
rupted, carries  on  her  own  operations  in  field,  and  flood,  and 
tree.' 

The  General,  less  poetically  inclined,  would  name  to  Helen 
all  the  fine  places  within  view — '  Residences,'  as  he  practi- 
cally remarked,  '  such  as  cannot  be  seen  in  any  country  in  the 
world  but  England ;  and  not  only  fine  places  such  as  these, 
but  from  the  cottage  to  the  palace — "  the  homes  of  Old  Eng- 
land "  are  the  best  homes  upon  earth.' 

'  The  most  candid  and  sensible  of  all  modern  French  tra- 
vellers,' said  Beauclerc,  'was  particularly  struck  with  the 
superiority  of  our  English  country  residences,  and  the  comfort 
of  our  homes.' 

'You  mean  M.  de  Stael.?'  said  the  General;  'true  English 
sense  in  that  book,  I  allow.' 

When  the  General  and  Beauclerc  did  agree  in  opinion  about 

105 


HELEN 

a  book,  which  was  not  a  circumstance  of  frequent  occurrence, 
they  were  mutually  delighted  ;  one  always  feeling  the  value  of 
the  other's  practical  sense,  and  the  other  then  acknowledging 
that  literature  is  good  for  something.  Beauclerc,  in  the  fulness 
of  his  heart  and  abundance  of  his  words,  began  to  expatiate 
on  M.  de  Stael's  merits,  in  having  better  than  any  foreigner 
understood  the  actual  workings  and  balances  of  the  British 
constitution,  that  constitution  so  much  talked  of  abroad,  and 
so  little  understood. 

'  So  little  understood  anywhere,'  said  the  General. 

Reasonably  as  Beauclerc  now  spoke,  Helen  formed  a  new 
idea  of  his  capacity,  and  began  to  think  more  respectfully  even 
of  his  common  sense,  than  when  she  had  heard  him  in  the 
Beltravers  cause.  He  spoke  of  the  causes  of  England's  pros- 
perity, the  means  by  which  she  maintains  her  superiority 
among  nations — her  equal  laws  and  their  just  administration. 
He  observed  that  the  hope  which  every  man  bom  in  England, 
even  in  the  lowest  station,  may  have  of  rising  by  his  own 
merits  to  the  highest  eminence,  forms  the  great  spring  of  in- 
dustry and  talent.  He  agreed  with  the  intelligent  foreigner's 
observation,  that  the  aristocracy  of  talent  is  superior  in  England 
to  the  aristocracy  of  birth. 

The  General  seemed  to  demur  at  the  word  superior,  drew 
himself  up,  but  said  nothing  in  contradiction. 

'  Industry,  and  wealth,  and  education,  and  fashion,  all  emulous, 
act  in  England  beneficially  on  each  other,'  continued  Beauclerc. 

The  General  sat  at  ease  again. 

'  And  above  all,'  pursued  Beauclerc, — '  above  all,  educa- 
tion and  the  diffusion  of  knowledge ' 

'  Knowledge — yes,  but  take  care  of  what  kind,'  said  his 
guardian. 

'  All  kinds  are  good,'  said  Beauclerc. 

'  No,  only  such  as  are  safe,'  said  the  General.  The 
march  of  intellect  was  not  a  favourite  march  with  him,  unless 
the  step  were  perfectly  kept,  and  all  in  good  time. 

But  now,  on  passing  a  projecting  bend  in  the  wood,  they 
came  within  sight  of  a  place  in  melancholy  contrast  to  all  they 
had  just  admired.  A  park  of  considerable  extent,  absolutely 
bereft  of  trees,  except  a  few  ragged  firs  on  each  side  of  a  large 
dilapidated  mansion  on  the  summit  of  a  bleak  hill :  it  seemed 
as  if  a  great  wood  had  once  been  there. 

1 06 


HELEN 

'  Old  Forest ! '  exclaimed  the  General ;  <  Old  Forest,  now 
no  more  !  Many  a  happy  hour,  when  I  was  a  boy,  have  I 
spent  shooting  in  those  woods,'  and  he  pointed  to  where  in- 
numerable stumps  of  trees,  far  as  the  eye  could  reach,  marked 
where  the  forest  had  once  stood :  some  of  the  white  circles  on 
the  ground  showed  the  magnificent  size  of  those  newly  felled. 
Beauclerc  was  quite  silent. 

The  General  led  the  way  on  to  the  great  gate  of  entrance  : 
the  porter's  lodge  was  in  ruins. 

A  huge  rusty  padlock  hung  upon  one  of  the  gates,  which 
had  been  dragged  half  open,  but,  the  hinge  having  sunk,  there 
it  stuck — ^the  gate  could  not  be  opened  further.  The  other 
could  not  be  stirred  without  imminent  hazard  of  bringing 
down  the  pier  on  which  it  hung,  and  which  was  so  crazy,  the 
groom  said,  'he  was  afraid,  if  he  shook  it  never  so  little,  all 
would  come  down  together.' 

'  Let  it  alone,'  said  the  General,  in  the  tone  of  one  re- 
solved to  be  patient ;  '  there  is  room  enough  for  us  to  get  in 
one  by  one — Miss  Stanley,  do  not  be  in  a  hurry,  if  you 
please  ;  follow  me  quietly.' 

In  they  filed.  The  avenue,  overgrown  with  grass,  would 
have  been  difficult  to  find,  but  for  deep  old  cart-ruts  which 
still  marked  the  way.  But  soon,  fallen  trees,  and  lopped 
branches,  dragged  many  a  rood  and  then  left  there,  made  it 
difficult  to  pass.  And  there  lay  exposed  the  white  bodies  of 
many  a  noble  tree,  some  wholly,  some  half,  stripped  of  their 
bark,  some  green  in  decay,  left  to  the  weather — and  every 
here  and  there  little  smoking  pyramids  of  burning  charcoal. 

As  they  approached  the  house  —  'How  changed,'  said 
the  General,  '  from  that  once  cheerful  hospitable  mansion  ! ' 
It  was  a  melancholy  example  of  a  deserted  home :  the 
plaster  dropping  off,  the  cut  stone  green,  the  windows  broken, 
the  shutters  half  shut,  the  way  to  the  hall-door  steps  blocked 
up.  They  were  forced  to  go  round  through  the  yards.  Coach- 
houses and  stables,  grand  ranges,  now  all  dilapidated.  Only 
one  yelping  cur  in  the  great  kennel.  The  back-door  being 
ajar,  the  General  pushed  it  open,  and  they  went  in,  and  on  to 
the  great  kitchen,  where  they  found  in  the  midst  of  wood 
smoke  one  little  old  woman,  whom  they  nearly  scared  out  of 
her  remaining  senses.  She  stood  and  stared.  Beauclerc 
stepped  towards  her  to  explain  ;  but  she  was  deaf ;  he  raised 

107 


HELEN 

his  voice — in  vain.  She  was  made  to  comprehend  by  the 
General,  whose  voice,  known  in  former  times,  reached  her 
heart — '  that  they  only  came  to  see  the  place.' 

'  See  the  place  !  ah  !  a  sad  sight  to  see.'  Her  eyes  re- 
verted to  Beauclerc,  and,  conceiving  that  he  was  the  young 
lord  himself,  she  waxed  pale,  and  her  head  shook  fearfully  ; 
but,  when  relieved  from  this  mistake,  she  went  forward  to 
show  them  over  the  house. 

As  they  proceeded  up  the  great  staircase,  she  confided  to 
her  friend,  the  General,  that  she  was  glad  it  was  not  the  young 
lord,  for  she  was  told  he  was  a  fiery  man,  and  she  dreaded 
his  coming  unawares. 

Lady  Cecilia  asked  if  she  did  not  know  him. 

No,  she  had  never  seen  him  since  he  was  a  little  fellow  ; 
'  he  has  been  always  roaming  about,  like  the  rest,  in  foreign 
parts,  and  has  never  set  foot  in  the  place  since  he  came  to 
man's  estate.' 

As  the  General  passed  a  window  on  the  landing-place,  he 
looked  out.  '  You  are  missing  the  great  elm,  sir.  Ah  !  I 
remember  you  here,  a  boy  ;  you  was,  always  good.  It  was  the 
young  lord  ordered  specially  the  cutting  of  that,  which  I 
could  not  stomach  ;  the  last  of  the  real  old  trees  !  Well, 
well !  I'm  old  and  foolish— I'm  old  and  foolish,  and  I  should 
not  talk.' 

But  still  she  talked  on,  and  as  this  seemed  her  only  comfort, 
they  would  not  check  her  garrulity.  In  the  hope  that  they 
were  come  to  take  the  house,  she  now  bustled  as  well  as  she 
could,  to  show  all  to  the  best  advantage,  but  bad  was  the  best 
now,  as  she  sorrowfully  said.  She  was  very  unwilling  that  the 
gentlemen  should  go  up  to  inspect  the  roof  They  went, 
however ;  and  the  General  saw  and  estimated,  and  Beauclerc 
saw  and  hoped. 

The  General,  recollecting  the  geography  of  the  house,  ob- 
served that  she  had  not  shown  them  what  used  to  be  the 
picture-gallery,  which  looked  out  on  the  terrace  ;  he  desired  to 
see  it.  She  reluctantly  obeyed ;  and,  after  trying  sundry 
impossible  keys,  repeating  all  the  while  that  her  heart  was 
broke,  that  she  wished  it  had  pleased  God  never  to  give  her  a 
heart,  unlock  the  door  she  could  not  in  her  trepidation. 
Beauclerc  gently  took  the  keys  from  her,  and  looked  so  com- 
passionately upon  her,  that  she  God-blessed  him,  and  thought 

io8 


HELEN 

it  a  pity  her  young  lord  was  not  like  him  ;  and  while  he  dealt 
with  the  lock,  Lady  Cecilia,  saying  they  would  trouble  her  no 
further,  slipped  into  her  hand  what  she  thought  would  be  some 
comfort.  The  poor  old  creature  thanked  her  ladyship,  but 
said  gold  could  be  of  no  use  to  her  now  in  life  ;  she  should 
soon  let  the  parish  bury  her,  and  be  no  cost  to  the  young  lord. 
She  could  forgive  many  things,  she  said,  but  she  could  never 
forgive  him  for  parting  with  the  old  pictures.  She  turned 
away  as  the  gallery-door  opened. 

One  only  old  daub  of  a  grandmother  was  there  ;  all  the  rest 
had  been  sold,  and  their  vacant  places  remained  discoloured 
on  the  walls.  There  were  two  or  three  dismembered  old 
chairs,  the  richly-dight  windows  broken,  the  floor  rat- eaten. 
The  General  stood  and  looked,  and  did  not  sigh,  but  absolutely 
groaned.  They  went  to  the  shattered  glass  door,  which  looked 
out  upon  the  terrace — that  terrace  which  had  cost  thousands 
of  pounds  to  raise,  and  he  called  Cecilia  to  show  her  the  place 
where  the  youngsters  used  to  play,  and  to  point  out  some  of 
his  favourite  haunts. 

'  It  is  most  melancholy  to  see  a  family-place  so  gone  to 
ruin,'  said  Beauclerc ;  'if  it  strikes  us  so  much,  what  must 
it  be  to  the  son  of  this  family,  to  come  back  to  the  house  of 
his  ancestors,  and  find  it  thus  desolate  !     Poor  Beltravers  ! ' 

The  expression  of  the  General's  eye  changed. 

'  I  am  sure  you  must  pity  him,  my  dear  General,'  con- 
tinued Beauclerc. 

'  I  might,  had  he  done  anything  to  prevent,  or  had  he 
done  less  to  hasten,  this  ruin.' 

'  How  ?  he  should  not  have  cut  down  the  trees,  do  you 
mean  ? — but  it  was  to  pay  his  father's  debts ' 

'  And  his  own,'  said  the  General. 

'  He  told  me  his  father's,  sir.' 

'  And  I  tell  you  his  own.' 

'  Even  so,'  said  Beauclerc,  '  debts  are  not  crimes  for  which 
we  ought  to  shut  the  gates  of  mercy  on  our  fellow-creatures — 
and  so  young  a  man  as  Beltravers,  left  to  himself,  without  a 
home,  his  family  abroad,  no  parent,  no  friend — no  guardian 
friend.' 

'  But  what  is  it  you  would  do,  Beauclerc  ? '  said  the 
General. 

'What    you    must    wish    to    be    done,'     said    Beauclerc. 
109 


HELEN 

'  Repair  this  ruin,  restore  this  once  hospitable  mansion,  and 
put  it  in  the  power  of  the  son  to  be  what  his  ancestors  have 
been.' 

'  But  how — my  dear  Beauclerc  ?     Tell  me  plainly — how  ? ' 

'  Plainly,  I  would  lend  him  money  enough  to  make  this 
house  fit  to  live  in.' 

'  And  he  would  never  repay  you,  and  would  never  live  in 
it.' 

'  He  would,  sir — he  promised  me  he  would.' 

'  Promised  you  ! ' 

'  And  I  promised  him  that  I  would  lend  him  the  money.' 

'  Promised  !  Beauclerc  ?  Without  your  guardian's  know- 
ledge ?     Pray,  how  much ' 

'  Confound  me  if  I  remember  the  words.  The  sense  was, 
what  would  do  the  business  ;  what  would  make  the  house  fit 
for  him  and  his  sisters  to  live  in.' 

'  Ten  thousand  ! — fifteen  thousand  would  not  do.' 

'  Well,  sir.  You  know  what  will  be  necessary  better  than  I 
do.  A  few  thousands  more  or  less,  what  signifies,  provided 
a  friend  be  well  served  ?  The  superfluous  money  accumulated 
during  my  long  minority  cannot  be  better  employed.' 

'  All  that  I  have  been  saving  for  you  with  such  care  from 
the  time  your  father  died  ! ' 

'  My  dear  guardian,  my  dear  friend,  do  not  think  me 
ungrateful  ;  but  the  fact  is, — in  short,  ray  happiness  does  not 
depend,  never  can  depend,  upon  money  ;  as  my  friend,  there- 
fore, I  beseech  you  to  consider  my  moneyed  interest  less,  and 
my  happiness  more.' 

'  Beauclerc,  you  do  not  know  what  your  happiness  is.  One 
hour  you  tell  me  it  is  one  thing,  the  next  another.  What  is 
become  of  the  plan  for  the  new  house  you  wanted  to  build  for 
yourself  ?  1  must  have  common  sense  for  you,  Beauclerc,  as 
you  have  none  for  yourself.  I  shall  not  give  you  this  money 
for  Lord  Beltravers.' 

'  You  forget,  sir,  that  I  told  you  I  had  promised.' 

'  You  forget,  Beauclerc,  that  I  told  you  that  such  a  promise, 
vague  and  absurd  in  itself,  made  without  your  guardian's 
concurrence  or  consent,  is  absolutely  null  and  void.' 

'  Null  and  void  in  law,  perhaps  it  may  be,'  cried  Beauclerc  ; 
'but  for  that  very  reason,  in  honour,  the  stronger,  the  more 
binding",  and  I  am  speaking  to  a  man  of  honour.' 


HELEN 

'  To  one  who  can  take  care  of  his  own  honour,'  said  the 
General. 

'  And  of  mine,  I  trust.' 

'  You  do  well  to  trust  it,  as  your  father  did,  to  me :  it  shall 
not  be  implicated ' 

'  When  once  I  am  of  age,'  interrupted  Beauclerc. 

'  You  will  do  as  you  please,'  said  the  General.  '  In  the 
meantime  I  shall  do  my  duty.' 

'  But,  sir,  I  only  ask  you  to  let  me  lend  this  money.' 

'  Lend — nonsense  !  lend  to  a  man  who  cannot  give  any 
security.' 

'  Security  ! '  said  Beauclerc,  with  a  look  of  unutterable 
contempt.  '  When  a  friend  is  in  distress,  to  talk  to  him  like 
an  attorney,  of  security!  Do,  pray,  sir,  spare  me  that.  I 
would  rather  give  the  money  at  once.' 

'  I  make  no  doubt  of  it ;  then  at  once  I  say  No,  sir.' 

'  No,  sir  !  and  why  do  you  say  no  ? ' 

'  Because  I  think  it  my  duty,  and  nothing  I  have  heard  has 
at  all  shaken  my  opinion.' 

'  Opinion  !  and  so  I  am  to  be  put  down  by  opinion,  with- 
out any  reason  ! '  cried  Beauclerc.  Then  trying  to  command 
his  temper,  '  But  tell  me,  my  dear  General,  why  I  cannot  have 
this  cursed  money  ? ' 

'  Because,  my  dear  Beauclerc,  I  am  your  guardian,  and 
can  say  no,  and  can  adhere  to  a  refusal  as  firmly  as  any  man 
living,  when  it  is  necessary.' 

'  Yes,  and  when  it  is  unnecessary.  General  Clarendon,  ac- 
cording to  your  own  estimate,  fifteen  thousand  pounds  is  the 
utmost  sum  requisite  to  put  this  house  in  a  habitable  state — 
by  that  sum  I  abide  ! ' 

'  Abide  ! ' 

'  Yes,  I  require  it,  to  keep  my  promise  to  Beltravers,  and 
have  it  I  must.' 

'  Not  from  me.' 

'  From  some  one  else  then,  for  have  it  I  will.' 

'  Dearest  Clarendon,'  whispered  Lady  Cecilia,  '  let  him 
have  it,  since  he  has  promised ' 

Without  seeming  to  hear  her  whisper,  without  a  muscle  of 
his  countenance  altering,  General  Clarendon  repeated,  '  Not 
from  me.' 

'  From  some  one  else  then — I  can.' 


HELEN 

'  Not  while  I  have  power  to  prevent.' 

'  Power  !  power !  power !  Yes,  that  is  what  you  love, 
above  all  things  and  all  persons,  and  I  tell  you  plainly. 
General  Clarendon,'  pursued  Beauclerc,  too  angry  to  heed  or 
see  Lady  Cecilia's  remonstrating  looks,  '  at  once  I  tell  you 
that  you  have  not  the  power.  You  had  it.  It  is  past  and 
gone.  The  power  of  affection  you  had,  if  not  of  reason  ;  but 
force,  General  Clarendon,  despotism,  can  never  govern  me. 
I  submit  to  no  man's  mere  will,  much  less  to  any  man's  sheer 
obstinacy.' 

At  the  word  obstinacy,  the  General's  face,  which  was  before 
rigid,  grew  hard  as  iron.  Beauclerc  walked  up  and  down  the 
room  with  great  strides,  and  as  he  strode  he  went  on  talking 
to  himself. 

'  To  be  kept  from  the  use  of  my  own  money,  treated  like 
a  child — an  idiot — at  my  time  of  life  !  Not  considered  at 
years  of  discretion,  when  other  men  of  the  meanest  capacity, 
by  the  law  of  the  land,  can  do  what  they  please  with  their 
own  property  !     By  heavens  ! — that  will  of  my  father's ' 

'  Should  be  respected,  my  dear  Granville,  since  it  was  your 
father's  will,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  joining  him  as  he  walked. 
'  And  respect '     He  stopped  short. 

'  My  dear    Lady    Cecilia,  for    your    sake '  he    tried    to 

restrain  himself. 

'  Till  this  moment  never  did  I  say  one  disrespectful  word 
to  General  Clarendon.  I  always  considered  him  as  the 
representative  of  my  father  ;  and  when  most  galled  I  have 
borne  the  chains  in  which  it  was  my  father's  pleasure  to  leave 
me.  Few  men  of  my  age  would  have  so  submitted  to  a 
guardian  not  many  years  older  than  himself.' 

'  Yes,  and  indeed  that  should  be  considered,'  said  Lady 
Cecilia,  turning  to  the  General. 

'  I  have  always  considered  General  Clarendon  more  as  my 
friend  than  my  guardian.' 

'  And  have  found  him  so,  I  had  hoped,'  said  the  General, 
relaxing  in  tone  but  not  in  looks. 

'  I  have  never  treated  you,  sir,  as  some  wards  treat  their 
guardians.  I  have  dealt  openly,  as  man  of  honour  to  man  of 
honour,  gentleman  to  gentleman,  friend  to  friend.' 

'  Acknowledged,  and  felt  by  me,  Beauclerc' 

'  Then  now,  my  dear  Clarendon,  grant  the  only  request  of 


HELEN 

any  consequence  I  ever  made  you — say  yes.'  Beauclerc 
trembled  with  impatience. 

'  No,'  said  the  General,  '  I  have  said  it — No.' 

The  gallery  rang  with  the  sound. 

'  No  ! '  repeated  Beauclerc. 

Each  walked  separately  up  and  down  the  room,  speaking 
without  listening  to  what  the  other  said.  Helen  heard  an 
offer  from  Beauclerc,  to  which  she  extremely  wished  that  the 
General  had  listened.  But  he  was  deaf  with  determination 
not  to  yield  to  anything  Beauclerc  could  say  further ;  the 
noise  of  passion  in  their  ears  was  too  great  for  either  of  them 
to  hear  the  other. 

Suddenly  turning,  Beauclerc  exclaimed, — 

'  Borne  with  me,  do  you  say  ?  'Tis  I  that  have  to  bear 
— and  by  heavens  ! '  cried  he,  '  more  than  I  can — than  I  will 
— bear.  Before  to-morrow's  sun  goes  down  I  will  have  the 
money.' 

'  From  whom  ? ' 

'From  any  money-lending  Jew  —  usurer  —  extortioner — 
cheat — rascal — whatever  he  be.  You  drive  me  to  it — you — 
you  my  friend — you,  with  whom  I  have  dealt  so  openly  ;  and 
to  the  last  it  shall  be  open.  To  no  vile  indirections  will  I 
stoop.  I  tell  you,  my  guardian,  that  if  you  deny  me  my  own, 
I  will  have  what  I  want  from  the  Jews.' 

'  Easily,'  said  his  guardian.  '  But  first,  recollect  that  a 
clause  in  your  father's  will,  in  such  case,  sends  his  estates  to 
your  cousin  Venables.' 

'To  my  cousin  Venables  let  them  go — all — all;  if  such 
be  your  pleasure,  sir,  be  it  so.  The  lowest  man  on  earth  that 
has  feehng  keeps  his  promise.  The  slave  has  a  right  to  his 
word  !  Ruin  me  if  you  will,  and  as  soon  as  you  please ; 
disgrace  me  you  cannot ;  bend  my  spirit  you  cannot ;  ruin  in 
any  shape  I  will  meet,  rather  than  submit  to  such  a  guardian, 
such  a ' 

Tyrant  he  was  on  the  point  of  saying,  but  Lady  Cecilia 
stopped  that  word  by  suddenly  seizing  upon  his  arm  :  forcibly 
she  carried  him  off,  saying,  '  Come  out  with  me  on  the  terrace, 
Granville,  and  recover  your  senses.' 

'  My  senses  !  I  have  never  lost  them  ;  never  was  cooler  in 
my  life,'  said  he,  kicking  open  the  glass  door  upon  its  first 
resistance,  and  shattering  its  remaining  panes  to  fragments. 

I  113 


HELEN 

Unnoticing,  not  hearing  the  crash,  the  General  stood  leaning 
his  elbow  on  the  mantelpiece,  and  covering  his  eyes  with  his 
hand.  Helen  remained  near  him,  scarce  breathing  loud  enough 
to  be  heard  ;  he  did  not  know  she  was  there,  and  he  repeated 
aloud,  in  an  accent  of  deep  feeling,  '  Tyrant  !  from  Beau- 
clerc  ! ' 

A  sigh  from  Helen  made  him  aware  of  her  presence,  and, 
as  he  removed  his  hand  from  his  eyes,  she  saw  his  look  was 
more  in  sorrow  than  in  anger  :  she  said  softly,  '  Mr.  Beauclerc 
was  wrong,  very  wrong,  but  he  was  in  a  passion,  he  did  not 
know  what  he  meant.' 

There  was  silence  for  a  few  moments.  '  You  are  right,  I 
believe,'  said  the  General,  '  it  was  heat  of  anger ' 

'  To  which  the  best  are  subject,'  said  Helen,  '  and  the  best 
and  kindest  most  easily  forgive.' 

'  But  Beauclerc  said  some  things  which  were ' 

'  Unpardonable — only  forget  them  ;  let  all  be  forgotten.' 

'  Yes,'  said  the  General,  '  all  but  my  determination  ;  that, 
observe,  is  fixed.  My  mind.  Miss  Stanley,  is  made  up,  and, 
once  made  up,  it  is  not  to  be  changed.' 

'  I  am  certain  of  that,'  said  Helen,  '  but  I  am  not  clear 
that  your  mind  is  made  up.' 

The  General  looked  at  her  with  astonishment. 

'Your  refusal  is  not  irrevocable.' 

'  You  do  not  know  me,  Miss  Stanley.' 

'  I  think  I  do.' 

'  Better  than  I  know  myself  ? ' 

'  Yes,  better,  if  you  do  yourself  the  injustice  to  think  that 
you  would  not  yield,  if  it  were  right  to  do  so.  At  this  very 
instant,'  pursued  Helen,  disregarding  his  increasing  astonish- 
ment, '  you  would  yield  if  you  could  reasonably,  honourably 
— would  not  you  ?  If  you  could  without  injury  to  your  ward's 
fortune  or  character,  would  you  not  ?  Surely  it  is  for  his  good 
only  that  you  are  so  resolute  ? ' 

'  Certainly  ! '  He  waited  with  eyes  fixed,  bending  forward, 
but  with  intensity  of  purpose  in  his  calmness  of  attention. 

'  There  was  something  which  I   heard  Mr.    Beauclerc  say, 
which,  I   think,  escaped  your  attention,'  said  Helen.      '  When 
you  spoke  of  the  new  house  he  intended  to  build  for  himself, 
which  was  to  cost  so  much,  he  offered  to  give  that  up.' 
'  I  never  heard  that  offer.' 

114 


HELEN 

'  I  heard  him,'  said  Helen,  '  I  assure  you :  it  was  when  you 
were  both  walking  up  and  down  the  room.' 

'  This  may  be  so,  I  was  angry  then^  said  the  General. 

'  But  you  are  not  angry  now,'  said  Helen. 

He  smiled,  and  in  truth  he  desired  nothing  more  than  an 
honourable  loophole — a  safe  way  of  coming  off  without  injury 
to  his  ward — without  hurting  his  own  pride,  or  derogating 
from  the  dignity  of  guardian.  Helen  saw  this,  and,  thanking 
him  for  his  condescension,  his  kindness,  in  listening  to  her,  she 
hastened  as  quickly  as  possible,  lest  the  relenting  moment  Jhight 
not  be  seized ;  and  running  out  on  the  terrace,  she  saw  Beauclerc, 
his  head  down  upon  his  arms,  leaning  upon  an  old  broken  stone 
lion,  and  Lady  Cecilia  standing  beside  him,  commiserating  ; 
and  as  she  approached,  she  heard  her  persuading  him  to  go 
to  the  General,  and  speak  to  him  again,  and  say  so — only  say  so. 

Whatever  it  was,  Helen  did  not  stay  to  inquire,  but  told 
Cecilia,  in  as  few  words  as  she  could,  all  that  she  had  to  say  ; 
and  ended  with  '  Was  I  right  ? ' 

'  Quite  right,  was  not  she,  Granville  ? ' 

Beauclerc  looked  up — a  gleam  of  hope  and  joy  came  across 
his  face,  and,  with  one  grateful  look  to  Helen,  he  darted 
forward.  They  followed,  but  could  not  keep  pace  with  him  ; 
and  when  they  reached  the  gallery,  they  found  him  appealing, 
as  to  a  father,  for  pardon. 

'  Can  you  forgive,  and  will  you  ? ' 

'  Forgive  my  not  hearing  you,  not  listening  to  you,  as  your 
father  would  ?  My  dear  Beauclerc,  you  were  too  hot,  and  I 
was  too  cold  ;  and  there  is  an  end  of  it.' 

This  reconciliation  was  as  quick,  as  warm,  as  the  quarrel 
had  been.  And  then  explanations  were  made,  as  satisfactorily 
as  they  are  when  the  parties  are  of  good  understanding,  and 
depend  on  each  other's  truth,  past,  present,  and  future. 

Beauclerc,  whose  promise  all  relied  on,  and  for  reasons  good, 
none  more  implicitly  than  the  General,  promised  that  he  would 
ask  for  no  more  than  just  what  would  do  to  put  this  Old  Forest 
house  in  habitable  trim ;  he  said  he  would  give  up  the  new 
house  for  himself,  till  as  many  thousands  as  he  now  lent,  spent, 
or  wasted — take  which  word  you  vnll — should  be  again  accumu- 
lated from  his  income.  It  was  merely  a  sacrifice  of  his  own 
vanity,  and  perhaps  a  httle  of  his  own  comfort,  he  said,  to  save 
a  friend,  a  human  being,  from  destruction. 

IIS 


S/ie  saw  Seaucierc  leaning  upon  an  old  irolcen  stone  lion^  and  Lady  Cecilia 
standing  beside  him. 


HELEN 

'  Well,  well,  let  it  rest  so.' 

It  was  all  settled,  witness  present — '  two  angels  to  witness,' 
as  Beauclerc  quoted  from  some  old  play. 

And  now  in  high  good-humour,  up  again  to  nonsense  pitch, 
they  all  felt  that  delightful  relief  of  spirits,  of  which  friends, 
after  perilous  quarrel,  are  sensible  in  perfect  reconciliation. 
They  left  this  melancholy  mansion  now,  with  Beauclerc  the 
happiest  of  the  happy,  in  the  generous  hope  that  he  should  be 
the  restorer  of  its  ancient  glories  and  comfort.  The  poor  old 
woman  was  not  forgotten  as  they  passed,  she  courtesying,  hoping, 
and  fearing :  Lady  Cecilia  whispered,  and  the  deaf  ear  heard, 

'  The  roof  will  not  fall — all  will  be  well :  and  there  is  the 
man  that  will  do  it  all.' 

'Well,  well,  my  heart  inclined  to  him  from  the  first — at 
least  from  the  minute  I  knew  him  not  to  be  my  young  lord.' 

They  were  to  go  home  by  water.  The  boat  was  in  readiness, 
and,  as  Beauclerc  carefully  handed  Helen  into  it,  the  General 
said  — '  Yes,  you  are  right  to  take  care  of  Miss  Stanley, 
Beauclerc ;  she  is  a  good  friend  in  need,  at  least,  as  I  have 
found  this  morning,'  added  he,  as  he  seated  himself  beside  her. 

Lady  Cecilia  was  charming,  and  everything  was  delightful, 
especially  the  cold  chicken. 


CHAPTER  XI 

No  two  people  could  be  more  unlike  in  their  habits  of  mind 
than  this  guardian  and  ward.  General  Clarendon  referred  in 
all  cases  to  old  experience,  and  dreaded  innovation  ;  Beauclerc 
took  for  his  motto,  '  My  mind  leadeth  me  to  new  things.' 
General  Clarendon  was  what  is  commonly  called  a  practical 
man  ;  Granville  Beauclerc  was  the  flower  of  theorists.  The 
General,  fit  for  action,  prompt  and  decided  in  all  his  judgments, 
was  usually  right  and  just  in  his  conclusions — but  if  wrong, 
there  was  no  setting  him  right  ;  for  he  not  only  would  not,  but 
could  not,  go  back  over  the  ground — he  could  not  give  in  words 
any  explanation  of  his  process  of  reasoning — it  was  enough  for 
him  that  it  was  right,  and  that  it  was  his;  while  Beauclerc, 
who  cared  not  for  any  man's  opinion,  was  always  so  ingeniously 

117 


HELEN 

wrong,  and  could  show  all  the  steps  of  his  reasoning  so  plausibly, 
that  it  was  a  pity  he  should  be  quite  out  of  the  right  road  at 
last.  The  General  hated  metaphysics,  because  he  considered 
them  as  taking  a  flight  beyond  the  reach  of  discipline,  as  well  as 
of  common  sense  :  he  continually  asked,  of  what  use  are  they  ? 
While  Lady  Davenant  answered, — 

'  To  invigorate  and  embellish  the  understanding.  "  This 
turning  the  soul  inward  on  itself  concentrates  its  forces,  and 
fits  it  for  the  strongest  and  boldest  flights  ;  and  in  such  pursuits, 
whether  we  take  or  whether  we  lose  the  game,  the  chase  is 
certainly  of  service." ' 

Possibly,  the  General  said  ;  he  would  not  dispute  the  point 
with  Lady  Davenant,  but  a  losing  chase,  however  invigorating, 
was  one  in  which  he  never  wished  to  engage  :  as  to  the  rest,  he 
altogether  hated  discussions,  doubts,  and  questionings.  He 
had  'made  up  his  fagot  of  opinions,'  and  would  not  let  one  be 
drawn  out  for  examination,  lest  he  should  loosen  the  bundle. 

Beauclerc,  on  the  contrary,  had  his  dragged  out  and  scat- 
tered about  every  day,  and  each  particular  stick  was  tried,''and 
bent,  and  twisted,  this  way  and  that,  and  peeled,  and  cut,  and 
hacked  ;  and  unless  they  proved  sound  to  the  very  core,  not  a 
twig  of  them  should  ever  go  back  into  his  bundle,  which  was 
to  be  the  bundle  of  bundles,  the  best  that  ever  was  seen,  when 
once  tied  so  that  it  would  hold  together — of  which  there 
seemed  little  likelihood,  as  every  knot  slipped,  and  all  fell  to 
pieces  at  each  pull. 

While  he  was  engaged  in  this  analysis,  he  was,  as  his 
guardian  thought,  in  great  moral  peril,  for  not  a  principle  had 
he  left  to  bless  himself  with  ;  and,  in  any  emergency,  if  any 
temptation  should  occur,  what  was  to  become  of  him  ?  The 
General,  who  was  very  fond  of  him,  but  also  strongly  attached 
to  his  own  undeviating  rule  of  right,  was  upon  one  occasion 
about  peremptorily  to  interpose,  not  only  with  remonstrances 
as  a  friend,  but  with  authority  as  a  guardian. 

This  occurred  when  Beauclerc  was  with  them  at  Florence, 
and  when  the  General's  love  for  Lady  Cecilia,  and  intimacy 
with  her  mother,  commenced.  Lady  Davenant,  being  much 
interested  for  young  Beauclerc,  begged  that  the  patient  might 
be  left  to  her,  and  that  his  guardian  would  refrain  from  inter- 
ference. This  was  agreed  to  the  more  readily  by  the  General, 
as  his  thoughts  and  feelings  were  then  more  agreeably  engrossed, 

ii8 


HELEN 

and  Beauclerc  found  in  Lady  Davenant  the  very  friend  he 
wanted  and  wished  for  most  ardently — one  whose  mind  would 
not  blench  at  any  moral  danger,  would  never  shrink  from  truth 
in  any  shape,  but,  calm  and  self-possessed,  would  examine 
whether  it  were  indeed  truth,  or  only  a  phantom  assuming  her 
form.  Besides,  there  was  in  Lady  Davenant  towards  Beau- 
clerc a  sort  of  maternal  solicitude  and  kindness,  of  which  the 
effect  was  heightened  by  her  dignified  manner  and  pride  of 
character.  She,  in  the  first  place,  listened  to  him  patiently ; 
she,  who  could  talk,  would  listen  :  this  was,  as  she  said,  her 
first  merit  in  his  estimation.  To  her  he  poured  forth  all  those 
doubts,  of  which  she  was  wise  enough  not  to  make  crimes  : 
she  was  sure  of  his  honourable  intentions,  certain  that  there 
was  no  underhand  motive,  no  bad  passion,  no  concealed  vice, 
or  disposition  to  vice,  beneath  his  boasted  freedom  from 
prejudice,  to  be  justified  or  to  be  indulged  by  getting  rid  of 
the  restraints  of  principle.  Had  there  been  any  danger  of  this 
sort,  which  with  young  men  who  profess  themselves  ultra- 
liberal  is  usually  the  case,  she  would  have  joined  in  his 
guardian's  apprehensions  ;  but  in  fact  Beauclerc,  instead  of 
being  '  le  philosophe  sans  le  savoir,'  was  '  le  bon  enfant  sans  le 
savoir'  ;  for,  while  he  questioned  the  rule  of  right  in  all  his 
principles,  and  while  they  were  held  in  abeyance,  his  good 
habits  and  good  natural  disposition  held  fast  and  stood  him  in 
stead  ;  while  Lady  Davenant,  by  slow  degrees,  brought  him  to 
define  his  terms,  and  presently  to  see  that  he  had  been  merely 
saying  old  things  in  new  words,  and  that  the  systems  which 
had  dazzled  him  as  novelties  were  old  to  older  eyes  ;  in  short, 
that  he  was  merely  a  resurrectionist  of  obsolete  heresies,  which 
had  been  gone  over  and  over  again  at  various  long- past 
periods,  and  over  and  over  again  abandoned  by  the  common 
sense  of  mankind:  so  that,  after  puzzling  and  wandering  a 
weary  way  in  the  dark  labyrinth  he  had  most  ingeniously  made 
for  himself,  he  saw  light,  followed  it,  and  at  length,  making 
his  way  out,  was  surprised,  and  sorry  perhaps,  to  perceive  that 
it  was  the  common  light  of  day. 

It  is  of  great  consequence  to  young  enthusiastic  tyros,  like 
Beauclerc,  to  have  safe  friends  to  whom  they  can  talk  of  their 
opinions  privately,  otherwise  they  will  talk  their  ingenious 
nonsense  publicly,  and  so  they  bind  themselves,  or  are  bound, 
to  the  stake,  and  live  or  die  martyrs  to  their  own  follies. 

119 


HELEN 

From  these  and  all  such  dangers  Lady  Davenant  protected 
him,  and  she  took  care  that  nobody  hurt  him  in  his  defenceless 
state,  before  his  shell  was  well  formed  and  hardened.  She 
was  further  of  peculiar  service  in  keeping  all  safe  and  smooth 
between  the  ward  and  guardian.  All  Beauclerc's  romance 
the  General  would  have  called  by  the  German  word  '  Schwdr- 
merey,' — not  fudge — not  humbug — literally  'sky-rocketing' 
— visionary  enthusiasm  ;  and  when  it  came  to  arguments, 
they  might  have  turned  to  quarrels,  but  for  Lady  Davenant's 
superior  influence,  while  Lady  Cecilia's  gentleness  and  gaiety 
usually  succeeded  in  putting  all  serious  dangerous  thoughts  to 
flight. 

Nature  never  having  intended  Lady  Cecilia  for  a  manoeuvrer, 
she  was  now  perpetually  on  the  point  of  betraying  herself; 
and  one  day,  when  she  was  alone  with  Helen,  she  exclaimed, 
'  Never  was  anything  better  managed  than   I   managed  this, 

my  dear  Helen  !   I  am  so  glad  I  told  you '     Recollecting 

herself  just  in  time,  she  ended  with,  '  so  glad  I  told  you  the 
truth.' 

'  Oh  yes  !  thank  you,'  said  Helen.  '  My  uncle  used  to  say 
no  one  could  be  a  good  friend  who  does  not  tell  the  whole 
truth.' 

'  That  I  deny,'  thought  Cecilia.  The  twinge  of  conscience 
was  felt  but  very  slightly  ;  not  visible  in  any  change  of  counte- 
nance, except  by  a  quick  twinkling  motion  of  the  eyelashes, 
not  noticed  by  unsuspicious  Helen. 

Everything  now  went  on  as  happily  as  Cecilia  could  have 
desired  ;  every  morning  they  rode  or  boated  to  Old  Forest  to 
see  what  was  doing.  The  roof  was  rather  hastily  taken  off ; 
Lady  Cecilia  hurried  forward  that  measure,  aware  that  it  would 
prevent  the  possibility  of  any  of  the  ladies  of  the  family  coming 
there  for  some  time.  Delay  was  all  she  wanted,  and  she 
would  now,  as  she  promised  herself,  leave  the  rest  to  time. 
She  would  never  interfere  further  in  word  or  look,  especially 
when  her  mother  might  be  by.  One  half  of  this  promise  she 
kept  faithfully,  the  other  she  broke  continually. 

There  were  plans  to  be  made  of  all  the  alterations  and 
improvements  at  Old  Forest.  Beauclerc  applied  to  Lady 
Ceciha  for  her  advice  and  assistance.  Her  advice  she  gave, 
but  her  assistance  she  ingeniously  contrived  to  leave  to  Helen  ; 
for  whenever  Beauclerc  brought  to  her  a  sketch  or  a  plan  of 

120 


HELEN 

what  was  to  be  done,  Lady  Cecilia  immediately  gave  it  to 
Helen,  repeating,  '  Never  drew  a  regular  plan  in  my  life,  you 
know,  my  dear,  you  must  do  this ' ;  so  that  Helen's  pencil  and 
her  patience  were  in  constant  requisition.  Then  came  apologies 
from  Beauclerc,  and  regrets  at  taking  up  her  time,  all  which 
led  to  an  intimacy  that  Lady  Cecilia  took  care  to  keep  up  by 
frequent  visits  to  Old  Forest,  so  that  Helen  was  necessarily 
joined  in  all  his  present  pursuits. 

During  one  of  these  visits  they  were  looking  over  some  old 
furniture  which  Lord  Beltravers  had  commissioned  Beauclerc 
to  have  disposed  of  at  some  neighbouring  auction.  There  was 
one  curiously-carved  oak  arm-chair,  belonging  to  '  the  old  old 
gentleman  of  all '  which  the  old  woman  particularly  regretted 
should  go.  She  had  sewn  it  up  in  a  carpet,  and  when  it  came 
out,  Helen  was  struck  with  its  likeness  to  a  favourite  chair  of 
her  uncle's  ;  many  painful  recollections  occurred  to  her,  and 
tears  came  into  her  eyes.  Ashamed  of  what  appeared  so  like 
affectation,  she  turned  away,  that  her  tears  might  not  be  seen, 
and  when  Cecilia,  following  her,  insisted  on  knowing  what  was 
the  matter,  she  left  Helen  immediately  to  the  old  woman,  and 
took  the  opportunity  of  telling  Beauclerc  all  about  Dean 
Stanley,  and  how  Helen  was  an  heiress  and  no  heiress,  and 
her  having  determined  to  give  up  all  her  fortune  to  pay  her 
uncle's  debts.  There  was  a  guardian,  too,  in  the  case,  who 
would  not  consent ;  and,  in  short,  a  parallelism  of  circum- 
stances, a  similarity  of  generous  temper,  and  all  this  she 
thought  must  interest  Beauclerc — and  so  it  did.  But  yet  its 
being  told  to  him  would  have  gone  against  his  nice  notions  of 
delicacy,  and  Helen  would  have  been  ruined  in  his  opinion 
had  he  conceived  that  it  had  been  revealed  to  him  with  her 
consent  and  connivance.  She  came  back  before  Lady  Cecilia 
had  quite  finished,  and  a  few  words  which  she  heard  made 
her  aware  of  the  whole.  The  blush  of  astonishment — the 
glance  of  indignation — which  she  gave  at  Lady  Cecilia,  settled 
Beauclerc's  opinion  ;  and  Cecilia  was  satisfied  that  she  had 
done  her  friend  good  service  against  her  will ;  and  as  to  the 
means  thought  she — what  signifies  going  back  to  consider 
when  they  succeed  ? 

The  Collingwoods  gladly  availed  themselves  of  Lady  Cecilia 
Clarendon's  kind  invitation,  as  they  were  both  most  anxious  to 
take   leave   of  Helen   Stanley  before  their  departure.     They 


HELEN 

were  to  sail  very  soon,  so  that  their  visit  was  but  short ;  a  few 
days  of  painful  pleasure  to  Helen — a  happy  meeting,  but 
enjoyed  with  the  mournful  sense  that  they  were  so  soon  to 
separate,  and  for  so  long  a  time  ;  perhaps  for  ever. 

Mr.  Collingwood  told  Helen  that  if  she  still  agreed  to  his 
conditions,  he  would  arrange  with  Mr.  James,  the  solicitor, 
that  all  the  money  left  to  her  by  her  uncle  should  be  appro- 
priated to  the  payment  of  his  debts.  '  But,'  continued  he, 
'  pause  and  consider  well,  whether  you  can  do  without  this 
money,  which  is  still  yours  ;  you  are,  you  know,  not  bound  by 
any  promise,  and  it  is  not  yet  too  late  to  say  you  have  altered 
your  decision.' 

Helen  smiled  and  said,  '  You  cannot  be  serious  in  saying 
this,  I  am  sure.' 

Mr.  Collingwood  assured  her  that  he  was.  Helen  simply 
said  that  her  determination  was  unalterable.  He  looked 
pleased,  yet  his  last  words  in  taking  leave  of  her  were, 
'  Remember,  my  dear,  that  when  you  have  given  away  your 
fortune,  you  cannot  live  as  if  you  had  it.' 

The  CoUingwoods  departed ;  and,  after  a  decent  time  had 
elapsed,  or  what  she  deemed  a  decent  time,  Lady  Cecilia  was 
anxious  to  ascertain  what  progress  had  been  made  ;  how, 
relatively  to  each  other.  Lady  Blanche  Forrester  and  Helen 
stood  in  Beauclerc's  opinion,  or  rather  in  his  imagination. 
But  this  was  not  quite  so  easy  a  matter  to  determine  as  she 
had  conceived  it  would  be,  judging  from  the  frankness  of 
Beauclerc's  temper,  and  from  the  terms  of  familiarity  on  which 
they  had  lived  while  abroad.  His  confidence  was  not  to  be 
won,  surprised,  or  forced.  He  was  not  only  jealous  of  his  free 
will,  as  most  human  beings  are  in  love  affairs,  but,  like  all  men 
of  true  feeling,  he  desired  in  these  matters  perfect  mental  privacy. 

When  Psyche  is  awakened,  it  should  be  by  Cupid  alone. 
Beauclerc  did  not  yet  wish  that  she  should  be  awakened.  He 
admired,  he  enjoyed  that  repose  :  he  was  charmed  by  the  per- 
fect confiding  simplicity  of  Helen's  mind,  so  unlike  what  he 
had  seen  in  others — so  real.  The  hope  of  that  pure  friend- 
ship which  dawned  upon  him  he  wished  to  prolong,  and 
dreaded  lest,  by  any  doubt  raised,  all  might  be  clouded  and 
changed.  Lady  Cecilia  was,  however,  convinced  that,  without 
knowing  it,  he  was  falling  comfortably  in  love  through  friend- 
ship ;  a  very  easy  convenient  way. 


HELEN 

And  Helen,  had  she  too  set  out  upon  that  easy  convenient 
road  of  friendship  ?  She  did  not  think  about  the  road,  but 
she  felt  that  it  was  very  agreeable,  and  thought  it  was  quite 
safe,  as  she  went  on  so  smoothly  and  easily.  She  could  not 
consider  Mr.  Beauclerc  as  a  new  acquaintance,  because  she 
had  heard  so  much  about  him.  He  was  completely  one  of  the 
family,  so  that  she,  as  part  of  that  family,  could  not  treat  him 
as  a  stranger.  Her  happiness,  she  was  sensible,  had  much 
increased  since  his  arrival ;  but  so  had  everybody's.  He  gave 
a  new  spring,  a  new  interest,  to  everything ;  added  so  much 
to  the  life  of  life  ;  his  sense  and  his  nonsense  were  each  of 
them  good  in  their  kind ;  and  they  were  of  various  kinds, 
from  the  high  sublime  of  metaphysics  to  the  droll  realities 
of  life.  But  everybody  blaming,  praising,  scolding,  laughing 
at,  or  with  him,  he  was  necessary  to  all,  and  with  all,  for 
some  reason  or  other,  a  favourite. 

But  the  General  was  always  as  impatient  as  Lady  Cecilia 
herself  both  of  his  hypercriticism  and  of  his  never-ending 
fancies,  each  of  which  Beauclerc  pursued  with  an  eagerness 
and  abandoned  with  a  facihty  which  sorely  tried  the  General's 
equanimity. 

One  day,  after  having  ridden  to  Old  Forest,  General  Cla- 
rendon returned  chafed.  He  entered  the  library,  talking  to 
Cecilia,  as  Helen  thought,  about  his  horse. 

'  No  managing  him  !  Curb  him  ever  so  little,  and  he  is  on 
his  hind-legs  directly.  Give  him  his  head,  put  the  bridle  on 
his  neck,  and  he  stands  still ;  does  not  know  which  way  he 
would  go,  or  what  he  would  do.  The  strangest  fellow  for  a 
rational  creature.' 

Now  it  was  clear  it  was  of  Beauclerc  that  he  spoke.  '  So 
rash  and  yet  so  resolute,'  continued  the  General. 

'  How  is  that  ? '  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'  I  do  not  know  how,  but  so  it  is,'  said  the  General.  '  As 
you  know,'  appealing  to  Helen  and  to  Lady  Cecilia,  '  he  was 
ready  to  run  me  through  till  he  had  his  own  way  about  that 
confounded  old  house  ;  and  now  there  are  all  the  workmen  at 
a  stand,  because  Mr.  Beauclerc  cannot  decide  what  he  will 
have  done  or  undone.' 

'Oh,  it  is  my  fault!'  cried  Helen,  with  the  guilty  re- 
collection of  the  last  alteration  not  having  been  made  yesterday 
in  drawing  the  working  plan,  and  she  hastened  to  look  for  it 

123 


HELEN 

directly  ;  but  when  she  found  it,  she  saw  to  her  dismay  that 
Beauclerc  had  scribbled  it  all  over  with  literary  notes ;  it  was 
in  no  state  to  meet  the  General's  eye  ;  she  set  about  copying  it 
as  fast  as  possible. 

'  Yes,'  pursued  the  General ;  '  forty  alterations — shuffling 
about  continually.     Cannot  a  man  be  decided  .^ ' 

'  Always  with  poor  Beauclerc,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  '  le  mieux 
est  tennemi  dii  bzen.' 

'  No,  my  dear  Cecilia,  it  is  all  his  indolence ;  there  he  sat 
with  a  book  in  his  hand  all  yesterday  !  with  all  his  impetuosity, 
too  indolent  to  stir  in  his  own  business,'  said  the  General. 

'  His  mind  is  too  active  sometimes  to  allow  his  body  to  stir,' 
said  Lady  Davenant ;  '  and  because  he  cannot  move  the 
universe,  he  will  not  stir  his  little  finger.' 

'  He  is  very  fond  of  paradoxes,  and  your  ladyship  is  very 
fond  of  him,'  said  the  General ;  '  but  indolent  he  is  ;  and  as  to 
activity  of  mind,  it  is  only  in  pursuit  of  his  own  fancies.' 

'And  your  fancies  and  his  differ,'  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'  Because  he  never  fancies  anything  useful,'  said  the  General. 

'  Cest  selon  !  c'est  selon  ! '  cried  Lady  Cecilia  gaily  ;  '  he 
thinks  his  fancies  useful,  and  especially  all  he  is  doing  at  Old 
Forest ;  but  I  confess  he  tends  most  to  the  agreeable.  Cer- 
tainly he  is  a  most  agreeable  creature.' 

'  Agreeable  !  satisfied  to  be  called  an  agreeable  man ! ' 
cried  the  General  indignantly ;  '  yes,  he  has  no  ambition.' 

'  There  I  differ  from  you.  General,'  said  Lady  Davenant  ; 
'  he  has  too  much  :  have  patience  with  him  ;  he  is  long-sighted 
in  his  visions  of  glory.' 

'  Visions  indeed  ! '  said  the  General. 

'  Those  who  are  really  ambitious,'  continued  Lady  Davenant, 
'  must  think  before  they  act.  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  for  ever 
known  ? "  is  a  question  which  deserves  at  least  a  little  more 
thought  than  those  which  most  young  men  ask  themselves, 
which  commonly  are,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  known  to-morrow 
— on  the  Turf  or  at  Brooks's — or  in  Doctors'  Commons — or  at 
some  exclusive  party  at  charming  Lady  Nobody's  ?  " ' 

'  What  will  you  do  for  the  plan  for  these  workmen  in  the 
meantime,  my  dear  Clarendon  ? '  said  Lady  Cecilia,  afraid  that 
some  long  discussion  would  ensue. 

'  Here  it  is  ! '  said  Helen,  who  had  managed  to  get  it  ready 
while   they  were  talking.      She   gave   it   to   the  General,  Avho 

124 


HELEN 

thanked  her,  and  was  off  directly.  Cecilia  then  came  to 
divert  herself  with  looking  at  Beauclerc's  scribbled  plan,  and 
she  read  the  notes  aloud  for  her  mother's  amusement.  It  was 
a  sketch  of  a  dramatical,  metaphysical,  entertainment,  of  which 
half  a  dozen  proposed  titles  had  been  scratched  out,  and  there 
was  finally  left  'Tarquin  the  Optimist,  or  the  Temple  of 
Destiny.'  It  was  from  an  old  story  begun  by  Laurentius  Valla, 
and  continued  by  Leibnitz  ; — she  read, 

'  "  Act  i.  Scene  1.  Sexttis  Tarquin  goes  to  consult  the  Oracle, 
who  foretells  the  crime  he  is  to  commit." 

'  And  then,'  cried  Lady  Cecilia,  '  come  measures  of  old  and 
new  front  of  Old  Forest  house,  wings  included.  Now  he  goes 
on  with  his  play. 

'  "  Tarquin! s  complaint  to  Jupiter  of  the  Oracle — Modern 
Predestination  compared  to  Ancient  Destiity.'' 

'  And  here,'  continued  Cecilia,  '  come  prices  of  Norway  deal 
and  a  great  blot,  and  then  we  have  "Jupiter's  answer  that 
Sextus  may  avoid  his  doom,  if  he  pleases,  by  staying  away  from. 
Rome;  but  he  does  not  please  to  do  so,  because  he  -must  then 
renounce  the  crown.  Good  speech  here  on  vanity.,  and  in- 
consistency of  human  wishes." 

'  "  Kitchen  23  ft.  by  2i.     Query  with  hobs  .?" 

'  I  cannot  conceive,  my  dear  Helen,'  continued  Lady  Cecilia, 
'how  you  could  make  the  drawing  out  through  all  this,'  and 
she  continued  to  read, 

'  "  Scene  yd. 

'  "  High  Priest  of  Delphi  asks  Jupiter  why  he  did  not  give 
Sextus  a  better  will  ? — why  not  make  him  choose  to  give  up 
the  crown,  rather  than  com7nit  the  crime  f  Jupiter  refuses  to 
answer,  and  sends  the  High  Priest  to  consult  Minerva  at 
Athens'' 

'  "  N.B.  Old  woman  at  Old  Forest,  promised  her  an  oven," 
— "  Leibnitz  gives " 

'  Oh  !  if  he  goes  to  Leibnitz,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  '  he  will  be 
too  grand  for  me,  but  it  will  do  for  you,  mamma. 

'  "  Leibnitz  gives  in  his  Temple  of  the  Destinies  a  repre- 
sentation of  every  possible  universe  from  the  worst  to  the  best 
— This  could  not  be  done  on  the  stage." 

'Very  true  indeed,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  'but,  Helen,  listen, 
Granville  has  really  found  an  ingenious  resource. 

'  "  By  Ombres  Chinoises,  suppose;  or  a  gauze  curtain,  as  in 

125 


HELEN 

Zemire  et  Azore,  the  audience  might  be  made  to  understand  the 
main  point,  that  GOOD  resulted  from  Targuin's  BAD  choice. 
Brutus,  Liberty,  Rotne's  grandeur,  and  the  Optimist  right  at 
last.      Q.E.D." 

'  Well,  well,'  continued  Lady  Cecilia,  '  I  don't  understand 
it ;  but  I  understand  this, — "  Bricks  wanting."  ' 

Lady  Davenant  smiled  at  this  curious  specimen  of  Beauclerc's 
versatility,  but  said,  '  I  fear  he  will  fritter  away  his  powers  on 
a  hundred  dififerent  petty  objects,  and  do  nothing  at  last  worthy 
of  his  abilities.  He  will  scatter  and  divide  the  light  of  his 
genius,  and  show  us  every  change  of  the  prismatic  colours — 
curious  and  beautiful  to  behold,  but  dispersing,  wasting  the 
light  he  should  concentrate  on  some  one,  some  noble  object.' 

'  But  if  he  has  light  enough  for  little  objects  and  great  too  ? ' 
said  Lady  Cecilia,  '  I  allow,  quHl  faudrait plus  dun  C(xur pour 
aimer  tant  de  choses  d,  la  fois ;  but  as  I  really  think  Granville 
has  more  heart  than  is  necessary,  he  can  well  afford  to  waste 
some  of  it,  even  on  the  old  woman  at  Old  Forest.' 


CHAPTER    XII 

One  evening,  Helen  was  looking  over  a  beautiful  scrap-book 
of  Lady  Cecilia's.  Beauclerc,  who  had  stood  by  for  some 
time,  eyeing  it  in  rather  scornful  silence,  at  length  asked 
whether  Miss  Stanley  was  a  lover  of  albums  and  autographs. 

Helen  had  no  album  of  her  own,  she  said,  but  she  was 
curious  always  to  see  the  autographs  of  celebrated  people. 

'Why?'  said  Beauclerc. 

'  I  don't  know.  It  seems  to  bring  one  nearer  to  them.  It 
gives  more  reality  to  our  imagination  of  them  perhaps,'  said 
Helen. 

'  The  imagination  is  probably  in  most  cases  better  than  the 
reality,'  replied  he. 

Lady  Davenant  stooped  over  Helen's  shoulder  to  look  at 
the  handwriting  of  the  Earl  of  Essex — the  writing  of  the 
gallant  Earl  of  Essex,  at  sight  of  which,  as  she  observed,  the 
hearts  of  queens  have  beat  high.      '  What  a  crowd  of  associated 

126 


HELEN 

ideas  rise  at  the  sight  of  that  autograph  !  who  can  look  at  it 
without  some  emotion  ? ' 

Helen  could  not.  Beauclerc  in  a  tone  of  raillery  said  he 
was  sure,  from  the  eager  interest  Miss  Stanley  took  in  these 
autographs,  that  she  would  in  time  become  a  collector  herself; 
and  he  did  not  doubt  that  he  should  see  her  with  a  valuable 
museum,  in  which  should  be  preserved  the  old  pens  of  great 
men,  that  of  Cardinal  Chigi,  for  instance,  who  boasted  that  he 
wrote  with  the  same  pen  for  fifty  years. 

'  And  by  that  boast  you  know,'  said  Lady  Davenant, 
'  convinced  the  Cardinal  de  Retz  that  he  was  not  a  great, 
but  a  very  little  man.  We  will  not  have  that  pen  in  Helen's 
museum.' 

'  Why  not  ? '  Beauclerc  asked  ;  '  it  was  full  as  well  worth 
having  as  many  of  the  relics  to  be  found  in  most  young  ladies' 
and  even  old  gentlemen's  museums.  It  was  quite  sufficient 
whether  a  man  had  been  great  or  little  that  he  had  been 
talked  of, — that  he  had  been  something  of  a  lion — to  make 
anything  belonging  to  him  valuable  to  collectors,  who  pre- 
serve and  worship  even  "  the  parings  of  lions'  claws." ' 

That  class  of  indiscriminate  collectors  Helen  gave  up  to  his 
ridicule  ;  still  he  was  not  satisfied.  He  went  on  to  the  whole 
class  of  "  lion-hunters,"  as  he  called  them,  condemning  indis- 
criminately all  those  who  were  anxious  to  see  celebrated 
people  ;  he  hoped  Miss  Stanley  was  not  one  of  that  class. 

'  No,  not  a  lion-hunter,'  said  Helen  ;  she  hoped  she  never 
should  be  one  of  that  set,  but  she  confessed  she  had  a  great 
desire  to  see  and  to  know  distinguished  persons,  and  she 
hoped  that  this  sort  of  curiosity,  or,  as  she  would  rather  call 
it,  enthusiasm,  was  not  ridiculous,  and  did  not  deserve  to  be 
confounded  with  the  mere  trifling  vulgar  taste  for  sight-seeing 
and  lion-hunting. 

Beauclerc  half  smiled,  but,  not  answering  immediately, 
Lady  Davenant  said  that  for  her  part  she  did  not  consider 
such  enthusiasm  as  ridiculous  ;  on  the  contrary,  she  liked  it, 
especially  in  young  people.  '  I  consider  the  warm  admiration 
of  talent  and  virtue  in  youth  as  a  promise  of  future  excellence 
in  maturer  age.' 

'  And  yet,'  said  Beauclerc,  '  the  maxim  "  not  to  admire  "  is, 
I  beheve,  the  most  approved  in  philosophy,  and  in  practice  is 
the  great  secret  of  happiness  in  this  world.' 

127 


HELEN 

'  In  the  fine  world,  it  is  a  fine  air,  I  know,'  said  Lady 
Davenant.  '  Among  a  set  of  fashionable  young  somnambulists 
it  is  doubtless  the  only  art  they  know  to  make  men  happy  or 
to  keep  them  so  ;  but  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  philosophy, 
Beauclerc,  though  it  has  to  do  with  conceit  or  affectation.' 

Mr.  Beauclerc,  now  piqued,  with  a  look  and  voice  of 
repressed  feeling,  said  that  he  hoped  her  ladyship  did  not 
include  him  among  that  set  of  fashionable  somnambulists. 

'  I  hope  you  will  not  include  yourself  in  it,'  answered  Lady 
Davenant ;  '  it  is  contrary  to  your  nature,  and  if  you  join  the 
nil  admirari  coxcombs,  it  can  be  only  for  fashion's  sake — mere 
affectation.' 

Beauclerc  made  no  reply,  and  Lady  Davenant,  turning  to 
Helen,  told  her  that  several  celebrated  people  were  soon  to 
come  to  Clarendon  Park,  and  congratulated  her  upon  the 
pleasure  she  would  have  in  seeing  them.  '  Besides  being  a 
great  pleasure,  it  is  a  real  advantage,'  continued  she,  '  to  see 
and  be  acquainted  early  in  life  with  superior  people.  It 
enables  one  to  form  a  standard  of  excellence,  and  raises  that 
standard  high  and  bright.  In  men,  the  enthusiasm  becomes 
glorious  ambition  to  excel  in  arts  or  arms  ;  in  women,  it  refines 
and  elevates  the  taste,  and  is  so  far  a  preventive  against 
frivolous,  vulgar  company,  and  all  their  train  of  follies  and 
vices.  I  can  speak  from  my  own  recollection,  of  the  great 
happiness  it  was  to  me,  when  I  early  in  life  became  acquainted 
with  some  of  the  illustrious  of  my  day.' 

'  And  may  I  ask,'  said  Beauclerc,  '  if  any  of  them  equalled 
the  expectations  you  had  formed  of  them  ? ' 

'  Some  far  exceeded  them,'  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'You  were  fortunate.  Everybody  cannot  expect  to  be  so 
happy,'  said  Beauclerc.  '  I  believe,  in  general  it  is  found  that 
few  great  men  of  any  times  stand  the  test  of  near  acquaintance. 
No  man ' 

'Spare  me!'  cried  Lady  Davenant,  interrupting  him,  for 
she  imagined  she  knew  what  he  was  going  to  say  ;  '  oh  !  spare 
me  that  old  sentence,  "  No  man  is  a  hero  to  his  valet  de 
chambre."  I  cannot  endure  to  hear  that  for  the  thousandth 
time  ;   I  heartily  wish  it  had  never  been  said  at  all.' 

'  So  do  I,'  replied  Beauclerc ;  but  Lady  Davenant  had 
turned  away,  and  he  now  spoke  in  so  low  a  voice  that  only 
Helen  heard  him.      'So  do  I   detest  that  quotation,  not  only 

128 


HELEN 

for  being  hackneyed,  but  for  having  been  these  hundred  years 
the  comfort  both  of  lean-jawed  envy  and  fat  mediocrity.' 

He  took  up  one  of  Helen's  pencils  and  began  to  cut  it — he 
looked  vexed,  and  low  to  her  observed,  '  Lady  Davenant  did 
not  do  me  the  honour  to  let  me  finish  my  sentence.' 

'  Then,'  said  Helen,  '  if  Lady  Davenant  misunderstood  you, 
why  do  not  you  explain  ? ' 

'  No,  no,  it  is  not  worth  while,  if  she  could  so  mistake  me.' 

'  But  anybody  may  be  mistaken  ;  do  explain.' 

'  No,  no,'  said  he,  very  diligently  cutting  the  pencil  to 
pieces  ;  '  she  is  engaged,  you  see,  with  somebody — something 
else.' 

'  But  now  she  has  done  listening.' 

'  No,  no,  not  now  ;  there  are  too  many  people,  and  it's  of  no 
consequence.' 

By  this  time  the  company  were  all  eagerly  talking  of  every 
remarkable  person  they  had  seen,  or  that  they  regretted  not 
having  seen.  Lady  Cecilia  now  called  upon  each  to  name  the 
man  among  the  celebrated  of  modern  days  whom  they  should 
most  like  to  have  seen.  By  acclamation  they  all  named  Sir 
Walter  Scott,  "  The  Ariosto  of  the  North  !  " ' 

All  but  Beauclerc  ;  he  did  not  join  the  general  voice  ;  he 
said  low  to  Helen  with  an  air  of  disgust — '  How  tired  I  am  of 
hearing  him  called  "  The  Ariosto  of  the  North  !  " ' 

'  But  by  whatever  name,'  said  Helen,  '  surely  you  join  in 
that  general  wish  to  have  seen  him  ? ' 

'  Yes,  yes,  I  am  sure  of  your  vote,'  cried  Lady  Cecilia, 
coming  up  to  them.  '  You,  Granville,  would  rather  have  seen 
Sir  Walter  Scott  than  any  author  since  Shakespeare — would 
not  you  ? ' 

'  Pardon  me,  on  the  contrary,  I  am  glad  that  I  have  never 
seen  him.' 

'  Glad  not  to  have  seen  him  ! — not  ? ' 

The  word  noi  was  repeated  with  astonished  incredulous 
emphasis  by  all  voices.  '  Glad  not  to  have  seen  Sir  Walter 
Scott !  How  extraordinary !  What  can  Mr.  Beauclerc 
mean  ? ' 

'  To  make  us  all  stare,'  said  Lady  Davenant,  '  so  do  not 

gratify  him.     Do  not  wonder  at  him  ;  we  cannot  believe  what 

is  impossible,  you  know,  only  because  it  is  impossible.     But,' 

continued  she,   laughing,   '  I   know  how  it  is.       The  spirit  of 

K  129 


HELEN 

contradiction — the  spirit  of  singularity — two  of  your  familiars, 
Granville,  have  got  possession  of  you  again,  and  we  must  have 
patience  while  the  fit  is  on.' 

'  But  I  have  not,  and  will  not  have,  patience,'  said  Lord 
Davenant,  whose  good-nature  seldom  failed,  but  who  was  now 
quite  indignant. 

'  I  wonder  you  are  surprised,  my  dear  lord,'  said  Lady 
Davenant,  '  for  Mr.  Beauclerc  likes  so  much  better  to  go 
wrong  by  himself  than  to  go  right  with  all  the  world,  that  you 
could  not  expect  that  he  would  join  the  loud  voice  of  universal 
praise.' 

'  I  hear  the  loud  voice  of  universal  execration,'  said  Beau- 
clerc ;  '  you  have  all  abused  me,  but  whom  have  I  abused  ? 
What  have  I  said  ?  ' 

'  Nothing,'  replied  Lady  Cecilia  ;  '  that  is  what  we  complain 
of.  I  could  have  better  borne  any  abuse  than  indifference  to 
Sir  Walter  Scott.' 

'  Indifference  ! '  exclaimed  Beauclerc — '  what  did  I  say. 
Lady  Cecilia,  from  which  you  could  infer  that  I  felt  indiffer- 
ence ?  Indifferent  to  him  whose  name  I  cannot  pronounce 
without  emotion  !  1  alone,  of  all  the  world,  indifferent  to  that 
genius,  pre-eminent  and  unrivalled,  who  has  so  long  com- 
manded the  attention  of  the  whole  reading  public,  arrested 
at  will  the  instant  order  of  the  day  by  tales  of  other  times, 
and  in  this  commonplace,  this  everyday  existence  of  ours, 
created  a  holiday  world,  where,  undisturbed  by  vulgar  cares, 
we  may  revel  in  a  fancy  region  of  felicity,  peopled  with  men 
of  other  times — shades  of  the  historic  dead,  more  illustrious 
and  brighter  than  in  life  ! ' 

'Yes,  the  great  Enchanter,'  cried  Ceciha. 
'  Great  and  good  Enchanter,'  continued  Beauclerc,  '  for  in 
his  magic  there  is  no  dealing  with  unlawful  means.  To  work 
his  ends,  there  is  never  aid  from  any  one  of  the  bad  passions 
of  our  nature.  In  his  writings  there  is  no  private  scandal — 
no  personal  satire — no  bribe  to  human  frailty — no  libel  upon 
human  nature.  And  among  the  lonely,  the  sad,  and  the  suf- 
fering, how  has  he  medicined  to  repose  the  disturbed  mind,  or 
elevated  the  dejected  spirit  ! — perhaps  fanned  to  a  flame  the 
unquenched  spark,  in  souls  not  wholly  lost  to  virtue.  His 
morahty  is  not  in  purple  patches,  ostentatiously  obtrusive, 
but  woven  in  through  the  very  texture  of  the  stuff.      He  paints 

130 


HELEN 

man  as  he  is,  with  all  his  faults,  but  with  his  redeeming 
virtues — the  world  as  it  goes,  with  all  its  compensating  good 
and  evil,  yet  making  each  man  better  contented  with  his  lot. 
Without  our  well  knowing  how,  the  whole  tone  of  our  minds  is 
raised — for,  thinking  nobly  of  our  kind,  he  makes  us  think 
more  nobly  of  ourselves  ! ' 

Helen,  who  had  sympathised  with  Beauclerc  in  every  word 
he  had  said,  felt  how  true  it  is  that 


Next  to  genius,  is  the  power 

Of  feeling  where  true  genius  lies. 


'Yet  after  all  this,  Granville,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  'you 
would  make  us  believe  you  never  wished  to  have  seen  this 
great  man  ? ' 

Beauclerc  made  no  answer. 

'  Oh,  how  I  wish  I  had  seen  him  ! '  said  Helen  to  Lady 
Davenant,  the  only  person  present  who  had  had  that  happiness. 

'  If  you  have  seen  Raeburn's  admirable  pictures,  or  Chan- 
trey's  speaking  bust,'  replied  Lady  Davenant,  'you  have  as 
complete  an  idea  of  Sir  Walter  Scott  as  painting  or  sculpture 
can  give.  The  first  impression  of  his  appearance  and  manner 
was  surprising  to  me,  I  recollect,  from  its  quiet,  unpretending 
good  nature ;  but  scarcely  had  that  impression  been  made 
before  I  was  struck  with  something  of  the  chivalrous  courtesy 
of  other  times.  In  his  conversation  you  would  have  found  all 
that  is  most  delightful  in  all  his  works — the  combined  talent 
and  knowledge  of  the  historian,  novelist,  antiquary,  and  poet. 
He  recited  poetry  admirably,  his  whole  face  and  figure  kindling 
as  he  spoke  :  but  whether  talking,  reading,  or  reciting,  he  never 
tired  me,  even  with  admiring ;  and  it  is  curious  that,  in  con- 
versing with  him,  I  frequently  found  myself  forgetting  that  I 
was  speaking  to  Sir  Walter  Scott;  and  what  is  even  more 
extraordinary,  forgetting  that  Sir  Walter  Scott  was  speaking  to 
me,  till  I  was  awakened  to  the  conviction  by  his  saying  some- 
thing which  no  one  else  could  have  said.  Altogether  he  was 
certainly  the  most  perfectly  agreeable  and  perfectly  amiable 
great  man  I  ever  knew.' 

'And  now,  mamma,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  'do  make  Gran- 
ville confess  honestly  he  would  give  the  world  to  have  seen 
him.' 

'Do,   Lady  Davenant,'  said   Helen,  who   saw,  or  thought 

131 


HELEN 

she  saw,  a  singular  emotion  in  Beauclerc's  countenance,  and 
fancied  he  was  upon  the  point  of  yielding  ;  but  Lady  Dave- 
nant,  without  looking  at  him,  replied,  — '  No,  my  dear,  I  will 
not  ask  him — I  will  not  encourage  him  in  affectation.' 

At  that  word  dark  grew  the  brow  of  Beauclerc,  and  he  drew 
back,  as  it  were,  into  his  shell,  and  out  of  it  came  no  more  that 
night,  nor  the  next  morning  at  breakfast.  But,  as  far  as  could 
be  guessed,  he  suffered  internally,  and  no  effort  made  to  relieve 
did  him  any  good,  so  every  one  seemed  to  agree  that  it  was 
much  better  to  let  him  alone,  or  let  him  be  moody  in  peace, 
hoping  that  in  time  the  mood  would  change  ;  but  it  changed 
not  till  the  middle  of  that  day,  when,  as  Helen  was  sitting 
working  in  Lady  Davenant's  room,  while  she  was  writing,  two 
quick  knocks  were  heard  at  the  door. 

'  Come  in  ! '  said  Lady  Davenant. 

Mr.  Beauclerc  stood  pausing  on  the  threshold. 

'  Do  not  go.  Miss  Stanley,'  said  he,  looking  very  miserable 
and  ashamed,  and  proud,  and  then  ashamed  again. 

'  What  is  the  matter,  Granville  ?  '  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'  I  am  come  to  have  a  thorn  taken  out  of  my  mind,'  said 
he — '  two  thorns  which  have  sunk  deep,  kept  me  awake  half 
the  night.  Perhaps,  I  ought  to  be  ashamed  to  own  I  have 
felt  pain  from  such  little  things.  But  so  it  is  ;  though,  after 
all,  I  am  afraid  they  will  be  invisible  to  you,  Lady  Davenant.' 

'  I  will  try  with  a  magnifying-glass,'  said  she  ;  '  lend  me 
that  of  your  imagination,  Granville — a  high  power,  and  do  not 
look  so  very  miserable,  or  Miss  Stanley  will  laugh  at  you.' 

'  Miss  Stanley  is  too  good  to  laugh.' 

'  That  is  being  too  good  indeed,'  said  Lady  Davenant. 
'Well,  now  to  the  point' 

'  You  were  very  unjust  to  me.  Lady  Davenant,  yesterday, 
and  unkind.' 

'  Unkind  is  a  woman's  word  ;  but  go  on.' 

'  Surely  man  may  mark  " unkindness'  altered  eye"  as  well 
as  woman,'  said  Beauclerc ;  '  and  from  a  woman  and  a  friend 
he  may  and  must  feel  it,  or  he  is  more  or  less  than  man.' 

'  Now  what  can  you  have  to  say,  Granville,  that  will  not  be 
anticlimax  to  this  exordium  ?  ' 

'  I  will  say  no  more  if  you  talk  of  exordiums  and  anti- 
climaxes,' cried  he.  '  You  accused  me  yesterday  of  affecta- 
tion— twice,  when  I  was  no  more  affected  than  you  are.' 

132 


Mr.  Beauclen  stood  pausing  oti  the  threshold. 


HELEN 

'  Oh  !  is  that  my  crime  ?  Is  that  what  has  hurt  you  so 
dreadfully  ?  Here  is  the  thorn  that  has  gone  in  so  deep  !  I 
am  afraid  that,  as  is  usual,  the  accusation  hurt  the  more 
because  it  was ' 

'  Do  not  say  "  true,"  interrupted  Beauclerc,  '  for  you  really 
cannot  believe  it.  Lady  Davenant.  You  know  me,  and  all  my 
faults,  and  I  have  plenty ;  but  you  need  not  accuse  me  of  one 
that  I  have  not,  and  which  from  the  bottom  of  my  soul  I 
despise.  Whatever  are  my  faults,  they  are  at  least  real,  and 
my  own.' 

'  You  may  allow  him  that,'  said  Helen. 

'Well,  I  will  —  I  do,'  said  Lady  Davenant;  'to  appease 
you,  poor  injured  innocence  ;  though  any  one  in  the  world 
might  think  you  affected  at  this  moment.  Yet  1,  who  know 
you,  know  that  it  is  pure  real  folly.  Yes,  yes,  I  acquit  you  of 
affectation.' 

Beauclerc's  face  instantly  cleared  up. 

'  But  you  said  two  thorns  had  gone  into  your  mind — one  is 
out,  now  for  the  other.' 

'  I  do  not  feel  that  other  now,'  said  Beauclerc,  '  it  was  only 
a  mistake.  When  I  began  with  "  No  man,"  I  was  not  going 
to  say,  "  No  man  is  a  hero  to  his  valet  de  chambre."  If  I  had 
been  allowed  to  finish  my  sentence,  it  would  have  saved  a 
great  deal  of  trouble.  1  was  going  to  say  that  no  man  admires 
excellence  more  fervently  than  I  do,  and  that  my  very  reason 
for  wishing  not  to  see  celebrated  people  is,  lest  the  illusion 
should  be  dispelled. 

'  No  description  ever  gives  us  an  exact  idea  of  any  person, 
so  that  when  any  one  has  been  much  described  and  talked  of, 
before  we  see  them  we  form  in  our  mind's  eye  some  image, 
some  notion  of  our  own,  which  always  proves  to  be  unlike  the 
reality  ;  and  when  we  do  afterwards  see  it,  even  if  it  be  fairer 
or  better  than  our  imagination,  still  at  first  there  is  a  sort  of 
disappointment,  from  the  non-agreement  with  our  previously 
formed  conception.  Everybody  is  disappointed  the  first  time 
they  see  Hamlet,  or  FalstafT,  as  I  think  Dugald  Stewart 
observes.' 

'  True  ;  and  I  remember,'  said  Lady  Davenant,  '  Madame 
de  la  Rochejaquelin  once  said  to  me,  '  I  hate  that  people 
should  come  to  see  me.      I  know  it  destroys  the  illusion.' 

'  Yes,'  cried  Beauclerc  ;  '  how  much  I  dread  to  destroy  any 

134 


HELEN 

of  those  blessed  illusions,  which  make  the  real  happiness  of 
life.  Let  me  preserve  the  objects  of  my  idolatry  ;  I  would  not 
approach  too  near  the  shrine  ;  I  fear  too  much  light.  I  would 
not  know  that  they  were  false  ! ' 

'  Would  you  then  be  deceived  ? '  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'  Yes,'  cried  he ;  '  sooner  would  I  believe  in  all  the  fables  of 
the  Talmud  than  be  without  the  ecstasy  of  veneration.  It  is 
the  curse  of  age  to  be  thus  miserably  disenchanted  ;  to  outlive 
all  our  illusions,  all  our  hopes.  That  may  be  my  doom  in  age, 
but,  in  youth,  the  high  spring-time  of  existence,  I  will  not  be 
cursed  with  such  a  premature  ossification  of  the  heart.  Oh  ! 
rather,  ten  thousand  times  rather,  would  I  die  this  instant ! ' 

'  Well !  but  there  is  not  the  least  occasion  for  your  dying,' 
said  Lady  Davenant,  '  and  I  am  seriously  surprised  that  you 
should  suffer  so  much  from  such  slight  causes  ;  how  will  you 
ever  get  through  the  world  if  you  stop  thus  to  weigh  every 
light  word .'' ' 

'  The  words  of  most  people,'  replied  he,  '  pass  by  me  like 
the  idle  wind ;  but  I  do  weigh  every  word  from  the  very  few 
whom  I  esteem,  admire,  and  love ;  with  my  friends,  perhaps, 
1  am  too  susceptible,  I  love  them  so  deeply.' 

This  is  an  excuse  for  susceptibility  of  temper  which  flatters 
friends  too  much  to  be  easily  rejected.  Even  Lady  Davenant 
admitted  it,  and  Helen  thought  it  was  all  natural. 


CHAPTER    XIII 

Lady  Cecilia  was  now  impatient  to  have  the  house  filled  with 
company.  She  gave  Helen  a  catalogue  raisonrU  of  all  who 
were  expected  at  Clarendon  Park,  some  for  a  fashionable  three 
days'  visit ;  some  for  a  week ;  some  for  a  fortnight  or  three 
weeks,  be  the  same  more  or  less.  '  I  have  but  one  fixed 
principle,'  said  she,  '  but  I  have  one, — never  to  have  tiresome 
people  when  it  can  possibly  be  avoided.  Impossible,  you 
know,  it  is  sometimes.  One's  own  and  one's  husband's 
relations  one  must  have  ;  but,  as  for  the  rest,  it's  one's  own 
fault  if  one  fails  in  the  first  and  last  maxim  of  hospitaUty — to 
welcome  the  coming  and  speed  the  parting  guest.' 

135 


HELEN 

The  first  party  who  arrived  were  of  Lady  Davenant's  par- 
ticular friends,  to  whom  Cecilia  had  kindly  given  the  precedence, 
if  not  the  preference,  that  her  mother  might  have  the  pleasure 
of  seeing  them,  and  that  they  might  have  the  honour  of 
taking  leave  of  her,  before  her  departure  from  England. 

They  were  political,  fashionable,  and  literary ;  some  of 
ascendency  in  society,  some  of  parliamentary  promise,  and 
some  of  ministerial  eminence — the  aristocracy  of  birth  and 
talents  well  mixed. 

The  aristocracy  of  birth  and  the  aristocracy  of  talents  are 
words  now  used  more  as  a  commonplace  antithesis,  than  as 
denoting  a  real  difference  or  contrast.  In  many  instances, 
among  those  now  living,  both  are  united  in  a  manner  happy 
for  themselves  and  glorious  for  their  country.  England  may 
boast  of  having  among  her  young  nobility 

The  first  in  birth,  the  first  in  fame, 

men  distinguished  in  literature  and  science,  in  senatorial 
eloquence  and  statesmanlike  abilities. 

But  in  this  party  at  Clarendon  Park  there  were  more  of  the 
literary  and  celebrated  than  without  the  presence  of  Lady 
Davenant  could  perhaps  have  been  assembled,  or  perhaps 
would  have  been  desired  by  the  General  and  Lady  Cecilia. 
Ceciha's  beauty  and  grace  were  of  all  societies,  and  the  General 
was  glad  for  Lady  Davenant's  sake  and  proud  for  his  own 
part  to  receive  these  distinguished  persons  at  his  house. 

Helen  had  seen  some  of  them  before  at  Cecilhurst  and  at 
the  Deanery.  By  her  uncle's  friends  she  was  kindly  re- 
cognised, by  others  of  course  politely  noticed  ;  but  miserably 
would  she  have  been  disappointed  and  mortified,  if  she  had 
expected  to  fix  general  attention,  or  excite  general  admiration. 
Past  and  gone  for  ever  are  the  days,  if  ever  they  were,  when 
a  young  lady,  on  her  entrance  into  life,  captivated  by  a  glance, 
overthrew  by  the  first  word,  and  led  in  triumph  her  train  of 
admirers.      These  things  are  not  to  be  done  nowadays. 

Yet  even  when  unnoticed  Helen  was  perfectly  happy. 
Her  expectations  were  more  than  gratified  in  seeing  and  in 
hearing  these  distinguished  people,  and  she  sat  listening  to 
their  conversation  in  delightful  enjoyment,  without  even  wanting 
to  have  it  seen  how  well  she  understood. 

There  is  a  precious  moment  for  young  people,  if  taken  at 
136 


HELEN 

the  prime,  when  first  introduced  into  society,  yet  not  expected, 
not  called  upon  to  take  a  part  in  it,  they,  as  standers-by,  may 
see  not  only  all  the  play,  but  the  characters  of  the  players, 
and  may  learn  more  of  life  and  of  human  nature  in  a  few 
months  than  afterwards  in  years,  when  they  are  themselves 
actors  upon  the  stage  of  life,  and  become  engrossed  by  their 
own  parts.  There  is  a  time,  before  the  passions  are  awakened, 
when  the  understanding,  with  all  the  life  of  nature,  fresh  from 
all  that  education  can  do  to  develop  and  cultivate,  is  at  once 
eager  to  observe  and  able  to  judge,  for  a  brief  space  blessed 
with  the  double  advantages  of  youth  and  age.  This  time  once 
gone  is  lost  irreparably  ;  and  how  often  it  is  lost — in  premature 
vanity,  or  premature  dissipation  ! 

Helen  had  been  chiefly  educated  by  a  man,  and  a  very 
sensible  man,  as  Dean  Stanley  certainly  was  in  all  but  money 
matters.  Under  his  masculine  care,  while  her  mind  had  been 
brought  forward  on  some  points,  it  had  been  kept  back  on 
others,  and  while  her  understanding  had  been  cultivated,  it 
had  been  done  without  the  aid  of  emulation  or  competition  ; 
not  by  touching  the  springs  of  pride,  but  by  opening  sources 
of  pure  pleasure  ;  and  this  pure  pleasure  she  now  enjoyed, 
grateful  to  that  dear  uncle. 

For  the  single  inimitable  grace  of  simplicity  which  she 
possessed,  how  many  mothers,  governesses,  and  young  ladies 
themselves,  willingly,  when  they  see  how  much  it  charms, 
would  too  late  exchange  half  the  accomplishments,  all  the 
acquirements,  so  laboriously  achieved  ! 

Beauclerc,  who  had  seen  something  of  the  London  female 
world,  was,  both  from  his  natural  taste  and  from  contrast, 
pleased  with  Helen's  fresh  and  genuine  character,  and  he 
sympathised  with  all  her  silent  delight.  He  never  interrupted 
her  in  her  enthusiastic  contemplation  of  the  great  stars,  but  he 
would  now  and  then  seize  an  interval  of  rest  to  compare  her 
observations  with  his  own ;  anxious  to  know  whether  she 
estimated  their  relative  magnitude  and  distances  as  he  did. 
These  snatched  moments  of  comparison  and  proof  of  agree- 
ment in  their  observations,  or  the  pleasure  of  examining  the 
causes  of  their  difference  of  opinion,  enhanced  the  enjoyment 
of  this  brilliant  fortnight ;  and  not  a  cloud  obscured  the  deep 
serene. 

Notwithstanding    all    the  ultra-refined   nonsense  Beauclerc 

137 


HELEN 

had  talked  about  his  wish  not  to  see  remarkable  persons,  no 
one  could  enjoy  it  more,  as  Helen  now  perceived  ;  and  she 
saw  also  that  he  was  considered  as  a  man  of  promise  among 
all  these  men  of  performance.  But  there  were  some,  perhaps 
very  slight  things,  which  raised  him  still  more  in  her  mind, 
because  they  showed  superiority  of  character.  She  observed 
his  manner  towards  the  General  in  this  company,  where  he 
had  himself  the  'vantage  ground — so  different  now  from  what 
it  had  been  in  the  Old  Forest  battle,  when  only  man  to  man, 
ward  to  guardian.  Before  these  distinguished  persons  there 
was  a  look — a  tone  of  deference  at  once  most  affectionate  and 
polite. 

'  It  is  so  generous,'  said   Lady  Cecilia  to  Helen  ;   '  is  not 
it  ? '  and  Helen  agreed. 

This  brilliant  fortnight  ended  too  soon,  as  Helen  thought, 
but  Lady  Cecilia  had  had  quite  enough  of  it.  '  They  are  all 
to  go  to-morrow  morning,  and  I  am  not  sorry  for  it,'  said  she 
at  night,  as  she  threw  herself  into  an  arm-chair  in  Helen's 
room  ;  and,  after  having  indulged  in  a  refreshing  yawn,  she 
exclaimed,  '  Very  delightful,  very  delightful  !  as  you  say, 
Helen,  it  has  all  been  ;  but  I  am  not  sure  that  I  should  not 
be  very  much  tired  if  I  had  much  more  of  it.  Oh  yes,  I 
admired  them  all  amazingly,  but  then  admiring  all  day  long  is 
excessively  wearisome.  The  very  attitude  of  looking  up 
fatigues  both  body  and  mind.  Mamma  is  never  tired,  because 
she  never  has  to  look  up  ;  she  can  always  look  down,  and 
that's  so  grand  and  so  easy.  She  has  no  idea  how  the  neck 
of  my  poor  mind  aches  this  minute ;  and  my  poor  eyes ! 
blasted  with  excess  of  light.  How  yours  have  stood  it  so  well, 
Helen,  I  cannot  imagine  !  how  much  stronger  they  must  be 
than  mine.  I  must  confess,  that,  without  the  relief  of  music 
now  and  then,  and  ecartd,  and  that  quadrille,  bad  as  it  was,  I 
should  never  have  got  through  it  to-night  alive  or  awake. 
But,'  cried  she,  starting  up  in  her  chair,  '  do  you  know  Horace 
Churchill  stays  to-morrow  ?  Such  a  compliment  from  him  to 
stay  a  day  longer  than  he  intended  !  And  do  you  know  what 
he  says  of  your  eyes,  Helen  ? — that  they  are  the  best  listeners 
he  ever  spoke  to.  I  should  warn  you  though,  my  dear,  that 
he  is  something,  and  not  a  little,  I  believe,  of  a  male  coquette. 
Though  he  is  not  very  young,  but  he  well  understands  all 
the    advantages    of  a    careful    toilette.        He    has,   like    that 

138 


She  threw  herself  into  an  ar»i-ehmr  in  Helen's  room, 


HELEN 

George  Herbert  in  Queen  Elizabeth's  time,  'a  genteel  humour 
for  dress.'  He  is  handsome  still,  and  his  fine  figure,  and  his 
fine  feelings,  and  his  fine  fortune,  have  broken  two  or  three 
hearts  ;  nevertheless  I  am  delighted  that  he  stays,  especially 
that  he  stays  on  your  account.' 

'  Upon  my  account  ! '  exclaimed  Helen.  '  Did  not  you 
see  that,  from  the  first  day  when  Mr.  Churchill  had  the 
misfortune  to  be  placed  beside  me  at  dinner,  he  utterly 
despised  me  ?  he  began  to  talk  to  me,  indeed,  but  left  his 
sentence  unfinished,  his  good  story  untold,  the  instant  he 
caught  the  eye  of  a  grander  auditor.' 

Lady  Cecilia  had  seen  this,  and  marvelled  at  a  well-bred 
man  so  far  forgetting  himself  in  vanity  ;  but  this,  she  observed, 
was  only  the  first  day  ;  he  had  afterwards  changed  his  manner 
towards  Helen  completely. 

'  Yes,  when  he  saw  Lady  Davenant  thought  me  worth 
speaking  to.  But,  after  all,  it  was  quite  natural  that  he 
should  not  know  well  what  to  say  to  me.  I  am  only  n  young 
lady.  I  acquit  him  of  all  peculiar  rudeness  to  me,  for  I  am 
sure  Mr.  Churchill  really  could  not  talk  for  only  one  in- 
significant hearer,  could  not  bring  out  his  good  things,  unless 
he  felt  secure  of  possessing  the  attention  of  the  whole  dinner- 
table,  so  I  quite  forgive  him.' 

'  After  this  curse  of  forgiveness,  my  dear  Helen,  I  will 
wish  you  a  good -night,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  laughing  ;  and 
she  retired  with  a  fear  that  there  would  not  be  jealousy  enough 
between  the  gentlemen,  or  that  Helen  would  not  know  how  to 
play  them  one  against  another. 

There  is  a  pleasure  in  seeing  a  large  party  disperse  ;  in 
staying  behind  when  others  go  : — there  is  advantage  as  well 
as  pleasure,  which  is  felt  by  the  timid,  because  they  do  not 
leave  their  characters  behind  them  ;  and  rejoiced  in  by  the 
satirical,  because  the  characters  of  the  departed  and  departing 
are  left  behind,  fair  game  for  them.  Of  this  advantage  no 
one  could  be  more  sensible,  no  one  availed  himself  of  it  with 
more  promptitude  and  skill,  than  Mr.  Churchill ;  for  well  he 
knew  that  though  wit  may  fail,  humour  may  not  take — though 
even  flattery  may  pall  upon  the  sense,  scandal,  satire,  and 
sarcasm  are  resources  never  failing  for  the  lowest  capacities, 
and  sometimes  for  the  highest. 

This  morning,  in  the  library  at  Clarendon  Park,  he  looked 
140 


HELEN 

out  of  the  window  at  the  departing  guests,  and,  as  each  drove 
off,  he  gave  to  each  his  coup  de  patie.  To  Helen,  to  whom  it 
was  new,  it  was  wonderful  to  see  how  each,  even  of  those  next 
in  turn  to  go,  enjoyed  the  demolition  of  those  who  were  just 
gone ;  how,  bhnd  to  fate,  they  laughed,  applauded,  and  hcked 
the  hand  just  raised  to  strike  themselves.  Of  the  first  who 
went — '  Most  respectable  people,'  said  Lady  Cecilia ;  '  a  bonne 
mire  de  famille.' 

'  Most  respectable  people  ! '  repeated  Horace  —  '  most 
respectable  people,  old  coach  and  all.'  And  then,  as  another 
party  drove  off — '  No  fear  of  anything  truly  respectable  here.' 

'  Now,  Horace,  how  can  you  say  so  ? — she  is  so  amiable 
and  so  clever.' 

'  So  clever  ?  only,  perhaps,  a  thought  too  fond  of  English 
liberty  and  French  dress.      Poissarde  Men  coiffee.' 

•■Poissarde!  of  one  of  the  best-born,  best-bred  women  in 
England  ! '  cried  Lady  Cecilia  ;   '  bien  coiffde  I  allow.' 

'  Lady  Cecilia  is  si  coiffde  de  sa  belle  amie  that  I  see  I  must 
not  say  a  word  against  her,  till — the  fashion  changes.  But, 
hark  !  I  hear  a  voice  I  never  wish  to  hear.' 

'  Yet  nobody  is  better  worth  hearing ' 

'  Oh  yes,  the  queen  of  the  Blues — the  Blue  Devils  ! ' 
'  Hush  ! '  cried  the  aide-de-camp,  '  she  is  coming  in  to  take 
leave.' 

Then,  as  the  queen  of  the  Blue  Devils  entered,  Mr. 
Churchill,  in  the  most  humbly  respectful  manner,  begged— 
'  My  respects — I  trust  your  Grace  will  do  me  the  favour — the 
justice  to  remember  me  to  all  your  party  who — do  me  the 
honour  to  bear  me  in  mind'— then,  as  she  left  the  room,  he 
turned  about  and  laughed. 

'  Oh  !  you  sad,  false  man  ! '  cried  the  lady  next  m  turn  to 
go.  '  I  declare,  Mr.  Churchill,  though  I  laugh,  I  am  quite 
afraid  to  go  off  before  you.' 

'  Afraid  !    what   could  malice  or  envy  itself  find  to  say  of 
your  ladyship,  intacte  as  you  are?    IntacteP  repeated  he,  as  she 
drove  off,  'intacte/— a.  well-chosen  epithet,  I  flatter  myself!' 
'Yes,    z«/arf«— untouched— above   the  breath  of  slander,' 

cried  Lady  Cecilia. 

'  I  know  it  :  so  I  say,'  replied  Churchill  :  'fidelity  that  has 
stood  all  temptations— to  which  it  has  ever  been  exposed  ;  and 

her  husband  is ' 

141 


HELEN 

'  A  near  relation  of  mine,'  said  Lady  Cecilia.  '  I  am  not 
prudish  as  to  scandal  in  general,'  continued  she,  laughing  ; 
'  "  a  chicken,  too,  might  do  me  good,"  but  then  the  fox  must  not 
prey  at  home.  No  one  ought  to  stand  by  and  hear  their  own 
relations  abused.' 

'  A  thousand  pardons  !  I  depended  too  much  on  the 
general  maxim  —  that  the  nearer  the  bone  the  sweeter  the 
slander.' 

'  Nonsense  ! '  said  Lady  Cecilia. 

'  I  meant  to  say,  the  nearer  the  heart  the  dearer  the  blame. 
A  cut  against  a  first  cousin  may  go  wrong — but  a  bosom 
friend — oh !  how  I  have  succeeded  against  best  friends ;  scolded 
all  the  while,  of  course,  and  called  a  monster.  But  there 
is  Sir  Stephen  bowing  to  you.'  Then,  as  Lady  Cecilia 
kissed  her  hand  to  him  from  the  window,  Churchill  went  on  : 
'  By  the  bye,  without  any  scandal,  seriously  I  heard  something 
— I  was  quite  concerned — that  he  had  been  of  late  less  in  his 

study  and  more  in  the  boudoir  of .      Surely  it  cannot  be 

true  ! ' 

'  Positively  false,'  said  Lady  Cecilia. 

'  At  every  breath  a  reputation  dies,'  said  Beauclerc. 

'  'Pon  my  soul,  that's  true  ! '  said  the  aide  -de  -  camp. 
'  Positively,  hit  or  miss,  Horace  has  been  going  on,  firing  away 
with  his  wit,  pop,  pop,  pop  !  till  he  has  bagged — how  many 
brace  ? ' 

Horace  turned  away  from  him  contemptuously,  and  looked 
to  see  whereabouts  Lady  Davenant  might  be  all  this  time. 


CHAPTER    XIV 

Lady  Davenant  was  at  the  far  end  of  the  room  engrossed, 
Churchill  feared,  by  the  newspaper  ;  as  he  approached  she 
laid  it  down,  and  said, — 

'  How  scandalous  some  of  these  papers  have  become,  but  it 
is  the  fault  of  the  taste  of  the  age.  "  Those  who  live  to  please, 
must  please  to  live."  ' 

Horace  was  not  sure  whether  he  was  cut  or  not,  but  he  had 
the  presence  of  mind  not  to  look  hurt.     He  drew  nearer  to 

142 


HELEN 

Lady  Davenant,  seated  himself,  and  taking  up  a  book  as  if  he 
was  tired  of  folly,  to  which  he  had  merely  condescended,  he 
sat  and  read,  and  then  sat  and  thought,  the  book  hanging  from 
his  hand. 

The  result  of  these  profound  thoughts  he  gave  to  the  public, 
not  to  the  aide-de-camp  ;  no  more  of  the  httle  popgun  pellets 
of  wits — but  now  were  brought  out  reason  and  philosophy.  In 
a  higher  tone  he  now  reviewed  the  literary,  philosophical,  and 
political  world,  with  touches  of  La  Bruy^re  and  Rochefoucauld 
in  the  characters  he  drew  and  in  the  reflections  he  made  ;  with 
an  air,  too,  of  sentimental  contrition  for  his  own  penetration 
and  fine  moral  sense,  which  compelled  him  to  see  and  to  be 
annoyed  by  the  faults  of  such  superior  men. 

The  analysis  he  made  of  every  mind  was  really  perfect — in 
one  respect,  not  a  grain  of  bad  but  was  separated  from  the 
good,  and  held  up  clean  and  clear  to  public  view.  And  as  an 
anatomist  he  showed  such  knowledge  both  of  the  brain  and  of 
the  heart,  such  an  admirable  acquaintance  with  all  their 
diseases,  and  handled  the  probe  and  the  scalpel  so  well,  with 
such  a  practised  hand  ! 

'  Well,  really  this  is  comfortable,'  said  Lord  Davenant, 
throwing  himself  back  in  his  arm-chair — 'true  English 
comfort,  to  sit  at  ease  and  see  all  one's  friends  so  well 
dissected  !  Happy  to  feel  that  it  is  our  duty  to  our  neighbour 
to  see  him  well  cut  up — ably  anatomised  for  the  good  of 
society ;  and  when  I  depart — when  my  time  comes — as  come 
it  must,  nobody  is  to  touch  me  but  Professor  Churchill.  It 
will  be  a  satisfaction  to  know  that  I  shall  be  carved  as  a  dish 
fit  for  gods,  not  hewed  as  a  carcase  for  hounds.  So  now 
remember,  Cecilia,  I  call  on  you  to  witness — I  hereby,  being  of 
sound  mind  and  body,  leave  and  bequeath  my  character,  with  all 
my  defects  and  deficiencies  whatever,  and  all  and  any  singular 
curious  diseases  of  the  mind,  of  which  I  may  die  possessed, 
wishing  the  same  many  for  his  sake, — to  my  good  friend 
Doctor  Horace  Churchill,  professor  of  moral,  philosophic,  and 
scandalous  anatomy,  to  be  by  him  dissected  at  his  good 
pleasure  for  the  benefit  of  society.' 

'  Many  thanks,  my  good  lord  ;  and  I  accept  your  legacy  for 
the  honour — not  the  value  of  the  gift,  which  everybody  must 
be  sensible  is  nothing,'  said  Churchill,  with  a  polite  bow — '  ab- 
solutely nothing.      I  shall  never  be  able  to  make  anything  of  it.' 

143 


HELEN 

'  Try — try,  my  dear  friend,'  answered  Lord  Davenant. 
'  Try,  don't  be  modest.' 

'  That  would  be  difficult  when  so  distinguished,'  said  Beau- 
clerc,  with  an  admirable  look  of  proud  humility. 

'  Distinguished  Mr.  Horace  Churchill  assuredly  is,'  said 
Lady  Davenant,  looking  at  him  from  behind  her  newspaper. 
'  Distinguished  above  all  his  many  competitors  in  this  age  of 
scandal ;  he  has  really  raised  the  art  to  the  dignity  of  a 
science.  Satire,  scandal,  and  gossip,  now  hand-in-hand — 
the  three  new  graces  :  all  on  the  same  elevated  rank — three, 
formerly  considered  as  so  different,  and  the  last  left  to  our 
inferior  sex,  but  now,  surely,  to  be  a  male  gossip  is  no 
reproach.' 

'  Oh,  Lady  Davenant  ! — male  gossip — what  an  expression  ! ' 

'  What  a  reality  ! ' 

'Male  gossip!  —  ^^  Toinbe  sur  moi  le  del/"'  cried 
Churchill. 

'  "  Pourvu  que  je  me  venge "  always  understood,'  pursued 
Lady  Davenant ;  '  but  why  be  so  afraid  of  the  imputation  of 
gossiping,  Mr.  Churchill  ?  It  is  quite  fashionable,  and  if  so, 
quite  respectable,  you  know,  and  in  your  style  quite  grand. 

•  And  gossiping  wonders  at  being  so  fine  ! 

Malice,  to  be  hated,  needs  but  to  be  seen,  but  now  when  it  is 
elegantly  dressed  we  look  upon  it  without  shame  or  conscious- 
ness of  evil ;  we  grow  to  doat  upon  it — so  entertaining,  so 
graceful,  so  refined.  When  vice  loses  half  its  grossness,  it 
loses  all  its  deformity.  Humanity  used  to  be  talked  of  when 
our  friends  were  torn  to  pieces,  but  now  there  is  such  a  philo- 
,  sophical  perfume  thrown  over  the  whole  operation,  that  we  are 
irresistibly  attracted.  How  much  we  owe  to  such  men  as  Mr. 
Churchill,  who  make  us  feel  detraction  virtue  ! ' 

He  bowed  low  as  Lady  Davenant,  summoned  by  her  lord, 
left  the  room,  and  there  he  stood  as  one  condemned  but  not 
penitent. 

'  If  I  have  not  been  well  sentenced,'  said  he,  as  the  door 
closed,  '  and  made  "  to  feel  detraction  virtue  ! "  But  since 
Lady  Cecilia  cannot  help  smiling  at  that,  I  am  acquitted,  and 
encouraged  to  sin  again  the  first  opportunity.  But  Lady  Dave- 
nant shall  not  be  by,  nor  Lord  Davenant  either.' 

Lady  Cecilia  sat  down  to  write  a  note,  and  Mr.  Churchill 
144 


HELEN 

walked  round  the  room  in  a  course  of  critical  observation  on 
the  pictures,  of  which,  as  of  everything  else,  he  was  a  supreme 
judge.  At  last  he  put  his  eye  and  his  glass  down  to  something 
which  singularly  attracted  his  attention  on  one  of  the  marble 
tables. 

'  Pretty  ! '  said  Lady  Cecilia,  '  pretty  are  not  they  ? — though 
one's  so  tired  of  them  everywhere  now — those  doves  1 ' 

'  Doves  ! '  said  Churchill,  '  what  I  am  admiring  are  gloves, 
are  not  they.  Miss  Stanley  ? '  said  he,  pointing  to  an  old  pair  of 
gloves,  which,  much  wrinkled  and  squeezed  together,  lay  on 
the  beautiful  marble  in  rather  an  unsightly  lump. 

'  Poor  Doctor  V ,'  cried  Helen  to  Cecilia ;  '  that  poor 

Doctor  V is  as  absent  as  ever  !  he  is  gone,  and  has  for- 
gotten his  gloves  ! ' 

'  Absent !  oh,  as  ever ! '  said  Lady  Cecilia,  going  on  with 
her  note,  '  the  most  absent  man  alive.' 

'  Too  much  of  that  sort  of  thing  1   think  there  is  in  Doctor 

V ,'   pursued    Churchill :    '  a  touch    of  absence  of  mind, 

giving  the  idea  of  high  abstraction,  becomes  a  learned  man 
well  enough  ;  but  then  it  should  only  be  slight,  as  a  soupqon 
of  rouge,  which  may  become  a  pretty  woman  :  all  depends  on 
the  measure,  the  taste,  with  which  these  things  are  managed — 
put  on.' 

'There  is  nothing  managed,  nothing  put  on,  in  Doctor 
V ,'  cried  Helen  eagerly,  her  colour  rising  ;  '  it  is  all  per- 
fectly sincere,  true  in  him,  whatever  it  be.' 

Beauderc  put  down  his  book. 

'  All  perfectly  true  !  You  really  think  so,  Miss  Stanley  ? ' 
said  Churchill  smiling,  and  looking  superior  down. 

'  I  do,  indeed,'  cried  Helen. 

'  Charming — so  young  I  How  1  do  love  that  freshness  of 
mind  ! ' 

'  Impertinent  fellow  !  I  could  knock  him  down,'  felt  Beau- 
derc. 

'  And  you  think  all  Doctor  V 's  humility  true  ? '  said 

Churchill. 

'  Yes,  perfectly  ! '  said  Helen  ;  '  but  1  do  not  wonder  you 
are  surprised  at  it,  Mr.  Churchill.' 

She  meant  no  malice,  though  for  a  moment  he  thought  she 
did  ;  and  he  winced  under  Beauclerc's  smile. 

'  I   do  not  wonder  that  any  one  who  does  not  know  Doctor 

L  145 


HELEN 

V .  should   be    surprised    by    his    great    humihty,'   added 

Helen. 

'  You  are  sure  that  it  is  not  pride  that  apes  humility  ?  '  asked 
Churchill. 

'  Yes,  quite  sure  ! ' 

'  Yet — '  said  Churchill  (putting  his  malicious  finger  through 
a  great  hole  in  the  thumb  of  the  Doctor's  glove),  '  I  should  have 
fancied  that  I  saw  vanity  through  the  holes  in  these  gloves,  as 
through  the  philosopher's  cloak  of  old.' 

'  Horace  is  a  famous  fellow  for  picking  holes  and  making 
much  of  them,  Miss  Stanley,  you  see,'  said  the  aide-de-camp. 

'  Vanity  !   Doctor  V has  no  vanity  ! '   said  Helen,  '  if  you 

knew  him.' 

'  No  vanity  !  Whom  does  Miss  Stanley  mean  ?  '  cried  the 
aide-de-camp.      '  No  vanity  ?  that's  good.      Who?  Horace?' 

'  Maiivais  plaisant !'  Horace  put  him  by,  and,  happily 
not  easily  put  out  of  countenance,  he  continued  to  Helen, — 

'You  give  the  good  doctor  credit,  too,  for  all  his  naivete?' 
said  Churchill. 

'He  does  not  want  credit  for  it,'  said  Helen,  'he  really  has  it.' 

'  I  wish  1  could  see  things  as  you  do.  Miss  Stanley.' 

'  Show  him  that,  Helen,'  cried  Lady  Cecilia,  looking  at  a 
table  beside  them,  on  which  lay  one  of  those  dioramic  prints 
which  appear  all  a  confusion  of  lines  till  you  look  at  them  in 
their  right  point  of  view.  '  Show  him  that — it  all  depends, 
and  so  does  seeing  characters,  on  getting  the  right  point  of 
view.' 

'  Ingenious  ! '  said  Churchill,  trying  to  catch  the  right 
position  ;  '  but  1  can't,  I  own — '  then  abruptly  resuming, 
'■  Naiiicte  charms  me  at  fifteen,'  and  his  eye  glanced  at  Helen, 
then  was  retracted,  then  returning  to  his  point  of  view,  '  at 
eighteen  perhaps  may  do,'  and  his  eyes  again  turned  to  Helen, 
'at  eighteen — it  captivates  me  quite,'  and  his  eye  dwelt.  '  But 
naivete  at  past  fifty,  verging  to  sixty,  is  quite  another  thing, 
really  rather  too  much  for  me.  1  like  all  things  in  season,  and 
above  all,  simplicity  will  not  bear  long  keeping.  I  have  the 
greatest  respect  possible  for  our  learned  and  excellent  friend, 
but  I  wish  this  could  be  any  way  suggested  to  him,  and  that 
he  would  lay  aside  this  out-of-season  simplicity.' 

'  He  cannot  lay  aside  his  nature,'  said  Helen,  '  and  I  am 
glad  of  it,  it  is  such  a  good  nature.' 

146 


HELEN 

'  Kind-hearted  creature  he  is,  I  never  heard  him  say  a 
severe  word  of  any  one,'  said  Lady  Cecilia. 

'What  a  sweet  man  he  must  be!'  said  Horace,  making  a 
face  at  which  none  present,  not  even  Helen,  could  forbear  to 
smile.  '  His  heart,  I  am  sure,  is  in  the  right  place  always.  I 
only  wish  one  could  say  the  same  of  his  wig.  And  would  it 
be  amiss  if  he  sometimes  (I  would  not  be  too  hard  upon  him, 
Miss  Stanley),  once  a  fortnight,  suppose — brushed,  or  caused 
to  be  brushed,  that  coat  of  his  .' ' 

'  You  have  dusted  his  jacket  for  him  famously,  Horace,  I 
think,'  said  the  aide-de-camp. 

At  this  instant  the  door  opened,  and  in  came  the  doctor 
himself. 

Lady  Cecilia's  hand  was  outstretched  with  her  note,  think- 
ing, as  the  door  opened,  that  she  should  see  the  servant  come 
in,  for  whom  she  had  rung. 

'  What  surprises  you  all  so,  my  good  friends  ? '  said  the 
doctor,  stopping  and  looking  round  in  all  his  native  simplicity. 

'  My  dear  doctor,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  '  only  we  all  thought 
you  were  gone — that's  all.' 

'  And  I  am  not  gone,  that's  all.  I  stayed  to  write  a  letter, 
and  am  come  here  to  look  for — but  I  cannot  find — my ' 

'  Your  gloves,  perhaps,  doctor,  you  are  looking  for,'  said 
Churchill,  going  forward,  and  with  an  air  of  the  greatest 
respect  and  consideration,  both  for  the  gloves  and  for  their 
owner,  he  presented  them  ;  then  shook  the  doctor  by  the  hand, 
with  a  cordiality  which  the  good  soul  thought  truly  Enghsh, 
and,  bowing  him  out,  added,  '  How  proud  he  had  been  to 
make  his  acquaintance, — au  revoir,  he  hoped,  in  Park  Lane.' 

'  Oh  you  treacherous ! '  cried  Lady  Cecilia,  turning  to 

Horace,  as  soon  as  the  unsuspecting  philosopher  was  fairly 
gone.  '  Too  bad  really !  If  he  were  not  the  most  simple- 
minded  creature  extant,  he  must  have  seen,  suspected,  some- 
thing from  your  look  ;  and  what  would  have  become  of  you  if 
the  doctor  had  come  in  one  moment  sooner,  and  had  heard 
you ?     I  was  really  frightened.' 

'  Frightened  !  so  was  I,  almost  out  of  my  wits,'  said  Churchill. 
'Lesrevenansa.l-wa.ys  frighten  one;  and  they  never  hear  any 
good  of  themselves,  for  which  reason  I  make  it  a  principle, 
when  once  I  have  left  a  room,  full  of  friends  especially,  never 
never  to  go  back.      My  gloves,  my  hat,  my  coat,  I'd  leave, 

147 


■O 


'  PFkai  surprises  you  all  so,  my  good  friends  f ' 


HELEN 

sooner  than  lose  my  friends.  Once  I  heard  it  said,  by  one 
who  knew  the  world  and  human  nature  better  than  any  of 
us — once  I  heard  it  said  in  jest,  but  in  sober  earnest  I  say, 
that  I  would  not  for  more  than  I  am  worth  be  placed,  without 
his  knowing  it,  within  earshot  of  my  best  friend.' 

'  What  sort  of  a  best  friend  can  yours  be  ? '  cried  Beauclerc. 

'  Much  like  other  people's,  I  suppose,'  replied  Horace, 
speaking  with  perfect  nonchalance — '  much  like  other  people's 
best  friends.  Whosoever  expects  to  find  better,  I  guess,  will 
find  worse,  if  he  live  in  the  world  we  live  in.' 

'  May  I  go  out  of  the  world  before  I  believe  or  suspect  any 
such  thing  ! '  cried  Beauclerc.  '  Rather  than  have  the  Roman 
curse  light  upon  me,  "  May  you  survive  all  your  friends  and 
relations  ! "  may  I  die  a  thousand  times  ! ' 

'  Who  talks  of  dying,  in  a  voice  so  sweet — a  voice  so  loud  ? ' 
said  provoking  Horace,  in  his  calm,  well-bred  tone  ;  '  for  my 
part,  I  who  have  the  honour  of  speaking  to  you,  can  boast, 
that  never  since  I  was  of  years  of  discretion  (counting  new 
style,  beginning  at  thirteen,  of  course)' — never  have  I  lost  a 
friend,  a  sincere  friend — never,  for  this  irrefragable  reason — 
since  that  nonage,  never  was  I  such  a  neophyte  as  to  fancy  I 
had  found  that  lusus  naturae,  a  friend  perfectly  sincere.' 

'  How  1  pity  you  ! '  cried  Beauclerc,  '  if  you  are  in  earnest ; 
but  in  earnest  you  can't  be.' 

'  Pardon  me,  I  can,  and  I  am.  And  in  earnest  you  will 
oblige  me,  Mr.  Beauclerc,  if  you  will  spare  me  your  pity  :  for, 
all  things  in  this  world  considered,'  said  Horace  Churchill, 
drawing  himself  up,  '  I  do  not  conceive  that  I  am  much  an 
object  of  pity.'  Then,  turning  upon  his  heel,  he  walked  away, 
conscious,  however,  half  an  instant  afterwards,  that  he  had 
drawn  himself  up  too  high,  and  that  for  a  moment  his  temper 
had  spoiled  his  tone,  and  betrayed  him  into  a  look  and  manner 
too  boastful,  bordering  on  the  ridiculous.  He  was  in  haste  to 
repair  the  error. 

Not  Garrick,  in  the  height  of  his  celebrity  and  of  his  sus- 
ceptibility, was  ever  more  anxious  than  Horace  Churchill  to 
avert  the  stroke  of  ridicule — to  guard  against  the  dreaded 
smile.  As  he  walked  away,  he  felt  behind  his  back  that  those 
he  left  were  smiling  in  silence. 

Lady  Cecilia  had  thrown  herself  on  a  sofa,  resting,  after  the 
labour  of  tHoquence  de  billet.     He  stopped,  and,  leaning  over 

149 


HELEN 

the  back  of  the  sofa  on  which  she  rechned,  repeated  an  Italian 
line  in  which  was  the  word  ' pavoneggiarsi.' 

'  My  dear  Lady  Cecilia,  you,  who  understand  and  feel  Ita- 
lian so  well,  how  expressive  are  some  of  their  words  !  Pavoneg- 
giarsi ! — untranslatable.  One  cannot  say  well  in  English  to 
peacock  oneself.  To  make  oneself  like  unto  a  peacock  is  flat ; 
but  pavoneggiarsi — action,  passion,  picture,  all  in  one  !  To 
plume  oneself  comes  nearest  to  it ;  but  the  word  cannot  be 
given,  even  by  equivalents,  in  English  ;  nor  can  it  be  natu- 
ralised, because,  in  fact,  we  have  not  the  feeling.  An  English- 
man is  too  proud  to  boast — too  bashfal  to  strut ;  if  ever  he 
peacocks  himself,  it  is  in  a  moment  of  anger,  not  in  display. 
The  language  of  every  country,'  continued  he,  raising  his  voice, 
in  order  to  reach  Lady  Davenant,  who  just  then  returned  to 
the  room,  as  he  did  not  wish  to  waste  a  philosophical  observa- 
tion on  Lady  Cecilia, — '  the  language  of  every  country  is,  to  a 
certain  degree,  evidence,  record,  history  of  its  character  and 
manners.'  Then,  lowering  his  voice  almost  to  a  whisper,  but 
very  distinct,  turning  while  he  spoke  so  as  to  make  sure  that 
Miss  Stanley  heard — '  Your  young  friend  this  morning  quite 
captivated  me  by  her  nature — nature,  the  thing  that  now  is 
most  uncommon,  a  real  natural  woman  ;  and  when  in  a  beauty, 
how  charming  !  How  delicious  when  one  meets  with  effusion 
de  cceur :  a  young  lady,  too,  who  speaks  pure  English,  not  a 
leash  of  languages  at  once  ;  and  cultivated,  too,  your  friend  is, 
for  one  does  not  like  ignorance,  if  one  could  have  knowledge 
without  pretension — so  hard  to  find  the  golden  mean  ! — and  if 
one  could  find  it,  one  might  not  be  nearer  to ' 

Lady  Cecilia  listened  for  the  finishing  word,  but  none  came. 
It  all  ended  in  a  sigh,  to  be  interpreted  as  she  pleased.  A 
look  towards  the  ottoman,  where  Beauclerc  had  now  taken  his 
seat  beside  Miss  Stanley,  seemed  to  point  the  meaning  out : 
but  Lady  Cecilia  knew  her  man  too  well  to  understand  him. 

Beauclerc,  seated  on  the  ottoman,  was  showing  to  Helen 
some  passages  in  the  book  he  was  reading  ;  she  read  with 
attention,  and  from  time  to  time  looked  up  with  a  smile  of 
intelligence  and  approbation.  What  either  said  Horace  could 
not  hear,  and  he  was  the  more  curious,  and  when  the  book 
was  put  down,  after  carelessly  opening  others  he  took  it  up. 
Very  much  surprised  was  he  to  find  it  neither  novel  nor  poem  : 
many  passages  were  marked  with  pencil  notes  of  approbation, 

15° 


HELEN 

he  took  it  for  granted  these  were  Beauclerc's  ;  there  he  was 
mistaken,  they  were  Lady  Davenant's.  She  was  at  her  work- 
table.  Horace,  book  in  hand,  approached ;  the  book  was  not 
in  his  line,  it  was  more  scientific  than  literary — it  was  for 
posterity  more  than  for  the  day  ;  he  had  only  turned  it  over  as 
literary  men  turn  over  scientific  books,  to  seize  what  may  serve 
for  a  new  simile  or  a  good  allusion  ;  besides,  among  his  philo- 
sophical friends,  the  book  being  talked  of,  it  was  well  to  know 
enough  of  it  to  have  something  to  say,  and  he  had  said  well, 
very  judiciously  he  had  praised  it  among  the  elect ;  but  now  it 
was  his  fancy  to  depreciate  it  with  all  his  might ;  not  that  he 
disliked  the  author  or  the  work  now  more  than  he  had  done 
before,  but  he  was  in  the  humour  to  take  the  opposite  side 
from  Beauclerc,  so  he  threw  the  book  from  him  contemptuously. 
'  Rather  a  slight  hasty  thing,  in  my  opinion,'  said  he. 
Beauclerc's  eyes  took  fire  as  he  exclaimed,  '  Slight !  hasty  ! 
this  most  noble,  most  sohd  work  ! ' 

'Sohd  in  your  opinion,'  said  Churchill,  with  a  smile  defe- 
rential, slightly  sneering. 

'  Our  own  opinion  is  all  that  either  of  us  can  give,'  said 
Beauclerc  ;  <  in  my  opinion  it  is  the  finest  view  of  the  progress 
of  natural  philosophy,  the  most  enlarged,  the  most  just  in  its 
judgments  of  the  past,  and  in  its  prescience  of  the  future  ;  in 
the  richness  of  experimental  knowledge,  in  its  theoretic  inven- 
tion, the  greatest  work  by  any  one  individual  since  the  time  of 
Bacon.' 

'  And  Bacon  is  under  your  protection,  too  ? ' 
'  Protection  !  my  protection  ? '  said  Beauclerc. 
'  Pardon  me,  I  simply  meant  to  ask  if  you  are  one  of  those 
who  swear  by  Lord  Verulam.' 

'  I  swear  by  no  man,  I  do  not  swear  at  all,  not  on  philo- 
sophical subjects  especially  ;  swearing  adds  nothing  to  faith,' 
said  Beauclerc. 

'  I  stand  corrected,'  said  Churchill,  '  and  I  would  go  further, 
and  add  that  in  argument  enthusiasm  adds  nothing  to  reason 

much  as   I    admire,   as  we  all    admire,'  glancing    at    Miss 

Stanley,  '  that  enthusiasm  with  which  this  favoured  work  has 
been  advocated  ! ' 

'  I  could  not  help  speaking  warmly,'  cried  Beauclerc ;  'it  is 
a  book  to  inspire  enthusiasm  ;  there  is  such  a  noble  spirit  all 
through    it,    so    pure    from    petty    passions,    from    all    vulgar 

151 


HELEN 

jealousies,  all  low  concerns !  Judge  of  a  book,  somebody 
says,  by  the  impression  it  leaves  on  your  mind  when  you  lay 
it  down  ;  this  book  stands  that  test,  at  least  with  me  ;  I  lay  it 
down  with  such  a  wish  to  follow — with  steps  ever  so  unequal 
still  to  follow — where  it  points  the  way.' 

'  Bravo  !  bravissimo  !  hear  him,  hear  him  !  print  him, 
print  him  !  hot-press  from  the  author  to  the  author,  hot-press  ! ' 
cried  Churchill,  and  he  laughed. 

Like  one  suddenly  awakened  from  the  trance  of  enthusiasm 
by  the  cold  touch  of  ridicule,  stood  Beauclerc,  brought  down 
from  heaven  to  earth,  and  by  that  horrid  little  laugh,  not  the 
heart's  laugh. 

'  But  my  being  ridiculous  does  not  make  my  cause  so,  and 
that  is  a  comfort.' 

'And  another  comfort  you  may  have,  my  dear  Granville,' 
said  Lady  Davenant,  '  that  ridicule  is  not  the  test  of  truth  ; 
truth  should  be  the  test  of  ridicule.' 

'  But  where  is  the  book  ?  '  continued  Beauclerc. 

Helen  gave  it  to  him. 

'  Now,  Mr.  Churchill,'  said  Beauclerc  ;  '  1  am  really  anxious, 
I  know  you  are  such  a  good  critic,  will  you  show  me  these 
faults  ?  blame  as  well  as  praise  must  always  be  valuable  from 
those  who  themselves  excel.' 

'  You  are  too  good,'  said  Churchill. 

'  Will  you  then  be  good  enough  to  point  out  the  errors  for 
me  ? ' 

'  Oh,  by  no  means,'  cried  Churchill,  '  don't  note  me,  do  not 
quote  me,  I  am  nobody,  and  I  cannot  give  up  my  authorities.' 

'  But  the  truth  is  all  I  want  to  get  at,'  said  Beauclerc. 

'  Let  her  rest,  my  dear  sir,  at  the  bottom  of  her  well  ;  there 
she  is,  and  there  she  will  be  for  ever  and  ever,  and  depend 
upon  it  none  of  our  windlassing  will  ever  bring  her  up.' 

'  Such  an  author  as  this,'  continued  Beauclerc,  '  would  have 
been  so  glad  to  h,i\e  corrected  any  error.' 

'  So  every  author  tells  you,  but  I  never  saw  one  of  them 
who  did  not  look  blank  at  a  list  of  errata — if  you  knew  how 
little  one  is  thanked  for  them  ! ' 

'  But  you  would  be  thanked  now,'  said  Beauclerc  :  -  '  the 
faults  in  style,  at  least.' 

'  Nay,  I  am  no  critic,'  said  Churchill,  confident  in  his  habits 
of  literary  detection  ;   'but  if  you  ask  me,'  said  he,  as  he  dis- 

152 


HELEN 

dainfully  flirted  the  leaves  back  and  forward  with  a  '  There 
now!'  and  a  '  Here  now!'  'We  should  not  call  that  good 
writing — you  could  not  think  this  correct  ?  I  may  be  wrong, 
but  I  should  not  use  this  phrase.  Hardly  English  that — 
colloquial,  I  think  ;  and  this  awkward  ablative  absolute — never 
admitted  now.' 

'  Thank  you,'  said  Beauclerc,  '  these  faults  are  easily 
mended.' 

'  Easily  mended,  say  you  ?      I  say,  better  make  a  new  one.' 

'  Who  could  ? '  said  Beauclerc. 

'  How  many  faults  you  see,'  said  Helen,  '  which  I  should 
never  have  perceived  unless  you  had  pointed  them  out,  and  I 
am  sorry  to  know  them  now.' 

Smiling  at  Helen's  look  of  sincere  mortification,  in  contrast 
at  this  moment  with  Mr.  Churchill's  air  of  satisfied  critical 
pride,  Lady  Davenant  said, — 

'  Why  sorry,  my  dear  Helen  ?  No  human  work  can  be 
perfect ;  Mr.  Churchill  may  be  proud  of  that  strength  of  eye 
which  in  such  a  powerful  light  can  count  the  spots.  But 
whether  it  be  the  best  use  to  make  of  his  eyes,  or  the  best  use 
that  can  be  made  of  the  light,  remains  to  be  considered.' 


CHAPTER   XV 

Beyond  measure  was  Churchill  provoked  to  find  Lady 
Davenant  against  him  and  on  the  same  side  as  Granville 
Beauclerc  —  all  unused  to  contradiction  in  his  own  society, 
where  he  had  long  been  supreme,  he  felt  a  difference  of 
opinion  so  sturdily  maintained  as  a  personal  insult. 

For  so  young  a  man  as  Beauclerc,  yet  unknown  to  fame, 
not  only  to  challenge  the  combat  but  to  obtain  the  victory, 
was  intolerable ;  and  the  more  so,  because  his  young  opponent 
appeared  no  ways  elated  or  surprised,  but  seemed  satisfied  to 
attribute  his  success  to  the  goodness  of  his  cause. 

Churchill  had  hitherto  always  managed  wisely  his  great 
stakes  and  pretensions  in  both  the  fashionable  and  literary 
world.  He  had  never  actually  published  anything  except  a 
clever  article  or  two  in  a  review,  or  an  epigram,  attributed  to 

153 


HELEN 

him  but  not  acknowledged.  Having  avoided  giving  his 
measure,  it  was  believed  he  was  above  all  who  had  been 
publicly  tried — it  was  always  said — 'If  Horace  Churchill 
would  but  publish,  he  would  surpass  every  other  author  of 
our  times.' 

Churchill  accordingly  dreaded  and  hated  all  who  might  by 
possibility  approach  the  throne  of  fashion,  or  interfere  with 
his  dictatorship  in  a  certain  literary  set  in  London,  and  from 
this  moment  he  began  cordially  to  detest  Beauclerc — he  viewed 
him  with  scornful,  yet  with  jealous  eyes ;  but  his  was  the 
jealousy  of  vanity,  not  of  love  ;  it  regarded  Lady  Davenant 
and  his  fashionable  reputation  in  the  first  place — Helen  only 
in  the  second. 

Lady  Davenant  observed  all  this,  and  was  anxious  to  know 
how  much  or  how  little  Helen  had  seen,  and  what  degree  of 
interest  it  excited  in  her  mind.  One  morning,  when  they 
were  alone  together,  looking  over  a  cabinet  of  cameos.  Lady 
Davenant  pointed  to  one  which  she  thought  like  Mr.  Beauclerc. 
Helen  did  not  see  the  likeness. 

'  People  see  likenesses  very  differently,'  said  Lady  Davenant. 
'  But  you  and  1,  Helen,  usually  see  characters,  if  not  faces, 
with  the  same  eyes.  I  have  been  thinking  of  these  two 
gentlemen,  Mr.  Churchill  and  Mr.  Beauclerc — which  do  you 
think  the  most  agreeable  ? ' 

'Mr.  Churchill  is  amusing  certainly,'  said  Helen,  'but  I 
think  Mr.  Beauclerc's  conversation  much  more  interesting — 
though  Mr.  Churchill  is  agreeable,  sometimes — when ' 

'  When  he  flatters  you,'  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'When  he  is  not  satirical — 1  was  going  to  say,'  said  Helen. 

*  There  is  a  continual  petty  brilliancy,  a  petty  effort  too,' 
continued  Lady  Davenant,  '  in  Mr.  Churchill,  that  tires  me 
— sparks  struck  perpetually,  but  then  you  hear  the  striking 
of  the  flints,  the  clink  of  the  tinder-box.' 

Helen,  though  she  admitted  the  tinder-box,  thought  it  too 
low  a  comparison.  She  thought  Churchill's  were  not  mere 
sparks. 

'  Well,  fireworks,  if  you  will,'  said  Lady  Davenant,  '  that 
rise,  blaze,  burst,  fall,  and  leave  you  in  darkness,  and  with  a 
disagreeable  smell  too  ;  and  it's  all  feu  cF artifice  after  all. 
Now  in  Beauclerc  there  is  too  little  art  and  too  ardent  nature. 
Some  French  friends  of  mine,   who   knew  both,   said  of  Mr. 

'54 


HELEN 

Churchill,  "  De  t  esprit  on  ne  pent  pas  plus  mime  d.  Paris"  the 
highest  compliment  a  Parisian  can  pay,  but  they  allowed  that 
Beauclerc  had  "  beaucoup  plus  d'ame."  ' 

'  Yes,'  said  Helen  ;  '  how  far  superior  ! ' 

'  It  has  been  said,'  continued  Lady  Davenant,  '  that  it  is 
safer  to  judge  of  men  by  their  actions  than  by  their  words, 
but  there  are  few  actions  and  many  words  in  life ;  and  if 
women  would  avail  themselves  of  their  daily,  hourly,  oppor- 
tunities of  judging  people  by  their  words,  they  would  get  at 
the  natural  characters,  or,  what  is  of  just  as  much  consequence, 
they  would  penetrate  through  the  acquired  habits  ;  and  here, 
Helen,  you  have  two  good  studies  before  you.' 

Preoccupied  as  Helen  was  with  the  certainty  of  Beauclerc 
being  an  engaged,  almost  a  married  man,  and  looking,  as  she 
did,  on  Churchill  as  one  who  must  consider  her  as  utterly 
beneath  his  notice,  she  listened  to  Lady  Davenant's  remarks 
as  she  would  have  done  to  observations  about  two  characters 
in  a  novel  or  on  the  stage. 

As  Churchill  could  not  immediately  manifest  his  hatred  of 
Beauclerc,  it  worked  inwardly  the  more.  He  did  not  sleep 
well  this  night,  and  when  he  got  up  in  the  morning,  there  was 
something  the  matter  with  him.  Nervous,  bilious— cross  it 
could  not  be ; — -joumalier  (a  French  word  settles  everything) 
— journalier  he  allowed  he  was ;  he  rather  gloried  in  it, 
because  his  being  permitted  to  be  so  proved  his  power, — his 
prerogative  of  fortune  and  talent  combined. 

In  the  vast  competition  of  the  London  world,  it  is  not 
permitted  to  every  man  to  be  in  his  humour  or  out  of  his 
humour  at  pleasure ;  but,  by  an  uncommon  combination  of 
circumstances,  Churchill  had  established  his  privilege  of 
caprice ;  he  was  allowed  to  have  his  bad  and  his  good  days, 
and  the  highest  people  and  the  finest  smiled,  and  submitted 
to  his  '  cachet  de  faveur  et  de  disgrace '  ;  and  when  he  was 
sulky,  rude,  or  snappish,  called  it  only  Horace  Churchill's  way. 
They  even  prided  themselves  on  his  preferences  and  his 
aversions.  '  Horace  is  always  charming  when  he  is  with  us.' 
'  With  me  you  have  no  idea  how  delightful  he  is.'  '  Indeed 
I  must  do  him  the  justice  to  say  that  I  never  found  him 
otherwise.  While  the  less  favoured  permitted  him  to  be  as 
rude  as  he  pleased,  and  only  petted  him,  and  told  of  his  odd 
ways  to  those  who  sighed  in  vain  to  have  him  at  their  parties. 


HELEN 

But  Lady  Davenant  was  not  a  person  to  pet  or  spoil  a  child  of 
any  age,  and  to  the  General  Mr.  Churchill  was  not  particularly 
agreeable — not  his  sort;  while  to  Lady  Cecilia,  secure  in 
grace,  beauty,  and  fashion,  his  humours  were  only  matter  of 
amusement,  and  she  bore  with  him  pleasantly  and  laughingly. 

'  Such  weather  ! '  cried  he  in  a  querulous  tone  ;  '  how  can 
a  man  have  any  sense  in  such  weather  ?  Some  foreigner  says 
that  the  odious  climate  of  England  is  an  over-balance  for  her 
good  constitution.  The  sun  of  the  south  is  in  truth  well  worth 
the  liberty  of  the  north.  It  is  a  sad  thing,'  said  he,  with  a 
very  sentimental  air,  '  that  a  free-born  Briton  should  be  servile 
to  these  skyey  influences '  ;  and,  grumbling  on,  he  looked  out 
of  the  window  as  cross  as  he  pleased,  and  nobody  minded  him. 
The  aide-de-camp  civilly  agreed  with  him  that  it  was  horrid 
weather,  and  likely  to  rain,  and  it  did  rain  ;  and  every  one 
knows  how  men,  like  children,  are  in  certain  circumstances 
affected  miserably  by  a  rainy  day.  There  was  no  going  out ; 
horses  at  the  door,  and  obliged  to  be  dismissed.  Well,  since 
there  could  be  no  riding,  the  next  best  thing  the  aide-de-camp 
thought  was  to  talk  of  horses,  and  the  officers  all  grew  eager, 
and  Churchill  had  a  mind  to  exert  himself  so  far  as  to  show 
them  that  he  knew  more  of  the  matter  than  they  did ;  that  he 
was  no  mere  book -man;  but  on  this  unlucky  day  all  went 
wrong.  It  happened  that  Horace  fell  into  some  grievous 
error  concerning  the  genealogy  of  a  famous  racehorse,  and, 
disconcerted  more  than  he  would  have  been  at  being  convicted 
of  any  degree  of  moral  turpitude,  vexed  and  ashamed,  he 
talked  no  more  of  Newmarket  or  of  Doncaster,  left  the  race- 
ground  to  those  who  prided  themselves  on  the  excellences  of 
their  four-footed  betters,  and  lounged  into  the  billiard-room. 

He  found  Lady  Cecilia  playing  with  Beauclerc ;  Miss 
Stanley  was  looking  on.  Churchill  was  a  famous  billiard- 
player,  and  took  his  turn  to  show  how  much  better  than 
Beauclerc  he  performed,  but  this  day  his  hand  was  out,  his 
eye  not  good  ;  he  committed  blunders  of  which  a  novice  might 
have  been  ashamed.  And  there  was  Miss  Stanley  and  there 
was  Beauclerc  by  to  see  !  and  Beauclerc  pitied  him  ! 

O  line  extreme  of  human  misery  ! 

He  retreated  to  the  book -room,  but  there  the  intellectual 
Horace,  with  all  the  sages,  poets,  and  novelists  of  every  age 

156 


HELEN 

within  his  reach,  reached  them  not ;  but,  with  his  hands  in 
his  pockets,  like  any  squire  or  schoolboy  under  the  load  of 
ignorance  or  penalties  of  idleness,  stood  before  the  chimney- 
piece,  eyeing  the  pendule,  and  verily  believing  that  this  morn- 
ing the  hands  went  backward.  Dressing-time  at  last  came, 
and  dinner-time,  bringing  relief  how  often  to  man  and  child 
ill-tempered;  but  this  day  to  Churchill  dinner  brought  only 
discomfiture  worse  discomfited. 

Some  of  the  neighbouring  families  were  to  dine  at  Clarendon 
Park.  Mr.  Churchill  abhorred  country  neighbours  and  country 
gentlemen.  Among  these,  however,  were  some  not  unworthy 
to  be  perceived  by  him ;  and  besides  these,  there  were  some 
foreign  officers  ;  one  in  particular,  from  Spain,  of  high  rank 
and  birth,  of  the  sangre  azul,  the  blue  blood,  who  have  the 
privilege  of  the  silken  cord  if  they  should  come  to  be  hanged. 
This  Spaniard  was  a  man  of  distinguished  talent,  and  for  him 
Horace  might  have  been  expected  to  shine  out ;  it  was  his 
pleasure,  however,  this  day  to  disappoint  expectations,  and  to 
do  'the  dishonours  of  his  country.'  He  would  talk  only  of 
eating,  of  which  he  was  privileged  not  only  to  speak  but  to 
judge,  and  pronounce  upon  en  dernier  ressort,  though  this  was 
only  an  air,  for  he  was  not  really  a  gourmand  ;  but  after  ogling 
through  his  glass  the  distant  dishes,  when  they  with  a  wish 
came  nigh,  he,  after  a  cursory  glance  or  a  close  inspection, 
made  them  with  a  nod  retire. 

At  last  he  thought  an  opportunity  offered  for  bringing  in  a 
well-prepared  anecdote  which  he  had  about  Cambac^rfes,  and  a 
hot  blackbird  and  white  feet,  but  unluckily  a  country  gentle- 
man would  tell  some  history  of  a  battle  between  poachers  and 
gamekeepers,  which  fixed  the  attention  of  the  company  till  the 
moment  for  the  anecdote  was  past. 

Horace  left  his  tale  untold,  and  spoke  word  never  more  till 
a  subject  was  started  on  which  he  thought  he  could  come  out 
unrivalled.  General  Clarendon  had  some  remarkably  good 
wines.  Churchill  was  referred  to  as  a  judge,  and  he  allowed 
them  to  be  all  good,  but  he  prided  himself  on  possessing  a 
certain  Spanish  wine,  esteemed  above  all  price,  because  not  to 
be  had  for  money — amontillado  is  its  name.  Horace  appealed 
to  the  Spanish  officer,  who  confirmed  all  he  said  of  this  vinous 
phenomenon.  '  No  cultivator  can  be  certain  of  producing  it. 
It  has  puzzled,  almost  to  death,  all  the  growers  of  Xeres  : — it 

157 


HELEN 

is  a  variety  of  sherry,  almost  as  difficult  to  judge  of  as  to 
procure.' 

But  Mr.  Churchill  boasted  he  had  some,  undoubtedly 
genuine  ;  he  added,  '  that  Spanish  judges  had  assured  him  his 
taste  was  so  accurate  he  might  venture  to  pronounce  upon  the 
difficult  question  of  amontillado  or  not ! ' 

While  he  yet  spoke.  General  Clarendon,  unawares,  placed 
before  him  some  of  this  very  fine  wine,  which,  as  he  finished 
speaking,  Churchill  swallowed  without  knowing  it  from  some 
other  sherry  which  he  had  been  drinking.  He  would  have 
questioned  that  it  was  genuine,  but  the  Spaniard,  as  far  as  he 
could  pretend  to  judge,  thought  it  unquestionable. 

Churchill's  countenance  fell  in  a  manner  that  quite  surprised 
Helen,  and  exceedingly  amused  Lady  Cecilia.  He  was  more 
mortified  and  vexed  by  this  failure  than  by  all  the  rest,  for  the 
whole  table  smiled. 

The  evening  of  this  day  of  misfortune  was  not  brighter  than 
the  morning,  everything  was  wrong — even  at  night — at  night 
when  at  last  the  dinner  company,  the  country  visitors,  relieved 
him  from  their  presence,  and  when  some  comfort  might  be  had, 
he  thought,  stretched  in  a  good  easy-chair — Lord  Davenant 
had  set  him  the  example.  But  something  had  happened  to 
all  the  chairs, — there  was  a  variety  of  fashionable  kinds  ;  he 
tried  them  by  turns,  but  none  of  them  this  night  would  suit 
him.  Yet  Lady  Cecilia  maintained  (for  the  General  had  chosen 
them)  that  they  were  each  and  all  of  them  in  their  way  com- 
fortable, in  the  full  English  spirit  of  the  word,  and  according 
to  the  French  explanation  of  comfortable,  given  to  us  by  the 
Duchess  d'Abrantes,  convcnablement  bon j  but  in  compassion 
to  Mr.  Churchill's  fastidious  restlessness,  she  would  now  show 
him  a  perfection  of  a  chair  which  she  had  just  had  made  for 
her  own  boudoir.  She  ordered  that  it  should  be  brought,  and 
in  it  rolled,  and  it  was  looked  at  in  every  direction  and  sat  in, 
and  no  fault  could  be  found  with  it,  even  by  the  great  fault- 
finder ;  but  what  was  it  called  ?  It  was  neither  a  lounger, 
nor  a  dormeuse,  nor  a  Cooper,  nor  a  Nelson,  nor  a  kangaroo  : 
a  chair  without  a  name  would  never  do  ;  in  all  things  fashion- 
able the  name  is  more  than  half  Such  a  happy  name  as 
kangaroo  Lady  Cecilia  despaired  of  finding  for  her  new 
favourite,  but  she  begged  some  one  would  give  it  a  good 
one  ;  whoever  gave  her  the  best  name  should  be  invited  to 

iS8 


'%•^^^ 


Sleeky-hollow  ! 


HELEN 

the  honours  and  pleasures  of  the  sitting  in  this  chair  for  the 
rest  of  the  night. 

Her  eyes,  and  all  eyes,  turned  upon  JMr.  Churchill;  but 
whether  the  occasion  was  too  great,  or  that  his  desire  to 
satisfy  the  raised  expectation  of  the  public  was  too  high 
strained,  or  that  the  time  was  out  of  joint,  or  that  he  was 
out  of  sorts,  the  fact  was  he  could  find  no  name. 

Beauclerc,  who  had  not  yet  tried  the  chair,  sank  into  its 
luxurious  depth,  and  leaning  back,  asked  if  it  might  not  be 
appropriately  called  the  '  Sleepy-hollow.' 

'Sleepy-hollow!'  repeated  Lady  Cecilia,  '  excellent  f  and 
by  acclamation  '  Sleepy-hollow '  was  approved  ;  but  when 
Beauclerc  was  invited  to  the  honours  of  the  sitting,  he  declined, 
declaring  that  the  name  was  not  his  invention,  only  his  re- 
collection ;  it  had  been  given  by  a  friend  of  his  to  some  such 
easy  chair. 

This  magnanimity  was  too  much  for  Horace  ;  he  looked  at 
his  watch,  found  it  was  bed-time,  pushed  the  chair  out  of  his 
way,  and  departed  ;  Beauclerc,  the  first  and  last  idea  in  this 
his  day  of  mortifications. 

Seeing  a  man  subject  to  these  petty  irritations  lowers  him 
in  the  eyes  of  woman.  For  that  susceptibility  of  temper  arising 
from  the  jealousy  of  love,  even  when  excited  by  trifles,  woman 
makes  all  reasonable,  all  natural  allowance  ;  but  for  the 
jealousy  of  self-love  she  has  no  pity.  Unsuited  to  the  manly 
character  ! — so  Helen  thought,  and  so  every  woman  thinks. 


CHAPTER  XVI 

It  was  expected  by  all  who  had  witnessed  his  discomfiture 
and  his  parting  push  to  the  chair,  that  Mr.  Churchill  would 
be  off  early  in  the  morning — such  was  his  wont  when  he  was 
disturbed  in  vanity  :  but  he  reappeared  at  breakfast. 

This  day  was  a  good  day  with  Horace  ;  he  determined  it 
should  be  so,  and  though  it  was  again  a  wet  day,  he  now 
showed  that  he  could  rule  the  weather  of  his  own  humour, 
when  intensity  of  will  was  wakened  by  rivalry.  He  made 
himself  most   agreeable,  and  the  man  of  yesterday  was  for- 

i6o 


HELEN 

gotten  or  remembered  only  as  a  foil  to  the  man  of  to-day. 
The  words  he  so  much  loved  to  hear,  and  to  which  he  had  so 
often  surreptitiously  listened,  were  now  repeated,  '  No  one 
can  be  so  agreeable  as  Horace  Churchill  is  on  his  good 
days ! ' 

Bright  he  shone  out,  all  gaiety  and  graciousness  ;  the  cachet 
de  faveur  was  for  all,  but  its  finest  impression  was  for  Helen. 
He  tried  flattery,  and  wit,  each  playing  on  the  other  with 
reflected  and  reflecting  lustre,  for  a  woman  naturally  says  to 
herself,  '  When  this  man  has  so  much  wit,  his  flattery  even 
must  be  worth  something.' 

And  another  day  came,  and  another,  and  another  party  of 
friends  filled  the  house,  and  still  Mr.  Churchill  remained,  and 
was  now  the  delight  of  all.  As  far  as  concerned  his  successes 
in  society,  no  one  was  more  ready  to  join  in  applause  than 
Beauclerc ;  but  when  Helen  was  in  question  he  was  different, 
though  he  had  reasoned  himself  into  the  belief  that  he  could 
not  yet  love  Miss  Stanley,  therefore  he  could  not  be  jealous. 
But  he  had  been  glad  to  observe  that  she  had  from  the  first 
seemed  to  see  what  sort  of  a  person  Mr.  Churchill  was.  She 
was  now  only  amused,  as  everybody  must  be,  but  she  would 
never  be  interested  by  such  a  man  as  Horace  Churchill,  a  wit 
without  a  soul.  If  she  were — why  he  could  never  feel  any 
further  interest  about  her — that  was  all ! 

So  it  went  on  ;  and  now  Lady  Cecilia  was  as  much  amused 
as  she  expected  by  these  daily  jealousies,  conflicts,  and  com- 
parisons, the  feelings  perpetually  tricking  themselves  out,  and 
strutting  about,  calling  themselves  judgments,  like  the  servants 
in  Gil  Bias  in  their  masters'  clothes,  going  about  as  counts, 
dukes,  and  grandees. 

'Well,  really,'  said  Lady  Cecilia  to  Helen,  one  day,  as  she 
was  standing  near  her  tambour  frame,  '  you  are  an  industrious 
creature,  and  the  only  very  industrious  person  I  ever  could 
bear.  I  have  myself  a  natural  aversion  to  a  needle,  but  that 
tambour  needle  I  can  better  endure  than  a  common  one,  be- 
cause, in  the  first  place,  it  makes  a  little  noise  in  the  world  ; 
one  not  only  sees  but  hears  it  getting  on ;  one  finds  that 
without  dragging  it  draws  at  every  link  a  lengthened  chain.' 

'  It  is  called  chainstitch,  is  it  not?'  said  the  aide-de-camp  ; 
'  and  Miss  Stanley  is  working  on  so  famously  fast  at  it  she  will 
have  us  all  in  her  chains  by  and  by.' 
M  i6i 


HELEN 

'  Bow,  Miss  Stanley,'  said  Lady  Cecilia ;  '  that  pretty  com- 
pliment deserves  at  least  a  bow,  if  not  a  look-up.' 

'  I   should  prefer  a  look-down,   if   I   were  to  choose,'  said 
Churchill. 

'  Beggars  must  not  be  choosers,'  said  the  aide-de-camp. 
'  But  the  very  reason  I  can  bear  to  look  at  you  working, 
Helen,'  continued  Lady  CeciUa,  '  is,  because  you  do  look  up 
so  often — so  refreshingly.  The  professed  Notables  I  detest — 
those  who  never  raise  their  eyes  from  their  everlasting  work  ; 
whatever  is  said,  read,  thought,  or  felt,  is  with  them  of 
secondary  importance  to  that  bit  of  muslin  in  which  they 
are  making  holes,  or  that  bit  of  canvas  on  which  they  are 
perpetrating  such  figures  or  flowers  as  nature  scorns  to  look  upon. 
I  did  not  mean  anything  against  you,  mamma,  I  assure  you,'  con- 
tinued Cecilia,  turning  to  her  mother,  who  was  also  at  her  em- 
broidering frame,  '  because,  though  you  do  work,  or  have  work 
before  you,  to  do  you  justice,  you  never  attend  to  it  in  the  least.' 
Thank  you,  my  dear  Cecilia,'  said  Lady  Davenant, 
smiling  ;  '  I  am,  indeed,  a  sad  bungler,  but  still  I  shall  always 
maintain  a  great  respect  for  work  and  workers,  and  I  have 
good  reasons  for  it.' 

'  And  so  have  1,'  said  Lord  Davenant.  '  I  only  wish  that 
men  who  do  not  know  what  to  do  with  their  hands  were  not 
ashamed  to  sew.  If  custom  had  but  allowed  us  this  resource, 
how  many  valuable  lives  might  have  been  saved,  how  many 
rich  ennuy^s  would  not  have  hung  themselves,  even  in 
November  !  What  years  of  war,  what  overthrow  of  empires, 
might  have  been  avoided,  if  princes  and  sultans,  instead  of 
throwing  handkerchiefs,  had  but  hemmed  them  ! ' 

'  No,  no,'  said  Lady  Davenant ;  '  recollect  that  the  race  of 
Spanish  kings  has  somewhat  deteriorated  since  they  exchanged 
the  sword  for  the  tambour  frame.  We  had  better  have  things 
as  they  are  :  leave  us  the  privilege  of  the  needle,  and  what  a 
valuable  resource  it  is  ;  sovereign  against  the  root  of  all  evil — 
an  antidote  both  to  love  in  idleness  and  hate  in  idleness — 
which  is  most  to  be  dreaded,  let  those  who  have  felt  both 
decide.  I  think  we  ladies  must  be  allowed  to  keep  the 
privilege  of  the  needle  to  ourselves,  humble  though  it  be,  for  we 
must  allow  it  is  a  good  one.' 

'  Good  at  need,'  said  Churchill.  '  There  is  an  excellent 
print,  by  Bouck,  I  believe,  of  an  old  woman  beating  the  devil 

162 


HELEN 

with  a  distaff ;  distaffs  have  been  out  of  fashion  with  spinsters 
ever  since,  I  fancy.' 

'  But  as  she  was  old,  Churchill,'  said  Lord  Davenant,  'might 
not  your  lady  have  defied  his  black  majesty  without  her  distaff?' 

'  His  black  majesty  !  I  admire  your  distinction,  my  lord," 
said  Churchill,  '  but  give  it  more  emphasis  ;  for  all  kings  are 
not  black  in  the  eyes  of  the  fair,  it  is  said,  you  know.'  And 
here  he  began  an  anecdote  of  regal  scandal  in  which  Lady 
Cecilia  stopped  him — 

'  Now,  Horace,  I  protest  against  your  beginning  with 
scandal  so  early  in  the  morning.  None  of  your  on  dits,  for 
decency's  sake,  before  luncheon  ;  wait  till  evening.' 

Churchill  coughed,  and  shrugged,  and  sighed,  and  declared 
he  would  be  temperate  ;  he  would  not  touch  a  character,  upon 
his  honour  ;  he  would  only  indulge  in  a  few  little  personalities ; 
it  could  not  hurt  any  lady's  feelings  that  he  should  criticise  or 
praise  absent  beauties.  So  he  just  made  a  review  of  all  he 
could  recollect,  in  answer  to  a  question  one  of  the  officers. 
Captain  Warmsley,  had  asked  him,  and  which,  in  an  absent 
fit,  he  had  had  the  ill -manners  yesterday,  as  now  he  re- 
collected, not  to  answer — Whom  he  considered  as  altogether 
the  handsomest  woman  of  his  acquaintance  ?  Beauclerc  was 
now  in  the  room,  and  Horace  was  proud  to  display,  before  him 
in  particular,  his  infinite  knowledge  of  all  the  fair  and  fashion- 
able, and  all  that  might  be  admitted  fashionable  without  being 
fair — all  that  have  the  je  ne  sais  quoi  which  is  than  beauty 
dearer.  As  one  conscious  of  his  power  to  consecrate  or 
desecrate,  by  one  look  of  disdain  or  one  word  of  praise,  he 
stood ;  and  beginning  at  the  lowest  conceivable  point,  his 
uttermost  notion  of  want  of  beauty — his  laid  ideal,  naming  one 
whose  image,  no  doubt,  every  charitable  imagination  will  here 
supply,  Horace  next  fixed  upon  another  for  his  mediocrity 
point — what  he  should  call  'just  well  enough' — assez  bien, 
assez — just  up  to  the  Bellasis  motto,  ^  Bonne  et  belle  assez.' 
Then,  in  the  ascending  scale,  he  rose  to  those  who,  in  common 
parlance,  may  be  called  charming,  fascinating ;  and  still  for 
each  he  had  his  fastidious  look  and  depreciating  word.  Just 
keeping  within  the  verge,!Horace,  without  exposing  himself  to  the 
ridicule  of  coxcombry,  ended  by  sighing  for  that  being  '  made 
of  every  creature's  best ' — perfect,  yet  free  from  the  curse  of 
perfection.     Then,  suddenly  turning  to  Beauclerc,  and  tapping 

J  63 


UjJiM 


s 


HELEN 

him  on  the  shoulder — '  Do  give  us  your  notions — to  what  sort 
of  a  body  or  mind,  now,  would  you  willingly  bend  the  knee  ? ' 

Beauclerc  could  not  or  would  not  tell — '  I  only  know  that 
whenever  I  bend  the  knee,'  said  he,  'it  will  be  because  I 
cannot  help  it ! ' 

Beauclerc  could  not  be  drawn  out  either  by  Churchill's 
persiflage  or  flattery,  and  he  tried  both,  to  talk  of  his  tastes  or 
opinions  of  women.  He  felt  too  much  perhaps  about  love  to 
talk  much  about  it.  This  all  agreed  well  in  Helen's  imagina- 
tion with  what  Lady  Cecilia  had  told  her  of  his  secret  engage- 
ment. She  was  sure  he  was  thinking  of  Lady  Blanche,  and 
that  he  could  not  venture  to  describe  her,  lest  he  should  betray 
himself  and  his  secret.  Then,  leaving  Churchill  and  the 
talkers,  he  walked  up  and  down  the  room  alone,  at  the  farther 
side,  seeming  as  if  he  were  recollecting  some  lines  which  he 
repeated  to  himself,  and  then  stopping  before  Lady  Cecilia, 
repeated  to  her,  in  a  very  low  voice,  the  following  : — 

'  I  saw  her  upon  nearer  view, 
A  spirit,  yet  a  woman  too  ! 
Her  household  motions  light  and  free. 
And  steps  of  virgin  liberty  ; 
A  countenance  in  which  did  meet 
Sweet  records,  promises  as  sweet ; 
A  creature  not  too  bright  or  good 
For  human  nature's  daily  food  ; 
For  transient  sorrows,  simple  wiles, 
Praise,  blame,  love,  kisses,  tears,  and  smiles.' 

Helen  thought  Lady  Blanche  must  be  a  charming  creature  if 
she  was  like  this  picture ;  but  somehow,  as  she  afterwards  told 
Lady  Cecilia,  she  had  formed  a  different  idea  of  Lady  Blanche 
Forrester.     Cecilia  smiled  and  asked,  '  How  ?  different  how  ? ' 

Helen  did  not  exactly  know,  but  altogether  she  had 
imagined  that  she  must  be  more  of  a  heroine,  or  perhaps  more 
of  a  woman  of  rank  and  fashion.  She  had  not  formed  any 
exact  idea — but  different  altogether  from  this  description. 
Lady  Cecilia  again  smiled,  and  said,  '  Very  natural ;  and  after 
all  not  very  certain  that  the  Lady  Blanche  is  like  this  picture, 
which  was  not  drawn  for  her  or  from  her  assuredly — a.  re- 
semblance found  only  in  the  imagination,  to  which  we  are,  all 
of  us,  more  or  less,  dupes  ;  and  tant  mieux  say  I — tant  pis 
says  mamma — and  all  mothers.' 

165 


HELEN 

'  There  is  one  thing  I  like  better  in  Mr.  Beauclerc's  manners 
than  in  Mr.  Churchill,'  said  Helen. 

'  There  are  a  hundred  I  like  better,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  '  but 
what  is  your  one  thing  ? ' 

'  That  he  always  speaks  of  women  in  general  with  respect 
— as  if  he  had  more  confidence  in  them,  and  more  dependence 
upon  them  for  his  happiness.  Now  Mr.  Churchill,  with  all  the 
adoration  he  professes,  seems  to  look  upon  them  as  idols  that  he 
can  set  up  or  pull  down,  bend  the  knee  to  or  break  to  pieces,  at 
pleasure — I  could  not  like  a  man  for  a  friend  who  had  a  bad, 
or  even  a  contemptuous,  opinion  of  women  —  could  you, 
Cecilia  ? ' 

'  Certainly  not,'  Lady  Cecilia  said ;  '  the  General  had 
always,  naturally,  the  greatest  respect  for  women.  Whatever 
prejudices  he  had  taken  up  had  been  only  caught  from  others, 
and  lasted  only  till  he  had  got  rid  of  the  impression  of  certain 
"  untoward  circumstances." '  Even  a  grave,  serious  dislike, 
both  Lady  Cecilia  and  Helen  agreed  that  they  could  bear 
better  than  that  persiflage  which  seemed  to  mock  even  while 
it  most  professed  to  admire. 

Horace  presently  discovered  the  mistakes  he  had  made  in 
his  attempts,  and  repaired  them  as  fast  as  he  could  by  his 
infinite  versatility.  The  changes  shaded  off  with  a  skill  which 
made  them  run  easily  into  each  other.  He  perceived  that  Mr. 
Beauclerc's  respectful  air  and  tone  were  preferred,  and  he  now 
laid  himself  out  in  the  respectful  line,  adding,  as  he  flattered 
himself,  something  of  a  finer  point,  more  polish  in  whatever  he 
said,  and  with  more  weight  of  authority. 

But  he  was  mortified  to  find  that  it  did  not  produce  the 
expected  effect,  and,  after  having  done  the  respectful  one 
morning,  as  he  fancied,  in  the  happiest  manner,  he  was  vexed 
to  perceive  that  he  not  only  could  not  raise  Helen's  eyes  from 
her  work,  but  that  even  Lady  Davenant  did  not  attend  to  him : 
and  that,  as  he  was  rounding  one  of  his  best  periods,  her  looks 
were  directed  to  the  other  side  of  the  room,  where  Beauclerc 
sat  apart ;  and  presently  she  called  to  him,  and  begged  to 
know  what  it  was  he  was  reading.  She  said  she  quite  envied 
him  the  power  he  possessed  of  being  rapt  into  future  times  or 
past,  completely  at  his  author's  bidding,  to  be  transported  how 
and  where  he  pleased. 

Beauclerc  brought  the  book  to  her,  and  put  it  into  her 
i66 


HELEN 

hand.  As  she  took  it  she  said,  '  As  we  advance  in  life,  it 
becomes  more  and  more  difficult  to  find  in  any  book  the  sort 
of  enchanting,  entrancing  interest  which  we  enjoyed  when  hfe, 
and  books,  and  we  ourselves,  were  new.  It  were  vain  to  try 
and  settle  whether  the  fault  is  most  in  modern  books,  or  in  our 
ancient  selves  ;  probably  not  in  either  :  the  fact  is,  that  not 
only  does  the  imagination  cool  and  weaken  as  we  grow  older, 
but  we  become,  as  we  live  on  in  this  world,  too  much  engrossed 
by  the  real  business  and  cares  of  life,  to  have  feeling  or  time 
for  factitious,  imaginary  interests.  But  why  do  I  say 
factitious  ?  while  they  last,  the  imaginative  interests  are  as 
real  as  any  others.' 

'Thank  you,'  said  Beauclerc,  'for  doing  justice  to  poor 
imagination,  whose  pleasures  are  surely,  after  all,  the  highest, 
the  most  real,  that  we  have,  unwarrantably  as  they  have  been 
decried  both  by  metaphysicians  and  physicians.' 

The  book  which  had  so  fixed  Beauclerc's  attention  was 
Segur's  History  of  Napoleoris  Russian  Campaign.  He  was 
at  the  page  where  the  burning  of  Moscow  is  described — the 
picture  of  Buonaparte's  despair,  when  he  met  resolution  greater 
than  his  own,  when  he  felt  himself  vanquished  by  the  human 
mind,  by  patriotism,  by  virtue — virtue  in  which  he  could  not 
believe,  the  existence  of  which,  with  all  his  imagination,  he 
could  not  conceive :  the  power  which  his  indomitable  will 
could  not  conquer. 

Beauclerc  pointed  to  the  account  of  that  famous  inscription 
on  the  iron  gate  of  a  church  which  the  French  found  still 
standing,  the  words  written  by  Rostopchin  after  the  burning 
of  his  '  delightful  home.' 

'  Frenchmen,  I  have  been  eight  years  in  embellishing  this 
residence;  I  have  lived  in  it  happily  in  the  bosom  of  my  family. 
The  inhabitants  of  this  estate  (amounting  to  seventeen  hundred 
and  twenty)  have  quitted  it  at  your  approach;  and  I  have, 
with  my  own  hands,  set  fire  to  my  own  house,  to  prevent  it  from 
being  polluted  by  your  presence.^ 

'  See  what  one,  even  one,  magnanimous  individual  can  do 
for  his  country,'  exclaimed  Beauclerc.  'How  little  did  this 
sacrifice  cost  him!  Sacrifice  do  I  say?  it  was  a  pride — a 
pleasure.' 

Churchill  did  not  at  all  like  the  expression  of  Helen's 
countenance,  for  he  perceived  she  sympathised  with  Beauclerc's 

167 


HELEN 

enthusiasm.  He  saw  that  romantic  enthusiasm  had  more 
charm  for  her  than  wit  or  fashion  ;  and  now  he  meditated 
another  change  of  style.  He  would  try  a  noble  style.  He 
resolved  that  the  first  convenient  opportunity  he  would  be  a 
little  romantic,  and  perhaps,  even  take  a  touch  at  chivalry,  a 
burst  like  Beauclerc,  but  in  a  way  of  his  own,  at  the  degeneracy 
of  modern  times.  He  tried  it — but  it  was  quite  a  failure  ; 
Lady  Cecilia,  as  he  overheard,  whispered  to  Helen  what  was 
once  so  happily  said — 

'AA/  le  pauvre  ho  mine  /  cotmne  il  se  batte  les  fiancs  cPun 
enthoudasme  de  commande.' 

Horace  was  too  clever  a  man  to  persist  in  a  wrong  line, 
or  one  in  which  his  test  of  right,  success,  did  not  crown  his 
endeavours.  If  this  did  not  do,  something  else  would — 
should.  It  was  impossible  that  with  all  his  spirit  of  resource 
he  should  ultimately  fail.  To  please,  and  to  make  an  im- 
pression on  Helen,  a  greater  impression  than  Beauclerc — to 
annoy  Beauclerc,  in  short,  was  still,  independently  of  all 
serious  thoughts,  the  utmost  object  of  Churchill's  endeavours. 


CHAPTER    XVII 

About  this  time  a  circumstance  occurred,  which  seemed  to 
have  nothing  to  do  with  Churchill,  or  Beauclerc,  but  which 
eventually  brought  both  their  characters  into  action  and 
passion. 

Lord  Davenant  had  purchased,  at  the  sale  of  Dean  Stanley's 
pictures,  several  of  those  which  had  been  the  Dean's  favourites, 
and  which,  independently  of  their  positive  merit,  were  peculiarly 
dear  to  Helen.  He  had  ordered  that  they  should  be  sent 
down  to  Clarendon  Park  ;  at  first,  he  only  begged  house-room 
for  them  from  the  General  while  he  and  Lady  Davenant  were 
in  Russia  ;  then  he  said  that  in  case  he  should  never  return 
he  wished  the  pictures  should  be  divided  between  his  two 
dear  children,  Cecilia  and  Helen  ;  and  that,  to  prevent 
disputes,  he  would  make  the  distribution  of  them  himself 
now,  and  in  the  kindest  and  most  playful  manner  he  allotted 
them  to  each,  always  finding  some  excellent  reason  for  giving 

i68 


HELEN 

to  Helen  those  which  he  knew  she  Hked  best ;  and  then  there 
was  to  be  a  hanging  committee,  for  hanging  the  pictures, 
which  occasioned  a  great  deal  of  talking,  Beauclerc  always 
thinking  most  of  Helen,  or  of  what  was  really  best  for  the 
paintings  ;  Horace  most  of  himself  and  his  amateurship. 

Among  these  pictures  were  some  fine  Wouvermans,  and 
other  hunting  and  hawking  pieces,  and  one  in  particular  of 
the  duchess  and  her  ladies,  from  Don  Quixote.  Beauclerc, 
who  had  gone  round  examining  and  admiring,  stood  fixed 
when  he  came  to  this  picture,  in  which  he  fancied  he  dis- 
covered in  one  of  the  figures  some  likeness  to  Helen  ;  the  lady 
had  a  hawk  upon  her  wrist.  Churchill  came  up  eagerly  to 
the  examination,  with  glass  at  eye.  He  could  not  discern  the 
slightest  resemblance  to  Miss  Stanley  ;  but  he  was  in  haste 
to  bring  out  an  excellent  observation  of  his  own,  which  he 
had  made  his  own  from  a  Quarterly  Review,  illustrating 
the  advantage  it  would  be  to  painters  to  possess  knowledge, 
even  of  kinds  seemingly  most  distant  from  the  line  of  their 
profession. 

'  For  instance  now,  a  priori,  one  should  not  insist  upon  a 
great  painter's  being  a  good  ornithologist,  and  yet,  for  want 
of  being  something  of  a  bird-fancier,  look  here  what  he  has 
done — quite  absurd,  a  sort  of  hawk  introduced,  such  as  never 
was  or  could  be  at  any  hawking  affair  in  nature  :  would  not 
sit  upon  lady's  wrist  or  answer  to  her  call — would  never  fly  at 
a  bird.     Now  you  see  this  is  a  ridiculous  blunder.' 

While  Churchill  plumed  himself  on  this  critical  remark. 
Captain  Warmsley  told  of  who  still  kept  hawks  in  England, 
and  of  the  hawking  parties  he  had  seen  and  heard  of — '  even 
this  year,  that  famous  hawking  in  Wiltshire,  and  that  other 
in  Norfolk.' 

Churchill  asked  Warmsley  if  he  had  been  at  Lord  Bemer's 
when  Landseer  was  there  studying  the  subject  of  his  famous 
hawking  scene.  '  Have  you  seen  it.  Lady  Cecilia  ? '  continued 
he  ;  'it  is  beautiful ;  the  birds  seem  to  be  absolutely  coming 
out  of  the  picture '  ;  and  he  was  going  on  with  some  of  his 
connoisseurship,  and  telling  of  his  mortification  in  having 
missed  the  purchase  of  that  picture  ;  but  Warmsley  got  back 
to  the  hawking  he  had  seen,  and  he  became  absolutely  eloquent 
in  describing  the  sport. 

Churchill,  though  eager  to  speak,  hstened  with  tolerably 
169 


HELEN 

polite  patience  till  Warmsley  came  to  what  he  had  forgot  to 
mention, — to  the  label  with  the  date  of  place  and  year  that  is 
put  upon  the  heron's  leg  ;  to  the  heron  brought  from  Denmark, 
where  it  had  been  caught,  with  the  label  of  having  been  let 
fly  from  Lord  Berner's ;  '  for,'  continued  he,  '  the  heron  is 
always  to  be  saved  if  possible,  so,  when  it  is  down,  and  the 
hawk  over  it,  the  falconer  has  some  raw  beef  ready  minced, 
and  lays  it  on  the  heron's  back,  or  a  pigeon,  just  killed,  is 
sometimes  used  ;  the  hawk  devours  it,  and  the  heron,  quite 
safe,  as  soon  as  it  recovers  from  its  fright,  mounts  slowly 
upward  and  returns  to  its  heronry.' 

Helen  listened  eagerly,  and  so  did  Lady  Cecilia,  who  said, 
'  You  know,  Helen,  our  favourite  Washington  Irving  quotes 
that  in  days  of  yore  "  a  lady  of  rank  did  not  think  herself 
completely  equipped  in  riding  forth,  unless  she  had  her  tassel- 
gentel  held  by  jesses  on  her  deUcate  hand.'" 

Before  her  words  were  well  finished,  Beauclerc  had  decided 
what  he  would  do,  and  the  business  was  half  done  that  is  well 
begun.  He  was  at  the  library  table,  writing  as  fast  as  pen 
could  go,  to  give  carte  blanche  to  a  friend  to  secure  for  him 
immediately  a  whole  hawking  establishment  which  Warmsley 
had  mentioned,  and  which  was  now  upon  public  sale,  or  pri- 
vately to  be  parted  with  by  the  present  possessor. 

At  the  very  moment  when  Beauclerc  was  signing  and  seal- 
ing at  one  end  of  the  room,  at  the  other  Horace  Churchill,  to 
whom  something  of  the  same  plan  had  occurred,  was  charm- 
ing Lady  Cecilia  Clarendon  by  hinting  to  her  his  scheme — 
anticipating  the  honour  of  seeing  one  of  his  hawks  borne  upon 
her  dehcate  wrist. 

Beauclerc,  after  despatching  his  letter,  came  up  just  in  time 
to  catch  the  sound  and  the  sense,  and  took  Horace  aside  to  tell 
him  what  he  had  done.  Horace  looked  vexed,  and  haughtily 
observed  that  he  conceived  his  place  at  Erlesmede  was  better 
calculated  for  a  hawking  party  than  most  places  in  England  ; 
and  he  had  already  announced  his  intentions  to  the  ladies. 
The  way  was  open  to  him — but  Beauclerc  did  not  see  why  he 
should  recede  ;  the  same  post  might  carry  both  their  letters — 
both  their  orders.' 

'  How  far  did  your  order  go,  may  I  ask  ? '  said  Churchill. 

'  Carte  blanche.' 

Churchill  owned,  with  a  sarcastic  smile,  that  he  was  not 
170 


HELEN 

prepared  to  go  quite  so  far.  He  was  not  quite  so  young  as 
Granville  ;  he,  unfortunately,  had  arrived  at  years  of  discre- 
tion— he  said  unfortunately ;  without  ironical  reservation,  he 
protested  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart  he  considered  it  as  a 
misfortune  to  have  become  that  slow  circumspect  sort  of  crea- 
ture which  looks  before  it  leaps.  Even  though  this  might  save 
him  from  the  fate  of  the  man  who  was  in  Sicily,  still  he  con- 
sidered it  as  unfortunate  to  have  lost  so  much  of  his  natural 
enthusiasm. 

'  Natural  enthusiasm  ! '  Beauclerc  could  not  help  repeating 
to  himself,  and  he  went  on  his  own  way.  It  must  be  confessed, 
as  even  Beauclerc's  best  friends  allowed,  counting  among  them 
Lady  Davenant  and  his  guardian,  that  never  was  man  of  sense 
more  subject  to  that  kind  of  temporary  derangement  of  the 
reasoning  powers  which  results  from  being  what  is  called  bit  by 
a  fancy ;  he  would  then  run  on  straight  forward,  without  look- 
ing to  the  right  or  the  left,  in  pursuit  of  his  object,  great  or 
small.  That  hawking  establishment  now  in  view  completely 
shut  out,  for  the  moment,  all  other  objects  ;  '  of  tercels  and  of 
lures  he  talks ' ;  and  before  his  imagination  were  hawking 
scenes,  and  Helen  with  a  hawk  on  her  wrist,  looking  most 
graceful — a  hawk  of  his  own  training  it  should  be.  Then, 
how  to  train  a  hawk  became  the  question.  While  he  was  wait- 
ing for  the  answer  to  his  carte  blanche,  nothing  better,  or  so 
good,  could  be  done,  as  to  make  himself  master  of  the  whole 
business,  and  for  this  purpose  he  found  it  essential  to  consult 
every  book  on  falconry  that  could  be  found  in  the  hbrary,  and 
a  great  plague  he  became  to  everybody  in  the  course  of  this 
book-hunt. 

'  What  a  bore  ! '  Warmsley  might  be  excused  for  muttering 
deep  and  low  between  the  teeth.  General  Clarendon  sighed 
and  groaned.  Lady  Davenant  bore  and  forbore  philo- 
sophically— it  was  for  Beauclerc ;  and  to  her  great  philosophy 
she  gave  all  the  credit  of  her  indulgent  partiality.  Lady 
Cecilia,  half-annoyed  yet  ever  good-natured,  carried  her 
complaisance  so  far  as  to  consult  the  catalogue  and  book-shelves 
sundry  times  in  one  hour ;  but  she  was  not  famous  for 
patience,  and  she  soon  resigned  him  to  a  better  friend — Helen, 
the  most  indefatigable  of  book-hunters.  She  had  been  well 
trained  to  it  by  her  uncle  ;  had  been  used  to  it  all  her  life ; 
and  really  took  pleasure  in  the  tiresome  business.     She  assured 

171 


HELEN 

Beauclerc  it  was  not  the  least  trouble,  and  he  thought  she 
looked  beautiful  when  she  said  so.  Whosoever  of  the  male 
kind,  young,  and  of  ardent,  not  to  say  impatient,  spirit,  has 
ever  been  aided  and  abetted  in  a  sudden  whim,  assisted,  for- 
warded, above  all,  sympathised  with,  through  all  the  changes 
and  chances  of  a  reigning  fancy,  may  possibly  conceive  how 
charming,  and  more  charming  every  hour,  perhaps  minute, 
Helen  became  in  Beauclerc's  eyes.  But,  all  in  the  way  of 
friendship  observe.  Perfectly  so — on  her  part,  for  she  could 
not  have  another  idea,  and  it  was  for  this  reason  she  was  so 
much  at  her  ease.  He  so  understood  it,  and,  thoroughly  a 
gentleman,  free  from  coxcombry,  as  he  was,  and  interpreting 
the  language  and  manners  of  women  with  instinctive  delicacy, 
they  went  on  delightfully.  Churchill  was  on  the  watch,  but 
he  was  not  alarmed  ;  all  was  so  undisguised  and  frank,  that 
now  he  began  to  feel  assured  that  love  on  her  side  not  only 
was,  but  ever  would  be,  quite  out  of  the  question. 

Beauclerc  was,  indeed,  in  the  present  instance,  really  and 
truly  intent  upon  what  he  was  about  ;  and  he  pursued  the  His- 
tory of  Falconry,  with  all  its  episodes,  from  the  olden  time  of 
the  Boke  of  St.  Alban's  down  to  the  last  number  of  the  Sport- 
ing Magazine,  including  Colonel  Thornton's  latest  flight,  with 
the  adventures  of  his  red  falcons,  Miss  M'Ghee  and  Lord 
Townsend,  and  his  red  tercels,  Messrs.  Croc  Franc  and 
Craignon  ; — not  forgetting  that  never-to-be  forgotten  hawking 
of  the  Emperor  Arambombamboberus  with  Trebizonian  eagles, 
on  the  authority  of  a  manuscript  in  the  Grand  Siguier's  library. 

Beauclerc  had  such  extraordinary  dependence  upon  the 
sympathy  of  his  friends,  that,  when  he  was  reading  anything 
that  interested  him,  no  matter  what  they  might  be  doing,  he 
must  have  their  admiration  for  what  charmed  him.  He  brought 
his  book  to  Lord  Davenant,  who  was  writing  a  letter.  '  Listen, 
oh  listen  !  to  this  pathetic  lament  of  the  falconer, — "  Hawks, 
heretofore  the  pride  of  royalty,  the  insignia  of  nobility,  the 
ambassador's  present,  the  priest's  indulgence,  companion  of  the 
knight,  and  nursling  of  the  gentle  mistress,  are  now  uncalled 
for  and  neglected." ' 

'  Ha  !  very  well  that,'  said  good-natured  Lord  Davenant, 
stopping  his  pen,  dipping  again,  dotting,  and  going  on. 

Then  Beauclerc  passaged  to  Lady  Davenant,  and,  interrupt- 
ing her  in  Scott's  Lives  of  the  Novelists,  on  which  she  was 

172 


HELEN 

deeply  intent,  'Allow  me,  my  dear  Lady  Davenant,  though 
you  say  you  are  no  great  topographer,  to  show  you  this,  it  is  so 
curious  ;  this  royal  falconer's  proclamation — Henry  the  Eighth's 
— to  preserve  his  partridges,  pheasants,  and  herons,  from  his 
palace  at  Westminster  to  St.  Giles's  in  the  Fields,  and  from 
thence  to  Islington,  Hampstead,  and  Highgate,  under  penalty  for 
every  bird  killed  of  imprisonment,  or  whatever  other  punish- 
ment to  his  highness  may  seem  meet.' 

Lady  Davenant  vouchsafed  some  suitable  remark,  consonant 
to  expectation,  on  the  changes  of  times  and  places,  and  men 
and  manners,  and  then  motioned  the  quarto  away,  with  which 
motion  the  quarto  reluctantly  complied ;  and  then  following 
Lady  Cecilia  from  window  to  window,  as  she  tended  her  flowers, 
he  would  insist  upon  her  hearing  the  table  of  precedence  for 
hawks.  She,  who  never  cared  for  any  table  of  precedence  in 
her  life,  even  where  the  higher  animals  were  concerned,  would 
only  undertake  to  remember  that  the  merlin  was  a  lady's  hawk, 
and  this  only  upon  condition  that  she  should  have  one  to  sit 
upon  her  wrist  like  the  fair  ladies  in  Wouvermans'  pictures. 
But  further,  as  to  Peregrine,  Gerfalcon,  or  Gerkin,  she  would 
hear  nought  of  them,  nor  could  she  listen,  though  Granville 
earnestly  exhorted,  to  the  several  good  reasons  which  make  a 
falcon  dislike  her  master — 

1st,   If  he  speak  rudely  to  her. 

2nd,    If  he  feed  her  carelessly. 

Before  he  could  get  thirdly  out.  Lady  Cecilia  stopped  him, 
declaring  that  in  all  her  hfe  she  never  could  listen  to  anything 
that  began  ^I'l'Ca.  first  and  secondly — reasons  especially. 

Horace,  meanwhile,  looked  superior  down,  and  thought 
with  ineffable  contempt  of  Beauclerc's  htde  skill  in  the  arts  of 
conversation,  thus  upon  unwilling  ears  to  squander  anecdotes 
which  would  have  done  him  credit  at  some  London  dinner. 
'  What  I  could  have  made  of  them !  and  may  make  of  them 
yet,'  thought  he  ;  '  but  some  there  are,  who  never  can  contrive, 
as  some  others  cleverly  do,  to  ride  their  hobby-horses  to  good 
purpose  and  good  effect ;— now  Beauclerc's  hobbies,  I  plainly 
see,  will  always  run  away  with  him  headlong,  cost  him  dear 
certainly,  and,  may  be,  leave  him  in  the  mire  at  last.' 

What  this  fancy  was  to  cost  him,  Beauclerc  did  not  yet 
know.  Two  or  three  passages  in  the  Sporting  Magazine  had 
given  some  hints  of  the  expense  of  this  '  most  delectable  of  all 

173 


HELEN 

country  contentments,'  which  he  had  not  thought  it  necessary 
to  read  aloud.  And  he  knew  that  the  late  Lord  Orford,  an 
ardent  pursuer  of  this  '  royal  and  noble '  sport,  had  expended 
one  hundred  a-year  on  every  hawk  he  kept,  each  requiring  a 
separate  attendant,  and  being  moreover  indulged  in  an  excursion 
to  the  Continent  every  season  during  moulting-time  :  but 
Beauclerc  said  to  himself  he  had  no  notion  of  humouring  his 
hawks  to  that  degree  ;  they  should,  aristocratic  birds  though 
they  be,  content  themselves  in  England,  and  not  pretend  to 
'  damn  the  climate  like  a  lord.'  And  he  flattered  himself 
that  he  should  be  able  to  pursue  his  fancy  more  cheaply  than 
any  of  his  predecessors  ;  but  as  he  had  promised  his  guardian 
that,  after  the  indulgence  granted  him  in  the  Beltravers  cause, 
he  could  not  call  upon  him  for  any  more  extraordinary  supplies, 
he  resolved,  in  case  the  expense  exceeded  his  ways  and  means, 
to  sell  his  hunters,  and  so  indulge  in  a  new  love  at  the  expense 
of  an  old  one. 

The  expected  pleasure  of  the  first  day's  hawking  was  now 
bright  in  his  imagination  ;  the  day  was  named,  the  weather 
promised  well,  and  the  German  cadgers  and  trainers  who  had 
been  engaged,  and  who,  along  with  the  whole  establishment, 
were  handed  over  to  Beauclerc,  were  to  come  down  to  Clarendon 
Park,  and  Beauclerc  was  very  happy  teaching  the  merlins  to 
sit  on  Lady  Cecilia's  and  on  Miss  Stanley's  wrist.  Helen's 
voice  was  found  to  be  peculiarly  agreeable  to  the  hawk,  who, 
as  Beauclerc  observed,  loved,  like  Lear,  that  excellent  thing  in 
woman,  a  voice  ever  soft,  gentle,  and  low. 

The  ladies  were  to  wear  some  pretty  dresses  for  the 
occasion,  and  all  was  gaiety  and  expectation  ;  and  Churchill 
was  mortified,  when  he  saw  how  well  the  thing  was  likely  to 
take,  that  he  was  not  to  be  the  giver  of  the  fete,  especially  as 
he  observed  that  Helen  was  particularly  pleased — when,  to  his 
inexpressible  surprise,  Granville  Beauclerc  came  to  him,  a  few 
days  before  that  appointed  for  the  hawking-party,  and  said  that 
he  had  changed  his  mind,  that  he  wished  to  get  rid  of  the 
whole  concern — that  he  should  be  really  obliged  to  Churchill 
if  he  would  take  his  engagement  off  his  hands.  The  only 
reason  he  gave  was,  that  the  establishment  would  altogether 
be  more  than  he  could  afford,  he  found  he  had  other  calls  for 
money,  which  were  incompatible  with  his  fancy,  and  therefore 
he  would  give  it  up, 

174 


HELEN 

Churchill  obliged  him  most  willingly  by  taking  the  whole 
upon  himself,  and  he  managed  so  to  do  in  a  very  ingenious 
way,  without  incurring  any  preposterous  expense.  He  was 
acquainted  with  a  set  of  rich,  fashionable  young  men,  who  had 
taken  a  sporting  lodge  in  a  neighbouring  county,  who  desired 
no  better  than  to  accede  to  the  terms  proposed,  and  to  dis- 
tinguish themselves  by  giving  a  flte  out  of  the  common  line, 
while  Churchill,  who  understood,  like  a  true  man  of  the  world, 
the  worldly  art  of  bargaining,  contrived,  with  off-hand  gentle- 
manlike jockeying,  to  have  every  point  settled  to  his  own 
convenience,  and  he  was  to  be  the  giver  of  the  entertainment 
to  the  ladies  at  Clarendon  Park. 

When  this  change  in  affairs  was  announced,  Lady  Cecilia, 
the  General,  Lady  Davenant,  and  Helen,  were  all,  in  various 
degrees,  surprised,  and  each  tried  to  guess  what  could  have 
been  the  cause  of  Beauclerc's  sudden  relinquishment  of  his 
purpose.  He  was — very  extraordinary  for  him — impenetrable  : 
he  adhered  to  the  words  '  I  found  I  could  not  afford  it.'  His 
guardian  could  not  believe  in  this  wonderful  prudence,  and 
was  almost  certain  '  there  must  be  some  imprudence  at  the 
bottom  of  it  all.' 

Granville  neither  admitted  nor  repelled  that  accusation. 
Lady  Cecilia  worked  away  with  perpetual  little  strokes,  hopirig 
to  strike  out  the  truth,  laut,  as  she  said,  you  might  as  well 
have  worked  at  an  old  flint.  Nothing  was  elicited  from  him, 
even  by  Lady  Davenant ;  nor  did  the  collision  of  all  their 
opinions  throw  any  light  upon  the  matter. 

Meanwhile  the  day  for  the  hawking-party  arrived.  Churchill 
gave  the  fHe,  and  Beauclerc,  as  one  of  the  guests,  attended 
and  enjoyed  it  without  the  least  appearance  even  of  disappoint- 
ment ;  and,  so  far  from  envying  Churchill,  he  assisted  in 
remedying  any  little  defects,  and  did  all  he  could  to  make  the 
whole  go  off  well. 

The  party  assembled  on  a  rising  ground ;  a  flag  was  dis- 
played to  give  notice  of  the  intended  sport ;  the  falconers 
appeared,  picturesque  figures  in  their  green  jackets  and  their 
long  gloves,  and  their  caps  plumed  with  herons'  feathers — 
some  with  the  birds  on  their  wrists — one  with  the  frame  over 
his  shoulder  upon  which  to  set  the  hawk.  Set,  did  we  say  ? — 
no  :  '  cast  your  hawk  on  the  perch '  is,  Beauclerc  observed,  the 
correct    term ;    for,    as    Horace    sarcastically   remarked,    Mr. 

175 


HELEN 

Beauclerc  might  be  detected  as  a  novice  in  the  art  by  his  over- 
exactness  ;  his  too  correct,  too  attic,  pronunciation  of  the 
hawking  language.  But  Granville  readily  and  gaily  bore  all 
this  ridicule  and  raillery,  sure  that  it  would  neither  stick  nor 
stain,  enjoying  with  all  his  heart  the  amusement  of  the  scene 
— the  assembled  ladies,  the  attendant  cavaliers  ;  the  hood- 
winked hawks,  the  ringing  of  their  brass  bells  ;  the  falconers 
anxiously  watching  the  clouds  for  the  first  appearance  of  the 
bird  ;  their  skill  in  loosening  the  hoods,  as,  having  but  one 
hand  at  liberty,  they  used  their  teeth  to  untie  the  string. 
And  now  the  hoods  are  off,  and  the  hawks  let  fly. 

They  were  to  fly  many  casts  of  hawks  this  day  :  the  first 
flight  was  after  a  curlew ;  and  the  riding  was  so  hard,  so 
dangerous,  from  the  broken  nature  of  the  ground,  that  the 
ladies  gave  it  up,  and  were  contented  to  view  the  sport  from 
the  eminence  where  they  remained. 

And  now  there  was  a  question  to  be  decided  among  the 
sportsmen  as  to  the  comparative  rate  of  riding  at  a  fox-chase, 
and  in  '  the  short,  but  terrifically  hard  gallop,  with  the  eyes 
raised  to  the  clouds,  which  is  necessary  for  the  full  enjoyment 
of  hawking '  ;  and  then  the  gentlemen,  returning,  gathered 
round  the  ladies,  and  the  settling  the  point,  watches  in  hand, 
and  bets  depending,  added  to  the  interest  of  flight  the  first, 
and  Churchill,  master  of  the  revels,  was  in  the  highest  spirits. 

But  presently  the  sky  was  overcast,  the  morning  lowered, 
the  wind  rose,  and  changed  was  Churchill's  brow  ;  there  is 
no  such  thing  as  hawking  against  the  wind — that  capricious 
wind  ! 

'  Curse  the  wind  ! '  cried  Churchill  ;  '  and  confusion  seize 
the  fellow  who  says  there  is  to  be  no  more  hawking  to-day  ! ' 

The  chief  falconer,  however,  was  a  phlegmatic  German, 
and  proper -behaved,  as  good  falconers  should  be,  who,  as 
'  Old  Tristram's  booke '  has  it,  even  if  a  bird  should  be  lost, 
should  never  swear,  and  only  say,  '  Dieii  soil  loue,'  and 
'  remember  that  the  mother  of  hawks  is  not  dead.' 

But  Horace,  in  the  face  of  reason  and  in  defiance  of  his 
German  counsellors,  insisted  upon  letting  fly  the  hawks  in  this 
high  wind ;  and  it  so  fell  out  that,  in  the  first  place,  all  the 
terms  he  used  in  his  haste  and  spleen  were  wrong ;  and  in  the 
next,  that  the  quarry  taking  down  the  wind,  the  horsemen 
could  not   keep  up  with   the  hawks  ;    the  falconers   in  great 

176 


HELEN 

alarm  called  to  them  by  the  names  they  gave  them — 'Miss 

Didlington,'  'Lord  Berners.'     'Ha!   Miss  Didlington's  ofF; 

off,  with  Blucher,  and  Lady  Kirby,  and  Lord  Berners,  and  all 
of  'em   after  her.'     Miss   Didlington   flew  fast   and   far,   and 

farther  still,  till  she  and  all  the  rest  were  fairly  out  of  sight 

lost,  lost,  lost ! 

'  And  as  fine  a  cast  of  hawks  they  were  as  ever  came  from 
Germany  ! ' — the  falconers  were  in  despair,  and  Churchill  saw 
that  the  fault  was  his  ;  and  it  looked  so  like  cockney  sportsman- 
ship !  If  Horace  had  been  in  a  towering  rage,  it  would  have 
been  well  enough  ;  but  he  only  grew  pettish,  snappish,  waspish  : 
now  none  of  those  words  ending  in  ish  become  a  gentleman  ; 
ladies  always  think  so,  and  Lady  Cecilia  now  thought  so,  and 
Helen  thought  so  too,  and  Churchill  saw  it,  and  he  grew  pale 
instead  of  red,  and  that  looks  ugly  in  an  angry  man. 

But  Beauclerc  excused  him  when  he  was  out  of  hearing ; 
and  when  others  said  he  had  been  cross,  and  crosser  than 
became  the  giver  of  a  gala,  Beauclerc  pleaded  well  for  him, 
that  falconry  has  ever  been  known  to  be  '  an  extreme  stirrer- 
up  of  the  passions,  being  subject  to  mischances  infinite.' 

However,  a  cold  and  hot  collation  under  the  trees  for  some, 
and  under  a  tent  for  others,  set  all  to  rights  for  the  present. 
Champagne  sparkled,  and  Horace  pledged  and  was  pledged, 
and  all  were  gay  ;  even  the  Germans  at  their  own  table,  after 
their  own  fashion,  with  their  Rhenish  and  their  foaming  ale, 
contrived  to  drown  the  recollection  of  the  sad  adventure  of  the 
truant  hawks. 

And  when  all  were  refreshed  and  renewed  in  mind  and 
body,  to  the  hawking  they  went  again.     For  now  that 

The  wind  was  laid,  and  all  their  fears  asleep, 

there  was  to  be  a  battle  between  heron  and  hawk,  one  of  the 
finest  sights  that  can  be  in  all  falconry. 

'  Look  !  look  !  Miss  Stanley,'  cried  Granville  ;  '  look  !  follow 
that  high-flown  hawk — that  black  speck  in  the  clouds.  Now  ! 
now !  right  over  the  heron  ;  and  now  she  will  canceleer — turn 
on  her  wing.  Miss  Stanley,  as  she  comes  down,  whirl  round, 
and  balance  herself — chanceUr.  Now  !  now  look  !  canceleer- 
ing  gloriously ! ' 

But  Helen  at  this  instant  recollected  what  Captain  Warmsley 
had  said  of  the  fresh-killed  pigeon,  which  the  falconer  in  the 
N  177 


HELEN 

nick  of  time  is  to  lay  upon  the  heron's  back ;  and  now,  even 
as  the  canceleering  was  going  on — three  times  most  beauti- 
fully, Helen  saw  only  the  dove,  the  white  dove,  which  that 
black-hearted  German  held,  his  great  hand  round  the  throat, 
just  raised  to  wring  it.  '  Oh,  Beauclerc,  save  it,  save  it ! ' 
cried  Lady  Cecilia  and  Helen  at  once. 

Beauclerc  sprang  forward,  and,  had  it  been  a  tiger  instead 
of  a  dove,  would  have  done  the  same  no  doubt  at  that  moment ; 
the  dove  was  saved,  and  the  heron  killed.  If  Helen  was 
pleased,  so  was  not  the  chief  falconer,  nor  any  of  the  falconers, 
the  whole  German  council  in  combustion  !  and  Horace 
Churchill  deeming  it  '  rather  extraordinary  that  any  gentle- 
man should  so  interfere  with  other  gentlemen's  hawks.' 

Lady  Cecilia  stepped  between,  and  never  stepped  in  vain. 
She  drew  a  ring  from  her  finger — a  seal ;  it  was  the  seal  of 
peace — no  great  value — but  a  well-cut  bird — a.  bird  for  the 
chief  falconer — a  guinea-hen,  with  its  appropriate  cry,  its 
polite  motto,  '  Come  back,  come  back ' ;  and  she  gave  it  as  a 
pledge  that  the  ladies  would  come  back  another  day,  and  see 
another  hawking ;  and  the  gentlemen  were  pleased,  and  the 
aggrieved  attendant  falconers  pacified  by  a  promise  of  another 
heron  from  the  heronry  at  Clarendon  Park ;  and  the  clouded 
faces  brightened,  and  '  she  smoothed  the  raven  down  of  dark- 
ness till  it  smiled,'  whatever  that  may  mean  ;  but,  as  Milton 
said  it,  it  must  be  sense  as  well  as  sound. 

At  all  events,  in  plain  prose,  be  it  understood  that  every- 
body was  satisfied,  even  Mr.  Churchill ;  for  Beauclerc  had 
repaired  for  him,  just  in  time,  an  error  which  would  have  been 
a  blot  on  his  gallantry  of  the  day.  He  had  forgotten  to  have 
some  of  the  pretty  gray  hairs  plucked  from  the  heron,  to  give 
to  the  ladies  to  ornament  their  bonnets,  but  Beauclerc  had 
secured  them  for  him,  and  also  two  or  three  of  those  much- 
valued,  smooth,  black  feathers,  from  the  head  of  the  bird, 
which  are  so  much  prized  that  a  plume  of  them  is  often  set 
with  pearls  and  diamonds.  Horace  presented  these  most 
gracefully  to  Lady  Cecilia  and  Helen,  and  was  charmed  with 
Lady  Cecilia's  parting  compliments,  which  finished  with  the 
words  '  Quite  chivalrous.' 

And  so,  after  all  the  changes  and  chances  of  weather,  wind, 
and  humour,  all  ended  well,  and  no  one  rued  the  hawking  of 
this  day. 

178 


HELEN 


CHAPTER   XVIII 


'  But  all  this  time,'  said  Lady  Davenant,  '  you  have  not  told 
me  whether  you  have,  any  of  you,  found  out  what  changed 
Granville's  mind  about  this  falconry  scheme — why  he  so 
suddenly  gave  up  the  whole  to  Mr.  Churchill.  Such  a  point- 
blank  weathercock  turn  of  fancy  in  most  young  men  would 
no  more  surprise  me  than  the  changes  of  those  clouds  in  the 
sky,  now  shaped  and  now  unshaped  by  the  driving  wind ;  but 
in  Granville  Beauclerc  there  is  always  some  reason  for  apparent 
caprice,  and  the  reason  is  often  so  ingeniously  wrong  that  it 
amuses  me  to  hear  it ;  and  even  as  a  study  in  human  nature, 
I  am  curious  to  know  the  simple  fact.' 

But  no  one  could  tell  the  simple  fact,  no  one  could  guess 
his  reason,  and  from  him  it  never  would  have  been  known — 
never  could  have  been  found  out,  but  from  a  mistake — from  a 
letter  of  thanks  coming  to  a  wrong  person. 

One  morning,  when  Helen  was  sitting  in  Lady  Davenant's 
room  with  her,  Lord  Davenant  came  in,  reading  a  letter,  like 
one  walking  in  his  sleep. 

'  What  is  all  this,  my  dear  ?  Can  you  explain  it  to  me  ? 
Some  good  action  of  yours,  I  suppose,  for  which  I  am  to  be 
thanked.' 

Lady  Davenant  looked  at  the  letter.  She  had  nothing 
to  do  with  the  matter,  she  said ;  but,  on  second  thoughts, 
exclaimed,  '  This  is  Granville  Beauclerc's  doing,  I  am  clear  ! ' 

The  letter  was  from  Count  Polianski,  one  of  the  poor 
banished  Poles  ;  now  poor,  but  who  had  been  formerly  master 
of  a  property  estimated  at  about  one  hundred  and  sixty-five 
thousand  available  individuals.  In  attempting  to  increase  the 
happiness  and  secure  the  liberty  of  these  available  individuals, 
the  count  had  lost  everything,  and  had  been  banished  from 
his  country — a  man  of  high  feeling  as  well  as  talents,  and  who 
had  done  all  he  could  for  that  unhappy  country,  torn  to  pieces 
by  demagogues  from  within  and  tyrants  from  without. 

Lady  Davenant  now  recollected  that  Beauclerc  had  learned 
from  her  all  this,  and  had  heard  her  regretting  that  the 
circumstances    in   which   Lord  Davenant  was   placed  at  this 

179 


HELEN 

moment  prevented  the  possibility  of  his  affording  this  poor 
count  assistance  for  numbers  of  his  suffering  fellow-country- 
men who  had  been  banished  along  with  him,  and  who  were 
now  in  London  in  the  utmost  distress.  Lady  Davenant  re- 
membered that  she  had  been  speaking  to  Granville  on  this 
subject  the  very  day  that  he  had  abandoned  his  falconry 
project.  '  Now  I  understand  it  all,'  said  she ;  '  and  it  is 
like  all  I  know  and  all  I  have  hoped  of  him.  These  hundreds 
a-year  which  he  has  settled  on  these  wretched  exiles  are 
rather  better  disposed  of  in  a  noble  national  cause,  than  in 
pampering  one  set  of  birds  that  they  may  fly  at  another  set.' 

'  And  yet  this  is  done,'  said  Lord  Davenant,  '  by  one  of 
the  much-reviled  high-bred  English  gentlemen — among  whom, 
let  the  much-reviling  low-bred  English  democrats  say  what 
they  will,  we  find  every  day  instances  of  subscription  for  public 
purposes  from  private  benevolence,  in  a  spirit  of  princely 
charity  to  be  found  only  in  our  own  dear  England — "  England 
with  all  her  faults."  ' 

'  But  this  was  a  less  ordinary  sort  of  generosity  of  Gran- 
ville's,' said  Lady  Davenant, — '  the  giving  up  a  new  pleasure, 
a  new  whim  with  all  its  gloss  fresh  upon  it,  full  and  bright  in 
his  eye.' 

'  True,'  said  Lord  Davenant ;  '  I  never  saw  a  strong-pulling 
fancy  better  thrown  upon  its  haunches.' 

The  white  dove,  whose  life  Helen  had  saved,  was  brought 
home  by  Beauclerc,  and  was  offered  to  her  and  accepted. 
Whether  she  had  done  a  good  or  a  bad  action,  by  thus  saving 
the  life  of  a  pigeon  at  the  expense  of  a  heron,  may  be  doubted, 
and  will  be  decided  according  to  the  several  tastes  of  ladies 
and  gentlemen  for  herons  or  doves.  As  Lady  Davenant 
remarked,  Helen's  humanity  (or  dove-anity,  as  Churchill  called 
it)  was  of  that  equivocal  sort  which  is  ready  to  destroy  one 
creature  to  save  another  which  may  happen  to  be  a  greater 
favourite. 

Be  this  as  it  may,  the  favourite  had  a  friend  upon  the 
present  occasion,  and  no  less  a  friend  than  General  Clarendon, 
who  presented  it  with  a  marble  basin,  such  as  doves  should 
drink  out  of,  by  right  of  long  prescription. 

The  General  feared,  he  said,  '  that  this  vase  might  be  a 
little  too  deep — dangerously  perhaps ' 

But  Helen  thought  nothing  could  be  altogether  more  perfect 


W^as  offered  to  her  and  accented. 


HELEN 

in  taste  and  in  kindness — approving  Beauclerc's  kindness  too 
— a  remembrance  of  a  day  most  agreeably  spent. 

Churchill,  to  whom  she  looked  as  she  said  the  last  words, 
with  all  becoming  politeness  bowed  and  accepted  the  com- 
pliment, but  with  a  reserve  of  jealousy  on  the  brow ;  and 
as  he  looked  again  at  the  dove,  caressing  and  caressed,  and 
then  at  the  classic  vase,  he  stood  vexed,  and  to  himself  he 
said, — 

'  So  this  is  the  end  of  all  my  pains — hawking  and  all, 
"  quite  chivalrous "  !  Beauclerc  carries  off  the  honours  and 
pleasures  of  the  day,  and  his  present  and  his  dove  are  to  be 
all  in  all.  Yet  still,'  continued  he  to  himself  in  more  con- 
solatory thought — '  she  is  so  open  in  her  very  love  for  the 
bird,  that  it  is  plain  she  has  not  yet  any  love  for  the  man. 
She  would  be  somewhat  more  afraid  to  show  it,  delicate  as  she 
is.  It  is  only  friendship — honest  friendship,  on  her  side ;  and 
if  her  affections  be  not  engaged  somewhere  else — she  may  be 
mine  :  if — if  I  please — if — I  can  bring  myself  fairly  to  propose 
— we  shall  see — I  shall  think  of  it.' 

And  now  he  began  to  think  of  it  seriously.  Miss  Stanley's 
indifference  to  him,  and  the  unusual  difficulty  which  he  found 
in  making  any  impression,  stimulated  him  in  an  extraordinary 
degree.  Helen  now  appeared  to  him  even  more  beautiful 
than  he  had  at  first  thought  her — '  Those  eyes  that  fix  so 
softly,'  thought  he,  '  those  dark  eyelashes — that  blush  coming 
and  going  so  beautifully — and  there  is  a  timid  grace  in  all 
her  motions,  with  that  fine  figure  too — and  that  high-bred  turn 
of  the  neck  ! — altogether  she  is  charming  !  and  she  will  be 
thought  so  ! — she  must  be  mine  ! ' 

She  would  do  credit  to  his  taste  ;  he  thought  she  would, 
when  she  had  a  little  more  usage  du  monde,  do  the  honours  of 
his  house  well ;  and  it  would  be  delightful  to  train  her  !  If 
he  could  but  engage  her  affections,  before  she  had  seen  more 
of  the  world,  she  might  really  love  him  for  his  own  sake — 
and  Churchill  wished  to  be  really  loved,  if  possible,  for  his 
own  sake  ;  but  of  the  reality  of  modern  love  he  justly  doubted, 
especially  for  a  man  of  his  fortune  and  his  age ;  yet,  with 
Helen's  youth  and  innocence  he  began  to  think  he  had  some 
chance  of  disinterested  attachment,  and  he  determined  to  bring 
out  for  her  the  higher  powers  of  his  mind — the  better  parts  of 
his  character. 


HELEN 

One  day  Lady  Davenant  had  been  speaking  of  London 
conversation.      '  So  brilliant,'  said  she,  '  so  short-lived,  as  my 

friend  Lady  Emmeline  K once  said,  "  London  wit  is  like 

gas,  which  lights  at  a  touch,  and  at  a  touch  can  be  ex- 
tinguished "  ; '  and  Lady  Davenant  concluded  with  a  com- 
pliment to  him  who  was  known  to  have  this  '■touch  and  go''  of 
good  conversation  to  perfection. 

Mr.  Churchill  bowed  to  the  compliment,  but  afterwards 
sighed,  and  it  seemed  an  honest  sigh,  from  the  bottom  of  his 
heart.  Only  Lady  Davenant  and  Helen  were  in  the  room, 
and  turning  to  Lady  Davenant  he  said, 

'  If  I  have  it,  I  have  paid  dearly  for  it,  more  than  it  is 
worth,  much  too  dearly,  by  the  sacrifice  of  higher  powers  ;  I 
might  have  been  a  very  different  person  from  what  I  am.' 

Helen's  attention  was  instantly  fixed  ;  but  Lady  Davenant 
suspected  he  was  now  only  talking  for  effect.  He  saw  what 
she  thought — it  was  partly  true,  but  not  quite.  He  felt  what 
he  said  at  the  moment ;  and  besides,  there  is  always  a  sincere 
pleasure  in  speaking  of  oneself  when  one  can  do  it  without 
exposing  oneself  to  ridicule,  and  with  a  chance  of  obtaining 
real  sympathy. 

'  It  was  my  misfortune,'  he  said,  '  to  be  spoiled,  even  in 
childhood,  by  my  mother.' 

As  he  pronounced  the  word  '  mother,'  either  his  own  heart 
or  Helen's  eyes  made  him  pause  with  a  look  of  respectful 
tenderness.  It  was  cruel  of  a  son  to  blame  the  fond  indulgence 
of  a  mother ;  but  the  fact  was,  she  brought  him  too  forward 
early  as  a  clever  child,  fed  him  too  '  much  with  that  sweet 
dangerous  fostering  dew  of  praise.  The  child — the  man — 
must  suffer  for  it  afterwards. 

'  True,  very  true,'  said  Lady  Davenant  ;  '  I  quite  agree 
with  you.' 

'  I  could  do  nothing  without  flattery,'  continued  he,  pursuing 
the  line  of  confession  which  he  saw  had  fixed  Lady  Davenant's 
attention  favourably.  'Unluckily,  I  came  too  early  into 
possession  of  a  large  fortune,  and  into  the  London  world,  and 
I  lapped  the  stream  of  prosperity  as  I  ran,  and  it  was  sweet 
with  flattery,  intoxicating,  and  I  knew  it,  and  yet  could  not 
forbear  it.     Then  in  a  London  life  everything  is  too  stimulating 

over-exciting.     If  there  are  great  advantages    to    men    of 

science  and  literature  in  museums  and    public    libraries,  the 

183 


HELEN 

more  than  Avicenna  advantages  of  having  books  come  at  will, 
and  ministering  spirits  in  waiting  on  all  your  pursuits — there 
is  too  much  of  everything  except  time,  and  too  little  of  that. 
The  treasures  are  within  our  reach,  but  we  cannot  clutch  ;  we 
have,  but  we  cannot  hold.  We  have  neither  leisure  to  be 
good  nor  to  be  great  :  who  can  think  of  living  for  posterity, 
when  he  can  scarcely  live  for  the  day  ?  and  sufficient  for  the 
day  are  never  the  hours  thereof  From  want  of  time,  and 
from  the  immense  quantity  that  nevertheless  must  be  known, 
comes  the  necessity,  the  unavoidable  necessity,  of  being 
superficial.' 

'Why  should  it  be  unavoidable  necessity  ? '  asked  Lady 
Davenant. 

'  Because  should  waits  upon  must,  in  London  always,  if  not 
elsewhere,'  said  Churchill. 

'  A  conversation  answer,'  replied  Lady  Davenant. 

'  Yes,  I  allow  it  ;  it  is  even  so,  just  so,  and  to  such  tricks, 
such  playing  upon  words,  do  the  bad  habits  of  London  con- 
versation lead '  ;  and  Lady  Davenant  wondered  at  the  courage 
of  his  candour,  as  he  went  on  to  speak  of  the  petty  jealousies, 
the  paltry  envy,  the  miserable  selfish  susceptibility  generated 
by  the  daily  competition  of  London  society.  Such  dissensions, 
such  squabbles  —  an  ignoble  but  appropriate  word  —  such 
deplorable,  such  scandalous  squabbles  among  literary,  and  even 
among  scientific  men.  '  And  who,'  continued  he,  '  who  can 
hope  to  escape  in  such  a  tainted  atmosphere — an  atmosphere 
overloaded  with  life,  peopled  with  myriads  of  little  buzzing 
stinging  vanities  ?  It  really  requires  the  strength  of  Hercules, 
mind  and  body,  to  go  through  our  labours,  fashionable, 
political,  bel  esprit,  altogether  too  much  for  mortal.  In  Parlia- 
ment, in  politics,  in  the  tug  of  war,  you  see  how  the  strongest 
minds  fail,  come  to  untimely ' 

'  Do  not  touch  upon  that  subject,'  cried  Lady  Davenant, 
suddenly  agitated.  Then,  commanding  herself,  she  calmly 
added — '  As  you  are  not  now,  I  think,  in  Parliament,  it  cannot 
affect  you.  \Vhat  were  you  saying  ? — your  health  of  mind 
and  body,  I  think  you  said,  you  were  sensible  had  been  hurt 
by ' 

'  These  straining,  incessant  competitions  have  hurt  me. 
My  health  suffered  first,  then  my  temper.  It  was  originally 
good,  now,  as    you    have    seen,    I    am    afraid ' — glancing    at 

184 


HELEN 

Helen,  who  quickly  looked  down,  '  I  am  afraid  I  am 
irritable.' 

There  was  an  awkward  silence.  Helen  thought  it  was 
for  Lady  Davenant  to  speak ;  but  Lady  Davenant  did  not 
contradict  Mr.  Churchill.  Now,  the  not  contradicting  a 
person  who  is  abusing  himself  is  one  of  the  most  heinous 
offences  to  self-love  that  can  be  committed ;  and  it  often  provokes 
false  candour  to  pull  off  the  mask  and  throw  it  in  your  face  ; 
but  either  Mr.  Horace  Churchill's  candour  was  true,  or  it  was 
so  well  guarded  at  the  moment  that  no  such  catastrophe 
occurred. 

'  Worse  than  this  bad  effect  on  my  temper,'  continued  he, 
'  I  feel  that  my  whole  mind  has  been  deteriorated  —  my 
ambition  dwindled  to  the  shortest  span — my  thoughts  con- 
tracted to  the  narrow  view  of  mere  effect ;  what  would  please 
at  the  dinner-table  or  at  the  clubs — what  will  be  thought  of 
me  by  this  literary  coterie,  or  in  that  fashionable  boudoir. 
And  for  this  reputation  de  salon  I  have  sacrificed  all  hope  of 

other  reputation,  all  power  of  obtaining   it,  all  hope  of ' 

(here  he  added  a  few  words,  murmured  down  to  Lady 
Davenant's  embroidery  frame,  yet  still  in  such  a  tone  that 
Helen  could  not  help  thinking  he  meant  she  should  hear) — '  If 

I  had  a  heart  such  as '  he  paused,  and,  as  if  struck  with 

some  agonising  thought,  he  sighed  deeply,  and  then  added — 
'but  I  have  not  a  heart  worth  such  acceptance,  or  I  would 
make  the  offer.' 

Helen  was  not  sure  what  these  words  meant,  but  she  now 
pitied  him,  and  she  admired  his  candour,  which  she  thought 
was  so  far  above  the  petty  sort  of  character  he  had  at  first 
done  himself  the  injustice  to  seem,  and  she  seized  the  first 
opportunity  to  tell  Beauclerc  all  Mr.  Churchill  had  said  to 
Lady  Davenant  and  to  her,  and  of  the  impression  it  had 
made  upon  them  both.  Beauclerc  had  often  discussed  Mr. 
Churchill's  character  with  her,  but  she  was  disappointed  when 
she  saw  that  what  she  told  made  no  agreeable  impression 
on  Beauclerc :  at  first  he  stood  quite  silent,  and  when  she 
asked  what  he  thought,  he  said — '  It's  all  very  fine,  very 
clever.' 

'  But  it  is  all  true,'  said  Helen.  '  And  I  admire  Mr. 
Churchill's  knowing  the  truth  so  well  and  teUing  it  so 
candidly.' 

i8S 


HELEN 

'  Everything  Mr.  Churchill  has  said  may  be  true — and  yet 
I  think  the  truth  is  not  in  him.' 

'  You  are  not  usually  so  suspicious,'  said  Helen.  '  If  you 
had  heard  Mr.  Churchill's  voice  and  emphasis,  and  seen  his 
look  and  manner  at  the  time,  I  think  you  could  not  have 
doubted  him.' 

The  more  eager  she  grew,  the  colder  Mr.  Beauclerc 
became.  '  Look  and  manner,  and  voice  and  emphasis,'  said 
he,  '  make  a  great  impression,  I  know,  on  ladies.' 

'  But  what  is  your  reason,  Mr.  Beauclerc,  for  disbelief.''  I 
have  as  yet  only  heard  that  you  believe  everything  that  Mr. 
Churchill  said  was  true,  and  yet  that  you  do  not  believe  in  his 
truth,'  said  Helen,  in  a  tone  of  raillery. 

And  many  a  time  before  had  Beauclerc  been  the  first  to 
laugh  when  one  of  his  own  paradoxes  stared  him  in  the  face  ; 
but  now  he  was  more  out  of  countenance  than  amused,  and  he 
looked  seriously  about  for  reasons  to  reconcile  his  seeming 
self-contradiction. 

'  In  the  first  place,  all  those  allusions  and  those  metaphorical 
expressions,  which  you  have  so  wonderfully  well  remembered, 
and  which  no  doubt  were  worth  remembering,  all  those  do  not 
give  the  idea  of  a  man  who  is  really  feeling  in  earnest,  and 
speaking  the  plain  truth  about  faults,  for  which,  if  he  felt  at 
all,  he  must  be  too  much  ashamed  to  talk  in  such  a  grand 
style  ;  and  to  talk  of  them  at  all,  except  to  most  intimate 
friends,  seems  so  unnatural,  and  quite  out  of  character  in  a 
man  who  had  expressed  such  horror  of  egotists,  and  who  is  so 
excessively  circumspect  in  general.' 

'  Yes,  but  Mr.  Churchill's  forgetting  all  his  little  habits  of 
circumspection,  and  all  fear  of  ridicule,  is  the  best  proof  of 
his  being  quite  in  earnest — that  all  he  said  was  from  his 
heart.' 

'  I  doubt  whether  he  has  any  heart,'  said  Beauclerc. 

'  Poor  man,  he  said '  Helen  began,  and  then  re- 
collecting the  words,  '  or  I  would  make  the  offer,'  she  stopped 
short,  afraid  of  the  construction  they  might  bear,  and  then, 
ashamed  of  her  fear,  she  coloured  deeply. 

'  Poor   man,    he   said '  repeated   Beauclerc,    fixing    his 

eyes  upon  her  ;   '  what  did  he  say,  may  I  ask  ? ' 

'  No, — '  said  Helen  ;  '  I  am  not  sure  that  I  distinctly  heard 
or  understood  Mr.  Churchill.' 

i86 


HELEN 

'  Oh,  if  there  was  any  mystery '. '  Beauclerc  begged 
pardon. 

And  he  went  away  very  quickly.  He  did  not  touch  upon 
the  subject  again,  but  Helen  saw  that  he  never  forgot  it ;  and, 
by  few  words  which  she  heard  him  say  to  Lady  Davenant 
about  his  dislike  to  half-  confidences,  she  knew  he  was 
displeased,  and  she  thought  he  was  wrong.  She  began  to 
fear  that  his  mistrust  of  Churchill  arose  from  envy  at  his 
superior  success  in  society  ;  and,  though  she  was  anxious  to 
preserve  her  newly -acquired  good  opinion  of  Churchill's 
candour,  she  did  not  like  to  lose  her  esteem  for  Beauclerc's 
generosity.  Was  it  possible  that  he  could  be  seriously  hurt 
at  the  readiness  with  which  Mr.  Churchill  availed  himself  of 
any  idea  which  Beauclerc  threw  out,  and  which  he  dressed  up, 
and  passed  as  his  own  ?  Perhaps  this  might  be  what  he 
meant  by  '  the  truth  is  not  in  him.'  She  remembered  one  day 
when  she  sat  between  him  and  Beauclerc,  and  when  he  did 
not  seem  to  pay  the  least  attention  to  what  Mr.  Beauclerc  was 
saying  to  her,  yet,  fully  occupied  as  he  had  apparently  been  in 
talking  for  the  company  in  general,  he  had  through  all  heard 
Granville  telling  the  Chinese  fable  of  the  '  Man  in  the  Moon, 
whose  business  it  is  to  knit  together  with  an  invisible  silken 
cord  those  who  are  predestined  for  each  other.'  Presently, 
before  the  dessert  was  over,  Helen  found  the  '  Chinese  Man  in 
the  Moon,'  whom  she  thought  she  had  all  to  herself,  figuring 
at  the  other  end  of  the  table,  and  received  with  great  applause. 
And  was  it  possible  that  Beauclerc,  with  his  abundant  springs 
of  genius,  could  grudge  a  drop  thus  stolen  from  him  ?  but 
without  any  envy  in  the  case,  he  was  right  in  considering  such 
theft,  however  petty,  as  a  theft,  and  right  in  despising  the 
meanness  of  the  thief.  Such  meanness  was  strangely  incom- 
patible with  Mr.  Churchill's  frank  confession  of  his  own  faults. 
Could  that  confession  be  only  for  effect  ? 

Her  admiration  had  been  sometimes  excited  by  a  particular 
happiness  of  thought,  beauty  of  expression,  or  melody  of  lan- 
guage, in  Mr.  Churchill's  conversation.  Once  Beauclerc  had 
been  speaking  with  enthusiasm  of  modern  Greece,  and  his 
hopes  that  she  might  recover  her  ancient  character ;  and  Mr. 
Churchill,  as  if  admiring  the  enthusiasm,  yet  tempering  it  with 
better  judgment,  smiled,  paused,  and  answered, 

'  But  Greece  is  a  dangerous  field  for  a  political  speculator ; 
187 


HELEN 

the  imagination  produces  an  illusion  resembling  the  beautiful 
appearances  which  are  sometimes  exhibited  in  the  Sicilian 
straits  ;  the  reflected  images  of  ancient  Grecian  glory  pass  in 
a  rapid  succession  before  the  mental  eye ;  and,  delighted  with 
the  captivating  forms  of  greatness  and  splendour,  we  forget  for 
a  moment  that  the  scene  is  in  reality  a  naked  waste.' 

Some  people  say  they  can  distinguish  between  a  written  and 
a  spoken  style,  but  this  depends  a  good  deal  on  the  art  of  the 
speaker.  Churchill  could  give  a  colloquial  tone  to  a  ready- 
written  sentence,  and  could  speak  it  with  an  off-hand  grace, 
a  carelessness  which  defied  all  suspicion  of  preparation  ;  and 
the  look,  and  pause,  and  precipitation — each  and  all  came  in 
aid  of  the  actor's  power  of  perfecting  the  illusion.  If  you  had 
heard  and  seen  him,  you  would  have  believed  that,  in  speaking 
this  passage,  the  thought  of  the  Fata  Morgana  rose  in  his 
mind  at  the  instant,  and  that,  seeing  it  pleased  you,  and  pleased 
with  it  himself,  encouraged  by  your  look  of  intelligence,  and 
borne  along  by  your  sympathy,  the  eloquent  man  followed  his 
own  idea  with  a  happiness  more  than  care,  admirable  in  con- 
versation. A  few  days  afterwards,  Helen  was  very  much 
surprised  to  find  her  admired  sentence  word  for  word  in  a 
book,  from  which  Churchill's  card  fell  as  she  opened  it. 

Persons  without  a  name  Horace  treated  as  barbarians  who 
did  not  know  the  value  of  their  gold  ;  and  he  seemed  to  think 
that,  if  they  chanced  to  possess  rings  and  jewels,  they  might  be 
plucked  from  them  without  remorse,  and  converted  to  better 
use  by  some  lucky  civilised  adventurer.  Yet  in  his  most  suc- 
cessful piracies  he  was  always  haunted  by  the  fear  of  discovery, 
and  he  especially  dreaded  the  acute  perception  of  Lady  Dave- 
nant ;  he  thought  she  suspected  his  arts  of  appropriation,  and 
he  took  the  first  convenient  opportunity  of  sounding  her  opinion 
on  this  point. 

'How  I  enjoy,'  said  he  to  Lady  Cecilia,  'telling  a  good 
story  to  you,  for  you  never  ask  if  it  is  a  fact.  Now,  in  a  good 
story,  no  one  sticks  to  absolute  fact ;  there  must  be  some  little 
embellishment.  No  one  would  send  his  own  or  his  friend's 
story  into  the  world  without  "  putting  a  hat  on  its  head,  and 
a  stick  into  its  hand," '  Churchill  triumphantly  quoted ;  this 
time  he  did  not  steal. 

'  But,'  said  Lady  Davenant,  '  I  find  that  even  the  pleasure  I 
have  in  mere  characteristic  or  humorous  narration  is  heightened 


HELEN 

by  my  dependence  on  the  truth — the  character  for  truth — of 
the  narrator.' 

Not  only  Horace  Churchill,  but  almost  everybody  present, 
except  Helen,  confessed  that  they  could  not  agree  with  her. 
The  character  for  truth  of  the  story-teller  had  nothing  to  do 
with  his  story,  unless  it  was  historique,  or  that  he  was  to  swear 
to  it. 

'  And  even  if  it  were  historique^  cried  Horace,  buoyed  up 
at  the  moment  by  the  tide  in  his  favour,  and  floating  out  far- 
ther than  was  prudent — '  and  even  if  it  were  historique,  how 
much  pleasanter  is  graceful  fiction  than  grim,  rigid  truth  ;  and 
how  much  more  amusing  in  my  humble  opinion  ! ' 

'  Now,'  said  Lady  Davenant,  '  for  instance,  this  book  I  am 
reading ' — (it  was  Dumont's  Mimoires  de  Mirabeau) — '  this 
book  which  I  am  reading  gives  me  infinitely  increased  pleasure, 
from  my  certain  knowledge,  my  perfect  conviction,  of  the  truth 
of  the  author.  The  self-evident  nature  of  some  of  the  facts 
would  support  themselves,  you  may  say,  in  some  instances  ; 
but  my  perceiving  the  scrupulous  care  he  takes  to  say  no 
more  than  what  he  knows  to  be  true,  my  perfect  reliance 
on  the  relater's  private  character  for  integrity,  gives  a  zest  to 
every  anecdote  he  tells — a  specific  weight  to  every  word  of 
conversation  which  he  repeats — appropriate  value  to  every 
trait  of  wit  or  humour  characteristic  of  the  person  he  de- 
scribes. Without  such  belief,  the  characters  would  not  have 
to  me,  as  they  now  have,  all  the  power,  and  charm,  and  life, 
of  nature  and  reality.  They  are  all  now  valuable  as  records 
of  individual  varieties  that  have  positively  so  existed.  While 
the  most  brilliant  writer  could,  by  fiction,  have  produced  an 
effect,  valuable  only  as  representing  the  general  average  of 
human  nature,  but  adding  nothing  to  our  positive  knowledge, 
to  the  data  from  which  we  can  reason  in  future.' 

Churchill  understood  Lady  Davenant  too  well  to  stand  quite 
unembarrassed  as  he  listened ;  and  when  she  went  on  to  say 
how  differently  she  should  have  felt  in  reading  these  memoirs 
if  they  had  been  written  by  Mirabeau  himself;  with  all  hi? 
brilliancy,  all  his  talents,  how  inferior  would  have  been  her 
enjoyment  as  well  as  instruction ;  his  shrinking  conscience 
told  him  how  this  might  all  be  applied  to  himself;  yet,  strange 
to  say,  though  somewhat  abashed,  he  was  nevertheless  flattered 
by  the  idea  of  a  parallel  between  himself  and  Mirabeau.     To 

189 


HELEN 

Mirabeauder  was  no  easy  task  ;  it  was  a  certain  road  to  noto- 
riety, if  not  to  honest  fame. 

But  even  in  the  better  parts  of  his  character,  his  liberality 
in  money  matters,  his  good-natured  patronage  of  rising  genius, 
the  meanness  of  his  mind  broke  out.  There  was  a  certain 
young  poetess  whom  he  had  encouraged ;  she  happened  to  be 
sister  to  Mr.  Mapletofft,  Lord  Davenant's  secretary,  and  she 
had  spoken  with  enthusiastic  gratitude  of  Mr.  Churchill's  kind- 
ness. She  was  going  to  publish  a  volume  of  Sonnets  under 
Mr.  Churchill's  patronage,  and,  as  she  happened  to  be  now  at 
some  country  town  in  the  neighbourhood,  he  requested  Lady 
Cecilia  to  allow  him  to  introduce  this  young  authoress  to  her. 
She  was  invited  for  a  few  days  to  Clarendon  Park,  and  Mr. 
Churchill  was  zealous  to  procure  subscriptions  for  her,  and 
eager  to  lend  the  aid  of  his  fashion  and  his  literary  reputation 
to  bring  forward  the  merits  of  her  book.  '  Indeed,'  he  whispered, 
'  he  had  given  her  some  little  help  in  the  composition,'  and  all 
went  well  till,  in  an  evil  hour,  Helen  praised  one  of  the  sonnets 
rather  too  much — more,  he  thought,  than  she  had  praised 
another,  which  was  his  own.  His  jealousy  wakened — he  began 
to  criticise  his  protegee's  poetry.  Helen  defended  her  admira- 
tion, and  reminded  him  that  he  had  himself  recommended 
these  lines  to  her  notice. 

'  Well  ! — yes — I  did  say  the  best  I  could  for  the  whole 
thing,  and  for  her  it  is  surprising — that  is,  I  am  anxious  the 
publication  should  take.  But  if  we  come  to  compare — you  know 
this  cannot  stand  certain  comparisons  that  might  be  made. 
Miss  Stanley's  own  taste  and  judgment  must  perceive — when 
we  talk  of  genius — that  is  quite  out  of  the  question,  you  know.' 

Horace  was  so  perplexed  between  his  philanthropy  and  his 
jealousy,  his  desire  to  show  the  one  and  his  incapability  of  con- 
cealing the  other,  that  he  became  unintelligible  ;  and  Helen 
laughed,  and  told  him  that  she  could  not  now  understand  what 
his  opinion  really  was.  She  was  quite  ready  to  agree  with 
him,  she  said,  if  he  would  but  agree  with  himself  j  this  made 
him  disagree  still  more  with  himself  and  unluckily  with  his 
better  self,  his  benevolence  quite  gave  way  before  his  jealousy 
and  ill-humour,  and  he  vented  it  upon  the  book ;  and,  instead 
of  prophecies  of  its  success,  he  now  groaned  over  '  sad  careless 
lines,' — 'passages  that  lead  to  nothing,' — 'similes  that  will  not 
hold  when  you  come  to  examine  them.' 

igo 


HELEN 

Helen  pointed  out  in  the  dedication  a  pretty,  a  happy 
thought. 

Horace  smiled,  and  confessed  that  was  his  own. 

What !  in  the  dedication  to  himself  ? and  in  the  blind- 
ness of  his  vanity  he  did  not  immediately  see  the  absurdity. 

The  more  he  felt  himself  in  the  wrong,  of  course  the  more 
angry  he  grew,  and  it  finished  by  his  renouncing  the  dedication 
altogether,  declaring  he  would  have  none  of  it.  The  book  and 
the  lady  might  find  a  better  patron. 

There  are  things  which  no  man  of  real  generosity  could  say 
or  do,  or  think,  put  him  in  ever  so  great  a  passion.  He  would 
not  be  harsh  to  an  inferior — a  woman — a  proiegie  on  whom 
he  had  conferred  obligations  ;  but  Mr.  Churchill  was  harsh — 
he  showed  neither  generosity  nor  feeling  ;  and  Helen's  good 
opinion  of  him  sank  to  rise  no  more. 

Of  this,  however,  he  had  not  enough  of  the  sympathy  or 
penetration  of  feeling  to  be  aware. 


CHAPTER    XIX 

The  party  now  at  Clarendon  Park  consisted  chiefly  of  young 
people.  Among  them  were  two  cousins  of  Lady  Cecilia's, 
whom  Helen  had  known  at  Cecilhurst  before  they  went  abroad, 
while  she  was  still  almost  a  child.  Lady  Katrine  Hawksby, 
the  elder,  was  several  years  older  than  Cecilia.  When  Helen 
last  saw  her,  she  was  tolerably  well-looking,  very  fashionable, 
and  remarkable  for  high  spirits,  with  a  love  for  quizzing,  and 
for  all  that  is  vulgarly  called  fun,  and  a  talent  for  ridicule,  which 
she  indulged  at  everybody's  expense.  She  had  always  amused 
Cecilia,  who  thought  her  more  diverting  than  really  ill-natured  ; 
but  Helen  thought  her  more  ill-natured  than  diverting,  never 
liked  her,  and  had  her  own  private  reasons  for  thinking  that 
she  was  no  good  friend  to  Cecilia  :  but  now,  in  consequence 
either  of  the  wear  and  tear  of  London  life,  or  of  a  disappoint- 
ment in  love  or  matrimony,  she  had  lost  the  fresh  plumpness 
of  youth  ;  and  gone  too  was  that  spirit  of  mirth,  if  not  of  good 
humour,  which  used  to  enliven  her  countenance.  Thin  and 
sallow,  the  sharp  features  remained,  and  the  sarcastic  without 

191 


HELEN 

the  arch  expression  ;  still  she  had  a  very  fashionable  air.  Her 
pretensions  to  youth,  as  her  dress  showed,  were  not  gone  ;  and 
her  hope  of  matrimony,  though  declining,  not  set.  Her  many- 
years-younger  sister,  Louisa,  now  Lady  Castlefort,  was  beau- 
tiful. As  a  girl,  she  had  been  the  most  sentimental,  refined, 
delicate  creature  conceivable  ;  always  talking  poetry — and  so 
romantic — with  such  a  soft,  sweet,  die-away  voice — lips  apart 
— and  such  fine  eyes,  that  could  so  ecstatically  turn  up  to 
heaven,  or  be  so  cast  down,  charmingly  fixed  in  contemplation  : 
— and  now  she  is  married,  just  the  same.  There  she  is, 
established  in  the  library  at  Clarendon  Park,  with  the  most 
sentimental  fashionable  novel  of  the  day,  beautifully  bound,  on 
the  little  rosewood  table  beside  her,  and  a  manuscript  poem, 
a  great  secret,  '  Love's  Last  Sigh,'  in  her  bag  with  her  smell- 
ing-bottle and  embroidered  handkerchief ;  and  on  that  beautiful 
arm  she  leaned  so  gracefully,  with  her  soft  languishing  ex- 
pression ;  so  perfectly  dressed  too — handsomer  than  ever. 

Helen  was  curious  to  know  what  sort  of  man  Lady  Louisa 
had  married,  for  she  recollected  that  no  hero  of  any  novel  that 
ever  was  read,  or  talked  of,  came  up  to  her  idea  of  what  a  hero 
ought  to  be,  of  what  a  man  must  be,  whom  she  could  ever 
think  of  loving.  Cecilia  told  Helen  that  she  had  seen  Lord 
Castlefort,  but  that  he  was  not  Lord  Castlefort,  or  likely  to  be 
Lord  Castlefort,  at  that  time  ;  and  she  bade  her  guess,  among 
all  she  could  recollect  having  ever  seen  at  Cecilhurst,  who  the 
man  of  Louisa's  choice  could  be.  Lady  Katrine,  with  infinite 
forbearance,  smiled,  and  gave  no  hint,  while  Helen  guessed 
and  guessed  in  vain.  She  was  astonished  when  she  saw  him 
come  into  the  room.  He  was  a  little  deformed  man,  for  whom 
Lady  Louisa  had  always  expressed  to  her  companions  a 
peculiar  abhorrence.  He  had  that  look  of  conceit  which 
unfortunately  sometimes  accompanies  personal  deformity,  and 
which  disgusts  even  Pity's  self.  Lord  Castlefort  was  said  to 
have  declared  himself  made  for  love  and  fighting !  Helen 
remembered  that  kind-hearted  Cecilia  had  often  remonstrated 
for  humanity's  sake,  and  stopped  the  quizzing  which  used  to  go 
on  in  their  private  coteries,  when  the  satirical  elder  sister  would 
have  it  that  le  petit  bossu  was  in  love  with  Louisa. 

But  what  could  make  her  marry  him  ?  Was  there  anything 
within  to  make  amends  for  the  exterior  ?  Nothing — nothing 
that  could  '  rid  him  of  the  lump  behind.'      But  superior  to  the 

192 


HELEN 

metamorphoses  of  love,  or  of  fairy  tale,  are  the  metamorphoses 
of  fortune.  Fortune  had  suddenly  advanced  him  to  uncounted 
thousands  and  a  title,  and  no  longer  le  petit  bossu.  Lord  Castle- 
fort  obtained  the  fair  hand,  the  very  fair  hand,  of  Lady  Louisa 
Hawksby,  plus  belle  que  fee  ! 

Still  Helen  could  not  believe  that  Louisa  had  married  him 
voluntarily  ;  but  Lady  Ceciha  assured  her  that  it  was  voluntarily, 
quite  voluntarily.  '  You  could  not  have  so  doubted  had  you 
seen  the  trousseau  and  the  corbeille,  for  you  know,  '■'■  Le  present 
fait  oublier  le  futur."  ' 

Helen  could  scarcely  smile. 

'  But  Louisa  had  feeling — really  some,'  continued  Lady 
Cecilia  ;  '  but  she  could  not  afford  to  follow  it.  She  had  got 
into  such  debt,  I  really  do  not  know  what  she  would  have  done 
if  Lord  Castlefort  had  not  proposed ;  but  she  has  some  little 
heart,  and  I  could  tell  you  a  secret ;  but  no,  I  will  leave  you 
the  pleasure  of  finding  it  out.' 

'  It  will  be  no  pleasure  to  me,'  said  Helen. 

'  I  never  saw  anybody  so  out  of  spirits,'  cried  Lady  Cecilia, 
laughing,  '  at  another's  unfortunate  marriage,  which  all  the  time 
she  thinks  very  fortunate.  She  is  quite  happy,  and  even 
Katrine  does  not  laugh  at  him  any  longer,  it  is  to  be  supposed  ; 
it  is  no  laughing  matter  now.' 

'  No  indeed,'  said  Helen. 

'  Nor  a  crying  matter  either,'  said  Cecilia.  '  Do  not  look 
shocked  at  me,  my  dear,  1  did  not  do  it ;  but  so  many  do,  and 
I  have  seen  it  so  often,  that  I  cannot  wonder  with  such  a  fool- 
ish face  of  blame — I  do  believe,  my  dear  Helen,  that  you  are 
envious  because  Louisa  is  married  before  you !  for  shame,  my 
love  !  Envy  is  a  naughty  passion,  you  know  our  Madame 
Bonne  used  to  say  ;  but  here's  mamma,  now  talk  to  her  about 
Louisa  Castlefort,  pray.' 

Lady  Davenant  took  the  matter  with  great  coolness,  was 
neither  shocked  nor  surprised  at  this  match,  she  had  known  so 
many  worse ;  Lord  Castlefort,  as  well  as  she  recollected,  was 
easy  enough  to  live  with.  'And  after  all,'  said  she,  'it  is 
better  than  what  we  see  every  day,  the  fairest  of  the  fair  know- 
ingly, willingly,  giving  themselves  to  the  most  profligate  of  the 
profligate.  In  short,  the  market  is  so  overstocked  with  accom- 
plished young  ladies  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  men 
find  wives  and  establishments  so  expensive,  clubs  so  cheap  and 

0  193 


HELEN 

so  much  more  luxurious  than  any  home,  hberty  not  only  so 
sweet  but  so  fashionable,  that  their  policy,  their  maxim,  is, 
'  Marry  not  at  all,  or  if  marriage  be  ultimately  necessary  to 
pay  debts  and  leave  heirs  to  good  names,  marry  as  late  as 
possible '  ;  and  thus  the  two  parties  with  their  opposite  in- 
terests stand  at  bay,  or  try  to  outwit  or  outbargain  each  other. 
And  if  you  wish  for  the  moral  of  the  whole  affair,  here  it  is  : 
from  the  vulgar  nursery-maids,  with  their  broad  sense  and  bad 
English,  and  the  good  or  bad  French  of  the  governess,  to  the 
elegant  innuendo  of  the  drawing-room,  all  is  working  to  the 
same  effect ;  dancing-masters,  music-masters,  and  all  the  tribe, 
what  is  it  all  for,  but  to  prepare  young  ladies  for  the  grand 
event ;  and  to  raise  in  them,  besides  the  natural,  a  factitious, 
an  abstract  idea  of  good  in  being  married  ?  Every  girl  in  these 
days  is  early  impressed  with  the  idea  that  she  must  be  married, 
that  she  cannot  be  happy  unmarried.  Here  is  an  example  of 
what  1  meant  the  other  day  by  strength  of  mind  ;  it  requires 
some  strength  of  mind  to  be  superior  to  such  a  foolish,  vain, 
and  vulgar  belief.' 

'It  will  require  no  great  strength  of  mind  in  me,' said 
Helen,  '  for  I  really  never  have  formed  such  notions.  They 
never  were  early  put  into  my  head  ;  my  uncle  always  said  a 
woman  might  be  very  happy  unmarried.  1  do  not  think  1  shall 
ever  be  seized  with  a  terror  of  dying  an  old  maid.' 

'You  are  not  come  to  the  time  yet,  my  dear,'  said  Lady 
Davenant,  smiling.  '  Look  at  Lady  Katrine  ;  strength  of  mind 
on  this  one  subject  would  have  saved  her  from  being  a  prey  to 
envy,  and  jealousy,  and  all  the  vulture  passions  of  the  mind. 

'  In  the  old  French  regime,'  continued  Lady  Davenant,  'the 
young  women  were  at  least  married  safely  out  of  their  con- 
vents ;  but  our  young  ladies,  with  their  heads  full  of  high-flown 
poetry  and  sentimental  novels,  are  taken  out  into  the  world 
before  marriage,  expected  to  see  and  not  to  choose,  shown  the 
most  agreeable,  and  expected,  doomed,  to  marry  the  most 
odious.  But,  in  all  these  marriages  for  establishment,  the 
wives  who  have  least  feeling  are  not  only  likely  to  be  the 
happiest,  but  also  most  likely  to  conduct  themselves  well.  In 
the  first  place,  they  do  not  begin  with  falsehood.  If  they  have 
no  hearts,  they  cannot  pretend  to  give  any  to  the  husband,  and 
that  is  better  than  having  given  them  to  somebody  else.  Husband 
and  wife,  in  this  case,  clearly  understand  the  terms  of  agree- 

194 


HELEN 

ment,  expect,  imagine  no  more  than  they  have,  and  jog-trot 
they  go  on  together  to  the  end  of  life  very  comfortably.' 

'Comfortably!'  exclaimed  Helen,  'it  must  be  most  miserable.' 

'Not  most  miserable,  Helen,'  said  Lady  Davenant ;  'keep 
your  pity  for  others  ;  keep  your  sighs  for  those  who  need  them 
— for  the  heart  which  no  longer  dares  to  utter  a  sigh  for  itself, 
the  faint  heart  that  dares  to  love,  but  dares  not  abide  by  its 
choice.  Such  infatuated  creatures,  with  the  roots  of  feeling 
left  aching  within  them,  must  take  what  opiates  they  can  find ; 
and  in  after-life,  through  all  their  married  existence,  their 
prayer  must  be  for  indifference,  and  thankful  may  they  be  if  that 
prayer  is  granted.' 

These  words  recurred  to  Helen  that  evening,  when  Lady 
Castlefort  sang  some  tender  and  passionate  airs  ;  played  on 
the  harp  with  a  true  Saint  Cecilia  air  and  attitude  ;  and  at 
last,  with  charming  voice  and  touching  expression,  sang  her 
favourite — '  Too  late  for  redress.' 

Both  Mr.  Churchill  and  Beauclerc  were  among  the  group 
of  gentlemen  ;  neither  was  a  stranger  to  her.  Mr.  Churchill 
admired  and  applauded  as  a  connoisseur.  Beauclerc  listened 
in  silence.  Mr.  Churchill  entreated  for  more — more — and 
named  several  of  his  favourite  Italian  airs.  Her  ladyship 
really  could  not.  But  the  slightest  indication  of  a  wish  from 
Beauclerc  was,  without  turning  towards  him,  heard  and 
attended  to,  as  her  sister  failed  not  to  remark  and  to  make 
others  remark. 

Seizing  a  convenient  pause  while  Mr.  Churchill  was  search- 
ing for  some  masterpiece.  Lady  Katrine  congratulated  her 
sister  on  having  recovered  her  voice,  and  declared  that  she  had 
never  heard  her  play  or  sing  since  she  was  married  till 
to-night. 

'You  may  consider  it  as  a  very  particular  compliment,  I 
assure  you,'  continued  she,  addressing  herself  so  particularly 
to  Mr.  Beauclerc  that  he  could  not  help  being  a  little  out  of 
countenance, — '  I  have  so  begged  and  prayed,  but  she  was 
never  in  voice  or  humour,  or  heart,  or  something.  Yesterday, 
even  Castlefort  was  almost  on  his  knees  for  a  song, — were 
not  you.  Lord  Castlefort  ? ' 

Lord  Castlefort  pinched  his  pointed  chin,  and  casting  up 
an  angry  look,  replied  in  a  dissonant  voice, — '  I  do  not 
remember ! ' 

195 


HELEN 

'  Tout  voir,  tout  e^itendre,  tout  oublier^  whispered  Lady 
Katrine  to  Mr.  Churchill,  as  she  stooped  to  assist  him  in  the 
search  for  a  music-book — '  Tout  voir,  tout  entendre,  tout 
oublier,  should  be  the  motto  adopted  by  all  married  people.' 

Lady  Castlefort  seemed  distressed,  and  turned  over  the 
leaves  in  such  a  flutter  that  she  could  not  find  anything,  and 
she  rose,  in  spite  of  all  entreaties,  leaving  the  place  to  her 
sister,  who  was,  she  said,  '  so  much  better  a  musician  and  not 
so  foolishly  nervous.'  Lady  Castlefort  said  her  '  voice  always 
went  away  when  she  was  at  all ' 

There  it  ended  as  far  as  words  went ;  but  she  sighed,  and 
retired  so  gracefully  that  all  the  gentlemen  pitied  her. 

There  is  one  moment  in  which  ill-nature  sincerely  repents 
— the  moment  when  it  sees  pity  felt  for  its  victim. 

Horace  followed  Lady  Castlefort  to  the  ottoman,  on  which 
she  sank.  Beauclerc  remained  leaning  on  the  back  of  Lady 
Katrine's  chair,  but  without  seeming  to  hear  what  she  said 
or  sang.  After  some  time  Mr.  Churchill,  not  finding  his 
attentions  well  received,  or  weary  of  paying  them,  quitted 
Lady  Castlefort,  but  sat  down  by  Helen  ;  and  in  a  voice  to  be 
heard  by  her,  but  by  no  one  else,  he  said — 

'What  a  relief!  —  I  thought  I  should  never  get  away!' 
Then,  favoured  by  a  loud  bravura  of  Lady  Katrine's,  he  went 
on — '  That  beauty,  between  you  and  me,  is  something  of  a 
bore — she — I  don't  mean  the  lady  who  is  now  screaming — 
she  should  always  sing.  Heaven  blessed  her  with  song,  not 
sense — but  here  one  is  made  so  fastidious  ! ' 

He  sighed,  and  for  some  moments  seemed  to  be  given  up 
to  the  duet  which  Lady  Katrine  and  an  officer  were  performing ; 
and  then  exclaimed,  but  so  that  Helen  only  could  hear, — 
'  Merciful  Heaven  !  how  often  one  wishes  one  had  no  ears  : 
that  Captain  Jones  must  be  the  son  of  Stentor,  and  that 
lady  ! — if  angels  sometimes  saw  themselves  in  a  looking-glass 
when  singing — there  would  be  peace  upon  earth.' 

Helen,  not  liking  to  be  the  secret  receiver  of  his  contraband 
good  things,  was  rising  to  change  her  place,  when,  softly 
detaining  her,  he  said,  '  Do  not  be  afraid,  no  danger — trust 
me,  for  I  have  studied  under  Talma.' 

'  What  can  you  mean  ?  ' 

'  I  mean,'  continued  he,  '  that  Talma  taught  me  the  secret 
of  his  dying  scenes — how  every  syllable  of  his  dying  words 

ig6 


HELEN 

might  be  heard  to  the  farthest  part  of  the  audience  ;  and  I 
—give  me  credit  for  my  ingenuity — know  how,  by  reversing 
the  art,  to  be  perfectly  inaudible  at  ten  paces'  distance,  and 
yet,  I  trust,  perfectly  intelligible,  always,  to  you.' 

Helen  now  rose  decidedly,  and  retreated  to  a  table  at  the 
other  side  of  the  room,  and  turned  over  some  books  that  lay 
there — she  took  up  a  volume  of  the  novel  Lady  Castlefort  had 
been  reading — Love  unquestionable.  She  was  surprised  to 
find  it  instantly,  gently,  but  decidedly  drawn  from  her  hand  : 
she  looked  up — it  was  Beauclerc. 

'  I  beg  your  pardon.  Miss  Stanley,  but ' 

'  Thank  you  !  thank  you  ! '  said  Helen  ;  '  you  need  not  beg 
my  pardon.' 

This  was  the  first  time  Beauclerc  had  spoken  in  his  friendly, 
cordial,  natural  manner,  to  her,  since  their  incomprehensible 
misunderstanding.  She  was  heartily  glad  it  was  over,  and 
that  he  was  come  to  himself  again.  And  now  they  conversed 
very  happily  together  for  some  time ;  though  what  they  said 
might  not  be  particularly  worth  recording.  Lady  Katrine 
was  at  Helen's  elbow  before  she  perceived  her  'looking  for 
her  sac '  ;  and  Lady  Castlefort  came  for  her  third  volume,  and 
gliding  off,  wished  to  all  '  Felice,  felicissima  noite.' 

Neither  of  these  sisters  had  ever  liked  Helen  ;  she  was  too 
true  for  the  one,  and  too  good-natured  for  the  other.  Lady 
Katrine  had  always,  even  when  she  was  quite  a  child,  been 
jealous  of  Lady  Cecilia's  affection  for  Helen  ;  and  now  her 
indignation  and  disappointment  were  great  at  finding  her 
established  at  Clarendon  Park — to  live  with  the  Clarendons,  to 
go  out  with  Lady  Cecilia.  Now,  it  had  been  the  plan  of  both 
sisters  that  Lady  Katrine's  present  visit  should  be  eternal. 
How  they  would  ever  have  managed  to  fasten  her  ladyship 
upon  the  General,  even  if  Helen  had  been  out  of  the  question, 
need  not  now  be  considered.  Their  disappointment  and 
dislike  to  Helen  were  as  great  as  if  she  had  been  the  only 
obstacle  to  the  fulfilment  of  their  scheme. 

These  two  sisters  had  never  agreed — 

-Doom'd  by  Fate 


To  live  in  all  the  elegance  of  hate  ; 

and  since  Lady  Castlefort's  marriage,  the  younger,  the  beautiful, 
being  now  the   successful  lady  of  the  ascendant,   the    elder 

197 


HELEN 

writhed  in  all  the  combined  miseries  of  jealousy  and  depend- 
ence, and  an  everyday  lessening  chance  of  bettering  her 
condition.  Lord  Castlefort,  too,  for  good  reasons  of  his  own, 
well  remembered,  detested  Lady  Katrine,  and  longed  to  shake 
her  off.  In  this  wish,  at  least,  husband  and  wife  united ;  but 
Lady  Castlefort  had  no  decent  excuse  for  her  ardent  im- 
patience to  get  rid  of  her  sister.  She  had  magnificent  houses  in 
town  and  country,  ample  room  everywhere — but  in  her  heart. 
She  had  the  smallest  heart  conceivable,  and  the  coldest ;  but 
had  it  been  ever  so  large,  or  ever  so  warm,  Lady  Katrine  was 
surely  not  the  person  to  get  into  it,  or  into  any  heart,  male 
or  female :  there  was  the  despair.  '  If  Katrine  was  but 
married — Mr.  Churchill,  suppose  ? ' 

Faint  was  the  suppose  in  Lady  Castlefort's  imagination. 
Not  so  the  hope  which  rose  in  Lady  Katrine's  mind  the 
moment  she  saw  him  here.  '  How  fortunate  ! '  Her  ladyship 
had  now  come  to  that  no  particular  age,  when  a  remarkable 
metaphysical  phenomenon  occurs  ;  on  one  particular  subject 
hope  increases  as  all  probability  of  success  decreases.  This 
aberration  of  intellect  is  usually  observed  to  be  greatest  in  very 
clever  women ;  while  Mr.  Churchill,  the  flattered  object  of 
her  present  hope,  knew  how  to  manage  with  great  innocence 
and  modesty,  and  draw  her  on  to  overt  acts  of  what  is  called 
flirtation. 

Rousseau  says  that  a  man  is  always  awkward  and  miserable 
when  placed  between  two  women  to  whom  he  is  making  love. 
But  Rousseau  had  never  seen  Mr.  Churchill,  and  had  but  an 
imperfect  idea  of  the  dexterity,  the  ambiguity,  that  in  our  days 
can  be  successfully  practised  by  an  accomplished  male  coquette. 
Absolutely  to  blind  female  jealousy  may  be  beyond  his  utmost 
skill ;  but  it  is  easy,  as  every  day's  practice  shows,  to  keep 
female  vanity  pleasantly  perplexed  by  ocular  deception — to 
make  her  believe  that  what  she  really  sees  she  does  not  see, 
and  that  what  is  unreal  is  reality  :  to  make  her,  to  the  amuse- 
ment of  the  spectators,  continually  stretch  out  her  hand  to 
snatch  the  visionary  good  that  for  ever  eludes  her  grasp,  or 
changes,  on  near  approach,  to  grinning  mockery. 

This  delightful  game  was  now  commenced  with  Lady 
Katrine,  and  if  Helen  could  be  brought  to  take  a  snatch, 
it  would  infinitely  increase  the  interest  and  amusement  of  the 
lookers-on.        Of  this,   however,   there  seemed  little  chance ; 

198 


HELEN 

but  the  evil  eye  of  envy  was  set  upon  her,  and  the  demon  of 
jealousy  was  longing  to  work  her  woe. 

Lady  Castlefort  saw  with  scornful  astonishment  that  Mr. 
Beauclerc's  eyes,  sometimes  when  she  was  speaking,  or  when 
she  was  singing,  would  stray  to  that  part  of  the  room  where 
Miss  Stanley  might  be  ;  and  when  she  was  speaking  to  him, 
he  was  wonderfully  absent.  Her  ladyship  rallied  him,  while 
Lady  Katrine,  looking  on,  cleared  her  throat  in  her  horrid 
way,  and  longed  for  an  opportunity  to  discomfit  Helen,  which 
supreme  pleasure  her  ladyship  promised  herself  upon  the 
first  convenient  occasion, — convenient  meaning  when  Lady 
Davenant  was  out  of  the  room ;  for  Lady  Katrine,  though 
urged  by  prompting  jealousy,  dared  not  attack  her  when 
under  cover  of  that  protection.  From  long  habit,  even  her 
sarcastic  nature  stood  in  awe  of  a  certain  power  of  moral 
indignation,  which  had  at  times  flashed  upon  her,  and  of 
which  she  had  a  sort  of  superstitious  dread,  as  of  an  in- 
comprehensible, incalculable  power. 

But  temper  will  get  the  better  of  all  prudence.  Piqued  by 
some  little  preference  which  Lady  Cecilia  had  shown  to  Helen's 
taste  in  the  choice  of  the  colour  of  a  dress,  an  occasion  offered 
of  signalising  her  revenge,  which  could  not  be  resisted.  It 
was  a  question  to  be  publicly  decided,  whether  blue,  green,  or 
white  should  be  adopted  for  the  ladies'  uniform  at  an  approach- 
ing fite.  She  was  deputed  to  collect  the  votes.  All  the 
company  were  assembled  ;  Lady  Davenant,  out  of  the  circle, 
as  it  was  a  matter  that  concerned  her  not,  was  talking  to  the 
gentlemen  apart. 

Lady  Katrine  went  round  canvassing.  '  Blue,  green,  or 
white  ?  say  blue,  pray.'  But  when  she  came  to  Helen,  she 
made  a  full  stop,  asked  no  question — preferred  no  prayer,  but 
after  fixing  attention  by  her  pause,  said,  '  I  need  not  ask  Miss 
Stanley's  vote  or  opinion,  as  I  know  my  cousin's,  and  with 
Miss  Stanley  it  is  always  '  I  say  ditto  to  Lady  Cecilia ' ;  there- 
fore, to  save  trouble,  I  always  count  two  for  Ceciha — one  for 
herself  and  one  for  her  double.' 

'  Right,  Lady  Katrine  Hawksby,'  cried  a  voice  from  afar, 
which  made  her  start ;  '  you  are  quite  right  to  consider  Helen 
Stanley  as  my  daughter's  double,  for  my  daughter  loves  and 
esteems  her  as  her  second  self — her  better  self.     In  this  sense 

Helen  is  Lady  Cecilia's  double,  but  if  you  mean ' 

199 


HELEN 

'  Bless  me  !   I  don't  know  what  I  meant,  I  declare.      I  could 

not  have  conceived  that  Lady  Davenant •     Miss  Stanley,  I 

beg  a  thousand  million  of  pardons.' 

Helen,  with  anxious  good-nature,  pardoned  before  she  was 
asked,  and  hastened  to  pass  on  to  the  business  of  the  day,  but 
Lady  Davenant  would  not  so  let  it  pass ;  her  eye  still  fixed, 
she  pursued  the  quailing  enemy — '  One  word  more.  In  jus- 
tice to  my  daughter,  I  must  say  her  love  has  not  been  won  by 
flattery,  as  none  knows  better  than  the  Lady  Katrine  Hawksby.' 

The  unkindest  cut  of  all,  and  on  the  tenderest  part.  Lady 
Katrine  could  not  stand  it.  Conscious  and  trembling,  she 
broke  through  the  circle,  fled  into  the  conservatory,  and, 
closing  the  doors  behind  her,  would  not  be  followed  by  Helen, 
Cecilia,  or  anybody. 

Lady  Castlefort  sighed,  and  first  breaking  the  silence  that 
ensued,  said,  "Tis  such  a  pity  that  Katrine  will  always  so 
let  her  wit  run  away  with  her — it  brings  her  so  continually 

into For  my  part,   in  all  humility  1  must  confess,  I  can't 

help  thinking  that,  what  with  its  being  unfeminine,  and  alto- 
gether so  incompatible  with  what  in  general  is  thought  ami- 
able— I  cannot  but  consider  wit  in  a  woman  as  a  real  misfor- 
tune. What  say  the  gentlemen  ?  they  must  decide,  gentlemen 
being  always  the  best  judges.' 

With  an  appealing  tone  of  interrogation  she  gracefully 
looked  up  to  the  gentlemen  ;  and  after  a  glance  towards 
Granville  Beauclerc,  unluckily  unnoticed  or  unanswered,  her 
eyes  expected  reply  from  Horace  Churchill.  He,  well  feeling 
the  predicament  in  which  he  stood,  between  a  fool  and  a 
fem7ne  d' esprit,  answered,  with  his  ambiguous  smile,  '  that  no 
doubt  it  was  a  great  misfortune  to  have  ^^ plus  d'esprit  qu'on  ne 
suit  inener." ' 

'  This  is  a  misfortune,'  said  Lady  Davenant,  '  that  may  be 
deplored  for  a  great  genius  once  in  an  age,  but  is  really  rather 
of  uncommon  occurrence.  People  complain  of  wit  where,  nine 
times  in  ten,  poor  wit  is  quite  innocent ;  but  such  is  the  con- 
sequence of  having  kept  bad  company.  Wit  and  ill-nature 
having  been  too  often  found  together,  when  we  see  one  we 
expect  the  other  ;  and  such  an  inseparable  false  association  has 
been  formed,  that  half  the  world  take  it  for  granted  that  there 
is  wit  if  they  do  but  see  ill-nature.' 

At  this  moment  Mr.  Mapletofift,  the  secretary,  entered  with 
200 


HELEN 

his  face  full  of  care,  and  his  hands  full  of  papers.  Lady 
Katrine  needed  not  to  feign  or  feel  any  further  apprehensions 
of  Lady  Davenant ;  for,  an  hour  afterwards,  it  was  announced 
that  Lord  and  Lady  Davenant  were  obhged  to  set  off  for  town 
immediately.  In  the  midst  of  her  hurried  preparations  Lady 
Davenant  found  a  moment  to  comfort  Helen  with  the  assur- 
ance that,  whatever  happened,  she  would  see  her  again.  It 
might  end  in  Lord  Davenant's  embassy  being  given  up.  At 
all  events  she  would  see  her  again — she  hoped  in  a  few  weeks, 
perhaps  in  a  few  days.  '  So  no  leave-takings,  my  dear  child, 
and  no    tears — it  is    best    as    it    is.     On    my  return    let   me 

find ' 

'  Lord  Davenant's  waiting,  my  lady,'  and  she  hurried  away. 


CHAPTER  XX 

Absent  or  present,  the  guardian  influence  of  a  superior  friend 
is  one  of  the  greatest  blessings  on  earth,  and  after  Lady 
Davenant's  departure  Helen  was  so  full  of  all  she  had  said  to 
her,  and  of  all  that  she  would  approve  or  disapprove,  that  every 
action,  almost  every  thought,  was  under  the  influence  of  her 
friend's  mind.  Continually  she  questioned  her  motives  as 
well  as  examined  her  actions,  and  she  could  not  but  condemn 
some  of  her  conduct,  or  if  not  her  conduct,  her  manner,  towards 
Horace  Churchill  ;  she  had  been  flattered  by  his  admiration, 
and  had  permitted  his  attentions  more  than  she  ought,  when 
her  own  mind  was  perfectly  made  up  as  to  his  character.  Ever 
since  the  affair  of  the  poetess,  she  had  been  convinced  that 
she  could  never  make  the  happiness  or  redeem  the  character 
of  one  so  mean. 

According  to  the  ladies'  code,  a  woman  is  never  to  under- 
stand that  a  gentleman's  attentions  mean  anything  more  than 
common  civility ;  she  is  supposed  never  to  see  his  mind, 
however  he  may  make  it  visible,  till  he  declares  it  in  words. 
But,  as  Helen  could  not  help  understanding  his  manner,  she 
thought  it  was  but  fair  to  make  him  understand  her  by  her 
manner.  She  was  certain  that  if  he  were  once  completely 
convinced,  not  only  that  he  had  not  made  any  impression,  but 

20I 


HELEN 

that  he  never  could  make  any  impression,  on  her  heart,  his 
pursuit  would  cease.  His  vanity,  mortified,  might  revenge 
itself  upon  her,  perhaps  ;  but  this  was  a  danger  which  she 
thought  she  ought  to  brave  ;  and  now  she  resolved  to  be  quite 
sincere,  as  she  said  to  herself,  at  whatever  hazard  (probably 
meaning  at  the  hazard  of  displeasing  Cecilia)  she  would  make 
her  own  sentiments  clear,  and  put  an  end  to  Mr.  Churchill's 
ambiguous  conduct  :  and  this  should  be  done  on  the  very  first 
opportunity. 

An  opportunity  soon  occurred — Horace  had  a  beautiful  little 
topaz  ring  with  which  Lady  Katrine  Hawksby  fell  into  raptures  ; 
such  a  charming  device  !  —  Cupid  and  Momus  making  the 
world  their  plaything. 

It  was  evident  that  Lady  Katrine  expected  that  the  seal 
should  be  presented  to  her.  Besides  being  extravagantly  fond 
of  baubles,  she  desired  to  have  this  homage  from  Horace.  To 
her  surprise  and  mortification,  however,  he  was  only  quite 
flattered  by  her  approving  of  his  taste  :  —  it  was  his  favourite 
seal,  and  so  '  he  kept  the  topaz,  and  the  rogue  was  bit.' 

Lady  Katrine  was  the  more  mortified  by  this  failure,  because 
it  was  witnessed  by  many  of  the  company,  among  whom,  when 
she  looked  round,  she  detected  smiles  of  provoking  intelligence. 
Soon  afterwards  the  dressing-bell  rang  and  she  quitted  the 
room  ;  one  after  another  every  one  dropped  off,  except  Helen, 
who  was  finishing  a  letter,  and  Horace,  who  stood  on  the  hearth 
playing  with  his  seal.  When  she  came  to  sealing-time,  he 
approached  and  besought  her  to  honour  him  by  the  acceptance 
of  this  little  seal.  '  If  he  could  obliterate  Momus — if  he  could 
leave  only  Cupid,  it  would  be  more  appropriate.  But  it  was  a 
device  invented  for  him  by  a  French  friend,  and  he  hoped  she 
would  pardon  his  folly,  and  think  only  of  his  love  ! ' 

This  was  said  so  that  it  might  pass  either  for  mere  jest  or 
for  earnest  ;  his  look  expressed  very  sentimental  love,  and 
Helen  seized  the  moment  to  explain  herself  decidedly. 

It  was  a  surprise — a  great  surprise — to  Mr.  Churchill,  a 
severe  disappointment,  not  only  to  his  vanity  but  to  his  heart, 
for  he  had  one.  It  was  some  comfort,  however,  that  he  had 
not  quite  committed  himself,  and  he  recovered — even  in  the 
moment  of  disappointment  he  recovered  himself  time  enough 
dexterously  to  turn  the  tables  upon  Helen. 

He  thanked  her  for  her  candour — for  her  great  care  of  his 
202 


It  was  a  surprise— a-  erea-t  surprise— U  Mr.  CImrchill. 


HELEN 

happiness,  in  anticipating  a  danger  which  might  have  been  so 
fatal  to  him  ;  but  he  really  was  not  aware  that  he  had  said 
anything  which  required  so  serious  an  answer. 

Afterwards  he  amused  himself  with  Lady  Katrine  at  Miss 
Stanley's  expense,  representing  himself  as  in  the  most  pitiable 
case  of  Rejected  Addresses — rejected  before  he  had  offered. 
He  had  only  been  guilty  of  Folly,  and  he  was  brought  in 
guilty  of  Love. 

Poor  Helen  had  to  endure  not  only  this  persiflage,  which 
was  soon  made  to  reach  her  ear,  but  also  the  reproaches  of 
Lady  Cecilia,  who  said,  '  I  should  have  warned  you,  Helen, 
not  to  irritate  that  man's  relentless  vanity ;  now  you  see  the 
consequences.' 

'  But,  after  all,  what  harm  can  he  do  me  ? '  thought  Helen. 
'  It  is  very  disagreeable  to  be  laughed  at,  but  still  my  con- 
science is  satisfied,  and  that  is  a  happiness  that  will  last  ;  all 
the  rest  will  soon  be  over.  I  am  sure  I  did  the  thing 
awkwardly,  but  I  am  glad  it  is  done.' 

Mr.  Churchill  soon  afterwards  received  an  invitation  —  a 
command  to  join  a  royal  party  now  at  some  watering-place  ;  an 
illustrious  person  could  not  live  another  day  without  Horace 
le  desire.  He  showed  the  note,  and  acted  despair  at  being 
compelled  to  go,  and  then  he  departed.  To  the  splendid  party 
he  went,  and  drowned  all  recollections  of  whatever  love  he 
had  felt  in  the  fresh  intoxication  of  vanity — a  diurnal  stimulus 
which,  however  degrading,  and  he  did  feel  it  degrading,  was 
now  become  necessaiy  to  his  existence. 

His  departure  from  Clarendon  Park  was  openly  regretted  by 
Lady  Cecilia,  while  Lady  Katrine  secretly  mourned  over  the 
downfall  of  her  projects,  and  Beauclerc  attempted  not  to  dis- 
guise his  satisfaction. 

He  was  all  life  and  love,  and  would  then  certainly  have  de- 
clared his  passion,  but  for  an  extraordinary  change  which  now 
appeared  in  Helen's  manner  towards  him.  It  seemed  unac- 
countable ;  it  could  not  be  absolute  caprice,  she  did  not  even 
treat  him  as  a  friend,  and  she  evidently  avoided  explanation. 
He  thought,  and  thought,  and  came  as  near  the  truth  without 
touching  it  as  possible.  He  concluded  that  she  had  understood 
his  joy  at  Churchill's  departure  ;  that  she  now  clearly  per- 
ceived his  attachment ;  and  was  determined  against  him. 
Not  having  the  slightest  idea  that  she  considered  him  as  a 

204 


HELEN 

married  man,  he  could  not  even  guess  the  nature  of  her 
feelings. 

And  all  the  time  Helen  did  not  well  understand  herself;  she 
began  to  be  extremely  alarmed  at  her  own  feelings — to  dread 
that  there  was  something  not  quite  right.  This  dread,  which 
had  come  and  gone  by  fits, — this  doubt  as  to  her  own  senti- 
ments,— was  first  excited  by  the  death  of  her  dove  —  Beau- 
clerc's  gift.  The  poor  dove  was  found  one  morning  drowned 
in  the  marble  vase  in  which  it  went  to  drink.  Helen  was  very 
sorry  —  that  was  surely  natural ;  but  she  was  wonderfully 
concerned.  Lady  Katrine  scoflSngly  said,  and  before  every- 
body, before  Beauclerc,  worse  than  all,  her  ladyship  repre- 
sented to  the  best  of  her  ability  the  attitude  in  which  she  had 
found  Helen  mourning  over  her  misfortune,  the  dove  in  her 
hand  pressed  close  to  her  bosom — '  And  in  tears — absolutely.' 
She  would  swear  to  the  tears. 

Helen  blushed,  tried  to  laugh,  and  acknowledged  it  was 
very  foolish.  Well,  that  passed  off  as  only  foolish,  and  she 
did  not  at  first  feel  that  it  was  a  thing  much  to  be  ashamed  of 
in  any  other  way.  But  she  was  sorry  that  Beauclerc  was  by 
when  Lady  Katrine  mimicked  her  ;  most  sorry  that  he  should 
think  her  foolish.  But  then  did  he  ?  His  looks  expressed 
tenderness.  He  was  very  tender-hearted.  Really  manly  men 
always  are  so ;  and  so  she  observed  to  Lady  Cecilia.  Lady 
Katrine  heard  the  observation,  and  smiled — her  odious  smile 
— implying  more  than  words  could  say.  Helen  was  not  quite 
clear,  however,  what  it  meant  to  say. 

Some  days  afterwards  Lady  Katrine  took  up  a  book,  in 
which  Helen's  name  was  written  in  Beauclerc's  hand.  '  Gage 
iVamitii  ? '  said  her  ladyship  ;  and  she  walked  up  and  down 
the  room,  humming  the  air  of  an  old  French  song  ;  interrupt- 
ing herself  now  and  then  to  ask  her  sister  if  she  could  recol- 
lect the  words.  '  The  refrain,  if  I  remember  right,  is  some- 
thing like  this — 

Sous  le  nom  d'amitie — sous  le  nom  d'amitie, 
La  moitie  du  monde  trompe  I'autre  moitie, 
Sous  le  nom,  sous  le  nom,  sous  le  nom  d'amitie. 

And  it  ends  with 

Sous  le  nom  d'amitie,  Damon,  je  vous  adore, 
Sous  le  nom,  sous  le  nom  d'amitie. 
205 


HELEN 

Miss  Stanley,  do  you  know  that  song  ? '  concluded  her  ma- 
licious ladyship. 

No  —  Miss  Stanley  had  never  heard  it  before ;  but  the 
marked  emphasis  with  which  Lady  Katrine  sang  and  looked 
made  Helen  clear  that  she  meant  to  apply  the  words  taunt- 
ingly to  her  and  Beauclerc, — but  which  of  them  her  ladyship 
suspected  was  cheating,  or  cheated,  '  sous  le  nam  d'amitie,' 
she  did  not  know.  All  was  confusion  in  her  mind.  After  a 
moment's  cooler  reflection,  however,  she  was  certain  it  could 
not  be  Beauclerc  who  was  to  blame — it  must  be  herself,  and 
she  now  very  much  wished  that  everybody,  and  Lady  Katrine 
in  particular,  should  know  that  Mr.  Beauclerc  was  engaged — 
almost  married  ;  if  this  were  but  known,  it  would  put  an  end 
to  all  such  imputations. 

The  first  time  she  could  speak  to  Cecilia  on  the  subject,  she 
begged  to  know  how  soon  Mr.  Beauclerc's  engagement  would 
be  declared.  Lady  Cecilia  slightly  answered  she  could  not 
tell — and  when  Helen  pressed  the  question  she  asked, — 

'  Why  are  you  so  anxious,  Helen  ? ' 

Helen  honestly  told  her,  and  Lady  Cecilia  only  laughed  at 
her  for  minding  what  Lady  Katrine  said, — '  When  you  know 
yourself,  Helen,  how  it  is,  what  can  it  signify  what  mistakes 
others  may  make  ?  ' 

But  Helen  grew  more  and  more  uneasy,  for  she  was  not 
clear  that  she  did  know  how  it  was,  with  herself  at  least.  Her 
conscience  faltered,  and  she  was  not  sure  whether  she  was 
alarmed  with  or  without  reason.  She  began  to  compare  feelings 
that  she  had  read  of,  and  feelings  that  she  had  seen  in 
others,  and  feelings  that  were  new  to  herself,  and  in  this 
maze  and  mist  nothing  was  distinct — much  was  magnified — 
all  alarming. 

One  day  Beauclerc  was  within  view  of  the  windows  on  horse- 
back, on  a  very  spirited  horse,  which  he  managed  admirably  ; 
but  a  shot  fired  suddenly  in  an  adjoining  preserve  so  startled 

the  horse  that  it oh  1  what  it  did  Helen  did  not  see,  she 

was  so  terrified  :  and  why  was  she  so  much  terrified  ?  She 
excused  herself  by  saying  it  was  natural  to  be  frightened  for 
any  human  creature.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  Tom  Isdall 
was  a  human  creature,  and  she  had  seen  him  last  week  actually 
thrown  from  his  horse,  and  had  not  felt  much  concern.  But 
then  he  was  not  a  friend ;  and  he  fell  into  a  soft  ditch  :  and 

206 


HELEN 

there  was  something  ridiculous  in  it  which  prevented  people 
from  caring  about  it. 

With  such  nice  casuistry  she  went  on  pretty  well ;  and  be- 
sides, she  was  so  innocent,  so  ignorant,  that  it  was  easy  for 
her  to  be  deceived.  She  went  on,  telling  herself  that  she  loved 
Beauclerc  as  a  brother — as  she  loved  the  General.  But  when 
she  came  to  comparisons,  she  could  not  but  perceive  a  differ- 
ence. Her  heart  never  bounded  on  the  General's  appearance, 
let  him  appear  ever  so  suddenly,  as  it  did  one  day  when  Beau- 
clerc returned  unexpectedly  from  Old  Forest.  Her  whole  ex- 
istence seemed  so  altered  by  his  approach,  his  presence,  or  his 
absence.  Why  was  this  ?  Was  there  anything  wrong  in  it  ? 
She  had  nobody  whose  judgment  she  could  consult — nobody 
to  whom  she  could  venture  to  describe  her  feelings,  or  lay  open 
her  doubts  and  scruples.  Lady  Cecilia  would  only  laugh  ;  and 
she  could  not  quite  trust  either  her  judgment  or  her  sincerity, 
though  she  knew  her  affection.  Besides,  after  what  Cecilia  had 
said  of  her  being  safe  ;  after  all  she  had  told  her  of  Beauderc's 
engagement,  how  astonished  and  shocked  Cecilia  would  be  ! 

Then  Helen  resolved  that  she  would  keep  a  strict  watch 
over  herself,  and  repress  all  emotion,  and  be  severe  with  her 
own  mind  to  the  utmost :  and  it  was  upon  this  resolution  that 
she  had  changed  her  manner,  without  knowing  how  much,  to- 
wards Beauclerc  ;  she  was  certain  he  meant  nothing  but  friend- 
ship. It  was  her  fault  if  she  felt  too  much  pleasure  in  his 
company  ;  the  same  things  were,  as  she  wisely  argued,  right 
or  wrong  according  to  the  intention  with  which  they  were  said, 
done,  looked,  or  felt.  Rigidly  she  inflicted  on  herself  the 
penance  of  avoiding  his  delightful  society,  and  to  make  sure 
that  she  did  not  try  to  attract,  she  repelled  him  with  all  her 
power — thought  she  never  could  make  herself  cold,  and  stiff, 
and  disagreeable  enough  to  satisfy  her  conscience. 

Then  she  grew  frightened  at  Beauderc's  looks  of  astonish- 
ment— feared  he  would  ask  explanation — avoided  him  more 
and  more.  Then,  on  the  other  hand,  she  feared  he  might 
guess  and  interpret  wrong,  or  rather  right,  this  change  ;  and 
back  she  changed,  tried  in  vain  to  keep  the  just  medium — she 
had  lost  the  power  of  measuring — altogether  she  was  very  un- 
happy, and  so  was  Beauclerc  ;  he  found  her  incomprehensible, 
and  thought  her  capricious.  His  own  mind  was  fluttered  with 
love,  so  that  he  could  not  see  or  judge  distinctly,  else  he  might 

207 


HELEN 

have  seen  the  truth  ;  and  sometimes,  though  free  from  conceit, 
he  did  hope  it  might  be  all  love.  But  why  then  so  determined 
to  discourage  him  ?  he  had  advanced  sufficiently  to  mark  his 
intentions,  she  could  not  doubt  his  sincerity.  He  would  see 
farther  before  he  ventured  farther.  He  thought  a  man  was  a 
fool  who  proposed  before  he  had  tolerable  reason  to  believe  he 
should  not  be  refused. 

Lord  Beltravers  and  his  sisters  were  now  expected  at  Old 
Forest  immediately,  and  Beauclerc  went  thither  early  every 
morning,  to  press  forward  the  preparations  for  the  arrival  of 
the  family,  and  he  seldom  returned  till  dinner-time  ;  and  every 
evening  Lady  Castlefort  contrived  to  take  possession  of  him. 
It  appeared  to  be  indeed  as  much  against  his  will  as  it  could 
be  between  a  well-bred  man  and  a  high-bred  belle  ;  but  to  do 
her  bidding  seemed,  if  not  a  moral,  at  least  a  polite  necessity. 
She  had  been  spoiled,  she  owned,  by  foreign  attentions,  not 
French,  for  that  is  all  gone  now  at  Paris,  but  Italian  manners, 
which  she  so  much  preferred.  She  did  not  know  how  she 
could  live  out  of  Italy,  and  she  must  convince  Lord  Castlefort 
that  the  climate  was  necessary  for  her  health.  Meanwhile  she 
adopted,  she  acted,  what  she  conceived  to  be  foreign  manners, 
and  with  an  exaggeration  common  with  those  who  have  very 
little  sense  and  a  vast  desire  to  be  fashionable  with  a  certain 
set.  Those  who  knew  her  best  (all  but  her  sister  Katrine,  who 
shook  her  head)  were  convinced  that  there  was  really  no  harm 
in  Lady  Castlefort,  'only  vanity  and  folly.'  How  frequently 
folly  leads  farther  than  fools  ever,  or  wise  people  often,  foresee, 
we  need  not  here  stop  to  record.  On  the  present  occasion, 
all  at  Clarendon  Park,  even  those  most  inclined  to  scandal, — 
persons  who,  by  the  bye,  may  be  always  known  by  their  invari- 
able preface  of  '  I  hate  all  scandal,' — agreed  that  no  one  so  far 
could  behave  better  than  Granville  Beauclerc — '  so  far,' — '  as 
yet.'  But  all  the  elderly  who  had  any  experience  of  this 
world,  all  the  young  who  had  any  intuitive  prescience  in  these 
matters,  could  not  but  fear  that  things  could  not  long  go  on  as 
they  were  now  going.  It  was  sadly  to  be  feared  that  so  young 
a  man,  and  so  very  handsome  a  man,  and  such  an  admirer  of 
beauty,  and  grace,  and  music,  and  of  such  an  enthusiastic 
temper,  must  be  in  danger  of  being  drawn  on  farther  than  he 
was  aware,  and  before  he  knew  what  he  was  about. 

The  General  heard  and  saw  all  that  went  on  without  seem- 
208 


HELEN 

ing  to  take  heed,  only  once  he  asked  Cecilia  how  long  she 
thought  her  cousins  would  stay.  She  did  not  know,  but  she 
said  '  she  saw  he  wished  them  to  be  what  they  were  not — 
cousins  once  removed — and  quite  agreed  with  him.'  He 
smiled,  for  a  man  is  always  well  pleased  to  find  his  wife  agree 
with  him  in  disliking  her  cousins. 

One  night — one  fine  moonlight  night — Lady  Castlefort, 
standing  at  the  conservatory  door  with  Beauclerc,  after  talking 
an  inconceivable  quantity  of  nonsense  about  her  passion  for 
the  moon,  and  her  notions  about  the  stars,  and  congenial  souls 
bom  under  the  same  planet,  proposed  to  him  a  moonlight 
walk. 

The  General  was  at  the  time  playing  at  chess  with  Helen, 
and  had  the  best  of  the  game,  but  at  that  moment  he  made  a 
false  move,  was  checkmated,  rose  hastily,  threw  the  men  to- 
gether on  the  board,  and  forgot  to  regret  his  shameful  defeat, 
or  to  compliment  Helen  upon  her  victory.  Lady  Castlefort, 
having  just  discovered  that  the  fatality  nonsense  about  the  stars 
would  not  quite  do  for  Beauclerc,  had  been  the  next  instant 
seized  with  a  sudden  passion  for  astronomy ;  she  must  see 
those  charming  rings  of  Saturn,  which  she  had  heard  so  much 
of,  which  the  General  was  showing  Miss  Stanley  the  other 
night ;  she  must  beg  him  to  lend  his  telescope  ;  she  came  up 
with  her  sweetest  smile  to  trouble  the  General  for  his  glass. 
Lord  Castlefort,  following,  objected  strenuously  to  her  going 
out  at  night ;  she  had  been  complaining  of  a  bad  cold  when 
he  wanted  her  to  walk  in  the  daytime,  she  would  only  make 
it  worse  by  going  out  in  the  night  air.  If  she  wanted  to  see 
Saturn  and  his  rings,  the  General,  he  was  sure,  would  fix  a 
telescope  at  the  window  for  her. 

But  that  would  not  do,  she  must  have  a  moonlight  walk  ; 
she  threw  open  the  conservatory  door,  beckoned  to  Mr.  Beau- 
clerc, and  how  it  ended  Helen  did  not  stay  to  see.  She 
thought  that  she  ought  not  even  to  think  on  the  subject,  and 
she  went  away  as  fast  as  she  could.  It  was  late,  and  she  went 
to  bed  wishing  to  be  up  early,  to  go  on  with  a  drawing  she 
was  to  finish  for  Mrs.  Collingwood^a  view  by  the  river-side, 
that  view  which  had  struck  her  fancy  as  so  beautiful  the  day 
she  went  first  to  Old  Forest.  Early  the  next  morning — and  a 
delightful  morning  it  was — she  was  up  and  out,  and  reached 
the  spot  from  which  her  sketch  was  taken.  She  was  surprised 
p  209 


HELEN 

to  find  her  little  camp-stool,  which  she  had  looked  for  in  vain 
in  the  hall,  in  its  usual  place,  set  here  ready  for  her,  and  on  it 
a  pencil  nicely  cut. 

Beauclerc  must  have  done  this.  But  he  was  not  in  general 
an  early  riser.  However,  she  concluded  that  he  had  gone 
over  thus  early  to  Old  Forest,  to  see  his  friend  Lord 
Beltravers,  who  was  to  have  arrived  the  day  before,  with  his 
sisters.  She  saw  a  boat  rowing  down  the  river,  and  she  had 
no  doubt  he  was  gone.  But  just  as  she  had  settled  to  her 
drawing,  she  heard  the  joyful  bark  of  Beauclerc's  dog  Nelson, 
who  came  bounding  towards  her,  and  the  next  moment  his 
master  appeared,  coming  down  the  path  from  the  wood.  With 
quick  steps  he  came  till  he  was  nearly  close  to  her,  then  slack- 
ened his  pace. 

'  Good  morning  ! '  said  Helen  ;  she  tried  to  speak  with 
composure,  but  her  heart  beat — she  could  not  help  feeling 
surprise  at  seeing  him — but  it  was  only  surprise. 

'  I  thought  you  were  gone  to  Old  Forest  ? '  said  she. 

'  Not  yet,'  said  he. 

His  voice  sounded  different  from  usual,  and  she  saw  in  him 
some  suppressed  agitation.  She  endeavoured  to  keep  her  own 
manner  unembarrassed — she  thanked  him  for  the  nicely-cut 
pencil,  and  the  exactly  well-placed  seat.  He  advanced  a  step 
or  two  nearer,  stooped,  and  looked  close  at  her  drawing,  but 
he  did  not  seem  to  see  or  know  what  he  was  looking  at. 

At  this  moment  Nelson,  who  had  been  too  long  unnoticed, 
put  up  one  paw  on  Miss  Stanley's  arm,  unseen  by  his  master, 
and  encouraged  by  such  gentle  reproof  as  Helen  gave,  his 
audacious  paw  was  on  the  top  of  her  drawing-book  the  next 
moment,  and  the  next  was  upon  the  drawing — and  the  paw 
was  wet  with  dew.  '  Nelson  ! '  exclaimed  his  master  in  an 
angry  tone. 

'  Oh  do  not  scold  him,'  cried  Helen,  '  do  not  punish  him  ; 
the  drawing  is  not  spoiled — only  wet,  and  it  will  be  as  well  as 
ever  when  it  is  dry.' 

Beauclerc  ejaculated  something  about  the  temper  of  an 
angel  while  she  patted  Nelson's  penitent  head. 

'  As  the  drawing  must  be  left  to  dry,'  said  Beauclerc, 
'  perhaps  Miss  Stanley  would  do  me  the  favour  to  walk  as  far 
as  the  landing-place,  where  the  boat  is  to  meet  me — to  take 
me — if — if  I  MUST  go  to  Old  Forest ! '  and  he  sighed. 

2IO 


HELEN 

She  took  his  offered  arm  and  walked  on  —  surprised — 
confused ; — wondering  what  he  meant  by  that  sigh  and  that 
look — and  that  strong  emphasis  on  must.  '  If  I  must  go  to 
Old  Forest.'  Was  not  it  a  pleasure  ? — was  it  not  his  own 
choice  ? — what  could  he  mean  ?     What  could  be  the  matter  ? 

A  vague  agitating  idea  rose  in  her  mind,  but  she  put  it 
from  her,  and  they  walked  on  for  some  minutes,  both  silent. 
They  entered  the  wood,  and  feeling  the  silence  awkward,  and 
afraid  that  he  should  perceive  her  embarrassment,  and  that  he 
should  suspect  her  suspicion,  she  exerted  herself  to  speak — to 
say  something,  no  matter  what. 

'  It  is  a  charming  morning  ! ' 

After  a  pause  of  absence  of  mind,  he  answered, 

'  Charming  ! — very  ! ' 

Then  stopping  short,  he  fixed  his  eyes  upon  Helen  with  an 
expression  that  she  was  afraid  to  understand.  It  could  hardly 
bear  any  interpretation  but  one — and  yet  that  was  impossible 
— ought  to  be  impossible — from  a  man  in  Beauclerc's  circum- 
stances— engaged — almost  a  married  man,  as  she  had  been 
told  to  consider  him.  She  did  not  know  at  this  moment  what 
to  think — still  she  thought  she  must  mistake  him,  and  she 
should  be  excessively  ashamed  of  such  a  mistake,  and  now 
more  strongly  felt  the  dread  that  he  should  see  and  misinter- 
pret or  interpret  too  rightly  her  emotion ;  she  walked  on 
quicker,  and  her  breath  grew  short,  and  her  colour  heightened. 
He  saw  her  agitation — a  delightful  hope  arose  in  his  mind. 
It  was  plain  she  was  not  indifferent — he  looked  at  her,  but 
dared  not  look  long  enough — feared  that  he  was  mistaken. 
But  the  embarrassment  seemed  to  change  its  character  even  as 
he  looked,  and  now  it  was  more  like  displeasure — decidedly, 
she  appeared  displeased.  And  so  she  was  ;  for  she  thought 
now  that  he  must  either  be  trifling  with  her,  or,  if  serious,  must 
be  acting  most  dishonourably  ; — her  good  opinion  of  him  must 
be  destroyed  for  ever,  if,  as  now  it  seemed,  he  wished  to  make 
an  impression  upon  her  heart — yet  still  she  tried  not  to  think, 
not  to  see  it.  She  was  sorry,  she  was  very  wrong  to  let  such 
an  idea  into  her  mind— and  still  her  agitation  increased. 

Quick  as  she  turned  from  him  these  thoughts  passed  in  her 
mind,  alternately  angry  and  ashamed,  and  at  last,  forcing  her- 
self to  be  composed,  telling  herself  she  ought  to  see  farther 
and  at  least  to  be  certain  before  she  condemned  him — con- 

211 


HELEN 

demned  so  kind,  so  honourable  a  friend,  while  the  fault  might 
be  all  her  own  ;  she  now,  in  a  softened  tone,  as  if  begging 
pardon  for  the  pain  she  had  given,  and  the  injustice  she  had 
done  him,  said  some  words,  insignificant  in  themselves,  but 
from  the  voice  of  kindness  charming  to  Beauclerc's  ear  and 
soul. 

'  Are  not  we  walking  very  fast  ? '  said  she,  breathless.  He 
slackened  his  pace  instantly,  and  with  a  delighted  look,  while 
she,  in  a  hurried  voice,  added,  '  But  do  not  let  me  delay  you. 
There  is  the  boat.      You  must  be  in  haste — impatient  ! ' 

'  In  haste  !  impatient !  to  leave  you,  Helen  ! '  She  blushed 
deeper  than  he  had  ever  seen  her  blush  before.  Beauclerc  in 
general  knew 

Which  blush  was  anger's,  which  was  love's  ! 

But  now  he  was  so  much  moved  he  could  not  decide  at  the 
first  glance  :  at  the  second,  there  was  no  doubt  ;  it  was  anger 
— not  love.  Her  arm  was  withdrawn  from  his.  He  was 
afraid  he  had  gone  too  far.      He  had  called  her  Helen  ! 

He  begged  pardon,  half  humbly,  half  proudly.  '  I  beg 
pardon  ;  Miss  Stanley,  I  should  have  said.  I  see  I  have 
offended.  I  fear  I  have  been  presumptuous,  but  Lady 
Davenant  taught  me  to  trust  to  Miss  Stanley's  sincerity,  and 
I  was  encouraged  by  her  expressions  of  confidence  and 
friendship.' 

'  Friendship  !  Oh  yes  !  Mr.  Beauclerc,'  said  Helen,  in  a 
hurried  voice,  eagerly  seizing  on  and  repeating  the  word 
friendship  ;  '  yes,  I  have  always  considered  you  as  a  friend.  I 
am  sure  I  shall  always  find  you  a  sincere,  good  friend.' 

'  Friend  ! '  he  repeated  in  a  disappointed  tone — all  his  hopes 
sank.  She  took  his  arm  again,  and  he  was  displeased  even 
with  that.  She  was  not  the  being  of  real  sensibility  he  had 
fancied — she  was  not  capable  of  real  love.  So  vacillated  his 
heart  and  his  imagination,  and  so  quarrelled  he  alternately 
every  instant  with  her  and  with  himself.  He  could  not  under- 
stand her,  or  decide  what  he  should  next  do  or  say  himself ; 
and  there  was  the  boat  nearing  the  land,  and  they  were  going 
on,  on,  towards  it  in  silence.      He  sighed. 

It  was  a  sigh  that  could  not  but  be  heard  and  noticed  ;  it 
was  not  meant  to  be  noticed,  and  yet  it  was.  What  could  she 
think  of  it  ?     She  could  not  believe  that  Beauclerc  meant  to 


HELEN 

act  treacherously.     This  time  she  was  determined  not  to  take 
anything  for  granted,  not  to  be  so  foolish  as  she  had  been  with , 
Mr.  Churchill. 

'  Is  not  that  your  boat  that  I  see,  rowing  close  ? ' 

'  Yes,  I  believe — certainly.     Yes,'  said  he. 

But  now  the  vacillation  of  Beauclerc's  mind  suddenly 
ceased.  Desperate,  he  stopped  her,  as  she  would  have  turned 
down  that  path  to  the  landing-place  where  the  boat  was 
mooring.  He  stood  full  across  the  path.  '  Miss  Stanley,  one 
word — by  one  word,  one  look,  decide.  You  must  decide  for 
me  whether  I  stay — or  go — for  ever  ! ' 

'  I  t — Mr.  Beauclerc  ! ' 

The  look  of  astonishment- — more  than  astonishment,  almost 
of  indignation — silenced  him  completely,  and  he  stood 
dismayed.  She  pressed  onwards,  and  he  no  longer  stopped 
her  path.  For  an  instant  he  submitted  in  despair.  '  Then  I 
must  not  think  of  it.  I  must  go — must  I,  Miss  Stanley  ? 
Will  not  you  listen  to  me,  Helen  ?  Advise  me  ;  let  me  open 
my  heart  to  you  as  a  friend.' 

She  stopped  under  the  shady  tree  beneath  which  they 
were  passing,  and,  leaning  against  it,  she  repeated,  'As  a 
friend — but,  no,  no,  Mr.  Beauclerc — no ;  I  am  not  the 
friend  you  should  consult  —  consult  the  General,  your 
guardian.' 

'  I  have  consulted  him,  and  he  approves.' 

'  You  have  !  That  is  weU,  that  is  well  at  all  events,'  cried 
she  ;  '  if  he  approves,  then  all  is  right.' 

There  was  a  ray  of  satisfaction  on  her  countenance.  He 
looked  as  if  considering  what  she  exactly  meant.  He  hoped 
again,  and  was  again  resolved  to  hazard  the  decisive  words. 
'  If  you  knew  all ! '  and  he  pressed  her  arm  closer  to  him — '  if 
I  might  tell  you  all ? ' 

Helen  withdrew  her  arm  decidedly.  '  I  know  all,'  said  she  ; 
'  all  I  ought  to  know,  Mr.  Beauclerc' 

'  You  know  all ! '  cried  he,  astonished  at  her  manner. 
'  You  know  the  circumstances  in  which  I  am  placed  ? ' 

He  alluded  to  the  position  in  which  he  stood  with  Lady 
Castlefort ;  she  thought  he  meant  with  respect  to  Lady  Blanche, 
and  she  answered — '  Yes  :  I  know  all ! '  and  her  eye  turned 
towards  the  boat. 

'  I  understand  you,'  said  he  ;  '  you  think  I  ought  to  go  ? ' 
213 


.  '^^ 

^,»^'( 
<i^ii    ? 


'  Ifyoti  say  to  77ie,  Go  !  I  ojn  gone /or  ever  ! 


HELEN 

'  Certainly,'  said  she.  It  never  entered  into  her  mind  to 
doubt  the  truth  of  what  Lady  CeciHa  had  told  her,  and  she  had 
at  first  been  so  much  embarrassed  by  the  fear  of  betraying  what 
she  feh  she  ought  not  to  feel,  and  she  was  now  so  shocked  by 
what  she  thought  his  dishonourable  conduct,  that  she  repeated 
almost  in  a  tone  of  severity — '  Certainly,  Mr.  Beauclerc,  you 
ought  to  go.' 

The  words,  '  since  you  are  engaged,' — '  you  know  you  are 
engaged,'  she  was  on  the  point  of  adding,  but  Lady  Cecilia's 
injunctions  not  to  tell  him  that  she  had  betrayed  his  secret 
stopped  her. 

He  looked  at  her  for  an  instant,  and  then  abruptly,  and  in 
great  agitation,  said :  '  May  I  ask,  Miss  Stanley,  if  your 
affections  are  engaged  ? ' 

'  Is  that  a  question,  Mr.  Beauclerc,  which  you  have  a  right 
to  ask  me  ? ' 

'  I  have  no  right . —  no  right,  I  acknowledge  —  I  am 
answered.' 

He  turned  away  from  her,  and  ran  down  the  bank  towards 
the  boat,  but  returned  instantly,  and  exclaimed,  '  If  you  say  to 
me,  Go  !   I  am  gone  for  ever  ! ' 

'  Go  ! '  Helen  firmly  pronounced.  '  You  never  can  be  more 
than  a  friend  to  me  !     Oh  never  be  less  ! — go  ! ' 

'  I  am  gone,'  said  he,  '  you  shall  never  see  me  more.' 

He  went,  and  a  few  seconds  afterwards  she  heard  the 
splashing  of  his  oars.  He  was  gone  !  Oh  !  how  she  wished 
that  they  had  parted  sooner — a  few  minutes  sooner,  even 
before  he  had  so  looked — so  spoken  ! 

'  Oh  that  we  had  parted  while  I  might  have  still  perfectly 
esteemed  him  ;  but  now ! ' 


CHAPTER    XXI 

When  Helen  attempted  to  walk,  she  trembled  so  much  that 
she  could  not  move,  and  leaning  against  the  tree  under  which 
she  was  standing,  she  remained  fixed  for  some  time  almost 
without  thought.  Then  she  began  to  recollect  what  had  been 
before  all  this,  and  as  soon  as  she  could  walk  she  went  back 
for  her  drawing-book,  threw  from  her  the  pencil  which  Beau- 

2IS 


HELEN 

clerc  had  cut,  and  made  her  way  home  as  fast  as  she  could, 
and  up  to  her  own  room,  without  meeting  anybody ;  and  as 
soon  as  she  was  there  she  bolted  the  door  and  threw  herself 
upon  her  bed.  She  had  by  this  time  a  dreadful  headache, 
and  she  wanted  to  try  and  get  rid  of  it  in  time  for  breakfast — 
that  was  her  first  object ;  but  her  thoughts  were  so  confused 
that  they  could  not  fix  upon  anything  rightly.  She  tried  to 
compose  herself,  and  to  think  the  whole  affair  over  again  ; 
but  she  could  not.  There  was  something  so  strange  in  what 
had  passed  !  The  sudden — the  total  change  in  her  opinion 
— her  total  loss  of  confidence  !  She  tried  to  put  all  thoughts 
and  feelings  out  of  her  mind,  and  just  to  lie  stupefied  if  she 
could,  that  she  might  get  rid  of  the  pain  in  her  head.  She 
had  no  idea  whether  it  was  late  or  early,  and  was  going  to  get 
up  to  look  at  her  watch,  when  she  heard  the  first  bell,  half  an 
hour  before  breakfast,  and  this  was  the  time  when  Cecilia 
usually  opened  the  door  between  their  rooms.  She  dreaded 
the  sound,  but  when  she  had  expected  it  some  minutes,  she 
became  impatient  even  for  that  which  she  feared  ;  she  wanted 
to  have  it  over,  and  she  raised  herself  on  her  elbow,  and 
listened  with  acute  impatience  :  at  last  the  door  was  thrown 
wide  open,  and,  bright  and  gay  as  ever,  in  came  Cecilia,  but  at 
the  first  sight  of  Helen  on  her  bed,  wan  and  miserable,  she 
stopped  short. 

'  My  dearest  Helen  !  what  can  be  the  matter  ? ' 

'  Mr.  Beauclerc ' 

'  Well,  what  of  him  ? '  cried  Cecilia,  and  she  smiled. 

'  Oh,  Cecilia  !  do  not  smile  ;  you  cannot  imagine- 


■  Oh  yes  ;  but  I  can,'  cried  Ceciha.  '  I  see  how  it  is  ;  I 
understand  it  all ;  and,  miserable  and  amazed  as  you  look  at 
this  moment,  1  will  set  all  right  for  you  in  one  word.  He  is 
not  going  to  be  married — not  engaged.' 

Helen  started  up.      '  Not  engaged  ! ' 

'  No  more  than  you  are,  my  dear  !  Oh,  1  am  glad  to  see 
your  colour  come  again  ! ' 

'  Thank  Heaven  ! '  cried  Helen  ;   '  then  he  is  not ' 

'A  villain  ! — not  at  all.  He  is  all  that's  right ;  all  that  is 
charming,  my  dear.  So  thank  Heaven,  and  be  as  happy  as 
you  please.' 

'  But  I  cannot  understand  it,'  said  Helen,  sinking  back  ;  '  I 
really  cannot  understand  how  it  is,  Cecilia.' 

216 


HELEN 

Cecilia  gave  her  a  glass  of  water  in  great  haste,  and  was 
very  sorry,  and  very  glad,  and  begged  forgiveness,  and  all  in 
a  breath  :  but  as  yet  Helen  did  not  know  what  she  had  to 
forgive,  till  it  was  explained  to  her  in  direct  words  that  Ceciha 
had  told  her  not  only  what  was  not  true,  but  what  she  at  the 
time  of  telling  knew  to  be  false. 

'  For  what  purpose,  O  my  dear  Cecilia !  All  to  save 
me  from  a  little  foolish  embarrassment  at  first,  you  have  made 
us  miserable  at  last.' 

'  Miserable  !  my  dear  Helen  ;  at  worst  miserable  only  for 
half  an  hour.  Nonsense  !  lie  down  again,  and  rest  your  poor 
head.     I  will  go  this  minute  to  Granville.     Where  is  he  ? ' 

'  Gone  !     Gone  for  ever  !     Those  were  his  last  words.' 

'  Impossible  !  absurd  !  Only  what  a  man  says  in  a  passion. 
But  where  is  he  gone  ?  Only  to  Old  Forest !  Gone  for  ever 
— gone  till  dinner-time !  Probably  coming  back  at  this 
moment  in  all  haste,  like  a  true  lover,  to  beg  your  pardon  for 
your  having  used  him  abominably  ill.  Now,  smile  ;  do  not 
shake  your  head,  and  look  so  wretched  ;  but  tell  me  exactly, 
word  for  word  and  look  for  look,  all  that  passed  between  you, 
and  then  I  shall  know  what  is  best  to  be  done.' 

Word  for  word  Helen  could  not  answer,  for  she  had  been 
so  much  confused,  but  she  told  to  the  best  of  her  recollection ; 
and  Cecilia  still  thought  no  great  harm  was  done.  She  only 
looked  a  little  serious  from  the  apprehension,  now  the  real, 
true  apprehension,  of  what  might  happen  about  Lady  Blanche, 
who,  as  she  believed,  was  at  Old  Forest.  '  Men  are  so  foolish  ; 
men  in  love  so  rash.  B^uclerc,  in  a  fit  of  anger  and  despair 
on  being  so  refused  by  the  woman  he  loved,  might  go  and 
throw  himself  at  the  feet  of  another  for  whom  he  did  not  care 
in  the  least,  in  a  strange  sort  of  revenge.  But  I  know  how  to 
settle  it  all,  and  I  will  do  it  this  moment.' 

But  Helen  caught  hold  of  her  hand,  and  firmly  detaining  it, 
absolutely  objected  to  her  doing  anything  without  telling  her 
exactly  and  truly  what  she  was  going  to  do. 

Lady  Cecilia  assured  her  that  she  was  only  going  to  inquire 
from  the  General  whether  Lady  Blanche  was  with  her  sister  at 
Old  Forest,  or  not.  '  Listen  to  me,  my  dear  Helen  ;  what  I 
am  going  to  say  can  do  no  mischief.  If  Lady  Blanche  is 
there,  then  the  best  thing  to  be  done  is,  for  me  to  go 
immediately,  this  very  morning,  to  pay  the  ladies  a  visit  on 

217 


HELEN 

their  coming  to  the  country,  and  I  will  bring  back  Granville. 
A  word  will  bring  him  back.  I  will  only  tell  him  there  was  a 
little  mistake,  or  if  you  think  it  best,  I  will  tell  him  the  whole 
truth.  Let  me  go — only  let  me  go  and  consult  the  General 
before  the  breakfast- bell  rings,  for  I  shall  have  no  time 
afterwards.' 

Helen  let  her  go,  for  as  Beauclerc  had  told  her  that  he  had 
opened  his  mind  to  the  General,  she  thought  it  was  best  that 
he  should  hear  all  that  had  happened. 

The  moment  the  General  saw  Lady  Cecilia  come  in,  he 
smiled,  and  said,  '  Well !  my  dear  Cecilia,  you  have  seen 
Helen  this  morning,  and  she  has  seen  Beauclerc — what  is  the 
result  ?     Does  he  stay,  or  go  ? ' 

'  He  is  gone  ! '  said  Cecilia.  The  General  looked  surprised 
and  sorry.  '  He  did  not  propose  for  her,'  continued  Cecilia, 
'he  did  not  declare  himself — he  only  began  to  sound  her 
opinion  of  him,  and  she — she  contrived  to  misunderstand — 
to  offend  him,  and  he  is  gone,  but  only  to  Old  Forest,  afld  we 
can  have  him  back  again  directly.' 

'That  is  not  likely,'  said  the  General,  'because  I  know  that 
Beauclerc  had  determined  that  if  he  went  he  would  not  return 
for  some  time.  Your  friend  Helen  was  to  decide.  If  she 
gave  him  any  hope,  that  is,  permitted  him  to  appear  as  her 
declared  admirer,  he  could,  with  propriety,  happiness,  and 
honour,  remain  here  ;  if  not,  my  dear  Cecilia,  you  must  be 
sensible  that  he  is  right  to  go.' 

'  Gone  for  some  time  ! '  repeated  Cecilia,  '  you  mean  as 
long  as  Lady  Castlefort  is  here.' 

'  Yes,'  said  the  General. 

'  I  wish  she  was  gone,  I  am  sure,  with  all  my  heart,'  said 
Cecilia  ;  '  but  in  the  meantime,  tell  me,  my  dear  Clarendon, 
do  you  know  whether  Lord  Beltravers's  sisters  are  at  Old 
Forest  ? ' 

The  General  did  not  think  that  Lady  Blanche  had  arrived  ; 
he  was  not  certain,  but  he  knew  that  the  Comtesse  de  St. 
Cymon  had  arrived  yesterday. 

'  Then,'  said  Cecilia,  '  it  would  be  but  civil  to  go  to  see  the 
Comtesse.      I  will  go  this  morning.' 

General  Clarendon  answered  instantly,  and  with  decision, 
that  she  must  not  think  of  such  a  thing — that  it  could  not  be 
done.     '  Madame  de  St.  Cymon  is  a  woman  of  doubtful  reputa- 

218 


HELEN 

tion,  not  a  person  with  whom  Lady  Cecilia  Clarendon  ought 
to  form  any  acquaintance.' 

'  No,  not  form  an  acquaintance— I'm  quite  aware  of  that ' ; 
and  eagerly  she  pleaded  that  she  had  no  intention  of  doing 
anything  ;  '  but  just  one  morning  visit  paid  and  returned,  you 
know,  leads  to  nothing.  Probably  we  shall  neither  of  us  be  at 
home,  and  never  meet ;  and  really  it  would  be  such  a  marked 
thing  not  to  pay  this  visit  to  the  Beltravers  family  on  their 
return  to  the  country.  Formerly  there  was  such  a  good  under- 
standing between  the  Forresters  and  your  father ;  and  really 
hospitality  requires  it.  Altogether  this  one  visit  really  must 
be  paid,  it  cannot  be  helped,  so  I  will  order  the  carriage.' 

'  It  must  not  be  done  1 '  the  General  said  ;  '  it  is  a  question 
of  right,  not  of  expediency.' 

'  Right,  but  there  is  nothing  really  wrong,  surely ;  I  beheve 
all  that  has  been  said  of  her  is  scandal.  Nobody  is  safe 
against  reports — the  public  papers  are  so  scandalous  !  While 
a  woman  lives  with  her  husband,  it  is  but  charitable  to  suppose 
all  is  right.  That's  the  rule.  Besides,  we  should  not  throw 
the  first  stone.'  Then  Lady  Cecilia  pleaded,  lady  this  and 
lady  that,  and  the  whole  county,  without  the  least  scruple 
would  visit  Madame  de  St.  Cymon. 

'  Lady  this  and  lady  that  may  do  as  they  please,  or  as  their 
husbands  think  proper  or  improper,  that  is  no  rule  for  Lady 
Cecilia  Clarendon  ;  and  as  to  the  whole  county,  or  the  whole 
world,  what  is  that  to  me,  when  I  have  formed  my  own 
determination  ? ' 

The  fact  was,  that  at  this  very  time  Madame  de  St.  Cymon 
was  about  to  be  separated  from  her  husband.  A  terrible  dis- 
covery had  just  been  made.  Lord  Beltravers  had  brought  his 
sister  to  Old  Forest  to  hide  her  from  London  disgrace ;  there 
he  intended  to  leave  her  to  rusticate,  while  he  should  follow 
her  husband  to  Paris  immediately,  to  settle  the  terms  of 
separation  or  divorce. 

'  Beauclerc,  no  doubt,  will  go  to  Paris  with  him,'  said  the 
General. 

'  To  Paris  !  when  will  he  set  out  ? ' 

'To-day — directly,  if  Helen  has  decidedly  rejected  him; 
but  you  say  he  did  not  declare  himself.  Pray  tell  me  all  at 
once.' 

And  if  she  had  done  so,  all  might  have  been  well ;  but  she 
219 


HELEN 

was  afraid.  Her  husband  was  as  exact  about  some  things  as 
her  mother ;  he  would  certainly  be  displeased  at  the  deception 
she  had  practised  on  Helen ;  she  could  not  tell  him  that,  not 
at  this  moment,  for  she  had  just  fooled  him  to  the  top  of  his 
bent  about  this  visit ;  she  would  find  a  better  time  ;  she  so 
dreaded  the  instant  change  of  his  smile — the  look  of  dis- 
approbation ;  she  was  so  cowardly ;  in  short,  the  present  pain 
of  displeasing — the  consequences  even  of  her  own  folly,  she 
never  could  endure,  and  to  avoid  it  she  had  always  recourse  to 
some  new  evasion  ;  and  now,  when  Helen — her  dear  Helen's 
happiness,  was  at  stake,  she  faltered — she  paltered — she  would 
not  for  the  world  do  her  any  wrong  ;  but  still  she  thought  she 
could  manage  without  telling  the  whole — she  would  tell 
nothing  but  the  truth.  So,  after  a  moment's  hesitation,  while 
all  these  thoughts  went  through  her  mind,  when  the  General 
repeated  his  question,  and  begged  to  know  at  once  what  was 
passing  in  her  little  head,  she  smiled  in  return  for  that  smile 
which  played  on  her  husband's  face  while  he  fondly  looked 
upon  her,  and  she  answered,  '  I  am  thinking  of  poor  Helen. 
She  has  made  a  sad  mistake — and  has  a  horrid  headache  at 
this  moment — in  short  she  has  ofifended  Beauclerc  past  en- 
durance— past  his  endurance — and  he  went  off  in  a  passion 
before  she  found  out  her  mistake.  In  short,  we  must  have  him 
back  again  ;  could  you  go,  my  dear  love — or  write  directly  ? ' 

'  First  let  me  understand,'  said  the  General.  '  Miss  Stanley 
has  made  a  mistake — what  mistake  ? ' 

'  She  thought  Beauclerc  was  engaged  to  Lady  Blanche.' 

'  How  could  she  think  so  ?     What  reason  had  she  ? ' 

'  She  had  been  told  so  by  somebody.' 

'  Somebody  ! — that  eternal  scandal -monger  Lady  Katrine, 
I  suppose.' 

'  No — not  Lady  Katrine,'  said  CeciUa  ;  '  but  I  am  not  at 
liberty  to  tell  you  whom.' 

'  No  matter  ;  but  Miss  Stanley  is  not  a  fool ;  she  could  not 
believe  somebody  or  anybody,  contrary  to  common  sense.' 

'  No,  but  Beauclerc  did  not  come  quite  to  proposing — and 
you  know  she  had  been  blamed  for  refusing  Mr.  Churchill 
iDefore  she  was  asked — and  in  short — in  love,  people  do  not 
always  know  what  they  are  about.' 

'  I  do  not  understand  one  word  of  it,'  said  the  General ; 
'  nor  I  am  sure  do  you,  my  dear  Cecilia.' 


HELEN 


'  Yes,  I  really  do,  but- 


'  My  dear  Cecilia,  I  assure  you  it  is  always  best  to  let  people 
settle  their  love  affairs  their  own  way.' 

'Yes,  certainly — I  would  not  interfere  in  the  least — only  to 
get  Granville  back  again — and  then  let  them  settle  it  their  own 
way.     Cannot  you  call  at  Old  Forest  ? ' 

'No.' 

'  Could  you  not  write  ? ' 

'  No — not  unless  I  know  the  whole.  I  will  do  nothing  in  the 
dark.  Always  tell  your  confessor,  your  lawyer,  your  physician, 
your  friend,  your  whole  case,  or  they  are  fools  or  rogties  if  they 
act  for  you:  go  back  and  repeat  this  to  Helen  Stanley  from  me.' 

'  But,  my  dear,  she  will  think  it  so  unkind.' 

'  Let  her  show  me  how  I  can  serve  her,  and  I  will  do  it.' 

'  Only  write  a  line  to  Beauclerc — say,  "  Beauclerc,  come 
back, — here  has  been  a  mistake." '  She  would  have  put  a  pen 
into  his  hand,  and  held  paper  to  him. 

'  Let  me  know  the  whole,  and  then,  and  not  till  then,  can  I 
judge  whether  I  should  be  doing  right  for  her  or  not.'  The 
difficulty  of  telling  the  whole  had  increased  to  Lady  Cecilia, 
even  from  the  hesitation  and  prevarication  she  had  now  made. 
'  Let  me  see  Helen, — let  me  speak  to  her  myself,  and  learn 
what  this  strange  nonsensical  mystery  is.'  He  was  getting 
impatient.     '  Cannot  I  see  Miss  Stanley  ? ' 

'  Why  no,  my  dear  love,  not  just  now,  she  has  such  a  head- 
ache !  She  is  lying  down.  There  is  the  breakfast-bell — after 
breakfast,  if  you  please.  But  I  am  clear  she  would  rather  not 
speak  to  you  herself  on  the  subject.' 

'  Then  come  down  to  breakfast,  my  dear,  and  let  her  settle 
it  her  own  way — that  is  much  the  best  plan.  Interference  in 
love  matters  always  does  mischief  Come  to  breakfast,  my 
dear — I  have  no  time  to  lose — I  must  be  off  to  a  court-martial.' 

He  looked  at  his  watch,  and  Cecilia  went  half  down  stairs 
with  him,  and  then  ran  back  to  keep  Helen  quiet  by  the 
assurance  that  all  would  be  settled — all  would  be  right,  and 
that  she  would  send  her  up  some  breakfast — she  must  not 
think  of  coming  down  ;  and  Cecilia  lamented  half  breakfast- 
time  how  subject  to  headaches  poor  Helen  was ;  and  through 
this  and  through  all  other  conversation  she  settled  what  she 
would  do  for  her.  As  the  last  resource,  she  would  tell  the 
whole  truth — not  to  her  husband,  she  loved  him  too  well  to 


HELEN 

face  his  displeasure  for  one  moment — but  to  Beauclerc  ;  and 
writing  would  be  so  much  easier  than  speaking — without  being 
put  to  the  blush  she  could  explain  it  all  to  Beauclerc,  and  turn 
it  playfully ;  and  he  would  be  so  happy  that  he  would  be  only 
too  glad  to  forgive  her,  and  to  do  anything  she  asked.  She 
concocted  and  wrote  a  very  pretty  letter,  in  which  she  took  all 
the  blame  fully  on  herself — did  perfect  justice  to  Helen  ;  said 
she  wrote  without  her  knowledge,  and  depended  entirely  upon 
his  discretion,  so  he  must  come  back  of  his  own  accord,  and 
keep  her  counsel.  This  letter,  however,  she  could  not  despatch 
so  soon  as  she  had  expected  ;  she  could  not  send  a  servant 
with  it  till  the  General  should  be  off  to  his  court-martial.  Now 
had  Cecilia  gone  the  straightforward  way  to  work,  her  husband 
could  in  that  interval,  and  would,  have  set  all  to  rights  ;  but 
this  to  Cecilia  was  impossible  ;  she  could  only  wait  in  an  agony 
of  impatience  till  the  General  and  his  officers  were  all  out  of 
the  way,  and  then  she  despatched  a  groom  with  her  letter  to  Old 
Forest,  and  desired  him  to  return  as  fast  as  possible,  while 
she  went  to  Helen's  room,  to  while  away  the  time  of  anxious 
suspense  as  well  as  she  could  ;  and  she  soon  succeeded  in 
talking  herself  into  excellent  spirits  again.  '  Now,  my  dear 
Helen,  if  that  unlucky  mistake  had  not  been  made, — if  you  had 
not  fancied  that  Granville  was  married  already, — and  if  he  had 
actually  proposed  for  you, — what  would  you  have  said  .■■  — in 
short — would  you  have  accepted  him  ? ' 

'  O  Cecilia,  I  do  hope  he  will  understand  how  it  all  was  ; 
I  hope  he  will  believe  that  I  esteem  him  as  I  always  did  :  as 
to  love ' 

Helen  paused,  and  Lady  Cecilia  went  on  :  'As  to  love,  no- 
body knows  anything  about  it  till  it  comes — and  here  it  is 
coming,  I  do  believe  ! '  continued  she,  looking  out  of  the 
window.  No  !  not  Mr.  Beauclerc,  but  the  man  she  had  sent 
with  her  letter,  galloping  towards  the  house.  Disappointed 
not  to  see  Beauclerc  himself,  she  could  only  conclude  that  as 
he  had  not  his  horse  with  him,  he  was  returning  in  the  boat. 
The  answer  to  her  letter  was  brought  in.  At  the  first  glance 
on  the  direction,  her  countenance  changed.  '  Not  Granville's 
hand  ! — what  can  have  happened  ? '  She  tore  open  the  note, 
'He  is  gone! — gone  with  Lord  Beltravers  ! — set  off!  — 
gone  to  Paris  ! '  Helen  said  not  one  word,  and  Cecilia, 
in    despair,     repeated,     '  Gone  !  —  gone  I  —  absolutely  gone  ! 

222 


HELEN 

Nothing  more  can  be  done.  Oh  that  I  had  done  nothing 
about  it!  All  has  failed!  Heaven  knows  what  may 
happen  now  !  Oh  if  I  could  but  have  let  it  all  alone  !  I 
never,  never  can  forgive  myself!  My  dear  Helen,  be  angry 
with  me — reproach  me  :  pray — pray  reproach  me  as  I  de- 
serve !'  But  Helen  could  not  blame  one  who  so  blamed 
herself — one  who,  however  foolish  and  wrong  she  had  been, 
had  done  it  all  from  the  kindest  motives.  In  the  agony  of  her 
penitence,  she  now  told  Helen  all  that  had  passed  between  her 
and  the  General  ;  that,  to  avoid  the  shame  of  confessing  to  him 
her  first  deception,  she  had  gone  on  another  and  another  step 
in  these  foolish  evasions,  contrivances,  and  mysteries  ;  how, 
thinking  she  could  manage  it,  she  had  written  without  his 
knowledge ;  and  now,  to  complete  her  punishment,  not  only 
had  everything  which  she  had  attempted  failed,  but  a  conse- 
quence which  she  could  never  have  foreseen  had  happened. 
'  Here  I  am,  with  a  note  actually  in  my  hand  from  this  horrid 
Madame  de  St.  Cymon,  whom  Clarendon  absolutely  would  not 
hear  of  my  even  calling  upon  !  Look  what  she  writes  to  me. 
She  just  took  advantage  of  this  opportunity  to  begin  a  corre- 
spondence before  an  acquaintance  :  but  I  will  never  answer  her. 
Here  is  what  she  says  : — 

'  "  The  Comtesse  de  St.  Cymon  exceedingly  regrets  that 
Lady  Cecilia  Clarendon's  servant  did  not  arrive  in  time  to 
deliver  her  ladyship's  letter  into  Mr.  Beauclerc's  own  hand. 
Mr.  B.  left  Old  Forest  with  Lord  Beltravers  early  to-day  for 
Paris.  The  Comtesse  de  St.  Cymon,  understanding  that  Lady 
Cecilia  Clarendon  is  anxious  that  there  should  be  as  little  delay 
as  possible  in  forwarding  her  letter,  and  calculating  that  if  re- 
turned by  her  ladyship's  servant  it  must  be  too  late  for  this 
day's  post  from  Clarendon  Park,  has  forwarded  it  immediately 
with  her  own  letters  to  Paris,  which  cannot  fail  to  meet  Mr. 
Beauclerc  directly  on  his  arrival  there." 

'  Oh  ! '  cried  Lady  Cecilia,  '  how  angry  the  General  would 
be  if  he  knew  of  this  ! '  She  tore  the  note  to  the  smallest  bits 
as  she  spoke,  and  threw  them  away  ;  and  next  she  begged  that 
Helen  would  never  say  a  word  about  it.  There  was  no  use  in 
telling  the  General  what  would  only  vex  him,  and  what  could 
not  be  helped  ;  and  what  could  lead  to  nothing,  for  she  should 
never  answer  this  note,  nor  have  any  further  communication  of 
any  kind  with  Madame  de  St.  Cymon. 

223 


HELEN 

Helen,  nevertheless,  thought  it  would  be  much  better  to  tell 
the  General  of  it,  and  she  wondered  how  Cecilia  could  think  of 
doing  otherwise,  and  just  when  she  had  so  strongly  reproached 
herself,  and  repented  of  these  foolish  mysteries  ;  and  this  was 
going  on  another  step.  '  Indeed,  Cecilia,'  said  Helen,  '  I  wish 
— on  my  own  account  I  wish  you  would  not  conceal  anything. 
It  is  hard  to  let  the  General  suspect  me  of  extreme  folly  and 
absurdity,  or  of  some  sort  of  double  dealing  in  this  business,  in 
which  I  have  done  my  utmost  to  do  right  and  to  go  straight 
forward.'  Poor  Helen,  with  her  nervous  headache  beating 
worse  and  worse,  remonstrated  and  entreated,  and  came  to 
tears  ;  and  Lady  Cecilia  promised  that  it  should  be  all  done  as 
she  desired  ;  but  again  she  charged  and  besought  Helen  to  say 
nothing  herself  about  the  matter  to  the  General :  and  this 
acceded  to.  Lady  Cecilia's  feelings  being  as  transient  as  they 
were  vehement,  all  her  self-reproaches,  penitence,  and  fears 
passed  away,  and,  taking  her  bright  view  of  the  whole  affair, 
she  ended  with  the  certainty  that  Beauclerc  would  return  the 
moment  he  received  her  letter  ;  that  he  would  have  it  in  a  very 
few  days,  and  all  would  end  well,  and  quite  as  well  as  if  she 
had  not  been  a  fool. 


CHAPTER   XXII 

The  first  tidings  of  Beauclerc  came  in  a  letter  from  him  to  the 
General,  written  immediately  after  his  arrival  at  Paris.  But  it 
was  plain  that  it  must  have  been  written  before  Lady  Cecilia's 
letter,  forwarded  by  Madame  de  St.  Cymon,  could  have 
reached  him.  It  was  evident  that  matters  were  as  yet  unex- 
plained, from  his  manner  of  writing  about  '  the  death-blow  to 
all  his  hopes,'  and  now  he  was  setting  off  with  Lord  Beltravers 
for  Naples,  to  follow  M.  de  St.  Cymon,  and  settle  the  business 
of  the  sister's  divorce.  Lady  Cecilia  could  only  hope  that  her 
letter  would  follow  him  thither,  enclosed  in  this  Madame  de  St. 
Cymon's  despatches  to  her  brother ;  and  now  they  could  know 
nothing  more  till  they  could  hear  from  Naples. 

Meanwhile,  Helen  perceived  that,  though  the  General  con- 
tinued to  be  as  attentive  and  kind  to  her  as  usual,  yet  that 
there  was  something  more  careful  and  reserved  in  his  manner 

224 


HELEN 

than  formerly,  less  of  spontaneous  regard,  and  cordial  con- 
fidence. It  was  not  that  he  was  displeased  by  her  having 
discouraged  the  addresses  of  his  ward,  fond  as  he  was  of 
Beauclerc,  and  well  as  he  would  have  been  pleased  by  the 
match.  This  he  distinctly  expressed  the  only  time  that  he 
touched  upon  the  subject.  He  said  that  Miss  Stanley  was  the 
best  and  the  only  judge  of  what  would  make  her  happy  ;  but 
he  could  not  comprehend  the  nature  of  the  mistake  she  had 
'  made ;  Cecilia's  explanations,  whatever  they  were,  had  not 
made  the  matter  clear.  There  was  either  some  caprice,  or 
some  mystery,  which  he  determined  not  to  inquire  into,  upon 
his  own  principle  of  leaving  people  to  settle  their  love  affairs 
in  their  own  way.  Helen's  spirits  were  lowered  :  naturally  of 
great  sensibility,  she  depended  more  for  her  happiness  on  her 
inward  feelings  than  upon  any  external  circumstances.  A 
great  deal  of  gaiety  was  now  going  on  constantly  among  the 
young  people  at  Clarendon  Park,  and  this  made  her  want  of 
spirits  more  disagreeable  to  herself,  more  obvious,  and  more 
observed  by  others.  Lady  Katrine  rallied  her  unmercifully. 
Not  suspecting  the  truth,  her  ladyship  presumed  that  Miss 
Stanley  repented  of  having,  before  she  was  asked,  said  No 
instead  of  Yes  to  Mr.  Churchill.  Ever  since  his  departure 
she  had  evidently  worn  the  willow. 

Lady  Cecilia  was  excessively  vexed  by  this  ill-natured  rail- 
lery :  conscious  that  she  had  been  the  cause  of  all  this  annoy- 
ance to  Helen,  and  of  much  more  serious  evil  to  her,  the  zeal 
and  tenderness  of  her  affection  now  increased,  and  was  shown 
upon  every  little  occasion  involuntarily,  in  a  manner  that  con- 
tinually irritated  her  cousin  Katrine's  jealousy.  Helen  had 
been  used  to  live  only  with  those  by  whom  she  was  beloved, 
and  she  was  not  at  all  prepared  for  the  sort  of  warfare  which 
Lady  Katrine  carried  on  ;  her  perpetual  sneers,  innuendoes, 
and  bitter  sarcasms,  Helen  did  not  resent,  but  she  felt  them. 
The  arrows,  ill-aimed  and  weak,  could  not  penetrate  far ;  it 
was  not  with  their  point  they  wounded,  but  by  their  venom 
— wherever  that  touched  it  worked  inward  mischief. 

Often  to  escape  from  one  false  imputation  she  exposed  her- 
self to  another  more  grievous.  One  night,  when  the  young 
people  wished  to  dance,  and  the  usual  music  was  not  to  be 
had,  Helen  played  quadrilles,  and  waltzes,  for  hours  with 
indefatigable  good-nature,  and  when  some  of  the  party  returned 
Q  225 


HELEN 


their  cordial  thanks,  Lady  Katrine  whispered,  '  Our  musician 
had  been  well  paid  by  Lord  Estridge's  admiration  of  her  white 
hands.'  His  lordship  had  not  danced,  and  had  been  standing 
all  the  evening  beside  Helen,  much  to  the  discomfiture  of 
Lady  Katrine,  who  intended  to  have  had  him  for  her  own 
partner.  The  next  night  Helen  did  not  play,  but  joined  the 
dance,  and  with  a  boy  partner,  whom  nobody  could  envy  her. 
The  General,  who  saw  wonderfully  quickly  the  by-play  of 
society,  marked  all  this,  and  now  his  eye  followed  Helen 
through  the  quadrille,  and  he  said  to  some  one  standing  by 
that  Miss  Stanley  danced  charmingly,  to  his  taste,  and  in  such 
a  ladylike  manner.  He  was  glad  to  see  her  in  good  spirits 
again  ;  her  colour  was  raised,  and  he  observed  that  she  looked 
remarkably  well.  '  Yes,'  Lady  Katrine  answered,  '  remarkably 
well ;  and  black  is  so  becoming  to  that  sort  of  complexion, 
no  doubt  this  is  the  reason  Miss  Stanley  wears  it  so  much 
longer  than  is  customary  for  an  uncle.  Short  or  long  mourn- 
ings are,  to  be  sure,  just  according  to  fashion,  or  feehng,  as 
some  say.  For  my  part,  I  hate  long  mournings  —  so  like 
ostentation  of  sentiment  ;  whatever  I  did,  at  any  rate  I  would 
be  consistent.  I  never  would  dance  in  black.  Pope,  you 
know,  has  such  a  good  cut  at  that  sort  of  thing.  Do  you 
recollect  the  lines  ? 

'  And  bear  about  the  mockery  of  woe 
To  midnight  dances  and  the  public  show.' 

Lady  Castlefort  took  Miss  Stanley  aside,  after  the  dance 
was  over,  to  whisper  to  her  so  good-naturedly,  how  shockingly 
severe  Katrine  had  been  ;  faithfully  repeating  every  word 
that  her  sister  had  said.  '  And  so  cruel,  to  talk  of  your 
bearing  about  the  mockery  of  woe !  But,  my  sweet  little 
lamb,  do  not  let  me  distress  you  so.'  Helen,  withdrawing 
from  the  false  caresses  of  Lady  Castlefort,  assured  her  that 
she  should  not  be  hurt  by  anything  Lady  Katrine  could  say, 
as  she  so  little  understood  her  real  feelings  ;  and  at  the  mo- 
ment her  spirit  rose  against  the  injustice,  and  felt  as  much 
superior  to  such  petty  malice  as  even  Lady  Davenant  could 
have  desired. 

She  had  resolved  to  continue  in  mourning  for  the  longest 
period  in  which  it  is  worn  for  a  parent,  because,  in  truth,  her 
uncle  had  been  a  parent  to  her ;  but  the  morning  after  Lady 

226 


HELEN 

Katrine's  cruel  remarks,  Cecilia  begged  that  Helen  would 
oblige  her  by  laying  aside  black.  '  Let  it  be  on  my  birth- 
day.' Lady  Cecilia's  birthday  was  to  be  celebrated  the  en- 
suing week.  '  Well,  for  that  day  certainly  I  will,'  Helen 
said  ;  '  but  only  for  that  day.'  This  would  not  satisfy  Cecilia. 
Helen  saw  that  Lady  Katrine's  observations  had  made  a 
serious  impression,  and,  dreading  to  become  the  subject  of 
daily  observation,  perhaps  altercation,  she  yielded.  The 
mourning  was  thrown  aside.  Then  everything  she  wore 
must  be  new.  Lady  Cecilia  and  Mademoiselle  Felicie,  her 
waiting-maid,  insisted  upon  taking  the  matter  into  their  own 
hands.  Helen  really  intended  only  to  let  one  dress  for  her 
friend's  birthday  be  bespoken  for  her ;  but  from  one  thing  she 
was  led  on  to  another.  Lady  Cecilia's  taste  in  dress  was 
exquisite.  Her  first  general  principle  was  admirable — 'What- 
ever you  buy,  let  it  be  the  best  of  its  kind,  which  is  always 
the  cheapest  in  the  end.'  Her  second  maxim  was — '  Never 
have  anything  but  from  such  and  such  people,  or  from  such 
and  such  places,'  naming  those  who  were  at  the  moment 
accredited  by  fashion.  '  These,  of  course,  make  you  pay  high 
for  the  name  of  the  thing ;  but  that  must  be.  The  name  is 
all,'  said  Lady  Cecilia.  '  Does  your  hat,  your  bonnet,  whatever 
it  be,  come  from  the  reigning  fashionable  authority  ?  then  it  is 
right,  and  you  are  quite  right.  You  can  put  down  all  objections 
and  objectors  with  the  magic  of  a  name.  You  need  think  no 
more  about  your  dress  ;  you  have  no  trouble  ;  while  the  poor 
creatures  who  go  toiling  and  rummaging  in  cheap  shops — 
what  comes  of  it  but  total  exhaustion  and  disgrace  ?  Yes- 
terday, now,  my  dear  Helen,  recollect.  When  Lady  Katrine, 
after  dinner,  asked  little  Miss  Isdall  where  she  bought  that 
pretty  hat,  the  poor  girl  was  quite  out  of  countenance.  "  Really 
she  did  not  know ;  she  only  knew  it  was  very  cheap."  You 
saw  that  nobody  could  endure  the  hat  afterwards  ;  so  that,  cheap 
as  it  might  be,  it  was  money  to  all  intents  and  purposes 
absolutely  thrown  away,  for  it  did  not  answer  its  purpose.' 

Helen,  laughing,  observed  that  if  its  purpose  had  been  to 
look  well,  and  to  make  the  wearer  look  well,  it  had  fully 
succeeded. 

'  Sophistry,  my  dear  Helen.  The  purpose  was  not  to  look 
well,  but  to  have  a  distinguished  air.  Dress,  and  what  we  call 
fashion  and  taste  altogether,  you  know,  are  mere  matters  of 

227 


HELEN 

opinion,  association  of  ideas,  and  so  forth.  When  will  you 
learn  to  reason,  as  mamma  says  ?  Do  not  make  me  despair 
of  you.' 

Thus,  half  in  jest,  half  in  earnest,  with  truth  and  falsehood, 
sense  and  nonsense,  prettily  blended  together.  Lady  Cecilia  pre- 
vailed in  overpowering  Helen's  better  judgment,  and  obtained 
a  hasty  submission.  In  economy,  as  in  morals,  false  principles 
are  far  more  dangerous  than  any  one  single  error.  One  false 
principle  as  to  laying  out  money  is  worse  than  any  bad  bargain 
that  can  be  made,  because  it  leads  to  bad  bargains  innumerable. 
It  was  settled  that  all  Helen  wanted  should  be  purchased,  not 
only  from  those  who  sold  the  best  goods,  but  from  certain  very 
expensive  houses  of  fashionably  high  name  in  London.  And 
the  next  point  Lady  Cecilia  insisted  upon  was,  that  Helen's 
dress  should  always  be  the  same  as  her  own.  'You  know  it 
used  to  be  so,  my  dear  Helen,  when  we  were  children  ;  let  it 
be  so  now.' 

'  But  there  is  such  a  difference  now^  said  Helen  ;  '  and  I 
cannot  afford ' 

'  Difference  !  Oh  !  don't  talk  of  differences — let  there  be 
none  ever  between  us.  Not  afford  ! — nonsense,  my  dear — 
the  expense  will  be  nothing.  In  these  days  you  get  the  mate- 
rials of  dress  absolutely  for  nothing — the  fashion — the  making- 
up  is  all,  as  Felicie  and  I,  and  everybody  who  knows  anything 
of  the  matter,  can  tell  you.  Now  all  that  sort  of  thing  we  can 
save  you — here  is  my  wedding  paraphernalia  all  at  your  service 
— patterns  ready  cut — and  here  is  Felicie,  whose  whole  French 
soul  is  in  the  toilette — and  there  is  your  own  little  maid,  who 
has  hands,  and  head,  and  heart,  all  devoted  to  you — so  leave 
it  to  us — leave  it  to  us,  my  dear — take  no  thought  what  you 
shall  put  on — and  you  will  put  it  on  all  the  better.'  Felicie 
was  summoned.  '  Felicie,  remember  Miss  Stanley's  dress  is 
always  to  be  the  same  as  my  own.  It  must  be  so,  my  dear. 
It  will  be  the  greatest  pleasure  to  me,'  and  with  her  most 
persuasive  caressing  manner,  she  added,  '  My  own  dear  Helen, 
if  you  love  me,  let  it  be  so.' 

This  was  an  appeal  which  Helen  could  not  resist.  She 
thought  that  she  could  not  refuse  without  vexing  Cecilia  ;  and, 
from  a  sort  of  sentimental  belief  that  she  was  doing  Cecilia  '  a 
real  kindness,' — that  it  was  what  Cecilia  called  '  a  sisterly 
act,'  she  yielded  to  what  she  knew  was  unsuited  to  her  cir- 

228 


HELEN 

cumstances — to  what  was  quite  contrary  to  her  better  judg- 
ment. It  often  so  happens  that  our  friends  doubly  guard  one 
obvious  point  of  weakness,  while  another  exists  undiscovered 
by  them,  and  unknown  to  ourselves.  Lady  Davenant  had 
warned  Helen  against  the  dangers  of  indecision  and  coquetry 
with  her  lovers,  but  this  danger  of  extravagance  in  dress  she 
had  not  foreseen — and  into  how  much  expense  this  one  weak 
compliance  would  lead  her,  Helen  could  not  calculate.  She 
had  fancied  that,  at  least,  till  she  went  to  town,  she  should  not 
want  anything  expensive — this  was  a  great  mistake.  Formerly 
in  England,  as  still  in  every  other  country  but  England,  a 
marked  difference  was  made  in  the  style  of  dress  in  the  country 
and  in  town.  Formerly,  overdressing  in  the  country  was  re- 
probated as  quite  vulgar  ;  but  now,  even  persons  of  birth  and 
fashion  are  guilty  of  this  want  of  taste  and  sense.  They  dis- 
play almost  as  much  expensive  dress  in  the  country  as  in  town. 

It  happened  that,  among  the  succession  of  company  at 
Clarendon  Park  this  summer,  there  came,  self-invited,  from 
the  royal  party  in  the  neighbourhood,  a  certain  wealthy  lady, 
by  some  called  '  Golconda,'  by  others  'the  Duchess  of  Bauble- 
shire.'  She  was  passionately  fond  of  dress,  and  she  eclipsed 
all  rivals  in  magnificence  and  variety  of  ornaments.  At 
imminent  peril  of  being  robbed,  she  brought  to  the  country, 
and  carried  about  everywhere  with  her,  an  amazing  number 
of  jewels,  wearing  two  or  three  different  sets  at  different  times 
of  the  day — displaying  them  on  the  most  absurdly  improper 
occasions — at  3.fHe  champHre,  or  a  boat-race. 

Once,  after  a  riding-party,  at  a  picnic  under  the  trees, 
when  it  had  been  resolved  unanimously  that  nobody  should 
change  their  dress  at  dinner-time,  Golconda  appeared  in  a 
splendid  necklace,  displayed  over  her  riding-dress,  and  when 
she  was  reproached  with  having  broken  through  the  general 
agreement  not  to  dress  she  replied  that  'really  she  had  put 
the  thing  on  in  the  greatest  hurry,  without  knowing  well  what 
it  was,  just  to  oblige  her  little  page  who  had  brought  three 
sets  of  jewels  for  her  choice — she  had  chosen  the  most 
undressed  of  the  three,  merely  because  she  could  not  dis- 
appoint the  poor  little  fellow.' 

Every  one  saw  the  affectation  and  folly,  and  above  all,  the 
vulgarity  of  this  display,  and  those  who  were  most  envious 
were  most  eager  to  comfort  themselves  by  ridicule.      Never 

229 


HELEN 

was  the  '  Golconda '  out  of  hearing,  but  Lady  Katrine  was 
ready  with  some  instance  of  her  '  absurd  vanity.'  '  If  fortune 
had  but  blessed  her  with  such  jewels,'  Lady  Katrine  said, 
'  she  trusted  she  should  have  worn  them  with  better  grace '  ; 
but  it  did  not  appear  that  the  taste  for  baubles  was  diminished 
by  the  ridicule  thrown  upon  them — quite  the  contrary,  it 
was  plain  that  the  laughers  were  only  envious,  and  envious 
because  they  could  not  be  envied. 

Lady  Cecilia,  who  had  no  envy  in  her  nature — who  was 
really  generous — entered  not  into  this  vain  competition  ;  on 
the  contrary,  she  refrained  from  wearing  any  of  her  jewels, 
because  Helen  had  none  ;  besides,  simplicity  was  really  the 
best  taste,  the  General  said  so — this  was  well  thought  and  well 
done  for  some  time,  but  there  was  a  little  lurking  love  of 
ornaments  in  Cecilia's  mind,  nor  was  Helen  entirely  without 
sympathy  in  that  taste.  Her  uncle  had  early  excited  it  in 
her  mind  by  frequent  fond  presents  of  the  prettiest  trinkets 
imaginable  ;  the  taste  had  been  matured  along  with  her  love 
for  one  for  whom  she  had  such  strong  affection,  and  it  had 
seemed  to  die  with  its  origin.  Before  she  left  Cecilhurst, 
Helen  had  given  away  every  ornament  she  possessed  ;  she 
thought  she  could  never  want  them  again,  and  she  left 
them  as  remembrances  with  those  who  had  loved  her  and 
her  uncle. 

Cecilia  on  her  birthday  brought  her  a  set  of  forget-me-nots, 
to  match  those  which  she  intended  to  wear  herself,  and  which 
had  been  long  ago  given  to  Lady  Cecilia  by  the  dear  good 
Dean  himself.  This  was  irresistible  to  Helen,  and  they  were 
accepted.  But  this  was  only  the  prelude  to  presents  of  more 
value,  which  Helen  scrupled  to  receive  ;  yet — 

Oft  to  refuse  and  never  once  offend 

was  not  so  easily  done  as  said,  especially  with  Lady  Cecilia ; 
she  was  so  urgent,  so  caressing,  and  had  so  many  plausible 
reasons,  suitable  to  all  occasions.  On  the  General's  birthday. 
Lady  Cecilia  naturally  wished  to  wear  his  first  gift  to  her — 
a  pair  of  beautiful  pearl  bracelets,  but  then  Helen  must  have 
the  same.  Helen  thought  that  Roman  pearl  would  do  quite 
as  well  for  her.  She  had  seen  some  such  excellent  imitations 
that  no  eye  could  detect  the  difference. 

'  No  eye  !   very  likely ;  but  still  your  own  conscience,  my 
230 


HELEN 

dear ! '  replied  Lady  Cecilia.  '  And  if  people  ask  whether 
they  are  real,  what  would  you  say  ?  You  know  there  are 
everywhere  impertinent  people ;  malicious  Lady  Katrines,  who 
will  ask  questions.  Oh  !  positively  I  cannot  bear  to  think  of 
your  being  detected  in  passing  off  counterfeits.  In  all  orna- 
ments, it  should  be  genuine  or  none — none  or  genuine.' 

'  None,  then,  let  it  be  for  me  this  time,  dear  Cecilia.' 

Cecilia  seemed  to  submit,  and  Helen  thought  she  had  well 
settled  it.  But  on  the  day  of  the  General's  fHe^  the  peai-1 
bracelets  were  on  her  dressing-table.  They  were  from  the 
General,  and  could  not  be  refused.  CeciUa  declared  she  had' 
nothing  to  do  with  the  matter. 

'  Oh,  Cecilia  ! ' 

'  Upon  my  word  ! '  cried  Lady  Cecilia  ;  '  and  if  you  doubt 
me,  the  General  shall  have  the  honour  of  presenting,  and  you 
the  agony  of  refusing  or  accepting,  them  in  full  salon.' 

Helen  sighed,  hesitated,  and  submitted.  The  General,  on 
her  appearing  with  the  bracelets,  bowed,  smiled,  and  thanked 
her  with  his  kindest  look  ;  and  she  was  glad  to  see  him  look 
kindly  upon  her  again. 

Having  gained  her  point  so  pleasantly  this  time.  Lady 
Cecilia  did  not  stop  there  ;  and  Helen  found  there  was  no 
resource  but  to  bespeak  beforehand  for  herself  whatever  she 
apprehended  would  be  pressed  upon  her  acceptance. 

Fresh  occasions  for  display,  and  new  necessities  for  expense, 
continually  occurred.  Reviews,  and  races,  and  race  balls,  and 
archery  meetings,  and  archery  balls,  had  been,  and  a  regatta 
was  to  be.  At  some  of  these  the  ladies  had  appeared  in 
certain  uniforms,  new,  of  course,  for  the  day ;  and  now 
preparations  for  the  regatta  had  commenced,  and  were  going 
on.  It  was  to  last  several  days  ;  and  after  the  boat-races  in 
the  morning,  there  were  to  be  balls  at  night.  The  first  of 
these  was  to  be  at  Clarendon  Park,  and  Mademoiselle  Felicie 
considered  her  lady's  dress  upon  this  occasion  as  one  of  the 
objects  of  first  importance  in  the  universe.  She  had  often 
sighed  over  the  long  unopened  jewel-box.  Her  lady  might  as 
well  be  nobody.  Mademoiselle  Felicie  could  no  ways  under- 
stand a  lady  well  bom  not  wearing  that  which  distinguished 
her  above  the  common  ;  and  if  she  was  ever  to  wear  jewels, 
the  ball-room  was  surely  the  proper  place.  And  the  sapphire 
necklace  would   look   h.  ravir  with  her  lady's  dress,   which, 

231 


HELEN 

indeed,  without  it,  would  have  no  effect ;  would  be  quite 
mesquine  and  manqu^e. 

Now  Lady  Cecilia  had  a  great  inclination  to  wear  that 
sapphire  necklace,  which  probably  Felicie  saw  when  she 
commenced  her  remonstrances,  for  it  is  part  of  the  business 
of  the  well-trained  waiting-woman  to  give  utterance  to  those 
thoughts  which  her  lady  wishes  should  be  divined  and  pressed 
into  accomplishment.  Cecilia  considered  whether  it  would 
not  be  possible  to  divide  the  double  rows  of  her  sapphires,  to 
make  out  a  set  for  Helen  as  well  as  for  herself;  she  hesitated 
only  because  they  had  been  given  to  her  by  her  mother,  and 
she  did  not  like  to  run  the  hazard  of  spoiling  the  set ;  but  still 
she  could  manage  it,  and  she  would  do  it.  Mademoiselle 
Felicie  protested  the  attempt  would  be  something  very  like 
sacrilege  ;  to  prevent  which,  she  gave  a  hint  to  Helen  of  what 
was  in  contemplation. 

Helen  knew  that  with  Cecilia,  when  once  she  had  set  her 
heart  upon  a  generous  feat  of  this  kind,  remonstrance  would 
be  in  vain  ;  she  dreaded  that  she  would,  if  prevented  from  the 
meditated  division  of  the  sapphires,  purchase  for  her  a  new 
set :  she  had  not  the  least  idea  what  the  expense  was,  but,  at 
the  moment,  she  thought  anything  would  be  better  than  letting 
Cecilia  spoil  her  mother's  present,  or  put  her  under  fresh 
obligations  of  this  sort.  She  knew  that  the  sapphires  had 
been  got  from  the  jewellers  with  whom  her  uncle  had  dealt, 
and  who  were  no  strangers  to  her  name  ;  she  wrote,  and 
bespoke  a  similar  set  to  Lady  Cecilia's. 

'  Charmante !  the  very  thing,'  Mademoiselle  Felicie  fore- 
saw, 'a  young  lady  so  well  bom  would  determine  on  doing. 
And  if  she  might  add  a  little  word,  it  would  be  good  at  the 
same  opportunity  to  order  a  ruby  brooch,  the  same  as  her 
lady's,  as  that  would  be  the  next  object  in  question  for  the 
second  day's  regatta  ball,  when  it  would  be  indispensable  for 
that  night's  appearance ;  positivement,  she  knew  her  lady 
would  do  it  for  Miss  Stanley  if  Miss  Stanley  did  not  do  it  of 
her  own  head.' 

Helen  did  not  think  that  a  brooch  could  be  very  expensive  ; 
there  was  not  time  to  consider  about  it — the  post  was  going — 
she  was  afraid  that  Lady  Cecilia  would  come  in  and  find  her 
writing,  and  prevent  her  sending  the  letter.  She  hastily 
added    an    order    for    the    brooch,    finished    the    letter,    and 

232 


HELEN 

despatched  it.  And  when  it  was  gone  she  told  Ceciha  what 
she  had  done.  Cecilia  looked  startled  ;  she  was  well  aware 
that  Helen  did  not  know  the  high  price  of  what  she  had 
bespoken.  But,  determining  that  she  would  settle  it  her  own 
way,  she  took  care  not  to  give  any  alarm,  and  shaking  her 
head,  she  only  reproached  Helen  playfully  with  having  thus 
stolen  a  march  upon  her. 

'  You  think  you  have  out-generaled  me,  but  we  shall  see. 
Remember,  I  am  the  wife  of  a  general,  and  not  without 
resources.' 


CHAPTER   XXIII 

Of  the  regatta,  of  the  fineness  of  the  weather,  the  beauty  of 
the  spectacle,  and  the  dresses  of  the  ladies,  a  full  account 
appeared  in  the  papers  of  the  day,  of  which  it  would  be  use- 
less here  to  give  a  repetition,  and  shameful  to  steal  or  seem 
to  steal  a  description.  We  shall  record  only  what  concerns 
Helen. 

With  the  freshness  of  youth  and  of  her  naturally  happy 
temper,  she  was  delighted  with  the  whole,  to  her  a  perfectly 
new  spectacle,  and  evei-ybody  was  pleased  except  Lady 
Katrine,  who,  in  the  midst  of  every  amusement,  always  found 
something  that  annoyed  her,  something  that  '  should  not  have 
been  so.'  She  was  upon  this  occasion  more  cross  than  usual, 
because  this  morning's  uniform  was  not  becoming  to  her,  and 
was  most  particularly  so  to  Miss  Stanley,  as  all  the  gentlemen 
observed. 

Just  in  time  before  the  ladies  went  to  dress  for  the  ball  at 
night,  the  precious  box  arrived,  containing  the  set  of  sapphires. 
Cecilia  opened  it  eagerly,  to  see  that  all  was  right.  Helen 
was  not  in  the  room.  Lady  Katrine  stood  by,  and  when  she 
found  that  these  were  for  Helen,  her  envious  indignation 
broke  forth.  '  The  poor  daughters  of  peers  cannot  indulge  in 
such  things,'  cried  she  ;  '  they  are  fit  only  for  rich  heiresses  ! 
I  understood,'  continued  she,  'that  Miss  Stanley  had  given 
away  her  fortune  to  pay  her  uncle's  debts,  but  I  presume 
she  has    thought   better  of  that,  as  I  always  prophesied  she 

233 


HELEN 

would.        Generosity    is    charming,  but,   after    all,    sapphires 
are  so  becoming  ! ' 

Helen  came  into  the  room  just  as  this  speech  was  ended. 
Lady  Katrine  had  one  of  the  bracelets  in  her  hand.  She 
looked  miserably  cross,  for  she  had  been  disappointed  about 
some  ornaments  she  had  expected  by  the  same  conveyance  that 
brought  Miss  Stanley's.  She  protested  that  she  had  nothing 
fit  to  wear  to-night.  Helen  looked  at  Cecilia  ;  and  though 
Cecilia's  look  gave  no  encouragement,  she  begged  that  Lady 
Katrine  would  do  her  the  honour  to  wear  these  sapphires  this 
night,  since  she  had  not  rer  ived  what  her  ladyship  had 
ordered.  Lady  Katrine  sufifered  herself  to  be  prevailed  on, 
but  accepted  with  as  ill  a  grace  as  possible.  The  ball  went 
on,  and  Helen  at  least  was  happier  than  if  she  had  worn  the 
bracelets.  She  had  no  pleasure  in  being  the  object  of  envy, 
and  now,  when  she  found  that  Cecilia  could  be  and  was  satis- 
fied, though  their  ornaments  were  not  exactly  ahke,  it  came 
full  upon  her  mind  that  she  had  done  foolishly  in  bespeaking 
these  sapphires  :  it  was  at  that  moment  only  a  transient  self- 
reproach  for  extravagance,  but  before  she  went  to  rest  this 
night  it  became  more  serious. 

Lady  Davenant  had  been  expected  all  day,  but  she  did  not 
arrive  till  late  in  the  midst  of  the  ball,  and  she  just  looked  in 
at  the  dancers  for  a  few  minutes  before  she  retired  to  her  own 
apartment.  Helen  would  have  followed  her,  but  that  was  not 
allowed.  After  the  dancing  was  over,  however,  as  she  was 
going  to  her  room,  she  heard  Lady  Davenant's  voice  calling  to 
her  as  she  passed  by  ;  and,  opening  the  door  softly,  she  found 
her  still  awake,  and  desiring  to  see  her  for  a  few  minutes,  if 
she  was  not  too  much  tired. 

'  Oh  no,  not  in  the  least  tired ;  quite  the  contrary,'  said 
Helen. 

After  affectionately  embracing  her.  Lady  Davenant  held  her 
at  arm's  length,  and  looked  at  her  as  the  light  of  the  lamp 
shone  full  upon  her  face  and  figure.  Pleased  with  her  whole 
appearance.  Lady  Davenant  smiled,  and  said,  as  she  looked  at 
her — '  You  seem,  Helen,  to  have  shared  the  grateful  old  fairy's 
gift  to  Lady  Georgiana  B.  of  the  never-fading  rose  in  the 
cheek.  But  what  particularly  pleases  me,  Helen,  is  the  perfect 
simplicity  of  your  dress.  In  the  few  minutes  that  I  was  in  the 
ball-room  to-night,  I  was  struck  with  that  over-dressed  duchess  ; 

234 


HELEN 

her  figure  has  been  before  my  eyes  ever  since,  hung  round  with 
jewellery,  and  with  that  aureole  a  foot  and  a  half  high  on  her 
head :  like  the  Russian  bride's  head-gear,  which  Heber  so  well 
called  "the  most  costly  deformity  he  ever  beheld."  Really, 
this  passion  for  baubles,'  continued  Lady  Davenant,  '  is  the 
universal  passion  of  our  sex.  I  will  give  you  an  instance  to 
what  extravagance  it  goes.  I  know  a  lady  of  high  rank,  who 
hires  a  certain  pair  of  emerald  earrings  at  fifteen  hundred 
pounds  per  annum.  She  rents  them  in  this  way  from  some 
German  countess  in  whose  family  they  are  an  heirloom,  and 
cannot  be  sold.'  Helen  expressed  her  astonishment.  '  This 
is  only  one  instance,  my  dear ;  I  could  give  you  hundreds. 
Over  the  whole  world,  women  of  all  ages,  all  ranks,  all  con- 
ditions, have  been  seized  with  this  bauble  insanity — from  the 
counter  to  the  throne.  Think  of  Marie  Antoinette  and  the 
story  of  her  necklace  ;  and  Josephine  and  her  Cisalpine  pearls, 
and  all  the  falsehoods  she  told  about  them  to  the  emperor  she 
reverenced,  the  husband  she  loved — and  all  for  what? — a 
string  of  beads  !  But  I  forget,'  cried  Lady  Davenant,  in- 
terrupting herself,  '  I  must  not  forget  how  late  it  is  :  and  I  am 
keeping  you  up,  and  you  have  been  dancing  :  forgive  me  ! 
When  once  my  mind  is  moved  I  forget  all  hours.  Good-night 
— or  good-morning,  my  dear  child  ;  go,  and  rest.'  But  just  as 
Helen  was  withdrawing  her  hand.  Lady  Davenant's  eye  fixed 
on  her  pearl  bracelets — '  Roman  pearls,  or  real  ?  Real,  I  see, 
and  very  valuable  ! — given  to  you,  I  suppose,  by  your  poor 
dear  extravagant  uncle  ?  ' 

Helen  cleared  her  uncle's  memory  from  this  imputation,  and 
explained  that  the  bracelets  were  a  present  from  General 
Clarendon.  She  did  not  know  they  were  so  '  very  valuable,' 
but  she  hoped  she  had  not  done  wrong  to  accept  of  them  in 
the  circumstances  ;  and  she  told  how  she  had  been  induced  to 
take  them. 

Lady  Davenant  said  she  had  done  quite  right.  The  General 
was  no  present-maker,  and  this  exception  in  his  favour  could 
not  lead  to  any  future  inconvenience.  '  But  Cecilia,'  con- 
tinued she,  'is  too  much  addicted  to  trinket- giving,  which 
ends  often  disagreeably  even  between  friends,  or  at  all  events 
fosters  a  foolish  taste,  and  moreover  associates  it  with  feelings 
of  affection  in  a  way  particularly  deceitful  and  dangerous  to 
such  a  little,  tender-hearted  person  as  I  am  speaking  to,  whose 

235 


HELEN 

common  sense  would  too  easily  give  way  to  the  pleasure  of 
pleasing  or  fear  of  offending  a  friend.  Kiss  me,  and  don't 
contradict  me,  for  your  conscience  tells  you  that  what  I  say  is 
true.' 

The  sapphires,  the  ruby  brooch,  and  all  her  unsettled 
accounts,  came  across  Helen's  mind ;  and  if  the  light  had 
shone  upon  her  face  at  that  moment,  her  embarrassment  must 
have  been  seen  ;  but  Lady  Davenant,  as  she  finished  the  last 
words,  laid  her  head  upon  the  pillow,  and  she  turned  and 
settled  herself  comfortably  to  go  to  sleep.  Helen  retired  with 
a  disordered  conscience  ;  and  the  first  thing  she  did  in  the 
morning  was  to  look  in  the  red  case  in  which  the  sapphires 
came,  to  see  if  there  was  any  note  of  their  price  ;  she  recol- 
lected having  seen  some  little  bit  of  card — it  was  found  on  the 
dressing-table.  When  she  beheld  the  price,  fear  took  away 
her  breath — it  was  nearly  half  her  whole  year's  income  ;  still 
she  could  pay  it.  But  the  ruby  brooch  that  had  not  yet  arrived 
— what  would  that  cost  ?  She  hurried  to  her  accounts  ;  she 
had  let  them  run  on  for  months  unlocked  at,  but  she  thought 
she  must  know  the  principal  articles  of  expense  in  dress  by 
her  actual  possessions.  There  was  a  heap  of  little  crumpled 
bills  which,  with  Felicie's  griffonage,  Helen  had  thrown  into 
her  table-drawer.  In  vain  did  she  attempt  to  decipher  the 
figures,  like  apothecaries'  marks,  linked  to  quarters  and  three- 
quarters,  and  yards,  of  gauzes,  silks,  and  muslins,  altogether 
inextricably  puzzling.  They  might  have  been  at  any  other 
moment  laughable,  but  now  they  were  quite  terrible  to  Helen  ; 
the  only  thing  she  could  make  clearly  out  was  the  total ;  she 
was  astonished  when  she  saw  to  how  much  little  nothings  can 
amount,  an  astonishment  felt  often  by  the  most  experienced — 
how  much  more  by  Helen,  all  unused  to  the  arithmetic  of 
economy  !  At  this  instant  her  maid  came  in  smiling  with  a 
packet,  as  if  sure  of  being  the  bearer  of  the  very  thing  her 
young  lady  most  wished  for  ;  it  was  the  brooch — the  very  last 
thing  in  the  world  she  desired  to  see.  With  a  trembling 
hand  she  opened  the  parcel,  looked  at  the  note  of  the  price, 
and  sank  upon  her  chair  half  stupefied,  with  her  eyes  fixed 
upon  the  sum.  She  sat  she  knew  not  how  long,  till,  roused 
by  the  opening  of  Cecilia's  door,  she  hastened  to  put  away  the 
papers. 

'  Let  me  see  them,  my  dear,  don't  put  away  those  papers,' 
236 


HELEN 

cried  Cecilia ;  '  Felicie  tells  me  that  you  have  been  at  these 
horrid  accounts  these  two  hours,  and — you  look — my  dear 
Helen,  you  must  let  nie  see  how  much  it  is  ! '  She  drew  the 
total  from  beneath  Helen's  hand.  It  was  astounding  even  to 
Cecilia,  as  appeared  by  her  first  unguarded  look  of  surprise. 
But,  recovering  herself  immediately,  she  in  a  playfully-scolding 
tone  told  Helen  that  all  this  evil  came  upon  her  in  consequence 
of  her  secret  machinations.  '  You  set  about  to  counteract  me, 
wrote  for  things  that  I  might  not  get  them  for  you,  you  see 
what  has  come  of  it !  As  to  these  bills,  they  are  all  from 
tradespeople  who  cannot  be  in  a  hurry  to  be  paid ;  and  as  to 
the  things  Felicie  has  got  for  you,  she  can  wait,  is  not  she  a 
waiting-woman  by  profession  ?  Now,  where  is  the  ruby  brooch  ? 
Have  you  never  looked  at  it  ? — I  hope  it  is  pretty — I  am  sure 
it  is  handsome,'  cried  she,  as  she  opened  the  case.  '  Yes  ;  I 
like  it  prodigiously,  I  will  take  it  off  your  hands,  my  dear  ;  will 
that  do  ? ' 

'  No,  Cecilia,  I  cannot  let  you  do  that,  for  you  have  one  the 
same,  I  know,  and  you  cannot  want  another — no,  no.' 

'  You  speak  like  an  angel,  my  dear,  but  you  do  not  look 
like  one,'  said  Cecilia.  '  So  woebegone,  so  pale  a  creature, 
never  did  I  see  !  do  look  at  yourself  in  the  glass  ;  but  you  are 
too  wretched  to  plague.  Seriously,  I  want  this  brooch,  and 
mine  it  must  be — it  is  mine  :   I  have  a  use  for  it,  I  assure  you.' 

'  Well,  if  you  have  a  use  for  it,  really,'  said  Helen,  '  I  should 
indeed  be  very  glad ' 

'  Be  glad  then,  it  is  mine,'  said  Cecilia ;  '  and  now  it  is 
yours,  my  dear  Helen,  now,  not  a  word,  pray,  if  you  love  me ! ' 

Helen  could  not  accept  of  it ;  she  thanked  Cecilia  with  all 
her  heart,  she  felt  her  kindness — her  generosity,  but  even  the 
hitherto  irresistible  words,  '  If  you  love  me,'  were  urged  in 
vain.  If  she  had  not  been  in  actual  need  of  money,  she  might 
have  been  over-persuaded,  but  now  her  spirit  of  independence 
strengthened  her  resolution,  and  she  persisted  in  her  refusal. 
Lady  Davenant's  bell  rang,  and  Helen,  slowly  rising,  took  up 
the  miserable  accounts,  and  said,  '  Now  I  must  go ' 

'  Where  ! '  said  Cecilia ;  '  you  look  as  if  you  had  heard  a 
knell  that  summoned  you — what  are  you  going  to  do  ? ' 

'  To  tell  all  my  follies  to  Lady  Davenant.' 

'Tell  your  follies  to  nobody  but  me,'  cried  Lady  Cecilia. 
'  I  have  enough  of  my  own  to  sympathise  with  you,  but  do  not 

237 


HELEN 

go  and  tell  them  to  my  mother,  of  all  people  ;  she,  who  has 
none  of  her  own,  how  can  you  expect  any  mercy  ? ' 

'  I  do  not  ;  I  am  content  to  bear  all  the  blame  I  so  richly 
deserve,  but  I  know  that  after  she  has  heard  me,  she  will  tell 
me  what  I  ought  to  do,  she  will  find  out  some  way  of  settling 
it  all  rightly,  and  if  that  can  but  be,  I  do  not  care  how  much  I 
suffer.     So  the  sooner  I  go  to  her  the  better,'  said  Helen. 

'  But  you  need  not  be  in  such  a  hurry  ;  do  not  be  like  the 
man  who  said,  "_/s  veux  &tre  Penfajit  prodigue,  je  veux  eire 
renfant  perdu."  L'enfant  prodigue,  well  and  good,  but  why 
V enfant  perdu  ? ' 

'  My  dear  Cecilia,  do  not  play  with  me  now — do  not  stop 
me,'  said  Helen  anxiously.  '  It  is  serious  with  me  now,  and  it 
is  as  much  as  I  can  do ' 

Cecilia  let  her  go,  but  trembled  for  her,  as  she  looked  after 
her,  and  saw  her  stop  at  her  mother's  door. 

Helen's  first  knock  was  too  low,  it  was  unheard,  she  was 
obliged  to  wait ;  another,  louder,  was  answered  by  '  Come  in.' 
And  in  the  presence  she  stood,  and  into  the  middle  of  things 
she  rushed  at  once  ;  the  accounts,  the  total,  lay  before  Lady 
Davenant.  There  it  was  :  and  the  culprit,  having  made  her 
confession,  stood  waiting  for  the  sentence. 

The  first  astonished  change  of  look  was  certainly  difficult  to 
sustain.  '  I  ought  to  have  foreseen  this,'  said  Lady  Davenant  ; 
'  my  affection  has  deceived  my  judgment.  Helen,  I  am  sorry 
for  your  sake,  and  for  my  own.' 

'  Oh  do  not  speak  in  that  dreadful  calm  voice,  as  if — do  not 
give  me  up  at  once,'  cried  Helen. 

'  What  can  1  do  for  you  ?  what  can  be  done  for  one  who 
has  no  strength  of  mind  ?  '  I  have  some,  thought  Helen,  or  I 
should  not  be  here  at  this  moment.  '  Of  what  avail,  Helen,  is 
your  good  heart — your  good  intentions,  without  the  power  to 
abide  by  them  ?  When  you  can  be  drawn  aside  from  the 
right  by  the  first  paltry  temptation — by  that  most  contemptible 
of  passions — the  passion  for  baubles  !  You  tell  me  it  was  not 
that,  what  then  ?  a  few  words  of  persuasion  from  any  one  who 
can  smile,  and  fondle,  and  tell  you  that  they  love  you  ; — the 
fear  of  offending  Cecilia !  how  absurd  !  Is  this  what  you 
both  call  friendship  ?  But  weaker  still,  Helen,  I  perceive  that 
you  have  been  led  blindfold  in  extravagance  by  a  prating  French 
waiting-maid — to  the  brink  of  ruin,  the  very  verge  of  dishonesty. ' 

238 


HELEN 

'  Dishonesty  !  how  ? ' 

'  Ask  yourself,  Helen  :  is  a  person  honest,  who  orders  and 
takes  from  the  owner  that  for  which  he  cannot  pay  ?  Answer 
me,  honest  or  dishonest  ? ' 

'  Dishonest !  if  I  had  intended  not  to  pay.  But  I  did  intend 
to  pay,  and  I  will.' 

'  You  will !  The  weak  have  no  will — never  dare  to  say  I 
will.  Tell  me  how  you  will  pay  that  which  you  owe.  You 
have  no  means — no  choice,  except  to  take  from  the  fund  you 
have  already  willed  to  another  purpose.  See  what  good  in- 
tentions come  to,  Helen,  when  you  cannot  abide  by  them  ! ' 

'  But  I  can,'  cried  Helen  ;  '  whatever  else  I  do,  I  will  not 
touch  that  fund,  destined  for  my  dear  uncle — I  have  not 
touched  it.  I  could  pay  it  in  two  years,  and  I  will — I  will 
give  up  my  whole  allowance.' 

'  And  what  will  you  live  upon  in  the  meantime  ? ' 

'  I  should  not  have  said  my  whole  allowance,  but  I  can  do 
with  very  little,  I  will  buy  nothing  new.' 

'  Buy  nothing — live  upon  nothing ! '  repeated  Lady  Davenant ; 
'how  often  have  I  heard  these  words  said  by  the  most  im- 
provident, in  the  moment  of  repentance,  even  then  as  blind 
and  uncalculating  as  ever  !  And  you,  Helen,  talk  to  me  of 
your  powers  of  forbearance, — you,  who,  with  the  strongest 
motive  your  heart  could  feel,  have  not  been  able  for  a  few 
short  months  to  resist  the  most  foolish — the  most  useless 
fancies.' 

Helen  burst  into  tears.  But  Lady  Davenant,  unmoved,  at 
least  to  all  outward  appearance,  coldly  said,  '  It  is  not  feeling 
that  you  want,  or  that  I  require  from  you  ;  I  am  not  to  be 
satisfied  by  words  or  tears.' 

'  I  deserve  it  all,'  said  Helen  ;  '  and  I  know  you  are  not 
cruel.  In  the  midst  of  all  this,  I  know  you  are  my  best 
friend.' 

Lady  Davenant  was  now  obliged  to  be  silent,  lest  her  voice 
should  betray  more  tenderness  than  her  countenance  chose 
to  show. 

'  Only  tell  me  what  I  can  do  now,'  continued  Helen  ;  '  what 
can  I  do  ?  ' 

'  What  you  can  do,  I  will  tell  you,  Helen.  Who  was  the 
man  you  were  danping  with  last  night  ? ' 

'  I  danced  with  several  ;  which  do  you  mean  ? ' 

239 


HELEN 

'  Your  partner  in  the  quadrille  you  were  dancing  when  I 
came  in.' 

'  Lord  Estridge  ;  but  you  know  him — he  has  been  often 
here.' 

'  Is  he  rich  ?'  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'  Oh  yes,  very  rich,  and  very  self-sufficient ;  he  is  the  man 
Cecilia  used  to  call  "  Le prince  de  mon  merite." ' 

'  Did  she  ?  I  do  not  remember.  He  made  no  impression 
on  me,  nor  on  you,  I  daresay.' 

'  Not  the  least,  indeed.' 

'  No  matter,  he  will  do  as  well  as  another,  since  he  is  rich. 
You  can  marry  him,  and  pay  your  present  debts,  and  contract 
new,  for  thousands  instead  of  hundreds  : — this  is  what  you  CAN 
do,  Helen.' 

'  Do  you  think  I  can  ? '  said  Helen. 

'  You  can,  I  suppose,  as  well  as  others.  You  know  that 
young  ladies  often  marry  to  pay  their  debts.' 

'  So  I  once  heard,'  said  Helen,  '  but  is  it  possible  ? ' 

'  Quite.  You  might  have  been  told  more — that  they  enter 
into  regular  partnerships,  joint-stock  companies  with  dress- 
makers and  jewellers,  who  make  their  ventures  and  bargains 
on  the  more  or  less  reputation  of  the  young  ladies  for  beauty 
or  for  fashion,  supply  them  with  finery,  speculate  on  their 
probabilities  of  matrimonial  success,  and  trust  to  being  repaid 
after  marriage.  Why  not  pursue  this  plan  next  season  in 
town  ?  You  must  come  to  it  like  others,  whose  example  you 
follow — why  not  begin  it  immediately  ? ' 

There  is  nothing  so  reassuring  to  the  conscience  as  to  hear, 
in  the  midst  of  blame  that  we  do  deserve,  suppositions  of  faults, 
imputations  which  we  know  to  be  unmerited — impossible. 
Instead  of  being  hurt  or  alarmed  by  what  Lady  Davenant  had 
said,  the  whole  idea  appeared  to  Helen  so  utterly  beneath  her 
notice,  that  the  words  made  scarcely  any  impression  on  her 
mind,  and  her  thoughts  went  earnestly  back  to  the  pressing 
main  question — '  What  can  I  do,  honestly  to  pay  this  money 
that  I  owe  ? '  She  abruptly  asked  Lady  Davenant  if  she 
thought  the  jeweller  could  be  prevailed  upon  to  take  back  the 
sapphires  and  the  brooch. 

'  Certainly  not,  without  a  considerable  loss  to  you,'  replied 
Lady  Davenant ;  but  with  an  obvious  change  for  the  better  in 
her  countenance,  she  added,   '  Still  the  determination  to  give 

240 


HELEN 

up  the  bauble  is  good  ;  the  means,  at  whatever  loss,  we  will 
contrive  for  you,  if  you  are  determined.' 

'Determined! — oh  yes.'  She  ran  for  the  bracelets  and 
brooch,  and  eagerly  put  them  into  Lady  Davenant's  hand. 
And  now  another  bright  idea  came  into  her  mind  :  she  had  a 
carriage  of  her  own — a  very  handsome  carriage,  almost  new  ; 
she  could  part  with  it — yes,  she  would,  though  it  was  a  present 
from  her  dear  uncle — his  last  gift ;  and  he  had  taken  such 
pleasure  in  having  it  made  perfect  for  her.  She  was  very, 
very  fond  of  it,  but  she  would  part  with  it ;  she  saw  no  other 
means  of  abiding  by  her  promise,  and  paying  his  debts  and 
her  own.  This  passed  rapidly  through  her  mind  ;  and  when 
she  had  expressed  her  determination.  Lady  Davenant's  manner 
instantly  returned  to  all  its  usual  kindness,  and  she  exclaimed 
as  she  embraced  her,  drew  her  to  her,  and  kissed  her  again 
and  again — '  You  are  my  own  Helen  !  These  are  deeds, 
Helen,  not  words  :  I  am  satisfied — I  may  be  satisfied  with  you 
now. 

'  And  about  that  carriage,  my  dear,  it  shall  not  go  to  a 
stranger,  it  shall  be  mine.  I  want  a  travelling  chaise — I  will 
purchase  it  from  you :  I  shall  value  it  for  my  poor  friend's 
sake,  and  for  yours,  Helen.  So  now  it  is  settled,  and  you  are 
clear  in  the  world  again.  I  will  never  spoil  you,  but  I  will 
always  serve  you,  and  a  greater  pleasure  I  cannot  have  in  this 
world.' 

After  this  happy  termination  of  the  dreaded  confession,  how 
much  did  Helen  rejoice  that  she  had  had  the  courage  to  tell 
all  to  her  friend.  The  pain  was  transient — the  confidence 
permanent. 

As  Helen  was  going  into  her  own  room,  she  saw  Cecilia 
flying  upstairs  towards  her,  with  an  open  letter  in  her  hand, 
her  face  radiant  with  joy.  '  I  always  knew  it  would  all  end 
well !  Churchill  might  well  say  that  all  the  sand  in  my  hour- 
glass was  diamond  sand.  There,  my  dear  Helen — there,' 
cried  Cecilia,  embracing  her  as  she  put  the  letter  into  her 
hand.  It  was  from  Beauclerc,  his  answer  to  Lady  Cecilia's 
letter,  which  had  followed  him  to  Naples.  It  was  written  the 
very  instant  he  had  read  her  explanation,  and,  warm  from  his 
heart,  he  poured  out  all  the  joy  he  felt  on  hearing  the  truth, 
and,  in  his  transport  of  delight,  he  declared  that  he  quite  for- 
gave Lady  Cecilia,  and  would  forget,  as  she  desired,  all  the 
R  241 


SAe  ran  for  ilie  bracelets  and  brooch,  and  eagerly  put  them  into  Lady  Davefi  ant's  hafui. 


HELEN 

misery  she  had  made  him  feel.  Some  confounded  quarantine 
he  feared  might  detain  him,  but  he  would  certainly  be  at 
Clarendon  Park  in  as  short  a  time  as  possible.  Helen's  first 
smile,  he  said,  would  console  him  for  all  he  had  suffered,  and 
make  him  forget  everything. 

Helen's  first  smile  he  did  not  see,  nor  the  blush  which 
spread  and  rose  as  she  read.  Cecilia  was  delighted.  '  Gene- 
rous, affectionate  Cecilia  ! '  thought  Helen  ;  '  if  she  has  faults, 
and  she  really  has  but  one,  who  could  help  loving  her?' 
Not  Helen,  certainly,  or  she  would  have  been  the  most 
ungrateful  of  human  beings.  Besides  her  sympathy  in  Helen's 
happiness,  Cecilia  was  especially  rejoiced  at  this  letter,  coming, 
as  it  did,  the  very  day  after  her  mother's  return ;  for  though 
she  had  written  to  Lady  Davenant  on  Beauclerc's  departure, 
and  told  her  that  he  was  gone  only  on  Lord  Beltravers's 
account,  yet  she  dreaded  that,  when  it  came  to  speaking,  her 
mother's  penetration  would  discover  that  something  extraordi- 
nary had  happened.  Now  all  was  easy.  Beauclerc  was  coming 
back  :  he  had  finished  his  friend's  business,  and,  before  he 
returned  to  Clarendon  Park  he  wished  to  know  if  he  might 

appear  there  as  the  acknowledged  admirer  of  Miss  Stanley if 

he  might  with  any  chance  of  success  pay  his  addresses  to  her. 
Secure  that  her  mother  would  never  ask  to  see  the  letter, 
considering  it  either  as  a  private  communication  to  his  guardian, 
or  as  a  love-letter  to  Helen,  Cecilia  gave  this  version  of  it  to 
Lady  Davenant ;  and  how  she  settled  it  with  the  General  Helen 
never  knew,  but  it  seemed  all  smooth  and  right. 

And  now,  the  regatta  being  at  an  end,  the  archery  meetings 
over,  and  no  hope  of  further  gaiety  for  this  season  at  Clarendon 
Park,  the  Castleforts  and  Lady  Katrine  departed.  Lady 
Katrine's  last  satisfaction  was  the  hard  haughty  look  with  which 
she  took  leave  of  Miss  Stanley — a  look  expressing,  as  well  as 
the  bitter  smile  and  cold  form  of  good  breeding  could  express 
it,  unconquered,  unconquerable  hate. 


243 


HELEN 


CHAPTER   XXIV 

There  is  no  better  test  of  the  strength  of  affection  than  the 
ready  turning  of  the  mind  to  the  Httle  concerns  of  a  friend, 
when  preoccupied  with  important  interests  of  our  own.  This 
was  a  proof  of  friendship  which  Lady  Davenant  had  lately 
given  to  Helen,  for,  at  the  time  when  she  had  entered  with  so 
much  readiness  and  zeal  into  Helen's  little  difficulties  and 
debts,  great  political  affairs  and  important  interests  of  Lord 
Davenant's  were  in  suspense,  and  pressed  heavily  upon  her 
mind.  What  might  be  the  nature  of  these  political  embarrass- 
ments had  not  been  explained.  Lady  Davenant  had  only 
hinted  at  them.  She  said,  '  she  knew  from  the  terror  exhibited 
by  the  inferior  creatures  in  office  that  some  change  in  adminis- 
tration was  expected,  as  beasts  are  said  to  howl  and  tremble 
before  storm,  or  earthquake,  or  any  great  convulsion  of  nature 
takes  place.' 

Since  Lady  Davenant's  return  from  town,  where  Lord 
Davenant  still  remained,  nothing  had  been  said  of  the  embassy 
to  Russia  but  that  it  was  delayed.  Lady  Cecilia,  who  was 
quick,  and,  where  she  was  not  herself  concerned,  usually 
right,  in  interpreting  the  signs  of  her  mother's  discomfiture, 
guessed  that  Lord  Davenant  had  been  circumvented  by  some 
diplomatist  of  inferior  talents,  and  she  said  to  Helen,  '  When 
an  ass  kicks  you  never  tell  it,  is  a  maxim  which  mamma  heard 
from  some  friend,  and  she  always  acts  upon  it  ;  but  a  kick, 
whether  given  by  ass  or  not,  leaves  a  bruise,  which  some- 
times tells  in  spite  of  ourselves,  and  my  mother  should 
remember  another  maxim  of  that  friend's,  that  the  faults  and 
follies  of  the  great  are  the  delight  and  comfort  of  the  little. 
Now,  my  mother,  though  she  is  so  well  suited,  from  her 
superior  abilities  and  strength  of  mind,  and  all  that,  to  be  the 
wife  of  a  great  political  leader,  yet  in  some  respects  she  is  the 
most  unfit  person  upon  earth  for  the  siiuation  j  for,  though  she 
feels  the  necessity  of  concihating,  she  cannot  unbend  with  her 
inferiors,  that  is,  with  half  the  world.  As  Catalani  said  of 
singing,  it  is  much  more  difficult  to  descend  than  to  ascend 
well.      Shockingly  mamma   shows  in  her   manner   sometimes 

244 


HELEN 

how  tired  she  is  of  the  stupid,  and  how  she  despises  the  mean  ; 
and  all  the  underlings  think  she  can  undo  them  with  papa,  for 
it  has  gone  abroad  that  she  governs,  while,  in  fact,  though 
papa  asks  her  advice,  to  be  sure,  because  she  is  so  wise,  she 
never  does  interfere  in  the  least ;  but,  now  it  has  once  got  into 
the  world's  obstinate  head  that  she  does,  it  cannot  be  put  out 
again,  and  mamma  is  the  last  person  upon  earth  to  take  her 
own  part,  or  condescend  to  explain  and  set  things  right.  She 
is  always  thinking  of  papa's  glory  and  the  good  of  the  public, 
but  the  public  will  never  thank  him  and  much  less  her  ;  so  there 
she  is,  a  martyr  without  her  crown  ;  now,  if  I  were  to  make  a 
martyr  of  myself,  which  Heaven  forbid  !  I  would  at  least  take 
right  good  care  to  secure  my  crown,  and  to  have  my  full  glory 
round  my  head,  and  set  on  becomingly.  But  seriously,  my 
dear  Helen,'  continued  Lady  Cecilia,  '  I  am  unhappy  about 
papa  and  mamma,  I  assure  you.  I  have  seen  little  clouds  of 
discontent  long  gathering,  lowering,  and  blackening,  and  I 
know  they  will  burst  over  their  heads  in  some  tremendous 
storm  at  last.' 

Helen  hoped  not,  but  looked  frightened. 

'  Oh,  you  may  hope  not,  my  dear,  but  I  know  it  will  be — 
we  may  not  hear  the  thundef,  but  we  shall  see  the  lightning 
all  the  more  dangerous.  We  shadl  be  struck  down,  unless 
'  she  paused. 

'  Unless  what  ? '  said  Helen. 

'  Unless  the  storm  be  dispersed  in  time.' 

'  And  how  ? ' 

'  The  lightning  drawn  off  by  some  good  conductor — such 
as  myself;  I  am  quite  serious,  and  though  you  were  angry 
with  me  for  laughing  just  now,  as  if  I  was  not  the  best  of 
daughters,  even  though  I  laugh,  I  can  tell  you  I  am  meditating 
an  act  of  self-devotion  for  my  mother's  sake — a  grand  coup 

'  Coup  d'etat  ?  you,  Cecilia  !  my  dear ' 

'  I,  Helen,  little  as  you  think  of  me.' 

'  Of  your  political  talents  you  don't  expect  me  to  think 
much,  do  you  ? ' 

'  My  political  talents  !  you  shall  see  what  they  are.  I  am 
capable  of  a  grand  coup  d'itat.  I  will  have  next  week  a  three- 
days'  congress,  anti-poUtical,  at  Clarendon  Park,  where  not  a 
word  of  politics  shall  be  heard,  nor  anything  but  nonsense  if  I 

245 


HELEN 

can  help  it,  and  the  result  shall  be,  as  you  shall  see,  goodwill 
between  all  men  and  all  women  —  women  ?  yes,  there's  the 
grand  point.  Mamma  has  so  affronted  two  ladies,  very  influ- 
ential as  they  call  it,  each — Lady  Masham,  a  favourite  at  court, 
and  Lady  Bearcroft,  risen  from  the  ranks,  on  her  husband's 
shoulders  ;  he,  "  a  man  of  law,"  Sir  Benjamin  Bearcroft,  and 
very  clever  she  is  I  hear,  but  loud  and  coarse ;  absolutely 
inadmissible  she  was  thought  till  lately,  and  now,  only  tolerated 
for  her  husband's  sake,  but  still  have  her  here  I  must.' 

'  I  think  you  had  better  not,'  remonstrated  Helen  ;  '  if  she 
is  so  very  vulgar.  Lady  Davenant  and  the  General  will  never 
endure  her.' 

'  Oh,  he  will ;  the  General  will  bear  a  great  deal  for 
mamma's  sake,  and  more  for  papa's.  I  must  have  her,  my 
dear,  for  the  husband  is  of  consequence  and,  though  he  is 
ashamed  of  her,  for  that  very  reason  he  cannot  bear  that  any- 
body should  neglect  her,  and  terribly  mamma  has  neglected 
her  !  Now,  my  dear  Helen,  do  not  say  a  word  more  against 
it.'  Very  few  words  had  Helen  said.  '  I  must  ponder  well,' 
continued  Cecilia,  'and  make  out  my  list  of  worthies,  my 
concordatum  party.' 

Helen  much  advised  the  consulting  Lady  Davenant  first; 
but  Lady  Cecilia  feared  her  mother  might  be  too  proud  to 
consent  to  any  advance  on  her  own  part.  Helen  still  feared 
that  the  bringing  together  such  discordant  people  would  never 
succeed,  but  Lady  Cecilia,  always  happy  in  paying  herself 
with  words  answerable  to  her  wishes,  replied  '  that  discords 
well  managed  often  produced  the  finest  harmony.'  The  only 
point  she  feared  was,  that  she  should  not  gain  the  first  step, 
that  she  should  not  be  able  to  prevail  upon  the  General  to  let 
her  give  the  invitations.  In  truth,  it  required  all  her  persua- 
sive words  and  more  persuasive  looks  to  accomplish  this  pre- 
liminary, and  to  bring  General  Clarendon  to  invite,  or  permit 
to  be  invited,  to  Clarendon  Park,  persons  whom  he  knew  but 
little,  and  liked  not  at  all.  But  as  Lady  Cecilia  pleaded  and 
urged  that  it  would  soon  be  over,  '  the  whole  will  be  over  in 
three  days — only  a  three-days'  visit ;  and  for  mamma  ! — I  am 
sure.  Clarendon — you  will  do  anything  for  her,  and  for  papa, 
and  your  own  Cecilia  ? ' — the  General  smiled,  and  the  notes 
were  written,  and  the  invitations  were  accepted,  and  when 
once    General    Clarendon    had    consented,   he   was   resolutely 

246 


HELEN 

polite  in  his  reception  of  these  to  him  unwelcome  guests. 
His  manner  was  not  false  ;  it  was  only  properly  polite,  not 
tending  to  deceive  any  one  who  understood  the  tokens  of  con- 
ventional good  breeding.  It  however  required  considerable 
power  over  himself  to  keep  the  line  of  demarcation  correctly, 
with  one  person  in  particular  to  whom  he  had  a  strong  political 
aversion :  Mr.  Harley.  His  very  name  was  abhorrent  to 
General  Clarendon,  who  usually  designated  him  as  "  that 
Genius,  Cecilia — that  favourite  of  your  mother's  ! ' — while  to 
Lady  Davenant  Mr.  Harley  was  the  only  person  from  whose 
presence  she  anticipated  any  pleasure,  or  who  could  make  the 
rest  of  the  party  to  her  endurable. 

Helen,  though  apprehensive  of  what  might  be  the  ultimate 
result  of  this  congress,  yet  could  not  help  rejoicing  that  she 
should  now  have  an  opportunity  of  seeing  some  of  those  who 
are  usually  considered  'high  as  human  veneration  can  look.' 
It  is  easy,  after  one  knows  who  is  who,  to  determine  that  we 
should  have  found  out  the  characteristic  qualities  and  talents 
in  each  countenance.  Lady  Cecilia,  however,  would  not  tell 
Helen  the  names  of  the  celebrated  unknown  who  were  as- 
sembled when  they  went  into  the  drawing-room  before  dinner, 
and  she  endeavoured  to  guess  from  their  conversation  the 
different  characters  of  the  speakers  ;  but  only  a  few  sentences 
were  uttered,  signifying  nothing ;  snuff-boxes  were  presented, 
pinches  taken  and  inclinations  made  with  becoming  reciprocity, 
iDut  the  physiognomy  of  a  snuff-box  Helen  could  not  interpret, 
though  Lavater  asserts  that  everything  in  nature,  even  a  cup 
of  tea,  has  a  physiognomy. 

Dinner  was  announced,  and  the  company  paired  off,  seem- 
ingly not  standing  on  the  order  of  their  going ;  yet  all,  especi- 
ally as  some  were  strangers,  secretly  mindful  of  their  honours, 
and  they  moved  on  in  precedence  just,  and  found  themselves 
in  places  due  at  the  dinner-table. 

But  Helen  did  not  seem  hkely  to  obtain  more  insight  into 
the  characters  of  these  great  personages  in  the  dining-room 
than  she  had  done  in  the  drawing-room.  For  it  often  happens 
that,  when  the  most  celebrated,  and  even  the  most  intellectual 
persons  are  brought  together  expressly  for  the  purpose  of  con- 
versation, then  it  does  not  flow,  but  sinks  to  silence,  and  ends 
at  last  in  the  stagnation  of  utter  stupidity.  Each  seems 
oppressed  with  the  weight  of  his  own  reputation,  and,  in  the 

247 


HELEN 

pride  of  high  celebrity,  and  the  shyness,  real  or  affected,  of 
high  rank,  each  fears  to  commit  himself  by  a  single  word. 
People  of  opposite  parties,  when  thrown  together,  cannot  at 
once  change  the  whole  habit  of  their  minds,  nor  without  some 
effort  refrain  from  that  abuse  of  their  opposites  in  which  they 
are  accustomed  to  indulge  when  they  have  it  all  to  themselves. 
Now  every  subject  seems  laboured — for  in  the  pedantry  of 
party  spirit  no  partisan  will  speak  but  in  the  slang  or  cant  of 
his  own  craft.  Knowledge  is  not  only  at  one  entrance,  but  at 
every  entrance,  quite  shut  out,  and  even  literature  itself  grows 
perilous,  so  that  to  be  safe  they  must  all  be  dumb. 

Lady  Cecilia  Clarendon  was  little  aware  of  what  she  under- 
took when  she  called  together  this  heterogeneous  assembly  of 
uncongenials  and  dissimilars  round  her  dinner-table.  After 
she  had  in  vain  made  what  efforts  she  could,  and,  well  skilled 
in  throwing  the  ball  of  conversation,  had  thrown  it  again  and 
again  without  rebound  from  either  side,  she  felt  that  all  was 
flat,  and  that  the  silence  and  the  stupidity  were  absolutely  in- 
vincible. Helen  could  scarcely  believe,  when  she  tried  after- 
wards to  recollect,  that  she  had  literally  this  day,  during  the 
whole  of  the  first  course,  heard  only  the  following  sentences, 
which  came  out  at  long  intervals  between  each  couple  of  ques- 
tions and  answers — or  observations  and  acquiescences  : — 
'  We  had  a  shower.' — '  Yes,  I  think  so.'  '  But  very  fine 
weather  we  have  had.' — '  Only  too  hot.' — '  Quite.'  '  The 
new  buildings  at  iMarblemore — are  they  getting  on,  my  lord  ? ' 
— '  Do  not  know  ;  did  not  come  that  way.'  '  Whom  have 
they  now  at  Dunstanbury  ? '  was  the  next  question.  Then  in 
reply  came  slowly  a  list  of  fashionable  names.  '  Sir  John  died 
worth  a  million,  they  say.' — '  Yes,  a  martyr  to  the  gout.' 
'  Has  Lady  Rachel  done  anything  for  her  eyes  ?  ' — '  Gone  to 
Brighton,  I  beheve.'  '  Has  anything  been  heard  of  the  North 
Pole  expedition  ?' — '  Not  a  word.'  '  Crockly  has  got  a  capital 
cook,  and  Enghsh  too.' — English!  eh.'' — 'English  —  yes.' 
Lord  Davenant  hoped  this  English  cook  would,  with  the 
assistance  of  several  of  his  brother  artistes  of  the  present  day, 
redeem  our  country  from  one -half  of  the  Abbe  Gregoire's 
reproach.  The  abbe  has  said  that  England  would  be  the 
finest  country  in  the  world,  but  that  it  wants  two  essentials, 
smtshine  and  cooks.  'Good  !  Good  !  Very!'  voices  from  differ- 
ent sides  of  the  table  pronounced  ;  and  there  was  silence  again. 


HELEN 

At  the  dessert,  however,  after  the  servants  had  withdrawn, 
most  people  began  to  talk  a  little  to  their  next  neighbours  ; 
but  by  this  Helen  profited  not,  for  each  pair  spoke  low,  and 
those  who  were  beside  her  on  either  hand  were  not  disposed 
to  talk ;  she  was  seated  between  Sir  Benjamin  Bearcroft  and 
Mr.  Harley — Sir  Benjamin  the  man  of  law,  and  Mr.  Harley 
the  man  of  genius,  each  eminent  in  his  kind  ;  but  he  of  law 
seemed  to  have  nothing  in  him  but  law,  of  which  he  was  very 
full.  In  Sir  Benjamin's  economy  of  human  life  it  was  a 
wholesome  rule,  which  he  practised  invariably,  to  let  his 
understanding  sleep  in  company,  that  it  might  waken  in  the 
courts,  and  for  his  repose  he  needed  not  what  some  great  men 
have  professed  so  much  to  like  — '  the  pillow  of  a  woman's 
mind.'  Helen  did  not  much  regret  the  silence  of  this  great 
legal  authority,  but  she  was  very  sorry  that  the  man  of  genius 
did  not  talk  ;  she  did  not  expect  him  to  speak  to  her,  but  she 
wished  to  hear  him  converse  with  others.  But  something  was 
the  matter  with  him  ;  from  the  moment  he  sat  down  to  dinner 
Helen  saw  he  seemed  discomfited.  He  first  put  his  hand 
across  his  eyes,  then  pressed  his  forehead ;  she  feared  he  had 
a  bad  headache.  The  hand  went  next  to  his  ear,  with  a 
shrinking,  excruciating  gesture  ;  it  must  be  the  earache,  thought 
Helen.  Presently  his  jaws  were  pinched  together  ;  toothache 
perhaps.  At  last  she  detected  the  disturbing  cause,  Opposite 
to  Mr.  Harley,  and  beside  Lady  Davenant,  sat  a  person  whom 
he  could  not  endure ;  one,  in  the  first  place,  of  an  opposite 
party,  but  that  was  nothing ;  a  man  who  was,  in  Mr.  Harley's 
opinion,  a  disgrace  to  any  party,  and  what  could  bring  him 
here  ?  They  had  had  several  battles  in  public,  but  had  never 
before  met  in  private  society,  and  the  aversion  of  Mr.  Harley 
seemed  to  increase  inversely  as  the  squares  of  the  distance. 
Helen  could  not  see  in  the  object  adequate  cause  for  this 
antipathy  :  the  gentleman  looked  civil,  smiling,  rather  mean, 
and  quite  insignificant,  and  he  really  was  as  insignificant  as 
he  appeared — not  of  consequence  in  any  point  of  view.  He 
was  not  high  in  office,  nor  ambassador,  nor  charge-d' affaires ; 
not  certain  that  he  was  an  attache  even,  but  he  was  said  to 
have  the  ear  of  somebody,  and  was  reputed  to  be  secretly 
employed  in  diplomatic  transactions  of  equivocal  character ; 
disclaimed,  but  used,  by  his  superiors,  and  courted  by  his  timid 
inferiors,    whom   he    had   persuaded    of    his    great    influence 

249 


HELEN 

somewhere.  Lady  Cecilia  had  been  assured,  from  good 
authority,  that  he  was  one  who  ought  to  be  propitiated  on  her 
father's  account,  but  now,  when  she  perceived  what  sort  of 
creature  he  was,  sorely  did  she  repent  that  he  had  been  invited ; 
and  her  mother,  by  whom  he  sat,  seemed  quite  oppressed  and 
nauseated. 

So  ended  the  dinner.  And,  as  Lady  Cecilia  passed  the 
General  in  going  out  of  the  room,  she  looked  her  contrition, 
her  acknowledgment  that  he  was  perfectly  right  in  his  prophecy 
that  it  would  never  do. 


CHAPTER   XXV 

It  was  rather  worse  when  the  ladies  were  by  themselves. 
Some  of  the  party  were  personally  strangers  to  Lady  Davenant ; 
all  had  heard  of  her  sufficiently ;  most  had  formed  a  formid- 
able and  false  opinion  of  her.  Helen  was  quite  astonished  at 
the  awe  her  ladyship  inspired  in  strangers.  Lady  Davenant's 
appearance  and  manner  at  this  moment  were  not,  indeed, 
calculated  to  dispel  this  dread.  She  was  unusually  distant  and 
haughty,  from  a  mistaken  sort  of  moral  pride.  Aware  that 
some  of  the  persons  now  before  her  had,  in  various  ways,  by 
their  own  or  their  husbands'  means,  power  to  serve  or  to  injure 
Lord  Davenant,  she  disdained  to  propitiate  them  by  the 
slightest  condescension. 

But  how  any  persons  in  England — in  London — could  be 
strangers  to  Lady  Da\-enant,  was  to  a  foreign  lady  who  was 
present  matter  of  inexpressible  surprise.  She  could  not  un- 
derstand how  the  wives  of  persons  high  in  political  life,  some 
of  opposite,  but  some  of  the  same  parties,  should  often  be 
personally  strangers  to  each  other.  Foreigners  are,  on  first 
coming  to  England,  apt  to  imagine  that  all  who  act  together  in 
public  life  must  be  of  the  same  private  society  ;  while,  on  the 
contrary,  it  often  happens  that  the  ladies  especially  of  the  same 
party  are  in  different  grades  of  fashion — moving  in  different 
orbits.  The  number  of  different  circles  and  orbits  in  London 
is,  indeed,  astonishing  to  strangers,  and  the  manner  in  which, 
though  touching  at  tangents,  these  keep  each  their  own  path, 

250 


HELEN 

attracted  and  repelled,  or  mutually  influential,  is  to  those  who 
have  not  seen  and  studied  the  planisphere  absolutely  incom- 
prehensible. And,  as  she  pondered  on  this  difficulty,  the 
ambassadress,  all  foreigner  as  she  was,  and  all  unused  to 
silence,  spoke  not,  and  no  one  spoke  ;  and  nought  was  heard 
but  the  cup  on  the  saucer,  or  the  spoon  in  the  cup,  or  the 
buzzing  of  a  fly  in  the  window. 

In  the  midst  of  this  awful  calm  it  was  that  Lady  Bearcroft 
blurted  out  with  loud  voice — '  Amazing  entertaining  we  are  ! 
so  many  clever  people  got  together,  too,  for  what  ? '  It  was 
worth  while  to  have  seen  Lady  Masham's  face  at  that  moment ! 
Lady  Bearcroft  saw  it,  and,  fearing  no  mortal,  struck  with  the 
comic  of  that  look  of  Lady  Masham's,  burst  into  laughter 
uncontrolled,  and  the  contrast  of  dignity  and  gravity  in  Lady 
Davenant  only  made  her  laugh  the  more,  till  out  of  the  room 
at  last  she  ran.  Lady  Masham  all  the  while,  of  course,  never 
betrayed  the  slightest  idea  that  she  could  by  any  possibility 
have  been  the  object  of  Lady  Bearcroft's  mirth.  But  Lady 
Davenant — how  did  she  take  it  ?  To  her  daughter's  infinite 
relief,  quite  quietly  ;  she  looked  rather  amused  than  displeased. 
She  bore  with  Lady  Bearcroft,  altogether,  better  than  could 
have  been  expected ;  because  she  considered  her  only  as  a 
person  unfortunately  out  of  her  place  in  society,  and,  without 
any  fault  of  her  own,  dragged  xxp  from  below  to  a  height  of 
situation  for  which  nature  had  never  intended,  and  neither  art 
nor  education  had  ever  prepared  her  ;  whose  faults  and 
deficiencies  were  thus  brought  into  the  flash  of  day  at  once, 
before  the  malice  of  party  and  the  fastidiousness  of  fashion, 
which  knows  not  to  distinguish  between  manque  d'esprit  and 
manque  d'usage. 

Not  so  Lady  Davenant :  she  made  liberal  and  philosophic 
allowance  for  even  those  faults  of  manner  which  were  most 
glaring,  and  she  further  suspected  that  Lady  Bearcroft  pur- 
posely exaggerated  her  own  vulgarity,  partly  for  diversion, 
partly  to  make  people  stare,  and  partly  to  prevent  their  seeing 
what  was  habitual,  and  what  involuntary,  by  hiding  the 
bounds  of  reality.  Of  this  Lady  Masham  had  not  the  most 
distant  conception  ;  on  the  contrary,  she  was  now  prepared  to 
tell  a  variety  of  odd  anecdotes  of  Lady  Bearcroft.  She  had 
seen,  she  said,  this  extraordinary  person  before,  but  had  never 
met  her  in  society,  and  delighted  she  was  unexpectedly  to  find 

251 


HELEN 

her  here — 'quite  a  treat.'  Such  characters  are  indeed  seldom 
met  with  at  a  certain  height  in  the  atmosphere  of  society,  and 
such  were  pecuHarly  and  justly  Lady  Masham's  delight,  for 
they  relieved  and  at  the  same  time  fed  a  sense  of  superiority 
insufficient  to  itself.  Such  a  person  is  fair,  privileged,  safe 
game,  and  Lady  Masham  began,  as  does  a  reviewer  determined 
to  be  especially  severe,  with  a  bit  of  praise. 

'  Really  very  handsome  Lady  Bearcroft  must  have  been  ! 
Yes,  as  you  say.  Lady  Cecilia,  she  is  not  out  of  blow  yet, 
certainly,  only  too  full  blown  rather  for  some  tastes — fortu- 
nately not  for  Sir  Benjamin  ;  he  married  her,  you  know,  long 
ago,  for  her  beauty  ;  she  is  a  very  correct  person — always  was  ; 
but  they  do  repeat  the  strangest  things  she  says — so  very  odd  ! 
and  they  tell  such  curious  stories,  too,  of  the  things  she  does.' 
Lady  Masham  then  detailed  a  variety  of  anecdotes,  which 
related  chiefly  to  Lady  Bearcroft's  household  cares,  which 
never  could  she  with  haste  despatch  ;  then  came  stories  of  her 
cheap  magnificence  and  extraordinary  toilette  expedients.  '  I 
own,'  continued  Lady  Masham,  'that  I  always  thought  the 
descriptions  I  heard  must  be  exaggerated ;  but  one  is 
compelled  to  acknowledge  that  there  is  here  in  reality  a 
terrible  want  of  tact.  Poor  Sir  Benjamin  !  I  quite  pity  him, 
he  must  so  see  it  !  Though  not  of  the  first  water  himself,  yet 
still  he  must  feel,  when  he  sees  Lady  Bearcroft  with  other 
people  !  He  has  feeling,  though  nobody  would  guess  it  from 
his  look,  and  he  shows  it  too,  I  am  told  :  sadly  annoyed  he  is 
sometimes  by  her  mal-apropoisms.  One  day,  she  at  one  end 
of  the  table  and  he  at  the  other,  her  ladyship  in  her  loud 
voice  called  out  to  him,  "  Sir  Benjamin,  Sir  Benjamin  !  this  is 
our  wedding-day  ! "  He,  poor  man,  did  not  hear ;  she  called 
out  again  louder,  "  Sir  Benjamin,  my  dear,  this  day  fifteen  years 
ago  you  and  I  were  married  !  "  "  Well,  my  dear,"  he  answered, 
"  well,  my  dear,  how  can  I  possibly  help  that  now  ? "  ' 

Pleased  with  the  success  of  this  anecdote,  which  raised  a 
general  smile,  Lady  Masham  vouched  for  its  perfect  correctness ; 
'  she  had  it  from  one,  who  heard  it  from  a  person  who  was 
actually  present  at  the  time  it  happened.'  Lady  Davenant 
had  not  the  least  doubt  of  the  correctness  of  the  story,  but  she 
believed  the  names  of  the  parties  were  different ;  she  had 
heard  it  years  ago  of  another  person.  It  often  happens,  as 
she    observed,    to    those    who   make    themselves    notoriously 

252 


HELEN 

ridiculous,  as  to  those  who  become  famous  for  wit,  that  all 
good  things  in  their  kinds  are  attributed  to  them  ;  though  the 
one  may  have  no  claim  to  half  the  witticisms,  and  the  other 
may  not  be  responsible  for  half  the  absurdities,  for  which  they 
have  the  reputation.  It  required  all  Lady  Masham's  politeness 
to  look  pleased,  and  all  her  candour  to  be  quite  happy  to  be 
set  right  as  to  that  last  anecdote.  But  many  she  had  heard 
of  Lady  Bearcroft  were  really  incredible.  'Yet  one  would 
almost  believe  anything  of  her.'  While  she  was  yet  speaking. 
Lady  Bearcroft  returned,  and  her  malicious  enemy,  leaning 
back  in  her  chair  as  if  in  expectation  of  the  piece  beginning, 
waited  for  her  puppet  to  play  or  be  played  off. 

All  this  time  Lady  Cecilia  was  not  at  ease  ;  she,  well  aware 
what  her  mother  would  feel,  and  had  felt,  while  Lady  Masham 
was  going  on  with  this  gossip-talk,  had  stood  between  her 
ladyship  and  Lady  Davenant,  and,  as  Lady  Masham  did  not 
speak  much  above  her  breath,  Cecilia  had  for  some  time 
flattered  herself  that  her  laudable  endeavours  to  intercept  the 
sound,  or  to  prevent  the  sense  from  reaching  her  mother's  ear, 
had  succeeded,  especially  as  she  had  made  as  many  exclama- 
tions as  she  could  of  '  Really  ! '  '  Indeed  ! '  '  How  extraordi- 
nary ! '  '  You  do  not  say  so  ? '  which,  as  she  pronounced  them, 
might  have  excited  the  curiosity  of  commonplace  people,  but 
which  she  knew  would  in  her  mother's  mind  deaden  all  desire  to 
listen.  However,  Lady  Masham  had  raised  her  voice,  and 
from  time  to  time  had  stretched  her  neck  of  snow  beyond 
Lady  Cecilia's  intercepting  drapery,  so  as  actually  to  claim 
Lady  Davenant's  attention.  The  consequences  her  daughter 
heard  and  felt.  She  heard  the  tap,  tap,  tap  of  the  ivory 
folding-knife  upon  the  table ;  and  well  interpreting,  she  knew, 
even  before  she  saw  her  mother's  countenance,  that  Lady 
Masham  had  undone  herself,  and,  what  was  of  much  more 
consequence,  had  destroyed  all  chance  of  accomplishing  that 
reconciliation  with  'mamma,'  that  projected  coalition  which 
was  to  have  been  of  such  ultimate  advantage  to  '  papa.' 

Notwithstanding  Lady  Bearcroft's  want  of  knowledge  of  the 
great  world,  she  had  considerable  knowledge  of  human  nature, 
which  stood  her  wonderfully  in  stead.  She  had  no  notion  of 
being  made  sport  of  for  the  degantes,  and,  with  all  Lady 
Masham's  plausibility  of  persiflage,  she  never  obtained  her  end, 
and  never  elicited  anything  really  absurd  by  all   attempts   to 

253 


HELEN 

draw  her  out — out  she  would  not  be  drawn.  After  an 
unconquerable  silence  and  all  the  semblance  of  dead  stupidity, 
Lady  Bearcroft  suddenly  showed  signs  of  life,  however,  and 
she,  all  at  once,  began  to  talk — to  Helen  of  all  people  !  And 
why  ? — because  she  had  taken,  in  her  own  phrase,  a  monstrous 
fancy  to  Miss  Stanley ;  she  was  not  sure  of  her  name,  but  she 
knew  she  liked  her  nature,  and  it  would  be  a  pity  that  her 
reason  should  not  be  known  and  in  the  words  in  which  she 
told  it  to  Lady  Cecilia,  '  Now  I  will  just  tell  you  why  I  have 
taken  such  a  monstrous  fancy  to  your  friend  here.  Miss 
Hanley ' 

'  Miss  Stanley — give  me  leave  to  mention,'  said  Lady 
Cecilia.     '  Let  me  introduce  you  regularly.' 

'  Oh  !  by  no  means  ;  don't  trouble  yourself  now.  Lady 
Cecilia,  for  I  hate  regular  introductions.  But,  as  I  was  going 
to  tell  you  how,  before  dinner  to-day,  as  I  came  down  the 
great  staircase,  I  had  an  uncommon  large,  big,  and,  for  aught 
I  know,  yellow  corking -pin,  which  that  most  careless  of 
all  careless  maids  of  mine — a  good  girl,  too — had  left  sticking 
point  foremost  out  of  some  part  of  me.  Miss  Hanley — 
Stanley  (beg  pardon)  was  behind,  and  luckily  saw  and 
stopped.  Out  she  pulled  it,  begging  my  pardon  ;  so  kindly 
too,  I  only  felt  the  twitch  on  my  sleeve,  and  turned,  and  loved 
the  first  sight  I  had  of  that  pretty  face,  which  need  never 
blush,  I  am  sure,  though  it's  very  becoming  the  blush  too. 
So  good-natured,  you  know,  Lady  Cecilia,  it  was,  when 
nobody  was  looking,  and  before  anybody  was  the  wiser.  Not 
like  some  young  ladies,  or  old  even,  that  would  have  showed 
one  up,  rather  than  help  one  out  in  any  pin's  point  of  a 
difficulty.' 

Lady  Cecilia  herself  was  included  in  Lady  Bearcroft's  good 
graces,  for  she  liked  that  winning  way,  and  saw  there  was  a 
real  good-nature  there  too.  She  opened  to  both  friends 
cordially,  d,  propos  to  some  love  of  a  lace  trimming.  Of  lace 
she  was  a  famous  judge,  and  she  went  into  details  of  her  own 
good  bargains,  with  histories  of  her  expeditions  into  the 
extremity  of  the  City  in  search  of  cheap  goods  and  unheard-of 
wonders  at  prime  cost,  in  regions  unknown.  She  told  how  it 
was  her  clever  way  to  leave  her  carriage  and  her  people,  and 
go  herself  down  narrow  streets  and  alleys,  where  only  wheel- 
barrows and  herself  could  go  ;    she  boasted  of  her  feats  in 

2S4 


'  Out  she  pulled  it,  begging-  my  pardon: 


HELEIJ 

diving  into  dark  dens  in  search  of  run  goods,  charming  things 
— French  warranted — that  could  be  had  for  next  to  nothing, 
and,  in  exemphfication,  showed  the  fineness  of  her  em- 
broidered cambric  handkerchiefs,  and  told  their  price  to  a 
farthing  ! 

Lady  Masham's  '  Wonderful ! '  was  worthy  of  any  Jesuit, 
male  or  female,  that  ever  existed. 

From  her  amazing  bargains,  the  lady  of  the  law-knight  went 
on  to  smuggling  ;  and,  as  she  got  into  spirits,  talking  loudly, 
she  told  of  some  amber  satin,  a  whole  piece  capitally  got  over 
in  an  old  gentleman's  '  Last  Will  and  Testament,'  tied  up  with 
red  tape  so  nicely,  and  sealed  and  superscribed  and  all,  got 
through  untouched  !  '  But  a  better  thing  I  did  myself,' 
continued  she  ;  '  the  last  trip  I  made  to  Paris — coming  back, 
I  set  at  defiance  all  the  searchers  and  stabbers,  and  custom- 
house officers  of  both  nations.  I  had  hundreds  of  pounds 
worth  of  Valenciennes  and  Brussels  lace  hid — you  would 
never  guess  where.  I  never  told  a  servant — not  a  mortal 
maid  even ;  that's  the  only  way  ;  had  only  a  confidant  of  a 
coachmaker.  But  when  it  came  to  packing-up  time,  my  own 
maid  smelt  out  the  lace  was  missing  ;  and  gave  notice,  I  am 
confident,  to  the  custom-house  people  to  search  me.  So  much 
the  more  glory  to  me.  I  got  off  clear  ;  and,  when  they  had 
stabbed  the  cushions,  and  torn  the  inside  of  my  carriage  all  to 
pieces,  I  very  coolly  made  them  repair  the  mischief  at  their 
own  cost.  Oh,  I  love  to  do  things  bravely  !  and  away  I  drove 
triumphant  with  the  lace,  well  stuffed,  packed,  and  covered 
within  the  pole  leather  of  the  carriage  they  had  been  searching 
all  the  time.' 

At  this  period  of  her  narrative  the  gentlemen  came  into  the 
drawing-room.  '  But  here  comes  Sir  Benjamin  !  mum,  mum  ! 
not  a  word  more  for  my  life  !  You  understand.  Lady 
Cecilia  !  husbands  must  be  minded.  And  let  me  whisper  a 
favour — a  whist-party  I  must  beg  ;  nothing  keeps  Sir  Ben 
in  good  humour  so  certainly  as  whist  —  when  he  wins,  I 
mean.' 

The  whist-party  was  made,  and  Lady  Cecilia  took  care  that 
Sir  Benjamin  should  win,  while  she  lost  with  the  best  grace 
possible.  By  her  conciliating  manners  and  good  management 
in  dividing  to  govern,  all  parties  were  arranged  to  general 
satisfaction.      Mr.  Harley's  antipathy,  the  attache,  she  settled 

256 


HELEN 

at  icarti  with  Lady  Masham,  who  found  him  '  quite  a  well- 
mannered,  pleasant  person.'  Lady  Cecilia  explained  to  Mr. 
Harley  that  it  was  her  fault — her  mistake  entirely — that  this 
person  had  been  invited.  Mr.  Harley  was  now  himself  again, 
and  happy  in  conversation  with  Lady  Davenant,  beside  whom 
he  found  his  place  on  the  sofa. 

After  Helen  had  done  her  duty  at  harp  and  pianoforte, 
Cecilia  relieved  her,  and  whispered  that  she  might  now  go  to 
her  mother's  sofa,  and  rest  and  be  happy.  '  Mamma's  work 
is  in  some  puzzle,  Helen  ;  you  must  go  and  set  it  to  rights,  my 
dear.'  Lady  Davenant  welcomed  her  with  a  smile,  made 
room  for  her  on  the  sofa,  and  made  over  to  her  the  tambour- 
frame  ;  and  now  that  Helen  saw  and  heard  Mr.  Harley  in  his 
natural  state,  she  could  scarcely  believe  that  he  was  the  same 
person  who  had  sat  beside  her  at  dinner.  Animated  and 
delightful  he  was  now,  and,  what  she  particularly  liked  in  him, 
there  was  no  display — nothing  in  the  Churchill  style.  When- 
ever any  one  came  near,  and  seemed  to  wish  to  hear  or  speak, 
Mr.  Harley  not  only  gave  them  fair  play,  but  helped  them  in 
their  play.  Helen  observed  that  he  possessed  the  art  which 
she  had  often  remarked  in  Lord  Davenant,  pecuhar  to  good- 
natured  genius — the  art  of  drawing  something  good  out  of 
everybody ;  sometimes  more  than  they  knew  they  had  in 
them  till  it  was  brought  out.  Even  from  Lord  Masham, 
insipid  and  soulless  though  he  was,  as  any  courtier-lord  in 
waiting  could  be,  something  was  extracted  ;  Lord  Masham, 
universally  believed  to  have  nothing  in  him,  was  this  evening 
surprisingly  entertaining.  He  gave  Lady  Davenant  a  de- 
scription of  what  he  had  been  so  fortunate  as  to  see— the  first 
public  dinner  of  the  king  of  France  on  his  restoration,  served 
according  to  all  the  ci-devant  ceremonials,  and  in  the  etiquette 
of  Louis  the  Fourteenth's  time.  Lord  Masham  represented  in 
a  lively  manner  the  Marquis  de  Dreux,  in  all  his  antiquarian 
glory,  going  through  the  whole  form  prescribed  :  first  knocking 
with  his  cane  at  the  door;  then  followed  by  three  guards 
viath  shouldered  carbines,  marching  to  buttery  and  hall,  each 
and  every  officer  of  the  household  making  reverential  obeisance 
as  they  passed  to  the  Nef—ihB.  Nef  being,  as  Lord  Masham 
explained  to  Miss  Stanley,  a  piece  of  gilt  plate  in  the  shape  of 
the  hull  of  a  ship,  in  which  the  napkins  for  the  king's  table 
are  kept.  '  But  why  should  the  hull  of  a  ship  be  appropriated 
S  257 


HELEN 

to  the  royal  napkins  ? '  was  asked.  Lord  Masham  confessed 
that  this  was  beyond  him,  but  he  looked  amazingly  considerate 
— delicately  rubbed  his  polished  forehead  with  the  second 
finger  of  the  right  hand,  then  regarded  his  ring,  and  turned  it 
thrice  slowly  round,  but  the  talismanic  action  produced 
nothing,  and  he  received  timely  relief  by  a  new  turn  given  to 
the  conversation,  in  which  he  was  not,  he  thought,  called  upon 
to  take  any  share — the  question  indeed  appeared  to  him  irre- 
levant, and  retiring  to  the  card-table,  he  '  left  the  discussion  to 
abler  heads.' 

The  question  was,  why  bow  to  the  Nef  at  all  ? — This  led 
to  a.  discussion  upon  the  advantages  of  ceremonials  in  pre- 
serving respect  for  order  and  reverence  for  authority,  and  then 
came  an  inquiry  into  the  abuses  of  this  real  good.  It  was 
observed  that  the  signs  of  the  times  should  always  be  con- 
sulted, and  should  guide  us  in  these  things.  How  far }  was 
next  to  be  considered.  All  agreed  on  the  principle  that 
'  order  is  Heaven's  first  law,'  yet  there  were  in  the  application 
strong  shades  of  difference  between  those  who  took  part  in  the 
conversation.  On  one  side,  it  was  thought  that  overturning 
the  tabouret  at  the  court  of  France  had  been  the  signal  for  the 
overthrow  of  the  throne  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  was 
suggested  that  a  rigid  adherence  to  forms  unsuited  to  the 
temper  of  the  times  only  exasperates,  and  that,  wherever 
reliance  on  forms  is  implicit,  it  is  apt  to  lead  princes  and  their 
counsellors  to  depend  too  much  on  the  strength  of  that  fence 
which,  existing  only  in  the  imagination,  is  powerless  when  the 
fashion  changes.  In  a  court  quite  surrounded  and  enveloped 
by  old  forms,  the  light  of  day  cannot  penetrate  to  the  interior 
of  the  palace,  the  eyes  long  kept  in  obscurity  are  weakened, 
so  that  light  cannot  be  borne  :  when  suddenly  it  breaks  in, 
the  royal  captive  is  bewildered,  and  if  obliged  to  act,  he 
gropes,  blunders,  injures  himself,  and  becomes  incapable  of 
decision  in  extremity  of  danger,  reduced  to  the  helplessness 
which  marks  the  condition  of  the  Eastern  despot,  or  les  rois 
faindans  of  any  time  or  country. 

As  Helen  sat  by,  listening  to  this  conversation,  what  struck 
and  interested  her  most  was  the  manner  in  which  it  went  on 
and  went  off  without  leading  to  any  unpleasant  consequences, 
notwithstanding  the  various  shades  of  opinion  between  the 
parties.     This  she  saw  depended  much  on  the  good  sense  and 

258 


HELEN 

talents,  but  far  more  on  the  good  breeding  and  temper  of  those 
who  spoke  and  those  who  Ustened.  Time  in  the  first  place 
was  allowed  and  taken  for  each  to  be  understood,  and  no  one 
was  urged  by  exclamation,  or  misconception,  or  contradiction, 
to  say  more  than  just  the  thing  he  thought. 

Lady  Cecilia,  who  had  now  joined  the  party,  was  a  little  in 
pain  when  she  heard  Louis  the  Fourteenth's  love  for  punctu- 
ality alluded  to.  She  dreaded,  when  the  General  quoted 
'  Punctuality  is  the  virtue  of  princes,'  that  Mr.  Harley,  with 
the  usual  impatience  of  genius,  would  have  ridiculed  so 
antiquated  a  notion  ;  but,  to  Lady  Cecilia's  surprise,  he  even 
took  the  part  of  punctuality ;  in  a  very  edifying  manner  he 
distinguished  it  from  mere  ceremonial  etiquette — the  ceremonial 
of  the  German  courts,  where  '  they  lose  time  at  breakfast,  at 
dinner,  at  supper ;  at  court,  in  the  antechamber,  on  the  stairs, 
everywhere  ' ; — punctuality  was,  he  thought,  a  habit  worthy  to 
be  ranked  with  the  virtues,  by  its  effects  upon  the  mind,  the 
power  it  demands  and  gives  of  self-control,  raising  in  us  a  daily, 
hourly  sense  of  duty,  of  something  that  ought,  that  must  be 
done,  one  of  the  best  habits  human  creatures  can  have,  either 
for  their  ovra  sake  or  the  sake  of  those  with  whom  they  live. 
And  to  kings  and  courtiers  more  particularly,  because  it  gives 
the  idea  of  stability — of  duration  ;  and  to  the  aged,  because  it 
gives  a  sort  of  belief  that  life  will  last  for  ever.  The  General 
had  often  thought  this,  but  said  he  had  never  heard  it  so  well 
expressed :  he  afterwards  acknowledged  to  Cecilia  that  he 
found  Mr.  Harley  was  quite  a  different  person  from  what  he 
had  expected — '  He  has  good  sense,  as  well  as  genius  and 
good  breeding.  I  am  glad,  my  dear  Cecilia,  that  you  asked 
him  here.'     This  was  a  great  triumph. 

Towards  the  close  of  the  evening,  when  mortals  are  begin- 
ing  to  think  of  bed-chamber  candles,  Lady  Cecilia  looked  at 
the  dcarU  table,  and  said  to  her  mother,  '  How  happy  they  are, 
and  how  comfortable  we  are !  A  card  table  is  really  a  ne- 
cessary of  life — not  even  music  is  more  universally  useful.' 
Mr.  Harley  said,  '  I  doubt,'  and  then  arose  between  Lady 
Davenant  and  him  an  argument  upon  the  comparative  power 
in  modem  society  of  music  and  cards.  Mr.  Harley  took  the 
side  of  music,  but  Lady  Davenant  inclined  to  think  that  cards, 
in  their  day,  and  their  day  is  not  over  yet,  have  had  a  wider 
range  of  influence.     '  Nothing  like  that  happy  board  of  green 

2S9 


HELEN 

cloth ;  it  brings  all  intellects  to  one  level,'  she  said.  Mr. 
Harley  pleaded  the  cause  of  music,  which,  he  said,  hushes 
all  passions,  calms  even  despair.  Lady  Davenant  urged  the 
silent  superiority  of  cards,  which  rests  the  weary  talker,  and 
relieves  the  perplexed  courtier,  and,  in  support  of  her  opinion, 
she  mentioned  an  old  ingenious  essay  on  cards  and  tea,  by 
Pinto,  she  thought ;  and  she  begged  that  Helen  would  some 
time  look  for  it  in  the  library.  Helen  went  that  instant.  She 
searched,  but  could  not  find  ;  where  it  ought  to  have  been, 
there  it  of  course  was  not.  While  she  was  still  on  the  book- 
ladder,  the  door  opened,  and  enter  Lady  Bearcroft. 

'  Miss  Hanley  ! '  cried  she,  '  I  have  a  word  to  say  to  you, 
for,  though  you  are  a  stranger  to  me,  I  see  you  are  a  dear 
good  creature,  and  I  think  I  may  take  the  liberty  of  asking 
your  advice  in  a  little  matter.' 

Helen,  who  had  by  this  time  descended  from  the  steps, 
stood  and  looked  a  little  surprised,  but  said  all  that  was  pro- 
perly civil,  'gratified  by  Lady  Bearcroft's  good  opinion — 
happy  to  be  of  any  service,' — etc. 

'  Well,  then — sit  ye  down  one  instant.  Miss  Hanley.'  Helen 
suggested  that  her  name  was  Stanley. 

'Stanley!  —  eh? — Yes,  I  remember.  But  I  want  to 
consult  you,  since  you  are  so  kind  to  allow  me,  on  a  little 
matter — but  do  sit  down,  I  can  never  talk  of  business  stand- 
ing. Now  I  just  want  you,  my  dear  Miss  Hanley,  to  do  a 
little  job  for  me  with  Lady  Davenant,  who,  with  half  an  eye 
I  can  see,  is  a  great  friend  of  yours. — Arn't  I  right  ?' 

Helen  said  Lady  Davenant  was  indeed  a  very  kind  friend 
of  hers,  but  still  what  it  could  be  in  which  Lady  Bearcroft 
expected  her  assistance  she  could  not  imagine. 

'  You  need  not  be  frightened  at  the  word  job  ;  if  that  is 
what  alarms  you,'  continued  Lady  Bearcroft ;  '  put  your  heart 
at  ease,  there  is  nothing  of  that  sort  here.  It  is  only  a  com- 
pliment that  I  want  to  make,  and  nothing  in  the  world  ex- 
pected in  return  for  it — as  it  is  a  return  in  itself  But  in  the 
first  place  look  at  this  cover.'  She  produced  the  envelope  of 
a  letter.  '  Is  this  Lady  Davenant's  handwriting,  think  you  ? ' 
She  pointed  to  the  word  '  Mis-sent,^  written  on  the  corner  of 
the  cover.  Helen  said  it  was  Lady  Davenant's  writing.  '  You 
are  certain  ? — Well,  that  is  odd  ! — Mis-sent !  when  it  was 
directed  to  herself,  and  nobody  else  on  earth,  as  you  see  as 

260 


HELEN 

plain  as  possible — Countess  Davenant,  surely  that  is  right 
enough  ? '  Then  opening  a  red  morocco  case  she  showed  a 
magnificent  diamond  Sdvignd.  '  Observe  now,'  she  continued, 
'  these  diamonds  are  so  big,  my  dear  Miss  Hanley — Stanley— 
they  would  have  been  quite  out  of  my  reach,  only  for  that  late 
French  invention  which  maybe  you  may  not  have  heard  of, 
nor  should  I,  but  for  the  hint  of  a  friend  at  Paris,  who  is  in 
the  jewellery  line.  The  French,  you  must  know,  have  got  the 
art  of  sticking  small  diamonds  together  so  as  to  make  little 
worthless  ones  into  large,  so  that,  as  you  see,  you  would  never 
tell  the  difference ;  and  as  it  was  a  new  discovery,  and  some- 
thing ingenious  and  scientific,  and  Lady  Davenant  being  re- 
ported to  be  a  scientific  lady,  as  well  as  political  and  influential, 
and  all  that,  I  thought  it  a  good  opportunity,  and  a  fine  excuse 
for  paying  her  a  compliment,  which  I  had  long  wished  to  pay, 
for  she  was  once  on  a  time  very  kind  to  Sir  Ben,  and  got  him 
appointed  to  his  present  station ;  and  though  Lord  Davenant 
was  the  ostensible  person,  I  considered  her  as  the  prime  mover 
behind  the  curtain.  Accordingly,  I  sat  me  down,  and  wrote 
as  pretty  a  note  as  I  could  pen,  and  Sir  Ben  approved  of  the 
whole  thing ;  but  I  don't  say  that  I'm  positive  he  was  as  off- 
handed and  clean-hearted  in  the  matter  as  I  was,  for  between 
you  and  I  his  gratitude,  as  they  say  of  some  people's,  is  apt  to 
squint  with  one  eye  to  the  future  as  well  as  one  to  the  past — 
you  comprehend  ? ' 

Helen  was  not  clear  that  she  comprehended  all  that  had 
been  said ;  still  less  had  she  any  idea  what  she  could  have  to 
do  in  this  matter ;  she  waited  for  further  explanation. 

'  Now  all  I  want  from  you  then,  Miss  Hanley — Stanley  I 
would  say,  I  beg  pardon,  I'm  the  worst  at  proper  names  that 
fives — but  all  I  want  of  you,  Miss  Hanley,  is — first,  your 
opinion  as  to  the  validity  of  the  handwriting, — well,  you  are 
positive,  then,  that  this  mis-sent  is  her  hand.  Now  then,  I 
want  to  know,  do  you  think  Lady  Davenant  knew  what  she 
was  about  when  she  wrote  it  ? ' 

Helen's  eyes  opened  to  their  utmost  power  of  distension,  at 
the  idea  of  anybody's  questioning  that  Lady  Davenant  knew 
what  she  was  about. 

'  La  !  my  dear,'  said  Lady  Bearcroft ;  '  spare  the  whites  of 
your  eyes,  I  didn't  mean  she  didn't  know  what  she  was  about 
in  that  sense.' 

261 


HELEN 

'  What  sense  ? '  said  Helen. 

'Not  in  any  particular  sense,'  replied  Lady  Bearcroft. 
'  But  let  me  go  on,  or  we  shall  never  come  to  an  understand- 
ing ;  I  only  meant  that  her  ladyship  might  have  just  sat  down 
to  answer  my  note,  as  I  often  do  myself,  without  having  read 
the  whole  through,  or  before  I  have  taken  it  in  quite.' 

Helen  thought  this  very  unlikely  to  have  happened  with 
Lady  Davenant. 

'  But  still  it  might  have  happened,'  continued  Lady  Bearcroft, 
'  that  her  ladyship  did  not  notice  the  delicacy  of  the  way  in 
which  the  thing  was /a/ — for  it  really  was  put  so  that  nobody 
could  take  hold  of  it  against  any  of  us — you  understand  ;  and 
after  all,  such  a  curiosity  of  a  Sdvigne  as  this,  and  such  fine 
"di'monds,"  was  too  pretty  and  too  good  a  thing  to  be  refused 
hand-over-head,  in  that  way.  Besides,  my  note  was  so  re- 
spectable, and  respectful,  it  surely  required  and  demanded 
something  more  of  an  answer,  methinks,  from  a  person  of  birth 
or  education,  than  the  single  bald  word  "mis-sent,"  like  the 
postman  !  Surely,  Miss  Hanley,  now,  putting  your  friendship 
apart,  candidly  you  must  think  as  I  do  ?  And,  whether  or  no, 
at  least  you  will  be  so  obliging  to  do  me  the  favour  to  find  out 
from  Lady  Davenant  if  she  really  made  the  reply  with  her  eyes 
open  or  not,  and  really  meant  what  she  said.' 

Helen  being  quite  clear  that  Lady  Davenant  always  meant 
what  she  said,  and  had  viritten  with  her  eyes  open,  declined, 
as  perfectly  useless,  making  the  proposed  inquiry.  It  was 
plain  that  Lady  Davenant  had  not  thought  proper  to  accept 
of  this  present,  and  to  avoid  any  unpleasant  explanations  had 
presumed  it  was  not  intended  for  her,  but  had  been  sent  by 
mistake.     Helen  advised  her  to  let  the  matter  rest. 

'Well,  well ! '  said  Lady  Bearcroft,  'thank  you,  Miss  Hanley, 
at  all  events  for  your  good  advice.  But,  neck  or  nothing,  I  am 
apt  to  go  through  with  whatever  I  once  take  into  my  head, 
and,  since  you  cannot  aid  and  abet,  I  will  trouble  you  no 
further,  only  not  to  say  a  word  of  what  I  have  mentioned. 
But  all  the  time  I  thank  you,  my  dear  young  lady,  as  much 
as  if  I  took  your  dictum.  So,  my  dear  Miss  Hanley — Stanley 
— do  not  let  me  interrupt  you  longer  in  your  book-hunt.  Take 
care  of  that  step-ladder,  though  ;  it  is  coggledy,  as  I  observed 
when  you  came  down — Good-night,  good-night.' 

262 


HELEN 


CHAPTER   XXVI 

'  My  dear  Helen,  there  is  an  end  of  everything  ! '  cried  Lady 
Cecilia,  the  next  day,  bursting  into  Helen's  room,  and  standing 
before  her  with  an  air  of  consternation.  '  What  has  brought 
things  to  this  sad  pass,  I  know  not,'  continued  she,  '  for,  but 
an  hour  before,  I  left  everybody  in  good  -  humour  with  them- 
selves— all  in  good  train.     But  now ' 

'  What  ? '  said  Helen,  '  for  you  have  not  given  me  the  least 
idea  of  what  has  happened.' 

'  Because  I  have  not  the  least  idea  myself,  my  dear.  All 
I  know  is,  that  something  has  gone  wrong,  dreadfully,  be- 
tween my  mother  and  Lady  Bearcroft.  Mamma  would  not 
tell  me  what  it  is ;  but  her  indignation  is  at  such  a  height  she 
declares  she  will  not  see  that  woman  again  : — positively  will 
not  come  forth  from  her  chamber  as  long  as  Lady  Bearcroft 
remains  in  the  house.  So  there  is  a  total  break-up — and  I 
wish  I  had  never  meddled  with  anything.  Oh  that  I  had  never 
brought  together  these  unsuitabilities,  these  incompatibilities  ! 
O  Helen  !  what  shall  I  do  ? ' 

Quite  pale,  Lady  Cecilia  stood,  really  in  despair ;  and 
Helen  did  not  know  what  to  advise. 

'  Do  you  know  anything  about  it,  Helen,  for  you  look  as  if 
you  did  ? ' 

An  abrupt  knock  at  the  door  interrupted  them,  and,  without 
waiting  for  permission,  in  came  Lady  Bearcroft,  as  if  blown 
by  a  high  wind,  looking  very  red  :  half  angry,  half  frightened, 
and  then  laughing,  she  exclaimed — 'A  fine  boggle-de-botch  I 
have  made  of  it ! '  But  seeing  Lady  Cecilia,  she  stopped  short 
— '  Beg  pardon — thought  you  were  by  yourself,  Miss  Hanley.' 

Lady  Cecilia  instantly  offered  to  retire,  yet  intimated,  as  she 
moved  towards  the  door,  a  wish  to  stay,  and,  if  it  were  not  too 
much,  to  ask  what  was  meant  by 

'  By  boggle-de-botch,  do  you  mean  ? '  said  Lady  Bearcroft. 
'  I  am  aware  it  is  not  a  canonical  word — classical,  I  mean  ; 
nor  in  nor  out  of  any  dictionary,  perhaps — but  when  people  are 
warm,  they  cannot  stand  picking  terms.' 

263 


HELEN 

'Certainly  not,'  said  Lady  Cecilia;  'but  what  is  the 
matter  ?     I  am  sorry  anything  unpleasant  has  occurred.' 

'  Unpleasant  indeed  ! '  cried  Lady  Bearcroft ;  '  I  have  been 
treated  actually  like  a  dog,  while  paying  a  compliment  too, 
and  a  very  handsome  compliment,  beyond  contradiction. 
Judge  for  yourself.  Lady  Cecilia,  if  this  Sevignd  is  to  be 
sneezed  at.' 

She  opened  the  case  ;  Lady  Cecilia  said  the  diamonds  were 
certainly  very  handsome,  but 

'  But  ! '  repeated  Lady  Bearcroft,  '  I  grant  you  there  may 
be  a  but  to  everything  in  life  ;  still  it  might  be  said  civilly,  as 
you  say  it.  Lady  Cecilia,  or  looked  civilly,  as  you  look  it. 
Miss  Hanley  :  and  if  that  had  been  done,  instead  of  being 
affronted,  I  might  after  all  have  been  well  enough  pleased  to 
pocket  my  diamonds  ;  but  nobody  can  without  compunction 
pocket  an  affront.' 

Lady  Cecilia  was  sure  her  mother  could  not  mean  any 
affront. 

'  Oh,  I  do  not  know  what  she  could  or  could  not  mean  ; 
but  I  will  tell  you  what  she  did — all  but  threw  the  diamonds 
in  my  face.' 

'  Impossible  ! '  cried  Helen. 

'  Possible — and  I  will  show  you  how.  Miss  Hanley.  This 
way  :  just  shut  down  the  case — snap  ! — and  across  the  table 
she  threw  it,  just  as  you  would  deal  a  card  in  a  passion,  only 
with  a  Mrs.  Siddons  air  to  boot.  I  beg  your  pardons,  both 
ladies,  for  mimicking  your  friend  and  your  parent,  but  flesh 
and  blood  could  not  stand  that  sort  of  style,  you  know,  and  a 
little  wholesome  mimicry  breaks  no  bones,  and  is  not  very 
offensive,  I  hope  ? '  The  mimicry  could  not  indeed  be  very 
offensive,  for  the  imitation  was  so  utterly  unlike  the  reality, 
that  Lady  Cecilia  and  Helen  with  difficulty  repressed  their 
smiles.  '  Ladies  may  smile,  but  they  would  smile  on  the 
wrong  sides  of  their  pretty  little  mouths  if  they  had  been 
treated  as  I  have  been — so  ignominiously.  I  am  sure  I  wish 
I  had  taken  your  advice,  Miss  Hanley  ;  but  the  fact  was,  last 
night  I  did  not  quite  believe  you  :  I  thought  you  were  only 
saying  the  best  you  could  to  set  off  a  friend  ;  for,  since  I  have 
been  among  the  great,  and  indeed  even  when  I  lived  with  the 
little,  I  have  met  with  so  many  fair  copies  of  false  countenances, 
that  I  could  not  help  suspecting  there  might  be  something  of 

264 


HELEN 

that  sort  with  your  Lady  Davenant,  but  I  am  entirely  con- 
vinced all  you  told  me  is  true,  for  I  peeped  quite  close  at  her, 
lifted  up  the  hood,  and  found  there  were  not  two  faces  under  it — 
only  one  very  angry  one  for  my  pains.  But  I  declare  I  would 
rather  see  that  than  a  double  one,  like  my  Lady  Masham's, 
with  her  spermaceti  smile.  And  after  all,  do  you  know,'  con- 
tinued Lady  Bearcroft  in  a  right  vulgarly-cordial  tone — '  do 
you  know  now,  really,  the  first  anger  over,  I  like  Lady 
Davenant — I  protest  and  vow,  even  her  pride  I  like — it  well 
became  her — birth  and  all,  for  I  hear  she  is  straight  from 
Charlemagne  !  But  I  was  going  to  mention,  now  my  recol- 
lection is  coming  to  me,  that  when  I  began  talking  to  her 
ladyship  of  Sir  Ben's  gratitude  about  that  place  she  got  for 
him,  she  cut  me  short  with  her  queer  look,  and  said  she  was 
sure  that  Lord  Davenant  (and  if  he  had  been  the  king  him- 
self, instead  of  only  her  husband,  and  your  father.  Lady  Cecilia, 
she  could  not  have  pronounced  his  name  with  more  distinction) 
— she  was  sure,  she  said,  that  Lord  Davenant  would  not  have 
been  instrumental  in  obtaining  that  place  for  Sir  Benjamin 
Bearcroft  if  he  had  known  any  man  more  worthy  of  it,  which 
indeed  I  did  not  think  at  the  time  over  and  above  civil — for 
where,  then,  was  the  particular  compliment  to  Sir  Ben  ? ' 

But  when  Lady  Bearcroft  saw  Lady  Cecilia's  anxiety  and 
real  distress  at  her  mother's  indignant  resolution,  she,  with 
surprising  good-humour,  said, — '  I  wish  I  could  settle  it  for 
you,  my  dear.  I  cannot  go  away  directly,  which  would  be  the 
best  move,  because  Sir  Benjamin  has  business  here  to-day  with 
Lord  Davenant — some  job  of  his  own,  which  must  take  place 
of  any  movements  of  mine,  he  being  the  more  worthy  gender. 
But  I  will  tell  you  what  I  can  do,  and  will,  and  welcome.  I 
will  keep  my  room  instead  of  your  mother  keeping  hers  ;  so 
you  may  run  and  tell  Lady  Davenant  that  she  is  a  prisoner  at 
large,  with  the  range  of  the  whole  house,  without  any  danger 
of  meeting  me,  for  I  shall  not  stir  till  the  carriage  is  at  the 
door  to-morrow  morning,  when  she  will  not  be  up,  for  we  will 
have  it  at  six.  I  will  tell  Sir  Benjamin,  he  is  in  a  hurry  back 
to  town,  and  he  always  is.  So  all  is  right  on  my  part.  And 
go  you  to  your  mother,  my  dear  Lady  Cecilia,  and  settle  her. 
I  am  glad  to  see  you  smile  again  ;  it  is  a  pity  you  should  ever 
do  anything  else.' 

It  was  not  long  before  Cecilia  returned,  proclaiming  '  Peace, 
265 


HELEN 

peace!'  She  had  made  such  an  amusing  report  to  her 
mother  of  all  that  Lady  Bearcroft  had  said  and  done,  and 
purposed  to  do,  that  Lady  Davenant  could  not  help  seeing  the 
whole  in  a  ludicrous  light,  felt  at  once  that  it  was  beneath  her 
serious  notice,  and  that  it  would  be  unbecoming  to  waste  in- 
dignation upon  such  a  person.  The  result  was,  that  she  com- 
missioned Helen  to  release  Lady  Bearcroft  as  soon  as  con- 
venient, and  to  inform  her  that  an  act  of  oblivion  was  passed 
over  the  whole  transaction. 

There  had  been  a  shower,  and  it  had  cleared  up.  Lady 
Cecilia  thought  the  sky  looked  bluer,  and  birds  sang  sweeter, 
and  the  air  felt  pleasanter,  than  before  the  storm.  '  Nothing 
like  a  storm,'  said  she,  '  for  clearing  the  air ;  nothing  like  a 
litde  honest  hurricane.  But  with  Lady  Masham  there  never 
is  anything  like  a  little  honest  hurricane.  It  is  all  still  and 
close  with  an  indescribable  volcano-like  feeling  ;  one  is  not 
sure  of  what  one  is  standing  upon.  Do  you  know,  Helen,' 
continued  she,  '  I  am  quite  afraid  of  some  explosion  between 
mamma  and  Lady  Masham.  If  we  came  to  any  difficulty  with 
her,  we  could  not  get  out  of  it  quite  so  well  as  with  Lady 
Bearcroft,  for  there  is  no  resource  of  heart  or  frankness  of 
feeling  with  her.  Before  we  all  meet  at  dinner,  I  must  sound 
mamma,  and  see  if  all  is  tolerably  safe.'  And  when  she  went 
this  day  at  dressing-time  with  a  bouquet,  as  was  her  custom, 
for  her  mother,  she  took  Helen  with  her. 

At  the  first  hint  of  Lady  Cecilia's  fears  that  Lady  Masham 
could  do  her  any  mischief.  Lady  Davenant  smiled  in  scorn. 
'  The  will  she  may  have,  my  dear,  but  she  has  not  the 
power.' 

'  She  is  very  foolish,  to  be  sure,'  said  Lady  Cecilia ;  still 
she  might  do  mischief,  and  there  is  something  monstrously 
treacherous  in  that  smile  of  hers.' 

'  Monstrously  ! '  repeated  Lady  Davenant.  '  No,  no,  my 
dear  Cecilia  ;  nothing  monstrous.  Leave  to  Lady  Bearcroft 
the  vulgar  belief  in  court-bred  monsters  ;  we  know  there  are 
no  such  things.  Men  and  women  there,  as  everywhere  else, 
are  what  nature,  education,  and  circumstances  have  made 
them  Once  an  age,  once  in  half-a-dozen  ages,  nature  may 
make  a  Brinvilliers,  or  art  allow  of  a  Zeluco  ;  but,  in  general, 
monsters  are  mere  fabulous  creatures — mistakes  often,  from  bad 
drawings,  like  the  unicorn.' 

266 


HELEN 

'  Yes,  mamma,  yes ;  now  I  feel  much  more  comfortable. 
The  unicorn  has  convinced  me,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  laughing 
and  singing 

'  'Tis  all  a  mere  fable  ;  there's  nothing  to  fear. 

'  And  I  shall  think  of  her  henceforth  as  nothing  but  what  she 
appears  to  be,  a  well-dressed,  well-bred,  fine  lady.  Ay — every 
inch  a  fine  lady ;  every  word,  look,  motion,  thought,  suited  to 
that  vidtier' 

'  That  vocation,'  said  Lady  Davenant ;  '  it  is  above  a  trade  ; 
with  her  it  really  is  a  sacred  duty,  not  merely  a  pleasure,  to  be 
fine.  She  is  a  fine  lady  of  the  first  order ;  nothing  too 
professional  in  her  manner — no  obvious  affectation,  for  affecta- 
tion in  her  was  so  early  wrought  into  habit  as  to  have  become 
second  nature,  scarcely  distinguishable  from  real — all  easy.' 

'  Just  so,  mamma ;  one  gets  on  so  easy  with  her.' 

'  A  curious  illusion,'  continued  Lady  Davenant,  '  occurs  with 
every  one  making  acquaintance  with  such  persons  as  Lady 
Masham,  I  have  observed ;  perhaps  it  is  that  some  sensation 
of  the  tread-mill  life  she  leads  communicates  itself  to  those  she 
is  talking  to ;  which  makes  you  fancy  you  are  always  getting 
on,  but  you  never  do  get  beyond  a  certain  point.' 

'That  is  exactly  what  I  feel,'  said  Helen,  'while  Lady 
Masham  speaks,  or  while  she  listens,  I  almost  wonder  how  she 
ever  existed  without  me.' 

'  Yes,  and  though  one  knows  it  is  all  an  illusion,'  said  Lady 
Cecilia,  'still  one  is  pleased,  knowing  all  the  time  that  she 
cannot  possibly  care  for  one  in  the  least ;  but  then  one  does 
not  expect  everybody  to  care  for  one  really  ;  at  least  I  know  I 
cannot  like  all  my  acquaintances  as  much  as  my  friends,  much 
less  can  I  love  all  my  neighbours  as  myself ' 

'  Come,  come,  Cecilia  ! '  said  her  mother. 

'  By  "  come,  come  ! "  mamma  means,  don't  go  any  further, 
Cecilia,'  said  she,  turning  to  Helen.  '  But  now,  mamma,  I  am 
not  clear  whether  you  really  think  her  your  friend  or  your 
enemy,  inclined  to  do  you  mischief  or  not.  Just  as  it  may  be 
for  her  interest  or  not,  I  suppose.' 

'And  just   as  it  may  be  the  fashion  or  not,'  said    Lady 

Davenant.     '  I  remember  hearing  old    Lady  M ,  one  of 

the  cleverest  women  of  the  last  century,  and  one  who  had  seen 
much  of  the  world,  say,  "  If  it  was  the  fashion  to  bum  me,  and 

267 


HELEN 

I  at  the  stake,  I  hardly  know  ten  persons  of  my  acquaintance 
who  would  refuse  to  throw  on  a  faggot." ' 

'  O  mamma  ! — -O  Lady  Davenant ! '  exclaimed  Helen  and 
Cecilia. 

'  It  was  a  strong  way  of  putting  the  matter,'  said  Lady 
Davenant,  laughing: — 'but  fashion  has,  I  assure  you,  more 
influence  over  weak  minds,  such  as  Lady  Masham's,  than  either 
party  or  interest.  And  since  you  do  not  like  my  illustration 
by  fire,  take  one  by  water — She  is  just  a  person  to  go  out 
with,  on  a  party  of  pleasure,  on  the  smooth  surface  of  a 
summer  sea,  and  if  a  slight  shower  comes  on  would  pity  your 
bonnet  sincerely,  but  if  a  serious  squall  arose  and  all  should  be 
in  danger ' 

'  Then,  of  course,  everybody  would  take  care  of  themselves,' 
interrupted  Lady  Cecilia,  '  excepting  such  a  simpleton  as  Helen, 
who  would  take  care  of  you  first,  mamma,  of  me  next,  and  of 
herself  last' 

'  I  believe  it — I  do  believe  it,'  cried  Lady  Davenant,  and, 
her  eyes  and  thoughts  fixing  upon  Helen,  she  quite  forgot  what 
further  she  was  going  to  say  of  Lady  Masham. 

The  perfectly  unimpassioned  tone  in  which  her  mother  had 
discussed  this  lady's  character,  even  the  candour,  convinced 
Lady  Cecilia  as  well  as  Helen  that  nothing  further  could  be 
done  as  to  drawing  them  together.  No  condescension  of 
manner,  no  conciliation,  could  be  expected  from  Lady  Davenant 
towards  Lady  Masham,  but  at  the  same  time  there  was  no  fear 
of  any  rupture.  And  to  this  humble  consolation  was  Lady 
Cecilia  brought.  She  told  Helen  that  she  gave  up  all  hope  of 
doing  any  good,  she  would  now  be  quite  content  if  she  avoided 
doing  harm,  and  if  this  visit  ended  without  coming  to  any 
further  outrage  on  the  part  of  Lady  Bearcroft,  and  without  her 
mother's  being  guilty  of  contempt  to  Lady  Masham.  She  had 
done  some  little  service,  however,  with  respect  to  the  ambassa- 
dress, and  her  mother  knew  it.  It  was  well  known  that  the 
ambassadress  governed  the  ambassador,  and  Lady  Cecilia  had 
quite  won  her  heart,  '  so  that  he  will  be  assuredly  a  friend  to 
papa.  Indeed,  this  has  been  almost  promised.  Madame 
I'Ambassadrice  assured  me  that  her  husband  looks  upon  Lord 
Davenant  as  one  of  the  first  sages  of  England,  that  is  to  say, 
of  Europe  ;  and  she  says  he  is  well  acquainted  with  all  Lord 
Davenant's  works — and  it  is  my  belief,'  concluded  Lady  Cecilia, 

268 


HELEN 

'  that  all  Sir  William  Davenant's  works  go  with  her  to  papa's 
credit,  for  as  she  spoke  she  gave  a  polite  glance  towards  the 
bookcase  where  she  saw  their  gilded  backs,  and  I  found  the 
ambassador  himself,  afterwards,  with  "  Davenant  on  Trade " 
in  his  hand  !  Be  it  so :  it  is  not,  after  all,  you  know,  robbing 
the  dead,  only  inheriting  by  mistake  from  a  namesake,  which 
with  foreigners  is  allowable,  because  impossible  to  avoid,  from 
the  time  of  "Monsieur  Robinson  parent  apparemment  de 
Monsieur  Crusoe?"  to  the  present  day.' 

By  dint  of  keeping  well  asunder  those  who  would  not  draw 
well  together,  Lady  Ceciha  did  contrive  to  get  through  the 
remaining  morning  of  this  operose  visit ;  some  she  sent  out  to 
drive  with  gallant  military  outriders  to  see  places  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood famed  for  this  or  that ;  others  walked  or  boated,  or 
went  through  the  customary  course  of  conservatories,  pheasantry, 
flower-garden,  pleasure-grounds,  and  best  views  of  Clarendon 
Park — and  billiards  always.  The  political  conferences  were 
held  in  Lord  Davenant's  apartment :  to  what  these  conferences 
tended  we  never  knew  and  never  shall ;  we  consider  them  as 
matters  of  history,  and  leave  them  with  due  deference  to  the 
historian  ;  we  have  to  do  only  with  biography.  Far  be  it  from 
us  to  meddle  with  politics — we  have  quite  enough  to  do  with 
manners  and  moraUty. 


CHAPTER   XXVII 

The  next  day,  as  Helen  was  going  across  the  hall,  she  saw  the 
members  of  the  last  political  conclave  coming  out  of  Lord 
Davenant's  room,  each  looking  as  if  the  pope  had  not  been 
chosen  according  to  his  wish — dark  and  disappointed ;  even 
Mr.  Harley's  radiant  countenance  was  dimmed,  and  the  dry 
symptomatic  cough  which  he  gave  after  taking  leave  of  Lady 
Davenant  convinced  Helen  that  all  was  not  well  within.  He 
departed,  and  there  seemed  to  be  among  those  who  remained 
a  greater  constraint  than  ever.  There  appeared  to  be  in  each 
an  awakened  sense  that  there  were  points  on  which  they 
could  never  agree ;  all  seemed  to  feel  how  different  it  would 
have  been  if  Mr.  Harley  had  remained.     True,  the  absence  or 

269 


HELEN 

presence  of  a  person  of  genius  makes  as  much  difference  in  the 
whole  appearance  of  things  as  sunshine  or  no  sunshine  on  the 
landscape. 

Dinner,  however,  was  got  through,  for  time  and  the  hour, 
two  hours,  or  three,  will  get  through  the  roughest  dinner  or 
the  smoothest.  '  Never  saw  a  difficult  dinner-party  better 
bothered ! '  was  Lady  Bearcroft's  compliment,  whispered  to 
Cecilia  as  they  went  into  the  drawing-room ;  and  Helen, 
notwithstanding  Lady  Bearcroft's  vulgarity,  could  not  help 
beginning  absolutely  to  like  her  for  her  good-nature  and 
amazingly  prompt  sympathy ;  but,  after  all,  good-nature  with- 
out good  manners  is  but  a  blundering  ally,  dangerous  to  its 
best  friend. 

This  evening.  Lady  Cecilia  felt  that  every  one  was  uncom- 
fortable, and,  flitting  about  the  room,  she  touched  here  and 
there  to  see  how  things  were  going  on.  They  were  not  going 
on  well,  and  she  could  not  make  them  better ;  even  her  efforts 
at  conciliation  were  ineffectual :  she  had  stepped  in  between 
her  mother,  some  of  the  gentlemen,  and  the  General,  in  an 
argument  in  which  she  heard  indications  of  strife,  and  she  set 
about  to  explain  away  contradictions,  and  to  convince  every- 
body that  they  were  really  all  of  the  same  opinion.  With  her 
sweet  voice  and  pretty  persuasive  look,  this  might  have  done 
for  the  General,  as  a  relaxing  smile  seemed  to  promise ;  but  it 
would  not  do  at  all  with  Lady  Davenant,  who,  from  feelings 
foreign  to  the  present  matter,  was  irritated,  and  spoke,  as 
Helen  thought,  too  harshly  : — '  Cecilia,  you  would  act 
Harmony  in  the  comedy  to  perfection  ;  but,  unfortunately,  I  am 
not  one  of  those  persons  who  can  be  persuaded  that  when  I 
say  one  thing  I  mean  quite  another — probably  because  it  is  not 
my  practice  so  to  do.  That  old  epigram.  Sir  Benjamin,  do 
you  know  it,'  continued  she,  '  which  begins  with  a  bankrupt's 
roguish  "  Whereas^'  ? 

'  Whereas  the  religion  and  fate  of  three  nations 
Depend  on  th'  importance  of  our  conversations  : 
Whereas  some  objections  are  thrown  in  our  way, 
And  words  have  been  construed  to  mean  what  they  say, — 
Be  it  known  from  henceforth  to  each  friend  and  each  brother, 
Whene'er  we  say  one  thing  we  mean  quite  another. ' 

Sir  Benjamin  gravely  remarked  that  it  was  good  law 
practice.     The  courts  themselves  would   be  shut  up  if  some 

270 


HELEN 

such  doctrine  were  not  understood  in  the  practice  there, 
subaudito,  if  not  publicly  proclaimed  with  an  absolute  '  Whereas 
be  it  known  from  henceforth.' 

Whether  this  was  dry  humour  of  Sir  Benjamin's,  or  plain 
matter  of  fact  and  serious  opinion,  the  gravity  with  which  it 
was  delivered  indicated  not ;  but  it  produced  the  good  effect 
of  a  smile,  a  laugh,  at  him  or  with  him.  Lady  Cecilia  did 
not  care  which,  the  laugh  was  good  at  all  events  ;  her  in- 
vincible good-nature  and  sweetness  of  temper  had  not  been 
soured  or  conquered  even  by  her  mother's  severity ;  and  Lady 
Davenant,  observing  this,  forgave  and  wished  to  be  forgiven. 

'  My  dearest  Ceciha,'  said  she,  '  clasp  this  bracelet  for  me, 
will  you  ?  It  would  really  be  a  national  blessing,  if,  in  the 
present  times,  all  women  were  as  amiable  as  you, 

'  Fond  to  spread  friendships,  but  to  cover  heats.' 

Then,  turning  to  a  French  gentleman,  she  spoke  of  the  change 
she  had  observed  when  she  was  last  at  Paris,  from  the  over- 
whelming violence  of  party  spirit  on  all  sides. 

'  Dreadfully  true,'  the  French  gentleman  replied — '  party 
spirit,  taking  every  Proteus  form,  calling  itself  by  a  hundred 
names  and  with  a  thousand  devices  and  watchwords,  which 
would  be  too  ridiculous  if  they  were  not  too  terrible — domestic 
happiness  destroyed,  all  society  disordered,  disorganised — 
literature  not  able  to  support  herself,  scarcely  appearing  in 
company — all  precluded,  superseded  by  the  pohtics  of  the 
day.' 

Lady  Davenant  joined  with  him  in  his  regrets,  and  added 
that  she  feared  society  in  England  would  soon  be  brought  to 
the  same  condition. 

'  No,'  said  the  French  gentleman ;  '  English  ladies  will 
never  be  so  vehement  as  my  countrywomen ;  they  will  never 
become,  I  hope,  like  some  of  our  lady  politicians,  "  qui  heurlent 
comme  des  demons^ ' 

Lady  Cecilia  said  that,  from  what  she  had  seen  at  Paris, 
she  was  persuaded  that  if  the  ladies  did  bawl  too  loud  it  was 
because  the  gentlemen  did  not  listen  to  them ;  that  above 
half  the  party-violence  which  appeared  in  Parisian  belles  was 
merely  dramatic,  to  produce  a  sensation,  and  draw  the  gentle- 
men, from  the  black /^/o/ow  in  which  they  gathered,  back  to 
their  proper  positions  round  Vs\^fauteuils  of  the  fair  ladies. 

271 


HELEN 

The  foreigner,  speaking  to  what  he  saw  passing  in  Lady 
Davenant's  mind,  went  on  ; — '  Ladies  can  do  much,  however, 
in  this  as  in  all  other  dilemmas  where  their  power  is,  and 
ought  to  be,  omnipotent.' 

'  Female  influence  is  and  ought  to  be  -potent,'  said  the 
General,  with  an  emphasis  on  influence,  contradistinguishing  it 
from  power,  and  reducing  the  exaggeration  of  omnipotent  by 
the  short  process  of  lopping  off  two  syllables. 

'  So  long  as  ladies  keep  in  their  own  proper  character,' 
said  Lady  Davenant,  '  all  is  well ;  but,  if  once  they  cease  to 
act  as  women,  that  instant  they  lose  their  privilege — their 
charm  :  they  forfeit  their  exorcising  power ;  they  can  no  longer 
command  the  demon  of  party  nor  themselves,  and  he  trans- 
forms them  directly,  as  you  say,'  said  she  to  the  French 
gentleman,  '  into  actual  furies.' 

'  And,  when  so  transformed,  sometimes  unconscious  of  their 
state,'  said  the  General,  drily,  his  eye  glancing  towards  the 
other  end  of  the  room,  and  lighting  upon  Lady  Bearcroft,  who 
was  at  the  instant  very  red  and  very  loud  ;  and  Lady  Cecilia 
was  standing,  as  if  watchful  for  a  moment's  pause,  in  which 
to  interpose  her  word  of  peace.  She  waited  for  some  time  in 
vain,  for  when  she  hastened  from  the  other  end  of  the  room  to 
this,  the  scene  of  action,  things  had  come  to  such  a  pass 
between  the  ladies  Masham  and  Bearcroft,  that  mischief, 
serious  mischief,  must  have  ensued,  had  not  Lady  Ceciha,  at 
utmost  need,  summoned  to  her  aid  the  happy  genius  of 
Nonsense — the  genius  of  Nonsense,  in  whose  elfin  power  even 
Love  delights  ;  on  whom  Reason  herself  condescends  often  to 
smile,  even  when  Logic  frowns,  and  chops  him  on  his  block : 
but,  cut  in  twain,  the  ethereal  spirit  soon  unites  again,  and 
lives,  and  laughs.  But  mark  him  well — this  little  happy 
genius  of  Nonsense ;  see  that  he  be  the  true  thing — the 
genuine  spirit.  You  will  know  him  by  his  well-bred  air  and 
tone,  which  none  can  counterfeit ;  and  by  his  smile  ;  for  while 
most  he  makes  others  laugh,  the  arch  little  rogue  seldom  goes 
beyond  a  smile  himself!  Graceful  in  the  midst  of  all  his 
pranks,  he  never  goes  too  far — though  far  enough  he  has  been 
known  to  go  ;  he  has  crept  into  the  armour  of  the  great  hero, 
convulsed  the  senate  in  the  wig  of  a  chancellor,  and  be- 
comingly, decorously,  put  on  now  and  then  the  mitre  of  an 
archbishop.      '  If  good  people,'  said  Archbishop  Usher,  '  would 

272 


HELEN 

but  make  goodness  agreeable,  and  smile,  instead  of  frowning 
in  their  virtue,  how  many  they  would  win  to  the  good  cause  ! ' 
Lady  Cecilia  in  this  was  good  at  need,  and  at  her  utmost 
need,  obedient  to  her  call,  came  this  happy  little  genius,  and 
brought  with  him  song  and  dance,  riddle  and  charade,  and 
comic  prints  ;  and  on  a  half-opened  parcel  of  books  Cecilia 
darted,  and  produced  a  Comic  Annual,  illustrated  by  him 
whom  no  risible  muscles  can  resist.  All  smiled  who  under- 
stood, and  mirth  admitted  of  her  crew  all  who  smiled,  and 
party-spirit  fled.  But  there  were  foreigners  present.  For- 
eigners cannot  well  understand  our  local  allusions  ;  our  Cruik- 
shank  is  to  them  unintelligible,  and  Hood's  Sorrows  of 
Number  One  quite  lost  upon  them.  Then  Lady  Bearcroft 
thought  she  would  do  as  much  as  Lady  Cecilia,  and  more — 
that  she  would  produce  what  these  poor  foreigners  could 
comprehend.  But  not  at  her  call  came  the  genius  of  lively 
nonsense,  he  heard  her  not.  In  his  stead  came  that  counter- 
feit, who  thinks  it  witty  to  be  rude  : 

And  placing  raillery  in  railing, 

Will  tell  aloud  your  greatest  failing — 

that  vulgar  imp  yclept  Fun — known  by  his  broad  grin,  by 
his  loud  tone,  and  by  his  rude  banter.  Head  foremost  forcing 
himself  in,  came  he,  and  brought  with  him  a  heap  of  coarse 
caricatures,  and  they  were  party  caricatures. 

'  Capital ! '  Lady  Bearcroft,  however,  pronounced  them,  as 
she  spread  all  upon  the  table  for  applause — but  no  applause 
ensued. 

Not  such,  these,  as  real  good  English  humour  produces 
and  enjoys,  independently  of  party — these  were  all  too  broad, 
too  coarse.  Lady  Davenant  despised,  the  General  detested, 
Helen  turned  away,  and  Lady  Cecilia  threw  them  under  the 
table,  that  they  might  not  be  seen  by  the  foreigners.  '  For 
the  honour  of  England  do  not  let  them  be  spread  abroad, 
pray,  Lady  Bearcroft.' 

'  The  world  is  grown  mighty  nice  ! '  said  Lady  Bearcroft ; 
'  for  my  part,  give  me  a  good  laugh  when  it  is  to  be  had.' 

'  Perhaps    we    shall   find    one   here,'    said    Lady    Cecilia, 

opening  a  portfolio  of  caricatures  in  a  different  style,  but  they 

were  old,  and  Lady  Bearcroft  would  have  thrown  them  aside  ; 

but  Lord  Davenant  observed  that,  if  they  have  lasted  so  long, 

T  273 


HELEN 

they  must  be  good,  because  their  humour  only  can  ensure 
their  permanence  ;  the  personahty  dies  with  the  person  :  for 
instance,  in  the  famous  old  print  of  the  minister  rat-catcher, 
in  the  Westminster  election,  the  likeness  to  each  rat  of  the 
day  is  lost  to  us,  but  the  ridicule  on  placemen  ratters  re- 
mains. The  whole,  however,  is  perfectly  incomprehensible  to 
foreigners. 

'  Rats  !  rat ! '  repeated  one  of  the  foreigners,  as  he  looked 
at  and  studied  the  print.  It  was  amusing  to  see  the  gravity 
with  which  this  foreign  diplomatist,  quite  new  to  England, 
listened  to  Lady  Bearcroft's  explanation  of  what  is  meant  in 
English  by  a  rat  political.  She  was  at  first  rather  good  on 
this  topic,  professing  a  supernatural  acuteness  of  the  senses, 
arising  from  an  unconquerable  antipathy,  bom  with  her,  to 
the  whole  race  of  rats.  She  declared  that  she  could  see  a  rat 
a  mile  off  in  any  man  —  could,  from  the  moment  a  man 
opened  his  mouth  in  Parliament,  or  on  the  hustings,  prophesy 
whether  he  would  turn  into  a  rat  at  last,  or  not.  She,  more- 
over, understood  the  language  of  rats  of  every  degree,  and 
knew  even  when  they  said  'No,'  that  they  meant  'Yes,' — 
two  monosyllables,  the  test  of  rats,  which  betray  them  all 
sooner  or  later,  and  transform  the  biped  into  the  quadruped, 
who  then  turns  tail,  and  runs  always  to  the  other  side,  from 
whatever  side  he  may  be  of. 

The  charge-d' affaires  stood  in  half  bow,  lending  deferential 
ear  and  serious  attention  the  whole  time  of  this  lecture  upon 
rats,  without  being  able  from  beginning  to  end  to  compass  its 
meaning,  and  at  the  close,  with  a  disconsolate  shrug,  he 
exclaimed,  '■Ah!  Je  renonce  d,  i^a ' 

Lady  Bearcroft  went  on — 'Since  I  cannot  make  your 
excellency  understand  by  description  what  I  mean  by  an 
English  rat-political,  I  must  give  you  an  example  or  two,  dead 
and  living — living  best,  and  I  have  more  than  one  noted  and 
branded  rat  in  my  eye.' 

But  Lady  Cecilia,  anxious  to  interrupt  this  perilous  business, 
hastily  rang  for  wine  and  water ;  and  as  the  gentlemen  went  to 
help  themselves  she  gave  them  a  general  toast,  as,  sitting  down 
to  the  pianoforte,  to  the  tune  of 

'  Here's  to  the  maiden  of  blushing  fifteen ' — 
she  sang — 

274 


HELEN 

'  Here's  to  rats  and  ratcatchers  of  every  degree, 

The  rat  that  is  trapped,  and  the  rat  that  is  free, 

The  rat  that  is  shy,  sir,  the  rat  that  is  bold,  sir, 

The  rat  upon  sale,  sir,  the  rat  that  is  sold,  sir. 

Let  the  rats  rat !     Success  to  them  all. 

And  well  off  to  the  old  ones  before  the  house  fall ! ' 


CHAPTER   XXVIII 

Sir  Benjamin  and  Lady  Bearcroft  departed  at  six  o'clock  the 
next  morning,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  political  and  diplomatic 
corps  left  immediately  after  breakfast. 

Lady  Davenant  looked  relieved,  the  General  satisfied,  and 
Lady  Cecilia  consoled  herself  with  the  hope  that,  if  she  had 
done  no  good,  she  had  not  done  any  harm.  This  was  a  bad 
slide,  perhaps,  in  the  magic  lantern,  but  would  leave  no  trace 
behind.  She  began  now  to  be  very  impatient  for  Beauclerc's 
appearance  ;  alway  sanguine,  and  as  rapid  in  her  conclusions 
as  she  was  precipitate  in  her  actions,  she  felt  no  doubt,  no 
anxiety,  as  to  the  future ;  for,  though  she  refrained  from  ques- 
tioning Helen  as  to  her  sentiments  for  Beauclerc,  she  was 
pretty  well  satisfied  on  that  subject.  Helen  was  particularly 
grateful  to  Lady  Cecilia  for  this  forbearance,  being  almost 
ashamed  to  own,  even  to  herself,  how  exceedingly  happy  she 
felt ;  and  now  that  it  was  no  longer  wrong  in  her  to  love,  or 
dishonourable  in  him  to  wish  to  be  loved,  she  was  surprised  to 
find  how  completely  the  idea  of  Beauclerc  was  connected  with 
and  interwoven  through  all  her  thoughts,  pursuits,  and  senti- 
ments. He  had  certainly  been  constantly  in  her  company  for 
several  months,  a  whole  summer,  but  she  could  scarcely  believe 
that  during  this  time  he  could  have  become  so  necessary  to  her 
happiness.  While,  with  still-increasing  agitation,  she  looked 
forward  to  his  arrival,  she  felt  as  if  Lady  Davenant's  presence 
was  a  sort  of  protection,  a  something  to  rely  on,  in  the  new 
circumstances  in  which  she  was  to  be  placed.  Lord  Davenant 
had  returned  to  town,  but  Lady  Davenant  remained.  The 
Russian  embassy  seemed  still  in  abeyance. 

One  morning  as  Helen  was  sitting  in  Lady  Davenant's 
room    alone    with  her,    she    said    suddenly:    'At    your   age, 

27s 


HELEN 

Helen,  I  had  as  little  taste  for  what  are  called  politics  as  you 
have,  yet  you  see  what  I  am  come  to,  and  by  the  same  road 
you  may,  you  will,  arrive  at  the  same  point.' 

'  I  !  oh,  I  hope  not  ! '  cried  Helen,  almost  before  she 
felt  the  whole  inference  that  might  be  drawn  from  this  ex- 
clamation. 

'  You  hope  not  ? '  repeated  her  ladyship  calmly.  '  Let  us 
consider  this  matter  rationally,  and  put  our  hopes,  and  our 
fears,  and  our  prejudices  out  of  the  question,  if  possible.  Let 
me  observe  to  you  that  the  position  of  women  in  society  is 
somewhat  different  from  what  it  was  a  hundred  years  ago,  or 
as  it  was  sixty,  or  I  will  say  thirty  years  since.  Women  are 
now  so  highly  cultivated,  and  political  subjects  are  at  present 
of  so  much  importance,  of  such  high  interest,  to  all  human 
creatures  who  live  together  in  society,  you  can  hardly  expect, 
Helen,  that  you,  as  a  rational  being,  can  go  through  the  world 
as  it  now  is,  without  forming  any  opinion  on  points  of  public 
importance.  You  cannot,  I  conceive,  satisfy  yourself  with  the 
common  namby-pamby  little  missy  phrase,  "  ladies  have  nothing 
to  do  with  politics."  ' 

Helen  blushed,  for  she  was  conscious  that,  wrong  or  right, 
namby-pamby,  little  missy,  or  not,  she  had  hitherto  satisfied 
herself  very  comfortably  with  some  such  thought. 

'  Depend  upon  it,  Helen,'  resumed  Lady  Davenant,  '  that 
when  you  are  married,  your  love  for  a  man  of  superior  abili- 
ties, and  of  superior  character,  must  elevate  your  mind  to  sym- 
pathy with  all  his  pursuits,  with  all  the  subjects  which  claim 
his  attention.' 

Helen  felt  that  she  must  become  strongly  interested  in  every 
subject  in  which  the  man  she  loved  was  interested ;  but  still 
she  observed  that  she  had  not  abilities  or  information,  like 
Lady  Davenant's,  that  could  justify  her  in  attempting  to  follow 
her  example.  Besides,  Helen  was  sure  that,  even  if  she  had, 
it  would  not  suit  her  taste  ;  and  besides,  in  truth,  she  did  not 
think  it  well  suited  to  a  woman — she  stopped  when  she  came 
to  that  last  thought.  But  what  kindness  and  respect  suppressed 
was  clearly  understood  by  her  penetrating  friend.  Fixing  her 
eyes  upon  Helen,  she  said  with  a  smile,  the  candour  and 
nobleness  of  her  character  rising  above  all  little  irritation  of 
temper, 

'  I  agree  with  you,  my  dear  Helen,  in  all  you  do  not  say, 
276 


HELEN 

and  were  I  to  begin  life  over  again,  my  conduct  should  in 
some  respects  be  dififerent.  Of  the  public  dangers  and  private 
personal  inconveniences  that  may  result  from  women  becoming 
politicians,  or,  as  you  better  express  our  meaning,  interfering 
with  public  affairs,  no  one  can  be  more  aware  than  I  am. 
Interfering,  observe  I  say,  for  I  would  mark  and  keep  the 
line  between  influence  and  interference.  Female  influence 
must,  will,  and  ought  to  exist  on  political  subjects  as  on  all 
others ;  but  this  influence  should  always  be  domestic,  not 
public — the  customs  of  society  have  so  ruled  it.  Of  the 
thorns  in  the  path  of  ambitious  men  all  moralists  talk,  but 
there  are  little,  scarcely  visible,  thorns  of  a  peculiar  sort  that 
beset  the  path  of  an  ambitious  woman,  the  venomous  prickles 
of  the  domestic  bramble,  a  plant  not  perhaps  mentioned  in 
Withering's  Botany,  or  the  Hortus  Kewensis,  but  it  is  too  well 
known  to  many,  and  to  me  it  has  been  sorely  known.' 

At  this  instant  General  Clarendon  came  in  with  some  letters, 
which  had  been  forwarded  to  him  express.  One,  for  Lady 
Davenant,  he  had  been  desired  to  put  into  her  hands  himself: 
he  retired,  and  Lady  Davenant  opened  the  letter.  By  the  first 
glance  at  her  countenance,  Helen  saw  that  there  was  something 
in  it  which  had  surprised  and  given  her  great  concern.  Helen 
withdrew  her  eyes,  and  waited  till  she  should  speak.  But 
Lady  Davenant  was  quite  silent,  and  Helen,  looking  at  her 
again,  saw  her  put  her  hand  to  her  heart,  as  if  from  some 
sudden  sense  of  violent  bodily  pain,  and  she  sank  on  the  sofa, 
fell  back,  and  became  as  pale  as  death  and  motionless.  Ex- 
cessively frightened,  Helen  threw  open  the  window,  rang  the 
bell  for  Lady  Davenant's  own  woman,  and  sent  the  page  for 
Lady  Cecilia.  In  a  few  moments  Lady  Cecilia  and  Elliott 
came.  Neither  was  as  much  alarmed  as  Helen  had  expected 
they  would  be.  They  had  seen  Lady  Davenant  under  similar 
attacks — they  knew  what  remedies  to  apply.  Elliott  was  a 
remarkably  composed,  steady  person.  She  now  went  on  doing 
all  that  was  necessary  without  speaking  a  word.  The  par- 
oxysm lasted  longer  than  usual,  as  Lady  Cecilia  observed  ;  and, 
though  she  continued  her  assurances  to  Helen  that  '  it  was  all 
nervous  —  only  nerves,'  she  began  evidently  to  be  herself 
alarmed.  At  length  symptoms  of  returning  animation  appeared, 
and  then  Cecilia  retired,  beckoning  to  Helen  to  follow  her 
into  the  next  room.     '  We  had  better  leave  mamma  to  Elliott, 

277 


HELEN 

she  will  be  happier  if  she  thinks  we  know  nothing  of  the 
matter.'  Then,  recollecting  that  Helen  had  been  in  the  room 
when  this  attack  came  on,  she  added — '  But  no,  you  must  go 
back,  for  mamma  will  remember  that  you  were  present — take 
as  little  notice,  however,  as  possible  of  what  has  happened.' 

Cecilia  said  that  her  mother,  when  they  were  abroad,  had 
been  subject  to  such  seizures  at  intervals,  'and  in  former 
times,  before  I  was  born,  I  believe,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  '  she 
had  some  kind  of  extraordinary  disease  in  the  heart ;  but  she 
has  a  particular  aversion  to  being  thought  nervous.  Every 
physician  who  has  ever  pronounced  her  nervous  has  always 
displeased  her,  and  has  been  dismissed.  She  was  once  quite 
vexed  with  me  for  barely  suggesting  the  idea.  There,'  cried 
Cecilia,  '  I  hear  her  voice,  go  to  her.' 

Helen  followed  Lady  Cecilia's  suggestion,  and  took  as  little 
notice  as  possible  of  what  had  happened.  Elliott  disappeared 
as  she  entered — the  page  was  waiting  at  the  door,  but  to 
Helen's  satisfaction  Lady  Davenant  did  not  admit  him. 
'  Not  yet :  tell  him  I  will  ring  when  I  want  him,'  said  she. 
The  door  closed :  and  Lady  Davenant,  turning  to  Helen,  said, 
'Whether  I  live  or  die  is  a  point  of  some  consequence  to  the 
friends  who  love  me ;  but  there  is  another  question,  Helen,  of 
far  more  importance  to  me,  and,  I  trust,  to  them.  That 
question  is,  whether  I  continue  to  live  as  I  have  lived, 
honoured  and  respected,  or  live  and  die  dishonoured  and 
despised,' — her  eye  glanced  towards  the  letter  she  had  been 
reading.  '  My  poor  child,'  continued  Lady  Davenant,  look- 
ing at  Helen's  agitated  countenance,  —  'my  poor  child,  I 
will  not  keep  you  in  suspense.'  She  then  told  Helen  that  she 
was  suspected  of  having  revealed  a  secret  of  state  that  had 
been  confided  to  her  husband,  and  which  it  was  supposed,  and 
truly  supposed,  that  Lord  Davenant  had  told  to  her.  Beyond 
its  political  importance,  the  disclosure  involved  a  charge  of 
baseness,  in  her  having  betrayed  confidence,  having  suffered  a 
copy  of  a  letter  from  an  illustrious  personage  to  be  handed 
about  and  read  by  several  people.  '  Lord  Davenant  as  yet 
knows  nothing  of  this,  the  effect  upon  him  is  what  I  most 
dread.  I  cannot  show  you  this,'  continued  she,  opening  again 
the  letter  she  had  just  received,  '  because  it  concerns  others  as 
well  as  myself.  I  am,  at  all  events,  under  obligations  that  can 
never   be  forgotten  to  the  person  who   gave  me  this  timely 

278 


HELEN 

notice,  which  could  no  otherwise  have  reached  me,  and  the 
person  to  whom  I  am  thus  obliged  is  one,  Helen,  whom 
neither  you  nor  I  like,  and  whom  Cecilia  particularly  dislikes — 
Miss  Clarendon  !  Her  manner  of  doing  me  this  service  is 
characteristic  :  she  begins — 

'  "  Miss  Clarendon  is  aware  that  Lady  Davenant  has  no 
Uking  for  her,  but  that  shall  not  prevent  Miss  Clarendon  from 
doing  what  she  thinks  an  act  of  justice  towards  a  noble 
character  falsely  attacked." ' — Lady  Davenant  read  no  more. 

'  Had  not  you  better  wait  till  you  are  stronger,  my  dear 
Lady  Davenant  ?'  said  Helen,  seeing  her  prepare  to  write. 

'  It  was  once  said,  gloriously  well,'  replied  Lady  Davenant, 
'  that  the  duties  of  life  are  more  than  life  itself — so  I  think.' 

While  she  wrote,  Helen  thought  of  what  she  had  just  heard, 
and  she  ventured  to  interrupt  Lady  Davenant  to  ask  if  she  had 
formed  any  idea  of  the  means  by  which  the  secret  could  have 
been  betrayed — or  the  copy  of  the  letter  obtained. 

'  Yes,  she  had  a  suspicion  of  one  person,  the  diplomatist  to 
whom  Mr.  Harley  had  shown  such  a  mortal  antipathy.  She 
recollected  that  the  last  morning  the  Congress  had  sat  in  Lord 
Davenant's  cabinet,  she  had  left  her  writing-desk  there,  and 
this  letter  was  in  it ;  she  thought  that  she  had  locked  the  desk 
when  she  had  left  the  room,  it  certainly  was  fast  when  she 
returned,  but  it  had  a  spring  Bramah  lock,  and  its  being  shut 
down  would  have  fastened  it.  She  had  no  proof  one  way  or 
other,  her  suspicion  rested  where  was  her  instinctive  dislike. 
It  was  remarkable,  however,  that  she  at  once  did  justice  to 
another  person  whom  she  did  not  like,  Mr.  Mapletofft,  Lord 
Davenant's  secretary.  '  His  manners  do  not  please  me,'  she 
said,  '  but  I  have  perfect  confidence  in  his  integrity.' 

Helen  felt  and  admired  this  generous  candour,  but  her  sus- 
picions were  not  of  the  diplomatist  alone  :  she  thought  of  one 
who  might  perhaps  have  been  employed  by  him — Carlos  the 
page.  And  many  circumstances,  which  she  recollected  and 
put  together,  now  strengthened  this  suspicion.  She  wondered 
it  had  not  occurred  to  Lady  Davenant ;  she  thought  it  must, 
but  that  she  did  not  choose  to  mention  it.  Helen  had  often 
heard  Lady  Davenant's  particular  friends, complain  that  it  was 
extremely  disagreeable  to  them  to  have  this  boy  constantly  in 
the  room,  whatever  might  be  the  conversation.  There  was 
the  page,  either  before  or  behind  a  screen,  always  within  hearing. 

279 


HELEN 

Lady  Davenant  said  that,  as  Carlos  was  a  Portuguese,  and 
had  never  been  in  England  till  she  had  brought  him  over,  a 
few  months  before,  he  could  not  understand  English  well 
enough  to  comprehend  what  was  going  on.  This  was  doubted, 
especially  by  Helen,  who  had  watched  his  countenance,  and 
had  represented  her  doubts  and  her  reasons  for  them  to  Lady 
Davenant,  but  she  was  not  convinced.  It  was  one  of  the  few 
points  on  which  she  could  justly  be  reproached  with  adhering 
to  her  fancy  instead  of  listening  to  reason.  The  more  Carlos 
was  attacked,  the  more  she  adhered  to  him.  In  fact,  it  was 
not  so  much  because  he  was  a  favourite,  as  because  he  was  a 
port^g^  ;  he  was  completely  dependent  upon  her  protection  : 
she  had  brought  him  to  England,  had  saved  him  from  his 
mother,  a  profligate  camp-follower,  had  freed  him  from  the 
most  miserable  condition  possible,  and  had  raised  him  to  easy, 
happy,  confidential  life.  To  the  generous  the  having  conferred 
an  obligation  is  in  itself  a  tie  hard  to  sever.  All  noble-minded 
people  believe  in  fidelity,  and  never  doubt  of  gratitude  ;  they 
throw  their  own  souls  into  those  they  oblige,  and  think  and 
feel  for  them,  as  they,  in  their  situation,  would  think  and  feel. 
Lady  Davenant  considered  it  an  injustice  to  doubt  the  attach- 
ment of  this  boy,  and  a  cruelty  she  deemed  it  to  suspect  him 
causelessly  of  being  the  most  base  of  human  creatures — he, 
a  young  defenceless  orphan.  Helen  had  more  than  once 
offended,  by  attempting  to  stop  Lady  Davenant  from  speaking 
imprudently  before  Carlos  ;  she  was  afraid,  even  at  this  moment, 
to  irritate  her  by  giving  utterance  to  her  doubts  ;  she  deter- 
mined, therefore,  to  keep  them  to  herself  till  she  had  some 
positive  grounds  for  her  suspicions.  She  resolved  to  watch  the 
boy  very  carefully.  Presently,  having  finished  her  letters.  Lady 
Davenant  rang  for  him.  Helen's  eyes  were  upon  Carlos  the 
moment  he  entered,  and  her  thoughts  did  not  escape  observation. 

'You  are  wrong,  Helen,'  said  Lady  Davenant,  as  she 
lighted  the  taper  to  seal  her  letters. 

'  If  I  am  not  right,'  said  Helen,  keeping  her  eyes  upon  the 
boy's  changing  countenance,  '  I  am  too  suspicious — but  observe, 
am  I  not  right,  at  this  instant,  in  thinking  that  his  countenance 
\%bad?' 

Lady  Davenant  could  not  but  see  that  countenance  change 
in  an  extraordinary  manner,  in  spite  of  his  efforts  to  keep  it 
steady. 

280 


HELEN 

'  You  cause  that  of  which  you  complain,'  said  she,  going  on 
seahng  her  letters  deliberately.  '  In  courts  of  public  justice, 
and  in  private  equity,'  the  word  equity  she  pronounced  with  an 
austere  emphasis,  'how  often  is  the  change  of  countenance 
misinterpreted.  The  sensibility  of  innocence,  that  cannot  bear 
to  be  suspected,  is  often  mistaken  for  the  confusion  worse 
confounded  of  guilt.' 

Helen  observed  that,  as  Lady  Davenant  spoke,  and  spoke 
in  his  favour,  the  boy's  countenance  cleared  up  ;  that  vacillating 
expression  of  fear,  and  consciousness  of  having  something 
within  him  unwhipt  of  justice,  completely  disappeared,  and  his 
whole  air  was  now  bold  and  open — towards  Helen,  almost  an 
air  of  defiance. 

'What  do  you  think  is  the  cause  of  this  change  in  his 
countenance — you  observe  it,  do  you  not  ? '  asked  Helen. 

'  Yes,  and  the  cause  is  as  plain  as  the  change.  He  sees  I 
do  not  suspect  him,  though  you  do ;  and  seeing,  Helen,  that 
he  has  at  least  one  friend  in  the  world,  who  will  do  him  justice, 
the  orphan  boy  takes  courage.' 

'  I  wish  I  could  be  as  good  as  you  are,  my  dearest  Lady 
Davenant,'  said  Helen  ;  '  but  I  cannot  help  still  feeling,  and 
saying, — I  doubt.  Now  observe  him,  while  I  speak  ;  I  will 
turn  my  eyes  away,  that  my  terrible  looks  may  not  confound 
him.  You  say  he  knows  that  you  do  not  suspect  him,  and 
that  I  do.     How  does  he  know  it  ? ' 

'  How  ! '  said  Lady  Davenant.  '  By  the  universal  language 
of  the  eyes.' 

'  Not  only  by  that  universal  language,  I  think,'  said  Helen  ; 
'  but  I  suspect  he  understands  every  word  we  say.' 

Helen,  without  ever  looking  up  from  a  bunch  of  seals  which 
she  was  rubbing  bright,  slowly  and  very  distinctly  added, 

'  I  think  that  he  can  speak,  read,  and  write  English.' 

A  change  in  the  countenance  of  Carlos  appeared,  notwith- 
standing all  his  efforts  to  hold  his  features  in  the  same  position  ; 
instead  of  placid  composure  there  was  now  grim  rigidity. 

'  Give  me  the  great  seal  with  the  coat  of  arms  on  it,'  said 
Lady  Davenant,  dropping  the  wax  on  the  letter,  and  watching 
the  boy's  eye  as  she  spoke,  without  herself  looking  towards  the 
seal  she  had  described.  He  never  stirred,  and  Helen  began  to 
fear  she  was  unjust  and  suspicious.  But  again  her  doubts,  at 
least  of  his  disposition,  occurred  :  as  she  was  passing  through 


HELEN 

Lady  Davenant's  dressing-room  with  her,  when  they  were 
going  down  to  dinner,  the  page  following  them,  Helen  caught 
his  figure  in  a  mirror,  and  saw  that  he  was  making  a  horrible 
grimace  at  her  behind  her  back,  his  dark  countenance  expressing 
extreme  hatred  and  revenge.  Helen  touched  Lady  Davenant's 
arm,  but,  before  her  eye  could  be  directed  to  the  glass,  Carlos, 
perceiving  that  he  was  observed,  pretended  to  be  suddenly 
seized  with  the  cramp  in  his  foot,  which  obliged  him  to  make 
these  frightful  contortions.  Helen  was  shocked  by  his  artful- 
ness, but  it  succeeded  with  Lady  Davenant  :  it  was  in  vain  to 
say  more  about  it  to  her,  so  Helen  let  it  pass.  When  she 
mentioned  it  afterwards  to  Lady  Cecilia,  she  said — '  I  am  sorry, 
for  your  sake,  Helen,  that  this  happened  ;  depend  upon  it,  that 
revengeful  little  Portuguese  gnome  will  work  you  mischief  some 
time  or  other.'  Helen  did  not  think  of  herself — indeed  she 
could  not  imagine  any  means  by  which  he  could  possibly  work 
her  woe ;  but  the  face  was  so  horrible,  that  it  came  again  and 
again  before  her  eyes,  and  she  was  more  and  more  determined 
to  watch  Carlos  constantly. 

This  was  one  of  the  public  days  at  Clarendon  Park,  on 
which  there  was  a  good  deal  of  company  ;  many  of  the  neigh- 
bouring gentry  were  to  be  at  dinner.  When  Lady  Davenant 
appeared,  no  inquiries  concerning  her  health  were  made  by  her 
daughter  or  by  the  General — no  allusion  to  her  having  been 
unwell.  She  seemed  quite  recovered,  and  Helen  observed 
that  she  particularly  exerted  herself,  and  that  her  manner  was 
more  gracious  than  usual  to  commonplace  people — more 
present  to  everything  that  was  passing.  She  retired  however 
early,  and  took  Helen  with  her.  The  depression  of  her  spirits, 
or  rather  the  weight  upon  her  mind,  appeared  again  as  soon  as 
they  were  alone  together.  She  took  her  writing-desk  and 
looked  over  some  letters  which  she  said  ought  to  be  burned. 
She  could  not  sleep  in  peace,  she  said — she  ought  not  to  sleep, 
till  this  was  done.  Several  of  these,  as  she  looked  over  them, 
seemed  to  give  her  pain,  and  excited  her  indignation  or  con- 
tempt as  she  from  time  to  time  exclaimed — '  Meanness  ! — 
corruption  ! — ingratitude  too  ! — all  favours  forgotten  !  To  see 
— to  feel  this — is  the  common  fate  of  all  who  have  lived  the 
hfe  I  have  lived  ;  of  this  I  am  not  so  inconsistent  as  to  com- 
plain. But  it  is  hard  that  my  own  character — the  integrity  of 
a  whole  life — should  avail  me  nothing  !     And  yet,'  added  she, 

282 


'-.fn- 


tielen  caught  his  figure  in  a  mirror,  a-nd  scm  thai  he  -was  making  a  horrible 
grimace  at  her  behind  her  back. 


HELEN 

after  a  moment's  pause  of  reflection,  'to  how  few  can  my 
character  be  really  known  !  Women  cannot,  like  men,  make 
their  characters  known  by  public  actions.     I  have  no  right  to 

complain  ;  but  if  Lord  Davenant's  honour  is  to  be '     She 

paused  ;  her  thoughts  seeming  too  painful  for  utterance.  She 
completed  the  arrangement  of  the  papers,  and,  as  she  pressed 
down  the  lid  of  her  writing-box,  and  heard  the  closing  sound 
of  the  lock,  she  said, — '  Now  I  may  sleep  in  peace.'  She  put 
out  the  lamp,  and  went  to  her  bedroom,  carrying  with  her  two 
or  three  books  which  she  intended  to  read  after  she  should  be 
in  bed ;  for,  though  she  talked  of  sleeping,  it  was  plain  she 
thought  she  should  not.  Helen  prevailed  upon^er  to  let  her 
remain  with  her,  and  read  to  her. 

She  opened  first  a  volume  of  Shakespeare,  in  which  was 
Lady  Davenant's  mark.  '  Yes,'  said  she,  '  read  that  speech  of 
Wolsey's  ;  read  that  whole  scene,  the  finest  picture  of  ambition 
ever  drawn.'  And,  after  she  had  heard  the  scene,  she  observed 
that  there  is  no  proof  more  certain  of  the  truth  of  poetic 
description,  than  its  recurring  to  us  at  the  time  we  strongly 
feel.  '  Those  who  tell  us,'  continued  she,  '  that  it  is  unnatural 
to  recollect  poetry  or  eloquence  at  times  of  powerful  emotion 
are  much  mistaken  ;  they  have  not  strong  feelings  or  strong 
imaginations.  I  can  affirm  from  my  own  experience  that  it  is 
perfectly  natural.'  Lady  Davenant  rapidly  mentioned  some 
instances  of  this  sort  which  she  recollected,  but  seeing  the 
anxiety  of  Helen's  look,  she  added,  'You  are  afraid  that  I  am 
feverish  ;  you  wish  me  to  rest ;  then,  go  on  reading  to  me.' 

Helen  read  on,  till  Lady  Davenant  declared  she  would  not 
let  her  sit  up  any  longer.  '  Only,  before  you  go,  my  dear 
child,  look  here  at  what  I  have  been  looking  at  while  you  have 
been  reading.'  She  made  Helen  place  herself  so  as  to  see 
exactly  in  the  same  direction  and  light  in  which  she  was  look- 
ing, and  she  pointed  out  to  her,  in  the  lining  of  the  bed,  a 
place  where,  from  the  falling  of  the  folds  and  the  crinkles  in 
the  material,  a  figure  with  the  head,  head-dress,  and  perfect 
profile  of  an  old  woman  with  a  turned-up  chin,  appeared.  At 
first  Helen  could  not  see  it ;  but  at  last  she  caught  it,  and 
was  struck  with  it.  '  The  same  sort  of  curious  effect  of  chance 
resemblance  and  coincidence  which  painters,  Leonardo  da 
Vinci  in  particular,  have  observed  in  the  moss  and  stains  on 
old  stones,'  observed  Lady  Davenant.     '  But  it  struck  me  to- 

284 


HELEN 

night,  Helen,  perhaps  because  I  am  a  little  feverish — it  struck 
me  in  a  new  point  of  view — moral,  not  picturesque.  If  such 
be  the  effects  of  chance,  or  of  coincidence,  how  cautious  we 
should  be  in  deciding  from  appearances,  or  pronouncing  from 
circumstantial  evidence  upon  the  guilt  of  evil  design  in  any 
human  creature.' 

'  You  mean  this  to  apply  to  me  about  Carlos  ? '  said  Helen. 

'  I  do.  But  not  only  of  him  and  you  was  I  thinking,  but 
of  myself  and  those  who  judge  of  me  falsely  from  coincidences, 
attributing  to  me  designs  which  I  never  had,  and  actions  of 
which  I  am  incapable.'  She  suddenly  raised  herself  in  her 
bed,  and  was  going  to  say  more,  but  the  pendule  striking  at 
that  instant  two  o'clock,  she  stopped  abruptly,  kissed  Helen, 
and  sent  her  away. 

Helen  gathered  together  and  carried  away  with  her  all  the 
books,  that  Lady  Davenant  might  not  be  tempted  to  look  at 
them  more.  As  she  had  several  piled  on  one  arm,  and  had  a 
taper  in  her  hand,  she  was  somewhat  encumbered,  and,  though 
she  managed  to  open  the  bedroom  door,  and  to  shut  it  again 
without  letting  any  of  the  books  fall,  and  crossed  the  little 
anteroom  between  the  bed-chamber  and  dressing-room  safely, 
yet,  as  she  was  opening  the  dressing-room  door,  and  taking  too 
much  or  too  little  care  of  some  part  of  her  pyramid  of  books, 
down  came  the  whole  pile  with  a  noise  which  in  the  stillness 
of  the  night  sounded  tremendous.  She  was  afraid  it  would 
disturb  Lady  Davenant,  and  was  going  back  to  tell  her  what 
it  was,  when  she  was  startled  by  hearing,  as  she  thought,  the 
moving  of  a  chair  or  table  in  the  dressing-room  :  she  stopped 
short  to  listen^all  was  silent ;  she  thought  she  had  mistaken 
the  direction  in  which  the  noise  came. 

She  softly  opened  the  dressing-room  door,  and  looked  in — 
all  was  silent — no  chair,  or  stool,  or  table  overturned,  every- 
thing was  in  its  place  exactly  as  they  had  left  it,  but  there 
was  a  strong  smell  of  a  half-extinguished  lamp  :  she  thought 
it  had  been  put  out  when  they  had  left  the  room,  she  now 
supposed  it  had  not  been  sufficiently  lowered,  she  turned  the 
screw,  and  took  care  now  to  see  it  completely  extinguished  ; 
then  went  back  for  the  books,  and  as  people  sometimes  will, 
when  most  tired  and  most  late,  be  most  orderly,  she  would  not 
go  to  bed  without  putting  every  volume  in  its  place  in  the 
book-case.     After  reaching  to  put  one  book  upon  the  highest 

285 


HELEN 

shelf,  as  she  was  getting  down  she  laid  her  hand  on  the  top  of 
Lady  Davenant's  writing-box,  and,  as  she  leaned  on  it,  was 
surprised  to  hear  the  click  of  its  lock  closing.  The  sound  was 
so  peculiar  she  could  not  be  mistaken  ;  besides,  she  thought 
she  had  felt  the  lid  give  way  under  her  pressure.  There  was 
no  key  left  in  the  lock — she  perfectly  recollected  the  very 
sound  of  that  click  when  Lady  Davenant  shut  the  lid  down 
before  leaving  the  room  this  night.  She  stood  looking  at  the 
lock,  and  considering  how  this  could  be,  and  as  she  remained 
perfectly  still,  she  heard,  or  thought  she  heard,  some  one 
breathing  near  her.  Holding  in  her  own  breath,  she  listened 
and  cautiously  looked  round  without  stirring  from  the  place 
where  she  stood — one  of  the  window  curtains  moved,  so  at 
least  she  thought — yes,  certainly  there  was  some  living  thing 
behind  it.  It  might  be  Lady  Davenant's  great  dog ;  but 
looking  again  at  the  bottom  of  the  curtain  she  saw  a  human 
foot.  The  page,  Carlos  !  was  her  instant  suspicion,  and  his 
vengeful  face  came  before  her,  and  a  vision  of  a  stiletto,  or 
she  did  not  well  know  what.  She  trembled  all  over ;  yet  she 
had  presence  of  mind  enough  to  recollect  that  she  should  not 
seem  to  take  notice.  And,  while  she  moved  about  the  books 
on  the  table,  she  gave  another  look,  and  saw  that  the  foot  was 
not  withdrawn.  She  knew  she  was  safe  still,  it  had  not  been 
perceived  that  she  had  seen  it ;  now  what  was  she  to  do  ? 
'  Go  up  to  that  curtain  and  draw  it  back  and  face  the  boy ' 
— but  she  did  not  dare ;  yet  he  was  only  a  boy — But  it  might 
be  a  man  and  not  the  page.  Better  go  and  call  somebody — 
tell  Lady  Davenant.  She  MUST  go  through  the  ante-chamber, 
and  pass  close  to  that  curtain  to  open  the  door.  All  this  was 
the  thought  of  one  moment,  and  she  went  on  holding  up  the 
light  to  the  book-shelves  as  if  in  quest  of  some  book,  and  kept 
coasting  along  to  gain  the  door ;  she  was  afraid  when  she  was 
to  pass  the  window-curtain,  either  of  touching  it,  or  of  stumb- 
ling over  that  foot.  But  she  got  past  without  touching  or 
stumbling,  opened  the  door,  whisked  through — that  was  done 
too  quickly,  but  she  could  not  help  it, — she  shut,  bolted  the 
door,  and  ran  across  the  ante -chamber  to  Lady  Davenant's 
bed-room.  She  entered  softly,  aware  of  the  danger  to  her  of 
sudden  alarm.  But  Lady  Davenant  was  not  asleep,  was  not 
alarmed,  but  was  effective  in  a  moment.  First  she  asked  :— 
'Did  you  lock  the  door  after  you  ?'     'Yes,  bolted  it.'     'That 

286 


HELEN 

is  well.'  Neither  of  them  said,  'Who  do  you  think  it  is?' 
But  each  knew  what  the  other  thought.  They  returned 
through  the  ante -chamber  to  the  dressing-room.  But  when 
they  opened  the  door,  all  was  quiet — no  one  behind  the 
curtain,  no  one  in  the  room — they  searched  under  the  sofas, 
everywhere ;  there  was  no  closet  or  hiding-place  in  which  any 
one  could  be  concealed.  The  window  fastenings  were  un- 
stirred. But  the  door  into  the  gallery  was  unlocked,  and  the 
simple  thing  appeared — that  Helen,  in  her  confusion,  had 
thought  only  of  fastening  the  door  into  the  ante -chamber, 
which  also  opened  on  the  gallery,  but  had  totally  forgotten  to 
lock  that  from  the  dressing-room  into  the  gallery,  by  which 
whoever  had  been  in  the  room  had  escaped  without  any 
difficulty.  Lady  Davenant  rather  inclined  to  believe  that  no 
one  had  been  there,  and  that  it  was  all  Helen's  imagination. 
But  Helen  persisted  that  she  had  seen  what  she  had  seen,  and 
heard  what  she  had  heard.  They  went  into  the  gallery — all 
silence,  no  creature  visible,  and  the  doors  at  the  ends  of  the 
gallery  locked  outside. 

After  a  fruitless  search  they  retired.  Lady  Davenant  to  her 
own  room,  and  Helen  to  hers,  full  of  shame  and  regret  that 
she  had  not  had  the  courage  to  open  the  curtain  at  the  right 
moment.  Nothing  could  stir  her  belief,  however,  in  the  evi- 
dence of  her  senses  ;  the  boy  must  have  been  there,  and  must 
be  still  concealed  somewhere  in  the  gallery,  or  in  some  of  the 
rooms  opening  into  it.  Some  of  these  were  unoccupied,  but 
they  were  all  locked  up,  as  Lady  Davenant  had  told  her  when 
she  had  proposed  searching  them  ;  one  or  two  they  tried  and 
found  fastened.  She  stood  at  her  own  door,  after  having  put 
down  the  candle  on  her  table,  still  giving  a  lingering  look-out, 
when,  through  the  darkness  in  the  gallery  at  the  further  end, 
she  saw  a  ray  of  light  on  the  floor,  which  seemed  to  come  from 
under  the  door  of  a  room  unoccupied — Mr.  Mapletofft's  room  ; 
he  had  gone  to  town  with  Lord  Davenant.  Helen  went  on 
tiptoe  very  softly  along  the  gallery,  almost  to  this  door,  when 
it  suddenly  opened,  and  the  page  stood  before  her,  the  lamp  in 
his  hand  shining  full  on  his  face  and  on  hers.  Both  started 
— then  both  were  motionless  for  one  second — but  he,  recover- 
ing instantly,  shot  back  again  into  the  room,  flung  to  the  door, 
and  locked  it. 

'  Seen  him  ! '   cried   Lady  Davenant,  when   Helen  flew  to 
287 


HELEN 

her  room  and  told  her ;  '  seen  him  !  do  you  say  ? '  and  then 
ringing  her  bell,  she  bade  Helen  run  and  knock  at  the  General's 
door,  while  she  went  herself  to  Mr.  Mapletofft's  room,  com- 
manding Carlos  to  open  the  door  immediately.  But  he  would 
not  open  it,  nor  make  any  answer  ;  the  servants  came,  and  the 
General  ordered  one  to  go  round  to  the  windows  of  the  room 
lest  the  boy  should  escape  that  way.  It  was  too  late,  he  had 
escaped ;  when  the  door  was  forced,  one  of  the  windows  was 
found  open ;  Carlos  was  not  in  the  room  ;  he  must  have 
swung  himself  down  from  the  height  by  means  of  a  tree  which 
was  near  the  window.  The  lamp  was  still  burning,  and 
papers  half  burnt  smouldering  on  the  table.  There  were 
sufficient  remains  to  tell  what  they  had  been.  Lady  Davenant 
saw,  in  the  handwriting  of  Carlos,  copies  of  letters  taken  from 
her  desk.  One  half-unbumt  cover  of  the  packet  he  had  been 
making  up,  showed  by  its  direction  to  whom  it  was  to  have 
been  sent,  and  there  were  a  few  lines  in  the  boy's  own  writing 
withinside  addressed  to  his  employer,  which  revealed  the  whole. 
His  employer  was,  as  Lady  Davenant  had  suspected — the 
diplomatist ! 

A  duplicate  Bramah  key  was  found  under  the  table,  and  she 
recollected  that  she  had  some  months  ago  missed  this  duplicate 
key  of  her  desk,  and  supposed  she  had  dropped  it  from  her 
watch-ring  while  out  walking ;  she  recollected,  farther,  that 
Carlos  had  with  great  zeal  assisted  her  in  the  search  for  it  all 
through  the  shrubbery  walks.  The  proofs  of  this  boy's  artifice 
and  long  -  premeditated  treachery,  accumulating  upon  Lady 
Davenant,  shocked  her  so  much  that  she  could  not  think  of 
anything  else.  '  Is  it  possible  ?  is  it  in  human  nature  ? '  she 
exclaimed.  '  Such  falsehood,  such  art,  such  ingratitude  ! ' 
As  she  fixed  her  eyes  upon  the  writing,  scarcely  yet  dry,  she 
repeated,  '  It  zs  his  writing — I  see  it,  yet  can  scarcely  believe 
it  !  I,  who  taught  him  to  write  myself — guided  that  little 
hand  to  make  the  first  letters  that  he  ever  formed  !  And  this 
is  in  human  nature  !  I  could  not  have  conceived  it — it  is 
dreadful  to  be  so  convinced,  it  lowers  one's  confidence  in  one's 
fellow -creatures.  That  is  the  worst  of  all!'  She  sighed 
deeply,  and  then,  turning  to  Helen,  said,  '  But  let  us  think  no 
more  of  it  to-night,  we  can  do  no  more,  they  are  in  pursuit  of 
him ;  I  hope  I  may  never,  never,  see  him  more.' 


HELEN 


CHAPTER   XXIX 


Some  people  value  their  friends  most  for  active  service,  some 
for  passive  kindness.  Some  are  won  by  tender  expressions, 
some  convinced  by  solid  proofs  of  regard ;  others  of  a  yet 
nobler  kind,  and  of  this  sort  was  Lady  Davenant,  are  apt  to  be 
best  pleased,  most  touched,  by  proofs  that  their  own  character 
has  been  thoroughly  understood,  and  that  they  have  justly 
appreciated  the  good  qualities  of  their  friend.  More  than  by 
all  the  kindness  and  sympathy  Helen  had  ever  before  shown 
her  was  she  now  pleased  and  touched  by  the  respect  for  her 
feelings  in  this  affair  of  the  page  ;  Helen  never  having  at  the 
moment  of  his  detection  nor  afterwards,  by  word  or  look,  in- 
dulged in  the  self-triumph  of  '  You  see  how  right  I  was  ! ' 
which  implies,  '  You  see  how  wrong  you  were ! '  On  the 
contrary,  she  gave  what  comfort  she  honestly  could  by  showing 
that  she  knew  from  what  humane  motives  and  generous 
feelings  Lady  Davenant  had  persisted  in  supporting  this  boy 
to  the  last. 

As  to  the  little  wretch  himself,  he  appeared  no  more. 
Search  was  made  for  him  in  every  direction,  but  he  was  not 
to  be  found,  and  Helen  thought  it  was  well  that  Lady  Davenant 
should  be  spared  the  pain  of  seeing  or  hearing  more  about 
him. 

The  whole  mystery  was  now  solved,  the  difficulty  for  Lady 
Davenant  in  a  fair  way  to  be  ended.  She  had  felt  an  instinctive 
aversion  to  the  fawning  tone  of  the  diplomatist,  whom  she  had 
suspected  of  caballing  against  Lord  Davenant  secretly,  and  it 
was  now  proved  that  he  had  been  base  beyond  what  she  could 
have  conceived  possible  ;  had  been  in  confederacy  with  this 
boy,  whom  he  had  corrupted,  purchasing  from  him  copies  of 
private  letters,  and  bribing  him  to  betray  his  benefactress. 
The  copy  of  that  letter  from  an  illustrious  personage  had  been 
thus  obtained.  The  proofs  now  brought  home  to  the  guilty 
person  deprived  him  at  once  of  all  future  means  of  injuring 
Lord  Davenant.  Completely  in  their  power,  he  would  be  ready 
to  ensure  silence  at  any  price,  and,  instead  of  caballing  further, 
this  low  intriguer  would  now  be  compelled  to  return  from 
U  289 


HELEN 

whence  he  came,  too  happy  to  be  permitted  to  retreat  from  his 
situation,  and  quit  England  without  being  brought  to  public 
disgrace.  No  notice  of  the  report  that  had  been  in  private 
circulation  against  Lady  Davenant  having  yet  appeared  in  the 
public  prints,  it  was  possible  to  prevent  the  mischief  that  even 
the  mention  of  her  name  in  such  an  affair  must  have  occasioned. 
It  was  necessary,  however,  that  letters  should  be  written 
immediately  to  the  different  persons  whom  the  private  reports 
had  reached ;  and  Helen  and  her  daughter  trembled  for  her 
health  in  consequence  of  this  extreme  hurry  and  fatigue,  but 
she  repeated  her  favourite  maxim — '  Better  to  wear  out  than 
to  rust  out ' — and  she  accomplished  all  that  was  to  be  done. 
Lord  Davenant  wrote  in  triumph  that  all  was  settled,  all 
difficulties  removed,  and  they  were  to  set  out  for  Russia 
immediately. 

And  now  Lady  Davenant  breathed  freely.  Relieved  from 
the  intolerable  thought  that  the  base  finger  of  suspicion  could 
point  at  her  or  at  Lord  Davenant,  her  spirits  rose,  her  whole 
appearance  renovated,  and  all  the  fears  that  Helen  and  her 
daughter  had  felt,  lest  she  should  not  be  able  to  sustain  the 
hardships  of  a  long  voyage  and  the  rigour  of  a  northern  climate, 
were  now  completely  dispelled. 

The  day  of  departure  was  fixed — Lady  Davenant  remained, 
however,  as  long  as  she  possibly  could  with  her  daughter ;  and 
she  was  anxious,  too,  to  see  Granville  Beauclerc  before  she 
left  Clarendon  Park. 

The  number  of  the  days  of  quarantine  were  gone  over  every 
morning  at  breakfast  by  Lady  Cecilia  and  the  General ;  they 
looked  in  the  papers  carefully  for  the  arrivals  at  the  hotel  which 
Beauclerc  usually  frequented.  This  morning,  in  reading  the 
list  aloud,  the  General  came  to  the  name  of  Sir  Thomas 
D'Aubigny,  brother  to  the  Colonel.  The  paragraph  stated 
that  Colonel  D'Aubigny  had  left  some  manuscripts  to  his 
brother,  which  would  soon  be  published,  and  then  followed 
some  puff  in  the  usual  style,  which  the  General  did  not  think  it 
necessary  to  read.  But  one  of  the  officers,  who  knew  some  of 
the  D'Aubignys,  went  on  talking  of  the  Colonel,  and  relating 
various  anecdotes  to  prove  that  his  souvenirs  would  be  amusing. 
Helen,  who  was  conscious  that  she  always  blushed  when 
Colonel  D'Aubigny's  name  was  mentioned,  and  that  the  General 
had  observed  it,  was  glad  that  he  never  looked  up  from  what 

290 


HELEN 

he  was  reading,  and  when  she  had  courage  to  turn  towards 
her  she  admired  CeciHa's  perfect  self-possession.  Beauclerc's 
name  was  not  among  the  arrivals,  and  it  was  settled  conse- 
quently that  they  should  not  see  him  this  day. 

Some  time  after  they  had  left  the  breakfast-room,  Helen 
found  Lady  Davenant  in  her  own  apartment,  sitting,  as  it  was 
very  unusual  with  her,  perfectly  unemployed  —  her  head 
leaning  on  her  hand,  and  an  expression  of  pain  in  her  counte- 
nance. '  Are  not  you  well,  my  dear  Lady  Davenant  ? '  Helen 
asked. 

'  My  mind  is  not  well,'  she  replied,  '  and  that  always  affects 
my  body,  and  I  suppose  my  looks.'  After  a  moment's  silence 
she  fixed  her  eyes  on  Helen,  and  said,  'You  tell  me  that 
Colonel  D'Aubigny  never  was  a  lover — never  was  an  admirer 
of  yours  ? ' 

'Never!'  said  Helen,  low,  but  very  decidedly.  Lady 
Davenant  sighed,  but  did  not  speak. 

After  a  longer  continuance  of  silence  than  had  almost  ever 
occurred  when  they  two  were  alone  together.  Lady  Davenant 
looked  up,  and  said,  '  I  hope  in  God  that  I  am  mistaken.  I 
p^y  that  I  may  never  live  to  see  it ! ' 

'  To  see  what  ? '  cried  Helen. 

'  To  see  that  one  little  black  spot,  invisible  to  you,  Helen, 
the  speck  of  evil  in  that  heart— my  daughter's  heart — spread 
and  taint,  and  destroy  all  that  is  good.  It  must  be  cut  out — 
at  any  pain  it  must  be  cut  away ;  if  any  part  be  unsound,  the 
corruption  will  spread,' 

'  Corruption  in  CeciUa  ! '  exclaimed  Helen.  '  Oh  !  I  know 
her — I  know  her  from  dear  childhood  !  there  is  nothing  corrupt 
in  her,  no,  not  a  thought ! ' 

'  My  dear  Helen,  you  see  her  as  she  has  been — as  she  is. 
I  see  her  as  she  may  become — very — frightfully  different. 
Helen  !  if  truth  fail,  if  the  principle  of  truth  fail  in  her  char- 
acter, all  will  fail !  All  that  charming  nature,  all  that  fair 
semblance,  all  that  fair  reality,  all  this  bright  summer's  dream 
of  happiness,  even  love — the  supreme  felicity  of  her  warm 
heart — even  love  will  fail  her.  Cecilia  will  lose  her  husband's 
affections  ! ' 

Helen  uttered  a  faint  cry. 

'  Worse  ! '  continued  Lady  Davenant.  '  Worse  !  she  will 
lose  her  own  esteem,  she  will  sink,  but  1  shall  be  gone,'  cried 

291 


HELEN 

she,  and  pressing  her  hand  upon  her  heart,  she  faintly  repeated, 
'  Gone  ! '  And  then  abruptly  added,  '  Call  Cecilia  !  I  must 
see  Cecilia,  I  must  speak  to  her.  But  first  I  will  tell  you, 
from  a  few  words  that  dropped  this  morning  from  General 
Clarendon,  I  suspect — I  fear  that  Cecilia  has  deceived  him  ! ' 

'  Impossible  ! — about  what — about  whom  ?  ' 

'  That  Colonel  D'Aubigny,'  said  Lady  Davenant. 

'  I  know  all  about  it,  and  it  was  all  nothing  but  nonsense. 
Did  you  look  at  her  when  the  General  read  that  paragraph  this 
morning — did  you  see  that  innocent  countenance  ? ' 

'  I  saw  it,  Helen,  and  thought  as  you  did,  but  I  have  been 
so  deceived — so  lately  in  countenance  ! ' 

'  Not  by  hers — never.' 

'  Not  by  yours,  Helen,  never.  And  yet,  why  should  I  say 
so  ?  This  very  morning,  yours,  had  I  not  known  you,  yours 
would  have  misled  me.' 

'  Oh,  my  foolish  absurd  habit  of  blushing,  how  I  wish  I 
could  prevent  it ! '  said  Helen ;  '  I  know  it  will  make  me 
betray  somebody  some  time  or  other.' 

'  Betray  !  What  have  you  to  betray  ? '  cried  Lady  Dave- 
nant, leaning  forward  with  an  eagerness  of  eye  and  voice  that 
startled  Helen  from  all  power  of  immediate  reply.  After  an 
instant's  pause,  however,  she  answered  firmly,  '  Nothing,  Lady 
Davenant,  and  that  there  is  nothing  wrong  to  be  known  about 
Cecilia,  I  as  firmly  believe  as  that  I  stand  here  at  this  moment. 
Can  you  suspect  anything  really  wrong  ? ' 

'Suspect! — wrong!'  cried  Lady  Davenant,  starting  up, 
with  a  look  in  her  eyes  which  made  Helen  recoil.  '  Helen, 
what  can  you  conceive  that  I  suspect  wrong  ? — Cecilia  ? — 
Captain  D'Aubigny  ?  What  did  you  mean  ?  Wrong  did 
you  say  ? — of  Cecilia  ?  Could  you  mean — could  you  conceive, 
Helen,  that  I,  having  such  a  suspicion,  could  be  here — living 

with  her — or — living  anywhere '     And  she  sank  down  on 

the  sofa  again,  seized  with  sudden  spasm — in  a  convulsion 
of  agonising  pain.  But  she  held  Helen's  hand  fast  grasped, 
detaining  her — preventing  her  from  pulling  the  bell ;  and  by 
degrees  the  pain  passed  off,  the  livid  hue  cleared  away,  the 
colour  of  life  once  more  returned,  but  more  tardily  than  before, 
and  Helen  was  excessively  alarmed. 

'  Poor  child !  my  poor,  dear  child,  I  feel — I  hear  your 
heart  beating.     You  are  a  coward,  Helen,  but  a  sweet  creature  ; 

292 


HELEN 

and  I  love  you — and  I  love  my  daughter.  What  were  we 
saying  ? ' 

'  Oh,  say  no  more  !  say  no  more  now,  for  Heaven's  sake,' 
said  Helen,  kneeling  beside  her  ;  and,  yielding  to  that  imploring 
look,  Lady  Davenant,  with  a  fond  smile,  parted  the  hair  on 
her  forehead,  kissed  her,  and  remained  perfectly  quiet  and 
silent  for  some  time. 

'  I  am  quite  well  again  now,'  said  she,  '  and  quite  com- 
posed. If  Cecilia  has  told  her  husband  the  whole  truth,  she 
will  continue  to  be,  as  she  is,  a  happy  wife ;  but  if  she  have 
deceived  him  in  the  estimation  of  a  single  word — she  is  un- 
done. With  him,  of  all  men,  never  will  confidence,  once  broken, 
unite  again.  Now  General  Clarendon  told  me  this  morning — 
would  I  had  known  it  before  the  marriage  ! — that  he  had 
made  one  point  with  my  daughter,  and  only  one,  on  the  faith 
of  which  he  married :  the  point  was,  that  she  should  tell  him 
if  she  had  ever  loved  any  other  man.  And  she  told  him — I 
fear  from  some  words  which  he  said  afterwards — I  am  sure 
he  is  in  the  belief — the  certainty,  that  his  wife  never  loved 
any  man  breathing  but  himself.' 

'  Nor  did  she,'  said  Helen.  '  I  can  answer  for  it — she 
has  told  him  the  truth — and  she  has  nothing  to  fear,  nor  have 
you.' 

'  You  give  me  new  life  ! '  cried  Lady  Davenant,  her  face 
becoming  suddenly  radiant  with  hope ;  '  but  how  can  you 
answer  for  this,  Helen  ?  You  had  no  part  in  any  deceit,  I  am 
sure,  but  there  was  something  about  a  miniature  of  you,  which 
I  found  in  Colonel  D'Aubigny's  hands  one  day.  That  was 
done,  I  thought  at  the  time,  to  deceive  me,  to  make  me  believe 
that  you  were  his  object.     Deceit  there  was.' 

'  On  his  part,'  said  Helen,  '  much  and  always ;  but  on 
Cecilia's  there  was  only,  from  her  over-awe  of  you,  some  little 
concealment ;  but  the  whole  was  broken  off  and  repented  of, 
whatever  little  there  was,  long  since.  And  as  to  loving  him, 
she  never  did  ;  she  told  me  so  then,  and  often  and  often  she 
has  told  me  so  since.' 

'  Convince  me  of  that,'  said  Lady  Davenant ;  '  convince 
me  that  she  thought  what  she  said.  I  believe,  indeed,  that  till 
she  met  General  Clarendon  she  never  felt  any  enthusiastic 
attachment,  but  I  thought  she  liked  that  man — it  was  all 
coquetry,  flirting  nonsense  perhaps.     Be  it  so — I  am  willing 

293 


HELEN 

to  believe  it.  Convince  me  but  that  she  is  true — there  is  the 
only  point  of  consequence.  The  man  is  dead  and  gone,  the 
whole  in  oblivion,  and  all  that  is  of  importance  is  her  truth  ; 
convince  me  but  of  that,  and  I  am  a  happy  mother.' 

Helen  brought  recollections,  and  proofs  from  conversations 
at  the  time  and  letters  since,  confirming  at  least  Cecilia's  own 
behef  that  she  had  never  loved  the  man,  that  it  was  all  vanity 
on  her  part  and  deception  on  his  :  Lady  Davenant  listened, 
willing  to  be  convinced. 

'  And  now,'  said  she,  '  let  us  put  this  matter  out  of  our  minds 
entirely — I  want  to  talk  to  you  of  yourself.' 

She  took  Helen  out  with  her  in  her  pony-phaeton,  and  spoke 
of  Granville  Beauclerc,  and  of  his  and  Helen's  prospects  of 
happiness. 

Lady  Cecilia,  who  was  riding  with  her  husband  in  some 
fields  adjoining  the  park,  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  phaeton  as  it 
went  along  the  avenue,  and,  while  the  General  was  giving  some 
orders  to  the  wood-ranger  about  a  new  plantation,  she,  telling 
him  that  she  would  be  back  in  two  minutes,  cantered  off  to 
overtake  her  mother,  and,  making  a  short  cut  across  the  fields, 
she  leaped  a  wide  ha-ha  which  came  in  her  way.  She  was  an 
excellent  horsewoman,  and  Fairy  carried  her  lightly  over  ;  and 
when  she  heard  the  General's  voice  in  dismay  and  indignation 
at  what  she  had  done,  she  turned  and  laughed,  and  cantered 
on  till  she  overtook  the  phaeton.  The  breeze  had  blown  her 
hair  most  becomingly,  and  raised  her  colour,  and  her  eyes  were 
joyously  bright,  and  her  light  figure,  always  well  on  horseback, 
now  looked  so  graceful  as  she  bent  to  speak  to  her  mother,  that 
her  husband  could  not  find  it  in  his  heart  to  scold  her,  and  he 
who  came  to  chide  remained  to  admire.  Her  mother,  looking 
up  at  her,  could  not  help  exclaiming, 

'  Well,  certainly,  you  are  an  excessively  pretty  creature  ! ' 

'  Bearers  of  good  news  always  look  well,  I  believe,'  said 
she,  smiling  ;  '  so  there  is  now  some  goodness  in  my  face.' 

'  That  there  certainly  is,'  said  her  mother,  fondly. 

'  But  you  certainly  don't  know  what  it  is — you  cannot  know 
till  I  tell  you,  my  dearest  Helen — my  dear  mother,  I  mean. 
Granville  Beauclerc  will  be  here  to-day — I  am  sure  of  it.  So 
pray  do  not  go  far  from  home — do  not  go  out  of  the  grounds  : 
this  was  what  I  was  in  such  a  hurry  to  say  to  you.' 
'  But  how  do  you  know,  Cecilia  ? 
294 


'  Well,  ceHainfy,  you  are  an  excessively  pretty  creature!  ■ 


HELEN 

'Just  because  I  can  read,'  replied  she,  'because  I  can  read 
a  newspaper  through,  which  none  of  you  newspaper-readers  by 
profession  could  do  this  morning.  After  you  all  of  you  laid  them 
down  I  took  them  up,  and  found  in  that  evening  paper  which 
your  stupid  aide-de-camp  had  been  poring  and  boring  over  a 
fresh  list  of  arrivals,  and  Mr.  Granville  Beauclerc  among  them 
at  full  length.  Now  he  would  not  stay  a  moment  longer  in  town 
than  was  absolutely  necessary,  you  know,  or  else  he  ought  to 
be  excommunicated.  But  it  is  not  in  his  nature  to  delay ;  he 
will  be  here  directly — I  should  not  be  surprised ' 

'You  are  right,  Cecilia,'  interrupted  the  General,  '  I  see  a 
caleche  on  that  road.      It  is  he.' 

The  caleche  turned  into  the  park,  and  in  a  few  minutes 
they  met.  Carriages,  horses,  and  servants,  were  sent  off  to 
the  house,  while  the  whole  party  walked,  and  talked,  and 
looked.  Lady  Cecilia  was  in  delightful  spirits,  and  so  affec- 
tionately, so  delicately  joyful — so  kind,  that  if  Helen  and 
Beauclerc  had  ever  blamed,  or  had  reason  to  blame  her,  it  must 
now  be  for  ever  forgotten.  As,  in  their  walk,  they  came  near 
that  seat  by  the  water's  side  where  the  lovers  had  parted, 
Cecilia  whispered  something  to  her  mother,  and  instantly  it 
was  '  done  as  desired.'  Beauclerc  and  Helen  were  left  to  their 
own  explanations,  and  the  rest  of  the  party  pursued  their  walk 
home.  Of  what  passed  in  this  explanatory  scene  no  note  has 
been  transmitted  to  the  biographer,  and  we  must  be  satisfied 
with  the  result. 


CHAPTER  XXX 

'  All  is  right ! '  cried  Lady  Cecilia.  '  O  my  dear  mother,  I 
am  the  happiest  creature  in  the  world,  if  you  were  not  going 
away ;  could  not  you  stay — a  little,  a  very  little  longer — just 
till • 

'  No,  no,  my  dear,  do  not  urge  me  to  stay,'  said  Lady 
Davenant  ;   '  I  cannot — your  father  expects  me  to-morrow.' 

All  her  preparations  were  made — in  short,  it  must  be  so, 
and  Lady  Davenant  begged  her  daughter  would  not  spend  the 
short  remaining  time  they  were  to  have  together  in  entreaties, 

296 


HELEN 

distressing  and  irritating  to  the  feelings  of  those  who  ask  and 
of  those  who  must  refuse.  '  Let  us  enjoy  in  peace,'  said  she, 
'  all  that  is  to  be  enjoyed  this  day  before  I  go.' 

When  Helen  entered  the  drawing-room  before  dinner, 
knowing  that  she  was  very  late,  she  found  assembled  Lady 
Davenant,  Beauclerc,  and  the  officers,  but  Cecilia  was  not 
there,  nor  did  the  punctual  General  make  his  appearance  ;  the 
dinner-hour  was  past,  a  servant  had  twice  looked  in  to  an- 
nounce it,  and,  seeing  neither  my  lady  nor  the  General,  had  in 
surprise  retired.  Silence  prevailed — what  could  be  the  matter  ? 
So  unusual  for  the  General  to  be  late.  The  General  came  in, 
hurried — ^very  uncommon  in  him,  and,  after  saying  a  few  words 
in  a  low  voice  to  Lady  Davenant,  who  immediately  went  up- 
stairs, he  begged  pardon,  was  very  sorry  he  had  kept  dinner 
waiting,  but  Lady  Cecilia  had  been  taken  ill — had  fainted — 
she  was  better— he  hoped  it  was  nothing  that  would  signify — 
she  was  lying  down — ^he  begged  they  would  go  to  dinner. 
And  to  dinner  they  went,  and  when  Lady  Davenant  returned 
she  put  Helen's  mind  at  ease  by  saying  it  was  only  a  httle 
faintishness  from  over-fatigue.  She  had  prescribed  rest,  and 
Cecilia  had  herself  desired  to  be  left  quite  alone.  After 
dinner  Lady  Davenant  went  up  again  to  see  her,  found  her 
not  so  well — feverish ;  she  would  not  let  Helen  go  to  her — 
they  would  talk  if  they  were  together,  and  she  thought  it 
necessary  to  keep  Cecilia  very  quiet.  If  she  would  but  sub- 
mit to  this,  she  would  be  well  again  probably  in  the  morning. 
At  tea-time,  and  in  the  course  of  the  evening  twice,  Cecilia 
sent  to  beg  to  speak  to  Helen ;  but  Lady  Davenant  and  the 
General  joined  in  requesting  her  not  to  go.  The  General  went 
himself  to  Lady  Ceciha  to  enforce  obedience,  and  he  reported 
that  she  had  submitted  with  a  good  grace. 

Helen  was  happily  engaged  by  Beauclerc's  conversation 
during  the  rest  of  the  evening.  It  was  late  before  they  retired, 
and  when  she  went  upstairs,  Felicie  said  that  her  lady  was 
asleep,  and  had  been  asleep  for  the  last  two  hours,  and  she  was 
sure  that  after  such  good  rest  her  ladyship  would  be  perfectly 
well  in  the  morning.  Without  further  anxiety  about  her  friend, 
therefore,  Helen  went  to  her  own  room.  It  was  a  fine  moon- 
fight  night,  and  she  threw  open  the  shutters,  and  stood  for  a 
long  time  looking  out  upon  the  moonlight,  which  she  loved ; 
and  even  after  she  had  retired  to  bed  it  was  long  before  she 

297 


HELEN 

could  sleep.  The  only  painful  thought  in  her  mind  was  of 
Lady  Davenant's  approaching  departure ;  without  her,  all 
happiness  would  be  incomplete  ;  but  still,  hope  and  love  had 
much  that  was  delightful  to  whisper,  and,  as  she  at  last  sank 
to  sleep,  Beauclerc's  voice  seemed  still  speaking  to  her  in  soft 
sounds.  Yet  the  dream  which  followed  was  uneasy ;  she 
thought  that  they  were  standing  together  in  the  library,  at  the 
open  door  of  the  conservatory,  by  moonlight,  and  he  asked  her 
to  walk  out,  and  when  she  did  not  comply,  all  changed,  and 
she  saw  him  walking  with  another — with  Lady  Castlefort ; 
but  then  the  figure  changed  to  one  younger — more  beautiful — 
it  must  be,  as  the  beating  of  Helen's  heart  in  the  dream  told 
her — it  must  be  Lady  Blanche.  Without  seeing  Helen,  how- 
ever, they  seemed  to  come  on,  smiling  and  talking  low  to  each 
other  along  the  matted  alley  of  the  conservatory,  almost  to  the 
very  door  where  she  was  still,  as  she  thought,  standing  with 
her  hand  upon  the  lock,  and  then  they  stopped,  and  Beau- 
clerc  pulled  from  an  orange-tree  a  blossom  which  seemed  the 
very  same  which  Helen  had  given  to  him  that  evening  ;  he 
offered  it  to  Lady  Blanche,  and  something  he  whispered  ;  but 
at  this  moment  the  handle  of  the  lock  seemed  to  slip,  and 
Helen  awoke  with  a  start ;  and  when  she  was  awake,  the  noise 
of  her  dream  seemed  to  continue  ;  she  heard  the  real  sound 
of  a  lock  turning  —  her  door  slowly  opened,  and  a  white 
figure  appeared.  Helen  started  up  in  her  bed,  and  awaking 
thoroughly,  saw  that  it  was  only  Cecilia  in  her  dressing-gown. 
'  Cecilia  !  What's  the  matter,  my  dear  ?  are  you  worse  ? ' 
Lady  Cecilia  put  her  finger  on  her  lips,  closed  the  door  be- 
hind her,  and  said,  '  Hush  !  hush !  or  you'll  waken  Felicie ; 
she  is  sleeping  in  the  dressing-room  to-night.  Mamma  ordered 
it,  in  case  I  should  want  her.' 

'  And  how  are  you  now  ?     What  can  I  do  for  you  ?  ' 
'  My  dear  Helen,  you  can    do  something  for  me  indeed. 
But  don't  get  up.     Lie  down   and  listen   to  me.      I   want  to 
speak  to  you.' 

'  Sit  down,  then,  my  dear  Cecilia,  sit  down  here  beside  me.' 
'  No,  no,  I  need  not  sit  down,  I   am  very  well,   standing. 
Only  let  me  say  what  I  have  to  say.      I  am  quite  well. 

'  Quite  well  !  indeed  you  are  not.  I  feel  you  all  trembling. 
You  must  sit  down,  indeed,  my  dear,'  said  Helen,  pressing 
her. 

298 


HELEN 

She  sat  down.  '  Now  listen  to  me — do  not  waste  time, 
for  I  can't  stay.  Oh  !  if  the  General  should  awake  and  find 
me  gone  ! ' 

'  What  is  the  matter,  my  dear  Cecilia  ?  Only  tell  me  what 
I  can  do  for  you.' 

'  That  is  the  thing  ;  but  I  am  afraid,  now  it  is  come  to  the 
point.'  Lady  Cecilia  breathed  quick  and  short.  '  I  am  almost 
afraid  to  ask  you  to  do  this  for  me.' 

'  Afraid  !  my  dear  Cecilia,  to  ask  me  to  do  anything  in  this 
world  for  you  !  How  can  you  be  afraid  ?  Tell  me  only  what 
it  is  at  once.' 

'  I  am  very  foolish — I  am  very  weak.  I  know  you  love 
me — would  do  anything  for  me,  Helen.  And  this  is  the 
simplest  thing  in  the  world,  but  the  greatest  favour  —  the 
greatest  service.  It  is  only  just  to  receive  a  packet,  which  the 
General  will  give  you  in  the  morning.  He  will  ask  if  it  is  for 
you.  And  you  will  just  accept  of  it.  I  don't  ask  you  to  say  it 
is  yours,  or  to  say  a  word  about  it — only  receive  it  for  me.' 

'  Yes,  I  will,  to  be  sure.  But  why  should  he  give  it  to  me, 
and  not  to  yourself? ' 

'  Oh,  he  thinks,  and  you  must  let  him  think,  it  is  for  you, 
that's  all.  Will  you  promise  me  ? '  But  Helen  made  no 
answer.  '  Oh,  promise  me,  promise  me,  speak,  for  I  can't 
stay.  I  will  explain  it  all  to  you  in  the  morning.'  She  rose 
to  go. 

'  Stay,  stay  !  Cecilia,'  cried  Helen,  stopping  her ;  '  stay  ! 
— you  must,  indeed,  explain  it  all  to  me  now — you  must 
indeed ! ' 

Lady  Cecilia  hesitated — said  she  had  not  time.  'You 
said,  Helen,  that  you  would  take  the  packet,  and  you  know 
you  must ;  but  I  will  explain  it  all  as  fast  as  I  can.  You 
know  I  fainted,  but  you  do  not  know  why.  I  will  tell  you 
exactly  how  it  all  happened : — you  recollect  my  coming  into 
the  library  after  I  was  dressed,  before  you  went  upstairs,  and 
giving  you  a  sprig  of  orange  flowers  ? ' 

'  Oh  yes,  I  was  dreaming  of  it  just  now  when  you  came  in,' 
said  Helen.     '  Well,  what  of  that  ? ' 

'  Nothing,  only  you  must  have  been  surprised  to  hear  so 
soon  afterwards  that  I  had  fainted.' 

'  Yes,'  Helen  said,  she  had  been  very  much  surprised  and 
alarmed  ;  and  again  Lady  Cecilia  paused. 

299 


HELEN 

'  Well,  I  went  directly  from  you  to  Clarendon,  to  give  him 
a  rose,  which  you  may  remember  I  had  in  my  hand  for  him. 
I  found  him  in  the  study,  talking  to  corporal  somebody.  He 
just  smiled  as  I  came  in,  took  the  rose,  and  said,  "  I  shall  be 
ready  this  moment  "  :  and  looking  to  a  table  on  which  were 
heaps  of  letters  and  parcels  which  Granville  had  brought  from 
town,  he  added,  "I  do  not  know  whether  there  is  anything 
there  for  you,  Cecilia."  I  went  to  look,  and  he  went  on  talk- 
ing to  his  corporal.  He  was  standing  with  his  back  to  the 
table.' 

Helen  felt  that  Lady  Cecilia  told  all  these  minute  details  as 
if  there  was  some  fact  to  which  she  feared  to  come.  Cecilia 
went  on  very  quickly.  '  I  did  not  find  anything  for  myself; 
but  in  tossing  over  the  papers  I  saw  a  packet  directed  to 
General  Clarendon.  I  thought  it  was  a  feigned  hand — and 
yet  that  I  knew  it — that  I  had  seen  it  somewhere  lately.  There 
was  one  little  flourish  that  I  recollected  ;  it  was  like  the  writing 
of  that  wretched  Carlos.' 

'  Carlos  ! '  cried  Helen  :  '  well ! ' 

'  The  more  I  looked  at  it,'  continued  Lady  Cecilia,  '  the 
more  like  I  thought  it ;  and  I  was  going  to  say  so  to  the 
General,  only  I  waited  till  he  had  done  his  business  :  but  as  I 
was  examining  it  through  the  outer  cover,  of  very  thin  foreign 
paper,  I  could  distinguish  the  writing  of  some  of  the  inside, 
and  it  was  like  your  hand  or  like  mine.  You  know  between 
our  hands  there  is  such  a  great  resemblance,  there  is  no  telling 
one  from  the  other.' 

Helen  did  not  think  so,  but  she  remained  silent. 

'At  least,'  said  Cecilia,  answering  her  look  of  doubt,  'at 
least  the  General  says  so  ;  he  never  knows  our  hands  asunder. 
Well !  I  perceived  that  there  was  something  hard  inside — more 
than  papers  ;  and  as  I  felt  it,  there  came  from  it  an  uncommon 
perfume — a  particular  perfijme,  like  what  I  used  to  have  once, 
at  the  time — that  time  that  I  can  never  bear  to  think  of,  you 
know ' 

'  I  know,'  said  Helen,  and  in  a  low  voice  she  added,  '  you 
mean  about  Colonel  D'Aubigny.' 

'  The  perfume,  and  altogether  I  do  not  know  what,  quite 
overcame  me.  I  had  just  sense  enough  to  throw  the  packet 
from  me  :  I  made  an  effort,  and  reached  the  window,  and  I 
was  trying  to  open  the  sash,  I  remember  ;  but  what  happened 

300 


HELEN 

immediately  after  tliat,  I  cannot  tell  you.  When  I  came  to 
myself,  I  was  in  my  husband's  arms  ;  he  was  carrying  me  up- 
stairs— and  so  much  alarmed  about  me  he  was  !  Oh,  Helen, 
I  do  so  love  him  !  He  laid  me  on  the  bed,  and  he  spoke  so 
kindly,  reproaching  me  for  not  taking  more  care  of  myself — 
but  so  fondly  !  Somehow  I  could  not  bear  it  just  then,  and  I 
closed  my  eyes  as  his  met  mine.  He,  I  knew,  could  suspect 
nothing  —  but  still !  He  stayed  beside  me,  holding  my 
hand :  then  dinner  was  ready  ;  he  had  been  twice  summoned. 
It  was  a  relief  to  me  when  he  left  me.  Next,  I  believe,  my 
mother  came  up,  and  felt  my  pulse,  and  scolded  me  for  over- 
fatiguing  myself,  and  for  that  leap  ;  and  I  pleaded  guilty,  and 
it  was  all  very  well.  I  saw  she  had  not  an  idea  there  was 
anything  else.  Mamma  really  is  not  suspicious,  with  all  her 
penetration— she  is  not  suspicious.' 

'  And  why  did  you  not  tell  her  all  the  little  you  had  to  tell, 
dear  Cecilia  ?  If  you  had,  long  ago,  when  I  begged  of  you 
to  do  so — if  you  had  told  your  mother  all  about ' 

'  Told  her  ! '  interrupted  Cecilia  ;  '  told  my  mother  ! — oh  no, 
Helen  ! ' 

Helen  sighed,  and  feebly  said,  '  Go  on.' 

'  Well !  when  you  were  at  dinner,  it  came  into  my  poor 
head  that  the  General  would  open  that  parcel  before  I  could 
see  you  again,  and  before  I  could  ask  your  advice  and  settle 
with  you — before  I  could  know  what  was  to  be  done.  I  was 
so  anxious,  I  sent  for  you  twice.' 

'  But  Lady  Davenant  and  the  General  forbade  me  to  goto  you.' 

'Yes,'  —  Lady  Cecilia  said  she  understood  that,  and  she 
had  seen  the  danger  of  showing  too  much  impatience  to  speak 
to  Helen  ;  she  thought  it  might  excite  suspicion  of  her  having 
something  particular  to  say,  she  had  therefore  refrained  from 
asking  again.  She  was  not  asleep  when  Helen  came  to  bed, 
though  Felicie  thought  she  was  ;  she  was  much  too  anxious 
to  sleep  till  she  had  seen  her  husband  again  ;  she  was  awake 
when  he  came  into  his  room ;  she  saw  him  come  in  with  some 
letters  and  packets  in  his  hand ;  by  his  look  she  knew  all  was 
still  safe — ^he  had  not  opened  that  particular  packet — he  held 
it  among  a  parcel  of  military  returns  in  his  hand  as  he  came 
to  the  side  of  the  bed  on  tiptoe  to  see  if  she  was  asleep — to 
ask  how  she  did ;  '  He  touched  my  pulse,'  said  Lady  Cecilia, 
— '  and  I  am  sure  he  might  well  say  it  was  terribly  quick. 

301 


HELEN 

'  Every  instant  I  thought  he  would  open  that  packet.  He 
threw  it,  however,  and  all  the  rest,  down  on  the  table,  to  be 
read  in  the  morning,  as  usual,  as  soon  as  he  awoke.  After 
feeling  my  pulse  again,  the  last  thing,  and  satisfying  himself 
that  it  was  better — '  Quieter  now,'  said  he,  he  fell  fast  asleep, 
and  slept  so  soundly,  and  I ' 

Helen  looked  at  her  with  astonishment,  and  was  silent. 

'  Oh  speak  to  me  ! '  said  Lady  Cecilia  ;  '  what  do  you  say, 
Helen  ?' 

'  I  say  that  I  cannot  imagine  why  you  are  so  much  alarmed 
about  this  packet.' 

'  Because  I  am  a  fool,  I  believe,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  trying 
to  laugh.      '  I  am  so  afraid  of  his  opening  it.' 

'  But  why?'  said  Helen,  '  what  do  you  think  there  is  in  it  ? ' 

'  I  have  told  you,  surely  !  Letters — foolish  letters  of  mine 
to  that  D'Aubigny.  Oh  how  I  repent  I  ever  wrote  a  line  to 
him  !  And  he  told  me,  he  absolutely  swore,  he  had  destroyed 
every  note  and  letter  I  ever  wrote  to  him.  He  was  the  most 
false  of  human  beings  ! ' 

'He  was  a  very  bad  man  —  I  always  thought  so,'  said 
Helen;  'but,  Cecilia,  I  never  knew  that  he  had  any  letters 
of  yours.' 

'  Oh  yes,  you  did,  my  dear,  at  the  time  ;  do  not  you  re- 
collect I  showed  you  a  letter,  and  it  was  you  who  made  me 
break  off  the  correspondence  ? ' 

'  I  remember  your  showing  me  several  letters  of  his,'  said 
Helen,  '  but  not  of  yours — only  one  or  two  notes — asking  for 
that  picture  back  again  which  he  had  stolen  from  your  port- 
folio.' 

'  Yes,  and  about  the  verses ;  surely  you  recollect  my  showing 
you  another  letter  of  mine,  Helen  ! ' 

'  Yes,  but  these  were  all  of  no  consequence  ;  there  must  be 
more,  or  you  could  not  be  so  much  afraid,  Cecilia,  of  the 
General's  seeing  these,  surely.'  At  this  moment  Lady 
Davenant's  prophecy,  all  she  had  said  about  her  daughter, 
flashed  across  Helen's  mind,  and  with  increasing  eagerness 
she  went  on  : — '  What  is  there  in  those  letters  that  can  alarm 
you  so  much  ?  ' 

'  I  declare  I  do  not  know,'  said  Cecilia,  '  that  is  the  plain 
truth  ;  I  cannot  recollect — I  cannot  be  certain  what  there  is 
in  them.' 

302 


HELEN 

'  But  it  is  not  so  long  ago,  Cecilia, — only  two  years  ? ' 

'  That  is  true,  but  so  many  great  events  have  happened 
since,  and  such  new  feelings,  all  that  early  nonsense  was  swept 
out  of  my  mind.      I  never  really  loved  that  wretch ' 

A  gleam  of  joy  came  across  Helen's  face. 

'  Never,  never,'  repeated  Lady  Cecilia. 

'  Oh,  I  am  happy  still,'  cried  Helen.  '  I  told  your  mother 
I  was  sure  of  this.' 

'  Good  heavens  !     Does  she  know  about  this  packet  ? ' 

'  No,  no  ! — how  could  she  ?  But  what  frightens  you,  my 
dear  Cecilia  ?  you  say  there  is  nothing  wrong  in  the  letters  .? ' 

'  Nothing — nothing.' 

'  Then  make  no  wrong  out  of  nothing,'  cried  Helen.  '  If 
you  break  confidence  with  your  husband,  that  confidence  will 
never,  never  unite  again — ^your  mother  says  so.' 

'  My  mother  ! '  cried  Cecilia  :  '  good  heavens  ! — so  she  does 
suspect  ? — tell  me,  Helen,  tell  me  what  she  suspects.' 

'  That  you  did  not  at  first — before  you  were  married — tell 
the  General  the  whole  truth  about  Colonel  D'Aubigny.' 

Cecilia  was  silent. 

'  But  it  is  not  yet  too  late,'  said  Helen,  earnestly ;  '  you  can 
set  it  all  right  now — this  is  the  moment,  my  dearest  Cecilia. 
Do,  do,'  cried  Helen,  '  do  tell  him  all — bid  him  look  at  the 
letters.' 

'  Look  at  them  !  Impossible  !  Impossible  ! '  said  Lady 
Cecilia.      '  Bid  me  die  rather.' 

She  turned  quite  away. 

'  Listen  to  me,  Cecilia  ; '  she  held  her  fast.  '  You  must  do 
it,  Cecilia.' 

'  Helen,  I  cannot.' 

'  You  can,  indeed  you  can,'  said  Helen  ;  '  only  have  courage 
now,  and  you  will  be  happier  all  your  life  afterwards.' 

'  Do  not  ask  it— do  not  ask  it — it  is  all  in  vain,  you  are 
wasting  time.' 

'  No,  no — not  wasting  time  ;  and  in  short,  CeciHa,  you  must 
do  what  I  ask  of  you,  for  it  is  right ;  and  I  will  not  do  what 
you  ask  of  me,  for  it  is  wrong.' 

'  You  will  not !  You  will  not ! '  cried  Lady  Cecilia,  breath- 
less. '  After  all !  You  will  not  receive  the  packet  for  me  ! 
you  will  not  let  the  General  believe  the  letters  to  be  yours  ! 
Then  I  am  undone  !     You  will  not  do  it !    Then  do  not  talk  to 

303 


HELEN 

me — do  not  talk  to  me — you  do  not  know  General  Clarendon. 
If  his  jealousy  were  once  roused,  you  have  no  idea  what  it 
would  be.' 

'  If  the  man  were  alive,'  said  Helen,  '  but  since  he  is 
dead ' 

'  But  Clarendon  would  never  forgive  me  for  having  loved 
another ' 

'  You  said  you  did  not  love  him.' 

'  Nor  did  I  ever  really  love  that  man  ;  but  still  Clarendon, 
from  even  seeing  those  letters,  might  think  I  did.  The  very 
fact  of  having  written  such  letters  would  be  destruction  to  me 
with  Clarendon.  You  do  not  know  Clarendon.  How  can  I 
convince  you  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  tell  him  ?     At  the  time 

he  first  proposed  for  me oh  !  how  I  loved  him,  and  feared 

to  lose  him.  One  day  my  mother,  when  I  was  not  by,  said 
something — I  do  not  know  what,  about  a  first  love,  let  fall 
something  about  that  hateful  D'Aubigny,  and  the  General  came 
to  me  in  such  a  state  !  Oh,  Helen,  in  such  a  state  !  I  thought 
it  was  all  at  an  end.  He  told  me  he  never  would  marry  any 
woman  on  earth  who  had  ever  loved  another.  I  told  him  I 
never  had,  and  that  was  true,  you  know  ;  but  then  I  went  a 
little  beyond  perhaps.  I  said  I  had  never  THOUGHT  of  any- 
body else,  for  he  made  such  a  point  of  that.  In  short,  I  was 
a  coward — a  fool;  I  little  foresaw — I  laughed  it  off,  and 
told  him  that  what  mamma  had  said  was  all  a  mistake,  all 
nonsense ;  that  Colonel  D'Aubigny  was  a  sort  of  universal 
flirt — and  that  was  very  true,  I  am  sure  ;  that  he  had  admired 
us  both,  both  you  and  me,  but  you  last,  you  most,  Helen,  I 
said.' 

'  Oh,  Cecilia,  how  could  you  say  so,  when  you  knew  he 
never  cared  for  me  in  the  least  ? ' 

'  Forgive  me,  my  dear,  for  there  was  no  other  way ;  and 
what  harm  did  it  do  you,  or  what  harm  can  it  ever  do  you  ? 
It  only  makes  it  the  easier  for  you  to  help  me — to  save  me 
now.  And  Granville,'  continued  Lady  Cecilia,  thinking  that 
was  the  obstacle  in  Helen's  mind,  '  and  Granville  need  never 
know  it.' 

Helen's  countenance  suddenly  changed.  '  Granville  !  I 
never  thought  of  that  ! '  and  now  that  she  did  think  of  it  she 
reproached  herself  with  the  selfishness  of  that  fear.  Till  this 
moment,  she  knew  her  motives  had  been  all  singly  for  Cecilia's 

304 


.  rA£«/««^'^'"'''*' 


HELEN 

happiness  ;  now  the  fear  she  felt  of  this  some  way  hurting  her 
with  Beauclerc  made  her  less  resolute.  Lady  Cecilia  saw  her 
giving  way  and  hurried  on — 

'  Oh,  my  dear  Helen  !  I  know  I  have  been  very  wrong, 
but  you  would  not  quite  give  me  up,  would  you  ?  Oh  !  for 
my  mother's  sake !  Consider  how  it  would  be  with  my 
mother,  so  ill  as  you  saw  her  !  I  am  sure  if  anything  broke 
out  now,  in  my  mother's  state  of  health  it  would  be  fatal.' 

Helen  became  excessively  agitated. 

'  Oh,  Helen  !  would  you  make  me  the  death  of  that 
mother  ?  Oh,  Helen,  save  her !  and  do  what  you  will  with 
me  afterwards.  It  will  be  only  for  a  few  hours — only  a  few 
hours  ! '  repeated  Lady  Cecilia,  seeing  that  these  words  made 
a  great  impression  upon  Helen, — '  Save  me,  Helen  !  save  my 
mother.' 

She  sank  upon  her  knees,  clasping  her  hands  in  an  agony 
of  supplication.  Helen  bent  down  her  head  and  was  silent — 
she  could  no  longer  refuse.      '  Then  I  must,'  said  she. 

'  Oh,  thank  you !  bless  you  ! '  cried  Lady  Cecilia  in  an 
ecstasy — -'  you  will  take  the  letters  ? ' 

'Yes,'  Helen  feebly  said  ;  'yes,  since  it  must  be  so.' 

Cecilia  embraced  her,  thanked  her,  blessed  her,  and  hastily 
left  the  room,  but  in  an  instant  afterward  she  returned,  and 
said,  '  One  thing  I  forgot,  and  I  must  tell  you.  Think  of  my 
forgetting  it  !  The  letters  are  not  signed  with  my  real  name, 
they  are  signed  Emma — Henry  and  Emma  ! — O  folly,  folly  ! 
My  dear,  dear  friend !  save  me  but  now,  and  I  never  will  be 
guilty  of  the  least  deception  again  during  my  whole  life  ;  be- 
lieve me,  believe  me  !  When  once  my  mother  is  safely  gone 
I  will  tell  Clarendon  all.  Look  at  me,  dear  Helen,  look  at 
me  and  believe  me.' 

And  Helen  looked  at  her,  and  Helen  believed  her. 


CHAPTER   XXXI 

Helen  slept  no  more  this  night.  When  alone  in  the  stillness 
of  the  long  hours,  she  went  over  and  over  again  all  that  had 
passed,  what  Cecilia  had  said,  what  she  had  at  first  thought 

306 


HELEN 

and  afterwards  felt,  all  the  persuasions  by  which  she  had  been 
wrought  upon,  and,  on  the  contrary,  all  the  reasons  by  which 
she  ought  to  be  decided  ;  backward  and  forward  her  mind 
vibrated,  and  its  painful  vacillation  could  not  be  stilled. 

'  What  am  I  going  to  do  ?  To  tell  a  falsehood  !  That 
cannot  be  right ;  but  in  the  circumstances — yet  this  is  Cecilia's 
own  way  of  palliating  the  fault  that  her  mother  so  fears  in  her 
— that  her  mother  trusted  to  me  to  guard  her  against ;  and 
now,  already,  even  before  Lady  Davenant  has  left  us,  I  am 
going  to  assist  Cecilia  in  deceiving  her  husband,  and  on  that 
very  dangerous  point — Colonel  D'Aubigny.'  Lady  Davenant's 
foreboding  having  already  been  so  far  accomplished  struck 
Helen  fearfully,  and  her  warning  voice  in  the  dead  silence  of 
that  night  sounded,  and  her  look  was  upon  her,  so  strongly, 
that  she  for  an  instant  hid  her  head  to  get  rid  of  her  image. 
'  But  what  can  I  do  ?  her  own  life  is  at  stake  !  No  less  a 
motive  could  move  me,  but  this  ought — must — shall  decide 
me.  Yet,  if  Lady  Davenant  were  to  know  it ! — and  I,  in  the 
last  hours  I  have  to  pass  with  her— the  last  I  ever  may  have 
with  her,  shall  I  deceive  her  ?  But  it  is  not  deceit,  only 
prudence — necessary  prudence  ;  what  a  physician  would  order, 
what  even  humanity  requires.  I  am  satisfied  it  is  quite  right, 
quite,  and  I  will  go  to  sleep  that  I  may  be  strong,  and  calm, 
and  do  it  all  well  in  the  morning.  After  all,  I  have  been  too 
cowardly ;  frightening  myself  about  nothing  ;  too  scrupulous — 
for  what  is  it  I  have  promised  ?  only  to  receive  the  letters  as 
if  they  were  mine.  Not  to  say  that  they  are  mine ;  he  will 
not  ask  me,  Cecilia  thinks  he  will  not  ask  me.  But  how  can 
she  tell  ?  if  he  should,  what  can  I  do  ?  I  must  then  answer 
that  they  are  mine.  Indeed  it  is  the  same  thing,  for  I  should 
lead  him  to  believe  it  as  much  by  my  receiving  them  in 
silence ;  it  will  be  telling  or  acting  an  absolute  falsehood,  and 
can  that  ever  be  right  ? '  Back  it  came  to  the  same  point, 
and  in  vain  her  cheek  settled  on  the  pillow  and  she  thought 
she  could  sleep.  Then  with  closed  eyes  she  considered  how 
the  General  would  look,  and  speak,  or  not  speak.  'What 
will  he  think  of  me  when  he  sees  the  picture- — the  letters  ?  for 
he  must  open  the  packet.  But  he  will  not  read  them,  no,  he 
is  too  honourable.  I  do  not  know  what  is  in  them.  There 
can  be  nothing,  however,  but  nonsense,  Cecilia  says  ;  yet  even 
so,   love-letters   he  must   know  they  are,   and  a  clandestine 

307 


HELEN 

correspondence.  I  heard  him  once  express  such  contempt  for 
any  clandestine  affair.  He,  who  is  so  nice,  so  strict,  about 
women's  conduct,  how  I  shall  sink  in  his  esteem  !  Well,  be 
it  so,  that  concerns  only  myself;  and  it  is  for  his  own  sake 
too,  to  save  his  happiness  ;  and  Cecilia,  my  dear  Cecilia,  oh  I 
can  bear  it,  and  it  will  be  a  pride  to  me  to  bear  it,  for  I  am 
grateful ;  my  gratitude  shall  not  be  only  in  words  ;  now,  when 
I  am  put  to  the  trial,  I  can  do  something  for  my  friends. 
Yes,  and  I  will,  let  the  consequences  be  what  they  may.'  Yet 
Beauclerc  !  that  thought  was  at  the  bottom  of  her  heart  ;  the 
fear,  the  almost  certainty,  that  some  way  or  other — every  way 
in  which  she  could  think  of  it,  it  would  lead  to  difficulty  with 
Beauclerc.  But  this  fear  was  mere  selfishness,  she  thought, 
and  to  counteract  it  came  all  her  generous,  all  her  grateful, 
all  her  long-cherished,  romantic  love  of  sacrifice — a  belief  that 
she  was  capable  of  self-devotion  for  the  friends  she  loved  ;  and 
upon  the  strength  of  this  idea  she  fixed  at  last.  Quieted,  she 
soothed  herself  to  repose,  and,  worn  out  with  reasoning  or 
trying  to  reason  in  vain,  she  at  last,  in  spite  of  the  morning 
light  dawning  upon  her  through  the  unclosed  shutters,  in  a 
soft  sort  of  enthusiastic  vision  fading  away,  fell  asleep. 

She  slept  long  ;  when  she  awoke  it  was  with  that  indescrib- 
able feeling  that  something  painful  had  happened — that 
something  dreadful  was  to  be  this  day.  She  recollected,  first, 
that  Lady  Davenant  was  to  go.  Then  came  all  that  had 
passed  with  Cecilia.  It  was  late,  she  saw  that  her  maid  had 
been  in  the  room,  but  had  refrained  from  awakening  her  ;  she 
rose,  and  dressed  as  fast  as  she  could.  She  was  to  go  to 
Lady  Davenant  when  her  bell  rang  twice.  How  to  appear 
before  one  who  knew  her  countenance  so  well,  without  showing 
that  anything  had  happened,  was  her  first  difficulty.  She 
looked  in  her  glass  to  see  whether  there  was  any  alteration  in 
her  face  ;  none  that  she  could  see,  but  she  was  no  judge. 
'  How  foolish  to  think  so  much  about  it  all ! '  She  dressed, 
and  between  times  inquired  from  her  maid  if  she  had  heard  of 
any  change  in  Lady  Davenant's  intentions  of  going.  Had 
any  counter-orders  about  the  carriage  been  given  ?  None  ;  it 
was  ordered  to  be  at  the  door  by  twelve  o'clock.  '  That  was 
well,'  Helen  said  to  herself  It  would  all  soon  be  over. 
Lady  Davenant  would  be  safe,  then  she  could  bear  all  the 
rest ;  next  she  hoped,  that  any  perturbation  or  extraordinary 

308 


HELEN 

emotion  in  herself  would  not  be  observed  in  the  hurry  of  de- 
parture, or  would  be  thought  natural  at  parting  with  Lady 
Davenant.  '  So  then,  I  come  at  every  turn  to  some  little 
deceit,'  thought  she,  '  and  I  must,  I  must ! '  and  she  sighed. 

'It  is  a  sad  thing  for  you,  ma'am.  Lady  Davenant's  going 
away,'  said  her  maid. 

Helen  sighed  again.  '  Very  sad  indeed.'  Suddenly  a 
thought  darted  into  her  mind,  that  the  whole  danger  might  be 
avoided.  A  hope  came  that  the  General  might  not  open  the 
packet  before  Lady  Davenant's  departure,  in  which  case 
Cecilia  could  not  expect  that  she  should  abide  by  her  promise, 
as  it  was  only  conditional.  It  had  been  made  really  on  her 
mother's  account ;  Cecilia  had  said  that  if  once  her  mother 
was  safe  out  of  the  house,  she  could  then,  and  she  would  the 
very  next  day,  tell  the  whole  to  her  husband.  Helen  sprang 
from  under  the  hands  of  her  maid  as  she  was  putting  up  her 
hair  behind,  and  ran  to  Cecilia's  dressing-room,  but  she  was 
not  there.  It  was  now  her  usual  time  for  coming,  and  Helen 
left  open  the  door  between  them,  that  she  might  go  to  her 
before  Felicie  should  be  rung  for.  She  waited  impatiently, 
but  no  Cecilia  came.  The  time,  to  her  impatience,  seemed 
dreadfully  long.  But  her  maid  observed,  that  as  her  ladyship 
had  not  been  well  yesterday,  it  was  no  wonder  she  was  later 
this  morning  than  usual. 

'  Very  true,  but  there  is  somebody  coming  along  the  gallery 
now,  see  if  that  is  Lady  Cecilia.' 

'  No,  ma'am,  Mademoiselle  Felicie.' 

Mademoiselle  Felicie  said  ditto  to  Helen's  own  maid,  and, 
moreover,  supposed  her  lady  might  not  have  slept  well.  Just 
then,  one  little  peremptory  knock  at  the  door  was  heard. 

'■Bon  Dieu!  Oest  Monsieur  U  General/'  exclaimed 
Felicie. 

It  was  so — Felicie  went  to  the  door  and  returned  with  the 
General's  compliments  to  Miss  Stanley,  and  he  begged  to  see 
her  as  soon  as  it  might  suit  her  convenience  in  the  hbrary, 
before  she  went  into  the  breakfast-room,  and  after  she  should 
have  seen  Lady  Cecilia,  who  wished  to  see  her  immediately. 

Helen  found  Lady  Cecilia  in  bed,  looking  as  if  she  had 
been  much  agitated,  two  spots  of  carnation  colour  high  up 
in  her  cheeks,  a  well-known  sign  in  her  of  great  emotion. 
'  Helen  ! '  she  cried,  starting  up  the  moment  Helen  came  in, 

3°9 


HELEN 

'  he  has  opened  the  packet,  and  you  see  me  ahve.  But  I  do 
believe  I  should  have  died,  when  it  came  to  the  point,  but  for 
you — dearest  Helen,  I  should  have  been,  and  still  but  for  you 
I  must  be,  undone — and  my  mother — oh  !  if  he  had  gone  to 
her!' 

'  What  has  happened,  tell  me  clearly,  my  dear  Cecilia,  and 
quickly,  for  I  must  go  to  General  Clarendon  ;  he  has  desired 
to  pee, me  as  soon  as  I  can  after  seeing  you.' 

'  I  know,  I  know,'  said  Cecilia,  '  but  he  will  allow  time,  and 
you  had  better  be  some  time  with  me,  for  he  thinks  I  have  all 
to  explain  to  you  this  morning — and  so  I  have,  a  great  deal  to 
say  to  you  ;  sit  down — quietly — oh  if  you  knew  how  I  have 
been  agitated.  I  am  hardly  able  yet  to  tell  anything  rightly.' 
She  threw  herself  back  on  the  pillows,  and  drew  a  long  breath, 
as  if  to  relieve  the  oppression  of  mind  and  body.  '  Now  I 
think  I  can  tell  it.' 

'  Then  do,  my  dear  Cecilia — all — pray  do  !  and  exactly — 

0  CeciHa,  tell  me  all.' 

'  Every  word,  every  look,  to  the  utmost,  as  far  as  I  can 
recollect,  as  if  you  had  been  present.  Give  me  your  hand, 
Helen,  how  cool  you  are — delightful  !  but  how  you  tremble  ! ' 

'  Never  mind,'  said  Helen ;  '  but  how  burning  hot  your 
hand  is  ! ' 

'  No  matter.  If  ever  I  am  well  or  happy  again  in  this 
world,  Helen,  I  shall  owe  it  to  you.  After  I  left  you  I  found 
the  General  fast  asleep,  I  do  not  believe  he  had  ever  awoke — 

1  lay  awake  for  hours,  till  past  five  o'clock  in  the  morning,  I 
was  wide  awake — feverish.  But  can  you  conceive  it  ?  just 
then,  when  I  was  most  anxious  to  be  awake,  when  I  knew 
there  was  but  one  hour — not  so  much,  till  he  would  awake 
and  read  that  packet,  1  felt  an  irresistible  sleepiness  come  over 
me  ;  I  turned  and  turned,  and  tried  to  keep  my  eyes  open, 
and  pulled  and  pinched  my  fingers.  But  all  would  not  do, 
and  I  fell  asleep,  dreaming  that  I  was  awake,  and  how  long  I 
slept  I  cannot  tell  you,  so  deep,  so  dead  asleep  I  must  have 
been  ;  but  the  instant  I  did  awake,  I  started  up  and  drew 
back  the  curtain,  and  I  saw — O  Helen  !  there  was  Clarendon 
dressed — standing  with  his  arms  folded — a  letter  open  hanging 
from  his  hand.  His  eyes  were  fixed  upon  me,  waiting, 
watching  for  my  first  look  :  he  saw  me  glance  at  the  letter  in 
his  hand,  and  then  at  the  packet  on  the  table  near  the  bed. 

310 


*  There  was  Clarendon  dressed— standing  with  his  arms  folded—a  letter  open 
hanging /rom  his  hand. ' 


HELEN 

For  an  instant  neither  of  us  spoke  :  I  could  not,  nor  exclaim 
even  ;  but  surprised,  terrified,  he  must  have  seen  I  was.  As 
I  leaned  forward,  holding  by  the  curtains,  he  pulled  one  of 
them  suddenly  back,  threw  open  the  shutters,  and  the  full 
glare  was  upon  my  face.  I  shut  my  eyes — I  could  not  help  it 
— and  shrank  ;  but,  gathering  strength  from  absolute  terror  of 
his  silence,  I  spoke  :  I  asked,  "  For  Heaven's  sake  !  Clarendon, 
what  is  the  matter  ?     Why  do  you  look  so  ?  " 

'  Oh,  that  look  of  his  !  still  fixed  on  me — the  same  as  I 
once  saw  before  we  were  married — once,  and  but  once,  when 
he  came  from  my  mother  to  me  about  this  man.  Well,  I 
put  my  hands  before  my  eyes  ;  he  stepped  forward,  drew  them 
down,  and  placed  the  open  letter  before  me,  and  then  asked 
me,  in  a  terrible  sort  of  suppressed  voice,  "  Cecilia,  whose 
writing  is  this  ?  " 

'  The  writing  was  before  my  eyes,  but  I  literally  could  not 
see  it — it  was  all  a  sort  of  maze.  He  saw  I  could  not  read  it, 
and  calmly  bade  me  "  take  time — examine — is  it  a  forgery  ?  " 

'A  forgery! — that  had  never  crossed  my  mind,  and  for 
an  instant  I  was  tempted  to  say  it  was  ;  but  quickly  I  saw 
that  would  not  do  :  there  was  the  miniature,  and  that  could 
not  be  a  forgery.  "  No,"  I  answered,  "  I  do  not  think  it  is  a 
forgery. '' 

'  "  What  then  ? "  said  he,  so  hastily  that  I  could  hardly 
hear  ;  and  before  I  could  think  what  to  answer,  he  said,  "  I 
must  see  Lady  Davenant."  He  stepped  towards  the  bell  ; 
I  threw  myself  upon  his  arm — "Good  Heavens!  do  not, 
Clarendon,  if  you  are  not  out  of  your  senses."  "  I  am  not  out 
of  my  senses,  Cecilia,  I  am  perfectly  calm  ;  answer  me,  one 
word  only — is  this  your  writing  ?  "  O  my  dear  Helen  !  then 
it  was  that  you  saved  me.' 

'I  !' 

'  Yes,  forgive  me,  Helen,  I  answered,  "  There  is  a  hand- 
writing so  like,  that  you  never  can  tell  it  from  mine.  Ask  me 
no  more,  Clarendon,"  I  said. 

'  I  saw  a  flash  of  light,  as  it  were,  come  across  his  face — 
it  was  hope — but  still  it  was  not  certainty.  I  saw  this  :  oh  ! 
how  quick  one  sees.  He  pointed  to  the  first  words  of  the 
letter,  held  his  finger  under  them,  and  his  hand  trembled — 
think  of  his  hand  trembling  !  "  Read,"  he  said,  and  I  read. 
How    I    brought    myself   to    pronounce    the   words,  I    cannot 

312 


HELEN 

imagine.  I  read  what,  as  I  hope  for  mercy,  I  had  no  recollec- 
tion of  ever  having  written — "  My  dear,  too  dear  Henry." 
"  Colonel  D'Aubigny  ?  "  said  the  General.  I  answered,  "  Yes." 
He  looked  astonished  at  my  self-possession — and  so  was  I. 
For  another  instant  his  finger  rested,  pressing  down  there 
under  the  words,  and  his  eyes  on  my  face,  as  if  he  would  have 
read  into  my  soul.  "  Ask  me  no  more,"  I  repeated,  scarcely 
able  to  speak  ;  and  something  I  said,  I  believe,  about  honour 
and  not  betraying  you.  He  turned  to  the  signature,  and, 
putting  his  hand  down  upon  it,  asked,  "  What  name  is  signed 
to  this  letter  ? "  I  answered,  I  have  seen — I  know — I  believe 
it  is  "  Emma." 

'  "  You  knew  then  of  this  correspondence  ? "  was  his  next 
question.  I  confessed  I  did.  He  said  that  was  wrong,  "  but 
quite  a  different  affair  "  from  having  been  engaged  in  it  myself, 
or  some  such  word.  His  countenance  cleared ;  that  pale  look 
of  the  forehead,  the  fixed  purpose  of  the  eye,  changed.  Oh  ! 
I  could  see — I  understood  it  all  with  half  a  glance — saw  the 
natural  colour  coming  back,  and  tenderness  for  me  returning 
— yet  some  doubt  lingering  still.  He  stood,  and  I  heard 
some  half- finished  sentences.  He  said  that  you  must  have 
been  very  young  at  that  time ;  I  said,  "  Yes,  very  young "  ;- — 
"  And  the  man  was  a  most  artful  man,"  he  observed  ;  I  said, 
"Yes,  very  artful."  That  was  true,  I  am  sure.  Clarendon 
then  recollected  that  you  showed  some  emotion  one  day  when 
Colonel  D'Aubigny  was  first  mentioned — at  that  time,  you 
know,  when  we  heard  of  his  death.  I  said  nothing.  The 
General  went  on  :  "I  could  hardly  have  beUeved  all  this  of 
Helen  Stanley,"  he  said.  He  questioned  no  farther : — and 
oh  !  Helen,  what  do  you  think  I  did  next  ?  but  it  was  the  only 
thing  left  me  to  put  an  end  to  doubts,  which,  to  me,  must 
have  been  fatal — forgive  me,  Helen  ! ' 

'  Tell  me  what  you  did,'  said  Helen. 

'  Cannot  you  guess  ? ' 

'  You  told  him  positively  that  I  wrote  the  letters  ? ' 

'  No,  not  so  bad,  I  never  said  that  downright  falsehood — 
no,  I  could  not ;  but  I  did  almost  as  bad.' 

'  Pray  tell  me  at  once,  my  dear  Cecilia.' 

'  Then,  in  the  first  place,  I  stretched  out  my  hand  for  the 
whole  packet  of  letters  which  lay  on  the  table  untouched.' 

'  Well  ? ' 

313 


HELEN 

'  Well,  he  put  them  into  my  hands  and  said,  "  There  is  no 
direction  on  these  but  to  myself,  I  have  not  looked  at  any  of 
them  except  this,  which  in  ignorance  I  first  opened  ;  I  have 
not  read  one  word  of  any  of  the  others."  ' 

'  Well,'  said  Helen  ;   '  and  what  did  you  do  ? ' 

'  I  said  I  was  not  going  to  read  any  of  the  letters,  that  I 
was  only  looking  for — now,  Helen,  you  know — I  told  you 
there  was  something  hard  in  the  parcel,  something  more  than 
papers,  I  was  sure  what  it  must  be — the  miniature — the 
miniature  of  you,  which  I  painted,  you  know,  that  I  might 
have  it  when  you  were  gone,  and  which  he  stole,  and  pretended 
before  my  mother  to  be  admiring  as  your  likeness,  but  he  kept 
it  only  because  it  was  my  painting.  I  opened  the  paper  in 
which  it  was  folded  ;  Clarendon  darted  upon  it — "It  is  Helen!" 
and  then  he  said,  "  How  like  !  how  beautiful !  how  unworthy 
of  that  man  !  " 

'  But,  oh,  Helen,  think  of  what  an  escape  I  had  next. 
There  was  my  name-^my  initials  C.  D.  at  the  bottom  of  the 
picture,  as  the  painter  ;  and  that  horrible  man,  not  content  with 
his  initials  opposite  to  mine,  had  on  the  back  written  at  full 
length,  "For  Henry  D'Aubigny."  Clarendon  looked  at  it,  and 
said  between  his  teeth,  "He  is  dead."     "Thank  God!"  said  I. 

'  Then  he  asked  me  how  I  came  to  paint  this  picture  for 
that  man  ;  I  answered — oh  how  happy  then  it  was  for  me  that 
I  could  tell  the  whole  truth  about  that  at  least ! — I  answered 
that  I  did  not  do  the  picture  for  Colonel  D'Aubigny  ;  that  it 
never  was  given  to  him  ;  that  he  stole  it  from  my  portfolio, 
and  that  we  both  did  what  we  could  to  get  it  back  again  from 
him,  but  could  not.  And  that  you  even  wanted  me  to  tell  my 
mother,  but  of  that  I  was  afraid  ;  and  Clarendon  said,  "  You 
were  wrong  there,  my  dear  Cecilia." 

'  I  was  so  touched  when  I  heard  him  call  me  his  dear 
Cecilia  again,  and  in  his  own  dear  voice,  that  I  burst  into  tears. 
That  was  a  great  relief  to  me,  and  I  kept  saying  over  and  over 
again,  that  I  was  wrong— very  wrong  indeed  !  and  then  he 
kneeled  down  beside  me,  and  I  so  felt  his  tenderness,  his  con- 
fiding love  for  me — for  me,  unworthy  as  I  am.'  The  tears 
streamed  from  Lady  Cecilia's  eyes  as  she  spoke- — 'Quite 
unworthy  ! ' 

'  No,  no,  not  quite  unworthy,'  said  Helen  ;  '  my  poor  dear 
Cecilia,  what  you  must  have  felt ! ' 

314 


HELEN 

'  Once,'  continued  Cecilia — '  once,  Helen,  as  my  head 
was  lying  on  his  shoulder,  my  face  hid,  I  felt  so  much  love,  so 
much  remorse,  and  knowing  I  had  done  nothing  really  bad,  I 
was  tempted  to  whisper  all  in  his  ear.  I  felt  I  should  be  so 
much  happier  for  ever — ever — if  I  could  ! ' 

'  Oh  that  you  had  !  my  dear  Cecilia,  I  would  give  anything 
upon  earth  for  your  sake,  that  you  had.' 

'Helen,  I  could  not — I  could  not.  It  was  too  late,  I 
should  have  been  undone  if  I  had  breathed  but  a  word.  When 
he  even  suspected  the  truth  !  that  look — that  voice — was 
so  terrible.  To  see  it — hear  it  again  !  I  could  not — oh, 
Helen,  it  would  have  been  utter  ruin — madness.  I  grant 
you,  my  dear  Helen,  it  might  have  been  done  at  first,  before 
I  was  married ;  oh,  would  to  Heaven  it  had  !  but  it  is  useless 
thinking  of  that  now.  Helen,  my  whole  earthly  happiness  is 
in  your  hands,  this  is  all  I  have  to  say,  may  I — may  I  depend 
on  you .' ' 

'Yes,  yes,  depend  upon  me,  my  dearest  Cecilia,'  said 
Helen  ;  '  now  let  me  go.' 

Lady  Cecilia  held  her  one  instant  longer,  to  say  that  she 
had  asked  Clarendon  to  leave  it  to  her  to  return  the  letters, 
'  to  save  you  the  embarrassment,  my  dearest  Helen  ;  but  he 
answered  he  must  do  this  himself,  and  I  did  not  dare  to  press 
the  matter :  but  you  need  not  be  alarmed,  he  will  be  all 
gentleness  to  you,  he  said,  "  it  is  so  different."  Do  not  be 
afraid.' 

'Afraid  for  myself?'  said  Helen;  'oh  no  —  rest,  dear 
Cecilia,  and  let  me  go.' 

'  Go  then,  go,'  cried  Cecilia ;  '  but  for  you  what  would 
become  of  my  mother  ! — of  me  ! — you  save  us  all.' 

Believing  this,  Helen  hastened  to  accomplish  her  purpose  ; 
resolved  to  go  through  with  it,  whatever  it  might  cost ;  her 
scruples  vanished,  and  she  felt  a  sort  of  triumphant  pleasure  in 
the  courage  of  sacrificing  herself. 


315 


HELEN 


CHAPTER  XXXII 


General  Clarendon  was  sitting  in  the  music-room,  within 
the  library,  the  door  open,  so  that  he  could  see  Helen  the 
moment  she  came  in,  and  that  moment  he  threw  down  his 
book  as  he  rose,  and  their  eyes  met :  hers  fell  beneath  his 
penetrating  glance  ;  he  came  forward  immediately  to  meet  her, 
with  the  utmost  gentleness  and  kindness  in  his  whole  appear- 
ance and  manner,  took  her  hand,  and,  drawing  her  arm  within 
his,  said,  in  the  most  encouraging  voice,  '  Consider  me  as  your 
brother,  Helen  ;  you  know  you  have  allowed  me  so  to  feel  for 
you,  and  so,  believe  me,  I  do  feel.' 

This  kindness  quite  overcame  her,  and  she  burst  into  tears. 
He  hurried  her  across  the  library,  into  the  inner  room,  seated 
her,  and  when  he  had  closed  the  door,  stood  beside  her,  and 
began,  as  if  he  had  been  to  blame,  to  apologise  for  himself. 

'  You  must  have  been  surprised  at  my  having  opened 
letters  which  did  not  belong  to  me,  but  there  was  no  direc- 
tion, no  indication,  that  could  stop  me.  They  were  simply 
in  a  cover  directed  to  me.  The  purpose  of  whoever  sent  them 
must  have  been  to  make  me  read  them ;  the  ultimate  purpose 
was,  I  doubt  not,  to  ruin  Lady  Cecilia  Clarendon  in  my 
opinion.' 

'  Or  me,'  said  Helen. 

'  No,  Miss  Stanley,  no  ;  that  at  all  events  cannot  be,'  said 
the  General.  '  Supposing  the  letters  to  be  acknowledged  by 
you,  still  it  would  be  quite  a  different  affair.  But  in  the  first 
place  look  at  them,  they  may  be  forgeries.  You  will  tell  me  if 
they  are  forgeries  ?  ' 

And  he  placed  the  packet  in  her  hands.  Scarcely  looking 
at  the  writing,  she  answered,  '  No,  forgeries  I  am  sure  they 
are  not.'  The  General  looked  again  at  the  direction  of  the 
cover,  and  observed,  '  This  is  a  feigned  hand.  Whose  can 
it  be  ?  ' 

Helen  was  on  the  brink  of  saying  that  Cecilia  had  told  her 
it  was  like  the  writing  of  Carlos,  Now  this  cover  had  not,  to 
the  General's  knowledge,  been  seen  by  Cecilia,  and  that  one 
answer  might  have  betrayed  all  that  she  was  to  conceal,  for  he 

316 


HELEN 

would  instantly  have  asked  how  and  when  did  Cecilia  see  it, 
and  the  cause  of  her  fainting  would  have  been  then  understood 
by  him.  Such  hazards  in  every,  even  the  first,  least,  step  in 
falsehood  ;  such  hazard  in  this  first  moment !  But  she  escaped 
this  peril,  and  Helen  answered :  '  It  is  something  like  the 
writing  of  the  page  Carlos,  but  I  do  not  think  all  that  direction 
is  his.  There  seem  to  be  two  different  hands.  I  do  not  know, 
indeed,  how  it  is.' 

'  Some  time  or  other  it  will  come  out,'  said  the  General. 
'  I  will  keep  this  cover,  it  will  lead  to  the  direction  of  that  boy, 
or  of  whoever  it  was  that  employed  him.' 

To  give  her  further  time  the  General  went  on  looking  at  the 
miniature,  which  he  held  in  his  hand.  'This  is  a  beautiful 
likeness,'  said  he,  '  and  not  ill  painted — by  Cecilia,  was  not  it  ? ' 

Helen  looked  at  it,  and  answered,  'Yes,  by  Cecilia.' 

'  I  am  glad  it  is  safe,'  said  the  General,  '  restored — Cecilia 
told  me  the  history.  I  know  that  it  was  stolen,  not  given  by 
you.' 

'  Given  ! '  said  Helen.     '  Oh  no  !  stolen.' 

'  Base  ! '  said  the  General. 

'  He  was  base,'  answered  Helen. 

General  Clarendon  held  in  his  hand,  along  with  the  picture, 
one  letter  separated  from  the  rest,  open  ;  he  looked  at  it  as  if 
embarrassed,  while  Helen  spoke  the  last  words,  and  he  repeated, 
'  Base  !  yes,  he  certainly  was,  or  he  would  have  destroyed  these 
letters.' 

Again  Helen  was  on  the  point  of  saying  that  Colonel 
D'Aubigny  had  told  Cecilia  he  had  done  so,  but  fortunately 
her  agitation,  in  default  of  presence  of  mind,  kept  her  silent. 

'  This  is  the  first  letter  I  opened,'  said  the  General,  '  before 
I  was  aware  that  they  were  not  what  I  should  read.  I  saw 
only  the  first  words,  I  thought  then  that  I  had  a  right  to  read 
them.  When  these  letters  met  my  eyes,  I  conceived  them 
to  have  been  written  by  my  wife.  I  had  a  right  to  satisfy 
myself  respecting  the  nature  of  the  correspondence  ;  that  done, 
I  looked  no  farther.  I  bore  my  suspense — I  waited  till  she 
awoke.' 

'  So  she  told  me,  Cecilia  has  told  me  all ;  but  even  if  she 
had  not,  in  any  circumstances  who  could  doubt  your  honour. 
General  Clarendon?' 

'  Then  trust  to  it,  Miss  Stanley,  for  the  past,  for  the  future, 

317 


HELEN 

trust  to  it !  You  gratify  me  more  than  I  can  express — you 
do  me  justice.  I  wished  to  return  these  letters  to  you  with  my 
own  hand,'  continued  he,  '  to  satisfy  myself,  in  the  first  place, 
that  there  was  no  mistake.  Of  that  your  present  candour, 
indeed,  the  first  look  of  that  ingenuous  countenance,  was 
sufficient.' 

Helen  felt  that  she  blushed  all  over. 

'  Pardon  me  for  distressing  you,  my  dear  Helen.  It  was 
a  matter  in  which  a  man  MUST  be  selfish,  must  in  point  of 
honour,  mtist  in  point  of  feeling.  I  owe  to  your  candour  not 
merely  relief  from  what  I  could  not  endure  and  live,  but  relief 
from  suspicion, — suspicion  of  the  truth  of  one  dearer  to  me 
than  life.' 

Helen  sat  as  if  she  had  been  transfixed. 

'  I  owe  to  you,'  continued  he,  '  the  happiness  of  my  whole 
future  life.' 

'  Then  I  am  happy,'  cried  Helen,  '  happy  in  this,  at  all 
events,  whatever  may  become  of  me.' 

She  had  not  yet  raised  her  eyes  towards  the  General  ;  she 
felt  as  if  her  first  look  must  betray  Cecilia  ;  but  she  now  tried 
to  fix  her  eyes  upon  him  as  he  looked  anxiously  at  her,  and 
she  said,  '  Thank  you,  thank  you,  General  Clarendon  !  Oh, 
thank  you  for  all  the  kindness  you  have  shown  me  ;  but  I  am 
the  more  grieved,  it  makes  me  more  sorry  to  sink  quite  in 
your  esteem.' 

'  To  sink  !  You  do  not :  your  candour,  your  truth,  raises 
you ' 


'  Oh  !  do  not  say  that ' 

'  I  do,'  repeated  the  General,  '  and  you  may  believe  me. 
I  am  incapable  of  deceiving  you — this  is  no  matter  of  compli- 
ment. Between  friend  and  friend  I  should  count  a  word,  a  look 
of  falsehood,  treason.' 

Helen's  tears  stopped,  and,  without  knowing  what  she  did, 
she  began  hastily  to  gather  up  the  packet  of  letters  which  she 
had  let  fall ;  the  General  assisted  her  in  putting  them  into  her 
bag,  and  she  closed  the  strings,  thanked  him,  and  was  rising, 
when  he  went  on — '  I  beg  your  indulgence  while  I  say  a  few 
words  of  myself 

She  sat  down  again  immediately.  '  Oh  !  as  many  as  you 
please.' 

'  I  believe  1  may  say  I  am  not  of  a  jealous  temper.' 
318 


HELEN 

'  I  am  sure  you  are  not,'  said  Helen. 

'  I  thank  you,'  said  the  General.  '  May  I  ask  on  what  your 
opinion  is  founded  ? ' 

'  On  what  has  now  passed,  and  on  all  that  I  have  heard 
from  Lady  Davenant.' 

He  bowed.  '  You  may  have  heard  then,  from  Lady  Dave- 
nant, of  some  unfortunate  circumstances  in  my  own  and  in  a 
friend's  family  which  happened  a  short  time  before  my 
marriage  ? ' 

Helen  said  she  had. 

'  And  of  the  impression  these  circumstances  made  on  my 
mind,  my  consequent  resolve  never  to  marry  a  woman  who  had 
ever  had  any  previous  attachment  ? ' 

Helen  was  breathless  at  hearing  all  this  repeated. 

'  Were  you  informed  of  these  particulars  .■' '  said  the  General. 

'  Yes,'  said  Helen  faintly. 

'  I  am  not  asking.  Miss  Stanley,  whether  you  approved  of 
my  resolution  ;  simply  whether  you  heard  of  it  ? ' 

'  Yes — certainly.' 

'  That's  well.  It  was  on  an  understanding  between  Cecilia 
and  myself  on  this  point  that  I  married.  Did  you  know 
this  ? ' 

'Yes,'  said  Helen. 

'  Some  words,'  continued  the  General,  '  once  fell  from  Lady 
Davenant  concerning  this  Colonel  D'Aubigny  which  alarmed 
me.  Cecilia  satisfied  me  that  her  mother  was  mistaken. 
Cecilia  solemnly  assured  me  that  she  had  never  loved  him.' 
The  General  paused. 

Helen,  conceiving  that  he  waited  for  and  required  her 
opinion,  replied,  '  So  I  always  thought — so  I  often  told  Lady 
Davenant.'  But  at  this  moment  recollecting  the  words  at  the 
beginning  of  that  letter,  '  My  dear,  too  dear  Henry,'  Helen's 
voice  faltered. 

The  General  saw  her  confusion,  but  attributed  it  to  her 
own  consciousness.  '  Had  Lady  Davenant  not  been  mistaken,' 
resumed  he,  '  that  is  to  say  had  there  ever  been — as  might 
have  happened  not  unnaturally — had  there  ever  been  an 
attachment ;  in  short,  had  Cecilia  ever  loved  him,  and  told  me 
so,  I  am  convinced  that  such  truth  and  candour  would  have 
satisfied  me,  would  have  increased — as  I  now  feel — increased 
my  esteem.      I  am  at  this  moment  convinced  that,  in  spite  of 

319 


HELEN 

my  declared  resolution,  I  should  in  perfect  confidence  have 
married.' 

'  Oh  that  Cecilia  had  but  told  him  ! '  thought  Helen. 

'  I  should  not,  my  dear  Miss  Stanley,'  continued  the 
General,  '  have  thus  taken  up  your  time  talking  of  myself,  had 
I  not  an  important  purpose  in  view.  I  was  desirous  to  do 
away  in  your  mind  the  idea  of  my  great  strictness — not  on  my 
own  account,  but  on  yours,  I  wished  to  dispel  this  notion.  Now 
you  will  no  longer,  I  trust,  apprehend  that  my  esteem  for  you 
is  diminished.      I  assure  you  I  can  make  allowances.' 

She  was  shocked  at  the  idea  of  allowances,  yet  thanked 
him  for  his  indulgence,  and  she  could  hardly  refrain  from  again 
bursting  into  tears. 

'  Still  by  your  agitation  I  see  you  are  afraid  of  me,'  said  he, 
smiling. 

'  No  indeed  ;  not  afraid  of  you,  but  shocked  at  what  you 
must  think  of  me.' 

'  I  am  not  surprised,  but  sorry  to  see  that  the  alarm  I  gave 
my  poor  Cecilia  this  morning  has  passed  from  her  mind  into 
yours.  To  her  I  must  have  appeared  harsh  :  I  was  severe  ; 
but  when  I  thought  I  had  been  deceived,  duped,  can  you 
wonder  ?  ' 

Helen  turned  her  eyes  away. 

'  My  dear  Miss  Stanley,  why  will  not  you  distinguish  ?  the 
cases  are  essentially  different.  Nine  out  of  ten  of  the  young 
ladies  who  marry  in  these  countries  do  not  marry  the  first  ob- 
ject of  their  fancy,  and  whenever  there  is,  as  there  will  be,  I 
am  sure,  in  your  case,  perfect  candour,  I  do  not  apprehend 
the  slightest  danger  to  the  happiness  of  either  party.  On  the 
contrary,  I  should  foretell  an  increase  of  esteem  and  love. 
Beauclerc  has  often ' 

Beauclerc's  voice  was  at  this  instant  heard  in  the  hall. 

'  Compose  yourself,  my  dear  Miss  Stanley — this  way,'  said 
the  General,  opening  a  door  into  the  conservatory,  for  he  heard 
Beauclerc's  step  now  in  the  library.  The  General  followed 
Helen  as  she  left  the  room,  and  touching  the  bag  that 
contained  the  letters,  said, 

'  Remember,  whatever  may  be  your  hurry,  lock  this  up 
first.' 

'  Thank  you,'  answered  she ;  '  1  will,  I  will ! '  and  she 
hastened  on,  and  in  a  moment  she  was  safe  across  the  hall 

320 


HELEN 

and  upstairs,  without  meeting  any  one,  and  in  her  own  room, 
and  the  bag  locked  up  in  her  cabinet.  Lady  Davenant's  bell 
rang  as  she  went  to  her  apartment ;  she  looked  in  at  Cecilia, 
who  started  up  in  her  bed. 

'AH  is  over,'  said  Helen,  'all  is  well.  I  have  the  letters 
locked  up  ;   I  cannot  stay.' 

Helen  disengaged  herself  almost  forcibly  from  Cecilia's 
embrace,  and  she  was  in  Lady  Davenant's  room  in  another 
minute.  She  bade  her  good  morning  as  composedly  as  she 
could,  she  thought  quite  as  usual.  But  that  was  impossible : 
so  much  the  better,  for  it  would  not  have  been  natural  this 
last  morning  of  Lady  Davenant's  stay,  when  nothing  was  as 
usual  externally  or  internally.  All  was  preparation  for  depart- 
ure— her  maids  packing — Lady  Davenant  making  some  last 
arrangements — in  the  midst  of  which  she  stopped  to  notice 
Helen — pressed  her  in  her  arms,  and  after  looking  once  in  her 
face,  said,  '  My  poor  child  !  it  must  be  so.' 

EUiott  interrupted,  asking  some  question,  purposely  to  draw 
off  her  attention  ;  and  while  she  turned  about  to  give  some 
orders  to  another  servant,  Elliott  said  to  Miss  Stanley,  '  My 
lady  was  not  well  last  night ;  she  must  be  kept  from  all  that 
can  agitate  her,  as  much  as  possible.' 

Helen  at  that  instant  rejoiced  that  she  had  done  what  she 
had.  She  agreed  with  Elliott,  she  said,  that  all  emotion  which 
could  be  avoided  should ;  and  upon  this  principle  busied 
herself,  and  was  glad  to  employ  herself  in  whatever  she  could 
to  assist  the  preparations,  avoiding  all  conversation  with  Lady 
Davenant. 

'  You  are  right,  my  love — quite  right,'  said  Lady  Davenant. 
'  The  best  way  is  always  to  employ  oneself  always  to  the  last. 
Yes,  put  up  those  drawings  carefully,  in  this  portfolio,  Elliott  ; 
take  silver  paper,  Helen.' 

They  were  Helen's  own  drawings,  so  all  went  on,  and  all 
was  safe — even  when  Cecilia  was  spoken  of;  while  the  silver 
paper  went  over  the  drawings,  Helen  answered  that  she  had 
seen  her.  'She  was  not  well,  but  still  not  seriously  ill, 
though ' 

'Yes,'    said    Lady   Davenant;    'only   the    General    is    too 

anxious   about  her — very  naturally.      He   sent  me  word  just 

now,'  continued  she,    'that   he   has   forbidden   her  to   get   up 

before  breakfast.      I  will  go  and  see  her  now ;  dear  Cecilia  ! 

Y  321 


HELEN 

I  hope  she  will  do  well — every  way — I  feel  sure  of  it,  Helen 
— sure  as  you  do  yourself,  my  dear — But  what  is  the  matter  ? ' 

'  Nothing  ! '  said  Helen.  That  was  not  quite  true  ;  but  she 
could  not  help  it — '  Nothing  ! '  repeated  she.  '  Only  I  am 
anxious,  my  dear  Lady  Davenant,'  continued  poor  Helen 
blundering,  unaccustomed  to  evasions — 'only  I  am  very 
anxious  you  should  go  soon  to  Cecilia  ;  I  know  she  is  awake 
now,  and  you  will  be  hurried  after  breakfast.' 

Elliott  looked  reproachfully  at  Miss  Stanley,  for  she  thought 
it  much  better  for  her  lady  to  be  engaged  in  more  indifferent 
matters  till  after  breakfast,  when  she  would  have  but  a  few 
minutes  to  spend  with  her  daughter ;  so  Helen,  correcting 
herself,  added — '  But  perhaps  I'm  wrong,  so  do  not  let  me 
interrupt  you  in  whatever  you  are  doing.' 

'  My  dear  child,'  said  Lady  Davenant  ;  '  you  do  not  know 
what  you  are  saying  or  doing  yourself  this  morning.' 

But  no  suspicion  was  excited  in  her  mind,  as  she  accounted 
for  Helen's  perturbation  by  the  sorrow  of  their  approaching 
separation,  and  by  the  hurry  of  her  spirits  at  Beauclerc's 
arrival  the  day  before.  And  then  came  the  meeting  the 
General  at  breakfast,  which  Helen  dreaded  ;  but  so  composed, 
so  impenetrable,  was  he  that  she  could  hardly  believe  that 
anything  could  have  occurred  that  morning  to  agitate  him. 

Lady  Davenant,  after  being  with  her  daughter,  came  to 
take  leave  of  Helen,  and  said  gravely,  '  Helen  !  remember 
what  I  said  of  Cecilia's  truth,  my  trust  is  in  you.  Remember, 
if  I  never  see  you  again,  by  all  the  love  and  esteem  I  bear 
you,  and  all  which  you  feel  for  me,  remember  this  my  last  re- 
quest— prayer — adjuration  to  you,  support,  save  Cecilia  ! ' 

At  that  moment  the  General  came  to  announce  that  the 
carriage  was  ready  :  promptly  he  led  her  away,  handed  her  in, 
and  the  order  to  '  drive  on '  was  given.  Lady  Davenant's 
last  look,  her  last  anxious  smile,  was  upon  Helen  and 
Beauclerc  as  they  stood  beside  each  other  on  the  steps,  and 
she  was  gone. 

Helen  was  so  excessively  agitated  that  Beauclerc  did  not 
attempt  to  detain  her  from  hurrying  to  her  own  room,  where 
she  sat  down,  and  endeavoured  to  compose  herself  She  re- 
peated Lady  Davenant's  last  words,  '  Support,  save  Cecilia,' 
and,  unlocking  the  cabinet  in  which  she  had  deposited  the 
fatal  letters,  she  seized  the  bag  that  contained  them,  and  went 

322 


HELEN 

immediately  to  Cecilia.  She  was  in  her  dressing-room,  and 
the  General  sitting  beside  her  on  the  sofa,  upon  which  she  was 
resting.  He  was  sitting  directly  opposite  to  Helen  as  she  en- 
tered ;  she  started  at  the  sight  of  him  :  his  eyes  instantly  fell 
upon  the  bag,  and  she  felt  her  face  suddenly  flush.  He  took 
out  his  watch,  said  he  had  an  appointment,  and  was  gone 
before  Helen  raised  her  eyes. 

'  My  dearest  friend,  come  to  me,  come  close  to  me,'  cried 
Cecilia,  and  throwing  her  arms  round  Helen,  she  said,  '  Oh, 
I  am  the  happiest  creature  now  ! ' 

'  Are  you  ? '  said  Helen. 

'  Yes,  that  I  am,  and  I  thank  you  for  it ;  how  much  I 
thank  you,  Helen,  it  is  impossible  to  express,  and  better  I  love 
you  than  anything  upon  earth  but  Clarendon  himself,  my  best 
friend,  my  generous  Helen.  Oh,  Clarendon  has  been  so  kind, 
so  very  kind  !  so  sorry  for  having  alarmed  me  !  He  is  a 
noble,  charming  creature.  I  love  him  a  thousand  times  better 
than  I  ever  did,  am  happier  than  I  ever  was  !  and  all  this  I 
owe  to  you,  dearest  Helen.  But  I  cannot  get  your  eyes  from 
that  bag, — what  have  you  there  ? ' 

'  The  letters,'  said  Helen. 

'  The  letters ! '  exclaimed  Cecilia,  springing  up,  '  give 
them  to  me,'  seizing  and  opening  the  bag.  '  Oh  that  dreadful 
perfume  !  Helen,  open  the  window,  and  bolt  the  door,  my 
dear — both  doors.' 

While  Helen  was  doing  so,  Cecilia  struck  one  little  quick 
blow  on  a  taper-lighter ;  it  flared,  and  when  Helen  turned,  one 
of  the  letters  was  in  flames,  and  Cecilia  continued  feeding  the 
flame  with  them  as  fast  as  ever  it  could  devour. 

'  Burn  !  bum  !  there,  there  ! '  cried  she,  '  I  would  not  look 
at  any  one  of  them  again  for  the  world  ;  I  know  no  more  what 
is  in  them  than  if  I  had  never  written  them,  except  those 
horrid,  horrid  words  Clarendon  saw  and  showed  me.  I 
cannot  bear  to  think  of  it.  There  now,'  continued  she,  as 
they  burned,  '  no  one  can  ever  know  anything  more  about  the 
matter :  how  glad  I  am  to  see  them  burning  ! — burnt !  safe  ! 
The  smell  will  go  off'  in  a  minute  or  two.  It  is  going, — yes, 
gone  !  is  not  it  ?  Now  we  may  breathe  freely.  But  you  look 
as  if  you  did  not  know  whether  you  were  glad  or  sorry,  Helen.' 

'  I  beheve  it  was  right ;  the  General  advised  me  to  lock 
them  up,'  said  Helen,  '  but  then ' 

323 


'  Th;  letters  ! '  exclahmd  Cecilia,  s;pringing  up. 


HELEN 

'  Did  he  ?  how  thoughtful  of  him  !  But  better  to  burn 
them  at  once ;  I  am  sure  it  was  not  my  fault  that  they  were 
not  long  ago  destroyed.  I  was  assured  by  that  abominable 
man — but  no  matter,  we  will  never  think  of  him  again.  It 
is  done  now — no,  not  completely  yet,'  said  she,  looking  close 
at  the  half-white,  half-black  burnt  paper,  in  which  words,  and 
whole  lines,  still  appeared  in  shrunken  but  yet  quite  legible 
characters.  '  One  cannot  be  too  careful,'  and  she  trampled  on 
the  burnt  paper,  and  scattered  the  cinders.  Helen  was  anxious 
to  speak,  she  had  something  important  to  say,  but  hesitated ; 
she  saw  that  Cecilia's  thoughts  were  so  far  from  what  she 
wanted  to  speak  of  that  she  could  not  instantly  say  it  ;  she 
could  not  bear  to  overturn  all  Cecilia's  present  happiness,  and 
yet  said  to  herself,  I  must — I  must — or  what  may  happen 
hereafter  ?  Then  forcing  herself  to  speak,  she  began,  '  Your 
mother  is  safe  now,  Cecilia.' 

'  Oh  yes,  and  thank  you,  thank  you  for  that ' 

'  Then  now,  Cecilia — your  promise.' 

'  My  promise  ! '  Lady  Cecilia's  eyes  opened  in  unfeigned 
astonishment.  '  What  promise  .■'  Oh,  I  recollect,  I  promised 
—did  I  ? ' 

'  My  dear  Cecilia,  surely  you  cannot  have  forgotten.' 

'  How  was  it  ? ' 

'  You  know  the  reason  I  consented  was  to  prevent  the 
danger  of  any  shock  to  Lady  Davenant.' 

'  Well,  I  know,  but  what  did  I  promise  ?  ' 

The  words  had  in  reality  passed  Lady  Cecilia's  lips  at  the 
time  without  her  at  all  considering  them  as  a  promise,  only  as 
a  means  of  persuasion  to  bring  Helen  to  her  point. 

'  What  did  I  promise  ?  '  repeated  she. 

'  You  said,  "  As  soon  as  my  mother  is  safe,  as  soon  as  she 
is  gone,  I  will  tell  my  husband  all,"  ■ —  Cecilia,  you  cannot 
forget  what  you  promised.' 

'  Oh  no,  now  I  remember  it  perfectly,  but  I  did  not  mean 
so  soon.  I  never  imagined  you  would  claim  it  so  soon  :  but 
some  time  I  certainly  will  tell  him  all.' 

'  Do  not  .put  it  off,  dearest  Cecilia.  It  must  be  done — let 
it  be  done  to-day.' 

'  To-day  ! '  Lady  Cecilia  almost  screamed. 

'  I  will  tell  you  why,'  said  Helen. 

'  To-day  ! '  repeated  Lady  Cecilia. 

325 


HELEN 

'  If  we  let  the  present  now  pass,'  continued  Helen,  '  we 
shall  lose  both  the  power  and  the  opportunity,  believe  me.' 

'  I  have  not  the  power,  Helen,  and  I  do  not  know  what 
you  mean  by  the  opportunity,'  said  Cecilia. 

'  We  have  a  reason  now  to  give  General  Clarendon — a  true 
good  reason,  for  what  we  have  done.' 

'  Reason  ! '  cried  Lady  Cecilia,  '  what  can  you  mean  .' ' 

'  That  it  was  to  prevent  danger  to  your  mother,  and  now 
she  is  safe  ;  and  if  you  tell  him  directly,  he  will  see  this  was 
really  so.' 

'  That  is  true  ;  but  I  cannot — wait  till  to-morrow,  at  least.' 

'  Every  day  will  make  it  more  difficult.  The  deception  will 
be  greater,  and  less  pardonable.  If  we  delay,  it  will  become 
deliberate  falsehood,  a  sort  of  conspiracy  between  us,'  said 
Helen. 

'  Conspiracy  !  Oh,  Helen,  do  not  use  such  a  shocking  word, 
when  it  is  really  nothing  at  all.' 

'  Then  why  not  tell  it  ? '  urged  Helen. 

'  Because,  though  it  is  nothing  at  all  in  reality,  yet  Clarendon 
would  think  it  dreadful — though  I  have  done  nothing  really 
wrong.' 

'  So  I  say — so  I  know,'  cried  Helen  ;  '  therefore ' 

'  Therefore  let  me  take  my  own  time,'  said  Cecilia.  '  How 
can  you  urge  me  so,  hurrying  me  so  terribly,  and  when  I  am 
but  just  recovered  from  one  misery,  and  when  you  had  made 
me  so  happy,  and  when  I  was  thanking  you  with  all  my 
heart  ? ' 

Helen  was  much  moved,  but  answered  as  steadily  as  she 
could, — '  It  seems  cruel,  but  indeed  I  am  not  cruel.' 

'  When  you  had  raised  me  up,'  continued  Cecilia,  '  to  dash 
me  down  again,  and  leave  me  worse  than  ever  ! ' 

'  Not  worse — no,  surely  not  worse,  when  your  mother  is 
safe.' 

'  Yes,  safe,  thank  you — but  oh,  Helen,  have  you  no  feeling 
for  your  own  Cecilia  ? ' 

'  The  greatest,'  answered  Helen  ;  and  her  tears  said  the 
rest. 

'  You,  Helen  !  I  never  could  have  thought  you  would  have 
urged  me  so  ! ' 

'  O  Cecilia !  If  you  knew  the  pain  it  was  to  me  to  make 
you  unhappy  again, — but  I  assure  you  it  is  for  your  own  sake. 

326 


HELEN 

Dearest  Cecilia,  let  me  tell  you  all  that  General  Clarendon  said 
about  it,  and  then  you  will  know  my  reasons.'  She  repeated 
as  quickly  as  she  could  all  that  had  passed  between  her  and 
the  General ;  and  when  she  came  to  this  declaration  that,  if 
Cecilia  had  told  him  plainly  the  fact  before,  he  would  have 
married  with  perfect  confidence,  and,  as  he  believed,  with  in- 
creased esteem  and  love,  Cecilia  started  up  from  the  sofa  on 
which  she  had  thrown  herself,  and  exclaimed, 

'  Oh  that  I  had  but  known  this  at  the  time,  and  I  would 
have  told  him.' 

'  It  is  still  time,'  said  Helen. 

'  Time  now  ? — impossible.  His  look  this  morning.  Oh, 
that  look  ! ' 

'  But  what  is  one  look,  my  dear  Cecilia,  compared  with  a 
whole  life  of  confidence  and  happiness  ? ' 

'  A  life  of  happiness  !  never,  never  for  me  ;  in  that  way  at 
least,  never.' 

'  In  that  way  and  no  other,  Cecilia,  believe  me.  I  am  cer- 
tain you  never  could  endure  to  go  on  concealing  this,  living 
with  him  you  love  so,  yet  deceiving  him.' 

'  Deceiving  !  do  not  call  it  deceiving,  it  is  only  suppressing 
a  fact  that  would  give  him  pain  ;  and  when  he  can  have  no 
suspicion,  why  give  him  that  pain  ?  I  am  afraid  of  nothing 
now  but  this  timidity  of  yours — this  going  back.  Just  before 
you  came  in.  Clarendon  was  saying  how  much  he  admired 
your  truth  and  candour,  how  much  he  is  obliged  to  you  for 
saving  him  from  endless  misery  ;  he  said  so  to  me,  that  was 
what  made  me  so  completely  happy.  I  saw  that  it  was  all 
right  for  you  as  well  as  me,  that  you  had  not  sunk,  that  you 
had  risen,  in  his  esteem.' 

'  But  I  must  sink,  Cecilia,  in  his  esteem,  and  now  it  hangs 
upon  a  single  point — upon  my  doing  what  I  cannot  do.' 
Then  she  repeated  what  the  General  had  said  about  that  per- 
fect openness  which  he  was  sure  there  would  be  in  this  case 
between  her  and  Beauclerc.  'You  see  what  the  General  ex- 
pects that  I  should  do.' 

'  Yes,'  said  Cecilia ;  and  then  indeed  she  looked  much 
disturbed.  '  I  am  very  sorry  that  this  notion  of  your  telling 
Beauclerc  came  into  Clarendon's  head — very,  very  sorry,  for 
he  will  not  forget  it.  And  yet,  after  all,'  continued  she,  '  he 
will  never  ask  you  point  blank,  "  Have  you  told  Beauclerc?" 

327 


HELEN 

— and    still    more   impossible   that   he   should   ask   Beauclerc 
about  it.' 

'  Cecilia  ! '  said  Helen,  '  if  it  were  only  for  myself  I  would 
say  no  more  ;  there  is  nothing  I  would  not  endure — that  I 
would  not  sacrifice — even  my  utmost  happiness.'  She  stopped, 
and  blushed  deeply. 

'  Oh,  my  dearest  Helen  !  do  you  think  I  could  let  you  ever 
hazard  that  ?  If  I  thought  there  was  the  least  chance  of 
injuring  you  with  Granville  ! — I  would  do  anything — I  would 
throw  myself  at  Clarendon's  feet  this  instant.' 

'  This  instant — I  wish  he  was  here,'  cried  Helen. 

'Good  Heavens!  do  you?'  cried  Lady  Ceciha,  looking  at 
the  door  with  terror — she  thought  she  heard  his  step. 

'  Yes,  if  you  would  but  tell  him.      Oh  let  me  call  him  ! ' 

'  Oh  no,  no  !  Spare  me — spare  me,  I  cannot  speak  now. 
I  could  not  utter  the  words  ;  I  should  not  know  what  words 
to  use.      Tell  him  if  you  will,  I  cannot.' 

'  May  I  tell  him  ? '  said  Helen  eagerly. 

'  No,  no — that  would  be  worse  ;  if  anybody  tells  him  it 
must  be  myself 

'  Then  you  will  now — when  he  comes  in  .? ' 

'  He  is  coming  ! '  cried  Cecilia. 

General  Clarendon  came  to  the  door — it  was  bolted. 

'  In  a  few  minutes,'  said  Helen.  Lady  Cecilia  did  not 
speak,  but  listened,  as  in  agony,  to  his  receding  footsteps. 

'  In  a  few  minutes,  Helen,  did  you  say  ? — then  there  is 
nothing  for  me  now,  but  to  die — I  wish  I  could  die — I  wish 
I  was  dead.' 

Helen  felt  she  was  cruel,  she  began  to  doubt  her  own 
motives  ;  she  thought  she  had  been  selfish  in  urging  Cecilia 
too  strongly  ;  and,  going  to  her  kindly,  she  said,  '  Take  your 
own  time,  my  dear  Cecilia  :  only  tell  him — tell  him  soon.' 

'  I  will,  I  will  indeed,  when  I  can — but  now  I  am  quite 
exhausted. ' 

'You  are  indeed,'  said  Helen;  'how  ci-uel  I  have  been  ! — 
how  pale  you  are  ! ' 

Lady  Cecilia  lay  down  on  the  sofa,  and  Helen  covered  her 
with  a  soft  India  shawl,  trembling  so  much  herself  that  she 
could  hardly  stand. 

'  Thank  you,  thank  you,  dear,  kind  Helen  ;  tell  him  I  am 
going  to  sleep,  and  I  am  sure  I  hope  I  shall.' 

3^8 


HELEN 

Helen  closed  the  shutters — she  had  now  done  all  she 
could  ;  she  feared  she  had  done  too  much  ;  and  as  she  left 
the  room,  she  said  to  herself, — '  Oh,  Lady  Davenant !  if  you 
could  see — if  you  knew — what  it  cost  me  ! ' 


CHAPTER  XXXIII 

The  overwrought  state  of  Helen's  feelings  was  relieved  by  a 
walk  with  Beauclerc,  not  in  the  dressed  part  of  the  park,  but 
in  what  was  generally  undiscovered  country :  a  dingle,  a 
bosky  dell,  which  he  had  found  out  in  his  rambles,  and  which, 
though  so  little  distant  from  the  busy  hum  of  men,  had  a 
wonderful  air  of  romantic  seclusion  and  stillness — the  stillness 
of  evening.  The  sun  had  not  set ;  its  rich,  red  light  yet 
lingered  on  the  still  remaining  autumn  tints  upon  the  trees. 
The  birds  hopped  fearlessly  from  bough  to  bough,  as  if  this 
sweet  spot  were  all  their  own.  The  cattle  were  quietly 
grazing  below,  or  slowly  winding  their  way  to  the  watering- 
place.  By  degrees  the  sounds  of  evening  faded  away  upon 
the  ear  ;  a  faint  chirrup  here  and  there  from  the  few  birds  not 
yet  gone  to  roost,  and  now  only  the  humming  of  the  flies  over 
the  water,  were  to  be  heard. 

It  was  perfect  repose,  and  Beauclerc  and  Helen  sat  down 
on  the  bank  to  enjoy  it  together.  The  sympathy  of  the 
woman  he  loved,  especially  in  his  enjoyment  of  the  beauties 
of  nature,  was  to  Beauclerc  an  absolute  necessary  of  life. 
Nor  would  he  have  been  contented  with  that  show  taste  for 
the  picturesque,  which  is,  as  he  knew,  merely  one  of  a 
modern  young  lady's  many  accomplishments.  Helen's  taste 
was  natural,  and  he  was  glad  to  feel  it  so  true,  and  for  him 
here  alone  expressed  with  such  peculiar  heightened  feeling, 
as  if  she  had  in  all  nature  now  a  new  sense  of  delight.  He 
had  brought  her  here,  in  hopes  that  she  would  be  struck  with 
this  spot,  not  only  because  it  was  beautiful  in  itself,  and  his 
discovery,  but  because  it  was  like  another  bushy  dell  and 
bosky  bourne,  of  which  he  had  been  from  childhood  fond,  in 
another  place,  of  which  he  hoped  she  would  soon  be  mistress. 
'  Soon  !    very  soon,   Helen  ! '   he   repeated,   in    a   tone    which 

329 


HELEN 

could  not  be  heard  by  her  with  indifference.  He  said  that 
some  of  his  friends  in  London  told  him  that  the  report  of 
their  intended  union  had  been  spread  everywhere — (by  Lady 
Katrine  Hawksby  probably,  as  Cecilia,  when  Lady  Castlefort 
departed,  had  confided  to  her,  to  settle  her  mind  about 
Beauclerc,  that  he  was  coming  over  as  Miss  Stanley's  ac- 
knowledged lover).  And  since  the  report  had  been  so  spread, 
the  sooner  the  marriage  took  place  the  better ;  at  least,  it 
was  a  plea  which  Beauclerc  failed  not  to  urge,  and  Helen's 
delicacy  failed  not  to  feel. 

She  sighed — she  smiled.  The  day  was  named — and  the 
moment  she  consented  to  be  his,  nothing  could  be  thought  of 
but  him.  Yet,  even  while  he  poured  out  all  his  sou! — while 
he  enjoyed  the  satisfaction  there  is  in  perfect  unreservedness 
of  confidence,  Helen  felt  a  pang  mix  with  her  pleasure.  She 
felt  there  was  one  thing  she  could  not  tell  him  :  he  who  had 
told  her  everything — all  his  faults  and  follies.  '  Oh  !  why,' 
thought  she,  '  why  cannot  I  tell  him  everything  ?  I,  who 
have  no  secrets  of  my  own — why  should  I  be  forced  to  keep 
the  secrets  of  another  ? '  In  confusion,  scarcely  finished, 
these  ideas  came  across  her  mind,  and  she  sighed  deeply. 
Beauclerc  asked  why,  and  she  could  not  tell  him !  She  was 
silent ;  and  he  did  not  reiterate  the  indiscreet  question.  He 
was  sure  she  thought  of  Lady  Davenant ;  and  he  now  spoke 
of  the  regret  he  felt  that  she  could  not  be  present  at  their 
marriage,  and  Lord  Davenant  too  !  Beauclerc  said  he  had 
hoped  that  Lord  Davenant,  who  loved  Helen  as  if  she  were 
his  own  daughter,  would  have  been  the  person  to  act  as  her 
father  at  the  ceremony.  But  the  General,  his  friend  and  hers, 
would  now,  Beauclerc  said,  give  her  to  him  ;  and  would,  he 
was  sure,  take  pleasure  in  thus  publicly  marking  his  approba- 
tion of  his  ward's  choice. 

They  rose,  and  going  on  down  the  path  to  the  river's 
side,  they  reached  a  little  cove  where  he  had  moored  his 
boat,  and  they  returned  home  by  water — the  moon  just 
visible,  the  air  so  still  ;  all  so  placid,  so  delightful,  and  Beau- 
clerc so  happy  that  she  could  not  but  be  happy ;  yes — 
quite  happy  too.  They  reached  the  shore  just  as  the  lamps 
were  lighting  in  the  house.  As  they  went  in,  they  met  the 
General,  who  said,  '  In  good  time ' ;  and  he  smiled  on  Helen 
as  she  passed. 

33° 


HELEN 

'  It  is  all  settled,'  whispered  Beauclerc  to  him ;  '  and  you 
are  to  give  her  away.' 

'  With  pleasure,'  said  the  General. 

As  Helen  went  upstairs,  she  said  to  herself,  '  I  under- 
stand the  General's  smile ;  he  thinks  I  have  followed  his 
advice  ;  he  thinks  I  have  told  all — and  I  —  I  can  only  be 
silent.' 

There  was  a  great  dinner  party,  but  the  General,  not  think- 
ing Cecilia  quite  equal  to  it,  had  engaged  Mrs.  Holdemesse, 
a  relation  of  his  own,  to  do  the  honours  of  the  day. 

Lady  Cecilia  came  into  the  drawing-room  in  the  evening  ; 
but,  after  paying  her  compliments  to  the  company,  she  gladly 
followed  the  General's  advice,  and  retired  to  the  music-room  : 
Helen  went  with  her,  and  Beauclerc  followed.  Lady  Cecilia 
sat  down  to  play  at  ecartS  with  him,  and  Helen  tuned  her 
harp.  The  General  came  in  for  a  few  minutes,  he  said,  to 
escape  from  two  young  ladies  who  had  talked  him  half  dead 
about  craniology.  He  stood  leaning  on  the  mantelpiece,  and 
looking  over  the  game.  Lady  Cecilia  wanted  counters,  and 
she  begged  Beauclerc  to  look  for  some  which  she  believed  he 
would  find  in  the  drawer  of  a  table  that  was  behind  him. 
Beauclerc  opened  the  drawer,  but  no  sooner  had  he  done  so, 
than,  in  admiration  of  something  he  discovered  there,  he  ex- 
claimed, '  Beautiful !  beautiful !  and  how  like  ! '  It  was  the 
miniature  of  Helen,  and  besides  the  miniature,  farther  back  in 
the  drawer.  Lady  Cecilia  saw — how  quick  is  the  eye  of  guilty 
fear  ! — could  it  be  ? — yes — one  of  the  fatal  letters — the  letter  ! 
Nothing  but  the  picture  had  yet  been  seen  by  the  General  or 
by  Beauclerc :  Lady  Cecilia  stretched  behind  her  husband, 
whose  eyes  were  upon  the  miniature,  and  closed  the  drawer. 
It  was  all  she  could  do,  it  was  impossible  for  her  to  reach  the 
letter. 

Beauclerc,  holding  the  picture  to  the  light,  repeated, 
'  Beautiful !  who  did  it  ?  whom  is  it  for  ?  General,  look  !  do 
you  know  it  ? ' 

'  Yes,  to  be  sure,'  replied  the  General ;   '  Miss  Stanley.' 

'  You  have  seen  it  before  ? ' 

'Yes,'  said  the  General  coldly. 

'  It  is  very  like.      Who  did  it  ? ' 

'  I  did  it,'  cried  Lady  Cecilia,  who  now  recovered  her 
voice. 

331 


'  Whom  is  it  for  ^    General^  look  !  do  you  know  it  ?' 


HELEN 

'  You,  my  dear  Lady  Cecilia  !  Whom  for  ?  for  me  ?  is  it 
for  me  ? ' 

'  For  you  ?     It  may  be,  hereafter,  perhaps.' 

'  Oh  thank  you,  my  dear  Lady  Cecilia  ! '  cried  Beauclerc. 

'  If  you  behave  well,  perhaps,'  added  she. 

The  General  heard  in  his  wife's  tremulous  tone,  and  saw  in 
her  half  confusion,  half  attempt  at  playfulness,  only  an  amiable 
anxiety  to  save  her  friend,  and  to  give  her  time  to  recover 
from  her  dismay.  He  at  once  perceived  that  Helen  had  not 
followed  the  course  he  had  suggested  ;  that  she  had  not  told 
Beauclerc,  and  did  not  intend  that  he  should  be  told,  the  whole 
truth.  The  General  looked  extremely  grave  ;  Beauclerc  gave 
a  glance  round  the  room.  '  Here  is  some  mystery,'  said  he, 
now  first  seeing  Helen's  disconcerted  countenance.  Then  he 
turned  on  the  General  a  look  of  eager  inquiry.  '  Some  mystery, 
certainly,'  said  he,  '  with  which  I  am  not  to  be  made  ac- 
quainted ? ' 

'  If  there  be  any  mystery,'  said  the  General,  '  with  which 
you  are  not  to  be  made  acquainted,  I  am  neither  the  adviser 
nor  abettor.  Neither  in  jest  nor  earnest  am  I  ever  an  adviser 
of  mystery.' 

While  her  husband  thus  spoke,  Lady  Cecilia  made  another 
attempt  to  possess  herself  of  the  letter.  This  time  she  rose 
decidedly,  and,  putting  aside  the  little  ^carU  table  which  was 
in  her  way,  pressed  forward  to  the  drawer,  saying  something 
about  '  counters.'  Her  Cashmere  caught  on  Helen's  harp, 
and,  in  her  eager  spring  forward,  it  would  have  been  overset, 
but  that  the  General  felt,  turned,  and  caught  it. 

'  What  are  you  about,  my  dear  Cecilia  ? — what  do  you 
want  ? ' 

'  Nothing,  nothing,  thank  you,  my  dear ;  nothing  now.' 
Then  she  did  not  dare  to  open  the  drawer,  or  to  let  him  open 
it,  and  anxiously  drew  away  his  attention  by  pointing  to  a 
footstool  which  she  seemed  to  want. 

'  Could  not  you  ask  me  for  it,  my  dear,  without  disturbing 
yourself?     What  are  men  made  for?' 

Beauclerc,  after  a  sort  of  absent  effort  to  join  in  quest  of 
the  footstool,  had  returned  eagerly  to  the  picture,  and  looking 
at  it  more  closely,  he  saw  the  letters  C.  D.  written  in  small 
characters  in  one  corner ;  and,  just  as  his  eye  turned  to  the 
other    corner,   Lady   Cecilia,   recollecting    what    initials    were 

333 


HELEN 

there,  started  up  and  snatched  it  from  his  hand.  '  Oh,  Gran- 
ville ! '  cried  she,  '  you  must  not  look  at  this  picture  any  more 
till  I  have  done  something  to  it'  Beauclerc  was  trying  to 
catch  another  look  at  it,  when  Cecilia  cried  out,  '  Take  it, 
Helen  !  take  it ! '  and  she  held  it  up  on  high,  but  as  she  held 
it,  though  she  turned  the  face  from  him,  she  forgot,  quite 
forgot,  that  Colonel  D'Aubigny  had  written  his  name  on  the 
back  of  the  picture  ;  and  there  it  was  in  distinct  characters 
such  as  could  be  plainly  read  at  that  height,  '  For  Henry 
D'Aubigny.'  Beauclerc  saw,  and  gave  one  glance  at  Helen. 
He  made  no  further  attempt  to  reach  the  picture.  Lady 
Cecilia,  not  aware  of  what  he  had  seen,  repeated,  '  Helen  ! 
Helen  !  why  don't  you  take  it  ? — now  !  now  ! ' 

Helen  could  not  stir.  The  General  took  the  picture  from 
his  wife's  hand,  gave  it  to  Miss  Stanley,  without  looking  at 
her,  and  said  to  Lady  Cecilia,  '  Pray  keep  yourself  quiet, 
Cecilia.  You  have  done  enough,  too  much,  to-day  ;  sit  down,' 
said  he,  rolling  her  arm-chair  close,  and  seating  her.  '  Keep 
yourself  quiet,  I  beg.'      '  I  beg,'  in  the  tone  of  '  I  insist.' 

She  sat  down,  but  catching  a  view  of  Beauclerc  was 
alarmed  by  his  aspect — and  Helen  !  her  head  was  bent  down 
behind  the  harp.  Lady  Cecilia  did  not  know  yet  distinctly 
what  had  happened.  The  General  pressed  her  to  lean  back 
on  the  cushions  which  he  was  piling  up  behind  her.  Beauclerc 
made  a  step  towards  Helen,  but  checking  himself,  he  turned 
to  the  ^carU  table.      '  Those  counters,  after  all,  that  we  were 

looking   for '     As   he  spoke   he  pulled  open  the  drawer. 

The  General  with  his  back  to  him  was  standing  before  Lady 
Cecilia  ;  she  could  not  see  what  Beauclerc  was  doing,  but  she 
heard  the  drawer  open,  and  cried  out,  '  Not  there,  Beauclerc  ; 
no  counters  there — you  need  not  look  there.'  But  before  she 
spoke,  he  had  given  a  sudden  pull  to  the  drawer,  which 
brought  it  quite  out,  and  all  the  contents  fell  upon  the  floor, 
and  there  was  the  fatal  letter,  open,  and  the  words  '■My  dear, 
too  dear  Henry,'  instantly  met  his  eyes ;  he  looked  no  farther, 
but  in  that  single  glance  the  writing  seemed  to  him  to  be 
Lady  Cecilia's,  and  quick  his  eye  turned  upon  her.  She 
kept  perfectly  quiet,  and  appeared  to  him  perfectly  composed. 
His  eye  then  darted  in  search  of  Helen  ;  she  had  sunk  upon  a 
seat  behind  the  harp.  Through  the  harp-strings  he  caught  a 
glimpse  of  her  face,   all   pale — crimsoned  it  grew  as  he  ad- 

334 


HELEN 

vanced  :  she  rose  instantly,  took  up  the  letter,  and,  without 
speaking  or  looking  at  any  one,  tore  it  to  pieces,  Beauclerc 
in  motionless  astonishment.  Lady  Cecilia  breathed  again. 
The  General's  countenance  expressed  '  I  interfere  no  farther.' 
He  left  the  room ;  and  Beauclerc,  without  another  look  at 
Helen,  followed  him. 

For  some  moments  after  Lady  Cecilia  and  Helen  were  left 
alone,  there  was  a  dead  silence.  Lady  Cecilia  sat  with  her 
eyes  fixed  upon  the  door  through  which  her  husband  and 
Beauclerc  had  passed.  She  thought  that  Beauclerc  might 
return  ;  but  when  she  found  that  he  did  not,  she  went  to 
Helen,  who  had  covered  her  face  with  her  hands. 

'  My  dearest  friend,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  '  thank  you  !  thank 
you  ! — you  did  the  best  that  was  possible  ! ' 

'O  Cecilia!'  exclaimed  Helen,  'towhathaveyouexposedme?' 

'  How  did  it  all  happen  ? '  continued  Cecilia.  '  Why  was 
not  that  letter  burnt  with  the  rest  ?  How  came  it  there  ? 
Can  you  tell  me  ? ' 

'  I  do  not  know,'  said  Helen,.  '  I  cannot  recollect.'  But 
after  some  effort,  she  remembered  that  in  the  morning,  while 
the  General  had  been  talking  to  her,  she  had  in  her  confusion, 
when  she  took  the  packet,  laid  *the  picture  and  that  letter  be- 
side her  on  the  arm  of  the  chair.  She  had,  in  her  hurry  of 
putting  the  other  letters  into  her  bag,  forgotten  this  and  the 
picture,  and  she  supposed  that  they  had  fallen  between  the 
chair  and  the  wall,  and  that  they  had  been  found  and  put  into 
the  table-drawer  by  one  of  the  servants. 

Helen  was  hastening  out  of  the  room,  Cecilia  detained  her. 
'  Do  not  go,  my  dear,  for  that  would  look  as  if  you  were  guilty, 
and  you  know  you  are  innocent.  At  the  first  sound  of  your 
harp  Beauclerc  will  return — only  command  yourself  for  one 
hour  or  two.' 

'Yes,  it  will  only  be  for  an  hour  or  two,'  said  Helen, 
brightening  with  hope.  '  You  will  tell  the  General  to-night. 
Do  you  think  Granville  will  come  back  ?  Where  is  the  harp- 
key  ? — I  dropped  it — here  it  is.'  She  began  to  tune  the  harp. 
Crack  went  one  string — then  another. 

'  That  is  lucky,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  '  it  will  give  you  some- 
thing to  do,  my  love,  if  the  people  come  in.' 

The  aide-de-camp  entered.  '  I  thought  I  heard  harp-strings 
going,'  said  he. 

335 


HELEN 

'  Several  ! — yes,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  standing  full  in  his 
way. 

'  Inauspicious  sounds  for  us  !  bad  omens  for  my  embassy. 
Mrs.  Holdernesse  sent  me.' 

'  I  know,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  '  and  you  will  have  the  goodness 
to  tell  her  that  Miss  Stanley's  harp  is  unstrung.' 

'  Can  I  be  of  any  use.  Miss  Stanley  ? '  said  he,  moving 
towards  the  harp. 

'  No,  no,'  cried  Lady  Cecilia,  '  you  are  in  my  service, — 
attend  to  me.' 

'  Dear  me,  Lady  Cecilia  !      I  did  not  hear  what  you  said.' 

'  That  is  what  I  complain  of — hear  me  now.' 

'  I  am  all  attention,  I  am  sure.      What  are  your  commands  ?  ' 

She  gave  him  as  many  as  his  head  could  hold.  A  long 
message  to  Mrs.  Holdernesse,  and  to  Miss  Holdernesse  and 
Miss  Anna  about  their  music-books,  which  had  been  left  in  the 
carriage,  and  were  to  be  sent  for,  and  duets  to  be  played,  and 
glees,  for  the  major  and  Lady  Anne  Ruthven. 

'  Good  Heavens  !  I  cannot  remember  any  more,'  cried  the 
aide-de-camp. 

'  Then  go  off,  and  say  and  do  all  that  before  you  come  back 
again,'  said  Lady  Cecilia. 

'  What  amazing  presence  of  mind  )'0U  have  ! '  said  Helen. 
'  How  can  you  say  so  much,  and  think  of  everything  ? ' 

The  aide-de-camp  performed  all  her  behests  to  admiration, 
and  was  rewarded  by  promotion  to  the  high  office  of  turner- 
over-general  of  the  leaves  of  the  music-books,  an  office  requiring, 
as  her  ladyship  remarked  to  Miss  Holdernesse,  prompt  eye 
and  ear,  and  all  his  distinguished  gallantry.  By  such  compli- 
ments she  fixed  him  to  the  pianoforte,  while  his  curiosity  and 
all  his  feelings,  being  subordinate  to  his  vanity,  were  prevented 
from  straying  to  Miss  Stanley  and  her  harp-stringing,  a  work 
still  doing — still  to  do. 

All  the  arrangement  succeeded  as  Lady  Cecilia's  arrange- 
ments usually  did.  Helen  heard  the  eternal  buzz  of  conversa- 
tion and  the  clang  of  instruments,  and  then  the  harmony  of 
music,  all  as  in  a  dream,  or  as  at  the  theatre,  when  the  thoughts 
are  absent  or  the  feelings  preoccupied  ;  and  in  this  dreamy 
state  she  performed  the  operation  of  putting  in  the  harp-strings 
quite  well :  and  when  she  was  at  last  called  upon  by  Cecilia, 
who  gave  her  due  notice  and  time,  she  sat  and  played  auto- 

336 


HELEN 

matically,  without  soul  or  spirit — but  so  do  so  many  others. 
It  passed  '  charmingly,'  till  a  door  softly  opened  behind  her, 
and  she  saw  the  shadow  on  the  wall,  and  some  one  stood,  and 
passed  from  behind  her.  There  was  an  end  of  her  playing  ; 
however,  from  her  just  dread  of  making  a  scene,  she  commanded 
herself  so  powerfully,  that,  except  her  timidity,  nothing  was 
observed  by  the  company,  and  that  timidity  was  pitied  by  the 
good-natured  Mrs.  Holdernesse,  who  said  to  her  daughter, 
'  Anne,  we  must  not  press  Miss  Stanley  any  more ;  she,  who 
is  always  so  obhging,  is  tired  now.'  She  then  made  way  for 
Helen  to  pass,  who,  thanking  her  with  such  a  look  as  might 
be  given  for  a  life  saved,  quitted  the  harp,  and  the  crowd, 
closing  behind  her,  happily  thought  of  her  no  more.  She 
retreated  to  the  darkest  part  of  the  room,  and  sat  down.  She 
did  not  dare  to  look  towards  what  she  most  wished  to  see. 
Her  eyes  were  fixed  upon  the  face  of  the  young  lady  singing, 
and  yet  she  saw  not  one  feature  of  that  face,  while  she  knew, 
without  looking,  or  seeming  to  look,  exactly  where  Beauclerc 
stood.  He  had  stationed  himself  in  a  doorway  into  the  draw- 
ing-room ;  there,  leaning  back  against  the  wall,  he  stood,  and 
never  stirred.  Helen  was  so  anxious  to  get  one  clear  view  of 
the  expression  of  his  countenance,  that  at  last  she  ventured  to 
move  a  little,  and  from  behind  the  broad  back  of  a  great  man 
she  looked  :  Beauclerc's  eyes  met  hers.  How  different  from 
their  expression  when  they  were  sitting  on  the  bank  together 
but  a  few  short  hours  before  !  He  left  the  doorway  instantly, 
and  placed  himself  where  Helen  could  see  him  no  more. 

Of  all  the  rest  of  what  passed  this  evening  she  knew 
nothing ;  she  felt  only  a  sort  of  astonishment  at  everybody's 
gaiety,  and  a  sense  of  the  time  being  intolerably  long.  She 
thought  that  all  these  people  never  would  go  away — that  their 
carriages  never  would  be  announced.  But  before  it  came  to 
that  time.  General  Clarendon  insisted  upon  Lady  Cecilia's 
retiring.  '  I  must,'  said  he,  '  play  the  tyrant,  Cecilia ;  you 
have  done  too  much  to-day — Mrs.  Holdernesse  shall  hold 
your  place.' 

He  carried  Cecilia  off,  and  Helen  thought,  or  fancied,  that 
he  looked  about  for  her.  Glad  to  escape,  she  followed  close 
behind.  The  General  did  not  offer  his  arm  or  appear  to  notice 
her.  When  she  came  to  the  door  leading  to  the  staircase, 
there  was    Beauclerc,   standing  with    folded  arms,   as   in  the 

z  337 


HELEN 

music-room ;  he  just  bowed  his  head,  and  wished  Lady 
Ceciha  a  good-night,  and  waited,  without  a  word,  for  Helen 
to  pass,  or  not  to  pass,  as  she  thought  fit.  She  saw  by  his 
look  that  he  expected  explanation  ;  but  till  she  knew  what 
Cecilia  meant  to  do,  how  could  she  explain  ?  To  say  nothing 
— to  bear  to  be  suspected, — was  all  she  could  do,  without 
betraying  her  friend.  That  word  betray — that  thought  ruled 
her.  She  passed  him  :  '  Good-night '  she  could  not  then  say. 
He  bowed  as  she  passed,  and  she  heard  no  'Good-night'  — 
no  sound.  And  there  was  the  General  in  the  hall  to  be  passed 
also,  before  she  could  reach  the  staircase  up  which  Cecilia  was 
going.  When  he  saw  Helen,  with  a  look  of  surprise — as  it 
seemed  to  her,  of  disapproving  surprise — he  said,  '  Are  you 
gone.  Miss  Stanley  ? '  The  look,  the  tone,  struck  cold  to  her 
heart.  He  continued — '  Though  I  drove  Cecilia  away,  I  did 
not  mean  to  drive  you  away  too.      It  is  early.' 

'  Is  it  ?     I  thought  it  was  very  late.' 

'  No — and  if  you  can,  I  hope  you  will  return.'  There  was 
a  meaning  in  his  eye,  which  she  well  understood. 

'  Thank  you,'  said  she  ;  '  if  I  can  certainly- ' 

'  I  hope  you  can  and  will.' 

'  Oh  !   thank  you  ;   but   I   must  first '   see  Cecilia,   she 

was  going  to  say,  but,  afraid  of  implicating  her,  she  changed 
the  sentence  to — '  I  must  first  consider ' 

'  Consider  !  what  the  devil ! '  thought  he,  and  his  counte- 
nance was  instantly  angrily  suited  to  the  thought.  Helen 
hesitated.  '  Do  not  let  me  detain — distress  you  farther.  Miss 
Stanley,  unavailingly ;  and  since  I  shall  not  have  the  pleasure 
of  seeing  you  again  this  evening,'  concluded  he,  in  a  constrained 
voice,  '  I  have  the  honour  to  wish  you  a  good-night.'  He 
returned  to  the  music-room. 


CHAPTER    XXXIV 

Helen  instantly  went  to  Cecilia's  room  ;  Felicie  was  with  her. 
Helen  expected  Lady  Cecilia  would  dismiss  her  instantly ;  but 
mademoiselle  was  chattering.  Helen  had  sometimes  thought 
Cecilia  let  her  talk  too  much,  but  to-night  it  was  insufferable. 

338 


HELEN 

Helen  was  too  impatient,  too  anxious,  to  bear  it.  '  Cecilia,  my 
dear,  I  want  to  speak  to  you  alone,  as  soon  as  you  can,  in  my 
own  room.' 

'As  soon  as  possible,'  Cecilia  answered  in  a  voice  not 
natural.  And  she  came,  but  not  as  soon  as  possible — shut 
the  door  behind  her,  showing  that  she  had  not  dismissed 
Felicie,  and,  with  hair  dishevelled,  as  if  hastening  back  to  her 
room,  said,  '  I  am  in  a  hurry  ;  the  General  ordered  me  to  make 
haste,  and  not  to  be  an  hour  undressing.' 

'  I  will  not  keep  you  a  moment,'  said  Helen.  '  I  am  in  as 
great  a  hurry  as  you  can  be.     Beauclerc  is  waiting  for  me.' 

'  Waiting  for  you  at  this  time  of  night  !  Oh,  my  dear, 
he  cannot  be  standing  there  with  his  arms  folded  all  this 
time.' 

Helen  repeated  what  the  General  had  said,  and  ended  with 
'  I  am  determined  to  return.' 

'  No,  no,'  Lady  Cecilia  said.  The  General  could  not  advise 
her  going  back  at  this  time  of  night.  And  with  rapidity  and 
confusion,  she  poured  out  a  multitude  of  dissuasive  arguments, 
some  contradicting  the  others.  '  At  this  time  of  night !  The 
world  is  not  gone,  and  Beauclerc  is  in  the  midst  of  them  by 
this  time,  you  may  be  sure.  You  don't  think  he  is  standing 
alone  there  all  this  time.  You  could  not  speak  to  him  before 
all  the  world — don't  attempt  it.  You  would  only  expose  your- 
self. You  would  make  a  scene  at  last- — undo  all,  and  come  to 
disgrace,  and  ruin  me  and  yourself.  I  know  you  would,  Helen. 
And  if  you  were  to  send  for  him — into  the  library — alone  ! 
the  servants  would  know  it — and  the  company  gone  !  And 
after  all,  for  you,  my  dear,  to  make  the  first  advance  to 
reconciliation  !  If  he  is  angry — I  don't  think  that  would  be 
quite — dignified  ;  quite  like  you,  Helen.' 

'  The  General  thinks  it  right,  and  I  am  sure  he  would  not 
advise  anything  improper — undignified.  It  does  not  signify, 
Cecilia,  I  am  determined — I  will  go.'  Trembling,  she  grew 
absolutely  desperate  from  fear.  '  I  am  afraid  you  have  for- 
got your  promise,  Cecilia ;  you  said  that  if  I  could  bear  it  for 
one  hour,  it  would  be  over.     Did  you  not  promise  me  that  if 

any  difficulty  came  between  me  and '     She  stopped  short. 

She  had  felt  indignant ;  but  when  she  looked  at  Cecilia,  and 
saw  her  tears,  she  could  not  go  on. 

'  O  Helen  ! '  cried  Cecilia,  '  I   do  not  ask  you  to  pity  me. 

339 


HELEN 

You  cannot  know  what  I  suffer — you  are  innocent — and  I  have 
done  so  wrong  !     You  cannot  pity  me.' 

'  I  do,  I  do,'  cried  Helen,  '  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart. 
Only  trust  me,  dear  Cecilia  ;  let  me  go  down ' 

Lady  Cecilia  sprang  between  her  and  the  door.  '  Hear 
me  !  hear  me,  Helen  !  Do  not  go  to-night,  and,  cost  what  it 
will — cost  me  what  it  may,  since  it  has  come  to  this  between 
you,  I  will  confess  all  this  night — I  will  tell  all  to  the  General, 
and  clear  you  with  him  and  with  Granville.  What  more  can 
you  ask .'  —  what  more  can  I  do,  Helen  ?  And  will  you 
go?' 

'  No,  no,  my  dear  Cecilia.  Since  you  promise  me  this,  I 
will  not  go  now.' 

'  Be  satisfied  then,  and  rest — for  me  there  is  no  rest '  ;  so 
saying  Cecilia  slowly  left  the  room. 

Helen  could  not  sleep  :  this  was  the  second  wretched  night 
she  had  passed  in  that  most  miserable  of  all  uncertainty — 
whether  she  was  right  or  wrong. 

In  the  morning,  to  Helen's  astonishment,  Ceciha's  first 
words  were  about  a  dream — '  Oh,  my  dear  Helen,  I  have  had 
such  a  dream  !  I  do  not  usually  mind  dreams  in  the  least,  but 
I  must  own  to  you  that  this  has  made  an  impression  !  My 
dear,  I  can  hardly  tell  it ;  I  can  scarcely  bear  to  think  of  it.  I 
thought  that  Clarendon  and  I  were  sitting  together,  and  my 
hand  was  on  his  shoulder ;  and  I  had  worked  myself  up — I 
was  just  going  to  speak.  He  was  winding  up  his  watch,  and 
I  leaned  forward  to  see  his  face  better.  He  looked  up — and 
it  was  not  him  :  it  was  Colonel  D'Aubigny  come  to  life.  The 
door  opened.  Clarendon  appeared — his  eyes  were  upon  me  ; 
but  I  do  not  know  what  came  afterwards  ;  all  was  confusion 
and  fighting.  And  then  I  was  with  that  nurse  my  mother 
recommended,  and  an  infant  in  her  arms.  I  was  going  to  take 
the  child,  when  Clarendon  snatched  it,  and  threw  it  into  the 
flames.     Oh  !    I  awoke  with  a  scream  ! ' 

'  How  glad  you  must  have  been,'  said  Helen,  '  to  awake  and 
find  it  was  only  a  dream  !  ' 

'  But  when  I  screamed,'  continued  Cecilia,  '  Clarendon 
started  up,  and  asked  if  I  was  in  pain.  "  Not  of  body,"  I 
said  ; — and  then — oh,  Helen  !  then  I  thought  I  would  begin. 
"Not  of  body,"  I  said,  "but  of  mind"  ;  then  I  added,  "  I  was 
thinking  of  Helen  and  Beauclerc."    Clarendon  said,  "  So  was  I  ; 

340 


HELEN 

but  there  is  no  use  in  thinking  of  it ;  we  can  do  no  good." 
"Then,"  I  said,  "suppose,  Clarendon — only  suppose  that 
Helen,  without  saying  anything,  were  to  let  this  matter  pass 
off  with  Beauclerc  ? "  Clarendon  answered,  "  It  would  not 
pass  off  with  Beauclerc."  "  But,"  said  I,  "  I  do  not  mean 
without  any  explanation  at  all.  Only  suppose  that  Helen  did 
not  enter  into  any  particulars,  do  not  you  think,  Clarendon,  that 
things  would  go  on  well  enough  ? "  "  No,''  he  said  decidedly, 
"  no."  "  Do  you  mean,"  said  I,  "  that  things  would  not  go  on 
at  all  ?  "  "I  do  not  say,  not  at  all,"  he  answered  ;  "  but  well 
they  would  not  go  on."  ' 

'  I  am  sure  the  General  is  right,'  said  Helen. 

'  Then,'  continued  Lady  Cecilia,  '  then  I  put  the  question 
differently.  I  wanted  to  feel  my  way,  to  try  whether  I  could 
possibly  venture  upon  my  own  confession.  "  Consider  it  this 
way,  Clarendon,"  I  said.  "  Take  it  for  granted  that  Helen  did 
somehow  arrange  that  Beauclerc  were  to  be  satisfied  without 
any  formal  explanation."  "  Formal ! "  said  he, — "  I  will  not 
say  formal,"  said  I ;  "but  without  a.  full  explanation  :  in  short, 
suppose  that  from  mere  timidity,  Helen  could  not,  did  not, 
exactly  tell  him  the  whole  before  marriage — put  it  off  till  after- 
wards— then  told  him  all  candidly ;  do  you  think,  Clarendon, 
that  if  you  were  in  Beauclerc's  place  (I  quite  stammered  when 
I  came  to  this) — do  you  think  you  could  pardon,  or  forgive,  or 
esteem,  or  love,''  I  intended  to  end  with,  but  he  interrupted  me 
with — "  I  do  not  know,"  very  shortly ;  and  added,  "  I  hope 
this  is  not  what  Miss  Stanley  intends  to  do  ? " ' 

'  Oh  !  what  did  you  answer  ? '  cried  Helen. 

'  I  said  I  did  not  know.  My  dear  Helen,  it  was  the  only 
thing  I  could  say.  What  would  Clarendon  have  thought,  after 
all  my  supposes,  if  I  had  said  anything  else  ?  he  must  have 
seen  the  truth.' 

'  And  that  he  is  not  to  see,'  said  Helen  :  '  and  how  false  he 
must  think  me  ! ' 

'  No,  no  ;  for  I  told  him,'  continued  Lady  Cecilia,  '  that  I 
was  sure  you  wished  always  to  tell  the  whole  truth  about 
everything,  but  that  there  might  be  circumstances  where  you 
really  could  not ;  and  where  I,  knowing  all  the  circumstances, 
could  not  advise  it.  He  said,  "  Cecilia,  I  desire  you  will  not 
advise  or  interfere  any  farther  in  this  matter.  Promise  me, 
Cecilia  ! "   He  spoke  sternly,  and  I  promised  as  fast  as  I  could. 

341 


HELEN 

"  Do  nothing,  say  nothing,  more  about  it,"  he  repeated ;  and 
now,  after  that,  could  I  go  on,  Helen?' 

'  No,  indeed  ;  I  do  not  think  you  could.  My  dear  Cecilia, 
I  really  think  you  could  not,'  said  Helen,  much  moved. 

'  And  do  you  forgive  me,  my  dear,  good '      But  seeing 

Helen  change  colour,  Lady  Cecilia,  following  her  eye,  and 
looking  out  of  the  window,  started  up,  exclaiming,  'There  is 
Beauclerc  ;  I  see  him  in  my  mothei^'s  walk.  I  will  go  to  him 
this  minute  ;  yes,  I  will  trust  him — I  will  tell  him  all  instantly.' 

Helen  caught  hold  of  her,  and  stopped  her.  Surprised, 
Cecilia  said,  '  Do  not  stop  me.  I  may  never  have  the  courage 
again  if  stopped  now.      Do  not  stop  me,  Helen.' 

'  I  must,  Cecilia.  General  Clarendon  desired  you  not  to 
interfere  in  the  matter.' 

'  But  this  is  not  interfering,  only  interposing  to  prevent 
mischief.' 

'But,  Cecilia,'  continued  Helen  eagerly,  'another reason  has 
just  struck  me.' 

'  I  wish  reasons  would  not  strike  you.  Let  me  go.  Oh, 
Helen  ;  it  is  for  you.' 

'  And  it  is  for  you  I  speak,  Cecilia,'  said  Helen,  as  fast  as 
she  could.  '  If  you  told  Beauclerc,  you  never  could  afterwards 
tell  the  General ;  it  would  be  a  new  difficulty.  You  know  the 
General  could  never  endure  your  having  confessed  this  to  any 
man  but  himself — trusted  Beauclerc  rather  than  your  husband.' 

Cecilia  stopped,  and  stood  silent. 

'  My  dear  Cecilia,'  continued  Helen,  '  you  must  leave  me  to 
my  own  judgment  now '  ;  and,  breaking  from  Cecilia,  she  left 
the  room.  She  hurried  out  to  meet  Beauclerc.  He  stopped 
on  seeing  her,  and  then  came  forward  with  an  air  of  evident 
deliberation. 

'  Do  you  wish  to  speak  to  me,  Miss  Stanley  ?' 

'  Miss  Stanley ! '  cried  Helen ;  '  is  it  come  to  this,  and 
without  hearing  me  ?  ' 

'Without  hearing  you,  Helen  !  Was  not  I  ready  last  night 
to  hear  you  ?  Without  hearing  you  !  Have  not  you  kept  me 
in  torture,  the  worst  of  tortures — suspense  ^  Why  did  not  you 
speak  to  me  last  night  ? ' 

'  I  could  not.' 

'Why,  why?' 

'  I  cannot  tell  you,'  said  she. 

342 


HELEN 

'Then  I  can  tell  you,  Helen.' 

'  You  can  ! ' 

'  And  will.  Helen,  you  could  not  speak  to  me  till  you  had 
consulted — arranged — settled  what  was  to  be  said — what  not 
to  be  said — what  told — what  left  untold.' 

Between  each  half-sentence  he  darted  looks  at  her,  defying 
hers  to  contradict — and  she  could  not  contradict  by  word  or 
look.  '  You  could  not  speak,'  continued  he  passionately,  '  till 
you  had  well  determined  what  was  to  be  told,  what  left  untold, 
to  me  !  To  me,  Helen,  your  confiding — devoted — accepted 
lover  !  for  I  protest  before  Heaven,  had  I  knelt  at  the  altar 
with  you,  Helen  Stanley,  not  more  yours,  not  more  mine  could 
I  have  deemed  you — -not  more  secure  of  your  love  and  truth — 
your  truth,  for  what  is  love  without  it  ? — not  more  secure  of 
perfect  felicity  could  I  have  been  on  earth  than  I  was  when  we 
two  sat  together  but  yesterday  evening  on  that  bank.  Your 
words — your  looks — and  still  your  looks — But  what  signify 
tears  ? — Tears,  women's  tears  !  Oh  !  what  is  woman  ? — and 
what  is  man  that  believes  in  her  'i — weaker  still ! ' 

'  Hear  me  ! — hear  me  ! ' 

'  Hear  you  ?  No,  Helen,  do  not  now  ask  me  to  hear  you. 
Do  not  force  me  to  hear  you.  Do  not  debase,  do  not  sully, 
that  perfect  image  of  truth.  Do  not  sink  yourself,  Helen, 
from  that  height  at  which  it  was  my  entranced  felicity  to  see 
you.  Leave  me  one  blessed,  one  sacred  illusion.  No,'  cried 
he,  with  increasing  vehemence,  '  say  nothing  of  all  you  have 
prepared — not  one  arranged  word  conned  over  in  your  mid- 
night and  your  morning  consultations,'  pointing  back  to  the 
window  of  her  dressing-room,  where  he  had  seen  her  and 
Lady  Cecilia. 

'  You  saw,'  Helen  began 

'  Yes.  Am  I  blind,  think  you  ?  I  wish  I  were.  Oh 
that  I  could  be  again  the  believing,  fond,  happy  dupe  I  was 
but  yesterday  evening  ! ' 

'Dupe!'  repeated  Helen.  'But  pour  out  all — all,  dear 
Granville.  Think — say — what  you  will — reproach — abuse  me 
as  you  please.  It  is  a  relief — take  it — for  I  have  none  to 
g^ve.' 

'  None  ! '  cried  he,  his  tone  suddenly  changmg,  '  no  relief 
to  give  !  What !  have  you  nothing  to  say  ?  No  explanation  ? 
Why  speak  to  me  then  at  all  ? ' 

343 


HELEN 

'  To  tell  you  so  at  once — to  end  your  suspense — to  tell  you 
that  I  cannot  explain.  The  midnight  consultation  and  the 
morning,  were  not  to  prepare  for  you  excuse  or  apology,  but  to 
decide  whether  I  could  tell  you  the  whole  ;  and  since  that 
cannot  be,  I  determined  not  to  enter  into  any  explanation. 
I  am  glad  that  you  do  not  wish  to  hear  any.' 

'Answer  me  one  question,'  said  he: — 'that  picture — did 
you  give  it  to  Colonel  D'Aubigny  ?  ' 

'  No.  That  is  a  question  I  can  answer.  No — he  stole  it 
from  Cecilia's  portfolio.      Ask  me  no  more.' 

'  One  question  more ' 

'  No,  not  one  more — I  cannot  tell  you  anything  more.' 

She  was  silent  for  a  moment,  he  withdrew  his  eyes,  and 
she  went  on. 

'  Granville  !  I  must  now  put  your  love  and  esteem  for  me  to 
the  test.  If  that  love  be  what  I  believe  it  to  be,  if  your 
confidence  in  me  is  what  I  think  it  ought  to  be,  I  am  now 
going  to  try  it.  There  is  a  mystery  which  I  cannot  explain. 
I  tell  you  this,  and  yet  I  expect  you  to  believe  that  I  am  inno- 
cent of  anything  wrong  but  the  concealment.  There  are 
circumstances  which  I  cannot  tell  you.' 

'But  why?'  interrupted  Beauclerc.  'Ought  there  to  be 
any  circumstances  which  cannot  be  told  to  the  man  to  whom 
you  have  plighted  your  faith  ?  Away  with  this  "  cannot — this 
mystery  "  !  Did  not  I  tell  you  every  folly  of  my  life — every 
fault  ?  And  what  is  this  i' — in  itself,  nothing  ! — concealment 
everything — Oh,  Helen ' 

She  was  going  to  say,  '  If  it  concerned  only  myself,' — but 
that  would  at  once  betray  Cecilia,  and  she  went  on, — '  If  it 
were  in  my  opinion  right  to  tell  it  to  you,  I  would.  On  this 
point,  Granville,  leave  me  to  judge  and  act  for  myself.  This 
is  the  test  to  which  I  put  your  love — put  mine  to  any  test  you 
will  ;  but  if  your  confidence  in  me  is  not  sufficient  to  endure 
this  trial,  we  can  never  be  happy  together.'  She  spoke  very 
low  :  but  Beauclerc  listened  with  such  intensity  that  he  could 
not  only  distinguish  every  syllable  she  said,  but  could  distinctly 
hear  the  beating  of  her  heart,  which  throbbed  violently,  in 
spite  of  all  her  efforts  to  be  calm.  '  Can  you  trust  me  ? ' 
concluded  she. 

'  I  can,'  cried  he.  '  I  can  —  I  do  !  By  Heaven  I  do  !  I 
think  you  an  angel,  and  legions  of  devils  could  not  convince 

344 


HELEN 

me  of  the  contrary.      I  trust  your  word — I  trust  that  heavenly 

countenance — I  trust  entirely- '     He  offered,  and  she  took 

his  offered  hand.  '  I  trust  entirely.  Not  one  question  more 
shall  I  ask — not  a  suspicion  shall  I  have  :  you  put  me  to  the 
test,  you  shall  find  me  stand  it.' 

'  Can  you  ? '  said  she  ;  '  you  knovc  how  much  I  ask.  I 
acknowledge  a  mystery,  and  yet  I  ask  you  to  believe  that  I 
am  not  wrong.' 

'  I  know,'  said  he  ;  '  you  shall  see.'  And,  both  in  happiness 
once  more,  they  returned  to  the  house. 

'  I  love  her  a  thousand  times  better  than  ever,'  thought 
Beauclerc,  '  for  the  independence  of  mind  she  shows  in  thus 
braving  my  opinion,  daring  to  set  all  upon  the  cast — some- 
thing noble  in  this  !  I  am  to  form  my  own  judgment  of  her, 
and  I  will,  independently  of  what  any  other  human  being  may 
say  or  think.  The  General,  with  his  strict,  narrow,  conventional 
notions,  has  not  an  idea  of  the  kind  of  woman  I  like,  or  of 
what  Helen  really  is.  He  sees  in  Helen  only  the  discreet 
proper-behaved  young  lady,  adapted,  so  nicely  adapted,  to  her 
place  in  society,  to  nitch  and  notch  in,  and  to  be  of  no  sort  of 
value  out  of  it.  Give  me  a  being  able  to  stand  alone,  to  think 
and  feel,  decide  and  act  for  herself  Were  Helen  only  what 
the  General  thinks  her,  she  would  not  be  for  me  ;  while  she  is 
what  I  think  her,  I  love — I  adore!'  And  when  he  saw  his 
guardian,  Beauclerc  declared  that,  though  Helen  had  entered 
into  no  explanations,  he  was  perfectly  satisfied. 

The  General  answered,  '  I  am  glad  you  are  satisfied.' 

Beauclerc  perceived  that  the  General  was  not ;  and  in  spite 
of  all  that  he  had  just  been  saying  to  himself,  this  provoked 
and  disgusted  him.  His  theory  of  his  own  mind,  if  not  quite 
false,  was  still  a  little  at  variance  with  his  practice.  His 
guardian's  opinion  swayed  him  powerfully,  whenever  he  believed 
that  it  was  not  designed  to  influence  him  ;  when  the  opinion 
was  repressed,  he  could  not  rest  without  drawing  it  out. 
'  Then,  you  think.  General,'  said  he,  '  that  some  explanation 
ought  to  have  been  made  ? ' 

'  No  matter  what  I  think,  Granville,  the  affair  is  yours.  If 
you  are  satisfied,  that  is  all  that  is  necessary.' 

Then  even,  because  left  on  their  own  point  of  suspension  to 
vibrate  freely,  the  diamond-scales  of  Beauclerc's  mind  began  to 
move,  from  some  nice,  unseen  cause  of  variation.     '  But,'  said 

345 


He  offered,  a-nd  she  took  his  offered  hayid.     '  I  tr-iist  entirely' 


HELEN 

he,   '  General  Clarendon,  no  one  can  judge  without  knowing 
facts.' 

'  So  I  apprehend,'  said  the  General. 

'  I  may  be  of  too  easy  faith,'  replied  Beauclerc.  [No  reply.] 
'  This  is  a  point  of  honour.'  [No  denial.]  '  My  dear  General, 
if  there  be  anything  which  weighs  with  you,  and  which  you 
know  and  I  do  not,  I  think,  as  my  friend  and  my  guardian, 
you  ought  to  tell  it  to  me.' 

'  Pardon  me,'  said  the  General,  turning  away  from  Beauclerc 
as  he  spoke,  and  striking  first  one  heel  of  his  boot  against  the 
scraper  at  the  hall-door,  then  the  other — '  pardon  me,  Granville, 
I  cannot  admit  you  to  be  a  better  judge  than  I  am  myself  of 
what  I  ought  to  do  or  not  to  do.' 

The  tone  was  dry  and  proud,  but  Beauclerc's  provoked 
imagination  conceived  it  to  be  also  mysterious  ;  the  scales  of 
his  mind  vibrated  again,  but  he  had  said  he  would  trust — trust 
entirely,  and  he  would  :  yet  he  could  not  succeed  in  banishing 
all  doubt,  till  an  idea  started  into  his  head — 'That  writing 
was  Lady  Cecilia's  !  I  thought  so  at  the  first  moment,  and  I 
let  it  go  again.  It  is  hers,  and  Helen  is  keeping  her  secret : — 
but  could  Lady  Cecilia  be  so  ungenerous — so  treacherous  ? ' 
However,  he  had  declared  he  would  ask  no  questions  ;  he  was 
a  man  of  honour,  and  he  would  ask  none — none  even  of  himself 
—  a  resolution  which  he  found  it  surprisingly  easy  to  keep 
when  the  doubt  concerned  only  Lady  Cecilia.  Whenever  the 
thought  crossed  his  mind,  he  said  to  himself,  '  I  will  ask 
nothing — suspect  nobody ;  but  if  it  is  Lady  Cecilia's  affair,  it 
is  all  the  more  generous  in  Helen.'  And  so,  secure  in  this 
explanation,  though  he  never  allowed  to  himself  that  he 
admitted  it,  his  trust  in  Helen  was  easy  and  complete,  and  his 
passion  for  her  increased  every  hour. 

But  Lady  Cecilia  was  disturbed  even  by  the  perfect  confi- 
dence and  happiness  of  Beauclerc's  manner  towards  Helen. 
She  could  not  but  fear  that  he  had  guessed  the  truth  ;  and  it 
seemed  as  if  everything  which  happened  tended  to  confirm  him 
in  his  suspicions  ;  for,  whenever  the  mind  is  strongly  interested 
on  any  subject,  something  alluding  to  it  seems  wonderfully, 
yet  accidentally,  to  occur  in  everything  that  we  read,  or  hear 
in  common  conversation  ;  and  so  it  now  happened :  things 
were  continually  said  by  persons  wholly  unconcerned,  which 
seemed  to  bear  upon  her  secret.     Lady  Cecilia  frequently  felt 

347 


HELEN 

this  with  pangs  of  confusion,  shame,  and  remorse  ;  and,  though 
Beauclerc  did  not  watch,  or  play  the  spy  upon  her  countenance, 
he  could  not  help  sometimes  observing  the  flitting  colour — the 
guilty  changes  of  countenance — the  assumed  composure  :  that 
mind,  once  so  artless,  began  to  be  degraded — her  spirits  sank  ; 
she  felt  that  she  '  had  lost  the  sunshine  of  a  soul  without  a 
mystery.' 

The  day  fixed  for  the  marriage  approached  ;  Lady  Cecilia 
had  undertaken  the  superintendence  of  the  trousseau,  and 
Felicie  was  in  anxious  expectation  of  its  arrival.  Helen  had 
written  to  the  CoUingwoods  to  announce  the  intended  event, 
asking  for  the  good  bishop's  sanction,  as  her  guardian,  and 
regretting  that  he  could  not  perform  the  ceremony.  She  had 
received  from  Lady  Davenant  a  few  lines,  written  just  before 
she  sailed,  warm  with  all  the  enthusiasm  of  her  ardent  heart, 
and  full  of  expectation  that  Helen's  lot  would  be  one  of  the 
happiest  this  world  could  afford.  All  seemed  indeed  to  smile 
upon  her  prospects,  and  the  only  clouds  which  dimmed  the 
sunshine  were  Cecilia's  insincerity,  and  her  feeling  that  the 
General  thought  her  acting  unhandsomely  and  unwisely  towards 
his  ward  ;  but  she  consoled  herself  with  the  thought  that  he 
could  not  judge  of  what  he  did  not  know,  that  she  did  not 
deserve  his  displeasure,  that  Granville  was  satisfied,  and  if  he 
was,  why  should  not  General  Clarendon  be  so  too  ?  Much  more 
serious,  however,  was  the  pain  she  felt  on  Cecilia's  account. 
She  reproached  herself  with  betraying  the  trust  Lady  Davenant 
had  reposed  in  her.  That  dreadful  prophecy  seemed  now 
accomplishing  :  Cecilia's  natural  generosity,  that  for  which 
Helen  had  ever  most  loved  and  admired  her,  the  brightest, 
fairest  parts  of  her  character,  seemed  failing  now  ;  what  could 
be  more  selfish  than  Cecilia's  present  conduct  towards  herself, 
more  treacherous  to  her  noble-minded,  her  confiding  husband  ? 
The  openness,  the  perfect  unreserve,  between  the  two  friends, 
was  no  longer  what  it  had  been.  Helen,  however,  felt  the 
constraint  between  them  the  less  as  she  was  almost  constantly 
with  Beauclerc,  and  in  her  young  happiness  she  hoped  all 
would  be  right.  Cecilia  would  tell  the  General,  and  they  would 
be  as  intimate,  as  affectionate,  as  they  had  ever  been. 

One  morning  General  Clarendon,  stopping  Cecilia  as  she 
was  coming  down  to  breakfast,  announced  that  he  was  obliged 
to  set  off  instantly  for  London,  on  business  which  could  not 

348 


HELEN 

be  delayed,  and  that  she  must  settle  with  Miss  Stanley  whether 
they  would  accompany  him  or  remain  at  Clarendon  Park. 
He  did  not  know,  he  said,  how  long  he  might  be  detained. 

Cecilia  was  astonished,  and  excessively  curious  ;  she  tried 
her  utmost  address  to  discover  what  was  the  nature  of  his 
business,  in  vain.  All  that  remained  was  to  do  as  he  required 
without  more  words.  He  left  the  room,  and  Cecilia  decided 
at  once  that  they  had  better  accompany  him.  She  dreaded 
some  delay ;  she  thought  that,  if  the  General  went  alone  to 
town,  he  might  be  detained  Heaven  knows  how  long ;  and 
though  the  marriage  must  be  postponed  at  all  events,  yet  if 
they  went  with  the  General,  the  ceremony  might  be  performed 
in  town  as  well  as  at  Clarendon  Park ;  and  she  with  some 
difficulty  convinced  Helen  of  this.  Beauclerc  feared  nothing 
but  delay.  They  were  to  go.  Lady  Cecilia  announced  their 
decision  to  the  General,  who  immediately  set  off,  and  the  others 
in  a  few  hours  followed  him. 


CHAPTER   XXXV 

'  In  my  youth,  and  through  the  prime  of  manhood,  I  never  entered 
London  without  feehngs  of  hope  and  pleasure.  It  was  to  me  the  grand 
theatre  of  intellectual  activity,  the  field  for  every  species  of  enterprise  and 
exertion,  the  metropolis  of  the  world,  of  business,  thought,  and  action. 
There,  I  was  sure  to  find  friends  and  companions,  to  hear  the  voice  of 
encouragement  and  praise.  There,  society  of  the  most  refined  sort  offered 
daily  its  banquets  to  the  mind,  and  new  objects  of  interest  and  ambition 
were  constantly  exciting  attention  either  in  poUtics,  hterature,  or  science. ' 

These  feehngs,  so  well  described  by  a  man  of  genius,  have 
probably  been  felt  more  or  less  by  most  young  men  who  have 
within  them  any  consciousness  of  talent,  or  any  of  that  enthu- 
siasm, that  eager  desire  to  have  or  to  give  sympathy,  which, 
especially  in  youth,  characterises  noble  natures.  But  after 
even  one  or  two  seasons  in  a  great  metropolis  these  feehngs 
often  change  long  before  they  are  altered  by  age.  Granville 
Beauclerc  had  already  persuaded  himself  that  he  now  detested, 
as  much  as  he  had  at  first  been  delighted  with,  a  London  life. 
From  his  metaphysical  habits  of  mind,  and  from  the  sensibility 
of  his  temper,  he  had  been  too  soon  disgusted  by  that  sort  of 

349 


HELEN 

general  politeness  which,  as  he  said,  takes  up  the  time  and 
place  of  real  friendship ;  and  as  for  the  intellectual  pleasures, 
they  were,  he  said,  too  superficial  for  him ;  and  his  notions  of 
independence,  too,  were  at  this  time  quite  incompatible  with 
the  conventional  life  of  a  great  capital.  His  present  wish  was 
to  live  all  the  year  round  in  the  country,  with  the  woman  he 
loved,  and  in  the  society  of  a  few  chosen  friends.  Helen  quite 
agreed  with  him  in  his  taste  for  the  country ;  she  had  scarcely 
ever  known  any  other  life,  and  yet  had  always  been  happy ; 
and  whatever  youthful  curiosity  had  been  awakened  in  her 
mind  as  to  the  pleasures  of  London  had  been  now  absorbed 
by  stronger  and  more  tender  feelings.  Her  fate  in  life,  she 
felt,  was  fixed,  and  wherever  the  man  she  loved  wished  to 
reside,  that,  she  felt,  must  be  her  choice.  With  these  feelings 
they  arrived  at  General  Clarendon's  delightful  house  in  town. 

Helen's  apartment,  and  Cecilia's,  were  on  different  floors, 
and  had  no  communication  with  each  other.  It  was  of  little 
consequence,  as  their  stay  in  town  was  to  be  but  short,  yet 
Helen  could  not  help  observing  that  Ceciha  did  not  express 
any  regret  at  it,  as  formerly  she  would  have  done  ;  it  seemed 
a  symptom  of  declining  affection,  of  which  even  the  slightest 
indication  was  marked  and  keenly  felt  by  Helen,  the  more  so 
because  she  had  anticipated  that  such  must  be  the  consequence 
of  all  that  had  passed  between  them,  and  there  was  now  no 
remedy. 

Among  the  first  morning  visitors  admitted  were  Lady 
Castlefort  and  Lady  Katrine  Hawksby.  They  did  not,  as  it 
struck  Cecilia,  seem  surprised  to  see  that  Miss  Stanley  was 
JVIiss  Stanley  still,  though  the  day  for  the  marriage  had  been 
announced  in  all  the  papers  as  fixed  ;  but  they  did  seem  now 
full  of  curiosity  to  know  how  it  had  come  to  pass,  and  there 
was  rather  too  apparent  a  hope  that  something  was  going 
v^Tong.  Their  first  inquisitive  look  was  met  by  Lady  Cecilia's 
careless  glance  in  reply,  which  said  better  than  words  could 
express,  '  Nothing  the  matter,  do  not  flatter  yourselves.'  Then 
her  expertness  at  general  answers  which  give  no  information 
completely  baffled  the  two  curious  impertinents.  They  could 
only  learn  that  the  day  for  the  marriage  was  not  fixed,  that  it 
could  not  be  definitively  named  till  some  business  should  be 
settled  by  the  General.  Law  business  they  supposed,  of  course. 
Lady  Cecilia  '  knew  nothing  about  it.      Lawyers  are  such  pro- 

35° 


0^^ 


Her  experiness  at  general  answers  which  give  no  in/onnaiion 
completely  haffled  the  two. 


HELEN 

yoking  wretches,  with  their  fast  bind  fast  find.  Such  an  un- 
conscionable length  of  time  as  they  do  take  for  their  parchment 
doings,  heeding  nought  of  that  Uttle  impatient  flapper  Cupid.' 

Certain  that  Lady  Cecilia  was  only  playing  with  their  curi- 
osity, yet  unable  to  circumvent  her,  Lady  Katrine  changed  the 
conversation,  and  Lady  Castlefort  preferred  a  prayer,  which 
was,  she  said,  the  chief  object  of  her  visit,  that  Lady  Cecilia 
and  Miss  Stanley  would  come  to  her  on  Monday  ;  she  was  to 
have  a  few  friends — a  very  small  party,  and  independently  of 
the  pleasure  she  should  have  in  seeing  them,  it  would  be  ad- 
vantageous perhaps  to  Miss  Stanley,  as  Lady  Castlefort,  in  her 
softest  voice,  added,  '  For  from  the  marriage  being  postponed 
even  for  a  few  days,  people  might  talk,  and  Mr.  Beauclerc  and 
Miss    Stanley    appearing    together    would    prevent    anybody's 

thinking  there  was  any  little Nothing  so  proper  now  as 

for  a  young  lady  to  appear  with  her  fttttir;  so  I  shall  expect 
you,  my  dear  Cecilia,  and  Miss  Stanley,' — and  so  saying,  she 
departed.  Helen's  objections  were  all  overruled,  and  when 
the  engagement  was  made  known  to  Beauclerc,  he  shrugged, 
and  shrank,  and  submitted  ;  observing,  '  that  all  men,  and  all 
women,  must,  from  the  moment  they  come  within  the  precincts 
of  London  life,  give  up  their  time  and  their  will  to  an  imaginary 
necessity  of  going  when  we  do  not  like  it,  where  we  do  not 
wish,  to  see  those  whom  we  have  no  desire  to  see,  and  who 
do  not  care  if  they  were  never  to  see  us  again,  except  for  the 
sake  of  their  own  reputation  of  playing  well  their  own  parts  in 
the  grand  farce  of  mock  civility.'  Helen  was  sorry  to  have 
joined  in  making  an  engagement  for  him  which  he  seemed  so 
much  to  dislike.  But  Lady  Cecilia,  laughing,  maintained  that 
half  his  reluctance  was  affectation,  and  the  other  half  a  lover- 
like spirit  of  monopoly,  in  which  he  should  not  be  indulged, 
and  instead  of  pretending  to  be  indifferent  to  what  the  world 
might  think,  he  ought  to  be  proud  to  show  Helen  as  a  proof 
of  his  taste. 

In  dressing  Helen  this  night,  Felicie,  excited  by  her  lady's 
exhortations,  displayed  her  utmost  skill.  Mademoiselle  Felicie 
had  a  certain  petite  niHaphysique  de  toilette,  of  which  she  was 
justly  vain.  She  could  talk,  and  as  much  to  the  purpose  as 
most  people,  of  Ic  ge7ire  classiqice,  and  le  genre  romantique,  of 
the  different  styles  of  dress  that  suit  different  styles  of  face  ; 
and  while  '  she  worked  and  wondered  at  the  work  she  made,' 

352 


HELEN 

she  threw  out  from  time  to  time  her  ideas  on  the  subject  to 
form  the  taste  of  Helen's  little  maid,  Rose,  who,  in  mute  atten- 
tion, held  the  Hght  and  assiduously  presented  pins.  '  Not  your 
pin  so  fast  one  after  de  other.  Miss  Rose — Tenez  !  tenez!' 
cried  mademoiselle.  'You  tink  in  England  alway  too  much 
of  your  pin  in  your  dress,  too  little  of  our  taste — too  httle  of 
our  elegance,  too  much  of  your  what  you  call  tidiness,  or  God 
know  what !  But  never  you  mind  dat  so  much,  Miss  Rose  ; 
and  you  not  prim  up  your  little  mouth,  but  listen  to  me. 
Never  you  put  in  one  pin  before  you  ask  yourself.  Miss  Rose, 
what  for  I  do  it  ?  In  every  toilette  that  has  taste  there  is 
above  all — tenez — a  character — a  sentiment  to  be  support ; 
suppose  your  lady  is  to  be  superbe,  or  she  will  rather  be 
Elegante,  or  charmante,  or  intdressante,  or  distingude — well, 
dat  is  all  ver"  well,  and  you  dress  to  that  id^e,  one  or  oder — 
well,  very  well — but  none  of  your  wat  you  call  odd.  No,  no, 
never.  Miss  Rose — dat  is  not  style  noble  ;  'twill  only  become 
de  petit  minois  of  your  English  originale.  I  wash  my  hand  of 
dat  always.'  The  toilette  superbe  mademoiselle  held  to  be  the 
easiest  of  all  those  which  she  had  named  with  favour,  it  may 
be  accomplished  by  any  common  hands ;  but  head  is  requisite 
to  reach  the  toilette  distinguee.  The  toilette  superbe  requires 
only  cost — a  toilette  distinguee  demands  care.  There  was  a 
happiness  as  well  as  care  in  Felicie's  genius  for  dress,  which, 
ever  keeping  the  height  of  fashion  in  view,  never  lost  sight  of 
nature,  adapting,  selecting,  combining  to  form  a  perfect  whole, 
in  which  art  itself  concealed  appeared  only,  as  she  expressed 
it,  in  the  sublime  of  simplicity.  In  the  midst  of  all  her  talking, 
however,  she  went  on  with  the  essential  business,  and  as  she 
finished,  pronounced  '  Prdcepte  commence,  exemple  acheve.' 

When  they  arrived  at  Lady  Castlefort's,  Lady  Cecilia  was 
surprised  to  find  a  line  of  carriages,  and  noise,  and  crowds  of 
footmen.  How  was  this  ?  She  had  understood  that  it  was  to 
be  one  of  those  really  small  parties,  those  select  reunions  of 
some  few  of  the  high  and  mighty  families  who  chance  to  be  in 
town  before  Christmas.  '  But  how  is  this  ? '  Lady  Cecilia 
repeated  to  herself  as  she  entered  the  hall,  amazed  to  find  it 
blazing  with  light,  a  crowd  on  the  stairs,  and  in  the  anteroom 
a  crowd,  as  she  soon  felt,  of  an  unusual  sort.  It  was  not  the 
soft  crush  of  aristocracy,  they  found  hard  unaccustomed  citizen 
elbows,  —  strange  round-shouldered,  square-backed  men  and 
2  A  353 


HELEN 

women,  so  over-dressed,  so  bejewelled,  so  coarse — shocking  to 
see,  impossible  to  avoid  ;  not  one  figure,  one  face.  Lady  Cecilia 
had  ever  seen  before  ;  till  at  last,  from  the  midst  of  the  throng 
emerged  a  fair  form — a  being  as  it  seemed  of  other  mould, 
certainly  of  different  caste.  It  was  one  of  Cecilia's  former 
intimates  —  Lady  Emily  Greville,  whom  she  had  not  seen 
since  her  return  from  abroad.  Joyfully  they  met,  and  stopped 
and  talked  ;  she  was  hastening  away,  Lady  Emily  said,  '  after 
having  been  an  hour  on  duty  ;  Lady  Castlefort  had  made  it  a 
point  with  her  to  stay  after  dinner,  she  had  dined  there,  and 
had  stayed,  and  now  guard  was  relieved.' 

'  But  who  are  all  these  people  ?  What  is  all  this,  my  dear 
Lady  Emily  ? '  asked  Cecilia. 

'  Do  not  you  know  ?  Louisa  has  trapped  you  into  coming 
then,  to-night,  without  telling  you  how  it  is  ? ' 

'  Not  a  word  did  she  tell  me,  I  expected  to  meet  only  our 
own  world.' 

'  A  very  different  world  you  perceive  this  !  A  sort  of  farce 
this  is  to  the  "  Double  Distress,"  a  comedy ; — in  short,  one  of 
Lord  Castlefort's  brothers  is  going  to  stand  for  the  City,  and 
citizens  and  citoyennes  must  be  propitiated.  When  an  election 
is  in  the  case  all  other  things  give  place  :  and,  besides,  he  has 
just  married  the  daughter  of  some  amazing  merchant,  worth  I 
don't  know  how  many  plums  ;  so  le  petit  Bossu,  who  is  proud 
of  his  brother,  for  he  is  reckoned  the  genius  of  the  family, 
made  it  a  point  with  Louisa  to  do  this.  She  put  up  her  eye- 
brows, and  stood  out  as  long  as  she  could,  but  Lord  Castlefort 
had  his  way,  for  he  holds  the  purse  you  know, — and  so  she 
was  forced  to  make  a  party  for  these  Goths  and  Vandals,  and 
of  course  she  thought  it  best  to  do  it  directly,  out  of  season, 
you  know,  when  nobody  will  see  it — and  she  consulted  me 
whether  it  should  be  large  or  small ;  I  advised  a  large  party, 
by  all  means,  as  crowded  as  possible.' 

'  Yes,  yes,  I  understand,'  said  Cecilia  ;  '  to  hide  the  shame 
in  the  multitude ;  vastly  well,  very  fair  all  this,  except  the 
trapping  us  into  it,  who  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.' 

'  Nothing  to  do  with  it  !  pardon  me,'  cried  Lady  Emily. 
'  It  could  not  have  been  done  without  us.  Entrapping  us  ! — 
do  not  you  understand  that  we  are  the  baits  to  the  traps  ? 
Bringing  those  animals  here,  wild  beasts  or  tame,  only  to  meet 
one  another,  would  have  been  "  doing  business  nohow."     We 

354 


HELEN 

are  what  they  are  "  come  for  to  see,"  or  to  have  it  to  say  that 
they  have  seen  the  Exclusives,  Exquisites,  or  Transcendentals, 
or  whatever  else  they  call  us.' 

'  Lady  Emily  Greville's  carriage  ! '  was  now  called  in  the 
anteroom. 

'  I  must  go,  but  first  make  me  known  to  your  friend  Miss 
Stanley,  you  see  I  know  her  by  instinct ' ;  but  '  Lady  Emily 
Greville's  carriage  ! '  now  resounded  reiteratedly,  and  gentle- 
men with  cloaks  stood  waiting,  and  as  she  put  hers  on.  Lady 
Emily  stooped  forward  and  whispered, 

'  I  do  not  believe  one  word  of  what  they  say  of  her,'  and 
she  was  off,  and  Lady  Cecilia  stood  for  an  instant  looking  after 
her,  and  considering  what  she  could  mean  by  those  last  words. 
Concluding,  however,  that  she  had  not  heard  aright,  or  had 
missed  some  intervening  name,  and  that  these  words,  in  short, 
could  not  possibly  apply  to  Helen,  Lady  Cecilia  turned  to  her, 
they  resumed  their  way  onward,  and  at  length  they  reached  the 
grand  reception-room. 

In  the  middle  of  that  brilliantly-lighted  saloon,  immediately 
under  the  centre  chandelier,  was  ample  verge  and  space  enough 
reserved  for  the  Mte  of  the  world  ;  circle  it  was  not,  nor  square, 
nor  form  regularly  defined,  yet  the  bounds  were  guarded. 
There  was  no  way  of  getting  to  the  farther  end  of  the  saloon, 
or  to  the  apartments  open  in  the  distance  beyond  it,  except  by 
passing  through  this  enclosed  space,  in  which  one  fair  entrance 
was  practicable,  and  one  ample  exit  full  in  view  on  the  opposite 
side.  Several  gentlemen  of  fashionable  bearing  held  the  out- 
posts of  this  privileged  place,  at  back  of  sofa,  or  side  of  fauteuil, 
stationary,  or  wandering  near.  Some  chosen  few  were  within  ; 
two  caryatides  gentlemen  leaned  one  on  each  side  of  the  fire- 
place, and  in  the  centre  of  the  rug  stood  a  remarkably  handsome 
man,  of  fine  figure,  perfectly  dressed,  his  whole  air  exquisitely 
scornful,  excruciatingly  miserable,  and  loftily  abstract.  'Twas 
wonderful,  'twas  strange,  'twas  passing  strange  !  how  one  so 
lost  to  all  sublunary  concerns,  so  far  above  the  follies  of  inferior 
mortals,  as  he  looked,  came  here — so  extremely  well  dressed 
too !  How  happened  it  ?  so  nauseating  the  whole,  as  he 
seemed,  so  wishing  that  the  business  of  the  world  were  done  ! 
With  half-closed  dreamy  eyelids  he  looked  silent  down  upon 
two  ladies  who  sat  opposite  to  him,  rallying,  abusing,  and 
admiring  him   to  his   vanity's   content.     They  gave  him  his 

35S 


HELEN 

choice  of  three  names,  I'Ennuye,  le  Frondeur,  or  le  Blasd. 
L'Ennuy^  ?  he  shook  his  head ;  too  common ;  he  would  have 
none  of  it.  Le  Frondeur  ?  no;  too  much  trouble  ;  he  shrugged 
his  abhorrence.  Le  Blas6,  he  allowed,  might  be  too  true. 
But  would  they  hazard  a  substantive  verb  ?  He  would  give 
them  four -and -twenty  hours  to  consider,  and  he  would  take 
twenty-four  himself  to  decide.  They  should  have  his  definitive 
to-morrow,  and  he  was  sliding  away,  but  Lady  Castlefort,  as 
he  passed  her,  cried,  '  Going,  Lord  Beltravers,  going  are  you  ? ' 
in  an  accent  of  surprise  and  disappointment ;  and  she  whispered, 
'  I  am  hard  at  work  here,  acting  receiver-general  to  these  City 
worthies  ;  and  you  do  not  pity  me — cruel ! '  and  she  looked 
up  with  languishing  eyes,  that  so  begged  for  sympathy.  He 
threw  upon  her  one  look  of  commiseration,  reproachful.  '  Pity 
you,  yes  !  But  why  will  you  do  these  things  ?  and  why  did 
you  bring  me  here  to  do  this  horrid  sort  of  work  ? '  and  he 
vanished. 

Lady  Cecilia  Clarendon  and  Miss  Stanley  now  appeared  in 
the  offing,  and  now  reached  the  straits  ;  Lady  Castlefort  rose 
with  vivacity  extraordinary,  and  went  forward  several  steps. 
'  Dear  Ceciha !  Miss  Stanley,  so  good !  Mr.  Beauclerc,  so 
happy  !  the  General  could  not .''  so  sorry  ! '  Then  with  hand 
pressed  on  hers,  '  Miss  Stanley,  so  kind  of  you  to  come.  Lady 
Grace,  give  me  leave — Miss  Stanley — Lady  Grace  Bland,'  and 
in  a  whisper,  '  Lord  Beltravers's  aunt.' 

Lady  Grace,  with  a  haughty  drawback  motion,  and  a  super- 
cilious arching  of  her  brows,  was  '  happy  to  have  the  honour.' 
Honour  nasally  prolonged,  and  some  guttural  sounds  followed, 
but  further  words,  if  words  they  were,  which  she  syllabled 
between  snuffling  and  mumbling,  were  utterly  unintelligible ; 
.^nd  Helen,  without  being  'very  happy,'  or  happy  at  all,  only 
returned  bend  for  bend. 

Lady  Cecilia  then  presented  her  to  a  group  of  sister  graces 
standing  near  the  sofas  of  mammas  and  chaperons — not  each 
a  different  grace,  but  similar  each,  indeed  upon  the  very  same 
identical  pattern  air  of  young-lady  fashion — well  bred,  and 
apparently  well  nurtured.  No  sooner  was  Miss  Stanley  made 
known  to  them  by  Lady  Cecilia,  than,  smiling  just  enough,  not 
a  muscle  too  much,  they  moved  ;  the  ranks  opened  softly,  but 
sufficiently,  and  Helen  was  in  the  group  ;  amongst  them,  but 
not  of  them  —  and  of  this  she  became  immediately  sensible, 

3S6 


Lady  Grace,  with  a.  haughty  drawback  motion,  and  a  supercilious  arching  0/ her 
hrows,  was  '  ha^py  to  have  the  honour,' 


HELEN 

though  without  knowing  how  or  why.  One  of  these  daughters 
had  had  expectations  last  season  from  having  been  frequently 
Mr.  Beauclerc's  partner,  and  the  mother  was  now  fanning  her- 
self opposite  to  him.  But  Helen  knew  nought  of  this  :  to  her 
all  was  apparently  soft,  smooth,  and  smiling.  While,  whenever 
any  of  the  unprivileged  multitude,  the  City  monsters,  passed 
near  this  high-bom,  high-bred  group,  they  looked  as  though 
the  rights  of  pride  were  infringed,  and,  smiling  scorn,  they 
dropped  from  half-closed  lips  such  syllables  of  withering  con- 
tempt as  they  thought  these  vulgar  victims  merited ;  careless 
if  they  heard  or  not,  rather  rejoicing  to  see  the  sufferers  wince 
beneath  the  wounds  which  they  inflicted  in  their  pride  and 
pomp  of  sway.  '  Pride  ! '  thought  Helen,  '  was  it  pride  ? '  If 
pride  it  was,  how  unlike  what  she  had  been  taught  to  consider 
the  proper  pride  of  aristocracy  ;  how  unlike  that  noble  sort 
which  she  had  seen,  admired,  and  loved  !  Helen  fancied  what 
Lady  Davenant  would  have  thought,  how  ignoble  ;  how  mean, 
how  vulgar,  she  would  have  considered  these  sneers  and  scoffs 
from  the  nobly  to  the  lowly  bom.  How  unworthy  of  their  rank 
and  station  in  society  !  They  who  ought  to  be  the  first  in 
courtesy,  because  the  first  in  place. 

As  these  thoughts  passed  rapidly  in  Helen's  mind,  she 
involuntarily  looked  towards  Beauclerc  ;  but  she  was  so  en- 
compassed by  her  present  companions  that  she  could  not 
discover  him.  Had  she  been  able  to  see  his  countenance, 
she  would  have  read  in  it  at  once  how  exactly  he  was  at 
that  instant  feeling  with  her.  More  indignant  than  herself, 
for  his  high  chivalrous  devotion  to  the  fair  could  ill  endure 
the  readiness  with  which  the  gentlemen,  attendants  at  otto- 
man or  sofa,  lent  their  aid  to  mock  and  to  embarrass  every 
passing  party  of  the  City  tribe,  mothers  and  their  hapless 
daughter-train. 

At  this  instant  Lady  Bearcroft,  who,  if  she  had  not  good 
breeding,  certainly  had  good-nature,  came  up  to  Beauclerc, 
and  whispered  earnestly,  and  with  an  expression  of  strong 
interest  in  her  countenance,  'As  you  love  her,  do  not  heed 
one  word  you  hear  anybody  say  this  night,  for  it's  all  on 
purpose  to  vex  you ;  and  I  am  certain  as  you  are  it's  all 
false — all  envy.  And  there  she  goes,  Envy  herself  in  the 
black  jaundice,'  continued  she,  looking  at  Lady  Katrine 
Hawksby,  who  passed  at  that  instant. 

3S8 


HELEN 

'  Good  Heavens  ! '  cried  Beauclerc,  '  what  can ' 

'  No,  no,'  interrupted  Lady  Bearcroft,  '  no,  no,  do  not  ask 
— better  not ;  best  you  should  know  no  more — only  keep  your 
temper  whatever  happens.  Go  you  up  the  hill,  like  the  man 
in  the  tale,  and  let  the  black  stones  bawl  themselves  hoarse 
— dumb.  Go  you  on,  and  seize  your  pretty  singing  thinking 
bird — the  sooner  the  better.     So  fare  you  well.' 

And  she  disappeared  in  the  crowd.  Beauclerc,  to  whom 
she  was  perfectly  unknown  (though  she  had  made  him  out), 
totally  at  a  loss  to  imagine  what  interest  she  could  take  in  Helen 
or  in  him,  or  what  she  could  possibly  mean,  rather,  inclined  to 
suppose  she  was  a  mad  woman,  and  he  forgot  everything  else 
as  he  saw  Helen  with  Lady  Cecilia  emerging  from  the  bevy  of 
young  ladies  and  approaching  him.  They  stopped  to  speak  to 
some  acquaintance,  and  he  tried  to  look  at  Helen  as  if  he  were 
an  indifferent  spectator,  and  to  fancy  what  he  should  think  of 
her  if  he  saw  her  now  for  the  first  time.  He  thought  that  he 
should  be  struck  not  only  with  her  beauty,  but  with  her  grace- 
ful air — her  ingenuous  countenance,  so  expressive  of  the  fresh- 
ness of  natural  sensibility.  She  was  exquisitely  well  dressed 
too,  and  that,  as  Felicie  observed,  goes  for  much,  even  with 
your  most  sensible  men.  Altogether  he  was  charmed,  whether 
considering  her  as  with  the  eyes  of  an  unbiassed  stranger  or 
with  his  own.  And  all  he  heard  confirmed,  and,  although  he 
would  not  have  allowed  it,  strengthened  his  feelings.  He 
heard  it  said  that,  though  there  were  some  as  handsome  women 
in  the  room,  there  were  none  so  interesting ;  and  some  of  the 
young  men  added,  '  As  lovely  as  Lady  Blanche,  but  with  more 
expression.'  A  citizen,  with  whom  Beauclerc  could  have 
shaken  hands  on  the  spot,  said,  '  There's  one  of  the  high- 
breds,  now,  that's  well-bred  too.'  In  the  height  of  the  rap- 
ture of  his  feelings  he  overtook  Lady  Cecilia,  who,  telling  him 
that  they  were  going  on  to  another  room,  delivered  Helen  to 
his  care,  and  herself  taking  the  arm  of  some  ready  gentleman, 
they  proceeded  as  fast  as  they  could  through  the  crowd  to  the 
other  end  of  the  room. 

This  was  the  first  time  Helen  had  ever  seen  Lady  Cecilia 
in  public,  where  certainly  she  appeared  to  great  advantage. 
Not  thinking  about  herself,  but  ever  willing  to  be  pleased  ;  so 
bright,  so  gay,  she  was  sunshine  which  seemed  to  spread  its 
beams  wherever  she  turned.     And  she  had  something  to  say 

359 


HELEN 

to  everybody,  or  to  answer  quick  to  whatever  they  said  or 
looked,  happy  always  in  the  a  propos  of  the  moment.  Little 
there  might  be,  perhaps,  in  what  she  said,  but  there  was  all 
that  was  wanted,  just  what  did  for  the  occasion.  In  others 
there  often  appeared  a  distress  for  something  to  say,  or  a  dead 
dulness  of  countenance  opposite  to  you.  From  others,  a  too 
fast  hazarded  broadside  of  questions  and  answers — glads  and 
sorrys  in  chain-shots  that  did  no  execution,  because  there  was 
no  good  aim — -congratulations  and  condolences  playing  at 
cross  purposes.  These  were  mistakes,  misfortunes,  which 
could  never  occur  in  Lady  Cecilia's  natural  grace  and  acquired 
tact  of  manner.  Helen  was  amused,  as  she  followed  her,  in 
watching  the  readiness  with  which  she  knew  how  to  exchange 
the  necessary  counters  in  the  commerce  of  society :  she  was 
amused,  till  her  attention  was  distracted  by  hearing,  as  she  and 
Beauclerc  passed,  the  whispered  words — '  /  prontessi  sposi 
— look — La  belle  fiancee.'  These  words  were  repeated  as  they 
went  on,  and  Lady  Cecilia  heard  some  one  say,  '  I  thought  it 
was  broken  off ;  that  was  all  slander  then  ? '  She  recollected 
Lady  Emily's  words,  and,  terrified  lest  Helen  should  hear 
more  of — she  knew  not  what,  she  began  to  talk  to  her  as  fast 
as  she  could,  while  they  were  stopped  in  the  doorway  by  a 
crowd.  She  succeeded  for  the  moment  with  Helen  ;  she  had 
not  heard  the  last  speech,  and  she  could  not,  as  long  as  Lady 
Cecilia  spoke,  hear  more  ;  but  Beauclerc  again  distinguished 
the  words  '  Belle  fianc'ee ' ;  and  as  he  turned  to  discover  the 
speaker,  a  fat  matron  near  him  asked,  '  Who  is  it  ? '  and  the 
daughter  answered,  '  It  is  that  handsome  girl,  with  the  white 
rose  in  her  hair.'  '  Hush  ! '  said  the  brother,  on  whose  arm 
she  leaned  ;  '  Handsome  is  that  handsome  does.' 

Handsome  does  !  thought  Beauclerc  :  and  the  mysterious 
warning  of  his  unknown  friend  recurred  to  him.  He  was 
astonished,  alarmed,  furious  ;  but  the  whispering  party  had 
passed  on,  and  just  then  Lady  Cecilia  descrying  Mr.  Churchill 
in  the  distance,  she  made  towards  him.  Conversation  sure  to 
be  had  in  abundance  from  him.  He  discerned  them  from  afar, 
and  was  happily  prepared  both  with  a  ready  bit  of  wit  and 
with  a  proper  greeting.  His  meeting  with  Lady  Cecilia  was, 
of  course,  just  the  same  as  ever.  He  took  it  up  where  he  left 
off  at  Clarendon  Park  ;  no  difference,  no  hiatus.  His  bow  to 
Beauclerc  and  Helen,  to  Helen  and  Beauclerc,  joined  in  one 

360 


HELEN 

little  sweep  of  a  congratulatory  motion,  was  incomparable  :  it 
said  everything  that  a  bow  could  say,  and  more.  It  implied 
such  a  happy  freedom  from  envy  or  jealousy  ;  such  a  polite 
acquiescence  in  the  decrees  of  fate  ;  such  a  philosophic  indiffer- 
ence ;  such  a  cool  sarcastic  superiority  to  the  event ;  and  he 
began  to  Lady  Cecilia  with  one  of  his  prepared  impromptus  : 
'  At  the  instant  your  ladyship  came  up,  I  am  afraid  I  started, 
actually  in  a  trance,  I  do  believe.  Methought  I  was — where 
do  you  think  ?     In  the  temple  of  Jaggernaut.' 

'  Why  ? '  said  Lady  Cecilia,  smiling. 

'  Methought,'  continued  Horace,  '  that  I  was  in  the  tem- 
ple of  Jaggernaut — that  one  strange  day  in  the  year,  when 
all  castes  meet,  when  all  distinction  of  castes  and  ranks  is  for- 
gotten— the  abomination  of  mixing  them  all  together  permitted, 
for  their  sins  no  doubt — high  caste  and  low,  from  the  aban- 
doned Pariah  to  the  Brahmin  prince,  from  their  Billingsgate 
and  Farringdon  Without,  suppose,  up  to  their  St.  James's 
Street  and  Grosvenor  Square,  mingle,  mingle,  ye  who  mingle 
may,  white  spirits  and  gray,  black  spirits  and  blue.  Now, 
pray,  look  around :  is  not  this  Jaggernaut  night  with  Lady 
Castlefort  ? ' 

'  And  you,'  said  Lady  Cecilia  ;  '  are  not  you  the  great 
Jaggernaut  himself,  driving  over  all  in  your  triumphant  chariot 
of  sarcasm,  and  crushing  all  the  victims  in  your  way  ? ' 

This  took  place  with  Horace  ;  it  put  him  in  spirits,  in  train, 
and  he  fired  away  at  Lady  Castlefort,  whom  he  had  been 
flattering  d.  Toutrance  five  minutes  before. 

'  I  so  admire  that  acting  of  sacrifice  in  your  belle  cousine 
to-night !  Pasta  herself  could  not  do  it  better.  There  is  a 
look  of  "  Oh,  ye  just  gods  !  what  a  victim  am  I  ! "  and  with 
those  upturned  eyes  so  charming  !  Well,  and  seriously  it  is  a 
sad  sacrifice.  ^Fathers  have  flinty  hearts  by  parental  prescrip- 
tion; but  husbands — petit  Bossus  especially — should  have 
mercy  for  their  own  sakes  ;  they  should  not  strain  their  marital 
power  too  far.' 

'  But,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  '  it  is  curious  that  one  bom  and 
bred  such  an  ultra  exclusive  as  Louisa  Castlefort  should  be 
obliged  after  her  marriage  immediately  to  open  her  doors  and 
turn  ultra  liberale,  or  an  universal  suffragist — all  in  conse- 
quence of  these  mhalliances.' 

'  True,  true,'  said  Churchill,  with  a  solemn,  pathetic  shake 
361 


HELEN 

of  the  head.  '  Gentlemen  and  noblemen  should  consider  be- 
fore they  make  these  low  matches  to  save  their  studs,  or  their 
souls,  or  their  entailed  estates.  Whatever  be  the  necessity, 
there  can  be  no  apology  for  outraging  all  biens^ance.  Neces- 
sity has  no  law,  but  it  should  have  some  decency.  Think  of 
bringing  upon  a  foohsh  elder  brother — But  we  won't  be 
personal.' 

'  No,  don't,  pray,  Horace,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  moving  on. 

'  But  think,  only  think,  my  dear  Lady  Cecilia  ;  think  what 
it  must  be  to  be  '^  How-d'ye-doed,"  and  to  be  "  dear  sistered  " 
by  such  bodies  as  these  in  public' 

'  Sad  !   sad  ! '  said  Lady  Cecilia. 

'  The  old  French  nobility,'  continued  Churchill,  '  used  to 
call  these  low  money -matches  me  tire  du  fumier  sur  nos 
terres.' 

'  Dirty  work  at  best,'  said  Lady  Cecilia. 

'  But  still,'  said  Horace,  'it  might  be  done  with  decency  if 
not  with  majesty.' 

'  But  in  the  midst  of  all  this,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  '  1  want 
some  ice  very  much  for  myself,  and  for  Helen  more.' 

'  I  have  a  notion  we  shall  find  some  here,'  replied  he,  '  if  you 
will  come  on  this  way — in  this  sanctum  sanctorum  of  Lady 
Katrine's.' 

He  led  them  on  to  a  little  inner  apartment,  where,  as  he 
said.  Lady  Katrine  Hawksby  and  her  set  do  always  scandal 
take,  and  sometimes  tea.  '  Tea  and  ponch,'  continued  he,  '  you 
know,  in  London  now  is  quite  &  la  Frangaise,  and  it  is  astonish- 
ing to  me,  who  am  but  a  man,  what  strong  punch  ladies  can 
take.' 

'  Only  when  it  is  iced,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  smihng. 

'  Be  it  so,'  said  he,  — '  very  refreshing  ice,  and  more  re- 
freshing scandal,  and  here  we  have  both  in  perfection.  Scandal 
hot  and  hot,  and  ice  cold  and  cold.' 

By  this  time  they  had  reached  the  entrance  to  what  he 
called  Lady  Katrine's  sanctum  sajzctorum,  where  she  had 
gathered  round  the  iced  punch  and  tea-table  a  select  party, 
whom  she  had  drawn  together  with  the  promise  of  the  other 
half  of  a  half-published  report, — a  report  in  which  '  I  promessi 
sposi'  and  ^  La  belle  fiancee'  were  implicated  ! 

'  Stop  here  one  moment,'  cried  Churchill,  '  one  moment 
longer.     Let  us  see  before  we  are   seen.     Look  in,  look  in, 

362 


HELEN 

pray,  at  this  group.  Lady  Katrine  herself  on  the  sofa,  finger 
up  —  holding  forth ;  and  the  deaf  old  woman  stretching 
forward  to  hear,  while  the  other,  with  the  untasted  punch, 
sits  suspended  in  curiosity.  "  What  can  it  be  ? "  she  says,  or 
seems  to  say.  Now,  now,  see  the  pretty  one's  hands  and  eyes 
uplifted,  and  the  ugly  one,  with  that  look  of  horror,  is  ex- 
claiming, "  You  don't  say  so,  my  dear  Lady  Katrine  !  "  Admir- 
able creatures !  Cant  and  scandal  personified  !  I  wish 
Wilkie  were  here — worth  any  money  to  him.' 

'  And  he  should  call  it  "  The  scandal  party," '  said  Lady 
Cecilia.  '  He  told  me  he  never  could  venture  upon  a  subject 
unless  he  could  give  it  a  good  name.' 

At  this  moment  Lady  Katrine,  having  finished  her  story, 
rose,  and  awaking  from  the  abstraction  of  malice,  she  looked  up 
and  saw  Helen  and  Lady  Cecilia,  and,  as  she  came  forward, 
Churchill  whispered  between  them,  '  Now — now  we  are  going 
comfortably  to  enjoy,  no  doubt,  Madame  de  Sevign^'s  pleasure 
de  mal  dire  du  prochain,  at  the  right  hour  too.' 

Churchill  left  them  there.  Lady  Katrine  welcoming  her 
victims — her  unsuspicious  victims — he  slid  off  to  the  friends 
round  the  tea-table  to  learn  from  '  Cant '  what  '  Scandal '  had 
been  telling.  Beauclerc  was  gone  to  inquire  for  the  carriage. 
The  instant  Helen  appeared,  all  eyes  were  fixed  upon  her,  and 
'■  Belle  fiancee''  was  murmured  round,  and  Cecilia  heard — '  He's 
much  to  be  pitied.' 

At  this  moment  Lord  Castlefort  went  up  to  Helen  ;  she 
had  always  been  a  favourite  of  his  ;  he  was  grateful  to  her  for 
her  constant  kindness  to  him,  and,  peevish  though  the  little 
man  might  be,  he  had  a  good  heart,  and  he  showed  it  now  by 
instantly  taking  Helen  out  of  the  midst  of  the  starers,  and 
begging  her  opinion  upon  a  favourite  picture  of  his,  a  Madonna. 
Was  it  a  Raffaelle,  or  was  it  not  ?  He  and  Mr.  Churchill,  he 
said,  were  at  issue  about  it.  In  short,  no  matter  what  he 
said,  it  engrossed  Helen's  attention,  so  that  she  could  not  hear 
anything  that  passed,  and  could  not  be  seen  by  the  starers  ; 
and  he  detained  her  in  conversation  till  Beauclerc  came  to  say 
— '  The  carriage  is  ready,  Lady  Cecilia  is  impatient.'  Lord 
Castlefort  opened  a  door  that  led  at  once  to  the  staircase,  so 
that  they  had  not  to  recross  all  the  rooms,  but  got  out 
immediately.  The  smallest  service  merits  thanks,  and  Helen 
thanked  Lord  Castlefort  by  a  look  which  he  appreciated. 

363 


HELEN 

Even  in  the  few  words  which  Beauclerc  had  said  as  he 
announced  the  carriage,  she  had  perceived  that  he  was  agitated, 
and,  as  he  attended  her  in  silence  down  the  stairs,  his  look 
was  grave  and  preoccupied  ;  she  saw  he  was  displeased,  and 
she  thought  he  was  displeased  with  her.  When  he  had  put 
them  into  the  carriage,  he  wished  them  good-night. 

'  Are  not  you  coming  with  us  ? '  cried  Lady  Cecilia. 

'  No,  he  thanked  her,  he  had  rather  walk,  and,'  he  added 
— '  I  shall  not  see  you  at  breakfast — I  am  engaged.' 

'  Home  ! '  said  Lady  Cecilia,  drawing  up  the  glass  with  a 
jerk. 

Helen  looked  out  anxiously.  Beauclerc  had  turned  away, 
but  she  caught  one  more  glance  of  his  face  as  the  lamp  flared 

upon  it — she  saw,  and  she  was  sure  that '  Something  is 

very  much  the  matter — I  am  certain  of  it.' 

'  Nonsense,  my  dear  Helen,'  said  Lady  Cecilia  ;  '  the  matter 
is  that  he  is  tired  to  death,  as  I  am  sure  I  am.' 

'There's  more  than  that,'  said  Helen,  'he  is  angry,' — and 
she  sighed. 

'  Now,  Helen,  do  not  torment  yourself  about  nothing,'  said 
Cecilia,  who,  not  being  sure  whether  Beauclerc  had  heard 
anything,  had  not  looked  at  his  countenance  or  remarked  his 
tone  ;  her  mind  was  occupied  with  what  had  passed  while 
Helen  was  looking  at  the  Madonna.  Lady  Cecilia  had  tried 
to  make  out  the  meaning  of  these  extraordinary  starings  and 
whisperings — Lady  Katrine  would  not  tell  her  anything  dis- 
tinctly, but  said,  '  Strange  reports — so  sorry  it  had  got  into  the 
papers,  those  vile  libellous  papers  ;  of  course  she  did  not 
believe  —  of  Miss  Stanley.  After  all,  nothing  very  bad — a 
little  awkward  only — might  be  hushed  up.  Better  not  talk  of 
it  to-night ;  but  I  will  try,  Cecilia,  in  the  morning,  to  find 
those  paragraphs  for  you.'  Lady  Cecilia  determined  to  go  as 
early  as  possible  in  the  morning,  and  make  out  the  whole ; 
and,  had  she  plainly  told  this  to  Helen,  it  would  have  been 
better  for  all  parties  :  but  she  continued  to  talk  of  the  people 
they  had  seen,  to  hide  her  thoughts  from  Helen,  who  all  the 
time  felt  as  in  a  feverish  dream,  watching  the  lights  of  the 
carriage  flit  by  like  fiery  eyes,  while  she  thought  only  of  the 
strange  words  she  had  heard  and  why  they  should  have  made 
Beauclerc  angry  with  her. 

At  last  they  were  at  home.     As  they  went  in,  Lady  Cecilia 

364 


HELEN 

inquired  if  the  General  had  come  in.  Yes,  he  had  been  at 
home  for  some  time,  and  was  in  bed.  This  was  a  relief. 
Helen  was  glad  not  to  see  any  one,  or  to  be  obliged  to  say 
anything  more  that  night.  Lady  Cecilia  bade  her  '  be  a  good 
child,  and  go  to  sleep.'  How  much  Helen  slept  may  be  left 
to  the  judgment  of  those  who  have  any  imagination. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI 

'  MiLADi  a  une  migranie  affreuse  this  morning,'  said  Felicie, 
addressing  herself  on  the  stairs  to  Rose.  Mille  amitiis  de  sa 
pari  to  your  young  lady,  Miss  Rose,  and  miladi  recommend  to 
her  to  follow  a  good  example,  and  to  take  her  breakfast  in  her 
bed,  and  then  to  take  one  good  sleep  till  you  shall  hear  midi 
sonnd? 

Miss  Stanley,  however,  was  up  and  dressed  at  the  time 
when  this  message  was  brought  to  her,  and  a  few  minutes 
afterwards  a  footman  came  to  the  door,  to  give  notice  that 
the  General  was  in  the  breakfast  -  room,  waiting  to  know 
whether  Miss  Stanley  was  coming  down  or  not.  The  idea  of 
a  tete-a-tete  breakfast  with  him  was  not  now  quite  so  agreeable 
as  it  would  have  been  to  her  formerly,  but  she  went  down. 
The  General  was  standing  with  his  back  to  the  fire,  news- 
papers hanging  from  his  hand,  his  look  ominously  grave. 
After  '  Good  -  mornings '  had  been  exchanged  with  awful 
solemnity,  Helen  ventured  to  hope  that  there  was  no  bad 
public  news. 

'  No  public  news  whatever,'  said  the  General. 

Next,  she  was  sorry  to  hear  that  Cecilia  had  '  such  a  bad 
headache.' 

'  Tired  last  night,'  said  the  General. 

'  It  was,  indeed,  a  tiresome,  disagreeable  party,'  said  Helen, 
hoping  this  would  lead  to  how  so  ?  or  why  ?  but  the  General 
drily  answered,  '  Not  the  London  season,'  and  went  on  eating 
his  breakfast  in  silence. 

Such  a  constraint  and  awe  came  upon  her,  that  she  felt  it 
would  be  taking  too  great  a  liberty,  in  his  present  mood,  to 
put  sugar  and  cream  into  his  tea,  as  she  was  wont  in  happier 

365 


HELEN 

times.  She  set  sugar-bowl  and  cream  before  him,  and  whether 
he  understood,  or  noticed  not  her  feelings,  she  could  not  guess. 
He  sugared,  and  creamed,  and  drank,  and  thought,  and  spoke 
not.  Helen  put  out  of  his  way  a  supernumerary  cup,  to  which 
he  had  already  given  a  push,  and  she  said,  '  Mr.  Beauclerc 
does  not  breakfast  with  us.' 

'  So  I  suppose,'  said  the  General,  '  as  he  is  not  here.' 

'  He  said  he  was  engaged  to  breakfast.' 

'  With  some  of  his  friends,  I  suppose,'  said  the  General. 

There  the  dialogue  came  to  a  full  stop,  and  breakfast,  un- 
comfortably on  her  part,  and  with  a  preoccupied  air  on  his, 
went  on  in  absolute  silence.  At  length  the  General  signified 
to  the  servant  who  was  in  waiting,  by  a  nod,  and  a  look 
towards  the  door,  that  his  further  attendance  was  dispensed 
with.  At  another  time  Helen  would  have  felt  such  a  dismissal 
as  a  relief,  for  she  disliked,  and  recollected  that  her  uncle  par- 
ticularly disliked,  the  fashion  of  having  servants  waiting  at  a 
family  breakfast,  which  he  justly  deemed  unsuited  to  our  good 
old  English  domestic  habits  ;  but  somehow  it  happened  that  at 
this  moment  she  was  rather  sorry  when  the  servant  left  the 
room.  He  returned  however  in  a  moment,  with  something 
which  he  fancied  to  be  yet  wanting  ;  the  General,  after  glancing 
at  whatever  he  had  brought,  said,  '  That  will  do,  Cockburn  ; 
we  want  nothing  more.' 

Cockburn  placed  a  screen  between  him  and  the  fire  ;  the 
General  put  it  aside,  and,  looking  at  him,  said  sternly — 
'  Cockburn,  no  intelligence  must  ever  go  from  my  house  to 
any  newspapers.' 

Cockburn  bowed — '  None  shall,  sir,  if  I  can  prevent  it  ; 
none  ever  did  from  me.  General.' 

'  None  must  ever  go  from  any  one  in  my  family — look  to 
it' 

Cockburn  bowed  again  respectfully,  but  with  a  look  of  reser- 
vation of  right  of  remonstrance,  answered  by  a  look  from  his 
master,  of  '  No  more  must  be  said.'  Yet  Cockburn  was  a 
favourite  ;  he  had  lived  in  the  family  from  the  time  he  was  a 
boy.  He  moved  hastily  towards  the  door,  and  having  turned 
the  handle,  rested  upon  it  and  said,  '  General,  I  cannot  answer 
for  others.' 

'  Then,  Cockburn,  I  must  find  somebody  who  can.' 

Cockburn  disappeared,  but  after  closing  the  door  the  veteran 
366 


HELEN 

opened  it  again,  stood,  and  said  stoutly,  though  seemingly  with 
some  impediment  in  his  throat — '  General  Clarendon,  do  me 
the  justice  to  give  me  full  powers.' 

'  Whatever  you  require  :  say,  such  are  your  orders  from 
me,  and  that  you  have  full  power  to  dismiss  whoever  disobeys.' 
Cockbum  bowed,  and  withdrew  satisfied. 

Another  silence,  when  the  General,  hastily  finishing  his 
breakfast,  took  up  the  newspaper,  and  said,  '  I  wished  to  have 
spared  you  the  pain  of  seeing  these,  Miss  Stanley,  but  it  must 
be  done  now.  There  have  appeared  in  certain  papers  para- 
graphs alluding  to  Beauclerc  and  to  you ;  these  scandalous 
papers  I  never  allow  to  enter  my  house,  but  I  was  informed 
that  there  were  such  paragraphs,  and  I  was  obliged  to  examine 
into  them.  I  am  sorry  to  find  that  they  have  some  of  them 
been  copied  into  my  paper  to-day.' 

He  laid  the  newspaper  before  her.  The  first  words  which 
struck  her  eye  were  the  dreaded  whispers  of  last  night ;  the 
paragraph  was  as  follows  : 

'  In  a  few  days  will  be  published  the  Memoirs  of  the  late 
Colonel  D' ,  comprising  anecdotes,  and  original  love- 
letters  ;  which  will  explain  the  mysterious  allusions  lately 
made  in  certain  papers  to  '  La  belle  fiancie'  and  ' / promesst 
sposi.' 

'  What ! '  exclaimed  Helen  ;  '  the  letters  !  published  ! ' 

The  General  had  turned  from  her  as  she  read,  and  had  gone 
to  his  writing-desk,  which  was  at  the  farthest  end  of  the  room  ; 
he  unlocked  it,  and  took  from  it  a  small  volume,  and  turning 
over  the  leaves  as  he  slowly  approached  Helen,  he  folded  down 
some  pages,  laid  the  volume  on  the  table  before  her,  and  then 
said,  'Before  you  look  into  these  scandalous  memoirs,  Miss 
Stanley,  let  me  assure  you  that  nothing  but  the  necessity  of 
being  empowered  by  you  to  say  what  is  truth  and  what  is 
falsehood  could  determine  me  to  give  you  this  shock.' 

She  was  scarcely  able  to  put  forward  her  hand ;  yet  took 
the  book,  opened  it,  looked  at  it,  saw  letters  which  she  knew 
could  not  be  Cecilia's,  but  turning  another  leaf,  she  pushed  it 
from  her  with  horror.  It  was  the  letter — beginning  with 
'  My  dear — too  dear  Henry.' 

'  In  print  ! '  cried  she  ;  '  in  print  !  published  ! ' 

'  Not  published  yet,  that  I  hope  to  be  able  to  prevent,'  said 
the  General. 

367 


Slie  pushed  it  from  her  ■with  horror. 


HELEN 

Whether  she  heard,  whether  she  could  hear  him,  he  was  not 
certain,  her  head  was  bent  down,  her  hands  clasping  her  fore- 
head. He  waited  some  minutes,  then  sitting  down  beside  her, 
with  a  voice  of  gentleness  and  of  commiseration,  yet  of  steady 
determination,  he  went  on  :  —  'I  must  speak,  and  you  must 
hear  me,  Helen,  for  your  own  sake,  and  for  Beauclerc's  sake.' 

'  Speak,'  cried  she,  '  I  hear.' 

'  Hear  then  the  words  of  a  friend,  who  will  be  true  to  you 
through  life — through  life  and  death,  if  you  will  be  but  true 
to  yourself,  Helen  Stanley — a  friend  who  loves  you  as  he  loves 
Beauclerc ;  but  he  must  do  more,  he  must  esteem  you  as  he 
esteems  Beauclerc,  incapable  of  anything  that  is  false.' 

Helen  listened  with  her  breath  suspended,  not  a  word  in 
reply. 

'  Then  I  ask ' 

She  put  her  hand  upon  his  arm,  as  if  to  stop  him  ;  she  had 
a  foreboding  that  he  was  going  to  ask  something  that  she  could 
not,  without  betraying  Cecilia,  answer. 

'  If  you  are  not  yet  sufficiently  collected,  I  will  wait ;  take 
your  own  time — my  question  is  simple — I  ask  you  to  tell  me 
whether  all  these  letters  are  yours  or  not  ? ' 

'  No,'  cried  Helen,  'these  letters  are  not  mine.' 

'  Not  all,'  said  the  General :  '  this  first  one  I  know  to  be 
yours,  because  I  saw  it  in  your  handwriting  ;  but  I  am  cer- 
tain all  cannot  be  yours  :  now  will  you  show  me  which  are  and 
which  are  not' 

I  will    take    them   to    my    own    room    and  consider  and 
examine.' 

'  Why  not  look  at  them  here.  Miss  Stanley  ? ' 

She  wanted  to  see  Cecilia,  she  knew  she  could  never  answer 
the  question  without  consulting  her,  but  that  she  could  not  say  ; 
still  she  had  no  other  resource,  so,  conquering  her  trembling, 
she  rose  and  said,  '  I  would  rather  go  to ' 

' Not  to  Cecilia,'  said  he ;  'to  that  I  object  :  what  can 
Cecilia  do  for  you  ?  what  can  she  advise,  but  what  I  advise, 
that  the  plain  truth  should  be  told .' ' 

'  If  I  could  !     Oh  if  I  could  ! '  cried  Helen. 

'  What    can  you   mean  ?     Pardon    me.   Miss    Stanley,  but 

surely  you  can  tell  the  plain  fact  ;  you  can  recollect  what  you 

have  written — at  least  you  can  know  what  you  have  not  written. 

You  have  not  yet   even   looked  beyond  a  few  of  the   letters 

2  B  369 


HELEN 

— pray  be  composed— be  yourself.  This  business  it  was  that 
brought  me  to  town.  I  was  warned  by  that  young  lady,  that 
poetess  of  Mr.  Churchill's,  whom  you  made  your  friend  by 
some  kindness  at  Clarendon  Park — I  was  warned  that  there 
was  a  book  to  come  out,  these  Memoirs  of  Colonel  D'Aubigny, 
which  would  contain  letters  said  to  be  yours,  a  publication  that 
would  be  highly  injurious  to  you.  I  need  not  enter  into  de- 
tails of  the  measures  I  consequently  took  ;  but  I  ascertained 
that  Sir  Thomas  D'Aubigny,  the  elder  brother  of  the  colonel, 
knows  nothing  more  of  the  matter  than  that  he  gave  a  manu- 
script of  his  brother's,  which  he  had  never  read,  to  be  published  : 
the  rest  is  a  miserable  intrigue  between  booksellers  and  literary 
manufacturers,  I  know  not  whom  ;  I  have  not  been  able  to  get 
to  the  bottom  of  it  ;  sufficient  for  my  present  purpose  I  know, 
and  must  tell  you.  You  have  enemies  who  evidently  desire  to 
destroy  your  reputation,  of  course  to  break  your  marriage.  For 
this  purpose  the  slanderous  press  has  been  set  at  work,  the 
gossiping  part  of  the  public  has  had  its  vile  curiosity  excited, 
the  publication  of  this  book  is  expected  in  a  few  days  :  this  is 
the  only  copy  yet  completed,  I  believe,  and  this  I  could  not 
get  from  the  bookseller  till  this  morning  ;  I  am  now  going  to 
have  every  other  copy  destroyed  directly.' 

'  O  my  dear,  dear  friend,  how  can  I  thank  you  ? '  Her 
tears  gushed  forth. 

'  Thank  me  not  by  words,  Helen,  but  by  actions  ;  no  tears, 
summon  your  soul — be  yourself.' 

'  Oh  if  I  could  but  retrieve  one  false  step  ! ' — she  suddenly 
checked  herself. 

He  stood  aghast  for  an  instant,  then  recovering  himself  as 
he  looked  upon  her  and  marked  the  nature  of  her  emotion,  he 
said  :  '  There  can  be  no  false  step  that  you  could  ever  have 
taken  that  cannot  be  retrieved.  There  can  have  been  nothing 
that  is  irretrievable,  except  falsehood.' 

'  Falsehood  !  No,'  cried  she,  '  I  will  not  say  what  is  false — 
therefore  I  will  not  say  anything.' 

'  Then  since  you  cannot  speak,'  continued  the  General,  '  will 
you  trust  me  with  the  letters  themselves  ?  Have  you  brought 
them  to  town  with  you  ?  ' 

'  The  original  letters  ?  ' 

'  Yes,  those  in  the  packet  which  I  gave  to  you  at  Clarendon 
Park. 

37° 


HELEN 

'  They  are  burned.' 

'AH  ? — one,  this  first  letter,  I  saw  you  tear;  did  you  bum 
all  the  rest  ? ' 

'  They  are  burned,'  repeated  she,  colouring  all  over.  She 
could  not  say,  '  I  burned  them.' 

He  thought  it  a  poor  evasion.  '  They  are  burned,'  con- 
tinued he,  '  that  is,  you  burned  them  :  unfortunate.  I  must 
then  recur  to  my  first  appeal.  Take  this  pencil,  and  mark. 
I  pray  you,  the  passages  that  are  yours.  I  may  be  called  on 
to  prove  the  forgery  of  these  passages  :  if  you  do  not  show  me, 
and  truly,  which  are  yours,  and  which  are  not,  how  can  I 
answer  for  you,  Helen  .' ' 

'  One  hour,'  said  Helen, — '  only  leave  me  for  one  hour,  and 
it  shall  be  done.' 

'  Why  this  cowardly  delay  ? ' 

'  I  ask  only  one  hour — only  leave  me  for  one  hour.' 

'  I  obey.  Miss  Stanley,  since  it  must  be  so.     I  am  gone.' 

He  went,  and  Helen  felt  how  sunk  she  was  in  his  opinion. 
— sunk  for  ever,  she  feared  !  but  she  could  not  think  distinctly, 
her  mind  was  stunned ;  she  felt  that  she  must  wait  for  some- 
body, but  did  not  at  first  recollect  clearly  that  it  was  for 
Cecilia.  She  leaned  back  on  the  sofa,  and  sank  into  a  sort 
of  dreamy  state.  How  long  she  remained  thus  unconscious 
she  knew  not ;  but  she  was  roused  at  last  by  the  sound,  as 
she  fancied,  of  a  carriage  stopping  at  the  door :  she  started 
up,  but  it  was  gone,  or  it  had  not  been.  She  perceived  that 
the  breakfast  things  had  been  removed,  and,  turning  her  eyes 
upon  the  clock,  she  was  surprised  to  see  how  late  it  was. 
She  snatched  up  the  pages  which  she  hated  to  touch,  and 
ran  upstairs  to  CeciUa's  room, — door  bolted; — she  gave  a 
hasty  tap — no  answer ;  another  louder,  no  answer.  She  ran 
into  the  dressing-room  for  Felicie,  who  came  with  a  face  of 
mystery,  and  the  smile  triumphant  of  one  who  knows  what  is 
not  to  be  known.  But  the  smile  vanished  on  seeing  Miss 
Stanley's  face. 

'  Bon  Dieu  !  Miss  Stanley — how  pale  !  mais  gu'est  ce  que 
dest  ?     Man  Dieu,  qu^est  ce  que  c'est  done  ? ' 

'Is  Lady  Cecilia's  door  bolted  withinside?'  said  Helen. 

'  No,  only  lock  by  me,'  said  Mademoiselle  Fehcie.  '  Mi- 
ladi  charge  me  not  to  tell  you  she  was  not  dere.  And  I  had 
de  presentiment  you  might  go  up  to  look  for  her  in  her  room. 

371 


HELEN 

Her  head  is  got  better  quite.  She  is  all  up  and  dress  ;  she  is 
gone  out  in  the  carriage,  and  will  soon  be  back  no  doubt.  I 
know  not  to  where  she  go,  but  in  my  opinion  to  my  Lady 
Katrine.  If  you  please,  you  not  mention  I  say  dat,  as  miladi 
charge  me  not  to  speak  of  dis  to  you.  Apparemment  quelque 
petit  vtystire? 

Poor  Helen  felt  as  if  her  last  hope  was  gone,  and  now  in  a 
contrary  extreme  from  the  dreamy  torpor  in  which  she  had 
been  before,  she  was  seized  with  a  nervous  impatience  for  the 
arrival  of  Cecilia,  though  whether  to  hope  or  fear  from  it,  she 
did  not  distinctly  know.  She  went  to  the  drawing-room,  and 
listened  and  listened,  and  watched  and  watched,  and  looked  at 
the  clock,  and  felt  a  still-increasing  dread  that  the  General 
might  return  before  Lady  Cecilia,  and  that  she  should  not 
have  accomplished  her  promise.  She  became  more  and  more 
impatient.  As  it  grew  later,  the  rolling  of  carriages  increased, 
and  their  noise  grew  louder,  and  continually  as  they  came  near 
she  expected  that  one  would  stop  at  the  door.  She  expected 
and  expected,  and  feared,  and  grew  sick  with  fear  long  de- 
ferred. At  last  one  carriage  did  stop,  and  then  came  a 
thundering  knock — louder,  she  thought,  than  usual ;  but  before 
she  could  decide  whether  it  was  Cecilia  or  not,  the  room- 
door  opened,  and  the  servant  had  scarcely  time  to  say  that 
two  ladies  who  did  not  give  their  names  had  insisted  upon 
being  let  up — when  the  two  ladies  entered.  One  in  the 
extreme  of  foreign  fashion,  but  an  Englishwoman,  of  assured 
and  not  prepossessing  appearance  ;  the  other,  half  hid  behind 
her  companion,  and  all  timidity,  struck  Helen  as  the  most 
beautiful  creature  she  had  ever  beheld. 

'  A  thousand  pardons  for  forcing  your  doors,'  said  the 
foremost  lady ;  '  but  I  bear  my  apology  in  my  hand  :  a 
precious  little  box  of  Roman  cameos  from  a  friend  of  Lady 
Cecilia  Clarendon's,  which  I  was  desired  to  deliver  myself 

Helen  was,  of  course,  sorry  that  Lady  Cecilia  was  not  at 
home. 

'  I  presume  1  have  the  honour  of  speaking  to  Miss  Stanley,' 
continued  the  assured  lady,  and  she  gave  her  card,  '  Comtesse 
de  St.  Cymon.'  Then  half  turning  to  the  beauty,  who  now 
became  visible  —  '  Allow  me  to  mention  —  Lady  Blanche 
Forrester.' 

At  that  name  Helen  did  not  start,  but  she  felt  as  if  she 

372 


HELEN 

had  received  an  electric  shock.  How  she  went  through  the 
necessary  forms  of  civility  she  knew  not ;  but  even  in  the 
agony  of  passion  the  little  habits  of  life  hold  their  sway.  The 
customary  motions  were  made,  and  words  pronounced ;  yet 
when  Helen  looked  at  that  beautiful  Lady  Blanche,  and  saw 
how  beautiful !  there  came  a  spasm  at  her  heart. 

The  comtesse,  in  answer  to  her  look  towards  a  chair,  did 
not  '  choose  to  sit  down — could  not  stay — would  not  intrude 
on  Miss  Stanley.'  So  they  stood,  Helen  supporting  herself  as 
best  she  could,  and  preserving,  apparently,  perfect  composure, 
seeming  to  listen  to  what  further  Madame  de  St.  Cymon  was 
saying ;  but  only  the  sounds  reached  her  ear,  and  a  general 
notion  that  she  spoke  of  the  box  in  her  hand.  She  gave 
Helen  some  message  to  Lady  Cecilia,  explanatory  of  her 
waiting  or  not  waiting  upon  her  ladyship,  to  all  which  Helen 
answered  with  proper  signs  of  civility ;  and  while  the  comtesse 
was  going  on,  she  longed  to  look  again  at  Lady  Blanche,  but 
dared  not.  She  saw  a  half-curtsey  and  a  receding  motion  ; 
and  she  knew  they  were  going,  and  she  curtsied  mechanically. 
She  felt  inexpressible  relief  when  Madame  de  St.  Cymon 
turned  her  back  and  moved  towards  the  door.  Then  Helen 
looked  again  at  Lady  Blanche,  and  saw  again  her  surpassing 
beauty  and  perfect  tranquillity.  The  tranquillity  gave  her 
courage,  it  passed  instantaneously  into  herself,  through  her 
whole  existence.  The  comtesse  stopped  in  her  way  out  to 
look  at  a  china  table.  Ha  !  beautiful !  Sevres  !— enamel — by 
Jaquetot,  is  it  not  ? ' 

Helen  was  able  to  go  forward,  and  answer  to  all  the 
questions  asked.  Not  one  word  from  the  Lady  Blanche  ;  but 
she  wished  to  hear  the  sound  of  her  voice.  She  tried — she 
spoke  to  her ;  but  to  whatever  Helen  said,  no  answer  came, 
but  the  sweetest  of  smiles.  The  comtesse,  with  easy  assurance 
and  impertinent  ill-breeding,  looked  at  all  that  lay  in  her  way, 
and  took  up  and  opened  the  miniature  pictures  that  were 
on  the  table.  '  Lady  Cecilia  Clarendon — charming  ! — Blanche, 
you  never  saw  her  yet.     Quite  charming,  is  it  not  ? ' 

Not  a  word  from  Lady  Blanche,  but  a  smile,  a  Guido 
smile.  Another  miniature  taken  up  by  the  curious  comtesse. 
'  Ah  !  very  like  indeed  I  not  flattered  though.  Do  you  know 
it,  Blanche — ehf 

It  was   Beauclerc.      Lady   Blanche  then  murmured  some 

373 


HELEN 

few  words  indistinctly,  in  a  very  sweet  voice,  but  showed  no 
indication  of  feeling,  except,  as  Helen  gave  one  glance,  she 
thought  she  saw  a  slight  colour,  like  the  inside  of  a  shell, 
delicately  beautiful  ;  but  it  might  be  only  the  reflection  from 
the  crimson  silk  curtain  near  which  she  stood  :  it  was  gone, 
and  the  picture  put  down ;  and  in  a  lively  tone  from  the 
comtesse  'An  revoi'r,'  and  exit,  a  graceful  bend  from  the 
silent  beauty,  and  the  vision  vanished. 

Helen  stood  for  some  moments  fixed  to  the  spot  where  they 
left  her.  She  questioned  her  inmost  thoughts.  '  Why  was 
I  struck  so  much,  so  strangely,  with  that  beauty — so  painfully  ? 
It  cannot  be  envy  ;  I  never  was  envious  of  any  one,  though 
so  many  I  have  seen  so  much  handsomer  than  myself  Jeal- 
ousy ?  surely  not ;  for  there  is  no  reason  for  it — no  possibility 
of  danger.  Yet  now,  alas  !  when  he  has  so  much  cause  to 
doubt  me  !  perhaps  he  might  change.  He  seemed  so  dis- 
pleased last  night,  and  he  has  never  been  here  all  the 
morning ! '  She  recollected  the  look  and  accent  of  Madame 
de  St.  Cymon,  as  she  said  the  words  '  au  revoir!  Helen  did 
not  like  the  words,  or  the  look.  She  did  not  like  anything 
about  Madame  de  St.  Cymon  ;  '  Something  so  assured,  so 
impertinent  !  And  all  that  unintelligible  message  about  those 
cameos  ! — a  mere  excuse  for  making  this  unseasonable  pushing 
visit — just  pushing  for  the  acquaintance.  The  General  will 
never  permit  it,  though — that  is  one  comfort.  But  why  do 
I  say  comfort  ? '  Back  went  the  circle  of  her  thoughts  to 
the  same  point.  '  What  can  I  do  ? — the  General  will  return, 
he  will  find  I  have  not  obeyed  him.  But  what  can  be  done 
till  Cecilia  returns  ?  If  she  were  but  here,  I  could  mark — 
we  could  settle.  O  Ceciha  !  where  are  you  ?  But,'  thought 
she,  '  I  had  better  look  at  the  whole.  I  will  have  courage 
to  read  these  horrible  letters.'  To  prevent  all  hazard  of 
further  interruption,  she  now  went  into  an  inner  room,  bolted 
the  doors,  and  sat  down  to  her  dreaded  task.  And  there  we 
leave  her. 


374 


HELEN 


CHAPTER   XXXVII 

That  Fortune  is  not  nice  in  her  morality,  that  she  frequently 
favours  those  who  do  not  adhere  to  truth  more  than  those  who 
do,  we  have  early  had  occasion  to  observe.  But  whether 
Fortune  may  not  be  in  this,  as  in  all  the  rest,  treacherous  and 
capricious ;  whether  she  may  not  by  her  first  smiles  and 
favours  lure  her  victims  on  to  their  cost,  to  their  utter  undoing 
at  last,  remains  to  be  seen. 

It  is  time  to  inquire  what  has  become  of  Lady  Cecilia 
Clarendon.  Before  we  follow  her  on  her  very  early  morning 
visit  to  her  cousin's,  we  must  take  leave  to  pause  one  moment 
to  remark,  not  in  the  way  of  moralising  by  any  means,  but 
simply  as  a  matter  of  history,  that  the  first  little  fib  in  which 
Lady  Cecilia,  as  a  customary  license  of  speech,  indulged 
herself  the  moment  she  awoke  this  morning,  though  it  seemed 
to  answer  its  purpose  exactly  at  the  time,  occasioned  her 
ladyship  a  good  deal  of  superfluous  toil  and  trouble  during  the 
course  of  the  day.  In  reply  to  the  first  question  her  husband 
had  asked,  or  in  evasion  of  that  question,  she  had  answered, 
'  My  dear  love,  don't  ask  me  any  questions,  for  I  have  such  a 
horrid  headache  that  I  really  can  hardly  speak.' 

Now  a  headache,  such  as  she  had  at  that  moment,  certainly 
never  silenced  any  woman.  Slighter  could  not  be — scarce 
enough  to  swear  by.  There  seemed  no  great  temptation  to 
prevarication  either,  for  the  General's  question  was  not  of  a 
formidable  nature,  not  what  the  lawyers  call  a  leading  ques- 
tion, rather  one  that  led  to  nothing.  It  was  only,  '  Had  you 
a  pleasant  party  at  Lady  Castlefort's  last  night,  my  dear 
Cecilia  ? '  But  with  that  prescience  with  which  some  nicely 
foresee  how  the  truth,  seemingly  most  innocent,  may  do  harm, 
her  ladyship  foreboded  that,  if  she  answered  straight  forward 
— 'no' — that  might  lead  to — why?  how?  or  wherefore? 
— and  this  might  bring  out  the  history  of  the  strange  rude 
manner  in  which  '  la  belle  fiancee '  had  been  received.  That 
need  not  necessarily  have  followed,  but,  even  if  it  had,  it 
would  have  done  her  no  harm, — rather  would  have  served  at 
once  her  purpose  in  the  best  manner  possible,  as  time  will 

375 


HELEN 

show.  Her  husband,  unsuspicious  man,  asked  no  more 
questions,  and  only  gave  her  the  very  advice  she  vfished  him 
to  give,  that  she  should  not  get  up  to  breakfast — that  she 
should  rest  as  long  as  she  could.  Further,  as  if  to  forward 
her  schemes,  even  without  knowing  them,  he  left  the  house 
early,  and  her  headache  conveniently  going  off,  she  was 
dressed  with  all  despatch — carriage  at  the  door  as  soon  as 
husband  out  of  sight,  and  away  she  went,  as  we  have  seen, 
without  Helen's  hearing,  seeing,  or  suspecting  her  so  well 
contrived  and  executed  project. 

She  was  now  in  good  spirits.  The  infection  of  fear,  which 
she  had  caught  perhaps  from  the  too  sensitive  Helen  last 
night,  she  had  thrown  off  this  morning.  It  was  a  sunny  day, 
and  the  bright  sunshine  dispelled,  as  ever  with  her,  any  black 
notions  of  the  night,  all  melancholy  ideas  whatsoever.  She 
had  all  the  constitutional  hopefulness  of  good  animal  spirits. 
But  though  no  fears  remained,  curiosity  was  as  strong  as  ever. 
She  was  exceedingly  eager  to  know  what  had  been  the  cause 
of  all  these  strange  appearances.  She  guessed  it  must  be  some 
pitiful  jealousy  of  Lady  Katrine's — some  poor  spite  against 
Helen.  Anything  that  should  really  give  Beauclerc  un- 
easiness, she  now  sincerely  believed  to  be  out  of  the  question. 
Nonsense — only  Helen  and  Beauclerc's  love  of  tormenting 
themselves  —  quite  nonsense  !  And  nonsense  !  three  times 
ejaculated,  quite  settled  the  matter,  and  assured  her  in  the 
belief  that  there  could  be  nothing  serious  to  be  apprehended. 
In  five  minutes  she  should  be  at  the  bottom  of  all  things,  and 
in  half  an  hour  return  triumphant  to  Helen,  and  make  her 
laugh  at  her  cowardly  self  The  carriage  rolled  on,  Lady 
Cecilia's  spirits  rising  as  she  moved  rapidly  onwards,  so  that 
by  the  time  she  arrived  at  Lady  Castlefort's  she  was  not  only 
in  good  but  in  high  spirits.  To  her  askings,  '  Not  at  home ' 
never  echoed.  Even  at  hours  undue,  such  as  the  present,  she, 
privileged,  penetrated.  Accordingly,  unquestioned,  unques- 
tioning, the  alert  step  was  let  down,  opened  wide  was  the 
hall-door,  and  lightly  tripped  she  up  the  steps  ;  but  the  first 
look  into  the  hall  told  her  that  company  was  in  the  house 
already — yes — a  breakfast  —  all  were  in  the  breakfast-room, 
except  Lady  Castlefort,  not  yet  come  down — above,  the  foot- 
man believed,  in  her  boudoir.  To  the  boudoir  Cecilia  went, 
but   Lady  Castlefort  was  not  there,  and  Cecilia  was  surprised 

376 


HELEN 

to  hear  the  sound  of  music  in  the  drawing-room,  Lady  Castle- 
fort's  voice  singing.  While  she  waited  in  the  next  room  for 
the  song  to  be  finished,  Cecilia  turned  over  the  books  on 
the  table,  richly  gilt  and  beautifully  bound,  except  one  in  a 
brown  paper  parcel,  which  seemed  unsuited  to  the  table,  yet 
excited  more  attention  than  all  the  others,  because  it  was 
directed  '■Private — for  Lady  Katherine  Hawksby  —  to  be 
returned  before  two  d clock!  What  could  it  be  ?  thought  Lady 
Ceciha.  But  her  attention  was  now  attracted  by  the  song 
which  Lady  Castlefort  seemed  to  be  practising ;  the  words 
were  distinctly  pronounced,  uncommonly  distinctly,  so  as  to 
be  plainly  heard — 

Had  we  never  loved  so  kindly, 
Had  we  never  loved  so  blindly, 
Never  met,  or  never  parted, 
We  had  ne'er  been  broken-hearted. 

As  Cecilia  listened,  she  cast  her  eyes  upon  a  card  which  lay 
on  the  table — '  Lord  Beltravers,'  and  a  new  light  flashed  upon 
her,  a  light  favourable  to  her  present  purpose  ;  for  since  the 
object  was  altered  with  Lady  Castlefort,  since  it  was  not 
Beauclerc  any  longer,  there  would  be  no  further  ill-will 
towards  Helen.  Lady  Castlefort  was  not  of  the  violent  vin- 
dictive sort,  with  her  there  was  no  long-lasting  d^pit  amoureux. 
She  was  not  that  fury,  a  woman  scorned,  but  that  blessed 
spirit,  a  woman  believing  herself  always  admired.  '  Soft, 
silly,  sooth — not  one  of  the  hard,  wicked,  is  Louisa,'  thought 
Cecilia.  And  as  Lady  Castlefort,  slowly  opening  the  door, 
entered,  timid,  as  if  she  knew  some  particular  person  was  in 
the  room,  Cecilia  could  not  help  suspecting  that  Louisa  had 
intended  her  song  for  other  ears  than  those  of  her  dear  cousin, 
and  that  the  superb  negligence  of  her  dress  was  not  unstudied ; 
but  that  well-prepared,  well-according  sentimental  air,  changed 
instantly  on  seeing — not  the  person  expected,  and  with  a 
start  she  exclaimed,  '  Cecilia  Clarendon  ! ' 

'  Louisa  Castlefort ! '  cried  Lady  Cecilia,  answering  that 
involuntary  start  of  confusion  with  a  well -acted  start  of 
admiration.  '  Louisa  Castlefort,  si  belle,  si  belle,  so  beautifully 
dressed  ! ' 

'  Beautifully  dressed — nothing  extraordinary  ! '  said  Lady 
Castlefort,  advancing  with  a  half-embarrassed,  \aXi-nonchalant 

377 


HELEN 

air, — '  One  must  make  something  of  a  toilette  de  matin,  you 
know,  when  one  has  people  to  breakfast.' 

'  So  elegant,  so  neghgent ! '  continued  Lady  Ceciha. 

'  There  is  the  point,'  said  Lady  Castlefort.  '  I  cannot 
bear  anything  that  is  studied  in  costume,  for  dress  is  really  a 
matter  of  so  little  consequence  !  I  never  bestow  a  thought 
upon  it.     Angelique  rules  my  toilette  as  she  pleases.' 

'  Angelique  has  the  taste  of  an  angel  fresh  from  Paris,' 
cried  Lady  Cecilia. 

'And  now  tell  me,  Ceciha,'  pursued  Lady  Castlefort,  quite 
in  good  humour,  'tell  me,  my  dear,  to  what  do  I  owe  this 
pleasure  ?  what  makes  you  so  7natinale  ?  It  must  be  some- 
thing very  extraordinary.' 

'  Not  at  all,  only  a  little  matter  of  curiosity.' 

Then,  from  Lady  Castlefort,  who  had  hitherto,  as  if  in 
absence  of  mind,  stood,  there  was  a  slight  '  Won't  you  sit  ? ' 
motion. 

'  No,  no,  I  can't  sit,  can't  stay,'  said  Lady  Cecilia. 

A  look,  quickly  visible  and  quickly  suppressed,  showed 
Lady  Castlefort's  sense  of  relief;  then  came  immediately 
greater  pressing  to  sit  down,  '  Pray  do  not  be  in  such  a 
hurry.' 

'  But  I  am  keeping  you  ;  have  you  breakfasted  .'' ' 

'  Taken  coffee  in  my  own  room,'  said  Lady  Castlefort. 

'  But  you  have  people  to  breakfast ;  must  not  you  go 
down  ? ' 

'  No,  no,  I  shall  not  go  down,  for  this  is  Katrine's  affair,  as 
I  will  explain  to  you.' 

Lady  Cecilia  was  quite  content,  without  any  explanation  ; 
and  sitting  down,  she  drew  her  chair  close  to  Lady  Castlefort, 
and  said,  '  Now,  my  dear,  my  little  matter  of  curiosity.' 

'  Stay,  my  dear,  first  I  must  tell  you  about  Katrine — now 
confidentially — very.' 

Lady  Cecilia  ought  to  have  been  aware  that  when  once 
her  dear  cousin  Louisa's  little  heart  opened,  and  she  became 
confidential,  very,  it  was  always  of  her  own  domestic  grievances 
she  began  to  talk,  and  that,  once  the  sluice  opened,  out 
poured  from  the  deep  reservoir  the  long -collected  minute 
drops  of  months  and  years. 

'  You  have  no  idea  what  a  life  I  lead  with  Katrine — now 
she  is  grown  blue.' 

378 


HELEN 

'  Is  she  ? '  said  Lady  Cecilia,  quite  indifferent. 

'  Deep  blue !  shocking :  and  this  is  a  blue  breakfast,  and 
all  the  people  at  it  are  blue  bores,  and  a  blue  bore  is,  as 
Horace  Churchill  says,  one  of  the  most  mischievous  creatures 
breathing ;  and  he  tells  me  the  only  way  of  hindering  them 
from  doing  mischief  is  by  ringing  them  ;  but  first  you  must 
get  rings.  Now,  in  this  case,  for  Katrine  not  a  ring  to  be  had 
for  love  or  money.     So  there  is  no  hope  for  me.' 

'  No  hope  for  me,'  thought  Lady  CeciUa,  throwing  herself 
back  in  her  chair,  submissive,  but  not  resigned. 

'  If  it  had  but  pleased  Heaven,'  continued  Lady  Castlefort, 
'  in  its  mercy,  to  have  sent  Katrine  a  husband  of  any  kind, 
what  a  blessing  it  would  have  been  !  If  she  could  but  have 
been  married  to  anybody — now  anybody ' 

'Anybody  is  infinitely  obliged  to  you,'  said  Cecilia,  'but 
since  that  is  out  of  the  question,  let  us  say  no  more  about  it — 
no  use.' 

'  No  use  !  that  is  the  very  thing  of  which  I  complain ;  the 
very  thing  which  must  ever — ever  make  me  miserable.' 

'  Well,  well,  my  dear,'  cried  Lady  Cecilia,  no  longer  capable 
of  patience  ;  '  do  not  be  miserable  any  more  just  now  ;  never 
mind  Katrine  just  now.' 

'  Never  mind  her  !  Easy  for  you  to  say,  Cecilia,  who  do 
not  live  with  Katrine  Hawksby,  and  do  not  know  what  it  is 
to  have  such  a  plague  of  a  sister,  watching  one — watching 
every  turn,  every  look  one  gives — worse  than  a  jealous 
husband.     Can  I  say  more  ? ' 

'  No,'  cried  Cecilia ;  '  therefore  say  no  more  about  it.  I 
understand  it  all  perfectly ;  and  I  pity  you  from  the  bottom  of 
my  heart ;  so  now,  my  dear  Louisa ' 

'  I  tell  you,  my  dear  Cecilia,'  pursued  Lady  Castlefort, 
continuing  her  own  thoughts,  '  I  tell  you,  Katrine  is  envious 
of  me.  Envy  has  been  her  fault  from  a  child.  Envy  of  poor 
me !  Envy,  in  the  first  place,  of  whatever  good  looks  it 
pleased  Providence  to  give  me.'  A  glance  at  the  glass. 
'  And  now  Katrine  envies  me  for  being  Lady  Castlefort. 
Heaven  knows  !  now,  Cecilia,  and  you  know,  she  need  not 
envy  me  so  when  she  looks  at  Lord  Castlefort ;  that  is  what 
she  sometimes  says  herself,  which  you  know  is  very  wrong  of 
her  to  say  to  me — unnecessary  too,  when  she  knows  I  had  no 
more  hand  in  my  marriage ' 

379 


HELEN 

'  Than  heart ! '   Ceciha  could  not  forbear  saying. 

'  Than  heart ! '  readily  responded  Lady  Castlefort ;  '  never 
was  a  truer  word  said.  Never  was  there  a  more  complete 
sacrifice  than  my  mother  made  of  me  ;  you  know,  Cecilia,  a 
poor,  young,  innocent,  helpless  sacrifice,  if  ever  there  was  one 
upon  earth.' 

'  To  a  coronet,'  said  Lady  Cecilia. 

'  Absolutely  dragged  to  the  altar,'  continued  Lady  Castlefort. 

'  In  Mechlin  lace,  that  was  some  comfort,'  said  Cecilia, 
laughing,  and  she  laughed  on  in  hope  of  cutting  short  this  sad 
chapter  of  sacrifices.  But  Lady  Castlefort  did  not  understand 
raillery  upon  this  too  tender  point.  '  I  don't  know  what  you 
mean  by  Mechlin  lace,'  cried  she  pettishly.  '  Is  this  your 
friendship  for  me,  Cecilia  ? ' 

Cecilia,  justly  in  fear  of  losing  the  reward  of  all  her  large 
lay-out  of  flattery,  fell  to  protesting  the  tenderest  sympathy. 
'  But  only,  now  it  was  all  over,  why  make  her  heart  bleed 
about  what  could  not  be  helped  ? ' 

'  Cannot  be  helped  !  Oh  !  there  is  the  very  thing  I  must 
ever,  ever  mourn.' 

The  embroidered  cambric  handkerchief  was  taken  out  of  the 
bag  ;  no  tears,  indeed,  came,  but  there  were  sobs,  and  Cecilia, 
not  knowing  how  far  it  might  go,  apprehending  that  her 
ladyship  meditated  hysterics,  seized  a  smelling-bottle,  threw 
out  the  stopper,  and  presented  it  close  under  the  nostrils.  The 
good  '■  sels  poignans  d'Angkterre,'  of  which  Felicie  always 
acknowledged  the  unrivalled  potency,  did  their  business  effect- 
ually. Back  went  the  head,  with  an  exclamation  of  '  That's 
enough  !     Oh,  oh  !  too  much  !  too  much,  Cecilia  ! ' 

'  Are  you  better,  my  dear  ?  '  inquired  Cecilia  ;  '  but  indeed 
you  must  not  give  way  to  low  spirits  ;  indeed,  you  must  not : 
so  now  to  change  the  conversation,  Louisa ' 

'  Not  so  fast.  Lady  Cecilia ;  not  yet '  ;  and  now  Louisa 
went  on  with  a  medical  maundering.  '  As  to  low  spirits,  my 
dear  Cecilia,  I  must  say  I  agree  with  Sir  Sib  Pennyfeather, 
who  tells  me  it  is  not  mere  common  low  spirits,  but  really  all 
mind,  too  much  mind  ;  mind  preying  upon  my  nerves.  Oh  ! 
I  knew  it  myself.  At  first  he  thought  it  was  rather  constitu- 
tional ;  poor  dear  Sir  Sib  !  he  is  very  clever,  Sir  Sib  ;  and 
I  convinced  him  he  was  wrong  ;  and  so  we  agreed  that  it  was 

all  upon  my  mind — all ;  all ' 

380 


HELEN 

At  that  instant  a  green  parrot,  who  had  been  half  asleep  in 
the  corner,  awoke  on  Lady  Castlefort's  pronouncing,  in  an 
elevated  tone,  '  All,  all ! '  and  conceiving  himself  in  some  way 
called  upon,  answered,  '  Poll !  Poll !  bit  o'  sugar  Poll ! '  No 
small  difficulty  had  Lady  Cecilia  at  that  moment  in  keeping 
her  risible  muscles  in  order ;  but  she  did,  for  Helen's  sake, 
and  she  was  rewarded,  for  after  Lady  Castlefort  had,  all  un- 
conscious of  ridicule,  fed  Poll  from  her  amber  bonbonniire,  and 
sighed  out  once  more  '  Mind  !  too  much  mind  ! '  she  turned  to 
Cecilia,  and  said,  '  But,  my  dear,  you  wanted  something ;  you 
had  something  to  ask  me.' 

At  once,  and  as  fast  as  she  could  speak.  Lady  Cecilia 
poured  out  her  business  about  Helen  Stanley.  She  told  of 
the  ill-bred  manner  in  which  Helen  had  been  received  last 
night ;  inquired  why  the  words  fromessi  sposi  and  belle fiancde 
were  so  oddly  repeated,  as  if  they  had  been  watchwords,  and 
asked  what  was  meant  by  all  those  strange  whisperings  in  the 
sanctum  sanctorum. 

'  Katrine's  set,'  observed  Lady  Castlefort  coolly.  '  Just  like 
them  ;  just  like  her  ! ' 

'  I  should  not  care  about  it  in  the  least,'  said  Lady  Cecilia, 
'  if  it  were  only  Katrine's  ill-nature,  or  their  ill-breeding.  Ill- 
breeding  always  recoils  on  the  ill-bred,  and  does  nobody  else 
any  harm.  But  I  should  be  glad  to  be  quite  clear  that  there 
is  nothing  more  at  the  bottom.' 

Lady  Castlefort  made  no  reply,  but  took  up  a  bunch  of 
seals,  and  looked  at  each  of  them  one  after  another.  Lady 
CeciHa,  more  afraid  now  than  she  had  yet  been  that  there  was 
something  at  the  bottom,  still  bravely  went  on,  '  What  is  it  ? 
If  you  know,  tell  me  at  once.' 

'  Nay,  ask  Katrine,'  said  Lady  Castlefort. 

'  No,  I  ask  you,  I  would  rather  ask  you,  for  you  are  good- 
natured,  Louisa — so  tell  me.' 

'  But  I  daresay  it  is  only  slander,'  said  the  good-natured 
Louisa. 

'  Slander  ! '  repeated  Lady  Cecilia,  '  slander  did  you  say  ? ' 

'  Yes  ;  what  is  there  to  surprise  you  so  much  in  that  word  ? 
did  you  never  hear  of  such  a  thing  ?  I  am  sure  I  hear  too 
much  of  it ;  Katrine  lives  and  breathes  and  fattens  upon  it ; 
as  Churchill  says,  she  eats  slander,  drinks  slander,  sleeps  upon 
slander.' 

381 


HELEN 

'  But  tell  me,  what  of  Helen  ?  that  is  all  I  want  to  hear,' 
cried  Lady  Cecilia  :  '  Slander  !  of  Helen  Stanley  !  what  is 
it  that  Katrine  says  about  poor  Helen  ?  what  spite,  what 
vengeance,  can  she  have  against  her  ? — tell  me,  tell  me.' 

'  If  you  would  ask  one  question  at  a  time,  I  might  be  able 
to  answer  you,'  said  Lady  Castlefort.  '  Do  not  hurry  me  so  ; 
you  fidget  my  nerves.  First  as  to  the  spite,  you  know  yourself 
that  Katrine,  from  the  beginning,  never  could  endure  Helen 
Stanley  ;  for  my  part,  I  always  rather  liked  her  than  other- 
wise, and  shall  defend  her  to  the  last.' 

'  Defend  her  ! ' 

'  But  Katrine  was  always  jealous  of  her,  and  lately  worse 
than  ever,  for  getting  into  her  place,  as  she  says,  with  you  ; 
that  made  her  hate  her  all  the  more.' 

'  Let  her  hate  on,  that  will  never  make  me  love  Helen  the 
less.' 

'  So  I  told  her ;  and  besides,  Miss  Stanley  is  going  to  be 
married.' 

'  To  be  sure  ; — well .'' ' 

'  And  Katrine  naturally  hates  everybody  that  is  going  to 
be  married.  If  you  were  to  see  the  state  she  is  in  always 
reading  the  announcements  of  marriages  in  High  Life  ! 
Churchill,  I  do  believe,  had  Miss  Stanley's  intended  match  put 
into  every  paper  continually,  on  purpose  for  the  pleasure  of 
plaguing  Katrine  ;  and  if  you  could  have  seen  her  long  face, 
when  she  saw  it  announced  in  the  Court  Gazette — good 
authority,  you  know — really  it  was  pitiable.' 

'  I  don't  care,  I  don't  care  about  that — Oh  pray  go  on  to 
the  facts  about  Helen.' 

'  Well,  but  the  fact  is  as  I  tell  you ;  you  wanted  to  know 
what  sufficient  cause  for  vengeance,  and  am  not  I  telling  you  ? 
If  you  would  not  get  into  such  a  state  of  excitement ! — as 
Sir  Sib  says,  excitements  should  be  avoided.  La  !  my  dear,' 
continued  Lady  Castlefort,  looking  up  at  her  with  unfeigned 
astonishment,  '  what  agitation  !  why,  if  it  were  a  matter  that 
concerned  yourself ' 

'  It  concerns  my  friend,  and  that  is  the  same  thing.' 

'  So  one  says  ;  but — you  look  really,  such  a  colour.' 

'  No  matter  what  colour  I  look,'  cried  Cecilia  ;  'go  on.' 

'  Do  you  never  read  the  papers  ? '  said  Lady  Castlefort. 

'  Sometimes,'  said  Lady  Cecilia  ;   '  but   I  have  not  looked 
382 


HELEN 

at  a  paper  these  three  days  ;  was  there  anything  particular  ? 
tell  me.' 

'  My  dear !  tell  you  !  as  if  I  could  remember  by  heart  all 
the  scandalous  paragraphs  I  read.'  She  looked  round  the 
room,  and  not  seeing  the  papers,  said,  '  I  do  not  know  what 
has  become  of  those  papers  ;  but  you  can  find  them  when  you 
go  home.' 

She  mentioned  the  names  of  two  papers,  noted  for  being 
personal,  scandalous,  and  scurrilous. 

'  Are  those  the  papers  you  mean  ? '  cried  Lady  Cecilia ;  '  the 
General  never  lets  them  into  the  house.' 

'  That  is  a  pity — that's  hard  upon  you,  for  then  you  never 
are,  as  you  see,  au  courant  du  jour,  and  all  your  friends  might 
be  abused  to  death  without  your  knowing  it,  if  some  kind 
person  did  not  tell  you  ' 

'  Do  tell  me,  then,  the  substance  ;  I  don't  want  the  words.' 

'  But  the  words  are  all.  Somehow  it  is  nothing  without 
the  words.' 

In  her  now  excited  state  of  communicativeness,  Lady 
Castlefort  rose  and  looked  all  about  the  room  for  the  papers, 
saying,  '  They  were  here,  they  -  were  there,  all  yesterday ; 
Katrine  had  them  showing  them  to  Lady  Masham  in  the 
morning,  and  to  all  her  blue  set  afterwards — Lord  knows  what 
she  has  done  with  them.  So  tiresome  looking  for  things  !  how 
I  hate  it.' 

She  rang  the  bell  and  inquired  from  the  footman  if  he  knew 
what  had  become  of  the  papers.  Of  course  he  did  not  know, 
could  not  imagine — servants  never  know,  nor  can  imagine, 
what  has  become  of  newspapers — but  he  would  inquire. 
While  he  went  to  inquire.  Lady  Castlefort  sank  down  again 
into  her  bergire,  and  again  fell  into  admiration  of  Cecilia's 
state  of  impatience. 

'  How  curious  you  are  !  Now  I  am  never  really  curious 
about  anything  that  does  not  come  home  to  myself;  I  have  so 
little  interest  about  other  people.' 

This  was  said  in  all  the  simplicity  of  selfishness,  not  from 
candour,  but  from  mere  absence  of  shame,  and  utter  ignorance 
of  what  others  think,  what  others  feel,  which  always  charac- 
terises, and  often  betrays,  the  selfish,  even  where  the  head  is 
best  capable  of  supplying  the  deficiencies  of  the  heart.  But 
Louisa  Castlefort  had  no   head   to  hide  her  want   of  heart ; 

383 


Cecilici  could  not  answer- 


HELEN 

while  Cecilia,  who  had  both  head  and  heart,  looked  down 
upon  her  cousin  with  surprise,  pity,  and  contempt,  quick 
succeeding  each  other,  in  a  sort  of  parenthesis  of  feeling,  as 
she  moved  her  eyes  for  a  moment  from  the  door  on  which  they 
had  been  fixed,  and  to  which  they  recurred,  while  she  stood 
waiting  for  the  appearance  of  those  newspapers.  The  footman 
entered  with  them.  '  In  Mr.  Landrum's  room  they  were,  my 
lady.' 

Lady  Cecilia  did  not  hear  a  word  that  was  said,  nor  did 
she  see  that  the  servant  laid  a  note  on  the  table.  It  was  well 
that  Louisa  had  that  note  to  read,  and  to  answer,  while 
Cecilia  looked  at  the  paragraphs  in  these  papers  ;  else  her 
start  must  have  been  seen,  her  exclamation  must  have  been 
heard  :  it  must  have  been  marked  that  the  whole  character  of 
her  emotion  changed  from  generous  sympathy  with  her  friend 
to  agony  of  fear  for  herself.  The  instant  she  cast  her  eyes 
on  that  much-read  paper,  she  saw  the  name  of  Colonel 
D'Aubigny ;  all  the  rest  swam  before  her  eyes.  Lady 
Castlefort,  without  looking  up  from  her  writing,  asked — What 
day  of  the  month  ?  Cecilia  could  not  answer,  but,  recalled  to 
herself  by  the  sound  of  the  voice,  she  now  tried  to  read — she 
scarcely  read  the  words,  but  some  way  took  the  sense  into  her 
mind  at  a  glance. 


CHAPTER   XXXVIII 

The  first  of  these  paragraphs  caught  the  eye  by  its  title  in 
capital  letters. 

'LA    BELLE    FIANCEE. 

'  Though  quite  unknown  in  the  London  world,  this  young 
lady  cannot  fail  to  excite  some  curiosity  among  our  fashion- 
ables as  the  successful  rival  of  one  whom  the  greatest  painter 
of  the  age  has  pronounced  to  be  the  fairest  of  the  fair — the 

Lady    B.    F .     This  new  Helen  is,  we  understand,  of  a 

respectable  family,  niece  to  a  late  dean,  distinguished  for 
piety  much  and  virtil  more.  It  was  reported  that  the  niece 
was  a  great  heiress,  but  after  the  proposal  had  been  made,  it 
was  discovered  that  Virtii  had  made  away  with  every  shilling 
2  C  385 


HELEN 

of  her  fortune.  This  made  no  difference  in  the  eyes  of  her 
inamorato,  who  is  as  rich  as  he  is  generous,  and  who  saw  with 
the  eyes  of  a  youth  '  Of  Age  to-morrow.'  His  guardian,  a 
wary  general,  demurred — but  nursery  tactics  prevailed.  The 
young  lady,  though  she  had  never  been  out,  bore  the  victory 
from  him  of  many  campaigns.      The  day  for  the  marriage  was 

fixed  as  announced  by  us .     But  we  are  concerned  to  state 

that  a  postponement  of  this  marriage  for  mysterious  reas07is  has 
taken  place.     Delicacy  forbids  us  to  say  more  at  present.' 

Delicacy,  however,  did  not  prevent  their  saying  in  the  next 
paper,  in  a  paragraph  headed,  '  Mystery  solved,'  '  We 
understand  that  in  the  course  of  a  few  days  will  appear  the 

"  Memoirs  of  the  late   Colonel    D y  ;    or.   Reminiscences 

of  a  Roue,  well  known  in  the  Fashionable  World."  This  little 
volume  bids  fair  to  engross  the  attention  of  the  higher  circles, 
as  it  contains,  besides  innumerable  curious,  personal,  and 
secret  anecdotes,  the  original  love-letters  of  a  certain  belle 
fiancee,  now  residing  with  a  noble  family  in  Grosvenor  Square.' 

Lady  Cecilia  saw  at  once  the  whole  dreadful  danger — her 
own  letters  to  Colonel  D'Aubigny  they  must  be  !  How  could 
they  have  got  them  ?  They  would  be  seen  by  her  husband — 
published  to  the  whole  world — if  the  General  found  out  they 
were  hers,  he  would  cast  her  off  for  ever.  If  they  were 
believed  to  be  Helen's — Helen  was  undone,  sacrificed  to  her 
folly,  her  cowardice.  '  Oh  !  if  I  had  but  told  Clarendon,  he 
would  have  stopped  this  dreadful,  dreadful  publication.'  And 
what  falsehoods  it  might  contain,  she  did  not  even  dare  to 
think.  All  was  remorse,  terror,  confusion — fixed  to  the  spot 
like  one  stupefied,  she  stood.  Lady  Castlefort  did  not  see  it 
— -she  had  been  completely  engrossed  with  what  she  had  been 
writing,  she  was  now  looking  for  her  most  sentimental  seal, 
and  not  till  she  had  pressed  that  seal  down  and  examined  the 
impression,  did  she  look  up  or  notice  Cecilia — Then  struck 
indeed  with  a  sense  of  something  unusual — '  My  dear,'  said 
she,  '  you  have  no  idea  how  odd  you  look — so  strange,  Cecilia — 
quite  3ahie  !  '  Giving  two  pulls  to  the  bell  as  she  spoke,  and  her 
eyes  on  the  door,  impatient  for  the  servant,  she  added, — '  After 
all,  Cecilia — Helen  Stanley  is  no  relation  even — only  a  friend. 
Take  this  note' — to  the  footman  who  answered  the  bell;  and 
the  moment  he  left  the  room,  continuing,  in  the  same  tone, 

386 


HELEN 

to  Lady  Cecilia,  she  said — 'You  will  have  to  give  her  up  at 
last — that's  all ;  so  you  had  better  make  your  mind  up  to  it.' 

When  Lady  Cecilia  tried  to  speak,  she  felt  her  tongue 
cleave  to  the  roof  of  her  mouth  ;  and  when  she  did  articulate, 
it  was  in  a  sort  of  hoarse  sound.  '  Is  the  book  published  ? ' 
She  held  the  paper  before  Lady  Castlefort's  eyes  and  pointed  to 
the  name  she  could  not  utter. 

'  D'Aubigny's  book — is  it  published,  do  you  mean  ? '  said 
Lady  Castlefort.  'Absolutely  published,  I  cannot  say,  but  it 
is  all  in  print,  I  know.  I  do  not  understand  about  publishing. 
There's  something  about  presentation  copies  :  I  know  Katrine 
was  wild  to  have  one  before  anybody  else,  so  she  is  to  have 
the  first  copy,  I  know,  and,  I  believe,  is  to  have  it  this  very 
morning  for  the  people  at  this  breakfast :  it  is  to  be  the  bonne 
bouche  of  the  business.' 

'  What  has  Katrine  to  do  with  it  ? — Oh,  tell  me,  quick  ! ' 

'  Dear  me,  Cecilia,  what  a  fuss  you  are  in  ! — you  make  me 
quite  nervous  to  look  at  you.  You  had  better  go  down  to  the 
breakfast-room,  and  you  will  hear  all  about  it  from  the  fountain- 
head.' 

'  Has  Katrine  the  book  or  not  ? '  cried  Lady  Cecilia. 

'  Bless  me  !  I  will  inquire,  my  dear,  if  you  will  not  look  so 
dreadful.'  She  rang  and  coolly  asked — '  Did  that  man,  that 
bookseller,  Stone,  send  any  parcel  or  book  this  morning,  do 
you  know,  for  Lady  Katrine  ? ' 

'  Yes,  my  lady  ;  Landrum  had  a  parcel  for  Lady  Katrine — 
it  is  on  the  table,  I  believe.' 

'Very  well.'     The  man  left  the  room. 

Lady  Cecilia  darted  on  the  brown  paper  parcel  she  had 
seen  directed  to  Lady  Katrine,  and  seized  it  before  the  amazed 
Louisa  could  prevent  her.  '  Stop,  stop  ! '  cried  she,  springing 
forward,  '  stop,  Ceciha ;  Katrine  will  never  forgive  me  ! ' 

But  Lady  Cecilia,  seizing  a  penknife,  cut  the  first  knot. 
'  O  Ceciha,  I  am  undone  if  Katrine  comes  in  !  Make  haste, 
make  haste  !  I  can  only  let  you  have  a  peep  or  two.  We 
must  do  it  up  again  as  well  as  ever,'  continued  Lady  Castlefort, 
while  Lady  Cecilia,  fast  as  possible,  went  on  cut,  cut,  cutting 
the  packthread  to  bits,  and  she  tore  off  the  brown  paper  cover, 
then  one  of  silver  paper,  that  protected  the  silk  binding. 

Lady  Castlefort  took  up  the  outer  cover  and  read,  '  To  be 
returned  before  two  o'clock.'     '  What  can  that  mean  ?     Then 

387 


HELEN 

it  is  only  lent ;  not  her  own.  Katrine  will  not  understand  this, 
— will  be  outrageously  disappointed.  I'm  sure  I  don't  care. 
But  here  is  a  note  from  Stone,  however,  which  may  explain  it.' 
She  opened  and  read — 'Stone's  respects — existing  circum- 
stances make  it  necessary  her  ladyship's  copy  should  be 
returned.     Will  be  called  for  at  two  o'clock.' 

'  Cecilia,  Cecilia,  make  haste  !  But  Katrine  does  not  know 
yet — Still  she  may  come  up.'  Lady  Castlefort  rang  and 
inquired, — 

'  Have  they  done  breakfast  ? ' 

'  Breakfast  is  over,  my  lady,'  said  the  servant  who  answered 
the  bell,  '  but  Landrum  thinks  the  gentlemen  and  ladies  will  not 
be  up  immediately,  on  account  of  one  of  the  ladies  being 
performing  a  poem.' 

'Very  well,  very  good,'  added  her  ladyship,  as  the  man  left 
ihe  room.  '  Then,  Cecilia,  you  will  have  time  enough,  for 
when  once  they  begin  performing,  as  Sylvester  calls  it,  there  is 
no  end  of  it' 

'  O  Heavens  ! '  cried  Cecilia,  as  she  turned  over  the  pages, 
'  O  Heavens !  what  is  here  ?  Such  absolute  falsehood ! 
Shocking,  shocking  ! '  she  exclaimed,  as  she  looked  on,  terrified 
at  what  she  saw  :   '  absolutely  false — a  forgery.' 

'  Whereabouts  are  you  ? '  said  Lady  Castlefort,  approaching 
to  read  along  with  her. 

'  Oh  do  not  read  it,'  cried  Cecilia,  and  she  hastily  closed 
the  book. 

'  What  signifies  shutting  the  book,  my  dear,'  said  Louisa, 
'  as  if  you  could  shut  people's  eyes  ?  I  know  what  it  is  ;  I 
have  read  it.' 

'  Read  it  ! ' 

'  Read  it !   I  really  can  read,  though  it  seems  to  astonish  you.' 

'  But  it  is  not  published  ?  ' 

'  One  can  read  in  manuscript.' 

'  And  did  you  see  the  manuscript  ? ' 

'  1  had  a  glimpse.  Yes — I  know  more  than  Katrine  thinks 
I  know.' 

'  Oh  tell  me,  Louisa  ;  tell  me  all,'  cried  Cecilia. 

'  I  will,  but  you  must  never  tell  that  I  told  it  to  you.' 

'  Speak,  speak,'  cried  Cecilia. 

'  It  is  a  long  story,'  said  Lady  Castlefort. 

'  Make  it  short  then.     Oh  tell  me  quick,  Louisa  ! ' 


HELEN 

'  There  is  a  literary  dessous  des  cartes,^  said  Lady  Castlefort, 
a  little  vain  of  knowing  a  literary  dessous  des  cartes;  '  Churchill 
being  at  the  head  of  everything  of  that  sort,  you  know,  the 
bookseller  brought  him  the  manuscript  which  Sir  Thomas 
D'Aubigny  had  offered  him,  and  wanted  to  know  whether  it 
would  do  or  not.  Mr.  Churchill's  answer  was  that  it  would 
never  do  without  more  pepper  and  salt,  meaning  gossip  and 
scandal,  and  all  that.  But  you  are  reading  on,  Ceciha,  not 
listening  to  me.' 

'  I  am  listening,  indeed.' 

'  Then  never  tell  how  I  came  to  know  everything.  Katrine's 
maid  has  a  lover,  who  is,  as  she  phrases  it,  one  of  the  gentle- 
men connected  with  the  press.  Now,  my  Angelique,  who 
cannot  endure  Katrine's  maid,  tells  me  that  this  man  is  only  a 
■wonder-maker,  a  half-crown  paragraph  writer.      So,  through 

Angelique,  and  indeed  from  another  person '  she  stopped  ; 

and  then  went  on — '  through  Angelique  it  all  came  up  to  me.' 

'  All  what  ? '  cried  Ceciha  ;  '  go  on,  go  on  to  the  facts.' 

'  I  will,  if  you  will  not  hurry  me  so.  The  letters  were  not 
in  Miss  Stanley's  handwriting.' 

'  No  !    I  am  sure  of  that,'  said  Cecilia. 

'  Copies  were  all  that  they  pretended  to  be  ;  so  they  may  be 
forgeries  after  all,  you  see.' 

'  But  how  did  Katrine  or  Mr.  Churchill  come  by  the  copies?' 

'  I  have  a  notion,  but  of  this  I  am  not  quite  sure — I  have  a 
notion,  from  something  I  was  told  by — in  short  I  suspect  that 
Carlos,  Lady  Davenant's  page,  somehow  got  at  them,  and  gave 
them,  or  had  them  given,  to  the  man  who  was  to  publish  the 
book.  Lady  Katrine  and  Churchill  laid  their  heads  together ; 
here,  in  this  very  sanctum  sanctorum.  They  thought  I  knew 
nothing,  but  I  knew  everything.  I  do  not  believe  Horace  had 
anything  to  do  with  it,  except  saying  that  the  love-letters  would 
be  just  the  thing  for  the  public  if  they  were  bad  enough.  I 
remember,  too,  that  it  was  he  who  added  the  second  title, 
"Reminiscences  of  a  Roue,"  and  said  something  about  allitera- 
tion's artful  aid.  And  now,'  concluded  Lady  Castlefort,  '  it  is 
coming  to  the  grand  catastrophe,  as  Katrine  calls  it.  She  has 
already  told  the  story,  and  to-day  she  was  to  give  all  her  set 
what  she  calls  ocular  demonstration.  Cecilia,  now,  quick, 
finish  ;  they  will  be  here  this  instant.  Give  me  the  book  ;  let 
me  do  it  up  this  minute.' 

389 


HELEN 

'  No,  no ;  let  me  put  it  up,'  cried  Lady  Cecilia,  keeping 
possession  of  the  book  and  the  brown  paper.  '  I  am  a  famous 
hand  at  doing  up  a  parcel,  as  famous  as  any  Bond  Street  shop- 
man :  your  hands  are  not  made  for  such  work.' 

Anybody  but  Lady  Castlefort  would  have  discerned  that 
Lady  Cecilia  had  some  further  design,  and  she  was  herself 
afraid  it  would  be  perceived  ;  but  taking  courage  from  seeing 
what  a  fool  she  had  to  deal  with,  Lady  Cecilia  went  on  more 
boldly :  '  Louisa,  I  must  have  more  packthread  ;  this  is  all  cut 
to  bits.' 

'  I  will  ring  and  ask  for  some.' 

'  No,  no  ;  do  not  ring  for  the  footman  ;  he  might  observe 
that  we  had  opened  the  parcel.  Cannot  you  get  a  string  with- 
out ringing  ?     Look  in  that  basket.' 

'  None  there,  I  know,'  said  Lady  Castlefort,  without  stirring. 

'  In  your  own  room  then  ;  Angelique  has  some.' 

'  How  do  you  know  ? ' 

'  I  know  !  never  mind  how.  Go,  and  she  will  give  you 
packthread.  I  must  have  it  before  Katrine  comes  up.  So  go, 
Louisa,  go.' 

'  Go,'  in  the  imperative  mood,  operated,  and  she  went ;  she 
did  not  know  why. 

That  instant  Lady  Cecilia  drew  the  book  out  of  the  half- 
folded  paper,  and  quick,  quick,  tore  out  page  after  page — 
every  page  of  those  letters  that  concerned  herself  or  Helen, 
and  into  the  fire  thrust  them,  and  as  they  blazed  held  them 
down  bravely — had  the  boldness  to  wait  till  all  was  black  :  all 
the  while  she  trembled,  but  stood  it,  and  they  were  burnt,  and 
the  book  in  its  brown  paper  cover  was  left  on  the  table,  and 
she  down  stairs,  before  Lady  Castlefort's  dressing-room  door 
opened,  and  she  crossed  the  hall  without  meeting  a  soul  except 
the  man  in  waiting  there.  The  breakfast-room  was  at  the 
back  of  the  house  looking  into  the  gardens,  and  her  carriage 
at  the  front  door  had  never  been  seen  by  Lady  Katrine  or  any 
of  her  blue  set.     She  cleared  out  of  the  house  into  her  carriage 

— ^and  off '  To  the  Park,'  said  she.      She  was  off,  but  just 

in  time.  The  whole  tribe  came  out  of  the  breakfast-room 
before  she  had  turned  the  corner  of  the  street.  She  threw 
herself  back  in  the  carriage  and  took  breath,  congratulating 
herself  upon  this  hairbreadth  'scape.  For  this  hour,  this  minute, 
she  had  escaped  ! — she  was  reprieved  ! 

390 


As  they  Hazed  held  them  down  bravely. 


HELEN 

And  now  what  was  next  to  be  done  ?  This  was  but  a 
momentary  reprieve.  Another  copy  would  be  had — no,  not 
till  to-morrow  though.  The  sound  of  the  words  that  had  been 
read  from  the  bookseller's  note  by  Lady  Castlefort,  though 
scarcely  noticed  at  the  time,  recurred  to  her  now ;  and  there 
was  hope  something  might  to-day  be  done  to  prevent  the  pub- 
lication. It  might  still  be  kept  for  ever  from  her  husband's  and 
from  Beauclerc's  knowledge.  One  stratagem  had  succeeded — 
others  might. 

She  took  a  drive  round  the  Park  to  compose  the  excessive 
flurry  of  her  spirits.  Letting  down  all  the  glasses,  she  had  the 
fresh  air  blowing  upon  her,  and  ere  she  was  half  round,  she 
was  able  to  think  of  what  yet  remained  to  do.  Money  !  oh  ! 
any  money  she  could  command  she  would  give  to  prevent  this 
publication.  She  was  not  known  to  the  bookseller — no  matter. 
Money  is  money  from  whatever  hand.  She  would  trust  the 
matter  to  no  one  but  herself,  and  she  would  go  immediately — 
not  a  moment  to  be  lost.      '  To  Stone's,  the  bookseller's.' 

Arrived.  '  Do  not  give  my  name  ;  only  say,  a  lady  wants 
to  speak  to  Mr.  Stone.' 

The  people  at  Mr.  Stone's  did  not  know  the  livery  or  the 
carriage,  but  such  a  carriage  and  such  a  lady  commanded  the 
deference  of  the  shopman.  '  Please  to  walk  in,  madam,'  and 
by  the  time  she  had  walked  in,  the  man  changed  madam  into 
your  ladyship — '  Mr.  Stone  will  be  with  your  ladyship  in  a 
moment — only  in  the  warehouse.  If  your  ladyship  will  please 
to  walk  up  into  the  back  drawing-room — there's  a  fire.'  The 
maid  followed  to  blow  it ;  and  while  the  bellows  wheezed  and 
the  fire  did  not  burn.  Lady  Cecilia  looked  out  of  the  window 
in  eager  expectation  of  seeing  Mr.  Stone  returning  from  the 
warehouse  with  all  due  celerity.  No  Mr.  Stone,  however, 
appeared  ;  but  there  was  a  good  fire  in  the  middle  of  the 
courtyard,  as  she  observed  to  the  maid  who  was  plying  the 
wheezing  bellows  ;  and  who  answered  that  they  had  had  a 
great  fire  there  this  hour  past  'burning  of  papers.'  And  at 
that  moment  a  man  came  out  with  his  arms  full  of  a  huge 
pile — sheets  of  a  book.  Lady  Cecilia  saw — it  was  thrown  on 
the  fire.  Then  came  out  and  stood  before  the  fire — could  she 
be  mistaken  ? — impossible — it  was  like  a  dream — the  General ! 

Cecilia's  first  thought  was  to  run  away  before  she  should  be 
seen  ;  but  the  next  moment  that  thought  was  abandoned,  for 

392 


HELEN 

the  time  to  execute  it  was  now  past.  The  messenger  sent 
across  the  yard  had  announced  that  a  lady  in  the  back  drawing- 
room  wanted  Mr.  Stone.  Eyes  had  looked  up — the  General 
had  seen  and  recognised  her,  and  all  she  could  now  do  was  to 
recognise  him  in  return,  which  she  did  as  eagerly  and  grace- 
fully as  possible.  The  General  came  up  to  her  directly,  not  a 
little  astonished  that  she,  whom  he  fancied  at  home  in  her  bed, 
incapacitated  by  a  headache  that  had  prevented  her  from 
speaking  to  him,  should  be  here,  so  far  out  of  her  usual  haunts, 
and,  as  it  seemed,  out  of  her  element^ — •'  What  can  bring  you 
here,  my  dear  Cecilia  ? ' 

'The  same  purpose  which,  if  I  rightly  spell,  brought  you 
here,  my  dear  General,'  and  her  eye  intelligently  glanced  at 
the  burning  papers  in  the  yard. 

'  Do  you  know  then,  Cecilia,  what  those  papers  are  ?  How 
did  you  know  ? ' 

Lady  Cecilia  told  her  history,  keeping  as  strictly  to  facts  as 
the  nature  of  the  case  admitted.  Her  headache,  of  course, 
she  had  found  much  better  for  the  sleep  she  had  taken.  She 
had  set  off,  she  told  him,  as  soon  as  she  was  able,  for  Lady 
Castlefort's,  to  inquire  into  the  meaning  of  the  strange  whispers 
of  the  preceding  night.  Then  she  told  of  the  scandalous  para- 
graphs she  had  seen  ;  how  she  had  looked  over  the  book ;  and 
how  successfully  she  had  torn  out  and  destroyed  the  whole 
chapter ;  and  then  how,  hoping  to  be  able  to  prevent  the 
publication,  she  had  driven  directly  to  Mr.  Stone's. 

Her  husband,  with  confiding,  admiring  eyes,  looked  at  her 
and  listened  to  her,  and  thought  all  she  said  so  natural,  so 
kind,  that  he  could  not  but  love  her  the  more  for  her  zeal  of 
friendship,  though  he  blamed  her  for  interfering,  in  defiance 
of  his  caution.  '  Had  you  consulted  me,  or  listened  to  me, 
my  dear  Cecilia,  this  morning,  I  could  have  saved  you  all  this 
trouble  ;  I  should  have  told  you  that  I  would  settle  with  Stone, 
and  stop  the  publication,  as  I  have  done.' 

'  But  that  copy  which  had  been  sent  to  Lady  Katrine,  surely 
I  did  some  good  there  by  burning  those  pages  ;  for  if  once  it 
had  got  among  her  set,  it  would  have  spread  like  wildfire,  you 
know.  Clarendon.' 

He  acknowledged  this,  and  said,  smiling — '  Be  satisfied 
with  yourself,  my  love  ;  I  acknowledge  that  you  made  there  a 
capital  coup  de  main.' 

393 


HELEN 

Just  then  in  came  Mr.  Stone  with  an  account  in  his  hand, 
which  the  General  stepped  forward  to  receive,  and,  after  one 
glance  at  the  amount,  he  took  up  a  pen,  wrote,  and  signed  his 
name  to  a  cheque  on  his  banker.  Mr.  Stone  received  it,  bowed 
obsequiously,  and  assured  the  General  that  every  copy  of  the 
offensive  chapter  had  been  withdrawn  from  the  book  and  burnt 
— '  that  copy  excepted  which  you  have  yourself,  General,  and 
that  which  was  sent  to  Lady  Katrine  Hawksby,  which  we  ex- 
pect in  every  minute,  and  it  shall  be  sent  to  Grosvenor  Square 
immediately.      I  will  bring  it  myself,  to  prevent  all  danger.' 

The  General,  who  knew  there  was  no  danger  there,  smiled 
at  Cecilia,  and  told  the  bookseller  that  he  need  take  no  further 
trouble  about  Lady  Katrine's  copy ;  the  man  bowed,  and  look- 
ing again  at  the  amount  of  the  cheque,  retired  well  satisfied. 

'You  come  home  with  me,  my  dear  Clarendon,  do  not  you?' 
said  Lady  Cecilia. 

They  drove  off.  On  their  way,  the  General  said — '  It  is 
always  difficult  to  decide  whether  to  contradict  or  to  let  such 
publications  take  their  course  :  but  in  the  present  case,  to  stop 
the  scandal  instantly  and  completely  was  the  only  thing  to  be 
done.  There  are  cases  of  honour,  when  women  are  concerned, 
where  law  is  too  slow  :  it  must  not  be  remedy,  it  must  be 
prevention.  If  the  finger  of  scorn  dares  to  point,  it  must  be 
— cut  off.'  After  a  pause  of  grave  thought,  he  added — '  Upon 
the  manner  in  which  Helen  now  acts  will  depend  her  happiness 
— her  character — her  whole  future  life.' 

Lady  Cecilia  summoned  all  her  power  to  prevent  her  from 
betraying  herself:  the  danger  was  great,  for  she  could  not 
command  her  fears  so  completely  as  to  hide  the  look  of  alarm 
with  which  she  listened  to  the  General ;  but  in  his  eyes  her 
agitation  appeared  no  more  than  was  natural  for  her  to  feel 
about  her  friend. 

'My  love,'  continued  he,  'if  Helen  is  worthy  of  your 
affection,  she  will  show  it  now.  Her  only  resource  is  in  per- 
fect truth  :  tell  her  so,  Cecilia — impress  it  upon  her  mind. 
Would  to  Heaven  I  had  been  able  to  convince  her  of  this  at 
first  !  Speak  to  her  strongly,  Cecilia;  as  you  love  her,  impress 
upon  her  that  my  esteem,  Beauclerc's  love,  the  happiness  of 
her  life,  depend  upon  her  truth  ! '  As  he  repeated  these  words, 
the  carriage  stopped  at  their  own  door. 


394 


HELEN 


CHAPTER   XXXIX 

We  left  Helen  in  the  back  drawing-room,  the  door  bolted,  and 
beginning  to  read  her  dreaded  task.  The  paragraphs  in  the 
newspapers,  we  have  seen,  were  sufficiently  painful,  but  when 
she  came  to  the  book  itself — to  the  letters — she  was  in  con- 
sternation, greater  even  than  what  she  had  felt  in  the  General's 
presence  under  the  immediate  urgency  of  his  eye  and  voice. 
Her  conviction  was  that  in  each  of  these  letters  there  were 
some  passages,  some  expressions,  which  certainly  were  Cecilia's, 
but  mixed  with  others,  which  as  certainly  were  not  hers.  The 
internal  evidence  appeared  to  her  irresistibly  strong  :  and  even 
in  those  passages  which  she  knew  to  be  Cecilia's  writing,  it  too 
plainly  appeared  that,  however  playfully,  however  delicately 
expressed,  there  was  more  of  real  attachment  for  Colonel 
D'Aubigny  than  Cecilia  had  ever  allowed  Helen  to  believe  ; 
and  she  felt  that  Cecilia  must  shrink  from  General  Clarendon's 
seeing  these  as  her  letters,  after  she  had  herself  assured  him 
that  he  was  her  first  love.  The  falsehood  was  here  so  indubi- 
table, so  proved,  that  Helen  herself  trembled  at  the  thought  of 
Cecilia's  acknowledging  the  plain  facts  to  her  husband.  The 
time  for  it  was  past.  Now  that  they  were  in  print,  published 
perhaps,  how  must  he  feel !  If  even  candid  confession  were 
made  to  him,  and  made  for  the  best  motives,  it  would  to  him 
appear  only  forced  by  necessity — forced,  as  he  would  say  to 
himself,  because  her  friend  would  not  submit  to  be  sacrificed. 

Such  were  Helen's  thoughts  on  reading  the  two  or  three 
first  letters,  but,  as  she  went  on,  her  alarm  increased  to  horror. 
She  saw  things  which  she  felt  certain  Cecilia  could  never  have 
written ;  yet  truth  and  falsehood  were  so  mixed  up  in  every 
paragraph,  circumstances  which  she  herself  had  witnessed  so 
misrepresented,  that  it  was  all  to  her  inextricable  confusion. 
The  passages  which  were  to  be  marked  could  not  now  depend 
upon  her  opinion,  her  belief;  they  must  rest  upon  Cecilia's 
integrity — and  could  she  depend  upon  it  ?  The  impatience 
which  she  had  felt  for  Lady  Cecilia's  return  now  faded  away, 
and  merged  in  the  more  painful  thought  that,  when  she  did 
come,  the  suspense  would  not  end — the  doubts  would  never  be 
satisfied. 

395 


HELEN 

She  lay  down  upon  the  sofa  and  tried  to  rest,  kept  herself 
perfectly  still,  and  resolved  to  think  no  more  ;  and,  as  far  as 
the  power  of  the  mind  over  itself  can  stay  the  ever-rising 
thoughts,  she  controlled  hers,  and  waited  with  a  sort  of  forced, 
desperate  composure  for  the  event.  Suddenly  she  heard  that 
knock,  that  ring,  which  she  knew  announced  Lady  Cecilia's 
return.  But  not  Cecilia  alone  ;  she  heard  the  General  also 
coming  upstairs,  but  Cecilia  first,  who  did  not  stop  for  more 
than  an  instant  at  the  drawing-room  door : — she  looked  in,  as 
Helen  guessed,  and  seeing  that  no  one  was  there,  ran  veryquickly 
up  the  next  flight  of  stairs.  Next  came  the  General : — on 
hearing  his  step,  Helen's  anxiety  became  so  intense  that  she 
could  not,  at  the  moment  he  came  near,  catch  the  sound  or 
distinguish  which  way  he  went.  Strained  beyond  its  power,  the 
faculty  of  hearing  seemed  suddenly  to  fail — all  was  confusion, 
an  indistinct  buzz  of  sounds.  The  next  moment,  however, 
recovering,  she  plainly  heard  his  step  in  the  front  drawing- 
room,  and  she  knew  that  he  twice  walked  up  and  down  the 
whole  length  of  the  room,  as  if  in  deep  thought.  Each  time 
as  he  approached  the  folding  doors  she  was  breathless.  At 
last  he  stopped,  his  hand  was  on  the  lock  —  she  recollected 
that  the  door  was  bolted,  and  as  he  turned  the  handle  she,  in 
a  powerless  voice,  called  to  tell  him,  but  not  hearing  her,  he 
tried  again,  and  as  the  door  shook  she  again  tried  to  speak, 
but  could  not.  Still  she  heard,  though  she  could  not  articulate. 
She  heard  him  say,  '  Miss  Stanley,  are  you  there  ?  Can  I  see 
you  ? ' 

But  the  words — the  voice  seemed  to  come  from  afar — 
sounded  dull  and  strange.  She  tried  to  rise  from  her  seat — 
found  a  difficulty — made  an  effort — stood  up — she  summoned 
resolution — struggled — hurried  across  the  room — drew  back 
the  bolt — threw  open  the  door — and  that  was  all  she  could 
do.  In  that  effort  strength  and  consciousness  failed — she  fell 
forward  and  fainted  at  the  General's  feet.  He  raised  her  up, 
and  laid  her  on  the  sofa  in  the  inner  room.  He  rang  for  her 
maid,  and  went  upstairs  to  prevent  Cecilia's  being  alarmed. 
He  took  the  matter  coolly  ;  he  had  seen  many  fainting  young 
ladies,  he  did  not  like  them — his  o\'\n  Cecilia  excepted — in 
his  mind  always  excepted  from  every  unfavourable  suspicion 
regarding  the  sex.  Helen,  on  the  contrary,  was  at  present 
subject  to  them  all,  and,  under  the  cloud  of  distrust,  he  saw 

396 


HELEN 

in  a  bad  light  everything  that  occurred ;  the  same  appearances 
which,  in  his  wife,  he  would  have  attributed  to  the  sensibiHty 
of  true  feeling,  he  interpreted  in  Helen  as  the  consciousness  of 
falsehood,  the  proof  of  cowardly  duplicity.  He  went  back  at 
once  to  his  original  prejudice  against  her,  when,  as  he  first 
thought,  she  had  been  forced  upon  him  in  preference  to  his 
own  sister.  He  had  been  afterwards  convinced  that  she  had 
been  perfectly  free  from  all  double  dealing ;  yet  now  he  slid 
back  again,  as  people  of  his  character  often  do,  to  their  first 
opinion.  '  I  thought  so  at  first,  and  I  find,  as  I  usually  do, 
that  my  first  thought  was  right.' 

What  had  been  but  an  adverse  feeling  was  now  considered 
as  a  prescient  judgment.  And  he  did  not  go  upstairs  the 
quicker  for  these  thoughts,  but  calmly  and  coolly,  when  he 
reached  Lady  Cecilia's  dressing-room,  knocked  at  the  door, 
and,  with  all  the  precautions  necessary  to  prevent  her  from 
being  alarmed,  told  her  what  had  happened.  'You  had 
better  not  go  down,  my  dear  Cecilia,  I  beg  you  will  not. 
Miss  Stanley  has  her  own  maid,  all  the  assistance  that  can  be 
wanted.  My  dear,  it  is  not  fit  for  you.  I  desire  you  will  not 
go  down.' 

But  Lady  Cecilia  would  not  listen,  could  not  be  detained ; 
she  escaped  from  her  husband,  and  ran  down  to  Helen. 
Excessively  alarmed  she  was,  and  well  she  might  be,  knowing 
herself  to  be  the  cause,  and  not  certain  in  any  way  how  it 
might  end.  She  found  Helen  a  little  recovered,  but  still  pale 
as  white  marble  ;  and  when  Lady  Cecilia  took  her  hand,  it  was 
still  quite  cold.  She  came  to  herself  but  very  slowly.  For 
some  minutes  she  did  not  recover  perfect  consciousness  or 
clear  recollection.  She  saw  figures  of  persons  moving  about 
her,  she  felt  them  as  if  too  near,  and  wished  them  away ; 
wanted  air,  but  could  not  say  what  she  wished.  She  would 
have  moved,  but  her  limbs  would  not  obey  her  will.  At  last, 
when  she  had  with  effort  half  raised  her  head,  it  sank  back 
again  before  she  could  distinguish  all  the  persons  in  the  room. 
The  shock  of  cold  water  on  her  forehead  revived  her ;  then, 
coming  clearly  to  power  of  perception,  she  saw  Cecilia  bending 
over  her.  But  still  she  could  not  speak,  and  yet  she  understood 
distinctly,  saw  the  affectionate  anxiety,  too,  in  her  little  maid 
Rose's  countenance  ;  she  felt  that  she  loved  Rose,  and  that 
she  could  not  endure  Fehcie,  who  had  now  come  in,  and  was 

397 


HELEN 

making  exclamations,  and  advising  various  remedies,  all  of 
which,  when  offered,  Helen  declined.  It  was  not  merely  that 
Felicia's  talking,  and  tone  of  voice,  and  superabundant  action, 
were  too  much  for  her ;  but  that  Helen  had  at  this  moment  a 
sort  of  intuitive  perception  of  insincerity  and  of  exaggeration. 
In  that  dreamy  state,  hovering  between  life  and  death,  in  which 
people  are  on  coming  out  of  a  swoon,  it  seems  as  if  there  was 
need  for  a  firm  hold  of  reality  ;  the  senses  and  the  understand- 
ing join  in  the  struggle,  and  become  most  acute  in  their 
perception  of  what  is  natural  or  what  is  unnatural,  true  or  false, 
in  the  expressions  and  feelings  of  the  bystanders.  Lady 
Cecilia  understood  her  look,  and  dismissed  Felicie,  with  all 
her  smelling-bottles.  Rose,  though  not  ordered  away,  judi- 
ciously retired  as  soon  as  she  saw  that  her  services  were  of  no 
further  use,  and  that  there  was  something  upon  her  young 
lady's  mind,  for  which  hartshorn  and  sal  volatile  could  be  of 
no  avail. 

Cecilia  would  have  kissed  her  forehead,  but  Helen  made  a 
slight  withdrawing  motion,  and  turned  away  her  face :  the 
next  instant,  however,  she  looked  up,  and  taking  Cecilia's 
hand,  pressed  it  kindly,  and  said,  '  You  are  more  to  be  pitied 
than  I  am  ;  sit  down,  sit  down  beside  me,  my  poor  Cecilia ; 
how  you  tremble  !  and  yet  you  do  not  know  what  is  coming 
upon  you.' 

'Yes,  yes,  I  do — I  do,'  cried  Lady  Cecilia,  and  she  eagerly 
told  Helen  all  that  had  passed,  ending  with  the  assurance 
that  the  publication  had  been  completely  stopped  by  her  dear 
Clarendon  ;  that  the  whole  chapter  containing  the  letters  had 
been  destroyed,  that  not  a  single  copy  had  got  abroad. 
'  The  only  one  in  existence  is  this,'  said  she,  taking  it  up  as 
she  spoke,  and  she  made  a  movement  as  if  going  to  tear  out 
the  leaves,  but  Helen  checked  her  hand,  '  That  must  not  be, 
the  General  desired ' 

And  almost  breathless,  yet  distinctly,  she  repeated  what  the 
General  had  said,  that  he  might  be  called  upon  to  prove  which 
parts  were  forged,  and  which  true,  and  that  she  had  promised 
to  mark  the  passages.  '  So  now,  Cecilia,  here  is  a  pencil,  and 
mark  what  is  and  what  is  not  yours.' 

Lady  Cecilia  instantly  took  the  pencil,  and  in  great  agita- 
tion obeyed.  '  Oh,  my  dear  Helen,  some  of  these  the  General 
could  not  think  yours.     Very  wicked  these  people  have  been  ! 

398 


HELEN 

— so  the  General  said  ;  he  was  sure,  he  knew,  all  could  not  be 
yours.' 

'  Finish,  my  dear  Cecilia,'  interrupted  Helen  ;  '  finish  what 
you  have  to  do,  and  in  this  last  trial,  give  me  this  one  proof  of 
your  sincerity.  Be  careful  in  what  you  are  now  doing,  mark 
truly  — O  Cecilia  !  every  word  you  recollect — as  your  con- 
science tells  you.  Will  you,  Cecilia  .■■  this  is  all  I  ask,  as  I  am 
to  answer  for  it — will  you  ? ' 

Most  fervently  she  protested  she  would.  She  had  no 
difficulty  in  recollecting,  in  distinguishing,  her  own  ;  and  at  first 
she  marked  truly,  and  was  glad  to  separate  what  was  at  worst 
only  foolish  girlish  nonsense  from  things  which  had  been 
interpolated  to  make  out  the  romance :  things  which  never 
could  have  come  from  her  mind. 

There  is  some  comfort  in  having  our  own  faults  over- 
shadowed, outdone,  by  the  greater  faults  of  others.  And  here 
it  was  flagrant  wickedness  in  the  editor,  and  only  weakness 
and  imprudence  in  the  writer  of  the  real  letters.  Lady  Cecilia 
continually  solaced  her  conscience  by  pointing  out  to  Helen,  as 
she  went  on,  the  folly,  literally  the  folly,  of  the  deception  she 
had  practised  on  her  husband ;  and  her  exclamations  against 
herself  were  so  vehement  that  Helen  would  not  add  to  her  pain 
by  a  single  reproach,  since  she  had  decided  that  the  time  was 
past  for  urging  her  confession  to  the  General.  She  now  only 
said,  '  Look  to  the  future,  Cecilia,  the  past  we  cannot  recall. 
This  will  be  a  lesson  you  can  never  forget.' 

'  Oh,  never,  never,  can  I  forget  it.  You  have  saved  me, 
Helen.' 

Tears  and  protestations  followed  these  words,  and  at  the 
moment  they  were  all  sincere  ;  and  yet,  can  it  be  believed  ? 
even  in  this  last  trial,  when  it  came  to  this  last  proof.  Lady 
Cecilia  was  not  perfectly  true.  She  purposely  avoided  putting 
her  mark  of  acknowledgment  to  any  of  those  expressions  which 
most  cleariy  proved  her  love  for  Colonel  D'Aubigny ;  for  she 
still  said  to  herself  that  the  time  might  come,  though  at 
present  it  could  not  be,  when  she  might  make  a  confession  to 
her  husband, — in  his  joy  at  the  birth  of  a  son,  she  thought  she 
might  venture  ;  she  still  looked  forward  to  doing  justice  to  her 
friend  at  some  future  period,  and  to  make  this  easier — to 
make  this  possible — as  she  said  to  herself,  she  must  now  leave 
out  certain  expressions,  which  might,  if  acknowledged,  remain 

399 


HELEN 

for  ever  fixed  in  Clarendon's  mind,  and  for  which  she  could 
never  be  forgiven. 

Helen,  when  she  looked  over  the  pages,  observed  among 
the  unmarked  passages  some  of  those  expressions  which  she 
had  thought  were  Cecilia's,  but  she  concluded  she  was  mis- 
taken :  she  could  not  believe  that  her  friend  could  at  such  a 
moment  deceive  her,  and  she  was  even  ashamed  of  having 
doubted  her  sincerity  ;  and  her  words,  look,  and  manner,  now 
gave  assurance  of  perfect  unquestioning  confidence. 

This  delicacy  in  Helen  struck  Lady  Cecilia  to  the  quick. 
Ever  apt  to  be  more  touched  by  her  refined  feelings  than  by 
any  strong  appeal  to  her  reason  or  her  principles,  she  was 
now  shocked  by  the  contrast  between  her  own  paltering 
meanness  and  her  friend's  confiding  generosity.  As  this 
thought  crossed  her  mind,  she  stretched  out  her  hand  again 
for  the  book,  took  up  the  pencil,  and  was  going  to  mark  the 
truth  ;  but,  the  impulse  past,  cowardice  prevailed,  and  cowardice 
whispered,  '  Helen  is  looking  at  me,  Helen  sees  at  this  moment 
what  I  am  doing,  and,  after  having  marked  them  as  not  mine, 
how  can  I  now  acknowledge  them? — it  is  too  late — it  is 
impossible.' 

'  I  have  done  as  you  desired,'  continued  she,  '  Helen,  to  the 
best  of  my  ability.  I  have  marked  all  this,  but  what  can  it 
signify  now,  my  dear,  except ? ' 

Helen  interrupted  her.  '  Take  the  book  to  the  General 
this  moment,  will  you,  and  tell  him  that  all  the  passages  are 
marked  as  he  desired  ;  stay,  I  had  better  write.' 

She  wrote  upon  a  slip  of  paper  a  message  to  the  same 
effect,  having  well  considered  the  words  by  which  she 
might,  without  further  step  in  deception,  save  her  friend,  and 
take  upon  herself  the  whole  blame — the  whole  hazardous 
responsibility. 

When  Cecilia  gave  the  marked  book  to  General  Clarendon, 
he  said,  as  he  took  it,  '  I  am  glad  she  has  done  this,  though  it 
is  unnecessary  now,  as  I  was  going  to  tell  her  if  she  had  not 
fainted  ;  unnecessary,  because  I  have  now  in  my  possession 
the  actual  copies  of  the  original  letters  ;  I  found  them  here  on 
my  return.  That  good  little  poetess  found  them  for  me  at  the 
printer's — but  she  could  not  discover — I  have  not  yet  been 
able  to  trace  where  they  came  from,  or  by  whom  they  were 
copied. ' 

400 


HELEN 

'  Oh,  let  me  see  them,'  cried  Lady  Cecilia. 

'  Not  yet,  my  love,'  said  he  ;  '  you  would  know  nothing 
more  by  seeing  them  ;  they  are  in  a  feigned  hand  evidently.' 

'  But,'  interrupted  Cecilia,  '  you  cannot  want  the  book  now, 
when  you  have  the  letters  themselves ' ;  and  she  attempted  to 
draw  it  from  his  hand,  for  she  instantly  perceived  the  danger 
of  the  discrepancies  between  her  marks  and  the  letters  being 
detected.  She  made  a  stronger  effort  to  withdraw  the  book, 
but  he  held  it  fast. 

'  Leave  it  with  me  now,  my  dear  ;  I  want  it  ;  it  will  settle 
my  opinion  as  to  Helen's  truth.' 

Slowly,  and  absolutely  sickened  with  apprehension,  Lady 
Cecilia  withdrew.  When  she  returned  to  Helen,  and  found 
how  pale  she  was  and  how  exhausted  she  seemed,  she  en- 
treated her  to  lie  down  again  and  try  to  rest. 

'Yes,  I  believe  I  had  better  rest  before  I  see  Granville,' 
said  Helen  :   '  where  can  he  have  been  all  day  ? ' 

'  With  some  friend  of  his,  I  suppose,'  said  Cecilia,  and 
she  insisted  on  Helen's  saying  no  more,  and  keeping  herself 
perfectly  quiet.  She  further  suggested  that  she  had  better  not 
appear  at  dinner. 

'  It  will  be  only  a  family  party,  some  of  the  General's  re- 
lations. Miss  Clarendon  is  to  be  here,  and  she  is  one,  you 
know,  trying  to  the  spirits  ;  and  she  is  not  likely  to  be  in  her 
most  suave  humour  this  evening,  as  she  has  been  under  a 
course  of  the  toothache,  and  has  been  all  day  at  the  dentist's.' 

Helen  readily  consented  to  remain  in  her  own  room,  though 
she  had  not  so  great  a  dread  of  Miss  Clarendon  as  Lady 
Cecilia  seemed  to  feel.  Lady  Cecilia  was  indeed  in  the 
greatest  terror  lest  Miss  Clarendon  should  have  heard  some  of 
these  reports  about  Helen  and  Beauclerc,  and  would  in  her 
blunt  way  ask  directly  what  they  meant,  and  go  on  with  some 
of  her  point-blank  questions,  which  Cecilia  feared  might  be 
found  unanswerable.  However,  as  Miss  Clarendon  had  only 
just  come  to  town  from  Wales,  and  come  only  about  her 
teeth,  she  hoped  that  no  reports  could  have  reached  her  ;  and 
Cecilia  trusted  much  to  her  own  address  and  presence  of  mind 
in  moments  of  danger,  in  turning  the  conversation  the  way  it 
should  go. 

But  things  were  now  come  to  a  point  where  none  of  the 
little  skilful  interruptions  or  lucky  hits  by  which  she  had  so 
2  D  401 


HELEN 

frequently  profited,  could  avail  her  further  than  to  delay  what 
must  be.  Passion  and  character  pursue  their  course  unalter- 
ably, unimpeded  by  small  external  circumstances  ;  interrupted 
they  may  be  in  their  progress,  but  as  the  stream  opposed  bears 
against  the  obstacle,  sweeps  it  away,  or  foams  and  passes  by. 

Before  Lady  Cecilia's  toilette  was  finished  her  husband  was 
in  her  dressing-room  ;  came  in  without  knocking, — a  circum- 
stance so  unusual  with  him,  that  Mademoiselle  Felicie's  eyes 
opened  to  their  utmost  orbit,  and,  without  waiting  for  word  or 
look,  she  vanished,  leaving  the  bracelet  half  clasped  on  her 
lady's  arm. 

'  Cecilia  ! '  said  the  General. 

He  spoke  in  so  stern  a  tone  that  she  trembled  from  head  to 
foot ;  her  last  falsehood  about  the  letters — all  her  falsehoods, 
all  her  concealments,  were,  she  thought,  discovered  ;  unable  to 
support  herself,  she  sank  into  his  arms.  He  seated  her,  and 
went  on  in  a  cool,  inexorable  tone,  '  Cecilia,  I  am  determined 
not  to  sanction  by  any  token  of  my  public  approbation  this 
marriage,  which  I  no  longer  in  my  private  conscience  desire  or 
approve  ;  I  will  not  be  the  person  to  give  Miss  Stanley  to  my 
ward.' 

Lady  Cecilia  almost  screamed  :  her  selfish  fears  forgotten, 
she  felt  only  terror  for  her  friend.  She  exclaimed,  '  Claren- 
don, will  you  break  off  the  marriage  ?  Oh  !  Helen,  what  will 
become  of  her  !      Clarendon,  what  can  you  mean  ? ' 

'  I  mean  that  I  have  compared  the  passages  that  Helen 
marked  in  the  book  with  those  copies  of  the  letters  which 
were  given  to  the  bookseller  before  the  interpolations  were 
made — the  letters  as  Miss  Stanley  wrote  them.  The  passages 
in  the  letters  and  the  passages  ma-'fed  in  the  book  do  not  agree.' 

'  Oh,  but  she  might  have  forgotten,  it  might  be  accident,' 
cried  Cecilia,  overwhelmed  with  confusion. 

'  No,  Cecilia,'  pursued  the  General,  in  a  tone  which  made 
her  heart  die  within  her — '  no,  Cecilia,  it  is  not  accident,  it 
is  design.  I  perceive  that  every  strong  expression,  every  word, 
in  short,  which  could  show  her  attachment  to  that  man,  has 
been  purposely  marked  as  not  her  own,  and  the  letters  them- 
selves prove  that  they  were  her  own.     The  truth  is  not  in  her.' 

In  an  agitation,  which  prevented  all  power  of  thought, 
Ceciha  exclaimed,  '  She  mistook — she  mistook  ;  I  could  not, 
I  am  sure,  recollect ;  she  asked  me  if  I  remembered  any.' 

402 


HELEN 


'  She  consulted  you,  then  ? ' 

'  She  asked  my  advice, — told  me  that- 


■  I  particularly  requested  her,'  interrupted  the  General, 
'  not  to  ask  your  advice ;  I  desired  her  not  to  speak  to  you  on 
the  subject — not  to  consult  you.  Deceit — double-dealing  in 
everything  she  does,  I  find.' 

'  No,  no,  it  is  my  fault ;  everything  I  say  and  do  is  wrong,' 
cried  Lady  Cecilia.  '  I  recollect  now — it  was  just  after  her 
fainting,  when  I  brought  the  book,  and  when  she  took  it  to 
mark  she  really  was  not  able.  It  was  not  that  she  consulted 
me,  but  I  forced  my  counsel  upon  her.  I  looked  over  the 
letters,  and  said  what  I  thought — if  anybody  is  wrong,  it  is 
I,  Clarendon.  Oh  do  not  visit  my  sins  upon  Helen  so  cruelly  ! 
— do  not  make  me  the  cause  of  her  ruin,  innocent  creature  ! 
I  assure  you,  if  you  do  this,  I  never  could  forgive  myself 

The  General  looked  at  her  in  silence  :  she  did  not  dare  to 
meet  his  eyes,  desperately  anxious  as  she  was  to  judge  by  his 
countenance  what  was  passing  within.  He  clasped  for  her  that 
bracelet  which  her  trembling  hands  were  in  vain  attempting  to 
close. 

'  Poor  thing,  how  its  heart  beats ! '  said  her  husband, 
pressing  her  to  him  as  he  sat  down  beside  her.  Cecilia  thought 
she  might  venture  to  speak.  '  You  know,  my  dear  Clarendon, 
I  never  oppose — interfere  with — any  determination  of  yours 
when  once  it  is  fixed ' 

'  This  is  fixed,'  interrupted  the  General. 

'  But  after  all  you  have  done  for  her  this  very  day,  for  which 
I  am  sure  she — I  am  sure  I  thank  you  from  my  soul,  would 
you  now  undo  it  all  ? ' 

'  She  is  saved  from  publi  shame,'  said  the  General,  '  from 
private  contempt  I  cannot  save  her :  who  can  save  those  who 
have  not  truth  ?  But  my  determination  is  fixed  ;  it  is  useless 
to  waste  words  on  the  subject.  Esther  is  come  ;  I  must  go 
to  her.  And  now,  Cecilia,  I  conjure  you,  when  you  see 
Beauclerc — I  have  not  seen  him  all  day — I  do  not  know 
where  he  has  been — I  conjure  you — I  command  you  not  to 
interfere  between  him  and  Helen.' 

'  But  you  would  not  have  me  give  her  up  !  I  should  be  the 
basest  of  human  beings.' 

'  I  do  not  know  what  you  mean,  Cecilia ;  you  have  done 
for  her  all  that  an  honourable  friend  could  do.' 

403 


n'/f 


Cecilia  thought  she  might  venture  to  speak. 


HELEN 

'  I  am  not  an  honourable  friend,'  was  Cecilia's  bitter 
consciousness,  as  she  pressed  her  hand  upon  her  heart,  which 
throbbed  violently  with  contending  fears. 

'  You  have  done  all  that  an  honourable  friend  could  do  ; 
more  must  not  be  done,'  continued  the  General.  '  And  now 
recollect,  Cecilia,  that  you  are  my  wife  as  well  as  Miss  Stanley's 
friend '  ;   and,  as  he  said  these  words,  he  left  the  room. 


CHAPTER  XL 

That  knowing  French  minister,  Louvois,  whose  power  is  said 
to  have  been  maintained  by  his  surpassing  skill  in  collecting 
and  spreading  secret  and  swift  intelligence,  had  in  his  pay 
various  classes  of  unsuspected  agents,  dancing-masters,  fencing- 
masters,  language-masters,  milliners,  hairdressers,  and  barbers 
— dentists  he  would  have  added,  had  he  lived  to  our  times ; 
and  not  all  Paris  could  have  furnished  him  with  a  person 
better  suited  to  his  purpose  than  the  most  fashionable  London 
dentist  of  the  day,  St.  Leger  Swift.  Never  did  Frenchman 
exceed  him  in  volubility  of  utterance,  or  in  gesture  significant, 
supplying  all  that  words  might  fear  or  fail  to  tell ;  never  was 
he  surpassed  by  prattling  barber  or  privileged  hunchback  in 
ancient  or  modern  story,  Arabian  or  Persian  ;  but  he  was  not 
a  malicious,  only  a  coxcomb  scandal-monger,  triumphing  in  his 
sgavoir  dire.  St.  Leger  Swift  was  known  to  everybody — knew 
everybody  in  London  that  was  to  be  or  was  not  to  be  known, 
every  creature  dead  or  alive  that  ever  had  been,  or  was  about 
to  be,  celebrated,  fashionable,  or  rich,  or  clever,  or  notorious, 
rouk  or  murderer,  about  to  be  married  or  about  to  be  hanged — 
for  that  last  class  of  persons  enjoys  in  our  days  a  strange  kind 
of  heroic  celebrity,  of  which  Voltaire  might  well  have  been 
jealous.  St.  Leger  was,  of  course,  hand  and  glove  with  all  the 
royal  family  ;  every  illustrious  personage — every  most  illus- 
trious personage — had  in  turn  sat  in  his  chair  ;  he  had  had 
all  their  heads,  in  their  turns,  in  his  hands,  and  he  had  capital 
anecdotes  and  sayings  of  each,  with  which  he  charmed  away 
the  sense  of  pain  in  loyal  subjects.  But  with  scandal  for  the 
fair  was  he  specially  provided.     Never  did  man  or  woman  skim 

405 


HELEN 

the  surface  tittle-tattle  of  society,  or  dive  better,  breathless, 
into  family  mysteries  ;  none,  with  more  careless  air,  could  at 
the  same  time  talk  and  listen — extract  your  news  and  give  you 
his  on  dit,  or  tell  the  secret  which  you  first  reveal.  There  was 
in  him  and  about  him  such  an  air  of  reckless,  cordial  coxcombry, 
it  warmed  the  coldest,  threw  the  most  cautious  off  their  guard, 
brought  out  family  secrets  as  if  he  had  been  one  of  your  family 
— your  secret  purpose  as  though  he  had  been  a  secular  father 
confessor  ;  as  safe  everything  told  to  St.  Leger  Swift,  he 
would  swear  to  you,  as  if  known  only  to  yourself:  he  would 
swear,  and  you  would  believe,  unless  peculiarly  constituted,  as 
was  the  lady  who,  this  morning,  took  her  seat  in  his  chair — 

Miss  Clarendon.  She  was  accompanied  by  her  aunt,  Mrs. 
Pennant. 

'  Ha  !  old  lady  and  young  lady,  fresh  from  the  country. 
Both,  I  see,  persons  of  family — of  condition,'  said  St.  Leger 
to  himself  On  that  point  his  practised  eye  could  not  mistake, 
even  at  first  glance  ;  and  accordingly  it  was  really  doing  him- 
self a  pleasure,  and  these  ladies,  as  he  conceived  it,  a  pleasure, 
a  service,  and  an  honour,  to  put  them,  immediately  on  their 
arrival  in  town,  aic  courant  du  jour.  Whether  to  pull  or  not 
to  pull  a  tooth  that  had  offended,  was  the  professional  question 
before  him. 

Miss  Clarendon  threw  back  her  head,  and  opened  her 
mouth. 

'  Fine  teeth,  fine  !  Nothing  to  complain  of  here  surely,' 
said  St.  Leger.  '  As  fine  a  show  of  ivory  as  ever  I  beheld. 
'Pon  my  reputation,  I  know  many  a  fine  lady  who  would  give 
— all  but  her  eyes  for  such  a  set.' 

'  I  must  have  this  tooth  out,'  said  Miss  Clarendon,  pointing 
to  the  offender. 

'  I  see  ;  certainly,  ma'am,  as  you  say.' 

'  I  hope,  sir,  you  don't  think  it  necessary,'  said  her  tender- 
hearted aunt  :   '  if  it  could  be  any  way  avoided ' 

'  By  all  means,  madam,  as  you  say.  We  must  do  nothing 
without  consideration.' 

'  I  have  considered,  my  dear  aunt,'  said  Miss  Clarendon. 
'  I  have  not  slept  these  three  nights.' 

'  But  you  do  not  consider  that  you  caught  cold  getting  up 
one  night  for  me  ;  and  it  may  be  only  an  accidental  cold,  my 
dear  Esther.      I  should  be  so  sorry  if  you  were  to  lose  a  tooth. 

406 


HELEN 

Don't  be  in  a  hurry  ;  once  gone,  you  cannot  get  it  back 
again.' 

'  Never  was  a  truer,  wiser  word  spoken,  madam,'  said  St. 
Leger,  swiftly  whisking  himself  round,  and  as  if  looking  for 
some  essential  implement.      '  May  be  a  mere  twinge,  accidental 

cold,  rheumatism,  or  may  be My  dear  madam '  (to  the 

aunt),  '  I  will  trouble  you  ;  let  me  pass.  I  beg  pardon — one 
word  with  you,'  and  with  his  back  to  the  patient  in  the  chair, 
while  he  rummaged  among  ivory-handled  instruments  on  the 
table,  he  went  on  in  a  low  voice  to  the  aunt — '  Is  she  nervous  ? 
is  she  nervous,  eh,  eh,  eh  ? ' 

Mrs.  Pennant  looked,  but  did  not  hear,  for  she  was  a  little  deaf. 

'  Yes,  yes,  yes ;  I  see  how  it  is.  A  word  to  the  wise,' 
replied  he,  with  a  nod  of  intelligence.  '  Every  lady's  nervous 
nowadays,  more  or  less.  Where  the  deuce  did  I  put  this 
thing  ?  Yes,  yes — nerves  ; — all  the  same  to  me  ;  know  how 
to  manage.  Make  it  a  principle — professional,  to  begin  always 
by  talking  away  nerves.  You  shall  see,  you  shall  see,  my 
dearest  madam  ;  you  shall  soon  see — you  shall  hear,  you  shall 
hear  how  I'll  talk  this  young  lady — your  niece — out  of  her 

nerves   fairly.     Beg  pardon,   miss ,   one   instant.      I    am 

searching  for — where  have  I  put  it  ? ' 

'  I  beg  your  pardon,  sir :  I  am  a  little  deaf,'  said  Mrs. 
Pennant. 

'  Deaf — hey  ?  Ha  !  a  Httle  deaf.  So  everybody  is  nowa- 
days ;  even  the  most  illustrious  personages,  more  or  less. 
Death  and  deafness  common  to  all — mors  omnibus.  I  have 
it.  Now,  my  dear  young  lady,  let  us  have  another  look  and 
touch   at  these   beautiful   teeth.     Your  head   will   do   very — 

vastly  well,  my  dear  ma'am — miss um,  um,  um  ! '  hoping 

the  name  would  be  supplied.  But  that  Miss  Clarendon  did 
not  tell. 

So  raising  his  voice  to  the  aunt  as  he  went  on  looking,  or 
seeming  to  look,  at  the  niece's  tooth,  he  continued  rapidly — 
'  From  Wales  you  are,  ma'am  ?  a  beautiful  country  Wales, 
ma'am.  Very  near  being  bom  there  myself,  like,  ha,  ha,  ha  ! 
that  Prince  of  Wales — first  Prince — Caernarvon  Castle — you 
know  the  historical  anecdote.  Never  saw  finer  teeth,  upon 
my  reputation.  Are  you  ladies,  may  I  ask,  for  I've  friends  in 
both  divisions — are  you  North  or  South  Wales,  eh,  eh  ? ' 

'  South,  sir.     Llansillen.' 

407 


HELEN 

'Ay,  South.  The  most  picturesque  certainly.  Llansillen, 
Llansillen ;  know  it ;  know  everybody  ten  miles  round. 
Respectable  people — all — very  ;  most  respectable  people  come 
up  from  Wales  continually.  Some  of  our  best  blood  from 
Wales,  as  a  great  personage  observed  lately  to  me, — Thick, 
thick  !  not  thicker  blood  than  the  Welsh.  His  late  Majesty, 
ti  propos,  was  pleased  to  say  to  me  once ' 

'  But,'  interrupted  Miss  Clarendon,  '  what  do  you  say  to  my 
tooth  ? ' 

'  Sound  as  a  roach,  my  dear  ma'am  ;  I  will  insure  it  for  a 
thousand  pounds.' 

'  But  that,  the  tooth  you  touch,  is  not  the  tooth  I  mean  : 
pray  look  at  this,  sir.' 

'  Excuse  me,  my  dear  madam,  a  little  in  my  light,'  said  he 
to  the  aunt.      '  May  I  beg  the  favour  of  your  name  ? 

'  Pennant  !  ah  !  ah  !  ah  ! '  with  his  hands  in  uplifted  admira- 
tion—  'I  thought  so — Pennant.  I  said  so  to  myself,  for  I 
know  so  many  Pennants — great  family  resemblance — Great 
naturahst  of  that  name — any  relation?  Oh  yes — No  —  I 
thought  so  from  the  first.  Yes — and  can  assure  you,  to  my 
private  certain  knowledge,  that  man  stood  high  on  the  pinnacle 
of  favour  with  a  certain  royal  personage, — for,  often  sitting  in 
this  very  chair — 

'  Keep  your  mouth  open — a  little  longer — little  wider,  my 
good  Miss  Pennant.  Here's  a  little  something  for  me  to  do, 
nothing  of  any  consequence — only  touch  and  go — nothing  to 
be  taken  away,  no,  no,  must  not  lose  one  of  these  fine  teeth. 
That  most  illustrious  personage  said  one  day  to  me,  sitting  in 
this  very  chair — "  Swift,"  said  he,  "  St.  Leger  Swift,"  familiarly, 
condescendingly,  colloquially  —  "St.  Leger  Swift,  my  good 
fellow,"  said  he — 

'  But  positively,  my  dear  miss um,  um,  if  you  have  not 

patience — you  must  sit  still — pardon  me,  professionally  I  must 
be  peremptory.  Impossible  I  could  hurt  —  can't  conceive  — 
did  not  touch — only  making  a  perquisition — inquisition — say 
what  you  please,  but  you  are  nervous,  ma'am  ;  I  am  only  tak- 
ing a  general  survey. 

'  A  propos — general  survey — General — a  friend  of  mine. 
General  Clarendon,  is  just  come  to  town.  My  ears  must  have 
played  me  false,  but  I  thought  my  man  said  something  like 
Clarendon  when  he  showed  you  up.' 

408 


HELEN 

No  answer  from  Miss  Clarendon,  who  held  her  mouth  open 
wide,  as  desired,  resolved  not  to  satisfy  his  curiosity,  but  to  let 
him  blunder  on. 

'  Be  that  as  it  may.  General  Clarendon's  come  to  town — 
fine  teeth  he  has  too  —  and  a  fine  kettle  of  fish — not  very 
elegant,  but  expressive  still — he  and  his  ward  have  made  of 
that  marriage  announced.  Fine  young  man,  though,  that 
Beauclerc — finest  young  man,  almost,  I  ever  saw  ! ' 

But  here  Mr.  St.  Leger  Swift,  starting  suddenly,  withdraw- 
ing his  hand  from  Miss  Clarendon's  mouth,  exclaimed, — 

'  My  finger,  ma'am  !  but  never  mind,  never  mind,  all  in  the 
day's  work.  Casualty — contingencies — no  consequence.  But 
as  I  was  saying,  Mr.  Granville  Beauclerc ' 

Then  poured  out,  on  the  encouragement  of  one  look  of 
curiosity  from  Mrs.  Pennant,  all  the  on  dits  of  Lady  Katrine 
Hawksby,  and  all  her  chorus,  and  all  the  best  authorities  ; 
and  St.  Leger  Swift  was  ready  to  pledge  himself  to  the  truth 
of  every  word.  He  positively  knew  that  the  marriage  was  off, 
and  thought,  as  everybody  did,  that  the  young  gentleman  was 
well  off  too ;  for  besides  the  young  lady's  great  fortune  turning 
out  not  a  sous — and  here  he  supplied  the  half-told  tale  by  a 
drawn-up  ugly  face  and  shrugging  gesture. 

'  Shocking !  shocking  !  all  came  to  an  eclat — esclandrej  a 
scene  quite,  last  night,  I  am  told,  at  my  friend  Lady  Castlefort's. 
Sad — sad — so  young  a  lady  !  But  to  give  you  a  general  idea, 
love-letters  to  come  out  in  the  Memoirs  of  that  fashionable 
Roud — friend  of  mine  too — fine  fellow  as  ever  breathed- — 
only  a  little — you  understand  ;  Colonel  D'Aubigny — Poor 
D'Aubigny,  heigho  —  only  if  the  book  comes  out  —  Miss 
Stanley ' 

Mrs.  Pennant  looked  at  her  niece  in  benevolent  anxiety ; 
Miss  Clarendon  was  firmly  silent ;  but  St.  Leger,  catching 
from  the  expression  of  both  ladies'  countenances  that  they 
were  interested  in  the  contrary  direction  to  what  he  had 
anticipated,  turned  to  the  right  about,  and  observed, — 

'This  may  be  all  scandal,  one  of  the  innumerable  daily 
false  reports  that  are  always  flying  about  town  ;  scandal  all,  I 
have  no  doubt — Your  head  a  little  to  the  right,  if  you  please 
— And  the  publication  will  be  stopped,  of  course,  and  the 
young  lady's  friends — you  are  interested  for  her,  I  see  ;  so  am 
I — always  am  for  the  young  and  fair,  that's  my  foible  ;  and 

409 


HELEN 

indeed,  confidentially  I  can  inform  you  —  If  you  could  keep 
your  head  still,  my  dear  madam.' 

But  Miss  Clarendon  could  bear  it  no  longer  ;  starting  from 
under  his  hand,  she  exclaimed,  '  No  more,  thank  you — no 
more  at  present,  sir:  we  can  call  another  day — no  more': 
and  added  as  she  hastily  left  the  room,  '  Better  bear  the 
toothache,'  and  ran  downstairs.  Mrs.  Pennant  slipped  into 
the  dentist's  hand,  as  he  pulled  the  bell,  a  double  fee  ;  for 
though  she  did  not  quite  think  he  deserved  it  much,  yet  she 
felt  it  necessary  to  make  amends  for  her  niece's  way  of  running 
off,  which  might  not  be  thought  quite  civil. 

'Thank  you,  ma'am  —  thank  ye,  ma'am — not  the  least 
occasion — don't  say  a  word  about  it — Young  lady's  nervous, 
said  so  from  the  first.  Nerves  !  nerves  !  all — open  the  door 
there  —  Nerves  all,'  were  the  last  words,  at  the  top  of  the 
stairs,  St.  Leger  Swift  was  heard  to  say. 

And  the  first  words  of  kind  Mrs.  Pennant,  as  soon  as  she 
was  in  the  carriage  and  had  drawn  up  the  glass,  were,  '  Do 
you  know,  Esther,  my  dear,  I  am  quite  sorry  for  this  poor 
Miss  Stanley.  Though  I  don't  know  her,  yet,  as  you  de- 
scribed her  to  me,  she  was  such  a  pretty,  young,  interesting 
creature  !      I  am  quite  sorry.' 

'  I  don't  believe  a  word  of  it,'  said  Miss  Clarendon. 

'  But  even  to  have  such  things  said  must  be  so  distressing 
to  her  and  to  her  lover,  your  friend  Mr.  Beauclerc — so  very 
distressing ! ' 

'  1  hope  they  are  not  such  fools  as  to  be  distressed  about 
such  stuff.  All  this  insufferable  talking  man's  invention,  I  dare- 
say.' 

'  Why  do  people  tell  such  things  ? '  said  Mrs.  Pennant. 
'  But,  my  dear  Esther,  even  supposing  it  to  be  all  false,  it  is 
shocking  to  have  such  things  spoken  of.  I  pity  the  poor 
young  lady  and  her  lover.  Do  you  not  think,  my  dear,  we 
shall  be  able  to  inquire  into  the  truth  of  the  matter  from  your 
brother  this  evening  ?  He  must  know,  he  ought  to  know, 
about  it  :  whether  the  report  be  true  or  false,  he  should  hear 
of  it.  He  can  best  judge  what  should  be  done,  if  anything 
should  be  done,  my  dear.' 

Miss  Clarendon  quite  agreed  with  all  this  ;  indeed  she  al- 
most always  agreed  with  this  aunt  of  hers,  who,  perhaps  from 
the  peculiar  gentleness  of  her  manner,  joined  to  a  simphcity  and 

410 


A 
ITo  more,  thunkyou—no  more  at  f  resent,  sir:  we  can  call  another  day— no  more.' 


HELEN 

sincerity  of  character  she  could  never  doubt,  had  an  ascendency 
over  lier,  which  no  one,  at  first  view,  could  have  imagined. 

They  had  many  country  commissions  to  execute  this  morn- 
ing, which  naturally  took  up  a  good  deal  of  aunt  Pennant's 
attention.  But  between  each  return  from  shop  to  carriage,  in 
the  intervals  between  one  commission  off  her  hands  and  another 
on  her  mind,  she  returned  regularly  to  '  that  poor  Miss  Stan- 
ley, and  those  love-letters!'  and  she  sighed.  Dear  kind- 
hearted  old  lady  !  she  had  always  a  heart,  as  well  as  a  hand, 
open  as  day  to  melting  charity — charity  in  the  most  enlarged 
sense  of  the  word  :  charity  in  judging  as  well  as  charity  in 
giving.  She  was  all  indulgence  for  human  nature,  for  youth 
and  love  especially. 

'  We  must  take  care,  my  dear  Esther,'  said  she,  '  to  be  at 
General  Clarendon's  early,  as  you  will  like  to  have  some  little 
time  with  him  to  yourself  before  any  one  else  arrives — shall  you 
not,  my  dear  ?  ' 

'  Certainly,'  replied  Miss  Clarendon  ;  '  I  shall  learn  the 
truth  from  my  brother  in  five  minutes,  if  Lady  Cecilia  does 
not  come  between  us.' 

'  Nay,  my  dear  Esther,  I  cannot  think  so  ill  of  Lady 
Cecilia  ;   I  cannot  believe ' 

'  No,  my  dear  aunt,  I  know  you  cannot  think  ill  of  any- 
body. Stay  till  you  know  Lady  Cecilia  Clarendon  as  I  do. 
If  there  is  anything  wrong  in  this  business,  you  will  find  that 
some  falsehood  of  hers  is  at  the  bottom  of  it.' 

'  Oh,  my  dear,  do  not  say  so  before  you  know  ;  perhaps, 
as  you  thought  at  first,  we  shall  find  that  it  is  all  only  a  mis- 
take of  that  giddy  dentist's  ;  for  your  brother's  sake  try  to 
think  as  well  as  you  can  of  his  wife  ;  she  is  a  charming  agree- 
able creature,  I  am  sure.' 

'  You've  only  seen  her  once,  my  dear  aunt,'  said  Miss 
Clarendon.  '  For  my  brother's  sake  I  would  give  up  half  her 
agreeableness  for  one  ounce — for  one  scruple — of  truth.' 

'  Well,  well,  take  it  with  some  grains  of  allowance,  my 
dear  niece  ;  and,  at  any  rate,  do  not  suffer  yourself  to  be  so 
prejudiced  as  to  conceive  she  can  be  in  fault  in  this  business.' 

'  We  shall  see  to-day,'  said  Miss  Clarendon  ;  '  I  will  not 
be  prejudiced  ;  but  I  remember  hearing  at  Florence  that  this 
Colonel  D'Aubigny  had  been  an  admirer  of  Lady  Ceciha's.  I 
will  get  at  the  truth.' 

412 


HELEN 

With  this  determination,  and  in  pursuance  of  the  resolve  to 
be  early,  they  were  at  General  Clarendon's  full  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  before  the  arrival  of  any  other  company ;  but  Lady 
Cecilia  entered  so  immediately  after  the  General  that  Miss 
Clarendon  had  no  time  to  speak  with  her  brother  alone. 
Determined,  however,  as  she  was,  to  get  at  the  truth,  without 
preface,  or  even  smoothing  her  way  to  her  object,  she  rushed 
into  the  middle  of  things  at  once.  '  Have  you  heard  any 
reports  about  Miss  Stanley,  brother  ? ' 

'  Yes.' 

'  And  you,  Lady  Cecilia  ? ' 

'  Yes.' 

'  What  have  you  heard  ? ' 

Lady  Cecilia  was  silent,  looked  at  the  General,  and  left  it  to 
him  to  speak  as  much  or  as  little  as  he  pleased.  She  trusted 
to  his  laconic  mode  of  answering,  which,  without  departing 
from  truth,  defied  curiosity.  Her  trust  in  him  upon  the  pre- 
sent occasion  was,  however,  a  little  disturbed  by  her  know- 
ledge of  his  being  at  this  moment  particularly  displeased  with 
Helen.  But,  had  she  known  the  depths  as  well  as  she  knew 
the  surface  of  his  character,  her  confidence  in  his  caution 
would  have  been  increased,  instead  of  being  diminished,  by 
this  circumstance  :  Helen  was  lost  in  his  esteem,  but  she  was 
still  under  his  protection  ;  her  secrets  were  not  only  sacred, 
but,  as  far  as  truth  and  honour  could  admit,  he  would  still 
serve  and  save  her.  Impenetrable,  therefore,  was  his  look, 
and  brief  was  his  statement  to  his  sister.  A  rascally  bookseller 
had  been  about  to  publish  a  book,  in  which  were  some  letters 
which  paragraphs  in  certain  papers  had  led  the  public  to  believe 
were  Miss  Stanley's  ;  the  publication  had  been  stopped,  the 
offensive  chapter  suppressed,  and  the  whole  impression  de- 
stroyed.' 

'  But,  brother,'  pursued  Miss  Clarendon,  '  were  the  letters 
Miss  Stanley's,  or  not  ?  You  know  I  do  not  ask  from  idle 
curiosity,  but  from  regard  for  Miss  Stanley ' ;  and  she  turned 
her  inquiring  eyes  full  upon  Lady  Cecilia. 

'  I  believe,  my  dear  Esther,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  '  I  believe 
we  had  better  say  no  more  ;  you  had  better  inquire  no 
further.' 

'  That  must  be  a  bad  case  which  can  bear  no  inquiry,'  said 
Miss  Clarendon  ;   '  which  cannot  admit  any  further  question, 

413 


HELEN 

even  from  one  most  disposed  to  think  well  of  the  person  con- 
cerned— a  desperately  bad  case.' 

'  Bad  !  no,  Esther.  It  would  be  cruel  of  you  so  to  conclude  : 
and  falsely  it  would  be — might  be  ;  indeed,  Esther  !  my  dear 
Esther ! ' 

Her  husband's  eyes  were  upon  Lady  Cecilia,  and  she  did  not 
dare  to  justify  Helen  decidedly  ;  her  imploring-  look  and  tone, 
and  her  confusion,  touched  the  kind  aunt,  but  did  not  stop  the 
impenetrable  niece. 

'  Falsely,  do  you  say  ?  Do  you  say.  Lady  Cecilia,  that  it 
would  be  to  conclude  falsely  ?  Perhaps  not  falsely  though, 
upon  the  data  given  to  me.      The  data  may  be  false.' 

'  Data !  I  do  not  know  what  you  mean  exactly,  Esther,' 
said  Lady  Cecilia,  in  utter  confusion. 

'  I  mean  exactly  what  I  say,'  pursued  Miss  Clarendon  ; 
'  that  if  I  reason  wrong,  and  come  to  a  false  conclusion,  or 
what  you  call  a  cruel  conclusion,  it  is  not  my  fault,  but  the 
fault  of  those  who  do  not  plainly  tell  me  the  facts.' 

She  looked  from  Lady  Cecilia  to  her  brother,  and  from  her 
brother  to  Lady  Cecilia.  On  her  brother  no  effect  was  pro- 
duced :  calm,  unalterable,  looked  he  ;  as  though  his  face  had 
been  turned  to  stone.  Lady  Cecilia  struggled  in  vain  to  be 
composed.  '  1  wish  I  could  tell  you,  Esther,'  said  she;  'but 
facts  cannot  always — all  facts — even  the  most  innocent — 
that  is,  even  with  the  best  intentions — cannot  always  be  all 
told,  even  in  the  defence  of  one's  best  friend.' 

'  If  this  be  the  best  defence  you  can  make  for  your  best 
friend,  I  am  glad  you  will  never  have  to  defend  me,  and  I  am 
sorry  for  Helen  Stanley.' 

'  Oh,  my  dear  Esther  ! '  said  her  aunt,  with  a  remonstrating 
look  ;  for,  though  she  had  not  distinctly  heard  all  that  was  said, 
she  saw  that  things  were  going  wrong,  and  that  Esther  was 
making  them  worse.  '  Indeed,  Esther,  my  dear,  we  had 
better  let  this  matter  rest.' 

'  Let  this  matter  rest ! '  repeated  Miss  Clarendon  ;  '  that 
is  not  what  you  would  say,  my  dear  aunt,  if  you  were  to  hear 
any  evil  report  of  me.  If  any  suspicion  fell  like  a  blast  on  my 
character  you  would  never  say  "  let  it  rest." ' 

Fire  lighted  in  her  brother's  eyes,  and  the  stone  face  was  all 
animated,  and  he  looked  sudden  sympathy,  and  he  cried,  '  You 
are  right,  sister,  in  principle,  but  wrong  in — fact.' 

414 


HELEN 

'  Set  me  right  where  only  I  am  wrong  then,'  cried  she. 

He  turned  to  stone  again,  and  her  aunt,  in  a  low  voice,  said, 
'  Not  now.' 

'  Now  or  never,'  said  the  sturdy  champion  ;  '  it  is  for  Miss 
Stanley's  character.  You  are  interested  for  her,  are  not  you, 
aunt  ? ■ 

'  Certainly,  I  am  indeed ;  but  we  do  not  know  all  the 
circumstances — we  cannot ' 

'  But  we  must.  You  do  not  know,  brother,  how  public 
these  reports  are.  Mr.  St.  Leger  Swift,  the  dentist,  has  been 
chattering  to  us  all  morning  about  them.  So,  to  go  to  the 
bottom  of  the  business  at  once,  will  you,  Lady  Cecilia,  answer 
me  one  straightforward  question  ? ' 

Straightforward  question  !  what  is  coming  ?  thought  Lady 
Cecilia  :  her  face  flushed,  and  taking  up  a  hand-screen,  she 
turned  away,  as  if  from  the  scorching  fire  ;  but  it  was  not  a 
scorching  fire,  as  everybody,  or  at  least  as  Miss  Clarendon, 
could  see.  The  face  turned  away  from  Miss  Clarendon  was 
full  in  view  of  aunt  Pennant,  who  was  on  her  other  side  ;  and 
she,  seeing  the  distressed  state  of  the  countenance,  pitied,  and 
gently  laying  her  hand  upon  Lady  Cecilia's  arm,  said,  in  her 
soft  low  voice,  '  This  must  be  a  very  painful  subject  to  you, 
Lady  Cecilia.      I  am  sorry  for  you.' 

'Thank  you,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  pressing  her  hand  with 
quick  gratitude  for  her  sympathy.  '  It  is  indeed  to  me  a 
painful  subject,  for  Helen  has  been  my  friend  from  childhood, 
and  I  have  so  much  reason  for  loving  her  ! ' 

Many  contending  emotions  struggled  in  Cecilia's  counte- 
nance, and  she  could  say  no  more  :  but  what  she  had  said, 
what  she  had  looked,  had  been  quite  enough  to  interest 
tenderly  in  her  favour  that  kind  heart  to  which  it  was  ad- 
dressed ;  and  Cecilia's  feeling  was  true  at  the  instant ;  she 
forgot  all  but  Helen  ;  the  screen  was  laid  down ;  tears 
stood  in  her  eyes — those  beautiful  eyes  !  '  If  I  could  but  tell 
you  the  whole — oh  if  I  could  !  without  destroying ' 

Miss  Clarendon  at  this  moment  placed  herself  close  opposite 
to  Cecilia,  and,  speaking  so  low  that  neither  her  brother  nor 
her  aunt  could  hear  her,  said,  'Without  destroying  yourself, 
or  your  friend — which  ? ' 

Lady  Cecilia  could  not  speak. 

'You  need  not — I  am   answered,'  said   Miss  Clarendon; 

415 


HELEN 

and  returning  to  her  place,  she  remained  silent  for  some 
minutes. 

The  General  rang,  and  inquired  if  Mr.  Beauclerc  had  come 
in. 

'No.' 

The  General  made  no  observation,  and  then  began  some 
indifferent  conversation  with  Mrs.  Pennant,  in  which  Lady 
Cecilia  forced  herself  to  join  ;  she  dreaded  even  Miss  Claren- 
don's silence — that  grim  repose, — and  well  she  might. 

'  D'Aubign^s  Memoirs,  I  think,  was  the  title  of  the  book, 
aunt,  that  the  dentist  talked  of?  That  is  the  book  you  burnt, 
is  not  it,  brother  ? — a  chapter  in  that  book  ?  ' 

'  Yes,'  said  the  General. 

And  again  Miss  Clarendon  was  silent  ;  for  though  she  well 
recollected  what  she  had  heard  at  Florence,  and  however 
strong  were  her  suspicions,  she  might  well  pause ;  for  she 
loved  her  brother  before  everything  but  truth  and  justice, — 
she  loved  her  brother  too  much  to  disturb  his  confidence.  '  I 
have  no  proof,'  thought  she  ;  '  I  might  destroy  his  happiness 
by  another  word,  and  I  may  be  wrong.' 

'  But  shall  not  we  see  Miss  Stanley  ? '  said  Mrs.  Pennant. 

Lady  Cecilia  was  forced  to  explain  that  Helen  was  not  very 
well,  would  not  appear  till  after  dinner — nothing  very  much 
the  matter — a  little  faintish. 

'  Fainted,'  said  the  General. 

'  Yes,  quite  worn  out — she  was  at  Lady  Castlefort's  last 
night — such  a  crowd!'  She  went  on  to  describe  its  City 
horrors. 

'  But  where  is  Mr.  Beauclerc  all  this  time  ? '  said  Miss 
Clarendon  :   '  has  he  fainted  too  ?  or  is  he  faintish  ? 

'  Not  likely,'  said  Lady  Cecilia  ;  'faint  heart  never  won  fair 
lady.      He  is  not  of  the  faintish  sort.' 

At  this  moment  a  thundering  knock  at  the  door  announced 
the  rest  of  the  company,  and  never  was  company  more 
welcome.  But  Beauclerc  did  not  appear.  Before  dinner  was 
served,  however,  a  note  came  from  him  to  the  General.  Lady 
Ceciha  stretched  out  her  hand  for  it,  and  read, 

'  My  dear  Friends — I  am  obliged  to  dine  out  of  town. 
I  shall  not  return  to-night,  but  you  will  see  me  at  breakfast- 
time  to-morrow. — Yours  ever,  Granville  Beauclerc' 

416 


HELEN 

Cockburn  now  entered  with  a  beautiful  bouquet  of  hot-house 
flowers,  which,  he  said,  Mr.  Beauclerc's  man  had  brought  with 
the  note,  and  which  were,  he  said,  for  Miss  Stanley.  Lady- 
Cecilia's  countenance  grew  radiant  with  joy,  and  she  exclaimed, 
'  Give  them  to  me, — I  must  have  the  pleasure  of  taking  them 
to  her  myself 

And  she  flew  off  with  them.  Aunt  Pennant  smiled  on  her  as 
she  passed,  and,  turning  to  her  niece  as  Lady  Cecilia  left  the 
room,  said,  'What  a  bright  creature!  so  warm,  so  affectionate!' 

Miss  Clarendon  was  indeed  struck  with  the  indisputably 
natural  sincere  satisfaction  and  affection  in  Cecilia's  counte- 
nance ;  and,  herself  of  such  a  different  nature,  could  not  com- 
prehend the  possibility  of  such  contradiction  in  any  character  : 
she  could  not  imagine  the  existence  of  such  variable,  transitory 
feelings — she  could  not  believe  any  human  being  capable  of 
sacrificing  her  friend  to  save  herself,  while  she  still  so  loved 
her  victim,  could  still  feel  such  generous  sympathy  for  her. 
She  determined  at  least  to  suspend  her  judgment;  she  granted 
Lady  Cecilia  a  reprieve  from  her  terrific  questions  and  her  as 
terrific  looks.  Cecilia  recovered  her  presence  of  mind,  and 
dinner  went  off  delightfully,  to  her  at  least,  with  the  sense  of 
escape  in  recovered  self-possession,  and  '  spirits  light,  to  every 
joy  in  tune.' 

From  the  good  breeding  of  the  company  there  was  no 
danger  that  the  topic  she  dreaded  should  be  touched  upon. 
Whatever  reports  might  have  gone  forth,  whatever  any  one 
present  might  have  heard,  nothing  would  assuredly  be  said  of 
her  friend  Miss  Stanley,  to  her,  or  before  her,  unless  she  or 
the  General  introduced  the  subject ;  and  she  was  still  more 
secure  of  his  discretion  than  of  her  own.  The  conversation 
kept  safe  on  London -dinner  generalities  and  frivolities.  Yet 
often  things  that  were  undesignedly  said  touched  upon  the 
taboo'd  matter ;  and  those  who  knew  when,  where,  and  how  it 
touched,  looked  at  or  from  one  another,  and  almost  equally 
dangerous  was  either  way  of  looking.  Such  perfect  neutrality 
of  expression  is  not  given  to  all  men  in  these  emergencies  as 
to  General  Clarendon. 

The    dessert    over,    out    of  the    dinner-room    and    in   the 

drawing-room,  the  ladies  alone  together,   things  were  not  so 

pleasant  to   Lady  Cecilia.       Curiosity  peeped   out  more   and 

more  in  great  concern  about  Miss  Stanley's  health ;  and  when 

2  E  417 


HELEN 

ladies  trifled  over  their  coffee,  and  saw  through  all  things  with 
their  half-shut  eyes,  they  asked,  and  Lady  Cecilia  answered, 
and  parried,  and  explained,  and  her  conscience  winced,  and 
her  countenance  braved,  and  Miss  Clarendon  listened  with 
that  dreadfully  good  memory,  that  positive  point-blank  re- 
collection, which  permits  not  the  slightest  variation  of  state- 
ment. Her  doubts  and  her  suspicions  returned,  but  she  was 
silent ;  and  sternly  silent  she  remained  the  rest  of  the  evening. 


CHAPTER   XLI 

If  'trifles  light  as  air  are  to  the  jealous  confirmations  strong 
as  proofs  of  Holy  Writ,'  and  that  they  are  no  one  since  the 
time  of  Othello  could  ever  doubt,  it  may  be  some  consolation 
to  observe,  on  the  credit  side  of  human  nature,  that,  to  those 
who  are  not  cursed  with  a  jealous  infirmity,  trifles  light  as  air 
are  often  confirmations  strong  of  the  constancy  of  affection. 
Well  did  Lady  Cecilia  know  this  when  she  was  so  eager  to  be 
the  bearer  of  the  flowers  which  were  sent  by  Beauclerc.  She 
foresaw  and  enjoyed  the  instant  effect,  the  quick  smile  and 
blush  of  delight  with  which  that  bouquet  was  received  by 
Helen. 

'  Oh,  thank  you  !  How  kind  of  him  ! '  and  '  all's  well,' 
was  her  immediate  conclusion.  When  she  saw  his  note,  she 
never  even  took  notice  that  he  did  not  particularly  mention 
her.  The  flowers  from  him  were  enough  ;  she  knew  his 
sincerity  so  well,  trusted  to  it  so  completely,  that  she  was 
quite  sure,  if  he  had  been  angry  with  her,  he  would  not  have 
sent  these  tokens  of  his  love, — slight  tokens,  though  they  were 
all-sufficient  for  her.  Her  fears  had  taken  but  one  direction, 
and  in  that  direction  they  were  all  dispelled.  He  would  be  at 
breakfast  to-morrow,  when  she  should  know  where  he  had 
been,  and  what  had  detained  him  from  her  the  whole  of  this 
day.  She  told  Cecilia  that  she  was  now  quite  well,  but  that 
she  would  not  attempt  to  go  down  stairs.  And  Cecilia  left 
her  happy,  so  far  at  least  ;  and  when  she  was  alone  with  her 
flowers,  she  doubly  enjoyed  them,  inhaling  the  fragrance  of 
each  which  she  knew  he  particularly  liked,  and  thanking  him 

418 


HELEN 

in  her  heart  for  the  careful  choice,  for  she  was  certain  that 
they  were  not  accidentally  put  together.  Some  of  them  were 
associated  with  little  circumstances  known  only  to  themselves, 
awakening  recollections  of  bright,  happy  moments,  and  selected, 
she  was  sure,  with  reference  to  a  recent  conversation  they  had 
had  on  the  language  of  flowers. 

Whether  Helen  fancied  half  this,  or  whether  it  was  all  true, 
it  had  the  effect  of  soothing  and  pleasing  her  anxious,  agitated 
mind ;  and  she  was  the  more  ready  to  indulge  in  that  pleasant 
reverie  from  all  that  she  had  previously  suffered  herself,  and 
all  that  she  feared  Beauclerc  had  yet  to  endure.  She  knew 
too  well  how  much  these  reports  would  affect  him — and  hear 
them  he  must.  She  considered  what  trials  he  had  already 
borne,  and  might  still  have  to  bear,  for  her  sake,  whatever 
course  she  might  now  pursue.  Though  soon,  very  soon,  the 
whole  would  be  told  to  him,  yet  still,  though  she  might  stand 
clear  in  his  eyes  as  to  the  main  points,  he  must,  and  would, 
blame  her  weakness  in  first  consenting  to  this  deception — he 
who  was  above  deceit.  She  had  not  absolutely  told,  but  she 
had  admitted  a  falsehood ;  she  had  acted  a  falsehood.  This 
she  could  not  extenuate.  Her  motive  at  first,  to  save  Lady 
Davenant's  life,  was  good ;  but  then  her  weakness  afterwards, 
in  being  persuaded  time  after  time  by  Cecilia,  could  not  well 
be  excused.  She  was  conscious  that  she  had  sunk  step  by 
step,  dragged  down  that  slippery  path  by  Cecilia,  instead  of 
firmly  making  a  stand,  as  she  ought  to  have  done,  and  up- 
holding by  her  own  integrity  her  friend's  failing  truth.  With 
returning  anguish  of  self-reproach  she  went  over  and  over 
these  thoughts  ;  she  considered  the  many  unforeseen  circum- 
stances that  had  occurred.  So  much  public  shame,  so  much 
misery,  had  been  brought  upon  herself  and  on  all  she  loved  by 
this  one  false  step  !  And  how  much  more  might  still  await 
her,  notwithstanding  all  that  best  of  friends,  the  General,  had 
done  !  She  recollected  how  much  he  had  done  for  her ! — ■ 
thinking  of  her  too,  as  he  must,  with  lowered  esteem,  and  that 
was  the  most  painful  thought  of  all ; — to  Beauclerc  she  could 
and  would  soon  clear  her  truth,  but  to  the  General — never, 
perhaps,  completely ! 

Her  head  was  leaning  on  her  hand,  as  she  was  sitting  deep 
in  these  thoughts,  when  she  was  startled  by  an  unusual  knock 
at  her  door.      It  was  Cockburn  with  a  packet,  which  General 

419 


HELEN 

Clarendon  had  ordered  him  to  dehver  into  Miss  Stanley's  own 
hands.  The  instant  she  saw  the  packet  she  knew  that  it  con- 
tained the  book  J  and  on  opening  it  she  found  manuscript  letters 
inserted  between  the  marked  pages,  and  there  was  a  note 
from  General  Clarendon.     She  trembled — she  foreboded  ill. 

The  note  began  by  informing  Miss  Stanley  how  the  en- 
closed manuscript  letters  came  into  General  Clarendon's  hands 
from  a  person  whom  Miss  Stanley  had  obliged,  and  who  had 
hoped  in  return  to  do  her  some  service.  The  General  next 
begged  Miss  Stanley  to  understand  that  these  letters  had  been 
put  into  his  possession  since  his  conversation  with  her  at 
breakfast  time  ;  his  only  design  in  urging  her  to  mark  her 
share  in  the  printed  letters  had  been  to  obtain  her  authority 
for  serving  her  to  the  best  of  his  ability ;  but  he  had  since 
compared  them  : — and  then  came  references,  without  comment, 
to  the  discrepancies  between  the  marked  passages,  the  uniform 
character  of  the  omissions,  followed  only  by  a  single  note  of 
admiration  at  each  from  the  General's  pen.  And  at  last,  in 
cold  polite  phrase,  came  his  regret  that  he  had  not  been  able 
to  obtain  that  confidence  which  he  had  trusted  he  had  deserved, 
and  his  renunciation  of  all  future  interference  in  her  affairs — 
or  concerns,  had  been  written,  but  a  broad  dash  of  the  pen  had 
erased  the  superfluous  words  ;  and  then  came  the  inevitable 
conclusion,  on  which  Helen's  eyes  fixed,  and  remained  im- 
movable for  some  time — that  determination  which  General 
Clarendon  had  announced  to  his  wife  in  the  first  heat  of 
indignation,  but  which,  Lady  Cecilia  had  hoped,  could  be 
evaded,  changed,  postponed  —  would  not  at  least  be  so 
suddenly  declared  to  Helen  ;  therefore  she  had  given  her  no 
hint,  had  in  no  way  prepared  her  for  the  blow, — and  with 
the  full  force  of  astonishment  it  came  upon  her  —  '  General 
Clarendon  cannot  have  the  pleasure  he  had  proposed  to  himself, 
of  giving  Miss  Stanley  at  the  altar  to  his  ward.  He  cannot 
by  any  public  act  of  his  attest  his  consent  to  that  marriage, 
of  which,  in  his  private  opinion,  he  no  longer  approves.' 

'And  he  is  right.  O  Cecilia!'  was  Helen's  first  thought, 
when  she  could  think  after  this  shock — not  of  her  marriage, 
not  of  herself,  not  of  Beauclerc,  but  of  Cecilia's  falsehood — 
Cecilia's  selfish  cowardice,  she  thought,  and  could  not  conceive 
it  possible, — could  not  believe  it,  though  it  was  there.  In- 
credible —  yet   proved  —  there  —  there  —  before    her   eyes  — 

420 


HELEN 

brought  home  keen  to  her  heart !  after  all !  at  such  a  time — 
after  her  most  solemn  promise,  with  so  little  temptation,  so 
utterly  false — with  every  possible  motive  that  a  good  mind 
could  have  to  be  true — in  this  last  trial — her  friend's  whole 
character  at   stake — ungenerous — base  !      '  O  Cecilia  !    how 
different  from  what  I  thought  you — or  how  changed  !     And  I 
have  helped  to  bring  her  to  this  ! — I — I  have  been  the  cause. 
I  will  not   stay  in   this  house — I   will    leave  her.     To   save 
her — to  save  myself — save  my  own  truth  and  my  own  real 
character — let  the  rest  go  as  it  will — the  world  think  what  it 
may  !     Farther  and  farther,  lower  and  lower,  I  have  gone  :   I 
will  not  go  lower— I  will  struggle  up  again  at  any  risk,  at  any 
sacrifice.     This  is  a  sacrifice  Lady  Davenant  would  approve 
of:  she  said  that  if  ever  I  should  be  convinced  that  General 
Clarendon  did  not  wish  me  to  be  his  guest — if  he  should  ever 
cease  to  esteem  me — I  should  go,  that  instant — and  I  will  go.' 
But  where  ?     To  whom  could  she  fly,  to  whom  turn  ?     The 
CoUingwoods  were  gone  ;  all  her  uncle's  friends  passed  rapidly 
through   her  recollection.       Since   she  had  been  living  with 
General  and  Lady  Cecilia  Clarendon,  several  had  written  to 
invite  her  ;  but  Helen  knew  a  little  more  of  the  world  now  than 
formerly,  and  she  felt  that  there  was  not  one,  no,  not  one  of 
all  these  to  whom  she  could  now,  at  her  utmost  need,  turn 
and    say,    'I    am   in   distress,   receive   me !    my   character   is 
attacked,  defend  me  !  my  truth  is  doubted,  believe  in  me  ! ' 
And,  her  heart  beating  with  anxiety,  she  tried  to  think  what 
was  to  be  done.     There  was  an  old  Mrs.  Medlicott,  who  had 
been  a  housekeeper  of  her  uncle's,  living  at  Seven  Oaks^she 
would  go   there — she  should   be  safe  —  she  should  be  inde- 
pendent.    She  knew  that  she  was  then  in  town,  and  was  to  go 
to  Seven  Oaks  the  next  day  ;  she  resolved  to  send  Rose  early 
in  the  morning  to  Mrs.  Medlicott's  lodging,  which  was  near 
Grosvenor  Square,  to  desire  her  to  call  at  General  Clarendon's 
as  she  went  out  of  town,  at  eight  o'clock.      She  could  then  go 
with  her  to  Seven  Oaks  ;  and,  by  setting  out  before  Cecilia 
could  be  up,  she  should  avoid  seeing  her  again. 

There  are  minds  which  totally  sink,  and  others  that  wonder- 
fully rise,  under  the  urgency  of  strong  motive  and  of  perilous 
circumstance.  It  is  not  always  the  mind  apparently  strongest 
or  most  daring  that  stands  the  test.  The  firm  of  principle  are 
those  most  courageous  in  time  of  need.     Helen  had  determined 

421 


HELEN 

what  her  course  should  be,  and,  once   determined,  she  was 
calm.     She  sat  down  and  wrote  to  General  Clarendon. 

'  Miss  Stanley  regrets  that  she  cannot  explain  to  General 
Clarendon  the  circumstances  which  have  so  much  displeased 
him.  She  assures  him  that  no  want  of  confidence  has  been, 
on  her  part,  the  cause ;  but  she  cannot  expect  that,  without 
further  explanation,  he  should  give  her  credit  for  sincerity. 
She  feels  that  with  his  view  of  her  conduct,  and  in  his 
situation,  his  determination  is  right, — that  it  is  what  she  has 
deserved, — that  it  is  just  towards  his  ward  and  due  to  his  own 
character.  She  hopes,  however,  that  he  will  not  think  it 
necessary  to  announce  to  Mr.  Beauclerc  his  determination  of 
withdrawing  his  approbation  and  consent  to  his  marriage, 
when  she  informs  him  that  it  will  now  never  be  by  her 
claimed  or  accepted.  She  trusts  that  General  Clarendon  will 
permit  her  to  take  upon  herself  the  breaking  off  this  union. 
She  encloses  a  letter  to  Mr.  Beauclerc,  which  she  begs  may  be 
given  to  him  to-morrow.  General  Clarendon  will  find  she  has 
dissolved  their  engagement  as  decidedly  as  he  could  desire, 
and  that  her  decision  will  be  irrevocable.  And  since  General 
Clarendon  has  ceased  to  esteem  her.  Miss  Stanley  cannot 
longer  accept  his  protection,  or  encroach  upon  his  hospitality. 
She  trusts  that  he  will  not  consider  it  as  any  want  of  respect, 
that  she  has  resolved  to  retire  from  his  family  as  soon  as 
possible.  She  is  certain  of  having  a  safe  and  respectable  home 
with  a  former  housekeeper  of  her  uncle  Dean  Stanley's,  who 
will  call  for  her  at  eight  o'clock  to-morrow,  and  take  her  to 
Seven  Oaks,  where  she  resides.  Miss  Stanley  has  named  that 
early  hour,  that  she  may  not  meet  Mr.  Beauclerc  before  she 
goes  ;  she  wishes  also  to  avoid  the  struggle  and  agony  of 
parting  with  Lady  Cecilia.  She  entreats  General  Clarendon 
will  prevent  Lady  Cecilia  from  attempting  to  see  her  in  the 
morning,  and  permit  her  to  go  unobserved  out  of  the  house  at 
her  appointed  hour. 

'So  now  farewell,  my  dear  friend — yes,  friend,  this  last 
time  you  must  permit  me  to  call  you  ;  for  such  I  feel  you  have 
ever  been,  and  ever  would  have  been,  to  me,  if  my  folly  would 
have  permitted.  Believe  me — notwithstanding  the  deception 
of  which  I  acknowledge  I  have  been  guilty  towards  you. 
General  Clarendon — I  venture  to  say,  believe  jue,   I  am  not 

422 


HELEN 

ungrateful.  At  this  instant  my  heart  swells  with  gratitude, 
while  I  pray  that  you  may  be  happy — ^happy  as  you  deserve 
to  be.  But  you  will  read  this  with  disdain,  as  mere  idle 
words  :  so  be  it.     Farewell !  Helen  Stanley.' 

Next,  she  was  to  write  to  Beauclerc  himself.      Her  letter 
was  as  follows  : — 

'With  my  whole  heart,  dear  Granville,  I  thank  you  for 
the  generous  confidence  you  have  shown  towards  me,  and  for 
the  invariable  steadiness  of  your  faith  and  love.  For  your 
sake  I  rejoice.  One  good  has  at  least  resulted  from  the  trials 
you  have  gone  through :  you  must  now  and  hereafter  feel 
sure  of  your  own  strength  of  mind.  With  me  it  has  been 
different,  for  I  have  not  a  strong  mind.  I  have  been  all 
weakness,  and  must  now  be  miserable ;  but  wicked  I  will  not 
be — and  wicked  I  should  be  if  I  took  advantage  of  your 
confiding  love.  I  must  disappoint  your  affection,  but  your  con- 
fidence I  will  not  betray.  When  I  put  your  love  to  that  test 
which  it  has  so  nobly  stood,  I  had  hoped  that  a  time  would 
come  when  all  doubts  would  be  cleared  up,  and  when  I  could 
reward  your  constancy  by  the  devotion  of  my  whole  happy 
life — but  that  hope  is  past :  I  cannot  prove  my  innocence — 
I  will  no  longer  allow  you  to  take  it  upon  my  assertion.  I 
cannot  indeed,  with  truth,  even  assert  that  I  have  done  no 
wrong  ;  for  though  I  am  not  false,  I  have  gone  on  step  by  step 
in  deception,  and  might  go  on,  I  know  not  how  far,  nor  to 
what  dreadful  consequences,  if  I  did  not  now  stop — and  I  do 
stop.  On  my  own  head  be  the  penalty  of  my  fault — upon  my 
own  happiness — my  own  character  :  I  will  not  involve  yours — 
therefore  we  part.  You  have  not  yet  heard  all  that  has  been 
said  of  me  ;  but  you  soon  will,  and  you  will  feel,  as  I  do, 
that  I  am  not  fit  to  be  your  wife.  Your  wife  should  not  be 
suspected;  I  have  been — I  am.  All  the  happiness  I  can 
ever  have  in  this  world  must  be  henceforth  in  the  thought  of 
having  saved  from  misery,  if  not  secured  the  happiness  of, 
those  I  love.  Leave  me  this  hope — O  Granville,  do  not  tell 
me,  do  not  make  me  believe,  that  you  will  never  be  happy 
without  me  !  You  will — indeed  you  will.  I  only  pray  Heaven 
that  you  may  find  love  as  true  as  mine,  and  strength  to  abide 
by  the  truth  !     Do  not  write  to  me — do  not  try  to  persuade 

423 


HELEN 

me  to  change  my  determination  :  it  is  irrevocable.  Further 
writing  or  meeting  could  be  only  useless  anguish  to  us  both. 
Give  me  the  sole  consolation  I  can  now  have,  and  which  you 
alone  can  give — let  me  hear  from  Cecilia  that  you  and  your 
noble-minded  guardian  are,  after  I  am  gone,  as  good  friends 
as  you  were  before  you  knew  me.  I  shall  be  gone  from  this 
house  before  you  are  here  again  ;  I  cannot  stay  where  I  can 
do  no  good,  and  might  do  much  evil  by  remaining  even  a  few 
hours  longer.  As  it  is,  comfort  your  generous  heart  on  m.y 
account  with  the  assurance  that  I  am  sustained  by  the  con- 
sciousness that  I  am  now,  to  the  best  of  my  power,  doing 
right.  Adieu,  Granville  !  Be  happy  !  you  can — you  have 
done  no  wrong.      Be  happy,  and  that  will  console 

'  Your  affectionate  Helen  Stanley.' 

This,  enclosed  to  General  Clarendon,  she  sent  by  Cockbum, 
who  delivered  it  to  his  master  immediately. 

Though  she  could  perfectly  depend  upon  her  maid  Rose's 
fidelity,  Helen  did  not  tell  her  that  she  was  going  away  in  the 
morning,  to  avoid  bringing  her  into  any  difficulty  if  she  were 
questioned  by  Lady  Cecilia  ;  and  besides,  no  note  of  prepara- 
tion would  be  heard  or  seen.  She  would  take  with  her  only 
sufficient  for  the  day,  and  would  leave  Rose  to  pack  up  all 
that  belonged  to  her,  after  her  departure,  and  to  follow  her. 
Thanks  to  her  own  late  discretion,  she  had  no  money  difficulties 
— no  debts  but  such  as  Rose  could  settle,  and  she  had  now 
only  to  write  to  Cecilia ;  but  she  had  not  yet  recovered  from 
the  tumult  of  mind  which  the  writing  to  the  General  and  to 
Beauclerc  had  caused.  She  lay  down  upon  the  sofa,  and 
closing  her  trembling  eyehds,  she  tried  to  compose  herself 
sufficiently  to  think  at  least  of  what  she  was  to  say.  As  she 
passed  the  table  in  going  to  the  sofa,  she,  without  perceiving 
it,  threw  down  some  of  the  flowers  ;  they  caught  her  eye,  and 
she  said  to  herself,  '  Lie  there  !  lie  there  !  Granville's  last  gifts  ! 
last  gifts  to  me  !  All  over  now  ;  lie  there  and  wither !  Joys 
that  are  past,  wither  !  All  happiness  for  me,  gone  !  Lie 
there,  and  wither,  and  die  ! — and  so  shall  I  soon,  I  hope— if 
that  only  hope  is  not  wrong.' 

Some  one  knocked  at  the  door  ;  she  started  up,  and  said,  '  1 
cannot  see  you,  Cecilia  ! ' 

A  voice  not  Cecilia's,  a  voice  she  did  not  recollect,  answered, 
424 


HELEN 

'  It  is  not  Cecilia ;  let  me  see  you.  I  come  from  General 
Clarendon.' 

Helen  opened  the  door,  and  saw — Miss  Clarendon.  Her 
voice  had  sounded  so  much  lower  and  gentler  than  usual,  that 
Helen  had  not  guessed  it  to  be  hers.  She  was  cloaked,  as  if 
prepared  to  go  away  ;  and  in  the  outer  room  was  another  lady 
seated  with  her  back  towards  them,  and  with  her  cloak  on  also. 

'  My  aunt  Pennant — who  will  wait  for  me.  As  she  is  a 
stranger,  she  would  not  intrude  upon  you,  Miss  Stanley ;  but 
will  you  allow  me  one  minute  ? ' 

Helen,  surprised,  begged  Miss  Clarendon  to  come  in,  moved 
a  chair  towards  her,  and  stood  breathless  with  anxiety.  Miss 
Clarendon  sat  down,  and  resuming  her  abruptness  of  tone,  said, 
'  I  feel  that  I  have  no  right  to  expect  that  you  should  have 
confidence  in  me,  and  yet  I  do.  I  believe  in  your  sincerity, 
even  from  the  little  I  know  of  you,  and  I  have  a  notion  you 
believe  in  mine.     Do  you  ? ' 

'  I  do.' 

'  I  wish  it  had  pleased  Heaven,'  continued  Miss  Clarendon, 
'  that  my  brother  had  married  a  woman  who  could  speak 
truth  !  But  you  need  not  be  afraid  ;  I  will  not  touch  on  your 
secrets.  On  any  matter  you  have  in  keeping,  my  honour  as 
well  as  yours  will  command  my  silence — as  will  also  my 
brother's  happiness,  which  I  have  somewhat  at  heart ;  not  that 
I  think  it  can  be  preserved  by  the  means  you  take.  But  this 
is  not  what  I  came  to  say.  You  mean  to  go  away  from  this 
house  to-morrow  morning  ? ' 

'  Yes,'  said  Helen. 

'  You  are  right.  I  would  not  stay  where  I  did  not  esteem 
or  where  I  had  reason  to  believe  that  I  was  not  esteemed. 
You  are  quite  right  to  go,  and  to  go  directly ;  but  not  to  your 
old  housekeeper.' 

'  Why  not  ? '  said  Helen. 

'  Because,  though  I  daresay  she  is  vastly  respectable, — an 
excellent  person  in  her  way,  I  am  convinced, — yet  my  brother 
says  she  might  not  be  thought  just  the  sort  of  person  to  whom 
you  should  go  now — not  just  the  thing  for  you  at  present ; 
though,  at  another  time,  it  would  be  very  well  and  condescend- 
ing ;  but  now,  when  you  are  attacked,  you  must  look  to 
appearances — in  short,  my  brother  will  not  allow  you  to  go  to 
this  old  lady's  boarding-house,  or  cottage,  or  whatever  it  may 

425 


'  Come !  say  thai  you  will' 


HELEN 

be,  at  Seven  Oaks  ;  he  must  be  able  to  say  for  you  where  you 
are  gone.  You  must  be  with  me  ;  you  must  be  at  Llansillen. 
Llansillen  is  a  place  that  can  be  named.  You  must  be  with 
me — with  General  Clarendon's  sister.  You  must — you  will,  I 
am  sure,  my  dear  Miss  Stanley.  I  never  was  so  happy  in 
having  a  house  of  my  own  as  at  this  moment.  You  will  not 
refuse  to  return  with  my  aunt  and  me  to  Llansillen,  and  make 
our  home  yours  ?  We  will  try  and  make  it  a  happy  home  to 
you.  Try  ;  you  see  the  sense  of  it :  the  world  can  say  nothing 
when  you  are  known  to  be  with  Miss  Clarendon ;  and  you 
will,  I  hope,  feel  the  comfort  of  it,  out  of  the  stir  and  din  of 
this  London  world.  I  know  you  like  the  country,  and  Llansillen 
is  a  beautiful  place — romantic  too ;  a  fine  castle,  an  excellent 
library,  beautiful  conservatory ;  famous  for  our  conservatories 
we  are  in  South  Wales  ;  and  no  neighbours — singular  blessing  ! 
And  my  aunt  Pennant,  you  will  love  her  so  !  Will  you  try  ? 
Come  !  say  that  you  will.' 

But  Helen  could  not ;  she  could  only  press  the  hand  that 
Miss  Clarendon  held  out  to  her.  There  is  nothing  more 
touching,  more  overcoming,  than  kindness  at  the  moment  the 
heart  is  sunk  in  despair.  '  But  did  General  Clarendon  really 
wish  you  to  ask  me  ? '  said  Helen,  when  she  could  speak. 
'  Did  he  think  so  much  and  so  carefully  for  me  to  the  last  ? 
And  with  such  a  bad  opinion  as  he  must  have  of  me  ! ' 

'  But  there  you  know  he  is  wrong.' 

'  It  is  like  himself,'  continued  Helen  ;  '  consistent  in  protect- 
ing me  to  the  last.     Oh,  to  lose  such  a  friend  ! ' 

'  Not  lost,  only  mislaid,'  said  Miss  Clarendon.  '  You  will 
find  him  again  some  fair  day  or  other ;  truth  always  comes  to 
light.  Meanwhile,  all  is  settled.  I  must  run  and  tell  my 
aunt,  and  bless  the  fates  and  Lady  Emily  Greville,  that  Lady 
Cecilia  did  not  come  up  in  the  middle  of  it.  Luckily,  she 
thinks  I  am  gone,  and  knows  nothing  of  my  being  with  you  ; 
for  my  brother  explained  all  this  to  me  in  his  study,  after  we 
had  left  the  saloon,  and  he  desires  me  to  say  that  his  carriage 
shall  be  ready  for  you  at  your  hour,  at  eight  o'clock.  We  shall 
expect  you  ;  and  now,  farewell  till  to-morrow.' 

She  was  gone,  and  her  motto  might  well  be,  though  in  a 
different  acceptation  from  that  of  our  greatest  modern  politician 
— '  Tout  faire  sans  ^araitre.' 

But  before  Helen  could  go  to  rest,  she  must  write  to  Lady 
427 


HELEN 

Cecilia,  and  her  thoughts  were  in  such  perplexity,  and  her 
feelings  in  such  conflict,  that  she  knew  not  how  to  begin.  At 
last  she  wrote  only  a  few  hasty  lines  of  farewell,  and  referred 
for  her  determination,  and  for  all  explanations,  to  her  letter  to 
the  General.      It  came  to  '  Farewell,  dear  Cecilia.' 

Dear !  yes,  still  dear  she  was  to  Helen — she  must  be  as 
Lady  Davenant's  daughter — still  dear  for  her  own  sake  was 
Cecilia,  the  companion  of  her  childhood,  who  had  shown  her 
such  generous  affection  early,  such  fondness  always,  who  was 
so  charming,  with  so  many  good  qualities,  so  much  to  win 
love — loved  she  must  be  still.  '  Farewell,  Cecilia ;  may  you 
be  happy ! ' 

But  as  Helen  wrote  these  words,  she  thought  it  impossible, 
she  could  scarcely  in  the  present  circumstances  wish  it  possible, 
that  Cecilia  should  be  happy.  How  could  she,  unless  her 
conscience  had  become  quite  callous  ? 

She  gave  her  note  to  Rose,  with  orders  to  deliver  it  herself 
to  Lady  Cecilia  to-night,  when  she  should  demand  admittance. 
And  soon  she  came,  the  very  instant  Lady  Emily  Greville 
went  away — before  Helen  was  in  bed  she  heard  Cecilia  at  her 
door  ;  she  left  her  to  parley  with  Rose — heard  her  voice  in 
the  first  instance  eager,  peremptory  for  admittance.  Then  a 
sudden  silence.  Helen  comprehended  that  she  had  opened  her 
note — and  in  another  instant  she  heard  her  retreating  step. 
On  seeing  the  first  words  referring  for  explanation  to  Helen's 
letter  to  the  General,  panic-struck.  Lady  Cecilia  hurried  to  her 
own  room  to  read  the  rest  privately. 

Helen  now  tried  to  recollect  whether  everything  had  been 
said,  written,  done,  that  ought  to  be  done  ;  and  at  last  went  to 
bed  and  endeavoured  to  sleep  for  a  few  hours. 


CHAPTER  XLII 

Helen  was  just  dressed,  and  had  given  her  last  orders  to  her 
bewildered  maid,  when  she  heard  a  knock  at  the  door,  and 
Mademoiselle  Felicie's  voice.  She  could  not  at  this  instant 
endure  to  hear  her  heartless  exclamatory  speeches  ;  she  would 
not  admit  her.  Mademoiselle  Felicie  gave  Rose  a  note  for  her 
young  lady — it  was  from  Cecilia. 

428 


HELEN 

'  Dearest  Helen — The  General  will  not  allow  me  to  take 
leave  of  you  this  morning,  but  I  shall  certainly  go  to  you  in 
the  course  of  to-day.  I  cannot  understand  or  make  you  under- 
stand anything  till  I  see  you.  I  will  see  you  to-day.  Your 
affectionate  Cecilia.' 

'  I  understand  it  too  well ! '  thought  Helen. 

The  carriage  was  announced,  Helen  was  ready;  she  hurried 
into  it,  and  she  was  gone  !  And  thus  she  parted  from  the 
friend  of  her  childhood — the  friend  she  had  but  a  few  months 
before  met  with  such  joy,  such  true  affection  ;  and  her  own 
affection  was  true  to  the  last. 

As  Helen  drove  from  the  door,  she  saw  the  General — yes, 
it  certainly  was  the  General  riding  off — at  this  unusual  hour  ! 
Was  it  to  avoid  her  ?  But  she  was  in  too  great  anguish  to 
dwell  upon  that  or  any  other  circumstance  ;  her  only  thought 
now  was  to  subdue  her  emotion  before  she  was  seen  by  Miss 
Clarendon  and  Mrs.  Pennant.  And  by  the  time  she  arrived, 
she  thought  she  had  quite  recovered  herself,  and  was  not  aware 
that  any  traces  of  tears  remained ;  but  to  Mrs.  Pennant's 
sympathising  eyes  they  were  visible,  and  after  the  first  intro- 
ductions and  salutations  were  over,  that  kind  lady,  as  she 
seated  her  at  the  breakfast -table,  gently  pressing  her  hand, 
said,  '  Poor  thing  !  no  wonder — parting  with  old  friends  for 
new  is  a  sad  trial :  but  you  know  we  shall  become  old  friends 
in  time  :  we  will  make  what  haste  we  can,  my  dear  Miss 
Stanley,  and  Esther  will  help  me  to  make  you  forget  that  you 
have  not  known  us  all  your  life.' 

'  There  is  very  little  to  be  known  ;  no  mysteries,  that  is  one 
comfort,'  said  Miss  Clarendon  ;  '  so  now  to  breakfast.  You  are 
very  punctual.  Miss  Stanley ;  and  that  is  a  virtue  which  aunt 
Pennant  likes,  and  can  estimate  to  a  fraction  of  a  minute  with 
that  excellent  watch  of  hers.' 

There  was  some  history  belonging  to  that  family- watch, 
which  then  came  out ;  and  then  the  conversation  turned  upon 
little  family  anecdotes  anci  subjects  which  were  naturally  in- 
teresting to  the  aunt  and  niece,  and  not  exciting  to  Helen, 
whose  mind,  they  saw,  needed  quiet,  and  freedom  from  all 
observation. 

From  the  first  awkwardness  of  her  situation,  from  the  sense 
of  intrusion,  and  the  suddenness  of  change,  she  was  thus  as 

429 


HELEN 

far  as  possible  gradually  and  almost  imperceptibly  relieved. 
By  their  perfect  good-breeding,  as  well  as  good-nature,  from 
their  making  no  effort  to  show  her  particular  attention,  she  felt 
received  at  once  into  their  family  as  one  of  themselves  ;  and 
yet,  though  there  was  no  effort,  she  perceived  in  the  most 
minute  circumstances  the  same  sort  of  consideration  which 
would  be  shown  to  an  intimate  friend.  They  not  only  did  not 
expect,  but  did  not  wish,  that  she  should  make  any  exertion  to 
appear  to  be  what  she  could  not  be  ;  they  knew  the  loneliness 
of  heart  she  must  feel,  the  weight  that  must  be  upon  her  spirits. 
They  left  her,  then,  quite  at  liberty  to  be  with  them  or  alone, 
as  she  might  like,  and  she  was  glad  to  be  alone  with  her  own 
thoughts  ;  they  soon  fixed  upon  Beauclerc.  She  considered 
how  he  would  feel,  what  he  would  think,  when  he  should  receive 
her  letter  :  she  pictured  his  looks  while  reading  it ;  considered 
whether  he  would  write  immediately,  or  attempt,  notwithstand- 
ing her  prohibition,  to  see  her.  He  would  know  from  General 
Clarendon,  that  is,  if  the  General  thought  proper  to  tell  him, 
where  she  was,  and  that  she  would  remain  all  this  day  in  town. 
Though  her  determination  was  fixed,  whether  he  wrote  or  came, 
to  abide  by  her  refusal,  and  for  the  unanswerable  reasons  which 
she  had  given,  or  which  she  had  laid  down  to  herself;  yet  she 
could  not,  and  who,  loving  as  she  did,  could  help  wishing  that 
Beauclerc  should  desire  to  see  her  again  ?  she  hoped  that  he 
would  make  every  effort  to  change  her  resolution,  even  though 
it  might  cost  them  both  pain.  Yet  in  some  pain  there  is 
pleasure ;  or  to  be  without  it  is  a  worse  kind  of  suffering. 
Helen  was  conscious  of  the  inconsistency  in  her  mind,  and 
sighed,  and  endeavoured  to  be  reasonable.  And,  to  do  her 
justice,  there  was  not  the  slightest  wavering  as  to  the  main 
point.  She  thought  that  the  General  might,  perhaps,  have 
some  relenting  towards  her.  Hope  would  come  into  he;:  mind, 
though  she  tried  to  keep  it  out ;  she  had  nothing  to  expect, 
she  repeatedly  said  to  herself,  except  that  either  Cecilia  would 
send,  or  the  General  would  call  this  morning,  and  Rose  must 
come  at  all  events. 

The  morning  passed  on,  however,  and  no  one  came  so  soon 
as  Helen  had  expected.  She  was  sitting  in  a  back  room  where 
no  knocks  at  the  door  could  be  heard  ;  but  she  would  have 
been  called,  surely,  if  General  Clarendon  had  come.  He  had 
come,  but  he  had  not  asked  for  her ;  he  had  at  first  inquired 

430 


HELEN 

only  for  his  sister,  but  she  was  not  at  home,  gone  to  the 
dentist's.  The  General  then  desired  to  see  Mrs.  Pennant,  and 
when  she  supposed  that  she  had  not  heard  rightly,  and  that 
Miss  Stanley  must  be  the  person  he  wished  to  see,  he  had 
answered,  '  By  no  means  ;  I  particularly  wish  not  to  see  Miss 
Stanley.      I  beg  to  see  Mrs.  Pennant  alone.' 

It  fell  to  the  lot  of  this  gentle-hearted  lady  to  communicate 
to  Helen  the  dreadful  intelligence  he  brought :  a  duel  had 
taken  place  !  When  Helen  had  seen  the  General  riding  off, 
he  was  on  his  way  to  Chalk  Farm.  Just  as  the  carriage  was 
coming  round  for  Miss  Stanley,  Mr.  Beauclerc's  groom  had  re- 
quested in  great  haste  to  see  the  General ;  he  said  he  was  sure 
something  was  going  wrong  about  his  master ;  he  had  heard 
the  words  Chalk  Farm.  The  General  was  off  instantly,  but 
before  he  reached  the  spot  the  duel  had  been  fought.  A  duel 
between  Beauclerc  and  Mr.  Churchill.  Beauclerc  was  safe,  but 
Mr.  Churchill  was  dangerously  wounded  ;  the  medical  people 
present  could  not  answer  for  his  life.  At  the  time  the  General 
saw  him  he  was  speechless,  but  when  Beauclerc  and  his 
second.  Lord  Beltravers,  had  come  up  to  him,  he  had  extended 
his  hand  in  token  of  forgiveness  to  one  or  the  other,  but  to 
which  he  had  addressed  the  only  words  he  had  uttered  could 
not  be  ascertained  ;  the  words  were,  '  You  are  not  to  blame  ! 
— escape  ! — fly  ! '  Both  had  fled  to  the  Continent.  General 
Clarendon  said  that  he  had  no  time  for  explanations,  he  had 
not  been  able  to  get  any  intelligible  account  of  the  cause  of 
the  affair.  Lord  Beltravers  had  named  Miss  Stanley,  but 
Beauclerc  had  stopped  him,  and  had  expressed  the  greatest 
anxiety  that  Miss  Stanley's  name  should  not  be  implicated, 
should  not  be  mentioned.  He  took  the  whole  blame  upon 
himself — said  he  would  write — there  was  no  time  for  more. 

Mrs.  Pennant  listened  with  the  dread  of  losing  a  single 
word  :  but,  however  brief  his  expressions,  the  General's  manner 
of  speaking,  notwithstanding  the  intensity  of  his  emotion,  was 
so  distinct  that  every  word  was  audible,  except  the  name  of 
Lord  Beltravers,  which  was  not  familiar  to  her.  She  asked 
again  the  name  of  Mr.  Beauclerc's  second.  '  Lord  Beltravers,' 
the  General  repeated  with  a  forcible  accent,  and,  loosening  his 
neckcloth  with  his  finger,  he  added,  '  Rascal !  as  I  always 
told  Beauclerc  that  he  was,  and  so  he  will  find  him — too 
late.' 

431 


HELEN 

Except  this  exacerbation,  the  General  was  calmly  reserved 
in  speech,  and  Mrs.  Pennant  felt  that  she  could  not  ask  him  a 
single  question  beyond  what  he  had  communicated.  When 
he  rose  to  go,  which  he  did  the  moment  he  had  finished  what 
he  had  to  say,  she  had,  however,  courage  enough  to  hope  that 
they  should  soon  hear  again,  when  the  General  should  learn 
something  more  of  Mr.  Churchill. 

Certainly  he  would  let  her  know  whatever  he  could  learn  of 
Mr.  Churchill's  state. 

Her  eyes  followed  him  to  the  door  with  anxious  eagerness 
to  penetrate  farther  into  what  his  own  opinion  of  the  danger 
might  be.  His  rigidity  of  composure  made  her  fear  that  he  had 
no  hope,  '  otherwise  certainly  he  would  have  said  something.' 

He  opened  the  door  again,  and  returning,  said,  '  Depend 
upon  it  you  shall  hear  how  he  is,  my  dear  Mrs.  Pennant,  before 
you  leave  town  to-morrow.' 

■  We  will  not  go  to-morrow,'  she  replied.  '  We  will  stay 
another  day  at  least.    Poor  Miss  Stanley  will  be  so  anxious ' 

'  I  advise  you  not  to  stay  in  town  another  day,  my  dear 
madam.  You  can  do  no  good  by  it.  If  Mr.  Churchill  survive 
this  day,  he  will  linger  long,  I  am  assured.  Take  Helen — 
take  Miss  Stanley  out  of  town,  as  soon  as  may  be.  Better  go 
to-morrow,  as  you  had  determined.' 

'  But  it  will  be  so  long,  my  dear  General  ! — one  moment — 
if  we  go,  it  will  be  so  long  before  we  can  hear  any  further  news 
of  your  ward.' 

'  I  will  write.' 

'  To  Miss  Stanley — Oh,  thank  you.' 

'  To  my  sister,'  he  looked  back  to  say,  and  repeated  dis- 
tinctly, '  To  my  sister.' 

'  Very  well — thank  you,  at  all  events.' 

Mrs.  Pennant  saw  that,  in  General  Clarendon's  present  dis- 
position towards  Miss  Stanley,  the  less  she  said  of  him  the 
better,  and  she  confined  herself  strictly  to  what  she  had  been 
commissioned  to  say,  and  all  she  could  do  was  to  prevent  the 
added  pain  of  suspense  ;  it  was  told  to  Helen  in  the  simplest, 
shortest  manner  possible: — but  the  facts  were  dreadful. 
Beauclerc  was  safe  ! — safe  !  but  under  what  circumstances  ? 
'  And  it  was  for  me,  I  am  sure,'  cried  Helen,  '  I  am  sure  it  was 
for  me !  I  was  the  cause  !  I  am  the  cause  of  that  man's 
death — of  Beauclerc's  agony.' 

432 


HELEN 

For  some  time  Helen  had  not  power  or  thought  for  any 
other  idea.  The  promise  that  they  should  hear  as  soon  as 
they  could  learn  anything  more  of  Mr.  Churchill's  state  was 
all  she  could  rely  upon  or  recur  to. 

When  her  maid  Rose  arrived  from  General  Clarendon's, 
she  said  that  when  Lady  Cecilia  heard  of  the  duel  she  had 
been  taken  very  ill,  but  had  since  recovered  sufficiently  to 
drive  out  with  the  General.  Miss  Clarendon  assured  Helen 
there  was  no  danger.  '  It  is  too  deep  a  misfortune  for  Lady 
Cecilia.  Her  feelings  have  not  depth  enough  for  it,  you  will 
see.     You  need  not  be  afraid  for  her,  Helen.' 

The  circumstances  which  led  to  the  duel  were  not  clearly 
known  till  long  afterwards,  but  may  be  now  related.  The 
moment  Beauclerc  had  parted  from  Helen  when  he  turned 
away  at  the  carriage-door  after  the  party  at  Lady  Castlefort's 
he  went  in  search  of  one,  who,  as  he  hoped,  could  explain  the 
strange  whispers  he  had  heard.  The  person  of  whom  he  went 
in  search  was  his  friend,  his  friend  as  he  deemed  him.  Lord 
Beltravers.  Churchill  had  suggested  that  if  anybody  knew 
the  bottom  of  the  matter,  except  that  origin  of  all  evil.  Lady 
Katrine  herself,  —  it  must  be  Lord  Beltravers,  with  whom 
Lady  Castlefort  was,  it  was  said,  fortement  eprise,  and  as 
Horace  observed,  'the  secrets  of  scandal  are  common 
property  between  lovers,  much  modern  love  being  cemented 
by  hate.' 

Without  taking  in  the  full  force  of  this  observation  in  its 
particular  application  to  the  hatred  which  Lord  Beltravers 
might  feel  to  Miss  Stanley,  as  the  successful  rival  of  his  sister 
Blanche,  Beauclerc  hastened  to  act  upon  his  suggestion.  His 
lordship  was  not  at  home  ;  his  people  thought  he  had  been  at 
Lady  Castlefort's  ;  did  not  know  where  he  might  be  if  not 
there.  At  some  gambling-house  Beauclerc  at  last  found  him, 
and  Lord  Beltravers  was  sufficiently  vexed  in  the  first  place  at 
being  there  found,  for  he  had  pretended  to  his  friend  Granville 
that  he  no  longer  played.  His  embarrassment  was  increased 
by  the  questions  which  Beauclerc  so  suddenly  put  to  him  ;  but 
he  had  nonchalante  impudence  enough  to  brave  it  through, 
and  he  depended  with  good  reason  on  Beauclerc's  preposses- 
sion in  his  favour.  He  protested  he  knew  nothing  about  it ; 
and  he  returned  Churchill's  charge  by  throwing  the  whole 
blame  upon  him  ;  said  he  knew  he  was  in  league  with  Lady 
2  F  433 


Hei>rotisted  he  knew  nothing  about  il. 


HELEN 

Katrine  ; — mentioned  that  one  morning,  some  time  ago,  he 
had  dropped  in  unexpectedly  early  at  Lady  Castlefort's,  and 
had  been  surprised  to  find  the  two  sisters,  contrary  to  their 
wont,  together — their  heads  and  Horace  Churchill's  over  some 
manuscript,  which  was  shuffled  away  as  he  entered.  This 
was  true,  all  but  the  shuffling  away ;  and  here  it  is  necessary 
to  form  a  clear  notion,  clearer  than  Lord  Beltravers  will  give, 
of  the  different  shares  of  wrong  ;  of  wrong  knowingly  and  un- 
knowingly perpetrated  by  the  several  scandal -mongers  con- 
cerned in  this  affair. 

Lord  Beltravers  could  be  in  no  doubt  as  to  his  own  share, 
for  he  it  was  who  had  furnished  the  editor  of  Colonel 
D'Aubigny's  Memoirs  with  the  famous  letters.  When  Carlos, 
Lady  Davenant's  runaway  page,  escaped  from  Clarendon  Park, 
having  changed  his  name,  he  got  into  the  service  of  Sir  Thomas 
D'Aubigny,  who  was  just  at  this  time  arranging  his  brother's 
papers.  Now  it  had  happened  that  Carlos  had  been  concealed 
behind  the  screen  in  Lady  Davenant's  room  the  day  of  her 
first  conversation  with  Helen  about  Colonel  D'Aubigny,  and 
he  had  understood  enough  of  it  to  perceive  that  there  was 
some  mystery  about  the  Colonel  with  either  Helen  or  Lady 
Cecilia ;  and  chancing  one  day,  soon  after  he  entered  Sir 
Thomas's  service,  to  find  his  escritoire  open,  he  amused  him- 
self with  looking  over  his  papers,  among  which  he  discovered 
the  packet  of  Lady  Cecilia's  letters.  Carlos  was  not  perfectly 
sure  of  the  handwriting ;  he  thought  it  was  Lady  Cecilia's  ; 
but  when  he  found  the  miniature  of  Miss  Stanley  along  with 
them,  he  concluded  that  the  letters  must  be  hers.  And  having 
special  reasons  for  feeling  vengeance  against  Helen,  and  cer- 
tain at  all  events  of  doing  mischief,  he  sent  them  to  General 
Clarendon :  not,  however,  forgetting  his  old  trade,  he  copied 
them  first.  This  was  just  at  the  time  when  Lord  Beltravers 
returned  from  abroad  after  his  sister's  divorce.  He  by  some 
accident  found  out  who  Carlos  was,  and  whence  he  came,  and, 
full  of  his  own  views  for  his  sister,  he  cross-examined  him  as 
to  everything  he  knew  about  Miss  Stanley;  and  partly  by 
bribes,  partly  by  threats  of  betraying  him  to  Lady  Davenant, 
he  contrived  to  get  from  him  the  copied  letters.  Carlos  soon 
after  returned  with  his  master  to  Portugal,  and  was  never 
more  heard  of.  Lord  Beltravers  took  these  purloined  copies 
of  the  letters,  thus  surreptitiously  obtained,  to  the  editor  into 

435 


HELEN 

whose  hands  Sir  Thomas  D'Aubigny  (who  knew  nothing  of 
books  or  book-making)  had  put  his  brother's  memoirs.  This 
editor,  as  has  been  mentioned,  had  previously  consulted  Mr. 
Churchill,  and  in  consequence  of  his  pepper-and-salt  hint. 
Lord  Beltravers  himself  made  those  interpolations  which  he 
hoped  would  ruin  his  sister's  rival  in  the  eyes  of  her  lover. 

Mr.  Churchill,  however,  except  this  hint,  and  except  his 
vanity  in  furnishing  a  good  title,  and  his  coxcombry  of  literary 
patronage,  and  his  general  hope  that  Helen's  name  being  impli- 
cated in  such  a  publication  would  avenge  her  rejection  of  him- 
self, had  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  business.  This  Lord 
Beltravers  well  knew,  and  yet  when  he  found  that  the  slander 
made  no  impression  upon  Beauclerc,  and  that  he  was  only 
intent  upon  discovering  the  slanderer,  he,  with  dexterous 
treachery,  contrived  to  turn  the  tables  upon  Churchill,  and  to 
direct  all  Beauclerc's  suspicion  towards  him.  He  took  his 
friend  home  with  him,  and  showed  him  all  the  newspaper 
paragraphs — paragraphs  which  he  himself  had  written  !  Yes, 
this  man  of  romantic  friendship,  this  blase,  this  hero  oppressed 
with  his  own  sensibility,  could  condescend  to  write  anonymous 
scandal,  to  league  with  newsmongers,  and  to  bribe  waiting- 
women  to  supply  him  with  information,  for  Mademoiselle 
Felicie  had,  through  Lady  Katrine's  maid,  told  all,  and  more 
than  all,  she  knew,  of  what  passed  at  General  Clarendon's  ; 
and  on  this  foundation  did  he  construct  those  paragraphs, 
which  he  hoped  would  blast  the  character  of  the  woman  to 
whom  his  dearest  friend  was  engaged.  And  now  he  contrived 
to  say  all  that  could  convince  Beauclerc  that  Mr.  Churchill 
was  the  author  of  these  very  paragraphs.  And,  hot  and  rash, 
Beauclerc  rushed  on  to  that  conclusion.  He  wrote  a  challenge 
to  Churchill,  and  as  soon  as  it  was  possible  in  the  morning  he 
sent  it  by  Lord  Beltravers.  Mr.  Churchill  named  Sir  John 
Luttrell  as  his  friend  :  Lord  Beltravers  would  enter  into  no 
terms  of  accommodation  ;  the  challenge  was  accepted,  Chalk 
Farm  appointed  as  the  place  of  meeting,  and  the  time  fixed 
for  eight  o'clock  next  morning.  And  thus,  partly  by  his  own 
warmth  of  temper,  and  partly  by  the  falsehood  of  others,  was 
Beauclerc  urged  on  to  the  action  he  detested,  to  be  the  thing 
he  hated.  Duelling  and  duellists  had,  from  the  time  he  could 
think,  been  his  abhorrence,  and  now  he  was  to  end  his  life,  or 
to  take  the  life  of  a  fellow-creature  perhaps,  in  a  duel, 

436 


HELEN 

There  was  a  dread  interval.  And  it  was  during  the  re- 
mainder of  this  day  and  night  that  Beauclerc  felt  most  strongly, 
compared  with  all  other  earthly  ties,  his  attachment,  his 
passionate  love,  for  Helen.  At  every  pause,  at  every  close  of 
other  thoughts  forced  upon  him,  his  mind  recurred  to  Helen — 
what  Helen  would  feel — what  Helen  would  think — what  she 
would  suffer — and  in  the  most  and  in  the  least  important 
things  his  care  was  for  her.  He  recalled  the  last  look  that  he 
had  seen  at  the  carriage-door  when  they  parted,  recollected 
that  it  expressed  anxiety,  was  conscious  that  he  had  turned 
away  abruptly — that  in  the  preoccupied  state  of  his  mind  he 
had  not  spoken  one  word  of  kindness — and  that  this  might  be 
the  last  impression  of  him  left  on  her  mind.  He  knew  that 
her  anxiety  would  increase,  when  all  that  day  must  pass  with- 
out his  return,  and  it  was  then  he  thought  of  sending  her 
those  flowers  which  would,  he  knew,  reassure  her  better  than 
any  words  he  could  venture  to  write. 

Meanwhile  his  false  friend  coldly  calculated  what  were  the 
chances  in  his  sister's  favour ;  and  when  Churchill  fell,  and 
even  in  the  hurry  of  their  immediate  departure.  Lord  Beltravers 
wrote  to  Madame  de  St.  Cymon,  over  whom  the  present 
state  of  her  affairs  gave  him  command,  to  order  her  to  set  out 
immediately,  and  to  take  Blanche  vrith  her  to  Paris,  without 
asking  the  consent  of  that  fool  and  prude,  her  aunt  Lady 
Grace. 

It  was  well  for  poor  Helen,  even  in  the  dreadful  uncertainty 
in  which  she  left  London,  that  she  did  not  know  all  these  cir- 
cumstances. It  may  be  doubted,  indeed,  whether  we  should 
be  altogether  happier  in  this  life  if  that  worst  of  evils,  as  it  is 
often  called,  suspense,  were  absolutely  annihilated,  and  if 
human  creatures  could  clearly  see  their  fate,  or  even  know  what 
is  most  likely  to  happen. 


CHAPTER    XLIII 

According  to  the  General's  advice,  Mrs.  Pennant  did  not  delay 
her  journey,  and  Helen  left  London  the  next  day  with  her  and 
Miss  Clarendon.     The  last  bulletin  of  Mr.  Churchill  had  been 

437 


HELEN 

that  he  was  still  in  great  danger,  and  a  few  scarce  legible  lines 
Helen  had  received  from  Cecilia,  saying  that  the  General  would 
not  allow  her  to  agitate  herself  by  going  to  take  leave  of  her, 
that  she  was  glad  that  Helen  was  to  be  out  of  town  till  all  blew 
over,  and  that  she  was  so  much  distracted  by  this  horrible 
event,  she  scarcely  knew  what  she  wrote. 

As  they  drove  out  of  town,  Miss  Clarendon,  in  hopes  of 
turning  Helen's  thoughts,  went  on  talking.  '  Unless,'  said 
she,  'we  could,  like  Madame  de  Genlis,  "promote  the  post- 
boys into  agents  of  mystery  and  romance,"  we  have  but  little 
chance,  I  am  afraid,  of  any  adventures  on  our  journey  to 
Llansillen,  my  dear  Miss  Stanley.' 

She  inveighed  against  the  stupid  safety,  convenience,  luxury, 
and  expedition  of  travelling  nowadays  all  over  England,  even 
in  Wales,  '  so  that  one  might  sleep  the  whole  way  from  Hyde 
Park  Corner  to  Llansillen  gate,'  said  she,  'and  have  no  un- 
conscionably long  nap  either.  No  difficulties  on  the  road,  no- 
thing to  complain  of  at  inns,  no  enjoying  one's  dear  delight  in 
being  angry,  no  opportunity  even  of  showing  one's  charming 
resignation.  Dreadfully  bad  this  for  the  nervous  and  bilious, 
for  all  the  real  use  and  benefit  of  travelling  is  done  away  ;  all 
too  easy  for  my  taste  ;  one  might  as  well  be  a  doll,  or  a  dolt, 
or  a  parcel  in  the  coach.' 

Helen  would  have  been  glad  to  have  been  considered  merely 
as  a  parcel  in  the  coach.  During  the  whole  journey,  she  took 
no  notice  of  anything  till  they  came  within  a  few  miles  of 
Llansillen  ;  then,  endeavouring  to  sympathise  with  her  com- 
panions, she  looked  out  of  the  carriage  window  at  the  prospect 
which  they  admired.  But,  however  charming,  Llansillen  had 
not  for  Helen  the  chief  charm  of  early,  fond,  old  associations 
with  a  happy  home.  To  her  it  was  to  be,  she  doubted  not, 
as  happy  as  kindness  could  make  it,  but  still  it  was  new  ;  and 
in  that  thought,  that  feeling,  there  was  something  inexpress- 
ibly melancholy  ;  and  the  contrast,  at  this  moment,  between 
her  sensations  and  those  of  her  companions,  made  the  pain 
the  more  poignant  ;  they  perceived  this,  and  were  silent.  Helen 
was  grateful  for  this  consideration  for  her,  but  she  could  not 
bear  to  be  a  constraint  upon  them,  therefore  she  now  exerted 
herself,  sat  forward — Admired  and  talked  when  she  was 
scarcely  able  to  speak.  By  the  time  they  came  to  Llansillen 
gate,  however,  she  could  say  no  more  ;  she  was  obliged  to  ac- 

438 


HELEN 

knowledge  that  she  was  not  well ;  and  when  the  carriage  at 
last  stopped  at  the  door,  there  was  such  a  throbbing  in  her 
temples,  and  she  was  altogether  so  ill,  that  it  was  with  the 
greatest  difBculty  she  could,  leaning  on  Miss  Clarendon's  arm, 
mount  the  high  steps  to  the  hall-door.  She  could  scarcely 
stand  when  she  reached  the  top,  but,  making  an  effort,  she 
went  on,  crossed  the  slippery  floor  of  that  great  hall,  and  came 
to  the  foot  of  the  black  oak  staircase,  of  which  the  steps  were 
so  very  low  that  she  thought  she  could  easily  go  up,  but  found 
it  impossible,  and  she  was  carried  directly  up  to  Miss  Claren- 
don's own  room,  no  other  having  been  yet  prepared.  The 
rosy  Welsh  maids  looked  with  pity  on  the  pale  stranger.  They 
hurried  to  and  fro,  talking  Welsh  to  one  another  very  fast ; 
and  Helen  felt  as  if  she  were  in  a  foreign  land,  and  in  a  dream. 
The  end  of  the  matter  was,  that  she  had  a  low  fever  which 
lasted  long.  It  was  more  dispiriting  than  dangerous — more 
tedious  than  alarming.  Her  illness  continued  for  many  weeks, 
during  which  time  she  was  attended  most  carefully  by  her 
two  new  friends — |by  Miss  Clarendon  with  the  utmost  zeal 
and  activity — by  Mrs.  Pennant  with  the  greatest  solicitude  and 
tenderness. 

Her  history  for  these  weeks — indeed  for  some  months 
afterwards — can  be  only  the  diary  of  an  invalid  and  of  a  con- 
valescent. Miss  Clarendon  meanwhile  received  from  her 
brother,  punctually,  once  a  week,  bulletins  of  Churchill's 
health  ;  the  surgical  details,  the  fears  of  the  formation  of  in- 
ternal abscess,  reports  of  continual  exfoliations  of  bone,  were 
judiciously  suppressed,  and  the  laconic  General  reported  only 
'  Much  the  same — not  progressing — cannot  be  pronounced 
out  of  danger.'  These  bulletins  were  duly  repeated  to  Helen, 
whenever  she  was  able  to  hear  them  ;  and  at  last  she  was  con- 
sidered well  enough  to  read  various  letters,  which  had  arrived 
for  her  during  her  illness  ;  several  were  from  Lady  Cecilia, 
but  little  in  them.  The  first  was  full  only  of  expressions  of 
regret,  and  self-reproach ;  in  the  last,  she  said,  she  hoped 
soon  to  have  u.  right  to  claim  Helen  back  again.  This  under- 
lined passage  Helen  knew  alluded  to  the  promise  she  had  once 
made,  that  at  the  birth  of  her  child  all  should  be  told  ;  but 
words  of  promise  from  Cecilia  had  lost  all  value — all  power 
to  excite  even  hope,  as  she  said  to  herself  as  she  read  the  words, 
and  sighed. 

439 


HELEN 

One  of  her  letters  mentioned  what  she  would  have  seen  in 
the  first  newspaper  she  had  opened,  that  Lady  Blanche  For- 
rester was  gone  with  her  sister,  the  Comtesse  de  St.  Cymon,  to 
Paris,  to  join  her  brother  Lord  Beltravers.  But  Lady  Cecilia 
observed  that  Helen  need  not  be  alarmed  by  this  paragraph, 
which  she  was  sure  was  inserted  on  purpose  to  plague  her. 
Lady  Cecilia  seemed  to  take  it  for  granted  that  her  rejection 
of  Beauclerc  was  only  a  ruse  d'amour,  and  went  on  with  her 
usual  hopes,  now  vague  and  more  vague  every  letter — that 
things  would  end  well  some  time,  somehow  or  other. 

Helen  only  sighed  on  reading  these  letters,  and,  quick 
as  she  glanced  her  eye  over  them,  threw  them  from  her  on 
the  bed  ;  and  Miss  Clarendon  said,  '  Ah  !  you  know  her  now,  I 
see  !' 

Helen  made  no  reply  :  she  was  careful  not  to  make  any 
comment  which  could  betray  how  much,  or  what  sort  of  reason 
she  had  to  complain  of  Lady  Cecilia  ;  but  Miss  Clarendon, 
confident  that  she  had  guessed  pretty  nearly  the  truth,  was 
satisfied  with  her  own  penetration,  and  then,  after  seeming  to 
doubt  for  a  few  moments,  she  put  another  letter  into  Helen's 
hand,  and  with  one  of  those  looks  of  tender  interest  which 
sometimes  softened  her  countenance,  she  left  the  room. 

The  letter  was  from  Beauclerc  ;  it  appeared  to  have  been 
written  immediately  after  he  had  received  Helen's  letter,  and 
was  as  follows  :  — 

'  Not  write  to  you,  my  dearest  Helen  !  Renounce  my  claim 
to  your  hand  !  submit  to  be  rejected  by  you,  my  affianced 
bride  !  No,  never — never  !  Doubt  !  suspicion  !  — suspicion 
of  you  !  — you,  angel  as  you  are — you,  who  have  devoted, 
sacrificed,  yourself  to  others.  No,  Helen,  my  admiration,  my 
love,  my  trust  in  you,  are  greater  than  they  ever  were.  And 
do  /  dare  to  say  these  words  to  you  ?  /,  who  am  perhaps  a  mur- 
derer !  I  ought  to  imitate  your  generosity,  I  ought  not  to  offer 
you  a  hand  stained  with  blood  : — 1  ought  at  least  to  leave  you 
free  till  1  know  when  I  may  return  from  banishment.  I  have 
written  this  at  the  first  instant  I  have  been  able  to  command 
during  my  hurried  journey,  and  as  you  know  something  of 
what  led  to  this  unhappy  business,  you  shall  in  my  next  letter 
hear  the  whole  ;  till  then,  adieu  ! 

'  Granville  Beauclerc' 
440 


HELEN 

The  next  day,  when  she  thought  Helen  sufificiently  recovered 
from  the  agitation  of  reading  Beauclerc's  letter,  aunt  Pennant 
produced  one  letter  more,  which  she  had  kept  for  the  last,  be- 
cause she  hoped  it  would  give  pleasure  to  her  patient.  Helen 
sat  up  in  her  bed  eagerly,  and  stretched  out  her  hand.  The 
letter  was  directed  by  General  Clarendon,  but  that  was  only 
the  outer  cover,  they  knew,  for  he  had  mentioned  in  his  last 
despatch  to  his  sister  that  the  letter  enclosed  for  Miss  Stanley 
was  from  Lady  Davenant.  Helen  tore  off  the  cover,  but  the 
instant  she  saw  the  inner  direction,  she  sank  back,  turned,  and 
hid  her  face  on  the  pillow. 

It  was  directed — 'To  Mrs.  Granville  Beauclerc' 

Lady  Davenant  had  unfortunately  taken  it  for  granted  that 
nothing  could  have  prevented  the  marriage. 

Aunt  Pennant  blamed  herself  for  not  having  foreseen  and 
prevented  this  accident,  which  she  saw  distressed  poor  Helen 
so  much.  But  Miss  Clarendon  wondered  that  she  was  so 
shocked,  and  supposed  she  would  get  over  it  in  a  few  minutes, 
or  else  she  must  be  very  weak.  There  was  nothing  that  tended 
to  raise  her  spirits  much  in  the  letter  itself,  to  make  amends 
for  the  shock  the  direction  had  given.  It  contained  but  a  few 
lines  in  Lady  Davenant's  own  handwriting,  and  a  postscript 
from  Lord  Davenant.  She  wrote  only  to  announce  their  safe 
arrival  at  Petersburg,  as  she  was  obliged  to  send  off  her 
letter  before  she  had  received  any  despatches  from  England ; 
and  she  concluded  with,  '  I  am  sure  the  first  will  bring  me 
the  joyful  news  of  Beauclerc's  happiness  and  yours,  my  dear 
child.' 

Lord  Davenant's  postscript  added  that  in  truth  Lady 
Davenant  much  needed  such  a  cordial,  for  that  her  health  had 
suffered  even  more  than  he  had  feared  it  would.  He  repented 
that  he  had  allowed  her  to  accompany  him  to  such  a  rigorous 
climate. 

All  that  could  be  said  to  allay  the  apprehensions  this  post- 
script might  excite,  was  of  course  said  in  the  best  way  by 
aunt  Pennant.  But  it  was  plain  that  Helen  did  not  recover 
during  the  whole  of  this  day  from  the  shock  she  had  felt  '  from 
that  foolish  direction,'  as  Miss  Clarendon  said.  She  could 
not  be  prevailed  upon  to  rise  this  day,  though  Miss  Clarendon, 
after  feeling  her  pulse,  had  declared  that  she  was  very  well 
able  to  get  up.      '  It  was  very  bad  for  her  to  remain  in  bed.' 

441 


HELEN 

This  was  true,  no  doubt.  And  Miss  Clarendon  remarked  to 
her  aunt  that  she  was  surprised  to  find  Miss  Stanley  so  weak. 
Her  aunt  replied  that  it  was  not  surprising  that  she  should  be 
rather  weak  at  present,  after  such  a  long  illness. 

'  Weakness  of  body  and  mind  need  not  go  together,'  said 
Miss  Clarendon. 

'  Need  not,  perhaps,'  said  her  aunt,  '  but  they  are  apt 
to  do  so.' 

'  It  is  to  be  hoped  the  weakness  of  mind  will  go  with  the 
weakness  of  body,  and  soon,'  said  Miss  Clarendon. 

'  We  must  do  what  we  can  to  strengthen  and  fatten  her, 
poor  thing  ! '  said  Mrs.  Pennant. 

'  Fatten  the  body,  rather  easier  than  to  strengthen  the 
mind.  Strength  of  mind  cannot  be  thrown  in,  as  you  would 
throw  in  the  bark,  or  the  chicken  broth.' 

'  Only  have  patience  with  her,'  said  Mrs.  Pennant,  '  and  you 
will  find  that  she  will  have  strength  of  mind  enough  when  she 
gets  quite  well.      Only  have  patience.' 

During  Helen's  illness  Miss  Clarendon  had  been  patient,  but 
now  that  she  was  pronounced  convalescent,  she  became  eager 
to  see  her  quite  well.  In  time  of  need  Miss  Clarendon  had 
been  not  only  the  most  active  and  zealous,  but  a  most  gentle 
and — doubt  it  who  may — soft-stepping,  soft-voiced  nurse  ; 
but  now,  when  Doctor  Tudor  had  assured  them  that  all  fever 
was  gone,  and  agreed  with  her  that  the  patient  would  soon  be 
well,  if  she  would  only  think  so,  Miss  Clarendon  deemed  it 
high  time  to  use  something  more  than  her  milder  influence,  to 
become,  if  not  a  rugged,  at  least  a  stern  nurse,  and  she  brought 
out  some  of  her  rigid  lore. 

'  I  intend  that  you  should  get  up  in  seasonable  time  to-day, 
Helen,'  said  she,  as  she  entered  her  room. 

'  Do  you  ? '  said  Helen  in  a  languid  voice. 

'  I  do,'  said  Miss  Clarendon ;  '  and  I  hope  you  do  not 
intend  to  do  as  you  did  yesterday,  to  lie  in  bed  all  day.' 

Helen  turned,  sighed,  and  Mrs.  Pennant  said,  '  Yesterday 
is  over,  my  dear  Esther — no  use  in  talking  of  yesterday.' 

'  Only  to  secure  our  doing  better  to-day,  ma'am,'  replied 
Miss  Clarendon,  with  prompt  ability. 

Helen  was  all  submission,  and  she  got  up,  and  that  was  well. 
Miss  Clarendon  went  in  quest  of  arrow-root  judiciously  ;  and 
aunt  Pennant  stayed  and  nourished  her  patient  meanwhile  with 

442 


HELEN 

'  the  fostering  dew  of  praise ' ;  and  let  her  dress  as  slowly  and 
move  as  languidly  as  she  liked,  though  Miss  Clarendon  had 
admonished  her  '  not  to  dawdle.' 

As  soon  as  she  was  dressed,  Helen  went  to  the  window  and 
threw  up  the  sash  for  the  first  time  to  enjoy  the  fresh  air,  and 
to  see  the  prospect,  which  she  was  told  was  beautiful ;  and  she 
saw  that  it  was  beautiful,  and,  though  it  was  still  winter,  she 
felt  that  the  air  was  balmy ;  and  the  sun  shone  bright,  and 
the  grass  began  to  be  green,  for  spring  approached.  But  how 
different  to  her  from  the  spring-time  of  former  years  !  Nature 
the  same,  but  all  within  herself  how  changed  !  And  all  which 
used  to  please,  and  to  seem  to  her  most  cheerful,  now  came 
over  her  spirits  with  a  sense  of  sadness  ; — she  felt  as  if  all  the 
life  of  life  was  gone.  Tears  filled  her  eyes,  large  tears  rolled 
slowly  down  as  she  stood  fixed,  seeming  to  gaze  from  that  win- 
dow at  she  knew  not  what.  Aunt  Pennant  unperceived  stood 
beside  her,  and  let  the  tears  flow  unnoticed.  '  They  will  do 
her  good  ;  they  are  a  great  relief  sometimes.' 

Miss  Clarendon  returned,  and  the  tears  were  dried,  but  the 
glaze  remained,  and  Miss  Clarendon  saw  it,  and  gave  a  re- 
proachful look  at  her  aunt,  as  much  as  to  say,  '  Why  did  you 
let  her  cry  ? '  And  her  aunt's  look  in  reply  was,  '  I  could 
not  help  it,  my  dear.' 

'  Eat  your  arrow-root,'  was  all  that  transpired  to  Helen. 
And  she  tried  to  eat,  but  could  not ;  and  Miss  Clarendon  was 
not  well  pleased,  for  the  arrow-root  was  good,  and  she  had 
made  it ;  she  felt  Miss  Stanley's  pulse,  and  said  that  '  it  was 
as  good  a  pulse  as  could  be,  only  low  and  a  little  fluttered.' 

'Do  not  flutter  it  any  more,  then,  Esther,  my  dear,'  said 
Mrs.  Pennant. 

'What  am  I  doing  or  saying,  ma'am,  that  should  flutter 
anybody  that  has  common  sense  ? ' 

'  Some  people  don't  like  to  have  their  pulse  felt,'  said  aunt 
Pennant. 

'  Those  people  have  not  common  sense,'  replied  the  niece. 

'  I  believe  I  have  not  common  sense,'  said  Helen. 

'Sense  you  have  enough — resolution  is  what  you  want, 
Helen,  I  tell  you.' 

'I  know,'  said  Helen,  'too  true ' 

'True,  but  not  too  true — nothing  can  be  too  true.' 

'  True,'  said  Helen,  with  languid  submission. 

443 


HELEN 

Helen  was  not  in  a  condition  to  chop  logic,  or  ever  much 
inclined  to  it ;  now  less  than  ever,  and  least  of  all  with  Miss 
Clarendon,  so  able  as  she  was.  There  is  something  very  pro- 
voking sometimes  in  perfect  submission,  because  it  is  unanswer- 
able. But  the  languor,  not  the  submission,  afforded  some  cause 
for  further  remark  and  remonstrance. 

'  Helen,  you  are  dreadfully  languid  to-day.' 

'  Sadly,'  said  Helen. 

'  If  you  could  have  eaten  more  arrow-root  before  it  grew 
cold,  you  would  have  been  better.' 

'  But  if  she  could  not,  my  dear  Esther,'  said  aunt  Pennant. 

'  Could  not,  ma'am  !  As  if  people  could  not  eat  if  they 
pleased.' 

'  But  if  people  have  no  appetite,  my  dear,  I  am  afraid  eating 
will  not  do  much  good.' 

'  I  am  afraid,  my  dear  aunt,  you  will  not  do  Miss  Stanley 
much  good,'  said  Miss  Clarendon,  shaking  her  head;  'you 
will  only  spoil  her.' 

'  I  am  quite  spoiled,  I  believe,'  said  Helen  ;  '  you  must 
unspoil  me,  Esther.' 

'  Not  so  very  easy,'  said  Esther ;  '  but  I  shall  try,  for  I 
am  a  sincere  friend.' 

'  I  am  sure  of  it,'  said  Helen. 

Then  what  more  could  be  said  ?  Nothing  at  that  time — 
Helen's  look  was  so  sincerely  grateful,  and  '  gentle  as  a  lamb,' 
as  aunt  Pennant  observed  ;  and  Esther  was  not  a  wolf  quite — 
at  heart  not  at  all. 

Miss  Clarendon  presently  remarked  that  Miss  Stanley  really 
did  not  seem  glad  to  be  better — glad  to  get  well.  Helen  ac- 
knowledged that,  instead  of  being  glad,  she  was  rather  sorry. 
'  If  it  had  pleased  Heaven,  I  should  have  been  glad  to  die.' 

'  Nonsense  about  dying,  and  worse  than  nonsense,'  cried 
Miss  Clarendon,  '  when  you  see  that  it  did  not  please  Heaven 
that  you  should  die ' 

'  I  am  content  to  live,'  said  Helen. 

'  Content !  to  be  sure  you  are,'  said  Miss  Clarendon.  '  Is 
this  your  thankfulness  to  Providence  ? ' 

'  I  am  resigned — I  am  thankful — I  will  try  to  be  more 
so — but  I  cannot  be  glad.' 

General  Clarendon's  bulletins  continued  with  little  variation 
for    some  time  ;    they  were  always  to    his   sister  —  he  never 

444 


HELEN 

mentioned  Beauclerc,  but  confined  himself  to  the  few  lines  or 
words  necessary  to  give  his  promised  regular  accounts  of  Mr. 
Churchill's  state,  the  sum  of  which  continued  to  be  for  a 
length  of  time:  'Much  the  same.'  'Not  in  immediate 
danger.'     '  Cannot  be  pronounced  out  of  danger.' 

Not  very  consolatory,  Helen  felt.  '  But  while  there  is  life, 
there  is  hope,'  as  aunt  Pennant  observed. 

'  Yes,  and  fear,'  said  Helen  ;  and  her  hopes  and  fears  on 
this  subject  alternated  with  fatiguing  reiteration,  and  with  a 
total  incapacity  of  forming  any  judgment. 

Beauclerc's  letter  of  explanation  arrived,  and  other  letters 
came  from  him  from  time  to  time,  which,  as  they  were  only 
repetitions  of  hopes  and  fears  as  to  Churchill's  recovery,  and 
of  uncertainty  as  to  what  might  be  his  own  future  fate,  only 
increased  Helen's  misery ;  and  as  even  their  expressions  of 
devoted  attachment  could  not  alter  her  own  determination, 
while  she  felt  how  cruel  her  continued  silence  must  appear, 
they  only  agitated  without  relieving  her  mind.  Mrs.  Pennant 
sympathised  with  and  soothed  her,  and  knew  how  to  soothe, 
and  how  to  raise,  and  to  sustain  a  mind  in  sorrow,  suffering 
under  disappointed  affection,  and  sunk  almost  to  despondency; 
for  aunt  Pennant,  besides  her  softness  of  manner,  and  her 
quick  intelligent  sympathy,  had  power  of  consolation  of  a 
higher  sort,  beyond  any  which  this  world  can  give.  She  was 
very  religious,  of  a  cheerfully  religious  turn  of  mind — of  that 
truly  Christian  spirit  which  hopeth  all  things.  When  she  was 
a  child  somebody  asked  her  if  she  was  bred  up  in  the  fear  of 
the  Lord.  She  said  no,  but  in  the  love  of  God.  And  so  she 
was,  in  that  love  which  casteth  out  fear.  And  now  the  mild- 
ness of  her  piety,  and  the  whole  tone  and  manner  of  her 
speaking  and  thinking,  reminded  Helen  of  that  good  dear 
uncle  by  whom  she  had  been  educated.  She  listened  with 
affectionate  reverence,  and  she  truly  and  simply  said,  '  You  do 
me  good — I  think  you  have  done  me  a  great  deal  of  good — 
and  you  shall  see  it.'  And  she  did  see  it  afterwards,  and  Miss 
Clarendon  thought  it  was  her  doing,  and  so  her  aunt  let  it 
pass,  and  was  only  glad  the  good  was  done. 

The  first  day  Helen  went  down  to  the  drawing-room,  she 
found  there  a  man  who  looked,  as  she  thought  at  first  glance, 
like  a  tradesman  —  some  person,  she  supposed,  come  on 
business,    standing    waiting    for   Miss    Clarendon,    or    Mrs. 

445 


HELEN 

Pennant.  She  scarcely  looked  at  him,  but  passed  on  to  the 
sofa,  beside  which  was  a  little  table  set  for  her,  and  on  it 
a  beautiful  work  -  box,  which  she  began  to  examine  and 
admire. 

'  Not  nigh  so  handsome  as  I  could  have  wished  it,  then, 
for  you.  Miss  Helen — I  ask  pardon,  Miss  Stanley.' 

Helen  looked  up,  surprised  at  hearing  herself  addressed  by 
one  whom  she  had  thought  a  stranger ;  but  yet  she  knew  the 
voice,  and  a  reminiscence  came  across  her  mind  of  having 
seen  him  somewhere  before. 

'  Old  David  Price,  ma'am.  Maybe  you  forget  him,  you 
being  a  child  at  that  time.      But  since  you  grew  up,  you  have 

been  the  saving  of  me  and  many  more '      Stepping  quite 

close  to  her,  he  whispered  that  he  had  been  paid  under  her 
goodness's  order  by  Mr.  James,  along  with  the  other  creditors 
that  had  been  left. 

Helen  by  this  time  recollected  who  the  poor  Welshman  was 
— an  upholsterer  and  cabinet-maker,  who  had  been  years 
before  employed  at  the  Deanery.  Never  having  been  paid  at 
the  time,  a  very  considerable  debt  had  accumulated,  and  having 
neither  note  nor  bond.  Price  said  that  he  had  despaired  of 
ever  obtaining  the  amount  of  his  earnings.  He  had,  however, 
since  the  Dean's  death,  been  paid  in  full,  and  had  been  able 
to  retire  to  his  native  village,  which  happened  to  be  near 
Llansillen,  and  most  grateful  he  was  ;  and  as  soon  as  he  per- 
ceived that  he  was  recognised,  his  gratitude  became  better  able 
to  express  itself.  Not  well,  however,  could  it  make  its  way  out 
for  some  time  ;  between  crying  and  laughing,  and  between  two 
languages,  he  was  at  first  scarcely  intelligible.  Whenever  much 
moved,  David  Price  had  recourse  to  his  native  Welsh,  in 
which  he  was  eloquent ;  and  Mrs.  Pennant,  on  whom, 
knowing  that  she  understood  him,  his  eyes  turned,  was  good 
enough  to  interpret  for  him.  And  when  once  fairly  set 
agoing,  there  was  danger  that  poor  David's  garrulous  gratitude 
should  flow  for  ever.  But  it  was  all  honest ;  not  a  word  of 
flattery  ;  and  his  old  face  was  in  a  glow  and  radiant  with 
feeling,  and  the  joy  of  telling  Miss  Helen  all,  how,  and  about  it ; 
particularly  concerning  the  last  day  when  Mr.  James  paid 
him,  and  them,  and  all  of  them :  that  was  a  day  Miss 
Stanley  ought  to  have  seen ;  pity  she  could  not  have  wit- 
nessed it  ;  it  would  have  done  her  good  to  the  latest  hour  of 

446 


Giving  a  shove  to  the  work-box  (?«  the  table. 


HELEN 

her  life.  Pity  she  should  never  see  the  faces  of  many,  some 
poorer  they  might  have  been  than  himself ;  many  richer,  that 
would  have  been  ruined  for  ever  but  for  her.  For  his  own 
part,  he  reckoned  himself  one  of  the  happiest  of  them  all,  in 
being  allowed  to  see  her  face  to  face.  And  he  hoped,  as  soon 
as  she  was  able  to  get  out  so  far — but  it  was  not  so  far — she 
would  come  to  see  how  comfortable  he  was  in  his  own  house. 
It  ended  at  last  in  his  giving  a  shove  to  the  work-box  on  the 
table,  which,  though  nothing  worth  otherwise,  he  knew  she 
could  not  mislike,  on  account  it  was  made  out  of  all  the 
samples  of  wood  the  Dean,  her  uncle,  had  given  to  him  in 
former  times. 

Notwithstanding  the  immoderate  length  of  his  speeches, 
and  the  impossibility  he  seemed  to  find  of  ending  his  visit, 
Helen  was  not  much  tired.  And  when  she  was  able  to  walk 
so  far,  Mrs.  Pennant  took  her  to  see  David  Price,  and  in  a 
most  comfortable  house  she  found  him ;  and  every  one  in  that 
house,  down  to  the  youngest  child,  gathered  round  her  by 
degrees,  some  more,  some  less  shy,  but  all  with  gratitude 
beaming  and  smiling  in  their  faces.  It  was  delightful  to 
Helen  ;  for  there  is  no  human  heart  so  engrossed  by  sorrow, 
so  overwhelmed  by  disappointment,  so  closed  against  hope  of 
happiness,  that  will  not  open  to  the  touch  of  gratitude. 


CHAPTER    XLIV 

But  there  was  still  in  Helen's  inmost  soul  one  deceitful  hope. 
She  thought  she  had  pulled  it  up  by  the  roots  many  times, 
and  the  last  time  completely  ;  but  still  a  little  fibre  lurked, 
and  still  it  grew  again.  It  was  the  hope  that  Cecilia  would 
keep  that  last  promise,  though  at  the  moment  Helen  had  flung 
from  her  the  possibility  ;  yet  now  she  took  it  up  again,  and 
she  thought  it  was  possible  that  Cecilia  might  be  true  to  her 
word.  If  her  child  should  be  born  alive,  and  IF  it  should  be 
a  boy  !  It  became  a  heart-beating  suspense  as  the  time  ap- 
proached, and  every  day  the  news  might  be  expected.  The 
post  came  in  but  three  times  a  week  at  Llansillen,  and  every 
post  day  Miss  Clarendon  repeated  her  prophecy  to  her  aunt, 

448 


HELEN 

'  You  will  see,  ma'am,  the  child  will  be  born  in  good  time, 
and  alive.  You  who  have  always  been  so  niuch  afraid  for 
Lady  Cecilia,  will  find  she  has  not  feeling  enough  to  do  her 
any  harm.' 

In  due  time  came  a  note  from  the  General.  '  A  boy  !  child 
and  mother  doing  well.     Give  me  joy.' 

The  joy  to  Miss  Clarendon  was  much  increased  by  the 
triumph  in  her  own  perfectly  right  opinion.  Mrs.  Pennant's 
was  pure  affectionate  joy  for  the  father,  and  for  Lady  Cecilia, 
for  whom,  all  sinner  as  she  was  in  her  niece's  eyes,  this  good 
soul  had  compassion.  Helen's  anxiety  to  hear  again  and 
again  every  post  was  very  natural  the  aunt  thought ;  quite 
superfluous  the  niece  deemed  it :  Lady  Cecilia  would  do  very 
well,  no  doubt,  she  prophesied  again,  and  laughed  at  the 
tremor,  the  eagerness,  with  which  Helen  every  day  asked  if 
there  was  any  letter  from  Cecilia.  At  last  one  came,  the  first 
in  her  own  handwriting,  and  it  was  to  Helen  herself,  and 
it  extinguished  all  hope.  Helen  could  only  articulate,  '  O 
Cecilia  ! ' 

Her  emotion,  her  disappointment,  were  visible,  but  un- 
accountable :  she  could  give  no  reason  for  it  to  Miss  Clarendon, 
whose  wondering  eye  was  upon  her  ;  nor  even  to  sympathising 
aunt  Pennant  could  she  breathe  a  word  without  betraying 
Cecilia  ;  she  was  silent,  and  there  was  all  that  day,  and  many 
succeeding  days,  a  hopelessness  of  languor  in  her  whole 
appearance.  There  was,  as  Miss  Clarendon  termed  it,  a 
'  backsliding  in  her  recovery,'  which  grieved  aunt  Pennant, 
and  Helen  had  to  bear  imputation  of  caprice  and  of  indolence 
from  Miss  Clarendon  ;  but  even  that  eye  immediately  upon 
her,  that  eye  more  severe  than  ever,  had  not  power  to  rouse 
her.  Her  soul  was  sunk  within,  nothing  further  to  hope ; 
there  was  a  dead  calm,  and  the  stillness  and  loneliness  of 
Llansillen  made  that  calm  almost  awful.  The  life  of  great 
excitation  which  she  had  led  previous  to  her  illness  rendered 
her  more  sensible  of  the  change,  of  the  total  want  of  stimulus. 
The  walks  to  Price's  cottage  had  been  repeated,  but,  though 
it  was  a  very  bright  spot,  the  eye  could  not  always  be  fixed 
upon  it. 

Bodily  exertion  being  more  easy  to  her  now  than  mental, 
she  took  long  walks,  and  came  in  boasting  how  far  she  had 
been,  and  looking  quite  exhausted.  And  Miss  Clarendon 
2  G  449 


HELEN 

wondered  at  her  wandering  out  alone  ;  then  she  tried  to  walk 
with  Miss  Clarendon,  and  she  was  more  tired,  though  the 
walks  were  shorter — and  that  was  observed,  and  was  not 
agreeable  either  to  the  observer  or  to  the  observed.  Helen 
endeavoured  to  make  up  for  it  ;  she  followed  Miss  Clarendon 
about  in  all  her  various  occupations,  from  flower-garden  to 
conservatory,  and  from  conservatory  to  pheasantry,  and  to  all 
her  pretty  cottages,  and  her  schools,  and  she  saw  and  admired 
all  the  good  that  Esther  did  so  judiciously,  and  with  such 
extraordinary,  such  wonderful  energy. 

'  Nothing  wonderful  in  it,'  Miss  Clarendon  said  .  and  as  she 
ungraciously  rejected  praise,  however  sincere,  and  required 
not  sympathy,  Helen  was  reduced  to  be  a  mere  silent,  stupid, 
useless  stander-by,  and  she  could  not  but  feel  this  a  little 
awkward.  She  tried  to  interest  herself  for  the  poor  people  in 
the  neighbourhood,  but  their  language  was  unintelligible  to 
her,  and  hers  to  them,  and  it  is  hard  work  trying  to  make 
objects  for  oneself  in  quite  a  new  place,  and  with  a  preoc- 
cupying sorrow  in  the  mind  all  the  time.  It  was  not  only 
hard  work  to  Helen,  but  it  seemed  labour  in  vain — bringing 
soil  by  handfuls  to  a  barren  rock,  where,  after  all,  no  plant  will 
take  root.  Miss  Clarendon  thought  that  labour  could  never 
be  in  vain. 

One  morning,  when  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  Helen 
had  been  sitting  too  long  in  the  same  position,  with  her  head 
leaning  on  her  hand.  Miss  Clarendon  in  her  abrupt  voice 
asked,  '  How  much  longer,  Helen,  do  you  intend  to  sit  there, 
doing  only  what  is  the  worst  thing  in  the  world  for  you — 
thinking  ? ' 

Helen  started,  and  said  she  feared  she  had  been  sitting  too 
long  idle. 

'  If  you  wish  to  know  how  long,  I  can  tell  you,'  said  Miss 
Clarendon  ;   'just  one  hour  and  thirteen  minutes.' 

'  By  the  stop  watch,'  said  Helen,  smiling. 

'  By  my  watch,'  said  grave  Miss  Clarendon  ;  '  and  in  the 
meantime  look  at  the  quantity  of  work  I  have  done.' 

'  And  done  so  nicely ! '  said  Helen,  looking  at  it  with 
admiration. 

'  Oh,  do  not  think  to  bribe  me  with  admiration  ;  I  would 
rather  see  you  do  something  yourself  than  hear  you  praise  my 
doings.' 

45° 


HELEN 

'  If  I  had  anybody  to  work  for.  I  have  so  few  friends 
now  in  the  world  who  would  care  for  anything  I  could  do  ! 
But  I  win  try — you  shall  see,  my  dear  Esther,  by  and  by.' 

'  By  and  by  !  no,  no — now.  I  cannot  bear  to  see  you  any 
longer,  in  this  half-alive,  half-dead  state.' 

'I  know,'  said  Helen,  'that  all  you  say  is  for  my  good. 
I  am  sure  your  only  object  is  my  happiness.' 

'  Your  happiness  is  not  in  my  power  or  in  yours,  but  it  is 
in  your  power  to  deserve  to  be  happy,  by  doing  what  is  right 
— by  exerting  yourself : — that  is  my  object,  for  I  see  you  are 
in  danger  of  being  lost  in  indolence.  Now  you  have  the 
truth  and  the  whole  truth.' 

Many  a  truth  would  have  come  mended  from  Miss 
Clarendon's  tongue  if  it  had  been  uttered  in  a  softer  tone, 
and  if  she  had  paid  a  little  more  attention  to  times  and 
seasons  :  but  she  held  it  the  sacred  duty  of  sincerity  to  tell  a 
friend  her  faults  as  soon  as  seen,  and  without  circumlocution. 

The  next  day  Helen  set  about  a  drawing.  She  made  it  an 
object  to  herself  to  try  to  copy  a  view  of  the  dear  Deanery 
in  the  same  style  as  several  beautiful  drawings  of  Miss 
Clarendon's. 

While  she  looked  over  her  portfolio,  several  of  her  old 
sketches  recalled  remembrances  which  made  her  sigh 
frequently  ;  Miss  Clarendon  heard  her,  and  said — '  I  wish  you 
would  cure  yourself  of  that  habit  of  sighing  ;  it  is  very  bad 
for  you.' 

'  I  know  it,'  said  Helen. 

'  Despondency  is  not  penitence,'  continued  Esther  :  '  reverie 
is  not  reparation.' 

She  felt  as  desirous  as  ever  to  make  Helen  happy  at 
Llansillen,  but  she  was  provoked  to  find  it  impossible  to  do  so. 
Of  a  strong  body  herself,  capable  of  great  resistance,  powerful 
reaction  under  disappointment  or  grief,-  she  could  ill  make 
allowance  for  feebler  health  and  spirits  —  perhaps  feebler 
character.  For  great  misfortunes  she  had  great  sympathy,  but 
she  could  not  enter  into  the  details  of  lesser  sorrows,  especially 
any  of  the  sentimental  kind,  which  she  was  apt  to  class 
altogether  under  the  head — '  Sorrows  of  my  Lord  Plumcake  ! ' 
an  expression  which  had  sovereignly  taken  her  fancy,  and 
which  her  aunt  did  not  relish,  or  quite  understand. 

Mrs.  Pennant  was,  indeed,  as  complete  a  contrast  to  her 

451 


HELEN 

niece  in  tliese  points  as  nature  and  habit  joined  could  pro- 
duce. She  was  naturally  of  the  most  exquisitely  sympathetic 
mimosa- sensibility,  shrinking  and  expanding  to  the  touch  of 
others'  joy  or  woe  ;  and  instead  of  having  by  long  use  worn 
this  out,  she  had  preserved  it  wonderfully  fresh  in  advanced 
years.  But,  notwithstanding  the  contrast  and  seemingly  in- 
compatible difference  between  this  aunt  and  niece,  the  founda- 
tions of  their  characters  both  being  good,  sound,  and  true,  they 
lived  on  together  well,  and  loved  each  other  dearly.  They 
had  seldom  differed  so  much  on  any  point  as  in  the  present 
case,  as  to  their  treatment  of  their  patient  and  their  guest. 
Scarcely  a  day  passed  in  which  they  did  not  come  to  some 
mutual  remonstrance  ;  and  sometimes  when  she  was  by,  which 
was  not  pleasant  to  her,  as  may  be  imagined.  Yet  perhaps 
even  these  little  altercations  and  annoyances,  though  they  tried 
Helen's  temper  or  grieved  her  heart  at  the  moment,  were  of 
use  to  her  upon  the  whole,  by  drawing  her  out  of  herself. 
Besides,  these  daily  vicissitudes — made  by  human  temper, 
manner,  and  character — supplied  in  some  sort  the  total  want 
of  events,  and  broke  the  monotony  of  these  tedious  months. 

The  General's  bulletins,  however,  became  at  last  more 
favourable  :  Mr.  Churchill  was  decidedly  better  ;  his  physician 
hoped  he  might  soon  be  pronounced  out  of  danger.  The 
General  said  nothing  of  Beauclerc,  but  that  he  was,  he  believed, 
still  at  Paris.  And  from  this  time  forward  no  more  letters 
came  from  Beauclerc  to  Helen  ;  as  his  hopes  of  Churchill's 
recovery  increased,  he  expected  every  day  to  be  released  from 
his  banishment,  and  was  resolved  to  write  no  more  till  he  could 
say  that  he  was  free.  But  Helen,  though  she  did  not  allow  it 
to  herself,  felt  this  deeply  :  she  thought  that  her  determined 
silence  had  at  last  convinced  him  that  all  pursuit  of  her  was 
vain  ;  and  that  he  submitted  to  her  rejection  :  she  told  herself 
it  was  what  should  be,  and  yet  she  felt  it  bitterly.  Lady 
Cecilia's  letters  did  not  mention  him,  indeed  they  scarcely 
told  anything ;  they  had  become  short  and  constrained  :  the 
General,  she  said,  advised  her  to  go  out  more,  and  her  letters 
often  concluded  in  haste,  with  '  Carriage  at  the  door,'  and  all 
the  usual  excuses  of  -t  London  life. 

One  day  when  Helen  was  sitting  intently  drawing,  JMiss 
Clarendon  said  '  Helen  ! '  so  suddenly  that  she  started  and 
looked  round  ;   Miss   Clarendon  was  seated  on  a  low  stool  at 

452 


HELEN 

her  aunt's  feet,  with  one  arm  thrown  over  her  great  dog's  neck  ; 
he  had  laid  his  head  on  her  lap,  and  resting  on  him,  she 
looked  up  with  a  steadiness,  a  fixity  of  repose,  which  brought 
to  Helen's  mind  Raphael's  beautiful  figure  of  Fortitude  leaning 
on  her  lion ;  she  thought  she  had  never  before  seen  Miss 
Clarendon  look  so  handsome,  so  graceful,  so  interesting ;  she 
took  care  not  to  say  so,  however. 

'  Helen  ! '  continued  Miss  Clarendon,  '  do  you  remember 
the  time  when  I  was  at  Clarendon  Park  and  quitted  it  so 
abruptly  ?  My  reasons  were  good,  whatever  my  manner  was  ; 
the  opinion  of  the  world  I  am  not  apt  to  fear  for  myself,  or 
even  for  my  brother,  but  to  the  whispers  of  conscience  I  do 
listen.  Helen  !  I  was  conscious  that  certain  feelings  in  my 
mind  were  too  strong, — in  me,  you  would  scarcely  believe  it — 
too  tender.  I  had  no  reason  to  think  that  Granville  Beauclerc 
liked  me  ;  it  was  therefore  utterly  unfit  that  I  should  think  of 
him  :  I  felt  this,  I  left  Clarendon  Park,  and  from  that  moment 
I  have  refused  myself  the  pleasure  of  his  society,  I  have 
altogether  ceased  to  think  of  him.  This  is  the  only  way  to 
conquer  a  hopeless  attachment.  But  you,  Helen,  though  you 
have  commanded  him  never  to  attempt  to  see  you  again,  have 
not  been  able  to  command  your  own  mind.  Since  Mr. 
Churchill  is  so  much  better,  you  expect  that  he  will  soon  be 
pronounced  out  of  danger — you  expect  that  Mr.  Beauclerc 
will  come  over — come  here,  and  be  at  your  feet ! ' 

'  I  expect  nothing,'  said  Helen  in  a  faltering  voice,  and 
then  added  resolutely,  '  I  cannot  foresee  what  Mr.  Beauclerc 
may  do ;  but  of  this  be  assured.  Miss  Clarendon,  that  until  I 
stand  as  I  once  stood,  and  as  I  deserve  to  stand,  in  the  opinion 
of  your  brother ;  unless,  above  all,  I  can  bring  proofs  to 
Granville's  confiding  heart  that  I  have  ever  been  unimpeach- 
able of  conduct  and  of  mind,  and  in  all  but  one  circumstance 
true — true  as  yourself,  Esther — never,  never,  though  your 
brother  and  all  the  world  consented,  never  till  I  myself  felt  that 
I  ^3.1,  proved  to  be  as  worthy  to  be  his  wife  as  I  think  I  am,  would 
I  consent  to  marry  him — no,  not  though  my  heart  were  to  break.' 

'  I  believe  it,'  said  Mrs.  Pennant ;  '  and  I  wish — oh,  how 
I  wish ' 

'  That  Lady  Cecilia  were  hanged,  as  she  deserves,'  said 
Miss  Clarendon  :  '  so  do  I,  I  am  sure  ;  but  that  is  nothing  to 
the  present  purpose.' 

453 


HELEN 

'  No,  indeed,'  said  Helen. 

'  Helen  ! '  continued  Esther,  '  remember  that  Lady  Blanche 
Forrester  is  at  Paris.' 

Helen  shrank. 

'  Lady  Cecilia  tells  you  there  is  no  danger ;   I  say  there  is.' 

'  Why  should  you  say  so,  my  dear  Esther  ? '   said  her  aunt. 

'  Has  not  this  friend  of  yours  always  deceived,  misled  you, 
Helen  ? ' 

'  She  can  have  no  motive  for  deceiving  me  in  this,'  said 
Helen  :   '  I  believe  her.' 

'  Believe  her  then  ! '  cried  Miss  Clarendon  ;  '  believe  her, 
and  do  not  believe  me,  and  take  the  consequences  :  I  have 
done.' 

Helen  sighed,  but  though  she  might  feel  the  want  of  the 
charm  of  Lady  Cecilia's  suavity  of  manner,  of  her  agreeable, 
and  her  agreeing  temper,  yet  she  felt  the  safe  solidity  of 
principle  in  her  present  friend,  and  admired,  esteemed,  and 
loved,  without  fear  of  change,  her  unblenching  truth.  Pretty 
ornaments  of  gold  cannot  be  worked  out  of  the  native  ore  ;  to 
fashion  the  rude  mass  some  alloy  must  be  used,  and  when  the 
slight  filigree  of  captivating  manner  comes  to  be  tested  against 
the  sterling  worth  of  unalloyed  sincerity,  weighed  in  the  just 
balance  of  adversity,  we  are  glad  to  seize  the  solid  gold,  and 
leave  the  ornaments  to  those  that  they  deceive. 

The  fear  about  Lady  Blanche  Forrester  was,  however,  soon 
set  at  rest,  and  this  time  Lady  Cecilia  was  right.  A  letter 
from  her  to  Helen  announced  that  Lady  Blanche  was  married  ! 
— actually  married,  and  not  to  Granville  Beauclerc,  but  to 
some  other  English  gentleman  at  Paris,  no  matter  whom. 
Lord  Beltravers  and  Madame  de  St.  Cymon,  disappointed,  had 
returned  to  London  ;  Lady  Cecilia  had  seen  Lord  Beltravers, 
and  heard  the  news  from  him.  There  could  be  no  doubt  of 
the  truth  of  the  intelligence,  and  scarcely  did  Helen  herself 
rejoice  in  it  with  more  sincerity  than  did  Miss  Clarendon,  and 
Helen  loved  her  for  her  candour  as  well  as  for  her  sympathy. 

Time  passed  on  ;  week  after  week  rolled  away.  At  last 
General  Clarendon  announced  to  his  sister,  but  without  one 
word  to  Helen,  that  Mr.  Churchill  was  pronounced  out  of 
danger.  The  news  had  been  sent  to  his  ward,  the  General 
said,  and  he  expected  Granville  would  return  from  his  banish- 
ment immediately. 

454 


HELEN 

Quite  taken  up  in  the  first  tumult  of  her  feelings  at  this 
intelligence,  Helen  scarcely  observed  that  she  had  no  letter 
from  CeciUa.  But  even  aunt  Pennant  was  obliged  to  confess, 
in  reply  to  her  niece's  observation,  that  this  was  '  certainly 
very  odd ;  but  we  shall  soon  hear  some  explanation,  I  hope.' 

Miss  Clarendon  shook  her  head  ;  she  said  that  she  had 
always  thought  how  matters  would  end ;  she  judged  from  her 
brother's  letters  that  he  began  to  find  out  that  he  was  not  the 
happiest  of  men.  Yet  nothing  to  that  effect  was  ever  said  by  him ; 
one  phrase  only  excepted,  in  his  letter  to  her  on  her  last  birth- 
day, which  began  with,  '  In  our  happy  days,  my  dear  Esther.' 

Miss  Clarendon  said  nothing  to  Helen  upon  this  subject ; 
she  refrained  altogether  from  mentioning  Lady  Cecilia. 

Two,  three  post-days  passed  without  bringing  any  letter  to 
Helen.  The  fourth,  very  early  in  the  morning,  long  before 
the  usual  time  for  the  arrival  of  the  post.  Rose  came  into  her 
room  with  a  letter  in  her  hand,  saying,  '  From  General 
Clarendon,  ma'am.  His  own  man,  Mr.  Cockbum,  has  just 
this  minute  arrived,  ma'am — from  London.' 

With  a  trembling  hand  Helen  tore  the  letter  open  :  not 
one  word  from  General  Clarendon  !  It  was  only  a  cover,  con- 
taining two  notes  ;  one  from  Lord  Davenant  to  the  General, 
the  other  from  Lady  Davenant  to  Helen. 

Lord  Davenant  said  that  Lady  Davenant's  health  had 
declined  so  alarmingly  after  their  arrival  at  Petersburg  that 
he  had  insisted  upon  her  return  to  England,  and  that,  as  soon 
as  the  object  of  his  mission  was  completed,  he  should 
immediately  follow  her.  A  vessel,  he  said,  containing  letters 
from  England,  had  been  lost,  so  that  they  were  in  total 
ignorance  of  what  had  occurred  at  home ;  and  indeed  it 
appeared  from  the  direction  of  Lady  Davenant's  note  to  Helen, 
written  on  her  landing  in  England,  that  she  had  left  Russia 
without  knowing  that  the  marriage  had  been  broken  off,  or 
that  Helen  had  quitted  General  Clarendon's.  She  wrote — 
'  Let  me  see  you  and  Granville  once  more  before  I  die.  Be  in 
London,  at  my  own  house,  to  meet  me.  I  shall  be  there  as 
soon  as  I  can  be  moved.' 

The  initials  only  of  her  name  were  signed.  Elliott  added  a 
postscript,  saying  that  her  lady  had  suffered  much  from  an 
unusually  long  passage,  and  that  she  was  not  sure  what  day 
they  could  be  in  town. 

455 


'  Front  General  Clarendon,  ma'am. ' 


HELEN 

There  was  nothing  from  Lady  CeciHa.  Cockbum  said  that 
her  ladyship  had  not  been  at  home  when  he  set  out ;  that  his 
master  had  ordered  him  to  travel  all  night,  to  get  to  Llansillen 
as  fast  as  possible,  and  to  make  no  delay  in  delivering  the 
letter  to  Miss  Stanley. 

To  set  out  instantly,  to  be  in  town  at  her  house  to  meet 
Lady  Davenant,  was,  of  course,  Helen's  immediate  determina- 
tion. General  Clarendon  had  sent  his  travelling  carriage  for 
her ;  and  under  the  circumstances,  her  friends  could  have  no 
wish  but  to  speed  her  departure.  Miss  Clarendon  expressed 
surprise  at  there  being  no  letter  from  Lady  Cecilia,  and  would 
see  and  question  Cockbum  herself;  but  nothing  more  was  to 
be  learned  than  what  he  had  already  told,  that  the  packet  from 
Lady  Davenant  had  come  by  express  to  his  master  after  Lady 
Ceciha  had  driven  out,  as  it  had  been  her  custom  of  late, 
almost  every  day,  to  Kensington,  to  see  her  child.  Nothing 
could  be  more  natural,  Mrs.  Pennant  thought,  and  she  only 
wondered  at  Esther's  unconvinced  look  of  suspicion.  '  Nothing, 
surely,  can  be  more  natural,  my  dear  Esther.'  To  which 
Esther  replied,  'Very  likely,  ma'am.' 

Helen  was  too  much  hurried  and  too  much  engrossed  by 
the  one  idea  of  Lady  Davenant  to  think  of  what  they  said. 
At  parting  she  had  scarcely  time  even  to  thank  her  two  friends 
for  all  their  kindness,  but  they  understood  her  feelings,  and,  as 
Miss  Clarendon  said,  words  on  that  point  were  unnecessary. 
Aunt  Pennant  embraced  her  again  and  again,  and  then  let  her 
go,  saying,  '  I  must  not  detain  you,  my  dear.' 

'  But  I  must,'  said  Miss  Clarendon,  '  for  one  moment. 
There  is  one  point  on  which  my  parting  words  are  necessary. 
Helen  !  keep  clear  of  Lady  Cecilia's  affairs,  whatever  they 
may  be.      Hear  none  of  her  secrets.' 

Helen  wished  she  had  never  heard  any  ;  did  not  believe 
there  were  any  more  to  hear ;  but  she  promised  herself  and 
Miss  Clarendon  that  she  would  observe  this  excellent  counsel. 

And  now  she  was  in  the  carriage,  and  on  her  road  to  town. 
And  now  she  had  leisure  to  breathe,  and  to  think,  and  to  feel. 
Her  thoughts  and  feelings,  however,  could  be  only  repetitions 
of  fears  and  hopes  about  Lady  Davenant,  and  uncertainty  and 
dread  of  what  would  happen  when  she  should  require  explan- 
ation of  all  that  had  occurred  in  her  absence.  And  how  would 
Lady  Cecilia  be  able  to  meet  her  mother's  penetration  ? — ill 

457 


HELEN 

or  well,  Lady  Davenant  was  so  clear-sighted.  'And  how 
shall  I,'  thought  Helen,  '  without  plunging  deeper  in  deceit, 
avoid  revealing  the  truth  ?  Shall  I  assist  Cecilia  to  deceive 
her  mother  in  her  last  moments  ;  or  shall  I  break  my  promise, 
betray  Cecilia's  secret,  and  at  last  be  the  death  of  her  mother 
by  the  shock  ? '  It  is  astonishing  how  often  the  mind  can  go 
over  the  same  thoughts  and  feelings  without  coming  to  any 
conclusion,  any  ease  from  racking  suspense.  In  the  mean- 
time, on  rolled  the  carriage,  and  Cockburn,  according  to  his 
master's  directions,  got  her  over  the  ground  with  all  conceiv- 
able speed. 


CHAPTER    XLV 

When  they  were  within  the  last  stage  of  London  the  carriage 
suddenly  stopped,  and  Helen,  who  was  sitting  far  back,  deep 
in  her  endless  reverie,  started  forward — Cockburn  was  at  the 
carriage-door. 

'  My  lady,  coming  to  meet  you.  Miss  Stanley.' 

It  was  Cecilia  herself  But  Cecilia  so  changed  in  her 
whole  appearance  that  Helen  would  scarcely  have  known  her. 
She  was  so  much  struck  that  she  hardly  knew  what  was  said  : 
but  the  carriage -doors  were  opened,  and  Lady  Cecilia  was 
beside  her,  and  Cockburn  shut  the  door  without  permitting 
one  moment's  delay,  and  on  they  drove. 

Lady  Cecilia  was  excessively  agitated.  Helen  had  not 
power  to  utter  a  word,  and  was  glad  that  Cecilia  went  on 
speaking  very  fast  ;  though  she  spoke  without  appearing  to 
know  well  what  she  was  saying  :  of  Helen's  goodness  in 
coming  so  quickly,  of  her  fears  that  she  would  never  have 
been  in  time — '  but  she  was  in  time, — her  mother  had  not  yet 
arrived.  Clarendon  had  gone  to  meet  her  on  the  road,  she 
believed — she  was  not  quite  certain.' 

That  seemed  very  extraordinary  to  Helen.  '  Not  quite 
certain  ? '  said  she. 

'  No,  I  am  not,'  replied  Cecilia,  and  she  coloured  ;  her 
very  pale  cheek  flushed  ;  but  she  explained  not  at  all,  she  left 
that  subject,  and  spoke  of  the  friends  Helen  had  left  at 
Llansillen — then  suddenly  of  her  mother's  return — her  hopes 

4S8 


HELEN 

— her  fears — and  then,  without  going  on  to  the  natural  idea  of 
seeing  her  mother,  and  of  how  soon  they  should  see  her,  began 
to  talk  of  Beauclerc — of  Mr.  Churchill's  being  quite  out  of 
danger — of  the  General's  expectation  of  Beauclerc's  immediate 
return.  'And  then,  my  dearest  Helen,'  said  she,  'all  will 
be 

'  Oh  !  I  do  not  know  how  it  will  be  ! '  cried  she,  her  tone 
changing  suddenly  ;  and,  from  the  breathless  hurry  in  which 
she  had  been  running  on,  sinking  at  once  to  a  low  broken  tone, 
and  speaking  very  slowly.  '  I  cannot  tell  what  will  become  of 
any  of  us.  We  can  never  be  happy  again — any  one  of  us. 
And  it  is  all  my  doing — and  I  cannot  die.  O  Helen,  when 
I  tell  you ' 

She  stopped,  and  Miss  Clarendon's  warning  counsel,  all 
her  own  past  experience,  were  full  in  Helen's  mind ;  and  after 
a  moment's  silence,  she  stopped  Ceciha  just  as  she  seemed  to 
have  gathered  power  to  speak,  and  begged  that  she  would  not 
tell  her  anything  that  was  to  be  kept  secret.  She  could  not, 
would  not,  hear  any  secrets  ;  she  turned  her  head  aside,  and 
let  down  the  glass,  and  looked  out,  as  if  determined  not  to  be 
compelled  to  receive  this  confidence. 

'  Have  you,  then,  lost  all  interest,  all  affection,  for  me, 
Helen  ?  I  deserve  it !  But  you  need  not  fear  me  now, 
Helen  :  I  have  done  with  deception,  would  to  Heaven  I  had 
never  begun  with  it ! ' 

It  was  the  tone  and  look  of  truth — she  steadily  fixed  her 
eyes  upon  Helen — and  instead  of  the  bright  beams  that  used 
to  play  in  those  eyes,  there  was  now  a  dark  deep-seated  sorrow, 
almost  despair.  Helen  was  touched  to  the  heart :  it  was 
indeed  impossible  for  her — ^it  would  have  been  impossible  for 
any  one  who  had  any  feehng — to  have  looked  upon  Lady  Cecilia 
Clarendon  at  that  moment,  and  to  have  recollected  what  she 
had  so  lately  been,  without  pity.  The  friend  of  her  childhood 
looked  upon  her  with  all  the  poignant  anguish  of  compassion — 

'  O  my  dear  Cecilia  !  how  changed  ! ' 

Helen  was  not  sensible  that  she  uttered  the  words  'how 
changed  ! ' 

'  Changed  !  yes,  I  believe  I  am,'  said  Lady  Cecilia,  in  a 
calm  voice,  '  very  much  changed  in  appearance,  but  much 
more  in  reaHty  ;  my  mind  is  more  altered  than  my  person. 
O    Helen  !    if  you  could  see   into  my  mind  at  this  moment, 

459 


HELEN 

and  know  how  completely  it  is  changed  ; — but  it  is  all  in  vain 
now  !  You  have  suffered,  and  suffered  for  me  !  but  your 
sufferings  could  not  equal  mine.  You  lost  love  and  happi- 
ness, but  still  conscious  of  deserving  both  :  I  had  both 
at  my  command,  and  I  could  enjoy  neither  under  the  con- 
sciousness, the  torture,  of  remorse.' 

Helen  threw  her  arms  round  her,  and  exclaimed,  '  Do  not 
think  of  me  ! — all  will  be  well — since  you  have  resolved  on  the 
truth,  all  will  yet  be  well.' 

Cecilia  sighed  deeply  and  went  on.  '  I  am  sure,  Helen, 
you  were  surprised  that  my  child  was  born  alive  ;  at  least  I 
was.  I  believe  its  mother  had  not  feeling  enough  to  endanger 
its  existence.  Well,  Clarendon  has  that  comfort  at  all  events, 
and,  as  a  boy,  it  will  never  put  him  in  mind  of  his  mother. 
Well,  Helen,  I  had  hopes  of  myself  to  the  last  minute ;  I 
really  and  truly  hoped,  as  I  told  you,  that  I  should  have  had 
courage  to  tell  him  all  when  I  put  the  child  into  his  arms. 
But  his  joy  ! — I  could  not  dash  his  joy — I  could  not  ! — and 
then  I  thought  I  never  could.  1  knew  you  would  give  me  up  ; 
I  gave  up  all  hope  of  myself  I  was  very  unhappy,  and 
Clarendon  thought  I  was  very  ill  ;  and  I  acknowledge  that  I 
was  anxious  about  you,  and  let  all  the  blame  fall  on  you, 
innocent,  generous  creature  !  I  heard  my  husband  perpetually 
upbraiding  you  when  he  saw  me  ill — all,  he  said,  the  conse- 
quences of  your  falsehood — and  all  the  time  I  knew  it  was  my 
own. 

'  My  dear  Helen,  it  is  impossible  to  tell  you  all  the  daily, 
hourly  necessities  for  dissimulation  which  occurred.  Every  day, 
you  know,  we  were  to  send  to  inquire  for  Mr.  Churchill ;  and 
every  day  when  Clarendon  brought  me  the  bulletin,  he  pitied 
me,  and  blamed  you  ;  and  the  double-dealing  in  my  counte- 
nance he  never  suspected — always  interpreted  favourably.  Oh, 
such  confidence  as  he  had  in  me — and  how  it  has  been  wasted, 
abused  !  Then  letters  from  Beauclerc — how  I  bore  to  hear 
them  read  1  cannot  conceive  :  and  at  each  time  that  I  escaped, 
I  rejoiced  and  reproached  myself — and  reproached  myself  and 
rejoiced.  I  succeeded  in  every  effort  at  deception,  and  was 
cursed  by  my  own  success.  Encouraged  to  proceed,  I  soon 
went  on  without  shame  and  without  fear.  The  General  heard 
me  defending  you  against  the  various  reports  which  my 
A'enomous  cousin    had  circulated,  and  he   only  admired  what 

460 


HELEN 

he  called  "  my  amiable  zeal."  His  love  for  me  increased,  but 
it  gave  me  no  pleasure  :  for,  Helen,  now  I  am  going  to  tell 
you  an  extraordinary  turn  which  my  mind  took,  for  which  I 
cannot  account — I  can  hardly  believe  it — it  seems  out  of 
human  nature — my  love  for  him  decreased  ! — not  only  because 
I  felt  that  he  would  hate  me  if  he  discovered  my  deceit,  but 
because  he  was  lowered  in  my  estimation  !  I  had  always  had, 
as  everybody  has,  even  my  mother,  the  highest  opinion  of  his 
judgment.  To  that  judgment  I  had  always  looked  up  ;  it  had 
raised  me  in  my  own  opinion  ;  it  was  a  motive  to  me  to  be 
equal  to  what  he  thought  me :  but  now  that  motive  was 
gone,  I  no  longer  looked  up  to  him  ;  his  credulous  affection 
had  blinded  his  judgment — he  was  my  dupe  !  I  could  not 
reverence — I  could  not  love  one  who  was  my  dupe.  But  I 
cannot  tell  you  how  shocked  I  was  at  myself  when  I  felt  my 
love  for  him  decrease  every  time  I  saw  him. 

'  I  thought  myself  a  monster ;  I  had  grown  used  to  every- 
thing but  that — that  I  could  not  endure  ;  it  was  a  darkness  of 
the  mind — a  coldness  ;  it  was  as  if  the  sun  had  gone  out  of 
the  universe  ;  it  was  more — it  was  worse — it  was  as  if  I  was 
alone  in  the  world.  Home  was  a  desert  to  me.  I  went  out 
every  evening  ;  sometimes,  but  rarely.  Clarendon  accompanied 
me  :  he  had  become  more  retired ;  his  spirits  had  declined 
with  mine ;  and  though  he  was  glad  I  should  go  out  and 
amuse  myself,  yet  he  was  always  exact  as  to  the  hours  of  my 
return.  I  was  often  late — later  than  I  ought  to  have  been, 
and  I  made  a  multitude  of  paltry  excuses ;  this  it  was,  I 
believe,  which  first  shook  his  faith  in  my  truth  ;  but  I  was 
soon  detected  in  a  more  decided  failure. 

'  You  know  I  never  had  the  least  taste  for  play  of  any  kind  : 
you  may  remember  I  used  to  be  scolded  for  never  minding 
what  I  was  about  at  icarU ;  in  short,  I  never  had  the  least 
love  for  it — it  wearied  me  ;  but  now  that  my  spirits  were 
gone  it  was  a  sort  of  intoxication  in  which  I  cannot  say  I  in- 
dulged-— for  it  was  no  indulgence — but  to  which  I  had  recourse. 
Louisa  Castlefort,  you  know,  was  always  fond  of  play — got 
into  her  first  difficulties  by  that  means — she  led  me  on.  I 
lost  a  good  deal  of  money  to  her,  and  did  not  care  about  it  as 
long  as  I  could  pay ;  but  presently  it  came  to  a  time  when  I 
could  not  pay  without  applying  to  the  General :  I  applied  to 
him,  but  under  false  pretences — to  pay  this  bill  or  that,  or  to 

461 


HELEN 

buy  something,  which  I  never  bought :  this  occurred  so  often 
and  to  such  extent  that  he  suspected — he  discovered  how  it 
went ;  he  told  me  so.  He  spoke  in  that  low,  suppressed,  that 
terrible  voice  which  I  had  heard  once  before  ;  I  said,  I  know 
not  what,  in  deprecation  of  his  anger.  "  I  am  not  angry, 
Cecilia,"  said  he.  I  caught  his  hand  and  would  have  detained 
him  ;  he  withdrew  that  hand,  and,  looking  at  me,  exclaimed, 
"  Beautiful  creature  !  half  those  charms  would  I  give  for  truth/" 
He  left  the  room,  and  there  was  contempt  in  his  look. 

'  All  my  love — all  my  reverence — returned  for  him  in  an 
instant ;  but  what  could  I  say  ?  He  never  recurred  to  the 
subject ;  and  now,  when  I  saw  the  struggle  in  his  mind,  my 
passion  for  him  returned  in  all  its  force. 

'  People  who  flattered  me  often,  you  know,  said  I  was 
fascinating,  and  I  determined  to  use  my  powers  of  fascination 
to  regain  my  husband's  heart ;  how  little  I  knew  that  heart  ! 
I  dressed  to  please  him — oh  !  I  never  dressed  myself  with 
such  care  in  my  most  coquettish  days  ; — I  gave  a  splendid 
ball ;  I  dressed  to  please  him — he  used  to  be  delighted  with 
my  dancing :  he  had  said,  no  matter  what,  but  I  wanted  to 
make  him  say  it — feel  it — again  ;  he  neither  said  nor  felt  it.  I 
saw  him  standing  looking  at  me,  and  at  the  close  of  the  dance 
I  heard  from  him  one  sigh.  I  was  more  in  love  with  him  than 
when  first  we  were  married,  and  he  saw  it,  but  that  did  not 
restore  me  to  his  confidence — his  esteem  ;  nothing  could  have 
done  that  but — what  I  had  not.  One  step  in  dissimulation  led 
to  another. 

'  After  Lord  Beltravers  returned  from  Paris  on  Lady 
Blanche's  marriage,  I  used  to  meet  him  continually  at  Louisa 
Castlefort's.  As  for  play,  that  was  over  with  me  for  ever,  but 
I  went  to  Louisa's  continually,  because  it  was  the  gayest  house 
I  could  go  to  ;  I  used  to  meet  Lord  Beltravers  there,  and  he 
pretended  to  pay  me  a  vast  deal  of  attention,  to  which  I  was 
utterly  indifferent,  but  his  object  was  to  push  his  sister  into 
society  again  by  my  means.  He  took  advantage  of  that  un- 
fortunate note  which  I  had  received  from  Madame  de  St. 
Cymon  when  she  was  at  Old  Forest ;  he  wanted  me  to  admit 
her  among  my  acquaintance  ;  he  urged  it  in  every  possible 
way,  and  was  excessively  vexed  that  it  would  not  do  :  not  that 
he  cared  for  her ;  he  often  spoke  of  her  in  a  way  that  shocked 
me,  but  it  hurt  his  pride  that  she  should  be  excluded  from  the 

462 


HELEN 

society  to  which  her  rank  entitled  her.  I  had  met  her  at 
Louisa's  once  or  twice  ;  but  when  I  found  that  for  her  brother's 
sake  she  was  always  to  be  invited,  I  resolved  to  go  there  no 
more,  and  I  made  a  merit  of  this  with  Clarendon.  He  was 
pleased  ;  he  said,  "  That  is  well,  that  is  right,  my  dear  Cecilia." 
And  he  went  out  more  with  me.  One  night  at  tjie  opera,  the 
Comtesse  de  St.  Cymon  was  in  the  box  opposite  to  us,  no  lady 
with  her,  only  some  gentlemen.  She  watched  me ;  I  did  all 
I  could  to  avoid  her  eye,  but  at  an  unlucky  moment  she  caught 
mine,  bent  forward,  and  had  the  assurance  to  bow.  The 
General  snatched  the  opera-glass  from  my  hand,  made  sure 
who  it  was,  and  then  said  to  me, 

'  "  How  does  that  woman  dare  to  claim  your  notice,  Lady 
Cecilia  ?  I  am  afraid  there  must  have  been  some  encourage- 
ment on  your  part." 

'  "  None,"  said  I,  "  nor  ever  shall  be  ;  you  see  I  take  no 
notice." 

'  "  But  you  must  have  taken  notice,  or  this  could  never  be." 

'  "  No  indeed  ! "  persisted  L 

'  Helen  !  I  really  forgot  at  the  moment  that  first  unfortunate 
note.  An  instant  afterwards  I  recollected  it,  and  the  visit 
about  the  cameos,  but  that  was  not  my  fault.  I  had,  to  be 
sure,  dropped  a  card  in  return  at  her  door,  and  I  ought  to 
have  mentioned  that,  but  I  really  did  not  recollect  it  till  the 
words  had  passed  my  lips,  and  then  it  was  too  late,  and  I  did 
not  like  to  go  back  and  spoil  my  case  by  an  exception.  The 
General  did  not  look  quite  satisfied  ;  he  did  not  receive  my 
assertions  as  implicitly  as  formerly.  He  left  the  box  afterwards 
to  speak  to  some  one,  and  while  he  was  gone  in  came  Lord 
Beltravers.  After  some  preliminary  nothings,  he  went  directly 
to  the  point ;  and  said  in  an  assured  manner,  "  I  believe  you 
do  not  know  my  sister  at  this  distance.  She  has  been  en- 
deavouring to  catch  your  eye." 

'  "  The  Comtesse  de  St.  Cymon  does  me  too  much  honour," 
said  I,  with  a  slight  inclination  of  the  head,  and  elevation  of 
the  eyebrow,  which  spoke  sufficiently  plainly. 

'  Unabashed,  and  with  a  most  provoking,  almost  sneering 
look,  he  replied,  "  Madame  de  St.  Cymon  had  wished  to  say  a 
few  words  to  your  ladyship  on  your  own  account ;  am  I  to 
understand  this  cannot  be  ? " 

'"On  my  own  account?"  said  I,  "I  do  not  in  the  least 

463 


HELEN 

understand  your  lordship."  "  I  am  not  sure,"  said  he,  "  that  I 
perfectly  comprehend  it.  But  I  know  that  you  sometimes 
drive  to  Kensington,  and  sometimes  take  a  turn  in  the  gardens 
there.  My  sister  lives  at  Kensington,  and  could  not  she, 
without  infringing  etiquette,  meet  you  in  your  walk,  and  have 
the  honour  of  a  few  words  with  you  ?  Something  she  wants  to 
say  to  you,"  and  here  he  lowered  his  voice,  "  about  a  locket, 
and  Colonel  D'Aubigny." 

'  Excessively  frightened,  and  hearing  some  one  at  the 
door,  I  answered,  "  I  do  not  know,  I  believe  I  shall  drive  to 
Kensington  to-morrow."  He  bowed  delighted,  and  relieved 
me  from  his  presence  that  instant.  The  moment  afterwards 
General  Clarendon  came  in.  He  asked  me,  "  Was  not  that 
Lord  Beltravers  whom  I  met  ?  " 

'  "Yes,"  said  1  ;  "he  came  to  reproach  me  for  not  noticing 
his  sister,  and  I  answered  him  in  such  a  manner  as  to  make 
him  clear  that  there  was  no  hope." 

'  "You  did  right,"  said  he,  "if  you  did  so.''  My  mind  was 
in  such  confusion  that  I  could  not  quite  command  my  counte- 
nance, and  I  put  up  my  fan  as  if  the  lights  hurt  me. 

'  "  Cecilia,"  said  he,  "  take  care  what  you  are  about.  Re- 
member, it  is  not  my  request  only,  but  my  command  to  my 
wife  "  (he  laid  solemn  stress  on  the  words)  "  that  she  should 
have  no  communication  with  this  woman." 

'  "  My  dear  Clarendon,  I  have  not  the  least  wish." 

'  "  I  do  not  ask  what  your  wishes  may  be  ;  I  require  onl)' 
your  obedience." 

'  Never  have  I  heard  such  austere  words  from  him.  I 
turned  to  the  stage,  and  I  was  glad  to  seize  the  first  minute  I 
could  to  get  away.  But  what  was  to  be  done  ?  If  I  did  not 
go  to  Kensington,  there  was  this  locket,  and  I  knew  not  what, 
standing  out  against  me.  I  knew  that  this  wretched  woman 
had  had  Colonel  D'Aubigny  in  her  train  abroad,  and  supposed 
that  he  must — treacherous  profligate  as  he  was — have  given 
the  locket  to  her,  and  now  I  was  so  afraid  of  its  coming  to 
Clarendon's  eyes  or  ears  ! — and  yet  \vhy  should  I  have  feared 
his  knowing  about  it  ?  Colonel  D'Aubigny  stole  it,  just 
as  he  stole  the  picture.  I  had  got  it  for  you,  do  you  re- 
collect ? ' 

'Perfectly,'  said  Helen,  '  and  your  mother  missed  it.' 

'  Yes,'  continued  Lady  Cecilia.       '  Oh  that   I  had  had  the 
464 


HELEN 

sense  to  do  nothing  about  it !  But  I  was  so  afraid  of  its 
somehow  bringing  everything  to  hght ;  my  cowardice  —  my 
conscience — my  consciousness  of  that  first  fatal  falsehood 
before  my  marriage  has  haunted  me  at  the  most  critical 
moments  ;  it  has  risen  against  me,  and  stood  like  an  evil  spirit 
threatening  me  from  the  right  path. 

'  I  went  to  Kensington,  trusting  to  my  own  good  fortune, 
which  had  so  often  stood  me  in  stead ;  but  Madame  de  St. 
Cymon  was  too  cunning  for  me,  and  so  interested,  so  mean, 
she  actually  bargained  for  giving  up  the  locket.  She  hinted 
that  she  knew  Colonel  D'Aubigny  had  never  been  your  lover, 
and  ended  by  saying  she  had  not  the  locket  with  her ;  and 
though  I  made  her  understand  that  the  General  would  never 
allow  me  to  receive  her  at  my  own  house,  yet  she  "hoped  I 
could  manage  an  introduction  for  her  to  some  of  my  friends, 
and  that  she  would  bring  the  locket  on  Monday,  if  I  would  in 
the  meantime  try,  at  least  with  Lady  Emily  Greville  and  Mrs. 
Holdernesse." 

'  I  felt  her  meanness,  and  yet  I  was  almost  as  mean  myself, 
for  I  agreed  to  do  what  I  could.  Monday  came,  Clarendon 
saw  me  as  I  was  going  out,  and,  as  he  handed  me  into  the 
carriage,  he  asked  me  where  I  was  going.  To  Kensington 
I  said,  and  added — O  Helen,  I  am  ashamed  to  tell  you,  I 
added, — I  am  going  to  see  my  child.  And  there  I  found 
Madame  de  St.  Cymon,  and  I  had  to  tell  her  of  my  failure 
with  Lady  Emily  and  Mrs.  Holdernesse.  I  softened  their 
refusal  as  much  as  I  could,  but  I  might  have  spared  myself 
the  trouble,  for  she  only  retorted  by  something  about  English 
prudery.  At  this  moment  a  shower  of  rain  came  on,  and  she 
insisted  upon  my  taking  her  home  ;  "  Come  in,"  said  she, 
when  the  carriage  stopped  at  her  door  ;  "  if  you  will  come  in, 
I  will  give  it  to  you  now,  and  you  need  not  have  the  trouble  of 
calling  again."  I  had  the  folly  to  yield,  though  I  saw  that  it 
was  a  trick  to  decoy  me  into  her  house,  and  to  make  it  pass 
for  a  visit.  It  all  flashed  upon  me,  and  yet  I  could  not  resist, 
for  I  thought  I  must  obtain  the  locket  at  all  hazards.  I 
resolved  to  get  it  from  her  before  I  left  the  house,  and  then  I 
thought  all  would  be  finished. 

'  She  looked  triumphant  as  she  followed  me  into  her  saloon, 
and  gave  a  malicious  smile,  which  seemed  to  say,  "  You  see 
you  are  visiting  me  after  all."  After  some  nonsensical  con- 
2  H  465 


'  Clarendon  stood  opposite  to  me  ! 


HELEN 

versation,  meant  to  detain  me,  I  pressed  for  the  locket,  and 
she  produced  it :  it  was  indeed  the  very  one  that  had  been 
made  for  you.  But  just  at  that  instant,  while  she  still  held 
it  in  her  hand,  the  door  suddenly  opened,  and  Clarendon 
stood  opposite  to  me  ! 

'  I  heard  Madame  de  St.  Cymon's  voice,  but  of  what  she 
said  I  have  no  idea.  I  heard  nothing  but  the  single  word 
"  rain,"  and  with  scarcely  strength  to  articulate,  I  attempted 
to  follow  up  that  excuse.  Clarendon's  look  of  contempt ! 
But  he  commanded  himself,  advanced  calmly  to  me,  and  said, 
"  I  came  to  Kensington  with  these  letters  ;  they  have  just 
arrived  by  express.  Lady  Davenant  is  in  England — she  is 
ill."  He  gave  me  the  packet,  and  left  the  room,  and  I  heard 
the  sound  of  his  horse's  feet  the  next  instant  as  he  rode  off. 
I  broke  from  Madame  de  St.  Cymon,  forgetting  the  locket 
and  everything.  I  asked  my  servants  which  way  the  General 
had  gone.  "  To  town."  I  perceived  that  he  must  have 
been  going  to  look  for  me  at  the  nurse's,  and  had  seen  the 
carriage  at  Madame  de  St.  Cymon's  door.  I  hastened  after 
him,  and  then  I  recollected  that  I  had  left  the  locket  on  the 
table  at  Madame  de  St.  Cymon's,  that  locket  for  which  I  had 
hazarded — lost — everything  !  The  moment  I  reached  home, 
I  ran  to  Clarendon's  room  ;  he  was  not  there,  and  oh,  Helen, 
I  have  not  seen  him  since  ! 

'  From  some  orders  which  he  left  about  horses,  I  suppose 
he  went  to  meet  my  mother.  I  dared  not  follow  him.  She 
had  desired  me  to  wait  for  her  arrival  at  her  own  house.  All 
yesterday,  all  last  night,  Helen,  what  I  have  suffered  !  I  could 
not  bear  it  any  longer,  and  then  I  thought  of  coming  to  meet 
you.  I  thought  I  must  see  you  before  my  mother  arrived — 
my  mother  !  but  Clarendon  will  not  have  met  her  till  to-day. 
O  Helen  !  you  feel  all  that  I  fear — all  that  I  foresee.' 

Lady  Cecilia  sank  back,  and  Helen,  overwhelmed  with  all 
she  had  heard,  could  for  some  time  only  pity  her  in  silence  ; 
and  at  last  could  only  suggest  that  the  General  would  not  have 
time  for  any  private  communication  with  Lady  Davenant,  as 
her  woman  would  be  in  the  carriage  with  her,  and  the  General 
was  on  horseback. 

It  was  late  in  the  day  before  they  reached  town.  As  they 
came  near  Grosvenor  Square,  Cockburn  inquired  whether  they 
were  to  drive  home,  or  to  Lady  Davenant's, 

467 


HELEN 

'  To  my  mother's,  certainly,  and  as  fast  as  you  can.' 

Lady  Davenant  had  not  arrived,  but  there  were  packages 
in  the  hall,  her  courier,  and  her  servants,  who  said  that 
General  Clarendon  was  with  her,  but  not  in  the  carriage  ;  he 
had  sent  them  on.  No  message  for  Lady  Ceciha,  but  that 
Lady  Davenant  would  be  in  town  this  night. 

To-night — some  hours  still  of  suspense  !  As  long  as  there 
were  arrangements  to  be  made,  anything  to  do  or  to  think  of 
but  that  meeting  of  which  they  dared  not  think,  it  was  en- 
durable, but  too  soon  all  was  settled  ;  nothing  to  be  done,  but 
to  wait  and  watch,  to  hear  the  carriages  roll  past,  and  listen, 
and  start,  and  look  at  each  other,  and  sink  back  disappointed. 
Lady  Cecilia  walked  from  the  sofa  to  the  window,  and  looked 
out,  and  back  again  —  continually,  continually,  till  at  last 
Helen  begged  her  to  sit  down.  She  sat  down  before  an  old 
pianoforte  of  her  mother's,  on  which  her  eyes  fixed  ;  it  was 
one  on  which  she  had  often  played  with  Helen  when  they 
were  children.  'Happy,  innocent  days,'  said  she;  'never 
shall  we  be  so  happy  again,  Helen  !  But  I  cannot  think  of 
it ' ;  she  rose  hastily,  and  threw  herself  on  the  sofa. 

A  servant,  who  had  been  watching  at  the  hall-door,  came 
in — '  The  carriage,  my  lady  !      Lady  Davenant  is  coming.' 

Lady  Cecilia  started  up  ;  they  ran  downstairs  ;  the  carriage 
stopped,  and  in  the  imperfect  light  they  saw  the  figure  of  Lady 
Davenant,  scarcely  altered,  leaning  upon  General  Clarendon's 
arm.  The  first  sound  of  her  voice  was  feebler,  softer,  than 
formerly — quite  tender,  when  she  said,  as  she  embraced  them 
both  by  turns,  '  My  dear  children  ! ' 

'  You  have  accomplished  your  journey,  Lady  Davenant, 
better  than  you  expected,'  said  the  General. 

Something  struck  her  in  the  tone  of  his  voice.  She  turned 
quickly,  saw  her  daughter  lay  her  hand  upon  his  arm,  and  saw 
that  arm  withdrawn  ! 

They  all  entered  the  saloon — it  was  a  blaze  of  light ;  Lady 
Davenant,  shading  her  eyes  with  her  hand,  looked  round  at 
the  countenances,  which  she  had  not  yet  seen.  Lady  Cecilia 
shrank  back.  The  penetrating  eyes  turned  from  her,  glanced 
at  Helen,  and  fixed  upon  the  General. 

'  What  is  all  this  .? '  cried  she. 

Helen  threw  her  arms  round  Lady  Davenant.  '  Let  us  think 
of  you  first,  and  only — be  calm.' 

468 


HELEN 

Lady  Davenant  broke  from  her,  and  pressing  forwards  ex- 
claimed, '  I  must  see  my  daughter — if  I  have  still  a  daughter  ! 
Cecilia  ! ' 

The  General  moved.  Lady  Cecilia,  who  had  sunk  upon  a 
chair  behind  him,  attempted  to  rise.  Lady  Davenant  stood 
opposite  to  her ;  the  light  was  now  full  upon  her  face  and 
figure  ;  and  her  mother  saw  how  it  was  changed  !  and  looking 
back  at  Helen,  she  said  in  a  low,  awful  tone,  '  I  see  it ;  the 
black  spot  has  spread  ! ' 

Scarcely  had  Lady  Davenant  pronounced  these  words,  when 
she  was  seized  with  violent  spasms.  The  General  had  but  just 
time  to  save  her  from  falling  ;  he  could  not  leave  her.  All  was 
terror  !  Even  her  own  woman,  so  long  used  to  these  attacks, 
said  it  was  the  worst  she  had  ever  seen,  and  for  some  time 
evidently  feared  it  would  terminate  fatally.  At  last  slowly  she 
came  to  herself,  but  perfectly  in  possession  of  her  intellects, 
she  sat  up,  looked  round,  saw  the  agony  in  her  daughter's 
countenance,  and  holding  out  her  hand  to  her,  said,  '  Cecilia,  if 
there  is  anything  that  I  ought  to  know,  it  should  be  said  now.' 

Cecilia  caught  her  mother's  hand,  and  threw  herself  upon 
her  knees.  '  Helen,  Helen,  stay  ! '  cried  she  ;  '  do  not  go, 
Clarendon  ! ' 

He  stood  leaning  against  the  chimneypiece,  motionless, 
while  Cecilia,  in  a  faltering  voice,  began  ;  her  voice  gaining 
strength,  she  went  on,  and  poured  out  all — even  from  the 
very  beginning,  that  first  suppression  of  the  truth,  that  first 
cowardice,  then  all  that  followed  from  that  one  falsehood — all 
— even  to  the  last  degradation,  when  in  the  power,  in  the 
presence,  of  that  bad  woman,  her  husband  found  and  left  her. 
She  shuddered  as  she  came  to  the  thought  of  that  look  of  his, 
and  not  daring,  not  having  once  dared  while  she  spoke,  to  turn 
towards  him,  her  eyes  fixed  upon  her  mother's  ;  but  as  she 
finished  speaking,  her  head  sank,  she  laid  her  face  on  the  sofa 
beside  her  ;  she  felt  her  mother's  arm  thrown  over  her  and  she 
sobbed  convulsively. 

There  was  silence. 

'  I  have  still  a  daughter  ! '  were  the  first  words  that  broke 
the  silence.  '  Not  sucli  as  I  might  have  had,  but  that  is  my 
own  fault.' 

'  O  mother  ! 

'  I  have  still  a  daughter  ! '  repeated  Lady  Davenant.  '  There 
469 


HELEN 

is,'  continued  she,  turning  to  General  Clarendon,  'there  is  a 
redeeming  power  in  truth.  She  may  yet  be  more  worthy  to 
be  your  wife  than  she  has  ever  yet  been  ! ' 

'  Never  ! '  exclaimed  the  General.  His  countenance  was 
rigid  as  iron  ;  then  suddenly  it  relaxed,  and  going  up  to  Helen, 
he  said, 

'  I  have  done  you  injustice,  Miss  Stanley.  I  have  been 
misled.  I  have  done  you  injustice,  and  by  Heaven  !  I  will  do 
you  public  justice,  cost  me  what  it  will.  Beauclerc  will  be  in 
England  in  a  few  days  ;  at  the  altar  I  will  give  you  to  him 
publicly  ;  in  the  face  of  all  the  world  will  I  mark  my  approba- 
tion of  his  choice  ;  publicly  will  I  repair  the  wrong  I  have 
done  you.  I  will  see  his  happiness  and  yours  before  I  leave 
England  for  ever  ! ' 

Lady  Cecilia  started  up  :  '  Clarendon  ! '  was  all  she  could 
say. 

'  Yes,  Lady  Cecilia  Clarendon,'  said  he,  all  the  stern  fixed- 
ness of  his  face  returning  at  once — 'Yes,  Lady  Cecilia 
Clarendon,  we  separate,  now  and  for  ever.' 

Then  turning  from  her,  he  addressed  Lady  Davenant.  '  1 
shall  be  ordered  on  some  foreign  service.  Your  daughter,  Lady 
Davenant,  will  remain  with  you,  while  I  am  still  in  England, 
unless  you  wish  otherwise ' 

'Leave  my  daughter  with  me,  my  dear  General,  till  my  death,' 
said  Lady  Davenant.  She  spoke  calmly,  but  the  General,  after 
a  respectful — an  affectionate  pressure  of  the  hand  she  held  out 
to  him,  said,  '  That  may  be  far  distant,  I  trust  in  God,  and  we 
shall  at  all  events  meet  again  the  day  of  Helen's  marriage.' 

'And  if  that  day  is  to  be  a  happy  day  to  me,'  cried  Helen, 
'  to  me  or  to  your  own  beloved  ward.  General  Clarendon,  it 
must  be  happy  to  Cecilia  ! ' 

'  As  happy  as  she  has  left  it  in  my  power  to  make  her. 
When  I  am  gone,  my  fortune ' 

'  Name  it  not  as  happiness  for  my  daughter,'  interrupted 
Lady  Davenant,  '  or  you  do  her  injustice.  General  Clarendon.' 

'  I  name  it  but  to  do  her  justice,'  said  he.  'It  is  all  that 
she  has  left  it  in  my  power  to  give ' ;  and  then  his  long-sup- 
pressed passion  suddenly  bursting  forth,  he  turned  to  Ceciha. 
'  All  1  can  give  to  one  so  false — false  from  the  first  moment 
to  the  last — false  to  me — to  me  !  who  so  devotedly,  fondly, 
blindly  loved  her  ! '     He  rushed  out  of  the  room. 

470 


HELEN 

Then  Lady  Davenant,  taking  her  daughter  in  her  arms, 
said,  '  My  child,  return  to  me  ! ' 

She  sank  back  exhausted.  Mrs.  EHiott  was  summoned,  she 
wished  them  all  out  of  the  room,  and  said  so ;  but  Lady 
Davenant  would  have  her  daughter  stay  beside  her,  and  with 
Cecilia's  hand  in  hers  she  fell  into  a  profound  slumber. 


CHAPTER  XLVI 

On  awaking  in  the  morning,  after  some  long-expected  event 
has  happened,  we  feel  in  doubt  whether  it  has  really  occurred, 
or  whether  it  is  all  a  dream.  Then  comes  the  awful  sense  of 
waking  truth,  and  the  fear  that  what  has  been  done,  or  said, 
is  irremediable,  and  then  the  astonishment  that  it  really  is 
done. 

'  It  is  over ! '  Helen  repeated  to  herself,  repeated  aloud,  be- 
fore she  could  well  bring  herself  from  that  state  of  half-belief, 
before  she  could  recover  her  stunned  faculties. 

Characters  which  she  thought  she  perfectly  understood  had 
each  appeared,  in  these  new  circumstances,  different  from  what 
she  had  expected.  From  Cecilia  she  had  scarcely  hoped,  even 
at  the  last  moment,  for  such  perfect  truth  in  her  confession. 
From  Lady  Davenant  not  so  much  indulgence,  not  all  that 
tenderness  for  her  daughter.  From  the  General,  less  violence 
of  expression,  more  feeling  for  Cecilia ;  he  had  not  allowed 
the  merit  of  her  candour,  her  courage,  at  the  last.  It  was  a 
perfectly  voluntary  confession,  all  that  concerned  Colonel 
D'Aubigny  and  the  letters  could  never  have  been  known  to 
the  General  by  any  other  means.  Disappointed  love,  confi- 
dence duped,  and  his  pride  of  honour,  had  made  him  forget 
himself  in  anger,  even  to  cruelty.  Helen  thought  he  would 
feel  this  hereafter,  fancied  he  must  feel  it  even  now,  but  that, 
though  he  might  relent,  he  would  not  recede ;  though  Jae  might 
regret  that  he  had  made  the  determination,  he  would  certainly 
abide  by  it ;  that  which  he  had  resolved  to  do  would  certainly 
be  done, — the  separation  between  him  and  Cecilia  would  take 
place.  And  though  all  was  clear  and  bright  in  Helen's  own 
prospects,  the  General's  esteem  restored,  his  approbation  to  be 

471 


HELEN 

publicly  marked,  Beauclerc  to  be  convinced  of  her  perfect 
innocence  !  Beauclerc,  freed  from  all  fear  and  danger,  return- 
ing all  love  and  joy  ;  yet  she  could  not  be  happy — it  was  all 
mixed  with  bitterness,  anguish  for  Cecilia. 

She  had  so  often  so  forcibly  urged  her  to  this  confession  ! 
and  now  it  was  made,  did  Helen  regret  that  it  was  made  ?  No, 
independently  of  her  own  cleared  character,  she  was  satisfied, 
even  for  Cecilia's  sake,  for  it  was  right,  whatever  were  the  con- 
sequences ;  it  was  right,  and  in  the  confusion  and  discordance 
of  her  thoughts  and  feelings,  this  was  the  only  fixed  point.  To 
this  conclusion  she  had  come,  but  had  not  been  able  further  to 
settle  her  mind,  when  she  was  told  that  Lady  Davenant  was 
now  awake,  and  wished  to  see  her. 

Lady  Davenant,  renovated  by  sleep,  appeared  to  Helen, 
even  when  she  saw  her  by  daylight,  scarcely  altered  in  her 
looks.  There  was  the  same  life,  and  energy,  and  elasticity, 
and  strength,  Helen  hoped,  not  only  of  mind,  but  of  body, 
and  quick  as  that  hope  rose,  as  she  stood  beside  her  bed,  and 
looked  upon  her,  Lady  Davenant  marked  it,  and  said,  '  You 
are  mistaken,  my  dear  Helen,  I  shall  not  last  long  ;  I  am  now 
to  consider  how  I  am  to  make  the  most  of  the  little  life  that 
remains.  How  to  repair  as  far  as  may  be,  as  far  as  can  be, 
in  my  last  days,  the  errors  of  my  youth  !  You  know,  Helen, 
what  I  mean,  and  it  is  now  no  time  to  waste  words,  therefore 
I  shall  not  begin  by  wasting  upon  you,  Helen,  any  reproaches. 
Foolish,  generous,  weak  creature  that  you  are,  and  as  the  best 
of  human  beings  will  ever  be — I  must  be  content  with  you  as 
you  are  ;  and  so,'  continued  she,  in  a  playful  tone,  '  we  must 
love  one  another,  perhaps  all  the  better,  for  not  being  too  per- 
fect. And  indeed,  my  poor  child,  you  have  been  well  punished 
already,  and  the  worst  of  criminals  need  not  be  punished  twice. 
Of  the  propensity  to  sacrifice  your  own  happiness  for  others 
you  will  never  be  cured,  but  you  will,  I  trust,  in  future,  when  I 
am  gone  never  to  return,  be  true  to  yourself.  Now  as  to  my 
daughter ' 

Lady  Davenant  then  went  over  with  Helen  every  circum- 
stance in  Cecilia's  confession,  and  showed  how,  in  the  midst 
of  the  shock  she  had  felt  at  the  disclosure  of  so  much  false- 
hood, hope  for  her  daughter's  future  truth  had  risen  in  her 
mind  even  from  the  courage,  and  fulness,  and  exactness  of  her 
confession.      '  And  it  is  not,'  continued  she,  '  a  sudden  reforma- 

472 


HELEN 

tion  ;  I  have  no  belief  in  sudden  reformations.  I  think  I  see 
that  this  change  in  Cecilia's  mind  has  been  some  time  working 
out  by  her  own  experience  of  the  misery,  the  folly,  the  degrada- 
tion of  deceit.' 

Helen  earnestly  confirmed  this  from  her  own  observations, 
and  from  the  expressions  which  had  burst  forth  in  the  fulness 
of  Cecilia's  heart  and  strength  of  her  conviction,  when  she 
told  her  all  that  had  passed  in  her  mind. 

'  That  is  well ! '  pursued  Lady  Davenant ;  '  but  principles 
cannot  be  depended  upon  till  confirmed  by  habit ;  and  Cecilia's 
nature  is  so  variable — impressions  on  her  are  easily,  even 
deeply  made,  but  all  in  sand  ;  they  may  shift  with  the  next 
tide — may  be  blown  away  by  the  next  wind.' 

'  Oh  no,'  exclaimed  Helen,  '  there  is  no  danger  of  that.  I 
see  the  impression  deepening  every  hour,  from  your  kindness 
and '  Helen  hesitated,  '  and  besides ' 

'■Besides^  said  Lady  Davenant,  'usually  comes  as  the 
arriere-ban  of  weak  reasons  :  you  mean  to  say  that  the  sight 
of  my  sufferings  must  strengthen,  must  confirm,  all  her  prin- 
ciples— her  taste  for  truth.  Yes,'  continued  she,  in  her  most 
firm  tone  ;  '  Cecilia's  being  with  me  during  my  remaining  days 
will  be  painful  but  salutary  to  her.  She  sees,  as  you  do,  that 
all  the  falsehood  meant  to  save  me  has  been  in  vain  ;  that  at 
last  the  shock  has  only  hastened  my  end :  it  must  be  so, 
Helen.  Look  at  it  steadily,  in  the  best  point  of  view — the 
evil  you  cannot  avert ;  take  the  good  and  be  thankful  for  it.' 

And  CeciHa — how  did  she  feel  ?  Wretched  she  was,  but 
still  in  her  wretchedness  there  was  within  her  a  relieved  con- 
science and  the  sustaining  power  of  truth  ;  and  she  had  now 
the  support  of  her  mother's  affection,  and  the  consolation  of 
feeling  that  she  had  at  last  done  Helen  justice  !  To  her  really 
generous,  affectionate  disposition,  there  was  in  the  return  of 
her  feelings  to  their  natural  course  an  indescribable  sense  of 
relief.  Broken,  crushed,  as  were  all  her  own  hopes,  her  sym- 
pathy, even  in  the  depths  of  her  misery,  now  went  pure,  free 
from  any  windings  of  deceit,  direct  to  Helen's  happy  prospects, 
in  which  she  shared  with  all  the  eagerness  of  her  warm  heart. 

Beauclerc  arrived,  found  the  General  at  home  expecting 
him,  and  in  his  guardian's  countenance  and  voice  he  saw  and 
heard  only  what  was  natural  to  the  man.  The  General  was 
prepared,  and  Beauclerc  was  himself  in  too  great  impatience 

473 


HELEN 

to  hear  the  facts,   to  attend   much   to  the   manner   in   which 
things  were  told. 

'  Lady  Davenant  has  returned  ill ;  her  daughter  is  with 
her,  and  Helen ' 

'And  Helen ' 

'  And  you  may  be  happy,  Beauclerc,  if  there  be  truth  in 
woman,'  said  the  General.  '  Go  to  her — you  will  find  I  can 
do  justice.  Go,  and  return  when  you  can  tell  me  that  your 
wedding-day  is  fixed.  And,  Beauclerc,'  he  called  after  him, 
'  let  it  be  as  soon  as  possible.' 

'  The  only  unnecessary  advice  my  dear  guardian  has  ever 
given  me,'  Beauclerc,  laughing,  replied. 

The  General's  prepared  composure  had  not  calculated  upon 
this  laugh,  this  slight  jest ;  his  features  gave  way.  Beauclerc, 
struck  with  a  sudden  change  in  the  General's  countenance, 
released  his  hand  from  the  congratulatory  shake  in  which  its 
power  failed.  The  General  turned  away  as  if  to  shun  inquiry, 
and  Beauclerc,  however  astonished,  respected  his  feelings,  and 
said  no  more.  He  hastened  to  Lady  Davenant  with  all  a 
lover's  speed — with  all  a  lover's  joy  saw  the  first  expression 
in  Helen's  eyes  ;  and  with  all  a  friend's  sorrow  for  Lady 
Davenant  and  for  the  General,  heard  all  that  was  to  be  told  of 
Lady  Cecilia's  affairs  :  her  mother  undertook  the  explanation, 
CeciUa  herself  did  not  appear. 

In  the  first  rush  of  Beauclerc's  joy  in  Helen's  cleared  fame, 
he  was  ready  to  forgive  all  the  deceit ;  yes,  to  forgive  all ;  but 
it  was  such  forgiveness  as  contempt  can  easily  grant,  which 
can  hardly  be  received  by  any  soul  not  lost  to  honour.  This 
Lady  Davenant  felt,  and  felt  so  keenly,  that  Helen  trembled 
for  her :  she  remained  silent,  pressing  her  hand  upon  her 
heart,  which  told  her  sense  of  approaching  danger.  It  was 
averted  by  the  calmness,  the  truth,  the  justice  with  which 
Helen  spoke  to  Beauclerc  of  Cecilia.  As  she  went  on,  Lady 
Davenant's  colour  returned  and  Beauclerc's  ready  sympathy 
went  with  her  as  far  as  she  pleased,  till  she  came  to  one  point, 
from  which  he  instantly  started  back.  Helen  proposed,  if 
Beauclerc  would  consent,  to  put  off  their  marriage  till  the 
General  should  be  reconciled  to  Cecilia. 

'Attempt  it  not,  Helen,'  cried  Lady  Davenant;  'delay  not 
for  any  consideration.  Your  marriage  must  be  as  soon  as 
possible,  for  my  sake,  for  Cecilia's — mark  me  ! — for  Cecilia's 

474 


HELEN 

sake,  as  soon  as  possible  let  it  be  ;  it  is  but  justice  that  her 
conscience  should  be  so  far  relieved,  let  her  no  longer  obstruct 
your  union.  Let  me  have  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  it  accom- 
plished ;  name  the  day,  Helen,  I  may  not  have  many  to  live.' 

The  day,  the  earliest  possible,  was  named  by  Helen  ;  and 
the  moment  it  was  settled,  Lady  Davenant  hurried  Beauclerc 
away,  saying — '  Return  to  General  Clarendon — spare  him  sus- 
pense— it  is  all  we  can  do  for  him.' 

The  General's  wishes  in  this,  and  in  all  that  followed,  were 
to  be  obeyed.  He  desired  that  the  marriage  should  be  public, 
that  all  should  be  bidden  of  rank,  fashion,  and  note — all  their 
family  connections.  Lady  Katrine  Hawksby  he  especially 
named.  To  do  justice  to  Helen  seemed  the  only  pleasurable 
object  now  remaining  to  him.  In  speaking  to  Beauclerc,  he 
never  once  named  Lady  Cecilia  ;  it  seemed  a  tacit  compact 
between  him  and  Beauclerc  that  her  name  should  not  be  pro- 
nounced. They  talked  of  Lady  Davenant ;  the  General  said 
he  did  not  think  her  in  such  danger  as  she  seemed  to  consider 
herself  to  be  :  his  opinion  was,  he  declared,  confirmed  by  his 
own  observation  ;  by  the  strength  of  mind  and  of  body  which 
she  had  shown  since  her  arrival  in  England.  Beauclerc  could 
only  hope  that  he  was  right ;  and  the  General  went  on  to 
speak  of  the  service  upon  which  he  was  to  be  employed  :  said 
that  all  arrangements,  laying  an  emphasis  upon  the  word, 
would  be  transacted  by  his  man  of  business.  He  spoke  of 
what  would  happen  after  he  quitted  England,  and  left  his  ward 
a  legacy  of  some  favourite  horse  which  he  used  to  ride  at 
Clarendon  Park,  and  seemed  to  take  it  for  granted  that  Beau- 
clerc and  Helen  would  be  sometimes  there  when  he  was  gone. 
Then,  having  cleared  his  throat  several  times,  the  General 
desired  that  Lady  Cecilia's  portrait,  which  he  designated  only 
as  '  the  picture  over  the  chimneypiece  in  my  room,'  should  be 
sent  after  him.  And  taking  leave  of  Beauclerc,  he  set  off  for 
Clarendon  Park,  where  he  was  to  remain  till  the  day  before 
the  wedding  ; — the  day  following  he  had  fixed  for  his  departure 
from  England. 

When  Beauclerc  was  repeating  this  conversation  to  Helen, 
Lady  Davenant  came  into  the  room  just  as  he  was  telling  these 
last  particulars.  She  marked  the  smile,  the  hope  that  was 
excited,  but  shook  her  head,  and  said,  '  Raise  no  false  hopes 
in  my  daughter's  mind,  I   conjure  you ' ;  and  she  turned  the 

475 


HELEN 

conversation  to  other  subjects.     Beauclerc  had  been  to  see  Mr. 
Churchill,  and  of  that  visit  Lady  Davenant  wished  to  hear. 

As  to  health,  Beauclerc  said  that  Mr.  Churchill  had  re- 
covered almost  perfectly ;  '  but  there  remains,  and  I  fear  will 
always  remain,  a  little  lameness,  not  disabling,  but  disfiguring 
— an  awkwardness  in  moving,  which,  to  a  man  of  his  personal 
pretensions,  is  trying  to  the  temper ;  but  after  noticing  the 
impediment  as  he  advanced  to  meet  me,  he  shook  my  hand 
cordially,  and  smiling,  said,  '  You  see  I  am  a  marked  man  ;  I 
always  wished  to  be  so,  you  know,  so  pray  do  not  repent,  my 
good  friend.'  He  saw  I  was  too  much  moved  for  jesting,  then 
he  took  it  more  seriously,  but  still  kindly,  assuring  me  that  I 
had  done  him  real  service  ;  it  is  always  of  service,  he  said,  to 
be  necessitated  to  take  time  for  quiet  reflection,  of  which  he 
had  had  sufficient  in  his  hours  of  solitary  confinement — this 
little  adversity  had  left  him  leisure  to  be  good. 

'  And  then,'  continued  Beauclerc,  '  Churchill  adverting  to 
our  foolish  quarrel,  to  clear  that  off  my  mind,  threw  the  whole 
weight  of  the  blame  at  once  comfortably  upon  the  absent — on 
Beltravers.  Churchill  said  we  had  indeed  been  a  couple  of 
bravely  blind  fools  ;  he  ought,  as  he  observed,  to  have  recol- 
lected in  time,  that 

'  Anger  is  like 

A  full  hot  horse,  who  being  allowed  his  way, 

Self-mettle  tires  him. 

'  So  that  was  good,  and  Horace,  in  perfect  good  humour 
with  me  and  himself,  and  all  the  world,  played  on  with  the 
past  and  the  future,  glad  he  had  no  more  of  his  bones  to 
exfoliate  ;  glad,  after  so  many  months  of  failure  in  '  the  first 
intention,'  to  find  himself  in  a  whole  skin,  and  me  safe  re- 
turned from  transportation  —  spoke  of  Helen  seriously  ;  said 
that  his  conduct  to  her  was  the  only  thing  that  weighed  upon 
his  mind,  but  he  hoped  that  his  sincere  penitence,  and  his 
months  of  suffering,  would  be  considered  as  sufficient  atone- 
ment for  his  having  brought  her  name  before  the  public  ;  and 
he  finished  by  inviting  himself  to  our  wedding,  if  it  were  only 
for  the  pleasure  of  seeing  what  sort  of  a  face  Lady  Katrine 
Hawksby  will  have  upon  the  occasion.  It  was  told  of  a  cele- 
brated statesman,  jealous  of  his  colleagues,  Horace  says,  that 
every  commonly  good  speech  cost  him  a  twinge  of  the  gout ; 
and    every  uncommonly  good   one  sent   him   to   bed  with   a 

476 


'  Von  see  I  am  a  marked  mati ;  /  always  ■wished  to  be  i 


HELEN 

regular  fit.  Now  Horace  protests  that  every  commonly  decent 
marriage  of  her  acquaintance  costs  Lady  Katrine  at  least  a  sad 
headache  ;  but  Miss  Stanley's  marriage,  likely  as  it  is  to  be 
so  happy  after  all,  as  he  politely  said,  foredooms  poor  Lady 
Katrine  to, a  month's  heartache  at  the  least,  and  a  face  full  ell 
long.' 

Whether  in  his  penitence  he  had  forsworn  slander  or  not, 
it  was  plain  that  Churchill  had  not  lost  either  his  taste,  talent, 
or  power  of  sarcasm,  and  of  this  Beauclerc  could  have  given, 
and  in  time  gave,  further  illustrations  ;  but  it  was  in  a  case 
which  came  home  to  him  rather  too  nearly,  and  on  which  his 
reports  did  not  flow  quite  so  fluently — touching  Lord  Bel- 
travers,  it  was  too  tender  a  subject.  Beauclerc  was  ashamed 
of  himself  for  having  been  so  deceived  when,  after  all  his 
guardian  had  done  to  save  his  fortune,  after  all  that  noble 
sacrifice  had  been  made,  he  found  that  it  was  to  no  good  end, 
but  for  the  worst  purpose  possible.  Lord  Beltravers,  as  it 
was  now  clear,  never  had  the  slightest  intention  of  living  in 
that  house  of  his  ancestors  on  which  Beauclerc  had  lavished 
his  thousands,  ay,  and  tens  of  thousands  ;  but  while  he  was 
repairing,  and  embellishing,  and  furnishing  Old  Forest,  fit  for 
an  English  aristocrat  of  the  first  water,  the  Lord  Beltravers 
at  the  gaming-table  pledged  it,  and  lost  it,  and  sold  it ;  and 
it  went  to  the  hammer.  This  came  out  in  the  first  fury  of 
Lord  Beltravers  upon  his  sister's  marriage  at  Paris  :  and  then 
and  there  Beauclerc  first  came  to  the  perception  that  his  good 
friend  had  predestined  him  and  his  fortune  for  the  ';Lady 
Blanche,  whom,  all  the  time,  he  considered  as  a  fool  and  a 
puppet,  and  for  whom  he  had  not  the  slightest  affection  :  it 
was  all  for  his  own  interested  purposes. 

Beauclerc  suddenly  opened  his  eyes  wide,  and  saw  it  all  at 
once  ;  how  it  had  happened  that  they  had  never  seen  it  before, 
notwithstanding  all  that  the  General  on  one  side,  and  Lady 
Davenant  on  the  other,  had  done  to  force  them  open,  was  in- 
comprehensible ;  but,  as  Lady  Davenant  observed,  'A  sort 
of  cataract  comes  over  the  best  eyes  for  a  time,  and  the  patient 
will  not  suffer  himself  to  be  couched  ;  and  if  you  struggle  to 
perform  the  operation  that  is  to  do  him  good  against  his  will, 
it  is  odds  but  you  blind  him  for  life.' 

Helen  could  not,  however,  understand  how  Granville  could 
have  been  so  completely  deceived,  except  that  it  had  been  im- 

478 


HELEN 

possible  for  him   to  imagine    the  exquisite  meanness  of  that 
man's  mind. 

'  There,'  cried  Beauclerc,  '  you  see  my  fault  was  having  too 
little,  instead  of  too  much  imagination.'  ^ 

Lady  Davenant  smiled,  and  said,  '  It  has  been» admirably 
observed,  that  "  it  is  among  men  as  among  certain  tribes  of 
animals,  it  is  sometimes  only  necessary  that  one  of  the  herd 
should  step  forward  and  lead  the  way,  to  make  all  the  others 
follow  with  alacrity  and  submission  "  ;  i  and  I  solve  the  whole 
difficulty  thus  :  I  suppose  that  Lord  Beltravers,  just  following 
Beauclerc's  lead,  succeeded  in  persuading  him  that  he  was  a 
man  of  genius  and  a  noble  fellow,  by  allowing  all  Beauclerc's 
own  paradoxes,  adopting  all  his  ultra-original  opinions,  and, 
in  short,  sending  him  back  the  image  of  his  own  mind,  till 
Granville  had  been  caught  by  it,  and  had  fairly  fallen  in  love 
with  it — a  mental  metaphysical  Narcissus. 

'  After  all,'  continued  Lady  Davenant,  smiling,  '  of  all 
the  follies  of  youth,  the  dangerous  folly  of  trying  to  do  good 
— that  for  which  you  stand  convicted — may  be  the  most  easily 
pardoned,  the  most  safely  left  to  time  and  experience  to  cure. 
You  know,  Granville,  that  ever  since  the  time  of  Alexander 
the  Great's  great  tutor,  the  characteristic  faults  of  youth  and 
age  have  been  the  "  too  much  "  and  the  "  too  little"  In  youth, 
the  too  much  confidence  in  others  and  in  themselves,  the  too 
much  of  enthusiasm — too  much  of  benevolence  ;  — in  age, 
alas  !  too  little.  And  with  this  youth,  who  has  the  too  much 
in  everything — what  shall  we  do  with  him,  Helen  ?  Take 
him,  for  better  for  worse,  you  must  ;  and  I  must  love  him  as 
I  have  done  from  his  childhood,  a  little  while  longer — to  the 
end  of  my  life.' 

'  A  little  longer,  to  the  end  of  her  life  ! '  said  Beauclerc  to 
himself,  as  leaning  on  the  back  of  Helen's  chair  he  looked  at 
Lady  Davenant.  '  I  cannot  believe  that  she  whom  I  see 
before  me  is  passing  away,  to  be  with  us  but  a  little  longer ; 
so  full  of  life  as  she  appears ;  such  energy  divine  !  No,  no, 
she  will  live,  live  long  ! ' 

And  as  his  eyes  looked  that  hope,  Helen  caught  it,  and  yet 

she  doubted,  and  sighed,  but  still  she  had  hope.     Cecilia  had 

none  ;  she  was  sitting  behind  her  mother ;  she  looked  up  at 

Helen,  and  shook  her  head  ;  she  had  seen  more  of  her  mother's 

1  Lord  Mahon. 

479 


HELEN 

danger,  she  had  been  with  her  in  nights  of  fearful  struggle. 
She  had  been  with  her  just  after  she  had  written  to  Lord 
Davenant  what  she  must  have  felt  to  be  a  farewell  letter — 
a  letter,  too,  which  contained  the  whole  history  of  Cecilia's 
deception  and  Helen's  difficulties,  subjects  so  agitating  that 
the  writing  of  them  had  left  her  mother  in  such  a  state  of 
exhaustion  that  Cecilia  could  think  only  with  terror  for  her, 
yet  she  exerted  all  her  power  over  herself  to  hide  her  anguish, 
not  only  for  her  mother's  but  for  Helen's  sake. 

The  preparations  for  the  wedding  went  on,  pressed  forward 
by  Lady  Davenant  as  urgently  as  the  General  could  desire. 
The  bridesmaids  were  to  be  Lady  Emily  Greville's  younger 
sister,  Lady  Susan,  and,  at  Helen's  particular  request,  Miss 
Clarendon.  Full  of  joy,  wonder,  and  sympathy,  in  wedding 
haste  Miss  Clarendon  and  Mrs.  Pennant  arrived,  both  dehghted 
that  it  was  all  happily  settled  for  Helen  :  which  most,  it  was 
scarcely  possible  to  say ;  but  which  most  curious  as  to  the 
means  by  which  it  had  been  settled,  it  was  very  possible  to 
see.  When  Miss  Clarendon  had  secured  a  private  moment 
with  Helen,  she  began, 

'  Now  tell  me — tell  me  everything  about  yourself 

Helen  could  only  repeat  what  the  General  had  already  written 
to  his  sister — that  he  was  now  convinced  that  the  reports 
concerning  Miss  Stanley  were  false,  his  esteem  restored,  his 
public  approbation  to  be  given,  Beauclerc  satisfied,  and  her 
rejection  honourably  retracted. 

'  I  will  ask  you  no  more,  Helen,  by  word  or  look,'  said 
Esther  ;  '  I  understand  it  all,  my  brother  and  Lady  Cecilia 
are  separated  for  life.  And  now  let  us  go  to  aunt  Pennant : 
she  will  not  annoy  you  by  her  curiosity,  but  how  she  v,\l\  be 
able  to  manage  her  sympathy  amongst  you  with  these  crossing 
demands  I  know  not  ;  Lady  Cecilia's  wretchedness  will  almost 
spoil  my  aunt's  joy  for  you — it  cannot  be  pure  joy.' 

Pure  joy  !  how  far  from  it  Helen's  sigh  told  ;  and  Miss 
Clarendon  had  scarcely  patience  enough  with  Lady  Cecilia  to 
look  at  her  again  ;  had  scarcely  seconded,  at  least  with  good 
grace,  a  suggestion  of  Mrs.  Pennant's  that  thgy  should  prevail 
on  Lady  Cecilia  to  take  a  turn  in  the  Park  with  them,  she 
looked  so  much  in  want  of  fresh  air. 

'  We  can  go  now,  my  dear  Esther,  you  know,  before  it  is 
time  for  that  picture  sale,  at  which  you  are  to  be  before  two 

480 


HELEN 

o'clock.'  Lady  Davenant  desired  Cecilia  to  go.  '  Helen  will 
be  with  me,  do,  my  dear  Cecilia,  go.' 

She  went,  and  before  the  awkwardness  of  Miss  Clarendon's 
silence  ceased,  and  before  Mrs.  Pennant  had  settled  which 
glass  or  which  l^lind  was  best  up  or  down.  Lady  Cecilia  burst 
into  tears,  thanked  aunt  Pennant  for  her  sympathy,  and  now, 
above  the  fear  of  Miss  Clarendon — above  all  fear  but  that  of 
doing  further  wrong  by  concealment,  she  at  once  told  the  whole 
truth,  that  they  might,  as  well  as  the  General,  do  full  justice 
to  Helen,  and  that  they  might  never,  never  blame  Clarendon 
for  the  separation  which  was  to  be. 

That  he  should  have  mentioned  nothing  of  her  conduct  even 
to  his  sister  was  not  surprising.  '  I  know  his  generous  nature,' 
said  Cecilia. 

'  But  I  never  knew  yours  till  this  moment,  Cecilia,'  cried 
Miss  Clarendon,  embracing  her  ;  '  my  sister,  now, — separation 
or  not.' 

'  But  there  need  be  no  separation,'  said  kind  aunt  Pennant. 

Cecilia  sighed,  and  Miss  Clarendon  repeated,  'You  will 
find  in  me  a  sister  at  all  events.' 

She  now  saw  Cecilia  as  she  really  was — faults  and  virtues. 
Perhaps  indeed  in  this  moment  of  revulsion  of  feeling,  in  the 
surprise  of  gratified  confidence,  she  overvalued  Lady  Cecilia's 
virtues,  and  was  inclined  to  do  her  more  than  justice,  in  her 
eagerness  to  make  generous  reparation  for  unjust  suspicion. 


CHAPTER   XLVII 

After  setting  down  Lady  Cecilia  at  her  mother's,  the  aunt 
and  niece  proceeded  to  the  picture  sale  which  Miss  Clarendon 
was  eager  to  attend,  as  she  was  in  search  of  a  pendant  to  a 
famous  Berghem  she  possessed  ;  and  while  she  was  considering 
the  picture,  she  had  the  advantage  of  hearing  a  story,  which 
seemed,  indeed,  to  be  told  for  the  amusement  of  the  whole 
room,  by  a  party  of  fashionables  who  were  standing  near  her : 
— a  wonderful  story  of  a  locket,  which  was  going  about ;  it 
was  variously  told,  but  all  agreed  in  one  point — that  a  young 
married  lady  of  high  rank  had  never  dared  to  appear  in  the 
2  I  481 


HELEN 

world  since  her  husband  had  seen  this  locket  in  her  hands — 
it  had  brought  out  something — something  which  had  occurred 
before  marriage ; — and  here  mysterious  nods  were  interchanged. 

Another  version  stated  that  the  story  had  not  yet  been  fully 
explained  to  the  husband,  that  he  had  found  the  locket  on  the 
table  in  a  room  that  he  had  suddenly  entered,  where  he  dis- 
covered her  kneeling  to  the  person  in  question, — '  the  person 
in  question '  being  sometimes  a  woman  and  sometimes  a  man. 

Then  leaned  forward,  stretching  her  scraggy  neck,  one  who 
had  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  husband  would  soon  speak 
out— the  public  would  soon  hear  of  a  separation:  and  every- 
body must  be  satisfied  that  there  could  not  be  a  separation 
without  good  grounds. 

Miss  Clarendon  inquired  from  a  gentleman  near  them,  who 
the  lady  was  with  the  outstretched  scraggy  neck — Lady 
Katrine  Hawksby. 

Miss  Clarendon  knew  her  only  by  reputation.  She  did  not 
know  Miss  Clarendon  either  by  reputation  or  by  sight ;  and 
she  went  on  to  say  she  would  'venture  any  wager  that  the 
separation  would  take  place  within  a  month.  In  short,  there 
could  be  no  doubt  that  before  marriage,' — and  she  ended  with 
a  look  which  gave  a  death-blow  to  the  reputation. 

Exceedingly  shocked.  Miss  Clarendon,  not  only  from  a 
sense  of  justice  to  Lady  Cecilia,  but  from  feeling  for  her 
brother's  honour,  longed  to  reply  in  defence ;  but  she  con- 
strained herself  for  once,  and  having  been  assured  by  Lady 
Cecilia  that  all  had  been  confessed  to  her  mother,  she  thought 
that  Lady  Davenant  must  be  the  best  person  to  decide  what 
should  be  done.  She  went  to  her  house  immediately,  sent  in 
word  that  she  begged  to  see  Lady  Davenant  for  two  or  three 
minutes  alone,  was  admitted  ;  Cecilia  immediately  vacated  the 
chair  beside  her  mother's  bed,  and  left  the  room.  Miss 
Clarendon  felt  some  difficulty  in  beginning,  but  she  forced  her- 
self to  repeat  all  she  had  heard.  Then  Lady  Davenant 
started  up  in  her  bed,  and  the  colour  of  life  spread  over  her 
face — 

'  Thank  you,  thank  you.  Miss  Clarendon  !  a  second  time  I 
have  to  thank  you  for  an  inestimable  service.  It  is  well  for 
Cecilia  that  she  made  the  whole  truth  known  to  us  both — 
made  you  her  friend  ;  now  we  can  act  for  her.  I  will  have  that 
locket  from  Madame  de  St.  CymonAefore  the  sun  goes  down.' 

482 


HELEN 

Now  Lady  Davenant  had  Madame  de  St.  Cymon  com- 
pletely in  her  power,  from  her  acquaintance  with  a  disgraceful 
transaction  which  had  come  to  her  knowledge  at  Florence. 
The  locket  was  surrendered,  returned  with  humble  assurances 
that  Madame  de  St.  Cymon  now  perfectly  understood  the 
thing  in  its  true  light,  and  was  quite  convinced  it  had  been 
stolen,  not  given.  Lady  Davenant  glanced  over  her  note  with 
scorn,  and  was  going  to  throw  it  from  her  into  the  fire,  but 
did  not.  When  Miss  Clarendon  called  upon  her  again  that 
evening  as  she  had  appointed,  she  showed  it  to  her,  and 
desired  that  she  would,  when  her  brother  arrived  next  day, 
teU  him  what  she  had  heard,  what  Lady  Davenant  had  done, 
and  how  the  locket  was  now  in  her  possession. 

Some  people  who  pretend  to  know,  maintain  that  the 
passion  of  love  is  of  such  an  all -engrossing  nature  that  it 
swallows  up  every  other  feeling ;  but  we  who  judge  more 
justly  of  our  kind,  hold  differently,  and  rather  believe  that  love 
in  generous  natures  imparts  a  strengthening  power,  a  magnetic 
touch,  to  every  good  feeling.  Helen  was  incapable  of  being 
perfectly  happy  while  her  friend  was  miserable ;  and  even 
Beauclerc,  in  spite  of  all  the  suffering  she  had  caused,  could 
not  help  pitying  Lady  Cecilia,  and  he  heartily  wished  the 
General  could  be  reconciled  to  her ;  yet  it  was  a  matter  in 
which  he  could  not  properly  interfere  ;  he  did  not  attempt  it. 

Lady  Davenant  determined  to  give  a  breakfast  to  all  the 
bridal  party  after  the  marriage.  In  her  state  of  health,  Helen 
and  Cecilia  remonstrated,  but  Lady  Davenant  had  resolved 
upon  it,  and  at  last  they  agreed  it  would  be  better  than  part- 
ing at  the  church-door — better  that  she  should  at  her  own 
house  take  leave  of  Helen  and  Beauclerc,  who  would  set  out 
immediately  after  the  breakfast  for  Thorndale. 

And  now  equipages  were  finished,  and  wedding  parapher- 
nalia sent  home — the  second  time  that  wedding-dresses  had 
been  furnished  for  Miss  Stanley  ; — and  never  once  were  these 
looked  at  by  the  bride-elect,  nor  even  by  Cecilia,  but  to  see 
that  all  was  as  it  should  be — that  seen,  she  sighed,  and 
passed  on. 

Fehcie's  ecstasies  were  no  more  to  be  heard :  we  forgot  to 
mention  that  she  had,  before  Helen's  return  from  Llansillen, 
departed,  dismissed  in  disgrace ;  and  happy  was  it  for  Lady 
Cecilia  and  Helen  to  be  relieved  from  her  jabbering,  and  not 

483 


HELEN 

exposed  to  her  spying  and  reporting.  Nevertheless,  the  gloom 
that  hung  over  the  world  above  could  not  but  be  observed  by 
the  world  below ;  it  was,  however,  naturally  accounted  for  by 
Lady  Davenant's  state  of  health,  and  by  the  anxiety  which 
Lady  Cecilia  must  feel  for  the  General,  who,  as  it  had  been 
officially  announced  by  Mr.  Cockburn,  was  to  set  out  on 
foreign  service  the  day  after  the  marriage. 

Lady  Cecilia,  notwithstanding  the  bright  hopefulness  of  her 
temper,  and  her  habits  of  sanguine  belief  that  all  would  end 
well  in  which  she  and  her  good  fortune  had  any  concern, 
seemed  now,  in  this  respect,  to  have  changed  her  nature ;  and 
ever  since  her  husband's  denunciations,  had  continued  quite 
resigned  to  misery,  and  submissive  to  the  fate  which  she 
thought  she  had  deserved.  She  was  much  employed  in  at- 
tendance upon  her  mother,  and  thankful  that  she  was  so  per- 
mitted to  be.  She  never  mentioned  her  husband's  name,  and 
if  she  alluded  to  him,  or  to  what  had  been  decreed  by  him,  it 
was  with  an  emotion  that  scarcely  dared  to  touch  the  point. 
She  spoke  most  of  her  child,  and  seemed  to  look  to  the  care 
of  him  as  her  only  consolation.  The  boy  had  been  brought 
from  Kensington  for  Lady  Davenant  to  see,  and  was  now  at 
her  house.  Cecilia  once  said  she  thought  he  was  very  like  his 
father,  and  hoped  that  he  would  at  least  take  leave  of  his  boy 
at  the  last.  To  that  last  hour — that  hour  when  she  was  to 
see  her  husband  once  more,  when  they  were  to  meet  but  to 
part,  to  meet  first  at  the  wedding  ceremony,  and  at  a  break- 
fast in  a  public  company, — altogether  painful  as  it  must  be, 
yet  she  looked  forward  to  it  with  a  sort  of  longing  ardent  im- 
patience. '  True,  it  will  be  dreadful,  yet  still — still  I  shall  see 
him  again,  see  him  once  again,  and  he  cannot  part  with  his 
once  so  dear  Cecilia  without  some  word,  some  look,  different 
from  his  last.' 

The  evening  before  the  day  on  which  the  wedding  was  to 
be,  Lady  Cecilia  was  in  Lady  Davenant's  room,  sitting  beside 
the  bed  while  her  mother  slept.  Suddenly  she  was  startled 
from  her  still  and  ever  the  same  recurring  train  of  melancholy 
thoughts  by  a  sound  which  had  often  made  her  heart  beat 
with  joy — her  husband's  knock ;  she  ran  to  the  window, 
opened  it,  and  was  out  on  the  balcony  in  an  instant.  His 
horse  was  at  the  door,  he  had  alighted,  and  was  going  up  the 
steps  ;  she  leaned  over  the  rails  of  the  balcony,  and  as  she 

484 


HELEN 

leaned,  a  flower  she  wore  broke  off — it  fell  at  the  General's 
feet :  he  looked  up,  and  their  eyes  met.  There  he  stood, 
waiting  on  those  steps,  some  minutes,  for  an  answer  to  his 
inquiry  how  Lady  Davenant  was :  and  when  the  answer  was 
brought  out  by  Elliott,  whom,  as  it  seemed,  he  had  desired  to 
see,  he  remounted  his  horse,  and  rode  away  without  ever 
again  looking  up  to  the  balcony. 

Lady  Davenant  had  awakened,  and  when  Cecilia  returned 
on  hearing  her  voice,  her  mother,  as  the  light  from  the  half- 
open  shutters  shone  upon  her  face,  saw  that  she  was  in  tears ; 
she  kneeled  down  by  the  side  of  the  bed,  and  wept  bitterly ; 
she  made  her  mother  understand  how  it  had  been. 

'  Not  that  1  hoped  more,  but  still — still  to  feel  it  so  !  Oh, 
mother,  I  am  bitterly  punished  ! ' 

Then  Lady  Davenant,  seizing  those  clasped  hands,  and 
raising  herself  in  her  bed,  fixed  her  eyes  earnestly  upon 
Cecilia,  and  asked, — 

'Would  you,  Cecilia — tell  me,  would  you  if  it  were  now, 
this  moment,  in  your  power — would  you  retract  your  con- 
fession ? ' 

'  Retract !  impossible  ! ' 

'  Do  you  repent — regret  having  made  it,  Cecilia  ? ' 

'  Repent  —  regret  having  made  it  !  No,  mother,  no  ! ' 
replied  Cecilia  firmly.  '  I  only  regret  that  it  was  not  sooner 
made.  Retract ! — impossible  I  could  wish  to  retract  the  only 
right  thing  I  have  done,  the  only  thing  that  redeems  me  in  my 
inmost  soul  from  uttermost  contempt.  No  !  rather  would  I  be 
as  I  am,  and  lose  that  noble  heart,  than  hold  it  as  I  did,  un- 
worthily. There  is,  mother,  as  you  said,  as  1  feel,  a  sus- 
taining, a  redeeming  power  in  truth.' 

Her  mother  threw  her  arms  round  her. 

'  Come  to  my  heart,  my  child,  close — close  to  my  heart. 
Heaven  bless  you !  You  have  my  blessing — my  thanks, 
CeciUa.  Yes,  my  thanks, — for  now  I  know — I  feel,  my 
dear  daughter,  that  my  neglect  of  you  in  childhood  has  been 
repaired.  You  make  me  forgive  myself,  you  make  me  happy, 
you  have  my  thanks — my  blessing — my  warmest  blessing  ! ' 

A  smile  of  delight  was  on  her  pale  face,  and  tears  ran  down 
as  Cecilia  answered — 'Oh,  mother,  mother!  blind  that  I 
have  been.  Why  did  not  I  sooner  know  this  tenderness  of 
your  heart  ? ' 

485 


HELEN 

'  And  why,  my  child,  did  I  not  sooner  know  you  ?  The 
fauh  was  mine,  the  suffering  has  been  yours, — not  yours  alone, 
though.' 

'  Suffer  no  more  for  me,  mother,  for  now,  after  this,  come 

what   may,    I   can  bear  it.     I    can  be  happy,   even    if ' 

There  she  paused,  and  then  eagerly  looking  into  her  mother's 
eyes  she  asked, — 

'  What  do  you  say,  mother,  about  him  ?  do  you  think  I 
may  hope  ? ' 

'  I  dare  not  bid  you  hope,'  replied  her  mother. 

'  Do  you  bid  me  despair  ?  ' 

'  No,  despair  in  this  world  is  only  for  those  who  have  lost 
their  own  esteem,  who  have  no  confidence  in  themselves,  for 
those  who  cannot  repent,  reform,  and  trust.  My  child,  you 
must  not  despair.  Now  leave  me  to  myself,'  continued  she  ; 
'  open  a  little  more  of  the  shutter,  and  put  that  book  within 
my  reach.' 

As  soon  as  Miss  Clarendon  heard  that  her  brother  had 
arrived  in  town  she  hastened  to  him,  and,  as  Lady  Davenant 
had  desired,  told  him  of  all  the  reports  that  were  in  circulation, 
and  of  all  that  Lady  Cecilia  had  spontaneously  confided  to 
her.  Esther  watched  his  countenance  as  she  spoke,  and 
observed  that  he  listened  with  eager  attention  to  the  proofs  of 
exactness  in  Cecilia  ;  but  he  said  nothing,  and  whatever  his 
feelings  were,  his  determination,  she  could  not  doubt,  was  still 
unshaken  ;  even  she  did  not  dare  to  press  his  confidence. 

Miss  Clarendon  reported  to  Lady  Davenant  that  she  had 
obeyed  her  command,  and  she  described  as  nearly  as  she  could 
all  that  she  thought  her  brother's  countenance  expressed. 
Lady  Davenant  seemed  satisfied,  and  this  night  she  slept,  as 
she  told  Cecilia  in  the  morning,  better  than  she  had  done 
since  she  returned  to  England.  And  this  was  the  day  of 
trial 

The  hour  came,  and  Lady  Davenant  was  in  the  church 
with  her  daughter.  This  marriage  was  to  be,  as  described  in 
olden  times,  '  celebrated  with  all  the  lustre  and  pomp  imagin- 
able '  ;  and  so  it  was,  for  Helen's  sake,  Helen,  the  pale  bride 

'  Beautiful ! '  the  whispers  ran  as  she  appeared,  '  but  too 
pale.'  Leaning  on  General  Clarendon's  arm  she  was  led  up 
the  aisle  to  the  altar.  He  felt  the  tremor  of  her  arm  on  his, 
but  she  looked  composed  and  almost  firm.     She  saw  no  one 

486 


HELEN 

individual  of  the  assembled  numbers,  not  even  Cecilia  or  Lady 
Davenant.  She  knelt  at  the  altar  beside  him  to  whom  she 
was  to  give  her  faith,  and  General  Clarendon,  in  the  face  of 
all  the  world,  proudly  gave  her  to  his  ward,  and  she,  without 
fear,  low  and  distinctly  pronounced  the  sacred  vow.  And  as 
Helen  rose  from  her  knees,  the  sun  shone  out,  and  a  ray  of 
light  was  on  her  face,  and  it  was  lovely.  Every  heart  said  so 
— every  heart  but  Lady  Katrine  Hawksby's — And  why  do 
we  think  of  her  at  such  a  moment  ?  and  why  does  Lady 
Davenant  think  of  her  at  such  a  moment  ?  Yet  she  did  ; 
she  looked  to  see  if  she  were  present,  and  she  bade  her  to  the 
breakfast. 

And  now  all  the  salutations  were  given  and  received,  and 
all  the  murmur  of  congratulations  rising,  the  living  tide  poured 
out  of  the  church  ;  and  then  the  noise  of  carriages,  and  all 
drove  off  to  Lady  Davenant's ;  and  Lady  Davenant  had  gone 
through  it  all  so  far,  well.  And  Lady  Cecilia  knew  that  it 
had  been  ;  and  her  eyes  had  been  upon  her  husband,  and  her 
heart  had  been  full  of  another  day  when  she  had  knelt  beside 
him  at  the  altar.  And  did  he,  too,  think  of  that  day  ?  She 
could  not  tell,  his  countenance  discovered  no  emotion,  his  eyes 
never  once  turned  to  the  place  where  she  stood.  And  she  was 
now  to  see  him  for  one  hour,  but  one  hour  longer,  and  at  a 
public  breakfast !  but  still  she  was  to  see  him. 

And  now  they  are  all  at  breakfast.  The  attention  of  some 
was  upon  the  bride  and  bridegroom ;  of  others,  on  Lady 
Cecilia  and  on  the  General ;  of  others,  on  Lady  Davenant ;  and 
of  many,  on  themselves.  Lady  Davenant  had  Beauclerc  on 
one  side.  General  Clarendon  on  the  other,  and  her  daughter 
opposite  to  him.  Lady  Katrine  was  there,  with  her  "■  tristeful 
visage,'  as  Churchill  justly  called  it,  and  more  tristeful  it 
presently  became. 

When  breakfast  was  over,  seizing  her  moment  when  con- 
versation flagged,  and  when  there  was  a  pause,  implying 
'  What  is  to  be  said  or  done  next  ? '  Lady  Davenant  rose  from 
her  seat  with  an  air  of  preparation,  and  somewhat  of  solemnity. 
All  eyes  were  instantly  upon  her.  She  drew  out  a  locket, 
which  she  held  up  to  public  view ;  then,  turning  to  Lady 
Katrine  Hawksby,  she  said — 'This  bauble  has  been  much 
talked  of,  I  understand,  by  your  ladyship,  but  I  question 
whether  you  have  ever  yet  seen  it,  or  know  the  truth  concern- 

487 


HELEN 

ing  it.  This  locket  was  stolen  by  a  worthless  man,  given  by  him 
to  a  worthless  woman,  from  whom  I  have  obtained  it ;  and  now 
I  give  it  to  the  person  for  whom  it  was  originally  destined.' 

She  advanced  towards  Helen  and  put  it  round  her  neck. 
This  done,  her  colour  flitted — her  hand  was  suddenly  pressed 
to  her  heart;  yet  she  commanded  —  absolutely  commanded, 
the  paroxysm  of  pain.  The  General  was  at  her  side  ;  her 
daughter,  Helen,  and  Beauclerc,  were  close  to  her  instantly. 
She  was  just  able  to  walk  ;  she  slowly  left  the  room — and  was 
no  more  seen  by  the  world  ! 

She  suffered  herself  to  be  carried  up  the  steps  into  her  own 
apartment  by  the  General,  who  laid  her  on  the  sofa  in  her 
dressing-room.  She  looked  round  on  them,  and  saw  that  all 
were  there  whom  she  loved  ;  but  there  was  an  alteration  in  her 
appearance  which  struck  them  all,  and  most  the  General,  who 
had  least  expected  it.  She  held  out  her  hand  to  him,  and 
fixing  her  eyes  upon  him  with  deathful  expression,  calmly 
smiled,  and  said — '  You  would  not  believe  this  could  be  ;  but 
now  you  see  it  must  be,  and  soon.  We  have  no  time  to  lose,' 
continued  she,  and  moving  very  cautiously  and  feebly,  she 
half-raised  herself — '  Yes,'  said  she,  '  a  moment  is  granted  to 
me,  thank  Heaven  ! '  She  rose  with  sudden  fwwer  and  threvi' 
herself  on  her  knees  at  the  General's  feet  :  it  was  done  before 
he  could  stop  her. 

'  For  God's  sake  ! '  cried  he,  '  Lady  Davenant ! — I  conjure 
you- 


She  would  not  be  raised.  '  No,'  said  she,  '  here  I  die 
if  I  appeal  to  you  in  vain — to  your  justice.  General  Clarendon, 
to  which,  as  far  as  I  know,  none  ever  appealed  in  vain — and 
shall  I  be  the  first  ? — a  mother  for  her  child — a  dying  mother 
for  your  wife — for  my  dear  Cecilia,  once  dear  to  you.' 

His  face  was  instantly  covered  with  his  hands. 

'Not  to  your  love,'  continued  she  —  'if  that  be  gone — 
to  your  justice  1  appeal,  and  MUST  be  heard,  if  you  are  what 
I  think  you  :  if  you  are  not,  why,  go — go,  instantly — go,  and 
leave  your  wife,  innocent  as  she  is,  to  be  deemed  guilty — 
Part  from  her,  at  the  moment  when  the  only  fault  she  committed 
has  been  repaired  —  Throw  her  from  you  when,  by  the 
sacrifice  of  all  that  was  dear  to  her,  she  has  proved  her  truth 
— Yes,  you  know  that  she  has  spoken  the  whole,  the  perfect 
truth ' 


She  joined  their  hands. 


HELEN 

'  I  know  it,'  exclaimed  he. 

'  Give  her  up  to  the  whole  world  of  slanderers ! — destroy 
her  character  !  If  now  her  husband  separate  from  her,  her 
good  name  is  lost  for  ever !  If  now  her  husband  protect  her 
not ' 

Her  husband  turned,  and  clasped  her  in  his  arms.  Lady 
Davenant  rose  and  blessed  him — blessed  them  both :  they 
knelt  beside  her,  and  she  joined  their  hands. 

'  Now,'  said  she,  '  I  give  my  daughter  to  a  husband  worthy 
of  her,  and  she  more  worthy  of  that  noble  heart  than  when 
first  his.  Her  only  fault  was  mine — my  early  neglect :  it  is 
repaired — I  die  in  peace  !  You  make  my  last  moments  the 
happiest !  Helen,  my  dearest  Helen,  now,  and  not  till  now, 
happy — perfectly  happy  in  Love  and  Truth  ! ' 


THE  END 


Printed  by  K,  &  R.  Clark,  Limited,  £dinhtrg/t. 


MACMILLAN  &  CO.'S  NEW  NOVELS. 

Crown  8vo.     6s.  each. 

Second  Edition  now  ready, 

THE  COURTSHIP  OF  MORRICE  BUCKLER.    By  A.  E.  W. 

Mason. 

i'i/iVC//'.— "Readers  will,  unless  gratitude  be  extinct,  thank  me  for  my  strong 
recommendation  as  to  the  excellent  entertainment  provided  for  them  in  The  Courtship  q/ 
Morriu  Buckler." 

GRAPHIC, — "A  fine  stirring  narrative  it  is.  Mr.  Mason  is  a  new  recruit  to  the 
growing  school  of  historical  romancers  in  which  Mr.  Stanley  Weyman  and  Mr.  Conan 
Doyle  are  conspicuous  figures,  and  he  promises  to  make  himself  well  worthy  of  his 
company.  The  *  Record  of  the  Growth  of  an  English  Gentleman  during  the  years 
1685-1687  under  strange  and  difficult  circumstances '  is  a  gallant  and  chivalrous  story,  cast 
in  a  period  and  among  scenes  of  which  I,  at  least,  am  never  tired  of  reading." 

HIS   HONOR  AND  A  LADY.     By  Mrs.  Everard  Cotes  (Sara 
Jeannette  Duncan).     Illustrated  by  A.  D.  McCormick. 

DAILY  CHRONICLE. — "  We  are  inclined  to  place  it  as  the  best  book  that  Mrs. 
Everard  Cotes  has  yet  written.  The  story  is  exceedingly  well  told,  is  everywhere  witty. 
It  has  that  charm  of  atmosphere  which  India  yields  so  readily  for  the  canvas  of  a  consum- 
mate artist." 

PALL  MALL  GAZETTE.— "This  is  a  fascinating  story  of  Anglo-Indian  life, 
accurate  in  detail  and  true  to  nature.  The  authoress  has  not  only  maintained  the  high 
standard  of  her  Simple  Adventures  of  a  Mem-Sakiby  but  surpassed  it.  This  is  praise, 
but  true." 

ADAM  JOHNSTONE'S  SON.     By  F.  Marion  Crawford. 

DAILY  NEWS. — "Mr.  Crawford  has  written  stories  richer  in  incident  and  more 
powerful  in  intention,  but  we  do  not  think  that  he  has  handled  more  deftly  or  shown  a 
more  delicate  insight  into  tendencies  that  go  towards  making  some  of  the  more  spiritual 
tragedies  of  life." 

SPEAKER.—"  A  book  to  be  enjoyed  by  everybody." 

THE  RELEASE,  OR  CAROLINE'S  FRENCH    KINDRED. 

By  Charlotte  M.  Yonge. 

WHITEHALL  REVIEW. — "  Miss  Yonge's  latest  work  is  a  worthy  successor  to 
her  previous  well-told  novels." 

DENIS.    A  Study  in  Black  and  White.    By  Mrs.  E.  M.  Field. 

GLASGOW  HERALD. — "A  fine  Irish,  story  .  .  .  She  gives  us  a  really  vivid 
picture  of  the  life  both  of  the  quality  and  of  the  peasants,  and  we  get  some  specially  fine 
glimpses  into  the  thoughts  and  feelmgs  of  the  latter,  whose  hopes  and  aspirations,  and 
superstitions  and  religious  beliefs,  are  here  described  by  one  who  evidently  is  perfectly 
acquainted  with  them." 

TOM  GROGAN.    By  F.  Hopkinson  Smith.    With  Illustrations  by 
Charles  S.  Reinhart. 

GLASGOW  HERALD.—*^  A  clever  bit  of  character  study." 

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd.,  LONDON. 


BY   RUDYARD    KIPLING. 

THE    SECOND    JUNGLE    BOOK.      With    Illustrations   by    J. 
LocKwoOD  Kipling.     Twenty-first  Thdusand. 
DAILY  TELEGRAPH. — "The  appearance  of  TA*  Second  Jungle  Book\%2L  literary 
event  of  which  no  one  will  mistake  the  importance.     Unlike  most  sequels,  the  various 
stories  comprised  in  the  new  volume  are  at  least  equal  to  their  predecessors." 

THE  JUNGLE  BOOK.     With  Jllustrations  by  J.  L.  Kipling,  W.  H. 

Drake,  and  P.  Frenzeny.     Twenty-eighth  Thousand.     Crown  8vo.     6s. 

A  THENjEUM. — "We  tender  our  sincere  thanks  to  Mr.  Kipling  for  the  hour  of  pure 
and  unadulterated  enjoyment  which  he  has  given  us,  and  many  another  reader,  by  this 
inimitable  Jungle  Book. " 

PUNCH — "  *  .^sop's  Fables  and  dear  old  Brer  Fox  and  Co.,'  observes  the  Baron 
sagely,  '  may  have  suggested  to  the  fanciful  genius  of  Rudyard  Kipling  the  delightful 
idea,  carried  out  in  the  most  fascinating  style,  of  The  Jungle  Book.'  " 

WEE  WILLIE  WINKIE  and  other  Stories.     Crown  8vo.     6s. 

SOLDIERS  THREE  and  other  Stories.     Crown  8vo.     6s. 

ST.  JAMES'S  GAZETTE.— "In  these,  ^  the  faithful  are  aware,  are  contained 
some  of  Mr.  Kipling's  very  finest  work." 

GLOBE. — "  Containing  some  of  the  best  of  his  highly  vivid  work." 

PLAIN   TALES    FROM    THE    HILLS.      Thirty-first  Thousand. 

Crown  8vo.     6s. 

SATURDAY  REV/EJV.— "Mr.  Kipling  knows  and  appreciates  the  English  in 
India,  and  is  a  born  story-teller  and  a  man  of  humour  into  the  bargain.  ...  It  would  be 
hard  to  find  better  reading." 

GLASGOIV  HERALD. — "Character,  situation,  incident,  humour,  pathos,  tragic 
force,  are  all  in  abundance  ;  words  alone  are  at  a  minimum.  Of  course  these  are  *  plain  ' 
tales — lightning-flash  tales.  A  gleam,  and  there  the  whole  tragedy  or  comedy  is  before 
you — elaborate  it  for  yourself  afterwards. " 

THE  LIGHT  THAT  FAILED.  Re-written  and  considerably  enlarged. 

Nineteenth  Thousand.     Crown  8vo.     6s. 
ACADEMY. — "Whatever  else  be  true  of  Mr.  Kipling,  it  is  the  first  truth  about  him 
that  he  has  power,  real  intrinsic  power.  .  .  .  Mr.  Kipling's  work  has  innumerable  good 
qualities." 

MANCHESTER  COURIER.—"  The  story  is  a  brilliant  one  and  full  of  vivid  interest." 

LIFE'S  HANDICAP.     Being  Stories  of  Mine  Own  People.    Twenty- 
third  Thousand.     Crown  8vo.    6s. 

BLACK  AND  WHITE. — "Life's  Handicap  conta.\ns  much  of  the  best  work  hitherto 
accomplished  by  the  author,  and,  taken  as  a  whole,  is  a  complete  advance  upon  its  prede- 
cessors." 

OBSERVER. — "The  stories  are  as  good  as  ever,  and  are  quite  as  well  told.  .  . 
Life's  Handicap  is  a  volume  that  can  be  read  with  pleasure  and  interest  under  almost 
any  circumstances." 

MANY     INVENTIONS.     Twentieth  Thousand.     Crown  8vo.     6s. 
PALL^   MALL   GAZETTE.— "T\i^  compl?test  book  that  Mr.    Kipling  has  yet 

fiven  us   in  workmanship,  the  weightiest  and  most   humane  in  breadth  of  view.   .  .  . 
t  can  only  be  regarded  as  a  fresh  landmark  in  the  progression  of  his  genius." 
NATIONAL   OBSERVER.— "The  book  is  one  for  all  Mr.  Kipling's  admirers  to 
rejoice  in — some  for  this,  and  some  for  that,  and  not  a  few  for  well-nigh  everything  it 
contains." 

BY   J.    LOCKWOOD    KIPLING. 
BEAST   AND    MAN    IN    INDIA.      A  Popular   Sketch  of  Indian 

Animals  in  their  Relations  with  the  People.     By  John  Lockwood  Kipling,  C.I.E. 
With  Illustrations  by  the  Author.     Extra  crown  8vo.     7s.  6d. 

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd.,  LONDON. 


BY   F.   MARION    CRAWFORD. 

Fcap.  %vo.     2s. 
LOVE  IN  IDLENESS  :    A  Bar  Harbour  Tale. 

DAILY  NEWS. — "  A  trifle  of  delicate  design  and  charming  worlcmanship." 
SATURDA  Y  JiEFI£IV.—" Theheroiae  is  an  admirable  study,  and  something  new 
to  fiction.  .  ,  .  She  has  two  admirers,  and  her  relations  with  these  and  three  maiden 
sisters,  who  are  delightfully  sketched,  form  the  pith  of  a  most  fascinating  story." 

Crown  Svo,     6s.  each, 
CASA  BRACCIO. 

GUARDIAN. — "A  very  powerful  tragedy  and  a  finished  work  of  art." 

ADAM  JOHNSTONE'S  SON. 

DAILY  NEWS. — "Mr.  Crawford  has  written  stories  richer  in  incident  and  more 
powerful^  in  intention,  but  we  do  not  think  that  he  has  handled  more  deftly  or  shown  a 
more  delicate  insight  into  tendencies  that  go  towards  making  some  of  the  more  spiritual 
tragedies  of  life." 

THE  RALSTONS. 

A^  THENj^UM.—''  Thsi  jpresent  instalment  of  what  promises  to  be  a  very  voluminous 
family  history,  increasing  in  interest  and  power  as  it  develops,  turns  upon  the  death  of 
Robert  and  the  disposition  of  his  millions,  which  afford  ample  scope  for  the  author's 
pleasantly  ingenious  talent  in  raising  and  surmounting  difficulties  of  details." 

Crown  %vo.     3J.  6d,  each. 
MR.  ISAACS  :  A  Tale  of  Modern  India. 

ATHENMXJM, — "  A  work  of  unusual  ability.  .  .  .  It  fully  deserves  the  notice  it  is 
sure  to  attract." 

DOCTOR  CLAUDIUS.    A  True  Story. 

ATHEN.MUM. — "Mr.  Crawford  has  achieved  another  success.  .  .  .  Few  recent 
books  have  been  so  difficult  to  lay  down  when  once  begun." 

A  ROMAN  SINGER. 

TIMES. — "A  masterpiece  of  narrative.  .  .  .  Unlike  any  other  romance  in  English 
literature.  .  .  .  The  characters  in  the  novel  possess  strong  individuality,  brought  out 
simply  by  the  native  stress  of  the  story." 

ZOROASTER. 

GUARDIAN. — "  An  instance  of  the  highest  and  noblest  form  of  novel.  .  .  .  Alike  in 
the  originality  of  its  conception 'and  the  power  with  which  it  is  wrought  out,  it  stands  on  a 
level  tmit  is  almost  entirely  its  own." 

MARZIO'S  CRUCIFIX. 

TIMES. — ' '  A  subtle 'compound  of  artistic  feeling,  avarice,  malice,  and  criminal  frenzy 
is  this  carver  of  silver  chalices  and  crucifixes." 

A  TALE  OF  A  LONELY  PARISH. 

GUARDIAN.— "The  tale  is  written  with  all  Mr.  Crawford's  skill." 
SA  TURD  A  Y  REVIEW.—'-'  Unlike  most  novels,  '  A  Tale  of  a  Lonely  Parish '  goes 
on  improving  up  to  the  end." 

PAUL  PATOFF. 

ST.  JAMES'S  GAZETTE.—"  The  action  of  the  story  never  flags.  ...  Those  who 
neglect  to  read  'Paul  Patoff'  will  throw  away  a  very  pleasurable  opportunity." 

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD.,  LONDON. 


BY  F.    MARION    CRAWFORiD. 

Crown  %vo.     y.  dd.  each. 
WITH  THE  IMMORTALS. 

SPECTATOR. — "It  is  a  book  which,  whatever  judgment  may  bepassed  upon  its 
form,  cannot  fail  to  please  a  reader  who  enjoys  crisp,  clear,  vigorous  writing,  and  thoughts 
that  are  alike  original  and  suggestive." 

GREIFENSTEIN. 

SPECTATOR. — "Altogether  we  like  '  Greifenstein  *  decidedly — so  much  so  as  to 
doubt  whether  it  does  not  dislodge  '  A  Roman  Singer'  from  the  place  hereto  occupied  by 
the  latter  as  our  favourite  amongst  Mr.  Crawford's  novels," 

SANT'  ILARIO. 

A  THENyEUM.—"  The  plot  is  skilfully  concocted,  and  the  interest  as  sustained  to  the 
end.  The  various  events,  jromantic  and  even  sensational,  follow  "naturally  and  neatly, 
and  the  whole  is  a  very  clever  piece  of  work." 

A  CIGARETTE-MAKER'S  ROMANCE. 

TIMES. — "  The  idea  is  original  in  a  striking  degree." 

GLOBE. — "  We  are  inclined  to  think  this  is  the  best  of  Mr.  Marion  Crawford's  stories." 

KH  ALED :  A  Tale  of  Arabia. 

ANTI-JACOBIN. — "  Mr.  Crawford  has  written  some  stories  more  powerful,  but  none 
more  attractive  than  this." 

THE  THREE  FATES. 

iV^T/OJV^Z  055'£ieK£';E.— "A  brilliant  variation  from  Mr.  F.  Marion  Crawford  s 
wonted  style.  .  .  .  Increases  in  strength  and  in  interest  even  to  the  end." 

THE  WITCH  OF  PRAGUE. 

ACADEMY. — "  It  is  so  remarkable  a  book  as  to  be  certain  of  as  wide  a  popularity  as 
any  of  its  predecessors  ;  it  is  a  romance  of  singular  daring  and  power  .  .  .  written  with  a 
power  which  shows  a  growing  and  not  a  waning  maturity  of  talent." 

MARION  DARCHE  :  A  Story  without  Comment. 

NATIONAL  REVIEW. — "Eminently  charming,  entertaining,  and 'readable  from 
beginning  to  end." 

SATURDAY  i?^F/^fF.—"  Charming  in  style  and  very  easy  to  read," 

KATHARINE  LAUDERDALE. 

PUNCH. — "Admirable  in  its  simple  pathos,  its  unforced  humour,  and,  above  all,  in 
its  truth  to  human  nature.  ,  There  is  not  a  tedious  page  or  paragraph  in  the  three 
volumes." 

THE  CHILDREN  OF  THE  KING. 

DAILY  CHRONICLE.—"  Mr.  Crawford  has  not  done  better  than  '  The  Children  of 
the  King  '  fora  long  time.    The  story  itself  is  a  simple  and  beautiful  one." 

PIETRO  GHISLERI. 

SPEAKER.- — "  Mr.  Marion  Crawford  is  an  artist,  and  a  great  one,  and  he  has  been 
brilliantly  successful  in  a  task  in  which  ninety-nine  out  of  every  hundred  writers  would 
have  failed." 

DON  ORSINO. 

ATHENjEUM. — "  '  Don  Orsino '  is  a  story  with  many  strong  points,  and  it  is  told 
with  all  the  spirit  we  have  been  wont  to  expect  from  its  author," 

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD.,  LONDON. 


MESSRS.  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 

UNIFORM  EDITION  OF  THE  NOVELS  AND  TALES  OF 

CHARLOTTE  M.YONCE. 

In  Crown  8vo,  Cloth  extra.     Illustrated.     3s.  6d. 

1.  THE  HEIR  OF  REDCLYFFE. 

2.  HEARTSEASE. 

3.  HOPES  AND  FEARS. 

4.  DYNEVOR  TERRACE. 

5.  THE  DAISY  CHAIN. 

6.  THE  TRIAL  :  More  Links  of  the  Daisy  Chaia 

7.  PILLARS  OF  THE  HOUSE.     Vol.  I. 

8.  PILLARS  OF  THE  HOUSE.     Vol.  II. 

9.  THE  YOUNG  STEPMOTHER. 

10.  THE  CLEVER  WOMAN  OF  THE  FAMILY. 

11.  THE  THREE  BRIDES. 

12.  MY  YOUNG  ALCIDES. 

13.  THE  CAGED  LION. 

14.  THE  DOVE  IN  THE  EAGLE'S  NEST. 

15.  THE  CHAP  LET  OF  PEARLS. 

16.  LADY  HESTER  AND  THE  DANVERS  PAPERS. 

17.  MAGNUM  BONUM. 

18.  LOVE  AND  LIFE. 

19.  UNKNOWN  TO  HISTORY. 

20.  STRAY  PEARLS. 

21.  THE  ARMOURER'S  'PRENTICES. 

22.  THE  TWO  SIDES  OF  THE  SHIELD. 

23.  NUTTIE'S  FATHER. 

24.  SCENES  AND  CHARACTERS. 

25.  CHANTRY  HOUSE. 

26.  A  MODERN  TELEMACHUS. 

27.  BYE-WORDS. 

28.  BEECHCROFT  AT  ROCKSTONE. 

29.  A  REPUTED  CHANGELING. 

30.  MORE  BYE-WORDS. 

31.  THE  LITTLE  DUKE. 

32.  THE  PRINCE  AND  THE  PAGE. 

33.  THE  LANCES  OF  LYNWOOD. 

34.  P'S    AND    Q'S,    AND    LITTLE    LUCY'S   WONDERFUL 

GLOBE. 

35.  THE  TWO  PENNILESS  PRINCESSES. 

36.  THAT  STICK. 

37.  AN  OLD   WOMAN'S    OUTLOOK   IN   A   HAMPSHIRE 

VILLAGE. 

38.  GRISLY  GRISELL  ;  or,  The  Laidly  Lady  of  Whitburn.     A 

Tale  of  the  Wars  of  the  Roses. 

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd.,  LONDON. 


A  SELECTION    FROM 
MCMILLAN  AND  CO.'S  THREE -AND -SIXPENNY   SERIES, 

Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d.  each  volume. 


BY   MRS.  CRAIK. 

(The  Author  of  '  John  Halifax,  Gentleman.') 


Olive.    With  Illustrations  by  G.  Bowers. 
The  OgllVlea.     With  Illustrations. 
Agatha's  Husband.     With  Illustrations. 
Head  of  the  Family.     With  Illustrations. 
Two  Marriages.       |      The  Laurel  Bush. 
Ahout  Money,  and  other  Things. 


My  Mother  and  I.    With  Illustrations. 
Miss   Tommy:  A  Mediaeval  Romance. 

Illustrated. 
EUng  Arthur:  Not  a  Love  Story. 
Sermons  out  of  Church. 
Concerning  Men,  and  other  Papers. 


Robbery  under  Arms. 
The  Squatter's  Dream. 
A  Colonial  Reformer. 


BY   ROLF   BOLDREWOOD. 

I         The  Miner's  Right. 

A  Sydney-Side  Saxon. 
I        Nevermore. 
A  Modem  Buccaneer. 


BY  J.   H.  SHORTHOUSE. 


John  Inglesant. 

Sir  Percival. 

The  Little  Schoolmaster  Mark. 


The  Countess  Eve. 

A  Teacher  of  the  Violin. 

Blanche,  Lady  Falalse. 


BY  CHARLES   DICKENS. 


The  Pickwick  Papers. 
Oliver  Twist. 
Nicholas  Nlckleby. 
Martin  Chuzzlewlt. 
The  Old  Curiosity  Shop. 
Bamaby  Rudge. 
Dombey  and  Son. 


Christmas  Books. 

Sketches  by  Boz. 

David  Copperfield. 

Bleak  House. 

American  Notes  and  Pictures  from 

Italy. 
The  Letters  of  Charles  Dickens. 


BY  THOMAS   HUGHES. 


Tom  Brown's  Schooldays.  With  Illustra- 
tions by  A.  Hughes  and  S.  P.  Hall. 

Tom  Brown  at  Oxford.  With  Illustra- 
tions by  S.  P.  Hall. 


The  Scouring  of  the  White  Horse,  and 
The  Ashen  Faggot.  With  Illustrations 
by  Richard  Doyle. 


Aunt  RacheL 
Schwartz. 


BY  D.  CHRISTIE    MURRAY. 

I        The  Weaker  Vessel. 
I        John  Vale's  Guardian. 


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,   Ltd.,   LONDON. 


July,  i8g6. 


A     CLASSIFIED 


CATALOGUE  OF  BOOKS 

IN   GENERAL   LITERATURE 

POBLISHED   BY 

MACMILLAN   AND   CO.,   LTD. 

BEDFORD   STREET,   STRAND,   LONDON,   W.C. 
For  purely  Educational  Works  see  Macmillan  AND  Co.'s  Educational  Catahgut. 


AGRICULTURB. 

(See  also  Botany;  Gardening.) 

FRANKLAND  (Prof.  P.  F.).— A  Handbook 
OF  Agricultural  Chemical  Analysis. 
Cr.  8vo.    7*.  td. 

KING  (F.  H.).— The  Soil,  Its  Nature,  etc. 
Fcp.  8vo.    3J.  net. 

LAURIE  (A.  P.). — Primer  of  Agricultural 
Chemistry,  or  The  Food  of  Plants. 
Pott  8vo.     IS. 

MTJIR  <J.).— Manual  of  Dairy  Work. 
Pott  8vo.     xs. 

——  Agriculture,  Practical  and  Scien- 
tific.    Cr.  8vo.     4*.  6d. 

NICHOLLS  (H.  A.  A.).— Text  Book  of 
Tropical  Agriculture.    Cr.  8vo.    ts. 

TANNER  (Henry).— Elementary  Lessons 
IN  THE  Science  of  Agricultural  Prac- 
tice.    Fcp.  8vo.     3^.  td. 

First    Principles    of    Agriculture!. 

Pott  8vo.     If. 

-  The  Principles  of  Agriculture.  For 
Use  in  Elementary  Schools.  Ext.  fcp.  8vo.— 
The  Alphabet  of  the  Principles  of 
Agriculture,  td.  —  Further  Steps  in 
the  Principles  of  Agriculture,  is. — 
Elementary  School  Readings  on  the 
Principles  of  Agriculture  for  the 
Third  Stage,     ij. 

The  Abbot's  Farm  ;  or,  Practice  with 

Science.    Cr.  8vo.    3^.  6d. 

ANATOSIT,  Human.    {See  Physiology.) 

ANTHROPOLOGY. 

BROWN  (J.  Allen).— Paleolithic  Man  in 
North-west  Middlesex.    8vo.    7*.  (>d. 

DAWKINS  (Prof.  W.  Boyd).— Early  Man 
in  Britain  and  his  Place  in  the  Ter- 
tiary Period.    Med.  8vo.    25*. 

DE  QUATREFAGES  (A.)— The  Pygmies. 
Translated  by  F.  Starr.     Cr.  Svo.    6s.  net. 

riNCK  (Henry  T.).— Romantic  Love  and 
Personal  Beauty.    2  vols.    Cr.  8vo.     18*. 

FISON  (L.)  and  HOWITT  (A.  W.).— Kami- 
laroi  and  Kurnai  Group.  Group-Mar- 
riage and  Relationship,  and  Marriage  by 
Elopement.    8vo.    15J. 

FRAZER  (J.  G.).— The  Golden  Bough  :  A 
Study  in  Comparative  Religion.  2  vols. 
8vo.     28f. 

GALTON  (Francis).— English  Men  of  Sci- 
ence :  their  Nature  and  Nurture. 
Bvo.    B«.  td. 


GALTON    (Francis).— Natural    Inherit* 

ANCE.      Svo.      ^S. 

Inquiries  into  Human  Faculty  and 

its  Development.     Bvo.     i6j. 

Life-History  Album  ;  Being  a  Persona* 

Note-book,  combining  Diary,  Photograph 
Album,  a  Register  of  Height,  Weight,  and 
other  Anthropometrical  Observations,  and  a 
Record  of  Illnesses.  4tc.  3f.6(^.— Or  with  Card* 
of  Wool  for  Testing  Colour  Vision.    4* .  6d. 

Record  of  Family  Faculties.     Con 

sisting  of  Tabular  Forms  and  Directions  foi 

Entermg  Data.    4to.     2^.  (>d. 
Hereditary  Genius  :  An  Enquiry  imc  its 

Laws  and  Consequences.  Ext.  cr.  8vc   7x.net. 
^—  Finger  Prints.     8vo.    6j.  net. 

Blurred  Finger  Prints.  8vo.  zs.  6d.  net 

FiNGER-pRiNT  Directories.  Svo.  si-.net. 

HOFFMAN  (W.  J.).— The  Beginnings  of 

Writing.    Cr.  Svo.    6s.  net. 
M'LENNAN  (J.    F.).— The   Patriarchal 

Theory.    Edited  and  completed  by  Donalc^ 

M'Lennan,  M.A.    Svo.     z4j. 

Studies  in  Ancient  History.     C»m> 

prising  "Primitive  Marriage."     Svo.     161. 

Second  Series.    8vo.    2tj. 

MASON  (O.  T.).— Woman's  Share  in  Primi- 

TiVE  Culture.    Cr.  Svo.    dr.  net. 
MONTELIUS— WOODS.— The    Civilisa 

TiON   OF   Sweden    in    Heathen    Times 

By  Prof.   Oscar  Montelius.    Translated 

by  Rev,  F.  H.  Woods.     lUustr.    Svo.     141. 
ORR  (H.  B.). — Theory  of  Development 

and  Heredity.     Cr.  Svo.    6s.  net. 
RATZEL  (F. ).— History  of  Mankind.    Ed. 

by  E.  B.  Tylor.    In  30  Monthly  Parts.    Roy. 

Svo.    i.r.  net  each     Vol.  1.    12s.  net. 
SEEBOHM  (H.  E.). —Structure  of  Greek 

Tribal  Society.    Svo.    ss.  net. 
TURNER  (Rev.  Geo.).— Samoa,  A  HuNDRKn 

Years  ago  and  long  before.   Cr.  Svo.  91 
TYLOR   (E.    B.).  — Anthropology.     With 

Illustrations.    Cr.  Svo.    js.  6d. 
WESTERM  ARCK  (Dr.  Edward).— The  His 

TORY  OF  Human  Marriage.    With  Preface 

by  Dr.  A.  R.  Wallace.    2nd  Edit.    Svo. 

145.  net. 

WILSON(SirDan!el).— Prehistoric  Annals 
of  Scotland.   Illustrated.  2  vols.  8vo.  36J 

Prehistoric  Man  :  Researches  into  the 

Origin  of  Civilisation  in  the  Old  and  New 
World.    Illustrated.    2  vols.     Svo.    361. 

The  Right  Hand  :  Left-Handednesk 

Cr,  Svo.    4s.  6d. 


ANTIQUITIES— ART. 


ANTIQUITIES. 

(See  also  Anthropology.) 

ATKINSON  (Rev.  J.  C.).— Fortv  Years  i> 
A  Moorland  Parish.  Ext.  cr.  8vo.  5^. 
net. — Illustrated  Edition.     i2i,  net. 

—  Memorials  of  Old  Whitby.  Illust. 
Ex.  cr.  8vo.     3*.  td.  net. 

BURN    (Robert). — Roman   Literatdrk   in 
Relation  to  Roman  Art.    With  lUastra- 
tions.    Ext.  cr.  8vo.    14J. 
DILETTANTI     SOCIETY'S     PUBLICA- 
TIONS. 
Antiquities  OF  Ionia.  Vols.  I. — III.  3/.  aj. 

each,  or  5/.  5J.  the  set,  net. — Vol.  IV.  Folio, 

half  morocco,  3/.  13J.  td^  net. 
An  Investigation  of  the  Principles  of 

Athenian    Architecture.      By  F.  C. 

Penrose.    Illustrated.    Folio.    7/.  71.  nei. 
Specimens  of  Ancient  Sculpture  :  Egyi- 

tian,  Etruscan,  Greek,  and  Roman. 

Vol.  II.     Folio.     5/.  sf.  net. 

DYER  (Louis). — Studies  of  the  Gods  in 
Greece  at  certain  Sanctuaries  re- 
cently Excavated.  Ext.  cr.  8vo.  8j.6rf.net. 

ERMAN  (A.). — Life  in  Ancient  Egypt. 
Transl.  by  H.  M.  Tirard.  Illust.  Super- 
royal  8vo.     21^.  net. 

EVANS  (Lady).  Chapters  on  Greek  Dress. 
Illustrated.     8vo.     5J.  net. 

FOWLER  (W.  W.).— The  Citv-State  of 
the  Greeks  and  Romans.     Cr.  8vo.     5*. 

GARDNER  (Ernest).— Handbook  of  Greek 
Sculpture.     Illustrated.     Ex.  cr.  8vo.     55. 

GARDNER  (Percy).— Samos  and  Samian 
Coins  :  An  Essay.    8vo.     7*.  6rf. 

GOWO-.  Litt.D.).~A  Companion  to  School 
Classics.   Illustrated.  3rd  Ed.   Cr.  8vo.  6*. 

HARRISON  (Miss  Jane)  and  VERRALL 
(Mrs.). — Mythology  and  Monuments  of 
Ancient  Athens.  Illustrated.  Cr.  8vo.  16*. 

HELLENICSOCIETY'SPUBLICATIONS 

— Excavations  at  Megalopolis,  1890 — 
1891.  By  Messrs.  E.  A.  Gardner,  W. 
LoRiNG,  G.  C.  Richards,  and  W.  J.  Wood« 
house.  With  an  Architectural  Description 
by  R.  W.  Schultz.  4to.  25J. 
— —  Ecclesiastical  Sites  in  Isauria  (Cili- 
CiA  Trachea).  By  the  Rev.  A.  C.  Head- 
lam.     Imp.  4to.     5J'. 

JONES  (H.  S.).— -Select  Passages  from 
Ancient  Writers,  Illustrative  of  the 
History  OF  Greek  Sculpture.  8vo.  7^.net. 

LANCIANI  (Prof.  R.).— Ancient  Rome  in 
THE  Light  of  Recent  Discoveries.  4to.  341. 

—  Pagan  and  Christian  Rome.   410.   24.1. 

MAHAFFY  {Prof.  J.  P.).— A  Primer  of 
Greek  Antiquities.    Pott  8vo.     is. 

-^  Social  Life  in  Greece  from  Homer 
TO  Menander.    6th  Edit.    Cr.  8vo.    gs. 

Rambles  and  Studies  in  Greece.  Il- 
lustrated.   3rd  Edit.    Cr.  8vo.    loj.  6d. 

{See  also  History,  p.  13.) 
NKWTON  (Sir  C.  r.).— Essays  on  Art  and 

ARCHi«0LOGV.      8V0.       12S.  6d. 


SCHUCHHARDT(C.).— Dr.  Schliemann's 
Excavations  AT  Troy,  Tiryns,  Mycenae, 
Orchomenos,  Ithaca,  in  the  Light  of 
Recent  Knowledge.    Trans,  by  Eugenie 
Sellers.  Prefaceby  Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D. 
Illustrated.    8vo.     181.  net. 
SCHREIBER  (T.).— Atlas  of   Classical 
Antiquities.    Edit,  by  W.  C.  F.  Ander- 
son.   Oblong  4to.    21J.  net. 
STRANG  FORD.  (5'«  Voyages  &  Travels.) 
tVALDSTEIN  (C.).— Catalogue  of  Casts 
IN  THE  Museum  of  Classical  Arch.aio- 
LOGY,  Cambridge.     Crown  8vo.     is.6d. — 
Large  Paper  Edition.     Small  4to.    5s. 
WHITE  (Gilbert).    (See  Natural  History.) 
VILKINS  (Prof.  A.  S.).— A  Primer  of  Ro- 
man Antiquities.     Pott  8vo.     i*. 

ARCHiGOLOGT.    (See  Antiquities.) 

ARCHITECTnRE. 

AVERY  ARCHITECTURAL  CATA- 
LOGUE.   Imp.  8vo,  half  mor.    sor.  net.    ijg^ 

FREEMAN  (Prof.  E.  A.).— History  of  thb 
Cathedral  Church  of  Wells.  Cr.  8vo. 
3S.6d. 

HULL(E.). — A  Treatise  on  Ornamental 
and  Building  Stones  of  Great  Britain 
AND  Foreign  Countries.     8vo.     i2j. 

LETHABY  (W.  R.)  and  SWAINSON  (H.). 
^The  Church  of  St.  Sophia  at  Constan- 
tinople.   Illust.    Med.  8vo.    2zs.  net. 

MOORE  (Prof.  C.  H.).— The  Development 
and  Character  of  Gothic  Architec- 
ture.    Illustrated.     Med.  8vo.     iBs. 

PENROSE  (F.  C).    {See  Antiquities.) 
STEVENSON  {].   J.).— House    Architec- 
ture.    With    Illustrations.    2    vols.    Roy. 
8vo.     i8j.  each. — Vol.    I.   Architecture  ; 
Vol.  II.  House  Planning. 

ART. 

{See  also  Music.) 
ANDERSON   (L.).      Linear   Perspective 

and  Model  Drawing.     8vo.     2s. 
ART    AT    HOME    SERIES.     Edited   by 
W.  J.  LoFTiE,  B.A.    Cr.  8vo. 
The  Bedroom  and  Boudoir.     By  Lady 

Barker.    2s.  6d. 
Needlework.     By  Elizabeth  Glaister. 

lUostrated      ss.  6d, 
Music  in  the  House.    By  John  Hullah, 

4th  edit.    2S.  td. 
The    Dining-Room.      By    Mrs.    Loftib. 

With  Illustrations.    2nd  Edit.     2J.  td. 

Amateur  Theatricals.     By  Walter  H, 

Pollock  and  Lady  Pollock.    Illustrated 

by  Kate  Greenaway.    2s.  td. 

ATKINSON  y.   B.).— An    Art    Tour    to 

Northern  Capitals  of  Europe.  8vo.  lai. 

BENSON  (W.   A.  S.).     Handicraft  and 

Design.     Cr.  8vo.     5^-.  net. 
BURN  (Robert).    (See  Antiquities.) 
CARR(J.C.)— Papers  ON  Art.  Cr.Svo.  ^s.td. 
COLLIER  (Hon.  John).— A  Primer  of  Art. 

Pott  8vo.  If. 
COOK  (E.  T.).— A  Popular  Handbook  to 
THE  National  Gallery.  Including  Notes 
collected  from  the  Works  of  Mr.  Roskin. 
4th  Edit.  Cr.  8vo,  half  morocco.  14J. — 
Large  paper  Edition,  250  copies.  2  vols.  8vo. 


ASTRONOMY— BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


OELAMOTTE(Prof.  P.  H.).-A  Beginner's 

Drawing-Book.    Cr.  8vo.    3*.  6rf. 
&LI.IS  (Tristram).— Sketching  fkom    Na- 

TORE.      Illustr.  by  H.  StACY  MARKS,  R.A., 

«nd  the  Author.    2nd  Edit.    Cr.  8vo.    31.  6d. 
FLORY(M.  A.).— A  Book  about  Fans.    Ex. 
Cr.  8vo.    loi.  6d. 

MAMERTON  (P.  G.).— Thodghts  aboot 
Art.     New  Edit.    Cr.  8vo.    8j.  6rf. 

HOOPER  (W.  H.)and  PHILLIPS  (W.  C  ).- 
A  Manual  of  Marks  on  Potterv  and 
Porcelain.    2nd  Edit.    lemo.    4s.  td. 

HUNT  (W.).— Talks  about  Art.  With  > 
Letter  from  Sir  J.  E.  Millais,  Bart.,  R.A. 
Cr.  8vo.    3j.  6rf.- 

HUTCHINSON  (G.  W.  C.).— Some  Hints 
on  Learning  to  Draw.    Roy.  8vo.    8j.  6rf. 

LA  FAROE  (J.) — Considerations  ON  Paint- 
ing.   Cr.  8vo.    6s.  net. 

LAURIE  (A.  P.).— Facts  about  Processes, 
Pigment  s,  and  Vehicles.  Cr.  8vo.  3J.  net. 

LECTURES  ON  ART.  By  Regd.  Stuart 
Poole,  Professor  W.  B.  Richmond,  E.  J. 
Povnter,  R.A.,  J.  T.  Micklethwaite, 
and  William  Morris.    Cr.  3vo.    41.  tJ. 

NEWTON  (Sir  C.  T.).-iSee  Antiquities.) 

PALGRAVE  (Prof.  F.  T.).— EssATS  on  Art. 

Ext.  fcp.  8vo.    6s. 
PATER  (W.).— The  Renaissance:  Studies 

In  Art  and  Poetry.  5th  Edit.  Cr.  8vo.  lot.  6d. 
PENNELL  (Joseph).— Pen  Drawing  and 

Pen  Draughtsmen.     New  and  Enlarged 

Edit., with 400 Illust.  4to Buckram.  42j.net. 
PROPERT  (J.   Lumsden).— A  History  of 

Miniature  Art.    Illustrated.     Super  roy. 

4to.3/.  135.  6d. — Bound  in  vellum.  4/.  14^.  6d. 
SPANTON   (J.    H.).  — Science   and   Art 

Dra  ving.    Svo.    10s.  net. 
TAYLOR  (E.  R.).— Drawing  and  Design. 

Ob.  cr.  Svo.     2; .  6d. 
THOMPSON  (E.).— Studies  in  the  Art 

Anatomy  of  Animals.    Illustrated.    4to. 
[/«  the  Press. 
(BURNER'S    LIBER    STUDIORUM :     A 

Description  and  a  Catalogue.   By  W.  G. 

Rawlinson.    Med.  Svo.    i2f.  6d. 

TYRWHITT  (Rev.  R.  St.  John).— OoR 
Sketching  Club.  5th  Edit  Cr.  Svo.  7f.  6d. 

WARE  (W.  R.).— Modern  Perspective. 
With  Plates.    5th.  Edit.    4to.    21J.  net. 

WYATT  (Sir  M.  Digby).— Fine  Art  I  A 
Sketch  of  its  History,  Theory,  Practice,  and 
Application  to  Industry.     Svo.     5f. 


ASTRONOUT. 

AIRY  (Sir  G.  B.).— Popular  Astronomy. 

Illustrated.    7th  Edit.     Fcp.  Svo.     ^s.  6d. 
——  Gravitation.    An  Elementary  Explana* 

tlon  of  the  Principal  Perturbations  in  the 

Solar  System.    2nd  Edit.     Cr.  Svo.     js.  6d. 
BLAKE    (J.    F.).— Astronomical    Myths. 

With  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.     9f. 
CHEYNE  (C.  H.  H.).— An    Elementary 

Treatise  on  the  Planetary  Theory. 

Cr.  Svo.     7J.  6d. 


CLARK  (L.)  and  SADLER  (H.).— The  Star 

Guide.    Roy.  Svo.    5^. 
CROSSLEY    (E.),    GLEDHILL    Q.),    and 

WILSON  (J.  M.).— A  Handbook  of  Dou- 
ble Stars.    Svo.    21J. 
Corrections  to  the   Handbook   of 

Double  Stars.    Svo.    is. 
GODFRAY     (Hugh).  — An      Elementary 

Treatise  on  the  Lunar  Theory.    2nd 

Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    51. 6d. 
A  Treatise  on  Astronomy,  for  the 

USE  OF  Colleges  AND  Schools.  Svo.  12s.  6d. 
GREGORY  (R.  A.). -The  Planet  Earth. 

Gl.  Svo.    2j. 
L0CKYER(J.  Norman,  F.R.S.).— A  Primer 

OF  Astronomy.    Illustrated.    Pott  Svo.    is. 

-  Elementary  Lessons  in  Astronomy, 
Illustr.     New  Edition.     Fcp.  Svo.     ss.  6d. 

Questions  on  the  same.    By  J.  Forbes 

Robertson.     Fcp.  Svo.     is.  6d. 

The  Chemistry  of  the  Sun.  Illus- 
trated.    Svo.     14J. 

The  Meteoritic  Hypothesis  of  the 

Origin  of  Cosmical  Systems.  Illustrated. 
8vo.     Tjs.  net. 

The  Evolution  of  the  Heavens  and 

THE  Earth.     Illustrated,    Cr.  Svo. 

[/« tk£  Press, 

Star-Gazing  Past  and  Present.  Ex- 
panded from  Notes  with  the  assistance  of 
G.  M.  Seabroke.     Roy.  Svo.     21s. 

LODGE  (O.  J.).— Pioneers  of  Science.  Ex  . 
cr.  Svo.     ts.  6d. 

MILLER  (R.  Kalley).— The  Romance  of 
Astronomy.    2nd  Edit.     Cr.  Svo.    4J.  6d. 

NEWCOMB  (Prof.  Simon).— Popular  As- 
tronomy.   Engravings  and  Maps.   Svo.   iBs. 

ROSCOE— SCHUSTER.    (See  Chemistry.) 

ATLASES. 
(See  also  Geography). 
BARTHOLOMEW   (J.   G.).— Elementary 
School  Atlas.     4to.     is. 

Physical  and  Political  School  Atlas. 

80  maps.     4to.     Bs.  6d.  ;  half  mor.  10s,  6d. 

Library   Reference   Atlas   of  the 

World.  With  Index  to  100,000  places. 
Folio.  52s,  6d.  net.- — Also  in  7  parts,  5; .  net 
each  ;  Geographical  Index,    7s.  6d.  net. 

LABBERTON  (R.  H.).— New  Historical 
Atlas  and  General  History.    4to.    151, 

BIBLE,    (See  under  THEOi.oav,  p.  3S.) 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

A  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  CATALOGUE  OF 
MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S  PUBLICA- 
TIONS, 1843—89.    Med.  Svo.    loi.  net. 

MAYOR  (Prof.  John  E.  B.).— A  Bibliogra- 
phical Clue  to  Latin  Literature.  Cr. 
Svo.     los.  6d. 

RYLAND  (F.).— Chronological  Outlines 
OF  English  Literature.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

SMITH  (Adam). — Catalogue  of  Library. 
Ed.  by  J.  Bonar.    Svo.     7^.  6d.  net. 

WHITCOMB  (L.  S.).— Chronological  Out- 
lines OF  American  Literature.  Intro- 
duction  by  Brander  Matthews.  Cr.  Svo. 
6s.  net. 


BIOGRAPHY. 


BIOGRAPHY. 

(See  also  History.) 
AGASSIZ  (Louis):    Life  and  Correspon 
DENCE.     Ed.    by  E.   C.  Agassiz.     2  vols. 
Cr.  8vo.     i8s. 

Life,  Letters,  and  Works.     By  J. 

Marcou.    2  vols.    8vo.    lyr.  net. 

ALBEMARLE  (Earl  oO-— Fifty  Years  op 

My  Life.  3rd  Edit.,  revised.  Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d. 
ALFRED    THE    GREAT.      By    Thomas 

Hughes.     Cr.  8vo,    6s. 
AMIEL(H.F.)-The Journal Intime.  Trans. 

Mrs.  Humphry  Ward.  2nd  Ed.  Cr.  8vo.  6s. 
ANDREWS  (Dr.  Thomas).    (See  Phvsics.) 
ARNAULD      (Angelique).       By     Frances 

Martin.    Cr.  8vo.    4s.  6d. 
ARTEVELDE.      James    and    Philip   van 

Artevelde.  By  W.  J.  Ashley,  Cr.  8vo.  6j. 
BACON  (Francis) :  An  Account  of  his  Life 

and  Works.    By  E.  A.  Abbott.    8vo.    14J. 
BAKER  (Sir.  S.  W.).— A  Memoir.     By  T. 

Douglas  Murray  and  A.  Silva  White. 

8vo.       2IJ'. 

BARNARD  (F.  A.  P.).— Memoirs.  By  John 
P'uLiDN.    8vo.     14.?.  net. 

BARNES.  Life  of  William  Barnes,  Poet 
and  Philologist.  By  his  Daughter,  Lucy 
Baxter  (*'  Leader  Scott ").    Cr.  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

BERLIOZ  (Hector):  Autobiography  of. 
Trns.  by  R.&  E.Holmes.  2  vols.  Cr.Bvo.  21s. 

BERNARD  (St.).  The  Life  and  Times  of 
St.  Bernard,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux.  By 
J.  C.  MoRisON,  M.A.     Cr.  8vo.     6s. 

BLACKBURNE.  Life  of  the  Right  Hon. 
Francis  Blackburne,  late  Lord  Chancellor 
of  Ireland,  by  his  Son,  Edward  Black- 
burne.    With  Portrait.     8vo.     12s. 

BLAKE.  Life  of  William  Blake.  With 
Selections  from  his  Poems,  etc.  lUustr.  from 
Blake's  own  Works.  By  Alexander  Gil- 
christ.   2  vols.    Med.  Bvo.    4.2s. 

BOLEYN  (Anne):  A  Chapter  of  English 
History,  1527—36.  By  Paul  Friedmann. 
2  vols.     8vo.     28^. 

BROOKE  (Sir  Jas.),  The  Raja  of  Sara- 
wak (Life  of).  By  Gertrude  L.  Jacob. 
2  vols.     8vo.    25i-. 

BURKE.    By  John  Morley.   Globe  8vo.   5s. 

CALLAWAY  (Bishop).— His  Life-History 
and  Work,  By  AL  S.  Benham.  Cr.Bvo.  6s. 

CALVIN.    (See  Select  Biography,  p.  6.) 

CAMPBELL  (Sir  G.)-— Memoirs  of  my  In- 
dian Career.  Edited  by  Sir  C.  E.  Ber- 
nard.    2  vols.     8vo.     21s.  net. 

CARLYLE  (Thomas).  Edited  by  Charles 
E.  Norton.    Cr.  Bvo. 

— —  Reminiscences.    2  vols.    12s. 

Early  Letters,  1814 — 26.    2  vols.    iBj. 

■         Letters,  1826 — 36.    2  vols.     i8j. 

Correspondence     between     Goethe 

AND  CaRLYLE.     QS. 

CARSTARES  (Wm.) :    A  Character  and 

Career  of  the  Revolutionary  Epoch 

(1649— 1715).     By  R.  H.  Story.     8vo.     12s. 

CAVOUR.    (See  Select  Biography,  p.  6.) 

CHURCH  (R.  W.).— Life   and   Letters. 

8vo.     "js.  6d. 


CHATTERTON  :   A  Story  of  the  Year 

1770.  By  Prof.  David  Masson.  Cr.  8vo.  5*. 
A  Biographical  Study.    BySirDANiBL 

Wilson.     Cr.  8vo.     6s.  6d. 
CLARK.     Memorials  from  Journals  and 

Letters  of  Samuel  Clark,  M.A.    Edited 

by  His  Wife.     Cr.  Bvo.     7^.  6d. 
CLOUGH  (A.  H.).    (See  Literature,  p.  24.) 
COLERIDGE  (S.T.):  A  Narrative  of  the 

Events  of  his  Life.    By  J.  D.  Campbell. 

8vo.     los.  6d. 
COMBE.     Life    of    George    Combe.     By 

Charles  Gibbon.     2  vols.     Bvo.    32^. 
CROMWELL.   (See  Select  Biography,  p.  6.) 
DAMIEN  (Father) :  A  Journey  from  Cash- 
mere to  his  Home  in  Hawaii.  By  Edward 

Clifford.     Portrait.    Cr.  Bvo.    2s.  6d. 
DANTE :    and  other  Essays.      By    Dean 

Church.     Globe  8vo.     sj. 
DARWIN  (Charles)  :   Memorial  Notices. 

By  T.  H.  Huxley,   G.  J.   Romanes,  Sir 

Arch.  Geikie,  and  W.  Thiselton  Dyer. 

With  Portrait.     Cr.  Bvo.     2s.  6d. 
DEAK  (Francis):   Hungarian  Statesman. 

A  Memoir.     8vo.     12s.  6d, 
DRUMMOND  OF  HAWTHORNDEN.  By 

Prof.  D.  Masson.     Cr.  Bvo.     loj.  6d. 
EADIE.     Life  of  John  Eadie,  D.D.     By 

James  Brown,  D.D.     Cr.  Bvo.     -^s.  6d. 
ELLIOTT.    Life   of   H.    V.   Elliott,  of 

Brighton.     By  J.  Bateman.    Cr.Bvo.    6*, 
EMERSON.    Life  of  Ralph  Waldo  Emer- 
son.   By  J.  L.  Cabot.   2  vols.    Cr.  8vo.    i8x, 
ENGLISH   MEN   OF  ACTION.    Cr.  8vo. 
With  Portraits.     2s.  6d.  each. 

Campbell  (Colin).    By  A.  Forbes. 

Clive.     By  Colonel  Sir  Charles  Wilson. 

Cook  (Captain).     By  Walter  Besant. 

Dampier.     By  W.  Clark  Russell. 

Drake.     By  Julian  Corbett. 

Dundonald.     By  Hon.  J.  W.  Fortescce. 

Gordon  (General).  By  Col.  Sir  W.  Butler. 

Hastings  (Warren).     By  Sir  A.  Lyall. 

Havelock  (Sir  Henry).     By  A.  Forbes. 

Henry  V.    By  Rev.  A.  J.  Church. 

Lawrence  (Lord).     By  Sir  Rich.  Temple. 

Livingstone.     By  Thomas  Hughes. 

Monk.     By  Julian  Corbett. 

Montrose.    By  Mowbray  Morris. 

Napier  (Sir  Chas.).    By  Sir  W.  Butler. 

Nelson.     By  J.  K.  Laughton. 

Peterborough.     By  W.  Stebbing. 

Rodney.     By  David  Hannay. 

Strafford.    By  H.  D.  Traill. 

Warwick,  the  King-Maker.     By  C.  W. 
Oman. 

Wellington.     By  George  Hooper. 

Wolfe.    By  A.  G.  Bradley. 
ENGLISH  MEN  OF  LETTERS.    Ed.  by 
John  Morley.    Cr.  Bvo.    ts.  6d.  ;  swd.  is. 

Addison.     By  W.  J.  Courthope. 

Bacon      By  Dean  Church. 

Bentley.     By  Prof.  Jebb. 

Bunyan.    By  J.  A.  Froude. 

Burke.     By  John  Morley, 

Burns.     By  Principal  Shairp. 

BvRON.     By  John  Nichol. 

Carlyle.     By  John  Nichol. 

Chaucer.     By  Prof.  A.  W.  WiRD. 

Coleridge.     By  H.  D.  Traill. 

Cowper.     By  GoLDwiN  Smith. 


BIOGRAPHY. 


ENGLISH  MEN  OF  LETTERS-c^w;^^. 

Defoe.     By  W.  Minto. 

De  Quincey.     By  Prof.  Masson. 

Dickens.     By  A.  W.  Ward. 

Dryden.     By  G.  Saintsburv. 

Fielding.     By  Austin  Dobson. 

Gibbon.    By  J.  Cotter  Morison. 

Goldsmith.     By  William  Black. 

Gray.     By  Edmund  Gosse. 

Hawthorne.     By  Henry  James. 

Hume.     By  T.  H.  Huxley. 

Johnson.     By  Leslie  Stephen. 

Keats.     By  Sidney  Colvin. 

Lamb.     By  Rev.  Alfred  Ainger. 

Landor.     By  Sidney  Colvin. 

Locke.     By  Prof.  Fowler.. 

Macaulay.     By  J.  Cotter  Morison. 

Milton.     By  Mark  Pattison. 

Pope,     By  Leslie  Stephen. 

Scott.     By  R.  H.  Hutton. 

Shelley.     By  J.  A.  Symonds. 

Sheridan.     By  Mrs.  Oliphant-. 

Sidney.     By  J.  A.  Symonds. 

SouTHEY.     By  Prof.  Dow  den. 

Spenser.     By  Dean  Church. 

Sterne     By  H.  D.  Traill. 

Swift.    By  Leslie  Stephen. 

Thackeray.     By  Anthony  Trollops. 

Wordsworth,     By  F.  W.  H.  Myers. 
ENGLISH  MEN  OF  LETTERS.     Reissue 

in  13  vols.     Cr.  8vo.     3J.  6d.  each. 

Vol.    I.     Chaucer,  Spenser,  Dryden. 

Vol.  II.     Milton,  Goldsmith,  Cowper. 

Vol.  III.     Byron,  Shelley,  Keats. 

Vol.  IV.  Wordsworth,  Southey,  Landor. 

Vol.  V.     Lamb,  Addison,  Swift. 

Vol.  VI.    Scott,  Burns,  Coleridge. 

Vol.  VII.     Hume,  Locke,  Burke. 

Vol.  VIII.    Defoe,  Sterne,  Hawthorne. 

Vol.  IX.   Fielding,  Thackeray,  Dickens. 

Vol.  X.     Gibbon,  Carlyle,  Macaulay. 

Vol.  XI.    Sidney,  De  Quincey,  Sheridan, 

Vol.  XII.     Pope,  Johnson,  Gray. 

Vol.  XIII.     Bacon,  Bunyan,  Bentley. 
ENGLISH       STATESMEN,       TWELVE. 
Cr.  8vo.     2J.  6d.  each.. 

William  the  Conqueror.    By  Edward 
A.  Freeman,  D.C.L.,  LL.D. 

Henry  II.     By  Mrs.  J.  R.  Green. 

Edward  I.     By  T.  F.  Tout,  M.A. 

Henry  VII,     By  James  Gairdner. 

Cardinal  Wolsey.    By  Bp.  Creighton. 

Elizabeth.     By  E.  S.  Beesly. 

Oliver  Cromwell.     By  F.  Harrison. 

William  III.     By  H.  D.  Traill. 

Walpole.     By  John  Morley. 

Chatham.  By  John  Morley.         [InPrrp. 

Pitt.     By  Lord  Rosebery. 

Peel.     By  J.  R.  Thursfield. 
FAIRFAX.     Ltfe  of  Robert  Fairfax  of 

Steeton,    Vice-Admiral,     Alderman,    and 

Member  for  York,  a.d.  1666-1723.     By  Cle- 
ments R.  Markham,  C.B.     8vo.     12J.  td. 
FITZGERALD  (E.).  (6'wLiteratdrf  p.  25.) 
FORBES  (Edward) :  Memoir  of.  By  George 
Wilson,  M.P.,  and  Sir  Archibald  Geikie, 
F.R.S.,etc.    8vo.     14*. 
FORBES-MITCHELL(W.)-Reminiscences 

of  the  Great  Mutiny.    Cr,  8vo,    3J.  6d. 
FOREIGN    STATESMEN.      Crown    8vo. 

2f ,  €>d.  each. 

Richelieu.    By  R.  Lodge,  M.A 

Philip  Augustus.  ByRev.W.H.  Hutton. 


FRANCIS  OF  ASSISI.  By  Mrs.  Oliphant. 
Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

FRASER.  James  Fraser,  Second  Bishop 
OF  Manchester  ;  A  Memoir.  By  T. 
Hughes.     Cr.  Bvo.    6j. 

FREEMAN  (E.  A.).— Life  and  Letters. 
By  W,  R.W.Stephens.  2  vols.  8vo.  17^- net. 

GOETHE:  Life  of.  By  Prof.  Heinrics 
DOntzer.  Translated  by  T.  W.  Lyster. 
2  vols.     Cr.  8vo.     21J. 

GORDON  (General) :  A  Sketch.  By  Regi- 
nald H.  Barnes.    Cr.  8vo.     is. 

Letters  of  General  C.  G.  Gordon  to 

HIS  Sister,  M.  A.  Gordon.    Cr.  8vo.    3^.6^, 

HANDEL :  Life  of.  By  W.  S.  Rockstro. 
Cr.  8vo.     loj.  6d. 

HAUSER,  KASPAR  :  True  Story  of.  By 
the  Duchess  OF  Cleveland.  Cr.Svo.  ^s.6d. 

HIGINBOTHAM  (Chief  Justice).— Life  of. 
By  E.  E   Morris.    Ex.  cr.  8vo.    gj. 

HOBART.    {See  Collected  Works,  p.  26.) 

HODGSON.  Memoir  of  Rev.  Francis 
Hodgson,  B.D.  By  his  Son,  Rev.  James  T. 
Hodgson,  M.A,    2  vols.    Cr.  Bvo.     xZs. 

HORT  (F.  J.  A.).— Life  and  Letters.  By 
His  Son.    2  vols.    8vo.    17J.  net. 

JEVONS  (W.  Stanley).— Letters  and  Jour- 
nal.   Edited  by  HiS  Wife.     Bvo.     14J. 

KAVANAGH  (Rt.  Hon.  A.  McMurrough) ;  A 
Biography.  ^  From  papers  chiefly  unpub- 
lished, compiled  by  his  Cousin,  Sarah  L. 
Steele.    With  Portrait.    8vo.     14J.  net. 

KINGSLEY(Chas.):  His  Letters,  and  Me- 
mories of  his  Life.  Edit,  by  His  Wife.  2 
vols.    Cr.  Bvo.    I2J.— Cheap  Edit,    i  vol.    6j. 

LAMB.  The  Life  of  Charles  Lamb.  By 
Rev.  Alfred  Ainger,  M.A.  Globe  Bvo.  51. 

LETHBRIDGE(Sir  R.).— Golden  Book  of 
India.     Royal  8vo.    40J. 

LIGHTFOOT.  Bishop  Lightfoot.  Re- 
printed  from  Quarterly Revieiv.  Cr.  Bvo,  3*.  dd. 

LOUIS  (St.).    {See  Select  Biography,  p.  6.) 

MACMILLAN  (D.).     Memoir  of  Daniel 

Macmillan.     By  Thomas  Hughes,  Q.C. 

With    Portrait.     Cr.    8vo.     4J.  6^/.— Cheap 

Edition.     Cr.  Bvo,  sewed.     \s. 

MALTHUS  AND  HIS  WORK.   By  James 

BoNAR.      Bvo.      Z2J.  fid, 

MANNING  (Cardinal):  Life    of.    By  E.  S. 

PuRCELL.    2  vols.    3rd  Edit.    Svo.    30J.  net. 
MAURICE.    Life  of  Frederick  Denison 

Maurice.   By  his  Son,  F.  Maurice.    2  vols. 

Bvo.    36J. — Popular  bd.   2  vols.   Cr,  Bvo.  i6j. 
MAXWELL.    Professor  Clerk  Maxwell, 

A  Life  of.    By  Prof.  L.  Campbell,  M.A., 

and  W.  Garnett,  M.A.  Cr.  Svo.  7*.  td. 
MAZZINI.  {S&e  Select  Biography,  p.  6.) 
MELBOURNE,      Memoirs    of    Viscount 

Melbourne.    By  W.  M.  Torrens.    With 

Portrait.     2nd  Edit.     2  vols.     Svo.     32J. 
MILTON.      The  Life  of   John   Milton. 

By  Prof.   David  Masson.    Vol.   I.,  21J, ; 

Vol.   II,  i6j.  ;   Vol.    III.,  iSj.  ;  Vols.  IV. 

and   v.,    32J. ;    Vol.    VI.,    with    Portrait, 

21J. ;  Index  to  6  vols.,  its.     (See  also  p.  18.) 
MILTON  :  Johnson's  Life  of.    Introduction 

and  Notes  by  K.  Deighton.  G1.  Bvo.  zs.qd. 


BIOGRAPHY. 


BIOGKAPUY— continued. 
NAPOLEON  I.  :  History  of.     By  P.  Lan- 

FREV.     4  vols.     Cr.  8vo.     30J. 
NELSON.      SouTHEv's  Life  of    Nelson. 

With  Introduction  and  Notes  by  Michael 

Macmillan,  B.A.    Globe  8vo.    3^.  6d. 
NEWMAN  (Cardinal):  The  Anglican  Ca- 
reer of.  By  E.  A.  Abbott,  2  vols.  25j-.net. 
NORTH  (M. J.— Recollections  of  a  Happy 

LiFB.  Heine  the  Autobiography  of  Marianne 

North.    Ed.  by  Mrs.  J.  A  Symonds.    and 

Edit.     2  vols.     Ex.  cr.  8vo.     17J.  net. 
Some   Further  Recollections  of  a 

Happy  Life.    Cr.  8vo.    8s.  6d.  net. 
OXFORD  MOVEMENT,   THE,  1833—45 

By  Dean  Church.     GI.  8vo.     5^. 
PARKER(W.  K.)— ABiographjcalSketch 

By  His  Son.    Cr.  8vo.    4s.  net. 
PARKES  (Sir  Harry)  :  Life  of.     Edited  by 

S.  Lane-Poole  and  F.  V.  Dickins.    2  vols. 

Bvo.     25^.  net. 
PATTESON.     Life  and  Letters  of  John 

Coleridge  Patteson,  D.D.,  Missionary 

Bishop.    By  C.  M.  Yonge.    z  vols.    Cr.  8vo. 

I2J.   (See  also  under  Awdrv,  p.  48.) 
PATTISON(M.).— Memoirs.  Cr.Svo.  8f.6rf. 
PITT.    {See  Select  Biography.) 
POLLOCK  (Sir  Frdk. ,  2nd  Bart.).— Personal 

Remembrances.    2  vols.    Cr.  8vo.     i6j. 
POOLE,   THOS.,  AND    HIS    FRIENDS. 

By  Mrs.  Sandford.   and  edit.    Cr.  Bvo.    ts. 
RAMSAY  (Sir  A.  C):   Life  of.     By  Sir  A. 

Geikie,  F.R.S.    8vo.    12j-.6flf.net. 
RENAN  (Ernest) :    In  Memoriam.     By  Sir 

M.  E.  Grant  Duff.     Cr.  8vo.    ts. 
ROBINSON  (Matthew) :  Autobiography  of. 

Edited  by  J.  E.  B.  Mayor.    Fcp.  8vo.    5^- 
ROSSETTI  (Dante  Gabriel)  :  A  Record  and 

A  Study.    By  W.  Sharp.    Cr.  8vo.    loj.  td. 
RUMFORD.  (^'ti  Collected  Works,  p.  28  ) 

SCHILLER,  Life  OF.  By  Prof.  H.  DOntzer. 

Transl  byP.  E.  PiNKERTON.  Cr.Svo.  ioj.6rf. 
SELBORNE  (Earl  of).— Family  and  Per- 
sonal Memorials,  1766 — 1865.    With  Por- 
traits.   2  vols.    8vo.  [/«  the  Press, 
SHELBURNE.     Life  of  William,  Earl 
OF  Shelburne.     By  Lord  Edmond  Fitz- 
maurice.     In  3  vols. — Vol.  I.     8vo.     12J. — 
Vol.  n.     8vo.     iM.— Vol.  III.     Bvo.     i6x. 
SIBSON.    {See  Medicine.) 
SMETHAM  (Jas,)  :  Letters  of.      Ed.  by 
Sarah  Smetham  and  W.  Davies.  Portrait. 
Globe  8vo.     s-^* 
SMITH(Adam.):  Lifeof.    ByJ.RAE.    8vo. 

i2.r.  6d.  net. 
SPINOZA:  A  Study.  By  Dr.  J.  Martineau. 

Cr.  Bvo.     dr. 
SWIFT :  Life  or.    Edit,  by  H.  Craik,  C.B. 

2  vols.    Gl.  8vo.    10s. 
TAIT.    The  Life  of  Archibald  Campbell 
Tait,   Archbishop  of  Canterbury.     By 
the  Bishop  of  Winchester  and  Rev.  W. 
Benham,  B.D.    2  vols.     Cr.  8vo.    loj.  net. 

Catharine     and     Crawfurd    Tait, 

Wife  and  Son  of  Archibald  Campbell, 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury:  A  Memoir. 
Ed.  by  Rev.  W.  Benham,  B.D.  Cr.  Bvo.  ts. 
—Popular  Edit.,  abridged.     Cr.Bvo.     2s.  td. 


IHRING  (Edward):  A  Memory  of.  By 
J.  H.  Skrine.     Cr.  Bvo.     ts. 

VICTOR  EMMANUEL  II.,  FIRST  KING 
OF  ITALY.  By  G.  S.  Godkin.  Cr.Bvo.  6*. 

WARD.  William  George  Ward  and  th» 
Oxford  Movement.  By  his  Son,  Wilfrid 
Ward.     With  Portrait.     8vo.     14J. 

William  George  Ward  and  the  Catho- 
lic Revival.     By  the  same.    8vo.     14J. 

WATSON.  A  Record  of  Ellen  Watson. 
By  Anna  Buckland.     Cr.  Bvo.     ts. 

WHEWELL.  Dr.  William  Whewell,  late 
Master  of  Trinity  College^  Cambridge.  An 
Account  of  his  Writings,  with  Selections  from 
his  Literary  and  Scientific  Correspondence, 
By  I.  ToDHUNTER,  M.A.    2  vols.    Bvo.   25* 

WILLIAMS  (Montagu).— Leaves  of  a  Lipe 
Cr.  8vo.    3J.  td. 

Later  Leaves.  Being  further  Reminis- 
cences.   With  Portrait.     Cr.  8vo.     y.  td. 

Round  London,  down  East  and  op 

West.    Cr.  8vo.     3^.  td. 

WILSON.  Memoir  of  Prof.  George  Wil» 
son,  M.D.  By  His  Sister.  With  Portrait. 
2nd  Edit.     Cr.  Bvo.     ts. 

WORDSWORTH  DoveCottage,  Words- 
worth's Home  1800 — 8.    Gl.  Bvo,  swd.    I*. 

Select  Biography. 

BIOGRAPHIES  OF  EMINENT  PER- 
SONS.    4  vols      Cr.  8vo.     3J.  td.  each. 

FARRAR  (Archdeacon).  — Seekers  aftbh 
God.     Cr.  8vo.     3J.  td. 

FAWCETT  (Mrs.  H.).  —  Some  Eminent 
Women  of  our  Times.     Cr.  Bvo     2s.  td, 

GUIZOT.— Great  Christians  of  France  i 
St.  Louis  and  Calvin.    Cr.  8vo.    6*. 

HARRISON  (Frederic).— The  New  Calen- 
dar of  Great  Men.    Ex. cr.  8vo.   7S.td.Tit.U 

LODGE  (O.  J.).— Pioneers  of  Science. 
Cr.  Bvo.     7s.  td. 

MARRIOTT  (J.  A.  R.).— The  Makers  of 
Modern  Italy:  Mazzini,  Cavodr,  Gari- 
baldi.   Cr.  Bvo.    IS.  td. 

MARTINEAU  (Harriet).  —  Biographical 
Sketches,  1852 — 75.    Cr.  Bvo.     ts. 

NEW  HOUSE  OF  COMMONS,  JULY. 
iBps.    Reprinted  from  the  Times.    i6mc.    ii. 

RITCHIE  (Mrs.).— Records  of  Tennyson, 
RusKiN,  AND  Browning.     Globe  8vo.    5*. 

Chapters      from     Some     Memoirs. 

Cr.  Bvo.     loj.  td. 

SMALLEY    (G.    W.).— Studies    of    Men. 

Cr.  Bvo     8j.  td  net. 
SMITH(Gold  win).— Three  EnglishStates- 

men  :  Cromwell,  Pym,  Pitt.    Cr.  Bvo.   5*. 
STEVENSON  (F.  S.).— Historic  Person- 

ality.    Cr.  Bvo.     4J.  6d. 
THORPE  (T.  E.).— Essays  in  Historical 

Chemistry.     Cr.  Bvo.     8j.  td.  net. 
WINKWORTH     (Catharine).  —  Christiah 

Singers  of  Germany.     Cr.  Bvo.    4*.  td, 
YONGE  (Charlotte  M.).— The  Pupils  of  St 

John.     Illustrated.    Cr.  Bvo.    ts. 

Pioneers  and  Founders  ;  or,  Recent 

Workers  in  the  Mission  Field.    O.  Bvo.     6f. 

A  Book  OF  Worthies.  Pott  Bvo.  ■zs.ftd.nct, 

A  Book  of  Golden  Deeds.    Pott  8vo. 

M.td.  net. — Globe  Readings  Edition.  Globe 
Bvo.    2^. — Abridged  Edition.    Pott  8vo.    1*. 


BIOLOGY— BOTANY. 


BIOLOGY. 

{S^e  also  Botany  ;  Natural  History  ; 
Physiology;  Zoology.) 

BALFOUR  (F.  M.).-Comparative  Em- 
bryology. Illustrated.  2  vols.  8vo.  Vol.  I. 
i8j.    Vol.  II.    21J. 

BALL  (W.  P.).— Ars  the  Effects  of  Use 
AND  Disuse  Inherited?   Cr.  8vo.    -^s.td. 

BATESON  (W.), — Materials  for  the 
Study  of  Variation.  lUustr.  8vo.  2if.net. 

BERNARD  (H.  M.).— The  Apodidae.  Cr. 
8vo.     7J.  6d. 

BIRKS  (T.  R.).— Modern  Physical  Fa- 
talism,  and  the  Doctrine  of  Evolution. 
Including  an  Examination  of  Mr.  Herbert 
Spencer's  "  First  Principles."    Cr.  8vo.     6*. 

CALDERWOOD  (H.).  —  Evolution  and 
Man's  Place  in  Nature.  2nd  Edit.  8vo. 
I  Of.  net. 

DE  VARIGNY  (H.).— Experimental  Evo- 
lution.    Cr.  Bvo.     5J. 

EIMER  (G.  H.  T.).— Organic  Evolution 
as  the  Result  of  the  Inheritance  of 
Acquired  Characters  according  to  the 
Laws  of  Organic  Growth.  Translated  by 
J.  T,  Cunningham,  M.A.     Bvo.     laj.  td. 

FISKE  (John). — Outlines  of  Cosmic  Philo- 
sophy, BASED  ON  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  EVO- 
LUTION.    2  vols.     8vo.     25J. 

- —  Man's  Destiny  Viewed  in  the  Light 
OF  HIS  Origin.    Cr.  8vo.    3*.  6d. 

FOSTER  (Prof.  M.)  and  BALFOUR  (F.  M.). 
—The  Elements  of  Embryology.  Ed.  A, 
Sedgwick,  and  Walter  Hsape.  Illust  3rd 
Edit. ,  revised  and  enlarged.   Cr.  8vo.   xoi .  td, 

HUXLEY  (T.  H.)  and  MARTIN  (H.  N.).— 
{See  under  Zoology,  p.  49.) 

KLEIN  (Dr.  E.).— Micro-Organisms  and 
Disease.     3rd  Edit.    Cr.  8vo.     ts. 

LANKESTER  (Prof.  E.  Ray).— Compara- 
tive Longevity  in  m!an  and  the  Lowex 
Animals.     Cr.  8vo.     4J.  td. 

LUBBOCK  (Sir  John,  BartJ.  —  Scientific 
Lectures.  Illustrated.  2nd  Edit.  Bvo.  8f.  td, 

MURPHY  (J.  J.).— Natural  Selection. 
Gl.  Bvo.     5J. 

ORR  (H.  B.).— Development  and  Here- 
dity.   Cr.  8vo.     6j.  net. 

OSBORN  (H.  F.).— From  the  Greeks  to 
Darwin.     8vo.     qs.  net. 

PARKER  (T.  Jeffery).— Lessons  in  Ele- 
mentary Biology.  lUustr.  Cr.  Bvo.  los.td. 

ROMANES  (G.  J.).— Scientific  Evidences 
of  Organic  Evolution.    Cr.  Bvo.    2*.  td. 

WALLACE  (Alfred  R.)-- Darwinism  :  An 
Exposition  of  the  Theory  of  Natural  Selec- 
tion.    Illustrated.    3rd  Edit.     Cr.  Bvo.     9*. 

Contributions    to    the   Theory    of 

Natural  Selection,  and  Tropical  Na- 
ture: and  other  Essays.  New  Ed.  Cr.Svo.  6*. 

The  Geographical  Distribution  of 

Animals.     Illustrated.    2  vols.    3vo.    42*. 

— r  Island  Ljfe.    Illustr.   Ext.  Cr.  Bvo.    6j. 
,  WILLEY(A.). — Amphioxos,  and  the  Ances- 
try of  the  Vertebrates.  8vo.  ioj.6(/,net. 

BIRDS.    {See  Zoology;  Ornithology.) 


BOOK-KEEFINa. 

THORNTON  (J.).— First  Lessons  in  Book- 
keeping.    New  Edition.    Cr.  Bvo.    2*.  td, 

Key.    Oblong  4to.     icw.  td. 

' Exercise  Books  to  First  Lessons  in 

Bookkeeping. 

No.  I.  For  Lessons  I.— IX.    g^. 
No.  2.  For  Test  Exercises,    gd. 
No.  3.  For  Test  Exercises,    is.  Sd. 
No.  4.  For  Lessons  XIII.  and  XIV.    is.Sd. 
Case  to  contain  all  the  above,  td.    Complete 
set  with  case,  $s. 
No.  5.  Condensed  Edition  for  Working 
OUT  a  Selection  on  all  the  Lessons.  2s. 
No.  6.  Journal,    ^d. 

Examination  Papers  in  Bookkeeping,  gd. 
Key  to  Examination  Papers,    zs. 
Primer  OF  Book-keeping.  Pott  Bvo,  ij. 

Key.    Demy  8vo.     2f.  td. 

Exercise  Books  to  Primer  of  Book- 
keeping. 

Part  I.  Ledger  ;  Part  II.  Journal.    The 
Set,  Tj. 

—-  Exercises  in  Book-keeping.  Pott  Bvo.  u. 

-  Manual  of  Book-keeping.  Gl.  Bvo. 
•js.  td. 

BOTANY. 

{See  also  Agriculture;   Gardening.) 
ALLEN    (Grant).  —  On    the    Colours    ok 

Flowers.    Illustrated.    Cr.  Bvo.    3^.  td. 
ATKINSON  (G.  F.).— Biology  of  Ferns. 

Bvo.     Zs.  td.  net. 
BALFOUR  (Prof.  J.  B.)  and  WARD  (Prof. 

H.    M.).  —  A    General    Text-Book    ok 

Botany.    Bvo.  [/« preparaiioh , 

BETTANY  (G.  T.).— First  Lessons  in  Prac- 

TiCAL  Botany.    Pott  Bvo.     is. 

BOWER  (Prof.  F.  O.).— A  Course  of  Prac 
TICAL  Instruction  in  Botany.  Cr.  3vt. 
zof .  td. 

Practical    Botany  for    Beginners. 

Gl.  Bvo.    35.  td. 

CAMPBELL(Prof.D,H.).— Structure  and 

Development    of    Mosses    and    Ferns. 

Illustrated.    8vo.    z^s.  net. 
GRAY  (Prof.  Asa).— Structural  BoTAm- ; 

or.   Organography  on   the    Basis    of    Mci 

phology.    Bvo.    loj.  td. 

The  Scientific  Papers  of  Asa  Gray. 

Selected  by  C.  S.  Sargent.  2  vols.  8vo,  «n. 

HANBURY    (Daniel).  —  Science    Papbm, 

chiefly  Pharmacological  and  Botahi- 

CAL.     Med.  8vo.     14^. 
HARTIG  (Dr.  Robert).— Text-Book  of  thb 

Diseases  of  Trees     Transl.  by  Prof.  Wm. 

Somerville,  B.Sc.    Introduction  by  Prof. 

H.  Marshall  Ward.    8vo.    ios.  net. 
HOOKER  (Sir  Joseph  D.).— The  Student's 

Flora    of   the    British    Islands.      jjd 

Edit.    Globe  Bvo.     los.  td. 

A  Primer  of  Botany.    Pott  8vo.     u. 

LASLETT  (Thomas).— Timber  and  Timper 

Trees,  Native  and  Foreign.    2nd  Ed. 

Revised  by  H.   Marshall  Ward,  D.Sc. 

Cr.  Bvo.    8j.  td. 
LUBBOCK  (Sir  John,  Bart.).— On  British 

Wild  Flowers  considered  in  Relation 

TO  Insects.     Illustrated.    Cr.  8vo.    4J.  td. 

Flowers,  Fruits,  and  Leaves.    Wl.b 

Illustrations.    Cr.  8vo.    41.  td^ 


BOTANY— CHEMISTRY. 


BOTANY— ccnitnued. 
MCLLER— THOMPSON.  — The    Fertili- 

SATioN  OF  Flowers.    By  Prof.  H.  MOllbk. 

Transl.  by  D'Arcy  W.  Thompson.     Preface 

by  Charles  Darwin,  F.R.S.     8vo.    21s. 
MURRAY  (G.)- — Introduction  to  Study 

OF  Seaweeds.    Cr.  8vo.    -js.  td. 
NISBET  (J.).— British  Forest  Trees  and 

THEIR     SylVICULTORAL     CHARACTERISTICS 

AND  Treatment.     Cr.  8vo.     6s,  net. 
OLIVER  (Prof.  Daniel).— Lessons  in  Ele- 

MENTARY  BOTANY.    lUuStr.    Fcp.  8vO.    ^.td. 

First  Book  of  Indian  Botany.  Illus- 
trated.    Ext.  fcp.  8vo.     6s.  6d. 

PETTIGREW  (J.  Bell).— The  Physiology 
o?  the  Circulation  in  Plants,  in  the 
Lower  Animals,  and  in  Man.     8vo.    lai 

SMITH,  (J.). — Economic  Plants,  Diction- 
ary OF  Popular  Names  of  ;  Their  His- 
tory, Products,  and  Uses.    8vo.    145. 

SMITH  (W.  G.).— Diseases  of  Field  and 
Garden  Crops,  chiefly  such  as  are 
caused  bv  Fungi.   lUust.   Fcp.  8vo-   4*.  td. 

VINES  (S.  H.J  and  KINCH  (E.).— Manual 
OF  Vegetablf  Physiologv.  Illustrated. 
Crown  8vo.  [In  PreParatton. 

WARD  (Prof.  H.  M.).— Timber  and  some  of 
its  Diseases.     Illustrated.     Cr.  8vo.     6i. 

YONGE(C.  M.).— The  Herb  of  the  Field. 
New  Edition,  revised.     Cr.  Svo.     51, 

BREWING. 

PASTEUR  — FAULKNER.  — Studies  on 
Fermentation  :  The  Diseases  of  Beer, 
THEIR  Causes,  and  the  means  of  pre- 
venting them.  By  L.  Pasteur.  Trans- 
lated by  Frank  Faulkner.    Svo.    21*. 

CHEMISTRY. 

{See  also  Metallurgy.) 

BEHRENS  (H.).— MicRocHEMicAL  Analy- 
sis.   Cr.  Svo.    6j. 

BRODI E  (Sir  Benjamin).  —Ideal  Chemistry. 
Cr.  Svo.     IS. 

COHEN  (J.  B.).  —  The  Owens  College 
Course  of  Practical  Organic  Chemis- 
try.    Fcp.  Svo.     2J.  6d. 

COMEY(A.  M.).— Dictionary  of  Chemical 
Solubilities.    Svo.    155.  net. 

COOKE  (Prof.  J.  P.,  jun.).— Principles  of 
Chemical  Philosophy.  New  Ed.  Svo.  igj. 

DOBBIN  (L.)and  WALKER  Qas.).— Chemi- 
Cal  Theory  for  Beginners.      Pott  Svo. 

FLEISCHER  (Emil).— A  System  of  Volo- 
METRIC  Analysis.  Transl.  with  Additions, 
byM.  M.P.  MuiR.F.R.S.E.  Cr.Svo.  ^s.6d. 

FRANKLAND  (Prof.  P.  F.).  (^«  Agri- 
culture.) 

GLADSTONE  Q.  H.)  and  TRIBE  (A.).- 
The  Chemistry  of  the  Secondary  Bat- 
teries OF pLANTft  and  Faure.  Cr.Svo.  ^sAid. 

HARTLEY  (Prof.  W.  N.).— A  Course  op 

8DANTITATIVE  Analysis   for  Students. 
lobe  Svo.     5J. 
HEMPEL   (Dr.    W.).  —  Methods    of    Gas 
Analysis.     Translated  by  L.  M.  Dennis. 
Cr.  Svo.     ^s.  td. 


HOFMANN  (Prof.  A.  W.).— The  Life  Work 
of  Liebig  in  Experimental  and  Philo- 
sophic Chemistry.     Svo.     v- 

JONES  (Francis).— The  Owens  College 
Junior  Course  of  Practical  Chemistrv. 
Illustrated.     Fcp.  Svo.     2^.  td, 

-  Questions  ON  Chemistry.  Ecp.Svo.  31. 
LANDAUER    (J.).  —  Blowpipe    Analysis. 

Translated  by  J.  Taylor.     Gl.  Svo.    4^.  td. 
LASSAR  -  COHN.  —  Organic     Chemistry. 

Transl.  by  A.  Smith.    Cr.  Svo.    %s.  td. 
LOCKYER    (J.     Norman,    F.R.S.).  —  The 

Chemistry  of  the  Sun.    Illustr.   Svo.   141. 
LUPTON    (S.).  —  Chemical    Arithmetic. 

With  1200  Problems.     Fcp.  Svo.     4J.  td. 
MANSFIELD  (C.  B.).— A  Theory  of  Salts. 

Cr.  Svo.     14J-. 
MELDOLA  (Prof.  R.).— The  Chemistry  of 

Photography.     Illustrated.     Cr.  Svo.     6j. 
MENSCHUTKIN  (A.). —Analytical  Che- 
mistry.   Trsl-  by  J.  Locke.    Svo.    17^.  net. 
MEYER  (E.  von).— History  of  Chemistry 

from  Earliest  Times  to  the  Present 

Day.    Transl.  G.  McGowan.    Svo.    14J.  net. 
MIXTER  (Prof.  W.  G.).— An  Elementary 

Text-Book  of  Chemistry.  Cr.  Svo.  ^s.  td. 
MUIR  (M.  M.  p.). — Practical  Chemistry 

for  M  edical  Students  (First  M.  B.  Course). 

Fcp.  Svo.     15.  td. 
MUIR  (M.  M.  P.)  and  WILSON  (D.  M.).- 

Elements  of  Thermal  Chemistry,  xzs.td. 
NERNST  (Dr.).— Theoretical  Chemistry. 

Translated  by  C.  S.  Palmer.    8vo.    15J.  net. 
OSTWALD  (Prof.).— Outlines  of  General 

Chemistry.  Tran.'-l.Dr.  J.  Walker,  rof.net. 
Manual  of  Physico-Chemical  Mea- 
surements.    Transl.  by  Dr.  J.  Walker. 

Svo.     75.  net. 
Analytical  Chemistry.    Translated  by 

G.  Mc  GowAN.    Cr.  Svo.    5J.  net. 
RAMSAY  (Prof.  William).— Experimental 

Proofs  of  Chemical  Theory  for  Begin- 
ners.    Pott  8vo.     2J.  td. 
Gases  of  the  Atmosphere.    Ex.  crown 

Svo.  \In  the  Press. 

REMSEN  (Prof.  Ira).— The  Elements  of 

Chemistry.    Fcp.  8vo.    2J.  td. 
An  Introduction  to  the  Stodv  of 

Chemistry  (Inorganic  Chemistry).    Cr. 

Svo.     ts.  td. 

A  Text-Book  of  Inorganic  Chemis- 
try.   Svo.     its. 

Compounds  of  Carbon  ;  or,  An  Intro- 
duction to  the  Study  of  Organic  Chemistry. 
Cr   Svo.     6s.  td. 

ROSCOE  (Sir  Henry  E.,  F.R.S.).— A  Primes 
OF  Chemistry.     Illustrated.    Pott  Svo.    21 

Lessons  in  Elementary  Chemistry, 

Inorganic  and  Organic.   Fcp.  Svo.  4J.  td. 

ROSCOE  (Sir  H.  E.)  and  SCHORLEMME  R 
(Prof.  C). — A  Complete  Treatise  on  In- 
organic AND  Organic  Chemistry.  Illusti. 
Svo. — Vols.  I.  and  11.  Inorganic  Chemis- 
try: Vol.  I.  The  Non-Metallic  Ele- 
ments, New  Edit.,  Revised  by  Drs.  H.  G. 
Colman  and  A.  Harden,  211.  Vol.  II. 
Parts  1.  and  II.  Metals,  iSj.  each. — Vol. 
III.  Organic  Chemistry  :  The  Chemistry 
OF  the  Hydro-Carbons  and  their  Deriva- 
tives. Parts  I.  II.  IV.  and  VI.  aw.  each; 
Parts  III.  and  V.  i8f.  each 


DICTIONARIES— EDUCATION. 


ROSCOE  (Sir  H.  E.)  and  HARDEN  (A.).- 
Dalton's  Atomic  Theory.    8vo.    6s.  net. 

ROSCOE  (Sir  H.  E.)  and  LUNT  (J.).— In- 
organic Chemistry  for  Beginners.  G1. 
8vo.    2S.  td, 

ROSCOE  (Sir  H.  E.)  and  SCHUSTER  (AJ. 
—Spectrum  Analysis.  By  Sir  Hehrt  E. 
RoscoE.  4th  Edit.,  revised  by  the  Anthot 
and  A.  Schdster,  F.R.S.  With  Coloured 
Plates.    8vo.     n.s. 

SCHORLEMMER  (C.).  — Rise  and  De- 
velopment OF  Organic  Chemistry.  Trans, 
by  Prof.  Smithells.    Cr.  8vo.    is.  net. 

SCHULTZ(G.)and  JULIUS  (P.).— Organic 
Colouring  Matters.  Transl.  by  A.  G. 
Green.    8vo.    2ij.  net 

THORPE  (Prof.  T.  E.)  and  TATE  (W.).- 
A  Series  of  Chemical  Fkobledis.  With 
Key.    Fcp.  8vo.    2i. 

THORPE  (Prof.  T.  E.)  and  ROcKER  (Prof. 
A.  W.). — A  Treatise  on  Chemical  Phy- 
sics.   Illustrated      8vo.        [In  freparatioH. 

TURPIN  (G.  S.).— Lessons  in  Organic 
Chemistry.    G1.  8vo.    zs.  (yd. 

Practical  Inorganic  Chemistry.    GI. 

Svo.    IS.  6d. 

WURTZ  (Ad.).— A  History  of  Chemical 
Theory.  Transl.  by  H.  Watts.  Cr.  8vo.  6i. 

CHRISTIAN  CHURCH,  History  of  the. 
{See  under  Theology,  p.  40.) 

CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND,  Tbe. 
(See  under  Theology,  p.  40.) 

COLLECTED  WORKS. 

{See  under  Literature,  p.  24.) 

COMPARATIVE  ANATOMT. 
{See  under  Zoology,  p.  49.) 

COOEERT. 
{See  under  Domestic  Economy,  below.) 

DEVOTIONAL  BOOKS. 
{See  under  THEO1.OGV,  p.  41.) 

DICTIONARIES  AND  GLOSSARIES. 

AUTENRIETH  (Dr.  G.).— An  Homeric 
Dictionary.  Translated  from  the  German, 
by  R.  P.  Keep,  Ph.D.    Cr.  8vo.    6j. 

BARTLETT  (J.).— Familiar  Quotations. 
Cr.  Svo.    6s.  mt. 

GROVE  (Sir  George).— A  Dictionary  of 
Music  and  Musicians.    {See  Music.) 

HOLE  (Rev.  C.).— A  Brief  Biographical 
Dictionary.    2nd  Edit.    Pott  8vo.    41.  6d. 

MASSON  (Gustave).— A  Compendious  Dic- 
tionary OF  the  French  Language. 
Cr.  8vo.    3s.  6d. 

PALGRAVE  (R.  H.  I.).— A  Dictionary  of 
Political  Economy.  {See  Political 
Economy.) 

WHITNEY  (Prof.  W.  D.).— A  Compendious 
German  and  English  Dictionary.  Cr. 
Svo.  $s. — German-English  Part  separately. 
31.  6d. 

WRIGHT  (W.  Aldis).— The  Bible  Word- 
BooK.     2nd  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.     7s.  6d. 

VONGE  (Charlotte  M.).— History  of  Chris- 
tian Names.    Cr.  Svo.    7J.  6d. 


DOMESTIC  ECONOMY. 
Cookery — Nursing — Needlework. 

Cookery- 
BARKER  (Lady).— First  Lessons  in  the 

Principles  of  Cooking.    3rd  Edit.    Pott 

Svo.    If. 
BARNETT  (E.  A  )  and  O'NEILL  (H.  C.).— 

Primer    of    Domestic    Economy.       Pott 

Svo.     \s. 

MIDDLE-CLASS  COOKERY  BOOK,  The. 
Compiled  for  the  Manchester  School  ot 
Cookery.    Pott  Svo.    t.s.  6d. 

TEGETMEIER  (W.  B.).— Household  Man- 
agement AND  Cookery.    Pott  Svo.    u. 

WRIGHT   (Miss    Guthrie).  —  The    School 

COOKSRY-BOOK.      Pott  Svo.      I.S. 

Nursing. 

CRAVEN  (Mrs.  Dacre).— A  Guide  to  Dis- 
trict Nurses.    Cr.  Svo.    2f.  6d. 

FOTHERGILL(Dr.  J.  M.).— Food  for  the 
Invalid,  the  Convalescent,  the  Dyspep- 
tic, AND  THE  (JOUTY.     Cr.  SvO.      3J.  6d. 

JEX-BLAKE  (Dr.  Sophia).— The  Care  of 

Infants.    Pott  Svo.    u. 
RATHBONE  (Wm.).— The    History   and 

Progress  of  District  Nursing,  from  1859 

to  the  Present  Date.    Cr.  Svo.    2j.  6d. 
RECOLLECTIONS   OF  A  NURSE.     By 

E.  D.    Cr.  Svo.    21. 
STEPHEN  (Caroline  E.).— The  Service  of 

THE  Poor.    Cr.  Svo.    6s.  6d. 

Needlework. 

GLAISTER  (Elizabeth).— Needlework.  Cr. 
Svo.    2j.  6d. 

GRAND'HOMME.  —  Cutting  Out  and 
Dressmaking.  From  the  French  of  Mdlle. 
E.  Grand'homme.    Pott  Svo.    ix. 

GRENFELL  (Mrs.)— Dressmaking.  Pott 
Svo.     IS. 

ROSEVEAR  (E.).  — Needlework,  Knitt. 
ING,  AND  Cutting  Out.  3rd  Edit.  Cr.  Svo. 
6s. 

Needlework,  Knitting,  and  Cutting- 
Out  for  Older  Girls.  Standard  IV.  6d. ; 
Standard  V.  id.  ;  Standard  VI.  VII.  and 
Ex-VII.    ij. 

Needlework,  Knitting,  and  Cutting- 
Out  for  Evening  Continuation  Schools. 
Globe  Svo.     2^. 

DRAMA,  The. 
{See  under  Literature,  p.  17.) 

ELECTRICITY. 
See  under  Physics,  p.  33.) 

EDUCATION. 

ARNOLD  (Matthew)-- Higher  Schools  and 
Universities  in  Germany.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

Reports    on    Elementary    Schools, 

1852-82.  Ed.  by  Lord  Sandford.  Svo.  ^.6a. 

A  French  Eton  :  or  Middle  Class 

Education  and  the  State.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

BLAKIST0N(J.  R.).— The  Teacher:  Hints 
ON  School  Management.   Cr.  Svo.   ns.  6d. 

CALDERWOOD  (Prof.  H.).— On  Teach- 
ing.   4th  Edit.    £xt.  fcp.  Svo.    2J.  6d. 


ENGINEERING— GEOGRAPHY. 


COMEE  (George).— Education  :  Its  Prin- 
ciples AND  Practice  as  Developed  bt 
George  Combe.  Ed.  by  W.  Jolly.  8vo.  151. 

CRAIK  (Henry). — The  State  in  its  Rela* 
TioN  TO  Education.    Cr.  8vo.    2s.  6d. 

State  Education  :   A  Speech.     8vo. 

Sewed,    td.  net. 

FEARON  (D.  R.).— School  Inspection. 
6th  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    2s.  6d. 

FITCH  (J.  G.).  —  Notes  on  American 
Schools  and  Training  Colleges.  Re* 
printed  by  permission.     Globe  Svo.     2s.  6d. 

■GLADSTONE  (J.  H.).— Spelling  Reform 
FROM  AN  Educational  Point  of  View. 
3rd  Edit.     Cr.  8vo.     is.  6d. 

HERTEL  (Dr.).— Overpressure  in  High 
Schools  in  Denmark.  With  Introdaction 
by  Sir  J.  Crichton-Browne.  Cr.  Svo.  ^s.6d. 

KINGSLEY  (Charles).— Health  and  Edu- 
cation.    Cr.  Svo.     6s. 

LUBBOCK  (Sir  John,  Bart.).— Political  and 
Educational  Addresses.    Svo.    Ss.  6d. 

MAURICE  (F.  D.).— Learning  and  Work- 
ing.     Cr.  Svo.     is.  6d. 

(PAULSEN  (F.).— The  German  Universi- 
ties.   By  E.  D.  Perry.    Cr.  8vo.    js.  net. 

RECORD  OF  TECHNICAL  AND  SE- 
CONDARY EDUCATION.  Crown  Svo. 
Sewed,  2s.  6d.     No.  I.     Nov.  iSgi. 

THRING  (Rev.  Edward).— Education  and 
School.    2nd  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

ENGINEERING. 

ALEXANDER  (T.)  and  THOMSON  (A.W.). 
—Elementary  Applied  Mechanics.  Part 
II.  Transverse  Stress.    Cr.  Svo.    ios.6d. 

'BERG  (L.  de  C.).— Safe  Building.  4th  Ed. 
2  vols.    4to.    4ZS.  net. 

CHALMERS  (J.  B.).— Graphical  Deter- 
mination OF  Forces  in  Engineering 
Structures.    Illustrated.    Svo.    24s. 

'CLARK  (T.  M.).— Building  Superinten- 
dence.   i2th  Edit.    4to.    I2J.  net. 

COTTERILL  (Prof  J.  H.).— Applied  Me- 
chanics :  An  Elementary  General  Introduc- 
tion to  the  Theory  of  Structures  and  Ma* 
chines.    4th  Edit.    Svo.     i&s. 

■COTTERILL   (Prof.    J.    H.)   and    SLADE 

y',  H.). — Lessons  in  Applied  Mechanics. 
cp.  Svo.    ss.  6d. 
KENNEDY  (Prof.  A.   B.   W.).— The    Me- 
chanics OF  Machinery.    Cr.  Svo.     8j.  6d. 
LANGMAID  (T.)  and  GAISFORD  (H.).— 

Steam  Machinery.     Svo.     6s.  net. 
PEABODY(Prof.  C.  H.).— Thermodynamics 

OF  THE  Steam  Engine  and  other  Heat- 

Engines.    Svo.    21s. 
KOBE  (R.).— Electric  Wiring.    4to.    10s. 
5HANN  (G.). — An  Elementary  Treatise 

ON  Heat  in  Relation  to  Steam  and  the 

Steam-Engine.  Illustrated.  Cr.  Svo.  4s.  6d. 
VIOLLET-LE-DUC    (E.    E.).— Rational 

Building.     Transl.  by  G.  M.  Huss.     Svo. 

X2S.  6d.  net. 
WEISBACH  (J.)  and  HERRMANN  (G.)-— 

Mechanics    of    Hoisting    Machinery. 

Transl.  K.  P.  Dahlstrom.  Svo.  12^.6*:^.  net. 


WOODWARD  (C.  M.).— a  History  of  the 
St.  Louis  Bridge.    4to.    2I.  2s.  net. 

YOUNG  (E.  W.).— Simple  Practical  Me- 
thods OF  Calculating  Strains  on  Gir- 
ders, Arches,  and  Trusses.    Svo.    js.  td. 

ENGLISH  CITIZEN  SERIES. 

{See  Politics.) 
ENGLISH  MEN  OF  ACTION. 

{See  Biography.) 

ENGUSH  MEN  OF  LETTERS. 
{See  Biography.) 

ENGUSH  STATESMEN.  Twelve. 
{See  Biography.) 

ENGRAVING.    (.Sw  Art.) 
ESSAYS.    {See  under  Literature,  p.  24.) 

ETCHING.    (^-^Art.) 

ETHICS.    {See  under  Philosophy,  p.  32.) 

FATHERS,  The. 

{See  under  Theology,  p.  41.) 

FICTION,  Prose. 
{See  «MiA?r  Literature,  p.  zi.) 

GARDENING. 

{See  also  Agriculture  ;  Botany.) 

AUSTIN  (Alfred).  —  The  Garden  that  I 
Love.    Ex.  cr.  8vo.    qj. 

In  Veronica's  Garden.  Ex.  cr.  Svo.  gs. 

BAILEY  (L.  H.)— Horticulturist's  Rule 
Book.    Fcp.  Svo.    3J.  net 

Plant  Breeding.    Fcp.  Svo.    4^.  net. 

BLOMFIELD  {R.)  and  THOMAS  (F.  I.).— 
The  Formal  Garden  in  England.  Illus- 
trated.    Ex.  cr.  Svo.     7^.  6d.  net. 

BRIGHT  (H.  A.).— The  English  Flower 
Garden.    Cr.  Svo.     3J.  6d. 

A  Year  in  a  Lancashire  Garden.   Cr. 

Svo.     3 J.  6d. 

COLLINS  (C). — Greenhouse  and  Window 
Plants.    Ed.  by  J.  Wright.    Pott  Svo.    i*. 

DEAN  (A.).— Vegetable  Culture.  Ed.  by 
J.  Wright.    Pott  Svo.    is. 

FOSTER-MELLIAR  (A.).— The  Book  of 
the  Rose.    IUus.    Ex.  cr.  Svo.    8j.  6d.  net. 

FREEMAN-MITFORD  (A.  B.).— The  Bam- 
boo Garden.    Svo.    io^'.  6d. 

HOBDAY  (E.).  — Villa  Gardening.  A 
Handbook  for  Amateur  and  Practical  Gar- 
deners.   Ext.  cr.  Svo.    6j, 

LODEMAN  (E.  G.).— Spraying  of  Plants. 
Fcp   Svo.    4J.  net. 

WRIGHT  U)-— A  Primer  of  Practical 
Horticulture.     Pott  8vo.     is. 

Garden  Flowers  and  Plants.     Pott 

Svo.    ij. 

GEOGRAPHY. 
{See  also  Atlases.) 

BLANFORD  (H.  F.).— Elementary  Geo- 
graphy of  India,  Burma,  and  Ceylon. 
Globe  Svo.     ij.  gd. 

CLARKE  (C.  B.).— A  Geographical  Rbadbk 
AND  Companion  to  the  Atlas.  Cr.Svo.  a*. 

A  Geographic  Reader.     With  Maps. 

Gl.  Svo.    2s.  6d. 

Reader  in  General  Geography.  Gl. 

Svo  swd.  IS. 

A  Class-Book  of  Geography.    With  x8 

Coloured  Maps.    Fcp.  Svo.    2s.  6d. ;  swd.,  at. 
Without  Maps,  is,  6d. 


GEOGRAPHY— HISTORY. 


II 


DAWSON (G.  M.)  and  SUTHERLAND(A.). 
Elbmentary  Geography  of  the  British 
Colonies.    Globe  8vo.    2j. 

ELDERTON   (W.   A.).-Maps    and    Map- 

Drawing.    Pott  8vo.    is. 
GEIKIE  (Sir  Archibald).— The  Teaching  of 

IjEography.    a  Practical  Handbook  for  the 

use  of  Teachers.     Globe  8vo.     2s. 
——  Geography    of    the    British    Isles, 

Pott  8vo.     IS. 

CONNER  (E.  C.  K.).-C0MMERCIAL  Geo- 
graphy.   Gl.  8vo.    3J. 

GREEN  (J.  R.  and  A.  S.).-A  Short  Geogra 
phyoftheBeitish Islands.  Fcp.8vo.  31.61/. 

GROVE  (Sir  George).— A  Primer  of  Geo- 
graphy.    Maps.     Pott  8vo.     If. 

KIEPERT    (H.).  — Manual    of    Ancient 

Geography.    Cr.  8vo.    51. 
rUBBOCK  (Rt.  Hon.  Sir  John,  Bart.). -The 

bCENEKY  of  Switzerland.    Illustrated.  Cr. 

8vo.    6s. 

iYDE  (L.  W.).— Man  and  His  Markets. 

Illustrated.    Cr.  Svo.  [/«  tit  Press. 

MILL  (H.  R.).— Elementary  Class-Book 

OF  General  Geography.    Cr.  8vo.    3*.  6d. 

SIME  (Tames). — Geography  of  Edropb. 
With  Illustrations.     Globe  8vo,     2s. 

STRACHEY  (Lieut.-Gen.  R.).— Lectures  on 
Geography.    Cr.  Svo.    4^ .  6d. 

SUTHERLAND  (A.).— Geography  of  Vic- 
toria.    Pott  Svo.      IS. 

Class  Book  of  Geography.  With  Maps. 

*  cp.  Svo.    2s.  6J. 

TOZER  (H.  F.).— A  Primer  of  Classical 
Geography.    Pott  Svo.    is. 

GEOLOGY  AUTD  MINERALOaY. 

BLANFORD  (W.  T.).  —  Geology  and 
Zoology  of  Abyssinia.    Svo.    21J. 

COAL :  Its  History  and  Its  Uses.  By 
Profs.  Green,  Miall,  Thorpe,  ROcker, 
and  Marshall.     Svo.     12s.  f>d. 

DAWSON  (Sir  J.  W.).— The  Geology  of 
Nova  Scotia,  New  Brunswick,  and 
Prince  Edward  Island  ;  or,  Acadian  Geo- 
logy.   4th  Edit.     Svo.     21S. 

GEIKIE  (Sir  Archibald).— A  Primer  of  Geo- 
logy.    Illustrated.     Pott  Svo.     is. 

Class-Book  of  Geology.    Illustrated, 

Cr.  Svo.     4r.  id. 

Geological  Sketches  at  Home  and 

Abroad.    lUust     Svo.    los.td. 

-  Outlines  of  Field  Geology.  With 
numerous  Illustrations.     Gl.  Svo.     y.  6d. 

Text-Book    of   Geology.    Illustrated. 

3rd  Edit.     Med.  8vo.     2Ss. 

The  Scenery  of  Scotland,    Viewed  In 

connection  with  its  Physical  Geology,     2nd 
Edit,     Cr.  Svo.     I2S.  6d. 

HATCH  (F.  J  )  and  CHALMERS  (J.  A.).— 
Gold  Mines  of  the  Rand.  Sup,  roy.  8vo. 
ijs.  net. 

HULL  (E.). — A  Treatise  on  Ornamental 
and  Building  Stones  of  Great  Britain 
AND  Foreign  Countries.    Svo.    12s. 

KELVIN  (Lord)  — Geology  and  General 
Physics.    Cr.  Svo.    yj.  6d. 


L0EWENSON-LESSING(F.)-.Tablksfor 
Determination  of  Rock-Forming  Mine. 
RALs.  fransl.  by  J.  W.  Gregory.  Svo. 
4J.  dd.  net. 

PENNINGTON  (Rooke).— Notes  on  the 
Barrows  and  Bone  Caves  of  Dbrbyshirje, 
Svo.    6f. 

PRESTWICH  (J.).— Papers  on  Geology. 
Svo.    los.  net. 

Certain  Phenomena  belonging  to  the 

Last  Geological  Period.  Svo.  2s.  6d.  net. 

ROSENBUSCH  (H.).— Microscopical  Phy- 
siography of  the  Rock-Making  Miner- 
als. By  H.  Rosenbusch.  Translated  by 
J,  P.  Iddings.     Illust.     Svo.    24J. 

TARR  (R.  S.).— Economic  Geology  of  the 
United  States.     Svo.     ids.  net. 

WILLIAMS  (G.  H.).— Elements  of  Crt- 
stallography.     Cr.  Svo.    ts. 

GLOBE  LIBRABY,  (5m  Literature,  p.  25,) 

GLOSSARIES.    (.See  Dictionaries.) 

GOLDEN  TREASURY  SERIES. 
{See  Literature,  p.  25.) 

GRAMIVIAR,    {Set  Philology.) 

HEALTH.    {See  Hygiene.) 

HEAT.    {See  under  Physics,  p.  34.) 

HISTOLOGY.    {See  Physiology.) 

HISTORY, 

{See  also  Biography.) 

ACTON  (Lord). — On  the  Studyof  History. 

Gl.  Svo.    2j.  6d. 
AMERICAN     HISTORICAL     REVIEW, 

Quarterly.    Svo.     35.  6rf.  net, 
ANNALS  OF  OUR  TIME.     A  Diurnal  of 

Events,    Social   and    Political,    Home    and 

Foreign.    By  Joseph  Irving.    Svo. — Vol.  1. 

Tune  20th,   1837,  to  Feb.  2Sth,  1871,  lis. ; 

Vol.  II.  Feb.  24th,  1871,  to  June  Z4th|  1887, 

iSj.     Also  Vol.  II,  in  3  parts :  Part  I,  Feb. 

24th,  1S7Z,  to  March  19th,  1874,  4;.  6d. ;  Part 

11.  March  20th,   1874,  to  July  2znd,   1878, 

4r.  6d. ;    Part  III.  July  23rd,  1S78,  to  June 

Z4th,  1887,  gs.    Vol.  III.     By  H.  H.  Fyfk. 

Part  1.  June  25th,  1887,  tn  Dec.  3ath,  189a. 

4f.6i/. ;5wd.3J.6</.  Pt.ll.1891,  1  J. 6^. ; swd. If, 
ANDREWS  (C.   M.).— The   Old    English 

Manor  :  A  Study  in  Economic  History, 

Royal  Svo.     6;.  net. 
ANNUAL  SUMMARIES.     Reprinted  from 

the  TtTnes.    z  Vols.     Cr.  Svo.     v.  ^d.  each, 
ARNOLD  (T.).— The  Second  Punic  War. 

By  Thomas  Arnold,  D.D.     Ed.  by  W.  T. 

Arnold,  M.A.    With  8  Maps.    Cr.  Svo.    51. 
ARNOLD  (W.   T.).— A   History   of    the 

Early  Roman  Empire,  Cr.  Svo.    Unprep, 
BEESLY  (Mrs.). — Stories  from  the  His- 

TORY  OF  Rome.     Fcp.  Svo.    2s.  td. 
BLACKIE  (Prof.  John  Stuart).— What  Dora 

History  Teach?       Globe  Svo.    w.6d. 
BRETT  (R.  B.).— Footprints  of  States- 
men during  the  Eighteenth  Century 

in  England.     Cr.  Svo.     6s. 
BRYCE  (James,  M.P.).— The  Holy  Rcmas 

Empire.      8th    Edit.      Cr.    Svo,      js.6d.— 

Lihrary  Edition.     Svo.     14*. 


12 


HISTORY. 


"ElBTOJiY—cemtiftued. 

BRUCE  (P.  A.).— Economic  History  of 
Virginia.    2  vols.    8vo.    25^.  net. 

BUCKLEY  (Arabella).— History  of  Eng- 
land FOR^EGiNNEKS.     Globe  8vo.     3J-. 

Primer   of   English    History.      Pott 

8vo.     IS. 

BURKE  (Edmund).    (.S-£^  Politics.) 
BURY  (J.  B.),— A  History  of  the  Later 

Roman  Empire  from  Arcadius  to  Irene, 

A.D.  390 — 800.    2  vols.    8vo.     32^. 
CASSEL   (Dr.    D.).— Manual    of    Jewish 

History  and  Literature.    Translated  by 

Mrs.  Henry  Lucas.    Fcp.  8vo.    2s.  6d. 
CHURCH  (Dean).— The  Beginning  of  the 

Middle  Ages.    GI.  8vo.    5s. 
COX  (G.  v.). — Recollections  of  Oxford 

2nd  Edit.     Cr.  8vo.     6s. 
DASENT(A.  L).  -History  of  St.  James's 

Square.    8vo     12s.  net. 
ENGLISH      STATESMEN,       TWELVE. 

(See  Biography,  p.  5.) 
FISKE  (John).— The  Critical  Period  in 

American    History,   1783—89.      Ext.    cr. 

8vo.     los.  td. 

The  Beginnings  of  New  England; 

or^  The  Puritan  Theocracy  in  its  Relations  to 
Civil  and  Religious  Liberty.   Cr.  8vo.    7*.  td. 

The   American   Revolution.    2  vols. 

Cr.  Bvo.     i8j. 

The  Discovery  of  America.    2  vols. 

Cr.  8vo.     18^. 

FRAMJI  (Dosabhai).  —  History  of  the 
Parses,  including  their  Manners,  Cui- 
toms,  Religion,  and  Present  PostTiOf . 
With  Illustrations,     z  vols.     Med.  8vo.     36^. 

FREEMAN  (Prof.  E.  A.).— History  of  the 
Cathedral  Church  of  Wells.  Cr.  Svo. 
3J.  6d. 

Old  English  History.  With    Coloured 

Maps,    glh  Edit.^evised.    Ext.  fcp.  8vo.    6j. 

Historical  Essays.     First  Series,    stb 

Edit.    Svo.     -los.  6d. 

Second    Series.       3rd    Edit.,    with 

Additional  Essays.     Svo.     10s.  6d. 

■         Third  Series.     Bvo.     12^. 

Fourth  Series.      8vo.      12s.  td. 

The  Growth  of  the  English  CoNtTX- 

TUTioN  from  the  Earliest  Times.     5th 
Edit.     Cr.  Svo.     5^. 

Comparative  Politics.    Lectures  at  tl  e 

Royal  Institution.    To  which  is  added  "  Tt  e 
Unity  of  History."     fvo.      14J. 

^■^  Subject  and  Neighbour  Lands  of 
Venice.     Illustrated.     Cr.  Svo.     loj.  6d. 

— ^  English  Towns  and  Districts.  A 
Series  of  Addresses  and  Essays.     Svo.     14* 

The  Office  of  the  Historical  Pro- 
fessor.    Cr.  Svo.     2s. 

Disestablishment     and     Disendow- 

ment  :  What  are  they?    Cr.  Svo.     21. 

Greater  Greece  and  Greater  Bri- 
tain :  George  Washington  the  Ex- 
pander OF  England.  With  an  Appendix 
on  Imperial  Federation.    Cr.  Svo.    31.  td. 

The  Methods  of  Historical  Study. 

Eight  Lectures  at  Oxford.     Bvo.      loj.  6d. 

The  Chief  Periods  of  European  His- 
tory. With  Fssay  on  "  Greek  Cities  under 
Roman  Rule."     Svo.     loj.  td. 

•——  Four  Oxford  Lectures,  1887;  Fiftt 
Years  of  European  History;  Teutonic 
Conquest  in  Gaul  and  Britain     8vo.    5j. 


FREEMAN  (Prof.  E.  A.).  — History  of- 
Federal  Govern  ment  in  Greece  and- 
Italy.  New  Edit,  by  J.  B.  Bury,  M.A. 
Ex.  cr.  Svo.     lis.  6d. 

Western  Europe  in  the  Fifth  Cen- 
tury.   Svo.  [In  the  Press. 

Western  Europe  in  the  Eighth  Cen- 
tury.   Svo.  [/»  the  Press. 

FRIEDMANN  (Paul).    {See  Biography.) 

GIBBINS  (H.  de   B.).— History  of  Com- 

MERCE  IN  Europe.     Globe  Bvo.    3J.  td. 

GREEN  (John  Richard).— A  Short  Histort 
OF  the  English  People.  New  Edit.,  re- 
vised. 159th  Thousand.  Cr.  Svo.  8j.  6rf. — 
Also  in  Parts,  with  Analysis.  3J.  each. — Part  I. 
607 — 1265;  II.  1204 — 1553;  III.  1540 — 1689; 
IV.  1660 — 1B73. — Illustrated  Edition.  Su- 
per roy.  Bvo.     4  vols.     12.?.  each  net. 

History  of  the  English  People.    In. 

4  vols.  Bvo.  its.  each.— In  8  vols.  Gl.  Svo. 
<,s.  each. 

The  Making  of  England.    8vo.    i6r. 

— —  The  Conquest  of  England.  With 
Maps  and  Portrait.     Bvo.    iBj. 

-^—  Readings  in  English  History.  In  3 
Parts.     Fcp.  Svo.     u.  td.  each. 

GREEN  (Alice  S.).— Town  Life  in  the: 
15TH  Century.     2  vols.     Svo.    32^. 

GUEST  (Dr.  E.).— Origines  Celtics.  Maps. 

2  vols.     Svo.     32.S. 
GUEST  (M.  J.).— Lectures  on  the  History 

OF  England.    Cr.  Svo.    ts. 

HARRISON  (F.).— The  Meaning  of  His- 
tory, and  other  Historical  Pieces. 
Ex.  cr.  Svo.    8j.  td.  net. 

HASSALL  (A.).— Handbook  of  European- 
History.    Cr.  Bvo.  [In  the  Press. 

HILL  (G.  B.).— Harvard  College.  By  An; 
Oxonian.     Cr.  Bvo.    qj. 

HISTORY  PRIMERS.     Edited    by    John 
Richard  Green.    Pott  Bvo.     is.  each. 
Europe.     By  E.  A.  Freeman,  M.A. 
Greece.    By  C.  A.  Fyffe,  M.A. 
Catalogue  of  Lantern  Slides  to  Illus- 
trate Above.    By  Rev.  T.  Field,  M.A. 
Pott  Bvo.    td. 
Rome.     By  Bishop  Creighton. 
France.     By  Charlotte  M.  Yonge. 
English  History.     By  A.  B.  Buckley. 

HISTORICAL  COURSE  FOR  SCHOOLS. 

Ed.  by  E.  A.  Freeman,  D.C.L.     Pott  Svo. 

General  Sketch  of  European  History. 
By  E.  a.  Freeman.    Maps.    3*.  td. 

History  of  England.  By  Edith  Thomp- 
son.    CoMured  Maps.     aj.  td. 

History  of  Scotland.      By  MargareT" 

MaCARTHUR.      2S. 

History  of  Italy.   By  the  Rev.  W.  Hunt, 

M.A.     With  Coloured  Maps.     3J.  td. 
History  of  Germany.  ByJ.SiME,  M.A.  3J.- 
HisTORY  OF  America.     By  J.  A.  Doyle, 

With  Maps.     4,s.  td. 
History    of    European    Colonies.      By 

E.  J.  Payne,  M.A.     Maps.    4J.  td. 
History  of  France.    By  Charlotte  M. 

Yonge.     Maps.     3J.  td. 

HOLE  (Rev.  C.).— Genealogical  Stemma. 
of  the  Kings  of  England  and  France^ 
On  a  Sheet,     is. 


HISTORY. 


13 


HOLM  (A.).— History  of  Greece  from 
ITS  Commencement  to  the  Close  of  the 
Independence  of  the  Greek  Nation. 
Translated.  4  vols.  Vols.  I.  and  II.  Cr. 
8vo.    6s.  net  each.  [Voi.  ///.  in  Press. 

INGRAM  (T.  Dunbar).— A  History  of  the 
Legislative  Union  of  Great  Britain 
AND  Ireland.     8vo.     km.  6d 

Two  Chapters  of  Irish  History  :  i.  The 

Irish  Parliament  of  James  II.;  2.  The  Alleged 
Violation  of  the  Treaty  of  Limerick.    8vo.  6s. 

JEBB  (Prof.  R.  C.).— Modern  Greece.  Two 
Lectures.     Crown  8vo.     ss. 

JENNINGS  (A.  C.).— Chronological  Ta- 
BLEs  OF  Ancient  History.    8vo.    5s. 

KEARY   (Annie).— The    Nations   Around 

Israel.     Cr.  8vo.     3^.  6d. 
KING  (G.).— New    Orleans,    The   Place 

AND  THE  People.    Cr.  8vo.    10s.  6d. 
KINGSLEY  (Charles).— The    Roman    and 

THE  Teuton.    Cr.  8vo.    js.  td. 

Historical    Lectures    and    Essays. 

Cr.  Svo.    35-.  td. 

LABBERTON  (R.  H.).    {See  Atlases.) 

LEE -WARNER   (W.).  — The    Protected 

Princes  of  India.    Svo.    los.  6d. 
LEGGE  (Alfred  O.).— The  Growth  of  the 

Temporal  Power  of  the  Papacy.    Cr. 

8vo.    8j.  6d. 
LETHBRIDGE  (Sir  Roper).— A  Short  Man- 

UAL  OF  THE  HiSTORV  OF  India.   Cr.  8vo.   5*. 

The  World's  History.  Cr.8vo,swd.  i*. 

History  of  India.  Cr.  Svo.  2^.  ;  sewed, 

IS.  td. 

History  OF  England.  Cr.8vo,swd.  ij.6rf. 

Easy  Introduction  to  the  History 

and  Geography  of  Bengal.  Cr.Svo.  \s,td. 

LIGHTFOOr  (J.  B.).— Historical  Essays. 

Gl.  Svo.    5f . 
LYTE  (H.  C.  Maxwell).— A  History  of  Eton 

College,  1440 — 1884.   lUastrated.  Svo.  zij. 

-  A  History  of  the  University  of 
Oxford,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to 
THE  Year  1530.    Svo.    i6f. 

MAHAFFY  (Prof.  J.  P.).— Social  Life  in 
Greece,  from  Homer  to  Menander. 
6th  Edit.     Cr.  Svo.     qs. 

-  Greek  Life  and  Thought,  from  the 
Age  of  Alexander  to  the  Roman  Con- 
quest.   Cr.  Svo.    I2J,  6d. 

The   Greek    World    under    Roman 

Sway,  from  Polybius  to  Plutarch.  Cr. 
Svo.     xos,  td. 

Problems  in  Greek  History.    Crown 

Svo.     7J.  6d. 

History  of  the  Ptolemies.    Cr.  Svo. 

1 2 J.  6rf. 

MARRIOTT  (J.  A.  R.).  (.S-^  Select  Bio- 
graphy, p.  6.) 

MATHEW(E.  J.).— First  Sketch  of  Eng- 
lish History.    Part  II.    Gl.  Svo.    2s. 

MICHELET(M.).— A  Summary  of  Modern 
History.  Translated  by  M.  C.  M.  Simp- 
son.    Globe  Svo.     4J.  6d. 

MULLINGER(J.B.).— Cambridge  Charac- 
teristics IN  THE  Seventeenth  Century. 
Cr.  Svo,     4*.  td. 

NORGATE  (Kate).— England  under  the 
Angevin  Kings.     In  2  vols.    Svo.    ^2*. 


OLTPHANT(Mrs.  M.  O.  W.).— The  Makers 
of  Florence  :  Dante,  Giotto,  Savona- 
rola, and  their  City  lUustr.  Cr.  Svo. 
loj.  td. — Edition  de  Luxe.    Svo.    21J.  net. 

The  Makers  of  Venice  :  Doges,  Con- 
querors, Painters,  and  Men  of  Letters. 
Illustrated.     Cr.  Svo.     xos  td. 

Royal     Edinburgh  ;      Her     Saints. 

Kings,  Prophets,  and  Poets.    Illustrated 

by  Sir  G.  Reid,  R.S.A.     Cr.  Svo.     lar.  td. 
Jerusalem,   its  History  and  Hope. 

Illust,      Cr.    Svo.      ros.  6^.- Large    Paper 

Edit.     505^.  net. 
The  Reign  of  Queen  Anne.     Illust. 

Ex.  cr.  Svo.    8j.  td.  net. 

The  Makers  of  Modern  Rome.    With 

Illustrations     Svo.    21  j. 

OTTE  (E.  C.).— Scandinavian  History. 
With  Maps.     Globe  Svo.     ts. 

PALGRAVE  (Sir  F.).— History  of  Nor- 
mandy and  of  England.  4  vols.  Svo.  4/.4*, 

PARKIN  (G.  R.).— The  Great  Dominion. 
Crown  Svo.     6s. 

PARKMAN  (Francis).  —  Montcalm  and 
Wolfe.  Library  Edition.  Illustrated  with 
Portraits  and  Maps.  2  vols.  Svo.  i2j.6,^.  each. 

The  Collected   Works    of    Francis 

Parkman.  Popular  Edition.  In  iz  vols. 
Cr.  Svo.  7J.  td.  each. — Pioneers  of  France 
IN  THE  New  World,  1  vol. ;  The  Jesuits 
IN  North  America,  r  vol. ;  La  Salle 
AND  the  Discovery  of  the  Great  West, 
I  vol. ;  The  Oregon  Trail,  i  vol. ;  The 
Old  Regime  in  Canada  under  Louis 
XIV.,  I  vol. ;  Count  Frontenac  and  New 
France  UNDER  Louis  XIV.,  i  vol. ;  Mont- 
calm and  Wolfe,  2  vols. ;  The  Con- 
spiracy of  Pontiac,  2  vols. ;  A  Half  Cen- 
tury OF  Conflict  2  vols. 

The  Oregon  Trail.    Illustrated.   Med. 

Svo.      2t.S. 

PERKINS  (J.  B.).— France  under  the 
Regency.     Cr.  Svo.    %s.  td. 

PIKE  (L.  O.).— Constitutional  History 
OF  THE  House  of  Lords.    Svo.    12s.  6d.  net. 

POOLE  (R.  L.).— A  History  of  the  Hugue- 
nots OF  THE  Dispersion  at  the  Recall 
of  the  Edict  of  Nantes.    Cr.  Svo.    6*. 

PROWSE(D.  W.).— History  OF  Newfound- 
land.   Svo.    2  If.  net. 

RHODES  (J.  F.).— History  of  the  United 
States  from  the  Compromise  of  1850  to 
1S80.    Vols.  I.  II.    24s.    Vol.  III.    Svo.    izj. 

ROGERS  (Prof.  J.  E.  Thorold).— Historical 
Gleanings.  Cr.  Svo. — ist  Series.  4J.  td. — 
and  Series,     ts. 

ROTHSCHILD  (F.).— Personal  Charac- 
teristics from  French  History.  Svo. 
xos.  6d.  net. 

SAYCE  (Prof.  A.  H.).— The  Ancient  Em- 
pires of  the  East.    Cr.  Svo.    ts. 

SEELEY  (Sir  J.  R.).  —  Lectures  and 
Essays.    Globe  Svo.    5*. 

The   Expansion   of  England.      Two 

Courses  of  Lectures.    Globe  Svo.    SJ. 

Our  Colonial  Expansion.      Extracts 

from  the  above.    Cr,  Svo.    is. 

SEWELL  (E.  M.)  and  YONGE  (C.  M.).— 
European  History  :  a  Series  of  Histori- 
cal Selections  from  the  best  Authori- 
ties.   2  vols.    3rd  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    65. 


'4 


HISTORY— ILLUSTRATED  BOOKS. 


SHAW  (Miss). —  \usTRALiA.      [/«  the  Press. 

iHUCKBURGH  (E.  S.).— A  History  of 
Rome  to  the  Battle  of  Actium.  Cr. 
8vo.    Zs.  6d, 

SMITH  (Goldwin). — Oxford  and  her  Col- 
leges. Pott  8vo.  3J. — Illustrated  Edition. 
ts.    {See  also  un'ier  Politics,  p.  37.) 

STEPHEN  (Sir  J.  Fitzjames).— The  Story 

OP    NUNCOMAR  AND  THE  IMPEACHMENT  OF 

Sm  Elijah  Impey.    2  vols.    Cr.  8vo.     15s, 
XAIT(C.  W.  A.).— Analysis  of  English  HiS' 

TORY,  BASED  ON  GrEEN's  "  ShORT  HiSTOKV 

OF  THE  English  People."   Cr.  8vo.    3^.  6d. 
TOUT  (T.  F.).— Analysis  of  English  His 

TORY.      Pott  BvO.      IS. 

TREVELYAN  (Sir  Geo.  Otto).— Cawnpore, 

Cr.  Svo.  6s. 
TUCKWELL  (W.).— The  Ancient  Ways 

Winchester  Fifty   Years  Ago.      Globe 

Svo.  4J.  6^. 
WHEELER   (J.    Talboys).— Primer   of  In. 

dian  History,  Asiatic  and  European 

Pott  Svo.     IS. 

College  History  of   India,  Asiatic 

and  European.    Cr.  Svo.    2s. 60.;  swd.  2s. 

A  Short  History  of  India.  With  Maps, 

Cr.  Svo.     12s. 

India  under  British  Rule.  Svo.  izs.6d. 

WILLI  AMS(H.).— Britain's  Naval  Power, 

Cr.  Bvo.     4J.  6d.  net. 
WOOD  (Rev.  E.  G.).— The  Regal  Power 

OF  THE  Church.     Svo.     4^.  6d. 
VONGE  (Charlotte).— Cameos  from  English 

History.    Ext.  fcp.  Svo.    5^.  each. — Vol.  i. 

From  Rollo  to  Edward  II. ;  Vol.  2.  The 

Wars  in  France;  Vol.  3.  The  Wars  of 

THE  Roses  ;  Vol.  4.  Reformation  Times  ; 

Vol.  5.  England  and  Spain  ;  Vol.  6.  Forty 

Years  of  Stewart  Rule  (1603 — 43) ;  Vol.  7. 

The  Rebellion  and  Restoration  (1642 — 

1678). 

The  Victorian  Half-Century.     Cr. 

Bvo.     i.r.  6d. ;  sewed,  is. 

The  Story  of  the  Christians  and 

Moors  in  Spain.     Pott  Svo.    2s.  6d.  net. 

HORSE  BREEDING. 

PEASE  (A.  E.), — Horse  Breeding  for 
Farmers.     Cr.  Svo.    aj-.  6d. 

HORTICULTURE.    (See  Gardening.) 

HYGIENE. 
BERNERS  (J.) — First  Lessons  on  Health, 

Pott  Svo.  IS. 
BLYTH  (A.  Wynter). — A  Manual  of  Public 

Health.     Svo.     17s.  net. 
Lectures    on    Sanitary   Law.      Svo. 

8s.  6d.  net. 
BROWNE  (J.  H.  Balfour).— Water  Supply, 

Cr.  Svo.     2s.  6d. 
CLIMATES  AND    BATHS    OF    GREAT 

BRITAIN.    Svo.    zis.  net. 
CORFIELD  (Dr.  W.  H.).— The  Treatment 

and  Utilisation  of  Sewage.    3rd  Edit, 

Revised   by  the  Author,  and  by  Louis  C. 

PARKES,  M.D.    Svo.     its. 
FAYRER  (Sir  J.).— On  Preservation   of 

Health  in  India.     Pott  Bvo.     is. 


GOODFELLOWQ.).— The  Dietetic  Vald» 
of  Bread.     Cr.  Bvo.     6.r. 

KINGSLEY  (Charles).— Sanitary  and  So- 
cial Lectures.     Cr.  Svo.     gj.  6d. 

Health  and  Education.    Cr.  Svo.    6j 

MIERS  (H.  A.)  and  CROSSKEY  (R.).— Thb 

Soil  in  Relationto  Health.  Cr.Bvo.  ^s.td. 
REYNOLDS  (E.  S.).— Primer  of  Hygiene. 

Pott  Svo.    IS. 
REYNOLDS  (Prof.  Osborne).— Sewer  Gas, 

AND  How  TO  KEEP  IT  OUT  OF  HoUSES.     3rd 

Edit.     Cr.  Svo.     is.  6d. 
RICHARDSON  (Dr.  Sir  B.  W.).— Hygeia  :  A 
City  of  Health.    Cr.  Svo.     is. 

The   Future   of   Sanitary   Science. 

Cr.  Svo.     is. 

Oil  Alcohol.    Cr.  Svo.    u. 

WILLOUGHBY  (E.  F.).— Public  Health 

AND  Demography      Fcp,  Svo.     4^.  6d. 

HYMNOLOGY. 

{See  under  Theology,  p.  42.) 

ILLUSTRATED  BOOKS. 

jESOP'S  FABLES.    Selected  by  J.  Jacobs. 

With   300   Illustrations   by   R.    Heighway. 

Cr.  Svo.    6.r. — Also  with  uncut  edges,  paper 

label,  6s. 
BALCH    (Elizabeth).  —  Glimpses    of    Old 

English  Homes.    G1.  4to.    141. 
BARLOW  (J.).— The  End   of  Elfintown. 

niust.  by  L.  Housman.     Cr.  Svo.     5^. 
BLAKE.    {See  Biography,  p.  4.) 
BOUGHTON  (G.  H.)  and  ABBEY  (E.  A.). 

{See  Voyages  and  Travels.) 
CHRISTMAS    CAROL    (A).       Printed    in 

Colours,  with  Illuminated  Borders.    4to.    2ii. 
CORIDON'S   SONG,  and  other  Verses. 

Preface  by  Austin  Dobson.     Illustrations 

by  Hugh  Thomson.     Cr.  Bvo.     6s. — Also 

with  uncut  edges,  paper  label,  6s. 
CRAWFORD  (F.  M.).  —  Constantinople. 

Illustrated  by  E.  L.  Weeks.    Sm.  410.    6s.  6d, 
DAYS  WITH  SIR  ROGER  DE  COVER. 

LEY.     From  the  Spectator,     Illustrated  by 

Hugh  Thomson.     Cr.  Svo.    6j. — Also  with 

uncut  edges,  paper  label.     6s. 
DELL  (E.  C). — Pictures  from  Shelley. 

Engraved  by  J.  D.  Cooper.    Folio.   2ii-.  net. 
FIELDE  (A.  M.).— A  Corner  of  Cathay. 

Illustrated.     Fcap.  410.     Bj.  6d.  net. 
GASKELL  (Mrs.).— Ckanford.      Illustrated 

by  Hugh  Thomson.      Cr.   Bvo.     6s. — Also 

with  uncut  edges   paper  label.     6s, 
GOETHE.— Reynard  the  Fox.    Edited  by 

J.   Jacobs.     Illustrated  by   F. 'Calderon. 

Cr.  Bvo.    6s.    Also  with  uncut  edges,  paper 

label.    6^. 
GOLDSMITH   (Oliver).  —  The    Vicak    op 

Wakefield.    New  Edition,  with  1S2  Illus- 
trations by  Hugh  Thomson.     Preface  by 

Austin  Dobson.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. — Also  with 

Uncut  Edges,  paper  label.    6.r. 
GREEN     (John     Richard).  —  Illustrated 

Edition  of  the  Short  History  of  thb 

English  People.     4  vols.     Sup.  roy.  Svo. 

I2J.  each  net. 
GRIMM.   {See  Books  for  the  Young,  p.  48.) 
HALLWARD  (R.  F.).— Flowers  of  Para 

DiSE.  Music,  Verse,  Design,  Illustration.  6s 


ILLUSTRATED   BOOKS— LAW. 


HAMERTON(P.  G.).— ManinArt    With 

Etchings  and  Photogravures.  3/.  i-^s.  6d.  net. 
— Large  Paper  Edition.     10/.  10s.  net. 
HARRISON  (F.).— Annals  of  an  Old  Ma- 
nor House,  Sutton  Place,  Guildford. 
4to.     42^.  net. 
HENLEY  (W.  E.).— A  London  Garland. 
Selected  from    Five  Centuries   of  English 
Verse.    Illustrated.    4to.    21J,  net. 
HOOD  (Thomas).— Humorous  Poems.  Illus- 
trated by  C.  E.  Brock.    Cr.  8vo.    6^. — Also 
with  uncut  edges,  paper  label.     6s, 
IRVING    (Washington).— Old    Christmas. 
From  the  Sketch  Book.  Illustr.  by  Randolph 
Caldecott.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. — Also  with  uncut 
edges,  paper  label.    6s.  —Large  Paper  Edi- 
tion.    30^-.  net. 
Bracebridge  Hall.     Illustr.  by  Ran- 
dolph   Caldecott.     Cr.    8vo      6s, — Also 
with  uncut  edges,  paper  label.     6s, 
——  Old     Christmas    and     Bracebridge 
Hall.    Edition  de  L.%cxe.    Roy.  8vo.     21J. 

■ Rip  Van  Winkle  and  the  Legend  of 

Sleepy  Hollow.  Illustr.  bv  G.  H.  Bough- 
ton.  Cr.  8vo.  6s. — Also  with  uncut  edges, 
paper  label.  6s. — Edition  de  Luxe.  Roy. 
8vo.  30J.  net. 
KINGSLEY  (Charles).— The  Water  Babies. 
\See  Books  for  the  Young,  p.  48.) 

The  Heroes.  i^See  Books  for  the  Young.) 

Glaucus.    {^See  Natural  History.) 

KIPLING  (Rudyard).     {See  Books  for  the 

Young.) 
LANG  (Andrew).— The    Library.     With  a 
Chapter    on    Modern    English     Illustrated 
Books,  by  Austin  Dobson.  Cr.  8vo.  4J.  6d. 
— Large  Paper  Edition.     21J.  net. 
LYTE  (H.  C.  Maxwell).     {See  History.) 
MAHAFFY  (Rev.  Prof.  J.  P.)  and  ROGERS 

(J.  E.).    iSee  Voyages  and  Travels.) 
MEREDITH  (L.  A.).— Bush    Friends    in 
Tasmania.      Native   Flowers,   Fruits,  and 
Insects,  with  Prose  and  Verse  Descriptions. 
Folio.     525-.  6d,  net. 
MITFORD  (M.  R.).— Our  Village,     Illus- 
trated by  Hugh  Thomson.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. — 
Also  with  uncut  edges,  paper  label.     6s, 
OLD    SONGS.      With  Drawings  by  E.  A. 
Abbey  and  A.  Parsons.  4to,mor.gilt.  %xs,6d. 
OLIPHAT^T  (Mrs.).    (J^^  Histor\.) 
PENNELLCJos.).    (^-^  Art.) 
PROPERT  a- L-).    (^^«Art.) 
STEEL  (F.   A.).— Tales  of  the  Punjab. 
Illustr.  by  J.  L.  Kipling.    Cr.  Svo.     6s. — 
Also  with  uncut  edges,  paper  label,  6s. 
STUART,    RELICS    OF    THE    ROYAL 
HOUSE  OF.    Illustrated  by  40  Plates  in 
Colours  drawn  from  Relics  of  the  Stuarts  by 
William  Gibb.    With  an  Introduction  by 
John  Skelton,  C.B.,  LL.D.,  and  Descrip- 
tive Notes  by  W.  St.  John  Hope.    Folio, 
half  morocco,  gilt  edges.     10/.  lar.  net. 
SWIFT.— Gulliver's  Travels.     Illustrated 
by  C.  E.  Brock.    Preface  by  H.  Craik,  C.B. 
Cr.  Svo.    6j.— Also  with  uncut  edges,  paper 
label,  6^. 
TENNYSON  (Hallam  Lord).— Jack  and  thb 
Bean-Stalk.    English  Hexameters.    Illus- 
trated by  R.  Caldecott.    Fcp.  4to.    3J.  6d, 


TRISTRAM  (W.  O.).— Coaching  Days  and 

Coaching  Ways.    Illust.  H.  Railton  and 

Hugh  Thomson.     Cr.  8vo.    6j.— Also  with 

uncut  edges,  paper  label,  6s. — Large  Papeii 

Edition,  30J.  net. 
TURNER'S    LIBER    STUDIORUM :     A 

Description  and  a  Catalogue.  ByW.G. 

Rawlinson.    Med.  Svo.    12^.  6d, 
WALTON  andCOTTON— LOWELL.— Thb 

Complete  Angler.    With  Introduction  by 

Jas.  Russell  Lowell.   2  vols.  Ext.  cr.  Svo; 

52J.  6d.  net. 
WHITE  (G.).— Natural  History  of  Sel- 

borne.      Introduction  by  J.   Burroughs. 

Illustrations  by  C.  Johnson.    2  vols.    Cr_ 

Svo.    xos.  td. 
WINTER  (W.).— Shakespeare's  England. 

80  Illustrations.     Cr.  Svo.     6s. 

LANGUAGE.    {.See  Philology.) 

LAW 

BALL(W.  W.  R.).— The  Student's  Guide 
to  the  Bar,    6th  Ed.    Cr.  Svo.    zs.  6d.  net, 
BERNARD  (M.).— Four  Lectures  on  Sub- 
jects connected  with  Diplomacy.  Svo.  g*. 
BIGELOW  (M.  M.).— History  of  Prock- 
dure  in   England    from   the   Norman 
Conquest,  1066-1204.    Svo.    i6j. 
BIRRELL  (A.).— Duties  and  Liabilities 

of  Trustees.  Cr.  Svo.  3J.  6d. 
BORGEAUD  (C).  —Constitutions  in 
Europe  and  America.  Transl.  by  C.  D, 
Hazen.  Cr.  Svo.  8j.  6d.  net. 
BOUTMY  (E.).  —  Studies  in  Constitu- 
tional Law.  Transl.  by  Mrs.  Dicey.  Pre- 
face by  Prof.  A.  V.  Dicey.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

The  English  Constitution.    'Jransl. 

by   Mrs.   Eaden.     Introduction  by   Sir   F. 
Pollock,  Bart.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 
CHERRY    (R.    R.).  —  Lectures    on    thb 
Growth  of  Criminal  Law  in  Ancient 
Communities.    Svo.     ^s.  net. 
DICEY  (Prof.  A.   V.).  —  Introduction  to 
the  Study  of  the  Law  of  the  Consti- 
tution.   4th  Edit.    Svo.      as.  6d. 
ENGLISH     CITIZEN     SERIES,     THE. 

{See  Politics.) 
GOODNOW    (F.    J.).— Municipal    Home 

Rule.    Cr.  Svo.    6s.  6d.  net. 
HOLLAND  (Prof.  T.  E.).— The  Treaty  Re- 
lations OF  Russia  and  Turkey,  from 
1774  TO  1853.    Cr.  Svo.    2f. 
HOLMES    (O.    W.,   jun.).  — The   Common 

Law.    8vo.     vis. 
HOWELL  (G.).— Handy  Book  of  the  La- 
bour Laws.    3rd  Ed.    Cr.  Svo.    3^.  6d.  net. 
LAWRENCE(T.  J.).— International  Law. 

8vo.    I2J-.  6d.  net. 
LIGHTWOOD  Q.  M.).— The  Nature  of 

Positive  Law.    Svo.    i2j.  6d. 

MAITLAND(F.  W.).— Pleas  of  the  Crown 

FOR  the  County  of  Gloucester,  a.d.  1221. 

Svo.     is.  6d. 

•^ —  Justice  and  Police.    Cr.  Svo.    2*.  6d. 

MONAHAN  (James  H.).— The  Method  or 

Law.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 
MUNRO   (J.   E.   C.).— Commercial   Law. 
Globe  Svo.    3s.  6d. 


i6 


LAW— LITERATURE. 


LAW — continued. 

PATERSON    (James). — Commentaries    on 

THE  Liberty  of  the  Subject,  and  the 

Laws  of  England  relating  to  the  Sb- 

CURITV  OF  THE  Person.  2  vols.  Cr.  8vo.  21J. 

The  Liberty  of  the  Press,  Speech, 

AND  Public  Worship.    Cr.  8vo.    izj, 

PHILLIMORE  (John  G.).— Private  Law 

AMONG  THE  ROMANS.      8vO.      ds. 

POLLOCK  (Sir  F.,  Bart.).— Essays  in  Juris- 

PRUDENCE  AND  EthICS.     8vO.     IOT.  dd. 

The  Land  Laws.     Cr.  8vo.    2J.  td, 

Leading  Cases  done  into  English. 

Cr.  8vo.     3J.  dd. 

A  First  Book  of  Jurisprudence.     Cr. 

8vo.  [/«  tJie  Press. 

RICHEY  (Alex.  G.) .— The  Irish  Land  Laws. 

Cr.  8vo.     35^.  td. 
STEPHEN  (Sir  J.  F.,  Bart.)-— A  Digest  of 

THE  Law  OF  Evidence.  6th  Ed.  Cr.  8vo.  6*. 

A    Digest    of    the    Criminal    Law  : 

Crimes  and  Punishments,  5th  Ed.  8vo.  i6j. 

A  Digest  of  the  Law  of  Criminal 

Procedure  in  Indictable  Offences.  By 
Sir  J.  F.,  Bart.,  and  Herbert  Stephen, 
LL.M.    8vo.     i2s.6d. 

A  History  of  the  Criminal  Law  of 

England.     3  vols.     8vo.    48^. 

A  General  View   of  the   Criminal 

Law  OF  England.     2nd  Edit.     8vo.     14J. 

STEPHEN  (J.  K.).— International  Law 
and  International  Relations.  Cr. 
8vo.     6^. 

STEVENS  (C.  E.).— Sources  of  the  Con- 
stitution OF  THE  United  States,  con- 
sidered in  Relation  to  Colonial  and 
English  History.    Cr.  8vo.    ts.  td.  net. 

WILLIAMS  (S.  E.).~Forensic  Facts  and 
Fallacies.    Globe  8vo.    4J.  6d. 

LETTERS.    {See  under  Literature,  p.  24  ) 

LIFE-BOAT. 

■GILMORE  (Rev.  John).— Storm  Warriors; 
or,  Life-Boat  Work  on  the  Goodwin  Sands. 
Cr.  8vo.     3^.  dd. 

LEWIS  (Richard). — History  of  the  Life- 
Boat  AND  its  Work.    Cr.  8vo.    5*. 

LIGHT.    {See  under  Physics,  p.  34.) 

UTERATURE. 

History  and  Crittcisfn  of — ConiTnentarits, 
etc. — Poetry  and  the  Drama — Poetical  Col- 
lections and  Selectiofts — Prose  Fiction — Col- 
lected  IVorks,  Essays,  Lectures,  Letters, 
Miscellaneous   JVorks. 

History  and  Criticism  of. 

(See  also  Essays,  p.  24.) 
ARNOLD  (M.).    {See  Essays,  p.  24.) 
BROOKE  (Stopford  A.).— A  Primer  of  Eng- 
lish Literature.    Pott  8vo.    is. — Large 
Paper  Edition.     8vo.     7s.  6d. 
A  History  of  Early  English  Litera- 
ture.   2  vols.    8vo.    20s.  net. 
CLASSICAL  WRITERS.    Edited  by  John 
Richard  Green.    Fcp.  8vo.     is.  6d.  each. 
Demosthenes.     By  Prof.  Butcher,  M.A. 
Euripides.    By  Prof.  Mahaffy. 
Livy.    By  the  Rev.  W.  W.  Capes,  M.A. 
Milton.    By  Stopford  A.  Brooke. 
Sophocles.    By  Prof.  L.  Campbell,  M.A. 
Tacitus.  By  Messrs. Church  and  Brodribb. 
Vergil.    By  Prof.  Nettleship,  M.A. 


COURTHOPE  (W.  J.)  —History  of  Eng- 
lish Poetry.    Vol.  I,    8vo.    10s.  net. 
ENGLISH    MEN    OF    LETTERS.      {See 

Biography,  p.  4.) 
HISTORY  OF  ENGLISH  LITERATURE. 
In  4  vols.     Cr.  8vo. 

Early  English  Literature.    By  Stop- 
ford Brooke,  M.A.        [In  preparation. 
Elizabethan    Literature    (1560 — 1665). 

By  George  Saintsbury,    ^s.  6d. 
Eighteenth  Century  Literature  (1660 
—1780).   By  Edmund  GossE,  M.A.   js.td. 
Nineteenth  Century  Literature.    By 
G.  Saintsbury.    js.  6d. 

/EBB  (Prof.  R.  C.).— A  Primer  of  Greek 

Literature.    Pott  8vo.    is. 
The  Attic  Orators,  from  Antiphon 

TO  IsAEOs.    2nd  Edit.    2  vols    8vo.    25J. 

Rise    and  Development   of    Greek 

Poetry.    Cr.  8vo.    ys.  net. 

JOHNSON'S  LIVES  OF  THE  POETS. 
Milton,  Dryden,  Pope,  Addison,  Swift, 
and  Gray  With  Macaulay's  "Life  of 
Johnson  "  Ed.  by  M.Arnold.  Cr.Svo.  4s.6d. 

JONES  (H.  A.), — Renascence  of  the  Eng- 
lish Drama.    Cr,  8vo.    6s. 

KINGSLEY  (Charles).  —  Literary  and 
General  Lectures.    Cr.  Bvo.    3J.  6d. 

MAHAFFY  (Prof.  J.  P.).— A  History  of 
Classical  Greek  Literature.  2  vols. 
Cr.  8vo.— Vol.  I.  The  Poets.  With  an 
Appendix  on  Homer  by  Prof.  Sayce.  In  a 
Parts. — Vol.  2.  The  Prose  Writers.  In  a 
Parts.     4s.  6d.  each. 

MORLEY  (John).  {See  Collected  Works, 
p.  27.) 

OLIPHANT  (Mrs.  M.  O.  W.).— The  Lite 
rary  History  of  England  in  the  End 
of  the  i8th  and  Beginning  of  the  19TH 
Century.    3  vols.    8vo.    21s. 

PATER  (W.).— Greek  Studies.  Ex.  cr.  8vo. 
JOS.  6d. 

Plato  and  Platonism.     Ex.  cr.  8vo. 

Ss.  6d. 

RYLAND  (F.). — Chronological  Outlines 
OF  English  Literature.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

SAINTSBURY  (G.).— A  Short  History  of 
English  Literature.    G1.  8vo.    [In  prep. 

TYRRELL  (Prof.  R.  Y.)  —Latin  Poetry. 
Cr.  8vo.     7^.  net 

WARD  (Prof.  A.  W.).— A  History  of  Eng- 
lish Dramatic  Literature,  to  the 
Death  of  Queen  Anne.   2  vols.    8vo.   321. 

WHITCOMB(L.  S.).— ChronologicalOut. 
LINES  OF  American  Literature.  Cr.  8vo. 
6s.  net. 

WILKINS  (Prof.  A.  S.).— A  Primer  of  Ro- 
man Literature.    Pott  8vo.    is. 

WULKER. — Anglo  Saxon  Literature, 
Transl.  by  A.  W.  Deering  and  C.  F.  Mc 
Clumpha.  [In  the  Press. 

Commeutaries,  etc. 

BROWNING. 
A  Primer  OF  Browning.  By  Mart  Wilson. 
Cr.  8vo.     2j.  6d. 

CHAUCER. 
A  Primer  of  Chaucer.     By  A.  W.  Pol- 
lard.    Pott  Bvo.     IS. 


POETRY  AND  THE  DRAMA. 


17 


JjANTE. 

Readings  on  the  Purgatorio  of  Dante. 
Chiefly  based  on  the  Commentary  of  Ben- 
venuto  da  Imola.  By  the  Hon.  W.  W, 
Vernon,  M.A.  With  an  Introduction  by 
Dean  Church.     2  vols.    Cr.  Svo.    24*. 

Readings  on  the  Inferno  of  Dante.  By 
the  Hon.  W.  W,  Vernon,  M.A,  With  an 
Introduction  by  Rev.  E.  Moore,  D.D, 
2  vols.     Cr.  Svo.     30J. 

Companion  to  Dante.    From  G.  A.  Scar* 
TAzziNi.  ByA.  J.  Butler.  Cr.  Svo.  iw.6^;. 
flOMER. 

Homeric  Dictionary.  {See  Dictionaries.) 

The  Problem  of  the  Homeric  Poems. 
By  Prof.  W.  D.  Geddes.     Svo.     14*. 

Homeric  Synchronism.  An  Inquiry  into 
the  Time  and  Place  of  Homer.  By  the 
Rt.  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone.   Cr.  Svo.  6j. 

Primer  of  Homer.  By  the  Rt.  Hon.  W.  E. 
Gladstone.     Pott  8vo.     i*. 

Landmarks  of  Homeric  Study,  together 
with  an  Essay  on  the  Points  of  Con- 
tact  between  the  Assyrian  Tablets 
and  the  Homeric  Text.  By  the  same. 
Cr.  Svo.     2S.  6d. 

Companion  to  the  Iliad  for  English 
Readers.    By  W.  Leaf.    Cr.  Svo.   js.  6d. 
HORACE. 

Studies,  Literary  and  Historical,  in 
the  Odes  of  Horace.     By  A.  W.  Van- 
rall,  Litt.D.     Svo.     Zs.td. 
'SHAKESPEARE. 

A  Primer  of  Shakspere.  By  Prof.  Dow- 
den.    Pott  Svo.    IS. 

A  Shakespearian  Grammar.  By  Rev. 
E.  A.  Abbott.     Ext.  fcp.  Svo.     ts. 

A  Shakespeare  Concordance.  By  J.Bart- 
lett.    4to.    42J-.  net. ;  half  mor.,  45J.  net. 

Shakespeareana  Genbalogica.  ByG.  R. 
French.     Svo.     15J. 

A  Selection  from  the  Lives  in  North's 
Plutarch  which  illustrate  Shakes- 
peare's  Plays.  Edited  by  Rev.  W.  W. 
Skeat,  M.A.     Cr.  Svo.    ts. 

Short  Studies  of  Shakespeare's  Plots. 
By  Prof.  Cyril  Ransome.  Cr.  Svo.  3* .  6rf, 
— Also  separately  :  Hamlet,  gd. ;  Mac- 
beth, gd. ;  Tempest,  gd. 

Caliban:  A  Critique  on  "The  Tempest" 
and  "A  Midsummer  Night's  Dream."    By 
Sir  Daniel  Wilson.    Svo.    tos.  td. 
aJENNYSON. 

A  Companion  to  "In  Memoriam."  By 
Elizabeth  R.  Chapman.   Globe  Svo.   aj. 

"  In  Memoriam  "-Its  Purpose  and  Struc- 
ture :  A  Study.  By  J.  F.  Genung.  Cr. 
Svo.    $s. 

Essays  on  the  Idylls  of  the  King.  By 
H.  Littledale,  M.A.    Cr.  Svo.     ^.dd. 

A  Study  of  the  Works  of  Alfred  Lord 
Tennyson.    By  E.  C.  Tainsh.    New  Ed. 
Cr.  Svo.     6s. 
THACKERAY. 

Thackeray  :  A  Study.     By  A.  A.  Jack. 
,.  Cr.  Svo.    3J.  6d. 
WbRDSWORTH. 

Wordsworth  I  ana  :  A  Selectinn  of  Papers 
read  to  the  Wordsworth  Society.  Edited 
by  W.  Knight.     Cr.  Svo.     js.  td. 

Poetry  and  the  Drama. 

ALDRICH  (T.  Bailey).— The  Sisters'  Tra- 
gedy :  with  other  Poems,  Lyrical  and  Dra- 
matic.    Fcp.  Svo.     3J.  €>d.  net. 

.ALEXANDER (C.F.)--PoEMS.  Gl.Svo.  -jsM. 


AN  ANCIENT  CITY  ;  and  other  Pobms. 

Ext.  fcp.  Svo.    ds. 
ANDERSON  (A.).— Ballads  and  Sonnets. 

Cr.  Svo.     5i. 

ARNOLD     (Matthew).  —  The     Complete 

Poetical  Works.    New  Edition.    3  vols, 

Cr.  Svo.    js,  6d,  each  ;  Globe  Svo,    $5.  each. 

Vol.1.  Early  Poems,  Narrative  Poems 

and  Sonnets. 
Vol.  2.  Lyric  and  Elegiac  Poems. 
Vol.  3.  Dramatic  and  Later  Poems. 

Complete   Poetical   Works,     i  vol. 

Cr.  Svo.     js.  6d. 

Selected  Poems.   Pott  Svo.   2.r.  6d.  net. 

AUSTIN  (Alfred).— Poetical  Works.    New 

Collected  Edition.  7  vols.  Cr.  Svo.    jj-,  each. 
Vol.  I.  The  Tower  of  Babel. 
Vol.  2.  Savonarola,  etc. 
Vol.  3.  Prince  Lucifer. 
Vol.  4.  The  Human  Tragedy. 
Vol.  5.  Lyrical  Poems. 
Vol.  6.  Narrative  Pohms. 
Vol.  7.  FoRTUNATUS  THE  Pessimist. 

Soliloquies  tn  Song.     Cr.  Svo.    6*. 

— —  At  the  Gate  of  the  Convent  :  and 
other  Poems.     Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

-  Madonna's  Child.    Fcp.  Svo.    2j.61f.net. 

Rome  or  Death.     Cr.  4to.    gj. 

The  Golden  Age.    Cr.  Svo.     5^. 

The  Season.     Cr.  Svo.     5^. 

Love's  Widowhood.     Cr.  Svo.     6*. 

——  English  Lyrics.     Cr.  Svo.    3J.  6d. 

England's  Darling.    Cr.  Svo.    &i. 

BETSY  LEE :  A  Fo'c's'le  Yarn.    Ext.  fcp. 

Svo.     ss.  6d. 
BLACKIE  (J.  S.).— Messis  Vitae  :  Gleanings 
of  Song  from  a  Happy  Life.    Cr.  Svo.    4s.6d. 

The  Wise  Men  of  Greece.    In  a  Series 

of  Dramatic  Dialogues.     Cr.  Svo.    gj. 

Goethe's  Faust.    Translated  into  Eng- 
lish Verse,     and  Edit.     Cr.  Svo.     gs, 

BLAKE.    (See  Biography,  p.  4.) 
BROOKE  (Stopford  A.).— Riquet   of   the 
Tuft  :  A  Love  Drama.    Ext.  cr.  Svo.    6*. 

Poems.     Globe  Svo.     6s, 

BROWN  (T.  E.).— The  Manx  Witch:  and 

other  Poems.     Cr.  Svo.     6s. 
— -  Old  John,  and  other  Poems.  Cr.  Svo.  6*. 
BURGON  (Dean).— Poems.  Ex.fcp.Svo.  ^.6d. 
BURNS.     The  Poetical  Works.    With  a 

Biographical  Memoir  by  A.  Smith.  In  2  vols. 

Fcp. Svo.  los.  {See also Gi^OBE  Librarv,p.zs.) 
BUTLER  (Samuel).— Hudibras.     Edit,  by 

Alfred  Milnes.   Fcp.  Svo.— Part  I.  3s.  td,  j 

Parts  II.  and  III.  4J.  6d. 
BYRON.  (6'fffGoLDEN  Treasury  Series,  p.2S) 
CALDERON.— Select   Plays.    Edited  by 

Norman  Maccoll.    Cr.  Svo.     14J. 
CARR   (J.    Comyns).  —  King    Arthur.      A 

Drama,  as  performed  at  the  Lyceum^    Svo 

ar.  net ;  sewed,  i^.  net. 
CAUTLEY  (G.  S.).— A  Century  of  Em- 
blems.   With  Illustrations  by  Lady  Marion 

Alford.     Small  4to.     lo; .  6d. 
CHAUCER.— Canterbury  Tales.   Edit,  by 

A.  W.  Pollard.    2  vols.    Gl.  Svo.    loi-. 
The  Riches  of  Chaucer.    With  Notes 

by  C.  Cowden  Clarke.    Cr.  Svo.    7^.  6d. 
CLOUGH  (A.  H.).— Poems.    Cr.  Svo.   7f.6rf. 

Selections   from   the  Poems.     Pott 

Svo.    25.  6d.  net. 


i8 


LITERATURE. 


LITERATURE. 

Poetry  and  the  Drama— to«/«««»rf. 

COLERIDGE :    Poetical   and    Dramatic 

Works.    4  vols.    Fcp.  8vo.    31s.  td. — Also 

an  Edition  on  Large  Paper,  2/.  i2j.  td. 
Complete  Poetical  Works.    With  In- 
troduction by  J.  D.  Campbell,  and  Portrait. 

Cr.  8vo.     ^s.  6d, 
COLQUHOUN.— Rhymes  and  Chimes.   By 

F.  S.  CoLQUHOUN  in^e  F.  S.  Fuller  Mait- 

land).     Ext.  fcp.  Bvo.     2J-.  6d. 
COWPER.— The  Task,  Book  IV.    With  In- 
troduction and  Notes  by  W.  T,  Webb,  M.A. 

Sewed,  u.— Book  V.   With  Notes.   Gl.  8vo. 

6d.    {See  Globe  Library,  p.  251  Golden 

Treasury  Series,  p.  25.) 
Shorter  Poems.    By  W.  T.  Webb,  M.A. 

Globe  8vo.    2s.  6d. 
CRAIK  (Mrs.).— Poems.    Ext.  fcp.  8vo.    6j. 
DABBS    (G.    H.    R.)— RIGHTON    (E.).— 

Dantb:  a  Dramatic  Poem.     Fcp.  8vo. 

2f.  6d. 
DAWSON    (W.    J.).— Poems    and    Lyrics. 

Fcp.  8vo.    4^.  t>d. 
DE  VERE  (A.).— Poetical  Works.     7  vols. 

Cr.  8vo.     ss.  each. 
Selections  from  Poetical  Works  of. 

By  G.  E.  WooDBERRY.    Globe  8vo.    ss. 
DOYLE  (Sir  F.  H.).— The  Return  of  the 

Guards  :  and  other  Poems.   Cr.  8vo.   7*.  td. 
DRYDEN.     {See   Collected  Works    and 

Globe  Librarv,  pp.  24,  25.) 
EMERSON.    {See  Collected  Works,  p.  24.) 
EVANS    (Sebastian).  —  Brother    Fabian's 

Manuscript:  and  other  Poems.  Fcp.Svo.  6*. 

In  the  Studio:   A  Decade  of  Poems. 

Ext.  fcp.  8vo.    SS- 

FITZ  GERALD  (Caroline).— Venetia  Vic- 
TRix  :  and  other  Poems.  Ext.fcp.8vo.  -^s.td. 

FITZGERALD  (Edward).— The  RubAiyat 
OF  Omar  KhAvyam.    Ext.  cr.  8vo.    loj.  td. 

FOC'SLE  YARNS,  including  "Betsy  Lee," 
and  other  Poems.     Cr.  8vo.     6s. 

FRASER-TYTLER.  —  Songs  in  Minok 
Keys.  By  C.  C.  Fraser-Tytlkr  (Mrs, 
Edward  Liddell).  2nd  Edit.  Pott  Bvo.  61. 

FURNIVALL  (F.  J.).— Le  Morte  Arthur. 
Edited  from  the  Harleian  MSS.  225a,  in  the 
British  Museum.     Fcp.  8vo.    -js.  td. 

GARNETT  (R.).— Idylls  and  Epigrams. 
Chiefly  from  the  Greek  Anthology.  Fcp. 
8vo.     2S.  td. 

GOETHE.— Faust.    {See  Blackie.) 

Reynard  the  Fox.   Transl.  into  English 

Verse  by  A.  D.  Ainslcf      Cr   8vo.     ^s.  6d. 

GOLDSMITH.— The  Travkllkr  and  the 

Deserted  Village.   With  Introduction  and 

Notes,  by  Arthur  Barrett,  B.A.    tj.  grf. ; 

sewed,  is.Sd. ;  (separately),  sewed,  is.  each. 

—By  J.  W.  Hales.    Cr.  Bvo.    6d    {See  also 

Globh  Library,  p.  25.) 
GRAHAM    (David).— King    James    I.     An 

Historical  Tragedy.     Globe  Bvo.     js. 
GRAY.  —Poems.  With  Introduction  and  Ndtes, 

by  J.  Bradshaw,  LL.D.    Gl.  8vo.    tj.  gd. ; 

sewed,  is.  6d.    {See  also  Collected  Works, 

p.  26.) 

Select  Odes.     With  Notes.     Gl.  8vo, 

sewed.    6d. 

HALLWARD.    {See  Illustrated  Books.) 


HAYES  (A.).— The  March  of  Man:  and 
other  Poems.     Fcp.  8vo.     3J.  6d.  net. 

HERRICK.  {See  Golden  Treasury  Se- 
ries, p.  25.) 

HOPKINS  (Ellice).— Autumn  Swallows: 
A  Book  of  Lyrics.     Ext.  fcp.  8vo.     61. 

HOSKEN  (J.  D.).— Phaon  and  Sappho,  and 
NiMROD.     Fcp.  8vo.     5s. 

JEWETT  (S.).— The  Pilgrim,  and  other. 
Poems.    Fcp.  8vo.    5J. 

JONES  (H.  A.). — Saints  and  Sinners. 
Ext.  fcp.  8vo.    3j.  6d. 

The  Crusaders.     Fcp.  8vo.    us.  6d. 

Judah.     Fcp.  8vo.     2s.  td. 

KEATS.  (6'i?fG0LDENTREASURYSKRlES,p.2S.). 

KINGSLEY    (Charles).— Poems.      Cr.    Bvo. 

is.  td.~Pockei  Edition.  Pott  8vo.   if.  dd.— 

Eversley  Edition.     2  vols.     Cr.  8vO.     loj. 
LAMB.    {See  Collected  Works,  p.  27.) 
LANDOR.    {See  Golden  Treasury  Series^ 

P-  25) 
LONGFELLOW.    {See  Golden   Trbasurt 

Series,  p.  25.) 
LOWELL  (Jas.  Russell).— Complete  Poetl 

cal  Works.    Pott  8vo.    4J.  td. 
With  Introduction  by  Thomas  Hughbs, 

and  Portrait.     Cr.  8vo.     7J.  td. 
Heartsease  and  Rue.    Cr.  Bvo.     5*. 

Old  English  Dramatists.  Cr.  8vo,  jj. 

(.5"^.?  also  Collected  Works,  p.  27.) 

LUCAS  (F.).— Sketches  of  Rural   Life. 

Poems.     Globe  8vo.     5J. 
MEREDITH    (George).  —  A    Reading   op 

Earth.     Ext.  fcp.  Bvo.     5^. 
■- —  Poems    and    Lyrics   of   the  Joy   op 

Earth.    3rd  Edit.    Ext.  fcp.  Bvo.    ts. 

Ballads  and  Poems  of  Tragic  Life. 

2nd  Edit.    Ext.  fcp.  Bvo.    6j. 

Modern  Love.     Ex.  fcap.  8vo.    5J. 

The  Empty  Purse.     Fcp.  Bvo.     51. 

MILTON.— Poetical  Works.    Edited,  with 

Introductions  and  Notes,  by  Prof.  Davie> 
Masson.  M.A.  3  vols.  Bvo.  2/.  2j.— [Uni- 
form witn  the  Cambridge  Shakespeare.] 

Edited  by  Prof.  Masson.    3  vols. 

Globe  Bvo.     15J. 

Globe'  Edition.      Edited    by    Prof. 

Masson.     Crown  Bvo.     ^s.  td. 

Paradise  Lost,  Books  i  and  a.    Edited 

by  Michael  Macmillan,  B.A.  is.^d.\ 
— Books  1  to  4  (separately),  is.  -^d.  each ; 
sewed,  \s.  each. 

L' Allegro,    II    Penseroso,    Lvcidas, 

Arcades,  Sonnets,  etc.  Edited  by  Wm. 
Bell,  M.A.     \s.  ad. 

Comus.    By  the  same.     is.  ^d. ;  swd,  is, 

Samson  Agonistes.    Edited  by  H.  M. 

Percival,  M.A.     2J. 

MOULTON    (Louise    Chandler).  —  In   the 

Garden  of  Dreams  :  Lyrics  and  Sonnets. 

Cr.  Bvo.     ts. 
— —  Swallow  Flights.     Cr.  8vo.    ts. 
MUDIE  (C.  E.).— Stray  Leaves:   Poems. 

4th  Edit.    Ext.  fcp.  Bvo.    3J.  td. 
MYERS    (E.).— The    Puritans:   A    Poem. 

Ext.  fcp.  8vo.    2s.  td. 

Poems.    Ext.  fcp.  8vo.    4*.  td. 

The    Defence    of    Rome:    and  othei 

Poems.     Ext.fcp.  8vo.     sj. 

The  Judgment  of  Prometheus  :  and 

other  Poems.     Ext.  fcp.  Bvo.     3^.  td. 


POETRY  AND  THE  DRAMA. 


19 


MYERS  (F.  W.  H.).— The  Renewal  of 
Youth  :  and  other  Poems.    Cr.  8vo.    ^s.  td. 

St.  Paul:  A  Poem.  Ext.fcp.8vo.  as.td. 

NORTON  (Hon.  Mrs.).— The  Lady  of  La 

Garaye.    9th  Edit.     Fcp.  8vo.    4J.  6d, 
PALGRAVR(Prof.F.T.).— Original  Hymns. 
3rd  Edit.     Pott  8vo.     xs.  td. 

Lyric  \L  Poems.     Ext.  fcp.  8vo.    ts, 

Visions  of  England.     Cr.  8vo.     7*.  dd. 

Amenophis.     Pott  8vo.     4^.  td. 

PALGRAVE  (W,  G.).— A  Vision  of  Life: 

Semblance  and  Reality.  Cr.  8vo.   'js.  net. 

PATERSON  (A.  B.).— Man  from  Snowy 
River.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

FEEL  (Edmund). — Echoes  from  Horeb  : 
and  other  Poems.    Cr.  8vo.    3J.  td 

POPE.    {See  Globe  Library,  p.  25.) 

RAWNSLEY  (H.  D.).— Poems,  Ballads, 
AND  Bucolics.    Fcp.  8vo.    5J. 

ROSCOE(W.  C.).— Poems.  Edit,  by  E.  M. 
RoscoE.    Cr.  Svo.     7^.  net. 

ROSSETTI  (Christina).— Poems.  New  Col- 
lected Edition,     Globe  Svo.    7*.  (>d.  ^ 

-  New  Poems.  Hitherto  unpublished  or 
uncollected.  Edited  by  W.  M.  Rossetti. 
G1.  8vo.    7j.  6d. 

-  SiNG-SoNG :  A  Nursery  Rhyme  Book. 
Small  4to.     Illustrated.     4*.  dd. 

'~—  Goblin  Market.    Illust.    Fcp.  8vo,    5*. 
Rossetti  Birthday  Book.     Edited  by 

O.  Rossetti.    i6mo.    2^.  6el. 
SCOTT.— The  Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel, 

and  The  Lady  of  the  Lake.    Edited  by 

Prof.  F.  T.  Palgrave.     is. 

-  The  Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel.  By 
G.  H.  Stuart,  M.A.,  and  E.  H.  Elliot, 
B.A.  Globe  8vo.  2J.— Canto  I.  9*^.- Cantos 
I. — III.  and  IV. — VI.  is.  3d.  each;  sewed. 
If.  each. 

'^—  Marmion.  Edited  by  Michael  Mac- 
MILLAN,  B  A.     3J. ;  sewed,  2J.  6d, 

Marmion,  and  The  Lord  of  the  Isles. 

By  Prof.  F.  T.  Palgrave.     is. 

The  Lady  of  the  Lake.     By  G.  H. 

Stuart,  M.A.    G1.  8vo.    2s.  6d, ',  swd.  2*.- 
Canto  I.,  sewed,  gd. 

Rokeby.      By    Michael    Macmillan, 

B.A.     3^ . ;  sewed,  ss.  6d, 

{See  also  Globe  Library,  p.  25.) 
SHAIRP  Uohn  Campbell).— Glen  Desserat: 
and  other  Poems,  Ljn-ical  and  Elegiac.    Ed. 
by  F.  T.  Palgrave.    Cr.  8vo.    6j. 
SHAKESPEARE.— The  WoRKSOF  William 
Shakespeare.     Cambridge  Edition.     New 
and  Revised  Edition,  by  W.  Alois  Wright, 
M.A.    9  vols.    8vo.    ioj.  td.  each. — Edition 
de  Luxe.  40  vols.  Sup.  roy.  8vo.  6s.  each  net. 
..~— Victoria  Edition.  Ins  vols.— Come- 
dies ;    Histories  ;    Tragedies.     Cr.  Svo. 
6j.  each. 

The  Tempest.    With  Introduction  and 

Notes,  by  K.  Deighton..    G1.  Svo.    w.  gd, 

Much  Ado  about  Nothing.    2j. 

A  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,    ij.  gd. 

The  Merchant  of  Venice,      zs.  gd. 

As  You  Like  It.    u.  gd. 

Twelfth  Night,     ij-  gd. 

The  Winter's  Tale.    zs. 

King  John.     if.  gd. 

Richard  II.    "•  Q^-         ,  , 

~  Henry  IV.     Part  I.    zs.  6d. ;  sewed,  -jm. 
Henry  IV.    Part  II.    2J.  6d. ;  sewed,  2*. 


SHAKESPEARE.  —  CoRiOLANUS.      By  K. 
Deighton.    2«.  td  ;  sewed,  2s. 

Henry  V.     is.  gd. 

Richard  III.     ByC.  H.  Tawney,  M.A. 

2S.  6d. ;  sewed,  ss. 

Henry  VIII.    By  K.  Deighton.    ts.gd, 

Romeo  and  Juliet.    2s.  td, ;  sewed,  2s. 

Julius  CjESar.    is.gd. 

Macbeth,     ij.  gd. 

Hamlet,    ss.  6d. ;  sewed,  2s. 

King  Lear.    xs.  gd. 

Othello.    2s. 

Antony  and  Cleopatra.  2s.6d.',  svfd.  2s. 

Cymbelinb.    2s.  td. ;  sewed,  2s. 

{See  also  Globe  Library,  p.  25 ;  Golden 

Treasury  Series,  p.  26.) 

SHELLEY. — Complete  Poetical  Works. 

Edited  by  Prof.  Dowden.  Portrait.  Cr.  Svo, 

•js.^d.  (5ff«  Golden  Treasury  Series,  p.26.) 
SKRI  NE  (J.  H.).— Joan  1  he  Maid.    Ex.  cr. 

Svo.    ta.  td. 
SMITH  (C.  Barnard).— Poems.   Fcp.  8vo.   5*. 
SMITH  ■(Horace).— Poems.    GlcOie  Svo.    5*. 

Interludes.    Cr.  8vo.    51. 

Interludes.  Second  Series.  Cr.  Svo.  $s, 

SPENSER.— Fairie  Qubene.  Book  I.  By 
H.  M.  Percival,  M.A.    Gl.  Svo.    31. ;  swd., 

2S.  td. 

Shepheard's    Calendar.     By  C.   H. 

Herford,  Litt.D.    01.  Svo.    2s.  td. 

{See  also  Globe  Library,  p.  25.) 
STEPHENS  (J.  B.).— Convict  Once:  and 

other  Poems.     Cr.  Svo,    ^s.  td. 
STRETTELL  <A'hna).— Spanish  and  Ital- 
ian Folk  Songs.  lUustr.  !Roy.i6mo.  xzs.td. 
SYMONS    (Arthur).  — Days    and   Nights. 

Globe  Svo.    6j. 
TENNYSON  (Lordi.— Complete   Works. 

New  and  Enlarged  E^dition,  with  Portrait. 

Cr.  Svo.    yj.  td. — School  Edition.    In  Fonr 

Parts.    Cr.  Svo.    2s.  td.  eadh. 
~—  Poetical    Works.      Pocket    Edition. 

Pott  8vo,  morocco,  gilt  edges,    js.  td.  net. 

Works.    Library  Edition.     In  9  vols. 

Globe  Svo.  5^.  each.  [Each  volume  may  be 
had  separately.]— Poems,  2  vols. — Idylls  of 
THE  King. — The  Princess,  and  Maud. — 
Enoch  Arden,  and  In  Memoriam. — Bal- 
lads, and  other  Poems. — Qu^n  Mary,  and 
Harold.— Becket,  and  other  Plays. — 
Demeter,  and  other  Poems. 

^—  Works.  Ext.  fcp.  %vo.  Edition,  on  Hand- 
made Paper.  In  10  vols,  (supplied  in  sets 
only),  si.  5s.  od. — Early  Poems.— Lucre- 
tius, and  other  Poems.— Iottlls  of  the 
King. — The  Princess,  and  Maud. — Enoch 
Arden,  and  In  Memoriam. — Queen  Mart, 
and  Harold. — Ballads,  and  other  Poems. 
— Becket,  The  Cup. — The  Foresters, 
The  Falcon,  The  Promise  of  May. — 
TiRESiAS,  and  other  Poems. 

Works.    Miniature  Edition,  in  x6  vols., 

viz.  The  Poetical  Works.  12  vols,  in  a 
box.  25s. — The  Dramatic  Works.  4  vols, 
in  a  box.    los.  td. 

The  Of  iginal  Editions.    Fcp.  Svo. 

Poems.    6^. 

Maud  :  and  other  Poems.    3*.  td. 

The  Princess,    zs.  td. 

The  Holy  Grail:  and  other  Poems,  \s.td,  . 

Ballads  :  and  other  Poems.    5*. 

Harold  :  A  Drama,    ts. 

Queen  Mary  :  A  Drama,    ts. 


LITERATURE. 


LITERATURE. 
Poetry  and  the  BrSim.a.—coniinued. 
TENNYSON  (Lord)— contimted. 
The  Original  Editions.    Fcp.  8vo. 
The  Cup,  and  The  Falcon,    sj. 
Becket.    6j. 

TiRESlAS  :  and  other  Poems.     6i. 
LocKSLEY  Hall  sixty  years  after,  etc.  6j. 
Demeter  :  and  other  Poems,     ts. 
The  Foresters  :  Robin  Hood  and  Maid 

Marian.    6j. 
The  Death  of  Oenone,  Akbar's  Dream, 
AND  other  Poems,     ts. 

The  People's  Edition.      In   23  volumes, 

demy  i6mo.,  cloth,  zs.  net;  leather,  is.  6d. 
net  per  volume.  Two  volumes  monthly  from 
November.  1895. — Juvenilia. — The  Lady 
op  Shalott,  and  other  Poems. — A  Dream 
OF  Fair  Women,  and  other  Poems. — Lock- 
sleyHall,  and  other  Poems. —WillWater- 
PROOF,  and  other  Poems.— The  Princess, 
I.— III.— The  Princess  IV.  to  end.— Enoch 
Arden,  Aylmek's  Field,  and  Lucretius. 
— In  Memoriam. — Maud,  The  Window, 
and  other  Poems. — The  Brook,  and  other 
Poems.— Idylls  OF  the  King  :  The  Coming 
OF  Arthur,  Gareth  and  Lvnette. — 
Idylls  of  the  King  :  The  Marriage  of 
Geraint,  Geraint  and  Enid. — Idylls  of 
the  King:  Balin  and  Balan,  Merlin 
and  Vivien. — Idylls  of  the  King  :  Lance- 
lot and  Elaine,  The  HolyGrail.-Idvlls 
OF  the  King  :  Pelleas  and  Ettarre,  The 
Last  Tournament. — Idylls  of  the  King  : 
Guinevere,  The  Passing  of  Arthur,  To 
the  Queen. — The  Lover's  Tale,  and  other 
Poems. — Rizpah,  and  other  Poems. — The 
Voyage  of  Maeldune,  and  other  Poems. — 
The  Spinster's  Sweet  Arts,  and  other 
Poems. — Demeter,  and  other  Poems. — The 
Death  of  GEnone,  and  other  Poems. 

-  Poems  by  Two  Brothers.  Fcp.  8vo.  6s. 

Maud.     Kehnscott  Edition.     Small  4to, 

vellum.     42J.  net. 

Poems.    Reprint  of  1857  Edition.    Ori- 

ginal  Illustrations.  4to.  21J. — Edition  dt 
Luxe.     Roy.  8vo.     42J.  net. 

T Hi  Royal  Edition,     i  vol.     8vo.     i6f. 

The  Tennyson  Birthday  Book.    Edit. 

by  Emily  Shakespear.    Pott  8vo.    is.  6d. 

Songs    from    Tennyson's    Writings. 

Square  8vo.     zj.  6d. 

■ Selections  from  Tennyson.  With  In- 
troduction and  Notes,  by  F.  J.  Rows,  M.A., 
and  W.  T.  Webb,  M.A.  Globe  8vo.  3J.  6d. 
Or  Part  I.  as.  6d. ;  Part  II.  2s.  6d. 

■ Morte  D'Arthur.     By  F.  J.  Rowe, 

M.A.,  and  W.  T.  Webb,  M.A.    Swd.,  ts. 

^—  Geraint  and  Enid:  and  the  Marriage 
OF  Geraint.  By  G.  C.  Macaulav,  M.A. 
Globe  8vo.     2s.  td. 

Enoch  Arden.     By  W.  T.  Webb,  M.A- 

Globe  8vo.     2s.  6d. 

Aylmer's  Field.   By  W.  T.  Webb,  M.A. 

Globe  8vo.     2s.  6d. 

The  Coming  of  Arthur,  and  The  Pass- 

INGOF  Arthur.  ByF.  J.Rowe.  Gl.Bvo.  2s.6d. 

The  Princess.  By  P.M.  Wallace,  M.A. 

Globe  8vo.     3J.  dd. 
Gareth    and    Lvnette.      By    G.    C. 

Macaulav,  M.A.     Globe  8vo.    2s.  td. 
The  Holy  Grail.   By  G.  C.  Macaulav, 

M.A.     Globe  8vo.     2s.  td. 


TENNYSON  (Lord).— Guinevere.  ByG.C. 

Macaulav,  M.A.    2s.  6d. 
Lancelot  and  Elaine.    By  F.  J.  Rowe, 

M.A.    2s.  6d. 

Tennyson  foe  the  Young.     By  Canon 

AiNGER.  Pott  8vo.  ii.net. — Large  Paper, 
nncut,  3J.  6d, ;  gilt  edges,  4s.  6d. 

Becket.   As  arranged  for  the  Stage  by  H, 

Irving.    8vo.    swd.    2J.  nei 

The  Brook.    With  20  Illustrations  by  A. 

Woodruff,    32mo.    2s.  6d. 

TENNYSON  (Frederic^).— The  Isles  of 
Greece  :  Sappho  and  Alcaeus.  Cr.  8vo. 
js.  6d. 

Daphne  :  and  other  Poems.  Cr.Svo.  7S.6d, 

TENNYSON  (Hallam,  Lord).     {See  Illds- 

TRATEL  Books.) 
TREVOR  (G.  H.).— Rhymes  of  Rajputana. 
Cr.  8vo.     js.  6d. 

TRUMAN  (Jos.). — After-thoughts:  Poems. 

Cr.  8vo.     -^s.  6d. 
TURNER  (Charles  Tennyson).— Collected 

Sonnets,  Old  and  New.  Ext.fcp.8vo.  ys.Sd, 
TYRWHITT  (R.  St.  John).— Free  Field. 

Lyrics,  chiefly  Descriptive.    Gl.  8vo.    3J.  6d* 

Battle  and  After,  concerning  Ser. 

geant  Thomas  Atkins,  Grenadieu 
Guards  :  and  other  Verses.    Gl.  8vo.    -^s.Gd, 

WARD    (Samuel). — Lyrical    Recreations. 

Fcp.  Svo.    6s, 
WATSON  (W.).— Poems.     Fcap.  Svo.    5*. 

Lachrymae  Musarum.  Fcp.Bvo.  45.61^. 

(See  also  Golden  Treasury  Series,  p.  25.) 

WEBSTER(A.).— Portraits.    Fcp.  8vo.   5s, 
Selections  from  Verse.  Fp.  8vo.  4^.  6d, 

Disguises  :  A  Drama.     Fcp.  Svo.    5s. 

In  a  Day  :  A  Drama.     Fcp.  Svo.    zs,  6tL 

The  Sentence.     Fcp.  Svo.     ^s.  6d. 

Sonnets.    Fcp.  Svo.    2s.  6d.  net. 

Mother  and  Daughter.     Fcp.  Svo. 

2S.  6d.  net. 

WH  ITT  I ER.— Complete  Poetical  Works 
of  John  Greenleaf  Whittier.  With 
Portrait.  Pott  Svo.  ^s.  6d.  (See  also  Gol- 
den Treasury  Series,  p.  26  ;  Collected 
Works,  p.  28.) 

WILLS  (W.  G.).— Melchior.    Cr.  Svo.    gs. 

WOOD  (Andrew  Goldie). — The  Isles  of  the 
Blest  :  and  other  Poems.     Globe  Svo.    51. 

WOOLNER  (Thomas).  —  My  Beautiful 
Lady.    3rd  Edit.     Fcp.  Svo.    5*. 

Pygmalion.    Cr.  Svo.    7^.  6d, 

SiLENUS.     Cr.  Svo.     6s. 

WORDSWORTH.  —Complete     Poetical 

Works.  Copyright  Edition.  With  an  Intro- 
duction by  John  Morley,  and  Portrait. 
Cr.  Svo.    ys.  6d. 

The  Recluse.    Fcp.  Svo.   2s.  6(;.— Largo 

Paper  Edition.     Svo.     loj.  6d. 

(See  also  Golden  Treasury  Series,  p.  a6 ; 

Collected  Works,  p.  28  ) 

Poetical  Collections  and  Selectlona. 
{See  also  Golden  Treasury  Series,  p.  25  ; 

Books  for  the  Young,  p.  48.) 

ELLIS  (A.).— Chosen  English.     Selections 

from   Wordsworth,    Byron,    Shelley,   Lamb, 

Scott.    Globe  Svo.    2.?.  6d. 

GE0RGE(H.  B.)— SIDGWICK(A.>-Poems 

of  England.    With  Notes.    Gl.  Svo,    2s.6d. 


PROSE  FICTION. 


21 


HALES  (Prof.  J.  W.).-LoNGER  English 
Poems.    With  Notes,  Philological  and  Ex- 

{ilanatory,  and  an  Introduction  on  the  Teach- 
ng  of  English.    Ext.  fcp.  Bvo.    4s.  6d. 

MACDONALD  (George).— England's  An 
TiPHON.     Cr.  8vo,     4s.  td. 

MARTIN  (F.).  {See  Books  for  the  Young, 
p.  48.) 

MASSON  (R.  O.  and  D.).— Three  Centuries 
of  English  Poetry.  Being  Selections  from 
Chaucer  to  Herrick.     Globe  Bvo.     3*.  6d. 

PALGRAVE  (Prof.  F.  T.).— Thb  Golden 
Treasury  of  the  best  Songs  and  Lyrical 
Poems  in  the  English  Language.  Large 
Type.  Cr.  8vo.  loj.  6d.  {See  also  Golden 
Treasury  Series,  p.  25 ;  Books  for  thb 
Voung,  p.  49.) 

SMITH  (Goldwin).— Bay  Leaves.  Trans- 
lations from  Latin  Poets.     Globe  8vo.     5J. 

WARD  (T.  H.).— English  Poets.  Selections, 
with  Critical  Introductions  by  various  Writers, 
and  a  General  Introduction  by  Matthew 
Arnold.  Edited  by  T.  H.  Ward,  M.A. 
4  vols,  and  Edit.  Cr.  Bvo.—  Vol.  I.  Chau- 
cer TO  DoNNB,  ys.  6d. ;  II.  Ben  Jonson  to 
Dryden,  ys.Sd. ;  III.  Addison  to  Blakb, 
7j.  6d.  •  IV.  Wordsworth  to  Tennyson, 
Ss.6d. 

Appendix  to  Vol.  IV.  containing  Brown- 
ing, Arnold,  and  Tennyson.    Cr.  8vo.    as. 

WOODS  (M.  A.),— A  First  Poetry  Book. 
Fcp.  8vo.     2s.  6d. 

A  Second  Poetry  Book.    2  Parts.    Fcp. 

Bvo.     2S.  6d.  each. — Complete,  45.  6d. 

~~-  A  Third  Poetry  Book.  Fcp.Svo.  4s.  6d. 

WORDS  FROM  THE  POETS.  WithaVig- 
netteand  Frontispiece.  12th  Edit.  PottSvo.  is. 

Prose  Fiction. 

AUSTEN  (Jane).  —  Pride  and  Prejudice. 
Illustrated.    Cr.  Bvo.    3^.  6d. 

Sense  and    Sensibility,      Illustrated. 

Cr.  8vo.    3^.  6d. 

BIKELAS  (D.):— LouKis    Laras;    or.  The 

Reminiscences  of  a  Chiote  Merchant  during 

the  Greek  War  of  Independence.    Translated 

by  J.  Gennadius.    Cr.  8vo.    71. 6d. 
BJORNSON    (B.).  — Synnove   Solbakken. 

Translated  by  Julie  Sutter.    Cr.  Bvo.    6*. 
BOLDREWOOD  iRolQ.—l/ni/orm  Edition. 

Cr.  8vo.     3f .  6d.  each. 

Robbery  Under  Arms. 

The  Miner's  Right. 

The  Squatter's  Dream. 

A  Sydnev-Sidb  Saxon. 

A  Colonial  Reformer. 

Nevermore.   |  A  Modern  Buccaneer. 

The  Crooked  Stick.    Cr.  Bvo.    ts. 

Old  Melbourne  Memories.  Cr.  8vo.  6s. 

The  Sphinx  OF  Eaglehawk.  Fcp.  Bvo.  2j. 

BORROW    (G.).  —  Lavbngro.      Illustrated. 

Cr.  Bvo.    3^.  dd. 
BURNETT(r.  H.).-Haworth's.  G1.  8vo.  %s. 

Louisiana,  and  That  Lass  o*  Lowrib's. 

Illustrated.     Cr.  8vo.    3* .  td. 

CALMIRE.    2  vols.    Cr,  Bvo.     its. 
CARMARTHEN      (Marchioness     of).  —  A 

Lover  of  the  Beautiful.    Cr.  Bvo.    6j. 
CONWAY    (Hugh).  —  A    Family    Affaie 

Cr.  8vo.    3*.  dd. 

-  Living  or  Dead.    Cr.  Bvo.    ^j.  6d. 


COOPER  (E.  H.).— Richard  Escott.    Cr. 

8vo,    ts. 
CORBETTUulian).— The  Fall  of  Asgard: 

ATaleofSt.Olaf'^sDay.  2  vols.  Gl.  8vo.  12J. 
For  God  and  Gold.    O.  8vo.    6s. 

KOPHETUA    THE    THIRTEENTH.      2    VOls. 

Globe  Bvo.     raj. 
COTES  (E.).— The  Story  of  Sonny  Sahib. 

Fcp.  Bvo.    2J.    {See  also  under  Duncan.) 
CRAIK(Mrs.).— i/«r/or?«  Edition.    Cr.  8vo. 

3f.  td.  each. 

OHVE. 

The  Ogilvies.    Also  Globe  8vo,  2f. 

Agatha's  Husband.    Also  Globe  8vo,  aj. 

The  Head  of  the  Family. 

Two  Marriages.    Also  Globe  Bvo,  2S. 

The  Laurel  Bush.   |   My  Mother  and  I. 

Miss  Tommy  :  A  Medisevai  Romance. 

King  Arthur  :  Not  a  Love  Story. 
CRAWFORD  (F.Marion).-- i;-?KA»rw  ^AVfow. 

Cr.  Bvo.     3^ .  6d.  each. 

Mr.  Isaacs  :  A  Tale  of  Modem  India. 

Dr.  Claudius. 

A  Roman  Singer.    |    Zoroaster. 

A  Tale  of  a  Lonely  Parish. 

Marzio^s  Crucifix.   |   Paul  Patoff. 

With  the  Immortals. 

Greifenstein.    I   Sant'  Il/rio. 

A  Cigarette  Maker  s  Romance. 

Khalbd  :  A  Tale  of  Arabia. 

The  Witch  of  Prague. 

The  Three  Fates.    |   Don  Orsino. 

Children  of  the  King. 

PiETKo  Ghisleri.    |   Marion  Darche. 

Katharine  Lauderdale. 
The  Ralstons.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

Casa  Braccio.    2  vols.    Gl.  Bvo.  12*. 

Love  in  Idleness.    Fcp.  Bvo.    2J. 

Adam"Johnstone's  Son.    Cr.  8vo.    dr. 

CUNNINGHAM  (Sir  H.  S.).— The  C<bro. 

LEANS  :  A  Vacation  Idyll.    O.  Bvo.    is.  6d. 

The  Heriots.    Cr.  8vo.    3J.  6d. 

Wheat  and  Tares.    Cr.  Bvo.    3*.  6d. 

Sibylla.    2  vols.    Gl.  Bvo.    12^. 

CURTIN  (J.).— Hero  Tales  of   Ireland. 

Ex.  cr.  8vo.    Zs.  6d.  net. 
DAHN  (Felix).— Felicitas.    Translated   by 

M.  A.  C.  E.     Cr.  8vo.     4s.  6d. 
DAVIS    (R.    H.).  — The    Princess    Aline. 

Fcp.  8vo.    xs.  6d. 
DAY  (Rev.  Lai  Behari).— Bengal  Peasant 

Life.    Cr.  Bvo.    6s. 

Folk  Tales  op  Bengal.   Cr  Bvo.  4S.6d 

DEFOE  (D.).    {See  Globe  Library,  p.  25  I 

Golden  Treasury  Series,  p.  25.) 
DEMOCRACY :  An  American  Novel.    Ci. 

Bvo.     4.S.  6d. 
DICKENS    (Charles).  —  Unifoftn    Edition, 

Cr.  8vo.     %s,  6d.  each. 

The  Pickwick  Papers. 

Oliver  Twist.    |    Nicholas  Nicklebt. 

Martin  Chdzzlewit. 

The  Old  Curiosity  Shop. 

Barnabv  Rudgk.    I    Dombey  and  Son. 

CIhristmas  Books.   ]   Sketches  by  Boz. 

David  Copperfield. 

American  Notes,  and   Pictures  from 
Italy. 

Bleak  House. 
The  Posthumous  Papers  of  the  Pick- 
wick Club.    Illust.    Edit,  by  C.  DickenSi 

Jun.     2  vols.     Ext.  cr.  Bvo.     21*. 


LITERATURE. 


LITERATURE. 

Prose  Fiction— continued. 

DICKENS  (M.  A.).— A  Mere  Cypher.    Cr. 

8vo.     ss.  6d. 

A  Valiant  Ignorance.   Cr.  8vo.   3^.  6d. 

DILLWYN  (E.  A.).— Jill.    Cr.  8vo.    6j. 
——  Jill  and  Jack.   2  vols.   Globe  8vo.    la*. 
DISRAELI  (E.).— Sybil.      Illustrated.     Cr. 

8vo.    3J.  6d. 
DOUGLAS  (Theo.).— A  Bride  Elect.     Cr. 

Svo,  sewed.    \s. 
DUNCAN  (S.  J.).— His  Honor  and  a  Ladv. 

Illustrated.    Cr.  Svo.    6j-. 
DUNSMUIR   (Amy).— Vida:    Study    of   a 

Girl.     3rd  Edit.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 
DURAND  (Sir  M.).— Helen    Treveryan. 

Cr.  8vo.     3J.  dd. 
EBERS  (Dr.  George).— The  Burgomasteb's 

Wife.   Transl.  by  C.  Bell.   Cr.  Svo.  41.  6rf 
'—  Only  a  Word.    Translated  by  Clara 

Bell.     Cr.  Svo.    4J.  6d. 
EDGEWORTH  (M.).— Castle  Rackrent. 

Illustrated.    Cr.  Svo.    -^s.  6d. 

Ormond.    Illustrated.    Cr.  Svo.    3^.  6d. 

——  Popular  Tales.    Illust.    Cr.  Svo.    3J.  td. 
"  ESTELLE  RUSSELL  "  (The  Author  of  ).- 

Harmonia.     3  vols.     Cr.  Svo.     31J.  td. 
FALCONER  (Lanoe).— Cecilia  de   Noel, 

Cr.  Svo.     3*.  6d. 
FIELD  (Mrs.  E.  M.).— Denis.    Cr.  Svo.    6^. 
FLEMING(G.).— ANilkNovel.  Gl.Bvo.  a*. 
— —  Mirage  :  A  Novel.     Globe  Svo.     a*. 
•^—  The  Head  of  Medusa.    Globe  Svo.    3« 

—  Vestigia.    Globe  Svo.    2J. 
FRANCIS  (Francis)— Wild  Rose.  Cr.Svo.  6j. 
FRATERNITY:    A  Romance.     2  vols.     Cr 

Svo.     21J. 
"FRIENDS  IN  COUNCIL"  (The  Authoi 

of).— Realmah.    Cr.  Svo.    61-. 
GALT  (J  ).— Annals  of  the  Parish  and 

the  Avrshire  Legatees.   Illustrated.    Cr. 

Svo.    3^.  6d. 
GRAHAM  (John  W.).— Ne^ra  :  A  Tale  of 

Ancient  Rome.     Cr.  Svo.     6s. 
GRANT  (C.)-— Tales  of  Naples  and  the 

Camorra.  [In  the  Press. 

HARBOUR  BAR,  THE.    Cr.  Svo.    6*. 
HARDY  (Arthur  Sherburne).— But    vet    a 

Woman  :  A  Novel.    Cr.  Svo.    \s.  6d. 
—^  TheWindofDestiny,  avols.  Gl.Svo.  la/. 
HARTE  (Bret).— Cressy.     Cr.  Svo.     3^.  6d. 

—  The  Heritage  of  Dedlow  Marsh  i 
and  other  Tales.     Cr.  Svo.     3s.  6d. 

A  First   Family  of   Tasajara.     Cr 

Svo.     3J.  6d. 

*'HOGAN,  M.P."  (The  Author  of).— Hogan, 
M.P.     Cr.  8vo.    3s.  6d. 

The  Hon.  Miss  Ferrard.    GI.  Svo.    2s. 

~—  Flitters,   Tatters,   and  the  CouN' 

SBLLOR,  ETC.      Cr    Svo.      3^ .  6d 

—  Christy  Carbw.    Globe  Svo.    as. 

IsMAv's  Children.     Globe  Svo.     2s. 

HOPPUS  (Mary).— A  Great  Treason:   A 

Story  of  the  War  of  Independence.  2  vols. 
Cr.  Svo.    gs. 

HUGHES  (Thomas).— Tom  Brown  at  Ox- 
ford.   Cr.  Svo.    3f.6rf. 

•~—  The  Scouring  of  the  White  Horse, 
and  The  Ashen  Faggot.    Cr.  Svo.    3s.  6a. 


HOGHES  (Thomas).— Tom  Brown's  Schooi. 
Oavs.  By  An  Old  Boy.— Golden  Treasury 
Edition,  as.  6d.  net. — Uniform  Edit.  3*.  6d, 
— People's  Edition.  2s. — People's  Sixpenny 
Edition.  Illustr.  Med.  4to.  6d. — Uniform 
with  Sixpenny  Kingsley.    Med.  Svo.    6d. 

IRVING  (Washington).  {See  Illustrated 
Books,  p.  15.) 

JACKSON  (Helen).— Ramona.    G1.  Svo.    2*. 

JAMES  (Henry).— The  Europeans  :  A  Novel. 
Cr.  Svo.     6s. ;  Pott  Svo,  as. 

Daisy  Miller  :  and  other  Stories.    Cr. 

Svo.     6s.  ;  Globe  Svo,  ss. 

^^  The  American.  Cr.  Svo.  6j.— Pott  Svo. 

a  vols.     4J. 
Roderick  Hudson.     Cr.  Svo.    6s. ;  Gl. 

Svo,  2s. ;  Pott  Svo,  2  vols.  4s. 

The  Madonna  of  the  Future:  and 

other  Tales.     Cr.  Svo.     6s. ;  Globe  Svo,  ax. 

Washington    Square,    the    Pension 

Beaurepas.     Globe  Svo.    2s. 

The  Portrait  of  a   Lady.    Cr.  Svo. 

6x.     Pott  Svo,  3  vols.  6s. 

Stories    Revived.      In    Two    Series. 

Cr.  Svo.     6s.  each. 

The  Bostonians.    Cr.  Svo.     6s. 

Novels  and  Tales.     Pocket  Edition. 

Pott  Svo.     2s.  each  volume. 

Confidence,     i  vol. 

The  Siege  of   London  ;    Madame   db 

Mauves.     I  vol. 
An  International  Episode  ;  The  P*bn- 

siON  Beaurepas  ;  The  Point  of  View, 

I  vol. 
Daisy  Miller,  a  Study ;   Four  Mbbt- 

iNGS  ;  Longstaff's  Marriage  ;  Bbh- 

voLio.     I  vol. 
The    Madonna    of    the    Future;    A 

Bundle  of  Letters  ;  The  Diary  or 

A  Man  of  Fifty  ;  Eugene  Pickering. 

I  vol. 

Tales  of  Three  Cities.  Cr.  Svo.  4s.  6rf. 

The  Princess  Casamassima.    Cr.  Svo. 

6s. ;  Globe  Svo,  2s. 

The  Reverberator.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

The Aspern Papers;  Louisa Pallantj 

The  Modern  Warning.    Cr.  Svo.    3*,  6d. 

A  London  Life.    Cr.  Svo.    3*.  6d. 

The  Tragic  Muse.    Cr.  Svo.     3*.  6d. 

The    Lesson    of    the   Master,  and 

other  Stories.     Cr.  Svo.     6^. 

The  Real  Thing,  and  other  Tales. 

Cr.  Svo.     6s. 

fCEARY  (Annie). — Janet's  Home.  Cr.  Svo. 
3X.  6d. 

Clemency  Franklyn.    Globe  Svo.    u, 

Oldbury.    Cr.  Svo.    3s.  6d. 

A  York  and  a  Lancaster  Rose.    Cr. 

Svo.     3s.  6d. 

Castle  Daly.    Cr.  Svo.    3*.  6d. 

A  Doubting  Heart.    Cr.  Svo.    31.  6d 

KENNEDY  (P.).— Legendary  Fictions  of 

THE  Irish  Celts.     Cr.  Svo.    3s.  6d. 

KINGSLEY  (Charles).  — Eversiev  EdiHon, 
II  vols.  Globe  Svo.  <,s.  each. — Westward 
Ho  I  2  vols.— Two  Years  Ago.  2  vols. — 
Hypatia.  2  vols. — Yeast.  1  vol. — Altoh 
Locke.  2  vols. — Hereward  the  Wake. 
8  vols. 

Sixpenny    Edition.       Med.     Svo.      fid, 

each.  —  Westward  Ho  !  —  Hvpatia.  — 
Yeast.— Alton  Locke. — Two  Years  Ago. 
—Hereward  the  Wakk. 


PROSE  FICTION. 


23 


KINGSLEY  (C.).-ComfUte  Edition.  Cr. 
8vo.  3i.  id.  eacn  —Westward  Ho  I  With 
a  Potlrait.—  Hvpati A.  —  Ybast.  —  Alton 
LocKB.  —  Two  Years  Ago.  —  Hereward 
THE  Wake. 

Pocket  Edition.    Pott  8vo.    is.  6d.  each, 

Hypatia.  —  Alton    Locke.  —  Westward 

Ho  !       2    vols. — HEREWAt*D     THE     WAKE. — 

Two  Years  Ago.    2  vols.— Yeast. 
KIPLING  (Rudyard).— Plain  Tai.es  from 
THE  Hills.    Cr.  8vo.    61. 

-  The  Light  that  Failed.    Cr.  8vo.   6t. 

Life's  Handicap  :  Being  Stories  of  mine 

own  People.     Cr.  8vo.     6s. 

Many  Inventions.     Cr.  8vo.     6s* 

Soldiers  Three,  etc.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

Wee  Willie  WiNKlE,  ETC.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

LAFARGUE  (Philip).— The  New  Jddgment 

of  Paris.    2  vols.    Globe  8vo.    12s. 
LEE  (Margaret). — Faithful  and  Unfaith- 

FUL.     Cr.  8vo      31. 6d. 
LEVY  (A.).— Reuben  Sachs.   Cr.  8vo.    3S.6d. 
LITTLE  PILGRIM  IN  THE  UNSEEN,  A. 

34th  Thousand.    Cr.  8vo,    as.  6d. 

"LITTLE  PILGRIM  IN  THE  UNSEEN, 
A  "  (Author  of). — The  Land  of  Darkness. 
Cr.  Bvo.     Si. 

LOVER   (S.).— Handy    Andy.      Illustrated. 

Cr.  8vo.    3s.  6d. 
LYSAGHT  (S.   R.).— The    Marplot.     Cr. 

8vo.     3J.  6d. 
LYTTON  (Earl  of ).— The  Ring  of  Amasis  I 

A  Romance.     Cr.  Svo.     js.  6d. 
McLENNAN    (Malcolm).— Mucklb    Jock; 

and  other  Stories  of  Peasant  Life  In  the  North. 
'"  Cr.  Svo.     3S.  6d. 
MACMILLAN   (M.    K.).  —  Kagonet    the 

Jester.     Cr.  8vo.     31.  6d. 
MACQUOID  (K.  S.).— Pattx.    G1.  Svo.    is. 
MADOC  (Fayr).— The  Story  of  Melicent, 

Cr.  Svo.     4i.  6d. 
MALET  (Lucas).— Mrs.  Lorimer  :  A  Sketch 

in  Black  and  White.     Cr.  Svo.     3s.  6d. 
MALORY  (Sir  Thos.).    {Set  Globe  Library, 

p.  25.) 
MARRY  AT  (Capt.).— Japhet  in  Search  of 

A  Father.    Illustrated.    Cr.  Svo.    31. 6d. 
Jacob  Faithful.    lUust.  Cr.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

Peter  Simple.    Illust.    Cr.  Svo.    3s.  6d. 

Midshipman  Easy.    Illust.    Cr.  Svo. 

[In  the  Press. 

T«E  Phantom  Ship.    Illust.    Cr.  Svo. 

[In  the  Press. 

The  King's  Own.    Illust.    Cr.  Svo. 

[In  the  Press. 

Poor  Jack.    Illust.    Cr.  Svo.    [In  Press. 

The  Dog-Fiend.  Illust.  Cr.Svo.  [InPress. 

MASON  (A.  E.  W.).— The  Courtship  of 

MoRRiCE  Buckler.    Cr.  Svo.    6^. 
MINTO  (W.).— The  Mediation  of  Ralph 

Hardelot.     3  vols.     Cr.  Svo.     31J.  6d. 
MITFORD  (A.  B.).— Tales  of  Old  Japan. 

With  Illustrations.    Cr.  Svo.     31.  6d. 
HIZ  MAZE,  THE ;   oh,  The  Winkworth 

Puzzle.      A    Story   in    Letters    by    Nina 

Authors.     Cr.  Svo.     ^s.  6d. 
MORIER  (J.)  — Hajji  Baba  of  Ispahan. 

Illustrated.    Cr.  Svo.    3s.  6d. 


MURRAY  (D.  Christie).  —  Aunt  Rachel. 
Cr.  Svo.    3s,  6d. 

Schwartz.    Cr.  Svo.    3J  6i. 

The  Weaker  Vessel.    Cr.  Svo.    31. 6d. 

John  Vale's  Guardian.  Cr.  Svo.  3s.  id. 

MURRAY  (D.  Christie)  and  HERMAN  (H.). 

— He  Fell  AMONG  Thieves.  Cr.Svo.  31.60. 
NEW  ANTIGONE,  THE:    A  Romanck. 

Cr.  Svo.    3s.  id, 
NOEL  (Lady  Augusta).— HiTHERSEA  Merb. 

3  vols.     Cr.  Svo.     31s.  id. 
NORRIS  (W.  E.).— My  Friend  Jim.    Glpbo 

Svo.       2S. 

Chris.    Globe  Svo.    2s, 

NORTON  (Hon.    Mrs.V— Old   Sir   Dqpg- 

LAS.    Cr.  Svo.    is. 
OLIPHANT   (Mrs.    M.   O.    W.^—Uni/orm 

Edition.    Cr.  Svo.     3s.  id.  each. 

A  Son  of  the  Soil. 

The  Curate  in  Charge. 

Young  Musgeave.   |   Sir  Tom. 

He  that  will  not  when  He  may. 

The  Wizard's  Son.  |   Hester. 

A  Country  Gentleman  and  his  Family. 

The  Second  Son. 

The  Marriage  of  Elinor. 

Neighbours  on  the  Green.  I  Joyce. 

A  Beleaguered  City.    1    Kirsteen. 

The  Railway  Man  and  his  Children. 

The  Heir-Presumptive  and  the  Heis- 
Apparent. 

Lady  William. 
PALMER  (Lady  Sophia).— Mrs.  Penicott"* 

Lodger  :  and  other  Stories.   Cr.  Svo.  as.  id, 
PARRY  (Gambler).— The  Story  of  Dick. 

Cr.  Svo.     3s.  id. 
PATER  (Walter).— Marius  the  Epicurean  I 

His  Sensations  and  Ideas.    3rd  Edit,    a 

vols.     Svo.     15J. 
PATERSON  (A.).— A  Son  of  the  Plains. 

Cr.  Svo.    is. 
PEACOCK  (T.    L.).— Maid   Marian,   etc. 

Illustrated.    Cr.  Svo.    31.  6d. 
Headlong  Hall  and  Nightmare  Ab- 
bey.    Illust.    Cr.  Svo.    3J.  id. 

Gryll  Grange.    Illust.    Cr.  Svo.    3s.  6d. 

Melincourt.     Illustr.     Cr.  Svo.    3^.  id. 

PHILLIPS  (F.  E.).  —  The  Education  of 

Antonia.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 
PRICE  (E.  C.).— In  the   Lion's   Mouth. 

Cr.  Svo.     3s.  6d. 
RHOADES  (J.).— The  Story  of  John  Trb- 

VENNiCK.     Cr.  Svo.     3s.  6d. 
ROSS  (Percy).- A  Misguidit  Lassie.    Cr. 

Svo.     4S.  id. 
ROY  (Neil).— The  Horseman's  Word.    Cr. 

Svo.    6s. 
RUSSELL  (W.    Clark).— Marooned.      Cr. 

Svo.    3*.  id. 

A  Strange  Elopement.  Cr.Svo,  3s.ia, 

ST.    JOHNSTON   (A.).  —  A    Sooth    Ska 

Lover  :  A  Romance.    Cr.  Svo.    6*. 
SCOTT  (M.).— Tom  Cringle's  Log.     Illus- 
trated.   Cr.  Svo.    31.  id. 
SHIPTON  (Helen).  —  The   Herons.      Cr. 

Svo.    6s, 
SHORTHOUSE  Q.  Henry),— Uniform  Edi- 
tion,   Cr.  Svo.     V.  6d.  each. 

John  Inglesant;  A  Romance. 
Blanche,  Lady  Falaise. 


24 


LITERATURE. 


LITERATURE. 
Prose  Fiction -continued. 
SHORTHOUSE  (J.  Henry).  — l/ni/brm  Edi- 
tion.    Cr.  8vo.     3^.  td.  each. 

Sir  Percival:  A  Story  of  the  Past  and  of 
the  Present. 

The    Little   Schoolmaster    Mark  :    A 
Spiritual  Romance. 

The  Countess  Eve, 

A  Teacher  of  the  Violin  :  and  other  Tales. 
SLIP  IN  THE  FENS,  A.  Globe  8vo.  2s. 
SMITH(  F.  H.).— Tom  Grogan.    Illustrated. 

Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

A  Gentleman  Vagabond.  Cr.  8vo,sd.  is. 

SMITH  (Garnet).  —  The    Melancholy    of 

Stephen  Allard.    Cr.  Bvo.    js.  td.  net. 
SMITH  (L.  P.).— The  Vouth  of  Parnassus. 

Cr.  8vo.    ts. 
STEEL(Mrs.F.A.).— MissStuart'sLegacv. 

Cr.  8vo.     3j.  (id. 

-  The  Flower  of  Forgiveness.  Crown 
8vo.    3  J.  Sd, 

Red  Rowans.    Cr.  8vo.    6.r. 

——  TalesofthePunjab.  Illust.  Cr.  8vo.  ts. 
THEODOLI  (Marchesa)— Under  Pressure. 

Cr.  Svo.     -^s.  6d. 
TIM.     Cr.  Svo.     3J.  6d. 
TOURGENIEF.— Virgin  Soil.    Translated 

by  AsHTON  W.  DiLKE.     Cr.  Svo.     6*. 
VELEY  (Margaret).— A  Garden  of  Mbmo- 

RiES ;    Mrs.    Austin  ;    Lizzie's   Bargain. 

Three  Stories,     2  vols.     Globe  Svo.     12s. 
VICTOR  (H.).— Mariam  :  or  Twenty-One 

Days.     Cr.  Svo.     6s, 
VOICES    CRYING    IN    THE    WILDER- 
NESS :  A  Novel.    Cr.  Svo.     js.  td. 
WARD  (Mrs.  T.Humphry).— Miss  Brethkr- 

TON.     Cr.  Svo.     3J.  td. 
WEST  (M.).— A  Born  Player.    Cr.  Svo.    ts 
WORTHEY  (Mrs.).— The  New  Continent  1 

A  Novel.     2  vols.     Globe  Svo.     i2J. 
YONGE  (C.  M.).— The  Long  Vacation.  Cr. 

Svo.    6s- 

The  Release.    Cr.  3\-o,    6s. 

-—  The  Rubies  of  St.  Lo.    Fcp.  Bvo.    2s. 

{See  also  p.  28.) 
VONGE(C.  M.)and  COLERIDGE  (C.  R.)- 

— Strolling  Plavers.    Cr.  Svo.    ts. 

Collected  Works ;  Essays ;  Lectures ; 
Letters;  miscellaneoua  Works. 

ADDISON.— Selections  from  the  "Spec- 
tator." With  IntroQuction  and  Notes  by 
K.  Deighton.     Globe  Svo.     2^,  td. 

AN  AUTHOR'S  LOVE.  Beiug  the  Unpub- 
lished Letters  of  Prosper  M6rimAe's 
"  Inconnue."     2  vols.     Ext.  cr.  8vo.     i2J. 

AR  HOLD  (Matthew).— Letters.  Edited  by 
G  W.  E.  Russell,  M.P.  2  vols.  Cr.  Svo. 
i=j.  net. 

Essays  IN  Criticism   6th  Ed.  Cr.  Svo   9*. 

Gt.  8vo.    5 J. 

Essays   in  Criticism.     Second  Series. 

Cr.  Svo.    7J.  td.    Gl.  Svo.    5r 

Discourses  IN  America.  Cr.  Svo.  4s.  6d. 

GI.  Svo.    $s. 

ASPi:CTS    OF    MODERN   STUDY.      Cr. 

Svo,     IS.  td.  net. 
AUSTIN  (A.).— The  Garden  that  I  Love. 

3rd  Edit.    Ex.  cr.  f?vo.    gs. 
In  Veronica's  Garden.  Ex.  cr.  Svo.   gj. 


BACON.— Essays.  Introduction  and  Notes, by 
F.  G.Selbv,  M.A.  Gl.  Svo.  3J. ;  swd.,  25.6(/.. 

Advancement  of  Learning.     By  the 

same.  Gl.  Svo.  Book  I.  zs.  Book  II.  4^.6^?. 
{See  also  Golden  Treasury  Series,  p.  25.) 

BATES(K.L.). — English  Religious  Drama. 

Cr.  Svo.     ts.  td.  net. 
BLACKIEQ-S.).— LavSermons.  Cr.Svo.  61. 

BRADFORD    (G.).  — Types    of    American 

Character.    Pott  Bvo.    3.^. 
BRIDGES  (John  A.).— Idylls  of  a  Lost 

Village.    Cr.  Svo.    7-^-  6d. 

BRIMLEY  (George).— Essays.  Globe  Svo.  51. 
BUNYAN  (John).— The  Pilgrim's  Progress 

from  this  World  to  that  which  is  to 

Come.    Pott  Bvo.    2J.  td.  net. 
BUTCHER  (ProL  S.  H.)— Some  Aspects  or 

THE  Greek  Genius.  Cr.  Svo.  -js.  net. 
CARLYLE  (Thomas).  {See  Biography.) 
CHURCH   (Dean).— Miscellaneous    Wri 

TINGS.     CoUected    Edition.     7  vols.     Globw 

Svo.      ss.   each. — Vol.    I.     Miscellaneod^ 

Essays. — II.  Dante:  and  other  Essays. 

—III.    St.    Anselm.— IV.     Spenser.— V. 

Bacon. — VI.    The    Oxford    Movement, 

1S33 — 45.— Vn.    The  Beginning  of  thk 

Middle  Ages. 
CLIFFORD  (Prof.  W.  K.).    Lectures  and 

Essays.    Edited  by  Leslie  Stephen  and 

Sir  F.  Pollock.     Cr.  Bvo.     8j.  td. 
CLOUGH  (A.  H.).— Prose  Remains.     With 

a  Selection  from  his  Letters,  and  a  Memoir 

by  His  Wife.    Cr.  Bvo.    7s.  td. 

COLLINS    G-    Churton).— The    Study    of 

English  Literature.    Cr.  Svo.    45.  6d. 

Essays  and  Studies.    Svo.    qj.  net. 

CORSON  (Hiram).— The  Aims  of  Literart 

Study.    Pott  Svo.    3.^. 
The  Voice  and  Spiritual  Education. 

Pott  Svo.    2s. 
COURTHOPE  (W.  J.).— Liberty  and  Au- 

thorityin  Mattersof  Taste.  Bvo.  u.net. 
COWPER.— Letters.    Ed.  by  W.  T.  Webb» 

M.A,     Globe  Bvo.     2s.  6d. 
CRAIK(H.). — English  Prose  Selections* 

WithCritical  Introductions  by  various  writersi 

and  General   Introductions  to  each  Period. 

Edited  by  H.  Craik,  C.B.    Vols.  I.  II.  III. 

and  IV.    Cr.  Svo.    7^-.  td.  each.    [  V.  in  Press, 
CRAIK   (Mrs.).  —  Concerning    Men:    and 

other  Papers.     Cr.  Svo.     3^.  td. 

About  Money:  and  other  Things.    Cr. 

Svo.     3 J.  td, 

Sermons  OUT  OF  Church.  Cr.Bvo.  ^s.td. 

CRAWFORD  (F.  M.).— The  Novel:  what 
IT  IS.     Pott  8vo.     3J. 

CRAWSHAW  (W.  H.).— The  Interpreta- 
tion OF  Literature.    Gl.  Svo.    3^.  td.  net. 

CUNLIFFE  (J.  W.).— The  Influence  of 
Seneca  on  Elizabethan  Tragedy.  4J.  net. 

DE  VERE  (Aubrey).— Essays  Chiefly  on 
Poetry.    2  vols.    Globe  Svo.    i2j. 

Essays,  Chiefly  Literary  and  Ethi» 

CAL.    Globe  Svo.    ts. 

DICKENS.— Lettersof  Charles  Dickens. 
Edited  by  his  Sister-in-Law  and  Marv 
DiCKHNS.     Cr.  Svo.     -^s.  td. 


COLLECTED  WORKS. 


25; 


DRYDEN,  Essays  of.  Edited  by  Prof. 
C.  D.  YoNGE.  Fcp.  8vo.  2f.  dd.  {See  also 
Globe  Library,  p.  25.) 

The  Satires.     Edited  by  J.  Churton 

Collins.     G1.  8vo.     is.  gd. 

DUFF  (Rt.  Hon.  Sir  M.  E.  Grant).— Miscel- 
lanies, Political  and  Literary.   8vo.   loj.  6d. 

ELLIS  (A.).— Chosen  English.  Selections 
from  Wordsworth,  Byron,  Shelley,  Lamb, 
Scott.    Globe  8vo.    2s.  6d. 

EMERSON(Ralph Waldo).— The  Collected 
Works.  6  vols.  Globe  8vo  5J.  each.— 
I.  Miscellanies.  With  an  Introductory 
Essay  by  John  Morley. — II.  Essays.— 
HI.  Poems.— IV.  English  Traits;  Re- 
presentative Men. — V.  CoNDUCTOF  Life  ; 
Society  and  Solitude. — VI,  Letters  ; 
Social  Aims  etc. 

FASNACHT  (G.  E.).— Select  Specimens  of 
THE  Great  French  Writers  in  the 
Seventeenth,  Eighteenth,  and  Nine- 
teenth Centuries.  With  Literary  Ap]^re- 
ciations  by  the  most  eminent  French  Critics, 
and  a  Historical  Sketch  of  French  Literature. 
Edit,  by  G.  E.  Fasnacht.    Cr.  8vo.    7*.  6d. 

FITZGERALD  (Edward):  Letters  and 
Literary  Remains  of.  Ed.  by  W.  Aldis 
Wright,  M.A.    3  vols.    Cr.  8vo.    31J.  6d. 

Letters.     Edited  by  W.  A.  Wright. 

2  vols.    Globe  8vo.    lor. 

FOWLER  (W.  W.).— Summer  Studies  of 

Birds  and  Books.    Ex.  cr.  8vo.    6s. 
GLOBE  LIBRARY.    Cr.  8vo.    3*.  6d.  each  : 
Boswell's  Life  of  Johnson.    Introduction 

by  Mowbray  Morris. 
Burns. — Complete  Poetical  Works  and 

Letters.   Edited,  with  Life  and  Glossarial 

Index,  by  Alexander  Smith. 
CowPER.— Poetical   Works.     Edited   by 

the  Rev.  W.  Benham,  B.D. 
Defoe. — The  Adventures  of  Robinson 

Crusoe.     Introduction  by  H.  Kingsley. 
Dryden. — Poetical  Works.     A    Revised 

Text  and  Notes.  By  W.  D.  Christie,  M.A. 
Froissart's  Chronicles.    Transl.  by  Lord 

Berners.    Ed.  by  G.  C.  Macaulay,  M.A. 
Goldsmith.  —  Miscellaneous      Works. 

Edited  by  Prof.  Masson. 
Horace. — Works.    Rendered  into  English 

Prose  by  James  Lonsdale  and  S.  Lee. 
Malory. — Le  Morte  d' Arthur.  Sir  Thos. 

Malory's  Book  of  King  Arthur  and  of  his 

Noble  Knights  of  the  Round  Table.   Ths 

Edition  of  Caxton,  revised  for  modem  use. 

By  Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart. 
Milton; — Poetical  Works.    Edited,  with 

Introductions,  by  Prof.  Masson. 
Pope. — Poetical   Works.      Edited,   with 

Memoir  and  Notes,  by  Prof.  Ward. 
Scott.— Poetical  Works.     With    Essay 

by  Prof.  Palgrave. 
Shakespeare. — Completb  Works.    Edit. 

by  W.  G.  Clark  and  W.  Aldis  Wright. 

India  Paper  Edition.    Cr.  8vo,  cloth  extra, 

gilt  edges.     loj.  td.  net. 
Spenser. — Complete   Works    Edited  by 

R. Morris.  Memoir byJ.W.HALES, M.A. 
Virgil.— Works.     Rendered  into  English 

Prose  by  James  Lonsdale  and  S.  Lee. 
GOETHE.  —  Maxims    and    Reflections. 
Trans,  by  T.  B.  Saunders.     G1.  8vo.     55. 

—  Nature  Aphorisms.  Transl.  by  T.  B, 
Saunders.     Pott  Svo     6d.  net. 


GOLDEN     TREASURY     SERIES.— Uni- 
formly  printed  in  Pott  Svo,  with  Vignette 
Titles   by  Sir   J.   E.    Millais,   Sir   Noeu 
Paton,  T.  Woolner   W.  Holman  Hunt, 
Arthur  Hughes,  etc.    2j.  td,  net  each. 
Golden  Treasury  of  the  Best  Songs  ani> 
Lyrical  Poems  in  the  English  Lan- 
guage, The.  Selected  and  arranged,  with 
Notes,  by  Prof.  F  T.  Palgrave.— Large 
Type.     Cr.   Svo.     loj.  6(^.— Large  Paper- 
Edition.     Svo.     loj.  td.  net 

Lyric  Love:  An  Anthology.  Edited  by  W. 
Watson. 

Children'sGarland  from  theBestPoets-- 
The.    Selected  by  Coventry  Patmore. 

Children's  Treasury  of  Lyrical  Poe- 
try.   By  F.  T.  Palgrave. 

The  Jest  Book.  The  Choicest  Anecdotes- 
and  Sayings.   Arranged  by  Mark  Lemon. 

Fairy  Book,  The  :  the  Best  Populah 
Fairy  Stories.  Selected  by  Mrs.  Craik, 
Author  of  "John  Halifax,  Gentleman." 

Book  of  Golden  Thoughts,  A.  By- 
Henrv  Attwell. 

Sunday  Book  of  Poetry  for  thf  Young, 
The.     Selected  by  C.  F.  Alexander.- 

Golden  Treasury  Psalter.  By  ious 
Friends. 

Book  of  Praise,  The.  From  the  Best  Eng- 
Hsh  Hymn  Writers.  Selected  by  RouN- 
DELL,  Earl  of  Selborne. 

Theologi a  Germanica.  By  S.  Wink- 
worth. 

The  Ballad  Book.  A  Selection  of  th© 
Choicest  British  Ballads.  Edited  by 
William  Allingham. 

Song  Book,  The.  Words  and  Tunes  se- 
lected and  arranged  by  John  Hullah. 

Scottish  Song.  Compiled  by  Mary  Cas- 
LYLE  Aitken. 

La  Lyre  FRANfAiSE  Selected  and  arranged, 
with  Notes,  by  G.  Masson. 

Balladen  und  Romanzen.  Being  a  Se- 
lection of  the  best  German  Ballads  and 
Romances.  Edited,  with  Introduction  and* 
Notes,  by  Dr.  Buchheim. 

Deutsche  Lyrik.  The  Golden  Treasury- 
of  the  best  German  L3n:ical  Poems.  So* 
lected  by  Dr.  Buchheim. 

Matthew  Arnold.— Selected  Poems. 

Addison. — Essays.  Chosen  and  Edited  by- 
John  Richard  Green 

Bacon. — Essays,  and  Colours  of  Gooi> 
and  Evil.  With  Notes  and  Glossarial 
IndexbyW.  Aldis  Wright,  M. A.— Large- 
Paper  Edition.     Svo.     ioj.  td  net. 

Browne,  Sir  Thomas. — Religio  Medici, 
Letter  to  a  Friend,  &c.,  and  Christ- 
ian Morals.    Ed.  by  W.  A.  Greenhill. 

—  Hydriotaphia  and  the  Garden  op-" 
Cyrus.    Ed,  by  W.  A.  Greenhill. 

BuNVAN.— The  Pilgrim's  Progress  from 
THIS  World  to  that  which  is  to  Comb. 
— Large  Paper  Edition.    8vo.    loj.  ^d.  net. 

Btron. — Poetry.  Chosen  and  arranged 
by  M.  Arnold. — Large  Paper  Edit.    g*. 

Clough. — Selections  from  the  Poems. 

Cowper. — Letters.  Edited,  with  Intro- 
duction, by  Rev.  W.  Benham. 

—  Selections  from  Poems.  With  an  Intro- 
duction by  Mrs.  Oliphant. 

Defoe. — The  Adventures  of  Robinsoi? 
Crusoe.    Edited  by  J.  W.  Clark,  M.A. 

Gracian  (Balthasar). — Art  of  Worldly- 
Wisdom.    Translated  by  J.  Jacobs. 


s6 


LITERATURE. 


LITERATURE. 
Collected  Works ;  Essays:  LectmeB ; 
Letters ;  MisceUaneous  woTJaa—conid. 
<K)LDEN  TREASURY  SERIES— co«M. 
Herrick.— Chrysomela.    Edited  by  Prof. 

b\  T.  Falgrave. 
tHuGHEs.— Tom  Brown  s  School  Days. 
Keats.— The  Poetical  Works.     Edited 

by  Prof.  F.  T.  Palgrave. 
Keble.— The  Christian  Year.     Edit,  by 

C.  M.  YONGE. 

Lamb. — Tales  from  Shakspeare.    Edited 

by  Rev.  Alfred  Ainger,  M.A. 
I«ANDOR.— Selections.   Ed.  by  S.  Colvin. 

iONGFELLOW.  —  BaLLADS,       LyRICS,       AND 

Sonnets. 
Mohammad.— Speeches  and  Table-Talk. 

Translated  by  Stanley  Lank-Poole. 
Newcastle. — The    Cavalier    and     his 

Lady.     Selections  from  the  Works  of  the 

First   Duke   and   Duchess   of   Newcastle. 

With  Introductory  Essay  by  E.  Jenkins. 
Plato.— The    Republic.      Translated    by 

J.  Ll.  Davies,  M.A.,  and  D.  J.  Vaughan. 

— Large  Paper  Edition.    8vo.    los.  6d.  net. 

—  The  Trial  and  Death  of  Socrates. 
Being  the  Euthyphron,  Apology,  Crito 
and  Phaedo  of  Plato.  Trans,  by  F.  J. 
Church. 

—  The  Phaedros,  Lysis,  and  Protagoras. 
Translated  by  J.  Wright. 

"Shakespeare. — Songs  and  Sonnets.  Ed. 
with  Notes,  by  Prof.  F.  T.  Palgrave. 

Shelley.— Poems.  Edited  by  Stopford 
A.  Brooke. — Large  Paper  Edit.     las.  td. 

SouTHEV. — Poems.  Chosen  and  Arranged 
by  E.  Dowden. 

Theocritus,  Bion,  and  Moschus.  Ren- 
dered into  English  Prose  by  Andrew 
Lang. — Large  Paper  Edition,     gj. 

"Whittier. — PoE^rs,  Religious  and  De- 
votional. 

Wordsworth.— Poems.  Chosen  and  Edited 
by  M.  Arnold. — Large  Paper  Edition, 
loj.  dd  net. 

Yonge. — A  Book  of  Golden  Deeds. 

—  A  Book  of  Worthies. 

—  The  Story  op  the  Christians  and 
Moors  in  Spain. 


Hare.— Guesses    at    Truth.      By    Two 

Brothers.     4J.  6d. 
Longfellow. — Poems  of  Places  :    Eng- 
land AND  Wales.     Edited  by  H.  W. 
Longfellow.     2  vols.    9*. 
Tennyson.— Lyrical  Poems.   Selected  and 
Annotated  by  Prof.  F.  T.  Palgrave.  4^.6^^. 
— Large  Paper  Edition,    pi. 
—  In    Memoriam.      4J.  6d. — Large    Paper 
Edition,     gx. 
^GOLDSMITH,  Essays  of.    Edited  by  C.  D. 
YoNGE,  M.A.     Fcp.  8vo.     2j.  €d.     (Ste  also 
Globe    Library,    p.     25 :     Illustrated 
Books,  p.  14.) 
<JRAY  (Asa).— Letters.     Edited  by  J.   L. 

Gray.  2  vols.  Cr.  8vo.  15^.  net. 
GRAY  (Thomas).— Works.  Edited  by  Ed- 
mund GosSE.  In  4  vols.  Gl.  8vo.  SJ.each. — 
Vol.  I.  Poems,  Journals,  and  Essays. — 
II.  Letters. — III.  Letters. — IV.  Notes 
ON  Aristophanes  and  Plato. 
■GREEN  (J.  R.).— Stray  Studies  from 
England  and  Italy.     Globe  8vo.    5s. 


GREENWOOD  (F.).— The  Lover's  Lexi- 
con.   Cr.  8vo.     6s. 

HAMERTON  (P.  G.).— The  Intellectual 
Life.    Cr.  8vo.     10^.  6d, 

Human  Intercourse.    Cr.  8vo.    8j.  6d. 

French  and  English  :  A  Comparison. 

Cr.  8vo.     los.  6d. 

HARRISON  (Frederic).— The  Choice  of 
Books.  Gl.  8vo.  6^.— Large  Paper  Ed.  15*. 

HELPS  (Sir  Arthur).— Essays  Written  in 
THE  Intervals  of  Business.  With  Intro- 
duction and  Notes,  by  F.  J.  Rowe,  M.A., 
and  W.  T.  Webb,  M.A.   is.  gd. ;  swd.  zs.  6d. 

HOBART  (Lord).— Essays  and  Miscella- 
neous Writings.  With  Biographical 
Sketch.  Ed.  Lady  HoBART.  2  vols.  8vo.  25*. 

HUTTON  (R.  H.).— Essays  on  some  of  the 
Modern  Guides  of  English  Thought  in 
Matters  of  Faith.     Globe  8vo.    5^. 

Essays.   2  vols.    Gl.  8vo     5^.  each.— Vol. 

I.  Literary  ;   II.  Theological. 

Criticisms  on  Contemporary  Thought 

AND  Thinkers.    2  vols.     Gl.  8vo.     10s. 

HUXLEY (Prof.T,  H.).— Collected  Essays. 
Gl.  8vo.  5*.  each.— I.  Method  and  Re- 
sults.— II.  Darwiniana.— III.  Science 
and  Education. — IV.  Science  and  He- 
brew Tradition. — V.  Science  and  Chris- 
tian Tradition.— VI.  Hume.— VII.  Man's 
Place  in  Nature.— VIII.  Discourses, 
Biological  and  Geological. — IX.  Evo- 
lution and  Ethics,  etc. 

Lay  Sermons,  Addresses,  and  Re- 
views.    8vo.     7s.  6d. 

•—  Critiques  and  Addresses.  8vo.  ioj.  6d. 

American  Addresses,  with  a  Lecture 

ON  the  Study  of  Biology.     8vo.    6s.  6d. 

Science    and    Culture,    and    othek 

Essays.    8vo.     10s.  6d. 

Introductory  Science  Primer.     Pott 

8vo.     IS. 

Essays    upon     some     Controverted 

Questions.     8vo.     14s. 

IRELAND  (A.).— The  Book-Lover's  En- 
chiridion.   Fcp.  8vo.    ys.  ;  vellum,  10s.  6d. 

JAMES  (Henry).— French  Poets  and  No- 
velists.   New  Edition.     Gl.  8vo.    5J. 

Portraits  of  Places.    Cr.  8vo.    7*.  6rf. 

Partial  Portraits.     Gl.  8vo.     51. 

JEBB  (R.  C). — Growth  and  Influence  of 

Classical  Greek  Poetry.  Cr.  8vo.  7^.  net. 

JOCELINE  (E.).  The  Mother's  Legacie 
TO  Her  Unborn  Child,    Cr.  i6mo.    ^s.td. 

JONES  (H.  a.).— The  Renascence  of  the 
English  Drama.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

KEATS.— Letters.      Edited     by     Sidnet 

Colvin.    Globe  8vo.    ss. 

KINGSLEY  (Charles).— Complete  Edition 
OP  THE  Works   of  Charles   Kingslev. 
Cr.  8vo.     3^.  6d.  each. 
Westward  Ho      With  a  Portnut. 
Hypatia.    I    Yeast. 
Alton  Locke.    |    Two  Years  Ago. 
Hereward  the  Wake. 
Poems. 
The  Heroes  ;  or,  Greek  Fairy  Tales  fof 

my  Children. 
The  Water  Babies  :  A  Fairy  Tale  for  a 

Land  Baby. 


COLLECTED   WORKS. 


27 


KINGSLEY    (C).  —  Complete    Edition— 

continued. 

Madam  How  and  Lady  Why  ;  or,  First 
Lesson  in  Earth-Lore  for  Children. 

At  Last  :  A  Christmas  in  the  West  Indies. 

Prose  Idylls. 

Plays  and  Puritans. 

The  Roman  and  the  Teuton.    With  Pre- 
face by  Professor  Max  MOller. 

Sanitary  and  Social  Lectures. 

Historical  Lectures  and  Kssats. 

Scientific  Lectures  and  Essays. 

Literary  and  General  Lectures. 

The  Hermits 

Glaucus  ;    or,   The  Wonders  of  the  Sea- 
shore.   With  Coloured  Illustrations. 

Village  and  Town  and  CountrySermohs. 

The  Water  of  Life,  and  other  Sermons. 

Sermons  on  National  Subjects  :  and  thb 
King  of  the  Earth. 

Sermons  for  the  Times. 

Good  News  of  God. 

The  Gospel  of  the  Pentateuch  :  and 
David. 

Discipline,  and  other  Sermons. 

Westminster  Sermons. 

All  Saints'  Day,  and  other  Sermons. 
Pocket  Edition.    Pott  8vo.    zs,  td.  each. 

— Hvpatia. — Alton    Locke. — Westward 

Ho  !     2  vols. — Hereward  the  Wake. — 

Two  Years  Ago.    2  vols. — Yeast. — Water 

Babies. — Heroes. 
KIPLING  (Rudyard).— A  Birthday  Book. 
1^  Selections  from  Writings.  Illust.  i6mo.  ^s.td. 
LAMB  (Charles).— Collected  Works.    Ed., 

with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  the  Rev. 

Alfred  Ainger,  M.A.   Globe  8vo.   5*.  each 

volume. — I.  Essays  of  Elia. — II.  Plays, 

Poems,  and  Miscellaneous  Essays. — III. 

Mrs.  Leicester's  School;  The  Adven- 
tures of  Ulysses  ;  and  other  Essays. — 

IV.  Tales  from  Shakespeare. — V.and  VI. 

Letters.    Newly  arranged,  with  additions, 

-  Tales  from  Shakespeare.  Pott  8vo. 
2J.  f^d.  net. 

Essays  of  Elia.  Edit,  by  N.  L.  Hall- 
ward,  M.A.  and  S.  C.  Hill,  B.A.  G1.  8vo. 
jj. ;  sewed,  2.?.  td. 

LANKESTER(Prof  E.  Ray).--THE  Advance- 
ment of  Science.  Occasional  Essays  and 
Addresses.    8vo.     xos.  td. 

fl^AWTON  (W.  C  ).— Art  and  Humanity  in 
Homer.    Pott  8vo.    35-. 

LESLIE  (G.  D.).— Letters  to  Marco.  Ex. 
or.  8vo,     js.  6d. 

Riverside  Letters.    Ex.  or.  8vo.   js.td. 

LETTERS  FROM  SOUTH  AFRICA.  Re- 
jMinted  from  the  Times.     Cr.  8vo.     2j.  td. 

"LETTERS  FROM  QUEENSLAND.  Re- 
printed from  the  Times.    Cr.  8vo.    2j.  td. 

LODGE  (Prof.  Oliver).— The  Pioneers  of 
Science.    Illustrated.    Ext.  cr.  8vo.    ^s.  td. 

LOWELL(Jas.  Russell).— Complete  Works. 
10  vols.  Cr.  8vo.  ts.  each. — Vols.  I.— IV. 
Literary  Essays.— V.  Political  Essays. 
—VI.  Literary  AND  Political  Addresses. 
VII.— X.  Poetical  Works. 

Political  Essays.    Ext.  cr.  8vo.    7*.  td. 

Latest  Literary  Essays.   Cr.  8vo.    6*. 

ILUBBOCK  (Rt.  Hon.  Sir  John,  Bart.).— Sci- 
entific Lectures.  Illustrated,  and  Edit, 
revised.    8yo.    8j.  td. 


LUBBOCK  (Rt.  Hon.  Sir  John,  Bart.).— Po- 
litical AND  Educational  Ai^ukesses. 
8vo.     8j.  td. 

Fifty  Years  of  Science:   Address  to 

the  British  Association,  1881.  Cr.  8vo.   2s.  td. 

The  Pleasures  OF  Life.  New  Edit.  Gl. 

8vo.  Part  I.  xs.td.;  sv/d.is.-  Part  II.  is.td.l 
sewed,  is. — Complete  in  i  vol.    2s.  td. 

The  Beauties  of  Nature.  Cr.  8vo.  61. 

Without  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.  xs.td.  ; 

sewed,  zs, 

— —  The  Use  of  Life.  Globe  8vo.  ss.  td.  ; 
Cheap  Edition,  ts.  td. ;  sewed,  i.!-. 

LYTTELTON  (E.).— Mothers  and  Sons. 
Cr.  8vo.     V.  td. 

MACAULAY.— Essay  on  Warren  Hast- 
ings. Ed.  byK.DEiGHTON.  Gl.  8vo.  ss.td. 

Essay  on  Lord  Clive.   By  the  same.    2s. 

Essay  on  Addison.     Edited  by  J.  W. 

Hales.    Globe  8vo.  [/«  the  Press. 

Boswell's  Life  of  Johnson.     Edit,  by 

R.  F.  Winch.    Gl.  8vo.    2s.  td. 

MACMILLAN  ^Rev.  Hugh).— Roman  Mo- 
saics, or.  Studies  in  Rome  and  its  Neigh- 
bourhood.   Globe  8vo.    ts. 

MAHAFFY  (Prof.  J.  P.).-The  Principles 
of  the  Art  of  Conversation.  Cr.Svo.  ^s.td, 

MAURICE  (F.  D.).— The  Friendship  of 
Books  :  and  other  Lectures.  Cr.  8vq.  3*.  td. 

MILTON.— Tractate  of  Education.  Ed. 
by  E.  E.  Morris.    Gl.  8vo.    is.  gd. 

MORLEY  (John).- Works.  Collected  Edit, 
In  XI  vols.  Globe  8vo.  5J.  each.— Voltairb. 
I  vol, — Rousseau.    2  vols. — Diderot  and 

THE  EnCYLOP^DISTS.  2  vols. — On  COM- 
PROMISE, I  vol. — Miscellanies.  3  vols. — 
Burke,  i  vol.— Studies  in  Literature. 
I  vol. 

MYERS(F.W.H.).— Essays.  2 vols.  Cr.Svo. 
4j.  6i£.  each.— I.  Classical;  II.  Modern. 

Science  AND  A  Future  LiPK.  G1.8vo.  s*. 

NADAL  (E.   S.).  — Essays  at  Home  and 

Elsewhere.    Cr.  8vo.    ts. 
OLIPHANT(T.  L.Kington).— The  Duke  AND 

the  Scholar  :  and  other  Essays.  8vo.  js.td. 
OWENS   COLLEGE   ESSAYS  AND  AD- 

DRESSES.      By  Professors  and  Lecturers 

of  the  College.     8vo.     14s. 
PATER  (W.).— The  Renaissance;  Studies 

in  Art  and  Poetry.    4th  Ed.    Cr.  8vo.    los.td. 

Imaginary  Portraits.    Cr.  8vo.    6*. 

Appreciations.     With    an    Essay    on 

"  Style."     2nd  Edit.     Cr.  8vo.     Ss.  td. 

Marius  the  Epicurean.    2  vols.    Cr. 

8vo.    15*. 

Plato  AND  Platonism.  Ex.cr,8vo.  Bs.td. 

Greek  Studies.    Ex.  cr.  8vo.    10s.  td. 

Miscellaneous  SxuriEs.  Ex.  cr.  8vo.  gs. 

PICTON(J.A.).— TheMysteryofMattek: 
and  other  Essays.    Cr.  8vo.    ts. 

POLLOCK  (Sir  F.,  Bart,).— Oxford  Lec- 
tures :  and  other  Discourses.    8vo.    gs. 

POOLE  (M.  E.).— Pictures  of  Cottagb 
Life  in  the  West  of  England.  2nd  Ed. 
Cr.  8vo.    3J.  td. 

POPE.— Essay  on  Man,  I.— IV.  Edited  by 
E.  E.  Morris,  M.A.    is.  gd. 

Essay  on  Man.    Epistle  I.    Gl,  8vo.    td. 

POTTER  (Louisa).— Lancashire  Memories. 
Cr.  8vo.    ts. 


2S 


COLLECTED  WORKS— MEDICINE. 


LITERATURE. 
Collected  Works;  Baaays:  Lectiores; 

Letters;   Mlscellaneoua   WoDnB—conia, 

POTTS  (W.)  —  From  a  New  England 
Hillside.    Pott  8vo.    ss. 

PK1CKAK.D  (A.  O.).— Aristotle  on  TiiE 
Art  of  Poetry.    Cr.  8vo.     ^s.  td. 

RUM  Kurd.— Complete  Works  of  Count 
RuMFORD.  Memoir  by  G.  Ellis.  Por- 
trait.    5  vols.     8vo.     4/.  14^.  td. 

SCAIFE(W.  B.).— Florentine  Life  during 
THE  Renaissance.     8vo.     ts.  net. 

SCIENCE  LECTURES  AT  SOUTH  KEN- 
SINGION.  Illustr.  2vols.  Cr.  8vo.  6j.eacb. 

SMALLEY  (George  VV.). — London  LETTt-K? 

AND  SOME  others.      2  Vols.      Svo.      ^21. 

Studies  of  Men.    Cr.  8vo.    Sj.  6d.  net. 

SMITH  (Goldwin).— Esi.AYs  on  Questions 
OftheDay.  2nd  Ed.  revised.  Ex.cr.8vo.  gs. 

STEPHEN  (Sir  James  F.,  Bart.).— HOR^E 
Sabbaticae.  Three  Series.  Gl.  Bvo.  5' 
each. 

THOREAU. — Selections  from  Writings. 
Edited  by  H.  S.  Salt.    Gl.  Bvo.    <,s. 

THRING  (Edward).— Thoughts  on  Life 
Science.    2nd  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    -js.  6d. 

TREVELYAN  (G.  O.)-— The  Competition 
Wallah.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

TYRRELL  (R.  Y.).— Latin  Poetry.  Cr. 
Svo.     ys   net. 

VAUGHAN  (D.  J.).— Questions  of  the 
Day.    Cr.  Svo.    ss. 

WARD  (W.).— Witnesses  to  the  Unseen. 
Svo.     los.  td. 

WESTCOTT  (Bishop).  (.S-e^  Theology,  p  45  ) 

WHITE  (A.  D.).— The  Warfare  OF  Science 
WITH  Theology  in  Christendom.  2  vols. 
Svo.     2TJ-.  net. 

WHTTTIER  (John  Greenleaf).  The  Com- 
plete Works.  7  vols.  Cr.  8vo.  ts.  each.— 
Vol.  I.  Narrative  AND  Legendary  Poems. 
— II.  Poems  of  Nature;  Poems  Sobjbo 
tive  and  Reminiscent  ;  Religious  Poems. 
— III.  Anti-Slavery  Poems;  Songs  of 
Labour  and  Reform. — IV.  Personai 
Poems;  Occasional  Poems;  ThbTenton 
the  Beach  ;  with  the  Poems  of  Elizabfth 
H.  Whittier,  and  an  Appendix  containing 
Early  and  Uncollected  Verses. — V.  Mar- 
garet Smith's  Journal  ;  Tales  ani> 
Sketches.-— VI.  Old  Portraits  and  M. 
DERN  Sketches  ;  Personal  Skhtchiw  ani* 
Tributes  ;  Historical  Papers. — VII.  Tun 
Conflict  with  Slavery,  Politics,  ant- 
Reform  ;  Thb  Innbr  LiFB,  Criticism. 

WILSON  (Dr.  George).— Rbligio  Chbmici 
Cr.  Svo.     8j.  td. 

Thb  Five  Gateways  of  Knowledge. 

t)th  Edit.     E-vr   fcp,  Svo.     is.  td. 

WORDSWORTH.  -TheWorks  of  William 
AND  Dorothy  Wordsworth.  Edited  by 
W.  Knight.    16  vols.     Gl.  8vo.    sj'.  each. 

{Monthly  from  A^ril,  1896. 

WRIGHT   (M.    O.).— Tmb    Friendship    of 

N  ATU  RE.     1 6mo.     3J. 
YONGE  (Charlotte  ^A.).~Uniform  Edition 
Cr.  Svo.     3J.  td.  each. 
Thb  Heir  of  Redclvpfb. 
Heartsease.    1    4opes  and  Fears 
Dynevor  Terrace.   |    The  Daisy  Chain. 
The  Trial  ;  More  Links  of  the  Daisy  Chain. 
Pillars  of  the  House.     2  vols. 
The  Young  Stf.pmother. 
Clever  Woman  of  the  Family. 
The  Three  Brides. 


YONGE  (C.  yi.)— continued. 

My  Young  Alcidks.  |  The  Caged  Lion. 

The  Dove  in  the  Eagle  s  Nest. 

The  Chaplet  of  Pearls. 

Lady  Hester,  and  The  Danvers  Papers^ 

Magnum  Bonum.  |  Love  and  Life. 

Unknown  to  History.  1  Stray  Pearls. 

The  Armourer's  Prentices. 

The  Two  Sides  of  the  Shield, 

Nuttie's  Father.  |  Chantry  House. 

Scenes  and  Characters. 

A  Modern  Telemachus.  i  Bye  Words. 

Beechcroft  at  Rockstone, 

MoreBywords.  I  AReputedChangeling^ 

The  LittlbDuke,Richard  the  Fearless. 

The  Lances  of  Lynwood. 

The  Prince  and  the  Page. 

P's  AND  Q's  :  Little  Lucy's  Wonderfol> 
Globe. 

The  Two  Penniless  Princesses. 

An  Old  Woman's  Outlook. 

That  Stick.  1  Grisly  Grisell. 

LOGIC.    {See  under  Philosophy,  p.  32.) 

BIAGAZINES.    {See  Periodicals,  p.  31). 
MAGNETISM.     {See  under  Physics,  p.  33.) 

MATHEMATICS,  History  of. 

BALL  (W.  W.  P.).— A  Short  Account  or 
THE  History  of  Mathematics.  2nd  Ed^. 
Cr.  Svo.     lor.  net. 

Mathematical     Recreations     and 

Problems.     Cr.  Svo.     ys.  net. 

Primer  of  History  of  Mathematics- 

G1.  Svo.    2J.  net. 

An    Essay    on    Newton's    Principia. 

Cr.  Svo.     6s.  net. 

CAJORI(F.). — History  of  Mathematics. 

Ext.  cr.  8vo.     i^s.  net. 
KLEIN  (F,). — Lectures  on  Mathematics 

Svo.     ts.  td.  net. 

MEDICINE. 

{See  also  Domeistic  Economy  ;  Nursing  ; 

Hvgibnb  :  Physiology.) 

ALLBUTT  (Dr.  T.  Clifford).— On  the  Use 

of  thb  Ophthalmoscopb.    Svo.     15J. 
- — System  of  Medicine.  Vol.1.  Svo.  25j.net. 
ALLBUTT  (T.C.)and  PLAYFAIR  (W.  S.)- 

System  op  Gynaecology.   Svo.    [In  Press. 
ANDERSON  (Dr.  McCall).— Lectures  oh 

Clinical  Mbdicinb.    Illustr.    Svo.    loj.  td. 
BALLANCE(C.A.)andEDMUNDS(Dr.W.). 

Ligation  IN  Continuity.  Illustr.  Roy.Svo. 

loj.  net. 
BARWELL     (Richard,      F.R.C.S.).  —  The 

Causes    and    Treatment    of    Latbral 

Curvaturb  op  the  Spine.    Cr.  Svo.    ts. 

On    Aneurism,    especially    of    the 

Thorax  and  Root  of  the  Neck,     v-  6^- 

BICKERTON  (T.  H.).— On  Colour  Blind- 
NBSS.     Cr.  Svo. 

BRAIN:  A  Journal  of  Neurology.  Edited 
for  the  Nexirological  Society  of  London,  by 
A- Db  Watteville,  Quarterly.  Svo.  js.td. 
(Part  I.  in  Jan.  1878.)  Vols.  15s.  each. 
[Cloth  covers  for  binding,  is.  each.] 

BRUNTON  (Dr.  T.  Lauder).  — A  Text- 
Book  of  Pharmacology,  Therapeutics, 
iND  Materia  Medica.  3rd  Edit.  Med. 
Bvo.     21J. — Or  in  2  vols.     22s.  td. 

Disorders  of  Digestion  :  their  Con- 
sequences AND  TuEATMEN't.    SvO.    lOJ.  tdl 

Pharmacology  AND  Therapeutics  ;  or. 

Medicine  Past  and  Present.     Cr.  Svo.     6j. 


MEDICINE— METALLURGY. 


29 


©RUNTON  (Dr.  T.  L.).-Tables  of  Ma- 
teria Medica  :  A  Coii  panion  to  the 
Materia  Medica  Museum     svb.    5^. 

^—  An  Introduction  to  Modern  Thera- 
peutics Croonian  Lectures  on  the  Rela- 
Uonship  between  Chemical  Structure  and 
Physiological  Action.    8vo.     3s.  6d  net. 

Modern  Developments  of  Harvey's 

Work.    8vo.    2j. 

fiUCKNILL,(Dr.).— The  Care  of  the  In- 

SANE.     Cr.  8vo.     -^s.  dd. 
CARTER  (R.  Brudenell,  F.C.S.).— A  Prao- 

TiCAL  Treatise  on  Diseases  of  the  Eye. 

8vo.     i6f. 
-^—  Eyesight,  Good  and  Bad.  Cr.  8vo.  fir. 

-  Modern  Operations  for  Cataract. 
8vo.    6j. 

COWELL  (George). —Lectures  on  Cata- 
ract :  Its  Causes,  Varieties,  and  Treat- 
ment.    Cr.  Bvo.     4J.  6d. 

ECCLES  (A.  S.). —Sciatica.     Svo.     ^j.  td. 

Practice  of   Massage.     Ex.  cr.  Svo. 

7J.  6d.  net. 

FL0CKIGER  (F.  A.)  and  HANBURY  (D.). 
— Pharmacographia.  a  History  of  the 
Principal  Drugs  of  Vegetable  Origin  met 
with  in  Great  Britain  and  India.     8vo.    215. 

fOTHERGILL  (Dr.  J.  Milner).— The  Prac- 
titioner's Handbook  of  Treatment  ; 
or.  The  Principles  of  Therapeutics.  Svo.  i6f . 

-  The  Antagonism  of  Therapeutic 
Agents,  AND  what  IT  Teaches.  Cr.  Svo.  6*. 

Food  for  the  Invalid,  the  Convales- 
cent, the  Dyspeptic,  and  the  Gouty. 
2nd  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.     -^s.  6d. 

yOX  (Dr.  Wilson).  —  On  the  Artificial 
Production  of  Tubercle  in  the  Lower 
Animals.    With  Plates.     4to.    5*.  6d. 

On  the  Treatment  of  Hyperpyrexia, 

as  Illustrated  in  Acute  Articular 
Rheumatism  by  means  of  the  External 
Application  of  Cold.    Svo.    2s.  6d. 

■GILLIES    (H.    C.).— Counter-Irritation, 

Svo.    6s.  net. 
GRIFFITHS  (W.  H.).— Lessons  on   Pre. 

SCRIPTIONS  AND  THE  ArT  OF  PRESCRIBING. 

New  Edition.    Pott  Svo.     -^s.  6d. 

HAMILTON  (Prof.  D.  J.).— On  the  Patho- 
logy OF  Bronchitis,  Catarrhal  Pneu- 
monia, Tubercle,  and  Allied  Lesions  of 
the  Human  Lung.     Svo.     Bs.  6d. 

-^—  A  Text-Book  of  Pathology,  Syste- 
matic and  Practical.  Illustrated.  Svo, 
Vol.  I.  2if.'"net.  Vol.  II.  in  2  parts.  15J, 
each  net, 

HANBURY  (Daniel).  —  Science  Papers, 
chiefly  Pharmacological  and  BotanI' 
Cal.     Med.  Svo.    14,$. 

HAWKINS  (H.  P.).— Diseases  of  the  Ver- 
miform Appendix.    Svo.    7^.  net. 

KAHLDEN  (C.).— Methods  of  Patholo 
GiCAL  Histology.  Transl.  by  H.  M 
Fletcher.    Svo.    6s, 

KANTHACK  (A.  A.)  and  DRYSDALE 
(J.  H.).— Elementary  Practical  Bac- 
teriology.    Cr.  Svo.     4s.  6d. 

KLEIN  (Dr.  E.).— Micro-Organisms  and 
Disease.  An  Introduction  into  the  Study 
of  Specific  Micro-Organisms.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

■^—  The  Bacteria  in  Asiatic  Cholera. 
Cr.  Svo.     <,s. 


LEPROSY  INVESTIGATION  COMMIT- 
TEE,  JOURNAL  OF  THE.  Edited  by 
P.  S.  Abraham,  M.A.  Nos.  2 — 4.  Svo. 
2S.  6d.  each  net. 

Prize  Essays.     By  E.  S.  Ehlers  and 

S.  P.  Impey.    Svo.    3s.  6d.  net. 

LINDSAY  (Dr.  J.  A.).  —  The  Climatic 
Treatment  of  Consumption.  Cr.  Svo.  51. 

MACDON  ALD  (G.)— Diseases  of  the  Nose, 
2nd  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    10s.  6d.  net. 

MACLAGAN  (Dr.  T.).— The  Germ  Theory. 
Bvo.     ioj.  6d. 

MACLEAN  (Surgeon-General  W.  C.).— Dis- 
eases of  "ITropical  Climates.    Cr.  Svo, 

10s.  6d, 

MERCIER  (Dr.  C.).— The  Nervous  System 
AND  THE  Mind.    Svo.    12s.  6d. 

NEWMAN(G.).— Decline  AND  Extinction 
OF  Leprosy.    Svo.    2s.  6d.  net. 

PIFFARD  (H.  G.).— An  Elementary  Trea- 
tise ON  Diseases  of  the  Skin.    Svo.    16*. 

PRACTITIONER,  THE :  Index  to  Vols. 
I.-L.    Svo.    IOJ.  6d. 

REYNOLDS  (Sir  J.  R.)— A  System  of  Medi- 
cine. Edited  by  Sir  J.  Russell  Reynolds, 
Bart.,  M.D.,  In  5  vols.  Vols.  I.— III.  and 
V.    Svo.    25^.  each. — Vol.  IV.    21J. 

RICHARDSON  (Dr.  B.  W.).— Diseases  of 
Modern  Life.     Cr.  Svo. 

The^  Field  of  Disease.     A  Book  of 

Preventive  Medicine.     Svo.     25*. 

SEATON  (Dr.  Edward  C.).— A  Handbook 
OF  Vaccination.     Ext.  fcp.  Svo.    Zs.  6d. 

SEILER  (Dr.  Carl).  — Micro-Photographi 
IN  Histologv,  Normal  and  Pathologi- 
cal.   4to.    31S.  6d. 

SIESON  (Dr.  Franci^.— Collected  Works. 
Edited  by  W.  M.  C3rd,  M.D.  Illustrated. 
4  vols.     Svo.     3/.  3J. 

SPENDER  (J.  Kent).— Therapeutic  Means 
for  the  Relief  of  Pain.    Svo.    8j.  6d. 

SURGERY  (THE  INI  ERNATIONAL 
ENCYCLOPAEDIA  OF).  A  Systematic 
Treatise  on  the  Theory  and  Practice  of  Sur- 
gery by  Authors  of  various  Nations.  Edited 
by  John  Ashhurst,  jun.,  M.D.  7  vols. 
Roy.  Svo.     31J.  6d.  each. 

THORNE  (Dr.  Thorne).— Diphtheria.  Cr. 
Svo.     Ss.  6d. 

WHITE  (Dr.  W.  Hale).— A  Text-Book  of 
General  Therapeutics.    Cr.  Svo.     Sf.  firf. 

WILLIAMS  (C.  T.).— Aero-Therapeutics. 
Svo.     6s.  net. 

ZIEGLER  (Ernst).— A  Text-Book  of  Pa- 
thological Anatomy  and  Pathogenesis. 
Translated  and  Edited  by  Donald  Mag- 
Alister,  M.A.,  M.D.  Illustrated.  Svo. — 
Part  I.  (General  Pathological  Anatom¥, 
T2S.  6rf.— Part  II.  Special  Pathological 
Anatomy.  Sections  I.— VIIL  and  IX. — 
XII.    Svo.    i2f.  6d.  each. 

METALLURGT. 

{See  also  Chemistry.) 
HIORNS   (Arthur  H.).— A  Text-Book  of 

Elementary  Metallurgy.     2nd  Edition. 

Gl.  Svo.    3s. 
Practical  Metallurgy  and  Assaying. 

Illustrated.    2nd  Edit.    Globe  8vo.    6s. 


30 


METALLURGY— NATURAL   HISTORY. 


f/lETALLVRGY—conizHued. 

HIORNS  (A.  H  ).— Mixed  Metals  or  Me- 
tallic Alloys     Globe  8vo.     6s. 

Iron  and  Steel  Manufacture.  Illus- 
trated.    Globe  8vo.     3J.  6d. 

—  Metal  Colouring  and  Bronzing. 
Globe  8vo.     5^. 

Principles  OF  Metallurgy.  Gi.  8vo.  6s. 

Questions  on  Metallurgy.     G1.  8vo, 

sewed,     is. 
PHILLIPS  (J.  A.).— A  Treatise  on  Orb 

Deposits.    Illustrated. 

[//ew  ediiion  in  preParatwn. 

METAPHYSICS. 
{^See  under  Philosophy,  p.  32.) 

MILITARY  AKT  AND  HISTORY. 

AITKEN  (Sir  W.).— The  Growth  of  th* 

Recruit  and  YoungSoldier.  Cr.8vo.  %s.6d. 
CUNYNGHAME    (Gen.    Sir   A.    T.).  — Mv 

Command    in    South    Africa,    1874 — 78. 

Bvo.    12J.  6d. 
DILKE  (Sir  C  )  and  WILKINSON  (S.).— Im- 

perial  Defence.     Cr.  8vo.     3^.  6d. 
FORTESCUE  Q-  W.).  — History  of  the 

17TH  Lancers.    Roy.  8vo.    25J.  net. 
HOZIER  (Lieut. -Col.  H.  M.).— The  Seven 

Weeks'  War.     ^rd  Edit.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 
——  The  Invasions  of  England.    2  vols. 

Svo.    28;. 
MARTEL  (Chas.).— Military  Italy.    With 

Map.    Svo.     i2'i.  6d. 
MAURICE(Maj.-Gen.).— War.    Svo.   5f.net. 

The  National  Defences.    Cr.  Svo. 

MERCUR  (Prof.  J.).— Elements    of   the 

Art  of  War.     Svo.     17J. 

MOLYNEUX  (W.  C.  F.).— Campaigning  in 
South  Africa  and  Egypt.    8vo.    lo?.  net. 

SCRATCHLEY  —  KINLOCH  COOKE.  — 
Australian  Defences  and  New  Guinea. 
Compiled  from  the  Papers  of  the  late  Major- 
General  Sir  Peter  Scratchlev,  R.E.,  by 
C.  Kinloch  Cooke.    Svo.     14J. 

THROUGH  THE  RANKS  TO  A  COM- 
MISSION.   New  Edition.    Cr.  Svo.    ^s.6d. 

WINGATE  (Major  F.  R.).— Mahdiism  and 
THE  Egyptian  Sudan.  An  Account  of  the 
Rise  and  Progress  of  Mahdiism,  and  of  Sub- 
sequent Events  in  the  Sudan  to  the  Present 
Time.     With  17  Maps.     Svo.     3ar.  net. 

WOLSELEY  (General  Viscount).— The  Sol- 
dier's Pocket-Book  for  Field  Service. 
5th  Edit.     i6mo,  roan.     sj. 

^—  Field  Pocket-Book  for  the  Auxiliary 
Forces.     i6nio.    u.  6d. 

YOUNGHUSBAND  (G.  J.  and  F.  E.).— 
Relief  of  Chitral.    Svo.    8j.  6d.  net. 

MINERALOGY.    {.See  Geology.) 

MISCELLANEOUS  WORKS. 
{See  under  Literature,  p.  24.) 

MUSIC. 
CHAPPELL  (W.).— Old  English  Popular 
Music.     2  vols.    4to.    42J.  net. — Ediiion  dt 
Luxe.     4to.     84^.  net. 


FAY  (Amy).— Music-Study  in  Germany^ 
Preface  by  Sir  Geo.  Grove.   Cr.Svo.   4s.  6d^ 

GROVE  (Sir  George).— A  Dictionary  of 
Music  and  Musicians,  a.d.  1450 — iBSq. 
Edited  by  Sir  George  Grove,  D.C.L.  In 
4  vols.  Svo.  21J.  each.  With  Illustrations  \q 
Music  Type  and  Woodcut. — Also  published 
In  Parts.  Parts  I.— XIV.,  XIX.— XXH 
3S.  6d.  each  ;  XV.  XVI.  7^- ;  XVII.  XVIII. 
7J.  ;  XXIII.— XXV.  Appendix,  Edited  by 
J.  A.  Fuller  Maitland,  M.A.  gs.  [Clotb- 
cases  for  binding  the  volumes,  is.  each.] 

A  Complete  Index  to  the  Above.    By 

Mrs.  E.  WoDEHOusE.     Svo.     7J.  6d. 

HULLAH  (John).— Music  in  the  Hoosb, 
4th  Edit.     Cr.  Svo.    2j.  6d. 

TAYLOR  (Franklin).— A  Primer  of  Piano- 
forte Playing.     Pott  Svo.     is. 

TAYLOR  (Sedley).— Sound  and  Music  3rd 
Edit.     Ext.  cr.  Svo.     Ss.  6d. 

-  A  System  of  Sight-Singing  from  th« 
Established  Musical  Notation.  Svo. 
ss.  net. 

Recordofthe  Cambridge  Centenary 

of  W.  a.  Mozart.     Cr.  Svo.     as.  6d.  net. 

NATURAL  HISTORY. 
ATKINSON  (J.  C.)     (5«  Antiquities,  p.  i.) 
BADEN0CH(L.  N.).— Romance  of  Insect 

World.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 
BAKER  (Sir  Samuel  W.)     {See  Sport,  p.  37.> 
BLANFORD     (W.     T.).  — Geology     and 

Zoology  of  Abyssinia.     Svo.    21J. 
CAMBRIDGE      NATURAL      HISTORY, 

THE.     Edit,  by  J.  W.  Clark,  S.  F.  Har- 

mer,  and  A.  E.  Shipley.    Svo.    Vol.  III. 

Molluscs    and    Brachiopods.     By   Rev. 

A.  H.  Cooke.   i-]s.  net.    Vol.  V.  Peripatus> 

MvRiAPors,   Insects.     Bv  A.   Sedgwick, 

F.  G.  Sinclair,  and  D.  Sharp.    17J.  net. 
FOWLER  (W.  W.).— Tales  of  the  Birds. 

Illustrated.     Cr.  Svo.     3J.  6d. 
— —  A  Year  with  the  Birds.     Illustrated. 

Cr.  Svo.     3J.  6d. 
Summer  Studies  of  Birds  and  Books, 

Cr.  8vD.    6s. 
HEADLEY  (F.  W  )  —Structure  and  Lifb 

OF  Birds.    Cr.  Svo.    ^s.  6d. 
KINGSLEY  (Charles).— Madam  How  and 

Lady  Why  ;  or,  First  Lessons  in  Earth-Lore 

for  Children.     Cr.  Svo.     3^.  6d. 

Glaucus  ;  or.  The  Wonders  of  the  Sea- 
Shore.  With  Coloured  Illustrations.  Cr, 
Svo.  3J.  6d. — Presentation  Edition.  Cr. 
Svo,  extra  cloth.     7^.  6d. 

KLEIN  (E.).— Etiology  and  Pathologt 
OF  Grouse  Disease.     Svo.     75.  net. 

MEYRICK  (E.),— Handbook  of  British 
Lepidoptera.    Ex.  cr.  Svo.    los.  6d.  net. 

MIALL  (L.  C.).— Natural  History  of 
Aquatic  Insects.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

WALLACE  (Alfred  Russel).— The  Mala» 
Archipelago  :  The  Land  of  the  Orane 
Utang  and  the  Bird  of  Paradise.  Maps  and 
Illastr.   Ext.  or.  Svo.  fa,  {See  also '&\o\jyGV^ 

WATERTON  (Charles).— Wanderings  ih 
South  America,  the  North-West  of 
THE  United  States,  and  the  Antilles. 
Edited  by  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood.  Illustrated. 
Cr.  Svo.     6s. — People's  Edition.     4to.     6d. 


NAVAL  SCIENCE— PHILOLOGY. 


3" 


WHITE  (Gilbert).— Natural  History  and 
Antiquities  of  Selbornb.  Ed.  by  Frank 
BUCKLAND.  With  a  Chapter  on  Antiquities 
by  the  Earl  of  Selborne.     Cr.  8vo.    6». 

Edited  by  J.  Burroughs,    a  vols.    Cr. 

Svo.    loj.  bd 

WRIGHT  (M.  0.).-Birdcraft.  Ex.  cr. 
Svo,    I2J.  (id.  net. 

NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY.    (St4  Physics.) 

NAVAL  SCIENCE  AND  HISTORY. 
DELBOS  (L.). — Lectures  Maritimes.    Cr. 

Svo.    2j.  net. 
Sea  Stories  for  French  Composition. 

Fcp.  Svo.    2j.  net. 

FLAGG  (A.  T.). — Primer  of  Navigation. 

Pott  Svo.      TS. 

GOW  (W.).— Marine  Insurance.  Globe 
Svo.    4J.  dd. 

KELVIN  (Lord). — Popular  Lectures  and 
Addresses.— Vol.  III.  Navigation.  Cr. 
Svo.    7J.  6d. 

NORWAY  (A.  H.).— History  of  the  Post 
Office  Packet  Service,  1793—1815.  Illus- 
trated.   Cr.  Svo.    Zs,  6(f.  net. 

ROBINSON  (Rev.  J.  L.).— Elements  of 
Marine  Surveying.  For  Junior  Na^^l 
Officers.  Illustrated,  znd  Edit.  Cr.  Svo. 
js.  6d. 

SHORTLAND  (Admiral).— Nautical  Sur- 
veying.    Svo.     axs. 

WILLIAMS  (H.)— Britain's  Naval  Power. 
Cr.  Svo.    4^.  6d.  net. 

NOVELS.    (^«  Prose  Ciction,  p.  21.) 

NURSING. 

{Ste  under  Domestic  Economy,  p.  g.) 

OPTICS  (or  LIGHT).    (See  Physics,  p.  34.) 

PAINTING.    (See  Art,  p.  2.) 

PATHOLOGY.    (See  Medicine,  p.  28.) 

PERIODICALS. 

AMERICAN HISTORICALREVIEW.  {Ste 

History.) 
AMERICAN  JOURNAL  OF  PHILOLOGY, 

THE.    (See  Philology.) 

BRAIN.    (See  Medicins.) 
CANTERBURY  DIOCESAN  GAZETTE. 

Monthlv.     Svo.     ^d. 
CENTURY  MAGAZINE.      Monthly.    Svo. 

IS.  4^ 

ECONOMIC  JOURNAL,  THE.  (Set  Po- 
litical Economy.) 

ECONOMICS,  THE  QUARTERLY  JOUR- 
NAL OF.    (See  Political  Economy.) 

HELLENIC  STUDIES,  THE  JOURNAL 
OF.  Published  Half- Yearly  fifom  1880.  Svo. 
30J. ;  or  Quarterly  Parts,  15J.  net. 

The  Journal  will  be  sold  at  'a  reduced  price 
to  Libraries  wishing  to  subscribe,  but  official 
application  must  in  e&ch  case  be  made  to  the 
Council.  Irfbrmation  on  this  point,  and  upon 
the  conditions  of  Mem  bership,maybeobtained 
on  application  to  the  Hon.  Sec,  Mr.  George 
Macmillan,2g3edford  Street,Covent  Garden. 


JEWISH  QUARTERLY  REVIEW.  Edited) 
by  I.  Abrahams  and  C.  G.  Montefiore^ 
Svo.    3*.  td. 

LEPROSY  INVESTIGATION  COMMIT- 
TEE, JOURNAL  OF.    (See  Medicine.) 

MACMILLAN'S  MAGAZINE.  Published 
Monthly,  if.— Half- Yearly  Vols.  ^i.  6rf. 
each.     [Cloth  covers  for  binding,  ij.  each.] 

MATHEMATICAL  GAZETTE,  THE.  (Set 
Mathematics.) 

NATURE :  A  Weekly  Illustrated  Jour- 
nal OF  Science.  Published  every  Thursday. 
Price  id.  Monthly  Parts,  is.  and  2J.  td.  ; 
Current  Half-yearly  vols.,  15J.  each.  [Cases 
for  binding  vols.  ij.  td.  each.] 

PHILOLOGY,  THE  JOURNAL  OF.  (^et 
Philology.) 

PHYSICAL  REVIEW,  THE.  (i'w Physics.> 
PSYCHOLOGICAL  REVIEW,  THE.  (Sea 

Psychology.) 
RECORD   OF   TECHNICAL   AND   SE- 
CONDARY   EDUCATION.      (Set  Edu- 
cation, p.  lo.) 

ST.  NICHOLAS  MAGAZINE.  Monthly. 
Svo.    If. 

PHILOLOGY. 

AMERICAN  JOURNAL  OF  PHILOLOGY, 
THE.  Edited  by  Prof  Basil  L.  Gilder- 
SLEEVE.     4f .  td.  each  No.  (quarterly). 

CORNELL  UNIVERSITY  STUDIES  IN' 
CLASSICAL  PHILOLOGY.  Edited  by 
\.  Flagg,  W.  G.  Hale,  and  B.  I.  Wheeler.. 
I.  The  C  f /If-CoNSTRUCTioNs:  their  His- 
tory and  Functions.  Part  I.  Critical,  ij,  8(/.- 
net  Part  II.  Constructive  By  W.  G.- 
Halb.  -35.  ^d.  net. — II.  Analogy  and  thb. 
Scope  of  its  Application  in  Language. 
By  B.  I.  Wheeler     is.-^d,  net. 

EMERSON  (O.  F.).— History  of  the  Eng- 
lish Language.     Cr.  Svo.     ts.  net. 

GILES  (P.).— A  Manual  of  Comparative 
Philology  for  Classical  Students.  Cr. 
Svo.    \os.  td. 

JOURNAL  OF  SACRED  AND  CLASSI- 
CALPHILOLOGY.  4vols.  Svo.  i2j.6<i.each. 

JOURNAL  OF  PHILOLOGY.  New  Series. 
Edited  by  W.  A.  Wright  M.A.,  I.  By- 
watbk,  M.A.,  and  H.  Tackson,  M.A. 
4s.  td.  each  No.  (half-yearly). 

KELLNER  (Dr.  L.).  —  Historical  Out- 
lines IN  English  Syntax.  Revised  by  L^ 
Kellner  and  H.  Bradley.    Globe  Svo.    6*. 

MACLEAN  (G.  E.).— An  Old  and  Middle- 
English  Reader.     Cr.  'Svo.     Sv.  net. 

MORRIS  <Rev.  Richard,  LL.D.).— Primek 
OF  English  Gkawmar.    Pott  Svo.    ij. 

Elbmentaky  Lessons  in  Historical 

Englisw  ^Grammar.    Pott  Svo.    zs.  td. 

— —  HrsTORiGAL Outlines  of  English  Ac- 
oI'DEnCe.  Revised  by  L.  Kellner  and  H. 
Bradley.    G1  Svo.     6f. 

MORRIS  (R.)  and  BOWEN  (H.  C). ^Eng- 
lish Grammar  Exercises.    Pott  Svo.    if. 

OLIPHANT  (T.  L.  Kington).  —  The  0l& 
AND  Middle  English.     Globe  Svo.    .9;. 

— —  The  New  English.   2  vols.  Cr.Svo.  211. 

PEILE  (John). —  A  Primer  of  Philology^ 
Pott  Svo.    IS. 


J2 


PHILOSOPHY. 


PELLISSIER  (E.).— French  Roots  and 
THEiK  Families.     Globe  8vo.    6s. 

TAYLOR    (Isaac).— Words     and     Places. 

9th  Edit.     Maps.     Globe  8vo.     6s. 
'—  Etruscan  Researches.     8vo.     14J. 

Greeks  and  Goths  :    A  Study  of  the 

Runes.     8vo.     qj. 

'WETHERELL  Q-)-— Exercises  on  Mor- 
ris's Primer  of  English  Grammar. 
Pott  8vo.     \s. 

¥0NGE  (C.  M.).— History  of  Christian 
Names,  New  Edit.,  revised.  Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d. 


PHILOSOPHY. 

Stkics  and  Metaphysics — Logic — PsycJwlogy. 

EtMcs  and  Metaphysics. 

BIRKS  (Thomas  Rawson). — First  Principles 
of  Moral  Science.    Cr.  8vo.    8j.  6d. 

-  Modern  Utilitarianism  ;  or,  The  Sys- 
tems of  Paley,  Bentham,  and  Mill  Examined 
and  Compared.     Cr.  8vo.     6s.  6d. 

Modern  Physical  Fatalism,  and  the 

Doctrine  of  Evolution.  Including  an 
Examination  of  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer's 
"First  Principles."     Cr.  Svo.     6s, 

CALDERWOOD  (Prof.  H.).— A  Handbook 
OF  Moral  Philosophy.     Cr.  8vo.    6*. 

D'ARCY  (C.  F.).— Short  Study  of  Ethics. 
Cr.  Svo.    5^.  net. 

DEUSSEN  (P.>— Elements  of  Metaphy- 
sics.   Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

FISKE  (John). — Outlines  of  Cosmic  Philo- 
sophy, based  on  the  Doctrine  of  Evolu- 
tion.   2  vols.     8vo.    25J. 

FOWLER  (Rev.  Thomas).  —  Progressive 
Morality:  An  Essay  in  Ethics.  2nd  Edit. 
Cr.  Svo.    '^s  net. 

HILL  (D.  J.).— Genetic  Philosophy.  Cr. 
Svo.     75.  net. 

HUXLEY  (Prof.  T.  H.).— Evolution  and 
Ethics.     Svo.     is.  net. 

KANT.— Kant's  Critical  Philosophy  for 
English  Readers.  By  J.  P.  Mahaffy, 
D.D.,  and  J.  H.  Bernard,  B.D.  2  vols. 
Cr.  Svo. —Vol.  I.  The  Kritik  of  Pure 
Reason  Explained  and  Defended,  js.td. 
—Vol.  II.  The  Prolegomena.  Translated, 
with  Notes  and  Appendices.    6s. 

Kritik  of  Judgment.     Translated  by 

J.  H.  Bernard,  D.D.    Svo.     ioj.  net. 

KANT— MAX  mOlLER.  —  Critique  of 
Pure  Reason  by  Immanuel  Kant.  Trans- 
lated by  F.  Max  MOller.  With  Intro- 
duction by  LuDwiG  NoiRi.  2  vols.  8vo. 
i6f.  each  (sold  separately). — Vol.  I.  His- 
torical Introduction,  by  Lddwig  NoirA, 
etc. — Vol.  II.  Critique  of  Pure  Reason. 

KNIGHT  (W.  A.),— Aspects  of  Theism. 
Svo.     Zs.  6d. 

MARSHALL  (H.   R.).— Pain,    Pleasure, 

and  Aesthetics.     Svo.    8j.  6d.  net. 
Aesthetic  Principles.  Cr.  Svo.   5^.  net. 

MAURICE  (F.  D.).— Moral  and  Meta- 
physical Philosophy,     z  vols.    Svo.     \6s. 


McCOSH  (Rev.  Dr.  James).— The  Method 
OF  THE  Divine  Government,  Physical 
AND  Moral.    Svo.     10^.  6d. 

The  Supernatural  in  Relation  to 

the  Natural.    Cr.  Svo.    7J.  6d, 

Intuitions  of  the  Mind.   Svo.    10s.  6d. 

An  Examination  of  Mr.  J.  S.  Mill's 

Philosophy.     Svo.     10^.  6d. 

Christianity  and  Positivism.  Lec- 
tures on  Natural  Theology  and  Apologetics. 
Cr   8vo.     7^.  6d. 

The  Scottish  Philosophy  from  Hut- 

CHESON  to  Hamilton,  Biographical,  Ex- 
pository, Critical.     Roy.  Svo.    i6x. 

Realistic  Philosophy  Defended  in  a 

Philosophic  Series.  2  vols.  —  Vol.  I. 
Expository.  Vol.  II.  Historical  and 
Critical.     Cr.  Svo.     \i^s. 

First    and    Fundamental    Truths. 

Being  a  Treatise  on  Metaphysics.     Svo.     9*. 

The  Prevailing  Types  of  Philosophy  : 

Can  they  Logically  reach  Reality  ? 
Svo.     3 J.  6d. 

Our  Moral  Nature.    Cr.  Svo.    zs.  td. 

MASSON  (Prof.  David).— Recent  British 

Philosophy.     3rd  Edit.     Cr.  8vo.    6s. 
SHELDON  (W.  L.).— An   Ethical  Hove- 

MENT.     Cr.  Svo.     5J.  net. 
SIDGWICK  (Prof.  Henry).— The  Methods 

of  Ethics.     5th  Edit.,  revised.     Svo.     14J. 

A  SOPPLEMENI  to  the  SeCOND  EDITION. 

Containing  all  the  important  Additions  and 
Alterations  in  the  Fourth  Edition.     Svo.     6s. 

Outlines  of  the  History  of  Ethics 

FOR  English  Readers.    Cr.  Svo.    35.  td. 

THORNTON  (W.  T.).  —  Old-FashionE3> 
Ethics  and  Common-Sense  Metaphysics. 
Svo.    loj.  6d. 

WILLIAMS  (C.  I\L).— A  Review  of  the  Sys- 
tems  of  Ethics  founded  on  the  Theort 
of  Evolution.    Cr.  Svo.     12s.  net. 

WINDELBAND  (W.).— History  of  Philo- 
sophy. Transl.  byJ.H.  Tjfts.  Svo.  21j.net. 

Logic. 

BOOLE  (George).  —  The  Mathematical 
Analysis  of  Logic.     Svo.  sewed.     5^. 

BOSANQUET  (B.).— Essentials  of  Logic. 

Cr.  Svo.  -^s.  net. 
CARROLL  (Lewis). — The  Game  of  Logic. 

Cr.  Svo.  3J.  net. 
Symbolic  Logic.    I.  Elementary.    G1. 

Svo.    2s.  net. 

JEV0NS(W.  Stanley).— a  Primer  of  Logic. 
Pott  Svo.     js. 

Elementary  Lessons  in  Logic,  De- 
ductive AND  Inductive.   Pott  Svo.   3*.  6d. 

Studies    in    Deductive    Logic,      and 

Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

The  Principles  of  Science:  Treatise  on 

Logic  and  Scientific  Method.  Cr.  Svo.  xis.td. 

Pure  I.,ogic:  and  other  Minor  Works. 

Edited  by  R.  Adamson,  M.A.,  and  Har- 
riet A.  Tevons.     8vo.     loj.  6d. 

KEYNES  (J.  N.).— Studies  and  Exercises 
IN  Formal  Logic.    3rd  Edit.    Svo.    i2j. 

McCOSH  (Rev.  Dr.).— The  Laws  of  Dis- 
cursive Thought.  A  Text-Book  of  Formal 
Logic.     Cr.  Svo.     ^s. 

RAY  (Prof.  P.  K.).— A  Text-Book  of  De- 
ductive Logic   4th  Edit.  Globe  Svo.  4X.  td. 


PHILOSOPHY— PHYSICS. 


33 


VENN  (Rev.  John).— The  Logic  of  Chance. 

2nd  Edit.    Cr.  8vo.     los.  6d. 
— —  Symbolic  Logic.  2nd  Ed.  Cr.  Bvo.  zos.6d, 

The  Principles  of  Empirical  or  In- 
ductive Logic.    8vo.    i8j. 

Psychology. 

BALDWIN  (Prof.  J.   M.).— Handbook   of 

FsvcHOLOGY :    Senses  and  Intellect.     Bvo. 
Bs,  6d.  net. 

Feeling  and  Will.     8vo.     Bs.  td.  net. 

-^—Elementsof Psychology.  Cr.8vo.  js.6d, 
Mental  Development  in  the  C^hild 

AND  THE  Race.     8vo.     jos.  net. 

CALDERWOOD  (Prof.  H.).  —  The  Rela 

TiONS  OF  Mind  and  Brain.  3rd  Ed.  8vo.  Bs. 
CATTELL      (J.     McK.).  —  Experimental 

Psychology.  [In  the  Press. 

CLIFFORD  (W.  K.).— Seeing  and  Think 

ing.    Cr.  8vo.    3i-.  6d. 

HOFFDING  (Prof.  H.).— Outlines  of  Psy 
chologv.  Translated  by  M.  E.  Lowndes. 
Cr.  Bvo.    ts. 

JAMES  (Prof.  William).— The  Principles  of 

Psychology.  2  vols.  Demy  8vo.  zg-r.  net. 
_—  Text-Book  of  Psychology.     Cr,  Bvo. 

7J.  net, 
JARDINE  (Rev.  Robert).— The  Elements 

OF  the  Psychology  of  Cognition.    3rd 

Edit.    Cr.  8vo.    6s.  6d. 
McCOSH  (Rev.  Dr.).— Psychology.  Cr.  8vo. 

I.    The   Cognitive  Powers.    6s.  6d. — II. 

The  Motive  Powers.    6*.  6d. 
The  Emotions.     Bvo.    qj. 

MAUDSLEY(Dr.  Henry).— The  Physiology 
of  Mind.     Cr.  8vo.     10s.  6d. 

The  Pathology  OF  Mind.   Bvo.   15f.net. 

Body  and  Mind.     Cr.  8vo.    6s.  6d. 

MURPHY  (J.  J.}.— Habit  and  Intelli- 
gence.   2nd  Edit.    Illustrated.    8vo.     i6s. 

PSYCHOLOGICAL  REVIEW,  THE.  Ed. 
by  J.  M.  Cattell  and  J.  M.  Baldwin. 
Bvo.  3f.net.  Annual  Subscription,  i6j.6(/.  net. 

PHOTOaRAPHY. 

MELDOLA  (Prof.  R.).— The  Chemistry  of 
Photography.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

PHYSICS  OR  NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

General— Electricity  and  Magnetism— 
Heatj  Lights  and  Sound, 

General. 
ANDREWS  (Dr.  Thomas) :  The  Scientific 

Papers  of  the  late.    With  a  Memoir  by 

Profs.  Tait  and  Crum  Brown.     8vo.    iBj. 
BARKER   (G.    F.).— Physics:   Advanced 

Course,     8vo.    zis. 
DANIELL   (A.),— A   Text-Book    of   the 

Principles  of  Physics.     Illustrated.     3rd 

Edit.     Med.  8vo.     21J. 
^—  Physics  for  Students  of  Medicine. 

Fcp.  Svo.    4*-  ^^■ 
EARL  (A).— Practical  Lessons  in  Physical 

Measurement.    Cr.  Bvo.    51. 
EVERETT  (Prof.  J.  D.).— The  C.  G.  S.  Sys- 

tem  of  Units,  with  Tables  of  Physical 

Constants.    New  Edit.    Globe  Bvo.    sx. 


FESSENDEN  (C.).— Elements  of  Physics. 

Fcp.  Bvo.    -^s. 
FISHER  (Rev.  Osmond).— Physics  of  the 

Earth's  Crust.    2nd  Edit.    Svo.    12*. 

GEE  (W.).  — Short  Studies  in  Nature 
Knowledge.    Globe  Bvo.    3J.  6d. 

GORDON  (H.)— Practical  Science.  Part 
I.     Pott  Bvo.     ts.       [Part  II.  in  the  Press. 

GREGORY  (R.  A.).— Elementary  Prac- 
tical Physics.    4to.    as.  6d. 

GUILLEMIN  (Am^d^e).— The  Forces  or 
Nature.  A  Popular  Introduction  to  tha 
Study  of  Physical  Phenomena.  455  Wood- 
cuts.   Ray.  Bvo.    21s. 

HUXLEY  (T.  H.).— Introductory  Primer 
OF  Science.    Pott  Svo.     is. 

KELVIN  (Lord).— Popular  Lectures  and 
Addresses. — Vol.  I.  Constitution  of 
Matter.    Cr.  Svo.    7^.  6d. 

KEMPE(A.  B.).— How  to  draw  a  Straight 
Line.     Cr.  Svo.     is,  6d. 

LOEWY  (B.).— Questions  and  Examples 
in  Experimental  Physics,  Sound,  Light, 
Heat,  Electricity,  and  Magnetism. 
Fcp.  Bvo.     zs. 

A  Graduated   Course   of   Natural 

Science.  Parti.  Gl.Svo.  2^.- Partll.  2s.6d. 

LOUDON  (W.  J.)  and  Mc  LENNAN 
(J.  C). — Laboratory  Course  in  Experi- 
mental Physics.    Bvo.    8s.  6d.  net. 

MOLLOY  (Rev.  G.).— Gleanings  in  Sa- 
ENCE :  A  Series  of  Popular  Lectures  OD 
Scientific  Subjects.    Svo.    7^.  6d. 

NICHOLS  (E.  L.).— Laboratory  Manual 
of  Physics  and  Applied  Electricity. 
Vol.  I.  Junior  Course  in  General  Phy- 
sics. With  Tables.  Svo.  t.2S.  6d.  net. — 
Vol.  II.  Senior  Courses.     i2j.  6d.  net. 

NICHOLS  (E.  L.)  and  FRANKLIN  (W.  S.). 
Elements  of  Physics.  Vol.  I.  Mechanics 
and  Heat.    Svo.    6s.  net. 

PHYSICAL  REVIEW,  THE.  Edited  by 
E.  L.  Nichols  and  E.  Merritt.  Bi- 
Monthly.     Bvo.     3J.  net. 

SCHUSTER(A.)and  LEES  (C.H.).— Inter- 
mediate Class  Book  in  Physics.  G1.  Bvo. 
[In  the  Press. 

STEWART  (Prof.  Balfour). —A  Primer  o» 
Physics.     Illustrated.     Pott  Svo.     u. 

Lessons  in  Elementary  Physics.  Illus- 
trated.   Fcp.  Svo.    4S.  6d. 

Questions  on  the  Same.     By  T.  H. 

Core.    Pott  Svo.    2x. 

STEWART  (Prof.  Balfour)  and  GEE  (W.  W. 

Haldane). — Lessons  in  Elementary  Prao- 

ticalPhysics.  Illustrated. — GeneralPht- 

siCAL  Processes.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 
TAIT  (Prof.  P.  G.).— Lectures   on   sohb 

Recent  Advances  in  Physical  Science. 

3rd  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    qf. 


Electricity  and  Magnetism. 

CUMMING  (LinuEeus).— An  Introductiom 
to  Electricity.    4th  Ed.    Cr.  Svo.    Bs.  6d. 

DAY  (R.  E.).— Electric  Light  Arithmetic. 

Pott  Bvo.      2S. 


34 


PHYSICS— PHYSIOLOGY. 


^ectricity— continued. 

GRAY  (Prof.  Andrew).— The  Theory  and 
Practice  of  Absolute  Measurements 
IN  Electricity  and  Magnetism.  2  vols. 
Cr.  Bvo.  Vol.1.  i2s.6d. — Vol.11.  2parts.  2$s. 

——  Absolute  Measurements  in  Elec- 
tricity AND  Magnetism.   Fcp.  8vo.  5*.  6d. 

Magnetism  and  Electricity.    8vo. 

[/m  the  Press. 

GUILLEMIN  (A.). —Electricity  and  Mag- 
netism. A  Popular  Treatise.  Translated 
and  Edited  by  Prof.  Silvanus  P.  Thomp- 
son.    Super  Roy.  8vo,     31J.  6d. 

HEAVISIDE  (O.)  — Electrical  Papers. 
2  vols.     8vo.     30J.  net. 

HERTZ  (H.).— Electric  Waves.  Transl. 
by  D.  E.  Jones,  B.Sc.     8vo.     10s.  net. 

'——  Miscellaneous  Papers.  Translated  by 
Jones  and  Schott.    8vo.    10s.  net. 

JACKSON  (D.  C.).— Text-Book  on  Elec- 
tro-Magnetism.   Vol.  I.    Cr.  Bvo.    9j.net. 

KEL V I N  (Lord).  —  Papers  on  Electro- 
statics and  Magnetism.     8vo.     i&s. 

LODGE  (Prof.  Oliver).— Modern  Views  of 
Electricity.     Illust.     Cr.  8vo.    6s.  6d. 

MENDENHALL  (T.  C.).— A  Century  of 
Electricity.     Cr.  Bvo.     4s.  6d. 

STEWART  (Prof.  Balfour)  and  GEE  (W.  W. 
Haldane). — Lessons  in  Elementary  Prac- 
tical Physics.  Cr.  8vo.  Illustrated.— Elec- 
tricity AND  Magnetism,    js.  6d, 

Practical  Physics  for  Schools.    G1. 

Bvo. — Electricity  AND  Magnetism.  2^.61:^. 

THOMPSON  (Prof.  Silvanus  P.).  —  Ele- 
mentary Lessons  in  Electricity  and 
Magnetism.  New  Edition.  Illustrated. 
Fcp.  8vo.    4j.  6d. 

TURNER  (H.  H.).— Examples  on  Heat 
and  Electricity.     Cr.  8vo.    ss.  6d. 

Heat,  Light,  and  Sound. 

AIRY  (Sir  G.  B.).— On  Sound  and  Atmo- 
spheric Vibrations.     Cr.  Bvo.     gs, 

CARNOT-THURSTON. -Reflections  on 
THE  Motive  Power  of  Heat,  and  on 
Machines  fitted  to  Develop  that 
Power.  From  the  French  of  N.  L.  S.  Car- 
NOT.  Edited  by  R.  H.  Thurston,  LL.D. 
Cr.  8vo.     7^.  6d. 

JOHNSON(A.).-Sunshine.  Illust.  Cr.8vo.6j. 

JONES  (Prof.  D.  E.).— Heat,  Light,  and 
Sound.    Globe  Svo.    2s.  6d. 

—  Lessons  in  Heat  and  Light.  Globe 
8vo.     -^s.  6d. 

MARTINEAU  (C.  A.) -Easy  Lessons  in 

Heat.     G1.  Svo.    2s.  6d. 
MAYER  (Prof.  A.  M.).— Sound.    A  Series  of 

Simple  Experiments.   Illustr.  Cr.  Bvo.  2^.6d. 
MAYER  (Prof.  A.  M.)and  BARNARD  (C.)— 

Light.     A  Series  of  Simple  Experiments. 

Illustrated.     Cr.  Svo.     2s.  6d. 
PARKINSON  (S.).— A  Treatise  on  Optics. 

4th  Edit.,  revised.     Cr.  Bvo.     loj.  6d. 
PEABODY  (Prof.  C.  H.).— Thermodynamics 

of  the  Steam  Engine  and  other  Heat- 

Engines.    8vo.    21s. 
PRESTON    T.).— The  Theory  of  Light. 

Illustrated.     Bvo.     155.  net. 
. The  Theory  of  Heat.    Svo.    17^.  net. 


RAYLEIGH    (Lord).— Theory    of    Sound. 

2  vols.     Bvo.     12s.  net  each. 

SHANN  (G.).— An  Elementary  Treatise 
ON  Heat  in  Relation  to  Steam  and  the 
Steam-Engine.    lUustr.    Cr.  8vo.    4J.  6d, 

SPOTTISWOODE  (W.).— Polarisation  of 
Light.     Illustrated.    Cr.  Svo.    3s.  6d. 

STEWART  (Prof.  Balfour)  and  GEE  (W.  W. 
Haldane).— Lessons  in  Elementary  Prac- 
tical Physics.  Cr.  Bvo.  Illustrated. — 
Optics,  Heat,  and  Sound.    [Ik  the  Press. 

—  Practical  Physics  for  Schools.  GK 
Svo. — Heat,  Light,  and  Sound. 

STOKES  (Sir  George  G.).— On  Light.  The 
Burnett  Lectures.     Cr.  Svo.     is.  6d. 

STONE  (W.  H.).— Elementary  Lessons  on 
Sound.     Illustrated.     Fcp.  Svo.     3s.  6d. 

TAIT  (Prof.  P.  G.).— Heat.  With  Illustra- 
tions.    Cr.  Svo.     6s. 

TAYLOR  (Sedley).— Sound  and  Music  and 
Edit.     Ext.  cr.  Svo.     Sj.  6d. 

TURNER  (H.  H.).    (See  Electricity.) 

WRIGHT  (Lewis).— Light.  A  Course  of 
Experimental  Optics.    Illust.  Cr.  Bvo.  •js.6d. 

YEO  (J.). — Steam  and  the  Marine  Steam 
Engine.    Svo.    7J.  6d.  net. 

PHYSIOGRAPHY  and  METEOROLOGY. 

ARATUS.— The  Skies  and  Weather  Fore. 

casts  of  Aratus.    Translated  by  E.  Poste, 

M.A.     Cr.  Svo.     3J.  6d. 
BLANFORD  (H.  F.).— The  Rudiments  or 

Physical  Geography   for   the  Use   of 

Indian  Schools.     Illustr.    Cr.  Svo.    2s.  6d. 

—  A  Practical  Guide  to  the  Climates 
and  Weather  of  India,  Ceylon  and 
Burmah,  and  the  Storms  of  Indian 
Seas.    Svo.    12s  6d. 

FERREL  (Prof.  W.).— A  Popular  Treatisb 
ON  THE  Winds.    2nd  Ed.     Svo.     lys.  net. 

GEIKIE  (Sir  Archibald).— A  Primer  of  Phy- 
sical Geography.    Illustr.    Pott  Svo.    w. 

Elementary    Lessons    in    Physical 

Geography.    Illustrated.    Fcp.  Svo.    4J.  6d. 

—^  Questions  on  the  same.    is.  6d. 

HUXLEY  (Prof.  T.  H.).— Physiography. 
Illustrated.     Cr.  Bvo.     6s. 

LOCKYER(J.  Norman).— Outlines  of  Pht- 
biography  :  the  Movements  of  tmb 
Earth.     Illustrated.     Cr.  Svo,  swd.     is.  6d. 

MARR  (J.  E.)  and  HARKER  (A.).— Physio- 
graphv  for  Beginners.    G1,  Bvo.   InPress, 

MELDOLA  (Prof.  R.)  and  WHITE  (Wm.).- 
Report  on  the  East  Anglian  Earth- 
quake OF  April  22ND,  1B84.    Bvo.    3^.  6d. 

RUSSELL(T.>— Meteorology.  Bvo.  i6j.net. 

TARR  (R.  S.). — Elementary  Physical 
Geography.    Cr.  Bvo.    7^.  6d.  net. 

PHYSIOLOGY. 

FEARNLEY(W.).— A  Manual  of  Elemen- 
TARY  Practical  Histology.  Cr.  Svo.  7*.  6d. 

FOSTER  (Prof.  M.)  and  LANGLEY  {J.  N.). 
— A  Course  of  Elementary  Practical 
Physiology  AND  Histology.  Cr.  Svo.  ^s.6d. 

FOSTER  (Prof.  M.)  and  SHORE  (L.  E.).— 
PhysiologyforBeginners.  G1.  Svo.  2s.6d. 


PHYSIOLOGY— POLITICAL  ECONOMY. 


35 


FOSTER  (Prof.  Michael).— A  Text-Book  of 
Physiology.  Illustrated.  6th  Edit.  8vo.— 
Part  I.  Book  1.  Blood  :  the  Tissues  o» 
Movement,  the  Vascular  Mechanism. 
KM.  6<f.— Part  II.  Book  II.  The  Tissues  of 
Chemical  Action,  with  theik  Respective 
Mechanisms  :  Nutrition,  ioi.  6rf.— Part 
III.  Book  III.  The  Central  Nervous 
System,  is.  6rf.— Part  IV.  Book  III.  Thb 
Senses,  and  some  Special  Muscular 
Mechanisms.— Book  IV.  The  Tissues  and 
Mechanisms  of  Reproduction.  lai.  td. 
— Appendix,  by  A.  S.  Lea.     is.  6if. 

'A  Primer  of  Physiology.  Pott  8vo.  u. 

GAMGEE  (Arthur).— a  Text-Book  of  the 
Physiological  Chemistry  of  the  Animal 
Body.    8vo.    Vol.  I.    i8j.    Vol.  II.    iSs. 

HUMPHRY  (Prof.  SirG.  M.).— The  Human 
Foot  and  the  Human  Hand.  Illustrated. 
Fcp.  8vo.    4s.  td. 

HUXLEY  (Prof.  Thos.  H.).— Lessons  in 
Elementary  Physiology.  Fcp.  8vo.  41.  td. 

.^^  Questions.  ByT.ALCOCK.  PottSvo.  ij.6rf. 

KIMBER  (D.  C.).— Anatomy  and  Physio- 
logy for  Nurses.    8vo.    ioj.  net. 

MIVART  (St.  George).— Lessons  in  Ele- 
mentary Anatomy.    Fcp.  8vo.    ts.  td. 

PETTIGREW  U-  Bell).— The  Physiology 
OF  THE  Circulation  in  Plants  in  the 
1<0WER  Animals  and  in  Man.    8vo.     isf . 

SEILER  (Dr.  Carl).— Micro-Photographs 
IN  Histology,  Normal  and  Pathologi- 
cal.   4to.    31J.  td. 

WIEDERSHEIM  (R.),— The  Structure  of 

Man.     Translated   by  H.   M.    Bernard. 

Revised  by  G.  B.  Howes.    8vo.    8j.  net, 

POETRY.    (Set  under  Literature,  p.  17.) 

POLITICAL  ECONOMT. 

BASTABLE  (Prof.  C.  F.).— Public  Finance. 
2nd  Ed.    Bvo.     I2f.  td.  net. 

BOhM-BAWERK  (Prof  ).— Capital  and  In- 
terest. Transl.  by  W.  Smart.  8vo.  i2j,net. 

— .—  The  Positive  Theory  of  Capital.  By 
the  same  Translator.     8vo.    i2f .  net. 

BONAR  (James). — Malthus  and  his  Work. 
Bvo.     125.  iid. 

Catalogue  of  the  Library  of  Adam 

Smith.     8vo.    'js.  6d.  net. 

BRUCE  (P.  A.)..    (See  under  History.) 

CAIRNES  (J.  E.).— -Some  Leading  Princi- 
ples of  Political  Economy  newly  Ex- 
founded.    Svo.    145. 

—  The  Character  and  Logical  Method 
OF  Political  Economy.    Cr.  Svo.    6j. 

CANTILLON.— EssAi  SUR  le  Commerce. 
z2mo.     "JS.  net. 

CLARE  (G.).— A  B  C  of  the  Foreign  Ex- 
changes.    Cr.  8vo.    3^.  net. 

CLARKE  (C.  B.).  —  Speculations  from 
Political  Economy.    Cr.  8vo.    35.  dd. 

COLUMBIA  COLLEGE.  Studies  in  His- 
tory, Economics,  and  Public  Laws.  4 
yols.    8vo.    iZs.  net.  each. 

COMMONS  (J.  R.)— Distribution  of 
Wealth.    Cr.  Svo     is.  net. 

COSSA  (L.).— Introduction  to  the  Study 
OF  Political  Economy.  Translated  by 
L.  Dyer.    Cr.  Svo.    is.  td.  net. 

DE  ROUSIERS  (P.).— Labour  Question  in 
Britain.    Translated.    8vo.    12*.  net. 


DICTIONARY  OF  POLITICAL  ECON- 
OMY, A.  By  various  Writers.  Ed.  R.  H.  I. 
Palgrave.  Parts  I.  to  VI.  y.td.  each  net. 
— Vol.  I.  Med.  Bvo.  2if.  net. 
ECONOMIC  CLASSICS.  Edited  by  W,  J. 
Ashley  Globe  Svo.  3J.  net.  each. 
Select  Chapters  from  the  "  Wealth  of 

Nations"  of  Adam  Smith, 
First  Six  Chapters  of  "  Principlesof  Po- 
litical Economy"  of  David  Ricardo. 
Parallel    Chapters    from    First    and 
Second    Editions    of    "Principle  of 
Population."    By  T.  R,  Malthus. 
England's  Treasure  by  Forraign  Trade. 

By  T.  MuN. 
Peasant  Rents.  By  Richard  Jones. 
Mercantile  System,  By  G,  Schmoller. 
ECONOMIC  JOURNAL,  THE.  —  Thb 
Journal  of  the  British  Economic  Asso- 
ciation. Edit,  by  Prof.  F.  Y.  Edgeworth. 
Published  Quarterly.  Svo.  M.  net,  (Part  I. 
April,i89i,)  Vols.  I,-IV,  2M,neteach.  [Cloth 
Covers  for  binding  Volumes,  is.  6d.  net  each,] 

ECONOMICS:  The  Quarterly  Journal 

OF,  Vol,  II,  Parts  II,  III,  IV,  2j.6rf.net  each. 

— Vol.  III.  4  parts.  2j.6rf.net  each, — Vol,  IV. 

4parts.  2j.6rf.net each, — Vol.V,  4part5,  2j,6rf. 

neteach. — Vol,  VI,  4parts,  2  j.  6rf.  net  each. 

— Vol,  VII,    4  parts,    2j,  6rf,  net  each. — ^Vol. 

VIII.     4  parts.    2S.  6rf.  net  each,— Vol.  IX. 

4  parts.    2j.  6rf    net  each. — Vol.  X.  Part  I. 

2J.  6rf.  net. 
FAWCETT  (Henry).— Manual  of  Politi- 

CAL  Economy.    7th  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    i2j. 

AnExplanatoryDigestoftheabovb. 

By  C.  A.  Waters.    Cr.  Svo.     2J.  6rf. 

Free   Trade   and   Protection.     6tb 

Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    3J.  6rf. 

FAWCETT  (Mrs.  H.).— Political  Econ- 
omy for  Beginners,  with  Questions. 
7th  Edit.    Pott  Svo.    2J.  6rf. 

FIRST  LESSONS  IN  BUSINESS  MAT- 
TERS. By  A  Banker's  Daughter,  2nd 
Edit,    Pott  Svo,    iJ, 

FONDA  (A,  J,)  —Honest  Money,  Cr.  Svo. 
3J.  6rf.  net. 

OILMAN  (N.  P.),  —  Profit-Sharing  be- 
tween Employer  and  Employee,  Cr, 
Svo.    7J.  6rf. 

GOSCHEN  (Rt.  Hon.  George  J.).— Reports 
AND  Speeches  on  Local  Taxation.  Svo.  sj, 

GUIDE  TO  THE  UNPROTECTED:  Ik 
Every-day  Matters  relating  to  Pro- 
perty AND  Income.    Ext.  fcp.  Svo.    3*.  6rf. 

GUNTON  (George).— Wealth  and  Pro- 
gress.   Cr.  Svo.    6j. 

HALLE  (E,  von),— Trusts  or  Industrial 
Combinations  and  Coalitions  in  the 
United  States,    Cr,  Svo,    sj,  net, 

HELM  (E,),— The  Joint  Standard,  Cr. 
Svo,    3J,  6rf,  net, 

HORTON  (Hon,  S,  Dana),— The  Silvbh 
Pound  and  England's  Monetary  Policy 
SINCE  THE  Restoration,    Svo,    14*. 

HOWELL  (George).— The  Conflicts  of 
Capital  and  Labour.    Cr.  Svo.    yj.  id. 

A  Handy  Book  of  the  Labour  Laws. 

3rd  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    3s.  6rf.  net. 

JEVONS  (W.  Stanley).— A  Primer  of  Politi- 
cal Economy.    Pott  Bvo.    w. 


36 


POLITICAL  ECONOMY— POLITICS. 


POLITICAL  ECONOMY— continued. 

JEVONS  (W.  S.).— The  Theory  of  Politi- 
cal Economy      3rd  Ed.    8vo.     los.  6d. 

-  Investigations  in  Currency  and  Fi- 
nance.   Edit,  by  H.  S.  FoxwELL.    8vo.    21J 

KEYNES  0-  N.).— The  Scope  and  Method 
of  Political  Economy.    Cr.  8vo.     75.  net. 

LEIBNITZ.—NouvEAUx  Essais.  Transl.by 
A.  G.  Langlev.  [/«  the  Press. 

MARSHALL  (Prof.  Alfred).— Principles  of 
Economics.  3rd  Ed.  8vo.  Vol.  L  z-zs.6d,  net. 

Elements  of  Economics  of  Industry. 

Crown  8vo.     3^ .  6d. 

MARTIN  (Frederick).  — The  History  of 
Lloyds,  and  of  Marine  Insurance  iw 
Great  Britain.    8vo.     14J. 

MENGER  (C.).— The  Right  to  the  whole 
Produce  of  Labour.  Transl.  by  M.  E. 
Tanner.  [/«  tke  Press. 

PRICE  (L.  L.  F  R  ).— Industrial  Peace  i 
ITS  Advantages,  Methods,  and  Diffi- 
culties.    Med.  8vo.    ts. 

QUESNAY  (F.).— Tableau  Oeconomique. 
4to.    2s,  6d,  net. 

RABBENO  (U.).— American  Commercial 
Policy.    8vo,    i2j.  net. 

RAE  (J.).— Eight  Hours  for  Work.  Cr. 
8vo.    4J.  dd.  net. 

RICARDO.— Chapters  I.— VI.  of  "The 
Principles  of  Political  Economy  and 
Taxation."    Globe  8vo.    3^-.  net. 

SELIGMAN  (E.  R.  A.).— Essays  in  Taxa- 
tion.   8vo.    I2J.  6d.  net. 

SIDGWICK  (Prof.  Henry).— The  Principles 
of  Political  Economy.  [New  Ed.  in  Press. 

SMART  (W.). — An  Introduction  to  the 
Theory  of  Value.     Cr.  8vo.     3J.  net. 

-  Studies  in  Economics.  Ex.  cr.  8vo. 
%s.  td.  net. 

SMITH  (Adam), — Select  Chapters  from 
"TheWealth  of  Nations."  G1.8vo.  3j.net. 

THOMPSON  (H.  M.).— The  Theory  of 
Wages  and  its  application  to  the  Eight 
Hours  Question.     Cr.  8vo.    3^.  6d. 

WALKER  (Francis  A.).— First  Lessons  in 
Political  Economy.    Cr.  8vo.    5*. 

■^^  A  Brief  Text-Book  of  Political 
Economy.    Cr.  Svo.    6s.  bd. 

Political  Economy.    8vo.     ^2S,  6d. 

The  Wages  Question.     Ext.  cr.  Svo. 

&s.  6d.  net. 

Money,  NewEdit.  Ext.cr.8vo.8j.6rf.net. 

Money  in  its  Relation  to  Trade  and 

Industry.     Cr.  Svo.     ys.  6d. 

Land  and  its  Rent.    Fcp.  8vo.    3*.  6d 

WALLACE  (A.  R,).— Bad  Times  :  An  Essay. 

Cr.  8vo.     2S.  6d. 
WICKSTEED  (Ph.  H.).— The  Alphabet  op 

Economic  Science. — I,  Elements  of  the 

Theory  of  Value  or  Worth.  G1.8vo.  2S.6d. 
W1ESER(F.  von).— Natural  Value.  Edit. 

by  W,  Smart,  M.A.     8vo.     ioj.  net. 
WILLOUGHBY  (W.  W.).— Nature  of  the 

State.    Svo.    12s.  6d. 

POLITICS. 

{See  also  History,  p.  11.) 

ADAMS  (Sir  F.  O.)  and  CUNNINGHAM 

(C.) — The  Swiss  Confederation.  Svo.  14*. 

BAKER  (Sir  Samuel  W.).— The  Egyptian 

Question.    Svo,  sewed,     2s. 


BATH    (Marquis    of).- 
Bulgarian  Affairs. 


-Observations    on 
Cr.  8vo,     3s.  6d. 

BRIGHT  (John). — Speeches  on  Questions 
OF  Public  Policy.  Edit,  by  J.  E.  Thorold 
Rogers.  With  Portrait.  2  vols.  Svo.  25J. 
— Popular  Edition.     Ext.  fcp,  Svo.     3J.  td, 

Public  Addresses.    Edited  by  J,  E.  T. 

Rogers.     Svo.     i^j. 

BRYCEGas.,  M.P.).— The  American  Com- 
monwealth. 3rd  Edit.  Ext.  cr.  Svo, 
2  vols.     1 2 J.  6(/,  each, 

BUCKLAND  (Anna).— Our  National  In- 
stitutions.    Pott  8vo.     ij. 

BURKE  (Edmund),— Letters,  Tracts,  and 
Speeches  on  Irish  Affairs.  Edited  by 
Matthew  ARNOLDjwith  Preface.  Cr.Svo.  6x. 

Reflections  on  the  French  Revolu- 
tion.   Ed.  by  F,  G.  Selby.    Globe  Svo.    5*. 

Speech  on  American  Taxation,  Speech 

ON  Conciliation  with  America,  Letter 
TO  THE  Sheriffs  of  Bristol.  Edited  by 
F.  G.  Selby.    Globe  Svo.    3J.  6d. 

CAIRNES  (J.  E.).— Political  Essays.   Svo. 

lOJ.  td. 

The  Slave  Power.    8vo.     loj.  hd 

CHIROL  (V.).— The  Far  Eastern  Ques- 
tion.   Bvo.    8j,  td.  net. 

COBDEN  (Richard).— Speeches  on  Ques- 
tions of  Public  Policy.  Ed.  by  J.  Bright 
and  [.  E.  Thorold  Rogers.  G1.  Bvo.  3J.  6rf. 

DICEY  (Prof.  A.  V.).— Letters  on  Unionist 
Delusions.    Cr.  Svo.     2s.  6d. 

DILKE  (Rt.  Hon.  SirCharlesW.).— Greater 
Britain,     gth  Edit.     Cr.  Svo.     6j. 

Problems  of  Greater  Britain.   Maps. 

3rd  Edit.     Ext.  cr.  Svo.     izs.  6d. 

DONISTHORPE  (Wordsworth).— Individ- 
UALisM  :  A  System  of  Politics.     Svo.     14J. 

Law  in  a  Free  State.    Cr.  Svo.    5J.  net. 

DUFF(Rt.  Hon,  SirM. E.Grant).— Miscella- 
NiES,  Political  AND  Literary.  Svo.  ios.6d. 

ENGLISH    CITIZEN,   THE.— His  Rights 

and  Responsibilities.    Ed.  by  Henry  Craik, 

C,B.     New  Edit.     Cr.  Svo.     2j.  6d.  each. 

Central  Government.  By  H.  D.  Traill. 

The  Electorate  and  the  Legislature. 
By  Spencer  Walpole. 

The  Land  Laws.  By  Sir  F.  Pollock, 
Bart.     2nd  Edit. 

The  Punishment  and  Prevention  of 
Crime.     By  Col.  Sir  Edmund  du  Cane. 

Local  Government.  By  M.  D.  Chalmers. 

Colonies  and  Dependencies  :  Part  I.  In- 
dia. By  J.  S  Cotton,  M.A.— H.  The 
Colonies.    By  E.  T.  Payne. 

The  State  in  its  Relation  to  Educa- 
tion.    Bv  Henry  Craik,  C,B. 

The  State  and  the  Church.  By  Hon. 
Arthur  Elliott,  M-P, 

The  State  in  its  Relation  to  Trade. 
By  Sir  T.  H.  Farrer,  Bart. 

The  Poor  Law.  By  the  Rev.  T.  W.  Fowlk. 

The  State  in  Relation  to  Labour.  By 
W.  Stanley  Jkvons.  3rd.  Edit.  By  M. 
Cabab6. 

Justice  and  Police.  By  F.  W.  Maitland. 

The  National  Defences.  By  Major-Gen. 
Maurice,  R.A.  [In  tke  Press. 

Foreign  Relations.     By  S.  Walpole. 

The  National  Budget  ;  National  Debt  ; 
Taxes  and  Rates.    By  A.  J.  Wilson. 


POLITICS— SPORT. 


37 


FAWCETT  (Henry).  —  Speeches  on  some 
Current     Political     Questions.      8vo. 

Free    Trade   and    Protection.     6th 

Edit.     Cr.  8vo.     gj.  Gd. 

FAWCETT  (Henry  and  Mrs.  H.).— EssAVS 
AND  Lectures  on  Political  and  Social 
Subjects.     Bvo.     ios.  6d. 

FISKE  (John).— American  Political  Ideas 
Viewed  from  the  Stand-point  of  Uni- 
versal History.    Cr.  8vo.    4J. 

-  Civil  Government  in  the  United 
States  considered  with  some  Reference 
to  its  Origin.    Cr.  8vo.    6s.  6d. 

FREEMAN   (E.   A.).  —  Disestablishment 

AND    DiSENDOWMENT.      WhAT   ARE  ThET  1 

4th  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.     is. 

The  Growth  of  the  English  Consti- 

tution.     5th  Edit.     Cr.  Svo.     5^. 

HILL   (Florence    D.). — Children    of    the 

State.    Edited  by  Fanny  Fowke.    Crown 

8vo.     3J.  td. 
HILL  (Octavia). — Our  Common  Land,  and 

other  Essays.    Ext.  fcp.  Svo.     3;.  6d. 
HOLLAND  (Prof.  T.  E.).— The  Treaty  Re- 

LATiONs  OF  Russia  and  Turkey,  from 

1774  to  1853.     Cr.  Svo.     2s. 
JENKS  (Prof.  Edward).— The  Government 

of  Victoria  (Australia).     Svo.     14J. 
JEPHSON(H.).— The  Platform  :  its  Rise 

AND  Progress,     a  vols.     Svo.    215. 
LOWELL  (J.  R.).    {See  Collected  Works.) 
LUBBOCK  (Sir  J.),  (i'rt  Collected  Works.) 
MACKNIGHT  (J.).— Ulster  as  it  is.  2  vols. 

Svo.    21s.  net. 
MATHEW(E.  J. )-Representative  Govern- 
ment.   Gl.  Svo.    is.  6d. 
PALGRAVE    (W.     Giflford).  —  Essays     on 

Eastern  Questions.    Svo.     ioj.  6d 
PARKIN  (G.  R.). — Imperial  Federation. 

Cr.  Svo.     4-S.  6d. 
— —  The    Great    Dominion,    Studies    in 

Canada.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 
POLLOCK  (Sir  F.,  Bart).— Introduction 

TO   the    History    of   the    Science   of 

Politics.     Cr.  Svo.    2f.  6d. 

Leading  Cases  done  into  English. 

Crown  Svo      3s.  6d. 

PRACTICAL  POLITICS.     Svo.    65. 
ROGERS  (Prof.   J.   E.   T.).— Cobdbn    and 

Political  Opinion.     Svo.    ioj.  6d. 
ROUTLEDGE  (Jas.).— Popular  Progress 

IN  England.     Svo.     16s. 
RUSSELL  (Sir  Charles).— New  Views   on 

Ireland.     Cr.  Svo.     2s.  6d. 

The  Parnell  Commission  :  The  Open- 
ing Speech  for  the  Defence.  Svo.  10*.  6d. 
— Popular  Edition.     Sewed.     %s. 

SEELEY  (Sir  J.  R.).— Introduction  to 
Political  Science.    Gl.  Svo.    5J. 

SIDGWICK  (Prof.  Henry).— The  Elements 
OF  Politics.     Svo.    14*.  net. 

SMITH  (Goldwin).— Canada  and  the  Cana- 
dian Question.     Svo.     Sj.  net. 

The  United  States,  1492 — 1871.    Cr. 

Bvo.     85.  6d. 

STATESMAN'S  YEAR-BOOK,  THE.  (^« 
under  Statistics.) 


STATHAM    (R.).  —  Black-s    Boers,    and 

British.     Cr.  Svo.    6s. 
STRACHEY  (J.  St.  L.).— The  Empire.    Gl. 

Svo.     IS.  6d. 
THORNTON  (W.  T.).--A  Plea  for  Peasant 

Proprietors.    New  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    71. 6d, 

Indian  Public  Works,  and  Cognate 

Indian  Topics.    Cr.  Svo.    Bs.  6d. 

TRENCH  (Capt.  F.).— The  Russo-Indian 

Question.    Cr.  Svo.    7s.  6d. 
WALLACE  (Sir  Donald  M.).— Egypt  and 

the  Egyptian  Question,     Svo.     14*. 

PSYCHOLOGY. 

{See  under  Philosophy,  p.  33.) 

SCULPTURE.    (5«Art.) 

SOCIAL  ECONOMY. 

BARNETT(E.  a.).— Training  of  Girls  for 

Work.    Gl.  Svo.    zs.  6d. 
BOOTH  (C.).— A  Picture  of  Pauperism. 

Cr.  Svo.    55.— Cheap  Edit.    Svo.     Swd.,  6d. 
— —  Life  and  Labour  of  the  People  of 

London.  Vols.  I. -IV.  Cr.  Svo.  3 j. 6*:/.  each. — 

Vols.  V.  VI.  and  VIT.,  7^.  6d.  net  each  vol. — 

Maps  to  illustrate  the  above.    ;  r. 

The  Aged    Poor   in    England    and 

Wales— Condition.       Ext.     crowr     Svo. 
Sj-.  6d.  net. 

B0SANQUET(B.).— Aspects  of  theSocial 
Problem.  By  Various  Writers.  Ed.  by 
B.  Bosanquet.    Cr.  Svo.    2J.  6d.  net. 

DRAGE  (G.).— The  Unemployed.  Cr.  Svo. 
3J.  6d.  net. 

DYER(H.).— The  Evolution  of  Industry. 
Svo.     ins.  net. 

FAWCETT  (H.  and  Mrs.  H.).  {See  Politics.) 

GIDDINGS  (F.  H.).— Principles  of  Socio- 
logy.   Svo.    12s.  6d.  net. 

OILMAN  (N.  P.).  —  Socialism  and  the 
American  Spirit.    Cr.  Svo.    6s.  6d. 

GOLDIE  (J.).— The  Poor  and  their  Happi- 
ness    Cr.  Bvo.    3*.  6d.  net. 

HILL  (Octavia).— Homes  of  the  London 
Poor.    Cr.  Svo,  sewed,    is. 

HUXLEY  (Prof.  T.  H.).— Social  Diseases 
and  Worse  Remedies  :  Letters  to  th« 
"Times."    Cr.  Svo.    sewed,     is.  net. 

JEVONS(W.  Stanley).— Methods  of  SoaAL 
Reform.    Svo.    ios.  6d. 

KIDD  (B.).— Social  Evolution.  Cr.  Svo. 
5s.  net. 

MAYO-SMITH  (R.).  —  Statistics  and 
Sociology.    Svo.     i2J.  6d.  net. 

PEARSON  (C.  H.).— National  Life  and 
Character  :  A  Forecast.   Cr.  Svo.  5*.  net, 

STANLEY  (Hon.  Maude).  —  Clubs  fob 
Working  Girls.    Cr.  Svo.    ^*.  6d. 

SOUND.    {See  under  Physics,  p.  34.) 

SPOET. 

BAKER   (Sir   Samuel  W.).— Wild   Beasts 

AND      THEIR     WaYS  ;      RiEMINISCENCES      OF 

Europe,  Asia,   Africa,  America,   from 
1845—88.    Illustrated.    Ext.  cr.  Svo.    12s.  6d, 

CHASSERESSE(D.).— SportingSketches. 
Illustrated.     Cr.  Svo.     35. 6d. 

CLARK  (R.).— Golf  :  A  Royal  and  Ancient 
Game.     Small  4to.     S^.  6d.  net. 


38 


THEOLOGY. 


EDWARDS-MOSS   (Sir   J.    E.,    Bart).— A 

Season  in  Sutherland.  Cr.  8vo.  w.  6d. 
KINGSLEY  (G.)- — Sketches  in  Sport  and 

Natural  History.  Ex.  cr.  8vo.  [/nPress. 
LOCKYERQ.  N.)andRUTHERFORD(W). 

Rules  of  Golf.    32mo.    ir.  6d.  ;  roan,  zs. 

STATISTICS. 
STATESMAN'S  YEAR-BOOK,  THE.  Sta- 
tistical  and  Historical  Annual  of  the  States 
of  the  World  for  the  Year  1896.  Revised  after 
Official  Returns.  Ed.  by  J.  Scott  Kbltib 
and  I.  P.  A.  Ren  wick.     Cr.  8vo.     lof.  6d. 

SURGERY.    {See  Medicine.) 

SWIMMING. 
LEAHY  (Sergeant).— THh.  Art  of  Swimming 
in  the  Eton  Stvle.    Cr.  8vo.    2s. 

TECHNOLOGY. 

EENEDIKTCR.)andLEWKOWITSCH(J.) 
— Chemical  Analysis  of  Oils,  Fats, 
Waxes,  and  i  heir  Commercial  Products 
8vo.    21S.  net 

BENSON  (W.   A.    S.).— Handicraft    and 

Design.     Cr.  8vo.     5^.  net. 
BURDETT  (C.  W.   B.).— Boot  and  Shoe 

Manufacture     Cr.  8vo.         [In  the  Press. 

DEGERDON  (W.  E.).— The  Grammar  of 
Woodwork.    410.    3^-.  ;  sewed,  2s. 

FOX  (T.  W.).— The  Mechanism  of  Weav- 
ing.   Cr.  8vo.    -js,  6d.  net. 

LETHABY  (W.  R.).— Lead  Work.  Cr.  8vo. 
4J.  6d.  net. 

LOUIS  (H.). — Handbook  of  Gold-Milling. 
Cr.  8vo.      loj.  net. 

TAGGART    (W.    S.).— Cotton     Spinning. 

Cr.  8vo.    4^.  net. 
VICKERMAN  (C.).— Woollen    Spinning. 

Cr.  8va.     6j.  net. 
WALKER  (Louisa). — Varied  Occupations 

IN  Weaving  and  Cane  and  Straw  •vqrk. 

Globe  8vo.    3^.  6d. 
——  Varied  Occupations  in  String  Work. 

By  the  same.    Gl.  8vo.    is.  6d, 

THEOLOGY. 

Th4  Bible—History  of  the  Christian  Church— 
The  Church  of  England — Devotional  Books 
— The  JRathers — Hytnnology — Sermons^  Lec- 
tures, Addresses,  and  Theological  Essays. 

Tbe  £il9le. 

History  oj  the  Bible— 

The  English  Bible  ;  An  External  and 
Critical  History  of  the  various  English 
Translations  of  Scripture.  By  Prof.  John 
Eadie.     2  vols.     8vo.     2^S. 

The  Bible  in  the  Church.  By  Right  Rev. 
Bp.  Westcott.  lothedit.  Pott8vo.  4,s.^d. 
Bihlical  Historv— 

The  Bible  for  Home  Reading.  By  C.  G. 
MoNTEFiORE.     Part  I.     Cr.  8vo.    6s,  net. 

The  Modern  Readers  Bible.  A  Series 
of  Books  from  the  Sacred  Scriptures  pre- 
sented in  Modern  Literary  Form.  Ed.  by 
R.  G.  Moulton,  M.A. 

Proverbs.  A  Miscellany  of  Sayings  and 
Poems  embodying  isolated  Observations  of 
Life.    2s.  6d. 

Ecclesiasticus.  a  Miscellany  including 
longer  compositions,  still  embodying  only 
isolated  Observations  of  Life.    2s.  6d. 


Biblical  History — 

Ecclesiastes — Wisdom  of  Solomon.  Each 
is  a  Series  of  Connected  Writings  embody- 
ing, from  different  standpoints,  a  Solution 
of  the  whole  Mystery  of  Life.    2s.  6<i. 

The  Book  of  Job.  A  Dramatic  Poem  in 
which  are  embodied  Varying  Solutions  of 
the  Mystery  of  Life.    q.s.  6d. 

Bible  Lessons.  By  Rev.  E.  A.  Abbott. 
Cr.  8vo.    4^  6d. 

Side-Lights  upon  Bible  History.  By 
Mrs.  Sydney  Buxton.     Cr.  8vo.     5*. 

Stories  from  the  Bible.  By  Rev.  A.  I, 
Church.  lUust.  Cr.8vo.  2parts. 3f.6(rf.eadi. 

Bible  Readings  selected  from  the  Pen- 
tateuch AND  THE  Book  of  Joshua. 
By  Rev.  J.  A.  Cross.     Gl.  8vo.     2s.  td. 

A  Class-Book  of  Old  Testament  His- 
tory. By  Rev.  Dr.  Maclear.  Pott  8vo. 
^s.  td. 

A  Class-Book  of  New  Testament  His- 
tory.    By  the  same.     Pott  8vo.     ^s.  hd, 

A  Shilling  Book  of  Old  Testament 
History.    By  the  same.    Pott  8vo.    u. 

A  Shilling  Book  of  New  Testament 
History.    By  the  =ame.    Pott  8vo.    11. 

The  Chill  ren's  Treasury  of  Biblb 
Stories.  By  Mrs.  H.  Gaskoin.  Pott  8vo, 
ij.  each.— Part  I.  Old  Testament;  II. 
New  Testament ;  III.  Three  Apostles. 

The  Nations  Around    Israel.     By  A. 
Keary.     Cr.  8vo.     3^.  6d. 
The  Old  1  tstument— 

Scripture  Readings  for  Schools  and 
Families.  By  C.  M.  Yonge.  Globe  8vo. 
IS.  6d,  each :  also  with  comments,  3^*.  6d. 
each.  —  Genesis  to  Deuteronomy.  — 
Joshua  to  Solomon. — Kings  and  th« 
Prophets. — The  GospelTimes. — Apos- 
tolic Times. 

The  Divine  Library  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. By  Prof.  KiRKPATRiCK.  Cr.  8vo. 
3^.  net. 

Doctrine  of  the  Prophets.  By  Prof. 
KiRKPATRiCK.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

The  Patriarchs  and  Lawgivers  of  thb 
Old  Testament.  By  F.  D.  Mauricjb. 
Cr.  8vo.    3J.  6d. 

The  Prophets  and  Kings  of  the  Old 
Testament.     By  same.    Cr.  8vo.    3J.  6rf. 

The  Canon  of  the  Old  Testament.  By 
Prof  H.  E.  Ryle.    2nd  Ed.    Cr.  8vo.    6*. 

Philo  and   Holy  Scripture.     By  Prof. 
H.  E.  Ryle.    Cr.  8vo.    los.  net. 
The  Pentateuch— 

An  Historico-Critical  Inquiry  into  thb 
Origin  and  Composition  of  the  Hexa- 
Teuch  (Pentateuch  and  Book  of 
Joshua).  By  Prof.  A.  Kuenen.  Trans, 
by  P.  H.  Wicksteed,  M.A.  8vo.  141. 
The  Psalms— 

The  Psalms  Chronologically  Arranged. 
By  Four  Friends.    Cr.  8vo.     5J.  net. 

Golden  Treasury  Psalter.  Student's 
Edition  of  the  above.  Pott  8vo.  2s.6d.ncX. 

The  Psalms.  With  Introduction  and  Notes. 
By  A.  C.  Jennings,  M.A.,  and  W.  H. 
LowK,  M.A.  2  vols.  Cr.  8vo.  lor.  6f/.  each. 

Introduction  to  the  Study  and  Usb  of 
the   Psalms.     By   Rev.   J.   F.   Thrdpp. 
2nd  Edit.    2  vols.    8vo.    21s. 
Isaiah — 

Isaiah  xu— lxvi.  With  the  Shorter  Pro- 
phecies allied  to  it.  Edited  by  Matthew 
Arnold.    Cr.  8vo.    5*. 


THE  BIBLE. 


39 


isaiah — 

Isaiah  of  Jerusalem.  In  the  Authorised 
Jinghsh  Version,  with  Introduction  and 
Notes.   By  M.  Arnold.    Cr.  8vo.   4*.  6rf. 

A  Bible-Reading  for  Schools.  The  Great 
Prophecy  of  Israel's  Restoration  (Isaiah 
xl.— Ixvi.).  Arranged  and  Edited  for  Young 
1-eamers.     By  the  same.     Pott  8vo.    i*. 

Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Isaiah  I 
Critical,  Historical,  and  Prophetical:  in- 
eluding  a  Revised  English  Translation. 
By  T.  R.  Birks.    and  Edit.    8vo.   12*.  6rf, 

The  Book  op  Isaiah  Chronologically 
Arranged.  By  T.  K.  Chetne.  Cr. 
8vo.    7J,  td, 

Ztchariak — 

The  Hebrew  Student's  Commentary  on 
Zechariah,  Hebrew  and  LXX.  ByW.  H. 
Lowe,  M. A.    8vo.    loj.  6^^. 

Th4  New  Testament— 

TThe  New  Testament.  Essay  on  the  Right 
Estimation  of  MS.  Evidence  in  the  Text 
of  the  New  Testament.  By  T.  R.  Birks. 
Cr.  8vo.    3J.  td. 

The  Messages  of  the  Books,  Discourses 
and  Notes  on  the  Books  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment.   By  Archd.  Farrar.     8vo.     14*. 

The  Classical  Element  in  the  New 
Testament.  Considered  as  a  Proof  of  its 
Genuineness,  with  an  Appendix  on  the 
Oldest  Authorities  used  in  the  Formation 
oftheCanon.  ByC.H.HooLE.  8vo.  los.td. 

On  a  Fresh  Revision  of  the  English 
New  Testament.  With  an  Appendix  on 
the  last  Petition  of  the  Lord's  Prayer,  By 
Bishop  Lightfoot.    Cr.  8vo.    7*.  6d. 

The  Unity  of  the  New  Testament.  By 
F.  D.  Maurice.    2  vols.    Cr.  8vo.    i2j. 

■The  Synoptic  Problem  for  English 
Readers.  ByA.  J.  Jolley.  Cr.Svo.  3j.net. 

A  General  Survey  of  the  History  of 
THE  Canon  of  the  New  Testament 
during  the  First  Four  Centuries.  By 
Bishop  Westcott.    Cr.  8vo.     \os.  6d 

<j reek-English  Lexicon  to  the  New 
Testament.  By  W.  J.  Hickie,  M.A. 
Pott  8vo.     3s, 

The  New  Testament  in  the  Original 
Greek.  The  Text  revised  by  Bishop 
Westcott,  D.D.,  and  Prof.  F.  J.  A. 
Hort,  D.D.  2  vols.  Cr.  8vo.  ios.6d. 
each.— Vol.  I.  Text.— VoL  II.  Introduc- 
tion and  Appendix. 

School  Edition  of  the  above.  Pott  Bvo, 
4J.  6d. ;  Pott  8vo,  roan,  5J.  6d. ;  morocco, 
^ilt  edges,  6s.  6d. — Library  Edition.  8vo. 
10s.  net. 

Essentials  of  New  Testament  Greek. 
By  J.  H.  Huddilston.   Pott  Bvo.   v-  net. 

TAe  Gospels— 
The  Common  Tradition  of  the  Synoptic 

Gospels.     In  the  Text  of  the  Revised 

Version.     By  Rev.   E.   A.   Abbott  and 

W.  G.  Rushbrooke.    Cr.  8vo.    ^j*.  6d. 
Svnopticon  :  An  Exposition  of  the  Common 

Matter  of  the  Synoptic  Gospels.    By  W.  G. 

Rushbrooke.  Printed  in  Colours.  4to.  35^. 
Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Fouk 

Gospels.  ByBp.WESTC0TT.Cr.8vo.  jos.td. 
The  Composition  of  the  Four  Gospels. 

By  Rev.  Arthur  Wright.    Cr.  8vo.    5*. 


The  Gospels— 

Synopsis  of  the  Gospels  in  Greek.  By 
Rev.  A.  Wright.    410.    6*.  net. 

Syro-Latin  Text  of  the  Gospels.  By 
F.  H.  Chase,    7*.  td,  net. 

The  Akhmim  Fragment  of  the  Apocry- 
phal Gospel  of  St.  Peter.    By  H.  B. 
Swete.    8vo.    sp.  net. 
Gospel  of  St.  Matthew— 

The  Greek  Text,  with  Introduction  and 
Notes  by  Rev.  A.  Slom an.  Fcp.Svo.  2s,6d. 

Choice  Notes  on  St.  Matthew.  Drawn 
from  Old  and  New  Sources.  Cr.  8vo.  4J.6rf, 
(St.  Matthew  and  St.  Mark  in  z  vol.    gf.) 

Gospel  of  St.  Mark~ 

School  Readings  in  the  Greek  TestA' 
MENT.  Bein^  the  Outlines  of  the  Life  of 
our  Lord  as  given  by  St.  Mark,  with  addi- 
tions from  the  Text  of  the  other  Evange- 
lists. Edited,  with  Notes  and  Vocabulary, 
byRev, A. Calvert, M.A,  Fcp.Svo.  2j.6<A 

Choice  Notes  on  St.  Mark.  Drawn  from 
Old  and  New  Sources.  Cr.  Bvo.  4^.  €d. 
(St.  Matthew  and  St.  Mark  in  z  vol.    gj.) 

Gospel  of  St.  Luke— 
Greek  Text,  with  Introduction  a  id  Notes 

by  Rev.  J.  Bond,  M.A.    Fcp.  Bvo.    as.  td. 
Choice  Notes  on  St,  Luke.    Drawn  from 

Old  and  New  Sources.    Cr.  Bvo.    4J.  6d. 
The  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven. 

A  Course  of  Lectures  on  the  Gospel  of  St. 

Luke.  By  F.  D.  Maurice.  Cr.Svo.  z^td. 

Gospel  0/ St.  John— 
The    Gospel    of    St.    John.     By  F.   D. 

Maurice.    Cr.  Svo.    31.  6d. 
Choice  Notes  on  St.  JTohn.    Drawn  from 

Old  and  New  Soiwces.    Cr.  Svo.    4J.  td. 
Th*  Acts  of  th€  Apostles— 
The  Old  Syriac  Element  in  the  Text 

of  the  Codex  Bez.«.    By  F.  H.  Chase. 

Bvo.    7J.  td.  net. 
The  Acts  of  the  Apostles.     By  F.  D. 

Maurice.    Cr.  Bvo.     3J,  td. 
English  Version.    By  T.  E.  Page,  M.A., 

and  Rev.  A.  S.  Walpole,  M.A.    Pott  Bvo 

2S.  td, 

Greek  Text,  with  Notes  by  T.  E.  PagBi 
M.A.     Fcp,  Bvo.    -Ks.  td. 

The  Church  of  the  First  Days  :  Thk 
Church  of  Jerusalem,  The  Church  of 
the  Gentiles,  The  Church  of  thb 
World.  Lectures  on  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles.  By  Very  Rev.  C.  J.  Vaughan, 
Cr.  Bvo.    lof .  td. 

The  Epistles  of  St.  Paul— 
Notes  on  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  from 

Unpublished  Commentaries.  By  Bishop 

Lightfoot.    Svo.    laj. 
The    Epistle    to    the    Romans.     The 

Greek  Text,  with  English  Notes.     By  the 

Very  Rev.  C.   J.  Vaughan.    7th  Edit. 

Cr.  Bvo.    ^s.  td. 
Prolegomena  to  the  Romans  and  thb 

Ephesians.     By  F.  J.  A.  Hort,   D.D. 

Cr.  Bvo.    ts. 
The  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians.  Greek 

Text,  with  Commentary.      By   Rev.    W. 

Kay.     Bvo.    gj. 
The    Epistle    to    the    Galatians,      A 

Revised  Text,  with  Introduction,  NoteS| 

and  Dissertations.  By  Bishop  Lightfoot. 

zoth  Edit.    Svo.    \is. 


40 


THEOLOGY. 


THEOLOGy. 
The  Bihle—coniinued. 

The  Epistles  of  St.  Paul— 
The    Epistle    to    the    Philippians.    A 
Revised  Text,  with  Introduction,   Notes, 
and  Dissertations.    By  Bishop  Lightfoot. 

8V0.      I2J. 

The  Epistle  to  the  Philippians.  With 
Translation,  Paraphrase,  and  Notes  for 
English  Readers.  By  the  Very  Rev.  C.  J. 
Vaughan.    Cr.  Svo.     5*. 

The  Epistles  to  the  Colossians  and 
TO  Philemon.  A  Revised  Text,  with  In 
troductions,  etc.  By  Bishop  Lightfoot, 
Qth  Edit.     8vo.     I2J. 

The  Epistles  to  the  EphesianSj  th» 
Colossians,  and  Philemon.  With  In^ 
troduction  and  Notes.  By  Rev.  J.  LI. 
Davies.    2nd  Edit.    8vo.    7*.  td. 

The  First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalo 
NiANS.  By  Very  Rev.  C.  J.  Vaughan, 
8vo,  sewed,     zs.  6d. 

The  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians. 
Commentary  on  the  Greek  Text.    By  Prof. 

JoHN  EaDIE.      8v0.      I2S. 

The  Epistle  of  St.  James— 
The  Greek  Text,  with  Introduction  and 

Notes.  By  Rev.  Joseph  B. Mayor.  8vo.  14s. 
The  Epistles  of  St.  John- 
The  Epistles  of  St.   John.     By  F.  D. 

Madrice.    Cr.  8vo.    31.  hd. 
—  The  Greek  Text,  with  Notes,  by  Bishop 

Wkstcott.    3rd  Edit.    8vo.    laj.  td, 
Th*  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews— 
Greek    and    English.      Edited  by  Rev. 

Frederic  Rendall.    Cr.  Svo.    6*. 
English  Text,  with  Commentary.     By  the 

same.    Cr.  Svo     7*.  dd. 
The   Greek   Text,   with   Notes,   by  Very 

Rev  C.  J.  Vaughan.    Cr.  Svo.    js.  td. 
The  Greek  Text,  with  Notes  and  Essays, 

by  Bishop  Westcott.    Svo.    14J. 
Riz  elation — 
Lectures  on  the  Apocalypse,     By  F.  D. 

Maurice.    Cr.  Svo.    y.td. 
The  Revelation  of  St.  John.    By  Rev. 

Prof.  W.  Milligan.     Cr.  Svo.     js.  td. 
Lectures  on  the  Apocalypse.      By  the 

same.     Crown  Svo.     ss. 
Discussions  on  the  Apocalypse.     By  the 

same.     Cr.  Svo.     5^. 
Lectures  on   the    Revelation   of   St. 

John.    By  Very  Rev.  C.  J.  Vaughan. 

5th  Edit.     Cr.  Svo.     loj.  td. 

The  Bible  Wokd-Book.  By  W.  Alois 
Wright.    2nd  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    7*.  td. 

History  of  the  ChrlBtlan  Chnrcli. 

CHEETHAM  (Archdeacon).— History  of 
the  Christian  Church  during  the  First 
Six  Centuries.    Cr,  Svo.    10s.  td. 

CUNNINGHAM(Rev.  John). —The  Growth 
OF  the  Church  in  its  Organisation  and 
Institutions.    Svo.    qj. 

CUNNINGHAM  (Rev.  William).  —  Thb 
Churches  of  Asia  :  A  Methodical  Sketch 
of  the  Second  Century.    Cr.  Svo.    ts. 

DALE  (A.  W.  W.).— The  Synod  of  Elvira, 
AND  Christian  Life  in  the  Fourth  Cbn» 
TURV.    Cr.  Svo.    loj.  td. 


GEE(H.)and  HARDY  (W.J.).— Documents 
Illustrative  of  English  Church  His- 
tory.   Cr.  Svo.    10s.  6d. 

GWATKIN  (H,  M.).— Selections  from 
Early  Writers  illustrative  of  Church 
History  to  the  Time  of  Constantink. 
Cr.  Svo.     4J.  net. 

HARDWICK  (Archdeacon).— A  History  of 
the  Christian  Church  :  Middle  Agb^I 
Edited  by  Bp.  Stubbs.    Cr.  Svo.     loj.  td. 

A  History  of  the  Christian  Church 

during  the  Reformation.     9th  Edit.,  re- 
vised by  Bishop  Stubbs.    Cr.  Svo.    lOJ.  td, 

HORT(Dr.  F.  J.  A.).— Two  Dissertations, 
I.  On  MONOFENHS  eE05  in  Scripturb 
and  Tradition.  II.  On  the"Constan- 
tinopolitan  "  Creed  and  other  Easterm 
Creeds  of  the  Fourth  Century.  Svo. 
7^.  td. 

Judaistic  Christianity.    Cr.  Svo.   6^. 

SIMPSON  (Rev.  W.).— An  Epitome  of  thb 
History  of  the  Christian  Church.  7th 
Edit.    Fcp.  Svo     3s.  td. 

SOHM(R.).— Outlines  of  Church  History. 
Transl.  by  Miss  Sinclair.  Ed.  by  Prof. 
Gwatkin.    Cr.  Svo.    3J-.  td. 

VAUGHAN  (Very  Rev.  C.  J.).— The  Church 
OF  THE  First  Days  ;  The  Church  of 
Jerusalem,  The  Church  of  the  Gen- 
tiles, The  Church  of  the  World.  Cr. 
Svo.    loj.  td. 


The  Church  of  Eiigland. 

Catechism  of— 
Catechism  and  Confirmation.     By  Rev. 

J.  C.  P.  Aldous.    Pott  Svo.    \s.  net. 
A  Class-Book  of  the  Catechism  of  thb 

Church  of  England.     By  Rev.  Canon 

Maclear.    Pott  Svo.    \s.  td. 
A  First  Class-Book  of  the  Catechism 

of  the  Church  of  England.     By  the 

same.    Pott  Svo.    td. 
The    Order    of    Confirmation.      With 

Prayers  and    Devotions.      By   the   same. 

32mo.    td. 

ColUcts- 

Collects  of  the  Church  of  England. 
With  a  Coloured  Floral  Design  to  each 
Collect.    Cr.  Svo.    i2f. 

Disestablishm-ent — 
Disestablishment  and  Disendowment. 

What  are  they  ?    By  Prof.  E.  A.  Freb- 

MAN.    4th  Edit.    Cr,  Svo.    IS. 
Hand  Book  on  Welsh  Church  Defence. 

By  the  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph.    Fcap.  Svo, 

sewed,     td. 
A  Defence  of  the  Church  of  England 

AGAINST  Disestablishment.    By  Roun- 

DELL,  Earl  of  Selborne.  Cr.  Svo.  ^s.td. 
Ancient  Facts  and  Fictions  concerning 

Churches  and  Tithes     By  the  same. 

2nd  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    7^.  td. 

Dissent  in  its  Relation  to — 
Dissent  in  its  Relation  to  the  Church 
of  England.     By  Rev.  G.  H.  Curteis. 
Barapton  Lectures  for  1871.  Cr.  Svo.  js.td. 


THE  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND-THE  FATHERS. 


4S4 


Holy  Communion — 

Those  Holy  Mysteries.  By  Rev.  J.  C.  P. 
Aldous.     i6ino.     u.  net. 

The  Communion  Sicrvice  from  the  Book 
OF  Common  Prayer.  With  Select  Read- 
ings from  the  Writings  of  the  Rev.  F.  D. 
Maurice.  Edited  by  Bishop  Colenso. 
6th  Edit.    i6mo.    %s.  td. 

Before  the  Table  :  An  Inquiry,  Historical 
and  Theological,  into  the  Meaning  of  the 
Consecration  Rubric  in  the  Communion 
Service  of  the  Church  of  England.  By 
Very  Rev.  J.  S.  HowsoN.    8vo.    js.  6d. 

First  Communion.  With  Prayers  and  De- 
votions for  the  newly  Confirmed.  By  Rev. 
Canon  Maclear.    32mo.    6d. 

A  Manual  of  Instruction  for  Confir- 
mation AND  First  Communion.  With 
Prayers  and  Devotions.  By  the  same. 
32mo.    3S. 

Ztiiurgy — 

An  Introduction  to  the  Creeds.  By 
Rev.  Canon  Maclear.    Pott  8vo.    ss.  6rf. 

An  Introduction  to  the  Articles  of 
theChurch  OF  England.  ByRev.  G.  F. 
Maclear  and  Rev.  W.  W.  Williams. 
Cr.  8vo.    los.  td. 

A  History  of  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer.  By  Rev  F.  Procter.  i8tb 
Edit.    Cr.  8vo.    loj.  6d. 

An  Elementay  Introduction  to  thjb 
Book  of  Common  Prayer.  By  Rev.  F, 
Procter  and  Rev.  Canon  Maclear, 
Pott  8vo.    IS.  6d, 

Twelve  Discourses  on  Subjects  con- 
nected with  the  Liturgy  and  Wor- 
ship OF  the  Church  of  England.  By 
Very  Rev.  C.  J.  Vaughan.    Fcp.  8vo.   6j. 

A  Companion  to  the  Lectionary.  By 
Rev.  W.  Benham,  B.D.    Cr.  8vo.    4*.  td. 

Read  and  Others  v.  The  Lord  Bishop  of 
Lincoln.  Judgment,  Nov.  21, 1890.  and 
Edit.    8vo.    zs.  net. 

Historical  and  Biographical^^ 

The  Oxford  Movbment,  1833 — 45.  By 
Dean  Church.    G1.  8vo.    SJ- 

The  Life  and  Letters  of  R.  W.  Church, 
late  Dean  of  St.  Paul's.    8vo.    ^s.  6d. 

James  Fraser,  Second  Bishop  of  Manches- 
ter. A  Memoir.  1818— 18B5.  ByTHOMAS 
Hughes,  Q.C.    2nd  Edit.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

Tjie  Life  of  Frederick  Denison  Mau- 
rice. Chiefly  told  in  his  own  letters.  Ed. 
fcy  his  Son,  Frederick  Maurice.  With 
Portraits.  In  2  vols.  2nd  Edit.  8vo.  36^. 
Cheap  Edit.    2  vols.    Cr.  8vo.    j6s. 

Life  of  Archibald  Campbell  Tait,  Arch- 
bishop of  Canterbury.    By  the  Bishop  of 

WlNCHESTERandW.BENHAMjB.D.   With 

Portraits.  3rd  Ed.  2  vols.  Cr.  8vo.  ior.net. 
William  George  Ward  *Mr  the  Oxford 

Movement.     By  W.   Ward.     Portrait. 

Bvo.    1 4  J. 
William  George  Ward  and  the  Catho 

Lie  Revival.     By  the  Same.     8vo.     t^s. 


CanterburvDiocesan  Gazette.  Monthly. 

8vo.    2d. 
JfiwisH  Quarterly  Review.    Edited  by  I. 

Abrahams    and    C.     G:     Montefiore. 

Demy  Bvo.    3J.  6d. 


Devotional  Books. 

EASTLAKE  (Lady).  —  Fellowship  :  Let- 
ters addressed  to  my  Sister-Mourners.. 
Cr.  8vo.    2s.  Sd. 

IMITATIO  CHRISTI.  Libri  IV.  Printed. 
In  Borders  after  Holbein,  Diirer,  and  other 
(rfd  Masters,  containing  Dances  of  DeatlK 
Acts  of  Mercy,  Emblems,  etc.  Cr.8vo.  'js.td, 

KINGSLEY  (Charles).— Out  of  the  Deep  i: 
Words  for  the  Sorrowful.  From  the 
Writings  of  Charles  Kingsley.  Ext.  fcp. 
Bvo.    3J.  6d. 

— —  Daily  Thoughts.  Selected  from  tho 
Writings  of  Charles  Kingsley.  By  His 
Wife.    Cr.  8vo.    ts. 

From  Death  to  Life.    Fragments  oV 

Teaching  to  a  Village  Congregation.    Edit, 
by  His  Wife.    Fcp.  8vo.    zs.  fid. 

MACLEAR  (Rev.  Canon).— A  Manual  of 
Instruction  for  Confirmation  and 
First  Communion,  with  Prayers  aniv- 
Devotions.    32mo.    2j. 

The  Hour  of  Sorrow  ;  or,  The  OfficC' 

for  the  Burial  of  the  Dead.     32mo.     zs. 

MAURICE  (F.  D.).— Lessons  of  Hope^ 
Readings  from  the  Works  of  F.  D.  Mauricb.. 
Selected  by  Rev.  J.  Ll,  Davies,  M.A.  Cr- 
8vo.    SJ. 

RAYS  OF  SUNLIGHT  FOR  DARK  DAYS. 
With  a  Preface  by  Very  Rev.  C.  J.  Vaughan. 
D.D.    New  Edition.    Pott  8yo.    3J.  td. 

SERVICE  (Rev.  J.).— Prayers  for  Public 
Worship.    Cr.  8vo.    4^.  td. 

THE  WORSHIP  OF  GOD,  AND  FEL- 
LOWSHIP AMONG  MEN.  By  Prof. 
Maurice  and  others.    Fcp.  8vo.    31.  td. 

WELBY-GREGORY  (Hon.  Lady).— Links- 
AND  Clues,    znd  Edit.    Cr.  8vo.    6f. 

WESTCOTT  (Rt.  Rev.  Bishop).— Thoughts 
ON  Revelation  and  Life.  Selections  from 
the  Writings  of  Bishop  Westcott.  Edltedi 
by  Rev.  S.  Phillips.    Cr.  8vo.    65. 

WILBRAHAM  (Francis  M.).— In  the  Ser» 
and  Yellow  Leaf  :  Thoughts  and  Re- 
collections FOR  Old  and  Young.  Globe- 
Bvo.    3s.  6d. 

Tho  Fditihcrs 
DONALDSON  (Prof.   James).— The   Apos- 
tolic Fathers.  A  Critical  Account  of  their 
Genuine  Writings,  and  of  their  Doctrines, 
and  Edit.    Cr.  Bvo.    7J.  dd. 
IVorks  oj  the  Greek  and  Latin  Fathers  : 
The  Apostolic  Fathers.     Revised  Texts^. 

with  Introductions,  Notes,  Dissertations, 

and  Translations.   By  Bishop  Lightfoot. 

— Part  I.  St.  Clement  of  Rome.    2  vols. 

8vo.     12J. — Part  II.  St.  Ignatius  to  St. 

Polycarp.    3  vols.    2nd  Edit.    Bvo.    48*. 
The  Apostolic  Fathers.     Abridged  Ediu 

With  Short  Introductions,  Greek  Text,  and 

English  Translation.    By  same.    Bvo.    76s. 
Index     of     Noteworthy     Words    and' 

Phrases   found    in    the  Clementinb 

Writings.     8vo.     ss. 
Six     Lectures     on    the    Ante-Nicene: 

Fathers.     By  F.  J.  A.  Hort.     Cr.  8vo.- 

3J.  6d. 
The  Epistle  of  St.  Barnabas.     Its  Date 

and  Authorship.    With  Greek  Text,  Latin 

Version,  Translation  and  Commentary.  By 

Rev.  W.  Cunningham.    Cr.  Bvo.    ns.td. 


42 


THEOLOGY. 


THEOLOGY. 
Hymnology. 
fiROOKE  (S.  A.).— Christian  Hvmns.  GI. 
8vo.  2f.6rf.net."CHRisTiAN  Hymns andSer- 
vicE  Book  of  Bedford  Chapel,  Blooms- 
BURV.  Gl.  8vo.  3J.  td.  net. — Service  Book. 
Gl.  8vo.     ij.  net. 

S»ALGRAVE     (Prof.     F.     T.).  —  Original 

Hymns,    ^rd  Edit.    Pott  8vo.    u.  6^. 
.-SELBORNE  (Roundell,  Earl  of).— The  Book 

OF  Praise.     Pott  8vo.    2j.  6rf.  net. 
A  Hymnal.    Chiefly  from  "  The  Book  of 

Praise." — A.    Royal    32010,    limp.     hd. — B. 

Pott  8vo,  larger  tj^e.    u.— C.    Fine  paper. 

ij.6(/. — With  Music,  Selected,  Harmonised, 

and  Composed  by  John  Hullah.    Pott  8vo. 

3J.  td. 
WOODS  (Miss  M.  A.).— Hymns  for  School 

Worship.    Pott  8vo,    is.  td. 

Sermons,  Lectures,  Addresses,  and 
Theological  Essays. 

ABBOT  (F.  E.),— Scientific  Theism.     Cr 

8vo.    ^s.  (id. 
The  Way  out  of  Agnosticism  ;  or,  The 

Philosophy  of  Free  Religion.  Cr.  8vo.  4s.  6d 

ABBOTT  (Rev.  E.  A.).— Cambridgb  Ser- 
mons.   8vo.    6*. 

Oxford  Sermons.     8vo.    js.  6d. 

— —  Philomythus.  a  discussion  of  Cardinal 
Newman's  Essay  on  Ecclesiastical  Miracles. 
Cr.  8vo.    3J.  6d. 

•—^  Newmanianism.    Cr.  8vo.     is.  net. 

ABRAHAMS(I.)andMONTEFI0RE(C.G.) 
— Aspects  of  Judaism.  2nd  Edit.  Fcp. 
8vo.    -IS.  6d.  net. 

AINGER  (Canon). — Sermons  Preached  in 
the  Temple  Church.    Ext.  fcp.  8vo.    ts. 

ALEXANDER  (Archbishop).— The  Leading 
Ideas  of  the  Gospels.  New  Edit.  Cr. 
8vo.    65. 

BAINES(Rev.  Edward).— Sermons.  Preface 
and  Memoir  by  Bishop  Barry.    Cr.  8vo.    6j. 

CBARRY  (A.). — Ecclesiastical  Expansion 
OF  England.    Cr.  8vo.    ts. 

BATHER  (Archdeacon).— On  Some  Minis- 
terial Duties,  Catechising,  Preaching, 
Etc.  Edited,  with  a  Preface,  by  Very  Rev. 
C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D.     Fcp.  8vo.     4*.  6d. 

SERNARD(Canon).—THECENTRAL  Teach- 
ing OF  Christ.    Cr.  8vo.     ts.  6d. 

^■^  Songs  of  the  Holy  Nativity.  Cr. 
Bvo.    5J. 

BINNIE(Rev.W.).— Sermons.   Cr.  8vo.   6*. 

1BIRKS  (Thomas  Rawson).— The  Difficul- 
TIES  OF  Belief  in  Connection  with  the 
Creation  and  the  Fall,  Redemption, 
AND  Judgment.    2nd  Edit.    Cr.  8vo.    5*. 

——  Justification  and  Imputed  Right- 
eousness.   A  Review.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

Supernatural  Revelation  ;  or,  First 

Principles  of  Moral  Theology.    8vo.    8*. 

tBRADFORD  (A.  H.).— Heredity  and 
Christian  Problems.    Cr.  Bvo.    5^.  net. 

•BROOKE  (S.  A.).— Short  Sermons.  Crown 
Bvo.    6s. 


BROOKS  (Bishop  Phillips).— The  Candle  of 
the  Lord  :  and  other  Sermons.  Cr.  8vo.   6s. 

-^  Sermons  Preached  in  English 
Churches.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

Twenty  Sermons.    Cr.  Bvo.    6s. 

-  Tolerance.    Cr.  Bvo.    2s.  6d. 

The  Light  OF  THE  World.  Cr.Bvo.  3^.6^. 

The  Mystery  of  Iniquity.  Cr.  Bvo.  6s, 

Essays  AND  Addresses.  Cr.Bvo.  5s.6d.net. 

BRUNTON  (T.  Lauder).— The  Bible  and 

Science.    Illustrated.    Cr.  Bvo.    10s.  6d. 
BUTLER   (Archer).— Sermons,   Doctrinal 
AND  Practical,    nth  Edit.    8vo.    %s. 

Second  Series  of  Sermons.    Bvo.    ^s, 

Letters  on  Romanism.     Bvo.     xqs.  6d. 

BUTLER  (Rev.  Geo.).— Sermons  Preached 

IN  Cheltenham  College  Chapel.     8vo. 

^s.  6d. 

CAMPBELL  (Dr.  John  M*Leod).~THH  Na- 
ture of  the  Atonement.     Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

Reminiscences      and      Reflections. 

Edited    by  his   Son,   Donald    Campbell, 
M.A.     Cr.  8vo.     ys.  6d. 

Thoughts  ON  Revelation.  Cr.Bvo.  5*. 

Responsibility     for    the    Gift    ow 

Eternal  Life.     Compiled  from  Sermons 
preached  1829 — 31.    Cr.  8vo.     5J. 

CANTERBURY  (Edward  White,  Archbishop 
of).— Bov-Life  :  ITS  Trial,  its  Strengthi 
ITS  Fulness.  Sundays  in  Wellington  Col- 
lege, 18^9 — 73.     Cr.  Bvo.    6s. 

The  Seven  Gifts.     Primary  Visitation 

Address.     Cr.  Bvo.     6s. 

Christ  and  His  Times.  Second  Visi- 
tation Address.     Cr.  Bvo.     6s. 

A  Pastoral  Letter  to  the  Diocesb 

of  Canterbury,  iBqo.    Bvo,  sewed,    id. 

Fishers    of    Men.      Third    Visitation 

Address.     Cr.  Bvo.     6s. 

CARPENTER  (W.  Boyd,  Bishop  of  Ripon).— 
Truth  in  Tale.  Addresses,  chiefly  to 
Children.     Cr.  8vo.    4^.  6d. 

Twilight  Dreams,    Cr.  Svo.     4J.  6d. 

The   Permanent   Elements   of  Rb- 

HGiON.    2nd  Edit.    Cr.  Bvo.    6s. 

Lectures    on    Preaching.      Cr.    Svo. 

3*.  6d.  net. 

Thoughts  on  Christian  Reunion.   Cr. 

Bvo.    3J.  6d.  net. 
CAZENOVE  (J.  Gibson).— Concerning  the 

Being  and  Attributes  of  God.    Bvo.    5*. 
CHURCH  (Dean).— Human  Life  and  its 

Conditions.    Cr.  Bvo.    6s. 
The  Gifts  of  Civilisation  :  and  other 

Sermons  and  Letters.    Cr.  Bvo.    7^.  6d. 

Discipline  of  the  Christian  Char- 
acter ;  and  other  Sermons.    Cr.  Bvo.  4^.  td* 

——  Advent  Sermons,i885.   Cr.  Bvo.    41.  6d, 

-  Village  Sermons.    Cr.  Bvo.    6s. 

ViLLAGJK  Sermons.  2nd  Series.  Cr.Bvo.  6f. 

Cathedral  and  University  Sermons. 

Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

Pascal,  andotherSermons.  Cr. Svo.  6*. 

CLERGYMAN'S    SELF-EXAMINATION 

CONCERNING       THE       APOSTLES' 

CREED.    Ext.  fcp.  Bvo.    is.  6d. 
CONFESSION  OF  FAITH  (A).     Fcp.  Svo. 

3s.  6d. 
CONGREVE    (Rev.    John).— High   Hopm 

AND  Pleadings  for  a  Reasonable  FaitHi 

Nobler  Thoughts,  and  Larger  Charitt. 

Cr.  Svo.    5J. 


SERMONS,  LECTURES,  Etc. 


43 


COOKE  (Josiah  P.,  jun.).— Religion    and 

Chemistry.    Cr.  8vo.    7s.  td. 

The   Credentials   of   Science,    The 

Warrant  of  Faith.     8vo.     Zs.  dd.  net. 

CORNISH  (F.).— Week  by  Week.  Fcap. 
8vo.    3J.  6rf. 

COTTON  (Bishop). — Sermons  preached  to 
English  Congregations  in  India.  Cr. 
8vo.    7^.  td. 

CUNNINGHAM  (Rev.  W.).  —  Christian 
Civilisation,  with  Special  Referenci 
TO  India.    Cr.  8vo.    <,s. 

CURTEIS  (Rev.  G.  H.).— The  Scientific 
Obstacles  to  Christian  Belief.  The 
Boyle  Lectures,  1884.    Cr.  8vo.    ts, 

OAVIES  (Rev.  J.  Llewelyn).— The  Gospel 
and  Modern  Life.    Ext.  fcp.  8vo.    ts. 

Social  Questions  from  the  Point  of 

View  OF  Christian  Theology.  Cr.Svo.  6*. 

-^—  Warnings  against  Superstition.  Ext. 
fcp.  8vo.    IS.  6d. 

The  Christian  Calling.  Ext.fp.8vo.  6j. 

——  Order  and  Growth  as  Involved  in 

the  Spiritual  Constitution  of  Human 
Society.    Cr.  8vo.    3*.  6d. 

-  Baptism,  Confirmation,  and  thb 
LoRij's  Supper.    Addresses.    Pott  8vo.    m. 

DAVIDSON  (Bp.).— Charge  Delivered  to 

the  Clergy  of  the  Diocese  of  Roches- 
ter, 1894.    8vo,  sewed.    2s.  net. 
DAVIES  (W.).— The  Pilgrim  of  the  Infi- 

NiTE.    Fcp.  8vo.    3 J.  6d. 
DIGGLE   (Rev.    J.    W.).— Godliness   and 

Manliness.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 
DRUMMOND  (Prof.  Jas.).— Introduction 

to  the  Study  of  Theology.    Cr.  8vo.    5s. 
DU  BOSE  (W.  P.).— The  Soteriology  of 

THE  New  Testament.    Cr.  8vo.    7*.  6d. 
ELLERTON    (Rev.   John).— The    Holiest 

Manhood,  and   its   Lessons   for   Bust 

Livpjs.    Cr.  8vo.    6*. 
ffAITH  AND  CONDUCT :  An  Essay  on 

Verifiable  Religion.    Cr.Svo.    •js.6d. 
ff  ARRAR  CVen.  Archdeacon).— Works,  t/ni- 

form  Edition.     Cr.  8vo.     31".  6d.  each. 

Seekers  after  God. 

Eternal     Hope.       Westminster     Abbey 
Sermons. 

The  Fall  of  Man  :  and  other  Sermons. 

The  Witness   of   History   to  Christ 
Hulsean  Lectures,  1870. 

TheSilenceandVoicesofGod.  Sermons. 

In  the  Days  of  Thy  Youth.  Marlborough 
College  Sermons 

Saintly  Workers.    Five  Lenten  Lectures. 

Ephphatha  ;  or.  The  Amelioration  of  the 

Mercy  and  Judgment.  [World. 

Sermons  and  Addresses   delivered   in 
America. 

-  The  History  of  Interpretation. 
Hampton  Lectures,  1885.    8vo.    its. 

FISKE  (John).— Man's  Destiny  Viewed  in 
THE  Light  of  his  Origin.   Cr.  8vo.    3*.  td. 

FORBES  (Rev.  Granville).— The  Voice  or 
God  in  the  Psalms.    Cr.  8vo.    6s.  6d. 

rOWLE  (Rev.  T.  W.).— A  New  Analogy 
BETWEEN  Revealed  Religion  and  the 
Course  and  Constitution  of  Nature, 
Cr  8vo.    6s. 

I'OXELL(W.  J.).— God's  Garden,  Sunday 
Talks  with  Boys.    G1.  8vo.    3*.  6d. 


FRASER  (Bishop).— Sermons.  Edited  by 
John  W.  Diggle.  2  vols.  Cr.  8vo.  6*.  each. 

GLOVER  (E.).  —  Memorials  of.  By  G. 
Glover.    Cr.  8vo.    3^.  net. 

GRANE  (W.  L.).— The  Word  and  the 
Way.     Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

HARE  (Julius  Charles).— The  Mission  of 
the  Comforter.  New  Edition.  Edited 
by  Dean  Plumptre.    Cr.  8vo.    7s.  6d. 

HAMILTON(John).--ONTRUTH  and  Error. 
Cr.  8vo.    ss- 

Arthur's  Seat  ;  or.  The  Church  of  the 

Banned.    Cr.  8vo.    6s 

——  Above  and  Around  :  Thoughts  on  God 

and  Man.    i2mo.    2s.  6d, 
HARDWICK   (Archdeacon).  — Christ    and 

other  Masters.  6th  Edit.  Cr.  8vo.  ios.6d. 
HARRIS  (Rev.  G.  C.).— Sermons.    With  a 

Memoir  bv  C.  M.  Vonge.    Ext.  fcp.  8vo.    6s, 
HORT  (F.  J.  A.).— The  Way,  the  Truth, 

THE  Life.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

Judaistic  Christianity.    Cr.  8vo.    6s, 

HUGHES    (T.).— Manliness    of    Christ. 

2nd  Edit.    Fcp.  8vo.    ss,  6d. 
BUTTON  (R.  H.).    {See  p.  26.) 
HYDE  (W.  de  W.).— Outlines  of  Social 

Theology.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 
ILLINGWORTH   (Rev.   J.   R.).— Sermons 

preached  in  a  College  Chapel.  Cr.Svo.  ^f. 
University  and  Cathedral  Sermons. 

Crown  8vo.     $s. 
Personality,    Human,    and    Divine. 

Crown  8vo.     6s. 
JACOB  (Rev.  J.  A.).— Building  in  Silence  I 

and  other  Sermons.    Ext.  fcp.  8vo.    6s. 
JAMES   (Rev.    Herbert).  —  The    Country 

Clergyman  and  his  Work.     Cr.  8vo.     6*. 
JEANS  (Rev.  G.  E.).— Hailevbury  Chapel  I 

and  other  Sermons.    Fcp.  8vo.    -^s.  6d. 
JELLETT  (Rev.   Dr.).— The  Elder  Son: 

and  other  Sermons.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

The  Efficacy  of  Prayer.   Cr.  8vo.   5*. 

KELLOGG  (Rev.  S.  H.).— The  Light  of 

Asia  and  the  Light  of  the  World.  Cr. 
8vo.    7*.  6d. 

Genesis  and  Growth  of  Religion. 

Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

KELLY  (E  ).  —  Evolution  and  Effort. 
Cr.  8vo.    4J.  6d.  net. 

KINGSLEY  (Charles).  (See  Collected 
Works,  p.  26.) 

KIRKPATRICK  (Prof.).— The  Divine  Li- 
brary  of  the  Old  Testament.  Cr.  8vo. 
3*.  net. 

Doctrine  of  the  Prophets.  Cr.  8vo.  6s, 

KYNASTON  (Rev.  Herbert,  D.D.).— Chel- 
tenham College  Sermons.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

LEGGE  (A.  O.).— The  Growth  of  the  Tem- 
poral Power  of  the  Papacy.  Cr.Svo.  Ss.6d, 

LIGHTFOOT  (Bishop).— Leaders  in  thb 
Northern  Church  :  Sermons.  Cr.  Svo.  6s, 

Ordination  Addresses  and  Counsels 

to  Clergy.    Cr.  Bvo.    6s. 

Cambridge  Sermons.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

Sermons    preached    in    St.    Paul's 

Cathedral.    Cr.  Bvo.    6;. 

Sermons  on  Special  Occasions.  8vo.  6s 

A  Charge  delivered  to  the  Clbrgt 

of  the  Diocese  of  Durham,  1886.   Svo.  as 


44 


THEOLOGY. 


THEOLOGY. 

Sermons,  Lectures,  Addresses,  and 

Theological  'EasaLya—continued. 

LIGHTFOOT  (Bp.).  -Essays  on  the  Work 

ENTITLED       "SUPERNATURAL      RELIGION." 

2nd  Edit.    8vo.    zos.  6rf. 
— —  On  a  Fresh  Revision  of  the  English 

Kew  Testament.     Cr.  8vo.    7J.  6d. 
'        Dissertations  on  the  Apostolic  Age. 

8vo.    14s. 
^—  Biblical  Essays.     Bvo,     12s. 

Historical  Essays.    G1.  8vo.    55. 

LYTTELT0N(A.T.).  Sermons.  Cr.Svo.  6s. 
MACLAREN(Rev.  A.).— Sermons  PREACHED 

AT  Manchester,  nth  Ed.  Fcp.  8vo.  ^s.6d. 

Second  Series   7thEd.  Fcp.  8vo  4s.  6d, 

Third  Series.    6th Ed.    Fcp.  8vo.    t^.6d. 

-^^  Week-Day  Evening  Addresses*     4th 

Edit.    Fcp.  8vo.    zs.  6d. 

The  Secret  of  Power  :  and  other  Ser- 
mons.   Fcp.  8vo.    4j.  6d. 

MACMILLAN  (Rev.  Hugh).— Bible  Teach- 
iNGS  IN  Nature.   15th  Edit.   Globe  8vo.  6s. 

— —  The  True  Vine  ;  or,  The  Analogies  of 
our  Lord's  Allegory.    5th  Edit.    Gl.  Bvo.    6s. 

The  Ministry  of  Nature.    8th  Edit. 

Globe  8vo.    6s. 

-  The  Sabbath  of  the  Fields.  6th 
Edit.    Globe  8vo.    6s. 

^—  The  Marriage  in  Cana.    Gl.  8vo.    6s. 

Two  Worlds  are  Ours.    Gl.  8vo.    6s. 

The  Olive  Leaf.    Globe  Bvo.    6s. 

-—  The  Gate  Beautiful  :  and  other  Bible 

Teachings  for  the  Young.     Cr.  8vo.     3^.  6d- 
MAHAFFY  (Prof.  J.  P.).— The  Decay   of 

Modern  Preaching.     Cr.  Bvo.     3^.  6d. 
MaTURIN  (Rev.  W.).— The  Blessedness 

OF  THE  Dead  in  Christ.    Cr.  Bvo.    js.  6d. 
MAURICE  (Frederick  Denison).— The  King- 

domofChrist.  3rdEd.  2vols.  Cr.  Bvo    12s. 
■ Dialogues  on  Family  Worship.     Cr. 

Bvo.    4.S.  6d. 
— —  Expository  Sermons  on  the  Prayer- 

Book,  and  THE  Lord's  Prayer.  Cr.Svo.  6s. 
— —    Sermons      Preached     in      Country 

Churches.    2nd  Edit.    Cr.  Bvo.    6s. 
— '       The  Conscience  :  Lectures  on  Casuistry. 

3rd  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    4^.  6d. 
— —  The  Doctrine  of  sacrifice  Deduced 

FROM  THE  Scriptures.  zndEdit.  O.Bvo.  6j. 
^—  The  Religions  of  the  World.     6th 

Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    ^s.  6d. 
— —  On  the  Sabbath  Day  ;  The  Character 

of  the  Warrior  ;  and  on  the  Interpre- 
tation OF  History.    Fcp.  Svo.    is.  6d. 
—— Learning  AND  Working.  Cr.Svo.  4s.6d. 
——  The  Lord's  Prayer,  the  Creed,  and 

THE  Commandments.    Pott  Svo,    \s. 

-  Sermons  Preached  in  Lincoln's  Inn 
Chapel.     6  vols.     Cr.  Bvo.     gj.  6d.  each. 

-^—Collected  Works.  Cr.  Bvo.  3J.  6rf.  each. 
Christmas  Day  and  other  Sermons. 
Theological  Essays. 
Prophets  and  Kings. 
Patpiarchs  and  Lawgivers. 
The  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven. 
Gospel  of  St.  John. 
Epistle  of  St.  John, 
Lectures  on  the  Apocalypse. 
Friendship  of  Books. 
Social  Morality. 
Prayer  Book  and  Lord's  Prayer. 
The  Doctrine  of  Sacrifice. 
The  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 


McCURDY(J.  F.>— History,  Prophecy,  and 
THE  Monuments.    2  vols.    Vol.  L,  14s.  net 

MILLIGAN  (Rev.  Prof.  W.).— The  Resur- 
rection  of  our  Lord.  4th  Edit.  Cr.8vo.  5J. 

The  Ascension  and  Heavenly  Priest- 
hood OF  our  Lord.     Cr.  Svo.    ^s.  6d. 

MOORHOUSE  (J.,  Bishop  of  Manchester).— 
Jacob  :  Three  Sermons.  Ext  fcp.  Svo.  3J  6d. 

The  Teaching  of  Christ  :  its  Condi- 
tions, Secret,  and  Results.    Cr.  Svo.    ^^i.net. 

Church    Work  :     Its     Means    and- 

Methods.    Cr.  Svo.    3s.  net. 

MURPHY(J.  J.).— Natural  Selection  ANi> 
Spiritual  Freedom.     Gl.  8vo.     s^. 

MYLNE  (L.  G.,  Bishop  of  Bombay),— 
Sermons  Preached  in  St.  Thomas's 
Cathedral,  Bombay.    Cr.  8va.    6s. 

PATTISON  (Mark).— Sermons.    Cr.  Bvo.   6s. 

PAUL  OF  TARSUS.     Bvo.     los.  6d, 

PHILOCHRISTUS :  Memoirs  of  a  Dis- 
ciple OF  THE  Lord.    ^rd.  Edit.    Bvo.    xzs. 

PLUMPTRE  (Dean).— Movements  in  Rb- 
LiGious  Thought.    Fcp.  Bvo.    3s.  6d. 

POTTER  (R.).— The  Relation  of  Ethics 

TO  Religion.    Cr.  Svo.    2s.  6d. 
REASONABLE  FAITH :   A  Short  Essat 

By  "  Three  Friends."    Cr.  Bvo.    is. 

REICHEL  (C.  P.,  Bishop  of  Meath).— Thb 
Lord's  Prayer.     Cr.  Bvo.     7J.  6d. 

Cathedral  and  University  Sermons. 

Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

RENDALL  (Rev.  P.).— The  Theology  op 
the  Hebrew  Christians.    Cr.  Svo.    ss. 

REYNOLDS  (H.  R.).— Notes  of  the  Chris- 
tian Life.    Cr.  Svo.    7s.  6d. 

ROBINSON  (Prebendary  H.  G.).— Man  i» 
THE  Image  of  God:  and  other  Sermons. 
Cr.  Bvo.     7J.  6d. 

RUSSELL  (Dean).— The  Light  that  Light- 
ETH  EVERY  Man  :  Sermons.  With  an  Intro- 
duction bvDeanPLUMPTRE,D.D.  Cr.Svo.  6*, 

RYLE  (Rev.  Prof.  H.).— The  Early  Narra- 
tives OF  Genesis.    Cr.  Bvo.    -^s.  net. 

SALMON  (Rev.  George,  D.D.).— NoN-MiR- 
ACULOus  Christianity  :  and  other  Sermons. 
2nd  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

Gnosticism    and    Agnosticism:     and 

other  Sermons.    Cr.  Bvo.    7^.  6d. 

SANDFORD  (Rt.  Rev.  C.  W.,  Bishop  of  Gib- 
raltar).— Counsel  to  English  Churchmen 
Abroad.     Cr.  Svo.     6s. 

SCOTCH  SERMONS,  irfBp.  By  Principal 
Caird  and  others.    3rd  Edit.     Bvo.     los.  td. 

SEELEY  (J.  R.).— EccE  Homo.   Gl.  8vo.   5s. 
Natural  Religion.    Gl.  Svo.    ss. 

SERVICE  (Rev.  J.).— Sermons.   Cr.Svo.   6i. 

SHIRLEY  (W.  N.).— Elijah  :  Four  Univor- 

sity  Sermons.    Fcp.  Svo.    2j.  6d. 
SMITH  (Rev.  Travers).— Man's  Knowledge 

OF  Man  and  of  God.    Cr.  Svo.    6.r. 

STANLEY  (Dean). --TheNationalThanks- 
giving.  Sermons  Preached  in  Westmlostar 
Abbey.    2nd  Edit.    Cr.  Bvo.    2s.  6d. 

Addresses  and  Sermons  delivered  ha 

America,  1878.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 


SERMONS,  LECTURES,  Etc. 


45 


STEWART  (Prof.  Balfour)  and  TAIT  (Prof. 
P.  G.). — The  Unseen  Universe,  or  Phy- 
sical Speculations  on  a  Future  State. 
Tsth  Edit.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

Paradoxical  Philosophy  :  A  Sequel  to 

the  above.    Cr.  8vo.    ys.  td. 

STUBBS  (Dean).— For  Christ  and  City. 
Sermons  and  Addresses.    Cr.  8vo.    6*. 

-  "  Christus  Imperator!"  A  Series  of 
Lecture- Sermons.    Cr.  8vo.    ds. 

TAIT  (Archbp.).— The  Present  Conditiom 
OF  THE  Church  of  England.  Primary 
Visitation  Charge.    3rd  Edit.    8vo.    31,  6rf. 

Duties  of  the  Church  of  England. 

Second  Visitation  Addresses.    8vo.    4*.  td. 

The  Church  of  the  Future.  Quad- 
rennial Visitation  Charges.    Cr.  8vo.    •?*.  6(f. 

TAYLOR  (Isaac).— The  Restoration  o» 
Belief.    Cr.  8vo.    Zs.  6d. 

TEMPLE  (Frederick,  Bishop  of  London).— 
Sermons  Preached  in  the  Chapel  of 
Rugby  School.  Second  Series.  Ex.  fcp.  8vo. 
6s.   Third  Series  4th  Edit.   Extfcp.  Svo.   6s. 

'—  The  Relations  Betv/een  Religion 
AND  Science.  Bampton  Lectures,  18B4. 
7th  and  Cheaper  Edition.    Cr.  Svo.    6*. 

TRENCH  (Archbishop).  —  The  Hulsbam 
Lectures  for  1845 — 6.    8vo.    7*.  6d. 

TULLOCH  (Principal).— The  Christ  of  the 
Gospels  and  the  Christ  of  Modern 
Criticism.    Ext.  fcp.  Svo.    4^.  6d. 

VAUGHAN  (C.  J.,  Dean  ot  Landaflf).— Me- 
MORiALS  of  Harrow  Sundays.  Svo.  iof.6i^. 

-  Epiphany,  Lent, and  Easter.  Svo.  iox.  6rf. 

Heroes  of  Faith.  2nd  Edit.  Cr.Bvo.  6* 

Life's  Work   and  God's  Discipline. 

Ext.  fcp.  Svo.     2S.  6d. 

The    Wholesome    Words    of    Jesus 

Christ.    2nd  Edit.    Fcp.  Svo.    3^.  6d. 

FoesofFaith.  2nd£dit.  Fcp.Svo.  3S.6d. 

Christ  Satisfying  the  Instincts  of 

Humanity.   2nd  Edit.   Ext.  fcp.  Svo.   3S.6d. 

Counsels  fo.<  Young  Students.    Fcp. 

8vo.     zs.  6d. 
The  Two  Great  Temptations.     2nd 

Edit.    Fcp.  Svo.    3J.  td. 
Addresses    for    Young    Clergymen. 

Ext.  fcp.  Svo.    is.  6d. 

"My  Son    Give  Me  Thine  Heart." 

Ext.  fcp.  Svo.    5*. 

Rest  Awhile.    Addresses  to  Toilers  In 

the  Ministry.    Ext.  fcp.  Svo.    $s. 

•~—  Temple  Sermons.    Cr.  Svo.    los.  6d, 

-  Authorised  or  Revised  ?  Sermons. 
Cr.  Svo     7J.  6d. 

' Lessons  of  the    .^ross  and  Passion; 

Words  from  the  Cross  ;  The  Reign  of 
Sin  ;  The  Lord's  Prayer.  Four  Courses 
of  Lent  Lectures.    Cr.  Svo.    loi.  6d. 

University  Sermons,  New  and  Old. 

Cr.  Svo.    tos.  6d. 

The  Prayers  of  Jesus  Christ.    Globe 

Svo.     3f .  6d. 

-—  DoNCASTER  Sermons;  Lessons  of  Life 
and  (Jodlinkss  ;  Words  from  the  Gos- 
pels.    Cr.  Svo.    loj.  6d. 

Notes  for  Lectures  on  Confirma- 
tion.    14th  Edit.    Fcp.  Svo.    If.  6d. 

Restful  Thoughts  in  Restless  Times. 

Crown  Svo.     5s. 
Last  Words  in  the  Temple  Church 

Gl.  Svo.    5s. 


VAUGHAN  (Rev.  D.  J.).— The  Present 
Trial  of  Faith.    Cr.  Svo.    5*.    (See  p.  26.) 

VAUGHAN  (Rev.  E.  T.)— Some  Reasons  of 
our  Christian  Hope.  Hulsean  Lectnrei 
for  187S.    Cr.  Svo.    6s.  6d. 

VAUGHAN  (Rev.  Robert).- Stones  from 
THE  Quarry.    Sermons.    Cr.  Svo.    5*. 

VENN  (Rev.  John).— On  some  Charactek- 
isTics  OF  Belief,  Scientific,  and  R«- 
ligious.  Hulsean  Lectures,  i86q.  Svo.  6s.6d. 

WELLDON  (Rev.  J.  E.  C.).— The  Spiritual 
Life  :  and  other  Sermons.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

WESTCOTT  (Rt.  Rev.  B.  F.,  Bishop  of  Dur- 
ham). — On  the.  Religious  Office  of  the 
Universities.    Sermons.    Cr.  Svo.    4*.  6d. 

Gifts  for  Ministrv.  Addresses  to  Can- 
didates for  Ordination.    Cr.  Svo.    is.  6d. 

The  ViciOKV  of  the  Cross.    Sermons 

Preached  in  1888.    Cr.  Svo.    3J.  6d. 

From  Strength  to  Sticength.    Threo 

Sermons(InMemoriam  J.  B.  D.).  Cr.  Svo.  2s, 

The  Revelation  of  the  Risen  Lokd. 

4th  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

The  Historic  Faith.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

The  Gospel  of   the   Resurrection. 

6th  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

The  Revelation  of  the  Father.   Cr. 

Svo.    6s. 

-  Christus  Consummator.    Cr.  Svo.    6*. 
— —  Some  Thoughts  from  the  Ordinal. 

Cr.  Svo.    IS.  6d. 
Social  Aspects  of  Christianity.    Cr, 

Svo.    6s. 

The  Gospel  of  Life.     Cr.  Svo.     6s. 

Essays  in  the  History  of  Religious 

Thought  in  the  West.    Globe  Svo.    51. 

Incarnation  and  Common  Life.    Cr, 

Svo.     9*. 

WHITTUCK(C.  A.).— Church  of  England 

and  Recent  Religious  Thought.     Cr. 

Svo.    ys.  6d. 
WICKHAM    (Rev.    E.     C.).— Wellington 

College  Sermons.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 
WILKINS  (Prof.  A.  S.).— The  Light  of  thb 

World:  An  Essay,  and  Ed.  Cr.  Svo.  ^s.6d, 
WILLIAMSON  (M.   B).— Truth  and  the 

Witness     Cr.  Svo.    45.  6d. 
WILLINK  (A.).— The  World  of  the  Un- 

seen.     Cr.  Svo.     -^s.  6d. 
WILSON  (J.  M.,  Archdeacon  of  Manchester). 

— Sermons  Preached  in  Clifton  College 

Chapel.    2nd  Series,  18S8 — go.    Cr.  Svo.    6s, 
'-'—  Essays  and  Addresses.     Crown  Svo. 

2f.  6d  net. 
Some  Contributions  to  the  Religious 

Thought  of  our  Time.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 
WOOD  (C.  J.).— Survivals  in  Christianity, 

Crown  Svo.     6s. 
WOOD  (Rev.  E.  G.).— The  Regal  Powb« 

of  the  Church.    Svo.    4s.  6d. 

THERAPEUTICS.    {See  Medicine,  p.  28.) 

TRANSLATIONS. 

From  the  Greek — From,  the  Italian — Front  tht 
Latin — Into  Latin  and  Greek  Verst. 

From  the  Greek. 
SPECIMENS    OF    GREEK    TRAGEDY, 
Transl.  by  Goldwin  Smith,  D.C.L.   2  vols. 
Gl.  Svo.     ioj. 


46 


TRANSLATIONS— VOYAGES  AND  TRAVELS. 


TB.ANSLAT10N&— continued. 

AESCHYLUS.— The  Supplices.  With  Trans' 
lation,  by  T.  G.  Tucker,  Litt.D.  8vo.  los.^d, 

The   Seven   against    Thebes.    With 

Translation,   by    A.   W.    Verrall,    Litt.D. 
8vo.    7^.  6d, 

-  The  Choephori.  With  Translation.  By 
the  same.     8vo.     125. 

EuMENiDES.     With  Verse    Translation, 

by  Bernard  Drake,  M.A.    8vo.    $.r. 

ARATUS.    iSee  Physiography,  p.  34.) 
ARISTOPHANES.— The  Birds.  Trans,  into 

English  Verse,  by  B.  H.  Kennedy.    Svo.   6*. 
•^^  Scholia   Aristophanica.     Transl.  by 

W.  G.  Rutherford,  LL.D.     Vols.  I.  and 

II.    Svo.    50J.  net. 
ARISTOTLE  ON  FALLACIES;  or,  Thb 

SoPHiSTici  Elenchi.    With  Translation,  by 

E.  PosTE  M.A.    8vo.    &s.  6d. 
ARISTOTLE. —The    First    Book  of  thb 

Metaphysics  of  Aristotle.     By  a  Cam* 

bridge  Graduate.    Svo.    5;. 

The  Politics.     By  J.  E,  C.  Welldon, 

M.A.    Cr.  Svo.    loj.  6d. 

The  Rhetoric.  By  same.  Cr.Svo.  7S.bd. 

-  The  Nicomachean  Ethics.  By  same. 
Cr.  8vo.     7^.  6d. 

^—  On  the  Constitution  of  Athens.  By 
E.  Poste.    2nd  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    3*.  6d. 

The  Poetics.  By  S.  H.  Butcher,  Litt.B. 

Svo.  ioj-.net. — Text  and  Translation.  3j.net. 

BION.    (See  Theocritus,) 

EURIPIDES.— The  Tragedies  in  English 
Verse.  By  A.  S.  Way,  M.A.  3  vols.  Cr. 
Svo.    6s.  net  each. 

Alcestis,  Hecuba,  Medea.  Separately, 

ewed.     IS.  6d,  each. 

HERODOTUS.— The  History.  By  G.  C. 
Macaulav,  M.A.    2  vols.    Cr.  Svo.    18*. 

HOMER. — The  Odyssey  done  into  Eng- 
lish Prose,  by  S.  H.  Butcher,  M.A.,  and 
A.  Lang,  M.A.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

The  Odyssey.    Books  I.— XII.    Transl. 

Into  English  Verse  by  Earl  of  Carnarvon. 
Cr.  Svo.     js.  6d. 

—^  The  Iliad  done  into  English  Prosk. 

by  Andrew   Lang,    Walter    Leaf,    and 

Ernest  Myers.    Cr.  Svo.    12^.  6d. 
The  Iliad  done  into  English  Verse. 

By  A.  S.  Way,  M.A.  2  vols.  410.  lo^.ec^.  net. 
MOSCHUS.    {See  Theocritus). 
PINDAR.— The  Extant  Odes.    By  Ernest 

Myers.    Cr.  8vo.    5s. 
PLATO.— Tim^us.     With    Translation,    by 

R.    D.    Archer-Hind,    M.A.      8vo.      16*. 

{See  also  Golden  Treasury  Series,  p.  26.) 
POLYBIUS.— The    Histories.      By  E.   S. 

Shuckburgh.    Cr.  Svo.    24s. 
SOPHOCLES.— CEdipus  the  King.     Trans 

lated  into  English  Verse  by  E.  D.  A.  Mors- 

head,  M.A.    Fcp.  Svo.    3^.  6d. 
THEOCRITUS,   BION,   and   MOSCHUS. 

By  A.  Lang,  M.A.    Pott  Svo.    us  6d.net.— 

Large  Paper  Edition.    Svo.    gs. 
XENOPHON.  —  The    Complete    Works. 

By  H.  G.  Dakvns,  M.A.    Cr.  8vo.— Vols.  I, 

and  II.     10^.  6d.  each. 

From  the  Italian. 
DANTE.— The   Purgatory.     With  Transl. 
andNotes, byA.  J.  Butler.  Cr.Svo.  i2S.6d, 


7 J.  td." 


DANTE.— The  Paradise.  ByA.  J.  Butler, 

2nd  Edii     Cr.  Svo.    12^.  6d. 

The  Hell.  By  the  same.  Cr.Svo.  i^s.td* 

De   MoNARCHiA.     By  F.  J.  Church. 

8vo.    4s.  6d. 

The  Divine  Comedy.  By  C.  E.  Nor- 
ton. I.  Hell.  II.  Purgatory.  IIL 
Paradise.    Cr.  Svo.    6j.  each. 

New  Life  of  Dante.    Transl.  by  C  E, 

Norton.    5j. 

The    Purgatory.     Transl.    by    C.    L. 

Shadwell.     Ext.  cr.  Svo.     10s.  net. 

From  the  Latin. 

CICERO. — The  Life  and  Letters  of  Mar- 
cus TuLLius  CiCERO.  By  the  Rev.  G.  E. 
Jeans,  M.A.    2nd  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    10*.  6d. 

■ The  Academics.  ByJ.S.RsiD.  Svo.  s*.6d. 

——  In  Defence  of  Cluentius.  By  W^ 
Peterson,  M.A.    Cr.  Svo.    5J. 

HORACE:  The  Works  of.  By  J.  Lonsdalb, 
M.A.,  and  S.  Lee,  M.A.    Gl.  Svo.    31.  dd. 

-  The  Odes  in  a  Metrical  Paraphrase. 
ByR.M.HovENDEN,B-A.  Ext.fcp.8vo.  4J.6rf. 

Life  and  Character  :  an  Epitome  of 

his  Satires  and  Epistles.     By  R.    M. 

HovENDEN,  B.A.    Ext.  fcp.  Svo.    4J.  td. 
——  Word  for  Word  from  Horace  :  Th© 

Odes  Literally  Versified.    By  W.  T.  Thorn- 

ton,  C.B.    Cr.  Svo.    7s.  6d. 
JUVENAL.— Thirteen  Satires.   By  Alex. 

Lebper,  LL.D.    New  Ed.    Cr.  Svo.    3s.  6d. 
LIVY.— Books  XXI.— XXV.    The  Second 

Punic  War.     By  A.  T.  Church,  M.A.,  and 

W.  J.  Brodribb,  M.A.     Cr.  Svo. 

Book  XXI  separately,  2s. 
MARCUS    AURELIUS    ANTONINUS.— 

Book  IV.   of  the  Meditations.      With 

Translation  and  Commentary,  by  H.  Cross- 
ley,  M.A.    Svo.    6s. 
SALLUST.— The  Conspiracy  of  Catilinb 

and  the  Jugurthine  War.     By  A.  W. 

Pollard.    Cr.  Svo.    6j. — Catiline.    v> 
TACITUS,    The   Works   of.       By    A.    J. 

Church,  M.A.,  and  W.  J  Brodribb,  M.A. 

The  History.    4th  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

The  Agricola  and  Germania.    With  the 
Dialogue  on  Oratory.    Cr.  Svo.    4^.  6d. 

The  Annals,    sth  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    7^.  td. 
VIRGIL :  The  Works  of.   By  J.  Lonsdale, 

M. A.,  and  S.  Lee,  M.A.    Globe  Svo.    31.  6d. 
■ The  iENEiD.    By  J.  W.  Mackail,  M.A. 

Cr.  Svo.    7S.  6d. 

Into  Latin  and  Greek  Verse. 
CHURCH  (Rev.  A.  J.).— Latin  Version  of 

Selections  from    Tennyson.      By  Prof. 

Conington,    Prof    Seeley,   Dr.   Hessey, 

T.  E.  Kebbel,  &c.    Edited  by  A.  J.  Church, 

M.A.    Ext.  fcp.  Svo.    6s. 
GEDDES  (Prof.  W.  D.).— Flosculi  Grjbci 

Boreales.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 
KYN ASTON  (Herbert  D.D.).— Exemplaria 

Chkltoniensia.    Ext.  fcp.  Bvo.    5*. 

VOYAGES  AND  TRAVELS. 
{Set  also  History,  p.  ii;  Sport,  p.  37.) 

APPLETON  (T.  G.).— A  Nile  Journau 
Illustrated  by  Eugene  Benson.  Cr.  Svo.   6*. 

"  BACCHANTE."  The  Cruise  of  H.M.S. 
"  Bacchante,"  1879— 18S2.  Compiled  from 
the  Private  Journals,  Letters  and  Note-boolcs 
of  Prince  Albert  Victor  and  Princb 
George  of  Wales.  By  the  Rev.  Canon 
Dalton.    2  vols.    Med.  Svo.    «;2j.  6d, 


VOYAGES  AND  TRAVELS. 


4-7 


BAKER  (Sir  Samuel  W.).-Ismailia.  A 
Narrative  of  the  Expedition  to  Central 
Africa  for  the  Suppression  of  the  Slave  Trade, 
organised  by  Ismail,  Khedive  of  Egypt. 
Cr.  8vo.     6s. 

The  Nile  Tributaries  of  Abyssinia, 

AND  THE  Sword  Hunters  of  the  Hamran 
Arabs.    Cr.  8vo.    6s, 

The  Albert  N'yanza  Great  Basin  of 

THE  Nile  and  Exploration  of  the  Nilk 
Sources.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 

Cyprus  AS  I  SAW  IT  IN  1879.  8vo.   i2j.  6^. 

BARKER  (Lady). — A  Year's  Housekbbfing 

IN  South  Africa.    Illustr.    Cr.  8vo.    3*.  6d. 

Station  Life  in  New  Zealand.    Cr. 

8vo.     3*.  6ei. 

Letters  to  Guy.    Cr.  8vo.    V- 

BLENNERHASSETT(R.)and  SLEEMAN 

(L.) — Adventures  in  Mashonaland.  Cr. 
8vo.    3J.  6ei, 

BOUGHrON  (G.  H.)  and  ABBEY  (E.  A.).— 

Sketching  Rambles  in  Holland.  With 
Illustrations.    Fcp.  4to.    21;. 

BROOKS  (Bishop  P.). —Letters  of  Travel. 
Ext.  cr.  Svo.     Bs.  6d.  net. 

CAMERON  (V.  L.).— Our  Future  Highway 
TO  India.    2  vols.    Cr.  Svo.    21s. 

CAMPBELL  Q.  F.).— My  Circular  Notes. 
Cr,  Svo.    6s. 

CARLES<W.R.).— LifeinCorea.  Svo.i2f.6(/. 

CAUCASUS:  Notes  on  the.  By  "Wan- 
derer."   Svo.    qs. 

CHANLER  (W.  A.).— Through  Jungle  and 
Desert.    Roy.  Svo.    21^.  net. 

COLE  (G.   A.  G.).— The  Gypsy  Road;   A 

Journey  from  Krakow  to  Coblentz.    Cr. 

8vo.    6s. 
CRAIK  (Mrs.). — An    Unknown    Country. 

Illustr.  by  F.Noel  Paton.  Roy.  Svo.  7s  6d, 
——  An  Unsentimental  Journey  THROUGH 

Cornwall.    Illustrated.    4to.    X2j.  6d. 
DILKE  (Sir  Charles).    {See  pp.  30,  36.) 

DORR  (J.  C.  R.).— The  Flower  of  Eng- 
land's Face.    Pott  8vo.    3^. 

DUFF  (Right  Hon.  Sir  M.  E.  Grant).— Notes 
OF  AN  Indian  Journey.    Svo.    ioj.  6d 

FORBES  (Archibald).— Souvenirs  of  some 
Continents.    Cr.  8vo.    3*.  6d. 

Barracks,   Bivouacs,    and    Battles. 

Cr.  8vo.     3J.  td 

FORBES-MITCHELLCW.)-Reminiscences 
OF  THE  Great  Mutiny.    Cr.  Svo.    3*.  6d. 

FULLERTON  (W.  M.).— In  Cairo.  Fcp. 
8vo.     3J.  6d. 

GONE  TO  TEXAS :  Letters  from  Our 
Boys.  Ed.  by  Thos.  Hughes.  Cr.Bvo.  4^.6^. 

GORDON  (Lady  Duff).  —  Last  Letters 
from  Egypt,towhich  are  added  Letters 
from  the  Cafe.    2nd  Edit.    Cr.  Svo.    qj. 

GREEN    (W.    S.).— Among   the    Selkirk 

Glaciers.    Cr.  Svo.    7J.  dd. 
HOOKER  (Sir  Joseph  D.)  and  BALL  (J.).— 

Journal  of  a  Tour  in  Marocco  and  the 

Great  Atlas.    8vo.    2m. 
hCbNER  (Baron  von).— A  Ramble  Round 

THE  World.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 


HUGHES  (Thos.).— Rugby,  Tennessee.  Cr, 
Bvo.    ^s.  6d. 

Vacation  Rambles.  Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

JACKSON  (F.  G.).  -The  Great  Frozew 
Land.  Ed.  by  A.  Montefiore.  Svo- 
15 J.  net. 

KALM  (P.).— Account  of  his  Visit  to  Eng- 
land. Trans.  J.  Lucas.  IUus.  Svo.  X2f.  net. 

KINGSLEY  (Charles).— At  Last  :  A  Christ- 
mas  in  the  West  Indies.    Cr.  Svo.    3^.  6d. 

KINGSLEY  (Henry).  —  Tales  of  Ole- 
Travel.    Cr.  Svo.    3J.  6d. 

KIPLING  (J.  L.).— Beast  and  Man  im 
India.     Illustrated.     Ext.  cr.  Svo.     "js.  6d. 

MAHAFFY  (Prof.  J.  P.).— Rambles  and 
Studies  in  Greece.  Illust.  Cr.  Svo.  Tos.6d. 

MAHAFFY  (Prof.  J.  P.)  and  ROGERS 
(J.  E.). — Sketches  from  a  Tour  through 
Holland  and  Germany.  Illustrated  by 
J.  E.  Rogers.    Ext.  cr.  Svo.    xos.  6d. 

NORDENSKIOlD.  —  Voyage  of  thb 
"Vega"  round  Asia  and  Europe.  By 
Baron  A.  E.  Von  Nordenskiold.  Trans,  by 
Alex.  Leslie.  400  Illustrations,  Maps,  etc. 
2  vols.  8vo.  45J. — Popular  Edit.  Cr.  Svo.  6sv 

OLIPHANT  (Mrs.).    {See  History,  p.  13.) 

OLIVER  (Capt.  S.  P.).— Madagascar  :  Ak 
Historical  and  Descriptive  Account  of 
the  Island.    2  vols.    Med.  Svo.    52;.  6d. 

PALGRAVE  (W.  Gifford).— A  Narrative 
OF  A  Year's  Journey  through  Central 
AND  Eastern  Arabia,  1862-63.  Cr.  Svo.  6s, 

Dutch  Guiana.    Svo.    gj. 

Ulysses  ;    or,    Scenes   and    btudies    id 

many  Lands.    Svo.    11s.  6d. 

PARKMAN  (F.).  —  The  Oregon  Trail, 
Illustrated.    Med.  Svo.    21^. 

PERSIA,  EASTERN.  An  Account  of  the 
Tourneys  of  the  Persian  Boundary 
Commission,  1870-71-72.    2  vols.    Svo.    42J, 

PIKE(W.)— The  Barren  Ground  of  North- 
ern Canada.     Svo.    \os.  td. 

ST.  JOHNSTON  (A.).— Camping  among 
Cannibals.    Cr.  8vo.    ^s.  6d. 

SANDYS  (J.  E.).— An  Easter  Vacation  i» 
Greece.    Cr.  8vo.    3^-.  6d. 

SMITH  (Goldwin)— A  Trip  to  England. 

Pott  Svo.    3j. 
Oxford  and  her  Colleges.  Pott  Svo.  3*. 

Illustrated  Edition.    6^ . 
STRANGFORD   (Viscountess).  -Egyptian 

Sepulchres  and  Syrian  Shrines.     New 

Edition.    Cr.  Svo.    7^.  6d. 
TAVERNIER  (Baron) :  Travels  in  India. 

of  Jean   Baptiste  Tavernier.    Transl. 

by  V.  Ball,  LL.D.    2  vols.     Svo.    42*. 
TRISTRAM(0.).  (.i'ee  Illustrated  Books.> 
TURNER  (Rev.  G.).    {See  Anthropology,) 
WALLACE  (A.  R.).  {See  Natural  History.> 
WATERTON    (Charles).— Wanderings    in 

South  America,   the   North-West   of 

the  United  States,  and  the  Antilles. 

Edited  by  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood.     Illustr.     Cr. 

Svo.    6s. — People  s  Edition.    4to.    6d. 
WATSON  (R.  Spence).— A  Visit  to  Wazan^ 

THE  Sacked  City  OF  Morocco.  Svo.  iox.6ff. 
YOE  (Shway).— The  Burman.    2nd  Edition. 

Svo.    12^.  6d. 


48 


BOOKS  FOR  THE  YOUNG. 


YOUNG,  Books  for  the. 
{See  also  Biblical  History,  p.  38.) 
^SOP— CALDECOTT  —Some    of    ^Esop's 
Fables,  with  Modem  Instances,  shown  in 
Designs  by  Randolph  Caldecott.  410.  5*. 
-—  iEsop's  Fables.    Selected  by  J.  Jacobs. 
Illustrated  by  R.  Heighway.    Gilt  or  uncut. 
Cr.  8vo.     6s. 

ARIOSTO. — Paladin  and  Saracen.  Stories 
from  Ariosto.  By  H.  C.  Hollwav-Cal- 
THROP.    Illustrated.    Cr.  8vo,    6s. 

.ATKINSON  (Rev.  J.  C.).— The  Last  oif 
THE  Giant  Killers.     Globe  Svo.     31.  6d. 

Walks,  Talks,  Travels,  and  Exploits 

OF  two  Schoolboys.    Cr.  8vo.     t.s.  ^d, 

—^  Playhours  and  Half-Holidays,  or 
Further  Experiences  of  two  School- 
boys.    Cr.  Svo.     3^.  dd. 

Scenes  in  Fairyland.    Cr.  Svo.   -fj.  td. 

AWDRY  (FrancesV— The  Story  of  a  Fel 
LOW  Soldier.  (A  Life  of  Bishop  Patteson 
for  the  Young.)    Globe  Svo.    is.  6d. 

BAKER  (Sir  S.  W.).— True  Tales  for  my 
Grandsons.     Illustrated.    Cr.  8vo.     3^.  6d. 

Cast  up  by  the  Sea  :  or.  The  Adven- 
tures OF  Ned  Gray.    Illust.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

BARKER  (Lady).— The  White  Rat.  G1. 
Svo.     2s.  6d. 

BARLOW  (Jane). —The  End  of  Elfintown. 
Illust.  by  L.  Housman.  Cr.  Svo.  5^- — 
Edition  de  Luxe-    Rov.  Svo.    21^.  net. 

.CARROLL  (Lewis). — Alice's   Adventures 
IN  Wonderland.     With  42  Illustrations  by 
Tenniel.    Cr.  Svo.    6s.  net. 
People's    Edition.      With    all    the    original 

Illustrations.  Cr.  Svo.  is.  6d.  net. 
A  German  Translation  of  the  same. 
Cr.  Svo.  6s.  net.  —A  French  Transla- 
tion OF  the  same.  Cr.  Svo.  6s.  net. 
An  Italian  Translation  of  the  samb. 
Cr.  Svo.     6s.  net. 

Alice's   Adventures  Under-ground. 

Being  a  Fascimile  of  the  Original  MS.  Book, 
afterwards  developed  in  to  "  Alice's  Adven- 
tures in  Wonderland."  With  27  Illustra- 
tions by  the  Author.  Cr.  Svo.  4^  net. 
——  Through  the  Looking-Glass  and 
what  Alice  found  there.  With  50  Illus- 
trations by  Tenniel.  Cr,  Svo.  6s.  net. 
People's   Edition.      With    all    the   original 

Illustrations.    Cr.  Svo.    is.  6d.  net. 
People's  Edition  of  "Alice's  Adventures  In 
WonderHnd,"  and  "Through  the  Looking- 
Glass."    I  vol.    Cr   Svo.    4J.  6(f.  net. 

Rhyme?  and  Reason      With  65  Illns- 

trations  by  Arthur  B.  Frost,  and  9  by 
Henry  Holiday.    Cr.  Svo.    6s.  net. 

A  Tangled  Tale.    With  6  Illustrations 

by  Arthur  B.  Frost.    Cr.  Svo.    ^s.  6d.  net. 

SvLviE  and  Bruno.  With  46  Illustra- 
tions by  Harry  Furniss.  Cr.Svo.  7j.6rf.net. 

Concluded.    With  Illustrations  by 

Harry  Furniss.    Cr.  Svo.     7^.  6d.  net. 

The  Nursery*'  Alice."  Twenty  Coloured 

Enlargements  from  Tenniel's  Illustrations 
to  "Alice's  Adventures  in  Wonderland," 
wiib  Text  adapted  to  Nursery  Readers. 
4to.     4^.  net. 

The  Hunting  OF  the  Snark,  An  AGONV 

IN  Eight  Fits.  With  9  Illustrations  by 
Henry  Holiday.    Cr.  Svo.    4^.  6d.  net. 


CLIFFORD  (Mrs.  W.K.).— Anyhow  Stories. 

With  Illustrations  by  Dorothy  Tennant. 

Cr.  Svo.    IS.  6d.  \  paper  covers,  u. 
CORBETT  (Julian).— For  God  and  Gold. 

Cr.  Svo.    6s. 
CRAIK  (Mrs.). — Alice  Learmont  :  A  Fairt 

Tale.    Illustrated.    Globe  Svo.    is.  6d. 
•—  The  Adventures  OF  A  Brownie,    lllos- 

trated  by  Mrs,  Allingham.    G1.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 
• The  Little   Lame   Prince   and   his 

Travelling  Cloak.  Illustrated  by  J.  McL. 

Ralston.    Globe  Svo     2s.  6d. 
■ Our  Year  :  A  Child's  Book  in  Prosk 

AND  Verse.    Illustrated.    Gl.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Little  Sunshine's   Holiday.      Globe 

Svo.    zs.  6d. 

The  Fairy  Book  :  The  Best  Popular 

Fairy  Stories.    Pott  Svo.    is.  6d,  net. 

Children  s  Poetry.  Ex.  fcp.  Svo.  4S.6d. 

Songs  of  our  Youth.    Small  410.    6*. 

DE  MORGAN  (Mary).- The  Necklace  or 
Princess  Fiorimonde,  and  other  Stories. 
Illustrated  by  Walter  Crane.  Ext.  fcp. 
8vo.  3*.  6d. — Large  Paper  Ed.,  with  Illus- 
trations on  India  Paper.    100  copies  printed. 

FOWLER  (W.  W.).  (See  Natural  History.) 

FRASER  (Mrs.).— The  Brown  Ambassador. 
Cr.  8vo.    3J-.  6d. 

GRIMM'S  FAIRY  TALES.  Translated  by 
Lucy  Crane,  and  Illustrated  by  Walter 
Crane.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

GREENWOOD    Qessy    E.).— The    Mooh 

Maiden:  and  other  Stories.  Cr.Svo.  i,s.6d. 

JERSEY  (Countess  of).— Maurice  :  or,  The 
Red  Jar.  Illustrated  by  Rosie  M.  M. 
Pitman.    Gl.  Svo.    is.  6d. 

Eric,  Prince  of  Lorlonia.    Illustrated 

by  A.  R.  Woodward.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

KEARY  (A.  and  E.). —The  Heroes  or 
Asgard.  Tales  from  Scandinavian  My- 
thology.   Globe  Svo.    IS.  ^d 

KEARY  (E.).— The  Magic  Valley.  Illustr. 
by"E.V.B."    Globe  Svo.    is.  6d. 

KINGSLEY    (Charles).- The  Heroes;    or, 

Greek  Fairy  Tales  for  my  Children.    Cr.  Svo, 

2S.  6d. — Presentation  Ed.,  gilt  edges.    •js.6d. 

— —  Madam  How  and  Lady  Why  .  or,  First 

Lessons  in  Earth-Lore.     Cr.  8vo.    3*.  6d. 

The  Water-Babies  :  A  Fairy  Tale  for  a 

Land  Baby.    Cr.  Svo.    3J.  6rf.— New  Edit, 
Illus.  by  L.  Sambourne.  Fcp.  4to.  12s.  6d. 

KIPLING  (Rudyard).— The  Jungle  Book. 
Illustrated.    Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

The  Second  Jungle  Book.    Illustrated 

Cr.  Svo.    6s. 

MACLAREN  (Arch.).— The  Fairy  Family. 

A   Series  of    Ballads   and    Metrical    Tales. 

Cr.  Svo.    ss. 
MACMILLAN  (Rev.  Hugh).     {See  p.  44.) 

MADAME  TABBY'S  ESTABLISHMENT. 
ByKARi.  Illust. by L. Wain.  Cr.Svo.  4s. 6d, 

MAGUIRE  a.  F.).— Young  Princb  Marl 
gold.    Illustrated.    Globe  Svo.    as.  6d. 

MARTIN    (Frances).- The    Poet's    Hodr. 

Poetry  selected  for  Children.  Pott  Svo.  as.6d. 
Spring-Time  with  the  Poets.  Pott  Svo. 

3s.  6d. 


BOOKS  FOR  THE  YOUNG— ZOOLOGY. 


49 


MAZINI  (Linda).— In  the  Golden  Shell. 
With  Illustrations.    Globe  8vo.    4*.  6d. 

MOLESWORTH    (Mrs.).— Works.     Illnstr. 

Globe   8vo.    2s.  6d.  dach. 

"  Carrots,"  Just  a  Little  Boy. 

A  Christmas  Child. 

Christmas-Tree  Land. 

The  Cuckoo  Clock. 

Four  Winds  Farm. 

Grandmother  Dear. 

Herr  Baby. 

Little  Miss  Peggy. 

The  Rectory  Children. 

Rosy. 

The  Tapestry  Room. 

Tell  Me  a  Story. 

Two  Little  Waifs. 

*'  Us"  :  An  Old-Fashioned  Story. 

Children  of  the  Castle. 

A  Christmas  Posy. 

Nurse  Heatherdale's  Story. 

The  Girls  and  I. 

My  New  Home. 

Mary. 
'—  Four  Ghost  Stories.    Cr.  Bvo.    6*. 
—  Sheila's  Mystery.     Illustrated.      Cr, 

8vo.    3J.  6d. 

The  Carved  Lions.  Illust.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.6d. 

OLIPHANT   (Mrs.).  — Agnes    Hopetoun's 

Schools  AND  Holidays.  Illust.  GLSvo.  2s.6d. 
PALGRAVE  (Francis  Turner).— The    Fivb 

Days'  Entertainments  at  Wentworth 

Grange.    Small  4to.    6s. 
—^  The  Children's  Treasury  of  Lyrical 

Poetry.    Pott  8vo,    a*.  6d. — Or  in  2  parts, 

If.  each. 
PATMORE   (C.).— The   Children's    Gra- 

land  from  the  best  Poets.    Pott  8vo. 

as.  6d.  net. 
ROSSETTI   (Christina).— Speaking   Lik]e> 

NEssES.  Illust.  by  A.  Hughes.  Cr.Svo.  is.6d. 
'——  Sing-Song  :   A    Nursery    Rhyme-Book. 

Small  4to.    4^.  6d. 
RUTH  AND  HER  FRIENDS :  A  Story 

FOR  Girls.    Illustrated.    Globe  8vo.   2*.  6d. 
ST.   JOHNSTON  (A.).  —  Camping  among 

Cannibals.    Cr.  8vo.    4*.  6rf. 
— -  Charlie  Asgarde  :  The  Story  of  a 

Friendship.     Illustrated  by  Hugh  Thom- 
son.   Cr.  8vo.    5*. 
"ST.  OLAVE'S"  (Author  oO-     Illustrated. 

Globe  Bvo. 

When  I  was  a  Little  Girl.    as.  6d. 

Nine  Years  Old.    2s.  6d. 

When  Papa  Comes  Home.    4s.  6d. 

Pansie's  Flour  Bin.    as.  6d. 
STEEL  (F.  A.).— Tales  of  the  Punjab. 

{See  under  Illustrated  Books,  p.  15.) 
STEWART  (Aubrey).— The  Talk  of  Trot. 

Done  into  English.    Globe  8vo,    y.  6d. 
SWIFT.— Gulliver's  Travels.    {See  under 

Illustrated  Books,  p.  15.) 
OIENNYSON  (Lord  H.).— Jack   and  the 

Bean-Stalk.   English  Hexameters.   Illust. 

by  R.  Caldecott.    Fop.  4to.    3*.  6d. 

"WANDERING  WILLIE"  (Author  of).— 
Conrad  the  Squirrel.   Globe  8vo.  21.  6d. 

WARD  (Mrs.  T.  Humphry).— Mi  lly  and 
Olly.  With  Illustrations  by  Mrs.  Alma 
Tadbma.    Globe  8vo.    2X.  6d. 


WEBSTER  (Augusta).— Daffodil  and  the 

CroAxaxicans.    Cr.  8vo.    6s. 
WILLOUGHBY   (F.).— Fairy   Guardians. 

Illustr.  by  Townley  Green.    Cr.  8vo.    5*. 

WOODS  (M.  A.).     {See  Collections,  p.  21.) 

YONGE  (Charlotte  M.).— The  Prince  and 
the  Page.    Cr.  Bvo.    -^s.  6d. 

A  Book  of  Golden  Deeds.    Pott  8vo. 

2s.6d.  net.  Globe  Bvo.  2s. — Airidg'ed  Edi- 
tion.    If. 

— —  Lances  of  Lynwood,  Cr.  Svo,  3J.  6d, 
— Abridged  Edition.    t.s,  dd. 

^—  P's  and  Q's  ;  and  Little  Lucy's  Won- 
derful Globe.   Illustrated.  Cr.  Bvo.  3f.  td. 

—  A  Storehouse  of  Stories,  a  vols. 
Globe  Bvo.   2s.  6d.  each. 

—  The  Population  of  an  Old  Pear- 
Tree  ;  or,  Stories  of  Insect  Life.  From  E. 
Van  Bruyssel.    Illustr.    Gl.  Bvo.    2s.  6d. 


ZOOLOGY. 

Comparative  Anatomy — Practical  ZooUgy — 
Entomology — Ornithology, 

{See  also  Biology;  Natural  History; 
Physiology.) 

Comparative  Anatomy. 
FLOWER  (Sir  W.  H.).— An  Intpoductioh 
to  the  Osteology  of  the  Mammalia. 
Illustrated.  3rd  Edit. ,  revised  with  the  assist- 
ance of  Hans  Gadow,  Ph.  D.  Cr.Svo.  zos.td, 

HUMPHRY  (Prof.  Sir  G.  M.).— Observa- 
tions IN  Myology.    Svo.    6j. 

LANG  (Prof.  Arnold).— Text-Book  of  Com- 
parative  Anatomy.  Transl.  by  H.  M.  and 
M.  Bernard.  Preface  by  Prof.  E.  Haec- 
kel.    Illustr.    2  vols.    Svo.    z^s.  net  each. 

PARKER  (T.  Jeffery).— A  Course  of  In- 
struction IN  Zootomy  (Vertebrata). 
Illustrated.    Cr.  Svo.    Sj  6d. 

PETTIGREW  0.  Bell).— The  Physiology 
OF  THE  Circulation  in  Plants,  in  the 
Lower  Animals,  and  in  Man.    Svo.     121. 

SHUFELDT  (R.  W.).— The  Myology  of 
the  Raven  {Corvus  co^ax  Sinuatus).  A 
(suide  to  the  Study  of  the  Muscular  System 
In  Birds.    Illustrated.    Svo.    1.-3.S.  net. 

WIEDERSHEIM  (Prof.  R.). —Elements  of 
THE  Comparative  Anatomy  of  Verte- 
brates. Adapted  by  W.  Newton  Parker. 
With  Additions.    Illustrated.    Svo.    i2j.  td. 


Practical  Zoology. 

CALDERWOOD  (W.  L.)— Mussel  Culture 
AND  THE  Bait  Supply.    Cr.  Svo.    2j.  6d. 

DEAN  (B.).— Fishes,  Living  and  Fossil. 
8vo.    Tos.  td.  net. 

HOWES  (Prof.  G.  B.).— An  Atlas  of  Prac- 
tical Elementary  Biology.  With  a  Pre- 
face by  Prof.  Huxley.    4to.    14*. 

HUXLEY  (T.  H.)  and  MARTIN  (H.  N.).— 
A  Course  of  Elementary  Instruction 
IN  Practical  Biology.  Revised  and  ex- 
tended by  Prof.  G.  B.  Howes  and  D.  H. 
Scott,  Ph.D.   Cr.  Bvo.    lor.  6d 


so 


ZOOLOGY. 


(EHOMSON  (Sir  C.  Wyville).— The  Voyage 
OF  THE  "Challenger"  ;  The  Atlantic. 
With  Illustrations,  Coloured  Maps,  Charts, 
Qtc      2  vols.     8vo.     4<;j. 

The  Depths  of  the  Sea.    An  Account 

of  the  Results  of  the  Dredging  Cruises  o( 
H.M.SS.  "  Lightning  "  and  ''  Porcupine," 
1868-69-70.  With  Illustrations,  Maps,  and 
Plans.    8vo.    31J.  td. 

WILSON  (E.  B.).  and  LEAKING  (E.).— 
Atlas  of  the  Karyokinesis  of  the  Ovum. 
4to.    17^.  net. 

Entomology. 

BADENOCH  (L.  N.).— Romance  of  the 
Insect  World.    Cr.  8vo.    ds. 

BUCKTON  (G.  B.).— Monograph  of  th* 
British  Cicada,  or  Tettigid^.  2  vols 
42j.net ;  or  in  8  Parts.     8j.  each  net 

■ Natural  History  of  Eristalis  Tenax. 

8vo.    Zs,  net. 

LUBBOCK  (Sir  John).— The  Origin  and 
Metamorphoses  of  Insects  Illustrated. 
Or.  8vo.    -^s.  td. 


MEYRICK  (E.).  — Handbook  of  British 
Lepidoptera.    Ex-  cr.  8vo.    lof .  6d.  net. 

MIALL  (L.  C.).— Natural  History  or 
Aquatic  Insects.    Cr,  8vo.    ts. 

SCUDDER  (S.  H.).— Fossil  Insects  of 
North  America.  Map  and  Plates.  * 
vols.     4to.     gos.  net. 


OnUthology, 

COUES  (Elliott).— Key  to  North  Ambricak 
Birds.    Illustrated.    8vo.    2/.  2^. 

Handbook  of  Field  and  General  Or- 
nithology.   Illustrated.    8vo.    lai.  net. 

F0WLER(W.  W.).  (.SwNatural  History.) 

HEADLEY  (F.  W.).— Structure  and  Life 
OF  Birds.    Cr.  8vo.    yj.  td. 

WHITE  (Gilbert).   {Stt  Natdral  History.) 

WRIGHT(M.  O.).   (^^^  Natural  History.) 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

Abrahams  (I.).  .  .  42 
Abbev(£.  A,j  .  .  15,47 
Abbot  (F.  E.)  .  .  .  42 
Abbott  (E.  A.)  6, 17,  38,  39, 42 
Acton  (Lord)  .  .  .11 
Adams  (Sir  F.  O.)  .  .  36 
Addison    .       .  4,  24, 25 

JEsop.  ...  14, 48 
Agassiz  (L.)  ...  4 
AiNGER  (Rev.  A.)  5,  20,  27,  42 
Ainslie(A.  D.).  .  .  i^ 
Airy  (Sir  G.  B.)  .  3,  34 
AiTKEN  (Mary  C.)  .  .  25 
AiTKEN  (Sir  W.)  ,  .  30 
Albemarle  (Earl  of)  .  4 
Aldous  (J.  C.  P.)  .  40,  41 
Aldrich{T.B.)  .  .  17 
Alexander  (C.  F.)  .  17,  25 
Alexander  (T.)  .    10 

Alexander  (Bishop)  .  4^ 
Allbutt(T.C.)  .  .  28 
Allen  (G.)  ...  7 
Allingham  (W.)  .  ,  25 
Amiel(H.F.)  ...  4 
Anderson  (A.^  .  ,  *  ^7 
Anderson  (L.).  .  .  2 
Anderson  (Dr.  McCall)  .  28 
Andrews  (C.  M,)  .  .  n 
Andrews  (Dr.  Thomas)  .  33 
Appleton  (T.  G.)  .  .  4"- 
Archer-Hind  (R.D.)  .  4*^ 
Arnold(M.)9,  17,24,25,38,39 
Arnold  (Dr.  T. )  .  .11 
Arnold  (W.T.)  ,  .11 
Ashley  (W.  J.).  ,  4,  35 
Atkinson  ((>.  F.)    •        •      7 


Atkinson  ij.  B.l 

on  (Rev.  J.  C. 


Atkinson  {kev.  J.  C.)  2,  4S 
Attwell  (H.)  .  .  .25 
Austen  (Jane) .  ,  .  21 
Austin  (Alfred)         10,  17,  24 

AUTENRIETH  (GcOtg)  .         O 

Awdry(F.)  ...  48 
Bacon  (Francis)  .  4.  24,  2"; 
Badenoch  (L.  N.)  .  30,  50 
Bailey  (L.  H.)  ,  .  10 
Baines  (Rev.  K.)  .  .  4a 
Baker  (Sir  S.W.)4, 36, 37.47.48 
Balch  (Elizabetl  )  .  .14 
Baldwin  (Prof.  J.  M.)  ,  33 
Balfour  (F.  M.)  .  .  7 
Balfour  (J.  B.)  .  .7 
Ball  (J.)  .        .  .47 

Ball  (W,  Piatt)  .  .  7 
Ball  <W.  W.  R.)  .  15,  28 
Ballancb  (C.  A.)  .  .  28 
Barker  (G.  F.)  .  .  3s 
Barker  (Lady)  .  2,  9,  47i  48 
Barlow  (J.)  .  .  i4»  48 
Barnard  (C.)  .  .     34 

Barnard  (F.  A.  P.).  .  4 
Barnes  (R.  H.)  .  .  5 
Barnes  (W.)  ...  4 
Barnett  (E.  a.)  .  9,  37 
Barry  (A.)  ...  42 
Bartholomew  <J.  G.)  3 

Bartlktt  (J.) .  9.  17 


PAGE 

Barwell  (R.)  .  .  .28 
Bastable  (Prof.  C.  F.)  .  35 
Bateman  (J.)  ...  4 
Bates  (K.  L.)  .  .  ,  24 
Bateson  (W.)  .        ,      7 

Bath  (Marquis  of)  .  .  36 
Bather  (Archdeacon)  .  42 
Baxter  (L.)  ...  4 
BEESLY(Mrs.)  .  .  5,  II 
Behrens  (H.)  ...  8 
Benedikt  (R.)  .        .     38 

Benham  (R^v.W.)  .  6,  2s,  4f 
Benson  (Archl^i  liop)  .  42 
Benson  (w.  A.  S.)  .  ^,  38 
Bentley  ....  4 
Berg  (L.) .  .  ,  ,10 
Berlioz  (H.)  ...  4 
Bernard  (C.  E.)  .  .  4 
Bernard  (J.  H.)  .  .33 
Bernard  (H.  M.)  .  7,35 
Bernard  (M.)  .  .  .15 
BERNAF^oiX.  D.)       ,  .     42 

Berners  (J.)  .  .  .14 
BESANT{Sir  W.)  .  ,  4 
Bettanv  (G.  '\  .)       ,        .7 

BlCKERTON  (T.  H.)  .  .      28 

Bigelow(M.  M.)     .        .    15 

BlK^LAS  (D.)      .  .  .21 

Btnnie  (Rev.  W.)      .         .     42 

BlRRELL  (A.)      .  .  .15 

BiKKS  (T.  R.)         7,  32,  39,  42 

BjORNSON  (B  ) .  .  .21 

Black  (W.)  ...  5 
Blackburnb(E.)     .  4 

Blackie  (J.  S.)        .11,  17,  24 

Blake  (J.  F.)  ...  3 
Blake  (W.)  ...  4 
Blakiston  (J.  R.)  .  .  9 
Blanford(H.  F.)  .  10,34 
Blanford  (W.  T.)  .  11,30 
Blennerhassett(R.)  .  47 
Blom  field  (R.)  .  .  10 
Blyth(A.W.).  .  .  14 
B6HM-BAWERK(Prof.)  ,  35 
Boldrewood  (Rolf).  .  21 
Bonar  (J.)  .  .  3.  5,  35 
Bond  (Rev.  J.).  ,  .  39 
Boole  (G.)  ,  .  .32 
Booth  (C.)  .  ,  .37 
Porgeaud(C).  .  .  15 
Borrow  (G.)  .  .  .21 
Bosanquet(B.)  .  32.37 
Bose(W.  P.  diO       .        .    43 

BOOGHTON  (G.  H.)    ,  .      47 

BOUTMY  (E.)      .  .  .15 

Bowen(H.C.).  .  .    31 

Rower  (F.  O.)  .  .      7 

Bradford  (A.  H.)  .  .    42 

Bradford  (G.).  .  •    24 

Bradley  (A  G.)  .  .      4 

Brett  (R.  B ) .  .  .11 

Bridges  (J.  A.).  .  ■    24 

Bright  fH.  A.).  .  .    10 

Bright  (John) .  •  '    36 

Brimley(G.)    .  •  •34 

Brodie  (Sir  B.).  .  .       8 

Brodribb  (W.  J.)  .  16,  46 


FAGB 

Brooke  (Sir  J.)        .  .      4 

Brooke  (S.  A.).      16,17,  26,42 

Brooks  (Bishop)       .  42, 47 

Brown  (Prof.  C.)      .  .    33 

Brown  (J.  A.)  .        .  .      i 

Brown  (Dr.  James)  ■  .      4 

Brown  (T.  E.)  .  ,17 

Browne  (J.  H.  E.)  ,    14 

Browne  (Sir  T.)       .  .     25 

Bruce  (P.  A.)  .  .  12,  35 
BRUNTON(Dr.T.L.)  28,29,42 

Bryce  (James) .        .  11,  36 

Bochheim  (C.  A.)    ,  .    25 

Buckland  (A.).        .  6,  36 

Buckley  (A.  B )      .  .    za 

BucKNiLL  (Dr.  J.  C  )  .29 

BucKTON  (G.  B.)      .  .    50 

BUNVAN     .  .  .4,  24,  35 

BURDETT  (C.  W.  B.).  .      38 

Burgon(J.W.)  .  .  17 
Burke  (E.)  ...  36 
Burn  (R.).  ...  2 
Burnett  (F.  Hodgson)  .  21 
Burns  ...  17, 25 
Bury  (J.  B)  ...  12 
Butcher  (Prof.  S.  H.) 

16,  24,  46 
Butler  (A.  J.).  .  17146 
Butler  (Rev.  G.)  .  .  4a 
Butler  fSamuel)  ,  .  17 
Butler  (Archer)  .  .  4a 
Butler  (Sir  W.  F.)  .  .4 
Buxton  (Mrs.  S.)  ,  .  38 
Byron  ....  25 
Cairnes  (J.  E.)  .  35,  36 
Cajori  (F.)  ...  28 
Caldecott  (R.)  .  15,  48 
Calderon  .  .  .17 
Calderwood  (H.)  7,  9,  32, 33 
Calderwood(W.  L.)  ,  49 
Callaway  (Bishop).  .  4 
Calvert  (Rev.  A.)  .  .  39 
Cameron  (V.  L.)  .  ,  47 
Campbell  (D.  H  )  .  .  7 
Campbell  (Sir  G.)  .  .  4 
Campbell  (J.  D.)  .  4,  18 
Campbell  (J.  F.)  .  .  47 
Campbell  (Dr.  J,  M.)  .  42 
Campbell  (Prof.  Lewis)  5,  16 
Cantillon  ...  35 
Capes  (W.W.).  ,  .  16 
Carles  (W.R.)  .  .  47 
Caelyle(T.)  ...  4 
Carmarthen  (Lady)  21 

Carnarvon  (Earl  of)  .  46 
Carnot  (N.  L.  G.)  .  .  34 
Carpenter  (Bishoo)  .  42 
Carr(J.C.)  .  .  2,  17 
Carroll  (Lewis)  .  32, 48 
Carter  (R.  Brudenell)  .  29 
Cassel  (Dr.  D.)  .  .  la 
Cattel  (J.  McK.)  .  .  33 
Cautlev(G.S.)  .  .  17 
Cazenove  (J.G.)  .  .  4a 
Chalmers  U- A.)  ,  ,  n 
Chalmers  (J.  B.)  ,  ,  10 
Chalmers  (M.  D.)  .       ,    36 


52 


INDEX. 


PAGB 
47 
17 
30 
39 
37 
6,  17 


Chanler  (W.  a.)  . 
Chapman  (Elizabeth  R.) 
ChappelhW.). 
Chase  (.Rev.  F.  H.). 
Chasserksse  (Diana) 
Chaucer  .  .  .  : 
Cheetham  (Archdeacon). 
Cherry  (R.  K.) 
Cheyne  (C.  H.  H.)  .  .3 
Cheyne  (T.  K.)  .  .  39 
Chirol(V.)  .  ,  .36 
Christik  (W.  D.) 
Church  (Rev.  A.  j.),4,i6,^8,46 
Church  (F.  J.).  .  20,46 
Church  (R.  W.). 

,  S<  6,  12,  17,  24,  41,  42 

•  35 
.      25 

•  3 
.     37 


Clare  (G.) 
Clark  Q.  W.)  . 


iO|  35 
5 

24.  31 

.     49 

18,  24,  25 

36 


Clark 
Clark  (R ) 

Clark  (S.) 
Clark  (T.  M.). 
Clarke  (C.T^.) 
Cleveland  (Duchess) 
Clifford  (Ed.) 
Clifford  (W.  K.)     . 
Clifford  (Mrs.  W.  K  ) 
Clough  (A  H.) 
COBDEN  (R  )      . 
Cohen  (J.  B.)   . 
Cole  (G.  A.  G.) 

COLENSO(J.  W.) 

Coleridge  (C.R.)  . 
Coleridge  (S.  T.)  . 
Collier  (Hon.  John) 
Collins  (C  )  . 
Collins  ( J .  Churton) 
Colquhoun  (F.  S.)  . 
CoLViN  (Sidney) 
Combe  fG.) 

C0MEV(A.  M.). 

Commons  (J.  R.) 
CONGREVE  (Rev.  J.) . 
Conway  (Hugh) 
Cook  (E.  T.) 
Cooke  (A.  H.)  . 
Cooke  (C.  Kinloch)  . 
Cooke  (J- P-)    • 
Cooper  (E.  H.) 

CORBETT  (J.) 

Corfield  (W.  H.)    . 
Cornish  (F.)    . 
Corson  (H  )     .        . 
COSSA  (L.) 
Cotes  (E.). 

COTTERlLL  (J.  H.)     . 

Cotton  (Bishop) 
Cotton  (C.) 
Cotton  (J.  S.)  . 
COUES  (E.) 
COURTHOPE  (W.  J.)  . 
COWELL  (G.) 
COWPER 

Cox  (G.  V.) 
CRAiK(Mrs.)  18,21,24,55,47,48 
Craik  (H.)  .  6,  10,  24,  36 
Crane  (Lucv)  .  •  •47 
Crane  (Walter)  .  .  47 
Craven  (Mrs.  D.)  ,  .  g 
Crawford  fF  M  1  .14,  21,  21 
Crawshaw  (W.  H.).  .  24 
Creighton  (Bishop  M.)  5,  17 

CRICHTON-BROWNE(SirJ.)      1 0 

Cross  (J.  A.)     .        .        .     38 
Crossket  (R.)  •       •       >    14 


,  21,  4B 


43 


•  A3 

•  15 

.  36 
.  .  =0 
•  A,  16,  24 

•  29 
.18,  24,  25 


PAGE 

Crosslev  (E.)  ...  3 
Crosslev  (H.)  .        ,        .46 

Gumming  (L.)  .        •        •  33 

Cunliffe  (J.  W.)    ,        .  24 

Cunningham  (C.)  .  •  36 
Cunningham  (Sir  H,  S.) 

Cunningham  (Rev.  J.)    .  40 

CUNNINGHAM(ReV.W)40,4I,,3 
CUNVNGHAME  (Sir  A.  T.) 

CTiRTEis(Rev.  G.  H.)      . 

CURTIN  (J.) 

D'Arcy(C.  F.). 
Dabbs(G.  H.  R.)     . 
Dahlstrom  (K.  p.). 
Dahn  (F.) 
Dakvns(H.  G.)       ,        .    46 
Dale(A.W.W.)      .        .    40 

DALTON(Rev.  J.N.) 
Daniell  (Alfred),  .  -  33 
Dante  .  .  .4,  17,  46 
Dasent  (a.  I.). 
Davidson  (Bishop)  .  41,  43 
Davies  (Rev.  J.  Ll.X  4  43 
Davies(W.^  .  .  (.,4  J 
Davis  (R.  H.)  .        .  -^i 

Dawkins(W.B.)     .  I 

Dawson  (G.  M.)  .  .  11 
Dawson  (Sir  J.  W.)  .  .  11 
Dawson  (W.  J.)  .  .  18 
Day  (L.  B.)  .  ,  .  21 
Dav(R.E.)  ...  33 
Dean  (A.).  ,  .  .10 
Dean  (B.).  .  .  .49 
Defoe  (D.)  .  .  5,  15 
Degerdon  (W.  E.)  .  .  38 
Deighton  (K.).  Si  iQi  24,  37 
Delamotte  (P.  H.).  .  3 
Delbos  (L.)  .  .  .31 
Dell(E.  C.)  ...  14 
De  Morgan  (M.)  .     48 

Deussen(P.)  .  .  .  32 
De  Quatrffages  (A.)  .  i 
De  Rousiers  (P.)  .  .  35 
De  Varigny(H.)  7 

De  Vere(A.)  .  .  18,  24 
D'ISRAELI  (B.).  .  .  22 
Dicey  (A.  V.)  ,  .  15,  36 
Dickens  (C.)    .        .       21,  24 

DiLKENS  (M.  A.)        ,  22,  24 

DlGGLE(Rev.J.  W.).  .  43 
Dilke  (Ashton  W.)  .  .  24 
DiLKE  (Sir  Charles  W.)  30,  36 
Dillwvn  (E.  a.)  .  .  22 
Dobbin  (L.)  ...  8 
DoBSON  (A.)  .  ,  5.  14 
Donaldson  (J.)        .        .    41 

DONISTHORPE  (W.)  .  .      36 

Dorr  (J.  C.  R.)        .  .     47 

Douglas  (Theo.)      .  .     22 

DowDEN  (E.)         5,  17,  19,  26 

Doyle  f  Sir  F.  H.)     .  .     18 

Dovle  h.  A.)    .        .  .12 

Drage(G.)       .        .  .37 

Drake  (B.)       .        .  .46 

DRUMMOND(Prof.  J.)  .     43 

Dryden     .         .  .         .     S5 

Du  Cane(E.  F.)  .  .  ^6 
DuFF(Sir  M.  E.  G.)  6, 25, 36,  47 

Duncan  (S.  J.).        .        .     22 

DuNSMUIR  (a.).  .  .22 

DOntzer  (H.)  .  .  .  5,  6 
DuRAND  (Sir  M.)  .  ,  22 
Dver(L.).  .  .  2,  35 
Dver(H.J.  ...  37 
Eadie(J.).        .        .  4,  38,  40 


Earl  (A.) . 
Eastlake  (Lady)    . 
Ebers(G.) 
ECCLES  (A.  S.) . 
Edgeworth  (Prof.  F.  Y.). 
Edgeworth  (M.)     , 
Edmunds  (Dr.  W.) 


PAGB 
.    33 


29 

35 


28 


EDWARDs-Moss(Sir  J.  E.)    38 

Ehlers  (E.  S.).  .  .  29 
EiMER(G.  H.  T.)  .  ,  7 
Elderton  (W.  A.)  .  II 

Ellerton  (Rev.  J.),  .  43 
Elliott  (Hon.  A.)  .  .  36 
Ellis  (A.).  .  .  20,  25 
Ellis  (T.).        •        .  3 

Emerson  (R.  W.)  .  4,  25 
Emerson  (O.  F.)  .  .  31 
Erman  (A.)  ...  a 
Evans (Lady)  .        .  a 

Evans  (S.)  ...  18 
Everett  (J.  D.)  .  .  33 
Falconer  (Lance)  .  .  22 
Farrar  (Archd.)  6,  39,  43 

t-'ARRER  (SirT.  H.)  .  36 

Fasnacht  (G.  E.)  .  .  25 
Faulkner  (F.).  .  .  8 
Fawcett  (Prof.  H.) .  35,  37 
Fawcett  (Mrs.  H.) .  6,  35,  77 
Fay  (Amy)        .        .  30 

Fayrer  (Sir  J.).  .  ,  14 
Fearnley  (W.)  .  ,  34 
Fearon  (D.  R.)  ,  .  10 
Ferrel  (W.)  .  .  .34 
Fessenden  (C.)  .  .  33 
Field  (Mrs.  E.  M.).  .  22 
Field  (Rev.  T.)  .  .  12 
FlELDE  (A  M.).  .  .  14 
Finck(H.T.)  .        .      1 

Fisher  (Rev.  O.)  .  .  33 
FisKE(J.).  7,  12,  32,  37,  43 
Fison(L.).  ...  1 
Fitch  U-G.)  ...  10 
FiTZ  Gerald  (Caroline)  .  18 
Fitzgerald  (Edward)  18,  25 
Fitzmaurice  (Lord  E  )  6 

Flagg(A.  T.)  . 
Fleischer  (E  ). 
Fleming  (G.)  . 
Florv(M.  A.)  , 
Flower  (Sir  W.H.). 
FlOckiger(F.A.)   . 


31 
S 

23 

3 
49 

29 

35 

.  47 

43 

47 


Fonda  (A.  J.) 
Forbes  (A.)       .        .         4 
Forbes  (Rev.  G.)      . 
Forbes-Mitchell  (W.)  5, 
FoRTESCUE  (Hon.  J.  W.).4,3o 
Foster  (Prof.  M.)    .  7,34,3s 
Foster-Melliar(A.)      .    10 

FOTHEEGILL  {Ut.  J.  M.)     9,  2g 


FowLE  (Rev.  T.  ^ 
Fowler  (Rev.  T.) 
Fowler  (W.W.)       .a, 
Fox(T.  W.)      . 
Fox  (Dr.  Wilson) 
Foxell  (W.  J.) 
FoxwELL  (Prof.  H.  S) 
Framji  (D.)      , 
Francis  (F.)     . 
Frankland  (P.  F.) . 
Franklin  (W.  S.)    . 
Eraser  (Mrs  )  . 
Fraser  (Bishop) 
Fraser-Tytler  (C.  C.) 
Frazer  (J.  G.)  . 
French  (G.  R.) 


36,43 

5i  3a 

25.  30 

38 

39 

36 


33 
48 
43 
x8 
z 
17 


INDEX. 


53 


PAGE 

Trbeman  (Prof.  E.  A.) 

,  =1  Si  12,  37.  40 
Friedmann  (p.)  .  ,  4 
-Froissart  .  .  .25 
Frost  (A.  B.)  ...  48 
FroudeQ.  A.),        .        .      4 

FULLERTON  (W.  M.)  .     47 

FURNIVALL  (F.J.)     .  .     18 

Fwfe(C.  A.)  .  .  .12 
Fvfe(H.  H.)  .  .  .1, 
Oaironer  (J.)  ...  5 
'Gaisford  (H.)  .        ,        .10 

•GaLT  (J.)  .  .  .  .23 

Galton  (F.)  ...  1 
Gamgke  (Arthur)  .  .  33 
'Gardner  (E.)  .  .  .  z 
Gardner  (Percy)  .  .  2 
Garnett  (R.)  .       .  18 

-Garnett^W.)  ,  .  .  5 
■Gaskell  (Mrb.)  .  .  14 
Gaskoin  (Mrs.  H.)  .  .  38 
Geddes(W.  D.)  .  17,  <6 
•Gee(H.)  ....  40 
Gee(W.W.H.)  .  33  34 
GB;iKiE(SirA.).  4,5,6,11,34 
Gennadius  (T.)        ,  21 

Gendng  (J.  r.)  .  .  17 
-George  (H.  B.)  .  .  so 
Gibbins(H.  de  B.)  .  .12 
Gibbon  (CHarlfs)      .       .      4 

■GiDDING  (F.  H.)        .  .     37 

Gillies  (H.  C.)  .  .  29 
Gilchrist  (A.).  ,  .  4 
Giles  (P.).  ...  31 
-Oilman  (N.  P.)  .  35  37 
GiLMOKt  (Rev.  J.)  .  .  16 
Gladstone  (Dr.  J.  H.)  8, 10 
Gladstone  (W.  E.) .  .  17 
Glaister  (E.)  .  .  .  2,  9 
•Glover  (E.)  .  .  .  43 
Godfrav  (H.)  ...  3 
Godkin(G.  S.).  .  .  6 
Goethe  .     5,  14,  x8,  25 

"Goldie(T.)  ...  37 
Goldsmith  5.  14,  18,  25,  26 
■Gonner(E.  C.  K.)  .       .    II 

GOODFELLOW  (J.)       .  .      14 

G00DN0W(F.  J.)       .  .      I! 

Gordon  (General  C.  G.)  .  5 
Gordon  (Lady  Duff)  .  47 
•Gordon  (H.)  .  .  .33 
GosLHEN  (Rt.  Hon.  G.  J.).  35 
OossE  (Edmund)  .  5,  16 
Gow(J.)  ....  2 
■Gow(W.)  ...    31 

Gracian  (Balthasat)  .  25 
Graham  (D.)  .  .  .18 
Graham  (J.  W.)  .  .  22 
Grand'homme  (E.)  .  .  9 
■Grane  (W.  L.).  .  .  43 
<Jrant(C.)  .  .  .22 
Gray  (Prof.  Andrew)  .  34 
Gray  (Asa)  .  .  7,26 
'Grat  .  .  .  5f  18,  26 
•Gray  (J.  L.)  ...  26 
•Gregory  (R.  A.)  .  3,  33 
Green  (J.  R.)  11, 12, 14.  25.  26 
Green  (Mrs.  J.  K.)  .  s,  11,  12 
Green  (W.  S.)  .  .  .  47 
Greenhill  (W.  a.)  .  .  25 
■Greenwood  (F.)  .  .  26 
Greenwood  (J.  E.)  .        .    48 

GEENFELL(MrS.)       .  .        9 

Griffiths  (W.  H.)  .  .  29 
■Gkimm      ....    48 


PAGE 
II,  30 


33.  34 


Grove  (Sir  G.) . 
Guest  (E.) 
Guest  (M.J.)  . 
Guillbmin  (A.) 
GuizoT  (F.  P.  G.)  .  .  (J 
Gunton  (G.)  .  -  .  35 
Gwatkin  (H.  M.)  .  .  40 
Halle  (E.  von)  .  .  35 
Hales  (J.  W.).  18,21,25,20 
Hallwaed  (R.  F.l  .  .  I 
Hambrton  (P.  G.ji  .  3,  15,  z6 
Hamilton  (Prof.  D.  J  .J  .  29 
Hamilton  (J.).  .  .  43 
Hanburv  (D.) .  .  7,29 
Hannav  (David)  .  .  4 
Harden  (A.)  ...  9 
Hardwick  (Archd.  C.)  40,  43 
Hardy  (A.  S.)  ...  22 
Hardy (W.  J.).  .  .  40 
Hare  (A.  W.)  ...  26 
Hare  (J.  C.)  ...  43 
Harker  (A.)  ...  '4 
Harris  (Rev.  G.  C.).  .  4 1 
Harrison  (F.)  .  5,  6, 12, 15,  26 
Harrison  (Miss  J.) .  .  2 
Harte  (Bret)  .  ,  .  22 
Hartig  (Dr.  R.)  .  .7 
Hartley  (Prof.  W.N.)    .      b 

HaSSALL  (A.)     .  ,  .       T2 

Hatch  (F.J.)  j  ,  .  11 
Hauser(K.)  ...  5 
Hawkins  (H.  P.)  .  .  29 
Haves  (A.)       .       .  18 

Headlam  (A.  C.)  .  .2 
Headley  (F.  W.)  .  30,  =0 
Heavisidk  (O.)        .  -4 

Helm(E.).  ...  35 
Helps  (Sir  A.)  .  .  .26 
Hempel  (Dr.  W.)  .  .  8 
Henley  (W.  E.)  .  .  15 
Herman  (H.)  .  .  .23 
Herodotus  .  •  .46 
Herrick  ....  26 
Herrmann  (G.)  •  .  10 
Hertel  (Dr.)  ...  10 
Hertz  (H.)  ...  34 
HiCKiE  (W.  J.).  .  .  39 
Higinbotham  (C.  J.)  .  5 
Hill  (D.J.)  ...  32 
Hill  (F.  Davenport)  .  37 
Hill  (O.)  ....  37 
Hill(G.  B.)  ...  12 
Hiorns  (A.  H.)  .  29,  30 
HoBART  (Lord)  .  .  26 
Hobday  (E.)  .  .  .10 
Hodgson  (Rev.  J.  T.)  .  5 
Hoffding  (Prof.  H.)  .  33 
Hoffman  (W.  J.)  .  .1 
Hofmann  (A.  W.)  .  .  8 
Hole  (Rev.  C.).  .  9,  12 
Holiday  (Henry)  .  .  48 
Holland  (T.  E.)  .  15.  37 
TTollway-Caltheop  (H.)  48 
Holm  (A.).  .        .     i3 

Holmes  (O.W.iJunr.)  .  is 
Homer  .       .       17.  4' 

Hood(T.V  ...  15 
Hooker  (Sir  J.  D.)  .  7.  47 
HOOLB  (C.  H.)  .  .  .  39 
Hooper  (G.)  ...  4 
Hooper  (W.H.)  .  .  3 
Hopkins  (E.)  ...  18 
Hoppus  (M.  A.  M.)  .  .  22 
Horace  .  .  17,  25, 46 
Hort  (F.  J.  A.)Si  39, 40, 41,  43 


PAGE 

Horton  (Hon.  S.  D.)  .  35 
HOSKEN  (J-  D.)        .        .     18 

HOVENDEN  (R.  M.)  .  .      46 

Howell  (George)  .  15,  35 
Howes  (G.  B.)  .  .  35,  49 
Howitt(A.  W.)  .  .  I 
HowsoN  (Very  Rev.  J.  S.)  41 
Hozier  (Col.  H.  M.).  .  30 
H0BNER  (Baron)  .  .  47 
Hughes  (T.) 

4,  5,  18,  22,  26,  41,  43,  47 
Huddilston  (J.  H.)  .  39 
Hull(E.)  .  .  2,11 
Hullah  (J.)  .  .  2,  25,  30 
H  u  MPHRV(Prof.  SirG.  M. )  35,49 
Hunt  (Rev.  W.)  .  .  « 
Hunt(W.)  ...  3 
Hutchinson  (G.  W.  C.)  .  3 
Hutton  (K.  H.)  5,  26 

HUTTON  (Rev.  W.  H.)  .  5 
Huxley  (T) 

5,  26,  32,  35.  34,  35,  37,  49 
Hyde  (W.  de  W.)  .  .  43 
1  LLl  ngworth  (Rev.  J.  R.)  43 
Impey(S.  P.)  ...  29 
Ingram  (T.U.)  .  .  13 
Ireland  (A.)  .  .  .26 
Irving  (H  )  .  .  .20 
Irving  (J.)  .  .  .11 
Irving  (Washington)  .  is 
Jack  (A.  A.)     .  .    17 

Jackson  (D.  C.)  .  .  34 
Jackson  (F.  G.)  .  .  47 
Jackson  (Helen)  .  .  22 
Jacob  (Rev.  J.  A.)  .     43 

Jacous(J.)  .  .14,25,47 
James  (Henry).  .  5,  22,  26 
James  (Rev.  H.)  .  .  43 
James  (Prof.  W.)  .  .  33 
JARDINE  (Rev.  R.)  .  .  33 
Jeans  (Rev.  G  E.)  .  43,  46 
jEBB(Prof.  R.  C.)  4,13,16,26 
JELIETT  (Rev.  J.  H.)  .  43 
Jenks  (Prof.  Ed.)  .  .  37 
Jennings  (A.  C.)  .  13,38 
Jersey  (Countess  of)  .  48 
Jephson(H.)  .  .  .37 
Jevons  (W.  S.)  5,  32,  35,  36,  37 


18 
9 
26 

•  34 
5,  16,  25 

•  39 
■    34 

8 
.16,  18,  26 


Jewett  (S.) 
Jex-Blake  (Sophia).  ■ 
Joceline  (E.)  . 
Johnson  (Amy) 
Johnson  (Samuel)    . 
JOLLEY  (A.  J.)  . 
Jones  (Prof.  D.  E.)  . 
Jones  (F.). 
Jones  (H.  Arthur) 
Jones  (H.  S.)   .        .        .2 

Julius  (Dr.  P.).       .       .  9 

Kahlden  (C.)  ...  29 

Kalm  (P.)         ...  47 

Kant        ....  32 

Kanthack  (A.  A.)  .        .  29 

Kari         ....  48 

KAvANAGH(Rt.Hn.A.M.)  j 

KAV(Rev.\V.).        .        .  39 
Keaey  (Annie).    13,  22,  38,  48 

Kearv  (Eliza)  ...  48 
Keats       .        .        .        5,  26 

Keble(J.).        .        .        .  26 

Kellner  (Dr.  L.)     .        .  31 

Kellogg  (Rev.  S.  H.)      .  43 

Kelly  (E.)       ...  43 

Keltie  (J.  S.)  .        .        .  38 
Kelvin  (Lord) .   11,  31,  33,  34 


54 

PAGE 

Kempe  (A.  B.)  .         .         -33 
Kennedy  (Prof.  A.  B,  W.)    lo 


INDEX. 


Kennedy  (B.  H.) 
Kennedy  (P.)  . 
Keynes  (J.  N.). 
Kidd(B.) 

KlEPERT  (H.)     . 

Kimbek(D.  C.) 
KiNG(F.  H.)  . 
King(G.). 

Kingsley  (Charles)  5,10,13, 14. 
16,18,22,2^,26,27,  30|  4^>47t4^ 
Kingsley(G.)  .        .         -     38 
Kingslev  (Henry)  25,  47 

Kipling  (J.  L.).         .         .     47 
Kipling  tRudyard)  .23,  27, 


32,  36 
■  37 
.  II 
•  35 
I 
13 


KlRKPATRlCK   {ftof.) 

38, 

41 

Klein  (Dr.  E.).         .  7, 

29. 

S'^ 

Klein  (F.) 

26 

Knight  (W.)    .         17, 

28, 

32 

KUENEN  (Prof.  A.)     . 

38 

Kvnaston  (Rev.  H.) 

43j 

46 

Labberton  (R.  H.)  . 

3 

La  Faroe  (J.)  . 

3 

Lafargue  (P.). 

23 

Lamb.       .        .        .5 

26 

27 

Lanciani  (Prof.  R.) . 

2 

Landauer  (J.). 

8 

Landor     . 

5. 

!6 

Lane-Poole  (S.)      . 

6. 

i6 

Lanfrev(P.)   . 

6 

Lang  (Andrew)           15, 

26, 

46 

Lang  (Prof.  Arnold) . 

49 

Langlev  (J.  N.) 

34 

Langmaid  (T.). 

10 

Lankester  (Prof.  Ray) 

7. 

27 

LaSSAr-Cohn  (Dr.). 

8 

Laslett  (T.)    . 

, 

7 

Laughton  (J.  K.)   . 

, 

4 

Laurie  (A.  P.). 

, 

1.3 

Lawrence  (T.  J.)    . 

, 

15 

Lawton  (W.  C.)      . 

27 

Lea(A.  S.) 

3'' 

Leaf  (W.) 

17 

46 

Leahv  (Sergeant)     . 

38 

LEEfM.)    . 

23 

Lee(S.)     .         .         . 

25 

.6 

Lees  (C.  H.)     . 

3  ■■ 

Lee- Warner  (W.)  . 

13 

Leeper  (A.) 
Legge  (.A.  0.)  . 

. 

f> 

13 

'3 

Leibnitz  . 

36 

Leslie  (G.  D.)  . 

27 

Lethaby  (W.  R.)     . 

2 

38 

Lethbrid^.e  (iir  Roper)  5 

>3 

Lew  (Amy) 

23 

Lewi    (R.) 

16 

Lewkowitsch  (J.)  . 

38 

LiGHTFOOT  (l.ishop) 

5,  13,  i.,  40,  41 

i43 

i44 

LiGHTWOOD  (J.  M.)  . 

IS 

Lindsay  (Dr.  J.  A.). 

29 

LiTTLEDALE  (H.)         . 

17 

Lockyer(.I  N)      3,6 

34 

38 

LODEMAN  (E.  G.)       . 

ID 

Lodge  (Prof.  O.J.)      3 

27 

34 

Lodge  (R.) 

5 

Lowenson-Lkssing  (F.) . 

11 

LOEWY  (B.) 

33 

L0FTiE(Mrs.W.J.). 

2 

Longfellow  (H.  W.) 

26 

Lonsdale  (J.)  . 

25 

46 

Lover  (S.). 

23 

Lowe  (W.  H.)  . 

S" 

39 

Lowell  (J.  R.).         15 

18 

27 

Loudon  (W.  J.) 
Louis  (H.) 

LuJBOCK(Sir  J.)7,  10,  II,; 
Lucas  (F.) 
Lucas  (Joseph). 
Lunt(J.). 
Lupton  (S.) 
LvALL  (Sir  Alfred)  • 
Lyde  (L.  \V.)  . 
Lysaght(S.  R.) 
Lyte(H.C.  M.) 
Lvttelton  (A.  T.) . 

LVTTELTON  (E.)  . 

Lytton  (Earl  of)  . 
MacAlister  (D.)  . 
Macarthur  (M.)  . 
Macaulay  (G.  C.)  .2( 
Macaulay  (Lord)  , 
Maccoll  (Norman) . 
McCurdyO-  F-)  . 
M'CosH  (Dr.  J.) 
Macdonald  (George) 
Macdonald  (G.) 
MackailU- W.)  . 
MacKnight(J.) 
Maclagan  (Dr.T.). 
Maclaren  (Rev.  Alex.) 
Maclaren  (Archibald) 
Maclean  (G.  E.)  . 
Maclean  (W.C.J  . 
Maclear  (Rev.  Dr.)  38, 
McLennan  (J.  C.)  . 
M'Lennan  (J.  K) 
M'Lennan  (Malcolm) 
MACMILLAN(RtV.  H.) 
Macmillan  (Michael) 
Macmillan  (M.  K.) 
Macquoid  (K.  S.)  . 
Madoc  (F.) 
Maguire(T.F.) 

MAHAFFT(Prof.  ;.  P.) 

2,    13,    16,    J',    32, 

Maitland  (F.  W.J  - 
Malet  (L.) 
Malory  (Sir  T.) 
Malthus(T.  R.)     . 
Mansfield(C.B.)  . 

^L\RCOU  (J.) 

I.VKKHAM   (C.  R.)       . 

Marr(J.  E.)    . 

M,^KIilOTT(r.  A.  R.). 

Marrvat  (Capt.) 
Marshall  (Prot.  A  ) 
Marshall  (H.  K.)  . 
Martel  (C.)     . 
Martin  (Frances)    . 
Martin  (Frederick). 
Martin  (H.N.) 
Martineau  (C.  a  ). 
Martineau  (H.) 
Martineau  (Dr.  J.) 
Mason  (A.  E.  W.)   , 
Mason  (O.  T.). 
Masson(D.)      s,  18,  21 
Masson  (G.)     . 
Masson  (R.  O.) 
Mathew(E.  J.) 
Maturin  (Rev.  W.), 
Maudsley  (Dr.  H.) . 
Maurice  (F.  D.) 

10,  27,  32,  18-40. 
Maurice  (Gen.F.)       5. 
Max  MOller  (F.)    . 
Mayer  (A.M.). 
Mayo-Smith  (R.)    . 


fagb 

.     33 

.     38 

27,  <o 

is 

47 

9 

8 

4 


25,  46 

•  27 

•  17 

•  44 
32,     3 

.     21 

•  29 

•  46 

•  37 

•  29 

•  44 

•  48 

■  31 

•  29 
40,41 

■  33 
1 

•  23 
27.  44 

6,  ig 

•  23 

•  23 

•  23 
.     48 

4(,  47 

■5.  i" 

23 

25 

3.'. 

S 

4 
5 

34 


36 

3' 

3° 

48 

36 

49 

34 

6 

6 

23 

I 

25.32 

9.  25 


•  33 

41.44 
30.  36 

•  32 

•  34 

•  37 


PAGB 

Mayor  (J.  B.)  .       .  .    40 

Mayor  (Prof.  J.  E.  B.)  .  3,  & 

Mazini  (L.)       .        ,  .4^ 

Meldola  (Prof.  R.).   8,  33,  34 

Mendenhall  (T.  C  )  .     34 

Menger  (C.)     .  ,    36 

Menschuticin  (A.)  .  .      a 

Mercier  (Dr.  C.)      .  .    29. 

Mercur  (Prof.  J.)    .  ,    30 

Mereiiith  (C.).        .  .    18 

Meredith  (L.  A.)     .  .     15 

Meyer  (E.  von)        .  8 

Meyrick  (E.)   .         .  .30 

Mi  all  (L.  C.)  .        .  30,  50- 

Michelet(M.)         .  .     13 

MiERS  (H.  A.)  .        .  .14- 
Mill(H.R.)    ...    II 

Miller  (R.K.).  .      3 

Milligan  (Rev.  W.).  40,  44- 


Milton 


5,  iC,  18,  25,  27 


MlNTO  (Prof.  W.)  5,  23 

Mitford  (A.  B.)       .  10,23 

Mitford  (M.  R.)     .  .     15 

MlVART  (St.  George).  -     35 
Mixter(W.G.) 

MOLESWORTH  (.Mrs.)  .  49. 

Molloy  (G.)  .  33 

Molyneux  (\V.  C.  F.)  .  30- 

Monahan(J.  II  )     .  .  15 

Montkfioke(C  G.)  38,42- 
Montelius  (O.) 
Moore  (C.  H.). 

MooRHousE  (Bi;.hop)  .  44. 

MORIER  (J.)         .  .  .23 

MoRisoN  (J.  C.)  .  .  5. 
MoRLEV  (John).  4,  5,  20,  27 
Morris  (E  E  ). 
Morris  (Mowbray)  . 
Morris  (R.) 
morshead  (e.  d.  a.) 
Moulton  (L.  C  ) 
Moulton  (R.  G.)  . 
Mudie  (C.  E.)  . 
Muir(I.). 
Muir(M.  M.P.)  . 
MOller  (H.) 

MULLINGER  (J.  B.)    . 
Mun  (T.)  . 
MUNRO(J.  E.  C.)       . 

Murphy  (J.  J  ). 
Murray!  1>.  f'.nristie) 
Murray  (G.)    . 
Myers  (L.j 
Myers  (I' .  W    H.)    . 
Mylne  (Bishop) 
Nadal(K.  S.)  . 

NERNST(Dr. )     . 

Nettleship  (H.).    . 
Newcomb  (S.)  . 
Newcastle    (Duke    ai 

Duchess) 
Newman  (G.)  . 
Newton  (Sir  C.  T.). 
NiCHOL  (J.) 
Nichols  (E.  L.) 
NlCHOLLS  (H.  A.  A.) 
Nisbet(J.) 
Noel  (Lady  A.) 
Nordenskiold  (.\.  E.  1 
NoRGATE  (Kate) 

NOEKIS  (W.  E.) 

Norton  (Charles  EHot) 
Norton  (Hon.  Mrs.) 
Norway  (A.  H.) 
Oliphant  (T.  L.  K.) 


5 
4>25 

25.  31 
46 
18 
38. 
i3 
I 
S 
8. 
13 
3S 
15 
33.44- 
23 
3 

18,46 
Si  19.  27 
4+ 

27 

i 

iS 

3 

26- 

29. 

2 

4 

33 


■     23. 

•  47 

•  13 

.       21 

4,  46 
19.  23 

•  31 
27,31s 


PAGE 

OupHANT(Mrs.M.  O.  W.) 

5,  I3i  i6i  23,  25,  49 
Olivke  (Prof.  D.)      .  » 

Oliver  (Capt.  S.  P.). 
Oman  (C.  W.)  . 
Orr  (H,  B.)  . 
OSBOEN  (H.  F.) 
OsTwALD  (Prof.) 
Ott*  (E.  C.)  . 
Page  (T.  E.)  . 
Palgravb  (SirF.) 
Palgrave(F.T.) 

3.  19,  21,  as,  26,  42, 
Palgrave  (R.  H.  Inglis) 
Palgrave  (W.  G.)     19,  37 
Palmer  (Lady  S.) 
Parker  (T.T.). 
Parker  (W.  K.) 

Parker  (W.  N.) 

Parkes  (Sir  H.) 

Parkin  (G.  R. ) 

Parkinson  (S.) 

Pakkman  (F.)  . 

Parry  (G.) 

Parsons  (Alfred) 

Pasteur  (L.)    . 

Pater  (W.)      . 

Paterson  (A.) . 

Paterson  (A.  B.) 

Paterson  (J.)  . 

Patmore  (Coventry) 

Patteson  (J.  C.) 

Pattison  (Mark) 

Paulsen  (F.)   . 

Payne  (E.J.)    . 

Peabody  (C.  H.) 


Peacock  (T.  L.) 

Pearson  (C.  H.) 

Pease  (A.  E.)  . 

Peel  (E.) . 

Peile(J.). 

Pellissibr  (E.) 

Pennell(J.)    . 

Pennington  (R.) 

Penrose  (F.C.) 

Percival  (H.  M.)    .       18,  19 

Perkins  (J.  B.)        .        .    13 

Peterson  (W.)        .       .     '^ 

Pettigrew  (J.  B.)   .  8,  35 

Phillimore  (J.  G.) 

Phillips  (F.  E.) 

Phillips  (J.  A.) 

Phillips  (W.  C.)       .        .      3 

PicTON  (J.  A.)  .        .        .27 

PiFFARD  (H.  G.)  .  .      29 

Pike  (L.  O.)  .  .  .  13 
Pike  (W.).  ...  47 
Playfair  (W.  S.)  .  .  28 
Plato  ...  26, 46 
Plumptre  (Dean)  .  .  44 
Pollard  (A.  W.)  .  16,  17,  46 
Pollock  (Sir  F.,  Bart.) 

6,  16,  27,  36,  37 
Pollock  (Lady)  .  .  2 
Poole  (M.  E.)  .  .  .  27 
Poole  (R.L.)  .  .  .13 
Pope  ,  .  .  .  Si  25,  27 
PosTE  (E.)  .  .  34, 46 
Potter  (L.)  .  •  .27 
Potter  (R.)  ,  .  .44 
Potts  (W.)  ...  28 
Preston  (T.)  ...  34 
Prestwich  (J.).  .  .11 
Price  (E.  C.)  .  .  .  23 
Prick  (L.L.F.R.)  .       .36 


13 
39 
13 

49 
35 
47 
23 
49 
6 

49 
t 

37 
34 
13,47 
23 
IS 


13 


x6,  23,  27 
23 
19 
16 

!5i  49 

6 

6,  44 

10 

i,  36 

iOi  34 

23 

37 

14 

19 

31 

32 

3 


INDEX. 


Prickard  (A.  O.)     . 
Prince  Albert  Victor 
Prince  George 
Procter  (F.)   . 
Propert  (I.  L.) 
Prowse  (D.  W.) 
Purcell  (E.  S.) 
Quesnay  (F.)  . 
Rabbeno  (U.)  . 
Rae(J.)    .        . 
Ramsay  (Sir  A.  C.) 
Ramsay  (W.)   . 
Ransome(C.)  . 
Rathbone  (W.) 
Ratzel  (F.)     . 
Rawlinson  (W.  G.). 
Rawnsley  (H.  D.) 
Ray  (P.  K.)      . 
Rayleigh  (Lord) 
Reichel  (Bishop) 
Reid  (J.  S.)       . 
Remsen  (I.)     . 
Renan  (E.)      . 
Rendall  (Rev.  F.) 
Reynolds  (E.  S.) 
Reynolds  (H.  R.) 
Reynolds  (Sir  J.  R. 
Reynolds  fO.) 
Rhoades  (J.)   . 
Rhodes  (J.  F.). 
Ricardo   . 
Richardson  (B.  W. 
Rickey  (A.  G.). 
Righton  (E.)  . 
Ritchie  (A.)    , 
Roeb(R.). 
Robinson  (Preb.  H 
Robinson  (J.  L.) 
Robinson  (Matthew) 
Rockstro  (W.  S.) 
Rogers  (J.  E.  T.) 
Romanes  (G.J.) 
RoscoE  (Sir  H.  E.) 
Roscoe(W.  C.) 
Rosebery  (Earl  of) 
Rosenbusch  (H.) 
Rosevear  (E.). 
Ross  (P.)  . 
Rossetti  (C.  G.) 
Rothschild  (F.) 
Routledge  (J.) 
Rowe(F.J.)     . 
Roy  (Neil) 
ROCKER  (Prof.  A.  W, 
Rumford  (Count) 
Rushbrooke  (W.  G 
Russell  (Dean) 
Russell  (Sir  Charles) 
Russell  (W.  Clark) 
Russell  (T.)    . 
Rutherford  (W. 
RvlandIF.)     . 
RYLE(Prof.  H.  E.) 
Sadler  (H.) 
Saintsbury  (G.) 
Salmon  (Rev.  G.) 
Salt  (H.  S.)  ^  . 
Sandford  (Bishop) 
Sandford  (M.  E.) 
Sandys  (J.E.). 
Sayce(A.H.)  . 
Scaife(W.  B.). 

SCARTAZZINI  (G.  a. 
ScHi  lEMANN  (Dr.) 

Schmoller  (G.) 


ss 


g.) 


page 

.  28 

.  46 

.  46 

.  41 

•  3 

•  13 

.  s 

.  36 

.  36 

6,36 

.  6 

.  S 

.  17 

.  9 

.  I 

•  15 
.  19 
■  32 
.  34 

•  4^ 


40,  44 
-  14 
.  44 
■  29 
.  14 
.  23 
•  13 
35i  36 
14,  29 
.  16 


.G.) 


44 
31 
.  .  6 
.  5 
I3i  37 
.  7 
.8,9 
.  19 
.  5 
II 
.  9 
.  23 
I9i  49 
.  13 
.  37 
.  20 
.  23 
.  9 
.    38 

•  39 
.     44 

•  37 
4>  23 

•  3« 
38,46 

.     16 

38,44 

3 

S,  16 

:  JJ 

:  'I 
•  47 

.  13 

.  28 

.  17 

.  2 

■  35 


fagx 

Schorlbmmbr  (C.)  . 

.8,0 

Schreiber(T.). 

2 

SCHUCHHABDT  (C.)  . 

3 

ScHULTz(Dr.  G.)     . 

.      9 

Schuster  (A.). 

•    33 

SCOTT(M.)          .          . 

■     23 

Scott  (Sir  W.^.       . 

19,  25 

SCRATCHLEV  (Sir  Peter)  .    30 

SCUDDER  (S.  H.)  .  .      SO 

SEATON(Pr.  E.G.)  .  .      39 

Seebohm  (H.  E.)  .  .  I 
Seeley  (Sir  J.  R.)  .13.37)44 
Seiler  (Dr.  Carl)  .  29,  35 
SELBORNE[Earlof)5i  25,  40,  42 
Seligman  (E.)  .  .  .36 
Sellers  (E.)  •  •  ■  2 
Service  (J.)  .  .  41,  44 
Sewell{E.  M.)  .  .  13 
Shadwell  (C.  L.)  .  .  46 
Shairp  (J.  CO  .  ■  4.  19 
Shakespeare  .  17,  191.25,  s6 
Shann  (G.)  .  .  10,  34 
Sharp  (W.)  ...  6 
Shaw  (Miss)  .  .  •14 
Sheldon  (W.  L.)  .  .  32 
Shelley  ...  19,  26 
Shipton  (Helen)  .  .  23 
Shirley  (W.N.)  .  .  44 
Shore  (L.  E.)  .  .  .  34 
Shorthousb  (J.  H.)  23,  24 
Shortland  (Admiral)  .  31 
Shuckburgh  (E.  S.)  14,  46 
Shufeldt  (R.  W.)  .  .  49 
SiBSON  (Dr.  F.)  .  .  29 
Sidgwick(A.)  .  .  .20 
SiDGWicK  (Prof.  H.)  32,  36,  37 

SiME  (J.)    .  .  .II,  12 

Simpson  (Rev.  W.)  .  .  40 
Skeat  (W.W.)  .  .  17 
Skrine  (J.  H.).  ,  6,  19 
Slade  ( j.  H.)  .  .  ,  10 
Sleeman  (L.)  .  .  .47 
Sloman  (Rev.  A.)  .  .  39 
Smart  (W.)  ...  36 
Smallev  (G.  W.)  .  6,28 
Smetham  (J.  and  S.)  .  6 
Smith  (Adam)  .  3,  6,  35,  36 
Smith  (Alexander)  .  17,  25 
Smith  (C.  B.)  ...  19 
Smith  (F.  Hopkinson)  .  24 
Smith  (Garnet).  .  .  34 
Smith  (Goldwin) 

4,  6,  14,  21,  28,  37,  45)  47 
Smith  (H.)  .  .  .19 
Smith  (J.)  ...  8 
Smith  (Rev.  T.)  .  .  44 
Smith  (W.  G.)  .  .  .8 
Smith  (L.  Pearsall)  .  .  24 
Sohm  (R.).  .  .  .40 
Somerville  (Prof.  W.)  .  7 
Soothey  .  .  .  6,  26 
Spanton  (J.)  ...  3 
Spender  Q.  K.)  .  .  29 
Spenser  ...  19, 25 
Spottiswoode(W.).  ,  34 
St.  Asaph  (Bishop  of)  .  40 
St,  Johnston  (A.)  .23,  47,  49 
Stanley (Dean)  .  .  44 
Stanley  (Hon.  Maude)  ,  37 
Statham  (R.)  ...    37 

STEBBINGtW.).  .  .        4 

Steel  (F.  A.)  .  *  i5)  24 
Stephen  (C.  E.)  .  .9 
Stephen  (H.)  .  .  .16 
Stephen  (Sir  J.  F.)  14, 16,  28 


S6 


INDEX. 


PAGE 
6 
5 
19 

5 
16 
6 


Stephen  (J.  K.) 
Stephen  (L.) 
Stephens  ( I.  B.) 
Stephens  (W    R.  W.) 
Stevens  (C.  E.) 
Stevenson  (F.  S.)   , 
Stevenson  0' J'>     • 
Stewart  (A.)  . 
Stewart  (Bal(our)    33,  34, 
Stokes  (Sir  G.  G.)   . 
Story  (R.  H.  )  . 
Stone  (W.H.). 
Strachey  (Sir  E.)    . 
Strachey(J.  St.  L.) 
Strachey  (Gen.  R.) . 
Strangford(  Viscountess) 
Strettell  (A.) 
Stubbs  (Dean) . 
Stubbs  (Bishop) 
Sutherland  (A.)    . 
Swainson  (H.). 
Swete  (Prof.  H.  B.). 
Swift  (Dean)   . 
Symonds  (J.  A.) 
SvMONDS  (Mrs.  J.  A.) 
Svmons  (A.) 
Taggart  (W.  S.)      . 
Tainsh(E.C.). 
Tait  (Archbishop) 
Tait  (C.  W.  a.) 
Tait  (Prof.  P.  G.) 
Tanner  (H.)    . 
Tarr(R.  S.)     . 
Tavernier  (J.  B.)    . 
Taylor  (E.  R.). 
Taylor  (Kraniclin) 
Taylor  (Isaac). 
Taylor  (Sedley) 
Tegetmeier  (W.  B.) 
Temple  (Bishop) 
Temple  (Sir  R.) 
Tennant  (Dorothy). 
Tenniel  (Sir  John)  . 
Tennyson  (Lord)  17, 19 
Tennyson  (Fredenclc) 
Tennyson  (Lord  H.) 
Theodoli  (Marchesa) 
Thompson  (D 'A.  %/.) 
Thompson  (E.). 
Thompson  (H.  M.)  . 
Thompson  (S.  P.) 
Thomson  (A.  W.)     . 
Thomson  (Sir  C.  W.) 
Thomson  (Hugh) 
Thoreau  . 
Thorne  (Dr.  Thome) 
Thornton  (J.). 
Thornton  (W.  T.)    32, 
Thorpe  (T.  E.). 
Thring  (E.)      . 
Thrupp  0-  F.)  • 
Thursfikld  (J.  R.)  . 
Todhunter  (I.) 

TORRENS  (W.  M.)       . 

Tourg^niep  (L  S.)  . 
Tout(T.F.)     . 
Tozer(H.  F.)  .        .        .     __ 
Traill  (H.  D.).        .    4,  5,  36 


39 
15 
5 
6 
IJ 
38 
17 
45 
14 
33.  34,  45 

34 

47 

3 

30 

32.  45 

3°.  34 

9 

43 

4 

48 

48 

,26 


Si  49 
24 


56 

34 

10 

50 

14 

28 

29 

7 

37.  46 

6,9 

10,  28 

33 

5 

6 

5 

24 

14 


PAGE 

Trench  (Capt.  F.)   .  .     37 

Trench  (Archbishop)  .     45 

Tkkvelvan  (Sir  G.  O.)  14,28 

Trevor  (G.H.)  .  .  so 
I'RIBE  (A.).         ...       8 

Tristram  (W.  O.)    .  .    15 

Trollope  (A.)  .        .  .      s 

Truman  (J.)     .        .  .20 

Tucker  (T.G.)        .  .    46 

TUCKWELL  (W.)  .  ,      14 

Tufts  0-  H.)  .        .  .     32 

TuLLOCH  (Prmcipal).  45 

Turner  fC.  Tennysoli)  .     ao 

Turner  (G.)     .  .      1 

Turner  (H.H.)       .  .    34 

Turner  (J.  M.  W.)  .  .    15 

Turpin(G  S.).  .9 

Tylor  (E.  B.)    .  .1 

Tvrwhitt  (R.  St.  J.)  3,  20 

Tyrrell  (R.Y.)  16,  28 

Vaughan(C.  J.)  39,  40,  41,  45 
Vaughan  (Rev.  D.J.J  26,28,45 

VAUGHAN(Rev.  E.  X.)  .    45 

Vaughan  (Rev.  R.).  .    45 

Velev  (M.)        .         .  .24 

Venn  (Rev.  J.).         .  33,45 

Vernon  (Hon.  W.  W.)  .    17 

Verrall  (A.  W.)      .  17,  46 

Verrall  (Mrs.)         ,  .       2 

ViCKERMAN  (C.)  .  .      38 

Victor  (H.)  .  .  .24 
Vines  (S.  H.)  .  .  .8 
Viollet-Le-Duc  (E.  E.).  10 
Wain  (Louis)  .  .  .48 
Waldstein  (C.)  .  .  2 
WAiKEE(Prof.  F.  A.)  .  36 
Walker  (Jas.)  .      8 

Walker  (Louisa)  .     38 

Wallace  (A.  R.)  .7,  30,  36 
Wallace  (Sir  D.  M.)  .  37 
Walpole(S.)  ...  36 
Walton  (1.)  ,  -.  .15 
Ward  (A.  W.)  .  4,  5,  16,  2S 
Ward  (H.  M.)  .  .  .  7,  8 
Ward(S.).  ...  20 
Wakd(T.  H.)  ...  21 
WARD(Mrs.  T.  H.)  .  24,49 
Ward  (W.)  .  .  6,  2!,  41 
Ware  (W.  R.)  .  .  .3 
Waters  (C.  A.)  .  .  35 
Waterton  (Ciiarles)  30,  47 
Watson  (E.)  ...  6 
Watson  (R.  S.)  .  .47 
Watson  (W.)  .  .  20,  25 
Way  (A.  S.)  .  .  .  46 
Webb  (W.  T.)  .  .  18,  20 
Webster  (Mrs.  A.)  .  20,  49 
Weisbach  (J.)  .        .  10 

Welby-Gregory  (Lady)  .  41 
Welldon  (Rev.  J.  E.  C.)  45,46 
West  (M.)  .  .  .24 
Westcott  (Bp.)  38,39,40,41,45 
Westermarck  (E.).  .  1 
Wetherell  (J.)  .  .  3a 
Wheeler  (J.  T.)  .  .  14 
Whewell(W.).  .  .  6 
Whitcomb  (L.  S.)  .  3,16 
White  (A.)       ...    28 


PAGK 

IS,  3' 


White  (Gilbert) 
White  (Dr.  W.  Hale) 
White  (W.)  ...  34 
Whitney  (W.  D.)  ,  .9 
Whittier  (J.  G.)  20,  s6,  28 
Whittuck  (C.  A.)  .  .  45 
WiCKHAM  (Rev.  E.  C.)      .-  45. 

WiCKSTEED  (P.  H.)  .  36,    ,8 

Wiedersheim  (R.)  .  35,  49. 

WiESER  (F.  von)       .  .     36- 

Wilbraham  (F.  M.).  .    41 

Wilkins  (Prof.  A.  S.)  2,16,45 

Wilkinson  (S.)        .  .    3c- 
Willey  (a.)      ...      7 

Williams  (C.  M.)    .  .    327 

WiLLiAi»s(C.  T.)     .  .    29 

Williams  (G.  H.)     .  .     11. 

Williams  (H.).        .  14,  311 

Williams  (Montagu)  6 

Williams  (S.  E.)  .     16 

Williamson  (M.  B.)  .    45. 

Willink  (A.)  .        .  .45 

Willoughby  (E.  F.)  .    i<„ 

Willoughby  (F.)     .  .    49* 
Willoughby  (W.  W.)     .     36 

Wills  (W.  G.)  .        .  .    20. 

Wilson  (A.  J.)  .        .  .    36 

Wilson  (Sir  C.)        .  .      4_ 

Wilson  (Sir  D.)       .  i,  4,  17 

Wilson  (E.  B.).        .  .    50 

Wilson  (Dr.  G.)        .  5,  6,  2* 

Wilson  (Archdeacon)  .    45 

Wilson  (Mary).        .  .    i6' 

Winch  (R.  F.)          .  .    27 
Winchester  (Bishop  oQ.      fr 

Windelband  (W.)  .  .    32 
WiNGATE  (Major  F.  R.)  .     30 

Winkworth  (C.)      .  .      6- 

WiNKWORTH  (S.)        •  .      25 

Winter  (W.)  .  .  .15 
WoLSELEY(Gen.Viscotmt)  3a 
Wood  (A.  G.) 
Wood  (C.  J.) 


WoODfRev.  E.  G.)   . 


•     45 
14.45 


Woods  (Rev.  F. : 
Woods  (Miss  M.  A.). 
Woodward  (C.  M.)  . 
WOOLNER  (T.)  .         .         .     i 
Wordsworth  4, 6, 17,  ao,  2G, : 


Worthey  (Mrs.) 
Wright  (Rev.  A.) 
Wright  (MissG.) 
Wright  (J.)     . 
Wright  (L.)     . 
Wright  (M.  O.) 
Wright  (W.  A.) 

WULKER  (Dr.)  . 
WuRTZ  (Ad.)  . 
Wyatt  (Sir  M.  D.) 


.  24. 
•  3» 
.      9. 

10,  2fr- 

.  34- 
28,  31 
9,18,25,40 
.  16 
.  9. 
3- 


Yeo(J.)  ....  34 
YoE  (Shway)  .  .  .47- 
YoNGE  (CM.)  6, 8, 9,  f2, 13, 14, 
24,  a6,  28,  32,  38,  4^ 
Young  (E.W.)  .  .  lo 
Younghusband(G.  J.  and 

F.  E.)     .        .        .        .    3» 
ZiEGLER  (Dr.  £.)      •        .    ag. 


MACMILLAN  AND   CO.,   Ltd.,   LONDON. 


to:soljlg6 


J.    P&LMEK,    PRINTER,    ALUXANDRA   STREET,    CAMBRIDGE, 


