Hypercritica
Author: Bolton, Edmund.
Publication info: Ancient Critical Essays Upon English Poets and Poesy . [34] p. London: Robert Triphook, 1815.

Hypercritica: or A Rule of Judgement, for writing or reading our History's ... By Edmund Bolton ... [in, Ancient Critical Essays upon English Poets and Poesy. Edited by Joseph Haslewood ...]
[Page 223]
ADDRESSE THE FIRST. [Sect. I] To write the History of England is a Work superfluous, if it ever had an History: but, having had all other Honours, it only wanteth that. Polydor Virgil in England , and Paulus Æmilius in France , both of them Italians , were entertain'd of Purpose. As if their Narrations ought to have most Belief, which were written by their Pens, who had least Interest in the Argument, or Relation to the Party's. This Counsel, whatsoever it seem'd to the Givers, or Receivers, found less in Success among us then it had in Probability. Many great Volumes carry among us the Titles of History's. But Learned men, and 1 Sr Henry Savil one of them, absolutely deny, that any of ours discharge that Office which the Titles promise. For my part I think that the most of them have their Praises, and all of them their Uses towards the composition of an universal History for England.
Sect. II. Among the greatest wants in our ancient Authours, are the wants of Art and Style, which as they add to the lustre of the Works and Delights of the Reader; yet add they nothing to
[Page 224]
the Truth; which they so esteemed, as they seem to have regarded nothing else. For without Truth, Art and Style come into the Nature of Crimes by Imposture. It is an act of high Wisdom, and not of Eloquence only, to write the History of so great, and noble a People as the English . For the Causes of things are not only wonderfully wrapt one within the other, but placed oftentimes far above the ordinary Reach's of human Wit; and he who relates Events, without their Premisses and Circumstances, deserves not the name of an Historian; as being like to him who numbers the Bones of a Man anatomized, or presenteth unto us the Bare Skeleton, without declaring the Nature of the Fabrick or teaching the Use of Parts.
Sect. III. The Part of heavenly Providence in the Actions of Men is generally left out by most of the Ethnicks in their Histories. Among whom copious Livy seems worthily the most religious, and consequently of theirs the best: as Cornelius Tacitus (let not plain Dealing offend his other Admirers) either the most irreligious, or with the most and therefore the less worthy to be in Honour as a Cabinet Counsellour with any man, to whom Piety towards powers divine is pretious. 2 This some affirm deliberately: notwithstanding all that which Boccalini in his late Lucianical Ragualias hath undertaken on his Behalf; as in their Anti-Tacitus , for Justification of those censures of levity, malice, and most apparent falsehood, which Tertullian, Orosius , and other of the ancient; Casaubon , and other of the modern, brand upon him, is (as they conceive) fully proved. On the other side Christian Authors, while for their ease they shuffled up the reasons of events, in briefly referring all causes immediately to the Will of God, have generally neglected to inform their Readers in the ordinary means of Carriage in human Affairs,
[Page 225]
and thereby singularly maimed their Narrations. Philip de Comines , and our Sr Thomas More (both of them great Counsellors of 3 State to their several Princes) are two of those very few Worthies, who respecting as well the superior, as the inferior Efficients of Operations in the World, come near to accomplish the most difficult duty of 4 Historians. In which number as I wish to be 5 one, so there is no fault to endeavour to be the only one; for, according to that of Quinctilian: Quid erat futurum, si nemo plus fecisset eo quem sequebatur?
Sect. IV. Truth is the soveraigne praise of an History. For want whereof Lucian did condemn unto his hell, Ctesias, Herodotus , and other of his Country men. And although himself were as false a Companion as any, yet Learning and Reason told him, that Truth in Story was only to be sacrificed unto, as the Goddess of that brave Province; and that all other respects came after, with a very large distance between. Which makes Velleius Paterculus , that courtly Historian, with his bis penetrata Britannia in flattery of Cæsar , rather to live for his Latin, and conceitful notions, then for his authority in matter; and Ammianus Marcellinus , notwithstanding his half barbarous style, to have a better and a greater Fame then polite Paterculus.
Sect. V. 6 There is a great complaint among some of the most Learned, against Galfridus Arthurius , or Galfridus Monumethensis , for want of Truth, and Modesty, as creating a BRUTE unto us for the Founder of our Britain . But who is he that proving it to be a Fiction, can prove it withal to be his? If that Work be quite abolished, there is a vast Blanck upon the Times of our
[Page 226]
Country, from the Creation of the World till the coming of Julius Cæsar , not terra incognita it self being less to be known then ours. The Things of which Ages as we understand not the more for Monmouths history, unless the same be true; so neither seem they (as being those Times which our Criticks mark with their ἊδΕλον , and their Μύθικον , their Ignotum , and Fabulosum ) much to be stood upon. Nevertheless, out of that very Story (let it be what it will) have Titles been framed in open Parliament, both in 7 England , and 8 Ireland , for the Rights of the Crown of England , even to entire Kingdoms. And though no Parliament can make that to be a Truth, which is not such in the proper Nature thereof, nor that much Authority is added thereby to that traditional Monument, because Parliament men are not always Antiquaries, yet are we somewhat the more, and rather ty'd to look with favour on the Case. Therefore it pleased me well, what once I did read in a great Divine, that in Apocryphis non omnia esse Apocrypha . And that very much of Monmouths book, or pretended Translation, de Origine & gestis Britannorum be granted to be fabulous, yet many Truths are mixed.
Sect. VI. The main Controversy concerning that Work is, whether it be an Antiquity or an Imposture. That it is full of Fables or Discohærencies no man denyeth, and Giraldus Cambrensis himself though being his Country-man, and living in that Age, 9 angerly taxeth it for such, albeit he grants a Brute , and much of the principal Substance to be true, and follows it. The Adversaries are both many, and many of special Account, as Nubrigensis, Whethamsted &c. among the ancient; and among the
[Page 227]
modern (whom also Camden citeth) Vives, Junius, Buchanan, Polidor, Bodin &c. but all of them Strangers. On the other side, friends alledge Malmesburie (the worthiest Writer of all our Historians) for the being of Arthur, Huntingdon, Aluredus, Hoveden, Cestrensis, Gervasius Tilburiensis &c. among our older Authors, and of the later times the Muster of Names is not thinn. Leland most famous, Sr John Prise Knight, Humfrey Lhuid , &c. Men singularly skill'd in our Antiquities, and Britanns of Race, Doctor Keyes , Founder of Keyes College in Cambridge , Mr Lambert of Lincolns Inn (who for freeing Monmouth from the suspicion of Forgery 10 voucheth his Possession of a Welsh Copie, older, in his opinion, then Monmouth's Translation) Doctor Powel , Mr Lewis , and all Welsh Bards, and Genealogist's, Doctor White of Basingstoke in his Latin Histories, Stowe, Holinshead , &c. So that if the cause were to be try'd, or carry'd by Voices, the affirmative would have the fuller Cry. And by that which Monmouth himself 11 in his Epistle dedicatory to that learned, brave, and warlike Prince Robert , Earl of Glocester , natural Son to K. Henry the first, concerning the style of the Welsh original, by him translated, (and perhaps interpolated) wherein abounded phalerata verba , and ampullosæ dictiones , pompous Words, (as he saith) and swelling phrases, it seems nothing else but a meer Satyra, Rhapsodie, or Cento, peiced together out of their Bards Songs, or Ballads, which may well be so. For Ammianus Marcellinus writes, that it was the Office of the Britain Bards: Fortia facta virorum illustrium heroicis composita versibus, cum dulcibus Lyræ modulis cantitare : and Lucan , long before his daies, hath recorded the same.
Sect. VII. Our Historians Office concerning the Use of such a Book as this of Monmouths , for Defence whereof not only a great party of learned Writers stand, but an whole noble Nation (anciently
[Page 228]
Lords of this Island) hath not an easy Description. Certainly much is attributed, and much is to be attributed, in this Case, unto domestick Monuments, how barbarous soever, specially touching the Originals of People. For Myrsilus of Lesbos is said to own this Sentence, that in Searches of such nature, Magis creditur ipsi genti atque vicinis, quam remotis & exteris . Which had no Myrsilus ever said, yet had it not been the less true, or the more needing Authority, because it is meerly a Dictate of common Sense, and all principal Authors allow thereof. Salust himself made use of King Hiempsal his Library, in the Carthaginian or Punick Tongue (which was a kind of Syriac shewing their Original to be from Tyre , and other Towns in Phænicia ) to write his Jugurtha the more exactly. What shall we say of Polydor Virgil's way in this very matter? though he utterly misliked Monmouths Narrations as fabulous, yet did he breif them into his Volumes with special Protestation by name against a little book of like Argument, passing for Gildas the Historiographer's. Sigebertus Gemblacensis , living in Monmouth's time, where his Chronicle tenders the Occasion, saith of that story thus: Nec dubia pro veris affirmamus, nec Historicam narrationem, quæ nuper de Britannico sermone in Latinum translata est, lectori subtrahimus . And this course carries the show of Justice and Reason. Nevertheless each may do as himself thinks best, though that perhaps be not best. For Salust in the like case reports what he finds, but taking nothing therein upon himself, plainly tells us: that fides ejus rei penes authores erit. Tacitus also (his Admirer, and next him to be admired for his Art) when he hath simply set down what he had heard concerning the Germans first Ancestry, (a Tale of a Father and his three Sons, as that is in Monmouth of Brute and his three Sons) concludeth Quæ neque confirmare argumentis, neque refellere in animo est . Let therefore, our Historian look well about him, and examine, whether this proceeding do not properly concern his Duty. Sure I am that if Cornelius Tacitus had holden the Course of every where following the ancient Histories, or historical Traditions of Countries, he had not in the Jews Antiquities been so ridiculous,
[Page 229]
idle and injurious, as he is in the fifth Book, a Fragment of his Histories.
Sect. VIII. However, it is the least Care, or among the least Care of famous old Historians, who are the only Examples of History, to spend much time in the Learning, or Etymologies of Nations or Countries Names. For as S. 12 Augustine saith, they are many times so changed, temporis vetustate, ut vix homines doctissimi antiquissimas historias perscrutantes, origines potuerunt reperire : and S. 13 Hierom (of all the Latin Fathers the most learned) hath words to like Purpose, where he speaks of such Nations as descended out of Joctan . And be it that the Names are never so well to be known, yet what is it to the purpose of an History (the glass of Actions) to understand the Reason, (or Conjectures rather) why, or how Britain was called Britain, Rome, Rome , or Troy, Troy? Certainly to perplex in this case our Reader, with long disputes, or long Rehearsals of Names, and their Etymologies, with which some late Antiquaries have cloy'd and pester'd us, falls into that rule, which 14 Ammianus hath upon the like occasion, where he reciteth divers Opinions concerning the Originals of the ancient Galls . Therefore with him I say for that Point, declinanda varietas sœpe satietati conjuncta . If any thing be clear in such a Case, or vehemently probable, it is both enough, and all, which the Dignity of an Historian's office doth permit, briefly to mention the same. As for the cause of the name of Britain , only two Conjectures among so many which have of late been brought, seem worth the remembring: the one is Camdens , who derives it out of the word Brith , which signify'd (as he saith) in the ancient tongue of Britain , 15 that Herb, with which the Britanns are reported to have painted, and decolour'd their Bodies. Which his Conjecture he upholds with singular Diligence, and great variety of
[Page 230]
learned Probability's. The other Opinion, or rather historical Affirmation is, that Britain was denominated of a man, as also the herb Britannica. 16 Pliny's words are- miror nominis causam. -Fuit quidem & hic quondam ambitus , NOMINIBUS SUIS eas adoptandi, quod docebimus fecisse REGES, ut res tanta iis debeatur, herbam invenire, vitam juvare . By which words it is plain, that Pliny thinks there was some KING, or other, whose name had Brit therein, and that the herb Britannica was perhaps consecrated by him, to the Preservation of his Name, and Memory to all Posterities. But Monmouth and his Followers directly draw us Britain out of Brutus , who according to their narration was great Grandchild to Æneas Father of Ascanius , Father of Silvius , Father of Brutus . This Derivation of our Island's Name is wonderfully esteem'd by the Welsh , now long since incorporated with us.
Therefore it behoves our Historian to be well advised, before he enter into any Kind of unkind Diligence against the same. For if in some Cases, communis error facit jus , error certainly in such Cases as this, as it bindeth no man, so neither is it singular to Britain , because the Licence of deriving Nations from supposed Gods, and Puissant Worthy's is universal. Arrianus and other Authors testify, that Alexander the Great said, he found it available in his actions, quod Ammonis filius habitus sit, cum certo teneret se filium Philippi; which are Alexander's words in Lucian. Varro also (as he is cited by St Augustin ) professeth; Utile esse civitatibus, ut se viri fortes, etiamsi falsum sit, ex Diis genitos esse credant, ut eo modo animus humanus, velut divinæ stirpis fiduciam gerens, res magnas præsumat audacius, agat vehementius, & ob hoc impleat ipsa securitate felicius . This Sentence notwithstanding, delivered by Marcus Varro , (the most learned Man which ever Rome heathen had) stands specially condemned by that holy Bishop, as setting open a wide Gate to Falsehood, and Abusion. Now therefore, if Jeffery of Monmouth's Work be concluded on all Hands for untrue, the noble Historian must prefer verity before politick
[Page 231]
Respects, but because it is not (as the World sees) he may remember the Temper of Gemblacensis , and of the other Authors cited above in this Address. For my Part, as I say with Camben, in hac re suum cuique liberum esto per me judicium , so nevertheless I incline very strongly to have so much of every Historical Monument, or Historical Tradition maintain'd, as may well be holden without open absurdity. My Histories notwithstanding begin at Julius Cœsar.
ADDRESSE THE SECOND. Sect. I. Indifferency, and even dealing are the Glory of Historians. Which Rule, venerable Beda reputed so sacred and inviolable, that albeit he much detested the Opinion of Aidanus , the Scot , according to which he celebrated the high feasts of Easter , otherwise than that Church did, whereof Beda was a Member within exact Obedience: nevertheless he durst not, as an Historian, but with all Candour, and Freedom possible, deliver Aidan's Praises. Yea he makes Profession, that he did not only detest him as a Quartodeciman tho' he were not a Judaizing Quartodeciman (for that he kept Easter in honour of Christ's Resurrection, upon the next Sunday after the 17 fourteenth Moon: and not indifferently upon the next day of the Week, what day soever it was) but he did also write of Purpose against Aidan's opinion therein, as himself professeth, citing Aidan's own Books. Beda , nevertheless, coming by the Order, and Necessity of his Task to memorise the Truth of Things, his closing Words full of Saintly Gravity, and sincere Conscience, are: scripsi hœc de persona, & operibus viri præfati, nequaquam in eo laudans, haud eligens hoc quod de observatione Paschæ minus perfecte sapiebat , &c. sed quasi VERAX historicus simpliciter ea quæ de illo, sive per illum sunt gesta describens, & quœ
[Page 232]
laude sunt digna in ejus actibus laudans, &c. According to which Rule he doth sincerely discharge his Duty, commending Aidan , not only for Learning, and Eloquence (which are common as well to the good as bad) but for his Charity, Peacefulness, Continence, Humility, for a Mind, iræ & avaritiæ victorem, which neither Wrath, nor Covetousness could overcome, and for many other Qualities characterical, and proper to a most worthy Man, and finally (which is a Principal point of Equanimity) he doth diligently extenuate, and allay the ill conceit which might be conceived against Aidan , for his Doctrine, and Practice in that Article; but doth not in no sort extenuate his Praises, concluding them with one of the fullest that perhaps we shall find of any Saint in the World, which is; that he omitted nothing, ex omnibus quæ in Evangelicis sive Apostolicis, sive Propheticis libris facienda, cognoverat, sed cuncta pro suis viribus explere curabat.
Sect. II. This admirable Justice and Integrity of Historians, as necessary as it is, yet is nothing in these Days farther of from Hope. For all late Authors that ever yet I could read among us, convey with them to Narrations of things done fifteen, or sixteen hundred years past, the Jealousies, Passions, and Affections of their own Time. Our Historians must therefore avoid this dangerous Syren, alluring us to follow our own Prejudices, unless he mean only to serve a Side and not to serve Truth and Honesty, and so to remain but in price while his Party is able to bear him out with all his Faults, for quarrels sake. He is simply therefore to set forth, without Prejudices, Depravations, or sinister items, things as they are. They who do otherwise; ob id ipsum, quia non rogati sententiam ferunt, valde suspecti sunt . The reason of which speech Monsieur Bodin (whose also it is) giveth to be: for that an History ought to be nothing else but an Image of truth, and as it were a Table of Things done: permitting the Judgement of all to the competent Reader, which
[Page 233]
Judgement we ought not forstall, howsoever in some rare Cases it may be lawful to lead the same.
Sect. III. This steel Rule whosoever honestly follows, may perhaps write incommodiously for some momentany Purposes, but shall thereby, both in present and to posterity, live with Honour, through the Justice of his Monuments. And if for them he should suffer Death, as 18 brave Cremutius Cordus did, yet other Historians shall eternise his Sufferings, and that Princes great Disgrace, under whom that Tragedy was committed. Nor, in so sacred a business as the putting into Books, for immortal Remembrance, the Acts of famous Men, need I fear to call it a canonical and inviolable Aphorism of Historiography, because it is absurd in the historical Volumes of holy Scripture; whose majesty no Attick, nor Tullian Eloquence can express, nor to whose Entireness of Verity any human Wit, or Diligence can come near. For in those Divine Records, Facts whether good or bad, and their Circumstances, are simply and clearly related, without (for the more part) any Manner of Censure, or Judgement upon the Facts, as in the Writers person. On the contrary let those other Writings which abound in the different Humour, be stript by Readers, who have Discretion, into the bare Matter, which they profess to handle, so that all their Authors, Commentations, Conjectures, Notes, Passions, and Censures, which they utter as in their proper Persons be diligently mark'd, abstracted, and laid apart; and then the Things which they write may be received without Danger, or certainly with little. For the Judgements of interested Authors are commonly not Judgements so much as prejudices and Preventions, ne quid suæ partes detrimenti capiant . Iniquities practis'd in this Point are not more ordinary than odious, and are sometime laid on so impudently thick, that with less than half an Eye the Paintings are discernable: otherwhile the more
[Page 234]
cunningly, yet so, as that with a little Attention they may readily be discover'd. Nor have the Translators of History any more privilege than their Authors; whether therefore they corrupt the Original, by the familiar Courses of Corruption, as Addition, Mutation, Mutilation, Subtraction, Distraction, or otherwise; as they generally do, who in the Phrase of their own Education, Sect, Faction, or Affection utter Antiquities, and Truths of another Tenour, it is a like worthy of Blame. Neither are Impostures and Frauds in Sentences only, but in Words also, as both Vincentius Lyrinensis , and the Apostle noteth. Such seems to me this genuating Vanity in the Chronological Table at the End of Marcellinus translated into English: Hyginus Minister, and Pastour of the Chuch of Rome suffered Martyrdom for Christ's Gospel. A strange Periphrasis, and style for a Pope; other Titles than Minister, and Pastour (though they are proper in Respect of Function) belonging to his Calling; As Patriarch and Archbishop, those by a new singularity grown after a sort peculiar to puritanical Superintendents, Enemies of Ecclesiastical Episcopality.
Sect. IV. And why should any of these Dealings, or Devices be at all? For who compelleth to write? and if we write why should we deceive? or if we would not deceive, why do we not use proper and received Terms? even lying Lucian himself gives it for a Precept to his Historian that he should call a FIGG a FIGG. What other Effect can the Ignobility of all the formerly taxed Courses produce, then in a short Time (as they already have for the most part) to bring the Dignity of Writing unto nothing? and who is he that rightly weighs an Historians Duty, and can dare to profane or embase the same without Remorse or Confusion? Every Man is free to hold his Hand off from Paper; but if one will needs write, then the Nobility of the office commands him rather to die, then with the Injury of Truth to humour Times, and Readers, and content himself.
[Page 235]
Quid enim fortius desideret anima (saith St Augustine) quam veritatem?
Sect. V. An Historiographers Office therefore abhorreth all sorts of Abuse, and Deceit, as Impiety, or Sacrilege; and so our Writer must, if he will live indeed, and live with love and Glory.
ADDRESSE THE THIRD. Sect. I. Sir Henry Savil , in an Epistle Dedicatory to 19 Q. Elizabeth, speaking of the History of England , after he hath therein condemned Polydor Vergill , writeth thus: Nostri ex fœce plebis Historici, dum majestatem tanti operis ornare studuerunt, putidissimis ineptiis contaminarunt. Ita factum est, nescio qua hujusce insulæ infelicitate, ut Majores Tui (Serenissima Regina) viri maximi, qui magnam hujus orbis partem imperio complexi, omnes sui tempores reges, rerum gestarum gloria facile superarunt, magnorum ingeniorum quasi lumine destituti, jaceant ignoti, atque delitescant, &c. Our Historians (saith the Knight) being of the Dregs of the common People, while they have endeavour'd to adorn the Majesty of so great a Work, have stain'd, and defiled it with most fusty Foolery's. Whereby tho' I wot not by what hard Fortune of this Island, it is come to pass that your Ancestors (most gracious Queen) most puissant Princes, who embracing a great part of this our World within their Empire, did easily overgo all the Kings of their Times, in the Glory of great Atchievements, now destitute of as it were the Light of brave Wits, do lye unknown, and unregarded. These Words utter'd by a Gentleman excellently learn'd, to a Sovereign
[Page 236]
Queen excellently understanding, and in Print, before a great Volume, are worthy to be exquisitely ponder'd, the summ whereof is, the common wish: That the Majesty of Handling our History might once equal the Majesty of the Argument.
Sect. II. Great Savil himself gave hope when this Epistle came abroad, that he would be the Man; and all the learned of England were arrected and full of Expectation, grieving to find it vain. Somewhat he is said to have attempted in that Argument, and made Searches in the Tower, for Furniture out of Records; but, if he did any such thing, whether impatient of the harsh, and dusty Rudeness of the Subject, or despairing that he could so truly, as the Honour, and Splendour of his Name, and as the Nature of the Work requir'd, or for what other Cause else soever; he desisted, converting all his Cares to the Edition of St Chrysostom in Greek; which with the Charge of ten thousand Pounds (so it hath been said) as well in procuring Manuscripts, and Transcripts, as in the printing, and otherwise, was at the last effected; thus was he carry'd away by Speculation of things Divine, as it were in a Chariot of Fire, from this other immortal Office to his native Country. Nor do I wonder at it. for unless the Charity, or Ambition of writing be extraordinary, it is otherwise an Affliction for those Minds, which have been conversant in the Marvels and Delights of Hebrew, Greek , and Roman Antiquities, to turn over so many musty Rolls, so many dry, bloodless Chronicles, and so many dull, and heavy paced Histories, as they must who will obtain the Crown, and triumphal Ensign of having compos'd a Corpus rerum Anglicarum . But unlearned Delicacy (the minion of the fine and fortunate) is good in great things for nothing, while it self by only doing nothing, yet censuring all Things, preserves itself from receiving Justice. Solid 20 Camden , saith as the thing is,
[Page 237]
Historia omnium œtatum authores & ferat & desideret: & ab aliis rerum, ab aliis verborum doctrina sit querenda.
Sect. III. The vast vulgar Tomes procured for the most part by the husbandry of Printers, and not by appointment of the Prince, or Authority of the Common-weal, in their tumultuary, and centonical Writings, do seem to resemble some huge disproportionable Temple, whose Architect was not 21 his Arts Master, but in which, store of rich Marble, and many most goodly Statues, Columns, Arks, and antique Peices, recover'd from out of innumerable Ruins, are here, and there in greater Number, then commendable order erected, with no dispraise to their Excellency, however they were not happy in the Restorer. In Mr Speed's Stories publish'd since that Knights Epistle, besides all common Helps, there are for the later times, the Collections, Notes, and Extracts out of the Compositions of 22 L d Vicount St Alban , Of the 23 Ld Carew , of Sr 24 Rob. Cotton , of 25 Sr Hen. 26 of 27 Doctor 28 Bar. of 29 Mr Edmund 30 B. &c. Speeds own Part is such therein for style, and Industry, that for one who (as Martial speaks) hath neither a Græcum ΧαîρΕ , nor an Ave Latinum, is perhaps without many Fellows in Europe. So much also have I understood of him by sure Information, that he had no Meaning in that labour to prevent great practick Learnedness, but to furnish it for the common Service of England's Glory.
Sect. IV. History in general hath as many Praises, as any Muse among the nine. One tells us, as from out of ancient Authors, that History is nothing else but 31 a kind of Philosophy using Examples;
[Page 238]
another, that History is the Metropolis of Philosophy. Plainlyer, and more to our Purpose, Tully , among other Titles, calls her the Light of Truth, and Mistress of Life. St Gregory 32 Nazianzen , (that excellent greek Father) styleth her a World of Wisdom, for so his quædam conglobata sapientia (as his Translator calls it) may be Englished. Our 33 Malmesbury saith well and worthily, that it is jucunda quædam gestorum notitia mores condiens, quæ ad Bona sequenda, vel mala cavenda, legentes exemplis irritat . To like purpose writes Venerable Beda 34 to K. Ceolulph . Excellent is that of Sr Thomas North, in his Preface to his Plutarch's Lives: Histories (saith he there) are fit for every place, serve for all Times, reach to all Persons, teach the living, revive the dead, so excelling all other Books, as it is better to see Learning in noble Mens Lifes, than to read it in Philosophers Writings.
Sect. V. What Grammatical Criticks (from whose Pens let no man greatly hope for any thing in History noble) do teach unto us, it is not mainly by any free Master to be regarded. For who did ever write well, simply as a Disciple of theirs? Because to make an Historian, there are also requisite certain Gifts of God, and Nature, ripen'd, and perfected by Experience, peculiar to that Duty, which Lucian himself placeth not within Purchase, as natural Wisdom and Eloquence. And Lucians Precepts, or Observations are the best for Historiography among all the Heathen, unless perhaps you will prefer Dionysius Halicarnassæus , where he, in a special Tract Compares Thucydides , and Salust . A principle Duty of an Historian, every where agreed upon, is to handle the Counsels and causes of Affairs. Causes again are twofold; consider'd (according to 35 Savil ) as they are in Composition (wherein he saith that Tacitus did not look so well about him) and as they are in Division; or as 36 Sr Francis
[Page 239]
Bacon Vicount St Alban doth far better for my Capacity distinguish them into Causes, second or scatter'd, and into Causes confederate, and knit together. In this point consisteth the principle Difficulty and mystery of Historical Office, and not only Difficulty and Mystery, but Felicity also, according to that of the Poet: Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.
Sect. VI. To come to particulars or Parts of our History. The 37 where a good Account of part of this Period may be met with. A. H. Roman 38 Period , or reign in Britain , containing from Julius Cæsar , (who first invaded it) to the Reign of Valentinian (who first lost it) the long Space of above four hundred and threescore Years, by reason of the presence of some Roman Emperor's, and of continuing Dealings with that incomparable People, may well be reputed the-as-it-were-purple, and Gold of Histories. Which notwithstanding is rather the Glory of the Romans, then of the Britains, whose Estate and Affairs are so obscure, or rather so quite forgotten, that but only for one Juvenal , we never had heard of Arviragus ; nor but for one Venerable Bede and Freculphus Lexoviensis, (unless the Roman Martyrologe be more ancient, for Tertullian names him not, tho' he toucheth at the Conversion in his Apologeticks) we had scarce ever had any competent Testimony of King Lucius, first Christian King of Britain . The chief Difficulty, Knot, and Masterpeice of this Period is to bring to light the Acts, and Commonweal of the Britains under the Roman Empire.
Sect. VII. The Britain Period , or Comprehension of Time, and 39 Matter from the Entrance of Hengist with his English-Saxons , (as Friends) till the time of Cadwalladar , last King of the Britains , is Troubled with the like Obscurity as the Roman Period.
[Page 240]
Within this Revolution of Ages begins the Labyrinth of the Saxon Heptarchy, or rather Ogdoarchy, dividing the Kingdoms of the North-Humbers into their two Kingdoms, Deira and Bernice : which after Fabian (that memorable Alderman of London ) Stowe , and others, Speed hath done so well, as with 40 me it deserves to be reputed his best peice. This Period embracing the Circle of about six hundred and sixty years, from Hengist , to the Norman Invasion, hath many Excellencies in the Persons and Acts of our Ancestors, whether we consider Piety, force of Arms, or Arts of Peace. For in this time the Foundations, and 41 Superedificators of Christian Policy of England , were fully lay'd. And these so far as they concern the Laws of our Land (being the same which in common Speech, we call the Common Laws of England , but are indeed none other then Jus Civile Anglorum ) are very weakly and negligently handled by all our vulgar Chroniclers: tho' a thing in it self most worthy to have been throughly describ'd, and for the doing of which there are good store of Monuments. The eccentrick 42 circle of the Danish Invasions, Spoils, and Tyrannies, being rather an Interruption of a Continuation, then a just Revolution in Empire, drawn by the compasses of time within this English-Saxon Circumference, hath in it very terrible Examples of God's anger. Which Visitations from above, tho' grievous to Flesh and Blood, were not without special Mercy towards both Nations, when the English-Saxon was thereby forc'd to better his Life, and the Danes (as if that were God's secret in it) by degrees obtain'd to be Christians, their Period determinating in that great, and holy Monarch King Canutus.
Sect. VIII. The great 43 large Space of Time containing the compass of above five hundred and fifty Years, between the Norman Conquest under K. William , till the Union under K. James , needs not be called by any other title then that of the English Revolution.
[Page 241]
For albeit the natural English Line of the Royal Ethelings 44 (as Malmesbury sirnameth them) was thrust out by the Norman , and conveyed itself into Scotland , in the person of St Margaret (from whom our King is come) though the House of Bloys gave us an Intruder in K. Stephen : and the House of Anjou by Matildis the Empress, Daughter of Beauclerck, furnish'd us with Kings, till the Line of the Britains , return'd in the person of Richmond, yet did the Norman name in England quickly pass into that of English , as the less into the more, and all those Transmutations, Concussions, and Superinductions were of Family's, or of Housen Royal, rather then of Nations. For neither the Normans , after a while: nor the French under Lewis the Dolphin, during the Barons Wars, nor the Poictovines under K. Henry the third: nor the Welch under the Tydders (who in three Descents have given us five Monarchs) did either so sway, or were ever able so to sway, but that the English still carry'd the general Opinion, Face, and Body, of the Nation, and whatsoever was done noble by any of these Soveraigns or under them, the whole resulted to none other Peoples Glory then to only ours.
Sect. IX. So then the English Revolution from the Conquest to K. James, or the Comprehension of Acts and Ages, within that Space, hath inclusively given unto us 24 Princes, good and bad, and is the most important Part of our Histories. For the penning whereof, whether it be best to do it by Distinction into several Actions, without intermixture of coincident Matter, or by Lifes, and Reigns of Princes, that is, by the Order of Times, and Sequences of Events, may worthily seem questionable: because the first way is absolutely best for presenting to the Mind, the whole State of every particular great Business, tho' the other is best for Narration, as that in which the natural Method of the doing is observed, according to the Time of the doing, with the Intermixture synchronical, or contemporany
[Page 242]
accidents. The former Sort or Kind, 45 Cicero calleth Perpetua & continentia scripta, & conjuncte contexta and the other he seems periphrastically to name, separata, sejuncta, and secreta à continentibus scriptis.
Sect. X. To pen our History by Actions is to describe some eminently main Affair. For example, The Norman Conquest , and the effects of that Tyranny, till the Common-weal freed it self: the Interposal of K. Stephen : the famous Controversies about Church-mens Privileges, between the King and Canterbury ; which were, in a manner, original, and fundamental to all the incredible Changes which have followed in the Rule, and Policy of our Country: The enterprise of the Cross by 46 Cordelion : the Wars of the Barons: the Umpireship of Long-shanks in the manifold Competition for the Crown of Scotland : the Minions of Carnarvon : the Victories of Windsore and of the black Prince, his incomparable Son: the Minions of Bourdeaux : the Intrusion of Lancaster (seed of the Civil Wars) and Yolking of Wales : the Victories of Monmouth : the Tutors of gentle Henry, and the Civil Wars of England : the imprudent Marriage of March : the Destruction of his Son; the Atchievement of the Crown by Glocester: Richmond's Troubles by Counterfeits, and so forth. The other way of penning our History by Races, Lives, and Reigns, is the common Way, and therefore the more conform to common Liking: which is an orderly, and distinct Explication of principal Matters, as they happen'd under those several Monarchs, containing five Lines of royal Successions, whereof the Norman in two descents, brought forth 4 Kings; the 2 Williams, Henry, and Stephen : The Anjouvine, or Plantagenists Line, first in 7 Descents 8 Kings: 2 Henrys , 2 Richards , 1 John , and 3 Edwards ; then again the Plantagenists of Lancaster , in 3 descents 3 Kings, all of them Henrys : and lastly, the Plantagenists of York, in 2 descents 3
[Page 243]
Kings, 2 Edwards , and one Richard : in all, of the Plantagenists only 14 Monarchs, 5 Henrys , 3 Richards , one John and 5 Edwards : 47 Tidders Line in 4 descents: 6 Monarchs inclusively, 2 Henrys, the rest severally named, Edward, Mary, Elizabeth, and James; and he the first who brought the Royal Sirname of Stuarts to the Soveraignty of England . But by what Point soever of the Historical Compass our Historian means to make his course through the great Sea, and Archipelago of so noble, and magnificent a Work, let him learn of me to know the Places of Danger, Syrts, Shallows, and Rocks of most Mischief, at which all late Writers do grate, either little or much, and never come of without Damage in Reputation.
Sect. XI. I. The Places, where the most universal Shipwracks are made, are those huge moveable Sands, which lye uncertainly throughout the main Ocean of our Affairs, and almost under every Cape, and Point of them (whether ancient, or modern) are certain seeming Opportunities to Advantage, or Disadvantage [to] this or that side in the present Professions of Religion: Their name is Prejudices in Faith.
II. Another terrible Danger are Rocks, alike generally spread in their Tops, but rising all out of one Root, or Bottom-peice, is the Greatness of the ancient Clergy, their Power, and Privileges, and may well be commonly called Lapis Scandali.
III. A third no less dreadful Peril is the narrow Channel, which now and then shifting it self, as the Sands about remove, doth
[Page 244]
notwithstanding evermore lye between that Scylla of the Peoples Liberty, and the Charibdis of Royal Prerogative; which being in some parts thereof invisible, and in other illimitable, brings present Destruction, if fallen into, and is entitled Points Of State . This makes George Buchanans Histories intolerable, while to the injury of Majesty, and Truth, he advanceth popular Licence as mischievously as immoderately.
IV. A fourth Place is somewhat dangerous by Reason of the Encounter of divers Tides, and by Reason of the Checks and Currents. These are the old Titles, and Claims, extant in our sincerest ancient Histories, made on behalf of the Crown of England , to the Crowns of other Kingdoms, and lye just under the highest Elevation of the Pole of Majesty among us, and may be term'd the Honour Of Nations . This makes the reign of Longshancks dangerous to write, and difficult to read, without Inclination to Partakings, where the Kings Carriage of the Scotish Affairs is by either Nation historify'd
V. The fifth are certain stormy and gusty Seas, and as it were of an other la Bermuda , where the fierce Winds blow as if Heaven and Earth would go together Tanta est discordia Fratrum . These are a kind of Caspian , or inland Lakes, or Meres, situated in those Passages of our Histories, where there is a Necessity to sail thro' the National Quarrels of Britain , which the Union wisheth should be forgotten, but that the Adamantine Laws, and Nature of the Task permits it not, and may be called the Quarrel of Nations . And these Winds, and Tempests are the Reason, why the mutual Victories, and Overthrows between English and Scots , and between English and Welch , and between English and Irish &c. are never related with sufficient Freedom or Sincerity by newest Historians.
[Page 245]
Sect. XII. At all these Places it is incredible to behold, how many have let their Credits split in Peices; other their whole Fraights, and innumerable their Masts, Tackle, Oars, and Sails, and other Fragments, Testimonies of their Miscarryings. Through all which nothing but the Pilotage of Truth, directed by God's Honour, and the Glory of England , and Magnanimities Steerage, either ever did, or ever shall conduct any Author with immortal commendation. It is withal to be observ'd also, that in Navigating this mighty Sea, it is a duty to God, and our Country, that History should be true; whereas the mischief, or danger of delivering truths entirely is only personal, and as contingent, so but oblique and lateral to the Writer, whose single Peril ought not to præponderate an universal Service. And albeit Vopiscus , in his Aurelianus writes thus of his own most excellent Roman Authours: Neminem scriptorum quantum ad historiam pertinet, Non aliquid esse mentitum; prodente etiam, in quo Livius, in quo Salustius, in quo Cornel. Tacitus, in quo Trogus, Manifestis Testibus convincerentur : Yet as Sr Henry Savil (in the before said famous Epistle) pronounceth of those old Historians of England, Malmsbury, Huntingdon, Hoveden , and the other, that howsoever rude, and homely for Style, yet that they were fidi rerum interpretes ; and Cambden affirms of Venerable Bede, that he was veri amantissimus; so shall the reader find this true, that the old civil Historians of our Country are brightest in that essential Quality, and not to be convinced of any apparent, much less of any wilful Falsehood.
[Page 246]
ADDRESSE THE FOURTH. 48 Sect. I. As for Language and Style, (the Coat and Apparel of matter) he who would pen our Affairs in English , and compose unto us an entire Body of them, ought to have a singular Care thereof. For our Tongue (tho' it have no noted Dialects,
[Page 247]
nor accentual Notes, as the Greeks, nor any received, or enacted certainty of Grammar, or Orthography) is very copious, and few there be, who have the best, and most proper Graces thereof. In which the rule cannot but be variable, because the peoples Judgements are uncertain. The Books also out of which we gather the most warrantable English are not many to my remembrance. The principal which I have seen, and can in present call to mind, either for Prose, or Verse, are these whose Names do follow.
Sect. II. The Histories written by Sr Thomas More, (some few Antiquated Words excepted) contain a clear and proper Phrase.
The Arcadia of Sr Philip Sidney is most famous for rich Conceit, and Splendour of Courtly Expressions, warily to be used by an Historian; whose style should have gloss and lustre, but otherwise rather Solidity and Fluency, then Singularity of Oratorial, or Poetical Notions. Such things as I have read of Q. Elizabeths own doing carry in them a most Princely and vital
[Page 248]
Character, not without 49 singular Energy, and Force of sought Elegancy, which makes me consent in a sort to the Praise even of those things, which I have not seen of hers, set forth by Sr Henry Savil , in these Words, of his dedicatory Epistle before translated Tacitus: The Cause that I publish'd it under your Majesty's Name, and Protection, (besides the Testification of my 50 bounded duty) was &c. principally to incite your Majesty by this, as by a Foil, to communicate to the World, if not those Admirable Compositions of your own, yet at the least those most rare and excellent Translations of Histories (if I may call them Translations) which have so infinitely exceeded the Originals) making evident Demonstration to all who have seen them, that as the great actions of Princes are the Subject of Storys, so Storys compos'd, or amended by Princes are not only the best Pattern, and rule of great actions, but also the most natural Registers thereof, the Writers being Persons of like Degree, and proportionable Conceits with the Doers . Somewhat it may detract from the Credit of this seeming hyperbolical Praise, both because it was written in her Life time, and also to her self. But I can believe that they were excellent. For perhaps the World never saw a Lady, in whose Person more 51 Greatness of Parts met, then in hers; unless it were in that most noble Princess, and Heroine, Mary Queen of Scots, inferior to her only in her outward Fortunes, in all other Respects, and Abilities at least her equal. A Princely, grave, and flourishing Peice of natural, and exquisite English is Card. Alans Apology said to be: and many have commended the Style and Phrase of Father Rob. Pearsons highly. The End of Nero, and beginning of Galba, prefix'd to the translated Histories of Tacitus, and thought to be Sr Henry Savil's own (as whose else should so rare a piece be:) is the work of a very great Master indeed, both in our Tongue, and in that Story. That Tractate which goeth under the name of the Earl of Essex his Apology, was thought by some to be Mr 52 Anthony Bacon's : but as it bears that E. name, so do I
[Page 249]
also think that it was the Earl's own, as also his Advices for Travel to Roger Earl of Rutland ; then which nothing almost can be more honourably utter'd, nor more to the Writer's Praise, so far as belong to a noble English Oratour. Mr Hookers Preface to his Books of Ecclesiastical Policy is a singular, and choice Parcel of our vulgar Language. Dr Hayward's Phrase, and Words are very good; only some have wish'd that in his Henry the 4th he had not called Sr Hugh Linn by so light a Word as Madcap, tho' he were such; and that he had not changed his Historical State into a Dramatical, where he induceth a Mother uttering a Womans Passion in the Case of her Son. Sr Walter Raleigh's Guiana, and his prefatory Epistle before his mighty Undertaking in the History of the World, are full of proper, clear, and Courtly graces of Speech. Most of all Sr Francis Bacons Writings which have the freshest, and most savoury form and aptest utterances, that (as I suppose) our Tongue can bear.
These, next to his Majesties own most Royal Style, are the principal Prose Writers, whom out of my present Memory I 53 dare commend for the best Garden-plots, out of which to gather English Language.
Sect. III. In verse there are Ed. Spencer's Hymns. I cannot advise the 54 allowance of other his Poems, as for practick English, no more than I can do Jeff. Chaucer, Lydgate, Peirce Ploughman, or Laureat Skelton . It was laid as a fault to the charge of Salust, that he used some old outworn Words, stoln out of Cato his Books de Originibus . And for an Historian in our Tongue to affect the like out of those our Poets would be accounted a foul Oversight. That therefore must not be, unless perhaps we cite the Words of some old Monument, as Livy cites Carmen Martium, or as other Latins might alledge Pacuvius, Andronicus, or Laws of the Twelve Tables, or what else soever of the ancients. My judgement is nothing at all in Poems, or Poesie,
[Page 250]
and therefore I dare not go far, but will simply deliver my Mind concerning those Authours among us, whose English hath in my Conceit most propriety, and is nearest to the Phrase of Court, and to the Speech used among the noble, and among the better sort in London ; the two sovereign Seats, and as it were Parliament tribunals to try the question in. Brave language 55 are Chapman's Iliads, those I mean which are translated into Tessara-decasyllabons, or lines of fourteen Syllables. The Works of Sam. Daniel contain'd somewhat aflat, but yet withal a very pure, and copious English, and words as warrantable as any Mans, and fitter perhaps for Prose than Measure. Michael Draiton's Heroical Epistles are well worth the reading also, for the Purpose of our Subject; which is; to furnish an English 56 Historian with Choice and Copy of Tongue. Q. Elizabeth's verses, those which I have seen and read, some exstant in the elegant, witty and artificial Book of the Art of English Poetry, the Work (as the Fame is) of one of her Gentlemen Pensioners, Puttenham, are Princely, as her Prose.
Never must be forgotten St Peter's Complaint, and those 57 other serious Poems said to be father Southwell's ; the English whereof as it is most proper, so the sharpness, and Light of Wit is very rare in them.
58 Noble Henry Constable was a great Master in English Tongue, nor had any Gentleman of our Nation a more pure, quick, or higher Delivery of Conceit; witness among all other, that Sonnet of his before his Majesty's Lepanto . I have not seen much of Sr Edward Dyers Poetry. Among the lesser late Poets, George Gascoign's Works may be endur'd. But the best of those Times (if 59 Albion's England be not preferr'd) for our business, is, The 60 Mirrour of Magistrates, and in that Mirrour, Sackvil's Induction, the work of Thomas , afterward Earl of 61 Dorset , and Lord Treasurer of England , whose also the famous Tragedy of Gorboduc was, the best of that time, even in Sr Phil. Sidney's Judgement; and all skilful English men cannot
[Page 251]
but ascribe as much thereto, for his Phrase, and Eloquence therein. But before in Age, if not also in Noble, Courtly, and Lustrous English , is that of the Songs and Sonnets of Henry Howard , Earl of Surrey (Son of that victorious Prince, the 62 Duke of Norfolk , and Father of that learned Howard his most lively image, Henry Earl of Northampton ) written chiefly by him, and by Sr Tho. Wiat , not the dangerous Commotioner 63 but his worthy Father. Nevertheless they who most commend those Poems, and exercises of honourable Wit, if they have seen that incomparable Earl of Surrey his English Translation of Virgil's Æneids, which for a book, or two, he admirably rendreth, almost Line for Line, will bear me witness that those other were 64 Foils and Sportives.
The English Poems of Sr Walter Raleigh , of John Donn , of Hugh Holland , but especially of Sr Foulk Grevile in his matchless 65 Mustapha , are not easily to be mended. I dare not presume to speak of his Majesty's Exercises in this Heroick Kind. Because I see them all left out in that Edition which Montague Lord Bishop of Winchester hath given us of his royal Writings. But if I should declare mine own Rudeness rudely, I should then confess, that I never tasted English more to my liking, nor more smart, and put to the height of Use in Poetry, then in that vital judicious, and most practicable Language of Benjamin Jonson's Poems. 66
Sect. IV. I hope now that no man will be so captious, or ungentle, as to make it a matter of quarrel to me, if I have left out any other for Want of Memory, or Knowledge 67 : or if in those of whom herein I have made mention, I have spoken either other, or otherwise then as they themselves would. Because it is enough that I dissembled not; and for that the Subject, to the Purpose whereof I bring this tumultuary Catalogue, and private free Opinion upon it, is rather Parergon , then the thing it self
[Page 252]
I write of. For though it be Honour and Necessity, that the Body of Man be clothed, yet that it should be clothed in this, or that Stuff, or in stuff of this, or that Fashion, is a point indifferent and arbitrary, at the Writers Pleasure, so as Truth be under. And this is the present case of clothing the Body of History in the Garment of English Idiom.
Sect. V. He who would compose a Corpus rerum Anglicarum , a general History of England in Latin, hath no other Rules to follow, but such as he who writes it in English. One thing nevertheless is primely needful by our Latin Historiographer to be consulted of, and determined, because I have observed much Perplexity rising out of the right, or erroneous Practice thereof. The difficulty therefore is, what to do in our Latin History, with Names of Persons, Things, or Places which are not filed down to the Smoothness of Latin Sounds, or Rules of Termination. Lucian notes a ridiculous Curiosity in one Historian, who affecting Attick Elegancy would needs fashion Latin names to the Greek Garb, either by Translation, by Allusion, or Transportation of letters. By Translation, as in calling Saturninus, Chronius ; by Allusion, as in calling Fronto, Frontis ; by Metathesis, or Transportation of Syllables, or Letters, in calling Titianus, Titanius . In this fine and meer schoolish Folly, after that, George Buchanan is often taken; not without casting his Reader into obscurity. For in his Histories, where he speaketh of one Wisehart , so little was his ear able to brook the Name, as that translating the Sense thereof into Greek, of Wisehart comes forth unto us Sophocardius : and Wisehart , whose Name it was intended should live, was quite lost, or must be sought for out in Lexicons. The better Care of that polite and eloquent Scot , had been of Truth, and Loyalty. All our ancient Historians, ad unum (for oughts I can remember) follow the plain Prolation, and Truth of proper Names, and so doth the most approved, and learned Philologer, and Antiquary of our Nation Mr Cambden.
[Page 253]
Sect. VI. Thuanus (the most eloquent Latin Historian of this Age) and others do often call places, especially by the Names by which they were known to the Romans anciently, and among themselves: Which troubleth the Reader, and makes work for an Index Topographicus . The Romans themselves use their own Privilege, in declining, and new moulding of local, or personal Appellations. There are in this Case, only two sure ways for a Writer; The first to set down Names just as they find them, without regard to Latinity. (For that is most Latinlike, or latinissimum , which is most true: Latin also (as other Tongues) being capable of all sorts of Words declinable, or indeclinable; and in this way would I my self precisely insist.) The second best counsel for a Latin Historian of English Affairs is to use Latin Analogy of proper Names in the Text, and to set the vulgar, and barbarously sounding Names in the Margin, or to post them over into a Repertory, or Table at the End of the Volume. Other Courses, besides that they savour of Affectation, do also involve the Reader with Obscurity, and afflicting him in seeking what, and whence, and whose a Name was, while the matter it self doth in the mean space either vanish in the Readers Mind, or altogether languish.
Sect. VII. God Almighty, I hope, hath now graciously brought me to the Conclusion of this high and Hypercritical Argument, which to his Glory I close up with this final admonition to my self, or to whosoever else doth meditate the Herculean, and truly noble Labour of composing an entire, and compleat Body of English affairs, a Corpus rerum Anglicarum , a general History of England , to which not only the exquisite Knowledge of our own matters is altogether necessary, but of all other our Neighbours 68 whatsoever, yea of all the World, for where our Arms, and Armies have not been, our Arts, and Navies have. Know therefore whosoever art in Love with
[Page 254]
Glory for good, and Heroick Deserts, that in writing an History thou bearest a fourfold person, and in regard of that Empersonation, thou standest charged with a fourfold Duty.
1. As a Christian Cosmopolite to discover God's Assistances, Disappointments and 69 Overruling in human affairs, as he is sensibly conversant in the Actions of men; to establish the just Fear of his celestial Majesty against Atheists, and Voluptuaries, for the general good of Mankind, and the World.
2. As a Christian Patriot to disclose the Causes, and Authours of 70 thy Countries good or evil, to establish thereby the lawful Liberty of Nations.
3. As a Christian Subject to observe to thy Reader, the benefit of Obedience, and Damage of Rebellions; to establish thereby, the regular Authority of Monarchs and Peoples Safety.
4. As a Christian Paterfamilias so to order thy Studys, that thou neglect not thy private, because the publick hath few real Friends; and Labours of this noble Nature are fitter to get Renown then Riches, which they will need, not amplyfy.
Sect. VIII. Of such Writings thou needest not fain with Dio , the Consul of Rome , any promise in Vision, that thy Name, and Praise shall be immortal by means of them. For they will outlast the Nations themselves, whose Acts in competent Style they memorize. And of such Works the late Earl of Essex under the letters A. B (for Fames gives it him) in an Epistle before the translated Tacitus of his Friend Sr Henry Savil , it is as probably pronounced for true, as if an Oracle had utter'd it: That there is no treasure so much enriches the mind of Man, as Learning; there is no Learning so proper for the Direction of the Life of Man as History; there is no History so well worth reading (I say not with him) as Tacitus , but as that of thine whosoever.
71 Deo gloria et honor.
NOTES
1 [1] The place is set down in my third Addresse.
2 [1] Epist. ad Hen. 4 tum, Gall. Reg. ante Polybium: illos excusari non posse judicamus, qui unicum hunc historicum omnibus aliis anteponunt. Quid enim principi, prœsertim juveni lectione illorum Annalium esse queat perniciosius.
3 [1] Esstate MS. Rawlinson.
4 [2] Of good Ib.
5 [3] I most heartily wish He had; for any Person of Skill, in every Paragraph, may easily discover Him to be a complete Master of his Subject. A. H.
6 [4] Here Mr. Hearne's Fragment begins, and ends with the Address. A. H.
7 [1] Apud Matth. Westm. Epist. Edv. 1. Regis A. ad Bonifaciam P. M. 1301. Et Epist. Procerum Angl. Anno eodem.
8 [2] II. Elizab. ap. Dubl. 23 Febru. Sr H. Sidney L. Deputy.
9 [3] Sicut fabulosa Gaufredi Arthuri mentitur Historia: These are the words of Giraldus cited by Sr John Prise, out of Giraldus, de Cambriæ descriptione, where Giraldus denies, and truly denies, that Wales was so called, either of Duke Wallo or of Queen Wendolena.
10 [1] Perambulat of Kent.
11 [2] Deest forte, writes. H.
12 [1] De Civitate Dei liber 16. cap. 11.
13 [2] De Trad. Hebr. in Genes.
14 [3] Histor. lib. 15. cap. 23.
15 [4] Correct: for Mr. Cambden saith not that it was the Herb, but the very being painted, smear'd or colour'd (with an herb) which the word Brith signify'd.
16 [1] Nat. Hist. lib. 25. cap. 3.
17 [1] Decimamquartam lunæ diem.
18 [1] Cor. Tacit. Annal.
19 [1] Ante suos rerum Anglicarum scriptores.
20 [1] Annal. Hiber. in sua Brit. pag. 836,
21 [1] Is, MS.
22 [2] In Hen. 7. Of the now MS. Rawlinson.
23 [3] In Henry throughout 5.
24 [4] In Henry 8.
25 [5] In Norfolk 7. Sic MS. A.H.
26 [6] Lege, Spelman.
27 [7] In K. John.
28 [8] L. Barcham.
29 [9] In K. Henry 2. the speech of Macmurgh K. of Leinster,
30 [10] Lege Bolton, i.e. the Author of this Treatise. A.H.
31 [11] Isa. Casaub.
32 [1] Ad Nicob. de Hist. le.
33 [2] Proæm. lib. 2. de gest. Reg. Anglor.
34 [4] Annot. 14. in Cap. 2. lib. 1. Histor. transla.
35 [4] Annot. 14. in Cap. 2. lib. 1. Histor. transla.
36 [5] Essay the 16. Cap. of Atheism.
37 [1] See his Nero Cæsar, p. 71–193
38 The Roman Period.
39 The British Period.
40 English Period.
41 [1] F. Superedifications, A. H.
42 Danish Period.
43 [2] Great Space MS. Rawlinson.
44 The English Revolution.
45 [1] Epist. 12. ad Lucceium Historicum lib. 5.
46 [2] Ceur de Lion, i.e. Richard I. A. H.
47 [1] Or Tudors. Tudor is turn'd by Lelænd into Theodorus. A. H.
48 The following extract from another copy of the work, in a less perfect state, preserved with Rawlinson's MSS. (Misc. I. p. 13.) is now given as being that portion of the Hypercritica which founds its principal claim to insertion in the present collection, and was probably the original outline of “Addresse the fourth.” Edit. Concerning Historicall language and Style. An emendation of the best Authors for written English. The Choise of English.—As for example, language and style, (the apparell of matter,) hee who would penn our affaires in English, and compose unto us an entire body of them, ought to haue a singuler care thereof. For albeit our tongue hath not receiued dialects, or accentuall notes as the Greeke, nor any certaine or established rule either of gramer or true writing, is notwithstanding very copious, and fewe there be who haue the most proper graces thereof, for which the rule cannot be variable; For as much as the people's judgements are vncertaine, the books also out of which wee gather the most warrantable English are not many to my remembrance, of which, in regard they require a ∥ticuler and curious tract, I forbeare to speake at this present. But among the chiefe, or rather the chiefe, are in my opinion these. Sr. Thomas Moore's works some fewe outworne or antiquated words excepted. The Arcadia of St. Phillip Sidney is worthiely most famous for rich conceipt, and splendor of courtly expressions which are not to be vsed by any historian but very rarely and with great judgement, as one whose style should haue glosse and lustre, but otherwise soliditie and fluencie rather then odd notions, full of affected newnes proper to oratours and poets. Queene Elizabeth. Sr. Henry Savile his end of Nero and begining of Galba. Robert earle of Essex his apologie and letters to Roger earle of Rutland. Mr. Hooker his preface to his booke of Ecelesiasticall Pollicy. Sr. John Heyward his Henry the fourth, some fewe things excepted. Sr. Francis Bacon lord viscount St. Alban in his summarie of King Henry the seauenth's life especially. King James some few Scotcismes excepted. Cardinall Allens Apologie a rare esteemed peece of English. Edmund Spencer (the most learned Poet of our Nation,) very little for the vse of history. George Chapman first seauen books of Jliades. Samuell Danyell. Michael Drayton his Heroicall Epistles of England. Marlowe his excellent fragment of Hero and Leander. Shakespere, Mr. Francis Beamont, and innumerable other writers for the stage, and presse tenderly to be vsed in this Argument. Southwell, Parsons and some fewe other of that sort. Henry Constable a rare gentleman. Richard earle of Dorset, the myrrour of Magistrates, and his tragedies of Gorboduck. Henry earle of Surrey and Sr. Thomas Wyatt of old. Henry earle of Northampton, sonne of that Surrey, for some fewe things, a man otherwise too exuberent and wordfull. Grevile lo. Brooke in his impious Mustapha. Beniamin Johnson Sr. Henry Wotton. The learned and truely noble Sr. John Beaumont barronet in all his &c.; and late dictionaries, some publiq: speaches, some sermons, &c.
49 [1] A singular MS. Rawlinson.
50 [2] Sic MS. L. bounden. A. H.
51 [3] Greatnesses MS. Rawlinson.
52 [4] 'Twas Sr Francis Bacon that wrote the Apology; but that is another thing.
53 King James.
54 Spencer.
55 Chapman's Homer.
56 Q. Eliz.
57 Southwell.
58 H. Constable.
59 [1] Albion's England written by W Warner. A. H.
60 [2] Mirrour of mag. written by J. Hygens. A. W.
61 Tho. Sackvil.
62 Hen. Howard.
63 Tho- Wiat.
64 [1] Were but Foils. MS. Rawlinson.
65 Foulk-Grevile.
66 Ben. Jonson.
67 [2] Knowledge of them: Ibid.
68 [1] Whosoever, MS. Rawlinson.
69 [1] Overrulings, MS. Rawlinson.
70 [2] Of all thy Ibid.
71 [3] Deo Gratias. Ibid.
$$$
