Illustrative Notes on Poetry And Art
Author: Dobell, Sydney.
Publication info: Thoughts On Art, Philosophy, and Religion . xviii, 339 p. London: Smith, Elder, & Co, 1876.

Illustrative Notes on Poetry And Art [in, Thoughts on Art, Philosophy, and Religion: Selected from the Unpublished Papers of Sydney Dobell]
[Page 66]
ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES ON POETRY AND ART. WHY POETRY SHOULD BE RELIGIOUS, AS DISTINCT FROM METAPHYSICAL. A truth is not Religious unless its analogues, homologues, or other congruous types can be understood in all other great departments of Thought: i.e. unless it will form part of a congruous system that shall comprehend all the chief interests of Mankind.
Whatever mode of thinking is necessarily confined to one or two points of the mental compass may be true but is not Religious.
Whatever form of a truth is incongruous with anything insuperable in the constitution or action of the human mind is not a Religious form.
Poetry therefore should be always Religious as distinct from Metaphysical. Because the Religious statement of Truth is such a version of it in any one department as can be congruously carried out into all
[Page 67]
others without anywhere being inconsistent with the constitution of Man.
FOOT-NOTES FOR LECTURE. Science (see Newton) says (as its fundamental axiom) we are to apply terrestrial principles to celestial phenomena— i.e. that the universe is one idea. Poetry acting on this is employed in showing the relations of its parts.
De Candolle tells us that a tree is a confederation of little trees. Human Physiology seems to indicate that the nervous system is an association of men, and the tendency of all science is to reduce phenomena to the varied application of one Principle.
A tree is a good illustration (remembering De Candolle's version of a tree) of the Law of a Poem, but the higher forms of creation are better, inasmuch as that is the finest work in which the greatest variety of application is consistent with unity in the Principle applied.
Language when analyzed is more than even a combination of words in literal senses.
Examine any passages of ordinary prose and you find that element by which the unseen is expressed—the metaphorical element. The Poets are the source of all this.
[Page 68]
Again the expressiveness of nouns, etc., of physical meaning is due to certain intimate relations between sign and thing signified. The Poets determine this.
Few words are used in their central sense : in innumerable cases an accidental sense having become the accepted meaning. Poets restore the central sense.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF PROSE AND POETRY. Go through a series of events under the constraining conditions of ordinary life. Remember and recount them accurately in the acted series. Prose.
Now tell the same story with such differences as result from allowing the facts to perfect themselves individually and to follow the order of essential association. Poetry.
Take a specimen of faulty prose and subtract from it all that is inconsistent with the qualities of an ideal man— e.g. his Love, Worship, Knowledge—and with those things which those qualities necessitate in their expression— e.g. Beauty, Sublimity, Order—and the quotient, if any, will be Poetry—the zero of Poetry, may be.
As an illustration of the axiom that Poetry is what
[Page 69]
will congruously form part of a Poem take the Scriptural passages adapted into Milton's seventh Book.
Contemplate a thing with all your powers—intellectual and moral—at once, and find a word or phrase that is the algebraic expression of that combination of forces and you speak Poetry, which is good in proportion to the degree in which your mind—at that time—is perfect.
NECESSITY OF RHYTHM. The unity of Law which has been shown to be essential to a Poem is as essential to the whole body of sound in which the inaudible materials are incorporated as to those materials. The total sound in the Poem may be taken as a great organized corpus.
Now whether we consider sound, per se , as an unorganized thing to be measured by quantity, or as a succession of impulses to the ear, or of efforts by the organs of speech, and therefore as consisting of numbers, the first necessity of reducing it to proportion must be a standard unit of measure. This being fixed a subordination of parts to the Law of a whole becomes possible.
Hence feet and metre: and rhythm which is a composition of the standard of measure whereby the standard itself is nevertheless suggested by the proportions borne to it.
[Page 70]
Rhythmus—rest and action occurring at intervals either pre-expected or self-justificatory by perceptible relation to the previous intervals.
All co-operative movements of many things that are obliged to conform to one time-beater, like the heart, must be rhythmic in order to avoid collision.
As a piece of Art how fine are those two verses—the last of John vii. (‘and every man went unto his own house’) and the first of John viii. (‘Jesus went unto the Mount of Olives’)—in which, out of the dispersion and confusion of the scene, the principal Figure comes into principality by the size and dignity of ‘Mount of Olives’ as compared with ‘own house.’
METAPHOR. A great part of the Poet's work is the making of equations. He finds ‘A’ to be the equivalent of ‘B’ —i.e. ‘A’ being presented to his balanced mind would induce the same change therein as the presentation of ‘B.’ Metaphor in a true Poet is not a work of conscious human intellect at all: it is the perfunctory work of a piece of Divine machinery which produces the alter ego of a fact involuntarily. A Poet therefore must describe what he sees in Imagination (whether the images there
[Page 71]
be simply remembered or also reconstructed) for the Emotions produced in his mind by positive Things would usually be so exquisite as to make any verbal equivalent impossible.
Nevertheless the verbal equivalents which he finds for Memories and Imaginations appear to the rest of mankind equivalents for Things. We understand therefore how much beyond the ordinary race are the perceptions of the Poet and comprehend Tennyson's
‘Dower'd with the hate of hate, the scorn of scorn,
The love of love.’
CONSTRUCTION. Every grown up full-functioned Human Being comes, more or less theoretically, to believe in an outside world of what he calls things, or facts, and an inner world which he calls himself.
Things in himself which he calls wishes or desires make him attempt to change the status quo of external things: to bring those together which were apart and separate those which were together. In this attempt he finds certain hindrances from ‘properties’ or conditions of outward and inward things; and finds that realization of his wishes is possible only by a selective compliance
[Page 72]
with these ‘properties’ and that execution of the attempt becomes easy in proportion as he conforms to the necessities these impose.
He whose activities have so wisely complied as to change the manner in which any set of ‘external’ things stand to each other has produced a ροίημα —his doing is ροίησις and himself a ροιητής.
ART AN INSTRUMENT OF PROGRESS. A Logician, per specialité , can seldom be a good (and is always a dangerous) man of action, because he will absolutely deduce from premises which, since perceived by imperfect men, are, by necessity, partly false.
Other men may ‘happen’ upon a felicitous entirety of temporary right, but he, in some part of his work, and often in the whole, must be consistently and inevitably wrong.
The harmony and consistency of every organism that is to live and act—whether political or otherwise—must not be that of Logic but of Art.
The great progress of things takes place by the passage of the highest form of each thing into the thing above it.
Art should be an instrument of this progress by
[Page 73]
always selecting the best phase of every individual, the best form of every type— i.e. the Ideal.
A WORK OF ART NEVER STRICTLY TELEOLOGIC. That work of Art which in construction is strictly teleologic—in which every part is essential to the whole —is artificial not natural, architecture not Nature.
A work of Art should be a part—a membrum—of the great Corpus Naturæ ; a whole in so far as a member is a whole quoad itself, but containing many things which are not essential to that whole insomuch as they have relation to the greater whole whereof it is a part.
By omitting those things, in the attempt at a theoretical completeness, the work falls from Art to mechanics. Hence the lifelessness and undivineness of much that is called Art.
(The sculptor knows that he can destroy the life of the most lovely marble face by simply making its two sides geometrically equal.)
HIGH ART NOT LITERAL. As an unliving thing, absolutely still—having not one of the infinitesimal motions that are incessant in the living surface—would, if an exact form-and-colour likeness of life, produce, in a few minutes in the beholder,
[Page 74]
an instinctive horror, may it not be a primary condition of all ‘ocular’ Art that it shall demonstrate its nonreality by some radical ‘manque?’ That colour should not have substance, or substance colour?
Art, though it cannot hope to produce Truth, is an aspiration and effort towards Truth, and must therefore be essentially uncongenial with lying.
Is not the lie of the marble Venus, with skin of exquisite colour and all that should result from a substance of organic life, but whose interior is a dead mass of inorganic stone, a greater lie than the almost nothing of canvas?
IN WHAT MANNER ART SHOULD RE-PRESENT NATURE. There are a thousand primroses on yonder Bank. What do I want Art to do for me? To reproduce the Bank as it is? That may be worth doing if practicable, but, for my part, I would rather wait the next Spring and see the Bank itself at the right season.
What I want Art to do is to bring a mind specially gifted to perceive among that thousand of Primroses the most typical Primrose—the αὐτὸ καθαυτόν —and to perpetuate that for me, so that looking at any time on that special Perfection I may not only receive the accompanying enjoyment but rise towards Perfection Universal.
[Page 75]
ART SHOULD TAKE POSSESSION OF MENTAL HABITS. In Art we should take possession of mental habits, inveterate ideas, invariable experiences, and natural functions: e.g. when Domenichino makes the nymph's foot look elastic the unconscious logic of the mind supplies motion: when the Apollo Belvedere is seen at that infinitesimal point of rest which must intervene in steps, the same logic takes the step: &c. &c.
MEMORY. It is probable that human Memory, in all cases, follows, with more or less ability, the laws of Poetic Imagination—omitting and rearranging according to Unity.
We see this on the large scale in the National Memory wherein facts become congruous and beautiful. I am not now alluding to the grotesque elements in Mythology which are due to another process.
$$$
