Illustrations on Sublimity
Author: Beattie, James.
Publication info: Dissertations Moral and Critical ... By James Beattie ... . x, [6], 655, [1] p. Edinburgh: ... W. Creech ...--Printed for W. Strahan; and T. Cadell .., 1783.

Illustrations on Sublimity [in, Dissertations Moral and Critical ... By James Beattie ...]
[Page 605]
ILLUSTRATIONS ON SUBLIMITY. Longinus , the Secretary of Zenobia queen of Palmyra, who was conquered by the emperour Aurelian about the middle of the third century, composed many books of philosophy and criticism, and among others a discourse on Sublimity, which is the only part of his writings that has been preserved to our time. He is an author, not more remarkable for accuracy of judgment, than for the energy of his style, and a peculiar boldness and elevation of thought. And men of learning have vied with each other, in celebrating and expounding that work; which is indeed one of the best specimens that remain of antient criticism, and well deserves the attention of every scholar.
But he has used the word 1 Hupsos in a more general sense, than is commonly annexed to the term Sublimity ; not always distinguishing what is sublime from what is elegant or beautiful. The distinction, however, ought to be made. Both indeed give delight; but the gratification we derive from the one is different from that which accompanies the other. It is pleasing to behold a fine face, or an apartment elegantly furnished and of exact proportion; it is also pleasing to contemplate a craggy mountain, a vast cathedral, or a magnificent palace: but surely, the one sort of pleasure differs as much from the other, as complacency differs from admiration, or the soft melody of a flute from the overpowering tones of a full organ.
[Page 606]
Grammarians are not agreed about the etymology of the word Sublime . The most probable opinion is, that it may be derived from supra and limus ; and so denotes literally the circumstance of being raised above the slime , the mud , or the mould , of this world. Be that as it may, it uniformly signifies in the Latin, whence we have taken it, elevation , or loftiness . And, because whatever is much elevated, as a high building, or a high mountain, infuses into the beholder a sort of pleasing astonishment; hence those things in art or nature, which have the same effect on the mind, are, with a view to that effect, called by the same name. Great depth, being the correlative of great height, and being indeed implied in it, (for whatever is high from below is deep from above) and because it astonishes and pleases the imagination, is also to be considered as sublime. For, if we be ourselves secure, every one must have observed, that it is agreeable to look down, from a mountain, upon the plain, or from the top of a high building, upon the various objects below. Cotton says, with the energy and enthusiasm of Dryden:
O my beloved rocks, that rise
To awe the earth, and brave the skies!
From some aspiring mountain's crown,
How dearly do I love,
Giddy with pleasure, to look down:
And from the vales to view the noble heights above! 2
“It is pleasant,” says Lucretius, “to behold from the land the labours of the mariner in a tempestuous ocean;—but nothing is more delightful, than from the heights of science to look down on those who wander in the mazes of error: not (says he) because we are gratified with another's distress; but because there is a pleasure in seeing evils from which we ourselves are
[Page 607]
free.” The fact is partly so; but the poet entirely mistakes the cause. It is pleasant to behold the sea in a storm, on account of its astonishing greatness and impetuosity; and it is pleasant to look down from an elevated situation, because here too there is greatness and delightful astonishment. But to see others in danger, or unhappy in their ignorance, must always give pain to a considerate mind, however conscious it may be of its own security, and wisdom. Such a sentiment we need not wonder to find in an Epicurean poet; as all the views of his master terminated in self. But it is somewhat strange, that Creech, in a note upon the passage, should vindicate his author in these terms: Id asserit poeta, quod omnes sentiunt; qui dolore aut morbo laborantem videt, protinus, O me fælicem: “The poet asserts nothing, but what is warranted by universal experience; when we see a man diseased, or in pain, we immediately exclaim (or think) How happy are we!” Every generous mind feels the falsehood of this doctrine. It was however, a favourite topick of Swift; as appears from those verses on his own death, in which he comments upon a silly and ambiguous maxim of Rochefoucault 3 According to this theory, the most
[Page 608]
desirable of all human conditions would be that of the superintendant of an hospital, the keeper of Bedlam, or the commander of galley-slaves: who would every moment be rejoicing in the thought, that he was free from the miseries which he beheld around him.
[Page 609]
What we admire, or consider as great, we are apt to speak of in such terms, as if we conceived it to be high in place: and what we look upon as less important we express in words that properly denote low situation. We go up to London; and thence down into the country. The Jews spoke in the same manner of their metropolis, which was to them the object of religious veneration. “Jerusalem, says the Psalmist, is a city, to which the tribes go up:” and the parable of the good Samaritan begins thus, “A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho.” Conformably to the same idiom, heaven is supposed to be above, and hell to be beneath; and we say, that generous minds endeavour to reach the summit of excellence, and think it beneath them to do, or design, any thing that is base. The terms base, groveling, low , &c. and those of opposite import, elevated, aspiring, lofty , as applied in a figurative sense to the energies of mind, do all take their rise from the same modes of thinking. The Latins expressed admiration by a verb which properly signifies to look up (suspicere) ; and contempt by another ( despicere ) whose original meaning is to look down . A high seat is erected for a king, or a chief magistrate, and a lofty pedestal for the statue of a hero; partly, no doubt, that they may be seen at the greater distance, and partly also, out of respect to their dignity.
But mere local elevation is not the only source of sublimity. Things that surpass in magnitude; as a spacious building, a great city, a large river, a vast mountain, a wide prospect, the ocean, the expanse of heaven, fill the mind of the beholder with the same agreeable astonishment. And observe, that it is rather the relative magnitude of things, as compared with others of the same kind, that raises this emotion, than their absolute quantity of matter. That may be a sublime edifice, which in real magnitude falls far short of a small hill that is not sublime: and a river two furlongs in breadth
[Page 610]
is a majestick appearance, though in extent of water it is as nothing when compared with the ocean.
Great number, too, when it gives rise to admiration, may be referred to the same class of things. Hence an army, or navy, a long succession of years, eternity, and the like, are sublime, because they at once please and astonish. In contemplating such ideas or objects, we are conscious of something like an expansion of our faculties, as if we were exerting our whole capacity to comprehend the vastness of that which commands our attention 4 This energy of the mind is pleasing, as all mental energies are when unaccompanied with pain: and the pleasure is heightened by our admiration of the object itself; for admiration is always agreeable.
In many cases, great number is connected with other grand ideas, which add to its own grandeur. A fleet, or army, makes us think of power, and courage, and danger, and presents a variety of brilliant images. A long succession of years brings to view the vicissitude of human things, and the uncertainty of life, which sooner or later must yield to death, the irresistable destroyer. And eternity reminds us of that awful consideration, our own immortality; and is connected with an idea still more sublime, and indeed the most sublime of all, namely, with the idea of Him , who fills immensity with his presence; creates, preserves, and governs all things; and is from everlasting to everlasting.
In general, whatever awakens in us this pleasurable astonishment is accounted sublime, whether it be connected with quantity and number, or not. The harmony of a loud and full organ conveys, no doubt, an idea of expansion and of power; but, independently on this, it overpowers with so sweet a violence, as charms and astonishes at the same time: and we are generally conscious of an elevation of mind when we hear it, even though the ear be not sensible of
[Page 611]
any melody. Thunder and tempest are still more elevating, when one hears them without fear; because the sound is still more stupendous; and because they fill the imagination with the magnificent idea of the expanse of heaven and earth, through which they direct their terrible career, and of that Almighty Being, whose will controuls all nature. The roar of cannon, in like manner, when considered as harmless, gives a dreadful delight; partly by the overwhelming sensation wherewith it affects the ear, and partly by the ideas of power and danger, triumph and fortitude, which it conveys to the fancy.
Those passions of the soul yield a pleasing astonishment, which discover a high degree of moral excellence, or are in any way connected with great number, or great quantity. Benevolence and piety are sublime affections; for the object of the one is the Deity himself, the greatest, and the best; and that of the other is the whole human race, or the whole system of percipient beings. Fortitude and generosity are sublime emotions: because they discover a degree of virtue, which is not every where to be met with; and exert themselves in actions, that are at once difficult, and beneficial to mankind 5 .—Great intellectual abilities, as the genius of Homer, or of Newton, we cannot contemplate without wonder and delight, and must therefore refer to that class of things whereof I now speak.—Nay great bodily strength is a sublime object; for we are agreeably astonished, when we see it exerted, or hear of its effects.— There is even a sublime beauty, which both astonishes and charms: but this will be found in those persons only, or chiefly, who unite fine features with a majestick form; such as we may suppose an antient statuary would have represented Juno, or Minerva, Achilles, or Apollo.
[Page 612]
When great qualities prevail in any person, they form what is called a sublime character 6 . Every good man is a personage of this order: but a character may be sublime, which is not completely good, nay, which is upon the whole very bad. For the test of sublimity is not moral approbation, but that pleasurable astonishment wherewith certain things strike the beholder. Sarpedon, in the Iliad, is a sublime character, and at the same time a good one: to the valour of the hero he joins the benignity of a gracious prince, and the moderation of a wise man. Achilles, though in many respects not virtuous, is yet a most sublime character. We hate his cruelty, passionate temper, and love of vengeance: but we admire him for his valour, strength, swiftness, generosity, beauty, and intellectual accomplishments, for the warmth of his friendship, and for his filial tenderness 7 . In a word, notwithstanding his violent nature, there is in his general conduct a mixture of goodness and of greatness, with which we are both pleased and astonished. Julius Cesar was never considered as a man of strict virtue. But, in reading his Memoirs , it is impossible not to be struck with the sublimity of his character: that strength of mind, which nothing can bear down; that self-command, which is never discomposed; that intrepidity in danger; that address in negociation; that coolness and recollection in the midst of perplexity; and that unwearied activity, which crouds together in every one of his campaigns as many great actions as would make a hero. Nay even in Satan, as Milton has represented him in Paradise Lost, though there are no qualities that can be called good in a moral view; nay, though every purpose of that wicked spirit is bent to evil, and to that only; yet there is the grandeur of a ruined archangel: there is force able to contend with the most boisterous elements; and there is boldness, which no power, but what is Almighty, can intimidate. These qualities are astonishing: and, though we always detest his malignity,
[Page 613]
we are often compelled to admire that very greatness by which we are confounded and terrified.
And be not surprised, that we sometimes admire what we cannot approve. These two emotions may, and frequently do, coincide: Sarpedon and Hector, Epaminondas and Aristides, David and Jonathan, we both approve and admire. But they do not necessarily coincide: for goodness calls forth the one, and greatness the other; and that which is great is not always good, and that may be good which is not great. Troy in flames, Palmyra in ruins, the ocean in a storm, and Etna in thunder and conflagration, are magnificent appearances, but do not immediately impress our minds with the idea of good: and a clear fountain is not a grand object, though in many parts of the world it would be valued above all treasures. So in the qualities of the mind and body: we admire the strong, the brave, the eloquent, the beautiful, the ingenious, the learned; but the virtuous only we approve. There have been authors indeed, one at least there has been, who, by confounding admiration with approbation, laboured to confound intellectual accomplishments with moral virtues; but it is shameful inaccuracy, and vile sophistry: one might as well endeavour to confound crimes with misfortunes, and strength of body with purity of mind; and say, that to be a knave and to lose a leg are equally worthy of punishment, and that one man deserves as much praise for being born with a healthy constitution, as another does for leading a good life.
But if sublime ideas are known by their power of inspiring agreeable astonishment, and if Satan in Paradise Lost is a sublime idea, does it not follow, that we must be both astonished at his character, and pleased with it? And is it possible to take pleasure in a being, who is the author of evil, and the adversary of God and man?
I answer; that, though we know there is an evil spirit of this name, we know also, that Milton's Satan is partly imaginary; and we believe, that those qualities are so in particular, which we admire
[Page 614]
in him as great: for we have no reason to think, that he has really that boldness, irresistable strength, or dignity of form, which the poet ascribes to him. So far, therefore, as we admire him for sublimity of character, we consider him, not as the great enemy of our souls, but as a fictitious being, and a mere poetical hero. Now the human imagination can easily combine ideas in an assemblage, which are not combined in nature; and make the same person the object of admiration in one respect, who in another is detestable: and such inventions are in poetry the more probable, because such persons are to be met with in real life. Achilles and Alexander, for example, we admire for their magnanimity, but abhor for their cruelty. And the poet, whose aim is to please, finds it necessary to give some good qualities to his bad characters; for, if he did not, the reader would not be interested in their fortune, nor, consequently, pleased with the story of it. 8
In the picture of a burning city, we may admire the splendour of the colours, the undulation of the flames, the arrangements of light and shade, and the other proofs of the painter's skill; and nothing gives a more exquisite delight of the melancholy kind, than Virgil's account of the burning of Troy. But this does not imply, that we should, like Nero, take any pleasure in such an event, if it were real and present. Indeed, few appearances are more beautiful, or more sublime, than a mass of flame, rolling in the wind, and blazing to heaven: whence illuminations, bonfires, and fireworks make part of a modern triumph. Yet destruction by fire is of all earthly things the most terrible.
An object more astonishing, both to the eye, and to the ear, there is hardly in nature, than (what is sometimes to be seen in the West Indies) a plantation of sugar-canes on fire, flaming to a vast height, sweeping the whole country, and every moment sending forth a thousand explosions, like those of artillery. A good description
[Page 615]
of such a scene we should admire as sublime; for a description can neither burn nor destroy. But the planter, who sees it desolating his fields, and ruining all his hopes, can feel no other emotions than horror and sorrow.—In a word, the Sublime, in order to give pleasing astonishment, must be either imaginary, or not immediately pernicious.
There is a kind of horror, which may be infused into the mind both by natural appearances, and by verbal description; and which, though it make the blood seem to run cold, and produce a momentary fear, is not unpleasing, but may be even agreeable: and therefore, the objects that produce it are justly denominated sublime. Of natural appearances that affect the mind in this manner, are vast caverns, deep and dark woods, overhanging precipices, the agitation of the sea in a storm: and some of the sounds above-mentioned have the same effect, as those of cannon and thunder. Verbal descriptions infusing sublime horror are such as convey lively ideas, of the objects of superstition, as ghosts and enchantments; or of the thoughts that haunt the imaginations of the guilty; or of those external things, which are pleasingly terrible, as storms, conflagrations, and the like.
It may seem strange, that horror of any kind should give pleasure. But the fact is certain. Why do people run to see battles, executions, and shipwrecks? Is it, as an Epicurean would say, to compare themselves with others, and exult in their own security while they see the distress of those who suffer? No, surely: good minds are swayed by different motives. Is it, that they may be at hand, to give every assistance in their power to their unhappy brethren? This would draw the benevolent, and even the tender-hearted, to a shipwreck; but to a battle, or to an execution, could not bring spectators, because there the humanity of individuals is of no use.— It must be, because a sort of gloomy satisfaction, or terrifick pleasure, accompanies the gratification of that curiosity which events of this nature are apt to raise in minds of a certain frame.
[Page 616]
No parts of Tasso are read with greater relish, than where he describes the darkness, silence, and other horrors, of the enchanted forest: and the poet himself is so sensible of the captivating influence of such ideas over the human imagination, that he makes the catastrophe of the poem in some measure depend upon them. Milton is not less enamoured “of forests and enchantments drear;” as appears from the use to which he applies them in Comus : the scenery whereof charms us the more, because it affects our minds, as it did the bewildered lady, and causes “a thousand fantasies”—
                                         —to throng into the memory,
Of calling shapes, and beckoning shadows dire,
And aery tongues, that syllable mens names
On sands, and shores, and desert wildernesses.
Forests in every age must have had attractive horrors: otherwise so many nations would not have resorted thither, to celebrate the rites of superstition. And the inventors of what is called the Gothick, but perhaps should rather be called the Saracen, architecture, must have been enraptured with the same imagery, when, in forming and arranging the pillars and ailes of their churches, they were so careful to imitate the rows of lofty trees in a deep grove.
Observe a few children assembled about a fire, and listening to tales of apparitions and witchcraft. You may see them grow pale, and croud closer and closer through fear: while he who is snug in the chimney corner, and at the greatest distance from the door, considers himself as peculiarly fortunate; because he thinks that, if the ghost should enter, he has a better chance to escape, than if he were in a more exposed situation. And yet, notwithstanding their present, and their apprehension of future, fears, you could not perhaps propose any amusement that would at this time be more acceptable. The same love of such horrors as are not attended with sensible inconvenience continues with us through life:
[Page 617]
and Aristotle has affirmed, that the end of tragedy is to purify the soul by the operations of pity and terror.
The mind and body of man are so constituted, that, without action, neither can the one be healthy, nor the other happy. And as bodily exercises, though attended with fatigue, as Dancing, or with some degree of danger, as Hunting, are not on that account the less agreeable; so those things give delight, which rouse the soul, even when they bring along with them horror, anxiety, or sorrow, provided these passions be transient, and their causes rather imaginary than real.
The most perfect models of sublimity are seen in the works of nature. Pyramids, palaces, fireworks, temples, artificial lakes and canals, ships of war, fortifications, hills levelled and caves hollowed by human industry, are mighty efforts, no doubt, and awaken in every beholder a pleasing admiration; but appear as nothing, when we compare them, in respect of magnificence, with mountains, volcanoes, rivers, cataracts, oceans, the expanse of heaven, clouds and storms, thunder and lightening, the sun, moon, and stars. So that, without the study of nature, a true taste in the sublime is absolutely unattainable. And we need not wonder at what is related of Thomson, the author of the Seasons ; who, on hearing that a certain learned gentleman of London was writing an Epick poem, exclaimed, “He write an Epick poem! it is impossible: he never saw a mountain in his life.” This at least is certain, that if we were to strike out of Homer, Virgil, and Milton, those descriptions and sentiments that allude to the grand phenomena of nature, we should deprive these poets of the best part of their sublimity.
And yet, the true sublime may be attained by human art. Musick is sublime, when it inspires devotion, courage, or other elevated affections: or when by its mellow and sonorous harmonies it overwhelms the mind with sweet astonishment: or when it infuses that pleasing horror abovementioned; which, when joined
[Page 618]
to words descriptive of terrible ideas, it sometimes does very effectually.
Architecture is sublime, when it is large and durable, and withal so simple and well-proportioned as that the eye can take in all its greatness at once. For when an edifice is loaded with ornaments, our attention to them prevents our attending to the whole; and the mind, though it may be amused with the beauty or the variety of the little parts, is not struck with that sudden astonishment, which accompanies the contemplation of sublimity. Hence the Gothick style of building, where it abounds in minute decorations, and where greater pains are employed on the parts, than in adjusting the general harmony of the fabrick, is less sublime than the Grecian, in which proportion, simplicity, and usefulness, are more studied than ornament. It is true, that Gothick buildings may be very sublime: witness the old cathedral churches. But this is owing, rather to their vast magnitude, to the stamp of antiquity that is impressed on them, and to their having been so long appropriated to religious service, than to those peculiarities that distinguish their architecture from the Grecian.
The Chinese mode of building has no pretensions to sublimity; its decorations being still more trivial than the Gothick; and because it derives no dignity from associated ideas, and has no vastness of magnitude to raise admiration. Yet is it not without its charms. There is an air of neatness in it, and of novelty, which to many is pleasing, and which of late it has been much the fashion to imitate.
Painting is sublime, when it displays men invested with great qualities, as bodily strength, or actuated by sublime passions, as courage, devotion, benevolence. That picture by Guido Rheni, which represents Michael triumphing over the evil spirit, I have always admired for its sublimity, though some criticks are not pleased with it. The attitude of the angel, who holds a sword in
[Page 619]
his right hand in a threatening posture, conveys to me the idea of dignity and grace, as well as of irresistable strength. Nor is the majestick beauty of his person less admirable: and his countenance, though in a slight degree expressive of contempt or indignation, retains that sweet composure, which we think essential to the angelick character. His limbs and wings are, it is true, contrasted: but the contrast is so far from being finical, that, if we consider the action, and the situation, we must allow it to be not only natural, but unavoidable, and such as a winged being might continue in for some time without inconvenience. 9 Guido is not equally fortunate in his delineation of the adversary; who is too mean, and too ludicrous, a figure, to cope with an archangel, or to require, for his overthrow, the twentieth part of that force which appears to be exerted against him.—Painting is also sublime, when it imitates grand natural appearances, as mountains, precipices, storms, huge heaps of rocks and ruins, and the like.
At the time when Raphael began to distinguish himself, two styles of painting were cultivated in Italy. His master Pietro Perugino copied nature with an exactness bordering upon servility: so that his figures had less dignity and grace than their originals. Michael Angelo ran into the opposite extreme; and, with an imagination fraught with great ideas, and continually aspiring to sublimity, so enlarged the proportions of nature, as to raise his men to giants, and stretch out every form into an extension that might almost be called monstrous. To the penetration of Raphael both styles seemed to be faulty, and both in an equal degree. The one appeared insipid in its accuracy, and the other almost ridiculous in its extravagance 10 . He therefore pursued a middle course; tempering
[Page 620]
the fire of Angelo with the caution of Perugino: and thus exhibited the true sublime of painting; wherein the graces of nature are heightened, but nothing is gigantick, disproportioned, or improbable. While we study his Cartoons, we seem to be conversing with a species of men, like ourselves indeed, but of heroick dignity and size.
This great artist is in painting, what Homer is in poetry. Homer magnifies in like manner; and transforms men into heroes and demigods; and, to give the more grandeur to his narrative, sets it off with marvellous events, which, in his time, though not improbable, were however astonishing. But Ariosto, and the authors of the Old Romance, resemble Michael Angelo in exalting their champions, not into heroes, but into giants and monsters. Achilles, though superiour to all men in valour, would not venture to battle without his arms: but a warriour of romance, whether armed or not, could fell a troop of horse to the earth at one blow, tear up trees by the root, and now and then throw a piece of a mountain at the enemy. The true sublime is always natural and credible: but unbounded exaggerations, that surpass all proportion and all belief, are more apt to provoke laughter than astonishment.
Poetry becomes sublime in many ways: and as this is the only fine art, which can at present supply us with examples, I shall from it select a specimen or two of the different sorts of sublimity.
1. Poetry is sublime, when it elevates the mind. This indeed is a general character of greatness. But I speak here of sentiments so happily conceived and expressed, as to raise our affections above the low pursuits of sensuality and avarice, and animate us with the love of virtue and of honour. As a specimen, let me recommend
[Page 621]
the account, which Virgil gives in his eighth book, of the person, family, and kingdom of Evander; an Arcadian prince, who, after being trained up in all the discipline of Greece, established himself and his people in that part of Italy, where a few centuries after was built the great metropolis of the Roman empire. In the midst of poverty, that good old man retains a philosophical and a royal dignity. “This habitation (says he, to Eneas, who had made him a visit) has been honoured with the presence of Hercules himself. Dare, my guest, to despise riches; and do thou also fashion thyself into a likeness of God:” or, as some render it, “do thou also make thyself worthy of immortality.”
Aude, hospes, contemnere opes; et te quoque dignum
Finge Deo.—
There is a strength in the expression, whereof our language is not capable. “I despise the world (says Dryden) when I read it, and myself when I attempt to translate it.”
2. Poetry is sublime, when it conveys a lively idea of any grand appearance in art or nature. A nobler description of this sort I do not at present remember, than that which Virgil gives, in the first book of the Georgick, of a dark night, with wind, rain, and lightening: where Jupiter appears, encompassed with clouds and storms, darting his thunderbolts, and overturning the mountains, while the ocean is roaring, the earth trembling, the wild beasts fled away, the rain pouring down in torrents, the woods resounding to the tempest, and all mankind overwhelmed with consternation. 11
[Page 622]
Ipse Pater, media nimborum in nocte, corusca
Fulmina molitur dextra; quo maxima motu
Terra tremit, fugere feræ, et mortalia corda
Per gentes humilis stravit pavor. Ille flagranti
Aut Atho, aut Rhodopen, aut alta Keraunia telo
Dejicit; ingeminant austri, et densissimus imber;
Nunc nemora ingenti vento, nunc littora plangunt. 12
This description astonishes, both by the grandeur, and by the horror, of the scene, which is either wrapt in total darkness, or made visible by the glare of lightning. And the poet has expressed it with the happiest solemnity of style, and a sonorous harmony of numbers.—As examples of the same sort of sublimity, namely of great images with a mixture of horror, I might call the reader's attention to the storm in the beginning of the Eneid, the death of Cacus in the eighth book, to the account of Tartarus in the sixth, and that of the burning of Troy in the second. But in the style of dreadful magnificence, nothing is superior, and scarce any thing equal, to Milton's representation of hell and chaos, in the first and second books of Paradise Lost.
In the concluding paragraph of the same work, there is brought together, with uncommon strength of fancy, and rapidity of narrative, a number of circumstances, wonderfully adapted to the purpose of filling the mind with ideas of terrifick grandeur: the descent of the cherubim; the flaming sword; the archangel leading in haste our first parents down from the heights of paradise, and then
[Page 623]
disappearing; and, above all, the scene that presents itself on their looking behind them.
They, looking back, all th' eastern cliff beheld
Of Paradise, so late their happy seat,
Waved over by that flaming brand; the gate
With dreadful faces throng'd and fiery arms.
To which the last verses form the most striking contrast that can be imagined.
Some natural tears they drop'd, but wiped them soon.
The world was all before them, where to chuse
Their place of rest, and Providence their guide.
They, hand in hand, with wandering steps, and slow,
Through Eden took their solitary way.
The final couplet renews our sorrow; by exhibiting, with picturesque accuracy, the most mournful scene in nature; which yet is so prepared, as to raise comfort, and dispose to resignation. And thus, while we are at once melting in tenderness, elevated with pious hope, and overwhelmed with the grandeur of description, the divine poem concludes. What luxury of mental gratification is here! Who would exchange this frame of mind (if nature could support it) for any other! How exquisitely does the faith of a Christian accord with the noblest feelings of humanity!
3. Poetry is sublime, when, without any great pomp of images or of words, it infuses horror by a happy choice of circumstances. When Macbeth (in Shakspeare) goes to consult the witches, he finds them performing rites in a cave; and, upon asking what they were employed about, receives no other answer than this short one, “A deed without a name.” One's blood runs cold at the thought, that their work was of so accursed a nature, that they themselves had no name to express it by, or were afraid to speak of it by any name. Here is no solemnity of style, nor any accumulation of
[Page 624]
great ideas; yet here is the true sublime; because here is something that astonishes the mind, and fills it, without producing any real inconvenience.
Among other omens, which preceded the death of Dido, Virgil relates, that, when she was making an oblation of wine, milk and incense upon the altar, she observed the milk grow black, and found that the wine was changed into blood. This the poet improves into a circumstance of the utmost horror, when he adds, that she never mentioned it to any person, not even to her sister, who was her confidante on all other occasions: insinuating, that it filled her with so dreadful apprehension, that she had not courage even to attempt to speak of it.—Perhaps I may be more struck with this, than many others are; as I once knew a young man, who was in the same state of mind, after having been frightened in his sleep, or, as he imagined, by a vision, which he had seen about two years before he told me of it. With much intreaty I prevailed on him to give me some account of his dream: but there was one particular, which he said that he would not, nay that he durst not, mention; and, while he was saying so, his haggard eyes, pale countenance, quivering lips, and faltering voice, presented to me such a picture of horror, as I never saw before or since. I ought to add, that he was, in all other respects, in his perfect mind, chearful, and active, and not more than twenty years of age.
Horror has long been a powerful, and a favourite, engine in the hands of the Tragick poet. Eschylus employed it more than any other antient artist. In his play called the Furies , he introduced Orestes haunted by a company of those frightful beings; intending thereby an allegorical representation of the torment which that hero suffered in his mind, in consequence of having slain his mother Clytemnestra, for the part she had taken in the murder of his father. But to raise the greater horror in the spectators, the poet was at pains to describe, with amazing force of expression, the appearance
[Page 625]
of the Furies; and he brought upon the stage no fewer than fifty of them; whose infernal looks, hideous gestures, and horrible screams, had such effects on the women and children, that, in the subsequent exhibitions of the play, the number of furies was by an express law limited, first to fifteen, and afterwards to twelve. There are, no doubt, sublime strokes in the poet's account of these furies; and there is something very great in the idea of a person haunted by his own thoughts, in the form of such terrifick beings. Yet horror of this kind I would hardly call sublime, because it is addressed rather to the eyes, than to the mind; and because it is easier to disfigure a man so, as to make him have the appearance of an ugly woman, than, by a brief description, or well-chosen sentiment, to alarm and astonish the fancy. Shakspeare has, in my opinion, excited horror of more genuine sublimity, and withal more useful in a moral view, when he makes Macbeth, in short and broken starts of exclamation, and without any pomp of images or of words, give an utterance half-suppressed to those dreadful thoughts that were passing in his mind immediately before and after the murder of Duncan, his guest, kinsman, sovereign, and benefactor. The agonies of a guilty conscience were never more forcibly represented, than in this tragedy; which may indeed be said, in the language of Aristotle, to purify the mind by the operation of terror and pity; and which abounds more in that species of the sublime whereof I now speak, than any other performance in the English tongue.—See its merits examined and explained, with the utmost correctness of judgment, beauty of language, and vivacity of imagination, in Mrs. Montagu's Essay on the writings and genius of Shakspeare.
4. Poetry is sublime, when it awakens in the mind any great and good affection, as piety, or patriotism. This is one of the noblest effects of the art. The Psalms are remarkable, beyond all other writings, for their power of inspiring devout emotions. But it is
[Page 626]
not in this respect only that they are sublime. Of the divine nature they contain the most magnificent descriptions that the soul of man can comprehend. The hundred and fourth psalm, in particular, displays the power and goodness of Providence, in creating and preserving the world, and the various tribes of animals in it, with such majestick brevity and beauty, as it is vain to look for in any human composition. The morning song of Adam and Eve 13 , and many other parts of Paradise Lost, are noble effusions of piety, breathed in the most captivating strains: and Thomson's Hymn on the Seasons, if we overlook an unguarded word or two, is not inferiour.
Of that sublimity which results from the strong expression of patriotick sentiments, many examples might be quoted from the Latin poets, particularly Virgil, Horace, and Lucan: but there is a passage in Homer that suits the present purpose better than any other that now occurs. While Hector is advancing to attack the Greek intrenchments, an eagle lets fall a wounded serpent in the middle of his army. This Polydamas considers as a bad omen, and advises him to order a retreat. Hector rejects the advice with indignation. “Shall I be deterred from my duty, (says he) and from executing the commands of Jupiter, by the flight of birds? Let them fly on my right hand or on my left, towards the setting or towards the rising sun, I will obey the counsel of Jove, who is the king of gods and of men.” And then he adds that memorable aphorism, “To defend our country is the best of all auguries 14 :” or, as Pope has very well expressed it,
Without a sign, his sword the brave man draws,
And asks no omen, but his country's cause.
If we attend to all the circumstances, and reflect that both Hector and Homer believed in auguries, we must own that the sentiment is wonderfully great.
[Page 627]
I might also quote, from the same book of the Iliad, Sarpedon's speech to Glaucus; which contains the noblest lesson of political wisdom, and the most enlivening motives to magnanimity. I shall not translate it literally, but confine myself to the general scope of the argument; and I shall give it in prose, that it may not seem to derive any part of its dignity from the charm of poetical numbers. “Why, O Glaucus, do we receive from our people in Lycia the honours of sovereignty, and so liberal a provision? Is it not in the hope, that we are to distinguish ourselves by our virtue, as much as we are distinguished by our rank? Let us act accordingly: that, when they see us encountering the greatest perils of war, they may say, we deserve the honours and the dignity which we possess. If indeed (continues he) by declining danger we could secure ourselves against old age and the grave, I should neither fight myself in the front of the battle, nor exhort you to do so. But since death is unavoidable, and may assail us from so many thousand quarters, let us advance, and either gain renown by victory, or by our fall give glory to the conquerour.” The whole is excellent: but the grandeur and generosity of the conclusion can never be too highly applauded.
5. Poetry is also sublime, when it describes in a lively manner the visible effects of any of those passions that give elevation to the character. Such is that passage, in the conclusion of the same twelfth book of the Iliad, which paints the impetuosity and terrible appearance of Hector, storming the intrenchments, and pursuing the enemy to their ships. Extraordinary efforts of magnanimity, valour, or any other virtue, and extraordinary exertions of strength or power, are grand objects, and give sublimity to those pictures or poems, in which they are well represented. All the great poets abound in examples.
Yet in great strength, for example, there may be unwieldiness, or awkwardness, or some other contemptible quality, whereby the
[Page 628]
sublime is destroyed. Polyphemus is a match for five hundred Greeks; but he is not a grand object. We hate his barbarity, and despise his folly, too much, to allow him a single grain of admiration. Ulysses, who in the hands of Polypheme was nothing, is incomparably more sublime, when, in walking to his palace, disguised like a beggar, he is insulted, and even kicked, by one of his own slaves, who was in the service of those rebels that were tempting his queen, plundering his household, and alienating the affections of his people. Homer tells us, that the hero stood firm, without being moved from his place by the stroke; that he deliberated for a moment, whether he should at one blow fell the traitor to the earth; but that patience and prudential thoughts restrained him. The brutal force of the Cyclops is not near so striking as this picture; which displays bodily strength and magnanimity united. For what we despise we never admire; and therefore despicable greatness cannot be sublime.
Homer and Virgil have, each of them, given a description of a horse, which is very much, and justly, celebrated. But they dwell rather upon the swiftness and beauty of the animal, or on such of his passions as have little or no dignity; and therefore their descriptions, though most elegant and harmonious, cannot properly be termed sublime. In the book of Job, we have the picture of a war-horse in the most magnificent style. The inspired poet expatiates upon the nobler qualities of that animal, his strength, impetuosity, and contempt of danger: and several of the words made use of, being figurative, and in their proper meaning expressive of human emotions, convey uncommon vivacity and elevation to the whole passage.
“Hast thou given the horse strength? Hast thou clothed his neck with thunder?”—alluding, perhaps, either to the noise of cavalry advancing; or to their speed, which the poet insinuates may be compared to that of lightning. “Canst thou make him afraid
[Page 629]
as a grashopper? the glory of his nostrils is terrible:”—that is, the breath coming from his nostrils, which appear red with distension, make him look as if fire and smoke were issuing from them; an idea, which Virgil has finely expressed in that line,
Collectumque premens volvit sub naribus ignem.
“He paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth in his strength; he goeth on to meet the armed men. He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted, neither turneth he back from the sword. The quiver rattleth against him, the glittering spear and the shield. He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage;” which probably signifies, according to some translation, “he looks as if the would swallow the ground 15 ; neither believeth he that it is the found of the trumpet. He saith among the trumpets, ha, ha ;” despises their alarm as much as we do that of a threatening which only provokes our laughter: “and he smelleth the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting.”—Besides the grandeur of the animal, as here painted, the sublimity of the passage is heightened exceedingly by the landscape; which presents to our view an army in order of battle, and makes us think we hear the crashing of armour, and the shouts of encountering multitudes.
In describing what is great, poets often employ sonorous language. This is suitable to the nature of human speech: for while we give utterance to that which elevates our imagination, we are apt to speak louder, and with greater solemnity, than at other times 16 . It must not however be thought, that high-sounding, words are essential to the Sublime. Without a correspondent dignity of thought, or grandeur of images, a sonorous style is ridiculous; and puts one in mind of those persons, who raise great expectation, and assume a look of vast importance, when they have
[Page 630]
either nothing at all to say, or nothing that is worth notice. That style is sublime, which makes us conceive a great object, or a great effort, in a lively manner; and this may be done, when the words are very plain and simple. Nay, the plainest and simplest words have sometimes a happy effect in setting off what is intrinsically great; as an act of vast bodily strength is the more astonishing, when performed by a slight effort. This sort of sublimity we have in perfection in many of those passages of Holy Writ, that describe the operation of Omnipotence: as, “God said, Let there be light, and there was light:—He spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast:—Thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good; thou hidest thy face, and they are troubled.”
It was observed, that the description of the horse in Job derives not a little of its dignity from those words, that properly signify human sentiments, and cannot be applied to an irrational animal, unless with a figurative meaning: “he rejoiceth in his strength ; he mocketh at fear ; he believeth not that it is the sound of the trumpet; he faith among the trumpets, ha, ha. ” It may now be remarked in general, that the sublime is often heightened, when, by means of figurative language, the qualities of a superiour nature are judiciously applied to what is inferiour. Hence we see in poetry, and in more familiar language, the passions and feelings of rationality ascribed to that which is without reason, and without life, or even to abstract ideas.—On Adam's eating the forbidden fruit,
Earth trembled from her entrails, as again
In pangs, and Nature gave a second groan;
Sky lower'd, and, muttering thunder, some sad drops
Wept, at compleating of the mortal sin
Original.
Who is not sensible of the greatness of the thought conveyed in these words; which represent the earth and heaven affected with horror at the sin then committed, and nature, or the universe, uttering
[Page 631]
in low thunder a groan of anguish? Had the poet simply said, that there was an earthquake, that the sky grew dark, and that some drops of rain fell, the account would no doubt have been sublime, as he would have given it. But is it not much more so, when we are informed, that this convulsion of nature was the effect of a sort of sensation diffused at that instant through the whole inanimate world? How dreadful must be the enormity of that guilt, which could produce an event so great, and withal so preternatural! Here are two sources of the sublime: the prodigy strikes with horror; the vastness of the idea overwhelms with astonishment.
In this place an unskilful poet would probably have brought on such a storm of thunder and lightning, and so violent an earthquake, as must have overturned the mountains, and set the woods on fire. But Milton, with better judgment, makes the alarm of that deep and awful kind, which cannot express itself in any other way, than by an inward and universal trembling: a sensation more affecting to the fancy, than those passions are, which vent themselves in outrageous behaviour; even as that sorrow is the most pathetick, which deprives one of the power of lamentation, and discovers itself only by fainting and groans. Besides, if this convulsion of the universe had been more violent, the unhappy offenders must have been confounded and terrified; which would not have suited the poet's purpose. For he tells us, and indeed the circumstances that follow in the narrative (which, by the by, are exquisitely contrived) do all suppose, that our first parents were so intent on gratifying their impious appetite, that they took no notice of the prodigies, which accompanied the transgression.
Writers of weak judgment, when they attempt the sublime, are apt to exaggerate description, till they make it ridiculous. And to Milton's prudent reserve on this occasion I cannot quote a better contrast, than that passage in Ovid, where the Earth, as a person, lifts up her head, and, holding her hand before her face, complains
[Page 632]
to Jupiter, in a voice almost inarticulate with thirst, of the torments she was suffering from the conflagration brought upon her by the rashness of Phaeton; and, at the end of her speech, half-suffocated with fire and smoke, draws back her head into the centre of her body. This is mere burlesque. Our fancy cannot be reconciled to so extravagant a fiction, nor conceive the earth to be an animal of so hideous and so ridiculous a form. But no art is necessary to reconcile us to the idea of the earth trembling with preternatural horror at such a lamentable catastrophe as the fall of Adam and Eve; the first crime by which the sublunary creation was polluted; and a crime, that
Brought death into the world, and all our woe.
In the poetical parts of Scripture, animation and sentiment are often, with the happiest effect, applied to things inanimate. “Let the floods clap their hands, and let the hills rejoice together before the Lord; for he cometh to judge the earth.—Canst thou send lightnings, that they may go, and say unto thee, Here we are?—God sendeth forth light, and it goeth; he calleth it again, and it obeyeth with fear.”—These and the like figures convey a lively and lofty idea of Divine Power, to which the inanimate parts of nature are as obsequious, as if they had intelligence and activity.
A common sentiment may be made sublime, when it is illustrated by an allusion to a grand object. “There is not, says Addison, a sight in nature so mortifying, as that of a distracted person, when his imagination is troubled, and his whole soul disordered and confused.” This is true; but there is nothing very striking in it. But when the author adds, “Babylon in ruins is not so melancholy a spectacle,” he gives great dignity to the thought, by setting before us one of the most hideous pictures of desolation that ever was seen by mortal eyes; and at the same time declaring, what is no more than the truth, that even this is not so mournful
[Page 633]
a sight as the other.—“The evils of life seem more terrible when anticipated than they are found to be in reality,” is no uncommon observation: but the same elegant author improves it into a sublime allegory, when he says, “The evils of this life appear, like rocks and precipices, rugged and barren at a distance; but, at our nearer approach, we find little fruitful spots and refreshing springs mixed with the harshness and deformities of nature.” This happy illustration pleases, not only by giving perspicuity to the thought, but also by suggesting the magnificent idea of a ridge of rocky precipices, as they appear at a distance to the traveller, and as he finds them to be on coming up to them. And it pleases yet further, when we compare the object alluded to with the idea signified, and find so perfect a coincidence.
Things, as well as sentiments, may be made sublime by the same artifice. Bees are animals of wonderful sagacity, but of too diminutive a form to captivate our imagination. But Virgil describes their economy with so many fine allusions to the more elevated parts of nature, as raise our astonishment, both at the skill of the poet, and at the genius of his favourite insect; whose little size becomes matter of admiration, when we consider those noble instincts wherewith the Creatour has endowed it.
It may seem strange, and yet it is true, that the sublime is sometimes attained by a total want of expression: and this may happen, when by silence, or by hiding the face, we are made to understand, that there is in the mind something too great for utterance. In a picture representing the sacrifice of Iphigenia, a Grecian painter 17 displayed varieties of sorrow in the faces of the other persons present; but, despairing to give any adequate expression to the countenance of her father Agamemnon, he made him cover it with his hands: an idea much admired by the antient artists, and often
[Page 634]
imitated by the modern; as what was likely to raise in the spectator a more exquisite horror, than any positive expression that could have been given to the face of the parent. Indeed, on such an occasion, it would be natural for a father to hide his face, as unable to endure so dreadful a sight; so that this contrivance was not only the most affecting to the beholder, but also the most proper in itself.
When Ulysses, in Homer, pays his compliments to the Grecian ghosts whom he had called up by incantation, we are told that, on seeing their old acquaintance and fellow-soldier, they all conversed with him, Ajax only excepted; who, still resenting the affront he had received at Troy, when Ulysses in opposition to his claim obtained the arms of Achilles, stood aloof, disdaining to take notice of his rival, or to return any answer to his kind expostulations. It is certain, that no less a person than Virgil admired this incident; for he copies it in his account of the infernal world: where Eneas, meeting Dido, endeavours to excuse his desertion of her, urging his unwillingness, and the command of Jupiter: but she, says the poet, turned her eyes another way, and minded no more what he said, than if she had been flint or marble.
This silence of Dido has been blamed by a very learned critick: who seems to think, that, though it was becoming in Ajax not to speak, because he was a hero, it would be natural for an injured woman to upbraid a faithless lover with the keenest reproaches. But I take the remark, rather as a joke upon that volubility of tongue, which satirists have imputed to the female sex, than as a serious criticism. Dido, as described by Virgil, is a more dignified character, than Homer's Ajax; and therefore, if the silence was majestick in him, on account of his greatness of mind, it must be equally so in her. If he, as a hero, was superiour to other men, she, as a heroine, was superiour to other women.
[Page 635]
Some writers (and the same thing is too often attempted in the pulpit) have endeavoured to express, by an elaborate soliloquy, what they suppose might pass in the mind of Abraham, on being commanded to offer up his Son. This I cannot but think injudicious. It seems to detract not a little from the Father of the faithful, to represent him as deliberating whether or not he should obey God's command, or conjecturing for what purpose so hard a task had been enjoined him. Let a man of sensibility, after hearing one of those rhetorical flourishes, read the narrative in the words of Moses, and he will feel , how much more affecting the one is in its simple majesty, than the other in its gaudy ornaments; and what inexpressible sublimity the character of the great Patriarch derives from his emphatick silence and prompt obedience. He knew the command was divine, and consequently good; and that, whatever his paternal emotions might be, his duty was, instantly to obey. He therefore “rose up early in the morning,” and began that journey, which he then thought would have so melancholy a termination. I may add, that there is something almost equally great in the silent submission of Isaac; who, being at this time about thirty years of age, might have attempted resistance or escape, if his faith and his piety had not been worthy the Son of such a Father.
Things in themselves great may become more or less sublime, according to the nature of the allusions, whereby the description of them is illustrated. Longinus, who seems to have thought not so favourably of the Odyssey as it deserves, represents the genius of the author as in the decline when he wrote that poem; but characterises that decline by two noble similitudes. “In the Odyssey (says he) Homer may be likened to the setting sun, whose grandeur still remains, though his beams have lost their meridian heat.” What a beautiful idea! Does it not even adorn the object which it is intended in some degree to depreciate? And
[Page 636]
a little after he has this remark. “Like the ocean, whose shores, when deserted by the tide, mark out the extent to which it sometimes flows, so Homer's genius, when ebbing into the fables of the Odyssey, plainly discovers, how vast it once must have been.” To be extolled by ordinary writers is not so flattering, as to be censured by a critick like Longinus, who tempers his blame with so much politeness and dignity. Indeed, it has been remarked of him, that he exemplifies every kind of good writing; so as in grandeur of thought, and beauty of expression, to vie with the author whom he celebrates.
Instances of ideas or images intrinsically great, rendered more so by the allusions employed in describing them, are common in Homer, Virgil, Milton, and all the sublime poets. So many examples crowd on one's memory, that one knows not which to prefer. Achilles in arms is a grand idea: but Homer throws upon it additional splendor, when he compares him to the moon, to the blaze of a beacon seen at a distance in a night of tempest, to a star or comet, and to the sun. Milton magnifies the strength and intrepidity of Satan, when he says,
                                         Satan alarm'd,
Collecting all his might, dilated stood
Like Teneriff or Atlas, unremoved;
His stature reach'd the sky, and on his crest
Sat horror.
The fires lighted up in the Grecian camp, and scattered over the plains of Troy, would be a beautiful appearance: but Homer makes it rise upon us in glory, by comparing them to the moon and stars illuminating the sky, when the clouds separate, and the pure ether shines forth in all the magnificence of midnight.
But observe, that great ideas are not always alluded to, in the description of great objects. For of two things, different in nature,
[Page 637]
that which is upon the whole inferiour may possess a quality or two in a more exquisite degree, than that which is in all other respects more elevated. How superiour is a man, especially a wise man, and still more especially, the wisest, and one of the greatest of men, to a vegetable! And yet we are warranted, on the best authority, to say, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of the lilies of the field.
We must therefore, in all cases, attend to that circumstance of likeness, upon which an allusion is founded. Homer compares Hector to a rock tumbling from the top of a mountain. Were we to hear nothing more of this similitude, it might appear even ridiculous; for one might imagine it was intended to paint the particular manner, in which that hero descended from a high to a lower ground: and surely, a man rolling headlong, like a stone, down a steep place, is an image of neither dignity nor elegance; nor can it raise any person in our esteem, to say of him that he is like a stone. But when we learn, that the poet means by this comparison to inform us, that Hector was irresistable while he advanced, and immoveable when he stopt, we are struck with the propriety, and at the same time with the greatness, of the allusion; for it heightens what we had before conceived of the warrior's impetuosity. If a huge fragment of a rock, torn from the top of a mountain by a winter torrent, were rolling and thundering down to the plain, no human power would be able to oppose it; and when it stopt, very great power would be necessary to move it.
“I will make Babylon a possession for the bittern, and pools of water: and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction. ” 18 The instrument alluded to is one of the meanest; and yet the idea conveyed by the allusion is exceedingly great. For it is not the manner, but the consequences, of the destruction, that are here painted: it will be so complete, that not the least memorial of that city shall
[Page 638]
remain: even as on a floor that is swept no trace is to be seen of the dust that was there formerly, or of the figures that might have been drawn in it. The allusion has also this emphatical meaning, that the people of Babylon are a nuisance, and that the earth will be purified by their being driven away; and it implies further, that all the efforts of human power are but dust, when the arm of the Almighty is lifted up against them.
“Ruin fiercely drives Her plowshare o'er creation,” says Young, speaking of the end of the world. The driving of a plow over a field is not a grand object. Yet the figure conveys a sublime idea to those who know, that some antient nations, when they meant to destroy a city, not only rased the buildings, but plowed up the foundation; to intimate, that it was never to be rebuilt any more. The poet's allegory, therefore, typifies a destruction that is to be total, and final.—If I were to criticize it further, I would say, that it is pity it should be above the apprehension of common readers: for the sublime is generally the worse for being wrapt up in learning, or in any other disguise. What we do not clearly perceive we cannot rationally admire. It is true, that, where sublimity with horror is intended, a certain degree of darkness may have a good effect; as unknown objects, viewed through mist or in the twilight, appear of greater size than the reality, and of more hideous proportion. But the example before us is rather ambiguous, than obscure: the learned reader knows that it comprehends a grand allusion; but to the unlearned it may seem inadequate to the subject, by reason of its meanness.
Out of many that occur I quote a few examples, to show, according to what has been already observed, that the sublime is not always accompanied with sonorous expression, or a pomp of images. These, when too anxiously sought after, or when they are not supported with a correspondent majesty of thought, are called Bombast or False Sublime; an unpardonable impropriety;
[Page 639]
which has in serious writing as bad an effect, as ignorance united with impudence, or a solemn behaviour with a mean understanding, would have in conversation. Most people, who are in earnest in what they say, naturally elevate their voice and style, when they speak of what is great; but, if they be of polite manners, that elevation is tempered with modesty; and they rather lay restraint on their feelings, than express them with the most emphatical utterance. Good writers, in like manner, rise in sound and solemnity of phrase, when their thoughts aspire to sublimity; but their style is always simple, and their ornaments natural: and they often throw out noble ideas in the plainest words, and without any ornament.
Yet he, who aims at the sublime, must not trust so implicitly to the grandeur of his thoughts, as to be careless about his expression. Well chosen words, and an elegant arrangement of them, are justly reckoned by Longinus among the sources of sublimity. Even when the thought is both good and great, the greatness, or the elegance, may be lost or lessened by an unskilful writer: and that in several ways.
First, by too minute description, and too many words. For, when we are engrossed by admiration or astonishment, it is not natural for us to speak much, or attend to the more diminutive qualities of that which we contemplate. On seeing a lofty edifice, if the first thing we did were to count the windows, or the panes of glass in each, it would be a sign of bad taste, and a proof, that we wanted either imagination to comprehend, or sensibility to take pleasure in, the grandeur of the whole. Were a hero to appear in arms before us, we should not think of looking at his teeth, or observing whether his beard were close shaved, or his nails nicely cut; at first, it is likely, that we should take notice of little besides his general appearance, and more striking features: or, if those other small matters were to engage our whole attention, might it not
[Page 640]
justly be said, that we had no true sense of the dignity of the person, nor any curiosity to know those particulars concerning him, which alone were worthy to be known? Writers, therefore, who describe too nicely the minute parts of a grand object, must both have disengaged their own minds, and must also withdraw ours, from the admiration of what is sublime in it. A few examples will make this plain.
Had Homer or had Milton been to describe the chariot of the Sun, he would probably have confined himself to its dazzling appearance, or vast magnitude, or some of those other qualities of it, which at the first glance might be supposed to fill the imagination, and raise the astonishment, of the beholder. But when Ovid tells us, that the axle was of gold, the pole of gold, the outward circumference of the wheels of gold, but that the spokes were silver 19 , we are not astonished at all; and are apt to think, from the minuteness of the account, that the author had examined this chariot, rather with the curiosity of a coachmaker or silversmith, than with the eye of a poet or painter. Such a detail resembles an inventory more than a description: as if it were material, in order to form a right idea of Phaeton's unlucky expedition, that we should know the value of the chariot in which he rode.
We read, in a certain author, of a giant, who in his wrath tore off the top of a promontory, and flung it at the enemy; and so huge was the mass, that you might, says he, have seen goats browsing on it as it flew through the air. This is unnatural and ridiculous. A spectator would have been too much confounded at the force, that could wield it, and at the astonishing appearance of such a ruin hurled through the sky, to attend to any circumstance so minute as what is here specified. Besides, the motion of such a fragment must have been too rapid, to allow the goats to keep their ground,
[Page 641]
or to admit the possibility of seeing them in the act of seeding. So that, whatever this idea may add to the magnitude, it must take away from the swiftness; and make the vast body seem to our imagination, as if it had loitered, or stopt, in its course, to give the beholder time to examine its curiosities, and that the poor goats might be in no danger of losing their hold.
In sublime description, though the circumstances that are specified be few, yet, if they be well chosen and great, the reader's fancy will compleat the picture: and often, as already hinted, the image will not be less astonishing, if in its general appearance there be something indefinite. When Hector forces the Greek intrenchments, the poet describes him by several grand allusions, and by this in particular,
Now rushing in the furious chief appears,
Gloomy as night , and shakes two shining spears. 20
In what respect he resembled night, Homer leaves to be determined by the reader's fancy. This conveys no positive idea; but we are hence led to imagine, that there must have been something peculiarly dark and dreadful in his look, as it appeared to the enemy: and thus we make the picture stronger perhaps than it would have been, if the author had drawn it more minutely 21 . A genius like
[Page 642]
Cowley would have interrupted the narrative, in order to enumerate all those particulars in which Hector resembled night; comparing his shield to the full moon; his eyes to stars; the flashing of his armour to comets and meteors; the dust that flew about him,
[Page 643]
to clouds and darkness; the clangour of his weapons to the scream of the owl; the terror he struck into the enemy, to the fear occasioned by apparitions; with perhaps a great deal more to the same purpose: which would have taken off our attention from the hero, and set us a wondering at the singularity of the author's wit. It ought to be considered, that the rapidity of Hector's motion requires a correspondent rapidity in the narrative, and leaves no time for long description; and it may be supposed, that the persons who saw him would not stand gazing, and making similies, but would fly before him if they were Greeks, or rush on along with him if they were his own people.
When an author, in exhibiting what he thinks great, says every thing that can be said, he confounds his readers with the multitude of circumstances; and, instead of rousing their imagination, leaves it
[Page 644]
in a state of indolence, by giving it nothing to do; making them at the same time suspect, that, as he has but few great ideas to offer, he is determined to make the most of what he has. Besides, long details encumber the narrative, and lengthen the poem without necessity. Brief description, therefore, and concise expression, may be considered as essential to the sublime.
And no where do they promote it so effectually, as in the poetical and historical parts of Scripture; which, however, more than any other compositions, have had their grandeur impaired by the verbosity of paraphrase. Castalio, in his Sacred Dialogues , is so imprudent in this respect, that, if his character as a man of learning and piety were not thoroughly established, we should be tempted to think he had meant to burlesque some passages of the Old Testament. He makes Abraham (for example), while preparing entertainment for the angels, bustle about with the officiousness and prattle of one of Fielding's landladies. Indeed these Dialogues are so frequently farcical, not to say indecent, that I wonder the reading of them is not discontinued in our schools.—I know it has been said, in their behalf, that the language is good, being formed on the model of Terence. But what idea of propriety in writing can he have, who applies the style of comedy to the illustration of Sacred History? What would be thought of an English divine, who should in his sermons imitate the phraseology of Mercutio, Benedick, or Will Honeycomb? Nor is Castalio correct, even in this sense of the word. He is often harsh: he admits modes of expression, that are not in Terence, or in any good writer: and his desire of diffusing a classical air through his work makes him give a new and ambiguous meaning to Roman words 22 , where, if he had adopted the common, and what may be called the technical, terms of Theology, he would have expressed himself more clearly, and without any real impropriety.
[Page 645]
Our poetical paraphrases of the Psalms are not less injurious to the original. Sternhold and Hopkins are confessedly beneath criticism; yet to those, who would rather see in the pulpit a threadbare coat than a laced one, are not in their rustick guise more offensive, than Brady and Tate in their finical ornaments. If we look into Buchanan, what can we say, but that the learned author, with great command of Latin expression, had no true relish for the emphatick conciseness, and unadorned simplicity, of the inspired poets? Arthur Johnston is not so verbose, and has of course more vigour: but his choice of a couplet, which keeps the reader always in mind of the puerile epistles of Ovid, was singularly injudicious.—As psalms may, in prose, as easily, as in verse, be adapted to musick, why should we seek to force those divine strains into the measures of Roman, or of modern, song? He who transformed Livy into Iambicks, and Virgil into monkish rhime, did not in my opinion act more absurdly. In fact, sentiments of devotion are rather depressed than elevated by the arts of the European versifier.
Secondly: Though an author's ideas be great, they may yet fall short of sublimity by excessive amplification. Hyperbolical phrases, for reasons assigned in another place 23 , are often natural, and may therefore promote the sublime; but if they are not used with discretion and a due regard to the proportions of nature, they become ridiculous.
A translator of Virgil concludes that elegant description (in the second Eneid) of the felling of a mountain-ash, with this enormous exaggeration. The tree, he says,
Headlong with half the shatter'd mountain flies,
And stretch'd out, huge in length, th' unmeasured ruin lies.
Before we can admit this hyperbole to be in any degree tolerable, we must suppose, either that the mountain was a hillock, or that the tree must have been at least a thousand yards high and fifty in diameter. Virgil only says, with his usual propriety;
[Page 646]
— traxitque jugis avolsa ruinam.
And drags a ruin from the mountain's brow.
When a certain poet speaks of one of his champions destroying a troop of horse with a single blow; and of another, whose impetuosity was such, that he fought for a considerable time after his head was cut off; he conveys to us the idea, not of strength or courage in the warriours, but of folly in himself. To magnify in this manner is as easy, as to multiply by a thousand; which only requires, that three ciphers be subjoined to the sum. At this rate, every child may be a sublime writer; the only qualifications necessary to contrive such things being, ignorance of nature, and a total disregard both to probability and to possibility. But nothing is sublime, that does not create in the mind a pleasing astonishment; and nothing can please a rational being, but what is consistent with itself, and regulated by the standard of nature.
When Cowley attempts to be great, he frequently becomes monstrous 24 . A true poet exhibits the most magnificent ideas without any apparent effort; as if they were familiar to him, and such as he can mould and manage at his pleasure. The one labours ineffectually, and awkwardly, to do what is above his strength; and makes himself ridiculous, by showing at once his vanity, and his weakness: of the other, after he has, with ease and with grace, performed the greatest exertions, we say, that “half his strength he put not forth.” The former reminds one of Asteropeus in the Iliad, straining with all his might, and distorting his body in vain, to wrench the spear of Achilles from the bank, into which, when flung by the hero's arm, it had penetrated to the middle: the latter may be compared to Achilles himself, who laying his hand upon it draws it forth at once. 25
[Page 647]
Thirdly: Mean words and mean circumstances, introduced in the description of what is great or elegant, will destroy the sublimity, and debase the beauty. The Duke of Buckingham, in some complimental verses addressed to Pope, has this couplet,
And yet so wonderful sublime a thing
As the great Iliad scarce could make me sing.
The passage is not much elevated, it is true: yet who does not see, that the little dignity it has is debased by the word thing ; which is chosen merely because it happens to make a rhime? “Homer's Iliad is a sublime thing”—the phrase would be despicable even in prose.
Take an example of a mean circumstance from Blackmore's Paraphrase of Job: a work in which one may find specimens of every sort of bad writing.
I solemnly pronounce, that I believe
My blest Redeemer does for ever live.
When future ages shall their circuit end,
And bankrupt Time shall his last minute spend,
Then he from heaven in triumph shall descend.
How groveling must be the imagination of a writer, who, in meditating on a passage so sublime, and a subject so awful, can bring himself to think and speak of bankruptcy! Such an idea, in such a place, is contemptible beyond expression. And its absurdity is equal to its meanness. A bankrupt is a person, who is either pitied for having lost, or blamed for having squandered, the money with which he ought to have paid his debts. But who can imagine, that, at the end of the world, Time will be either blamed or pitied, for having squandered, or lost his minutes!
Before I conclude, I must be a little more particular in describing the nature of what I call mean expressions: for against them I am anxious that we be more especially on our guard; first,
[Page 648]
because they are a grievous blemish in every sort of elegant writing; and, secondly, because in the provincial dialects they abound to such a degree, that without great attention, or much good advice, it is not easy for us to avoid them.
And first; Those words are not mean, which are so necessary at all times, that it is impossible to speak without them on any subject. And most of the classical words in every tongue are of this character. Words are not mean, because they are plain; nor elegant, because none but men of learning understand them: on the contrary, every thing in style is blameable, which is obscure or ambiguous to an attentive reader. We may have heard some persons celebrated for a fine style, because they were on every occasion dragging in strange words, to show their learning. But this is contrary to every rule of found criticism, and to the practice of all good writers. “Let there be light, and there was light,” is a much more elegant sentence than, “Let light irradiate the universe, and instantly light flashed into existence:” the former consists of words, that no person who knows English can misunderstand; the latter has more words than are necessary, and those are affected and ill-chosen, and such as he only can understand, who knows something of Latin, as well as of English. It is said of the style of Demosthenes, that, though the most artful that had ever appeared in Greece, there was not a phrase in it, which the meanest Athenian citizen did not understand. And in fact, the most elegant authors are in every language the most perspicuous; as Addison and Swift, in English; Cesar and Cicero, in Latin; Metastasio, Tasso, and Ariosto, in Italian; and Vertot, Boileau, and the Archbishop of Cambray, in French. Uncommon expressions are in general to be avoided, where they can be avoided. It is pedantry to affect them. And therefore, we must not imagine, that words are mean, or not elegant, merely because they are common.
[Page 649]
But secondly; Many words there are in every tongue, which are not used, except by illiterate persons, or on very familiar occasions, or in order to express what the decorum of polite society requires that we conceal: and these may be called mean words ; and are never to be introduced in sublime description, in elegant writing, or on any solemn or serious topick.
Such, in the first place, are vulgar proverbs. These, though they may have a good meaning, are too familiar to find a place in good style. We have heard common proverbs, particularly those of this country, celebrated for their force and truth: and some may perhaps wonder to see them proscribed as inelegant. I allow them to be emphatical, both in this and in other countries; for otherwise, nobody would think it worth while to remember them. But still they form a part of the vulgar dialect, and are therefore themselves vulgar. One of the common people may be a person of great worth and sense: but place him in fashionable company, and both you and he will perceive, that there is something awkward in his appearance; you may esteem him for his virtue, but cannot reconcile yourself to his air and manner; and you must be sensible that he and his present associates are not well suited to one another. Sancho Pansa is in many things ridiculous, but in nothing more than in his style, which is almost entirely made up of proverbs. In prayers and sermons, and on every solemn occasion, one must feel that these aphorisms would have a bad effect, and give a ludicrous turn both to the subject and to the speaker. Even in conversation they are rarely used by persons of polite manners, as they not only favour of vulgarity, but also breed suspicion of a barren fancy: for he who retails proverbs gives only what he has borrowed; that is, what he has heard from others: and borrowing generally implies poverty.
Common forms of compliment, though innocent in themselves, and though in society agreeable, because customary, must not appear
[Page 650]
in elegant writing: first, because they are too familiar to the ear, being used on every trivial occasion; and secondly, because they derive their meaning from the manners of particular times and places. How ridiculous would it be, if a translator of Virgil were to make Eneas introduce himself to Dido, with these words,
Madam, Your Majesty beholds in me
Your most obliged, obedient, humble servant,
Eneas, prince of Troy!
A painter, who would represent the interview, might with equal propriety dress the Trojan in a full-bottomed wig, with a hat and feather under his arm, and make him bend his body to the ground in all the formality of a minuet-bow. There is great dignity in the complimental expressions of Homer. Priam addresses the most dreadful of all his enemies, by the appellation of “Godlike Achilles 26 .” Achilles begins a speech to Ulysses with these words, “O wise Ulysses, descended from Jove;” and calls Ajax (who, by the by, had spoken to him with provoking bitterness) “Divine Ajax, son of Telamon, prince of the people.” 27 —Milton is perhaps still more attentive to this decorum; as his persons are of greater dignity than heroes. Adam addresses Eve in these exalted terms,
Daughter of God and man, accomplish'd Eve—
Best image of myself, and dearer half—
My fairest, my espoused, my latest found,
Heaven's last best gift, my ever new delight—
and Eve's complaisance to her husband is equally sublime;
Offspring of heaven and earth, and all earth's Lord—
O thou, in whom my thoughts find all repose,
My glory, my perfection—
Such compliments are not made vulgar by common use; and have,
[Page 651]
besides, a significancy, which all the world would acknowledge to be solemn and majestick.
A third class of expressions, that by their meanness would debase every sort of good writing, are those idioms, commonly called cant ; a jargon introduced by ignorant or affected persons, and which the most perfect acquaintance with every good author in a language would not enable one to understand. Their nature may be better known from a few examples, than from a general definition. To say, of a person, whose conversation is tedious, that he is a bore ; of a drunk man, that he is in liquor , that he is disguised , that he is half seas over , that he has his load , or that he clips the king's english ; of one who plays with an intention to lose, that he plays booty ; of one, who has nothing to reply, that he is dumbsounded ; of a transaction committed to writing, that it is taken down in black and white ; of a person baffled in any enterprise, that he is beat hollow , that he has received check-mate , or that he is routed horse foot and dragoons ; of one who arrives on the very point of being too late, that he has saved his distance ; of one, who has enriched himself by any business, that he has feather'd his nest :—these, and the like idioms, are all cant: they derive no authority from the analogy or grammar of a language; and polite writers and speakers, unless when they mean to speak or write ludicrously, avoid them as vulgarities of the lowest order.
There are some professions, that have a peculiar dialect; or certain phrases at least, which are not understood by people of other professions. Thus seamen make use of terms, which none but seamen are acquainted with: and the same thing is true of architects, painters, musicians, and many other artists. Now in sublime writings such words are to be avoided; partly because, being technical, they have something of a vulgar appearance; and chiefly, because to the greater part of readers they are unintelligible. That
[Page 652]
passage of Dryden's Virgil, in which he absurdly imitates the sea-dialect, has often been repeated and censured:
Tack to the larboard, and stand out to sea,
Veer starboard sea and land.
and is chargeable with something worse than affectation; for I am assured by an experienced mariner, that it has no meaning.— Milton sometimes errs in this way; especially when he alludes to architecture and astronomy. He speaks of cornice, freeze , and architrave , and of rays culminating from the equator ; which is very unsuitable to the heroick style. For, as Addison well observes, “It is one of the greatest beauties of poetry to make hard things intelligible, and to deliver what is abstruse of itself in such easy language, as may be understood by ordinary readers. Besides (continues he) the knowledge of a poet should rather seem born with him, or inspired, than drawn from books and systems.” True poetry is addressed to all mankind; and therefore its ideas are general; and its language ought to be so plain, as that every person acquainted with the poetical dialect may understand it.
It is scarce necessary to add, that all phrases are mean, which come under the denomination of barbarism, or provincial idiom; because they suggest the ideas of vulgar things, and illiterate persons. Meanness blended with dignity is one of those incongruities that provoke laughter. And therefore provincial idioms introduced in a solemn subject would make it, or the author at least, ridiculous. The speeches, in Ovid, of Ajax and Ulysses contending for the armour of Achilles, cannot be called sublime; but artful they are, and elegant, in a high degree. That of Ajax has been translated with tolerable exactness into one of the vulgar dialects of North Britain. When we read the original, we are seriously affected: but when we look into the Scotch version, we immediately fall a laughing. I was struck with this, when a schoolboy,
[Page 653]
but could not at that time account for it. The thoughts were nearly the same in both: what then could make the one solemn, and the other ridiculous? It is the mixture of mean words and serious sentiments, and of clownish and heroick manners, contrasted with what we remember of the original, that produces a jumble of discordant ideas; and such a jumble, as may be found in most ludicrous appearances when we analyse them. 28
The last thing I shall mention upon this head is, that turns of wit have a bad effect in sublime writing: for one does not naturally think of witticism, when one is engrossed by any of those grand ideas that raise pleasing astonishment. In fact, sublime poets are seldom, what we call, men of wit: Shakespeare is an exception; but he is a singular one. For wit arises from the discovery of minute relations and likenesses that had escaped the notice of others; and therefore a talent for it implies a habit of minute attention to circumstances and words: whereas a sublime genius directs his view chiefly to the great and more important phenomena of art and nature. They who excel in epigram have not often produced sublime verses: and Lord Chesterfield, who was a man of wit, and an epigrammatist, appears, from his letters, to have had no relish for the sublime poets.
Let it not be thought, because sublimity is one of the highest virtues of fine writing, that therefore no composition is excellent but what is sublime. A book, that partakes not of this quality at all, may please by its elegance, instruct by its doctrines, or amuse by its wit and humour, and in all, or in any of these respects, be truly valuable. Rivulets and meadows have their charms, as well as mountains and the ocean. Though Horace had never written any thing but his Epistles, in which there is no attempt at sublimity, he must always have been considered as an elegant and instructive poet.
[Page 654]
Nor think, because most of the preceding examples are taken from poetry, that the Sublime is peculiar to that art. In the orations of Cicero and Demosthenes; in the histories of Herodotus, Thucydides, and Livy; in the moral writings of Addison and Johnson, of Seneca, Plato, and Antoninus; and especially in the doctrinal and historical parts of Holy Writ, are many instances of the true Sublime, both in sentiment and description. The same thing may be said of almost every serious author, who composes with elegance.
Most of the writers on this subject have considered our passion for what is great and elevated, as a proof of the dignity of the soul, and of the glorious ends for which it was made. The words of Longinus to this purpose are well translated by Dr. Akenside. “God has not intended man for an ignoble being; but, bringing us into life, and the midst of this wide universe, as before a multitude assembled at some heroick solemnity, that we might be spectators of all his magnificence, and candidates high in emulation for the prize of glory, has therefore implanted in our souls an inextinguishable love of every thing great and exalted, of every thing which appears divine beyond our comprehension. Whence it comes to pass, that even the whole world is not an object sufficient for the depth and rapidity of human imagination, which often sallies forth beyond the limits of all that surrounds us. Let any man cast his eye through the whole circle of our existence, and consider how especially it abounds with excellent and grand objects, and he will soon acknowlege for what enjoyments and pursuits we were destined.”
These are the sentiments of a Pagan philosopher. And how noble, (I had almost said, how divine) must they appear, when compared with the selfish, sensual, and groveling ideas of the Epicurean, or with the narrow views and brutal insensibility of the antient and modern Pyrrhonist!—I must not omit, that Addison
[Page 655]
has adopted the same turn of thinking; and, enlightened with the knowledge, and warmed with the piety, of a Christian, has greatly improved it. “The Supreme Being,” says he, “has so formed the soul of man, that nothing but Himself can be its last, adequate, and proper happiness. Because therefore a great part of our happiness must arise from the contemplation of his being, that he might give our souls a just relish of such a contemplation, he has made them naturally delight in the apprehension of what is great and unlimited. Our admiration, which is a very pleasing emotion of the mind, immediately rises at the consideration of any object that takes up a great deal of room in the fancy; and, by consequence, will improve into the highest pitch of astonishment and devotion, when we contemplate his nature, who is neither circumscribed by time or place, nor to be comprehended by the largest capacity of a created being.”
I shall only add, that our taste for the Sublime, cherished into a habit, and directed to proper objects, may, by preserving us from vice, which is the vilest of all things, and by recommending virtue for its intrinsick dignity, be useful in promoting our moral improvement. The same taste will also lead to the study of nature, which every where displays the sublimest appearances. And no study has a better effect upon the heart. For it keeps men at a distance from criminal pursuits, yields a variety of inoffensive and profitable amusement, and gives full demonstration of the infinite goodness and greatness of the adorable Creator.
THE END.
NOTES
1 ὕψος
2 See Walton's Angler.Part ii.
3 The maxim is, Dans Padversitè de nos meilleurs amis nous trouvons toujours quelque chose, qui ne nous deplaist pas: In the adversity of our best friends we find always something that does not displease us. This may mean, either, that while our best friends are in adversity we always meet with some gratification; or, that the adversity of our best friends is always to us the source of some gratification. The former remark is true: for, while our friend is, or even while ourselves are, in trouble, we may no doubt have the comfort, of eating when we are hungry, drinking when thirsty, resting when weary, to say nothing of the higher enjoyments of science, and of virtue. But this is a childish observation; and has no particular reference to Rochefoucault's system. I therefore suppose the meaning to be, that the calamities which overtake our best friends always give us some degree of pleasure: and this, though no childish observation, every man, who is not corrupted by extreme selfishness, knows to be utterly false. It is natural to wish for that which we know to bring pleasure along with it: but what sort of person would he be, who for his own gratification could wish his best friends to be in adversity! To this notable aphorism Swift makes a little addition, by his paraphrase. “In all distresses of our friends, We first consult our private ends,” &c. What can this mean? A child who is playing near me gets a dangerous fall: a friend who is riding with me is thrown from his horse, and has his leg broken. In this case, what do I do? I first of all, says Swift, (what! before I either aid, or pity him? Yes; I first) consult some private end of my own; that is (if it be any thing) I consider, how I may make this accident turn to my own advantage. What might pass in the mind of Swift on an occasion like this, I know not: but in me, and in most other beings of human form, I am certain there would be no such idea. Without thinking of ourselves at all, we should instantly give every assistance in our power: or, if we did not, we should deserve to be driven out of society.—But perhaps, by the word first the author here means chiefly: “When our friend is in distress, our chief desire is, not that he may be relieved, but that we may from his suffering reap some benefit.” This will not mend the matter. For, at this rate, love is hatred; and friend and enemy are synonimous terms.— The truth may be, that Swift, knowing the couplet would not be compleat without a second line, and a rhime to friends, took the liberty, on this one occasion,—to make The one verse for the other's sake; For one for sense, and one for rhime, He thought sufficient at this time.—But he brings examples to confirm his doctrine. He does. In order to prove, from reason and experience, that in all distresses of our friends we first consult our private ends, he argues, that, when our friend is NOT IN DISTRESS, but in an advantageous situation, we wish to be in as good a place as he, or perhaps in a better; that, when Ned is in the gout, we patiently hear him groan, and are glad that we are not in it; that one poet wishes all his rival-poets in hell, rather than that they should write better than he: and he urges other considerations, humourously expressed indeed, but not more to the purpose. In a word, his arguments amount to this: “Emulation is natural; Some men, particularly poets and wits, are prone to envy; And we think it a good thing to be in health. Argal, There is no such thing in this world as sincere friendship, or disinterested compassion.” This may be wit; but it is not sense. Let not this note be deemed a digression. Of the sublimities of art and nature the human soul would be a very incompetent judge, if it were so mean, so contemptible, and so hateful a thing, as some writers would have us believe. Our taste for the sublime is considered by two great authors (who will be quoted in the sequel) as a proof of the dignity of our nature.
4 Spectator, Numb, 412. Gerard on Taste.
5 This idea of Fortitude is admitted by the Stoicks, and all the best Moralists. That courage (says Tully) which aims only at self-interest, and is not regulated by equity and benevolence, is to be called audacity rather than fortitude.
6 Gerard on Taste.
7 Essay on Poetry and Musick.Part i. chap. 4.
8 See Essay on Poetry and Musick.Part i. chap. 3.
9 Essay on Imagination. Chap. II. Sect. iv. §3.
10 I find that Sir Joshua Reynolds, from whose judgment there is no appeal, thinks more favourably of the Sublime of Michael Angelo. I therefore retract part of what is said above: but I am sure my indulgent Friend will not be offended to see this remark, as I had written it before I met with his admirable Discourse delivered in the Royal Academy, in December, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-two. The few pieces I have seen of Michael Angelo must have been in his worst manner.
11 The following is a more literal translation: but I know not how to imitate, in modern language, the awful, (I had almost said, the dreadful) simplicity of the original. High in the midnight storm enthroned, Heaven's Sire Hurls from his blazing arm the bolt of fire. Earth feels with trembling; every beast is fled; And nations prostrate fall, o'erwhelm'd with dread. Athos rolls headlong, where his lightnings fly, The rocks of Rhodope in ruin lie, Or huge Keraunia. With redoubled rage The torrent rain and bellowing wind engage; Loud in the woods afar the tempests roar, And mountain billows burst in thunder on the shore.
12 Georg. I. 328.
13 Par. Lost, book v.
14 Εrbitigr;ς ὀιωνὸς ἄριστος ἀμύνΕσθαι ρΕρὶ ράτρης..Iliad. xii. 243.
15 In a very ingenious criticism on this passage in the Guardian, these words are differently understood.
16 Essay on Poetry and Musick: last chapter.
17 Timanthes. See Plin. Hist. Nat. xxxv. 36. Val. Max. viii, II. Quintil. ii. 14.
18 Isaiah, chap. xiv.
19 Aureus axis erat, temo aureus, aurea summæ Curvatura rotæ, radiorum argenteus ordo. Metam, ii
20 Pope's Homer. Book 12. near the end.
21 Speculative men often err, from an immoderate attachment to some one principle; of which, because it holds in many cases, they think it must hold in all. Gilbert, in the course of his observations on the magnet, grew so fond of magnetism, as to fancy, that the phenomena of the universe might be solved by it. And electricity seems now to have become almost as great a favourite of many ingenious philosophers. That poetical description ought to be distinct and lively, and such as might both assist the fancy, and direct the hand, of the painter, is an acknowleged truth in criticism. The best poets are the most picturesque. Homer is in this respect so admirable, that he has been justly called the prince of painters, as well as of poets. And one cause of the insipidity of the Henriade is, that its scenery and images are described in too general terms, and want those distinguishing peculiarities that captivate the fancy, and interest the passions. But should every thing in poetry be picturesque? No. To the right imitation of nature shade is necessary, as well as light. We may be powerfully affected by that which is not visible at all; and of visible things some cannot be, and many ought not to be, painted: and the mind is often better pleased with images of its own forming, or finishing, than with those that are set before it complete in all their colours and proportions. From the passage referred to in the text, and from many others that might be quoted, it appears that in description Homer himself is not always definite; and that he knows how to affect his readers by leaving occasionally a part of his picture to be supplied by their imagination. Of Helen's person he gives no minute account: but, when he tells us, that her loveliness was such as to extort the admiration of the oldest Trojan senators, who had, and who owned they had, so good reason to dislike her, he gives a higher idea of the power of her charms, than could have been conveyed by any description of her eyes, mouth, shape, and other distinguishing beauties. Algarotti is of opinion, that the poetry of the northern nations is, in general, less picturesque than that of Italy. Virgil, says he, gives so exact a representation of Dido's dress when she goes a hunting, that a painter might follow it in every particular. Tandem progreditur, magna stipante caterva, Sidoniam picto chlamydem circumdata limbo; Cui pharetra ex auro, crines nodantur in aurum, Aurea purpuream subnectit fibula vestem. Whereas Milton describes the nuda bellezza of Eve by general terms and abstract ideas, that present no image to the mind. Grace was in all her steps, heaven in her eye, In every gesture dignity and love. Of this criticism I would observe, that the censure here passed on the poetry of the north, as compared with that of the modern Italians at least, will hardly be admitted by those who understand and have read our great poets, Chaucer, Spenser, Shakespeare, and Thomson; from whom instances without number might be brought of imagery as vivid and particular, as it is in the power of language to convey. Milton, where his subject requires that he should be exactly descriptive, as in his fourth, seventh, ninth, and eleventh books, is in this respect not inferiour to Homer himself. Indeed, when his seene of action lies Beyond the visible diurnal sphere; when, with a view to raise astonishment or horror, he paints what was never seen by mortal eye, it is impossible for him to be strictly picturesque. Figures so deeply shaded cannot present a definite outline: forms of such terrifick grandeur must be to a certain degree invested with darkness. As to the description objected to by the critick:—I think it would not have been improved by being made more particular. Nor is the example at all parallel to that of Dido. The varieties of dress are innumerable: and if the poet meant that we should have a distinct idea of Dido's attire, it was necessary for him to describe it as minutely as he has done. But no minute description is necessary to present the nuda bellezza of Eve to our imagination, or to improve the idea which in a case of this kind every imagination would form for itself. Algarotti has overlooked a very material circumstance; namely, that this account of Adam's first interview with Eve is given by Adam himself to an angel; who needed no information on the subject of her beauty, because he had seen her; and to whom it would have been highly indecent to particularize her bodily perfections. Adam, therefore, is brief in this part of the narrative; and insinuates, that, at her first appearance, his attention was chiefly engaged by the delicacy and the dignity of her mind, as they displayed themselves externally in her looks and demeanour. In a word, the sanctity of the state of innocence, the purity of the loves of Paradise, the sublime character of the speaker, the veneration due to the hearer, and that majesty of thought and of style which so peculiarly characterises the divine poem, would all have been violated, if the poet's ideas had in this place been conformable to those of the Critick. Algarotti was probably thinking of the luscious pictures of Tasso, and the sensualities of Rinaldo and Armida: but Milton was conversing with Gods, breathing “empyreal air,” and describing “immortal fruits of joy and love.” I know not whether any part of the poem does more honour to his judgment.
22 As when he uses adventitius for proselyte, genius for angel, Vejupiter for diabolus, &c.
23 Essay on Poetry and Musick,Part ii. chap. 1. sect. 3.
24 See the Davideis passim, particularly the account of Goliah.
25 Iliad xxi. 170. 200.
26 Iliad. xxiv.
27 Iliad. ix.
28 See An Essay on Laughter and Ludicrous Composition, chap. 2.
$$$
