, IM 





Wm. Tyrren & Co. 



IN CHANCERY 



IN CHANCERY 



BY 

JOHN GALSWORTHY 



44 Two households both afike in dignity, 

From ancient grudge break to new mutiny." 

Rome. **><//*. 



TORONTO 

THE COPP CLARK CO., LIMITED 
1920 



&> r 

X$\2^ ' 

N? 

COPYRIGHT. 1920, BY 
CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS 



COPYRIGHT, 1920, BY THE INTERNATIONAL MAGAZINX Ca 



PR 



Printed in U. S. A. 






TO 

JESSIE AND JOSEPH CONRAD 



In Chancery is sequel to The Man of Property and 
to Indian Summer of a Forsyte, and continues The 
Forsyte Saga. J. G. 



CONTENTS 

PART I 

CHAPTER PAGE 

i. AT TIMOTHY'S 3 

II. EXIT A MAN OF THE WORLD 15 

III. SOAMES PREPARES TO TAKE STEPS 30 

IV. SOHO 38 

V. JAMES SEES VISIONS 47 

VI. NO-LONGER-YOUNG JOLYON AT HOME 55 

VII. THE COLT AND THE FILLY 68 

VIII. JOLYON PROSECUTES TRUSTEESHIP 75 

IX. VAL HEARS THE NEWS 85 

X. SOAMES ENTERTAINS THE FUTURE 97 

XI. AND VISITS THE PAST IO3 

XII. ON FORSYTE 'CHANGE Ill 

XIII. JOLYON FINDS OUT WHERE HE IS 126 

XIV. AND SOAMES DISCOVERS WHAT HE WANTS 134 

PART II 

I. THE THIRD GENERATION 14! 

II. SOAMES PUTS IT TO THE TOUCH 153 

III. VISIT TO IRENE 165 

IV. WHERE FORSYTES FEAR TO TREAD I?3 

V. JOLLY SITS IN JUDGMENT . . . *... 183 
VI. JOLYON IN TWO MINDS '' 194 

VII. DARTIE VERSUS DARTIE . . , 2QO 

VIII. THE CHALLENGE 214 

IX. DINNER AT JAMES'S 221 

X. DEATH OF THE DOG BALTHASAR . . . . . 2JO 

XI. TIMOTHY STAYS THE ROT 236 

vii 



viii CONTENTS 

CHAPTER PAGE 

XII. PROGRESS OF THE CHASE 245 

xin. 'HERE WE ARE AGAIN!' . . . . . . .252 

XIV. OUTLANDISH NIGHT 265 

PART III 

I. TSOAMES IN PARIS 271 

II. IN THE WEB ,280 

III. RICHMOND PARK 285 

IV. OVER THE RIVER 2Q4 

V. SOAMES ACTS . 296 

VI. A SUMMER DAY 3OO 

-VII. A SUMMER NIGHT 309 

VIII. JAMES IN WAITING 314 

IX. OUT OF THE WEB 319 

X. PASSING OF AN AGE 331 

XI. SUSPENDED ANIMATION 345 

XII. BIRTH OF A FORSYTE 354 

XIII. JAMES IS TOLD 3^3 

XIV. HIS 369 



PART I 






IN CHANCERY 

CHAPTER I 
AT TIMOTHY'S 

THE possessive instinct never stands still. Through 
florescence and feud, frosts and fires, it followed 
the laws of progression even in the Forsyte family 
which had believed it fixed for ever. Nor can it be 
dissociated from environment any more than the 
quality of potato from the soil. 

The historian of the English eighties and nineties 
will, in his good time, depict the somewhat rapid 
progression from self -contented and contained pro- 
vincialism to still more self-contented if less con- 
tained imperialism in other words, the ' posses- 
sive ' instinct of the nation on the move. And so, 
as if in conformity, was it with the Forsyte family. 
They were spreading not merely on the surface, but 
within. 

When, in 1895, Susan Hayman, the married For- 
syte sister, followed her husband at the ludicrously 
low age of seventy-four, and was cremated, it made 
strangely little stir among the six old Forsytes left. 
For this apathy there were three causes. First : the 
almost surreptitious burial of old Jolyon in 1892 
down at Robin Hill first of the Forsytes to desert 
the family grave at Highgate. That burial, coming 



4 IN CHANCERY 

a year after Swithin's entirely proper funeral, had 
occasioned a great deal of talk on Forsyte's 'Change, 
the abode of Timothy Forsyte on the Bayswater 
Road, London, which still collected and radiated 
family gossip. Opinions ranged from the lamenta- 
tion of Aunt Juley to the outspoken assertion of 
Francie that it was ' a jolly good thing to stop all 
that stuffy Highgate business/ Uncle Jolyon in his 
later years indeed, ever since the strange and 
lamentable affair between his granddaughter June's 
lover, young Bosinney, and Irene, his nephew Soames 
Forsyte's wife had noticeably rapped the family's 
knuckles; and that way of his own which he had 
always taken had begun to seem to them a little way- 
ward. The philosophic vein in him, of course, had 
always been too liable to crop out of the strata of 
pure Forsyteism, so they were in a way prepared for 
his interment in a strange spot. But the whole thing 
was an odd business, and when the contents of his 
Will became current coin on Forsyte 'Change, a 
shiver had gone round the clan. Out of his estate 
(145,304 gross, with liabilities 35 7s. 4d.) he had 
actually left 15,000 to 'whomever do you think, 
my dear? To Irene!' that runaway wife of his 
nephew Soames; Irene, a woman who had almost 
disgraced the family, and still more amazing 
was to him no blood relation. Not out and out, of 
course ; only a life interest only the income from 
it ! Still, there it was ; and old Jolyon's claim to be 
the perfect Forsyte was ended once for all. That, 
then, was the first reason why the burial of Susan 
Hayman at Woking made little stir. 

The second reason was altogether more expansive 
and imperial. Besides the house on Campden Hill, 
Susan had a place (left her by Hayman when he 



AT TIMOTHY'S 5 

died) just over the border in Hants, where the Hay- 
man boys had learned to be such good shots and 
riders, as it was believed, which was of course nice 
for them and creditable to everybody; and the fact 
of owning something really countrified seemed 
somehow to excuse the dispersion of her remains 
though what could have put cremation into her head 
they could not think! The usual invitations, how- 
ever, had been issued, and Soames had gone down 
and young Nicholas, and the Will had been quite 
satisfactory so far as it went, for she had only had 
a life interest; and everything had gone quite 
smoothly to the children in equal shares. 

The third reason why Susan's burial made little 
stir was the most expansive of all. It was summed 
up daringly by Euphemia, the pale, the thin : " Well, 
/ think people have a right to their own bodies, even 
when they're dead." Coming from a daughter of 
Nicholas, a Liberal of the old school and most tyran- 
nical, it was a startling remark showing in a flash 
what a lot of water had run under the bridges since 
the death of Aunt Ann, just when the proprietorship 
of Soames over his wife's body was acquiring the 
uncertainty which had led to such disaster. Euphe- 
mia, of course, spoke like a child, and had no experi- 
ence ; for though well over thirty by now, her name 
was still Forsyte. But, making all allowances, her 
remark did undoubtedly show expansion of the prin- 
ciple of liberty, decentralisation and shift in the 
central point of possession from others to oneself. 
When Nicholas heard his daughter's remark from 
Aunt Hester he had rapped out : " Wives and 
daughters ! There's no end to their liberty in these 
days. I knew that ' Jackson ' case would lead to 
things lugging in Habeas Corpus like that ! " 



6 IN CHANCERY 

He had, of course, never really forgiven the Mar- 
ried Woman's Property Act, which would so have 
interfered with him if he had not mercifully married 
before it was passed. But, in truth, there was no 
denying the revolt among the younger Forsytes 
against being owned by others; that, as it were, 
Colonial disposition to own oneself, which is the 
paradoxical forerunner of Imperialism, was making 
progress all the time. They were all now married, 
except George, confirmed to the Turf and the 
Iseeum Club ; Francie, pursuing her musical career 
in a studio off the King's Road, Chelsea, and still 
taking ' lovers ' to dances ; Euphemia, living at home 
and complaining of Nicholas ; and those two Dro- 
mios, Giles and Jesse Hayman. Of the third gener- 
ation there were not very many young Jolyon 
had three, Winifred Dartie four, young Nicholas 
six already, young Roger had one, Marian Tweety- 
man one ; St. John Hayman two. But the rest of the 
sixteen married Soames, Rachel and Cicely of 
jjames's family; Eustace and Thomas of Roger's; 
Ernest, Archibald and Florence of Nicholas's ; Au- 
gustus and Annabel Spender of the Hayman's 
were going down the years unreproduced. 

Thus, of the ten old Forsytes twenty-one young 
Forsytes had been born; but of the twenty-one 
young Forsytes there were as yet only seventeen 
descendants; and it already seemed unlikely that 
there would be more than a further unconsidered 
trifle or so. A student of statistics must have no- 
ticed that the birth rate had varied in accordance 
with the rate of interest for your money. Grand- 
father ' Superior Dosset J Forsyte in the early nine- 
teenth century had been getting ten per cent, for his, 
hence ten children. Those ten, leaving out the 



AT TIMOTHY'S 7 

four who had not married, and Juley, whose hus- 
band Septimus Small had, of course, died almost at 
once, had averaged from four to five per cent, for 
theirs, and produced accordingly. The twenty-one 
whom they produced were now getting barely three 
per cent, in the Consols to which their fathers had 
mostly tied the Settlements they made to avoid death 
duties, and the six of them who had been reproduced 
had seventeen children, or just the proper two and 
five-sixths per stem. 

There were other reasons, too, for this mild re- 
production. A distrust of their earning powers, 
natural where a sufficiency is guaranteed, together 
with the knowledge that their fathers did not die, 
kept them cautious. If one had children and not 
much income, the standard of taste and comfort 
must of necessity go down; what was enough for 
two was not enough for four, and so on it would 
be better to wait and see what Father did. Besides, 
it was nice to be able to take holidays unhampered. 
Sooner in fact than own children, they preferred to 
concentrate on the ownership of themselves, con- 
forming to the growing tendency fin de siecle, 
as it was called. In this way, little risk was run, 
and one would be able to have a motor-car. Indeed, 
Eustace already had one, but it had shaken him hor- 
ribly, and broken one of his eye teeth; so that it 
would be better to wait till they were a little safer. 
In the meantime, no more children! Even young 
Nicholas was drawing in his horns, and had made no 
addition to his six for quite three years. 

The corporate decay, however, of the Forsytes, 
their dispersion rather, of which all this was symp- 
tomatic, had not advanced so far as to prevent a 
rally when Roger Forsyte died in 1899. It had been 



8 < IN CHANCERY 

a glorious summer, and after holidays abroad and 
at the sea they were practically all back in London, 
when Roger with a touch of his old originality had 
suddenly breathed his last at his own house in 
Princes Gardens. At Timothy's it was whispered 
sadly that poor Roger had always been eccentric 
about his digestion had he not, for instance, pre- 
ferred German mutton to all the other brands ? , 

Be that as it may, his funeral at Highgate had 
been perfect, and coming away from it Soames For- 
syte made almost mechanically for his Uncle Timo- 
thy's in the Bayswater Road. The ' Old Things ' 
Aunt Juley and Aunt Hester would like to hear 
about it. His father James at eighty-eight had 
not felt up to the fatigue of the funeral ; and Timo- 
thy himself, of course, had not gone ; so that Nicho- 
las had been the only brother present. Still, there 
had been a fair gathering; and it would cheer Aunts 
Juley and Hester up to know. The kindly thought 
was not unmixed with the inevitable longing to get 
something out of everything you do, which is the 
chief characteristic of the Forsytes, and indeed of 
the saner elements in every nation. In this practice 
of taking family matters to Timothy's in the Bays- 
water Road, Soames was but following in the foot- 
steps of his father, who had been in the habit 
of going at least once a week to see his sisters 
at Timothy's and had only given it up when he 
lost his nerve at eighty-six, and could not go out 
without Emily. ; To go with Emily was of no use, 
for who could really talk to anyone in the pres- 
ence of his own wife? Like James in the old 
days, Soames found time to go there nearly every 
Sunday, and sit in the little drawing-room into 
which, with his undoubted taste, he had intro- 



AT TIMOTHY'S 9 

duced a good deal of change and china not quite 
up to his own fastidious mark, and at least two 
rather doubtful Barbizon pictures, at Christmas- 
tides. He himself, who had done extremely well 
with the fearbizons, had for some years past moved 
towards the Marises, Israels, and Mauve, and was 
hoping to do better. In the riverside house which 
he now inhabited near Mapledurham he had a gal- 
lery, beautifully hung and lighted, to which few 
London dealers were strangers. It served, too, as 
a Sunday afternoon attraction in those week-end 
parties which his sisters, Winifred or Rachel, occa- 
sionally organized for him. For though he was 
but a taciturn showman, his quiet collected deter- 
minism seldom failed to influence his guests, who 
knew that his reputation was grounded not on mere 
aesthetic fancy, but on his power of gauging the 
future of market values. When he went to Timo- 
thy's he almost always had some little tale of tri- 
umph over a dealer to unfold, and dearly he loved 
that coo of pride with which his Aunts would greet 
it. This afternoon, however, he was differently ani- 
mated, coming from Roger's funeral in his neat 
dark clothes not quite black, for after all an 
uncle was but an uncle, and his soul abhorred ex- 
cessive display of feeling. Leaning back in a mar- 
queterie chair and gazing down his uplifted nose at 
the sky-blue walls plastered with gold frames, he 
was noticeably silent. Whether because he had 
been to a funeral or not, the peculiar Forsyte build 
of his face was seen to the best advantage this after- 
noon a face concave and long, with a jaw which 
divested of flesh would have seemed extravagant: 
altogether a chinny face, though not at all ill-look- 
ing. He was feeling more strongly than ever that 



I0 IN CHANCERY 

.Timothy's was hopelessly ' rum-ti-too/ and the souls 
of his aunts dismally mid- Victorian. The subject 
on which alone he wanted to talk his own undi- 
vorced position was unspeakable. And yet it 
occupied his mind to the exclusion of all else. It was 
only since the Spring that this had been so, and a 
new feeling grown up which was egging him 
on towards what he knew might well be folly in a 
Forsyte of forty-five. More and more of late he 
had been conscious that he was l getting on/ The 
fortune, already considerable when he conceived the 
house at Robin Hill which had finally wrecked his 
marriage with Irene, had mounted with surprising 
vigor in the twelve lonely years during which he 
had devoted himself to little else. He was worth 
to-day well over a hundred thousand pounds, and 
had no one to leave it to no real object for going 
on with what was his religion. Even if he were to 
relax his efforts, money made money, and he felt 
that he would have a hundred and fifty thousand 
before he knew where he was. There had always 
been a strongly domestic, philoprogenitive side to 
Soames ; baulked and frustrated, it had hidden itself 
away, but now had crept out again in this his ' prime 
of life/ Concreted and focussed of late by the at- 
traction of a girl's undoubted beauty, it had become 
a veritable prepossession. 

And this girl was French, not likely to lose her 
head, or accept any unlegalised position. Moreover, 
Soames himself disliked the thought of that. He 
had tasted of the sordid side of sex during those 
long years of forced celibacy, secretively, and al- 
ways with disgust, for he was fastidious, and his 
sense of law^and order innate. He wanted no hole 
and corner liaison. A marriage at the Embassy in 



AT TIMOTHY'S n 

Paris, a few months' travel, and he could bring 
Annette back quite separated from a past which in 
truth was not too distinguished, for she only kept 
the accounts in her mother's Soho Restaurant; he 
could bring her back as something very new and 
chic with her French taste and self-possession, to 
reign at ' The Shelter ' near Mapledurham. On For- 
syte 'Change and among his riverside friends it 
would be current that he had met a charming French 
girl on his travels and married her. There would 
be the flavour of romance, and a certain cachet 
about a French wife. No ! He was not at all afraid 
of that; it was only this cursed undivorced condition 
of his, and and the question whether Annette 
would take him, which he dared not put to the touch 
until he had a clear and even dazzling future to offer 
her. 

In his aunts' drawing-room he heard with but 
muffled ears those usual questions: How was his 
dear father? Not going out, of course, now that 
the weather was turning chilly? Would Soames be 
sure to tell him that Hester had found boiled holly 
leaves most comforting for that pain in her side ; a 
poultice every three hours, with red flannel after- 
wards ? And could he relish just a little pot of their 
very best prune preserve it was so delicious this 
year, and had such a wonderful effect? Oh! and 
about the Darties had Soames heard that dear 
Winifred was having a most distressing time with 
Montagu? Timothy thought she really ought to 
have protection. It was said but Soames mustn't 
take this for certain that he had given some of 
Winifred's jewellery to a dreadful dancer. It was 
such a bad example for dear Val just as he was 
going to college. Soames had not heard? Oh, but 



I2 IN CHANCERY 

he must go and see his sister and look into it at 
once! And did he think these Boers were really 
going to resist ? [Timothy was in quite a stew about 
it. The price of Consols was so high, and he had 
such a lot of money in them. Did Soames think they 
must go down if there was a war ? Soames nodded. 
But it would be over very quickly. It would be so 
bad for Timothy if it wasn't. And of course 
Soames' dear father would feel it very much at his 
age. Luckily poor dear Roger had been spared this 
dreadful anxiety. And Aunt Juley with a little 
handkerchief wiped away the large tear trying to 
climb the permanent pout on her now quite withered 
left cheek; she was remembering dear Roger, and 
all his originality, and how he used to stick pins 
into her when they were little together. Aunt Hes- 
ter, with her instinct for avoiding the unpleasant, 
here chimed in : Did Soames think they would make 
Mr. Chamberlain Prime Minister at once? He 
would settle it all so quickly. She would like to see 
that old Kruger sent to St. Helena. She could re- 
member so well the news of Napoleon's death, and 
what a relief it had been to his grandfather. Of 
course she and Juley "We were in pantalettes 
then, my dear" had not felt it much at the time. 
Soames took a cup of tea from her, drank it 
quickly, and ate three of those macaroons for which 
Timothy's was famous. His faint, pale, supercili- 
ous smile had deepened just a little. Really, his 
family remained hopelessly provincial, however 
much of London they might possess between them. 
In these go-ahead days their provincialism stared 
out even more than it used to. Why, old Nicholas 
was still a Free Trader, and a member of that ante- 
diluvian home of Liberalism, the Remove Club 



AT TIMOTHY'S 13 

though, to be sure, the members were pretty well 
all Conservative now, or he himself could not have 
joined; and Timothy, they said, still wore a night- 
cap. Aunt Juley spoke again. Dear Soames was 
looking so well, hardly a day older than he did when 
dear Ann died, and they were all there together, 
dear Jolyon, and dear Swithin, and dear Roger. 
She paused and caught the tear which had climbed 
the pout on her right cheek. Did he did he ever 
hear anything of Irene nowadays? Aunt Hester 
visibly interposed her shoulder. Really, Juley was 
always saying something ! The smile left Soames' 
face, and he put his cup down. Here was his sub- 
ject broached for him, and for all his desire to ex- 
pand, he could not take advantage. 

Aunt Juley went on rather nastily: 

"They say dear Jolyon first left her that fifteen 
thousand out and out; then of course he saw it 
would not be right, and made it for her life only." 

Had Soames heard that? 

Soames nodded. 

: 'Your Cousin Jolyon is a widower now. He is 
her trustee ; you knew that, of course ? " 

Soames shook his head. He did know, but wished 
to show no interest. Young Jolyon and he had not 
met since the day of Bosinney's death. 

"He must be quite middle-aged by now/' went 
on Aunt Juley dreamily. " Let me see, he was born 
when your dear uncle lived in Mount Street; long 
before they went to Stanhope Gate in December 
'48, the year of the Commune. He must be fifty! 
Fancy that ! Such a pretty baby, and we were all 
so proud of him; the very first of you all." Aunt 
Juley sighed, and a lock of not quite her own hair 
came loose and straggled, so that Aunt Hester gave 



J4 IN CHANCERY 

a little shiver. Soames rose, he was experiencing 
a curious piece of self -discovery. That old wound 
to his pride and self-esteem was not yet closed. He 
had come thinking he could talk of it, even wanting 
to talk of his fettered condition, and behold! he 
was shrinking away from this reminder by Aunt 
Juley, renowned for her Malapropisms. 

Oh, Soames was not going already ! 

Soames smiled a little vindictively, and said: 

" Yes. Good-bye. Remember me to Uncle Tim- 
othy ! " And, leaving a cold kiss on each forehead, 
whose wrinkles seemed to try and cling to his lips 
as if longing to be kissed away, he left them looking 
brightly after him dear Soames, it had been so 
good of him to come to-day, when they were not 
feeling very ! 

With compunction tweaking at his chest Soames 
descended the stairs, where was always that rather 
pleasant smell of camphor and port wine, and house 
where draughts are not permitted. The poor old 
things he had not meant to be unkind! And in 
the street he instantly forgot them, repossessed by 
the image of Annette and the thought of the cursed 
coil around him. Why had he not pushed the thing 
through and obtained divorce when that wretched 
Bosinney was run over, and there was evidence ga- 
lore for the asking ! And he turned towards his 
sister Winifred Dartie's residence in Green Street, 
Mayfair. 



CHAPTER II 

EXIT A MAN OF THE WORLD 

THAT a man of the world so subject to the vicissi- 
tudes of fortune as Montagu Dartie should still be 
living in a house he had inhabited twenty years at 
least would have been more noticeable if the rent, 
rates, taxes, and repairs of that house had not been 
defrayed by his father-in-law. By that simple if 
wholesale device James Forsyte had secured a cer- 
tain stability in the lives of his daughter and his 
grandchildren. After all, there is something in- 
valuable about a safe roof over the head of a sports- 
man so dashing as Dartie. Until the events of the 
last few days he had been almost supernaturally 
steady all this year. The fact was he had acquired 
a half share in a filly of George Forsyte's, who had 
gone irreparably on the turf, to the horror of Roger, 
now stilled by the grave. Sleeve-links, by Martyr, 
out of Shirt-on-fire, by Suspender, was a bay filly, 
three years old, who for a variety of reasons had 
never shown her true form. With half ownership 
of this hopeful animal, all the idealism latent some- 
where in Dartie, as in every other man, had put up 
its head, and kept him quietly ardent for months 
past. When a man has something good to live for 
it is astonishing how sober he becomes ; and what 
Dartie had was really good a three to one chance 

15 



X 6 IN CHANCERY" 

for an autumn handicap, publicly assessed at 
twenty-five to one. The old-fashioned heaven was 
a poor thing beside it, and his shirt was on the 
daughter of Shirt-on-fire. But how much more 
than his shirt depended on this granddaughter of 
Suspender ! At that roving age of forty-five, trying 
to Forsytes and, though perhaps less distinguish- 
able from any other age, trying even to Darties 
Montagu had fixed his current fancy on a dancer. 
It was no mean passion, but without money, and a 
good deal of it, likely to remain a love as airy as her 
skirts ; and Dartie never had any money, subsisting 
miserably on what he could beg or borrow from 
Winifred a woman of character, who kept him 
because he was the father of her children, and from 
a lingering admiration for those now-dying War- 
dour Street good looks which in their youth had 
fascinated her. She, together with anyone else who 
would lend him anything, and his losses at cards and 
on the turf, (extraordinary how some men make a 
good thing out of losses), were his whole means of 
subsistence; for James was now too old and ner- 
vous to approach, and Soames too formidably ada- 
mant. It is not too much to say that Dartie had 
been living on hope for months. He had never been 
fond of money for itself, had always despised the 
Forsytes with their investing habits, though careful 
to make such use of them as he could. What he 
liked about money was what it bought personal 
sensation. 

" No real sportsman cares for money," he would 
say, borrowing a * pony ' if it was no use trying for 
a ' monkey.' There was something delicious about 
Montagu Dartie. He was, as George Forsyte 
said, a ' daisy/ 



EXIT A MAN OF THE WORLD 17 

The morning of the Handicap dawned clear and 
bright, the last day of September, and Dartie, who 
had travelled to Newmarket the night before, ar- 
rayed himself in spotless checks and walked to an 
eminence to see his half of the filly take her final 
canter. If she won he would be a cool three thou. 
in pocket a poor enough recompense for the 
sobriety and patience of these weeks of hope, while 
they had been nursing her for this race. But he 
had not been able to afford more. Should he 
' lay it off ' at the eight to one to which she had 
advanced? This was his single thought while the 
larks sang above him, and the grassy downs smelled 
sweet, and the pretty filly passed, tossing her head 
and glowing like satin. After all, if he lost it would 
not be he who paid, and to ' lay it off ' would reduce 
his winnings to some fifteen hundred hardly 
enough to purchase a dancer out and out. Even 
more potent was the itch in the blood of all the 
Darties for a real flutter. And turning to George 
he said: " She's a clipper. She'll win hands down; 
I shall go the whole hog." George, who had laid 
off every penny, and a few besides, and stood to win, 
however it came out, grinned down on him from his 
bulky height, with the words : " So ho, my wild 
one ! " for after a chequered apprenticeship weath- 
ered with the money of a deeply complaining Roger, 
his Forsyte blood was beginning to stand him in 
good stead in the profession of owner. 

There are moments of disillusionment in the lives 
of men from which the sensitive recorder shrinks. 
Suffice it to say that the good thing fell down. 
Sleeve-links finished in the ruck. Dartie's shirt 
was lost. 

Between the passing of these things, and the day 



X S IN CHANCERY 

when Soames turned his face towards Green Street, 
what had not happened! 

When a man with the constitution of Montagu 
Dartie has exercised self-control for months from 
religious motives, and remains unrewarded, he does 
not curse God and die, he curses God and lives, to 
the distress of his family. 

Winifred a plucky woman, if a little too fash- 
ionable who had borne the brunt of him for 
exactly twenty-one years, had never really believed 
that he would do what he now did. Like so many 
wives, she thought she knew the worst, but she had 
not yet known him in his forty-fifth year, when he, 
like other men, felt that it was now or never. Pay- 
ing on the 2nd of October a visit of inspection to 
her jewel case, she was horrified to observe that 
her woman's crown and glory was gone the 
pearls which Montagu had given her in '85, when 
Benedict was born, and which James had been com- 
pelled to pay for in the spring of '87, to save scan- 
dal. She consulted her husband at once. He 
* pooh-poohed ' the matter. They would turn up ! 
Nor till she said sharply : " Very well, then, Monty, 
I shall go down to Scotland Yard myself'' did he 
consent to take the matter in hand. Alas ! that the 
steady and resolved continuity of design necessary 
to the accomplishment of sweeping operations 
should be liable to interruption by drink. That 
night Dartie returned home without a care in the 
world ^ or a particle of reticence. Under normal 
conditions Winifred would merely have locked her 
door and let him sleep it off, but torturing suspense 
about her pearls had caused her to wait up for him. 
Taking a small revolver from his pocket and hold- 
ing on to the dining table, he told her at once that 






EXIT A MAN OF THE WORLD 19 

he did not care a cursh whether she lived s'long as 
she was quiet; but he himself wash tired o' life. 
Winifred, holding on to the other side of the dining 
table, answered: 

" Don't be a clown, Monty. Have you been to 
Scotland Yard?" 

Placing the revolver against his chest, Dartie 
had pulled the trigger several times. It was not 
loaded. Dropping it with an imprecation, he had 
muttered : " For shake o' the children," and sank 
into a chair. Winifred, having picked up the re- 
volver, gave him some soda water. The liquor had 
a magical effect. Life had ill-used him ; Winifred 
had never ' unshstood'm.' If he hadn't the right to 
take the pearls he had given her himself, who had ? 
That Spanish filly had got'nr. If Winifred had any 
'jection he w'd cut her throat. What was the 
matter with that? (Probably the first use of that 
celebrated phrase so obscure are the origins of 
even the most classical language!) 

Winifred, who had learned self -containment in a 
hard school, looked up at him, and said : " Spanish 
filly ! Do you mean that girl we saw dancing in the 
Pandemonium Ballet ? Well, you are a thief and a 
blackguard." It had been the last straw on a sorely 
loaded consciousness; reaching up from his chair 
Dartie seized his wife's arm, and recalling the 
achievements of his boyhood, twisted it. Winifred 
endured the agony with tears in her eyes, but no 
murmur. Watching for a moment of weakness, 
she wrenched it free ; then placing the dining table 
between them, said between her teeth : " You are the 
limit, Monty." (Undoubtedly the inception of that 
phrase so is English formed under the stress of 
circumstance.) Leaving Dartie with foam on his 



20 IN CHANCERY 

dark moustache she went upstairs, and, after lock- 
ing her door and bathing her arm in hot water, lay 
awake all night, thinking of her pearls adorning 
the neck of another, and of the consideration her 
husband had presumably received therefor. 

The man of the world awoke with a sense of 
being lost to that world, and a dim recollection of 
having been called a ' limit.' He sat for half an 
hour in the dawn and the armchair where he had 
slept perhaps the unhappiest half-hour he had 
ever spent, for even to a Dartie there is something 
tragic about an end. And he knew that he had 
reached it. Never again would he sleep in his din- 
ing-room and wake with the light filtering through 
those curtains bought by Winifred at Nickens and 
Jarveys with the money of James. Never again 
eat a devilled kidney at that rosewood table, after a 
roll in the sheets and a hot bath. He took his note 
case from his dress coat pocket. Four hundred 
pounds, in fives and tens the remainder of the 
proceeds of his half of Sleeve-links, sold last night, 
cash down, to George Forsyte, who, having won 
over the race, had not conceived the sudden dislike 
to the animal which he himself now felt. The ballet 
was going to Buenos Aires the day after to-morrow 
and he was going too. Full value for the pearls 
had not yet been received ; he was only at the soup. 

He stole upstairs. Not daring to have a bath, or 
shave (besides, the water would be cold), he 
changed his clothes and packed stealthily all he 
could. It was hard to leave so many shining boots, 
but one must sacrifice something. Then, carrying 
a valise in either hand, he stepped out on to the 
landing. The house was very quiet that house 
where he had begotten his four children. It was a 



EXIT A MAN OF THE WORLD , 21 

curious moment, this, outside the room of his wife, 
once admired, if not perhaps loved, who had called 
him 'the limit/ He steeled himself with that 
phrase, and tiptoed on ; but the next door was harder 
to pass. It was the room his daughters slept in. 
Maud was at school, but Imogen would be lying 
there ; and moisture came into Dartie's early morn- 
ing eyes. She was the most like him of the four, 
with her dark hair, and her luscious brown glance. 
Just coming out, a pretty thing ! He set down the 
two valises. This almost formal abdication of 
fatherhood hurt him. The morning light fell on a 
face which worked with real emotion. Nothing so 
false as penitence moved him; but genuine paternal 
feeling, and that melancholy of ' never again/ He 
moistened his lips; and complete irresolution for a 
moment paralysed his legs in their check trousers. 
It was hard hard to be thus compelled to leave 
his home ! " D - n it ! " he muttered, " I never 
thought it would come to this/' Noises above 
warned him that the maids were beginning to get 
up. And grasping the two valises, he tiptoed on 
downstairs. His cheeks were wet, and the knowl- 
edge of that was comforting, as though it guaran- 
teed the genuineness of his sacrifice. He lingered 
a little in the rooms below, to pack all the cigars he 
had, some papers, a crush hat, a silver cigarette box, 
a Ruff's Guide. Then, mixing himself a stiff whisky 
and soda, and lighting a cigarette, he stood hesi- 
tating before a photograph of his two girls, in a 
silver frame. It belonged to Winifred. ' Never 
mind/ he thought; 'she can get another taken, and 
I can't ! ' He slipped it into the valise. Then, put- 
ting on his hat and overcoat, he took two others, 
his best malacca cane, an umbrella, and opened the 



22 IN CHANCERY 

front door. Closing it softly behind him, he walked 
out, burdened as he had never been in all his life, 
and made his way round the corner to wait there for 
an early cab to come by. . . . 

Thus had passed Montagu Dartie in the forty- 
fifth year of his age from the house which he had 
called his own. . . . 

When Winifred came down, and realised that he 
was not in the house, her first feeling was one of 
dull anger that he should thus elude the reproaches 
she had carefully prepared in those long wakeful 
hours. He had gone off to Newmarket or Brighton, 
with that woman as likely as not. Disgusting! 
Forced to a complete reticence before Imogen and 
the servants, and aware that her father's nerves 
would never stand the disclosure, she had been un- 
able to refrain from going to Timothy's that after- 
noon, and pouring out the story of the pearls to 
Aunts Juley and Hester in utter confidence. It 
was only on the following morning that she noticed 
the disappearance of that photograph. What did 
it mean? Careful examination of her husband's 
relics prompted the thought that he had gone for 
good. As that conclusion hardened she stood quite 
still in the middle of his dressing-room, with all the 
drawers pulled out, to try and realize what she was 
feeling. By no means easy ! Though he was ' the 
limit' he was yet her property, and for the life of 
her she could not but feel the poorer. To be wid- 
owed yet not widowed at forty-two; with four 
children; made conspicuous, an object of commiser- 
ation ! Gone to the arms of a Spanish jade ! Mem- 
ories, feelings, which she had thought quite dead, 
revived within her, painful, sullen, tenacious. 
Mechanically she closed drawer after drawer, went 



EXIT A MAN OF THE WORLD 23 

to her bed, lay on it, and buried her face in the pil- 
lows. She did not cry. What was the use of that ? 
When she got off her bed to go down to lunch she 
felt as if only one thing could do her good, and that 
was to have Val home. He her eldest boy 
who was to go to Oxford next month at James' ex- 
pense, was at Littlehampton taking his final gallops 
with his trainer for Smalls, as he would have 
phrased it following his father's diction. She 
caused a telegram to be sent to him. 

" I must see about his clothes," she said to Imo- 
gen ; " I can't have him going up to Oxford all any- 
how. Those boys are so particular." 

" Val's got heaps of things," Imogen answered. 

"I know; but they want overhauling. I hope 
he'll come." 

" He'll come like a shot, Mother. But he'll prob- 
ably skew his Exam." 

"I can't help that," said Winifred. "I want 
him." 

With an innocent shrewd look at her mother's 
face, Imogen kept silence. It was father, of 
course ! Val did come ' like a shot ' at six o'clock. 

Imagine a cross between a pickle and a Forsyte 
and you have young Publius Valerius Dartie. A 
youth so named could hardly turn out otherwise. 
When he was born, Winifred, in the heyday of 
spirits, and the craving for distinction, had deter- 
mined that her children should have names such as 
no others had ever had. (It was a mercy she 
felt now that she had just not named Imogen 
Thisbe.) But it was to George Forsyte, always a 
wag, that Val's christening was due. It so hap- 
pened that Dartie dining with him, a week after the 
birth of his son and heir, had mentioned this aspira- 
tion of Winifred's. 



24 IN CHANCERY 

" Call him Cato," said George, " it'll be damned 
piquant ! " He had just won a tenner on a horse of 
that name. 

" Cato ! " Dartie had replied they were a little 
' on ' as the phrase was even in those days " it's 
not a Christian name." 

" Hallo you! " George called to a waiter in knee 
breeches. " Bring me the Encyc'pedia Brit, from 
the Library, letter C" 

The waiter brought it. 

" Here you are ! " said George, pointing with his 
cigar : " Cato Publius Valerius by Virgil out of 
Lydia. That's what you want Publius Valerius 
is Christian enough." 

Dartie, on arriving home, had informed Winifred. 
She had been charmed. It was so ' chic.' And 
Publius Valerius became the baby's name, though 
it afterwards transpired that they had got hold of 
the inferior Cato. In 1890, however, when little Pub- 
lius was nearly ten, the word ' chic ' went out of 
fashion, and sobriety came in; Winifred began to 
have doubts. They were confirmed by little Pub- 
lius himself who returned from his first term at 
school complaining that life was a burden to him 
they called him Pubby. Winifred a woman of 
real decision promptly changed his school and 
his name to Val, the Publius being dropped even as 
an initial. 

At nineteen he was a limber, freckled youth with 
a wide mouth, light eyes, long dark lashes, a rather 
charming smile, considerable knowledge of what 
he should not know, and no experience of what he 
ought to do. Few boys had more narrowly escaped 
being expelled the engaging rascal. After kiss- 
ing his mother and pinching Imogen, he ran up- 



EXIT A MAN OF THE WORLD 25 

stairs three at a time, and came down four, dressed 
for dinner. He was awfully sorry, but his 
' trainer/ who had come up too, had asked him to 
dine at the Oxford and Cambridge ; it wouldn't do 
to miss the old chap would be hurt. Winifred 
let him go with an unhapy pride. She had wanted 
him at home, but it was very nice to know that his 
tutor was so fond of him. He went out with a wink 
at Imogen, saying: 

" I say, Mother, could I have two plover's eggs 
when I come in ? cook's got some. They top up 
sa jolly well. Oh ! and look here have you any 
money ? I had to borrow a fiver from old Snobby." 

Winifred, looking at him with fond shrewdness, 
answered : 

" My dear, you are naughty about money. But 
you shouldn't pay him to-night, anyway; you're his 
guest." How nice and slim he looked in his white 
waistcoat, and his dark thick lashes ! 

" Oh, but we may go to the theatre, you see, 
Mother; and I think I ought to stand the tickets; 
he's always hard up, you know." 

Winifred produced a five-pound note, saying: 

" Well, perhaps you'd better pay him, but you 
mustn't stand the tickets too." 

Val pocketed the fiver. 

" If I do, I can't," he said. " Good-night, Mum ! " 

He went out with his head up and his hat cocked 
joyously, sniffing the air of Piccadilly like a young 
hound loosed into covert. Jolly good biz! After 
that mouldy old slow hole down there! 

He found his t tutor ' not indeed at the Oxford 
and Cambridge, but at the Goat's Club. This 
' tutor ' was a year older than himself, a good-look- 
ing youth, with fine brown eyes, and smooth dark 



26 IN CHANCERY 

hair, a small mouth, an oval face, languid, immacu- 
late, cool to a degree, one of those young men who 
without effort establish moral ascendancy over their 
companions. He had missed being expelled from 
school a year before Val, had spent that year at 
Oxford, and Val could almost see a halo round his 
head. His name was Crum, and no one could get 
through money quicker. It seemed to be his only 
aim in life dazzling to young Val, in whom, how- 
ever, the Forsyte would stand apart, now and then 
wondering where the value for that money was. 

They dined quietly, in style and taste; left the 
Club smoking cigars, with just two bottles inside 
them, and dropped into stalls at the Liberty. For 
Val the sound of comic songs, the sight of lovely 
legs, were fogged and interrupted by haunting fears 
that he would never equal Crum's quiet dandyism. 
His idealism was roused ; and when that is so, one is 
never quite at ease. Surely he had too wide a 
mouth, not the best cut of waistcoat, no braid on his 
trousers, and his lavender gloves had no thin black 
stitchings down the back. Besides, he laughed too 
much Crum never laughed, he only smiled, with 
his regular dark brows raised a little so that they 
formed a gable over his just drooped lids. No ! he 
would never be Crum's equal. All the same it was 
a jolly good show, and Cynthia Dark simply ripping. 
Between the acts Crum regaled him with particulars 
of Cynthia's private life, and the awful knowledge 
became Val's that, if he liked, Crum could go be- 
hind. He simply longed to say : " I say, take me ! " 
but dared not, because of his deficiencies ; and this 
made the last act or two almost miserable. On 
coming out Crum said : " It's half an hour before 
they close ; let's go on to the Pandemonium." They 



EXIT A MAN OF THE WORLD 27 

took a hansom to travel the hundred yards, and 
seats costing seven-and-six apiece because they were 
going to stand, and walked into the Promenade. 
It was in these little things, this utter negligence of 
money, that Crum had such engaging polish. The 
ballet was on its last legs and night, and the traffic 
of the Promenade was suffering for the moment. 
Men and women were crowded in three rows against 
the barrier. The whirl and dazzle on the stage, the 
half dark, the mingled tobacco fumes and women's 
scent, all that curious lure to promiscuity which be- 
longs to Promenades, began to free young Val from 
his idealism. He looked admiringly in a young 
woman's face, saw she was not young, and quickly 
looked away. Shades of Cynthia Dark ! The young 
woman's arm touched his unconsciously; there was 
a scent of musk and mignonette. Val looked round 
the corner of his lashes. Perhaps she was young, 
after all. Her foot trod on his ; she begged his 
pardon. He said: 

" Not at all; jolly good ballet, isn't it? " 

" Oh, I'm tired of it; aren't you? " 

Young Val smiled his wide, rather charming 
smile. Beyond that he did not go not yet con- 
vinced. The 'Forsyte in him stood out for greater 
certainty. And on the stage the ballet whirled its 
kaleidoscope of snow-white, salmon-pink, and emer- 
ald-green, and violet, and seemed suddenly to freeze 
into a stilly spangled pyramid. Applause broke out, 
and it was over! Maroon curtains had cut it off. 
The semi-circle of men and women round the bar- 
rier broke up, the young woman's arm pressed his. 
A little way off disturbance seemed centring round 
a man with a pink carnation; Val stole another 
glance at the young woman, who was looking 



2 g IN CHANCERY 

towards it. Three men, unsteady, emerged, walk- 
ing arm in arm. The one in the centre wore the 
pink carnation, a white waistcoat, a dark mous- 
tache; he reeled a little as he walked. Crum's voice 
said slow and level : " Look at that bounder, he's 
screwed ! " Val turned to look. The ' bounder ' had 
disengaged his arm, and was pointing straight at 
them. Crum's voice, level as ever, said : 

" He seems to know you ! " The ' bounder ' 
spoke : 

" H'llo ! " he said. " You f 'Hows, look ! There's 
my young rascal of a son ! " 

Val saw. It was his father ! He could have sunk 
into the crimson carpet. It was not the meeting in 
this place, not even that his father was ' screwed ' ; 
it was Crum's word * bounder,' which, as by heav- 
enly revelation, he perceived at that moment to be 
true. Yes, his father looked a bounder with his dark 
good looks, and his pink carnation, and his square, 
self-assertive walk. And without a word he ducked 
behind the young woman and slipped out of the 
promenade. He heard the word, " Val ! " behind 
him, and ran down deep-carpeted steps past the 
' chuckers-out/ into the Square. 

To be ashamed of his own father is perhaps the 
bitterest experience a young man can go through. 
It seemed to Val, hurrying away, that his career 
had ended before it had begun. How could he go 
up to Oxford now amongst all those chaps, those 
splendid friends of Crum's, who would know that 
his father was a ' bounder ' ! And suddenly he 
hated Crum. Who the devil was Crum, to say that ? 
If Crum had been beside him at that moment, he 
would certainly have been jostled off the pavement. 
His own father his own! A choke came up in 
his throat, and he dashed his hands down deep into 



EXIT A MAN OF THE WORLD 29 

his overcoat pockets. Damn Crum ! He conceived 
the wild idea of running back and finding his father, 
taking him by the arm and walking about with him 
in front of Crum; but gave it up at once and pur- 
sued his way down Piccadilly. A young woman 
planted herself before him. " Not so angry, dar- 
ling ! " He shied, dodged her, and suddenly became 
quite cool. If Crum ever said a word, he would 
jolly well punch his head, and there would be an 
end of it. He walked a hundred yards or more, 
contented with that thought, then lost its comfort 
utterly. It wasn't simple like that! He remem- 
bered how, at school, when some parent came down 
who did not pass the standard, it just clung to the 
fellow afterwards. It was one of those things 
nothing could remove. Why had his mother mar- 
ried his father, if he was a ' bounder ' ? It was 
bitterly unfair jolly low-down on a fellow to 
give him a ' bounder ' for father. The worst of it 
was that now Crum had spoken the word, he real- 
ised that he had long known subconsciously that his 
father was not ' the clean potato/ It was the beast- 
liest thing that had ever happened to him beast- 
liest thing that had ever happened to any fel- 
low! And, downhearted as he had never yet 
been, he came to Green Street, and let himself in 
with a smuggled latchkey. In the dining-room his 
plover's eggs were set invitingly, with some cut 
bread and butter, and a little whisky at the bottom 
of a decanter just enough, as Winifred had 
thought, for him to feel himself a man. It made 
him sick to look at them, and he went upstairs. 

Winifred heard him pass, and thought: "The 
dear boy's in. Thank goodness ! If he takes after 
his father I don't know what I shall do! But he 
won't he's like me. Dear Val!" 



CHAPTER III 

SOAMES PREPARES TO TAKE STEPS 

WHEN Soames entered his sister's little Louis 
Quinze drawing-room, with its small balcony, al- 
ways flowered with hanging geraniums in the sum- 
mer, and now with pots of Lilium Auratum, he was 
struck by the immutability of human affairs. It 
looked just the same as on his first visit to the newly 
married Darties twenty-one years ago. He had 
chosen the furniture himself, and so completely that 
no subsequent purchase had ever been able to 
change the room's atmosphere. Yes, he had 
founded his sister well, and she had wanted it. In- 
deed, it said a great deal for Winifred that after all 
this time with Dartie she remained well-founded. 
From the first Soames had nosed out Dartie's na- 
ture from underneath the plausibility, savoir faire, 
and good looks which had dazzled Winifred, her 
mother, and even James, to the extent of permitting 
the fellow to marry his daughter without bringing 
anything into settlement a fatal thing to do. 

Winifred, whom he noticed next to the furniture, 
was sitting at her Buhl bureau with a letter in her 
hand. She rose and came towards him. Tall as 
himself, strong in the cheekbones, well tailored, 
something in her face disturbed Soames. She 

30 



SOAMES PREPARES TO TAKE STEPS 31 

crumpled the letter in her hand, but seemed to 
change her mind and held it out to him. He was 
her lawyer as well as her brother. 

Soames read, on Iseeum Club paper, these words : 

"You will not get chance to insult in my own 
again. I am leaving country to-morrow. It's 
played out. I'm tired of being insulted by you. 
You've brought on yourself. No self-respecting 
man can stand it. I shall not ask you for anything 
again. Good-bye. I took the photograph of the 
two girls. Give them my love. I don't care what 
your family say. It's all their doing. I'm going 
to live new life. < 

" M. D." 

This after-dinner note had a splotch on it not yet 
quite dry. He looked at Winifred the splotch 
had clearly come from her; and he checked the 
words: "Good riddance!" Then it occurred to 
him that with this letter she was entering that very 
state which he himself so earnestly desired to quit 
the state of a Forsyte who was not divorced. 

Winifred had turned away, and was taking a 
long sniff from a little gold-topped bottle. A dull 
commiseration, together with a vague sense of in- 
jury, crept about Soames's heart. He had come to 
her to talk of his own position, and get sympathy, 
and here was she in the same position, wanting of 
course to talk of it, and get sympathy from him. It 
was always like that! Nobody ever seemed to 
think that he had troubles and interests of his own. 
He folded up the letter with the splotch inside, and 
said: 

" What's it all about, now? " 

Winifred recited the story of the pearls calmly. 



32 IN CHANCERY 

" Do you think he's really gone, Soames? You 
see the state he was in when he wrote that." 

Soames who, when he desired a thing, placated 
Providence by pretending that he did not think it 
likely to happen, answered : 

" I shouldn't think so. I might find out at his 
Club." 

" If George is there," said Winifred, " he would 
know." 

"George?" said Soames; "I saw him at his 
father's funeral." 

" Then he's sure to be there." 

Soames, whose good sense applauded his sister's 
acumen, said grudgingly: "Well, I'll go round. 
Have you said anything in Park Lane? " 

" I've told Emily," returned Winifred, who re- 
tained that ' chic J way of describing her mother. 
" Father would have a fit." 

Indeed, anything untoward was now sedulously 
kept from James. With another look round at the 
furniture, as if to gauge his sister's exact position, 
Soames went out towards Piccadilly. The even- 
ing was drawing in a touch of chill in the Octo- 
ber haze. He walked quickly, with his close and 
concentrated air. He must get through, for he 
wished to dine in Soho. On hearing from the hall 
porter at the Iseeum that Mr. Dartie had not been 
in to-day, he looked at the trusty fellow and decided 
only to ask if Mr. George Forsyte was in the Club. 
He was. Soames, who always looked askance at 
his cousin George, as one inclined to jest at his ex- 
pense, followed the page-boy slightly reassured by 
the thought that George had just lost his father. 
He must have come in for about thirty thousand, 
besides what he had under that settlement of 



SOAMES PREPARES TO TAKE STEPS 33 

Roger's, which had avoided death duty. He found 
George in a bow-window, staring out across a half- 
eaten plate of muffins. His tall, bulky, black- 
clothed figure loomed almost threatening, though 
preserving still the supernatural neatness of the rac- 
ing man. With a faint grin on his fleshy face, he 
said: 

" Hallo, Soames ! Have a muffin? " 

" No, thanks," murmured Soames ; and, nursing 
his hat, with the desire to say something suitable 
and sympathetic, added : 

" How's your mother ? " 

" Thanks," said George ; " so-so. Haven't seen 
you for ages. You never go racing. How's the 
City?" 

Soames, scenting the approach of a jest, closed 
up, and answered: 

" I wanted to ask you about Dartie. I hear 
he's " 

" Flitted, made a bolt for Buenos Aires with the 
fair Lola. Good for Winifred and the little Dar- 
ties. He's a treat." 

Soames nodded. Naturally inimical as these 
cousins were, Dartie made them kin. 

" Uncle James'll sleep in his bed now," resumed 
George; " I suppose he's had a lot off you, too." 

Soames smiled. 

" Ah ! You saw him further," said George ami- 
cably. " He's a real rouser. Young Val will want 
a bit of looking after. I was always sorry for 
Winifred. She's a plucky woman." 

Again Soames nodded. " I must be getting back 
to her," he said ; " she just wanted to know for cer- 
tain. We may have to take steps. I suppose 
there's no mistake? " 



34 IN CHANCERY 

" It's quite O. K.," said George it was he who 
invented so many of those quaint sayings which 
have been assigned to other sources. " He was 
drunk as a lord last night; but he went off all right 
this morning. His ship's the Tuscarora;" an4 
fishing out a card, he read mockingly : 

"'Mr. Montagu Dartie. Poste Restante, 
Buenos Aires/ I should hurry up with the steps, 
if I were you. He fairly fed mje up last night." 

" Yes," said Soames; " but it's not always easy." 
Then, conscious from George's eyes that he had 
roused reminiscence of his own affair, he got up, 
and held out his hand. George rose too. 

" Remember me to Winifred. You'll enter her 
for the Divorce Stakes straight off if you ask me." 

Soames took a sidelong look back at him from the 
doorway. George had seated himself again and 
was staring before him ; he looked big and lonely in 
those black clothes. Soames had never known him 
so subdued. ' I suppose he feels it in a way/ he 
thought. ' They must have about fifty thousand 
each, all told. They ought to keep the estate to- 
gether. If there's a war, house property will go 
down. Uncle Roger was a good judge, though.' 
And the face of Annette rose before him in the 
darkening street ; her brown hair and her blue eyes 
with their dark lashes, her fresh lips and cheeks, 
dewy and blooming in spite of London, her perfect 
French figure. ' Take steps ! ' he thought. Re-en- 
tering Winifred's house he encountered Val, and 
they went in together. An idea had occurred to 
Soames. His cousin Jolyon was Irene's trustee, 
the first step would be to go down and see him at 
Robin Hill. Robin Hill ! The odd the very odd 
feeling those words brought back! Robin Hill 



SOAMES PREPARES TO TAKE STEPS 35 

the house Bosinney had built for him and Irene 
the house they had never lived in the fatal house i 
And Jolyon lived there now! H'm! And sud- 
denly he thought : ' They say he's got a boy at Ox- 
ford! Why not take young Val down and intro- 
duce them! It's an excuse! Less bald very 
much less bald ! ' So, as they went upstairs, he said 
to Val: 

' You've got a cousin at Oxford ; you've never 
met him. I should like to take you down with me 
to-morrow to where he lives and introduce you. 
You'll find it useful." 

Val, receiving the idea with but moderate trans- 
ports, Soames clinched it. 

" I'll call for you after lunch. It's in the country 
not far ; you'll enjoy it." 

On the threshold of the drawing-room he recalled 
with an effort that the steps he contemplated con- 
cerned Winifred at the moment, not himself. 

Winifred was still sitting at her Buhl bureau. 

" It's quite true," he said; " he's gone to Buenos 
Aires, started this morning we'd better have him 
shadowed when he lands. I'll cable at once. 
Otherwise we may have a lot of expense. The 
sooner these things are done the better. I'm al- 
ways regretting that I didn't " he stopped, and 

looked sidelong at the silent Winifred. " By the 
way," he went- on, " can you prove cruelty? " 

Winifred said in a dull voice : 

:( I don't know. What is cruelty? " 

" Well, has he struck you, or anything? " 

Winifred shook herself, and her jaw grew 
square. 

" He twisted my arm. Or would pointing a pis- 
tol count ? Or being too drunk to undress himself, 
or No I can't bring in the children." 



3 6 IN CHANCERY 

"No," said Soames; "no. I wonder! Of 
course, there's legal separation we can get that. 
But separation ! Um ! " 

"What does it mean?" asked Winifred deso- 
lately. 

"That he can't touch you, or you him; you're 
both of you married and unmarried." And again 
he grunted. What was it, in fact, but his own ac- 
cursed position, legalised! No, he would not put 
her into that ! 

" It must be divorce," he said decisively; " failing 
cruelty, there's desertion. There's a way of short- 
ening the two years, now. We get the Court to 
give us restitution of conjugal rights. Then if he 
doesn't obey, we can bring a suit for divorce in six 
months' time. Of course you don't want him back. 
But they won't know that. Still, there's the risk 
that he might come. I'd rather try cruelty." 

Winifred shook her head. " It's so beastly." 

:< Well," Soames murmured, " perhaps there isn't 
much risk so long as he's infatuated and got money. 
Don't say anything to anybody, and don't pay any 
of his debts." 

Winifred sighed. In spite of all she had been 
through, the sense of loss was heavy on her. And 
this idea of not paying his debts any more brought 
it home to her as nothing else yet had. Some rich- 
ness seemed to have gone out of life. Without her 
husband, without her pearls, without that intimate 
sense that she made a brave show above the domes- 
tic whirlpool, she would now have to face the world. 
She felt bereaved indeed. 

And into the chilly kiss he placed on her fore- 
head, Soames put more than his usual warmth. 

" I have to go down to Robin Hill to-morrow," he 



SOAMES PREPARES TO TAKE STEPS 37 

said, " to see young Jolyon on business. He's got a 
boy at Oxford. I'd like to take Val with me and 
introduce him. Come down to ' The Shelter ' for 
the week-end and bring the children. Oh! by the 
way, no, that won't do ; I've got some other people 
coming." So saying, he left her and turned to- 
wards Soho. 



CHAPTER IV 

SOHO 

OF all quarters in the queer adventurous amal- 
gam called London, Soho is perhaps least suited to 
the Forsyte spirit. ' So-ho, my wild one ! ' George 
would have said if he had seen his cousin going 
there. Untidy, full of Greeks, Ishmaelites, cats, 
Italians, tomatoes, restaurants, organs, coloured 
stuffs, queer names, people looking out of upper 
windows, it dwells remote from the British Body 
Politic. Yet has it haphazard proprietory instincts 
of its own, and a certain possessive prosperity which 
keeps its rents up when those of other quarters go 
down. For long years Soames' acquaintanceship 
with Soho had been confined to its Western bastion, 
Wardour Street. Many bargains had he picked up 
there. Even during those seven years at Brighton 
after Bosinney's death and Irene's flight, he had 
bought treasures there sometimes, though he had no 
place to put them ; for when the conviction that his 
wife had gone for good at last became firm within 
him, he had caused a board to be put up in Mont- 
pelier Square : 

FOR SALE 
THE LEASE OF THIS DESIRABLE RESIDENCE 

Enquire of Messrs. Lesson and Tukes, Court Street, Belgravia. 
38 



SOHO , 39 

It had sold within a week that desirable resi- 
dence, in the shadow of whose perfection a man and 
a woman had eaten their hearts out. 

Of a misty January evening, just before the board 
was taken down, Soames had gone there once more, 
and stood against the Square railings, looking at 
its unlighted windows, chewing the cud of posses- 
sive memories which had turned so bitter in the 
mouth. Why had she never loved him? Why? 
She had been given all she had wanted, and in return 
had given him, for three long years, all he had 
wanted except, indeed, her heart. He had ut- 
tered a little involuntary groan, and a passing po- 
liceman had glanced suspiciously at him who no 
longer possessed the right to enter that green door 
with the carved brass knocker beneath the board 
' For sale ! ' A choking sensation had attacked his 
throat, and he had hurried away into the mist. 
That evening he had gone to Brighton to live. . . . 

Approaching Malta Street, Soho, and the Res- 
taurant Bretagne, where Annette would be droop- 
ing her pretty shoulders over her accounts, Soames 
thought with wonder of those seven years at 
Brighton. How had he managed to go on so long 
in that town devoid of the scent of sweet-peas, 
where he had not even space to put his treasures? 
True, those had been years with no time at all for 
looking at them years of almost passionate 
money-making, during which Forsyte, Bustard and 
Forsyte had become solicitors to more limited Com- 
panies than they could properly attend to. Up to 
the City of a morning in a Pullman car, down from 
the City of an evening in a Pullman car. Law pa- 
pers again after dinner, then the sleep of the tired, 
and up again next morning. Saturday to Monday 



4 o IN CHANCERY 

was spent at his Club in town curious reversal of 
customary procedure, based on the deep and careful 
instinct that while working so hard he needed sea 
air to and from the station twice a day, and while 
resting must indulge his domestic affections. The 
Sunday visit to his family in Park Lane, to Timo- 
thy's, and to Green Street ; the occasional visits else- 
where had seemed to him as necessary to health as 
sea air on weekdays. Even since his migration to 
Mapledurham he had maintained those habits until 
he had known Annette. Whether Annette had 
produced the revolution in his outlook, or that out- 
look had produced Annette, he knew no more than 
we know where a circle begins. It was intricate 
and deeply involved with the growing consciousness 
that property without anyone to leave it to is the 
negation of true Forsyteism. To have an heir, 
some continuance of self, who would begin where he 
left off ensure, in fact, that he would not leave 
off had quite obsessed him for the last year and 
more. After buying a bit of Wedgwood one even- 
ing in April, he had dropped into Malta Street to 
look at a house of his father's which had been turned 
into a restaurant a risky proceeding, and one not 
quite in accordance with the terms of the lease. He 
had stared for a little at the outside painted a good 
cream colour, with two peacock-blue tubs containing 
little bay-trees in a recessed doorway and at the 
words ' Restaurant Bretagne ' above them in gold 
letters, rather favourably impressed. Entering, he 
had noticed that several people were already seated 
at little round green tables with little pots of fresh 
flowers on them and Brittany-ware plates, and had 
asked of a trim waitress to see the proprietor. They 
had shown him into a back room, where a girl was 



SOHO 41 

sitting at a simple bureau covered with papers, and 
a small round table was laid for two. The impres- 
sion of cleanliness, order, and good taste was con- 
firmed when the girl got up, saying, " You wish to 
see Maman, Monsieur ? " in a broken accent. 

" Yes," Soames had answered, " I represent your 
landlord; in fact, I'm his son." 

' Won't you sit down, sir, please? Tell Maman 
to come to this gentleman." 

He was pleased that the girl seemed impressed, 
because it showed business instinct ; and suddenly he 
noticed that she was remarkably pretty so re- 
markably pretty that his eyes found a difficulty in 
leaving her face. When she moved to put a chair 
for him, she swayed in a curious subtle way, as if 
she had been put together by someone with a special 
secret skill; and her face and neck, which was a 
little bared, looked as fresh as if they had been 
sprayed with dew. Probably at this moment 
Soames decided that the lease had not been violated; 
though to himself and his father he based the de- 
eision on the efficiency of those illicit adaptations in 
the building, on the signs of prosperity, and the ob- 
vious business capacity of Madame Lamotte. He 
did not, however, neglect to leave certain matters to 
future consideration, which had necessitated fur- 
ther visits, so that the little back room had become 
quite accustomed to his spare, not unsolid, but unob- 
trusive figure, and his pale chinny face with clipped 
moustache and dark hair not yet grizzling at the 
sides. 

' Un Monsieur ires distingue? Madame Lamotte 
found him ; and presently, ' Tres amical, tres gentil/ 
watching his eyes upon her daughter. 

She was one of those generously built, fine-faced, 



42 IN CHANCERY 

dark-haired Frenchwomen, whose every action and 
tone of voice inspire perfect confidence in the thor- 
oughness of their domestic tastes, their knowledge 
of cooking, and the careful increase of their bank 
balances. 

After those visits to the Restaurant Bretagne be- 
gan, other visits ceased without, indeed, any def- 
inite decision, for Soames, like all Forsytes, and the 
great majority of their countrymen, was a born 
empiricist. But it was this change in his mode of 
life which had gradually made him so definitely con- 
scious that he desired to alter his condition from 
that of the unmarried married man to that of the 
married man remarried. 

Turning in to Malta Street on this evening of 
early October, 1899, he bought a paper to see if 
there were any after-development of the Dreyfus 
case a question which he had always found use- 
ful in making closer acquaintanceship with Ma- 
dame Lamotte and her daughter, who were Catholic 
and anti-Dreyfusard. 

Scanning those columns, Soames found nothing 
French, but noticed a general fall on the Stock Ex- 
change and an ominous leader about the Transvaal. 
He entered, thinking : ' War's a certainty. I shall 
sell my consols/ Not that he had many personally, 
the rate of interest was too wretched; but he should 
advise his Companies consols would assuredly go 
down. A look, as he passed the doorways of the 
restaurant, assured him that business was good as 
ever, and this, which in April would have pleased 
him, now gave him a certain uneasiness. If the 
steps which he had to take ended in his marrying 
Annette, he would rather see her mother safely back 
in France, a move to which the prosperity of the 



SOHO 43 

Restaurant Bretagne might become an obstacle. 
He would have to buy them out, of course, for 
French people only came to England to make 
money; and it would mean a higher price. And 
then that peculiar sweet sensation at the back of his 
throat, and a slight thumping about the heart, which 
he always experienced at the door of the little room, 
prevented his thinking how much it would cost. 

Going in, he was conscious of an abundant black 
skirt vanishing through the door into the restaurant, 
and of Annette with her hands up to her hair. It 
was the attitude in which of all others he admired 
her so beautifully straight and rounded and 
supple. And he said : 

" I just came in to talk to your mother about pull- 
ing down that partition. No, don't call her." 

" Monsieur will have supper with us ? It will be 
ready in ten minutes." Soames, who still held her 
hand, was overcome by an impulse which surprised 
him. 

' You look so pretty to-night," he said, " so very 
pretty. Do you know how pretty you look, An- 
nette?" 

Annette withdrew her hand, and blushed. 
" Monsieur is very good." 

" Not a bit good," said Soames, and sat down 
gloomily. 

Annette made a little expressive gesture with her 
hands ; a smile was crinkling her red lips untouched 
by salve. 

And, looking at those lips, Soames said : 

" Are you happy over here, or do you want to go 
back to France?" 

" Oh, I like London. Paris, of course. But Lon- 
don is better than Orleans, and the English country 



44 IN CHANCERY 

is so beautiful. I have been to Richmond last Sun- 
day." 

Soames went through a moment of calculating 
struggle. Mapledurham! Dared he? After all, 
dared he go so far as that, and show her what there 
was to look forward to! Still! Down there one 
could say things. In this room it was impossible. 

" I want you and your mother," he said suddenly, 
" to come for the afternoon next Sunday. My 
house is on the river, it's not too late in this weather ; 
and I can show you some good pictures. What do 
you say ? " 

Annette clasped her hands. 

" It will be lovelee. The river is so beautiful." 

" That's understood, then. I'll ask Madame." 

He need say no more to her this evening, and risk 
giving himself away. But had he not already said 
too much? Did one ask restaurant proprietors 
with pretty daughters down to one's country house 
without design? Madame Lamotte would see, if 
Annette didn't. Well! there was not much that 
Madame did not see. Besides, this was the second 
time he had stayed to supper with them; he owed 
them hospitality. . . . 

Walking home towards Park Lane for he was 
staying at his father's with the impression of An- 
nette's soft clever hand within his own, his thoughts 
were pleasant, slightly sensual, rather puzzled. 
Take steps! What steps? How? Dirty linen 
washed in public? Pah! With his reputation for 
sagacity, for far-sightedness and the clever extrica- 
tion of others, he, who stood for proprietory inter- 
ests, to become the plaything of that Law of which 
he was a pillar ! There was something revolting in 
the thought! Winifred's affair was bad enough! 



SOHO 45 

To have a double dose of publicity in the family ! 
Would not a liaison be better than that a liaison, 
and a son he could adopt ? But dark, solid, watch- 
ful, Madame Lamotte blocked the avenue of that 
vision. No ! that would not work. It was not as if 
Annette could have a real passion for him ; one could 
not expect that at his age. If her mother wished, if 
the worldly advantage were manifestly great 
perhaps! If not, refusal would be certain. Be- 
sides, he thought : ' I am not a villain. I don't want 
to hurt her ; and I don't want anything underhand. 
But I do want her, and I want a son ! There's noth- 
ing for it but divorce somehow anyhow di- 
vorce ! ' Under the shadow of the plane-trees, in 
the lamplight, he passed slowly along the railings of 
the Green Park. Mist clung there among the bluish 
tree shapes, beyond range of the lamps. How 
many hundred times he had walked past those trees 
from his father's house in Park Lane, when he was 
quite a young man or from his own house in Mont- 
pelier Square in those four years of married life! 
And, to-night, making up his mind to free himself if 
he could of that long useless marriage tie, he took a 
fancy to walk on, in at Hyde Park Corner, out at 
Knightsbridge Gate, just as he used to when going 
home to Irene in the old days. What could she be 
like now ? how had she passed the years since he 
last saw her, twelve years in all, eight already since 
Uncle Jolyon left her that money! Was she still 
beautiful ? Would he know her if he saw her ? 
' I've not changed much/ he thought ; ' I expect she 
has. She made me suffer.' He remembered sud- 
denly one night, the first on which he went out to 
dinner alone an old Malburian dinner the first 
year of their marriage. With what eagerness he 



46 IN CHANCERY 

had hurried back; and, entering softly as a cat, had 
heard her playing. Opening the drawing-room 
door noiselessly, he had stood watching the expres- 
sion on her face, different from any he knew, so 
much more open, so confiding, as though to her 
music she was giving a heart he had never seen. 
And he remembered how she stopped and looked 
round, how her face changed back to that which he 
did know, and w r hat an icy shiver had gone through 
him for all that the next moment he was fondling 
her shoulders. Yes, she had made him suffer ! Di- 
vorce! It seemed ridiculous, after all these years 
of utter separation ! But it would have to be. No 
other way ! ' The question/ he thought with sud- 
den realism, ' is which of us ? She or me ? She 
deserted me. She ought to pay for it. There'll be 
someone, I suppose/ Involuntarily he uttered a 
little snarling sound, and, turning, made his way 
back to Park Lane. 



CHAPTER V 

JAMES SEES VISIONS 

THE butler himself opened the door, and closing it 
softly, detained Soames on the inner mat. 

" The master's poorly, sir," he murmured. " He 
wouldn't go to bed till you came in. He's still in the 
dining-room." 

Soames responded in the hushed tone to which the 
house was now accustomed. 

' What's matter with him, Warmson? " 

" Nervous, sir, I think. Might be the funeral ; 
might be Mrs. Dartie's comin' round this afternoon. 
I think he overheard something. I've took him in a 
negus. The mistress has just gone up." 

Soames hung his hat on a mahogany stag's-horn. 

" All right, Warmson, you can go to bed; I'll take 
him up myself." And he passed into the dining- 
room. . . . 

James was sitting before the fire, in a big arm- 
chair, with a camel-hair shawl, very light and warm, 
over his frock-coated shoulders, on to which his 
long white whiskers drooped. His white hair, still 
fairly thick, glistened in the lamplight ; a little mois- 
ture from his fixed, light grey eyes stained the 
cheeks, still quite well coloured, and the long deep 

47 



48 IN CHANCERY 

furrows running to the corners of the clean-shaven 
lips, which moved as if mumbling thoughts. His 
long legs, thin as a crow's, in shepherd's plaid 
trousers, were bent at less than a right angle, and on 
one knee a spindly hand moved continually, with 
fingers wide apart and glistening tapered nails. 
Beside him, on a low stool, stood a half-finished 
glass of negus, bedewed with beads of heat. There 
he had been sitting, with intervals for meals, all day. 
At eighty-eight he was still organically sound, but 
suffering terribly from the thought that no one ever 
told him anything. It is, indeed, doubtful how he 
had become aware that Roger was being buried that 
day, for Emily had kept it from him. She was al- 
ways keeping things from him. Emily was only 
seventy! James had a grudge against his wife's 
youth. He felt sometimes that he would never have 
married her if he had known that she would have so 
many years before her, when he had so few. It was 
not natural. She would live fifteen or twenty years 
after he was gone, and might spend a lot of money ; 
she had always had extravagant tastes. For all he 
knew she might want to buy one of these motor-cars. 
Cicely and Rachel and Imogen and all the young 
people they all rode those bicycles now, and went 
off Goodness knew where. And now Roger was 
gone. He didn't know couldn't tell ! The fam- 
ily was breaking up. Soames would know how 
much his uncle had left. Curiously, he thought of 
Roger as Soames' uncle, not as his own brother. 
Soames ! It was more and more the one solid spot 
in a vanishing world. Soames was careful ; he was 
a warm man ; but he had no one to leave his money 
to. There it was! He didn't know! And there 
was that fellow Chamberlain ! For James 1 political 



JAMES SEES VISIONS 49 

principles had been fixed between '70 and '85, when 
' that rascally Radical ' had been the chief thorn, in 
the side of property, and he distrusted Jiim to this 
day, in spite of his conversion; he would get the 
country into -a mess, and make money go down be- 
fore he had done with it. A stormy petrel of a 
chap ! Where was Soames ? He had gone to the 
funeral, of course, which they had tried to keep 
from him. He knew that perfectly well ; he had seen 
his son's trousers. Roger ! Roger in his coffin ! He 
remembered how, when they came up from school 
together from the West, on the box seat of the old 
Slowflyer in 1824, Roger had got into the ' boot ' 
and gone to sleep. James uttered a thin cackle. A 
funny fellow Roger an original ! He didn't 
know! Younger than himself, and in his coffin! 
The family was breaking up. There was Val going 
to the university; he never came to see him now. 
He would cost a pretty penny up there. It was an 
extravagant age. And all the pretty pennies that 
his four grandchildren would cost him danced be- 
fore James' eyes. He did not grudge them the 
money, but he grudged terribly the risk which the 
spending of that money might bring on them; he 
grudged the diminution of security. And now that 
Cicely had married, she might be having children 
too. He didn't know couldn't tell! Nobody 
thought of anything but spending money in these 
days, and racing about, and having what they called 
' a good time.' A motor-car went past the window. 
Ugly great lumbering thing, making all that racket ! 
But there it was, the country rattling to the dogs ! 
People in such a hurry that they couldn't even care 
for style a neat turn-out like his barouche and 
bays was worth all those new-fangled things. And 



50 IN CHANCERY 

consols at 1 16 ! There must be a lot of money in the 
country. And now there was this old Kruger! 
They had tried to keep old Kruger from him. But 
he knew better; there would be a pretty kettle of 
fish out there! He had known how it would be 
when that fellow Gladstone dead now, thank 
God ! made such a mess of it after that dreadful 
business at Majuba. He shouldn't wonder if the 
Empire split up and went to pot. And this vision of 
the Empire going to pot filled a full quarter of an 
hour with qualms of the most serious character. 
He had eaten a poor lunch because of them. But it 
was after lunch that the real disaster to his nerves 
occurred. He had been dozing when he became 
aware of voices low voices. Ah ! they never told 
him anything! Winifred's and her mother's. 
" Monty ! " That fellow Dartie always that fel- 
low Dartie! The voices had receded; and James 
had been left alone, with his ears standing up like a 
hare's, and fear creeping about his inwards. Why 
did they leave him alone? Why didn't they come 
and tell him? And an awful thought, which 
through long years had haunted him, concreted 
again swiftly in his brain. Dartie had gone bank- 
rupt fraudulently bankrupt, and to save Wini- 
fred and the children, he James would have to 
pay! Could he could Soames turn him into a 
limited Company? No, he couldn't! There it 
was ! With every minute before Emily came back 
the spectre fiercened. Why, it might be forgery! 
With eyes fixed on the doubted Turner in the centre 
of the wall, James sufifered tortures. He saw Dar- 
tie in the dock, his grandchildren in the gutter, and 
himself in bed. He saw the doubted Turner being 
sold at Jobson's, and all the majestic edifice of prop- 



JAMES SEES VISIONS 51 

erty in rags. He saw in fancy Winifred unf ash- 
ionably dressed, and heard in fancy Emily's voice 
saying: " Now, don't fuss, James! " She was al- 
ways saying: " Don't fuss! " She had no nerves; 
he ought never to have married a woman eighteen 
years younger than himself. Then Emily's real 
voice said : 

" Have you had a nice nap, James ? " 

Nap! He was in torment, and she asked him 
that! 

"What's this about Dartie?" he said, and his 
eyes glared at her. 

Emily's self-possession never deserted her. 

"What have you been hearing?" she asked 
blandly. 

"What's this about Dartie?" repeated James. 
" He's gone bankrupt." 

"Fiddle!" 

James made a great effort, and rose to the full 
height of his stork-like figure. 

"You never tell me anything," he said; "he's 
gone bankrupt." 

The destruction of that fixed idea seemed to 
Emily all that mattered at the moment. 

" He has not," she answered firmly. " He's gone 
to Buenos Aires." 

If she had said ' He's gone to Mars * she could not 
have dealt James a more stunning blow ; his imagi- 
nation, invested entirely in British securities, could 
as little grasp oneplace as the other. 

" What's he gone there for ? " he said. " He's 
got no money- What did he take ? " 

Agitated within by Winifred's news, and goaded 
by the constant reiteration of this jeremiad, Emily 
said calmly : 



52 IN CHANCERY 

" He took Winifred's pearls and a dancer." 

" What ! " said James, and sat down. 

His sudden collapse alarmed her, a'nd smoothing 
his forehead, she said : 

" Now, don't fuss, James ! " 

A dusky red had spread over James' cheeks and 
forehead. 

" I paid for them," he said tremblingly; " he's a 
thief ! I I knew how it would be. He'll be the 
death of me; he " words failed him and he sat 
quite still. Emily, who thought she knew him so 
well, was alarmed, and went towards the sideboard 
where she kept some sal volatile. She could not see 
the tenacious Forsyte spirit working in that thin, 
tremulous shape against the extravagance of the 
emotion called up by this outrage on Forsyte prin- 
ciples the Forsyte spirit deep in there, saying: 
* You mustn't get into a f antod, it'll never do. You 
won't digest your lunch. You'll have a fit ! ' All 
unseen by her, it was doing better work in James 
than sal volatile. 

"Drink this," she said. 

James waved it aside. 

" What was Winifred about," he said, " to let him 
take her pearls ? " Emily perceived the crisis past. 

" She can have mine," she said comfortably. " I 
never wear them. She'd better get a divorce." 

".There you go!" said James. "Divorce! 
We've never had a divorce in the family. Where's 
Soames? " 

:( He'll be in directly." 

:< No, he won't," said James, almost fiercely; 

" he's at the funeral. You think I know nothing." 

'Well," said Emily with calm, " you shouldn't 

get into such fusses when we tell you things." And 



JAMES SEES VISIONS 53 

plumping up his cushions, and putting the sal vola- 
tile beside him, she left the room. 

But James sat there seeing visions of Winifred 
in the Divorce Court, and the family name in the 
papers; of the earth falling on Roger's coffin; of 
Val taking after his father; of the pearls he had 
paid for and would never see again; of money back 
at four per cent., and the country going to the dogs ; 
and, as the afternoon wore into evening, and tea- 
time passed, and dinner-time, those visions became 
more and more mixed and menacing of being 
told nothing, till he had nothing left of all his 
wealth, and they told him nothing of it. Where 
was Soames? Why didn't he come in? ... His 
hand grasped the glass of negus, he raised it to 
drink, and saw his son standing there looking at 
him. A little sigh of relief escaped his lips, and put- 
ting the glass down, he said : 

" There you are! Dartie's gone to Buenos 
Aires!" 

Soames nodded. "That's all right," he said; 
" good riddance." 

A wave of assuagement passed over James' 
brain. Soames knew. Soames was the only one of 
them all who had sense. Why couldn't he come and 
live at home ? He had no son of his own. And he 
said plaintively : 

" At my age I get nervous. I wish you were 
more at home, my boy." 

Again Soames nodded; the mask of his counte- 
nance betrayed no understanding, but he went closer, 
and as if by accident touched his father's shoulder. 

* They sent their love to you at Timothy's," he 
said. " It went off all right. I've been to see Win- 
ifred. I'm going to take steps." And he thought : 
' Yes, and you mustn't hear of them.' 



54 IN CHANCERY 

James looked up ; his long white whiskers quiv- 
ered, his thin throat between the points of his collar 
looked very gristly and naked. 

" I've been very poorly all day," he said; " they 
never tell me anything." 

Soames's heart twitched. 

" Well, it's all right. There's nothing to worry 
about. Will you come up now ? " and he put his 
hand under his father's arm. 

James obediently and tremulously raised himself, 
and together they went slowly across the room, 
which had a rich look in the firelight, and out to the 
stairs. Very slowly they ascended. 

" Good-night, my boy," said James at his bedroom 
door. 

" Good-night, father," answered Soames. His 
hand stroked down the sleeve beneath the shawl ; it 
seemed to have almost nothing in it, so thin was the 
arm. And, turning away from the light in the 
opening doorway, he went up the extra flight to his 
own bedroom. 

' I want a son/ he thought, sitting on the edge of 
his bed ; ' I want a son/ 



CHAPTER VI 

NO-LONGER-YOUNG JOLYON AT HOME 

TREES take little account of Time, and the old oak on 
the upper lawn at Robin Hill looked no day older 
than when Bosinney sprawled under it and said to 
Soames : ' Forsyte, I Ve found the very place for 
your house/ Since then S within had dreamed, and 
old Jolyon died, beneath its branches. And now, 
close to the swing, no-longer-young Jolyon often 
painted there. Of all spots in the world it was per- 
haps the most sacred to him, for he had loved his 
father. 

Contemplating its great girth crinkled and a 
little mossed, but not yet hollow he would specu- 
late on the passage of time. That tree had Seen, 
perhaps, all real English history; it dated, he 
shouldn't wonder, from the days of Elizabeth at 
least. His own fifty years were as nothing to its 
wood. When the house behind it, which he now 
owned, was three hundred years of age instead of 
twelve, that tree might still be standing there, vast 
and hollow for who would commit such sacrilege 
as to cut it down ? A Forsyte might perhaps still 
be living in that house, to guard it jealously. And 
Jolyon would wonder what the house would look 
like coated with such age. Wistaria was already 

ss 



56 IN CHANCERY 

about its walls the new look had gone. Would 
it hold its own and keep the dignity Bosinney had be- 
stowed on it, or would the giant London have lapped 
it round and made it into an asylum in the midst of 
a jerry-built wilderness ? Often, within and with- 
out of it, he was persuaded that Bosinney had been 
moved by the spirit when he built. He had put his 
heart into that house, indeed! It might even be- 
come one of the ' homes of England ' a rare 
achievement for a house in these degenerate days 
of building. And the aesthetic spirit, moving hand 
in hand with his Forsyte sense of possessive contin- 
uity, dwelt with pride and pleasure on his owner- 
ship thereof. There was the smack of reverence 
and ancestor-worship (if only for one ancestor) in 
his desire to hand this house down to his son and his 
son's son. His father had loved the house, had 
loved the view, the grounds, that tree ; his last years 
had been happy there, and no one had lived there be- 
fore him. These last eleven years at Robin Hill 
had formed in Jolyon's life, as a painter, the impor- 
tant period of success. He was now in the very van 
of water-colour art, hanging on the line everywhere. 
His drawings fetched high prices. Specialising in 
that one medium with the tenacity of his breed, he 
had ' arrived ' rather late, but not too late for a 
member of the family which made a point of living 
for ever. His art had really deepened and im- 
proved. In conformity with his position he had 
grown a short fair 'beard, which was just beginning 
to grizzle, and hid his Forsyte chin ; his brown face 
had lost the warped expression of his ostracised 
period he looked, if anything, younger. The 
loss of his wife in 1894 had been one of those do- 
mestic tragedies which turn out in the end for the 



NO-LONGER-YOUNG JOLYON AT HOME 57 

good of all. He had, indeed, loved her to the last, 
for his was an affectionate spirit, but she had be- 
come increasingly difficult : jealous of her step-daugh- 
ter June, jealous even of her own little daughter 
Holly, and making ceaseless plaint that he could not 
love her, ill as she was, and ' useless to everyone, 
and better dead/ He had mourned her sincerely, 
but his face had looked younger since she died. If 
she could only have believed that she made him 
happy, how much happier would the twenty years of 
their companionship have been ! 

June had never really got on well with her who 
had reprehensibly taken her own mother's place; 
and ever since old Jolyon died she had been estab- 
lished in a sort of studio in London. But she had 
come back to Robin Hill on her stepmother's death, 
and gathered the reins there into her small decided 
hands. Jolly was then at Harrow ; Holly still learn- 
ing from Mademoiselle Beauce. There had been 
nothing to keep Jolyon at home, and he had removed 
his grief and his paintbox abroad. There he had 
wandered, for the most part in Brittany, and at last 
had fetched up in Paris. He had stayed there several 
months, and come back with the younger face and 
the short fair beard. Essentially a man who merely 
lodged in any house, it had suited him perfectly that 
June should reign at Robin Hill, so that he was free 
to go off with his easel where and when he liked. 
She was inclined, it is true, to regard the house 
rather as an asylum for her proteges; but his own 
outcast days had filled Jolyon for ever with sym- 
pathy towards an outcast, and June's ' lame ducks ' 
about the place did not annoy him. By all means let 
her have them down and feed them up ; and though 
his slightly cynical humour perceived that they min- 



58 IN CHANCERY 

istered to his daughter's love of domination as well 
as moved her warm heart, he never ceased to admire 
her for having so many ducks. He fell, indeed, year 
by year into a more and more detached and brotherly 
attitude towards his own son and daughters, treating 
them with a sort of whimsical equality. When he 
went down to Harrow to see Jolly, he never quite 
knew which of them was the elder, and would sit 
eating cherries with him out of one paper bag, with 
an affectionate and ironical smile twisting up an eye- 
brow and curling his lips a little. And he was al- 
ways careful to have money in his pocket, and to be 
modish in his dress, so that his son need not blush 
for him. They were perfect friends, but never 
seemed to have occasion for verbal confidences, both 
having the competitive self-consciousness of For- 
sytes. They knew they would stand by each other 
in scrapes, but there was no need to talk about it. 
Jolyon had a perfect horror partly original sin, 
but partly the result of his early immorality of 
the moral attitude. The most he could ever have 
said to his son would have been : 

' Look here, old man, don't forget you're a gentle- 
man ;' and then have wondered whimsically whether 
that was not a snobbish sentiment. The great 
cricket match .was perhaps the most searching and 
awkward time they annually went through together, 
for Jolyon had been at Eton. They would be partic- 
ularly careful during that match, continually say- 
ing : ' Hooray ! Oh ! hard luck, old man ! ' or ' Hoo- 
ray! Oh! bad luck. Dad!' to each other, when 
some disaster at which their hearts bounded hap- 
pened to the opposing school. And Jolyon would 
wear a grey top hat, instead of his usual soft one, to 
save his son's feelings, for a black top hat he could 



NO-LONGER-YOUNG JOLYON AT HOME 59 

not stomach. When Jolly went up to Oxford, Jol- 
yon went up with him, amused, humble, and a little 
anxious not to discredit his boy amongst all these 
youths who seemed so much more assured and old 
than himself. He often thought, * Glad I'm a 
painter ' for he had long dropped under-writing 
at Lloyds ' it's so innocuous. You can't look 
down on a painter you can't take him seriously 
enough.' For Jolly, who had a sort of natural lord- 
liness, had passed at once into a very small set, who 
secretly amused his father. The boy had fair hair 
which curled a little, and his grandfather's deep-set 
iron-grey eyes. He was well-built and very up- 
right, and always pleased Jolyon's aesthetic sense, 
so that he was a tiny bit afraid of him, as artists 
ever are of those of their own sex whom they admire 
physically. On that occasion, however, he actually 
did screw up his courage to give his son advice, and 
this was it : 

" Look here, old man, you're bound to get into 
debt ; mind you come to me at once. Of course, I'll 
always pay them. But you might remember that 
one respects oneself more afterwards if one pays 
one's own way. And don't ever borrow, except 
from me, will you? " 

And Jolly had said : 

" All right, Dad, I won't," and he never had. 

" And there's just one other thing. I don't know 
much about morality and that, but there is this : It's 
always worth while before you do anything to con- 
sider whether it's going to hurt another person more 
than is absolutely necessary." 

Jolly had looked thoughtful, and nodded, and 
presently had squeezed his father's hand. And Jol- 
yon had thought : ' I wonder if I had the right to say 



60 IN CHANCERY. 

that ? ' He always had a sort of dread of losing the 
dumb confidence they had in each other ; remember- 
ing how for long years he had lost his own father's, 
so that there had been nothing between them but 
love at a great distance. He under-estimated, no 
doubt, the change in the spirit of the age since he 
himself went up to Cambridge in '66; and perhaps 
he under-estimated, too, his boy's power of under- 
standing that he was tolerant to the very bone. It 
was that tolerance of his, and possibly his scepticism, 
which ever made his relations towards June so 
queerly defensive. She was such a decided mortal ; 
knew her own mind so terribly well ; wanted things 
so inexorably until she got them and then, indeed, 
often dropped them like a hot potato. Her mother 
had been like that, whence had come all those tears. 
Not that his incompatibility with his daughter was 
anything like what it had been with the first Mrs. 
Young Jolyon. One could be amused where a 
daughter was concerned ; in a wife's case one could 
not be amused. To see June set her heart and jaw 
on a thing until she got it was all right, because it 
was never anything which interfered fundamentally 
with Jolyon's liberty - the one thing on which his 
jaw was also absolutely rigid, a considerable jaw, 
under that short grizzling beard. Nor was there 
ever any necessity for real hep,rt-to-heart encoun- 
ters. One could break away into irony as indeed 
he often had to. But the real trouble with June was 
that she had never appealed to his aesthetic sense, 
though she might well have, with her red-gold hair 
and her viking-coloured eyes, and that touch of the 
Berserker in her spirit. It was very different with 
Holly, soft and quiet, shy and affectionate, with a 
playful imp in her somewhere. He watched this 



NO-LONGER-YOUNG JOLYON AT HOME 61 

younger daughter of his through the duckling stage 
with extraordinary interest. Would she come out 
a swan? With her sallow oval face and her grey 
wistful eyes and those long dark lashes, she might, 
or she might not. Only this last year had he been 
able to guess. Yes, she would be a swan rather 
a dark one, always a shy one, but an authentic swan. 
She was eighteen now, and Mademoiselle Beauce 
was gone the excellent lady had removed, after 
eleven years haunted by her continuous reminis- 
cences of the ' well-brrred little Tayleurs/ to another 
family whose bosom would now be agitated by her 
reminiscences of the 'well-brrred little Forsytes.' 
She had taught Holly to speak French like herself. 
Portraiture was not Jolyon's forte, but he had al- 
ready drawn his younger daughter three times, and 
was drawing her a fourth, on the afternoon of Oc- 
tober 4th, 1899, when a card was brought to him 
which caused his eyebrows to go up : 



MR. SOAMES FORSYTE 

THE SHELTER, CONNOISSEURS' CLUB, 

MAPLEDUXHAM. ST. JAMES'S 



But here the Forsyte Saga must digress 
again. . . 

To return from a long travel in Spain to a dark- 
ened house, to a little daughter bewildered with 
tears, to the sight of a loved father lying peaceful 
in his last sleep, had never been, was never likely 
to be, forgotten by so impressionable and warm- 



62 IN CHANCERY 

hearted a man as Jolyon. A sense as of mystery, 
too, clung to that sad day, and about the end of one 
whose life had been so well-ordered, balanced, and 
above-board. It seemed incredible that his father 
could thus have vanished without, as it were, an- 
nouncing his intention, without last words to his 
son, and due farewells. And those incoherent al- 
lusions of little Holly to ' the lady in grey/ of Made- 
moiselle Beauce to a Madame Errant (as it 
sounded) involved all things in a mist, lifted a little 
when he read his father's will and the codicil thereto. 
It had been his duty as executor of that will and 
codicil to inform Irene, wife of his cousin Soames, 
of her life interest in fifteen thousand pounds. He 
had called on her to explain that the existing in- 
vestment in India Stock, ear-marked to meet the 
charge, would produce for her the interesting net 
sum of 430 odd a year, clear of Income Tax. 
This was but the third time he had seen his cousin 
Soames' wife if indeed she was still his wife, of 
which he was not quite sure. He remembered hav- 
ing seen her sitting in the Botanical Gardens wait- 
ing for Bosinney a passive, fascinating figure, 
reminding him of Titian's ' Heavenly Love/ and 
again, when, charged by his father, he had gone to 
Montpelier Square on the afternoon when Bosin- 
ney's death was known. He still recalled vividly 
her sudden appearance in the drawing-room door- 
way on that occasion her beautiful face, passing 
from wild eagerness of hope to stony despair; re- 
membered the compassion he had felt, Soames' 
snarling smile, his words, 'We are not at home/ 
and the slam of the front door. 

This third time he saw a face and form more 
beautiful freed from that warp of wild hope and 



NO-LONGER-YOUNG JOLYON AT HOME 63 

despair. Looking at her, he thought: 'Yes, you 
are just what the dad would have admired ! ' And 
the strange story of his father's Indian summer be- 
came slowly clear to him. She spoke of old Jolyon 
with reverence and tears in her eyes. " He was so 
wonderfully kind to me; I don't know why. He 
looked so beautiful and peaceful sitting in that chair 
under the tree; it was I who first came on him sit- 
ting there, you know. Such a lovely day. I don't 
think an end could have been happier. We should 
all like to go out like that." 

'Quite right!' he had thought. 'We should all 
like to go out in full summer with beauty stepping 
towards us across a lawn/ 

And looking round the little, almost empty draw- 
ing-room, he had asked her what she was going to 
do now. " I am going to live again a little, Cousin 
Jolyon. It's wonderful to have money of one's 
own. I've never had any. I shall keep this flat, 
I think; I'm used to it; but I shall be able to go to 
Italy." 

"Exactly!" Jolyon had murmured, looking at 
her faintly smiling lips; and he had gone away 
thinking : ' A fascinating woman ! What a waste ! 
I'm glad the dad left her that money. He had not 
seen her again, but every quarter he had signed her 
cheque, forwarding it to her bank, with a note to 
the Chelsea flat to say that he had done so ; and al- 
ways he had received a note in acknowledgment, 
generally from the flat, but sometimes from Italy; 
so that her personality had become embodied in 
slightly scented grey paper, an upright fine hand- 
writing, and the words, 'Dear Cousin Jolyon.' 
Man of property that he now was, the slender 
cheque he signed often gave rise to the thought: 



64 IN CHANCERY 

' Well, I suppose she just manages' ; sliding into a 
vague wonder how she was faring otherwise in a 
world of men not wont to let beauty go unpossessed. 
At first Holly had spoken of her sometimes, but 
' ladies in grey' soon fade from children's memo- 
:ries ; and the tightening of June's lips in those first 
weeks after her grandfather's death whenever her 
former friend's name was mentioned, had discour- 
.aged allusion. Only once, indeed, had June spoken 
definitely: "I've forgiven her. I'm frightfully 
glad she's independent now.". . . 

On receiving Soames' card, Jolyon said to the 
maid for he could not abide butlers "Show 
him into the study, please, and say I'll be there in a 
minute" ; and then he looked at Holly and asked : 

" Do you remember ' the lady in grey/ who used 
to give you music-lessons ? " 

" Oh, yes, why? Has she come? " 

Jolyon shook his head, and, changing his holland 
blouse for a coat, was silent, perceiving suddenly 
that such history was not for those young ears. 
His face, in fact, became whimsical perplexity in- 
carnate while he journeyed towards the study. 

Standing by the french-window, looking out 
across the terrace at the oak-tree, were two figures, 
middle-aged and young, and he thought: ' Who's 
that boy? Surely they never had a child.' 

The elder figure turned. The meeting of those 
two Forsytes of the second generation, so much 
more sophisticated than the first, in the house built 
for the one and owned and occupied by the other, 
was marked by subtle defensiveness beneath dis- 
tinct attempt at cordiality. 'Has he come about 
his wife?' Jolyon was thinking; and Soames, 'How 
shall I begin? ' while Val, brought to break the ice, 



NO-LONGER-YOUNG JOLYON AT HOME 65 

stood negligently scrutinising this 'bearded pard' 
from under his dark, thick eyelashes. 

" This is Val Dartie," said Soames, " my sister's 
son. He's just going up to Oxford. I thought I'd 
like him to know your boy." 

" Ah ! I'm sorry Jolly's away. What college ? " 

"B.N.C," replied Val. 

"Jolly's at the 'House/ but he'll be delighted to 
look you up." 

' Thanks, awfully." 

"Holly's in if you could put up with a female 
relation, she'd show you round. You'll find her in 
the hall if you go through the curtains. I was just 
painting her." 

With another " Thanks, awfully! " Val vanished, 
leaving the two cousins with the ice unbroken. 

" I see you've some drawings at the ' Water Col- 
ours/ " said Soames. 

Jolyon winced. He had been out of touch with 
the Forsyte family at large for twenty-six years, 
but they were connected in his mind with Frith's 
' Derby Day ' and Landseer prints. He had heard 
from June that Soames was a connoisseur, which 
made it worse. He had become aware, too, of a 
curious sensation of repugnance. 

" I haven't seen you for a long time," he said. 

" No," answered Soames between close lips, " not 
since as a matter of fact, it's about that I've 
come. You're her trustee, I'm told." 

Jolyon nodded. 

" Twelve years is a long time," said Soames 
rapidly: "I I'm tired of it." 

Jolyon found no more appropriate ?"swer than: 

"Won't you smoke?" 

"No, thanks." 



66 IN CHANCERY 

Jolyon himself lit a cigarette. 

" I wish to be free/' said Soames abruptly. 

" I don't see her/' murmured Jolyon through the 
fume of his cigarette. 

"But you know where she lives, I suppose?" 

Jolyon nodded. He did not mean to give her ad- 
dress without permission. Soames seemed to di- 
vine his thought. 

" I don't want her address/' he said; " I know it." 

" What exactly do you want ? " 

" She deserted me. I want a divorce." 

" Rather late in the day, isn't it ? " 

" Yes," said Soames. And there was a silence. 

"I don't know much about these things at 
least, I've forgotten," said Jolyon with a wry smile. 
He himself had had to wait for death to grant him 
a divorce from the first Mrs. Jolyon. "Do you 
wish me to see her about it ? " 

Soames raised his eyes to his cousin's face. 

" I suppose there's someone," he said. 

A shrug moved Jolyon's shoulders. 

" I don't know at all. I imagine you may have 
both lived as if the other were dead. It's usual in 
these cases." 

Soames turned to the window. A few early 
fallen oak-leaves strewed the terrace already, and 
were rolling round in the wind. Jolyon saw the 
figures of Holly and Val Dartie moving across the 
lawn towards the stables. ' I'm not going to run 
with the hare and hunt with the hounds/ he thought. 
* I must act for her. The dad would have wished 
that.' And for a swift moment he seemed to see 
his father' ^gure in the old armchair, just beyond 
Soames, s rting with knees crossed, The Times in 
his hand. It vanished. 



NO-LONGER-YOUNG JOLYON AT HOME 67 

" My father was fond of her/' he said quietly. 

"Why he should have been I don't know," 
Soames answered without looking round. "She 
brought trouble to your daughter June ; she brought 
trouble to everyone. I gave her all she wanted. I 
would have given her even forgiveness but 
she chose to leave me." 

In Jolyon compassion was checked by the tone of 
that close voice. What was there in the fellow that 
made it so difficult to be sorry for him? 

" I can go and see her, if you like," he said. " I 
suppose she might be glad of a divorce, but I know 
nothing." 

Soames nodded. 

" Yes, please go. As I say, I know her address ; 
but I've no wish to see her." His tongue was busy 
with his lips, as if they were very dry. 

"You'll have some tea?" said Jolyon, stifling the 
words: '-And see the house/ And he led the way 
into the hall. When he had rung the bell and or- 
dered tea, he went to his easel to turn his drawing 
to the wall. He could not bear, somehow, that his 
work should be seen by Soames, who was standing 
there in the middle of the great room which had 
been designed expressly to afford wall space for his 
own pictures. In his cousin's face, with its unseiz- 
able family likeness to himself, and its chinny, nar- 
row, concentrated look, Jolyon saw that which 
moved him to the thought : ' That chap could never 
forget anything nor ever give himself away. 
He's pathetic!' 



CHAPTER VII 

COLT AND THE FILLY 

WHEN young Val left the presence of the last gen- 
eration he was thinking : ' This is jolly dull ! Uncle 
Soames does take the bun. I wonder what this 
filly's like ? ' He anticipated no pleasure from her 
society; and suddenly he saw her standing there 
looking at him. Why, she was pretty! What 
luck! 

" I'm afraid you don't know me," he said. " My 

name's Val Dartie I'm once removed, second 

cousin, something like that, you know. My 
mother's name was Forsyte." 

Holly, whose slim brown hand remained in his 
because she was too shy to withdraw it, said : 

" I don't know any of my relations. Are there 
many? " 

' Tons. They're awful most of them. At 
least, I don't know some of them. One's rela- 
tions always are, aren't they? " 

" I expect they think one awful too," said Holly. 

:{ I don't know why they should. No one could 
think you awful, of course." 

Holly looked at him the wistful candour in 
those grey eyes gave young Val a sudden feeling 
that he must protect her. 

" I mean there are people and people," he added 

68 



THE COLT AND THE FILLY 69 

astutely. "Your dad looks awfully decent, for 
instance." 

" Oh yes ! " said Holly fervently; " he is." 

A flush mounted in Val's cheeks that scene in 
the Pandemonium promenade the dark man with 
the pink carnation developing into his own father! 
" But you know what the Forsytes are," he said al- 
most viciously. " Oh! I forgot; you don't." 

"What are they?" 

"Oh! fearfully careful; not sportsmen a bit. 
Look at Uncle Soames ! " 

" I'd like to," said Holly. 

Val resisted a desire to run his arm through hers. 
" Oh no," he said, " let's go out. You'll see him 
quite soon enough. What' c your brother like ? " 

Holly led the way on to the terrace and down to 
the lawn without answering. How describe Jolly, 
who, ever since she remembered anything, had been 
her lord, master, and ideal ? 

" Does he sit on you ? " said Val shrewdly. " 1 
shall be knowing him at Oxford. Have you got 
any horses ? " 

Holly nodded. "Would you like to see the 
stables?" 

" Rather!" 

They passed under the oak-tree, through a thin 
shrubbery, into the stable-yard. There under a 
clock tower lay a fluffy brown-and-white dog, so 
old that he did not get up, but faintly waved the tail 
curled over his back. 

"That's Balthasar," said Holly; "he's so old 
awfully old, nearly as old as I am. Poor old boy! 
He's devoted to dad." 

:( Balthasar ! That's a rum name. He isn't 
pure-bred, you know." 



70 IN CHANCERY 

" No ! but he's a darling," and she bent down to 
stroke the dog. Gentle and supple, with dark un- 
covered head and slim browned neck and hands, she 
seemed to Val strange and, sweet, like a thing 
slipped between him and all previous knowledge. 

"When grandfather died," she said, "he 
wouldn't eat for two days. He saw him die, you 
know." 

"Was that old Uncle Jolyon? Mother always 
says he was a topper." 

" He was," said Holly simply, and opened the 
stable door. 

In a loose-box stood a silver roan of about fifteen 
hands, with a long black tail and mane. " This is 
mine Fairy." 

*Ah!" said Val, "she's a jolly palfrey. But 
you ought to bang her tail. She'd look much 
smarter." Then catching her wondering look, he 
thought suddenly : ' I don't know anything she 
likes ! ' And he took a long sniff of the stable air. 
" Horses are ripping, aren't they? My dad " he 
stopped. 

"Yes? "said Holly. 

An impulse to unbosom himself almost overcame 
him but not quite. " Oh ! I don't know he's 
often gone a mucker over them. I'm jolly keen on 
them too riding and hunting. I like racing aw- 
fully, as well ; I should like to be a gentleman rider." 
And oblivious of the fact that he had but one more 
day in town, with two engagements, he plumped 
out: 

" I say, if I hire a gee to-morrow, will you come a 
ride in Richmond Park? " 

Holly clasped her hands. 

" Oh yes ! I simply love riding. But there's 



THE COLT AND THE FILLY 71 

Jolly's horse ; why don't you ride him ? Here he is. 
We could go after tea." 

Val looked doubtfully at his trousered legs. He 
had imagined them immaculate before her eyes in 
high brown boots and Bedford cords. 

" I don't much like riding his horse," he said. 
" He mightn't like it. Besides, Uncle Soames 
wants to get back, I expect. Not that I believe in 
buckling under to him, you know. You haven't got 
an uncle, have you ? This is rather a good beast," 
he added, scrutinising Jolly's horse, a dark brown, 
which was showing the whites of its eyes. ' You 
haven't got any hunting here, I suppose? " 

" No; I don't know that I want to hunt. It must 
be awfully exciting, of course; but it's cruel, isn't 
it? June says so." 

" Cruel? " ejaculated Val. " Oh! that's all rot. 
Who's June?" 

" My sister my half-sister, you know much 
older than me." She had put her hands up to both 
cheeks of Jolly's horse, and was rubbing her nose 
against its nose with a gentle snuffling noise which 
seemed to have an hypnotic effect on the animal. 
Val contemplated her cheek resting against the 
horse's nose, and her eyes gleaming round at him. 
' She's really a duck,' he thought. 

They returned to the house less talkative, fol- 
lowed this time by the dog Balthasar, walking more 
slowly than anything on earth, and clearly expect- 
ing them not to exceed his speed limit. 

" This is a ripping place," said Val from under 
the oak-tree, where they had paused to allow the 
dog Balthasar to come up. 

' Yes," said Holly, and sighed. " Of course I 
want to go everywhere. I wish I were a gipsy." 



7 2 IN CHANCERY 

" Yes, gipsies are jolly," replied Val, with a con- 
viction which had just come to him ; " you're rather 
like one, you know." 

Holly's face shone suddenly and deeply, like dark 
leaves gilded by the sun. 

"To go mad-rabbiting everywhere and see 
everything, and live in the open oh ! wouldn't it 
he fun?" 

" Let's do it," said Val. 

"Oh yes, let's!" 

" It'd be grand sport, just you and I." 

Then Holly perceived the quaintness and flushed. 

" Well, we've got to do it," said Val obstinately, 
but reddening too. " I believe in doing things you 
want to do. What's down there ? " 

" The kitchen-garden, and the pond and the cop- 
pice, and the farm." 

"Let's go down!" 

Holly glanced back at the house. 

" It's tea-time, I expect ; there's dad beckoning." 

Val, uttering a growly sound, followed her 
towards the house. 

When they re-entered the hall gallery the sight 
of two middle-aged Forsytes drinking tea together 
had its magical effect, and they became quite silent. 
It was, indeed, an impressive spectacle. The two 
were seated side by side on an arrangement in mar- 
queterie which looked like three silvery pink chairs 
made one, with a low tea-table in front of them. 
They seemed to have taken up that position, as far 
apart as the seat would permit, so that they need 
not look at each other too much ; and they were eat- 
ing and drinking rather than talking Soames 
with his air of despising the tea-cake as it disap- 
peared, Jolyon of finding himself slightly amusing. 



THE COLT AND THE FILLY 73 

To the casual eye neither would have seemed 
greedy, but both were getting through a good deal 
of sustenance. The two young ones having been 
supplied with food, the process went on silent and 
absorbative, till, with the advent of cigarettes, Jol- 
yon said to Soames : 

" And how's Uncle James ? " 

" Thanks, very shaky." 

"We're a wonderful family, aren't we? The 
other day I was calculating the average age of the 
ten old Forsytes from my father's family Bible. I 
make it eighty-four already, and five still living. 
They ought to beat the record ;" and looking whim- 
sically at Soames, he added : " We aren't the men 
they were, you know." 

Soames smiled. ' Do you really think I shall 
admit that I'm not their equal,' he seemed to be say- 
ing, ' or that I've got to give up anything, especially 
life?' 

" We may live to their age, perhaps/' pursued 
Jolyon, " but self -consciousness is a handicap, you 
know, and that's the difference between us. We've 
conviction. How and when self-consciousness was 
born I never can make out. My father had a little, 
but I don't believe any other of the old Forsytes ever 
had a scrap. Never to see yourself as others see 
you, it's a wonderful preservative. The whole his- 
tory of the last century is in the difference between 
us. And between us and you," he added, gazing 
through a ring of smoke at Val and Holly, uncom- 
fortable under his quizzical regard, " there'll be 
another difference. I wonder what." 

Soames Jook out his watch. 

" We must go," he said, " if we're to catch our 
train." 



74 IN CHANCERY 

" Uncle Soames never misses a train," muttered 
Val, with his mouth full. 

" Why should I ? " Soames answered simply. 

"Oh! I don't know," grumbled Val, "other 
people do." 

At the front door he gave Holly's slim brown 
hand a long and surreptitious squeeze. 

"Look out for me to-morrow," he whispered; 
" three o'clock. I'll wait for you in the road ; it'll 
save time. We'll have a ripping ride." He gazed 
back at her from the lodge gate, and, but for the 
principles of a man about town, would have waved 
his hand. He felt in no mood to tolerate his uncle's 
conversation. But he was not in danger. Soames 
preserved a perfect muteness, busy with far-away 
thoughts. 

The yellow leaves came down about those two 
walking the mile and a half which Soames had trav- 
ersed so often in those long-ago days when he 
came down to watch with secret pride the building 
of the house that house which was to have been 
the home of him and her from whom he was now 
going to seek release. He looked back once, up that 
endless vista of autumn lane between the yellowing 
hedges. What an age ago ! ' I don't want to see 
her/ he had said to Jolyon. Was that true ? ' I 
may have to/ he thought; and he shivered, seized 
by one of those queer shudderings that they say 
mean footsteps on one's grave. A chilly world! 
A queer world! And glancing sidelong at his 
nephew, he thought: 'Wish I were his age! I 
wonder what she's like now ! ' 



CHAPTER VIII 

JOLYON PROSECUTES TRUSTEESHIP 

WHEN those two were gone Jolyon did not return 
to his painting, for daylight was failing, but went 
to the study, craving unconsciously a revival of that 
momentary vision of his father sitting in the old 
brown leather chair with his knees crossed and his 
straight eyes gazing up from under the dome of his 
massive brow. Often in this little room, cosiest in 
the house, Jolyon would catch a moment of com- 
munion with his father. Not, indeed, that he had 
definitely any faith in the persistence of the human 
spirit the feeling was not so logical it was, 
rather, an atmospheric impact, like a scent, or one 
of those strong animistic impressions from forms, 
or effects of light, to which those with the artist's 
eye are especially prone. Here only in this little 
unchanged room where his father had spent the 
most of his waking hours could be retrieved the 
feeling that he was not quite gone, that the steady 
counsel of that old spirit and the warmth of his 
masterful lovability endured. 

What would his father be advising now, in this 
sudden recrudescence of an old tragedy what 
would he say to this menace against her to whom he 
had taken such a fancy in the last weeks of his life? 

75 



76 IN CHANCERY 

' I must do my best for her/ thought Jolyon; ' he 
left her to me in his will. But what is the best ? ' 

And as if seeking to regain the sapience, the bal- 
ance and shrewd common sense of that old Forsyte, 
he sat down in the ancient chair and crossed his 
knees. But he felt a mere shadow sitting there; 
nor did any inspiration come, while the fingers of 
the wind tapped on the darkening panes of the 
french-window. 

1 Go and see her ? ' he thought, ' or ask her to come 
down here? What's her life been? What is it 
now, I wonder ? Beastly to rake up things at this 
time of day/ Again the figure of his cousin stand- 
ing with a hand on a front door of a fine olive-green 
leaped out, vivid, like one of those figures from old- 
fashioned clocks when the hour strikes; and his 
words sounded in Jolyon's ears clearer than any 
chime : ' I manage my own affairs. I Ve told you 
once, I tell you again: We are not at home/ The 
repugnance he had then felt for Soames for his 
flat-cheeked, shaven face full of spiritual bull-dog- 
gedness, for his spare, square, sleek figure slightly 
crouched as it were over the bone he could not di- 
gest came now again, fresh as ever, nay, with an 
odd increase. ' I dislike him/ he thought, 1 1 dis- 
like him to the very roots of me. And that's lucky ; 
it'll make it easier for me to back his wife/ Half- 
artist and half-Forsyte, Jolyon was constitutionally 
averse from what he termed ' ructions ' ; unless an- 
gered, he conformed deeply to that classic descrip- 
tion of the she-dog, ' Er'd ruther run than fight/ 
A little smile became settled in his beard. Ironical 
that Soames should come down here to this 
house, built for himself! How he had gazed and 
gaped at this ruin of his past intention; furtively 



JOLYON PROSECUTES TRUSTEESHIP 77 

nosing at the walls and stairway, appraising every- 
thing! And intuitively Jolyon thought: ' I believe 
the fellow even now would like to be living here. 
He could never leave off longing for what he once 
owned! Well, I must act, somehow or other; but 
it's a bore a great bore/ 

Late that evening he wrote to the Chelsea flat, 
asking if Irene would see him. 

The old century which had seen the plant of in- 
dividualism flower so wonderfully was setting in a 
sky orange with coming storms. Rumours of war 
added to the briskness of a London turbulent at the 
close of the summer holidays. And the streets to 
Jolyon, who was not often up in town, had a fever- 
ish look, due to these new motor-cars and cabs, of 
which he disapproved aesthetically. He counted 
these vehicles from his hansom, and made the pro- 
portion of them one in twenty. ' They were one in 
thirty about a year ago/ he thought ; ' they've come 
to stay. Just so much more rattling round of 
wheels and general stink' for he was one of those 
rather rare Liberals who object to anything new 
when it takes a material form; and he instructed 
his driver to get down to the river quickly, out of 
the traffic, desiring to look at the water through the 
mellowing screen of plane-trees. At the little block 
of flats which stood back some fifty yards from the 
Embankment, he told the cabman to wait, and went 
up to the first floor. 

Yes, Mrs. Heron was at home ! 

The effect of a settled if very modest income was 
at once apparent to him remembering the threadbare 
refinement in that tiny flat eight years ago when he 
announced her good fortune. Everything was now 
fresh, dainty, and smelled of flowers. The general 



78 IN CHANCERY 

effect was silvery with touches of black, hydrangea 
colour, and gold. 'A woman of great taste/ he 
thought. Time had dealt gently with Jolyon, for he 
was a Forsyte. But with Irene Time hardly seemed 
to deal at all or such was his impression. She 
appeared to him not a day older, standing there in 
mole-coloured velvet corduroy, with soft dark eyes 
and dark gold hair, with outstretched hand and a 
little smile. 

" Won't you sit down? " 

He had probably never occupied a chair with a 
fuller sense of embarrassment 

" You look absolutely unchanged," he said. 

" And you look younger, Cousin Jolyon." 

Jolyon ran his hands through his hair, whose 
thickness was still a comfort to him. 

"I'm ancient, but I don't feel it. That's one 
thing about painting, it keeps you young. Titian 
lived to ninety-nine, and had to have plague to kill 
him off. Do you know, the first time I ever saw you 
I thought of a picture by him ? " 

" When did you see me for the first time? " 

" In the Botanical Gardens." 

" How did you know me, if you'd never seen me 
before?" 

" By someone who came up to you." He was 
looking at her hardily, but her face did not change ; 
and she said quietly : 

" Yes; many lives ago." 

:t What is your recipe for youth, Irene? " 

" People who don't live are wonderfully pre- 
served." 

What a bitter little saying! People who don't 
live ! It was an opening, and he took it. " You re- 
member my Cousin Soames? " 



JOLYON PROSECUTES TRUSTEESHIP 79 

He saw her smile faintly at that whimsicality, and 
at once went on : " He came to see me the day before 
yesterday ! He wants a divorce. Do you ? " 

"I?" The word seemed startled out of her. 
" After twelve years ? It's rather late. Won't it 
be difficult?" 

Jolyon looked hard into her face. " Unless " 
he said. 

" Unless I have a lover now. But I have never 
had one since." 

What did he feel at the simplicity and candour of 
those words? Relief, surprise, pity! Venus for 
twelve years without a lover ! 

" And yet," he said, " I suppose you would give a 
good deal to be free, too? " 

" I don't know. What does it matter, now ? " 

" But if you were to love again ? " 

" I should love." In that simple answer she 
seemed to sum up the whole philosophy of one on 
whom the world had turned its back. 

" Well ! Is there anything you would like me to 
say to him?'* 

" Only that I'm sorry he's not free. He had his 
chance once. I don't know why he didn't take it." 

" Because he was a Forsyte ; we never part with 
things, you know, unless we want something in their 
place; and not always then." 

Irene smiled. "Don't you, Cousin Jolyon? I 
think you do." 

" Of course, I'm a bit of a mongrel not quite a 
pure Forsyte. I never take the halfpennies off my 
cheques, I put them on," said Jolyon uneasily. 

" Well, what does Soames want in place of me 
now?" 

" I don't know; perhaps children." 



8o IN CHANCERY 

She was silent for a little, looking down. 

" Yes," she murmured ; " it's hard. I would help 
him to be free if I could." 

Jolyon gazed into his hat, his embarrassment was 
increasing fast ; so was his admiration, his wonder, 
and his pity. She was so lovely, and so lonely; and 
altogether it was such a coil ! 

" Well," he said, " I shall have to see Soames. If 
there's anything I can do for you I'm always at your 
service. You must think of me as a wretched sub- 
stitute for my father. At all events I'll let you 
know what happens when I speak to Soames. He 
may supply the material himself." 

She shook her head. 

"You see, he has a lot to lose ; and I have nothing. 
I should like him to be free ; but I don't see what I 
can do." 

" Nor I at the moment," said Jolyon, and soon 
after took his leave. He went down to his hansom. 
Half -past three! Soames would be at his office 
still. 

" To the Poultry," he called through the trap. 
In front of the Houses of Parliament and White- 
hall, newsvendors were calling, ' Grave situation in 
the Transvaal ! ' but the cries hardly roused him, 
absorbed in recollection of that very beautiful fig- 
ure, of her soft dark glance, and the words : ' I have 
never had one since.' What on earth did such a 
woman do with her life, backwatered like this? 
Solitary, unprotected, with every man's hand 
against her or rather reaching out to grasp her at 
the least sign. And year after year she went on like 
that! 

The word ' Poultry ' above the passing citizens 
brought him back to reality. 



JOLYON PROSECUTES TRUSTEESHIP 81 

' Forsyte, Bustard and Forsyte/ in black letters 
on a ground the colour of peasoup, spurred him to a 
sort of vigour, and he went up the stone stairs mut- 
tering: "Fusty musty ownerships! Well, we 
couldn't do without them ! " 

" I want Mr. Soames Forsyte," he said to the boy 
who opened the door. 

"What name?" 

" Mr. Jolyon Forsyte." 

The youth looked at him curiously, never having 
seen a Forsyte with a beard, and vanished. 

The offices of ' Forsyte, Bustard and Forsyte ' 
had slowly absorbed the offices of ' Tooting and 
Bowles/ and occupied the whole of the first floor. 
The firm consisted now of nothing but Soames and 
a number of managing and articled clerks. The 
complete retirement of James some six years ago 
had accelerated business, to which the final touch of 
speed had been imparted when Bustard dropped off, 
worn out, as many believed, by the suit of ' Fryer 
versus Forsyte/ more in Chancery than ever and 
less likely to benefit its beneficiaries. Soames, with 
his saner grasp of actualities, had never permitted it 
to worry him; on the contrary, he had long per- 
ceived that Providence had presented him therein 
with 200 a year nett in perpetuity, and why not ? 

When Jolyon entered, his cousin was drawing out 
a list of holdings in consols, which in view of the 
rumours of war he was going to advise his companies 
to put on the market at once, before other companies 
did the same. He looked round, sidelong, and said : 

' How are you? Just one minute. Sit down, 
won't you ? " And having entered three amounts, 
and set a ruler to keep his place, he turned towards 
Jolyon, biting the side of his flat fore-finger. 



82 IN CHANCERY 

" Yes? "he said. 

" I have seen her." 

Soames frowned. 

"Well?" 

" She has remained faithful to memory." 

Having said that Jolyon was ashamed. His 
cousin had flushed a dusky yellowish red. What had 
made him tease the poor brute ! " I was to tell you 
she is sorry you are not free. Twelve years is a 
long time. You know your law better than I do, 
and what chance it gives you." Soames uttered a 
curious little grunt, and the two remained a full 
minute without speaking. ' Like wax ! ' thought Jol- 
yon, watching that close face, where the flush was 
fast subsiding. ' He'll never give me a sign of what 
he's thinking, or going to do. Like wax ! ' And he 
transferred his gaze to a plan of that flourishing 
town, ' By-Street on Sea/ the future existence of 
which lay exposed on the wall to the possessive in- 
stincts of the firm's clients. The whimsical thought 
flashed through him : ' I wonder if I shall get a bill 
of costs for this " To attending Mr. Jolyon For- 
syte in the matter of my divorce, to receiving his ac- 
count of his visit to my wife, and to advising him to 
go and see her again, sixteen and eightpence." ' 

Suddenly Soames said: " I can't go on like this. 
I tell you, I can't go on like this." His eyes were 
shifting from side to side, like an animal's when it 
looks for way of escape. ' He really suffers/ 
thought Jolyon ; ' I've no business to forget that, 
just because I don't like him/ 

" Surely," he said gently, " it lies with yourself. 
A man can always put these things through if he'll 
take it on himself." 

Soames turned square to him, with a sound which 
seemed to come from somewhere very deep. 



JOLYON PROSECUTES TRUSTEESHIP 83 

" Why should I suffer more than I've suffered al- 
ready? Why should I?" 

Jolyon could only shrug his shoulders. His rea- 
son agreed, his instinct rebelled; he could not have 
said why. 

* Your father," went on Soames, " took an inter- 
est in her why, goodness knows ! And I suppose 
you do too?" he gave Jolyon a sharp look. " It 
seems to me that one only has to do another person 
a wrong to get all the sympathy. I don't know in 
what way I was to blame I've never known. I 
always treated her well. I gave her everything she 
could wish for. I wanted her." 

Again Jolyon's reason nodded; again his instinct 
shook its head. ' What is it? ' he thought; ' there 
must be something wrong in me. Yet if there is, 
I'd rather be wrong than right/ 

"After all," said Soames with a sort of glum 
fierceness, " she was my wife." 

In a flash the thought went through his listener : 
' There it is ! Ownerships ! Well, we all own 
things. But human beings ! Pah ! ' 

" You have to look at facts," he said drily, " or 
rather the want of them." 

Soames gave him another quick suspicious look. 

'" The want of them? " he said. " Yes, but I am 
not so sure." 

" I beg your pardon," replied Jolyon ; " I've told 
you what she said. It was explicit." 

" My experience has not been one to promote 
blind confidence in her word. We shall see." 

Jolyon got up. 

" Good-bye," he said curtly. 

" Good-bye," returned Soames ; and Jolyon went 
out trying to understand the look, half-startled, 



84 IN CHANCERY 

half -menacing, on his cousin's face. He sought 
Waterloo Station in a disturbed frame of mind, as 
though the skin of his moral being had been scraped ; 
and all the way down in the train he thought of Irene 
in her lonely flat, and of Soames in his lonely office, 
and of the strange paralysis of life that lay on them 
both. ' In chancery ! ' he thought. ' Both their 
necks in chancery and hers so pretty ! ' 



CHAPTER IX 

VAL HEARS THE NEWS 

THE keeping of engagements had not as yet been a 
conspicuous feature in the life of young Val Dartie, 
so that when he broke two and kept one, it was the 
latter event which caused him, if anything, the 
greater surprise, while jogging back to town from 
Robin Hill after his ride with Holly. She had been 
even prettier than he had thought her yesterday, on 
her silver-roan, long-tailed ' palfrey ' ; and it seemed 
to him, self-critical in the brumous October gloam- 
ing and the outskirts of London, that only his boots 
had shone throughout their two-hour companion- 
ship. He took out his new gold ' hunter ' pres- 
ent from James and looked not at the time, but at 
sections of his face in the glittering back of its 
opened case. He had a temporary spot over one 
eyebrow, and it displeased him, for it must have dis- 
pleased her. Crum never had any spots. Together 
with Crum rose the scene in the promenade of the 
Pandemonium. To-day he had not had the faint- 
est desire to unbosom himself to Holly about his 
father. His father lacked poetry, the stirrings of 
which he was feeling for the first time in his nine- 
teen years. The Liberty, with Cynthia Dark, that 
almost mythical embodiment of rapture ; the Pande- 

8s 



86 IN CHANCERY 

monium, with the woman of uncertain age both 
seemed to Val completely ' off/ fresh from commun- 
ion with this new, shy, dark-haired young cousin of 
his. She rode ' jolly well/ too, so that it had been 
all the more flattering that she had let him lead her 
where he would in the long gallops of Richmond 
Park, though she knew them so much better than he 
did. Looking back on it all, he was mystified by the 
barrenness of his speech; he felt that he could say 
' an awful lot of fetching things ' if he had but the 
chance again, and the thought that he must go back 
to Littlehampton on the morrow, and to Oxford on 
the twelfth ' to that beastly exam/ too without 
the faintest chance of first seeing her again, caused 
darkness to settle on his spirit even more quickly 
than on the evening. He should write to her, how- 
ever, and she had promised to answer. Perhaps, 
too, she would come up to Oxford to see her brother. 
That thought was like the first star, which came out 
as he rode into Padwick's livery stables in the pur- 
lieus of Sloane Square. He got off and stretched 
himself luxuriously, for he had ridden some twenty- 
five good miles. The Dartie within him made him 
chaffer for five minutes with young Padwick con- 
cerning the favourite for the Cambridgeshire ; then 
with the words, " Put the gee down to my account/' 
he walked away, a little wide at the knees, and flip- 
ping his boots with his knotty little cane. ' I don't 
feel a bit inclined to go out/ he thought. ' I wonder 
if mother will stand fizz for my last night ! ' With 
' fizz ' and recollection, he could well pass a domestic 
evening. 

When he came down, speckless after his bath, he 
found his mother scrupulous in a low evening dress, 
and, ( to his annoyance, his Uncle Soames. They 



VAL HEARS THE NEWS 87 

stopped talking when he came in; then his uncle 
said: 

"He'd better be told/' 

At those words, which meant something about 
his father, of course, Val's first thought was of 
Holly. Was it anything beastly? His mother be- 
gan speaking. 

" Your father/' she said in her fashionably ap- 
pointed voice, while her fingers plucked rather piti- 
fully at sea-green brocade, "your father, my dear 
boy, has is not at New-market ; he's on his way 
to South America. He he's left us." 

Val looked from her to Soames. Left them! 
Was he sorry? Was he fond of his father? It 
seemed to him that he did not know. Then, sud- 
denly as at a whiff of gardenias and cigars his 
heart twitched within him, and he was sorry. One's 
father belonged to one, could not go off in this fash- 
ion it was not done ! Nor had he always been 
the 'bounder' of the Pandemonium promenade. 
There were precious memories of tailors' shops and 
horses, tips at school, and general lavish kindness, 
when in luck. 

"But why?" he said. Then, as a sportsman 
himself, was sorry he had asked. The mask of his 
mother's face was all disturbed; and he burst out: 

"All right, Mother, don't tell me! Only, what 
does it mean ? " 

" A divorce, Val, I'm afraid." 

Val uttered a queer little grunt, and looked 
quickly at his uncle that uncle whom he had been 
taught to look on as a guarantee against the conse- 
quences of having a father, even against the Dartie 
blood in his own veins. The flat-cheeked visage 
seemed to wince, and this upset him. 



88 IN CHANCERY 

" It won't be public, will it? " 

So vividly before him had come recollection of his 
own eyes glued to the unsavoury details of many a 
divorce suit in the public Press. 

" Can't it be done quietly somehow? It's so dis- 
gusting for for mother, and and everybody." 

" Everything will be done as quietly as it can, you 
may be sure." 

" Yes but, why is it necessary at all ? Mother 
doesn't want to marry again." 

Himself, the girls, their name tarnished in the 
sight of his schoolfellows and of Crum, of the men 
at Oxford, of Holly ! Unbearable ! What was 
to be gained by it ? 

" Do you, Mother ? " he said sharply. 

Thus brought face to face with so much of her 
own feeling by the one she loved best in the world, 
Winifred rose from the Empire chair in which she 
had been sitting. She saw that her son would be 
against her unless he was told everything ; and, yet, 
how could she tell him ? Thus, still plucking at the 
green brocade, she stared at Soames. Val, too, 
stared at Soames. Surely this embodiment of re- 
spectability and the sense of property could not wish 
to bring such a slur on his own sister ! 

Soames slowly passed a little inlaid paper-knife 
over the smooth surface of a marqueterie table; 
then, without looking at his nephew, he began : 

' You don't understand what your mother has 
had to put up with these twenty years. This is only 
the last straw, Val." And glancing up sideways at 
Winifred, he added: 

"Shall I tell him?" 

Winifred was silent. If he were not told, he 
would be against her ! Yet, how dreadful to be told 



VAL HEARS THE NEWS 89 

such things of his own father ! Clenching her lips, 
she nodded. 

Soames spoke in a rapid, even voice : 

"He has always been a burden round your 
mother's neck. She has paid his debts over and 
over again; he has often been drunk, abused and 
threatened her ; and now he is gone to Buenos Aires 
with a dancer." And, as if distrusting the efficacy 
of those words on the boy, he went on quickly : 

" He took your mother's pearls to give to her." 

Val jerked up his hand then. At that signal of 
distress Winifred cried out : 
' That'll do, Soames stop ! " 

In the boy, the Dartie and the Forsyte were strug- 
gling. For debts, drink, dancers, he had a certain 
sympathy ; but the pearls no ! That was too 
much ! And suddenly he found his mother's hand 
squeezing his. 

" You see," he heard Soames say, " we can't have 
it all begin over again. There's a limit; we must 
strike while the iron's hot." 

Val freed his hand. 

" But you're never going to bring out that 
about the pearls ! I couldn't stand that I simply 
couldn't!" 

Winifred cried out : 

" No, no, Val oh no ! That's only to show you 
how impossible your father is ! " And his uncle 
nodded. Somewhat assuaged, Val took out a cig- 
arette. His father had bought him that thin curved 
case. Oh ! it was unbearable just as he was go- 
ing up to Oxford ! 

" Can't mother be protected without? " he said. 
" I could look after her. It could always be done 
later if it was really necessary." 



90 IN CHANCERY 

A smile played for a moment round Soames's lips, 
and became bitter. 

" You don't know what you're talking of ; noth- 
ing's so fatal as delay in such matters." 

"Why?" 

" I tell you, boy, nothing's so fatal. I know from 
experience." 

His voice had the ring of exasperation. Val re- 
garded him round-eyed, never having known his 
uncle express any sort of feeling. Oh! Yes he 
remembered now there had been an Aunt Irene, 
and something had happened something which 
people kept dark; he had heard his father once use 
an unmentionable word of her. 

" I don't want to speak ill of your father," Soames 
went on doggedly, " but I know him well enough to 
be sure that he'll be back on your mother's hands be- 
fore a year's over. You can imagine what that will 
mean to her and to all of you after this. The only 
thing is to cut the knot for good." 

In spite of himself, Val was impressed ; and, hap- 
pening to look at his mother's face, he got what was 
perhaps his first real insight into the fact that his 
own feelings were not always what mattered most. 

" All right, mother," he said, " we'll back you up. 
Only I'd like to know when it'll be. It's my first 
term, you know. I don't want to be up there when it 
comes off." 

" Oh ! my dear boy," murmured Winifred, " it is 
a bore for you." So, by habit, she phrased what, 
from the expression of her face, was the most poign- 
ant regret. " When will it be, Soames ? " 

" Can't tell not for months. We must get res- 
titution first." 

' What the deuce is that ? ' thought Val. ' What 



VAL HEARS THE NEWS 91 

silly brutes lawyers are ! Not for months ! I know 
one thing : I'm not going to dine in ! ' And he said : 

" Awfully sorry, mother, I've got to go out to 
dinner now." 

Though it was his last night, Winifred nodded 
almost gratefully ; they both felt that they had gone 
quite far enough in the expression of feeling. 

Val sought the misty freedom of Green Street, 
reckless and depressed. And not till he reached Pic- 
cadilly did he discover that he had only eighteen- 
pence. One couldn't dine off eighteen-pence, and 
he was very hungry. He looked longingly at the 
windows of the Iseeum Club, where he had often 
eaten of the best with his father! Those pearls! 
There was no getting over them ! But the more he 
brooded and the further he walked the hungrier he 
naturally became. Short of trailing home, there 
were only two places where he could go his 
grandfather's in Park Lane, and Timothy's in the 
Bayswater Road. Which was the less deplorable ? 
At his grandfather's he would probably get a better 
dinner on the spur of the moment. At Timothy's 
they gave you a jolly good feed when they expected 
you, not otherwise. He decided on Park Lane, not 
unmoved by the thought that to go up to Oxford 
without affording his grandfather a chance to tip 
him was hardly fair to either of them. His mother 
would hear he had been there, of course, and might 
think it funny ; but he couldn't help that. He rang 
the bell. 

" Hullo, Warmson, any dinner for me, d'you 
think?" 

"They're just going in, Master Val. Mr. For- 
syte will be very glad to see you. He was saying at 
lunch that he never saw you nowadays." 



92 IN CHANCERY 

Val grinned : 

" Well, here I am. Kill the fatted calf, Warm- 
son, let's have fizz." 

Warmson smiled faintly in his opinion Val was 
a young limb. 

" I will ask Mrs. Forsyte, Master Val." 

" I say," Val grumbled, taking off his overcoat, 
" I'm not at school any more, you know." 

Warmson, not without a sense of humour, opened 
the door beyond the stags-horn coatstand, with the 
words : 

" Mr. Valerus, ma'am." 

" Confound him ! " thought Val, entering. 

A warm embrace, and a " Well, Val ! " from 
Emily; a rather quavery, "So there you are at 
last ! " from James, restored his sense of dignity. 

"Why didn't you let us know? There's only 
saddle of mutton. Champagne, Warmson," said 
Emily. And they went in. 

At the great dining-table, shortened to its utmost, 
under which so many fashionable legs had rested, 
James sat at one end, Emily at the other, Val half- 
way between them; and something of the loneliness 
of his grandparents, now that all their four children 
were flown, reached the boy's spirit. ' I hope I shall 
kick the bucket long before I'm as old as grand- 
father,' he thought. ' Poor old chap, he's as thin as 
a rail ! ' And lowering his voice while his grand- 
father and Warmson were in discussion about sugar 
in the soup, he said to Emily : 

" It's pretty brutal at home, Granny. I suppose 
you know." 

' Yes, dear boy." 

" Uncle Soames was there when I left. I say, 
isn't there anything to be done to prevent a divorce? 
Why is he so beastly keen on it ? " 



VAL HEARS THE NEWS 93 

"Hush, my dear!" murmured Emily; "we're 
keeping it from your grandfather/' 

James' voice sounded from the other end. 

;< What's that ? What are you talking about ? " 

" About Val's college," returned Emily. " Young 
Pariser was there, James ; you remember he 
nearly broke the Bank at Monte Carlo afterwards." 

James muttered that he did not know Val must 
look after himself up there, .or he'd get into bad 
ways. And he looked at his grandson with gloom, 
out of which affection distrustfully glimmered. 

"What I'm afraid of," said Val to his plate, "is 
of being hard up, you know." 

By instinct he knew that the weak spot in that old 
man was fear of insecurity for his grandchildren. 

" Well," said James, and the soup in his spoon 
dribbled over, "you'll have a good allowance; but 
you must keep within it." 

" Of course," murmured Val ; " if it is good. 
How much will it be, Grandfather? " 

" Three hundred and fifty; it's too much. I had 
next to nothing at your age." 

Val sighed. He had hoped for four, and been 
afraid of three. " I don't know what your young 
cousin has," said James; "he's up there. His' 
father's a rich man." 

" Aren't you ? " asked Val hardily. 

"I?" replied James, flustered. "I've got so 
many expenses. Your father " and he was si- 
lent. 

" Cousin Jolyon's got an awfully jolly place. I 
went down there with Uncle Soames ripping 
stables." 

"Ah!" murmured James profoundly. "That 
house I knew how it would be ! " And he lapsed 



94 IN CHANCERY 

into gloomy meditation over his fishbones. His 
son's tragedy, and the deep cleavage it had caused 
in the Forsyte family, had still the power to draw him 
down into a whirlpool of doubts and misgivings. 
Val, who hankered to talk of Robin Hill, because 
Robin Hill meant Holly, turned to Emily and said : 

"Was that the house built for Uncle Soames?" 
And, receiving her nod, went on : " I wish you'd tell 
me about him, Granny. What became of Aunt 
Irene? Is she still going? He seems awfully 
worked-up about something to-night." 

Emily laid her finger on her lips, but the word 
Irene had caught James' ear. 

" What's that? " he said, staying a piece of mut- 
ton close to his lips. " Who's been seeing her? I 
knew we hadn't heard the last of that." 

" Now, James," said Emily, " eat your dinner. 
Nobody's been seeing anybody." 

James put down his fork. 

" There you go," he said. " I might die before 
you'd tell me of it. Is Soames getting a divorce ? " 

" Nonsense," said Emily with incomparable 
aplomb; " Soames is much too sensible." 

James had sought his own throat, gathering the 
long white whiskers together on the skin and bone 
of it. 

" She she was always " he said, and with 

that enigmatic remark the conversation lapsed, for 
Warmson had returned. But later, when the 
saddle of mutton had been succeeded by sweet, 
savoury, and dessert, and Val had received a cheque 
for twenty pounds and his grandfather's kiss 
like no other kiss in the world, from lips pushed out 
with a sort of fearful suddenness, as if yielding to 
weakness he returned to the charge in the hall. 



VAL HEARS THE NEWS 95 

' Tell us about Uncle Soames, Granny. Why is 
he so keen on mother's getting a divorce? " 

' Your Uncle Soames/' said Emily, and her voice 
had in it an exaggerated assurance, " is a lawyer, 
my dear boy. He's sure to know best." 

" Is he ? " muttered Val. " But what did become 
of Aunt Irene? I remember she was jolly good- 
looking." 

" She er " said Emily, " behaved very badly. 
We don't talk about it." 

'' Well, I don't want everybody at Oxford to know 
about our affairs," ejaculated Val; "it's a brutal 
idea. Why couldn't father be prevented without 
its being made public? " 

Emily sighed. She had always lived rather in an 
atmosphere of divorce, owing to her fashionable 
proclivities so many of those whose legs had been 
under her table having gained a certain notoriety. 
When, however, it touched her own family, she 
liked it no better than other people. But she was 
eminently practical, and a woman of courage, who 
never pursued a shadow in preference to its sub- 
stance. 

"Your mother," she said, "will be happier if 
she's quite free, Val. Good-night, my dear boy; 
and don't wear loud waistcoats up at Oxford, 
they're not the thing just now. Here's a little pres- 
ent." 

With another five pounds in his hand, and a little 
warmth in his heart, for he was fond of his grand- 
mother, he went out into Park Lane. A wind had 
cleared the mist, the autumn leaves were rustling, 
and the stars were shining. With all that money in 
his pocket an impulse to ' see life ' beset him ; but he 
had not gone forty yards in the direction of Picca- 



96 IN CHANCERY 

dilly when Holly's shy face, and her eyes with an 
imp dancing in their gravity, came up before him, 
and his hand seemed to be tingling again from the 
pressure of her warm gloved hand. * No, dash it ! 
he thought, ' I'm going home ! ' 



CHAPTER X 

SOAMES ENTERTAINS THE FUTURE 

IT was full late for the river, but the weather was 
lovely, and summer lingered below the yellowing 
leaves. Soames took many looks at the day from 
his riverside garden near Mapledurham that Sun- 
day morning. With his own hands he put flowers 
about his little house-boat, and equipped the punt, 
in which, after lunch, he proposed to take them on 
the river. Placing those Chinese-looking cushions, 
he could not tell whether or no he wished to take 
Annette alone. She was so very pretty could he 
trust himself not to say irrevocable words, passing 
beyond the limits of discretion? Roses on the 
veranda were still in bloom, and the hedges ever- 
green, so that there was almost nothing of middle- 
aged autumn to chill the mood ; yet was he nervous, 
fidgety, strangely distrustful of his powers to steer 
just the right course. This visit had been planned 
to produce in Annette and her mother a due sense 
of his possessions, so that they should be ready to 
receive with respect any overture he might latei 
be disposed to make. He dressed with great care, 
making himself neither too young nor too old, very 
thankful that his hair was still thick and smooth 
and had no grey in it. Three times he went up to 

97 



g8 IN CHANCERY 

his picture-gallery. If they had any knowledge at 
all, they must see at once that his collection alone 
was worth at least thirty thousand pounds. He 
minutely inspected, too, the pretty bedroom over- 
looking the river where they would take off their 
hats. It would be her bedroom if if the matter 
went through, and she became his wife. Going up 
to the dressing-table he passed his hand over the 
lilac-coloured pincushion, into which were stuck all 
kind of pins; a bowl of pot-pourri exhaled a scent 
that made his head turn just a little. His wife! 
If only the whole thing could be settled out of hand, 
and there was not the nightmare of this divorce to 
be gone through first ; and with gloom puckered on 
his forehead, he looked out at the river shining 
beyond the roses and the lawn. Madame Lamotte 
would never resist this prospect for her child; An- 
nette would never resist her mother. If only he 
were free ! He drove to the station to meet them. 
What taste Frenchwomen had! Madame Lamotte 
was in black with touches of lilac colour, Annette 
in greyish lilac linen, with cream coloured gloves 
and hat. Rather pale she looked and Londony; 
and her blue eyes were demure. Waiting for them 
to come down to lunch, Soames stood in the open 
f rench-window of the dining-room moved by that 
sensuous delight in sunshine and flowers and trees 
which only came to the full when youth and beauty 
were there to share it with one. He had ordered 
the lunch with intense consideration ; the wine was 
a very special Sauterne, the whole appointments 
of the meal perfect, the coffee served on the 
veranda super-excellent. Madame Lamotte accepted 
creme de menthe; Annette refused. Her manners 
were charming, with just a suspicion of ' the con- 



SOAMES ENTERTAINS THE FUTURE 99 

scious beauty ' creeping into them. ' Yes/ thought 
Soames, ' another year of London and that sort of 
life, and she'll be spoiled/ 

Madame was in sedate French raptures. "Ado- 
rable! Le soleil est si bon! How everything is chic, 
is it not, Annette? Monseiur is a real Monte 
Cristo." Annette murmured assent, with a look up 
at Soames which he could not read. He proposed 
a turn on the river. But to punt two persons when 
one of them looked so ravishing on those Chinese 
cushions was merely to suffer from a sense of lost 
opportunity; so they went but a short way towards 
Pangbourne, drifting slowly back, with every now 
and then an autumn leaf dropping on Annette or on 
her mother's black amplitude. And Soames was 
not happy, worried by the thought : ' How when 
where can I say what?' They did not 
yet even know that he was married. To tell them he 
was married might jeopardize his every chance; 
yet, if he did not definitely make them un- 
derstand that he wished for Annette's hand, it 
would be dropping into some other clutch before he 
was free to claim it. 

At tea, which they both took with lemon, Soames 
spoke of the Transvaal. 

" There'll be war," he said. 

Madame Lamotte lamented. 

" Ces pauvres gens bergers! " Could they not 
be left to themselves? 

Soames smiled the question seemed to him ab- 
surd. 

Surely as a woman of business she understood 
that the British could not abandon their legitimate 
commercial interests. 

" Ah ! that ! " But Madame Lamotte found that 



I0 o IN CHANCERY 

the English were a little hypocrite. They were talk- 
ing of justice and the Uitlanders, not of business. 
Monsieur was the first who had spoken to her of 
that. 

" The Boers are only half-civilised," remarked 
Soames; "they stand in the way of progress. It 
will never do to let our suzerainty go." 

"What does that mean to say? Suzerainty! 
What a strange word ! " Soames became eloquent, 
roused by these threats to the principle of posses- 
sion, and stimulated by Annette's eyes fixed on 
him. He was delighted when presently she said: 

" I think Monsieur is right. They should be 
taught a lesson." She was sensible' 

" Of course," he said, " we must act with moder- 
ation. I'm no jingo. We must be firm without 
bullying. Will you come up and see my pictures ? " 
Moving from one to another of these treasures, he 
soon perceived that they knew nothing. They 
passed his last Mauve, that remarkable study of a 
' Hay-cart going Home,' as if it were a lithograph. 
He waited almost with awe to see how they would 
view the jewel of his collection an Israels whose 
price he had watched ascending till he was now 
almost certain it had reached top value, -and would 
be better on the market again. They did not view 
it at all. This was a shock; and yet to have in An- 
nette a virgin taste to form would be better than to 
have the silly, half-baked predilections of the Eng- 
lish middle-class to deal with. At the end of the 
gallery was a Meissonier of which he was rather 
ashamed Meissonier was so steadily going dbwn. 
Madame Lamotte stopped before it. 

''' Meissonier! Ah! What a jewel!' She had 
heard the name; Soames took advantage of that 



SOAMES ENTERTAINS THE FUTURE 101 

moment. Very gently touching Annette's arm, he 
said: 

" How do you like my place, Annette? " 

She did not shrink, did not respond; she looked 
at him full, looked down, and murmured: 

" Who would not like it ? It is so beautiful ! " 

"Perhaps some day " Soames said, and 

stopped. 

So pretty she was, so self-possessed she fright- 
ened him. Those cornflower-blue eyes, the turn of 
that creamy neck, her delicate curves she was a 
standing temptation to indiscretion! No! No! 
One must be sure of one's ground much surer! 
' If I hold off/ he thought, ' it will tantalise her/ 
And he crossed over to Madame Lamotte, who was 
still in front of the Meissonier. 

"Yes, that's quite a good example of his later 
work. You must come again, madame, and see 
them lighted up. You must both come and spend a 
night." 

Enchanted, would it not be beautiful to see them 
lighted? By moonlight too, the river must be rav- 
ishing! 

Annette murmured : 

'Thou art sentimental, Mcmant" 

Sentimental! That black-robed, comely, sub- 
stantial Frenchwoman of the world ! And suddenly 
he was certain as he could be that there was no 
sentiment in either of them. All the better. Of 
what use sentiment! And yet ! 

He drove to the station with them, and saw them 
into the train. To the tightened pressure of his 
hand it seemed that Annette's fingers responded 
just a little; her face smiled at him through the 
dark. 



102 IN CHANCERY 

He went back to the carriage, brooding. " Go on 
home, Jordan," he said to the coachman; "I'll 
walk." And he strode out into the darkening lanes, 
caution and the desire of possession playing see -saw 
within him. "Bon soir, monsieur!" How softly 
she had said it. To know what was in her mind! 
The French they were like cats one could tell 
nothing! But how pretty! What a perfect 
young thing to hold in one's arms ! What a mother 
for his heir ! And he thought, with a smile, of his 
family and their surprise at a French wife, and their 
curiosity, and of the way he would play with it and 
buffet it confound them ! The poplars sighed in 
the darkness; an owl hooted. Shadows deepened 
in the water. ' I will and must be free/ he thought. 
' I won't hang about any longer. I'll go and see 
Irene. If you want things done, do them yourself. 
I must live again live and move and have my 
being.' And in echo to that queer biblicality church- 
bells chimed the call to evening prayer. 



CHAPTER XI 

AND VISITS THE PAST 

ON a Tuesday evening after dining at his Club 
Soames set out to do what required more courage 
and perhaps less delicacy than anything he had yet 
undertaken in his life save perhaps his birth, and 
one other action. He chose the evening, indeed, 
partly because Irene was more likely to be in, but 
mainly because he had failed to find sufficient reso- 
lution by daylight, had needed wine to give him 
extra daring. 

He left his hansom on the Embankment, and 
walked up to the Old Church, uncertain of the block 
of flats where he knew she lived. He found it hid- 
ing behind a much larger mansion ; and having read 
the name, l Mrs. Irene Heron ' Heron, forsooth ! 
Her maiden name : so she used that again, did she ? 
he stepped back into the road to look up at the 
windows of the first floor. Light was coming 
through in the corner flat, and he could hear a piano 
being played. He had never had a love of music, 
had secretly borne it a grudge in the old days when 
so often she had turned to her piano, making of it a 
refuge place into which she knew he could not enter. 
Repulse! The long repulse, at first strained and 

103 



104 IN CHANCERY 

secret, at last open ! Bitter memory came with that 
sound. It must be she playing, and thus almost as- 
sured of seeing her, he stood more undecided than 
ever. Shivers of anticipation ran through him ; his 
tongue felt dry, his heart beat fast. ' / have no 
cause to be afraid/ he thought. And then the law- 
yer stirred within him. Was he doing a foolish 
thing? Ought he not to have arranged a formal 
meeting in the presence of her trustee ? No ! Not 
before that fellow Jolyon, who sympathized with 
her! Never! He crossed back into the doorway, 
and, slowly, to keep down the beating of his heart, 
mounted the single flight of stairs and rang the bell. 
When the door was opened to him his sensations 
were regulated by the scent which came that per- 
fume from away back in the past, bringing muf- 
fled remembrance : fragrance of a drawing-room h 
used to enter, of a house he used to own perfume 
of dried rose-leaves and honey ! 

" Say Mr. Forsyte," he said, " your mistress will 
see me, I know." He had thought this out; she 
would think it was Jolyon ! 

When the maid was gone and he was alone in the 
tiny hall, where the light was dim from one pearly- 
shaded sconce, and walls, carpet, everything was sil- 
very, making the walled-in space all ghostly, he 
could only think ridiculously : ' Shall I go in with my 
overcoat on, or take it off ? ' The music ceased, the 
maid said from the doorway: 

''Will you walk in, sir?" 

Soames Balked in. He noted mechanically that 
all was still silvery, and that the upright piano was 
of satinwood. She had risen and stood recoiled 
against it ; her hand, placed on the keys as if groping 
for support, had struck a sudden discord, held for 



AND VISITS THE PAST 105 

a moment, and released. The light from the shaded 
piano-candle fell on her neck, leaving her face 
rather in shadow. She was in a black evening dress, 
with a sort of mantilla over her shoulders he did 
not remember ever having seen her in black, and 
the thought passed through him : * She dresses even 
when she's alone.' 

" You ! " he heard her whisper. 

Many times Soames had rehearsed this scene in 
fancy. Rehearsal served him not at all. He simply 
could not speak. He had never thought that the sight 
of this woman whom he had once so passionately 
desired, so completely owned, and whom he had not 
seen for twelve years, could affect him in this way. 
He had imagined himself speaking and acting, half 
as man of business, half as judge. And now it was 
as if he were in the presence not of a mere woman 
and erring wife, but of some force, subtle and 
elusive as atmosphere itself, within him and outside. 
A kind of defensive irony welled up in him. 

" Yes, it's a queer visit ! I hope you're well." 

" Thank you. Will you sit down ? " 

She had moved away from the piano, and gone 
over to a window-seat, sinking on to it, with her 
hands clasped in her lap. Light fell on her there, 
so that Soames could see her face, eyes, hair, 
strangely as he remembered them, strangely beau- 
tiful. 

He sat down on the edge of a satin-wood chair, 
upholstered with silver-coloured stuff, close to where 
he was standing. 

" You have not changed," he said. 

"No? What have you come for?" 
' To discuss things." 

" I have heard what you want from your cousin." 



106 IN CHANCERY 

"Well?" 

" I am willing. I have always been." 

The sound of her voice, reserved and close, the 
sight of her figure watchfully poised, defensive, 
was helping him now. A thousand memories of 
her, ever on the watch against him, stirred, and he 
said bitterly: 

" Perhaps you will be good enough, then, to give 
me information on which I can act. The law must 
be complied with/' 

" I have none to give you that you don't know of." 

" Twelve years ! Do you suppose I can believe 
that?" 

" I don't suppose you will believe anything I say ; 
but it's the truth." 

Soames looked at her hard. He had said that 
she had not changed ; now he perceived that she had. 
Not in face, except that it was more beautiful ; not 
in form, except that it was a little fuller no ! She 
had changed spiritually. There was more of her, 
as it were, something of activity and daring, where 
there had been sheer passive resistance. ' Ah ! ' he 
thought, ' that's her independent income ! Con- 
found Uncle Jolyon ! ' 

" I suppose you're comfortably off now ? " he said. 
' Thank you, yes." 

'' Why didn't you let me provide for you ? I 
would have, in spite of everything." 

A faint smile came on her lips; but she did not 
answer. 

" You are still my wife," said Soames. Why he 
said that, what he meant by it, he knew neither when 
he spoke nor after. It was a truism almost pre- 
posterous, but its effect was startling. She rose 
from the window-seat, and stood for a moment per- 



AND VISITS THE PAST 107 

f ectly still, looking at him. He could see her bosom 
heaving. Then she turned to the window and 
threw it open. 

" Why do that ? " he said sharply. " You'll catch 
cold in that dress. I'm not dangerous." And he 
uttered a little sad laugh. 

She echoed it faintly, bitterly. 

"It was habit." 

" Rather odd habit," said Soames as bitterly. 
"Shut the window!" 

She shut it and sat down again. She had devel- 
oped power, this woman this wife of his ! He 
felt it issuing from her as she sat there, in a sort of 
armour. And almost unconsciously he rose and 
moved nearer; he wanted to see the expression on 
her face. Her eyes met his unflinching. Heavens ! 
how clear they were, and what a dark brown against 
that white skin, and that burnt-amber hair ! And 
how white her shoulders! Funny sensation this! 
He ought to hate her. 

" You had better tell me," he said; " it's to your 
advantage to be free as well as to mine. That old 
matter is too old." 

" I have told you." 

" Do you mean to tell me there has been nothing 
nobody?" 

" Nobody. You must go to your own life." 

Stung by that retort, Soames moved towards the 
piano and back to the hearth, to and fro, as he had 
been wont in the old days in their drawing-room 
when his feelings were too much for him. 

' That won't do," he said. " You deserted me. 
In common justice it's for you " 

He saw her shrug those white shoulders, heard 
her murmur: 



io8 IN CHANCERY 

" Yes. Why didn't you divorce me then ? Should 
I have cared? " 

He stopped, and looked at her intently with a 
sort of curiosity. What on earth did she do with 
herself, if she really lived quite alone? And why 
had he not divorced her? The old feeling that she 
had never understood him, never done him justice, 
bit him while he stared at her. 

" Why couldn't you have made me a good wife? " 
he said. 

" Yes ; it was a crime to marry you. I have paid 
for it. You will find some way perhaps. You 
needn't mind my name, I have none to lose. Now 
I think you had better go." 

A sense of defeat of being defrauded of his 
self-justification, and of something else beyond 
power of explanation to himself, beset Soames like 
the breath of a cold fog. Mechanically he reached 
up, took from the mantel-shelf a little china bowl, 
reversed it, and said: 

" Lowestof t. Where did you get this ? I bought 
its fellow at Jobson's." And, visited by the sudden 
memory of how, those many years ago, he and she 
had bought china together, he remained staring at 
the little bowl, as if it contained all the past. Her 
voice roused him. 

" Take it. I don't want it." 

Soames put it back on the shelf. 

"Will you shake hands?" he said. 

A faint smile curved her lips. She held out her 
hand. It was cold to his rather feverish touch. 
' She's made of ice/ he thought ' she was always 
made of ice ! ' But even as that thought darted 
through him, his senses were assailed by the per- 
fume of her dress and body, as though the warmth 



AND VISITS THE PAST 109 

within her, which had never been for him, were 
struggling to show its presence. And he turned on 
his heel. He walked out and away, as if someone 
with a whip were after him, not even looking for 
a cab, glad of the empty Embankment and the cold 
river, and the thick-strewn shadows of the plane- 
tree leaves confused, flurried, sore at heart, and 
vaguely disturbed, as though he had made some 
deep mistake whose consequences he could not fore- 
see. And the fantastic thought suddenly assailed 
him : If instead of : ' I think you had better go/ she 
had said, ' I think you had better stay ! ' What 
should he have felt, what would he have done ? That 
cursed attraction of her was there for him even 
now, after all these years of estrangement and bit- 
ter thoughts. It was there, ready to mount to his 
head at a sign, a touch. " I was a fool to go ! " he 
muttered. " I've advanced nothing. Who could 

imagine? I never thought ! " Memory, flown 

back to the first years of his marriage, played him 
torturing tricks. She had not deserved to keep her 
beauty the beauty he had owned and known so 
well. And a kind of bitterness at the tenacity of 
his own admiration welled up in him. Most men 
would have hated the sight of her, as she had de- 
served. She had spoiled his life, wounded his pride 
to death, defrauded him of a son. And yet the mere 
sight of her, cold and resisting as ever, had this 
power to upset him utterly ! It was some damned 
magnetism she had ! And no wonder if, as she as- 
serted, she had lived untouched these last twelve 
years. So Bosinney cursed be his memory! 
had lived on all this time with her ! Soames could 
not tell whether he was glad of that knowledge 
or no. 



no IN CHANCERY 

Nearing his Club at last he stopped to buy a 
paper. A headline ran : ' Boers reported to repudi- 
ate suzerainty ! ' Suzerainty ! ' Just like her ! ' he 
thought : ' she always did. Suzerainty ! I still 
have it by rights. She must be awfully lonely in 
that wretched little flat!' 



CHAPTER XII 

ON FORSYTE ''CHANGE 

SOAMES belonged to two Clubs, ' The Connoisseurs,' 
which he put on his cards and seldom visited, and 
' The Remove/ which he did not put on his cards 
and frequented. He had joined this Liberal insti- 
tution five years ago, having made sure that its 
members were now nearly all sound Conservatives 
in heart and pocket, if not in principle. Uncle 
Nicholas had put him up. The fine reading-room 
was decorated in the Adam style. 

On entering that evening he glanced at the tape 
for any news about the Transvaal, and noted that 
Consols were down seven-sixteenths since the 
morning. He was turning away to seek the read- 
ing-room when a voice behind him said : 

''' Well, Soames, that went off all right." 

It was Uncle Nicholas, in a frock-coat and his 
special cut-away collar, with a black tie passed 
through a ring. Heavens ! How young and dapper 
he looked at eighty-three ! 

" I think Roger'd have been pleased," his uncle 
went on. " The thing was very well done. Black- 
ley's? I'll make a note of them. Buxton's done 
me no good. These Boers are upsetting me that 
fellow Chamberlain's driving the country into war. 
What do you think?" 

in 



H2 IN CHANCERY 

" Bound to come/' murmured Soames. 

Nicholas passed his hand over his thin, clean- 
shaven cheeks, very rosy after his summer cure; a 
slight pout had gathered on his lips. This business 
had revived all his Liberal principles. 

" I mistrust that chap ; he's a stormy petrel. 
House-property will go down if there's war. You'll 
have trouble with Roger's estate. I often told him 
he ought to get out of some of his houses. He was 
an opinionated beggar." 

1 There was a pair of you ! ' thought Soames. 
But he never argued with an uncle, in that way 
preserving their opinion of him as ' a long-headed 
chap,' and the legal care of their property. 

" They tell me at Timothy's," said Nicholas, low- 
ering his voice, " that Dartie has gone off at last. 
That'll be a relief to your father. He was a rotten 
egg-" . 

Again Soames nodded. If there was a subject 
on which the Forsytes really agreed, it was the 
character of Montagu Dartie. 

1 You take care," said Nicholas, " or he'll turn 
up again. Winifred had better have the tooth out, 
I should say. No use preserving what's gone bad." 

Soames looked at him sideways. His nerves, ex- 
acerbated by the interview he had just come 
through, disposed him to see a personal allusion 
in those words. 

" I'm advising her," he said shortly. 

'Well," said Nicholas, "the brougham's wait- 
ing; I must get home. I'm very poorly. Remember 
me to your father." 

And having thus reconsecrated the ties of blood, 
he passed down the steps at his youthful gait and 
was wrapped into his fur coat by the junior porter. 



ON FORSYTE 'CHANGE 113 

' I've never known Uncle Nicholas other than 
" very poorly/' ' mused Soames, ' or seen him look 
other than everlasting. What a family ! Judging 
by him, I've got thirty-eight years of health before 
me. Well, I'm not going to waste them.' And go- 
ing over to a mirror he stood looking at his face. 
Except for a line or two, and three or four grey 
hairs in his little dark moustache, had he aged any 
more than Irene ? The prime of life he and she 
in the very prime of life ! And a fantastic thought 
shot into his mind. Absurd! Idiotic! But again 
it came. And genuinely alarmed by the recurrence, 
as one is by the second fit of shivering which pres- 
ages a feverish cold, he sat down on the weighing 
machine. Eleven stone! He had not varied two 
pounds in twenty years. What age was she? 
Nearly thirty-seven not too old to have a child 
not at all ! Thirty-seven on the ninth of next 
month. He remembered her birthday well he 
had always observed it religiously, even that last 
birthday so soon before she left him, when he was 
almost certain she was faithless. Four birthdays 
in his house. He had looked forward to them, be- 
cause his gifts had meant a semblance of gratitude, 
a certain attempt at warmth. Except, indeed, that 
last birthday which had tempted him to be too 
religious ! And he shied away in thought. Memory 
heaps dead leaves on corpse-like deeds, from under 
which they do but vaguely offend the sense. And 
then he thought suddenly : ' I could send her a pres- 
ent for her birthday. After all, we're Christians ! 
Couldn't I couldn't we join up again ! ' And he 
uttered a deep sigh sitting there. Annette ! Ah ! 
but between him and Annette was the need for that 
wretched divorce suit! And how? 



II4 .IN CHANCERY 

" A man can always work these things, if he'll 
take it on himself," Jolyon had said. 

But why should he take the scandal on himself 
with his whole career as a pillar of the law at stake? 
It was not fair! It was quixotic! Twelve years' 
separation in which he had taken no steps to free 
himself put out of court the possibility of using her 
conduct with Bosinney as a ground for divorcing 
her. By doing nothing to secure relief he had ac- 
quiesced, even if the evidence could now be gath- 
ered, which was more than doubtful. Besides, his 
own pride would never let him use that old incident, 
he had suffered from it too much. No ! Nothing 
but fresh misconduct on her part but she had 
denied it; and almost he had believed her. 
Hung up ! Utterly hung up ! 

He rose from the scooped-out red velvet seat 
with a feeling of constriction about his vitals. He 
would never sleep with this going on in him ! And, 
taking coat and hat again, he went out, moving 
eastward. In Trafalgar Square he became aware 
of some special commotion travelling towards him 
out of the mouth of the Strand. It materialised 
in newspaper men calling out so loudly that no 
words whatever could be heard. He stopped to 
listen, and one came by. 

" Payper ! Special ! Ultimatium by Krooger ! 
Declaration of war ! " Soames bought the paper. 
There it was in the stop press ! His first thought 
was : ' The Boers are committing suicide/ His sec- 
ond : * Is there anything still I ought to sell ? ' If so 
he had missed the chance there would certainly 
be a slump in the City to-morrow. He swallowed 
this thought with a nod of defiance. That ultima- 
tum was insolent sooner than let it pass he was 



ON FORSYTE 'CHANGE 115 

prepared to lose money. They wanted a lesson, and 
they would get it ; but it would take three months 
at least to bring them to heel. There weren't the 
troops out there; always behind time, the Govern- 
ment ! Confound those newspaper rats ! What was 
the use of waking everybody up? Breakfast to- 
morrow was quite soon enough. And he thought 
with alarm of his father. They would cry it down 
Park Lane. Hailing a hansom, he got in and told 
the man to drive there. 

James and Emily had just gone up to bed, and 
after communicating the news to Warmson, Soames 
prepared to follow. He paused by after-thought to 
say: 

'What do you think of it, Warmson ? " 

The butler ceased passing a hat brush over the 
silk hat Soames had taken off, and, inclining his 
face a little forward, said in a low voice : 

"Well, sir, they 'aven't a chance, of course; but 
I'm told they're very good shots. I've got a son in 
the Inniskillings." 

" You, Warmson ? Why, I didn't know you were 
married." 

" No, sir. I don't talk of it. I expect he'll be 
going out." 

The slighter shock Soames had felt on discover- 
ing that he knew so little of one whom he thought 
he knew so well was lost in the slight shock of dis- 
covering that the war might touch one personally. 
Born in the year of the Crimean War, he had only 
come to consciousness by the time the Indian Mu- 
tiny was over; since then the many little wars of 
the British Empire had been entirely professional, 
quite unconnected with the Forsytes and all they 
stood for in the body politic. This war would surely 



n6 IN CHANCERY 

be no exception. But his mind ran hastily over his 
family. Two of the Haymans, he had heard, were 
in some Yeomanry or other it had always been a 
pleasant thought, there was a certain distinction 
about the Yeomanry; they wore, or used to wear, a 
blue uniform with silver about it, and rode horses. 
And Archibald, he remembered, had once on a time 
joined the Militia, but had given it up because his 
father, Nicholas, had made such a fuss about his 
' wasting his time peacocking about in a uniform/ 
Recently he had heard somewhere that young Nich- 
olas's eldest, very young Nicholas, had become a 
Volunteer. ' No/ thought Soames, mounting the 
stairs slowly, ' there's nothing in that ! ' 

He stood on the landing outside his parents' bed 
and dressing rooms, debating whether or not to put 
his nose in and say a reassuring word. Opening the 
landing window, he listened. The rumble from 
Piccadilly was all the sound he heard, and with the 
thought, ' If these motor-cars increase, it'll affect 
house property,' he was about to pass on up to the 
room always kept ready for him when he heard, 
distant as yet, the hoarse rushing call of a news- 
vendor. There it was, and coming past the house ! 
He knocked on his mother's door and went in. 

His father was sitting up in feed, with his ears 
pricked under the white hair which Emily kept so 
beautifully cut. He looked pink, and extraordi- 
narily clean, in his setting of white sheet and pillow, 
out of which the points of his high, thin, night- 
gowned shoulders emerged in small peaks. His 
eyes alone, grey and distrustful under their with- 
ered lids, were moving from the window to Emily, 
who in a wrapper was walking up and down, squeez- 
ing a rubber ball attached to a scent bottle. The 



ON FORSYTE 'CHANGE 117 

room reeked faintly of the eau-de-Cologne she was 
spraying. 

" All right ! " said Soames, " it's not a fire. The 
Boers have declared war that's all." 

Emily stopped her spraying. 

" Oh ! " was all she said, and looked at James. 

Soames, too, looked at his father. He was taking 
it differently from their expectation, as if some 
thought, strange to them, were working in him. 

" H'm ! " he muttered suddenly, " I shan't live to 
see the end of this." 

" Nonsense, James ! It'll be over by Christmas." 

" What do you know about it ? " James answered 
her with asperity. " It's a pretty mess at this 
time of night, too ! " He lapsed into silence, and 
his wife and son, as if hypnotised, waited for him 
to say : ' I can't tell I don't know ; I knew how 
it would be ! ' But he did not. The grey eyes 
shifted, evidently seeing nothing in the room; then 
movement occurred under the bedclothes, and the 
knees were drawn up suddenly to a great height. 

:t They ought to send out Roberts. It all comes 
from that fellow Gladstone and his Majuba." 

The two listeners noted something beyond the 
usual in his voice, something of real anxiety. It 
was as if he had said : ' I shall never see the old 
country peaceful and safe again. I shall have to 
die before I know she's won.' And in spite of the 
feeling that James must not be encouraged to be 
fussy, they were touched. Soames went up to the 
bedside and stroked his father's hand which had 
emerged from under the bedclothes, long and wrin- 
kled with veins. 

" Mark my words ! " said James, " consols will 
go to par. For all I know, Val may go and enlist." 



u8 IN CHANCERY 

" Oh, come, James! " cried Emily, " you talk as 
if there were danger." 

Her comfortable voice seemed to soothe James 
for once. 

" Well/' he muttered, " I told you how it would 
be. I don't know, I'm sure nobody tells me any- 
thing. Are you sleeping here, my boy? " 

The crisis was past, he would now compose him- 
self to his normal degree of anxiety; and, assuring 
his father that he was sleeping in the house, Soames 
pressed his hand, and went up to his room. 

The following afternoon witnessed the greatest 
crowd Timothy's had known for many a year. On 
national occasions, such as this, it was, indeed, 
almost impossible to avoid going there. Not that 
there was any danger, or rather, only just enough 
to make it necessary to assure each other that there 
was none. 

Nicholas was there early. He had seen Soames 
the night before Soames had said it was bound 
to come. This old Kruger was in his dotage 
why, he must be seventy-five if he is a day ! (Nich- 
olas was eighty-three.) What had Timothy said? 
He had had a fit after Majuba. These Boers were 
a grasping lot ! The dark-haired Francie, who had 
arrived on his heels, with the contradictious touch 
which became the free spirit of a daughter of 
Roger, chimed in: 

" Kettle and pot ! Uncle Nicholas. What price the 
Uitlanders ? " What price, indeed ! A new expres- 
sion, and believed to be due to her brother George. 

Aunt Juley thought Francie ought not to say 
such a thing. Dear Mrs. MacAnder's boy, Charlie 
MacAnder, was one, and no one could call him 
grasping. At this Francie uttered one of her mots, 
scandalising, and so frequently repeated: 



ON FORSYTE 'CHANGE 119 

" Well, his father's a Scotchman, and his mother's 
a cat." 

Aunt Juley covered her ears, too late, but Aunt 
Hester smiled; as for Nicholas, he pouted witti- 
cism of which he was not the author was hardly to 
his taste. Just then Marian Tweetyman arrived, 
followed almost immediately by young Nicholas. 
On seeing his son, Nicholas rose. 

" Well, I must be going," he said, " Nick here 
will tell you what'll win the race." And with this 
hit at his eldest, who, as a pillar of accountancy, 
and director of an insurance company, was no more 
addicted to sport than his father had ever been, he 
departed. Dear Nicholas! What race was that? 
Or was it only one of his jokes ? He was a wonder- 
ful man for his age ! How many lumps would dear 
Marian take? And how were Giles and Jesse? 
Aunt Juley supposed their Yeomanry would be very 
busy now guarding the coast, though of course the 
Boers had no ships. But one never knew what the 
French might do if they had the chance, especially 
since that dreadful Fashoda scare, which had upset 
Timothy so terribly that he had made no invest- 
ments for months afterwards. It was the ingrati- 
tude of the Boers that was so dreadful, after every- 
thing had been done for them Dr. Jameson im- 
prisoned, and he was so nice, Mrs. MacAnder had 
always said. And Sir Alfred Milner sent out to 
talk to them such a clever man ! She didn't know 
what they wanted. 

But at this moment occurred one of those sensa- 
tions so precious at Timothy's which great oc- 
casions sometimes bring forth: 

" Miss June Forsyte." 

Aunts Juley and Hester were on their feet at 



120 IN CHANCERY 

once, trembling from smothered resentment, and 
old affection bubbling up, and pride at the return 
of a prodigal June! Well, this was a surprise! 
Dear June after all these years ! And how well 
she was looking ! Not changed at all ! It was al- 
most on their lips to add, ' And how is your dear 
grandfather?' forgetting in that giddy moment 
that poor dear Jolyon had been in his grave for 
seven years now. 

Ever the most courageous and downright of all 
the Forsytes, June, with her decided chin and her 
spirited eyes and her hair like flames, sat down, 
slight and short, on a gilt chair with a bead-worked 
seat, for all the world as if ten years had not elapsed 
since she had been to see them ten years of travel 
and independence and devotion to lame ducks. 
Those ducks of late had been all definitely painters, 
etchers, or sculptors, so that her impatience with 
the Forsytes and their hopelessly inartistic outlook 
had become intense. Indeed, she had almost ceased 
to believe that her family existed, and looked around 
her now with a sort of challenging directness which 
brought exquisite discomfort to the roomful. She 
had not expected to meet any of them but ' the poor 
old things '; and why she had come to see them she 
hardly knew, except that, while on her way from 
Oxford Street to a studio in Latimer Road, she had 
suddenly remembered them with compunction as 
two long-neglected old lame ducks. 

Aunt Juley broke the hush again : " We've just 
been saying, dear, how dreadful it is about these 
Boers! And what an impudent thing of that old 
Kruger!" 

/'Impudent!" said June. "I think he's quite 
right. What business have we to meddle with 



ON FORSYTE 'CHANGE 121 

them ? If he turned out all those wretched Uitland- 
ers it would serve them right. Jhey're only after 
money." 

The silence of sensation was broken by Francie 
saying : 

"What? Are you a pro-Boer?" (undoubtedly 
the first use of that expression). 

" Well! Why can't we leave them alone? " said 
June, just as, in the open doorway, the maid said: 
" Mr. Soames Forsyte." Sensation on sensation ! 
Greeting was almost held up by curiosity to see how 
June and he would take this encounter, for it was 
shrewdly suspected, if not quite known, that they 
had not met since that old and lamentable affair 
of her fiance Bosinney with Soames' wife. They 
were seen to just touch each other's hands, and 
look each at the other's left eye only. Aunt Juley 
came at once to the rescue : 

" Dear June is so original. Fancy, Soames, she 
thinks the Boers are not to blame." 

" They only want their independence," said June; 
" and why shouldn't they have it ? " 

" Because," answered Soames, with his smile a 
little on one side, " they happen to have agreed to 
our suzerainty." 

"Suzerainty!" repeated June scornfully; "we 
shouldn't like anyone's suzerainty over us." 

"They got advantages in payment," replied 
Soames ; " a contract is a contract." 

" Contracts are not always just," flamed June, 
" and when they're not, they ought to be broken. 
The Boers are much the weaker. We could afford 
to be generous." 

Soames sniffed. " That's mere sentiment," he 
said. 



122 IN CHANCERY 

Aunt Hester, to whom nothing was more awful 
than any kind of disagreement, here leaned for- 
ward and remarked decisively : 

"What lovely weather it has been for the time 
of year?" 

But June was not to be diverted. 

" I don't know why sentiment should be sneered 
at. It's the best thing in the world. She looked 
defiantly round, and Aunt Juley had to intervene 
again : 

" Have you bought any pictures lately, Soames ? " 

Her incomparable instinct for the wrong subject 
had not failed her. Soames flushed. To disclose 
the name of his latest purchases would be like walk- 
ing into the jaws of disdain. For somehow they all 
knew of June's predilection for ' genius ' not yet 
on its legs, and her contempt for ' success ' unless 
she had had a finger in securing. 

" One or two," he muttered. 

But June's face had changed ; the Forsyte within 
her was seeing its chance. Why should not Soames 
buy some of the pictures of Eric Cobbley her last 
lame duck? And she promptly opened her attack: 
Did Soames know his work? It was so wonderful. 
He was the coming man. 

Oh yes, Soames knew his work. It was in his 
view ' splashy ' and would never get hold of the 
public. 

June blazed up. 

"Of course it won't; that's the last thing one 
would wish for. I thought you were a connoisseur, 
not a picture-dealer." 

" Of course Soames is a connoisseur," Aunt 
Juley said hastily; "he has wonderful taste he 
can always tell beforehand what's going to be suc- 
cessful." 



ON FORSYTE 'CHANGE 123 

" Oh ! " gasped June, and sprang up from the 
bead-covered chair. " I hate that standard of suc- 
cess. Why can't people buy things because they 
like them?" 

"You mean/' said Francie, "because you like 
them." 

And in the slight pause young Nicholas was 
heard saying gently that Violet (his third) was 
taking lessons in pastel, he didn't know if they were 
any use. 

" Well, good-bye, Auntie," said June ; " I must 
get on," and kissing her aunts, she looked defiantly 
round the room, said " Good-bye " again, and went. 
A breeze seemed to pass out with her, as if every- 
one had sighed. 

The third sensation came before anyone had time 
to speak: 

" Mr. James Forsyte." 

James came in using a stick slightly and wrapped 
in a fur coat which gave him a fictitious bulk. 

Everyone stood up. James was so old; and he 
had not been at Timothy's for nearly two years. 

" It's hot in here," he said. 

Soames divested him of his coat, and as he did so 
could not help admiring the glossy way his father 
was turned out. James sat down, all knees, elbows, 
frock-coat, and long white whiskers. 

' What's the meaning of that? " he said. 

Though there was no apparent sense in his words, 
they all knew that he was referring to June. His 
eyes searched his son's face. 

" I thought I'd come and see for myself. What 
have they answered Kruger?" 

Soames took out an evening paper, and read the 
headline. 



124 



CHANCERY 



" ( Instant action by our Government state of 
war existing ! ' 

" Ah ! " said James, and sighed. " I was afraid 
they'd cut and run like old Gladstone. We shall 
finish with them this time." 

All stared at him. James! Always fussy, ner- 
vous, anxious ! James with his continual, ' I told 
you it would be ! ' and his pessimism, and his cau- 
tious investments. There was something uncanny 
about such resolution in this the oldest living For- 
syte. 

" Where's Timothy? " said James. " He ought 
to pay attention to this." 

Aunt Juley said she didn't know; Timothy had 
not said much at lunch to-day. Aunt Hester rose 
and threaded her way out of the room, and Francie 
said rather maliciously: 

"The Boers are a hard nut to crack, Uncle 
James." 

" H'm ! " muttered James. " Where do you get 
your information? Nobody tells me." 

Young Nicholas remarked in his mild voice that 
Nick (his eldest) was now going to drill regularly. 

" Ah ! " muttered James, and stared before him 
his thoughts were on Val. " He's got to look 
after his mother," he said, " he's got no time for 
drilling and that, with that father of his." This 
cryptic saying produced silence, until he spoke 
again. 

" What did June want here ? " And his eyes 
rested with suspicion on all of them in turn. " Her 
father's a rich man now." The conversation turned 
on Jolyon, and when he had been seen last. It was 
supposed that he went abroad and saw all sorts of 
people now that his wife was dead; his water-col- 



ON FORSYTE 'CHANGE 125 

ours were on the line, and he was a successful man. 
Francie went so far as to say: 

" I should like to see him again; he was rather a 
dear." 

Aunt Juley recalled how he had gone to sleep on 
the sofa one day, where James was sitting. He 
had always been very amiable; what did Soames 
think? 

Knowing that Jolyon was Irene's trustee, all felt 
the delicacy of this question, and looked at Soames 
with interest. A faint pink had come up in his 
cheeks. 

" He's going grey/' he said. 

Indeed! Had Soames seen him? Soames nod- 
ded, and the pink vanished. 

James said suddenly: "Well I don't know, 
I can't tell." 

It so exactly expressed the sentiment of every- 
body present that there was something behind every- 
thing, that nobody responded. But at this moment 
Aunt Hester returned. 

" Timothy," she said in a low voice, " Timothy 
has bought a map, and he's put in he's put in 
three flags." 

Timothy had ! A sigh went round the com- 
pany. 

If Timothy had indeed put in three flags already, 
well ! it showed what the nation could do when 
it was roused. The war was as good as over. 



CHAPTER XIII 

JOLYON FINDS OUT WHERE HE IS 

JOLYON stood at the window in Holly's old night 
nursery, converted into a studio, not because it had 
a north light, but for its view over the prospect 
away to the Grand Stand at Epsom. He shifted to 
the side window which overlooked the stableyard, 
and whistled down to the dog Balthasar who lay 
for ever under the clock tower. The old dog looked 
up and wagged his tail. ' Poor old boy ! ' thought 
Jolyon, shifting back to the other window. 

He had been restless all this week, since his at- 
tempt to prosecute trusteeship, uneasy in his con- 
science which was ever acute, disturbed in his sense 
of compassion which was easily excited, and with a 
queer sensation as if his feeling for beauty had re- 
ceived some definite embodiment. Autumn was 
getting hold of the old oak-tree, its leaves were 
browning. Sunshine had been plentiful and hot 
this summer. As with trees, so with men's lives! 
c I ought to live long/ thought Jolyon; ' I'm getting 
mildewed for want of heat. If I can't work, I shall 
be off to Paris.' But memory of Paris gave him no 
pleasure. Besides, how could he go? He must 
stay and see what Soames was going to do. 'I'm 
her trustee. I can't leave her unprotected,' he 

126 



JOLYON FINDS OUT WHERE HE IS 127 

thought. It had been striking him as curious how 
very clearly he could still see Irene in her little 
drawing-room which he had only twice entered. 
Her beauty must have a sort of poignant harmony ! 
No literal portrait would ever do her justice; the 
essence of her was ah! yes, what? . . . The 
noise of hoofs called him back to the other window. 
Holly was riding into the yard on her long-tailed 
'palfrey/ She looked up and he waved to her. 
She had been rather silent lately; getting old, he 
supposed, beginning to want her future, as they all 
did youngsters! Time was certainly the devil! 
And with the feeling that to waste this swift-travel- 
ling commodity was unforgivable folly, he took up 
his brush. But it was no use ; he could not concen- 
trate his eye besides, the light was going. ' I'll 
go up to town/ he thought. In the hall a servant 
met him. 

" A lady to see you, sir; Mrs. Heron/' 

Extraordinary coincidence! Passing into the 
picture-gallery, as it was still called, he saw Irene 
standing over by the window. 

She came towards him saying : 

"I've been trespassing; I came up through the 
coppice and garden. I always used to come that 
way to see Uncle Jolyon." 

" You couldn't trespass here," replied Jolyon ; 
" history makes that impossible. I was just think- 
ing of you." 

Irene smiled. And it was as if something shone 
through; not mere spirituality serener, completer, 
more alluring. 

" History ! " she murmured. " I once told Uncle 
Jolyon that love was for ever. Well, it isn't. Only 
aversion lasts." 



128 IN CHANCERY 

Jolyon stared at her. Had she got over Bosinney 
at last? 

" Yes ! " he said, " aversion's deeper than love or 
hate because it's a natural product of the nerves, 
and we don't change them." 

" I came to tell you that Soames has been to see 
me. He said a thing that frightened me. He said : 
' You are still my wife! ' " 

"What!" ejaculated Jolyon. 'You ought not 
to live alone." And he continued to stare at her, 
afflicted by the thought that where Beauty was, 
nothing ever ran quite straight, which, no doubt, 
was why so many people looked on it as immoral. 

"What more?" 

" He asked me to shake hands." 

"Did you?" 

" Yes. When he came in I'm sure he didn't want 
to; he changed while he was there." 

" Ah ! you certainly ought not to go on living there 
alone." 

" I know no woman I could ask; and I can't take 
a lover to order, Cousin Jolyon." 

" Heaven forbid ! " said Jolyon. " What a dam- 
nable position! Will you stay to dinner? No? 
Well, let me see you back to town ; I wanted to go up 
this evening." 

"Truly?" 
' Truly. I'll be ready in five minutes." 

On that walk to the station they talked of pictures 
and music, contrasting the English and French 
characters and the difference in their attitude to 
Art. But to Jolyon the colours in the hedges of the 
long straight lane, the twittering of chaffinches who 
kept pace with them, the perfume of weeds being al- 
ready burned, the turn of her neck, the fascination 



JOLYON FINDS OUT WHERE HE IS 129 

of those dark eyes bent on him now and then, the 
lure of her whole figure, made a deeper impression 
than the remarks they exchanged. Unconsciously 
he held himself straighter, walked with a more elas- 
tic step. 

In the train he put her through a sort of catechism 
as to what she did with her days. 

Made her dresses, shopped, visited a hospital, 
played her piano, translated from the French. She 
had regular work from a publisher, it seemed, which 
supplemented her income a little. She seldom went 
out in the evening. " Fve been living alone so long, 
you see, that I don't mind it a bit. I believe I'm 
naturally solitary." 

" I don't believe that," said Jolyon. " Do you 
know many people ? " 

" Very few." 

At Waterloo they took a hansom, and he drove 
with her to the door of her mansions. Squeezing 
her hand at parting, he said : 

" You know, you could always come to us at 
Robin Hill ; you must let me know everything that 
happens. Good-bye, Irene." 

" Good-bye," she answered softly. 

Jolyon climbed back into his cab, wondering why 
he had not asked her to dine and go to the theatre 
with him. Solitary, starved, hung-up life that she 
had! "Hotch Potch Club," he said through the 
trap-door. As his hansom debouched on to the Em- 
bankment, a man in top-hat and overcoat passed, 
walking quickly, so close to the wall that he seemed 
to be scraping it. 

' By Jove ! ' thought Jolyon ; ' Soames himself ! 
What's he up to now?' And, stopping the cab 
round the corner he got out and retraced his steps to 



IN CHANCERY 

where he could see the entrance to the mansions. 
Soames had halted in front of them, and was look- 
ing up at the light in her windows. ' If he goes in/ 
thought Jolyon, ' what shall I do ? What have I the 
right to do ? ' What the fellow had said was true. 
She was still his wife, absolutely without protection 
from annoyance ! ' Well, if he goes in/ he thought, 
' I follow.' And he began moving towards the 
mansions. Again Soames advanced; he was in the 
very entrance now. But suddenly he stopped, spun 
round on his heel, and came back towards the river. 
' What now ? ' thought Jolyon. ' In a dozen steps 
he'll recognise me.' And he turned tail. His cou- 
sin's footsteps kept pace with his own. But he 
reached his cab, and got in before Soames had 
turned the corner. " Go on ! " he said through the 
trap. Soames' figure ranged up alongside. 

" Hansom ! " he said. " Engaged ? Hallo ! " 

Cf Hallo ! " answered Jolyon. " You ? " 

The quick suspicion on his cousin's face, white in 
the lamplight, decided him. 

" I can give you a lift," he said, " if you're going 
West." 

' Thanks/' answered Soames, and got in. 

" I've been seeing Irene," said Jolyon when the 
cab had started. 

"Indeed!" 

" You went to see her yesterday yourself, I under- 
stand." 

" I did," said Soames ; " she's my wife, you 
know." 

The tone, the half -lifted sneering lip, roused sud- 
den anger in Jolyon ; but he subdued it. 

" You ought to know best," he said, " but if you 
want a divorce it's not very wise to go seeing her, 



JOLYON FINDS OUT WHERE HE IS 131 

is it ? One can't run with the hare and hunt with 
the hounds." 

' You're very good to warn me/' said Soames, 
" but I have not made up my mind." 

" She has," said Jolyon, looking straight before 
him; " you can't take things up, you know, as they 
were twelve years ago." 

" That remains to be seen." 

" Look here ! " said Jolyon, " she's in a damnable 
position, and I am the only person with any legal say 
in her affairs." 

" Except myself," retorted Soames, " who am 
also in a damnable position. Hers is what she made 
for herself ; mine what she made for me. I am not 
at all sure that in her own interests I shan't require 
her to return to me." 

"What!" exclaimed Jolyon; and a shiver went 
through his whole body. 

" I don't know what you may mean by ' what,' " 
answered Soames coldly; " your say in her affairs is 
confined to paying out her income ; please bear that in 
mind. In choosing not to disgrace her by a divorce, 
I retained my rights, and, as I say, I am not at all 
sure that I shan't require to exercise them." 

" My God ! " ejaculated Jolyon, and he uttered a 
short laugh. 

"Yes," said Soames, and there was a deadly 
quality in his voice. " I've not forgotten the nick- 
name your father gave me, ' The man of property ! ' 
I'm not called names for nothing." 

"This is fantastic," murmured Jolyon. Well, 
the fellow couldn't force his wife to live with him. 
Those days were past, anyway! And he looked 
round at Soames with the thought : ' Is he real, this 
man ? ' But Soames looked very real, sitting square 



i 3 2 IN CHANCERY 

yet almost elegant with the clipped moustache on his 
pale face, and a tooth showing where a lip was lifted 
in a fixed smile. There was a long silence, while 
Jolyon thought : * Instead of helping her, I've made 
things worse/ Suddenly Soames said: 

" It would be the best thing that could happen to 
her in many ways." 

At those words such a turmoil began taking place 
in Jolyon that he could barely sit still in the cab. It 
was as if he were boxed up with hundreds of thou- 
sands of his countrymen, boxed up with that some- 
thing in the national character which had always 
been to him revolting, something which he knew to 
be extremely natural and yet which seemed to him 
inexplicable their intense belief in contracts and 
vested rights, their complacent sense of virtue in the 
exaction of those rights. Here beside him in the 
cab was the very embodiment, the corporeal sum as 
it were, of the possessive instinct his own kins- 
man, too ! It was uncanny and intolerable ! ' But 
there's something more in it than that ! ' he thought 
with a sick feeling. ' The dog, they say, returns to 
his vomit ! The sight of her has reawakened some- 
thing. Beauty ! The devil's in it ! ' 

" As I say," said Soames, " I have not made up 
my mind. I shall be obliged if you will kindly leave 
her quite alone." 

Jolyon bit his lips ; he who had always hated rows 
almost welcomed the thought of one now. 

" I can give you no such promise," he said shortly. 

" Very well," said Soames, " then we know where 
we are. I'll get down here." And stopping the 
cab he got out without word or sign of farewell. 
Jolyon travelled on to his Club. 

The first news of the war was being called in the 



JOLYON FINDS OUT WHERE HE IS 133 

streets, but he paid no attention. What could he do 
to help her? If only his father were alive! He 
could have done so much ! But why could he not do 
all that his father could have done? Was he not 
old enough ? turned fifty and twice married, with 
grown-up daughters and a son. ' Queer/ he 
thought. ' If she were plain I shouldn't be thinking 
twice about it. Beauty is the devil, when you're 
sensitive to it ! ' And into the Club reading-room 
he went with a disturbed heart. In that very room 
he and Bosinney had talked one summer afternoon ; 
he well remembered even now the disguised and 
secret lecture he had given that young man in the in- 
terests of June, the diagnosis of the Forsytes he had 
hazarded; and how he had wondered what sort of 
woman it was he was warning him against. And 
now ! He was almost in want of a warning himself. 
' It's deuced funny ! ' he thought, ' really deuced 
funny ! ' 



CHAPTER XIV 

SOAMES DISCOVERS WHAT HE WANTS 

IT is so much easier to say, " Then we know where 
we are," than to mean anything particular by the 
words. And in saying them Soames did but vent 
the jealous rankling of his instincts. He got out of 
the cab in a state of wary anger with himself for 
not having seen Irene, with Jolyon for having seen 
her ; and now with his inability to tell exactly what 
he wanted. 

He had abandoned the cab because he could not 
bear to remain seated beside his cousin, and walk- 
ing briskly eastwards he thought : ' I wouldn't trust 
that fellow Jolyon a yard. Once outcast, always 
outcast ! ' The chap had a natural sympathy with 
with laxity (he had shied at the word sin, be- 
cause it was too melodramatic for use by a Forsyte). 

Indecision in desire was to him a new feeling. 
He was like a child between a promised toy and an 
old one which had been taken away from him; and 
he was astonished at himself. Only last Sunday de- 
sire had seemed simple just his freedom and An- 
nette. ' I'll go and dine there/ he thought. To see 
her might bring back his singleness of intention, 
calm his exasperation, clear his mind. 

The restaurant was fairly full a good many 

134 



SOAMES DISCOVERS WHAT HE WANTS 135 

foreigners and folk whom, from their appearance, 
he took to be literary or artistic. Scraps of conver- 
sation came his way through the clatter of plates 
and glasses. He distinctly heard the Boers sym- 
pathised with, the British Government blamed. 
' Don't think much of their clientele/ he thought. 
He went stolidly through his dinner and special 
coffee without making his presence known, and 
when at last he had finished, was careful not to be 
seen going towards the sanctum of Madame La- 
motte. They were, as he expected, having supper 
such a much nicer-looking supper than the dinner 
he had eaten that he felt a kind of grief and they 
greeted him with a surprise so seemingly genuine 
that he thought with sudden suspicion : ' I believe 
they knew I was here all the time/ He gave An- 
nette a look furtive and searching. So pretty, seem- 
ingly so candid ; could she be angling for him ? He 
turned to Madame Lamotte and said : 

" I've been dining here/' 

Really! If she had only known! There were 
dishes she could have recommended; what a pity! 
Soames was confirmed in his suspicion. ' I must 
look out what I'm doing! ' he thought sharply. 

" Another little cup of very special coffee, mon- 
sieur; a liqueur, Grand Marnier ? " and Madame La- 
motte rose to order these delicacies. 

Alone with Annette, Soames said, " Well, An- 
nette ? " with a defensive little smile about his lips. 

The girl blushed. This, which last Sunday would 
have set his nerves tingling, now gave him much the 
same feeling a man has when a dog that he owns 
wriggles and looks at him. He had a curious sense 
of power, as if he could have said to her, * Come and 
kiss me/ and she would have come. And yet it 



136 IN CHANCERY 

was strange but there seemed another face and 
form in the room too; and the itch in his nerves, was 
it for that or for this ? He jerked his head to- 
ward the restaurant and said: "You have some 
queer customers. Do you like this life ? " 

Annette looked up at him for a moment, looked 
down, and played with her fork. 

" No/' she said, " I do not like it." 

' I've got her, 5 thought Soames, ' if I want her. 
But do I want her ? ' She was graceful, she was 
pretty very pretty ; she was fresh, she had taste 
of a kind. His eyes travelled round the little room ; 
but the eyes of his mind went another journey a 
half-light, and silvery walls, a satinwood piano, a 
woman standing against it, reined back as it were 
from him a woman with white shoulders that he 
knew, and dark eyes that he had sought to know, and 
hair like dull dark amber. And as in an artist who 
strives for the unrealisable and is ever thirsty, so 
there rose in him at that moment the thirst of the 
old passion he had never satisfied. 

" Well," he said calmly, " you're young. There's 
everything before you." 

Annette shook her head. 

" I think sometimes there is nothing before me 
but hard work. I am not so in love with work as 
mother." 

" Your mother is a wonder," said Soames, faintly 
mocking; " she will never let failure lodge in her 
house." 

Annette sighed. " It must be wonderful to be 
rich." 

" Oh ! You'll be rich some day," answered 
Soames, still with that faint mockery; "don't be 
afraid." 



SOAMES DISCOVERS WHAT HE WANTS 137 

Annette shrugged her shoulders. " Monsieur is 
very kind." And between her pouting lips she put 
a chocolate. 

' Yes, my dear,' thought Soames, ' they're very 
pretty.' 

Madame Lamotte, .with coffee and liqueur, put an 
end to that colloquy. Soames did not stay long. 

Outside in the streets of Soho, which always gave 
him such a feeling of property improperly owned, 
he mused If only Irene had given him a son, he 
wouldn't now be squirming after women! The 
thought had jumped out of its little dark sentry-box 
in his inner consciousness. A son something to 
look forward to, something to make the rest of life 
worth while, something to leave himself to, some 
perpetuity of self. ' If I had a son,' he thought bit- 
terly, ' a proper legal son, I could make shift to go 
on as I used. One woman's much the same as an- 
other, after all.' But as he walked he shook his 
head. No ! One woman was not the same as an- 
other. Many a time had he tried to think that in 
the old days of his thwarted married life ; and he had 
always failed. He was failing now. He was try- 
ing to think Annette the same as that other. But she 
was not, she had not the lure of that old passion. 
' And Irene's my wife/ he thought, * my legal wife. 
I have done nothing to put her away from me. 
Why shouldn't she come back to me ? It's the right 
thing, the lawful thing. It makes no scandal, no 
disturbance. If it's disagreeable to her but why 
should it be? I'm not a leper, and she she's no 
longer in love ! ' Why should he be put to the shifts 
and the sordid disgraces and the lurking defeats of 
the Divorce Court, when there she was like an empty 
house only waiting to be retaken into use and pos- 



138 IN CHANCERY 

session by him who legally owned her ? To one so 
secretive as Soames the thought of re-entry into 
quiet possession of his own property with nothing 
given away to the world was intensely alluring. 
' No/ he mused, ' I'm glad I went to see that girl. 
I know now what I want most. If only Irene will 
come back I'll be as considerate as she wishes ; she 
could give her own life ; but perhaps perhaps she 
would come round to me.' There was a lump in his 
throat. And doggedly along by the railings of the 
Green Park, towards his father's house, he went, 
trying to tread on his shadow walking before him in 
the brilliant moonlight. 



PART II 



CHAPTER I 

THE THIRD GENERATION 

JOLLY FORSYTE was strolling down High Street, 
Oxford, on a November afternoon ; Val Dartie was 
strolling up. Jolly had just changed out of boating 
flannels and was on his way to the ' Frying-pan/ to 
which he had recently been elected. Val had just 
changed out of riding clothes and was on his way 
to the fire a bookmaker's in Cornniarket. 

"Hallo! "said Jolly. 

"Hallo!'; replied Val. 

The cousins had met but twice, Jolly, the second- 
year man, having invited the freshman to breakfast ; 
and last evening they had seen each other again 
under somewhat exotic circumstances. 

Over a tailor's in the Cornmarket resided one of 
those privileged young beings called minors, whose 
inheritances are large, whose parents are dead, 
whose guardians are remote, and whose instincts 
are vicious. At nineteen he had commenced one of 
those careers attractive and inexplicable to ordinary 
mortals for whom a single bankruptcy is good as a 
feast. Already famous for having the only roulette 
table then to be found in Oxford, he was antici- 
pating his expectations at a dazzling rate. He out- 
crummed Crum, though of a sanguine and rather 

141 



142 \ IN CHANCERY 

beefy type which lacked the latter's fascinating lan- 
guor. For Val it had been in the nature of baptism 
to be taken there to play roulette ; in the nature of 
confirmation to get back into college, after hours, 
through a window whose bars were deceptive. 
Once, during that evening of delight, glancing up 
from the seductive green before him, he had caught 
sight, through a cloud of smoke, of his cousin stand- 
ing opposite. 'Rouge gagne, impair, et manque!' 
He had not seen him again. 

" Come in to the Frying-pan and have tea," said 
Jolly, and they went in. 

A stranger, seeing them together, would have no- 
ticed an unseizable resemblance between these sec- 
ond cousins of the third generation of Forsytes ; the 
same bone formation in face, though Jolly's eyes 
were darker grey, his hair lighter and more wavy. 

" Tea and buttered buns, waiter, please," said 
Jolly, 

" Have one of my cigarettes ? " said Val. " I 
saw you last night. How did you do ? " 

" I didn't play." 

" I won fifteen quid." 

Though desirous of repeating a whimsical com- 
ment on gambling he had once heard his father make 
' When you're fleeced you're sick, and when you 
fleece you're sorry ' Jolly contented himself with : 

" Rotten game, I think ; I was at school with that 
chap. He's an awful fool." 

" Oh ! I don't know," said Val, as one might 
speak in defence of a disparaged god ; "he's a pretty 
good sport." 

They exchanged whiffs in silence. 

"You met my people, didn't you?" said Jolly. 
" They're coming up to-morrow." 



THE THIRD GENERATION 143 

Val grew a little red. 

" Really ! I can give you a rare good tip for the 
Manchester November handicap." 

" Thanks, I only take interest in the classic 



races." 



"You can't make any money over them," said 
Val. 

" I hate the ring," said Jolly ; " there's such a row 
and stink. I like the paddock." 

" I like to back my judgment," answered Val. 

Jolly smiled; his smile was like his father's. " I 
haven't got any. I always lose money if I bet." 

' You have to buy experience, of course." 

" Yes, but it's all messed up with doing people in 
the eye." 

" Of course, or they'll do you that's the excite- 
ment." 

Jolly looked a little scornful. 

" What do you do with yourself? Row? " 

" No ride, and drive about. I'm going to play 
polo next term, if I can get my granddad to stump 
up." 

"That's old Uncle James, isn't it? What's he 
like?" 

" Older than forty hills," ^said Val, " and always 
thinking he's going to be ruined." 

" I suppose my grandad and he were brothers." 

" I don't believe any of that old lot were sports- 
men," said Val ; " they must have worshipped 
money." 

" Mine didn't ! " said Jolly warmly. 

Val flipped the ash off his cigarette. 

" Money's only fit to spend," he said ; " I wish the 
deuce I had more." 

Jolly gave him that direct upward look of judg- 



144 IN CHANCERY 

ment which he had inherited from old Jolyon : One 
didn't talk about money! And again there was si- 
lence, while they drank tea and ate the buttered 
buns. 

" Where are your people going to stay? " asked 
Val, elaborately casual. 

" ' Rainbow/ What do you think of the war ? " 

" Rotten, so far. The Boers aren't sports a bit. 
Why don't they come out into the open? " 

" Why should they ? They've got everything 
against them except their way of fighting. I rather 
admire them." 

" They can ride and shoot," admitted Val, " but 
they're a lousy lot. Do you know Crum ? " 

" Of Merton ? Only by sight. He's in that fast 
set too, isn't he? Rather La-di-da and Brumma- 
gem." 

Val said fixedly: " He's a friend of mine." 

" Oh ! Sorry ! " And they sat awkwardly star- 
ing past each other, having pitched on their pet 
points of snobbery. For Jolly was forming himself 
unconsciously on a set whose motto was : ' We defy 
you to bore us. Life isn't half long enough, and 
we're going to talk faster and more crisply, do more 
and know more, and dwell less on any subject than 
you can possibly imagine. We are ' the best ' 
made of wire and whipcord.' And Val was uncon- 
sciously forming himself on a set whose motto was : 
' We defy you to interest or excite us. We have 
had every sensation, or if we haven't, we pretend 
we have. We are so exhausted with living that no 
hours are too small for us. We will lose our shirts 
with equanimity. We have flown fast and are past 
everything. AlHs cigarette smoke. Bismillah!' 
Competitive spirit, bone-deep in the English, was 



THE THIRD GENERATION 145 

obliging those two young Forsytes to have ideals; 
and at the close of a century ideals are mixed. The 
aristocracy had already in the main adopted the 
' jumping-jesus ' principle; though here and there 
one like Crum who was an honourable stood 
starkly languid for that gambler's Nirvana which 
had been the summum bonum of the old ' dandies ' 
and of ' the mashers ' in the eighties. And round 
Crum were still gathered a forlorn hope of blue- 
bloods with a plutocratic following. 

But there was between the cousins another far 
less obvious antipathy coming from the unseiz- 
able family resemblance, which each perhaps re- 
sented ; or from some half -consciousness of that old 
feud persisting still between their branches of the 
clan, formed within them by odd words or half-hints 
dropped by their elders. And Jolly, tinkling his 
teaspoon, was musing : ' His tie-pin and his waist- 
coat and his drawl and his betting good Lord ! ' 

And Val, finishing his bun, was thinking : ' He's 
rather a young beast ! ' 

" I suppose you'll be meeting your people? " he 
said, getting up. " I wish you'd tell them I should 
like to show them over B.N.C. not that there's 
anything much there if they'd care to come." 

" Thanks, I'll ask them." 

"Would they lunch? I've got rather a decent 
scout." 

Jolly doubted if they would have time. 
1 You'll ask them, though?" 

" Very good of you," said Jolly, fully meaning 
that they should not go ; but, instinctively polite, he 
added: " You'd better come and have dinner with us 
to-morrow." 

"Rather. What time?" 



146 IN CHANCERY 

"Seven-thirty." 

"Dress?" 

"No." And they parted, a subtle antagonism 
alive within them. 

Holly and her father arrived by a midday train. 
It was her first visit to the city of spires and dreams, 
and she was very silent, looking almost shyly at the 
brother who was part of this wonderful place. 
After lunch she wandered, examining his household 
gods with intense curiosity. Jolly's sitting-room 
was panelled, and Art represented by a set of Barto- 
lozzi prints which had belonged to old Jolyon, and 
by college photographs of young men, live young 
men, a little heroic, and to be compared with her 
memories of Val. Jolyon also scrutinised with care 
that evidence of his boy's character and tastes. 

Jolly was anxious that they should see him row- 
ing, so they set forth to the river. Holly, between 
her brother and her father, felt elated when heads 
were turned and eyes rested on her. That they 
might see him to the best advantage they left him at 
the Barge and crossed the river to the towing-path. 
Slight in build for of all the Forsytes only old 
Swithin and George were beefy Jolly was rowing 
' Two ' in a trial eight. He looked very earnest and 
strenuous. With pride Jolyon thought him the 
best-looking boy of the lot ; Holly, as became a sis- 
ter, was more struck by one or two of the others, but 
would not have said so for the world. The river 
was bright that afternoon, the meadows lush, the 
trees still beautiful with colour. Distinguished 
peace clung around the old city; Jolyon promised 
himself a day's sketching if the weather held. The 
Eight passed a second time, spurting home along the 
Barges Jolly's face was very set, so as not to 



THE THIRD GENERATION 147 

show that he was blown* They returned across the 
river and waited for him. 

" Oh ! " said Jolly in the Christ Church meadows, 
" I had to ask that chap Val Dartie to dine with us 
to-night. He wanted to give you lunch and show 
you B.N.C., so I thought I'd better ; then you needn't 
go. I don't like him much." 

Holly's rather sallow face had become suffused 
with pink. 

"Why not?" 

" Oh ! I don't know. He seems to me rather 
showy and bad form. What are his people like, 
Dad ? He's only a second cousin, isn't he ? " 

Jolyon took refuge in a smile. 

" Ask Holly," he said; " she saw his uncle." 

" I liked Val," Holly answered, staring at the 
ground before her ; " his uncle looked awfully 
different." She stole a glance at Jolly from under 
her lashes. 

" Did you ever," said Jolyon with whimsical in- 
tention, " hear our family history, my dears ? It's 
quite a fairy tale. The first Jolyon Forsyte at all 
events the first we know anything of, and that would 
be your great-great-grandfather dwelt in the 
land of Dorset on the edge of the sea, being by pro- 
fession an ' agriculturalist/ as your great-aunt put 
it, and the son of an agriculturist farmers, in 
fact; your grandfather used to call them, 'Very 
small beer/ ' He looked at Jolly to see how his 
lordliness was standing it, and with the other eye 
noted Holly's malicious pleasure in the slight drop 
of her brother's face. 

" We may suppose him thick and sturdy, standing' 
for England as it was before the Industrial Era be- 
gan. The second Jolyon Forsyte your great- 



148 IN CHANCERY 

grandfather, Jolly; better known as Superior Dosset 
Forsyte built houses, so the chronicle runs, begat 
ten children, and migrated to London town. It is 
known that he drank sherry. We may suppose him 
representing the England of Napoleon's wars, and 
general unrest. The eldest of his six sons was the 
third Jolyon, your grandfather, my dears tea 
merchant and chairman of companies, one of the 
soundest Englishmen who ever lived and to me 
the dearest." Jolyon's voice had lost its irony, and 
his son and daughter gazed at him solemnly. " He 
was just and tenacious, tender and young at heart. 
You remember him, and I remember him. Pass to 
the others ! Your great-uncle James, that's young 
Val's grandfather, had a son called Soames 
whereby hangs a tale of no love lost, and I don't 
think I'll tell it you. James and the other eight 
children of * Superior Dosset/ of whom there are still 
five alive, may be said to have represented Victorian 
England, with its principles of trade and individual- 
ism at five per cent, and your money back if you 
know what that means. At all events they've 
turned thirty thousand pounds into a cool million 
between them in the course of their long lives. 
They never did a wild thing unless it was your 
great-uncle Swithin, who I believe was once swin- 
dled at thimble-rig, and was called ' Four-in-hand 
Forsyte ' because he drove a pair. Their day is 
passing, and their type, not altogether for the ad- 
vantage of the country. They were pedestrian, but 
they too were sound. I am the fourth Jolyon For- 
syte a poor holder of the name " 

:t No, Dad," said Jolly, and Holly squeezed his 
hand. 

" Yes," repeated Jolyon, " a poor specimen, repre- 



THE THIRD GENERATION 149 

senting, I'm afraid, nothing but the end of the cen- 
tury, unearned income, amateurism, and individual 
liberty a different thing from individualism, 
Jolly. You are the fifth Jolyon Forsyte, old man, 
and you open the ball of the new century." 

As he spoke they turned in through the college 
gates, and Holly said: " It's fascinating, Dad." 

None of them quite knew what she meant. Jolly 
was grave. 

The Rainbow, distinguished, as only an Oxford 
hostel can be, for lack of modernity, provided one 
small oak-panelled private sitting-room^ in which 
Holly sat to receive, white-f rocked, shy, and alone, 
when the only guest arrived. 

Rather as one would touch a moth, Val took her 
hand. And wouldn't she wear this ' measly 
flower ' ? It would look ripping in her hair. He 
removed a gardenia from his coat. 

" Oh ! No, thank you I couldn't ! " But she 
took it and pinned it at her neck, having suddenly re- 
membered that word ' showy ' ! Val's buttonhole 
would give offence ; and she so much wanted Jolly 
to like him. Did she realise that Val was at his 
best and quietest in her presence, and was that, per- 
haps, half the secret of his attraction for her ? 

" I never said anything about our ride, Val." 

" Rather not ! It's just between us." 

By the uneasiness of his hands and the fidgeting 
of his feet he was giving her a sense of power very 
delicious ; a soft feeling too the wish to make him 
happy. 

" Do tell me about Oxford. It must be ever so 
lovely." 

Val admitted that it was frightfully decent to do 
what you liked ; the lectures were nothing; and there 



l$o IN CHANCERY 

were some very good chaps. " Only," he added, 
" of course I wish I was in town, and could come 
down and see you." 

Holly moved one hand shyly on her knee, and her 
glance dropped. 

" You haven't forgotten," he said, suddenly gath- 
ering courage, " that we're going madrabbiting to- 
gether?" 

Holly smiled. 

" Oh ! That was only make-believe. One can't 
do that sort of thing after one's grown up, you 
know." 

" Dash it ! cousins can," said Val. " Next Long 
Vac it begins in June, you know, and goes on for 
ever we'll watch our chance." 

But, though the thrill of conspiracy ran through 
her veins, Holly shook her head. " It won't come 
off," she murmured. 

" Won't it ! " said Val fervently; " who's going to 
stop it? Not your father or your brother." 

At this moment Jolyon and Jolly came in ; and ro- 
mance fled into Val's patent leather and Holly's 
white satin toes, where it itched and tingled dur- 
ing an evening not conspicuous for open-hearted- 
ness. 

Sensitive to atmosphere, Jolyon soon felt the la- 
tent antagonism between the boys, and was 'puzzled 
by Holly; so he became unconsciously ironical, 
which is fatal to the expansiveness of youth. A 
letter, handed to him after dinner, reduced him to a 
silence hardly broken till Jolly and Val rose to go. 
He went out with them, smoking his cigar, and 
walked with his son to the gates of Christ Church. 
Turning back, he took out the letter and read it 
again beneath a lamp. 



THE THIRD GENERATION 151 

" DEAR JOLYON, 

" Soames came again to-night my thirty-sev- 
enth birthday. You were right, I mustn't stay here. 
I'm going to-morrow to the Piedmont Hotel, but I 
won't go abroad without seeing you. I feel lonely 
and down-hearted. 

" Yours affectionately, 

"IRENE." 

He folded the letter back into his pocket and 
walked on, astonished at the violence of his feelings. 
What had the fellow said or done ? 

He turned into High Street, down the Turl, and 
on among a maze of spires and domes and long col- 
lege fronts and walls, bright or dark-shadowed in 
the strong moonlight. In this very heart of Eng- 
land's gentility it was difficult to realise that a lonely 
woman could be importuned or hunted, but what 
else could her letter mean ? Soames must have been 
pressing her to go back to him again, with public 
opinion and the Law on his side, too ! ' Eighteen- 
ninety-nine ! ' he thought, gazing at the broken glass 
shining on the top of a villa garden wall ; ' but when 
it comes to property we're still a heathen people ! I'll 
go up to-morrow morning. I dare say it'll be best 
for her to go abroad.' Yet the thought displeased 
him. Why should Soames hunt her out of Eng- 
land ! Besides, he might follow, and out there she 
would be still more helpless against the attentions of 
her own husband! ' I must tread warily,' he thought ; 
'that fellow could make himself very nasty. I 
didn't like his manner in the cab the other night.' 
His thoughts turned to his daughter June. Could 
she help ? Once on a time Irene had been her great- 
est friend, and now she was a ' lame duck,' such as 



152 IN CHANCERY 

must appeal to June's nature! He determined to 
wire to his daughter to meet him at Paddington Sta- 
tion. Retracing his steps toward the Rainbow he 
questioned his own sensations. Would he be up- 
setting himself over every woman in like case ? No ! 
he would not. The candour of this conclusion dis- 
comfited him; and, finding that Holly had gone 
up to bed, he sought his own room. But he could 
not sleep, and sat for a long time at his window, 
huddled in an overcoat, watching the moonlight on 
the roofs. 

Next door Holly too was awake, thinking of the 
lashes above and below Val's eyes, especially below ; 
and of what she could do to make Jolly like him bet- 
ter. The scent of the gardenia was strong in her 
little bedroom, and pleasant to her. 

And Val, leaning out of his first-floor window in 
B.N.C., was gazing at a moonlit quadrangle without 
seeing it at all, seeing instead Holly, slim and white- 
f rocked, as she sat beside the fire when he first went 
in. 

But Jolly, in his bedroom narrow as a ghost, lay 
with a hand beneath his cheek and dreamed he was 
with Val in one boat, rowing a race against him, 
while his father was calling from the towpath: 
Two ! Get your hands away there, bless you ! ' 



CHAPTER II 

SOAMES PUTS IT TO THE TOUCH 

OF all those radiant firms which emblazon with their 
windows the West End of London, Gaves and Cor- 
tegal were considered by Soames the most ' attrac- 
tive ' word just coming into fashion. He had never 
had his Uncle Swithin's taste in precious stones, 
and the abandonment by Irene when she left his 
house in 1889 of all the glittering things he had 
given her had disgusted him with this form of in- 
vestment. But he still knew a diamond when he 
saw one, and during the week before her birthday 
he had taken occasion, on his way into the Poultry 
or his way out therefrom, to dally a little before the 
greater jewellers where one got, if not one's money's 
worth, at least a certain cachet with the goods. 

Constant cogitation since his cab drive with Jol- 
yon had convinced him more and more of the su- 
preme importance of this moment in his life, the 
supreme need for taking steps and those not wrong. 
And, alongside the <Jry and reasoned sense that it 
was now or never with his self-preservation, now or 
never if he were to range himself and found a 
family, went the secret urge of his senses roused by 
the sight of her who had once been a passionately 
desired wife, and the conviction that it was a sin 

153 



I 5 4 IN CHANCERY 

against common sense and the decent secrecy of 
Forsytes to waste the wife he had. 

In an opinion on Winifred's case, Dreamer, Q.C. 
he would much have preferred Waterbuck, but 
they had made him a judge (so late in the day as to 
rouse the usual suspicion of a political job) had 
advised that they should go forward and obtain res- 
titution of conjugal rights, a point which to Soames 
had never been in doubt. When they had obtained 
a decree to that effect they must wait to see if it was 
obeyed. If not, it would constitute legal desertion, 
and they should obtain evidence of misconduct and 
file their petition for divorce. All of which Soames 
knew perfectly well. They had marked him ten 
and one. This simplicity in his sister's case only 
made him the more desperate about the difficulty in 
his own. Everything, in fact, was driving him to- 
wards the simple solution of Irene's return. If it 
were still against the grain with her, had he not 
feelings to subdue, injury to forgive, pain to forget ? 
He at least had never injured her, and this was a 
world of compromise ! He could offer her so much 
more than she had now. He would be prepared to 
make a liberal settlement on her which would not 
be upset. He often scrutinised his image in these 
days. He had never been a peacock like that fellow 
Dartie, or fancied himself a woman's man, but he 
had a certain belief in his own appearance not un- 
justly, for it was well-coupled and preserved, neat, 
healthy, pale, unblemished by drink or excess of any 
kind. The Forsyte jaw and the concentration of 
his face were, in his eyes, virtues. So far as he 
could tell there was no feature of him which need 
inspire dislike. 

Thoughts and yearnings, with which one lives 



\ 
SOAMES PUTS IT TO THE TOUCH 155 

daily, become natural, even if far-fetched in their 
inception. If he could only give tangible proof 
enough of his determination to let bygones be by- 
gones, and to do all in his power to please her, why 
should she not come back to him ? 

He entered Gaves and Cortegal's therefore, on the 
morning of November the 9th, to buy a certain dia- 
mond brooch. "Four twenty-five and dirt cheap, 
sir, at the money. It's a lady's brooch." There 
was that in his mood which made him accept without 
demur. And he went on into the Poultry with the 
flat green morocco case in his breast pocket. Sev- 
eral times that day he opened it to look at the seven 
soft shining stones in their velvet oval nest. 

" If the lady doesn't like it, sir, happy to exchange 
it any time. But there's no fear of that." If only 
there were not ! He got through a vast amount of 
work, only soother of the nerves he knew. A cable 
came in while he was in the office with details from 
the agent in Buenos Aires, and the name and ad- 
dress of a stewardess who would be prepared to 
swear to what was necessary. It was a timely spur 
to Soames' intense and rooted distaste for the wash- 
ing of dirty linen in public. And when he set forth 
by Underground to Victoria Station he received a 
fresh impetus towards the renewal of his married 
life from the account in his evening paper of a fash- 
ionable divorce suit. The homing instinct of all 
true Forsytes in anxiety and trouble, the corporate 
tendency which kept them strong and solid, made 
him choose to dine at Park Lane. He neither could 
nor would breathe a word to his people of his inten- 
tion too reticent and proud but the thought 
that at least they would be glad if they knew, and 
wish him luck, was heartening. 



156 IN CHANCERY 

James was in lugubrious mood, for the fire which 
the impudence of Kruger's ultimatum had lit in him 
had been cold-watered by the poor success of the last 
month, and the exhortations to effort in The Times. 
He didn't know where it would end. Soames sought 
to cheer him by the continual use of the word Buller. 
But James couldn't tell ! There was Colley and 
he got stuck on that hill, and this Ladysmith was 
down in a hollow, and altogether it looked to him a 
1 pretty kettle of fish ' ; he thought they ought to be 
sending the sailors they were the chaps, they did 
a lot of good in the Crimea. Soames shifted the 
ground of consolation. Winifred had heard from 
Val that there had been a ' rag ' and a bonfire on 
Guy Fawkes Day at Oxford, and that he had es- 
caped detection by blacking his face. 

"Ah!" James muttered, "he's a clever little 
chap." But he shook his head shortly afterwards, 
and remarked that he didn't know what would be- 
come of him, and looking wistfully at his son, mur- 
mured on that Soames had never had a boy. He 
would have liked a grandson of his own name. And 
now well, there it was ! 

Soames flinched. He had not expected such a 
challenge to disclose the secret in his heart. And 
Emily, who saw him wince, said : 

" Nonsense, James ; don't talk like that ! " 

But James, not looking anyone in the face, mut- 
tered on. There were Roger and Nicholas and Jol- 
yon; they all had grandsons. And Swithin and 
Timothy had never married. He had done his best ; 
but he would soon be gone now. And, as though 
he had uttered words of profound consolation, he 
was silent, eating brains with a fork and a piece of 
bread, and swallowing the bread. 



SOAMES PUTS IT TO THE TOUCH 157 

Soames excused himself directly after dinner. 
It was not really cold, but he put on his fur coat, 
which served to fortify him against the fits of ner- 
vous shivering he had been subject to all day. Sub- 
consciously, he knew that he looked better thus than 
in an ordinary black overcoat. Then, feeling the 
morocco case flat against his heart, he sallied forth. 
He was no smoker, but he lit a cigarette, and smoked 
it gingerly as he walked along. He moved slowly 
down the Row towards Knightsbridge, timing him- 
self to get to Chelsea at nine-fifteen. What did she 
do with herself evening after evening in that little 
hole? How mysterious women were! One lived 
alongside and knew nothing of them. What could 
she have seen in that fellow Bosinney to send her 
mad ? For there was madness after all in what she 
had done crazy moonstruck madness, in which all 
sense of values had been lost, and her life and his 
life ruined ! And for a moment he was filled with a 
sort of exaltation, as though he were a man read of 
in a story who, possessed by the Christian spirit, 
would restore to her all the prizes of existence, for- 
giving and forgetting, and becoming the good fairy 
of her future. Under a tree opposite Knights- 
bridge Barracks, where the moonlight struck down 
clear and white, he took out once more the morocco 
case, and let the beams draw colour from those 
stones. Yes, they were of the first water ! But, at 
the hard-closing snap of the case, another cold 
shiver ran through his nerves; and he walked on 
faster, clenching his gloved hands in the pockets of 
his coat, almost hoping she would not be in. The 
thought of how mysterious she was again beset him. 
Dining alone there night after night in an even- 
ing dress, too, as if she were making believe to be in 



158 IN CHANCERY 

society! Playing the piano to herself! Not 
even a dog or cat, so far as he had seen. And that 
reminded him suddenly of the mare he kept for sta- 
tion work at Mapledurham. If ever he went to the 
stable, there she was quite alone, half asleep, and 
yet, on her home journeys going more freely than on 
her way out, as if longing to be back and lonely in 
her stable ! ' I would treat her well/ he thought in- 
coherently. ' I would be very careful/ And all 
that capacity for home life of which a mocking Fate 
seemed for ever to deprive him swelled suddenly in 
Soames, so that he dreamed dreams opposite South 
Kensington Station. In the King's Road a man 
came slithering out of a public house playing a con- 
certina. Soames watched him for a moment dance 
crazily on the pavement to his own drawling jagged 
sounds, then crossed over to avoid contact with this 
piece of drunken foolery. A night in the lock-up ! 
What asses people were ! But the man had noticed 
his movement of avoidance, and streams of genial 
blasphemy followed him across the street. ' I hope 
they'll run him in/ thought Soames viciously. ' To 
have ruffians like that about, with women out 
alone ! ' A woman's figure in front had induced this 
thought. Her walk seemed oddly familiar, and 
when she turned the corner for which he was bound, 
his heart began to beat. He hastened on to the cor- 
ner to make certain. Yes ! It was Irene ; he could 
not mistake her walk in that little drab street. She 
threaded two more turnings, and from the last cor- 
ner he saw her enter her block of flats. To make 
sure of her now, he ran those few paces, hurried up 
the stairs, and caught her standing at her door. He 
heard the latch-key in the lock, and reached her side 
just as she turned round, startled, in the open door- 
way. 



SOAMES PUTS IT TO THE TOUCH 159 

" Don't be alarmed," he said, breathless, " I hap- 
pened to see you. Let me come in a minute." 

She had put her hand up to her breast, her face 
was colourless, her eyes widened by alarm. Then 
seeming to master herself, she inclined her head, 
and said: " Very well." 

Soames closed the door. He, too, had need to re- 
cover, and when she had passed into the sitting- 
room, waited a full minute, taking deep breaths to 
still the beating of his heart. At this moment, so 
fraught with the future, to .take out that morocco 
case seemed crude. Yet, not to take it out left him 
there before her with no preliminary excuse for 
coming. And in his dilemma he was seized with 
impatience at all this paraphernalia of excuse and 
justification. This was a scene it could be noth- 
ing else, and he must face it ! He heard her voice, 
uncomfortably, pathetically soft : 

" Why have you come again ? Didn't you under- 
stand that I would rather you did not ? " 

He noticed her clothes a dark brown velvet 
corduroy, a sable boa, a small round toque of the 
same. They suited her admirably. She had money 
to spare for dress, evidently ! He said abruptly : 

" It's your birthday. I brought you this," and he 
held out to her the green morocco case. 

"Oh! No no!" 

Soames pressed the clasp; the seven stones 
gleamed out on the pale grey velvet. 

" Why not? " he said. " Just as a sign that you 
don't bear me ill-feeling any longer." 

" I couldn't." 

Soames took it out of the case. 

" Let me just see how it looks." 

She shrank back. 



160 IN CHANCERY 

He followed, thrusting his hand with the brooch 
in it against the front of her dress. She shrank 
again. 

Soames dropped his hand. 

" Irene/' he said, " let bygones be bygones. If 7 
can, surely you might. Let's begin again, as if 
nothing had been. Won't you ? " His voice was 
wistful, and his eyes, resting on her face, had in 
them a sort of supplication. 

She, who was standing literally with her back 
against the wall, gave a little gulp, and that was all 
her answer. Soames went on: 

" Can you really want to live all your days half- 
dead in this little hole ? Come back to me, and I'll 
give you all you want. You shall live your own 
life; I swear it." 

He saw her face quiver ironically. 

" Yes," he repeated, " but I mean it this time. I'll 
only ask one thing. I just want I just want a 
son. Don't look like that! I want one. It's 
hard." His voice had grown hurried, so that he 
hardly knew it for his own, and twice he jerked his 
head back as if struggling for breath. It was the 
sight of her eyes fixed on him, dark with a sort of 
fascinated fright, which pulled him together and 
changed that painful incoherence to anger. 

" Is it so very unnatural ? " he said between his 
teeth. " Is it unnatural to want a child from one's 
own wife? You wrecked our life and put this 
blight on everything. We go on only half alive, and 
without any future. Is it so very unflattering to 
you that in spite of everything I I still want you 
for my wife? Speak, for Goodness' sake! do 
speak." 

Irene seemed to try, but did not succeed. 



SOAMES PUTS IT TO THE TOUCH 161 

" I don't want to frighten you," said Soames more 
gently. " Heaven knows. I only want you to see 
that I can't go on like this. I want you back. I 
want you." 

Irene raised one hand and covered the lower part 
of her face, but her eyes never moved from his, as 
though she trusted in them to keep him at bay. And 
all those years, barren and bitter, since ah ! when ? 
almost since he had first known her, surged up 
in one great wave of recollection in Soames ; and a 
spasm that for his life he could not control con- 
stricted his face. 

" It's not too late," he said; " it's not if you'll 
only believe it." 

Irene uncovered her lips, and both her hands 
made a writhing gesture in front of her breast. 
Soames seized them. 

" Don't ! " she said under her breath. But he 
stood holding on to them, trying to stare into her 
eyes which did not waver. Then she said quietly : 

" I am alone here. You won't behave again as 
you once behaved." 

Dropping her hands as though they had been hot 
irons, he turned away. Was it possible that there 
could be such relentless unf orgiveness ! Could that 
one act of violent possession be still alive within 
her? Did it bar him thus utterly? And doggedly 
he said, without looking up : 

" I am not going till you've answered me. I am 
offering what few men would bring themselves 
to offer, I want a a reasonable answer." 

And almost with surprise he heard her say : 

" You can't have a reasonable answer. Reason 
has nothing to do with it. You can only have the 
brutal truth: I would rather die." 



162 IN CHANCERY 

Soames stared at her. 

'" Oh! " he said. And there intervened in him a 
sort of paralysis of speech and movement, the kind 
of quivering which comes when a man has received 
a deadly insult, and does not yet know how he is 
going to take it, or rather what it is going to do with 
him. 

" Oh ! " he said again, " as bad as that ? Indeed ! 
You would rather die. That's pretty ! " 

" I am sorry. You wanted me to answer. I 
can't help the truth, can I? " 

At that queer spiritual appeal Soames turned for 
relief to actuality. He snapped the brooch back into 
its case and put it in his pocket. 

"The truth!" he said; "there's no such thing 
with women. It's nerves nerves." 

He heard the whisper : 

' Yes ; nerves don't lie. Haven't you discovered 
that? " He was silent, obsessed by the thought : ' I 
will hate this woman. I will hate her.' That was the 
trouble ! If only he could ! He shot a glance at her 
who stood unmoving against the wall with her head 
up and her hands clasped, for all the world as if she 
were going to be shot. And he said quickly : 

" I don't believe a word of it. You have a lover. 
If you hadn't, you wouldn't be such a such a little- 
idiot." He was conscious, before the expression in 
her eyes, that he had uttered something of a non- 
sequitur and dropped back too abruptly into the 
verbal freedom of his connubial days. He turned 
away to the door. But he could not go out. Some- 
thing within him that most deep and secret For- 
syte quality, the impossibility of letting go, the im- 
possibility of seeing the fantastic and forlorn nature 
of his own tenacity prevented him. He turned 



SOAMES PUTS IT TO THE TOUCH 163 

about again, and there stood, with his back against 
the door, as hers was against the wall opposite, 
quite unconscious of anything ridiculous in this 
separation by the whole width of the room. 

" Do you ever think of anybody but yourself ? " 
he said. 

Irene's lips quivered; then she answered slowly: 

" Do you ever think that I found out my mistake 
my hopeless, terrible mistake the very first 
week of our marriage ; that I went on trying three 
years you know I went on trying ? Was it for 
myself ?" 

Soames gritted his teeth. " God knows what it 
was. I've never understood you ; I shall never un- 
derstand you. You had everything you wanted; 
and you can have it again, and more. What's the 
matter with me ? I ask you a plain question : What 
is it ? " Unconscious of the pathos in that enquiry, 
he went on passionately: "I'm not lame, I'm not 
loathsome, I'm not a boor, I'm not a fool. What is 
it ? What's the mystery about me ? " 

Her answer was a long sigh. 

He clasped his hands with a gesture that for him 
was strangely full of expression. " When I came 
here to-night I was I hoped I meant every- 
thing that I could to do away with the past, and start 
fair again. And you meet me with 'nerves,' and si- 
lence, and sighs. There's nothing tangible. It's 
like it's like a spider's web." 

" Yes." 

That whisper from across the room maddened 
Soames afresh. 

" Well, I don't choose to be in a spider's web. I'll 
cut it." He walked straight up to her. " Now! " 
What he had gone up to her to do he really did not 



164 IN CHANCERY 

know. But when he was close, the x>ld familiar 
scent of her clothes suddenly affected him. He put 
his hands on her shoulders and bent forward to kiss 
her. He kissed not her lips, but a little hard line 
where the lips had been drawn in ; then his face was 
pressed away by her hands ; he heard her say : " Oh ! 
No!" Shame, compunction, sense of futility 
flooded his whole being, he turned on his heel and 
went straight out. 



CHAPTER III 

VISIT TO IRENE 

JOLYON found June waiting on the platform at Pad- 
dington. She had received his telegram while at 
breakfast. Her abode a studio and two bed- 
rooms in a St. John's Wood garden had been se- 
lected by her for the complete independence which it 
guaranteed. Unwatched by Mrs. Grundy, unhin- 
dered by permanent domestics, she could receive 
lame ducks at any hour of day or night, and not sel- 
dom had a duck without studio of its own made use 
of June's. She enjoyed her freedom, and possessed 
herself with a sort of virginal passion ; the warmth 
which she would have lavished on Bosinney, and of 
which given her Forsyte tenacity he must 
surely have tired, she now expended in champion- 
ship of the underdogs and budding ' geniuses ' of 
the artistic world. She lived, in fact, to turn ducks 
into the swans she believed they were. The very 
fervour of her protections warped her judgments. 
But she was loyal and liberal ; her small eager hand 
was ever against the oppressions of academic and 
commercial opinion, and though her income was 
considerable, her bank balance was often a minus 
quantity. 

She had come to Paddington Station heated in 

165 



166 IN CHANCERY 

her soul by a visit to Eric Cobbley. A miserable 
Gallery had refused to let that straight-haired gen- 
ius have his one-man show after all. Its impudent 
manager, after visiting his studio, had expressed 
the opinion that it would only be a ' one-horse show 
from the selling point of view/ This crowning ex- 
ample of commercial cowardice towards her favour- 
ite lame duck and he so hard up, with a wife and 
two children, that he had caused her account to be 
overdrawn was still making the blood glow in 
her small, resolute face, and her red-gold hair to 
shine more than ever. She gave her father a hug, 
and got into a cab with him, having as many fish to 
fry with him as he with her. It became at once a 
question which would fry them first. 

Jolyon had reached the words : " My dear, I want 
you to come with me/' when, glancing at her face, 
he perceived by her blue eyes moving from side to 
side like the tail of a preoccupied cat that she 
was not attending. 

" Dad, is it true that I absolutely can't get at any 
of my money ? " 

" Only the income, fortunately, my love." 

" How perfectly beastly ! Can't it be done some- 
how ? There must be a way. I know I could buy 
a small Gallery for ten thousand pounds." 

" A small Gallery," murmured Jolyon, " seems a 
modest desire. But your grandfather foresaw it." 

" I think," cried June vigorously, " that all this 
care about money is awful, when there's so much 
genius in the world simply crushed out for want of 
a little. I shall never marry and have children ; why 
shouldn't I be able to do some good instead of having 
it all tied up in case of things which will never come 
off?" 



VISIT TO IRENE 167 

" Our name is Forsyte, my dear," replied Jolyon 
in the ironical voice to which his impetuous daugh- 
ter had never quite grown accustomed; " and For- 
sytes, you know, are people who so settle their prop- 
erty that their grandchildren, in case they should die 
before their parents, have to make wills leaving the 
property that will only come to themselves when 
their parents die. Do you follow that? Nor do I, 
but it's a fact, anyway ; we live by the principle that 
so long as there is a possibility of keeping wealth in 
the family it must not go out ; if you die unmarried, 
your money goes to Jolly and Holly and their chil- 
dren if they marry. Isn't it pleasant to know that 
whatever you do you can none of you be destitute? " 

" But can't I borrow the money ? " 

Jolyon shook his head. " Without power of an- 
ticipation. You could rent a Gallery, no doubt, if 
you could manage it out of your income." 

June uttered a contemptuous sound. 

" Yes ; and have no income left to help anybody 
with." 

" My dear child," murmured Jolyon, " wouldn't 
it come to the same thing? " 

" No," said June shrewdly, " I could buy for ten 
thousand ; that would only be four hundred a year. 
But I should have to pay a thousand a year rent, and 
that would only leave me five hundred. If I had 
that Gallery, Dad, think what I could do. I could 
make Eric Cobbley's name in no time, and ever so 
many others." 

" Names worth making make themselves in time." 
' When they're dead." 

"Did you ever know anybody living, my dear, im- 
proved by having his name made ? " 

" Yes, you," said June, pressing his arm. 



i68 IN CHANCERY 

Jolyon started. 'I?' he thought. ' Oh! Ah! 
Now she's going to ask me to do something. We 
take it out, we Forsytes, each in our different ways/ 

June came closer to him in the cab. 

" Darling," she said, " you buy the Gallery, and 
I'll pay you four hundred a year for it. Then 
neither of us will be any the worse off. Besides, it's 
a splendid investment." 

Jolyon wriggled. " Don't you think," he said, 
" that for an artist to buy a Gallery is a bit dubious ? 
Besides, ten thousand pounds is a lump, and I'm not 
a commercial character." 

June looked at him with admiring appraisement. 

" Of course you're not, but you're awfully busi- 
nesslike. And I'm sure we could make it pay. It'll 
be a perfect way of scoring off those wretched deal- 
ers and people." And again she squeezed her 
father's arm. 

Jolyon's face expressed quizzical despair. 

''' Where is this desirable Gallery ? Splendidly 
situated, I suppose ? " 

" Just off Cork Street." 

' Ah ! ' thought Jolyon, ' I knew it was just off 
somewhere. Now r for what I want out of her! ' 

" Well, I'll think of it, but not just now. You re- 
member Irene? I want you to come with me and 
see her. Soames is after her again. She might be 
safer if we could give her asylum somewhere." 

The word asylum, which he had used by chance, 
was of all most calculated to rouse June's interest. 

"Irene! I haven't seen her since ! Of 

course! I'd love to help her." 

It was Jolyon's turn to squeeze her arm, in warm 
admiration for this spirited, generous-hearted little 
creature of his begetting. 



VISIT TO IRENE 169 

" Irene is proud," he said, with a sidelong glance, 
in sudden doubt of June's discretion; " she's difficult 
to help. We must tread gently. This is the place. 
I wired her to expect us. Let's send up our cards." 

" I can't bear Soames," said June as she got out; 
" he sneers at everything that isn't successful." 

Irene was in what was called the ' Ladies draw- 
ing-room ' of the Piedmont Hotel. 

Nothing if not morally courageous, June walked 
straight up to her former friend, kissed her cheek, 
and the two settled down on a sofa never sat on since 
the hotel's foundation. Jolyon could see that Irene 
was deeply affected by this simple forgiveness. 

" So Soames has been worrying you ? " he said. 

" I had a visit from him last night; he wants me 
to go back to him." 

" You're not, of course? " cried June. 

Irene smiled faintly and shook her head. " But 
his position is horrible," she murmured. 

" It's his own fault ; he ought to have divorced you 
when he could." 

Jolyon remembered how fervently in the old days 
June had hoped that no divorce would smirch her 
dead and faithless lover's name. 

" Let us hear what Irene is going to do," he said. 

Irene's lips quivered, but she spoke calmly. 
I'd better give him fresh excuse to get rid of 



me." 



How horrible ! " cried June. 

What else can I do?" 

Out of the question," said Jolyon very quietly, 



fc sans amour/' 



He thought she was going to cry ; but, getting up 
quickly, she half turned her back on them, and stood 
regaining control of herself. 



i 7 o IN CHANCERY 

June said suddenly : 

" Well, I shall go to Soames and tell him he must 
leave you alone. What does he want at his age ? " 

" A child. It's not unnatural." 

" A child ! " cried June scornfully. " Of course 1 
To leave his money to. If he wants one badly 
enough let him take somebody and have one; then 
you can divorce him, and he can marry her." 

Jolyon perceived suddenly that he had made a 
mistake to bring June her violent partizanship 
was fighting Soames' battle. 

" It would be best for Irene to come quietly to us 
at Robin Hill, and see how things shape." 

" Of course," said June; " only " 

Irene looked full at Jolyon in all his many at- 
tempts afterwards to analyze that glance he never 
could succeed. 

" No ! I should only bring trouble on you all. I 
will go abroad." 

He knew from her voice that this was final. The 
irrelevant thought flashed through him : ' Well, I 
could see her there/ But he said : 

" Don't you think you would be more helpless 
abroad, in case he followed ? " 

" I don't know. I can but try." 

June sprang up and paced the room. " It's all 
horrible," she said. " Why should people be tor- 
tured and kept miserable and helpless year after 
year by this disgusting sanctimonious law ? " But 
someone had come into the room, and June came to 
a standstill. Jolyon went up to Irene : 

" Do you want money? " 

" No." 

" And would you like me to let your flat ? " 

" Yes, Jolyon, please." 



VISIT TO IRENE 171 



' When shall you be going? " 
' To-morrow." 

" You won't go back there in the meantime, will 
you ? " This he said with an anxiety strange to 
himself. 

" No ; I've got all I want here." 

" You'll send me your address? " 

She put out her hand to him. " I feel you're a 
rock." 

" Built on sand," answered Jolyon, pressing her 
hand hard; " but it's a pleasure to do anything, at 
any time, remember that. And if you change your 
mind ! Come along, June ; say good-bye." 

June came from the window and flung her arms 
round Irene. 

" Don't think of him," she said under her breath ; 
" enjoy yourself, and bless you ! " 

With a memory of tears in Irene's eyes, and of a 
smile on her lips, they went away extremely silent, 
passing the lady who had interrupted the interview 
and was turning over the papers on the table. 

Opposite the National Gallery June exclaimed : 

" Of all undignified beasts and horrible laws ! " 

But Jolyon did not respond. He had something 
of his father's balance, and could see things im- 
partially even when his emotions were roused. 
Irene was right; Soames' position was as bad or 
worse than her own. As for the law it catered 
for a human nature of which it took a naturally low 
view. And, feeling that if he stayed in his 
daughter's company he would in one way or another 
commit an indiscretion, he told her he must catch 
his train back to Oxford ; and hailing a cab, left her 
to Turner's water-colours, with the promise that he 
would think over that Gallery. 



172 IN CHANCERY 

But he thought over Irene instead. Pity, they 
said, was akin to love! If so he was certainly in 
danger of loving her, for he pitied her profoundly. 
To think of her drifting about Europe so handicapped 
and lonely ! ' I hope to goodness she'll keep her 
head ! ' he thought ; ' she might easily grow desper- 
ate.' In fact, now that she had cut loose from her 
poor threads of occupation, he couldn't imagine how 
she would go on so beautiful a creature, hopeless, 
and fair game for anyone ! In his exasperation was 
more than a little fear and jealousy. Women did 
strange things when they were driven into corners. 

* I wonder what Soames will do now ! ' he thought. 

* A rotten, idiotic state of things ! And I suppose 
they would say it was her own fault/ Very preoc- 
cupied and sore at heart, he got into his train, mis- 
laid his ticket, and on the platform at Oxford took 
his hat off to a lady whose face he seemed to remem- 
ber without being able to put a name to her, not even 
when he saw her having tea at the Rainbow. 



CHAPTER IV 

WHERE FORSYTES FEAR TO TREAD 

QUIVERING from the defeat of his hopes, with the 
green morocco case still flat against his heart, 
Soames revolved thoughts bitter as death. A 
spider's web ! Walking fast, and noting nothing in 
the moonlight, he brooded over the scene he had 
been through, over the memory of her figure rigid 
in his grasp. And the more he brooded, the more 
certain he became that she had a lover her words, 
' I would sooner die ! ' were ridiculous if she had not. 
Even if she had never loved him, she had made no 
fuss until Bosinney came on the scene. No; she 
was in love again, or she would not have made that 
melodramatic answer to his proposal, which in all 
the circumstances was reasonable! Very well! 
That simplified matters. 

' I'll take steps to know where I am/ he thought ; 
' I'll go to Polteed's the first thing to-morrow morn- 
ing.' 

But even in forming that resolution he knew he 
would have trouble with himself. He had employed 
Polteed's agency several times in the routine of his 
profession, even quite lately over Dartie's case, but 
he had never thought it possible to employ them to, 
watch his own wife. 

173 



174 IN CHANCERY 

It was too insulting to himself ! 

He slept over that project and his wounded pride 

or rather, kept vigil. Only while shaving did he 
suddenly remember that she called herself by her 
maiden name of Heron. Polteed would not know, 
at first at all events, whose wife she was, would not 
look at him obsequiously and leer behind his back. 
She would just be the wife of one of his clients. 
And that would be true for was he not his own 
solicitor ? 

He was literally afraid not to put his design into 
execution at the first possible moment, lest, after all, 
he might fail himself. And making Warmson 
bring him an early cup of coffee, he stole out of the 
house before the hour of breakfast. He walked 
rapidly to one of those small West End streets 
where Polteed's and other firms ministered to the 
virtues of the wealthier classes. Hitherto he had 
always had Polteed to see him in the Poultry; but 
he well knew their address, and reached it at the 
opening hour. In the outer office, a room furnished 
so cosily that it might have been a moneylender's, he 
was attended by a lady who might have been a 
schoolmistress. 

" I wish to see Mr. Claud Polteed. He knows me 

never mind my name." 

To keep everybody from knowing that he, Soames 
Forsyte, was reduced to having his wife spied on, 
was the overpowering consideration. 

Mr. Claud Polteed so different from Mr. Lewis 
Polteed was one of those men with dark hair, 
slightly curved noses, and quick brown eyes, who 
might be taken for Jews but are really Phoenicians ; 
he received Soames in a room hushed by thickness 
of carpet and curtains. It was, in fact, confiden- 



WHERE FORSYTES FEAR TO TREAD 175 

tially furnished, without trace of document any- 
where to be seen. 

Greeting Soames deferentially, he turned the key 
in the only door with a certain ostentation. 

' If a client sends for me/ he was in the habit of 
saying, ' he takes what precaution he likes. If he 
comes here, we convince him that we have no leak- 
ages. I may safely say we lead in security, if in 
nothing else. . . .' " Now, sir, what can I do for 
you?" 

Soames' gorge had risen so that he could hardly 
speak. It was absolutely necessary to hide from 
this man that he had any but professional interest in 
the matter; and, mechanically, his face assumed its 
sideway smile. 

" I've come to you early like this because there's 
not an hour to lose " if he lost an hour he might 
fail himself yet ! " Have you a really trustworthy 
woman free ? " 

Mr. Polteed unlocked a drawer, produced a mem- 
orandum, ran his eyes over it, and locked the drawer 
up again. 

''' Yes," he said ; " the very woman." 

Soames had seated himself and crossed his legs 
nothing but a faint flush, which might have been his 
normal complexion, betrayed him. 

" Send her off at once, then, to watch a Mrs. Irene 
Heron of Flat D, Truro Mansions, Chelsea, till fur- 
ther notice." 

" Precisely," said Mr. Polteed; "divorce, I pre- 
sume ? " and he blew into a speaking-tube. " Mrs. 
Blanch in ? I shall want to speak to her in ten min- 
utes." 

"Deal with any reports yourself," resumed 
Soames, " and send them to me personally, marked 



176 IN CHANCERY 

confidential, sealed and registered. My client 
exacts the utmost secrecy." 

Mr. Polteed smiled, as though saying, * You are 
teaching your grandmother, my dear sir ' ; and his 
reyes slid over Soames' face for one unprofessional 
instant. 

" Make his mind perfectly easy," he said. " Do 
you smoke ? " 

" No," said Soames. " Understand me: Nothing 
may come of this. If a name gets out, or the watch- 
ing is suspected, it may have very serious conse- 
quences." 

Mr. Polteed nodded. " I can put it into the ci- 
pher category. Under that system a name is never 
mentioned; we work by numbers." 

He unlocked another drawer and took out two 
slips of paper, wrote on them, and handed one to 
Soames. 

" Keep that, sir ; it's your key. I retain this du- 
plicate. The case we'll call 7x. The party watched 
will be 17; the watcher 19; the Mansions 25; 
yourself I should say, your firm 31; my 
firm 32, myself 2. In case you should have to men- 
tion your client in writing I have called him 43 ; any 
person we suspect will be 47; a second person 51. 
Any special hint or instruction while we're about 
it?" 

" No," said Soames ; " that is every considera- 
tion compatible." 

Again Mr. Polteed nodded. " Expense? " 

Soames shrugged. " In reason," he answered 
curtly, and got up. " Keep it entirely in your own 
hands." 

" Entirely," said Mr. Polteed, appearing suddenly 
between him and the door. " I shall be seeing you 



WHERE FORSYTES FEAR TO TREAD 177 

in that other case before long. Good-morning, sir." 
His eyes slid unprofessionally over Soames once 
more, and he unlocked the door. 

" Good-morning/' said Soames, looking neither to 
right nor left. 

Out in the street he swore deeply, quietly, to him- 
self. A spider's web, and to cut it he must use this 
spidery, secret, unclean method, so utterly repug- 
nant to one who regarded his private life as his most 
sacred piece of property. But the die was cast, he 
could not go back. And he went on into the Poul- 
try, and locked away the green morocco case and 
the key to that cipher destined to make crystal-clear 
his domestic bankruptcy. 

Odd that one whose life was spent in bringing to 
the public eye all the private coils of property, the 
domestic disagreements of others, should dread so 
utterly the public eye turned on his own ; and yet not 
odd, for who should know so well as he the whole un- 
feeling process of legal regulation ? 

He worked hard all day. Winifred was due at 
four o'clock; he was to take her down to a confer- 
ence in the Temple with Dreamer Q.C., and waiting 
for her he re-read the letter he had caused her to 
write the day of Dartie's departure, requiring him 
to return. 

" DEAR MONTAGU, 

" I have received your letter with the news that 
you have left me for ever and are on your way to 
Buenos Aires. It has naturally been a great shock. 
I am taking this earliest opportunity of writing to 
tell you that I am prepared to let bygones be bygones 
if you will return to me at once. I beg you to do so. 
I am very much upset, and will not say any more 



178 IN CHANCERY 

now. I am sending this letter registered to the ad- 
dress you left at your Club. Please cable to me. 
" Your still affectionate wife, 
"WINIFRED DARTIE." 

Ugh! What bitter humbug! He remembered 
leaning over Winifred while she copied what he had 
pencilled, and how she had said, laying down her 
pen, " Suppose he comes, Soames ! " in such a 
strange tone of voice, as if she did not know her own 
mind. " He won't come," he had answered, " till 
he's spent his money. That's why we must act at 
once." Annexed to the copy of that letter was the 
original of Dartie's drunken scrawl from the Iseeum 
Club. Soames could have wished it had not been so 
manifestly penned in liquor. Just the sort of thing 
the Court would pitch on. He seemed to hear the 
Judge's voice say : " You took this seriously ! Seri- 
ously enough to write him as you did? Do you 
think he meant it ? " Never mind ! The fact was 
clear that Dartie had sailed and had not returned. 
Annexed also was his cabled answer : ' Impossible 
return. Dartie.' Soames shook his head. If the 
whole thing were not disposed of within the next 
few months the fellow would turn up again like a 
bad penny. It saved a thousand a year at least to 
get rid of him, besides all the worry to Winifred 
and his father. ' I must stiffen Dreamer's back,' he 
thought ; ' we must push it on/ 

Winifred, who had adopted a kind of half-mourn- 
ing which became her fair hair and tall figure very 
well, arrived in James' barouche drawn by James' 
pair. Soames had not seen it in the City since his 
father retired from business five years ago, and its 
incongruity gave him a shock. ' Times are chang- 



WHERE FORSYTES FEAR TO TREAD 179 

ing, J he thought ; * one doesn't know what'll g 
next ! ' Top hats even were scarcer. He enquired 
after Val. Val, said Winifred, wrote that he was 
going to play polo next term. She thought he was 
in a very good set. She added with fashionably 
disguised anxiety : " Will there be much publicity 
about my affair, Soames ? Must it be in the papers ? 
It's so bad for him, and the girls." 

With his own calamity all raw within him, 
Soames answered: 

" The papers are a pushing lot ; it's very difficult 
to keep things out. They pretend to be guarding 
the public's morals, and they corrupt them with their 
beastly reports. But we haven't got to that yet. 
We're only seeing Dreamer to-day on the restitu- 
tion question. Of course he understands that it's 
to lead to a divorce; but you must seem genuinely 
anxious to get Dartie back you might practice 
that attitude to-day." 

Winifred sighed. 

" Oh ! What a clown Monty's been ! " she said. 

Soames gave her a sharp look. It was clear to 
him that she could not take her Dartie seriously, 
and would go back on the whole thing if given half 
a chance. His own instinct had been firm in this 
matter from the first. To save a little scandal now 
would only bring on his sister and her children real 
disgrace and perhaps ruin later on if Dartie were 
allowed to hang on to them, going down-hill and 
spending the money James would leave his 
daughter. Though it was all tied up, that fellow 
would milk the settlements somehow, and make his 
family pay through the nose to keep him out of 
bankruptcy or even perhaps gaol! They left the 
shining carriage, with the shining horses and the 



l8o IN CHANCERY 

shining-hatted servants on the Embankment, and 
walked up to Dreamer Q.C.'s Chambers in Crown 
Office Row. 

" Mr. Bellby is here, sir," said the clerk; " Mr. 
Dreamer will be ten minutes." 

Mr. Bellby, the junior not as junior as he 
might have been, for Soames only employed barris- 
ters of established reputation ; it was, indeed, some- 
thing of a mystery to him how barristers ever man- 
aged to establish that which made him employ them 

Mr. Bellby was seated, taking 1 a final glance 
through his papers. He had come from Court, and 
was in wig and gown, which suited a nose jutting 
out like the handle of a tiny pump, his small shrewd 
blue eyes, and rather protruding lower lip no bet- 
ter man to supplement and stiffen Dreamer. 

The introduction to Winifred accomplished, they 
leaped the weather and spoke of the war. Soames 
interjected suddenly : 

" If he doesn't comply we can't bring proceedings 
for six months. I want to get on with the matter, 
Bellby." 

Mr. Bellby, who had the ghost of an Irish brogue, 
smiled at Winifred and murmured : " The Law's de- 
lays, Mrs. Dartie." 

" Six months! " repeated Soames; " it'll drive it 
up to June ! We shan't get the suit on till after the 
long vacation. We must put the screw on, Bellby " 

he would have all his work cut out to keep Wini- 
fred up to the scratch. 

:( Mr. Dreamer will see you now, sir." 

They filed in, Mr. Bellby going first, and Soames 

escorting Winifred after an interval of one minute 

by his watch. 

Dreamer Q.C., in a gown but divested of wig, was 



WHERE FORSYTES FEAR TO TREAD 181 

standing before the fire, as if this conference were 
in the nature of a treat ; he had the leathery, rather 
oily complexion which goes with great learning, a 
considerable nose with glasses perched on it, and 
little greyish whiskers; he luxuriated in the per- 
petual cocking of one eye, and the concealment of 
his lower with his upper lip, which gave a smothered 
turn to his speech. He had a way, too, of coming 
suddenly round the corner on the person he was 
talking to ; this, with a disconcerting tone of voice, 
and a habit of growling before he began to speak 
had secured a reputation second in Probate and Di- 
vorce to very few. Having listened, eye cocked, to 
Mr. Bellby's breezy recapitulation of the facts, he 
growled, and said: 

" I know all that ;" and coming round the corner 
at Winifred, smothered the words: 

" We want to get back, don't we, Mrs. Dartie? " 

Soames interposed sharply: 

" My sister's position, of course, is intolerable." 

Dreamer growled. " Exactly. Now, can we 
rely on the cable refusal, or must we wait till after 
Christmas to give him a chance to have written 
that's the point, isn't it? " 

" The sooner " Soames began. 

" What do you say, Bellby ? " said Dreamer, com- 
ing round his corner. 

Mr. Bellby seemed to sniff the air like a hound. 

" We won't be on till the middle of December. 
We've no need to give um more rope than that." 

" No," said Soames, " why should my sister be in- 
commoded by his choosing to go " 

" To Jericho ! " said Dreamer, again coming 
round his corner ; " quite so. People oughtn't to go 
to Jericho, ought they, Mrs. Dartie ? " And he 



182 IN CHANCERY 

raised his gown into a sort of fantail. " I agree. 
We can go forward. Is there anything more ? " 

" Nothing at present," said Soames meaningly; 
" I wanted you to see my sister." 

Dreamer growled softly : " Delighted. Good- 
evening ! " And let fall the protection of his gown. 

They filed out. Winifred went down the stairs. 
Soames lingered. In spite of himself he was im- 
pressed by Dreamer. 

" The evidence is all right, I think," he said to 
Bellby. " Between ourselves, if we don't get the 
thing through quick, we never may. D'you think 
he understands that ? " 

" I'll make um," said Bellby. " Good man though 
good man." 

Soames nodded and hastened after his sister. He 
found her in a draught, biting her lips behind her 
veil, and at once said : 

" The evidence of the stewardess will be very 
complete." 

Winifred's face hardened; she drew herself up, 
and they walked to the carriage. And, all through 
that silent drive back to Green Street, the souls of 
both of them revolved a single thought : * Why, oh ! 
why should I have to expose my misfortune to the 
public like this ? Why have to employ spies to peer 
into my private troubles? They were not of my 
making/ 



CHAPTER V 

JOLLY SITS IN JUDGMENT 

THE possessive instinct, which, so determinedly 
balked, was animating two members of the Forsyte 
family towards riddance of what they could no 
longer possess, was hardening daily in the British 
body politic. Nicholas, originally so doubtful con- 
cerning a war which must affect property, had been 
heard to say that these Boers were a pig-headed lot; 
they were causing a lot of expense, and the sooner 
they had their lesson the better. He would send 
out Wolseley ! Seeing always a little further than 
other people whence the most considerable for- 
tune of all the Forsytes he had perceived already 
that Buller was not the man * a bull of a chap, 
who just went butting, and if they didn't look out 
Ladysmith would fall.' This was early in Decem- 
ber, so that when Black Week came, he was enabled 
to say to everybody : ' I told you so/ During that 
week of gloom such as no Forsyte could remember, 
very young Nicholas attended so many drills in his 
corps, ' The Devil's Own,' that young Nicholas con- 
sulted the family physician about his son's health 
and was alarmed to find that he was perfectly 
sound. The boy had only just eaten his dinners 
and been called to the bar, at some expense, and it 

183 



184 IN CHANCERY 

was in a way a nightmare to his father and mother 
that he should be playing with military efficiency at 
a time when military efficiency in the civilian popu- 
lation might conceivably be wanted. His grand- 
father, of course, pooh-poohed the notion, too thor- 
oughly educated in the feeling that no British war 
could be other than little and professional, and pro- 
foundly distrustful of Imperial commitments, by 
which, moreover, he stood to lose, for he owned De 
Beers, now going down fast, more than a sufficient 
sacrifice on the part of his grandson. 

At Oxford, however, rather different sentiments 
prevailed. The inherent effervescence of conglom- 
erate youth had, during the two months of the term 
before Black Week, been gradually crystallising out 
into vivid oppositions. Normal adolescence, ever 
in England of a conservative tendency, though not 
taking things too seriously, was vehement for a 
fight to a finish and a good licking for the Boers. 
Of this larger faction Val Dartie was naturally a 
member. Radical youth, on the other hand, a small 
but perhaps more vocal body, was for stopping the 
war and giving the Boers autonomy. Until Black 
Week, however, the groups were amorphous, with- 
out sharp edges, and argument remained but aca- 
demic. Jolly was one of those who knew not where 
he stood. A streak of his grandfather old Jolyon's 
love of justice prevented him from seeing one side 
only. Moreover, in his set of ' the best ' there was a 
' jumping-jesus ' of extremely advanced opinions 
and some personal magnetism. Jolly wavered. His 
father, too, seemed doubtful in his views. And 
though, as was proper at the age of twenty, he kept 
a sharp eye on his father, watchful for defects 
which might still be remedied, still that father had 



JOLLY SITS IN JUDGMENT 185 

an * air ' which gave a sort of glamour to his creed 
of ironic tolerance. Artists, of course, were notori- 
ously Hamlet-like, and to this extent one must dis- 
count for one's father, even if one loved him. But 
Jolyon's original view, that to ' put your nose in 
where you aren't wanted ' (as the Uitlanders had 
done) ' and then work the oracle till you get on 
top is not being quite the clean potato/ had, whether 
founded in fact or no, a certain attraction for his 
son, who thought a deal about gentility. On the 
other hand Jolly could not abide such as his set 
called ' cranks/ and Val's set called ' smugs/ so 
that he was still balancing when the clock of Black 
Week struck. One two three, came those 
ominous repulses at Stormberg, Magersfontein, 
Colenso. The sturdy English soul reacting after 
the first cried, 'Ah! but Methuen!' after the sec- 
ond : ' Ah ! but Buller ! ' then, in inspissated gloom, 
hardened. And Jolly said to himself : " No, damn 
it ! We've got to lick the beggars now ; I don't care 
whether we're right or wrong." And, if he had 
known it, his father was thinking the same thought. 
That next Sunday, last of the term, Jolly was 
bidden to wine with "one of the best.' After the 
second toast, ' Buller and damnation to the Boers/ 
drunk no heel taps in the college Burgundy, 
he noticed that Val Dartie, also a guest, was look- 
ing at him with a grin and saying something to his 
neighbour. He was sure it was disparaging. The 
last boy in the world to make himself conspicuous 
or cause public disturbance, Jolly grew rather red 
and shut his lips. The queer hostility he had al- 
ways felt towards his second-cousin was strongly 
and suddenly reinforced. " All right ! " he said to 
himself ; " you wait, my friend ! " More wine than 



i86 IN CHANCERY 

was good for him, as the custom was, helped him to 
remember, when they all trooped forth to a secluded 
spot, to touch Val on the arm. 

" What did you say about me in there? " 

" Mayn't I say what I like? " 

" No." 

" Well, I said you were a pro-Boer and so you 
are!" 

"You're a liar!" 

" D'you want a row ? " 

" Of course, but not here ; in the garden." 

"All right. Come on." 

They went, eyeing each other askance, unsteady, 
and unflinching; they climbed the garden railings. 
The spikes on the top slightly ripped Val's sleeve, 
and occupied his mind. Jolly's mind was occupied by 
the thought that they were going to fight in the 
precincts of a college foreign to them both. It was 
not the thing, but never mind the young beast ! 

They passed over the grass into very nearly dark- 
ness, and took off their coats. 

" You're not screwed, are you? " said Jolly sud- 
denly. " I can't fight you if you're screwed." 

" No more than you." 

" All right then." 

Without shaking hands, they put themselves at 
once into postures of defence. They had drunk too 
much for science, and so were especially careful to 
assume correct attitudes, until Jolly smote Val al- 
most accidentally on the nose. After that it was 
all a dark and ugly scrimmage in the deep shadow 
of the old trees, with no one to call ' time,' till, bat- 
tered and blown, they unclinched and staggered 
back from each other, as a voice said: 

" Your names, young gentlemen? " 



JOLLY SITS IN JUDGMENT 187 

At this bland query spoken from under the lamp 
at the garden gate, like some demand of a god, 
their nerves gave way, and snatching up their coats, 
they ran at the railings, shinned up them, and made 
for the secluded spot whence they had issued to the 
fight. Here, in dim light, they mopped their faces, 
and without a word walked, ten paces apart, to the 
college gate. They went out silently, Val going 
towards the Broad along the Brewery, Jolly down 
the lane towards the High. His head, still fumed, 
was busy with regret that he had not displayed 
more science, passing in review the counters and 
knock-out blows which he had not delivered. His 
mind strayed on to an imagined combat, infinitely 
unlike that which he had just been through, in- 
finitely gallant, with sash and sword, with thrust 
and parry, as if he were in the pages of his beloved 
Dumas. He fancied himself La Mole, and Aramis, 
Bussy, Chicot, and D'Artagnan rolled into one, but 
he quite failed to envisage Val as Coconnas, Brissac, 
or Rochefort. The fellow was just a confounded 
cousin who didn't come up to Cocker. Never mind ! 
He had given him one or two. ' Pro-Boer ! ' The word 
still rankled, and thoughts of enlisting jostled his 
aching head; of riding over the veldt, firing gal- 
lantly, while the Boers rolled over like rabbits. And, 
turning up his smarting eyes, he saw the stars shin- 
ing between the house-tops of the High, and himself 
lying out on the Karoo (whatever that was) rolled 
in a blanket, with his rifle ready and his gaze fixed 
on a glittering heaven. 

He had a fearful ' head ' next morning, which he 
doctored, as became one of ' the best/ by soaking it 
in cold water, brewing strong coffee which he could 
not drink, and only sipping a little Hock at lunch. 



i88 IN CHANCERY 

The legend that ' some fool ' had run into him round 
a corner accounted for a bruise on his cheek. He 
would on no account have mentioned the fight, for, 
on second thoughts, it fell far short of his stand- 
ards. 

The next day he went 'down/ and travelled 
through to Robin Hill. Nobody was there but June 
and Holly, for his father had gone to Paris. He 
spent a restless and unsettled Vacation, quite out of 
touch with either of his sisters. June, indeed, was 
occupied with lame ducks, whom, as a rule, Jolly 
could not stand, especially that Eric Cobbley and 
his family, ' hopeless outsiders/ who were always 
littering up the house in the Vacation. And be- 
tween Holly and himself there was a strange divi- 
sion, as if she were beginning to have opinions of 
her own, which was so unnecessary. He punched 
viciously at a ball, rode furiously but alone in Rich- 
mond Park, making a point of jumping the stiff, 
high hurdles put up to close certain worn avenues 
of grass keeping his nerve in, he called it. Jolly 
was more afraid of being afraid than most boys. 
He bought a rifle, too, and put a range up in the 
home field, shooting across the pond into the 
kitchen-garden wall, to the peril of gardeners, with 
the thought that some day, perhaps, he would en- 
list and save South Africa for his country. In fact, 
now that they were appealing for Yeomanry re- 
cruits the boy was thoroughly upset. Ought he to 
go? None of 'the best/ so far as he knew and 
he was in correspondence with several were 
thinking of joining. If they had been making a 
move he would have gone at once very competi- 
tive, and with a strong sense of form, he could not 
bear to be left behind in anything but to do it off 



JOLLY SITS IN JUDGMENT 189 

his own bat might look like ' swagger ' ; because of 
course it wasn't really necessary. Besides, he did 
not want to go, for the other side of this young 
Forsyte recoiled from leaping before he looked. 
It was altogether mixed pickles within him, hot and 
sickly pickles, and he became quite unlike his serene 
and rather lordly self. 

And then one day he saw that which moved him 
to uneasy wrath two riders, in a glade of the 
Park close to the Ham Gate, of whom she on the 
left-hand was most assuredly Holly on her silver 
roan, and he on the right-hand as assuredly that 
' squirt ' Val Dartie. His first impulse was to urge 
on his own horse and demand the meaning of this 
portent, tell the fellow to ' bunk/ and take Holly 
home. His second to feel that he would look a 
fool if they refused. He reined his horse in behind 
a tree, then perceived that it was equally impossible 
to spy on them. Nothing for it but to go home and 
await her coming! Sneaking out with that young 
bounder ! He could not consult with June, because 
she had gone up that morning in the train of Eric 
Cobbley and his lot. And his father was still in 
' that rotten Paris/ He felt that this was emphati- 
cally one of those moments for which he had trained 
himself, assiduously, at school, where he and a boy 
called Brent had frequently set fire to newspapers 
and placed them in the centre of their studies to 
accustom them to coolness in moments of danger. 
He did not feel at all cool waiting in the stable- 
yard, idly stroking the dog Balthasar, who, queasy 
as an old fat monk, and sad in the absence of his 
master, turned up his face, panting with gratitude 
for this attention. It was half an hour before 
Holly came, flushed and ever so much prettier than 



IQO IN CHANCERY 

she had any right to look. He saw her look at him 
quickly guiltily of course then followed her 
in, and, taking her arm, conducted her into what 
had been their grandfather's study. The room, not 
much used now, was still vaguely haunted for them 
both by a presence with which they associated ten- 
derness, large drooping white moustaches, the 
scent of cigar smoke, and laughter. HeFe Jolly, in 
the prime of his youth, before he went to school at 
all, had been wont to wrestle with his grandfather, 
who even at eighty had an irresistible habit of crook- 
ing his leg. Here Holly, perched on the arm of the 
great leather chair, had stroked hair curving silvery 
over an ear into which she would whisper secrets. 
Through that window they had all three sallied 
times without number to cricket on the lawn, and 
a mysterious game called ' Wopsy-doozle ' not to be 
understood by outsiders, which made old Jolyon 
very hot. Here once on a warm night Holly had 
appeared in her ' nighty/ having had a bad dream, 
to have the clutch of it released. And here Jolly, 
having begun the day badly by introducing fizzy 
magnesia into Mademoiselle Beauce's new-laid egg, 
and gone on to worse, had been sent down (in the 
absence of his father) to the ensuing dialogue: 

' Now, my boy, you mustn't go on like this." 

" Well, she boxed my ears, Gran, so I only boxed 
hers, and then she boxed mine again." 

"Strike a lady? That'll never do! Have you 
begged her pardon?" 

''' Not yet." 

'' Then you must go and do it at once. Come 
along." 

But she began it, Gran ; and she had two to my 



one." 



JOLLY SITS IN JUDGMENT 191 

" My dear, it was an outrageous thing to do." 
"Well, she lost her temper; and I didn't lose 



mine." 



" Come along." 

" You come too, then, Gran." 

"Well this time only." 

And they had gone hand in hand. 

Here where the Waverley novels and Byron's 
works and Gibbon's Roman Empire and Humboldt's 
Cosmos, and the bronzes on the mantelpiece and 
that masterpiece of the oily school, ' Dutch Fishing- 
Boats at Sunset/ were fixed as fate, and for all sign 
of change old Jolyon might have been sitting there 
still, with legs crossed, in the armchair, and domed 
forehead and deep eyes grave above The Times 
here they came, those two grandchildren. And 
Jolly said: 

" I saw you and that fellow in the Park." 

The sight of blood rushing into her cheeks gave 
him some satisfaction; she ought to be ashamed! 

"Well?" she said. 

Jolly was surprised; he had expected more, or 
less. 

" Do you know," he said weightily, " that he 
called me a pro-Boer last term ? And I had to fight 
him." 

"Who won?" 

Jolly wished to answer : ' I should have/ but it 
seemed beneath him. 

" Look here ! " he said, " what's the meaning of 
it ? Without telling anybody ! " 

' Why should I? Dad isn't here; why shouldn't 
I ride with him? " 

' You've got me to ride with. I think he's an 
awful young rotter." 



I9 2 IN CHANCERY 

Holly went pale with anger. 

" He isn't, it's your own fault for not liking him." 

And slipping past her brother she went out, leav- 
ing him staring at the bronze Venus sitting on a 
tortoise, which had been shielded from him so far 
by his sister's dark head under her soft felt riding 
hat. He felt queerly disturbed, shaken to his young 
foundations. A lifelong domination lay shattered 
round his feet. He went up to the Venus and me- 
chanically inspected the tortoise. Why didn't he 
like Val Dartie? He could not tell. Ignorant of 
family history, barely aware of that vague feud 
which had started thirteen years before with Bosin- 
ney's defection from June in favour of Soames' 
wife, knowing really almost nothing about Val, he 
was at sea. He just did dislike him. The question, 
however, was: What should he do? Val Dartie, it 
was true, was a second-cousin, but it was not the 
thing for Holly to go about with him. And yet to 
' tell ' of what he had chanced on was against his 
creed. In this dilemma he went and sat in the old 
leather chair and crossed his legs. It grew dark 
while he sat there staring out through the long win- 
dow at the old oak-tree, ample yet bare of leaves, 
becoming slowly just a shape of deeper darjc printed 
on the dusk. 

' Grandfather ! ' he thought without sequence, and 
took out his watch. He could not see the hands, 
but he set the repeater going. ' Five o'clock ! ' His 
grandfather's first gold hunter watch, butter- 
smoothed with age all the milling worn from it, 
and dented with the mark of many a fall. The 
chime was like a little voice from out of that golden 
age, when they first came from St. John's Wood, 
London, to this house came driving with grand- 



JOLLY SITS IN JUDGMENT 193 

father in his carriage, and almost instantly took to 
the trees. Trees to climb, and grandfather water- 
ing the geranium-beds below! What was to be 
done? Tell Dad he must come home? Confide in 
June ? only she was so so sudden ! Do noth- 
ing and trust to luck? After all, the Vac. would 
soon be over. Go up and see Val and warn him off? 
But how get his address? Holly wouldn't give it 
him ! A maze of paths, a cloud of possibilities ! He 
lit a cigarette. When he had smoked it halfway 
through his brow relaxed, almost as if some thin 
old hand had been passed gently over it ; and in his 
ear something seemed to whisper : ' Do nothing ; 
be nice to Holly, be nice to her, my dear ! ' And 
Jolly heaved a sigh of contentment, blowing smoke 
through his nostrils. . . . 

But up in her room, divested of her habit, Holly 
was still frowning. ' He is not he is not ! ' were 
the words which kept forming on her lips. 



CHAPTER VI 

JOLYON IN TWO MINDS 

A LITTLE private hotel over a well-known restau- 
rant near the Gare St. Lazare was Jolyon's haunt 
in Paris. He hated his fellow Forsytes abroad 
vapid as fish out of water in their well-trodden runs 
the Opera, Rue de Rivoli, and Moulin Rouge. Their 
air of having come because they wanted to be some- 
where else as soon as possible annoyed him. But 
no other Forsyte came near this haunt, where he 
had a wood fire in his bedroom and the coffee was 
excellent. Paris was always to him more attractive 
in winter. The acrid savour from woodsmoke and 
chestnut-roasting braziers, the sharpness of the 
wintry sunshine on bright days, the open cafes 
defying keen-aired winter, the self-contained brisk 
boulevard crowds, all informed him that in winter 
Paris possessed a soul which, like a migrant bird, in 
high summer flew away. 

He spoke French well, had some friends, knew 
little places where pleasant dishes could be met with, 
queer types observed. He felt philosophic in Paris, 
the edge of irony sharpened; life took on a subtle, 
purposeless meaning, became a bunch of flavours 
tasted, a darkness shot with shifting gleams of light. 

When in the first week of December he decided 
to go to Paris, he was far from admitting that 

194 



JOLYON IN TWO MINDS 195 

Irene's presence was influencing him. He had not 
been there two days before he owned that the wish 
to see her had been more than half the reason. In 
England one did not admit what was natural. He 
had thought it might be well to speak to her about 
the letting of her flat and other matters, but in 
Paris he at once knew better. There was a glamour 
over the city. On the third day he wrote to her, 
and received an answer which procured him a pleas- 
urable shiver of the nerves : 

" MY DEAR JOLYON, 

" It will be a happiness for me to see you. 

" IRENE/' 

He took his way to her hotel on a bright day 
with a feeling such as he had often had going to 
visit an adored picture. No woman, so far as he 
remembered, had ever inspired in him this special 
sensuous and yet impersonal sensation. He was 
going to sit and feast his eyes, and come away know- 
ing her no better, but ready to go and feast his eyes 
again to-morrow. Such was his feeling, when in 
the tarnished and ornate little lounge of a quiet 
hotel near the river she came to him preceded by a 
small page-boy who uttered the word, " Madame'' 
and vanished. Her face, her smile, the poise of 
her figure, were just as he had pictured, and the ex- 
pression of her face said plainly : ' A friend ! ' 

" Well," he said, " what news, poor exile? " 

" None." 

"Nothing from Soames?" 

" Nothing." 

" I have let the flat for you, and like a good stew- 
ard I bring you some money. How do you like 
Paris?" 



196 IN CHANCERY 

While he put her through this catechism, it 
seemed to him that he had never seen lips so fine 
and sensitive, the lower lip curving just a little up- 
wards, the upper touched at one corner by the least 
conceivable dimple. It was like discovering a 
woman in what had hitherto been a sort of soft and 
breathed-on statue, almost impersonally admired. 
She owned that to be alone in Paris was a little diffi- 
cult ; and yet, Paris was so full of its own life that it 
was often, she Confessed, as innocuous as a desert. 
Besides, the English were not liked just now ! 

"That will hardly be your case," said Jolyon; 
"you should appeal to the French." 

" It has its disadvantages." 

Jolyon nodded. 

" Well, you must let me take you about while I'm 
here. We'll start to-morrow. Come and dine at 
my pet restaurant; and we'll go to the Opera- 
Comique." 

It was the beginning of daily meetings. 

Jolyon soon found that for those who desired a 
static condition of the affections, Paris was at once 
the first and last place in which to be friendly with 
a pretty woman. Revelation was alighting like a 
bird in his heart, singing: ' Elle est ton revel Elle 
est ton revel' Sometimes this seemed natural, 
sometimes ludicrous a bad case of elderly rap- 
ture. Having once been ostracised by Society, he 
had never since had any real regard for conven- 
tional morality; but the idea of a love which she 
could never return and how could she at his age? 
hardly mounted beyond his subconscious mind. 
He was full, too, of resentment, at the waste and 
loneliness of her life. Aware of being some com- 
fort to her, and of the pleasure she clearly took in 



JOLYON IN TWO MINDS 197 

their many little outings, he was amiably desirous 
of doing and saying nothing to destroy that pleas- 
ure. It was like watching a starved plant draw up 
water, to see her drink-in his companionship. So 
far as they could tell, no one knew her address ex- 
cept himself ; she was unknown in Paris, and he but 
little known, so that discretion seemed unnecessary 
in those walks, talks, visits to concerts, picture-gal- 
leries, theatres, little dinners, expeditions to Ver- 
sailles, St. Cloud, even Fontainebleau. And time 
fled one of those full months without past to it 
or future. What in his youth would certainly have 
been headlong passion, was now perhaps as deep a 
feeling, but far gentler, tempered to protective com- 
panionship by admiration, hopelessness, and a sense 
of chivalry arrested in his veins at least so long 
as she was there, smiling and happy in their friend- 
ship, and always to him more beautiful and spir- 
itually responsive: for her philosophy of life 
seemed to march in admirable step with his own, 
conditioned by emotion more than by reason, iron- 
ically mistrustful, susceptible to beauty, almost pas- 
sionately humane and tolerant, yet subject to in- 
stinctive rigidities of which as a mere man he was 
less capable. And during all this companionable 
month he never quite lost that feeling with which 
he had set out on the first day as if to visit an 
adored work of art, a wellnigh impersonal desire. 
The future inexorable pendant to the present 
he took care not to face, for fear of breaking up 
his untroubled manner ; but he made plans to renew 
this time in places still more delightful, where the 
sun was hot and there were strange things to see 
and paint. The end came swiftly on the 20th of 
January with a telegram : 



198 IN CHANCERY 

" Have enlisted in Imperial Yeomanry. JOLLY/' 

Jolyon received it just as he was setting out to 
meet her at the Louvre. It brought him up with a 
round turn. While he was lotus-eating here, his 
boy, whose philosopher and guide he ought to be, 
had taken this great step towards danger, hardship, 
perhaps even death. He felt disturbed to the soul, 
realising suddenly how Irene had twined herself 
round the roots of his being. Thus threatened with 
severance, the tie between them for it had be- 
come a kind of tie no longer had impersonal 
quality. The tranquil enjoyment .of things in com- 
mon, Jolyon perceived, was gone for ever. He saw 
his feeling as it was, in the nature of an infatuation. 
Ridiculous, perhaps, but so real that sooner or later 
it must disclose itself. And now, as it seemed to 
him, he could not, must not, make any such dis- 
closure. The news of Jolly stood inexorably in the 
way. He was proud of this enlistment; proud of 
his boy for going off to fight for the country; for 
on Jolyon's pro-Boerism, too, Black Week had left 
its mark. And so the end was reached before the 
beginning ! Well, luckily he had never made a sign ! 

When he came into the Gallery she was standing 
before the 'Virgin of the Rocks/ graceful, ab- 
sorbed, smiling and unconscious. ' Have I to give 
up seeing that? 9 he thought. 'It's unnatural, so 
long as she's willing that I should see her/ He 
stood, unnoticed, watching her, storing up the 
image of her figure, envying the picture on which 
she was bending that long scrutiny. Twice she 
turned her head towards the entrance, and he 
thought : ' That's for me ! ' At last he went for- 
ward. 

"Look!" he said. 



JOLYON IN TWO MINDS 199 

She read the telegram, and he heard her sigh. 

That sigh, too, was for him! His position was 
really cruel! To be loyal to his son he must just 
shake her hand and go. To be loyal to the feeling 
in his heart he must at least tell her what that feel- 
ing was. Could she, would she understand the si- 
lence in which he was gazing at that picture ? 

" I'm afraid I must go home at once," he said at 
last. " I shall miss all this awfully." 

" So shall I ; but, of course, you must go." 

" Well ! " said Jolyon holding out his hand. 

Meeting her eyes, a flood of feeling nearly mas- 
tered him. 

" Such is life!" he said. "Take care of your- 
self, my dear ! " 

He had a stumbling sensation in his legs and feet, 
as if his brain refused to steer him away from her. 
From the doorway, he saw her lift her hand and 
touch its fingers with her lips. He raised his hat 
solemnly, and did not look back again. 



CHAPTER VII 

DARTIE VERSUS DARTIE 

THE suit Dartie versus Dartie for restitution 
of those conjugal rights concerning which Wini- 
fred was at heart so deeply undecided, followed the 
laws of subtraction towards day of judgment. 
This was not reached before the Courts rose for 
Christmas, but the case was third on the list when 
they sat again. Winifred spent the Christmas 
holidays a thought more fashionably than usual, 
with the matter locked up in her low-cut bosom. 
James was particularly liberal to her that Christ- 
mas, expressing thereby his sympathy, and relief, 
at the approaching dissolution of her marriage with 
that ' precious rascal,' which his old heart felt but 
his old lips could not utter. 

The disappearance of Dartie made the fall in 
Consols a comparatively small matter ; and as to the 
scandal the real animus he felt against that fel- 
low, and the increasing lead which property was at- 
taining over reputation in a true Forsyte about to 
leave this world, served to drug a mind from which 
all allusions to the matter (except his own) were 
studiously kept. What worried him as a lawyer 
and a parent was the fear that Dartie might sud- 
denly turn up and obey the Order of the Court when 
made. That would be a pretty how-de-do! The 



D ARTIE VERSUS DARTIE 201 

fear preyed on him in fact so much that, in present- 
ing Winifred with a large Christmas cheque, he 
said: " It's chiefly for that chap out there; to keep 
him from coming back." It was, of course, to pitch 
away good money, but all in the nature of insurance 
against that bankruptcy which would no longer 
hang over him if only the divorce went through; 
and he questioned Winifred rigorously until she 
could assure him that the money had been sent. 
Poor woman! it cost her many a pang to send 
what must find its way into the vanity-bag of ' that 
creature ! ' Soames, hearing of it, shook his head. 
They were not dealing with a Forsyte, reasonably 
tenacious of his purpose. It was very risky with- 
out knowing how the land lay out there. Still, it 
would look well with the Court; and he would see 
that Dreamer brought it out. " I wonder," he said 
suddenly, " where that ballet goes after the Argen- 
tine " ; never omitting a chance of reminder ; for 
he knew that Winifred still had a weakness, if not 
for Dartie, at least for not laundering him in pub- 
lic. Though not good at showing admiration, he 
admitted that she was behaving extremely well, 
with all her children at home gaping like young 
birds for news of their father Imogen just on 
the point of coming out, and Val very restive about 
the whole thing. He felt that Val was the real 
heart of the matter to Winifred, who certainly 
loved him beyond her other children. The boy could 
spoke the wheel of this divorce yet if he set his 
mind to it. And Soames was very careful to keep 
the proximity of the preliminary proceedings from 
his nephew's ears. He did more. He asked him to 
dine at the Remove, and over Val's cigar introduced 
the subject which he knew to be nearest to his heart. 



202 IN CHANCERY 

" I hear," he said, " that you want to play polo 
up at Oxford." 

Val became less recumbent in his chair. 

"Rather! "he said. 

" Well," continued Soames, " that's a very ex- 
pensive business. Your grandfather isn't likely to 
consent to it unless he can make sure that he's not 
got any other drain on him." And he paused to see 
whether the boy understood his meaning. 

Val's dark thick lashes concealed his eyes, but a 
slight grimace appeared on his wide mouth, and he 
muttered : 

' I suppose you mean my dad ! " 

" Yes," said Soames; " I'm afraid it depends on 
whether he continues to be a drag or not ; " and 
said no more, letting the boy dream it over. 

But Val was also dreaming in those days of a 
silver-roan palfrey and a girl riding it. Though 
Crum was in town and an introduction to Cynthia 
Dark to be had for the asking, Val did not ask; 
indeed, he shunned Crum and lived a life strange 
even to himself, except in so far as accounts with 
tailor and livery stable were concerned. To his 
mother, his sisters, his young brother, he seemed 
to spend his Vacation in ' seeing fellows/ and his 
evenings sleepily at home. They could not propose 
anything in daylight that did not meet with the one 
response: "Sorry; I've got to see a fellow"; and 
he was put to extraordinary shifts to get in and out 
of the house unobserved in riding clothes; until, 
being made a member of the Goat's Club, he was 
able to transport them there, where he could change 
unregarded and slip off on his hack to Richmond 
Park. He kept his growing sentiment religiously 
to himself. Not for a world would he breathe to 



DARTIE VERSUS DARTIE 203 

the ' fellows/ whom he was not ' seeing/ anything 
so ridiculous from the point of view of their creed 
and his. But he could not help its destroying his 
other appetites. It was coming between him and 
the legitimate pleasures of youth at last on its own 
in a way which must, he knew, make him a milk- 
sop in the eyes of Crum. All he cared for was to 
dress in his last-created riding togs, and steal away 
to the Robin Hill Gate, where presently the silver 
roan would come demurely sidling with its slim and 
dark-haired rider, and in the glades bare of leaves 
they would go off side by side, not talking very much, 
riding races sometimes, and sometimes holding 
hands. More than once of an evening, in a moment 
of expansion, he had been tempted to tell his mother 
how this shy sweet cousin had stolen in upon 
him and wrecked his ' life/ But bitter experience, 
that all persons above thirty-five were spoil- 
sports, prevented him. After all, he supposed he 
would have to go through with College, and she 
would have to ' come out/ before they could be 
married; so why complicate things, so long as he 
could see her ? Sisters were teasing and unsympa- 
thetic beings, a brother worse, so there was no one 
to confide in ; besides, this beastly divorce business ! 
Ah ! what a misfortune to have a name which other 
people hadn't ! If only he had been called Gordon 
or Scott or Howard or something fairly common ! 
But Dartie there wasn't another in the direc- 
tory ! One might as well have been named Morkin 
for all the covert it afforded ! So matters went on, 
till one day in the middle of January the silver- 
roan palfrey and its rider were missing at the tryst. 
Lingering in the cold, he debated whether he should 
ride on to the house. But Jolly might be there, 



204 IN CHANCERY 

and the memory of their dark encounter was still 
fresh within him. One could not be always fighting 
with her brother ! So he returned dismally to town 
and spent an evening plunged in gloom. At break- 
fast next day he noticed that his mother had on an 
unfamiliar dress and was wearing her hat. The 
dress was black with a glimpse of peacock blue, the 
hat black and large she looked exceptionally well. 
But when after breakfast she said to him, " Come 
in here, Val," and led the way to the drawing-room, 
he was at once beset by qualms. Winifred care- 
fully shut the door and passed her handkerchief 
over her lips; inhaling the violette de Parme with 
which it had been soaked, Val thought : ' Has she 
found out about Holly ? ' 

Her voice interrupted: 

" Are you going to be nice to me, dear boy? " 

Val grinned doubtfully. 

"Will you come with me this morning " 

" I've got to see " began Val, but something 

in her face stopped him. " I say," he said, " you 
don't mean " 

1 Yes, I have to go to the Court this morning." 

Already! that d d business which he had 
almost succeeded in forgetting, since nobody ever 
mentioned it. In self -commiseration he stood pick- 
ing little bits of skin off his fingers. Then noticing 
that his mother's lips were all awry, he said impul- 
sively : " All right, mother ; I'll come. The brutes ! " 
What brutes he did not know, but the expression 
exactly summed up their joint feeling, and restored 
a measure of equanimity. 

"I suppose I'd better change into a 'shooter," 
he muttered, escaping to his room. He put on the 
' shooter,' a higher collar, a pearl pin, and his neatest 



DARTIE VERSUS DARTIE 205 

grey spats, to a somewhat blasphemous accompani- 
ment. Looking at himself in the glass, he said, 
" Well, I'm damned if I'm going to show any- 
thing ! " and went down. He found his grand- 
father's carriage at the door, and his mother in 
furs, with the appearance of one going to a Man- 
sion House Assembly. They seated themselves 
side by side in the closed barouche, and all the way 
to the Courts of Justice Val made but one allusion 
to the business in hand. " There'll be nothing about 
those pearls, will there?" 

The little tufted white tails of Winifred's muff 
began to shiver. 

" Oh no," she said, " it'll be quite harmless to- 
day. Your grandmother wanted to come too, but 
I wouldn't let her. I thought you could take care 
of me. You look so nice, Val. Just pull your coat 
collar up a little more at the back that's right." 

" If they bully you " began Val. 

" Oh ! they won't. I shall be very cool. It's the 
only way." 

"They won't want me to give evidence or any- 
thing?" 

"No, dear; it's all arranged." And she patted 
his hand. The determined front she was putting 
on it stayed the turmoil in VaPs chest, and he busied 
himself in drawing his gloves off and on. He had 
taken what he now saw was the wrong pair to go 
with his spats; they should have been grey, but 
were deerskin of a dark tan ; whether to keep them 
on or not he could not decide. They arrived soon 
after ten. It was his first visit to the Law Courts, 
and the building struck him at once. 

" By Jove ! " he said as they passed into the hall, 
" this'd make four or five jolly good racket courts." 



206 IN CHANCERY 

Soames was awaiting them at the foot of some 
stairs. 

" Here you are ! " he said, without shaking hands, 
as if the event had made them too familiar for such 
formalities. " It's Happerly Browne, Court I. 
We shall be on first." 

A sensation such as he had known when going in 
to bat was playing now in the top of Val's chest, 
but he followed his mother and uncle doggedly, 
looking at no more than he could help, and thinking 
that the place smelled ' fuggy/ People seemed to 
be lurking everywhere, and he plucked Soames by 
the sleeve. 

" I say, Uncle, you're not going to let those 
beastly papers in, are you? " 

Soames gave him the sideway look which had re- 
duced many to silence in its time. 

" In here," he said. " You needn't take off your 
furs, Winifred." 

Val entered behind them, nettled and with his 
head up. In this confounded hole everybody 
and there were a good many of them seemed sit- 
ting on everybody else's knee, though really divided 
from each other by pews; and Val had a feeling 
that they might all slip down together into the well. 
This, however, was but a momentary vision of 
mahogany, and black gowns, and white blobs of 
wigs and faces and papers, all rather secret and 
whispery before he was sitting next his mother 
in the front row, with his back to it all, glad of her 
violette de Parme, and taking off his gloves for the 
last time. His mother was looking at him; he was 
suddenly conscious that she had really wanted him 
there next to her, and that he counted for some- 
thing in this business. All right ! He would show 



DARTIE VERSUS DARTIE 207 

them ! Squaring his shoulders, he crossed his legs 
and gazed inscrutably at his spats. But just then 
an ' old Johnny ' in a gown and long wig, looking 
awfully like a funny raddled woman, came through 
a door into the high pew opposite, and he had to 
uncross his legs hastily, and stand up with every- 
body else. 

* Dartie versus Dartie ! ' 

It semed to Val unspeakably disgusting to have 
one's name called out like this in public! And, 
suddenly conscious that someone nearly behind him 
had begun talking about his family, he screwed his 
face round to see an old be-wigged buffer, who 
spoke as if he were eating his own words queer- 
looking old cuss, the sort of man he had seen once or 
twice dining at Park Lane and punishing the port ; 
he knew now where they ' dug them up/ All the 
same he found the old buffer quite fascinating, and 
would have continued to stare if his mother had not 
touched his arm. Reduced to gazing before him, 
he fixed his eyes on the Judge's face instead. Why 
should that old 'sportsman' with his sarcastic 
mouth and his quick-moving eyes have the power to 
meddle with their private affairs hadn't he 
affairs of his own, just as many, and probably just 
as nasty ? And there moved in Val, like an illness, 
all the deep-seated individualism of his breed. The 
voice behind him droned along: " Differences about 
money matters extravagance of the respondent " 
(What a word! Was that his father?) 
" strained situation frequent absences on the 
part of Mr. Dartie. My client, very rightly, your 
Ludship will agree, was anxious to check a course 
but lead to ruin remonstrated gambling at 
cards and on the racecourse " (' That's 



208 IN CHANCERY 

right!' thought Val, 'pile it on!') "Crisis early 
in October, when the respondent wrote her this let- 
ter from his Club." Val sat up and his ears burned. 
" I propose to read it with the emendations neces- 
sary to the epistle of a gentleman who has been 
shall we say dining, me Lud? " 

'Old brute!' thought Val, flushing deeper; 
' you 're not paid to make jokes ! ' 

" ' You will not get the chance to insult me again 
in my own house. I am leaving the country to- 
morrow. It's played out ' an expression, your 
Ludship, not unknown in the mouths of those who 
have not met with conspicuous success." 

' Sniggering owls ! ' thought Val, and his flush 
deepened. 

' I am tired of being insulted by you.' My client 
will tell your Ludship that these so-called insults 
consisted in her calling him ' the limit ' a very 
mild expression, I venture to suggest, in all the cir- 
cumstances." 

Val glanced sideways at his mother's impassive 
face, it had a hunted look in the eyes. ' Poor 
mother ' he thought, and touched her arm with his 
own. The voice behind droned on. 

" ' I am going to live a new life. M. D.' 

"And next day, me Lud, the respondent left 
by the steamship Tuscarora for Buenos Aires. 
Since then we have nothing from him but a cabled 
refusal in answer to the letter which my client wrote 
the following day in great distress, begging him to 
return to her. With your Ludship's permission, I 
shall now put Mrs. Dartie in the box." 

When his mother rose, Val had a tremendous 
impulse to rise too and say : ' Look here ! I'm going 
to see you jolly well treat her decently.' He sub- 



DARTIE VERSUS DARTIE 209 

dued it, however ; heard her saying, ' the truth, the 
whole truth, and nothing but the truth/ and looked 
up. She made a rich figure of it, in her furs and 
large hat, with a slight flush on her cheek-bones, 
calm, matter-of-^act ; and he felt proud of her thus 
confronting all these ' confounded lawyers.' The 
examination began. Knowing that this was only 
the preliminary to divorce, Val followed with a cer- 
tain glee the questions framed so as to give the im- 
pression that she really wanted his father back. It 
seemed to him that they were * foxing Old Bagwigs 
finely/ And he had a most unpleasant jar when the 
Judge said suddenly: 

" Now, why did your husband leave you not 
because you called him ' the limit/ you know ? " 

Val saw his uncle lift his eyes to the witness box, 
without moving his face; heard a shuffle of papers 
behind him ; and instinct told him that the issue was 
in peril. Had Uncle Soames and the old buffer be- 
hind made a mess of it ? His mother was speaking 
with a slight drawl. 

" No, my lord, but it had gone on a long time." 
' What had gone on?" ' 

" Our differences about money." 

" But you supplied the money. Do you suggest 
that he left you to better his position? " 

' The brute ! The old brute, and nothing but the 
brute ! ' thought Val suddenly. ' He smells a rat 
he's trying to get at the pastry ! ' And his heart 
stood still. If if he did, then, of course, he would 
know that his mother didn't really want his father 
back. His mother spoke again, a thought more 
fashionably. 

" No, my Lord, but you see I had refused to give 
him any more money. It took him a long time to 



2io IN CHANCERY 

believe that, but he did at last and when he 

did -" 

" I see, you had refused. But you've sent him 



some since." 



" My Lord, I wanted him back." 

" And you thought that would bring him? " 

" I don't know, my Lord, I acted on my father's 
advice." 

Something in the Judge's face, in the sound of 
the papers behind him, in the sudden crossing of his 
uncle's legs, told Val that she had made just the 
right answer. ' Crafty ! ' he thought ; ' by Jove, 
what humbug it all is ! ' 

The Judge was speaking : 

" Just one more question, Mrs. Dartie. Are you 
still fond of your husband? " 

Val's hands, slack behind him, became fists. 
What business had that Judge to make things 
human suddenly? To make his mother speak out 
of her heart, and say what, perhaps, she didn't know 
herself, before all these people ! It wasn't decent. 
His mother answered, rather low : " Yes, my 
Lord." Val saw the Judge nod. 'Wish I could 
take a cock-shy at your head ! ' he thought irrever- 
ently, as his mother came back to her seat beside 
him. Witnesses to his father's departure and con- 
tinued absence followed one of their own maids 
even, which struck Val as particularly beastly ; there 
was more talking, all humbug; and then the Judge 
pronounced the decree for restitution, and they got 
up to go. Val walked out behind his mother, chin 
squared, eyelids drooped, doing his level best to de- 
spise everybody. His mother's voice in the corri- 
dor roused him from an angry trance. 

" You behaved beautifully, dear. It was such a 



DARTIE VERSUS DARTIE 211 

comfort to have you. Your uncle and I are going 
to lunch." 

" All right/' said Val; " I shall have time to go 
and see that fellow." And, parting from them 
abruptly,* he ran down the stairs and out into the 
air. He bolted into a hansom, and drove to the 
Goat's Club. His thoughts were on Holly and 
what he must do before her brother showed her 

this thing in tomorrow's paper. 

* * * * * 

When Val had left them Soames and Winifred 
made their way to the Cheshire Cheese. He had 
suggested it as a meeting place with Mr. Bellby. 
At that early hour of noon they would have it to 
themselves, and Winifred had thought it would be 
' amusing ' to see this far-famed hostelry. Having 
ordered a light repast, to the consternation of the 
waiter, they awaited its arrival together with that 
of Mr. Bellby, in silent reaction after the hour and 
a half's suspense on the tenterhooks of publicity. 
Mr. Bellby entered presently, preceded by his nose, 
as cheerful as they were glum. Well ! they had got 
the decree of restitution, and what was the matter 
with that! 

" Quite," said Soames in a suitably low voice, 
" but we shall have to begin again to get evidence. 
He'll probably try the divorce it will look fishy if 
it comes out that we knew of misconduct from the 
start. His questions showed well enough that 
he doesn't like this restitution dodge." 

" Pho! " said Mr. Bellby cheerily, " he'll forget! 
Why, man, he'll have tried a hundred cases between 
now and then. Besides, he's bound by precedent to 
give ye your divorce, if the evidence is satisfactory. 
We won't let um know that Mrs. Dartie had knowl- 



212 IN CHANCERY 

edge of the facts. Dreamer did it very nicely 
he's got a fatherly touch about um ! " 

Soames nodded. 

" And I compliment ye, Mrs. Dartie," went on 
Mr. Bellby; "ye've a natural gift for giving evi- 
dence. Steady as a rock." 

Here the waiter arrived with three plates bal- 
anced on one arm, and the remark : " I 'urried up 
the pudden, sir. You'll find plenty o' lark in it to- 
day." 

Mr. Bellby applauded his forethought with a dip 
of his nose. But Soames and Winifred looked 
with dismay at their light lunch of gravified brown 
masses, touching them gingerly with their forks in 
the hope of distinguishing the bodies of the tasty 
little song-givers. Having begun, however, they 
found they were hungrier than they thought, and 
finished the lot, with a glass of port apiece. Con- 
versation turned on the war. Soames thought 
Ladysmith would fall, and it might last a year. 
Bellby thought it would be over by the summer. 
Both agreed that they wanted more men. There 
was nothing for it but complete victory, since it 
was now a question of prestige. Winifred brought 
things back to more solid ground by saying that she 
did not want the divorce suit to come on till after 
the summer holidays had begun at Oxford, then the 
boys would have forgotten about it before Val had 
to go up again; the London season too would be 
over. The lawyers reassured her, an interval of 
six months was necessary after that the earlier 
the better. People were now beginning to come in, 
and they parted Soames to the city, Bellby to 
his chambers, Winifred in a hansom to Park Lane 
to let her mother know how she had fared. The 



D ARTIE VERSUS D ARTIE 213 

issue had been so satisfactory on the whole that it 
was considered advisable to tell James, who never 
failed to say day after day that he didn't know 
about Winifred's affair, he couldn't tell. As his 
sands ran out, the importance of mundane matters 
became increasingly grave to him, as if he were 
feeling : ' I must make the most of it, and worry 
well ; I shall soon have nothing to worry about.' 

He received the report grudgingly. It was a 
new-fangled way of going about things, and he 
didn't know! But he gave Winifred a cheque, 
saying: 

" I expect you'll have a lot of expense. That's a 
new hat you've got on. Why doesn't Val come and 
see us?" 

Winifred promised to bring him to dinner soon. 
And, going home, she sought her bedroom where 
she could be alone. Now that her husband had been 
ordered back into her custody with a view to putting 
him away from her for ever, she would try once 
more to find out from her sore and lonely heart 
what she really wanted. 



CHAPTER VIII 

THE CHALLENGE 

THE morning had been misty, verging on frost, but 
the sun came out while Val was jogging towards the 
Roehampton Gate, whence he would canter on to the 
usual tryst. His spirits were rising rapidly. There 
had been nothing so very terrible in the morning's 
proceedings beyond the general disgrace of violated 
privacy. ' If we were engaged ! ' he thought, ' what 
happens wouldn't matter/ He felt, indeed, like hu- 
man society, which kicks and clamours at the results 
of matrimony, and hastens to get married. And he 
galloped over the winter-dried grass of Richmond 
Park, fearing to be late. But again he was alone 
at the trysting spot, and this second defection on 
the part of Holly upset him dreadfully. He could 
not go back without seeing her to-day ! Emerging 
from the Park, he proceeded towards Robin Hill. 
He could not make up his mind for whom to ask. 
Suppose her father were back, or her sister or 
brother were in! He decided to gamble, and ask 
for them all first, so that if he were in luck and they 
were not there, it would be quite natural in the end 
to ask for Holly; while if any of them were in an 
' excuse for a ride ' must be his saving grace. 

214 



THE CHALLENGE 215 

" Only Miss Holly is in, sir." 

" Oh ! thanks. Might I take my horse round to 
the stables? And would you say her cousin, 
Mr. Val Dartie." 

When he returned she was in the hall, very 
flushed and shy. She led him to the far end, and 
they sat down on a wide window-seat. 

" I've been awfully anxious," said Val in a low 
voice. " What's the matter ? " 

"Jolly knows about our riding." 

"Is he in?" 

" No; but I expect he will be soon." 

" Then ! " cried Val, and diving forward, he 

seized her hand. She tried to withdraw it, failed, 
gave up the attempt, and looked at him wistfully. 

" First of all," he said, " I want to tell you some- 
thing about my family. My Dad, you know, isn't 
altogether I mean, he's left my mother and 
they're trying to divorce him; so they've ordered 
him to come back, you see. You'll see that in the 
paper to-morrow." 

Her eyes deepened in colour and fearful interest ; 
her hand squeezed his. But the gambler in Val 
was roused now, and he hurried on : 

" Of course there's nothing very much at present, 
but there will be, I expect, before it's over ; divorce 
suits are beastly, you know. I wanted to tell you, 
because because you ought to know if " 
and he began to stammer, gazing at her troubled 
eyes, " if if you're going to be a darling and love 
me, Holly. I love you ever so; and I want to be 
engaged." He had done it in a manner so inade- 
quate that he could have punched his own head ; and, 
dropping on his knees, he tried to get nearer to that 
soft, troubled face. " You do love me don't you ? 



2i6 IN CHANCERY 

If you don't, I " There was a moment of si- 
lence and suspense, so awful that he could hear the 
sound of a mowing-machine far out on the lawn pre- 
tending there was grass to cut. Then she swayed 
forward; her free hand touched his hair, and he 
gasped: "Oh, Holly!" 

Her answer was very soft : " Oh, Val ! " 

He had dreamed of this moment, but always in an 
imperative mood, as the masterful young lover, and 
now he felt humble, touched, trembly. He was 
afraid to stir off his knees lest he should break the 
spell ; lest, if he did, she should shrink and deny her 
own surrender so tremulous was she in his grasp, 
with her eyelids closed and his lips nearing them. 
Her eyes opened, seemed to swim a little ; he pressed 
his lips to hers. Suddenly he sprang up ; there had 
been footsteps, a sort of startled grunt. He looked 
round. No one! But the long curtains which 
barred off the outer hall were quivering. 

"My God! Who was that?" 

Holly too was on her feet. 

"Jolly, I expect," she whispered. 

Val clenched fists and resolution. 

" All right ! " he said, " I don't care a bit now 
we're engaged," and striding towards the curtains, 
he drew them aside. There at the fireplace in the 
hall stood Jolly, with his back elaborately turned. 
Val went forward. Jolly faced round on him. 

" I beg your pardon for hearing," he said. 

With the best intentions in the world, Val could 
not help admiring him at that moment ; his face was 
clear, his voice quiet, he looked somehow distin- 
guished, as if acting up to principle. 

" Well ! " he said abruptly, " it's nothing to you." 

" Oh!" said Jolly; " you come this way," and he 



THE CHALLENGE 217 

crossed the hall. Val followed. At the study door 
he felt a touch on his arm ; Holly's voice said : 

" I'm coming too." 

" No," said Jolly. 

" Yes," said Holly. 

Jolly opened the door, and they all three went in. 
Once in the little room, they stood in a sort of 
triangle on three corners of the worn Turkey car- 
pet; awkwardly upright, not looking at each other, 
quite incapable of seeing any 'humour in the situa- 
tion. 

Val broke the silence. 

" Holly and I are engaged." 

Jolly stepped back and leaned against the lintel 
of the window. 

" This is our house," he said; " I'm not going to 
insult you in it. But my father's away. I'm in 
charge of my sister. You've taken advantage of 
me." 

" I didn't mean to," said Val hotly. 

" I think you did," said Jolly. " If you hadn't 
meant to, you'd have spoken to me, or waited for 
my father to come back." 

" There were reasons," said Val. 

;< What reasons?" 

"About my family I've just told her. I 
wanted her to know before things happen." 

Jolly suddenly became less distinguished. 
' You're kids," he said, " and you know you are." 

" I am not a kid," said Val. 

" You are you're not twenty." 

"Well, what are you?" 

" I am twenty," said Jolly. 

" Only just ; anyway, I'm as good a man as you." 

Jolly's face crimsoned, then clouded. Some 



218 IN CHANCERY 

struggle was evidently taking place in him ; and Val 
and Holly stared at him, so clearly was that struggle 
marked ; they could even hear him breathing. Then 
his face cleared up and became oddly resolute. 

" We'll see that," he said. " I dare you to do 
what I'm going to do." 

"Dare me?" 

Jolly smiled. "Yes," he said, "dare you; and I 
know very well you won't." 

A stab of misgiving shot through Val; this was 
riding very blind. 

" I haven't forgotten that you're a fire-eater," 
said Jolly slowly, " and I think that's about all you 
are ; or that you called me a pro-Boer." 

Val heard a gasp above the sound of his own 
hard breathing, and saw Holly's face poked a little 
forward, very pale, with big eyes. 

" Yes," went on Jolly with a sort of smile, " we 
shall soon see. I'm going to join the Imperial Yeo- 
manry, and I dare you to do the same, Mr. Val 
Dartie." 

Val's head jerked on its stem. It was like a blow 
between the eyes, so utterly unthought of, so ex- 
treme and ugly in the midst of his dreaming; and 
he looked at Holly with eyes grown suddenly, touch- 
ingly haggard. 

"Sit down!" said Jolly. ' Take your time! 
Think it over well." And he himself sat down on 
the arm of his grandfather's chair. 

Val did not sit down ; he stood with hands thrust 
deep into his breeches' pockets hands clenched 
and quivering. The full awfulness of this decision 
one way or the other knocked at his mind with 
double knocks as of an angry postman. If he did 
not take that ' dare ' he was disgraced in Holly's 



THE CHALLENGE 219 

eyes, and in the eyes of that young enemy, her 
brute of a brother. Yet if he took it, ah ! then all 
would vanish her face, her eyes, her hair, her 
kisses just begun! 

"Take your time," said Jolly again; "I don't 
want to be unfair." 

And they both looked at Holly. She had re- 
coiled against the bookshelves reaching to the ceil- 
ing; her dark head leaned against Gibbon's Roman 
Empire, her eyes in a sort of soft grey agony were 
fixed on Val. And he, who had not much gift of 
insight, had suddenly a gleam of vision. She 
would be proud of her brother that enemy ! She 
would be ashamed of him ! His hands came out of 
his pockets as if lifted by a spring. 

"All right!" he said. "Done!" 

Holly's face oh! it was queer! He saw her 
flush, start forward. He had done the right thing 
her face was shining with wistful admiration. 
Jolly stood up and made a little bow as who should 
say : ' You've passed/ 

"To-morrow, then," he said, "we'll go to- 
gether." 

Recovering from the impetus which had carried 
him to that decision, Val looked at him maliciously 
from under his lashes. 'All right,' he thought, 
' one to you. I shall have to join but I'll get back 
on you somehow.' And he said with dignity: " I 
shall be ready." 

" We'll meet at the main Recruiting Office, then," 
said Jolly, " at twelve o'clock." And, opening the 
window, he went out on to the terrace, conforming 
to the creed which had made him retire when he 
surprised them in the hall. 

The confusion in the mind of Val thus left alone 



220 IN CHANCERY 

with her for whom he had paid this sudden price 
was extreme. The mood of ' showing-off ' was 
still, however, uppermost. One must do the 
wretched thing with an air ! 

" We shall get plenty of riding and shooting, 
anyway," he said; "that's one comfort." And it 
gave him a sort of grim pleasure to hear the sigh 
which seemed to come from the bottom of her 
heart. 

"Oh! the war'll soon be over," he said; "per- 
haps we shan't even have to go out. I don't care, 
except for you." He would be out of the way of that 
beastly divorce. It was an ill-wind! He felt her 
warm hand slip into his. Jolly thought he had 
stopped their loving each other, did he? He held 
her tightly round the waist, looking at her softly 
through his lashes, smiling to cheer her up, prom- 
ising to come down and see her soon, feeling some- 
how six inches taller and much more in command 
of her than he had ever dared feel before. Many 
times he kissed her before he mounted and rode 
back to town. So, swiftly, on the least provoca- 
tion, does the possessive instinct flourish and grow. 



CHAPTER IX 

DINNER AT JAMES'S 

DINNER parties were not now given at James's in 
Park Lane to every house the moment comes 
when Master or Mistress is no longer 'up to it'; 
no more can nine courses be served to twenty 
mouths above twenty fine white expanses ; nor does 
the household cat any longer wonder why she is 
suddenly shut up. 

So with something like excitement Emily who 
at seventy would still have liked a little feast and 
fashion now and then ordered dinner for six in- 
stead of two, herself wrote a number of foreign 
words on cards, and arranged the flowers mi- 
mosa from the Riviera, and white Roman hyacinths 
not from Rome. There would only be, of course, 
James and herself, Soames, Winifred, Val, and 
Imogen but she liked to pretend a little and dally 
in imagination with the glory of the past. She so 
dressed herself that James remarked : 

"What are you putting on that thing for? 
You'll catch cold." 

But Emily knew that the necks of women are 
protected by love of shining, unto fourscore years, 
and she only answered : 



222 IN CHANCERY 

" Let me put you on one of those dickies I got you, 
James ; then you'll only have to change your trous- 
ers, and put on your velvet coat, and there you'll 
be. Val likes you to look nice." 

" Dicky ! " said James. ' You're always wasting 
your money on something." 

But he suffered the change to be made till his 
neck also shone, murmuring vaguely : 

" He's an extravagant chap, I'm afraid." 

A little brighter in the eye, with rather more 
colour than usual in his cheeks, he took his seat in 
the drawing-room to wait for the sound of the 
front-door bell. 

" I've made it a proper dinner party," Emily said 
comfortably ; " I thought it would be good practice 
for Imogen she must get used to it now she's 
coming out." 

James uttered an indeterminate sound, thinking 
of Imogen as she used to climb about his knee or 
pull Christmas crackers with him. 

" She'll be pretty," he muttered, " I shouldn't 
wonder." 

" She is pretty," said Emily; " she ought to make 
a good match." 

" There you go," murmured James; " she'd much 
better stay at home and look after her mother." A 
second Dartie carrying off his pretty grand- 
daughter would finish him! He had never quite 
forgiven Emily for having been as much taken in 
by Montagu Dartie as he himself had been. 

"Where's Warmson?" he said suddenly. "I 
should like a glass of Madeira to-night." 

" There's champagne, James." 

James shook his head. " No body," he said: " I 
can't get any good out of it." 



DINNER AT JAMES'S 223 

Emily reached forward on her side of the fire 
and rang the bell. 

" Your master would like a bottle of Madeira 
opened, Warmson." 

" No, no ! " said James, the tips of his ears quiv- 
ering with vehemence, and his eyes fixed on an ob- 
ject seen by him alone. " Look here, Warmson, 
you go to the inner cellar, and on the middle shelf 
of the end bin on the left you'll see seven bottles ; 
take the one in the centre, and don't shake it. It's 
the last of the Madeira I had from Mr. Jolyon when 
we came in here never been moved ; it ought to 
be in prime condition still ; but I don't know, I can't 
tell." 

"Very good, sir," responded the withdrawing 
Warmson. 

" I was keeping it for our golden wedding," said 
James suddenly, "but I shan't live three years at 
my age." 

" Nonsense, James," said Emily, " don't talk like 
that." 

" I ought to have got it up myself," murmured 
James, " he'll shake it as likely as not." And he 
sank into silent recollection of long moments among 
the open gas-jets, the cobwebs, and the good smell 
of wine-soaked corks, which had been appetiser to 
so many feasts. In the wine from that cellar was 
written the history of the forty-seven years since 
he had come to the Park Lane house with his young 
bride, and of the many generations of friends and 
acquaintances who had passed into the unknown; 
its depleted bins preserved the record of family fes- 
tivity all the marriages, births, deaths of his kith 
and kin. And when he was gone there it would be, 
and he didn't know what would become of it. It'd 
be drunk or spoiled, he shouldn't wonder! 



224 IN CHANCERY 

From that deep reverie the entrance of his son 
dragged him, followed very soon by that of Wini- 
fred and her two eldest. 

They went down arm-in-arm James with Imo- 
gen, the debutante, because his pretty grandchild 
cheered him; Soames with Winifred; Emily with 
Val, whose eyes lighting on the oysters brightened. 
This was to be a proper full ' blow-out ' with ' fizz ' 
and port ! And he felt in need of it, after what he 
had done that day, as yet undivulged. After the 
first glass or two it became pleasant to have this 
bombshell up his sleeve, this piece of sensational 
patriotism, or example, rather, of personal daring, 
to display for his pleasure in what he had done 
for his Queen and Country was so far entirely per- 
sonal. He was now a ' blood/ indissolubly con- 
nected with guns and horses; he had a right to 
swagger not, of course, that he was going to. 
He should just announce it quietly, when there was 
a pause. And, glancing down the menu, he deter- 
mined on ' Bombe aux f raises ' as the proper mo- 
ment ; there would be a certain solemnity while they 
were eating that. Once or twice before they 
reached that rosy summit of the dinner he was at- 
tacked by remembrance that his grandfather 
was never told anything! Still, the old boy was 
drinking Madeira, and looking jolly fit! Besides, 
he ought to be pleased at this set-off to the disgrace 
of the divorce. The sight of his uncle opposite, 
too, was a sharp incentive. He was so far from be- 
ing a sportsman that it would be worth a lot to see 
his face. Besides, better to tell his mother in this 
way than privately, which might upset them both! 
He was sorry for her, but after all one couldn't be 
expected to feel much for others when one had to 
part from Holly. 



DINNER AT JAMES'S 225 

His grandfather's voice travelled to him thinly. 

" Val, try a little of the Madeira with your ice. 
You won't get that up at college." 

Val watched the slow liquid filling his glass, the 
essential oil of the old wine glazing the surface ; in- 
haled its aroma, and thought : ' Now for it ! ' It 
was a rich moment. He sipped, and a gentle glow 
spread in his veins, already heated. With a rapid 
look round, he said, * I joined the Imperial Yeo- 
manry to-day, Granny," and emptied his glass as 
though drinking the health of his own act. 

"What!" It was his mother's desolate little 
word. 

" Young Jolly Forsyte and I went down there to- 
gether." 

" You didn't sign ? " from Uncle Soames. 

" Rather ! We go into camp on Monday." 

"I say!" cried Imogen. 

All looked at James. He was leaning forward 
with his hand behind his ear. 

" What's that? " he said. " What's he saying? 
I can't hear." 

Emily reached forward to pat Val's hand. 

"It's only that Val has joined the Yeomanry, 
James ; it's very nice for him. He'll look his best 
in uniform." 

" Joined the rubbish ! " came from James, 
tremulously loud. "You can't see two yards be- 
fore your nose. He he'll have to go out there. 
Why! he'll be fighting before he knows where he 



is." 



Val saw Imogen's eyes admiring him, and his 
mother still and fashionable with her handkerchief 
before her lips. 

Suddenly his uncle spoke. 



226 IN CHANCERY 

" You're under age." 

" I thought of that," smiled Val ; " I gave my age 
as twenty-one." 

He heard his grandmother's admiring, " Well, 
Val, that was plucky of you"; was conscious of 
Warmson deferentially filling his champagne glass ; 
and of his grandfather's voice moaning: "/ don't 
know what'll become of you if you go on like this." 

Imogen was patting his shoulder, his uncle look- 
ing at him sidelong; only his mother sat unmoving, 
till, affected by her stillness, Val said : 

" It's all right, you know ; we shall soon have 
them on the run. I only hope I shall come in for 
something." 

He felt elated, sorry, tremendously important all 
at once. This would show Uncle Soames, and all 
the Forsytes, how to be a sportsman. He had cer- 
tainly done something heroic and exceptional in 
giving his age as twenty-one. 

Emily's voice brought him back to earth. 

"You mustn't have a second glass, James. 
Warmson ! " 

" Won't they be astonished at Timothy's ! " burst 
out Imogen. " I'd give anything to see their faces. 
Do you have a sword, Val, or only a popgun? " 

"What made you?" 

His uncle's voice produced a slight chill in the pit 
of Val's stomach. Made him? How answer 
that? He was grateful for his grandmother's 
comfortable : 

" Well, I think it's very plucky of Val. I'm sure 
he'll make a splendid soldier; he's just the figure 
for it. We shall all be proud of him." 

"What had young Jolly Forsyte to do with it? 
Why did you go together?" pursued Soames, un- 



DINNER AT JAMES'S 227 

cannily relentless. " I thought you weren't 
friendly with him? " 

" I'm not/' mumbled Val, " but I wasn't going to 
be beaten by him." He saw his uncle look at him 
quite differently, as if approving. His grand- 
father was nodding too, his grandmother tossing 
her head. They all approved of his not being 
beaten by that cousin of his. There must be a 
reason! Val was dimly conscious of some disturb- 
ing point outside his range of vision ; as it might be, 
the unlocated centre of a cyclone. And, staring at 
his uncle's face, he had a quite unaccountable 
vision of a woman with dark eyes, gold hair, and a 
white neck, who smelt nice, and had pretty silken 
clothes which he had liked feeling when he was 
quite small. By Jove, yes. Aunt Irene! She 
used to kiss him, and he had bitten her arm once, 
playfully, because he liked it so soft. His 
grandfather was speaking: 

"What's his father doing?" 

"He's away in Paris," Val said, staring at the 
very queer expression on his uncle's face, like 
like that of a snarling dog. 

" Artists ! " said James. The word, coming from 
the very bottom of his soul, broke up the dinner. 

Opposite his mother in the cab going home, Val 
tasted the after- fruits of heroism, like medlars over- 
ripe. 

She only said, indeed, that he must go to his 
tailor's at once and have his uniform properly 
made, and not just put up with what they gave him. 
But he could feel that she was very much upset. It 
was on his lips to console her with the spoken 
thought that he would be out of the way of that 
beastly divorce, but the presence of Imogen, and the 



228 IN CHANCERY 

knowledge that his mother would not be out of the 
way, restrained him. He felt aggrieved that she 
did not seem more proud of him. When Imogen 
had gone to bed, he risked the emotional. 

" I'm awfully sorry to have to leave you, 
Mother." 

" Well, I must make the best of it. We must try 
and get you a commission as soon as we can; then 
you won't have to rough it so. Do you know any 
drill, Val?" 

" Not a scrap." 

" I hope they won't worry you much. I must 
take you about to get the things to-morrow. Good- 
night; kiss me." 

With that kiss, soft and hot, between his eyes, 
and those words, ' I hope they won't worry you 
much,' in his ears, he sat down to a cigarette, be- 
fore a dying fire. The heat was out of him the 
glow of cutting a dash. It was all a damned heart- 
aching bore. ' I'll be even with that chap Jolly,' he 
thought, trailing up the stairs, past the room where 
his mother was biting her pillow to smother a sense 
of desolation which was trying to make her sob. 

And soon only one of the diners at James' was 
awake Soames, in his bedroom above his 
father's. 

So that fellow Jolyon was in Paris what was 
he doing there ? Hanging round Irene ! The last 
report from Polteed had hinted that there might be 
something soon. Could it be this? That fellow, 
with his beard and his cursed amused way of speak- 
ing son of the old man who had given him the 
nickname ' Man of Property,' and bought the fatal 
house from him. Soames had ever resented hav- 
ing had to sell the house at Robin Hill ; never for- 



^DINNER AT JAMES'S 229 

given his uncle for having bought it, or his cousin 
for living in it. 

Reckless of the cold, he threw his window up 
and gazed out across the Park. Bleak and dark 
the January night; little sound of traffic; a frost 
coming; bare trees ; a star or two. f I'll see Polteed 
to-morrow/ he thought. ' By God ! I'm mad, I 

think, to want her still. That fellow! If ? 

Urn! No!' 



CHAPTER X 

DEATH OF THE DOG BALTHASAR 

JOLYON, who had crossed from Calais by night, 
arrived at Robin Hill on Sunday morning. He had 
sent no word beforehand, so walked up from the 
station, entering his domain by the coppice gate. 
Coming to the log seat fashioned out of an old 
fallen trunk, he sat down, first laying his overcoat 
on it. ' Lumbago ! ' he thought ; ' that's what love 
ends in at my time of life!' And suddenly Irene 
seemed very near, just as she had been that day of 
rambling at Fontainebleau when they sat on a 
log to eat their lunch. Hauntingly near ! Odour 
drawn out of fallen leaves by the pale filtering sun- 
light soaked his nostrils. ' I'm glad it isn't spring,' 
he thought. With the scent of sap, and the song of 
birds, and the bursting of the blossoms, it would 
have been unbearable ! ' I hope I shall be over it 
by then, old fool that I am ! ' and picking up his coat, 
he walked on into the field. He passed the pond 
and mounted the hill slowly. Near the top a hoarse 
barking greeted him. Up on the lawn above the 
fernery he could see his old dog Balthasar. The 
animal, whose dim eyes took his master for a 
stranger, was warning the world against him. 
Jolyon gave his special whistle. Even at that dis- 

230 



DEATH OF THE DOG BALTHASAR 231 

tance of a hundred yards and more he could see the 
dawning recognition in the obese brown-white 
body. The old dog got off his haunches, and his 
tail, close-curled over his back began a feeble, ex- 
cited fluttering; he came waddling forward, gath- 
ered momentum, and disappeared over the edge of 
the fernery. Jolyon expected to meet him at the 
wicker gate, but Balthasar was not there, and, 
rather alarmed, he turned into the fernery. On 
his fat side, looking up with eyes already glazing, 
the old dog lay. 

"What is it, my poor old man?" cried Jolyon. 
Balthasar's curled and fluffy tail just moved; his 
filming eyes seemed saying: " I can't get up, master, 
but I'm glad to see you/' 

Jolyon knelt down; his eyes, very dimmed, could 
hardly see the slowly ceasing heave of the dog's 
side. He raised the head a little very heavy. 

" What is it, dear man? Where are you hurt? " 
The tail fluttered once; the eyes lost the look of life. 
Jolyon passed his hands all over the inert warm 
bulk. There was nothing the heart had simply 
failed in that obese body from the emotion of his 
master's return. Jolyon could feel the muzzle, 
where a few whitish bristles grew, cooling already 
against his lips. He stayed for some minutes 
kneeling, with his hand beneath the stiffening head. 
The body was very heavy when he bore it to the top 
of the field ; leaves had drifted there, and he strewed 
it with a covering of them ; there was no wind, and 
they would keep him from curious eyes until the 
afternoon. 'I'll bury him myself,' he thought. 
Eighteen years had gone since he first went into the 
St. John's Wood house with that tiny puppy in his 
pocket. Strange that the old dog should die just 



232 IN CHANCERY 

now! Was it an omen? He turned at the gate 
to look back at that russet mound, then went slowly 
towards the house, very choky in the throat. 

June was at home; she had come down hot-foot 
on hearing the news of Jolly's enlistment. His pa- 
triotism had conquered her feeling for the Boers. 
The atmosphere of his house was strange and pock- 
ety when Jolyon came in and told them of the dog 
Balthasar's death. The news had a unifying ef- 
fect. A link with the past had snapped the dog 
Balthasar ! Two of them could remember nothing 
before his day ; to June he represented the last years 
of her grandfather ; to Jolyon that life of domestic 
stress and aesthetic struggle before he came again 
into the kingdom of his father's love and wealth! 
And he was gone ! 

In the afternoon he and Jolly took picks and 
spades and went out to the field. They chose a 
spot close to the russet mound, so that they need not 
carry him far, and, carefully cutting off the sur- 
face turf, began to dig. They dug in silence for 
ten minutes, and then rested. 

" Well, old man/ 5 said Jolyon, " so you thought 
you ought ? " 

"Yes," answered Jolly; " I don't want to a bit, 
of course." 

How exactly those words represented Jolyon's 
own state of mind! 

" I admire you for it, old boy. I don't believe I 
should have done it at your age too much of a 
Forsyte, I'm afraid. But I suppose the type gets 
thinner with each generation. Your son, if you 
have one, may be a pure altruist ; who knows ? " 

"He won't be like me, then, Dad; I'm beastly 
selfish." 



DEATH OF THE DOG BALTHASAR 233 

" No, my dear, that you clearly are not." Jolly 
shook his head, and they dug again. 

" Strange life a dog's," said Jolyon suddenly ; 
" the only four- footer with rudiments of altruism, 
and a sense of God ! " 

Jolly looked at his father. 

"Do you believe in God, Dad? I've never 
known." 

At so searching a question from one to whom it 
was impossible to make a light reply, Jolyon stood 
for a moment feeling his back tried by the digging. 

" What do you mean by God?" he said; " there 
are two irreconcilable ideas of God. There's the 
unknowable Creative Principle one believes in 
That. And there's the Sum of altruism in man 
naturally one believes in That." 

" I see. That leaves out Christ, doesn't it? " 

Jolyon stared. Christ, the link between those 
two ideas! Out of the mouth of babes! Here 
was orthodoxy scientifically explained at last ! The 
sublime poem of the Christ life was man's attempt 
to join those two irreconcilable conceptions of God. 
And since the Sum of human altruism was as much 
a part of the Unknowable Creative Principle as 
anything else in Nature and the Universe, a worse 
link might have been chosen after all! Funny 
how one went through life without seeing it in that 
sort of way ! 

'' What do you think, old man ? " he said. 

Jolly frowned. " Of course, my first year we 
talked a good bit about that sort of thing. But in 
the second year one gives it up ; I don't know why 
it's awfully interesting." 

Jolyon remembered that he also had talked a 
good deal about it his first year at Cambridge, and 
given it up in his second. 



J 
234 IN CHANCERY 

" I suppose," said Jolly, " it's the second God, you 
mean, that old Balthasar had a sense of." 

" Yes, or he would never have burst his poor old 
heart because of something outside himself." 

"But wasn't that just selfish emotion, really?" 

Jolyon shook his head. " No, dogs are not pure 
Forsytes, they love something outside themselves." 

Jolly smiled. 

" Well, I think I'm one," he said. " You know, 
I only enlisted because I dared Val Dartie to." 

"But why?" 

" We bar each other," said Jolly shortly. 

" Ah ! " muttered Jolyon. So the feud went on, 
unto the third generation this modern feud 
which had no overt expression? 

' Shall I tell the boy about it ? ' he thought. But 
to what end if he had to stop short of his own 
part? 

And Jolly thought : ' It's for Holly to let him 
know about that chap. If she doesn't, it means she 
doesn't want him told, and I should be sneaking. 
Anyway, I've stopped it. I'd better leave well 
alone ! ' 

So they dug on in silence, till Jolyon said : 

" Now, old man, I think it's big enough." And, 
resting on their spades, they gazed down into the 
hole where a few leaves had drifted already on a 
sunset wind. 

"I can't bear this part of it," said Jolyon sud- 
denly. 

Let me do it, Dad. He never cared much for 



me." 



Jolyon shook his head. 

' We'll lift him very gently, leaves and all. I'd 
rather not see him again. I'll take his head. 
Now!" 



DEATH OF THE DOG BALTHASAR 235 

With extreme care they raised the old dog's body, 
whose faded tan and white showed here and there 
under the leaves stirred by the wind. They laid 
it, heavy, cold, and unresponsive, in the grave, and 
Jolly spread more leaves over it, while Jolyon, 
deeply afraid to show emotion before his son, began 
quickly shovelling the earth on to that still shape. 
There went the past! If only there were a joyful 
future to look forward to! It was like stamping 
down earth on one's own life. They replaced the 
turf carefully on the smooth little mound, and, 
grateful that they had spared each others' feelings, 
returned to the house arm-in-arm. 



CHAPTER XI 

TIMOTHY STAYS THE ROT 

ON Forsyte 'Change news of the enlistment spread 
fast, together with the report that June, not to be 
outdone, was going to become a Red Cross nurse. 
These events were so extreme, so subversive of 
pure Forsyteism, as to have a binding effect upon 
the family, and Timothy's was thronged next Sun- 
day afternoon by members trying to find out what 
they thought about it all, and exchange with each 
other a sense of family credit. Giles and Jesse 
Hayman would no longer defend the coast but go 
to South Africa quite soon ; Jolly and Val would be 
following in April; as to June well, you never 
knew what she would really do ! 

The retirement from Spion Kop and the absence 
of any good news from the seat of war imparted 
an air of reality to all this, clinched in startling 
fashion by Timothy. The youngest of the old 
Forsytes scarcely eighty, in fact popularly 
supposed to resemble their father, ' Superior Dos- 
set,' even in his best-known characteristic of drink- 
ing sherry had been invisible for so many years 
that he was almost mythical. A long generation 
had elapsed since the risks of a publisher's business 
had worked on his nerves at the age of forty, so 

236 



TIMOTHY STAYS THE ROT 237 

that he had got out with a mere thirty-five thousand 
pounds in the world, and started to make his living 
by careful investment. Putting by every year, at 
compound interest, he had doubled his capital in 
forty years without having once known what it was 
like to shake in his shoes over money matters. He 
was now putting aside some two thousand a year, 
and with the care he was taking of himself ex- 
pected, so Aunt Hester said, to double his capital 
again before he died. What he would do with it 
then, with his sisters dead and himself dead, was 
often mockingly queried by free spirits such as 
Francie, Euphemia, or young Nicholas' second, 
Christopher, whose spirit was so free that he had 
actually said he was going on the stage. All ad- 
mitted, however, that this was best known to Tim- 
othy himself, and possibly to Soames, who never 
divulged a secret. 

Those few Forsytes who had seen him reported a 
man of thick and robust appearance, not very tall, 
with a brown-red complexion, grey hair, and little 
of the refinement of feature with which most of the 
Forsytes had been endowed by ' Superior Dosset's ' 
wife, a woman of some beauty and a gentle temper- 
ament. It was known that he had taken surprising 
interest in the war, sticking flags into a map ever 
since it began, and there was uneasiness as to what 
would happen if the English were driven into the 
sea, when it would be almost impossible for him to 
put the flags in the right places. As to his knowl- 
edge of family movements or his views about them, 
little was known, save that Aunt Hester was al- 
ways declaring that he was very upset. It was, 
then, in the nature of a portent when Forsytes, ar- 
riving on the Sunday after the evacuation of Spion 



238 IN CHANCERY 

Kop, became conscious, one after the other, of a 
presence seated in the only really comfortable arm- 
chair, back to the light, concealing the lower part of 
his face with a large hand, and were greeted by the 
awed voice of Aunt Hester: 

" Your Uncle Timothy, my dear." 

Timothy's greeting to them all was somewhat 
identical ; and rather, as it were, passed over by him 
than expressed : 

" How de do? How de do? 'Xcuse me gettin' 
up!" 

Francie was present, and Eustace had come in his 
car; Winifred had brought Imogen, breaking the 
ice of the restitution' proceedings with the warmth 
of family appreciation at Val's enlistment; and 
Marian Tweetyman with the last news of Gile and 
Jesse. These with Aunts Juley and Hester, young 
Nicholas, Euphemia, and of all people ! 
George, who had come with Eustace in the car, 
constituted an assembly worthy of the family's 
palmiest days. There was not one chair vacant in 
the whole of the little drawing-room, and anxiety 
was felt lest someone else should arrive. 

The constraint caused by Timothy's presence 
having worn off a little, conversation took a mili- 
tary turn. George asked Aunt Juley when she was 
going out with the Red Cross, almost reducing her 
to a state of gaiety ; whereon he turned to Nicholas 
and said : 

"Young Nick's a warrior bold, isn't he? 
When's he going to don the wild khaki ? " 

Young Nicholas, smiling with a sort of sweet 
deprecation, intimated that of course his mother 
was very anxious. 

"The Dromios are off, I hear," said George, 



TIMOTHY STAYS THE ROT 239 

turning to Marian Tweetyman ; " we shall all be 
there soon. En avant, the Forsytes! Roll, bowl, 
or pitch ! Who's for a cooler ? " 

Aunt Juley gurgled, George was so droll! 
Should Hester get Timothy's map ! Then he could 
show them all where they were. 

At a sound from Timothy, interpreted as assent, 
Aunt Hester left the room. 

George pursued his image of the Forsyte ad- 
vance, addressing Timothy as Field Marshal; and 
Imogen, whom he had noted at once for ' a pretty 
filly/ as Vivandiere ; and holding his top-hat be- 
tween his knees, he began to beat it with imaginary 
drumsticks. The reception accorded to his fan- 
tasy was mixed. All laughed George was li- 
censed; but all felt that the family was being 
' rotted ' ; and this seemed to them unnatural, now 
that it was going to give five of its members to the 
service of the Queen. George might go too far; 
and there was relief when he got up, offered his arm 
to Aunt Juley, marched up to Timothy, saluted him, 
kissed his aunt with mock passion, said, "Oh ! what 
a treat, dear papa ! Come on, Eustace ! " and 
walked out, followed by the grave and fastidious 
Eustace, who had never smiled. Aunt Juley's be- 
wildered, " Fancy not waiting for the map ! You 
mustn't mind him, Timothy. He's so droll!" 
broke the hush, and Timothy removed the hand 
from his mouth. 

" I don't know what things are comin' to," he 
was heard to say. " What's all this about goin' out 
there? That's not the way to beat those Boers." 

Francie alone had the hardihood to observe : 

" What is, then, Uncle Timothy? " 

" All this new-fangled volunteerin' and expense 
lettin' money out of the country." 



240 IN CHANCERY 

Just then Aunt Hester brought in the map, hand- 
ling it like a baby with eruptions. With the assist- 
ance of Euphemia it was laid on the piano, a small 
Colwood grand, last played on, it was believed, the 
summer before Aunt Ann died, thirteen years ago. 
Timothy rose. He walked over to the piano, and 
stood looking at his map while they all gathered 
round. 

, " There you are," he said; " that's the position up 
to date; and very poor it is. H'm! " 

" Yes," said Francie, greatly daring, " but how 
are you going to alter it, Uncle Timothy, without 
more men?" 

" Men! " said Timothy; " you don't want men 
wastin' the country's money. You want a Napo- 
leon, he'd settle it in a month." 

" But if you haven't got him, Uncle Timothy? " 
'That's their business," replied Timothy. 
"What have we kept the Army up for to eat 
their heads off in time of peace ! They ought to be 
ashamed of themselves, comin' on the country to 
help them like this! Let every man stick to his 
business, and we shall get on." 

And looking round him, he added almost angrily : 

" Volunteering indeed ! Throwin' good money 
after bad! We must save! Conserve energy 
that's the only way." And with a prolonged sound, 
not quite a sniff and not quite a snort, he trod on 
Euphemia's toe, and went out, leaving a sensation 
and a faint scent of barley-sugar behind him. 

The effect of something said with conviction by 
one who has evidently made a sacrifice to say it is 
ever considerable. And the eight Forsytes left be- 
hind, all women except young Nicholas, were silent 
for a moment round the map. Then Francie said: 



TIMOTHY STAYS THE ROT 241 

" Really, I think he's right, you know. After 
all, what is the Army for? They ought to have 
known. It's only encouraging them." 

" My dear ! " cried Aunt Juley, " but they've been 
so progressive. Think of their giving up their 
scarlet. They were always so proud of it. And 
now they all look like convicts. Hester and I were 
saying only yesterday we were sure they must feel 
it very much. Fancy what the Iron Duke would 
have said ! " 

"The new colour's very smart," said Winifred; 
" Val looks quite nice in his." 

Aunt Juley sighed. 

" I do so wonder what Jolyon's boy is like. To 
think we've never seen him! His father must be 
so proud of him." 

"His father's in Paris," said Winifred. 

Aunt Hester's shoulder was seen to mount sud- 
denly, as if to ward off her sister's next remark, for 
Juley's crumpled cheeks had flushed. 

" We had dear little Mrs. MacAnder here yester- 
day, just back from Paris. And whom d'you think 
she saw there in the street? You'll never guess." 

" We shan't try, Auntie," said Euphemia. 

"Irene! Imagine! After all this time; walk- 
ing with a fair beard " 

" Auntie! you'll kill me! A fair beard " 

" I was going to say," said Aunt Juley severely, 
" a fair-bearded gentleman. And not a day older ; 
she was always so pretty," she added, with a sort of 
lingering apology. 

"Oh! tell us about her, Auntie," cried Imogen; 
" I can just remember her. She's the skeleton in 
the family cupboard, isn't she? And they're such 
fun." 



242 IN CHANCERY 

Aunt Hester sat down. Really, Juley had done 
it now! 

" She wasn't much of a skeleton as I remember 
her," murmured Euphemia, "extremely well-cov- 
ered." 

" My dear ! " said Aunt Juley, " what a peculiar 
way of putting it not very nice." 

" No, but what was she like? " persisted Imogen. 

" I'll tell you, my child," said Francie; " a kind of 
modern Venus, very well-dressed." 

Euphemia said sharply : " Venus was never 
dressed, and she had blue eyes of melting sapphire." 

At this juncture Nicholas took his leave. 

" Mrs. Nick, is awfully strict," said Francie with 
a laugh. 

"She has six children," said Aunt Juley; "it's 
very proper she should be careful." 

"Was Uncle Soames awfully fond of her?" pur- 
sued the inexorable Imogen, moving her dark lus- 
cious eyes from face to face. 

Aunt Hester made a gesture of despair, just as 
Aunt Juley answered: "Yes, your Uncle Soames 
was very much attached to her." 

" I suppose she ran off with someone ? " 

"No, certainly not; that is not precisely." 

"What did she do, then, Auntie?" 

"Come along, Imogen," said Winifred, "we 
must be getting back." 

But Aunt Juley interjected resolutely : " She 
she didn't behave at all well." 

" Oh, bother ! " cried Imogen; " that's as far as I 
ever get." 

" Well, my dear," said Francie, " she had a love 
affair which ended with the young man's death ; and 
then she left your uncle. I always rather liked 
her." 



TIMOTHY STAYS. THE ROT 243 

" She used to give me chocolates," murmured 
Imogen, " and smell nice." 

" Of course ! " remarked Euphemia. 

"Not of course at all!" replied Francie, who 
used a particularly expensive essence of gilly-flower 
herself. 

" I can't think what we are about," said Aunt 
Juley, raising her hands, " talking of such things ! " 

"Was she divorced?" asked Imogen from the 
door. 

" Certainly not," cried Aunt Juley ; " that is 
certainly not-" 

A sound was heard over by the far door. Tim- 
othy had re-entered the back drawing-room. " I've 
come for my map," he said. "Who's been di- 
vorced?" 

" No one, Uncle," replied Francie with perfect 
truth. 

Timothy took his map off the piano. 

" Don't let's have anything of that sort in the 
family," he said. "All this enlistin's bad enough. 
The country's breakin' up ; I don't know what were 
comin' to." He shook a thick finger at the room : 
" Too many women nowadays, and they don't know 
what they want." 

So saying, he grasped the map firmly with both 
hands, and went out as if afraid of being answered. 

The seven women whom he had addressed broke 
into a subdued murmur, out of which emerged 

Francie's, " Really, the Forsytes ! " and Aunt 

Juley's: "He must have his feet in mustard and 
hot water to-night, Hester; will you tell Jane? 
The blood has gone to his head again, I'm 
afraid.". . . 

That evening, when she and Hester were sitting 



244 IN CHANCERY 

alone after dinner, she dropped a stitch in her cro- 
chet, and looked up : 

" Hester, I can't think where I've heard that dear 
Soames wants Irene to come back to him again. 
Who was it told us that George had made a funny 
drawing of him with the words, ' He won't be happy 
till he gets it'?" 

" Eustace," answered Aunt Hester from behind 
The Times ; " he had it in his pocket, but he wouldn't 
show it us." 

Aunt Juley was silent, ruminating. The clock 
ticked, The Times crackled, the fire sent forth its 
rustling purr. Aunt Juley dropped another stitch. 

" Hester," she said, " I have had such a dreadful 
thought" 

' Then don't tell me," said Aunt Hester quickly. 

" Oh ! but I must. You can't think how dread- 
ful ! " Her voice sank to a whisper : 

" Jolyon Jolyon, they say, has a has a fair 
beard, now." 



CHAPTER XII 

PROGRESS OF THE CHASE 

Two days after the dinner at James's, Mr. Polteed 
provided Soames with food for thought. 

" A gentleman," he said, consulting the key con- 
cealed in his left hand, " 47 as we say, has been pay- 
ing marked attention to 17 during the last month in 
Paris. But at present there seems to have been 
nothing very conclusive. The meetings have all 
been in public places, without concealment res- 
taurants, the Opera, the Comique, the Louvre, Lux- 
embourg Gardens, lounge of the hotel, and so forth. 
She has not yet been traced to his rooms, nor vice 
versa. They went to Fontainebleau but nothing 
of value. In short, the situation is promising, but 
requires patience." And looking up suddenly, he 
added: 

"One rather curious point 47 has the same 
name as er 31 ! " 

" The fellow knows I'm her husband," thought 
Soames. 

" Christian name an odd one Jolyon," con- 
tinued Mr. Polteed. "We know his address in 
Paris and his residence here. We don't wish, of 
course, to be running a wrong hare." 

" Go on with it, but be careful," said Soames dog- 
gedly. 

245 



246 IN CHANCERY 

Instinctive certainty that this detective fellow 
had fathomed his secret made him all the more 
reticent. 

" Excuse me," said Mr. Polteed, " I'll just see if 
there's anything fresh in." 

He returned with some letters. Relocking the 
door, he glanced at the envelopes. 

" Yes, here's a personal one from 19 to myself." 

"Well?" said Soames. 

"Urn!" said Mr. Polteed, "she says: '47 left 
for England to-day. Address on his baggage: 
Robin Hill. Parted from 17 in Louvre Gallery at 
3 :30 ; nothing very striking. Thought it best to stay 
and continue observation of 17. You will deal with 
47 in England if you think desirable, no doubt.' " 
And Mr. Polteed lifted an unprofessional glance on 
Soames, as though he might be storing material 
for a book on human nature after he had gone out 
of business. " Very intelligent woman, 19, and a 
wonderful make-up. Not cheap, but earns her 
money well. There's no suspicion of being shad- 
owed so far. But after a time, as you know, sensi- 
tive people are liable to get the feeling of it, without 
anything definite to go on. I should rather advise 
letting-up on 17, and keeping an eye on 47. We 
can't get at correspondence without great risk. I 
hardly advise that at this stage. But you can tell 
your client that it's looking up very well." And 
again his narrowed eyes gleamed at his taciturn 
customer. 

" No," said Soames suddenly, " I prefer that you 
should keep the watch going discreetly in Paris, and 
not concern yourself with this end." 

" Very well," replied Mr. Polteed, " we can do it." 

" What what is the manner between them? " 



PROGRESS OF THE CHASE 247 

" I'll read you what she says," said Mr. Policed, 
unlocking a bureau drawer and taking out a file of 
papers ; " she sums it up somewhere confidentially. 
Yes, here it is! '17 very attractive conclude 47 
longer in the tooth '(slang for age, you know) 
'distinctly gone waiting his time 17 perhaps 
holding off for terms, impossible to say without 
knowing more. But inclined to think on the whole 
doesn't know her mind likely to act on impulse 
some day. Both have style." 

' What does that mean? " said Soames between 
close lips. 

" Well," murmured Mr. Polteed with a smile, 
showing many white teeth, " an expression we use. 
In other words, it's not likely to be a week-end busi- 
ness they'll come together seriously or not at all." 
;' H'm ! " muttered Soames, " that's all, is it? " 
" Yes," said Mr. Polteed, " but quite promising." 
' Spider ! ' thought Soames. " Good-day ! " 
He walked into the Green Park that he might 
cross to Victoria Station and take the Underground 
into the City. For so late in January it was warm ; 
sunlight, through the haze, sparkled on the frosty 
grass an illumined cobweb of a day. 

Little spiders and great spiders! And the 
greatest spinner of all, his own tenacity, for ever 
wrapping its cocoon of threads round any clear way 
out. What was that fellow hanging round Irene 
for ? Was it really as Polteed suggested ? Or was 
Jolyon but taking compassion on her loneliness, as 
he would call it sentimental radical chap that he 
had always been? If it were, indeed, as Polteed 
hinted ! Soames stood still. It could not be ! The 
fellow was six years older than himself, no better 
looking! No richer! What attraction had he? 



248 IN CHANCERY 

' Besides, he's come back/ he thought ; ' that 

doesn't look I'll go and see him ! ' and, taking 

out a card, he wrote: 

" If you can spare half an hour some afternoon 
this week, I shall be at the Connoisseurs any day 
between 5.30 and 6, or I could come to the Hotch 
Potch if you prefer it. I want to see you. S. F." 

He walked up St. James's Street and confided it 
to the porter at the Hotch Potch. 

" Give Mr. Jolyon Forsyte this as soon as he 
comes in," he said, and took one of the new motor 
cabs into the City. . . . 

Jolyon received that card the same afternoon, 
and turned his face towards the Connoisseurs. 
What did Soames want now ? Had he got wind of 
Paris ? And stepping across St. James's Street, he 
determined to make no secret of his visit. ' But it 
won't do,' he thought, ' to let him know she's there, 
unless he knows already.' In this complicated state 
of mind he was conducted to where Soames was 
drinking tea in a small bay-window. 

" No tea, thanks," said Jolyon, " but I'll go on 
smoking if I may." 

The curtains were not yet drawn, though the 
lamps outside were lighted; the two cousins sat 
waiting on each other. 

" You've been in Paris, I hear," said Soames at 
last. 

"Yes; just back." 

" Young Val told me ; he and your boy are going 
off, then?" 

Jolyon nodded. 

" You didn't happen to see Irene, I suppose. It 
appears she's abroad somewhere." 

Jolyon wreathed himself in smoke before ke an- 
swered: " Yes, I saw her." 



PROGRESS OF THE CHASE 249 

"How was she?" 

" Very well." 

There was another silence; then Soames roused 
himself in his chair. 

" When I saw you last/' he said, " I was in two 
minds. We talked, and you expressed your opinion. 
I don't wish to re-open that discussion. I only 
wanted to say this: My position with her is ex- 
tremely difficult. I don't want you to go using your 
influence against me. What happened is a very long 
time ago. I'm going to ask her to let bygones be 
bygones." 

" You hare asked her, you know," murmured 
Jolyon. 

" The idea was new to her then ; it came as a 
shock. But the more she thinks of it, the more she 
must see that it's the only way out for both of us." 

" That's not my impression of her state of mind," 
said Jolyon with particular calm. " And, forgive 
my saying, you misconceive the matter if you think 
reason comes into it at all." 

He saw his cousin's pale face grow paler he 
had used, without knowing it, Irene's own words. 

"Thanks," muttered Soames, "but I see things 
perhaps more plainly than you think. I only want to 
be sure that you won't try to influence her against 



me." 



" I don't know what makes you think I have any 
influence/' said Jolyon; " but if I have I'm bound to 
use it in the direction of what I think is her happi- 
ness. I am what they call a ' feminist/ I believe." 

" Feminist ! " repeated Soames, as if seeking to 
gain time. " Does that mean that you're against 
me?" 

" Bluntly/' said Jolyon, " I'm against any woman 



250 IN CHANCERY 

living with any man whom she definitely dislikes. 
It appears to me rotten." 

" And I suppose each time you see her you put 
your opinions into her mind." 

" I am not likely to be seeing her." 

" Not going back to Paris? " 

" Not so far as I know," said Jolyon, conscious of 
the intent watchfulness in Soames' face. 

" Well, that's all I had to say. Anyone who comes 
between man and wife, you know, incurs heavy re- 
sponsibility." 

Jolyon rose and made him a slight bow. 

" Good-bye," he said, and, without offering to 
shake hands, moved away, leaving Soames staring 
after him. ' We Forsytes/ thought Jolyon, hailing 
a cab, ' are very civilised. With simpler folk that 
might have come to a row. If it weren't for my 

boy going to the war " The war! A gust 

of his old doubt swept over him. A precious war! 
Domination of peoples or of women ! Attempts to 
master and possess those who did not want you! 
The negation of gentle decency ! Possession, vested 
rights ; and anyone ' agin ' 'em outcast ! ' Thank 
Heaven ! ' he thought, f I always felt ' agin ' 'em, 
anyway ! ' Yes ! Even before his first disastrous 
marriage he could remember fuming over the blud- 
geoning of Ireland, or the matrimonial suits of 
women trying to be free of men they loathed. Par- 
sons would have it that freedom of soul and body 
were quite different things! Pernicious doctrine, 
that ! Body and soul could not thus be separated. 
Free will was the strength of any tie, and not its 
weakness. ' I ought to have told Soames/ he 
thought, 'that I think him comic. Ah! but he's 
tragic, too ! ' 



PROGRESS OF THE CHASE 251 

Was there anything indeed more tragic in the 
world than a man enslaved by his own possessive 
instinct, who couldn't see the sky for it, or even 
enter fully into what another person felt ! ' I must 
write and warn her/ he thought ; ' he's going to 
have another try.' And all the way home to Robin 
Hill he rebelled at the strength of that duty to his 
son which prevented him from posting back to 
Paris. . . . 

But Soames sat long in his chair, the prey of a no 
less gnawing ache a jealous ache, as if it had 
been revealed to him that this fellow held precedence 
of himself, and had spun fresh threads of resistance 
to his way out. ' Does that mean that you're against 
me? ' he had got nothing out of that disingenuous 
question. Feminist ! Phrasey fellow ! ' I mustn't 
rush things,' he thought. ' I have some breathing 
space ; he's not going back to Paris, unless he was 
lying. I'll let the spring come ! ' Though how the 
spring would serve him, save by adding to his ache, 
he could not tell. And gazing down into the street, 
where figures were passing from pool to pool of the 
light from the high lamps, he thought : ' Nothing 
seems any good nothing seems worth while. I'm 
lonely that's the trouble.' 

He closed his eyes ; and at once he seemed to see 
Irene, in a dark street below a church passing, 
turning her neck so that he caught the gleam of her 
eyes and her white forehead under a little dark hat, 
which had gold spangles on it and a veil hanging 
down behind. He opened his eyes so vividly he 
had seen her ! A woman was passing below, but not 
she ! Oh no, there was nothing there ! 



CHAPTER XIII 

' HERE WE ARE AGAIN ! ' 

IMOGEN'S frocks for her first season exercised the 
judgment of her mother and the purse of her grand- 
father all through the month of March. With 
Forsyte tenacity Winifred quested for perfection. 
It took her mind off the slowly approaching rite 
which would give her a freedom but doubtfully de- 
sired; took her mind, too, off her boy and his fast 
approaching departure for a war from which the 
news remained disquieting. Like bees busy on sum- 
mer flowers, or bright gadflies hovering and darting 
over spiky autumn blossoms, she and her 'little 
daughter/ tall nearly as herself and with a bust 
measurement not far inferior, hovered in the shops 
of Regent Street, the establishments of Hanover 
Square and of Bond Street, lost in consideration and 
the feel of fabrics. Dozens of young women of 
striking deportment and peculiar gait paraded be- 
fore Winifred and Imogen, draped in ' creations/ 
The models ' Very new, modom ; quite the latest 
thing ' which those two reluctantly turned down 
would have filled a museum ; the models which they 
were obliged to have nearly emptied James' bank. 
It was no good doing things by halves, Winifred 
felt, in view of the need for making this first and 

252 



'HERE WE ARE AGAIN' 253 

sole untarnished season a conspicuous success. 
Their patience in trying the patience of those im- 
personal creatures who swam about before them 
could alone have been displayed by such as were 
moved by faith. It was for Winifred a long pros- 
tration before her dear goddess Fashion, fervent 
as a Catholic might make before the Virgin; for 
Imogen an experience by no means too unpleasant 

she often looked so nice, and flattery was implicit 
everywhere: in a word it was ' amusing.' 

On the afternoon of the 20th of March, having, 
as it were, gutted Skyward's, they had sought re- 
freshment over the way at Caramel and Baker's, 
and, stored with chocolate frothed at the top with 
cream, turned homewards through Berkeley Square 
of an evening touched with spring. Opening the 
door freshly painted a light olive-green ; nothing 
neglected that year to give Imogen a good send-off 

Winifred passed towards the silver basket to 
see if anyone had called, and suddenly her nostrils 
twitched. What was that scent ? 

Imogen had taken up a novel sent from the 
library, and stood absorbed. Rather sharply, be- 
cause of the queer feeling in her breast, Winifred 
said: 

" Take that up, dear, and have a rest before din- 



ner." 



Imogen, still reading, passed up the stairs. Wini- 
fred heard the door of her room slammed to, and 
drew a long savouring breath. Was it spring tickling 
her senses whipping up nostalgia for her ' clown/ 
against all wisdom and outraged virtue? A male 
scent! A faint reek of cigars and lavender-water 
not smelt since that early autumn night six months 
ago, when she had called him * the limit.' Whence 



254 IN CHANCERY 

came it, or was it ghost of scent sheer emanation 
from memory ? She looked round her. Nothing 
not a thing, no tiniest disturbance of her hall, nor 
of the dining-room. A little day-dream of a scent 

illusory, saddening, silly! In the silver basket 
were new cards, two with ' Mr. and Mrs. Polegate 
Thorn/ and one with ' Mr. Polegate Thorn ' thereon; 
she sniffed them, but they smelled severe. ' I must 
be tired/ she thought. ' I'll go and lie down/ Up- 
stairs, the drawing-room was darkened, waiting for 
some hand to give it evening light ; and she passed 
on up to her bed-room. This, too, was half -cur- 
tained and dim, for it was six o'clock. Winifred 
threw off her coat that scent again ! then stood, 
as if shot, transfixed against the bed-rail. Some- 
thing dark had risen from the sofa in the far cor- 
ner. A word of horror in her family escaped 
her: "God!" 

" It's I Monty," said a voice. 

Clutching the bed-rail, Winifred reached up and 
turned the switch of the light hanging above her 
dressing-table. He appeared just on the rim of 
the light's circumference, emblazoned from the ab- 
sence of his watch-chain down to boots neat and 
sooty brown, but yes ! split at the toe-cap. His 
chest and face were shadowy. Surely he was thin 

or was it a trick of the light? He advanced, 
lighted now from toe-cap to the top of his dark 
head surely a little grizzled ! His complexion had 
darkened, sallowed; his black moustache had lost 
boldness, become sardonic; there were lines which 
she did not know about his face. There was no pin 
in his tie. His suit ah ! she knew that but 
how unpressed, and unglossy ! She stared again at 
the toe-cap of his boot. Something big and relent- 



'HERE WE ARE AGAIN ' 255 

less had been ' at him/ had turned and twisted, 
raked and scraped him. And she stayed, not speak- 
ing, motionless, staring at that crack across the toe, 

" Well ! " he said, " I got the letter. I'm back." 

Winifred's bosom began to heave. The nostalgia 
for her husband which had rushed up with that 
scent was struggling with a deeper jealousy than 
any she had felt yet. There he was a dark, and 
as if harried, shadow of his sleek and brazen self ! 
What force had done this to him squeezed him 
like an orange to its dry rind ! That woman ! 

" I'm back/' he said again. " I've had a beastly 
time. By God ! I came steerage. I've got nothing 
but what I stand in, and that bag." 

" And who has the rest? " cried Winifred, sud- 
denly alive. " How dared you come? You knew 
it was just for divorce that you got that letter to 
come back. Don't touch me ! " 

They held each to the rail of the big bed where 
they had spent so many years of nights together. 
Many times, yes many times she had wanted him 
back. But now that he had come she was filled 
with this cold and deadly resentment. He put his 
hand up to his moustache; but did not frizz and 
twist it in the old familiar way, he just pulled it 
downwards. 

"Gad!" he said: "If you knew the time I've 
had!" 

"I'm glad I don't!" 

"Are the kids all right?" 

Winifred nodded. " How did you get in? " 

" With my key." 

" Then the maids don't know. You can't stay 
here, Monty." 

He uttered a Httle sardonic laugh. 



256 IN CHANCERY 

"Where then?" 
"Anywhere." 

" Well, look at me ! That that damned " 

" If you mention her" cried Winifred, " I go 
straight out to Park Lane and I don't come back." 

Suddenly he did a simple thing, but so uncharac- 
teristic that it moved her. He shut his eyes. It was 
as if he had said: 'All right! I'm dead to the 
world!' 

" You can have a room for the night," she said; 
" your things are still here. Only Imogen is at 
home." 

He leaned back against the bed-rail. " Well, it's 
in your hands," and his own made a writhing move- 
ment. " I've been through it. You needn't hit too 
hard it isn't worth while. I've been frightened; 
I've been frightened, Freddie." 

That old pet name, disused for years and years, 
sent a shiver through Winifred. 

' What am I to do with him ? ' she thought. 
' What in God's name am I to do with him ? ' 

"Got a cigarette?" 

She gave him one from a little box she kept up 
there for when she couldn't sleep at night, and 
lighted it. With that action the matter-of-fact side 
of her nature came to life again. 

" Go and have a hot bath. I'll put some clothes 
out for you in the dressing-room. We can talk 
later." 

He nodded, and fixed his eyes on her they 
looked half-dead, or was it that the folds in the lids 
had become heavier? 

'He's not the same/ she thought. He would 
never be quite the same again! But what would 
he be? 



'HERE WE ARE AGAIN' 257 

" All right," he said, and went towards the door. 
He even moved differently, like a man who has 
lost illusion and doubts whether it is worth while to 
move at all. 

When he was gone, and she heard the water in 
the bath running, she put out a complete set of gar- 
ments on the bed in his dressing-room, then went 
downstairs and fetched up the biscuit box and 
whisky. Putting on her coat again, and listening 
a moment at the bathroom door, she went down and 
out. In the street she hesitated. Past seven o'clock ! 
Would Soames be at his Club or at Park Lane? 
She turned towards the latter. Back ! Soames had 
always feared it she had sometimes hoped it. 
Back! So like him clown that he was with 
this : ' Here we are again ! ' to make fools of them 
all of the Law, of Soames, of herself! Yet to 
have done with the Law, not to have that murky 
cloud hanging over her and the children ! What a 
relief ! Ah ! but how to accept his return ? That 
' woman ' had ravaged him, taken from him passion 
such as he had never bestowed on herself, such as 
she had not thought him capable of. There was 
the sting ! That selfish, blatant ' clown ' of hers, 
whom she herself had never really stirred, had been 
swept and ungarnished by another woman ! Insult- 
ing! Too insulting! Not right, not decent to take 
him back ! And yet she had asked for him ; the Law 
perhaps would make her now ! He was as much her 
husband as ever she had put herself out of court ! 
And all he wanted, no doubt, was money to keep 
him in cigars and lavender-water! That scent! 
1 After all, I'm not old/ she thought, ' not old yet ! ' 
But that woman who had reduced him to those 
words : ' I've been through it. I've been frightened 



25 8 IN CHANCERY 

frightened, Freddie!' She neared her father's 
house, driven this way and that, while all the time 
the Forsyte undertow was drawing her to deep con- 
clusion that after all he was her property, to be held 
against a robbing world. And so she came to 
James's. 

"Mr. Soames? In his room? I'll go up; don't 
say I'm here." 

Her brother was dressing. She found him before 
a mirror, tying a black bow with an air of despising 
its ends. 

" Hullo ! " he said, contemplating her in the glass ; 
" what's wrong? ' ; 

" Monty ! " said Winifred stonily. 

Soames spun round. " What ! " 

"Back!" 

"Hoist," muttered Soames, "with our own pe- 
tard. Why the deuce didn't you let me try cruelty ? 
I always knew it was too much risk this way." 

"Oh! Don't talk about that I What shall I do ?" 

Soames answered, with a deep, deep sound. 

"Well?" said Winifred impatiently. 

' What has he to say for himself? " 

" Nothing. One of his boots is split across the 
toe." 

Soames stared at her. 

" Ah ! " he said, " of course ! On his beam ends. 
So it begins again! This'll about finish father." 

" Can't we keep it from him ? " 

" Impossible. He has an uncanny flair for any- 
thing that's worrying." 

And he brooded, with fingers hooked into his blue 
silk braces. ' There ought to be some way in law," 
he muttered, " to make him safe." 

" No," cried Winifred, " I won't be made a fool of 
again; I'd sooner put up with him." 



'HERE WE ARE AGAIN ' 259 

The two stared at each other. Their hearts were 
full of feeling, but they could give it no expression 
Forsytes that they were. 

" Where did you leave him? " 

" In the bath/' and Winifred gave a little bitter 
laugh. " The only thing he's brought back is lav- 
ender-water." 

" Steady ! " said Soames ; " you're thoroughly up- 
set. I'll go back with you." 

"What's the use?" 
' We ought to make terms with him." 

" Terms ! It'll always be the same. When he re- 
covers cards and betting, drink and ! " She 

was silent, remembering the look on her husband's 
face. The burnt child the burnt child! Per- 
haps ! 

" Recovers? " replied Soames: " Is he ill? " 

" No; burnt out; that's all." 

Soames took his waistcoat from a chair and put 
it on, he took his coat and got into it, he scented his 
handkerchief with eau-de-Cologne, threaded his 
watch-chain, and said : " We haven't any luck." 

And in the midst of her own trouble Winifred was 
sorry for him, as if in that little saying he had re- 
vealed deep trouble of his own. 

" I'd like to see mother," she said. 

" She'll be with father in their room. Come down 
quietly to the study. I'll get her." 

Winifred stole down to the little dark study, 
chiefly remarkable for a Canaletto too doubtful to 
be placed elsewhere, and a fine collection of Law 
Reports unopened for many years. Here she stood, 
with her back to maroon-coloured curtains close- 
drawn, staring at the empty grate, till her mother 
came in followed by Soames. 



260 IN CHANCERY 

" Oh! my poor dear! " said Emily: " How mis- 
erable you look in here! This is too bad of him, 

really!" 

As a family they had so guarded themselves from 
the expression of all unfashionable emotion that it 
was impossible to go up and give her daughter a 
good hug. But there was comfort in her cushioned 
voice, and her still dimpled shoulders under some 
rare black lace. Summoning pride and the desire 
not to distress her mother, Winifred said in her 
most off-hand voice : 

" It's all right, Mother ; no good fussing." 

" I don't see," said Emily, looking at Soames, 
" why Winifred shouldn't tell him that she'll prose- 
cute him if he doesn't keep off the premises. He 
took her pearls ; and if he's not brought them back, 
that's quite enough." 

Winifred smiled. They would all plunge about 
with suggestions of this and that, but she knew 
already what she would be doing, and that was 
nothing. The feeling that, after all, she had won a 
sort of victory, retained her property, was every 
moment gaining ground in her. No ! if she wanted 
to punish him, she could do it at home without the 
world knowing. 

' Well," said Emily, " come into the dining-room 
comfortably you must stay and have dinner with 
us. Leave it to me to tell your father." And, as 
Winifred moved towards the door, she turned out 
the light. Not till then did they see the disaster in 
the corridor. 

There, attracted by light from a room never 
lighted, James was standing with his dun-coloured 
camel-hair shawl folded about him, so that his arms 
were not free and his silvered head looked cut off 



'HERE WE ARE AGAIN' 361 

from his fashionably trousered legs as if by an ex- 
panse of desert. He stood, inimitably stork-like, 
with an expression as if he saw before him a frog 
too large to swallow. 

" What's all this ? " he said. " Tell your father ? 
You never tell me anything." 

The moment found Emily without reply. It was 
Winifred who went up to him, and, laying one hand 
on each of his swathed, helpless arms, said : 

" Monty's not gone bankrupt, Father. He's only 
come back." 

They all three expected something serious to 
happen, and were glad she had kept that grip of 
his arms, but they did not know the depth of root 
in that shadowy old Forsyte. Something wry oc- 
curred about his shaven mouth and chin, something 
scratchy between those long silvery whiskers. Then 
he said with a sort of dignity: " He'll be the death 
of me. I knew how it would be." 

"You mustn't worry, Father," said Winifred 
calmly. " I mean to make him behave." 

" Ah ! " said James. " Here, take this thing off, 
I'm hot." They unwound the shawl. He turned, 
and walked firmly to the dining-room. 

" I don't want any soup," he said to Warmson, 
and sat down in his chair. They all sat down too, 
Winifred still in her hat, while Warmson laid the 
fourth place. When he left the room, James said : 
" What's he brought back? " 

" Nothing, Father." 

James concentrated his eyes on his own image in 
a table-spoon. " Divorce ! " he muttered ; " rubbish ! 
What was I about ? I ought to have paid him an 
allowance to stay out of England. Soames ! you go 
and propose it to him." 



262 IN CHANCERY 

It seemed so right and simple a suggestion^ that 
even Winifred was surprised when she said: " No, 
I'll keep him now he's back; he must just behave 
that's all." 

They all looked at her. It had always been known 
that Winifred had pluck. 

"Out there ! " said James elliptically, " who knows 
what cut-throats ! You look for his revolver ! Don't 
go to bed without. You ought to have Warmson to 
sleep in the house. I'll see him myself to-morrow.'* 

They were touched by this declaration, and Emily 
said comfortably: " That's right, James, we won't 
have any nonsense." 

" Ah!" muttered James darkly, "I can't tell." 

The advent of Warmson with fish diverted con- 
versation. 

When, directly after dinner, Winifred went over 
to kiss her father good-night, he looked up with 
eyes so full of question and distress that she put all 
the comfort she could into her voice. 

" It's all right, Daddy, dear ; don't worry. I 
shan't need anyone he's quite bland. I shall only 
be upset if you worry. Good-night, bless you ! " 

James repeated the words, " Bless you ! " as if he 
did not quite know what they meant, and his eyes 
followed her to the door. 

She reached home before nine, and went straight 
upstairs. 

Dartie was lying on the bed in his dressing-room, 
fully re-dressed in a blue serge suit and pumps; 
his arms were crossed behind his head, and an ex- 
tinct cigarette drooped from his mouth. 

Winifred remembered ridiculously the flowers in 
her window-boxes after a blazing summer day ; the 
way they lay, or rather stood parched, yet rested 



'HERE WE ARE AGAIN 1 263 

by the sun's retreat. It was as if a little dew had 
come already on her burnt-up husband. 

He said apathetically : " I suppose you Ve been to 
Park Lane. How's the old man? " 

Winifred could not help the bitter answer : " Not 
dead." 

He winced, actually he winced. 

" Understand, Monty," she said, " I will not have 
him worried. If you aren't going to behave your- 
self, you may go back, you may go anywhere. Have 
you had dinner ? " 

" No." 

"Would you like some ?" 

He shrugged his shoulders. 

" Imogen offered me some. I didn't want any." 

Imogen ! In the plenitude of emotion Winifred 
had forgotten her. 

" So you've seen her? What did she say? " 

" She gave me a kiss/' 

With mortification Winifred saw his dark sar- 
donic face relaxed. ' Yes ! ' she thought, ' he cares 
for her, not for me a bit.' 

Dartie's eyes were moving from side to side. 

" Does she know about me? " he said. 

It flashed through Winifred that here was the 
weapon she needed. He minded their knowing! 

" No. Val knows". The others don't; they only 
know you went away." 

She heard him sigh with relief. 

" But they shall know," she said firmly, " if you 
give me cause." 

" All right ! " he muttered, " hit me ! I'm down ! " 
Winifred went up to the bed. " Look here, Monty ! 
I don't want to hit you. I don't want to hurt you. 
I shan't allude to anything. I'm not going to worry. 



264 IN CHANCERY 

What's the use? " She was silent a moment. " I 
can't stand any more, though, and I won't ! You'd 
better know. You've made me suffer. But I used 

to be fond of you. For the sake of that " 

She met the heavy-lidded gaze of his brown eyes 
with the downward stare of her green-grey eyes; 
touched his hand suddenly, turned her back, and 
went into her room. 

She sat there a long time before her glass, finger- 
ing her rings, thinking of this subdued dark man, 
almost a stranger to her, on the bed in the other 
room ; resolutely not ' worrying', but gnawed by 
jealousy of what he had been through, and now 
and again just visited by pity. 



CHAPTER XIV 

OUTLANDISH NIGHT 

SOAMES doggedly let the spring come no easy 
task for one conscious that time was flying, his 
birds in the bush no nearer the hand, no issue from 
the web anywhere visible. Mr. Polteed reported 
nothing, except that his watch went on costing a 
lot of money. Val and his cousin were gone to the 
war, whence came news more favourable; Dartie 
was behaving himself so far ; James had retained his 
health; business prospered almost terribly there 
was nothing to worry Soames except that he was 
' held up/ could take no step in any direction. 

He did not exactly avoid Soho, for he could not 
afford to let them think that he had ' piped off/ as 
James would have put it he might want to ' pipe 
on ' again at any minute. But he had to be so re- 
strained and cautious that he would often pass the 
door of the Restaurant Bretagne without going in, 
and wander out of the purlieus of that region which 
always gave him the feeling of having been posses- 
sively irregular. 

He wandered thus one May night into Regent 
Street and the most amazing crowd he had ever 
seen : a shrieking, whistling, dancing, jostling, gro- 
tesque and formidably jovial crowd, with false noses 

265 



2 66 IN CHANCERY 

and mouth-organs, penny whistles and long feath- 
ers, every appanage of idiocy, as it seemed to him. 
Maf eking ! Of course, it had been relieved ! Good ! 
But was that an excuse ? Who were these people, 
what were they, where had they come from into the 
West End? His face was tickled, his ears whistled 
into. Girls cried : ' Keep your hair on, stucco ! ' A 
youth so knocked off his top-hat that he recovered it 
with difficulty. Crackers were exploding beneath 
his nose, between his feet. He was bewildered, ex- 
asperated, offended. This stream of people came 
from every quarter, as if impulse had unlocked 
flood-gates, let flow waters of whose existence he 
had heard, perhaps, but believed in never. This, 
then, was the populace, the innumerable living nega- 
tion of gentility and Forsyteism. This was egad ! 
Democracy ! It stank, yelled, was hideous ! In 
the East End, or even Soho, perhaps but here in 
Regent Street, in Piccadilly ! What were the police 
about! In 1900, Soames, with his Forsyte thou- 
sands, had never seen the cauldron with the lid off ; 
and now looking into it, could hardly believe his 
scorching eyes. The whole thing was unspeakable ! 
These people had no restraint, they seemed to think 
him funny; such swarms of them, rude, coarse, 
laughing and what laughter ! Nothing sacred to 
them ! He shouldn't be surprised if they began to 
break windows. In Pall Mall, past those august 
dwellings, to enter which people paid sixty pounds, 
this shrieking, whistling, dancing dervish of a 
crowd was swarming. From the Club windows his 
own kind were looking out on them with regulated 
amusement. They didn't realise! Why, this was 
serious might come to anything ! The crowd was 
cheerful, but some day they would come in differ- 



OUTLANDISH NIGHT 267 

ent mood ! He remembered there had been a mob 
in the late eighties, when he was at Brighton; they 
had smashed things and made speeches. But more 
than dread, he felt a deep surprise. They were 
hysterical it wasn't English ! And all about the 
relief of a little town as big as Watford, six thou- 
sand miles away. Restraint, reserve ! Those quali- 
ties to him more dear almost than life, those indis- 
pensable attributes of property and culture, where 
were they? It wasn't English ! No, it wasn't Eng- 
lish! So Soames brooded, threading his way on. 
It was as if he had suddenly caught sight of some- 
one cutting the covenant ' for quiet possession ' out 
of his legal documents ; or of a monster lurking and 
stalking out in the future, casting its shadow before. 
Their want of stolidity, their want of reverence! 
It was like discovering that nine-tenths of the people 
of England were foreigners. And if that were so 
then, anything might happen ! 

At Hyde Park Corner he ran into George Forsyte, 
very sunburnt from racing, holding a false nose in 
his hand. 

" Hallo, Soames! " he said; " have a nose! " 

Soames responded with a pale smile. 

" Got this from one of these sportsmen," went 
on George, who had evidently been dining; " had to 
lay him out for trying to bash my hat. I say, one 
of these days we shall have to fight these chaps, 
they're getting so damned cheeky all radicals and 
socialists. They want our goods. You tell Uncle 
James that, it'll make him sleep." 

'In vino veritas' thought Soames, but he only 
nodded, and passed bn up Hamilton place. There 
was but a trickle of roysterers in Park Lane, not 
very noisy. And looking up at the houses he 



268 IN CHANCERY 

thought : * After all, we're the backbone of the coun- 
try. Jhey won't upset us easily. Possession's nine 
points of the law/ 

But, as he closed the door of his father's house 
behind him, all that queer outlandish nightmare in 
the streets passed out of his mind almost as com- 
pletely as if, having dreamed it, he had awakened in 
the warm clean morning comfort of his spring- 
mattressed bed. 

Walking into the centre of the great empty draw- 
ing-room, he stood still. 

A wife ! Somebody to talk things over with. One 
had a right ! Damn it ! One had a right ! 



PART III 



CHAPTER I 

SOAMES IN PARIS 

SOAMES had travelled little. Aged nineteen he had 
made the ' petty tour ' with his father, mother, and 
Winifred Brussels, the Rhine, Switzerland, and 
home by way of Paris. Aged twenty-seven, just 
when he began to take interest in pictures, he had 
spent five hot weeks in Italy, looking into the Ren- 
aissance not so much in it as he had been led to 
expect and a fortnight in Paris on his way back, 
looking into himself, as became a Forsyte sur- 
rounded by people so strongly self-centred and 
' foreign ' as the French. His knowledge of their 
language being derived from his public school, he 
did not understand them when they spoke. Silence 
he had found better for all parties; one did not 
make a fool of oneself. He had disliked the look 
of the men's clothes, the closed-in cabs, the theatres 
which looked like beehives, the Galleries which 
smelled of beeswax. He was too cautious and too 
shy to explore that side of Paris supposed by For- 
sytes to constitute its attraction under the rose; and 
as for a collector's bargain not one to be had! 
As Nicholas might have put it they were a grasp- 
ing lot. He had come back uneasy, saying Paris 
was overrated. 

271 



272 IN CHANCERY 

When, therefore, in June of 1900, he went to 
Paris, it was but his third attempt on the centre of 
civilization. This time, however, the mountain 
was going to Mahomet; for he felt by now more 
deeply civilised than Paris, and perhaps he really 
was. Moreover, he had a definite objective. This 
was no mere genuflection to a shrine of taste and 
immorality, but the prosecution of his own legiti- 
mate affairs. He went, indeed, because things were 
getting past a joke. The watch went on and on, 
and . nothing nothing! Jolyon had never re- 
turned to Paris, and no one else was ' suspect ! ' 
Busy with new and very confidential matters, Soames 
was realising more than ever how essential reputa- 
tion is to a solicitor. But at night and in his lei- 
sure moments he was ravaged by the thought that 
time was always flying and money flowing in, and 
his own future as much ' in irons ' as ever. Since 
Mafeking night he had become aware that a ' young 
fool of a doctor 5 was hanging round Annette. 
Twice he had come across him a cheerful young 
fool, not more than thirty. Nothing annoyed 
Soames so much as cheerfulness an indecent, 
extravagant sort of quality, which had no relation 
to facts. The mixture of his desires and hopes 
was, in a word, becoming torture; and lately the 
thought had come to him that perhaps Irene 
knew she was being shadowed. It was this which 
finally decided him to go and see for himself; 
to go and once more try to break down her 
repugnance, her refusal to make her own and 
his path comparatively smooth once more. If he 
failed again well, he would see what she did with 
herself, anyway ! 

He went to an hotel in the Rue Caumartin, highly 



SOAMES IN PARIS 273 

recommended to Forsytes, where practically no- 
body spoke French. He had formed no plan. He 
did not want to startle her ; yet must contrive that 
she had no chance to evade him by flight. And next 
morning he set out in bright weather. 

Paris had an air of gaiety, a sparkle over its star- 
shape which almost annoyed Soames. He stepped 
gravely, his nose lifted a little sideways in real cu- 
riosity. He desired now to understand things 
French. Was not Annette French? There was 
much to be got out of his visit, if he could only get 
it. In this laudable mood and the Place de la Con- 
corde he was nearly run down three times. He 
came on the * Cours la Reine/ where Irene's hotel 
was situated, almost too suddenly, for he had not 
yet fixed on his procedure. Crossing over to the 
river side, he noted the building, white and cheerful- 
looking, with green sunblinds, seen through a 
screen of plane-tree leaves. And, conscious that it 
would be far better to meet her casually in some 
open place than to risk a call, he sat down on a 
bench whence he could watch the entrance. It 
was not quite eleven o'clock, and improbable that 
she had yet gone out. Some pigeons were strutting 
and preening their feathers in the pools of sunlight 
between the shadows of the plane-trees. A work- 
man in a blue blouse passed, and threw them crumbs 
from the paper which contained his dinner. A 
* bonne ' coiffed with ribbon shepherded two little 
girls with pigtails and frilled drawers. A cab 
meandered by, whose cocker wore a blue coat and a 
black-glazed hat. To Soames a kind of affectation 
seemed to cling about it all, a sort of picturesque- 
ness which was out of date. A theatrical people, 
the French ! He lit one of his rare cigarettes, with 



274 IN CHANCERY 

a sense of injury that Fate should be casting his life 
into outlandish waters. He shouldn't wonder if 
Irene quite enjoyed this foreign life; she had never 
been properly English even to look at ! And he 
began considering which of those windows could be 
hers under the green sunblinds. How could he 
word what he had come to say so that it might 
pierce the defence of her proud obstinacy? He 
threw the fag-end of his cigarette at a pigeon, with 
the thought : ' I can't stay here for ever twiddling 
my thumbs. Better give it up and call on her in 
the late afternoon.' But he still sat on, heard 
twelve strike, and then half-past. ' I'll wait till 
one,' he thought, 'while I'm about it/ But just 
then he started up, and shrinkingly sat down again. 
A woman had come out in a cream-coloured frock, 
and was moving away under a fawn-coloured par- 
asol. Irene herself! He waited till she was too 
far away to recognise him, then set out after her. 
She was strolling as though she had no particular 
objective; moving, if he remembered rightly, to- 
ward the Bois de Boulogne. For half an hour at 
least he kept his distance on the far side of the way 
till she had passed into the Bois itself. Was she 
going to meet someone after all? Some con- 
founded Frenchman one of those ' Bel Ami ' 
chaps, perhaps, who had nothing to do but hang 
about women for he had read that book with 
difficulty and a sort of disgusted fascination. He 
followed doggedly along a shady alley, losing sight 
of her now and then when the path curved. And it 
came back to him how, long ago, one night in Hyde 
Park he had slid and sneaked from tree to tree, 
from seat to seat, hunting blindly, ridiculously, in 
burning jealousy for her and young Bosinney. The 



SOAMES IN PARIS 275 

path bent sharply, and, hurrying, he came on her 
sitting in front of a small fountain a little green- 
bronze Niobe veiled in hair to her slender hips, gaz- 
ing at the pool she had wept. He came on her so 
suddenly that he was past before he could turn and 
take off his hat. She did not start up. She had 
always had great self-command it was one of the 
things he most admired in her, one of his greatest 
grievances against her, because he had never been 
able to tell what she was thinking. Had she real- 
ised that he was following? Her self-possession 
made him angry; and, disdaining to explain his 
presence, he pointed to the mournful little Niobe, 
and said: 

" That's rather a good thing." 

He could see, then, that she was struggling to 
preserve her composure. 

" I didn't want to startle you; is this one of your 
haunts?" 

" Yes/' 

" A little lonely." As he spoke, a lady, strolling 
by, paused to look at the fountain and passed on. 

Irene's eyes followed her. 

" No," she said, prodding the ground with her 
parasol, "never lonely. One has always one's 
shadow." 

Soames understood ; and, looking at her hard, he 
exclaimed : 

" Well, it's your own fault. You can be free of 
it at any moment. Irene, come back to me, and be 
free." 

Irene laughed. 

" Don't ! " cried Soames, stamping his foot ; " it's 
inhuman. Listen! Is there any condition I can 
make which will bring you back to me? If I prom- 



276 IN CHANCERY 

ise you a separate house and just a visit now and 
then?" 

Irene rose, something wild suddenly in her face 
and figure. 

"None! None! None! You may hunt me to 
the grave. I will not come." 

Outraged and on edge, Soames recoiled. 

" Don't make a scene ! " he said sharply. And 
they both stood motionless, staring at the little 
Niobe, whose greenish flesh the sunlight was bur- 
nishing. 

" That's your last word, then," muttered Soames, 
clenching his hands ; " you condemn us both." 

Irene bent her head. " I can't come back. Good- 
bye!" 

A feeling of monstrous injustice flared up in 
Soames. 

" Stop ! " he said, " and listen to me a moment. 
You gave me a sacred vow you came to me with- 
out a penny. You had all I could give you. You 
broke that vow without cause, you made me a by- 
word; you refused me a child; you've left me in 
prison ; you you still move me so that I want you 
I want you. Well, what do you think of your- 
self?" 

Irene turned, her face was deadly pale, her eyes 
burning dark. 

"God made me as I am," she said; "wicked if 
you like but not so wicked that I'll give myself 
again to a man I hate." 

The sunlight gleamed on her hair as she moved 
away, and seemed to lay a caress all down her cling- 
ing cream-coloured frock. 

Soames could neither speak nor move. That 
word ' hate ' so extreme, so primitive made all 



SOAMES IN PARIS 277 

the Forsyte in him tremble. With a deep impreca- 
tion he strode away from where she had vanished, 
and ran almost into the arms of the lady sauntering 
back the fool, the shadowing fool! 

He was soon dripping with perspiration, in the 
depths of the Bois. 

' Well,' he thought, * I need have no consideration 
for her now; she has not a grain of it for me. I'll 
show her this very day that she's my wife still.' 

But on the way home to his hotel, he was forced 
to the conclusion that he did not know what he 
meant. One could not make scenes in public, and 
short of scenes in public what was there he could 
do? He almost cursed his own thin-skinnedness. 
She might deserve no consideration ; but he alas ! 
deserved some at his own hands. And sitting 
lunchless in the hall of his hotel, with tourists pass- 
ing every moment, Baedeker in hand, he was visited 
by black dejection. In irons ! His whole life, with 
every natural instinct and every decent yearning 
gagged and fettered, and all because Fate had 
driven him seventeen years ago to set his heart 
upon this woman so utterly, that even now he 
had no real heart to set on any other ! Cursed was 
the day he had met her, and his eyes for seeing in 
her anything but the cruel Venus she was! And 
yet, still seeing her with the sunlight on the clinging 
China crepe of her gown, he uttered a little groan, 
so that a tourist who was passing, thought : ' Man in 
pain ! Let's see ! what did I have for lunch ? ' 

Later, in front of a cafe near the Opera, over a 
glass of cold tea with lemon and a straw in it, he 
took the malicious resolution to go and dine at her 
hotel. If she were there, he would speak to her ; 
if she were not, he would leave a note. He dressed 
carefully, and wrote as follows : 



27 8 IN CHANCERY 

"Your idyll with that fellow Jolyon Forsyte is 
known to me at all events. If you pursue it, under- 
stand that I will leave no stone unturned to make 
things unbearable for him. 

* S. F." 

He sealed this note but did not address it, refus- 
ing to write the maiden name which she had impu- 
dently resumed, or to put the word Forsyte on the 
envelope lest she should tear it up unread. Then 
he went out, and made his way though the glowing 
streets, abandoned to evening pleasure-seekers. 
Entering her hotel, he took his seat in a far corner 
of the dining-room whence he could see all en- 
trances and exits. She was not there. He ate 
little, quickly, watchfully. She did not come. He 
lingered in the lounge over his coffee, drank two 
liqueurs of brandy. But still she did not come. He 
went over to the key board and examined the names. 
Number twelve, on the first floor ! And he deter- 
mined to take the note up himself. He mounted 
red-carpeted stairs, past a little salon; eight, ten, 
twelve ! Should he knock, push the note under, or 

? He looked furtively round and turned the 

handle. The door opened, but into a little space 
leading to another door ; he knocked on that no 
answer. The door was locked. It fitted very 
closely to the floor; the note would not go under. 
He thrust it back into his pocket, and stood a mo- 
ment listening. He felt somehow certain that she 
was not there. And suddenly he came away, pass- 
ing the little salon down the stairs. He stopped at 
the bureau and said : 

" Will you kindly see that Mrs. Heron has this 
note?" 

"Madame Heron left to-day, Monsieur sud- 



SOAMES IN PARIS 279 

denly, about three o'clock. There was illness in 
her family." 

Soames compressed his lips. "Oh!" he said; 
" do you know her address ? " 

" Non, Monsieur. England, I think." 

Soames put the note back into his pocket and 
went out. He hailed an open horse-cab which was 
passing. 

" Drive me anywhere ! " 

The man, who, obviously, did not understand, 
smiled, and waved his whip. And Soames was 
borne along in that littfe yellow- wheeled Victoria 
all over star-shaped Paris, with here and there a 
pause, and the question, " C'est par id, Monsieur? " 
" No, go on," till the man gave it up in despair, and 
the yellow-wheeled chariot continued to roll be- 
tween the tall, flat-fronted shuttered houses and 
plane-tree avenues a little Flying Dutchman of 
a cab. 

' Like my life/ thought Soames, ' without object, 
on and on ! ' 



CHAPTER II 

IN THE WEB 

SOAMES returned to England the following day, 
and on the third morning received a visit from Mr. 
Polteed, who wore a flower and carried a brown 
billycock hat. Soames motioned him to a seat. 

" The news from the war is not so bad, is it? " 
said Mr. Polteed. " I hope I see you well, sir." 

"Thanks! quite." 

Mr. Polteed leaned forward, smiled, opened his 
hand, looked into it, and said softly: 

" I think we've done your business for you at 
last." 

' What? " ejaculated Soames. 

" Nineteen reports quite suddenly what I think 
we shall be justified in calling conclusive evidence," 
and Mr. Polteed paused. 

"Well?" 

" On the 10th instant, after witnessing an inter- 
view between 17 and a party, earlier in the day, 19 
can swear to having seen him coming out of her 
bedroom in the hotel about ten o'clock in the even- 
ing. With a little care in the giving of the evidence 
that will be enough, especially as 17 has left Paris 
no doubt with the party in question. In fact, 

280 



IN THE WEB 281 

they both slipped off, and we haven't got on to them 
again, yet; but we shall we shall. She's worked 
hard under very difficult circumstances, and I'm 
glad she's brought it off at last." Mr. Polteed took 
out a cigarette, tapped its end against the table, 
looked at Soames, and put it back. The expression 
on his client's face was not encouraging. 

" Who is this new person ? " said Soames 
abruptly. 

" That we don't know. She'll swear to the fact, 
and she's got his appearance pat." 

Mr. Polteed took out a letter, and began reading : 

" ' Middle-aged, medium height, blue dittoes in 
afternoon, evening dress at night, pale, dark hair, 
small dark moustache, flat cheeks, good chin, grey 
eyes, small feet, guilty look ' 

Soames rose and went to the window. He stood 
there in sardonic fury. Congenital idiot spi- 
dery congenital idiot! Seven months at fifteen 
pounds a week to be tracked down as his own 
wife's lover ! Guilty look ! He threw the window 
open. 

"It's hot," he said, and came back to his seat. 
Crossing his knees, he bent a supercilious glance on 
Mr. Polteed. 

" I doubt if that's quite good enough," he said, 
drawling the words, " with no name or address. I 
think you may let that lady have a rest, and take up 
our friend 47 at this end." Whether Polteed had 
spotted him he could not tell ; but he had a mental 
vision of him in the midst of his cronies dissolved in 
inextinguishable laughter. 'Guilty look!' Dam- 
nation ! 

Mr. Polteed said in a tone of urgency, almost of 
pathos : " I assure you we have put it through some- 



2 g 2 IN CHANCERY 

times on less than that. It's Paris, you know. At- 
tractive woman living alone. Why not risk it, sir? 
We might screw it up a peg." 

Soames had sudden insight. The fellow's pro- 
fessional zeal was stirred : ' Greatest triumph of my 
career ; got a man his divorce through a visit to his 
own wife's bedroom ! Something to talk of there, 
when I retire ! ' And for one wild moment he 
thought: 'Why not? ' After all, hundreds of men 
of medium height had small feet and a guilty look ! 

" I'm not authorised to take any risk! " he said 
shortly. 

Mr. Polteed looked up. 

"Pity," he said, " quite a pity! That other 
affair seemed very costive." 

Soames rose. 

" Never mind that. Please watch 47, and take 
care not to find a mare's nest. Good-morning ! " 

Mr. Polteed's eye glinted at the words ' mare's 
nest ! ' 

"Very good. You shall be kept informed." 

And Soames was alone again. The spidery, 
dirty, ridiculous business ! Laying his arms on the 
table, he leaned his forehead on them. Full ten 
minutes he rested thus, till a managing clerk roused 
him with the draft prospectus of a new issue of 
shares, very desirable, in Manifold and Topping's. 
That afternoon he left work early and made his 
way to the Restaurant Bretagne. Only Madame 
Lamotte was in. Would Monsieur have tea with 
her? 

Soames bowed. 

When they were seated at right angles to each 
other in the little room, he said abruptly: 

" I want a talk with you, Madame." 



IN THE WEB 283 

The quick lift of her clear brown eyes told him 
that she had long expected such words. 

" I have to ask you something first : That young 
doctor what's his name? Is there anything be- 
tween him and Annette? " 

Her whole personality had become, as it were, 
like jet clear-cut, black, hard, shining. 

" Annette is young," she said; " so is monsieur le 
docteur. Between young people things move 
quickly; but Annette is a good daughter. Ah! 
what a jewel of a nature ! " 

The least little smile twisted Soames' lips. 

" Nothing definite, then? " 

" But definite no, indeed ! The young man is 
veree nice, but what would you? There is no 
money at present." 

She raised her willow-patterned tea-cup ; Soames 
did the same. Their eyes met. 

" I am a married man," he said, " living apart 
from my wife for many years. I am seeking to 
divorce her." 

Madame Lamotte put down her cup. Indeed! 
What tragic things there were! The entire ab- 
sence of sentiment in her inspired a queer species of 
contempt in Soames. 

" I am a rich man," he added, fully conscious that 
the remark was not in good taste. " It is useless to 
say more at present, but I think you understand." 

Madame's eyes, so open that the whites showed 
above them, looked at him very straight. 

"Ah! ga mais nous avons le temps!" was all 
she said. " Another little cup ? " Soames re- 
fused, and, taking his leave, walked westward. 

He had got that off his mind ; she would not let 
Annette commit herself with that cheerful young 



284 IN CHANCERY 

ass until ! But what chance of his ever being 
able to say: 'I'm free.' What chance? The fu- 
ture had lost all semblance of reality. He felt like 
a fly, entangled in cobweb filaments, watching the 
desirable freedom of the air with pitiful eyes. 

He was short of exercise, and wandered on to 
Kensington Gardens, and down Queen's Gate to- 
wards Chelsea. Perhaps she had gone back to her 
flat. That at all events he could find out. For 
since that last and most ignominious repulse his 
wounded self-respect had taken refuge again in the 
feeling that she must have a lover. He arrived 
before the little Mansions at the dinner-hour. No 
need to enquire ! A grey-haired lady was watering 
the flower-boxes in her window. It was evidently 
let. And he walked slowly past again, along the 
river an evening of clear, quiet beauty, all har- 
mony and comfort, except within his heart. 



CHAPTER III 

RICHMOND PARK 

ON the afternoon that Soames crossed to France a 
cablegram was received by Jolyon at Robin Hill : 

"Your son down with enteric no immediate dan- 
ger will cable again." 

It reached a household already agitated by the 
imminent departure of June, whose berth was 
booked for the following day. She was, indeed, in 
the act of confiding Eric Cobbley and his family 
to her father's care when the message arrived. 

The resolution to become a Red Cross nurse, 
taken under stimulus of Jolly's enlistment, had been 
loyally fulfilled with the irritation and regret which 
all Forsytes feel at what curtails their individual 
liberties. Enthusiastic at first about the ' wonder- 
fulness ' of the work, she had begun after a month 
to feel that she could train herself so much better 
than others could train her. And if Holly had not 
insisted on following her example, and being trained 
too, she must inevitably have 'cried off.' The de- 
parture of Jolly and Val with their troop in April 
had further stiffened her failing resolve. But now, 
on the point of departure, the thought of leaving 
Eric Cobbley, with a wife and two children, adrift 
in the cold waters of an unappreciative world 

285 



2 86 IN CHANCERY 

weighed on her so that she was still in danger of 
backing out. The reading of that cablegram, with 
its disquieting reality, clinched the matter. She 
saw herself already nursing Jolly for of course 
they would let her nurse her own brother ! Jolyon 
ever wide and doubtful had no such hope. 
Poor June! Could any Forsyte of her generation 
grasp how rude and brutal life was? Ever since 
he knew of his boy's arrival at Cape Town the 
thought of him had been a kind of recurrent sick- 
ness in Jolyon. He could not get reconciled to the 
feeling that Jolly was in danger all the time. The 
cablegram, grave though it was, was almost a re- 
lief. He was now safe from bullets, anyway. And 
yet this enteric was a virulent disease! The 
Times was full of deaths therefrom. Why could 
he not be lying out there in that up-country hospital, 
and his boy safe at home ? The un-Forsytean self- 
sacrifice of his three children, indeed, had quite be- 
wildered Jolyon. He would eagerly change places 
with Jolly, because he loved his boy; but no such 
personal motive was influencing them. He could 
only think that it marked the decline of the Forsyte 
type. 

Late that afternoon Holly came out to him under 
the old oak-tree. She had grown up very much 
during these last months of hospital training away 
from home. And, seeing her approach, he thought : 
' She has more sense than June, child though she is ; 
more wisdom. Thank God she isn't going out.' 
She had seated herself in the swing, very silent and 
still. ' She feels this,' thought Jolyon, ' as much as 
I.' And, seeing her eyes fixed on him, he said: 
" Don't take it to heart too much, my child. If he 
weren't ill, he might be in much greater danger." 



RICHMOND PARK 287 

Holly got out of the swing. 

" I want to tell you something, Dad. It was 
through me that Jolly enlisted and went out." 

"How's that?" 

" When you were away in Paris, Val Dartie and 
I fell in love. We used to ride in Richmond Park ; 
we got engaged. Jolly found it out, and thought 
he ought to stop it; so he dared Val to enlist. It 
was all my fault, Dad; and I want to go out too. 
Because if anything happens to either of them I 
should feel awful. Besides, I'm just as much 
trained as June." 

Jolyon gazed at her in a stupefaction that was 
tinged with irony. So this was the answer to the 
riddle he had been asking himself; and his three 
children were Forsytes after all. Surely Holly 
might have told him all this before! But he 
smothered the sarcastic sayings on his lips. Ten- 
derness to the young was perhaps the most sacred 
article of his belief. He had got, no doubt, what 
he deserved. Engaged ! So this was why he had 
so lost touch with her ! And to young Val Dartie 
nephew of Soames in the other camp! It 
was all terribly distasteful. He closed his easel, 
and set his drawing against the tree. 

" Have you told June? " 

' Yes ; she says she'll get me into her cabin some- 
how. It's a single cabin ; but one of us could sleep 
on the floor. If you consent, she'll go up now and 
get permission." 

"Consent ? " thought Jolyon. ' Rather late in the 
day to ask for that ! ' But again he checked him- 
self. 

' You're too young, my dear ; they won't let 
you." 



288 IN CHANCERY 

" June knows some people that she helped to go to 
Cape Town. If they won't let me nurse yet, I 
could stay with them and go on training there. 
Let me go, Dad!" 

Jolyon smiled because he could have cried. 

" I never stop anyone from doing anything," he 
said. 

Holly flung her arms round his neck. 

" Oh ! Dad, you are the best in the world." 

' That means the worst/ thought Jolyon. If he 
had ever doubted his creed of tolerance he did so 
then. 

" I'm not friendly with Val's family," he said, 
" and I don't know Val, but Jolly didn't like him." 

Holly looked at the distance, and said : 

" I love him." 

" That settles it," said Jolyon dryly, then catching 
the expression on her face, he kissed her, with the 
thought : ' Is anything more pathetic than the faith 
of the young?' Unless he actually forbade her 
going it was obvious that he must make the best of 
it, so he went up to town with June. Whether due 
to her persistence, or the fact that the official they 
saw was an old school friend of Jolyon's, they ob- 
tained permission for Holly to share the single cabin. 
He took them to Surbiton station the following 
evening, and they duly slid away from him, pro- 
vided with money, invalid foods, and those letters 
of credit without which Forsytes do not travel. 

He drove back to Robin Hill under a brilliant sky 
to his late dinner, served with an added care by 
servants trying to show him that they sympathised, 
eaten with an added scrupulousness to show them 
that he^ appreciated that sympathy. But it was a 
real relief to get to his cigar on the terrace of flag- 



RICHMOND PARK 289 

stones cunningly chosen by young Bosinney for 
shape and colour with night closing in around 
him, so beautiful a night, hardly whispering in the 
trees, and smelling so sweet that it made him ache. 
The grass was drenched with dew, and he kept to 
those flag-stones, up and down, till presently it be- 
gan to seem to him that he was one of three, not 
wheeling, but turning right about at each end, so 
that his father was always nearest to the house, and 
his son always nearest to the terrace edge. Each 
had an arm lightly within his arm ; he dared not lift 
his hand to his cigar lest he should disturb them, 
and it burned away, dripping ash on him, till it 
dropped from his lips, at last, which were getting 
hot. They left him then, and his arms felt chilly. 
.Three Jolyons in one Jolyon they had walked ! 

He stood still, counting the sounds a carriage 
passing on the highroad, a distant train, the dog at 
Gage's farm, the whispering trees, the groom play- 
ing on his penny whistle. A multitude of stars up 
there bright and silent, so far off ! No moon as 
yet ! Just enough light to show him the dark flags 
and swords of the iris flowers along the terrace 
edge his favourite flower that had the night's 
own colour on its curving crumpled petals. He 
turned round to the house. Big, unlighted, not a 
soul beside himself to live in all that part of, it. 
Stark loneliness! He could not go on living here 
alone. And yet, so long as there was beauty, why 
should a man feel lonely? The answer as to 
some idiot's riddle was: Because he did. The 
greater the beauty, the greater the loneliness, for 
at the back of beauty was harmony, and at the back 
of harmony was union. Beauty could not com- 
fort if the soul were out of it. t The night, madden- 



29 o ",IN CHANCERY 

ingly lovely, with bloom of grapes on it in star- 
shine, and the breath of grass and honey coming 
from it, he could not enjoy, while she who was to 
him the life of beauty, its embodiment and essence, 
was cut off from him, utterly cut off now, he felt, 
by honourable decency. 

He made a poor fist of sleeping, striving too hard 
after that resignation which Forsytes find difficult 
to reach, bred to their own way and left so com- 
fortably off by their fathers. But after dawn he 
dozed off, and soon was dreaming a strange dream. 

He was on a stage with immensely high rich cur- 
tains high as the very stars stretching in a 
semi-circle from footlights to footlights. He him- 
self was very small, a little black restless figure 
roaming up and down ; and the odd thing was that 
he was not altogether himself, but Soames as well, 
so that he was not only experiencing but watching. 
This figure of himself and Soames was trying to 
find a way out through the curtains, which, heavy 
and dark, kept him in. Several times he had 
crossed in front of them before he saw with delight 
a sudden narrow rift a tall chink of beauty the 
colour of iris flowers, like a glimpse of Paradise, 
remote, ineffable. Stepping quickly forward to 
pass into it, he found the curtains closing before 
him. Bitterly disappointed he or was it 
Soames? moved on, and there was the chink 
again through the parted curtains, which again 
closed too soon. This went on and on and he never 
got through till he woke with the word " Irene " on 
his lips. The dream disturbed him badly, especially 
that identification of himself with Soames. 

Next morning, finding it impossible to work, he 
spent hours riding Jolly's horse in search of fatigue. 



RICHMOND PARK 291 

And on the second day he made up his mind to move 
to London and see if he could not get permission to 
follow his daughters to South Africa. He had just 
begun to pack the following morning when he re- 
ceived this letter: 

" GREEN HOTEL, 
" RICHMOND. 
"June 13. 

" MY DEAR JOLYON, 

" You will be surprised to see how near I am 
to you. Paris became impossible and I have 
come here to be within reach of your advice. I 
would so love to see you again. Since you left 
Paris I don't think I have met anyone I could really 
talk to. Is all well with you and with your boy? 
No one knows, I think, that I am here at present. 

" Always your friend, 

" IRENE." 

Irene within three miles of him ! and again in 
flight! He stood with a very queer smile 'on his 
lips. This was more than he had bargained for ! 

About noon he set out on foot across Richmond 
Park, and as he went along, he thought : ' Richmond 
Park ! By Jove, it suits us Forsytes ! ' Not that 
Forsytes lived there nobody lived there save roy- 
alty, rangers, and the deer but in Richmond Park 
Nature was allowed to go so far and no further, 
putting up a brave show of being natural, seeming 
to say : ' Look at my instincts they are almost 
passions, very nearly out of hand, but not quite, of 
course ; the very hub of possession is to possess one- 
self.' Yes! Richmond Park possessed itself, even 
on that bright day of June, with arrowy cuckoos 



2 9 2 IN CHANCERY 

shifting the tree-points of their calls, and the wood 
doves announcing high summer. 

The Green Hotel, which Jolyon entered at one 
o'clock, stood nearly opposite that more famous 
hostelry, the Crown and Sceptre; it was modest, 
highly respectable, never out of cold beef, goose- 
berry tart, and a dowager or two, so that a carriage 
and pair was almost always standing before the 
door. 

In a room draped in chintz so slippery as to 
forbid all emotion, Irene was sitting on a piano stool 
covered with crewel work, playing ' Hansel and 
Gretel ' out of an old score. Above her on a wall, 
not yet Morris-papered, was a print of the Queen 
on a pony, amongst deer-hounds, Scotch caps, and 
slain stags; beside her in a pot on the window-sill 
was a white and rosy fuchsia. The Victorianism 
of the room almost talked ; and in her clinging frock 
Irene seemed to Jolyon like Venus emerging from 
the shell of the past century. 

" If the proprietor had eyes," he said, " he would 
show you the door; you have broken through his 
decorations." Thus lightly he smothered up an 
emotional moment. Having eaten cold beef, 
pickled walnut, gooseberry-tart, and drunk stone- 
bottle ginger-beer, they walked into the Park, and 
light talk was succeeded by the silence Jolyon had 
dreaded. 

" You haven't told me about Paris," he said at 
last. 

" No. I've been shadowed for a long time ; one 
gets used to that. But then Soames came. By the 
little Niobe the same story; would I go back to 
him?" 

"Incredible!" 



RICHMOND PARK 293 

She had spoken without raising her eyes, but she 
looked up now. Those dark eyes clinging to his 
said as no words could have : ' I have come to an 
end ; if you want me, here I am.' 

For sheer emotional intensity had he ever old 
as he was passed through such a moment? 

The words : * Irene, I adore you ! ' almost escaped 
him. Then, with a clearness of which he would not 
have believed mental vision capable, he saw Jolly 
lying with a white face turned to a white wall. 

" My boy is very ill out there/' he said quietly. 

Irene slipped her arm through his. 

" Let's walk on, I understand." 

No miserable explanation to attempt! She had 
understood! And they walked on among the 
bracken, knee-high already, between the rabbit- 
holes and the oak-trees, talking of Jolly. He left 
her two hours later at the Richmond Hill Gate, 
and turned towards home. , : 

' She knows of my feeling for her, then/ he 
thought. Of course! One could not keep knowl- 
edge of that from such a woman ! 



CHAPTER IV 

OVER THE RIVER 

JOLLY was tired to death of dreams. They had left 
him now too wan and weak to dream again; left 
him to lie torpid, faintly remembering far-off 
things ; just able to turn his eyes and gaze through 
the window near his cot at the trickle of river run- 
ning by in the sands, at the straggling milk-bush 
of the Karoo beyond. He knew what the Karoo 
was now, even if he had not seen a Boer roll over 
like a rabbit, or heard the whiffle of flying bullets. 
This pestilence had sneaked on him before he had 
smelled powder. A thirsty day and a rash drink, 
or perhaps a tainted fruit who knew ? Not he, 
who had not even strength left to grudge the evil 
thing its victory just enough to know that there 
were many lying here with him, that he was sore 
with frenzied dreaming; just enough to watch that 
thread of river and be able to remember faintly 
those far-away things. . . . 

The sun was nearly down. It would be cooler 
soon. He would have liked to know the time to 
feel his old watch, so butter-smooth, to hear the re- 
peater strike. It would have been friendly, home- 
like. He had not even strength to remember that 
the old watch was last wound the day he began to 

294 



OVER THE RIVER 295 

lie here. The pulse of his brain beat so feebly that 
faces which came and went, nurse's, doctor's, or- 
derly's, were indistinguishable, just one indifferent 
face ; and the words spoken about him meant all the 
same thing, and that almost nothing. Those 
things he used to do, though far and faint, were 
more distinct walking past the foot of the old 
steps at Harrow ' bill ' ' Here, sir ! Here, sir ! ' 
wrapping boots in the Westminster Gazette, 
greenish paper, shining boots grandfather com- 
ing from somewhere dark a smell of earth the 
mushroom house ! Robin Hill ! Burying poor old 
Balthasar in the leaves! Dad! Home.' . . . 

Consciousness came again with noticing that the 
river had no water in it someone was speaking 
too. Want anything? No. What could one 
want? Too weak to want only to hear his 
watch strike. . . . 

Holly! She wouldn't bowl properly. Oh! 
Pitch them up ! Not sneaks ! . . . ' Back her, 
Two and Bow!' He was Two! . . . Conscious- 
ness came once more with a sense of the violet-dusk 
outside, and a rising blood-red crescent moon. His 
eyes rested on it fascinated ; in the long minutes of 
brain-nothingness it went moving up and up. . . . 

"He's going, doctor!" Not pack boots again? 
Never ? ' Mind your form, Two ! ' Don't cry ! 
Go quietly over the river sleep! . . . Dark? 
If somebody would strike his watch! . . . 



CHAPTER V 

SOAMES ACTS 

A SEALED letter in the handwriting of Mr. Polteed 
remained unopened in Soames' pocket throughout 
two hours of sustained attention to the affairs of the 
' New Colliery Company/ which, declining almost 
from the moment of old Jolyon's retirement from 
the Chairmanship, had lately run down so fast that 
there was now nothing for it but a ' winding-up/ 
He took the letter out to lunch at his City Club, 
sacred to him for the meals he had eaten there with 
his father in the early seventies, when James used 
to like him to come and see for himself the nature 
of his future life. 

Here in a remote corner before a plate of roast 
mutton and mashed potato, he read : 

" DEAR SIR, 

" In accordance with your suggestion we have 
duly taken the matter up at the other end with grati- 
fying results. Observation of 47 has enabled us to 
locate 17 at the Green Hotel, Richmond. The two 
have been observed to meet daily during the past 
week in Richmond Park. Nothing absolutely cru- 
cial has so far been notified. But in conjunction 
with what we had from Paris at the beginning of 

296 



SOAMES ACTS 297 

the year, I am confident we could now satisfy the 
Court. We shall, of course, continue to watch the 
matter until we hear from you. 

" Very faithfully yours, 

" CLAUD POLTEED." 

Soames read it through twice and beckoned to the 
waiter. 

'' Take this away; it's cold." 
" Shall I bring you some more, sir ? " 
" No. Get me some coffee in the other room." 
And, paying for what he had not eaten, he went 
out, passing two acquaintances without sign of rec- 
ognition. 

' Satisfy the Court ! ' he thought, sitting at a little 
round marble table with the coffee before him. 
That fellow Jolyon! He poured out his coffee, 
sweetened and drank it. He would disgrace him in 
the eyes of his own children ! And rising, with that 
resolution hot within him, he found for the first time 
the inconvenience of being his own solicitor. He 
could not treat this scandalous matter in his own 
office. He must commit the soul of his private dig- 
nity to a stranger, some other professional dealer in 
family dishonour. Who was there he could go to? 
Linkman and Laver in Budge Row, perhaps re- 
liable, not too conspicuous, only nodding acquaint- 
ances. But before he saw them he must see Pol- 
teed again. But at this thought Soames had a mo- 
ment of sheer weakness. To part with his secret? 
How find the words ? How subject himself to con- 
tempt and secret laughter ? Yet, after all, the fel- 
low knew already oh yes, he knew. And, feeling 
that he must finish with it now, he took a cab into 
the West End. 



298 LIN CHANCERY 

In this hot weather the window of Mr. Polteed's 
room was positively open, and the only precaution 
was a wire gauze, preventing the intrusion of flies. 
TWO or three had tried to come in, and been caught, 
so that they seemed to be clinging there with the in- 
tention of being devoured presently. Mr. Polteed, 
following the direction of his client's eye, rose apolo- 
getically and closed the window. 

' Posing ass ! ' thought Soames. Like all who 
fundamentally believe in themselves he was rising 
to the occasion, and, with his little sideway smile, he 
said : " I've had your letter. I'm going to act. I 
suppose you know who the lady you've been watch- 
ing really is ? " 

Mr. Polteed's expression at that moment was a 
masterpiece. It so clearly said : ' Well, what do you 
think? But mere professional knowledge, I assure 
you pray forgive it ! ' He made a little half airy 
movement with his hand, as who should say : ' Such 
things such things will happen to us ! ' 

' Very well, then," said Soames, moistening his 
lips ; " there's no need to say more. I'm instructing 
Linkman and Laver of Budge Row to act for me. 
I don't want to hear your evidence, but kindly make 
your report to them at five o'clock, and continue to 
observe the utmost secrecy." 

Mr. Polteed half closed his eyes, as if to comply 
at once. " My dear sir," he said. 

" Are you convinced," asked Soames with sudden 
energy, " that there is enough? " 

The faintest movement occurred to Mr. Polteed's 
shoulders. 

' You can risk it," he murmured ; " with what we 
have, and human nature, you can risk it." 

Soames rose. " You will ask for Mr. Linkman. 



SOAMES ACTS 299 

Thanks; don't get up." He could not bear Mr. Pol- 
teed to slide as usual between him and the door. 
In the sunlight of Piccadilly he wiped his forehead. 
This had been the worst of it he could stand the 
strangers better. And he went back into the City 
to do what still lay before him. 

That evening in Park Lane, watching his father 
dine, he was overwhelmed by his old longing for a 
son a son, to watch him eat as he went down the 
years, to be taken on his knee as James on a time 
had been wont to take him ; a son of his own beget- 
ting, who could understand him because he was the 
same flesh and blood understand, and comfort 
him, and become more rich and cultured than him- 
self because he would start even better off. To get 
old like that thin, grey, wiry-frail figure sitting 
there and quite alone with possessions heaping 
up around him ; to take no interest in anything be- 
cause it had no future and must pass away from 
him to hands and mouths and eyes for whom he 
cared no jot ! No ! He would force it through now, 
and be free to marry, and have a son to care for him 
before he grew to be like the old old man his father, 
wistfully watching now his sweetbread, now his son. 

In that mood he went up to bed. But, lying warm 
between those fine linen sheets of Emily's providing, 
he was visited by memories and torture. Visions of 
Irene, almost the solid feeling of her body, beset 
him. Why had he ever been fool enough to see her 
again, and let his flood back on him so that it was 
pain to think of her with that fellow that stealing 
fellow ! 



CHAPTER VI 

A SUMMER DAY 

His boy was seldom absent from Jolyon's mind in 
the days which followed the first walk with Irene 
in Richmond Park. No further news had come; 
enquiries at the War Office elicited nothing; nor 
could he expect to hear from June and Holly for 
three weeks at least. In these days he felt how in- 
sufficient were his memories of Jolly, and what an 
amateur of a father he had been. There was not a 
single memory in which anger played a part; not 
one reconciliation, because there had never been a 
rupture; nor one heart-to-heart confidence, not even 
when Jolly's mother died. Nothing but half-ironical 
affection. He had been too afraid of committing 
himself in any direction, for fear of losing his lib- 
erty, or interfering with that of his boy. 

Only in Irene's presence had he relief, highly 
complicated by the ever-growing perception of how 
divided he was between her and his son. With 
Jolly was bound up all that sense of continuity and 
social creed of which he had drunk deeply in his 
youth and again during his boy's public school and 
varsity life all that sense of not going back 
on what father and son expected of each other. 
With Irene was bound up all his delight in beauty 

300 



A SUMMER DAY 301 

and in Nature. And he seemed to know less and 
less which was the stronger within him. From such 
sentimental paralysis he was rudely awakened, how- 
ever, one afternoon, just as he was starting off to 
Richmond, by a young man with a bicycle and a face 
oddly familiar, who came forward faintly smiling. 

" Mr. Jolyon Forsyte ? Thank you ! " Placing an 
envelope in Jolyon's hand he wheeled off the path 
and rode away. Bewildered, Jolyon opened it. 

" Admiralty Probate and Divorce, Forsyte v. 
Forsyte and Forsyte ! " A sensation of shame and 
disgust was followed by the instant reaction : ' Why ! 
here's the very thing you want, and you don't like 
it ! ' But she must have had one too ; and he must 
go to her at once. He turned things over as he went 
along. It was an ironical business. For, whatever 
the Scriptures said about the heart, it took more 
than mere longings to satisfy the law. They could 
perfectly well defend this suit, or at least in good 
faith try to. But the idea of doing so revolted Jol- 
yon. If not her lover in deed he was in desire, and 
he knew that she was ready to come to him. Her 
face had told him so. Not that he exaggerated her 
feeling for him. She had had her grand passion, 
and he could not expect another from her at his age. 
But she had trust in him, affection for him; and 
must feel that he would be a refuge. Surely she 
would not ask him to defend the suit, knowing that 
he adored her! Thank Heaven she had not that 
maddening British conscientiousness which refused 
happiness for the sake of refusing! She must re- 
joice at this chance of being free after seventeen 
years of death in life ! As to publicity, the fat was 
in the fire ! To defend the suit would not take away 
the slur. Jolyon had all the proper feeling of a 



3 02 m CHANCERY 

Forsyte whose privacy is threatened: If he was to 
be hung by the Law, by all means let it be for a 
sheep ! Moreover the notion of standing in a wit- 
ness box and swearing to the truth that no gesture, 
not even a word of love had passed between them 
seemed to him more degrading than to take the tacit 
stigma of being an adulterer more truly degrad- 
ing, considering the feeling in his heart, and just as 
bad and painful for his children. The thought of 
explaining away, if he could, before a judge and 
twelve average Englishmen, their meetings in Paris, 
and the walks in Richmond Park, horrified him. 
The brutality and hypocritical censoriousness of the 
whole process ; the probability that they would not 
be believed the mere vision of her, whom he 
looked on as the embodiment of Nature and of 
Beauty, standing there before all those suspicious, 
gloating eyes was hideous to him. No, no ! To de- 
fend a suit only made a London holiday, and sold 
the newspapers. A thousand times better accept 
what Soames and the gods had sent! 

* Besides/ he thought honestly, ' who knows 
whether, even for my boy's sake, I could have stood 
this state of things much longer? Anyway, her 
neck will be out of chancery at last ! ' Thus ab- 
sorbed, he was hardly conscious of the heavy heat. 
The sky had become overcast, purplish, with little 
streaks of white. A heavy heat-drop plashed a little 
star pattern in the dust of the road as he entered 
the^Park. ' Phew ! ' he thought, ' thunder ! I hope 
she's not come to meet me; there's a ducking up 
there ! ' But at that very minute he saw Irene com- 
ing towards the Gate. ' We must scuttle back to 
Robin Hill/ he thought. 



A SUMMER DAY 303 

The storm had passed over the Poultry at four 
o'clock, bringing welcome distraction to the clerks 
in every office. Soames was drinking a cup of tea 
when a note was brought in to him : 



" DEAR 

Forsyte v. Forsyte and Forsyte 
" In accordance with your instructions, we beg to 
inform you that we personally served the respon- 
dent and co-respondent in this suit to-day, at Rich- 
mond, and Robin Hill, respectively. 

" Faithfully yours, 

" LlNKMAN AND LAVER." 

For some minutes Soames stared at that note. 
Ever since he had given those instructions he had 
been tempted to annul them. It was so scandalous, 
such a general disgrace! The evidence, too, what 
he had heard of it, had never seemed to him conclu- 
sive; somehow, he believed less and less that those 
two had gone all lengths. But this, of course, would 
drive them to it ; and he suffered from the thought. 
That fellow to have her love, where he had failed ! 
Was it too late? Now that they had been brought 
up sharp by service of this petition, had he not a 
lever with which he could force them apart? ' But 
if I don't act at once,' he thought, ' it will be too late, 
now they've had this thing. I'll go and see him ; I'll 
go down ! ' 

And sick with nervous anxiety, he sent out for 
one of the ' new-fangled ' motor-cabs. It might 
take a long time to run that fellow to ground, and 
Goodness knew what decision they might come to 
after such a shock ! ' If I were a theatrical ass/ he 
thought, ' I suppose I should be taking a horse- whip 



3 o 4 IN CHANCERY 

or a pistol or something ! ' He took instead a bundle 
of papers in the case of ' Magentie versus Wake/ 
intending to read them on the way down. He did 
not even open them, but sat quite still, jolted and 
jarred, unconscious of the draught down the back 
of his neck, or the smell of petrol. He must be 
guided by the fellow's attitude; the great thing was 
to keep his head ! 

London had already begun to disgorge its work- 
ers as he neared Putney Bridge ; the ant-heap was 
on the move outwards. What a lot of ants, all with 
a living to get, holding on by their eyelids in the 
great scramble! Perhaps for the first time in his 
life Soames thought: '/ could let go if I liked! 
Nothing could touch me ; I could snap my fingers, 
live as I wished enjoy myself ! ' No ! One could 
not live as he had and just drop it all settle down 
in Capua, to spend the money and reputation he had 
made. A man's life was what he possessed and 
sought to possess. Only fools thought otherwise 
fools, and socialists, and libertines ! 

The cab was passing villas now, going a great 
pace. ' Fifteen miles an hour, I should think ! ' he 
mused ; * this'll take people out of town to live ! ' and 
he thought of its bearing on the portions of London 
owned by his father he himself had never taken 
to that form of investment, the gambler in him hav- 
ing all the outlet needed in his pictures. And the 
cab sped on, down the hill past Wimbledon Com- 
mon. This interview! Surely a man of fifty-one 
with grown-up children, and hung on the line, 
would not be reckless. ' He won't want to disgrace 
the family/ he thought; 'he was as fond of his 
father as I am of mine, and they were brothers. 
That woman brings destruction what is it in her ? 



A SUMMER DAY 305 

I've never known/ The cab branched off, along 
the side of a wood, and he heard a late cuckoo call- 
ing, almost the first he had heard that year. He 
was now almost opposite the site he had originally 
chosen for his house, and which had been so un- 
ceremoniously rejected by Bosinney in favour of 
his own choice. He began passing his handker- 
chief over his face and hands, taking deep breaths 
to give him steadiness. * Keep one's head/ he 
thought, ' keep one's head ! ' 

The cab turned in at the drive which might have 
been his own, and the sound of music met him. He 
had forgotten the fellow's daughters. 

" I may be out again directly," he said to the 
driver, " or I may be kept some time ; " and he rang 
the bell. 

Following the maid through the curtains into the 
inner hall, he felt relieved that the impact of this 
meeting would be broken by June or Holly, which- 
ever was playing in there, so that with complete 
surprise he saw Irene at the piano, and Jolyon sit- 
ting in an armchair listening. They both stood up. 
Blood surged into Soames' brain, and all his reso- 
lution to be guided by this or that left him utterly. 
The look of his farmer forbears dogged For- 
sytes down by the sea, from ' Superior Dosset ' 
back grinned out of his face. 
'Very pretty!" he said. 

He heard the fellow murmur : 

" This is hardly the place we'll go to the study, 
if you don't mind." And they both passed him 
through the curtain opening. In the little room to 
which he followed them, Irene stood by the open 
window, and the ' fellow ' close to her by a big 
chair. Soames pulled the door to behind him with 



306 IN CHANCERY < 

a slam ; the sound carried him back all those years 
to the day when he had shut out Jolyon shut him 
out for meddling with his affairs. 

" Well," he said, " what have you to say for 
yourselves ? " 

The fellow had the effrontery to smile. 

" What we have received to-day has taken away 
your right to ask. I should imagine you will be 
glad to have your neck out of chancery." 

" Oh ! " said Soames ; " you think so ! I came to 
tell you that I'll divorce her with every circumstance 
of disgrace to you both, unless you swear to keep 
clear of each other from now on." 

He was astonished at his fluency, because his 
mind was stammering and his hands twitching. 
Neither of them answered; but their faces seemed 
to him as if contemptuous. 

"Well/ 1 he said; "you Irene? " 

Her lips moved, but Jolyon laid his hand on her 
arm. 

" Let her alone ! " said Soames furiously. " Irene, 
will you swear it ? " 

" No." 

"Oh! and you?" 

" Still less." 

" So then you 're guilty, are you? " 

'Yes, guilty." It was Irene speaking in that 
serene voice, with that unreached air which had 
maddened him so often; and, carried beyond him- 
self, he cried: 

' You are a devil." 

" Go out ! Leave this house, or I'll do you an 
injury." That fellow to talk of injuries! Did he 
know how near his throat was to being scragged? 

" A trustee," he said, " embezzling trust prop- 
erty! A thief, stealing his cousin's wife." 



A SUMMER DAY 307 

" Call me what you like. You have chosen your 
part, we have chosen ours. Go out ! " 

If he had brought a weapon Soames might have 
used it at that moment. 

" I'll make you pay ! " he said. 

" I shall be very happy/' 

At that deadly turning of the meaning of his 
speech by the son of him who had nicknamed him 
' the man of property/ Soames stood glaring. It 
was ridiculous ! 

There they were, kept from violence by some 
secret force. No blow possible, no words to meet 
the case. But he could not, did not know how to 
turn and go away. His eyes fastened on Irene's 
face the last time he would ever see that fatal 
face the last time, no doubt ! 

" You," he said suddenly, " I hope you'll treat 
him as you treated me that's all." 

He saw her wince, and with a sensation not 
quite triumph, not quite relief, he wrenched open 
the door, passed out through the hall, and got into 
his cab. He lolled against the cushion with his eyes 
shut. Never in his life had he been so near to mur- 
derous violence, never so thrown away the restraint 
which was his second nature. He had a stripped 
and naked feeling, as if all virtue had gone out of 
him life meaningless, mind striking work. Sun- 
light streamed in on him, but he felt cold. The scene 
he had passed through had gone from him already, 
what was before him would not materialise, he 
could catch on to nothing; and he felt frightened, 
as if he had been hanging over the edge of a preci- 
pice, as if with another turn of the screw sanity 
would have failed him. Tm not fit for it,' he 
thought; ' I mustn't I'm not fit for it/ The cab 



3 o8 IN CHANCERY 

sped on/and in mechanical procession trees, houses, 
people passed, but had no significance. ' I feel 
very queer/ he thought; ' I'll take a Turkish bath. 
I I've been very near to something. It won't do/ 
The cab whirred its way back over the bridge, up 
the Fulham Road, along the Park. 

" To the Hammam," said Soames. 

Curious that on so warm a summer day, heat 
should be so comforting! Crossing into the hot 
room he met George Forsyte coming out, red and 
glistening. 

" Hallo ! " said George ; " what are you training 
for? You've not got much superfluous." 

Buffoon! Soames passed him with his sideway 
smile. Lying back, rubbing his skin uneasily for 
the first signs of perspiration, he thought: 'Let 
them laugh ! I won't feel anything ! I can't stand 
violence ! It's not good for me ! ' 



CHAPTER VII 

A SUMMER NIGHT 

l : ' .' 

SOAMES left dead silence in the little study. 

" Thank you for that good lie/' said Jolyon sud- 
denly. " Come out the air in here is not what 
it was ! " 

In front of a long high southerly wall on which 
were trained peach-trees, the two walked up and 
down in silence. Old Jolyon had planted some 
cupressus-trees, at intervals, between this grassy 
terrace and the dipping meadow full of buttercups 
and ox-eyed daisies; for twelve years they had 
flourished, till their dark spiral shapes had quite a 
look of Italy. Birds fluttered softly in the wet 
shrubbery ; the swallows swooped past, with a steel- 
blue sheen on their swift little bodies; the grass 
felt springy beneath the feet, its green refreshed; 
and butterflies chased each other. After that pain- 
ful scene the quiet of Nature was wonderfully 
poignant. Under the sun-soaked wall ran a nar- 
row strip of garden-bed full of mignonette and 
pansies, and from the bees came a low hum in 
which all other sounds were set the mooing of a 
cow deprived of her calf, the calling of a cuckoo 
from an elm-tree at the bottom of the meadow. 
Who would have thought that behind them, within 

309 



' IN CHANCERY 

ten miles, London began that London of the For- 
sytes, with its wealth, its misery; its dirt and noise; 
its jumbled stone isles of beauty, its grey sea of 
hideous brick and stucco ? That London which had 
seen Irene's early tragedy, and Jolyon's own hard 
days; that web; that princely workhouse of the 
possessive instinct! 

And while they walked Jolyon pondered those 
words : 'I hope you'll treat him as you treated me.' 
That would depend on himself. Could he trust him- 
self ? Did Nature permit a Forsyte not to make a 
slave of what he adored? Could beauty be con- 
fided to him? Or should she not be just a visitor, 
coming when she would, possessed for moments 
which passed, to return only at her own choosing? 
' We are a breed of spoilers ! ' thought Jolyon, 
' close and greedy ; the bloom of life is not safe 
with us. Let her come to me as she will, when she 
will, not at all if she will not. Let me be just her 
stand-by, her perching-place ; never never her 
cage!' 

She was the chink of beauty in his dream. Was 
he to pass through the curtains now and reach her ? 
Was the rich stuff of many possessions, the close 
encircling fabric of the possessive instinct walling 
in that little black figure of himself, and Soames 
was it to be rent so that he could pass through into 
his vision, find there something not out of the senses 
only ? ' Let me/ he thought, ' ah ! let me only know 
how not to grasp and destroy ! ' 

^ But at dinner there were plans to be made. To- 
night she would go back to the hotel, but to-morrow 
he would take her up to London. He must instruct 
his solicitor Jack Herring. Not a finger must 
be raised to hinder the process of the Law. Dam- 



A SUMMER NIGHT 311 

ages exemplary, judicial strictures, costs, what they 
liked let it go through at the first moment, so 
that her neck might be out of chancery at last ! To- 
morrow he would see Herring they would go 
and see him together. And then abroad, leaving 
no doubt, no difficulty about evidence, making the 
lie she had told into the truth. He looked round at 
her; and it seemed to his adoring eyes that more 
than a woman was sitting there. The spirit of uni- 
versal beauty, deep, mysterious, which the old paint- 
ers, Titian, Giorgione, Botticelli, had known how 
to capture and transfer to the faces of their women 
this flying beauty seemed to him imprinted on 
her brow, her hair, her lips, and in her eyes. 

' And this is to be mine ! ' he thought. ' It fright- 
ens me ! ' 

After dinner they went out on to the terrace to 
have coffee. They sat there long, the evening was 
so lovely, watching the summer night come very 
slowly on. It was still warm and the air smelled 
of lime blossom early this summer. Two bats 
were flighting with the faint mysterious little noise 
they make. He had placed the chairs in front of 
the study window, and moths flew past to visit the 
discreet light in there. There was no wind, and not 
a whisper in the old oak-tree twenty yards away! 
The moon rose from behind the copse, nearly full; 
and the two lights struggled, till moonlight con- 
quered, changing the colour and quality of all the 
garden, stealing along the flagstones, reaching 
their feet, climbing up, changing their faces. 

:< Well," said Jolyon at last, "you'll be so tired; 
we'd better start. The maid will show you Holly's 
room," and he rang the study bell. The maid who 
came handed him a telegram. Watching her take 



3I2 IN CHANCERY 

Irene away, he thought: ' This must have come an 
hour or more ago, and she didn't bring it out to us ! 
That shows ! Well, we'll be hung for a sheep soon ! ' 
And, opening the telegram, he read: 

"JOLYON FORSYTE, Robin Hill. Your son passed 
painlessly away on June 20th. Deep sympathy " 
some name unknown to him. 

He dropped it, spun round, stood motionless. 
The moon shone in on him; a moth flew in his face. 
The first day of all that he had not thought almost 
ceaselessly of Jolly. He went blindly towards the 
window, struck against the old armchair his 
father's and sank down on to the arm of it. He 
sat there huddled forward, staring into the night. 
Gone out like a candle flame ; far from home, from 
love, all by himself, in the dark ! His boy ! From 
a little chap always so good to him so friendly ! 
Twenty years old, and cut down like grass to 
have no life at all ! 'I didn't really know him,' he 
thought, 'and he didn't know me; but we loved 
each other. It's only love that matters. 5 

To die out there lonely wanting them 
wanting home! This seemed to his Forsyte heart 
more painful, more pitiful than death itself. No 
shelter, no protection, no love at the last! And all 
the deeply rooted clanship in him, the family feel- 
ing and essential clinging to his own flesh and blood 
which had been so strong in old Jolyon was so 
strong in all the Forsytes felt outraged, cut, and 
torn by his boy's lonely passing. Better far if he 
had died in battle, without time to long for them to 
come to him, to call out for them, perhaps, in his 
delirium ! 

The moon had passed behind the oak-tree now, 
endowing it with uncanny life, so that it seemed 



A SUMMER NIGHT 313 

watching him the oak-tree his boy had been so 
fond of climbing, out of which he had once fallen 
and hurt himself, and hadn't cried! 

The door creaked. He saw Irene come in, pick 
up the telegram and read it. He heard the faint 
rustle of her dress. She sank on her knees close to 
him, and he forced himself to smile at her. She 
stretched up her arms and drew his head down on 
her shoulder. The perfume and warmth of her 
encircled him; her presence gained slowly his whole 
being. 



CHAPTER VIII 

JAMES IN WAITING 

SWEATED to serenity, Soames dined at the Remove 
and turned his face toward Park Lane. His father 
had been unwell lately. This would have to be kept 
from him ! Never till that moment had he realised 
how much the dread of bringing James' grey hairs 
down with sorrow to the grave had counted with 
him; how intimately it was bound up with his own 
shrinking from scandal. His affection for his 
father, always deep, had increased of late years 
with the knowledge that James looked on him as the 
real prop of his decline. It seemed pitiful that one 
who had been so careful all his life and done so 
much for the family name so that it was almost 
a byword for solid, wealthy respectability should 
at his last gasp have to see it in all the newspapers. 
This was like lending a hand to Death, that final 
enemy of Forsytes. 'I must tell mother/ he 
thought, ' and when it comes on, we must keep the 
papers from him somehow. He sees hardly any- 
one.' Letting himself in with his latchkey, he was 
beginning to ascend the stairs when he became con- 
scious of commotion on the second-floor landing. 
His mother's voice, was saying: 

314 



JAMES IN WAITING 315 

" Now, James, you'll catch cold. Why can't you 
wait quietly ? " 

His father's answering: 

"Wait? I'm always waiting. Why doesn't he 
come in? " 

" You can speak to him to-morrow morning, in- 
stead of making a guy of yourself on the landing." 

" He'll go up to bed, I shouldn't wonder. I 
shan't sleep." 

" Now come back to bed, James." 

" Um ! I might die before to-morrow morning 
for all you can tell." 

" You shan't have to wait tin to-morrow morn- 
ing ; I'll go down and bring him up. Don't fuss ! " 

" There you go always so cock-a-hoop. He 
mayn't come in at all." 

" Well, if he doesn't come in you won't catch him 
by standing out here in your dressing-gown." 

Soames rounded the last bend and came in sight 
of his father's tall figure wrapped in a brown silk 
quilted gown, stooping over the balustrade above. 
Light fell on his silvery hair and whiskers, invest- 
ing his head with a sort of halo. 

"Here he is ! " he heard him say in a voice which 
sounded injured, and his mother's comfortable an- 
swer from the bed-room door : 

t That's all right. Come in, and I'll brush your 
hair." James extended a thin, crooked finger, 
oddly like the beckoning of a skeleton, and passed 
through the doorway of his bedroom. 

'What is it?' thought Soames. 'What has he 
got hold of now ? ' 

His father was sitting before the dressing-table 
sideways to the mirror, while Emily slowly passed 
two silver-backed brushes through and through his 



316 IN CHANCERY 

hair. She would do this several times a day, for 
it had on him something of the effect produced on 
a cat by scratching between its ears. 

"There you are ! " he said. :f I've been waiting." 

Soames stroked his shoulder, and, taking up a 
silver buttonhook, examined the mark on it. 

" Well," he said, " you're looking better." 

James shook his head. 

" I want to say something. Your mother hasn't 
heard." He announced Emily's ignorance of what 
he hadn't told her, as if it were a grievance. 

" Your father's been in a great state all the even- 
ing. I'm sure I don't know what about." The 
faint ' whish-whish ' of the brushes continued the 
soothing of her voice. 

" No ! you know nothing," said James. " Soames 
can tell me." And, fixing his grey eyes, in which 
there was a look of strain, uncomfortable to watch, 
on his son, he muttered : 

" I'm getting on, Soames. At my age I can't tell. 
I might die any time. There'll be a lot of money. 
There's Rachel and Cicely got no children; and 
Val's out there that chap his father will get hold 
of all he can. And somebody'll pick up Imogen, I 
shouldn't wonder." 

Soames listened vaguely he had heard all this 
before. Whish-whish! went the brushes. 

" If that's all ! " said Emily. 

" All ! " cried James ; " it's nothing. I'm coming 
to that." And again his eyes strained pitifully at 
Soames. 

"It's you, my boy," he said suddenly; "you 
ought to get a divorce." 

That word, from those of all lips, was almost too 
much for Soames' composure. His eyes reconcen- 



JAMES IN WAITING 317 

trated themselves quickly on the buttonhook, and as 
if in apology James hurried on : 

" I don't know what's become of her they say 
she's abroad. Your Uncle Swithin used to ad- 
mire her he was a funny fellow." (So he al- 
ways alluded to his dead twin ' The Stout and 
the Lean of it/ they had been called.) "She 
wouldn't be alone, I should say." And with that 
summing-up of the effect of beauty on human na- 
ture, he was silent, watching his son with eyes 
doubting as a bird's. Soames, too, was silent. 
Whish-whish ! went the brushes. 

" Come, James ! Soames knows best. It's his 
business." 

" Ah ! " said James, and the word came from deep 
down ; " but there's all my money, and there's his 
who's it to go to ? And when he dies the name goes 
out." 

Soames replaced the buttonhook on the lace and 
pink silk of the dressing-table coverlet. 

"The name?" said Emily, "there are all the 
other Forsytes." 

" As if that helped me" muttered James. " I 
shall be in my grave, and there'll be nobody, unless 
he marries again." 

" You 're quite right," said Soames quietly ; " I 'm 
getting a divorce." 

James' eyes almost started from his head. 

"What?" he cried. "There! nobody tells me 
anything." 

' Well," said Emily, " who would have imagined 
you wanted it? My dear boy, that is a surprise, 
after all these years." 

" It'll be a scandal," muttered James, as if to him- 
self ; " but I can't help that. Don't brush so hard. 
When'llitcomeon?" 



3 i8 IN CHANCERY 

" Before the Long Vacation ; it's not defended." 

James' lips moved in secret calculation. "I 
shan't live to see my grandson," he muttered. 

Emily ceased brushing. "Of course you will, 
James. Soames will be as quick as he can." 

There was a long silence, till James reached out 
his arm. 

" Here ! let's have the eau-de-Cologne," and, put- 
ting it to his nose, he moved his forehead in the di- 
rection of his son. Soames bent over and kissed 
that brow just where the hair began. A relaxing 
quiver passed over James' face, as though the 
wheels of anxiety within were running down. 

" I'll get to bed," he said; " I shan't want to see 
the papers when that comes. They're a morbid lot ; 
but I can't pay attention to them, I'm too old." 

Queerly affected, Soames went to the door; he 
heard his father say: 

" Here, I'm tired. I'll say a prayer in bed." 

And his mother answering: 

" That's right, James; it'll be ever so much more 
comfy." 



CHAPTER IX 

OUT OF THE WEB 

ON Forsyte 'Change the announcement of Jolly's 
death, among a batch of troopers, caused mixed 
sensation. Strange to read that Jolyon Forsyte 
(fifth of the name in direct descent) had died of 
disease in the service of his country, and not be 
able to feel it personally. It revived the old grudge 
against his father for having estranged himself. 
For such was still the prestige of old Jolyon that the 
other Forsytes could never quite feel, as might 
have been expected, that it was they who had cut 
off his descendants for irregularity. The news in- 
creased, of course, the interest and anxiety about 
Val ; but then Val's name was Dartie, and even if 
he were killed in battle or got the Victoria Cross, 
it would not be at all the same as if his name were 
Forsyte. Not even casualty or glory to the Hay- 
mans would be really satisfactory. Family pride 
felt defrauded. 

How the rumour arose, then, that ' something 
very dreadful, my dear,' was pending, no one, least 
of all Soames, could tell, secret as he kept every- 
thing. Possibly some eye had seen ' Forsyte v. For- 
syte and Forsyte ' in the cause list ; and had added 
it to ' Irene in Paris with a fair beard.' Possibly 

319 



320 IN CHANCERY 

some wall at Park Lane had ears. The fact re- 
mained that it was known whispered among the 
old, discussed among the young that family pride 
must soon receive a blow. 

Soames, paying one of his Sunday visits to Timo- 
thy's paying it with the feeling that after the 
suit came on he would be paying no more felt 
knowledge in the air as he came in. Nobody, of 
course, dared speak of it before him, but each of 
the four other Forsytes present held their breath, 
aware that nothing could prevent Aunt Juley from 
making them all uncomfortable. She looked so 
piteously at Soames, she checked herself on the 
point of speech so often, that Aunt Hester excused 
herself and said she must go and bathe Timothy's 
eye he had a sty coming. Soames, impassive, 
slightly supercilious, did not stay long. He went 
out with a curse stifled behind his pale, just smiling 
lips. 

Fortunately for the peace of his mind, cruelly tor- 
tured by the coming scandal, he was kept busy day 
and night with plans for his retirement for he 
had come to that grim conclusion. To go on seeing 
all those people who had known him as a 'long- 
headed chap/ an astute adviser after that no ! 
The fastidiousness and pride which was so 
strangely, so inextricably blended in him with pos- 
sessive obtuseness, revolted against the thought. 
He would retire, live privately, go on buying pic- 
tures, make a great name as a collector after all, 
his heart was more in that than it had ever been in 
Law. In pursuance of this now fixed resolve, he 
had to get ready to amalgamate his business with 
another firm without letting people know, for that 
would excite curiosity and make humiliation cast 



OUT OF THE WEB 321 

its shadow before. He had pitched on the firm of 
Cuthcott, Holliday, Kingson, two of whom were 
dead. The full name after the amalgamation would 
therefore be Cuthcott, Holliday, Kingson, Forsyte, 
Bustard and Forsyte. But after debate as to which 
of the dead still had any influence with the living, 
it was decided to reduce the title to Cuthcott, King- 
son and Forsyte, of whom Kingson would be the 
active and Soames the sleeping partner. For leav- 
ing his name, prestige, and clients behind him, 
Soames would receive considerable value. 

One night, as befitted a man who had arrived at 
so important a stage of his career, he made a cal- 
culation of what he was worth, and after writing 
off liberally for depreciation by the war, found his 
value to be some hundred and thirty thousand 
pounds. At his father's death, which could not, 
alas, be delayed much longer, he must come into at 
least another fifty thousand, and his yearly expen- 
diture at present just reached two. Standing among 
his pictures, he saw before him a future full of bar- 
gains earned by the trained faculty of knowing 
better than other people. Selling what was about 
to decline, keeping what was still going up, and 
exercising judicious insight into future taste, he 
would make a unique collection, which at his death 
would pass to the nation under the title ' Forsyte 
Bequest.' 

If the divorce went through, he had determined 
on his line with Madame Lamotte. She had, he 
knew, but one real ambition to live on her 
* rentes ' in, Paris near her grandchildren. He 
would buy the goodwill of the Restaurant Bretagne 
at a fancy price. Madame would live like a Queen- 
Mother in Paris on the interest, invested as she 



IN CHANCERY 

would know how. (Incidentally Soames meant to 
put a capable manager in her place, and make the 
restaurant pay good interest on his money. There, 
were great possibilities in Soho.) On Annette he 
would promise to settle fifteen thousand pounds 
(whether designedly or not), precisely the sum old 
Jolyon had settled on ' that woman.' 

A letter from Jolyon's solicitor to his own had 
disclosed the fact that ' those two ' were in Italy. 
And an opportunity had been duly given for noting 
that they had first stayed at a hotel in London. 
The matter was clear as daylight, and would be dis- 
posed of in half an hour or so; but during that 
half -hour he, Soames, would go down to hell; and 
after that half-hour all bearers of the Forsyte name 
would feel the bloom was off the rose. He had no 
illusions like Shakespeare that roses by any other 
name would smell as sweet. The name was a pos- 
session, a concrete, unstained piece of property, the 
value of which would be reduced some twenty per 
cent, at least. Unless it were Roger, who had once 
refused to stand for Parliament, and oh, irony ! 
Jolyon, hung on the line, there had never been a 
distinguished Forsyte. But that very lack of dis- 
tinction was the name's greatest asset. It was a 
private name, intensely individual, and his own 
property; it had never been exploited for good or 
evil by intrusive report. He and each member of 
his family owned it wholly, sanely, secretly, with- 
out any more interference from the public than 
had been necessitated by their births, their mar- 
riages, their deaths. And during these weeks of 
waiting and preparing to drop the Law, he con- 
ceived for J:hat Law a bitter distaste, so deeply did 
he resent its coming violation of his name, forced 



OUT OF THE WEB 323 

on him by the need he felt to perpetuate that name 
in a lawful manner. The monstrous injustice of 
the whole thing excited in him a perpetual sup- 
pressed fury. He had asked no better than to live 
in spotless domesticity, and now he must go into the 
witness box, after all these futile, barren years, and 
proclaim his failure to keep his wife incur the 
pity, the amusement, the contempt of his kind. It 
was all upside down. She and that fellow ought 
to be the sufferers, and they were in Italy! In 
these weeks the Law he had served so faithfully, 
looked on so reverently as the guardian of all prop- 
erty, seemed to him quite pitiful. What could be 
more insane than to tell a man that he owned his 
wife, and punish him when someone unlawfully 
took her away from him? Did the law not know 
that a man's name was to him the apple of his eye, 
that it was far harder to be regarded as cuckold 
than as seducer? He actually envied Jolyon the 
reputation of succeeding where he, Soames, had 
failed. The question of damages worried him, too. 
He wanted to make that fellow suffer, but he re- 
membered his cousin's words, " I shall be very 
happy," with the uneasy feeling that to claim dam- 
ages would make not Jolyon but himself suffer; he 
felt uncannily that Jolyon would rather like to pay 
them the chap was so loose. Besides, to claim 
damages was not the thing to do. The claim, in- 
deed, had been made almost mechanically; and as 
the hour drew near Soames saw in it just another 
dodge of this insensitive and topsy-turvy Law to 
make him ridiculous; so that people might sneer 
and say : " Oh yes, he got quite a good price for 
her ! " And he gave instructions that his Counsel 
should state that the money would be given to a 



3 2 4 



IN CHANCERY 



Home for Fallen Women. He was a long time hit- 
ting off exactly the right charity; but, having 
pitched on it, he used to wake up in the night and 
think: ' It won't do, too lurid; it'll draw attention. 
Something quieter better taste/ He did not care 
for dogs, or he would have named them; and it was 
in desperation at last for his knowledge of chari- 
ties was limited that he decided on the blind. 
That could not be inappropriate, and it would make 
the Jury assess the damages high. 

A good many suits were dropping out of the list, 
which happened to be exceptionally thin that sum- 
mer, so that his case would be reached before Au- 
gust. As the day grew nearer, Winifred was his 
only comfort. She showed the fellow-feeling of 
one who had been through the mill, and was the 
' feme-sole ' in whom he confided, well knowing 
that she would not let Dartie into her confidence. 
That ruffian would be only too rejoiced! At the 
end of July, on the afternoon before the case, he 
went in to see her. They had not yet been able to 
leave town, because Dartie had already spent their 
summer holiday, and Winifred dared not go to 
her father for more money while he was waiting 
not to be told anything about this affair of Soames. 

Soames found her with a letter in her hand. 
1 That from Val ? " he asked gloomily. " What 
does he say?" 

" He says he's married," said Winifred. 
'Whom to, for Goodness' sake?" 

Winifred looked at him. 

" To Holly Forsyte, Jolyon's daughter." 



[( He got leave and did it. I didn't even know 
he knew her. Awkward, isn't it? " 



OUT OF THE WEB 325 

Soames uttered a short laugh at that character- 
istic minimisation. 

" Awkward ! Well, I don't suppose they'll hear 
about this till they come back. They'd better stay 
out there. That fellow will give her money." 

" But I want Val back," said Winifred almost 
piteously; " I miss him; he helps me to get on." 

" I know," murmured Soames. " How's Dartie 
behaving now?" 

" It might be worse ; but it's always money. 
Would you like me to come down to the Court to- 
morrow, Soames ? " 

Soames stretched out his hand for hers. The 
gesture so betrayed the loneliness in him that she 
pressed it between her two. 

" Never mind, old boy. You'll feel ever so much 
better when it's all over." 

" I don't know what I've done," said Soames 
huskily; "I never have. It's all upside down. I 
was fond of her ; I've always been." 

Winifred saw a drop of blood ooze out of his lip, 
and the sight stirred her profoundly. 

" Of course," she said, " it's been too bad of her 
all along ! But what shall I do about this marriage 
of Val's, Soames ? I don't know how to write to 
him, with this coming on. You've seen that child. 
Is she pretty ?' : 

"Yes, she's pretty," said Soames. "Dark - 
lady-like enough." 

* That doesn't sound so bad,' thought Winifred 
' Jolyon had style.' 

" It is a coil," she said. " What will father say ? " 

" Mustn't be told," said Soames. " The war'll 
soon be over now, you'd better let Val take to farm- 
ing out there." 



32 6 IN CHANCERY 

It was tantamount to saying that his nephew was 

lost. 

" I haven't told Monty," Winifred murmured 

desolately. 

The case was reached before noon next day, and 
was over in little more than half an hour. Soames 
pale, spruce, sad-eyed in the witness box had 
suffered so much beforehand that he took it all like 
one dead. The moment the decree nisi was pro- 
nounced he left the Courts of Justice. 

Four hours until he became public property! 
' Solicitor's divorce suit ! ' A surly, dogged anger 
replaced that dead feeling within him. * Damn 
them all ! ' he thought ; ' I won't run away. I'll act 
as if nothing had happened/ And in the sweltering 
heat of Fleet Street and Ludgate Hill he walked all 
the way to his City Club, lunched, and went back to 
his office. He worked there stolidly throughout the 
afternoon. 

On his way out he saw that his clerks knew, and 
answered their involuntary glances with a look so 
sardonic that they were immediately withdrawn. 
In front of St. Paul's, he stopped to buy the most 
gentlemanly of the evening papers. Yes ! there he 
was ! ' Well-known solicitor's divorce. Cousin co- 
respondent. Damages given to the blind ' so, 
they had got that in! At every other face, he 
thought: ' I wonder if you know! ' And suddenly 
he felt queer, as if something were racing round in 
his head. 

What was this? He was letting it get hold of 
him ! He mustn't ! He would be ill. He mustn't 
think! He would get down to the river and row 
about, and fish. ' I'm not going to be laid up,' he 
thought. 



OUT OF THE WEB 327 

It flashed across him that he had something of 
importance to do before he went out of town. 
Madame Lamotte! He must explain the Law. 
Another six months before he was really free! 
Only he did not want to see Annette! And he 
passed his hand over the top of his head it was 
very hot. 

He branched off through Covent Garden. On 
this sultry day of late July the garbage-tainted air 
of the old market offended him, and Soho seemed 
more than ever the disenchanted home of rapscal- 
lionism. Alone, the Restaurant Bretagne, neat, 
daintily painted, with its blue tubs and the dwarf 
trees therein, retained an aloof and Frenchified 
self-respect. It was the slack hour, and pale trim 
waitresses were preparing the little tables for din- 
ner. Soames went through into the private part. 
To his discomfiture Annette answered his knock. 
She, too, looked pale and dragged down by the heat. 

" You are quite a stranger," she said languidly. 

Soames smiled. 

" I haven't wished to be ; I've been busy. Where's 
your mother, Annette? I've got some news for 
her." 

" Mother is not in." 

It seemed to Soames that she looked at him in a 
queer way. What did she know ? How much had 
her mother told her ? The worry of trying to make 
that out gave him an alarming feeling in his head. 
He gripped the edge of the table, and dizzily saw 
Annette come forward, her eyes clear with sur- 
prise. He shut his own and said : 

" It's all right. I've had a touch of the sun, I 
think." The sun! What he had was a touch of 
darkness ! Annette's voice, French and composed, 
said: 



32 g IN CHANCERY 

" Sit down, it will pass, then." Her hand pressed 
his shoulder, and Soames sank into a chair. When 
the dark feeling dispersed, and he opened his eyes, 
she was looking down at him. What an inscrutable 
and odd expression for a girl of twenty ! 

" Do you feel better?" 

" It's nothing," said Soames. Instinct told him 
that to be feeble before her was not helping him 
age was enough handicap without that. Will- 
power was his fortune with Annette; he had lost 
ground these latter months from indecision he 
could not afford to lose any more. He got up, and 
said: 

" I'll write to your mother. I'm going down to 
my river house for a long holiday. I want you both 
to come there presently and stay. It's just at its 
best. You will, won't you ? " 

" It will be veree nice." A pretty little roll of 
that *r,' but no enthusiasm. 1 And rather sadly he. 
added : 

" You're feeling the heat, too, aren't you, An- 
nette ? It'll do you good to be on the river. Good- 
night." Annette swayed forward. There was a 
sort of compunction in the movement. 

" Are you fit to go ? Shall I give you some 
coffee?" 

" No," said Soames firmly. " Give me your 
hand." 

She held out her hand, and Soames raised it to 
his lips. When he looked up, her face wore again 
that strange expression. ' I can't tell ' he thought as 
he went out; 'but I mustn't think I mustn't 
worry.' 

But worry he did, walking toward Pall Mall. 
English, not of her religion, middle-aged, scarred 



OUT OF THE WEB 329 

as it were by domestic tragedy, what had he to give 
her ? Only wealth, social position, leisure, admira- 
tion ! It was much, but was it enough for a beau- 
tiful girl of twenty? He felt so ignorant about 
Annette. He had, too, a curious fear of the French 
nature of her mother and herself. They knew so 
well what they wanted. They were almost For- 
sytes. They would never grasp a shadow and 
miss a substance ! 

The tremendous effort it was to write a simple 
note to Madame Lamotte when he reached his Club 
warned him still further that he was at the end of 
his tether. 

"Mv DEAR MADAME (he said), 

" You will see by the enclosed newspaper cut- 
ting that I obtained my decree of divorce to-day. 
By the English Law I shall not, however, be free to 
marry again till the decree is confirmed six months 
hence. In the meanwhile I have the honour to ask 
to be considered a formal suitor for the hand of 
your daughter. I shall write again in a few days 
and beg you both to come and stay at my river 
house. 

" I am, dear Madame, 

" Sincerely yours, 

" SOAMES FORSYTE." 

Having sealed and posted this letter, he went 
into the dining-room. Three mouthfuls of soup 
convinced him that he could not eat ; and, causing a 
cab to be summoned, he drove to Paddington Sta- 
tion and took the first train to Reading. He reached 
his house just as the sun went down, and wandered 
out on to the lawn. The air was drenched with 



330 IN CHANCERY 

the scent of pinks and picotees in his flawer borders. 
A stealing coolness came off the river. 

Rest peace ! Let a poor fellow rest ! Let not 
worry and shame and anger chase like evil night- 
birds in his head ! Like those doves perched half- 
sleeping on their dovecot, like the furry creatures 
in the woods on the far side, and the simple folk 
in their cottages, like the trees and the river itself, 
whitening fast in twilight, like the darkening corn- 
flower-blue sky where stars were coming up let 
him cease from himself, and rest ! 



CHAPTER X 

PASSING OF AN AGE 

THE marriage of Soames with Annette took place 
in Paris on the last day of January, 1901, with such 
privacy that not even Emily was told until it was 
accomplished. The day after the wedding he 
brought her to one of those quiet hotels in London 
where greater expense can be incurred for less re- 
sult than anywhere else under heaven. Her beauty 
in the best Parisian frocks was giving him more 
satisfaction than if he had collected a perfect bit of 
china, or a jewel of a picture; he looked forward 
to the moment when he would exhibit her in Park 
Lane, in Green Street, and at Timothy's. 

If someone had asked him in those days, " In 
confidence are you in love with this girl ? " he 
would have replied: " In love? What is love? If 
you mean do I feel to her as I did towards Irene in 
those old days when I first met her and she would 
not have me; when I sighed and starved after her 
and couldn't rest a minute until she yielded no! 
If you mean do I admire her youth and prettiness, 
do my senses ache a little when I see her moving 
about yes ! Do I think she will keep me straight, 
make me a creditable wife and a good mother for 
my children ? again yes ! What more do I need ? 

331 



332 



IN CHANCERY 



and what more do three-quarters of the women 
who are married get from the men who marry 
them? " And if an enquirer had pursued his query, 
" And do you think it was fair to have tempted this 
girl to give herself to you for life unless you have 
really touched her heart?'' he would have an- 
swered : " The French see these things differently 
from us. They look at marriage from the point 
of view of establishments and children; and, from 
my own experience, I am not at all sure that theirs 
is not the sensible view. I shall not expect this time 
more than I can get, or she can give. Years hence 
I shouldn't be surprised if I have trouble with her ; 
but I shall be getting old, I shall have children by 
then. I shall shut my eyes. I have my great pas- 
sion ; hers is perhaps to come I don't suppose it 
will be for me. I offer her a great deal, and I don't 
expect much in return, except children, or at least 
a son. But one thing I am sure of she has very 
good sense ! " 

And if, insatiate, the enquirer had gone on, " You 
do not look, then, for spiritual union in this mar- 
riage?" Soames would have lifted his sideway 
smile, and rejoined : " That's as it may be. If I get 
satisfaction for my senses, perpetuation of myself, 
good taste and good humour in the house, it is all 
I can expect at my age. I am not likely to be going 
out of my way towards any far-fetched sentimen- 
talism." Whereon, the enquirer must in good taste 
have ceased enquiry. 

The Queen was dead, and the air of the greatest 
city upon earth grey with unshed tears. Fur- 
coated and top-hatted, with Annette beside him in 
dark furs, Soames crossed Park Lane on the morn- 
ing of the funeral procession, to the rails in Hyde 



PASSING OF AN AGE 333 

Park. Little moved though he ever was by pub- 
lic matters, this event, supremely symbolical, this 
summing-up of a long rich period, impressed his 
fancy. In '37, when she came to the throne, ' Su- 
perior Dosset ' was still building houses to make 
London hideous ; and James, a stripling of twenty- 
six, just laying the foundations of his practice in 
the Law. Coaches still ran; men wore stocks, 
shaved their upper lips, ate oysters out of barrels; 
* tigers ' swung behind cabriolets ; women said, 
' La ! ' and owned no property ; there were manners 
in the land, and pigsties for the poor; unhappy 
devils were hanged for little crimes, and Dickens 
had but just begun to write. Wellnigh two genera- 
tions had slipped by of steamboats, railways, 
telegraphs, bicycles, electric light, telephones, and 
now these motor cars of such accumulated 
wealth, that eight per cent, had become three, and 
Forsytes were numbered by the thousand ! Morals 
had changed, manners had changed, men had be- 
come monkeys twice-removed, God had become 
Mammon Mammon so respectable as to deceive 
himself. Sixty-four years that favoured property, 
and had made the upper middle class; buttressed, 
chiselled, polished it, till it was almost indistin- 
guishable in manners, morals, speech, appearance, 
habit, and soul from the nobility. An epoch which 
had gilded individual liberty so that if a man had 
money, he was free in law and fact. An era which 
had canonised hypocrisy, so that to seem to be re- 
spectable was to be. A great Age, whose trans- 
muting influence nothing had escaped save the na- 
ture of man and the nature of the Universe. 

And to witness the passing of this Age, London 
its pet and fancy was pouring forth her citi- 



334 IN CHANCERY 

zens through every gate into Hyde Park, hub of 
Victorianism, happy hunting-ground of Forsytes. 
Under the grey heavens, whose drizzle just kept 
off, the dark concourse gathered to see the show. 
The ' good old ' Queen, full of years and virtue, had 
emerged from her seclusion for the last time to 
make a London holiday. From Houndsditch, Ac- 
ton, Ealing, Hampstead, Islington, and Bethnal 
Green; from Hackney, Hornsey, Leytonstone, Bat- 
tersea, and Fulham ; and from those green pastures 
where Forsytes flourish Mayfair and Kensing- 
ton, St. James' and Belgravia, Bayswater and Chel- 
sea and the Regents Park, the people swarmed down 
on to the roads where death would presently pass 
with dusky pomp and pageantry. Never again would 
a Queen reign so long, or people have a chance to see 
much history buried for their money. A pity the 
war dragged on, and that the Wreath of Victory 
could not be laid upon her coffin! All else would 
be there to follow and commemorate soldiers, 
sailors, foreign princes, half-masted bunting, toll- 
ing bells, and above all the surging, great, dark- 
coated crowd, with perhaps a simple sadness here 
and there deep in hearts beneath black clothes put 
on by regulation. After all, more than a Queen 
was going to her rest, a woman who had braved 
sorrow, lived well and wisely according to her lights. 
Out in the crowd against the railings, with his 
arm hooked in Annette's, Soames waited. Yes ! the 
Age was passing! What with this Trade-Union- 
ism, and Labour fellows in the House of Commons, 
with continental fiction, and something in the gen- 
eral feel of everything, not to be expressed in words, 
things were very different; he recalled the crowd 
on Maf eking night, and George Forsyte saying: 



PASSING OF AN AGE 335 

" They're all socialists, they want our goods." Like 
James, Soames didn't know, he couldn't tell with 
Edward on the throne ! Things would never be as 
safe again as under good old Viccy ! Convulsively 
he pressed his young wife's arm. There, at any 
rate, was something substantially his own, domes- 
tically certain again at last ; something which made 
property worth while a real thing once more. 
Pressed close against her and trying to ward others 
off, Soames was content. The crowd swayed round 
them, ate sandwiches and dropped crumbs; boys 
who had climbed the plane-trees chattered above like 
monkeys, threw twigs and orange-peel. It was past 
time ; they should be coming soon ! And, suddenly, 
a little behind them to the left, he saw a tallish 
man with a soft hat and short grizzling beard, and 
a tallish woman in a little round fur cap and veil. 
Jolyon and Irene talking, smiling at each other, 
close together like Annette and himself! They 
had not seen him ; and stealthily, with a very queer 
feeling in his heart, Soames watched those two. 
They looked happy ! What had they come here for 

inherently illicit creatures, rebels from the Vic- 
torian ideal? What business had they in this 
crowd ? Each of them twice exiled by morality 
making a boast, as it were, of love and laxity ! He 
watched them fascinated; admitting grudgingly 
even with his arm thrust through Annette's that 

that she Irene No ! he would not admit 

it; and he turned his eyes away. He would not 
see them, and let the old bitterness, the old longing 
rise up within him! And then Annette turned to 
him and said: "Those two people, Soames; they 
know you, I am sure. Who are they? " 

Soames nosed sideways. 



336 IN CHANCERY 

"What people?" 

" There, you see them; just turning away. They 
know you." 

" No," Soames answered; " a mistake, my dear." 

"A lovely face! And how she walk! Elle est 
ires distingue el" 

Soames looked then. Into his life, out of his 
life she had walked like that swaying and erect, 
remote, unseizable; ever eluding the contact of his 
soul ! He turned abruptly from that receding vision 
of the past. 

" You'd better attend," he said, " they're coming 
now!" 

But while he stood, grasping her arm, seemingly 
intent on the head of the procession, he was quiver- 
ing with the sense of always missing something, 
with instinctive regret that he had not got them 
both. 

Slow came the music and the march, till, in si- 
lence, the long line wound in through the Park gate. 
He heard Annette whisper, " How sad it is and 
beautiful!" felt the clutch of her hand as she 
stood up on tiptoe ; and the crowd's emotion gripped 
him. There it was the bier of the Queen, coffin of 
the Age slow passing! And as it went by there 
came a murmuring groan from all the long line of 
those who watched, a sound such as Soames had 
never heard, so unconscious, primitive, deep and 
wild, that neither he nor any knew whether they 
had joined in uttering it. Strange sound, indeed! 
Tribute of an Age to its own death. ... Ah ! Ah ! 
. . . The hold on life had slipped. That which had 
seemed eternal was gone ! The Queen God bless 
her! 

It moved on with the bier, that travelling groan, 



PASSING OF AN AGE 



337 



as a fire moves on over grass in a thin line ; it kept 
step, and marched alongside down the dense crowds 
mile after mile. It was a human sound, and yet in- 
human, pushed out by animal subconsciousness, by 
intimate knowledge of universal death and change. 
None of us none of us can hold on for ever ! 

It left silence for a little a very little time, till 
tongues began, eager to retrieve interest in the show. 
Soames lingered just long enough to gratify An- 
nette, then took her out of the Park to lunch at his 
father's in Park Lane. . . . 

James had spent the morning gazing out of his 
bedroom window. The last show he would see 
last of so many ! So she was gone ! Well, she was 
getting an old woman. Swithin and he had seen her 
crowned slim slip of a girl, not so old as Imogen ! 
She had got very stout of late. Jolyon and he had 
seen her married to that German chap, her husband 

he had turned out all right before he died, and 
left her with that son of his. And he remembered 
the many evenings he and his brothers and their 
cronies had wagged their heads over their wine and 
walnuts and that fellow in his salad days. And 
now he had come to the throne. They said he had 
steadied down he didn't know couldn't tell! 
He'd make the money fly still, he shouldn't wonder. 
What a lot of people out there ! It didn't seem so 
very long since he and Swithin stood in the crowd 
outside Westminster Abbey when she was crowned, 
and Swithin had taken him to Cremorne afterwards 

racketty chap, Swithin ; no, it didn't seem much 
longer ago than Jubilee Year, when he had joined 
with Roger in renting a balcony in Piccadilly. Jolyon, 
Swithin, Roger all gone, and he would be ninety in 
August ! And there was Soames married again to 



33 8 IN CHANCERY 

a French girl The French were a queer lot, but 
they made good mothers, he had heard. Things 
changed! They said this German Emperor was 
here for the funeral, his telegram to old Kruger had 
been in shocking taste. He shouldn't be surprised 
if that chap made trouble some day. Change! 
H'm! Well, they must look after themselves when 
he was gone : he didn't know where he'd be ! And 
now Emily had asked Dartie to lunch, with Wini- 
fred and Imogen, to meet Soames' wife she was 
always doing something. And there was Irene liv- 
ing with that fellow Jolyon, they said. He'd marry 
her now, he supposed. 

' My brother Jolyon/ he thought, ' what would 
he have said to it all ? ' And somehow the utter im- 
possibility of knowing what his elder brother, once 
so looked up to, would have said, so worried James 
that he got up from his chair by the window, and 
began slowly, feebly to pace the room. 

* She was a pretty thing, too,' he thought ; ' I was 
fond of her. Perhaps Soames didn't suit her I 
don't know I can't tell. We never had any trouble 
with our wives.' Women had changed every- 
thing had changed ! And now the Queen was dead 
well, there it was! A movement in the crowd 
brought him to a standstill at the window, his nose 
touching the pane and whitening from the chill of it. 
They had got her as far as Hyde Park Corner 
they were passing now ! Why didn't Emily come up 
here where she could see, instead of fussing about 
lunch. He missed her at that moment missed 
her ! Through the bare branches of the plane-trees 
he could just see the procession, could see the hats 
coming off the people's heads a lot of them would 
catch colds, he shouldn't wonder ! A voice behind 
him said: 



PASSING OF AN AGE 339 

" You've got a capital view here, James ! " 

" There you are ! " muttered James ; " why 
didn't you come before? You might have missed 
it!" 

And he was silent, staring with all his might. 
' What's that noise? " he asked suddenly. 

"There's no noise," returned Emily; "what are 
you thinking of ? they wouldn't cheer." 

" I can hear it." 

" Nonsense, James ! " 

No sound came through those double panes ; what 
James heard was the groaning in his own heart at 
the sight of his Age passing. 

"Don't you ever tell me where I'm buried," he 
said suddenly. " I shan't want to know." And he 
turned from the window. There she went, the old 
Queen; she'd had a lot of anxiety she'd be glad 
to be out of it, he should think ! 

Emily took up the hair-brushes. 

" There'll be just time to brush your head," she 
said, " before they come. You must look your best, 
James." 

" Ah ! " muttered James ; " they say she's pretty." 

The meeting with his new daughter-in-law took 
place in the dining-room. James was seated by the 
fire when she was brought in. He placed his hands 
on the arms of the chair and slowly raised himself. 
Stooping and immaculate in his frock-coat, thin as 
a line in Euclid, he received Annette's hand in his ; 
and the anxious eyes of his furrowed face, which 
had lost its colour now, doubted above her. A little 
warmth came into them and into his cheeks, re- 
fracted from her bloom. 

" How are you ? " he said. " You've been to see 
the Queen, I suppose ? Did you have a good cross- 



34 o IN CHANCERY 

ing? " In this way he greeted her from whom he 
hoped for a grandson of his name. 

Gazing at him, so old, thin, white, and spotless, 
Annette murmured something in French which 
James did not understand. 

" Yes, yes," he said, " you want your lunch, I 
expect. Soames, ring the bell; we won't wait for 
that chap Dartie." But just then they arrived. 
Dartie had refused to go out of his way to see ' the 
old girl/ With an early cock-tail beside him, he 
had taken a ' squint ' from the smoking-room of the 
Iseeum, so that Winifred and Imogen had been 
obliged to come back from the Park to fetch him 
thence. His brown eyes rested on Annette with a 
stare of almost startled satisfaction. The second 
beauty that fellow Soames had picked up! What 
women could see in him ! Well, she would play him 
the same trick as the other, no doubt; but in the 
meantime he was a lucky devil ! And he brushed up 
his moustache, having in nine months of Green 
Street domesticity regained almost all his flesh and 
his assurance. Despite the comfortable efforts of 
Emily, Winifred's composure, Imogen's enquiring 
friendliness, Dartie's showing-off , and James' solici- 
tude about her food, it was not, Soames felt, a suc- 
cessful lunch for his bride. He took her away very 
soon. 

" That Monsieur Dartie," said Annette in the cab, 
" je n'amie pas ce type la! " 

" No, by George! " said Soames. 

' Your sister is veree amiable, and the girl is 
pretty. Your father is veree old. I think your 
mother has trouble with him ; I should not like to be 
her.'" 

Soames nodded at the shrewdness, the clear hard 



PASSING OF AN AGE 341 

judgment in his young wife ; but it disquieted him a 
little. The thought may have just flashed through 
him, too : ' When I'm eighty she'll be fifty-five, hav- 
ing trouble with me ! ' 

' There's just one other house of my relations I 
must take you to/' he said; "you'll find it funny, 
but we must get it over ; and then we'll dine and go 
to the theatre." 

In this way he prepared her for Timothy's. But 
Timothy's was different. They were delighted to 
see dear Soames after this long long time; and so 
this was Annette ! 

" You are so pretty, my dear ; almost too ydung 
and pretty for dear Soames, aren't you? But he's 
very attentive and careful such a good hus- 

b " Aunt Juley checked herself, and placed her 

lips just under each of Annette's eyes she after- 
wards described them to Francie, who dropped in, 
as : " Cornflower-blue, so pretty, I quite wanted to 
kiss them. I must say dear Soames is a perfect con- 
noisseur. In her French way, and not so very 
French either, I think she's as pretty though not 
so distinguished, not so alluring as Irene. Be- 
cause she was alluring, wasn't she ? with that white 
skin and those dark eyes, and that hair, coleur de 
what was it? I always forget." 

" Feuille morte," Francie prompted. 

" Of course, dead leaves so strange. I remem- 
ber when I was a girl, before we came to London, 
we had a foxhound puppy to ' walk ' it was called 
then ; it had a tan top to its head and a white chest, 
and beautiful dark brown eyes, and it was a lady." 

' Yes, auntie," said Francie, " but I don't see the 
connection." 

" Oh! " replied Aunt Juley, rather flustered, " it 



342 IN CHANCERY 

was so alluring, and her eyes and hair, you 

know " She was silent, as if surprised in some 

indelicacy. " Feuille morte," she added suddenly; 
" Hester do remember that ! " . . . 

Considerable debate took place between the two 
sisters whether Timothy should or should not be 
summoned to see Annette. 

" Oh, don't bother ! " said Soames. 

"But it's no trouble, only of course Annette's 
being French might upset him a little. He was so 
scared about Fashoda. I think perhaps we had bet- 
ter not run the risk, Hester. It's nice to have her 
all to ourselves, isn't it ? And how are you, Soames ? 
Have you quite got over your " 

Hester interposed hurriedly: 

" What do you think of London, Annette? " 

Soames, disquieted, awaited the reply. It came, 
sensible, composed: "Oh! I know London, I have 
visited before." 

He had never ventured to speak to her on the 
subject of the restaurant. The French had different 
notions about gentility, and to shrink from connec- 
tion with it might seem to her ridiculous; he had 
waited to be married before mentioning it ; and now 
he wished he hadn't. 

' And what part do you know best? " asked Aunt 
Juley. 

" Soho," said Annette simply. 

Soames snapped his jaw. 

;' Soho? " repeated Aunt Juley; " Soho? " 

' That'll go round the family,' thought Soames. 
' It's very French, and interesting," he said. 

'Yes," murmured Aunt Juley, "your Uncle 
Roger had some houses there once ; he was always 
having to turn the tenants out, I remember." 



PASSING OF AN AGE 343 

Soames changed the subject to Mapledurham. 

" Of course," said Aunt Juley, " you will be going 
down there soon to settle in. We are all so looking 
forward to the time when Annette has a dear 
little " 

" Juley ! " cried Aunt Hester desperately, " ring 
for tea!" 

Soames dared not wait for tea, and took Annette 
away. 

" I shouldn't mention Soho if I were you," he said 
in the cab. " It's rather a shady part of London; 
and you're altogether above that restaurant business 
now ; I mean," he added, " I want you to know nice 
people, and the English are fearful snobs." 

Annette's clear eyes opened ; a little smile came on 
her lips. 

"Yes? "she said. 

' H'm ! ' thought Soames, * that's meant for me ! ' 
and he looked at her hard. ' She's got good business 
instincts,' he thought. ' I must make her grasp it 
once for all ! ' 

"Look here, Annette! it's very simple, only it 
wants understanding. Our professional and lei- 
sured class still think themselves a cut above our 
business classes, except of course the very rich. It 
may be stupid, but there it is, you see. It isn't ad- 
visable in England to let people know that you ran 
a restaurant or kept a shop or were in any kind of 
trade. It may have been extremely creditable, but 
it puts a sort of label on you ; you don't have such a 
good time, or meet such nice people that's all." 

" I see," said Annette; " it is the same in France." 

" Oh ! " murmured Soames, at once relieved and 
taken aback. " Of course, class is everything, 
really." 



344 IN CHANCERY 

"Yes," said Annette; " comme vous etes sage." 
' That's all right/ thought Soames, watching her 
lips, ' only she's pretty cynical.' His knowledge of 
French was not yet such as to make him grieve that 
she had not said ' tu/ He slipped his arm round 
her, and murmured with an effort : 
" Et vous etes ma belle femme." 
Annette went off into a little fit of laughter. 
" Oh, non! " she said. " Oh, non! ne parlez pas 
Franqais, Soames. What is that old lady, your aunt, 
looking forward to? " 

Soames bit his lip. "God knows!" he said; 
" she's always saying something; " but he knew bet- 
ter than God. 



CHAPTER XI 

SUSPENDED ANIMATION 

THE war dragged on. Nicholas had been heard to 
say that it would cost three hundred millions if it 
cost a^ penny before they'd done with it! The in- 
come-tax was seriously threatened. Still, there 
would be South Africa for their money, once for 
all. And though the possessive instinct felt badly 
shaken at three o'clock in the morning, it recovered 
by breakfast-time with the recollection that one 
gets nothing in this world without paying for it. 
So, on the whole, people went about their business 
much as if there were no war, no concentration 
camps, no slippery de Wet, no feeling on the Con- 
tinent, no anything unpleasant. Indeed, the attitude 
of the nation was typified by Timothy's map, whose 
animation was suspended for Timothy no longer 
moved the flags, and they could not move them- 
selves, not even backwards and forwards as they 
should have done. 

Suspended animation went further; it invaded 
Forsyte 'Change, and produced a general uncer- 
tainty as to what was going to happen next. The 
announcement in the marriage column of The 
Times, l Jolyon Forsyte to Irene, only daughter of 
the late Professor Heron/ had occasioned doubt 

345 



346 IN CHANCERY 

whether Irene had been justly described. And yet, 
on the whole, relief was felt that she had not been 
entered as, ' Irene, late the wife/ or ' the divorced 
wife/ ' of Soames Forsyte/ Altogether, there had 
been a kind of sublimity from the first about the way 
the family had taken that ' affair/ As James had 
phrased it, ' There it was/ No use to fuss ! Noth- 
ing to be had out of admitting that it had been a 
' nasty jar ' in the phraseology of the day. 

But what would happen now that both Soames 
and Jolyon were married again? That was very 
intriguing. George was known to have laid Eustace 
six to four on a little Jolyon before a little Soames. 
George was so droll! It was rumoured, too, that 
he and Dartie had a bet as to whether James would 
attain the age of ninety, though which of them had 
backed James no one knew. 

At the end of May, Winifred came round to say 
that Val had been wounded in the leg by a spent 
bullet, and was to be discharged. His wife was 
nursing him. He would have a little limp noth- 
ing to speak of. He wanted his grandfather to buy 
him a farm out there where he could breed horses. 
Her father was giving Holly eight hundred a year, 
so they could be quite comfortable, because his 
grandfather would give Val five, he had said; but 
as to the farm, he didn't know couldn't tell : he 
didn't want Val to go throwing away his money. 

" But, you know/' said Winifred, " he must do 
something." 

Aunt Hester thought that perhaps his dear grand- 
father was wise, because if he didn't buy a farm it 
couldn't turn out badly. 

" But Val loves horses/' said Winifred. " It'd be 
such an occupation for him." 



SUSPENDED ANIMATION 347 

Aunt Juley thought that horses were very un- 
certain, had not Montagu found them so ? 

" Val's different," said Winifred; " he takes after 



me." 



Aunt Juley was sure that dear Val was very 
clever. " I always remember," she added, " how 
he gave his bad penny to a beggar. His dear grand- 
father was so pleased. He thought it showed such 
presence of mind. I remember his saying that he 
ought to go into the Navy." 

Aunt Hester chimed in : Did not Winifred think 
that it was much better for the young people to be 
secure and not run any risk at their age? 

" Well," said Winifred, " if they were in London, 
perhaps ; in London it's amusing to do nothing. But 
out there, of course, he'll simply get bored to death." 

Aunt Hester thought that it would be nice for 
him to work, if he were quite sure not to lose by it. 
It was not as if they had no money. Timothy, of 
course, had done so well by retiring. Aunt Juley 
wanted to know what Montagu had said. 

Winifred did not tell her, for Montagu had merely 
remarked: "Wait till the old man dies." 

At this moment Francie was announced. Her 
eyes were brimming with a smile. 

" Well," she said, " what do you think of it? " 

"Of what, dear?" 

" In The Times this morning." 

" We haven't seen it, we always read it after 
dinner; Timothy has it till then." 

Francie rolled her eyes. 

" Do you think you ought to tell us ? " said Aunt 
Juley. "Whatwojit?" 

:( Irene's had a son at Robin Hill." 

Aunt Juley drew in her breath. " But," she said, 
" they were only married in March ! " 



348 IN CHANCERY 

"Yes, Auntie; isn't it interesting?" 

" Well/' said Winifred, " I'm glad. I was sorry 
for Jolyon losing his boy. It might have been Val." 

Aunt Juley seemed to go into a sort of dream. 

" I wonder," she murmured, " what dear Soames 
will think ? He has so wanted to have a son himself. 
A little bird has always told me that." 

" Well," said Winifred, " he's going to bar ac- 
cidents." 

Gladness trickled out of Aunt Juley's eyes. 

" How delightful ! " she said. " When ? " 

" November." 

Such a lucky month ! But she did wish it could 
be sooner. It was a long time for James to wait, at 
his age! 

To wait! They dreaded it for James, but they 
were used to it themselves. Indeed, it was their 
great distraction. To wait! For The Times to 
read; for one or other of their nieces or nephews to 
come in and cheer them up ; for news of Nicholas's 
health ; for that decision of Christopher's about go- 
ing on the stage; for information concerning the 
mine of Mrs. MacAnder's nephew ; for the doctor to 
come about Hester's inclination to wake up early in 
the morning ; for books from the library which were 
always out ; for Timothy to have a cold ; for a nice 
quiet warm day, not too hot, when they could take a 
turn in Kensington Gardens. To wait, one on each 
side of the hearth in the drawing-room, for the 
clock between them to strike; their thin, veined, 
knuckled hands plying knitting-needles and cro- 
chet-hooks, their hair ordered to stop like Ca- 
nute's waves from any further advance in colour. 
To wait in their black silks or satins for the Court 
to say that Hester might wear her dark green, and 



SUSPENDED ANIMATION 349 

Juley her darker maroon. To wait, slowly turning 
over and over in their old minds the little joys and 
sorrows, events and expectancies, of their little fam- 
ily world, as cows chew patient cuds in a familiar 
field. And this new event was so well worth waiting 
for. Soames had always been their pet, with his 
tendency to give them pictures, and his almost 
weekly visits which they missed so much, and his 
need for their sympathy evoked by the wreck of his 
first marriage. This new event the birth of an 
heir to Soames was so important for him, and for 
his dear father, too, that James might not have to 
die without some certainty about things. James 
did so dislike uncertainty; and with Montagu, of 
course, he could not feel really satisfied to leave no 
grandchildren but the young Darties. After all, 
one's own name did count ! And as James' ninetieth 
birthday neared they wondered what precautions 
he was taking. He would be the first of the For- 
sytes to reach that age, and set, as it were, a new 
standard in holding on to life. That was so impor- 
tant, they felt, at their ages eighty-seven and eighty- 
five; though they did not want to think of them- 
selves when they had Timothy, who was not yet 
eighty-two, to think of. There was, of course, a 
better world. ' In my Father's house are many 
mansions ' was one of Aunt Juley's favourite say- 
ings it always comforted her, with its suggestion 
of house property, which had made the fortune of 
dear Roger. The Bible was, indeed, a great re- 
source, and on very fine Sundays there was church 
in the morning ; and sometimes Juley would steal into 
Timothy^ study when she was sure he was out, and 
just put an open New Testament casually among the 
books on his little table he was a great reader, of 



350 IN CHANCERY 

course, having been a publisher. But she had no- 
ticed that Timothy was always cross at dinner af- 
terwards. And Smither had told her more than 
once that she had picked books off the floor in doing 
the room. Still, with all that, they did feel that 
heaven could not be quite so cosy as the rooms in 
which they and Timothy had waited for so long. 
Aunt Hester, especially, could not bear the thought 
of the exertion. Any change, or rather the thought 
of a change for there never was any always 
upset her very much. Aunt Juley, who had more 
spirit, sometimes thought it would be quite exciting ; 
she had so enjoyed that visit to Brighton the year 
dear Susan died. But then Brighton one knew was 
nice, and it was so difficult to tell what heaven would 
be like, so on the whole she was more than content 
to wait. 

On the morning of James' birthday, August the 
5th, they felt extraordinary animation, and little 
notes passed between them by the hand of Smither 
while they were having breakfast in their beds. 
Smither must go round and take their love and little 
presents and find out how Mr. James was, and 
whether he had passed a good night with all the 
excitement. And on the way back would Smither 
call in at Green Street it was a little out of her 
way, but she could take the bus up Bond Street af- 
terwards ; it would be a nice little change for her 
and ask dear Mrs. Dartie to be sure and look in 
before she went out of town. 

All this Smither did an undeniable servant 
trained thirty years ago under Aunt Ann to a per- 
fection not now procurable. Mr. James, so Mrs. 
James said, had passed an excellent night, he sent 
his love; Mrs. James had said he was very funny 



SUSPENDED ANIMATION 351 

and had complained that he didn't know what all 
the fuss was about. Oh ! and Mrs. Dartie sent her 
love, and she would come to tea. 

Aunts Juley and Hester, rather hurt that their 
presents had not received special mention they 
forgot every year that James could not bear to re- 
ceive presents, ' throwing away their money on 
him/ as he always called it were 'delighted'; 
it showed that James was in good spirits, and that 
was so important for him. And they began to wait 
for Winifred. She came at four, bringing Imogen, 
and Maud, just back from school, and * getting such 
a pretty girl, too/ so that it was extremely difficult 
to ask for news about Annette. Aunt Juley, how- 
ever, summoned courage to enquire whether Wini- 
fred had heard anything, and if Soames was anxious. 

" Uncle Soames is always anxious, Auntie," in- 
terrupted Imogen; "he can't be happy now he's 
got it." 

The words struck familiarly on Aunt Juley's ears. 
Ah! yes; that funny drawing of George's, which 
had not been shown them ! But what did Imogen 
mean ? That her uncle always wanted more than he 
could have ? It was not at all nice to think like that. 

Imogen's voice rose clear and clipped: 

" Imagine ! Annette's only two years older than 
me; it must be awful for her, married to Uncle 
Soames." 

Aunt Juley lifted her hands in horror. 

" My dear," she said, " you don't know what 
you're talking about. Your Uncle Soames is a 
match for anybody. He's a very clever man, and 
good-looking and wealthy, and most considerate 
and careful, and not at all old, considering every- 
thing." 



352 



IN CHANCERY 



Imogen, turning her luscious glance from one to 
other of the ' old dears/ only smiled. 

" I hope/' said Aunt Juley quite severely, " that 
you will marry as good a man." 

" / shan't marry a good man, Auntie," murmured 
Imogen; "they're dull." 

" If you go on like this," replied Aunt Juley, still 
very much upset, "you won't marry anybody. 
We'd better not pursue the subject ; " and turning to 
Winifred, she said: " How is Montagu? " 

That evening, while they were waiting for din- 
ner, she murmured : 

" I've told Smither to get up half a bottle of the 
sweet champagne, Hester. I think we ought to 
drink dear James' health, and and the health of 
Soames' wife; only, let's keep that quite secret. 
I'll just say like this, ' And you know, Hester ! ' and 
then we'll drink. It might upset Timothy." 

" It's more likely to upset us," said Aunt Hester. 
" But we must, I suppose ; for such an occasion." 

" Yes," said Aunt Juley rapturously, " it is an 
occasion! Only fancy if he has a dear little boy, 
to carry the family on ! I do feel it so important, 
now that Irene has had a sor. Winifred says 
George is calling Jolyon ' The Three-Decker/ be- 
cause of his three families, you know! George is 
droll. And fancy! Irene is living after all in the 
house Soames had built for them both. It does 
seem hard on dear Soames ; and he's always been so 
regular." 

That night in bed, excited and a little flushed still 
by her glass of wine and the secrecy of the second 
toast, she lay with her prayer-book opened flat, and 
her eyes fixed on a ceiling yellowed by the light 
from her reading-lamp. Young things ! It was so 



SUSPENDED ANIMATION* 353 

nice for them all! And she would be so happy if 
she could see dear Soames happy. But, of course, 
he must be now, in spite of what Imogen had said. 
He would have all that he wanted: property, and 
wife, and children! And he would live to a green 
old age, like his dear father, and forget all about 
Irene and that dreadful case. If only she herself 
could be here to buy his children their first rocking- 
horse! Smither should choose it for her at the 
stores, nice and dappled. Ah! how Roger used to 
rock her until she fell off! Oh dear! that was a 
long time ago! It was! 'In my Father's house 

are many mansions ' A little scrattling noise 

caught her ear ' but no mice ! ' she thought me- 
chanically. The noise increased. There ! it was a 
mouse! How naughty of Smither to say there 
wasn't. It would be eating through the wainscot 
before they knew where they were, and they would 
have to have the builders in. They were such de- 
structive things ! And she lay, with her eyes just 
moving, following in her mind that little scrattling 
sound, and waiting for sleep to release her from it. 



CHAPTER XII 

BIRTH OF A FORSYTE 

SOAMES walked out of the garden door, crossed the 
lawn, stood on the path above the river, turned 
round and walked back to the garden door, without 
having realised that he had moved. The sound of 
wheels crunching the drive convinced him that time 
had passed, and the doctor gone. What, exactly, 
had he said? 

" This is the position, Mr. Forsyte. I can make 
pretty certain of her life if I operate, but the baby 
will be born dead. If I don't operate, the baby will 
most probably be born alive, but it's a great risk for 
the mother a great risk. In either case I don't 
think she can ever have another child. In her state 
she obviously can't decide for herself, and we can't 
wait for her mother. It's for you to make the de- 
cision, while I'm getting what's necessary. I shall 
be back within the hour." 

The decision ! What a decision ! No time to get 
a specialist down ! No time for anything ! 

The sound of wheels died away, but Soames still 
stood intent; then, suddenly covering his ears, he 
walked back to the river. To come before its time 
like this, with no chance to foresee anything, not 
even to get her mother here ! It was for her mother 

354 



BIRTH OF A FORSYTE 355 

to make that decision, and she couldn't arrive from 
Paris till to-night! If only he could have under- 
stood the doctor's jargon, the medical niceties, so 
as to be sure he was weighing the chances properly ; 
but they were Greek to him like a legal problem 
to a layman. And yet he must decide! He 
brought his hand away from his brow wet, though 
the air was chilly. These sounds which came from 
her room! To go back there would only make it 
more difficult. He must be calm, clear. On the 
one hand life, nearly certain, of his young wife, 
death quite certain, of his child; and no more 
children afterwards ! On the other, death, perhaps 
of his wife, nearly certain life for the child ; and 
no more children afterwards! Which to choose? 
. . . It had rained this last fortnight the river 
was very full, and in the water, collected round the 
little house-boat moored by his landing-stage, were 
many leaves from the woods above, brought off by 
a frost. Leaves fell, lives drifted down! Death! 
To decide about death ! And no one to give him a 
hand. Life lost was lost for good. Let nothing 
go that you could keep; for, if it went, you couldn't 
get it back. It left you bare, like those trees when 
they lost their leaves; barer and barer until you, 
too, withered and came down. And, by a queer 
somersault of thought, he seemed to see not Annette 
lying up there behind that window-pane on which 
the sun was shining, but Irene lying in their bed- 
room in Montpelier Square, as it might conceivably 
have been her fate to lie, sixteen years ago. Would 
he have hesitated then ? Not a moment ! Operate, 
operate! Make certain of her life! No decision 
a mere instinctive cry for help, in spite of his 
knowledge, even then, that she did not love him! 



35 6 IN CHANCERY 

But this! Ah! there was nothing overmastering 
in his feeling for Annette ! Many times these last 
months, especially since she had been growing 
frightened, he had wondered. She had a will of 
her own, was selfish in her French way. And yet 
so pretty ! What would she wish to take the 
risk? 'I know she wants the child,' he thought. 
' If it's born dead, and no more chance afterwards 
it'll upset her terribly. No more chance! All 
for nothing ! Married life with her for years and 
years without a child. Nothing to steady her! 
She's too young. Nothing to look forward to, for 
her for me! For me I' He stuck his hands 
against his chest ! Why couldn't he think without 
bringing himself in get out of himself and see 
what he ought to do ? The thought hurt him, then 
lost edge, as if it had come in contact with a breast- 
plate. Out of oneself! Impossible! Out into 
soundless, scentless, touchless, sightless space! 
The very idea was ghastly, futile! And touching 
there the bedrock of reality, the bottom of his For- 
syte spirit, Soames rested for a moment. When 
one ceased, all ceased ; it might go on, but there'd be 
nothing in it ! 

He looked at his watch. In half an hour the doc- 
tor would be back. He must decide! If against 
the operation and she died, how face her mother 
and the doctor afterwards? How face his own 
conscience? It was his child that she was having. 
If for the operation then he condemned them 
both to childlessness. And for what else had he 
married her but to have a lawful heir? And his 
father at death's door, waiting for the news! 
' It's cruel ! ' he thought ; ' I ought never to have 
such a thing to settle ! It's cruel ! ' He turned 



BIRTH OF A FORSYTE 357 

towards the house. Some deep, simple way of de- 
ciding! He took out a coin, and put it back. If 
he spun it, he knew he would not abide by what 
came up ! He went into the dining-room, furthest 
away from that room whence the sounds issued. 
The doctor had said there was a chance. In here 
that chance seemed greater ; the river did not flow, 
nor the leaves fall. A fire was burning. Soames 
unlocked the tantalus. He hardly ever touched 
spirits, but now he poured himself out some whisky 
and drank it neat, craving a faster flow of blood. 
' That fellow Jolyon,' he thought ; ' he had children 
already. He has the woman I really loved; and 
now a son by her ! And I I'm asked to destroy 
my only child ! Annette can't die ; it's not possible. 
She's strong ! ' 

He was still standing sullenly at the sideboard 
when he heard the doctor's carriage, and went out 
to him. He had to wait for him to come down- 
stairs. 

''' Well, doctor?" 

" The situation's the same. Have you de- 
cided?" 

"Yes," said Soames; " don't operate! " 

"Not? You understand the risk's great?" 

In Soames' set face nothing moved but the lips. 

" You said there was a chance ? " 

" A chance, yes ; not much of one." 

"You say the baby must be born dead if you 
do?" 

" Yes." 

" Do you still think that in any case she can't 
have another ? " 

" One can't be absolutely sure, but it's most un- 
likely." 



358 IN CHANCERY 

"She's strong," said Soames; "well take the 
risk." 

The doctor looked at him very gravely. " It's 
on your shoulders," he said; " with my own wife, I 
couldn't." 

Soames' chin jerked up as if someone had hit him. 

" Am I of any use up there? " he asked. 

"No; keep away." 

" I shall be in my picture-gallery, then ; you know 
where." 

The doctor nodded, and went upstairs. 

Soames continued to stand, listening. * By this 
time to-morrow,' he thought, ' I may have her death 
on my hands.' No ! it was unfair monstrous, to 
put it that way ! Sullenness dropped on him again, 
and he went up to the gallery. He stood at the win- 
dow. The wind was in the north; it was cold, 
clear; very blue sky, heavy ragged white clouds 
chasing across; the river blue, too, through the 
screen of goldening trees; the woods all rich with 
colour, glowing, burnished an early autumn. If 
it were his own life, would he be taking that risk? 
' But she'd take the risk of losing me,' he thought, 
'sooner than lose her child! She doesn't really 
love me ! ' What could one expect a girl and 
French? The one thing really vital to them both, 
vital to their marriage and their futures, was a 
child! 'I've been through a lot for this,' he 
thought, Til hold on hold on. There's a chance 
of keeping both a chance ! ' One kept till things 
were taken one naturally kept ! He began walk- 
ing round the gallery. He had made one purchase 
lately which he knew was a fortune in itself, and he 
halted before it a girl with dull gold hair which 
looked like filaments of metal gazing at a little 



BIRTH OF A FORSYTE 359 

golden monster she was holding in her hand. Even 
at this tortured moment he could just feel the extra- 
ordinary nature of the bargain he had made ad- 
mire the quality of the table, the floor, the chair, 
the girl's figure, the absorbed expression on her 
face, the dull gold filaments of her hair, the bright 
gold of the little monster. Collecting pictures; 

growing richer, richer! What use, if ! He 

turned his back abruptly on the picture, and went 
to the window. Some of his doves had flown up 
from their perches round the dovecot, and were 
stretching their wings in the wind. In the clear 
sharp sunlight their whiteness almost flashed. 
They flew far, making a flung-up hieroglyphic 
against the sky. Annette fed the doves; it was 
pretty to see her. They took it out of her hand; 
they knew she was matter-of-fact. A choking sen- 
sation came into his throat. She would not 
could not die! She was too too sensible; and 
she was strong, really strong, like her mother, in 
spite of her fair prettiness ! 

It was already growing dark when at last he 
opened the door, and stood listening. Not a sound ! 
A milky twilight crept about the stairway and the 
landings below. He had turned back when a sound 
caught his ear. Peering down, he saw a black 
shape moving, and his heart stood still. What was 
it? Death? The shape of Death coming from 
her door ? No ! only a maid without cap or apron. 
She came to the foot of his flight of stairs and said 
breathlessly : 

:{ The doctor wants to see you, sir." 

He ran down. She stood flat against the wall to 
let him pass, and said : 

"Oh, sir! it's over." 



360 IN CHANCERY 

"Over?" said Soames, with a sort of menace; 
"what d'youmean? " 

" It's born, sir." 

He dashed up the four steps in front of him, and 
came suddenly on the doctor in the dim passage. 
The man was wiping his brow. 

"Well?" he said; "quick!" 

" Both living; it's all right, I think." 

Soames stood quite still, covering his eyes. 

" I congratulate you," he heard the doctor say; 
" it was touch and go." 

Soames let fall the hand which was covering his 
face. 

" Thanks," he said; " thanks very much. What 
is it?" 

" Daughter luckily ; a son would have killed 
her the head." 

A daughter ! 

" The utmost care of both," he heard the doctor 
say, " and we shall do. When does the mother 
come?" 

" To-night, between nine and ten, I hope." 

" I'll stay till then. Do you want to see them? " 

" Not now," said Soames ; " before you go. I'll 
have dinner sent up to you." And he went down- 
stairs. 

Relief unspeakable, and yet a daughter! It 
seemed to him unfair. To have taken that risk 
to have been through this agony and what 
agony! for a daughter! He stood before the 
blazing fire of wood logs in the hall, touching it 
with his toe and trying to readjust himself. ' My 
father ! ' he thought. A bitter disappointment, no 
disguising it ! One never got all one wanted in this 
life ! And there was no other at least, if there 
was, it was no use! 



BIRTH OF A FORSYTE 361 

While he was standing there, a telegram was 
brought him. 

" Come up at once, your father sinking fast. 

MOTHER." 

He read it with a choking sensation. One would 
have thought he couldn't feel anything after these 
last hours, but he felt this. Half-past seven, a 
train from Reading at nine, and madame's train, if 
she had caught it, came in at eight-forty he 
would meet that, and go on. He ordered the car- 
riage, ate some dinner mechanically, and went up- 
stairs. The doctor came out to him. 

' They're sleeping/' 

" I won't go in," said Soames with relief. " My 
father's dying ; I have to go up. Is it all right ? " 

The doctor's face expressed a kind of doubting 
admiration. ' If they were all as unemotional ! ' he 
might have been saying. 

' Yes, I think you may go with an easy mind. 
You'll be down soon ? " 

" To-morrow," said Soames. " Here's the ad- 
dress." 

The doctor seemed to hover on the verge of sym- 
pathy. 

" Good-night !" said Soames abruptly, and 
turned away. He put on his fur coat. Death ! It 
was a chilly business. He smoked a cigarette in 
the carriage one of his rare cigarettes. The 
night was windy and flew on black wings ; the car- 
riage lights had to search out the way. His father ! 
That old, old man ! A comfortless night to die ! 

The London train came in just as he reached the 
station, and Madame Lamotte, substantial, dark- 
clothed, very yellow in the lamplight, came towards 
the exit with a dressing-bag. 



362 IN CHANCERY 

" This all you have? " asked Soames. 

" But yes ; I had not the time. How is my little 
one?" 

" Doing well both. A girl ! " 

" A girl ! What joy ! I had a frightful cross- 
ing!" 

Her black bulk, solid, unreduced by the frightful 
crossing, climbed into the brougham. 

" And you, mon cherf " 

" My father's dying," said Soames between his 
teeth. " I'm going up. Give my love to An- 
nette." 

"Tiens!" murmured Madame Lamotte; " quel 
malheur! " 

Soames took his hat off, and moved towards his 
train. ' The French ! ' he thought. 



CHAPTER XIII 

JAMES IS TOLD 

A SIMPLE cold, caught in the room with double win- 
dows, where the air and the people who saw him 
were filtered, as it were, the room he had not left 
since the middle of September and James was in 
deep waters. A little cold, passing his little 
strength and flying quickly to his lungs. " He 
mustn't catch cold," the doctor had declared, and he 
had gone and caught it. When he first felt it in 
his throat he had said to his nurse for he had one 
now " There, I knew how it would be, airing the 
room like that ! " For a whole day he was highly 
nervous about himself and went in advance of all 
precautions and remedies; drawing every breath 
with extreme care and having his temperature 
taken every hour. Emily was not alarmed. 

But next morning when she went in the nurse 
whispered : " He won't have his temperature taken." 

Emily crossed to the side of the bed where he was 
lying, and said softly, " How do you feel, James ? " 
holding the thermometer to his lips. James looked 
up at her. 

" What's the good of that ? " he murmured husk- 
ily ; " I don't want to know." 

Then she was alarmed. He breathed with diffi- 

363 



364 IN CHANCERY 

culty, he looked terribly frail, white, with faint red 
discolorations. She had ' had trouble ' with him, 
Goodness knew ; but he was James, had been James 
for nearly fifty years; she couldn't remember or 
imagine life without James James, behind all his 
fussiness, his pessimism, his crusty shell, deeply 
affectionate, really kind and generous to them all ! 

All that day and the next he hardly uttered a 
word, but there was in his eyes a noticing of every- 
thing done for him, a look on his face which told 
her he was fighting ; and she did not lose hope. His 
very stillness, the way he conserved every little 
scrap of energy, showed the tenacity with which he 
was fighting. It touched her deeply; and though 
her face was composed and comfortable in the sick- 
room, tears ran down her cheeks when she was out 
of it. 

About tea-time on the third day she had just 
changed her dress, keeping her appearance so as not 
to alarm him, because he noticed everything she 
saw a difference. ' It's no use ; I'm tired,' was writ- 
ten plainly across that white face, and when she 
went up to him," he muttered: " Send for Soames." 

"Yes, James," she said comfortably; "all right 
at once." And she kissed his forehead. A tear 
dropped there, and as she wiped it off she saw that 
his eyes looked grateful. Much upset, and without 
hope now, she sent Soames the telegram. 

When he entered out of the black windy night, 
the big house was still as a grave. Warmson's 
broad face looked almost narrow; he took the fur 
coat with a sort of added care, saying : 
' Will you have a glass of wine, sir ? " 

Soames shook his head, and his eyebrows made 
enquiry. 



JAMES IS TOLD 365 

Warmson's lips twitched. " He's asking for 
you, sir; " and suddenly he blew his nose. " It's a 
long time, sir/' he said, " that I've been with Mr. 
Forsyte a long time." 

Soames left him folding the coat, and began to 
mount the stairs. This house, where he had been 
born and sheltered, had never seemed to him so 
warm, and rich, and cosy, as during this last pil- 
grimage to his father's room. It was not his taste ; 
but in its own substantial, lincrusta way it was the 
acme of comfort and security. And the night was 
so dark and windy ; the grave so cold and lonely ! 

He paused outside the door. No sound came 
from within. He turned the handle softly and was 
in the room before he was perceived. The light 
was shaded. His mother and Winifred were sit- 
ting on the far side of the bed ; the nurse was mov- 
ing away from the near side where was an empty 
chair. ' For me ! ' thought Soames. As he moved 
from the door his mother and sister rose, but he 
signed with his hand and they sat down again. He 
went up to the chair and stood looking at his father. 
James* breathing was as if strangled ; his eyes were 
closed. And in Soames, looking on his father so 
worn and white and wasted, listening to his stran- 
gled breathing, there rose a passionate vehemence 
of anger against Nature, cruel, inexorable Nature, 
kneeling on the chest of that wisp of a body, slowly 
pressing out the breath, pressing out the life of the 
being who We s dearest to him in the world. His 
father, of all men, had lived a careful life, moder- 
ate, abstemious, and this was his reward to have 
life slowly, painfully squeezed out of him! And, 
without knowing that he spoke, he said : " It's 
cruel." 



366 IN CHANCERY 

He saw his mother cover her eyes and Winifred 
bow her face towards the bed. Women! They 
put up with things so much better than men. He 
took a step nearer to his father. For three days 
James had not been shaved, and his lips and chin 
were covered with hair, hardly more snowy than his 
forehead. It softened his face, gave it a queer 
look already not of this world. His eyes opened. 
Soames went quite close and bent over. The lips 
moved. 

" Here I am, Father." 

" Um what what news ? They never tell 

" the voice died, and a flood of emotion made 

Soames' face work so that he could not speak. 
Tell him? yes. But what? He made a great 
effort, got his lips together, and said : 

" Good news, dear, good Annette, a son." 

" Ah ! " It was the queerest sound, ugly, re- 
lieved, pitiful, triumphant like the noise a baby 
makes getting what it wants. The eyes closed, and 
that strangled sound of breathing* began again. 
Soames recoiled to the chair and stonily sat down. 
The lie he had told, based, as it were, on some deep, 
temperamental instinct that after death James 
would not know the truth, had taken away all power 
of feeling for the moment. His arm brushed 
against something. It was his father's naked foot. 
In the struggle to breathe he had pushed it out from 
under the clothes. Soames took it in his hand, a 
cold foot, light and thin, white, ver^ cold. What 
use to put it back, to wrap up that which must be 
colder soon! He warmed it mechanically with his 
hand, listening to his father's laboured breathing; 
while the power of feeling rose again within him. 
A little sob, quickly smothered, came from Wini- 



JAMES IS TOLD 367 

f red, but his mother sat unmoving, with her eyes 
fixed on James. Soames signed to the nurse. 

" Where's the doctor?" he whispered. 

" He's been sent for." 

" Can't you do anything to ease his breathing? " 

" Only an injection; and he can't stand it. The 
doctor said, while he was fighting " 

"He's not fighting," whispered Soames, "he's 
being slowly smothered. It's awful." 

James stirred uneasily, as if he knew what they 
were saying. Soames rose and bent over him. 
James feebly moved his two hands, and Soames 
took them. 

" He wants to be pulled up," whispered the nurse. 

Soames pulled. He thought he pulled gently, 
but a look almost of anger passed over James' face. 
The nurse plumped the pillows. Soames laid the 
hands down, and bending over kissed his father's 
forehead. As he was raising himself again, James' 
eyes bent on him a look which seemed to come from 
the very depths of what was left within. ' I'm 
done, my boy,' it seemed to say, ' take care of them, 
take care of yourself ; take care I leave it all to 
you.' 

" Yes, yes," Soames whispered, " yes, yes." 

Behind' him the nurse did he knew not what, for 
his father made a tiny movement of repulsion as if 
resenting that interference ; and almost at once his 
breathing eased away, became quiet; he lay very 
still. The strained expression on his face passed, 
a curious white tranquillity took its place. His 
eyelids quivered, rested; the whole face rested, at 
ease. Only by the faint puffing of his lips could 
they tell that he was breathing. Soames sank back 
on his chair, and fell to cherishing the foot again. 



368 IN CHANCERY 

He heard the nurse quietly crying over there by the 
fire ; curious that she, a stranger, should be the only 
one of them who cried! He heard the quiet lick 
and flutter of the fire flames. One more old For- 
syte going to his long rest wonderful, they were ! 
wonderful how he had held on ! His mother and 
Winifred were leaning forward, hanging on the 
sight of James' lips. But Soames bent sideways 
over the feet, warming them both; they gave him 
comfort, colder and colder though they grew. Sud- 
denly he started up ; a sound, a dreadful sound such 
as he had never heard, was coming from his father's 
lips, as if an outraged heart had broken with a long 
moan. What a strong heart, to have uttered that 
farewell ! It ceased. Soames looked into the face. 
No motion; no breath! Dead! He kissed the 
brow, turned round and went out of the room. He 
ran upstairs to the bedroom, his old bedroom, still 
kept for him, flung himself face down on the bed, 
and broke into sobs which he stifled with the pil- 
low. . . . 

A little later he went downstairs and passed into 
the room. James lay alone, wonderfully calm, free 
from shadow and anxiety, with the gravity on his 
ravaged face which underlies great age, the worn 
fine gravity of old coins. 

Soames looked steadily at that face, at the fire, 
at all the room with windows thrown open to the 
London night. 

" Good-bye! " he whispered, and went out. 



CHAPTER XIV 

HIS 

HE had much to see to, that night and all next day. 
A telegram at breakfast reassured him about An- 
nette, and he only caught the last train back to 
Reading, with Emily's kiss on his forehead and in 
his ears her words : 

" I don't know what I should have done without 
you, my dear boy." 

He reached his house at midnight. The weather 
had changed, was mild again, as though, having 
finished its work and sent a Forsyte to his last ac- 
count, it could relax. A second telegram, received 
at dinner-time, had confirmed the good news of An- 
nette, and, instead of going in, Soames passed down 
through the garden in the moonlight to his house- 
boat. He could sleep there quite well. Bitterly 
tired, he lay down on the sofa in his fur coat and 
fell asleep. He woke soon after dawn and went on 
deck. He stood against the rail, looking west 
where the river swept round in a wide curve under 
the woods. In Soames, appreciation of natural 
beauty was curiously like that of his farmer ances- 
tors, a sense of grievance if it wasn't there, sharp- 
ened, no doubt, and civilised, by his researches 
among landscape painting. But dawn has power to 
fertilise the most matter-of-fact vision, and he was 

369 



37 o IN CHANCERY 

stirred. It was another world from the river he 
knew, under that remote cool light; a world into 
which man had not entered, an unreal world, like 
some strange shore sighted by discovery. Its col- 
our was not the colour of convention, was hardly 
colour at all ; its shapes were brooding yet distinct ; 
its silence stunning ; it had no scent. Why it should 
move him he could not tell, unless it were that he 
felt so alone in it, bare of all relationship and all 
possessions. Into such a world his father might be 
voyaging, for all resemblance it had to the world 
he had left. And Soames took refuge from it in 
wondering what painter could have done it justice. 
The white-grey water was like like the belly of 
a fish ! Was it possible that this world on which he 
looked was all private property, except the water 
and even that was tapped ! No tree, no shrub, not 
a blade of grass, not a bird or beast, not even a fish 
that was not owned. And once on a time all this 
was jungle and marsh and water, and weird crea- 
tures roamed and sported without human cogni- 
zance to give them names; rotting luxuriance had 
rioted where those tall, carefully planted woods 
came down to the water, and marsh-misted reeds 
on that far side had covered all the pasture. Well ! 
they had got it under, kennelled it all up, labelled it, 
and stowed it in lawyer's offices. And a good thing 
too! But once in a way, as now, the ghost of the 
past came out to haunt and brood and whisper to 
any human who chanced to be awake : ' Out of my 
unowned loneliness you all came, into it some day 
you will all return/ 

And Soames, who felt the chill and the eeriness 
of that world new to him and so very old: the 
world, unowned, visiting the scene of its past 



HIS 37i 

went down and made himself tea on a spirit-lamp. 
When he had drunk it, he took out writing mate- 
rials and wrote two paragraphs : 

" On the 20th instant at his residence in Park 
Lane, James Forsyte, in his ninety-first year. Fun- 
eral at noon on the 24th at Highgate. No flowers 
by request." 

" On the 20th instant at The Shelter, Mapledur- 
ham, Annette, wife of Soames Forsyte, of a daugh- 
ter. 5 ' And underneath on the blotting-paper he 
traced the word " son." 

It was eight o'clock in an ordinary autumn world 
when he went across to the house. Bushes across 
the river stood round and bright-coloured out of a 
milky haze; the wood-smoke went up blue and 
straight ; and his doves cooed, preening their feath- 
ers in the sunlight. 

He stole up to his dressing-room, bathed, shaved, 
put on fresh linen and dark clothes. 

Madame Lamotte was beginning her breakfast 
when he went down. 

She looked at his clothes, said, "-Don't tell me! " 
and pressed his hand. " Annette is prettee well. 
But the doctor say she can never have no more chil- 
dren. You knew that ? " Soames nodded. " It 
is a pity. Mais la petite est adorable. Du cafe? " 

Soames got away from her as soon as he could. 
She offended him solid, matter-of-fact, quick, 
clear French. He could not bear her vowels, 
her ' r's ' ; he resented the way she had looked at 
him, as if it were his fault that Annette could never 
bear him a son ! His fault ! He even resented her 
cheap adoration of the daughter he had not yet seen. 

Curious how he jibbed away from sight of his 
wife and child ! 



372 IN CHANCERY 

One would have thought he must have rushed up 
at the first moment. On the contrary, he had a 
sort of physical shrinking from it fastidious 
possessor that he was. He was afraid of what An- 
nette was thinking of him, author of her agonies, 
afraid of the look of the baby, afraid of showing his 
disappointment with the present and the future. 

He spent an hour walking up and down the draw- 
ing-room before he could screw his courage up to 
mount the stairs and knock on the door of their 
room. 

Madame Lamotte opened it. 

" Ah ! At last you come ! Elle vous attend! " 
She passed him, and Soames went in with his noise- 
less step, his jaw firmly set, his eyes furtive. 

Annette was very pale and very pretty lying 
there. The baby was hidden away somewhere; he 
could not see it. He went up to the bed, and with 
sudden emotion bent and kissed her forehead. 

" Here you are then, Soames," she said. " I am 
not so bad now. But I suffered terribly, terribly. 
I am glad I cannot have any more. Oh! how I 
suffered!" 

Soames stood silent, stroking her hand; words 
of endearment, of sympathy, absolutely would not 
come ; the thought passed through him : ' An Eng- 
lish girl wouldn't have said that ! ' At this mo- 
ment he knew^with certainty that he would never 
be near to her in spirit and in truth, nor she to him. 
He had collected her that was all ! And Jolyon's 
words came rushing into his mind : " I should ima- 
gine you will be glad to have your neck out of chan- 
cery." Well, he had got it out ! Had he got it in 
again ? 

" We must feed you up," he said, " you'll soon be 
strong." 



HIS 373 

" Don't you want to see baby, Soames ? She is 
asleep." 

" Of course," said Soames, " very much." 

He passed round the foot of the bed to the other 
side and stood staring. For the first moment what 
he saw was much what he had expected to see a 
baby. But as he stared and the baby breathed and 
made little sleeping movements with its tiny fea- 
tures, it seemed to assume an individual shape, 
grew to be like a picture, a thing he would know 
again; not repulsive, strangely bud-like and touch- 
ing. It had dark hair. He touched it with his fin- 
ger, he wanted to see its eyes. They opened, they 
were dark whether blue or brown he could not 
tell. The eyes winked, stared, they had a sort of 
sleepy depth in them. And suddenly his heart felt 
queer, warm, as if elated. 

'" Ma petite fleur! " Annette said softly. 

" Fleur," repeated Soames : " Fleur ! we'll call her 
that." 

The sense of triumph and renewed possession 
swelled within him. 

By God! this this thing was his! 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



