Introduction
Author: Lewes, George Henry.
Publication info: Selections From the Modern British Dramatists, With Introduction and Biographical Notices By G. H. Lewes ... New Edition. Volume I . [8], 491 p. Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1867.

Introduction [in, Selections from the Modern British Dramatists, With Introduction and Biographical Notices by G. H. Lewes ... New Edition. Volume I]
[Page ]
INTRODUCTION. It is many years since the Drama has occupied any considerable position in English Literature. It still holds its place among intellectual amusements; but as Art, in any high and serious import, it is almost entirely defunct. The stage is no longer the ambition of matured intellects. Young men, naturally enough, continue to write tragedies, and dream of restoring the Drama to its pristine glory; but the keener-sighted among them quickly perceive the hopelessness of such an ambition, and burn their manuscripts with stoical courage. The few who persist in the attempt, discover, after paying the printer's bill, that neither managers nor readers can be induced to waste an hour over such works. Indignation at the “prosaic tendencies of the age” may console their amour-propre ; but all the railing in the world will not chide the public into enthusiasm for plays which do not amuse it.
“I very much fear,” said Sheridan, “that people go to the theatre to be amused .” Those who imagine that the theatre is visited for instruction, or for moral edification —that audiences mainly desire to have their “passions purified”, and to enjoy the “rules of art”, must have an ingenious facility in misapprehending the plain facts of the case. If the public can be morally and mentally elevated by means of theatrical representations, a great gain is achieved; but no greater mistake can be committed than to suppose men go to the theatre for the sake of any such object. They go to be amused. It is in human nature to be amused by dramatic representations
[Page 4]
of life and passion; it is also in human nature to be amused by ballet, spectacle, farcical extravagance, and splendid costumes; and one may safely say that these sources of amusement constitute the chief attractions of most theatres. There is a small minority which prefers poetry,
High actions and high passions best describing,
to all scenic splendor; but this minority would not suffice to support a theatre; and moreover this minority would on the whole prefer reading poetry by a quiet fireside, to hearing it recited from the stage.
It was otherwise in Shakspeare's days. The stage then not only occupied its position as an Amusement, but also supplied what is now supplied by circulating libraries, and cheap publications. The audience then listened with patience and delight to long poetical descriptions, and to dialogues interesting by reason of their poetry, or their quips and cranks; because the theatre was almost the only place where such poetry and wit could be heard. It is otherwise now; and thus it is that modern audiences yawn where their ancestors applauded. We are no longer sufficiently amused by dialogue or description; we have become critical and exigent as regards character, motive, and action,
Zwar sind wir an das Beste nicht gewöhut,
Allein wir haben schrecklich viel gelesen.
It has become immensely difficult to amuse us with dramas of the higher class; with those of the lower class we are less critical.
About twenty years ago the “Decline of the Drama” was a question much debated in books, pamphlets, prefaces, and periodicals. So deep is the decline, that now-a-days it has even ceased to be a subject of discussion. At the time I allude to, there was a small sect of ardent believers in the possibility of regenerating the drama, who made some noise. They styled themselves the Unacted Dramatists—and were styled by others the Unactable Dramatists. It is certain that the implied object of their preaching was to regenerate the drama by the production
[Page 5]
of their own works—works which had been mercilessly rejected by all managers. Their avowed object was to restore the poetic drama to its original supremacy, by doing away with the monopoly which was then enjoyed by the two patent theatres. They maintained that dramatic genius was abundant in England, but could find no scope. Instead of acknowledging that we had no Shakspearian drama, because we had no Shakspeare, they insinuated that Shakspeare would be forthcoming if the stage were free. Drury Lane and Covent Garden were two theatres which had the monopoly of what was called the “legitimate drama”. They, and they alone, could perform five act plays. It was their privilege;—and although they seldom availed themselves of this privilege (which seemed like an argument against there being any strong desire in the public to witness performances of legitimate works), they prevented every other theatre from trying its chance with such works. Here, then, was a grievance. Here was the central cause of the drama being on the decline. Dramatic genius had no field. Dramatists had no opportunity of learning their art; no encouragement to learn it.
The Unacted referred to the days of Shakspeare, when one hundred and ten plays were produced in the space of six years, and the demand for new works was so great, that almost all the poetic talent of the day took the direction of the stage. Henslow employed as many as thirty authors, besides Shakspeare, Marlowe, Greene, Peele, Massinger, Beaumont and Fletcher; and we know that all the successful authors were amazingly prolific: Shakspeare left thirty-seven plays; Ben Jonson eighteen plays and upwards of thirty Masques; Beaumont and Fletcher wrote fifty-three plays; Middleton thirty; Massinger thirty-seven; Ford twenty; Heywood two hundred and twenty; and Shirley forty. It was argued that the sole cause of this productivity was the fact that any theatre might perform any piece it pleased; whereas had there been a monopoly of the intellectual drama by two theatres, such productivity would have been impossible. The logic of this was not a little unsound, but it made an impression nevertheless;
[Page 6]
and so much stir was made about the injustice of the monopoly, that a bill was finally passed in Parliament, which rendered free trade in the drama unrestricted.
The hopes of the Unacted were high. Henceforward instead of only two theatres, upwards of twenty were free to perform the legitimate drama. All these hopes were disappointed. The Unactable remained Unacted; and so far from the removal of the monopoly having encreased the demand for the legitimate drama, the production of five act plays has become rarer and rarer; at the present moment I cannot recal a single five act play which has been produced during the last three years.
There are doubtless many causes at work determining the present condition of the drama, but the main cause I take to be the rarity of dramatic genius. It is true that the habits of modern society, and the increase of popular literature, have rendered the stage less attractive and less important. This is the case even in France and Germany; it is still more emphatically proclaimed by the condition of the stage in England. But, nevertheless, no sooner does a good actor or actress appear, no sooner is a five act play tolerably successful, than there is always an abundant and enthusiastic public ready to fill the theatre. No question of dinner hour, of ill-ventilated theatres, or of popular literature is then raised. A fine actor or a fine play will always command success. At the very height of the dispute which was being carried on by the Unacted and their critics,—when we heard every day that the public was indifferent to dramatic art, and that this indifference arose from the obstinacy and stupidity with which managers refused to produce new plays such as might stimulate and educate public taste—at this very time all England had seen, or intended to see, “The Hunchback”, “The Lady of Lyons”, and “The Love Chase”. It is true that the Unacted thought slightingly of these works; but the fact was that these works amused the public, and therefore the public would see them.
In all countries and in all ages a really fine play must be a rarity, since it is a work which of all others demands the greatest combination of powers. It is not enough for
[Page 7]
a man to be a great poet, a great inventor, a great humourist —it is not enough for him to have insight into character, and power of representing it in action—it is not enough for him to have command over brilliant dialogue and striking situation—there must also be added to these, a peculiar instinct for dramatic evolution, a peculiar art of construction and ordonnance, which will combine all these qualities so as to meet psychological and theatrical exigencies. To be able to invent a story is one thing; to tell it dramatically is another; and to throw that story into the form of a drama is a third, and still more difficult, achievement. The poet who will keep his readers suspended upon his words, exciting their interest and sustaining it for hours, may not be able to move or amuse a theatrical audience during one short hour. Scott, for example, has few rivals in the art of telling a story, still fewer in the dramatic power of conceiving and representing character; yet no sooner did he attempt the drama than all his powers seemed paralysed; and, what is more, even his most dramatic novels have not made good dramas.
The drama is not merely poetry or literature, it is an applied form of these. A man may be a first-rate mathematician, yet wholly incompetent to an engineer's work; in like manner he may be a magnificent poet, yet an incompetent dramatist. Of this, poets are for the most part ignorant. They imagine that it will suffice if they throw a poetical story into dialogue, and divide it into acts and scenes. If it then reads beautifully, they conceive that it will act effectively. If the language is elevated and rich in images, the characters well devised and well drawn, the story interesting, what more remains for success? Let such a work be performed, and the exasperating indifference of the public will disclose some essential weakness in it; and any competent critic will be able to point out the source of that weakness. The work will be a poem in dialogue, not a drama to be acted.
The mistake here referred to is very natural in a country where the dramatic art is so little understood. Shakspeare's supremacy as a poet causes him to be
[Page 8]
studied by thousands who know nothing, care nothing, about his marvellous dramatic art; and young poets imagine that it is in virtue of this poetical supremacy that he is still the most popular of dramatists. But the fact is, there are some of his plays which are extremely bad as dramas, and because of their badness they are never performed. Not all the prestige of his name, not all the intrinsic beauty of these plays, will induce a manager to produce them, or will make the public eager to see them. On the other hand, there are a few of his plays which in all senses are dramatic masterpieces, and these are the most popular plays in the English language, incessantly performed, never growing out of date, and familiar though they may be, yet equalling in attractiveness the latest novelty. Hamlet, Othello, Macbeth, and The Merchant of Venice are every night being performed at one or more theatres in town and provinces; and they are not only popular with the most cultivated audiences, they are the prime favorites in barns, strolling companies, and the lowest theatres. The truth is that, stripped entirely of those higher and deeper qualities which we most delight in, these plays would still be incomparable melodramas. Whereas some other great favorites in the study, such as “Cymbeline”, or “The Midsummer Night's Dream”, are, and always will be, wearisome on the stage.
I have spoken of the discussions raised by the Unacted, because, although they are now sunk into oblivion, and the decline of the drama is accepted as a fact inevitable, the majority of the plays reprinted in this volume were produced during the days of the discussion. “Ion” and “The Legend of Florence” stand as representatives of the more purely poetical class of drama. There were few of this class which attained the honors of representation, still fewer which achieved success. The decided bent of public taste was towards domestic subjects, and the dramatists naturally followed in this direction. Any one who traces the rise and progress of the English Drama will notice the encreasing tendency to represent the realities of every day life, to become domestic, in short, instead of ideal. In the old Miracle Plays the
[Page 9]
subjects were sacred, but here the domestic, and even farcical, representation of daily life finds a place. The sacred subject was replaced by the romantic—and no reader of Shakspeare and his contemporaries need be told how large a place was occupied by the domestic element in their plays. The romantic, or heroic subjects, have in turn given place to the domestic—even when heroic subjects are chosen they are treated domestically. In this encroachment of the domestic on the ideal we have the genesis of our modern drama, which deals almost exclusively with the ordinary passions and incidents of life. For many years our stage has sought its chief successes in stories of a domestic nature; and when we seek, even among the poetical dramas, for those which have been most popular, they are “Virginius”, “The Hunchback”, and “The Lady of Lyons”—three pieces which would be indistinguishable from our ordinary domestic dramas, if they were written in prose, and in three acts instead of five.
In making the selection, here reprinted, I was guided by the desire to represent the various forms of drama, and at the same time to give fair specimens of the most successful and readable pieces. In the Domestic Drama, several specimens offered themselves: “Masks and Faces”, “The Rent Day”, and “Prisoners of War”, were chosen as best fulfilling the requirements. In Poetical Comedy “The Love Chase” stands almost alone. In Prose Comedy there was but little choice, and “Money”, “The Bubbles of the Day”, and “London Assurance”, amply represent the species. In Farce the difficulty was very great, not only because of the abundance, but also because the vast majority were of French origin. “Twice Killed” is original, and will stand as well as any other, as representative of the species. In Burlesque again the difficulty was of another kind: it is a species peculiar to the English stage, but is always a vehicle for magnificent scenery and dresses, for singing and dancing, no less than burlesque acting, so that it suffers more than any other kind when considered apart from the stage. “Fortunio” has been chosen as the type of this species.
[Page 10]
All these various forms of the art, which together with opera, ballet, pantomime, and melodrama include the whole theatrical amusement, may be seen almost nightly on the London stage. The demand seems to be greatest for Farce, and least for the Tragic Drama. Music and Spectacle are daily growing more and more important; wit and poetry daily becoming rarer. But it would be a gross mistake to conclude from this that the English public is becoming more indifferent to wit and poetry; so far is this from being true, that at no time in the history of literature were poetical works welcomed by a larger or more enthusiastic public. It is not, however, in the theatre that poetry finds a fitting audience.
Very naturally the decline of the drama has been associated with the decline of good acting, and the paucity of good actors. Yet the fact is that at the time when our stage was in its most flourishing condition, the drama was pitiably poor. The greatest actors we have ever had— Garrick and Kean—failed to produce one single play of any permanent worth. And I am forced to recur to the old position, that the chief reason why we have not a brilliant dramatic literature is simply because we have not abundant dramtic genius.
Not that the causes which operate against the general cultivation of the theatre are to be set aside as of little account. They are real causes; and they are causes which no rhetoric or exhortation will enfeeble. Men will not change their habits in order to rescue an amusement from falling into utter neglect; and however preposterous may be the bigotry which condemns theatrical amusements, there is little chance of the self-styled “religious world” being taught either charity or sense, by its opponents. There is no difficulty in making any candid mind fully aware of the odious tyranny exercised by this “religious world” over the respectable classes, especially in the provinces; but unhappily the candid minds are rare in this body, and therefore you cannot get a hearing. It is in vain for you to argue that dancing is not sinful, that concerts are not sinful, that the pit of a theatre is no pit of perdition: the “religious world” sourly declares
[Page 11]
these things are sinful, and will never hear your protest to the contrary; or, hearing it, will declare that it leads to “scoffing unbelief”. In England, whatever the “religious world” objects to, is apt to be branded as “leading to Atheism”. Religious people outside the “religious world”, are more charitable.
When it is said that the “religious world” has been encreasing in its hostility to the drama, and that the general public has been growing more and more indifferent to it, enough has been said to explain the inevitable decadence. One gloomy section bitterly declaims against it because it is an Amusement (and all amusement beyond the control of the priest is sinful); the other section turns away from it because it is no longer amusing. And I think this second cause the more powerful of the two; for so strong is the natural desire for amusement, that even the “religious world” will seize any flimsy subterfuge to enjoy it. Thus, people who shudder at the idea of a theatre, crowd to see an actor or actress giving a dramatic representation in a concert room; and the pale-faced clergy, with their atrabiliar followers, who would consider a visit to the opera a step on the path of perdition, may be seen in great numbers listening to operatic singers and operatic music, provided they listen to it in Exeter Hall, or a provincial cathedral. Oratorios are mainly supported by this class. Yet were any dramatist daring enough to make a musical drama out of the Bible Histories—to place Saul, Elijah, St. Paul, or Eli on the stage , with dresses and decorations, every pulpit in England would resound with yells of execration at such a profanation. But Saul in a balck coat and white waistcoat, singing with unmistakable operatic graces to a Michal in crinoline and flounces, is considered very edifying; if the musical drama be called an oratorio, and be performed out of a theatre!
Nor let it be argued that the “religious world” objects to theatres because theatres are centres of profligacy and vice; because things are said on the stage, and are seen off the stage, which propriety and morality severely disapprove. There was a time when such accusations
[Page 12]
were just—and that was a time when theatres flourished, and the drama occupied a considerable place in men's thoughts. It is no longer true of our theatres; they have been purified of these causes of offence—and the drama is rapidly decaying.
Finally, let it be noted that the encreasing predominance of pieces translated or adapted from the French, however it may be deplored by those who would fain see our stage nourished by English genius, is only a symptom, not a cause, of the decline. French pieces now usurp our stage, because French pieces amuse the public, and English pieces do not. It is wholly to misunderstand the real state of the case to say, as is often said, that English dramatists have no encouragement, and retire in disgust, because French dramatists are in possession of the stage. An original play will always have the preference with an English audience, even if it be less amusing; but if it be not amusing at all, we cannot expect patriotism to refrain from yawning; and the fact assuredly is that original pieces, for the most part, have so little amused the public, that French pieces have become gradually the staple of our repertory. In Shakspeare's days, in Congreve's, Garrick's, and Kean's, our stage freely sought Spanish and French aid; but it was reserved for the present century, and I might almost say the present decade, to see French aid all but universal.
From what has been said, the reader will not be prepared to find the following samples of our dramatic literature worthy to hold a position beside the chefs-d'œuvre of a national drama; but they will be found interesting as representatives of the best England produced during the days of the decline.
$$$
