Introductory Chapter
Author: Stodart, Mary Ann.
Publication info: Female Writers: Thoughts On Their Proper Sphere, and On Their Powers Of Usefulness . 203 p. London: Published by R.B. Seeley and W. Burnside, 1842.

Introductory Chapter [in, Female Writers: Thoughts on Their Proper Sphere, and on Their Powers of Usefulness. By M. A. Stodart]
[Page 1]
INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. In that most humorous, but deeply affecting preface, the prologue to the second part of Don Quixote, Cervantes remarks, with true Spanish gravity and sly irresistible humour, “I know well what the temptations of the devil are, and that one of the greatest is to put into a man's mind, that he can compose and print a book, by which he may gain as much fame as money, and as much money as fame.” Had Cervantes lived in England in times present, he would probably have admitted, that many persons are equally entitled with his malevolent
[Page 2]
adversary to his contemptuous pity, as being under this melancholy delusion of the great enemy. We entirely agree with him in a sentence which follows, that it is no little labour to write a book, even when neither money nor fame is the object of the labour. Our object, we frankly avow, is very simple. Desirous of entering upon a field which has as yet been little trod, of following out an interesting train of thought, and giving it permanence and fixedness by developing it on paper, it may be that the train of thought thus developed, will be interesting and useful to other minds. If not, no great harm is done, for it is at least, in every body's power to abstain from reading what we proceed to write.
We are well aware that a strong prejudice has existed against learned and even against literary women. This prejudice is first to be imputed to the natural and deeply-rooted selfishness, (with all respect be it spoken) of poor woman's lord and master. It has found vent in the evanescent, but not impotent form of conversational attacks, rather than in the formal treatise and pointed satire. Yet it has not been confined to airy syllables. Boileau in France, and his friend Molière, blew some of the
[Page 3]
loudest blasts that ever resounded through Europe, against this monstrous atrocity on the part of woman. We refer to them merely as having given a palpable expression to ideas which were before vaguely floating in public opinion; not with any intention or desire of excuse or refutation. Yet one remark naturally escapes from the pen. Boileau was an unmarried man; how could he for one moment be imagined, to comprehend the mind of women, who from his very situation, was debarred from their intimate friendship? We refer not merely to conjugal friendship, but to the obvious fact that a married man has far superior opportunities of forming friendships with the high-minded and virtuous of the opposite sex. Boileau's satire on women is a satire on himself: his quiver is exhausted, and many of the arrows are pointless. As for “Les Femmes Savantes” of Molière, there is but one answer to be given. His learned women were not learned: they were merely pretenders to learning. Molière wrote as any man or woman of common sense would write, against the vain assumption of a literary character, and against the cant, affectation, pretence, vanity, insincerity, and neglect of common duties, ever to be found in such
[Page 4]
circumstances. He made use of that most potent of all arms, ridicule; laughing breaks no bones, but many who could endure physical pain with fortitude, shrink appalled from a sarcastic laugh. It has been said by a good judge, that “it is easy to parry an argument, but who can withstand a sneer?” Certainly not weak woman, whose situation is more influenced by opinion than by law, and whose duty it is, in matters of minor importance, to bend, in a certain degree, to public opinion. The tocsin had sounded; the invectives of these celebrated French writers influenced in some degree, the literature, and still more strongly, the state of opinion in our own country. The safety of the middle path was forgotten; there was a retreat far on the other side. Women had been the first to help themselves to the tree of knowledge; and it seemed as if now the flaming sword of public opinion were employed to drive them away from all approach to its vicinity. It became the fashion for ladies to know nothing, absolutely nothing; as if mental power were given for any purpose rather than to be cultivated,—as if the gentle Scotticism of “innocents” as applied to idiots, were founded on facts. But so it was: a tide of frivolity set in, which threatened to carry all before
[Page 5]
it; a tide of frivolity, ignorance, helplessness. Towards the close of last century, the re-echoings of this noted blast had in some degree subsided. Poor frightened women raised their heads and began to look around them; just as, in spring, the animals which have been in a state of torpor during the howling winds of winter, creep forth from their holes, and bask in the vivifying sun-beams. Then there was indeed a galaxy of bright women;—
O darkly, deeply, beautifully blue,
   As some one somewhere sings about the sky,
And I, ye learned ladies, sing of you,
   They say your stockings are so, heaven knows why,
I have examined few pairs of that hue,
   Blue as the garters which serenely lie
Round the patrician left-leg, and adorn,
The festal midnight, and the levee morn.
But we are falling among the sneerers again, and it is an unhealthy, damp, and rheumatic atmosphere; it is the Pontine marshes of the mind, and the malaria resulting from it is too evident to all. Give us, if you will, honest censure, but spare us from sneering praise.
In truth, the enquiry upon which we enter, is in itself, of no slight importance. Every human being has faculties, powers, and influence, for which he,
[Page 6]
aye, and she too, will have to give a strict account. Let it be conceded, for the sake of argument, that women often have, compared with the nobler sex, but one intellectual talent; it is the more incumbent upon them then to cultivate it. If they have but little, let them do their diligence gladly to improve that little. It was not the richly endowed servant who drew upon himself the rebuke of idleness; it was he to whom least was entrusted, who went and digged in the ground and hid his lord's money. No one will, it is hoped, be so stupid as to imagine that we confine this principle to intellectual acquirements and improvement; the application of it to intellectual pursuits is quite justifiable. Not that there is at present any want of literary activity. On the contrary, almost every body writes; it is a writing age; women have caught the mania, a disease which is most easily caught, but which is most difficult to be cured. Every one who really reads, and who is not engaged in a laborious profession, writes, and many write who do not read; so that in the literary commonwealth as at present existing in England, there are actually more writers than readers. Go into the society of educated persons; you will probably find one in eight, an author. There
[Page 7]
would be no particular harm in writing; it is amusing, and in some degree improving, but the misfortune is that there must be printing and publishing also.
'Tis something sure to see one's name in print;
A book's a book, although there's nothing in't.
And thus we go on till the public is inundated with crude and childish productions. A good book is the pure life-blood of an immortal mind; the concentrated essence of its most vigorous thoughts and subtle reflexions; but the poor ephemeral productions to which we allude, are not the offspring of thought in the mind of the author, nor do they strike it forth in the mind of the reader. “Ought there not always to be an idea in a word?” says the poor simple-minded student in Faust, to the demon Mephistophiles.—“Yes, if it be possible,” answers the false instructor; “but there is no occcasion to torment yourself too much on that head, for when ideas are wanting, words come very seasonably to supply their place.” It is this paucity of ideas, this abundance of words, of which, in the present state of our literature, we complain. There is a poverty in it, a want of reflexion, of thought, of imagination, of development of principles, of every
[Page 8]
thing in short, which can make a national literature valuable. In the language in which Bacon thought, and Shakespeare struck out his wonderful conceptions; in which Newton pursued his discoveries, and Milton embodied his sublime and glorious ideas, these things ought not so to be. A strong light, it is quite true, is cast upon our path from the liteture of olden time, but that light tends to make our present obscurity more palpable. It is not our part to call on men to arouse themselves, and to tread in the steps of their fathers; our views are rather confined to those who must ordinarily occupy a lower post, and exercise an inferior influence in the literary world. Every one in his place and order; there are stars over our head, and there are flowers under our feet: to some it is given to enlighten; to others, to soothe and please. We would call upon women in general to cultivate their minds, and to exercise their powers of thought; so that if any of them should be called upon by circumstances to write for the public, there may be greater power, and less poverty. There will be a reflex influence upon men; the argument has sometimes been urged for the cultivation of the lower orders in society, that it will force the upper
[Page 9]
ones to exert themselves in order to maintain their superiority of station, and surely it may fairly be applied to the two great divisions of humanity; those whose province it is to rule, and those to whom it is appointed to obey.
There is another reason for the importance of the enquiry. The literature of a country may be considered as the expression of the national mind, breathing out from the union of many voices into one full symphony. “The man is not without the woman, nor the woman without the man in the Lord.” A full-voiced choir would not be considered complete without some female voices, and there must always be chasms in a literature where women are sedulously excluded from the expression of thought and sentiment. We say nothing, far be it from us, against attention to domestic duties. Home is and ever must be the true sphere for woman, and her domestic duties her first duties. Nothing can alter the position assigned to her in Scripture. “I will, therefore,” said the Apostle Paul, “that the younger women marry, bear children, guide the house, give none occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully.” And those who so abide are, in our judgment, the happiest women. We
[Page 10]
shall have to return to this again. Perhaps, too, this is the post of the greatest usefulness. “Whom does your majesty consider to be the most distinguished woman of France?” said Madame de Stäel to the Emperor Napoleon. (The anecdote appears rather apocryphal, but it is not, on that account, less apt for illustration.) “The woman,” was the surly answer, “who has given to the commonwealth the greatest number of children.” While, however, we recognize the paramount importance of every-day employments, home and fire-side duties, the unobtrusive labours of domestic life, we feel and know that there are many women who have few or no domestic cares, upon whose mind, and still less upon whose tongue and pen a padlock cannot be placed. They would say like the “high and mighty countess” in Les Plaideurs, “Je ne veux point être liée,” and truth to say, attend who will, or criticise who like, they write away.
And there is one consideration which seems not to have been brought forward with sufficient prominence. Never was there greater scope for the literary talents of women than in England in the present day. A distinguished female writer has said,
[Page 11]
that under popular governments, where knowledge is really cultivated, perhaps it would be natural that literature, properly so called, should become the share of women, while men should devote themselves entirely to the study of the higher branches of philosophy. We cannot say that our own country has attained to this eminence on the hill of science; but certainly we do say that there are at present more women than men devoted to literature in England. And the reason is a very simple one. In the citation from Cervantes, with which this chapter opened, two objects are set before us as being usually aimed at by authors—money and fame. Now fame is a mere word—it is air—“insensible to the dead, and it will not live with the living, because detraction will not suffer it.” We cannot feed, camelion-like, upon air, so alas! genius must eat, drink, live, and condescend to accept remuneration for his labours. Then as it regards money, the returns for literary labour are notoriously, proverbially scanty. 1 And as to honour, empty as it is, unless a literary man rise to the highest rank, he is
[Page 12]
merely a bookseller's drudge, and derives no social consideration from the exercise of his talents. The consequence of this is, that men of powerful minds, who might have embraced literature as a profession, and risen to the highest ranks in it, enter into some other career; they are to be found in the senate, amid the turmoil of political life; at the bar; and, in fact, in all the learned professions. Nature abhors a vacuum, and women, with dwarfish men, step forward to supply the gap. The present state of literature in England evidences the truth of these observations.
Under these impressions, we will consider first the mental powers of women as qualified to act on others. In the second place, we will endeavour to review the various departments of literature, and consider some of the females who have therein distinguished themselves. We are far from intending to speak of all the celebrated female writers that have ever lived; that would be merely compiling a biographical dictionary; our endeavour would rather be so to select facts as to add weight to argument, and to give illustration to principles. We will intersperse practical remarks as to the channels into which the powers of women may most advantageously
[Page 13]
be directed, and point out the dangers to which literary celebrity exposes them.
A critic of ancient times warns authors not to promise too much in their preface, lest out of the mountain should creep forth a mouse. We remember the warning, and hasten on to the body of the work.
NOTES
1 See Babbage on the Economy of Manufactures, for he enters into this question fully, and gives practical numerical details.
$$$
