Introduction (Aristophanic Comedy)
Author: Frere, John Hookham.
Publication info: Introduction; (Aristophanic Comedy) (In, the Plays Of Aristophanes; a Metrical Version With Notes and an Essay Or Aristophanic Comedy; By John Hookham Frere) . lii, 321 p. London: George Routledge & Sons, Limited, 1908.

Introduction; (Aristophanic Comedy) (in, The Plays of Aristophanes; A Metrical Version with Notes And An Essay or Aristophanic Comedy; By John Hookham Frere)
[Page ]
INTRODUCTION (ARISTOPHANIC COMEDY) 1 Some of our readers may be disposed to think that the subject of the Aristophanic comedy has of late occupied a sufficient space in our pages: we must, however, persevere, and insist like Falstaff—‘Play on the play. We have much to say in behalf of that same Aristophanes’. With respect to the present translation, it may truly be said to be much the best that has hitherto appeared in our own, or, as far as our acquaintance extends, in any other modern language. It may even be said, with truth, that to an English reader, the first perusal of this translation may afford as much pleasure as the perusal of the original is calculated to give to a proficient in the Greek language, who undertakes, for the first time, to read a play of Aristophanes in the original. Those, however, who have indulged in a continued study of the original, and (prompted by the perpetual development of new and unobserved beauties in the change and play of style, and in the brief and pointed expression of comic character), have become entirely familiar with the author, will continue to derive a pleasure from repeated reperusals of the original, such as we cannot venture to promise to the English scholar, if he should be induced to recur, for a second or third time, to the work now before us. We shall, however, before we conclude, have the satisfaction of pointing out some
[Page viii]
passages which, like those of the original, fix themselves (the great test of excellence) involuntarily in the memory, and which may be recalled to it and repeated with undiminished gratification. The main cause of the defect alluded to, and of the disappointment which will be experienced by those who are best acquainted with the original, if they expect to find the various forms of language, and the phrases expressive of character, represented in a satisfactory manner by English equivalents, is to be attributed to the adoption of a particular style; the style of our ancient comedy in the beginning of the 17th century. We shall proceed to give the reasons which lead us to consider this style as peculiarly proper for the purposes to which our own early dramatic poets applied it; and which, at the same time, and for the same reasons, if they are just ones, must render it wholly unsuitable for representing or reproducing that peculiar species of drama to which the comedies of Aristophanes belong.
The early comedy of modern Europe, that of the first half of the 17th century, is a fancy portrait of the society of the time. The pleasure which it afforded was similar to that which we experience when we contemplate a picture, in which the resemblance of a countenance familiar to us is expressed with that addition of harmony and grace which embellish the resemblance, without much detracting from its truth. Such was the character and principle of the dramas of Calderon and his contemporaries; and, before him, of Lope; and of Fletcher, Shirley, and others, amongst ourselves. In all these, dignity of character is uniformly maintained—the cavaliers are represented as daring and generous, delicate and faithful to excess: the highest tone of sentiment is kept up: the tone of the language also, (which is more to our purpose,) is proportionably elevated above the common parlance of those times. Hence, as in tragedy (and for the same reasons), the
[Page ix]
appearance of truth and nature in the whole composition is preserved by the easy and probable arrangement of events, quarrels, jealousies, discoveries, and sudden turns of fortune, which constitute what is called the plot. The excellence of these comedies, and the merit of the author, were estimated, in great measure, from the construction of the plot; for as by the rules which belong to that species of drama, the language and characters were idealized, and, therefore, to a certain degree, removed from reality and experience, the admission of this improbability would require to be compensated by a greater apparent probability in the only part which remained, viz., the action and events 2 .
But the ancient Aristophanic comedy proceeded upon a principle of compensation totally different. In this species of composition, the utter extravagance and impossibility of the supposed action is an indispensable requisite; the portion of truth and reality, which is admitted as a counterpoise, consists wholly in the character and language. It is a grave, humorous, impossible, GREAT LIE, related with an accurate mimicry of the language and manner of the persons introduced, and great exactness of circumstance
[Page x]
in the inferior details. In its simpler state, it appears to be one of the commonest and most spontaneous products of the human mind; and usually arises in some strong expression, which, a moment after, is taken literally, converted into a reality, and invested with all the circumstances of action and dialogue. We shall show that the plays now before us, the Acharnæ and the Knights (or Demagogues ), are capable of being traced to the kind of conversation, out of which, in all probability, they did originate.
There are other plays, which appear to have grown up from mere sport, when, in a playful conversation, fancied events are developed into an imaginary detail.
If we were possessed of the Boswells of antiquity, who are cited by Athenæus, we might, perhaps, find some notices which would illustrate the history of the comic stage; but for want of them, let us suppose an ancient prototype of our entertaining countryman, giving an account of the origin and first suggestion of the Thesmophoriazousæ.
After supper Philonides, meaning to rouse Aristophanes, who had been cracking his nuts without much attending to the conversation, began to talk about Euripides, and, turning to Aristophanes, asked him—what he thought of his last tragedy? Arist. ‘Why, it has his usual faults and his usual merits, only I think he's more than usually severe upon the women.’
Phil. ‘He's worse than ever—why, he'll drive them to desperation—yes, they will be driven to some desperate measure against him—we have had so many plots and conspiracies of late, the women will take the hint—we shall have a conspiracy of the women against Euripides.’
Arist. ‘Well, now is their time—they have three days to themselves at the Thesmophoria—considering how the art of plotting is improved, there is time enough to form a very promising conspiracy.’
Phil. ‘Upon my word, I begin to suspect that there must be something of the kind in agitation—I almost think it would be right to speak to some friend of Euripides to desire him to
[Page xi]
be upon his guard.—But what would he do, do you think, upon the first alarm?’
M. or N. ( across the table ). ‘Why, I suppose he would consult with that fine rough-handed fellow his father-in-law Mnesilochus.’
Arist. ‘No, he would not consult him; he would only tell him to keep himself in readiness to receive his order.’
Phil. ‘But what would be the first thing he would do?’
Arist. ‘The first thing, of course, would be to compose one of his long apologetical harangues, according to all the established rules of rhetoric, and in direct opposition to decorum and common sense.’
Phil. ‘But after all, this harangue must be delivered among the assembled females—how is he to contrive that?—The women are so exasperated against him, none of them would be persuaded to appear as his advocate.’
M. or N. ( as before ). ‘Might not Agathon, the poet, go amongst them in disguise, with that smooth face of his?’
Arist. ‘Oh no, Agathon would take care of himself, depend upon it; he will never get himself into a scrape for anybody.’
Phil. ‘Well then, it must be old Mnesilochus himself,— Euripides must shave him and dress him up for the purpose. But what will become of him when he is detected?’
Arist. ‘Then, of course, Euripides must exert himself, and employ his whole system of tragical devices for his escape.’
Phil. ( after a pause ). ‘Well, now, Aristophanes, I can't help thinking, if all that we have been saying was put together, and worked up in your way, it would turn out a very tolerable comedy.’
Arist. ‘Why perhaps it might, as good as some of mine are; and better than some others; and better than other people's.’
Phil. ‘Then perhaps you will think of it, if nothing better should occur, as a subject in time for the next festival?’
Arist. ‘Why perhaps I may.’
For the sake of those who may not have read it, or who do not immediately recollect it, it may be necessary to state that this supposed dialogue comprehends all the material incidents of the comedy.
The origin of the Acharnæ is simpler. Let us suppose
[Page xii]
an honest warm-tempered man obliged, (as many were at the time,) like Dicæopolis in this play, to abandon his landed property to destruction, and to take refuge in the town—we may suppose that he would be likely to express his feelings nearly in this way:
‘If our great politicians, and your leading people here in Athens, choose to waste the public treasure in embassies and expeditions, that is their own affair; but I do not see what right they have to bring down a Peloponnesian army to drive me out of my farm—there's no quarrel that we country-people ever had with them to my knowledge—we should all be glad enough to let-alone for let-alone—for my part, if these enemies of ours (as they call them) would allow me to live on my farm, and buy and sell as I used to do, I'd give 'em up all the money I'm worth, and thank 'em into the bargain—and I'd go there to-morrow:—but as for our Statesmen, I'm persuaded if a Deity were to come down from Heaven, on purpose to propose a Peace to them, they would never listen to him.’
We have here a natural and passionate form of expression, which, uttered in the hearing of a poet such as Aristophanes, was sufficient to suggest the plot of the Acharnæ and the scene of the Demigod Amphitheus; the rest of the play, with all its wild and fanciful circumstances, being, in fact, nothing more than a whimsical exemplification of the first supposition; namely, that a private citizen had succeeded in concluding and maintaining a separate peace.
With respect to the play of the Knights (or Demagogues ), the very conversation out of which it originated is to be traced in the passage from line 125 to 144 of the original. The conversation turned upon ‘the degradation of the democracy since the death of Pericles, whose successors in administration had been a lintseller, Eucrates, a sheepseller, Lysicles, and a leatherseller, Cleon, ( στυρρΕιορώλης — ρροβατορώλη—βυρσορώλης, ), who had superseded each other in a rapid succession’. Then some speculation arose as to what branch of trade was likely to furnish the
[Page xiii]
leading statesmen to whom the destinies of the state were to be next entrusted, when (in reference to the occupation of one Hyperbolus, whose rising impudence and rascality appeared to mark him out for popular eminence) it was said ‘Depend upon it, it will be a lampseller’— λυχνορώλης τις ᾿ὴ λαμραδορώλης ;—to which the answer was Μὰ Δία ἀλλ' ᾿αλλαντορώλης —‘Depend upon it, we cannot expect to stop short in the downfall of all decency and dignity —the lowest occupation will have the best chance—we shall have a sausage-seller.’ The particular occupation ‘a sausage-seller’ would be suggested by something of a similarity in the sound of the words in Greek.
We have here the whole action of the play, which supposes a sausage-seller to succeed in supplanting Cleon, and to assume the administration in his place: the personification of the Athenian democracy is an invention of the highest poetical ànd moral merit; but it would seem to have been secondary in point of time, and to have been adopted as one of the means of arriving at the predetermined result. We think that the primary idea, from which the whole organization of the play was evolved, must have existed in a conversation somewhat similar to that which we have supposed.
We have been somewhat diffuse in our illustration of the mode of Invention which belongs to this species of Comedy, because it has in general been regarded as utterly extravagant and unaccountable; at least by all those who have considered it in reference to the established rules of dramatic composition and invention; we shall now resume, briefly, but with a more comprehensive view, the subject with which we set out, and from which we have so long digressed.
The object of the poetic and dramatic art is to instruct without offence; to give men hints of their faults and errors, sufficiently strong to enable them, each for himself, to make
[Page xiv]
the personal application to his own case, but so that neither the author nor the actor shall appear in the character of an accuser, or even of a monitor, which, among equals, is always odious. 3 . In order to effect this, truth must be mixed up with some ingredients of unreality; either the persons must be obviously fictitious, as in fable, or the events must be impossible, as in the Aristophanic comedy; or supposing the events to be combined with probability, the language and sentiments must be removed from the reality of ordinary life, as is the case in tragedy, and (to a certain degree) in our own old regular comedy of the seventeenth century, the comedy of Jonson and Fletcher. Thus, absolute Reality is to be avoided as too directly offensive; but absolute Unreality is equally objectionable, it is vague, feeble, and applies to nothing. The two opposites must be combined. Where the events are coherent and possible, the language must be ideal—where the fiction is wild and extravagant, its extravagance must be compensated by a reality in the language. In Shakespeare's play of the Tempest, we perceive a tendency to a fault arising out of a neglect of this rule, and the correction which his great judgment applied to it; the impossibility of the events, combined with the ideality of the language and characters, begin to give a character of vagueness and vacuity to the scene, till the strong infusion of vulgar reality in the character of Trinculo, and his speculations on the profit which might be made in London by exhibiting his friend Caliban, restore the equilibrium at once, and place
[Page xv]
the spectator in that due medium between truth and falsehood which the laws of composition require.
In Aristophanes it may be observed that in those parts of his plays in which the circumstances are the most outrageously impossible, the truth and reality of the dialogue are the most studiously laboured. It is then that he delights to exhibit the little unavowed struggle for ascendancy, with its alternate triumphs, efforts and defeats, and, above all, the pride of local information by which the new-comer, whether at the mansion of Jupiter or of Pluto, is kept at arm's-length and obliged to bow to the superior knowledge and importance of the established resident. But as all the plays of Aristophanes involve more or less the assumption of some impossibility, so throughout, the perfect reality of the dialogue, both in the little artifices of conversation, and in the forms and turns of expression, is maintained; we might say, uniformly; but that occasionally, passages are interspersed, consisting either of burlesque of particular passages in the tragic writers, or of the tragic style in general. Now as these passages are perfectly distinguishable in the original, they ought undoubtedly to be at least recognizable in the translation; and here we think, that the choice which Mr Mitchell has made, of a style borrowed from our early comedies, has subjected him to particular disadvantages: the tone of his general style having been pitched too high, and partaking of an artificial character, it becomes impossible almost, to mark, by any corresponding change, those transitions, by which the original passes from natural into artificial language. Hence, in the dialogue between Dicæopolis and Euripides, and in the harangue of the former, the variation and play of style, passing perpetually from the natural to the burlesque, and, in the scene between Demosthenes and the Sausage-seller, the strong declamatory language of the one, and the vulgar interruptions of the other, are represented in the translation
[Page xvi]
by the same uniform and artificial language. It is not too much to say that if Ben Jonson himself, who was certainly a mighty master both of learning and humour, had attempted a translation of Aristophanes, in the same style which he has employed in his own comedies, the very nature of the attempt would have made it impossible for him to produce an adequate representation of the original. But Jonson would have possessed many advantages, which cannot belong to a modern who undertakes to perform the same task in language imitated from him. The language of Jonson, though not purely natural, was at least founded upon, and immediately deduced from nature; it was not an imitation of daily speech, but was conformable to it, and never lost sight of it as a test by which the proper employment of words, and the natural combination of them, was to be determined. Hence, though we are sensible that the language is neither simple nor natural, we are never shocked by anomalous or discordant arrangements of words; the aberration is confined within a certain limit—a limit which was traced out to the author by that usage:
Quem penes arbitrium est et jus et norma loquendi.
But the author, who attempts to write in the language of times that are past, has no such guide; he has no resource beyond his books, and if they fail him or mislead him, he is in perpetual danger of committing offences against the propriety of language. In a work of so much merit and labour, we should be unwilling to quote particular passages for reprobation; but there are many in which the English idiom is so strained, that a reader to whose recollection the original is not immediately present, would be led to conclude, that the harshness of the translation must have arisen from a verbal adherence to the idiom of the original; and he is surprised, on turning to it, to find that the phrase
[Page xvii]
which he has condemned is given as the English equivalent for an idiom of a different construction. But even if the style and language of our own old comedies were suited to represent the character of the ancient Aristophanic comedy; which from the essential differences subsisting between the two genera, we think, that it is not ;—and even supposing that ancient style to be perfectly imitated, we should still feel an objection, arising from the very perfection of the imitation; as it would have a constant tendency to destroy that illusion which it is the object of the translator to create: the translation might be admirable, but the reader would be constantly reminded, that he was reading an admirable translation—he would never be allowed to lose himself in the thoughts and images, and forget for a moment the language in which they were conveyed to him.
The language of translation ought, we think, as far as possible, to be a pure, impalpable and invisible element, the medium of thought and feeling, and nothing more; it ought never to attract attention to itself; hence all phrases that are remarkable in themselves, either as old or new; all importations from foreign languages, and quotations, are as far as possible to be avoided. This may appear somewhat too strict to some of our readers; but we are persuaded that Mr Mitchell himself is too well acquainted with the principles of translation, not to be aware, upon reflection, that such phrases as he has sometimes admitted, ‘ solus cum solo ’, for instance, ‘ petits pâtés ’, &c., have the immediate effect of reminding the reader that he is reading a translation, and that the illusion of originality, which the spirited or natural turn of a sentence immediately preceding might have excited, is instantly dissipated by it.
We think that licences of this kind have in themselves a character of petulance and flippancy—that they are wholly unworthy of the judgment and good taste which Mr
[Page xviii]
Mitchell has in general shown:—they belong more properly to that class of translators who are denominated Spirited Translators , whose spirit and ability consist in substituting a modern variety or peculiarity for an ancient one, to the utter confusion of all unity of time, place, and character; leaving the mind of the reader bewildered as in a masquerade, crowded and confused with ancient and modern costumes. Of this class of translators, and of their ancient and inveterate antagonists, the Faithful Translators , we should wish to say something, because we think that it may tend to illustrate the principle of translation generally.—The proper domain of the Translator is, we conceive, to be found in that vast mass of feeling, passion, interest, action and habit which is common to mankind in all countries and in all ages; and which, in all languages, is invested with its appropriate forms of expression, capable of representing it in all its infinite varieties, in all the permanent distinctions of age, profession, and temperament, which have remained immutable, and of which the identity is to be traced almost in every page of the author before us.
Nothing can be more convincing or more deeply astonishing than the result which must remain upon the mind of every man who has read the remains of Aristophanes with the attention which they deserve. It is evident that every shade of the human character, and the very mode in which each is manifested, remain the same; not a genus or a species is become extinct; many even which might naturally have been considered as mere accidental varieties, are still preserved, or have been reproduced.
The original author who is addressing his contemporaries must of course make use of phrases according to their conventional import; he will likewise, for the sake of immediate effect, convey his general observations in the form of local or even personal allusion. It is the office, we presume, of the Translator to represent the forms of
[Page xix]
language according to the intention with which they are employed; he will therefore in his translation make use of the phrases in his own language, to which habit and custom have assigned a similar conventional import, taking care, however, to avoid those, which, from their form or any other circumstances, are connected with associations exclusively belonging to modern manners; he will likewise, if he is capable of executing his task upon a philosophic principle, endeavour to resolve the personal and local allusions into the genera, of which the local or personal variety employed by the original author is merely the accidental type; and to reproduce them in one of those permanent forms which are connected with the universal and immutable habits of mankind. The Faithful Translator will not venture to take liberties of this kind; he renders into English all the conversational phrases according to their grammatical and logical form, without any reference to the current usage which had affixed to them an arbitrary sense, and appropriated them to a particular and definite purpose. He retains scrupulously all the local and personal peculiarities, and in the most rapid and transient allusions thinks it his duty to arrest the attention of the reader with a tedious explanatory note. The Spirited Translator, on the contrary, employs the corresponding modern phrases; but he is apt to imagine that a peculiar liveliness and vivacity may be imparted to his performance, by the employment of such phrases as are particularly connected with modern manners; and if at any time he feels more than usually anxious to avoid the appearance of pedantry, he thinks he cannot escape from it in any way more effectually, than by adopting the slang and jargon of the day. The peculiarities of ancient times he endeavours to represent, by substituting in their place the peculiarities of his own time and nation.
But after all that we have said, an instance in the two
[Page xx]
opposite styles will perhaps make our meaning more intelligible: Bacchus is interposing to calm the controversy between Æschylus and Euripides, which is rising into violence on both sides, and he represents to them:
λοιδορΕîσαι δ%aposgr; οὐ ρρέρΕι
᾿Άνδρας ροιητὰς ᾿ώσρΕρ ᾿αρτορώλιδας ,
literally:
                                         It ill beseems
Illustrious bards to scold like bakers' wives.
And so, accordingly, the literal and Faithful Translator will render it, with the addition of a note, in which he makes it clear, by the testimony of various learned authorities, that the bakers' wives in Athens were addicted to scolding above their fellows. Not so the Spirited Translator; he looks for a modern peculiarity to countervail the ancient, and puts boldly, ‘to scold like oyster wenches’.
But he, the lawful and true Translator, such as we conceive him— τὸν φρόνιμον ᾿άνδρα τὸν ὑρέρσοφον —proceeding upon the philosophic principle before mentioned, and revolving in his mind those characteristics, which (from the necessary order of sublunary things) must inseparably adhere to the practice of inferior traffic in a place of open competition; and more especially where the articles exposed for sale are in themselves of a perishable and transitory nature; he will infer a priori , that among the vendors of such commodities, so circumstanced, a spirit of objurgatory altercation must of necessity prevail; the authority of antiquity, the concurring reports of enlightened and veracious travellers, the testimony of his own ears, in passing through the various Agorai of our own metropolis, will satisfy him, that the conclusion to which he before arrived by induction, is a just one; and that the race of Market Scolds are a permanent and imperishable species. Emboldened by this discovery, he proceeds to resolve the
[Page xxi]
variety into the species, and ventures to translate ᾿αρτορώιδος ‘hucksters’ or ‘market-women’, as may happen to suit the verse; and though the passage so rendered be neither brilliant nor spirited, nor literally faithful, he is satisfied, that by avoiding both the ancient and the modern peculiarity, he does not, (during the perusal of one line at least,) oblige his reader to recollect, that the work which he has before him is a mere translation.
But in order to convey more perfectly our own idea of what we should consider as an adequate translation, we will suppose an imaginary case:—An ancient manuscript containing one of the plays of Aristophanes, hitherto supposed to have been lost, falls by some accident into the hands of a person capable of translating it upon the principle which we should consider as the true one. He translates accordingly, and publishes his translation; but determines for a time to keep the original to himself. The learned readers of such a translation, when they had finished their perusal, might be able to infer, from the total absence of any of those peculiarities, unintelligible to an English reader, which belong to antiquity, but which are no wise characteristic of it, which distract the attention without affording employment for the imagination—they would infer, we say, from the total absence of all these types of authenticity, that the translation could not have been executed in strict and literal conformity to the text of the supposed manuscript. But if on the other hand, the tone and character of antiquity, and the general spirit of the original author, should have been so perfectly maintained throughout, as to make it impossible to fix upon any one passage, of which it could confidently be said, ‘that it was a deviation from the original’, or if in so fixing upon a particular passage, the learned before-mentioned should happen to be wrong; we should conceive in such a case, that the translator had in no degree transgressed the
[Page xxii]
limits of that licence, which is fairly allowable to him; that he had fulfilled at least one important condition, in preserving the unity and propriety of costume; and that he ought in justice to be exempt from that condemnation, to which the race of spirited translators, before mentioned, are, we think, deservedly consigned.
We shall now return to a part of our subject of which we had almost lost sight. The principle of generalization will be found, we imagine, to be more or less applicable to translation, in proportion as the mind of the original author may be found to have proceeded habitually upon the same principles. Shakespeare appears at the first glance to be an author, beyond all others, encumbered and beset with accidental peculiarities, (the peculiarities of his own age and nation,) and might accordingly be considered as incapable of being properly translated; but a deeper insight into his works discovers a spirit of generalization, in which the local and peculiar allusions served but as types and abstracts of universal and permanent forms: hence we should see no reason why a mind capable of truly comprehending him, and possessing a practical command of any modern language, might not succeed (as the Germans are said to have done) in producing an adequate translation of his works. The same remark will apply to Aristophanes; the impossibility of producing a good translation of him has been so long repeated, that it has come at last to be admitted as an established critical dogma: he is, indeed, like Shakespeare, (and even in a much greater degree,) encumbered with local and individual allusions, and might from that difficulty alone, if it were an insuperable one, be abandoned at once as untranslateable; but the greater portion of his works has evidently been conceived in a deep and comprehensive spirit of generalization: if therefore we suppose a competent portion of dexterity in the management of any modern language, to be superadded
[Page xxiii]
to a thorough comprehension of the original; we, for our parts, are unable to see why an adequate translation, of such parts at least of the original as have been composed upon these principles, may not by possibility be produced; the talent and attainments requisite are not of the highest order, and if we add to these a natural feeling of taste, and a disposition to execute the task, with the degree of perfection of which it is capable, it should seem that little else would be requisite.
We have ventured to say, that Aristophanes composed for the most part upon principles of generalization; and, we repeat it. His representation is, indeed, a caricature of the Genus; but still it is Generic. Lamachus, for instance, in the play before us (the Acharnians), is not the individual Lamachus ; he is as pure an abstract as his opponent Dicæopolis; the one proud, haughty, courteous, romantic, adventurous, and imaginative; the other shrewd, calculating, peaceful and sensual, humble or saucy, as circumstances may require or permit: they are the permanent contrasts of human nature, and like their parallels, Don Quixote and Sancho, belong equally to all nations and times.
The pretensions and airs of the Envoys returned from two Courts of a different description, are not accidental but permanent traits. If we substitute the Court of the Czar Peter and that of Louis XIV for Thrace and Persia, we shall see that the Envoy returned from the one, would be disposed to boast of his familiarity with the barbarous Autocrat, the rude conviviality in which they had lived together, and the sincerity and heartiness of his royal friend's politics; while the other, in an affected tone of complaint, would detail the intolerable excess of luxury and magnificence and accommodation, which had been obtruded upon him, at Versailles and the voyage de Marly.
The two Country People who are introduced as attending
[Page xxiv]
Dicæopolis's market, are not merely a Megarian and a Theban, distinguished by a difference of dialect and behaviour; they are the two extremes of rustic character —the one (the Megarian) depressed by indigence into meanness, is shifting and selfish, with habits of coarse fraud and vulgar jocularity. The caricature, to be sure, is extravagant; but it is a caricature of the Genus.—The Theban is the direct opposite—a primitive, hearty, frank, unsuspicious, easy-minded fellow; he comes to market with his followers, in a kind of old-fashioned rustic triumph, with his bagpipers attending him: Dicæopolis (the Athenian, the medium between the two extremes before described) immediately exhibits his superior refinement, by suppressing their minstrelsy; and the honest Theban, instead of being offended, joins in condemning them. He then displays his wares, and the Athenian, with a burlesque tragical rant, takes one of his best articles (a Copaic eel) and delivers it to his own attendants to be conveyed within doors. The Theban, with great simplicity, asks how he is to be paid for it, and the Athenian, in a tone of grave superiority, but with some awkwardness, informs him that he claims it, as a toll due to the market. The Theban does not remonstrate, but after some conversation agrees to dispose of all his wares, and to take other goods in return; but here a difficulty arises, for the same articles which the Athenian proposes in exchange, happen to be equally abundant in Bœotia; the scene here passes into burlesque, but it is a burlesque expressive of the character which is assigned to the Theban; a character of primitive simplicity, utterly unacquainted with all the pests by which existence was poisoned in the corrupt community of Athens. A common Sycophant or Informer is proposed as an article which the Athenian soil produced in great abundance, but which would be considered as a rarity in Bœotia. The Theban agrees to the exchange,
[Page xxv]
saying, that if he could get such an animal to take home, he thinks he could make a handsome profit by exhibiting him. A noted informer (Nicarchus by name) immediately appears; the Theban replies to his first inquiry with the utmost simplicity, and the informer in return denounces his merchandize as enemies' property. Upon this the Athenian proceeds to execute his bargain by seizing him, and (with the assistance of his attendants) tying him round with cords like an oil-jar; this operation is performed in cadence to a lively song of no great meaning (not much unlike that of Nancy Dawson), after which he is properly adjusted as a burden on the back of the Theban's attendants, who departs with his purchase.
As this scene has been omitted by Mr Mitchell, we shall insert an attempt which has been made to translate it, on the principles which have been recommended above.
Scene. — Dicæopolis, the Athenian, in his new Market-place, which (by virtue of a private Treaty) he has opened to the Citizens of those States which were at war with Athens.— Enter a Theban with his Attendants all bearing Burdens, and followed by a Train of Bagpipers.
Theban.
Good troth, I'm right-down shoulder-gall'd; my Lad,
Set down your bundles—You—take care o' the herbs,
Gently—be sure don't bruise 'em, and now You Minstrels
That needs must follow us all the way from Thebes,
Blow wind i' the tail of your Bagpipes—Puff away.
Dicæ.
Get out!—what wind has brought 'em here, I wonder?—
A parcel of Hornets buzzing about the door!
You humble-bumble drones—Get out—Get out—
Theb.
As Iolaus shall help me; that's well done,
Friend, and I thank you;—coming out of Thebes
They blew me away the blossoms from all these herbs—
You've served 'em right—So now, would you please to buy
What likes you best of all my Chaffer here,
[Page xxvi]
All kinds, four-footed things and feather'd fowl.
Dicæ. 4
My little tight Bœotian! Welcome kindly
My little pudding-eater! What have you brought?
Theb.
In a manner, every thing, as a body may say
All the good cheer of Thebes and the primest wares,
Mats, trefoil, wicks for lamps, sweet marjoram,
Coots, didappers, and water-hens—What not?
Widgeon and teal.
Dicæ.
Why you're come here amongst us
Like a northwind in Winter, with your wild fowl.
Theb.
Moreover I've brought geese, and hares moreover,
And eels from the lake Copais which is more.
Dicæ.
O thou bestower of the best of spitchcocks
That ever yet was given to mortal man,
Permit me to salute those charming Eels.
Theb.
(addressing the Eel, and delivering it to Dicæopolis) .
Daughter, come forth and greet the courteous stranger
First-born of Fifty Damsels of the Lake.
Dicæ.
O long regretted and recover'd late
Welcome; thrice welcome to the comic quire,
Welcome to me, to Morychus and all;
—(Ye slaves, prepare the chafing-dish and stove.)
Children, behold her here, the best of Eels,
The loveliest and the best, at length return'd
After six years of absence! I myself
Will furnish you with charcoal for her sake.
Salute her with respect, and wait upon
Her entrance there within, with due conveyance:
[ The Eel is here carried off by Dicæopolis's servants .
—Grant me, ye Gods! so to possess thee still,
While my life lasts, and at my latest hour,
Fresh even and sweet as now—with ... Savory Sauce 5 .
Theb.
But how am I to be paid for it? Won't you tell me?
Dicæ.
Why with respect to this Eel, in the present instance,
I mean to take it a perquisite,
[Page xxvii]
As a kind of toll to the market, you understand me—
—These other things—I suppose you mean to sell them?
Theb.
Yes sure—I sell 'em all.
Dicæ.    
Well, what do you ask?
Or would you take commodities in exchange?
Theb.
Ay; think of something of your country produce
That's plentiful Down Here, and scarce Up There.
Dicæ.
Well you shall take our Pilchards or our Pottery.
Theb.
Pilchards and Pottery!—Naw! we've plenty of they—
But think of something, as I said before,
That's plentiful Down Here, and scarce Up There—
Dicæ.
( after a moment's reflection ).
I have it!—A true-bred Sycophant, an Informer—
I'll give you one, tied neatly and corded up,
Like an oil-jar.
Theb.    
Ay; that's fair; by the Holy Twins!
He'd bring in money, I warrant; money enough,
Amongst our folks at home, with shewing him,
Like a mischief-full kind of a foreign Ape.
Dicæ.
Well, there's Nicarchus bustling on this way,
Laying his Informations—There he comes.
Theb.
( contemplating him with the eye of a purchaser ).
'A seems but a small one to look at.
Dicæ.    
Ay, but I promise ye,
He's full of tricks and roguery, every inch of him.
                     Enter Nicarchus
Nic. (in the pert peremptory tone of his profession as an Informer ).
Whose goods are these? these articles?
Theb.    
Mine sure;
We be come here from Thebes.
Nic.
Then I denounce them
As enemies' property—
Theb.
( with an immediate outcry ). Why, what harm have they done,
[Page xxviii]
The birds and creatures?—Why do you quarrel with 'em?
Nic.
And I'll denounce you too.
Theb.
What, me? What for?
Nic.
To satisfy the bystanders I'll explain—
You've brought in Wicks for Lamps, from an enemy's country.
Dicæ.
( ironically ). And so, you bring 'em to light ?
Nic.    
I bring 'em to light
A plot!—a plot to burn the arsenal!
Dicæ.
( ironically ). With the Wick of Lamp?
Nic.    
Undoubtedly—
Dicæ.    
In what way?
Nic.
( with great gravity ). A Boœotian might be capable of fixing it
On the back of a Cockroach, who might float with it
Into the Arsenal, with a north-east wind,
And if once the fire caught hold of a single vessel,
The whole would be in a blaze!
Dicæ.
( seizing hold of him) .   You Dog—You Villain,
Would a Cockroach burn the Ships and the Arsenal?
Nic.
Bear witness, all of ye.
Dicæ.    
There stop his mouth;
And bring me a band of straw to bind him up,
And send him safely away for fear of breaking,
Gently and steadily, like a potter's jar.
Chor.
   To preserve him safe and sound,
   You must have him fairly bound,
   With a cordage nicely wound
   Up and down and round and round;
                                         Se-curely pack'd.
Dicæ.
   I shall have a special care,
   For he's a piece of paltry ware,
   And as you strike him Here—or There—
                                         ( Striking him .)
   The noises he returns declare—
                                         ( The Informer screaming ). He's partly crack'd.
Chor.
How then is he fit for use?
Dicæ.
As a store-jar of abuse,
   Fit to slander and traduce,
   Plots and lies he cooks and brews,
[Page xxix]
                                         Or any thing.
Chor.
Have you stow'd him safe enough?
Dicæ.
Never fear, he's hearty stuff,
   Fit for usage hard and rough,
   Fit to beat and fit to cuff,
                                         To toss and fling.
( The Informer, being by this time reduced to a Chrysalis state, by successive involutions of cordage, is flung about and hung up and down in illustration and confirmation of Dicæopolis's warranty of him .)
   You can hang him up or down,
   By the heels or by the crown.
Theb.
I'm for harvest business bown.
Chor.
Fare ye well, my jolly clown,
                                         We wish ye joy.
   You've a purchase tight and neat,
   A rogue, a sycophant complete—
   Fit to bang about and beat,
   Fit to bear the cold and heat—
                                         And all employ.
Dicæ.
I'd a hard job with the rascal tying him up!
—Come, my Bœotian, take away your bargain.
Theb.
(speaking to one of his servants). Ismenias, stoop your
   back, and hoist him up,
Gently and steadily—So—now carry him off—
Dicæ.
He's an unlucky commodity; notwithstanding,
If he earns you a profit, you can have to say
What few can say—‘you've been a gainer by him
And better'd your affairs by an informer.’— 6
Having endeavoured to explain as well as we could, what we conceive to be the principles applicable to a translation of Aristophanes, and having moreover exemplfied them to the best of our ability, we find it still necessary to take notice of one point which, for the sake of those readers who may be disposed to compare our version with
[Page xxx]
the original, may be, perhaps, more conveniently discussed after a perusal of the translation. The principles which we before stated will account for the omission of all local peculiarities, which, however interesting as matters of curiosity to the antiquary, would, if inserted in a translation, have no other effect than that of distracting the attention, or diverting it from the broad general expression of character and humour which is evidently the primary object of the poet; but it may, perhaps, be thought, that in one or two instances we have taken an unwarrantable liberty in expanding the text of the original. Our defence must be that the text of the original is not the original — it is the text of the original and nothing more: it contains the original always potentialiter , but not always actualiter . The true actual Original, which the ancient dramatic poets had in view, and upon the success of which their hopes of applause and popularity were founded, consisted of the entire Performance, as exhibited, and in the dialogue as represented by Actors trained and disciplined under the immediate direction of the Author himself; a sentences, therefore, of three words, or even a single word, if pronounced with the tone and gesture appropriated to it by the author, would in many, we may say in most cases, convey an expression, which would not belong to the same words barely printed or written, and presenting themselves, without any accompaniment, to the mere eye of the reader: wherever, therefore, in such cases, the tone and intended expression of the original can be ascertained or fairly inferred, we conceive that the translator (if he considers it as a part of his office to convey to the modern reader the sense and intention of his author) must of necessity expand his sentence into a dimension capable of bearing a distinct and intelligible impress of character. The original Author made use of a sort of comic shorthand; which was explained to the Actor, and through his medium
[Page xxxi]
was rendered intelligible, and even obvious to the audience: but the translator has no such intermediate agent at his command; words are his only instrument—words, in the form of dull, naked, uniform letter-press; he must, therefore, make use of them as well as he can, and he must make use of them as well as he can, and he must make use of more of them, if he wishes to give his readers a tolerably easy chance of comprehending the conception which he has formed of the original design of the author whom he professes to reproduce.
In considering the mode in which Aristophanes should be translated, there is one point of more than literary importance, which we must not overlook. As we would not consent to expel Swift from the shelves of an English library, so, with respect to mere grossness, vulgarity and nastiness, in a translation of Aristophanes, an occasional spice of each, sparingly applied, (more sparingly a great deal than in the literary banquet of the Dean,) may be necessary to give a notion of the genuine flavour of the original.—Mere physical impurity has not changed its nature, and the ancients and the moderns do not in this respect materially differ from each other—not more, perhaps, than the higher and lower classes in the same society. Aristophanes, it must be recollected, was often under the necessity of addressing himself exclusively to the lower class. But the σοφοὶ and the δΕξιοὶ , the persons of taste and judgment, to whom the author occasionally appeals, form, in modern times, the tribunal to which his translator must address himself; the utmost which they can be expected to endure may, perhaps, be estimated by the degree of grossness which they tolerate as characterstic, in the vulgar (which are not altogether the worst) comedies of Molière; and within this limit we should think that a translator of Aristophanes would do well to confine himself. But with respect to moral impurity the case is widely different; the distance between the modern Christian
[Page xxxii]
world and Heathen antiquity is immense, and the retrenchment must be absolute; for this reason, at least, if for no other—that the impression is not the same, and consequently can no longer correspond with the intention of the Author.
We would not willingly particularize instances of this kind; but it would not be difficult to point out lines of extreme grossness, which have evidently been inserted, for the purpose of pacifying the vulgar part of the audience, during passages in which their anger or impatience, or disappointment, was likely to break out: they are evidently forced compromises on the part of the author; breaking in upon the unity of that true comic humour which he was directing to the more refined and intelligent part of his audience. When considered in connexion with the context, and in relation to what is called the business of the stage, it is probable that they were delivered (parenthetically as it were) with some peculiar broadness of gesture and tone, sufficient to separate them from that genuine vein of comic humour, which the more intelligent auditors might still be able to follow, in spite of a burlesque interruption, as a Spanish audience follow up the interest of a serious dialogue, without finding their attention distrbed by the buffooneries and by-play of the Gracioso. In discarding such passages, therefore, the translator is merely doing that for his author, which he would willingly have done for himself. It is only in the opening scenes of his plays that material chasms would occur; for, as the poet found it necessary (like the orator) to begin ‘by captivating the benevolence of his auditory’, these popular and conciliatory efforts are occasionaly accompanied by a most profuse largesse of filth and trash.
It is now time for us to proceed to the examination of the manner in which Mr Mitchell has executed his work. We do not mean to follow him through the Preliminary Discourse, which occupies his first hundred pages; indeed,
[Page xxxiii]
we could only do so, for the purpose of amplification and illustration. He seems to have formed, and he has communicated in a very perspicuous style, a just estimate of the genius, the character, and the patriotic intention of his author, and he has swept away with great vigour, the heaps of calumnious rubbish, which have been accumulating against him for so many centuries.
We will now begin at the beginning. We do not see why the phrase in the fifth line of the original should not have been translated agreeably to Brunck's interpretation. Mr Mitchell has himself translated τη̂ ρόλΕι γὰρ ᾿άξιον (v. 205) agreeably to the sense which is always implied by the word ᾿άξιος when followd by a dative case; ‘what is necessary for’, ‘advantageous to’, though he has at the same time with great good taste preserved the tinge of associated meaning, derived from its more general use, and which is always found to adhere to a word when employed in a sense remote from its habitual meaning.
τη̂ ρόλΕι γὰρ ᾿άξιον .
It concerns her pride and honour that our town his motions know.
In this instance the strict grammatical import of the word ᾿άξιος , 7 , and the associated impression connected with it, are very happily reconciled. We think that in v. 3 the same combination might have been effected with the same felicity, and that at any rate the real and strict sense of the passage ought at least to be discoverable in the translation. In the next line, it appears as if the translator had not perceived the humour of the original, and the double sense in which the word τραγω ι δικὸν ‘(tragical)’
[Page xxxiv]
is employed. We will endeavour to make it more palpable by re-arranging and concentrating the passage. Dicæopolis says ‘I met with a tragical misfortune lately, for I went to the theatre expecting to hear a tragedy of Æschylus's; and when I got there, they were going to act a new tragedy of Theognis's. Now that is what I call altogether quite a tragical disappointment’.
In verses 17 and 18 of the original, the translator (if we understand rightly the sense of the his note) seems to be of opinion, that the humour of the passage consists in the want of connexion between the proposition and its antecedent; but Dicæopolis is not, we conceive, complaining of the dust , either in jest or earnest. The whole passage appears to be a metaphor, drawn from one of the Miseries of Human Life in Athens, when persons bathing, and sprinkled with an alkaline powder in the bath, had the misfortune to get it into their eyes: children (whose skins did not require the same process) were exempt from this inconvenience, hence he says ᾿Εξ ῀ότου . On turning to Brunck's interpretation we find this sense recognized in the word lixivium —we again turn to the translator's note; but neither in the note nor the translation can we discover anything which explains the metaphor; or which even implies that the passage is altogether a metaphorical one. It is possible, that this may be a fault of misexplanation, rather than of misconception; but in either case, the result of embarrassment and disappointment to the reader remains the same. It is, after all, one of those many expressions which are best represented by an equivalent.
We do not mean to pursue this minute species of remark any further; we might have objected to the translation of the word ραρέκυψΕ , as if expressing a continued attitude instead of a momentary action; but taking the line—
That fellow, Chæris, stooping, Sirs, and slouching,
[Page xxxv]
as an amplification, sufficiently in harmony with the intention of the author, and characteristic of the appearance of a person performing on such an instrument, we are unwilling to object to it, though we wish that the strict sense (which we conceive to be that of unexpected and inopportune ‘appearance’), had been preserved at the same time. We should, however, leave our readers under a false impression of the merits of this translation, if they should infer that defects similar to those which we have noticed, occur in the same proportion in other parts of the work; it is unfortunate that they should present themselves in the first pages, and we therefore suggest them for reconsideration in a future edition— ᾿agr;ρχομένου δ' ᾿έργου ρρόσωρον χρὴ θέμΕν τηλαυγές
We shall take our leave of the long soliloquy upon which we have hitherto animadverted, by inserting the concluding lines, which (‘excepting as before excepted’) appear to us to be very happily translated.
For my part, Sirs, sure as the morning comes,
So sure am I the first at the assembly.
Solus cum solo there I take my seat;
At first I groan a little,—then I yawn
A little,—stretch a little,—hawk a little:—
Then comes a fit of vapours,—then I fall
To tracing figures in the sand, or pluck
An idle hair or so, or puzzle me
In sums and items of Arithmetic;
While ever and anon I cast an eye
Upon the blooming fields, and breathe a prayer
Of earnestness for peace. As for the town,—
Fogs and east winds light on't!—I lack of nothing
But my snug country-box and pleasant acres.
No talk from them of buying coals and oil
And vinegar; buy! buy ! thank heaven the word's
Unknown to them, they yield their produce all
For nothing, they: nor ever stoop to twit me
With that cursed by-word, buy . Here then come I—
[Page xxxvi]
Hands, feet and lungs prepared; and if a word
Our orators let fall, save what pertains
To peace, I'll raise a storm of words, and rain
A very tempest of abuse upon them!—pp. 17–9.
We may appear, perhaps, too minute in our criticism, but the words ‘sung country-box’ do not quite satisfy us. A ‘sung country-box’ conveys the idea of a place of occasional retirement for a person whose occupation and resources are fixed in a neighbouring city; it implies no connexion with agriculture as a means of subsistence to the occupant. But Dicæopolis is lamenting the loss of his entire livelihood, his farm, not the mere convenience of a villa; a single word ill chosen is often sufficient, as in the present instance, to impair materially the breadth and harmony of a beautiful passage. 8
We select with pleasure, and without any drawback of criticism, a Semi-Chorus characteristic of the patriotic inveteracy and vehemence of the Old Acharnians, in pursuit of poor Dicæopolis, who has been detected in concluding a separate peace.
Toil and search are in vain,
He is gone—fled amain.
Now shame to my age,
And to life's parting stage.
Other tale it had been,
When my years were yet green,
And my youth in her pride
Followed fast at the side
Of Phayllus the racer!
A fleet-going pacer,
Though coals a full sack
Press'd hard at my back.
[Page xxxvii]
Then had not this maker
Of peace, and a breaker
With his best friends, I ween,
Long space put between
His country's undoer
And me his pursuer,
Nor should we thus part
For a leap and a start.—pp. 38–9.
Dicæopolis, after an altercation in long trochaics, some of which are most admirably translated, ‘makes a voluntary proposal: a block is to be brought forward, and if he cannot jusitfy himself for having entered into this separate treaty of peace with the enemies of his country, his head is to pay the forfeit of his indiscretion. Such is the homeliness of humour with which the countrymen of Pericles and Plato were to be cheated into their proper interests.’
We think that in the concluding observation the translator gives up the cause of his client rather too easily. We have little doubt that this incident is a mere burlesque of a rhetorical scene, in one of the many tragedies of Euripides of which we know nothing, in which the preparations for execution were made on the stage, and in the presence of the hero who was to harangue for his life.
In Dicæopolis's harangue which follows, the sense of the word ᾿Ενασριδώσομαι seems to have escaped Brunck and the present translator; the former interprets it ‘ clypeo me non muniam hercle ’; the true version would have been ‘ intra clypeum non me continebo ’; the metaphor is taken from a military phrase, expressing the behaviour of a cowardly soldier, who is contented with lying snug behind his own shield, without venturing to expose himself by attacking the enemy in return. This interpretation agrees perfectly with the context, the tenor of which implies that the future harangue is intended to be accusatory rather than exculpatory.
[Page xxxviii]
The prefatory discourse terminates to Dicæopolis's advantage; he obtains permission to prepare for his defence, by equipping himself in a pathetical costume, which is to be borrowed from Euripides. His interview with Euripides follows; but the translation represents it to great disadvantage. It appears as if Dicœoplis, in applying to Euripides for assistance, began by wantonly affronting him; whereas the original expresses only the impertinence which involuntarily escapes from a man in an excess of eagerness and hurry. We shall attempt to make our meaning more intelligible by a loose imitation. ‘Oh dear! Euripides, what, you're there, are you? You're writing your tragedies up stairs? You write them there always? Always upstairs in the garret, hah! You prefer it to the ground floor? Well, now, is it not You? an't you the Man that makes those tragedies with the cripples and the lame characters? Ah, if you had but a suit of tatters, belonging to one of your old tragedies, that you would lend me, to make me look pathetic! You're the poet, an't you, that makes the tragedies with the beggars in them?’
The interview which Dicæopolis enters upon thus blunderingly and abruptly, terminates to his satisfaction; he procures a complete tragical equipment, and returns to make his defence. At the close the Chorus are divided in opinion; they form themselves into a double Semi-Chorus, and commence a scuffle. When Lamachus arrives, he (of course, as a soldier) takes part against Dicæopolis, and a personal struggle (which is marked in the original, v. 590) takes place between them. Lamachus's military assault is baffled by some knack in wrestling, characteristic of his rustic opponent; and they proceed to dispute, in a tone which implies an ascendancy on the part of Dicæopolis; his arguments are directed to captivate the favour of the Chorus, composed (as their names indicate) of the charcoalburners
[Page xxxix]
of Acharnæ—Prinides, Marilades, &c. He addresses them in the lowest style of popular rhetoric.
Why should not they be employed in Commands and Embassies?—They are old enough; they are steady, honest, industrious men—why should Lamachus, and the other showy expensive young fellows monopolize all the salaried offices and employments?
Lamachus is worked up to a fury by this discourse, and departs. But why (it may be asked) should Aristophanes have put topics of such extravagant low democracy into the mouth of his principal character?—We cannot help thinking that in this passage there is a spirit of deep and bitter irony;—we will suppose Lamachus himself, the individual Lamachus , to have asked the question of the author.
L. Well, Aristophanes, I have not seen you, I think, since your last comedy.—You have made very good fun of me; but there is nothing I ought to take amiss—nothing degrading in it, as far as I am concerned.
A. I am glad you think so—it is not very easy to hit that precise point—it cost me some trouble, I assure you.
L. But why should you make your friend Dicæopolis talk such low vulgar trash to the Chorus; as if men without birth or education were as well fitted for public employment as persons of my sort? We have had a good education, at least, and are used to live in a liberal society:—it seems so contrary to your principles, that I am at a loss to comprehend your drift.
A. Then I will tell you; it is precisely the men of your sort (the young rising promising set) that have brought us into our present difficulties.—Pericles was employing the public resources splendidly and usefully—embellishing the city; giving occupation to a multitude of the poorer class; creating future resources for us; and (as he thought) strengthening his own interest, by the patronage attached to this peaceful harmless sort of expenditure. But he and his administration were
[Page xl]
grown old;—a new generation had sprung up, who thought themselves active enough and clever enough, to begin fingering the public money. They could not endure that the whole public expenditure should pass directly from Pericles's hands, to be distributed among mere architects and artists and mechanics. The young rising political and military geniuses (precisely the men of your sort) felt it as a kind of contempt that he should presume to govern without their participation or assistance. His scheme of policy was deficient in point of office and salary for persons of their description. They began, therefore, by attacking the system; Phidias was accused and ruined, and he himself was threatened with opposition at the approaching audit of his accounts; finally, he was driven to a compromise, and was obliged to make war, in order to have the means of stopping your mouths with appointments and commissions. —I have seen all this; and now, I see you (the very same young gentlemen) extremely indignant at finding yourselves occasionally hustled and jostled and ousted in your contests for office, by the very individual ragamuffins who were your agents among the populace at the time when you succeeded in raising an uproar against Pericles. Now, for my own part, I feel quite incapable of sympathizing with those exalted and indignant sentiments; I prefer you (no doubt) to your new rivals; but whenever they happen to get the better of you, I console myself with the reflection, that your present mortifications are the results of your own measures—that you have, in fact, nothing to complain of, except that you are deprived (perhaps with some mortifying circumstances) of the fruits of your own unjustifiable policy.—And lastly; that after all, the remedy is in your own hands; if you will unite yourselves to make a peace, your own salaries, and this offensive rivalry on the part of your inferiors, will cease together at once, and so I think Dicæopolis has told you (v. 619).
We shall now close our account of the Acharnœ ; but we shall first extract a burlesque lyrical passage which appears to us perfectly well translated.
O, for a muse of fire,
Of true Acharnian breed!
[Page xli]
A muse that might some strain inspire,
Brightness, tone and voice supplying,
Like sparks which, when our fish are frying,
   The windy breath of bellows raise
   From forth the sturdy holm-oak's blaze:
   What time our cravings to supply,
Some sift the meal and some the Thasian mixture try.
—p.90.
We do not mean to enter so much at length into the examination of the Knights (or Demagogues , as they are more properly called). We shall content ourselves with noticing a few oversights not peculiar to the present translator. In the first scene, there is a manifest tone of drunkenness in Demosthenes's part, it is the caricaturist's mark by which he indicates that the figure on the stage is meant to represent Demosthenes—timidity and superstition, in like manner, serve to mark out Nicias—just as, in the caricatures of fifty years ago, a fox's tail projecting between the flaps of a full dressed coat, supplied the defective resemblance of a young orator. The poet follows the rule of association, which is more suited to burlesque than the law of cause and effect. Demosthenes is represented drinking on the stage, but the tone of drunkenness begins as soon as he begins to talk about drinking:
The verse too stammers and the line is drunk.
῀Ορâς ... ῀όταν ρίνουσιν ᾿άνθρωροι ... τότΕ ...
observe, too, the similar endings in the following lines perfectly suited to express the pronunciation of a drunken man.
According to the same rule, the poet, before he leaves the stage, has no scruple in representing him as sober and even eloquent.—It is usual with Aristophanes, in the first instance, to mark the person; and afterwards to modify him. Thus Don Quixote, in the first chapters, is a mere
[Page xlii]
madman; towards the conclusion he is modified, and becomes a vehicle for communicating many of the author's own sentiments and opinions. We shall now extract some lines of the attack upon Cleon, which appear to be admirably well translated.
Where's the officer at audit but has felt your cursed gripe?
Squeezed and tried with nice discernment, whether yet the wretch be ripe.
Like the men our figs who gather, you are skilful to discern,
Which is green and which is ripe, and which is just upon the turn.
Is there one well-pursed among us, lamb-like both in heart and life,
Link'd and wedded to retirement, hating business, hating strife?
Soon your greedy eye's upon him—when his mind is least at home,—
Room and place—from farthest Thrace, at your bidding he must come.
Foot and hand are straight upon him—neck and shoulder in your grip,
To the ground anon he's thrown, and you smite him on the hip.
—pp. 185–6.
In the passage which follows, ‘ old deeds of valour’ is a most unlucky epithet. The party opposed to Cleon had been lately much strengthened in popularity and influence by the result of the expedition to Corinth. Cleon was aware of it—and (as it appears by this passage) had been truckling to them and began talking about ‘his intention of proposing a proposal for a plan for erecting a monument in memory of the event’. In the last two lines of the original there is a studied vagueness of expression.
In verse 327, ῀ο δ' ῀Ιρροδάμου λΕίβΕται θΕώμΕνος , Brunck translates liquitur lacrimis , and the present translator has adopted the same sense. We would rather follow the scholiast, who thinks that a slap is given to Hippodamus, by the bye—the phrase should seem equivalent to τάκΕται
[Page xliii]
᾿οφθαλμοὺς , not as expressing sorrow , but envious longing. 9 —At line 450, the translator observes:
If the reader should think that the abuse of this pair has reached its climax, he has yet to learn the perseverance and extent of Grecian invective—the two rivals compass half the circle of Grecian science for terms of reproach, before they conclude; —the builder's art, the power of the nail and the hammer, the glue-pot, the carpenter's yard, the art of running and casting metal, the crafts of the founder, the brazier, the cheesemonger, and the currier, all furnish terms which render their sarcasms more poignant, and alternately turn the tide of victory.—p. 199.
This, we think, is an imperfect view of the subject; in the passage, the omission of which is supplied by this observation, it is evidently the object of the poet to mark a departure from the ancient decorum of public oratory, by an affectation of employing metaphors derived from the mechanical arts.—A similar style of affected homeliness has occasionally been in fashion in parliamentary speaking, and would furnish sufficient equivalents for a translation.
But an example is more satisfactory, and commonly more concise, than an explanation. We shall endeavour to give the passage according to our notion of the poet's intention.
Cleon says:
By the Holy Goddess, it's not new to me,
This scheme of yours—I've known the job long since,
The measurement and the scantling of it all,
And where it was shaped out and tack'd together.
[ The Chorus are alarmed at this new vein of popular metaphor, and encourage their advocate to do his best in the same style.
[Page xliv]
Ch.
   Ah, there it is!—you must exert yourself,
Come, try to match him again with a carpenter's phrase.
Sausage-seller.
Does he think I have not track'd him in his intrigues
At Argos? his pretence to make a treaty
With the people there, and his clandestine meetings
With the Spartans? Then he works and blows the coals,
And has plenty of other irons in the fire.
Chorus.
Well done! the blacksmith beats the carpenter 10 .
The contest in this instance is no longer a mere reciprocation of abuse and menace; it is an imitation of public oratory as infected and debased by vulgar jargon. What follows is in the same style, and is still more evidently an imitation of the accusatory and menacing style of the orators at that time, when actually speaking before the people. We should suspect that the Sausage-seller's style was copied from ‘ Hyperbolus's vein ’.
But our readers, if they have followed us thus far, will be glad to turn to a very beautiful specimen of Mr Mitchell's translation, in which the higher and more austere lyrical poetry is imitated with a slight infusion of burlesque.
Lord of the Waters! king of might,
Whose eyes and ears take stern delight
From neighing steeds and stormy fight
   And galley swift pursuing;
From starting car and chariot gay,
And contests on that festive day,
When Athens' sprightly youth display
   Their pride and their—undoing;
Lord of the dolphins and the spear—
Geræstian—Sunian—or more dear,
If Cronus' name salute thy ear,
   And Phormion's gallant daring;
[Page xlv]
O come amongst us in thy power,
Great Neptune; in her trying hour
Athens knows none so swift to shower
   Aids of immortal bearing.—pp. 209–10.
In p. 213 (v. 595 of the original) the translator justly controverts the opinion of Casaubon as to the intention of the poet in this burlesque description of the expedition to Corinth. The truth seems to be that neither compliment nor censure was intended. Aristophanes was the poetical advocate of his party; it was his business to serve them by bringing their merits to the recollection of his audience, and he thought that this might be done more effectually and less invidiously in the fanciful style of humour which he has here adopted. His statement of the political character and merits of his clients was given distinctly in the Epirrema; here in the Antepirrema, it is enforced by example, but extravagantly and whimsically; in the first place, to avoid tediousness and uniformity; and secondly, from the consideration (manifest in the concluding lines of the Epirrema), that the party for which he was pleading was particularly obnoxious to popular disgust and envy. It would have been politic in Cleon, as their adversary, to tempt them to acquiesce in an offensive display of their services by a public monument. Their advocate, on the contrary (but from the same considerations), makes his poetic record as humorous and as inoffensive as possible. The Chorus, composed of knights, could hardly have been allowed seriously to celebrate their own exploits.
We shall here insert, as a curious scene in itself, and as a fair specimen of the translation, the Sausage-seller's narrative of his contest with Cleon before the senate, with the chorus of congratulation on his success:
Straight as he went from hence, I clapt all sail
And follow'd close behind. Within I found him
Launching his bolts and thunder-driving words,
[Page xlvi]
Denouncing all the Knights, as traitors, vile
Conspirators—jags, crags, and masses huge
Of stone were nothing to the monstrous words
His foaming mouth heaved up. All these to hear
Did the grave Council seriously incline;
They love a tale of scandal to their hearts,
And his had been as quick in birth as golden-herb.
Mustard was in their faces, and their brows
With frowns were furrow'd up. I saw the storm,
Mark'd how his words had sunk upon them, taking
Their very senses prisoners:—and, oh!
In knavery's name, thought I,—by all the fools
And scrubs and rogues and scoundrels in the town,—
By that same forum, where my early youth
Received its first instruction, let me gather
True courage now: be oil upon my tongue,
And shameless Impudence direct my speech.
Just as these thoughts pass'd over me, I heard
A sound of thunder pealing on my right—
I mark'd the omen,—grateful, kiss'd the ground—
And pushing briskly thro' the lattice-work—
Raised my voice to its highest pitch, and thus
Began upon them—‘Messieurs of the Senate,
I bring good news, and hope your favour for it.
Anchovies, such as since the war began
Ne'er cross'd my eyes for cheapness, do this day
Adorn our markets’—at the words a calm
Came over every face, and all was hush'd—
A crown was voted me upon the spot.
Then I (the thought was of the moment's birth),
Making a mighty secret of it, bade them
Put pots and pans in instant requisition,
And then—one obol loads you with anchovies,
Said I: anon most violent applause,
And clapping hands ensued; and every face
Grew unto mine, gaping in idiot vacancy.
My Paphlagonian discern'd the humour
O' the time; and seeing how the members all
Were tickled most with words, thus utter'd him:
[Page xlvii]
‘Sirs—Gentlemen—'tis my good will and pleasure,
That for this kindly news we sacrifice
One hundred oxen to our patron-goddess.’
Straight the tide turn'd; each head within the Senate
Nodded assent and warm good-will to Cleon:
‘What! Shall a little bull-flesh gain the day?’
Thought I within me: then aloud, and shooting
Beyond his mark:—‘I double, sirs, this vote,—
Nay more, sirs, should to-morrow's sun see sprats
One hundred to the penny sold, I move
That we make offering of a thousand goats
Unto Diana.’—Every head was raised;
And all turn'd eyes incontinent on me.
This was a blow he ne'er recover'd: straight
He fell to muttering fooleries and words
Of no account—the chairmen and the officers
Were now upon him.—All meantime was uproar
In th' Assembly—Nought talk'd of but anchovies.—
How fared our statesman? he with suppliant tones
Begg'd a few moments' pause.—‘Rest ye, sirs, rest ye
Awhile—I have a tale will pay the hearing—
A herald is arrived from Sparta, claiming
An audience—he brings terms of peace, and craves
Your leave to utter them before ye.’ ‘Peace!’
Cried all, (their voices one,) ‘is this a time
To talk of peace?—out, dotard! What, the rogues
Have heard the price anchovies bear!—marry—
Our needs, sir, ask not peace.—War, war, for us,
And, chairmen, break the assembly up.’ 'Twas done,
Upon their bidding, straight—who might oppose
Such clamour?—then, what haste and expedition
On every side! one moment clears the rails!
I the meantime steal privately away
And buy me all the leeks and coriander
In the market—these I straight make largess of,
And gratis give as sauce to dress their fish.
Who may recount the praises infinite
And groom-like courtesies this bounty gain'd me!
In short you see a man, that for one pennyworth
[Page xlviii]
Of coriander vile has purchased him
An entire senate—not a man among them
But is at my behest and does me reverence.
It will readily be imagined that this speech elicits a song of applause from the delighted Chorus .
Chorus.
Well, my son, hast thou begun, and well hast thou competed;
Rich bliss and gain wilt thou attain, thy mighty task completed.
   He, thy rival, shall admire,
   Choked with passion, pale with ire,
   Thy audacity and fire:
   He shall own, abash'd, in thee
   Power and peerless mastery
   In the crafts and tricks that be.
   At all points art thou equipt,
   Eye and tongue with treachery tipt,
   Soul and body both are dipt
      In deceit and knavery.
Forward, son of mine, undaunted—complete thy bold beginning:
No aid from me shall be delay'd—which may the prize be winning.—pp. 217–23.
The passage, from the sixth to the twelfth line of the Chorus, is, we think, in the true tone which should belong to the choruses of this extraordinary play. In the three first especially:
   He shall own, abash'd, in thee
   Power and peerless mastery
   In all crafts and tricks that be—
Mr Mitchell has hit the very key-note of Aristophanes, whose choruses throughout this play are contrived to afford a relief and contrast to the vulgar acrimony of his dialogue; not in their logical and grammatical sense, but in their form and rhythm, and in the selection of the words; which,
[Page xlix]
if heard imperfectly, would appear to belong (as in the present instance) to a grave, or tender, or beautiful subject.
We may except from this general observation the first chorus, ᾿ω̂ μιαρὲ καὶ βδΕλυρὲ , as it forms a transition from the eager and vehement part which the chorus has taken just before. This also is translated by Mr Mitchell with great power and effect.
Cho.
   Wretch! without a parallel—
   Son of thunder—child of hell,—
   Creature of one mighty sense,
   Concentrated impudence!—
   From earth's centre to the sea,
   Nature stinks of that and thee.
      It stalks at the bar,
      It lurks at the tolls;
   In th' Assembly, black war
   And defiance it rolls.
   It speaks to our ears
   In an accent of thunder;
   It climbs to the spheres
   And rives heaven asunder.
Athens deafens at the sound in her ears still drumming;
      While seated high,
      You keep an eye
   Upon the tolls, like those who spy
   If tunny-fish be coming.—pp. 188–9.
Having extracted already the contest between Cleon and his adversary in the senate, we shall subjoin a part of their subsequent altercation before the assembly of the people, personified in the character of Demus.
Cl. ( to Demus ).
For service and zeal I to facts, sir, appeal: say of all that e'er sway'd this proud city,
Who had ever more skill your snug coffer to fill, undisturb'd by respectance or pity?
For one and for two I've the rope and the screw, to a third I make soft supplication;
[Page l]
And I spurn at all ties, and all laws I despise,
                     so that Demus find gratification.
Saus.
Mere smoke this and dust! Demus, take it on trust,
                     that my service and zeal can run faster:
I am he that can steal at the mouth a man's meal,
                     and set it before my own master.
Other proofs than of love in this knave's grate and stove.
                     noble lord, may your eyes be discerning:
There the coal and the fuel that should warm your own gruel,
                     to your slave's ease and comfort are burning.
Nay, since Marathon's day, when thy sword ( to Demus ) paved
                     the way to Persia's disgrace and declension,
(That bountiful mint in which bards without stint
                     fashion words of six-footed dimension,)
Like a stone or a stock, hast not sat on a rock,
                     cold, comfortless, bare and derided:—
While this chief of the land never yet to your hand
                     a cushion or seat hath provided?
But take this ( giving a cushion ) to the ease of your hams and
                     your knees: for since Salamis' proud day of story,
With a fleet ruin-hurl'd, they took rank in the world,
                     and should seat them in comfort and glory.
Dem.
What vision art thou! let me read on thy brow,
                     what lineage and kindred have won thee!
Thou wert born for my weal, and the impress and seal
                     Of Harmodius are surely upon thee.
Cleon
( mortified ). O feat easy done! and is Demus thus won
                     by diminutive gifts and oblations?
Saus.
Small my baits I allow, but in size they outgo
                     your own little douceurs and donations.
Cl.
( fiercely ). Small or great be my bait, ne'er my boast I abate,
                     but for proof head and shoulders I offer,
That in act and in will to Demus here still
                     a love unexampled I proffer.
Saus.
( dactylics ). You proffer love indeed! you that have
                     seen him bleed;
                     buffing and roughing it years twice four;
A tub-and-cask tenant,—vulture-lodged—sixth-floor man;
                     batter'd and tatter'd, and bruised and sore!
[Page li]
There was he pent and shent with a most vile intent,
                     his milk and honey sweet from him to squeeze;
Pity none e'er he won, tho' the smoke pinch'd his eyes,
                     and his sweet wine it was drawn to the lees.
When Archeptolemus lately brought Peace to us:
                     who but you ( to Cleon ) scatter'd and scared the virgin,
While your foot rudely placed, where Honour's soul is cased,
                     spurn'd at all such as acceptance were urging?
Cl.
( fawning ). And, my good sir, the cause?—Marry that
                     Demus' laws
                     Greece universal might obey:
Oracles here have I, and they in verity
                     bear that this lord of ours must hold sway,
Judging in Arcady, and for his salary,
                     earning him easily a five-obol coin.
Let him but wait his fate; and in meantime his state,
                     food and support shall be care of mine. —pp. 230–3.
Upon the whole, the specimens of lyrical execution which we have given above, will justify us in venturing the opinion (which Goldsmith's friend suggested to the travelling connoisseur as a safe one in all cases), that ‘the picture would have been better, if the painter had taken more pains’. There is evidently a very just comprehension of the intended effect of the original, and a full power of expressing it, but this power is not uniformly exerted. With respect to the dialogue, we have already noticed the defects which are inseparable from an obsolete and unfamiliar language, and which, in our opinion, would make it impossible for any talent to produce an adequate representation of Aristophanes in a style so unsuited to this species of Comedy. This, however, is an estimate of the work merely as compared with the original;—as compared with former translations, it stands on the highest ground—and even the original does not, at the first perusal, reveal to the young student so much, perhaps, as the mere English reader may collect from
[Page lii]
Mr Mitchell's translation. His estimate of the character of his author, as detailed in the Preliminary Dissertation, is (in our opinion) perfectly correct and curious, and interesting in the highest degree. The notes, though we have pointed out one or two defects, are in general spirited, judicious, and learned:—and even if we were inclined to attribute to the translator a degree of poetical merit much inferior to that which he may justly claim, we should still consider British literature as under the highest obligations to him, for an addition of such a mass of curious, interesting, and instructive matter; which has hitherto been inaccessible and which is now laid open to every English reader, to a point beyond which many professed scholars have not thought it worth their while to proceed. Since the publication of Mr Mitford, nothing has appeared, so calculated to convey a true impression of the character of antiquity, or to efface those theatrical and pedantic notions, which are become the source not only of infinite absurdity and distortion of mind among scholars, but of much practical mischief and error, in proportion as the blunders of the learned are diffused among the vulgar.
NOTES
1 [1] The Comedies of Aristophanes. By T. Mitchell, M.A., late Fellow of Sidney-Sussex College, Cambridge. Vol. I. London, 1820.
2 [1] In what we have said on this subject, we have followed the course by which we are persuaded that the authors we have mentioned arrived at the conclusions which guided their practice; but for mere illustration it would be equally obvious to invert the statement, and to say that where the incidents are probable, the language and sentiments must be elevated above ordinary nature, and in this order it would seem that the inferior tribe of dramatists have, in general, proceeded, taking probability of character and incident as their basis, and endeavouring to ennoble it by displays of style and sentiment. The result of the direct and of the inverted process may be exemplified in the Electras of Sophocles and Euripides; in the first, the display of character is evidently the principal object; the probability of the story is artfully elaborated; but we see that it was a secondary consideration. In Euripides, on the contrary, probability is evidently the primary object, while the characters are left to display themselves as circumstances may permit. We have taken our illustration of the two opposite processes from tragedy, because, in fact, this system of counterpoise, in which the probability of the story is placed as a weight in one of the scales, belongs equally to tragedy and to the higher species of comedy.
3 [1] This is the true medium, and whenever the Drama professes to do more (like most extravagant professors) it commonly betrays its trust.—Comedy at once moral and probable, is found, generally speaking, to be nothing more than a formal sententious sycophant, inveighing against vices and errors which are no longer in vogue; and celebrating exclusively those virtues which are most nearly allied to the prevailing follies and disorders of the time. It is the morality of the Hermite de la Chaussée d' Antin, which (as a friend observed) is precisely that of a grave, sober, discreet, obliging, grey-headed keeper of a bagnio
4 [1] Dicæopolis is made to practise the common trick of ascendancy; taking no notice of the new comer for some time, and then recognizing him suddenly with a kind of hearty jolly condescension.
5 [2] The conclusion in broader burlesque is expressed in the original by the word ᾿ΕντΕτΕυτλανωμένης. Aristophanes gives it to shew the rhythm suited to the conclusion of such a passage, and to mark more strongly the defect of the line in Euripides, from which it is parodied, ending with three words, each of them a separate Iambic foot, τη̂ς μόνης ριστη̂ς ᾿Εμοί. The burlesque word has the true tender faltering cadence—μηδὲ γὰρ θανών ροτΕ Σου̂ χωρὶς Ε᾿ίην ᾿ΕντΕτΕυτλανωμένης.
6 [1] The above is from Mr Frere's own translation, then in manuscript.
7 [1] The real meaning of the word is what is called for. We are inclined to believe with Mr Whiter, that there is no Greek verb which may not be followed through its various significations by a radical form our own language; ᾿αξιόω, the verb, though apparently derived from the adjective, retains the primary sense, and signifies to ask, or, as we find it in old language, to axe.
8 [1] The first origin of a phrase will always continue to mark its character. A citizen becomes the proprietor of a villa; he does not choose that his opulence should be estimated by the scale of his new purchase; he therefore applies a disqualifying term to it—‘'a mere box’, ‘my box in the country’.
9 [1] Hence you squeeze and drain alone the rich milch kine of our allies, While the son of Hippodamus licks his lips with longing eyes.
10 [1] This again is from Mr Frere's own version.
$$$
