John Paul Frederick Richter
Author: De Quincey, Thomas.
Publication info: The Collected Writings Of Thomas De Quincey . 14 v. Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black, 1890.

John Paul Frederick Richter [in, The Collected Writings of Thomas De Quincey; New And Enlarged Edition; By David Masson ...]
[Page ]
JOHN PAUL FREDERICK RICHTER 1 Grasmere, Oct. 18, 1821.
My Dear F.—You ask me to direct you generally in your choice of German authors; secondly, and especially, among those authors to name my favourite. In such an ocean as German Literature your first request is of too wide a compass for a letter; and I am not sorry that, by leaving it untouched, and reserving it for some future conversation, I shall
[Page 260]
add one moment (in the language of dynamics) to the attractions of friendship and the local attractions of my residence, —insufficient, as it seems, of themselves, to draw you so far northwards from London. Come, therefore, dear F., bring thy ugly countenance to the Lakes; and I will engraft such German youth and vigour on thy English trunk that henceforwards thou shalt bear excellent fruit. I suppose, F., you know that the golden pippin is now almost, if not quite, extinct in England: and why? Clearly from want of some exotic, but congenial, inoculation. So it is with the literatures of whatsoever land: unless crossed by some other of different breed, they all tend to superannuation. Thence comes it that the French literature is now in the last stage of phthisis, dotage, palsy, or whatever image will best express the most abject state of senile—(senile? no! of anile)—imbecility. Its constitution, as you well know, was in its best days marrowless and without nerve,—its youth without hope, and its manhood without dignity. For it is remarkable that to the French people only, of all nations that have any literature at all, has it been, or can it be justly, objected, that they have “no paramount book,”—none, that is to say, which stands out as a monument adequately representative of the intellectual power of a whole nation, none which has attested its own power by influencing the modes of thinking, acting, educating, through a long tract of centuries. They have no book on which the national mind has adequately acted,— none which has reacted, for any great end, upon the national mind. We English have mighty authors,—almost, I might say, almighty authors,—in whom (to speak by a scholastic term) the national mind is contained eminenter ; that is, virtually contained in its principles: and, reciprocally, these abstracts of the English mind continue, in spite of many counteracting forces, to mould and modulate the national tone of thought: I do not say directly , for you will object that they are not sufficiently studied; but indirectly, inasmuch as the hundreds in every generation who influence their contemporary millions have themselves derived an original influence from these books. The planet Jupiter, according to the speculations of a great German philosopher, is just now coming into a habitable condition: its primeval
[Page 261]
man is, perhaps, now in his Paradise: the history, the poetry, the woes of Jupiter, are now in their cradle. Suppose, then, that this Jovian man were allowed to come down upon our Earth, to take an inquest among us, and to call us, nation by nation, to a solemn audit on the question of our intellectual efforts and triumphs. What could the Earth say for herself? For our parts, we should take him into Westminster Abbey; and, standing upon the ancestral dust of England, we should present him with two volumes: one containing Hamlet, Lear , and Othello ; the other containing Paradise Lost . This, we should say, this is what we have achieved: these are our Pyramids. But what could France present him? and where? Why, her best offering must be presented in a boudoir : the impudence even of a Frenchman would not dare to connect the sanctities of religious feeling with any book in his language: the wildest vanity could not pretend to show the correlate of Paradise Lost . To speak in a language suitable to a Jovian visitor,—that is, in the language of astronomy,— our books would appear to him as two heavenly bodies of the first magnitude, whose period , the cycle and the revolution of whose orbit, were too vast to be calculated; whilst the very best of France could be regarded as no more than satellites, fitted to move about some central body of insignificant size. Now, whence comes this poverty of the French Literature? Manifestly hence,—that it is too intensely steeped in French manners to admit of any influences from without: it has rejected all alliance with exotic literature; and, like some royal families, or like a particular valley in this county, from intermarrying too exclusively in their own narrow circle, it is now on its last legs, and will soon go out like a farthing rushlight.
Having this horrid example before our eyes, what should we English do? Why, evidently, we should cultivate an intercourse with that literature of Europe which has most of a juvenile constitution. Now that is beyond all doubt the German. I do not so much insist on the present excellence of the German literature (though, poetry apart, the current literature of Germany appears to me by much the best in Europe): what weighs most with me is the promise and assurance of future excellence held out by the originality and
[Page 262]
masculine strength of thought which has moulded the German mind since the time of Kant. Whatever be thought of the existing authors, it is clear that a mighty power has been at work in the German mind since the French Revolution, which happily coincided in point of time with the influence of Kant's great work. 2 Change of any kind was good for Germany. One truth was clear,—Whatever was, was bad. And the evidence of this appears on the face of the literature. Before 1789 good authors were rare in Germany: since then they are so numerous that in any sketch of their literature all individual notice becomes impossible; you must confine yourself to favourite authors, or notice them by classes. And this leads me to your question—Who is my favourite author? My answer is that I have three favourites; and those are Kant, Schiller, and John Paul Richter. But, setting Kant aside, as hardly belonging to the literature in the true meaning of that word, I have, you see, two. In what respect there is any affinity between them I will notice before I conclude. For the present, I shall observe only that, in the case of Schiller, I love his works chiefly because I venerate the memory of the man, whereas in the case of Richter my veneration and affection for the man is founded wholly on my knowledge of his works.
This distinction will point out Richter as the most eligible author for your present purpose. In point of originality, indeed, there cannot arise a question between the pretensions of Richter and those of any other German author whatsoever. He is no man's representative but his own; nor do I think he will ever have a successor. Of his style of writing it may be said, with an emphatic and almost exclusive propriety, that except when it proceeds in a spirit of perfect freedom it cannot exist,—unless moving from an impulse self-derived, it cannot move at all. What, then, is his style of writing? What are its general characteristics? These I will endeavour to describe with sufficient circumstantiality to meet your present wants: premising only that I call him frequently John Paul , without adding his surname, both because all Germany gives him that appellation as an expression of
[Page 263]
affection for his person, and because he has himself sometimes assumed it in the title-pages of his works.
First .—The characteristic distinction of Paul Richter amongst German authors,—I will venture to add, amongst modern authors generally,—is the two-headed power which he possesses over the pathetic and the humorous; or, rather, let me say at once, what I have often felt to be true, and could (I think) at a fitting opportunity prove to be so, this power is not two-headed, but a one-headed Janus with two faces. The pathetic and the humorous are but different phases of the same orb; they assist each other, melt indiscernibly into each other, and often shine each through each like layers of coloured crystals placed one behind another. Take as an illustration Mrs. Quickly's account of Falstaff's death. Here there were three things to be accomplished. First, the death of a human being was to be described,—of necessity, therefore, to be described pathetically; for, death being one of those events which call up the pure generalities of human nature, and remove to the background all individualities, whether of life or character, the mind would not in any case endure to have it treated with levity,—so that, if any circumstances of humour are introduced by the poetic painter, they must be such as will blend and fall into harmony with the ruling passion of the scene: and, by the way,—combining it with the fact, that humorous circumstances often have been introduced into death-bed scenes, both actual and imaginary,—this remark of itself yields a proof that there is a humour which is in alliance with pathos. How else could we have borne the jests of Sir Thomas More after his condemnation,—which, as jests, would have been unseasonable from anybody else; but, being felt in him to have a root in his character, they take the dignity of humorous traits, and do in fact deepen the pathos. So, again, mere naïveté , or archness, when it is felt to flow out of the cheerfulness of resignation, becomes humorous, and at the same time becomes pathetic: as, for instance, Lady Jane Grey's remark on the scaffold—“I have but a little neck,” &c. But to return. The death of Falstaff, as the death of a man, was, in the first place, to be described with pathos, and, if with humour, no otherwise than as the one could be
[Page 264]
reconciled with the other. But, 2d, it was the death not only of a man, but also of a Falstaff; and we could not but require that the description should revive the image and features of so memorable a character: if not, why describe it at all? The understanding would as little bear to forget that it was the death-bed of a Falstaff as the heart and affections to forget that it was the death-bed of a fellow-creature. Lastly, the description is given, not by the poet speaking in his own universal language, but by Mrs. Quickly —a character as individually portrayed, and as well known to us, as the subject of her description.—Let me recapitulate: 1st, it was to be pathetic, as relating to a man; 2d, humorous as relating to Falstaff; 3d, humorous in another style, as coming from Mrs. Quickly. These were difficulties rather greater than those of levelling hills, filling up valleys, and arranging trees in picturesque groups: yet Capability Brown 3 was allowed to exclaim, on surveying a conquest of his in this walk of art—“Ay! none but your Browns and your G--- Almighties can do such things as these.” Much more then might this irreverent speech be indulged to the gratitude of our veneration for Shakspere on witnessing such triumphs of his art. The simple words, “ and a' babbled of green fields ,” I should imagine, must have been read by many a thousand with tears and smiles at the same instant,—I mean, connecting them with a previous knowledge of Falstaff and of Mrs. Quickly. 4 Such, then, being demonstrably the possibility of blending, or fusing, as it were, the elements of pathos and of humour, and composing out of their union a
[Page 265]
third metal sui generis (as Corinthian brass, you know, is said to have been the product of all other metals, from the confluence of melted statues, &c., at the burning of Corinth), —I cannot but consider John Paul Richter as by far the most eminent artist in that way since the time of Shakspere. What! you will say, greater than Sterne? I answer “ Yes , to my thinking”; and I could give some arguments and illustrations in support of this judgment. But I am not anxious to establish my own preference as founded on anything of better authority than my idiosyncrasy, or more permanent, if you choose to think so, than my own caprice.
Second .—Judge as you will on this last point,—that is, on the comparative pretensions of Sterne and Richter to the spolia opima in the fields of pathos and of humour,—yet in one pretension he not only leaves Sterne at an infinite distance in the rear, but really, for my part, I cease to ask who it is that he leaves behind him, for I begin to think with myself who it is that he approaches. If a man could reach Venus or Mercury, we should not say he has advanced to a great distance from the earth,—we should say, he is very near to the sun. So also, if in anything a man approaches Shakspere, or does but remind us of him, all other honours are swallowed up in that: a relation of inferiority to him is a more enviable distinction than all degrees of superiority to others, the rear of his splendours a more eminent post than the supreme station in the van of all others. I have already mentioned one quality of excellence, viz. the interpenetration 5 of the humorous and the pathetic, common in Shakspere
[Page 266]
and John Paul; but this, apart from its quantity or degree, implies no more of a participation in Shaksperian excellence than the possession of wit, judgment, good sense, &c., which, in some degree or other, must be common to all authors of any merit at all. Thus far I have already said that I would not contest the point of precedence with the admirers of Sterne; but, in the claim I now advance for Richter, which respects a question of degree , I cannot allow of any competition at all from that quarter. What, then, is it that I claim? Briefly, an activity of understanding so restless and indefatigable that all attempts to illustrate or express it adequately by images borrowed from the natural world,—from the motions of beasts, birds, insects, &c., from the leaps of tigers or leopards, from the gamboling and tumbling of kittens, the antics of monkeys, or the running of antelopes and ostriches, &c.,—are baffled, confounded, and made ridiculous by the enormous and overmastering superiority of impression left by the thing illustrated. The rapid but uniform motions of the heavenly bodies serve well enough to typify the grand and continuous motions of the Miltonic mind. But the wild, giddy, fantastic, capricious, incalculable, springing, vaulting, tumbling, dancing, waltzing, caprioling, pirouetting , sky-rocketing of the chamois, the harlequin, the Vestris, the storm-loving raven—the raven? no, the lark (for often he ascends “singing up to heaven's gates,” but like the lark he dwells upon the earth), —in short, of the Proteus, the Ariel, the Mercury, the monster, John Paul,—can be compared to nothing in heaven or earth, or the waters under the earth, except to the motions of the same faculty as existing in Shakspere. Perhaps meteorology may hereafter furnish us with some adequate analogon or adumbration of its multitudinous activity: hereafter , observe; for, as to lightning, or anything we know at present, it pants after them “in vain,” in company with
[Page 267]
that pursy old gentleman, Time, as painted by Dr. Johnson. 6 To say the truth, John Paul's intellect,—his faculty of catching at a glance all the relations of objects, both the grand, the lovely, the ludicrous, and the fantastic,—is painfully and almost morbidly active: there is no respite, no repose allowed; no, not for a moment, in some of his works, —not whilst you can say Jack Robinson . And, by the way, a sort of namesake of this Mr. Robinson, viz. Jack-o'-the-lantern, comes as near to a semblance of John Paul as anybody I know. Shakspere himself has given us some account of Jack; and I assure you that the same account will serve for Jack Paul Richter. One of his books ( Vorschule der Aesthetik ) is absolutely so surcharged with quicksilver that I expect to see it leap off the table as often as it is laid there; and therefore, to prevent accidents, I usually load it with the works of our good friend --- ---, Esq. and F.R.S. In fact, so exuberant is this perilous gas of wit in John Paul that, if his works do not explode, at any rate I think John Paul himself will blow up one of these days. It must be dangerous to bring a candle too near him: many persons, especially half-pay officers, have lately “gone off” by inconsiderately blowing out their bed-candle. 7 They were loaded with a different sort of spirit, it is true: but I am sure there can be none more inflammable than that of John Paul!
To be serious, however, and to return from chasing this
[Page 268]
Will-o'-the-wisp, there cannot be a more valuable endowment to a writer of inordinate sensibility than this inordinate agility of the understanding. The active faculty balances the passive; and without such a balance there is great risk of falling into a sickly tone of maudlin sentimentality,— from which Sterne cannot be pronounced wholly free, and still less a later author of pathetic tales whose name I omit. By the way, I must observe that it is this fiery, meteoric scintillating, coruscating power of John Paul which is the true foundation of his frequent obscurity. You will find that he is reputed the most difficult of all German authors; and many Germans are so little aware of the true derivation of this difficulty that it has often been said to me, as an Englishman, “What! can you read John Paul?”—meaning to say, Can you read such difficult German? Doubtless, in some small proportion, the mere language and style are responsible for his difficulty; and, in a sense somewhat different, applying it to a mastery over the language in which he writes, the expression of Quintilian in respect to the student of Cicero may be transferred to the student of John Paul: “Ille se profecisse sciat cui Cicero valde placebit”: he may rest assured that he has made a competent progress in the German language who can read Paul Richter. Indeed he is a sort of proof author in this respect: a man who can “ construe ” him cannot be stopped by any difficulties purely verbal. But, after all, these verbal obscurities are but the necessary result and product of his style of thinking. The nimbleness of his transitions often makes him elliptical: the vast expansion and discursiveness in his range of notice and observation carries him into every department and nook of human life, of science, of art, and of literature; whence comes a proportionably extensive vocabulary, and a prodigious compass of idiomatic phraseology; and, finally, the fineness and evanescent brilliancy of his oblique glances and surface-skimmering allusions often fling but half a meaning on the mind, and one is puzzled to make out its complement. Hence it is,—that is to say, from his mode of presenting things, his lyrical style of connexion, and the prodigious fund of knowledge on which he draws for his illustrations and his images,—that his obscurity arises. And these are
[Page 269]
causes which must affect his own countrymen no less than foreigners. Further than as these causes must occasionally produce a corresponding difficulty of diction, I know of no reason why an Englishman should be thought specially concerned in his obscurity, or less able to find his way through it than any German. But just the same mistake is commonly made about Lycophron: he is represented as the most difficult of all Greek authors. Meantime, as far as language is concerned, he is one of the easiest. Some peculiar words he has, I acknowledge; but it is not single words that constitute verbal obscurity,—it is the construction, synthesis, composition, arrangement, and involution of words, which only can obstruct the reader. Now, in these parts of style Lycophron is remarkably lucid. Where, then, lies his reputed darkness? Purely in this,—that, by way of colouring the style with the sullen views of prophetic vision, Cassandra is made to describe all those on whom the fates of Troy hinged by enigmatic periphrases, oftentimes drawn from the most obscure incidents in their lives 8 : just as if I should describe Cromwell by the expression “ unfortunate tamer of horses ” because he once nearly broke his neck in Hyde Park when driving four-in-hand, or should describe a noble lord of the last century as “ the roaster of men ” because, when a member of the Hell-fire Club, he actually tied a poor man to the spit, and, having spitted him, proceeded to roast him. 9
Third .—You will naturally collect, from the account here given of John Paul's activity of understanding and fancy, that, over and above his humour, he must have an overflowing opulence of wit. In fact he has. On this earth of ours, —I know nothing about the books in Jupiter, where Kant has proved that the authors will be far abler than any poor Terræ Filius such as Shakspere or Milton, but on this poor earth of ours,—I am acquainted with no book of such unintermitting
[Page 270]
and brilliant wit as his Vorschule der Aesthetik ; it glitters like the stars on a frosty night, or like the stars on Count ---'s coat, or like the ἀνήριθμον γέλασμα, , the multitudinous laughing, of the ocean under the glancing lights of sunbeams, or like a feu-de-joie of fireworks. In fact, John Paul's works are the galaxy of the German literary firmament. I defy a man to lay his hand on that sentence which is not vital and ebullient with wit. What is wit? We are told that it is the perception of resemblances; whilst the perception of differences, we are requested to believe, is reserved for another faculty. Very profound distinctions, no doubt; but very senseless for all that. I shall not here attempt a definition of wit: but I will just mention what I conceive to be one of the distinctions between wit and humour: viz. that, whilst wit is a purely intellectual thing, into every act of the humorous mood there is an influx of the moral nature: rays, direct or refracted, from the will and the affections, from the disposition and the temperament, enter into all humour; and thence it is that humour is of a diffusive quality, pervading an entire course of thoughts, whilst wit—because it has no existence apart from certain logical relations of a thought which are definitely assignable and can be counted even—is always punctually concentrated within the circle of a few words. On this account I would not advise you to read those of John Paul's works which are the wittiest, but those which are more distinguished for their humour. You will thus see more of the man. In a future letter I will send you a list of the whole, distributed into classes.
Fourthly and finally .—Let me tell you what it is that has fixed John Paul in my esteem and affection. Did you ever look into that sickening heap of abortions—the Ireland forgeries? 10 In one of these (Deed of Trust to John Hemynges) he makes Shakspere say, as his reason for having assigned to
[Page 271]
a friend such and such duties usually confided to lawyers, that he had “founde muche wickednesse amongste those of the lawe.” On this Mr. Malone, whose indignation was justly roused to see Shakspere's name borrowed to countenance such loathsome and stupid vulgarity, expresses himself with much feeling 11 ; and I confess that, for my part, that passage alone, without the innumerable marks of grossest forgery which stare upon one in every word, would have been quite sufficient to expose the whole as a base and most childish imposture. For, so far was Shakspere from any capability of leaving behind him a malignant libel on a whole body of learned men that, among all writers of every age, he stands forward as the one who looked most benignantly, and with the most fraternal eye, upon all the ways of men, however weak or foolish. From every sort of vice and infirmity he drew nutriment for his philosophic mind. It is to the honour of John Paul that in this, as in other respects he constantly reminds one of Shakspere. Everywhere a spirit of kindness prevails: his satire is everywhere playful, delicate, and clad in smiles,—never bitter, scornful, or malignant. But this is not all. I could produce many passages from Shakspere which show that, if his anger was ever roused, it was against the abuses of the time,—not mere political abuses, but those that had a deeper root, and dishonoured human nature. Here again the resemblance holds in John Paul; and this is the point in which I said that I would notice a bond of affinity between him and Schiller. Both were intolerant haters of ignoble things, though placable towards the ignoble men. Both yearned, according to their different temperaments, for a happier state of things,—I mean, for human nature generally, and, in a political sense, for Germany. To his latest years, Schiller, when suffering under bodily decay and anguish, was an earnest contender for whatever promised to elevate human nature, and bore emphatic witness against the evils of the time. 12 John Paul,
[Page 272]
who still lives, is of a gentler nature; but his aspirations tend to the same point, though expressed in a milder and more hopeful spirit. With all this, however, they give a rare lesson on the manner of conducting such a cause; for you will nowhere find that they take any indecent liberties of a personal sort with those princes whose governments they most abhorred. Though safe enough from their vengeance, they never forgot, in their indignation as patriots and as philosophers, the respect due to the rank of others, or to themselves as scholars and the favourites of their country. Some other modern authors of Germany may be great writers; but Frederick Schiller and John Paul Richter I shall always view with the feelings due to great men.
For the present, my dear F., farewell, and believe me to be most faithfully yours, Grasmeriensis Teutonizans. 13
NOTES
1 [1] Appeared originally in the London Magazine for December 1821, —the first of De Quincey's contributions to that periodical in succession to his “Confessions of an English Opium-Eater”: reprinted in 1860, in the last and posthumous volume of his own Collective Edition of his writings. In that reprint there was omitted the following, which stood prefixed to the article in the Magazine, by way of whimsical introductory motto, immediately under the title:—“Virum, ex hodiernis transrhenanis, quem ego prae caeteris stupeo, et qui locum principis in Litteris Germanicis meretur jure: de quo spero quod mihi gratias agetis, utpote nomen ejus, hactenus inauditum per nostras Athenas, nunc palam apud vos proferenti,—libros vero speciosissimi argumenti in usum vernaculi lectoris civitati posthac donaturo. Quod si me fefellerit opinio quam de illo habeo, sciatis nusquam gentium reperiri inter Teutonicos scriptores qui possit penitus approbari.—Trebell. Pollio (inter Historiæ Augustæ Scriptores: Is. Casauboni, Par. 1603, 4to, p. 274): ex editione Grasmeriensi.” (“A man, among our Transrhenane contemporaries, whom I am amazed by more than by any of the rest, and who rightly deserves the place of a chief in German Literature: with respect to whom I hope that you will give me thanks, as being the person who now brings forward openly among you his name, hitherto unheard of through our Athens, and who is indeed hereafter to present the community with some of his finest books for the use of the vernacular reader. If, however, the opinion I have of him should be wrong, be sure that nowhere among Teutonic writers is one to be found that can be approved of thoroughly.—Trebellius Pollio in Isaac Casaubon's Writers of the Augustan History, Paris 1603, quarto, p. 274: from the Grasmere Edition.”)—M.
2 [1] The Critik der Reinen Vernunft was published about five years before the French Revolution, but lay unnoticed in the publisher's warehouse for four or five years.
3 [1] Launcelot Brown, a celebrated landscape gardener (1715–1783), had the nickname of Capability Brown.—M.
4 [2] This famous description by Mrs. Quickly of the death of Falstaff occurs in Henry V, Act II, Scene 3.—“A' made a finer end and went away an it had been any Christom child; a' parted even just between twelve and one, even at the turning of the tide: for, after I saw him fumble with the sheets and play with flowers and smile upon his fingers' ends, I knew there was but one way; for his nose was as sharp as a pen, and a' babbled of green fields.”—The last six words, “and a' babbled of green fields,” do not occur at all in the quarto editions of the play; and in the first and second folios the words are “and a Table of greene fields,”—an unintelligible reading, which has greatly perplexed modern editors. Pope accounted for it by supposing that in one of the old stage copies of the play there had been at this point a marginal stage direction for the bringing in of a table (said table to be one of Greenfield's, the property-man of the theatre!), and that the stage-direction had been nonsensically welded into the printed text. He therefore rejected the words altogether. Others, however, refused Pope's explanation,—evidently a very forced one,—and supposed a misprint of some words actually in the original. Hence several proposed emendations,—“upon a table of green fells,” “on a table of green frieze,” &c. &c. To Theobald belongs the credit of having suggested the reading now generally adopted, “and a' babbled of green fields,”—one of the happiest emendations ever proposed, though some think “talked” more likely to have been the word than “babbled.”—M.
5 [1] “Interpenetration”:—This word is from the mint of Mr. Coleridge; and, as it seems to me a very “laudable” word (as surgeons say of pus), I mean to patronise it, and beg to recommend it to my friends and the public in general. By the way, the public, of whose stupidity I have often reason to complain, does not seem to understand it. The prefix inter has the force of the French entre in such words as s'entrelacer: reciprocal penetration is the meaning,—as if a black colour should enter a crimson one, yet not keep itself distinct, but, being in turn pervaded by the crimson, each should diffuse itself through the other.
6 [1] “And panting Time toiled after him in vain.” So that, according to the Doctor, Shakspere performed a match against Time; and, being backed by Nature, it seems he won it.
7 [2] Of which the most tremendous case I have met with was this; and, as I greatly desire to believe so good a story, I should be more easy in mind if I knew that anybody else had ever believed it. In the year 1818, an Irishman, and a great lover of whisky, persisted obstinately, though often warned of his error, in attempting to blow out a candle: the candle, however, blew out the Irishman, and the following result was sworn to before the coroner:—The Irishman shot off like a Congreve rocket, passed with the velocity of a twenty-four pounder through I know not how many storeys, ascended to the “highest heaven of invention”;—viz. to the garrets where slept a tailor and his wife. Feather-beds, which stop cannon-balls, gave way before the Irishman's skull: he passed like a gimlet through two mattresses, a feather-bed, &c., and stood grinning at the tailor and his wife, without his legs, however,—which he had left behind him in the second floor.
8 [1] About Lycophron see ante, Vol. X, p. 214, footnote.—M.
9 [2] “Proceeded to roast him,—yes; but did he roast him?” Really I can't say. Some people like their mutton underdone; and Lord --- might like his man underdone. All I know of the sequel is that the sun expressed no horror at this Thyestean cookery,—which might be because be had set two hours before; but the Sun newspaper did, when it rose some nights after (as it always does) at six o'clock in the evening.
10 [1] These forgeries by William Henry Ireland,—consisting of a confession of faith and other documents alleged to be in Shakspere's handwriting, with letters of his to Anne Hathaway and others, one entire new drama, &c.—made a great stir about the year 1796, when first exhibited and published. Ireland was then a young man of nineteen years of age, clerk in a lawyer's office in London. The imposture was exposed almost immediately by Malone and others. Ireland lived till 1835.—M.
11 [1] Inquiry, &c., p. 279. [Enquiry into the authenticity of certain miscellaneous papers and legal instruments attributed to Shakspeare, &c., 1796.—M.]
12 [2] Goethe has lately (Morphologie, p. 108, Zweyter Heft) recurred to his conversations with Schiller in a way which places himself in rather an unfavourable contrast.
13 [1] Grasmeriensis Teutonizans may be translated “The German Student at Grasmere.” The closing words of the letter, with this signature, were omitted in the reprint of the paper in 1860; as was also the following paragraph of postscript under the signature:— “P.S.—You will observe in my motto from Trebellius Pollio [ante, p. 259] that I announce an intention of translating a few Analecta Paulina into English. Two specimens chosen at random from the Flegel-jahre I subjoin. They are adopted hastily and translated hastily, and can do little towards exhibiting in its full proportions a mind so various as that of John Paul. In my next letter I will send you a better selection, and executed in a style of translation more corresponding to the merits of my brilliant original. Once again, however, let me remind you of the extraordinary difficulties which beset the task,—difficulties of apprehending the sense in many cases, difficulties of expression in all. But why need I say this to you, who in six weeks will be able to judge for yourself upon all points connected with German Literature, and to unite with me and others in furnishing an anthology in our own language better reflecting by absolute specimens the characteristics of the most eminent German writers than all mere evolutions of style and manner could ever do? Every man shall take his own favourite: mine, in any case, is to be Paul Richter. But I talk too much: so ‘manum de tabula.’ ”—M.
$$$
