Keble's Lectures on Poetry 1832-1841 (1844)
Author: Keble, John.
Publication info: Keble's Lectures On Poetry 1832–1841 . 2 v. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1912.

Keble's Lectures on Poetry 1832–1841
[Page ]
[VOLUME I] TRANSLATOR'S NOTE The history of these Lectures—originally delivered in Latin (1832–41)—since their publication in 1844 is rather curious. They have been continuously honoured with high praise, culminating in the considered and critical tribute, which by his kind permission is quoted below, of Mr. George Saintsbury, Professor of Rhetoric and English Literature, Edinburgh, in 1904 ( History of Criticism , iii. 621). The question of translation was more than once discussed during Mr. Keble's lifetime, notably at the instance of Sir John Coleridge, who himself half contemplated the task and has given us a specimen of his manner ( Memoir of John Keble , c.x). Since Mr. Keble's death a translation has been called for, expressly or impliedly, over and over again by critics of unquestioned reputation. And I am told that ‘several people have started on it’, but none of them seem to have got very far. These conditions form my apology for submitting the present attempt.
I propose, in this note, first, to offer quotations from a few of the notices and criticisms referred to above, and, secondly, to add some brief remarks upon the aims and circumstances of the present translation.
1. ‘The Lectures in question had been delivered terminally while he held the Professorship of Poetry, and were afterwards collected in a volume: and various circumstances combined to give them a peculiar character. Delivered one by one at intervals, to a large, cultivated and critical audience, they both demanded and admitted of special elaboration of the style. As coming from a person of his high reputation for Latinity they were displays of art’ (J. H. Newman, Idea of a University: Elementary Studies , §3 (2). ‘His greatest literary work, his Lectures on Poetry , so
[Page 4]
full of acute remark and so beautiful in language, is in Latin’ (J. H. Newman in Keble's Occasional Papers and Reviews , Preface, p. xii).
‘This outline fails to do justice to a volume which Dean Church 1 has called “the most original and memorable course ever delivered from the Chair of Poetry in Oxford”: and Bishop Moberly, 2 in even stronger praise, “One of the most charming and valuable volumes of classical criticism that ever issued from the press.” But it may serve to draw the attention of a later generation to it and may suggest the advisability of an English translation’ (Dr. Lock, John Keble: A Biography , p. 49).
‘An English edition would be most welcome and would do much to enhance the lecturer's reputation’ ( National Observer , then edited by the late Mr. W. E. Henley, vol. ix (New Series), p. 420: in a review of Dr. Lock's Biography. )
‘Not the least critical genius that ever adorned the Oxford chair was possessed by John Keble. ... Still the Praelectiones themselves must of course always be Keble's own touchstone or rather his ground and matter of assay. And he comes out well. The dedication (a model of stately enthusiasm) to Wordsworth as non solum dulcissimae poeseos verum etiam divinae veritatis antistes strikes the key-note of the whole. But it may be surprising to some to find how “broad” Keble is in spite of his inflexible morality and his uncompromising churchmanship. He was kept right partly, no doubt, by holding fast as a matter of theory to the “Delight” test; pure and virtuous delight of course, but still delight, first of all and most of all. But mere theory would have availed him little without the poetic spirit which everywhere in him translates itself into the critical, and almost as little without the wide (and whether deliberately or not) comparative reading of
[Page 5]
ancient and modern verse which he displays. His general definition of poetry here is slightly different from that given above (i.e. in Keble's Occasional Papers and Reviews ). ... But his working out—necessarily in its main lines obvious, but interesting to compare with his successor Mr. Arnold's undogmatized and secularized application of the same idea—(those who make the contrast will, however, I think, find out that Arnold owes more to his forerunner than might be gathered from his published lectures)—is less interesting to us in itself than the aperçus on different poets ancient and modern to which it gives rise. Few pages deserve to be skipped by the student: even technical discussion of the tenuis et arguta kind, as he modestly calls it, becomes alive under his hand on such subjects as the connexion of Poetry and Irony ( Prael. v) ... On his narrower subject the judgement of Sophocles in Prael. xxviii is singularly weighty, and I should much like to have heard Mr. Arnold answer on behalf of his favourite. ... I wish he had written more on Dante himself: what he has is admirable (ii. 678 and elsewhere). ... But, in fact, Keble always is noteworthy and more. Mere moderns may dismiss him with or without a reading as a mill-horse treader of academic rounds. He is nothing so little. He is in fact almost the first representative of the Romantic movement who has applied its spirit to the consecrated subjects of study: and he has shown—unfortunately to too limited a circle—how fresh, how interesting, how inspiring the results of this and of the true comparison of ancient and modern can be.
... Literary criticism—indeed literature itself as such—was with him, it is true, only a by-work, hardly more than a pastime. But had it been otherwise, he would, I think, twenty years before Arnold, have given us the results of a more thorough scholarship, a reading certainly not less wide, a taste nearly as delicate and catholic, a broader
[Page 6]
theory, and a much greater freedom from mere crotchet and caprice’ (Professor Saintsbury, History of Criticism , iii. 621 et seq.).
‘Whatever may have been the feeling in Keble's own time, I think it has been admitted since that the fact of his lectures being in Latin has prevented their finding that vogue which they deserved, or producing that effect which they might well have produced. ... I am glad to think that this drawback is about to be removed’ (T. H. Warren, President of Magdalen College and Professor of Poetry. Inaugural Lecture, June 1911, pp. 4, 36).
2. As to the present translation I may say that the version is as close as is consistent with being readable by those who may not have access to the original Latin, and that my aim has simply been to render Keble's thought in the clearest and plainest English I could command. With this view the whole has been critically revised twice, and considerable parts of it three times. In so long a work I must have gone astray here and there, I fear, and shall therefore be grateful to any readers who may be so kind as to point out my errors.
I leave the foregoing paragraph standing as first drawn, but it is now of little or no importance, inasmuch as the whole translation has since—at the instance of the Delegates of the University Press—had the inestimable advantage of being revised, corrected and, as to some passages, recast by Dr. Lock, Warden of Keble College. I cannot sufficiently thank Dr. Lock for his great kindness in giving valuable time and much labour towards making the best possible of my poor attempt. But he will doubtless find ample reward in the certain gratitude of all who ‘revere the honoured memory of John Keble ’.
E. K., fl. 1573 F.
Colchester : October 1911.
[Page ]
PRÆLECTIONES ACADEMICÆ
OXONII HABITÆ
A JOANNE KEBLE, A.M.
Ὁ δὲ ΘΕὸΣ διὰ ράντων τούτων ἕλκΕι τὴν ψυχὴν ὅροι ἂν βούλη ται τω̂ν ἀνθρώρων ἀνακρΕμαννὺς ἐζ ἀλλήλων τὴν δύναμιν. Plato in Ione, c. 7
[Page ]
TO WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
                     TRUE PHILOSOPHER AND INSPIRED POET
                     WHO BY THE SPECIAL GIFT AND CALLING OF ALMIGHTY GOD
                     WHETHER HE SANG OF MAN OR OF NATURE
                     FAILED NOT TO LIFT UP MEN'S HEARTS TO HOLY THINGS
                     NOR EVER CEASED TO CHAMPION THE CAUSE
                     OF THE POOR AND SIMPLE
                     AND SO IN PERILOUS TIMES WAS RAISED UP
                     TO BE A CHIEF MINISTER
                     NOT ONLY OF SWEETEST POETRY
                     BUT ALSO OF HIGH AND SACRED TRUTH
                     THIS TRIBUTE, SLIGHT THOUGH IT BE, IS OFFERED
                     BY ONE OF THE MULTITUDE WHO FEEL EVER INDEBTED
                     FOR THE IMMORTAL TREASURE OF HIS SPLENDID POEMS
                     IN TESTIMONY OF
                     RESPECT, AFFECTION, AND GRATITUDE
[Page ]
TO THE READER There are many pleas which I might naturally put forward in this Introduction in order to win a kindly criticism for this slight work of mine; but I see that I have urged nearly all of them in my Inaugural Lecture. Yet I confess there is one thing which I did not anticipate. I did not foresee that in these last few years it would be perils threatening the Church more than perils threatening the State which would withdraw the minds of us all from the delights of quiet literary study. Yet so it has been, and had I not been encouraged by the opinion of those to whose judgement I chiefly defer on such a point that there is a real possibility that discussions on poetry may not be without profit even in the sphere of religion, I should neither at the outset have undertaken the task of delivering these lectures, nor have decided now to publish them.
I fear too, that I may be blamed for undue delay in their publication: but they needed long and careful revision: and if at length they are free—would that I could think so—of any serious blemishes, I should wish my readers to give the whole credit of that to a dear friend, well skilled himself in these literary studies, who has been generous enough to burden a life which has tasks enough of its own with the further task of correcting my mistakes.
[Page ]
INAUGURAL ORATION
OR
LECTURE I
3
Preliminary considerations. The reason why, for lectures on Poetry, our predecessors have preferred Latin to English. Poetry defined, not by a strict logical definition, but by one special property of it, viz. that it enables men without undue publicity, to express and relieve passionate personal feeling.
Former holders of this Professorship, though men of real learning; with ample leisure at command, and fresh from academic study, have recorded that they first approached the duties of this chair with grave misgiving; what then must be the feelings of one who has long been engrossed in practical life, and whom you have been pleased to recall from the battle-field of life to the training-ground of youth? You have taken the initiative in welcoming one who indeed is most anxious to serve you well: and undying gratitude will make me all my life devoted, as few of her sons are devoted, to the service of my ‘Alma Mater’. You have acted, I know, out of your wonted generosity of heart: but to myself, the more closely I view the conditions of the problem, I must confess that the doubt very often suggests itself, whether you have sufficiently protected the dignity of this chair and the furtherance of liberal studies.
Not to dwell on many other considerations which often 4 cause me anxiety, I sometimes seriously question whether I am not too advanced in years to be able to deal sympathetically with the theory and characteristics of poetry.
[Page 12]
For which of us, in middle life, does not complain that, little by little, the fire and vigour of his youthful spirit seems to cool and ebb; and, just as with advancing day the morning glories of the sky hourly fade, so, too, that keen pleasure which beguiles the young to study of the poets, becomes daily weaker and, as old age draws nigh, feebler. Who would tolerate a criticism of poetry from one whose own fount of inspiration has dried up and who has lost the sense of the Muses' charm?
There are, however, considerations which, again and again, comfort and refresh me when disquieted by these anxieties. In the first place, I still feel, and to an eminent degree, the marvellous charm of these studies: and this emboldens me to hope that I shall not wholly disappoint the enthusiasm of younger minds: further, in my judgement, it is true that, especially in the present day, it is the bridle rather than the spur which he needs who speaks to others about poetry. Far, far too familiarly (I do not hesitate to say) are we—both young and old—accustomed to handle and criticize the achievements and works of great poets; too rashly and irreverently do we burst into these sanctuaries. If any one thinks he has discovered something new and unheard of, there is no delay, no sense of reverence: there and then, with much blowing of trumpets, the whole is brought out and thrown down before the eyes of every one. From this offence, assuredly, these assemblies of yours, beyond all others, ought to be free, seeing that they are a type and example of purer ideals, and I unreservedly congratulate you that, up to 5 now, they have been free: and the hope that they will so continue for the future becomes stronger and surer, in proportion as those to whose care and wisdom you entrust this chair are men ripe in years and ripe in judgement. This is the only ground on which my age helps me to lay a ‘flattering unction’ to my mind: I hope, and, if I dare
[Page 13]
promise anything concerning myself, I promise that, throughout the whole of my task, I will maintain the religious reverence due to a subject so serious, I had almost said so sacred.
There is another point, a point which has, I imagine, occurred to all of you, which I ought not to leave wholly unnoticed: the political times are not such as to allow any one, especially one serving the sacred office, to take his pastime, free from care and distraction, in the delights of studies such as these. This is a fresh ground for giving me pause: yet even this is not without its own compensation. Assuredly, if I am not to be wanting—wretchedly and shamefully wanting—in the duty that I have undertaken, it will be necessary for me, after long absence from the University and pre-occupation with wholly different work, to undergo very severe toil: the slumbering fires of learning, if indeed there is still in their embers ‘something that doth live’, must be fanned into flame: many things must be recalled to mind: more still be learned anew, everything has to the best of my power to be marshalled and systematized. In short, the delights which I have hitherto enjoyed in silence, I must now analyse and set forth methodically before a learned audience. I shall want all the leisure I can command that I may be able to concentrate without distraction upon this one aim, first, to search out in quiet thought, and then to delineate in true and fitting expression no day-dreams of my own, but the very mysteries of the poet's art. On the other hand, I fear there is little hope of repose, amid the universal unrest, when the most sacred causes are in extreme peril. For who has not observed, these two years past, with what zealous industry unprincipled men are doing their evil work: with what mischievous eagerness they seek out country seclusions, so that there is no cottage, however sequestered or remote, which they have not filled with scandalous and
[Page 14]
6 profane pamphlets, to serve as fuel for their seditions. These are the perils against which we are already on the watch: these the foes against whom we are posting our sentinels: and for myself I fear that, as the evil creeps on day by day, this watchfulness will be needed much longer yet. So, since by the most just decree of the Eternal Judge, repose and peace seem for the present beyond all hope, it will still be my duty to see, that in the midst of all these distractions and anxieties, no want of energy on my part shall bring discredit on the good name of our University and on the cause of these liberal studies; and it will be an act of generous indulgence on your part to attribute any shortcomings of mine (and there will, I know, be many) rather to the evil of the time and the poverty of my gifts than to negligence and indolence.
But, even had I the ability which one who speaks with authority from this chair ought to have, I would certainly never shrink from my task on the plea that at a time of national peril it ill becomes us to betake ourselves to the study of poetry; nay, I believe that, on the one hand, nothing is more effective than these studies in bracing citizens to all virtues; and, on the other, nothing is more helpful to the studies themselves than the sight of a true patriot quitting himself self-sacrificingly, strenuously and unweariedly in the service of the State in its hour of need. And, no doubt, I shall find some opportunity later of showing how closely intertwined are the functions of noble poetry and good citizenship. Meanwhile, I must first remove to the best of my power one final scruple; then I shall be free to say a few words on my subject, and to set forth an outline of my plan.
There are many at present, I am fully aware, who confess themselves at a loss to understand why, within these walls, we may only speak in Latin: and especially on a subject which springs from the deepest feelings of the mind, and
[Page 15]
is concerned with the most minute, and most delicate discrimination of thought and expression; with refinements which, as they aver, even the mother tongue fails to delineate with adequate clearness.
They allege further, that, among modern writers, there 7 are new kinds of poetry, plainly not known to the ancients, and, in each kind, an almost infinite wealth of illustrations: and that, by comparing these with Greek and Latin poets, we may clearly and plainly perceive what, in these subjects, is due to a common human nature, and what peculiar to special times, places, and individual poets: finally, that we gratuitously burden a problem difficult in itself, with additional difficulty, when, obstinately refusing to desert the ways of a less civilized time, we decree that a subject which we desire may engage the interest, and, by its charm, fasten the affections of youth, shall be discussed in a foreign, and now almost obsolete, tongue.
So they argue; and, certainly, I for my part should be willing to gratify them, were I assured the concession would not result in banishing the Latin Muses from our University, and our having to regret their entire departure. And I think this no idle apprehension, when I see, daily, some inroad made upon their domain; so that, among us now, changed times and manners hardly accord them more than the scantiest recognition. I know not indeed what others may feel, but to me, certainly, should we lose them, it would be a grievous loss, not merely because of their inherent charm and the close connexion which they have ever enjoyed with all liberal studies, but also because of that respect invariably due to the literary memorials of illustrious men: of those, I mean, who within our fathers' and our own times have been heard from this very chair and whose writings are familiar to us all. Is it a slight achievement, gentlemen, which they have wrought who have had the good fortune—and it has happened twice already in
[Page 16]
one century—to hand down to posterity a work that deserves to be called ‘golden’? But of living writers, especially of my own friends, I think it wise to be silent, for I remember that notable warning of Pericles, ‘The friend who knows the facts is likely to think that the words of the speaker fall short of his knowledge and of his wishes; another who is not so well informed will suspect exaggeration.’ 8 9 But there is one treatise, that exquisite course of lectures upon ‘The Sacred Poetry of the Hebrews’, which will, I trust, long secure for Latin its true place among us. We shall never feel regret for a style so finished: we shall always pursue with special favour that branch of study which has conferred such credit upon ourselves. But with regard to this particular art: we must before all things take the greatest care, even though with intent to enlarge its domain, lest we rashly concede anything opposed to the Statutes of the University, the custom of our ancestors, or finally to the behests of our Founder, whose love of letters first honoured Poetry by the institution of this chair.
In the next place, I am not sure that the medium of Latin is not, to a large extent, more suitable at the present time, for treating poetry, than our own tongue. I do not indeed deny, for almost every hour I am deeply and painfully conscious of the fact, that the natural strength of my capacity, whatever it be worth, is in some degree hampered and restricted, the edge of my fancy is blunted, and my whole spirit more quickly fatigued and exhausted: in fine, that there is some risk lest, while anxiously balancing word and phrase, and striving after an elegant Latin style, something may be lost from the just treatment of the subject. Assuredly it is so: nevertheless I would not for this reason plead for any change, inasmuch as there seem graver and more threatening dangers on the other side. The truth is that the fashion in criticism has sunk so
[Page 17]
low, that a poet is held of little account unless he constantly, as it were, dazzles his readers. There is no room for what is dignified, simple, and genuine: there is a want of repose, of clearness; only that which is startling, not to say monstrous and uncouth, makes a noise and is talked about. The authors are like untrained boys trying to sing: the one aim of each is to sing as loud as he can: whether 10 they are singing sweetly and in tune they neither know nor care.
Now, with poetry thus decadent and deteriorated, it is hardly possible that criticism should faithfully discharge its function: for who could expect to find upright judges in a corrupt state? At any rate, it is now the case that the very men whose duty it is to curb extravagance, themselves indulge in widest and wildest latitude of theme and style: those who should prune all pretentiousness are of all men most pretentious, and those who should uphold the judgements of true human instincts themselves daily scatter broadcast inventions of the wildest fancy. In a word, too much applause is given to wit and smartness, too little to reality and truth.
Add to this, that nothing can be imagined more troublesomely insistent than their publications: some weekly, others more modestly once a month, those who are most self-restrained not less than four times a year—all claiming the name and authority of critics. Very few, in this rush of writing, avoid giving utterance to a great deal as far as possible removed from simple and fitting appreciation. But however silly and impertinent they may be, yet each finds, generally, its supporters, and, what is most regrettable of all, its buyers and readers.
Amid such circumstances, I think it a happy chance that, in this important task, we should be governed, paramountly, by statutes framed to protect your reputation, and the serious study of a serious subject, rather than to produce
[Page 18]
a short-lived pleasure of the ear, or satisfy the expectations of clever men. We shall cheerfully resign much, in other respects desirable and not unfitting—recognition, appreciation, a crowded audience: and, what is more important, we shall be content to forgo many splendid fields of inquiry, and even such as might be of notable advantage to an effective execution of our task; so long as nothing that 11 is in bad taste, nothing meretricious, nothing that is not well tested by age, nothing that is not open and simple, be admitted in dealing with our high theme.
But should it fall to the lot of one of us to light upon some happy discovery which, in the interest of sound learning, should be communicated to those who are not scholars, there is nothing to prevent it being made public, as usual, in English, in whatever way shall seem most fitting: only let it be done with extreme modesty, sensibly, and with due restraint. Thus, in result, all will be safeguarded; Latin will retain its prerogative, the University her dignity: and yet, no injury will be done in any way to the highest learning.
These are the points with regard to this vexed question which I have thought necessary to state once for all. Now I will indicate, as clearly as I can, which special region of the unbounded domain of poetry I mean to explore. It will then be abundantly clear that I do not advocate the use of Latin with any idea of sparing myself labour. For I commence, to-day, an inquiry and examination which is perhaps less than any calculated to submit to the restraints and limitations of an alien tongue.
In the first place, while there are very many charms, charms very various and manifold, and all of them wonderfully intermingled and involved, attending that generic whole which we call Poetry, yet I shall endeavour to separate and distinguish one in particular which may pre-eminently and peculiarly be styled the poetic charm.
[Page 19]
Next, I shall review the immense realm of Poetry, in search of traces of this fundamental charm wherever they may be found: that its value may be manifested as enabling us both to classify poets and to explain the various opinions of critics about Poetry in general; opinions, 12 certainly very diverse, and yet capable, I think, of reconciliation, if only the basis of our inquiry be well laid.
Lastly, I shall call into the witness-box the greatest poets of antiquity, and risk my theory by testing it on all the greatest of them. In this way even if it should seem, and I hope that it will not, that I have been mistaken about, or have not clearly enough explained, my main theory, nevertheless some advantage may result by means of citation and example.
To begin with, then, we are all so framed by nature that we experience great relief, when carried away by any strong current of thought or feeling, if we are at last able, whether by speech or gesture or in any other way, to find an expression for it. This is most clearly seen in the case of those who, even when alone, mutter and croon to themselves, under the influence of strong emotion. Illustrations are to be found again and again in Tragedy: where nothing is commoner than to represent the most important characters detailing their deeds and their schemes aloud to themselves. And such freedom (though too often abused) would assuredly not be tolerated on any terms, were not the audience conscious from their own experience of a certain natural propriety therein.
What need to spend time on this? In all languages, those common forms of lament, of exclamation, even of cursing, do not they all point the same way? Such curses are indeed impious and profane, the utterance of depraved and wicked men, but at least they serve to demonstrate how relevant to the stay of passion are speech and expression, yielding outlet as it were to the spirit.
[Page 20]
13 But such utterance was suitable only in men uncivilized and scarcely removed from savagery: they would, almost like wild beasts, shout out aloud with uncouth outcry, at once and in any way, whatever came into their minds. Yet there lingers, I believe, even in the most abandoned a higher and better instinct, which counsels silence as to many things: and, if they are willing to obey the instinct, they will rather die than declare openly what is in their mind. We may note too that men so wrought upon—I mean, for instance, by vanity, grief, and other like human emotions—very often exhibit excessive shamefacedness, being overquick and sensitive in their sense of shame as in everything else: especially such as ‘live the lives of freeborn citizens in a happy country, conditions which’, as Cicero justly notes of the citizens of Rome, ‘give men's minds a more delicate sensibility.’ 14
Thus it comes about that those to whom, most of all, utterance would be the relief from a burden are altogether restrained by a sort of shame, far from discreditable, nay rather, noble and natural, from any such relief. What must they do? they are ashamed and reluctant to speak out, yet, if silent, they can scarcely keep their mental balance; some are said even to have become insane.
Not very far removed from these, yet not exactly the same, appears clearly to be the case of lofty souls in whom, as in the youthful Nisus of Virgil,
The restless mind is bent on some great emprise. 15
Some great emprise—something that is great, yet still vague and undecided, of which the outline and the details have yet to be filled in. All recognize this experience whose minds have at any time been overwhelmed in pondering, more closely than of wont, on the vicissitudes of human affairs, on the marvellous ordered symmetry of the universe,
[Page 21]
or last of all, on the holy vision of true and divine goodness.
The mind indeed, oppressed and overcome by a crowd 16 of great thoughts, pressing in upon it at one and the same time, knew not where to turn, and sought for some such relief and solace for itself as tears give to the worn-out body. And this is to feel the same craving as I ascribed to men torn by violent passion; but there was this difference, the latter shrunk, through shame, from any speech: the former feeling is higher and nobler, and therefore is neither able nor willing to be expressed in the speech of daily life.
I say therefore that that Almighty Power, which governs and harmonizes, not heaven and earth only, but also the hearts of men, has furnished amplest comfort for sufferers of either kind in the gift of Poetry. I will not now take pains to consider what Poetry fully means: even were I able to define it exactly, this is not the fitting opportunity: there are two points only, and points which no one will traverse, which I should wish to be allowed to assume as axiomatic; the first, that Poetry, of whatever kind, is, in one way or other, closely associated with measure and a definite rhythm of sound: the second, that its chief aim is to recall, to renew, and bring vividly before us pictures of absent objects: partly it has to draw out and bring to light things cognate or similar to each object it represents, however slight the connexion may be; partly it has to systematize and explain the connexion between them: in a word, it is the handmaid to Imagination and Fancy. In both of these processes it exhibits, assuredly, wonderful efficacy in soothing men's emotions and steadying the balance of their mind. For while we linger over language and rhythm, it occupies our minds and diverts them from cares and troubles: when, further, it gives play to Imagination, summons before us the past, forecasts the future, in brief,
[Page 22]
paints all things in the hues which the mind itself desires, we feel that it is sparing and merciful to the emotions that seethe within us, and that, for a while, we enjoy at least that solace which Dido once fruitlessly craved, to her woe:
                                         a transient grace
To give this madness breathing-space. 17
18 But how can the needs of modest reserve, and that becoming shrinking from publicity before noticed, be better served than if a troubled or enthusiastic spirit is able to express its wishes by those indirect methods best known to poets? At all events, it is remarkable how felicitous are the outlets which minds moved by strong excitement, and aspiring by a kind of blind impulse to high ideals, have sometimes found for themselves, by following the leadings of measure and rhythm, as they first offered, like a labyrinthine clue. They needed, in fact, some clue to guide them amid a thousand paths to take the right, and this clue, as every one can see, scansion and measure, simply in themselves, are well able to supply.
Let us therefore deem the glorious art of Poetry a kind of medicine divinely bestowed upon man: which gives healing relief to secret mental emotion, yet without detriment to modest reserve: and, while giving scope to enthusiasm, yet rules it with order and due control. But while all unanimously acclaim its eminent efficacy in this regard, it has occurred to no one, as far as I know, to make use of this special feature as the starting-point for explaining the origin of Poetry, and as the means of dividing it into its various branches. Yet I think both that this can be done and done with advantage. And therefore I have decided, with such care and accuracy as in me lie, to make the attempt. The road is clear then, gentlemen, for me
[Page 23]
to develop my views such as they are, and commend them to your kind indulgence: I have myself experienced that indulgence on many occasions in the past, and it will, I know, never be denied to any one who may err simply through the failings of natural ability, not for lack of taking pains: and I earnestly beg and pray you to hear the speaker and to judge of what is said, with fair and generous mind.
[Page ]
19 LECTURE II
The theory of poetic pleasure strengthened by examples drawn from common speech. What is meant by ‘Poetical’ as applied to the words and actions of the young or uncultured. Three several ways in which simple men unconsciously evince a kind of poetic sensibility. First, attachment to familiar scenes; secondly, regard for the memory of the dead; thirdly, their feeling for the ceremonial of religion.
I have not overlooked, gentlemen, the fact that one who aspires to contribute something of his own to the criticism of so subtle a branch of literature as the present, runs great risk that, by over-fondness for his own theories, he may mistakenly suppose that all things, however diverse, ought to be tested by one and the same rule. Therefore, when I ventured to attribute to Poetry, as by peculiar prerogative, the function of providing that mortal men should not be without remedial relief, when either unwilling or unable to declare openly their inmost feelings, I quite appreciated the difficulty and treacherous uncertainty of my position. Indeed, I said particularly at the time, what my hearers should ever remember, that I do not attempt a precise definition, complete in every detail; 20 to use the language of Logic, I do not aim at defining the significance of Poetry by its genus and differentia, but only at describing it by one peculiar property, or, by at least an almost inseparable accident of it. Consequently, if to any of you I seemed either too presumptuous, in dealing with this question otherwise than great critics of the past had deemed fitting, or too short-sighted, in laying so slight foundation for such an ample structure, let him be assured that I submit my views for acceptance without the least prejudice to the canons laid down by others, and, while closely linking with Poetry the special charm in question,
[Page 25]
leave room for all its charms of imitation, of imaginative power, of musical form.
Do not suppose, however, that in urging as Poetry's peculiar charm the power of ministering to our feelings and soothing our minds, I was speaking either unadvisedly or without much reflection. I spoke, relying on men's daily feelings and common speech. To make this clearer, I crave your permission, gentlemen, to indulge in a slight digression, and examine fully, perhaps you may think too minutely, what is the force of the word ‘poetic’, as employed outside its special domain: in common daily life, and also, in the other arts which are associated with a liberal culture.
First of all, then, let us consider what the word means in common speech: not that I desire to press unduly the mere meanings of words: we all know that they constantly change and fluctuate, for the most part without leaving very clearly-defined traces behind: there is, nevertheless, a sane and cautious use to be made of them; and, assuredly, any one who entirely ignores it, would seem wilfully to 21 shut himself off from an exceptional means of reaching the truth. Indeed, I am inclined to think that the standard of common speech is nowhere more profitably appealed to than upon a question of this kind, which, although properly depending, at all events in great degree, upon the arbitrament of Nature herself and the simplest instincts of all mankind, yet we know to be complicated and perplexed by the fine distinctions of clever critics.
What quality, then, is it which, even in those whom we may assume have never even dreamed of composing a set poem—in the young, in simple country-folk, or in rude and uncultivated men—what is it of which we say that it savours of poetry, that it is touched with poetic feeling? Unless I am entirely mistaken there is absolutely no case of this kind which does not carry with it token and evidence of some hidden emotion, none which does not by some
[Page 26]
refined consolation appease a yearning desire which for the present is denied satisfaction.
It may be that my first illustration will seem trivial: but I shall speak boldly and openly, well knowing that it is, for the most part, just these trifles which Nature makes use of to indicate her meaning most unerringly. Do we not, even among boys at play, perceive marked shades of difference, so that, while one, as chance may be, flits from game to game, another, lost in reverie, seems bent on some great scheme? Now, if one of the latter class should chance to be more than usually clever in expressing the thoughts that fill his mind; if he is able, by action, gesture, or any form of imitation, to express and body forth the fancies stored within, do not the spectators cry out—not only ‘how pretty’, ‘how clever’, but also ‘how poetical’?
Imagine that any of us had been present at the incident, so beautifully sketched by Herodotus, of that boy who, when the king denied him and his companions their wages, 22 and pointed mockingly and in contempt to the rays of the sun as their remuneration, replied: ‘We accept thy payment, O king,’ then more quickly than it takes time to tell, ‘traced a circle on the floor of the house round the sun's rays, and having so traced the circle, and having drawn the sun's rays three times into his bosom, departed.’ 23 That was assuredly a token of a nature, certainly extraordinary, nay even kingly: and the king, seemingly stricken with boding terror, at once, though too late, pursued the fugitive in order to put him to death: and long after, found him come back again, his master in war and arms. Herodotus, in his usual fashion, has blended fable with all this, yet much is redolent of natural truth: and I think it not impertinent to our discussion. Nor would any one, I believe, should he see nowadays anything like it,
[Page 27]
hesitate to declare that a spark of true poetic fire flashed forth in the boy: yet it is most unlikely that any idea of composing poetry ever occurred to him. But it was a poetic instinct to solace by such fanciful device his royal mind, already seeking glory and not yet ripe for deeds; and had adverse fortune forbidden him to hope for a kingdom, we can easily fancy him comforting, in some sort, his broken aspirations, by writing epics like Homer's, and devoting his age to poems on war. What need to spend time on this? I think it abundantly evident, by this one instance, what men mean when they say that ‘babes of high spirit’, to use the phrase of Horace, 24 unconsciously act poetry.
I pass to countrymen and uncultivated people generally: as to whom doubts are sometimes expressed, whether they should be held in any way capable of sharing in the kind of pleasure properly associated with Poetry. To confess the truth, such doubt always seems to me to savour of arrogancy: it is a doubt natural enough in the leisured and the privileged, but scarcely in any with kindly hearts, 25 unless, to be sure, we are to think that Juvenal wrote in sober seriousness:
Never, no never, did he wildly rave,
And shake his thyrsus in the Roman cave,
Whom poverty kept sober, and the cries
Of a lean stomach, anxious for supplies. 26
But it should not be forgotten that, whatever we may finally decide to be the ultimate outcome of the poet's task, its sources must necessarily spring from that innermost humanity which is common to all ranks.
‘But poor men have no leisure.’ A drawback, I admit, if it be a question merely of writing poems: but if, penetrating further back, we look for the fountain springs of
[Page 28]
poetry in the mind itself, I am inclined to think their advantage in being free from those unworthy rivalries which hamper the wealthier classes, more than compensates for their lack of literary leisure. True, they write much more scantily, yet it may well be that their glowing thoughts shape themselves and find expression not unfelicitously.
‘But simple countrymen’, it is said again, ‘do not care aright even for their rustic surroundings:
The sun, the stars, the seasons of the year
That come and go, some gaze at without fear. 27
Moreover, in their ordinary talk among themselves, about the sky and the weather, it is not those gloomy and wild scenes dear to poets which draw out their praise, but rather trimness, neatness, or a profusion that offends good taste; they will desecrate a wood with marble columns.’ 28 In short: listening to these critics, you would say that the simple countryman is utterly devoid of poetic sensibility; indeed that his neglect of the beauty of his own fields is proof of itself that he is no disciple of the Muses.
But I very much wish that those who talk in this way would ask themselves somewhat strictly what for the most part is the real feeling for the country felt by the wealthy 29 and the privileged. How many, think you, when they talk so glibly nowadays of ‘rocks and wildernesses’, are simply falling in with a fashionable convention rather than in all honesty and sincerity trying to soothe a burning enthusiasm! If their words were honest and, to use a phrase of Lucretius, 30 ‘forced out from the bottom of their hearts,’ we should often find what, in my experience at least, happens very rarely, that some few, at all events, of our so-called moneyed men, would deliberately and gladly diminish their fortunes through love of beautiful places, and estates would as a
[Page 29]
rule be of higher value, not only in proportion as they are more fertile, but also as commanding lovelier scenery. Since there are few instances of this sort, the inference is clear: they are empty words which our millionaires use, when by the side of their artificial fish-ponds, they quote poetic phrases about ‘rural charms’ and ‘trackless haunts of the Muses’.
But grant that they are genuine and spring from the heart, yet they are not such as would unquestionably characterize enthusiastic lovers of stream and wood. In fact, let a man be once touched, I might say ‘inspired’, with the sense of Nature's charms, and he will regard those simple delights common to all regions alike—I mean the appearances of clouds and stars, the shifting courses of sun and moon, the hues of spring and autumn, the songs of birds, the sounds of winds and waves and trees—these, and other like beauties, the peculiarities of no one region, he will regard, I repeat, with such lively delight as to deem those which are special to some particular region unimportant in comparison. With this general charm, as though it were the very breath of his life, the country lover will, everywhere and always, comfort and support himself; other special features he will admire of course, yet ever give preference to his own familiar scenes, his paternal acres, his own home, endeared and consecrated by ‘daily round and common task’ beyond them all.
Now that we have compared the opinions of simple country-folk, with those of cultured people, with regard to the varied beauty of Nature, we may fairly question whether the distinction between them be not simply this: the cultured are generally more moved by remoter charms, 31 the simple by those more familiar to them: those discuss the attractions of particular places, these take real joy and pride in the common boons of Nature. On this assumption I fear that men of liberal education and breeding do not
[Page 30]
really set a higher value on ‘the fields and streams that water the valleys’ 32 than do the rude and uncultivated. In either class (if I may be forgiven for saying so) I suspect that not so very many have these things really at heart.
But to return: if only a fair consideration be given to the arguments of those who refuse to limit the divine gift of Poetry to the manufacture of verses, and hold that there is something even in the illiterate which is akin to Poetry, it will be found that the general tenor of almost all of them supports the requirements of my theory. For there are, in especial, three modes in which, unintentionally and unconsciously, the poetic feeling of countrymen is said to show itself: first, attachment to particular places; secondly, loving regard for the departed; thirdly, religion and the worship of Almighty God.
I need not, surely, spend many words in reminding you how lovingly, how keenly, men of simple and quiet life are wont to treasure the recollection of places they have once much loved. Some have been known to prefer starvation to leaving their familiar fields and landmarks; others, revisiting them after long absence, have felt keen distress at seeing everything changed, roads cut, river-beds cleared out, ‘groves uprooted that have stood idle for many a year’: 33 they cannot bear, these poor men, that things should be improved and adapted. So indeed they unmistakably evidence their loving regard for their own countryside: and I am inclined to think it a weightier proof than 34 if richer men were to say the same: for their own poverty must have taught them that to some extent everything has to be adapted to practical needs. Nor is it worth while to detail at length how ingeniously emigrants, like lovers, picture to themselves their hearths and homes. Their delight is unbounded if they fancy they spy out in the distance, even the most insignificant corner of their native
[Page 31]
place, or the smoking chimneys of their parental home. When far from their own land, they love to fix, if only by guesswork with the help of the quarters of the heavens, whereabouts their distant country lies.
Not more beautiful than true are the lines of the Scottish poet, himself a true child of the ‘divine country’: which it may be worth while to quote here in Greek, (however inadequate my version may be,) since they breathe the very spirit of Theocritus or even something sweeter:
νυκτὸς ἀΕὶ Ζέφυρον ροτιδέρκομαι, ὁρρότ' ἐς Εὐνὰν
ἐκλίνθην [illeg.] τό μοι ἁδὺν ἐρ' ὄμμασινἽρνον ἔχΕυΕ'
ρρὸς Ζέφυρον γὰρ τηλόσ' ἀρώχΕτο φίλτατος ἀνδρω̂ν [illeg.]
ὤχΕτ' ἰών [illeg.] ρόθος ἁμίν, ἐμοὶ καὶ ραιδὶ ἀφαυρω̂ 35
To omit a host of other examples, this one most beautiful stanza is sufficient to illustrate my whole point. For you would be much mistaken, gentlemen, should you fancy that these refinements are too subtle and too finely drawn to be true to the feelings of the simple country-side. A more balanced judgement would be, I think, that the sentiment itself might have occurred to many, but the expression in song to none but a consummate poet. Let us imagine, then, that we see with our own eyes some poor man stirred by such feelings, or, it may be, hear of such a case, though the scene was not expressed in metre nor embellished by beauty of phrase; would not this be a kind of implicit poetry? Would not the common human feeling of almost every one recognize the note and inspiration of the divine art?
Then again, is it not universally true that all colonists 36 who settle in unpeopled regions are careful to transport,
[Page 32]
along with themselves, the endeared and familiar names of farms and towns and rivers? Such was the frequent practice of the Dorians in Sicily, and now again, after three thousand years, we hear how religiously it is followed by our countrymen in the New World.
I will add one last point—and this carries more weight than all, whether you are thinking of their affection for localities, or of their native and ingrained poetic power. In nothing do the simple minds of country-folk show keener solicitude than for the decent and orderly disposition of their remains when they come to die; that they may find secure and inviolate repose in their native place, side by side with their forefathers, and in the familiar plot of dedicated ground. Nor indeed is this a feeling of any exceptional refinement or only seen in few. Reckon up all the humble inhabitants of any village you please, and few indeed (of such at least as ever seriously think of what will befall them) will be found who do not comfort their declining years and poverty with this assurance.
Do not think, I entreat you, that these are the idle imaginings of superstition: as if they ignorantly supposed some undefined sense of pain or disgrace may linger in their bodily frame even after death. Poor rustics are not thus uninformed and irreligious. But it is a dying testimony to their undying love for those same regions which throughout life, above all others, they have revered and held dear: where in life they worshipped God with their neighbours, where they have said farewell to friends who have paid the last debt of Nature, there, for their part, do they desire that their bones may lie. This last, this most sacred token of piety, reverence, and love; this solace, such as it is, of troubled feeling; this testimony of a constant mind, they believe, and assuredly hope, may not be displeasing to Almighty God.
37 Almost unwittingly, we have fallen upon the second
[Page 33]
division of the subject: that, namely, which is concerned with the memories which country-folk cherish for the departed. This class is characterized by almost identically the same meaning and motive as that of which we have just spoken. For those who are so bound to the departed as to desire to lie near them in death, will assuredly have at heart ‘whate'er is the honour of a tomb: whate'er solace there may be in burial.’ 38 Therefore, in performance of the last ceremonies they are, before all things, scrupulous to do nothing carelessly or perfunctorily: to observe every minute detail prescribed by rite and custom: in addition, if they know that the dead have expressed any special wish, it is carried out with exactest precision. Lastly, you may often see them invent for themselves some outward sign of their own to indicate the depth of their sorrow: either, they make some slight change in their dress, as a token of their lasting sorrow; or, they are at pains to lay up and preserve as a kind of treasure, some loved relic of the dead; or, at definite times, they visit the grave. Time would fail me even to enumerate rapidly all the expedients of mourners. But there is little doubt that more of these are hidden and secret than are displayed, since it is a peculiar mark of real and lasting grief, to shun the light and the eye of man; to keep its easing consolations to itself, secret and preserved from prying curiosity.
But of these I have said enough: for the facts are indeed too well known to all to require enforcement at length. Now, then, I may address myself to the third category, which, as we said, is concerned with divine religion and regard for holy things. And this has the widest range of all. For while there is no part of life or conduct which is not affected by the sincere desire to avoid offending a Higher Power, yet the feelings of worship are above all others full of sanctity and awe: they, least of all, can
[Page 34]
find true expression, even in the language of liturgical students; much less can the simple and unlettered 39 find words for them. Thus they are wont to resort to every kind of device—it may be gesture or look or subdued tones of voice—in order to relieve their hidden emotion; and if ever any such expedient has seemed happily to meet their own need, very probably friends and neighbours, partly from affection, partly from admiration, partly from the mere desire to imitate, will copy it; until at last a kind of religious custom becomes so long-established as to make any change or omission difficult.
This is the origin—(and I ask you to pardon me, gentlemen, if the example I quote shall seem to any of you too daring or too solemn considering the nature of my subject)—this is the origin, I repeat, of that remarkable reverence for the Cross which is universal throughout the world. Hardly any one, I think, will deny that Nature herself might have implanted the germs of such a reverence in the minds of pious men. For what more natural than that loyal soldiers should encourage themselves in the crisis of their fortunes with an emblem of their king? It is, however, to be regretted and deprecated that, when the notion of the necessity of such an act arose, men imagined either that the deity can be propitiated by a mere symbol, or that it was intended magically as a bodily talisman, not a mental comfort.
It is obvious on the face of it, that the worship of Relics, as they are called, is of a similar origin. First, they comfort the mourners in their bereavement; then, having been carefully treasured, after long lapse of time it comes to be believed that an indefinable sanctity and efficacy essentially resides in them. I say nothing now on the deeper question whether many of our human judgements in such things may not sometimes seem to have received a Divine sanction.
Then there are omens and portents and the whole array
[Page 35]
of expedients, by the aid of which men, especially unlearned men, flatter themselves that they can divine the future. When men are moved by strong feeling, whether of love or fear or desire, and when, trembling with expectancy or apprehension, they have been sorely distressed by prolonged anxiety touching their own lives or those of their kinsfolk, or the fortunes of their country, or of their near and dear 40 friends; when, moreover, they believe that an all-present power ever watches over them, it would be strange if they did not twist everything in the direction in which their own thoughts are running. So the flight of birds, the appetite of chickens, the accidental words of bystanders, seem divinely inspired to accord with and answer to the secret feelings of their minds. Nothing is too insignificant, nothing too haphazard to be fastened upon as an augury. The more ignorant people are, the more eagerly do they seize on such things: for they have not full knowledge to perceive how utterly baseless, for the most part, these all are: and they lack the many remedies for an overwrought spirit which the arts of culture and refinement would afford them.
Is it not plain, then, that within the life and manners of peasants there is a field ample enough wherein a kind of poetic faculty may, without reaching to song, yet find scope and exercise? Nor are there any grounds for hesitating any longer to call this poetic, for the common language of almost all educated men, when discussing the rural character, entirely supports this use of the term; whenever they observe anything motived by kindness and affection, that has been devised by country-folk with special subtlety and grace—whether associated with reverent regard for particular places, for the departed, or for a Higher Power—they at once instinctively assign and relegate it to Poets as their natural theme.
In thus making employ of a threefold division I am far
[Page 36]
enough from suggesting that this wide field is confined within these limits; but, believing that the strength of the position is best shown by examples, I wished to submit to you those three which are most marked: these, well weighed, will enable any one who desires to do so to find others easily for himself.
Let me add one thing more (since, as has been said, some altogether deny that the sense of Poetry exists, as a rule, among the uncultured): I fully admit that, in the lowest and rudest classes, there is a failing which often obscures, sometimes even extinguishes this implicit Poetry and play of Fancy; for many, indeed, when excited cannot 41 control themselves but must pour forth everything, fit or unfit for utterance, till their seething minds quiet down. Thus in their excitement they leave no room for finer and gentler feeling: and herein I seem to see why it is, as some one has remarked, that those who live in towns have less in common with Poetry than men of country life. Townsmen have less becoming reserve; they are more habituated to daily avocations in the full light of publicity: and so waste no time in search for expedients and indirect methods, but give full vent to their feeling.
Whether we regard therefore such considerations as almost seem to banish the delights of the Muses from the life of poor men, or those which appear to imply that even among them there is a certain suggestion of Poetry, both aspects, assuredly, make for my argument; for both indicate that it is the function of Poetry to facilitate, yet without prejudice to modest reserve, the expression of glowing emotion.
In conclusion, keep intact, I beg you, gentlemen—since assuredly this task, at all events in great degree, is laid upon you,—keep intact by advice, by instruction, by authority, by example, that characteristic modesty of the peasantry and their scrupulous apprehension of
[Page 37]
undue publicity; for if any one with his own free will loses these instincts, whether through an insane longing for praise or through the offensive arrogance which springs from learning and cleverness, or through a mistaken fanaticism, he has, you may be assured, not only turned his back upon the fairest of all studies, but also put away from himself for once and all, a most important aid to virtue and true piety.
It remains to discuss briefly what there may be of poetic quality also in the other allied arts which are called ‘liberal’: and this will help us to divide Poetry itself into its proper branches after the standard proposed.
[Page ]
42 LECTURE III
The argument further supported by consideration of various Polite Arts. The meaning of ‘Poetical’ as commonly applied to Painting and Sculpture, to Architecture and Music, lastly to Oratory and Prose writing generally, shown by examples.
Having completed that part of our inquiry which relates to common speech and daily life, I now proceed, with your permission, to consider the other part, which will show, from the use of words, first, that a certain poetical element is assigned to each of the Arts, and, secondly, that in all of them the office and function of this element are regarded as almost identical. But I candidly confess, gentlemen, that I approach this part of my subject reluctantly; nay, I wellnigh decided to omit it altogether: being conscious that I have hardly skimmed the surface of subjects upon which I must speak before so critical an audience. Therefore, I should have passed it by, had I not reflected that even those who have no technical knowledge may well be allowed an opinion in an argument of this sort. For we do not now seek to ascertain the principles of each several art: nor do we assume to be even students, still less, professional teachers of them: but we are like untrained spectators in a picture gallery. If 43 any such dogmatize about arts of which they are ignorant, they deservedly incur the stigma of impertinent assumption: but if they only attempt to draw out those points whose decision rests with the common instincts and feelings of mankind, they are pardoned even if they make mistakes.
Since, then, I hope to be privileged thus by you on this occasion, I proceed, as an ordinary observer, to indicate what kinship there seems to be with Poetry, in Painting, in Sculpture, and other allied arts.
[Page 39]
And, first, the better to explain what I mean with regard to pictures, let us put in comparison for a while that glorious pair of splendid artists, of whom one surpassed almost all Italian painters, and the other surpassed all Dutch painters in technique, in fertility, and in grandeur: and, that they may enter the contest on closer terms, let us see, too, what each has done with the same subject. Raffaelle painted that most beautiful picture of the Holy Child and His Mother, the ‘Madonna di San Sisto’, which is now in the Dresden Gallery, but among ourselves also, its main features, at all events in bare uncoloured outline, have been made generally familiar by a well-known and useful form of artistic reproduction: so that no picture-lover can, I think, have failed to examine it, with more or less care, at some time or other. Kindly recall it for a moment to your mind's eye. Picture to yourselves the form of the Child, larger than life, seated, as on an imperial throne, in the arms of the Blessed Virgin:
See, breathing in His face appear
   Signs of celestial life:
Observe His eyes how bright they shine. 44
Yet his likeness to His Mother is enough to prove Him linked with ourselves and burdened with our cares. Below, each with fitting reverence, are worshipping Pope and 45 maiden: beautiful and dignified types, he of venerable, she of virgin saintliness. In the centre two winged cherubs, who, as all must see, exquisitely exhibit a piety that suits with their tender age; their eyes are indeed turned away from the Virgin, yet, by gesture and look they testify that they are free from care in the consciousness of a present Deity. In fine, each part of the picture is pregnant with weighty meaning; and the mere total impression seems to teach us a lesson in man's true attitude to God.
I come to the other, who lived nearer our own time;
[Page 40]
Rubens lies, first of all, under this disadvantage, that he showed himself less successful with sacred subjects than with any other. A highly competent judge, himself without an equal in England as a painter, has declared that ‘the only picture of Christ in which Rubens succeeds is when he represents him dead’. 46 Even in his most splendid and best-known work, ‘The Descent from the Cross,’ he is said to have borrowed largely from an Italian painter; 47 so that, of his many pictures, scarcely a single one can be found worthy to be compared with Raffaelle. Perhaps it will be better, therefore, to appeal to Reynolds again, an impartial and lenient critic if ever there was one, who crowns much hearty praise of Rubens with this one stricture: ‘He never possessed a poetical conception of character. In his representations of the highest characters in the Christian or the fabulous world, instead of something above humanity which might fill the idea which is conceived of such beings, the spectator finds little more than mere mortals such as he meets with every day.’ 48
49 But of Raffaelle his verdict is completely opposite. ‘How much the great style exacts from its professors to conceive and represent their subjects in a poetical manner not confined to mere matter of fact may be seen in the cartoons of Raffaelle.’ 50
You have thus, gentlemen, Sir Joshua's deliberate judgement regarding these two great painters, and it is undeniable that he is heart and soul the champion of our theory. For what else does he say than that they were severally influenced and inspired, Raffaelle by love of Nature, Rubens by a love of his own art; that Raffaelle primarily and keenly looks to bodying forth in beautiful form the inner conception of his mind: while Rubens eagerly and happily seizes those unlooked-for combinations
[Page 41]
of colour, light, and form which endlessly present themselves to the artist's mind and eye at the very moment of painting? So it comes about that, looking at a Raffaelle, we think of the subject, not the artist: Rubens is constantly reminding us of himself, and how skilfully, with what judgement and ease, he deals with and fashions everything he touches.
Moreover, if we take into consideration what are severally held to be their faults or weaknesses, it is said that Raffaelle, while possessing a noble and lofty though perhaps somewhat unelastic genius, was somewhat careless and has left some works too crudely executed: as one who would indeed far rather violate the rules of art than not satisfy the inner vision, which he had conceived with marvellous beauty. And since one instance may stand for many more, recall for a moment that blemish in his masterpiece, ‘The Transfiguration,’ which offends even a tyro's eyes. There are, as it were, two scenes on one canvas. On the mountain's crest, clothed with unapproachable glory, appears the Son of God; at the foot a band of disciples, 51 struggling vainly, in their Master's absence, with an evil spirit: and then, so slight is the space between, that the heads of the disciples seem almost to reach the mountain top. Such a mistake is one which it seems impossible to suppose even a novice, to say nothing of a Raffaelle, could have committed through ignorance of technique. Perhaps, however, he considered that the nearer the two contrasted subjects were to one another, the more truly and more fully would the silent meaning of the scene be brought out. That meaning was, I think, this: above, in presence of the Messiah, all is quiet, happy, devout: below, in His absence, all is disturbed and anxious: thus the painter gave a clear type of the contrast between Paradise and this lower world. And the artist was content to be deemed careless of technique, if only he could enforce a solemn lesson of religious
[Page 42]
truth, worthy to be learnt by every future age. Rubens, on the other hand, seems too zealously and ambitiously to have made technique and workmanship (and he was assuredly a consummate craftsman) his first consideration, even in sacred subjects. An example is the attitude assigned to our Lord in the ‘Raising of Lazarus’, now in the Gallery at Berlin. With outstretched hands, slightly bending forward, with eager expression blended with wonder, he has the air of one who sees a sight that surpassed his hopes. Certainly the whole conception of the picture demanded some such pose: and by keeping it, he imparted complete symmetry to the whole design. At the same time, unless I mistake; it has marred not a little that impression of Divine majesty which should be suggested and felt.
The truth comes to this, gentlemen: Rubens is misled 52 by his consummate power of execution: Raffaelle by a design too majestic for art. His skill in painting redeems and excuses the one, his boldness of conception the other. Now to Raffaelle there is always attributed the glow of poetic inspiration: to Rubens, if not altogether refused, certainly it is not invariably conceded.
My aim in all this has been to explain and make demonstrably clear to you that, what is called the poetry of painting simply consists in the apt expression of the artist's own feeling: the examples I have adduced show this most plainly: and I might have multiplied them both from the works of other painters and from other kinds of painting, especially from landscape painting, which portrays the beauty of nature.
But I must proceed to another art, the art of Sculpture: now it has long since been a traditional canon of criticism, that the more sculptors show of poetic conception, the more warmly are they applauded: and that, certainly, sculptures are far closer akin to Poetry than paintings are. This judgement if true, may, I think, be thus explained.
[Page 43]
Painting is wholly concerned, as you know, with fluid colouring, that is with the softest of all media, which easily admits of infinite variability. Sculptors, on the other hand, work with a very hard material, marble, and with no aid from colour. Consequently a likeness can be far more easily painted to the life than it can be wrought in bronze or marble; especially since brilliance of colour appeals to all, while few, and those mostly connoisseurs, appreciate the beauty of form. And since the medium of expression is comparatively imperfect, it is imperative to 53 supply the truth to life through the artist's own genius.
Accordingly true sculptors (for I make no account of the hateful rout of mere copyists by whom they say, nowadays, this most beautiful art is afflicted), but sculptors worthy of the name; such as were those masters among the Greeks, whose names, for the most part, are lost to us but whose works are immortal: these are wont to take special care lest they offend by striving to reproduce every detail, and always leave as much as may be to imagination. And for this reason: their work is too simple, too far removed from common attractions, for it ever to be readily popular; and youthful artists are not often carried away by its attractions, save a few of unusually vivid imagination. Moreover, should any one of those who rest their claim as sculptors on execution, not conception, chance to turn out a piece of work feeble or in bad taste, he generally incurs severer and speedier blame than if a painter had committed the like fault, since the total conception must inevitably be apparent in the bare unadorned marble, but faults in a picture sometimes escape observation in the variety of the design, the brilliance of colour, and the many other devices of clever artists.
Such are, I think, in general, the reasons why there is more frequent reference to poetic feeling in the case of those who carve in statuary than those who paint pictures:
[Page 44]
all clearly tending to show that Poetry is the index to men's cares and the interpreter of their fancies; and thus whensoever sculptors by their work effect this office, they are applauded on the score of poetic feeling.
It remains to consider Architects and Musicians: and the implicit Poetry, whatever there is that exists in them, should be more easily discovered, since their works are far 54 more familiar to all classes, and more frequently appeal to human senses. Moreover, with them, imitation is either neglected altogether, or at all events plays a minor part: and this makes it the more clear that there must be a certain subtler pleasure originating in the mind itself, which men of taste, though ignorant of art, are wont to derive from Architecture and Music.
And first as to Architecture, let us, if you will, test its force and power, by taking the most noble example of all. Do we not, by natural instinct, draw a distinction between sacred and secular, between temples and dwelling-houses, not merely in respect of their size, magnificence, and workmanship, but also by reason of a certain majesty and mysterious awe not wholly unmixed with pleasure, an indefinable quality which human spirits touched even with the faintest religious instinct are loath to miss in sacred places or to find in secular buildings? Looking at the structures of those who have designedly and successfully had regard to this religious feeling as their first consideration, we assuredly feel that the realms of Architecture and Poetry are not far apart. For the fabric itself more clearly than any poem seems eloquent of the religious feeling which dwelt, or at all events should have dwelt, in the artist's mind.
And it must be borne in mind too that there are many styles of sacred buildings; each the favourite of its own age; and that they are so distinct from each other, that, though they all share a common religious note, yet they
[Page 45]
affect our minds in quite different ways. All are instinct with the same religious awe: its special tone and colour are peculiar to each.
Let us briefly review some leading classes: I do not dwell upon the Greek temples, which with all their striking impressiveness and beauty, yet are not adapted to Divine Truth and religious worship as we understand them. There was almost invariably in their edifices (I do not here speak 55 of their sacred groves), with their dim solitude, their array of columns stretching to an infinite distance, their faint gloom, something which certainly implied fear of a deity, but of a deity who by reason of the vague darkness surrounding him was barely, if at all, intelligible to mortal men: of his worshippers it may be said: ‘Dimly they took their way beneath the lonesome night, through the gloom, and through the empty mansions and unsubstantial realms of Dis.’ 56
But when we try to read the silent teaching of those fanes which our ancestors built, to the honour not of false Deities but of the True and Living God, we find in them, almost invariably, a certain implicit quality, in harmony with belief in a world to come, with worshippers who walk in the light, and with sure and well-grounded principles of piety. The most ancient still standing present a vast structure of pillars and columns, with doors, roofs, and windows of simple outline; with sculptured ornament not very elaborate nor much distributed, such indeed as seems hardly more closely connected with the general effect of the building than are flowers and plants with that of the mountain on which they grow. They thus exhibit a sort of massive assurance of lasting stability, not to say immortality; and by their mere aspect commend to worshippers of the Divine a constancy of soul and an unflinching courage untainted by pride.
[Page 46]
These ancient and perhaps rather crude structures were gradually superseded by a style of Architecture which, to me at least, is, in comparison with all others, the most beautiful of all, and by far the most in harmony with the mysteries of religion. Columned arches are sharpened to a point and reared to great height: pillars are no longer plain and simple but fasciculated, and, as it were, formed of many small pillars clustered and bound together: their capitals, carved with delicate skill, gradually blend with 57 the roof: numerous windows throw a flood of light and are exquisitely chiselled: their traceries, like foliage, not running wild indeed, but yet freely training in all directions. Our ancestors who reared them, being men of deep religious feeling, sought that the scheme of the whole fabric and the blending of the several parts should be so ordered that each and every particular should lead up to that part which ought to be the centre of the whole—namely, to the innermost parts of the shrine and the holy Sanctuary itself, the most sacred spot under heaven. Further, their scrupulous care to construct all their churches with three aisles pointing eastwards: their creation of those graceful spires, tapering to a point, like a finger pointing towards heaven, and reared to an immense height: what can we suppose to have dictated these but a mind and temper fixedly intent on religious things, perhaps not always—for so some think—in due proportion, yet nevertheless always intent on them?
I might explain at greater length how highly skilled artists, more poetical (if I may be forgiven the saying) than almost all poets, exquisitely and variously elaborated all the many minute details as their taste and imagination led them. Of the splendid monuments of their art, those first erected, above all things, evince in them and foster in others a great and high-soaring spirit, impatient of all that is trivial: those of later times, on the one hand, tend to
[Page 47]
encourage, by a certain indescribable charm, pious souls seeking the. Divine Presence; on the other, impress upon us by a glorious splendour the fact that true worshippers will deem they cannot be too lavish in their offerings to a kind and merciful God.
But, not to be unduly lengthy, I pass these by. And I think some reasons have now been adduced for conceding a certain poetic feeling to Architects also, and for explaining Poetry as the art which under certain veils and disguises yet reveals the fervent emotions of the mind. We need not spend much time in considering how far Poetry enters into Music: for it is universally allowed that they are twin 58 sisters, and just as an echo reproduces and returns from afar the human voice, so Poetry and Music alike give back the subtle turns and changes of the mind. Indeed, I often wonder how it happens that, in this art beyond all others, untrained minds are conscious of the differences between composers; so that, while the numbers and measures of one linger long in the popular mind, those of another cannot even win the ear of any but cultured hearers. My conclusion is something like this: the mere sequence and progression of sound, which I suppose would be termed Melody, somehow appeals more easily and effectively to ear and mind than those other qualities associated with what is styled Harmony: which is a subtly woven blend of sound ordered after fixed rules, many elements being combined at one and the same time. The popular favourites, I apprehend, please by the sequence rather than by the combination of sounds. Only a few highly trained experts can appreciate the masters of intricate Harmony.
Moreover, their appreciation in this case is only appreciation of the musician's conformity to technical rules of art; though they themselves, even in dealing with simpler compositions, do not hesitate to borrow their phrases from any quarter, so long as they find words fit to express the
[Page 48]
emotions excited by Music. It is indeed true that, like the blind man who, endeavouring to give his idea of the colour of scarlet, said that it seemed to him like the blare of a trumpet, just so men's language, whether they be cultured or uncultured, is always hard put to it to find expedients by which to describe alike the softer or severer kinds of Music. What is this but a confession that, even in harmonies, success implies not only conformity to and delicate and skilful variations of the technical laws of art, but also the power of giving faithful and felicitous expression to the deepest secrets of the human spirit? this is indeed the final crown of the most perfect harmony, yet it is also often attained, even where harmony is absent, by means of the 59 simple order and sequence of sounds. This is, I apprehend, the reason why vocal music has most in common with Poetry: the words being generally so blended with musical measure that it is hard to say, taking the whole total impression of pleasure, what part of it is due to Poetry, what to Music.
In short, it is the common verdict that Music of all arts approaches nearest to Poetry, and moreover approaches it on that side of its effect which is concerned in piercing into, and drawing out to the light, the secrets of the soul: and in this verdict some such function is assigned to Poetry itself as we have all along been feeling after.
Rhetoric and prose composition generally can be tested in the same way; but, though this topic lends itself preeminently to my argument, yet I shall deal with it very shortly, the materials for decision being open to every one. And what I am about to say is not my view alone, but that of almost the whole republic of letters. There are many clever prose-writers; many not wanting in eloquence; not a few with a sense of rhythm; but few indeed instinct and touched with Poetry. What orator has ever been more cadenced, more ornate than Cicero? who could stir the
[Page 49]
feelings more? who more happy and fertile in illustrations? Yet no one, I think, even if he had written in verse, could ever have called him a poet. But if Plato be named, all will exclaim that he is rightly called more poetical than Homer himself. And why? Because, I apprehend, Cicero is always the orator, he always has in mind the theatre, the benches, the audience; he plies, emphasizes, and pours out what may be of moving effect. Plato, on the other hand, seems absorbed in his own delightful themes; he writes to please himself, not to win over others; he generally hints at rather than speaks out 60 his deeper truths; rich as he is in most beautiful thoughts, he seems to leave even more unsaid. We wonder much that one who sat down to write with so full a mind yet so religiously observed the maxim, ‘Not a touch more to the picture’: 61 yet I think that it was his devotion to his theme which made him desire not only to commend it to worthy hearers, but also, by the words he uses, to conceal it from the profane:
Dealt to the wise delight they bring,
To vulgar ears unmeaning ring. 62
But you would like, perhaps, an example coming more nearly home to ourselves. Let us, then, compare two men—both of whom have been acknowledged as masters of eloquence, the one by our own fathers as a speaker in Parliament in the times of the French Revolution, the other by an earlier generation, as a preacher in the troublous days of our great King and Martyr. Both amid richest luxuriance of language yet maintained true dignity of sentiment: both, with all their vehemence, never allowed themselves to forget their main purpose, but were carried forward to it by the very force of feeling. Yet there is
[Page 50]
a marked difference between them, as may be seen by examples.
First, recall Burke's glowing picture of the Queen of France, when so shamefully dethroned: ‘It is now sixteen or seventeen years since I saw the Queen of France, then the dauphiness, at Versailles; and surely never lighted on this orb, which she hardly seemed to touch, a more delightful vision. I saw her just above the horizon, decorating and cheering the elevated sphere she just began to move in—glittering like the morning star, full of life and splendour and joy. Oh! what a revolution! and what a heart I must have to contemplate without emotion that elevation and that fall!’ 63
Should any one declare this ‘beyond all praise’, ‘truly 64 magnificent’, ‘splendid’, I readily assent and heartily endorse it: but ‘poetic’, I am not prepared to allow: it has a certain rhetorical ring and an air of being over-carefully framed to appeal to an audience.
Now let us hear how impressively and in fewest words the illustrious author of Holy Living and Holy Dying describes, in his turn, a great lady: ‘In all her religion, and in all her actions of relation towards God, she had a strange evenness and untroubled passage sliding toward her ocean of God and of infinity with a certain and silent motion.’ 65 Will any one deny this to be the outpouring of a full heart? Or who doubts for a moment, that one who thus discoursed before men would even when silent and alone hold like commune with himself?
Both illustrations alike are models of splendid style, but all the same, while Burke speaks as an accomplished orator, Taylor touches the heights of Poetry.
I have said enough about my general theory; and
[Page 51]
perhaps it has been too subtly, too finely drawn. I leave it now, for your special consideration; it ought to be confirmed or refuted—if you think it worth the trouble—not merely by the study of books, but by the usage of the arts and of common life.
If you feel that in my main contention I have had some glimpse of the truth, your kindly judgement will not despise my arguments simply because my illustrations may not seem to be those best adapted to prove each point.
[Page ]
66 LECTURE IV
Plato's views consistent with the theory now advanced. Two orders of Poets. The division illustrated, first, from everyday speech and proverbs: secondly, from the resemblance which Poetry bears to frenzy; thirdly, from a similar division between readers of poetry: fourthly, from the decay of the love of Poetry in old age. The beginnings of Poetry as indicated by probable conjecture and written records, such as the Bible and early histories.
There is a saying of Plato's, quoted too with high approval by Cicero, that ‘All liberal and humane studies are linked together by a certain bond of union.’ 67 And it is indeed to be regretted that these distinguished men did not, at some time, themselves undertake to track out and define the nature of this unity and agreement, which they, of all men, most keenly recognized. But though content to feel with delicate sensibility, without precisely defining it, they nevertheless may be quoted as sanctioning my attempt to trace a poetic element in so many differing and widely separated pursuits.
It is true that Plato's dictum more strictly applies to 68 mathematics and physics; yet Cicero not unreasonably transferred it to the liberal arts with which we are dealing. For, in the first place, Plato himself held that, by a strange and undefinable kinship and a mutual bond of sympathy, the visible universe and the human mind corresponded one with another. Indeed, perhaps, this is the very reason why Plato, like Pythagoras, held in so high honour the significance of numbers, to which they recur so often: for it is by numbers that physicists can measure and control the movements of the elements, and that musicians sway
[Page 53]
the emotions of the human mind. That, however, is their concern: my own point here is that, whatever either may have thus laid down as to physical science, there is good reason to suppose would, in his view, apply also to human life and character.
In the next place, if we examine a little more closely the celebrated passage in Plato in which he banishes poets from his ideal state, we shall assuredly find that the ‘imitation’ which this distinguished authority lays stress upon as the very essence of Poetry is not confined by him to song and verse alone, but extended generally to all arts which are employed in the education of youth. When Plato, treating of these in order, embraces them all under the general term Music , he would seem, unless I mistake, to suggest exactly that truth which after long and careful search has seemed to ourselves to be most probable: that each several one of the so-called liberal arts contains a certain poetic quality of its own, and that this lies in its power to heal and relieve the human mind when agitated by care, passion, or ambition: further, that the art naturally most fitted for this office, and therefore claiming it as her prerogative, is specially and peculiarly called Poetry: finally, that it is so fitted for this purpose, because it makes use of rhythmical language.
We have thus sketched in, however slight the outlines may be, our definition of the Poet's Art; we may now examine it somewhat more closely, and, keeping our test-rule in hand, divide poets according to classes and orders. And here there is a distinction, arising indeed from 69 the very nature of the subject, which should, I think, before all things be kept constantly in mind. All poets whatsoever belong to one of two classes; on the one hand, we have those who, spontaneously moved by impulse, resort to composition for relief and solace of a burdened or over-wrought mind; on the other, those who, for one
[Page 54]
reason or another, imitate the ideas, the expression, and the measures of the former. The first, therefore, let us denominate Primary Poets, Poets born in the Muses' home, poets in their own right; let us esteem all others as entitled to the name from a meed of semblance of the divine gift, not from the actual possession of it.
Now in drawing this line between two classes of poets we most certainly advance nothing new or out of the way, for it has long been commonly proverbial that a poet is born, not made:
The wise are they whom Nature has endued
With power to gather Learning's various stores:
The would-be wise with heat and vehemence
Urge ceaselessly their wordy crudities,
With gabbling, vain as if the crow should stretch
Her voice against Jove's bird of power divine. 70
We are all familiar with many such passages: which would be wholly unmeaning were any one able, adequately, to assume the part and office of a poet merely by imitation of others or by stringing together words in metre. What is easier than for a man not wholly without parts, if he will take moderate pains, to become a most pleasing imitator? Or in what pursuit, even if inspiration be lacking, is the labour of the file more effective than in verse-writing? So that we may truly remark of it as Cicero did of Mathematics: ‘Hardly any one seems to have studied this science ardently without success.’ 71 To each class, then, we 72 must assign its fitting praise, but to the latter it will not be that essentially proper to poets, if indeed proverbs have any weight, and, as indicating the general opinion, they must always be held in highest authority. But, certainly, all this makes for our theory, which assigns to poetry a charm, such as, unless natural gift concurs, not
[Page 55]
merely cannot be fully taught, but cannot even be felt as necessary nor in the least understood.
It is not unlikely, indeed, that the common opinion that the genuinely inspired poet is touched with a feeling akin to madness, also points in this direction. Assuredly, to return to our first principles, minds either moved by passionate emotion or depressed by overpowering sorrow, ill suffer the want of some outlet by way of natural relief, and, so far as I can conjecture, it not unfrequently happens that these poetic frenzies, as they are called, act as a safetyvalve, preserving men from actual madness.
Consistently with this, the famous Democritus is said to have excluded ‘from Helicon all poets in their senses,’ 73 and Plato frequently proposes similar enactments. He says, for instance, ‘But he who without the madness of the Muses, approaches the gates of poesy under the persuasion that by means of art he can become an efficient poet, both himself fails in his purpose, and his poetry being that of a sane man is thrown into the shade by the poetry of such as are mad.’ 74 And has not the chief of our English poets himself classed together, as closely allied to one another, ‘the lunatic, the lover, and the poet’? 75 Yet none would maintain either faithful and consummately perfect imitation, or exquisite harmony of subject and expression, to be characteristic of madmen. Do we not infer that neither of these, simply and of itself, carries with it the whole power of Poetry, but that he alone who can skilfully 76 and forcefully use them as means to give healing and relief, is and is called a poet?
I know not indeed whether more learned scholars will endorse my opinion, but it certainly seems to me that even Aristotle, the great founder and admiring supporter of the imitation theory, recognizes, when giving advice to
[Page 56]
tragedians as to the best way of influencing the emotions, some such line of demarcation among poets as I do: ‘We share,’ he says, ‘the agitation of those who appear to be truly agitated—the anger of those who appear to be truly angry. Hence it is that Poetry demands, either great natural quickness of parts, or an enthusiasm allied to madness. By the first of these we mould ourselves with facility to the imitation of every form; by the other, transported out of ourselves we become what we imagine.’ 77 For what else do these phrases, ‘enthusiasm allied to madness,’ ‘transported out of ourselves,’ imply, but that images of distant objects have sunk deeply into the poet's mind and that he fixes his gaze upon, or reaches out towards them with an almost morbid longing, utterly oblivious of present realities. And that other phrase, ‘quickness of parts,’ how aptly it labels the herd of imitators, who apply their powers here and there with calculated skill, but with no real feeling, needs hardly to be pointed out.
Then what of the fact that the common verdict and judgement of mankind find much the same distinction even among those who devote themselves to reading poetry? Just as some listen to music con amore and with enthusiasm, while others seem to criticize by some fixed rules and merely follow the fashion: so there are those who fasten on beautiful poems of their own accord, prize them like a discovered treasure, and believe themselves to have lighted, at last, upon a unique mental solace, a heaven-sent relief for their trouble: while others, I fear the majority, while they find a certain pleasure in verse and rhyme, yet can easily dispense with poetry altogether. Now any one must see at once that this distinction between 78 readers corresponds to the difference I have maintained to be manifested clearly among writers
Here, too, I think, may be found the explanation of
[Page 57]
a fact which often troubles lovers of the Muse: for we have often, I am sure, heard people frankly regret that, little by little, as years pass by, their youthful love of Poetry cools and, at last, dies away. Now do not suspect that those who use this language never really delighted in Poetry, but merely, like so many others, followed the popular taste: and do not accuse Nature herself, as if, like a cruel step-mother, she were given to capricious withdrawal of pleasures once conceded; but rather consider how aptly this all accords with my theory. When the torments of passionate emotion are keenly felt, as they are, for the most part, in youth, a more potent remedy must be found and applied: but when a malady has worn itself out, no one is ever ashamed of discontinuing the medicine. So, when by the mere lapse of time the seething imagination has subsided, when men, having compassed their desires or abandoned their ambitions, have become immersed in practical affairs, then it is that study of the poets begins to pall, save where it remains as a charming recreation for some student who takes delight in serious and skilful imitation of others or in composing poems of his own. Therefore, instead of deploring that these charms at last lose their attraction, we should rather give them credit for continuance so long as really needed. When I reflect on this, my mind is wont to think of that sea-breeze which travellers tell us is wafted from the ocean at early morn in torrid climes; for in just the same way, a kindly Providence has decreed that the sweet breath of Poetry should soothe and temper the ‘torrid zone’ of youth.
But, to return to my point: when men advancing in years tell us that Poetry has lost its charm, what is this but implicitly to hold with me, that Poetry properly and truly 79 so called can only be comprehended with a mind full to overflowing, and, consequently, by men whose feelings are so strong that they cannot suppress them and yet shrink
[Page 58]
from wholly revealing them? Whereas when other associated elements of delight, numerous undoubtedly and widespread though they be, are styled Poetic, it is ‘in a secondary sense’, as the Greeks say, and with a borrowed name.
I trust, however, no one will construe what has been said as if, in my view, any poet, to be ranked as primary, must fulfil the essential conditions in every part of his work; for I am well aware that in a long composition, even by the most inspired poet, there are often inserted many parts not really essential to the action: especially as the keen impulse of genius, when it has once burst out into song, is partly fascinated by the sense of its own power, partly stimulated by various side-attractions such as hope of praise, sweetness of rhythmical sound, wealth and beauty of illustrations, by memory of great poets in the past, and by an affection which tries to rival them. But I do not apply my theory in such sort that it must necessarily be pressed right up to the hilt. When we feel, as we read him, that a poet has written for the most part from the impulse of his own passion, I accord him primary rank: he who, as a rule, writes otherwise, will be classed as secondary, howsoever superior in talent, weightier in theme, or more splendid in diction he may be.
To make all this the clearer, we must now, it seems, retrace our steps to the very infancy of the divine art, and briefly consider what we may learn both from its intrinsic meaning and from the traditions of antiquity as to its origin.
And first, as we have said all through, nothing is so intrinsically reasonable as the connexion between excited feeling and the relief of spoken words: and, supposing these words have but once by some chance, or I may say providence, shaped themselves into rhythm and cadence, if once the ailing mind feels itself soothed by them, like a child with a new game, little wonder if, as often as
[Page 59]
like trouble occurs, the like charm is invoked, until by the repetition or variation of the cadences, something like a poem is developed. Forthwith the fevered anxieties 80 and ponderings which were spreading hither and thither like a flood, are now controlled and confined to a single channel: thither are directed or naturally flow all that crowds into the mind from all sides: and as Imagination strives to draw them together, while consciously or unconsciously she gives them outline and ornament, men gradually become their own physicians and do not resent the change that comes over them. In some such manner as this, gentlemen, I should suppose Poetry first developed: unless, indeed (as many think), we are to assign it to the express revelation of Deity. But, for the purpose of our inquiry as to its power and virtue, the question whether the remedy itself was directly revealed by Heaven, or grew up as the fruit of a long experience, is of small importance.
But it may be urged: ‘These after all are mere speculations, with which any one who likes may, no doubt, amuse himself ingeniously: yet, not of any great value so far as the truth is concerned.’ Nay, it certainly is of some value, if we can offer even a plausible suggestion as to the way in which so mighty a growth could possibly derive from such humble beginnings. But seeing that the subject is admittedly most obscure, almost the problem of a different world from our own, what if I should attempt also to adduce something which may serve as proof? I am indeed conscious that on this ground I must tread with greater modesty and reverence, like one who is ‘bearing the vessels of the Lord’; yet I cannot refrain from uttering my mind. Scholars believe Lamech's address to his wives to be the most ancient of all songs that remain to us; 81 and though we are ignorant of its occasion, yet the very words plainly
[Page 60]
declare that it was when filled with disquiet and remorse through consciousness of crime, that he confessed his iniquity in verse—if the parallelism of words common among the Hebrews be rightly called verse. In that case, it would appear that the first man known to us who had recourse to poetry, was moved by mental agony and quest 82 of relief and solace. And he was, as we believe, that same Lamech whose younger son was ‘the first of such as handle the harp’; 83 and this fact makes it all the more credible that his father was the originator of Poetry.
Some there will be, however, who fancy they detect traces of Poetry far earlier, and that there is a poetic ring in the sentence pronounced by the Divine Judge upon our first parents, after the Fall. I advance this with all submission to that eminent writer who was the first to guide us to and show us the sources of Hebrew Poetry; indeed I feel it almost a religious offence not to follow him wholeheartedly and without any reserve on a question of this kind. Yet let us hear the divine words:
Thou art cursed above all cattle,
And above every beast of the field;
Upon thy belly shalt thou go,
And dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life:
And I will put enmity between thee and the woman,
And between thy seed and her seed;
It shall bruise thy head,
And thou shalt bruise his heel.
Then addressing the woman:
I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception:
In sorrow thou shalt bring forth children;
And thy desire shall be to thy husband,
And he shall rule over thee.
Lastly, to the man:
Cursed is the ground for thy sake:
In sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life:
[Page 61]
Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee:
And thou shalt eat the herb of the field:
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread,
Till thou return unto the ground: for out of it wast thou taken;
For dust thou art
And unto dust shalt thou return. 84
Assuredly, unless I mistake, there is the note of Poetry here: but I leave the decision to the judgement of critical ears, neither being willing to press conjecture unduly in 85 so sacred a theme, nor yet to forbear to quote this well-known passage, which seems to me at least to illustrate above all others the goodness of God. What benignity is here shown! how profound, how lofty beyond mortal hope: for the very sentence of condemnation not only serves to encourage hope of future redemption, but even hints at the way by which the sorrows in store for men might be assuaged.
However, let the suggestion pass for what it may be worth. Resuming the argument, who does not recognize that Noah's personal plaint, 86 when cursing his son (and this, after Lamech's, is the earliest instance of primitive poetry), is the outcome of a heart deeply moved. For the indignant patriarch, I apprehend, though prophetically declaring the divine decrees, did not, therefore, speak without reference to his own feelings. It has indeed always been God's method not to override the free-will of men, even of His prophets when most strongly moved by the fervour of inspiration. Each retains his own style of speech, his individual passions, his natural character. And, therefore, the great prophet just mentioned spoke as moved with righteous indignation; and Isaac as led by blind affection; Jacob and Moses by unwearying and keenest zeal, the first for his race, the second for his
[Page 62]
country; and many others as they were inspired: while all declaring the decrees of one and the same Deity, yet each spoke in a manner true to himself and his circumstances. 87 It was assuredly the policy of Divine wisdom, not forcibly to drive forth Nature, but gently to win its way into the very heart of human nature. But I leave these thoughts for more sacred occasions, lest perchance I may seem over-rashly to tread on holy ground. My only thought was that it would make for my contention could I show that this primitive poetry, which is of all poetry freest from artifice and affectation, was adopted as a solace for human ills, 88 and therefore that the Framer of the human mind Himself, when He decreed the employ of prophecy and psalm, chose designedly those men as His prophets whose minds glowed within them spontaneously, and who chiefly needed that aid and remedy. But do not they themselves bear witness to this?
I said, I will take heed to my ways,
That I sin not with my tongue;
I will keep my mouth with a bridle,
While the wicked is before me:
I was dumb with silence,
I held my peace, even from good;
And my sorrow was stirred.
My heart was hot within me,
While I was musing the fire burned:
Then spake I with my tongue. 89
And so Jeremiah:
Then I said, I will not make mention of him,
Nor speak any more in his name.
But his word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones,
And I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay. 90
[Page 63]
Thus much as to the earliest sacred Hebrew Poetry: which, since it is, unquestionably, by far the most ancient, may conceivably have served, too, as foundation and model for that of other nations. At all events, such remains of song among savage races as survive to us accord well enough with this view; as, for instance, the lays so common among Northern peoples, who were wont thus to allay, from time to time, their unsatiated thirst for martial glory. Among these, the most noted is the well-known elegy—or shall I say, song of triumph?—of King Ragner, overthrown and distressed, yet unsubdued in spirit:
With swords have we striven;
Fifty times and more have I answered call,
When pitched battle was waged.
Least of all men did I think
What fate might befall me. 91
In youth learnt I to dye my good sword in blood.
Never will the Gods summon
A king more renowned in war.
Death needs no lament.
With swords have we striven.
My spirit craves to end song and life,
The virgins, the fates, beckon me,
Whom from Odin's palace
The king of Deities sends to meet me.
Joyfully shall I quaff honeyed draughts,
Throned on high with the Immortals.
Now the hour of life slips from me,
With a smile on my lips will I die. 92
We note here, not so much the vivid genius of the poet, as the very truth and reality of a high-spirited soul bodied forth and depicted in language. Just the same is true of the poet who first burst forth in those passionate strains so well known in North America:
   Undaunted is my heart,
I shun not the funeral pyre.
[Page 64]
   The man whom such things terrify
Is but a woman, a coward.
   For the brave—to live or to die—
What matters it? O may the foe fall
   Pierced by the Furies, stricken with terrors.
O may a happier day
   Yield them half-dead to devour,
And to fill my cup with blood! 93
On the other hand, the Polynesian,
Where the soft ocean breezes breathe around
The islands of the blest, 94
sings in the softest strain: as witness that fragment of a dirge chanted at a chieftain's funeral:
A gentle rain falls on the isles of the sea
   When the land mourneth her prince,
Shall we call it rain, or the tears of a God
   Who ruleth the fortunes of man? 95
96 Listening to these lines, one truly feels that the genius loci has lent to the singers something of his own lavish gentleness.
Sweeter too than honey are the lines attributed to a certain Lapp lover: all the more striking as met with 'mid snows and ice, on the furthest edge of the world:
With brightest beams let the sun shine
On Orra moor.
Could I be sure
That from the top o' the lofty Pine
I Orra moor might see,
I to his highest bough would climb
And with industrious Labour try
Thence to descry
My Mistress, if that there she be.
Could I but know amidst what Flowers
Or in what shade she stays,
The gaudy Bowers
With all their verdant Pride,
[Page 65]
Their Blossoms and their Sprays,
Which make my Mistress disappear
And her in envious Darkness hide,
I from the Roots and Beds of earth would tear. 97
Compare the lines of a poet who still survives to us:
I saw the moon 98 rise clear
   O'er hills and vales of snow,
Nor told my fleet reindeer
   The track I wished to go.
But quick he bounded forth:
   For well my reindeer knew
I've but one path on earth—
   The path which leads to you. 99
I have selected these few from many possible examples: all of them, however much they differ from each other, having one and the same motive; for, whether gentle or martial, they equally flow from a full heart. In fact, to put it shortly, all the songs of all primitive peoples spring 100 from one of two sources; either men sing like that warrior in prison, being themselves deeply moved, or they supply, as occasion demands, form and expression for the emotions of others: such was the function of the Welsh Bards.
For that third class of measured verse which may fitly be styled the Gnomic, seems hardly poetical at all: very many of the so-called Triads of the Welsh Bards are of this kind, except when some of them have added words of their own, expressive of sorrow or admiration, to the maxims of the sages which they took in hand to turn into verse. And this indeed not seldom happened.
To sum up, my conclusion stands good that in whatever nation you find a native poetry, its origin has always been the desire to relieve thoughts that could not be controlled; whether the poems were secular or sacred; whether it
[Page 66]
was grief or joy, love or ambition by which men were stirred.
The faculty of verse once acquired, there were two classes of men who above all others would be prepared to welcome and delight in it: those who themselves suffer from similar agitation, and those whose minds are listless and idle through abundance of leisure. To each comes the Poet as a godsend: giving an outlet to the restive, gradually rousing the lethargic. Then, made much of abroad and at home, what he at first essayed, moved by blind impulse, for his own relief, he next, as occasion arose, learnt to repeat, to modify, and to embellish. Perhaps friends wished to hear them: perhaps his superiors called upon him to sing: or perhaps simply led on by the sweetness of measure, or again (and this was as effective as anything), by the keen zest of his own mind growing conscious of its 101 powers. Soon there sprang up a crowd of imitators; any one who was more talented than his neighbours, any one who had a keener ear, or a style fit for great themes, tried his hand at poetry. It, assuredly, not a little contributed to this, that Poetry was held in honour, and proved very lucrative to some. Thus, little by little, an infinite host of versifiers thronged around those first pioneers:
Which who would learn, as soon may tell the sands,
Driv'n by the western wind on Libyan lands,
Or number, when the blust'ring Eurus roars,
The billows beating on Ionian shores. 102
And yet, just as they say of Music, that each harmony has its peculiar motif and primal chord, which once rightly seized, the whole structure becomes clear: just so does Poetry ever hark back to its prime and peculiar function of healing and relief. If this once wholly disappears, though you may write the most polished verses, you will
[Page 67]
prove nothing more than a consummate imitator of poets, not the true primary poet himself.
Some perhaps would have me indicate the marks and notes of this primary Poetry which I have praised so often. To such I would give this note of warning: they ought not, in dealing with so delicate a subject, to expect an exact definition of every detail.
As in other things, so here, the maxim holds: ‘I cannot point to an instance; I can only feel after the truth.’ 103 The problem is the same as in our judgement of men's character. Not by any formula, but by instinct, do we discern simple unadorned truthfulness, whether in life or in poetry; it is shown by a true light of its own: there is no possibility of doubt, no need of explanation. For who can flatter himself that he has exhaustively explored, or if he has explored, can express in writing the many varied and delicate strands, so complex and intimately inter-twined, which go to make even the least of poets? It 104 will be enough, and more than enough, for us, if only a few outlines, although of the crudest, be so sketched, that it is clear that we have not wholly mistaken the essence of true poetry.
But of this we shall speak, by itself, on a future occasion. For so high a theme should not, through undue haste, be inadequately set forth, nor must I run the risk of tiring and wearying those who have already listened so long.
[Page ]
105 LECTURE V
Some leading marks of Primary Poetry. Primary poets are consistent; do not strain after novelty: write reservedly on what lies near their hearts. The importance of reserve in Religion: and thence the main methods by which it affects poetry: it suggests rather than describes: it avoids exaggeration: it delights in Irony.
You have now seen, gentlemen, that all Poetry may be divided in two classes: and I have described, so far as can be inferred conjecturally, how one of these, which is Primary and takes precedence of the other both in importance and in time, originally arose. Our next task is to point out certain indications whereby the common instinct of men distinguishes imitators from genuine poets. And, in drawing this line, we shall, I think, be not a little assisted by sound judgement as to human life and character. For a simple and sincere mind declares itself by almost exactly the same manifestations, whether in poetry or in the common talk of daily life: so that he who is keen-eyed to distinguish truth from appearance in ordinary converse and society, will, you may be sure, have gained a great help thereby for assigning poets to their true class, if that should be his task.
106 Well, then, there are three leading qualities whereby that truth of ordinary daily discourse which we are looking for is wont to be indicated: one of them being consistency; the second, a certain indifference to the effect produced; and the third, modesty. I repeat—truth of character as evinced in ordinary daily discourse : for I am not now dealing with the truth which is demanded in the graver concerns of life, and which aims at counteracting a low materialism. But my meaning is this: when the general
[Page 69]
run of men, talking of common ordinary affairs, declare their likes and dislikes, emphatically and reiteratedly, we may judge of their sincerity by observing whether their expressions are consistent with their other sayings and doings, whether they appear ambitious of saying something novel and striking, and whether they dwell too ostentatiously on some one subject.
As to the importance of the first requirement, ‘to thine own self be true,’ few words will suffice. For it is almost a fixed law of social life that men cannot lightly veer round in their opinions, even in trivial matters, without being suspected of insincerity in their former preferences and of having used mere empty words. People say, ‘He will agree with none who cannot even agree with himself.’ This is, perhaps, somewhat too severe, for a man may quickly change his view without any wish to deceive others. But, after all, the broad principle stands: truth is characterized by consistency, while fraud, deceit, and vainglory are shifting and shifty.
I am inclined to believe, too, that their language falls even more short of truthfulness, who are ever striving after something strikingly novel, and think their labour lost unless they startle their hearers with sensation and paradox.
Lastly, Nature herself instructs us to distrust the man who speaks unseasonably and inappropriately of his own inner feelings, without discretion or discrimination as to subject, time, or audience.
Applying, then, this threefold test of what is true and what is artificial to Poetry, let us now, with your permission, 107 consider how it assists us in determining the rank of poets, and, if I may use the phrase, ‘issuing our class-list’.
In the first place, let us lay it down that a writer has written sincerely, when he is either consistent throughout, or at least, if at any time he oversteps the limit, he is seen
[Page 70]
to be consistently inconsistent. But if a poet lightly takes up and lightly abandons his themes and tastes, changing according to time and season, it is certainly to be feared he will rather prove artificial than genuinely inspired.
To take examples from our own literature: if ever there was a poet throughout all his poems consistent with himself, it was Spenser. In whatever region his scene is placed, whether his form be lyric or epic, whether love-song or elegy, his eyes are always fixed, with strange affection and devotion, on the ideal features of true nobleness. The only exceptions appear in his elaborate imitations of antique models, and these are very few. But his contemporary, the prince of dramatists, can he on any standard be held consistent and unvarying? he who so completely held ‘nothing relating to man foreign to himself’ that, like Aristippus, ‘every complexion of life, condition, fortune’ seemed almost equally ‘to become him’. 108 And some there are who will have it that he never had a serious end in view, but exulting in his great powers was playfully ‘beating the air’. Were this indeed true, I must admit my test grievously lacking in critical penetration: for what sort of test would it be which denied primary rank to Shakespeare? But recall your impressions on reading through his plays for the first time: while your sympathies were, throughout the development of the whole play, enlisted on the side of such characters as were pure and good, did you not, especially at the final scene, feel yourself inwardly stimulated to nobility of mind? and not that nobility merely which 109 by a certain attractive and enthusiastic quality excites youthful minds, but the more austere qualities of purity, integrity, strenuousness, goodness? And as for his looser and broader scenes, we easily perceive that they were, in great part, due to the taste of the time, not to his own
[Page 71]
inclination, and sometimes presented by way of warning, as drunken helots were shown to the youth of Sparta. Thus we are assured that he was heartily on the side of virtue: and the more so since most dramatists of the time rather leaned the other way. We may quote him, therefore, as a splendid example of that consistent inconsistency which we said sometimes characterizes Primary Poets.
Of a totally different order are those who apparently with equal ability and resource, adopt, reject, pass over, or resume anything and everything—even flat contradictories: such as we have (may I be forgiven for saying so!) in our own Dryden. He is unsurpassed in power and copiousness of expression: no poet offers a richer harvest of thought and substance, no one is more happily daring, no one more freely and joyously lets himself go in the consciousness of his strength. One quality alone there is wholly unworthy of a great poet: so wanting in self-consistency is he that we feel he never heartily and sincerely praised any human being, or felt any real enthusiasm for any subject he took up.
But perhaps I dwell on this unduly: next, then, let us consider our second Primary characteristic. Unless I am wholly mistaken, a poet will seem to come far nearer to the Primary rank in proportion as he is indifferent to mere novelty and untainted by ambition such as this:
Give me a theme that's great and new
   Untouched by any other Muse. 110
And why? it is the listless, not the ardent spirits, who seek far-fetched attractions and scorn what is familiar; wherefore the genuine poet will be greatest in teaching those themes and experiences which are common to all poets— 111 nay, to all men, such as the beauty of the heavens, the changes of the year, the frailty of our mortal life.
But these common experiences will nevertheless be
[Page 72]
presented by each in a way peculiar to himself. This will be so, quite naturally, if a man simply and faithfully strives to utter the feelings that are in him. Men's minds are as various as their features and manner, as though nature had intended, that in spite of the striking resemblance between all mankind, it should yet be easy to distinguish man from man. And thus it is that the great poets again and again return, without apprehension of wearying, to the old familiar themes.
Nor do they hesitate even to reproduce the very same expressions, whether their own or another's, which have once pleased them. Thus (only to mention well-known instances), Homer often plagiarizes from himself, Virgil appropriates Homer's very phrases, our own Spenser borrows from Virgil or the famed poets of Italy. No doubt this is partly due to an indisposition to take trouble (though, to me at least, most such instances seem due to genuine love of their great forerunners and to reverence for them), yet it is quite plain that many were careless, even to indifference, as to the credit of invention. On the other hand, those who nervously strain after something wholly new and unheard of, even at their best, certainly evince their ambition but not the simplicity of truth.
There is one poem, widely known in our own tongue, which is crammed with such blemishes, though certainly weighty, learned, and brilliant—I mean Young's Night Thoughts. An immense number of passages could be cited, beginning well enough, but tailing off into wordy banalities, changes being rung on the phrases, in the hope of striking out some novelty, till the reader is wearied out.
Consequently, should the question arise, as often happens, 112 whether some particular poet should be ranked as Primary or not, let us apply also the test which is based on his pride in or indifference to a reputation for originality, as well as the previous test of consistency.
[Page 73]
To these two we may add, if you will, a third, which is, by itself alone, an admirable touchstone of genuine and keenly felt emotion, as well as of transparently sincere poetry. Let us test whether a writer overshoots the mark, whether his imagination runs riot without any reserve, whether he unworthily intermingles sacred with secular themes. Common everyday experience will be sufficient to show us the kind of expression we expect in a man genuinely moved by some deep emotion. Once a strong feeling has touched him to the quick, all that he utters will suggest the current of his troubled passion: and yet not quite plainly and openly. He cannot bring himself to confess all to all men, but like a harp lightly touched, he needs but very few notes to convey his real meaning to sympathetic hearts.
Her faltering tongue forbids to speak the rest. 113
That is the kind of expression one looks for in those enthralled by love, and it also well becomes poets enthralled by some beauteous vision. It would be enough just to mention it here; for it is indicated by the very principle and quality of Poetry as we have defined it from the outset, and will in the sequel be illustrated by numerous examples. Yet, as I may call it the very pivot on which our whole theory turns, I have decided to quote a few instances, as plainly showing in a cognate subject the great influence of this human instinct of reserve.
Reverence for the eternal power, if it is genuine and springs from inmost feeling, not only shuns too great publicity for itself, but also, should any one, forgetting a true reticence, chatter lightly of sacred things, seeks in some way or other to withdraw from him and keep him at a distance. Though our subject is far more serious than 114 his was, there occur to my mind the lines of Horace:
[Page 74]
   Who drags Eleusis' rite to day,
That man shall never share my home,
   Or join my voyage. 115
Certainly the early Fathers of the Church who were specially fitted to be defenders of pure religion insisted that every care must be taken lest opponents and mockers should attain knowledge of sacramental mysteries and the keywords of the faith. How common are the phrases, ‘Those who have been initiated know,’ ‘Those who partake the mysteries know,’ ‘Holy things for holy persons.’ If any one conveyed these mysteries to any not yet initiated, he was held to be a traitor, not a teacher. Such inculcations are here more noteworthy since, at all events in early times, those who uttered them incurred no slight peril. For Christians were tauntingly reproached for such secrecy: ‘they meet at night: their rites are mysterious: they will not let every one join in them.’ But if these men, scorning vulgar report, which seemed to menace both their own security and the worship of God, none the less, at all events in some degree, deliberately withdrew into their own sanctuaries and refused to tolerate profane eyes; it is, I think, abundantly clear, how strongly simple and unspoilt spirits are influenced by reverential awe of powers unseen, and by a certain reserved modesty well becoming men whose sins have only just been purged.
There was no prohibition, as far as I know, scriptural or ecclesiastical, against open speech concerning these things. Nor was there need; Nature herself was a sufficient check. Did she not plainly indicate that many things connected with religious worship are wisely concealed from general view, I cannot conceive what should have led to the custom, long established among Christians over a large portion of the world, of reciting prayers in Latin.
[Page 75]
Had it been instituted through priestly deception; were it only (as no doubt to some extent it originally was) a foolish superstition of a barbarous people; is it believable it would 116 have obtained so long and so widely, unless in some way it was suitable to and according with man's natural disposition? Even among ourselves none but those initiated (by Confirmation) are admitted as partakers of the holiest mysteries,—a most sound provision, characteristic of religious and reverent men. But if we may descend from the rules for congregational worship to individuals, do we not find that men of loftiest piety are reserved and reverent as regards holy things; they bear themselves religiously in their religious worship, and only in the narrow circle of intimate friends ever speak of God's forgiveness or their hopes of heaven? They show forth their holiness by their life, not in their discourse, and they ever remember the golden precept: ‘Talk not of great deeds but live them:’ unless it sometimes happens that the cause of religion itself demands open confession before all men.
But, it is urged, ‘some persons in their simple piety constantly offend against the dictates of reverent modesty; in fact, by their unseasonable insistence on religion, truly become tiresome, not to say repellent.’
And I confess, indeed, this is so: either they are excited by some fanatic eccentricity, or they cherish the vain hope that in this way more souls may be brought to true belief. Still, I am assured that these very persons were oftentimes, when they first joined a sect of this kind, strangely troubled and distressed therein, until habit made the mind callous and overcame their primitive reluctance to speech, whether due to inexperience or to natural modesty; so that there is no real contradiction, and my principle still holds that true worshippers are, as a rule, recognized by their reverence and reserve.
Now it is with poets as with lovers and with those deeply
[Page 76]
exercised in the things of the spirit: poets, that is, who write from the heart, such as we have called Primary. 117 For they all agree in having some object, which they love and reverence beyond all others, which they cannot so much as speak of, except it be worthily and to worthy hearers. But a hearer worthy of such confidences will be only one among a thousand, for how few do not cool before enthusiasm? Who sufficiently keeps pace with and responds to the warm feelings of another?
And truly, when men's minds are keenly alive to all that affects that which they have most at heart, no wonder that those who would otherwise be eloquent in glowing words and phrases often withhold and restrain themselves from some fear of ridicule. For what is more liable to be ridiculed than deep emotion and mental struggle exhibited in the absence of any sympathy, when there is no response of affection? To sing to the deaf, to dance before the blind, however gracefully, is of little use. In youth, no doubt, we are carried along by a certain swing, which is not careless indeed of the opinion of others, but readily assumes that others will resemble ourselves. But ere long, even the reluctant are forced to subscribe to the maxim of Epicharmus: ‘Be wary, and slow to give your confidence: this is the backbone of the mind's strength.’ 118 They feel that they and their tragic sorrows are deemed high-flown; and, again and again, they come to yearn for nothing so much as that their treasures may be removed from profane gaze, lest their raptures be suddenly chilled by unkindly criticism.
In short, the law which governs all three especially applies to poets—that the more keenly a man pursues any desired object the less inclined he is, for the most part, to discourse of it to all and sundry.
But, to do full justice to the subject, let us briefly consider
[Page 77]
how far this principle has been maintained in every age, among the greatest poets, and in every kind of poetry. Now, in the first place they are wont reluctantly and rarely to depict and dwell minutely upon the real objects of their 119 enthusiasm: next, whensoever anything of the kind happens, they so depict and describe, that many things which stand out and greatly impress the average man are passed over: lastly, they take strange delight in a sort of Socratic irony and use it in many ways more than any other writers.
The chief effect of this modesty, as we may call it, of poets, will thus be seen to be that they hint at very many things rather than are at pains to describe and define them. For they are under no necessity to delineate in minute detail; neither to assist recollection of the thing itself (for that is treasured up in their own mind and soul); nor to rouse the feeling of hearers, who, when everything is methodically insisted upon, either lose interest or admire the skill of the narrator, not the story told. Judicious writers, therefore, lightly touch the special points to be impressed on the reader; and an author, like a host, shows his ability most surely if his readers are dismissed with an appetite whetted but not satisfied.
There is nothing more remarkable in this way than the manner of Virgil, at all events in passages where he extols his favourite delights—the country and country life. How happily, sometimes by a single word, he calls up for us a whole scene: as when he enjoins the herdsmen:
Aestibus in mediis umbrosam exquirere vallem,
Sicubi magna Iovis antiquo robore quercus
Ingentes tendat ramos: aut sicubi nigrum
Ilicibus crebris sacra nemus accubet umbra. 120
[Page 78]
How wonderfully he places the whole scene before us, as with a touch of a painter's brush, by that one word accubet
Horace sketches a delightful vision with all but the same word:
Valles et Usticae cubantis
   Levia personuere saxa. 121
The sloping hills and polished rocks,
With his melodious pipe resound. 122
123 Yet here there is lacking that exact appropriateness which charms us so in Virgil's lines. For while his whole passage suggests with extraordinary aptness the sweet peace of the country, the last delightful phrase crowns all, so exactly appropriate is it.
But not to wander from the point, enticed by the beauty of these quotations, compare these lines in which Virgil treats, as I said, of his own favourite delights, with such lines as his description of Fame, 124 or the picture of Mount Etna. 125 or of the night vision of the fury Alecto. 126 We shall infallibly find that these, which it is more than likely he introduced through poetic convention, not through any feeling of his own, are elaborated with a wealth of language and an ordered sequence of metaphor, whereas those springing form his own feeling are merely touched by the way, as it were, and incidentally.
I do not apprehend blame, as mingling things holy and sacred with things secular and common, if I venture here to adduce a grand example from inspired literature, and with it compare the same theme as treated by a Latin poet. In the Ninth Book of Lucan's Pharsalia there is a most erudite account of the African serpents, which, each fastening on a man severally, destroyed Cato's soldiers
[Page 79]
with their poisonous venom. A more apt opportunity for Lucan's genius, which always shows more facility than felicity, could not be imagined. Incidentally he describes a soldier dying form thirst:
Swift flames consume the marrow and the brain,
And the scorch'd entrails rage with burning pain;
Upon his heart the thirsty poisons prey,
And drain the sacred juice of life away.
No kindly floods of moisture bathe his tongue,
But cleaving to the parched roof it hung;
No trickling drops distil, no dewy sweat,
To ease his weary limbs, and cool the raging heat.
Nor could he weep: ev'n grief could not supply
Streams for the mournful office of his eye,
The never-failing source of tears was dry.
Frantick he flies, and with a careless hand
Hurls the neglected Eagle on the sand;
Nor hears, nor minds his pitying Chief's command,
For springs he seeks, he digs, he proves the ground,
For springs, in vain, explores the desert round,
For cooling draughts, which might their aid impart,
And quench the burning venom in his heart ...
Now ev'rywhere for drink, in vain, he pries:
Now to the Syrts and briny seas he flies:
The briny seas delight, but seem not to suffice.
Nor yet he knows what secret plague he nurs'd,
Nor found the poison, but believ'd it thirst.
Of thirst, and thirst alone, he still complains,
Raving for thirst, he tears his swelling veins,
From ev'ry vessel drains a crimson flood,
And quaffs in greedy draughts his vital
blood. 127
This shows no mean skill and power, but for the reality 128 and truth, turn to the Lamentations of the Jewish prophet:
‘Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is poured upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my people: because the children and the sucklings swoon in the streets of the city.
[Page 80]
‘They say to their mothers where is corn and wine? when they swooned as the wounded in the streets of the city, when their soul was poured out into their mothers' bosom.’ 129
Again, we have a still closer description in Jeremiah:
‘The cry of Jerusalem is gone up. And their nobles have sent their little ones to the waters: they came to the pits, and found no water; they returned with their vessels empty; they were ashamed and confounded, and covered their heads.’ 130
In that single verse alone, we are, I think, made to realize what it must be to die of hunger and thirst, far more clearly than by even the longest description by Lucan or Ovid. The simple reason being that while they were describing that of which they had only read, Jeremiah was telling of scenes which he saw with his own eyes, which were at the time wringing his heart and calling forth his sad intercession.
It no doubt does happen sometimes that even poets, writing under real inspiration, paint for us a picture complete in all its details. But it is instructive to note with what judgement and subtlety,—I had wellnigh said with what scrupulous delicacy,—they work. This, indeed, is the second note of primary quality which we before mentioned.
For just as when vague rumours are current, the common run of men repeat the most shocking details, without the smallest reserve: while those with any feeling discriminate and seek the most favourable constructions: so, having marked what details any poet singles out in his narrations or descriptions, we can make fair inference as to his mental tone and judgement.
131 In a well-known and graceful ode Horace sketches his boyhood:
   Fatigu'd with Sleep, and youthful Toil of Play
   When on a Mountain's Brow, reclin'd I lay,
   Near to my natal Soil, around my Head
The fabled woodland Doves a verdant Covering spread:
[Page 81]
   Matter, be sure, of Wonder most profound
   To all the gazing Habitants around,
   Who dwell on Acherontia's airy Glades,
Amid the Bantian Woods, or low Ferentum's Meads,
   By Snakes of Poison black, and Beasts of Prey,
   That thus, in dewy Sleep, unharm'd I lay
   Beneath the sacred Bays, and Myrtle pil'd,
Not without Guardian Gods, an animated Child. 132
And then Pindar, the subject being nearly the same:
Forth from her arms with short and grateful throe
   Came Iämus to light: her child
On th' Earth she left o'erwhelmed with woe:
   Him there two Serpent forms with eyes of azure mild,
Mysterious ministers of love divine,
   Fed with the baneless beverage of the bee:
When now from rocky Pytho's warning shrine
   In haste the King return'd, and earnestly
From all his question'd household 'gan require
Evadne's new-born son, ‘For Phoebus is his sire,
   Destin'd before all mortals to prevail
The peerless prophet of mankind;
   Whose race, whose name shall never fail.’
Thus represented he: they with one voice combined
All vow'd their ignorance: nor sight had seen,
   Nor infant sound had heard: for he five days
'Mong shrubs and pathless briars and rushes green
   Had lain, the dewy violet's mingled rays
Sprinkling with purple and gold his tender frame:
Whence fond Evadne's joy proclaim'd his deathless name. 133
With all reverence for the Latin Muse the palm must here, methinks, be given to the Theban: who turns our minds, 134 one hardly knows how, not to the boy's future fame but to his endangered safety. Two words convey my meaning and we will borrow them from Horace himself. Horace's Ode is of surpassing loveliness and beauty ( pulchrius ): but
[Page 82]
nothing can surpass the sweet charm ( dulcius ) of Pindar's verses. The difference, rightly viewed, depends wholly on selection due to the point of vision; Horace writes as a passing neighbour might have done, Pindar like the child's own mother. Sorrowing she seeks her child; when she has found him, she rejoices.
But to pass on. The last point which arises from the law of modest reticence, which, as I have said, Primary poets observe, consists in the frequent and innocent use of what has been called Irony. It would almost seem, indeed, as if some Primary poets purposely selected even as their poem's main subject something quite remote from their real taste and liking; yet of such a kind that by some sort of ingenious artifice, they might often fall back on the subjects which they really had at heart. Among the ancients we have, if I mistake not, an eminent example of this in Virgil's Aeneid. But I hope to develop this particular instance more fully and systematically in the sequel. Here and now. I should like to say what occurs to me of the English Virgil , for no lover of the Muse will, I think, find fault if I give that title to our own Spenser. I believe (not to mention other cases) that in his exquisitely graceful Epithalamion , he betrays to us what was really ever in his thought, even when writing his Faerie Queene. Being, as he was, the most loyal and devoted of lovers, he has in many passages cleverly worked in allusions to his own love amid the praises of his Queen, and thus, without alienating the sympathy of his readers, or betraying his secret passion, he could case his own love troubles through poetic expression.
If, however, in simple selection of subject, such scope is afforded for innocent mystification, it inevitably has even wider play in the colouring of the style and general manner 135 of expression. Not seldom does it happen that those suffering most keenly through real, perhaps irreparable,
[Page 83]
affliction, are the very men who most lightly trifle and play with words. What else could one do when
Love, anguish, wrath, and grief to madness wrought,
Despair, and secret shame, and conscious thought
Of inborn worth, his lab'ring soul opprest? 136
Dramatists, as they are wont, have transferred this habit from real life to the stage: indeed, some critics, failing to appreciate its natural truth, have blamed even Shakespeare for introducing insipid and discordant jesting into scenes of grief.
Nor does this affected merriment consort naturally with grief and deep emotion alone, but, sometimes even in weightiest affairs it affords a powerful weapon for stern reproof. God's own ministers, the Prophets, have not disdained to use it when most impressively urging His decrees and exhorting to repentance. For instance, in the Book of Kings the heroic prophet Micaiah scornfully echoes the lying refrain of his sycophant brethren, and affects to encourage, in words, Ahab's proposed campaign against Syria, while, in truth, earnestly dissuading from it.
‘And the King said unto him, Micaiah, shall we go against Ramoth Gilead to battle or shall we forbear? And he answered him, Go, and prosper; for the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the King.’ 137
Who can mistake the meaning of Jehovah's words as he bids his ungrateful people be off to their impure idolatries?
‘As for you, O house of Israel, thus saith the Lord God; Go ye, serve ye every one his idols, and hereafter also, if ye will not hearken unto me: but pollute ye my holy name no more with your gifts, and with your idols.’ 138
This is undoubted irony, in the truest sense of the word; 139 but sometimes there is only a play upon words and the
[Page 84]
similarity of sounds is used to express it, in a way that will scarcely bear translation. An example occurs in the fifth chapter of Isaiah; it is apparent in the Greek:
He looked for judgement ( κρίμα ),
But behold oppression ( δΕîμα );
For righteousness ( Εἰκός ),
But behold a cry ( νΕîκος ). 140
Under the same category fall those passages where names of persons and places are changed with a certain pointed application—a favourite device often met with in Hebrew scripture. 141
There is irony too, but of gentler quality and distributed broadly through a lengthened discourse, where writers spontaneously belittle their own special fancies and affect to ridicule them. To use an Aristotelian phrase rather forcible than elegant, ‘Those who begin a tickling match do not get tickled.’ 142 Such authors cleverly meet the shafts and tauntings of criticism half-way. Virgil is wonderfully happy in his use of this manner, especially in the book in which he discourses ‘of the heavenly gifts of honey borne in the air.’ 143 He describes for us the far-reaching city and polity of his bees: their kings, their nobles, palaces, and battlements: their sentries and guards: all is high, magnificent: everything is suited to please the citizens of Rome. Even his verse seems to march with a prouder, auguster tread. Never did a poet, I believe, play more happily with his own chosen delights.
I have thus, gentlemen, laid before you a few of the many indications of that modest reserve—I might even compare it to the modest blush of a country maiden—which is shown 144 by those who write from the heart. They use these hints as suggestions that they may neither conceal their secrets
[Page 85]
from worthy readers nor cast their pearls before the unworthy. In short, they more willingly understate than exaggerate, while the common run of poets pride themselves most of all in outdoing their rivals in the production of what is novel, passionate, and startling.
Such are, then, the leading marks of Primary Poets: it remains to classify those poets themselves, after some system in their proper ranks and orders.
[Page ]
LECTURE VI
145 The author's theory of the essence of poetry not too narrow, because it embraces the gentler emotions as well as vehement passion. Some Primary Poets calm and even-tempered: others vigorous and full of interest in practical life. Of these last, Homer, burning with enthusiasm for the heroic age, the most splendid type. The Iliad a completed whole and written by one man.
When I first approached my present method of treating Poetry I was much exercised by the reflection that Tragedy and Epic, by universal consent the most perfect forms of poetry, are, more than any others, redolent of art and elaboration, only maturing indeed after long lapse of time and through much painstaking thought. ‘How is this,’ some one may say, ‘what can men, who spend infinite pains on thinking out a poem, have to do with the surging unrest of a passionate spirit? Was there ever, anywhere, a man who, when stirred by some strong emotion, resolved to devote half a lifetime, in order to set forth more clearly and effectively a story, not merely unconnected with himself and his own time, but also such, it may be, as he himself was fully conscious could never have happened?’
Furthermore, poets, whose aim has been didactic rather 146 than narrative, and who, like Lucretius, describe in poetry the Nature of the Universe, or, like Virgil, the rules of husbandry, or, like many others, subjects concerned with morals, philosophy, and practical arts of all kinds—such will, I fear, seem to some critics quite irreconcilable with my principle. For in these we have, for the most part, subjects which are, some too remote, some too ordinary, for any one easily to believe they could so strike men's sympathies as to hurry and plunge them, by inevitable fate, into such poetic expression as the theory requires.
[Page 87]
Accordingly it is concluded that either our theory is proved baseless, or that Lucretius and others like him must be held to be no poets.
To such an objector I would thus reply: first, that it is a mistake to dissociate utterly all deep feeling from laborious finish and deliberation. For what is more common than for men who have been under some strong emotion to feel impelled to read over and over again what they may chance to have written at the moment: to linger over almost every word; to erase, to add, to recast the whole: and hardly to please themselves with any form?
Next, as to the subject of a Tragedy or Epic being, so they say, frequently foreign to the writer, surely we are not wholly without experience regarding the subtle associations of mind with mind; and of what little importance are subject, time, and place, where Nature once moves us to laugh with those who laugh, or weep with those who weep. Are theatre-goers slower to disapprove, to be charmed or moved to compassion because, forsooth, neither Caesar nor Oedipus, nor any one else on the stage, is really anything to them? Let it not therefore seem strange that actors and poets find nothing foreign to themselves which helps to relieve a spirit glowing with passion.
Lastly, to show that Lucretius and his followers ought not (though this is a view which seems to have commended 147 itself to Aristotle) to be relegated to the ranks of mere scientists, let us now, guided by Nature's own teaching, split up the array of Primary Poets into classes: our plan of distribution being such that no one can hereafter doubt that an Oedipus , or the Iliad itself, or some yet longer and more elaborate poetic effort, might well spring from the enthusiastic promptings of a mind deeply stirred.
We have, in general terms, laid it down that Primary Poets, those whom I may call the native inhabitants of Poetry's realm, have the special characteristic of writing from a full
[Page 88]
heart, of being skilled to relieve the outbursts of emotion by aid of song. Grant me this as my starting-point, and it will follow that there will be as many and as many kinds of poems as there are emotions of the human mind.
Now (I will here borrow Quintilian's words) ‘Emotion is of two orders; the Greeks call the one ράθος , which we may fittingly render, feeling; the other ἦθος , a word which, at least, so it seems to me, has no precise Latin equivalent: mores we call it, or character; and thence that part of philosophy which deals with character is styled ἠθικὴ or Moral. More circumspect critics are governed in their definition rather by use and intention than strict etymology. Thus, the former they have called passionate feelings, the latter mild and gentle: by the one men are vehemently excited, by the other they are calmed: the one overpowers us, the other persuades.’ 148
Why, then, should we not with like discrimination recognize Poetry as twofold? There will, assuredly, be one kind the special solace of spirits strongly moved, and another more adapted to those of milder and calmer disposition. The former will refresh and encourage the man who is anxious, longing, grief-stricken, or joyous, by its very whirl and rush of passion; the latter will give expression to a cast of mind which is apprehensive, eager, melancholy, 149 alert. Either kind will give full rein to men's imagination, ever eager to turn, should fortune favour, in any direction in which each may freely indulge his characteristic temper.
To illustrate what I mean, from the Bible; Balaam, when, inspired for a moment by pious enthusiasm, he envies the death of the righteous, exhibits one principle of conduct; quite another is seen in the great and good man, whoever he was, that wrote the Book of Job. Yet both speak to one end; but while Job has bequeathed us the poetic expression of an ἦθος or saintly character, the outcome of a lifetime,
[Page 89]
Balaam merely shows a passing impulse of feeling. And any one can easily distinguish for himself, in a similar way, other poets exhibiting other passions. Some there are whom, just now and again, their wrath at wickedness has driven to poetic expression: as the Psalmist in the vigorous rendering of Buchanan:
Quid gloriaris, impie
Tyranne, pravis artibus?
Tua lingua semper fraudibus
Intenta comminsciitur
Nefas, nitente cotibus
Acutior novacula.
Te prava rectis plus iuvant,
Plus falsa veris recreant;
Dolisque pestilentibus
Libenter aurem commodas.
Ergo Deus te conteret,
Hominumque contubernio
Eliminabit, ac domum
Evertet omnem funditus. 150
In others, such as Juvenal and Archilochus, we see rage and righteous indignation giving the colouring of their whole work. Style can hardly show greater contrast than between Sappho and Tibullus: he recalls the love affairs of a lifetime: she seeks remedy for present passion.
But I need not pursue this further; none can fail to see, I think, how widely this distinguishing principle applies, and how greatly it assists us in adjusting the claims and assigning the provinces of poetic rivals.
[Page 90]
151 But as an eager spirit generally burns itself out quickly, poems which arise through intense feeling and are thrown off in a single jet, as it were, will probably be shorter than the other kind and of simpler form: but the productions of a steady, even-balanced mind, may well be long drawn out, evidence much elaboration, and, as was said of Demosthenes, smell of midnight oil.
We see, therefore, that there is nothing irrational in the contention that even an Epic may serve the purpose of the most fervid poet and soothe deep-rooted and vital yearning.
Now, strong passion visits us but rarely: we ordinarily follow the natural bent of our temperament and character; no wonder, then, that far the greater number of poetic productions strike the gentler note. Indeed, except some lyrics and elegies, and a few satires, I hardly recall one famous poem which is a pure and simple outcome of passion. All other poems reflect the character of a lifetime, and tastes which have become familiar to the mind by long association. Yet none the less, they must be acknowledged to spring from the inmost heart: you might indeed say that really and truly they are framed after and accord with the man's secret nature even more faithfully. Other remedies are at hand to allay or distract sudden access of anger or grief. Swift emotion both dies away spontaneously, and, moreover, is wont to arouse and stimulate genuine and stable strength of spirit. But what remedy is to be found for troubles which have clearly grown up with the character, silent and unnoticed, interpenetrating a man's whole life? Certainly, it will be a most effective solace if a man can, in some sort, enshrine in verse something of the form and feature of that which is closest to his heart.
Indeed, on the same principle on which we have before declared that verse has more power to soothe than prose, 152 we may, I think, plainly perceive why it is, that in composing
[Page 91]
a poem too, it is better to have some story or settled plan before us, than to utter the changing impulse of the moment. The very fact of orderly and methodized progress may not a little conduce to settlement of mind: since, out of the boundless abundance of thought and language simultaneously placed before the mind, we can carefully select those thoughts most fitted for our undertaking and that language which is best adapted to the subject and the rhythm, and also most useful for our purpose.
And here I must express the surprise I often feel at the want of insight of those—they are principally young men—in whose view works showing skill and plan seem frigid and jejune and less worthy of a poet. They think they have indeed written something great if by lucky chance they have stitched in, here and there, some striking and clever patches; caring nothing whether they are appropriate or inappropriate, since they deny that a poet's fine frenzy is subject to law or control. I should like, once for all, to warn them that it is just the jejune poet who, hopeless of better, sticks tenaciously to what first comes into his mind; that he has a frigid spirit who, troubling little as to the subject, is readily pleased with his own productions, but that it is the great and earnest soul which tries every possible means, which selects only the best, which spares neither labour nor learning if only he may thus produce an adequate and beautiful representation of that in which his heart delights.
But to resume; none need now, I am convinced, be apprehensive, lest, by what I may call our edict, we have fixed our bounds too strictly, and seem to have forcibly pressed into close confines the noble family of poets. For you have seen that wellnigh everything which may suddenly excite or long engross men's minds, is embraced and included by our principle. And so I proceed to their divisions and orders. 153 It were endless to dwell on particulars; suffice it to make trial in a few leading instances.
[Page 92]
First of all, those poets whose work bears witness to the permanent tenor of a lifetime and a certain stable character ( ἦθος ) admit of convenient division into two ranks. For just as connoisseurs classify artists, adjudging one a painter of tranquil scenes and another a master of compositions busy with action and life; so it is with poets: one will be charmed with the ‘cool, sequestered vale of life’, while another will sing
Of battles, and the breath
Of stormy war, and violent death.
Each will create for himself his own special form of poetry: the one, fond of action, keen to watch the character and affairs of men, creates epic or the drama or any other form which represents action; while the other, who loves restful things, the country, or quiet pursuits, will surely be drawn to write Georgics or Eclogues.
But if, by what men call chance, he should happen to adopt, of his own accord or through the suggestion of others, a subject little suited to him; should one whose real joy is in the country sing of battles, for instance, or the ‘sad stories of the death of kings’, assuredly, to such as can read between the lines, his poem will afford no uninteresting study. Again and again Nature will reappear triumphant, and though taken up with things far removed, will wistfully gaze back on the well-known charms which have delighted her from her birth. A noble work may thus result, though not quite of such character as the writer proposed at the outset.
The subject, then, of his poem a writer should fix upon with whatever care and insight he can command: but it will not greatly matter, I think, whether the form is dramatic or narrative, whether you give it to the world with the help of actors or of a rhapsodist; for surely no one would suggest that Homer would have failed in Tragedy or Shakespeare in an Epic. These matters are mere framework,
[Page 93]
not essentials, their choice depending less on the 154 writer's own taste than on that of his age.
I propose next to make proof of my theory by applying it to the case of the greatest of all poets. We have reached the point at which we must deal with Homer's Iliad : we must trace by what special impulse, by what unrest he was led to draw together, as by a magician's wand, all the undiscovered resources of poetry:
                                         And in the race
He equalled all the promise of his form
In those his rounds, and so with noblest prize
Of conquest left the ground. 155
It most unfortunately happens, indeed, that details of his life have either entirely perished or are so disfigured by legendary accretion, that it is only once or twice at the outside that they throw any light, and that always very dim, on inferences drawn from the poems themselves. Still, this is of less importance to Homeric students, since there is no writer known to us who more simply and openly exhibits, in almost every part of his poem, his real character and feeling.
We may remark, to begin with, that he is far removed from the quietly reflective class: he ever hastens and presses forward; and displays on every page a genius for affairs. This it is which Aristotle so often praises in him: ‘Homer alone may be said to deserve the name of poet, not only on account of his other excellences, but also of the dramatic spirit of his imitations ... he is the only poet who seems to have understood what part in his poem it was proper for him to take himself. The poet, in his own person, should speak as little as possible. ...But other poets, ambitious to figure throughout, themselves, imitate but little and seldom. Homer after a few preparatory lines, immediately introduces a man, a woman, or some other character:
[Page 94]
for all have their character—nowhere are the manners neglected.’ 156
No doubt, to Aristotle, action, as for morality, so for 157 poetry, seemed the one thing needful: nor was he, it seems, much inclined to admit within the magic circle of the poets any one, even by name, but Homer and the Attic tragedians. We, however, who have lived late enough to read a Lucretius and a Virgil (not to mention other instances) modify his canon by assigning due place to reflective writers: yet we would by no means cancel one word of his pre-eminent praise of Homer as the chief of dramatic poets.
Suppose, then, a man of ardent genius, highly gifted with imaginative faculty, living in Greece about the time of the decline of the Heroic Age: suppose, whether by chance or ill condition of affairs, there was no career open to him in the public service, either civil or military: we may easily conceive such an one to have joined the ranks of the rhapsodists, then at the height of their vogue among his countrymen: that so he might beguile his years by at least celebrating in song great deeds, such as fate forbade him to act. And, after all, how better could his end be served than by selecting out of the many stories available one of amplest range, of widespread fame, graced by noble names; which would recall to him day by day, as he wrote, those bygone times which he so dearly cherished; and, perhaps, after he was dead and gone might hand down his name to history linked with the majestic memories of heroes?
But it will be worth while to recall the meaning and significance of that Heroic Age, for to Homer's passionate and admiring reverence for it we are, I suggest, indebted for his splendid poems. We all know that the highest glory of heroes lay in warlike valour; yet in valour
[Page 95]
qualified in many ways, which bear a certain resemblance to our own ancestors and to what are called Mediaeval times. 158 The Argives (not yet called Hellenes, according to Thucydides) 159 were then associated by the bond of a common soil and race; oftener, indeed, than it should have been, sundered by tribal discord and separating distances. Their chiefs were held in highest—indeed, wellnigh religious—reverence: for common tradition assigned them an ancestry, springing, in part, even from the Gods themselves: Homer constantly speaks of ‘god-nurtured kings’, and carefully traces their genealogy through three or four generations to some deity. Nor did ever any people more scrupulously assign, not merely to particular regions but to individual men, their tutelary patrons and guardians, drawn from the celestial deities such as the ‘daemons’ spoken of by Hesiod,
Earth-wandering daemons they their charge began,
The ministers of good and guards of man. 160
And every chief and leader secretly cherished the hope that he might himself, perhaps, attain one day to this august company.
These things, as they are well known to all, I have but briefly recalled: now we must examine the Iliad itself, in order to see whether it is so entirely in the spirit of those bygone times, that it is conceivable that its creation is due to a passionate love of them. For we are compelled to fall back on such tests of an author's bias and disposition when details of his life are wholly wanting. Careful analysis of the plan of the work, both as a whole and in detail; determination of the poet's main influences, in selection of subject, in choice of characters, of style and language—all these points must be thoroughly considered. We must anxiously avoid, however, allowing a too zealous, not to say too pedantic, regard for our own theories to issue in
[Page 96]
hard and fast rules; lest we allow our own petty restrictions 161 to obscure the brilliant gifts of genius. So at length, after drawing at least some probable support for our theory from the poem itself, we shall proceed to consider what evidence is to be found in grammarians and historians; and through them, I think, we shall plainly infer that Homer must have lived in an age when gifted and eager-minded men were naturally led to turn their minds, with a certain sad wistfulness, back to the thought of that heroic age.
The general question, however, demands fuller time than we can assign it, I think, to-day, Now, let me merely add a word or two in consideration of any whose minds may have been troubled by the subtleties of certain critics, who deny that such a person as we call Homer ever lived at all; and those poems, which eighty generations have styled the Iliad and the Odyssey , these keener-sighted critics declare to be, not the work of a single author, but a collection of shorter works produced here and there by many hands and brought together in the form of two long poems, under the direction, perhaps, of Lycurgus or Hipparchus. I believe that many will resent such a theory, and am quite sure that to myself, at all events, it would be annoying. I should be wasting all my toil; and the host of critics would be engaged in a mock combat, like that in the Iliad itself, when:
The silver-bowed fair God then threw in the tumultuous throng
An image, that in stature, look, and arms he did create
Like Venus' son; for which the Greeks and Trojans made debate,
Laid loud strokes on their ox-hide shields and bucklers easily borne;
Which error Phoebus pleased to urge on Mars himself in scorn. 162
But there is no ground for alarm, gentlemen; such speculations
[Page 97]
send us back to the simple instinct of our own feeling. We must appeal to the people, putting on one side the speculations of a few distinguished men. Recall what impression was made on each of us when reading Homer for the first time. Indeed, if my experience is worth anything, I should say that never were any decisions dependent on internal evidence, so absolutely certain as these two, that the Iliad is a single work and that it was written by one man.
This is, first of all, shown by the marvellous linking and 163 sequence of the different episodes: and as to this, Aristotle, a most exacting critic in such matters, thus declares himself; ‘Yet is the construction of those poems [the Iliad and the Odyssey ] as perfect, and as nearly approaching to the imitation of a single action, as possible.’ 164 Nor can I possibly conceive with what show of reason any one can persuade himself that a poem which is put forward as a pattern and model of arrangement by Aristotle and Horace, was the result either of mere chance or of some Amphion's skill, piecing the scattered elements into a finished unity.
Moreover, through the whole work, where so much depends on character, the several actors maintain a wonderful consistency: such as were Achilles, Agamemnon, Nestor, and the rest in the First Book, that they remain to the end. How difficult of imitation this would have been sufficiently appears from the example of poets who draw from tradition and present historical characters. Not one but reads himself into the common type. Aeschylus' conception of Electra is one thing, that of Sophocles another, nor do Euripides and Ovid suggest to us the same notion of Medea. So much the more incredible is it that any one could have filled in the unfinished (as they assume) portrait of Achilles with such skill that no trace of the piecing
[Page 98]
together remains: all the elements seeming consistent one with another, and all with the magnificent creation of the hero himself. Besides, we see that Achilles was from the beginning marked out by the poet for the fate which befalls him: to deny the catastrophe to Homer seems to me much the same as to maintain, not that the spring (as we read 165 in Thucydides some one advised), but that autumn should be left out of the year: why, it is to lead up to this that all the other parts are arranged.
As to style, there are few lines indeed without the Homeric ring, nor are these more frequent in the later books (whose authenticity is questioned) than in the earlier. Later poets may perhaps have here and there interposed something of their own, but the evidence is far short of proving them to have materially tampered with the main structure of the glorious poem by addition of any integral part of it.
Nor am I much concerned with an objection which may perhaps occur to some students: namely, that in those times there must have been many capable of composing verse rhythmical enough to reach the Homeric standard. Granting it were so, at least as far as concerns rhythm and sound, yet I would remind objectors that this applies to a later age, not to that of Pisistratus or Lycurgus: in whose times very few written works, if any, can be supposed to have existed for copyists to busy themselves with.
‘Well, but towards the close of the Iliad we meet an extraordinary number of words which the writer had not hitherto used.’ The answer is, that the entirely new subjects with which those books are full necessarily called for new words to express them.
And, as for the contention that after the death of Hector the sequel has nothing to do with the main plot: two whole books containing nothing but a description of his funeral rites and those of Patroclus, I shall deal, if possible,
[Page 99]
with this more fully at a later stage. I merely note now that Homer, if we have rightly divined his true method and his character, would he sure to commemorate the lament for Heroes, and their funeral ceremonies, with earnest sympathy.
Finally, I advise you, gentlemen, least of all to be disturbed by the far-fetched and too clever speculation of certain contemporary would-be critics, whose constant 166 theme is that the age, not the writer, is the real author of all that is written: and that results both of talent and of literary achievement are produced by a kind of fatalistic destiny, and so, as Homer lived among rude and uncultivated men, they say he might well have written isolated rhapsodies, but not have built up a whole Iliad out of them. This is such reasoning as carries its own refutation with the bare statement. Therefore, especially to a long-patient audience, I shall not dwell further on the point: but it did seem necessary, in passing, to caution the younger of you not to yield too easy credence to these ingenious triflers: nor assign so great weight to the age and time, whether in literature, politics, manners, or daily life as to ignore that far more and much greater influence is accorded by a kindly Providence to each man's character, strength of will and patient industry.
In short, let us thankfully and joyfully take our Homer as the learning of ages has handed him down to us: let all credit be given to Pisistratus or whoever it may have been that gathered together the ‘scattered limbs’ of the poet and welded them into a whole: so nevertheless that we firmly hold this whole to have come together by no chance but out of the splendid conception of the author.
Our next lecture will deal with his general plan, the materials being drawn from the poem itself.
[Page ]
167 LECTURE VII
The subject of the Iliad and the character of Achilles considered. Both suggest that Homer might have been impelled to write by his enthusiastic delight in the Heroic Age.
Our discussion about the Iliad will embrace two chief points. One, much the more important, derived from the course of the poem itself: which will afford proof throughout to an attentive reader that the poet had the same outlook on life as the old heroes: the other will maintain that Homer lived just at that period when he would have been most keenly influenced by the heroic feeling ράθος and a wistful regret for an age just passing away. Hence we may at least with reasonable probability, infer that he betook himself to composition in order to appease in some measure his restless, burning passion for bygone days and departed heroes.
As a preliminary we must review the whole design of the Iliad , and examine whether it be of such a character as might answer to the cravings of an eager-souled man, with his eye intently fixed on heroic deeds.
168 And here it is to be noticed in the first place, that those who limit the plan of the renowned poem to the story of Achilles' wrath, scarcely comprehend Homer's mind: they press too hard and interpret too literally the opening lines:
Achilles' wrath, to Greece the direful spring
Of woes unnumbered, heavenly Goddess, sing.
More truly, I think, might it be said, that his proposed subject was to celebrate the capture of Troy by the Greeks. So thought Horace, indeed, who calls Homer the ‘narrator
[Page 101]
of the Trojan war’, praising him because he does not trace back his subject to its starting-point in ‘Leda's twin eggs’. And he contrasts with him, too, a certain ‘braggart’ who grandiloquently began:
Of Priam's fate and far-famed war I'll sing. 169
Such praise would have had no meaning had not the critic clearly recognized that events of equal greatness were dealt with by both. Elsewhere, Horace, in two or three lines, sums up the whole Iliad :
And Troy (her Hector swept away)
Became to Greece an easier prey. 170
Indeed, Homer himself many times implies that the whole fate of the war hung in the balance when Hector's life was imperilled:
                                         Thy hand that did defend
These gates of Ilion, these long walls by thy arm measured still
Amply and only. 171
And on this turns the whole of Priam's appeal, vainly beseeching his son to avoid the last fatal combat:
   Take the town, retire, dear son, and save
Troy's husbands and their wives, nor give thine own life to the grave
For this man's glory. Pity me, me, wretched, so long alive,
Whom in the door of age Jove keeps, that so he may deprive
My being in fortune's utmost curse, to see the blackest thread
Of this life's miseries.’ 172
Manifestly, the whole hope and fortune of the Trojan name lay in the life and triumph of one man: and he, in truth, did not merely by his valour, but by his piety and
[Page 102]
goodness, shield the walls and homes of the fatherland: and is therefore very often called ‘dear to Zeus’.
173 And so, after he had for nine years, practically by himself, repelled the attacks of the Greeks, the ancient chroniclers themselves recorded, I believe, some such state of affairs as Homer has painted for us: to such a pass, namely, were the Trojans come, that none, not even Hector himself, dared any longer risk pitched battle in open field. Achilles brags of it in terms:
When I was armed among the Greeks, he would not offer fight
Without the shadow of his walls, but to the Scaean ports
Or to the holy beech of Jove came backed by his consorts. 174
Therefore it was, that by decree of heaven (and Homer ever acknowledges its guiding power) the fatal quarrel arose between Agamemnon and Achilles. And so, in the absence of Achilles, the Trojans once more venture the field, and, by frequent success, their spirits are so encouraged that they would not decline, as before, even his onset; thus, in the end, they were utterly overthrown and the Greeks issued triumphant over Asia.
Such is the main theme of the Iliad , when narrated without ornament in the simple style of a chronicle: though some critics, with little real insight, declare it to be ended with the reconciliation of Achilles. This would indeed, perhaps, be a fit subject were the poem a panegyric, such as Pindar's odes, for instance: but by itself alone, it is not large enough to be conceived capable of filling out the broad expanse of an Homeric epic. And thus he named his book the Iliad , not as Statius did his poem—the Achilleid : and made it deal with the whole Argive race, not with the men of Phthia alone, or the sons of the Myrmidons. Indeed,
[Page 103]
it affected all the nations of that time, for it was this strife which first brought the Greeks as a nation into conflict with the Barbarians. ‘For before the Trojan war nothing appeareth to have been done by Greece in common.’ 175 Nor throughout ancient annals does any one cause stand 176 out more powerfully effective to draw together the widely scattered Greek tribes and marshal them against Asia.
Let us therefore take it for granted that the climax of the Iliad is the death of Hector, with its consequence the imminent fall of Troy: and that Achilles' wrath is (as Aristotle says) more rightly viewed as the turning-point of the plot rather than the subject of the whole poem. Through that, no doubt, the success of the Greeks was long delayed: that once aroused, first encouraged Troy to battle, and at last appeased, ensured decisive triumph to the Greeks.
Such is the plan of the whole poem, pre-eminently splendid, truly epic, and founded on a war wherein were engaged and strained to their very utmost all the forces both of Greece and of Asia. So it fell out—almost like an answer to the poet's prayer—that all that was noble and great on either side, and all which for heroic valour and renown might most forcibly excite and take hold of men's minds, could be displayed in one comprehensive picture.
Further yet, observe how that period of the whole war is chosen that was most likely to rouse enthusiasm preeminently in a warlike mind (which we marked at the outset as the index of the heroic temper), and to illustrate conspicuously the prowess of the Greeks, and especially of Achilles himself—‘most heroic of all heroes’ ( ἡρωικώτατος ). Aristotle remarks that that which is condensed is always more attractive; in other words, that events which are crowded together and follow quickly in close succession, for some reason or other, arrest the attention more vividly; this may be seen if anywhere, surely, in the story told
[Page 104]
in the Iliad. Contests and struggles which had been long drawn out and widely extended over many shores and islands, had now by the fortunes of war become confined within a narrow space and the shortest possible time. And 177 these facts contribute very much to that direct force and vivid simple movement which quickly recalls the past and carries us hither and thither as the poet wills. For instance; Virgil's account of the fighting of Aeneas seems utterly tame compared with the Iliad , whether because it is spread over many months, or because it takes place in scenes far distant from each other, and is mixed up with many other incidents and discussions, which do not speedily focus, as it were, to a crisis. The result is, that although all is woven together with consummate art, our attention is with greatest difficulty restrained from wandering, and is hardly maintained to the end. In fact, Virgil keeps our minds fixed on the fortunes of a whole war, with all its complex variations, while the reader of the Iliad seems to be looking on at the chances and changes of a single battle, something like that army mentioned by Thucydides: ‘when the battle raged just before their eyes ... and at each moment their friends were all but saved or all but lost.’ 178
But yet the limitations of time and place did not hamper Homer or prevent him, as occasion offered, from exhibiting his countrymen in every kind of combat, or in every task incumbent on private soldiers or leaders. He mainly delighted in a pitched and hard-contested battle; and indeed, if anything could weary us in Homer, I myself should almost admit that he repeats these so often that he does weary us. But there is room left for the single-handed duels of great warriors, sometimes by chance encounter and sometimes after challenge in due form: again, the famous ‘battle at the walls’ is elaborately pictured; there is the
[Page 105]
night adventure of Diomed and Ulysses, when they attempt by stratagem to seize the Trojan bulwarks; and what is alone worth all the rest, whatever happens seems no mere result of the poet's clever arrangement, but a simple consequence of the natural order of events.
Certainly Homer, in laying down these limitations for himself, had wit enough to see that by so doing he could best minister to the glory of his country and of the great man whom he displays as the ideal example of the heroic character. The Asiatics, too, would be soothed and 179 flattered when they found such great deeds ascribed to their own Hector, and Troy itself only falling at last through a certain strength of Fate, and the utmost endeavour of a more than human power. Indeed, with marvellous skill, he so contrives, that while always in real sympathy with his own Greeks, he should never be chargeable with being niggard or sparing in his meed of praise to their foes: and this by common consent is a notable quality of the truly heroic character. Who does not recall the opening description of the first battle?
So to the fight the thick battalions throng,
Shields urged on shields, and men drove men along,
Sedate and silent move the numerous bands:
No sound, no whisper, but their chief's commands,
Those only heard: with awe the rest obey,
As if some god had snatch'd their voice away.
Not so the Trojans: from their host ascends
A general shout that all the region rends.
As when the fleecy flocks unnumber'd stand
In wealthy folds and wait the milker's hand,
The hollow vales incessant bleating fills,
The lambs reply from all the neighb'ring hills;
Such clamours rose from various nations round,
Mix'd was the murmur, and confused the sound.
Each host now joins, and each a god inspires,
These Mars incites, and those Minerva fires. 180
[Page 106]
He assigns the first honours to his own countrymen, yet in such wise as to suggest that the Trojans came off second rather through some untoward chance than through any lack of bravery.
Observe too, how, whenever the celestial deities hold aloof from the strife, the Greeks are invariably triumphant:
The stern fight freed of all the Gods, conquest with doubtful wings
Flew on their lances. 181
                                         This made so strong their chace
That all the Trojans had been housed, and never turned a face, 182
unless, as Helenus advised, Hector had set forth to win over Minerva by prayer and vow. The very next day, Diomed, the gods remaining passive, renewed the doubtful struggle:
                                         Then souls were set on wing;
Then high exploits were undergone; then Trojans in their walls
Had been infolded like meek lambs, had Jove winked at their falls,
Who hurl'd his horrid thunder forth. 183
And again, wherever the reader's sympathy is likely to side with Troy, just there the poet—and I fancy by no mere accident—drops a word about Paris and Helen. 184 Is it, too, without object that the touching interview between Hector and his wife is prefaced by severe upbraiding of her notorious brother, the ill-omened Paris?
War burns about the town for thee: for thee our slaughtered friends
Besiege Troy with their carcasses, on whose heaps our high walls
Are overlooked by enemies. 185
[Page 107]
Does not Hector, when nearing his end, in express terms take upon himself and his Trojan countrymen all the reproach of a disastrous war and broken faith?
                                         What if I hang my shield,
My helm and lance here on these walls, and meet in humble field
Renowned Achilles, offering him Helen and all the wealth,
Whatever in his hollow keels bore Alexander's stealth
For both th'Atrides. 186
So that, in spite of all his piety and his great deserts, it seems right that he should suffer, for attaching himself to so base a cause.
These are a few instances out of many, in which Homer has deliberately intended that his readers should wish well to the Greeks, even when their sympathies were touched most keenly for Hector. It is entirely of a piece with this that in the main conduct of the poem, he takes thought for the whole of the Greek race, as much as for his own country, and chiefly celebrates those periods of the war when great deeds are done while Achilles himself is absent: inasmuch as, when in the field, he would have towered over and obscured the powers of the rest.
But we must now pass on to consider the character of Achilles himself,—for this by itself gives us the clearest indication of Homer's true spirit, and, moreover, is so essentially interwrought and commingled with the whole course of the Iliad that no one could possibly discern the latter, and leave this to one side. Therefore (with all 187 respect to so clear-sighted a critic) Horace hardly, I think, shows his usual judgement in the lines:
If Homer's great Achilles tread the stage,
Intrepid, fierce, of unforgiving rage,
Like Homer's Hero let him spurn all laws,
And by the sword alone assert his cause. 188
[Page 108]
A description which would much better and more truly accord with some braggart soldier of the Imperial Guard, say of Nero or, if you like, of Octavius himself, than with the ‘blameless son of Peleus’.
Kindly bear with me for a moment, gentlemen, while I recall in succession some few of the ways by which Homer quite clears Achilles from all suspicion of such outrageous savagery. He is not only endowed with a warlike virtue, more than human, but commended to men's affection, and wellnigh reverence, on many other grounds.
First of all, how great, how solemnly impressive, how deeply touching, the passage which sets forth that he had come to Troy of his own free-will, with full knowledge that he was thus marked for death. Since, although he seems, repeatedly, to refer his destiny to Fate, that sternest arbitress of human fortunes, yet in one place he tells us, in express terms, that the Gods had conceded his wish and desire that he might be permitted, himself, to choose the time and manner of his end:
My fates long since by Thetis were disclosed,
And each alternate, life or fame, proposed:
Here if I stay, before the Trojan town,
Short is my date but deathless my renown;
If I return, I quit immortal praise
For years on years, and long extended days. 189
This foreboding of death, speedily to overtake him after having slain Hector, seems to me mysteriously to accompany and tinge his whole being and character.
A flood of tears, at this, the goddess shed;
Ah then, I see thee dying, see thee dead!
When Hector falls, thou diest.—Let Hector die,
And let me fall! Achilles made reply. 190
191 Consequently he does not rush blindly to face wounds and death like a mere common warrior: nor does he waver betwixt hope and fear like a gambler, who just
[Page 109]
because of the very element of chance displays a certain show of courage. But Achilles possesses a spirit able to foresee all the future, yet so unmoved and firm, that one views him not as courting a voluntary death, but as bowing in submission to what fate has decreed: thus he presents a clear picture, not only of a most brave soldier, but (if I may say so) of a dedicated and devoted victim.
Note too how extraordinarily effective is this boding fate, in winning our sympathy. For there was indeed no slight risk that the part played by Achilles might be slow to interest us: since he is so far beyond mortals both in courage and power as to seem scarcely in danger of death or wound, and, in addition, is plainly in the wrong owing to his uncurbed passion through almost the whole Iliad. But Homer, with consummate skill, meets both these drawbacks to our sympathy by mention of the nearness of his death and his own foreknowledge of it. Thus, at the very outset of his ill-omened rage:
   To the shore of the old sea he betook
Himself alone, and casting forth upon the purple sea
His wet eyes, and his hands to heaven advancing, this sad plea
Made to his mother: ‘Mother! since you brought me forth to breathe
So short a life, Olympius had good right to bequeath
My short life honour.’ 192
And Thetis is made to say in return:
Her answer she poured forth in tears: ‘O me, my son,’ said she,
‘Why brought I up thy being at all, that brought thee forth to be
Sad subject of so hard a fate? O would to heaven, that since
Thy fate is little, and not long, thou mightest without offence
And tears perform it!’ 193
[Page 110]
And, are not those lines, which I quoted just now, setting forth the two-fold decree of fate, and his inevitable doom 194 should he remain in Troy, introduced admirably just when he seems especially implacable and forbidding: in cool blood, absolutely refusing the least consideration to Agamemnon's friendly overtures? Then are not the bitter words with which he lashes Hector prefaced by those mournful lines?—
                     O would to heaven thy throne,
With these fair Deities of the sea, thou still had sat upon,
And Peleus had a mortal wife, since by his means is done
So much wrong to thy grieved mind, my death being set so soon,
And never suffering my return to grace of Peleus' court!
Nor do I wish it: nor to live in any man's resort,
But only that the crying blood for vengeance of my friend
Mangled by Hector may be stilled: his foe's death paying his end. 195
And a little further on:
And when the loser of my friend his death in me shall find,
Let Death take all. Send him, ye Gods, I'll give him my embrace.
———
And if such fate expect my life, where death strikes I will lie.
Meantime I wish a good renown, that these deep-breasted dames
Of Ilion and Dardania may, for the extinguished flames
Of their friends' lives, with both their hands wipe miserable tears
From their so curiously-kept cheeks, and be the officers
To execute my signs on Troy, when (seeing my long retreat
[Page 111]
But gathered strength, and gives my charge answerable heat)
They well may know 'twas I lay still, and that my being away
Presented all their happiness. 196
So too, I think, those savage scenes, the farthest removed of all from the true heroic spirit, in which we read of the suppliant Lycaon being cut up and trampled under foot, or of Hector's corpse being brutally and shamefully belaboured,—even these are, unless I am wrong, softened slightly by the picture which he draws of his own coming death:
Die then, my friend! what boots it to deplore?
The great, the good Patroclus is no more!
He, far thy better, was foredoomed to die,
And thou, dost thou bewail mortality?
Seest thou not me, whom nature's gifts adorn,
Spring from a hero, from a goddess born?
The day shall come (which nothing can avert)
When by the spear, the arrow, or the dart,
By night, or day, by force or by design,
Impending death and certain fate are mine. 197
And more plainly still, even to detail of names, like a seer when events are hurrying to their crisis, Hector at the very point of death declares:
Yet think, a day will come, when Fate's decree
And angry gods shall wreak this wrong on thee;
Phoebus and Paris shall avenge my fate,
And stretch thee here, before this Scaean gate. 198
And now let us consider certain features which, looked at 199 in themselves, seem above the human level and ill calculated to win the ‘sympathy’ of ordinary humanity. Such are the twice-given arms of Vulcan for example: those ‘immortal arms’:
By aged Peleus to Achilles given,
As first to Peleus by the court of heaven. 200
[Page 112]
Impressive and magnificent, but it fails to touch our feelings. Who would not say that scarcely, if indeed at all, does one so divinely supported stand in hazard of battle? All the more, therefore, does the significant close of the sentence stimulate and rouse our slackened interest:
Forbid by fate to reach his father's years.
We are suddenly touched, and plainly see that we have to do not with a deity but a man, and one indeed short-lived.
And the poet, designedly, recalls this to our minds with even greater persistence, in that part of the story where Achilles, splendidly equipped, is led again, reclaimed, as it were, into the field. Observe with what ominous forebodings Thetis addresses herself to petition arms for her son:
Sprung from my bed, a godlike hero came,
The bravest sure that ever bore the name:
Like some fair plant, beneath my careful hand,
He grew, he flourish'd, and he graced the land:
To Troy I sent him: but his native shore
Never, ah never shall receive him more! 201
And Vulcan's reply:
O could I hide him from the fates as well,
Or with these hands the cruel stroke repel,
As I shall forge most envied arms, the gaze
Of wondering ages, and the world's amaze. 202
Finally, Achilles himself, accoutred with the Olympian armour, drawn in a car by immortal steeds, standing 203 without peer or rival in the eyes of gods and men alike, issues forth to certain victory:
The chief beholds himself with wondering eyes;
His arms he poises, and his motions tries;
Buoyed by some inward force, he seems to swim,
And feels a pinion lifting every limb.
And now he shakes his great paternal spear,
Ponderous and huge! which not a Greek could rear:
[Page 113]
From Pelion's cloudy top an ash entire
Old Chiron fell'd, and shaped it for his sire:
A spear which stern Achilles only wields,
The death of heroes, and the dread of fields.
———
All bright in heavenly arms, above his squire
Achilles mounts, and sets the field on fire:
Not brighter Phoebus in th'ethereal way,
Flames from his chariot, and restores the day,
High o'er the host, all terrible he stands,
And thunders to his steeds these dread commands. 204
These are lofty deeds almost beyond the range of human sympathy and apprehension. And there was some risk, therefore, that our minds, having no fear or doubt as to the issue, should feel but a languid interest in Achilles, as though he were only a god brought upon the stage. But with wonderful art this feeling is met in the lines that follow immediately:
The generous Xanthus, as the words he said,
Seemed sensible of woe and droop'd his head:
Trembling he stood before the golden wain,
And bow'd to dust the honours of his mane:
When, strange to tell! (so Juno willed) he broke
Eternal silence, and portentous spoke:
Achilles! yes! this day at least we bear
Thy rage in safety through the files of war:
But come it will, the fatal time must come,
Not ours the fault, but God decrees thy doom.
Not through our crime, or slowness in the course
Fell thy Patroclus, but by heavenly force:
The bright far-shooting god who gilds the day
(Confess'd we saw him) tore his arms away.
No—could our swiftness o'er the winds prevail,
Or beat the pinions of the western gale,
All were in vain—the fates thy death demand,
Due to a mortal and immortal hand.
   Then ceased for ever, by the Furies tied
His fateful voice. The intrepid chief replied
[Page 114]
With unabated rage—So let it be!
Portents and prodigies are lost on me.
I know my fate: to die and see no more
My much-loved parents, and my native shore—
Enough—when heaven ordains, I sink in night,
Now perish Troy! He said, and rush'd to fight. 205
I have not hesitated, gentlemen, to quote more fully than is usual from this chair, being convinced that nothing could illustrate more clearly the character and genius both of 206 Achilles and of Homer himself. For, first of all, as probably has already been pointed out sufficiently, that blinding brilliance of superhuman prowess is to some degree softened by the introduction of these lines: we are touched with an indescribable pathos seeing, that, even in the lot of one unconquered, stern and unyielding,
E'en here the tear of pity springs
And hearts are touched by human things. 207
Then we may note another trait which of itself alone seems to soften the harshness of a passionate temper. I mean the reverential and grateful recollection of father and mother. And this is the more noticeable in the instance of Achilles, since he is not shown to us like Hector as being touched by tender love for a wife, though Homer evidently means to endow him with that eager and restless force of mind, and with that brooding peering into the future, which is the mark of a lover. In Achilles, however, this passionate feeling is expended partly in his delight in battle, and partly in his striking and inexhaustible love for his father, for Patroclus and for his ancestral home. Thus in the passage just quoted he declares that the keenest sorrow of all is, that he must die ‘and see no more my much-loved parents’: while to Hector, when he broods ominously (as men will do at times) upon the future, the
[Page 115]
vision of regret and longing is of ‘our city, our wives and our dear children’. 208
In fact, even in the very midst of his lament for Patroclus, this love of his father and his native soil most beautifully declares itself:
What greater sorrow could afflict my breast,
What more, if hoary Peleus were deceased?
Who now, perhaps, in Phthia dreads to hear
His son's sad fate, and drops a tender tear. 209
And after affectionate reference to his son he again returns to his father:
For Peleus breathes no more the vital air;
Or drags a wretched life of age and care,
But till the news of my sad fate invades
His hastening soul, and sinks him to the shades.
And, finally, when he suffers himself to relent in his 210 implacable rage against Hector, it is due, not to the beseeching appeal of Priam, but to his thought of his own father.
Again his unwavering love for Patroclus, both during life and after his death, a love passing the love of women, bears no small testimony to a gentler side of his character. But since this friendship has become proverbial, I have no need to quote instances in support of it. Yet one thing I should like you to consider, namely whether (due regard being had for the sacredness of scripture) we may not justly here compare that most surpassing instance of affection afforded by David and Jonathan. I confess that when there is talk of heroic times I almost instinctively think of David: who in his life made visible to the eyes of men the very form and picture of heroic valour and virtue. And so, whenever we find fancied embellishments of poets running parallel to that true and vivid story, we may be assured that the poet has hit the mark well. And nowhere is the resemblance closer than in this instance.
[Page 116]
Just as Jonathan is attached to the David of history; so is Patroclus to the Achilles of poetry—two most tender and sweet natures bound in affection with two of the sternest:
   Bear the merits of the dead in mind;
How skilled he was in each obliging art;
The mildest manners and the gentlest heart. 211
And common experience shows us that the most stable and lasting friendships are found between those who both pursue and are devoted to the same ends—one, however, strenuously, the other more coolly and moderately. Further, it is likely that David's sorrowing for his lost friend was emphasized, as Homer feigned or had heard by tradition Achilles' laments were, by the fact that both reproached themselves as having been partly the cause—however unwittingly—of the fate of their friends. Not that this is, 212 in either case, stated in terms, but it is nevertheless the inevitable inference, and throws not a little light on the disposition of each of them. At all events, the savagery of Achilles' character is tempered somewhat, if he appears not unworthy of comparison with the saintly king.
But to pass on. Another note of the heroic character was, that while strictly assigning the first honours to the Greeks ample recognition was accorded to the warlike eminence even of their foes. Homer maintains this attitude throughout the whole Iliad , and Achilles exhibits it most notably. Thus he first, when the pestilence fell on the army, calls the chiefs to council; and he makes his almost maternal care a reproach to an ungrateful country:
   Long toils, long perils, in their cause I bore,
But now th' unfruitful glories charm no more. ...
Of all my dangers, all my glorious pains,
A life of labours, lo! what fruit remains?
As the bold bird her helpless young attends,
From danger guards them, and from want defends,
[Page 117]
In search of prey she wings the spacious air,
And with untasted food supplies her care.
For thankless Greece such hardships have I braved,
Her wives, her infants, by my labours saved,
Long sleepless nights in heavy arms I stood,
And sweat laborious days in dust and blood. 213
When the ships were ablaze, he of his own accord, incites Patroclus, ‘smiting his thigh’:
Arm, arm, Patroclus! lo, the flame aspires!
The glowing ocean reddens with the fires,
Arm, ere our vessels catch the spreading flame,
Arm, ere the Grecians be no more a name. 214
We have ample proof from his own words that he bore no unbounded animosity towards enemies, as was the manner of those times:
Fool, urge not ruth nor price to me, till that solemnity
Resolved for on Patroclus' death pay all his rites to fate.
Till his death I did grace to Troy, and many lives did rate
At price of ransom, but none now of all the brood of Troy, &c.’ 215
But, most decisive of all, there is the account of his conference with Priam by night, where, as it always seems 216 to me, the very type of the heroic age appears:
Satiate at length with unavailing woes,
From the high throne divine Achilles rose;
The reverend monarch by the hand he raised;
On his white beard and form majestic gazed,
Not unrelenting. 217
And a few lines on:
Such griefs, O king! have other parents known;
Remember theirs, and mitigate thy own.
The care of heav'n thy Hector has appear'd;
Nor shall he lie unwept, and uninterr'd;
[Page 118]
Soon may thy aged cheeks in tears be drown'd,
And all the eyes of Ilion stream around. 218
———
When now the rage of hunger was repress'd,
The wondering hero eyes his royal guest;
No less the royal guest the hero eyes,
His godlike aspect, and majestic size;
Here, youthful grace and noble fire engage,
And there, the mild benevolence of age.
Thus gazing long, the silence neither broke,
(A solemn scene!) at length the father spoke. 219
Entirely in keeping with all this is the marked respect which he always shows to the aged. Thus he receives Phoenix, although a partisan of Agamemnon, with lavish hospitality and the most conciliatory manner. He pays pointed attention to Nestor, seated as a spectator at the funeral games, manifesting his respect by graceful words and costly gifts; and thus wins in return for himself just such compliments as especially become a noble-spirited youth when honourably noticed by a venerable old man:
While pleased I take the gift thy hands present
(Pledge of benevolence, and kind intent);
Rejoiced, of all the numerous Greeks, to see
Not one but honours sacred age and me:
Those due distinctions thou so well canst pay,
May the just gods return another day. 220
Lines which, as I think, breathe the very soul and essence of polished courtesy.
Nor let me be reproached with dwelling on mere trifles if I instance one or two of those traits which evince, as it were, by chance and incidentally, the character of a brave and strong man: thus he keeps his native Phthia carefully treasured in his memory and, sore at heart, reverts with
[Page 119]
passionate feeling to his birth-place and the well-remembered scenes of his youth:
Far hence removed, the hoarse resounding main,
And walls of rocks, secure my native reign. 221
or he consoles himself, with Patroclus for audience, by music and song: 222
Amused at ease, the godlike man they found,
Pleased with the solemn harp's harmonious sound.
(The well-wrought harp from conquer'd Thebae came,
Of polished silver was its costly frame.)
With this he soothes his angry soul, and sings
Th' immortal deeds of heroes and of kings.
Patroclus only of the royal train,
Placed in his tent, attends the lofty strain:
Full opposite he sat, and listened long,
In silence waiting till he ceased the song. 223
Take again his courteous reception of the messengers dispatched by Agamemnon to take away Briseis, he not only dismisses them unharmed but even receives them with courteous words.
All these points are strikingly crowned by the fact, carefully emphasized throughout the whole course of the poem, that Achilles was pre-eminently beloved by the gods, and that everywhere and always, all diviner powers wonderfully sympathized with him. Does he bewail his fortune, alone in his tent? forthwith the ocean nymphs are stirred with grief:
Far in the deep recesses of the main,
Where aged ocean holds his watery reign. 224
Does he prayerfully entreat the winds to fan into flame the funeral pile of his friend? Iris hears his cry and makes report to the assembly of the winds. They hasten with
[Page 120]
preparation due, and perform the task, like ministering spirits. 225
I may finally close this array of examples by instancing that exquisite funeral dirge in the obsequies of Patroclus in which—even if no other evidence were available—Achilles shows himself prodigal of life and strength, mindful of his country, his father, and his friend; as linked, on the one side to poor mortality, on the other to the lineage and guardianship of the celestial deities; so that in this one passage alone we may see displayed wellnigh his whole character:
But great Achilles stands apart in prayer,
And from his head divides the yellow hair:
Those curling locks which from his youth he vowed,
And sacred grew to Sperchius' honoured flood:
Then sighing, to the deep his looks he cast,
And roll'd his eyes around the watery waste:
   Sperchius! whose waves in mazy errors lost,
Delightful roll along my native coast!
To whom we vainly vow'd, at our return,
226 These locks to fall, and hecatombs to burn:
Full fifty rams to bleed in sacrifice,
Where to this day thy silver fountains rise,
And where in shade of consecrated bowers
Thy altars stand, perfumed with native flowers!
So vow'd my father, but he vow'd in vain;
No more Achilles sees his native plain:
In that vain hope these hairs no longer grow,
Patroclus bears them to the shades below. 227
Is it not clearly manifest that Achilles was far removed from that savage order of fighters who breathe forth naught but destruction and defiance: and that he closely approached that standard, and ideal type of the heroic age which in a former passage we sketched, however roughly? In him there is no lack of warlike fire, no lack of that true, if perhaps a little too boastful, love of his country and his
[Page 121]
Argive race, nor of that characteristically primitive faith which pictures special gods as acting as comrades and guardians to special men.
We conclude, therefore, that he was not a random creation, a sketch from some rustic braggart's workshop, but a picture drawn with an art beyond that of Phidias, of nobler outline than his ideal Zeus: and thus we have for ever handed down, the true and living features of heroic valour such as Homer believed, and certainly desired, to flourish among his own Greeks.
[Page ]
228 LECTURE VIII
Consideration of the character of Achilles continued; first, Homer's skill and policy in making the whole story centre round him; secondly, the successive stages which lead up to the climax of his glory and renown; thirdly, the importance herein of the episodes of Patroclus' friendship and the funeral rites of Hector. Comparison of Achilles with other famous warriors in the Iliad.
Although I am not without apprehension that I may seem to linger over-long on one theme, yet I have decided to devote a third lecture to Homer and, indeed, to Achilles himself. For nothing appears of greater value and importance when endeavouring to estimate the poet's genius and qualities as a whole, than a thorough acquaintance with the character to whom he designedly accords the leading part. So I crave your further indulgence if Achilles, the chief, and, as one may say, the founder, of the heroic line, is yet once more brought on the scene.
Having cleared him to the best of my power from the unfounded strictures of Horace, it falls next in order to show how strikingly almost the whole course of the Iliad is made subservient to his honour and fame, alike by the chain of circumstance, the disposition of motives, and the entire relevancy and sequence of the episodes. We may afterwards make comparison with other chiefs, appearing each in his due place in the story, whose several dispositions 229 and characters, while varied and contrasted with marvellous skill, are yet so fashioned that, when Achilles is compared with them, his excellence and pre-eminence becomes more and more apparent. This done, we may then pass on to other tests whereby the leanings and preferences of great poets are wont to declare themselves.
[Page 123]
I will begin, then, with one point in which Homer always has appeared to me to surpass even himself in skilful art. Many examples prove to us how effective it is towards influencing the readers' minds, that their expectations should be held in suspense for a while, the personage who plays the chief part in the story being kept in the background as it were, and seen at a distance. Among our own poets, Spenser, the most exquisite of them all, well understood the capabilities of this expedient: for, having conceived the character of Arthur as the perfect type of a high-minded hero, he made the whole story centre in him, and yet very sparingly and only at long intervals brought him upon the scene. Indeed, while the whole character of Arthur suggests heroic or divine power, this is particularly seen in the fact, proverbially characteristic of the gods, that he only appears when some great problem offers itself worthy of his interference and solution. One thing may be fairly deplored—that he is usually made to intervene in aid of some extreme critical emergency, not by the ordinary course of events, but almost by the caprice of fortune. This was due, perhaps, to too hasty a pen, or, as will sometimes happen, to a ‘nodding genius’: and indeed, he was content to follow with too great facility (this was, indeed, a marked characteristic of his genius) Ariosto and the other poets of Italy. For all these, in their style of story, reproduce Ovid rather than Homer, taking no pains as to probability or natural reason of things, so long as by marvels and unexpected events they may arrest attention at the moment. But then Spenser himself tells us that his deliberate purpose was, throughout, to keep Arthur's solitary figure ever in the thought of the reader, and yet 230 but rarely to bring him openly upon the scene.
Well, the comparative failure of such a man as Spenser, gifted with such keen instinct, such incomparably delicate judgement, is the measure of Homer's praise, in that he
[Page 124]
not only clearly intended, but amply achieved the same effect. No reader can fail to be conscious of some want in by far the greater part of the Iliad , when Achilles is hidden or far removed.
Whatsoever the Greeks may be engaged upon, whether they are assembled in council or marshalled in battle array, be the point of interest chariots, horses, or weapons of war, through all and each recurs the memory of Achilles:
The hero's valour, acts, and birth inspire
Her soul with love and fan the secret fire. 231
And (what is most striking) it all springs naturally, without special insistence. Take, for example, those indubitably splendid lines which crown the catalogue of the ships:
Great Ajax Telamon for strength passed all the peers of war,
While vexed Achilles was away: but he surpassed him far.
The horse that bore that faultless man were likewise past compare;
Yet lay he at the crooked-sterned ships, and fury was his fare,
For Atreus' son's ungracious deed: his men yet pleased their hearts
With throwing of the holed stone, with hurling of their darts,
And shooting fairly on the shore: their horse at chariots fed
On greatest parsley, and on sedge that in the fens is bred,
His princes' tents their chariots held, that richly covered were.
His princes, amorous of their chief, walked storming here and there
About the host, and scorned to fight. 232
A magnificently vivid description truly, which brings the scene before our eyes. We seem to roam the shore
[Page 125]
itself; we see the soldiers at their games, and the Myrmidons 233 chafing that they, amid all the warlike bustle, are alone inactive. A remarkable tribute this to Achilles: but it is more impressive still that, even when high deeds are preparing, our minds revert with mysterious boding to his absence, and yet higher expectation is aroused of what is to follow.
Then there are comparatively trivial allusions, nevertheless not without their own importance, being as it were merely by the way: such as the description of Nireus' manly comeliness:
Nireus, in faultless shape, and blooming grace,
The loveliest youth of all the Grecian race;
Pelides only match'd his early charms. 234
Or Ajax's words of warning to Hector:
Now, Hector, shalt thou clearly know, thus meeting man to man,
What other leaders arm our host beside great Thetis' son,
Who with his hardy lion's heart hath armies over-run. 235
Such passing reference is the very highest tribute to the hero's pre-eminent worth.
Passing, however, from chance trifles, let us consider evidences which are both absolutely decisive and of such importance as deservedly to be deemed typical. For there is no room for doubt that the consummate artist intended that his whole plot, from first to last, should turn upon Achilles alone. And what is more, such was his extraordinary skill that all the incidents are so knit together that everything seems to be associated with Achilles naturally and spontaneously by the mere force and sequence of events: nothing is due to chance, there is nothing strained, nothing that excites our resentment as passing belief. Once only, as far as I remember, is artificial
[Page 126]
accident allowed to influence the order and sequence of the causes. In the Eleventh Book Achilles sends Patroclus as his messenger to inquire who was the wounded warrior whom Nestor succeeded in rescuing out of the battle:
                     And from within did call
His friend Patroclus, who, like Mars in form celestial,
Came forth with first sound of his voice, first spring of his decay. 236
For that most tender-hearted hero when he had witnessed 237 the Grecian slaughter, could not resist imploring Achilles that he would at least let himself—Patroclus—accoutred in the great chief's own armour, attempt, as far as might be, to retrieve the field. This is the one and solitary instance where Homer makes a goddess of Fortune: how different from those poets who in every crisis have high-souled heroes ready at hand, like gods in a tragedy, to rescue at the last moment those who have lost their way, and are all but overwhelmed:
Far better he who enters at his ease,
Nor takes your breath with empty flourishes, 238
and makes no more demand upon Fortune than would be natural or likely in our daily life.
What need to trace the ordered stages as it were through which the hero, whom he had deliberately concealed so long, is finally brought to view and once more takes his share in the fray. The first point is that in the person of Patroclus we are cleverly and splendidly shown the prestige of the hero's mere name and armour:
                     Now, my friends, remember you express
Your late-urged virtue, and renown our great Aeacides,
That he being strongest of all the Greeks, his eminence may dim
All others likewise in our strengths that far off imitate him;
[Page 127]
And Agamemnon now may see his fault as general
As his place high, dishonouring him that so much honours all. 239
Observe, gentlemen, how Patroclus makes nothing of the part he himself plays: with what scrupulous reverence he attributes all to his friend: a most beautiful trait in itself, and especially redounding to Achilles' glory.
Next—and this is the most splendid instance of all—when Patroclus falls, and not Ajax himself can sustain the Trojan advance, Achilles standing unarmed intimidates them by his mere voice and aspect. It may be worth while here to turn back for a moment to the expressions elsewhere applied to Diomed in a parallel position:
Then Pallas breathed in Tydeus' son, to render whom supreme
To all the Greeks, at all his parts, she cast a hotter beam
On his high mind, his body filled with much superior might,
And made his complete armour cast a far more complete light.
From his bright helm and shield did burn a most unwearied fire,
Like rich Autumnus' golden lamp, whose brightness men admire
Past all the other host of stars, when, with his cheerful face 240
Fresh washed in lofty ocean waves, he doth the skies enchase.
To let whose glory lose no sight, still Pallas made him turn
Where tumult most expressed his power, and where the fight did burn. 241
One would say, assuredly, that nothing finer could be conceived. But we must change our opinion, I think,
[Page 128]
when we are confronted with the following lines concerning Achilles:
                     She wooed, and he was won;
And straight Minerva honoured him, who Jove's shield clapped upon
His mighty shoulders, and his head girt with a cloud of gold
That cast beams round about his brows. And as when arms enfold
A city in an isle, from thence a fume at first appears,
Being in the day, but, when the even her cloudy forehead rears,
Thick show the fires, and up they cast their splendour, that men nigh,
Seeing their distress, perhaps may set ships out to their supply:
So, to show such aid, from his head a light rose, scaling heaven,
And forth the wall he stept and stood, nor brake the precept given
By his great mother, mixed in fight, but sent abroad his voice;
Which Pallas far off echoed, who did betwixt them hoise
Shrill tumult to a topless height. And as a voice is heard
With emulous affection, when any town is sphered
With siege of such a foe as kills men's minds, and for the town
Makes sound his trumpet: so the voice from Thetis' issue thrown
Won emulously th' ears of all. His brazen voice once heard,
The minds of all were startled so they yielded; and so feared
The fair-maned horses that they flew back, and their chariots turned
Presaging in their augurous hearts the labours that they mourned
A little after, and their guides a repercussive dread
Took from the horrid radiance of his refulgent head,
Which Pallas set on fire with grace. 242
[Page 129]
I confess, gentlemen, that when I ponder over these lines I feel unable to repress a certain feeling that literary critics, as they are called, act a little profanely when they make it a kind of business, without delicacy or scruple, to canvass, and, so to speak, pull about and dissect such poetic beauties as these. The result is that such men's minds grow callous, and the more they understand about the composition of these artistic beauties, the less they are affected by them. However, just as we do not interdict those whose profession it is to dress and cure wounds from 243 pursuing the requisite studies and investigations, though they become thereby somewhat hardened and indifferent to the sight of bodily anguish; so we too may be pardoned when we scrutinize, rather too presumptuously perhaps, the work of great poets: more especially since it really adds to their glory and renown that the hidden and deeplying beauties of their work should be placed in a clear light and be recognized by all. Premising this, I will venture to compare these two passages, relating the one to Diomed, the other to Achilles, rather more critically.
To begin with, each of them, no doubt at the touch of Minerva, is clothed with a heavenly radiance: but Diomed is in full armour, while Achilles is without accoutrements: on the one, shield and helmet glitter with divine glamour: to the other the heavenly light of itself serves alike for helmet and for shield:
And straight Minerva honoured him, who Jove's shield clapped upon
His mighty shoulders, and his head girt with a cloud of gold
That cast beams round about his brows.
This alone, I think, most vividly emphasizes the difference between the two; Diomed, the simple soldier, and Achilles, the hero. Nor are the several comparisons
[Page 130]
appropriated to each of them without pregnant significance in this regard. The glitter of Diomed strikingly burns:
Like rich Autumnus' golden lamp, whose brightness men admire
Past all the other host of stars, when, with his cheerful face
Fresh washed in lofty ocean waves, he doth the skies enchase.
The coronal of Achilles, on the other hand, is not some bright and shining object that he has put on, but heaven's own light and protection enshrouding his whole self: as clearly appears from the little picture of the besieged island with wide-flaming beacons of distress seen from afar. And lastly, how striking, how impressive, is the description of the ominous terror felt by the very horses at the sound of the hero's voice:
                     And so feared
The fair-maned horses that they flew back, and their chariots turned
Presaging in their augurous hearts the labours that they mourned.
244 It was indeed the popular and traditional belief that when some messenger was sent to men from the gods above or from the spirits of the dead, he was observed and recognized even by dumb animals. Homer transfers this to the living and breathing Achilles, as a token of his more than human majesty: a most weighty token indeed; and one made all the more effective in not being set off by accessories, but simply and naturally stated: like the plain unadorned narratives of miracles which are found in the Bible.
But I must not linger on this point: I pass to a circumstance which has always seemed to me to be conceived with the finest judgement: namely, that, even after Achilles' wrath has been appeased, the plot is purposely lengthened out and is still able to sustain its interest: the poet, quite fittingly, leading him back to his comrades and
[Page 131]
to the scene of action with slow and stately step, and with much pomp and circumstance on the part both of gods and men. This is mainly effected by the elaborate ‘making of his armour’. It is idle to suppose that Homer introduced this episode simply as embroidery, and that he might excite admiration at the beauty of the armour. Besides, our attention, already somewhat wearied with fighting, finds welcome relief in watching, first of all, the workshop of Vulcan himself, and then an exquisitely peaceful and rural picture scene: herds, vineyards, cornfields, flocks, and ploughs. Moreover, it was consonant to the ideas of the age that those whom fatal decree had singled from the crowd for some great achievement, should be thoroughly furnished with martial outfit. Finally, as we have hinted before, at this stage, it was necessary for the poet, as in charge of grave mysteries, to proceed with deliberation: he must dwell at length even on small details: to the end that Achilles might have his true distinction, surpassing that of Diomed and Agamemnon and all the others, whose setting forth for battle had, already more than once, been splendidly described. And I am inclined to think that Homer has performed this task more weightily and effectively than did his follower Virgil, who placed on Aeneas' shoulders by means of Vulcan's shield the ‘fame and 245 fortunes of his descendants’. 246 It is obvious, of course, that on behalf of Aeneas, only the tutelary gods of the Roman race would be invoked, while for Achilles all divinities whatsoever would be called to his aid: especially as it was customary in his time (if we may believe Aeschylus) for warriors to express their real aims and hopes upon the devices of their shields. 247 Thus, when we see the universal frame of the whole world so depicted on Achilles' shield and associated with every form of human life, what other resolve does it declare but this, well befitting a favourite
[Page 132]
of the gods—that he would proceed to battle confident in the support of heavenly power wherever it may reside?
However, I pass on lest I seem over-subtle. At all events no one will contest that, inasmuch as the story was bound to move with a kind of majestic deliberation, the writer—otherwise of swiftest movement—has most admirably, in this particular part of his work, drawn out these long evasive digressions. So too, in the whole of the following book, with like purpose, he takes up the time in discussion and debate: and, to confess the truth, this seems to me rather a tedious business, though, perhaps, it may be that Homer has here been deliberately playful, and has exhibited in Agamemnon the sort of specious relief which men invent for themselves, when in spite of noble aims they are restless in themselves, through the remembrance of past actions. It is at least true that the irrelevant stories which that king of kings tells about the births of Hercules and Eurystheus, of Juno's deceit upon Jove, and of Discord's ejection from heaven, lie open to such a suspicion. The tenor of his discourse is quite true to nature, though it may perhaps seem rather too remote from high-flown 248 epic and the grand style. But I leave the discussion to those who would have an epic smooth and polished throughout, always on a high level and striking a loud note. I am satisfied to have noted in a sentence or two how persistently, whether by means of grave affairs or trivial interludes, Achilles' return to combat is long delayed: so that all careless haste might be avoided in what was really the crown of the work. Thus Homer, who had pressed rapidly up to the crisis, has the art to hold us in suspense, once it begins to develop: a mark, assuredly, of a master hand, and displaying an attitude and execution very different from those of the ordinary run of poets.
Achilles now at last having appeared on the scene, there was risk lest, being the man he was, without equal or rival,
[Page 133]
he might end with one decisive action the whole story and fate of the war. Observe, then, with what skill the poet, while retarding the inevitable event, yet maintains undiminished the fame and renown of the unconquerable hero. First, it is clearly emphasized that the Trojans would not even have dared to meet him at all without the prompting of their favouring deities: and Jove therefore concedes them permission, hitherto withheld, to interpose in the contest:
Work out our will, Celestial powers! descend,
And, as your minds direct, your succour lend
To either host. Troy soon must lie o'erthrown,
If uncontroll'd Achilles fights alone:
Their troops but lately durst not meet his eyes. 249
Then Aeneas, who first ventured combat with Achilles, is rescued in the midst of the contest by divine interposition of Neptune (strange to say), who hitherto had ever favoured the Greeks. We must consider it indeed as the final crown to his glory that the very gods who were his allies took care that he should not win triumphs greater than fate had destined for him. Lastly, when, after incredible carnage, the war seemed to have been brought to its end, suddenly the genius of the river is roused. The whole detail of the 250 action, strenuous, fiery, full of keenest excitement as it is, seems brought before our very eyes:
                     In all his worst, Achilles yet from shore
Leaped to his midst. Then swelled his waves, then raged, then boiled again
Against Achilles. Up flew all, and all the bodies slain
In all his deeps, of which the heaps made bridges to his waves,
He belched out, roaring like a bull. The unslain yet he saves
[Page 134]
In his black whirlpits vast and deep. A horrid billow stood
About Achilles. On his shield the violence of the Flood
Beat so, it drave him back, and took his feet up, his fair palm
Enforced to catch into his stay a broad and lofty elm,
Whose roots he tossed up with his hold, and tore up all the shore.
With this then he repelled the waves, and those thick arms it bore
He made a bridge to bear him off, for all fell in, when he
Forth from the channel threw himself. The rage did terrify
Even his great spirit, and made him add wings to his swiftest feet,
And tread the land. and yet not there the Flood left his retreat,
But thrust his billows after him, and blacked them all at top,
To make him fear, and fly his charge, and set the broad field ope
For Troy to 'scape in. He sprung out a dart's cast, but came on
Again with a redoubled force. As when the swiftest flown,
And strong'st of all fowls, Jove's black hawk, the huntress, stoops upon
A much loved quarry: so charged he: his arms with horror rung
Against the black waves. Yet again he was so urged, he flung
His body from the Flood, and fled: and after him again
The waves flew roaring. 251
To such a pitch at last is the description carried, that, although long since assured of the issue, readers are horrorstricken with anxiety as to Achilles' fate: this is almost the highest tribute to a story-teller.
As for the light skirmishing on the part of the gods, which so greatly incurred Plato's displeasure, I am inclined
[Page 135]
indeed to think it is below the dignity of the subject: but it certainly seems to me skilfully introduced at this particular juncture of affairs. For it being thus once made apparent that, should it come to a pitched battle, the Grecian deities must be victorious, forthwith Juno, Minerva, Neptune, and the rest retire from the field, relinquishing the glory of triumph to Achilles alone.
And so I come, finally, to the conclusion, gentlemen, that 252 Homer designedly drew out his story by slow and difficult stages till he reached the climax of the war—which in fact, as I have said, consists in the death of one man, namely Hector.
‘But’, say some, ‘after Hector's death, must not the two remaining books be held somewhat needless? One seeming more appropriate to athletes than to warriors: the other merely describing, and indeed most beautifully, the mourning of a father and the appeasement of a hero's wrath: yet neither of exciting interest, so far as the war is concerned.’
Unquestionably, such critics, if any there be, show themselves rather crude in judgement, and we need not give much weight to their appreciation of poetry. Are we, even in such cases as this, to reduce everything to the strict and unbending standard of utility? Surely we are not wearied in lingering for a short while over funeral honours paid to high-souled heroes? Do the funeral rites and ceremonials of such men as Patroclus and Hector move us in no degree? As if the Iliad did not fall to a close far more delightfully and completely than if (as in Virgil's Aeneid ) dead blank silence followed, when the fighting was at an end.
But if we may, not altogether improperly, conclude the whole bias and disposition of Homer's poetry by reference to the character of Achilles, as being intended by the poet to be a highly-finished example and model of all heroes,
[Page 136]
then most assuredly weighty reasons are not wanting to justify an elaborate description of the funeral rites of Patroclus and of Hector, as part of the perfected and completely rounded poem. For it was a fitting office of friendship to spare nothing which could honour a departed comrade, and it was a true instinct of humanity and pity to pardon a foe, when once defeated. Each of these qualities, moreover, results from a most scrupulous religious feeling, deep-rooted in heathen societies, and such as Homer, without doubt, intended to have great weight with Achilles and to be sufficient by its sole force to tame the unbridled passion of his ardent mind.
253 And this is the reason why, even now, Christian men have a kindly feeling for Achilles: they see that he is concerned not merely for material things which may be seen and touched, but looks beyond, and has in regard the heavenly abodes of heroes, and the rites due to their departed spirits. This is most manifest throughout the whole book styled, ‘The Funeral Games in Honour of Patroclus,’ and especially in that well-known passage, one of the sweetest and most pathetic, as I think, in the whole range of poetry:
The friend the shores maritimal
Sought for his bed, and found a place, fair, and upon which played
The murmuring billows. There his limbs to rest, not sleep, he laid,
Heavily sighing. Round about, silent and not too near,
Stood all his Myrmidons, when straight, so overlaboured were
His goodly lineaments with chase of Hector, that beyond
His resolution not to sleep, Sleep cast his sudden bond
Over his sense and loosed his care. Then of his wretched friend
The Soul appeared: at every part the form did comprehend
[Page 137]
His likeness; his fair eyes, his voice, his stature, every weed
His person wore it fantasied;
Towards the close, spondaic feet predominate, so that the very measure itself, being subdued and mournful, bespeaks a profound grief.
                                         and stood above his head
This sad speech uttering: ‘Dost thou sleep? Aeacides, am I
Forgotten of thee? Being alive, I found thy memory
Ever respectful: but now, dead, thy dying love abates.
Inter me quickly, enter me in Pluto's iron gates,
For now the souls (the shades) of men, fled from this being, beat
My spirit from rest, and stay my much-desired receipt
Amongst souls placed beyond the flood. Now every way I err
About this broad-doored house of Dis. O help then to prefer
My soul yet further! Here I mourn, but, had the funeral fire
Consumed my body, never more my spirit should retire
From hell's low region: from whence souls never are retrieved
To talk with friends here.’ 254
These quotations are somewhat lengthy, yet I may be forgiven for introducing them, since, unless I mistake, they are strikingly significant of the one influence which, as I have said, was most able to temper and soften the stern mind of the hot-blooded soldier. Consider a little more attentively, and seriously ponder, if you will, those reproachful words:
                     Being alive, I found thy memory
Ever respectful: but now, dead, thy dying love abates.
Thus even in sleep he is pursued by the reproach, as if 255 it were a base and signal impiety, of having been for a mere
[Page 138]
short hour, forgetful, not of a living but a departed comrade. A striking contrast this to our daily experience and observation of men now. So effeminate have we become, that we can scarcely endure, when we have lost a friend, to wear the signs of mourning for a month or so. It cannot be wondered at, then, if some of our critics are impatient of Homer's elaborate detail as to the grief of the Myrmidons, the building, dedication, and firing of the funeral pile, the ordered ceremonies of the feast and games. Some, however, there will ever be, I think, whom these things will deeply and solemnly interest: not merely as antiquarian lore, of which, indeed, the whole picture is richly full: but because of their close connexion with the deepest instincts of nature and of human life.
And then, is it not also true that Achilles is, with prophetic soul, really celebrating his own obsequies, at the same time as those of his friend? There seems some such suggestion in the rest of the speech of the shade seen in a dream:
                     ‘Nor shall I; a hateful fate deprived
My being here, that at my birth was fixed, and to such fate
Even thou, O godlike man, art marked; the deadly Ilion gate
Must entertain thy death. O then, I charge thee now, take care
That our bones part not; but as life combined in equal fare
Our loving beings, so let death. When from Opunta's towers
My father brought me to your roofs (since, 'gainst my will, my powers
Incensed, and indiscreet at dice, slew fair Amphidamas)
Then Peleus entertained me well; then in thy charge I was
By his injunction and thy love: and therein let me still
Receive protection. Both our bones, provide in thy last will,
[Page 139]
That one urn may contain; and make that vessel all of gold,
That Thetis gave thee, that rich urn.’
And Achilles himself utters expressions to just the same effect:
And then let search Patroclus' bones ...
Being found, I'll find an urn of gold t'enclose them, and betwixt
The air and them two kels of fat lay on them, and to rest
Commit them, till mine own bones seal our love, my 256 soul deceased.
The sepulchre I have not charged to make of too much state,
But of a model something mean, that you of younger fate
When I am gone, may amplify with such a breadth and height
As fits your judgements and our worths. 257
Furthermore, not a word escapes him in his grief, unworthy of a brave and lofty soul: though there is nothing harder to bear than such enforced clam. It is evident that, henceforward, he will endure a lifelong sorrow, yet a sorrow not weak or womanish or such as hinders the duties of daily life. Indeed, through the whole course of the games he is alert in mind, ceremonious, and punctilious: and then, finally, yields himself to mourning and lamentation, as to a fresh duty imposed upon him.
And now I will deal as shortly as possible with the objections to that other episode. Observe first that Achilles' barbarous treatment of the body of Hector was due rather to a sort of crude and savage religious instinct than to mere blind rage. Wrought upon and excited as he assuredly was, he had only one aim, was bent upon one thing alone, namely, that every due honour should be paid to his dead friend. And it was regarded as a necessary part of such honour that Hector should suffer the fullest
[Page 140]
penalty. Those barbarous insults, therefore, happen at their due time, as a solemn duty; they were associated with and form part of Patroclus' funeral rites. Indeed, even when these rites were ended, at the very outset of the last book, Achilles, overcome with grief and watching, is thus described:
                                         Although he saw the morn
Show sea and shore his ecstasy, he left not, till at last
Rage varied his distraction; horse, chariot, in haste
He called for, and, those joined, the corse was to his chariot tied,
And thrice about the sepulchre he made his fury ride,
Dragging the person. All this past, in his pavilion
Rest seized him, but with Hector's corse his rage had never done,
Still suffering it t’ oppress the dust. 258
It needed a message from the gods to convince him that it was right and fitting for him to allow Hector's burial, even though the spirit of his dead friend might delight in seeing him unburied. And further, when the body has been surrendered, and indeed it was with his own hands that he 259 placed it on Priam's chariot, he humbly implores the shade of Patroclus to forgive him, as if he had been guilty of some impiety:
                     O friend, do not except
Against this favour to our foe, if in the deep thou hear,
And that I give him to his sire: he gave fair ransom; dear
In my observance is Jove's will: and whatsoever part
Of all these gifts by any mean I fitly may convert
To thy renown here, and will there, it shall be poured upon
Thy honoured sepulchre. 260
In brief, should any one demand, ‘To what purpose these last two books?’ I might admit, perhaps, that judged by an historian's test they are irrelevant. For history is concerned with the sequence of events: once this is completed (and with Hector's death it is plain that Troy's
[Page 141]
fall cannot be delayed) it is needless to add more. But if the great poet not only intended to chronicle the downfall of Troy, but through it to exhibit the ideal of heroic valour, it will at once appear, beyond question, that little indeed of these books could be spared without loss.
We see in fact, gentlemen, that, just as dramatists are wont to adapt their plays to the individualities of the leading actors, so the Iliad was carefully planned in view of the character of Achilles. And we may add this crowning fact, that, whensoever we compare him with the other warriors, the more glorious his qualities appear. Whilst so many great warriors, differing widely from each other, are each assigned fitting praise, it is somehow magically contrived that Homer seems not only to discourse of courage and resolution better than all the philosophers, but also that the protagonist Achilles stands forth all the greater by implied comparison with the other chiefs.
Hector I have spoken of already: while far more 261 lovable, he is without the majesty of Achilles. The poet represents him not as ‘god-descended’, but only ‘god-like’; no dark shadow of destiny hangs over his fortunes. He is all through unvaryingly brave and noble, but hardly ever passes the measure of humanity. He insists, just like any good husband and father, on the duty of dying, should need arise, for one's country:
                     If any bravely buy
His fame or fate with wounds or death, in Jove's name let him die.
Who for his country suffers death sustains no shameful thing,
His wife in honour shall survive, his progeny shall spring
In endless summers, and their roofs with patrimony swell.
And all this, though with all their freight the Greek ships we repel. 262
[Page 142]
Compare too his address to Paris:
But come, hereafter we shall calm these hard conceits of theirs,
When, from their ports the foe expulsed, high Jove to them hath given
Wished peace, and us free sacrifice to all the Powers of Heaven. 263
We plainly see that home, peace, and ease are the rewards of victory he keeps before him. Nothing like this crosses Achilles' mind, after he has once decided to die at Troy for sake of renown.
What need to linger over the rest? Take Agamemnon: intended by the poet, as the type, I think, of the aristocratical temper: a lover of his country, but still more jealous of his own importance.
Diomed again, keen in his quest for reputation, for renown, nay, even for wealth: he seems indeed, more than once, to put himself forward as a rival of Achilles: as, for instance, in passages such as those in the Ninth Book, after the embassy had been dismissed:
Would God, Atrides, thy request were yet to undertake,
And all thy gifts unoffered him! He's proud enough beside,
But this ambassage thou hast sent will make him burst with pride.
But let us suffer him to stay, or go, at his desire,
Fight when his stomach serves him best, or when Jove shall inspire. 264
265 But those few lines alone—which have become proverbial—describing the exchange of armour with Glaucus, are sufficient to place them wide apart from one another:
                                         And then did Jupiter elate
The mind of Glaucus, who, to show his reverence to the state
[Page 143]
Of virtue in his grandsire's heart, and gratulate beside
The offer of so great a friend, exchanged, in that good pride,
Curets of gold for those of brass, that did on Diomed shine,
One of a hundred oxen's price, the other but of nine. 266
Glaucus does not lose more in regard to repute for prudence and caution, than does Diomed as to generosity and frank simplicity. One cannot imagine such a story being told of Achilles even in jest.
Quite different from both is the character of Ajax, which is nevertheless characteristic of a simple soldier and camp hero: frank and blunt of speech: always ready to obey, quick in execution, not over-subtle in counsel. I fancy him as a retainer, serving his lord whole-heartedly, without thought of praise or reward. Whether an order issued is right or wrong, that is nothing to him: his one thought is diligently to execute his task. When singled out as one of the embassy to Achilles, he neither objects nor refuses, in this respect widely different from Diomed: when Achilles refuses, he plies him with little delicacy of feeling:
                                         Let us insist no more
On his persuasion. I perceive the world would end before
Our speeches end in this affair. We must with utmost haste
Return his answer, though but bad. The peers are elsewhere placed,
And will not rise till we return. Great Thetis' son hath stored
Proud wrath within him, as his wealth, and will not be implored,
Rude that he is, nor his friends' love respects, do what they can,
Wherein past all we honoured him. ...
[Page 144]
But thee a wild and cruel spirit the gods for plague have given.
And for one girl, of whose fair sex we come to offer seven,
The most exempt for excellence, and many a better prise.
Then put a sweet mind in thy breast: 267
The soldierly simplicity of the man! Achilles, he thinks, wastes time on trifles: and Ajax neither sympathizes with 268 nor understands him. ‘One maid has been taken: seven are offered instead—what possible ground for hesitation is there or what more can you want?’
But Ajax's masterpiece is his prayer to Jove over the slain Patroclus:
O father Jupiter, do thou the sons of Greece release
Of this felt darkness; grace this day with fit transparences,
And give the eyes thou giv'st, their use, destroy us in the light,
And work thy will with us, since needs thou wilt against us fight. 269
I have quoted these familiar lines, as themselves alone summing up, I think, the tone and temper of Ajax: a plain unvarnished soldier unquestionably, less anxious for success than for a hard and strenuous contest. In a word: Homer's conception of his temper and quality is almost exactly what among ourselves we are wont to associate with an ordinary average man of the people.
For him who desires to follow up this clue, there is a wealth of example available: Ulysses, Nestor, Antilochus, Sarpedon for instance, and others: every one of whom is gifted, over and above the splendid and glorious soldierly virtues common to them all, with some characteristic and distinction of his own. But I am afraid, indeed, I have been for some time too insistent and almost tedious upon
[Page 145]
a quite obvious theme. However, I have observed it often happens that students of Homer, carried away by the swiftness of the narrative and the rush of the emotions, fail to appreciate his wonderful constructive skill, his rich variety and marvellous method. And thus I judged it might not be irrelevant, especially for the sake of my younger hearers, if I took this opportunity to show somewhat fully how Homer keeps, as far as he possibly can, this heroic temper and quality of Achilles before his mind, both in disposing the sequence of the action and in constituting the characters of the subordinate actors.
I must now press forward to the remaining portion of the subject: and examine if anywhere soever, either from choice of subject and illustrations, or from the tone and features of his style, we can arrive at some conjecture as to the poet's bent and genius.
[Page ]
270 LECTURE IX
The warlike, and therefore the heroic, spirit of Homer illustrated by examples drawn from his treatment of camp life, of active combat, and of other peculiarly military affairs.
The ancients were wont to maintain, gentlemen, that Homer merited exceptional praise, not merely as a poet, but as being universally skilled in all arts whatsoever. This was of course an absurd and childish view to take: yet their high-soaring claim possesses a certain clear and useful significance in assisting us to form a sound judgement both of his art and of himself as an artist. For they recognized that his manner of handling all subjects exhibits him not as one working in regions foreign to himself, but as fashioning and moulding at his own will subjects which were in a real sense his own. Now our discussion has long ago made it quite clear that it is in exactly this power that the very essence of poetic art is to be found. True poets are unquestionably not confined to one region only, but range widely wheresoever they please. One and all they tinge and transfigure each subject with a brilliance and colour that are all their own:
With aether vested and a purple sky—
The blissful seats of happy souls below:
Stars of their own, and their own suns they know. 271
272 Now it was the Heroic Age, as it is called, which provided Homer with his ‘sun’ and ‘stars’: and he was either contemporary with, or was only so little removed in date from it, that he was yet able to see its form and appearance with his own eyes: he was wholly absorbed in its traditions,
[Page 147]
and neither knew nor cared to know what lay beyond it. In a word, you might safely say he would have wished, had he not been Homer, to be Achilles.
I trust, however, that this has already been emphasized sufficiently, so far as the main outline of the Iliad and the personality of Achilles are concerned. I shall now add a few further illustrations, sufficient to show that even in the scenes which he pictures, and the very words and phrases which he selects, the same bias clearly dominated.
And I am inclined to think that my contention is more strongly enforced by these instances than by the previous arguments. For it may well be, it has indeed been evidenced more than once by striking examples, that in the general conception of a poem a writer, even of primary rank, is influenced more by his time than by his own predilection. But when we examine single passages, when we scrutinize the similes and imagery, when we subject language and versification to criticism, the true bias of the poet's own mind will again and again come to the surface, whether it be naturally ingrained or the result of long habit: it is from these, when it is seen that there is a real consistency between things important and things trivial, between unexpected illustrations and the careful plan, between random touches and the whole picture, that the most confident inference may be drawn. In these respects no writer was ever more true and constant to himself than the author of the Iliad : he informs the minutest details with the very same spirit which he impresses on the whole: and that with the absolute freedom and felicity of one who is treating of themes that are truly his own.
But let us come to examples. And that we may observe some sort of limitation (for as many instances crowd upon 273 the mind as the Iliad has lines) let us consider first, what are the subjects upon which he enthusiastically delights to discourse: secondly, what are the favourite similes and
[Page 148]
comparisons which he freely and eagerly scatters through his work: lastly, what style of rhythm and metre he mainly affects.
To begin, then, with the point whence these ancient panegyrists start and to which they again work round—I suppose that we shall all agree that Homer when he treats of war and combat manifestly takes part with the fighters and marvellously sympathizes ( συμράσχΕι ) with them (I must be forgiven for employing a Greek word since Latin does not readily convey my meaning): he sympathizes, I say, with his warriors, not as deliberately seeking out warlike subjects in preference to others: but rather as displaying the spirit and tone of one who has never even dreamt of any other sort of virtue and glory than such as he had daily before his eyes.
It is this quality which pre-eminently stamps writers as contemporaries of the affairs they celebrate: a quality hardly—if indeed at all—to be attained by those who in after times attempt to describe the same events, however painstaking be their study, however versatile their genius. This it is which infallibly marks off our own primitive lays, Runic or Teutonic, from their modern imitators. I do not even except that great man whose loss two years ago we still lament: though at his magic touch the age of Western chivalry all but sprang into life again before our very eyes.
But if ever there was a man gifted with ability to make mere strength of imagination, and the fruits of learned research and study, take the place of real devotion to some contemporary object, it was surely he, gentlemen, whom I have just mentioned: whom indeed I name not only with reverence for his memory, but with deep sorrow for his loss.
274 By no poet, in my judgement, has that vivacious, swift, Homeric rush been more nearly approached. The great and important difference between them is that Homer had actually before him the very model of life and manners to
[Page 149]
which he could at any moment turn for inspiration: our own great poet had to rely on books, chronicles, and the poems of bygone times. Homer saw before his eyes what he described; his only task was to raise the whole to a higher beauty: Scott had the harder task, to reclaim from oblivion and obscurity, as best he could, a type and order of men long since departed.
But to come back to examples of Homer's intimate knowledge of, and delight in, all that belongs to military life. The whole effect of the facts themselves will be put in clearer light if we follow the soldier first in camp life, then in line of battle, and finally in hours of relaxation, manly games, and banquets. We shall throughout meet with many details such as could not have occurred to any but one taught by actual facts and realities.
To begin with, let us summon before us the picture of the bustling, restless camp, swayed hither and thither with various impulses:
The other sceptre-bearing States arose too, and obeyed
The people's Rector. Being abroad, the earth was overlaid
With flockers to them, that came forth, as when of frequent bees
Swarms rise out of a hollow rock, repairing the degrees
Of their egression endlessly, with ever rising new
From forth their sweet nest: as their store, still as it faded, grew,
And never would cease sending forth her clusters to the spring,
They still crowd out so; this flock here, that there, belabouring
The loaded flowers; so from the ships and tents the army's store
Trooped to these princes, and the court, along th' unmeasured shore;
Amongst whom, Jove's ambassadress, Fame, in her virtue shined,
Exciting greediness to hear. The rabble, thus inclined,
[Page 150]
Hurried together: uproar seized the high court; earth did groan
Beneath the settling multitude; tumult was there alone.
Thrice three vociferous heralds rose to check the rout, and get
Ear to their Jove-kept governors, and instantly was set
The huge confusion: every man stood fast, the clamour ceased. 275
276 Do not suppose (as I fear most do on reading this passage for the first time) the effect is wrought by a confused resonance of words and random press of hurrying soldiers. I never remember reading a clearer or more accurate description, whether as regards ordered sequence or welding together of detail; nor do I believe many similar examples can anywhere be found approaching nearer to Nature and Truth.
To begin with, the soldiers leave their tents, as bees one by one issue from a cave: the unceasing stream, familiar to us as boys, being finely sketched by the phrase αἰΕὶ νέον ἐρχομΕνάων (ever freshly pouring forth). Then they advance, not in close marching order, but in loose groups— ἰλαδὸν Εἰς ἀγ̂ορήν (by troops to the assembling), just as bees which hang together like a bunch of grapes; each taking his own path as it may chance, along the beach: so too ἠϊόνος ρροράροιθΕ βαθΕίης (along the unmeasured shore) vividly presents the setting and disposal of the soldiers: whom the poet pictures as seen from the land, disposed between the spectator and the immense background of sea and sky, or, as he says, ἠϊόνος βαθΕίης (unmeasured shore). Can anything be more striking? And yet, forsooth, critics are found who hesitate to allow to the ancient poets—even to Homer himself—any praise for
[Page 151]
the power of clear and vivid description! But whatever they may say as to that, at all events these lines support my contention, as proving Homer an eye-witness of, and keenly touched with unaffected pleasure in, warlike affairs.
Then come the magnificent lines:
Amongst whom Jove's ambassadress, Fame, in her virtue shined,
Exciting greediness to hear.
Pray do not think that this is introduced as mere poetic ornament—as is often assumed by critics when trifles are introduced with pomp and circumstance. My firm belief is, that if you wish to sympathize truly with the poet in 277 such details, you must put yourself in the place not of a rhetorician or romancer, but of the average common soldier. Such men are wont to be much stirred by the movement of a large crowd, such as is usually found in bustling camps: and it is easily believable that if they have to express their feeling in words they will largely use hyperbole, and a more swelling style than is demanded by strict truth. Thus, with them, the gossip running through the ranks becomes ‘Fame, Jove's messenger’: they describe the earth as groaning under the tramp of soldiery, as they hurriedly settle on the resounding earth:
                                         Earth did groan
Beneath the settling multitude.
But there are dozens of like instances whereby any one may easily satisfy himself that Homer does not speak merely from hearsay but is just like one of the common people, who describe things which have keenly struck their eye or ear with ampler language than the fact itself justifies.
So much for camp life, full of stir and movement. We next proceed to scenes of rest and quiet. Let us turn to the night-watch of the chiefs described in the Tenth Book.
[Page 152]
We need not stop now to point out the beauties of that fine picture of the wakeful and vigilant Agamemnon:
                                         And, as quick lightnings fly,
From well-deck'd Juno's sovereign, out of the thickened sky,
Preparing some exceeding rain, or hail the fruit of cold,
Or down-like snow that suddenly makes all the fields look old,
Or opes the gulfy mouth of war with his ensulphured hand,
In dazzling flashes poured from clouds, on any punished land;
So from Atrides' troubled heart, through his dark sorrows, flew
Redoubled sighs; his entrails shook, as often as his view
Admired the multitude of fires that gilt the Phrygian shade,
And heard the sounds of fifes, and shawms, and tumults soldiers made.
But when he saw his fleet and host kneel to his care and love,
He rent his hair up by the roots as sacrifice to Jove,
Burnt in his fiery sighs, still breathed out of his royal heart. ... 278
279 Nor need we dwell on the passage which draws such a splendid contrast between the Trojans banqueting and exultant over their victory, and the Greeks silent, hushed, and anxious as they keep watch; those incidents will suit my purpose better which incidentally imply Homer's intimate acquaintance with camp life. For example, Agamemnon and Menelaus carefully discuss their plans lest, as each goes his own way, they may miss finding each other in the gloom of night:
‘Command'st thou then,’ his brother asked, ‘that I shall tarry here
Attending thy resolved approach, or else the message bear,
[Page 153]
And quickly make return to thee?’ He answered: ‘Rather stay,
Lest otherwise we fail to meet, for many a different way
Lies through our labyrinthian host.’ 280
So again, there is another detail which some might criticize as even too minutely elaborate; not merely each man's armour and accoutrement, but even his general bearing, style of walk, his very position asleep on his couch and the disposition of his limbs are described. Thus Nestor, advanced in years, reclines on a luxurious cushioned bed, with splendid accoutrements about him:
Himself to Nestor, whom he found in bed within his tent,
By him his damask curets hung, his shield, a pair of darts,
His shining casque, his arming waist: in these he led the hearts
Of his apt soldiers to sharp war, not yielding to his years. 281
Is it not obvious that Homer fastens on the very objects and details sure to strike Agamemnon's first notice on entering the tent?
Diomed again, with his followers, is found sleeping on the ground in the open—a type of strict or rough discipline:
And both took course to Diomed. They found him laid in field,
Far from his tent; his armour by; about him was dispread
A ring of soldiers, every man his shield beneath his head;
His spear fixed by him as he slept, the great end in the ground,
The point that bristled the dark earth, cast a reflection round
[Page 154]
Like pallid lightnings thrown from Jove; thus this heröe lay,
And under him a big ox-hide: his royal head had stay
On arras hangings, rolled up. 282
How naturally, too, does he describe the anxious conference of the chiefs, sitting on the ground:
Beyond the dike they chose a place, near as they could from blood,
Where yet appeared the falls of some, and whence, the crimson flood
283 Of Grecian lives being poured on earth by Hector's furious chace,
He made retreat, when night repoured grim darkness in his face.
There sat they down. 284
All such traits as these, the more trivial they are in themselves, and the less claim they have to poetic charm, are only clearer and more decisive proof, I think, that Homer had either, at some time, himself seen service, or had at all events mixed familiarly with soldiers.
Next, let us observe the Homeric battalions issuing to the field and thence to battle itself. First, before all, occur to mind those beautiful lines breathing, as it seems to me, the warrior's spirit, if ever expression did:
No more they sigh, inglorious to return,
But breathe revenge, and for the combat burn. 285
[And dearer to their hearts than thoughts of home
Or wish'd return, became the battle-field.] 286
Think for a moment, a little carefully, what such a feeling really implies. First, the mere act of fighting appeals to them not simply as an avenue to fame or triumph, but as something prized and pleasing in itself. Notice, next, the instant change of feeling through the vast array—so
[Page 155]
deeply moved are they all, at the mere touch of Ulysses' sceptre: how true this is to the fickle moods of a camp mob! In a word, you have here a great truth, quite simple and the worthy expression of a brave spirit, that for warlike renown alone men should readily give up all thought of home, of country, and of family; nay, when such a hope is once raised, they cannot feel, they ought not to feel, that they have any choice. The same truth, though more fully elaborated, is found in those well-known lines spoken by Sarpedon:
                                         Glaucus, say, why are we honoured more Than other men of Lycia, in place: with greater store Of meats and cups: with goodlier roofs: delightsome gardens; walks:
More lands and better: so much wealth, that court and country talks
Of us and our possessions, and every way we go,
Gaze on us as we were their Gods? This where we dwell is so;
The shores of Xanthus ring of this; and shall we not exceed
As much in merit as in noise? Come, be we great in deed
As well as look; shine not in gold, but in the flames of 287 fight;
That so our neat-armed Lycians may say: ‘See, these are right
Our kings, our rulers: these deserve to eat and drink the best;
These govern not ingloriously; these, thus exceed the rest,
Do more than they command to do.’ O friend, if keeping back
Would keep back age from us, and death, and that we might not wrack
In this life's human sea at all, but that deferring now We shunned death ever, nor would I half this vain valour show,
Nor glorify a folly so, to wish thee to advance:
But since we must go, though not like, and that, besides the chance
[Page 156]
Proposed now, there are infinite fates of other sort in death,
Which, neither to be fled nor 'scaped, a man must sink beneath,
Come, try we, if this sort be ours, and either render thus
Glory to others, or make them resign the same to us. 288
These instances, then, declare Homer as a man to whom battle is delight: and I pass to a few others which prove him skilled in warlike affairs—not forgetting that many such exist, almost, if not quite, impossible for us now to note and appreciate, so entirely changed are the methods of warfare, more especially for men such as most of us here, who have led retired and quiet lives. Still, the subject must not be passed over: it should be fully understood, however, that there are many more of the kind than even the most learned expert, still less we ourselves, can in these days discover.
I select, in the first place, one or two which unite military knowledge with a certain poetic beauty. Not more splendid than true to life is the picture of Hector's progress through the ranks of his men:
                                         And as amidst the sky
We sometimes see an ominous star blaze clear and dreadfully,
Then run his golden head in clouds, and straight appear again:
So Hector otherwhiles did grace the vaunt-guard, shining plain,
Then in the rear-guard hid himself, and laboured everywhere
To order and encourage all; his armour was so clear,
And he applied each place so fast, that, like a lightning thrown
Out of the shield of Jupiter, in every eye he shone. 289
[Page 157]
I am reminded of that great king of France, Henry of 290 Navarre, who, like Hector, was a ‘plume-dazzling’ hero, and who at the commencement of the battle of Ivry addressed his army in some such words as these: ‘During the fight ever have regard to this white plume. Advance as it advances: and unless it leads retreat yield not you an inch.’ 291
It is likely enough that Hector, like Henry, was conspicuous in the field, not so much through his flashing armour as by his swift movement; and when Homer calls the star ‘ominous’, we all feel the striking significance of the word: for not with eye only, but with foreboding mind too, we see him dashing hither and thither.
In a wholly different situation, but exhibiting the like manner and force, we have the lines describing Hector's menacing approach to the Greek ships: each word tells of keenness, of quick movement, of exact truth:
                                         Great Hector still directs
His powers against the first near ship. 'Twas that fair bark that brought
Protesilaus to those wars, and now herself to nought. 292
The special singling out of the ship of Protesilaus seems fraught with omen:
One slew another desperately, and close the deadly toil
Was pitched on both parts. Not a shaft, nor far-off striking dart
Was used through all. One fight fell out, of one despiteful heart.
[Page 158]
Sharp axes, twybills, two-hand swords, and spears with two heads borne,
Were then the weapons: fair short swords, with sanguine hilts still worn,
Had use in like sort: of which last, ye might have numbers viewed
Drop with dissolved arms from their hands, as many down-right hewed
From off their shoulders as they fought, their bawdricks cut in twain.
And thus the black blood flowed on earth from soldiers hurt and slain. 293
The man who so minutely elaborates this picture of swords lying on the ground, partly encased in sheaths, partly withdrawn, must surely have had a fellow sympathy with soldiers:
294 When Hector once had seized the ship, he clapt his fair broad hand
Fast on the stern, and held it there, and there gave this command:
‘Bring fire, and all together shout. Now Jove hath drawn the veil
From such a day as makes amends for all his storms of hail;
By whose blest lights we take those ships that, in despite of heaven,
Took sea, and brought us worlds of woe, all since our peers were given
To such a laziness and fear: they would not let me end
Our ling'ring banes, and charge thus home, but keep home and defend,
And so they ruled the men I led. 295
Truly, as I read these lines, the mere words and rhythm make me feel that the scene is being enacted before my eyes. Nor am I conscious in any part of this vivid sketch (since as to that even one unskilled may pronounce) of the want of a hand experienced in war.
But in such an investigation as this, the most decisive
[Page 159]
tests are passages least noticeable for beauty of ornament, since they carry genuine truth on the face of them. Such are those which constantly meet us, regarding the wounds of the heroic warriors, or the way in which they died, and Homer intentionally varies these again and again. The care here bestowed is extraordinary; indeed, it is almost wearisome to ourselves, as we read them, A notable instance occurs near the opening of the Fifth Book. The Trojans having been put to flight, the poet spends great pains in describing the wounds of each. At the end we seem to have learned completely by how many kinds of wounds men having turned their backs in flight can be slain. Such carefulness of detail is surprising, if judged as poetry, but it bears unquestionable stamp of truth and actual observation: especially since in that age men's vocations not yet being highly specialized, each soldier was wont to understand and—even in critical cases—to apply remedies to his own wounds. Thus all such descriptions, and there are very many, make strongly for our contention that Homer writes of soldiers from his own experience, and that this enthusiasm and delight is shown for a theme which was truly his own.
And I almost think the fact that frequently even his 296 bravest warriors shrink from the onset of the foe points in the same direction. He has no scruple in saying of Hector, or Diomed, or even Achilles himself:
He saw, and, stopping, shunn'd the brazen death
A little space. 297
Nor do the wounded show themselves ashamed of shivering at sight of blood:
Yet, fearing he had fared much worse, the hair stood up on end
On Agamemnon, when he saw so much black blood descend;
[Page 160]
And stiff'ned with the like dismay was Menelaus too,
But seeing th'arrow's stale without, and that the head did go
No further than it might be seen, he called his spirits again. 298
Not at once, defied by Hector, do those ‘chosen chieftains of the Danai, foremost of men,’ 299 take up the challenge:
Sham'd to refuse, but fearful to accept. 300
And even Hector himself, face to face with Ajax, seems to fall short not a little of that unmoved courage which the Stoics praise:
So th' Achive rampire, Telamon, did 'twixt the hosts appear;
Smiled: yet of terrible aspéct: on earth, with ample pace,
He boldly stalked, and shook aloft his dart with deadly grace.
It did the Grecians good to see; but heartquakes shook the joints
Of all the Trojans. Hector's self felt thoughts with horrid points,
Tempt his bold bosom: but he now must make no counterflight,
Nor, with his honour, now refuse, that had provoked the fight. 301
Finally, what instinct and feeling must we suppose likely to rule, amid the full press of battle, the man who in the following splendid lines has summed in one view the fate and courage of those who fought on either side?
Had some brave chief this martial scene beheld,
By Pallas guarded through the dreadful field,
Might darts be bid to turn their points away,
And swords around him innocently play,
[Page 161]
The war's whole art with wonder he had seen,
And counted heroes where he counted men.
So fought each host, with thirst of glory fired,
And crowds on crowds triumphantly expired. 302
I turn now to certain minor details carrying a like 303 conclusion: they imply, that is to say, a writer naturally fitted for affairs, well taught and well seen in the most insignificant cares belonging to the practice of war. Such is that in the following lines, describing Sarpedon wounded by a spear:
Sarpedon from the field his comrades bore,
By pain o'erpow'r'd, as at the spear they tugg'd;
None had the skill the weapon to withdraw,
Which baffled all their efforts on the car
To place him: thus they labour'd but in vain; 304
and in this account of Diomed:
She found him at his chariot, refreshing of his wound
Inflicted by slain Pandarus; his sweat did so abound,
It much annoyed him underneath the broad belt of his shield:
With which, and tired with his toil, his soul could hardly yield
His body motion. With his hand he lifted up the belt,
And wiped away that clottered blood the fervent wound did melt. 305
Much the same, too, is the picture of the busy doings during the night attack when Rhesus was slain:
Ulysses waited on his sword, and ever as he slew,
He drew them by their strengthless heels out of the horses' sight,
That, when he was to lead them forth, they should not with affright
Boggle, nor snore, in treading on the bloody carcasses;
For being new come, they were unused to such stern sights as these.
[Page 162]
Meanwhile Ulysses loosed his horse, took all their reins in hand,
And led them forth. 306
Then there is the scene where brave Hector shatters the Grecian gates with a stone:
Close to the gate he stood: and planting firm
His foot, to give his arm its utmost pow'r,
Full on the middle dash'd the mighty mass. 307
And Patroclus at a somewhat similar crisis:
                                         Patroclus from his car
Leap'd to the ground: his left hand held his spear;
And in the right a pond'rous mass he bore
Of rugged stone, that fill'd his ample grasp. 308
It seems to have been a specially sharp and long stone 309 which gave an easy hold; this the poet pictured clearly to himself, and therefore exactly expressed it in the words:
That fill'd his ample grasp.
Take, too, the impulsive thoughts and images of Agenor, at a life and death crisis:
Or should I leave the others to their fate,
Scatter'd by Peleus' son; and from the wall
And o'er the plain of Troy direct my flight,
Far as the foot of Ida's hill, and there
Lie hid in thickest covert; and at eve,
Refresh'd by bathing in the cooling stream,
And purg'd the sweat, retrace my steps to Troy? 310
Is this a description such as could easily be thought out for himself by some unwarlike and timid spirit? Would those who strike the high epic note have tolerated reference at such grave crisis to ‘washing off sweat’? Yet nothing, if we see things as they truly are, could be more apt than this very thing. For in some strange fashion men's minds
[Page 163]
in midst of grave peril catch at slightest trifles: whether because they cannot well bear even a single additional drop to their full cup of anguish, or because genuine courage instinctively fastens on these everyday troubles lest it grow over-anxious by dwelling on greater issues.
Perhaps I may be allowed in this connexion to cite an illustration within recent memory. You will not have forgotten that noble French lady who so ably narrated the misfortunes and disasters experienced by her family some forty years ago. She herself, overcome by troubles, bereft of property, her husband dying before her eyes, in flight from ruffianly brigands, after describing her piteous plight, adds without hesitation a detail which would beyond doubt scandalize high-sounding writers such as I just mentioned—she complains that when following on foot the litter in which her wounded husband was carried, her feet were hurt and pinched by a tight shoe. 311
This little touch of nature and Agenor's human simplicity 312 are of a pair: and I lay the more stress on them because it is just this simple human minuteness which people are wont to reprehend in the utterances of great poets.
Quite in accord with these, too, is Homer's careful particularity in his description of banquets and feasts: witness the oft-quoted lines:
The thighs consum'd with fire, the inward parts
They tasted first; the rest upon the spits
Roasted with care, and from the fire withdrew;
Their labours ended and the feast prepar'd
They shar'd the social meal, nor lack'd there aught. 313
And the reward of Ajax with a larger share of the sacrificed victim:
All had enough: but Telamon the king fed past the rest
With good large pieces of the chine. 314
[Page 164]
So, too, the praise assigned to Patroclus for his skill (which our own ancestors fostered in well-born young men, whether servants of pupils) in preparing and setting forth the banqueting tables of his chief:
How oft hast thou, ill-fated, dearest friend,
Here in this tent with eager zeal prepar'd
The tempting meal, whene'er the sons of Greece
In haste would arm them for the bloody fray! 315
These exquisite lines recall to mind that soldierly hospitality with which Achilles entertained the embassy of Agamemnon—described in the Ninth Book:
Patroclus kindled then a blazing fire:
And when the fire burnt hotly and the flame
Subsided, spread the glowing embers out,
And hung the spits above: then sprinkled o'er
The meat with salt, and lifted from the stand.
The viands cooked and placed upon the board,
From baskets fair Patroclus portioned out
316 The bread to each: the meat Achilles shared.
Facing the sage Ulysses sat the host
On th' other side the tent: and bade his friend,
Patroclus, give the gods their honours due:
He in the fire the wonted offerings burnt. 317
These all suggest the soldier: nor can any one fitly criticize them but one who has made special study of life on service, whether in the camp or on board ship, since the latter is even more available to an Englishman.
We pass easily from banqueting to athletic games: and find here, as, too, in hunting and the chase, that the spirit of war and martial life is inculcated and felt throughout.
But no need to dwell on this: the thing speaks for itself. I should like, however, to emphasize the great difference in this particular between Homer and Pindar. Homer, just as if he were one of the competitors, strenuously throws himself now into this contest, now into the other:
[Page 165]
and with pleasure and zest shows what was to be done, what avoided. But Pindar you will find all through his many odes, hardly two or three times describes the actual details of a contest. At the very first chance occasion gives him, he revels in far and wide digression. I intend to examine this contrast to the best of my power when the time comes for reviewing Pindar's own poems. But I just touch on it now as throwing not a little light on Homer's genius.
Then it could not but be that one who so enthusiastically made war his main delight should expatiate upon chariots, horses, weapons, and all the apparatus of military glory. As to armour and weapons, the most striking passage is where Thetis appears before Achilles' tent laden with the presents of Vulcan:
The drops the radiant burden on the ground;
Clang the strong arms, and ring the shores around:
Back shrink the Myrmidons, with dread surprise, 318
And from the broad effulgence turn their eyes.
Unmoved, the hero kindles at the show,
And feels with rage divine his bosom glow;
From his fierce eyeballs living flames expire,
And flash incessant like a stream of fire:
He turns the radiant gift; and feeds his mind
On all th' immortal artist had designed. 319
And lest any one should urge that these are praised as being the gift of a god and not for the sake of the accoutrement in itself, turn to the lines which splendidly describe the Greeks girding themselves for the battle: theirs were without doubt arms of man's workmanship only:
So helms succeeding helms, so shields from shields
Catch the bright beams, and brighten all the fields;
Broad glittering breastplates, spears with pointed rays,
Mix in one stream, reflecting blaze on blaze:
[Page 166]
Thick beats the centre as the coursers bound,
With splendour flame the skies, and laugh the fields around.
   Full in the midst, high-towering o'er the rest,
His limbs, in arms divine, Achilles dress'd;
Arms which the father of the fires bestow'd,
Forged on th' eternal anvils of the god. 320
The whole passage shines and glitters with flaming brilliance.
Of gentler character, yet pointing in the same direction, is the description of the favourite bow of Pandarus, of the favourite breastplate of Achilles, or that of the armour which Diomed and Ulysses borrowed when preparing for their night adventure.
The same inference may be drawn from Homer's assignment of all these equipments—chariots, horses, armour—to the very gods themselves! not only to Minerva her helmet and shield, to Apollo his bow and arrows, but to Juno, too, her chariot, to Neptune, even to highest Jove himself—all the apparatus of heroic panoply:
This said, his brass-hoofed winged horse he did to chariot bind,
321 Whose crests were fringed with manes of gold; and golden garments shined
On his rich shoulders; in his hand he took a golden scourge,
Divinely fashioned, and with blows their willing speed did urge
Midway betwixt the earth and heaven. To Ida then he came,
Abounding in delicious springs, and nurse of beasts untame,
Where on the mountain Gargarus, men did a fane erect
To his high name, and altars sweet: and there his horse he checked,
Dissolved them from his chariot, and in a cloud of jet
[Page 167]
He covered them, and on the top took his triumphant seat,
Beholding Priam's famous town, and all the fleet of Greece. 322
It may be suggested that all this is simply after the fashion of that age, and in no way throws light on the leanings of Homer himself. Now, first, I hold we must maintain strenuously—with horse, foot, and artillery, as they say—that it is the part of average and mediocre poets to follow their own times: it is the prerogative of Homer, and of such as stand forth commandingly like Homer, to impress their own personality and standpoint upon their contemporaries.
Next, all the marks by which great writers especially declare their own true aim are duly found here. Nowhere does the verse flow more smoothly, nowhere is the language more impetuous, or the imagery clearer, than when he marshals the gods to battle.
Minerva wrapt her in the robe that curiously she wove,
With glorious colours, as she sate on th' azure floor of Jove,
And wore the arms that he puts on, bent to the tearful field.
About her broad-spread shoulders hung his huge and horrid shield,
Fringed round with ever-fighting snakes.
———
                                         On her big head she placed
His four-plumed glittering casque of gold, so admirably vast
It would an hundred garrisons of soldiers comprehend:
Then to her shining chariot her vigorous feet ascend;
And in her violent hand she takes his grave, huge, solid lance,
With which the conquests of her wrath she useth to advance,
And overturns whole fields of men, to show she was the Seed
Of him that thunders. 323
[Page 168]
But grant that this story suited the popular taste, yet even then the realistic power, and simple, direct clearness— 324 ἐναργ̂Εία as it is called—with which it is told, are proof enough that the poet shared the popular feeling.
But among this whole class of examples the descriptions of the warriors' horses easily take the first place in importance—not that they are very numerous, but that they are so appropriate, so impressive, so full of true feeling. It was well ordered assuredly that the poet whose trumpet call was for all ages to inflame the soldier's spirit should at the same time celebrate with a peculiar affection the soldier's friend and servant. I pass by that well-known passage, in which the very rhythm and free movement of the lines show that the poet is revelling in a subject dear to his heart:
The wanton courser thus, with reins unbound,
Breaks from his stall and beats the trembling ground;
Pamper'd and proud he seeks the wonted tides,
And laves, in height of blood, his shining sides:
His head now freed he tosses to the skies:
His mane dishevell'd o'er his shoulders flies:
He snuffs the females in the distant plain,
And springs, exulting, to his fields again. 325
Note how appropriately the broken, abrupt phrases accord with the horse's wild unchecked career:
And springs, exulting, to his fields again.
Now, however, I wish rather to examine instances associating the fate and fortune of certain noble horses with vital events in the Iliad , where they are shown as actively, and indeed intelligently, playing their part, at most critical junctures. To begin with, Diomed, even when in actual peril of his own life, seems after all most concerned lest the enemies' horses may escape:
[Page 169]
If amply-wise Athenia give both their lives to me,
Rein our horse to their chariot hard, and have a special heed
To seize upon Aeneas' steeds, that we may change their breed,
And make a Grecian race of them that have been long of Troy. 326
Then listen to him, the very next day, boasting of them as 327 being now his own horses:
                                         My chariot therefore use,
And try how ready Trojan horse can fly him that pursues,
Pursue the flier, and every way perform the varied fight;
I forced them from Anchises' son, well skilled in cause of flight. 328
In utter contrast is Hector's mind, and far other his address to his horses:
Make me some worthy recompense for so much choice of meat,
Given you by fair Andromache; bread of the purest wheat,
And with it, for your drink, mixed wine, to make ye wished cheer,
Still serving you before myself, her husband young and dear. 329
Although some scholars amuse themselves by rejecting these lines, to my mind, nevertheless, they are characteristic of Hector in the highest degree: and may well be compared with those spoken by Achilles which we have already quoted, and which form the most splendid illustration of my present point:
Xanthus and Balius! of Podarges' strain
(Unless ye boast that heavenly race in vain),
Be swift, be mindful of the load ye bear,
And learn to make your master more your care:
[Page 170]
Through falling squadrons bear my slaughtering sword,
Nor, as ye left Patroclus, leave your lord. 330
I cite them here, however, not as illustrating the wonderful self-consistency of these heroes even in smallest details, but to emphasize the more clearly Homer's loving care as suggesting his personal feeling even in such things as these.
But since mention has been made of Achilles' horses it would be almost a crime to overlook the impressive lines which picture them weeping in sorrow for Patroclus. And so I conclude the whole argument with citation of them as reaching the high-water mark of such passages; our argument, remember, being wholly directed to maintain that Homer viewed everything with the eye of a soldier:
                                         When strange affects contended
In these immortal heaven-bred horse of great Aeacides,
331 Whom, once removed from forth the fight, a sudden sense did seize
Of good Patroclus' death, whose hands they oft had undergone,
And bitterly they wept for him. Nor could Automedon
With any manage make them stir; oft use the scourge to them,
Oft use his fairest speech, as oft threats never so extreme,
They neither to the Hellespont would bear him nor the fight. 332
Everybody knows that horses are wont in any great confusion and excitement, as, for instance, when their stables are ablaze, to stand stock-still and immovable. Nor should this particular case be considered a miracle. Who has not observed how dogs, horses, and all domestic animals often sympathize with us, especially when they miss one who has been accustomed to feed them?
[Page 171]
But still as any tombstone lays his never stirrèd weight
On some good man or woman's grave for rites of funeral,
So unremoved stood these steeds. 333
Observe that the comparison selected is pre-eminently appropriate and apt for mourners: we may fairly match it with the simile of our great Shakespeare describing a girl pining away through sorrow:
                                         She pin'd in thought,
And with a green and yellow melancholy,
She sat like Patience on a monument,
Smiling at grief. 334
So Shakespeare: but no one will suppose he had Homer's lines in mind: Homer, as his subject demanded, is the more simple: each with a kind of consummate instinct (it was no art to be taught) has so adapted the same image to his need that nothing could be happier. But to return to Homer:
So unremovèd stood these steeds, their heads to earth let fall,
And warm tears gushing from their eyes, with passionate desire
Of their kind manager, their manes, that flourished with the fire
Of endless youth allotted them, fell through the yoky sphere,
Ruthfully ruffled and defiled. Jove saw their heavy cheer,
And pitying them, spake to his mind. 335
A creed worthy of a poet's genius and the wisdom of a sage 336 —that Jove cares not only for the race of men but the whole world of living things.
And I doubt whether thoughts more grave and solemn
[Page 172]
than he attributes to the god are to be found in ancient philosophy:
                                         ‘Poor wretched beasts,’ said he,
‘Why gave we you t'a mortal king, when immortality
And incapacity of age so dignifies your states?
Was it to haste the miseries poured out on human fates?
Of all the miserablest things that breathe and creep on earth,
No one more wretched is than man.’ 337
He touches that inscrutable question which still hides its secret, even from us though taught by revelation: Why should it be that, often and often, even innocent dumb creatures should be involved in the evils of wretched man?
A result of his very difficulty is that not only in the foregoing instance, but throughout the whole range of poets, so far as dumb animals are concerned, we can even yet clearly sympathize with the mind and feeling of the old writers; the case being mostly quite otherwise, through changed views of religion, where men's lives and manners are in question. I hope to deal with this more fully in what remains to be said of the Iliad : where my object will be to show that Homer's mind and disposition can be inferred not only from his story, but from his imagery and the comparisons which he draws from every quarter, and from the choice which he makes of poetic ornament and beauty, to illustrate both the language and the subjects of which he treats.
[Page ]
LECTURE X 338
Importance, for the true appreciation of Homer, of acquaintance (1) with Eastern life, (2) with the manners and habits of country folk. Proof drawn from the similes and the language of the Iliad that its writer lived a wandering open-air life, and was a poor man. The reason why boys so delight in Homer.
As I now propose to review critically that aspect of Homer's art which relates to ornamental imagery and literary style, it seems not irrelevant to indicate here shortly what are the special aids which will assist us to form a just inference as to Homer's character, and to put ourselves in his place.
For assuredly (as has often been remarked) it is much more easy for those writers who celebrate the charms of country scenes, of ease, retirement, and of love, to win the sympathy of after ages: whereas I am afraid that, as the result of the complete change of manners, poems of action, real life, and minutely drawn character are in danger of failing to appeal to us. So much the more was Homer divinely inspired: for though devoted to this latter class of subject, he has been the favourite of all readers throughout the ages. So true are the hues with which he colours every part; 339 so real his sympathy not merely with all that is Greek, but with all that is truly human, that under his spell even men like ourselves, leading lives widely apart from the camp, seem able at every point to detect the presence of a martial, nay, a truly heroic spirit in the poet. He does not seek out, but rather catches up as they spontaneously suggest themselves, just the exact similes, the thoughts, the recurring phrases which we can well suppose would occur to a hardy weather-beaten soldier.
[Page 174]
And I am emboldened to speak the more confidently by means of those aids to which I just referred, and which, I think, are to a great extent derived partly from the Bible and partly from the everyday talk of ordinary men, especially of those in the country.
I say, first, then, that careful study of the Jewish poets and prophets must necessarily be of great assistance in reading Homer: for it is plain that in both similar conditions prevail to a very great extent, not only in warfare but in life generally. Whether at home or abroad: whether in fighting or feasting: whether in hospitality, or in speech and form of dress, ancient Judaism bears throughout its history the tone and temper of the heroic age.
Nor is it without importance that almost all the Scriptures were written—under divine guidance—by men of much the same condition in life as we infer Homer to have been, neither leisured nor of high station, but, if ever men were, markedly capable and experienced in affairs.
And, most important of all, in reading the Scriptures, we assuredly know that we are in presence of truth itself, and that not even the smallest detail need be withdrawn from their full story. Consequently it is by their standard, when we have once ascertained and tested it, that Homer and his fellows must be judged. Writers who are found in 340 apt harmony with the Scriptures may safely be taken as also in accord with nature and truth, and as presenting us with a lifelike picture of a heroic race.
In Homer's case, moreover, the Hebrew Scriptures are perhaps of more assistance than in most others, since he was himself at least half an Asiatic. So it comes about that, for him, the general features of sky, land, and sea are especially touched with such colour as must necessarily have day by day met the eye of one constantly familiar with the flat plains of Asia or the shores of the Aegean Sea.
By way of test, take the tropical storm, harbinger not
[Page 175]
of rain but of heat, which makes such a striking simile of Mars as he withdraws from the battle:
                                         Up flew the God to heaven;
And with him was through all the air as black a tincture driven,
To Diomed's eyes, as when the earth half choked with smoking heat
Of gloomy clouds, that stifle men and pitchy tempests threat,
Ushered with horrid gusts of wind. 341
So, too, in the common case of similes, if the poet happens to let fall details indicating locality, these always suggest an inhabitant of the district near the Troad.
And as two lateral-sited winds, the west wind and the north,
Meet at the Thracian sea's black breast, join in a sudden blore,
Tumble together the dark waves, and pour upon the shore
A mighty deal of forth and weed. 342
                                         And as about the flood
Caïster, in an Asian mead, flocks of the airy brood,
Cranes, geese, or long-necked swans, here, there, proud of their pinions fly,
And in their falls lay out such throats, that with their spiritful cry
The meadow shrieks again. 343
Lastly, to take the most frequent illustration, the mention of lions would be quite natural in a Lydian or Carian, but less likely in a Greek. To my knowledge, there is no evidence that lions were ever met with in Greece: yet the writer of the Iliad may be inferred to have reckoned them as a familiar, almost a daily, experience.
It is to be wished indeed that some learned Orientalist
[Page 176]
344 would test these details systematically. I fully believe that they would prove no less admirable for truth and accuracy than for literary and artistic skill: as it is, they do indeed appeal to us, yet they do not receive the praise they really deserve, not only because of our unfamiliarity with the subject, but also because insipid imitators have for ages past talked of wild animals of which they knew nothing, simply on Homer's authority. But do not imagine that the many references to lions in the Iliad are merely identical repetitions and uniform. From no source does he draw similes more effective or more varied: we have before our very eyes the spectacle of the high-spirited beast careering through the thickets, now dashing into sheepfolds, now at bay harassed with missiles and shouting, now engrossed in feasting on a goat or stag he has killed: now (as is their wont) tenderly carrying the cubs or holding them with his teeth:
Then Ajax gathered to the corse, and hid it with his targe,
There setting down as sure a foot as, in the tender charge
Of his loved whelps, a lion doth, two hundred hunters near
To give him onset, their more force makes him the more austere,
Drowns all their clamour in his roars, darts, dogs, doth all despise,
And lets his rough brows down so low they cover all
his eyes. 345
All this savours not of Europe, but of Asia. So is it, too, with other wild beasts from which his similes are sometimes taken: such as those ‘raw flesh eating’ jackals, well known throughout the East as attendants upon lions, and the panther found in Asia Minor, even in Cicero's time, 346
[Page 177]
whose incredibly fierce courage Homer paints so clearly that we feel he must have often witnessed it:
                                         This last heart made him bold
To stand Achilles, and stirred up a mighty mind to blows.
And as a panther, having heard the hounds' trail, doth disclose
Her freckled forehead, and stares forth from out some deep-grown wood 347
To try what strength dares her abroad; and when her fiery blood
The hounds have kindled, no quench serves of love to live or fear,
Though struck, though wounded, though quite through she feels the mortal spear,
But till the man's close strength she tries, or strows earth with his dart,
She puts her strength out: so fared it with brave Agenor's heart,
And till Achilles he had proved, no thoughts no deeds once stirred
His fixed foot. 348
Instances such as these show very clearly how much a scholar would gain for the study of Homer, who had come to feel himself at home in Asiatic life by a thorough knowledge of the Scriptures.
I pass on to the other class of tests which may serve to set in clearer light the whole principle and method of Homeric poetry. I propose to compare with it the simple speech of plain men, either relating what they have done, or describing picturesquely what they have seen. If I do not mistake we shall find a striking agreement between them.
To begin with, Homer, when he has to make a comparison, delights as a rule to suggest simple and obvious resemblances such as at first sight arrest the attention even of uncultivated people. We are astonished, not without reason, that the sources from which he draws his similes are so few when
[Page 178]
the similes drawn from them are so countless and so varied. Just as in music no more than seven notes are the foundation of the whole rich elaboration of the divine art, so the like marvel is found in Homer, the prince of poets. With the aid of six or seven general types he has pictures and similes sufficient to illustrate the whole rich world of the Trojan war and the heroic age.
Chief among these are those which depict the panorama of the sky, now, it may be, calm, now again disturbed by wind and cloud. Listen to the following few lines (out of many available), which clearly imply that Homer's observation was not that of a stay-at-home or leisured student, 349 but gained by experience of voyagings by sea and land, under martial discipline:
The winds transferred into the friendly sky,
Their supper's savour: to the which they sat delightfully,
And spent all night in open field. Fires round about them shined.
As when about the silver moon, when air is free from wind,
And stars shine clear, to whose sweet beams, high prospects and the brows
Of all steep hills and pinnacles, thrust themselves up for shows,
And even the lowly valleys joy to glitter in their sight,
When the unmeasured firmament bursts to disclose her light,
And all the signs in heaven are seen that glad the shepherd's heart:
So many fires disclosed their beams, made by the Trojan part,
Before the face of Ilion, and her bright turrets
showed. 350
One can imagine the depths of the clear air at midsummer: the freshening breeze, the cleared sky: the moon, almost at her full, so illuminating the whole heaven that the lesser
[Page 179]
stars are eclipsed while the great constellations are seen in unrivalled glory: then the mountain, the sea cliffs, the woody groves, the bare steeps just emerging into view: no wonder that the shepherd exults with joy as at the sight of an old friend after a long absence.
Let us consider another passage:
And as, upon a hill's steep top, the south wind pours a cloud,
To shepherds thankless, but by thieves, that love the night, allowed,
A darkness letting down, that blinds, a stone's cast off, men's eyes. 351
Most writers would fasten on picturesque surroundings: his first thought is the effect on the flock; does not this argue a mind experienced and watchful in pastoral cares? It would at once occur to any one, I should think, how decisively these lines suggest the daily speech of some simple countryman, ever preoccupied with his own cares and duties, whether the immediate topic be rivers and woods or the phenomena of the sky or aught else soever.
A third passage presents a description of a sea vapour rising far off, terrible in the gloom:
                                         And as a goatherd spies,
On some hill's top, out of the sea, a rainy vapour rise,
Driven by the breath of Zephyrus, which, though far off he rest, 352
Comes on as black as pitch, and brings a tempest in his breast,
Whereat he, frighted, drives his herds apace into a den;
So dark'ning earth with darts and shields showed these with all their men. 353
There are many such passages: and repeated reading only more and more convinces me that Homer shows the same skill in his choice of imagery as in his narration of events.
[Page 180]
Aristotle's words apply equally to both: ‘Homer, after a few preparatory lines, immediately introduces a man, a woman, or some other character: for all have their character—nowhere are the manners , neglected.’ 354 So truly human is he that there is no scene in nature, not even the movements of a cloud or the flow of a river, which he does not connect with some fact of human life.
And there are still more plain and pointed instances where; in quite alien connexion, images are sought from husbandry, thus plainly evincing his rustic instinct and sympathy:
Mulciber prepared a mighty fire,
First in the field used, burning up the bodies that the ire
Of great Achilles reft of souls
———
And as fields that have been long time cloyed
With catching weather, when their corn lies on the gavel heap,
Are with a constant north wind dried, with which forcomfort leap
Their hearts that sowed them: so this field was dried. 355
A ponderous stone bold Hector heaved to throw,
Pointed above, and rough and gross below:
Not two strong men th' enormous weight could raise,
Such men as live in these degenerate days.
Yet this, as easy as a swain could bear
The snowy fleece, he toss'd and shook in air. 356
That is a happy and vivid description of the stone's immense massive weight—so vivid that we find it difficult to believe that it could be lightly swung by hand: but the added simile of the fleece, I fancy, no one could have introduced, unless speaking from experience, not simply of what he had seen others do, but of what he had done with his own hands.
[Page 181]
Again, there are country similes used to illustrate hurled darts rebounding from the light breastplate:
As on some ample barn's well hardened floor
(The winds collected at each open door),
While the broad fan with force is whirl'd around,
Light leaps the golden grain, resulting from the ground:
So from the steel that guards Atrides' heart,
Repell'd to distance flies the bounding dart. 357
And the following, where we see two chiefs fighting side 358 by side, like two oxen beneath one yoke:
Oïleus by his brother's side stood close, and moved not thence
For any moment of that time. But, as through fallow fields
Black oxen draw a well-joined plough, and either evenly yields
His thrifty labour, all heads couched so close to earth they plough
The fallow with their horns, till out the sweat begins to flow,
The stretched yokes crack, and yet at last the furrow forth is driven;
So toughly stood these to their task, and made their work as even. 359
Then there is the picture of Achilles, as he tries vainly to escape the on-rushing river:
                                         Yet again he was so urged, he flung
His body from the Flood, and fled: and after him again
The waves flew roaring. As a man that finds a water-vein,
And from some black fount is to bring his streams through plants and groves,
Goes with his mattock, and all checks set to his course removes;
When that runs freely, under it the pebbles all give way,
And, where it finds a fall, runs swift, nor can the leader stay
[Page 182]
His current then, before himself full paced it murmurs
on;
So of Achilles evermore the strong Flood vantage won;
Though most deliver, Gods are still above the powers of men. 360
Perhaps finest of all, however, is the picture of Achilles' chariot urged furiously forth over the fallen foe:
And look how oxen, yoked and driven about the circular floor
Of some fair barn, tread suddenly the thick sheaves thin of corn,
And all the corn consumed with chaff: so mixed and overborne,
Beneath Achilles' one-hoofed horse, shields, spears, and men, lay trod. 361
I quote these lines the more willingly, that I may be able to enter my protest against Lowth's too harsh criticism of them. 362 Contrasting them with Hebrew poetry, and rightly adjudging them ‘far below its majesty and daring’, he urges that the comparison is ‘too close’ and that ‘the two things are too nearly alike’. But it should be borne in mind that Homer was not writing to win credit for ingenuity in the judgement of learned men by intricate and 363 subtle imagery. Nay, entirely forgetful of himself, he is wholly absorbed, if I may so say, in the character of Achilles; he is eager to show, quite simply and unmistakably, how, without effort, he swept down the enemy's ranks to annihilation. Lowth was wrong, therefore, in thinking that Achilles himself ought to have been compared to the threshing-sledge: nay, it was he who was resistlessly driving the sledge, as though he was under no control of God or man. For surely we cannot expect from a pagan writer that he should be true to the standard of revealed
[Page 183]
religion, and take account of God's directing providence in such a matter.
But I freely grant that these, and indeed all Homer's images from rural life, fall far short of the majesty of the Hebrew prophets. How could it be otherwise? since the whole force of their similitudes depends on the comparison drawn between the very greatest things and those of least account and most familiar.
But to come back to examples of Homer's rustic style—if I may be forgiven the phrase. It is his common wont to measure size, weight, or lapse of time most preferably by those simple signs and marks in which even now our country folk take delight. For instance:
So distant they, and such the space between,
As when two teams of mules divide the green
(To whom the hind like shares of land allows),
When now few furrows part th' approaching
ploughs. 364
With these we may perhaps suitably compare the scriptural account of that Philistine garrison destroyed by two Hebrew warriors: for there the position is indicated just in the same way by lines drawn by a plough. 365 Moreover, the parenthesis which Homer adds—‘To whom the hind like shares of land allows’—the less poetical it seems, all the more shows the mind of the genuine country-man accustomed to honest toil.
The same thing, I think, is evidenced by the following 366 lines, finely describing the athletic action of the quoit-thrower:
Far as a swain his whirling sheephook throws,
That distant falls among the grazing cows,
So past them all the rapid circle flies. 367
[Page 184]
Observe that the feat, as though it were the easiest thing in the world (and this is the special and chief mark of gymnastic power), is performed in passing and without effort: just as is seen in sculpture, in proportion to its impression of consummate beauty.
If these seem too trivial, my next quotation will assuredly delight all who find even the slightest charm in the appearance of land and sky:
Far as a shepherd, from some point on high,
O'er the wide main extends his boundless eye;
Through such a space of air, with thundering sound,
At every leap the immortal coursers bound. 368
Here is subtly suggested that common experience felt even by children, in gazing down from a lofty height: the indefinable desire to throw oneself down and float in the thin air. Near and distant objects are, moreover, both shrewdly and truthfully conjoined, this being effected by the words ἠΕροΕιδές (in the far distance, dimly) and οἴνορα (wine-coloured).
Time, too, he likes to mark similarly:
Thus while the morning beams increasing bright
O'er heaven's pure azure spread the glowing light,
Commutual death the fate of war confounds,
Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds.
But now (what time in some sequester'd vale
The weary woodman spreads his sparing meal,
When his tired arms refuse the axe to rear,
And claim a respite from the sylvan war:
But not till half the prostrate forests lay
Stretch'd in long ruin, and exposed to day)
Then, nor till then, the Greeks' impulsive might
Pierced the black phalanx and let in the
light. 369
This loveliest picture of the peaceful wood is felicitously suggested amid the fight, and gives breathing time to the mind jaded with the details of wounds and unceasing
[Page 185]
carnage. Virgil, too, knew well how to mark the hour by the daily tasks performed at it:
Now when the Night her middle race had rode,
And his first slumber had refresh'd the god—
The time when early housewives leave the bed;
When living embers on the hearth they spread, 370
Supply the lamp, and call the maids to rise;—
With yawning mouths and with half-open'd eyes,
They ply the distaff by the winking light,
And to their daily labour add the night;
Thus frugally they earn their children's bread,
And uncorrupted keep their nuptial bed—
Not less concerned, nor at a later hour,
Rose from his downy couch the forging
pow'r. 371
These lines are unquestionably more beautiful by far than Homer's: save that Homer's have the charm just referred to, arising from the unlooked-for relief from sterner story—not to mention that this picture of the woman at her household duties is itself borrowed from the Iliad. I refer to the passage where the Trojans fight long and indecisively on the very ramparts of the Greeks:
                                         Nor yet the Greeks did bear
Base back-turned faces: nor their foes would therefore be out-faced.
But as a spinster poor and just, ye sometimes see, straitlaced
About the weighing of her web, who, careful, having charge
For which she would provide some means, is loth to be too large
In giving or in taking weight, but ever with her hand
Is doing with the weights and wool, till both in just paise stand:
So evenly it stood with these foes. 372
It may be that not so much for sake of comparison as (so to say) for relief details like these are introduced at such
[Page 186]
a crisis: so opportune are they indeed that I really almost think our minds are more impressed, simply on this account, unpolished and (I had wellnigh said) harsh as the diction is, than by that most tender picture in Virgil.
As Virgil's name has been introduced, I take leave to note a difference, of no slight importance, which may be detected (so at least it seems to me) between him and Homer. I mean, that where there is question of wealth and worldly position, Homer, as if dazzled by a kind of splendour, feels just like poor men do at the sight of riches. He is at times insistent and particular as to the market value of traffickable goods, recording how much they may be priced at:
One of a hundred oxen's price, the other but of nine.
373 374 And this not merely when offered as prizes in athletic contest, but even in mid-stress of stern combat, when most men have little leisure for such trifles. For instance, Lycaon appeals to Achilles:
Some pity to a suppliant's name afford,
Who shared the gifts of Ceres at thy board:
Whom late thy conquering arm to Lemnos bore,
Far from his father, friends, and native shore;
A hundred oxen were his price that day,
Now sums immense thy mercy shall repay. 375
Nor does he hesitate to interweave such considerations even in the most harrowing narratives:
He fell and slept an iron sleep; wretched young man, he died,
Far from his newly married wife, in aid of foreign pride,
And saw no pleasure of his love; yet was her jointure great,
A hundred oxen gave he her, and vowed in his retreat
[Page 187]
Two thousand head of sheep and goats, of which he store did leave,
Much gave he of his love's firstfruits and nothing did receive. 376
All through the Iliad he loves to enumerate and extol any one's treasures, ivories, and costly heirlooms: such as the description of Achilles' libation cup:
But mindful of the gods, Achilles went
To the rich coffer in his shady tent:
There lay on heaps his various garments roll'd,
And costly furs, and carpets stiff with gold
(The presents of the silver-footed dame):
From thence he took a bowl of antique frame,
Which never man had stain'd with ruddy wine.
Nor raised in offerings to the powers divine.
But Peleus' son: and Peleus' son to none
Had raised in offerings, but to Jove
alone. 377
And do we not see the same instinct when Priam, setting forth to ransom his son's body for burial, is highly praised for being willing to sacrifice a particular splendid dish? Or when, as happens more than once, both in moments of triumph and in moments of sadness, complaint is made that the armour has been soiled by dust? And Sarpedon's grounds of exhortation to fight courageously, are they not just such as are eminently natural in the mouth of some 378 common soldier imagining himself for the moment in the position of his chief?
                                         Why are we honoured more
Than other men of Lycia, in place; with greater store
Of meats and cups; with goodlier roofs: delightsome gardens; walks;
More lands and better: so much wealth, that court and country talks
Of us and our possessions, and every way we go,
Gaze on us as we were their Gods? This where we dwell is so;
[Page 188]
The shores of Xanthus ring of this: and shall we not exceed
As much in merit as in noise? ...
That so our neat-armed Lycians may say: ‘See, these are right
Our kings, our rulers: these deserve to eat and drink the best:
These govern not ingloriously; these thus exceed the rest,
Do more than they command to do.’ 379
I detect the same ring in the lines where Phoenix is described as dwelling lovingly on each particular one of the gifts offered to appease Meleager. 380
And further yet, more than once in Homer the mere fact of being wealthy is praised, as if it were something noble in itself. Andromache is styled richly dowered ( ρολύδωρος ). 381 Aeneas prides himself on his ancestor Ericthonius, in that he was ‘richest of mortal men’. 382 We meet with imagery, too, which unquestionably derives some of its magnificence from the suggestion of wealth:
The Trojans, like a sort of ewes penned in a rich man's fold,
Close at his door, till all be milked. 383
So, too, the ornate description of the eagle vouchsafed to Priam as a celestial augury:
And how broad the chamber nuptial
Of any mighty man hath doors, such breadth cast
either wing. 384
But no need to quote further: always and at every turn we trace the retainer of rich men, one who himself is not too well off.
On the other hand, the real secret of Virgil's love of the
[Page 189]
country is well described in the familiar lines of his friend Horace:
In change e'en luxury finds a zest: 385
The poor man's supper, neat but spare,
With no gay couch to seat the guest,
Has smooth'd the rugged brow of care. 386
I have cited these lines here, however, not in the least questioning that Virgil really loved the streams and the woods with his whole soul: indeed, I always think that he of all men, in writing of country delights, shows not only the widest observation but the keenest feeling. But what I am inclined to hold is this: that just as rich men's children, throwing away their costly toys, often delight to play with straws and twigs of trees, while those of the poor are struck dumb with astonishment at the sight of gold, splendid costumes, and costly gems: so precisely I apprehend, Virgil gladly and eagerly turned away from the magnificence and brilliance of the imperial palace to betake himself to his country farm: while Homer delighted in lavish display and the halls of kings: each mainly admiring what was least in keeping with his own worldly fortunes.
But of Virgil I shall treat elsewhere: here, perhaps, I may cite one single instance from the Iliad which strikingly suggests that it comes from a man who earned his daily bread by the work of his hands. You know the doubtless rather clownish story of Neptune and Apollo, banished from heaven and engaged for hire by Laomedon. This legend Homer by mouth of his own Neptune re-tells:
But when the much-joy-bringing Hours brought term for our reward,
The terrible Laomedon dismissed us both, and scared
Our high deservings, not alone to hold our promised fee,
But give us threats too. ...His vow's breach and reviles,
Made us part angry with him then. 387
It is specially to day labourers that the hours seem ‘much-joy-bringing’
[Page 190]
as they bring at last the welcome time for receiving their wage: as we are told in weighty words by the inspired Hebrew lawgiver, who himself at one time knew what it meant to be poor and a wanderer, and, it may be, 388 had worked for hire: ‘At his day thou shalt give him his hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he is poor, and setteth his heart upon it: lest he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee.’ 389 Moreover, Neptune's epithet to Laomedon—‘terrible’—is, of course, ironical contempt, and just what insolent servants might say after a quarrel with their master.
There remains what is, perhaps, the most fruitful field of all: the many kinds of birds and beasts, tame and wild; whose sports, food, fierce contests, and whole manner and habit of living afford a rich source of splendid imagery. But I do not propose now to dwell upon these: partly because their character is so clear and manifest as to be obvious to the most casual reader; partly because examples have already been given of horses and lions, certainly two of the noblest of the class, and I am unwilling to repeat myself. But, in dismissing the subject, let us remember that it is summed under two categories. For whatever examples Homer takes of this sort, they all seem to be proper to hunters or shepherds. And so they are exactly what might be looked for in such a man, as we; moved by many independent reasons, infer that he must have been.
But I press on to the subject reserved for the last—the style of language, namely, affected by the author of the Iliad. For no less on this account than from his mode of thought and choice of comparisons, I apprehend that he stands out, first as a warrior, next as a countryman, finally as of humble birth and poor in station.
The first fact from which I should infer all these points
[Page 191]
lies in the fact that he does not hesitate to repeat again and again, not words merely, but even whole lines—indeed, one may say sometimes longish narratives: especially where 390 he introduces messengers, delivering their message with religious precision,—Iris, for instance, or Apollo charged with messages to Achilles. But this is the very manner, as we ourselves daily experience, of simple, rustic characters when narrating events.
And further, both the simple rustic and the soldier stand pretty clearly revealed in the fixed epithets which Homer associates with all but perhaps one or two of the whole company of chiefs and leaders. Thus we have ‘swift-footed’ Achilles, ‘cloud-compelling’ Jove, ‘helmet-glancing’ Hector, and many others. Such formulae had the sanction of tradition, almost a legal sanction; it was wellnigh an offence to omit them. Nor are these homely, familiar epithets confined to deities and men alone, but even an impersonal thing, if well known, has its distinctive characteristic assigned in like manner. For instance, death ‘that lays one out at length’, the ‘unfruitful’ sea, ‘articulate-speaking’ men, ‘clear-voiced’ heralds, ‘single-hoofed’ horses, and others of the same kind. Those who criticize such frequent epithets show themselves little acquainted with the simple style and vocabulary of poor men, which is a sort of standard whereby almost all Homeric expressions should be measured.
One set there is, moreover, of these ‘appropriate’ epithets which is eminently graceful in itself and exactly natural to one leading an out-of-door life: those, I mean, which, as soon as heard, vividly bring before us, or re-present , the whole aspect of the thing suggested. Such is the picture of a green-banked river:
                                         When they reach'd
Asopus' grassy banks and rushes deep. 391
[Page 192]
And those splendid lines describing a herdsman pasturing his flocks:
While thou didst on his plodding herds attend,
In many-crested Ida's woody glens. 392
393 Try another instance:
Swift as the snow-flakes from the clouds descend,
Or wintry hail before the driving blast
Of Boreas, ether-born. 394
The vividness of the word αἰθρηγΕνέος (born or sprung from ether) has always seemed to me most wonderful. In the same way that glittering radiance which Job, the inspired poet of Nature's realm, portrays as issuing from the north, drives far away hail and watery clouds: ‘Fair weather cometh out of the north: with God is terrible majesty.’ 395 If such a season had to be described in one word, certainly ‘ether-born’ would be that word.
Sometimes an object is placed before us not so much by attributes and appropriate epithets as by certain results very briefly indicated but conspicuously and closely associated with it. The dead Trojans lay—mere shapeless corpses—on the plain, and Homer flashes the situation upon us in this fashion. They were, says he:
More grateful now to vultures than their wives! 396
Note the curt and crisp, almost enigmatic, phrasing: and such, as a rule, are the pithy sentences commonly preferred and employed by the people.
Then there is Hector's celebrated reproach of Paris:
                                         Infectious cowardice
In thee hath terrified our host: for which thou well deserv'st
A coat of tombstone, not of steel in which for form thou serv'st. 397
[Page 193]
A soldier's characteristic taunt. Moreover, I almost think we may include under this head the sort of paean sung over the soothsayer Eurydamas' slaughtered sons:
And the sad father tried his arts in vain:
No mystic dream could make their fates appear,
Though now determined by Tydides' spear. 398
Everything, in short, points to the conclusion that the 399 permeating tone of Homer's diction is such as befits a man who lived no student's life, but was inured to the stress and strain of the camp, and reared amidst toil and hazard, direct in speech and manner, simple, unpolished: nor was any one ever nearer that unique merit of the sacred writers whose precept was that he who writes for men should nowhere deliver himself of either more or less than his own best judgement approved.
But I need hardly remind you that the point which I am urging to-day is not one that can be decided by quoting a few lines here and there; a few examples can merely indicate it, certainly not prove it. The Iliad itself must be submitted to the test of careful perusal, and compared, on the one hand with the diction of rustics, of soldiers and the people generally, and on the other with the Hebrew Scriptures: and this pre-eminently holds good where its expressions on first acquaintance appear perhaps trivial or of obscure meaning.
I am absolutely convinced that he who desires to know Homer through and through must be trained in the same strict discipline as Horace enjoins on his young friend:
To suffer hardness with good cheer,
In sternest school of warfare bred,
Our youth should learn ...
Cold skies , keen perils , brace his
life. 400
In fact, I imagine this is just the reason why the majority of men, and even of boys, however little devoted they are
[Page 194]
to such studies, nevertheless readily admit that they delight in Homer. For, leading an open-air life, ‘under cold skies’, as Horace has it, they are surprised and delighted at the truthfulness with which he describes everything. For in these things, too, ‘Truth is great and will prevail’. Even unlettered men, I repeat, are astonished 401 that a poet who lived so long ago should so exactly agree with their own daily experience.
Further, Homer's poetry is such (nor could it possess a sweeter charm) that, if only we assume that the picture which it presents is true to life and not merely fanciful, it powerfully appeals to us by reviving the memory of our own childhood. For almost all of us, when children, lived mainly in the open air: we were thrown among servants, with labourers, with those who worked in their smocks for their daily bread: we were wont to watch their work and toil with absorbed delight. But when once, as time passed on, we were educated and settled down to a fixed rule of life, by degrees we learnt rather to avoid such homeliness as being rough and vulgar: while, nevertheless, we looked back with no little affection upon that which delighted us in boyhood.
And thus it comes about that even those of mature age are greatly charmed with those songs, poems, and stories which recall the country without being countrified, and which savour of simple life, and plain, homely manners, without offending our taste. In just the same way men are conscious of subtle pleasure in the reminder of their youthful recreation and pastimes.
Consequently I myself by no means tire, though having read them over and over again, of those detailed accounts Homer dwells upon so lovingly, such as the building of ships and chariots, the fashioning of armour, the preparations for the evening meal, for the yoking of the mules to Priam's chariot, and for the felling of timber on Mount Ida:
[Page 195]
With proper instruments they take the road,
Axes to cut, and ropes to sling the load.
First march the heavy mules, securely slow,
O'er hills, o'er dales, o'er crags, o'er rocks, they go:
Jumping high o'er the shrubs of the rough ground,
Rattle the clattering cars, and the shock'd axles bound.
But when arrived at Ida's spreading woods
(Fair Ida, water'd with descending floods),
Loud sounds the axe, redoubling strokes on strokes:
On all sides round the forest hurls her oaks
Headlong. Deep-echoing groan the thickets brown;
Then rustling, crackling, crashing, thunder down; 402
The wood the Grecians cleave, prepared to burn;
And the slow mules the same rough road
return. 403
—One realizes here, I think, the very march of the mules, cautiously and with a sort of discrimination, plodding their way over the rough passes—
The sturdy woodmen equal burthens bore
(Such charge was given them) to the sandy shore;
There on the spot which great Achilles shew'd,
They eased their shoulders and disposed the load;
Circling around the place, where times to come
Shall view Patroclus' and Achilles' tomb. 404
Do you ask how it is that such passages so greatly charm? Not only, I fancy, by reason of their wonderful ‘vividness’, but also because in reading them we become, as it were, young again and enjoy that unalloyed pleasure of fascinated contemplation which was the delight of our childhood.
The same chord is touched, unless I mistake, where he lovingly elaborates the very smallest incidents: as when Lycaon has been just made captive by Achilles:
Whom lately in the night
He had surprised as in a wood of Priam's he had cut
The green arms of a wild fig-tree, to make him spokes to put
In naves of his new chariot. An ill then, all unthought,
Stole on him in Achilles' shape. 405
[Page 196]
Why this precise detail of the fig-tree? Not to pass it over is just what might be expected in some simple character: no boy, for instance, would have failed to note it. And so those who have loving memory of their youth willingly linger over such trifles, nor do they anywhere find these poems weary them.
I must at last conclude. I have amply proved at least this, that Homer both as to choice of similes and in quality of style, is marvellously self-consistent throughout, and, 406 moreover, that the general effect of his whole work is to afford restful pleasure to such a mind as, by many tests, we infer that Homer possessed. I apprehend, namely, that he wrote as one deeply moved with loving care for the heroes of old: whom, however, he knew by report only, and never saw face to face.
Having thus supported my criticism so far as my power allowed, by quotations drawn far and wide from the whole Iliad , it will be my next task to deal with the remaining round of the Homeric course, and proceed to test my theories by review of the Odyssey also.
[Page ]
LECTURE XI 407
Consideration of the opinion of Longinus that the Odyssey betrays the old age of the author. It appeals to seamen as the Iliad does to soldiers. Inferences from the pining for home and rest which runs through it.
I now approach that other heirloom bequeathed to us by the golden age of antiquity—the Odyssey : which, while having much in common with the Iliad , at the same time affords some ground for the importunate subtlety of those captious critics who delight in questioning the most obvious facts. They refuse, indeed, to allow that such differing streams can have issued from one and the same source: they maintain either that no such person as Homer ever lived, or at any rate that there were two different men so called, one who wrote of Troy, the other of Ithaca. But I have decided to pass over for the present such trifling arguments as they can adduce: partly because we have, I think, already disposed of them: for most of what has been said about their contentions, when treating of the Iliad , will be applied here without difficulty: and what remains I shall deal with to the best of my power in due place, as occasion arises. And here let me appeal to that oft-quoted judgement of the celebrated Longinus, which, 408 if once admitted, is in itself answer enough to such fancies. We have in him a man of critical instinct, a devoted student of Homer, if ever there was one, who detected as he thought in the Odyssey clear indications of the poet of the Iliad as he might have been in declining years:
‘Writing the Iliad in the heyday of his spirit, he made the whole structure dramatic and combative; that of the Odyssey is in the main narrative, which is the special mark of age. So it is that in the Odyssey one might liken Homer
[Page 198]
to a setting sun; the intensity is gone, but there remains the greatness. Here the tone of those great lays of Ilium is no longer maintained—the passages on one level of sublimity with no sinking anywhere, the same stream of passion poured upon passion, the readiness of turn, the closeness to life, the throng of images all drawn from the truth: as when Ocean retires into himself, and is left lonely around his proper bounds, only the ebbings of his greatness are left to our view, and a wandering among the shallows of the fabulous and the incredible. While I say this, I have not forgotten the storms in the Odyssey , nor the story of the Cyclops, nor certain other passages; I am describing an old age, but the old age of Homer.’ 409
Thus Longinus: with whom I am mainly in accord, while nevertheless honouring the poem as a whole rather more highly than he does: much indeed for which he tries to find excuse, I, on the contrary, place to Homer's credit. His strictures with regard to those marvellous and portentous stories occurring in the Odyssey —‘dreams of folly’, as he styles them—savour rather too much, I fancy, of the criticism of his own time. For in the decay of the old theology, rhetoricians and philosophers found aids and supports where they could: and were not a little troubled that Homer lent himself to the association of such trivialities, so little worthy of the majesty of the gods, with their most venerable rites and beliefs.
410 Moreover, Longinus evidently agrees with those critics who insist that in an Epic all should be imposing, spacious, magnificent, and maintained throughout at the same level: just as if even the Iliad had not its times of withdrawal and relief, as I may call them, while warriors and heroes enjoyed rest and relaxation, recruiting themselves for new exploits.
But, with these qualifications, there is much in Longinus' appreciation with which I agree—to this extent, at any
[Page 199]
rate, that I quite believe that Homer, when advanced in years, wrote the Odyssey as a sequel to the Iliad. I now propose to develop this view, and point out how well it accords with our own previous criticism.
To begin with, while many characteristics confirm the theory of Homer's authorship of the Odyssey , by far the most important is the fact that it is completely informed throughout with the same heroic temper as the Iliad
There are, and always have been, two fields or careers pre-eminently standing out as offering scope for heroic valour—one of which belongs to the soldier, the other to the sailor: and to this division these two noble poems admirably correspond: for nothing could be more happily suited to soldiers than the Iliad , to sailors than the Odyssey. By ‘sailor’ I mean the explorer of new lands—not the man-of-war's man. For it is to such exploration that ardent spirits turn when there has been for a long time no outlet in war. As it was with the ancient Greeks after the close of the Trojan War, so was it with our own ancestors, when once the zeal and passion of the Crusades and of the age of Christian chivalry began to cool. Forthwith there appeared and spread far and wide a new field for winning fame by memorable deeds: in the exploration of distant 411 seas, the opening up of new countries, the description of the wonders of Nature and of the manners of barbarous races. This was a most luxuriant field for poets, and many worked it successfully. In that age every poet devoted much of his poem to the wanderings of heroes and maidens over land and sea; to shipwrecks, to monsters of the deep, and fabled islands of renown—all being mingled with wars and battles.
But enough: we are alternately reminded now of the Iliad , now of the Odyssey , whenever we read Spenser or his Italian forerunners. All have Virgil as their common model. But I doubt whether they, or most of them at
[Page 200]
least (and I include Virgil himself), were well advised in weaving together such opposed modes of life in one story. For, as in real life, we are all without exception, I think, convinced that a man goes far towards ensuring success, who has one clear goal in view from the first, so this seems to hold good in a strange degree in Epic story. Our peerless Homer appeals to us, in a manner more direct and more effective than if, like most poets, he had given us the wrath of Achilles associated with Ulysses' wanderings, perils of the sea mingled and interwoven with the chances of battle. Once our interest is fixed by the excitement of hope and fear we turn aside reluctantly: and on resuming the main thread of story after such a digression, we feel our interest flag.
Any one will see what I mean who takes the trouble to compare carefully the Odyssey with the Aeneid at those parts in which the Trojans and Ulysses respectively are described as at last approaching the shores they longed to reach. Reading Virgil we feel, I suspect, that the climax is reached: and so our minds inevitably relax and are 412 unable at once to summon up any interest in the battle scenes which follow. We have been chilled, and our zeal needs kindling afresh. But I am conscious of nothing of the sort at Ithaca: it is only the scene that has changed; the same story is being told: I feel the charm of hope and fear, just as I did through all the sea adventures.
But leaving keener critics to decide this question, let us return to the subject. I repeat that what we may call the other circle of the heroic heaven, that, namely, which is concerned with the deeds and fortune of seafarers and explorers, afforded a theme notably worthy of Homer. Histories, moreover, without exception testify that much glory was acquired by such means throughout Greece just about the era in question. Undoubtedly after Trojan times the nation so spread itself by ceaseless migration beyond
[Page 201]
sea, that at last the Greeks, welded into one strong empire, met and drove back the might of the East. Even Alexander the Great himself, a most enthusiastic admirer of Homer and Achilles, when he had reduced Asia to his sway added naval renown to military exploits, exploring first the mouths of the Indus, and subsequently, by his officer Nearchus, the shores of the Persian Gulf. And thus, as we may say, he followed up his Iliad by a sort of Odyssey: placing it beyond doubt that both are within the compass of one man's spirit.
‘But consider the entire silence of the Odyssey , for the xmost part, as to war, pitched battles, and wounds: whereas in the Iliad their appearance is so frequent as almost to excite disgust in some readers.’ True: but this is just the reason why we anticipated that his declining age would choose this theme. What more faithful to Nature and truth than that even the most passionate poet should gradually abate his martial ardour, when we find that not even the bravest soldiers maintain their campaigning zeal to the end of their life?—and with them these pursuits should be far more constant than with any poet, both by reason of daily habit and through the risk of public censure as failing in professional duty.
But after all, I should like to ask what marks of the 413 veteran soldier are wanting in the Odyssey. Indeed, the lines in which Virgil sings the praises of a noble horse seem not inapplicable to the tone and disposition of the poem:
The fiery courser, when he hears from far
The sprightly trumpets, and the shouts of war,
Pricks up his ears; and trembling with delight,
Shifts place, and paws, and hopes the promis'd
fight. 414
For instance, Ulysses addresses Eurymachus at the assembly of the enraged suitors:
[Page 202]
Or should Saturnian Jove this day excite
Here battle, or elsewhere, and were I arm'd
With two bright spears and with a shield, and bore
A brazen casque well-fitted to my brows,
Me then thou should'st perceive mingling in fight
Amid the foremost Chiefs, nor with the crime
Of idle beggary should'st upbraid me more. 415
Does he not, manifestly, forgetting his assumed character (for as you know he was posing as a beggar), let himself go in the very style of the Iliad?
Then his donning sword and armour when preparing his attack on Scylla:
Just then, forgetful of the strict command
Of Circe not to arm, I cloth'd me all
In radiant armour, grasp'd two quivering spears,
And to the deck ascended at the prow. 416
So, too, the oft-quoted lines about the wooden horse of Epeus, and the secret ambuscade led up to the very walls of Troy 417 : which, while admirably illustrating Ulysses' crafty spirit, at the same time show how Homer lingers lovingly on the thought of shores and places known long ago. I grant indeed, as I admitted before, that such reminiscences are introduced sparingly, and not, moreover, without a certain reserve, but that itself is exactly suitable to a veteran.
We must also before everything remember this too—and nothing could be more delightful or more suited to mellowing years—namely, that two widely severed and most differing things are mingled in the Odyssey , as it were 418 under one artistic form: on one side the heroic temper—wandering, restless, adventuresome: on the other the consuming love and craving for home and native land.
This appears notably in the whole plan of the work.
[Page 203]
Not to win fame, like the Argonauts, not for gain, not for empire, does Ulysses adventure: on one quest alone his heart is set, the quest of home:
I rather wish, that I might home retire,
After my sufferance of a world of woes
Far off, and then my glad eyes might disclose
The day of my return. 419
Yet earnestly as he begs the gods to grant him rest from wandering, it is always with a spirit braced to danger and toil. And this is, indeed, the very character of seafarers. Nor is it without its heroic side, though far from the splendour of the Achillean standard: and here again it answers better to a genius tempered by declining years.
You grasp then the general scheme of the story. Now let us consider Ulysses' personality: which differs from that of Achilles as does the Odyssey from the Iliad. He is older by many years: and on this account even in council influences Achilles by that well-known line:
In wisdom, yet, no less, I dare advance
My right above thee, since above in years, and knowing more. 420
All through, the things he says, the things he does, are those in which riper age delights.
Then each has his distinguishing epithet, singularly fitted to express the difference; for Ulysses is ‘many-counselled’, Achilles is ‘swift-footed’. Nor is it without significance that the one generally acts from impulse, the other acts by plan and with deliberation: one is swayed, as it were, by passion, the other ever cool and self-mastered. This is most conspicuously illustrated by the deeds done in the cave of Polyphemus: I confess that I am surprised that Longinus praised the scene as magnificent and splendid; indeed, it would shock my mind, were it not that I feel
[Page 204]
that there is a vein of humour running through it. Besides, 421 I believe that it was adopted from the traditional story which Homer was obliged to respect. Be that as it may, the balanced deliberation in the cave at all events implies the most collected and resolute temper conceivable:
When thus the Cyclops had with human flesh
Fill'd his capacious belly, and had quaff'd
Much undiluted milk, among his flocks
Outstretch'd immense, he press'd his cavern-floor.
Me, then, my courage prompted to approach
The monster with my sword drawn from the sheath,
And to transfix him where the vitals wrap
The liver: but maturer thoughts forbad.
For so, we also had incurr'd a death
Tremendous, wanting power to thrust aside
The rocky mass that closed his cavern-mouth
By force of hand alone. 422
I quote these lines fully and freely, because they are a clear example of that dramatic description so much admired in the Iliad. Again, there is Ulysses' account of his recognition of his mother in Hades (ignorant as he was of her death at home during his absence at Troy): here he appears not only master of his fears, but of his grief, and that in marvellous degree.
                                         Whom when I sought the shores
Of Ilium, I had living left at home.
Seeing her, with compassion touch'd, I wept;
Yet even her (although it pain'd my soul)
Forbad, relentless, to approach the blood,
Till with Tiresias I should first confer. 423
Another significant difference between the two lies in the fact that Achilles believed that his whole career was swayed by fate and destiny, and in this belief offered himself as a victim consecrated to the gods below. There is not a trace of anything like this with Ulysses: all
[Page 205]
through he is guided by his own skill and foresight. Perils follow upon perils: but he is equal to each as it arrives; from each he extricated himself wisely, sagaciously, and with vigour: meanwhile we read on without anxiety: for we feel well assured the issue is safe, whether he is in peril on the seas or is himself plotting his scheme of vengeance. In a word, we admire Achilles in the hour of success: we watch with fascinated interest to see how one self-devoted 424 and dedicated to a fatal end will act: Ulysses attracts us in the time of adversity: we curiously speculate how he will release himself and issue to his destined reward. I need not say which of the two more strongly appeals to youthful minds.
But now, dismissing Achilles, it will perhaps be worth while to quote a few passages which strikingly place in strong light before us that craving for home and rest which, as I have said, not only inspires the character of Ulysses, but breathes through the whole length of the Odyssey. No other inference can be drawn from the lines where we first meet with him at the opening of the poem: ‘But my heart is torn for wise Odysseus, the hapless one, who far from his friends this long while suffereth affliction in a seagirt isle, where is the navel of the sea, a woodland isle, and therein a goddess hath her habitation, the daughter of the wise and terrible Atlas, ... while Odysseus’ 425 is not like that other unwearied hero who complains that he is become
A useless load upon the Earth, 426
but simply
‘yearning to see if it were but the smoke leap upward from his own land, hath a desire to die.’ 427
[Page 206]
The reference to Atlas seems introduced advisedly and with meaning: being of the race of Titans he naturally placed himself and his followers in opposition to Olympian deities, pursuing other ways than those they desired, and is therefore called by Minerva, ‘terrible.’ I suspect, indeed, that underlying this are certain vague traces of that religious or philosophical belief which held sway in every age far and wide in the East, of another race of gods, of evil influence and always contending in deadliest hate 428 with the Olympians. And, certainly, on this view, the detention of Ulysses on the island becomes a problem more adequate to the intervention of a goddess.
But returning to him, let us give attention to that sweetest scene of fond converse where the goddess and hero interchange their last farewells:
Laertes' noble son, for wisdom famed
And artifice! Oh canst thou thus resolve
To seek, incontinent, thy native shores?
I pardon thee. Farewell! but couldst thou guess
The woes which fate ordains thee to endure
Ere yet thou reach thy country, well-content
Here to inhabit, thou would'st keep my grot
And be immortal, howsoe'er thy wife
Engage thy every wish day after day.
Yet can I not in stature or in form
Myself suspect inferior aught to her,
Since competition cannot be between
Mere mortal beauties, and a form divine.
   To whom Ulysses ever-wise replied.
Awful Divinity! be not incensed.
I know that my Penelope in form
And stature altogether yields to thee,
For she is mortal, and immortal thou,
From age exempt; yet not the less I wish
My home, and languish daily to return. 429
I have cited these lines, familiar though they are, because
[Page 207]
nothing can more strikingly indicate the guiding impulse of the whole work. Note how gently and kindly Calypso speaks to the lover who is on the point of deserting her: a situation where many by no means inferior poets make a stormy scene, depicting a deserted Dido or Medea, who fills heaven and earth alike with her bewailings. But Homer deliberately sets aside these passionate outbursts: and this scene I would again and again commend to the reflection of those to whom poetry destitute of lovers' vows and reproaches seems but cold and insipid. But it was no case of a mistress first won and then wantonly deserted, such as Dido or Medea. All through those seven 430 years of delay Ulysses had openly and plainly declared, that he remembered his wife and his native land with longing and desire. Calypso might complain of his neglect, but not that he had deceived her: and so her freedom from passionate sorrow adds to Ulysses' credit.
Then with what grace and tact he declines the marriage with an immortal goddess! We say, clearly this man has known what it is to negotiate with princes. At the same time he shows his constancy and proves that his preference of his mortal wife to a goddess was not due to youthful passion, but to a man's ripened judgement, otherwise he would not have conceded fully Calypso's superior beauty. Every word shows us the same man who elsewhere honours his native Ithaca with praise like this:
I dwell in Ithaca, earth's most renown'd,
All over-shadowed with the shake-leaf hill,
Tree-fam'd Neritus; whose near confines fill
Islands—a number, well inhabited,
That under my observance taste their bread;
Dulichius, Samos, and the full-of-food
Zacynthus, likewise grac'd with store of wood.
But Ithaca, though in the seas it lie,
Yet lies she so aloft, she casts her eye
[Page 208]
Quite over all the neighbour continent;
Far northward situate, and, being lent
But little favour of the morn and sun,
With barren rocks and cliffs is over-run;
And yet of hardy youths a nurse of name:
Nor could I see a soil where'er I came
More sweet and wishful. 431
He longs to see it again, not because it is the best of lands, but because it is his own.
Very beautiful, too, is the scene in which he describes his own return to the followers who had despaired of seeing him again: and in which he incidentally shows his unquenchable longing for his native country:
You have not seen young heifers (highly kept,
Fill'd full of daisies at the field, and driven
Home to their hovels, all so spritely given
That no room can contain them, but about
Race by the dams, and let their spirits out
In ceaseless bleating) of more jocund plight
Than my kind friends, even crying out with sight
Of my return so doubted; circled me
With all their welcomes, and as cheerfully
Dispos'd their rapt minds, as if there they saw
Their natural country cliffy Ithaca,
And even the roofs where they were bred and born. 432
These lines—whether fittingly or not I cannot say, but 433 irresistibly—always bring to my mind certain verses of holy writ: those verses, I mean, with which the last of the Prophets, Malachi, brings his visions to a close: ‘But unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth and gambol (R. V.) as calves of the stall.’ 434 Foretelling a day which shall see the destruction of the wicked, he prophesies that it will be propitious and unspeakably joyous to the righteous: that the Sun of Righteousness will arise, with
[Page 209]
rays outspreading from side to side, like the shining circuit of wings, and will protect and comfort all around. Those in whom true and living goodness resides, having descried will forthwith advance to meet it, and dance with delight as calves at sight of their dam.
As I am almost ignorant of Hebrew literature, I make this comparison with diffidence and hesitation: but assuredly it seems to me that the imagery is much more beautiful when we also associate these ‘gambollings’ with joy born at sight of the new-risen sun, than if we merely think of calves eager, after their wont, for a richer pasture.
But to return to the Odyssey. More than once in it, when we have almost made the port, we are driven out to sea by some mischance. Such experiences somehow or other intensify and wonderfully sharpen the desire for the rest of home. Thus at the outset, having passed the Aegean, the ship's prow is turned round towards the Ionian Sea:
And now, all danger pass'd, I had attain'd
My native shore, but, doubling in my course
Malea, waves and currents and North-winds
Constrain'd me devious to Cythera's isle. 435
And the episode of Aeolus:
Nine days continual, night and day we sail'd,
And on the tenth my native land appear'd.
Not far remote my Ithacans I saw
Fires kindling on the coast;
———
                                         ... Whose mischievous advice prevail'd.
They loos'd the bag; forth issued all the winds,
And caught by tempests o'er the billowy waste, 436
Weeping they flew, far, far from Ithaca.
I then, awaking, in my noble mind
Stood doubtful, whether from my vessel's side
[Page 210]
Immersed to perish in the flood, or calm
To endure my sorrows, and consent to live.
I calm endured them; but around my head
Winding my mantle, laid me down below. 437
Tending in the like direction, I think, is that passage where he is shown under a subtle illusion; forgetting for a time the familiar scenes of his home, and lamenting, on the very shore of his own Ithaca, in belief that he had been conveyed elsewhere:
                                         Meantime Ulysses woke,
Unconscious where; stretch'd on his native soil
He lay, and knew it not, long time exiled.
For Pallas, progeny of Jove, a cloud
Drew dense around him
———
All objects, therefore, in the Hero's eyes
Seem'd alien, footpaths long, commodious ports,
Heaven-climbing rocks, and trees of amplest growth.
Arising, fixt he stood, his native soil
Contemplating, till with expanded palms
Both thighs he smote, and plaintive thus began,
   Ah me! what mortal race inhabits here? 438
Homer deliberately intended that Ulysses should not enjoy his native land all at once, but slowly, step by step: thus teaching us more fully and effectually what a brave man can endure, and how deeply the love of one's native soil sinks into the heart. Minerva, who meets him in the guise of a young man, is the first to suggest Ithaca to him:
   This joy'd him much, that so unknown a land
Turn'd to his country. 439
But, discovering her to be Minerva, he is still troubled with a vague misgiving: this she finally relieves and dissipates, having assured herself by test, that he is not minded to proceed hastily or under mere impulse, but will advance with method and plan, lest he may, as they say, ‘suffer
[Page 211]
shipwreck’ even at home: then, it is, I repeat, the goddess 440 withdraws the veil and points out to him one after another his well-remembered haunts:
But I will give thee proof—come now—survey
These marks of Ithaca, and be convinc'd.
   This is the port of Phorcys, sea-born sage:
That, the huge olive at the haven's head:
Fast by it, thou behold'st 441 the pleasant cove
Umbrageous, to the nymphs devoted named
The Naiads; this the broad-arch'd cavern is
Where thou wast wont to offer to the nymphs
Many a whole hecatomb; and yonder stands
The mountain Neritus with forests clothed.
                                         So saying, the Goddess scatter'd from before
His eyes all darkness, and he knew the land.
Then felt Ulysses, Hero toil-inur'd,
Transport unutterable, seeing plain
Once more his native isle. He kiss'd the glebe,
And with uplifted hands the nymphs adored.
Nymphs, Naiads, Jove's own daughters! I despair'd
To see you more, whom yet with happy vows
I yet can hail again. Gifts, as of old,
We will hereafter at your shrines present. 442
Truly a splendid picture: which some nevertheless criticize because (so they read it) the poet names the same cave twice:
Fast by it, thou behold'st 443 the pleasant cove
Umbrageous.
And subsequently:
This the broad-arch'd cavern is.
They criticize this as a meaningless repetition. But I rather think they do not rightly see Homer's meaning here. For he was recalling or imagining a shore with a cavern having two entrances, one of which is more gloomy and withdrawn
[Page 212]
than the other, and guarded with more sacred observance: he calls it ‘sacred to the nymphs’, and a little before had himself described it in these lovely lines:
                                         In that cave beakers of stone
And jars are seen: bees lodge their honey there;
And there, on slender spindles of the rock
The nymphs of rivers weave their wondrous robes.
Perennial springs water it, and it shows
A twofold entrance: ingress one affords
To mortal man, which Northward looks direct,
But holier is the Southern far: by that
No mortal enters, but the Gods alone. 444
445 The other cavity was more exposed, wider, and accessible to mortal men: it formed a kind of vestibule to the sanctuary of the nymphs: and it may well be that here the Ithacans sacrificed their hecatombs. This, as I have said, Minerva pointed out: but implies that the other was out of sight:
That, the huge olive at the haven's head:
Fast by it, thou behold'st the pleasant cove
Umbrageous. 446
I perhaps over-refine here: but scholars know that such questions turn on the minutest details.
The next point to be well noted is that Ulysses, though wandering so many years, and touching so many shores and harbours, almost everywhere falls upon peaceful scenes of life, so that on each occasion the sad remembrance of home and rest springs up again in his heart. The many kinds and aspects of quiet life in the heroic age all come within his voyaging: not as of design, which would be displeasing and affected, but as the natural result of poetic inspiration and of an unwritten law that guides the whole work.
To begin with, he lands among the Lotophagi, a race
[Page 213]
of simplest life and diet, passing their days under a genial sun; for Ulysses had sailed southward from Malea for nine days before reaching their land;
Nine days by cruel storms thence was I borne
Athwart the fishy Deep, but on the tenth
Reach'd the Lotophagi, a race sustain'd
On sweetest fruit alone
———
Nor hostile aught
Or savage the Lotophagi devised
Against our friends, but offered to their taste
The lotus: of which fruit what man soe'er
Once tasted, no desire felt he to come
With tidings back, or seek his country more,
But rather wish'd to feed on lotus still
With the Lotophagi, and to renounce
All thoughts of home. Them, therefore, I constrain'd
Weeping on board, and dragging each beneath
The benches, bound him there. 447
Change but the name and we might be reading of the 448 Pacific islands discovered almost within our own memory: their inhabitants feed upon a shrub called the bread-tree; and some of our own countrymen, careless of their native land, have chosen to remain there, beguiled by the luxurious delights and enervating ease of the clime.
The Cyclopes, again, introduce us to another type of quiet life, a shepherd's life rich with the abundance that the country can supply:
Attaining soon that neighbour land, we found
At its extremity, fast by the sea,
A cavern, lofty, and dark-brow'd above
With laurels; in that cavern slumbering lay
Much cattle, sheep and goats, and a broad court
Enclosed it, fenced with stones from quarries hewn,
With spiry firs and oaks of ample bough. 449
[Page 214]
                                         With lambs and kids his pens
Close-throng'd we saw, and folded separate
The various charge
———
His pails and bowls with whey
Swam all, neat vessels into which he
milk'd. 450 Then down he sat,
And as he milk'd his ewes and bleating goats
All in their turns, her yeanling gave to each;
Coagulating, then, with brisk despatch,
The half of his new milk, he thrust the curd
Into his wicker sieves, but stored the rest
In pans and bowls—his customary drink. 451
                                         But when, at length,
Aurora, day-spring's daughter rosy-palm'd,
Look'd forth, then kindling fire, his flocks he milk'd
In order. 452
Then, hissing them along, he drove his flocks
Toward the mountain. 453
At even-tide he came, his fleecy flocks
Pasturing homeward. 454
Is it not obvious that all these scenes were calculated to delight the minds of sailors wearied with buffetings on sea? all suggesting a wild primitive abundance, and a life led ‘far from the madding crowd’ under the open sky.
Should any one find difficulty in understanding how such manners could possibly be associated with ruthless massacre of strangers and savage orgies, let him remember the ancient Scythians: though they were a race of shepherds and herdsmen, their name has become a proverb for fierce savagery, and we may well believe that some part of Sicily formerly contained inhabitants of a like unspeakable 455 ferocity. Yet a stranger who chanced upon their huts, while the savage owners were absent, might well be filled with admiration for the signs of plenty and security.
[Page 215]
There is one thing more, which I had almost passed over, but which claims mention lest perhaps some may imagine that the address of Polyphemus to his ram, detailed in these charming lines, is incongruous with his savage nature:
My darling ram! why, latest of the flock
Comest thou, whom never, heretofore, my sheep
Could leave behind, but stalking at their head,
Thou first wast wont to crop the tender grass,
First to arrive at the clear stream, and first
With ready will to seek my sheep-cote here
At evening: but, thy practice changed, thou comest
Now last of all. Feel'st thou regret, my ram!
Of thy poor master's eye by a vile wretch
Bored out?
———
Ah! that thy heart
Were as my own, and that distinct as I
Thou couldst articulate, so shouldst thou tell,
Where hidden, he eludes my furious wrath. 456
This shows profound knowledge of human nature: for it is common experience that the most callous men not seldom exhibit a softer disposition towards their dogs and horses or favourite animal, whatever it may be: in dealing with them, sparks of a true feeling, which is suppressed within, flash out from time to time. The truth is, these morose and rough-spoken natures are generally somewhat proud and sensitive, and show a shamefaced reluctance to relax and soften for a while in the presence of other men; so by some subtle instinct they choose confidants which can babble to nobody. Caligula's horse and the pet dragon of Tiberius are well-known instances: and we may see the same spirit, perhaps, in Mezentius, that scorner of the gods, when he so mournfully and affectionately addressed his horse: ‘Rhoebus, long (if aught be long in this our mortal life) you and I have
[Page 216]
lived.’ 457 Indeed, he had been less than human had not a gentler vein run through his stern and ruthless career.
458 I pass with Ulysses to the isle of Aeolus. For here also we read of devices which would strike the observation of sailors with their charm of repose, though of a different kind from that offered by the sight of Cyclops alone in his cave with his sheep and goats. The hospitality of Aeolus, on the other hand, drew them within well-built walls and approached a high standard of civilization:
A brazen wall impregnable on all sides
Girds it, and smooth its rocky coast ascends.
His children in his own fair palace born,
Are twelve; six daughters, and six blooming sons.
He gave his daughters to his sons to wife;
They with their father hold perpetual feast
And with their royal mother, still supplied
With dainties numberless: the sounding dome
Is fill'd with savoury odours all the day,
And with their consorts chaste at night they sleep
On stateliest couches with rich arras spread.
Their city and their splendid courts we reach'd.
A month complete he, friendly, at his board
Regaled me, and enquiry made minute
Of Ilium's fall. 459
Next to Aeolus comes Circe (for I pass by the Laestrygonians as little relevant). Nor do I deny even that there is more than one incident on Circe's island which seems little to accord with my proposition. For the very man who elsewhere was consumed with unquenchable yearning to revisit his native land, fritters away with unbecoming patience a whole year in a witch's palace. And even then it is the importunity of his companions, not his own motion, which induces him to beg the goddess to let them depart. We must either say that ‘Homer nodded here’
[Page 217]
or that the explanation is found in Mercury's precept to Ulysses:
                                         Decline not thou
Her love, that she may both release thy friends,
And may with kindness entertain thyself. 460
The long dalliance was needed to win Circe, to open up, by her advice, the way first to Tiresias and finally to Ithaca.
And, after all, they had reached her island jaded and 461 shaken by strange adventures, needing a long rest: and Circe blended with her enticings seductive suggestions of return to Ithaca and home:
Provoke ye not each other, now, to tears.
I am not ignorant, myself, how dread
Have been your woes, both on the fishy Deep,
And on the land by force of hostile powers.
But come—Eat now, and drink ye wine, that so
Your freshen'd spirit may revive, and ye
Courageous grow again, as when ye left
The rugged shores of Ithaca, your home. 462
Clearly, with her subtle penetration, she well read the hearts of the seafarers: and to her may be applied with absolute truth what is said in the Iliad of Ulysses:
                                         thy mind
Knows how sweet gentle counsels are. 463
Moreover, all the details woven into the story,—the lonely home in the forest; the smoke, seen far off, rising among the trees; the voice of Circe herself singing sweetly at her loom—all, while in themselves of greatest beauty, are also skilfully apt to touch each man's heart with keen remembrance of his own far-off home and his darling children:
I stood, and on the distant plain, beheld
Smoke which from Circe's palace through the gloom
Of trees and thickets rose. 464
[Page 218]
And now before the Goddess' gates arrived,
They heard the voice of Circe singing sweet
Within, while busied at the loom. 465
Thus then Polites, ... the rest bespake:—
Ye hear the voice, comrades, of one who weaves
An ample web within, and at her task
So sweetly chaunts that all the marble floor
Re-echoes: human be she or divine
I doubt. 466
But I am the more sparing of these quotations, since they are, in great measure, similar to that loveliest of all Homer's pictures, that of the grove and cave of Calypso:
They reaching, now, that isle remote, forsook
The azure Deep, and at the spacious grot,
Where dwelt the amber-tressèd nymph, arrived,
467 Found her within. A fire on all the hearth
Blazed sprightly, and, afar-diffused, the scent
Of smooth-split cedar and of cypress wood
Odorous, burning, cheer'd the happy isle.
She, busied at the loom, and plying fast
Her golden shuttle, with melodious voice
Sat chaunting there: a grove on either side,
Alder and poplar, and the redolent branch
Wide-spread of cypress, skirted dark the
cave. 468
There is indeed this material distinction between them, namely, that these last are wholly rural, while Circe's surroundings suggest a more artificial elegance: thus we read of them:
‘And they found the house of Circe built in the woods with polished stones, in a lofty situation.’ 469
‘And they stood in the gates of the beautiful-haired Goddess.’ 470
‘But she immediately coming out opened the shining doors and called them.’ 471
[Page 219]
How much more delightful and pleasing are the following lines breathing the free air of nature!
There many a bird of broadest pinion built
Secure her nest, the owl, the kite, and daw
Long-tongued, frequenter of the sandy
shores. 472
Here, most elegantly, those birds are singled out which generally take their sleep in highly remote and withdrawn retreats: thus actually leaving the impression of wildest solitude:
A garden-vine luxuriant on all sides
Mantled the spacious cavern, cluster-hung
Profuse: four fountains of serenest lymph
Their sinuous course pursuing side by side,
Stray'd all around, and everywhere appear'd
Meadows of softest verdure, purpled o'er
With violets: it was a scene to fill
A God from heaven with wonder and delight. 473
It might be suggested, and not without ground, that the writer recalled in these lines some favourite spot of his own which he yearned to immortalize in sweetest flowing verse. Assuredly, indeed, it has served as a model and type for all later poets who have dealt with the same 474 theme: and such pictures abound in poetic romance and travellers' tales, pictures, that is, of mariners whom a shipwreck casts by chance on some uninhabited shore, of their doings, their means of shelter, their provision for food and the requisites of life. Among these romances the first place is, and I believe always will be, due to that story, which every boy knows, of a certain countryman of ours, the sailor who was for twelve years stranded in a southern island. 475 He it is and that long exile which most recall what we are told of Ulysses: and in especial where he betakes himself to building a boat: except that in his case it was no visible goddess, but as it were a kind of
[Page 220]
tutelar genius who after leaving him long in despair at last suggests a bare chance of escape:
To her waist she bound
Her golden zone, and veil'd her beauteous head,
Then, musing, plann'd the noble Chief's return.
She gave him, fitted to the grasp, an axe
Of iron, ponderous, double edged
———
                                         Then, placing in his hand
A polish'd adze, she led, herself, the way
To her isle's utmost verge, where tallest trees
But dry long since and sapless stood, which best
Might serve his purposes, as buoyant most,
The alder, poplar, and cloud-piercing fir.
                                         ... Then slept not he,
But, swinging with both hands the axe, his task
Soon finish'd; trees full twenty to the ground
He cast, which, dexterous, with his adze he smooth'd,
The knotted surface chipping by a line.
Meantime the lovely Goddess to his aid
Sharp augers brought, with which he bored the beams,
Then, side by side placing them, fitted each
To other, and with long cramps join'd them all.
———
Meantime, Calypso brought him for a sail
Fittest materials, which he also shaped,
And to his sail due furniture annex'd
Of cordage strong, foot-ropes and ropes aloft,
Then heaved her down with levers to the Deep. 476
But if the comparison just made springs up unbidden to the reader's mind, assuredly the very nature of the thing emphasizes the unique predominance in the Odyssey of love for country, home, and family.
477 Yet we must, I think, hold well in mind that Ulysses craved not merely for return home and rest, but for such a home and such a rest as might befit a great and brave man. Hence springs the second half of the plot, one that has the true epic ring, of richest variety and of deepest
[Page 221]
passion. But in my judgement we should not proceed to consider this till I have developed a few points touching on our topic of to-day: being, some of them, drawn from what Homer tells us of the adventures in Phaeacia, and the remainder lying scattered here and there at random and running through the whole poem.
[Page ]
478 LECTURE XII
The guiding principle of Ulysses' wanderings is to kindle more and more his longing for his native land and an honourable rest. Much in the Odyssey, notably the ‘oracles of the dead’, accords with this postulate. The central theme of the Odyssey connected with the general social condition of Greece in Homer's time.
The net result of our long discussion about the Odyssey is, in a word, this: that we have there placed before us, in splendid poetry, what may be called the spirit of the explorer, the ‘sailor character’. And inasmuch as the special peculiarity of this character is to blend in strange fashion thirst for renown and glory with yearning for one's fatherland, it is obvious that such a spirit most happily accords with the advancing years whether of the hero or the poet; and further, the plan of the whole Odyssey exhibiting, as it does, one form of civil life and repose after another, has been proved well fitted to portray it. For whether we consider the effeminate softness of the Lotophagi, the rich pastoral possessions of Polyphemus, 479 or Aeolus feasting with his children round him, or Circe with her abandonment to song and magic art, or finally Calypso's luxurious retreat in mid-ocean, they are, one and all, framed to enhance the charms of rest and quiet living, and to delight the mind with reminiscence of the restfulness of home.
And of the same tenor are the experiences which meet Ulysses when cast on the shore of Phaeacia: indeed, this part of the Homeric writings is pre-eminent in picturing a refined ease, and all which marks an ordered and civilized life.
[Page 223]
To begin with, all we are told so delightfully, and not without a certain naïve simplicity, of that band of girls who were the first to meet Ulysses when cast on the strange shore, is exactly calculated to revive in the mind of the shipwrecked guest recollection of his own household engaged in their daily tasks. One can well believe that the suffering, weary, and much sea-tossed wanderer would be not a little touched by their merriment and games, so true to that of maidens whiling away the long summer hours, without a disturbing thought, under the blue heaven:
When they had all purified, and no spot
Could now be seen or blemish more, they spread
The raiment orderly along the beach
Where dashing tides had cleansed the pebbles most,
And laving, next, and smoothing o'er with oil
Their limbs, all seated on the river's bank,
They took repast, leaving the garments, stretch'd
In noon-day fervour of the sun, to dry.
Their hunger satisfied, at once arose
The mistress and her train, and putting off
Their head-attire, play'd wanton with the ball,
The princess singing to her maids the while. 480
It was not without design, perhaps, that Nausicaa is introduced, not like Virgil's Dido in royal robe,
‘With her Sidonian mantle bordered with an embroidered hem,’ 481
but busied with household duty. In estimating such a scene we are told that we must always judge by the standard of primitive simplicity and unsophisticated antiquity; that is true, yet such a rule will not carry us far 482 in our present discussion. For granting that a housemaiden's work well became Nausicaa, the daughter of a king: why should it be selected before all as the one
[Page 224]
occupation in which the shipwrecked Ulysses was to find her? We are bound to believe that even in such small matters the greatest poets have a distinct purpose in view and choose their details on a deliberate plan. And as a matter of fact it is the custom even now in Eastern countries for women, otherwise strictly secluded from gaze of men, to wash garments out of doors by the river-side. This custom is alluded to in the Iliad , where certain springs are assigned as a stage in Hector's flight from Achilles:
There water's concrete crystal shined, near which were cisterns made,
All paved and clear, where Trojan wives and their fair daughters had
Laundry for their fine linen weeds, in times of cleanly peace
Before the Grecians brought their siege. 483
These are most beautiful lines in themselves, and where they occur, they in a moment recall and shed a ray of peacefulness and repose over that scene of savage cruelty. It cannot but be that Homer, in his wanderings through Asia, must, like any traveller of to-day, have often met with scenes such as that which he has made such a beautiful setting for his Nausicaa. And how charming such scenes appeared to the benign and refined old man, is evidenced by those verses of his quoted by Thucydides—a precious relic if ever there was one. In it the poet thus greets the maidens of Delos:
But come, Latona, and thou King of flames,
With Phoebe, rect'ress of chaste thoughts in dames,
Let me salute ye, and your graces call
Hereafter to my just memorial.
   And you, O Delian virgins, do me grace,
When any stranger of our earthy race,
Whose restless life affliction hath in chace,
[Page 225]
Shall hither come and question you, who is,
To your chaste ears, of choicest faculties
In sacred poesy, and with most right
In author of your absolut'st delight,
Ye shall yourselves do all the right ye can
To answer for our name:—‘The sightless man
Of stony Chios. All whose poems shall 484
In all last ages stand for capital.’ 485
These lines are clearly akin, if I mistake not, to the passage concerning Nausicaa now under review: which, I repeat, is assigned its exact place with finest judgement, being so pre-eminently fit to recreate the mind after the unspeakable unrest and buffetings of the sea.
Then recollect the leading natural features by means of which she instructs Ulysses as to the path to follow: the approach to the city, the neighbouring grove where a traveller can rest for a while, even the very arrangements of her father's palace and the family circle as it sits before the hearth:
Sacred to Pallas a delightful grove
Of poplar skirts the road, which we shall reach
Ere long: within that grove a fountain flows,
And meads encircle it: my father's farm
Is there, and his luxuriant garden-plot:
A shout might reach it from the city-walls.
There wait, till in the town arrived we gain
My father's palace, and when reason bids
Suppose us there, then entering thou the town,
Ask where Alcinoüs dwells, my valiant Sire.
Well known is his abode, so that with ease
A child might lead thee to it, for in nought
The other houses of our land the house
Resembles, in which dwells the Hero, King
Alcinoüs. Once within the court received
Pause not, but, with swift pace advancing, seek
My mother; she beside a column sits
In the hearth's blaze, twirling her fleecy threads
Tinged with sea-purple, bright, magnificent,
[Page 226]
With all her maidens orderly behind.
There also stands my father's throne, on which
Seated, he drinks and banquets like a God.
Pass that; then suppliant clasp my mother's knees. 486
One sees how all converges to picture a scene of quiet and dignified leisure: such as those enjoy who pass through life, one day little varying from another, and with regular time and place allotted to each task.
But in truth throughout the whole region of the 487 Phaeacians, whithersoever our eyes are directed, everything is typical of town life and liberal means: and it may be assumed that Homer had met with such a manner of life in his own experience. This is suggested by that splendid garden, so artistically laid out and disposed, and by the gardeners' elaborate care, never suffering the sequence of fruit-bearing trees to fail. And there is another detail which more than any points to wealthy and leisured inhabitants; there are aqueducts throughout the town, and the gardens too, it appears, are artificially watered. The whole forms an admirable contrast to the wilds of Ortygia, with their pathless regions innocent of reclaiming skill. So, too, the manners and acquirements of the Phaeacians notably savour of riches and refinement: they are like men who have each and all so devotedly applied themselves from youth up to some special pursuit that they have no skill or aptitude for anything else; nor are hands or mind capable of departing even a hair's breadth from the groove of their daily function.
I am not certain that this may not have occurred to Homer himself: undoubtedly he makes Phaeacia claim for itself special pre-eminence in two arts, those of seamanship and wool-weaving:
Far as Phaeacian mariners all else
Surpass, the swift ship urging through the floods,
[Page 227]
So far in tissue-work the women pass
All others, by Minerva's self endow'd
With richest fancy and superior skill. 488
Yet in the other accomplishments which seem more appropriate to a warrior and a hero, Alcinoüs allows that they are easily surpassed:
                                         We must needs give place
To other countrymen, and freely yield
We are not blameless in our fights of field,
Buffets, nor wrestlings: but in speed of feet,
And all the equipage that befits a fleet,
We boast us best: for table ever spread,
With neighbour feasts, for garments varièd,
For poesy, musique, dancing, baths and beds. 489
Yet I take it that even this boasted superiority in seamanship 490 is not the skill of the adventurous voyager, but rather that of those who are expert in skilful and dexterous handling of a vessel as a mere machine. The names with which their chiefs are graced, indicate prettily and subtly that the Phaeacians were more famous for such skill than for any warlike qualities:
Up stood Acroneus and Ocyalus,
Elatreus, Nauteus, Prymneus, after whom
Anchialus with Anabeesineus
Arose, Eretmeus, Ponteus, Proreus bold,
Amphialus and Thoön. 491
Can any one doubt that the poet played the more freely with such trifles when writing of people who attached supreme importance to these nautical subtleties? To the same effect are the high-sounding claims of Alcinoüs:
                                         For our ships
No pilot need or helm, as ships are wont,
But know, themselves, our purpose; know beside
All cities, and all fruitful regions well
[Page 228]
Of all the earth, and with dark clouds involved
Plough rapid the rough Deep, fearless of harm
(Whate'er betide) and of disastrous wreck. 492
This assuredly assigns extraordinary swiftness and skill to the rowers. One would think the vessels made the port without rudder or pilot.
But these wool-weaving and nautical accomplishments were, as I have said, associated with grave drawbacks to Phaeacia; her ‘young dandies, who spent too much time in caring for their bodies,’ 493 grew lax and self-indulgent in the midst of their wealth. Moreover, as usually happens with a city populace, once it becomes well-fed and indolent, a malicious and unbridled licence of speech was very prevalent: so Nausicaa gives a prudent warning against those
Whose bitter tongues I shun,
———
(For these vile vulgars are extremely proud,
And foully languag'd),— 494
495 My motive in thus quoting so many instances is to make more clear the poet's purpose; while thus sketching a life devoted to wealth, a life without vigour and without the warlike spirit, a life lived in one unbroken groove, he has wished to imply a certain reproach: while at the same time he has also meant by it to keep Ulysses, worn with perils of the sea, mindful of his daily longed for home.
Nor was the life there entirely without means of tempting and proving a man, devoted to his wife and his native land, a man of unblemished probity and constant to his standard of right. I pass by the charm of Nausicaa—the loveliest and most modest figure in all ancient poetry—though that most tender farewell of hers declares how deeply the godlike bearing of the hero had impressed her:
But, as he pass'd, the Princes all divine
Beside the pillars of the portals, lost
[Page 229]
In admiration of his graceful form,
Stood, and in accents wing'd him thus address'd.
   Hail, Stranger! at thy native home arrived
Remember me, thy first deliverer here. 496
And this, after her father had more than once, with no disguise of his meaning, offered her hand to Ulysses: but, passing by Nausicaa, take the address of Alcinoüs himself, conveyed with such kindness and delicate courtesy:
And oh, I would to heaven, that, being such
As now thou art, and of one mind with me,
Thou would'st accept my daughter, would'st become
My son-in-law and dwell contented here!
House would I give thee and possessions too,
Were such thy choice: else, if thou choose it not,
No man in all Phaeacia shall by force
Detain thee. Jupiter himself forbid! 497
And he alone of all the banqueters detects Ulysses' silent emotion, when he listens to the story of Troy sung by the bard:
Thus, unperceived by all, the Hero mourn'd,
Save by Alcinoüs: he alone his tears 498
(Beside him seated) mark'd, and his deep sighs
O'erhearing, the Phaeacians thus bespake.
Phaeacia's Chiefs and Senators attend!
We have regaled sufficient, and the harp
Heard to satiety, companion sweet
And seasonable of the festive hour.
Now go we forth for honourable proof
Of our address in games of every kind. 499
He well knew—and it is not given to every one—with what tact and reserve a mourner must be treated; with a like thoughtfulness, deserving our highest praise, does he invite the hero to unfold the cause of his grief:
Say also, from what secret grief of heart
Thy sorrows flow, oft as thou hear'st the fate
[Page 230]
Of the Achaians, or of Ilium sung?
That fate the Gods prepared: they spin the thread
Of man's destruction, that in after-days
The bard may make the sad event his theme.
Did some heroic kinsman perish there?
Or hast thou at the siege of Ilium lost
Father-in-law or son-in-law? for such
Are next and dearest to us after those
Who share our own descent: or was the dead
Thy bosom-friend, whose heart was as thy own?
For worthy as a brother of thy love
The constant friend and the discreet I deem. 500
Observe that the omits any suggestion of those nearest ties of all, brothers, parents, children, since mention of them might perchance be more than could be borne. In short, Homer obviously endowed the king with a disposition of the most refined courtesy, so that we might rate the constancy at no common height which enabled Ulysses to decline, so definitely such hospitality and such offer of alliance, nor forget, at any moment, Penelope and his native Ithaca.
From all that has been instanced we may perhaps reasonably infer that Homer led his Ulysses through so many seas and islands, and familiarized him with the manners and cities of so many peoples, on such a plan that, after testing every kind of peaceful life, he yet might find, go where he would, something that kindled into higher flame his ever-present longing for his paternal home.
501 We may now fall back on a few passages from the earlier books of the Odyssey which seem to point much the same way. First, there is the fact that so many delays are spun out round the fortunes of Telemachus. One or two whole books, indeed, are devoted to his wrangling with the circle of suitors: but I let these incidents pass for the present, as associated more with the last act of the
[Page 231]
Odysseian drama, which is principally concerned with the slaughter of the suitors. But it will be sufficient for our purpose to bear in mind that the first four books are designedly domestic: everything takes place within doors, within the house of Nestor, or Menelaus, or of Ulysses himself and Penelope: so that the reader, like Telemachus himself, is constantly pained by the contrast between the sight of the peaceful calm of the palace and the thought of Ulysses encompassed by toils and danger. In this connexion the episode of Menelaus stands out pre-eminently. Read that, and you seem to taste at once the flavour of the whole poem: especially where there is flashed upon us for a fleeting instant a vision of consummate and perfect rest:
But, Menelaus, dear to Jove! thy fate
Ordains not thee the stroke of death to meet
In steed-famed Argos, but far hence the Gods
Will send thee to Elysium, and the earth's
Extremest bounds: (there Rhadamanthus dwells,
The golden-hair'd, and there the human kind
Enjoy the easiest life; no snow is there,
No biting winter, and no drenching shower,
But zephyr always gently from the sea
Breathes on them, to refresh the happy race:)
For that fair Helen is by nuptial bands
Thy own, and thou art son-in-law of Jove. 502
These lines make perhaps the greater impression as closely following the utterance about the fortunes of Ulysses—an oracle speaking only of trouble and disquiet:
Him in an island weeping I beheld,
Guest of the nymph Calypso, by constraint
Her guest, and from his native land withheld
By sad necessity: for ships well-oar'd,
Or faithful followers hath he none, whose aid
Might speed him safely o'er the spacious flood. 503
[Page 232]
504 It seems somehow to heighten our concern that Ulysses should be tried by so many bitter experiences when a happy and lasting repose is confidently assured to Menelaus.
More than this, the very same repose is shown to please and satisfy the Gods themselves:
So saying, Minerva, Goddess azure-eyed,
Rose to Olympus, the reputed seat
Eternal of the Gods, which never storms
Disturb, rains drench, or snow invades, but calm
The expanse and cloudless shines with purest day.
There the inhabitants divine rejoice
For ever. 505
It may be noticed, by the way, that Lucretius in following this surpassingly beautiful passage, has hardly ventured to vary it by as much as a single word:
Thro' parted Heavens I see the Mighty Space ,
The Rise of Things , the Gods, and Happy Seats,
Which Storm or violent Tempest never beats:
Nor Snow invades, but with the purest Air,
And gawdy light diffus'd, look gay and fair;
There bounteous Nature makes supplies for ease,
There Minds enjoy an undisturbèd Peace. 506
Unquestionably a fine passage: but Lucretius has not dared to approach Homer's most felicitous phrase describing the pellucid air of a high noon:
And cloudless shines with purest day.
Perhaps it was an impossible phrase in Latin: anyway Lucretius' substitution ‘laughs with diffused light’ is neither like it nor even to be named with it.
[Page 233]
But to return: ‘The oracles of the dead,’ as they are called, plainly indicate advancing age and a spirit much changed from that which was dominant in the Iliad. The poet absolutely revolts at and flees from the idea of death, as something chilling, forbidding, grievous. Indeed, by the mouth of Achilles himself he does not hesitate to give utterance to sentiments which seemed so unbecoming in 507 Plato's judgement that largely on their account he banishes the whole tribe of poets from his ideal state:
Renown'd Ulysses! think not death a theme
Of consolation; I had rather live
The servile hind for hire, and eat the bread
Of some man scantily himself sustain'd,
Than sovereign empire hold o'er all the shades. 508
But this is so trite and commonplace that it has long since crystallized into the proverb that ‘a live dog is better than a dead lion’—it is, I say, this well-worn platitude which Achilles puts in his own fashion. But, if we assume with Longinus that the Odyssey was written when Homer was somewhat weakened by age, there will be some excuse since the aged (if we may trust Aristotle) are naturally ‘attached to life, and particularly at its last closing day, for it is the absent which is the object of desire’. 509
And here it will be instructive to note the view which Homer held of the state of the departed. He is quite at one with the ignorant crowd, and apparently neither assigns them a fixed abode nor any stated manner of existence. Rather, on the other hand, do they wander hither and thither, feebly and flutteringly, unresting, disconsolate; ‘images of the dead’, ‘unsubstantial heads of the dead’—these are his names for them. 510 In the Odyssey the summoned shades depart with a groan, just like those
[Page 234]
visions which we see in our dreams. There is not a trace of the Virgilian Elysium, where the sojourners agreeably cheat the long hours with imaged shadows of their past deeds:
Their lances fix'd in earth—their steeds around,
Free from their harness, graze the flow'ry ground:
The love of horses which they had, alive,
And care of chariots, after death survive. 511
512 Very different from this is Homer's ‘Oracles of the Dead’. Nor is the passing shade of Hercules, though absorbed as ever in delight of the chase, to be excepted:
Around him, clamorous as birds, the dead
Swarm'd turbulent; he gloomy-brow'd as night,
With uncased bow and arrow on the string
Peer'd terrible from side to side, as one
Ever in act to shoot. 513
True, he is shown indeed busied in pursuits which in life he loved: but then it is not really Hercules, but a mere shade raised up to represent him for the moment:
The might of Hercules I next survey'd:
His semblance: for himself their banquet shares
With the immortal Gods and in his arms
Enfolds neat-footed Hebe. 514
From these and like passages we may confidently infer, I apprehend, that Homer followed here the beliefs not of educated men, but of the common people: especially as the whole episode is inaugurated by the popular method of divination through the sacrificial blood. Consequently, Ulysses does not gain admission into the region of the departed: he only attains the extreme boundary of it, and, as it were, stands on the threshold of closed doors. In a word, any one who chooses may hold the writer's own view to
[Page 235]
have been such that he sincerely laments and bewails the doubtful doom of the departed, their gloomy dwelling and dark future: though yet not without cherishing some hope that mortals might possibly win a better estate, since he assigns Menelaus to Elysium and Hercules to the heaven of the gods. Any one to whom this supposition commends itself will at once recognize that even these ‘oracles of the dead’ well accord with the whole tone of the Odyssey : the old passion for renown has become dimmed, when the hope of rest is not assured even in the grave.
Finally the whole subject may be most ably summed 515 up in the prophecy of Tiresias, in which he teaches Ulysses the rites which will enable him to bid a long farewell to the perils of the deep:
That once perform'd, and every suitor slain
Either by stratagem, or face to face
In thy own palace, bearing, as thou goest,
A shapely oar, journey till thou hast found
A people who the sea know not, nor eat
Food salted: they trim galley crimson-prow'd
Have ne'er beheld, nor yet smooth-shaven oar,
With which the vessel wing'd scuds o'er the waves.
Well thou shalt know them: this shall be the sign;
When thou shalt meet a traveller, who shall name
The oar on thy broad shoulder borne, a van, 516
There, deep infixing it within the soil,
Worship the King of Ocean with a bull,
A ram, and a lascivious boar, then seek
Thy home again, and sacrifice at home
A hecatomb to the Immortal Gods,
Adoring each duly, and in his course.
So shalt thou die in peace a gentle death,
Remote from Ocean; it shall find thee late,
In soft serenity of age, the Chief
Of a blest people.—I have told thee truth. 517
Should any one be inclined to object that the meaning
[Page 236]
of this is not quite clear, since it appears probable that some small historical detail, perhaps, or some custom, which the writer was thinking of has not come down to us, I should assuredly agree with him: but it is at least quite evident, I think, that what is here said is exactly in keeping with the wonted usage of old sailors: who hold it a sacred duty when they return safe and sound, before abandoning themselves to their well-earned leisure and home life, to sacrifice with all solemnity to the Sea God. And this is why it was necessary, in order to appease the God, not merely that victims should be sacrificed, but that men living far from the sea should be initiated in his rites. But further, in this narrative it is especially noteworthy with what fidelity the characteristics of the true landsman are 518 reproduced. They have no idea of the sea at all: they are innocent even of adding salt to their food: they have never seen a ship, or learnt to row; and as for an oar they suppose, on first sight of one, that the blade belongs to a winnowing-fan.
This is all told with such spirit that we are convinced the poet sympathized with sailors, to whom it would be incredible that through the whole world there could anywhere be men so ignorant: and he adds in conclusion, what would comfort any sailor's heart, taking his farewell of Ocean: that death would meet Ulysses, as a sailor would desire, coming from the sea:
‘And thine own death shall come upon thee from the sea, a gentle death, which shall end thee, foredone with a smooth old age.’ 519
All acquainted with sailors know that something like this is not seldom on their lips and in their prayers when they think about their death and burial.
Having dealt with that part of the Odyssey which presents Ulysses in peril by land and sea, we may now proceed to
[Page 237]
the second act of the Tragedy, as it may be called, namely, the story after he returns to Ithaca and his own palace; and this clearly points to the same issue, setting forth the charm of rest after toil, yet not rest merely, but such rest as is worthy of a brave man and a truly regal spirit. For Ulysses was to revisit his native land certainly, but, more than that, to restore its liberty and release it from an infamous crowd of mischievous parasites. I know that some have been misled by this fact and have held the Odyssey to be essentially opposed to the Iliad , in that the whole scene of the former is placed within private dwellings, while the latter is concerned with public affairs and the fortunes of kings, chiefs, and peoples. And it seems that the high priest of criticism was of this opinion: for this is how he sums up the Odyssey :
‘A certain man is supposed to be absent from his own 520 country for many years; he is persecuted by Neptune, deprived of all his companions, and left alone. At home his affairs are in disorder—the suitors of his wife dissipating his wealth, and plotting the destruction of his son. Tossed by many tempests, he at length arrives, and, making himself known to some of his household, attacks his enemies, destroys them, and remains himself in safety. This is essential, the rest is episode.’ 521
But with all due respect to so great an authority, I think he should not have failed to notice the one fact of all which chiefly contributes to give both reality and dignity to the story—namely, that he to whom these insults were shown, whose return and vengeance are here related, was no ordinary man but a king, yes, and a king of the heroic age. Such a one was by divine right the shepherd and father of his people, and therefore the greater the peril incurred, the deeper and more serious the wrong done, were any, in his absence on public duty, to usurp his
[Page 238]
place in his home, corrupt his household, and violently or fraudulently waste his substance.
Moreover, it must be remembered that according to the most simple theory of kingly power which was held in ancient times, the king's property was that of the State itself: just, I apprehend, as among the primitive Celtic tribes, where each hereditary chieftain was bound by inviolable custom to extend the hospitality of his lands, pastures, and granaries to the whole clan. Traces of these manners linger in what we read in the Odyssey itself of the table and banquets of Alcinoüs, whither it appears the leading citizens without exception resorted daily. Any one can see that it was much more of a public matter, if a household of this kind were upset and thrown into confusion, than can be conceived possible in modern times.
Unquestionably, therefore, on Ulysses' return and triumph over the suitors depended not only the fortunes of his own house, but those too of Ithaca herself.
522 But if we rightly infer that Homer flourished during the decline of the heroic age, it follows that his Odyssey to a great extent records a state of affairs which he had himself witnessed, and indeed, should occasion have offered, may in some degree have actively influenced. For at that epoch the kingly power was in decline throughout Greece, and there was a general tendency, not without grave social disorder, towards popular government. And this revolution was not seldom the work of pushing and forward men of low type, able to push their schemes in consequence of their chief's absence. The chiefs were in those times much away from their domains, since wars were frequent, and all the soldiers' tasks were expected to be performed by the commanders in person. Suppose that this was the condition of things in the time of Homer himself, and we go far to explain the general scheme of the Odyssey
[Page 239]
At all events I am strongly of opinion that the Odyssey has a far wider range of interest than the limitations of a single family. Rather should I say that it is associated with the fortunes of all Greece. Just as the Iliad is not merely concerned with one single man, Achilles, but with the issue of a war greater than all which had up to that time ever been waged, and with the destinies of Europe and Asia, so in the Odyssey our minds are directed not only to Ulysses and Ithaca, but to the whole problem of the political stability of Greece, when unrest had once been caused, either, as was often the case, owing to the protracted absence of a chieftain, or through failure of the regal succession, or through defeat in war, or in any other way. In those times some stood in the old ways, upholding the customs of the heroic age, whose ideal of the state is well summed and defined by Thucydides as an ‘hereditary monarchy with fixed prerogatives' 523 : while others, regardless of past traditions, either openly seized upon power for 524 themselves, or more subtly and cunningly invoked the sacred name of the people: and it is impossible to suppose that at such a crisis the author of the Odyssey should not have had leanings to one side or the other.
It will not perhaps be irrelevant to develop this view somewhat further, and endeavour to show that Homer's sympathies were on the aristocratic side: if indeed we must style aristocrats those who supported in these communities the ancient form of government. But this is a rather large question, and may be more conveniently postponed to a later opportunity.
‘But how, possibly, could a man who never even by report’ (so they say) ‘knew anything of democratic government have been conversant with such political controversies?’ This is maintained by an eminent author of our own country, whose Greek History is hardly rivalled
[Page 240]
in respect of keen insight and lucid statement. ‘In Homer,’ he says, ‘there is no record of a State without king or chief.’ 525 True: but it does not therefore follow that no beginnings of discord and unrest had shown themselves in Homer's time. Indeed, the writer just quoted himself says that ‘immediately after the Homeric age the rule of the chiefs ceased, and throughout almost the whole of Greece the very name of king disappeared: the individuals who held chief power were called tyrants—an extraordinary change truly unless in Homer's time even under the kings there had not existed, if not positive laws, certainly manners suited to free government.’ 526
So he writes: and it necessarily follows that discussion as to the best form of government cannot have been unknown in Homer's time. Already in those days the passions of restless men were inflamed: already there was strife between desperate adventurers and men of means: 527 between restless innovators and sober citizens. And perhaps it was this state of things, in part at all events, which Homer's near contemporary, Hesiod, lamented in his gravely pregnant lines:
O would that Nature had denied me birth
Midst this fifth race, this iron age of earth;
That long before within the grave I lay,
Or long hereafter could behold the day!
Corrupt the race, with toils and griefs opprest,
Nor day nor night can yield a pause of rest:
Still do the gods a weight of care bestow,
Though still some good is mingled with the woe. ...
Nor sire with son, with brethren brethren blend,
Nor host with guest, nor friend, as erst, with friend:
Reckless of heaven's revenge the sons behold
The hoary parents wax too swiftly old;
And impious point the keen dishonouring tongue,
With hard reproofs and bitter mockeries hung:
[Page 241]
Nor grateful in declining age repay
The nurturing fondness of their better day.
Now man's right hand is law; for spoil they wait,
And lay their mutual cities desolate:
Unhonour'd he by whom his oath is fear'd:
Nor are the good beloved, the just rever'd.
With favour grac'd the evil-doer stands,
Nor curbs with shame nor equity his hands:
With crooked slanders wounds the virtuous man,
And stamps with perjury what hate began.
Lo! ill-rejoicing Envy, winged with lies,
Scattering calumnious rumours as she flies,
The steps of miserable men pursue,
With haggard aspect blasting to the view,
Till those fair forms in snowy raiment bright
From the broad earth have wing'd their heavenward flight,
Call'd to th' eternal synod of the skies,
The virgins Modesty and Justice rise,
And leave forsaken man to mourn below
The weight of evil, and the cureless wo. 528
[Page ]
529 LECTURE XIII
The opinion of the author of the Odyssey as to the best form of government considered: especially with reference to his treatment of the suitors. Two reasons why one attached to the heroic tradition would naturally be in sympathy with an aristocracy.
I have now described the social conditions in Greece when the heroes returned home after the fall of Troy, and consequently in Homer's own time: it remains to discuss briefly the famous poet's general views as to the best form of government: a discussion which will, perhaps, prove interesting in itself, and will, unless I mistake, be most relevant to our special subject of Poetry, provided we can succeed in dealing with it fairly and tactfully—for the subject is, I confess, not without risk. Not without risk, I repeat, for politicians, at all events in this country, somehow fasten eagerly upon anything others let fall which may seem to serve their own turn; and all the greater care is requisite lest one may incur suspicion of crying one's own wares under cover of Homer's.
530 But, indeed, if we have thus far rightly interpreted the Odyssey , there will not long be room for doubting that it places before us the picture of an age full of unrest, as seen by a veteran who loves and clings to the old order. Every one, therefore, will allow that it would be little short of a miracle if Homer had not zealously sided with those whose downfall would also involve the destruction of the privileges of the Heroic Kings, of a quiet restful life, of the happiness of the whole State. But, in fact, the plan of the whole Odyssey is, I think, ample demonstration of this. Who ever heard of any one more attached to his own ways and customs than the man who preferred Ithaca
[Page 243]
to Elysium and his home to immortality? And this is the hinge on which, as we all well know, the whole plot of the Odyssey turns from beginning to end:
Awful Divinity! be not incensed.
I know that my Penelope in form
And stature altogether yields to thee,
For she is mortal, and immortal thou,
From age exempt: yet not the less I wish
My home, and languish daily to return. 531
Homer could hardly, at least to my thinking, have more exactly reflected the mind of those who, without hesitation, prefer their own happy condition, however antiquated, however obsolete and old-fashioned, to the untried nostrums of reformers. So that, were we entirely without other indications of Homer's political opinions, the very substance of his work would, I think, evidence his aristocratic leanings. But he has more than once expressed his views with ample clearness.
To begin with, many passages imply that the suitors in Ithaca are regarded not so much as mere profligate debauchees about town as Catilines or Cleons in the State: men, in fact, whose scheme was to drive the house of Laertes from the kingdom, and then in the consequent anarchy, 532 each for himself, seize upon and hold what spoil he could. Listen to Antinous when stirred to anger by the vigorous reproaches of Telemachus:
Telemachus! the Gods, methinks, themselves
Teach thee sublimity, and to pronounce
Thy matter fearless. Ah forbid it, Jove!
That one so eloquent should with the weight
Of kingly cares in Ithaca be charged,
A realm, by claim hereditary, thine. 533
He suspected (for unjust men, when dealing with the affairs of others, are wont to see ‘lions in their path’)
[Page 244]
that Telemachus was trying to gain the succession to his father's kingdom. This he not only sharply opposes, but even solemnly sets aside and deprecates for him as something bitter and fateful. How does Telemachus answer him? He neither allows nor denies that such a thing is within his ambition: thus showing plainly enough that reverence for the kingly power had already declined in Ithaca:
Although my speech, Antinoüs, may perchance
Provoke thee, know that I am not averse
From kingly cares, if Jove appoint me such.
Seems it to thee a burden to be fear'd
By men above all others? trust me, no.
There is no ill in royalty: the man,
So station'd, waits not long ere he obtain
Riches and honour. 534
And then, with a skilled speaker's courtesy, such as is often met with throughout the Odyssey , he reproves these ‘men of the people’!
                                         But I grant that Kings
Of the Achaians may no few be found
In sea-girt Ithaca, both young and old,
Of whom since great Ulysses is no more,
Reign whoso may; but King, myself, I am
In my own house, and over all my own
Domestics, by Ulysses gained for me. 535
Forthwith Eurymachus gets up to support the other side of the question, with great show of truth and right:
                                         What Grecian Chief shall reign
In sea-girt Ithaca, must be referr'd
536 To the Gods' will, Telemachus! Meantime
Thou hast unquestionable right to keep
Thy own, and to command in thy own house.
[Page 245]
May never that man on her shores arrive,
While an inhabitant shall yet be left
In Ithaca, who shall by violence wrest
Thine from thee. 537
We are not altogether unfamiliar with this sort of generosity on the lips of popular reformers; and have either at some time known, or at all events heard of, men who while violently overriding civil rights, profess their respect for private property with astonishing zeal. And, besides, it is exactly characteristic of a demagogue's callous insolence that the very man who, heedless of right or wrong, had troubled and wasted the home of Telemachus during nearly four years, at the same time professes his desire to deal always in a spirit of justice and fairness.
So we see that Penelope's suitors have much in common with those who pay court to the mob for their own ambitious ends: whether it is in their hatred of the principle of hereditary monarchy, or in the fact that they vociferously insist that, even in a revolution, private property must be held safe and inviolate: or that while so insisting, yet themselves cannot refrain from plunder.
But come, let us see how these friends of the people really acted when there was a question of popular rights and of liberty. It is extraordinary how exact an agreement there is, in this respect too, between the plans of the suitors in the Odyssey and those of the ‘demagogues’ in the states of Greece. There is in the Second Book of the Odyssey a striking speech delivered by a certain old man of Ithaca, who held it an intolerable and monstrous thing that during the whole twenty years since the departure of Ulysses for Troy no assembly of the people had ever been summoned:
Hear me, ye men of Ithaca, my friends!
Nor council here nor session hath been held 538
[Page 246]
Since great Ulysses left his native shore.
Who now convenes us? What especial need
Hath urged him, whether of our youth he be,
Or of our senators by age matured?
Have tidings reach'd him of our host's return,
Which here he would divulge? or brings he aught
Of public import on a different theme?
I deem him, whomsoe'er he be, a man
Worthy to prosper, and may Jove vouchsafe
The full performance of his chief desire! 539
He implies that the summoning of the assembly was unusual and unexpected, that there had been none for very many years, and that it had now been hailed by all with delight. But what say the conspirators? for we may perhaps fitly call them so. Why, they dismiss the people, not allowing any resolution to be reached, and bitterly reproach those who have dared to act independently of themselves:
Mentor! the railer, made a fool with pride,
What language giv'st thou that would quiet us
With putting us in storm? exciting thus
The rout against us? Who, though more than we,
Should find it is no easy victory
To drive men, habited in feast, from feasts.
...To their labours then
Disperse these people: and let these two men,
Mentor and Halitherses, that so boast
From the beginning to have govern'd most
In friendship of the father, to the son
Confirm the course he now affects to run.
But my mind says, that if he would but use
A little patience, he should here hear news
Of all things that his wish would understand,
But no good hope for, of the course in hand.
   This said the Council rose: when every peer
And all the people in dispersion were
To houses of their own. 540
[Page 247]
Thus Eurymachus 541 : who throughout the story is the spokesman whenever the suitors' position needs defence.
Now there is little room for doubt in what estimation that truly seditious company was held by Homer. First of all it is very significant that in no single individual instance does he represent their unscrupulous acts as being redeemed by any one good quality: and herein he differs from almost all poets who have described shameless and monstrous deeds. Far the greater number invest their villain, be he tyrant, brigand, or assassin, with a certain glamour. They do not hesitate to glorify splendid vices. Such examples as Medea, Clytemnestra, Mezentius, will at once suggest themselves to all. If any one wishes to pursue 542 this further, the house of Ulysses will unquestionably offer him the most free and ample range. And when Homer utterly departs from this practice (for we may pass by Antinous, whose only distinction is his madcap insolence, and Eurymachus with his polished cunning) it is at once evident what contempt he feels for the whole of that unruly crew.
Next, if we review the special qualities which were in that age held in highest esteem, it will appear that Homer deliberately denies them all to the suitors, while assigning them to Telemachus and his adherents in unusual measure
For example, in the reception of strangers, the suitors show themselves not merely careless, but without human feeling and downright barbarous. This is marked clearly at the very outset when Minerva in the guise of Mentes enters the place of Ulysses:
Long ere the rest Telemachus himself
Mark'd her, for sad amid them all he sat,
Pourtraying in deep thought contemplative
His noble Sire. ...
Amid them musing thus, sudden he saw
The Goddess, and sprang forth, for he abhorr'd
[Page 248]
To see a guest's admittance long delay'd:
Approaching eager her right hand he seized,
The brazen spear took from her, and in words
With welcome wing'd Minerva thus address'd.
   Stranger, all hail! to share our cordial love
Thou comest; the banquet finish'd, thou shalt next
Inform me wherefore thou hast here arrived.
   So saying, toward the spacious hall he moved,
Followed by Pallas, and, arriving soon,
Beneath the lofty roof, placed her bright spear
Within a pillar's cavity, long time
The armoury where many a spear had stood,
Bright weapons of his own illustrious Sire. 543
Notice what a happy touch that is, the mention of the place where the weapons of the absent chieftain were kept; it falls in with the general sense of sorrow for his absence, 544 of resentment against the suitors. But to finish the quotation:
Then, leading her toward a footstool'd throne
Magnificent, which first he overspread
With linen, there he seated her, apart
From that rude throng, and for himself disposed
A throne of various colours at her side,
Lest, stunn'd with clamour of the lawless band,
The new-arrived should loth perchance to eat,
And that more free he might the stranger's ear
With questions of his absent Sire address. 545
Thus it is that, from the very first, the mind and disposition of the two parties are placed in clear relief. In Telemachus we observe a royal graciousness, a frank and generous reception, a mind alert and eager to observe the rights, even the religious reverence, due to a guest: in the suitors, such haughty pride as will not even suffer Telemachus to receive a friendly guest, without being himself exposed to insult. And we see plainly that if the stranger went away unharmed and unmenaced, that was
[Page 249]
not due to the suitors acting of their own free-will, but because they are instinctively conscious of a more than mortal dignity which compels them to unwilling respect. Eurymachus thus delivers himself:
   But permit me, noble Sir!
To ask thee of thy guest. Whence came the man?
What country claims him? Where are to be found
His kindred and his patrimonial fields?
Brings he glad tidings of the Sire's approach
Homeward? or came he to receive a debt
Due to himself? How swift he disappear'd!
Nor opportunity to know him gave
To those who wish'd it: for his face and air
Him speak not of Plebeian birth obscure. 546
Some fear, vague and undefined, restrained these savage spirits from venturing to harm a goddess, even though her divinity was veiled. But later on, when Ulysses at last returns, clothed in rags, like a beggar, with what insolence do they then act! Though, to say the truth, some 547 distinction is drawn between Antinous and the other princely suitors. Homer unquestionably makes Antinous the worst of them: he puts him forward as a complete and finished specimen of the degenerate and unhappy age which followed when the heroic type had been banished.
Thus he assails the suppliant wanderer not only with reproaches, but with actual violence. It will be worth while to quote some of his insulting speeches:
   Then thus Antinous stern rebuked
The swine-herd. Ah, notorious as thou art,
Why hast thou shewn this vagabond the way
Into the city? are we not enough
Infested with these troublers of our feasts?
Deem'st it a trifle that such numbers eat
At thy Lord's cost, and hast thou, therefore, led
This fellow hither, found we know not where? 548
[Page 250]
Equally bitter are his exasperating words, a little further on, to Ulysses himself, who, as beggars do, is going round begging a crust or two from each banqueter:
What demon introduced this nuisance here,
This troubler of our feast? stand yonder, keep
Due distance from my table, or expect
To see an Egypt and a Cyprus worse
Than those, bold mendicant and void of shame!
Thou hauntest each, and inconsiderate each
Gives to thee, because gifts at others' cost
Are cheap and plentifully served themselves,
They squander, heedless, viands not their own. 549
These lines are worth notice, as reminding us, that in Homer's judgement it is one and the same disposition which attacks the authority of the ruler and the rights of the aristocracy and which assails the poor outcast with abuse and ill-usage.
On that occasion, indeed, the rest of the suitors show that their conscience is shocked by the conduct of Antinous, and thus even his own proud companions censured him:
   Antinoüs! thou didst not well to smite
The wretched vagabond. Oh, thou art doom'd
For ever, if there be a God in heaven;
For in similitude of strangers oft,
The Gods, who can with ease all shapes assume,
Repair to populous cities, where they mark
The outrageous and the righteous deeds of men. 550
551 Well would it have been if their judgement had maintained such genuine and sound religious feeling! But once their fear is relieved there is scarcely any limit to their insulting words and even violence. On the other hand, with Eumaeus and those who like him side with the king, none are more entitled to respect and reverence than strangers, however
[Page 251]
poor. You can see that they never lose sight of the solemn truth:
   For all the poor that are,
And all the strangers are the care of Jove. 552
I pass on to another mark, and no slight one truly, of a prudent and devout spirit, according to the religious belief of the age. Divine auguries and omens, often met with in the Odyssey , are despised by the company of suitors, but respected by the adherents of Ulysses. There are two special occasions which strikingly place the contrast in relief; both as decisive and eloquent in evidence of Homer's own feeling as they are notable for poetic force and beauty. In the first of them Eurymachus thus inveighs against a certain augur who was foretelling Ulysses' return:
   Hence to thy house,
Thou hoary dotard! there, prophetic, teach
Thy children to escape woes else to come.
Birds numerous flutter in the beams of day,
Not all predictive. Death, far hence remote
Hath found Ulysses, and I would to heaven
That, where he died, thyself had perish'd too:
Thou hadst not then run o'er with prophecy
As now, nor provocation to the wrath
Given of Telemachus, in hope to win
Perchance, for thine some favour at his hands. 553
Do not fail to note that he ridicules divine care of human interests for much the same reason as is employed by some would-be philosophers nowadays:
Birds numerous flutter in the beams of day,
Not all predictive.
As much as to say that since we are often unable, by 554 absolutely certain signs, to infer the divine presence, we may deny it altogether. And with this he couples almost exactly the very same taunt which scoffers still urge with
[Page 252]
tedious repetition—that the whole priestly order are actuated by motives of gain and will say anything for due reward:
                                         In hope to win
Perchance for thine some favour at his hands.
Subsequently, too, this irrepressible Eurymachus interrupts Theoclymenus, when he foretells the doom that is now close at hand, with jest and ridicule—that final resource of pleasure-loving worldlings. I cite the whole passage, advisedly, as full of significance: especially since nothing finer, nothing more informed with religious awe, can be found in the Odyssey , or even in the Iliad itself:
                                         Then Pallas struck
The suitors with delirium: wide they stretch'd
Their jaws with unspontaneous laughter loud;
Their meat dripp'd blood: tears fill'd their eyes, and dire
Presages of approaching woe, their hearts.
Then thus the prophet Theoclymenus.
   Ah, miserable men! what curse is this
That takes you now? night wraps itself around
Your faces, bodies, limbs; the palace shakes
With peals of groans—and oh, what floods ye weep!
I see the walls and arches dappled thick
With gore; the vestibule is throng'd, the court
On all sides throng'd with apparitions grim
Of slaughter'd men sinking into the gloom
Of Erebus; the sun is blotted out
From heaven, and midnight whelms you premature. 555
I seem to trace here the germ of that awful terror which we find in Aeschylus, and could believe that the solemn warnings of Cassandra and the Furies do but give freer and ampler expression to what Homer here touches briefly. But to continue:
He said, they hearing laugh'd: and thus the son
Of Polybus, Eurymachus replied.
[Page 253]
   This wanderer from a distant shore hath left 556
His wits behind. Hoa there! conduct him hence
Into the forum: since he dreams it night
Already, teach him there that it is day. 557
It was but to be expected that men who flouted both poor men and the higher powers should exhibit ready contempt for the dead: and thus we find Antinous rebuking Eumaeus and Philaetius for the tears which like true retainers they shed in memory of their lost chieftain, when they see, and themselves handle, his mighty bow, taken down after long disuse:
So saying, she bade Eumaeus lay the bow
Before them, and the twice six rings of steel.
He wept, received them, and obey'd: nor wept
The herdsman less, seeing the bow which erst
His Lord had occupied: when at their tears
Indignant, thus Antinous began.
   Ye rural drones, whose purblind eyes see not
Beyond the present hour, egregious fools!
Why weeping trouble ye the Queen, too much
Before afflicted for her husband lost?
Either partake the banquet silently,
Or else go weep abroad, leaving the bow,
That stubborn test, to us. 558
I pass by those other facts which lie upon the surface: the insolence of the suitors, their inordinate revelling, their sottishness, lust, and greed. I merely add one remark: that the servants, and even the maidservants, faithfully reflect the contrasted dispositions. The most beautiful instance of all is the well-known conversation in the cottage of Eumaeus. And, should I be asked what is the chief reason why this episode always charms me so much, my reply would be, that it is not that most lovely picture of a peasant's life; not the abundance and tranquillity of that home; not the ordered round of common tasks, nor
[Page 254]
that liberal and cheerful hospitality, but it is the steadfast loyalty to their absent master and pious devotion towards the immortal gods: and these are indicated not so much by any words, delicate and subtle as they all are, but by a silent unaltered tone that runs through the whole 559 passage. A few illustrations will show clearly what I mean. His own hounds rush to attack Ulysses at the threshold of Eumaeus' lodge:
Soon as those clamorous watch-dogs the approach
Saw of Ulysses, baying loud, they ran
Toward him; he, as ever, well-advised
Squatted, and let his staff fall from his hand.
Yet foul indignity he had endured
Even there, at his own farm, but that the swain,
Following his dogs in haste, sprang through the porch
To his assistance, letting fall the hide.
With chiding voice and volleyed stones he soon
Drove them apart, and thus his Lord bespake.
   Old man! one moment more, and these my dogs
Had, past doubt, worried thee, who should'st have proved,
So slain, a source of obloquy to me.
But other pangs the Gods, and other woes
To me have given, who here lamenting sit
My godlike master, and his fatted swine
Nourish for others' use, while he, perchance,
A wanderer in some foreign city seeks
Fit sustenance, and none obtains, if still
Indeed he live and view the light of day. 560
It should be carefully noted how simply Ulysses is named, and how lovingly the whole speech of Eumaeus is pervaded by thought of his absent, and perhaps dead, master. He again addresses Ulysses, who has acknowledged his kind courtesy:
My guest! I should offend, treating with scorn
The stranger, though a poorer should arrive
[Page 255]
Than even thyself: for all the poor that are,
And all the strangers are the care of Jove.
Little, and with good will, is all that lies
Within my scope: no man can much expect
From servants living in continual fear
Under young masters: for the Gods, no doubt,
Have intercepted my own Lord's return,
From whom great kindness I had, else, received,
With such a recompense as servants gain
From generous masters. 561
The next passage exhibits a high sense of honour, expressed with natural and unaffected simplicity. Ulysses, still in his beggar's dress, has offered his life in pledge, should Eumaeus not, before long, witness his master's promised safe return. But the good old man replies:
Yes, stranger! doubtless I should high renown
Obtain for virtue among men, both now
And in all future times, if, having first
Invited thee, and at my board regaled,
I next should slay thee: then my prayers would mount,
Past question, swiftly to Saturnian Jove. 562
Reading this simple speech no wonder we recall Virgil's 563 description of country life:
Wild beasts of nature in his woods abound;
And youth, of labour patient, plough the ground,
Inur'd to hardship, and to homely fare.
Nor venerable age is wanting there
In great examples to the youthful train;
Nor are the gods ador'd with rites profane.
From hence Astraea took her flight, and here
The prints of her departing steps appear. 564
Hardly anywhere do the two great masters of Greek and Latin poetry more nearly approach one another. In short: he who wrote the Georgics , at some time or other must
[Page 256]
have lived with some true Eumaeus. But to return to Homer: we may conclude certainly, on the foregoing evidence, that he desired, as far as in him lay, to support the tottering fabric of the heroic spirit.
In dismissing the subject I may add that, whereas in the Odyssey , as we have seen, the suitors are not conceded one redeeming virtue, in the Iliad Greeks and Trojans alike are impartially endowed with mixed qualities of good and evil. I cannot think this difference is accidental. May we not infer that the poet will make no terms with seditious agitators, while readily assigning due praise to a declared enemy of his country?
You are now in possession, gentlemen, of all I have now to say on this subject. All tends to prove that Penelope's suitors were of like character with the men who at that period evinced an eager passion for innovation and scoffed at rank and religion. And we see, too, that the poet himself, with his whole soul, ever honoured old ways, holy things, and the cultured few rather than new reforms, the secular fashion, and the dictates of the crowd. So that it all falls in with our main argument concerning the Homeric poems, and confirms the view that we have repeatedly urged, that their main principle is neither more 565 nor less than to appease the author's ardently felt passion for heroic times and discipline.
There is another Homeric characteristic of a significance neither slight nor to be overlooked, namely, that throughout the whole poem appeal is made to an avenging deity, and that the immortal gods themselves ever protect and befriend Ulysses. I intend returning to this point, which as regards both range and importance is well worthy of separate discussion. In this lecture I shall only adduce some reasons for maintaining that not only Homer but all true poets naturally incline to that party in a State which holds it a sacrilege to disturb what is peaceful, or
[Page 257]
to try to upset in mere pursuit of novelty practices sanctioned by ancient usage and by religion.
And first, nothing is further removed from poetry than the spirit which reduces everything to the mere standard and test of gain and utility. But it is just this, and I assert it boldly and without qualification though demagogues may fret and fume, which specially characterizes a democracy. I mean by ‘democracy’ a system which aims at complete levelling of rank and class, and this not only legally but socially. In such a State the sole distinction will be that of wealth. The Horatian precept will prevail far and wide:
Seek money first, good friends, and virtue next. 566
What possible sympathy can such a set as this have with the charms of the Muses?—they cannot help a man to make or to keep a fortune. And so poetry necessarily droops and lies unhonoured and neglected: a condition which we can see in our own times to no small extent: indeed, once the revolutionary and mercenary passion prevails, whether it be with individuals or communities, forthwith a certain unreasoning contempt for poetry possesses them: though there may be, perchance, here and there some 567 feeble imitators, aping, after a fashion, the strong work of a better and earlier age.
I proceed to suggest another reason for holding that, speaking generally, poetry will be unappreciated under a democracy; unquestionably we must allow that one most essential feature of all poetry is a due reserve, which always shrinks from pouring forth everything, worthy or unworthy, without selection or modesty. A certain reverence must be observed: as with sacred things, so here everything must be touched upon with due reserve: nor could it be otherwise, for he who sings because he must
[Page 258]
and is no mere versifier, well knows that he is betraying the secrets of his heart and the inmost aspirations of his soul.
Now, any one may see at once how foreign is all this to those who write to catch the public ear. Indeed, nothing is more marked than the contrast between the self-control displayed by men of real and liberal culture and the restless eagerness to say all they know to all who will listen which characterizes the multitude. If, therefore, some eminent poets have succeeded in pleasing the people, they are generally admired for just those qualities which better judges rather excuse than applaud. For instance, even at Athens itself, when Sophocles produced the Trachiniae , you may imagine how large a proportion of the groundlings probably thought much more highly of Hercules' bitter recriminations when maddened by poison than of that exquisite marriage-song, or rather dirge, in honour of Deianira:
And lo! the bride's fair face,
The prize of all the strife,
Still piteously abides,
And from her mother's care
She, like lorn heifer, strays. 568
Perhaps some instances from the poets of our own country may not be unacceptable: but here I am not quite sure if my views will be generally approved: still, 569 I shall express them, since they appear highly relevant to our present discussion. Popular favour has placed easily first among all poets of our own time a man whom I too should rank high, had he not sullied his splendid powers by many serious vices, inexcusable in any one, to say nothing of a great poet. 570 Nothing, if I may speak freely, has more powerfully contributed to this popular success than his lavish profusion and impetuous style in utter
[Page 259]
disregard whether what he writes be fit and becoming or not. This want of true modesty—I may even call it this recklessness of speech—succeeds with merely indolent readers, and such as seek a passing relaxation in trifling over a volume of verse. For myself, I even think that, tested by the canon laid down, his work must forfeit all pretension to rank as true and primary poetry: for it is the essential mark of that to give utterance sparingly, and only under veils and disguises, to the deepest feelings. But I say no more of this: I am quite willing to leave it to each one's judgement: provided, indeed, that; on the strength of our general theory about poetry, it be granted that a really great poet is withheld by many subtle influences from saying publicly and openly things which the multitude, on the other hand, find it hard to conceal. Hence it follows that the poet, being little in harmony with the ignorant many, will more naturally lean towards the political party which is furthest removed from them. By the ‘many’ he will not only mean the populace, but all of whatever class who test everything by this crude standard of utility. But, above all, he will be chiefly drawn to those venerable institutions whereby our forefathers, though of remote ages, seem even yet, in a way, to influence our life:—custom, law, religion; and will deeply resent any violation or neglect of them.
‘But surely there have been poets of high distinction who not only passively endured popular government, but even supported it strenuously to the utmost of their 571 power.’ I admit there have been a few, perhaps: though even so, one may doubt whether they are not to be ranked rather as artificial versifiers than born poets. But suppose there have been such, and even that they have been genuinely inspired, what we have called primary, poets: will these few exceptions disprove our case? As if we were not, each of us, at once conscious of many inconsistent
[Page 260]
sympathies: as if poets too were not variously swayed and moved by conflicting emotions: as if, in short, the same man must necessarily be self-consistent throughout.
It is, I submit, amply sufficient for support of my general proposition, if solid ground be shown for thinking it likely that lovers of the Muses will have little in common with the motives and ideas of the ignorant many, and if this appears, as a matter of fact, to have been so with the majority of poets.
But if we may venture to cite one example as a type of all, we have in our own England a poet who may perhaps well stand for the whole fraternity. We claim as ours the very high priest of Tragedy, who not once only, nor with uncertain sound, has set forth his views of State government:
What subject can give sentence on his king?
And who sits here that is not Richard's subject?
Thieves are not judged but they are by to hear,
Although apparent guilt be seen in them;
And shall the figure of God's majesty,
His captain, steward, deputy-elect,
Anointed, crowned, planted many years,
Be judged by subject and inferior breath,
And he himself not present? O forfend it, God,
That in a Christian climate souls refined
Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed! 572
These are well paralleled by Homer's own lines:
We must not all be kings. The rule is most irregular
Where many rule. One lord, one king, propose to thee: and he,
To whom wise Saturn's son hath given both law and empery
To rule the public, is that king. 573
[Page ]
LECTURE XIV 574
Indications in the Odyssey that Homer was both blind and poor. His 575 power of expressing the feelings of the poor and even of slaves shown by his account of Irus, of Eumaeus, and of Ulysses in beggar guise. Evidence as to his blindness, from the Hymn to Apollo, discussed. How it was that although blind he yet excelled in vivid description. Contrast between the Iliad and Odyssey in this respect: and also between Homer and Milton.
We have now, I think, discussed as fully as need be, Homer's political sympathies and views of government. We have not uncertainly shown that, as might be expected in a poet, he looked back with affectionate regret upon the old privileges of the heroic chiefs: bitterly resented any wrong done to them, any insolent, overbearing conduct, such as that of the suitors, in a royal palace: and lastly, that he noted, as deserving eternal reprobation, that those who set themselves against royal power have also, as a rule, slighted the poor and scoffed at religion. I propose 576 now to supplement this by some few remarks on two personal factors which, all through the poem, as I think, throw a most pleasing light upon the poet's real disposition and views: namely, his poverty and also his blindness. Could there be a stronger proof of a truly noble elevation of spirit than that one, so afflicted, should regard those more fortunate than himself with no touch of envy or of bitterness?
Of Homer's poverty, at all events, much has already been said when considering the Iliad : the conclusion being that he had known at close quarters, and himself endured, those tasks and burdens which he describes as falling to the poor man's lot. I now crave indulgence while I submit
[Page 262]
some instances of like tendency from the Odyssey , and, in doing so, we may perhaps strengthen our judgement as to the authorship of the whole poem, should it appear, from this point of view too, that it may be well claimed for Homer.
I do not dwell upon examples already fully represented, such as the mode of indicating time: Homer, in both poems, availing himself of devices familiar to labouring men of every condition:
As when some hungry swain whose sable beeves
Have through the fallow dragg'd his ponderous plough
All day, the setting sun views with delight
For supper's sake, which with tired feet he seeks,
So welcome to Ulysses' eyes appear'd
The sunset of that eve. 577
                                         So at length it chanc'd
To me, as to a judge that long advanc'd
To judge a sort of hot young fellow's jars,
At length time frees him from their civil wars,
When glad he riseth and to dinner goes:
So time, at length, releast with joys my woes,
And from Charybdis' mouth appear'd my keel. 578
Nor shall I waste time on such as show the poet well versed in country pursuits and a seafarer's life: for instance, the measurement of the Cyclops' threshold, and of his club.
Upheaving, next, a rocky barrier huge
To his cave's mouth, he thrust it home. That weight
579 Not all the oxen from its place had moved
Of twenty and two wains: with such a rock
Immense his den he closed. 580
Beside the sheep-cote lay a massy club
Hewn by the Cyclops from an olive stock,
Green, but which dried would serve him for a staff.
To us, considering it, that staff appear'd
[Page 263]
Tall as the mast of a huge trading-bark,
Impell'd by twenty rowers o'er the Deep. 581
We may well compare with this the lines of our learned poet Milton, describing the mass and bulk of Satan's enormous spear:
His spear, to equal which the tallest pine
Hewn on Norwegian hills, to be the mast
Of some great ammiral, were but a wand. 582
This gives an impression of enormous size certainly: but with him there is no attempt at exact measurement , and that seems to suggest a poet living more of a student life.
And observe, too, how Homer again and again, in the very manner of simple country-folk, intersperses his narrative with digressions not over-relevant. Thus in one place Minerva, in guise of a stranger, expresses a fervent wish that ere long Ulysses himself might reappear among his own people:
                                         For could he now appear
There, at yon portal, arm'd with helmet, shield,
And grasping his two spears, such as when first
I saw him drinking joyous at our board,
From Ilus son of Mermeris, who dwelt
In distant Ephyre, just then return'd,
(For thither also had Ulysses gone
In his swift bark, seeking some poisonous drug
Wherewith to taint his brazen arrows keen,
Which drug through fear of the eternal Gods
Ilus refused him, and my father free
Gave to him, for he loved him past belief:)
Could now, Ulysses, clad in arms as then,
Mix with these suitors, short his date of life
To each, and bitter should his nuptials prove. 583
There is not a little here which is far from relevant, and 584 characterized by a countryman's rambling discursiveness rather than by elegant brevity.
[Page 264]
It would be an almost endless business to collect all the passages illustrating this quality: thus the writer does not hesitate even to risk the charge of being tedious in his constantly interjected and almost stereotyped insistence upon meals and feasting:
And now all stretch'd their hands toward the feast
Reeking before them. 585
And a hundred such might be found: or again, he is so far from thinking it beneath him to evince his fellow feeling with day labourers and the whole class of workers that he often makes use of their ideas in his narratives or in his similes: such is the passage concerning the Laestrygonian shepherds:
The sleepless there might double wages earn,
Attending, now, the herds, now tending sheep,
For the night-pastures, and the pastures grazed
By day, close border, both, the city- walls. 586
The meaning is not altogether clear, possibly because some old legend underlies it which has not come down to us. But this much is plain at all events: that the poet had in his mind some far-off region, perhaps near the land of those he called Cimmerians, bordering, according to ancient scientific theory, on the immediate confines of darkness and light. Since the story suggests a kind of holy awe, it may surprise some that Homer finishes it as a day labourer might do, thinking of his wage. But I fancy that no one familiar with the common talk and gossip of the poor will share their difficulty.
Obviously of like import are those numerous personal traits which readers of both poems will at once recall:
Whatever wild desires have swell'd the breast,
Whatever passions have the soul possest,
Joy, Sorrow, Fear, Love, Hatred, Transport, Rage 587
[Page 265]
—all these are found characteristic of the circumstances and temper of the poor. Such is that unfortunate mistrust on the part of Ulysses' sailor companions, who thought it 588 unfair that he alone should enjoy the rich gifts they supposed him to have received from Aeolus. 589 So they opened his treasure: but the bags contained no money, only the winds: hence followed countless perils, fruitless toils. Strange conduct indeed, but how true to the nature of labouring men, so ready to act on rumours of this kind.
So, too, the poet often delights to enlarge upon the contrivances with which resourceful men relieve the hardships of their needy condition: as, for instance, Ulysses' clever scheme for getting himself a blanket on the cold night on which he was the guest of Eumaeus. 590 And one may add (for it is worth quoting, though trifling in itself, since it is just the smallest trifles that throw most light on such points as this) that when about to see Penelope once more, after long years of absence, he takes special care (for it was cold weather) to secure a seat by the fire:
Now, therefore, let Penelope, although
Impatient, till the sun descend postpone
Her questions: then she may inquire secure
When comes her husband, and may nearer place
My seat to the hearth-side, for thinly clad
Thou know'st I am, whose aid I first implored. 591
At this point in the Odyssey we reach the part which is obviously more important than any other, when we are considering the ways and manners of the poor and the lower classes generally. In truth, when the story reaches the scene where Ulysses disguises himself and solicits alms as a beggar at his own door, as if fortune had given him the opening for which he had long been looking, Homer gives himself free play on his own ground, revels delightedly
[Page 266]
in the cares, meals, and daily talk of humble folk, even in the reproaches and taunts that they bandy about: lingers round the lowly hearth of Eumaeus: shows himself skilled and ready in the very smallest details of their 592 life: in short, so accurately and considerately does he picture an old retainer's functions and duties, that one cannot doubt that his sympathies lay rather with servants and poor men than with their masters and those rolling in wealth. This greatest of poets, I repeat, publicly and openly avows and gives prominence to his servile feelings: has neither shame nor scruple in betraying his intimate knowledge of servants ' tasks. One instance will serve, where many might be quoted,—the scene in which Ulysses is described on the very night before the massacre of the suitors, as taking his rest on the bare ground. The dreadful sense of impending doom is heightened indescribably by the casual mention of his lowly couch, the surrounding disorder, the nocturnal gloom of the deserted and silent hall:
But in the vestibule the Hero lay
On a bull's hide undress'd, o'er which he spread
The fleece of many a sheep slain by the Greeks,
And, cover'd by the household's governess
With a wide cloak, composed himself to rest.
Yet slept he not, but meditating lay
Woe to his enemies. 593
Remember, too, the comparison which is specially singled out to picture him while lying sleepless and restless with anxious thoughts:
As when some hungry swain turns oft a maw
Unctuous and savoury on the burning coals,
Quick expediting his desired repast,
So he from side to side roll'd, pondering deep
How likeliest with success he might assail
Those shameless suitors; one to many opposed. 594
I apprehend that this simile—more apt than elegant—
[Page 267]
was introduced here solely that everything might be of a piece, and the scene of the approaching tragedy might not want its fitting properties.
And a little later, when an omen was needed to encourage Ulysses, observe how naturally and genially he falls back on humble life and the daily tasks of house-servants:
A woman, next, a labourer at the mill
Hard by, where all the palace-mills were wrought,
Gave him the omen of propitious sound. 595
Twelve maidens, day by day, toil'd at the mills,
Meal grinding, some of barley, some of wheat,
Marrow of man. The rest (their portion ground)
All slept; she only from her task as yet
Ceased not, for she was feeblest of them all;
She rested on her mill, and thus pronounced
   The happy omen by her Lord desired.
Jove, Father, Governor of heaven and earth!
Loud thou hast thunder'd from the starry skies
By no cloud veil'd: a sign propitious, given
To whom I know not: but oh, grant the prayer
Of a poor bond-woman! appoint their feast
This day, the last that in Ulysses' house
The suitors shall enjoy, for whom I drudge,
With aching heart and trembling knees their meal
Grinding continual. Feast they here no more!
   She ended, and the listening Chief received
With equal joy both signs. 596
I should like to quote side by side with this all the conversations between Ulysses and Eumaeus. Indeed, the whole part which Eumaeus plays is designed to combine two thoughts, skilfully blended together: the first is the love with which he dwells upon the memory of his absent chief, and this trait I have already illustrated to the best of my power. The second is the way in which he again and again gives us a slave's own view of his condition:
                                         Now from the herd the best
Select, in honour of our foreign guest:
[Page 268]
With him, let us the genial banquet share,
For great and many are the griefs we bear:
While those who from our labours heap their board,
Blaspheme their feeder, and forget their lord. 597
In fact, men of this class, though as loyal to their masters as they well can be, yet hold themselves fully free to indulge in grumbling on occasion. Indeed, such utterance serves as a kind of relief to them. Let them have their grumble from time to time, and you may rely upon their prompt and cheerful service on all occasions.
But let us proceed with our account of Eumaeus, and learn from him what it is that appeals to and wins the hearts of servants:
But kindness none experience I, or can,
From fair Penelope (my mistress now)
598 In word or action, so is the house cursed
With that lewd throng. Glad would the servants be
Might they approach their mistress, and receive
Advice from her; glad too to eat and drink,
And somewhat bear each to his rural home,
For perquisites are every servant's joy. 599
And with this we should couple those other familiar lines:
Domestics, missing once their Lord's control
Grow wilful, and refuse their proper tasks;
For whom Jove dooms to servitude, he takes
At once the half of that man's worth away. 600
None can fail to recognize how skilfully the poet outlines the essential manners of the class: their whole happiness depends upon their master's presence: nor is there anything in which they take more pride than being cognizant of family secrets and being honoured by their lords' confidences.
And, lastly, no one who has carefully read this episode of Eumaeus and his views about his own circumstances
[Page 269]
will need reminding by me that the condition of slaves in Greece, low as it ranked, yet offered many features which would inevitably impress and arrest the mind of any great poet. For in that age in every great house there were many slaves who had been taken prisoner in open war, or perchance kidnapped in some raid. It was quite possible to meet with swineherds, shepherds, or vinedressers who could boast royal descent. Moreover, the higher servants, at all events, took meals at their master's table: there was, too, always hope of some day acquiring their freedom: so that there was much to soften the indignities at which free men would revolt in the thought of servile duties and dispositions. We need not, therefore, think it anything striking or unusual if a distinguished poet occupied himself at such length with the concerns of men and even women servants. Assuredly Homer's truly noble disposition so respected even the lowest lot of humanity that, just as he could speak of the rich and royal without envy, so he could deal with the poorest of the poor 601 without a touch of slight or contempt.
Another fact which points in the same direction is the simple-minded admiration with which he views the wealth and luxurious homes of the rich: for this is what we usually find in a poor man who is contented with his lot. This is finely illustrated where Telemachus is described as entering the palace of Menelaus, which was most richly adorned with Eastern spoils:
Themselves he, next, into the royal house
Conducted, who survey'd, wondering, the abode
Of the heaven-favour'd King: for on all sides
As with the splendour of the sun or moon
The lofty dome of Menelaus blazed. 602
                                         And when the force
No longer now of appetite they felt,
[Page 270]
Telemachus, inclining close his head
To Nestor's son, lest others should his speech
Witness, in whisper'd words him thus address'd.
   Dearest Pisistratus, observe, my friend!
How all the echoing palace with the light
Of beaming brass, of gold and amber shines,
Silver and ivory! for radiance such
The interior mansion of Olympian Jove
I deem: what wealth, how various, how immense
Is here! astonished I survey the sight. 603
Almost exactly the same is the feeling of Ulysses on approaching the palace of Alcinoüs. Moreover—and this is perhaps still more striking—Agamemnon, even in the lower world, is represented as dwelling on the mere recollection of the lavish display which he had witnessed at the funeral of Achilles:
                                         I have beheld
The burial rites of many a Hero bold,
When on the death of some great Chief, the youths
Girding their loins anticipate the prize,
But sight of those with wonder fill'd me most,
So glorious past all others were the games
By silver-footed Thetis given for thee. 604
A man of high rank or great wealth would not regard such things so passionately, or at all events he would not confess it.
And still more would such a one scorn to betray anxiety 605 as to the safe-keeping of clothes, drinking-vessels, and other such things. Yet to Homer such anxiety is expressed regularly and as a matter of course. For example, the queen of the Phaeacians exhibits this feeling when she honours the departing Ulysses with gifts:
                                         Meantime the queen
Producing from her chamber-stores a chest
All-elegant, within it placed the gold
And raiment..
[Page 271]
And in wing'd accents to Ulysses said.
Now take, thyself, the coffer's lid in charge:
Girdle it quickly with a cord, lest loss
Befall thee on thy way. ...
Which when Ulysses heard, Hero renown'd,
Adjusting close the lid, he cast a cord
Around it, which with many a mazy knot
He tied, by Circe taught him long before. 606
Does it not show Homer's knowledge of a sailor's life that he represents Ulysses as knowing a special knot of his own which no one else can untie? Again, King Alcinoüs is just as careful:
                                         Each hasted to the bark
With his illustrious present, which the might
Of King Alcinous, who himself her sides
Ascended, safe beneath the seats bestowed,
Lest it should harm or hinder, while he toil'd
In rowing, some Phaeacian of the crew. 607
And so, too, is even Minerva herself:
So saying, the Goddess enter'd deep the cave
Caliginous, and its secret nooks explored
From side to side: meantime Ulysses brought
All his stores into it, the gold, the brass,
And robes magnificent, his gifts received
From the Phaeacians; safe he lodged them all,
And Pallas, daughter of Jove, aegis-arm'd
Closed fast, herself, the cavern with a stone. 608
I cannot easily believe that any man of birth or wealth would have dreamed of describing Telemachus as being desirous to return home, not merely on account of weighty affairs, but through anxiety as to his personal property:
I would at once depart, (for guardian none
Of my possessions have I left behind,)
Lest, while I seek my father, I be lost
Myself, or lose what I should grudge to spare. 609
[Page 272]
610 Actually too, even at the very crisis of the poem, when it was vitally important for Ulysses, single-handed as he was, to devise some plan for the suitors' downfall, the scheme is suggested by the arrangements of a poor man's cottage:
My son! we must remove and safe dispose
All these my well-forged implements of war;
And should the suitors, missing them, enquire
Where are they? thou shalt answer smoothly thus—
I have convey'd them from the reach of smoke,
For they appear no more the same which erst
Ulysses, going hence to Ilium, left,
So smirch'd and sullied by the breath of fire. 611
But the truth is that throughout all the books where Ulysses is in the guise of a beggar scarcely anything happens which is not strictly characteristic of a man well inured to poverty.
And since the crisis (as it may be called) of the whole poem has just been referred to, we may take opportunity to observe how much, from another point of view also, Homer's feeling for the poor contributes to its solution. Assuredly, it was not probable that a wandering outcast should so easily gain admission to the interior of the palace; though absolutely essential, since it was the sole means by which the scheme could be planned with the help of Telemachus and Euryclea. And here lies the relevancy of the whole episode relating to Irus: which may possibly repel some readers, as though it were a mere digression on the author's part, a lingering over servants' squabbles simply for amusement's sake. But any one who considers this stage of the poem attentively, will see that Ulysses was not a little assisted by this troublesome fellow. For the boisterous suitors were so delighted at the discomfiture of Irus in hand-to-hand fight, that they accorded
[Page 273]
the victorious Ulysses, by way of reward, a seat with them at their banquets:
                                         And shall with us thenceforth
Feast always: neither will we here admit
Poor man beside to beg at our repasts. 612
So it was actually their own doing that the king in humble guise moved freely within his own palace and planned and 613 prepared their destruction. Further, anticipating some grumbling from the servants and maids, who would naturally resent a beggar being allowed to lodge in the palace, Ulysses more than once boasts himself expert in all the duties of domestics and consequently obtains permission to pass the night in the house and tend the fires and lights. By this means he is fully free to go forward with his schemes of revenge, and Homer himself has ample range for amusing digressions about the insolent underlings.
For Homer's attitude towards the concerns of retainers and domestics totally differs from that of the Attic dramatists. I doubt if they in a single instance represent a servant as being held in regard for his own merits. For I take no account here of the Tecmessa of Sophocles, of Euripides’ Ion , and of others like them: they had been accidentally reduced to slavery through reverse of fortune, and no one would be so rash as to infer from their case the writer's views about true slaves. Dismissing these, then, what part, I ask, is assigned to servants on the stage except to carry messages: to execute the commands of some leading character: to listen to long-drawn-out speeches? They are more like stage properties than real living persons: how different from Eumaeus and his companions! I would ask those who flatter and appeal to the lower classes which shows the nobler and higher feeling in this matter—Homer, the champion of royalty, or the Tragedians who appealed
[Page 274]
to the people? For my part, since our poet deemed even men of the lowest degree worthy of account, I recognize him as the child of a nobler generation: but his truthful and clear description of the dispositions, ways of life, manner of speech of serving-men, I take as evidence of his 614 own poverty, which perhaps proved a more effective teacher of all these than he himself would have wished.
So much for the subject of servants and retainers, which seemed sufficiently important for separate treatment. Next I propose to adduce a few other points in which we can see the traces of poverty: and those which are scattered here and there in Homer's writings place it beyond doubt, to my mind, that he, at all events at some time in his life, had struggled with the trials of indigence. I note first that in his view it is almost the most sacred of all duties to care for the poor and relieve distress. This is clearly shown where Ulysses, at the instance of Minerva, passes round the whole circle of the suitors on the chance of discovering even one or two only not wholly devoid of human sympathy:
When Minerva, drawing nigh
To Laertiades, impelled the Chief
Crusts to collect or any pittance small
At every suitor's hand, for trial's sake
Of just and unjust. 615
There is the same tone in the courteous insistence of Nestor, loath that his guests should return to their ship for the night:
   Forbid it, Jove, and all the Powers of heaven!
That ye should leave me to repair on board
Your vessel, as I were some needy wretch
Cloakless and destitute of fleecy stores
Wherewith to spread the couch soft for myself
Or for my guests. 616
[Page 275]
More than once a distinction is drawn between the food at the tables of men of highest class and that provided for the people and lowest class:
Now eat, my guest! such as a servant may
I set before thee, neither large of growth
Nor fat: the fatted—those the suitors eat,
Fearless of heaven and pitiless of man. 617
And Telemachus’ provision-store is characterized in like 618 fashion:
And the intendant matron of the stores
Disposed meantime within the chariot, bread
And wine, with dainties such as princes eat. 619
Notice, again, the impression suggested by the splendid banquets of the Phaeacians:
Beneath which the Phaeacian princes sate
At wine and food, and feasted all the year. 620
Why, ‘feasted all the year’? It would appear as if the writer, accustomed himself to scanty fare, is amazed that any one should find ample provisions prepared for him all the year through. There is no grumbling or complaint in this; here he merely remarks it incidentally, as if the point of view had belonged to him all his life,—just the air with which the poor comment on the luxuries of their rich friends.
But I should be willing to rest my case that Homer, as very few other men have done, had known what it was to be poor, yet without feeling bitterness or resentment, upon Ulysses' comforting words to Eumaeus:
                                         But Jove
Hath neighbour'd all thy evil with this good,
That after numerous sorrows thou hast reach'd
[Page 276]
The house of a kind master, at whose hands
Thy sustenance is sure, and here thou lead'st
A tranquil life: but I have late arrived,
City after city of the world explored. 621
Does not this bespeak a serene and gentle temper? he spontaneously lays stress on all that can alleviate a poor man's lot: he does not mention—as most people with their ready criticism do—the points that can embitter it. He neither grudges the rich the enjoyment of their possessions nor reproaches Fate: for all that falls out prosperously he thanks the Gods.
And his temper appears sweeter still when compared with that of one of our own great poets, who is always 622 fretting at the fact that he, with all his genius, had only a poor man's fare and shelter granted him by Fate.
If I'm design'd yon lordling's slave—
   By Nature's law design'd—
Why was an independent wish
   E'er planted in my mind?
If not, why am I subject to
   His cruelty or scorn? 623
Such was the description of his own feelings as to his worldly fortune given by an illustrious poet of our own nation, the glory of Scotland, much resembling Homer in his passionate love both of rustic pleasures and wild scenery, and also, as I think, in his poverty. Would that he had further resembled him in the kindly and sweet temper which Homer, though poor himself, evinced towards the rich and fortunate: and thus had chosen rather to jest with his fortunes than be embittered by them! But in this respect, as throughout life, a mad and truly reckless craving for pleasure proved the greatest curse to him. Hence sprang all his angry feelings, his anxiety, his restlessness:
[Page 277]
hence a self-accusing conscience, unable to view kindly either man or nature: hence his blind railing against the powers that be, and unrestrained indignation should any seem to him more fortunate than they deserved. On the other hand, it was but natural that Homer, who was, for a non-Christian writer, pre-eminently modest and pure in tone, should prove cheerful and equal to any circumstances, whatever they might be. For it was not without good reason said that men ought to seek for ‘that which gives pure tranquillity ’; 624 which means that he who would have a peaceful mind must, above all, live a pure and innocent life. So true is it that there is a common bond which links all virtues not only to each other but also to the highest and truest poetry.
And now having, I trust, set forth with sufficient clearness how Homer's patience under poverty made for sweetness of disposition, I may pass to the other point I proposed 625 to deal with in this lecture, which, being similar to and springing from almost the same principles as the former, need not long detain us. There was, as you know, among the ancients a most persistent tradition of Homer's blindness: moreover, should any one be doubtful we have the weighty support of Thucydides. 626 He quotes as being Homer's the beautiful verses of the Delian hymn which end with the line:
A blind man is he, and he dwells in rocky Chios.
As for the rest of the poem, which is called the ‘Hymn to Apollo’, any one is free to form his own judgement as to the authorship: but not only the testimony of the historian, but the style and easy flow of the verse incontrovertibly establish Homer's claim to this fragment. I will give but one example, not to be tedious about an oft-told tale. Immediately following the lines quoted by
[Page 278]
Thucydides, the poet honours the sacred company of maidens with this assurance:
This for your own sakes I desire, for I
Will propagate mine own precedency
As far as earth shall well-built cities bear,
Or human conversation is held dear,
Not with my praise direct, but praises due,
And men shall credit it because 'tis true. 627
One cannot imagine that the clear and simple phrase ‘because 'tis true’ is likely to have been written by any one but Homer.
I might here cite much from the rest of the poem which plainly suggests Homer's hand: though the various fragments have come down to us through the long ages pitifully disconnected and scattered. But without dwelling on this, 628 I should like you to consider those splendid lines which picture with wonderful vividness Apollo darting to and fro in sight of the circling company of his priests:
                                         And then forth brake
The far-shot King, like to a star that strows
His glorious forehead where the mid-day glows,
That all in sparkles did his state attire,
Whose lustre leap'd up to the sphere of fire.
He trod where no way oped, and pierced the place
That of his sacred tripods held the grace,
In which he lighted such a fluent flame
As gilt all Crissa; in which every dame,
And dame's fair daughter, cast out vehement cries
At those fell fires of Phoebus' prodigies,
That shaking fears through all their fancies threw.
Then, like the wind's swift light, again he flew
Back to the ship, shaped like a youth in height
Of all his graces, shoulders broad and straight,
And all his hair in golden curls enwrapp'd. 629
[Page 279]
You see, then, the traditional belief of every age that this world's greatest poet was or became blind, may be held confirmed and established even by this single poem: as well as the further fact that he was so before the last years of his old age, while he was still strong enough to travel through cities and isles, singing his wonted lays.
This suggests an interesting question, namely, whether Homer was already stricken in sight when he wrote the two great poems we possess and enjoy to-day. And I am bound to confess that on first impression we are met by some fairly strong reasons for answering in the negative. For how can we associate with a blind poet those many word-pictures, so varied in kind, form, colour, movement, and gesture—all so richly and truthfully painted? Yet perhaps, on closer consideration, the thing will appear not entirely impossible of belief. For any one who will look deeply into the recesses of his mind, when deeply affected by the charms of Nature, will at once discover that the several forms of woods, streams, mountains, do not at the moment present themselves in the clear outline and grouping needed by a poet or painter. But when the strength 630 of the emotion has somewhat cooled, when the mind looks back upon it in tranquillity, then it is that the mingled images, like the regiments on a battle-field, range themselves in order and proportion: nor is it long before the order of each part, the relation of each to the other and to the whole, is fully grasped. In short, the memory largely enters into the most consummate picture. Suppose, then, a painter gifted with extremely keen memory to be deprived of vision: will he not again and again recall in imagination and dwell upon those regions once known more intimately or loved more passionately than all others? And the more, since loss of sight closes the portals of the mind, so that novel impressions cannot enter and disturb the old. No wonder, therefore, should the appearance of outward objects be
[Page 280]
sometimes more truthfully retained by the blind than by those blessed with sight: just as old men remember their boyish doings with far greater minuteness and detail than younger men what happened but yesterday.
Now since, throughout the Odyssey , cities, ports, rivers, are described with singular precision, though similes drawn from nature to suit a particular moment, or to express the general aspect of earth or sky, are seldom introduced: while in the Iliad , on the other hand, such general similes predominate, and there are few exact descriptions of places with definite sites and names: I decidedly think the whole position is best explained by supposing that the Iliad was written while Homer's sight remained to him, and the Odyssey , or most of it at least, when he had lost it. To the Iliad certainly belongs with special propriety the quality in which, according to Aristotle, Homer preeminently excelled: ‘Everything is made to move and live.’ We do not find in the Odyssey the quick movements of animals, the sudden changes in the appearance of the 631 sky, or the violent onset of men, so frequently as peaceful paths, hills, and woods: in a word, definite spots, each with its clearly-marked boundaries. The Odyssey elaborates restful scenery: the Iliad catches in a moment some passing sight and fixes it before us. So that the latter demands quick eyes, the former a keen memory.
Some one may perhaps object to this that even the Odyssey sometimes fails in accuracy of situation and locality. For instance, they point out that the Ithaca of modern times is not in the least like the Ithaca of Homer. We are thus driven to conclude either that with lapse of ages some change of name has occurred: or, if the poet himself was indeed at fault, it is most likely that just because of his blindness the mental idea, once wrongly acquired, remained uncorrected.
But on this question the beautiful lines concerning the
[Page 281]
bard Demodocus are precisely in point, and it would be a shame to pass them over:
And now the herald came, leading with care
The tuneful bard: dear to the Muse was he,
Who yet appointed him both good and ill,
Took from him sight, but gave him strains divine.
For him Pontonous in the midst disposed
An argent-studded throne, thrusting it close
To a tall column, where he hung his lyre
Above his head, and taught him where it hung.
He set before him, next, a polish'd board
And basket, and a goblet fill'd with wine
For his own use, and at his own command. 632
Read these lines carefully through, and then I trust that the views I have been suggesting to-day as to Homer's blindness, as well as his sweet disposition and his unembittered feelings towards those of happier fortune than himself, will commend themselves to your judgement. You cannot, I am sure, fail to note with what thoughtful care he enumerates just the kindly offices which would most strongly call forth the gratitude of a blind man. His seat is placed so that on leaning back he can rest himself close against the pillar. Just over his head his 633 harp is hung: so that he can reach it merely by putting out his hand: and finally, when the assembly disperses, the blind poet is reverently and gently led away.
And then, as if to place beyond question his submission to the heavenly powers, and, as one may say, his pious trust, we have those beautiful lines which exhibit his gift of verse as compensating for his affliction:
                                         dear to the Muse was he,
Who yet appointed him both good and ill,
Took from him sight, but gave him strains divine.
Not only do they evince, assuredly, a high strain of piety,
[Page 282]
but a kind of gentle cheerfulness, what the Greeks call Εὐθυμία —tranquillity—prepared to face all the chances and changes of life.
And on this side of his character we may, if we please, compare Homer with our own Milton: who, though he too was blind, and though he too sought to find in poetry relief for his affliction, was yet, I fear, without Homer's tranquil sweetness, though I readily grant that some of his poems are rich in steadfast faith and austere piety:
When I consider how my light is spent,
   Ere half my days, in this dark world and wide,
   And that one talent which is death to hide
   Lodg'd with me useless, though my soul more bent
To serve therewith my Maker, and present
   My true account, lest he returning chide;
   ‘Doth God exact day-labour, light deny'd?’
   I fondly ask; But Patience, to prevent
That murmur, soon replies, ‘God doth not need
   Either man's work, or his own gifts; who best
   Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best: his State
Is Kingly: thousands at his bidding speed,
   And post o'er land and ocean without rest;
   They also serve who only stand and wait.’ 634
Would he had always written in like spirit! but even here one feels that the man wrestles, as it were, with his lot: 635 one would judge that the writer could not look upon the wealth of others without casting a longing eye upon it, and that in politics (as was indeed the case) he would incline not to the side which Homer took, but rather to revolution and the will of the people.
It now only remains for us to consider the many passages illustrating Homer's views regarding religion: which may well be associated with what has been said of his blindness and poverty. For it is hard to suppose that a man could be so tried and yet not be indignant with Fortune, if he
[Page 283]
were destitute of reverence for higher Powers. Besides, any one attempting even the merest sketch of the heroic age must reckon with the immense importance of sacred observances. I shall therefore proceed to this consideration without delay, taking my instances mainly from the Odyssey : this done, my remarks upon Homer will at length be brought to a close.
[Page ]
636 LECTURE XV
The essential thought underlying both the Homeric Epics, and the Odyssey in particular, is that divine retribution waits on wrongdoing. This explains the constant reference to the descendants of Pelops: the severity of the vengeance taken on the suitors; the divine influence exerted to appease the resentment of the men of Ithaca. All acts, even the most trifling, are performed as in the presence of Deity; Horace's critical precept herein considered. They are performed too with modesty and reverence, as if Deity were present but would be veiled from men. Finally, nothing is credited to Fortune and Fate: all is possible to a good and strong spirit.
When we first approached the study of Homer's work, gentlemen, two things seemed to us fairly certain: the first regarded Homer's personality, namely, that on and the same poet wrote both the Iliad and the Odyssey : the other affected his temper and tone, that they were those of a man inspired and kindled by the memory of a heroic age that had passed away: and while trusting that the foregoing arguments have in no small degree commended these views to your judgement, yet I see clearly that the strongest support for them is to be found in the poet's attitude towards religion; so I propose to deal with that to-day.
First of all, then, it happens, almost providentially, that at the very start and opening of each poem the poet 637 recognizes and respects the authority and precepts of the leading religious ideas of his own age—nay, of those which in all ages a natural and genuine piety has deemed most important. For the main subject of the Iliad is concerned directly with a religious duty, the duty, that is to say, of hospitality, which Paris has violated: whence it was decreed that neither the State sacrificial offerings of Troy, nor those of Hector himself, should avail to ward off the coming doom or to prevent the appearance of Achilles as the agent of that doom, prepared to lay down his life in
[Page 285]
order to take vengeance on the monstrous crime. And for the Odyssey , no one can fail to see that the fabric of the whole poem, from first to last, is wrought on the same lines: whether one regards the issue of the story, or its method and structure, the whole is throughout, from beginning to end, influenced by the kindly presence of a Divine Power.
It is, indeed, quite obvious (as we have insisted repeatedly) that the purposed goal of the Odyssey lies not merely in restoring Ulysses in safety to his home and country, but also in inflicting punishment upon the vile band of suitors, and re-establishing on a firmer foundation the rights and claims of royalty, of hospitality, and of wedlock. In the very beginning of the poem this purpose is defined, and shown to be worthy of being entertained by Jove himself and the council of the Gods. Notice, too, how impressively the first mention of it is introduced, not as of set intention, but as if by accident, occasion being supplied in connexion with the slaughter of Aegisthus:
                                         The Gods
In Jove's abode, meantime, assembled all,
'Midst whom the Sire of heaven and earth began.
For he recalled to mind Aegisthus slain
By Agamemnon's celebrated son
Orestes, and retracing in his thought
That dread event, the Immortals thus addressed.
   Alas! how prone are human-kind to blame
The Powers of Heaven! From us, they say, proceed
The ills which they endure, yet more than Fate
Herself inflicts, by their own crimes incur.
So now Aegisthus, by no force constrain'd
Of Destiny, Atrides' wedded wife
Took to himself, and him at his return
Slew, not unwarn'd of his own dreadful end
By us: for we commanded Hermes down, 638
The watchful Argicide, who bade him fear
Alike, to slay the King or woo the Queen:
For that Atrides' son Orestes, soon
[Page 286]
As grown mature, and eager to assume
His sway imperial, should avenge the deed.
So Hermes spake, but his advice moved not
Aegisthus, on whose head the whole arrear
Of vengeance heap'd, at last, hath therefore fallen,
   Whom answer'd then Pallas cœrulean-eyed.
Oh Jove, Saturnian Sire, o'er all supreme!
And well he merited the death he found;
So perish all who shall, like him, offend.
But with a bosom anguish-rent I view
Ulysses, hapless Chief, who from his friends
Remote, affliction hath long time endured
In yonder woodland isle, the central boss
Of Ocean. 639
Truly a splendid exordium to a religious poem, an ample proof in itself that we shall find the writer's mind fixed and intent upon the things of God. But it may well be asked why Homer represented the Gods as chancing, almost by accident, after a mention of Agamemnon, upon the issue between Ulysses and the suitors. May not he have wished thus to safeguard his Deities against any possible suspicion of bias or blind partiality in favouring this or that interest? Such a suspicion does arise, I must admit, in the Iliad : there, to speak truly, Apollo, Neptune, and the rest manifestly seem each to have taken sides already. For instance, at the very opening of the Iliad , we find Apollo filled with rage, because:
The king of men his reverend priest defied. 640
Far more just and of higher dignity are the words of Jupiter and Minerva in the Odyssey :
And well he merited the death he found;
So perish all who shall, like him, offend.
Their reprobation is not moved by personal feeling of their own, but they lay down a fixed and definite—almost a judicial—decree, one which may be of universal application at all times.
[Page 287]
And I am inclined to think, indeed, we may, after comparing 641 these two passages, fairly find here again an indication of advancing years: in the earlier poem we have threatenings and rage, in the latter cool and weighty judgement. However this may be, the following fact will certainly support my main argument: I mean the fact that the fates of Agamemnon and the Pelopidae, not once only, but all through the poem, are purposely emphasized. How often do those who wish to encourage Telemachus to exert himself and win distinction quote the example of Orestes as very recent and familiar to all!
For thou art now no child, nor longer mayest
Sport like one. Hast thou not the proud report
Heard, how Orestes hath renown acquired
With all mankind; his father's murderer
Aegisthus slaying, the deceiver base
Who slaughter'd Agamemnon? Oh, my friend!
(For with delight thy vigorous growth I view,
And just proportion) be thou also bold,
And merit praise from ages yet to come. 642
We may also cite the warning counsels of Nestor:
Ye have yourselves doubtless, although remote,
Of Agamemnon heard, how he return'd,
And how Aegisthus cruelly contriv'd
For him a bloody welcome, but himself
Hath with his own life paid the murderous deed.
Good is it therefore if a son survive
The slain, since Agamemnon's son hath well
Avenged his father's death. 643
If we weave together these allusions, and also Nestor's reply, a little further on, when questioned by Telemachus concerning the death of Agamemnon, 644 Menelaus' account in the next book of the story told him by old Proteus, 645 and lastly Agamemnon's own funeral dirge, as it may be
[Page 288]
styled, chanted by his shade, 646 we shall have pretty clearly the whole plot, and that in no bare outline, of the Aeschylean tragedy. And it will be self-evident what interest is aroused, and what expectations excited, by the frequent reminder of this one story.
Then, too, at the end of the whole Epic, after the climax has been reached, even in the infernal shades Agamemnon 647 once more appears to meet the ghosts of the suitors: for what end but that both powers above and powers below may bear witness that sure penalties are visited upon violent ill-doers? The reason surely is that it was necessary to place the hearth and home of the heroes under the special guardianship of the Gods, lest any rising of the people or violence of powerful neighbours should endamage their property in their absence. How much this was to be dreaded is shown not only in the case of Ulysses and Agamemnon, but also by the words of Achilles when he makes minute inquiry as to his father Peleus:
                                         Say also hast thou heard
Of royal Peleus? shares he still respect
Among his numerous Myrmidons, or scorn
In Hellas and in Phthia, for that age
Predominates in his enfeebled limbs?
For help is none in me; the glorious sun
No longer sees me such, as when in aid
Of the Achaians I o'erspread the field
Of spacious Troy with all their bravest slain.
Oh! might I, vigorous as then, repair
For one short moment to my father's house,
They all should tremble; I would show an arm,
Such as should daunt the fiercest who presumes
To injure him , or to despise his age. 648
[Page 289]
Achilles' character is admirably sketched here, and with wonderful likeness to that which we know in the Iliad : the resemblance, too, lies in a feature which could hardly occur to an imitator save one of extraordinary care. I mean the well-nigh superhuman combination of devotion towards his aged father, with warlike ardour: this is strikingly appropriate in one who yielded Hector's body to Priam, moved by mournful recollection of his own far-away father. Such things as these, however, are of very finest texture, and seem inevitably to imply the master's hand.
But to return to the religious observances spoken of in the Odyssey : their propriety will be, I think, easily allowed, if we can entirely free ourselves of the associations of our own age and, so to speak, realize more closely the unprotected homes and orphaned families of the heroes. We shall 649 then find it probable that Homer's contemporaries were not wholly mistaken in thinking that it was necessary to place the royal palace under the special guardianship of the Gods in the absence of the king. May it not well be that in troubled days the Powers of heaven watch with jealous care over the homes of private citizens, much more over those of heroes? It would be, one would think, quite in accord with the workings of divine goodness to extend a special care and a special protection to spots in which law and morality had ceased to prevail:
Which did he not, their unresisted sway
Would sweep the world before them in their way;
Earth, air, and seas, through empty space would roll,
And heaven would fly before the driving soul. 650
Taking, then, his stand upon this true principle, Homer can put in a plea which will in some measure excuse him for representing Ulysses as so implacable, and the punishments which he remorselessly inflicts upon the servants and handmaidens who have betrayed him as so cruel and barbarous.
[Page 290]
If I am right, this is less due to the passion of an enraged master than to the sacred duty laid upon him as king and head of a family, upon whom in such a society nothing was more vitally incumbent than to see to it that servants were strictly taught their duty, and punished for breach of faith and duty towards their lords. Let us see how firmly he himself rebukes Eurycleia when, with a woman's love of revenge, she was exulting after the slaughter of the suitors:
                                         She the carnage spread
On all sides seeing, and the pools of blood,
Felt impulse forcible to publish loud
That wondrous triumph: but her lord repressed
The shout of rapture ere it burst abroad,
And in winged accents thus his will enforced.
Silent exult, O ancient matron dear!
Shout not, be still. Unholy is the voice
Of loud thanksgiving over slaughtered men.
Their own atrocious deeds and the Gods' will
Have slain all these: for whether noble guest
Arrived or base, they scoffed at all alike,
And for their wickedness have therefore died. 651
His acts are not those of a mad spirit of vengeance: they have nothing in common with blind passion: nay, 652 they are acts enjoined upon him by the Gods, acts quite right for him as the champion of the slighted majesty of heaven to carry through to the bitter end. Hence it is not Homer himself but the age in which he lived which should bear the blame of those too dreadful and severe penalties: the poet himself we may freely praise indeed, in that he associated the cruel deed with holy motives as being wrought under divine sanction.
There is another point, at the very end of the Odyssey , which may perhaps give offence: the thread of the story seems spun out to an unnecessary length, and the plot
[Page 291]
drags and halts: the protests of the citizens of Ithaca, the bravery of the old Laertes, the intervention of Minerva, are all, it is said, narrated at much too great length. Yet he whom these offend must needs have small perception of the very essence of Homer's design. For not only was it imperative that the plotting suitors should be punished, but the people must be reckoned with, beginning (as is ever the way with the populace) to sympathize with the victims, however righteously put to death: a lesson must be read for the warning of those who might come after, so that none in any State should dare to side with men of such condition. And observe how skilfully the poet solves the difficulty. Ulysses retires from the town for a short time with a double purpose; partly he wishes to allow time for the indignation of the natives of Ithaca, roused by loss of their relatives, to subside: and partly he wishes to see once more his old and careworn father. While the friends of the suitors are arming themselves to take revenge, they are first met by Medon, who assures them, and no one was more fitted to do so, that their relatives had suffered with divine approval:
Hear me, my countrymen! Ulysses planned
With no disapprobation of the Gods
The deed that ye deplore. I saw, myself,
A Power immortal at the Hero's side,
In semblance just of Mentor; now the God,
In front apparent, led him on, and now,
From side to side of all the palace, urged
To flight the suitors: heaps on heaps they fell. 653
But those of them who, despising Medon's warning, dared 654 to attack the house of Laertes, the old man himself, encouraged by Minerva, scatters in flight with one cast of his javelin, killing, moreover, Antinous' father, who had been the first to stir the people to arms. Finally, Minerva,
[Page 292]
after certain portents have made it clear that greatest Jove himself was at hand to support her, authoritatively brings the whole strife and issue between king and people to an end:
Then flew Ulysses and his noble son,
With faulchion and with spear of double edge,
To the assault, and of them all had left
None living, none of them had home returned,
But that Jove's virgin daughter with a voice
Of loud authority thus quelled them all.
   Peace, O ye men of Ithaca! while yet
The field remains undeluged with your blood.
   So she, and fear at once paled every cheek.
All trembled at the voice divine; their arms
Escaping from the grasp fell to the earth,
And covetous of longer life, each fled
Back to the city. Then Ulysses sent
His voice abroad, and with an eagle's force
Sprang on the people: but Saturnian Jove
Cast down, incontinent, his smouldering bolt
At Pallas' feet, and thus the Goddess spake.
   Laertes' noble son, for wiles renowned!
Forbear; abstain from slaughter: lest thyself
Incur the anger of high-thundering Jove.
   So Pallas, whom Ulysses glad obeyed.
Then faithful covenants of peace between
Both sides ensued, ratified in the sight
Of Pallas, progeny of Jove, who seemed
In voice and form, the Mentor known to all. 655
So majestically is the whole action conducted, that perhaps to the minds of some readers it may recall the figure of the high priest, staying the pestilence among the idolatrous Jews, and standing himself between the living and the dead. 656 Thus we realize that this conclusion could not have been well left out, seeing that the interests of the most important classes in the State were involved and 657 menaced in these domestic broils: since, indeed, the rest
[Page 293]
of the men of Ithaca were in some sort responsible for the insult and wrong done to the royal house. If, then, we would characterize the Odyssey on the main lines of the whole work, it is evident that it may well be styled a sacred poem, since its whole significance and its structure turn upon reverence and devotion to the Gods.
I pass now to the plan and method by which the poet reaches his aim and steers his ship into the haven where he would be. First, there is the fact which is obvious to every one, that nowhere throughout the whole poem is the overshadowing presence of the divine power absent. The whole plot is carried out, not so much by Ulysses and Telemachus, as by Minerva: Ulysses and his adherents are placed, as it were, under her protection from the very outset: and nowhere, from first to last, has the poet the least scruple in showing her as solicitously watching over their affairs and interests, and at times, it may be, over the most trivial details.
In fact, as often as I read the Odyssey afresh, I confess that I always wonder by what poetic fate it has happened that so many generations of learned critics have so readily subscribed to the Horatian precept:
Nor let a god in person stand displayed,
Unless the labouring plot deserve his aid. 658
Especially since, by their own canon, we should seek the rules of poetry nowhere but in the works of the great masters. And I confidently ask, ‘where, throughout Homer, do they find authority for this celebrated maxim?’ In the Odyssey , unquestionably, we see Minerva constantly attached to Ulysses, as his guide and helper in the very smallest affairs. Thus we have those lines, which recur so often, about Penelope taking refuge from her cares in dream and sleep:
[Page 294]
So saying, she to her splendid chamber thence
Retired, not sole but by her female train
Attended: there arrived, she wept her spouse,
Her loved Ulysses, till Minerva dropped
The balm of slumber on her weary lids. 659
660 And the same Goddess again, when Telemachus is about to take ship, plays her full part of an alert messenger:
Then Pallas, Goddess azure-eyed, her thoughts
Elsewhere directing, all the city ranged
In semblance of Telemachus, each man
Exhorting, at the dusk of eve to seek
The gallant ship, and from Noemon, son
Renowned of Phronius, asked, herself, a bark,
Which, soon as asked, he promised to supply.
   Now set the sun, and twilight dimmed the ways,
When, drawing down his bark into the Deep,
He gave her all her furniture, oars, arms,
And tackle, such as well-built galleys bear,
Then moored her in the bottom of the bay.
Meantime, his mariners in haste repaired
Down to the shore, for Pallas urged them on. 661
So too, as if at the touch of her magic wand, those she favours repeatedly stand forth more comely and far more imposing than they were before. As an example there are these fine lines concerning Laertes:
                                         Then, by the hands
Of his Sicilian matron, the old King
Was bathed, anointed, and attired afresh,
And Pallas drawing nigh, dilated more
His limbs, and gave his whole majestic form
Increase of amplitude. He left the bath.
His son, amazed as he had seen a God
Alighted newly from the skies, exclaimed. 662
Homer here shows himself at his very sweetest, as in honouring age he ever did, and, now verging to the close
[Page 295]
of his poem, he seems to linger lovingly over the subject that he loves.
But should the Horatians object that in these just cited instances there were difficulties amply warranting divine intervention, since Laertes' dwelling was beset by foes: what will they say to Minerva playing such inferior parts as those of a shepherd, a messenger, a herald, or a little girl carrying water? What justifies her descending from her celestial seat beside Jove himself, merely to show some one his right road, or to summon a meeting of citizens, or, again, to seek out dark recesses in a cavern where the 663 treasures of Ulysses may be safely hidden? And, indeed, on one occasion she deems it nowise beneath her to measure the chance cast of the quoit pitched by Ulysses, and to proclaim him conqueror by a great distance:
Swiftly he swung, and from his vigorous hand
Sent it. Loud sang the stone, and as it flew
The maritime Phaeacians low inclined
Their heads beneath it; over all the marks,
And far beyond them, sped the flying rock.
Minerva in a human form, the cast
Prodigious measured, and aloud exclaimed.
   Stranger! the blind himself might with his hands
Feel out the 'vantage here. Thy quoit disdains
Fellowship with a crowd, borne far beyond.
Fear not a losing game: Phaeacian none
Will reach thy measure, much less overcast.
She ceased; Ulysses, hardy Chief, rejoiced
That in the circus he had found a judge
So favourable. 664
Assuredly he displays a spirit quick and eager to recognize the actions of the immortal Gods, a mind which firmly believes that not the very smallest deed escapes their notice: that he who has won their favour by his upright and reverent life will find them on his side even
[Page 296]
in trivial and common daily affairs: and finally—and this really involves the rest—that they reveal their presence to brave and good men by proofs, slight, no doubt, but unmistakable to the men themselves.
Taking Homer as our test, therefore, Horace's precept must either be dismissed to the gardens of Epicurus as being only the utterance of pleasure-seekers and those who scout higher things: or at all events must be construed as meaning that, though nothing really happens without the Gods, yet for the most part they do not speak to men, and are only seen for a fleeting moment. I should not myself like to see a Jupiter or a Hercules appear suddenly and accidentally at some crisis: but should such a one have made his presence silently felt throughout the whole plot as concerned with the affairs of men, then there would be no reason why I should disbelieve or resent his appearance. 665 Furthermore, Horace is not speaking of all kinds of poetry, but only of the drama, where, should some deus ex machina be unsuitably introduced, the sight offends our eyes and is obviously unworthy of a divine power.
Generally speaking, as regards Homeric deities, the writer needed great skill, the greatest self-restraint, and reverent feeling, to judge rightly when any one of them might appear openly and before men's eyes: when more subtly he might reveal himself to one or two only whom he specially favoured: when, finally, he should be veiled in clouds and solemn awfulness. Any poet who dares to venture in that region, who has not been accustomed to reckon with the divine presence in all spheres of life, must needs flounder miserably. One who has ignored the fact that the course of his own life and fortunes is ordered by a divine providence will have little true insight when he introduces God into his poems.
But, to impress my meaning more completely, let me cite some passages from the Odyssey which Homer would
[Page 297]
certainly never have written, had he not been most reverential in all that touches religion, and timidly reserved in so much as even naming the divine powers. Our first instance shall be drawn from that class of cases where the tutelary deities are hidden from the eyes even of their favourites:
But while we sought my galley on the beach,
With tepid tears bedewing, as we went,
Our cheeks, meantime the Goddess to the shore
Descending, bound within the bark a ram
And sable ewe, passing us unperceived.
For who hath eyes that can discern a God
Going or coming, if he shun the view. 666
Here we are plainly told that men's guardian angels may come and depart unseen, may bring gifts or avert evil, or may intervene for good: weak humanity all the time 667 attributing their blessings to Fortune. And many such instances may be found in the Odyssey. One might well believe that Homer felt that the common run of humanity was not worthy to receive in any way revelations from celestial spirits. To this cause must be attributed the choice of the particular characters assumed by Minerva when wishing to help her friends: or the character of the dreams by which Penelope, Telemachus, and others are advised and instructed: or once more, the alteration now and again of the appearances of heaven and land at her bidding, in aid of those she favours:
                                         Meantime Ulysses woke,
Unconscious where: stretched on his native soil
He lay, and knew it not, long time exiled.
For Pallas, progeny of Jove, a cloud
Drew dense around him. 668
In one instance she stays the course of the sun itself for the sake of Ulysses:
Thus had they wept till rosy-fingered morn
Had found them weeping, but Minerva checked
[Page 298]
Night's almost finished course, and held, meantime,
The golden dawn close prisoner in the Deep,
Forbidding her to lead her coursers forth,
Lampus and Phaethon that furnish light
To all the earth, and join them to the yoke. 669
In this fashion, the poet uses one device after another for men's advantage, so that none should deem himself, at any juncture of life, wholly bereft of divine providence: whether it be a chance meeting with friends, or a change in the aspect of the sky, or some reversal of natural events, or the swaying and movements of men's minds. In his view no man ought ever to feel positively sure that he may not see some one or other of the Gods before him in human shape:
Antinous! thou didst not well to smite
The wretched vagabond. O thou art doomed
For ever, if there be a God in heaven;
For in similitude of strangers oft,
670 The Gods, who can with ease all shapes assume,
Repair to populous cities, where they mark
The outrageous and the righteous deeds of men. 671
Heaven's watchful eyes guard even men's slumbers:
For a dream too is from Jove. 672
Of not one of all the stable or moving objects that meet our view, neither rains, storms, calms, can any man feel assured that it may not denote some kindly aid of his tutelary providence.
Thus, while the deities in Homer's poems are indeed continually present with the mass of men, yet they are, for the most part, unperceived by them; while to those whom they distinguish by special favour, and consequently to the heroic line, they permit the peculiar privilege that such become conscious of their intervention, if not
[Page 299]
through manifest and open appearance, yet beyond doubt by unmistakable signs. Alcinous refers to this distinction, perhaps more boastfully than truly, when extolling the good fortune of himself and his family, to excite the admiration of the stranger Ulysses:
But should he prove some Deity from heaven
Descended, then the Immortals have in view
Designs not yet apparent; for the Gods
Have ever from of old revealed themselves
At our solemnities, have on our seats
Sat with us evident, and shared the feast;
And even if a single traveller
Of the Phaeacians meet them, all reserve
They lay aside; for with the Gods we boast
As near affinity as do themselves
The Cyclops or the Giant race profane. 673
Far more after the poet's mind, I imagine, is Ulysses' admonition to Telemachus to refrain from loud utterance since they are in presence of Deity:
Some Power celestial, doubtless, is within.
   To whom Ulysses, ever-wise, replied,
Soft! ask no questions. Give no vent to thought.
Such is the custom of the Powers divine. 674
Truly a speech of weightiest prudence and instinct with 675 piety, not doubtfully instructing us how important it is, that in the things of religion men should demean themselves soberly and with self-control. Mark, moreover, that only when departing do the Gods suffer, as it were, some slight spark of their divinity to gleam forth:
   She spake, and as with eagle-wings upborne,
Vanished incontinent, but him inspired
With daring fortitude, and on his heart
Dearer remembrance of his Sire impressed
Than ever. Conscious of the wondrous change,
Amazed he stood, and in his secret thought
Revolving all, believed his guest a God. 676
[Page 300]
However unmistakably they may reveal themselves, one would say it is to spiritual vision rather than physical sense. Now and then they take care to make employ of oracular speech, which often bears strange testimony to their god-like majesty when once we grasp its true significance.
And lastly, which may perhaps seem surprising to those who only read superficially, I find that Homer not merely shows care, but even delicate balance in ordering the interposition of his deities, and addresses himself to it, if ever man did, with all reverence and discretion as to a task of weightiest import. He does not forget assuredly that he is speaking of things divine in the presence of Deity itself. I would that those who sing the praises of the God of Revelation would less often forget that they should utter words that are not only true, but solemn, holy, modest, full of all reverence and religion.
But since among those who allow that human affairs are under divine rule there are some who hold that the divine will itself is subject to a certain blind necessity; while others maintain that it rules and orders all, limited only by the principles of truth and goodness, it will be worth while to consider also what were the views of the chief of poets on this point. And there is the more reason 677 for such inquiry because not a few hold that they find this creed of a rigid fatalism set forth in the Homeric poems in so many words. As, for instance, where Minerva herself declares:
Yet not the Gods themselves can save from death
All-levelling, the man whom most they love,
When Fate ordains him once to his last sleep. 678
But let those who are of this opinion reflect how it can be reconciled with the noble utterance of supreme Jove,
[Page 301]
which Homer stamped on the whole poem at the outset, like a mystic superscription on a shrine:
Alas! how prone are human-kind to blame
The Powers of Heaven! From us, they say, proceed
The ills which they endure, yet more than Fate
Herself inflicts, by their own crimes incur. 679
I, at all events, cannot see how this phrase, ‘More than Fate inflicts,’ can possibly be reconciled with Stoic belief. For is it not clearly laid down that an entirely different future had been decreed for Aegisthus, had he not himself, by his own mad folly, brought crime and its retribution on his own head?
Of a piece with these, from another point of view, are Ulysses' petitions when in beggar's guise he puts the suitors, and Amphinomus in particular, to the test, trying to see, first, whether they will be ready to help a case of distress, and, secondly, whether any one of them would repent even at the eleventh hour, as the phrase goes, and lead a better life:
                                         Minerva, drawing nigh
To Laertiades, impelled the Chief
Crusts to collect or any pittance small
At every suitor's hand, for trial's sake
Of just and unjust. 680
Minerva was minded, it would seem, to spare even doomed lives, if only they showed themselves worthy of salvation: and in exactly similar fashion the wretched Aegisthus had by his own wickedness drawn down upon himself a doom which neither nature nor destiny had marked out for him. And Amphinomus, as being better dispositioned than the rest, is again urged to reform his life, and shown how perilous it will be for all who linger 681 among that ribald company:
For such as the complexion of his lot
By the appointment of the Sire of all,
[Page 302]
Such is the colour of the mind of man.
I too, have been familiar in my day
With wealth and ease, but I was then self-willed,
And many wronged, emboldened by the thought
Of my own father's and my brethren's power.
Let no man, therefore, be unjust, but each
Use modestly what gift soe'er of heaven.
So do not these. These ever bent I see
On deeds injurious, the possessions large
Consuming, and dishonouring the wife
Of one, who will not, as I judge, remain
Long absent from his home, but is, perchance,
Even at the door. Thee, therefore, may the Gods
Steal hence in time: ah, meet not his return
To his own country! 682
Nothing, surely, could be more impressive than this appeal, which all but brings before our very vision the compassion of divine majesty, leaving no means untried rather than suffer him, unwarned, to be carried away blindly by his own folly. But such forbearance is extended to Amphinomus as fruitlessly as to all the rest: since, though not without some better feeling, he yet refused to dissociate himself from that shameless herd. Indeed, at the last, he is found aiding and abetting them at their worst. Thus he perishes through false shame, rather than be chargeable with the smallest lack of loyalty to his friends.
And, finally, what else is implied, I would ask, by the terrible deliverance of the augur Theoclymenus, but that vengeance, whether divine or human, after rejection of such a warning must be pardoned any severity whatsoever. One may be forgiven for once more quoting some few lines from it: for they are assuredly a most worthy conclusion to this whole disquisition concerning Homer's pious reverence:
                                         Then Pallas struck
The suitors with delirium: wide they stretch'd
Their jaws with unspontaneous laughter loud;
[Page 303]
Their meat dripp'd blood: tears fill'd their eyes,
and dire
Presages of approaching woe, their hearts.
Darkly, as so often happens, do the forebodings of the 683 augur intermingle with the chance mishaps of the suitors while gluttonously feasting:
Then thus the prophet Theoclymenus.
   Ah, miserable men! what curse is this
That takes you now? night wraps itself around
Your faces, bodies, limbs; the palace shakes
With peals of groans—and oh, what floods ye weep!
I see the walls and arches dappled thick
With gore; the vestibule is throng'd, the court
On all sides throng'd with apparitions grim
Of slaughter'd men sinking into the gloom
Of Erebus; the sun is blotted out
From heaven, and midnight whelms you premature.
   He said, they hearing laughed. 684
Beyond doubt all tends to prove that the Gods, in Homer's conception, have keenest appreciation for each man's deserts: as for the poets of the following age, if they taught a sterner and more Stoic doctrine, our poet cannot bear the blame of that. Nay, it seems to me that Homer's main purpose is to show that the free-will of man can be reconciled with the power and goodness of a supreme Being.
[Page ]
685 LECTURE XVI
Homer lived at a time when he would naturally have been filled with loving regret for the heroic age. To the happy fortune of Greek Literature, he stood forth pre-eminently as a type and model to all who followed. Discussion of the question, whether it be in the main to the advantage of Poetry that the best and greatest poet should also be earliest in time. Some remarks on so-called Minor Poets: of whom, Alcaeus, Sappho, Archilochus, Simonides, were each in his and her own degree, Primary Poets.
It was our intention, as you may perhaps remember, gentlemen, (since we decided to make test in Homer first of all, as was but fitting, of the soundness of our general theory of poetry), it was, I say, our intention, after examination of the poems themselves, to proceed next to consider how far such historic details as have been handed down by the ancients concerning the life, fortunes, and disposition of the revered poet agree with our inferences. For, however scanty and meagre, owing to the ravages of time, such remains may be, it will nevertheless tend strongly to confirm generally such conjectures as we have thus made, should we seem to have hit the mark in but one or two particulars: and should this not be so, our estimate, so far as it is sound and sober, will be little invalidated.
For example: relying upon certain facts in the poems 686 which seemed of real importance, we have concluded that Homer was in greater sympathy with the common soldier than with the leaders and men of position. Now it is plain to any one that our reasoning would be greatly fortified if we found a tradition that at some time or other he fought in the ranks: but if no one has said so, the
[Page 305]
strength and even the probability of our argument is nowise affected. All that is necessary is that we should be on our guard, lest, through over-affection for our own theories, we twist stubborn and awkward facts to support our view.
This then, in brief, is what seemed to us the true inference from the poems themselves; that the poet was oppressed with enthusiasm and regret for the manners and life of the ‘heroic age’: that, to find an outlet for these feelings, he wrote the Iliad in his prime, the Odyssey in declining years: that in each poem, whether we look at the trend of the story itself, the choice of the characters playing the chief parts in the action, the style of the narrative and speeches, or finally the writer's open and plainly-avowed political and religious leanings, we find traces of such a man as has just been described. With this difference, however, that the more impassioned tone of the Iliad , and of Achilles in particular, is softened and seems as it were to droop in the Odyssey : and further, that the later poem faithfully illustrates the sailor type of character as the Iliad the soldier's.
This is practically all which by plausible inference we gathered from the poems themselves. It now remains, by means of appeal to trustworthy authorities, to see how far our suppositions are well founded. Not that I expect to throw new light on the subject, or to submit any conclusions other than those which sound scholars have long ago arrived at and settled. But, since I am addressing some who are less advanced, the point cannot be entirely passed over without leaving the argument unfinished and doubtful in a material part.
And I must begin, I think, with some remarks as to the 687 date at which Homer lived. I have certainly no pretensions to contribute anything original as to this vexed question, but it will be sufficient for the purpose, probably, if I satisfy
[Page 306]
you that the learned are almost all agreed as to the date within such limits as can readily enough be proved consistent with my own views. Even Duris the Samian, 688 who throws back the siege of Troy further than any one, and some of our own eminent scholars, who place it no more than one hundred and forty years anterior to the first Olympiad, 689 while they are at variance, certainly, so far as relates to the fall of Troy, yet hold views as to the date of the Homeric poems that can be easily reconciled. For whether with Duris we date the siege of Troy more than thirteen hundred years before the Christian era, or with Newton only nine hundred, the weighty testimony of Thucydides, 690 that the return of the Heracleids followed the fall of Troy by no greater interval than eighty years, will remain unaffected.
But if any one, following Mitford, prefers to place the date of the Iliad as preceding the Heracleids, we should have the very period which best suits our theories. And many indications of date scattered here and there through the two poems certainly tend to this result: which the writer just named, who ranks high among Englishmen as an authority upon Greek history, points out with his accustomed acuteness. 691 And he finds assuredly no slight support of his conjectures in the fact that hardly anywhere in Homer is there the least reference to what must have been of recent memory, such as the migration of whole populations, the overthrow of cities, the downfall and 692 massacre of tribes and peoples. How important this fact of omission is may be appreciated when we consider the usage of the greatest number of poets: with whom no literary device is more common than to introduce men of an older generation prophesying and predicting events to happen
[Page 307]
in the poet's own day. Of this both Aeschylus and Pindar furnish splendid examples: and the more close they are to Homer in date and nationality, the more strange is it to find him almost entirely destitute of a poetic artifice (as it may be styled) in which they so keenly delighted.
Mr. Mitford has marshalled many other events which, had they happened within Homer's knowledge, he would hardly have passed unnoticed. Being passed over, they argue the poet to have lived at a date too early to admit of his acquaintance with them.
From Strabo too, if I am not mistaken, a candid and keen discernment may select not a few records of similar tendency. For instance, he tells us that certain cities of Aetolia owed their foundation to the Heracleids: 693 but these are almost the only cities not mentioned in the poet's very full ‘catalogue’. Now Strabo 694 certainly shows that he followed Homer as his most trustworthy guide with regard to the coast lands of Greece. In fact he considers the geographical information derivable from him so complete that he sometimes throws doubt on traditions or beliefs simply because they are unnoticed by Homer.
And, really, I incline to make similar inference from what we read in the opening of the Twelfth Book of the Iliad as to the utter overthrow and destruction of the Greek camps and defences:
This stood, while Hector and Achilles raged,
While sacred Troy the warring hosts engaged;
But when her sons were slain, her city burned,
And what survived of Greece to Greece returned,
Then Neptune and Apollo shook the shore. 695
I am inclined, I repeat, to believe that Homer was here 696 somewhat anxious lest in his account of these regions something of his usual exactitude might seem wanting.
[Page 308]
And so he narrates, or perhaps invents—yes, and describes with words that catch the rush and roar—the seething onrush of river and of sea, so that men may be less surprised that no trace is left of such great works. But had he lived many centuries after the Trojan War, he might without any artifice have left this to be explained as the work of Time.
Now it seems highly improbable that a poet so scrupulously particular with regard to the vicissitudes in the character of localities should be so utterly silent touching the overthrow of noble families and the migration of whole tribes and peoples. Such considerations as these have led some to be of opinion that Homer lived about Orestes' time, before the Dorians had broken in upon the Peloponnesus.
But I must candidly admit that there are facts which place no slight difficulties in the way of this view. There is the comment of Ephorus quoted in Strabo, where explanation is given of the fact that Homer at one time styles Crete ‘hundred citied’, and at another ‘ninety citied’. He says: 697 It is said that the last ten were built at a later date, after the Trojan era, by the Dorian followers of Althaemenes the Argive.’ So that Homer described Crete in one place as it existed in the Trojan age, and in another as in his own time. It follows necessarily that he must have written the latter passage after the Peloponnesus had been completely conquered by the Dorians. For this same Althaemenes, under whose rule Crete became ‘hundred citied’, is said to have been the grandson of that Temenus whom, after the overthrow of the House of Pelops, the Heracleids created King of Mycenae.
There is another real difficulty in the chronology both of 698 Herodotus and of Isocrates, each of them an authority commanding respect. Isocrates, when advanced in life, tells
[Page 309]
us 699 that the Peloponnesus was colonized by the ancestors of the Spartans as far back as seven hundred years before his own time. Herodotus, on the other hand, though born about half a century earlier than Isocrates, says 700 that no more than four hundred years separated himself from the times of Homer and Hesiod. Hence it follows that when Herodotus was born the Dorians had been settled in the Peloponnesus about five centuries and a half, and that the date of Homer and Hesiod is one hundred and fifty years after the return of the Heracleids, two hundred and thirty after the siege of Troy.
But I am somewhat apprehensive that Herodotus may not, in fixing these dates, have had the advantage of the best authority: yet I hesitate to set aside his testimony, especially since it agrees fairly well with the conclusions arrived at by Eratosthenes: who, as is well known, laid the foundation of the recognized chronology of Grecian history. I only call attention to one important fact: in this very passage Herodotus clearly implies that even his contemporaries were far from agreed as to the date assignable to the great poet. This is what he says: ‘For I am of opinion that Hesiod and Homer lived four hundred years before my time and not more.’ Obviously, then, his view was not shared by all: so that we may be the more readily excused for not adopting it, should there appear to be sufficient reason. And I think we must part company from Herodotus, so far at least as to hold that Homer probably lived not after but at the time of the Heracleids, when settlements were being widely spread and Crete had already become ‘hundred citied’. It is easy to understand that at such a time, in the midst of a period of unsettlement and unrest, he would naturally make no mention of the Heracleids. All the other facts square easily with this date.
[Page 310]
701 In short, to tell the truth. I do not think it worth while to spend much time on this point. Whether Homer, as Herodotus states, lived one or two centuries after the Trojan War: or whether, as some infer from the internal evidence of his poems, he was contemporary with the Heracleids, or even lived before them: it is abundantly clear that his life fell well within the lingering survivals of the Trojan age, when the privileges of the heroic chieftain and their religious customs were maintained in form and outward show, though their essential force and virtue had all but disappeared. And thus it might well be, that, smitten deeply with regret for that fast-departing civilization, he might wish, in song at all events, to hand down to future times its glories and his delight in it. Such we may conceive to have been the first impulse, so to speak, and the starting-point of each noble poem.
So much for the age in which Homer lived. As for his poverty, his blindness, his wandering life, especially his intimate acquaintance with the shores of the Aegean and Ionian waters, we have testimony in the scanty remains of popular tradition preserved for us by Pausanias and the writer of ‘the life of Homer’ attributed to Herodotus. Pausanias highly commends him for the fact that, unlike so many poets, he refused to accept royal patronage. After enumerating a goodly list of those who severally lived under the protection of some princely court he proceeds: ‘Hesiod and Homer either never chanced to be brought into contact with kings or designedly kept aloof from them. The former preferred a wandering life by reason of his simplicity and shyness: while Homer was both a persistent traveller, and esteemed the applause of the people more highly than the patronage of the rich and powerful: although Homer himself describes Demodocus at the court of Alcinous, and tells how Agamemnon left behind him a certain bard to watch over and protect his
[Page 311]
wife.’ 702 Here we have, in my opinion, indubitable proof—I do not say, of what Homer really was—but at lowest, of the general notions as to his mode of life and characteristics current among his countrymen. We leave the learned to pronounce whether, in particular, those books of the Odyssey in which the reception accorded to strangers by the suitors and Eumaeus respectively is tacitly contrasted, 703 are not redolent of the type ( ἦθος ) of man here suggested.
From what has been said it seems clear that, considering the centuries that have intervened and the fact that there is an almost entire dearth of evidence, the agreement of such historical details as there are with what can be inferred by probable conjecture from the internal evidence of the poems themselves is by no means contemptible. So we can now proceed with better heart and hope to consider the other Greeks who after Homer have won renown as ‘primary’ poets. Yet we are met on the threshold by a question which seems to give us pause. Some people suspect that the highest poetry is bound to suffer in any country in which it so happens that the poet first in time is also by universal consent so easily first in attainment, as to have neither equal nor rival. Therefore, seeing that Homer alone of all who have been the first to essay the task of the Muses in their own country has held undisputed sway among his countrymen, they refuse to allow that any of them could well develop as a true and original poet. For they all, by fatal necessity, trod in his footsteps.
This much must be conceded, that admiration for Homer's poetry and desire to imitate it are deeply seated in Greek literature, and consequently in the literature of all those nations which, however slightly, came under the influence of that ancient culture. Nevertheless, for many
[Page 312]
reasons I am most strongly of opinion, that so far from restraining poetic freedom, the all but regal glory of Homer has conspicuously fostered and increased it.
In order to put this more clearly, let us consider for a moment, gentlemen, by how many avenues Homer's poetry must have wound its way into the minds of his countrymen, and how deeply it has driven its roots. Do not suppose that he drew round himself a mere circle of disciples, though that he well might claim to do, in the 704 way in which versifiers of the present day are wont to act, as year by year they try to win popularity. The fact is, that, in the public life of Greece at that date there was absolutely no walk of life, either civil or military, no duties of citizenship, public or private, with which the Homeric poems had not something in common: so true and lifelike is the picture which they give us of their age, though the picture has just the sombre colour of the survival of a decaying period, perhaps making a greater appeal by its very tone of sadness and regret. In short, Homer's poems answered to the circumstances and dispositions of his contemporaries just as sea-songs nowadays are suited to the circumstances and appeal to the minds of sailors, and ‘the poet’ took just the same place in popular esteem as Shakespeare, rightly styled by pre-eminence the Bard of the English, does among ourselves.
The same place, did I say? Nay, one far more intimate and closer to men's most sacred beliefs and their domestic hearths: mainly in connexion with the worship of the Gods, with which the recollection of Homer's work was, as you know, always so closely bound. Every one will recall here what Herodotus says of Hesiod and Homer: ‘These were they who framed a theogony for the Greeks, and gave names to the Gods, and assigned to them their honours and their arts, and pointed out their several forms.’ 705
[Page 313]
Of course, I do not mean that this should be construed, as some have done, to imply that they imported, say from Egypt and from Asia, a colony of new deities: but I take it to mean that these two first ranged and enshrined in poems, and so committed to men's memories, the notions concerning the Gods which before them were vague, undefined, preserved only by oral tradition: that in their poems they gave the origin and rationale of facts of constant experience, such as games, sacrifices, and festivals: 706 and nothing could give more pleasure to men who, though uncultured, were deeply religious.
And so, not to dwell on other qualifications which eminently fitted him to charm the Greek mind, as for instance that, great as he was, he was always a true scion of Greece and never passed far beyond her boundaries; or that he deals with subjects and details familiar in some degree even to the humblest, such as the changes in the fortunes of countries, cities and noble houses, the daily work of sailors, husbandmen, soldiers, all set forth simply and truly: leaving these aside, I should anticipate, solely because of the religious interest, that Homer would, in the briefest possible space of time, be in the hands of all who could read Greek, not only because of the splendid poetry, but also because men would almost constantly be reminded of him as of a dear and close friend, in whatever direction they turned their eyes or thoughts. I could almost fancy that his shadow, like that of a guardian spirit, was ever close at their side: that he whose name and genius were so closely joined with all that men held most sacred, would himself be adorned with a religious halo and regarded as worthy of all men's reverence.
In truth, all Greek antiquity testifies that this was so indeed. To select a few proofs from among many: Pindar tells us that all poets were called Homeridae from the name of the greatest poet: while, on the other hand, Homer
[Page 314]
himself, his own name discarded, is generally styled The Poet , and not only in the centuries next succeeding his age, but throughout Greek literature. The legends of the seven Asiatic cities keenly contesting among themselves, even down to the days of Tiberius, the honour of being his birthplace are so well known that I should weary you if I discussed them in detail. And, though the rivalry at last only implied an empty desire for renown, it is probable 707 that, at first, it was nearly associated with religious veneration. For the city which really and truly could claim Homer would justly be the seat of his temple, altars, and ceremonial: and, as a consequence, the city itself would gain a sanctity, as being the guardian of his temple, and the high priest of his worship, when once he was ranked among the Gods. And, remember, we read that his poems were more than once appealed to in controversies about the exact boundaries of countries: his words were treated as a decision issuing from the sacred tripod, so that he was credited with the divine attribute of giving oracles.
Obviously that fleeting and merely literary adulation by which a crowd of imitators pay homage to great men is one thing: quite another is that absolute worship which all Greece accorded to her Homer. There is as much difference as between a man who has rich red life-blood coursing through his veins and one whose skin has been only daubed with paint. Granting fully, therefore, that there is always some danger to his countrymen from the presence of a great poet, lest those who come after may degenerate into servile and unworthy imitation: it is yet quite evident that in Homer's case there was the less need for apprehension; since a certain reverential regard placed him high above not merely poets and authors, but the whole race of men.
Moreover, it is a question whether the Homeric style has not had perhaps more influence on later Greek prose than upon the poets themselves. It would follow that
[Page 315]
men framed themselves on his model rather as to spirit than form: and it is indeed undeniable that the Greek genius corresponds with Homer's style, like antistrophe with strophe in a choral song, and wonderfully harmonizes with it. Not to mention others, take Herodotus and Plato. The former not only recalls Homer in his Ionic dialect and his primitive simplicity, but in his whole style of narration, and especially in some ways of thought, such as his reflections 708 on the frailty of human life and the sorrowfulness of mortal experience, which are beautifully interwoven with his story. As to Plato, men have in terms styled him the most Homeric of philosophers: in the apt words of Horace:
Is there a Man, whom real Genius fires,
Whom an Enthusiasm divine inspires,
Who talks true Greatness: let him boldly claim
The sacred Honours of a Poet's name. 709
Therefore, so far as Homer and the Greeks are concerned, I certainly find no reason for supposing it unfortunate that the first to devote himself to poetry should have produced a poem which is a perfect model in every way: unless it be thought, forsooth, that owing to Homer's influence such eminent writers as Plato, Herodotus, Pindar, Aeschylus, and the rest were less great than they would have been; whereas it is easy to see how great is the debt which every one of them owes to him.
‘But perhaps the case of Homer and the Greeks was exceptional?’ Let us, if you will, consider this question a little more minutely. Let us seek reasons from the very nature of the subject to prove that, when the balance has been carefully struck, such splendid poetic beginnings ought always and everywhere to be treated as a great asset to a nation. And I certainly hope you will not suppose that this is merely a lifeless and academic discussion. It is, believe me, of the greatest importance that the limits of
[Page 316]
imitation should be carefully and judiciously laid down: and it will be so much the easier, the more subtly the wonderful fellowship and intercommunion of great minds is appreciated, and the better it is understood how far it is allowable for each to make use of others' work as though it were his own. So that we may be pardoned if we pause and linger a little upon this question.
Now I desire that the essential point at issue should be most clearly grasped. The question is as to true and genuine poetry, whether it is advantageous that in whatever region it may flourish, one man should stand out by 710 general consent like a leader in a chorus and reign preeminent and unapproached. And it is necessary here to hold fast firmly to the definition we have given of true and genuine poetry. We accord this noble honour to those writers alone who, burning with an instinctive passion, are as it were compelled to sing, and by singing obtain for themselves, in some degree, repose and relief. So that the question proposed comes to this, to determine whether men, especially young men, with minds full of strong emotion, will be helped to let their emotion break forth into poetry if they have a perfect model before their eyes.
No doubt, most plausible reasons will be adduced for denying this to be likely. First of all this well-known passage occurs to us:
Oh! the bards of olden ages, blessed bards in songcraft skill'd,
Happy henchmen of the Muses, when the field was yet untill'd,
All the land is now apportion'd: bounds to all the Arts belong:
Left the last of all the poets, looking keenly, looking long,
I can find no bright new chariot for the race-course of my song. 711
[Page 317]
We must suppose that many, everywhere, and in all ages, who would fain launch into verse, when they remember the works left behind by great men, recognize either that they are only doing afresh what has been already done, or, at all events, that they will be wasting time and toil. On this view Greece would boast fewer poets because of her one Homer.
And, worst of all, it is urged that really gifted men are perhaps more easily disheartened than those who are dull and incapable. The keener ear a man has, the more difficult it is to induce him to sing, when he has once heard the wonderful variety of notes in a first-rate singer's voice. The unrefined and unsensitive are easily pleased with their own performances.
There is a further fact which I cannot venture to deny, that wherever a poet of the first order has appeared, before 712 long a rank crop of wretched imitators follows. But, on the other hand, the apprehension that, for the same reason, some who might otherwise have produced good poetry are reduced to silence, this, though it seems plausible, will be found hardly reasonable or accordant with fact. For in the present discussion we do not give the title of poet to him who publishes his verse with great popular acclaim, but rather to the man who meditates the Muse at home for his own delectation and solace. But I fail to see why such men as these, though but unwillingly and timidly trusting their work to public criticism, should be more slow to compose simply because they may have fallen in with some great poet's works, and thus become more conscious of their own mediocrity. Indeed, I think good reasons could be assigned for thinking they might rather be stimulated to composition, when they realize through the example of some immortal work what may be achieved by the divinely-given power of inspired poetry.
For as fire is kindled by fire, so is a poet's mind kindled by contact with a brother poet. Timid and sensitive men
[Page 318]
who before had scarcely, or perhaps not at all, acknowledged even to themselves their inmost feelings, have no misgivings in sharing these deepest secrets with a writer who has once won their sympathy: they look upon poems that are in tune with their own minds and instincts in the light of friends: so they gradually become bolder and launch forth themselves: they learn to smooth life's way by solace of song, and at last, according to their power and quality, they bloom forth as poets. It may be that, scattered here and there, every great poet has his band of followers who silently and secretly cherish the spark of genius he has struck forth and hold it all the dearer as being a hidden delight. Consequently, everywhere and always, we shall find the number of those who will make 713 good their title to be enrolled among genuine poets greater than might have been expected: men who are well content that their work perish with themselves, granting only that, while they live, they may sing, and by their song enchant the hearts and ears of their fellow men.
Nor, again, will Emulation, that stimulus of genius, that foster-mother of great works, be without its usual force and influence in this matter. There will always, I believe, be a few men, men of great and enthusiastic genius, who, so far from being chilled and paralysed by the surpassing beauty of earlier models, will be stirred by them to perfect their own style more and more, and will have their own hope of success kindled by the very greatness of those models. Few, very few, no doubt, but some there will surely be. The memories of Miltiades would not suffer Themistocles to rest, and such disquieting chivalry is not confined merely to those whose hearts are set on martial glory. It will be possible to transfer to literature and the Muses' gifts that saying which is said to have fallen from the lips of the greatest of painters, who was, moreover, eminent in architecture, when contemplating the arch of
[Page 319]
some Roman temple of earlier times: ‘Good indeed,’ said he, ‘but what would you say if, some day or other, you were to see such a vault as this hung by me, almost in mid air!’ And the dome of St. Peter stands witness, as they say, that he marvellously fulfilled his words. So it was no empty vaunt, but the strong and candid expression of a self-confidence that was justified. There is no improbability in supposing something like this to happen now and again in Poetry also. And every such instance would be an object-lesson, teaching us how great is the benefit and advantage to Poetry to have had splendid beginnings.
And what a help it must be, truly, for those whose minds are travailing within, to have ready to their hand words, phrases, and metre, whereby they may bring to birth the thoughts and imaginations that are stirring within them! Often and often, I believe, are men of natural genius tormented because, while they are conscious within them of great ideas fit to be enshrined in verse, they yet cannot express them in language: indeed, they 714 cannot even in mind marshal their feelings. But when these men have by reading learned the methods and technique of pure poetry, they at once rejoice in the sense that a grievous burden is lifted from them, and that a powerful impulse to write has been accorded them. A book of some fine poet will serve them as an arsenal, or, if you will, a field of exercise: to it they will resort, not to gain literary material, but to try and practise themselves thoroughly so that their power of expression may not be too rigid and unelastic to correspond to the swift movements of their mind. Their subject lay already at hand and call: now they can compass form and arrangement, thanks to the priceless gift of ancient masters.
It is therefore now clear that, if the interests of ancient Greek poetry suffered any detriment by reason of one man's early and unquestioned supremacy, there was a
[Page 320]
threefold compensation: first, the study of great primary poets, by the exquisite sympathy they inspired, struck out, or rather gently drew forth, the hidden fire which was latent in the veins of other men, especially those of a more sensitive nature: next, the better balanced and more robust minds were encouraged to write: finally, the inexperienced learned gradually to clothe their thoughts and emotions in verse and metre: so that just as one who has never been trained to sing, if he is suddenly carried away by the rush and body of voice in an orchestra, realizes what his own voice can truly effect, so those who had before seemed far removed from the Muse, when they become well read in some consummate bard, of their own accord let themselves be borne on the rushing stream of his melody.
‘But,’ it is objected, ‘even those who are undaunted by the admired excellence of bygone genius will perhaps be hindered in another way, and barred from taking rank among primary poets. It may result that a writer may be so devoted heart and soul to some one of the regal few that he can hardly venture to frame a period or a sentence 715 not formed strictly after his fashion and model. Or, as more often happens, he may spontaneously and unconsciously, out of mere affection for his model, copy him exactly. We see this in the ordinary intercourse of daily life; when men have a strong affection for another, when they delight in his intimate friendship, they almost instinctively copy him, even at times his gesture, his pose, his gait. The greatest care is needed lest this go too far and the imitation be so obvious as to give offence; for this detracts—though perhaps more than is right—from the reputation even of a wise and good man. Now this same imitation in poetry repels the reader, and cannot be indulged in without imperilling the fair name and weakening the real powers of the writer. In a word, such a man loses caste: he who might otherwise not unsuccessfully have
[Page 321]
aimed at taking primary rank is now in danger of sinking to a mere imitator.’
Possibly the objector will further insist: ‘That this is the reason why, in various regions, poetic schools have often appeared, like those which are named after certain philosophers: that nothing can be possibly conceived more harmful in result, unless we are prepared to hold that the versifiers who slavishly imitated Petrarch in Italy, or Milton in our own country, added anything valuable to the treasures of Poetry. Indeed, it usually happens,’ say they, ‘that the nations and men who are most apt at reproducing style and manner are generally most wanting in originality,’ which they support by citing the special case of Russian literature, declaring that ‘it is all but non-existent because that people is gifted with a marvellous aptitude for acquisition of other tongues, and readily adapt themselves to foreign phrase and idiom.’
But surely all this applies rather to the outward form 716 and manner than to the inner secret and soul of Poetry, to that deep-seated poetic impulse which I have so often extolled, through whose aid we are enabled to allay our over-restless emotions by divine song! Certainly, so far as I know, there is nothing whatever to hinder this faculty existing, even to the highest degree, in a writer who makes not the least scruple of setting forth his own thoughts in a borrowed style and form. And so he will very frequently avail himself of the phrases, images, and even whole sentences of other poets: the character of his style, the rhythm of his verse, will too closely perhaps suggest his favourite master: but yet real genius will not be wanting, nor the ‘diviner mind’, and he will justly be ranked among primary poets, even though he has not skill enough to express his own emotions and ideas in language truly his own. I am far from denying that he would be a lesser poet than he might have been, but still he will be a genuine poet.
[Page 322]
But there is one rule which a writer who is stirred by emulation to copy some other poet must carefully follow: he must not choose the same kind of poetry as his model. For example, one devoted to Homer, in my judgement, should essay Tragedy rather than an Epic. The difference of metre will be useful in checking him from reaping another's harvest, and from giving offence by borrowing too directly the language, expression, periods, and sentences affected by his favourite poet.
If, therefore, heed be taken in this respect, there is no reason why any one should hesitate to train himself in the constant study of an author for fear of destroying his own powers by over-devotion to another. Rather, indeed, is it an important element in every study to learn not only the subject of study, but also the opinions and predilections of great men about it. And even if it should chance that 717 some few among those born for better things should, through indolence, sink into being mere imitators, yet it is likely that there are far more who would have remained unworthily silent but for the influence of some book, or even some portion of a book, thrown in their way by chance. Why, was not even that chief of Scotch poets, who was, if any man, the architect of his own poetic fortune, wont to be strangely moved, when a boy, by reading the works of those who had, before him, sung the charms of forest and stream? Were, therefore, his tones feeble and faint when he himself came to write? Few, very few, first find a road! but when found and marked out by greater men, all, I think, may keep it who are gifted with the least tinge of Poetry.
Truly, it is past belief how powerfully single words or phrases, even perhaps the cadences of syllables falling on the ear in happy hour, call forth the hidden fire. And, the more numerous the volumes of great poets, the greater, as all will allow, the chances of such experience. But I need
[Page 323]
not dwell on this; the very same reasoning which leads us inevitably to conclude that there will be many more lovers of the Muse in a land refined by liberal arts and studies than where a stolid and savage barbarism prevails, confirms the belief that when primary poetry has once appeared and is often on men's lips it will strike root and extend its domain.
So far we have been basing our conclusions on conjecture: now, with your permission, let us proceed to actual fact: let us make trial of the chief representatives of Greek Poetry who followed Homer, on whose account all this discussion has arisen. Can it be supposed for a moment that we should have had more poets like Pindar or Aeschylus, or any other of the true geniuses who appeared at that time, if only no Homer had led the way? Such a speculation would, I confess, be impossible to settle absolutely: yet perhaps we may not unreasonably draw the natural inference from the fact that those who then especially exhibited the true native and divine enthusiasm were most 718 of them devoted to Homer ( Ὁμηρικώτατοι ). Just review the company of poets which Greece produced during the brief, but ever memorable, course of the era which lies between Pisistratus and Ptolemy Philadelphus. I mean that Pisistratus who first, if we may believe report, collected and framed together as an organic unity the scattered fragments of the great poet's works, and gave them, so arranged, into the hands of his countrymen. Once this was done, forthwith there arose new aspects of Poetry, a new succession of inspired poets—beginning with Alcaeus and only ending with Apollonius Rhodius. And—passing over Sophocles, Euripides, and others beside, whose claim to be ranked among primary poets we shall, I hope, be able to consider on a future opportunity—at all events no one would withhold that honour from Pindar and Aeschylus, both of whom were devoted students of Homer's poetry.
[Page 324]
But this is too wide a field for us to venture upon at present. I will here merely make a few remarks upon the so-called Minor Poets: an appellation, as I think, to be understood as referring to the quantity, not the quality, of their work: for time has so grudged us their priceless monuments that most of them only survive in a few brief lines. Among them, as we all know, two illustrious pairs stand out: Alcaeus, Sappho: Archilochus, Simonides: all of whom, moreover, Simonides excepted, invented new measures, no doubt to enable them more fully and freely to express their thronging emotions.
Scarcely twenty verses of Alcaeus remain to us: and we, therefore, are the more amazed at the truly divine strength and genius which he has so clearly and forcibly exhibited within such narrow limits. I will cite two passages, which most happily harmonize with what we 719 learn of him from Horace. In the first he describes a ship lately wrecked and cast on the cold shore:
Now here, now there, the wild waves sweep,
Whilst we betwixt them o'er the deep,
In shattered tempest-beaten bark,
With labouring ropes are onward driven,
The billows dashing o'er our dark
Upheavèd deck, in tatters riven
Our sails, whose yawning rents between
The raging sea and sky are seen. 720
In another fragment his characteristically bold and free genius rebukes some one—either himself, perhaps; or another—for being restrained by false shame:
I fain would speak—I fain would tell—
But shame and fear my utterance quell. ...
If aught of good, if aught of fair,
Thy tongue were labouring to declare—
[Page 325]
Nor shame should dash thy glance, nor fear
Forbid thy suit to reach my ear. 721
I cannot easily say definitely how or why, but it seems to me that even from these fragmentary remains we may infer the writer's character to have been Homeric, to this extent: that both in him and Homer one is conscious of the tone of a seafarer, not derived from report or imagination, but learnt amid perils and almost branded on his very soul. This well suits, I think, with the regular and yet rather vehement metre called after Alcaeus: beginning with swift onset, gradually calming, withdrawing, and finally declining on a purposed close, as if under governance of a steady and experienced pilot. And, further, if there be any musical measure more fitted than all others for the battle-field, I apprehend that Alcaic verse would well accord with it.
Next, as Alcaeus led the way in this severer lyric poetry, so Sappho must be allowed to have been the first writer of lighter and amatory verse: and strains of her muse, sometimes sad and sobbing, sometimes laughing and jesting, find fit expression in the so-styled Sapphic metre, partly 722 broken up in spasmodic bursts, partly borne onward swiftly and evenly as though with a favouring breeze. She, perhaps, of all the Greeks, owes least to Homer. That great poet's moral and masculine genius had little in common with her passionate Aeolic outbursts. It was the belief of all antiquity that her verse enshrines her own only too true story: and if so, it was out of a sad and bitter experience that she yet won a place among primary poets.
Let us now turn to a third poet, whose passion is well attested by that single line of Horace:
Archilochus, with fierce Resentment warmed,
Was with his own severe Iambics armed. 723
[Page 326]
I am not sure that the phrase ‘fierce Resentment’ is not somewhat too severe, if we may fairly draw inferences from the verses that survive. While their tone is indeed harsh, it is, nevertheless, softened by the tenderest feeling for the limitations of our life and for mortal frailty:
Soul! O Soul! when round thee whelming
   Cares like mountain surges close,
Patient bear their mighty rage, and
   With thy strength their strength oppose.
Be a manly breast your bulwark,
   Your defence firm-planted feet:
So the serried line of hostile
   Spears with calm composure meet.
Yet in Victory's golden hour,
   Raise not your proud vaunts too high;
Nor, if vanquished, meanly stooping,
   Pierce with loud lament the sky:
But in prosperous fortune so rejoice,
   and in reverses mourn,
As well knowing what is destined
   For the race of woman born. 724
The spirit in which he looked upon earth and sky appears in another fragment which I especially commend to those critics who deny that the ancient poets were ever successful in such descriptions:
Behold, my Glaucus! how the deep
   Heaves, while the sweeping billows howl,
And round the promontory steep
   The big black clouds portentous scowl,
With thunder fraught and lightning's glare,
While Terror rules and wild Despair. 725
726 He too was of the order of poets who mark a path for themselves not merely by the invention of new metres but also by striking out with force and brilliance a new line
[Page 327]
of thought: he became the forerunner of Satiric verse, as Alcaeus and Sappho led in Lyric.
Then, finally, there is Simonides, who if not the first to write Elegies (Horace, as you know, leaves this doubtful 727 ) was certainly, in the judgement of ancient critics, the greatest among those who wrote in that mournful strain. Like Archilochus, he watched and pondered the changes and chances of mortal life and that varied web of ills which led the ancients, almost in set phrase, to designate mortal men as ‘suffering weaklings’ ( aegri ) 728 ; so watching, not as a fellow sufferer, but as it were from afar with dispassionate vision, he tried to lighten men's cares by such pathetic melodies as taught men by their very sweetness, that the gift of tears is (as has been said 729 the best gift of God to suffering man. Let me cite one or two of them: by their mere style they clearly show traces of Homer's influence:
A land not thine hath shed its dust o'er thee,
A fated wanderer o'er the Pontic sea;
No joys for thee of sweet regretted home;
To sea-girt Chios thou didst never come. 730
Grievous disease! why enviest thou to men
   In lovely youth to stay?
Amercing young Timarchus of his life
   Before his nuptial day?
———
He, in his father's arms embrac'd,
   Thus gasp'd with failing breath,—
‘O Timenorides, forget me not,
   Thy virtuous child, in death.’ 731
Thus much as to the Minor Poets: whom I have thus briefly noticed, in order to make it quite clear that the realms of Greek poetry were not narrowed, but rather more widely extended through Homer's influence: and also that
[Page 328]
732 they might, at the same time, serve to support my view of the true significance and origin of poetry.
We next approach, at length, that other glory of Greece, namely Tragedy, the most grave and austere order of Poetry, which owes its birth to a grave and austere writer—Aeschylus.
[Page ]
LECTURE XVII 733
The manifold debt of Tragedy to Epic, of Aeschylus to Homer. The chief points of difference—the less easy diction and the simpler plot, illustrated by an examination of the plays of Aeschylus. Discussion of the date of each. Aeschylus to be ranked with Homer if only for their common martial vein; illustrations, mainly naval, from the Persae. Proof that this play is not meant to ridicule the Persians, but that it contains the chief elements of true religious wisdom.
It was by a happy inspiration, gentlemen, that Pindar gave the name of Homeridae 734 to those who devoted themselves to the graver order of poetry in his day, using a name which suggests their true ancestry; and by this name he implied, I think, not so much that they imitated Homer, as that a stream of his generous life-blood had subtly flowed into and enriched their genius. So that, while reading their works, we are constantly reminded of their great forerunner: and, however far from Homeric themes, they yet seem unmistakably tinged with a Homeric character: just as travellers in a country recognize natives by their national type of feature.
But we need further to consider how far this dependence 735 upon Homer is true not only in the case of individual poets, but throughout the whole range of Poetry. It is, in truth, very conceivable that just as Homer stimulated other Epic writers, so the whole school of Tragedians in Greece may have had its origin in Epic Poetry itself. Could anything be more entirely consistent with the rapid, vehement movement of Epic than that a change of form should be introduced by which, instead of the poet narrating a story, the persons concerned should act their own story before
[Page 330]
men's eyes with voice and look and gesture? You remember that Aristotle specially commends the Homeric Epics as an example for Tragedy, and lauds Homer as ‘most dramatic’ of all poets. How little do epic and dramatic dialogues, after all, really differ! The only distinction, in fact, is that the former always introduce a speech by some phrase like ‘Then, in reply, he spoke’, ‘To whom then answered’, or the like: while Tragedy, more boldly direct, tells its story at once through the mouths of the characters represented.
It results, that the founder of Tragic drama, whoever he might happen to be, would find much common ground in the Homeric Epics. And that Aeschylus was, in deed and in truth, that founder is acknowledged by the testimony of all ancient critics: if, that is, we dignify by the name of Tragedy, not that motley band of singers and players which Thespis was the first to elaborate, but that graver and more refined art of writing regular plots; which cast aside all light raillery and had a serious aim, and also by addition of a second actor approached more nearly the familiar usage of common life.
And, unquestionably, if we leave aside those accessories which, in the evolution of Tragedy, are especially due to Aeschylus, such as his improvement of the stage, his increase of the number of actors, his diversion of the sportive drama of Thespis to the service of more serious literature, we clearly recognize in reading his dramas that 736 there are very many points of agreement between these two eminent poets: so that without question we may style Aeschylus the most Homeric of the Attic Tragedians. Yet I wish it well understood that this should be construed as meaning that the disciple recalls the master, not by external tricks of expression or gesture, but by a deep-seated sympathy, so much so that the resemblance may not be very obvious to superficial readers. But we shall
[Page 331]
perhaps better appreciate the resemblance between them if I first briefly indicate their main contrasts.
We designate Aeschylus ‘most Homeric’, therefore, not as approaching more nearly than others the Homeric type and standard in diction and rhythm: for indeed his well-known fullness of diction, the force and sonorousness of his expressions, heaped high one upon another, little resemble even in mere sound Homer's vivid swiftness. We can well understand that Aristophanes had fair ground for laughing at him in his well-known lines:
Now for your answer, illustrious architect,
   Founder of lofty theatrical lays!
Patron in chief of our tragical trumperies!
   Open the floodgate of figure and phrase! 737
where he seems to censure not merely high-flown and ambitious diction, but also that too obvious effort and labour which Aeschylus painfully betrays in his narration; he is successful, I admit, in the result, but we are always conscious of the effort he has made. While Homer, on the other hand, is carried forward, as though with favouring gales, in happy swiftness, like Virgil's dove, which
   leaves her callow care, and cleaves the skies:
At first she flutters: but at length she springs
To smoother flight, and shoots upon her wings. 738
But this Aeschylean heaviness (let not the word be taken 739 amiss, I do not mean a slow and dull mind, but simply a certain cumbrous difficulty of expression and manner)—this heaviness, I repeat, showed itself in two ways: sometimes varying and expressing one subject in many ways, sometimes moving slowly step by step towards the goal by means of epithets heaped one on another: and this explains the clever phrase of Aristophanes styling the poet an illustrious ‘architect’. A notable example is afforded
[Page 332]
by the Choric hymn of the Theban maidens lamenting the fate of the house of Oedipus:
I fear her might who doth this whole house wreck,
   The Goddess unlike Gods,
The prophetess of evil all too true,
The Erinnys of thy father's imprecations,
   Lest she fulfil the curse,
   O'er-wrathful, frenzy-fraught,
   The curse of Oedipus,
   Laying his children low. 740
There is nothing trivial or otiose here: every word is fraught with deepest feeling. But it strikes us as crude and uncouth, because it is simply the same thing repeated again and again.
Those familiar and splendid lines concerning the sacrifice of Iphigenia have before now been quoted by a learned scholar in support of the very same criticism:
   And Paean I invoke
As Healer, lest she on the Danai send
   Delays that keep the ships
   Long time with hostile blasts,
So urging on a new, strange sacrifice,
   Unblest, unfestivalled,
By natural growth artificer of strife,
Bearing far other fruit than wife's true fear;
   For there abideth yet,
   Fearful, recurring still,
Ruling the house, full subtle, unforgetting,
   Vengeance for children slain. 741
742 Any one who, arguing from the structure of these lines, ventures to accuse the great poet of not taking pains will do him an injustice. I should rather say, that he errs from taking too great pains, as is often the wont of those who are so wholly intent on their subject that they take little account of refinements of phrase and measure: their one
[Page 333]
aim and object is to express fully and freely what they have in their minds.
Further, the undoubted facts that the plots of his plays are rather simple than subtle: that the great issues hang on the action of very few persons: that in Aeschylus' hands the course of fortune is wont to drag, being little varied by change or reversal—all point to the same conclusion: they show us that the writer had not a ready style: that his range, as it were, both as to men and subjects, was limited; but that, in whatsoever he had once determined to represent, whether story or character, no possible care, no subtle insight, on his part, are ever to seek.
Let us review, gentlemen, the general scheme of each of his plays which remain to us. It is marvellous out of what slight material and furniture such weighty plots are so powerfully wrought. We shall endeavour, moreover, to take the plays in the probable order of their production; for this order, once rightly grasped, may very materially assist our judgement.
First in order, then, scholars place the Persae : a play which Aeschylus is said to have produced in the seventh year after the battle of Plataea, 743 while the contest for maritime supremacy in the Aegean still continued. And with this date the motive and tendency of the play itself agree excellently, breathing as it does the spirit of war, especially of naval war. Now, if we reckon up the characters, 744 we shall find that the conduct of the Persae is almost wholly in the hands of no more than three actors—the Chorus, Atossa, and the shade of Darius. For little account need be taken here of Xerxes himself, who does nothing but pour out a torrent of grief. And if we allow that this is explained, in some degree at least, by the hitherto undeveloped and primitive form of Tragic Drama, to which
[Page 334]
Aeschylus himself was the first to add a second player, nevertheless the poet himself, I think, must be held responsible in so far as he never attempted to vary this simplicity by new scenic devices, but was entirely content to set vividly before us his two or three characters, worked up in perfect form. To him too it is due that the play is composed only of bare narrative, with no problem to solve, no sudden surprise to interest us. Only, as is hinted from the outset, the ‘pathos’ of the disaster deepens at every step until at last the certain news is brought and all is turned to mourning and to woe.
I now come to the Prometheus Vinctus : for we are told that the same tetralogy included both the Persae and Prometheus the Firebearer , 745 and as the latter is, in a sense, the first part of the Vinctus , I apprehend it could not have had long priority. The general style of this play, so far as it survives for us, is almost identical with that of the Persae , proceeding from first to last in one even tenor, without either any sudden change of event or unlooked-for tangle of motive: I confess that it is distinguished by a richer stage, first by the appearance of the sea-nymphs, then of Neptune, and finally, of the restless, wandering Io. But truly, in my judgement, Aeschylus seems in this play to give himself wider range than anywhere throughout his work, and to approach more nearly the Homeric ease and 746 swiftness: though, in spite of this, the utmost simplicity of plot is maintained throughout. The actors enter and depart, the tragic situation never alters.
And, perhaps, the same qualities are even more clearly still exhibited in the splendid tragedy styled The Seven against Thebes. We are unable to fix the exact date of its production: though the scholiast on Aristophanes 747 tells us that it was written after the Persae. In this, Eteocles by himself alone sustains the burden of the whole
[Page 335]
play, and to such a degree, indeed, that it impresses us less as a drama than as a sort of tragic pageant exhibited before him. No one appears in person; Amphiaraus, Capaneus, and the rest may be said to come forward, but only in the words of the messenger. In short, the poet here so completely indulges his characteristic simplicity that he has all but bereft his play of dramatic form.
As for the appearance on the stage at the poem's very close, of Antigone and her sister, and the creation of a new interest by the intermingling of their grief for the loss of their brothers with the general rejoicings at the victory which saved the city, I think that Aeschylus was here rather following the manner of Sophocles (who began about this time to rule the stage) than his own taste and judgement.
And yet here too, at the end of the play, I recognize a true Aeschylean touch, in that we are left still anxious in mind, the issue uncertain and incomplete. It is like hearing music when the harmony fails at some point; the sound remains as it were suspended in air, without duly returning, rounded and complete, to earth. Consider whether the final lines of the Prometheus are not of this character also:
Such is the storm from Zeus
That comes as working fear,
In terrors manifest. 748
O Mother venerable!
O Aether! rolling round
The common light of all,
See'st thou what wrongs I bear? 749
Nor is the conclusion of the Choephorae much more complete:
Where will it end? where will it cease at last,
The mighty Até dread,
Lulled into slumber deep? 750
[Page 336]
However, the case of the Prometheus , the Agamemnon , and the Choephorae seems somewhat different from that of the other plays: inasmuch as each of these three is one of the earlier plays of a trilogy, not a complete tragedy in itself. So that it is natural for them to involve something beyond them for completion. But we have no evidence of anything of the kind in connexion with The Seven against Thebes. And so we may, as I said, infer that its close is formed on the model of Sophocles. We say nothing at present of any more weighty and higher lesson which the poet may have intended to convey by constructing his story on this plan: the conclusion stands that we may quote this play too as evidence of the simplicity of Aeschylus.
What shall we say of that most beautiful drama, The Suppliants ? for this has been placed next in date to The Seven against Thebes by what seems to me a probable and almost certain conjecture. For though the ancient critics, as far as I know, are silent on the point, we are not without grounds for inference. We have only to bear in mind that Aeschylus, like later dramatists, especially those of Athens, had regard now and again to the political circumstances of the moment in planning his plays. It is perfectly clear, moreover, from the mere outline of The Suppliants , that the writer had mainly two regions of the earth in view—Egypt and the coast of Argolis: and it is also unquestioned that, during the life of Aeschylus, the thoughts and cares of the Athenian people were much occupied with those two countries. Four years before his death there occurred 751 the Egyptian revolt, when Inarus attacked the Persians, 752 and, as we all know, the Athenians at once intervened with a considerable force. Thus Egypt was on every Athenian's lips, and the populace would eagerly fasten on anything relating to that quarter. The same year saw the
[Page 337]
commencement of the notable quarrel which broke out between the Spartans and the Athenians on account of their differences at the siege of Ithome in the Messenian war: 753 and this caused the Athenians, in their indignation, to intrigue for an alliance with Argos. May we not suppose, as suggested by a learned scholar, 754 that Aeschylus having met with a story which was concerned both with Egypt and Argos, adapted it, with little difficulty, to the existing political situation?—by this means complimenting and conciliating the Argives and also pleasing such of his countrymen as had either made the Egyptian campaign or had lost friends in the war there.
I certainly think that the simplicity ( ἀφέλΕια ) of the poem itself agrees admirably with this theory. Does it not much avail towards soothing men's ruffled sensibilities if, not by any artifice in the narrative, nor after a violent struggle or fierce excitement, but merely by the equable course of the plot, they are brought to a conclusion to which human law, divine righteousness, and the sacred rights of suppliants alike point? Of character or ἦθος , as the critics call it, I should almost say this play exhibits none. It is assuredly so constituted in this respect as to depict classes of men generally; not particular individuals. Even the daughters of Danaus are not individuals, but types of all women who are or might ever be suppliants: so Pelasgus and the Argive people are types of monarchs and of popular crowds. Think, too, of the simplicity of the story, the absence of all intricacy in it. The maidens approach the shore, invoke the protection of the Argives, are hospitably received, are saved from the menace of their pursuers, and regain their freedom. There is no place here for intricate problems or ingenious solutions. Those who only care for these subtleties 755 will, I think, find perusal of The Suppliants simply tedious.
[Page 338]
There remains the most splendid set of all the plays—the Oresteian trilogy: I admit that the texture of this is of a less simple pattern; yet it should be remembered that Aeschylus produced it almost at the very end of his career, and thus when his supremacy was not unquestioned and he found Sophocles his successful rival. It may well be, therefore, that he changed his manner not so much on his own judgement, as in deference to the times and to the taste of the Greek stage—if indeed we are to say it was really changed. But after all, what reason is there, I would ask, for holding even these plays anywise wanting in Aeschylus' characteristic simplicity? There is certainly a larger number of actors on the stage, and they are severally more carefully distinguished: there is greater boldness in varying the feelings appealed to, the places described, and the fortunes of the actors. But even so, how widely removed are all these from the clever artifices of his successors! Only compare the Choephorae with the Electra of Sophocles; any one can see and appreciate that the latter is full of arts and devices from which the other is wholly free.
In short, we may take it for granted that the style of Aeschylus is more learned and more severe than that of Homer, yet also as a rule more rigid and unelastic: and this may be inferred not only by taking account of his plays and their characters, but by the further fact that our good Aeschylus very rarely varies his cadences or metrical forms. Take eighty or a hundred lines of his iambics at random and compare them with a similar number taken from Sophocles (even more would this be the case with Aristophanes); and it will be surprising indeed if by mere 756 test of ear the rhythm of the later poets is not manifestly lighter in movement and more readily varied to the writer's theme.
It may be asked in what sense, then, can Aeschylus be
[Page 339]
called the most Homeric of poets? I answer shortly that it is because he takes delight in the same things as Homer does, and like Homer was wont to throw himself wholeheartedly into the affairs and business of life. This is most obvious and recognizable in his treatment of military and, still more, of naval affairs. And what in Homer's case we can only conjecturally infer is established in the case of Aeschylus by the unquestionable testimony of ancient writers: that he was highly distinguished as a soldier in the most warlike era of Greece. His own renown is associated with the immortal names of Marathon, Salamis, and Plataea, 757 as the noted marbles still preserved within these walls bear witness: 758 and so did that painting of the battle of Marathon which, according to Pausanias, 759 adorned the theatre at Athens: we have, moreover, the lines inscribed on the poet's tomb: 760
Athenian Aeschylus, Euphorio's son,
   Buried in Gela's fields, these lines declare:
His deeds are register'd at Marathon,
   Known to the deep-hair'd Mede who met him there, 761
—and this inscription was said, on the authority of Pausanias, to have been written by the poet himself.
But there is no need to labour the question: for nothing about him is better known than that at the very time of his life when he betook himself to the stage and the writing of Tragedy, he, with his two brothers, was exposed to the sternest martial toil and danger. This may well be the very reason why there is generally a graver and loftier ring in the work of Aeschylus than in the other great Tragedians. For it was no ordinary or trivial contest that was then impending, no mere worthless crown in the games for which he was striving, but the times were pre-eminently 762
[Page 340]
of a character calculated to rouse and urge towards great deeds the soul of a great poet. And perhaps this explains his comparative inattention to smaller details: for one is conscious of a kind of lofty carelessness such as might not ill become soldiers at a time of peril to their country.
But leaving surmise, all historical authorities prove that Aeschylus saw active service, and his poems themselves, even on superficial perusal merely, seem redolent, as it were, of war and arms. They show him often glorying in the circumstances, first that he is himself an Athenian, and secondly that Athens had so happily won for herself victory and freedom. I am of course thinking here chiefly of the Persae , for (whatever verdict may be passed as to the rest) that play unquestionably, and without any disguise, bears witness to a mind keenly interested in affairs of State and martial cares; so much so that Mr. Mitford, well accustomed to weigh historic evidence, has no hesitation in treating it as material for history. 763 How easily we can suppose the question of the chorus of old men in the Persae spoken by some old campaigner:
Is it the archer's bow that wins the day?
                     Or does the strength prevail
Of iron point that heads the spear's strong shaft? 764
Thus they still maintain their old campaigning instincts so far as to indicate nationality by characteristic weapons and manner of combat, and are eagerly curious not merely as to which army, but which manner of warfare, proved superior. Note, too, that in their laudation of the reign of Darius they begin with military prowess:
For first we showed the world our noble hosts;
                     And laws of tower-like strength
Directed all things: and our backward march
After our wars unhurt, unsuffering led
                     Our prospering armies home. 765
[Page 341]
Again, there is the description of Xerxes' dispersed and 766 retreating legions risking the passage of the frozen river:
                                         And after that the host
Ceased from its instant calling on the Gods,
It crosses o'er the glassy, frozen stream;
And whosoe'er set forth before the rays
Of the bright God were shed abroad, was saved:
For soon the glorious sun with burning blaze
Reached the mid-stream and warmed it with its flame,
And they, confused, each on the other fell.
Blest then was he whose soul most speedily
Breathed out its life. 767
This, unless I mistake, is the language of one not altogether a stranger to the very experiences related: or at any rate of one who thoroughly understands the thoughts and emotions of soldiers striving against such fortunes. For in plight like this the hearts of truly brave men, in some sort sink and droop, though at other times undaunted and unmoved even in the supreme hazard of actual combat.
But, after all, these are qualities of a soldier and landsman. The peculiar and especial glory of Aeschylus, on the other hand, as became an Athenian and a member of one of the noblest families ( ἐκ τω̂ν Εὐρατριδω̂ν ), was connected with the sea and with maritime warfare. Hear first with what force of utterance and beauty of choicest measure and verse do the Persian elders claim first honours for their country by land or sea:
For Fate of old, by the high Gods' decree,
Prevailed, and on the Persians laid this task,
                     Wars with the crash of towers,
And set the surge of horsemen in array,
And the fierce sack that lays a city low.
So far of war by land: and truly these are splendid
[Page 342]
verses; but note, pray, how when once he comes to sea warfare the poet is, as it were, carried beyond himself:
But now they learnt to look on ocean plains,
The wide sea hoary with the violent blast,
                     768 Waxing o'er confident
In cables formed of many a slender strand
And rare device of transport for the host. 769
One should be a genuine seaman to sympathize fully with Aeschylus here. Otherwise he will with difficulty, if at all, understand why a person need learn how to gaze into the depths of the sea: and will fail rightly to picture what is meant by an ‘ocean plain’, a plain, that is, covered with coral and seaweed.
But, in this connexion, the speech of the messenger describing the battle of Salamis stands pre-eminent; and indeed is so well known that it will be sufficient to cite here a few lines merely, lines in which the gallant poet gives freest scope to his seamanship—if I may say so. A good example is the passage where the Persians range themselves at night to blockade the Athenian shore and the Grecian fleet:
And they, not mutinous, but prompt to serve,
Then made their supper ready, and each sailor
Fastened his oar around true-fitting thole. 770
Such, too, the account of the wretched victims battered and struggling blindly with waves and rocks, who
Hard by the island where the doves abound,
Beat here and there upon the rocky shore ...
And they, as men spear tunnies, or a haul
Of other fishes, with the shafts of oars
Or spars of wrecks went smiting, cleaving down;
And bitter groans and wailings overspread
The wide sea-waves ...
[Page 343]
                     Alas, alas! sea-tossed
The bodies of our friends, and much disstained:
Thou say'st that they are floated to and fro
   On planks that drifted onward. ...
   Torn by the whirling flood, ah me!
   Their carcases are gnawed, alas!
By the dumb brood of stainless sea, woe! woe! 771
We may add to these the following lines in which, more 772 than anywhere else, the poet expresses the feeling so characteristic of a veteran sailor as to the unconquerable power and force of the sea:
Yea, there is none so tried as, withstanding the flood of the mighty,
To keep within steadfast bounds that wave of ocean resistless. 773
Do not, however, imagine that, when Aeschylus wrote thus in honour of his country's victories, he was ridiculing the misfortunes of the Persians: though scholars have so maintained. 774 But I would ask, how possibly can ridicule and insolence consist with his invariably respectful and chivalrous references to the Persians, to Darius, and even Xerxes himself? As for the Persian people, notably, he describes them as pre-eminently rich, not only in worldly possessions, but in military and civil virtues. This, I think, is the very purpose of the gorgeous language and rhythm with which he begins his play:
The king's great host, destroying cities mighty,
Hath to the land beyond the sea passed over,
Crossing the straits of Athamantid Helle,
                     On raft by ropes secured,
And thrown his path, compact of many a vessel,
As yoke upon the neck of mighty ocean.
Of populous Asia thus the mighty ruler
'Gainst all the land his God-sent host directeth
[Page 344]
In two divisions, both by land and water,
                     Trusting the chieftains stern,
The men who drive the host to fight, relentless—
775 He, sprung from gold-born race, a hero god-like.
Glancing with darkling look, and eyes as of ravening dragon,
(this last simile being no doubt intended to suggest, as it were, the hereditary mien and expression of the Persian royal house)
With many a hand, and many a ship, and Syrian chariot driving.
He upon spearmen renowned brings battle of conquering arrows.
And a line or two further on:
Hard to fight is the host of the Persians, the people stout-hearted.
Yet ah! what mortal can ward the craft of the God all-deceiving? 776
These are assuredly not the expressions of one who ridicules or deliberately disparages his foe, but rather of poet who feels that the victory of his own country is enhanced and set off by generous praise of its rivals.
And there remains, too, the figure of Darius, summoned from the grave, and put forward by the dramatist as a kind of symbol and picture of Persia's former glory; his person is invested with a religious, almost a divine halo: this appears both in the rites which usher his arrival from the lower world and in his entrance on the stage, as well as in his own utterances, which are full of paternal and royal dignity. Observe how affectionately the Persian nobles—his own former comrades—welcome their lost king:
Why was Dareios erst so free from harm,
                     First bowman of the State,
The leader whom the men of Susa loved? 777
[Page 345]
Let me be pardoned for noting here that this phrase 778 ‘free from harm’ ( ἀβλαβής ) must not be pressed too strictly, as if implying that the prowess of Darius had never exposed the Persians to defeat: nor, similarly, the boast of the chorus:
                                         And our backward march
After our wars unhurt, unsuffering led
                     Our prospering armies home. 779
Some have reproached Aeschylus as failing here in historic accuracy. But I think that the Scythian retreat or even Marathon itself should hardly avail to dim the lustre of his many years of peace and of victory.
But to return to the presentation of Darius. Could the lofty respect which is due to venerable and sacred priests be better expressed than in the chorus where the elders invoke and summon from the grave the royal shade?
                     Doth he, the blest one, hear,
                     The King like Gods in power,
                     Hear me, as I send forth
                     My cries in barbarous speech,
———
                     Ah, doth he hear below?
                     But thou, O Earth, and ye,
                     The other Lords of those
                     Beneath the grave that dwell:
                     Grant that the god-like one
                     May come from out your home,
                     The Persians' mighty God,
                     In Susa's palace born;
                     Send him, I pray you, up,
                     The like of whom the soil
                     Of Persia never hid.
Dear was our chief, and dear to us his tomb,
                     For dear the life it hides;
Aidoneus, O Aidoneus, send him forth,
Thou who dost lead the dead to Earth again,
Yea, send Dareios. ... What a king was he! 780
[Page 346]
Then with what feeling do they picture to themselves the very tiara and slippers, the ancient symbols of royal splendour, with which he will appear:
Come to the summit of sepulchral mound,
                     781 Lifting thy foot encased
                     In slipper saffron-dyed,
                     And giving to our view
                     Thy royal tiara's crest. 782
And observe, too, that when he issues forth they receive him with awful reverence, hardly daring even to utter a word in his presence:
                     I fear to look on thee,
                     Fear before thee to speak,
With all the awe of thee I felt of old. 783
In short, let any one earnestly and carefully examine this one episode of Darius, and he will be little inclined to believe that the play was constructed so as to enable the victors to ridicule the conquered: I will not even dwell on Atossa's noble self-control, which it would be assuredly impossible to reconcile with so arrogant a purpose.
The further argument that, in order to insult Xerxes, he is brought on as a fugitive, with his garments rent, seems to overlook the manners of the ancient world, especially of Eastern nations: for with them, as we learn from the Hebrew Scriptures, rent garments, not a change to mourning dress, are the acknowledged method of expressing a calamity.
Again, it is objected that, more than once, names of kings and leaders are piled one on another with harsh and barbarous assonance, for the mere end of exciting mirth and jest in the gallery. But in all likelihood these are real names of the Persian nobles which had become perfectly well known to Aeschylus, if to any Athenian, and it is just as fitting that they should appear on his stage
[Page 347]
as that in Homer's catalogue both Trojans and Greeks should be enumerated. The array of Persian names certainly lacks the Homeric grace, but seems nevertheless well calculated to display the splendour of Xerxes' rule, marshalling in his single army the warriors of so many clans and nations whose boundary limits thus mark the 784 empire of the great king.
In conclusion, I am far from denying that those fragmentary dirges (or κόμματα , as they are called) with which Xerxes and the Chorus, towards the end of the play, excite each other in turn to bursts of weeping, do rather jar upon our ears. Yet it is with difficulty that I can be induced to believe that they were designedly introduced to move the laughter of the house, seeing that bewailings and lamentations in just the same style appear in other plays where there is not the least question of ridicule. And in truth it seems to me that all such wailing dirges are introduced in the interest of the singers rather than of the poet. Little pains are spent on the words; the rhythm and tunes are carefully thought out.
It comes, then, to this, that in order to maintain successfully that Aeschylus held up the Persians to ridicule, a critic cannot appeal to particular lines; he will need to show that a sort of bitter irony runs through the whole play. Now first of all this is pure and indeed gratuitous conjecture, since impartial perusal affords not the slightest ground for it. Next, it need hardly be said how utterly foreign such a tone would be to the character and genius of this gravest of writers. That Aeschylus, not merely a poet but a philosopher of the strictest sect, should jest, like an Aristophanes, on a subject which involved the fate and fortune of the Athenian people, indeed of the whole world! That he, soldier as he was, and crowned with military glory, should flout the brave warriors conquered and driven in flight by his own aid! And beyond all,
[Page 348]
that he, a devoted worshipper of the Gods, and a sincerely religious man, should childishly play and trifle at a time of thanksgiving (for Tragedy was always a part of a religious festival), when thanks were due to the Gods for the preservation of temples, homes, and indeed the State itself!
785 Indeed, the case is so clear that it is hardly necessary to waste time over it: but the fact is, there exist certain shallow and cynical critics, more numerous nowadays than any one who truly and worthily loves Goodness and her handmaid Poetry can well approve; they are men who not merely jest themselves, but, worse than that, declare that every one treats everything as a jest; they cannot conceive the possibility of serious treatment of any subject, and it is on their account that I have made these comments: since such men are wont to take special pleasure when they find, as they suppose, some great poet idly trifling with serious affairs.
But as I have chanced upon religion, let us see whether the general scheme and construction of the Persae do not simply spring out of a religious sense of a Divine Power, watching closely the affairs of men. To begin with, the poet says so himself: he traces, in so many words, the Persian downfall to the ruined temples and desecrated altars of the Grecian deities:
                     and there of ills
The topmost crown awaits them, penalty
Of wanton outrage and of godless thoughts:
For they to Hellas coming held not back
In awe from plundering sculptured forms of Gods
And burning down their temples: and laid low
Are altars, and the shrines of Gods o'erthrown,
E'en from their base. They therefore having wrought
Deeds evil, now are suffering, and will suffer
Evil not less, and not as yet is seen
E'en the bare groundwork of the ills, but still
They grow up to completeness. 786
[Page 349]
Then it is clear that Atossa in her dialogues with the Chorus and with the shade of Darius shows herself anxious to preserve the favour of the Gods and to appease their wrath. To exhibit religion and goodness as the source and mainspring of all human affairs is, in truth, the very characteristic of Aeschylus. And so, when it fell to his lot to produce a play in honour of recent Athenian triumphs he makes it full of fighting and of battles; full of the shouts of sailors and the clashings of ships: he shows his knowledge of the scene, his love of his country, his acquaintance with affairs of State: but still before everything 787 indulges his own instincts, and extends his main care and reverence towards the Gods above, the shades below, and ceremonial observances. I pass over, intentionally, for the present, many like instances which will probably be more conveniently dealt with at a later stage of our consideration of his dramas. Here I will ask you simply to note the character of Atossa, with its wonderful combination of the dignity of a queen, the tenderness of a mother, the sorrow of a widow. Note this character, and note also one striking utterance of hers. When the event which she foreboded had become evident and beyond doubt, she neither gives herself to tears and lamentation nor nurses her grief in that silence which is bitterer than tears: but, as becomes a wise and good woman, forthwith betakes herself to the altars and protection of the Gods: nor, as might one of ordinary piety, does she refrain from vows and petitions as if they had so far been offered in vain:
Yet since your counsel pointed to that course,
I to the Gods will first my prayer address.
And then with gifts to Earth and to the Dead,
Bringing the chrism from my store, I'll come.
For our past ills, I know, 'tis all too late,
But for the future, I may hope, will dawn
A better fortune! 788
[Page 350]
Such a spirit is not far from that trusting Faith which we, taught by Divine revelation, rate so highly.
But to proceed. After a while, with the same calm bearing as when she set forth, Atossa returns, bringing the offerings for the dead. She does not allow herself to be overborne by the sharp grief which weighs upon her:
So now all these disasters from the Gods
Seem in mine eyes filled full of fear and dread,
And in mine ears rings cry unpaeanlike,
So great a dread of all has seized my soul:
And therefore now, without or chariot's state
Or wonted pomp, have I thus issued forth
789 From out my palace, to my son's sire bringing
Libations loving, gifts propitiatory,
Meet for the dead. 790
In this speech that word ‘loving’ ( ρρΕυμΕνΕîς ) twice used in this connexion (for a little earlier the Chorus had advised ‘And ask thy husband ... with loving mood [ ρρΕυμΕνω̂ς ] from 'neath the earth’, l. 219)—that word ‘loving’, I say, finely and naturally suggests one who addresses herself to a religious duty in a spirit neither slavish, nor distracted with anxiety, nor crushed and overburdened with fear; we see calm in her face, humility in her look, resignation in her heart.
One final remark: it is an entirely mistaken view of some critics, that when compared with Sophocles and Euripides, Aeschylus, while he surpasses them both in his treatment of dreadful scenes and supernatural apparitions and all that tends to excite terror, yet is unsuccessful when sweetness and delicate sympathy are demanded. On the contrary, we see, in the single instance of Atossa, a picture of sweetness and calm which cannot be surpassed. But here, as always, average men exhibit precisely the same qualities in their criticism on an ancient poet as in their
[Page 351]
judgement on the religious questions of the day. They, at once, pay attention to two or three striking features, which are vehemently and noisily put forward, but all that is quiet, calm, and truly reverent they neglect. Yet whether sweetness or dignity be aimed at, true and genuine poetry will be essentially distinguished by quietness and calm.
But I hope to speak at another opportunity of Aeschylus' religious views, and at the same time to consider the sources from which the peerless poet probably derived them.
[Page ]
791 LECTURE XVIII
Theology of Aeschylus considered, mainly as it may be gathered from the ‘Prometheus Bound’. It involves: (1) A keen sense of the wretched plight of the human race. (2) Belief in a Divine Providence—yet not in fatalism: as appears by his conception of the characters of the Eumenides and the whole scheme of the Oresteian Trilogy. (3) Grave apprehension whether pessimism be not well founded. (4) But nevertheless a faint trust in final good based on a certain sympathy which seems to obtain between poor humanity and the natural universe.
While Aeschylus in the play called The Persae is directly concerned with war and military affairs, he nevertheless is not slow to seize any opportunity to impress his religious views: inasmuch as Xerxes' attack upon Greece almost had the quality of a religious war. As a matter of fact, the Persians, guided by the teaching of their Magi, did to their shame destroy the Grecian temples, holding in deadly hatred all sacred places, sacrifices, and images. Further, Xerxes himself, filled with overbearing arrogance, acted, both at Athos and at the Hellespont, as one who both on land or sea was more powerful than the Gods: so that nothing was more natural for a poet with religious feeling than to maintain the claims of a divine providence and vindicate its supremacy over human affairs.
792 But what Aeschylus added, incidentally, as it were, and of his own pleasure, in writing the Persae , concerning religion and the scope of sacred things, was of the very essence of his subject in nearly all the other plays, and especially in the Prometheus , as that play turns throughout on the secret interdependence of things divine and human: so that the opinions of Aeschylus not merely as a poet, but as a philosopher, concerning Gods and men must be sought, primarily and chiefly, there.
[Page 353]
The first point which every one is bound to note is this, that the general conditions of human life are exhibited in colours far from cheerful—indeed, as being as sad as possible. Jupiter is represented to us, not as a Benign and Supreme Deity, but as a sort of insolent, evil-disposed, spiteful enemy of the human race, in every possible way and to the fullest possible extent. Prometheus, on the other hand, the champion of man, is tried and tortured by every conceivable cruelty, and simply because of this very championship, and not, as most writers represent, because by wicked fraud he brought the gift of fire down to earth. In fine, the human race was so regarded by the powers of heaven that it was solely due to Prometheus that it was not utterly destroyed once and for ever. Prometheus saved them indeed from this destruction, yet he could only redeem them from punishment at the cost of unspeakable agony: and the redeemed race had still to face dreadful and tremendous conflict with the angered deity. Jupiter, says Aeschylus:
                                         for unhappy mortals
Had no regard, and all the present race
Will'd to extirpate, and to form anew.
None, save myself, oppos'd his will: I dar'd:
And boldly pleading sav'd them from destruction,
Sav'd them from sinking to the realms of night.
For this offence I bend beneath these pains,
Dreadful to suffer, piteous to behold. 793
I merely mention in passing a thought which is wont to 794 occupy very many of us, that the one way of true salvation is, in some degree, divinely foreshadowed by a story like this. To begin with, the world is given over to the power of a relentless tyrant, who, while flushed with recent triumph, yet feels no secure confidence for the future, and therefore tries every harmful scheme to work the destruction
[Page 354]
of the human race. There is, nevertheless, a vague underlying trust that some future amelioration of their unhappy lot is in store for mortals, not through any power of their own, but by the might of some one or other of the deities. Finally, whosoever it be of the celestial deities who shall at last resolve himself to take up man's cause, he has to meet terrible punishment, to pay the penalty of this untimely love for man in basest contempt, in grief, and awful agony. If all these things are seriously pondered, it is little wonder if some thought of that sacred scheme and divine ‘economy’ by which the true and living God willed our salvation should spontaneously suggest itself to the reader. Certainly, the Fathers of the Church, when treating of dim and unconscious testimony borne to the Truth by the Spirits who presided over earlier faiths, or by the poets who immortalized them, are wont to quote the Prometheus as the most striking instance. But, as I said I dismiss this for the present; by no means as doubting or denying it to have been divinely ordered that these poetic or Pythagorean imaginations should be evidently in harmony with true belief; but because we are now treating of Aeschylus' own opinions, not of the secret counsels of the Most High, which controlled him, no doubt, but without his conscious knowledge.
Nor do I dwell upon a view which commended itself to a writer of weightiest authority—Lord Bacon 795 : namely, that the whole story of Prometheus should be construed as a philosophical allegory, meant to illustrate the growth 796 of the arts which mainly support and comfort man's life. Certainly (to adopt the words of Virgil) ‘the great Sire himself would not have the path of tillage’ (and so of other arts) ‘to be a smooth one’ ...
Jove added venom to the viper's brood,
And swell'd, with raging storms, the peaceful flood;
[Page 355]
Commission'd hungry wolves t'infest the fold,
And shook from oaken leaves the liquid gold;
Remov'd from human reach the cheerful fire,
And from the rivers bade the wine retire. 797
To put it briefly; on this view, it is held that the harshness of Jove typifies the conditions of human existence, seeing that Nature hides away, as if it were in dark and distant corners, many things that make for our use and enjoyment. Prometheus, on the other hand, on this same view, what else does he indicate but that divinely-given inventive power by whose aid weak mortals have ingeniously discovered so many useful expedients? And since through all the ages this faculty has carried with it the torture implied in anxious thought and in many misgivings and anxieties; and the more so the further the ground and reason of things are traced back (according to the scriptural declaration that ‘he that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow’ 798 ), we therefore have Prometheus represented as bound to a rock, laden with manacles and daily tortured by a cruel vulture's beak. But we cannot dwell on this to-day, and indeed for my part I do not think that Aeschylus was much concerned with such problems of natural philosophy. It may well be, indeed, that the first deviser of the whole story of Prometheus had in mind nothing beyond useful arts and the conditions of this our daily life: but that Aeschylus himself had a graver and higher intent, I make no doubt whatever.
Still less do I hold with those who would maintain that both in this and in other plays the great poet is expressing a political theory, and therefore that his main theme is the duties of kings and leaders. I quite admit that not 799 unfrequently precepts are scattered through his poems, such as well befit a distinguished citizen of a free State: especially at a period when the Persian storm had scarcely
[Page 356]
passed, or indeed had not passed at all. For instance, there are many utterances concerning tyrannical power unrestrained by law:
                     I know that Zeus is hard,
And keeps the Right supremely to
himself: 800
All things bring toil except for Gods to reign:
For none but Zeus can boast of freedom true: 801
And Zeus, by his own laws his sway maintaining,
                     Shows to the elder Gods
                     A mood of haughtiness. 802
Again, we are frequently warned of the danger that fresh-won victory will make the victor harsh and cruel:
And many groans and wailings profitless
Thy lips shall utter: for the mind of Zeus
Remains inexorable. Who holds a power
But newly gained is ever stern of mood. 803
Similar, too, is the acute observation that a tyrant's mind is keen to alter and destroy:
New pilots now o'er high Olympos rule,
   And with new-fashioned laws
   Zeus reigns, down-trampling right,
And all the ancient powers He sweeps away. 804
And what must we infer when not a few such lines as these are found in the Persae also? Atossa, you will recollect, with much difficulty restrains herself from ill-omened words:
Such terrors it has been my lot to see,
And yours to hear: for be ye sure, my son,
If he succeed, will wonder-worthy prove:
But if he fail, still irresponsible
He to the people, and in either case,
He, should he but return, is sovereign
still. 805
[Page 357]
If I do not mistake, she openly and clearly confesses 806 the very fear she wishes to deny, or why this mention of responsibility to the people?
Again, in another passage the Chorus foretells that Asia will shortly be free from subjection:
And throughout all Asia's borders
None now own the sway of Persia,
Nor bring any more their tribute,
Owning sway of sovereign master.
Low upon the Earth, laid prostrate,
Is the strength of our great monarch.
No more need men keep in silence
Tongues fast bound: for now the people
May with freedom speak at pleasure:
For the yoke of power is broken. 807
The shade of Darius apprehends something even more serious:
Nay, was not my poor son oppressed with madness?
And much I fear lest all my heaped-up treasure
Become the spoil and prey of the first comer. 808
Many like examples might be quoted: their force, however, is such as in no case amounts to evidence that Aeschylus wrote as a mere Athenian wholly occupied with the city and public affairs. Such examples do not touch the heart of the story: unless, indeed, any one chooses to think (such is the poor and perverted criticism of some men) that the splendid conceptions of an inspired poet are to be reduced to mere everyday life and the commonplace concerns of this earth.
So I return to my original point; Aeschylus was moved by that feeling for humanity which led Virgil constantly to speak of mortals as ‘sick of heart’ and ‘unhappy’: but at the same time, we must hold that Aeschylus was not to be ranked as a fatalist. Some recent critics, 809
[Page 358]
undoubtedly of great authority, have maintained the contrary: they hold that the essential quality of Greek Tragedy lies in ascribing all events to a kind of pre-ordained necessity, which, as it were, carries men away, and conducts them to a dark and gloomy end:
Thus wander travellers in woods by night,
By the moon's doubtful and malignant light,
When Jove in dusky clouds involves the skies,
And the faint crescent shoots by fits before their eyes. 810
So that, according to this theory, the whole power and beauty of Tragedy is especially centred in the one fact that though the road may be uncertain, yet all things and persons tend towards a decreed and certain end. The interest of the spectators is excited to see, not what the actors in each play may do, but in what manner, and by what stages, unflinching and inevitable Fate will track its victims down.
Now while I quite allow that all such tragedy is surrounded with a certain mysterious gloom, highly congenial to the art, yet at the same time I strenuously deny that Aeschylus was one of those who hold that the Divine Power works and acts towards men utterly regardless of their right or wrong. Let us see how Prometheus sets forth the sum and essence of this question. After declaring, at length, what great and clever devices he had himself planned in order to help mankind, he still denies, as becomes a religious man, that it lay within his own genius or strength to free himself completely from his chains and bondage. The Chorus of Maidens encourages the hope that one who had with such skill relieved the sufferings of mankind might also in good time free himself from his dreadful lot:
Nay, be not thou to men so over-kind,
While thou thyself art in sore evil case;
[Page 359]
For I am sanguine that thou too, released
From bonds, shalt be as strong as Zeus himself. 811
Prometheus therefore bids the maidens to be calm and of 812 good heart about his fate, yet none the less to hope nothing from his own art or skill, but ascribe all to the power of some unknown Deity:
It is not thus that Fate's decree is fixed;
But I, long crushed with twice ten thousand woes
And bitter pains, shall then escape my bonds;
Art is far weaker than Necessity. 813
Observe how reverently and prudently they at once reply with the question:
                     Who then is ruler of Necessity?
This warns us from thinking that the poet is speaking not of a Divine Providence, but of a blind destiny and some immanent necessity. The reply of Prometheus is solemn indeed, and of profound meaning, and derives from the innermost sanctities of the religion of the ancient world:
Fates triple-formed, Erinnyes unforgetting.
Clearly this is emphasized simply for one thing—that none may conclude, from this reference to necessity, that there is any suggestion of a kind of fatal power, independent of Deity or personality. Nay, Aeschylus plainly tells us that all events are under control of a double band of Goddesses—the Fates and the Furies, and accordingly that the Parcae or Fates declare and typify a divine will untrammelled by hindrances, and proof against chance and change, while the Eumenides or Furies prove that the same will is not only devoted to perfect justice, but also to all that is equitable and kindly.
These Eumenides, when there is question of the punishment inflicted on wicked men, are more properly called
[Page 360]
Erinnyes. And no doubt they appear most often among the ancients under this name: and this, I suppose, simply because, in face of the fall and degeneracy of mankind, 814 Justice is more commonly concerned with the punishment of crimes than with recognition of the meritorious deeds of good men. Certainly Aeschylus himself, in the magnificent choral song which they chant as they pursue Orestes, represents them as laying claim to this as their chief prerogative:
Come, then, let us form our chorus;
Since 'tis now our will to utter
Melody of song most hateful,
Telling how our band assigneth
All the lots that fall to mortals;
And we boast that we are righteous:
Not on one who pure hands lifteth
Falleth from us any anger,
But his life he passeth scatheless;
But to him who sins like this man
And his blood-stained hands concealeth,
Witnesses of those who perish,
Coming to exact blood-forfeit,
We appear, to work completeness.
And a little further on:
   This lot the all-pervading Destiny
Hath spun to hold its ground for evermore,
   That we should still attend
On him on whom there rests the guilt of blood
   Of kin shed causelessly,
Till earth lie o'er him; nor shall death set free. 815
And yet, though Aeschylus makes them chant in words like these, the favourite title that he gives them is that of Eumenides, and towards the close of the play he does not hesitate to ascribe to their influence all the happy and auspicious qualities with which he lavishly glorifies his country:
[Page 361]
Cho. What hymn then for this land dost bid me raise? Ath. Such as is meet for no ill victory.
———
And pray that blessings upon men be sent,
And that, too, both from earth, and ocean's spray,
And out of heaven; and that the breezy winds,
In sunshine blowing, sweep upon the land,
And that o'erflowing fruit of field and flock
May never fail my citizens to bless,
Nor safe deliverance for the seed of men. 816
In view of all this, I cannot agree with those who would 817 rank the Eumenides among the deities of the lower world. For, after all, this very function of inflicting judgement upon the wicked forms no small constituent of a supreme and unbounded goodness; and the ancient mythology gave a very clear indication of this fact in the tradition that the Erinnyes and the Eumenides were the same in number and differed only in name.
We conclude, therefore, whenever a so-called evil genius seems to pursue some house and family; if the terrible Furies follow with every conceivable menace some man's descendants, clan, and family; that this is no mere chance, nor the capricious resentment of a Higher Power, but is due to the righteous judgement of the great celestial Deities, in visitation of some crime committed by those still living or by their ancestors.
Not to mention other Tragedians for the present, what I have just said of the views of Aeschylus regarding Fate finds ample support from the whole tenor of the noble trilogy concerning the house of Pelops. The treatment throughout shows that the terrible web of disaster was not woven by any caprice of Fortune, but that the whole origin of it lay, first, in the guilty passion of the wife of Atreus, then in the terrible meal of Thyestes, recorded in
[Page 362]
poetic legend. And this explains, unless I am mistaken, the great pains which such a serious poet as Aeschylus has devoted to the part played by the prophetess Cassandra and her inspired utterances: it is not merely due to the tragic and poetic awfulness of those scenes. You will recall that as soon as Cassandra first appears on the stage we are reminded of the ancient and hereditary crime. At the mere mention of the name of Atreus, she thrusts it from her as an omen of horror:
Cass
What path hast led me? To what roof hast brought? Chorus
To that of the Atreidae. This I tell, If 818 thou know'st not. Thou wilt not find it false. Cass
Ah! Ah! Ah me!
Say rather to a house God hates—that knows
Murder, self-slaughter, ropes,
A human shamble, staining earth with blood. 819
As might be expected, the Chorus hardly take this seriously, whereupon she shows that she is thinking of the past, not only foretelling the future:
Lo! there the witnesses whose word I trust,—
   Those babes who wail their death,
The roasted flesh that made a father's meal. 820
It is plain from the very outset of the tragedy that some dark apprehension hangs over the whole household of Agamemnon: all are conscious of some impending horror, but their minds sway this way and that, in wonder what the crime can be which has brought dread peril upon the devoted house:
                                         Why thus continually
Do haunting phantoms hover at the gate
   Of my foreboding heart?
Why floats prophetic song, unbought, unbidden?
[Page 363]
   Why doth no steadfast trust
   Sit on my mind's dear throne,
To fling it from me as a vision dim?
———
                                         And yet
My mind within itself, taught by itself,
   Chanteth Erinnys' dirge,
   The lyreless melody,
And hath no strength of wonted confidence.
Not vain these inner pulses, as my heart
Whirls eddying in breast oracular.
   I, against hope, will pray
   It prove false oracle. 821
At such a time comes Cassandra, with her divine inspiration, to tell them that all is due to the wrath of heaven against the crimes of their ancestors. In the Chorus of 822 Elders who disbelieve and resent her forebodings, we recognize the stubbornness of the average man, always unwilling to explain every event by the action of Divine Power, or by the recollection of some deed which seems to them too remote and already forgotten. I might easily add many other points which would strongly support the view here advanced: but I refrain: and indeed I should have to write out in full almost the whole part played by the maiden prophetess. For she speaks throughout as one who, taught by the Gods themselves, comes to claim human affairs for their control, and not for that of a blind and headlong destiny.
Then, again, on the other side, we have Clytemnestra, who, while she neither dares, nor indeed wishes, to deny the crime she has wrought, with wonderful audacity shelters herself under the plea that the sin was a necessity laid upon her. This, and this only, is the reason why she fastens so eagerly on the name of the Daemon or Evil Genius as soon as it has been introduced by the Chorus:
[Page 364]
Now thou dost guide aright thy speech and thought,
   Invoking that dread Power,
The thrice-gorged evil genius of this house:
   For he it is who feeds
In the heart's depth the raging lust of blood:
Ere the old wound is healed, new bloodshed comes. 823
Her mind, conscience-stricken, turns rapidly this way and that, trying all means, if perchance by any expedient she can absolve herself from her deed of cruelty. But the Chorus reflecting, as its manner is, the mind of the poet himself, will not allow her to appeal to a vague nameless power of evil, but at all times attributes the chief influence to an overruling Providence:
   Yes, of a Power thou tell'st
Mighty and very wrathful to this house;
Ah me! ah me! an evil tale enough
   Of baleful chance of doom,
   Insatiable of ill:
   Yet, ah! it is through Zeus,
824 The all-appointing and all-working One;
   For what with mortal men
   Is wrought apart from Zeus?
What of all this is not by God decreed? 825
Whereupon the queen, horror-stricken, repudiates her own personality, going so far as to deny herself to be really Agamemnon's wife, and actually pretending that the avenging shade of the house of Atreus has appeared in her likeness, has taken her place, and perpetrated the unspeakable crime:
Thou speak'st big words as if the deed were mine:
   Yet think thou not of me
   As Agamemnon's spouse:
But in the semblance of this dead man's wife,
The old and keen Avenger of the house
Of Atreus, that cruel banqueter of old,
[Page 365]
Hath wrought out vengeance full
On him who lieth here,
And full-grown victim slain
Over the younger victims of the past. 826
This is the bitter language of a conscience racked by remorse; but her plea is at once traversed in express terms, lest perchance others, guilty of crime, seek excuse in such mad imaginings:
   That thou art guiltless found
Of this foul murder who will witness bear?
How can it be so, how? And yet perchance,
   As helper to the deed,
   Might come the avenging Fiend
   Of that ancestral time. 827
But enough said: most finely does Aeschylus here, with his usual judgement, associate this fateful and tragic awe with the essential truths of true wisdom—teaching us that it is not possible for any great and flagrant wickedness to be wrought by the Gods themselves nor yet without their providence.
Further, in the Choephorae too, when Orestes finally appears, at the very moment when punishment is close at hand, Clytemnestra tries to excuse herself by vouching Fate:
Fate, O my son, must share the blame of that.
But Orestes rejoins:
This fatal doom, then, it is Fate that sends. 828
We have here nearly the same reasoning as that great 829 and learned divine, Bishop Butler, employs in a like argument. He acutely remarks when reproving those who, taking refuge in a belief in Fate, deny that evil men are punished righteously: ‘As if the Necessity, which is supposed to destroy the injustice of murder, for instance,
[Page 366]
would not also destroy the injustice of punishing it.’ 830 As illustrating the temper and views of Aeschylus it is surely significant that he not only, as it were, hitting the nail on the head, exposes the perversity of those who, on the score of fatalism, deny the reason of religion, but also anticipates the subtle comment of this keen intellect, and teaches that even were the governance of the world fated and pre-ordained, yet none the less it may be controlled by wholly righteous laws.
Such are the citations from the Agamemnon which seemed to me relevant to our present discussion: and I have adduced them with the view of ascertaining more exactly the opinions held by Aeschylus as to divine rule and governance. All of them, did time allow, might be strengthened by many other striking examples, some from the same play and the rest from the other two plays of the Oresteian trilogy.
But to return to the Prometheus : since it is from that play especially that we have set ourselves to-day to extract the poet's mind. From what has been said it is sufficiently clear that those
Fates triple-formed, Erinnyes unforgetting,
are not moved by blind necessity, but work according to the justest dictates of reason. And, in that case, what must we say of the sad note of ‘mortal man so sick at heart’ which is so constant throughout the whole poem? Unless I am mistaken, the meaning is this: it was to show us that the poet's mind, though quite assured as to the control of a higher power, was highly troubled and concerned by certain facts which seem to carry on their surface the appearance of a terrible Fatalism. In short, Aeschylus by some instinct divined the truth that the world is free, but was exercised and troubled because in
[Page 367]
so many parts of it he seemed to see clear marks of the 831 fetters of fatal destiny. He was, in the end, almost driven to suggest that the various attributes of the Supreme Deity were separated from each other: with the result that the Greatest could not rightly be held the Best, nor the Omnipotent be held omniscient: so that not only in mortal, but also in divine and heavenly things, there were strange entanglements and a confused medley of results.
I should like to illustrate these points more fully; and first, we note that no one more freely expatiates on that common theme of poets, the misery and wretchedness of mortal life. Take, as one instance out of many, the dirge of the Ocean nymphs hastening to comfort Prometheus:
   See how that boon, dear friends,
   For thee is bootless found.
   Say, where is any help?
   What aid from mortals comes?
Hast thou not seen this brief and powerless life,
Fleeting as dreams, with which man's purblind race
   Is fast in fetters bound?
   Never shall counsels vain
   Of mortal men break through
   The harmony of Zeus. 832
They clearly manifest here a certain scorn mingled with their pity: such as we might expect from heaven-born maidens more accustomed to pride themselves on the brightness of their own home, than to deplore the sorrows of others. A like note is struck in their opening chorus when they first appear on the stage:
Not to unwilling hearers hast thou uttered,
   Prometheus, thy request;
And now with nimble foot abandoning
   My swiftly rushing car,
[Page 368]
And the pure aether, path of birds of heaven,
I will draw near this rough and rocky land;
   For much do I desire
To hear this tale, full measure, of thy woes. 833
And on the approach of Oceanus, he is thus greeted by Prometheus:
Let be. What boots it? Thou then too art come
To gaze upon my sufferings. How did'st dare,
834 Leaving the stream that bears thy name, and caves
Hewn in the living rock, this land to visit,
Mother of iron? What then, art thou come
To gaze upon my fall and offer pity?
Are these the true signs of a mind full of kindly feelings to the human race? Oceanus leaves his secure retreats, the Nymphs their unrestrained flight through the clear heaven: they visit this rough and stony region, nurse of a hardy race, lest they may seem wanting in sympathy with the friend of man suffering unjustly and cruelly. But though they come, they plainly and directly deplore the lot of the earth itself and its mortal inmates, not only as placed by their very condition of life far below themselves, but as degenerate and utterly unworthy that the natives of light and upper air should approach them.
And we remark, further, that this fallen and degenerate condition of humanity mainly sprang, according to Aeschylus, from the circumstance that the essential attributes of divine perfection were not all centred in one Deity, but, among celestial powers, one excelled in goodness, another in wisdom, and a third (namely the lately victorious Jove) in far-reaching and inexhaustible power alone.
And so we find, even from the very outset of the drama, insistence on two sides, of one or other of which every one must declare himself a partisan—namely, Jove and humanity. For this is the gist of the prologue, spoken
[Page 369]
by the messenger of the angered Deity. He insists that Prometheus is punished,
That he may learn to bear the sovereign rule
Of Zeus, and cease from his philanthropy. 835
And in like sense, too, Prometheus himself complains:
And since ye ask me under what pretence
He thus maltreats me, I will show it you:
For soon as He upon his father's throne
Had sat secure, forthwith to divers Gods
He divers gifts distributed, and his realm 836
Began to order. But of mortal men
He took no heed, but purposed utterly
To crush their race and plant another new;
And, I excepted, none dared cross his will;
But I did dare, and mortal men I freed. 837
Should there, however, appear something lacking here as regards the benevolence of Prometheus himself, it needs but to recall his kindly feeling, not only towards his friend Oceanus, but also to his brother Atlas, though differing in their policy: and indeed even to Typhoeus, that determined foe of all the Gods; he pities him, too, that he has to endure such grievous and bitter punishment:
                                         Nay, be still;
Keep out of harm's way; sufferer though I be,
I would not therefore wish to give my woes
A wider range o'er others. No, not so:
For lo! my mind is wearied with the grief
Of that my kinsman Atlas, who doth stand
In the far West, supporting on his shoulders
The pillars of the earth and heaven, a burden
His arms can ill but hold: I pity too
The giant killer of Kilikian caves,
Dread portent with his hundred hands, subdued
By force, the mighty Typhon, who arose
'Gainst all the Gods. 838
[Page 370]
Now, since this unwearying goodness is harassed and thwarted in many ways; since it is at all times opposed by most powerful enemies; a belief in necessary fate, as you well know, asserts itself in many men's minds, which, as they think, in some sort explains rationally and methodically the general upshot of human life. In a word, such is the tendency of nearly all the incidents, that that oft-quoted expression springs spontaneously to Prometheus' lips:
                                         But I needs must bear
My destiny as best I may, knowing well
The might resistless of Necessity. 839
840 Yes, but it is only that Necessity of which the Eumenides and Parcae hold the reins: and which, though threading dark and tortuous ways, yet is ever moving to its goal by righteous and unvarying laws.
I come now to another point which Aeschylus teaches with no doubtful voice; it is this, that amid all misfortunes and distresses, men have given into their hands a sort of token or assurance of a better age yet to be, seeing that ‘The earth likewise and the expanse of the deep sea’, 841 and all that cheers and delights the eye, seem to sympathize, not with tyrants, but with the kindly Deities and the friends of humanity. And this is a fact of widest compass, which leads true poets into regions of unrivalled loveliness. Why, does not Prometheus, when he is left to himself and at last his cruel tormentors are departed, forthwith burst forth into those splendid lines which almost encourage belief in the legends told of Orpheus: so excellently and so effectively are they fitted to draw after them all the powers of Nature?
Thou firmament of God, and swift-winged winds,
Ye springs of rivers, and of ocean waves
That smile innumerous! Mother of us all,
O Earth, and Sun's all-seeing eye, behold,
[Page 371]
I pray, what I a God from Gods endure.
   Behold in what foul case
   I for ten thousand years
   Shall struggle in my woe,
   In these unseemly chains.
Such doom the new-made Monarch of the Blest
Hath now devised for me. 842
Nor is his appeal in vain; those he invokes hasten to comfort him, first the Ocean Nymphs, and then Father Ocean himself. I fear that scarcely any of you will agree with my theory about this scene, but I will, nevertheless, express what often occurs to my mind. May we not imagine that Aeschylus, highly skilled as he was in knowledge of the sea, here bears testimony to that soothing power of the mighty ocean which I think we one and all feel, when, jaded and overstrained in mind, we greet the 843 sights and sounds of sea-shore with its waves and rocks: and in especial that sight which more than anything has power to soothe our feelings—I mean the wondrous blending of the expanse of sky above with the limitless surface of the deep?
But in this I perhaps over-refine, and so content myself with touching upon it in passing. I will add, however, one or two remarks which will commend themselves to all. First, Prometheus, when conscious of the sudden appearance of the Nymphs and Oceanus, is—and with truest fidelity to nature—perturbed in mind: for though he had just prayed for sympathy, and, one may say solemnly, called Gods and men to witness his sufferings, now he feels a touch of shame and is vexed, and almost resents the fact that any one soever should hasten to gaze at his punishment:
                                         And now this penalty
Of that offence I pay, fast riveted
In chains beneath the open firmament.
[Page 372]
   Ha! ha! what now?
What sound, what odour floats invisibly?
Is it of God or man, or blending both?
And has one come to this remotest rock
To look upon my woes? Or what wills he?
Behold me bound, a God to evil doomed. 844
And a few lines on:
   Behold ye me, and see
   With what chains fettered fast,
I on the topmost crags of this ravine
Shall keep my sentry-post unenviable.
And here again this shame clearly overcomes him:
Ah! would that 'neath the Earth, 'neath Hades too,
Home of the dead, far down to Tartaros
Unfathomable He in fetters fast
   In wrath had hurled me down:
   So neither had a God
Nor any other mocked at these my woes;
But now, the wretched plaything of the winds,
I suffer ills at which my foes rejoice. 845
846 Moreover, he implicitly, as it seems, deprecates the coming of Oceanus as an intrusion:
Let be. What boots it? Thou then too art come
To gaze upon my sufferings
———
   What then, art thou come
To gaze upon my fall and offer pity?
Behold this sight; see here the friend of Zeus,
———
With what foul outrage am I crushed by him! 847
All this would seem to show—and nothing is more usual with sufferers—that this terrible death in life, not only wearies and wears a man out, but even humiliates him: we feel we are disrespectfully treated should any, even to comfort, dare to approach us nearly, when grievously
[Page 373]
suffering: and this is especially so with those who, like Prometheus, are more keenly sensitive than other men.
Not only here, but throughout the whole play, we observe that the character of Prometheus, though he is a superhuman being, yet is intentionally conceived and fashioned after the nature and disposition common to humanity, which we all know from experience: for this Prometheus is the representative and champion of the whole human race.
In the next place, the very disposition of the whole scene, and the various gestures and carriage of the friends who arrive, are most gracefully adapted by tacit contrast to make us keenly conscious, on the one side, of the bitter sense of unmerited punishment, and, on the other, of a certain exultation and joyous delight on the part of those who are free to wander at will through the wide spaces of heaven. The bound victim asks (for he cannot turn his eyes because of his fetters):
Ah me! what rustling sounds
Hear I of birds not far?
With the light whirr of wings
The air re-echoeth. 848
The Nymphs floating in the air reply:
Nay, fear thou nought: in love
All our array of wings
In eager race hath come
To this high peak, full hardly gaining o'er 849
Our Father's mind and will;
And the swift-rushing breezes bore me on.
We may mention too, in this connexion, their song before quoted:
And now with nimble foot abandoning
My swiftly rushing car, &c.
[Page 374]
Again, when Oceanus approaches:
Lo, I come to thee, Prometheus,
Reaching goal of distant journey,
Guiding this my winged courser
By my will, without a bridle. 850
And, on his departure:
For this my bird four-footed flaps with wings
The clear path of the aether. 851
I believe that Aeschylus dwelt on all these details less from motives of art than from a certain instinct which enables those who posses it to make us realize vividly that sad truth of human life, that the very people who kindly come to comfort our troubles are wont to make them worse in one way or another: and this, not from thoughtlessness, but from the very contrast of circumstances.
But we are addressing ourselves to the task of indicating what is the special solace, what the hope which Aeschylus considered might soothe Prometheus' woes. And, first, there is the not unimportant consideration that he is, on all hands, assured of sympathy and regret at his afflictions, both from mortals and from superhuman beings, and indeed we may say from the whole range of Nature. One and all, I repeat, deplore the chaining of Prometheus, not only from gratitude for the great blessings received from him, but also because they are enraged at the bitter and cruel rule of Jove. The Nymphs manifest this plainly in 852 recapitulating the punishments of Atlas as well as those of Prometheus: which, they declare, are maintained in spite of the deep grief and indignation of earth and heaven:
And lo! the ocean billows murmur loud
In one accord with him;
[Page 375]
The sea-depths groan, and Hades; swarthy pit
   Re-echoeth the sound,
And fountains of clear rivers, as they flow,
   Bewail his bitter griefs. 853
Quite in accord with this feeling is it that a certain blind hope underlies the sufferings of Prometheus (who represents the human race) that a deliverer would, some time, appear and change things for the better: since such great sympathy on all sides could hardly be without result. Nay, more than that, these vague and instinctive dreams of relief were crowned and completed, if we believe Aeschylus, by an absolutely certain prediction of the aid that was to come:
Nay, of a truth, though put to evil shame,
   In massive fetters bound,
   The Ruler of the Gods
Shall yet have need of me, yes, e'en of me,
   To tell the counsel new
   That seeks to strip from him
His sceptre, and his might of sovereignty. 854
And he elsewhere again insists on this, encouraging the Chorus not to be over-intimidated by dread of Jove:
Yea, of a truth shall Zeus, though stiff of will,
Be brought full low. Such bed of wedlock now
Is he preparing, one to cast him forth
In darkness from his sovereignty and throne.
———
And from these troubles no one of the Gods
But me can clearly show the way to 'scape.
I know the time and manner. 855
In fine, so interwoven is this hope with the whole thread and texture, as it were, of the play that it may be taken quite clearly for granted that, so far as can be ascertained from the Prometheus , Aeschylus felt perplexed by one special
[Page 376]
problem in his views about religion, namely, that Deity is not at once omnipotent and omniscient, but that knowledge is associated with goodness and unlimited power with 856 a tyrannic spirit: and so he would look forward to the future with the hope that at some time the better nature, not by force but by knowledge, might successfully assert itself against the supremacy of the worse.
In conclusion, I would ask, whether it may not be found that the great dramatist modified this view, in some degree, at a later period of his life: before, I would suggest, he produced the Oresteian Trilogy? But it will be time enough to decide this later, after we have more closely considered the tenor and tone of the Oresteia itself. I may just add this, that the trend of Prometheus' story, as we have interpreted it, wonderfully accords with what we are told of the Indian mythology, not only by other writers as well, but by that great poet 857 who of all in our own time has best set forth the character and quality of Eastern religion. Let any one read carefully the concluding passages of that noble poem which sets forth the story of the Indian Rajah Kehama: whose overthrow is due simply to one thing, namely, his belief that one, whether God or man, who was not omniscient, could be practically omnipotent. This shows, assuredly, a wonderful harmony between the Pythagorean Aeschylus and these Eastern legends.
And hence, perhaps, we may form some fair conjecture as to the main source from which Aeschylus derived his religious views.
[Page ]
LECTURE XIX 858
Aeschylus' views concerning Divine Providence are qualified and softened, first, by the final issue of the Promethean story; secondly, by the whole trend and tenor of the Oresteian Trilogy. The scope of the ‘Agamemnon’. The part played by the Watchman, though of comic humour, yet quite in keeping with the play. The ‘first entrance’ ( ράροδος ) of the Chorus. Importance attached by Aeschylus to auspices: his power of interpreting the feelings of animals generally. The effect of his Pythagorean training upon this. The theory of ‘Metamorphosis’. Christianity has rather increased than lessened our poetic resources in this direction. Jove represented as a tyrant in the Prometheus, but appears in the ‘Agamemnon’ as a defender of righteousness and justice.
Our conclusions upon Aeschylus' religious views as gathered, especially, from a study of the Prometheus , may be shortly stated as follows: first, he is touched with a keen sense of human misery and sorrow; secondly, he attributes all events to a divine power, not to a blind principle of Fate with decrees laid down without regard to right or wrong; lastly, he makes no concealment of his inability to reconcile the tangled medley of human life with a supremely wise and good Governor: and therefore is inclined to conjecture that this world has been temporarily given over to a tyrant. For that the part assigned 859 to Jove in this tragedy is that of a most vindictive tyrant I apprehend none can doubt, while the reader's favour and sympathy are enlisted throughout for Prometheus as the defender and liberator of the human race. We are, undoubtedly, here confronted with a difficult position, whether as regards the reverence and piety of Aeschylus himself, or the general opinion of his times concerning the immortal Gods. It will be relevant, therefore, to make
[Page 378]
inquiry, at this stage, whether Aeschylus has anywhere else modified this opinion. This is what his personal piety and wisdom would lead us to expect, and, so far as I am aware, we do not ever find that he, at any time of his life, incurred the penalties of the law by reason of any lines of his being held injurious to Supreme Power, nor experienced the displeasure of the whole theatre, resenting anything resembling impiety: which there is good authority for believing to have happened at some time to Euripides. 860
Now, first of all, there is one point which must be remembered concerning Aeschylus: namely, that even from the tenor of the Prometheus Vinctus itself we gather no uncertain hope that, to some extent at least, there is relief in store for minds perplexed about the ways of God to man, and that what seems harshly expressed concerning Jove's character, as a hater of mortals, ruling all by an arbitrary omnipotence, not by reason, may perhaps, as the play develops, be softened by some welcome explanation.
And, to begin with, is it not well known that the work is incomplete? for the ravages of time have only spared us a single one out of the three connected plays which Aeschylus wrote and exhibited on the subject of Prometheus. Hence if, here and there, some expressions sound over-harsh, yet it may well be that the poet had either previously softened them by anticipation, in the first play 861 called Prometheus the Firebearer : or intended to relieve and temper them fully when he reached the closing play of the series treating of the release of Prometheus. Assuredly, if we look at the connected trilogy about Agamemnon, the account of the wrath of the Gods against the house of Pelops would seem quite maimed and incomplete, had it not happened that the whole story, complete in all its three parts, has survived for us. And therefore, with
[Page 379]
excellent judgement, or I may say by a sort of instinct almost amounting to judgement, he has ended the Prometheus on a note which harmonizes excellently with the belief that the issue is still undecided. What reader, I ask, could quietly endure to be brought to a full stop amid such universal confusion if there were no hope of better issues, and no adequate justification of the existing position?
[ A pause, and then flashes of lightning and peals of thunder. ] Prom
Yea, now in very deed,
No more in word alone,
The earth shakes to and fro,
And the loud thunder's voice
Bellows hard by, and blaze
The flashing levin-fires;
And tempests whirl the dust,
And gusts of all wild winds
On one another leap,
In wild conflicting blasts,
And sky with sea is blent:
Such is the storm from Zeus
That comes as working fear,
In terrors manifest.
O mother venerable!
O Aether! rolling round
The common light of all,
See'st thou what wrongs I bear? 862
Readers are here warned, if I may be allowed to repeat myself, all but in express terms, that the way is in some sort left clear for future developments: lest they may perchance complain too loudly that they can find no traces of justice worthy of a Divine Providence.
Further than this, we see scattered here and there throughout the play hints, by no means obscure, of a plan in the author's mind for the liberation of Prometheus. It is clear that a time was to come when Prometheus should 863
[Page 380]
reveal to Jove the danger of his meditated marriage alliance: 864 but, nevertheless, not till he had himself, by Hercules' aid, been freed from the vulture that feeds upon him and from the rock to which he is fettered. But the plan of Hercules' intervention, as far as it can be inferred, either from scattered passages of Aeschylus himself or the few and doubtful statements of other authors, lay wholly in the following expedients—first, that Hercules should himself endure captivity, and then Chiron, mortally wounded by Hercules, should of his own wish suffer death in order to save Prometheus. 865
It thus appears that, according to Aeschylus, the conflicting counsels of the Gods concerning humanity could only be harmonized by some sort of vicarious and voluntary suffering, and this through the energy, courage, and goodness of Hercules: and so at last it befell that mortal men could conscientiously worship Jove not only as the God of Power, but also as the God of Goodness.
We have expressed our views as to the conclusion of the Promethean Trilogy, so far as was possible on such an obscure question. But it will be better, after all, to abandon conjectures, and interrogate the writer himself by means of the Agamemnon as to his view in later life both as regards the much-involved question of Fate, and also all that pertains to the worship of the Gods. Of Fate enough, and more than enough, has been already said: when Clytemnestra, a thoroughly bad woman, is charged with her crime and pleads the force of Fate, the Chorus, in so many words, utterly denies that the guilt of a crime, committed of her own free-will, can be lightened by any such plea.
[Page 381]
Let us proceed to what is the leading fundamental question in connexion with this whole subject. Let us see whether, in Aeschylus' opinion, the divine power of heaven ever and always visits wrong with punishment and goodness with favour. We shall assuredly find that the whole tenor of 866 the three tragedies is in some sort charged with indications of this character: for what has been said of the main drift of the Agamemnon applies, to a very great degree, to the Choephorae and also to the Eumenides. The three tragedies, I repeat, are connected, as it were, by one thread: with this difference only, that the main current which, at first, is involved with many difficult problems, becomes simpler in the Choephorae , while in the Eumenides epilogue it is of transparent simplicity: the order of events develops under divine guidance, it unravels itself, and itself gives the clue into the readers' hands. And this sequence of the poem's story so harmonizes with the sequence of divine retribution, that we cannot investigate the former without tracing the latter at the same time. Consequently, I must be pardoned here for making a slight digression from my original plan, and for considering rather more carefully, not merely such details as plainly and openly indicate the writer's religious feeling, but also the character of the composition itself and the whole ‘economy’ of the Agamemnon
And, first of all, some surprise may perhaps be felt, that where the theme is so serious and horrible, the prologue is put in the mouth of a soldier, who seems more fitted for the comic stage. This is no unfair description: for I do not mean that a strain of buffoonery is intentionally introduced into his words: they are not spoken to raise a laugh, much less are they scurrilous and abusive: but I am wont to consider as specially appropriate to Comedy all that has to do with the commonplaces of everyday life and men's trifling pursuits and cares: and the complaints
[Page 382]
of this servant as to his long and constant watching are precisely of this kind:
And when I keep my bed of little ease,
Drenched with the dew, unvisited by dreams,
(For fear, instead of sleep, my comrade is,
So that in sound sleep ne'er I close mine eyes). 867
868 And so also the scarcely veiled reference to Clytemnestra's faithlessness to her husband:
As to all else, the word is ‘Hush!’ An ox
Rests on my tongue: had the house a voice,
'Twould tell too clear a tale. 869
Undoubtedly, it is in keeping with poetic artifice that all should proceed with complete calm at the outset: otherwise a serene sky would not, as commonly happens, usher in the storm about to burst.
A like reason explains the appearance of the Pythian priestess at the beginning of the Eumenides : if any one is inclined to think that she purposelessly wastes time with prolix details about the ancient deities of the spot:
First, with this prayer, of all the Gods I honour
The primal seeress Earth, and Themis next 870
—I am afraid he has not grasped with sufficient clearness Aeschylus' design, which is to prepare the way for the awe-inspiring entry of the Furies:
Dread things to tell, and dread for eyes to see
Have sent me back again from Loxias' shrine. 871
We feel the sight to be the more terrible the less it was expected, and the more rudely, as it were, the fearful apparition breaks in upon the wonted course of life and thought. It illustrates Aristotle's saying that the effect of contraries is most great when they are placed in close juxtaposition.
[Page 383]
And, as you know, the poet who most often makes use of this device is our own Shakespeare: to the great scandal indeed of some who wish to be thought critics: for he hardly ever hesitates to introduce highly comic incidents amid the most terrible and tragic situations. For instance, whilst Macbeth is in the act of murdering the king, the porter at the door makes a speech full of vulgar jests. 872 Again, the melancholy ceremonial of Ophelia's funeral is 873 preluded by the chattering of the two grave-diggers, indulging in their rustic humour at such a moment! 874 And there are many such instances, familiar to everybody.
But I do not believe that this effect of contrast is due to poetic insight alone and stage artifice. Assuredly, not only are our minds forcibly appealed to and stimulated by these contrast, but they are also touched with a certain profounder feeling as to human fate: we recognize a faithful reflection of our mortality with its painful and abrupt changes and chances. And there is on record within our own memory an instance of a great man, keen of intellect and of undying fame, who, when his army was overthrown and he himself in peril of his life, confessed that his reverse of fortune was made doubly bitter by following so quickly upon amusement and festivity. 875 Impious and monstrous indeed it was in him to jest so with his own evil deeds, yet it was an acute and true saying that it does add a final drop to the cup of misfortune, if a great disaster follows close on the heels of merriment and amusement. It adds a new sting to the unfortunate (who are certainly always highly sensitive), as if the higher powers were mocking them, when anything happens, perhaps at the crisis of their sorrow, which is common, trivial, or humorous. And it may well be that something of this sort is the reason why so many things unimportant and absurd in themselves
[Page 384]
have been looked upon as omens, not only by the old Etruscan augurs, but by almost all men who have paid any attention to such signs. However this may be, it would, I think, be to the detriment of Tragedy should any one decree, as modern French critics are inclined to do, that such comic characters should be banished entirely from its domain. I certainly think that the play before us would be maimed and weakened by withdrawal of the part of the Watchman, garrulous though he may be: since 876 it serves to rest the mind for a time and darkly points to uncertain perils.
I now come to consider the ‘first entrance’ of the Chorus ( ράροδ [illeg.] ος ). The main purport of their speech is to hint, not only that evil is at hand, but also that it is an evil which comes as retribution for wrong-doing. It is retribution which is implied in the long account—some may think it unduly long—of the auspices taken in Aulis; I mean the sight of two eagles swooping cruelly down upon the head of a miserable hare which with her unborn young they devour:
How the Acheans' twin-throned majesty,
Accordant rulers of the youth of Hellas,
   With spear and vengeful hand,
Were sent by fierce, strong bird 'gainst Teucrian shore,
Kings of the birds to kings of ships appearing,
   One black, with white tail one,
Near to the palace, on the spear-hand side,
   On station seen of all,
A pregnant hare devouring with her young,
   Robbed of all runs to come. 877
This makes it clear that Troy's destruction was imminent indeed, but not without great menace of peril to the victors at the hands of the angered goddess Artemis: though no reason whatever for her displeasure appears. But I read
[Page 385]
this omen as warning mortal men that no cause which sets forth with such savage cruelty towards the animal world can hope to commend itself to any kindly God, most certainly not to Artemis, the patron of woodland life:
For she, the fair One, though so kind of heart
To fresh-dropt dew from mighty lion's womb
   And young that suck the teats
   Of all that roam the fields,
   Yet prays Him bring to pass
   The portents of those birds. 878
The poet thus touches here on a subject surpassed by few in grave import, and fraught to the full with solemn religious meaning and tenderest feeling: namely that wild beasts and birds and other unreasoning creatures are in some strange way in real touch both with Gods and men: so that our minds can scarcely help being cheered or depressed by their cries, their gestures, their movements.
Hence it is that in all ages simple folk have believed 879 that dogs and horses certainly divine by a sort of instinctive prevision the coming misfortunes of their master's house: and, moreover, so far as in them lies, give warning of it by unmistakable signs. This it is which gives augurs and soothsayers their opportunity: this explains the speech of Achilles' horse: hence, too, those numerous legends which grew up among our own ancestors, attributing to each family, as its special messenger to warn it of coming ills, some bird or animal, supposed to be sent from heaven with its warning omen. We recall, too, one writer of surpassing genius, who won his readers' sympathies in more than one of his tales, mainly by associating the fortunes of a noble dog with the main tenor of his story. 880
Now his poems are themselves ample evidence that this philosophy or superstition—call it which you please—was very near to the heart of Aeschylus. This is conspicuously
[Page 386]
seen in the exquisite range of fancy with which, as one indulging himself in a favourite delight, he was wont to vary and elaborate those images in especial which are derived from the ways of domestic and wild animals. For instance, take the lovely chant in The Suppliants :
Behold me suppliant, exile, wanderer,
   Like heifer chased by wolves
   Upon the lofty crags,
   Where, trusting to her strength,
   She lifteth up her voice,
And to the shepherd tells her tale of grief. 881
Beyond question, he who could write thus must have studied the ways and feelings of dumb animals, not merely with close observation but with genuine sympathy.
And Cassandra, when she is on the eve of death, does she not, as it were, forget her own wretched plight, and burst into enthusiastic rapture on mere mention of the nightingale's song? The Chorus, it is true, had—as is usually done—compared the voice of this bird, which is 882 generally heard at night, with the tearful strains of Cassandra, as though the nightingale's note was fitted by nature only to express wailing and lamentation:
Frenzied art thou, and by some God's might swayed,
   And utterest for thyself
A melody which is no melody,
   Like to that tawny one,
   Insatiate in her wail,
The nightingale, who still with sorrowing soul
   And ‘Itys, Itys,’ cry,
Bemoans a life o'erflourishing in ills. 883
The Chorus, as I have already remarked, here follows the popular notion as to the nightingale: for since men imagine that they hear in his song the name of Itys oft reiterated (which is indeed very natural, on account of the
[Page 387]
similarity of certain sounds), they forthwith associate with the melody, especially when heard at night, all manner of mournful and melancholy feelings. Thus Virgil in some well-known lines:
So, close in poplar shades, her children gone,
The mother nightingale laments alone,
Whose nest some prying churl had found, and thence
By stealth convey'd th' unfeather'd innocence.
But she supplies the night with mournful strains:
And melancholy music fills the plains. 884
Milton, too, has more than once indicated his view that the nightingale's song typifies a mind smitten with love passion or wearied with the confusions and follies of life. But Homer, on the other hand, always in such details pre-eminently a close student of nature and truth, while apparently following the common opinion and the ancient tradition, yet depicts the bird's strains rather as restless and perturbed than gloomy:
As when at spring's first entrance, her sweet song
The azure-crested nightingale renews,
Daughter of Pandarus: within the grove's
Thick foliage perched,
a line which most happily suggests a notable characteristic of this bird, namely, that when in full song she usually delights to withdraw within the most thickly-clustered boughs,
                                         she pours her echoing voice,
Now deep, now clear, still varying the strain
With which she mourns her Itylus, her son 885
By royal Zethus, whom she, erring, slew,
So also I, by soul-distressing doubts
Tossed ever. 886
It is obvious that the comparison turns on the idea that it is a varying and changeful note which most effectively reflects the mood of the nightingale.
[Page 388]
But to return to Aeschylus and his creation Cassandra: she, as I said, when reminded of Philomela, does not cite her, like so many, as a type of grief, but rather of joyful and easeful life:
Ah, for the doom of clear-voiced nightingale!
The Gods gave her a body bearing wings,
   And life of pleasant days
   With no fresh cause to weep:
   But for me waiteth still
   Stroke from the two-edged sword. 887
This is not much unlike the aspiration of the Psalmist:
‘My heart is sore pained within me: and the terrors of death are fallen upon me. Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and horror hath overwhelmed me. And I said, Oh that I had wings like a dove! for then would I fly away, and be at rest. Lo, then would I wander far off, and remain in the wilderness.’ 888
There is this difference, however, that whereas the sorely pressed Psalmist only craves wings on which he might at once wing his way to a safe haven, Cassandra shows herself charmed with the wondrous delight of the life, so we imagine, led by song-birds amid leafy foliage and woodland flowers. To me, assuredly, the nightingale's voice for the most part seems to suggest:
                                         a life of pleasant days
With no fresh cause to weep.
So that Aeschylus not only observes here more closely than most other poets, but further, with what I might almost call ‘unpremeditated art’, seems to clothe himself with the character of the bird and completely associates himself with its temper and spirit.
889 But I grant that in another context he assigns to this bird a dirge, and that sadder than any in his poems:
[Page 389]
And if some augur of the land be near,
   Hearing our piteous cry,
   Sure he will deem he hears
   The voice of Tereus' bride,
   Piteous and sad of soul,
The nightingale sore harassed by the kite.
It may be asked how can the two aspects be reasonably reconciled with each other; how can the voice of one and the same bird be expressive both of joy and of sorrow? But note what follows:
For she, driven back from wonted haunts and streams,
   Mourns with a strange new plaint
   The home that she has lost,
   And wails her son's sad doom,
   How he at her hand died,
Meeting with evil wrath unmotherly. 890
Hence it appears that only against her natural bent does the nightingale complain in tearful measure; when she laments that through her terror of the harassing kite she is barred from her loved rivers and fields. It is only then that she resembles Philomela wailing for her son's sad death.
I have thought it worth while to dwell minutely on this illustration, since, the poet's delicate observation of this, the sweetest surely of songsters, evidences both how keen was his eye and how deep his sympathy for all the charms of forest life.
But Aeschylus' real feeling for animals appears even more fully from the fact that he lavishes loving care not only on those of gentle nature, such as are wont to be loved and favoured by all mankind, but those, too, which by most men are held in detestation and horror, either through their savage disposition, or by reason of their habit of life and the repellent cruelty with which they prey
[Page 390]
891 upon their food. He represents Artemis, we have just seen, as protecting not only the young of tame and domestic beasts but:
Fresh-dropt dew from mighty lion's womb. 892
There are, too, some splendid lines, where he pictures a lion's whelp brought up by some poor man in his own house, and, after all, at last showing its savage nature: the passage betrays the hand of a writer who had witnessed what he describes:
So once a lion's cub,
A mischief in his house,
As foster child one reared,
While still it loved the teats:
In life's preluding dawn,
Tame, by the children loved,
And fondled by the old,
Oft in his arms 'twas held,
Like infant newly born,
With eyes that brightened to the hand that stroked, And fawning at the hest of hunger keen.
And at last, when the cub reaches the point of killing and making his savage meal upon the sheep, observe how gently the poet touches on the delinquent's lapse, as if some nursling of his own:
But when full-grown, it showed
The nature of its sires:
For it unbidden made
A feast in recompense
Of all their fostering care,
By banquet of slain sheep:
With blood the house was stained. 893
Quite in harmony with this are the lines near the opening of the Agamemnon describing a vulture brood torn from the nest and the lamentations of the bereaved parents:
E'en as vultures shriek who hover,
Wheeling, whirling o'er their eyrie,
[Page 391]
In wild sorrow for their nestlings,
With their oars of stout wings rowing,
Having lost the toil that bound them
To their callow fledglings' couches.
But on high One,—or Apollo,
Zeus, or Pan,—the shrill cry hearing,
Cry of birds who are his clients,
Sendeth forth on men transgressing,
Erinnys, slow but sure avenger. 894
But though this inhuman savagery was perpetrated, not, 895 as in the former instance, on a harmless hare, but on the nest and brood of fierce predatory birds, yet we see the act is treated as of evil omen, and as one which will bring a deadly retribution, since birds have their avenging Furies and none is suffered to wrong them with impunity.
By such preluding flights does the poet subtly move his readers' minds, and holds them on the watch for the melancholy course of retribution impending, now upon the Trojans, now on the house of Atreus and the sons of Pelops. But, before following him, I wish to say a very few words in connexion with that special department of poetic treatment which we have just considered: namely, the tone and temper exhibited by great poets in dealing with the disposition, tastes, and habits of dumb animals. We can, in fact, form a definite and clear notion of the views held by Aeschylus in this regard—if, indeed, we may accept as well-founded, Cicero's testimony that he was not only a poet but also a Pythagorean philosopher. 896 Now, Pythagoras, as is well known, held views with regard to animals, both domestic and wild, such as associated them closely with the human race. Indeed, since he was for many years, so it is said, deeply engaged in eastern lore and travel, it would be strange had he not imbibed something of the philosophy which denies both that men's souls are
[Page 392]
extinguished by death and that they forthwith attain to their immortal home, and asserts that at death they clothe themselves with one body after another and are constantly migrating from one species to another:
Then they are happy, when by length of time
The scurf is worn away of each committed crime:
No speck is left of their habitual stains;
But the pure aether of the soul remains. 897
Then at last, having undergone the penalty of their misdeeds, they are absorbed into the great ‘world soul’. And there is no question that this philosophy deals most 898 ingeniously with two questions which are wont to perplex very seriously the whole body of thinking men. They are exercised to comprehend, first of all, how the deeds, good or ill, of the short span of human life can involve the doers in a fate to last for ever: and, next, how it can possibly be, under the government of an all-righteous and all-powerful Deity, that the innocent brute creation should, though not sharing man's guilt, be involved in man's penalty. Both difficulties are met, to some degree at least, by the Pythagorean doctrine of Metempsychosis, as it is called: since it clearly extends to infinity the term in which punishment and reward are merited, and plainly lays down that nothing suffered by any living creature is unmerited; for obviously we are ignorant to what extent any one of them may have sinned before reaching the form of life it enjoys at any given time.
Consequently, it is not surprising that, while the light of heavenly truth was still withheld, the majority of philosophers agreed in this belief, or rather conjecture: more particularly since it must have marvellously appealed to the poets, who, beyond all others, have always been the philosophers' closest allies. You readily see, I imagine, that any poet who held this opinion would look upon any
[Page 393]
living creature with a kind of peculiar vision and would penetrate deeper, as he reflected on the real meaning of its destiny and character and the ultimate issue of its life and death. And this perhaps is the reason why the poetry of the ancients devoted such elaborate care to the wonderful series of Metamorphoses: since such transformations well agreed, as I have said, with this philosophic speculation. For what difference is there between the Metamorphosis of Ovid and the Pythagorean Metempsychosis, save that the former was effected by virtue of a divine or magic touch during life?
And so that skilful master of phrase and verse gracefully describes Pythagoras as defending his own theory in language 899 and reasoning which might easily be applied to the imaginings of Ovid himself:
Nor dies the Spirit, but new Life repeats
In other forms, and only changes seats.
———
Thus all things are but altered, nothing dies:
And here and there th' unbody'd spirit flies,
By Time, or Force, or Sickness dispossest,
And lodges, where it lights, in Man or Beast;
Or hunts without, till ready Limbs it find,
And actuates those according to their kind:
From tenement to tenement is tossed;
The soul is still the same, the figure only lost:
And as the softened wax new seals receives,
This face assumes, and that impression leaves;
Now called by one, now by another name:
The form is only changed, the wax is still the same:
So Death, so called, can but the form deface,
The immortal soul flies out in empty space:
To seek her fortune in some other place. 900
When a man has once imbibed this teaching he must be allowed to have progressed far in that region, not only of ancient philosophy, but of ancient poetry, which is
[Page 394]
preoccupied and concerned with the habits and appearances of brute animals: a field of no mean interest certainly, which would be especially pleasing and attractive to Aeschylus as we conceive him.
Some may perhaps be inclined to suspect, that since these dreams or fancies have been scattered to the winds by the revelation of the soul's immortality, poetry nowadays is under a certain disadvantage in this respect; I will therefore, so far as is in my power, set down briefly my view as to this: for the subject will not be without interest in itself, and moreover is connected with a question than which there is none graver, not to say more sacred, in the whole range of Poetry. I mean the question whether or no it has been to the advantage of Poetry that our holiest religion has been given to the world. For myself, indeed, I hold clearly that, with respect to all the imagery which poets draw from the animal world, Poetry has not only not suffered by the change of religion, but has gained better opportunities and a fuller completeness: and this, first, because now it is not by any baseless and vague conjecture, but by a trustworthy revelation from the Most 901 High that we are taught that His loving care reaches even to creatures without human reason: and that not the smallest bird falls to the ground without knowledge and permission of Divine Power. And how much dignity redounds to all that we see about us from this single reflection alone is manifest to all, without any words of mine. But if we accord a certain honour to a vulture or a lion's whelp, as introduced into their poetry by Homer or by Aeschylus, what shall we say of these verses by the divinely inspired Psalmist?
‘Thou makest darkness, and it is night: wherein all the beasts of the forest do creep forth. The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God. The sun ariseth, they gather themselves together, and lay them
[Page 395]
down in their dens. Man goeth forth unto his work and to his labour until the evening.’ 902
Manifestly it is not without divine ordinance that the greatest movements of the heavenly bodies are wonderfully adapted to the needs of the animals for food and sleep. So, then, each and every living thing has its assigned place and function in the manifold chorus of the universe: even savage and hateful beasts are under God's governance, nor without His knowledge can they anywise harm us, either of themselves, or through those evil spirits whose ends, perhaps, they sometimes subserve.
Nay, more, the Holy Scriptures, unless I err, lead us to an even nobler and holier view of the whole range of living things. For we are taught that it is by means of the breath of the mouth of God, now bestowed, now withdrawn, that all living creatures are renewed or decay: seeing that we thus read of them: ‘Thou takest away their breath, they die and return to their dust. Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renewest the face of the earth.’ 903 The sacred writer exclaims moreover: ‘O Lord, thou preservest man and beast.’ 904
And there are very many like instances: which make 905 it quite clear that poets may lightly suffer the loss of the Pythagorean dream of the transmigration of souls, since on the witness of highest Truth a far more sacred bond exists between men and the animal world. Each in our order, we partake of the very life of Him whom pious antiquity acknowledged as ‘ Lord and Giver of Life ’—source and fount, not only of the life which sustains an immortal spirit, but of that which fits the body for its work, and through wondrous instinct guides even flock and herd.
Such reflections are indeed weighty and far-reaching;
[Page 396]
yet there is another which crowns and surpasses them. For we learn from Holy Scripture that all living creatures sympathize mysteriously with our own race, whether in its fall or in its recovery: as the apostle says, in strange and subtle ways ‘the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now.’ 906 And there are not a few prophetic promises of like import: ‘The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them.’ 907 It was indeed but just and fitting, that the animal world should not be without advantage through man's salvation, since not only at the epoch of the flood, but all through history, they have suffered grievously by man's perversity and sin. And so, though I am far from denying that to this day the counsels of Divine Goodness regarding dumb creatures are, for us, involved in deep obscurity, yet we see, nevertheless, that Scripture foretells for them a ‘glorious liberty’, and we are assured that the compassion of Heaven, to which we owe so much, will not be wanting to them.
908 To sum up: no poet need look back with regret upon the fablings of Pythagoras or Ovid: still the Pythagorean philosophy seems certainly to have stood Aeschylus (to return to him once more) in good stead to this extent, that he speaks with fuller compass and more serious import, when he deals with auguries or similes derived from the manners of bird and beast. His manner of treatment in thus touching upon the fate even of vultures and hares in the prelude to the tragedy of Agamemnon's death would certainly approve itself to that school of philosophers.
So far, indeed, it has only been implicitly that he has felt his way to a true view as to a God of just Retribution. Next, he intentionally and in set terms, acknowledges Jove
[Page 397]
as the supreme governor of all things, and that after a standard of strict justice:
O Zeus—whate'er He be,
If that Name please him well,
By that on Him I call:
Weighing all other names I fail to guess
Aught else but Zeus, if I would cast aside,
                     Clearly, in very deed,
From off my soul this idle weight of care. 909
In reading this passage, I often wonder how it can possibly have been that a certain learned scholar should suppose that Aeschylus was simply perplexed as to the right name by which the Deity should be invoked. I quite admit that such doubts are found not infrequently as a stereotyped formula in ancient writers: yet it does not suit the dignity of Aeschylus' style to dwell at such length, not to say with such irrelevance, on so trivial a point: it is much more suited to Euripides or Ovid.
And besides, the tone of the ensuing lines does not well accord with this construction. For, carrying on the quotation:
   Nor He who erst was great,
   Full of the might to war,
   Avails now; He is gone; 910
And He who next came hath departed too,
His victor meeting: but if one to Zeus,
   High triumph-praise should sing,
His shall be all the wisdom of the wise.
There is here no question of the different names for the same God but, manifestly, of different Gods, in fact, of Gods in strife one with another. As to the name, the Chorus at the very beginning of their song declared themselves but little troubled:
O Zeus—whate'er He be, &c.
As much as to say: ‘O Jove, whoever he may indeed be
[Page 398]
who we are taught takes pleasure in that name, Jove at once most righteous and most powerful—Jove we adore thee alone. For it stands immovably decreed that our whole trust should be in him alone. But if we resort either to the chronicles of ancient heroes or the memories of those lately passed away, we assuredly get but faded oracles; they will give no answer that can bring true comfort.’
   Nor He who erst was great,
   Full of the might to war,
   Avails now: He is gone;
And He who next came hath departed too,
His victor meeting;
‘Why then seek to rely on those who have themselves vanished into nothingness?’
                     But if one to Zeus, &c.
‘He alone the conqueror, whom none may ever conquer, will lay low on the ground the crowns of kings and leaders, nay, of philosophers too. And the more cheerfully each man gives himself up to honour the triumph of Jove, and the more completely he attaches himself to the cause not of men but of Almighty God, the wiser will he prove 911 himself.’ Counsel truly well worthy of a holy shrine and sounding a strain not far from the declaration of the inspired Psalmist:
‘Thou hast rebuked the heathen, thou hast destroyed the wicked, thou hast put out their name for ever and ever. O thou enemy! destructions are come to a perpetual end: and thou hast destroyed cities; their memorial is perished with them. But the Lord shall endure for ever: he hath prepared his throne for judgement. And he shall judge the world in righteousness, he shall minister judgement to the people in uprightness.’ 912
There is, too, another utterance of yet more religious truth, the assertion that calamities are sent by the great
[Page 399]
Ruler of all for purification of souls and redress of wickedness. For Jove is extolled as he
   who leadeth men in wisdom's way,
And fixeth fast the law,
That pain is gain. 913
And so, if we trust Aeschylus, it is by no blind course of self-evolving events, but by the fullest intent and decree of God himself that men are ever taught by suffering:
And slowly dropping on the heart in sleep
   Comes woe-recording care,
And makes the unwilling yield to wiser thoughts. 914
This seems to me a consummate description of the silent promptings of conscience, likening them to the falling of dew from heaven: such as in dreams also present themselves to an anxious and restless spirit. And lastly, lest some may suppose that these thoughts arise spontaneously and, so far as men can tell, without divine intervention, note the exquisite and reverent close:
And doubtless this too comes from grace of Gods,
Seated in might upon their awful thrones. 915
In fine, I doubt whether any uninspired writer, save Aeschylus, reached such a height of religious wisdom, as 916 to imagine that the most secret thoughts of sleepers are not only perceived, but, as it were, moulded and silently formed and fashioned by the Supreme Maker of all: so that strength from the throne of God flows down to us, in some sort, within the very secrecy of our chamber.
Such is the opening of this weighty drama which I have thus dwelt upon somewhat fully: mainly because it is of the utmost import in exhibiting Aeschylus' views on religion. For we see that Jupiter, who in the Prometheus is represented as the cruellest of tyrants, appears in the Agamemnon
[Page 400]
plays not only as benevolent, but full of sympathetic kindness, graciously directing and aiding erring souls on their upward way. Notice also how scrupulously the dramatist reveres and honours the very name of Jove: and thus it is no idle conjecture that he is singing his ‘recantation’ ( ραλιν [illeg.] δία ), not in express terms but implicitly, as conscious that in the Prometheus he spoke of the great deity too sharply and sternly: one could easily suppose that through the mediation of Hercules or some such device, God and man now were reconciled and at peace.
And there is yet another reason (I will confess it) why I decided to expend so much time on this Choral Hymn. There is (unless perhaps I am over sensitive), with some critics and readers, a most unworthy tendency through which, whenever Homer or Aeschylus or any other poet delivers himself of high and holy thought above the level of the men of his own day, they forthwith distort and minimize and interpret on a lower level the thoughts of these great poets: and this is because they can hardly, or not at all, reconcile such insight into sacred things with an uninspired author. But I would have them remember, first, that it has not seldom pleased the divine Power that even the 917 weightiest and truest oracles should be delivered by the mouth of men, who were the very foes of religion, they being all the while unconscious of the full force of their utterance. In the next place, I deprecate that acute insight on which they so greatly pride themselves, which aims at lowering the sacredness of all God's creation: surely it is an unlovely and churlish sort of wisdom (if indeed it is to be called wisdom) which by its unworthy glosses unhallows all that is most noble in word and phrase: as if God had forbidden that sacred vessels, or vessels which can be made sacred, should be borne on the shoulders of Syrians or Chaldeans. Lastly, it neither accords with philosophy nor true religion that the plain, simple sense of a poem should
[Page 401]
be set aside unless on some grave necessity: and this excuse cannot be pleaded by those who would limit within the narrowest possible compass the utterances of ancient writers whether they treat of the highest good or the Nature of the Gods or of Providence and Fate.
This, then, is why I have gladly taken opportunity, according to the best of my power, to vindicate the greatness of this particular Chorus: which, as I have said, has been lamentably misconstrued by the over-acuteness of critics: and the rather too, since by its means the general plan and policy of Aeschylus throughout the Agamemnonian Trilogy becomes far more clearly seen. For we are thus assured of the fact which was more obscurely suggested by the omens of birds and hares, that the main purpose of the Tragedy is this: it aims at showing that God, though a late champion, is in the end the whole-hearted champion of the good, that he is sure in the end to avenge the blood of the innocent and the violation of the marriage tie. But this is a theme on which many things still remain to say: and I propose to deal at least with the more important of them, if possible, on a future occasion.
[Page ]
918 LECTURE XX
Aeschylus in his last three plays insists on the rights and claims of the Great Avenger of crimes. This is the explanation of the repeated mention of Iphigeneia, of Helen, and of the fall of Troy: but especially of the characters of Clytemnestra and Cassandra.
Before proceeding to the special subjects to which our course brings us naturally to-day, there are a few remarks I wish to make with regard to the character and favourite pursuits of Aeschylus himself: I wish to show that he was entirely consistent throughout his life, and that, in his declining age, he appears in these three Tragedies to be one and the same man as he had been when in younger days he wrote the Persae and Prometheus. And this I consider a decisive characteristic of a primary poet.
Certainly we find quite intact in these plays the spirit of an Athenian citizen and sailor: for, in the first place, being still mindful of Persian pomp, he maintains that he alone is a truly royal king who scorns to magnify himself above other men by extravagant display and luxury:
I pray thee, do not in thy woman's fashion
Pamper my pride, nor in barbaric guise
919 Prostrate on earth raise full-mouthed cries to me;
Make not my path offensive to the Gods
By spreading it with carpets. They alone
May claim that honour: but for mortal men
To walk on fair embroidery, to me
Seems nowise without peril. So I bid you
To honour me as man, and not as God. 920
Who can doubt that, when he wrote thus, the poet was thinking of the ill-omened pride and arrogance of Xerxes and his satraps?
[Page 403]
So too in his reply to his wife's question:
Had Priam conquered, what had Priam done? 921
Agamemnon cleverly implies a tacit contrast between the taste and manners of Greek and Barbarian:
His feet had trod the purple: doubt it not.
In short, the man who showed in the Prometheus his hatred of tyrants, and, in the Persae , of Oriental barbarism, wished Agamemnon to be the ideal type of a king, the ideal representative of the Greek spirit.
I think it also is neither inappropriate nor uninteresting to note that the same man who had won distinction at Salamis, and, more than that, had beyond all others immortalized the battle in his poems, lets drop in the work of his later years frequent indications—and those neither doubtful nor insignificant—of a mind keenly attracted to naval affairs and especially experienced in that branch of warfare: such, for instance, are the following lines which exhibit close observation of storms and the perilous deep:
                                         And when rose
The sun's bright orb, behold, the Aegean sea
Blossomed with wrecks of ships and dead Achaeans. 922
And these too, where the Furies describe the miserable plight of impious men, under the simile of shipwrecked sailors pitiably struggling amid storms and rocks:
But he that dareth and transgresseth all,
   In wild, confusèd deeds
   Where Justice is not seen,
I say that he perforce, as time wears on,
   Will have to take in sail,
When trouble make him hers, and each yard-arm 923
   Is shivered by the blast.
And then he calls on those who hear him not,
   And struggles all in vain
   In the fierce waves' mid-whirl;
[Page 404]
And God still mocks the man of fevered mood,
When he sees him who bragged it ne'er would come,
   With woes inextricable
   Worn out, and failing still
To weather round the perilous promontory:
   And for all time to come,
Wrecking on reefs of Vengeance bliss once high,
   He dies unwept, unseen. 924
And I should reproach myself for omitting here those splendid lines spoken by Cassandra:
Nay, now no more from out of maiden veils
My oracle shall glance, like bride fresh wed;
But seems as though 'twould rush with speedy gales
In full, clear brightness to the morning dawn;
So that a greater woe than this shall surge
Like wave against the sunlight. 925
Observe how easily the thought of the sunrise in mid-ocean suggests itself to Aeschylus, even when preoccupied with things far different: and how he notes the way it is wont to play on the restless waves at early dawn: such traits beyond question mark him as one well seasoned in experience of the sea and taking pleasure in dwelling on his memories of it.
But I must pass on. For these are merely subordinate details, at all events in so far as these three plays are concerned. For our examination of Aeschylus has now gone far enough to make it clear that in the splendid trilogy which opens with the Agamemnon , he placed before him an end and aim very different from that of ordinary tragedians. They, for the most part, propose to themselves the development of the fortunes of some family, or perhaps some state, to an issue long before known and anticipated. 926 They are not greatly concerned with right and justice so long as, by some ingenious sequence of events, they reach
[Page 405]
the required end. For instance, even Sophocles himself, in his highly-extolled Oedipus , does nothing more than put before our eyes, like a victim already doomed to sacrifice, a man who is not only innocent but a great benefactor to the whole city; the events are as cleverly and neatly arranged to bring about his overthrow, as if the Deity held it a pastime and pleasure to set snares for guileless men. But Aeschylus has far other and better aims; his desire, assuredly, being pre-eminently this, that he may himself discern, and enable others to discern, the policy and counsel by which the Gods rule mortal affairs. The sum and essence of his Tragedies lie not in the mere narration of the deeds wrought by Agamemnon, Prometheus, and Oedipus, but in his lucid and splendid unfolding of the designs entertained by the Supreme Ruler concerning the fortune and destiny of each of them.
Now any one who, keeping this well before him as a sort of clue, carefully follows the Agamemnonian Trilogy, will find, unless I mistake, some such distribution of its three parts as follows. First, in the Agamemnon itself, though clouds and darkness are round about, yet men just get a glimpse of the truth that divine retribution will inevitably assert itself, even though it may tarry long; they are taught, partly by express forebodings, partly by the event itself, that some one will arise some day to inflict the due penalty. In the next place, we have, in the Choephorae , most terrifying oracles, and the clear commands and authorized ministers of the Gods. Finally, the Furies, in the third place, commit the whole conduct of the cause to the higher Powers themselves, to Apollo namely and Minerva, as the interpreters of the Supreme Will. So that the ‘knot’, as it is called, to be unravelled in the whole trilogy, is tied in the Agamemnon , made more intricate and difficult in the Choephorae , and lastly, in the Eumenides , is resolved in such wise, that mortals are rather bidden to
[Page 406]
stand in silent awe before the majesty of the great and 927 good deity than allowed to fathom the plans of divine policy.
The full meaning of these things will more clearly appear if we resume the previous thread of discourse. We have laid it down that Aeschylus in this whole trilogy finally arranges his controversy with Almighty Jove, begun in the Prometheus : and that this is the main purpose of the splendid Choral Song towards the beginning of the Agamemnon , in which, as surely as in an oracle, divine power and goodness are declared, and we are shown how they are wont to be imparted to men's minds even in visions and the terrors of the night:
And doubtless this too comes from grace of Gods
Seated in might upon their awful thrones. 928
So beautifully does he teach the deep truth that the kindly providence of a Supreme Power ministers even to unwilling and reluctant minds. But I hope that no one will find fault with Aeschylus here, on the ground that, religious as his feeling is, he has chosen an unfortunate moment at which to praise that Jove whom he had formerly reprobated. For the connexion and ordering of this magnificent strophe I take to be much as follows. Calchas had in the past darkly foreboded both that the Greeks would be compelled to offer some ill-omened sacrifice, in order to appease the wrath of Diana, and also that vengeance for innocent blood would not tarry long. The Chorus, as if aghast and overwhelmed by these omens, betakes itself to the refuge becoming such wise and prudent elders, namely, to the counsels of the Supreme Ruler of all, which they opine to be most righteous and unfailing in their issue. Thus, finally, with reassured and tranquil spirit, the Chorus proceeds with the story of Iphigeneia.
[Page 407]
Moreover, the main purpose of the whole of this passage is to defend the murder of Agamemnon himself, which 929 would seem but little consistent with divine justice, if no wrong had been done by him. Clytemnestra indeed, the instrument of the deed, urges this argument again and again until she wearies us. She professes herself amazed that the Chorus should think that the death of such a one as Agamemnon deserved their sorrow and resentment:
Who, with no more regard than had been due
To a brute's death, although he called his own
Full many a fleecy sheep in pastures bred,
Yet sacrificed his child, the dear-loved fruit
Of all my travail-pangs, to be a charm
Against the winds of Thrakia. 930
And she invokes the same argument to prove that her husband's corpse is rightly treated with contempt:
   Nay, not dishonourable
   His death doth seem to me:
   Did he not work a doom,
   In this our house with guile?
Mine own dear child, begotten of this man,
Iphigeneia, wept with many a tear,
He slew: now slain himself in recompense,
   Let him not boast in Hell,
   Since he the forfeit pays,
   Pierced by the sword in death,
For all the evil that his hand began. 931
This first Chorus, therefore, which narrates the sacrifice of the victim maiden, must not be deemed mere idle embroidery, a sort of purple patch: rather so germane is it to the essence of the story that the memory of that deed is of vital importance. For it is thus made credible and natural, that the Olympian deities should permit
[Page 408]
Agamemnon's murder, which would otherwise have been inconceivably monstrous and unmerited.
Nor is it without meaning that Aeschylus attributes to Agamemnon himself, in the very act of sacrificing his daughter, tender and genuinely paternal feeling. And here I would point out to younger scholars, that the tragic scene is managed with no slight art, so that Agamemnon himself is made the real centre of it, not Iphigeneia. It is 932 on him that the dreadful necessity is laid, to calm the anger of his host chafing at the delay of their expedition:
And then of those Achaean ships the chief,
   The elder, blaming not
   Or seer or priest;
(note how completely this differs from the Homeric parallel where Agamemnon's rage is directed against Calchas near the opening of the Iliad ;) here we are told
But tempered to the fate that on him smote
———
So it is only with difficulty (and this shows his tender-hearted character), only when he sees that the decrees of Fate agree with the menaces of his angry host, that he surrenders to the terrible behest of the Gods;
                                         When that Achaean host
Were vexed with adverse winds and failing stores,
Still kept where Chalkis in the distance lies
And the vexed winds in Aulis ebb and flow;
And breezes from the Strymon sweeping down,
Breeding delays and hunger, driving forth
   Our men in wandering course
   On seas without a port,
Sparing nor ships nor rope nor sailing gear,
With doubled months wore down the Argive host. 933
Most finely does the poet portray the chafing resentment of the soldiers, as he piles their indignant phrases, one
[Page 409]
upon another, while at the same time he implies that the reluctant king was borne down by stress of overwhelming pressure: as clause follows clause, the very rhythm seems to sweep him off his feet. But the poet shows that nothing so moved the father to decree at last his own daughter's sacrifice, as that grievous and unhappy belief which possessed him, that human life is at the mercy of Fate. Once imbued with this, Agamemnon becomes quite other than the man he had been. Or, to put it in Aeschylus' own words:
So when he himself had harnessed
To the yoke of Fate unbending,
With a blast of strange new feeling
Sweeping o'er his heart and spirit,
Aweless, godless, and unholy,
He his thoughts and purpose altered
To full measure of all daring. 934
All this admirably falls into line with the passages from the Prometheus before quoted, on which I argued that 935 Aeschylus, beyond doubt a follower of Pythagoras, rejected both the extravagances of Epicurus and the doctrines of fatalism. And as to my contention that chief stress is laid intentionally in the narrative on Agamemnon, not Iphigeneia herself, I think any one will agree with me who is at the trouble to compare carefully Aeschylus, Lucretius, and Euripides, without doubt the most renowned among those who have told the story. Taking these in turn, the Lucretian Iphigeneia wins our sympathy at once, so slight are the touches with which the picture is sketched, so sweet and childlike her simplicity:
She saw her father by, whose tears did flow
In streams, the only pity he could show:
She saw the crafty priest conceal the knife
From him, bless'd and prepar'd against her life;
[Page 410]
She saw her citizens with weeping eyes
Unwillingly attend the sacrifice:
Then dumb with grief her tears did pity crave,
But 'twas beyond her father's power to save;
In vain did Innocence, Youth, and Beauty plead,
In vain the first pledge of his nuptial bed;
She fell, e'en now grown ripe for nuptial joy,
To bribe the Gods, and buy a wind for
Troy. 936
On the other hand, Euripides in his play assigns her a noble and high-toned speech, perhaps somewhat overstrained, but magnificently effective on the stage:
I suffer not a tear to fall. But you,
Ye virgins, to my fate attune the hymn,
‘Diana, daughter of Almighty Jove,’
With fav'ring omens sing ‘Success to Greece’,
Come, with the basket one begin the rites,
One with the purifying cakes the flames
Enkindle; let my father his right hand
Place on the altar; for I come to give
Safety to Greece and conquest to her arms.
Lead me: mine the glorious fate
To o'erturn the Phrygian state,
Ilium's towers their head shall bow. 937
And now let us see if in Aeschylus' drama our minds are not drawn, as I think the trend of the play demanded, in the most exquisitely skilful manner, rather to the sacrificing father than to the victim daughter:
All her prayers and eager callings
On her tender name of Father,
[Page 411]
All her young and maiden freshness,
They but set at naught, those rulers,
In their passion for the battle.
And her father gave commandment
To the servants of the Goddess, 938
When the prayer was o'er, to lift her,
Like a kid, above the altar,
In her garments wrapt, face downwards,—
Yea, to seize with all their courage,
And that o'er her lips of beauty
Should be set a watch to hinder
Words of curse against the houses,
With the gag's strength silence-working.
And then we have these lines most exquisitely recalling memories of her native soil and peaceful home:
   And she upon the ground
Pouring rich folds of veil in saffron dyed,
Cast at each one of those who sacrificed
   A piteous glance that pierced,
   Fair as a pictured form;
   And wishing,—all in vain—
   To speak; for oftentimes
In those her father's hospitable halls
She sang, a maiden pure with chastest song,
   And her dear father's life
That poured its threefold cup of praise to God,
   Crowned with all choicest good,
   She with a daughter's love
   Was wont to celebrate. 939
I will point out one thing further concerning this episode: here and there mysterious words are let fall whereby our attention is, as it were, purposely drawn to the terrible disaster overhanging the house of Pelops, and we are led to forebode evil for it in the near future. Thus Iphigeneia, we are told, is not suffered to speak lest, all unconscious, she may utter ‘words of curse against the
[Page 412]
houses’. And so too those pregnant sentences towards the close of the Chorus:
   What then ensued mine eyes
Saw not, nor may I tell, but Calchas' arts
Were found not fruitless. Justice turns the scale
   For those to whom through pain
   At last comes wisdom's gain. 940
And, lastly, there are those darker hints, yet implying a deep truth, by which even Clytemnestra is secretly moved, as all are moved who have deliberately committed but one single evil deed:
Still base counsel's fatal frenzy,
Wretched primal source of evils,
Gives to mortal hearts strange boldness. 941
Thus much as to the opening song of the Chorus in the Agamemnon , beyond question a noble lyric, and one which in itself alone contains all the elements of a finished and complete tragedy. Next we shall find in another part of the play, too, reference to the angered deities and an 942 awestruck presentiment of coming retribution. The fall of Troy is in itself a most striking fact to prove to impious men that they may not hope to enjoy the fruit of their crimes with impunity; and so the poet recounts it in splendid detail on two several occasions, and insists that nothing was due to the policy of the Greeks themselves, but all to be attributed to an avenging Deity:
So against young Alexandros
Atreus' sons the great king sendeth,
Zeus, of host and guest protector. 943
And beyond all, when the news of the victory of the Greeks has arrived, he declares the whole scheme of divine retribution:
Zeus, of host and guest protector,
Who hath wrought these things I worship:
[Page 413]
   He long since on Alexandros
   Stretched his bow that so his arrow
   Might not sweep at random, missing,
   Or beyond the stars shoot idly.
Yes, one may say, 'tis Zeus whose blow they feel;
   This one may clearly trace;
   They fared as he decreed. 944
This word ‘decreed’ ( ἔκρανΕν ), usually confined to the Fates ( Parcae ), is not without significance assigned here to Jove. As if to say that it was the unfettered overruling power of the God, not the blind force of the Fates, that had wrought the deed. And then he exposes the madness of certain thinkers, who resembled the Epicureans of a later date:
   Yea, one there was who said,
‘The Gods deign not to care for mortal men
By whom the grace of things inviolable
   Is trampled under foot.’
   No fear of God had he. 945
I now come to the exquisite lyrical song concerning the ill-omened Helen. Nowhere throughout it does the Chorus lay the faintest stress on the glory won by the Greek warriors. One thing is perpetually in its vision—the vengeance of the Gods, delayed indeed, but terrible beyond compare and unerring:
And so the wrath which works its vengeance out
   Dear bride to Ilion brought,
(Ah, all too truly named!) exacting still
   After long lapse of time
The penalty of foul dishonour done
To friendship's board and Zeus, of host and guest 946
   The God, from those who paid
   Their loud-voiced honour then
   Unto that bridal strain,
That hymeneal chorus which to chant
Fell to the lot of all the bridegroom's
kin. 947
[Page 414]
In this passage Aeschylus also corrects the view of those who maintain that evil and good alternate in a kind of fatal circle. We are taught, on the contrary, that, for the most part, evil degenerates to worse, while innocence rises to higher joy and happiness:
There lives an old saw, framed in ancient days,
In memories of men, that high estate
Full-grown brings forth its young, nor childless dies,
   But that from good success
Springs to the race a woe insatiable.
   But I, apart from all,
   Hold this my creed alone:
For impious act it is that offspring breeds,
   Like to their parent stock:
   For still in every house
That loves the right their fate for evermore
Rejoiceth in an issue fair and good. 948
The popular maxim ( γνώμη ), we observe, is set aside in such a way that at the same time the mind is braced to accept a higher and a stronger truth: a device which Aristotle held to merit highest praise in didactic precept. And, throughout the whole song, whether the Chorus is lamenting the ill-omened alliance, or the danger that threatens a house from the presence of an untamed lion's cub, or whether it is praising honest poverty and deprecating ‘golden-decked wealth’,—in all these and many other indirect ways, it is tacitly and incidentally using Paris, Helen, and the Trojans as means to warn Aegisthus, Clytemnestra, and their friends. But I need not labour the point: in this one Chorus the reader's mind is sufficiently schooled and toned against risk of being unduly depressed by the disaster which threatens the good.
949 But we must pass on. Nowhere, as I think, has religious reverence been more happily combined with a true
[Page 415]
kingly bearing than in Agamemnon's speech on his first entrance:
First Argos, and the Gods who guard the land,
'Tis right to greet: to them in part I owe
This my return, and vengeance that I took
On Priam's city. Not on hearsay proof
Judging the cause, with one consent the Gods
Cast in their votes into the urn of blood
For Ilion's ruin and her people's death;
I' the other urn Hope touched the rim alone,
Still far from being filled full. 950
An utterance worthy of an inspired poet! even the very ‘allegory’, as we may term it, has all the force of soberest history. A little further on we read:
For these things it is meet to give the Gods
Thank-offerings long-enduring; for our nets
Of vengeance we set close, and for a woman
Our Argive monster laid the city low. 951
His whole concern is to honour Jove and the Gods; he is completely silent as to himself and his followers:
And now will I to home and household hearth
Move on, and first give thanks unto the Gods
Who led me forth, and brought me back
again. 952
On the other hand, when anything of the nature of boasting is said about the exploits of the Greeks, it is to none other than Clytemnestra that the extravagant and proud words are assigned:
                                         and now,
Dear husband, leave thy car, nor on the ground,
O King, set thou the foot that Ilion trampled.
Why linger ye [ turning to her attendants ], ye maids, whose task it was
To strew the pathway with your tapestries? 953
[Page 416]
Assuredly there is here no ordinary malevolence. Even here the wife is planning her husband's doom, for she is tempting him to do something which may provoke the Nemesis of the immortal Gods; exactly as the false prophet 954 in Holy Scripture turned the minds of the Israelites to evil, when otherwise unable to harm them. We see that the mode of injury is one which shows that the guilty woman's mind is still influenced by religious feeling, however hateful that feeling may be, so that even where the beliefs of wicked men and evildoers are concerned, Aeschylus seems to insist on his creed that all things show the action of deity, be that deity what it may. But in that Agamemnon, ‘spontaneous, yet with most unwilling mind,’ 955 humours his faithless wife, he shows, as became him, the spirit of a large-minded man, not unbending or obstinate in matters of comparative unimportance. Yet doubtless the poet even here intends to suggest that something terrible and grievous hangs over one who, though himself guiltless of all conscious irreverence, yet, as he treads upon the carpet, allies himself in some sense to the overweening haughtiness of another.
And there is, too, another means, almost constant with Clytemnestra, whereby she encircles her husband with ill-omened presages. For she again and again, with deliberate design, utters quite openly sayings of darkest import concerning him. As, for example: at the very instant when the fall of Troy is announced by the lighted beacons, there occurs to her the thought of the risk which the Greek army ran of committing sacrilege:
And if they reverence well the guardian Gods
Of that new-conquered country, and their shrines,
Then they, the captors, will not captured be.
Ah! let no evil lust attack the host
Conquered by greed, to plunder what they ought not:
[Page 417]
For yet they need return in safety home,
Doubling the goal to run their backward race. 956
But, for my conviction that she knowingly and deliberately let fall these ominous words I specially rely on these three final lines:
But should the host come sinning 'gainst the Gods,
Then would the curse of those that perishèd
Be watchful, e'en though no quick ill might fall. 957
Why, I ask, this insistence on ‘quick ills’ if not because 958 the proud wife was thinking in resentment and rage of the paramour Cassandra, just as in the previous line she had in mind her victim daughter when she declared that the ‘curse of those that perished would be watchful’? Strongly wrought upon by these two emotions she bursts out with words which both veil and indicate her bitter resentment:
Such thoughts are mine, mere woman though I be. 959
As much as to say—Though I am a woman, a fact which you treat almost as a ground for scorn, I nevertheless warn you I am one who knows herself wronged and knows how to avenge herself on the ill-doer.
Assuredly the circumstances under which Agamemnon returned from his Trojan triumph were such that, according to the religious belief of the time, none could fail to forebode something sad and disastrous in store for him. Not a few intimations of this are interspersed even in the Choral Song which chants his triumph: whether because his hands were crimsoned with blood of warfare:
   And now my boding fear
   Awaits some news of ill,
As yet enwrapt in blackness of the night.
   Not heedless are the Gods
   Of shedders of much blood. 960
[Page 418]
or because of that Nemesis which, according to Herodotus, is always hostile, always fatal, to the pre-eminence and happy fortunes of men.
Fame in excess is but a perilous thing;
   For on men's quivering eyes
Is hurled by Zeus the blinding thunderbolt.
   I praise the good success
   That rouses not God's wrath. 961
But if Talthybius—a plain, simple soldier, speaking artlessly as such men do—took special care to avoid ‘mingling good with evil’, 962 it behoved the chief's wife herself to refrain most scrupulously from sinister and ill-omened words. Yet Clytemnestra, as I have said, knowingly and deliberately, again and again insists on such things: and she seems to pride herself on them, just as if, like one of 963 the Fates, she were herself able to turn and influence the course of events by scattering her charms and spells where she will. Thus, this is the way she ends her speech while the Trojan downfall was simply signalled, not yet reported:
May good prevail beyond all doubtful chance!
For I have got the blessing of great joy 964
—words which easily lend themselves to bear an ill meaning, especially when seconded by an equivocal suggestion of tone and expression. This rings even clearer still in her greeting of Agamemnon on his return:
Let the whole road be straightway purple-strown,
That Justice lead to home he looked not for. 965
But the Chorus, in accordance with its due function, most impressively and finely rebukes the impious queen: so far, at all events, as the following lines declaring the
[Page 419]
true inwardness of all words, whether of good or ill omen, are of such avail:
Who was it named her with such wondrous truth?
   (Could it be One unseen,
In strange prevision of her destined work
   Guiding the tongue through chance?)
Who gave that war-wed, strife-upstirring one
The name of Helen, ominous of ill?
   For all too plainly she
   Hath been to men, and ships,
   And towers, as doom of Hell. 966
Consider these lines a little carefully:
In strange prevision of her destined work
   Guiding the tongue through chance.
We have here a formula of briefest possible compass assuredly, but its teaching is drawn from the innermost sanctuary of Truth. Beyond all question, Aeschylus held the belief that men's tongues are neither ruled by blind fate nor wanton caprice: but that a higher influence, an influence of mysterious prophetic power, prevails both in the choice of names and in the words which seem to fall from men's lips by mere chance. Therefore, on this ground 967 too, we find him in full accord with revealed truth. For the sacred writers lay it down that among God's people names are mainly bestowed under divine influence, and have a peculiar significance associated with the recipient's disposition, habits, and fortune in life, so that the mere mention of a man's name serves as a token of the presence of a higher Power. Such was the pious reverence of this the most serious of all poets, that he held even the most trivial thing to be divinely directed.
But to revert to Clytemnestra: seeing that she plays the chief part in a tragedy, of which the main purpose is to defend a belief in a Divine Providence, there will be no
[Page 420]
irrelevance in adding a few remarks with a view to showing that from the outset of her ill-doing she was inwardly distracted and harassed in mind by an instinctive consciousness of offended Deity. And I should like to suggest a careful comparison between her and Lady Macbeth, when set on her terrible murder; unrestrained as the latter was by any scruple in her treachery to the royal guest, it is marvellous how, without the least embarrassment, nay, with all the charm of a ready courtesy, she receives him on his arrival. Clytemnestra, on the other hand, seems to express anxiety for her absent lord with awkward effort, as if it went against the grain. Observe, in the first place, how cold and apathetic she is at the very instant when assured that Troy has succumbed to the Grecian arms!
I long ago for gladness raised my cry,
When the first fiery courier came by night,
Telling of Troïa taken and laid waste:
And then one girding at me spake, ‘Dost think,
Trusting in beacons, Troïa is laid waste?
This heart elate is just a woman's way.’ ...
And that I show all zeal to welcome back
My honoured lord on his return (for what
Is brighter joy for wife to see than this,
When God has brought her husband back from war,
To open wide her gates?) tell my lord this,
‘To come with all his speed, the city's idol.’ 968
969 Observe that she is rather piqued and angered at being taxed with her own easy credulity, than elated by her husband's triumph. And even this tepid joy is wanting till she is prompted by the Chorus:
'Tis meet these things should be a special care
To Clytemnestra and the house, and yet
That they should make me sharer in their joy. 970
Then again, does it not give ground—to any one of real
[Page 421]
feeling—for extremely harsh suspicion when she welcomes her long-absent husband with such strained words as these?
Ye citizens, ye Argive senators,
I will not shrink from telling you the tale
Of wife's true love. 971
And how utterly without trace of affection does she call to mind the oft-repeated report of her husband's death!
Yea, if my lord had met as many wounds
As rumour told of, floating to our house,
He had been riddled more than any net. 972
How affectedly she describes herself as worn out with weeping, watching, and by ill-omened dreams! and then drags in banal and trivial similes, as if laboriously creating an affection, very different indeed from genuine feeling:
I hail my lord as watch-dog of the fold,
The stay that saves the ship, of lofty roof
Main column-prop, a father's only child,
Land that beyond all hope the sailor sees,
Morn of great brightness following after storm,
Clear-flowing fount to thirsty traveller. 973
I have made citation of these speeches at such length to make it quite clear that even with the impious and inhuman queen, there is something that checks her both in thought and in word, something that springs from an apprehension of future judgement. Nor did this escape the Chorus, as it quietly stood by, for they again and again speculate on the real meaning of the woman's circumlocutions. For example, they thus address the Herald, clearly with irony, at the end of Clytemnestra's double-faced 974 speech:
She hath thus spoken in thy hearing now
A goodly word for good interpreters. 975
[Page 422]
And what else can be the real meaning of the solemn ending of their song, of those words which echo like an oracle:
But unless Fate, firm-fixed, had barred our fate
From any chance of succour from the Gods,
   Then had my heart poured forth
   Its thoughts, outstripping speech.
   But now in gloom it wails
   Sore vexed, with little hope
At any time hereafter fitting end
   To find, unravelling,
My soul within me burning with hot thoughts. 976
The elders here confess plainly that they wish, indeed, themselves to lay bare the evil plot, but that they are kept back by some ‘firm-fixed Fate’ which in some sort controls even the utterances of the Gods themselves, and hinders any interference. Thus it comes about, to the king's great misfortune, that, though burning at heart to speak, they yet keep silence. Nor do they fully believe even Cassandra in her most outspoken speech, until the cry of the dying king reaches their ears.
But the more suspicions press in on all sides, the more do we admire the generous trust of Agamemnon, his truly soldierly simplicity, indeed his genuine piety without alloy or hypocrisy. He is never moved by the least fear, and he only tolerates the praise heaped upon him as the conqueror of Troy, on condition that the whole glory be attributed to the powers of heaven:
First Argos and the Gods who guard the land
'Tis right to greet. 977
I doubt whether in any other poet we can find a picture 978 of such a noble and great soul, so complete in every detail, yet sketched in so few lines. It has indeed ever been
[Page 423]
a special note and distinction of primary poets, to effect with a single stroke of the brush, as it were, what with other men is the work of prolonged labour and manifold effort.
There is again another token of religious feeling in Clytemnestra: she never ceases to claim that whatever grievous and cruel fate may befall her husband at her hands, has the reasonable sanction of a most righteous and even divine vengeance. It is this feeling which is behind the bitter allusions which she makes from time to time, not only to Iphigeneia but to Cassandra and Chryseis as well:
There lies he, [ pointing to the corpse of Agamemnon ] one who foully wronged his wife,
The darling of the Chryseïds at Troïa:
And there [ pointing to Cassandra ] this captive slave, this auguress,
His concubine, this seeress trustworthy,
Who shared his bed, and yet was as well known
To the sailors as their benches! 979
But when she names Iphigeneia we note an indefinable softening, and she shows herself more womanly:
Mine own dear child, begotten of this man,
Iphigeneia, wept with many a tear,
He slew: now slain himself in recompense,
   Let him not boast in Hell,
   Since he the forfeit pays,
   Pierced by the sword in death,
For all the evil that his hand began. 980
Aeschylus, clearly, knew how to temper her stubborn nature with this sweet touch of grief, calling into play a mother's tender love for a child. And, moreover, when she contumeliously and bitterly declaims against her yet unburied victim, she employs no merely idle reproaches,
[Page 424]
but sings in sweetest language, as it were a dirge, for her lost daughter:
   'Twas at our hands he fell,
   Yea, he fell low in death,
   And we will bury him,
Not with the bitter tears of those who weep
    981 As inmates of the house:
But she, his child, Iphigeneia, there
Shall meet her father, and with greeting kind,
E'en as is fit, by that swift-flowing ford,
   Dark stream of bitter woes,
   Shall clasp him in her arms,
   And give a daughter's kiss. 982
It now only remains for us to consider the attitude and bearing of this guilty woman in the very act of her murderous deed. And here she presents the greatest contrast to the Shakespearian character just mentioned—Lady Macbeth. For Clytemnestra, embarrassed neither with shame nor fear, openly and freely glories in her husband's murder: she points to the accusing spot of blood on her forehead, while at the same time she loudly proclaims herself as not avenging a mere personal wrong, but as a divine instrument, avenging the treason wrought against the supreme deities:
Ye test me as a woman weak of mind;
But I with dauntless heart to you that know
Say this, and whether thou dost praise or blame
Is all alike:—here Agamemnon lies,
My husband, now a corpse, of this right hand,
An artist just, the handiwork: so stands it. 983
So she shows herself at the very moment of her abominable crime: but, as is the way with such fierce natures when once their desires are attained, she begins to relent gradually, and to adduce in palliation of her deed, first
[Page 425]
Iphigeneia, then Cassandra, and finally even Chryseis: as if indeed she cast about for reasons by which she might defend her crime, not merely in the judgement of God and man, but in the secret forum of her own conscience. The same object is aimed at by the fact which I have previously noted at sufficient length: namely, that she constantly lays the blame upon one of the Fates or the evil genius of the Pelopidae. And by this reasoning she at last seems to satisfy herself completely:
   But I for my part wish,
   (Binding with strongest oath
The evil dæmon of the Pleisthenids,) 984
   Though hard it be to bear,
To rest content with this our present lot:
And, for the future, that he go to vex
Another race with homicidal deaths. 985
And in this connexion must be specially remarked her frequent reference to sacrifices:
I have no leisure here to stay without:
For as regards our central altar, there
The sheep stand by as victims for the fire;
For never had we hoped such thanks to give:
If thou wilt do this, make no more delay. 986
And again in describing her crime:
And twice I smote him, and with two deep groans
He dropped his limbs. And when he thus fell down
I gave him yet a third, thank-offering true
To Hades of the dark, who guards the dead. 987
And the closing lines of the speech we have quoted before look the same way: where she suggests that the catastrophe is the work not of her right hand, but of some evil spirit,
[Page 426]
an enemy to the house: and the religious sacrifice of a victim rather than a personal act of vengeance:
But in the semblance of the dead man's wife,
The old and keen Avenger of the house
Of Atreus, that cruel banqueter of old,
   Hath wrought out vengeance full
   On him who lieth here,
   And full-grown victim slain
Over the younger victims of the past. 988
It is striking how consistent this is with the outlook and temper of those under the influence of false religious beliefs, whenever (as is often met with by the student of these peoples in particular) a God has been propitiated by sacrifice either of a tyrant king or some wicked blasphemer. And so too, at the very end of the drama, she calms the dispute between Aegisthus and the Chorus with the declaration that she has had enough and to spare of violence and domestic carnage:
Nay, let us not do other evil deeds,
Thou dearest of all friends. An ill-starred harvest
It is to have reaped so many. Enough of woe:
Let no more blood be shed. 989
In short, I hold that the character of Clytemnestra even in 990 her full cruelty, not to speak of her more yielding moments, is so drawn that it is easy to see in her what great power an innate fear of the Gods exerts even upon the callous and wicked. This makes it more easy to believe that Cassandra is represented as an almost holy character: she is meant to be a constant witness that God is ever close at hand, and notes the crimes of mortals with watchful eye; even though He may seem to thoughtless men to deal carelessly and almost to make sport with their affairs. For, undoubtedly, the whole value of prophetic utterance lies in this, that when the final event is long deferred, it
[Page 427]
keeps alive the recollection of a present deity, lest men's minds drift into the folly of Epicureanism. Now, since Aeschylus was intending to let the curtain drop upon a frightful crime, it was necessary to create in the minds of the spectators an expectation of something beyond it, to cheer them with some hope of future retribution: and this is manifestly effected most impressively by the entrance of Cassandra: not merely by her expressed forebodings, but far more by the whole tone of her bearing and personality; her very silence seems to cry aloud that God is here
I will explain what I mean by instances. To begin with, she is met at her first approach, you will remember, by Clytemnestra, who, in the coldest manner, speaks of Jove the God of hospitality, and then invites the captive to take her part in the religious rites of the household:
Thou too—I mean Cassandra—go within;
Since Zeus hath made it thine, and not in wrath,
To share the lustral waters in our house,
Standing with many a slave the altar nigh
Of Zeus, who guards our goods. 991
On the other hand, how does Cassandra demean herself? First and foremost, while Clytemnestra remains present, she maintains a profound silence: as if the queen were unworthy even to hear the words of the messenger of heaven: next, as if left alone with her protecting Deity, she bursts forth only in broken words: then, little by little, pays some attention to the words let fall by the Chorus: and thus, after having passed through almost 992 every stage of lyrical pathos, recovers herself and with quiet and steady control utters her long farewell to the things of earth:
Well then I go, and e'en within will wail
My fate and Agamemnon's. And for me,
[Page 428]
Enough of life. Ah, friends! Ah! not for nought
I shrink in fear, as bird shrinks from the brake.
When I am dead do ye this witness bear,
When in revenge for me, a woman, Death
A woman smites, and man shall fall for man
In evil wedlock wed. This friendly office,
As one about to die, I pray you do me. 993
Is it not manifest that Clytemnestra takes part in sacred rites and worships the immortal Gods with lip-service merely, but Cassandra in reality and from her deepest soul? One, like the general run of men, simply repeats the common forms of religion: the other, in the spirit of those truly religious and reverent, really feels that all things are filled with the divine.
Next we may note another trait which is truly godlike (for Jehovah Himself, the True and Living God, deals in the same way with the stubborn and unbelieving); she bears patiently and meekly with those who spurn her warnings and indeed ridicule her forebodings. The Chorus, even while deeply sympathizing with her unhappy fate, yet by no means yield belief to her prophecies:
O thou most wretched, yet again most wise:
Long hast thou spoken, lady, but if well
Thou know'st thy doom, why to the altar go'st thou,
Like heifer driven of God, so confidently? 994
Gently does she reason with this incredulity:
                                         Ah! not for nought
I shrink in fear, as bird shrinks from the brake. 995
And so, at last, even the fatal obstinacy of the Chorus is broken down: they cease to contend with her, and recognize her as able to divine the truth:
Thy doom foretold, poor sufferer, moves my pity. 996
[Page 429]
Finally, as she leaves the stage to meet her death, she shows that she grieves less at her own sad fate, than at 997 the evil plight of the whole race of man:
Ah, life of man! when most it prospereth,
It is but limned in outline: and when brought
To low estate, then doth the sponge, full soaked,
Wipe out the picture with its frequent touch:
And this I count more piteous e'en than that. 998
She maintains, in fact, that in her eyes it is a more bitter doom to disregard heaven-sent reproof and warning than to suffer woes like Priam or the house of Pelops: a creed well worthy the sanction of a messenger and intermediary of the immortal Gods.
Indeed, any one who carefully considers the final issue of her oracular utterance, and notices how with dread steps one follows close upon another, will recognize, if I mistake not, much the same succession which we find was observed by the great prophets of Judaea. At the outset, as I pointed out, profound silence: then mere sighs and short sobs: next, broken ejaculations significant of the calamity to come: and, at last, chafed and wearied of silence, she declares the whole event, laying bare in clear terms, so that all can understand, first the crime, then the retribution.
I will add but this: Cassandra is made the more awful and impressive in her forebodings from the fact that her own disposition is tender and quick to show compassion, as we can gather from her reference to the nightingale:
Ah, for the doom of clear-voiced nightingale! 999
or from that touching utterance just quoted, in which she bewails the granite heart of man, whom not even the penalties inflicted by the Gods can touch to any real depth:
[Page 430]
and, above all, from the way in which her heart returns again and again with unsatisfied yearning to the thought of her ruined country and the fallen house of Priam:
Woe for the marriage-ties, the marriage-ties
Of Paris that brought ruin on his friends!
   Woe for my native stream,
   Scamandros that I loved!
1000 Once on thy banks my maiden youth was reared,
   (Ah, miserable me!)
Now by Cokytos and by Acheron's shores
I seem too likely soon to utter song
   Of wild, prophetic speech. 1001
The mere name of Scamander seems to raise visibly to her imagination Troy's walls, the crowd of suppliants in the temple, her father's fruitless sacrifices:
Woe for the toil and trouble, toil and trouble
Of city that is utterly destroyed!
   Woe for the victims slain
   Of herds that roamed the fields,
My father's sacrifice to save his towers!
   No healing charm they brought
To save the city from its present doom. 1002
And, to sum all, nothing seems to explain the unresisting and resigned way in which she yields herself to Clytemnestra's murderous sword, so much as the memory, deep-seated in her mind, of her native soil, of her ruined country, of her father cut off before her eyes:
Why then do I thus groan in this new home,
When, to begin with, Ilion's town I saw
Faring as it did fare, and they who held
That town are gone by judgment of the Gods?
I too will fare as they, and venture death. 1003
[Page 431]
Her resource and solace remind us of that addressed by the holy prophet to the sorrowing Jew: ‘Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, unto thee, O Baruch; Thou didst say, Woe is me now! for the Lord hath added grief to my sorrow: I fainted in my sighing, and I find no rest. Thus shalt thou say unto him, The Lord saith thus: Behold, that which I have built will I break down, and that which I have planted I will pluck up, even this whole land. And seekest thou great things for thyself? seek them not: for, behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh, saith the Lord.’ 1004 Those who are thus passion-stricken take shame to themselves and feel reproach as for dereliction of duty, should the thought of what they have loved and lost even for an instant escape them.
Hence too, towards the close of the same scene, on mention of ‘the fortunate and happy’, as if she herself might be supposed among them, she bursts forth at once 1005 in sudden anguish:
Woe's me for thee and thy brave sons, my father. 1006
Any one, seriously considering these traits, cannot but be conscious that Cassandra's prophecies gain no little in impressiveness as uttered by one of gentle nature, keenly susceptible of delicate and womanly affection, even when carried out of herself by the frenzy which Apollo inspires; similar traits will be found in nearly all women described by poets as inspired to foretell the future.
Let me be allowed to explain here very briefly what would seem to be the main reason why Aeschylus has been more successful in the character of Cassandra than almost all other poets in the seers whom they have portrayed. I think it arises from three facts: In the first place, she is neither fettered by thought of reward, nor constrained
[Page 432]
by force. Nor do men summon her from afar, like Proteus or the Sibyl, to declare oracles in some question alien to herself: but she comes naturally in the due course of the action, as one divinely endowed with knowledge of the future and scorning to refrain from declaring what she knows out of consideration for herself or those dear to her. Next, she has nothing whatever in common with the mischievous tribe of soothsayers. She divines neither by inspection of entrails nor flight of birds: she has herself learned directly from the Gods that knowledge which she again passes on to mankind: so that her warnings seem to be separated by the smallest possible line from divine knowledge. And lastly, and this one thing alone beyond all makes deep impression on our minds, Cassandra affords striking proof of the peril which those incur for themselves who seek to overpass the lawful bounds of knowledge. According to the words of Aeschylus himself:
                                         Justice turns the scale
   For those to whom through pain
   At last comes wisdom's gain.
   But for our future fate,
   Since help for it is none,
Good-bye to it before it comes, and this
Has the same end as wailing premature. 1007
1008 Nay, I may quote higher testimony, ‘He who increases knowledge increases sorrow.’ This truth has profoundly impressed the mind of man, which for the most part soon droops in the presence of those facts and events which pass the bound of mortality and human affections. The whole character of Cassandra mainly turns on the fact that her misery was caused by Apollo, and that because of her gift of divination: and this, subject to the condition that she should never be able to avoid peering into times to come and declaring things that were to be. Such,
[Page 433]
we are taught, is the fascination, such the evil fate, for mere mortals, of that knowledge which anticipates the future.
With all this before us there is nothing, I think, to hinder us from the conclusion that, in composing the Agamemnon , Aeschylus had peculiarly and conspicuously in aim to strengthen a true religious feeling, which was imperilled by the sight of the inequalities of human fortune. I think that he used every effort in order to discountenance, with the highest sanctions of religion, the theories of those who hold human affairs to be disposed merely by fate or chance: and that he took delight in showing, however indistinctly, that the eyes of the Lord Most High watch, with perfect justice, alike over good and evil men, at all times and in all places. And thus it is that it would be hard to meet with any one who did not rise from perusal of the play without a disposition to prefer for himself rather the piteous end of the upright king than secure triumph with his murderers. Further, as I have said, Aeschylus mainly attached this pure and solemn meaning to a most abominable and cruel deed, through his skilful presentation of two distinguished women: one of whom, adulterous as she was and stained with almost every wickedness, yet cannot prevent herself from showing some religious feeling, some sense of a Divine Presence. But the other, with all due honour for a name worthy of reverence beyond all others, I should almost enroll in the army of martyrs : inasmuch as she, knowingly and willingly, testified with her life to the claims of highest truth.
But, whether from the utterances of Cassandra or from 1009 the total impression of the play, a vague trust is begotten in us that at some time, perhaps long delayed, the wronged house may be avenged and justified: and thus it was inevitable that a poet, an upholder of religion, should develop more fully and freely the course of divine retribution.
[Page 434]
Hence the Agamemnon is followed by the Choephorae , and that play in its turn by the Eumenides. I shall on a future occasion consider the leading principles and motives of both these plays, and the degree in which they each especially support the claims of the everlasting Deity and the interests of dishonoured piety.
End of Vol. I
[Page ]
VOLUME II LECTURE XXI 1010
The Choephorae: the tragic horror of the story tempered by four methods: first, by maintaining throughout the impression of a solemn sacrifice: secondly, by the support of Apollo and the Sacred Oracle: thirdly, by an undefined suggestion of the near presence of Agamemnon himself: lastly, by the human feeling exhibited by Orestes, and, in an even higher degree, by Electra.
You have been good enough, gentlemen—though I fear it is out of your indulgent kindness rather than out of strict regard for my deserts—to confer this distinguished office upon me for another five years: 1011 and I tender you my warmest thanks, fully conscious as I am, that as this act has increased your kindness, so it has made more difficult the hard task which I have undertaken. For it is a bolder act on your part to show indulgence to one who does not merit it after you have tested his powers, than to form too high an estimate of him when still untried. I, indeed, could wish that my powers, or, at all events, my leisure were greater, so that I might more faithfully take up the remaining links of this chain of discourse upon the subject of Poetry. But so far as my main views are concerned I have nothing to withdraw or modify: in fact, the proofs in support of them seem to become only clearer and more cogent as time passes.
To pass, however, to the immediate subject of my present lecture—the Choephorae of Aeschylus. This play forms, as you know, a sequel to the Agamemnon , but there 1012 is this marked distinction between the two plays: in the Agamemnon an uncertain and vague apprehension
[Page 6]
predominates, and an undefined sense of approaching evil: while in the Choephorae our minds feel reassured and at rest from the first, as though we were on the point of reaching the goal of righteous vengeance: and this for the simple reason that Divine Power here suggests and declares itself far more openly than in the former drama. In brief, to the Agamemnon may be fitly assigned as a motto these closing lines of one of its own choral songs:
   But now in gloom it wails
   Sore vexed, with little hope
At any time hereafter fitting end
   To find, unravelling,
My soul within me burning with hot thoughts. 1013
But the Choephorae may be just as fairly summed in its two magnificent lines:
   Long tarries destiny,
But comes to those who pray. 1014
Thus a tone of calm unruffled serenity dominates the whole play. Not once is there the least misgiving as to a Divine Providence, or as to retribution following upon crime: the only excitement is to watch the exact method and stages by which the inevitable vengeance will carry out its appointed task.
To-day, therefore, I shall set forth in detail, to the best of my power, the salient points of this great work of art: and these, I think, may all be embraced under four headings. First, the form and feature of the whole Tragedy are conceived after the manner of a religious function. Secondly, all the characters are governed throughout by the utterance of the Sacred Oracle, namely that of Apollo of Delphi, who never for a moment fails to protect Orestes with his divine 1015 presence. Thirdly, Orestes and Electra appeal to the shade of Agamemnon, not once or twice merely but whenever
[Page 7]
they have to give effect to their solemn vows, and they appeal to him, I repeat, in such words as show that to them he was silently present, hearing and supporting them. Lastly, if we carefully scrutinize the leading characters of the play, we shall find, beyond all question, the weightiest indications of pious reverence: throughout, the more violent impulses of their dispositions are tempered, the excesses of their hope, grief, and resentment are restrained, and that because their minds are filled with trust in a Divine Power. I shall now proceed to illustrate this fourfold analysis by the clearest examples I can select.
In the first place, then, I said that the tenor of this tragedy was in high degree comparable to that of a solemn liturgy, conducted with due ceremonial: and this, I suppose, cannot fail to strike any one who with the least attention has pictured to himself the first entrance of Orestes on the stage:
O Hermes of the darkness 'neath the earth,
Who hast the charge of all thy Father's sway,
To me who pray deliverer, helper, be:
For I to this land come, from exile come,
And on the raised mound of this monument
I bid my father hear and list. 1016
Observe that at the very opening of the play two more than human personages are invoked to bear their due part—one, Agamemnon himself who has long been dead, the other Hermes, the messenger of the gods of the lower world—both of whom, in my judgement, Aeschylus intended to be considered as silently present on the stage throughout the whole course of the play. It is, indeed, a silent presence, felt but not visible to mortal eyes; yet not without its real effect, nor in any way doubtful to sympathetic observers. This, however, deserves fuller treatment on its own account: I now merely note it, as showing that
[Page 8]
1017 Aeschylus deliberately, and at the very outset of his play, took care to invoke those sacred names, thus emphasizing that, as if at his own Eleusis (for he was born in that village), a sort of mystic and religious function was being performed.
Moreover, the very order and sound of the diction itself seems to suggest a solemn, set form of liturgy: especially, among other reasons, from the fact that one and the same thought is varied and reiterated in differing phrase: Deliverer, helper be: I come, from exile come : I bid my father hear and list . Aristophanes indeed, as was the manner of that master of ridicule, makes jest of this: but it must be remembered that such repetition is quite natural to those who employ a set form of words in prayer. For, in some measure; such set forms are like a formal proclamation recited in public: which, either to suit the dignity of the subject, or to overcome the inattentiveness of the hearers, frequently reiterates and insists upon the same idea.
Then how impressive, how solemn, is the effect of making the whole course of the play take place near the grave of Agamemnon! which, as far as I can conjecture, stood before the gateway of Clytemnestra's palace. For the lines of the Chorus, who follow Orestes with their prayers after he has, in the guise and dress of a traveller, just entered Aegisthus' palace, plainly show that the scene does not change, and that the actors do not move about from place to place, as in other plays and indeed in the very next play of the poet, the Eumenides . When he has knocked at the gate and entered the house by invitation of the queen, the Chorus of Maidens bursts forth at once with words of good augury:
O earth revered! thou height revered, too,
Of the mound piled o'er the body
Of our navy's kingly captain,
Oh, hear us now: oh, come and help us:
[Page 9]
For 'tis time for subtle Suasion
To go with them to the conflict. 1018
Whence it is quite obvious that they are speaking in sight 1019 of the tomb which they venerate with such loving regard. In the beginning of the poem they show that it has the sacredness of an altar for them; for when Electra appeals to them for counsel this is how they promise their support:
Thy father's tomb as altar honouring,
I, as thou bidd'st, will speak my heart-thoughts out! 1020
It would be a mistake to suppose that the tomb is thus placed merely by chance, or for the sake of scenic effect. In the first place, the very fact that the whole story, such as it is, is completed in one and the same place, greatly tends, as any one may see, to simplicity and to a dignified, severe style of composition: indeed, the observance of this rule is the main reason why Greek Tragedy is for the most part more impressive and severe than our own. But the more simple and severe such a rule is, the better suited was it for a writer who was imitating the form of a great religious service. I may also incidentally remark that the same play retained another mark of primitive simplicity which the writer had neglected in the Agamemnon ; namely, the observance of the ‘unity of time’: which requires that neither shall the play as represented on the stage be too long, nor shall it compress into a very few hours events which in reality extended over many years. For instance, in the Agamemnon , the return of the Argives follows immediately upon the fall of Troy, though, as all the spectators knew, it was a process involving many months. Again, when Aeschylus composed the Eumenides , he did not scruple to represent in close proximity localities so far removed in distance and time as the Delphic rock and the Areopagus. There is absolutely nothing of this kind in the
[Page 10]
Choephorae : everything is strictly and exactly ordered after 1021 the rules laid down by the most stringent critics. And this, as I have said, is eminently appropriate to a religious ceremonial.
There is another point which I should like you to consider, for it is indeed the chief cause why we have this express mention of Agamemnon's tomb: it is that in this more than in any other way the crime of matricide, which would otherwise be unspeakably monstrous and horrible, is palliated and made to appear less revolting. For whenever Orestes and Electra turn their eyes thither they become as it were ocular witnesses of the savage murder committed by Clytemnestra, and they remind themselves that they have sworn to avenge their father: then their slumbering resentment awakens: the spirit of a righteous and holy warfare is kept alive in their hearts. Whenever they invoke solemn curses upon their enemies, this is not the language of taunting resentment or of merciless savagery: rather, we would say, it has the character of prophecy, as it might be the voice of divinity itself, with awful formula dooming to destruction wicked and impious mortals. In short, we may give practically the same explanation of these tragic imprecations as is usually given of those maledictions sometimes found in the writings of the Hebrew Psalmist: namely, that in great part they indicate, not what men desire, but what they forebode and feel will shortly come to pass. For instance:
O Zeus! O Zeus! who sendest from below
   A woe of tardy doom
Upon the bold and subtle hands of men ... .
May it be mine to chant o'er funeral pyre
Cry well accordant with the pine-fed blaze,
   When first the man is slain,
   And his wife perisheth! 1022
[Page 11]
These lines, whether they are assigned to Electra or to the Chorus (for scholars are not unanimous on this point), seem to me, unquestionably, to have the quality, not of a prayer merely, but of an oracular utterance. What more 1023 likely than that a mind eager to follow the Divine guidance and assured, beyond doubt, of its behests, should adopt in preference to all others that form of speech which preeminently suggests and avows its own whole-hearted agreement with the Higher Powers? And I think the poet plainly shows this, for he immediately makes the same speaker reason thus:
Why should I hide what flutters round my heart?
As much as to say, that she is not giving way to anger when she so openly invokes evils upon the adulterers, but that she is obeying the bidding of some celestial monitor: and that under its influence she is like a ship driven rapidly forward by a strong breeze:
On my heart's prow a blast blows mightily,
   Keen wrath and loathing fierce. 1024
This most serious of poets thus gives us due warning that where the bitterest wrath and resentment are expressed, at the same moment appeal is made to a Divine avenging power: so that none may conclude that it is simply a question of the private rights of Orestes and Electra, but all should realize that something of universal and sacred interest is involved, which has the closest connexion with the universal laws of right and wrong.
There is a sacred impressiveness, too, in the fact that, even at the moment when the criminals are put to death, the idea of the royal tomb as a kind of altar is maintained. For while Aeschylus stays short of offering Clytemnestra as a sacrifice on the tomb itself (for that would have been
[Page 12]
too monstrous and repulsive for public representation), yet their just lifeless bodies are brought forth and exposed 1025 like those of sacrificed victims: and not without a solemn and set prayer being offered by Orestes, for his words sound like a prayer:
See ye this country's tyrant rulers twain,
My father's murderers, wasters of his house ... .
And ye who hear these ills, behold ye now
Their foul device, as bonds for my poor father ... .
Show ye the snare that wrapt him o'er, that He
May see, our Father,—not of mine I speak,
But the great Sun that looks on all we do,—
My mother's deeds, defilèd and impure,
That He may be a witness in my cause,
That I did justly bring this doom to pass
Upon my mother. 1026
Any one can see that the whole scene was intentionally constructed in this key in order that the unhappy son may appear to be performing the task of a priest rather than that of an executioner: and so be entitled to all indulgence and excuse, as one offering sacrifice pursuant to the behests of Supreme Power. Thus Aeschylus, by reason of this one artistic effect, gained by representing the action of the play as taking place at the tomb of Agamemnon, has marvellously proved his superiority to Sophocles and Euripides, both of whom subsequently dealt with the same story.
Let me next enumerate a few minor details, which, however trifling they may seem in themselves, yet are not without significance in a play of religious and sacred import. We find Orestes, for example, after the manner of the old heroes, first of all severing a lock of his hair, cherished with pious care, as an offering to Inachus the God of his country's stream:
                                         One tress,
Thank-offering for the gifts that fed my youth,
To Inachus I consecrate. 1027
[Page 13]
In this short extract from Orestes' beautiful prayer Aeschylus shows that he himself was a zealous student of Homer, and that Orestes, while intent on the great task he had undertaken, was not entirely forgetful of his childish years and the sweet charm of familiar regions.
A little later again, a pause occurs before the prayers are 1028 offered at the tomb, but the interruption itself arose from religious scruples. First the chorus of captive women, then Electra herself, approach the tomb bringing the sacrificial offerings sent by the queen: but the greater part of the speeches of each of them turns on the sole question as to whether it is right to offer to the shades of the slain king gifts sent by her who wrought his murder: these doubts solved and the invocations completed, the celebrated ‘recognition’ follows, where Electra identifies Orestes by aid of his votive lock of hair laid on the tomb.
And in connexion with this episode there is another and no uncertain sign of a scrupulous piety, which deserves careful notice, namely, that amidst her affectionate greetings and sudden joy at her brother's unhoped-for return, the loving sister seems to check herself and breaks off abruptly into a prayer to the Gods:
                                         May Might and Right,
And sovran Zeus as third, my helpers be! 1029
While her brother, who is of still sterner mould, does not respond to her tears and endearments by as much as one affectionate word, but at once begins with formal prayer, as if overcome and almost horrified at the tremendous burden of the duty divinely imposed upon him:
Zeus! Zeus! be Thou a witness of our troubles,
See the lorn brood that calls an eagle sire,
Eagle that perished in the coils and folds
Of a fell viper. Now on them bereaved
[Page 14]
Presses gaunt famine. Not as yet full-grown
Are they to bring their father's booty home. 1030
We have here an instance of a characteristic which we have already noticed in Aeschylus,—that he draws comparisons from the life of animals, and incidentally introduces little sketches of their ways and habits. But to proceed with Orestes' address:
1031 Thus it is thine to see in me and her,
(I mean Electra) children fatherless,
Both suffering the same exile from our home.
And should'st Thou havoc make of brood of sire
Who at Thine altar greatly honoured Thee,
Whence wilt Thou get a festive offering
From hand as free? Nor, should'st Thou bring to naught
The eagle's nestlings, would'st Thou have at hand
A messenger to bear Thy will to man
In signs persuasive; nor when withered up
This royal stock shall be, will it again
Wait on Thine altars at high festivals. 1032
He appeals to Jove with just those reasonings which we know were most usual among the ancients in such situations. Following on this, the three—Orestes, Electra, and the Chorus—chant in turn a threefold appeal to Avenging Deity, or lament for Agamemnon—whichever we choose to call it: and certainly the verses, both in rhythm and structure, most aptly suggest the formal liturgy common to suppliants.
But what more need I say? nearly half the whole play is taken up with performance of these solemn ceremonials: and unless Aeschylus devised them with strict religious meaning, his labour had been better spent in contriving an ingenious dramatic situation with Sophocles, or a clever variety of arguments with Euripides.
And besides, the choruses in this play are throughout
[Page 15]
of such a tone, as constantly to recall men's minds and feelings to the thought of a present Deity and of the retribution about to issue from His innermost sanctuary: so that it would scarcely be wrong to treat these choral songs also as if partaking of the nature of a solemn ceremonial. And, even more than this, the Chorus, 1033 immediately following the departure of Orestes on his fatal design, is much taken up with reprobation of wicked women and the evil wrought by them: such as Althaea, who killed her own son in a fit of rage: and Scylla the Megarian who, moved by mad passion, destroyed her own father: and above all, the most unqualified detestation is reserved for those Lemnian women who murdered their husbands. All 1034 this, I apprehend, was not only intended to menace Clytemnestra with dark omens, but, as it were, to surrender her to the sure and righteous vengeance of the Higher Powers, and especially of those powers whose chief care it is to maintain the rights and interests of mortal men—Erinnys, I mean, Mercury, and Jove Himself, who are each invoked by name in this solemn chorus.
Of similar import is the circumstance that when, towards the commencement of the Chorus, reference is made to the ills besetting men's lives, the Pythagorean Aeschylus has recorded his belief—in this agreeing with the Peripatetic philosopher, as quoted by Cicero 1035 —that nowhere and at no time are we menaced so seriously as we are by our own selves whenever, be we men or women, we are urged by headlong passion. We can see the end of evils which storms of the elements or rage of wild beasts bring down upon humanity: but those which issue from men against their kind these can neither be numbered nor kept within bounds:
Many dread forms of evils terrible
Earth bears, and Ocean's bays
[Page 16]
   With monsters wild and fierce
O'erflow, and through mid-air the meteor lights
   Sweep by; and wingèd birds
And creeping things can tell the vehement rage
   Of whirling storms of winds.
But who man's temper overbold may tell,
   Or daring passionate loves
   Of women bold in heart,
Passions close bound with men's calamities? 1036
Some may perhaps detect here no faint suggestion of the inspired truth found in the New Testament: ‘For every kind of beasts, and of birds, and of serpents, and of things in the sea, is tamed, and hath been tamed of mankind: But the tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly evil, full of 1037 deadly poison.’ 1038 I quote these verses all the more readily inasmuch as they are taken from that part of the sacred writings which seems to me, beyond all the rest, to be most imbued with the qualities we find in those of Aeschylus himself: whether it be due to a certain archaic dignity of thought, or because the inspired writer, like Aeschylus, constantly adds thought to thought in a sequence which is simple rather than ingenious and artistic.
But, to pursue our consideration of the choruses in this play: may not the poet's purpose, in this bitter denunciation of the wickedness of men, have been to turn our minds more effectively towards the unbounded and untiring goodness of the Gods? Can we not suppose that the Chorus, standing forth as representing, in some sort, this whole race of wretched mortals, took upon itself to confess before the Gods the sins, misdeeds, and errors which are common to all humanity? Such confession springs from the promptings of Nature herself, and has been, throughout all ages, not the least part of religion and the service of the Gods. But I have said enough of this lyric.
Again, when Orestes has entered the palace, the Chorus
[Page 17]
follow his movements with chants of happy omen. In all of these the chief note is a prayer, in set form, to Jove and Mercury and the household Gods to lend their aid: then, when his task has thus won the blessing of heaven, they openly and plainly urge him to his mother's murder; and add incentives, lest his hand should pause in horror:
But thou, take courage when the time is come
   For action, and cry out,
   Shouting thy father's name,
When she shall cry aloud the name of ‘son’,
And work thou out a woe that none will blame. 1039
Assuredly this exhibits artistic skill in a high degree: for the Chorus, standing as interpreter of the Divine Will, in the midst, too, of prayers and religious ceremonial, actually counsels and rehearses in anticipation what would else appear as the most horrible detail of a horrible deed.
Finally, when the fatal deed is fully accomplished, the 1040 Chorus is, in like spirit, prepared with its Song of Triumph: wishing to testify that the sacrificial act is viewed as just by the immortal Gods:
Late came due vengeance on the sons of Priam,
   Just forfeit of sore woe;—
Late came there too to Agamemnon's house,
   Twin lions, twofold Death.
The exile who obeyed the Pythian hest
   Hath gained his full desire,
Sped on his way by counsel from the Gods.
Shout ye, loud shout for the escape from ills
   Our master's house has seen ... .
And so on one who loves the war of guile
   Revenge came subtle-souled:
And in the strife of hands the child of Zeus
   In very deed gave help,
(We mortals call her Vengeance, hitting well
   The meetest name for her,)
Breathing destroying wrath against her foes.
[Page 18]
She, she it is whom Loxias summons now,
Who dwelleth in Parnassia's cavern vast,
   Calling on her who still
   Is guileful without guile. 1041
So ‘foams, thunders, glows’ 1042 our poet, hardly, indeed, leaving breathing space for a cool contemplation of the deed itself: nor can we easily bring ourselves to stamp as parricide an act wrought with the assent, and even with the assistance, of the Higher Powers.
Hence, whether we look at the Choric Odes, or the scheme of place and scene, or the alternate prayers of Electra and Orestes at their father's tomb, or the severe simplicity of the whole poem, with none of the changes and chances of Fortune to vary the interest, no ambitious ornaments of style to distract the attention—we shall not, in my judgement, greatly err when we conclude that this play has closest affinity with religion and with sacred rites.
I pass to the part played by the oracle of Phoebus, a part most weighty and remarkable, both in this play and 1043 also in the Eumenides ; and that you may better appreciate its real significance, I will ask you to remember how important the fact is when the religious aspirations of many separate states have one common centre, and then flow out from it, and flow as from one common spring, to every part of the whole nation. It is in this way, that those who were once scattered and dispersed, whose minds turned this way and that in their search for truth, come all alike to recognize one external manifestation of religion. We are, moreover, so constituted by our very nature that the power of locality is almost incredibly strong not only to remind us of things once witnessed, but also to make us believe in things remote, and such as are situate far beyond our vision. Hence the mere name of the Delphic shrine had a great, nay a marvellous, effect: at the mere mention of it, even
[Page 19]
those who were never likely to see the place itself were far more readily influenced in mind towards religion and a sacred, holy reverence. Each man at once would picture to himself the spots which he had never seen, and this would make it more easy for him to present to and impress upon his mind the laws and utterances of the God. But should any have ever seen Delphi, and gazed with their own eyes upon those distant and venerated haunts, the peaks of Parnassus, the fountain of Castalia, the rocks, the caves, the laurel-clad glades: then, I should say confidently, not only would the memory of these things ever abide in their minds, but it would also throughout life colour in some sort their affection and thoughts so far as these are concerned with holy and sacred things.
There is another consideration too, which, important as it is, I do not dwell upon: I mean that, at that particular time in Greek history, the minds of men who had political ambition, or had their country's interests at heart, turned instinctively to the thought of this temple and oracular shrine as being a common possession of all Greece. The 1044 number of such men was largely increased in the time of Aeschylus himself by the Persian invasion, when the Asiatic pillagers were miraculously confounded at the threshold of the temple. In short, true Greeks felt no ordinary or simple pleasure whenever this temple or its adjacent regions were referred to on the stage: such would have been their feeling, on hearing the prologue of the Eumenides :
The Nymphs adore I too where stands the rock
Korykian, hollow, loved of birds, and haunt
Of Gods. 1045
Or the morning hymn in the Ion of Euripides:
Now the resplendent chariot of the Sun
Shines o'er the Earth: from its ethereal fires,
Beneath the veil of sacred night, the stars
[Page 20]
Conceal themselves. Parnassus' cloven ridge,
Too steep for human footsteps to ascend,
Receives the lustre of its orient beams,
And through the world reflects them: while the smoke
Of fragrant myrrh ascends Apollo's roof;
The Delphic priestess on the holy tripod
Now takes her seat, and to the listening sons
Of Greece those truths in mystic notes unfolds,
With which the Gods inspire her labouring breast.
But, O ye Delphic ministers of Phoebus,
Now to Castalia's silver fount repair,
And when ye have performed the due ablutions,
Enter the temple. 1046
Lines such as these summoned before the imagination the loveliest windings of valleys and all the seductive dread of the dense and pathless grove: but, above all, stirred the remembrance of the common brotherhood and alliance of all Greeks, of their national altar, of their common religion.
So that, when Aeschylus (I return to the subject whence I have strayed a little) represents the Pythian Apollo as counselling and encouraging Orestes, it is much as if he had summoned to champion his cause all the religious 1047 feelings of all Greece; and he has done this far more naturally and artistically than if, like Euripides, he had from time to time sprung a Deus ex machina upon the stage: a device which, to me, appears to offend even more gravely against good taste and due reverence to the Gods than against the truth of human life. For how absurd it is to think that a deed otherwise of utmost atrocity can be made venial on the mere utterance of a voice from the skies! an expedient which Euripides, whom I just referred to, employs both elsewhere and at the end of his Electra . How much more justly conceived is the scheme of Aeschylus, who insists from the outset that the whole design depends upon the decree of the sacred oracle: and however things fall out, that Orestes need by no means
[Page 21]
reproach himself since he had but obeyed the command of so mighty a Power:
Nay, nay, I tell you, Loxias' oracle,
In strength excelling, will not fail us now,
That bade me on this enterprise to start,
And with clear voice spake often, warning me
Of chilling pain-throes at the fevered heart,
Unless my father's murderers I should chase.
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
Must I not trust such oracles as these? 1048
To this Aeschylus has added those terrific maledictions which Apollo held over his head should he fail to avenge his father:
For the dark weapon of the Gods below,
Winged by our kindred that lie low in death
And beg for vengeance, yea, and madness too,
And vague, dim fears at night disturb and haunt me,
Seeing full clearly, though I move my brow
In the thick darkness ... and that then my frame,
Thus tortured, should be driven from the city
With brass-knobbed scourge: and that for such as I
It was not given to share the wine-cup's taste,
Nor votive stream in pure libation poured;
And that my father's wrath invisible
Would drive me from all altars, and that none
Should take me in or lodge with me; at last,
That, loathed of all and friendless, I should die,
A wretched mummy, all my strength consumed. 1049
This is extremely like the formula of excommunication which is said to obtain even now both at Rome and elsewhere, when some contumacious person is visited with 1050 curses and execrations. And on this account I have deemed it worthy of notice here, for the similarity shows how deep was its religious significance.
Again, when Orestes begins to explain his plan more distinctly, namely, that he means to proceed by guile,
[Page 22]
not open violence, observe how wisely, at the outset of this speech too, Apollo's orders are pleaded in excuse:
That they who slew a noble soul by guile,
By guile may die and in the self-same snare
Be caught, as Loxias gave his oracle,
The King Apollo, seer that never lied. 1051
Thus is the deed—perhaps almost too horrible—palliated.
And, finally, at the very crisis of the crime, what else is it that sustains his halting purpose than Apollo's behest spoken this time by Pylades, who hitherto had not uttered a word?
What shall I do, my Pylades? shall I
Through this respect forbear to slay my mother? 1052
So questions Orestes, much moved, as he might well be, by his mother's entreaties, her bared bosom, and the thoughts of his childhood. But Pylades replies: ‘Spare not: by no means leave the sacrifice unfinished.’
Where, then, are Loxias' other oracles,
The Pythian counsels, and the fast-sworn vows?
Have all men hostile rather than the Gods.
We may perhaps speculate, how it is that Pylades should break silence in this one place, though, save here, he does not utter a single word: similarly in Sophocles and Euripides he does not even speak once. I infer, therefore, that this was due to the traditional treatment of the story of Orestes: for it is hardly likely that the later poets here 1053 merely followed Aeschylus, especially as Euripides has more than once silently criticized Aeschylus for details of this kind; still less can we suppose that three poets, differing among themselves so markedly, should one and all by accident have fallen upon this same device, far removed as it was from the common practice of the drama. Why, therefore, may we not conclude that Aeschylus, with his
[Page 23]
usual grave impressiveness, deliberately departed both from ancient tradition and other writers in this solitary speech of Pylades; wishing to mark him out clearly to us as being a sort of ambassador, the interpreter and messenger of the Oracle and thus of Apollo himself? Therefore, though speechless, by his mere presence and countenance he warns Orestes what he has to do: but when the affair becomes critical—begins, as the Greeks say, ‘to stand upon the razor's edge’—when the sword is drawn to slay his mother, then as his temper unworthily leans to pity, and recollection of the divine command all at once grows dim: at length, as from some oracle, the voice of his comrade, which till then had been silent, sounds forth and insists that ‘all must be placed second to the Gods’. Once he hears this, Orestes braces himself to the fatal act: Pylades, his part played, becomes speechless as before. In this way the revolting murder is extenuated, the oracle being seasonably repeated, and yet the modesty and reverence due to supreme power are sustained, for the God himself is not needlessly, repellently, and without dignity brought upon the stage.
But so much for the part assigned to Pylades. I merely mention in passing, since it is patent and clear to all, that when Orestes leaves the stage he appeals to Apollo in express terms:
                                         And I
As chiefest spell that made me dare this deed
Count Loxias, Pythian prophet, warning me
That doing this I should be free from blame,
But slighting ... I pass o'er the penalty, 1054
For none, aim as he will, such woes will hit. 1055
It is a touch highly characteristic of Aeschylus, and one, I think, pre-eminently bound up with piety and holiness, that he represents Orestes, greatly terrified, and, as it were,
[Page 24]
closing his eyes, at the thought of the divine displeasure and punishment. But to proceed with Orestes:
And now ye see me, in what guise equipped,
[ Putting on the suppliant's wreaths of wool, and taking an olive branch in his hand .
With this my bough and chaplet I will gain
Earth's central shrine, the home where Loxias dwells,
And the bright fire that is as deathless known,
Seeking to 'scape this guilt of kindred blood;
And on no other hearth, so Loxias bade,
May I seek shelter. 1056
In fine, by his wreath, habit of dress, and carriage he declares himself a suppliant of Delphi: and claims the audience as witnesses with their own eyes, that not without sanction and support of Apollo had he wrought what he did. And this, coming as it does at the very end of the play, sends the spectators away with far deeper feelings than if, like the Orestes of Sophocles, he had forthwith indulged in empty triumph. For after this, indeed, neither in imagination nor in the recollection of what they had seen, could they sever and disjoin the thought of Orestes the agent from that of Apollo his champion. And thus he attains what is a real triumph of art: though mother is slain by son and daughter, we do not feel the act repulsive.
It remains for us to consider the silent part which the dead Agamemnon plays (if I may use the word), the significance of which is much the same as that of the oracle of Apollo of which I have just spoken. For we are somehow made to feel that the dead king is really present at every part of the poem, though purposely veiled from sight: an effect which, had it been in the hands of Euripides, one can hardly doubt would have been produced by his ghost standing in full gaze before the audience, and in a dull and insipid speech saying much which Aeschylus more effectively
[Page 25]
assigns to those who are making their offering and to the solemn Chorus.
‘But’, it may be objected, ‘our own Shakespeare, 1057 who certainly was never dull and insipid, did not hesitate in several instances to bring ghosts upon the stage clothed in bodily form, and, more than that, to effect by their agency much which was of highest importance in developing the action.’ That is true, yet any one who desires to shelter himself under the authority of that great man, will have to be very sparing and to deal very reverently with the spirits of the dead. Four times only, if I remember aright, in the long list of his tragedies did Shakespeare permit himself to call up such spirits. They are all well known to you, since each appears in one of his chief plays. First there is that king who unable to sleep is terror-stricken at seeing in the night the ghosts of those who had been his own innocent victims: who appearing one after another in due order menace him with dreadful omens and invoke all kinds of good fortune on his opponent. 1058 But, obviously it is here simply a question of a dream sent from heaven, such as, in that age, according to trustworthy testimony, was wont to visit troubled minds. Certainly the circumstance that these visions appear in full face of the audience and exhibit themselves to the test of ear and eye seems somewhat crude and inartistic; yet it may be that this was the only way by which the divine significance of the dream could be recognized.
With these is to be classed the ghost which appeared to Macbeth 1059 when sitting at supper, taking the form of a man who had been by his agency most cruelly murdered; this was absolutely silent and visible to none but himself; whence it is amply clear that it was a simple figment of a mind seething with the bitter consciousness of crime, and therefore not a being to be presented to the eyes of the spectators
[Page 26]
or named among the characters of the tragedy. Thirdly, the form of the dead Caesar 1060 appeared to Brutus when he 1061 was on the point of death; but for what purpose? only to speak three words and then vanish into air: and even in this detail the poet, we may be sure, was merely following received traditions. For he does not go beyond the actual words recorded in Plutarch; the only change he makes being that Shakespeare calls it Caesar's ghost, while Plutarch gives it no name. Had Shakespeare been the least more ambitious of excellence in dealing with such a theme, surely here was an opportunity which allowed him ample range. But he was assuredly taught, taught by his instinctive reverence, that strictest reserve was due in all that borders on religion.
In my judgement, in fact, so far as these three instances are concerned, Shakespeare by no means overpassed the reserve characteristic of Aeschylus in his presentment of departed spirits. To begin with, in these rare cases which I have quoted, he may either plead that he was following some early tradition, which asserted that the event really happened: or that the tenor of events was calculated to arouse the Furies of a guilty conscience, or to summon up dreams likely to forecast some divine retribution. And then, after all, what a small part of each play turns upon such apparitions! The wraith that appears to Macbeth, the image of the slain Banquo, is seen by himself alone and once only, and then departs without uttering a single syllable. The others speak no more than just suffices to hint that they are bringing a message from heaven.
Such are the grounds which led me to declare that Shakespeare, when dealing with this theme, proceeds with extreme caution and almost reluctantly: there can be no question of the fact: nor shall we find anything tending to a contrary view in the only play which remains to be considered
[Page 27]
—I mean Hamlet —the noblest and greatest of all his tragedies: and I refer to this play all the more readily inasmuch as many critics have noticed that its general scheme presents many points of similarity with the Choephorae . Both present to us a royal house and family stained by murder of a king and the incestuous passion of his queen: in each the son of the victim appears as his avenger, urged to inflict retribution upon his mother by express command of heaven. In short, the outline of the 1062 plot is the same in both, but in the treatment there are striking differences, which make all the more striking their agreement in this one respect, I mean that they feel that Poetry ought to show great self-restraint and a religious tenderness in all treatment of departed spirits. Nor does it militate against this agreement that while Orestes is braced to his deed of vengeance by receiving a command from the oracle of Apollo, Hamlet is braced by an appearance of his father's spirit at night. Each writer followed, I imagine, received traditions: though Aeschylus was in this respect somewhat the more fortunate of the two, since he was thus able to maintain more fully the austere dignity of the Gods who guard the dead, as the spirit of Agamemnon is completely withdrawn from sight, while our own poet was compelled to summon the ghost of the dead king from the tomb, exposing him openly to public gaze, and causing him to speak his mind at length. I do not in the least intend to suggest that our prince of poets is to be blamed for this: rather it is his distinguished glory to have associated not only discreetly but piously that reverence which the departed should inspire with this terrible apparition. Nor should fault be found, in my judgment, because the ghost not only appeared to Hamlet, but to the three soldiers as well. For thus the doubt was met, which was sure to arrest the keen-minded Hamlet, that his vision was an illusion and merely a figment of his own brain. Even after
[Page 28]
so many notable evidences, he still hesitates, doubting whether the apparition brings with it ‘airs from heaven or blasts from hell’, whether it is ‘a spirit of health or goblin damned’. Moreover, observe how deliberately, in Shakespeare's judgement, indeed, with what reluctance, the shades of the departed reveal themselves to the eyes of mortal men. On the first occasion, that impressive apparition 1063 (for indeed it should be called impressive rather than dreadful or monstrous) is only seen by two soldiers while on guard at the entrance of the royal castle: on the third night there is associated with them only the intimate friend and companion of Hamlet himself. All these the apparition passes by in dead silence: once, however, it seemed only prevented from speaking by the entrance of the dawn. And, more than this, even on meeting Hamlet himself the ghost will only speak when all witnesses have withdrawn, and then only on such things as have reference either to the duty of sacred revenge or to the courage and right spirit of a true son; themes not unworthy, in sooth, of a father's care after death. Again, the dead king's spirit more than once, during the progress of the drama, makes itself felt by the audience: as, for instance, when he makes evident by voice dully heard from below ground that he is himself witness of the oaths sworn by his son's companions: 1064 the purport being of vital importance to the successful issue of the work of revenge; or again when in presence of his wife he urges and rallies his son 1065 whose ‘blunted purpose’ lets go by the important acting of his dread command: all this, I say, has much the same meaning as, and may be compared with, the single exhortation of Pylades to the hesitating Orestes. And in this latter scene his feeling, though deeply angered, shows itself touched by the appearance of the wretched queen and his memory of the past: so much so, that, just as he had enjoined his son to spare
[Page 29]
the queen's life, he now insists that she is not to be treated over-harshly even in word.
All this leads to the conviction that the father's spirit ever watches his son in his task of vengeance: but that he only reveals himself to sight or hearing when some urgent need demands. How more finely and effectively could regard be shown either for the deep reverence due to the departed or the weak cravings of mortal men, the former forbidding, the latter demanding, a more immediate presence of those who have left this life?
A similar desire (for I now at last go back to Aeschylus) 1066 is obviously dominant in the Choephorae . I will cite one instance, and there is none finer, from among many such. Every one will remember the conclusion of the solemn invocations recited in turn by the brother and sister, Orestes and Electra. After their passionate lyric outpourings something of a more restrained and quieter tone properly follows:
O.
Set free my sire, O Earth, to watch the battle.
E.
O Persephassa, goodly victory grant!
O.
Remember, sire, the bath in which they slew thee!
E.
Remember thou the net they handselled so!
O.
In fetters not of brass wast thou snared, father.
E.
Yea, basely with that mantle they devised.
O.
Art thou not roused by these reproaches, father?
E.
Dost thou not lift thine head for those thou lov'st. 1067
Who, as he listens to these lines, would not be stirred and excited, expecting that, then and there, will arrive from the tomb ‘Mycenae's leader of the warlike Achaeans’, 1068 eager to avenge his wrongs? But Orestes stood in no need of such a portent, fully strengthened and supported as he was by the declaration of Apollo. To sum up the position shortly then; in Aeschylus' play, Agamemnon is never allowed to speak, from just the same motives of affection,
[Page 30]
reverence, and proper feeling for the dead, as make Shakespeare limit the appearance of Hamlet's father to two or three occasions. I speak here only of the piety or proper feeling due to the dead, the desire not to violate their sanctity, the instinct which restrains a poet from rashly and lightly mingling the things of this world and of the world below.
There is another sphere of ‘piety’, that of children towards their parents: and since the whole principle of it seems strangely violated by these deeds of the house of Agamemnon, it is worth while to inquire how Aeschylus has succeeded in meeting this awkward difficulty: and this brings me to the last point which I proposed to deal 1069 with to-day. As you remember, perhaps, it was to have special reference to the characters of Orestes and Electra. Their distinguishing and main characteristic was their hatred of their mother on account of their devotion to their father—they are influenced by a piety, which may almost be called impiety: and on this head the problem was more difficult for Aeschylus than for Shakespeare, seeing that Hamlet was bidden to visit vengeance only on the adulterous king, leaving the queen unpunished. Now what is the chief device by which Aeschylus makes this tragic situation more bearable? It is by the same means to which we have so often referred, by the religious sanction of the oracle. Orestes is depicted as so thoroughly possessed by the thought that he is prepared to face all risks, even the risk of his life itself, provided that he can carry out his task. At night, by day, at home, abroad, this is the one thought which exercises and racks his mind. The same thing may be also said of Hamlet: but they undoubtedly differ in this, that with Hamlet one sees that there still linger ‘sparks of earlier fires’ ( veteris vestigia flammae ): he is carried away in various directions; anxieties, affections, even jests serve to distract his mind,
[Page 31]
while Orestes, on the other hand, cannot venture for a moment to let his thoughts turn on anything save the one thought—that the God must at all costs be obeyed. What is the explanation of this complete obsession? It is, I think, that on Orestes is laid a more terrible duty: in his case it is not simple murder, but the murder of a mother that is commanded, and the more serious the deed, the more intently must the mind keep itself fixed upon the authority of him who gives the command. Observe again how calmly and quietly, and with what deliberation Orestes construes his mother's dream, one of the most dreadful augury:
So must she, as that monster dread she nourished,
Die cruel death: and I, thus serpentised,
Am here to slay her, as this dream portends. 1070
It cannot be that he who nursed such thoughts in his mind was without apprehension of the Furies that threatened his own life. To all these thoughts he had long schooled his mind: indeed, he prays for his own 1071 death on hearing of his mother's shameful conduct towards his dead father:
Ah! thou hast told the whole full tale of shame;
Shall she not pay then for that outrage dire
      Unto my father done,
      So far as Gods prevail,
      So far as my hands work?
May it be mine to smite her and then die! 1072
And therefore, too, at the end of the tragedy, when the Furies are already seated on the threshold, when he is fully conscious that he will be driven out of his mind, he reasserts that he has done nothing but what justice and the laws required; first inveighing in the sternest language against his mother, then urging as excuse the oracle of Apollo, and showing to all around the robe of Agamemnon with the blood-stains on it: to the end that it may appear beyond
[Page 32]
doubt that he has done his work at divine instance, not of his own seeking: nor unwillingly merely, but even at the cost to himself of poignant and bitter grief.
Some remarks might here be added, did time allow, with reference to the character of Electra: who is not savage and prone to violent speech as she appears in Sophocles, nor does she show dutiful feeling towards her father alone. Listen, on the contrary, how gently she deals with her mother, even at the moment when she is most deeply stirred at the recollection of her father, slain before her eyes.
   I strike an Arian stroke, and in the strain
   Of Kissian mourner skilled,
Ye might have seen the stretching forth of hands,
With rendings of the hair, and random blows,
   In quick succession given,
Dealt from above with arm at fullest length,
And with the beating still my head is stunned,
   Battered and full of woe. 1073
So chants the Chorus, seeming to hear again the strokes that wounded the king, and to see the right arm of the murderess dealing the wounds. And how does Electra comport herself? Surely she bursts forth in reproach and execration? But no, she chants a gentle, tender, sad and tearful dirge much more near to compassion than to resentment:
O mother, hostile found, and daring all!
   With burial as of foe
1074 Thou had'st the heart a ruler to inter,
   His citizens not there,
A spouse unwept, with no lamentings loud. 1075
So too, when, earlier in the play, she was making offerings to the Gods of the lower world:
And to myself grant thou that I may be
Than that my mother wiser far of heart,
Holier in act. 1076
[Page 33]
Nothing more gentle, more modest, could be uttered. The lines, too, in which she takes counsel with the Chorus concerning religious rites, when she first enters on the stage bearing sacred gifts, are inspired not by modesty but the very purest pious feeling:
         Give me your advice in this,
What shall I say as these funereal gifts
I pour? How shall I speak acceptably?
How to my father pray? What? Shall I say
‘I bring from loving wife to husband loved
Gifts'—from my mother? No, I am not bold
Enough for that, nor know I what to speak,
Pouring this chrism on my father's tomb. 1077
She is not moved to any rash extravagance, says nothing in passion, is ever mindful of law, human and divine: her mother she will hardly venture to reproach with crimes which are proved to all.
Her whole character, moreover, exhibits a striking picture of devotion to her brother: especially when from the colour of the lock of his hair or the traces of his footmarks she at once intuitively divines Orestes' return. Aeschylus has shown great skill in making subtle variations and delicate distinctions in this beautiful episode: knowing well, as he did, that the traits of mutual affection would not be alike in brother and sister severally. I forgo examples owing to want of time. But, both in view of all these considerations and the main text of the play—the inculcation of respect and reverence towards kings and rulers—all, I think, without exception, who read 1078 with the least care, are conscious that the whole terrible catastrophe is in great degree qualified and excused: their minds are less troubled at the inhuman matricide than impressed with the thought of the power of the
[Page 34]
gods; they are left wondering what may be the issue of so weighty and difficult a situation. And thus Aeschylus naturally proceeds to solve this problem in the Eumenides : which solution I propose to consider to the best of my ability when I next have opportunity of addressing you.
[Page 35]
LECTURE XXII 1079
After some brief introductory remarks upon the true standard of poetic criticism the problem of the last three tragedies of Aeschylus is stated upon the lines laid down at the beginning of the Eumenides. It is shown to be solved by a sort of appeal on the part of Orestes: and then follows a full discussion, first as to the Furies, against whose sentence Orestes appeals: next, of the part played by Apollo who suggests the appeal: and, finally, of the jurisdiction to which appeal is made, which is not to the Areopagus but to highest Jove himself.
I propose to-day to deal with the Eumenides , the third part of the celebrated trilogy, but, before I do so, I ask you, gentlemen, to allow me to spend a little more time upon a question which is intimately connected with our argument, and which will often occur to all lovers of Poetry. For when first I set myself to trace what may be called the essential characteristic of Poetry, I adopted this method: I asked in the case of every writer who is rightly credited with the divine name of poet, what is the one subject which stirs his enthusiasm, which carries him out of himself? and this method implies that there are plainly as many kinds of Poetry as of opinions and of men (for Poetry, native and true Poetry, is nothing else than each poet's innermost feeling issuing in rhythmic language): when, 1080 I repeat, I first began to reflect on these things, there at once occurred to me a certain difficulty which I will to-day, as far as my power allows, attempt to deal with and remove.
There is no doubt, I think, that a considerable portion of mankind will be repelled completely by this view, and will not, without reluctance, suffer themselves to be drawn away from the charms of language and imagery, and the outward show and ornament of Poetry, in order to pry
[Page 36]
into the secrets of the poet's mind. How, they demand, does it concern us, in what spirit and with what disposition the poet wrote, so long as his writings are such as delight and stimulate men's thought and feelings?
And it is only what might be expected if they drift into the same reasonings, with which those who hold in special dislike, above all kinds of literature, what is called Allegory, are wont to support their criticism. For when once the minds of readers begin to be drawn to and reflect upon something deeper—‘when from the crowd and stage of life they withdraw into retirement’ 1081 —I think, indeed, it makes little difference whether the result is produced by an allegorical symbolism or by the transference of the poet's own passion and disposition to actual characters. For either way, the reader who once surrenders himself heartily to the poet's real meaning, will have little leisure for mere ornament and prettiness, not even for those delightful charms which are removed at furthest distance from Epicurean indulgence, and approach very nearly to the secret truths of a higher philosophy.
But truly, indeed, as of virtue herself, so of genuine Poetry it must ever be said:
But Virtue dwells on high; the gods before
Have placed the dew that drops from every pore;
And at the first to that sublime abode
Long, steep, th' ascent, and rough the rugged road. 1082
Now, those who are unwilling to face this toil and stress may indeed catch a glimpse with the outward eye of some light shadow of Poetry, but I doubt if they ever attain to knowledge of her form and feature with the inner eye of the mind. And so then, just as in perusal of perfect 1083 Allegory, even when handled by Spenser himself, their interest soon flags and tires; so, even in other poems
[Page 37]
which they zealously profess to delight in, I should be inclined to believe they never reach the fountain sources themselves, but, as Cicero says, 1084 merely follow after some tributary streams. On the other hand, if those who rightly appreciate Homer, for instance, or Aeschylus, feel less pleasure in Spenser, we must seek some other reason for this than the mere fact, for which they find fault with him, that his poem is one long-drawn-out allegory. At all events, it is quite clear that Allegory itself offers no obstacle to many of our countrymen, who take marvellous delight in the perusal of the work in which the way of a pious and holy life is presented under the similitude of The Pilgrim's Progress .
Whether, therefore, throughout the whole course of a poem one story is really told in fact and substance, another outwardly in words—which is the characteristic of Allegory: or whether we make the true tenor of a poem to depend not so much upon the things described as upon the spirit and temper of the poet, in either case it is clear that the force and beauty of true poetry is twofold. For not only are the direct themes of the poem themselves expressed with lucidity and beauty, but the whole work is tinctured with the character and leanings of the poet as by some mysterious aroma: and in such wise, indeed, that all recognize that he bursts forth into such expression naturally, and not for artistic effect. Should either of these two qualities be lacking, the poetry will be maimed and defective, or absolutely not poetry at all: maimed, unless the subject be faithfully and finely treated; not poetry at all, should it not be obviously the spontaneous outburst of the poet's inmost feeling.
Returning to Aeschylus, let us test the value of this principle by considering the Eumenides . The problem of the whole trilogy, you will remember, stood to be solved
[Page 38]
in this final play: the problem was to find some means of reconciliation not merely between conflicting feelings of men, but also between the conflicting views of the Gods 1085 themselves: it was to prevent our being left in doubt how we were to estimate a man who, in reliance on a sacred oracle, has wrought a deed which, save for that sanction, must be pronounced atrocious. Now in order that this serious question may be fitly and surely settled, we see that the whole scheme of this last Tragedy is made to turn upon what we may call an appeal to a Supreme Court, just as the play which immediately precedes it (the Choephorae ) has almost the effect of a religious service. And inasmuch as this appeal was not to be simple or isolated in effect, as governing only the case of Orestes, or whoever else at the time might perchance lie under a capital charge, but also extending to those controversies in which the most weighty laws, divine and human, are involved: we see, therefore, that the development of the play is by no means concluded when Orestes is absolved and exonerated. For unless Minerva had convinced even the Furies themselves, in spite of the dismissal of their cause, of the righteousness of her court's decision, the reader's mind must have remained in doubtful suspense, with deities on either side still urging contrary counsels.
And it is quite probable that, in the Promethean trilogy also, Aeschylus provided some such wise solution. For there too, as we have previously pointed out, a struggle between two orders of deities was of the essence of the story. But Time's unkindly action has denied us the solution of that problem, two parts of this renowned work being now lost to us. It is so much the more fortunate, that we to-day have the advantage of possessing the Oresteian trilogy intact, so that none can feel doubtful as to the reverent and pious quality of Aeschylus' spirit: since, unlike others, he was not satisfied to have traced the
[Page 39]
fortunes of the house of Pelops to the desired issue, but he spent far more pains in showing not only that the majesty of the Gods remained intact, but that agreement and harmony reigned among them all; so that men need no longer wander in perplexity through having no guide, or only one who pointed to different paths.
But the very course and tone of the poem testifies, unless I mistake, that it was only with the greatest difficulty that Aeschylus was enabled to extricate himself from these perplexities. And we well know that nothing more grievously troubles and pains those of religious feeling 1086 than doubts as to the righteousness of Supreme Power, should they arise and be not fully removed.
Moreover, it is clear that Aeschylus shared in this reverent and honourable anxiety, simply from this fact, that he has purposely postponed the solution till the last possible moment. Even ‘into sanctuary’, if I may use the phrase, the avenging company of Furies pursue Orestes. His one aim is to make good his escape: he only just eludes, like some hunted animal, by the merest fraction of time, the clutches of his pursuers. I can hardly believe that celebrated first entrance of the horrible and terrible Chorus can be read without a sort of breathless anxiety, such as is wont to possess the mind and eye of those who watch the very crisis of a pursuit and escape. This the poet most graphically brings before us by the mere stage management alone, when the curtain first rises, presenting openly within the temple what the Pythian priestess had sketched in her prologue:
                                         I see
Upon the central stone a God-loathed man,
Sitting as suppliant, and with hands that dripped
Blood-drops, and holding sword but newly drawn,
And branch of olive from the topmost growth,
With amplest tufts of white wool meetly wreathed;
[Page 40]
For this I will say clearly. And a troop
Of women strange to look at sleepeth there. 1087
And here observe the consummate judgement exhibited by Aeschylus. For since a sight savage and horrible beyond belief was about to be presented to their eyes, he warns his audience beforehand what they may expect, lest, in sheer incredulity, they revolt at the appearance of the Furies when suddenly seen. And then there is the further expedient, not merely skilful, but fraught with deepest human feeling, that this happens in the early morning, at a time when the priestess, preoccupied with solemn things, was moving to perform her usual tasks, little thinking of anything of the kind:
                                         If Hellas pilgrims sends,
Let them approach by lot, as is our law:
For as the god guides I give oracles, 1088
—at that very moment she encounters nothing but what 1089 is hateful and repulsive, exciting terror, panic, and disgust:
Dread things to tell, and dread for eyes to see,
Have sent me back again from Loxias' shrine. 1090
Whence we can see how it is wont to chance, contrary to their hope and against their will, that even worthy and religious men are not always able to secure, even in ministry of divine things, that peace and satisfaction which they seek for: but that, around the very altar, and within the secret sanctuary, their minds are distracted and troubled, perhaps by recollection of past misdeeds, or by the uncertainties and constant unrest suggested by the doubtful doom of humankind. And I think this same fact appears even more plainly, when the Fates follow Orestes for the second time, and appear close upon his track in the very temple of Minerva. If any one could ever feel confident
[Page 41]
of safety and refuge anywhere, we should assuredly believe that that inmost secret sanctuary was free from all danger, and that any one was safe who was hiding there not merely under the protection of the goddess, but within the very shelter of her arms. But even there, too, these huntresses are in a moment on the track of their prey:
Lo! here are clearest traces of the man:
Follow thou up that dumb informer's hints:
For as the hound pursues a wounded fawn,
So by red blood and oozing gore track we.
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
He, it is true, in full security,
Clasping the statue of the deathless goddess,
Would fain now take his trial at our hands.
This may not be. 1091
You would suppose they could not press in more closely: yet something still remains to heighten the horror in no small degree. For they not only encircle him with their menacing dances, but petrify him with magic song and chant:
      And over him as slain,
We raise this chant of madness, frenzy-working,
      The hymn the Erinnyes love,
A spell upon the soul, a lyreless strain 1092
      That withers up men's strength. 1093
The lines seem almost to bring before our eyes that deadly snake whose mere gaze and aspect, or the horrid hiss of its advance, so strikes terror into birds that they are paralysed and fall into its jaws of their own accord.
All these descriptions are so splendid, if we only judge them by the test of poetic ‘vividness’, that it should surprise no one if most men, while duly honouring the philosophy of Aeschylus, yet at the same time contend that he was not seriously concerned about anything, except
[Page 42]
those artistic beauties which, as they insist, are the peculiar glory of Poetry. But if they once read with more kindly eyes even the Eumenides alone, willing to credit the poem with an aim a little more sacred and the possession of an under-meaning, it is almost impossible to say how greatly their delight would be increased even in that one pleasure, which they praise at the expense of all others; and how much more deeply skilful narration, or smooth sweetness of the verse, or charm of the imagery, would penetrate and permeate the inmost recesses of their hearts, when bathed and illuminated in a kind of heavenly light, glorifying a picture already beautiful in itself.
And recall, I beg, to your minds just one verse—the single line with which Clytemnestra rouses the slumbering Furies, as so many dogs, to pursuit of their rich prey:
Chase him, and wither with a fresh pursuit. 1094
The very words seem to glow and burn: such is the rush of the action. But if the reader has in mind the deeply profound significance of the verse, suggesting as it does the deepest pang which tortures men's hearts:
While the vexed mind, her own tormentor, plies
A scorpion scourge, unmarked by human eyes! 1095
1096 —can it be doubted for a moment, that the force and high-wrought feeling of the bodeful utterance are immensely heightened?
‘Chase him and wither with a fresh pursuit.’ The words seem to say: ‘No sure peace can he enjoy who has once committed foul wrong towards a father or mother. It may be that, for an interval, sheltered in sanctuary, or under the favour of some protecting deity, his mind has some rest: but soon the Fates will return; no time, no distance can bar their approach.’
[Page 43]
But without further insistence on isolated passages, let us now consider as a whole the general significance of Orestes' flight—that is, of the entire play; I mean the implicit significance that lies beneath the surface, what may perhaps be called its secret meaning . It turns mainly on three factors: for since the sum of the whole plot, as has been said, is contained in an appeal, we must inquire, first, whose decree is appealed against; secondly, at whose instance; thirdly, to whom the appeal is made.
First of all, then, who are these Eumenides, or, at any rate, what do they claim for themselves?—these Eumenides whose decree we see here called in question? Called in question, I say, yet not so called in question but that the reverence due to them is most religiously observed: not even the great Gods lightly pardon and restore to favour those whom these have condemned, unless they too give their consent and grant forgiveness. Such, indeed, is the attitude and disposition of the dread goddesses that we at once perceive that they personify the Divine wrath just as it presents itself to wicked and guilty men, when once touched by remorse, or to the severest judges of the actions of others.
To begin with, not without grave meaning are revolting form and horrible aspect ascribed to them: 1097
                                         Wingless, though, are these,
And swarth, and every way abominable.
They snort with breath that none may dare approach,
And from their eyes a loathsome humour pours. 1098
From the Choephorae , too, we gather the widespread belief that vipers streamed as hair from their heads:
Dark-robed, and all their tresses hang entwined
With many serpents. 1099
[Page 44]
And in this tragedy Apollo's menacing speech seems to imply the same thing:
Lest, smitten with a serpent winged and bright,
Forth darted from my bow-string golden-wrought,
Thou in sore pain bring up dark foam, and vomit
The clots of blood thou suck'dst from human veins. 1100
In this passage no obscure allusion is made to another fact, which sounds even more revolting and more unworthy of the perfect dignity of an avenging deity—the fact that these evil demons silently and imperceptibly drain away in loathsome fashion the very lifeblood of the sinner:
But thou must give to us to suck the blood
Red from thy living members: yea, from thee,
May I gain meal of drink undrinkable!
And, having dried thee up, I'll drag thee down
Alive to bear the doom of matricide. 1101
Some will, perhaps, be inclined to urge in excuse the feeling of the common people regarding daemonic beings of such horrible cruelty, which they say still even now survives and indeed flourishes in some regions. Nor should I deny by any means that there is a vast difference, judged by the standard of highest Poetry, whether a writer advances his own fancies, or is only adapting popular legends with a view to heighten magic or religious horror. For it hardly seems likely that a portentous belief should be spread over a whole nationality unless it be one which 1102 nearly touches the most intimate and genuine human feelings. But that Aeschylus had in mind something greater than the bare recital of a popular legend is evident from this alone; that closely associated with this revolting vengeance are the pains and penalties to be suffered after this life:
There thou shalt see, if any other man
Has sinned in not revering God or guest
[Page 45]
Or parents dear, that each receiveth there
The recompense of sin that Vengeance claims. 1103
Thus their speech seems to hurry on to these infernal regions as being chief of all in importance, only lightly mentioning, in passing, this ghoulish preying on living victims: whose very intent, moreover, is to effect easily, by their means, the picture of a mind wasting and pining away through the recollection of evil deeds:
Nay, nor Apollo, nor Athena's might
Can save thee from the doom of perishing,
Outcast, not knowing where to look for joy,
The bloodless food of demons, a mere shade. 1104
Observe that the doom is wrought, not so much by direct purpose or righteous judgement, as by the passionate working of the man's own mind: whence so much the more suitable becomes that simile of dogs in full chase, almost a commonplace in this connexion:
Thou, phantom-like, dost hunt thy prey and criest,
Like hound that never rests from care of toil. 1105
And in another passage we are told that their one and only task is to inflict penalties, and that they owed their being to this one end only—that they might deal severely with evil-doers:
They owe their birth to evils; for they dwell
In evil darkness, yea in Tartarus
Beneath the earth, and are the hate and dread
Of all mankind and of Olympian Gods. 1106
Moreover, they themselves in their own choral chants only claim for themselves authority to impose punishments 1107 and to exercise a silent inquisition over guilty men. The opening, in fact, of their first chorus partakes of the nature of an appeal: the Furies appeal to Night their mother,
[Page 46]
not to suffer them to become a laughing-stock to the younger deities, who are too little inclined to severity:
O mother who did'st bear me, mother Night,
A terror of the living and the dead,
   Hear me, Oh hear!
The son of Leto puts me to disgrace
   And robs me of my spoil. 1108
And then they declare that their function extends to all ages and to all countries, so that only a state in which there is no crime or guilt can do without them:
This lot the all-pervading Destiny
Hath spun, to hold its ground for evermore,
   That we should still attend
On him on whom there rests the guilt of blood
   Of kin shed causelessly,
Till earth lie o'er him. 1109
Again, in so many words, they confess themselves banished from the court and banquets of the deities above and to be wholly without share in their honours or counsels:
Such lot was then assigned us at our birth:
From us the Undying Ones must hold aloof:
   Nor is there one who shares
   The banquet-meal with us;
In garments white I have nor part nor lot. 1110
And when, at last, we reach the point at which, with their consent, their cause is submitted to mortal decision, not even then do these Furies claim any functions save those which deal with revenge and punishment. In an earlier chorus they boasted that their powers had been granted by the eternal law of heaven; here they complain that great will be the loss to human life if their rights are withdrawn:
Now there will be an outbreak of new laws: ...
   This deed will prompt forthwith
[Page 47]
All mortal men to callous recklessness. ...
For since no wrath on evil deeds will creep
   Henceforth from those who watch
With wild, fierce souls the evil deeds of men,
   I will let loose all crime. 1111
This is a faithfully-drawn picture of that over-rigid 1112 severity with which men of sterner nature generally meet the advocates of mercy and indulgence.
In short, we may not unfairly, perhaps, construe these celebrated Furies as typifying Divine Justice on a certain side of it—that, namely, which is wont most to approve itself to those who form, as the mass of men do, hasty and superficial judgements. They are conscious that the world is, broadly speaking, governed according to the law that, generally, good befalls good men and evil overtakes the bad: and, in consequence, they cannot easily acquiesce wheresoever, either by chance or design, things seem otherwise ordered. To them it is a shameful thing that a penitent man should go scot-free.
Thus much for those from whose decree the appeal is made: now let us proceed to consider the supporter of the appeal, namely, Apollo. It is obvious to every one that his character affords no slight proof of divine clemency and goodwill to men. Deeds such as these qualities produce are just what the ancients report of Apollo: by his agency it is, mainly, that mortals enjoy some more intimate intercourse with the supreme deities; he, more than other Gods, mixes freely and gladly in the societies and conversations of men. Indeed, there were not lacking old traditions, such as the story of his tending the flocks of Admetus, or of the stratagems by means of which he had outwitted the Fates:
Thou did'st o'erthrow, yea, thou, laws hoar with age,
And drug with wine the ancient Goddesses. 1113
[Page 48]
Clearly, then, Apollo only acts in accord with his known character, whenever, in this play too, he favours unduly even guilty men.
It is said, moreover, that we have here traces of an older theology and of a more ancient race of Gods between whom and Apollo with his fellow deities there rankled no slight ill-will: this is most certainly true, and upon it mainly turns the whole structure, both of these three plays 1114 and of the Prometheus : though it must not therefore be supposed that anything is thus detracted from the poet's conception, which was meant to depict the ferment and unrest of human affairs so long as the divine governance remained doubtful and dark. Rather it well became a consummate artist to take up the beliefs already held by ordinary men and weave them to their fitting uses and to the purposes of his philosophy. But we previously dealt with this position when the Prometheus Vinctus was under discussion. For, just as there the goodness of the Supreme Ruler was called in question, on account of evils which may be called Natural; so here we have those who pass strictures on His equity by reason of the uncertainties of human duty when rewards and penalties are not governed by unwavering law. Indeed, in every age, and even with the light of Heaven's revelation, there have been those who denied the Deity to be at once pitiful and just: either by reason of the more stern and unbending injunctions of the Jewish law, or because of that long-suffering mercy which characterizes perfect and true religion. Thus Aeschylus, having transferred this controversy from the philosophers' schools to the councils and assemblies of the Gods, intends Apollo, together with the younger deities, as representative of that more merciful view. Hence, too, in the shadow of his temple, even the very Furies themselves are at last appeased, and for a space Orestes enjoys an undisturbed retreat, owing to the veneration for the pious and holy sanctuary:
[Page 49]
And now thou see'st these fierce ones captive ta'en,
These loathly maidens fallen fast in sleep. 1115
Again, weigh well the words of Apollo, who cannot endure the sight of them:
Out, out, I bid you, quickly from this temple;
Go forth, and leave this shrine oracular.
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
This is no house where ye may meetly come,
But there where heads upon the scaffold lie,
And eyes are gouged, and throats of men are cut,
And mutilation mars the bloom of youth,
Where men are maimed and stoned to death, and groan
With bitter wailing, 'neath the spine impaled; 1116
Hear ye what feast ye love, and so become
Loathed of the Gods? Yes, all your figure's fashion
Points clearly to it. Such as ye should dwell
In cave of lion battening upon blood,
Nor tarry in these sacred precincts here,
Working defilement. Go, and roam afield
Without a shepherd, for to flock like this
Not one of all the Gods is friendly found. 1117
Here he most happily indicates the attitude of such men as maintain that the punishment even of wicked men ill accords with Divine mercy.
And the poet scatters here and there other suggestions, which would encourage Orestes in his appeal. The shade of Clytemnestra herself spontaneously allows that the deities in the shades below are in sympathy with Orestes, not with herself:
                                         Nor fails reproach
Among the shades that I a murderess am:
And so in shame I wander, and I tell you
That at their hands I bear worst form of blame.
And much as I have borne from nearest kin,
Yet not one God is stirred to wrath for me,
Though done to death by matricidal hands. 1118
[Page 50]
A speech which implicitly confesses that she has herself suffered a due and righteous retribution.
Then there is that most impressive fact of all, that here too, as in the Choephorae , the son Orestes is conscious of the silent presence of Agamemnon his father, though not so as to be discerned by eyes of men. It is pre-eminently this support which enables him to present an undaunted front even before his judges:
I trust my sire will send help from the tomb. 1119
It was to be taken, too, as of good omen, that Orestes had passed through many purifying experiences before he ventured to approach Minerva's threshold:
For the blood fails and fades from off my hands;
1120 The guilt of matricide is washed away.
For when 'twas fresh, it then was all dispelled,
At Phoebus' shrine, by spells of slaughtered swine.
Long would the story be, if told complete,
Of all I joined in harmless fellowship. 1121
That is almost exactly the line of thinking whereby simple and good men are wont to comfort themselves, when they question if it be possible for them ever to be forgiven their sins. They generally fall back upon their instinctive belief that they will not be utterly cast off by a kindly Deity whilst they are able to approach His altars, to pay their vows, and to offer prayer to Him. In such wise did the woman in the Book of Judges soothe the apprehensions of her husband: ‘If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt offering and a meat offering at our hands, neither would he have showed us all these things.’ 1122
So too Orestes, while his case is still undecided, while he himself is almost o'erwrought by physical weakness, by
[Page 51]
long wandering, by sleepless watchings, still denies that he any way repents himself of having obeyed the counsel of Apollo. When the Furies scornfully demand,
The prophet-God prompt thee to matricide? 1123
he answers as became one confident in his piety,
Yea, and till now I do not blame my lot. 1124
As much as to say, ‘Gladly can I bear the loss of all things so long as Apollo, to whom I first surrendered myself, be propitious towards me.’
Lastly, which was the most hopeful augury of all, the character of Orestes himself arouses not pity merely, but a certain respect, through his modesty, piety, and greatness of soul. It is surprising how few words he utters, protagonist though he is, and though the scheme of the whole play depends and turns upon him alone: as if Aeschylus intended to exhibit in his person what sort of 1125 address and what quality of appeal best become a man who has admitted his crime. There is nothing laboured, nothing artificial, nothing elaborately calculated to elicit compassion: all is dignified, staid, modest: not for a moment does he forget that he speaks in presence of high and holy deity, with the choice between death and salvation lying close at hand. In short: Orestes himself declares that in naught does he act on his own prompting, but as one who has surrendered himself soul and body to follow the commands of his lord Apollo.
O'er land and water travelling alike,
Keeping great Loxias' charge oracular,
I come, O goddess, to thy shrine and statue:
Here will I stay and wait the trial's issue. 1126
Consistently with this, he relies on Apollo, even in presence of his judges, not so much as an advocate of his
[Page 52]
cause (for the rules of that rigid court did not admit the presence of advocates) but as what was called an ‘exegete’, or expounder of any difficulty or obscurity in the law. The part played by such an ‘exegete’, together with many other details touching the forms and procedure of Attic law, has lately been elucidated with conspicuous learning and charm of style by a German commentator upon this play—Müller. Assuredly, it admirably accords with the views laid down by this celebrated scholar that in the conduct of the cause Apollo's voice is not heard until a question arises of the interpretation of the law: for as to fact Orestes admits it at once, openly confessing that he killed his mother:
Now bear thou witness, and declare to me,
Apollo, if I slew her righteously;
For I the deed, as fact, will not deny.
But whether right or wrong this deed of blood
Seem in thine eyes, judge thou that these may hear. 1127
The attitude of mind here exhibited is, unless I err, one 1128 closely and straitly joined with a genuine and living religious feeling: namely, that it behoves mortals but rarely and with reluctance to attempt debate upon the principles of divine law. In such a cause as this the sole part for men is to decide, if we can, the question of fact. On the question of right, it is enough for us that He Himself has spoken, who in his own good time, without any advocacy from us poor men, will defend His own law. Further, the prejudice against the appellant's claim was considerably reduced, when the defence of the horrible deed was shifted to another, especially to a god.
Finally, this device served also to remind the audience that the question at issue was not merely the condemnation of Orestes: but one of the most vital of the truths of religion. For when gods are openly contending with
[Page 53]
gods, can we imagine any who can rightly intervene to settle such a dispute save the God of gods?
But, it may be objected, the appeal is not made to any god, but only, and that by Minerva's counsel, to the Court of Areopagus. So little, it is said, was the father of Tragedy actuated here by any thought of religion, that, plainly and avowedly, he is influenced by two quite other motives: first, to recommend to his fellow Athenians a certain special and exalted veneration for justice: secondly, to press on their confidence that renowned Court of Areopagus, the pre-eminent guardian and glory of their city, but whose authority, at that very period, was being shaken and undermined. Such motives are quite rightly attributed to him, yet they also leave ample room for the deeper truths of religion which are so characteristic of Aeschylus. To take a parallel case: what if it is true that, taking the opportunity of the fact that Orestes was a native of Mycenae, our poet has more than once praised an alliance with Argos which Athens at that time had either actually concluded or was about to conclude? So, what if he intended to sanction for ever, by a divine prophecy, the Court of Areopagus, to which the natural thread of his story had led him, at a time when the partisan attacks 1129 of demagogues was rashly tampering with it?
                                         In this, I say,
The reverent awe its citizens shall own,
And fear, awe's kindred, shall restrain from wrong
By day, nor less by night, so long as they,
The burghers, alter not themselves their laws:
But if with drain of filth and tainted soil
Clear river thou pollute, no drink thou'lt find.
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
But rightly shrinking, owning awe like this,
Ye then would have a bulwark of your land,
A safeguard for your city, such as none
Boast or in Skythia's or in Pelops' clime.
This council I establish pure from bribe,
[Page 54]
Reverend, and keen to act, for those that sleep
An ever-watchful sentry of the land. 1130
It is my opinion (as I have more than once indicated) that it was more than anything else the special task of an Athenian poet to interweave such advice and counsel as he desired from time to time to impress upon his fellow citizens, with some other teaching of loftier strain directly associated with all that is righteous, holy, and eternal. Would he not also add greatly to the praise of his native Athens in showing it to have been pre-eminently in this city that not only human but divine law had fount and origin?
Consequently, inasmuch as the nature of the appeal which is described in the Eumenides involves a divine appellant from a divine decree, we cannot doubt for a moment that it will be a god to whom the appeal is to be made, and that the affair will be remitted to the settlement of gods, not of men. In fact, the final judgement in the cause is not assigned even to Minerva herself: but all refer to her father Jove, the ‘Saviour’ (as he is styled), the resolution of the whole case.
In the first place, we have an indication given of his supreme authority in the fact that his name is placed last of all in the list of the gods of Delphi, to whom in due order 1131 the Pythian priestess does homage, in the opening scene of this tragedy. For last of all she commemorates:
Zeus most High, supreme Accomplisher. 1132
Next, Apollo, though he names no one, clearly indicates that he it is too, who may, at some time, undertake anew the cause of a suppliant who has been put to death or left unheard:
And I will help him and my suppliant free;
For dreadful among Gods and mortals too
The suppliant's curse, should I abandon him. 1133
[Page 55]
Truly an utterance of deep meaning, which seems to derive from some loftier creed: implying that the intercourse of the celestial deities too, whether among themselves or with mankind, is limited and governed by law: that is to say (to adopt Cicero's phrase) by highest reason, which, deep-rooted in natural things, commands what should be done and forbids the contrary. 1134 Apollo intimates that, since this law will not be futile nor dead, the resentment of a spurned suppliant will not be without its terrors even for himself. And why? Because he, too, reverences a God higher in authority, older in length of rule, than himself.
And indeed, from the first entrance of Minerva upon the stage, we are conscious, unless I mistake, of the near presence of the Supreme Ruler. We recognize some more august—indeed, to put it in a word—diviner presence. Nowhere does she condescend to reproach: never, even in argument, does she use bitter or stinging words: she proceeds throughout with quiet and even address: just as if she manifested the eternal wisdom of Supreme Deity.
Note, too, how exactly her entrance upon the stage suits 1135 one who has to play such a part: she is brought forward with quiet, even movement:
Thence came I, plying foot that never tires,
Flapping my aegis-folds, no need of wings,
My chariot drawn by young and vigorous steeds. 1136
If we compare this with the Homeric line describing the same goddess (together with Juno):
Smooth as the sailing doves, they glide along 1137
—Aeschylus will, I fancy, be thought superior by every one; whether because the two warlike goddesses seem somewhat inaptly compared to doves, the gentlest of birds: or because Aeschylus has exactly caught the virile, undaunted, unwearied spirit of Minerva:
Flapping her aegis-folds
[Page 56]
—whence it is all the more surprising that, being of such a character, she hesitates to proceed forthwith to adjudge the Oresteian cause on her own responsibility: especially since both sides submit it to her. But it was to be made plain, in her person, how little befitting, in such problems as these, a rash or hasty sentence given on the spur of the moment, would be: since their secret principle lies hidden among the mysteries of highest Jove. To him, therefore, without delay even his own interpreter appeals: for the cause was too subtle for dispensing with his supreme arbitrament: religion giving its sanction on the one side to the suppliant Orestes, on the other to the dread goddesses. She names, certainly, a picked list of her own citizens to act as judges: but any one may see that in deed and in truth the judgement will rest with Jove himself alone. This honour, however, was accorded to the Athenian populace, the worshippers of Minerva, that they should be the mouthpiece through whom the edicts of supreme power 1138 were declared publicly. In fact Apollo, during the course of the trial, appeals to Jove in express terms:
Ne'er have I spoken on prophetic throne
Of man, or woman, or of commonwealth,
But as great Zeus, Olympian Father, bade. 1139
Carefully consider the two following lines, which form the conclusion of the same speech:
I bid you [ Turning to the court of jurymen ] follow out my Father's will;
No oath can be of greater might than Zeus.
We have here the very deepest evidence of a genuine piety: not even men pledged by oath are to speak according to their own convictions, should it by any means sufficiently appear that the decree of Jove would be opposed to them.
Moreover Orestes, when the cause is finally decided, while according his gratitude to Minerva and Apollo, still
[Page 57]
seems to accord chief honour to Jove by his special and peculiar name of ‘Saviour’:
                     The man's an Argive once again,
And dwells upon his father's heritage,
Because of Pallas and of Loxias,
And Zeus, the true third Saviour, all o'erruling,
Who, touched with pity for my father's fate,
Saves me, beholding these my mother's pleaders. 1140
Finally, Pallas herself soothes and pacifies the Furies, enraged at the failure of their case, by simply urging that thus was the will of Jove, by whose decree all must needs abide, though they might not see clearly the law or principle on which the decision was based:
But the clear evidence of Zeus was given. 1141
If any one should even yet deem himself as suffering unjustly, let that man know that what Jove has once ratified can be neither blotted out nor changed by any device of man. At his own peril does any one seek to 1142 oppose it:
I too, yes I, trust Zeus. Need I say more?
I only of the high Gods know the keys
Of chambers where the sealed-up thunder lies. 1143
I doubt if any one of the poets has uttered a sentence full of warning at once so impressive and so wise. Certainly, I do not apprehend that any one will venture to compare with it Virgil's celebrated ‘Quos ego’. 1144 But even finer still is it, that this one utterance of Minerva, in a manner, comprises the solution of the problem suggested by the whole trilogy. For whatever may befall Orestes, the justice of his cause is declared simply by the fact that the Supreme Father of all approves him.
[Page 58]
Thus I may sum up the whole matter in a sentence: deities being at strife one with another, those of stern justice at strife with those of mercy—even divine sagacity and prudence can find no end to the controversy save this, that all be willing readily and contentedly to submit their case to the infinite power of Supreme Deity. For He—being always able to effect what He wishes, and Himself always overflowing with perfect happiness—has no need or reason at any time to lay down anything beyond what is right and lawful. So that the motto which in human affairs is associated with tyrants alone, ‘This is my will: this I command,’ ought, where Deity is concerned, not only to be endured, but whole-heartedly welcomed.
You now have before you the chief article of Aeschylean theology, and I should like each of you to compare it for himself with that part of the Holy Scriptures which more than any other deals with the laws and principles of the religion, such indeed as it was, which the ancient philosophers enjoyed. I mean the Book of Job, which is apparently the only book of Scripture addressed to men 1145 who had no revealed law from Heaven. Is not the argument of that book concerning the inequalities of human life, this—that in the last resort everything depends on the absolute will of the one Great Ruler, of whom, as you grant that He is omnipotent, you must concede that He cannot will what is unjust.
When Minerva, however, in giving her vote in favour of Orestes, subjoins some special reasons of her own:
For I no mother own that brought me forth,
And saving that I wed not, I prefer
The male with all my heart, and make mine own
The father's cause, nor will above it place
A woman's death, who slew her own true lord,
The guardian of her house 1146
[Page 59]
—we must not imagine that so weighty a cause turns on such a trivial argument. Minerva is not, in this address, dealing with the case as a whole, but merely explaining how it comes about that she is destitute of feminine feeling, and without the least sympathy for the murdered mother. It hence results, that the wisdom which is cognate with, and most resembling the Gods, is virile, chaste, self-controlled, and such as can never be dethroned by any emotion: but we shall never find that it attempts anything without divine aid.
We have now sufficiently shown how in these three orders of Gods arose all the elements of a most solemn appeal: we need only add that, since the older and stricter order was cast in the suit, special care was needed lest the honour paid to them in the past should suffer any diminution. For Aeschylus by no means meant that the merciful deities should in any way triumph over those of sterner traditions, but that one and the same power and spirit regarding a question of highest piety should inspire all the divine powers. And so, though Orestes is acquitted, the curtain does not yet fall. For the Furies must be pacified, and that not only for the sake of the city and the crops, but still more for the sake of human life and character: lest any one assume he may be a pious and good man though destitute of holy and sober fear. Observe how tactfully Minerva 1147 addresses herself to the task of appeasing their wrath:
Nay, list to me, and be not over-grieved:
Ye have not been defeated, but the cause
Came fairly to a tie, no shame to thee. 1148
In other words, she wishes it recognized from the mere fact of the even voting, how far from clear the question really was: for this fact alone implies, not slight, but honour and
[Page 60]
respect. She proceeds to conciliate them with hospitable words:
For lo! I promise, promise faithfully,
That, seated on your hearths with shining thrones,
Ye shall find cavern homes in righteous land,
Honoured and worshipped by these citizens. 1149
These lines are a counterpart and reply to those in which the Chorus had earlier, at the beginning of the play, described its duties:
Fulfilling tasks dishonoured, unrevered,
      Apart from all the Gods,
      In foul and sunless gloom,
Driving o'er rough steep road both those that see
      And those whose eyes are dark. 1150
Thus, those who hitherto were wont to wander far and wide, keenly intent on their dread pursuit, are now promised by Minerva a secure and certain home, and—as one may fairly put it—the freedom of the state of Athens. Again, when they throw out menacing words in the way which irritated men, especially those advanced in years, are wont to do, she supplements her promises by the much-prized addition of her own fellowship and that of all the gods:
Lull thou the bitter storm of that dark surge,
As dwelling with me, honoured and revered;
And thou with first-fruits of this wide champaign,
Offerings for children's birth and wedlock-rites,
Shalt praise these words of mine for evermore. 1151
Here, too, the lines correspond with those sung by the Furies concerning themselves:
Such lot was then assigned us at our birth;
From us the Undying Ones must hold aloof:
       1152 Nor is there one who shares
      The banquet-meal with us;
In garments white I have nor part nor lot. 1153
[Page 61]
In fact, they who formerly were banished from civic life are now, in a manner, inscribed as Athenian citizens: they who once exercised a mere executioner's office will now watch over joyful marriage ties, or be fortunate and good-omened attendants on human births. And, in brief, this mutual understanding effects that henceforth, while nominally spirits of the world below, they are in deed and truth to be ranked among the Olympian deities.
The ancient critics perceived that in this fact especially the general force of the play centred: most of them, in epitomizing it, carefully insert this sentence: ‘Having made the Furies gentle, he gave them the name of Gracious Goddesses.’ Not that the actual name Gracious Goddesses ( Eumenides ) is met with anywhere in the play itself: they are, however, once or twice called ‘august deities’, which implies the same meaning. But the name is of no importance: the one point to be grasped is, that the Furies, their disposition being softened, are enrolled as allies of the power of Him who alone sways all: and thus that no family or State will prosper which refuses them their rightful reverence:
Now from these strange forms and fearful
See I to my townsmen coming,
E'en to these, great meed of profit;
For if ye, with kindly welcome,
Honour these as kind protectors,
Then shall ye be famed as keeping,
Just and upright in all dealings,
Land and city evermore. 1154
Finally, Aeschylus, as his wont is, takes care that all this shall be made manifest, not through mere statement only, but by ocular demonstration. And the Eumenides are conducted in solemn state, with kindled torches and sacred hymn, from the Acropolis to their own temple, or rather
[Page 62]
cavern, in the neighbouring valley. And so, at the very close of the poem, when the circle of care and crime is 1155 complete, he brings us back to the serene calm from which he started. At the beginning and at the end he has introduced the thought of the protection of the gods, above all of Jove the Supreme God, as the one means of salvation. There, ‘Zeus Most High, Supreme Accomplisher’ gives ear to the prayers of the Greeks suppliant at Delphi: here,
You, 'neath the wings of Pallas ever staying,
   The Father honoureth. 1156
And we see that, as in song or music, just so in this noblest work—be it Poetry or Philosophy—the strain is happily closed by the same note which broke silence in the beginning:
From Zeus let us begin and with Zeus make end, ye
      Muses. 1157
[Page 63]
LECTURE XXIII 1158
Discussion of views of Aeschylus concerning the character and disposition of women, partly as deduced from the qualities of Io in the Prometheus Bound: but mainly as illustrated in The Suppliants.
Both in ancient times and in our own, gentlemen, there have been those who have criticized Aeschylus as lacking the tenderer emotions and all power of describing the affections of women, and their household duties and cares. The Athenians, who were undoubtedly judges entitled to respect, found fault with him for this very fact, that he hardly touches a topic which, to most writers, seems so fruitful—namely, the ill-omened love-affairs of women. And certainly, in Aristophanes, Aeschylus is made to boast:
But I never allow'd of your lewd Sthenoboeas,
Or filthy, detestable Phaedras—not I—
Indeed, I should doubt if my drama throughout
Exhibit an instance of woman in love. 1159
Whereas Euripides, representing, I imagine, those who at that time—more, indeed, by the daring effrontery of their treatment than by its wisdom—dominated the Attic stage, replies:
No, you were too stern for an amorous turn,
For Venus and Cupid too stern and too stupid. 1160
Aeschylus' Pythagorean muse was evidently too chaste 1161 and austere to please sufficiently their voluptuous fancy.
But I always wonder how it is that these so-called deficiencies should be endorsed by that most illustrious master of modern criticism whose opinions in such matters
[Page 64]
are, in his native Germany, justly venerated as oracles; I mean Schlegel, who has laid it down in express terms, that Aeschylus, being little more than an unrefined cynic, was incapable of these more tender strains of poetry.
And yet, in this controversy, perhaps one might not unreasonably dispense with quoting examples, since it is plain, on the very face of the thing, that it is scarcely possible any poet whatsoever can feel strenuously with the brave, piously with the religious, and then be cool and apathetic where the honour and praise of noble women are concerned. For the essence of all human virtues—even those of most widely severed character—is one and the same. The dignity and modesty severally characteristic of the soldier, the maiden, and the priest have singularly much in common: hence we have no reason for expecting to find that a writer who has given us with perfect expression a drama ‘full of the War God’, like the story of Thebes, would be remote in sympathy from a more delicate and quiet virtue.
But, after all, the mere mention of the name Iphigeneia by itself is enough to clear Aeschylus from so unjust a suggestion. I will go further, and assert that no poet—not even among those who, either from ancient tradition or taught by revealed philosophy, have held that something holy and divine dwells in woman—none, I say, of them all, has ever more sweetly and truly described those sweetest affections, whether of daughter, or wife, or, finally (which these detractors deny), of a highborn noble woman.
‘But our author has not—like Euripides—honoured the story of Iphigeneia with a separate play: a single lyric, 1162 and that a very short lyric, is all that he devoted to immortalizing her memory.’ But suppose I show that the Aeschylean poetry, so much at least as envious time has left to us, was largely devoted to that very subject with which these critics declare he was wholly unconcerned?
[Page 65]
Suppose I show that this very disciple of Mars has essayed the praises of noble women with such zeal that we unhesitatingly feel him to have shared with Aristotle the belief: ‘All states among whom the regulations regarding women are bad enjoy scarcely the half of happiness.’ 1163
I pass over the female characters who appear in the plays which we have already set forth and discussed—Cassandra, Atossa, Electra: but let us see whether in our quest we may not find quite sufficient for our contention in Io and her offspring, such as Aeschylus has painted them, partly in the Prometheus Bound , and still more at large in that tenderest, sweetest of his plays, The Suppliants . For certainly no one who attentively considers the two plays can have much doubt that, when the author was preparing The Suppliants , he had in mind his previous work: and was not without a certain delight, as is only natural, that he was re-treading a path familiar to him long before. It is still more important to notice that it is not only the story but also the moral tone and the theology of the Prometheus , so far as these are concerned with Io, that are fully developed in The Suppliants . For I cannot be wrong in thinking that in the earlier play Io's fortunes were intended to illustrate clearly the Virgilian creed as to the wretchedness and feebleness of mankind (‘the doubtful doom of human kind’). This was the real lesson taught by the protagonist, Prometheus himself, undergoing torments because of his undue love and sympathy for the race of man: and the same view of the conditions of our life is inculcated by Io: she teaches us that in some way or other a sort of Nemesis hangs over men who are overbold 1164 in aspiration: whether, like Prometheus, they devise methods and expedients for alleviation of common ills: or, as Io, indulge in building castles in the air, which is the way with most of us in the ignorance of our early years.
[Page 66]
Thus, in a sense, a double field of misfortunes presents itself—the main theme of Tragedy.
The hard-heartedness of Heaven seems to afflict, beyond all others, two types of mortals; on the one hand, those of brilliant natural gifts, of manly force of character, with high ambitious dreams: on the other, those in the first flush of sanguine youth, of feminine spirit, with quieter aspirations. Of Prometheus we have already spoken, whom the poet intends as the type of disappointment in the sphere of speculation and of political life. Now we turn to consider Io, our aim being first to define what we may call the governing motive of her character, and in the next place to show the careful piety of Aeschylus, who softens and explains in her case, as previously in that of Prometheus, any reproach to the Supreme God which may perchance have sounded over harsh and revolting.
Now there is one speech which will best explain the wandering maiden's real character, that which she herself delivers in presence of the chorus of nymphs, when relating the origin of her exile:
For nightly visions, coming evermore
Into my virgin bower, sought to woo me
With glozing words. ‘O virgin greatly blest,
Why art thou still a virgin, when thou might'st
Attain to highest wedlock? For with dart
Of passion for thee Zeus doth glow, and fain
Would make thee his. And thou, O child, spurn not
The bed of Zeus, but go to Lerna's field,
Where feed thy father's flocks and herds,
That so the eye of Zeus may find repose
From this his craving.’ With such visions I
Was haunted every evening. 1165
1166 Will any one contradict me if I say that the life-stories of hundreds of young men and women run on much the same lines as these? At that age most of us are wont to be
[Page 67]
filled with hope and desire for a career too great and splendid for the limitations of human nature, much more of our own mediocrity.
Aeschylus pictures her as having been allured to the Lernaean fields and the pastures and sheepfolds of her father Inachus: and I certainly incline to suppose that he intended to mark herein an experience most trying to the troubled minds of youth: namely, that this unrest finds its way, in strange fashion, amid those very scenes which are in especial familiar and beloved, whether owing to the old associations of childhood or to the recollection of those near and dear to them.
But note how deeply these broodings take seat in the innermost hearts of the unhappy sufferers. Io herself, for instance, after long lapse of time, tortured and wellnigh overcome by wanderings to and fro, comes to consult the oracle of Jove at Dodona:
                                         And the shrine
Oracular of Jove Thesprotian,
And the strange portent of the talking oaks,
By which—
(so the poet admonishes her)
By which full clearly, not in riddle dark,
Thou wast addressed as noble spouse of Zeus—
If aught of pleasure such things give to thee. 1167
Assuredly it is a strange truth which is here, in half a line, touched so briefly and searchingly: in a way these unhappy beings delight in their wretchedness. They have come to realize that their hopes were blind and vain: yet they cannot easily put them aside, and eagerly grasp at their dying embers caught sight of once again after long years.
I now pass to consider the nature of the penance—twofold 1168 in quality—which the unfortunate victim of rash ambition
[Page 68]
had to undergo. First, tormented by a gadfly, she is driven here and there, over sea and land, with no relief from her frenzy, without a moment's rest. By this I suppose Aeschylus intends to impress on us how violent are the apprehensions, the longings, and the misery which agitate those who are once carried in mind and desire beyond what is lawful. This wandering unrest much resembles madness in many ways, and especially in this, that men plainly perceive whither they are borne and what the issue will be: and yet by a sort of fate are hurried along without power of self-control. And this is the reason why, not to another speaker, but to the overwrought maiden herself, are assigned those glowing lines in which insanity is described:
The throbbing pain inflames me, and the mood
   Of frenzy-smitten rage;
   The gadfly's pointed sting,
   Not forged with fire, attacks,
And my heart beats against my breast with fear.
   Mine eyes whirl round and round:
   Out of my course I'm borne
By the wild spirit of fierce agony,
   And cannot curb my lips,
And turbid speech at random dashes on
Upon the waves of dread calamity. 1169
Who that has observed the words and expressions of the insane, has not noted with surprise that, though governed by no sure law, they are yet confined within limits of their own, and never range far away from the source of their malady, whatever it was? The more wretched and revolting, therefore, is the lot of those who, like Io, are borne hither and thither, by gloomy anxieties and agonies, just in the manner of madmen.
Again, how terrible is the strain in which the unhappy maiden prays that she may be freed from that spectre of the
[Page 69]
earth-born Argos, which is the second half of the punishment 1170 divinely visited on her:
Spectre of Argos, thou, the earth-born one—
   Ah, keep him off, O Earth!
I fear to look upon that herdsman dread,
   Him with ten thousand eyes;
Ah lo! he cometh with his crafty look,
Whom Earth refuses even dead to hold;
   But coming from beneath
   He hunts me miserable,
And drives me famished o'er the sea-beach sand. 1171
Once carried away by blind passion beyond due bound she deliriously fancies that keen eyes, which she may not escape, are ever haunting her: the mere indulgence of undisciplined thoughts is now a sorrow, nay a source of shame to her; she feels shame in the presence of God and men alike: nay even in the presence of the familiar spots, as if they too were conscious of her offence or of her madness. And thus, on this ground too, it is probable that Aeschylus designedly attributes to the maiden such a character as brings vividly before us the experiences of youth, bashful indeed and open-hearted, but over impulsive and bent on hopeless aims.
But, lest it may be suspected that I am making too much of mere fancies of my own, let me remind you that much the same view commended itself to a critic so sober and competent as Horace. In recommending that common tradition should as a rule be followed, as regards the characteristic qualities of those presented on the stage, he quotes among other instances this very Io, whom he describes as ‘a wanderer’:
Still be Medea all revenge and scorn,
Ino still sad, Ixion still forsworn,
Io a wanderer still, Orestes still forlorn. 1172
[Page 70]
‘Let Io’, he says, ‘be a wanderer.’ But why insist on that? As her whole story consists only of her wanderings, if Io 1173 appears at all, obviously she cannot but be ‘a wanderer’. Horace, however, I imagine, understood by ‘wandering’ not so much her journeyings from place to place, as her general type of character and outlook on life: otherwise the mention of her in his poem would not well accord with the other characters we have just quoted: one of whom is treacherous, another sad, a third revengeful and scornful—all named after their disposition and not their fate in life. Besides, since no tragedian, so far as I am aware, except Aeschylus has commemorated the daughter of Inachus, I can hardly doubt that it was his Prometheus Horace had in mind, when he laid down this rule. Why, therefore, relying on so high an authority, may we not confidently assert that this wandering maiden may have been intended by Aeschylus as a type and instance of the pass to which young men and women arrive, whose minds are fired with ambition for that which lies beyond their reach and which is denied to them?
Not that I consider any reproach for shameful conduct should attach to the unhappy maiden. Indeed, I note, scattered among her various utterances, no ambiguous proofs of true womanly modesty. In the first place, it is only most reluctantly, even to the most sympathetic hearers, that she pours forth the tale of her woes:
                     And yet I blush to tell
The storm that came from God, and brought the loss
Of maiden peace, what way it seized on me. 1174
Yet, in her story, when told, there is not the least trace of anything shameful: it is merely that her mind shrinks from utterance, by reason of some religious instinct making her sensitive to men's eyes and God's light.
[Page 71]
And next, when she recounts the course of that ill-omened passion, or I may rather say vision, she tells us that, with a modesty becoming a religious and modest girl, she concealed nothing from her father:
                                         With such visions I
Was haunted every evening, till I dared
To tell my father all these dreams of night. 1175
And it accords, too, with a sense of religious awe, that in bewailing her mad passion she does not so much resent her 1176 bitter griefs as hold it a disgraceful thing that she is so uncontrolled of tongue, and is borne weakly and at random along a torrent of disordered words:
And turbid speech at random dashes on
Upon the waves of dread calamity. 1177
It may, perhaps, be instructive to compare her maiden bewailings with the indignant menaces thrown forth by Prometheus:
For what offence, O son of Cronos, what,
   Hast thou thus bound me fast
   In these great miseries? 1178
That she has sinned grievously, she has not the least doubt: all she asks is to be made acquainted with the quality of her fault. Thus she proceeds:
Burn me with fire, or bury me in earth,
Or to wild sea-beasts give me as a prey:
   Nay, grudge me not, O King,
   An answer to my prayers. 1179
Observe how she resigns herself to the Superior Powers even in the form of her punishment; all she eagerly begs is that it may be such as will reach some end, and that she may not have to rove through infinite time over the whole
[Page 72]
earth. Thus she tends in a totally different direction from that stubborn and unyielding Titan: and we may not be far wrong in believing that Aeschylus is putting before us two types—in her the type of womanly patience, in him that of masculine and indomitable courage.
Much of the same significance are the traits exhibited in her ready confidence in Prometheus when once she recognizes him, and in the fact that in the midst of her own terror and torment she feels pity that such as he should have to endure such terrible suffering. At first, indeed, when she hears the name of her father Inachus,
Surely I heard the maid by gadfly driven,
Daughter of Inachus, 1180
1181 she is filled with amazement, but hardly yields complete trust:
Who art thou, who, poor wretch,
Who thus so truly nam'st me miserable?
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
                     But thou, make clear to me
                     What yet for me remains,
What remedy, what healing for my pangs,
                     Show me, if thou dost know. 1182
Afterwards, however, on Prometheus merely declaring his name, she instantly places full trust in him. Moreover, filled with compassion, she desires first of all to be told the story of his adversities before being enlightened as to the limits of her own wanderings:
O thou to men as benefactor known,
Why, poor Prometheus, sufferest thou this pain? 1183
In both cases she shows a maidenly simplicity.
These are the reasons which lead me to infer that the part played by Io was deliberately assigned with especial
[Page 73]
intent to make clear the unhappiness of those, either still young or with youthful mind, who allow themselves to be possessed by some far-off and deluding ambition. And thence it follows that her fate and fortunes, perhaps, also serve to declare to us the discipline of the gods, whereby extravagant desires are wont to be restrained. Such men or women grow weary soon of their interminable wandering, and are ashamed to meet the gaze of onlookers, whether gods or men. But yet they wander, disturbed and anxious, till the healing hand of divine power is extended, dispelling the deep-rooted malady by simple touch. Of this there is very significant indication towards the close of the play, where Io, or we may perhaps rather call her Isis, is led on to this end, by devious road, till she reaches the fatal spot—sacred indeed as being situate on the Egyptian coast, once a holy region—where she is bid wait for the advent of Jove:
                                         A city stands,
Canôbos, at its country's furthest bound,
Hard by the mouth and silt-bank of the Nile:
There Zeus shall give thee back thy mind again.
And note, pray, the method of her cure: 1184
With hand that works no terror touching thee. 1185
What other import can these lines have, but to warn mankind that by no means other than a holy and chastened love, whether of the gods or men, can unbridled passion and the unrest of youthful minds be soothed and quieted? But the seer with happiest forecast thus proceeds:
Touch only—and thou then shalt bear a child
Of Zeus begotten, Epaphos, ‘Touch-born,’
Swarthy of hue, whose lot shall be to reap
The whole plain watered by the broad-streamed Neilos. 1186
It is sufficiently clear, I think, that the origin assigned to this Epaphos is far other than such as was commonly
[Page 74]
given to those whom the impious piety of the ancients acclaimed as sons and daughters to highest Jove: since he owes his birth, as we have said, simply to the touch and breath of the divine lips. And the frequent reference to this miracle, which we find in The Suppliants , testifies how greatly Aeschylus delighted in it. The Chorus there invoke their hero ancestor:
Child of the heifer-foundress of our line,
                     Who cropped the flowery mead,
Born of the breath and named from touch of Zeus. 1187
And they add that when the fated time, or as Pindar calls it, ‘the appointed month,’ 1188 had completed its course, it proved by the happy issue the power of the divine touch:
                     And lo! the destined time
                     Wrought fully with the name,
And she brought forth the ‘Touch-born’ Epaphos.
—an extraordinary testimony to the power of a pure and duly restrained love. In no obscure phrase the Chorus declares the same story, as it had been handed down:
Zeus with his touch an offspring then begets. 1189
But far the most beautiful are the lines which the Chorus, 1190 again, afterwards interweave in their supplications, besieging Jove, as the way was, with reminders of his ancient kindness to their race. ‘Remember it,’ they pray, ‘O Thou who did'st on Io lay thy mystic touch.’ 1191 And lest there may be doubt of their looking upon Epaphos' birth in the light of a prodigy, they add, first having told the story of the maiden's banishment:
   Who was it then that soothed
Poor Io, wandering in her sore affright,
Driven on, and ever on, by gadfly's maddening sting?
   Zeus, Lord of endless time
[Page 75]
   Was seen All-working then;
He, even he, for by his sovereign might
That works no ill, was she from evil freed;
   And by his breath divine
She findeth rest, and weeps in floods of tears
   Her sorrowing shame away. 1192
That common feature associated with mental disorder, the drying up of the fount of tears, is beautifully touched upon; when, therefore, it again bursts forth, we have an assurance of the return of the mind to its normal self. But to proceed with Io:
And with new burden big,
Not falsely ‘Zeus-born’ named,
(Prometheus' prophecy being thus fulfilled)
She bare a son that grew in faultless growth.
I would have this story carefully compared with the same Jove as presented to us by Io herself in the Prometheus Bound and the description of his relentless expulsion of the wretched maiden from her father's home. Without doubt, on comparison, we shall find reason to believe that, when writing The Suppliants , Aeschylus felt some scruples as to what he had before written, too boldly and freely, concerning so mighty a deity. And thus, perhaps, what we have before suggested with regard both to the Prometheus Unbound and the praises of Jove, carefully and frequently repeated in the Agamemnonian trilogy, may seem the more likely to be well founded.
But I am afraid that too much time has been spent on this, which is, after all, only a kind of prelude to The Suppliants . Let us proceed, now, to the play itself, which, 1193 undoubtedly, of all the extant plays of Aeschylus, touches most directly on the concerns and interests of women. Perhaps we shall not be far wrong, if we consider The Suppliants related to that part of the Prometheus which
[Page 76]
concerns Io and her fortunes, much in the same manner as the first portion of a trilogy has its complement in the second or in the final play. I quite agree, indeed, with a most learned critic 1194 that there are by no means doubtful signs in The Suppliants of its being an incomplete work: especially at the end, where we have the two so-called semichoruses at variance between themselves: yet I can hardly go so far as to conclude, as he does, that it is the second, not the first, of the three plays which has survived to us. For if we recall such remains as we have of the fabled story of the house of Danaus, the opinion will perhaps be more probable which makes The Suppliants the first of the series: while next to them would follow the slaughter of the husbands, just like the terrible matricide in the Choephorae : while in the third play the curtain would fall upon the terrible exaction of penalties both from the father, Danaus, and the fifty daughters, taking place partly on the earth, but chiefly in the shades below. That would, indeed, be a terrific scene, with the dread goddesses revelling in it, one well worthy of Aeschylus with his rush of thought and glowing phrase. As it is, since untoward fate has decreed that we can enjoy no more than a very small part of the whole splendid work, and that part itself mutilated, it is inevitable that we manifestly miss, to a great extent, the full significance of the poem: but traces of the story as formerly received, if they chance to be met with, will, on that account, be so much the more acceptable: nor is there any reason why we should not avail ourselves of both sources to work out some connected thread if we can: whereby it may be shown that Aeschylus followed these 1195 traditions as regards both the overruling prudence of Heaven and the ways and dispositions of women.
I say the ways and dispositions of women, not of this or that particular woman: for it seems a special mark of
[Page 77]
this tragedy, as we have previously indicated, that the author intended in it to set before us certain universal types rather than individual distinctions of character. We see that very few proper names appear in it: neither the Argive king nor the Egyptian priest has a particular name: nor has any one of the fifty maidens a conspicuous and characteristic part assigned to her. Some will, perhaps, find fault, and perhaps rightly, with this simplicity, and compare it with the ostentatious poverty of a rich man, but, while I fully allow that, hereby, the sharp outline of the whole play is blunted, and there are no distinct varieties and hues to correspond to the facts of real life, yet we derive thus much of advantage from this very defect, that it is exactly this method which puts us into possession of the point of view of the great poet on the subject we treat to-day: I mean the essential disposition and characteristics of women. For since he has not given us a portrait of Hypermnestra or of any other of the maidens, what else could Aeschylus have intended, I would ask, than to depict the general character of womankind, and to show what feelings would naturally influence women in such a crisis. The mere story itself, I submit, was bound to bring out his opinion, whatever that may have been, regarding the whole world of women. And now observe what are the chief colours which he has used in drawing his picture.
First of all, he always notes one trait, itself the most characteristic of a true maiden's modesty: his suppliants not only shun and shrink from their insolent suitors, the sons of Danaus, but also, because of their conduct, avoid all companionship and even the very gaze of men. This seems 1196 implied in their prayers, couched more than once in such form as this:
May He, the all-seeing Father, grant that I,
   Great seed of Mother dread,
[Page 78]
In time may 'scape, still maiden undefiled,
   My suitor's marriage-bed. 1197
And again they pray:
Ah! may I ne'er be captive to the might
   Of males! 1198
They speak, not of this or that particular man, but of the whole race of men. Moreover, they often set men and women over against each other, as they might two opposing parties in a state: for example:
Drive thou far off the wantonness of men,
   The pride thou hatest sore,
And in the pool of darkling purple hue
Plunge thou the woe that comes in swarthy barque.
                     Look on the women's cause;
                     Recall the ancient tale
Of one whom Thou did'st love in time of old,
                     The mother of our race. 1199
When admitted to citizenship, they thus sing the praises of the Argives:
                     For they have mercy shown;
                     And passed their kind decree,
Pitying this piteous flock, the suppliants of great Zeus.
They did not take their stand with men 'gainst women,
Casting dishonour on their plea for help. 1200
Finally, in a solemn prayer at the very commencement of the poem, they use the phrase ‘a swarm of men’ as a term of bitter reproach:
                     And that swarm of men that follow,
                     Haughty offspring of Ægyptos,
                     Ere they set their foot among you
                     On this silt-strown shore,—oh send them
                     Seaward in their ship swift-rowing. 1201
[Page 79]
Clearly, these maidens belong to the ranks of those who, both rightfully and willingly, are wont to appeal chiefly 1202 for aid to the virgin goddesses, and this is what we find in their prayers.
At one time they approach Minerva with their petition:
Thou, virgin daughter of high Jove,
A virgin's vows hear and approve;
Holding thy sober, awful state,
Protect us from the touch we hate:
From bold incontinence secure,
Pure thyself, preserve us pure. 1203
At another they seek the protection of Diana:
                     And Artemis the chaste,
                     May she behold our band
With pity: ne'er be marriage rites enforced
                     On us by Kythereia. 1204
But above all they honour their father Danaus: they cherish his every word: they cannot bear to be away from him:
I fain would take my seat not far from thee. 1205
Leave me not here alone, I pray thee, father! 1206
Even when in sore peril, they will not suffer themselves to be conducted to any shelter save under their father's advice:
                     But kindly send to us
Our father Danaus, brave and true of heart,
                     To counsel and direct.
His must the first decision be where we
                     Should dwell, and where to find
A kindly home. 1207
And observe also how, touched with religious reverence,
[Page 80]
they shrink from remembering, or, at all events, from speaking of the story told them by their parents, of the fate and fortune of their mother ‘the Wanderer’:
They tell of one who bore the temple-keys
Of Hera, Io, in this Argive land.
So was 't indeed, and wide the fame prevails. 1208
You can feel that a reverent modesty checks them from saying more.
Thus much of feminine modesty: it remains to add a few remarks as to their love and religious feeling for 1209 particular places. With indescribable charm these exiles combine a strange yearning for their native land with a reverent and grateful feeling, not merely towards their Argive hosts, but even towards their shores and hills, their rivers, and the whole Argive region. They are conscious of the attraction of the land of their ancestors: but, in spite of it, they still long with tenderest regret for their own Egyptian land. In a set chorus they resound its praises:
And so she cometh, as that herdsman winged
                     Pierces with sharpest sting,
To holy plain all forms of life sustaining,
                     Fields that are fed from snows,
Which Typhon's monstrous strength has traversèd,
                     And unto Neilos' streams,
                     By sickly taint untouched. 1210
But still stronger evidence, I think, is afforded of their love of native land, by chance references dropped from time to time in songs which deal with quite other themes. For instance: they liken themselves to some nightingale, bewailing, not her rifled nest, but her loved rivers and forests, from which the hawk has banished her:
[Page 81]
For she, driven back from wonted haunts and streams,
                     Mourns with a strange new plaint
                     The home that she has lost. 1211
Apparently they call it a ‘new plaint’, since to her old lament for Itys is added now a new lament for banishment from her home and haunts. I can fancy, too, that Aeschylus had in mind the ways and disposition of that tireless songster, weaving a new strain almost from hour to hour. And note with what charming skill the poet works up the ‘answering clause’ of the comparison:
E'en so do I, to wailing all o'er-given,
In plaintive music of Ionian mood,
Vex the soft cheek on Neilos' banks that bloomed,
                     And heart that bursts in tears,
And pluck the flowers of lamentations loud,
                     Not without fear of friends,
                     Lest none should care to help 1212
This flight of mine from that mist-shrouded shore. 1213
The measure is described as ‘Ionian mood’, being unfamiliar and thoroughly novel to them as foreigners, and so fitly answering to that ‘strange new plaint’. The ‘soft cheek on Neilos' bank that bloomed’ is beautifully associated with the memories of peaceful youth. Many suggestions have been made to explain the epithet ‘mist-shrouded’ as applied to Egypt, but I shall only mention one, which is recommended by its very simplicity. ‘Mist-shrouded’ says one of the old Greek commentators, ‘because lying low and, to those approaching from the sea, seeming as if underground.’ Navigators, I imagine, applied this epithet to Egypt, having seen its shores from afar, shrouded, as is generally the case, in a vague appearance of haze. Why, therefore, should not the poet have imagined this word to occur to the Suppliants, seeing once more with their mind's eye their country's coast receding from sight and
[Page 82]
now barely visible, now not visible at all, above the waves? If to any one these speculations seem trivial or oversubtle, let him remember that a poem is like a picture in which the whole effect is not seldom produced by the most delicate stroke of the brush.
But I said that with their affection for the old country there was strikingly combined a certain confidence and trust in the Argive State: indeed, even in the very localities, the hills, rivers, and, before all, in the temples of the Argive Gods:
And to what land more propitious
Could we come than this before us,
Holding in our hand the branches
Suppliant, wreathed with white wool fillets?
O State! O land! O water gleaming!
Ye the high Gods, ye the awful,
In the dark the graves still guarding;
Thou too with them, Zeus Preserver,
Guardian of the just man's dwelling,
Welcome with the breath of pity,
Pity as from these shores wafted,
Us poor women who are suppliants. 1214
1215 And they congratulate themselves a little later upon the conditions under which their petitions are poured forth:
And now invoking him in grassy fields,
Where erst his mother strayed. 1216
They hold it of good omen, that a secure refuge is allowed them in the very region where long ago their great ancestor passed her youth, innocent and free from cares:
                     We boast that we are come
Of consecrated land the habitants,
And from this land by lineage high descended.
                     Now to the ancient track,
                     Our mother's, I have passed
The flowery meadow-land where she was watched,—
[Page 83]
                     The pastures of the herd,
Whence Io, by the stinging gadfly driven,
                     Flees, of her sense bereft,
Passing through many tribes of mortal men. 1217
In short, either they associate both regions in friendliest unison in a single appeal, or, if yielding Argos pre-eminence, they take pains to show that they remember with no ordinary affection their own old Egyptian home:
Let praise attend this city of Pelasgos;
Let us no more, no more adore the mouths of Neilos
                     With these our hymns of praise;
Nay, but the rivers here that pour calm streams through our country,
Parents of many a son, making glad the soil of our meadows,
With wide flood rolling on, in full and abounding richness. 1218
I am not certain that I ought not to attribute to the same cause, I mean to a true womanly instinct, the kindliness which the Suppliants show to dumb, unreasoning animals. No doubt (as I have before suggested) the Pythagorean training of Aeschylus had great influence in this direction. But let us see whether it was not intentionally that the author placed in the mouths of this chorus of women such indications of the feeling as appear in this tragedy: perhaps he thought that otherwise there would be something lacking on their part in true and tender sympathy.
This explains those lovely lines, already cited by us no great way back, in which, on the one hand, the maidens picture to themselves a nightingale barred from her familiar groves, and on the other, a calf wandering on the 1219 rocks plaintively lowing to attract its keeper:
                     She lifteth up her voice
And to the shepherd tells her tale of grief. 1220
[Page 84]
See with what skill there is combined with Io's story pity for a heifer stung by a gadfly: one and the same chorus seems to hymn at once a dirge both for men and dumb animals; this is like the thought of the inspired Psalmist, ‘Thou, Lord, shalt save both man and beast.’ 1221 But it is enough to have glanced in passing at these details, merely to let it be seen how they affect the feminine disposition as conceived by Aeschylus. For it is a well-known and accepted fact that, as a rule, women have kindlier feelings than men towards dumb animals.
Very significant, too, is the delicate grace which makes them crave indulgence for their foreign tongue even when praying to gods of an alien land:
Thee, Apian sea-girt bluff,
I greet (our alien speech
Thou knowest well, O land). 1222
And this most beautiful trait of reserve:
Therefore from faces by our boughs o'ershadowed
Let prayers ascend in emulous eagerness. 1223
Was it possible to have expressed more fittingly the true combination of modest reverence with that confidence in prayer which should be seen in all religious observance and ceremonial, especially on the part of women? Again, what singular simplicity they exhibit, when speaking of the perils of ocean and their own troubles:
The oar indeed and dwelling, timber-wrought,
With sails of canvas, 'gainst the salt sea proof,
   Brought me with favouring gales,
   By stormy wind unvexed:
Nor have I cause for murmur. 1224
So, too, when they invoke a sea-storm for their enemies:
[Page 85]
                                         Oh, send them,
Seaward in their ship swift-rowing;
There, with whirlwind tempest-driven,
There, with lightning and with thunder, 1225
There, with beasts that bring the storm-rain,
May they in the fierce sea perish. 1226
In each case their words are such as are natural to maidens having but once had experience of a sea voyage. Nor must we omit to notice the fact, trivial as it may seem, that, in the midst of all their griefs, they bethink themselves of their garments, wretchedly torn and rent, in the customary manner of those in trouble:
And oft-times fall, with rendings passionate,
On robe of linen and Sidonian veil. 1227
And certainly their trembling fears, on first hearing the announcement of the approach of the ship of Ægyptus, and the hesitating suspicion which for some time leads them to shrink from Pelasgus, in spite of his kindly welcome, are all such traits as would at once suggest themselves to any artist imagining the part to be played by young women.
A more subtle trait it is that when their father has taught them to which of the gods they should specially make appeal, they add to each petition some special plea, likely to touch the heart of each deity. For instance, this is how they address Apollo:
We call the sun's bright rays to succour us,
Apollo too, the holy, in that He
A God has tasted exile from high heaven;
Knowing that fate, He well may feel for men. 1228
They style him ‘holy’, to win his sympathy for a band of maidens: they remind him of his own exile to win his sympathy for exiles. Then, turning to Neptune they say:
Well hath He brought us, well may He receive! 1229
[Page 86]
—pressing past favours as security for those they desire. Thirdly, there is Mercury: they desire this herald to be mindful of his due office; mainly because they themselves are freeborn, and worthy of his speedy help:
To us, as free, let him good herald prove. 1230
What is the purport of these minute refinements? Well, 1231 to me, at all events, these adroit expedients of the suppliant women are eminently suited to their characters: indeed, I will make a bolder confession; they seem to me akin to the spirit of that woman who, when the Lord refused for a while to grant her prayer, reverently yet shrewdly answered: ‘Yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters' table,’ and who, in consequence, earned a meed of praise from His own lips. 1232
Any one may justifiably conclude from this array of instances, such as it is, that Aeschylus by no means undervalued the softer affections, as they are called, or the domestic interests and general ways of women. But, to make doubly sure, he himself declares in the person of Danaus what control of speech, what modesty in their whole conduct of life, they must exhibit who would be held to merit the high title of virgin:
And with your speech, let mood not over-bold,
Nor vain nor wanton, shine from modest brow
And calm clear eye: and be not prompt to speak,
Nor full of words. 1233
And again:
But ye, I charge you, see ye shame me not,
With this your life's bloom drawing all men's eyes.
The goodly vintage is full hard to watch;
All men and beasts make fearful havoc of it,
Nay, birds that fly, and creeping things of earth;
And Kypris offers fruitage, dropping ripe,
[Page 87]
As prey to wandering lust, nor lets it stay;
And on the goodly comeliness of maidens
Each passer-by, o'ercome with hot desire,
Darts forth the amorous arrows of the eye. 1234
Only, I charge you, keep your father's precepts,
Prizing as more than life your chastity. 1235
He who thus wisely and weightily discoursed on the duties of women, certainly held also that their fortunes deserved in a special degree the overruling protection of the Supreme Power. Hence that same Jupiter, who in the Prometheus 1236 had decreed that Io should be disciplined by wretched wanderings, though always holding out hope that the wanderer should at last recover both settled mind and settled home; that same Jupiter, I repeat, is ever at hand to support these suppliant maidens, the descendants of Io: to him they appeal in their need; he it is whom they assume to preside over the circle of deities who protect Argos; and while making distinction of two orders of deity, as it were, namely those above and those below, they yet, in striking fashion, place Jove separate and apart from both, as being superior, not only in degree but in kind: for these words show their belief:
Ye the high Gods, ye the awful,
In the dark the graves still guarding;
Thou too with them, Zeus Preserver. 1237
They hail him too, as the one last support of pious homes:
Guardian of the just man's dwelling. 1238
Moreover, Danaus asseverates that, slowly but surely, as the phrase goes, Jupiter both chastises ill-doers and justifies and delivers his own worshippers. So men must ever wait for his own time; they must not be hasty and
[Page 88]
impatient, remembering the darkness that hangs over human life:
                                         Take courage then;
In their own time and at the appointed day,
Whoever slights the Gods shall pay for it. 1239
Again we read:
Nor have I cause for murmur. Issues good
May He, the all-seeing Father, grant. 1240
Furthermore, Jove's decrees are brought to pass in ways absolutely unfailing, but mysterious beyond comparison: one might fairly say that the divine counsels resemble some wood, clad with boughs in densest profusion, whose paths are impenetrable to keenest insight, and rarely lead to the 1241 region under heaven towards which they seem to make at first:
And yet the will of Zeus is hard to scan:
   Through all it brightly gleams,
E'en though in darkness and the gloom of chance
   For us poor mortals wrapt.
   Safe, by no fall tripped up,
The full-wrought deed decreed by brow of Zeus;
   For dark with shadows stretch
The pathways of the counsels of his heart
   And difficult to see. 1242
And it is further added, that the thunderbolts of the Supreme Ruler flash forth most readily and willingly against the proud and violent: that none sin with impunity, not even those who after a space come to their senses and divest themselves of their violent arms:
And from high-towering hopes He hurleth down
To utter doom the heir of mortal birth;
   Yet sets He in array
   No forces violent;
All that Gods work is effortless and calm. 1243
[Page 89]
Finally, rewards and punishments are not to be attributed to secondary causes, as they are termed: Jove himself, seated on his holiest throne, works the effect, I will not even say by the mere glance of his eye, but by the silent power of his spirit:
Seated on holiest throne,
Thence, though we know not how,
He works His perfect will. 1244
But, it may be objected, the maidens by no means invoke the decree of Jove as the end of strife: seeing that in one chorus they threaten to seek, perhaps at the hands of the gods below, the equity denied them by the neglect of the gods above:
   But if this may not be,
   We, of swarth sun-burnt race,
Will with our suppliant branches go to him,
   Zeus, sovereign of the dead,
The Lord that welcomes all that come to him, 1245
   Dying by twisted noose
If we the grace of Gods Olympian miss. 1246
But I incline to look on this as a mere formal phrase intended to press Jove with more strenuous appeal: it is like the assertion which we find at times in Holy Scripture, where the prophets in appealing to the true God declare that they are willing to sacrifice their own lives if only they may secure the salvation of their people, which is bound up with His own glory. 1247 At all events, the lines delivered in the very next strophe by the Suppliants would seem to imply this construction:
   And then shall Zeus to words
   Unseemly be exposed,
Having the heifer's offspring put to shame,
[Page 90]
   Whom he himself begat,
And now his face averting from our prayers:
   Ah, may he hear on high,
Yea, pitying look and hear propitiously! 1248
They imply clearly, as we have seen already, from the language assigned to Apollo in the Eumenides , 1249 that laws exist which, in some sort, control even deity itself—the immovable and eternal principles of equity and goodness: and that they who plead these in prayer to Jove, though in word indeed they seem to appeal against him, are really by their very appeal falling back upon his protection: seeing that these very laws and principles but express his highest and most absolute will.
And thus in the case of these Suppliants, as fully as in the Prometheus , Aeschylus maintained his true piety inviolate and intact. He assigns to Supreme Deity an oversight in the domestic life and fortunes of women not a whit less watchful than that previously claimed for him in the concerns of civil life and the learning of philosophers.
But had not the inroads of time denied us the enjoyment 1250 of those plays with which it is probable that Aeschylus completed the trilogy, I apprehend we should possess evidence—splendid, assuredly, but at the same time most mournful—of the gradual stages whereby the character and quality of woman is wont to decline, and to be changed by a kind of fate from the highest good to the utmost conceivable wickedness, when once it has entered on the downward path. And no one, I think, will deny that Aeschylus was specially fitted to deal with that terrible punishment which legend says was the climax of the story, when the scene passes to the world below and that well-known penalty:
                                         Those maidens' guilt,
Their famous doom, the ceaseless drain
[Page 91]
Of outpour'd water, ever spilt,
   And all the pain
Reserved for sinners, even when dead. 1251
For myself, I make no doubt that even here there would have been found that tone of deep piety which we have seen pervading, as with light of Elysium, all those writings of Aeschylus now remaining to us.
And though the great father of Tragedy has come down to us shorn of so great a part of his works, our age may yet be congratulated that from his meagre remains we derive so many memorials of pure religion: and I should account among these The Suppliants to hold almost the first place, were it for this alone—that the chief lesson which is taught by it is—that the most religious poet of ancient Greece also maintains and defends with utmost zeal the cause of chastity.
[Page 92]
LECTURE XXIV 1252
What poets are to be distinctively classed as Lyrical. Two reasons given which make it difficult to classify them in due order. The reason why they generally adopt such involved and complicated metres. The essential principle of Pindar's Odes discussed: they are of the heroic class, and yet differ from the Homeric Epic and the Aeschylean drama. Examples are cited to establish that Pindar was inspired by a kind of passion where athletes and their games are concerned.
Some may be of opinion, and not without a certain appearance of truth, that lyric poets may far more easily than others be distributed in class, each in his due order: I mean in accordance with that standard which we laid down at the outset as the true test of Poetry. For it is regarded as the special note of lyric poets that, when they write, they are not fettered by any hard-and-fast rule: they simply recount, or at least suggest, in appropriate song that which their ‘wish, fear, rage, or delight’ suggest at the moment. 1253 One would suppose, therefore, that the special tastes and dispositions of such as thus write would stand forth revealed in clearest light. But that, in the instance of Pindar, as well as other lyric poets, the result has been quite the opposite, no one will deny who will read their works with a little care, and will not attempt to form his judgement on the whole from the perusal of only one or two poems. Unless I am mistaken, we shall often find ourselves faced with extremely difficult and 1254 perplexed questions: first, whether they may in strict propriety be ranked among the poets whom I have before named ‘primary’, and next, what is to be assigned as the peculiar and chief excellence of each—what is the inspired bent of Genius which possesses each?
[Page 93]
There are, indeed, very adequate causes which explain why it is that this uncertainty of which I am complaining arises chiefly with regard to Lyrical poetry, and some of these I will now set forth to the best of my power before proceeding to consider Pindar's Odes: which should of right and in due order be discussed at this particular stage, when we have now completed what was to be said concerning Homer and Aeschylus.
And, first of all, let me remind you that under the general description ‘Lyrical’ I am including all poems written as occasion arose to relieve the poet's mind without any connected story or train of thought. Let me be allowed to call all these Lyrics, even though they have an infinite variety of metre, of feeling, even of limit and scale. For whether their emotion is tranquil or impulsive, whether the style is terse or free and untrammelled, assuredly they all have this note in common, that they are trying to express the seething feelings of the soul by means of rhythmical language, drawing their inspiration from the circumstances of the moment, and not like Epic and Tragic or ‘Didactic’ poets, always carrying in their mind the scheme of a poem already outlined long ago.
As for the title ‘Lyric’: we may fairly say, perhaps, that a writer of this quality seeks counsel from his lyre as circumstance and season demand: particularly since in this order of Poetry the method of metre and rhythm is of such prominent importance: nay, very frequently (as those having direct experience best know) the very flow and tenor of the thought will need to be arranged to suit them. It follows, therefore, that these writers may rightly be styled Lyrical on the same principle as those are styled 1255 Dramatic, whose whole scheme essentially turns on some action or story: and those again Didactic, whose concern it is to inculcate the elements of some art or method. In a sense, indeed, all poets are lyrical: all others however
[Page 94]
have certain rules peculiar to the quality of their special theme, and limits within which they must confine themselves: while there is nothing to hinder lyrical poets, properly so called, from roving at will whithersoever the strings of their lyre may lead them, or their own temperament guide them, or poetic inspiration and art urge them on.
And thus, as before remarked, where these lyrical poets are in question, two considerations in especial make it no easy task, even for trained and keen observers, to distinguish and adjudicate upon individual composers, and to decide in what class each should justly be placed. One of these difficulties results from the feelings and dispositions common to all humanity, the other from those peculiar to poets.
First, then, do we not all recognize that men vary from hour to hour, notably those apt to be carried away more powerfully than others, by enthusiastic feeling? Consequently those who venture to base their judgement only upon some two or three poems often find themselves at fault. We need to test and see whether at the time of composition the writer may not have been carried away, as often happens, by some unusual impulse of passion or sorrow, of admiration or keen regret. For when our souls are strongly moved (who does not know this by his own experience?) words and expressions repeatedly break forth quite alien to our normal and ordinary temper. And while these are absolutely sincere at the time, and are, indeed, most intimate to the nature of genuine Poetry, I venture to doubt whether any one would find them a true gauge by which to test the central feeling and true character of the speaker.
What guidance have we, should men's characteristic delights be inconstant and shift from day to day? how are we to proceed should some such instance present itself
[Page 95]
like that Scottish ploughman, than whom no one in all literature has more happily and exquisitely sung in pastoral strain? Assuredly, never was man more unequal to himself 1256 than he was. Only compare those many songs of his, loosely flowing in reckless unrestraint, with that most beautiful poem 1257 where he limns before us his own father, one like those
                     Rustic forefathers in days of yore,
Robust though frugal, and content though poor. 1258
See him preparing for his Sabbath with the family Bible at his side: what a glimpse we have not only of the peace of home but of deep piety! Will any one deny that the tone of these lines is not only charming and delightful, but even reverent and religious? Who does not lament and marvel too, that the man who wrote it could so rapidly have declined to sottish courses and indulged in ribald abuse, pleasures in which, if ever man did, he revelled keenly and eagerly?
Of a writer of such quality, therefore, we must conclude, that he is gifted to support the part, not of one, but of many poets: for he is clearly inspired in various poems, in absolutely opposed directions, and that with an equal strength of feeling which is never assumed or artificial: and, further, he has an equal command of rhythm and of diction for expressing feelings so conflicting. The question which suggests itself is, whether behind this extraordinary inconsistency there may not lie hidden some one constant vein of feeling, always guiding in one direction a mind which apart from this seems so inconsistent. And perhaps we may find something of the kind in the case of the poet just referred to, in his feeling for river and forest, the splendid pageant of sky and land which surrounds us: perhaps, I say, we may find that this passion was able,
[Page 96]
by its quiet, persistent strength, to hold together and give shape to his restless thoughts and cares.
This is but a slender thread to guide us, and I confess I could not trace it throughout his poems, yet, for all that, I am inclined to believe that no poet, indeed no human being, is without some master feeling which focuses and binds together into somewhat of a unity the fluctuating 1259 and many varying distractions of the mind. At all events, meanwhile, we may lay it down as certain that the honour of the sacred style of poet must by no means be refused to any one merely by reason of his shifting feelings, provided that they are true and sincere at the time he writes. The essential requirement is that everything should flow from a full heart.
But here another difficult problem arises, which results from this very truth. Just as the common run of mankind is ever inconstant and fickle, so men more highly gifted have a strange power of adapting themselves, in very high degree, to every possible mode of feeling. What can possibly be so artificial (to follow Cicero's words 1260 ) as measured verse, a stage, a play? Now while among all orders of poets there is frequently ample room for doubt, whether a poem is a real utterance of true feeling or a merely artistic effort, no man of penetration, I think, would deny that this doubt is peculiarly and specially felt as regards lyrical poets. It is far more easy to pretend to feel a strong emotion in a short poem, and the result is more convincing: while it is hardly possible for any one to use borrowed notes in a long epic or tragic story. In a word, it is clear on the face of it, first, that it is more easy for lyrical poets than for any others to affect for the time to be other than their natural selves; secondly, that this is done with much less difficulty with those particular feelings which are quick and impulsive than with those that are more enduring.
[Page 97]
The reason is that the more refined and tender feelings, such as, when once conceived, tinge with their own special quality the whole remaining outlook on life, can hardly, if ever, be satisfactorily assumed by any one, however skilful, either in poetry or in real life. Hence, ‘elegiac’ poems and those sonnets which are such favourites with the Italians, of which the renowned Petrarch gave the first, or certainly at least the most striking and finished examples, reveal to us more readily and decisively the genuine disposition of the author than those poems which move with quicker and more tripping step and are usually called ‘Odes’.
I now proceed to the second consideration, to which 1261 I referred as a reason why our judgement of the real disposition and attitude of lyric writers is generally less easy to form: and this resides in the nature and character of Poetry itself.
It is quite clear, indeed I fear I may have wearied you by dwelling on the point too often, that much of the very essence of Poetry lies in the fact that the poet's deepest and most intimate feelings do not indeed lie wholly hidden, but do take refuge as it were in a kind of sanctuary, behind a veil, and shrink from the full light of day. Now, in the case of those who set themselves to weave a regular plot, I mean dramatic and epic poets, it is obvious that the composer's personality naturally holds itself apart and retires into the background. Opinions are expressed, judgements passed, praise and blame are meted out, not however as the utterances of Homer or Aeschylus, but as those of an Achilles or a Prometheus. It is true that, even so, the poet's own hidden feelings—feelings sometimes of the most sacred nature, which he would scruple, and indeed which he would feel it a sin, to express directly—somehow find utterance: yet when a man speaks his own thoughts through another's lips modesty is observed, while the agitated, full heart is relieved.
[Page 98]
It is perhaps due to the same cause that most of the writers of memorial elegies have recourse to similar expedients, and make some imaginary ‘shepherd’ play the mourner's part. This device, since it owes its origin to writers of the greatest name, Theocritus and Virgil, and was more than once adopted by our own Spenser, must not be wholly condemned: though I quite agree that hosts of writers in later times have employed it in a trivial and thoroughly inartistic fashion. But its special purpose seems to be that it enables a writer to utter, behind the thin veil of allegory, many things which he would never allow himself to speak publicly and openly: Meliboeus was thus enabled, for instance, freely and without danger, to lament his confiscated fields, the soldiers' licence, the 1262 harmful power of Caesar himself: 1263 again, it enabled the Thestylis of Spenser 1264 to describe intimately the woes and sorrows of the noble family of the Sidneys: and, more important still, the device enables the poet to introduce in support of the feeling which he is portraying, those objects in which all poets are wont, and rightly wont, to take eminent delight, woods, mountains, and trees, in short, all that belongs to the country and rural life. Note the special way in which Milton's Lycidas attracts us: there we rove at will amid shadowed hollows, flower-covered glades, gentle evening breezes—in fine, all those delights whereby Nature itself most soothes the sorrows of man. But there would, I apprehend, be no room for these charms were a writer forbidden to imagine for himself some pastoral scene, and to present himself in the guise of a sad shepherd leading his flock to pasture at early morn, and singing to himself amid his toil with passionate sorrow for his dead companion.
[Page 99]
But now remember, that the whole tribe of lyrical poets (if that is the right name for them) cannot avail itself of this expedient of shifted responsibility, since in this species of poetry everything is uttered in the poet's own person. Consequently the art and skill of the writer had to effect that which could not be effected by the nature of the poem: and let us see whether there are not two chief methods which enable lyrical poets to maintain the true dignity of poetic reserve, and to protect their inmost thoughts and enthusiasms and emotions from being exposed to the full blaze of daylight. I suggest that this is effected, first, by the tact or judgement of the writers, in choosing subjects somewhat remote from those which in truth hold their affection . Thus it comes about that, even if perchance they touch on these deepest subjects, they appear rather to fall in with them incidentally, than to have sought them purposely. But in the main they, as it were, trifle with and play round their dearest delights. Such is, to a great extent, the method of our own Herbert, who hides the deep love of God which consumed him behind a cloud of precious conceits: the 1265 result appears to most readers inappropriate, not to say chilling and repellent. Fair-minded critics are wont to excuse him on the score of the taste and tone of the age in which he lived: still, granting as much weight as you choose to this cause, it will still be open to us to contend that it was Herbert's modest reserve which made him veil under these refinements his deep piety.
But the end which Herbert and many others effected mainly by choice of subject, some, unless I err, have attempted to gain by elaborate metrical devices. In all kinds of poetic work, indeed, as I laid down at the outset, the poet finds a real source of solace and soothing in even the very slight pains he has to take, verse after verse, to make the lines end rightly: by the recurring beat of the line, as by a regular touch of the hand, the restless and
[Page 100]
troubled feelings are soothed, as children are by the croonings of their nurses. In all regions of Poetry, I repeat, this is of much importance: but I seem to detect a peculiar and emphatic appropriateness in it as regards lyrical writers. There have been, in fact, not a few writers of such consummate facility, that they could as easily set forth any subject whatsoever in metre, as others do in prose. Thus in order that their poetry may not, in large degree, fail of its due function, they spontaneously adopt a somewhat more complicated form: they give variety to their metre by many refined subtleties: build up period on period, mutually answering one another. In brief, with a marvellous skill, art of the most exquisite kind is made to minister its healing touch to disordered Nature. And this has the further effect, which more than anything powerfully ministers to that modest reserve which we have so often praised, that, by means of this expedient, we enjoy a kind of restful shade and retreat, specially grateful to the ardent feeling of a refined and diffident man. Indeed, to the inexperienced—to laymen as they may be called—the chief part of the poetic toil seems to be spent in versification and in elaboration of phrase. This effort is always obvious to 1266 readers, while for a space the restless and strenuous turmoil of the poet's mind is withdrawn from sight. This is the origin of all circumlocutions and periphrases, under whose cover a writer over-sensitive of publicity can veil himself. Hence, the dramatists also, when they reach their choral songs, which have much the same nature as lyrical poems thrown off to suit the moment and adapted to the feelings of daily life: when, I repeat, they approach a choral song, we observe that at once they employ much more elaborate metres, with much stricter laws. I refer to the scheme which consists in a threefold sequence of stanzas or verses, marshalled with such delicate precision, not merely as to each line, but even to their smallest details, that not even
[Page 101]
a syllable, whether long or short, can break away from its proper position: but any reader who has once mastered the opening lines has the key to the metrical arrangement of the whole poem. There is one feature that is scrupulously maintained, namely, that in each several metrical set, two opposite sides should answer each other in Antistrophic fashion, as it is styled: but the third part, which is called the epode, runs in a wholly different metre: and this, I apprehend, was purposely arranged lest too frequent repetition of the same beats might offend the sensitive ear of the Greeks.
You now perceive, I trust, what was, in all likelihood, the general scheme of the dramatic chorus: and I shall endeavour to show how much it accords with the structure of Pindar's verse, first, however, adding a few remarks which seem pertinent to the subject generally. In more modern days there has sprung up a new form of poem, and it is one of the most favourite forms in the present day, which more strictly than all others restrains the writer's powers within its own extremely narrow limits: I mean the sonnet, which I referred to before as having been first brought into repute among the Italians by Petrarch.
Since this particular form prescribes such scanty limits (for by inviolable rule it never exceeds fourteen lines); 1267 and since it submits itself to the further difficult law that the lines must not only be of equal length, but also rhyme at definite intervals, and these intervals stand in uneven relation to each other, we cannot but wonder how it has come to pass that so many eager and enthusiastic temperaments have voluntarily submitted to these restraints. For, besides Petrarch to whom I have just referred, Dante Alighieri spent pains upon this form of poetry, and yielded to none in his scrupulous strictness: so too did the renowned Michael Angelo Buonarroti, a man of unfettered and colossal genius, whom no rules, not to say of any particular
[Page 102]
art, but of any and every art easily held: so too did our own Spenser, at once the tenderest and most dignified of poets: not to mention more recent instances, not unworthy assuredly to be enrolled among this company. I am persuaded, indeed, that it was by no mere chance, but by a deeply-rooted instinct, that such men as these adopted this form, because the fact that it was unusually stringent enabled it to soothe and compose their deepest emotions and longings without violating a true reserve. Thus it resulted that all that vigorous mental force, which, if it had been without such poetic relief, might have ruined itself, was in a high degree enlarged and strengthened.
I now return to the lyric poets, and in particular to Pindar, the mention of whose works occasioned this digression. Now I imagine that no one, however slightly he has dipped into Pindar's poetry, can fail to note with what peculiar force all we have hitherto advanced concerning lyric writers in general, applies to him: namely, that it is a most arduous and complex business, in their case, to discover the one dominating thought or disposition in each. For not only are the Pindaric metres varied and 1268 interwoven with wondrous skill, but he, more than any other writer, goes far afield in search of his themes, his sentiments, and all the other apparatus of his Odes. Both these reasons make it very difficult to conjecture the real ruling motives of his song. To begin with, the majority of his readers are at once, not only by the sound but also by the sense, led away from the subject of the poem and personal feeling of the poet to dwell upon the delicate melody of his verse. In the next place they feel, owing to the swift change and succession of idea and imagery, that their judgements are in some sort bewildered and dazzled, as our eyes are by rapid movements: and consequently they can perceive neither the aim and intent of the poet at any one time, nor the central feeling which actuates him.
[Page 103]
Further, it must be remembered that in all Pindar's extant Odes, the poet did not choose his material for himself but had to accept what was given to him. Consequently, in addition to that reserve which he shares in common with other lyric poets to which we have already alluded, he laboured under the necessity of inventing for himself preluding themes, sometimes of great length, through which he might gradually approach some one of the real fountains of his own poetry. By such fountains I mean those images, emotions, and desires which filled his inmost soul.
And I seem by some chance to have arrived here, at a stage specially suitable for setting at rest a doubt which sometimes troubles those who treat of Poetry. For they are at a loss to know how it can possibly be, that the vivid inspiration of poets can obediently respond to a king's command or the clamour of the populace, or even to the unuttered tone and mood of a particular age: it is to them inexplicable that Virgil, at Caesar's bidding, betook himself to composing the Aeneid : or that Spenser devoted himself now to Epithalamia, now to Threnodies, just as the circumstances of one of his patrons required. And some perhaps have consequently suspected that the transports which professed poets exhibit and delight in, must be set down as assumed and unreal: inasmuch as they not only 1269 serve the turn of the poet's friends, but also, which is even less honourable, are not unfrequently bought by money. But I should like these somewhat exacting critics to remember that it is an unfailing principle with genuine Poetry, at least with all that with perfect right can claim that honoured title, to seek retreat from publicity, to avoid the full light, to be coy and hesitant in unveiling its secrets save to any whom it believes touched with like enthusiasm. Consequently, it does not object to far-fetched subjects: indeed, one may say often prefers them: so long only as some secret path is open, whereby it may quietly digress to the themes
[Page 104]
it naturally delights in and holds dear. And there is no reason, I imagine, why a theme should not be suggested by royal command, such as a clever poet can easily treat in a way which will bring relief to his own emotions.
Hence it may well be that, even in the case of Pindar, some unusually keen-sighted student may win his way through various bypaths and tributary streams to the main sources, the fountain-heads as I have called them, of his poetry. Though I grant it a disadvantage that there is not a single poem which the writer has composed on his own initiative: never once has he given himself the start. There was at one time, according to ancient authority, an immense collection of his various poems—Hymns, Dithyrambs, Banqueting Songs, Dirges: and did these survive to-day, we might more readily reach the poet's real mind. For judging by Horace's often quoted and most graceful ode:
   Whether in dithyrambic roll
Pouring new words he burst away
   Beyond control,
Or gods and god-born heroes tell, 1270
we realize that he must have used great freedom both in metre and subject. But further, when we approach that 1271 other class of poems which is extolled in the following stanza:
Or mourn the bridegroom early torn
   From his young bride, and set on high
Strength, courage, virtue's golden morn,
      Too good to die, 1272
we feel that such a theme, so diverse from the triumphal Odes, would assuredly shed a clearer light on the writer's genius and disposition. Since, however, by unhappy fate the greater part of his work has perished, while those that survive almost all relate to athletic victories, a subject both meagre in itself and marked by hardly the least
[Page 105]
variety of circumstance: we must trust to our own ingenuity to track out as best we may his hidden enthusiasms; and this will be best accomplished if we observe into what haven his poetry puts for rest, after its many preludings and wanderings: what the quality of the digressions he chiefly affected: what are the themes in which his verse finds fullest play and richest melody.
For those who have experience know well, that there is a marvellous harmony between that in which the ear and that in which the mind takes pleasure: and thus when the poet approaches subjects which stand highest in his regard and are dear to his soul, the poem, precisely then, flows in freer vein, and the true feet, syllables, and rhymes more readily present themselves to the mind just as required. And undoubtedly verses whose glowing words or large and deep meaning testify that then, at all events, the author is adopting no conventional form, but writing from the inmost sincerity of his heart, do, somehow or other, for the most part, flow and fall more happily and with richer rhythm.
I will ask you then to let your ear judge by the mere test of sound one of the more celebrated of Pindar's poems. Let us take the very first that meets us:
Water the first of elements we hold:
   And, as the flaming fire at night
   Glows with its own conspicuous light,
Above proud treasure shines transcendent gold: 1273
   But if, my soul, 'tis thy desire
   For the Great Games to strike thy lyre,
   Look not within the range of day
      A star more genial to descry
   Than you warm sun, whose glittering ray
      Dims all the spheres that gild the sky;
      Nor loftier theme to raise thy strain
      Than famed Olympia's crowded plain. 1274
[Page 106]
Is it not clear that this surpassing and unique splendour is set forth with a magnificent apparatus of sound and rhythm? And it was indeed a theme well worthy to possess the heart of this nobly great poet. Next, however, as he approaches the subject of his poem, he expresses himself, unless I am mistaken, in a key much nearer the language of everyday life:
From whence, by gifted minstrels richly wove,
   Th' illustrious hymn, at glory's call,
   Goes forth to Hiero's affluent hall,
To hail his prosperous throne and sing Saturnian Jove.
   Hiero the just, that rules the fertile field,
   Where fair Sicilia's pastures feed
   Unnumbered flocks, and for his meed
   Culls the sweet flowers that all the virtues yield. 1275
Then again, as it seems to me, from this verse onward the numbers rise and swell once more to higher strains: for in them he makes mention of the lyre and of lyric contests, a theme he never fails to follow with unflagging delight:
Such as the social feast around
   Full oft our tuneful band inspire—
But wherefore sleeps the thrilling sound? 1276
From these lines, and others like them, it may perhaps be seen that the ease and variety of the poet's numbers are of great import in guiding us to his personal feeling and disposition: just as a man's walk is an index to the movements of his mind.
Relying, gentlemen, upon such indications as these, I venture, unhesitatingly, to associate Pindar with the order of poets which we have described as containing those two noble ornaments—Homer and Aeschylus: so far, at any rate, that they were all attracted by the manners and times of the heroic age. Though, as to Aeschylus, it may be doubted whether he should be so assigned on any other
[Page 107]
ground save that of time: since he was almost wholly preoccupied 1277 with his own philosophy, or I should rather say religion: and only so far concerned with the deeds of kings and princes and with their fatal wars, as finding there an object-lesson whence he might illustrate the freaks of Fortune and the vain desires of man. I apprehend, however, that the chief reason why he devoted himself to heroic story was that in it could be more easily seen how divine and human affairs are interwoven, and that then there was a freer intercourse between heaven and earth. To which we may add that it was absolutely essential to select subjects a little removed from his own age: and that nothing lay so near his hand as the annals and records of the heroes, blended as they were, too, with the concerns of religion. The principle and motive of the Homeric poems have been heretofore sufficiently discussed in their proper place: where it was shown that the great poet was absorbed by a sort of passion for an age recently past, and thus sought relief and comfort for himself in his splendid imaginings of it.
But the case of Pindar, so far as I can conjecture, differs somewhat from either. He is unlike Aeschylus in that material objects of sense do not seem worthless in his eyes as compared with mystic and holy speculations: nor does he, as Homer, regret the departed age with a kind of affectionate grief. I think, however, the simple truth is that Pindar viewed with unsophisticated delight the remains and records of that bygone age; was won by the splendour of its memories; impressed by its glory and panoramic effect, and revelled, as it were, in the pictures and reflections of the years for ever flown. In short, Pindar's poems have much the same relation to the age which Homer sang, as the poetry which flourished three or four centuries ago bore to the marvels of the so-called Middle Ages. For, at that period, it was firmly held, not by the vulgar merely,
[Page 108]
1278 but by many true and primary poets, that martial and knightly contests, fields of tourney and stately solemnities of royal palaces, were indissolubly associated with a bygone nobility of character. Thus both with Spenser and those poets of Italy on whom he modelled himself, we see prevailing all these imagined, artificial glories, not the very form and reality of a life lived under heaven's sun and amid dangerous adventure, but a sort of storied resemblance of it. Need we then be surprised that a man like Pindar should show himself capable of feeling emotion in contemplation of athletic toils and triumphs, the contests of Olympia, the wealth and banqueting of kings. Certainly, he felt that over all these things was cast the radiance of a bygone age: that for a passing moment there were called back to life, if not the actual force and almost divine spirit of the old heroes, yet at least a picturesque pageant of the time, traces of its surpassing beauty, and all the ancient dignity of feature, bearing, and speech.
Realizing, as I said, all this, Pindar blended passing events with ancient times in such wise that he does not seem to be praising the past, but rather fanning into flame the embers of a dying beauty: happy and gay scenes, for the most part, float before his vision: we see as Horace says, although,
He liked the high, he yet could grace the low. 1279
What I mean may be shown by examples: though the point is of a kind little adapted to formal and strict demonstration. It is not every poet, in my opinion, who would be capable of showing a real and hearty enthusiasm for the struggles and contests in the games. Yet Pindar assuredly possessed this power, if indeed it is credible that such topics as he eagerly celebrates when the occasion demands should appeal to any one. But we know that
[Page 109]
Pindar took delight not merely in narrating the course and result of each triumph, but in developing its methods and causes, and showing in what skill especially each victor was pre-eminent. For instance, in congratulating the 1280 victor in the Pancration, he touches with keen insight upon each special merit of that form of contest; first, that the victor had defeated such an array of athletes, following one after another in swift succession (ἔφΕδροι):
The brave unproved in silence die.
Warriors themselves, till fortune's hand
Th' ennobling victory gives, no fame command;
For e'en the conqueror's wreath is fortune's gift.
Oft hath the feebler rival's shift
Filch'd from the best his undisputed crown. 1281
And next he adds, a little further on the following exquisite appreciation of the same contest:
Branch of Telesias, like the roaring king
   Of the rough woods in heart and strength is he,
   Yet guileful as the fox might be
That stays the impetuous eagle's wing,
   Couch'd on the ground supine below:
   All sleights are just that foil the foe.
   For he no vast Oärion port
   Displays, of outward stature mean and short:—
   In the fierce conflict stanch and terrible. 1282
Observe how penetratingly and truly he suggests the exercises of the wrestling school, and the supple movement of the limbs like those of boys at play; yet never for a moment does he sink below the true standard of lyric poetry. Many such instances might be cited, which, quite incidentally, prove the writer both a careful and experienced observer of all the contests he celebrates. As where he honours Hiero, victor in the chariot race, in that:
With glittering hand and lenient rein he broke
   His youthful coursers to the yoke. 1283
[Page 110]
And he thus commends a charioteer to his patron:
There, with no erring hand, the charioteer
His bounding steeds rebuked, and wound their fleet career;
For 'twas Nicomachus, whose well-timed skill,
   With reins all loose, their fury drove. 1284
With a well-chosen happy phrase he shows that the reins were not exactly guided, but rather that, as they lay loosely on the horses' necks, they answered at once to the slightest movement of the right hand.
1285 But innumerable similes drawn from the gymnasia and the arena at Olympia occur all through his writings: and thus any one can see that his mind was informed and eager in these pursuits: so, he bursts forth, for instance:
   O! for a spirit that could bid
New words and quickening thoughts to rise,
   Of skill the Muse's daring car to guide
In all the might of genius through the skies! 1286
One realizes here, without difficulty, that there rises before the writer's mind the vision of a charioteer holding his steeds well in hand, not only conscious of his strength but confident of a successful issue.
And there is that most beautiful touch where, being about to enter on some fabled story, he opens with a call such as drivers of four-horse chariots were wont to indulge in, as they advanced into the open field:
   Bring forth thy mules, O Phintis, and behind
In haste the glittering harness join,
   With me thy chariot mount and find
Along yon spacious road the cradle of his line. 1287
And there is another passage, where, as if he were a charioteer, he affects and emphasizes keen anxiety, lest
[Page 111]
perchance the victor may not reach the goal with chariot sound and whole:
Twelve times round the measured bourn
   With heel unmatch'd, uninjured rein,
Flew the swift steeds, nor tire nor trapping torn—
   Lo! where by Delphi's fane
Hangs the fair chariot (sound and bright
   As from the sculptor's hand it wheeled
Beneath the steep Crisaean height
   To Th' hollow plain and sacred field),
Slung from the cypress beam, the God beside. 1288
In truth Pindar, not unbecomingly, is filled with just as much anxiety about the wheels and pole of the chariots or the implements of the gymnasium as we saw that Homer was concerning arms and spears and every weapon needed 1289 by warriors.
Passing on to other contests: two of these the author skilfully associates in this single line—‘guided aright the course of blows.’ 1290 The blows of the boxer are aptly joined with the chariot-racing in the arena; since, in each, the main concern is for the champion to make straight for the goal in view. Then he proceeds to praise the victor in the boxing as one who is ‘in the struggle of hands that bring limbs low, a cunning adversary’. As much as to say, that he ever keeps his presence of mind: even when striving with all his strength, most is achieved by skill.
In another ode, too, he shows himself not unversed in wrestling combat:
Like his that binds unrivall'd now
With wreaths of skill Melesias' brow.
   Unmaster'd in the lists of song
His might each champion throws;
   Mild to the good, but roused by wrong,
Rough and revengeful on his recreant foes. 1291
[Page 112]
Again, do we not nearly always find that the formal shifts which Pindar, like all writers of longer poems, devises, whether to essay some higher flight or to return from it to his theme, are effected by phrases borrowed from athletics and gymnastics? As, for instance, when he is leading up to the praise of Hiero:
But thou this prince's praise to sing
   Intent, as some the brazen javelin wield,
   Urge not thy song beside the field,
But forward far, where rivals ne'er can fling. 1292
Sometimes he goes to quoit-throwers for his metaphor, lest any form of athletic contest may be unhonoured:
   O! could I hurl as far, as long,
   The disk, the javelin of my song,
As thy sweet sire in goodness all outshone! 1293
1294 Nor does he overlook contests with bow and arrow; though I doubt whether this exercise ever won for itself a footing in athletic games—at all events, not in those of Greece. Still, its quality is such that a frequent reference to it implies a tone of mind by no means without enthusiasm for athletics. Consider then if the following lines do not well fall in with our present argument:
On my quiver'd arm I bear
Many an arrow swift and rare;
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
Heed not thou their envious tongue,
Straight to the mark advance thy bow;
Whither, brave spirit, shall thy song
Throw the shaft of glory now?
Lo it flies, by Justice sent,
Full at famous Agrigent. 1295
Of like import is a passage in which he checks himself lest
[Page 113]
his praises miss the mark by being aimed in too many directions.
But while direct the lance of song we send,
   What boots it from the tuneful string
   Far from the mark our shafts to fling? 1296
But of these enough and to spare. It remains to quote a few passages whose importance lies in proving that Pindar sympathized with athletes in a marvellous degree. First, as regards the toil itself: in one place he congratulates a competitor, because
Thou with unswelter'd neck, with limbs untired,
   Didst in thy gripe the wrestler's rage repress,
Ere day's meridian flame thy limbs had fired:—
   Toil, that but raised the raptures of success. 1297
He pictures the defeated rival slinking homeward: we see the humiliation, the sense of shame with which each finds some nook in which to hide:
   To them the Pythian judge profound
Doom'd not the sweet return, nor smile of love
   From fond maternal grace to meet;
   Pierced with their sad mischance, alone,
   By path forlorn they slink and secret street,
   The taunting foe to shun. 1298
And, on the other hand, what of the glorious victor? Is he 1299 wholly without care? is he wholly swathed in delight, sure of his renown? Truly, he too has his anxieties, and apprehensions: though they are blended with the unspeakable sweetness of triumph. Listen:
But he, that hath some recent glory gain'd,
   On exultation's wings,
   Lord of his hope, triumphant springs
To heights which Wealth's low cares can ne'er ascend. 1300
[Page 114]
And the following lines are of like ring, though less clearly expressed:
For various ties, as love or fame inspire,
   Our mortal hearts engage.
He that holds his hope's reward
   The present bliss by heaven supplied
With liveliest care will guard;
   For hours to come no wisdom can provide. 1301
What, we ask, is this care, this anxiety, the restless and urging hope, which forbids man to be happy, even after a second victory? The truth is, that he who had prevailed in lesser competitions almost always let his ambition look forward to Olympia: and even he who had triumphed there was not wholly free from the longings of disturbing ambition, ever pressing towards higher achievements. For each of these, Pindar has a characteristic word of comfort: for to stimulate the former he exalts the Olympic crown with extraordinary honour; and, in relief of the latter, he enlarges on the theme so often dwelt on, both by poets and philosophers, urging that unbounded ambition should be satisfied when once the goal is attained. We will quote a few instances of each of these.
In the first he most gracefully flatters an Isthmian victor who is looking forward to Olympia, taking his metaphors from banquet and feast:
As with replenish'd bowl the banquet glows,
   Again for Lampon's brave athletic line
   We mix the Muses' cup divine:
The first to Jove was pour'd, when round their brows
    1302 His Nemean braid illustrious hung;
This to the despot of the seas,
   And fifty damsels fair from Nereus sprung,
For wreaths by youngest born Phylacides
   From Isthmian rivals torn: on Pisa's plain
   Oh! that 'twere theirs a third to gain,
[Page 115]
Mine in the Olympian Saviour's name to shed
The full mellifluous hymn on blest Aegina's head. 1303
It may be remarked that on this theme he more than once employs circumlocution and veiled expression; which are usually the resource of those in love, and indeed of any whose minds are set on some high thought, such as they could not venture to express openly in the hearing of all men. Again, some competitor has carried off first honours at Nemea and Pindar thus forecasts his future:
Yet oft, if right-directing time
   Dooms him Th' Athenian name to grace,
And gives him, like his sire, to climb
   The steeps of glory's race,
With conquering hand Timonous' son
Shall pluck, from Isthmian contests won,
The fairest wreaths they yield,—
Oft rise victorious from the Pythian
field. 1304
Observe how with scrupulous reverence he avoids mention of Olympia, the very thought in all men's minds. Nor must we pass over unnoticed the following lines, profoundly impressive assuredly, and well worthy to stand as a model of true prayer:
   First of the first he shone
'Mongst all the Hellenian host in Pytho's groves;
   Isthmian and Nemean crowns his prowess won;
Fortune still follows as he moves.
   Thrice at the gates that flank the main,
   Thrice on the consecrated plain
   Whose weal Th' Adrastian laws diffuse,
   He sow'd the harvest of the Muse.
Paternal Jove! the wish that fires his breast
His lip reveals not: but all things in thee
   End and begin: by dangers none repress'd,
His toil-train'd heart but asks what all the brave would be.
[Page 116]
What the Muse hopes the godhead knows;
Knows he whose soul for glory glows,
Who pants to bind him with Th' Heraclian wreaths,
Which Pisa's noblest rite bequeaths. 1305
The other condition, as already stated, concerned those unable to satisfy their ambition even with an Olympic 1306 victory: and, with their praises, he is wont to blend impressive warning:
If Wealth and Worth and Happiness and Fame
Be thine, among the Gods seek not t' inscribe thy name. 1307
And again:
   Two things alone, with wealth combined,
Feed life's fair flower, and thus bestow
   Joy's purest blessings on mankind;—
These are fair fortune and recording fame.
   Aspire not to be Jove; all things are thine,
If these great gifts thy destiny may claim:
   To mortal hopes thy mortal means confine. 1308
Hence springs a famed array of richly coloured passages; for instance, the lines referring to the pillars of Hercules:
If then with manliest beauty graced,
   And rich in deeds that form to suit,
The son of Aristophanes hath placed
   On glory's loftiest peak his daring foot,
There must he pause; 'tis no mean task to brave
Beyond Th' Herculean rocks Th' unnavigable wave:
Rocks, which the hero-god stupendous piled,
   His proud memorial, to display
   The limit of his wondrous way. 1309
And these again, about the race of Hyperboreans:
   'Tis not for man to climb the brazen heaven;
They on the farthest fairest beach
The bark of mortal life can reach,
[Page 117]
   Through dangers braved their sails display.
But who with venturous course through wave or waste
To Hyperborean haunts and wilds untraced
   E'er found his wondrous way? 1310
And sometimes he brings in to strengthen his appeal the warning of the folly that tried to scale heaven itself:
   Man is too brief long aims to reach;
   Presumptuous hope, that fain would stretch
   To heaven's high throne her daring view,
   Is but the winged steed that threw
Bellerophon, what time his frenzied pride
   Aspired to tread Th' eternal domes above
   And sit amongst the peers of Jove. 1311
All these many passages make it quite clear. I think, that Pindar was, as it were, bound closely to his athletic victors by sympathetic feeling and inclinations. Something yet 1312 remains for me to add on this subject, more indeed than can be conveniently dealt with in this lecture. We will, if you please, defer it to a future occasion. I only wish to add a warning against the opinion which some may share that all these subjects are unworthy of being dwelt upon, as being utterly trivial and ridiculous. But, on the contrary, I have to some extent already made clear, and I hope at the proper time, to the best of my ability, to show rational ground for believing that a great poet might well, and not unworthily, have devoted his genius to these themes.
[Page 118]
LECTURE XXV 1313
It is shown that the Public Games afforded Pindar an ample field for his genius. Many examples adduced illustrating his temperament and disposition: such, more particularly, as either describe the rewards of victory or are consistent with the athletic type of character.
Should any of my hearers be inclined to consider that, in assigning the public gymnastic contests as the peculiar source of Pindar's inspiration, we have confined him within over-narrow limits or assigned to him a trivial and childish subject, let him, I beg, remember in the first place, what will be plain to every one, that, in the political conditions of those times, gymnastic pursuits and athletic skill were most important to the very highest interests of the Greek nation. War at that period was waged incessantly: the nation had few soldiers to place in the field, and their equipment and manner of fighting were such that success mainly depended on the physical strength and agile movements of individuals: and consequently the fortunes of a battle generally turned upon the prowess of one or two of the leading combatants. Moreover, the common safety of all Greece, which was constantly, throughout all Pindar's life, 1314 in grave peril from the menacing power of Persia, seemed to be very closely bound up with these contests. For what was the purpose of those solemn ceremonies and sacrifices, of those days of festival set apart in honour of the Gods, of the names of the old heroes honourably and religiously proclaimed near their sepulchres, of the wreaths placed on their monuments, the dirges sung in their honour? what but that the devotion of their fathers and ancestors might sink more deeply into the minds of the Greeks, and the whole nation be kindled to resentment against those who
[Page 119]
had plundered their temples, and destroyed their statues? And on these same festival days did not all revive in memory, nay almost picture to themselves the actual presence of, those bygone warriors, their nation's glory, of whom the greater and nobler part, namely, the comrades of Hercules and Agamemnon, had most bravely fought against these very Asiatics?
But, to confess the truth, I am hardly inclined to believe that these public considerations ever occurred to Pindar by way of justifying to himself the choice of his subject as being not wholly unworthy of serious and great poetry. Far other, unless I am mistaken, has generally been the training of those who have in different ages performed the functions of great poets. As a general rule, Nature, or what is styled chance, has so trained them from their earliest days that their childish games and pleasures have served as a kind of school, wherein they might test their strength and gradually rise to higher things. And thus, rather by a fortunate providence than by any conscious deliberation of their minds, each is guided to whatever is the true bent of his own genius. May not Pindar, a child of Thebes, a city which boasted its own special games and was not far from Delphi and the Pythian contests, which also was (as Pindar often reminds us) connected with Aegina by very close ties, may not Pindar, I say, almost from his cradle have haunted the gymnasia, mixed with the athletes, and followed heart and soul the fortunes of the competitors?
Should any one be inclined to dismiss this as a poor and prosaic suggestion, let him call to mind the beginnings of 1315 any great work, so far as it is possible to infer them. He will find it a general rule, which applies not only to poets but to all who in any way aim at intellectual production, that their task advances much more smoothly and effectively when they start from some minuter point of detail,
[Page 120]
than if they endeavour at once to embrace the whole range of their subject. Often have I heard it remarked by experienced teachers that the style and manner of young writers are best formed by proposing to them limited and somewhat unexciting subjects, rather than those of wider scope: the truth being that, to use the phrase of logicians, it is more fitting and more direct to proceed from particulars to generals, than from generals to particulars. Probably this principle holds with especial force in poetry, where the judgement of the eyes and not of the mind alone has greater reach and effect, the whole function of sight being directed towards particular objects.
Nor are we herein denying poets the very amplest freedom to range whithersoever their fancy leads them. For every one is familiar with the alert, unwearied, unbounded power of memory, by which all that has been done, said, seen, thought in the same localities or at the same time is wonderfully collected and united in a harmonious whole. Who, for instance, among the old Greeks, if he had once heard the legend, related somewhere by Pindar, of the way in which the olive-tree was introduced into Greece in order to give their true and permanent honour to the contests when first established, ever looked at the olive-wreath without at once calling to mind memories of Hercules and Olympia? And you may, I think, easily appreciate that there is hardly anything in the world of Nature which will not be connected in some such way either with some traditional story or with some exquisite simile.
For, in truth, all things which at any time either have 1316 occurred or will occur to us, seem mutually connected in an infinite, though mysterious, sequence; each detail in the sequence has its exact significance and position. And, as far as I can see, when any one has the gift—and this gift has always been deemed the special prerogative of inspired
[Page 121]
genius—of picking up a thread and clearly and effectively following it through all its windings, there is nothing to prevent his linking the humblest beginnings with the noblest issues. Still less was there any obstacle to hinder the prince of lyric poets from blending all that is greatest and most sacred with the gymnasium and the arena. Undoubtedly, just as some philosophers, and those of no mean authority, assert, there exists a common bond which links together all the ‘humaner’ arts, all the various divisions of strict science, and indeed everything that can be classed under any one genus: one consequence of which fact is that, as was pointed out by the keen penetration of Bishop Butler, ‘No one can tell whether any single truth may not be so consequent on all truths, for the most part in ways mysterious and unseen, but so notwithstanding that on denial of a single one all fall and dissolve.’ 1317 So, precisely, all votaries of poetry well know, that whatever subject comes to hand or occurs to their mind may be turned to their purpose, if only a writer has the true spiritual fire and devotes himself heart and soul to his task.
In view of all this, we must hesitate to conclude that Pindar has not been assigned a sufficiently ample field, when it is asserted that the whole secret of his poetry can be explained as originating in his delight in the gymnasia and athletic contests. We have, it will be remembered, so far dealt in detail with this position, as to make clear by numerous quotations that Pindar had an extraordinarily keen sympathy with athletes, at least in the very hour of the contest.
Now let us pass to consider the rewards of victory: the 1318 proclamation, wreaths, the festal procession, the triumphal ode: in all of which Pindar, as was meet and right, felt a special delight. A wealth of instances, richer perhaps and more numerous than those before cited, will readily
[Page 122]
offer themselves: to reduce them to some order, we will first deal with those common to the whole company of athletes: and next, those in which we fully allow there is blended a quality special and peculiar to Pindar himself.
Now nothing, I apprehend, was held in higher esteem, nothing was more pleasing to victors, than the proclamation of their names with the name of their father and their country in full assembly of their countrymen by the public herald. It would be surprising, therefore, if ‘the sweettongued voice of the good herald’ 1319 did not from time to time come in for its meed of honour at the hands of Poets of the Contests; particularly as Greek antiquity ever attributed a sort of religious sanctity to the herald's function. Thus Pindar congratulates the colony of Aetna, because Hiero the Pythian victor chose that she and not his native Syracuse should be named in the customary formula of proclamation:
Graced with whose name the bordering state below
   Shares its great founder's large renown,
By herald's voice at Pytho's listening games
   Declared: while Hiero's chariot-crown,
A monarch's meed, Th' inspiring note
   proclaims. 1320
Where there is tacit reference, I apprehend, to the time-honoured chant:
Huzza,
Rejoice, O glorious, noble Hercules,
And Iolaus also,—two great warriors—
Huzza.
This was the song which, with a well-known tune, was ordinarily used in Panegyrics, if any one of the athletes had no special poet to sing his praises. Surely there is an 1321 allusion to this chant both here and when he honours Arcesilaus?
[Page 123]
Him, who sends from Pytho's hills
   The graceful song, that far o'erbuys
The cost of conquest, to the prince that fills
   The praises of the wise. 1322
And indeed he alludes to it more than once elsewhere. It was just what we should expect of a poet, for whom everything to do with Olympia had a special charm, to remember with notable pleasure a chant specially associated with the place itself. As for the herald take these beautiful lines:
If yet, Agesias, thy maternal race,
Whose affluent dwellings rose by old Cyllenè's base,
   Have knelt at Mercury's sacred shrine
   The swift-wing'd herald of the skies,
   With soothing prayers and gifts divine. 1323
(He alludes gracefully, as with a master's touch to the victor's family, living in happy possession of local honour and ancestral faith, at home amid their own hills. But, on mention of Mercury, the poet at once remembers the herald, who, not so long ago, celebrated Agesias with his proclamation: and with ingenious subtlety he attributes his functions to the herald of the gods.)
   (He guards the games, allots the prize
And loves Arcadia's youth); 'twas he,
   Aided by thundering Jove's regard,
Gave, son of Sostratus, to thee
   Thy conquest and reward. 1324
In another ode he claims the function of herald for himself:
Herald of Th' athletic fray
   Fought in famed Olympia's vale,
In Nemean grove and Isthmian bay
   The brave Theandrian tribe I hail. 1325
Under this head may perhaps be fitly placed Pindar's references to solemn oaths, which we meet with more than
[Page 124]
once. At Olympia in those times the use of a formal oath 1326 was very common: not only were the judges sworn, but even each of the competitors before entering the contest: facts which perhaps throw some light on these lines of Pindar's:
   Nor brawl, nor paradox I love;
I hate with cavillers to contend;
   But this my surest oath I've pledged to prove,
And the mellifluous Muse her lasting aid shall lend. 1327
Moreover, on one occasion the poet deliberately and willingly gives a solemn pledge himself. He consoles his friend because:
Him sickly hope and pale parental fear
   Held from the triumphs of the Pythian field,
   From the rich risks Olympian chaplets yield:
Else (by my judgement's pledge, my oath, I swear)
   From those stern pastimes his superb return
   Had left his vanquish'd foes to mourn
By lone Castalia's murmuring rill,
And seek the sheltering oaks that shade the Cronian hill. 1328
But, returning to the victor's rewards: immediately after the proclamation followed the crowning with the wreath:
Champions, whose brows Th' Aetolian seer,
   That gives Th' Herculean mandates old,
The Game's unerring arbiter,
   Bids Victory's graceful prize enfold:
He round their locks the silvery olive flings. 1329
How highly Pindar rated this function may be inferred from the fact that he did not in the least hesitate to compare the toil of the Muses themselves with the handiwork of those who curiously wrought the wreath:
No skill the vulgar chaplets ask;
Reck not, my Muse, the unworthy task:
[Page 125]
Thou, with rich ivory chased, thy golden crown
Dost weave with choral flowers from fostering seadews blown. 1330
Indeed, he devotes a whole strophe, and a most beautiful one, to glorifying the discovery of the olive:
   Whose leaves of yore Amphitryon's son,
   To frame Olympia's matchless crown,
From freezing regions brought, and Ister's shadowy springs.
He Th' Hyperborean tribes and chieftains wild,
   That bend the knee before Apollo's shrine,
Peaceful besought; and with persuasion mild,
   To form his Sire's capacious grove divine,
The conqueror's wreath, the stranger's shade,
   Won the fair plant. 1331
And we may fitly notice here, I think, those exquisite lines 1332 in which with great care he sings the praise of spring with all its rich hues—a theme, fully worked in later times, but rare at least among the ancient Greeks:
‘In Argive Nemea the prophet of the god overlooketh not the branch of palm, what time with the opening of the chamber of the Hours, the nectarous plants perceive the fragrant spring.
Then, then are strown over the face of the eternal earth the lovely violet-tufts, then are roses twined in hair, then sound to the flute's accompaniment voices of song, then sound our choice hymns unto the honour of bright-filleted Semele.’ 1333
Observe that the time of year is indicated not by rising and setting of the stars, nor (as Virgil would have done) by the labours of the farm, but by a detail which would have occurred to none but a writer whose whole heart was in gymnastic pursuits and the Grecian Games. He who writes as the Sacred Priest of the Nemean festival
[Page 126]
notes as the surest accompaniment of spring that the tender shoots are budding on the sacred palm, a wand of which was placed in the Victor's hands at Nemea. Can the real bias of the poet, intent heart and soul on the prizes of victory, escape any reader?
But Pindar touches somewhat sparingly upon this subject of wreaths: it is of extremest simplicity and hardly capable of much variety. Far more numerous are the references to banquets, and especially the Triumphal Procession ( Κω̂μος ): this is a field on which Pindar delighted to expatiate, for it was full of splendour and joyance, and gave freedom and scope to his happy and enthusiastic temperament. Thus, for instance, he compares the gift of poetry with a cup of wine pledged at a marriage rite:
   As one, whose wealthy hands enfold
   The sparkling cup of massy gold
   Froth'd with the vineyard's purple tide,
   His Banquet's grace, his Treasure's prid,
   Presents it to the youthful spouse,
   Pledg'd in full draught from house to house;
And thus, affection's honours fondly paid,
    1334 While on the soft connubial hour
   Encircling friends their blessings pour,
Gives to his envied arms the coy consenting maid.
   Thus to the Youth, whose conquering brow
   The Olympian wears or Pythian bough,
   Lord of his hope, inspired I pay
   The tribute of my liquid lay,
   The nectar of the Muse's bowl,
   Press'd from the clusters of the soul. 1335
No one can fail to be touched by this most charming picture of domestic happiness, which this consummate artist has sketched, almost by the way, in a line or two. But it is remarkable that his mind instinctively seeks out just those images which are usually associated with victory at
[Page 127]
the games. He uses a like comparison in the fifth Isthmian Ode, but there it is to give us a picture not so much of domestic happiness as of religious piety:
As with replenish'd bowl the banquet glows,
   Again for Lampon's brave athletic line
   We mix the Muses' cup divine:
The first to Jove was pour'd, when round their brows
   His Nemean braid illustrious hung;
This to the despot of the seas,
   And fifty damsels fair from Nereus sprung,
For wreaths by youngest born Phylacides
   From Isthmian rivals torn; on Pisa's plain
   Oh! that 'twere theirs a third to gain,
Mine in the Olympian Saviour's name to shed
The full mellifluous hymn on blest Aegina's head. 1336 .
This variety may perhaps be due to some specific difference between the two victors honoured. We know that Phylacides, at all events, in whose celebration the poet introduces this banquet-custom, was, at the time, eager and intent for the Olympia: a condition of affairs with which the reference to the votive cup well accords. Of Diagoras we read nothing of that sort: we merely hear of many triumphs by which he had shed honour upon his native Rhodes. Nevertheless, if any one perchance likes to imagine that he had but lately married some noble lady, he would 1337 not in my opinion be very far from the truth.
Once more, in another ode Pindar celebrates banqueting delights not in figure but in direct description:
But 'tis the generous bowl that gives
   Clearness and courage to the minstrel's throat—
   The prompting prophet of his note.
      Bid the sparkling beverage dance,
   The silver circling goblets shine
      With the stout offspring of the vine;—
   Goblets, which erst in Chromius' car,
[Page 128]
Crown'd with Apollo's glittering bough,
Which justice weaves for glory's brow,
   The conquering coursers whirl'd from far—
From Sicyon's sacred field. 1338
With characteristic appropriateness he introduces into triumphal banquet the bowls and goblets which had been won at former contests.
Nor should it, I think, be unnoticed that he deemed the bath, that resource of the athlete and refreshing concomitant of banquets, worthy of honour in finished song:
The bath's warm waves not so reclaim,
So rouse the champion's fainting frame,
As praises bland his soul inspire,
Warbled on truth's delightful lyre. 1339
This indeed is but once referred to: but the festive dance and procession of revellers, with which it was usual for the victor's friends to receive him at his home, are again and again extolled in his odes, and always with a striking indication that he is himself joining in the welcome. But in order to appreciate more intimately Pindar's high aims in dealing with this theme, let us inquire what was the exact significance of such processions. After the wreath had been conferred, the victor with his comrades and other friends proceeded to a temple, sacred to one of the Gods. Then, having duly made his vows and offerings, he was led back under their escort amid friendly shouting and songs. This procession might however take place, either at the very spot where the games were celebrated, or after the triumphant athlete's return, at his own home; but in either case it was a necessary part of the pageant that the ‘triumph-song’ ( ἐρινίκιον ) should be sung.
1340 Now, it will, I think, be found—and this has special reference to our present discussion—that, in the case of
[Page 129]
almost all his Odes, the poet was relying upon a chorus at the victor's home, not on one at Delphi or Olympia in the moment of the competition. In fact, I fancy no doubtful indications may be detected, that all Pindar's Panegyrics—perhaps excepting three or four of the Olympian—were first sung, either in the native country, or, at all events, at the abode of those whom he celebrated. It follows that he was able more than any other poet to introduce a marvellous variety in his themes, to suit the spirit of each locality or the different legends which might be associated with each particular region.
And I think all recognize, how much it makes for the grace and elegance of such poems as these, if ideas and emotions instead of roaming at random, are located, if possible, in some known region and neighbourhood. So powerful is the effect of this, that Homer, Virgil, and others often designedly interweave with their stories the names of country houses, towns, and rivers, even if they are unknown to the readers, sometimes introducing the bare name, sometimes adding some one simple epithet: so important did they feel it to influence and interest their readers by some appearance of reality, however slight. For, somehow or other, the mere mention of definite names, is wont to make men at once picture to their imagination the appearance of regions and localities. Here is an instance from Virgil:
Mutuscans from their olive-bearing town,
And all Th' Eretian powers: besides a band
That follow'd from Velinum's dewy land,
And Amiternian troops, of mighty fame,
And mountaineers, that from Severus came,
And from the craggy cliffs of Tetrica,
And those where yellow Tyber takes his way,
And where Himella's wanton waters play.
Casperia sends her arms, with those that lie
By Fabaris, and fruitful Foruli;
[Page 130]
The warlike aids of Horta next appear,
And the cold Nursians come to close the rear,
Mix'd with the natives born of Latine blood,
Whom Allia washes with her fatal flood. 1341 .
Or if an example from Homer be preferred, any number can be quoted from the catalogue of ships:
Th' inhabitants of Hyria, and stony Aulida,
Schaene, Scole, the hilly Eteon, and holy Thespia,
Of Graea, and great Mycalesse, that hath the ample plain,
1342 Of Harma, and Ilesius, and all that did remain
In Eryth, and in Eleon, in Hylen, Peteona. 1343
—with very many more.
I fully grant, indeed, that this mention of names was especially pleasing to the ears of Greeks, since they themselves had a great knowledge of the localities; and at times they would have the pleasure of recognizing an allusion to their own native land or home. Nevertheless, even now among ourselves, so far removed from these regions, I submit that lists like these are by no means without attraction. And still less do we resent such preludes to his Odes, as Pindar so finely composed:
Come, heavenly muse, the mother of my song,
   To fair Aegina's Dorian isle
   With many a stranger throng'd, the while
Nemea's high games the sacred moon prolong;—
   Come, for behold from far the youthful band,
   Framing their sweet triumphal air,
   By old Asopus' banks to hear
Thy dulcet voice impatient stand. 1344
Observe how simply this is presented: the company of Theban youths pauses on its journey towards Aegina, expecting the descent of the Muse to lead both their song and their march: the scene being summoned vividly before us, by the mere mention of the banks of the Asopus.
[Page 131]
Sometimes the chorus, still answering to the music's notes, is borne across the sea: as for instance, to Rhodes, that the victory of Diagoras may be duly honoured:
Blest they, whose deeds applauding worlds admire!
   For them, as each her glance partakes,
   The life-enlightening Grace awakes
The various vocal flute, the sweet melodious lyre.
   To-day the lyre and flute and song,
   Roused by Diagoras, I move,
   Hymning fair Rhode, from Venus sprung,
   The Sun's own Nymph and watery love. 1345
Here the word in the original ( κατέβαν ) suggests to our imagination the procession just as it has come from the ship and spreading itself out on the shore of that famous harbour.
These are assuredly splendid lines: but far more impressive are those in another ode where he approaches Syracuse after Hiero's Pythian victory. Hiero was, in 1346 fact, at the time, in poor health: so, seizing his opportunity, Pindar gives an exquisite account of the birth of Aesculapius, his teaching and his death: and here he draws largely from profoundly sacred religious sources. But note how easily and delicately his song at length passes to Hiero himself, and the procession just arrived at Syracuse:
But O! that still yon mountain cave
   Sage Chiron held, where this mellifluous strain
      With tuneful charm his heart might move
      Some healing power to send, from Jove
      Or Phoebus sprung, with spells endued
      To still the pangs that rack the good.
   With him the bounding bark I'd mount,
      And ride the rough Ionian wave,
   By Arethusa's bubbling fount
   My kind Aetnaean host to save:
[Page 132]
Him Syracuse reveres, her lenient king,
   Whose pride ne'er pined at Virtue's just success;
   Whose love Th' unfriended strangers bless—
O! could I reach thy realm, and bring
   Health, golden Health, with Song to grace
   The wreath that crown'd thy Pythian race,
   (Which late from Cirrha to thy shore
   The matchless Pherenicus bore),
   Then should thy glorious minstrel shine
From far with beams of goodlier light,
   With two such gifts advancing o'er the brine,
Than you celestial star to thy rejoicing sight. 1347
We have vision of the goddess of Health herself with her priestess, accompanying the triumphal chorus. And what are we to say of that vivid picture of the happy constellation rising in the far East over the horizon? These are conceived in a vein which at once makes us feel in the presence of a poet, ‘not made but born.’
In another opening too, he magnificently declares that the Hours themselves, that is, the goddesses of the seasons, who watch over the moments fixed by fate, are taking their part in the festive crowd which comes to announce the triumph:
O Thou, that driv'st in clouds above
Th' impetuous Thunder, mighty Jove!
Me with my lyre and varying strain
1348 Thy circling Hours have sent again
Their tuneful witness to proclaim
The glories of thy matchless game.
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
O hear the advancing choir prolong,
Moved by the Graces, their triumphal song. 1349
Our own Cowley has touched the same theme in a strain, which not only rises to Pindar's own heights, but even—surprising as that is—surpasses him in the judgement of many. This is his effort:
[Page 133]
Begin the song, and strike the living lyre;
Lo! how the years to come, a numerous and well-fitted quire,
All hand in hand do decently advance,
And to my song with smooth and equal measures dance!
Whilst the dance lasts, how long soe'er it be,
My musick's voice shall bear it company;
   Till all gentle notes be drowned
   In the last trumpet's dreadful sound:
That to the spheres themselves shall silence bring,
   Untune the universal string. 1350
But while Cowley in these lines, in which it is not his own genius but the influence of a divine prophecy that inspires him, shows himself the more impressive and grander of the two: yet was Pindar in all other respects much the more highly gifted: and he never loses the glow of true inspiration through any ambitious over-refinement. Would that Cowley had exhibited the same good judgement! Take, for instance, the lines which Pindar addresses to the leader of Agesias' triumphal procession. The victor was by descent an Arcadian, though owning Sicily as his native land, and so the poet makes the procession proceed from Stymphalus in Arcadia to Syracuse. And as this was a somewhat unwonted procedure, Aeneas, who heads the triumph, is instructed how to perform his task. First, starting from the Arcadian city they were to bid formal farewell to its guardian deity—Juno:
Rise, Aeneas, and enjoin thy swelling choirs
   To sing Parthenian Juno. 1351
Then on the actual journey, or rather voyage, they must 1352 take pains with their allotted task, training themselves in the words and tunes of Pindar's ode. And here our poet, with his usual freedom, jests with his theme, alluding to
[Page 134]
a proverb which ridiculed the Boeotians, either for the dulness of their climate or the dulness of their brains:
                                         then declare,
If the stale stigma that belied our sires,
(Boeotian boars forsooth)! we still shall bear. 1353
Next, honourably addressing the leader in friendly speech, he declares:
Thou art Truth's harbinger, the Muse's tongue,
Her mystic staff, the cup that pours her potent song. 1354
It was assuredly curiously apt to style the chief singer the Muse's ‘mystic staff’, implying that he would act as interpreter, and supply the key to the cipher employed in the subtle refinements of the poet's verse. We thence infer that, in Pindar's judgement, the musical tune is most closely connected with the poet's style and meaning: and that one who knows the tune well, has a clue which may often guide him into the poet's secret meaning. But in calling Aeneas
the cup that pours her potent song,
is he not hinting at that extraordinarily happy power of exquisite singing, which enables it subtly to evoke one after another the many kindred emotions: to such degree that, frequently by a single modulation of the melody, we seem led, by different paths, into fresh varieties of song. Fitly, therefore, is the great artist of song termed a cup or mixing-bowl of songs, implying that those who hear may sip from him not of one alone but of many of the rills of poetry. After this Pindar next passes with his revellers across 1355 the Ionian Sea: the leader is adjured to remember Syracuse, since he is now not far from that port, and then by an easy transition he passes to the conventional and usual laudations of Hiero himself:
[Page 135]
   Bid them remember Syracuse, and sing
Of proud Ortygia's throne, secure
   In Hiero's rule, her upright king.
With frequent prayer he serves and worship pure
   The rosy-sandal'd Ceres, and her fair
      Daughter, whose car the milk-white steeds impel,
   And Jove, whose might Th' Aetnean fires declare. 1356
It would seem, I have little doubt, that Hiero was just at that time keeping the festival of Ceres and Proserpina. Finally, as he draws to the end, he returns to his starting-point, and thus simultaneously dismisses his poem and the votive procession:
Time, mar not his success! with welcome sweet
Agesias' choral pomp his liberal smile shall greet.
   Lo from Arcadia's parent seat,
      Her old Stymphalian walls, they come,
   From fields with flocks o'erspread, to meet
      Sicilia's strains, from home to home.
   O'er the swift prow, when night-storms lour,
      Two anchors oft 'tis well to cast—
   Heaven on them both its blessings pour,
      And bid their glories last.
   Lord of the main! direct aright,
With toils unvex'd their prosperous way;
   Spouse of the golden-wanded Amphitrite,
With lovelier hues enrich the flowers that crown my lay. 1357
In this final strophe the familiar sea-faring proverb covertly, and the prayer to Neptune plainly indicate that the poet is dealing with a chorus that is voyaging by sea. I was led to enlarge more fully on this subject, because this Ode has exercised, in no small degree, the critical powers of scholars: if, however, viewed on these principles, which assume it framed for a procession intended to voyage by sea, the inter-connexion of its parts will be found, I think, much more appropriate and artistic.
[Page 136]
But it would be inexcusable, when treating of triumphal choruses, did I not illustrate a few of the ways in which this theme is dignified and adorned by our poet. Such circumstances, for instance, as that Gods or Goddesses, guardians of cities, are enrolled in the ranks of the revellers: or that the very regions passed through, the harbours, the towns, and the rivers, are vividly presented 1358 before our eyes.
As for the Goddesses, there is a goodly company: for instance, the Graces are summoned to swell the triumph at Orchomenus:
August Aglaïa, blithe Euphrosynè,
   Daughters of Heaven's resistless king,
   And thou, that lovest the liquid lay,
Thalia, hear my call, and see
   The choiring minstrels on their way,
   By favouring fortune wooed,
With festive steps advancing: I to sing
   Asopichus in Lydian mood
And laboured measures come:
   For Minya from Th' Olympian shrine
   Bright victory bears thy gift divine. 1359
Again, a company of tutelary Nymphs attends a Theban victor:
Daughter of Cadmus, Semele,
   That dwell'st in heaven the Olympian queens among,
And thou that in the chambers of the sea
   Sleep'st, Ino, with the Nereids haste along,
Join'd with the hero-teeming dame that bare
   Great Hercules, to Melia's golden shrine,
Glittering with tripods rare,
   By Loxias honour'd most, his treasury divine.
That seat of truth oracular
   He gave his loved Ismenian name to grace;
Thither, ye children of Harmonia fair,
   He calls your native choir and heroine race
[Page 137]
Of ancient Themis, in becoming strain,
   To sing, when Eve hath her dun sail unfurl'd,
And Pytho's sacred plain,
   And Delphi's warning cell, the centre of the world.
   So shall your grateful transports hail
   Seven-portall'd Thebes and Cirrha's vale. 1360
I pass to instances where the regions themselves in which the processions took place are exquisitely painted; in these a complete picture is often summoned before us by a single word. Thus he describes:
Great Syracuse, the splendid shrine
   Of battle-breathing Mars. 1361
A city which, indeed, under Hiero's rule both by reason of its extent and a certain martial glamour, profoundly impressed, it is said, strangers from other lands. Cyrene is lauded as:
The town for chariots famed on Libya's glittering mound. 1362
The royal monuments of Battus, too, near that city, are 1363 recounted with that detailed care which unmistakably declares the eye-witness:
                                         For the gods
   High groves he raised, their dark abodes:
He the Scyrotan to Apollo's shrine,
   Where the full pomp with prancing steed
   Imploring blessings might proceed,
His spacious causeway plann'd. The Forum nigh,
Aloof the vulgar tombs his reliques lie. 1364
The local position and rising walls of Camarina, a colony not long founded, are depicted with an extraordinary vividness:
   Returned from that delightful plain
   Oenomaus' once and Pelops' reign,
[Page 138]
Minerva's shrine, whose fostering power
   Guards his young state, he hallows now
Oänus' stream and many a bower
   That shades the glittering lake below;
Hallows the banks and solemn clifts,
   Where Hipparis' wholesome waters rove,
Laving his peopled realm. He lifts
   The pillar'd pile, the marble grove,
Whereon his princely chambers rise
In swelling domes, that crown the skies. 1365
And lastly, in one Ode Pindar represents the victor as being escorted to his native Thebes, just at the time when the festal day in honour of Hercules was being celebrated: hence we have a clear account of the religious ceremonial at night, the torches, the altars, the incense-clouds, peculiar to the god: you cannot doubt that the service was taking place as the joyous procession returned from the Isthmus and at nightfall entered the Theban gates:
For him, o'er famed Electra's gate,
   We Thebans still the feast prepare,
And with fresh flow'rets consecrate
   The new-built altars blazing there;—
Blazing with offerings to the spirits brave
   Of his eight sons from blooming Megara born;
   To them, from eve to radiant morn,
Through the long night continuous wave
   The reddening flames, and toss on high
   Their fuming fragrance to the sky. 1366
I have, as already hinted, singled out these few examples from many available, to show how important were these honoured and hallowed assemblies, both in Pindar's own esteem and that of those whose deeds he sung. And what shall we say of the fact that at times he eulogizes poetry and the poet's inspiration? Some may say ‘he was somewhat of a braggart, and too loud (as is often the case) 1367 in the praise of his own profession.’ But (I should answer)
[Page 139]
there is nothing so appropriate to the spirit and temper of an athlete as such a theme. Assuredly the ‘goodwill and honouring speech of mighty bards’, 1368 as a familiar poet declares, have ever been the peculiar and distinguishing reward of the soldier and of the victor in warlike tourney. And, not to digress into the well-worn commonplaces of a debating society, as to the free range of the Muse, neither confined to any region nor affected by length of time: it seems to me that this warlike and athletic spirit has not a little in common with lyric and especially Pindaric verse. Strong men delight in forceful speech: soldiers relish a speaker delivering himself a little unreservedly: they delight in the freedom, not to say the audacity, in which lyric poets more than any others indulge, their one aim seeming to be to find some adequate expression for the feelings of the moment. And thus, I fancy, our author, in permitting himself a humorous arrogance, by no means displeased his Therons and Chromiuses, expert critics of the stadium and wrestling-school.
And I am inclined to think that he nowhere shows his delicate insight so conspicuously, as in the way in which, while glorifying his own task, he makes it always second to the glory of those whose deeds he had to celebrate. There is the Ode in which Chromius of Aetna is conducted from Nemea in the flush of triumph: an Ode which not a little resembles in tone that poetry which was the ornament of a later, post-Roman, heroic age:
                     The shaft of truth I throw,
   And boundless is my theme.
   In the porch of Chromius' hall
Honour'd I stand, warbling Th' applausive lay,
   And at his bounteous call
Share the rich banquet. Many a festive day
That board the welcome stranger knows: 1369
His virtues mar the slanders of his foes,
[Page 140]
   And quench like flood the flame.
Various arts mankind delight;
   But he that tempts the field of Fame
Must march with Nature to the fight.
   Strength its might by action shows;
The mind by thought and sure sagacity;
   As heaven each gift bestows. 1370
In that last line he hints, unless I am mistaken, at the truth which was a favourite one with him, that Virtue is given at birth, not acquired by learning:
From Nature all perfections flow;
And though from task'd attention slow
   Taught excellence will sometimes strain
And struggle to renown; if Heaven
Has not Th' inspiring impulse given,
   'Tis silence best rewards the pain. 1371
This is more than once insisted upon, by means of a well known comparison:
   Genius his stores from nature draws;
In words not wit the learned shine;
   Clamorous in vain, like croaking daws,
They rail against the bird of Jove divine. 1372
Elsewhere, again, he is still more explicit and more distinctly true to Nature:
                     But through the skies
Swiftest of fowl the eagle flies;
Lured from afar he sails away,
And pounces on his mangled prey;
While with hoarse croak and timorous flight
   The inglorious jackdaw courts the ground. 1373
The whole point of all the instances of this kind is to show that the poet is not only boasting of his own gift, but calling the victorious athlete to share his fame. Take the opening of the Ode in honour of Pytheas: who, it is
[Page 141]
said, had some misgivings regarding the cost of these panegyrics, arguing that with the like amount of money he might have reared a gilded statue for himself. But hear Pindar:
   I am no sculptor to display
Statues of silent stone, that in one place
Stand motionless upon their idle base,
   Unknown. Speed thou, my dulcet lay,
In every bark and pinnace o'er the deep,
From loud Aegina's echoing steep, 1374
   Spreading this tale the world around—
How Lampon's valiant son,
   Pytheas, with wreath Pancratian crown'd,
In Nemea's grove the palm of strength has won. 1375
And elsewhere he asseverates that his Odes would be known in all ages, just as he here speaks of all lands:
   Her everlasting word survives
The doer and the deed,
   When graceful genius largely gives
From wisdom's deepest fount the living meed. 1376
In two or three words he has sketched the real task of those who give themselves to poetic composition. To begin with,
When graceful genius largely gives,
—this implies that it is almost by chance, but chance guided by the Gods, that words, phrases, and skilful periods suggest themselves at the fitting moment to the poet's mind. And then by some subtle association, when once the right expression has been found, there often follows a rich flow, not merely of language, but of thought drawn from the deepest fountains of the heart:
From wisdom's deepest fount the living meed.
Assuredly, Pindar exactly hit the mark when he chanced upon this definition of poetry.
[Page 142]
There remain, too, passages where he briefly but acutely points out that he is dealing with those who value most the honour conferred on them by poets. Let them mark the retribution, perhaps most bitter of all, which overtakes Phalaris:
Still Croesus lives for kindness blest:
   On Phalaris, whose remorseless reign
   The bull and torturing fire
Upheld, the curses of all ages rest:
   Him nor the festive band, nor cheering lyre,
Nor youths in sweet communion joined
   With fond remembrance hail! 1377
‘The festive band,’ playing beneath the roof ( ὑρωροφίαι ), all but brings before our eyes the victor's hall, the accustomed banquet, the band of harpists on their elevated dais. What shall we say, moreover, of the commendation which 1378 he adds in the Pythian Ode in honour of Thrasybulus? He declares that a rich store of song which no untoward fate can destroy is treasured for his city and house in the very temple of Apollo:
Where for th' Emmenian tribe renown'd,
   And watery Agrigent, and great
Xenocrates with Pythian conquest crown'd,
   Apollo's proud retreat
Enshrines, its golden stores among,
The treasure of our rich triumphal song.
Song, that nor wintry shower nor driving hail,
   Keen squadrons of the pitiless thunder-cloud,
   Nor weltering sands shall beat, nor sweeping gale
   Sink in the caverns of Th' all-whelming flood. 1379
These lines seem, if I may be allowed a conjecture, to suggest a reference to some catastrophe, which the leading men of Agrigentum had experienced about that time, due to violence of wind or water: such as we read frequently occurred on the coast of Sicily. At any rate, we
[Page 143]
infer that Pindar on more than one occasion, touched distantly (as became his good sense) upon events which had happened in his neighbourhood, or which he perhaps himself had witnessed: especially if they involved anything too invidious or painful to be noticed, without unpleasantness, in express terms. For instance, when offering congratulations to Cleander on a victory won while he was in mourning, he says:
   From huge disasters free, no more
Its wreath the champion's front shall lack,
   Past ill 'tis folly to deplore. 1380
For ‘lacking the wreath’ he uses the word ‘bereavement’ ( ὀρφανία ), which indirectly recalls his loss. But to resume.
We have thus dealt both with the banquetings of the athletes and the glorification of poets. And Pindar's quality and disposition, in either case, have been seen to be in thorough sympathy with the tastes and proclivities of athletes. To which, perhaps, may not inappropriately be added his frequent dwelling upon the personal beauty of 1381 those whose victories he celebrated:
If then with manliest beauty graced,
   And rich in deeds that form to suit,
The son of Aristophanes hath placed
   On glory's loftiest peak his daring foot,
There must he pause. 1382
And he finely depicts Arcesilas, not simply as beautiful, but as endowed with a form and grace which eminently became a cultivated youth of royal blood:
First as thou art the sceptred lord
   Of mighty realms, and bear'st combined
By Nature for that proud reward,
   The ruler's eye, the sage's mind. 1383
He praises him, you see, exactly as soldiers and
[Page 144]
campaigners would have done. And it would have been strange indeed, had he not, sometimes, crowned this praise by assurances of approval won from the maidens who looked on:
When by Peneus' echoing shore
   The tribe of Ephyré shall throng
These dulcet notes to pour;
   Hippocleas' self shall brighten from the song,
Take, while fresh crowns his temples grace,
Amongst his peers the worthiest place,
   Win e'en the slow respect of age,
And warm the virgin breast with soft desire. 1384
Here it is put rather simply: but in another Ode the same idea is expressed more fully and with most charming vividness:
   Oft at the great Pentathlian feast
The fair beheld thee crown'd with victory;
   And each her wish in silence gave
   That Telesicrates the brave
Were but her darling son, or noble spouse might be. 1385
Another quality, too, is noticeable, highly consistent with the athletic character; he gives no small meed of praise to open-handed liberality, almost bordering on extravagance. Thus, with considerable freedom, he pleads with Hiero:
   Thousands observe thy sovereignty;
A thousand listening ears bear witness to thy shame.
   If yet Fame's dulcet voice to hear
       1386 Thou long'st, still crown'd to stand at Virtue's post,
      Oh! shrink not from the worthless cost;
   But, like a brave and liberal captain, spare
Thy spreading canvas to the wind. 1387
And observe in passing that, in these lines, as throughout the whole Ode, he has in mind the things of the sea, and
[Page 145]
such similes and images as are wont to occur to sailors: not inaptly, whether he wished to please the Syracusans, a people highly devoted to the sea, or because, as already noticed, this procession was intended to proceed to the victor's home across the Ionian Sea.
In connexion with such open-handed profusion, special and peculiar praise is given to hospitality, to the open house whose doors are shut to none. Thus referring to Xenocrates:
                                         At his board
   Ceased not the fresh convivial gale
   To fill the banquet's swelling sail;
His bounty's voyage, as the summer's smile
Or wintry gloom prevail'd, was Phasis or the Nile. 1388
In conclusion, I will submit a few examples which, though by no means seeming to have been deliberately intended by the author for the glorification of the athletic life, yet plainly evince a disposition which had long and deeply loved such pursuits. Under this head, perhaps, may be cited the well-known panegyric on the city of Corinth, in which he skilfully blends her prowess at Olympia with her devotion to those pursuits which specially tend not only to refinement of life but to the safety and well-being of the state itself as well:
Sons of the famed Aletes, round your brows
   Oft have the blooming Hours display'd
At sacred game in Glory's field
   Triumphant Virtue's noblest braid;
Oft to your throbbing hearts by hints reveal'd
Discoveries old of Wisdom's ways,
And works still pregnant with th' inventor's praise. 1389
As if, indeed, a victory once and again achieved in wrestling or boxing was of such high importance that it might fairly be reckoned among the chief glories of a city like Corinth, great as she was.
[Page 146]
1390 Furthermore, it may fairly be contended that the thought of the ‘right moment for action’ ( καîρος ), on which Pindar is constantly laying such stress, came so often to his mind, simply because the whole fate of competition depends on its being grasped or let pass. If we keep this idea before us, perhaps we shall better understand such sentences as these, which he repeats again and again:
   Wouldst thou foil the censurer's sneer,
Thy copious theme in narrowest pale
   Confine: nor pall Th' impatient ear
That throbs for fresh delights and loathes the lengthening tale. 1391
Or these:
Boundless is virtue's praise: yet he that woos
   The wise, with sparing blazon will supply
   The abundant theme, while opportunity
That perfects all things curbs the excursive Muse. 1392
But why dwell longer on a position sufficiently obvious and indeed recognized? Let me, however, in dismissing the subject, submit those most sweetly tender lines describing a victor's father as being roused from his sleep in the shades below, lest the palm, just won, might lack the recognition most longed for and best prized of all:
   Go now, sweet Echo of my lyre,
To pale Proserpine's melancholy dome
   With thy proud tidings to the Sire;
Tell Cleodamus, that his youthful son
In Pisa's glorious vale the braid
   From Jove's illustrious games hath won
And twined the plumes of conquest round his head. 1393
I would indeed, even on the strength of this single example, take upon me to maintain that human affection of every kind may be joined, fitly and congruously, with this one subject alone, I mean the deeds of athletes: and that
[Page 147]
this subject is not unworthy to be looked upon as the fountain-head of all Pindar's poetry. But we shall be in a position to pronounce more decisively on this question after I have concluded the next division of my subject. In that I shall explain the true function which is performed by a lyric poet, and notably by Pindar, when he either 1394 tries to cheer and brighten the hearts of sorrowing mortals, or offers counsel to kings or to his friends on political or religious matters.
[Page 148]
LECTURE XXVI 1395
Numerous passages considered which show Pindar to have been of a joyous and buoyant disposition: this is specially illustrated by the delight he takes in reverting to his native Thebes and all things associated with his boyhood.
Every one, I suppose, has heard of the controversy of Zeno, the chief of the Stoic school, with a rival philosopher: when the latter denied the existence of motion, Zeno, as we read, made no verbal reply, but merely walked once or twice up and down the portico where they chanced to be; and thus by walking, not by arguing, he triumphantly demonstrated that there was such a thing as motion. Now, what if I should prove by a somewhat similar method, that Pindar's rich poetic vein—and certainly none other was ever richer—might be traced entirely to a love of the games and of the gymnasium? I supported this view, you remember, quite recently by many probable inferences: now I should like to complete the argument by quoting the example of the noblest of all poets in our own day, Walter Scott—Scott by name and Scot by country—one whom I can never mention without reverence. The history of his whole life has now been revealed, as fully as on a votive tablet (to use Horace's phrase), 1396 a fact which is very rare, if not unique, in the case of poets: and I have not been able to refrain from carefully examining it to see whether 1397 we may not discover something which may either weaken or strengthen my view as to the essence of the poetic gift. There are, indeed, many things which fall in with my views, but the most striking of all is the fact that this illustrious light of Poetry was first kindled by a love of sport. 1398 For when, as a boy, being in delicate health, he
[Page 149]
was sent into the country among his ancestral mountains, and began to lead an open-air life, there forthwith was stimulated within him an extraordinary interest and love for that past age, of which poets had sung, in which his fathers had lived: all around him glowed with memories of the past heroes of a warlike and indomitable clan. But, I apprehend, the main thing which woke up in his mind the shadow and image of that bygone time was the country sports and pastimes, and the chase in its varied forms: for we know that, for Scott, all such pursuits as these had a powerful charm. In short, the part played in Pindar's poetical development by the Pythian and Olympic assemblages: in Spenser's and his contemporaries by martial and knightly tourneys which still kept alive the lingering memories of the so-called Middle Age: this was in Scott's case played by country life, by dogs and horses—and the hunter's cry ‘repeated by the assenting groves.’ 1399 All had this common characteristic, that they fastened on the circumstances in which they were placed, as images and suggestions of bygone times and departed heroes. This is what was in my mind when I hinted that the history of the great poet might be of no less value in coming to a decision concerning the genuine fount of Pindar's poetry than was Zeno's marching up and down his porch in the controversy about the existence of motion.
Consequently, I approach with increased confidence to-day's subject, in which I hope to make clear that this fascination for athletic and gymnastic pursuits which took such strong possession of Pindar was subtly blended with his other interests, so that it need not seem incredible 1400 that such almost boyish beginnings should serve as a stepping-stone to high and sacred themes. But I am far from denying that with Pindar an eager, buoyant joyousness was for the most part the dominant note. As far as I know,
[Page 150]
there has never been any famous poet who has less borne out the well-known opinion of Aristotle that ‘all men of genius are naturally melancholic’. 1401 For whenever he is led to those commonplaces, in which all men, to say nothing of poets, are wont sometimes to indulge, as to the brevity and fragility of our existence, the wretched and painful plight of mortal man, the doubtful duties, the trivial cares of man: at once the sorrowful strains are held back and curbed, as if his voice was ill suited to mourning, and at once he turns to some thought which may bring comfort and relief:
Yet ah! how short the vernal hour
   Allow'd for mortal bliss to blow!
Fate from the stem soon shakes the fluttering flower,
   That droops and dies below.
Child of a day, what's man? what is he not?
   His life a shadow's dream! 1402
So far you have a dirge, worthy of Aeschylus or any other poet who in gloomy tone has lamented over the ills of life. But observe how the verse proceeds:
         Yet when from Jove
   The gladdening gleam appears,
Then bright and brilliant is his lot,
   And calms unclouded gild his years.
Unlike Aeschylus, he speaks in no dark and uncertain tone; on the mere mention of the divine name, he finds peace in the sure and certain hope of better things.
And this hope, as he impresses on us in another Ode, not even death extinguishes. Wretched men, indeed, complain that what is once done can never be cancelled and made null:
Virtue's achievement, Folly's crime,
   Whate'er of guilt or good the past has known,
Not e'en the Sire of all things, mighty Time,
   Hath power to change, or make the deed undone. 1403
[Page 151]
But yet, Pindar replies: 1404
   But, when the prosperous hour returns,
O'er woes long wept Oblivion softly lays
   Her shadowy veil: and from the heart that mourns,
By goodlier joys subdued, Th' inveterate bane decays. 1405
And he goes on to strengthen belief in such Divine Providence by instancing the ultimate good fortune of the Nymphs, daughters of Cadmus: yet their happiness lay entirely in Elysium, beyond the present life.
I am not sure whether I ought properly to include among these illustrations the case in which, after narrating the unfortunate fate of Neoptolemus, who was murdered close by the altar of Apollo at Delphi, he hastens to palliate, in some measure, the ill-omened deed, and, as we may say, to absolve the gods from blame. He certainly pleads in its defence a decree of fate:
   Yet thus the debt of destiny he paid.
Fate had required that of the Aeacian race,
   Within that ancient grove for ever laid,
Fast by the gorgeous fane, a king should rest:
   Whose hallowed shade with vigil pure,
When fuming offerings heap'd Th' heroic feast,
   The pompous ritual might secure.
      A word his rare desert rewards;
      True to the trust the rites he guards,
   And fearless thus shall vouch. 1406
It may well be, I allow, that this version was intended to soothe the susceptibilities of the Aeginetans, who might resent what he had narrated of Neoptolemus. Nevertheless, I often wonder whether such a plea would ever have occurred to any one except to one who was naturally prone to put the best interpretation on all facts, and who would never allow himself to be thrown off his balance by the most trying circumstances.
[Page 152]
Consider too whether it is not the case that, all through Pindar's writings, sparks, so to say, of a buoyant and joyous disposition gleam forth: as when in beginning an Ode he sometimes plays and circles round many diverse topics:
                                         like Matine bee
In act and guise, 1407
1408 as if unable to make up his mind where to settle; for instance:
Mark how the strong wave, as it sweeps along,
   Rolls the wash'd pebble from the shore;
   Mark how Th' arrear shall vanish as we pour
Friendship's full tribute, our historic song 1409
—or, as when he delights in suddenly checking himself, and with a swift period rounds off a theme which he had begun at undue length:
All their glorious deeds to tell
   Lyric law forbids the string:—
Time urges, and some potent spell
   Lures me the new-moon sports to sing.
Quit, roving muse, the tempting tale,
And in mid sea reverse thy sail;
Transcendent thus o'er all thy foes,
Its day thy glorious orb shall close. 1410
There are many passages of similar tone: and if they seem somewhat vainglorious, it should be remembered that a certain youthful arrogance is closely allied to what we deem a noble spirit. But, on this head, we have previously cited examples, in that part of our subject which treated of Pindar's agreement and sympathy with the outspoken frankness of soldiers and athletes. Here I will simply note the obvious fact that Pindar made no scruple of indulging this broad freedom, not even in that splendid Ode which used to be called ‘The Argonauts’, and more nearly
[Page 153]
approaches epic form than anything he left to us. But he does not hesitate unexpectedly to cut the thread even of this: merely excusing himself on the ground that it would be over long to be completely told on that occasion:
But the time urges, and 'twere long
   The vulgar tedious path to tread;
I know the readier route of song;
   And Wisdom follows where I lead. 1411
A spirited and thoroughly soldierly outspokenness. Yet who would tolerate such defiance of all critical rules except in a lyric poet, and one, too, of that class which, revelling in a kind of wanton and joyous freedom, suffer themselves to be borne away wherever the spirit's impulse dictates?
But I am far from denying that, both in this instance 1412 and in many others, Pindar is influenced by some graver underlying motive, either concerning the state or the personal circumstances of those whom he celebrates. Well-qualified critics have proved before now that the ground-scheme of the work he has in hand is wonderfully kept in view, even when he appears to expatiate most widely, unrestrained by any fixed law or method. In spite of all his flights, the real spirit of the writer is discernible in the entire structure of the poem, as truly as the spirit of a man can be traced in his expression and gestures.
And then remember how sometimes he gracefully and aptly refers to things and persons immediately, perchance, before his eyes:
                                         O Phintis
(he addresses the charioteer by name to complete the realism of his picture):
   Bring forth thy mules, O Phintis, and behind
In haste the glittering harness join,
   With me thy chariot mount and find
Along yon spacious road the cradle of his line.
[Page 154]
   Full well, I ween, Th' illustrious track they know,
Learnt from the plaudits of Th' Olympian throng
   That crown'd their necks with glory. Open throw
To their careering speed the gates of song.
   To-day we press for Pitana, and lave
   Ere night our burning team in cool Eurotas' wave. 1413
A beautiful figure in itself, enriched with a spice of almost boyish exhilaration. Of diverse, yet fully equal charm, is the way in which he commends to his lord the charioteer of Arcesilaus of Cyrene as he returns home crowned with victory:
First of thy peers be great Carrhotus styled;
   He brought not to Th' applauding plain,
   Where Battus' just descendants reign,
Excuse, repentant Epimethes' child;
   But foremost in the chariot-course
   By pleased Castalia's sacred source
Th' accepted stranger pass'd, and round
Thy kingly locks his wreath of glory bound. 1414
1415 There is a touch of amusing irony in pretending to enroll ‘Excuse’ among the ranks of the Nymphs.
Just such irony is it which allows him to jest familiarly with the Muse herself, calling her ‘daughter’—whom but a few lines before he had hailed as ‘mother’!
No scant supply, no lingering stream
   Daughter
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
Pour from these lips to match my pregnant theme. 1416
Translators have, I confess, construed this in a wholly different sense: but why might not Pindar, now growing old, well jest familiarly even with the goddess herself, whose companion and comrade he had been for so many years?
[Page 155]
And lastly (I will add this point, though some may think it trivial), some there are whose feelings towards Pindar are such that, when trying to classify his poems and (as lovers of Poetry will) casting about for analogies, they maintain that his verse is most aptly likened to the song of the lark: since this little bird pre-eminently recalls something of the essential tone of lyric verse by its untrammelled, joyous, and perennial strain. Further, the lark is not mute even amid bare and barren fields, but soars up to the sky with joyous trill from its nest, wherever it may be: in this just like Pindar himself, who from the most straitened and (it may happen) obscure beginnings, delights to soar to lofty, noble themes. Lastly, it alone among birds is wont to sing during flight: and this recalls that special characteristic of Pindar, that he delights in the mere act of singing itself, in comparative disregard of theme and subject. Thus he takes as a starting-point anything that first offers to hand: only varying it with wondrous modulations, and consummately adapting it to time and place.
I leave to those who care for such conceits to decide 1417 whether this analogy is just: certainly there are many slight indications of Pindar's spirit which bear it out, where he is from time to time adding ornament and illustration to themes drawn from the gymnasium and the palaestra. In the first place, he readily turns aside to the praise of spring-time (I have already quoted an instance of this), and often, moreover, shows himself an enthusiastic lover of flowers. Thus, when he has to celebrate the happy fields in the ‘Islands of the Blest’ the first things which come into his mind are the flower-strewn earth and branches of the trees with their many-coloured hues:
Where sea-born breezes gently blow
   O'er blooms of gold that round them glow,
[Page 156]
   Which Nature boon from stream or strand
Or goodly tree profusely pours;
   Whence pluck they many a fragrant band,
And braid their locks with never-fading flowers. 1418
It may well be that Pindar had chanced to hear accounts from travellers of the marvellous and splendid variety of flowers adoring, as we know, tropical regions, which are so much nearer to the sun, particularly as, in his time, those long voyages on which travellers boldly faced the perils of the sea in quest of fame began once more, as in the heroic age, to be common: and how highly Pindar rated these adventures we have proof in his oft-repeated praise of Hercules and his pillars, and in his Argonautic Ode, that splendid poem written in praise of those who spend their toil to win the glory of the sea. Indeed, there are many other instances which prove the same point.
We find him again dwelling on flowers, especially those of spring, with great show of delight, in that exquisite little legend concerning the birth of Iamus, who, as he tells us, when left by his mother amid the woods, escaped the vigilance of the king's scouts:
                                         For he five days
'Mong shrubs and pathless briars and rushes green 1419
   Had lain, the dewy violet's mingled rays
Sprinkling with purple and gold his tender frame:
   Whence fond Evadne's joy proclaimed his deathless name. 1420
I know nothing more lovely than this, except perhaps Spenser's soothing elegy over his lost friend Sidney: whose spirit, he maintains, cannot have perished utterly:
Ah! no; it is not dead, ne can it die,
But lives for aie, in blissful Paradise:
Where like a new-borne babe it soft doth lie,
In bed of lillies wrapped in tender wise;
[Page 157]
   And compast all about with roses sweet,
   And daintie violets from head to feet.
There thousand birds, all of celestial brood,
To him do sweetly caroll day and night:
And with strange notes, of him well understood,
Lull him asleep in Angelick delight;
   Whilst in sweet dreame to him presented bee
   Immortall beauties, which no eye may see. 1421
These lines of Spenser are well worthy to be placed side by side with Pindar's, in order to show the almost religious function of true Poetry: if indeed it may be said that Poetry's most essential task is to lift to a higher plane all the emotions of our minds, and to make them take their part in a diviner philosophy.
For we must not suppose it was a mere chance that so many poets combine to call upon flowers and leaves, the glory of spring, to protect sleeping infancy. For beyond the two instances just cited, we well know that the idea has commended itself to country-folk in many nations and in many ages. To this feeling we may trace Horace's account of his own childish experience: 1422
O'ertired, poor child, with play and sleep,
   With living green the stock-doves crown'd—
A legend, nay, a miracle, ... .
‘Bears, vipers, spared him as he lay,
   The sacred garland deck'd his hair,
The myrtle blended with the bay:
   The child's inspired: the gods were there. 1423
From the same source comes our own fairy tale of the boy and girl in the wood, how, when at last worn out with hunger and wandering, the birds performed the last rites of burial with a kindly covering of leaves. But it is my deliberate opinion that underlying such fancies or such legends as these is no doubtful token of that heavenly
[Page 158]
Goodness, which has accorded to all men everywhere a special token of Its Presence in the world of flowers and kindly herbs. This is the truth which men of earlier days taught by fables of this kind, for they all point to this lesson, that no man can in sorrow charge God with being unjust or hostile to him, so long as he has at hand but one blade of grass or one bud upon the trees.
But I perceive that in following up these reflections I have unintentionally touched upon another source and fount of Pindar's poetry—I mean his delight in any mention of boyish sports and of all that has to do with boyhood. This, too, well accords with the simple kindliness of the man and his optimistic spirit. But concerning the child Iamus no more need be added to what has been already said. Not even a mother herself could ever give utterance to anything more tender or true to nature than that phrase, 1424 ‘sprinkling his tender frame.’ So rich is its grace and beauty that nothing in the world could more fitly suggest that more than mother's care with which a loving Supreme Power guards and tends holy souls after death. And this is the lesson which Spenser learnt, as we have seen, from it.
The story of Hercules, too, is highly Pindaric, where he pictures the serpents strangled by the new-born infant, as he lies crying in his cradle: there is a marvellous blending of godlike strength with a child's fearlessness:
Through the wide gates with many a fold
They to the dark and spacious chamber roll'd,
      Their jaws with slaver smear'd,
   Ravening for their infant prey:
      Stirr'd at the sound, his front he rear'd,
   And roused him for the maiden fray.
   Round their necks in durance sure
With gripe inevitable his hands he clasp'd;
   Till time their sprites impure
Press'd from the strangled monsters as he grasp'd 1425
[Page 159]
Nothing, one would think, could be imagined more widely remote from the description of Iamus' tenderest and most fragile infancy: yet these lines, too, subtly savour of a boy or of one used to play with boys.
Finally, that no time of life may be left without illustration, let us see whether with equal insight he has touched the habits and feelings of those a little older: and let us take the poem which sets forth the youthful days of Achilles, brought up under Chiron's guardianship amid the woodlands, and occupied with hunting and field pursuits:
Mark how the part divine Achilles play'd!
   While Philyra yet with a watchful eye
   O'erlook'd his home-kept infancy,
E'en then men's feats his childish sports he made.
   Poising with infant hand the barbed lance,
      Full oft the lion's wrathful might,
      Swift as the wind, he match'd in fight;
   Oft faced the bristling boar's advance,
   And at old Chiron's feet exulting laid,
Scarce six years born, his panting prey.
   Thence on his youth the Delian maid,
The stern Minerva, smil'd, and cheer'd his wondrous way. 1426
Are we not fully justified in concluding that Pindar 1427 knew equally well the tastes and interests of beardless youths, as they lead cheerful lives in the open air and eagerly seek out for themselves everywhere imitations and mimicries of the hunter's skill?
In this respect it may be noticed, however, that there is a considerable contrast between Pindar and Aeschylus. Aeschylus, in the main, as being a disciple of Pythagoras, not only extends his sympathy to animals offered as sacrificial victims, but even to the whole race of wild creatures and such game as men are wont to chase, whether for food or by way of sport: but, as far as I know, no such
[Page 160]
thought ever occurred to Pindar. This trait, in itself, marks him as one of those poets who, even within the sphere of Poetry, keep their sympathy with the mass of mankind; who delight to view things gaily and light-heartedly, rather than gravely; in short, who show themselves more like Homer than Virgil: for, unless I mistake, this pair of great writers represents two great types, and we may class every poet, in whatever matter we have to judge him, as falling under one or other of these types.
I pass now to consider the points which show Pindar's enthusiasm for his own native Thebes or for the general concerns of Greece; and although such a feeling is far from being limited to the Pindaric class now under review, poets, namely, of buoyant and active disposition (for all men without exception, not poets merely, share the common love for country, and reverence for ancestral law and custom), nevertheless, so I at least conceive, we may find in it too some clue to Pindar's disposition and temper. The truth is that the state of Thebes, at that time, was looked on with some disfavour, because it had withheld its support from Greece at a critical period—indeed, had 1428 even assisted the Persians. Pindar, however, was wholeheartedly on the side of Greece: as, first of all, I show from his own express words:
O grieve not at Th' abortive wrong;
   The toil hath ceased, the fight is won.
Spread far and wide the joyful strain—
   For lo! the ponderous stone
Of Tantalus, that o'er us threatening hung,
Some god hath heaved aside, and Greece revives again.
Intolerable weight! till dread dismay
   Thus by celestial aid dispell'd,
   My soul's o'erwhelming care had quell'd:
But to the business of the present day,
   Man's best employ—for time unseen
      Hangs o'er us with his shadowy thong,
      Urging life's stealthy steeds along.
[Page 161]
Yet well brave hearts, I ween,
   Wounds deep as ours, with freedom blest,
May bear, and for success to come
   On hope's assurance rest. 1429
These lines give no obscure hint of the writer's own leanings in the politics of his time. It is obvious that he rejoiced in the triumph of his country so heartily and sincerely, that his mind turns back to the thought of that triumph as the surest source of reassurance in a troublous time. More than this, he declares, if I read him aright, that he not only shares in the present rejoicing, but will always cling to the belief that no man, so long as his freedom be secure, can ever be utterly cast down.
And then his praises of Hiero himself, whom it was his special delight to honour, are associated with tributes to Athens and Sparta, though these have no obvious relation to his subject:
Bid, son of Saturn, the Phoenicians' rage
   In calm domestic arts subside,
Yon tuscan rout remember in retreat
   Their comrade's groans on Cumae's tide,
With tarnish'd ensigns strew'd and foundering fleet.
Such was the wild promiscuous wreck
   Wrought by the Syracusian stroke,
Whose captain from the towering deck
Dash'd to the deep their vanquish'd throng,
   And knapp'd in twain the barbarous yoke.
   When Athens asks my praise,
From Salamis I'll date the swelling song;
   Cithaeron's field the Spartan's fame shall raise,
Where Persia's boasted archery fell:
   But when, Dinomenes, the lyre
   Thy conquering sons inspire,
Oh, then, from Himera's banks the glittering bough
   I'll pluck to plant on Virtue's brow,
And bid those echoing shores their foe's disasters tell. 1430
[Page 162]
1431 Do you think that he did not look favourably on Salamis and Plataea, who held that any great and splendid deed might be appraised by the standard of those two battles?
But it may be urged that he never celebrated those victories, whose praise you would expect at that time from a writer to whom the common security of Greece was of utmost concern and importance: and further—and this is more surprising—that he never indulges in bitter reproach against Thebes, never denounces it as a mean and unworthy thing, that it separated its cause from the cause of Greece, and that his own fellow countrymen sympathized with foreign tyrants. That could not be said of him which Horace says of Alcaeus:
                                         But when the song
Of combat tells and tyrants fled,
Keen ears, press'd shoulders, closer throng. 1432
Grant that all this is true, yet there is nothing (believe me) in it, which militates against what has been said. It is natural to a buoyant and joyous temperament, such as Pindar's was, not to let anything depress it very greatly, not even the discredit and humiliation of his country: in the same way our own great poet, whose poetry we said just now might be compared with Pindar's, when he observed the political party, to which he was ardently devoted, daily losing influence and power, yet never once touched on the theme in his poems, either in indignation or regret. He betook himself to the one resource open to him, to the memories of the past and the records of heroic deeds as a safe haven in which he could find rest, when beaten and buffeted by the blasts of modern politics. Why may not Pindar, though disapproving the policy of his native state, have yet taken joy and delight in the city
[Page 163]
itself, its surrounding scenes, its religious belief and observances, and all the monuments of its bygone heroes?
On this subject, the highest place must be assigned to that most beautiful lament on the Theban army overthrown near Oenophyta: with regard to which it should be noticed, as we frequently find in Pindar's poems, that the chief merit of it lies in the thread which runs through the whole and in the general style of the poem, so admirably calculated to give solace, not so much, indeed, to his fellow citizens as to the poet himself. Do not suppose, however, that the 1433 force and charm of this consummate art can be fairly appreciated by any one who only hears one or two small extracts; those who would form a proper judgement of it must read and re-read it carefully. But even with the great drawback of this limitation, we cannot help seeing the man's reverent, kindly, zealous affection for his native city: he begins by tacitly diverting attention from the disquieting circumstances of the time to the glories and nobility of a bygone age:
For which of all thy sons renown'd of yore,
   Fortunate Thebes, most swell'd thy patriot pride? 1434
Then he almost dazzles our eyes with the long and illustrious line of heroes, whom one after another the splendid city had reared; and purposely he winds up the list with an allusion to the alliance which Thebes once had maintained with the Peloponnesus:
   Or when thy colonies, with Dorian shoot
   Ingrafted, raised on Spartan root
Their vigorous branches: and the Pythian powers
   Sent Aegeus' sons, thy warlike race,
Amyclae's plunder'd walls to sway. 1435
Where his meaning is, I apprehend, that the policy which his contemporaries had lately adopted on like occasion
[Page 164]
had been thoroughly endorsed and approved by the shades of their ancestors. Could he offer a more potent solace than this to men's spirits, shaken and discouraged by their recent defeat and losses? Then, in the spirit of a kindly friend, he associates the praises and the strife of the father-land with those of the victor: of Strepsiades he declares:
Lo while his name and fame his uncle shares,
   Their violet locks Th' applauding Muses wave—
Fall'n in the field of brazen-shielded Mars,
   For honour is the guerdon of the brave. 1436
1437 Next, in the vein of Homer or Tyrtaeus, he stimulates their minds to martial exploits:
Assured be he, whose generous power,
In the fierce fight's tempestuous hour,
Wards from his country's front away
The furious hailstorm of the fray,
Hurling retorted vengeance on the foe,
   That fame his life shall crown, and largely grace
   Beyond the grave his honoured race.
Son of Diodotus, now liest thou low,
   Rival in war's destructive game
Of Meleager, and the dread
   Amphiareus, and Hector's fame!
In youth's fair prime thy lofty spirit fled.
'Twas in the flight's first rank, where round thee cast
   Their desperate stand thy bravest comrades made.
Finally (and it was this passage which chiefly induced me to dwell at some length upon the Ode) he expressly states that he himself suffers with the suffering of his friend and of his country, and yet that he has a sure and certain hope that he shall keep a brave and tranquil heart:
Much hath thy fate perplex'd me!—but ’tis past—
   Neptune with gracious hand the storm hath laid,
      And all is calm again. I'll fling
      Braids round the victor's brows and sing.
[Page 165]
   Quench not, kind heav'n, the minstrel's fire;
   Grudge not the raptures of the lyre!
'Tis but the moment's ecstasy, which I,
   Well pleased, in peace indulge, till age and death
Shall come, as come they must—for all shall die,
   Though fates unequal close our days beneath.
Man is too brief long aims to reach. 1438
In conclusion, after a passing reference to the story of Bellerophon, he briefly recalls the song to his friend the victor, whom he was celebrating on that occasion:
   O Loxias, whose unclouded brow
Beams with the golden locks of day,
   Grant us thine own great games to know,
And bind our temples with thy Pythian bay. 1439
You can recognize in our poet Cicero's description of ‘the gentle and refined old man’, 1440 who is wont, so far as he is himself concerned, to contemplate the play of Fortune with untroubled spirit; who entertains no lofty, no magnificent ambitions; and yet looks with no unkindly eyes on the 1441 struggles and the enthusiasms of youth.
Perhaps I have dwelt over long on this Ode: but it seemed not beside the point to demonstrate, if possible, by one striking example, that, with Pindar, both public joys and public sorrows are tempered, in the highest degree possible, by his gentle and equable disposition—and this all the more as he advanced in years.
Let us now consider other characteristics which testify Pindar's affection for his native Thebes. Does he not, then, exhibit keen pleasure, on occasion, in summoning the choruses of native nymphs to lead the triumphal processions along the banks of Boeotia's streams?—
Daughter of Cadmus, Semelé,
   That dwell'st in heaven the Olympian queens among,
And thou that in the chambers of the sea
   Sleep'st, Ino, with the Nereids haste along,
[Page 166]
Join'd with the hero-teeming dame that bare
   Great Hercules, to Melia's golden shrine,
Glittering with tripods rare,
   By Loxias honour'd most, his treasury divine:
That seat of truth oracular
   He gave his loved Ismenian name to grace;
Thither, ye children of Harmonia fair,
   He calls your native choir and heroine race
Of ancient Themis, in becoming strain,
   To sing, when Eve hath her dun sail unfurl'd,
And Pytho's sacred plain
   And Delphi's warning cell, the centre of the world.
So shall your grateful transports hail
   Seven-portall'd Thebes and Cirrha's vale. 1442
And does he not imply that the victors he celebrates are gratified by the mere name of the fountain of Dirce, as if it had a magic charm of its own?—
For them from Dirce's fount, the living spring
   Which golden-vested Memory's daughters bring,
I'll pour, where Cadmus' wall its towering port unfolds. 1443
And in another Ode he is yet bolder:
Cold is the tardy tongue that will not move—
   Not burn for Hercules to sing,
   Nor that beloved Dircëan spring
Remember, from whose bubbling stream,
   With Iphicles, he drank. For vows
With many a trophy crown'd, to them
   The loud triumphal choir I'll rouse.
      Ye warbling Graces, on this head
      Cease not your beams of song to shed. 1444
1445
Pindar, we may note, expresses himself as if convinced that the familiar founts and springs of each man's native place would prove to him, so to say, a fountain of poetic inspiration: a view, in my opinion, which has in it a large measure of truth. What, I would ask, more natural than
[Page 167]
that youthful minds should be subtly influenced by the very localities, hills, rivers, and windings of shore and valley, which meet their eyes in earliest infancy, and that the man's poetic gift may be traced to such sources as these? Pindar, I imagine, either believed, or at all events, vaguely felt, something like this, when he suggests that the full light of the Muse would fail him, did he ever forget the fount of Dirce.
Moreover, in sacred rite and prayer, too, whenever occasion serves, he is instant to remember his native city. Among all the deities, he unhesitatingly singles out the Great Mother, as the goddess to whom, before all others, he commends with many prayers Hiero in his sickness. And this simply, as I suspect, because a votive temple to this deity stood hard by his own house door:
But to the Matron Goddess, in whose praise
   Oft near my portal at the midnight hour
   With Pan their hymns the damsels pour,
For thee my distant voice I'll raise. 1446
It may be questioned, moreover, if he does not celebrate the worship of the Pythian Apollo with more whole-hearted enthusiasm than those of the other deities, in whose honour splendid athletic contests were founded. I make no exception—not even the Olympic Jove. Take, for instance, the impressive lines in which he congratulates Aeacus and Aegina that Neoptolemus was entombed at Delphi within the sanctuary itself:
Still, though death's wave without distinction roll
   O'er all alike, the nameless and the great,
For warriors yet, that reach Th' eternal goal,
   Approved of heaven, conspicuous honours wait.
Thus, when the towers of Troy, so long by Greeks
   Assail'd, brave Pyrrhus to the skies 1447
In smouldering flames had whirl'd, the grove he seeks,
   In whose dark shades sequester'd lies
[Page 168]
The spacious earth's mysterious nave,
And shrines him in a Pythian grave. 1448
And these lines, moreover, occur in one of the Nemean Odes: small wonder then that in the Pythian Odes themselves ‘that centre of the loud-echoing earth’ is again and again honoured. I have already indicated the high veneration in which Aeschylus held it: Pindar, with equal affection, though springing from a different source, was moved to reverence not only by the divine majesty of the place itself, but by the memory of his own youth and all of strange and mysterious that he had heard about the temple and the shrine in his boyhood.
Moreover, it seems highly accordant with Pindar's notable affection for his native Thebes, that he at times spends great pains in tracing the genealogy of those who, if we may believe old tradition, were connected, however remotely, with the Theban stock: herein exhibiting just the same devotion as that Scotch Pindar to whom I have more than once referred: who shows unwearying delight in enumerating far-back ancestors of some noble house which either by birth or marriage seems to be connected with his own family. Thus Pindar implies that Stymphalus, an Arcadian city, is of interest to him, mainly because a certain Thebé was said to have been born there who was the guardian deity of Thebes:
   'Twas fair Metope's love, Stymphalian spouse,
To Thebes equestrian Thebé gave:
   In whose sweet fount, for warriors' brows
Weaving the various hymn, my tuneful lips I lave. 1449
This would seem far-fetched reasoning did not the poet take special interest and delight in such things. In another 1450 place he pleases himself in extolling Cyrene, having found
[Page 169]
a clue to trace that city's origin to Thebes and thence to his own tribe:
Spartans born my favour'd sires,
   From Aegeus sprung, to Thera came:
Fate led them to the land, whose sacred fires
   With many a victim flame.
Thence, Phoebus, thy Carneian rites
   To proud Cyrene's mount we bore. 1451
A scholar of great experience and learning 1452 supports the view that these lines are supposed to be spoken by Pindar himself, not by the leader of the Chorus, on the simple ground that it is the quality of lyric poetry for the writer, without scruple, to allow himself and his own concerns to play due part in his poems: while in Tragedy and Epic the case is commonly just the reverse. Thus Pindar was enabled all the more freely to indulge his own feeling, as often as the mention of some locality, or the thread of his story, gave him an opportunity for introducing some reference to things with which he himself had been long and intimately familiar.
But among all examples of this kind there is none more striking than the frequent praise of Aegina, so lovingly intertwined with the honour and exaltation of Thebes: at all events, if we accept Pindar's own explanation of his enthusiasm for it, that it was only due to the fact that by tradition there had been a prehistoric bond of relationship between Thebes and Aegina:
   Born in seven-portall'd Thebes, ’tis mine
Song's sweetest flowers and freshest bloom
   For famed Aegina's brows to twine.
She with her heroine sister brave,
   Fairest and youngest of their line,
From old Asopus sprung, and won
   Jove's amorous grace divine. 1453
[Page 170]
Now, as all readers who have made even the slightest acquaintance with Pindar know, he is wont to be more than ordinarily moved to the enthusiasm which is the outcome of a reverent and genuine feeling, whenever he refers to Aegina. Indeed, the two states were associated, not only by the firmest bonds of alliance, but by the ties of hospitality. And this is why Pindar, who is always most 1454 scrupulous about the duties due to guests, greets, with all his heart and more fully than he does any one else, an Aeginetan victor in a Theban contest:
For, where Amphitryon's proud remains
Inurn'd Th' illustrious tomb contains,
Cadmean chiefs, with willing hand,
Twined round his brows the glittering band:
   Fondly they swell'd Aegina's fame;
For, welcome to that wall,
   By friends received a friend he came,
And sat in great Alcides' gorgeous hall. 1455
Perhaps we may detect here some trace of private hospitality interchanged between Pindar himself and some of the leading citizens of Aegina: especially if the lines are compared with a passage occurring in another Ode, where, speaking of the house of an Aeginetan victor, Pindar commends him to the care of Hercules as being a neighbour, because his house lay between two shrines of that god in the Aeginetan city:
For as the parting pole on either hand
   Flanks the quadrigal chariot's gilded yoke,
Between thy stately fanes his turrets stand. 1456
The places in Aegina are obviously quite familiar to him: perhaps, as I indeed incline to infer, he had been more than once entertained there. This being so, the reason is not far to seek why Pindar flatters the Aeginetans so far as, on one occasion at least, to assign to them the greatest share
[Page 171]
of the glorious victory at Salamis: though he takes care to guard against the risk of praise likely to stir jealous envy:
   Witness triumphal Salamis
By Ajax' towers encompass'd round;
   'Midst war's mad waves and angry skies,
By naval strength sustain'd, by myriads press'd,
   She braved the deathful hailstorm of the fray;
   But steep'd in silence be the vaunting lay—
Jove, lord of all things, as it seems him best,
   Dispenses good and ill. 1457
Indeed, he confesses in express terms, that his Muse was wont to leave the theme in hand, and wander off unbidden to praise the race of Aeacus beyond all other heroes whatsoever:
   Apart Th' Aeacean race, my thirsty soul
Tastes not the lay. 1458
But no one will deny that the result was happy for the poet himself, when we recollect the wealth of splendid 1459 passages in which he extols either Aeacus himself, toiling in aid of deities before the walls of Troy: or his sons, grandsons, and others of the race: such as Telamon summoned by Hercules to share his glory, or the unsullied youth and heavenly bridal of Peleus, or the boyhood of Achilles, or the splendid ritual at the burial of Neoptolemus. It may be questioned, moreover, whether it was not among his friends and hosts in Aegina, rather than at any other place, that the poet learnt to introduce the sailor's life into his poems, since he was clearly by birth a landsman. Who was it taught him to contemplate the vast sea deeps with a kind of divine exaltation, blended with awe? Whence did he learn to describe, as on a votive tablet, the restless care, the unstable desires, the boundless hope, of sea
[Page 172]
voyagers? In treating of either of these themes pre-eminent beyond all the rest is the Argonautic Ode:
   Juno their hearts with sweet persuasive zeal
   Inspired to bound on Argo's keel,
To court the tempting toil: that none might long
   To waste undanger'd on his mother's arm
Youth without glory. 1460
Unerringly and skilfully too, if ever poet did, he has drawn for us the picture of that strange passion for the sea, while still unseen, with which, as we know, boys and youths are often fired, as if fascinated by some fatal charm. And then he describes their emotions when they first board a ship: an unsurpassingly fine effort:
                                         In haste
The panting band embark'd, and from below
The lifted anchor hung upon the dancing prow.
   High on the stern a golden goblet rear'd
      The chief, and to the sire of all the gods,
   The lightning-lancèd Jove, his prayer preferr'd;
   Invoked the powers, that sway the winds and floods,
      The sea's wild ways, the nights forlorn,
      And smiling days, and sweet return.
      Heaven's prompt assent in accents loud
      Spake the big thunder from the cloud,
      And playful pour'd in volleys bright
      Its fractured beams of harmless light.
Paused those rude heroes, by that gleam divine
1461 And sound ambiguous awed—Mopsus that hail'd the sign
   Cheer'd to their oars the rallied crew,
      And with sweet hopes their hearts inspired:
   At their stout stroke the galley flew;
      Toss'd from their blades the surge retired. 1462
The phrase ‘at their stout stroke’ should be specially noted: for it indicates a writer who has trusted to observation merely, without having had practical experience: while
[Page 173]
Aeschylus, on the other hand, as we have seen, generally details sea affairs with the air of a man who had not only himself known the sea well, but with his own hands, so to speak, pulled an oar.
We have noticed the keen interest which Pindar exhibits towards Aegina, as being connected in some way with his native Thebes, and bound to himself personally, if we conjecture aright, by ties of hospitality. We intended to have next submitted a few remarks, by way of completing the subject, on his general views as to the most satisfactory form of political government. He was, undoubtedly, as one would expect in a Theban, most inclined to the side of an aristocracy: though this by no means hindered him from frequently criticizing the mistakes even of the nobles themselves. But I forbear, at present, to offer examples of this, since they will be better held over, perhaps, until we reach the conclusion of what is to be said concerning Pindar and his poetry. For I see that one of the points we took in hand still remains to be considered—the manner and spirit in which Pindar availed himself of that freedom, which the ancients for the most part accorded to poets, especially lyricists and dramatists—the freedom, I mean, and even licence, to find fault with leading men, and even kings themselves, for past deeds and warn them against future actions. In treating this division of the subject it will clearly appear that, also where he is dealing with political affairs, Pindar's youthful feelings survived even to his old age, and that his patriotism was fired not by art but by his natural instinct.
Finally, to sum up in one sentence what seems to me the main result of our present discussion. It is a great merit, I might almost call it a divine gift, when any poet is 1463 seen to retain throughout life, traces of his youthful impressions and feelings: if only for this, that with the course of that impressionable time of life clearly before us
[Page 174]
we possess, as it were, a clue whereby we may penetrate to the deepest poetry of the man. And, in this connexion, we may, I think, fitly adopt that well-known passage of Cicero, which always falls on my ear like the utterance of some sacred oracle, as if it were spoken with a more than human voice, ‘For, as I like a young man in whom there is something of the old, so I like an old man in whom there is something of the young.’ 1464 Similarly, I would have a poet's strains distil, like a subtle aroma, the memory of his earliest years: first, because that has an inborn charm which no art can produce; it is a thing which ‘I feel but want the power to paint’: 1465 and, secondly, because we may thus most surely and easily approach the very fountain-head of Poetry, and not merely follow tributary streams. Nay, more (though I speak boldly, it is not far from the truth), whenever we enjoy the study of such a one, we are contemplating the works not of this or that poet but of Nature herself, or rather of Him who created Nature.
[Page 175]
LECTURE XXVII 1466
Pindar, for good and sufficient reasons, attached himself to the aristocracy: yet in spite of this he indulged in absolute frankness in expression of his political views: first, owing to his naturally independent and happy disposition: next, because it was the habit and manner of his time: thirdly, and chiefly, because he held belief in a future life and that the spirits of the happy dead witness our actions even here.
I now approach the last division, and that the most important, of this discussion of Pindar and his poetry. According to the plan laid out, I have now to deal with that lyric freedom and outspokenness ( ραρρeegr;σία ) which he preserves, as though it were a traditional right, in most of his poems.
Now, when we really face this fact, our first thought is whether it be conceivable that the same man who, even when advanced in years, was so alert and tenacious of the memories of all that charmed him as a boy, should be capable of giving serious advice in difficult and important affairs without the least fear of kings, to say nothing of his own friends: advice, too, which he often enforces by appeal to the holiest religious sanction and to the deities of Olympus or the shades below. We may well marvel whether any method can make two such opposite qualities blend and work together as the severity of a very severe judge and a bright, happy, almost careless temperament.
But this was the very reason (for so I think we should 1467 reply to those who raise a difficulty of this kind) that I conceived that it was the result of something more than human art or contrivance if any poet, like Pindar, was able, while dealing with such grave questions, to maintain this simple, native, and (to say the truth) childlike
[Page 176]
disposition. Assuredly, a man of such mould as this must look down from a great height upon the common crowd of humanity and everywhere see:
                                         deep, wondrous deep below,
How poor mistaken mortals wandering go.
Seeking the path to Happiness; some aim
At Learning, Wit, Nobility, or Fame;
Others with Cares and Dangers vex each hour
To reach the top of Wealth and sovereign Power. 1468
In short, we are none of us ignorant that men of strong and noble mind have appeared in the world who have evinced in death, as well as throughout life, a buoyant gaiety, thoroughly characteristic of youth's opening years: and I cannot but conclude, when I observe and weigh such examples, that there must be some very close connexion between this gaiety and their striking courage.
And I am inclined to think that this fact is at any rate a part of what is implied in that divine saying which teaches us the pre-eminent dignity and beauty of childhood and youth: that to ‘such as these’ pertains the essence of all divine and heavenly knowledge—‘for of such is the kingdom of God’. 1469
But to return to Pindar's poems: I am convinced that any one who would grasp their essential qualities should realize aright all that lies in a calm and somewhat jovial old age: in an age which, though long freed from all distraction of passion or discontent, has not yet wholly banished the sweet and pleasing recollections of youth. 1470 Does not he who can sincerely deliver himself in the following lines stand fully prepared for all that may threaten him, and ready to face any adverse fortunes?
Teach me through life truth's simple path to find,
   That my sons blush not for their sire.
   Some showers of gold from heaven require,
Others for boundless plains have pined;
[Page 177]
Grant me my country's smiles to meet,
   And let these limbs the grave devour;
Still probity with praise I'll greet,
   Still on the knave my vengeance pour. 1471
And if he seems sometimes to praise riches overmuch, yet his tone always gives the impression that he himself neither despises nor is extravagantly fond of it:
   If there be one, whose wisdom crown'd
   Th' unerring paths of Truth has found,
   'Tis his with heart uplift to Heaven
   T’ improve the gift its grace has given.
   The winds that sweep the vaulted sky
Shift every hour their changeful way;
   And when on man swelling Prosperity
In all its fullness comes, it will not, must not stay.
Humble in want, in greatness I'll be great,
   Still to my fortune's form I’ll shape my will,
My wit the follower of my fate.
   Should some kind god my lap with affluence fill,
      To Fame's high peak my hopes aspire. 1472
A true picture that of the brave man, of one ‘splendidly equipped to face the assaults of fortune’, 1473 one to whom, like an eager youth, his joyous and gay heart lends strength and courage.
Now let us see what manner of man he shows himself, when any rulers of the state stand in need of his admonitions. First, nothing can be clearer than that he strongly supported the view that the chief conduct of affairs should be left rather to the judgement of a select few of the leading citizens, than to the general decision of the people at large. Indeed, as became one who was ever faithful to his youthful memories, he remained constant throughout life to the opinions he had imbibed among the Boeotians when a boy. Of this we have a rich variety of example.
[Page 178]
In one passage he describes three different methods of government, but his words are so chosen that none can doubt that his unqualified sympathy lay with the aristocracy:
Truth in all states her fearless front may rear;
   Whether proud kings or fierce democracies,
Or sapient peers the public weal maintain. 1474
1475
These lines exhibit a notable freedom of speech: for they are addressed to Hiero, a king himself. Observe, moreover, with what splendour of language and richness of poetic device he glorifies Corinth, which may be said to have been the chief citadel of strength for those who throughout all Greece espoused the aristocratic side:
                                         There the Golden Sisters reign
   From Themis sprung, Eunomia pure,
Safe Justice and congenial Peace,
   Basis of states; whose counsels sure
With wealth and wisdom bless the world's increase,
And Insolence, the child of bold-tongued Pride,
   Far from the social haunt repel. 1476
But I hope it will not be supposed that this tendency to praise only that method of government to which he had from early youth been accustomed was based simply upon the feelings of youth or the passion of a blind lover. For there was ample reason why the political sympathies of those who in that age sang at Olympia or at Delphi should naturally incline that way. For must not those ancient heroes, who on such occasions afforded to lyric poets the richest—if not the sole—material of their song, must they not, when compared with other men, have seemed to form an aristocracy of themselves? men who not only were honoured by the solemn style of ‘godbegotten’, but also were commonly believed to bear on
[Page 179]
their very bodies some mark of a more than human, of an inviolable, nature: hence perhaps Pindar's phrase:
The sons of Gods alone nor chance nor change can wound. 1477
Thus one who was constantly thinking and occupying himself about this order of beings, must almost necessarily have become imbued with the belief that men differ widely from men, and that not merely by law, or by common opinion, but by distinctions fixed at their birth, which no lapse of time can alter: and, moreover, that this distinction 1478 was transmitted to their sons and descendants, perhaps in perpetuity, at all events through long ages. And further than this, among their descendants were often ranked those actual contemporaries of Pindar, the chief and leading men throughout Greece, whose glorious contests he celebrated repeatedly, and with most of whom he was on intimate terms of friendship: for such were the manners of the times: these distinguished victors made great account of the distinguished poet who gave them the chief part of their glory. And that Pindar specially cherished and enjoyed his privileges, he himself confesses in well-known lines:
   'Bove all the ranks of greatness at the top
Shines the consummate king—
   Beyond that height lift not thy hope.
Be thine in that bright station long to bear
   Thy upright course: mine, with the conquering band
   To take my honourable stand,
And 'mong the bards of Greece the palm of genius wear. 1479
Assuredly, throughout all his writings, we at once trace the friend and associate of the leading men of the state, one accustomed to the tables of the rich, sometimes even
[Page 180]
drinking from cups of gold. And, as we all know, no bond of any association is closer than that between those whose good fortune it is (to use Horace's phrase) to ‘visit Corinth’, that is, to enjoy the friendship of great men.
In the next place, the pursuits and interests which especially appealed to Pindar are more peculiarly suitable to men of birth than to those of inferior rank, namely, the martial and gymnastic games by whose means especially he was enabled to revive the splendid legends or stories of the past. All these are the privilege of men of leisure, not of those who have to earn their bread from day to day. Pindar himself alludes to this fact, with the grace we might expect from him:
   'Tis but the pastime, not the pain
Of Genius his unfailing word to give,
   That bravery shall not strive in vain,
That virtue raised by him in Fame's bright heaven shall live. 1480
   All have their tasks, and each by turns
   His favourite compensation earns:
   The ploughman rude, the shepherd, all
That strike the wild-bird's wing, or fish the deep,
   Stir but at hunger's craving call,
And struggle but to feast and sleep;
But he that in rough game or mortal fight
Bids the foil'd foe record his might,
   Wins for his work the brave man's crown,
   The lofty lucre of renown,
His nation's pride, the world's delight. 1481
Lastly, which is worth all the rest, patricians play a part in the state which is wont pre-eminently to appeal to lofty and noble spirits. They who heartily espouse this side will at times be mysteriously lifted beyond the feelings of our daily life, and will be rapt away into times past: they will spontaneously betake themselves to the hidden sources of things and become, in imagination, wellnigh
[Page 181]
eyewitnesses of primitive and unknown times. Listen now: for I cannot refrain from transcribing these magnificent lines, whose cadences by their mere sound, so full, so sweet, testify how gladsomely the poet expatiated on this theme:
                                         the tempest wild
Of roughest war, in one disastrous hour,
   From their loved hearth and prosperous home
   Four kindred warriors swept away.
   Now, when the wintry month and darken'd day
   No longer lowers, again they bloom,
Like the fresh vernal vale with nature's rosiest flower.
Such is heaven's will; and he that shakes
   Earth's bellowing shore, the Onchestian god,
What time by Corinth's walls he makes
   Her sea-bridge loud his wild abode,
Hath given Melissus' race this blazoning strain:
   He from the couch of ages, where she lay
   In dark oblivion hush'd away,
Hath roused their ancient fame again,
   That now like Lucifer displays,
Brightest of stars, her rising rays. 1482
Thoroughly in harmony with this is his assertion that, even in the Isles of the Blessed, no small part of the happiness will consist in being with the time-honoured band of kings and heroes:
Peleus and Cadmus there high honours crown;
   The like to great Achilles largely given
With prayers from yielding Jove persuasive Thetis won. 1483
But while Pindar is so strong a supporter of the aristocracy, this does not hinder him from readily according loyal devotion to kings. Indeed, he honours even tyrants, 1484 such as Hiero, Thero, Arcesilas, with the very flower of his verse. What he thinks of democracy may be learnt from a single phrase when he refers to it as ‘the fierce democracy’.
[Page 182]
Thus we conclude that Pindar's ancestral political leanings were absolutely at one with his own entire temperament: we may say that he was emphatically the man and the poet of the few.
Nevertheless, he by no means shrinks from impressing the sternest warnings, when occasion demands, upon men of rank and powerful friends, sometimes by implication, sometimes openly and directly. For much the same function as, at Athens, the dramatists fulfilled towards a boasting and empty-headed populace, the Lyric writers, unless I mistake, maintained as regarded kings and nobles. Perhaps their duty and office did not much differ from the part assigned by Horace to the Tragic Chorus: ‘Let it ever support the good, give sage counsel to its friends, soothe the passionate, and love those who shrink from sin.’ 1485 Thus Pindar soothes the passion of Arcesilas, supports and gives sage counsel to Hiero, and loves and encourages Thero, who it seems was shrinking from wrongdoing.
Let us consider shortly the features in some particular poems which set in relief either the good sense of his eulogies, or the respect which was felt in that age for the outspokenness of a poet's utterances. He begins by trying to win the goodwill of Arcesilas in several ways, but especially by declaring his praises, not merely in a single ode, as he had done for others, but by breaking out into that splendid Argonautic poem which is almost epic in its volume. Then he advances a somewhat enigmatic comparison which enabled him, on the one hand, so to veil his advice that it might run less risk of offending the citizens, and also be more respectful towards the king himself: on the other, to approach, as nearly as possible, to the form of a direct message from heaven, such as the 1486 Greeks were accustomed to recognize, either in the responses
[Page 183]
of their prophets or the words delivered from the inner shrine of the Gods:
Use now the wit of Oedipus profound—
   If one with sharpen'd axe and reckless stroke
Lops as he lists the sightly branches round
   And shames the honours of the spreading oak:
   Though fruit thereon no longer glows,
   Still her proud bulk and strength she shows,
   What time in winter's hour of need
   The crackling hearth her fragments feed;
   Or stretch'd along the lengthening row
   Of stateliest columns rear'd below
Some stranger's pressing palace she sustains
With firm unfailing trunk, forc'd from the’ unsheltered plains. 1487
But in this passage I do not understand—as do all the commentators with whom I am acquainted—the phrase κΕιμέριον ρυ̂ρ (winter fire) to mean that the wood of the oak is cut off and used for the fire. With all respect to these learned scholars, I cannot but think this explanation inappropriate. But I take the passage in this way: the trunk of an oak, even when stripped of all its branches by some stroke of lightning, still maintains no uncertain show of its former self, with bark torn and limbs, as generally happens, hollowed out. But if it be removed from its native earth and made into a beam or column in some building, it yet preserves its characteristic quality so far as to remain firm and fixed, in its position, beyond all other material. But when he describes the task performed by the timber in an alien home as ‘a wretched toil’ ( δύστανον μόΧθαν ), you can see that he is borrowing the thought by anticipation from the corresponding factor in the simile. For it was the exiled Damophilus, who was really ‘wretched’, not this tree. Damophilus, I say, whom Pindar in these lines veiledly praises and recommends to Arcesilas: by whose decree he was at that time living
[Page 184]
in banishment. Weighty words of exhortation follow, which indeed embrace the sum of the whole policy of the patricians:
With lenient hand, relenting sire,
Soften and heal thy subjects' wound;
The worst, the weakest from its base
A state with ease may shake; but to replace
Th' accomplish'd pile is power indeed,
Unless some guardian spirit in his love
Seize the loose helm, the leaders lead. 1488
1489 A little further on the poet openly refers to Damophilus by name: and many well-known topics, that are common in such petitions, are urged in his favour:
                                         'Tis bitterest pain
To know, yet need, and crave in vain
The sweets that friends and freedom give;
Thus does this suffering Atlas strive,
From wealth and kin and country driven,
Against thy weight, his pressing heaven.
Yet Jove the Titans loosed, and when the gale
Vexes the deep no more, we furl the useless sail. 1490
It is highly characteristic of Pindar that, amidst so many other important topics, involved as one may say in a sea of fabled story, he clearly shows that he has nothing more keenly at heart than that his friend, lately ‘welcomed as his guest at Thebes'—so he declares in the very last line of this renowned Ode—might not fail in his petition.
But Hiero, a more august potentate possibly, but with whom he was on more intimate terms of friendship, he addresses somewhat familiarly, and in a tone more nearly approaching ordinary converse:
Hail to thy greatness! o'er the sea
Like rich Phoenician stores I send
My freight of eulogies for thee.
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
[Page 185]
But praise on apes let boys bestow,
Keep thou the course thy virtues know:
Thus wisest Rhadamanthus won
The reverence of mankind:
The fruits of conscience all his own;
No flattering falsehood lured his mind;
Wherewith, the sufferer's and the listener's bane,
Weak ears intriguing whisperers gain. 1491
And besides this, Pindar is not with Hiero, as in the case of Arcesilas, pleading a particular cause which was pressing at the moment, but as man to man exhorts the king generally on the theory of right living:
With forced applause, with grief profound,
   The vulgar audience listens to the lays
   That swell the prosperous stranger's praise:
   Yet since the flatterer Envy's deadliest wound
   Pains not the brave like Pity's tear,
   Cling thou to good; thy vessel's martial throng
   With the sure helm of Justice steer,
   And on Truth's anvil steel thy guarded tongue; 1492
   Sparks of mischief struck from thee
   Spread far and wide Th' authentic flame:
   Thousands observe thy sovereignty;
   A thousand listening ears bear witness to thy shame. 1493
And then, which is especially surprising, he actually criticizes him as too sparing of expense, and that with no vague allusions:
If yet Fame's dulcet voice to hear
Thou long'st, still crown'd to stand at Virtue's post,
Oh! shrink not from the worthless cost:
But, like a brave and liberal captain, spare
Thy spreading canvas to the wind.
Trust not, my friend, to Flattery's ill-bought breath:
Glory, whose living lamp behind
Departed mortals gilds the shrine of death,
[Page 186]
Bids History's pomp on Goodness wait:
And rouses the rewarding strain
To sound the triumphs of the great.
Still Croesus lives, for kindness blest. 1494
It may be said that lyric writers generally give themselves full play in applauding liberality of this kind; indeed, that it is the way of all singers in all times. And I agree: yet I am inclined to think that no ordinary freedom was enjoyed by a poet who did not hesitate thus to address a royal patron.
So far we have dealt with open, and by no means ambiguous advice: but (if we may trust critics and scholars) there are many more places in which the outspokenness is veiled and hidden from view, the poet selecting from the wide field of history such incidents as seemed appropriate to each poem. For instance, when honouring Telesicrates, a youth of Cyrene, who was, it would seem, of rather wanton disposition, he occupies himself entirely with marriage songs, celebrating, first of all, the loves of Cyrene and Apollo and then of one Alexidamus, a fleet runner, who by his swiftness of foot had won for himself a most honourable marriage with the daughter of the king of the Nomads:
Thus for his daughter fair the Libyan sire
Fit spousal found. Her envied place
Fast by the goal, in rich attire,
He fix'd, to close and crown the race.
‘To him whose passing speed,’ he said,
1495 ‘Her veil first gains, the prize be due,’
Foremost Alexidamus flew,
And by her yielded hand in triumph led
Through troops of Nomads his accomplish'd spouse;
They from their steeds with transports new
Fresh leaves and flowers upon him threw,
While plumes of conquest past hung graceful round his brows. 1496
[Page 187]
I am inclined to think that nowhere in ancient poetry will you find such graceful playing with the theme, or anything that so closely approaches the style of those ballads 1497 which were such favourites with our own ancestors, especially with such as led lives in the open air, amid hazardous circumstances, threatened by neighbouring foes. Such men delighted in such ballads, probably on account of a certain freedom and joyousness which are closely akin to the bold licence of the camp. But to return to the point whence I digressed: it is said that by such stories as these Pindar sought to impress upon Telesicrates how great was the praise and honour of chastity:
That warned from joys forbidden men might haste
The practicable bliss to taste. 1498
And in another Ode he impresses just the same lesson upon two Aeginetan youths, Phylacidas and Pytheas, reminding them of the peril incurred by the renowned Peleus through the impure advances of a certain Thessalian:
'Twas all the truth reversed—the fraud of lust.
With fervent prayers, avow'd desires,
Oft had she press'd him: but his stern disgust,
His rage the bold proposal fires.
The wrath of hospitable Jove
He fear'd, and spurn'd the unholy love.
Jove from his cloudy throne, heaven's ruling lord,
Mark'd the just youth, and for his bride
Gave him the Nereid queen, his truth's reward,
That deep in crystal wave the golden distaff plied. 1499
From these examples it is possible to form a fair idea of the general quality of Pindar's method. When once he has the right clue given to him he endeavours, by all devices and resources available from fable or story, to form men's minds to virtue or political wisdom.
[Page 188]
1500 Should it seem strange and scarcely credible that such high reverence was entertained for the Muses in those times as to make men in a lawless age, possessed of royal power, willing to endure the reproaches, or even strictures, of a simple poet, we must recollect, firstly, that the Grecian mind had been trained in such high respect through the course of centuries. We have none of us forgotten the Homeric bard whom Agamemnon left to guard his wife at home, when he was departing for Troy:
At first, with worthy shame and decent pride,
The royal dame his lawless suit denied.
For virtue's image yet possest her mind,
Taught by a master of the tuneful kind:
Atrides, parting for the Trojan war,
Consign'd the youthful consort to his care.
True to his charge, the bard preserv'd her long
In honour's limits: such the power of song.
But when the gods these objects of their hate
Dragg'd to destruction by the links of fate:
The bard they banish'd from his native soil,
And left all helpless in a desert isle:
There he, the sweetest of the sacred train,
Sung dying to the rocks, but sung in vain.
Then virtue was no more: her guard away,
She fell to lust a voluntary prey. 1501
And, in fact, it was no small part of Aegisthus' wickedness that he insulted and banished one thus held in almost sacred regard.
But it seems all the more natural and likely that, even in the time of Pindar, poets still maintained their privileged and free character, since they exercised an art and office which never failed to delight the whole class of soldiers and athletes. So that, if perchance any poet, through over-outspokenness, incurred the displeasure of prince or nobles, the popular favour would serve as a protection:
[Page 189]
men realized that they could by no means afford to sacrifice so powerful a champion of their own interests.
Moreover, over and above those indirect allusions to which I referred just now, and which the wisest poets aimed at in the treatment of their themes, lest advice which was necessarily unpalatable might become even less palatable by being stated too openly, there was another fact in the delivery of these poems which had a considerable effect in sparing the feelings of those to whom such advice was given. These poems were neither read nor were they delivered 1502 formally amid silence from a platform: they were set off by musical accompaniment and something like the accompaniments of a stage; so that attention was diverted to the brilliance of the surroundings, and any criticism that might be over bold nevertheless did not openly meet the notice of the ordinary crowd. How many can we suppose, amid the sound of the voices and the din of the instruments, can as much as have heard—not to say understood—what was being sung!
But really in the treatment of this subject the most important factor is the religious: I mean, that religious reverence with which ancient Greece regarded those who devoted themselves to poetry and song. Undoubtedly that which Tacitus tells us of German women was equally true of poets: the Greeks believed that in them there was something of a sacred and prophetic character: and I apprehend that this opinion had a stronger hold in those times from the fact that the ‘rhapsodists’, as they were called, never or seldom wrote: they never read out what they had previously committed to writing, but poured forth their song just as occasion and time prompted, appearing to be inspired by divine influence.
It will be sufficient to have alluded once to this feeling, as it is well known and so trite as to be almost proverbial; it was especially marked among the Romans, for in Latin
[Page 190]
the words ‘Canere’. ‘Carmen’, ‘Vates’, have all a double meaning (‘to sing’ or ‘to prophesy’: ‘a song’ or ‘a prophecy’: ‘a poet’ or ‘a prophet’): in fact there was much in common between poets and augurs. And among those nations whose common speech bore traces of some close link which united poetry with the power of prediction, two results followed: on the one hand; even tyrants themselves were not seldom restrained by religious reverence; and, on the other, the favour of the people would be a great protection to poets whose criticisms were outspoken and severe; for the people would not stand any 1503 cruel treatment of men who were regarded as wellnigh bringing oracles from the Gods.
It was this which enabled Simonides, who is said to have taught Pindar, to win the gratitude of King Hiero: and consequently, in his dialogue called ‘Hiero’, Xenophon, who shows great discrimination in assigning his parts, attributes to him in particular the function of royal counsellor; and the renowned Tyrtaeus had so great influence with the men of Sparta, that not only did he stimulate them to fresh combat when already routed and almost in despair, but also induced them to decree that certain Helots should, on his advice, be made free: advice than which scarcely any could have been more offensive and repulsive to the pride of Lacedaemonians. Nor did he effect this, I apprehend, by the mere force of his warlike songs, but much more by the belief they entertained of his sacred character: for he had been summoned through the advice of an oracle and poured forth his fiery song at the commencement of the battle, just as the frenzy moved him at the moment. But, as far as I know, we do not read that any rhapsodist or lyric poet was ever visited with the dire resentment of either prince or people because he had too freely reprimanded their failings; while, on the other hand, the Athenian populace condemned
[Page 191]
Phrynichus to pay a pecuniary penalty, and Socrates even to suffer death: the explanation being, I suppose, that among them the belief in a divine influence over song and poets either did not exist or was less pronounced.
Thus far as to the judgement of the common crowd: but we must not suppose that the strength of the poetic outspokenness lay in anything so much as in what I may call a divine audacity which it bred in the poets themselves, as often as any of them felt that a voice, not his own but divinely inspired, spoke in his song. That Pindar held this view, to the great advantage of his poetry, is sufficiently clear from the first Pythian Ode. Give me leave to quote a few lines from the Exordium of this 1504 celebrated poem, in the hope—for that is the aim of all criticism—that some new light may be thrown upon what is so familiar to us all:
O golden lyre, the common treasure of Apollo and the
violet-tressed Muses.
Why does he speak of a ‘common treasure’? Does not Pindar here seek to impress upon Hiero that everything which serves the poet's purpose is far from being concerned with pleasure merely: but is associated with some deity, and meant to carry out his behests: nor can it be slighted without reproach to him as well? He next proceeds to show how important it is for even the blessed hierarchy of heaven itself to be justly regulated by the spirit of poetry and harmony:
The lancèd lightning's everlasting fire
Thou hast extinguish'd, while by thee
On Jove's own sceptre lull'd the Feather'd King
Forgets his awful ministry,
And hangs from either flank the drooping wing:
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
                                         For even
The gods themselves thy searching shaft subdues
By skilled Latoides aim'd in heaven,
Framed in the bosom of the swelling Muse. 1505
[Page 192]
And then, as a warning not to scorn this most solemn messenger from Deity, he thus describes those who oppose Poetry:
But those, whom all-discerning Jove
Abides not, shudder at the sound
The chaste Pierian Damsels move,
On earth or in the restless wave,
Or where in durance underground
The gods' presumptuous foe
Lies, hundred-headed Typhon. 1506
If it be thought over serious to seek the deliberate theory of a philosopher amid the splendour and burning words of a poet, I may add that I do not suggest that Pindar had any formulated doctrine to set forth, but threw it off, as chanced, in the full play of his ardent temperament. Still, even in that tumultuous tide of thought and phrase some more serious consciousness must be presupposed whereby, as a kind of ballast, the vessel of song may hold 1507 a steady and just course, even amid its infinite unbounded and restless ocean. Such lines would be indeed little more than empty sound, were it not for the profound truth of the real essence of Poetry, which runs like a hidden vein of ore through the whole Ode. Briefly: in Pindar's judgement the disciples of the Muse do not seek a light or trivial reward: but rather, they are performing a task entrusted them by the immortal gods.
Moreover, the views which he held about divine things were such as would calm all fear and encourage freedom to the utmost: partly, because he firmly believed in the existence of a world beyond the grave, in which the good are rewarded, the evil punished: partly, because departed heroes and indeed Olympic deities were supposed to hover round even our earthly abode: so that none can fancy that he is ever free from witnesses to his good or evil actions.
[Page 193]
And first of the Gods below: let us take as the best guide to his belief those noble and wellnigh inspired verses in which he consoles Thero in the hour of adversity, and yet at the same time does not flinch from tempering his good fortunes with solemn warnings:
                                         No less he knows
The day fast comes when all men must depart,
   And pay for present pride in future woes.
   The deeds that frantic mortals do
   In this disorder'd nook of Jove's domain,
   All meet their meed; and there's a Judge below
Whose hateful doom inflicts Th' inevitable pain. 1508
The poet seems here discreetly to increase the religious dread of Tartarus, in that he does not, as many have done, depict the punishments of individuals, but simply sketches the whole region in dark outline with a fearful (I might almost say religious) awe. Thus ‘there is who passes doom beneath the earth’, ‘there are who endure pain dreadful to gaze upon’. On the other hand he expatiates on the happiness of the blessed, as if he had been an eyewitness: 1509 first, says he, those who have once or twice died worthily enjoy a mere untroubled ease;
O'er the Good soft suns the while
   Through the mild day, the night serene,
   Alike with cloudless lustre smile,
   Tempering all the tranquil scene.
   Theirs is leisure; vex not they
   Stubborn soil or watery way,
To wring from toil want's worthless bread:
No ills they know, no tears they shed. 1510
But when they have thrice stood the ordeal of life and death, forthwith holy souls are wafted to some one of the islands of the blest where vernal breezes and flowers ever prevail.
There is indeed a blot on these lines, though in strict
[Page 194]
harmony with Pindar's creed, in that he declares all this apparatus of reward and punishment to be reserved for those of noble birth alone. For he congratulates, and at the same time warns, the rich on this very account:
And Wealth more bright with Virtue join'd,
   Brings golden Opportunity,
   The sparkling star, the sun-beam of mankind:
Brings to the rich man's restless heart
   Ambition's splendid cares. 1511
The reason is that he thinks of wealth as bringing leisure with it, which if any man sets himself to employ rightly, he may, like a successful hunter, search out and explore many important questions and become versed in those studies which throw the light of truth on man and his life. ‘If any one hath wealth, he knoweth what lies in the future:’ as to those less fortunate, Pindar is profoundly silent. And in Elysium itself, too, he places it as the consummate felicity of good men that they meet in familiar intercourse Peleus, Cadmus, Achilles, and others from whom the Greek nobility proudly traced their descent. Everything savours of birth and aristocracy, even in Orcus. Yet even here we see a notable proof of the poet's free outspokenness: for those whom he stimulates with the prospect of Elysium are the only men whom he warns to beware of Tartarus: that is, men who hold the first place by birth or wealth.
Here too, as elsewhere, Pindar more than once shows 1512 himself a follower of Pythagoras: as when he tells us how the heroes learnt in their youth:
Before all powers to fear and love
   The god that wields the lightning's fire,
The deep-mouth'd thunder's lord, Saturnian Jove;
   Next, to thy reverend sire,
Through all his life's appointed day,
With her that gave thee thine, like honours pay. 1513
[Page 195]
This reads, I think, like a stereotyped phrase, and probably may be traced back to what were called the ‘golden verses’ of the philosopher.
Let us now come to the second aspect and quality of Pindar's religious piety: with whose fragrant sweetness the whole of his poetry is penetrated. This consists in his constant suggestion that the departed heroes are present with the great nobles he celebrates, at all times and everywhere; yes, and even the higher deities also: especially those from whose stock any particular prince or noble (as was commonly believed) traced his lineage. Thus we have the frequent mention of deities being summoned by night and answering the prayers of mortals whom they held dear:
   At night's dark hour alone he hied
To the rough shore of the loud-bellowing main,
   And called the Trident-sceptred God,
Whose form forthwith beside him stood. 1514
Still more exquisitely fine is the account of Iamus:
Now when fresh youth its golden flower
   Full o'er his blooming cheeks had strew'd,
Alone at night's tempestuous hour
   In Alpheus' midmost stream he stood.
He called his grandsire Neptune's name,
   Wide Ruler of the boisterous deep;
Called on that Archer God whose flame
   Beams on the Delian steep;
For patriot fame he pour'd his prayer
   Beneath the vault of heav'n: ‘My son,’
Replied his Sire's unerring speech, ‘repair
   To yon frequented tract, my Word shall lead thee on.’ 1515
Do we not all but see the youth gazing around him, not knowing in which direction he should turn, since not the least shadow of a form was at hand, but only a kind of
[Page 196]
heavenly voice, to whose assurance he was to commit 1516 himself? Sometimes, too, the deity appears, even when unsummoned: as Pallas to Bellerophon:
                                         Pallas made
For his rude hand the golden rein
   In dazzling dream before him laid—
‘Sleep'st thou, Aeolian king?’ with wakening strain
She cried. ‘Yon fiery steed to rule
Take this bright spell.’ 1517
Thus it is implied that some god, even though there be no tie of kinship, will be at hand to help those who find out new arts.
And finally, there is no mountain or forest solitude, no river course, no shore, one might almost say not a summer breeze, which is not haunted by some diviner power, ready to make known his presence in the hour of need. Every spot is crowded with deities. Thus we meet with that lone-roving deity ( οἰορόλος δαίμων ) who, by his gift of a clod of earth to one of the Argonauts, sealed a bond of friendly treaty between Europe and Libya for all time. 1518 This, too, explains the astonishment of the folk of Thessaly, on the first appearance of Jason, a man clearly of heroic form:
Unknown he stood—‘Apollo's mien
   Is this?’ some gazing wonderer cried,
‘Or his that wooed the Cyprian queen,
   Whose reins the brazen chariot guide?’ 1519
What a striking picture of that golden time when, if I may slightly vary Virgil's well-known verse, ‘men received the life of gods, and saw heroes mingled with the denizens of Heaven.’ 1520
May we not mention here, too, how, even in his own age and in his own concerns, Pindar recognizes a similar
[Page 197]
care bestowed by heaven upon himself, and the close companionship, not indeed of a deity, yet of a heroic spirit? Certainly, at least, he records that Alcmaeon, whose shrine stood near his own dwelling, was at hand with kindly ministry and counsel when he was proceeding on a journey:
Nor with less rapture round Alcmaeon's brows
   Will I the wreath entwine,
Less bathe him with the dews of song:
   For he my neighbour is: his shrine
Guards with its shade my hallow'd house: 1521
   As to Earth's central dome I came,
      His spirit cross'd my startled way,
Touch'd with his sire's prophetic flame,
   And told the triumphs of the day. 1522
Nor does the poet exhibit as taking part in our daily life only those august beings—divine or heroic—which the piety of universal Greece held in reverence; but he asserts that the spirits of his ancestors are present to every man, and are at least witnesses of all he does, whether good or ill. He can conceive no more potent stimulus to excite high-born athletes than to summon from the shades below some one of their ancestors as a spectator, and to picture the contest as taking place in his presence. In solemn tones, assuredly, and such as reach not far from revealed truth, he claims for the departed their share also in the rejoicing and glory, whenever their sons or grandchildren or descendants are crowned victors:
Their kindred's rite the dead shall share;
Its praise departed Virtue claims:
The trump of Glory echoes in the tomb.
From Fame, the child of Hermes, Iphion
Heard ere he died, and shall delighted tell
Callimachus Th' Olympian Crown that fell
By Jove's good gift to his distinguished son. 1523
[Page 198]
Elsewhere, in a lighter strain, yet using the tone of command in virtue of a poet's privilege, he dispatches a nymph as an envoy to the shades below:
      Go now, sweet Echo of my lyre,
   To pale Proserpine's melancholy dome
   With thy proud tidings to the Sire;
   Tell Cleodamus, that his youthful son
In Pisa's glorious vale the braid
   From Jove's illustrious games hath won
And twined the plumes of conquest round his head. 1524
By this time it must be quite clear how just and proper, throughout this discussion of Pindar's outspokenness, has been our persistent reference to his religious creed. For what wrath, either of mob or king, could he fear who fully believed himself of the elect number of those destined to Elysian bliss? What unpopularity among men would 1525 he shrink from who held that his own life was passed amid the glorious illumination and companionship both of immortal gods and his own ancestors? To come, then, to the conclusion, to which we have long been tending: I suggest that the chief function assigned by Providence to this outspoken freedom accorded to lyric poets was to keep alive some of those holier feelings and thoughts which otherwise would quickly have returned to heaven which gave them: an office which belonged in earlier days to rhapsodists and lyrists, afterwards to tragedians; last of all to the band of philosophers. And thus was brought about the truth which we are taught in Holy Scripture, ‘He left not himself without witness,’ 1526 even before that purer Light, never to be overshadowed, arose and cast abroad its illuminating rays.
To conclude: there may, unless I mistake, be found even in the history of later centuries facts which seem to lend no slight confirmation to this view as to the foundations
[Page 199]
of Pindar's outspokenness. What weapon was it which enabled that great city of God, when Rome was overthrown and she herself was, in some sort, a captive, to make her wild conquerors her captives? It was her independent spirit and the outspokenness of her divine message: and whence came such entire independence? In the first place, her children knew themselves assuredly immortal; and, secondly, they were fully persuaded that their God and His holy angels attended them at all times and in all places. And we may even conjecture Pindar to have been supported by some vague and distant anticipation of these things. Thus it was, in this respect also, the will of the great Supreme Power to maintain a kind of analogy, wherein earlier and imperfect shadows should in some degree run parallel to the final and perfect realities.
If these views appeal to any as not altogether unfounded, they will, no doubt, agree with me that it was not without the marked guidance of Providence that the Greeks were gifted, in the earliest days of their poetry, with that splendid line of three poets, each of whom in his own order is not only a primary poet, but also a model to all others: Homer, I mean, Aeschylus, and Pindar. And since, however, 1527 enough, consistently with our plan, has been said of their poetic work, we must now pass to an order of poetry different in character and coming from a different country: but before that I must say a few words concerning Sophocles and Euripides; as I should not like any one to complain that but one among the three lights of Tragedy has been included by me among primary poets.
[Page 200]
LECTURE XXVIII 1528
Doubts suggested as to the claims of Sophocles to be included among primary poets. First, because, in the sphere of human life, he has no interest in people of minor importance: everything moves on too dignified a scale: there is not sufficient variety in the characters. Next, as regards the face of earth and sky, though he has given us most charming passages, both in the Ajax and Philoctetes, yet such instances are fewer than they should be in a primary poet. Then he is chiefly praised on the score of his style and his skill in construction of plot: neither of which factors touch the heart of original and genuine poetry, especially as he sometimes borders on what is repulsive: aims at scenic and popular effects: may often be detected in imitation: and was both in his life and in his writings even and easy-going ( Εὔκολος ).
I propose now to make some few remarks on the plays of Sophocles, and to consider the especial rank which we should accord this great writer among poets: and I perceive, indeed, that I have undertaken a task in which I run the risk of giving no slight offence. For you know how keenly people resent any question being raised concerning the merits of great poets, and especially in the case of those to whom they themselves have been devoted in their youth. For some reason they seem to take such criticism as a personal wrong or insult: just as if these writers with whose poems they had been familiar from childhood were connected with them either in blood or by 1529 some sacred bond; and this is indeed a proof how great is the influence of genuine and divinely inspired poetry, when any imitation of it, however deceptive, touches the mind so deeply.
And perhaps in the case of Sophocles there is a peculiar and special reason why any one who, at this time of day, shall question the right of one who has been so highly
[Page 201]
praised to the title of a primary poet should be unusually liable to give offence. For with Sophocles or Euripides the most part of our ingenuous youth make their first acquaintance with the real charms of the Greek tongue. It is mainly in the study of their writings that the minds of boys, who have become tired of light amatory poems, are wont to learn lessons of deeper quality. When they reach these studies they are urged to greater effort, in the hope of really understanding the beauty of ancient tragedy. No wonder, therefore, if they look back for the springs of poetry itself to those writers, thanks to whom they first began to see that there was anything real in poetry.
And there is this further difficulty that among all, without exception, who have ever written poetry, no one has ever earned more varied praise, whether from ancient or modern critics and readers. So that the ‘buskin of Sophocles’ (as Virgil has called it 1530 ) has almost become a proverbial synonym for Tragedy.
But, put shortly, the position comes simply to this: we must admit that we have been expending our time and labour upon an idle fancy, unless we are prepared to apply our theory to the most renowned writers just as strictly as to one who is of small account and gifts. The central point of our theory is that the essence of all poetry is to be found, not in high-wrought subtlety of thought, nor in pointed cleverness of phrase, but in the depths of the heart and the most sacred feelings of the men who write. Consequently, nothing will tend more conclusively to strengthen our contention than if, selecting one or two of those poets who are held of highest account, we take them as a test of the theory. The inquiry will mainly resolve itself into two questions: first, whether Sophocles exhibits traces of those qualities which usually show the presence of the true 1531 vein and real force of poetry; and, secondly, if we decide
[Page 202]
that he cannot justly be ranked as a primary poet, we must explain what is the real ground of the praise which by general consent he has won. And should we fail to find any genuine spring of inspiration in his work, while there are not wanting amply sufficient reasons for his great reputation, then I apprehend that, though he cannot be called a primary poet, yet we may class him with those who have become poets in virtue of consummate skill and culture, rather than in virtue of natural instincts.
And, to begin with, I may as well frankly confess the truth, that hitherto, though a careful student of Sophocles, I have not been able to trace any one deep feeling and pervading passion running through the whole of his work. Thus I, necessarily, am doubtful whether anything of the sort possessed him. Of course, I am well aware that we can hardly infer the general disposition of a writer from the impression made upon a single reader. For what one critic is competent to gauge the varying genius of so many great poets? And I hope that some one else may be so fortunate, some time, as to trace some such constant vein of feeling, which hitherto has eluded my own careful search. I should certainly yield to none in pleasure and delight at the discovery. For do we not all count it as real gain when any new fact is brought to light concerning the sources of the best poetry and the inmost feelings of great men?
Still, I can hardly expect that any one will easily discover in our good Sophocles native springs of inspiration of this quality: I, indeed, entirely miss in him those glowing emotions of the mind which spring to birth spontaneously; and this, both in his choruses and in his discussions and dialogues. Let us see how he acquits himself in situations whose whole strength is wont to lie in generous warmth of feeling.
1532 These are concerned either with strong human feelings, or with the whole aspect of sky, earth, and the changes of
[Page 203]
the seasons. Are we, then, to conclude, some one may ask, that Sophocles shows small power in all that relates to human feelings? Does he who placed before us on the stage Electra, Philoctetes, Hercules, and, above all, Oedipus, seem to you to have utterly failed in this region? Sophocles, who, in his presentment of Ajax, so happily blended a warlike and ungoverned arrogance with the consciousness of a frenzy which he cannot wholly shake off?
Dost thou behold this once intrepid Ajax,
The brave, the mighty, long for strength renowned,
And dauntless courage in the bloody field,
Dost thou behold him? O what laughter now,
What vile reproach must he sustain! 1533
I, for one, should most readily believe that many readers have found themselves moved in no small degree by these lines: for what affects us more deeply than the laments wrung from a noble and brave man, as he struggles against the hard conditions of his life? But the grounds on which I hesitate to allow that Sophocles, when he drew this picture, was wholly rapt and inspired, as those who are poets by Nature and necessity are wont to be, may be stated as follows. First, because all his labour and interest are expended on the single character of Ajax, to the almost complete disregard of those who play minor parts. For neither in Tecmessa, as far as I can see, nor in the Atridae, nor even in Ulysses as depicted by Sophocles, does anything whatever stand out as a clear distinguishing mark sufficient to separate any one of them from the ordinary run of mankind. They, one and all, simply say and do such things as may assist the plot, or contribute to a discussion on some question of casuistry, such as are constantly met with in the later Greek Drama: but of their real self and of all that belongs to it there is utter silence. On the contrary, in Shakespeare's plays, as we all know, 1534
[Page 204]
even the characters playing the most insignificant parts successfully claim their author's interest—not, of course, in equal degree, but in a similar way. With him we never find a countryman who happens to be standing by, or a soldier or a common jester, or any other whosoever, but has assigned him, in the word or two he has to say, something which suggests a character of his own. Thus we accord to Shakespeare, as of pre-eminent right, the high commendation of holding nothing that is human alien to himself, seeing that he was able to enter into the mind, the character, the very features of all classes of men in all parts of the world. In this respect he may be compared to Nature herself, which is wont to frame and adorn with minute detail, not merely regions which are, by reason of their striking beauty, visited and admired by all, but even obscure nooks not easily penetrated by the rays of the sun or by the eye of the sightseer. One and the same Nature, with one and the same loving care, adorns alike majestic oak-tree and the minutest specimen of fungus or fern which springs up under the shadow of that kingly tree. And perhaps we may in the same connexion compare the careful love of detail which our ancestors showed when building their churches, taking pains to carve and ornament the highest nook of the ceiling, the hinder part of the pillars, and everything that was far removed from the sun's light and men's observation. Consequently, when a poet lavishes his whole care on a single character, we judge that he is not modelled in Nature's mould, but on some rules of art. Whether, indeed, in our good Sophocles’ case there is really any room for doubt on this point I leave skilled judges to decide.
I will add another point: those writers who have had the power of sympathizing with all frames of mind and all emotions—a quality in which Shakespeare was pre-eminent, if not unique, among our own poets and Homer
[Page 205]
among the Greeks—have hardly been able to avoid introducing trivial and grotesque incidents in the very crisis of gravest events. For such is generally the case in real life: 1535 serious things and mere trifles, laughable things and things that cause pain, are wont to be mixed in strangest medley. It is necessary, then, that Tragedy, as being a mirror of life, must leave room for an element of comic humour. But Sophocles’ taste was, it would seem, too severe, his fastidiousness too great; to allow him to admit such a blending, such a hotch-potch of opposite qualities. We find in him no character like the soldier of the Agamemnon or the nurse in the Choephoroe : each of which has the like motive— to impress upon us, namely, that even men of the lowest rank, the sansculottes, occupied with meanest tasks, share in and understand life's sorrows and misfortunes. With Sophocles all is ornate, solemn, of set and formal speech: whence it is clear enough that he did not possess that source of inspiration which those enjoy who are by nature both alive to, and indeed sympathize with, every care.
But, then, who more felicitously skilful than Sophocles, in depicting those who are tortured by extreme suffering? Only recall to mind Hercules on Mount Oeta, and the magnificent throng of words with which he himself describes the onset of the disease which gains on him every moment:
For, cleaving to my side, it eats within,
Consuming all my flesh, and from my lungs,
Still winding in, it drains my arteries,
Drinks the warm blood, and I am done to death,
My whole frame bound with this unheard-of chain. 1536
These lines are, indeed, beyond all praise: and I remember how one who was amongst the most learned men that I can remember, having read this passage over again, impulsively exclaimed ‘Bravo, Sophocles! what perfect art!’ And we certainly cannot deny it: yet I fear that
[Page 206]
testimony such as this rather snatches away the crown of primary rank from the poet's brow than places it there. 1537 For surely Sophocles has here with consummate art described the agony from without rather than seemed himself to weep with him that wept. Just compare these lines with the lamentations uttered by the Hebrew writers, such as those of David, Job, Hezekiah, who, moved by a Spirit higher than human, have recorded in poetic form the effect and result wrought upon wretched mortals by tortured limbs and drooping heart and the whole array of diseases and bodily pains. It will be found beyond all question that their bewailings correspond strikingly with the expressions met with every day in such cases in real life: short and agonized ejaculations being, one by one, wrung from their inmost hearts, as if by the very force of their suffering. Then they range sea and land, so to speak, in quest of comparisons, if by possibility they may describe in speech their secret feelings of utter misery: while the Hercules of Sophocles seems to state in set speech what any onlooker infers, rather than what he himself inly experiences.
It may be questioned, too, whether in Sophocles wholly different characters, when whelmed in similar calamities, exhibit sufficient difference, one from the other; whether they follow, that is, the rule and, as it were, inviolable decree of Nature, never so ordering her workings that any two living creatures, much less any two human beings, should correspond each to each in every detail. It is only one who not merely thoroughly grasps this principle, but furthermore, so expresses it in his poetry, that any reader may be conscious of a real bond of sympathy between him and each separate character, that can be adjudged and classed as a primary poet by special right—so far, at all events, as concerns that domain of Poetry which touches men's feelings and emotions.
[Page 207]
To dwell just a little more at length upon the point to which we have thus been led: notice how very slight is the difference between Hercules and Philoctetes as regards their bearing under stress of pain. If indeed we except one detail—the fact that with Hercules the thought repeatedly 1538 presses of his disgrace, as he feels it, at being betrayed to tears like a woman by stress of anguish—all the rest is simply like Philoctetes.
Perhaps I may be met here with the question, whether it is quite fair to draw conclusions from bodily pains: since such suffering affects every one in much the same manner, and that a very simple one: so that we need not expect to see any difference between one person and another. Let us test the question, then, in another way, though still keeping to Philoctetes. For as he is comparable to Hercules in respect of disease and bodily pain, so, as regards the contempt and slight he experienced from the Atridae, he resembles Ulysses. Well, each of them inveighs against his enemies, not merely to like effect, but even in identical phrase and expression. We are at once conscious that the writer has taken little pains to assign to each expressions of resentment appropriate to his character. Nor is this a solitary instance; if we compare Antigone with Electra, or Creon enraged and denouncing the augur, with King Oedipus in like passion, do we not there, too, utterly fail to trace that natural variety of tone and hue, and those true utterances which break from the depths of the heart? Once more, the Argive Chrysothemis and the Theban Ismene, actually, in almost the same set identical words, each disowns her sister's scheme. And it will be noticed by any one, that while only seven plays of Sophocles survive to us, three times does he employ the familiar device of an ominous silence on the part of high-born women who, on simply hearing of some calamity, forthwith hang or stab themselves. First, we are told of Jocasta:
[Page 208]
Why has thy queen, O Oedipus, gone forth
In her wild sorrow rushing? Much I fear
Lest from such silence evil deeds burst out. 1539
1540 Then, in the Antigone , the Chorus is perplexed what to think of Eurydice, the mother of Haemon:
What dost thou make of this? She turneth back,
Before one word, or good or ill she speaks. 1541
Lastly, in the case of Deianira too, just the same formula for dying (if I may so term it) is employed:
Why creep'st thou off in silence? Know'st thou not
That silence but admits the accuser's charge? 1542
Some writers, of course, through a kind of carelessness, often repeat themselves, while they nevertheless show discrimination as to their characters and evince by other indications, and especially by their fully charged feeling, that they possess the native spring of Poetry. This is notably so, unless I am mistaken, in the case of our own Shakespeare. But, trust me, Sophocles laboured under no carelessness of this sort. Who of all the poets is more exquisite in rhythm? What artist ever handled the Greek tongue with greater power, to make it express whate'er he would? But I should say that the question stands much in this way; Sophocles, as his contemporaries bear witness, was pre-eminently of tranquil and easy temper, little liable to be deeply moved by grief, either on his own account or for the sake of others. For this is what I understand by that ‘easy temper’ ( Εὐκολία ) which is the special quality of praise accorded to him by Aristophanes:
an easy-minded soul, and always was. 1543
Small wonder, then, if, in that region of Poetry which
[Page 209]
depends on the more subtle motions of the soul, he should show himself less happily gifted.
But I am far indeed from denying that the minds of all men, who are not wholly wanting in appreciation, are most keenly affected from time to time by his work, and, in especial, by perusal of the renowned Oedipus . But this effect is, I think, produced less by any powerful feeling evoked in us by the actors than by the tenor of the plot. 1544 It is the story itself, not the character of Oedipus, which seizes and captivates our minds: and this interest is by no means without its own special charm: but whether it can be justly attributed to the poet's art I shall not attempt to discuss here.
Passing, then, from these for the present, let us next consider what may be called the other province of the poetic kingdom: and in this (I will confess it) I am almost inclined to allow Sophocles primary rank: as you recollect, it is pre-eminently concerned with the influence of Nature and the charm of scenery. In the treatment of this theme the first place among the Sophoclean plays is held, by general consent, both on the ground of sweetness and impressiveness, by the Oedipus at Colonos . Indeed, the aged Sophocles, when conducting the aged Oedipus to his native Athens, where he was to find a destined resting-place, could hardly fail to be strangely moved and inspired by the thought of the familiar spots, by the memories of his boyhood, above all, by the presence of the deities whom in his boyhood he and his parents had worshipped. Then how sacred, how impressive, how far removed from the routine of daily life, was the fact that not merely his native country Attica, the common haven and asylum for all sufferers, but even his own town, his own native soil, nay, the rocks, fountains, and trees which had been familiar to him from his tenderest years, should have Guardian Spirits of special kindliness. So, he hastens at the very
[Page 210]
opening of the tragedy to make reference to the place most dear to him:
My father, woe-worn Oedipus! afar,
If I see right, are towers that shield a town;
This spot is holy, one may clearly tell,
Full as it is of laurel, olive, vine,
And many a nightingale within sings sweetly.
Rest thy limbs here upon this rough-hewn rock. 1545
In exactly the same spirit we have the frequent praise, 1546 throughout the play, of all that concerns Attica, and in especial the picture of the last resting-place of the dying old man, which is described almost by rule and line: so that any one who will may follow his footsteps and not diverge a hair's breadth from the hallowed spot:
And when he neared the threshold's broken slope,
With steps of bronze fast rooted in the soil,
He stopped on one of paths that intersect,
Close to the hollow urn where still are kept
The pledges true of Perithos and Theseus;
And stopping at mid-distance between it,
And the Thorikian rock, and hollow pear,
And the stone sepulchre, he sat him down. 1547
By such indications of the actual spots and by obscure allusions frequently made to the near presence of guardian deities, the writer brings it about, that a tragedy which more than all the rest lags in plot and action and proceeds haltingly, yet attracts and long holds our attention with powerful grip: however often I read it, I am moved as deeply as were those who, when they first heard it, decreed the prize with fullest honours to Sophocles, though his powers seemed already to some to be failing through age. Hence, even to me, it appears almost sacrilege to deny inspiration to such a man. One is reminded of Virgil, and might almost believe that, all unknown to himself,
[Page 211]
some contributory streamlet of that part of his poetry which depends on the delight in natural things may have trickled down to him from Sophocles.
And we shall find not a little that strengthens this opinion, when we turn back to the Ajax . For in that play men's fates and emotions are exquisitely blended with the various beauty of sea, shore, and river. As when the sailors in quest of their lost leader invoke the spirits haunting the region:
   Who, then, will tell me; who
   Of fisher's loving toil,
   Plying his sleepless task, 1548
   Or who of Nymphs divine
   That haunt Olympos’ height,
   Or which of all the streams
   Where Bosporos flows fast,
Will tell if they have seen him anywhere,
   Wandering, the vexed in soul. 1549
Again, the same men, more than once, with a sort of home-sick gaze, look back on their native land, not without a weary disgust of the Trojan soil:
What joy remaineth for me?
Would I were there, where the rock,
Thick-wooded and washed by the waves,
Hangs o'er the face of the deep,
Under Sunion's broad jutting peak,
That there we might hail, once again,
Athens, the holy, the blest. 1550
We can fancy that we actually see the vessel sailing along the familiar shore, the sailors standing up on the deck and joyfully hailing their native land.
Then this too:
                                         O glorious Salamis!
Thou dwellest blest within thy sea-girt shores,
   Admired of all men still;
[Page 212]
While I, poor fool, long since abiding here
   In Ida's grassy mead,
   Winter and summer too,
Dwell, worn with woe, through months innumerable. 1551
Is not that an exact picture of the longing with which wanderers, far from home, turn their eyes back to their accustomed haunts? Islanders and used to the sea, they think slightly of the downs and meadows under Mount Ida, of that low-lying, tree-shaded region, those ‘meadowy pastures of the sheep’; as compared with the open shore, the steep cliffs of their home, with the ocean breezes around them.
On this theme, however, there is another strange fact to be noted, namely, that men, far off from home and weighed down by some grief, are wont to consider the very 1552 regions themselves, which have become familiar by long association, as being comrades and sharers in their sorrow. Consequently, when bidden to leave them, even for their own country and for freedom, they will feel a certain regret at the prospect of being separated from the objects which had been, perhaps through many years, a solace and comfort to them. Whoever would thoroughly penetrate the secret causes of this fact of human nature will perhaps find himself inevitably compelled to rise to things higher and diviner, and to consider the whole subject of Poetry on that side of it where it touches the wisdom of Heaven. If you ask for illustrations, you will find the noblest in the story which is told about a castle on the Lake of Geneva, 1553 when the one survivor among many captives was reluctant to be relieved of his chains, and could not, without wrench and effort, resign the bare walls, the plash of waters, the cell's cold stone floor, the cracked walls in many places admitting the light and air of heaven. With this single exception, which will to many perhaps appear
[Page 213]
incredible and like a morbid dream, I doubt indeed whether in any author we shall find more striking examples of this clinging affection, than in Sophocles’ portrayal of Ajax and of Philoctetes.
And indeed, when Ajax has become weary of his life and looks forward eagerly to his final rest in death, even then he is held back for a while by an indefinable sense of sorrowful regret at the thought of leaving rivers, caverns, and woods which, by a campaign of ten long years, had become almost as companions and friends to him:
O ye paths of the wave!
O ye caves by the sea!
O thou glade by the shore!
Long time, long time my feet
On Troïa's soil ye kept;
But never, never more
Breathing the breath of life;
Let the wise hear and heed.
O streams, Scamandros’ streams
Hard by, to Argives kind,
Never again shall ye see
This man who calls to you now. 1554
By the very flow of the lines, sweet and wonderful as 1555 it is, Sophocles has taught us here how deeply it touches a man's spirit to be wrenched from regions made dear by long intercourse: and this is more striking, if we remember Ajax's high spirit and indomitable temper.
Then, in the Philoctetes , nothing throughout the whole play so touches us as the frequent mention of his cave, the mountains, the rivers, indeed even the birds and beasts, by whose friendly influences the sorely stricken exile had somewhat lightened the burden of his griefs. This is why, at the very beginning of the poem, we have our attention carefully drawn, in vivid outline, to his unlovely retreat, more like the lair of a wild beast:
[Page 214]
                                         But thy task it is
To do thine office now, and search out well
Where lies a cavern here with double mouth,
Where in the winter twofold sunny side
Is found to sit in, while in summer heat
The breeze sends slumber through the tunnell'd vault;
And just below, a little to the left,
Thou may'st perchance a stream of water see,
If still it flow there. 1556
Hence, when betrayed by Neoptolemus, Philoctetes does not make the same appeals that others do in the same plight: he does not invoke the Gods, nor the Furies: he only appeals to his island, and the old familiar places:
O creeks! O cliffs out-jutting in the deep!
O all ye haunts of beasts that roam the hills!
O rocks that go sheer down, to you I wail
(None other do I know to whom to speak),
To you who were my old familiar friends,
The things this son of great Achilles does;
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
O cave with double opening, once again
I enter thee stript bare, my means of life
Torn from me. I shall waste away alone
In this my dwelling, slaying with this bow
Nor wingéd bird, nor beast that roams the hills:
But I myself, alas! shall give a meal
To those who gave me mine, and whom I chased
Now shall chase me; and I, in misery,
Shall pay in death the penalty of death
By me inflicted. 1557
1558 Finally, when, as he believes, about to be left to languish in exile, it is by their companionship and comfort that he seeks to soothe his grief:
   O cave of hollow rock,
Now hot, now icy cold,
And I was doomed, ah me!
To leave thee never more;
[Page 215]
But e'en in death thou still wilt be to me
   My one true helping friend. 1559
O all ye wingéd game,
And tribes of bright-eyed deer,
Who on these high lawns fed,
No more from this my home
Will ye allure me forth.
I wield not in my hands
The strength I had of old
(Ah me!) from those my darts;
Full carelessly this place
Is barred against you now,
No longer fearful. 1560
Moreover, he shows that he shall feel regret for them in future days, even when he has achieved a triumphant release and full happiness. I shall quote once more the oft-quoted lines, both for their intrinsic beauty and because they are more appropriate than any to my present subject:
   Come, then, I leave this isle,
   And speak my parting words:
   Farewell, O roof, long time
   My one true guard and friend:
   And ye, O nymphs that sport
   In waters or in fields;
   Strong roar of waves that break
   On jutting promontory,
   Where oft my head was wet
   (Though hid in far recess)
   With blasts of stormy South:
   And oft the mount that bears
   The name of Hermes gave
   Its hollow loud lament,
   Echoing my stormy woe;
   And now, ye streams and fount
   Lykian, where haunt the wolves,
   We leave you, leave you now,
   Who ne'er had dreamt of this.
[Page 216]
Farewell, O Lemnos, girt by waters round,
   With fair breeze send me on
   Right well, that none may blame,
   Where Fate, the mighty, leads. 1561
We cannot help feeling that this most exquisite Farewell was due from Philoctetes, as much as it is due from a youth about to leave his country that he should seek a parent's embrace and blessing.
1562 Who will deny that lines like these have a genuine inspiration and are ‘sweeter than honey’? But I fear that they will be found too rare in Sophocles to allow them to be taken as a test of the quality of his poetry as a whole. Yet had it not been his lot to grow old in the shelter of a cultured city life, such as was that of distinguished men at Athens, I believe he would have afforded many more such illustrations; chiefly, because, if we may trust tradition, such was his rooted attachment to his home and native ground, so ‘extremely fond of the Athenians’ (to use their own description of him) was he, that he would accept no invitation, not even of the greatest monarch, which involved leaving his own country. If, then, any one wishes to place him in the circle of primary poets, on the score of his love and devotion to his own country, I shall make no objection, though I could wish for more numerous or more decisive evidences of this sort, or at any rate that such as there are should bear clearer marks of strong feeling, and should seem to gush forth freely rather than to be fashioned and polished by art.
Moreover, may I not submit that his case is perhaps all the weaker, because of the very praises which by general consent he has won for himself? These praises, I should say, are hardly at all concerned with any quality which is thoroughly cognate with and common to genuine poetry. For I note that Sophocles approves himself to the great
[Page 217]
majority of readers mainly for two reasons: either because he is so finished and subtle in his diction, and easily stands out as the most learned among the whole learned Greek race: or because he weaves the general sequence of his plot so cleverly and cunningly. Of these two grounds, I infer that the first specially commended itself to the ancient Greeks, the other to our own times, and chiefly to the judgement of those who hold with Aristotle that the chief merit of a poem lies in the action. But in each case we may be allowed to question whether they necessarily touch the real art and poetic gift, or may not 1563 merely be viewed as their formal part and machinery.
First, then, let us consider the charm of his perfect Attic Greek, his consummate use of words and sentences: as we all know, so far as this is concerned, Sophocles was almost reverenced as divine in the critical judgement of the Greek ear: at least, if we may believe that the popular vote and taste is fairly reflected in the well-known and beautiful epigram:
Gently, where lies our Sophocles in sleep,
Gently, green ivy, with light tendrils creep:
There may the rose-leaf too and cluster'd vine
Climb round his honour'd tomb in graceful twine:
Sweet were his lays, with sense and feeling fraught,
Alike by Muses and by Graces taught. 1564
Observe that the ivy-leaves, ‘the meed of learned brows,’ 1565 crown his head especially because ‘sense and feeling’ are embodied in ‘sweet lays’: and how great was the power and attraction of this among the Greeks, especially with the Athenians, can, I think, scarcely be conjectured, much less realized, in our own duller clime and by our less sensitive ear. But to those who hold that ‘beauty of language’ is one of the very sources and fountain-heads of Poetry and
[Page 218]
must colour the whole stream, I should be inclined to say that they fall into precisely the same mistake as one who should maintain that we apprehend those objects which touch our external sense with the body, not the mind: whereas all philosophy which is at once sane and noble teaches us it is not with our eyes we see the things we see, nor are sounds heard by the ear: but that the mind withdrawn in its own dwelling makes use of these agents as only messengers and reporters. In the same way Poetry uses both words and metres as mere instruments, just like a queen employing her messengers: they are not dominant, not of first importance; the heavenly flame is not by their means enkindled, but merely transmitted. Hence it follows, with regard to any poet who by general consent is mainly 1566 praised for the richness and beauty of his diction, that we may fairly question if he has anything in common with those who are made poets by Nature and true feeling before they occupy themselves with literary style and metrical form.
With regard to the second ground of praise, which is given to poets who cleverly construct their plots, who contrive intricate situations, and yet through them all guide the thread of the story to the point which their scheme or truthfulness to facts requires, perhaps the question will be more difficult: especially as we have to reckon with such weighty authorities as Aristotle and his followers, who emphasize the ‘plot’ or story, as being of greater importance than all other elements of a drama, and place Sophocles before all other tragedians as being the most skilled and consummate artist in construction and plot. Moreover, almost the whole of this line of argument is wont to be based upon the Oedipus Tyrannus , as if it were the only or at least the main proof of their position. Now their authority would have greater weight with me, did I not observe that they themselves defer too much to the
[Page 219]
popular judgement. I find that all through Aristotle's Art of Poetry there is an underlying appeal to the people and the gallery: that, invariably, it is the external form and feature of the poem, not the inner spirit of the poet, which is looked to and considered: and that this is especially noticeable when Aristotle develops his reasons for holding that in the composition of Tragedy the plot should be assigned the chief place. Though he has the air of offering many reasons, yet the sum of them all is contained in this single one: ‘Those parts of Tragedy, by means of which it becomes most interesting and affecting, are parts of the fable : I mean, revolutions and discoveries .’ 1567 As though, forsooth, the reputation of great poets is to stand or fall by theatrical applause, by the number and lungs of the shouters.
The man who has made up his mind to be governed by decrees of this sort must needs rank some trivial story, such as may be met with nowadays in any bookseller's shop, above the Iliad itself. Indeed, people who take up such a book cannot relinquish it till read through to the end: so enthralled are they by the skilful intricacy of its tangled skein. Such a theory, I imagine, scarcely ever, if 1568 ever, happens in reading Homer or Aeschylus: more truly inspired Poetry elects to be separated by a vast gulf from mere skill in story-telling. But it is my deliberate opinion, however, that true genuine Poetry may show itself also in the construction of the plot: if a writer of surpassing power were to set forth the changes and chances of mortal life, the issues of conduct, and the mocking sport of Fortune, not with intent that his books may be devoured by boys and girls for mere amusement, but that he himself may enjoy a profounder sense of the laws which silently control and govern all things. This, I repeat, I acknowledge to be true Poetry: and most likely to be found in
[Page 220]
men whose minds are thoroughly imbued with sacred prophecy or history.
But to attribute so splendid and lofty an aim to Sophocles, even in the Oedipus , is impossible, first and chiefly because the details of the story are so shocking: indeed, to confess the truth, it has always seemed to me to border on that class of story which Aristotle himself rejects as being monstrous and repulsive, and it goes against our right feeling that one who is innocent of any crime should be so harshly punished, and should leave the stage without hope, without even an implied suggestion that at some future time his fate may take a happier turn: just as if some relentless Genie played with all men's fortunes as with his. Aeschylus, unless I am mistaken, has a far higher religious sense: when cruel and wicked deeds are wrought, he takes greater pains to hint at the real presence of Deity and at the truth that One above will both exact due penalties and restore those who have suffered undeservedly. But when once we feel, in connexion with such an important element, any vague suspicion of this kind, I am afraid that our minds tend to turn with disgust from those oft-praised ‘revolutions and discoveries’, and that all the more the more cleverly they are contrived. So, while I fully allow that no artist ever wrought the web of his story with greater art or skill: yet it may well be questioned if this very skilfulness may not somewhat detract from his praise as a poet: for he is without true 1569 religious feeling; without pity; and without that tender love of humanity with which Virgil is wont to trace the story of unhappy and suffering mortals.
Nor ought I to omit to add this: Sophocles excelled beyond all other dramatists in all that relates to scenic apparatus and device: and there is no need to demonstrate how perilous is such a gift, and how near it is to elaborate histrionic devices. Aeschylus also is said to have
[Page 221]
enlarged in many respects the machinery of the stage. But observe, how even here each is true to his own character. Aeschylus indeed, if I understand aright, was the first to substitute tragic representation for lyric songs, and only introduced such changes in the character and number of actors as was absolutely needed for a simple and dignified treatment. Sophocles brought on a third actor; he had his stage painted, and increased by one-fourth the number of the Chorus: the one effect of all the changes being to transfer the pleasure from the ear to the eye of the spectator. Indeed, it is said that he sometimes designedly wrote tragedies in order to suit this or that actor. Did time allow, I could point out many instances taken from his plays, which would wholly fail of their effect unless the scene were presented before the eye on the stage: and yet Aristotle himself declares that ‘the effect of Tragedy can be felt without representation and actors’. But let me ask, what is the end and purpose of introducing in the Electra the shrouded body of Clytemnestra, just after the murder, as if it were that of Orestes: whereby Aegisthus is first deceived and then bewildered and appalled. To what purpose the feigned contrition of Ajax, the long-delayed contrition of Deianira and of Creon? What other justification of these changes of feeling can there possibly be but that they aimed at keeping the attention of spectators and readers in suspense? All such things have to do with the stage effect, not with the author.
Then we note that Sophocles from time to time presents on the stage, what is not merely hateful, but actually monstrous and horrible, such as Philoctetes’ wound, the 1570 tunic of Hercules, the mangled eyes of Oedipus. Again, there is much too great elaboration of details, when any long narrative or casuistical discussion is introduced, with the result (and no result can be more offensive) that the poet very often is playing the part of a rhetorician or
[Page 222]
sophist, or even of some pushing demagogue or would-be politician. Assuredly, if Sophocles is open to blame in these particulars, any one may see that one simple explanation accounts for them all. Everything he wrote suggests a man whose poetry did not flow spontaneously as theme and feeling urged, but was with great effort and toil worked up to a point which would suit the stage and be more pleasing to the Athenian populace.
Then even the ancients bear witness that he was an imitator (‘he culls beauties from each poet’, says the Scholiast), and no one who has even dipped into Homer or Aeschylus before reading Sophocles can fail to notice it. This, indeed, is only an indication that a writer is without native poetic feeling, where it appears to result, not from carelessness or rapid composition, but from art and design, and especially in passages which are introduced in order to touch the reader's feelings. Let those who claim primary rank for Sophocles tell us, whether we may not fairly assign to the latter class the dialogue of Ajax and Tecmessa, which closely follows Hector's well-known farewell to Andromache: or the whole conception of the Electra , which is almost exactly on the lines of Aeschylus' Choephoroe , except that Sophocles held it right to dispense with all the constant reference to religion, by which alone Aeschylus justified his story against the charge of impiety.
But if (and it is commonly alleged) we infer the celebrated ‘easy temper’ ( Εὐκολία ) of Sophocles to have been closely allied to the licence of his day, there will be less reason for surprise that such a distinguished and graceful 1571 writer was without genuine poetic inspiration. We all know that nothing more dulls and weakens sincere and genuine feeling than an indulgent and pleasure-loving way of life. The admirers of Sophocles, then, may be the less troubled if he be degraded from patrician rank, as we shall allow him to take the very first place among those who
[Page 223]
are poets made, not poets born: yet even in giving this verdict, we ought perhaps to make an exception in favour of that one special merit which has been before referred to, namely, that he seems often to have spoken with full and natural feeling whenever some nearer reference to places, especially those dear to himself, chanced to offer itself.
[Page 224]
LECTURE XXIX 1572
Euripides’ title to rank among primary poets. Four reasons why some have demurred to his claims examined and explained. It is finally maintained—special stress being laid upon the characters of Iphigenia, Antigone, and Polyxena—that while he dwelt upon and praised with sincere delight the common feelings and affections of home life, yet that he lingered most willingly and lovingly on qualities of sterner vein and such as are closely allied to asceticism. The charges against him of misogyny and even godlessness considered.
Just as in ordinary life it not unfrequently happens that the opinion which we have for years held of some particular man, even of one with whom we have lived on terms of intimacy, has to be changed or modified, when light has been thrown upon the meaning of his habits and way of life, on that side of his character which perhaps before seemed wanting in tenderness or wisdom: so no one who has given himself even but slightly to the study of the Muse can doubt that the same experience meets us in connexion with Poetry. For indeed, to confess the truth, the problem of the central significance of any poet's writings is too subtle and complex to be proved to demonstration: there will always be room for critics to offer some new probable interpretation. In this, as in much else besides, ‘Poetry is 1573 like a picture.’ 1574 How often, indeed, even after long acquaintance with a picture, do splendid, and perhaps the most beautiful, parts of it reveal themselves to us, when perhaps the rays of the sun have fallen upon it, after we have once placed it in the proper light! how many beauties at once stand forth in shaded corners, in high removed places, in regions otherwise dark and forbidding, which had previously escaped even the most skilled and critical
[Page 225]
observation, to say nothing of our own! Assuredly there is no reason why the same thing should not happen in poems also: at least in the works of those poets of whose life and manners there is either no record or merely some dim memory: since it is the special and peculiar virtue of Poetry ever to hold something secret, and always to yield to all who meditate upon it long and deeply a rich harvest of thought. Indeed, the special hope which stimulates us to devote ourselves to these studies is the hope that we may in time become familiarly acquainted with great men and penetrate into their most intimate counsels: whence it follows that there is always something for us to learn. And we shall, I think, consider it an unqualified gain should any one among those who, on first acquaintance, seemed of secondary and minor powers, so justify his claims, on what are called ‘second thoughts’—which are often the ‘wiser thoughts’ 1575 —as to appear entitled to enrolment among those of primary rank: the real source of his inspiration having been discovered. I say we shall put this down as a distinct gain, for what lover of the spring and of its flowers does not welcome with delight some new species, or even a well-known species which he had overlooked before?
I have said this much by way of prefacing to-day's lecture, because I am afraid that in what I have said in former lectures I have not done adequate justice to that great man whom Attica, the nurse of Tragedy, ever ranked as the third among her tragic dramatists. In fact, when I first addressed myself to my present method and plan of treating poetry, I by no means inclined to think (I will confess it) 1576 that Euripides had any title to be ranked among those who have been so independent as to seek out for themselves their own fount of inspiration.
When, however, after elucidating and explaining, to the
[Page 226]
best of my power, the plays of Sophocles, I came to consider Euripides more nearly, many points arose which gave me pause and made me slow to degrade from primary rank a poet who has won such praise: and the chief of them was this, that I think I may venture to say that I have put my finger on a definite source and origin of his poetry, or at least a thread which connects, I will not say all its parts, but at least those which are most striking and most inspired. In short, I decided that it would be worth while perhaps to set forth and consider the arguments on either side, provided I am capable of expressing in Latin what I seem to myself to see and feel. If nothing else, we shall, I hope, effect this much: we shall set forth the topics which ought to turn the scale in such an inquiry: we shall consider what combination of excellence and defect is possible in one and the same writer: and finally, realize how wrong it is to be too dogmatic in a decision on so doubtful and delicate a problem.
But to come to the point. The grounds of complaint against Euripides are well known and indeed trite. The first is that his language is often trivial and in bad taste, as he chatters away or even sermonizes at some great crisis. Next, his choruses are, generally, feeble and sometimes insipid and flat. Again, he assails with almost savage reproach the whole of womankind. Lastly, he speaks without due restraint of the immortal Gods and of all kinds of religion, and thus sins against true piety. The upshot of all which criticisms is that it is incredible that one chargeable with such faults as these, could be capable of being carried away by generous and truly poetic enthusiasm.
1577 Now, to begin with, there is no need to spend much time on discussing his frigid and ill-timed argumentativeness, since the fact stands admitted, nor would it be easy to quote a single tragedy of Euripides which does not
[Page 227]
exhibit, even to the most hasty reader, blemishes of this kind: thus Medea, stricken with heavy misfortune, in the very stress of her grief and rage, describes in set language how difficult is the position of those who depend on the judgements of others! and then how unequal are the terms on which women contract marriage:
From my apartment, ye Corinthian dames,
Lest ye my conduct censure, I come forth:
For I have known full many who obtained
Fame and high rank; some to the public gaze
Stood ever forth, while others in a sphere
More distant, chose their merits to display:
Nor yet a few, who, studious of repose,
Have with malignant obloquy been called
Devoid of spirit: for no human eyes
Can form a just discernment. 1578
And a few lines further on:
                                         But sure among all those
Who have with breath and reason been endued,
We women are the most unhappy race.
And she pursues the subject at some length, finally quoting herself and her own experiences by way of illustration. What shall we say, again, of this speech of Jason towards the end of the play: does it not suggest the skill of the rhetorician rather than the real feelings of a father?—
O most abandoned woman, by the gods,
By me and all the human race abhorred,
Who with the sword could pierce the sons you bore,
And ruin me, a childless wretched man,
Yet after you this impious deed have dared
To perpetrate, still view the radiant sun
And fostering earth: may vengeance overtake you!
For I that reason have regained which erst
Forsook me, when to the abodes of Greece
[Page 228]
I from your home, from a Barbarian realm,
Conveyed you, to your sire a grievous bane,
And the corrupt betrayer of that land
Which nurtured you. 1579
How far more just, how much more true to nature, is our 1580 own Shakespeare! There are no high-sounding phrases, no shrewd pointed sayings, when he makes a father, who hears of the murder of his wife and children, thus express himself:
Macduff.
                                         My children too?
Ross.
Wife, children, servants, all
That could be found.
Macduff.
And must I be from thence!
My wife kill'd too?
Ross.
                                         I have said.
Macduff.
                                         All my pretty ones?
Did you say all? O hell-kite! All?
What, all my pretty chickens and their dam
At one fell swoop? 1581
Euripides sometimes offends us, not by a set harangue, as it were, but by his proclivity to interposing wise saws or proverbs in places far from suitable: in fact, he not unfrequently inserts some short sentence of this quality, in a moment of crisis, when men's minds are stirred to their depths. For instance, who but is astonished at the sentence closing Andromache's lament for her son's death:
                     All men hold
Their children dear as life: but he who scorns them
Because he ne'er experienced what it is
To be a father, though with fewer griefs
Attended, but enjoys imperfect bliss. 1582
How frigid, too, is his fondness for setting everything out fully and exactly when expressing the deepest thoughts! In real life men who are more than usually stirred hint
[Page 229]
at rather than fully state what they feel. Thus I cannot bring myself to believe that Andromache, when contending with her rival, would really speak out such thoughts as these, though doubtless they must have been present to her mind:
                                         Alas! impetuous youth
Proves baleful to mankind, and there are none
Who act with justice in their blooming years.
But what I dread is this, lest slavery curb
My tongue, though I have many truths to utter:
In this dispute with you, if I prevail,
That very triumph may become my bane;
For those of haughty spirits ill endure
The most prevailing arguments when urged
By their inferiors. 1583
And, indeed, who can endure that scene in which Medea, wild with frenzy and prepared to murder her children, yet 1584 cannot forgo her little maxim?—
                                         I now am well aware
What crimes I venture on; but rage, the cause
Of woes most grievous to the human race,
Over my better reason hath prevailed. 1585
Numberless instances of this sort may be found in Euripides: and they are all spoilt by one and the same fault: the event is merely narrated, not really acted before our eyes. This is the same fault that is made by those who are beginning to learn painting: for I have frequently heard experienced artists declare, that there is no more common mistake among beginners than their constant habit of introducing details which they know to belong to the object which they are painting, instead of reproducing those which they actually see at the moment: a failing, as I apprehend, of men who prefer to be clever rather than simple and natural.
Another point is that our good Euripides, whether to
[Page 230]
please himself or (as I am inclined to believe) to humour his Athenian audience, hardly in a single play fails to advert to the political government under which they lived: if not in set statements, yet at any rate in his favourite short and pointed maxims. For boastful Demos had become far more exacting than in Aeschylus' and Sophocles’ times, and did not easily forgive the neglect of any opportunity to give him a flattering word. Euripides humoured this craving to the full, assuredly to the great injury of his tragedy: we can readily believe the statement that this was the main reason why in the Andromache he almost entirely disregarded the real story of the play, touching and pathetic as it was, and directed his main efforts to loading Sparta with contumely: and also why, in The Suppliants , he extravagantly praises democratic government, and only 1586 superficially touches on the piteous and tragic story. As for the glorification of Athens in the Medea , this, though irrelevant, I am almost inclined to condone and pass over: for whom does not the splendid lyric win with its charm?—
Heroes of Erechtheus’ race,
To the Gods who owe your birth,
And in a long succession trace
Your sacred origin from earth. 1587
Indeed, I hardly know whether it be not unjust to call them irrelevant: since the poet by ‘a happy key-note’, as it is called, joined them with the fortunes of Medea:
   For its holy streams renowned
   Can that city, can that state
Where friendship's generous traces are found,
Shelter thee from public hate,
When, defiled with horrid guilt,
Thou thy children's blood hast spilt?
Think on this atrocious deed
Ere thy dagger aim the blow.
[Page 231]
I add this caution; even frigid and ill-timed speeches in a tragedy are not invariably to be condemned. For it may well be that even at some serious moment there is present some foolish and garrulous person whose trivialities nevertheless contribute not a little to the total effect of the pathos: for the very contrast makes the situation harder to bear, and makes it jar more upon our feelings: just as it has been remarked that squalid hovels and all the uncleanly sights of small cottage yards by their very propinquity lend a heightened melancholy to the ruins of churches or palaces. On this ground we may find excuse for many passages, both in Shakespeare and in Euripides, which would otherwise seem irrelevant and insipid: such as these lines assigned to the Theban herald in the Suppliants , who towards the end of a speech pours out an astounding wealth of proverbs:
                                         It behoves
Those who are wise to love their children first,
Their aged parents next, and native land,
Whose growing fortunes they are bound t’ improve,
And not dismember it. In him who leads
A host, or pilot stationed at the helm,
Rashness is dangerous: he who by discretion
His conduct regulates desists in time,
And caution I esteem the truest valour. 1588
‘What is the good of all this,’ it may be asked: ‘it is 1589 neither relevant nor essentially novel?’ I apprehend, however, that these lines were inserted so that, by contrast, the soldierly dignity and regal wisdom of Theseus might stand out and make the more striking impression. The same purpose may well be served by the well-known speech of this same Theseus, though over-long and far-fetched, which he delivers not far from the beginning of the play concerning the advantage and benefits of civil life:
[Page 232]
For some there are who say the ills which wait
On man exceed his joys; but I maintain
The contrary opinion, that our lives
More bliss than woe experience. 1590
Might not the king, astute as he was, well speak thus, just like statesmen, who cannot decently refrain from speech and yet cannot afford to buoy up their petitioners with over-sanguine expectation? So though their speech may be sometimes trivial they are not really trifling or wasting time.
By means of such considerations as these, an advocate of Euripides may often win a verdict for him: though, at the same time, much, not to say a great deal, will remain which we are compelled to allow is simply the outcome of want of due effort. The same thing may be said with regard to his choral songs (which is the second ground of accusation): indeed, with regard to them I think that, relying on the authority of Aristotle, it may be said even more confidently. Aristotle, we know, in express words on this score assigns superiority to Sophocles: ‘The chorus,’ he says, ‘should be considered as one of the persons in the drama: should be a part of the whole and a sharer in the action: not as in Euripides, but as in Sophocles. As for other poets—their choral songs have no more connexion with their subject than with that of any other tragedy.’ 1591 Observe that, with the exception of Sophocles, fault is found with all poets, that in their choral songs they stray from the central subject and introduce any song they may have in their desk, which seems likely to catch the public ear by its brilliance or melody. Who can deny the 1592 truth of the charge? and yet on this score, too, I deprecate any rash stricture upon great writers: I would not that readers should immediately be quite so sure that the whole
[Page 233]
scheme and method of a great poem lie revealed to them after one hasty perusal. You and I, with our blunt perception, may fail to see any harmony in the piece, but it does not follow that it is not there. Take as an example the well-known lyric, the first choral song in the Hecuba : you could scarcely find any more beautiful and yet less appropriate to its exact context. For at the moment when our minds are wrought to highest pitch at the vision of Polyxena's approaching end, while Hecuba lies before us fainting on the ground, the Maiden Chorus bursts forth with some light, youthful strain, their sole pre-occupation being as to which of the Greek isles they themselves will be sent as captives:
   Ye breezes, who the ships convey,
That long becalmed at anchor lay,
   Nor dared to quit the strand;
As the swift keel divides the wave,
Say whither am I borne a slave. 1593
What, I would like to know, has this to do with Hecuba? nevertheless, even this chorus, unless I mistake, is not entirely without justification. May not the poet have intended to emphasize the common human experience, that amid gravest catastrophes affecting those near and dear to them, men still have leisure for their own cares, even the most trivial? Or again, may he not have intended to let ears dazed by the fatal news find relief in calmer sounds, just as Homer and the Homeric writers delight, in the very thick of battle, to interpose some pleasing simile, to revive the mind by memories of river or wood or even of a life of quiet repose? In short, it may again and again be shown in such cases that the detail which annoys us is either well in keeping with some character in the play, or is introduced for the sake of some pleasing diversion and variety.
[Page 234]
But while these are, in many instances, not without excuse, 1594 nevertheless, the common reproach against Euripides, that at times there is much that is trivial both in his songs and in his arguments, can, I confess, by such means be extenuated merely, not entirely removed. Are we therefore to decide that he is to be wholly banished from the ranks of those who are true and primary poets? Consider, I beg, what this would involve. If we are too exacting in this respect, and require a standard of perfection, I very much fear that we must cast out Shakespeare himself from that glorious company. No one has ventured, I suppose, to deny that Shakespeare can by no means be absolved from this failing, being wont, as he is, even in connexion with gravest affairs, to play sometimes with words or syllables, sometimes with subtlety of idea and expression. Hence, we are taught that while stigmatizing a poet as overmuch given to such triflings, we should take care not immediately to adjudge him to be wanting in the force and fire of true poetry. Let us, then, press on in considering the case of Euripides, and proceed, after all this, to see what is to be said on the other side. For I purposely pass over, for the present, those other charges—serious enough though they are—that he assails with excessive freedom and bitterness both the character of women and the due worship of the Gods, inasmuch as I have good confidence that under either head I may be able to exhibit amply sufficient reasons for praising him.
What then, gentlemen, are we to assign as the peculiar and surpassing merit of Euripides? in what region, beyond all others, are we to seek the hidden sources of his poetic power? And here I have no esoteric secret to tell: nothing, indeed, which has not been repeated from age to age: I only claim in Aristotle's own words that he stands pre-eminent as ‘the most tragic of all poets’. 1595 In laying down
[Page 235]
this opinion, that acute critic, as I apprehend, had in view that aim and end of Tragedy which he had himself previously defined, namely, that its purpose was to purge men's feeling and affections by the influences of fear and pity. Now there is a universal agreement that no tragedian 1596 in any age penetrated more intimately to the secret springs of sorrow and compassion than the creator of Hecuba, of Iphigenia, and of the peerless Alcestis. This was largely due to the transcendent humanity of the man, holding, as he did, nothing to be beneath his interest.
Whatever wild desires have swell'd the breast,
Whatever passions have the soul possest:
Joy, Sorrow, Fear, Love, Hatred, Transport, Rage,
Shall form the motley subject of my page. 1597
But, in truth, he occupies himself more readily, as a rule, with the affairs of homely life than with heroic actions: makes no search for lofty or deep subjects; loiters instinctively in the beaten track and the common avenues of life. One might say that he was the Socrates among the Muses’ friends, seeking to bring Poetry, as that sage did Philosophy, from sky and cloud down to our daily life.
Of this quality we have, beyond question, wonderful proof in his Andromache. On mere mention of this woman's name, who does not at once divine that there will be a violent outburst of bitterest passion, that heaven and earth are bound to join together in the outcry: since she whom we shall see is Andromache the wife of Hector, resigned to the wooings of Pyrrhus, bereft of the son she had borne to Hector, far from her native land, performing the duties of a servant? On the contrary, the only fear which seems to touch her to the quick is the fear inspired by the presence of her rival Hermione. Yet she is not so forgetful of past times but that once, in set song, she complains:
[Page 236]
In Helen sure, to Troy's imperial towers
   Young Paris wasted no engaging bride,
But when he led her to those nuptial bowers
   Some fiend infernal crossed the billowy tide. 1598
But after that she has no thoughts but for present things. And all these, indeed, she laments just as any simple matron might: one is hardly conscious of the queen, the wife of Hector, the daughter-in-law of Priam, in a single 1599 line that she speaks. This is how she upbraids Hermione; as any woman might, and in a way that almost borders on comedy:
                                         Not beauty, but the virtues,
O woman, to the partners of our bed
Afford delight. But if it sting your pride
That Sparta's a vast city, while you treat
Scyros with scorn, amidst the poor display
Your riches, and of Menelaus speak
As greater than Achilles; hence your lord
Abhors you. 1600
Well, then; are we to say that the tragic poet intentionally introduced these trivial and almost comic sentences that he might picture for us the mind and spirit of the most nobly born of women as crushed by stress of grief? We know well that the spirit may sometimes be miserably shaken by long-continued daily sorrow, and that, little by little, the fine aroma of its nobility may, as it were, dissipate in thin air: and especially when the sufferer undergoes the humiliation of servitude. If we may believe Homer:
For whom Jove dooms to servitude, he takes
At once the half of that man's worth away. 1601
Either, therefore, we must conclude that Euripides deliberately intended to represent a weak and degenerate Andromache; or (and this is in my opinion more probable)
[Page 237]
the poet is here true to himself, and prefers that the emotions and manners of all his creations should be modelled on ordinary lives lived in private and retirement. The popular view was that he at times was at fault in this and overshot the mark: though Aristophanes must not be too hastily accepted as an entirely trustworthy witness of the feeling of the Greeks in his own time. Certainly, there is no charge he enforces more severely against Euripides than that he represents his heroes and heroines in the hour of their sorrow as wearing mean rags and uttering unworthy speeches:
When you brought forth your kings, in a villainous fashion,
In patches and rags, as a claim for compassion.
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
He has taught every soul to sophisticate truth;
And debauch'd all the bodies and minds of the youth. 1602
Assuredly, Euripides seems to have willingly sacrificed, 1603 not only polished phrase, but even the signs of a lofty spirit, rather than admit the least swerving from the simple and unvarnished truth of things: and to such degree, that one may perhaps not unfairly say as to the whole body and range of his poetry, what, as tradition goes, he himself urged in extenuation of the quality of his characters: namely, that he had painted them as in deed and truth they are; Sophocles as they ought to be.
Connected, however, with this same quality of direct simplicity is the care which Euripides again and again exhibits in sketching those experiences which are peculiarly associated with the lot of the poor, of servants, indeed of slaves. He is wont to let it be seen, and clearly does so not without a kind of satisfaction, that he is able to sympathize with these classes in a high degree. For instance,
[Page 238]
observe the spirit with which Andromache's maid finally undertakes a hazardous mission on her behalf. At first she had opposed the scheme, arguing just as a slave would:
'Twere dangerous: for Hermione is watchful. 1604
Andromache then reproaches her:
Dost thou perceive the danger and renounce
Thy friends in their distress?
The maid, thus pressed, replies nobly:
Not thus; forbear
                     To brand me with so infamous a charge.
Yet she adds something withal, which thoroughly savours of a slave's feelings:
I go; for of small value is the life
(Whate'er befall me) of a female slave.
Which of us has not now and then heard poor and discontented men give vent among themselves to complaints like this!
Remember, again, the bold words of Theseus' slave about the dying Hippolytus. Do they not combine a 1605 certain outspokenness with a tone of servility, in a way wonderfully characteristic of men of his degree?
Though I indeed, O king, am in your house
A servant, yet I never can be brought
To think your son was with such guilt defiled,
Though the whole race of women should expire
Suspended in the noose, and every pine
On Ida's summit were with letters filled;
So well am I convinced that he was virtuous. 1606
And since, in our present discussion, mention has been made more than once of Shakespeare, it will be interesting to examine whether, in this connexion, there may not be a marked bond of community between him and Euripides:
[Page 239]
I mean that each of them touches with ready interest on the fortunes and feelings of men of lowliest rank and circumstance. There is, however, this difference between them: Shakespeare, whenever he was so minded, could always rise from such interest to any heights he pleased: with Euripides, on the other hand, if we have rightly read his mind, this was the only sphere which he felt to be really his own: his real mastery lay in dealing with those emotions which are naturally common to all men and all conditions of worldly fortune. In his plays it is not Medea, Alcestis, Iphigenia, and others who speak, but any mother, any wife, any daughter. We feel that each character is strongly moved, but nevertheless, only with such sort of emotion as all have experienced who have love for child, husband, or parent. Even those exquisite lines in which Medea bids farewell to her sons, whom she herself is dooming to destruction, do not suggest anything which specially pertains either to Colchis, or an enchantress, or even to her own savage temperament: they simply, as I apprehend, breathe a mother's tenderest love:
                                         To my sons
Fain would I say: ‘O stretch forth your right hands,
Ye children, for your mother to embrace.
O dearest hands, ye lips to me most dear,
Engaging features and ingenuous looks, 1607
May ye be blest, but in another world;
For by the treacherous conduct of your sire
Are ye bereft of all this earth bestowed.
Farewell, sweet kisses—tender limbs, farewell!
And fragrant breath! I never more can bear
To look on you, my children.’ My afflictions
Have conquered me. 1608
Neither, again, does the speech of the sorrowing Admetus, but just bereft of his loved spouse, exhibit any quality
[Page 240]
which might not equally become any husband soever who had chanced to survive his wife:
                                         How shall I bear
To enter here? To whom shall I address
My speech? Whose greeting renders my return
Delightful? Which way shall I turn? Within
In lonely sorrow shall I waste away,
As widowed of my wife I see my couch,
The seats deserted where she sate, the rooms
Wanting her elegance. Around my knees
My children hang, and weep their mother lost:
These too lament their mistress now no more. 1609
We shall all allow that these are most sweet and tender lines: and the more so, perhaps, since any one with a fairly long experience must have often witnessed in real life the same or similar scenes. And finally, take the notable instance of Iphigenia in Aulis, what expressions, in her most pathetic address, does she employ, other than those which might well become any daughter greeting her father when first seen after long separation:
Iph.
Would it offend my mother, should I run
And throw myself into my father's arms?
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
My father, to thy arms I wish to run,
Clasped to thy bosom; dear to me thy sight
After such absence: be not angry with me.
Ag.
Enjoy thy wish: of all my children thou
Hast of thy father always been most fond.
Iph.
Absent so long, with joy I look on thee.
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
Well hast thou done to bring me to thy presence.
Ag.
If well or not well done, I cannot say.
Iph.
A gloom hangs on thee 'midst thy joy to see me.
Ag.
A king and chief hath many anxious cares.
Iph.
But let me have thee now: think not of cares. 1610
1611
And much more there is in like spirit: and the main purpose
[Page 241]
of it all is, as any one may perceive, that the simple evidence of a child's affection expressing itself in well-known phrases, should keenly sting and cut to the heart Agamemnon, who at the very moment was planning acts far other than befit a loved and honoured father.
The result is, as I said, to show that Euripides’ province and power specially lay within the affairs of home life and with the affections which each feels for those who are near and dear to him: for there is an almost universal consent that the strongest case to be made out for him rests upon his Medea, Alcestis, Iphigenia, and other like characters.
Seeing that we have been led to the Iphigenia in Aulis , let us examine briefly how it is that, in the judgement of no less a critic than Aristotle, her character seemed so inconsistent: he has chosen her as his one instance of what he calls ‘inconsistency of character’; ‘for the Iphigenia who supplicates for her life has no resemblance to the Iphigenia of the conclusion of the play.’ 1612 And why does he so say? Because, I apprehend, she who, when we first see her, was of more sensitive disposition—for she makes no scruple of pleading with tears and all a woman's appeals against the fatal decree—this very same Iphigenia, afterwards willingly and joyfully, not to say voluntarily, offers herself as a sacrifice: she steadfastly refuses the certain and invincible aid of Achilles: and yet no reason seems to be given for so sudden a change of mind: there is no persuasion by friends, no change of fortune, no trace, I do not say of a deus ex machina , of which in like junctures Euripides affords many instances, but not even of any suggestion prompted to her mind from heaven. Just consider the following:
                                         Hear then what to my mind
Deliberate thought presents. It is decreed
[Page 242]
For me to die: this then I wish, to die
With glory, all reluctance banished far.
My mother, weigh this well, that what I speak
Is honour's dictate. All the powers of Greece
Have now their eyes on me; on me depends
The sailing of the fleet, the fall of Troy,
And not to suffer, should a new attempt
Be dared, the rude barbarians from blest Greece
To bear in future times her dames by force.
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
1613 By dying all these things shall I achieve,
And blest, for that I have delivered Greece,
Shall be my fame. To be too fond of life
Becomes not me; nor for thyself alone,
But to all Greece a blessing, didst thou bear me.
Shall thousands, when their country's injured, lift
Their shields, shall thousands grasp the oar, and dare,
Advancing bravely 'gainst the foe, to die
For Greece? And shall my life, my single life
Obstruct all this?
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
Vain the attempt: for Greece I give my life.
Slay me, demolish Troy: for these shall be
Long time my monuments, my children these,
My nuptials, and my glory. 1614
I have quoted this passage at unusual length, since it certainly seems to me that it carries with it the explanation of Iphigenia's attitude, and turns the reproach of inconsistency into a high honour. May it not have been that, at so grave a crisis, when decision must be made in so short a time, when the presence of the immortal gods seemed all around her, such thoughts as these might spring up unprompted in a high-born maiden's mind? Especially as we see good reason to believe that her previous tearful, and even (if she will pardon the word) abject, appeal was not entirely due to her own promptings. For I assuredly so infer, when I read and re-read her most touching little address:
[Page 243]
Had I, my father, the persuasive voice
Of Orpheus, and his skill to charm the rocks
To follow me, and soothe whom e'er I please
With winning words, I would make trial of it;
But I have nothing to present thee now
Save tears, my only eloquence: and those
I can present thee. 1615
While these are certainly most exquisitely beautiful lines, I am not sure, notwithstanding, that they do not suggest something of the rhetorician's art, in which Euripides is said to have been trained from his earliest years. A high-born maiden might well deliver herself of such a prologue: if we rightly infer that she spoke not from her own heart, but as tutored by her mother. Then rapidly warming, as was natural, through the mere current and rapid rush of her words, she bursts forth in the following lines, far more consonant with Nature and with truth:
                                         I was the first
To call thee father, me thou first didst call
Thy child; I was the first that on thy knees
Fondly caressed thee, and from thee received 1616
The fond caress; this was thy speech to me:
‘Shall I, my child, e'er see thee in some house
Of splendour, happy in thy husband, live,
And flourish, as becomes my dignity?’
My speech to thee was, leaning 'gainst thy cheek,
Which with my hand I now caress: ‘And what
Shall I then do for thee? Shall I receive
My father when grown old, and in my house
Cheer him with each fond office, to repay
The careful nurture which he gave my youth?’
These words are on my memory deep impressed;
Thou hast forgot them, and wilt kill thy child.
But what are we to make of these concluding lines?—
I will sum all in this, which shall contain
More than long speech: To view the light of life
[Page 244]
To mortals is most sweet, but all beneath
Is nothing: of his senses is he reft
Who hath a wish to die; for life, though ill,
Excels whate'er there is of good in death.
Assuredly this is too stiff and stilted: unless, indeed, as I just hinted, we believe Iphigenia not to have been playing her own natural part, and thus hardly well knowing what it became her to say at such a time.
But, after all, suppose we grant that the end does not well agree with the beginning: are men in real life always consistent? Are not their minds often swayed hither and thither by the very slightest influences, and this in the most important affairs? And, seeing that Euripides declined to follow the school of dramatists who exalt their leading characters to a plane above that of ordinary humanity, we may well assume that he advisedly allowed his Iphigenia to be changeable and inconsistent. Indeed, there was no other way by which he could carry out his primary aim, of reproducing the very forms and features of men and affairs, as they all appear daily in real life. The theory of his Hermione in the Andromache does not indeed bear this out: she was in truth a poor frivolous creature who, in her first appearance on the stage, plainly shows that she could be taken captive by the charms of gems and robes:
The gorgeous ornaments of gold these brows
1617 Encircling, and the tissued robes I wear,
I from Achilles', or from Peleus' stores,
As chosen presents when I hither came,
Received not, but from Sparta's realm; these gifts
My father Menelaus hath bestowed
With a large dower. 1618
Yet even her sudden remorse, which is an essential feature of the play, is by no means without weight for those who
[Page 245]
seek to trace the hidden springs of Euripides' poetry. And the same thing may be remarked of the two Atridae in the Iphigenia in Aulis , and of other like instances. Numerous details declare with no uncertain meaning, that he delighted in dealing with the common round of daily life, and with those personal and domestic incidents which touch the hearts of most men. One side of his thoughts perhaps may be excepted, that which regards religion: and I will, to the best of my powers, draw out the special points which are peculiar to Euripides on this theme; but before doing so, I will add a few words to prove that his views about women were not so unkindly as they have been thought. For it is here, specially, that certain critics relentlessly impeach him.
Now, first, it surely must seem surprising that a poet who took pre-eminent interest in all that relates to the life of home and everyday pursuits and cares, should at the same time have hated from the bottom of the heart those upon whom all the conditions and circumstances of that home life depend. In the next place, I would recommend any who have been taught this old criticism, to look a little more minutely into his plays, and especially to compare them with those of Sophocles. And in order to narrow the discussion within definite lines, let us take as our test that character by whom Sophocles may most completely support his own claims in this region. Let us compare his Antigone with the same character as drawn by Euripides in his Phoenissae . The former certainly impresses us more powerfully by her strength and nobility of spirit: but the latter touches us far more pleasingly in that she shows a deeply affectionate feeling for her brother, and that in 1619 a way which implies much more than it expresses. Especially striking, from this point of view, is the dialogue between the royal maiden and the old serving-man as they catch sight of the Argive lines from their watch-tower. First,
[Page 246]
like a girl, she is much taken with the mere glitter of arms from afar:
Thou venerable daughter of Latona,
Thrice sacred Goddess Hecate, how gleams
With brazen armour the whole field around! 1620
Then, womanlike, she betrays anxiety as to whether the gates are closed:
Are the gates closed? what barriers guard the walls
Reared by Amphion's skill?
Finally, after much eager curiosity, just such as might possess a young girl on the occasion, she suddenly lets fall a remark as to her brother:
                                         But where is he, whom Fate
Decreed in evil hour from the same womb
With me to spring? Say, O thou dear old man,
Where's Polynices? 1621
But when he is pointed out she almost fails to recognize him, as is so natural with those who after a long separation try to recognize from afar those very dear to them:
Att.
                                         See you him?
Ant.
                                         I see him,
But not distinctly; I can just discern
A faint resemblance of that kindred form,
The image of that bosom.
And then she bursts forth in tenderest strain:
                                         Would to heaven,
Borne on the skirts of yonder passing cloud,
Through the ethereal paths, I with these feet
Could to my brother urge my swift career!
Then would I fling my arms round the dear neck
Of him who long hath been a wretched exile.
Even at such a juncture she cannot restrain a woman's delight in the splendour of his armour:
[Page 247]
How gracefully, in golden arms arrayed,
Bright as Hyperion's radiant beams, he moves!
After this scene we hear absolutely nothing of her until 1622 she appears, when called by her mother, just as her brothers are met in fatal combat. Here she still maintains her maidenly modesty, shrinking from coming out from her chamber before the gaze of men, especially in the midst of an array of soldiery:
Ant.
                                         What more hast thou, O mother, to relate?
Joc.
                                         Naught that can give thee joy, but follow me.
Ant.
                                         Say whither must I go, and leave behind
My virgin comrades?
Joc.
                                         To the host.
Ant.
                                         I blush
To mingle with the crowd.
Joc.
                                         These bashful fears
Are such as in thy present situation
Become thee not.
Ant.
                                         How can my help avail?
Joc.
Thou haply mayst appease this impious strife
Betwixt thy brothers.
Ant.
                                         Mother, by what means?
Joc.
                                         By falling prostrate at their knees with me.
Ant.
                                         Lead on betwixt the van of either host,
This crisis will admit of no delay. 1623
She shows herself brave and patient: yet traces of a true woman can be seen throughout. I will only add one more passage, but it makes a noble picture: in the scene where she prepares to go into exile with her blind father, he protests that she ought not so abruptly to forsake her long familiar haunts and her circle of friends, nor, most important of all, the holy shrines of the native Deities:
Oedip.
                                         To Bacchus temple then
Repair, on that steep mountain where no step
Profane invades his orgies, chosen haunt
Of his own Maenades. 1624
[Page 248]
His daughter at once, as though inspired with the memory of her childhood, exclaims:
                                         Erst in the hides
Of Theban stags arrayed, I on these hills
Joined in the dance of Semele, bestowing
A homage they approved not on the gods.
And with these words she finally disappears with Oedipus from the scene, to become his guide and comrade: and assuredly, had Euripides but left this single witness for himself, he would have ample ground for alleging that he was not utterly hostile and unkindly in his judgement of women.
And so I pass over Iphigenia, Alcestis, and many others who might be quoted in support of my view: and will say a few words concerning Polyxena: inasmuch as I am 1625 afraid Euripides may not, in his portrayal of her character, very well correspond to the view I take of the whole class. Remember this is what is suggested: that in his poetry those feelings and affections which are common to humanity predominate, no stress whatever being laid upon those who may be called aristocrats; nor upon the heroic character: the standard being always that of our daily life and common feelings. But Polyxena, if any one, seems to rise to higher things:
                                         O ye Argives, who laid waste
My city, willingly I die; let no man
Confine these arms, I with undaunted breast
Will meet the stroke. I by the gods conjure you
Release, and slay me as my rank demands
Like one born free: for I from mighty kings
Descend, and in the shades beneath should blush
To be accounted an ignoble slave. 1626
A magnificent speech truly: but observe, pray, the real explanation of her desire for death: she had, in fact,
[Page 249]
before declared that she desired to die, since her lot in life was unhappy:
                                         for no hope,
No ground for thinking I shall e'er be happy,
Can I discern. 1627
Without doubt this is a reason which was really influencing her: though it is not so splendid or heroic.
Besides, we must not forget that Polyxena is purposely put forward as the type and example of her noble house. Thus the Chorus commends her as follows:
   A great distinction, and among mankind
The most conspicuous, is to spring from sires
Renowned for virtue: generous souls hence raise
To heights sublimer an ennobled name. 1628
But it is very seldom that poets praise, thus, in set words, the things they really hold especially dear: in dealing with them one only feels throughout the presence of a subtle passion which runs through the whole character, pervades the whole man with a kind of aroma, yet hardly ever can be openly stated. So that the question stands as it did at first: the character of Polyxena does not 1629 require us to modify the general principle concerning the main quality of Euripides' poetry, already set forth.
But how did it happen, then, that the opinion has prevailed so long that he attacked the whole female sex with a kind of hatred, not to say savage ferocity? In the first place, we all know, that in his tragedies there can be found many passages almost akin to comedy, wherein the ills of domestic life are stigmatized, as a comedian would do, with bitter speeches: but then, if any one thinks to construe these with strict literalness, taking no account of what is called irony, assuredly he proves himself but a poor student both of literature and of life. For instance (I take the first passage which presents itself on turning over the
[Page 250]
plays), we have, in the Andromache , these expressions of Hermione:
But never, never (I this truth repeat)
Should wedded men, who have the gift of reason,
Let women have a free access and visit
Their consort. For they teach her evil lessons. 1630
Can any one fail to perceive that complaints like this should be appraised according to the situation, the temper and character of the speaker? And this is a principle which may be generally applied.
Further (for I will boldly declare what I think), how if the temperament of Euripides was such that he deliberately chose this theme as the one in which he loved to indulge his humour and employ that irony of which we spoke?
Certainly, so far as one may conjecture, he was, if not a follower, at least a hearty admirer, of an ascetic type of life: indeed, he was a disciple of two philosophers of great distinction, Anaxagoras and Prodicus. It is said, too, that, when he was a youth, he underwent athletic discipline: and perhaps his poems evince some evidence of his proficiency in it, as, for instance, where he describes, 1631 with careful minuteness, the celebrated final conflict of the sons of Oedipus. 1632 Well, we all know that the gymnasium is pre-eminently the school of self-control and purity of life:
The youth who runs for prizes wisely trains,
Bears cold and heat, is patient and abstains. 1633
And he was also, undeniably, a most refined and critical observer of human life, especially on its domestic and social side. Now it would be strange if one who aimed at associating such a philosophy as we have indicated with
[Page 251]
such careful criticism did not prove a somewhat strict censor of men and life: and the wiser of such critics are wont to blunt the edge of their criticisms by some sort of irony, which shows itself in an endless number of ways all marvellously differing from each other: and among them all, why may not anything whatsoever which Euripides has scornfully urged against women fairly find place?
But it may be asked, has Euripides himself shown any evidence of being the kind of man disposed to cultivate an austere discipline and, as it is called nowadays, the ascetic life? Well, he has, and that abundantly: at all events, if we do not wholly mistake the meaning and spirit of his Hippolytus. Euripides worked up this character, unless I mistake, with a peculiar pleasure: he put his whole heart into it, as Homer did into Achilles or Apelles into his Venus. For poets, like painters, are somehow able, even without conscious effort, to achieve what they aim at with great facility when they touch parts of their work which they themselves hold dear: their touch at once becomes more delicate: a happier instinct guides them where to add, where to withhold, another stroke. Consider, I beg, whether Hippolytus’ first entrance on the stage and all the details of the pure offerings due to Diana do not furnish some support to what I say:
To deck thee, I this wreath, O goddess, bear,
Cropt from yon mead, o'er which no swain his flock
For pasture drives, nor hath the mower's steel
Despoiled its virgin herbage; 'midst each flower
Which spring profusely scatters, there the bee
Roams unmolested, and religious awe
Waters the champaign with abundant springs. 1634
And then he declares that these sacred rites are reserved 1635 alone for those naturally upright and pure: even penitents can gain no access there:
[Page 252]
They who owe naught to learning, but have gained
From nature wisdom such as never fails
In their whole conduct, are by Heaven allowed
To cull these sweets, not so the wretch profane.
But I hesitate to suggest what source should be assigned to the lines which follow, so weighty are they, so chaste, so holy: so nearly approaching the majesty of the Scriptures:
Vouchsafe, O dearest goddess, to receive
This braided fillet for thy golden hair,
From me a pious votary, who alone
Of all mankind am for thy worship meet,
For I with thee reside, with thee converse,
Hearing thy voice indeed, though I thy face
Have never seen. My life as it began,
May I with spotless purity conclude!
This seems (I speak with all reverence) to foreshadow as if from afar that divine sentence: The pure in heart shall see God. Whence, too, comes that language, more impressive than that of any moral philosopher, with which he inveighs against those who meditate base deeds?—
                                         thus, vile wretch,
In privacy you came, with me to form
An impious treaty for surrendering up
My royal father's unpolluted bed.
Soon from such horrors in the limpid spring
My ears will I make pure: how could I rush
Into the crime itself, when, having heard
Only the name made mention of, I feel
As though I some defilement thence had caught? 1636
And this, too, which, in a Greek, is the height of severity of life:
                                         but I am not eager
To look on these, for still my soul retains
Its virgin purity. 1637
And then, in his extreme agony, when at the point of
[Page 253]
death, he is cheered by nothing so much as by the dim sense of the presence of the Goddess of Purity:
                                         From celestial lips
How doth a fragrant odour breathe around!
Amid my sufferings thee did I perceive,
The pangs I feel were instantly assuaged,
Diana sure is here. 1638
But let us observe how both the friends who advise 1639 Hippolytus, and those who, like his angry father, load him with reproaches, alike resort to arguments such as, even to-day, are urged against those who aim at a stricter religious life. First there is the sagacious old family retainer:
Know you the law prescribed to man?
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗ To loathe that pride which studies not to please. 1640 Afterwards the enraged Theseus taunts him for fasting for religion's sake:
                                         Yet art thou the man
Who holds familiar converse with the gods
As though his life were perfect? Art thou chaste
And pure from all defilement?
Now glory in thy vegetable food,
Disciple of the tuneful Orpheus, rave
With Bacchus’ frantic choir, and let the fumes
Of varied learning soothe thee.
But lest it be imagined that Hippolytus is placed before us as an example of a perverted disposition, which should clearly be avoided, observe with what sweet graces the poet adorns his austere morality. Who more reverential towards a father than Hippolytus?—
                                         nor is it just,
My father, your afflictions to conceal
From friends, and those who are yet more than friends. 1641
[Page 254]
And finally, on the eve of death, not only does he refrain from reproaches against Theseus, but even shows himself more concerned for his father's grief than his own agony:
Hipp
                                         I bewail my sire.
Diana.
                                         Him by her arts that goddess hath misled.
Hipp.
                                         To you, my father, this event hath proved A source of woes abundant.
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
Yet more for you, who have been thus deluded,
Than for myself I grieve. 1642
Moreover, just as in the Hippolytus , the praises of chastity, so in the Ion are sung those of that solitude and retirement which those who are dedicated for life to serve in holy temples and divine things enjoy, provided they themselves are holy and sanctified. At early dawn 1643 the youthful Ion betakes himself with joyous eagerness to his religious duty: wreathes sprays of laurel: repels by his cries the persistent birds: cleanses the paved floor of the shrine: sprinkles water: sings a paean of praise: and takes such joy in his office as to protest he would not change it for regal wealth and Athens' splendid towers:
I deem my situation here exceeds
What Athens can bestow. 1644
Finally, in the Bacchae , Euripides' aim seems to have been to exalt the characteristic mystery, which so deeply pervades all divine things: and to impress on us that nothing in religion is to be held of light account, simply because its justification is not immediately apparent or does not readily commend itself to the mere human sense.
I much wish that time would permit me to illustrate all this by instances drawn from the Ion and Bacchae , as in the case of the Hippolytus . But I must be content to offer and leave with you this simple outline, so that any who desire it may have a standard by which to test our general
[Page 255]
view of Euripides. If it shall appear not wholly groundless, at all events the poet may be thereby relieved from the charge, which, as I have remarked, has been fixed upon him by some critics of highest authority. He will prove to have been no scoffer at divine things. We shall see clearly that any unbridled expressions which he has at times used on this theme are partly due to the character of the speaker in whose mouth they are put, and partly to the fact that he is, like Plato, only criticizing the popular fancies about the Gods. Indeed, he often seems to handle all those stories of the base lusts of the Gods, of their blind rage, of their mutual jealousies, as if he held them not so much to be inventions of the fancy, as to have been in deed and truth at some time the work of some evil spirits. Unless I mistake, this is the theory which throws most light on the Venus of the Hippolytus and perhaps the Apollo of the Ion .
In result, therefore, we enroll Euripides among that order of poets who have drawn from their own native resources the song they have given us: inasmuch as he is the champion 1645 and protector of the common human feelings; and yet at the same time shows and cherishes a special affection for those who, since they are servants of the gods, hold it a duty to reserve themselves body and soul to service of the divine office, despising pleasures and withdrawing from affairs.
[Page 256]
LECTURE XXX 1646
Concerning poets who sing the praises of country life: these have been later in date than the great poets of action: and in Greece hardly appeared at all. The reasons of these facts considered: supported and illustrated from Hebrew and Christian literary history: it is maintained that the two orders of poetry flourished naturally and providentially each at its needed and proper time.
I come now to consider the lovers of the country: for we may call by this distinctive name that other great family of poets whose interest and effort lay, not in the deeds and fortunes of men, but in rivers, in woods, in rocks, and desert regions, in the haunts of beasts and birds: briefly, in all that variety of beauty with which Nature has adorned the face of earth and sky. I do not indeed suppose that these two classes are so capable of being defined and marked off by certain invariable signs, that anybody can at once perceive and declare authoritatively to which order this or that poet ought to be assigned. The conditions of human affairs rarely, if ever, admit of such precise limitation. For it is with Poetry as it is with life and character: each man's disposition and actual circumstances are blended with and influenced by his 1647 external environment, such as the climate and site of his home, and all the array of natural objects which appeal to his eye or ear. I repeat, then, that these two orders are intermingled one with another, so that it is by no means easy with regard to any poet or even any individual to form a clear judgement how far he has intentionally linked himself to the one or other family. Yet, nevertheless, there are not wanting certain dividing lines—and those quite clear enough considering the subject—whereby, if
[Page 257]
not individual authors, yet at least classes of authors, may be conveniently marked off from each other.
First of all, it is clear that in the one class men of leisure and retiring temperament, in the other, for the most part, strenuous and active spirits, are to be reckoned. To take an instance familiar even to schoolboys, let us compare for a moment Homer and Virgil. Do we not all immediately recognize that the former must, by Nature's own verdict, be grouped among those who delight in active toil, and the latter with the lovers of calm and tranquillity? Each loves the open-air life: but the one prefers adventure in it, the other peace and quiet.
Then I would add another point, which, indeed, is plain enough to all who but lightly and cursorily glance at what I may call the history of literature. In almost every nation the poetry of strenuous toil, full of movement and action, flourished first: and at a later time there succeeded an aftermath of those whom ‘the fields of the country delight and the streams that water the valleys’, who ‘love the rivers and forests’; 1648 . men who care for leisure, not for renown. Examine all the remains and fragments of poetry—so far indeed as we know of them—that have reached us from rude and uncultivated ages. They will, unless I am mistaken, one and all show the same sequence and range of poetic production. At first all poets sing openly and without reserve the praises of love or war, or celebrate some theme connected with human character and action. It is only as their second love, that the quiet life of the country and all the varied beauty of the world 1649 around us come in for praise.
At present, I do not attempt to suggest an explanation of this: I merely wish you to reflect whether the fact be so or not. We have at all events this striking evidence of it, that no single poet, so far as I am aware, arose in
[Page 258]
ancient Greece who can be supposed to have devoted his chief interest to the charms of Nature. Pastoral poetry, as we call it, appeared some centuries later, and in fact owed its beginnings to Sicily and its finished form to Rome; if, indeed, we may fairly assign that honour to Virgil's Georgics , the delight of the Muses and of the world.
But I am conscious here that I must be on my guard lest I should seem to have made an admission which will seriously undermine my own theory. ‘What,’ it may be said, ‘have you not authoritatively denied that any poetry is of true ring except it result from the abundance and overflow of a full heart: and have you not also assigned so ample a field to the art as to declare that it can, unaided, minister to all the movements of the spirit and the various aspects of life? and, in spite of this, do you now assert that the love of country life and rural pursuits, which occupy men's minds to so large an extent, lay neglected and without any to honour it, until, after the decadence of Greek poetry, some Sicilian shepherds composed their poems on this theme? Did men really remain callous through all those centuries, unmoved by the sweetness of spring or the solemnity of autumn? Did they, so long time, “gaze at without fear,” as Horace puts it,
The sun, the stars, the seasons of the year
That come and go? 1650
‘No one could credit this for a moment. And therefore you must allow, either that, before Theocritus, there were 1651 some who satisfied in song their love of wood and country, or must give up your theory: do not, then, keep advertising poetry as a great panacea: let us, after all, look upon it as merely one art among many, delightful indeed and beautiful as may be, but by no means necessary or touched with any peculiar sanctity.’
[Page 259]
I shall to-day, so far as I am able, deal with this criticism: but shall certainly not seek to shelter myself under the wing of those, though of by no means despicable authority, who deny that among the Greek peoples at large there was any real feeling for the beauty of natural scenery. Such over-subtle critics seem to me to fall into just the same error as if they maintained that musical measure and rhythm could be appreciated by none but such as had been pupils of some professional musician: whereas, on the contrary, merely by listening to the innumerable variety of the sounds with which woods, seas, rivers, and the blended songs of birds, fill our ears, all men who are not wholly unmusical give back the sounds from within, and, with none to teach them, frame for themselves each his own melody. But this fact is overlooked by the ordinary observer who demands some formulated laws of music and of song. We are prepared, therefore, for much the same attitude in those who suppose that Nature was unappreciated in ancient Greece. The fact is that seeing the painter's art highly developed, they demand every poem should show a sort of artistic picture and an ordered arrangement of its parts, with some details kept in the background, others thrown into full relief. And, since this finished nicety is almost entirely absent among the early Greeks, some critics have too hastily concluded that they were wholly wanting in this order of poetry.
But there is no need for me to spend much time upon this subject, after the many various and splendid instances which I have quoted, some from Homer, some from Pindar, and some from the three Tragedians. But even if nothing of this kind had come down to us, would it, I ask, be credible to any one, that a nation which was ever gifted 1652 with the finest appreciation of form should have been blind to the charms of Nature and scenery? and that when the source of pleasure is the same in both? For
[Page 260]
trees quivering before the wind, clouds sailing along the sky, streams coursing down their channel, may be well compared with the gestures of human beings, at all events those of graceful form: and the colours of spring, whether in the skies or in flowers, suggest life and animation. Whence we infer, that whether a man is truly and appreciatively delighted with the beauty of human form or with the face of earth and sky, the feeling arises from the same mental qualities. And therefore we should be slow to believe that a region or an age which produced a Phidias and an Apelles was incapable of being won by the charms of meadows, woods, and rivers.
Then, too, consider the quality and texture of all those fables which the Greeks so greatly affected: were they not wont to frame such fancies and dreams about their Gods and Heroes as show that they themselves led and delighted in leading a life in the open air? Why,—think of their circles of Nymphs, Dryads, Oreads, and the rest, besides all the inferior gods and goddesses—do they not, for the most part, clearly point to a people who carefully watched Nature's movements? Indeed, we have no light support for this view from one who is not merely learned and skilled in all that regards country life, but is, moreover, easily the first of modern poets. And this is what that distinguished man says, if I may paraphrase his words: ‘The whole scheme of the religion of Greece was grounded on the experiences and observation of refined and acute men, who marked as evidence of present Deity all that they witnessed under the sky, by day or night, and felt to be venerable, beautiful, or magnificent. And it followed that they recognized as many Divine Powers as there are aspects of Nature, evoking fear or admiration. 1653 A shepherd (for instance) taking his midday rest, lyre in hand, shapes to himself the vision of the great Apollo, with golden cithern and with shining locks: the illusion
[Page 261]
being heightened, should he hear, perchance,
A distant strain, far sweeter than the sounds
Which his poor skill could make;
the hunter wandering among the hills by night evokes from the moon and stars the train of Diana and her nymphs: cloud shadows moved by northern breezes across the distant hills suggest to men the circling dances of Oreads: and
                                         withered boughs grotesque, ...
From depth of shaggy covert peeping forth,
create Faunus and the Satyrs.’ 1654
But even leaving all this out of the question, I would nevertheless confidently undertake to defend the Greeks in this controversy, by appealing to Plato alone. In the celebrated introduction to the Phaedrus he acknowledges having fully yielded himself to the fascination of city life and the conversation of men, yet in such terms as make it clear that he is influenced and delighted, in the highest degree, by pure and simple Nature:
‘By Juno, a beautiful retreat. For this plane-tree is very wide-spreading and lofty, and the height and shadiness of this agnus castus are very beautiful, and as it is now at the perfection of its flowering, it makes the spot as fragrant as possible. Moreover, a most agreeable fountain flows under the plane-tree, of very cold water, to judge from its effect on the foot. It appears from these images and statues to be sacred to certain nymphs and to Achelous. Observe again the freshness of the spot, how charming and very delightful it is, and how summer-like and shrill it sounds from the choir of grasshoppers. But the most delightful of all is the grass, which with its gentle slope is naturally adapted to give an easy support to the head, as one reclines.’ 1655
What are we to make of this stress upon the plane-tree, 1656 the cool water of Ilissus, the soft grass, and all the array
[Page 262]
of charm in the sweet retreat—but that they plainly evince a temperament delicately appreciating and heartily loving the joyous spring-time?
So I may dismiss this point: let us see, however, whether there may not be yet another reason which explains the absence of pastoral poetry in the earliest Greek ages. How if I suggest the paradox that such poetry was absent for the very reason that the delights and charms which would inspire it were present in such abundance? Indeed, as I have more than once insisted, there is no richer fount of poetic inspiration than the unquenchable longing for some object which is absent. Now those great men who were the pride of Greece in its early days all had their rivers and their forests in which to delight: Homer with his lute passed over shore and island, Pindar paid honour to the Delphic deity among the groves and caves and fountains at the foot of Parnassus: while the three Tragedians, like all their fellow citizens, could, in what way each liked, enjoy their own delightsome Attica. Moreover, we have a witness, beyond all cavil, as to the affection with which the race regarded their gardens, estates, and pleasant villa retreats—namely, Thucydides: who, writing of the era which saw the rule of Pericles, at the outset of the ill-omened Peloponnesian war, when the Spartan army first set foot in Attica, tells us that nothing troubled the citizens more than that they were obliged to quit the little country holdings so dear to each.
‘This removal,’ he says, ‘in respect they had most of them been accustomed to the country life, grieved them very much. This custom was from great antiquity, more familiar with the Athenians than any other of the rest of Greece. ... The Athenians were, nevertheless, for the custom which most had till the Persian war to live in the country with their whole families, unwilling to remove. It pressed them likewise, and was heavily taken, besides their houses, to leave to things that pertained to their
[Page 263]
religion, which, since their old form of government, were become patrial, and to change their manner of life, and to be no better than banished every man his city.’ 1657
Aristophanes gives like evidence, in every comedy making 1658 mention of rich fields and meadows, of the well-to-do home-steads, of the old people basking in the sun on festal days, and all the other associations of happy country life. Remember, too, that there was no lack of slaves: so that we need not marvel if Athenian citizens born in a moderate station of life had leisure enough to spend their time in the country.
Thus, just as for Homer and Pindar, so for the Tragedians also, there was no lack of means at hand to satisfy and appease their ardent love of wood and river. No need in such an age of set formal song, while they had full enjoyment in their everyday life of the substance itself. Enough for them, in my opinion, if by means of similes and images, by word and phrase let fall here and there, they repeatedly betrayed their true inner feelings.
But should any one prefer to hold that, even in the earlier ages of Greece, there were poets who deliberately set themselves to praise the beauties of Nature, he will find me very much inclined to agree with him: in spite of the fact that, so far as I am aware, not even the name of a single writer of the kind has survived. But that is a difficulty which, I confess, presses me but little. For certainly, just the same considerations which affected a writer also affected readers: there was nothing or little to stimulate either. There would be little vogue for poets who merely dwelt on pleasures and charms which all men, without any prompting from them, could enjoy to the full. We need not wonder, then, either if great and pre-eminent poets each devoted himself to some other kind of poetry,
[Page 264]
or, if any of less note took this as their province, that their work and even their memory has perished.
And we may deal in similar manner with Aristotle, who discusses the whole subject of poetry on the assumption that no one can be rightly and strictly called a poet except one who makes it his task either to narrate or to represent on the stage human actions and the changes and chances of fortune. For I do not apprehend that it was 1659 some idiosyncrasy of the philosopher that was the sole reason why he would have us confine an art which is obviously of boundless compass within limits so narrow. It is perhaps true to say that in every subject he impresses us more by the acuteness of his observation than by the delicacy of his touch; yet he nowhere even hints at his feeling any delight in the charms of Nature and all the beauty of earth and sky. The fact is that, keen observer as he was, he recognized that the whole company of the poets with whom in that day he was acquainted, might be well comprehended within these bounds: and further, as his manner was, he based his judgement about the whole subject on the significance of its name. But, had he lived later than Virgil, who can doubt that he would have extended the limits of true poetry, lest he might seem to exclude so famed a writer?
I have said what seemed relevant concerning the character and temperament of the Greek nation. But how if I suggest and maintain that the varied forms of poetic work are linked one after another as in a series and rational succession? I confess, indeed, that I am conscious of some misgiving, whenever I find myself in danger of siding with those who demand an explanation for everything: I appreciate how deceptive and treacherous is this kind of reasoning. So I ask your indulgence, for I shall only be raising a question, not advocating a theory. Are not the conditions of human life such that we generally find
[Page 265]
men seeking for their happiness first in action or in the pursuit of truth, and afterwards, when tired and disillusioned, taking refuge in quiet rural retreat, and then beginning to enjoy the wonderful solace which springs from a closer insight into the forms and beauties of Nature? And why may we not suppose that the poetry of the ancients may have developed in a not wholly dissimilar manner? Thus poets like Homer and Pindar first celebrated and handed on such traditions of the heroic age as each had received from those before him. Then Aeschylus the Pythagorean showed the splendid power that lies in high philosophy. Then when each of these fields had been 1660 well and thoroughly worked, it remained for a later age to betake itself to the quiet haven, as I have called it, of Nature and the pleasant country-side.
And soon, following in this flight, would be seen men of Homer's school, busy active spirits wearied at last of war or politics; yes, and members of the school of Aeschylus (if I may use the phrase), they too wearying at last of restless and perplexing speculation, tossed hither and thither by the great problems of human life, with no one to say the final word, no clear principle to guide them. Lucretius is a striking example of the one class, Virgil of the other. Indeed, the essence and spring of the Lucretian muse may be traced to this one simple fact, that the poet gladly and joyously lets himself be drawn up, far above all thought of himself and his own concerns, into themes difficult and remote:
From such-like thoughts I mighty pleasure find,
And silently admire thy strength of Mind;
By whose one single force, to curious eyes
All naked and exposed whole Nature lies. 1661
He has not simply the desire that secret mysteries may
[Page 266]
be made clear: nor that the subtle principles and shapings of the universe should be sought out successfully: still less does he perceive immortal and highest goodness shadowed forth in the outward things which meet our eye: would, indeed, it had been thus! but Lucretius had no conception of the kind. All he aims at, all he desires and strives for, is to succeed in offering to anxious and troubled souls some sort of relief and comfort by mere contemplation of the vastness and wonderful beauty of the world. He stands, indeed, as a follower of Epicurus, and claims to be entirely loyal to that master's teachings: indeed, he unceasingly claims that no other medicine than the ‘peculiar tenets’ of the philosopher can touch the diseases of the soul and the troubles and sorrows of human life. Yet we feel throughout the whole poem that the man himself is tortured in his own mind and driven this way and that, as if conscious that he has no sure foothold where he 1662 stands: but that for a while he is cheered and of somewhat happier mind when he reviews the marvels of Nature, the courses of the heavenly bodies, the sounds of wood and hills, the flowings of river and ocean. And we may plainly perceive that all these wonders are thus honoured by him not merely as illustrations of his teaching, but also as the solace and the one and only refuge for his own spirit.
But I shall deal with this topic elsewhere: for the present I only wished to say enough to enable any one to form an opinion whether such an observer of earth and heaven as we infer Lucretius to have been does not naturally, and in due succession, come later than Aeschylus.
Next, to take Virgil's case, I apprehend that none will question that his poems are well calculated to give pleasure chiefly to those who after a life spent in public before the eyes of all men have at last withdrawn into quiet, having realized by experience how little even the most advantageous worldly fortune avails to a good and happy
[Page 267]
life. This most winning of all poets was, as any may perceive, wont to temper any too bitter complaints about his own life by a not displeasing tone of melancholy: as is often the case with those who have passed their life in the blaze of a court and in public cares. His sorrow and sympathy for ‘wretched and weak mortals’ (I adopt his own expressions) remind one of a person trying to soothe a child's tears, sympathizing, yet half smiling all the while. He brings into his poems the cattle in their summer pastures, the oxen at the plough, the flocks of sheep, the swarms of bees, even the growth of trees; each plays its part, and the poet not unwillingly seems to enjoy each scene, as if he was afraid that, should he seek anything beyond these simple joys, it would all (as they say) vanish in smoke and ashes.
I deem it enough to say thus much here as to Virgil's position in connexion with our present discussion. In fact, just as Lucretius points out the refuge offered by river and wood to men wearied by philosophy and thought, so Virgil, in like manner, points those surfeited with the life 1663 of politics and business to the same retreat.
Some may perhaps object that my whole theory has been invented for the occasion, and has been adroitly drawn from the particular quality, and confirmed by the single example, of the poetry of the Greeks: I say, of the Greeks, since there is no doubt the Roman poets were pupils of the Greeks. And then they insist that it is unfair to measure the art by a theory we have shaped for ourselves, based on that single example.
It may be worth while, then, to consider how the case holds among nations widely differing both in time and genius. For instance, the Hebrew sacred writers, who were the first to address themselves to poetry and song, by no means failed to appreciate the charm and beauty of the world, yet not one of them ever devoted himself
[Page 268]
in particular to that special field. All through the long ages they were writing verse, with consummate art and with glowing phrase, yet never made the main argument of even the shortest psalm to turn on the glory of the country and of Nature. And why? (for I will say my mind, with all reverence for the Divine Presence). They possessed, they of all men most assuredly, something which the whole company of Greeks, both dramatists and Homerics, wholly lacked. For they enjoyed a sure and certain hope both of attaining truth and of living well and happily. No need had they of the solace of retirement and rural bliss, whither to make retreat when wearied and sad. For they had knowledge of Him who is the beginning and the end; and full of devotion to Him, could neither be touched by sorrow nor weariness. A light to guide them was present night and day with them all, at all times and in all places: and if perchance it seemed to hide itself either through their sins or through some misfortune, it 1664 was not to river or valley that they fled, nor to rocks or solitudes, as if the mere outward show of things seen by mortal sight had any strength to lift their trouble. But, leaving the streams, they held that the Fount Himself was their true refuge.
‘Did, then, the Hebrew prophets turn Nature, and all her charms to no account?’ On the contrary, they did, and great account too. For all the forms and appearances of things seen around us in the marvellous structure of earth and sky, they read as indications and, as it were, pledges of God's nearer Presence and of a world truly divine. It was not, therefore, in search of repose or consolation that they turned themselves to these charms and beauties, but from the first they had learnt that it was by their aid that their minds should rise to higher and better things. And in this way they left no part of Nature untouched, and illuminated all that they touched with
[Page 269]
a mysterious halo. Never did they sing of beauty without a tender sweetness, nor of sorrow without deep feeling, nor of magnificence without a kind of enthusiasm. Indeed (if I may use secular language in connexion with so sacred a theme)
Th' ethereal vigour is in all the same;
And every soul is fill'd with equal flame. 1665
And this is equally true, whether, like Job, they look around them and, recognizing everywhere traces of God's power, make no doubt of His goodness: or, like Isaiah, they take the country and such country operations as the Jews were most familiar with as texts for their teachings or for their rebukes: or finally, like the royal psalmist, follow the common paths of Nature and sing like travellers as they go, finding springs of praise to Almighty God from every object that meets them. Yet while thus taking delight in Nature, they clearly fix the heart and essence of their poetry quite otherwhere: therein resembling the Homeric and Greek poets, though with a higher blessing upon them.
Well, all these things, I think, make for our principle, so far, at all events, that the race most conspicuously wanting in pastoral poetry was just that one on which 1666 alone could never fall the heart-sickness which arises from the feeling that all labour is vanity and that the life of poor wretched mortals is not worth living.
And now, leaving the Hebrew writers, let us pass on to those men who were the first to dedicate themselves to our own holy faith and to the true wisdom: we shall find that their case is not different, though not exactly the same. For, to confess the truth, we shall look in vain, at all events for many ages, in that ‘city of God’, not merely for Virgilian or pastoral poetry, but for any kind
[Page 270]
of poetry at all. And why? It was (if we may give a meagre and inadequate answer to so far-reaching a problem) because they had none of that strong sense of need, none of the restless longing for a nobler life, for which poetry is needed as a solace. For the very foundations of their faith assured them that they were made sharers of a life of bliss and holiness. No need for them, like Homeric writers, to comfort themselves, as far as might be, by poetry and song, because the things they loved were far from them: no need with Virgil to deplore the sad lot of humankind, in which no true happiness could be found, but only such temporary relief as the country and its scenery can give.
But perhaps you may wonder how it was possible that, when there were no regular poets, men could find where-withal to satisfy their hearts, full, as they were, of love and enthusiasm. Well, there were the Hebrew Scriptures, the prayers and sacred songs of the Church, and all the many sacraments that touched life at all its points. These were three veins of truest poetry and were rich and abundant indeed: by their ministry the longings and aspirations of pious souls might well find full expression, even though never marshalled in verse or set in rhythmic measure. In a word, the mysteries of divine Truth supplied the place of poetry among our forefathers, while now the present generation readily forgoes that higher wisdom, satisfied as it would seem with that poetry which is but a shadow of it.
1667 ‘But still, even in those times, there were some, too, among the followers of the Church who in nowise were true to the blessings within their reach: there were degenerate and restless men, liable to the greatest perplexities and anxieties. There was surely nothing,’ say some, ‘to hinder these from finding relief in Virgilian and rural poetry: yet they never did so.’ Such critics go further
[Page 271]
and are inclined to doubt if the poetry of Virgil be rightly traced to the source which we have suggested. But, believe me, the objection is vain and unfounded. To begin with, how few there must have been in the early Church against whom any such a charge could be rightly brought; for while the Church was still persecuted and struggling for its existence, its pure and primitive piety survived. In the next place, if any fell away, there was a remedy close at hand: namely, a manly, brave, and lasting penitence maintained throughout life. Once possessed of this regenerative influence, men's minds had little need of elegiac measures, or that sad sweetness which seemed so essential to their forefathers who had not yet been taught better things.
To conclude: it is clear, I think, that nothing could be more apt and opportune than the rise of this class of poets: if, indeed, we are right in assuming, first, that the beginning of poetry among the ancient Greeks may have been wrought by spirits not yet wholly crushed, nor without hope that men might yet live well and happily, if only the heroic spirit could live again in the disciples of Homer, and the Pythagorean discipline in those of Aeschylus: and secondly, that men of a later day, when life-giving and heavenly light had dawned upon the world, had no need of such solace: so in the interval between the two it was fitting and natural that the Virgilian poetry should minister to men's needs and cravings. And thus the records of this school seem, at all events, not inconsistent with the principle 1668 we laid down at the outset as to poetry generally.
There occurs to me here a remark which should by no means be passed by: for it touches a fair and natural question. It may be asked, namely, how it can be that men of highest character and noblest life now rate so highly an art which those who were closest to the fountain-spring of good so willingly forwent? In fact, I apprehend
[Page 272]
that on this account there may be found even nowadays men of primitive and simple virtue who regard all that is implied by ‘writing in verse’ with small favour: as being touched with worldly stain and closely associated (so they fancy) with luxury and effeminacy.
Such men should, I think, be warned not to insist that medicine should be rejected by the sick, just because the whole have no need of it. May it not be by the special guidance of Providence that a love of country and Nature, and of the poetry which deals with them, should be strong, just at the time when the aids which led our forefathers willingly to forgo any claim to poetic taste are far removed from the habit of our daily life? Now, as I have just said, their comfort lay in three things, namely, holy scripture, solemn liturgies, and sacramental symbolism: but to-day (I say it without offence) prayers in our churches are few and far between: as for sacramental symbols, such as the first Christians saw around them at all times and in all places, there is not the least thought of such now, except when perchance the ordered ritual of the sanctuary is in question: the Hebrew scriptures are, it is true, read by all, but with little delight or real study, as if they dare not venture beyond the mere letter. Consequently, men gladly betake themselves to rural charms and pastoral poetry and find in them a very real satisfaction: 1669 no religious scruple restrains their minds from expatiating freely on every side, nor each of them from selecting for himself what may cheer the dejected spirit, spur the sluggish, or soothe the passionate.
Finally, as it would clearly be impiety to slight the opportune gift of the Supreme Power, so, too, it would be arrogant pride and foolish partiality for the times in which we live, should any one flatter himself that a keen sensibility to this refined poetry stamps him as possessing a noble mind and as being, as they say, cast in a nobler
[Page 273]
mould. Then only shall we reap the full value of these splendid bequests of our forefathers when we feel that they win us from trivial tastes or pursuits to seek those true and living remedies for all ill which both Nature herself and her handmaid Poetry only typify and foreshadow.
Thus I have dealt, as far as my powers permit, with the characteristic note and the original sources of this class of poetry: it remains to consider and pay our tribute to some of the poets themselves. And this done (and it will need several discourses, I apprehend) my task and course will be completed.
[Page 274]
1670 LECTURE XXXI
How it comes about that also those who lead a country life feel the need of pastoral poetry. Philosophy has the same two divisions as poetry, but in philosophy the order of time is reversed. The use and benefit of Virgilian poetry are by no means superseded since the diviner revelation from Heaven. Concerning Empedocles and Theocritus the forerunners of Lucretius and Virgil. Many qualities would seem to vindicate primary rank for Theocritus: yet there are more which withhold it.
There are very many facts in the history of Poetry which suggest the presence of an overruling Providence, and the most striking of all is the comparatively late, yet most well-timed, rise of that kind whose whole interest is centred in the country and the ways of Nature. For to resume shortly what we have said on this subject up to the present; we laid down, first, that both those who write, and those who admire Poetry, may be clearly divided into two classes, according to a twofold note of difference. For they are seen to be either given to action, or of quiet, contemplative disposition: either they occupy themselves with human deeds and fortunes, or they are drawn towards rural life and the study of Nature. Thus it results that whoever devotes himself to the poetic art tends to one or the other of these two classes, according as he is endowed 1671 with an active or a tranquil temperament. In the next place, we said that the poetry of the Greeks developed in its various parts and members, according to a certain sequence and order: the law and plan being that the poetry of Homer and of action had its rise prior to those who, like Virgil and Lucretius, betook themselves to the benign retreats of the country and to Nature, because weary
[Page 275]
either of the anxieties of active life or of the fruitless quest of truth. Nor was this a mere accident, but it was due to a method and a plan, it being a gift conceded by a Benevolent Power to suffering mortals that, at fitting time, writers should appear who would help them to enjoy the hidden solace wherewith all things seen around us are instinct to overflowing.
But I understand that this theory of ours is especially criticized in that portion of it where we suggest that the reason why the ancient Greeks never evolved pastoral poetry may perhaps have been due to the fact that they always possessed the means of enjoying and using the charms of Nature and the country. And my critics urge: ‘We have ourselves known poets, and distinguished poets too, who, so far from being led to feel through their daily and ordinary experience of these rural delights, that life could be lived without the poetry of them, dedicated a whole lifetime to composing poems of this very quality. How could it be, then,’ they ask, ‘that the ancients who were stirred by the same feelings should never have expressed them?’
But could any one really assert that it is impossible for men, when living in the midst of enjoyment, to feel a sense of need or any sorrow of mind? The truth is, we are wont to be troubled, not merely by the absence of the things we love, but are also, in great part, afflicted by a certain torturing sense of powerlessness; so that the mind proves unequal to the full enjoyment of its pleasures; it seems ‘to wander on enchanted ground with dizzy brow and tottering feet’. 1672 Which of us is not sometimes affected almost to despair by the splendid vision of earth and sky: when, wherever a man casts his gaze, the lights and shadows
[Page 276]
of hill, wood, and shore all appear charmingly intermingled, shifting from moment to moment, yet ever keeping a law 1673 of beauty, and nevertheless he feels himself unequal to true admiration or appreciation? Who has not sometimes been filled with emotion at sight of some nook of scenery— pleasant it may be, or perhaps of grimmer aspect— whether by reason of some childish memory or some subtle suggestion of things now lost beyond recall, or finally by the mere grace of form and colour; while nevertheless he has no feeling of satisfaction, for he is conscious that either through some personal shortcoming or through some cause beyond his own will and thought, he is losing much, very much, of the real beauty or majesty of the scene? Indeed, there is nothing for which this human lot of ours is more wont to be deplored than the fact that we cannot ourselves command our feelings or solace them by expression. Do not the more sensitive spirits among us, when filled with special love for any object, constantly lament that no words, not even any feelings, are really adequate to express their love? Are there, for instance, any words delicate enough or exquisitely modulated enough to express fitly and adequately the caressing endearments of mothers playing with their children?
So we must take it as established, that to a large number men and women poetry is a requisite, even though each has his own special delights ready to his need. But as for the ancient Greeks, what I think is simply this:—inasmuch as they were happily gifted with most delightful scenery and an ideal climate, those of them who were lovers of the country had at hand all that each needed for his solace and joy, in spite of the fact that they were wholly wanting in poetry of the Virgilian order: seeing that lyric and heroic poets particularly, and indeed the tragedians also, had full scope and opportunity for introducing many passages such as both bear witness to and
[Page 277]
give delight to minds devoted to Nature and the country. Thus, unless I am mistaken, what I before maintained still holds good: this pastoral muse was by no means inconsistent with the thought of Homeric and Aeschylean times, but neither was it absolutely essential to them. Moreover, in deed and truth, it had not yet developed; the reason 1674 being that men had not yet fully realized how little either the study of philosophy or a life of action availed really to satisfy their cravings: and it only finally emerged to light (such was God's goodness) when human nature began to perceive her need of some such comfort.
I will here merely add a single argument, lest perchance we may seem to some in this view of ours more like dreamers than philosophers: namely, that this entire question turns pre-eminently upon a distinction which is rooted in the facts of nature and of the human mind. It has, in truth, been ordered by the great and perfect Source of all good that His influences should flow towards wretched and suffering humanity through a twofold channel: He, partly, reveals Himself by all the wondrous array of the world and the stable order of all we see around us, and, partly, by His guidance and control of human history. Thus we at once perceive that there may well be two schools, not only of Poetry but of Philosophy also, so far at least as it deals with the things of earth: and the distinction will depend upon the fact that some are more strongly affected by the facts of human life, others by the beauty of earth and sky. And thus, just as the Philosophy of the ancients has on the one hand its Pythagorean, on the other its Ionic school, the former contemplating the ‘paths of heaven’ 1675 and the secret ways of Nature, the latter being wholly drawn to consider the inconstant play of Fortune and the character or civic life of men, so the art of Poetry has its own division arising from the same law.
[Page 278]
I observe that there was this one important difference in the history of philosophers and poets: in Poetry the Homeric and active kind was the first to develop: it was a somewhat later age that sang of the things of Nature and the culture of ploughed fields. But in the schools of Philosophy the course taken was exactly the opposite: at least if we are not wholly to disregard that oft-quoted 1676 praise of Socrates: who according to Cicero ‘was the first who brought down philosophy from the heavens, placed it in cities, introduced it into families, and obliged it to examine into life and morals, good and evil’. 1677 You may ask how it was that such similar circumstances should have proceeded in so contrary an order. Well, I am inclined to think that the explanation is simply as follows. The one aim of philosophers is the search after truth: but those who devoted themselves to this, betook themselves more especially to studies wherein truth seemed less on the surface, and needing rather to be drawn up from far deeps. For the enterprising, gifted, and even self-reliant race of Greeks, when first it occupied itself with literature, was by way of fancying that on the subject of human character everything was bound to be simple and straight-forward. And this is, for the most part, the attitude of children: indeed, the saying that the ancient Greeks remained children all their lives has completely passed into a proverb: καὶ γέρων Ἕλλην οὐδΕίς (‘no Greek was ever an old man’). But, on the other hand, as to physical principles:—‘numbers and motions, the beginning and end of things ... the magnitude of the stars, their distances, courses,’ and, in a word, ‘all that relates to the heavens’ 1678 — all these were virgin themes and still shrouded in doubt: here they recognized a field for their subtle intellect, here there were secrets to be revealed, so that such as aspired to be ranked as philosophers betook themselves to these
[Page 279]
questions; leaving the poets to deal with all the region relating to human affairs, to fate, fortune, and character. But as time went on, and they realized by long experience what impenetrable obscurity lay over men's fortunes, and therefore over men's characters as well: how hard and arduous was the precept ‘know thyself’: then it was they turned their minds to moral philosophy and made Poetry hark back to subjects of country life and Nature study. For as the issue of their own lot grew daily more obscure and involved, with all the more sympathy and longing did they turn their eyes to all the various glory of earth and sky, like men who, when accurate knowledge has been denied them, would fain seek some sign and augury in any thing whatsoever they might encounter.
But I need not pursue this further. I only wished to 1679 safeguard myself against the thought that might occur to some of you that in lauding the value of Virgilian poetry as being bestowed by way of noble gift upon weak and wearied humanity, I have exalted it unduly. But again, on the other hand, some one, perhaps, and not without a certain plausibility, may urge: ‘So be it then: granted that this pastoral Muse is notably adapted to solace men's minds: but, even so, who can suppose it divinely imparted? more especially seeing that the one true and eternal medicine for the soul was vouchsafed at the very same time: when that was once given, such slight and temporary relief was bound to cease. What’, they ask, ‘is the use of Virgil's pastorals, when we have inspired utterances issuing from the Holy of Holies itself? To what end, “the fields and the cool streams in the valley,” the pathetic sweetness of river and wood, when the way lies open to all, which conducts to heavenly repose, to the abodes of those who are justly called blessed? Why, have you not yourself already ruled that the primitive pure Church willingly forwent all the art and charm of Poetry,
[Page 280]
just on this very account, that human life was so much altered for the higher and better, that solace of this kind came to seem trivial and absurd?’
But, in sober fact, who has ever supposed that the one and only cause of all the divine gifts to man is found in their apparent use to ourselves? Does not every year testify how lavish, indeed how prodigal, is Nature: whether we consider the wealth of flowers scattered in every nook and corner, of infinite and most delightful variety, whose colour and feature, nevertheless, no single human being will ever enjoy: or the luxuriance of wild berries and all kinds of fruit, of which the richer the prospect in spring and summer, the wider the scattering 1680 by the winds of autumn? To whom of us all—those at least who have left our youth behind us—has not the truth of Virgil's lines come home only too often?—
This youth (the blissful vision of a day)
Shall just be shown on earth, then snatched away. 1681
So let none deem it beyond credence that Virgilian poetry, even though only just come to birth, might possibly be superseded and set aside on the discovery of truths with more power to heal, more charm to recreate mankind. Besides, who knows but that it may have been bestowed upon us by divine counsel as a reproach to our sluggish and ungrateful minds, to the end that we might not ever remain unworthy of divine providences? For, assuredly, that vein of poetry, that sought a life of quiet and tender feelings, that loved to hide in sheltered nooks, might stand as eternal proof how little mortal minds are self-sufficing, whether they betake themselves to worldly business or philosophic contemplation. It might reprove the folly of those who, when the certainties of heaven are offered to them, prefer to cling to the uncertainties of
[Page 281]
earth. It might, finally, afford comfort to weaker spirits, and prepare those wearied with vice and error for a sterner discipline.
Such are the considerations which move me to believe it not extravagant for any one to maintain that it was not without the guidance of providence that there appeared, just at their particular times, first Lucretius and later Virgil, who may be said to be the leaders in this new family of poets. Moreover, there was a mass of material ready to hand for each in his work; they by no means entered on an utterly virgin field: already the ground had been broken, and the way, so to speak, levelled, for Lucretius, by Empedocles; for Virgil, by Theocritus.
As to Empedocles, indeed, what has come down to us is too meagre for me to venture on any certain conclusions concerning the character of his writings. Aristotle, in the Poetics , denies him anything in common with Homer, except metre. 1682 Yet, in another work, if we may trust Laertius, 1683 Aristotle styled him Homeric, and said that he was gifted with every poetic art and faculty. But if we take, as a just example of his power, the fragments of his poems which are quoted from time to time in the works of Plutarch, Aristotle, and others, I should certainly say that, in so far as metre is concerned, he perhaps sometimes approaches the majesty of Homer: but as regards splendour of word and thought, his verse is comparatively dull and heavy. He deserves Lucretius’ memorable and splendid encomium, rather by reason of his penetrating insight into natural things than for any peculiarly poetic distinction. But hear what Lucretius says:
                                         Thus sang Empedocles ...
In fruitful Sicily, whose crooked sides
The Ionian washes with impetuous Tides,
And a small Frith from Italy divides:
[Page 282]
Here Scylla raves and fierce Charybdis roars,
Beating with boisterous waves the trembling shores;
Here prest Enceladus with mighty loads,
Vomits revenge in flames against the Gods;
Thro' Etna's jaws he impudently threats,
And thundering Heaven with equal thunder beats:
This Isle, tho’ with such wondrous sights as these
Doth call forth Trav'lers, and the Curious please,
Is rich with men and fruit, hath rarely shown
A thing more glorious than this single One.
His verse compos'd of Nature's works declare
His Wit was strong, and his Invention rare:
His Judgment deep and sound, whence some began,
And justly too, to think him more than Man. 1684
Is it not clear that he is praised as one who pours forth wise sayings, not as a poet who ‘pens lucid verses o'erlaying all with the Muses' charm’, 1685 an honour with which Lucretius himself does not hesitate to dignify his own name? Thus he was, probably, led to these regions of Poetry by the example and guidance of Empedocles, and, moreover, borrowed, as occasion demanded, not a little from his apparatus and general equipment, while nevertheless he charged it all—the theme being somewhat over-severe for poetry—with a certain peculiar force of his own.
But I pass from Empedocles: for indeed, like the maimed statue of some ancient hero, he has hardly left us a single complete limb even by which to recognize him. I proceed to consider Theocritus, a subject both more attractive and 1686 offering a richer material for discussion. As all know, Virgil, when he first began to poetize, resorted to his works as a fount of inspiration;
I first transferr'd to Rome Sicilian strains;
Nor blush'd the Doric Muse to dwell on Mantuan plains.
1687
[Page 283]
Thus openly and frankly he assigns to Theocritus the honours of originality and declares himself only an imitator. And of like import are his oft-repeated references to Sicily and the Sicilian Muse. In fact, we see for ourselves that the Eclogues are to a great extent derived from the Idylls: not simply isolated embellishments of expression, and brilliant passages scattered here and there, but even the whole scheme and ordering of the poems.
Nor was Virgil the only imitator of Theocritus, but as epic poets imitated Homer, so all who wrote what are called pastorals, seem, without exception, to have placed him before them as their model. Hence we should rightly infer that he was really inspired to strike out the poetic form best adapted for setting forth the way of life, the tastes and pursuits, the religion, even the light jests and badinage, of simple countryfolk.
All this being so, it may fairly be ground of surprise that I only assign a secondary poetic rank to so great a man: and hold that, not in his own right, but simply because of his literary connexion with Virgil, has he any claim to be enrolled among primary poets. And I quite admit that there are not lacking some considerations which largely make for his higher claims. For those very facts which I have already emphasized argue a mind fixed and keen upon its own special delights: his being the first, namely, to conceive for himself a kind of artistic form previously unattempted and suitable for expressing the most beautiful poetry: and also the fact that he has proved not only the pioneer, but the only master to all who followed. Moreover, I am conscious that a third fact still remains to be mentioned, which may be urged to the same end: and with this, indeed, I am still more impressed. For the truth is, that in Theocritus we not unfrequently 1688 meet a trait which is generally an index of a genuine and by no means artificial enthusiasm, namely, that designedly,
[Page 284]
and at points where his subject does not require it, he introduces rustic and simple scenes. For example, his shepherd in the first Idyll describes a beechen cup; and so, too, one of Virgil's swains does the same: but note the difference between them. The latter introduces certain similes, beautiful indeed in themselves, and the special delight of Greek artists, but, nevertheless, rather beyond the appreciation of simple shepherds:
Two figures on the sides emboss'd appear—
Conon, and what's his name who made the sphere
And shew'd the seasons of the sliding year? 1689
And of another cup we read:
Where Orpheus on his lyre laments his love,
With beasts encompass'd, and a dancing grove. 1690
On the other hand, the scenes painted on the bowl of Theocritus suggest one and all the simple life of countryfolk:
Amidst the scene, a fisher, grey with years,
On the rough summit of a rock appears:
And labouring with one effort as he stands,
To throw his large net, drags it with both hands!
So muscular his limbs attract the sight—
You'd swear the fisher stretch'd with all his might.
Round his hoar neck, each swelling vein displays
A vigour worthy youth's robuster days!
Next, red ripe grapes in bending clusters glow:
A boy, to watch the vineyard, sits below!
Two foxes round him skulk: this slily gapes,
To catch a luscious morsel of the grapes;
But that, in ambush, aiming at the scrip,
Thinks 'tis too sweet a moment to let slip—
And cries: ‘It suits my tooth—the little dunce—
I'll send him dinnerless away, for once!’
He, idly-busy, with his rush-bound reeds
Weaves locust-traps; nor scrip nor vineyard heeds. 1691
[Page 285]
This is just the way in which those who are exiled far from their loved country scenes solace their minds with some painting of them.
And then there is that most enticingly beautiful scene, where the same poet describes Galatea sporting on the seashore, and Polyphemus with his dog. Does not its quality suggest that the writer had in deed and truth himself 1692 actually witnessed something of the kind?
With apples Galatea pelts thy flocks,
And thee, rude Polypheme, gay tittering, mocks!
Sweet as thou pip'st, she calls thee goatherd-churl;
And yet thou dost not see the skittish girl,
Still piping on, more senseless than a log—
There—there—the little wanton pelts thy dog!
He, on the lucid wave, his form surveys;
And, on the beach, his dancing shadow bays!
Call—call him, lest he rush upon the fair;
Lest her emerging limbs the rover tear!
Yet, lo! the frolic maiden sports at ease,
Light as the down that floats upon the breeze,
When summer dries the thistle's silver hair,
Its softness melting into azure air!—
Her lover, led by strange caprice, she flies;
And views her scorner with complacent eyes! 1693
No doubt—I quite admit it—all sketches of this kind are but light and trivial: yet they are of quality such as any one who is a hearty and sincere lover of the country and familiar haunts, having once witnessed, instinctively fixes in his memory.
In this connexion we may fairly quote the beautiful little story of the goatherd, delivered miraculously from the cruel designs of his master:
Next shall he sing—how tyranny oppress'd
The goatherd, prison'd in his ample chest!
And how the bees from flowery meadows bore
Their balms, and fed him with the luscious store!
[Page 286]
For on his lips the favour of the Muse
Distil'd the nectar of her sweetest dews!
To thee, Comates, though confin'd so fast,
Sure. with quick pace, the vernal season past!
Happy, amid thy prison, all day long,
While honey dropp'd delicious on thy tongue!
O hadst thou liv'd with us, a brother-swain,
How oft my charmed ears had caught thy strain!
Thy goats upon the mountains had I fed,
Or o'er the tufted vales with pleasure led!
Then had thy voice its sweetest power display'd,
Beneath Th' embowering oak or pine-tree shade! 1694
Here, assuredly, even the very progress and scheme of the metre have in them something melodious and flowing which exactly becomes one freely and rapturously revelling 1695 in his own familiar fields. And I doubt if any poet has ever more happily given us a picture of a mind accustomed to delight in these summer joys of rural folk.
Is there anything, then, so decisively opposed to these merits that the real disposition of Theocritus stands finally doubtful, and it is not clear whether he sang from genuine love of country life, or moved by love of fame and gain? As a matter of fact, there is more than one consideration of the kind, and such as seem, in a case like this, to admit well-grounded conjecture. Theocritus, according to the scholiasts, when of mature age and reputation, migrated, either from the Isle of Cos or from Sicily, to the court of King Ptolemy in Egypt. Thus we have a twofold series of his poems: for some were written in his native home whilst he had actually before his eyes the woods and country he celebrated: some, at Alexandria, when he had entirely changed his mode of life as well as his place of abode. His passion for woodland and country scenes, therefore, were it genuine and heartfelt, should colour the later poems with its peculiar quality as much as the earlier. What matter if, perchance,
[Page 287]
a subject was offered to him alien to the peaceful pastoral life? if he was called upon to hymn the praises of Ptolemy, or to sing the victory of Pollux in a boxing-match, or Hercules’ mastery, when an infant, over twin vipers, or when a grown man, over the terrible Nemean lion? Colour and light and similes might nevertheless have well been drawn from his memories of Sicily and the lives of simple husbandmen. But I am afraid that in the city and court Idylls of Theocritus, we shall look in vain for any such rustic recollections. He might, at all events, have intermingled something of this kind, opportunely, in the poem called ‘The Festival of Adonis’. 1696 Since two Syracusan women are speakers in it, the Doric dialect is used, and the gardens of Adonis are described. But I find there nothing plainly suggestive of Sicily, except perhaps these exquisitely sweet lines:
And green shades, arch'd with anise, rise,
Where many a little Cupid flies, 1697
Like the young nightingales that love,
New-fledg'd, to flutter through the grove—
Now perching, now with short essay
Borne on weak wing from spray to spray! 1698
And again, the dirge called
Ἠρακλίσκος , although exhibiting a lyric and almost Pindaric splendour (indeed, the substance of it seems adapted from Pindar's first Nemean Ode), yet I doubt if, in any single particular, it preserves the simple Doric note specially characteristic of Theocritus. In short, my deliberate opinion is, that in this writer two tendencies were strongly manifested at different periods: the first, which was truer and more vital, lured him to country scenes and the joys of simple countryfolk; in the other, which was of later date, everything was modelled on Homer, and that too, not so much to please
[Page 288]
his own taste as King Ptolemy's, or perhaps that of the time and fashion.
For I leave on one side a suspicion which (I will confess) sometimes occurs to me: that perhaps not all the poems which now pass themselves off under the name of Theocritus are rightly assigned to him. But while this is, in many cases, not without plausible ground, yet I steadfastly maintain that the Syracusan Women already quoted could not possibly have been written by any one but Theocritus alone. It still holds good, therefore, that his later poems do not well agree with those written earlier: a fact which, in my view, is most significant of a mind not thoroughly devoted to any one leading enthusiasm.
However, I advance this with a certain hesitancy: but there is another fact, which seems to me clear beyond doubt, namely, that Theocritus touches these loveliest natural scenes with a coarseness and want of refined feeling, after the fashion of such as measure all things by the mere standard of outward sense. And I am afraid that the whole poetry of the ancients, except perhaps the work of Aeschylus alone, labours under this defect: such coarseness seems indeed a characteristic mark, thoroughly ingrained 1699 in their misguided religions. And not the ancients alone, but those also in our own age who have trod most closely in their footsteps, and are therefore esteemed as most graceful poets, are very far from appreciating the genuine charms of Nature. Indeed, I can see that all such are tainted with this most grievous blemish, namely, that they tend to judge whatever amid the grand scene of earth and sky touches men's eyes and ears with special delight, by a sensuous and purely material standard. In this spirit Aristophanes, in this spirit Catullus, and (what is most regrettable) Horace—the brightest and gayest of them all—retreats to river and wood not so much seeking relief for a jaded mind as to seek a fresh stimulus for his
[Page 289]
pleasures. They may be justly, then, entitled to high praise as regards the kindly spirit of their thoughts and the beauty of their verse: but I can by no means allow them to be ranked among true lovers of the country, since they took delight in the things of Nature and of the country life not for the sake of the country and Nature, but merely by reason of their self-indulgent and luxurious tastes, which, as they deemed, could be more fully indulged in the country.
Well, I am compelled, however unwillingly, to confess that Theocritus must be ranked in the number of these Epicureans; partly, because his shepherds are wont to blurt out everything in their talk, without any reserve or any reverence: a blemish, it is true, which offends us very much even in Virgil and the other ancient poets, but, nevertheless, it is far less common with them than in the Idylls of Theocritus. They give the impression of using such language as a matter of literary convention, because they have to imitate their predecessors: Theocritus rather seems to give play to his own genius and taste.
Another thing, I admit, weighs greatly with me in this connexion (which, however, ‘I feel, but want the power to paint,’ as the phrase goes 1700 ); I mean a certain tinge or quality, namely, which pervades this poet's works throughout: it is not inelegant certainly, nor without its own special charm: and yet I cannot but feel it wholly irreconcilable 1701 with an honest and sincere passion for Nature. And as in all such cases, examples best express one's meaning, let us test in the case of the Idyll known as Thalusia , what was the real spirit in which Theocritus contemplates the pageant of country life and Nature at large. No other poem more plainly declares the cravings of his natural disposition: nowhere does he give freer rein to his characteristic power of dialogue: in no other poem
[Page 290]
does the verse flow more easily. And this is how he concludes the whole thing—after a sort of musical contest, including some rather wanton stories, has been disposed of:
I sung, and (as presenting me his crook
He smil'd) the hospitable token took!
Then, parting, to the left, for Pyxa's towers
He turn'd: while we to Phrasidamus’ bowers
Slop'd o'er the right-hand path our speedy way,
And hail'd the pleasures of the festal day.
There, in kind courtesy, our host had spread
Of vine and lentisk the refreshing bed!
Their breezy coolness elms and poplars gave,
And rills their murmur, from the Naïad's cave!
Cicadas now retiring from the sun,
Amid the shady shrubs their song begun.
From the thick copse we heard, far off and lone,
The mellow'd shrillness of the woodlark's tone!
Warbled the linnet and the finch more near,
And the soft-sighing turtle sooth'd the ear!
The yellow bees humm'd sweetly in the shade,
And round the fountain's flowery margin play'd:
All summer's redolence effus'd delight!
All autumn, in luxuriant fruitage bright—
The pears, the thick-strown apples' vermeil glow,
And bending plums, that kiss'd the turf below!
Our wines four years had mellow'd in the cask—
And then how gracefully he plays amid the echoes of old story and the cadences of heroic song—
And could Alcides boast so rich a flask,
(Say, Nymphs of Castaly) when Chiron gave
The generous juice, in Pholus' stony cave?
Or did such nectar, at Anapus' stream,
Rouse to the dance the Cyclops Polypheme,
(Who hurls the mountain-rocks across the brine)
1702 As, Nymphs, ye mix'd at Ceres' glowing shrine?
Oh! may I fix the purging fan, again
(Delightful task!), amid her heaps of grain;
And, in each hand, the laughing Goddess hold
The poppy's vivid red—the ears of gold. 1703
[Page 291]
Truly, even as Virgil's Bitias, that ‘thirsty soul’,
With pleasure swill'd the gold, nor ceased to draw,
Till he the bottom of the brimmer saw; 1704
so, in composing these lines, the poet drank deep, as it were, of rural delights and, if I may so express it, ‘swilled himself with the flowing’ country: all the while, however, as any one may see, his sympathies are rather with any hedger or ditcher, than with such as, wearied with study or business, betake themselves to the country for the sake of soothing shade and shelter. Consequently, whoever, with me, holds that from this Idyll alone we may find a specimen and type of Theocritus' work, will not remain doubtful of what I have laboured to impress in this discourse, namely, that the Sicilian Muse was not truly the forerunner of the Virgilian poetry, but rather supplied Virgil with his material. And accordingly the germs of that order of poetry which is concerned with the country and Nature ought to be traced not to those who were the earliest to write pastoral poems, but rather to such as were the first to feel the real need of such relief: those whose passion for the groves, the open country, and the pastured meadows was grounded, not on opulent display but on the charms of peace and quiet.
Finally, let it not seem strange if a writer who so deeply moves readers even of our own time, and who furnished to Virgil, great poet as he was, to a large extent, the original ideas and groundwork of his poems, should be refused by us the honour of primary rank: for it should be remembered in these questions of poetic criticism, that it is all but impossible for readers to avoid unintentionally and unconsciously confusing, in many instances, their own feelings with those of the writer. Just as in feeling a pulse it is not always easy for a doctor to detect whether the
[Page 292]
beating comes from himself or from his patient, so the case is exactly the same in the close union and mingling 1705 of the minds of author and reader. Whosoever, by some charm of recollection or by some natural instinct, are carried spontaneously away to country and wood, must necessarily feel their minds moved by the mere mention of the loved objects, almost as if they saw them immediately before their eyes. Such readers forthwith perhaps attribute to the genius of the writer their own enthusiasm, which they would nevertheless have felt to just the same degree, in whatever form or manner the ideas had been presented before them. Thus it may happen that the majority of readers follow with delight even a quite mediocre poet, so long as he narrates rustic affairs in a homely country style, and natural things with native simplicity; and they take it amiss if their favourite is excluded from the ranks of those who are really born poets: though he could only be enrolled in the divine choir by a principle of criticism, which would equally admit any one of the countryfolk themselves, who himself, in person, enacted the things so described and narrated. For instance: in Theocritus there is a shepherd who upbraids his dog for sleeping at the wrong moment, obviously just after the everyday manner of country-living folk:
Hah, Brightfoot! how my dog! so fast asleep?
Here trusting to a boy such numerous sheep? 1706
Nothing could be more simple: the impression clearly is exactly as if one heard the words spoken, either in the stable or the fields. So far, therefore, as the lines have a quality imparting emotion after the manner of poetry— which they have, undoubtedly, on several grounds—it remains uncertain whether this poetic effect is due to the writer or the reader. This principle has many applications: so let no one deny that a poet may kindle in another a fire
[Page 293]
which he lacks himself; nor marvel that Virgil, the imitator, is actually nearer the fount and spring of his style of poetry than Theocritus who was its originator and pioneer.
No need, gentlemen, that I should impress on you that are of a younger generation, how gravely important it is, even in this poetic delight and enjoyment, that each 1707 of us should keep and guard his mind in all modesty, simplicity, and purity. If we do this, not even perusal of the most weak and tasteless writer will be without its advantage: while, on the other hand, from mere voluptuaries and those of debased imagination, Nature herself and Poetry her handmaid and interpreter, will withhold their own rich fragrance.
[Page 294]
LECTURE XXXII 1708
Lucretius and Virgil are taken as specimens of the two classes of the poetry which deals with Nature. Lucretius’ main delight was in the mystery and infinity of Nature, the vast ranges and the splendour of the heavens, the restless play of wind and light. To this was due his devotion to the philosophy of Epicurus.
I am well aware that the essence of the charm of poetry is too subtle, too elusive, to be brought easily under any fixed rule or to be defined in set language. To whatever part of it we turn, we fall back again and again upon the well-known saying, ‘I feel, but want the power to paint.’ 1709 Moreover, I apprehend that nowhere do those who affect to lay down principles and rules concerning these subjects find greater difficulties than when they approach Pastoral Poetry, and the case of poets smitten with the attractions of forest and river. For the cares and occupations of men, whether warlike or civil, public or private, have each severally a definite character: each has something peculiar and distinctive. You can say at once, this man is attracted by naval, that by martial glory: this delights in athletics, another in court life; a third, it may be, in scholarly 1710 retirement. On the other hand, those who feast their eyes with the beauty of Nature, all seem to exhibit precisely the same principle and disposition; or, if there is any difference, it is such that there is no hard and fast line by which you can clearly mark off one from another.
But in deed and truth, just as it is said that there is not a single individual who does not, even by his very gait, gesture, and minute distinctions of that kind, clearly differ from all other human beings, so it must needs be that those who, moved by love of country life and nature's
[Page 295]
charms, betake themselves to Poetry, possess each his own quality, of which we may at least catch the broad outlines: this is at least so far true, that when once some one or two of the primary poets have been described and classed, we shall gain some clear types to which the form and feature of the lesser poets may be referred. Hence I have thought it appropriate to our discussion if I invite you in to-day's lecture to see whether we can discover the essential point of difference between the principles and methods of Virgil and Lucretius. For we have already pronounced that to these two poets may be traced the first beginnings of that region of Poetry which has to do conspicuously and chiefly with all that relates to the appearances of sky and earth and the secret things of Nature.
So I will at once go to that which will always lie at the root of the matter in such a discussion. There are two chief ways in which the panorama of Nature is wont to affect men's thoughts and feelings most keenly. It does so, either in virtue of the deeply hidden and remote causes of things; and the mind that has once essayed to divine these causes cannot satiate itself by long and deep contemplation:—for ‘it is by nature delightful to learn and to admire’ 1711 —or, because of the charm of its quiet and tranquillity, whereby those who have either always hated public life, or those who have been wearied with it and renounced it, at last feel that they gain recreation and refreshment. The former delight in all that is more obscure and difficult, the latter in all that is sheltered from care: and thus we see that the men who, again and again, withdraw to the secrets of country life, have for the most part 1712 devoted themselves either to inquiry into Nature's inner truths, or to the mere enjoyment of her charms.
Now it is, unless I mistake, just this very difference that most especially distinguishes Lucretius from Virgil. The
[Page 296]
former delightedly contemplates Nature as if it were a shrine, full of sacred mysteries, the quality of all of which is such that they reveal themselves to none but him whose vision is purified by philosophy, and even minds best prepared for the study lose themselves in the sense of infinity. The latter, enthralled by her mere loveliness, like a child, looks for nothing more, let him only be carried among the open fields, and free to expatiate midst the wide sky and land, without care and without disturbance. Lucretius, one sees, wheresoever he casts around his gaze, is hunting for arguments and reasons whereby he may defend the speculative theories of his master, to which he has devoted himself: while Virgil, on the contrary, suffers himself to be borne away to the country, as to a haven of rest: he seems to be persistently bidding, not only the wealthy and those burdened with public cares, but even the whole tribe of philosophers and reasoners, to go and enjoy themselves elsewhere.
But why spend time on this? Virgil himself, I think, has not uncertainly indicated some distinction of this kind in these far-famed and beautiful lines:
Happy the man, who, studying Nature's laws,
Through known effects can trace the secret cause—
His mind possessing in a quiet state,
Fearless of Fortune and resigned to Fate!
And happy too is he, who decks the bow'rs
Of Silvans, and adores the rural pow'rs— 1713
Does not he seem, clearly, to describe for us this twofold significance of the poetry which is concerned with Nature? It is as if he said, ‘I could wish indeed, did not my feebler power forbid, to rank myself with the followers of Lucretius. But I am conscious that Nature has assigned me a quite different field: it is my task to sing of all that is charming, all that is beautiful, all that is tender in the
[Page 297]
scenes that meet our eye on all hands: I shall comfort 1714 myself with these, to these I shall fly for refuge, resigning that other deep, solemn, austere vein of poetry.’ And here I would have you note no doubtful traces of a certain Virgilian ‘irony’, as it is called. Doubtless, the poet denies his ability to follow the theme of Lucretius, yet he denies it with such dignity and impressiveness of phrase, as to show us plainly that, should he so will, he could attain a very high level in that sphere too:
Ye sacred Muses! with whose beauty fir'd,
My soul is ravish'd and my brain inspir'd—
Whose priest I am, whose holy fillets wear—
Would you your poet's first petition hear;
Give me the ways of wandering stars to know,
The depths of heaven above and earth below:
Teach me the various labours of the moon,
And whence proceed Th' eclipses of the sun;
Why flowing tides prevail upon the main,
And in what dark recess they shrink again;
What shakes the solid earth; what cause delays
The summer nights, and shortens winter days. 1715
In this passage he seems to single out for himself just those parts of the philosophy of Nature which Lucretius had either omitted altogether or dealt with less carefully. But when he has essayed a short Lucretian flight, he betakes himself readily and joyfully to his own true strain:
But, if my heavy blood restrain the flight
Of my free soul, aspiring to the height
Of nature, and unclouded fields of light—
My next desire is, void of care and strife,
To lead a soft, secure, inglorious life. 1716
I have here cited these familiar and widely-known lines, since I conceived it would much advance our argument, if I could put Virgil himself into the witness-box, certainly an adequate witness both about Lucretius and himself.
[Page 298]
But now to come to the heart of the Lucretian poem,—I apprehend that I have undertaken a twofold task in dealing with this subject. First, I shall maintain that Lucretius should be ranked among those possessed by a pre-eminent passion for Nature and the country: next, that he more especially contemplated Nature on that side of her which is characterized by secrecy and mystery, where its laws are not clear, its limits not defined, its divisions not clearly marked. For to both parts of my contention difficulties and objections may be raised.
1717 To begin with, it must at once strike every one, that the whole of this speculation concerning the nature of things is abstruse and remote from all poetic feeling, seeing that it includes nothing of human action, and in the greater part of it the object is to get away from the impressions of eye and ear and from the entire outward show of things, to the contemplation of some arid regions of philosophy. In short: we may, unquestionably, under this argument, bring in all that men are wont to advance whenever mathematics or physics are discussed, and the irreconcilable quarrel which is said to exist between all this kind of learning and the interests and principles of poets.
Nor can we allow ourselves to fall back on the suggestion that the peculiar disposition of the poet ill accorded with the subject of his poem: and consequently, that he seized on all opportunities of interlude and digression, whereby he might often and again escape, and betake himself to the themes he really loved: just as, in his Aeneid , Virgil contrived, in the very midst of war and heroic turmoil to refresh his spirit with some hint that recalled the memory of country life. Such a resource, I say, the case of Lucretius does not permit us: since if ever a poet, having once conceived a scheme, held to it, enforced it, emphasized it, with heart and soul, that poet was Lucretius: nor did he ever allow anything whatever to withdraw him for long
[Page 299]
from his chosen theories and philosophy. Nay, never once, as far as I know (and in this I should say he marvellously differs from Virgil), does he appear, even for the sake of relief, to exhibit any trace of a gay and trifling tone. With might and main, as the saying is, he utterly declines and avoids irony. Nowhere do we find him playing with his atoms and phantoms as we see Virgil playing with his bees and his flocks. In fact, herein he everywhere shows himself the strictest of teachers, as if he meant to imply that he would not tolerate any one who would play while dealing with such a theme. This circumstance perhaps 1718 affords scope for wider treatment: here I simply point out this—it affords strong evidence that Lucretius was a man wholly and absolutely wrapt up in his philosophy such as it was: and that no weariness of his subject led him to seek solace in forest and river.
What if I maintain further that these two qualities of his poetry were associated by inevitable necessity, and that those Epicurean dreams pleased Lucretius for no other reason than that which drew his gaze to this universal frame and feature of earth and sky? Throughout his poem, if we look a little carefully, we shall find that he is drawn to Nature like one eager to outline, not her delicate grace, the soft light of her colour, her charming retreats, but rather her vastnesses, profundities, mysteries, and infinity; those influences of hers which seem to expand out infinitely on every side and to escape our ken: those which by hidden paths lose themselves in dark obscurity, and then from time to time unexpectedly flash out and give us vistas of some far-off scene. In short, he adored the Infinite with all his heart and soul.
Let us see, then, if those splendid lines concerning the ‘whole sum of the universal sum’ (as he calls it) do not betray something of this quality. We may here quote just a few out of many which might be cited:
[Page 300]
But lastly, Things to things still Bounds appear:
So Air to lofty Hills, and Hills to Air,
So Earth the Seas, and Seas the Earth control,
But there is nothing that can bound the Whole.
Wherefore 'tis such, that did swift Lightning flie
Thro' the vast space to all eternity,
No utmost part, no end would e're be found,
So vastly wide it is, and without bound. 1719
Accordingly, once having conceived this notion of a region 1720 bounded by no limits, he seems to feel an extraordinary delight in the thought, as if he felt himself started on a free and untrammelled career, and borne through the limitless void: this is just like the pleasure, if pleasure it can be called, which children feel when, stationed on some lookout, they feel, as they often do, an impulse prompting them to cast themselves down and leap into mid, empty air. Assuredly the following lines, in which Lucretius, a little earlier in the same book had argued about the infinity of space, bear witness to such a fancy:
                                         But grant it finite—
Suppose a man on the extreamest part,
Suppose him stand, and strive to throw a Dart:
The Dart would forward fly, or hindred stay:
Choose which you will, the Reason's good each way
And firm: For if some further space admit,
Or some resistance stops its hasty flight,
That's not the end: so place the utmost part
Where e're you will, I'll follow with the Dart,
And by this single Argument deface.
(For still the Void will give a further place)
Those feign'd extreams and Bounds you fix to space. 1721
I can easily imagine that the writer of these lines, like a boy released to play, would revel with delight as his mind roamed through the extremest spaces of the universe; the mere love of his freedom and of his power to range where he would carrying him along.
[Page 301]
Observe, moreover, how eagerly his eyes are ever fixed on the sky, whether obscured by cloud or clear and serene: he cannot satiate his sense of delight as often as he gazes up at ‘this refulgent heaven above’, to use the phrase of his master Ennius. He even declares in one passage that he is astonished how men can ever cease to look out on 1722 the heavens with awe and delight.
But now attend, I'll teach thee something new:
'Tis strange, but yet ’tis reason, and ’tis true.
E'en what we now with greatest ease receive,
Seem'd strange at first, and we could scarce believe;
And what we wonder at, as years increase,
Will seem more plain, and all our wonder cease.
For look, the Heaven, the Stars, the Sun, and Moon,
If on a sudden unto Mortals shown,
Discover'd now, and never seen before,
What could have rais'd the people's wonder more?
What could be more admired at here below?
E'en you had been surprised at such a show,
But now all cloy'd with these, scarce cast an eye,
Or think it worth the pains to view the sky. 1723
Assuredly these lines, Epicurean though they may be, far surpass the Stoic motto Nil admirari ; a precept, I may briefly remark, which even Horace would seem to reprove; for he laments in a well-known passage, how
The sun, the stars, the seasons of the year
That come and go, some gaze at without fear— 1724
while, nevertheless, these very men are dumb with astonishment at the wealth of land and ocean, and treasures of purple, precious stones and gold. And if the sleek and cultured Horace, who frankly tells us that he belongs to ‘Epicurus' sty’, could not see without resentment the simple joy in this wide universal Nature diminished and extinguished, what, I ask, can we suppose that Lucretius would make of such people, Lucretius who was so keen
[Page 302]
in temperament, and carried away by such impassioned feelings? Truly, to say what I think, who knows whether this may not be the real reason why all the more refined spirits in ancient days were attracted rather to the school of Epicurus than to that of Zeno? Certainly a school which devotes such pains to the description of the outward order 1725 around, even if it assigned undue importance to the physical senses, must yet be allowed to approach more nearly to the special tastes and disposition of poets, than the one which was occupied almost entirely with a certain barren subtlety of phraseology. In a word, natural science is much more nearly allied to the Muses than Dialectics are.
Let us, however, return to Lucretius, and by way of illustration of his genius, consider one or two other passages wherein he hymns the praises of the pure, infinite ether: showing his extraordinary delight, partly in its clear brilliance, partly in its vast expanse without let or limit. Listen to him recounting in the Fifth Book its beginnings —a veritable hymn of dawn:
And thus the parts of Heaven did first retire,
And bore up with them numerous Seeds of Fire.
As when the Sun begins his early race,
And views the joyful earth with blushing face,
And quaffs the Pearly Dew spread o're the Grass,
From earth he draws some Mists with busie beams,
From wandring waters some, and running streams:
These thin, these subtle Mists when raised on high,
And joyn'd above, spread clouds o're all the sky:
Just so the parts of Heaven did upward move,
The subtle ether thus combin'd above;
And vastly wide, and spread o're every place
Contains the rest within her kind embrace. 1726
One might say these lines are redolent and fragrant of morn herself: then, a little further on, he tells of the stable peace of this great sphere in highly beautiful language:
[Page 303]
Thence Seas, thence Air, thence Ether, every Mass
Distinct from others, took its proper place:
All Fluids, and All differently light,
And therefore reach't the less or greater height.
Then Liquid Ether did the farthest rear,
And lies on softest Beds of yielding Air;
But yet its parts ne're mix, whilst Winds do blow,
And rapid storms disturb all here below;
They undisturb'd move round the steddy Pole,
And sun and stars with constant motion roll:
For that by constant turns the sky may move,
The constant motions of the waters prove; 1727
This thing the mighty Mass, the Ocean, shows,
For that at settled hours still ebbs and flows. 1728
These he sets forth, almost in the manner of Aristotle. For it was the teaching of Aristotle that neither the celestial sphere nor its inhabitants will ever be subject to the least change. ‘Neither is there any changeability of any of the existences marshalled most outwardly upon the orb of things. But unchangeable and impassive, enjoying the best and most independent life, they continue through all eternity.’ 1729 So true is it that even the speculative dreams of philosophers are inspired at times to hint at some most sacred truth.
And that famous passage concerning the gods of Epicurus will be seen to tend the same way:
For whatsoere's Divine must live in Peace,
In undisturb'd and everlasting ease;
Not care for us, from fears and dangers free,
Sufficient to its own felicity:
Nought here below, Nought in our power it needs;
Ne're smiles at good, ne're frowns at wicked deeds. 1730
Moreover, it would be strange indeed, should a poet, whose mind seems to leap forth into the void spaces of the heavens, not take pre-eminent pleasure in their brilliance
[Page 304]
and unadorned beauty. On this subject, the chief passage is that which deals with the ever-constant flow of rays of light: which, moreover, like many ideas met with in the poem, would seem to harmonize not badly with the modern theories of physical science:
   But more, the Air thro' all the mighty Frame
Is chang'd each hour, we breathe not twice the same:
Because as all things waste, the parts must flie
To the vast sea of Air: they mount on high,
And softly wander in the lower sky.
Now did not this the wasting things repair,
All had been long ago dissolv'd, all Air.
Well then, since all things waste, their vital chain
Dissolv'd, how can the frame of Air remain?
It rises from, and makes up things again.
   Beside, the sun that constant spring of Light
Still cuts the Heaven with streams of shining white,
And the decaying Old with New supplies;
For every portion of the beam that flies
Is but short-liv'd; it just appears and dies. 1731
1732 There is, too, something wonderfully fascinating and elevating in the passage where he sets forth his various speculations concerning the stars as they seem to career through the void expanse: I submit a few lines out of many which might be selected:
   Or else the Orbs may lie at rest above,
Steddy and fixt, and only stars may move;
Because the Fires, confin'd to little space,
Grow fierce and wild and seek a larger place,
And thus thro' the vast Heaven begin their Race.
Or else external Air or subtle wind
May whirl them round; or they may move to find
Their nourishment, and run where food invites
And kindly calls their eager Appetites. 1733
Do we not all feel this a most splendid picture, this simile of a flock or herd widely scattered over the vast field of
[Page 305]
the ether? especially if, to some of us, the idea has occurred spontaneously in our childhood; and this I can well believe to have been the experience of many.
Finally, Lucretius is highly excited and joyously and freely borne out of himself at any mention of swift movement, so that this third splendour may be suitably associated with those just mentioned: namely, crystal light and endless space. For example, take those exquisitely clear lines concerning the restlessness of matter: they too breathe the very spirit of a morning hymn:
For when the Morning climbs the eastern Skies,
And tuneful birds salute her early rise,
In every grove and wood with joy appear,
And fill with ravishing sounds the yielding Air;
We see how swift the beams of Th' Rising Sun
Shoot forth: their race is finished when begun;
From Heaven to Earth they take their hasty flight,
And guild the distant Globe with gawdy light:
But this thin vapor, and this glittering ray
Thro’ a meer void make not their easie way,
But with much trouble force a passage thro'
Resisting Air and therefore move more slow.
Nor are they seeds, but little bodies joyn'd, 1734
And adverse motions in small space confin'd:
And therefore from without resisting force,
And inbred jars, must stop their eager course.
But solid seeds, that move thro' empty space,
And all whose parts do seek one common place,
Whom nothing from without resists, than light
And beams more swift, must make their hasty flight,
And in that time a larger distance flie,
Whilst the sun's lazy rays creep thro' our skie. 1735
All these passages seem to establish the conclusion to which our discussion has so long been tending—namely, that these Epicurean speculations concerning the general scheme of the universe, frigid and barren as they seem to
[Page 306]
us with our greater knowledge, perhaps commended themselves to Lucretius because they were connected and mixed up with those visions, or rather phantoms, to which he was so devoted, of infinite space, of fathomless depths of light, of numbers beyond all count. We can well suppose that, while yet a boy, he was familiarized with exposed and lofty cliffs, from which a vast outlook over the Ocean or the sky was open to him. And who will doubt he felt a sort of sensuous delight, whensoever, rapt in contemplation, he gazed forth upon that free and immense Void which plays so great a part in the teaching and philosophy of Epicurus? Suppose him, too, to have been accustomed to gaze upon the sky and the sun with a cultured sympathy; to have been endowed with a power of vision which watched eagerly the rise and setting of the sun: and I should suppose the ideas with which the Epicurean school busied itself would pre-eminently delight such a man, when he once encountered their speculative dream of the phantoms and appearances given forth, hither and thither, from each object of sight. Then as regards restless motion, there is little need to point out that the lightning-swift career of the Seeds, as they are called, must have made deep impression on a poet, so delighting in swiftest natural movements of all kinds; storms, for instance, thunderbolts, and flashes of light.
1736 Finally, the whole fabric of the universe as conceived by Epicurus was moved and sustained by some indefinable force which those who deny it to be the force of destiny, yet feel to be very real and beyond all power of control: how, then, could a man, who from his earliest years had been wont to seize eagerly upon the far and wide scattered suggestions of Nature's hidden forces, possibly fail to be fascinated with this? For instance: just consider what he says in the very introduction to his whole poem concerning the blind force of the winds:
[Page 307]
For first the winds disturb the seas, and tear
The stoutest ships, and chase clouds thro' the Air:
Sometimes thro' humble Plains their violent course
They take and bear down Trees with mighty force
Sometimes they rise so high, their strength so great,
With furious storms they lofty Mountains beat,
And tear their woods.
These must be Bodies, tho’ unseen they be,
Which thus disturb Heaven, Earth, Air and Sea;
Which hardest Oaks and Rocks, and all things tear,
And snatch them up in whirlings thro' the Air.
He then compares the phenomenon with the rush of waters, as one whose ear had taught him that the sounds of forest and sea are wonderfully alike, both suggesting, and not doubtfully, a power transcending humanity:
They all rush on, as headlong Rivers flow
Swoln big with falling showers or melting snow:
Those Rocks and Trees o'return, and weighty Beams,
And whirl their conquer'd prey in rapid streams;
No Bridge can check, no force the stream controle,
It grows more wild and fierce, and beats the Mole:
Ruine and Noise attend where e're it flows,
It rolls great stones, and breaks what dare oppose:
So rush the blasts of wind, which like a flood,
Which way so e're they tend, drive rocks and wood,
And All before them: sometimes upwards bear
In rapid turns, and whirl them in the Air. 1737
Further, unless I mistake, Lucretius himself confesses that he was chiefly attracted to the Epicurean camp, because 1738 the philosophy of the sage was so largely concerned with all that is immense and boundless. Thus we have those often-quoted lines:
                                         Thro’ all he past
The strongest bounds that powerful Nature cast:
His vigorous and active Mind was hurl'd
Beyond the flaming limits of this World
Into the mighty space, and there did see
How things begin. 1739
[Page 308]
Nay, further, he declares that that which brought honour to the master would bring relief and solace to his pupils:
For when I hear thy mighty Reasons prove
This World was made without the Powers above,
All fears and terrors waste, and fly apace;
Thro’ parted Heavens I see the Mighty space,
The Rise of Things, the Gods, and happy Seats,
Which storm or violent Tempest never beats;
Nor snow invades, but with the purest Air
And gawdy light diffus'd, look gay and fair. 1740
And he proceeds joyfully to celebrate how, under his master's guidance and discovery, the path lies clear, not only to highest heights, but to hidden depths:
And thro' the earth I can distinctly view
What underneath the busie Atoms do.
From such like thoughts I mighty pleasure find,
And silently admire thy strength of Mind;
By whose one single force to curious eyes
All naked and expos'd whole Nature lies. 1741
Thus we have the poet's own, almost express, testimony concerning himself and his poems. Indeed, the thing is plain. Nothing more decisively moved him to attach himself to Epicurus than the fact that his school, as it seemed, afforded splendid conceptions whereby one might contemplate this same boundless and undefined domain, those immense and serene expanses, that marvellous rapidity of motion. Well, therefore, does he deserve to be enrolled among the lovers of Nature, since just those qualities in a philosophical theory, decide his adhesion as a disciple, which that philosophy shares in common with the 1742 external features of earth and sky. If, however, we have with sufficient probability conjectured that the very essence of the Lucretian muse lies in his delight in Nature, there will be, I apprehend, no necessity to quote an array of examples of that well-known quality whereby such poets,
[Page 309]
for the most part, declare their own learing and partiality. Such passages may be frequently met with in Lucretius, and are (I had almost said) no less Virgilian than Virgil himself. Who of all the poets has touched with more exquisite art that one single chord, as it may well be called, which, once struck, we all—except, perhaps, here and there, one or two of less sensitive feeling and with little power of enjoying any such pleasures—feel to call out an echo in our inner spirit? So in music, to the judgement of trained ears even isolated notes are said to give sufficient suggestion of a complete harmony. Of this quality is this splendid phrase:
—totum circumtremere aethera signis. 1743
And this, said of torches:
                                         tremere ignibus instant,
Instant, nec loca lux inter quasi rupta relinquit. 1744
And perhaps we may fairly add what, in another passage, is said of the moisture rising from the surface of the sea:
                                         validi verrentes aequora venti
Diminuunt, radiisque retexens aetherius sol: 1745
—that is, if we may believe the word ‘retexens’ (‘decomposing’) was introduced advisedly, seeing that it brings the process before our very eyes. For it relates to those threadlike films of vapour which we usually see drawn up from the sea towards the lower rim of a cloud behind which we know the sun to be hidden, when these bright lines look as if some one were unravelling a web and drawing out the threads one by one.
[Page 310]
1746 Even if these instances seem far-fetched to any one, yet I make certain, all will agree that they proclaim Lucretius second to none, either in that easy mastery which consists in expressing a whole thought in a single line, or in the reserve and modesty he exhibits in this field. For he selects a few out of many traits and qualities, and those such as at once strike a simple masculine mind. He does not pursue or dwell upon that which delights him: he feels awe, if one may so say, before the majesty of Nature. And thus he bears the palm from two of the greatest poets, each in their own line; he rivals Virgil in selection and reserve, and Ovid in easy power.
For the rest, since there yet remain not a few remarks, nor those unimportant, which I desire to submit concerning Lucretius, I just take the opportunity to add here by way of termination, certain exquisite lines touching first the simple country life, and next, a father's untimely death—a second common theme of Poetry. Whenever I read them I am filled with admiration at the poet's tact and judgement in withholding his hand at the exactly fitting moment: yet still more keenly am I impressed by his simple passion for Nature, so unpretentious and unartificial. But let us see:
                                         What tho' no Boys of Gold
Adorn the Walls, and sprightly Tapers hold;
Whose beauteous rays scattering the gawdy light,
Might grace the feasts and revels of the Night?
What tho' no Gold adorns, no Musick's sound
With doubled sweetness from the roofs rebound?
Yet underneath a loving Myrtle's shade,
Just by a purling stream supinely laid,
When Spring with fragrant flowers the Earth hath spread,
And sweetest Roses grow around our head,
Envied by wealth and power, with small expence
We may enjoy the sweet delights of sense. 1747
[Page 311]
And finally of all the dirges ever chanted over the dead, 1748 the essential fragrance and central essence seem concentrated in this brief and lovely strain:
   Ay, but he now is snatcht from all his joys:
No more shall his chaste Wife, and prattling Boys
Run to their Dad with eager haste, and strive
Which shall have the first kiss, as when alive.
Ay, but he now no more from wars shall come,
Bring peace and safety to his Friends at home.
Wretched, O wretched man! One fatal day
Hath snatcht the vast delights of Life away! 1749
[Page 312]
LECTURE XXXIII 1750
The simplicity of the poetic machinery in Lucretius. The two methods by which Poets describe what is legendary and foreign to their readers. Analogy as a universal description of a particular detail. Instances of both methods given from Lucretius, though he uses each rarely. He took special delight in contemplating clouds and forests. He may be compared in some ways with the renowned Florentine, Dante.
I see that while I have been pointing out the delight which Lucretius felt in the beauty of sky and earth, which is the first point that I undertook to prove, I have unwittingly introduced not a little that more properly belongs to my second point. The object of this was to show that the reason why this remarkable poet devoted himself to the study of Nature was that in it he found on all sides traces of that which is infinite and mysterious: whether it was that his mind was able, at least according to the view of Epicurus, to roam free and untrammelled through vast and infinite spaces ‘beyond the flaming walls of the world’, or whether it arose from the innumerable company of atoms conceived as flying hither and thither in the void; or, lastly, was due to the marvellous swiftness wherewith, as he supposed, all things in the universe are at all times 1751 being carried and driven along. Let us now proceed to certain other details, neither unrelated to this subject nor, as I trust, in themselves altogether without interest.
And first we may remark, that it is quite possible that Lucretius willingly dispensed with much of the machinery and the many devices which modern poets delight in: they, when they sing the praises of Nature, think that they have achieved nothing unless they produce some fact never heard of before, but which their own eyes have
[Page 313]
witnessed; or at least unless they can describe each detail at great length and in a way never used before. Hence we have those far-fetched stories, now from the Indies, now from the remotest West, such as a description of an Indian fig-tree, 1752 or of American birds, or whatever else reading of many books may have particularly impressed upon learned men.
I should not, of course, deny that the most delightful poetry is sometimes largely concerned with things which the writer has never seen. Who would maintain so foolish an opinion? especially among ourselves, who are wont, in the whole of this region of Art, to ascribe the primary, or, at all events, a prominent influence to Fancy. But of one thing I make no doubt: where any writers in this class of poetry have conspicuously won favour and applause, it has been very largely due to one of two causes: either because that which they have made peculiarly their own has in it some quality which is obviously common to all nations and regions: or because, by a certain law of ‘analogy’, there is a real correspondence between things known and things unknown.
And first of all to explain, briefly, what I mean by ‘analogy’—we see that not only the quality and character of natural scenes, but also the manners of men, their abilities, their religious instincts, while they exhibit an 1753 endless variety, dependent on the temperament of each nation, its geography and its history, yet at bottom always retain a strange common likeness. Consequently, when we know what a man has actually done, it will not be hard to infer what he will do, making allowance, of course, for difference of time and circumstance. For instance, among poets within our own memory, not one has more nearly touched men's sympathies than he who has sung of Thalaba's youth, his wanderings, his death-won triumph.
[Page 314]
Yet the tendency of his whole story is, at least on the surface, to commend to us the Ottoman faith and the monstrosities of Mahomet. Notwithstanding, it has given pleasure and, in my opinion, always will give pleasure, even to those who are whole-heartedly devoted to the pure and sacred Truth: mainly and especially, if I mistake not, by reason of the implied, underlying comparison which the reader's mind spontaneously institutes for itself. While we read, we reflect, that is to say, how one affected and influenced, in this or that manner, by these erroneous beliefs, would develop when once brought to a knowledge of sound and pure religious truth. In fact, in modern times, good and pious men take pleasure in the study of the ancient poets largely for this simple reason, that they can tacitly transfer to the Great and Good God that which is said in Homer (it may be) or in Pindar, in honour of the fabled Jove, regarding them as dimly feeling after Him and foreshadowing the true Revelation and Sacrifice. And thus a true religious reserve is carefully protected: genuine piety is not exposed to the eye of men and the full light of publicity, yet it is present, hidden behind a veil, at one time and place the veil of ancient Greek worship, at another that of modern errors.
But it would be endless to set forth all that might be said in this connexion. For the principle is of widest application, and is applicable not only to poetry, but to all pleasurable arts which touch humanity. Why else (for 1754 instance) are the ruined remains of ancient temples, ‘preserved through many years by ancestral reverence’, 1755 gazed upon with tender regard, even by those who are wont, with greatest vehemence, to revolt from and condemn the creeds and ceremonies which they typify? Simply because they are conscious of some vague ‘traces of their own flame’—as Virgil puts it. 1756
[Page 315]
Take again the analogy of men who are travelling in the dark, or when the moon gives but a sparing and niggardly light, along a path that they have never traversed before: do they not ordinarily try to find some point, however vague, of likeness with places that they have long known and loved? And this gives them even more comfort and pleasure than would the beauty of the scene itself.
Now this is exactly the method and expedient of those poets who aim at describing trees or wild animals or the manners of men or scenes of nature, which are removed by a whole hemisphere, it may be, from themselves and their own experience. The most successful in this sphere are not those who most laboriously depict the native colour and qualities of things, but those rather who can now and then, as it were with a stroke of the pen, reproduce just those things which are dear and familiar to the reader: the touch may be slight and faint, yet it is sufficient to recall the scene. This it is, in my view at any rate, which makes Virgil's book concerning bees so sweet and delightful to our minds.
so far, then, of that ‘analogy’ which, when correctly and fitly observed, would seem the chief reason why poets have sometimes been quite successful when putting before us minutely detailed description of things never seen by themselves or their readers. I now pass to consider the other method which I spoke of as being also used by them. According to Horace, it argues a high degree of poetic gift to be able ‘to put one's own stamp on what is a common theme’:
'Tis hard, I grant, to treat a subject known
And hackneyed, so that it may look one's own. 1757
With ourselves nowadays, however, this standard of criticism must be, as it were, inverted, and praise is rather to be accorded when an author succeeds in putting a common 1758
[Page 316]
stamp upon what is his own. I will give some illustrations to explain what I mean by this. Suppose that an English painter represents trees, wild animals, towns, men's features and garb, such as he imagines them to be, say in Africa or any other quarter of the world; but he nevertheless tones the whole work with a certain natural colour equally appropriate to all regions and localities. There are the light of heaven and the sun, the waters of the sea, the bloom of the flower, the varying play of sunbeam and shadow. The result is that our mind passes from what is peculiar to one spot into that which is universal; we are not cramped up in a narrow sphere which does not interest or inspire us. Now we may well suppose that just this is the method and principle of Poetry: indeed, pastoral poetry can only win praise and give pleasure if it is not wholly without some reference, however slight, to things and objects which, being scattered over and common to the whole world, appeal equally to all: such as the deeps of air or sea, the murmur of the forest, the liquid flow of streams. By way of illustration, take this splendid picture by Virgil himself, a picture which I should place at the head of all such descriptions:
In fair Calabria's woods a snake is bred,
With curling crest, and with advancing head:
Waving he rolls, and makes a winding track:
His belly spotted, burnish'd is his back.
While springs are broken, while the southern air
And dropping heav'ns the moisten'd earth repair,
He lives on standing lakes and trembling bogs,
And fills his maw with fish, or with loquacious frogs:
But when, in muddy pools, the water sinks,
And the chapt earth is furrow'd o'er with chinks,
He leaves the fens, and leaps upon the ground,
And, hissing, rolls his glaring eyes around.
With thirst inflam'd, impatient of the heats,
He rages in the fields, and wide destruction threats. 1759
[Page 317]
We positively seem to see the creature gliding along before our eyes: yet to confess the truth I am conscious 1760 of something lacking, something which will make it clear that the story is told by a poet and not merely by a naturalist. And this is furnished, and most beautifully, by the lines that follow:
Oh! let not sleep my closing eyes invade
In open plains, or in the secret shade,
When he, renew'd in all the speckled pride
Of pompous youth, has cast his slough aside,
And in his summer liv'ry rolls along,
Erect, and brandishing his forky tongue,
Leaving his nest, and his imperfect young,
And, thoughtless of his eggs, forgets to rear
The hopes of poison for the following year. 1761
The line:
In open plains, or in the secret shade,
by a strange magic suddenly brings the whole picture into the common field of general feeling: just in the same way as musicians are sometimes wont to introduce some simple air, familiar to us all, amid intricate and subtle harmonies: and by this expedient those who would else have only applauded coolly and formally are stirred to enthusiasm.
Ovid, too, has some lines which may in this connexion usefully be compared with Virgil. In each poet mortals of divine parentage are described as returning to their ancestral home; in Ovid it is Phaethon; in Virgil Aristaeus. Each poet describes the divine palace, Ovid that of the Sun, Virgil that of the Nereids. Mark, however, the wide difference between them. Ovid's lines dazzle, glitter, and ring in our ear: all in his description is foreign to earth, miraculous in scale:
The Sun's bright Palace, on high Columns rais'd,
With burnish'd Gold and flaming Jewels blaz'd;
[Page 318]
The Folding Gates diffus'd a Silver Light,
And with a milder Gleam refresh'd the Sight;
Of polish'd Iv'ry was the Cov'ring wrought:
The Matter vied not with the Sculptor's Thought,
For in the Portal was display'd on high
(The work of Vulcan) a fictitious sky.
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
O'er all, the Heav'ns refulgent Image shines;
On either Gate were six Engraven Signs. 1762
Then a little further on:
The God sits high, exalted on a throne
Of blazing Gems, with Purple Garments on. 1763
1764 There is not a single word carrying the faintest suggestion of the ordinary everyday aspect of the sky and earth which we all know and love: unless, indeed, we are to believe that Ovid, when he wrote these lines, saw in his mind's eye the sky at sunrise, with its golden and fiery splendours. Certainly something like this is not altogether inaptly figured by the mention of the lofty columns of surpassing brilliance, having, on each side, widespread doors of purest silver, while above spreads a firmament of marble or of ivory. Then, seeing that the poet imagines as graven thereon, the heaven, sea, lands, with figures of Nymphs and all the rest of the general panoply and array of the world we see around us; perhaps his intention was by such device to hint at the marvellous variety of the shapes and forms which any one who is accustomed to enjoy that pageant is wont to trace out or imagine in the clouds, especially at morn. Such an interpretation may perhaps be forced: but even allowing it to have been in the poet's mind, yet it does not bring the poem under the law which we are laying down. For the poet was bound at least to let fall some indication, however slight and passing, sufficient to lead the mind of the reader to the
[Page 319]
point. But there is nothing of the kind here, not the faintest trace. Wherefore Ovid is entitled to praise for poetically presenting strange and rare things with ingenious skill, but not as celebrating well-known and cherished objects with love and sympathy.
And now compare with his lines these of Virgil:
                                         ‘Conduct my son, conduct him here:
'Tis lawful for the youth, deriv'd from gods,
To view the secrets of our deep abodes.’
At once she wav'd her hand on either side;
At once the ranks of swelling streams divide,
Two rising heaps of liquid crystal stand,
And leave a space betwixt, of empty sand.
Thus safe receiv'd, the downward track he treads,
Which to his mother's wat'ry palace leads.
With wond'ring eyes he views the secret store
Of lakes, that, pent in hollow caverns, roar; 1765
He hears the crackling sounds of coral woods,
And sees the secret source of subterranean floods;
And where distinguish'd in their several cells,
The fount of Phasis, and of Lycus, dwells;
Where swift Enipeus in his bed appears,
And Tyber his majestic forehead rears:
Whence Anio flows, and Hypanis profound
Breaks through Th' opposing rocks with raging sound;
Where Po first issues from his dark abodes,
And, awful in his cradle, rules the floods;
Two golden horns on his large front he wears,
And his grim face a bull's resemblance bears:
With rapid course he seeks the sacred main,
And fattens, as he runs, the fruitful plain. 1766
All this descriptive detail as to the hidden source of rivers, no less, I apprehend, suggests the realm of fable, is no less remote from the test of our daily vision and the ordinary course of our life, than the account given by Ovid of the celestial palace of the Sun. But Virgil, with most delightful skill and charm, has succeeded, merely by the
[Page 320]
reference to caverns, in communicating in full force and commending the whole scene to all who have ever delighted in deep caves, ‘fresh water and seats of natural stone’, 1767 and all the other adjuncts whereby the wide expanse of shore, the moan of the sea, nay, the beating of the waves, and the dull indefinite tremor, which, as we all know, pervades such regions, soothe and win man's spirit; the sense of touch, no less than those of eye and ear, seeming to suggest the near presence of infinity. Just by this one mention of these delightful recesses, the poet, I repeat, somehow softens his fabled story and lifts it into a region where men's minds feel free to range.
We learn from these examples that great writers, whenever they painted a scene which was either remote and foreign to the reader, or perhaps too obviously fabulous, were wont to meet the difficulty by a twofold device: either they threw light on the whole scene by the help of some analogy; or else they seemed, as if by accident, to bring out some familiar and homely detail, where the best light could fall upon it. Now let us go back to Lucretius: who while he does not offer many instances of what is 1768 fabulous or foreign to daily use, is not, nevertheless, wholly lacking in passages which seem to admit of this artistic expedient. He presents in one passage an elaborate and magnificent description of the rites of the Great Mother, Cybele: and, after having therein detailed much, absolutely foreign and abhorrent to the ideas and manners of his own age, it is very noticeable how happily he brings the whole story down to the common sympathies, which all can share alike: and this by one allusion to childhood and the games in which all children take part:
Here some in Arms dance round among the crowd,
Look dreadful gay in their own sparkling blood,
Their crests still shaking with a dreadful Nod.
[Page 321]
Those represent those armed Priests, who strove
To drown the tender cries of Infant Jove;
By dancing quick they made a greater sound,
And beat their Armor as they danc't around,
Lest Saturn should have found and eat the Boy,
And Ops for ever mourned her prattling Joy. 1769
Again, he has shown how effective ‘analogy’ can be in several places, when his reasoning grows rather abstruse, but the most striking instance is where an earthquake, a catastrophe almost unknown at Rome, is attributed to the blind force and rage of the winds:
Thus Aegae, thus Phenician Towns did fall,
The greedy earth gap'd wide, and swallow'd all:
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
But if the Vapor's cold, too weak the wind
To force a way, if by strong bounds confin'd,
It spreads o'er all the Pores the Earth contains,
And brings a shivering cold thro' all the veins,
As when Frost comes, it brings a trembling chill,
And makes our members shake against our will. 1770
This is indeed consummately done: the whole earth is made to shiver, as if it were endowed with life: the result is that he manages to bring clearly before his readers a very rare and unusual occurrence, and almost makes them feel it.
But, as I have said, such instances are few and far 1771 between in Lucretius: inasmuch as he, for the most part, preferred to keep within the sphere of common life. It would be hard to name any poet who is content with such slight material for his poetry: grant him the tiniest outlook upon the sky or the or the ocean, and he will find a source of delight there, and space enough for the quest of reasonings and illustrations to defend the philosophy of his master Epicurus. And truly, indeed, wheresoever we turn, all things are full of mystery and high argument. No need
[Page 322]
for distant journeyings, nor great array of books and authorities, nor painful and curious search into ancient histories: only cast your eye around, there will be no lack of subject material, if once the mind is thoroughly imbued with some true principle, or at least with some imaginary dreams which can serve as a principle. In truth, the theories which give us the greatest pleasure, as we conceive or dwell upon them, are those which seem beyond the reach of the ordinary run of mankind, and yet deal with subjects which all see and talk about. A writer may well feel proud if he has described with more than usual skill a subject that is foreign or obsolete, but to endow with fresh and original brilliance some familiar and trite field of thought, we hold to imply truly exceptional and all but divine power of insight. Nay, the man who is not merely able to feel and trace some hidden power which prevails through the broad world, in the sun, the sky, the movement of water and air, but to reduce it to rule and law and stated modes of action, seems almost gifted with another sense beyond the five known to Nature. So that none need feel surprise if a poet whom we have decided to be mainly devoted to all that is mysterious and infinite, should in large measure have spontaneously spent his powers on subjects open to all and, as one may say, met with in the highway of life.
Yet at times even Lucretius himself lingered with evident 1772 zest over subjects highly intricate and involved. For instance, no one has ever more finely and exquisitely painted the form, colour, and movement of clouds. He shows, too, in no uncertain manner, that he takes special delight in roaming through forests and all densely wooded regions. Yet each of these themes appears at first sight to be exactly the opposite of those before referred to; namely, the open sky, the boundless ocean, and the clear unspotted brilliance and colour of the dawn.
[Page 323]
But I should unhesitatingly maintain that even here Lucretius is quite consistent. For in the case both of clouds and woods the eye roams along uncertain tracks, as it were, and refuses to be tied down within fixed and bounded limits. As for the clouds, they change utterly and constantly even while we gaze at them. And where we light on a region more thickly wooded than ordinary, and impenetrable to the eye even in leafless winter, do we not all feel heightened interest in speculating what it may conceal and where we shall find an exit? But if, may be, such lonely retreats follow one after another in prolonged succession, we are then filled with still vaguer and darker feeling, as if approaching nearer and nearer to some mysterious and sacred haunt. In short, it is obvious that in each case, that of clouds and that of forests, there is something specially attractive to those who love mystery and infinity: for at no single moment can one anticipate what will happen next. Such thoughts as these enable us to see that there is one clear principle in that poetry which, while satisfied with the simplest possible material and machinery, yet takes delight in the varying forms of clouds and the tortuous mazes of a forest, shifting, ill-defined, and complex as they are. But now let us quote a few examples from Lucretius himself.
And, first of all, let us consider such as are concerned with clouds: the field which of the two seems the more 1773 congenial to the spirit of Lucretius. For it is to be found everywhere and is daily before the eye of all. Moreover, it carries with it all the qualities which he loved: the endless deeps of heaven, an air now gloomy, now serene, the rain mingled with the clouds, the very swiftest movement. Finally, all is combined in such a way that while no one who has eyes to see can deny its beauty, yet its inner and real principle is mysterious to all. And there is another peculiar and striking constituent in cloud regions,
[Page 324]
which I do not think any language can indicate more fully and finely than that of the poem itself:
But now, besides those subtle forms that rear
From Bodies, Thousand new are fram'd in Air,
Fashioned by chance; and these, when born on high,
Do change their shapes, and wanton in the sky;
Then joyn in various forms, grow thick, and move
Like clouds combin'd, and darken all above,
Fanning the air with motion. 1774
I cannot pass on, gentlemen, without specially commending to your admiration the expression ‘fanning the air with their motion’, for nothing could more delightfully make us feel that we are in the presence of a poet given to intense and rapt study of these phenomena. One sees easily that Lucretius was a man who was at once arrested and then carried away by any sight of earth or heaven, like a swimmer delighting in the current that bears him along. But to proceed with the quotation:
Hence Prodigies, hence some Gigantick war,
Marshall'd i' Th' Air, looks dreadful from afar,
And shadows all: hence Mountains seem to flie,
And scatter'd Rocks cut thro' the wounded Sky;
Hence other clouds do frightful creatures show;
We stare amaz'd, and wonder at below. 1775
1776 Some have supposed that these ideas are borrowed from Aristophanes, who in one of his comedies makes fun out of the shapes of the clouds:
[Page 325]
Socrates. You have perhaps sometimes observed in the sky, clouds resembling a centaur, a leopard, a wolf, a bull?
Strepsiades. To be sure; and what of that?
Socrates. They have power to transform themselves at will. Suppose, looking down, they behold some vicious creature, with long locks, hairy as a beast, like Xenophantes’ son: well, to show their contempt of him they take the form of centaurs.
Strepsiades. And when they see Simon, who embezzles public money, what then?
Socrates. To mimic him to the life they immediately appear as wolves. 1777
To my mind, however, it is far more likely that each poet drew these similes from his own native stores. For why should we not suppose that each, gifted with taste and discernment as he was, would often contemplate these marvels of fleeting clouds, whether in a calm or stormy sky?
But dismissing this point, I should like you to consider whether this changing vision and scene of cloudland is not closely akin to the Epicurean theories concerning Images: precisely in the same way as those who gaze upon the depths of the blue air and the wide waters of ocean are from time to time inevitably reminded of the vast and boundless void. It would be strange, then, if Lucretius, the devoted admirer alike of Nature and Epicurus, did not eagerly fasten upon and delight in both these themes.
But towards the beginning of his Sixth Book the poet more fully reveals his own interests; he shows that by no ordinary effort of ear and of thought he has listened to and grasped the meaning of the varied sounds caused by colliding clouds: in fact, corresponding with their change of shape and motion, he even associates a special meaning with each sound. And in dealing with this subject Lucretius is true to one special characteristic of his style;
[Page 326]
for taking a simile from the routine of daily life, he illustrates by it each detail of the sky, and yet adds no touch of what is mean or commonplace. But let him speak for himself: 1778
They give the crack, as o'er a Theater
Vast curtains spread are ruffled in the Air,
Or torn (for such a sound is often known
From Thunder's crack) they give a mighty groan;
Or as spread cloaths, or sheets of Paper flie
Before the wind and rattle o're the sky. 1779
A few lines further on we have a simile which brings clouds and woods together:
But more, 'tis Reason too that Noise should rise,
When violent storms rage o'er the lower skies;
For thousand clouds appear, rough, close combin'd
And thick, and able to resist the wind:
Thus Noise must rise: as when the woods they wound
The injur'd Boughs sigh forth a mournful sound:
These winds do cut the clouds, and passing thro',
With murmuring Sound fill all the Air below:
For that the winds may break the clouds, and flie
Thro’ all resistance in the lower sky,
'Tis easy to discover, since they break,
And twist our Trees: yet here their force is weak. 1780
And then we have these lines which, like many others, place Lucretius before us as a most subtly keen observer of Nature, if ever there was one:
But if the cloud is dry, and Thunder fall,
A crackling Blaze doth rise, and spread o're all;
[Page 327]
As when fierce Fires, prest on by Winds, do seize
Our Laurel Groves, and waste the Virgin Trees,
The Leaves all crackle: she that fled the chase
Of Phoebus' Love, still flies the Flame's embrace. 1781
From these lines the transition will be easy, I think, to our second point, his delight in forest scenes, where we have already shown that the poet who took special pleasure in all that is mysterious and infinite would naturally be glad to linger. And, for proving his feeling in this connexion, the often-quoted passage will be quite sufficient in which he declares the peculiar and pre-eminent sweetness he was wont to derive, from the mere fact that his task was a new one:
I Feel, I rising feel Poetick Heats; 1782
And now inspir'd, trace o're the Muses Seats
Untrodden yet: 'tis sweet to visit first
Untoucht and Virgin Streams, and quench my Thirst;
I joy to crop fresh Flowers, and get a Crown
For new and rare Inventions of my own;
So noble, great, and generous the Design,
That none of all the Mighty Tuneful Nine
E're grac'd a Head with Laurels like to Mine. 1783
Has any one ever, I would ask, delineated more faithfully and sweetly the feelings of those who roam in the summer woods, joying in each intricate pathway, and exulting in the notion that they may finally issue upon some hidden retreat as yet untrodden by man?
What, too, are we to infer when a poet, who elsewhere in his great poem most rarely introduces fabled beings of
[Page 328]
the kind, sympathetically names the Sylvan powers and makes them play their part?
The Vulgar and the Neighbours think, and tell,
That there the Nymphs, and Fauns, and Satyrs dwell;
And that their wanton sport, their loud delight,
Breaks thro' the quiet silence of the Night:
Their Musick's softest Ayrs fill all the Plains,
And mighty Pan, delights the list'ning swains;
The Goat-fac'd Pan, whilst Flocks securely feed,
With long-hung lip he blows his Oaten Reed;
The horn'd, the half-beast God, when brisk and gay,
With Pine-leaves crown'd provokes the swains to play. 1784
And there are other lines which clearly suggest that he was at some time intimately acquainted with some forest-clad mountain, one of the Apennines perhaps, or Pelion:
But you will answer thus; 'Tis often known
That stately Trees on lofty Mountains grown,
When beaten by a furious Southern blast,
Grow warm and hot, and so take Fire at last.
All this we grant—
Yet there's no actual fire, but seeds of Heat,
Which dasht together all this flame beget;
For if i' Th' wood such actual flame was held,
How could it for one moment be conceal'd?
It streight would show its mighty force, and burn,
And Shrubs, and Trees, and all to ashes turn. 1785
Is it not plain that Lucretius maintains the same attitude whether he be concerned with the sky or the forest?
[Page 329]
Things secret, infinite, obscure, in a word, all that is 1786 mysterious, he fastens upon whenever met with, or pursues when sighted afar off.
And lest it may be said that this combination of eager delight in the deep passes and glooms of forests with the simplicity of which we have spoken was specially peculiar to Lucretius, what if I should show that precisely the like happened with another poet, who, of all others, seems most closely to resemble him in his love for what is mysterious and infinite? I mean the renowned Florentine, famous for his threefold poem touching the threefold destinies of such as have passed from this life. Every one who has drunk, however sparingly, from that truly divine fountain knows with what array of noblest poetry this poet illumined a theme in itself unpromising enough; here we seem to hear the sounds of sweet music: there to see the radiance of celestial light, and here the dances of those who move ‘in solemn troops and sweet societies’. To mention those only pertaining to celestial Light: what a scene is that in which that glorious Lady about to guide the poet through the region of the Blessed, simply fixes their gaze upon the Sun, and was thus enabled to translate him to the Empyrean and to win her way thither herself! 1787 And at the approach of some purified soul, as we are assured by the poet, both the constellations and the shades of the sanctified seem to smile and clothe themselves with new lustre! 1788 And does not that remarkable fancy of the circle of beatified spirits, ranged as stars, in the shape, at one time, of an eagle, at another of a crown, 1789 seem admirably in keeping with this exalted and purest region of Heaven? Time would assuredly fail me did I attempt all the examples of this sort which may be found in this truly Divine Comedy. All make manifest that in a theme wherein ordinary poets
[Page 330]
sink most grievously, Dante alone bore himself with 1790 unerring sureness. While they, for the most part, transfer material and earthly qualities to their Elysiums and Paradises, he never admits to his ethereal region, either the pleasantness of gardens nor the most refined beauty of person: amply satisfied, as I said, with three elements— Light, Motion, Music.
Now this same poet, who found such slight and scanty materials perfectly sufficient for his purpose, elsewhere makes it clear that he unboundedly delights in the charms of tortuous woods, and dark and doubtful straying through grove and mountain pass; as, for instance, at the very beginning of his great work, he tells us how he wandered in some deep-wooded and gloomy valley: or, still more, in that loveliest canto, where he pictures the earthly Paradise. 1791
Indeed, my own belief is that readers who take high pleasure in the study of Dante, really experience to a great degree just the same delight as those who rove freely through pathless woods, little knowing at any stage what they may encounter next. Thus what was said of Lucretius a few sentences back is quite conceivable; when a poet is drawn by the glamour of whatever is mysterious and infinite, he will take pleasure, not only in what lies plain to view, such as the vast ocean and the far-off constellations, but also in the deeps of cloudland and the far-withdrawn passes of the forest.
But it is sufficient just to note this. Any one may search out instances for himself, so long as he bears in mind that to brace oneself whole-heartedly to the study of the poem demands both time and trouble. Moreover, he must not be discouraged and give up because of some few features of it which seem too harsh, not to say revolting. 1792 We must now revert to the point whence we digressed.
[Page 331]
And I recognize, moreover, that the gravest question of all regarding Lucretius remains to be considered. For many, I believe, cannot understand how it comes about that a poet who would sweep away, not merely all existing forms of religion, but all religion whatsoever, has been able to win so exalted a place in the honoured band of poets. In the next place, then, I propose to deal with this question to the best of my power.
[Page 332]
LECTURE XXXIV 1793
The reason why Christians view Lucretius, Epicurean though he is, more indulgently than his own countrymen did. The reason is partly his mental affliction: which is established both by external testimony and by internal indications. How mental unsoundness may contribute to poetic effect.
In human friendships and social relations it is to many of us a most surprising fact that a strong affection is sometimes seen to exist between men of doubtful reputation and others of nobler character and life, and any one who has taken the slightest delight in Poetry knows that something of the same kind happens with regard to our feeling towards poets. A good and virtuous man, for instance, will not hesitate to yield himself to the charm of the poems of men, with whom he would never willingly be brought into personal contact. For, if we put aside for the present the well-known instability of human character, which often causes some men, almost from day to day, to change from what is best to what is worst, both in their outward life and in their writings, the truth is that we all recognize that heavenly things may be suggested by earthly, divine by human, I had almost said pure by impure. But, as a rule, authors do not deliberately sink to the lower level. They are wont, at utmost, to make some show of 1794 modesty and goodness. Even if they do not openly praise God's power, they not seldom imply that it exists and that it is nigh at hand. Yet Lucretius, on the contrary (for it is he whom we have in mind in this), denies, in set terms, that there exists anything above us which has the least influence on earthly and human affairs. Moreover, he professes this senseless creed, not merely here and there, as
[Page 333]
if it fell from him incidentally: indeed, it asserts itself as the main feature of the plan and scheme of his whole poem:
Long time men lay opprest with slavish fear,
Religion's Tyranny did domineer,
Which being plac'd in Heaven look'd proudly down,
And frighted abject spirits with her frown.
At length a mighty one of Greece began
T' assert the natural liberty of Man,
By senseless terrors and vain fancies led
To slavery: straight the conquer'd Fantoms fled.
Not the fam'd stories of the Deity,
Not all the Thunder of the threat'ning sky
Could stop his rising Soul: thro' all he past
The strongest bounds that powerful Nature cast:
His vigorous and active Mind was hurl'd
Beyond the flaming limits of this world
Into the mighty Space, and there did see
How Things begin, what can, what cannot be;
How All must dye, All yield to fatal force,
What steddy limits bound their natural course;
He saw all this, and brought it back to us.
Wherefore by his success our Right we gain,
Religion is our subject, and we reign. 1795
This was the reason why he held the Epicurean school in such regard and reverence: this is what won his admiration, in this he delighted, this is the teaching he made it his business to hand on to young and old. A hateful and mischievous doctrine, who can deny? Yet his poem is read, learned by heart, recited, and quoted: indeed, he has earned himself a place, only second to one or two, among all who have devoted themselves to truly noble poetry. In fine, the man who declares, from first to last, that he acknowledges neither Author nor Ruler of Nature, is lauded as high-priest and interpreter of this very Nature herself. The fact is clear, or some might say it were 1796
[Page 334]
incredible. I now propose to offer some few remarks as to the causes of it.
And they will indeed be evident enough, provided we have rightly reached our previous conclusion, that the sum and essence of Lucretius’ poetry is centred in a sort of passion for the Infinite: that the poet delighted preeminently in all that is mysterious, vast, and boundless: and for this reason devoted himself to that Philosophy which roams over such fields as though it had a special ownership of them. I shall further enlarge on these questions, after having first adduced some other considerations which I ought to urge in self-defence, should it seem to any that I am too tolerant of the monstrous and impious teaching of Epicurus.
First of all, no one can be ignorant, that the case of any who in the age of Lucretius denied that the gods bestow any thought upon mortal men, is altogether different from that of those who deny it in these days, after we have witnessed so many miracles of divine goodness. At all events, the ancient school of Epicurus had many things to urge in extenuation, none of which any good man would permit himself to adopt nowadays.
Moreover, I rather think the more deeply attached a man is to divinely revealed truth, the more tolerant he is of the mad folly of these old philosophers. For such men realize, far better than the average, the great disadvantages the ancients laboured under, not through their own fault, but (as it would seem) by reason of the times in which they lived. For this cause they may at times be over-indulgent to ancient authors who held impious views concerning the gods. Indeed (if some recent writers will forgive me for saying it), when there is question of these monstrous theories of Epicurus, Cicero speaks in language more severe and impressive than do our own philosophers. This perhaps explains how it is that he never, so far as
[Page 335]
I know, so much as mentions Lucretius in his philosophical writings: while he, nevertheless, in one passage, carefully details the succession of those who set themselves to commend 1797 to a Roman public the idle speculations of Epicurus and his followers. Cicero tells us that about the time when the Romans first turned their attention to Philosophy there appeared a certain Amafinius: ‘on the publishing of whose writings the people were deeply impressed, and enlisted themselves chiefly under this sect, either because the doctrine was more easily understood or that they were invited thereto by the enticements of pleasure; or that, because there was nothing better, they laid hold of what was offered them.’ It is quite clear that he has a supreme contempt for the popular judgement on the subject. He then proceeds to give his own opinion of those who taught these doctrines. ‘But after Amafinius, when many of the same sentiments had written much about them, the Epicureans spread all over Italy: but that these doctrines should be so easily understood and approved of by the unlearned, is a great proof that they were not written with any great subtlety, and they think their establishment to be owing to this.’ 1798
At the very time Cicero was writing thus, it is probable that the poem of Lucretius was already published at Rome, and, I imagine, widely read and praised; at all events, not many years after, Virgil thought it worthy of imitation. In fact, it had come into Cicero's hands: for he refers to it in one of his letters to his brother Quintus. ‘Lucretius' poem,’ he says, ‘is just as you describe it: full of the brilliance of genius, but highly artificial.’ 1799 Should we be far wrong in assuming that it was this poem that the criticism which we just cited from the Tusculan Questions had really in view, though the name of the writer was suppressed? For unless he was cursorily
[Page 336]
dismissing the whole class for religious reasons as hateful and mischievous, I can hardly conceive it possible that he should pass over in absolute silence so weighty a writer, especially one who belonged wholly to Latium and the Latin race.
1800 But, in truth, Cicero's writings afford numberless indications that devout and good men could not tolerate even the mere mention of Epicurus and his views concerning the immortal Gods. Those of modern times have been for the most part much more indulgent: the truth being that they look at the case from afar: regarding Epicureans, Stoics, and every ancient school of philosophy with almost equal indifference, feeling pity for all rather than indignation against any.
But if they judge so tolerantly such as maintain the teaching and method of Epicurus in cool logic after the manner of the schools, they would, I should suppose, be far more tolerant of a poet of like opinions: in the first place, he has the advantage of those numerous embellishments and digressions, whereby the more repulsive aspects of the doctrine may be kept in the background: then, too, by the very law and privilege of his function, he is allowed to touch on other things besides those he aims at and emphasizes. Consequently it is quite possible that, while the main argument of a poem avowedly and openly denies that there are gods in heaven above or in the world below, yet, nevertheless, its whole tenor and quality may be on the side of those who love true religion.
Such, then, are my reasons for holding that Lucretius, both as a poet and as writing in an age as yet unenlightened by revelation, should rightly be judged by a more kindly standard. And besides, there is a tradition that this great man was mentally afflicted, though not unfrequently regaining sanity and repose, and in lucid intervals, cheating, as it were, grievous disease with poetry and philosophy.
[Page 337]
We have the express testimony of Eusebius, assuredly a careful writer, on this point. He records that in the year in which the triumvirate of Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus was renewed, there died T. Lucretius, a poet who, ‘having been made insane by a love philtre, afterwards composed several books of poetry in his lucid intervals, 1801 and died by his own hand at the age of 44.’ 1802
His statement that Cicero afterwards corrected the poem of Lucretius may seem perhaps the more probable since, in the letter before quoted, Cicero records that he had just read the poet's work, and at the same time makes mention of one Sallustius, who had written verses ‘concerning Empedocles’, which would, so far as the subject goes, if that is a fair inference from its title, be not altogether out of harmony with the De Rerum Natura .
But reverting to Lucretius’ madness: not only does Eusebius record the fact in express terms, but it is quite credible that Statius alludes to it when he is recounting the chief names among Latin poets: ‘The uncouth Muse of untamed Ennius yields the palm, so does the fierce rage of learned Lucretius, and he who leads the Argonauts over the seas, and he, too, who wrote of Metamorphoses : I may go further:—even the Aeneid itself pays honour to your Latin poem.’ 1803 This is what he says when praising Lucan and comparing him with those who had most won fame before him,—Ennius, Lucretius, Valerius Flaccus, Ovid: indeed, he holds that even Virgil himself is not too great to be compared with him. And the fact that he attributes to Lucretius both learning and a kind of fierce fury, is, assuredly, fully in keeping with one who, as Eusebius declares, wrote in the intervals of disease, after his mind had been unhinged. Nor has the story anything in radical disagreement with the tenor of his poem. For as to his
[Page 338]
orderly arrangement, his highly subtle reasoning, his exquisite 1804 and polished style: it is common knowledge that those who are either at certain times or on some particular subject mad and wild, at other times or with regard to other matters express themselves like staid and sober men. Indeed, to a great extent they handle the very subject of their madness with orderly method, they treat it with seriousness and sound judgement. Thus there is often, it is said, a method in men's madness. If one simply takes for granted the head and front of their delusion, all else follows in due place, in admirable sequence and perfect connexion, so that none need be surprised if a man supporting his views so ably by reason and argument might be insane.
Moreover, the circumstances that he never indulges in ‘irony’ (as it is called); that he touches nothing lightly and playfully, in this respect being utterly different from Virgil; that he never advances his views with hesitation or modest diffidence, but insists on his master's teaching, as the utterance of an oracle, in things most mysterious and remote from human sense: nothing could be more in keeping than all this with the attitude and ways of those mentally distraught.
Now, supposing that Lucretius did labour under this disease, simple human feeling will, I think, teach us how far the fact goes to win a kindly judgement from every one, not only for minor faults and failings, but even for his central teaching, monstrous and almost impious as it is. For it both enlists sympathy and affords some ground for inferring that he erred, not of his own will, but through a kind of fatality.
And I regret indeed that our own time is not without instances which can be quoted to illustrate this subject. On the contrary, there is more than one such case, very striking and very sad. We have not yet, I apprehend,
[Page 339]
forgotten a poet, at once of noble birth and noble genius, who in our youth was held to have borne the palm of poetic art and power from nearly all rivals. Ardent and 1805 profound as his poetic gift was, he spoilt it all by associating it with the wild dreams of those who, whether or no they really believe that either no Supreme Power or, if any, a Malignant Power, rules the Universe, at any rate wish that it were so. The consequence was that one who should have been a minister and interpreter of the mysteries that lie hid in Nature, has, in spite of all the vehement passion and variety of his poetry, in the main given us nothing but the picture of his own mind and personality, excited now by an almost savage bitterness, and now by voluptuous exaltation. Yet it is marvellous how eagerly, not only refined and cultured men, but even women, read and re-read, indeed, in their devotion, actually copied out his verse: never even dreaming that they thereby in any way failed in reverence to true goodness. Already by that time the poet had, I believe, shown some indication of an ill-balanced mind. And so if there were anything base and irreverent in his writings, the more charitable readers attributed it not to his own fault, but to the afflicting visitation of Providence.
Another followed after him, of utterance, so far as regards this morbid philosophy, even more outrageous and unbridled, but in command of language and of rhythm an even greater master, and, as it would seem, of far more sensitive temperament. But it was fancied, with some probability, that even he was scarcely master of himself. In short, they were, and are now, both of them, considered rather as unhappy than as impious. 1806 This fact should show us how strong is the tendency of human nature on the side of goodness and piety: since men actually have recourse
[Page 340]
to a suspicion from which they naturally shrink and recoil rather than be brought to believe that the Deity can ever have been denied by any human being in his sound and sober senses. They would rather deem them insane than impious and wicked.
‘But,’ it will be asked, ‘could any one who was seeking relief for an unbalanced mind ever be satisfied by the data 1807 of a philosophy so utterly chilling and barren: by Atoms, A great Void, by Images of Things, by Callousness of Feeling? Must not one, whom such trivialities pleased simply as a speculation, have emerged from them chilled and enfeebled himself? far less can they be a solace to those afflicted with grief and anxiety.’
I agree, entirely, yet I would suggest that the case of our Lucretius may have been quite different. If what we are told of him be true, I apprehend that those infinite worlds, those marshallings of atoms, found ready acceptance in his brain, not as one in search of immovable and true tranquillity, but rather for something which might, in the intervals of his malady, bring him some temporary distraction, laying to rest his anxieties, and yielding him some ray of hope. In short: the fault that we should find with Lucretius is very different from that which lies at the door of Democritus and Epicurus: they could contemplate without a pang the sight of a barren and formless universe, after denying any overruling Providence: his was the case of a troubled and diseased spirit, who, in an interval of his malady, merely seeks to find wide tranquil spheres in which to find rest, lest he may again, and more quickly than of wont, be thrown from his balance.
But now that such considerations have softened the judgement which we pass on the impiety of Lucretius, it remains to be considered, whether perhaps this very affliction itself—insanity—may not have in it something which arrests the mind, and, for a time, holds us like a tragedy,
[Page 341]
rapt with a kind of pleasing horror. We hang on each word uttered by those who are insane, not knowing what they may say next. And although, in actual deed and truth, this is dangerous and disturbing, yet when depicted on the stage or in literature, it is not without an attraction of its own: exactly in the same way as, on the stage, we tolerate crimes, disgraceful deeds, murders, pestilence, and many monstrous deeds, which in real life would incur nothing but stern and fatal condemnation. This is the charm of those scenes in Shakespeare where we have at one time those lamentations of a father shamefully ill-used, at another of a maiden pining away through love, passages 1808 which are universal favourites. And what of the impressive character of Hamlet himself, one of the truest to life and reality? I doubt whether anything more wins our sympathies and finds its way to the heart, than those vague preludings of insanity, which even to the present day raise such points of contention among critics.
All these things a reader who aspires, rightly and in order, to follow the thread of argument in the De Rerum Natura would do well to remember. Let him not forget that he has to do with a most acute writer indeed, but with one who views everything, as it were, through a sort of cloud which somehow extravagantly distorts the shapes and dimensions of things. In truth, a reader should throughout have in mind the sad and pitiable lot of mortal men, the very finest fruits of whose genius are often closely akin to insanity. This kindly sympathy will not be unpleasing in itself nor wholly without use as we consider the ample force, now of tender, now of stern poetry which gushes everywhere from the Lucretian fount.
Perhaps, however, it may be worth while to notice here a few facts which seem to point to such insanity as we have described. In the first place, some persons may not unreasonably feel surprise that Lucretius speaks in such
[Page 342]
high terms of Epicurus—a man, if ever there was one, wholly out of sympathy with all that appeals to a poet: void of ornament, frigid, and unattractive: almost wholly destitute of the vivid touch of genius, of the glow of passion, and of brilliance of style: so far, at all events, as we can infer from the fragments remaining to us of his writings, and the views held concerning him by the ancients. Yet, consider this eulogy of him, typical of many such in 1809 the De Rerum Natura :
Thee, who hast Light from midst thick darkness brought,
And Life's advantages and pleasures taught,
Thee, chiefest glory of the Grecian State,
I strictly trace; willing to imitate,
Not contradict: for how can Larks oppose
The vigorous Swans? They are unequal foes;
Or how can tender Kids with feeble force
Contend in Racing with the noble Horse?
Thou, Parent of Philosophy, hast shown
The way to Truth by Precepts of thy Own.
For as from sweetest Flowers the labouring Bee
Extracts the precious juyce; Great Soul, from Thee
We all our Golden Sentences derive,
Golden and fit Eternally to live. 1810
And, in the Epilogue to the same book, he insists that death is to be looked at without fear, since not only are Homer and other heroes dead, but:
Even Epicurus' race of Life is run,
That Man of Wit, who other men out-shon,
As far as meaner Stars the Mid-day Sun. 1811
Of course, whenever Plato represents the Sophists, or Cicero the Epicureans, as celebrating the greatness of their masters, one sees at once how absurd and foolish it all is, for the men are themselves absurd. But when we approach Lucretius, I, at all events, cannot easily escape the impression
[Page 343]
that he was a man of such intense enthusiasm, that he wholly surrendered himself to what was merely an illusion of his own—which is exactly the way with madmen.
Next, it must, I think, strike any one, that Lucretius is wont to maintain his views with greater insistence and obstinacy than the force of his reasoning warrants: that he confuses and blends poor arguments with strong, dubious with certain, in the strangest fashion: obviously, he appraises his arguments, not by weight but by number, as the phrase goes: though, in spite of all this, no one can be more critically acute in such things. He delivers himself of all his statements with unvarying assurance, not to say audacity, as if they were the oracles of a shrine. He implies, and that very plainly, that he will take it 1812 extremely ill should any one refuse to subscribe to the teaching of his master and himself.
Probably, too, an idea which has before suggested itself to us, may be fairly pertinent here: namely, that Lucretius expresses everything with extreme seriousness and intense conviction: his teaching is wholly wanting in the humour and lightness of touch which are so characteristic of Virgil: one is prepared to find him, even when dealing with the most trivial detail, with eyes firm-set and face of adamant: and, just as to a skilled observer, such a look affords strong indication of an overwrought mind, so there is a style which corresponds to such a look, a contemptuous and overbearing style, which may perhaps rightly be construed as an indication of mental unsoundness.
Inasmuch, however, as this tone affects the poem as a whole, it will be obvious that it cannot be conveniently evidenced by examples. Yet I should like to illustrate by quotation of a few lines, the arrogance with which Lucretius dismisses other men's speculations, more probable perhaps than his own:
[Page 344]
Now since the Nature of the Mind and Soul
Is fully found, and prov'd a part of Th' whole,
Let those that call it Harmony and please
Their fancies to derive such words as these
From Musick's sounds, or whence soe're it came,
Apply'd to that which had no proper name,
Take back their Term again; 'tis here o'erthrown,
And useless prov'd: Let us go farther on. 1813
And a few lines on, boasting his own views:
Now since the nature of the Mind is found
So apt to move, of Bodies small and round
It must be fram'd: which knowledge (lovely Youth)
Will lead thee on to undiscover'd Truth. 1814
‘He speaks with the confidence'—to borrow Cicero's words in an almost identical situation—‘with the confidence 1815 peculiar to his sect, dreading nothing so much as to seem to doubt of anything, as if he had just descended from the Council of the Gods and Epicurus's intervals of worlds.’ 1816
Thus much as to his style and tone of argument: next, I desire you to recall the subjects themselves to which (so at least it seems to me) Lucretius always turned with greatest pleasure. These were all things infinite and uncertain: whether in number, extent, motion, or dimension; all that was without limit, indivisible, innumerable, just the qualities observed when men's minds tend to become unhinged. Almost invariably they are introspective, engrossed with themselves and their own secrets. Their vision is distorted and, one may say, contracted, unwontedly and unnaturally: to such degree, indeed, that their accustomed and native power is clearly lost. Undoubtedly the study of the more abstruse regions of philosophy, which we now call Metaphysics, and wherein Lucretius took
[Page 345]
special delight, always seems to have included an element not very much removed from a sort of insanity.
We come, then, to the conclusion that Lucretius' poem is not wholly free from symptoms of the malady under which Donatus and Eusebius record him to have laboured: to this extent at least, that his apparent irreligion would seem rather pitiable than reprehensible: and that readers' minds are touched with a certain tragic horror, which is not wholly displeasing. Indeed, if I may confess what I really feel, may there not be some ground for suspecting that those who are touched with madness have something in them, I do not say holy and prophetic (which the ancient Germans believed with regard to women), but yet something which implies the presence of a more than human power? For all are agreed that they give utterance with their lips to feelings not their own: in fact, most men have ever believed that they are influenced by the Divine Power, or at least by some spirit. And perhaps this is 1817 the reason why it was sometimes believed that there is a certain common tie between the insane and the company of prophets and poets: a link hard to explain or define, yet none the less real.
Nor must it be supposed that this view is wholly obsolete and superseded in our own times, now that the true heavenly light is diffused throughout the whole world. For, in the first place, it may fairly be argued, that the whole question as to the nature and causes of insanity is outside the province of religion. Divine Truth did not appear on the earth for the purpose of resolving difficult problems or to aid those who make a study of psychology and the theory of disease.
Besides, such hints as are found in Holy Scripture—for there are only incidental hints, no definite statements— would seem to support the popular belief, not to throw doubt upon it. How many accounts do we there read of
[Page 346]
persons unhappily troubled by an evil spirit, or even by more than one! and what is there stated as to the symptoms of these afflictions, clearly agrees with what we see nowadays in the case of maniacs and madmen. Will any one venture to guarantee that these are wholly free from the power of evil spirits? these, I repeat, whom we meet with in our own times? How much more credible then is it, that in those remote ages, while the truth was as yet unrevealed, that oracles may have been again and again promulgated by good or bad spirits, when they had once gained possession of some man of more than usually inspired genius, and with the gift of splendid expression, and yet not wholly master of himself! and such a one was, in my judgement, Lucretius.
There was anciently a confirmed belief among those most deeply versed in sacred things, that the oracles and answers given forth from the most celebrated shrines, those of the Dodonian Jove, the Pythian Apollo, Trophonius, 1818 Ammon, and others, were not unassisted by spiritual powers. Why, then, may we not suppose that philosophers and poets sometimes gave utterance to the decrees of a Spirit who inspired them? especially such as bordered upon insanity.
Nor must it be supposed that nothing but what is base and impious could issue from such a source: for it seems with the Great and Good Ruler of all to have been almost a law, to emphasize and declare his own decrees by the testimony, willing or unwilling, of his enemies, whether men or evil spirits.
And any one to whom what has been here said does not seem wholly vain and beside the mark, will have no difficulty in comprehending how it happens that the poem of Lucretius is so toned and modified that, though he was of morbid mind, though an Epicurean and one who despised all Gods and religions, yet it is not merely excused but
[Page 347]
even followed with a kind of genuine affection by good and true men: indeed, in his strain they recognize qualities which make it the best introduction to poems and prophecies which are truly divine. How this is mainly brought about I will endeavour, as best I can, to explain on another occasion. And with that our consideration of Lucretius, already too prolonged, will most fittingly conclude.
[Page 348]
LECTURE XXXV 1819
How Lucretius unconsciously serves the cause of Religion: first, because he again and again laments the vanity of life, even the life of ease and pleasure: and next, in that the consolations for it which he suggests are such as lead us in the direction of the truth: indeed he actually declares his longing for communion with the Deities: further, he grasps eagerly after things not present, complains of the inadequacy of language to express the truth, shows himself averse to trifling and levity: but, above all, because of that distinguishing passion visible throughout, not only for the Infinite and Profound, but for a certain secret and perfect Beauty.
In our discussion as to the characteristic and central thought of the poetry of Lucretius it seemed to us, as you remember, that the chief interest which fascinated and possessed his mind was the love of things mysterious and infinite, or, as one may say, of the recesses and secrets of Nature. And then, after illustrating this peculiarity by quotations, we touched on a problem of great importance, considering how it was that the poet escapes the stigma of being shocking and repellent (to use Aristotle's phrase), although there runs through his whole poem, like a contaminating stain, the philosophy of those who, while acknowledging the Gods in word, make them in fact and truth of no account; and the chief reason for this seemed to us to lie in the belief that the poet's impiety was not entirely his own fault, but arose from his disordered mind. 1820 This led us to consider, briefly, the whole question of insanity: its effect in connexion with the poetic gift, and the special remedies and alleviations whereby it seeks refuge from its painful self-consciousness. And, finally, we found ourselves in some doubt whether certain qualities in Lucretius did not suggest the presence of a more than
[Page 349]
human agency: a view which was entertained in former ages both with regard to insane persons, when they delivered themselves of utterances rather more methodical and rational than their wont, and also with regard to all writers of pagan literature and heathen philosophy. It was, in primitive times, fully believed that in both these orders of men there dwelt a certain secret power, whether from above or from below. But this idea once grasped, we may see how it might naturally modify and soften the verdict of those who otherwise would insist, on grounds of piety and religion, that Lucretius ought not to be so much as read. For it makes all the difference, I apprehend, whether we are dealing with the wanton and scoffing tongue and idle chatter of mere men, or with the utterance of a benevolent deity mysteriously showing us the true path of life by the voice and means of unconscious, or perhaps even hostile, witnesses.
But it must not be supposed that our opinion of Lucretius hangs entirely on considerations of this kind. Grant that our conjecture about the poet's madness, or at least that our theory of some tacit divine power uttering its oracles by the mouth of madmen, is baseless and futile; dismiss from your minds both of these theories; there will still remain the peculiar charm of the poem: just as in that region of science which has to do with the movements of the heavenly bodies, whatever theory is adopted as to their secret force and causes, or even if the question is left wholly in doubt, as it is by most men, yet it does not follow necessarily that all comprehension of universal beauty, all subtle feeling for natural things, are thereby excluded. So, perhaps, it may well happen that readers of Lucretius who find in his poem no trace of the alleged 1821 mental disturbance, or hold that, even if existing, it cannot be attributed to some mysterious second sight or to the presence of some Divine power, are, nevertheless, led to
[Page 350]
feel that the poet, all unknown to himself, wonderfully supports, indeed, communicates and commends to all who read him, the very religious sense which, in terms he seeks to abolish.
And, in truth, you will not easily find any one among the poets who lacked the enlightenment of revealed Truth, who affords so many splendid lines which, as it were spontaneously, cast their testimony in favour of sound and sincere piety. Not one of them has left more numerous passages which any one, perhaps changing here and there a word or two, but yet maintaining the general tenor of the whole, can quote on the side of goodness and righteousness. Such a method of quotation is technically called a ‘parody’ ( ραρ [illeg.] δία ): but that word is generally used only of comic and humorous adaptations; and yet that it is of force even in grave subjects will be universally allowed, I apprehend, by all who read the poets, especially the ancient poets, with a little care. Let us test, therefore, by an instance or two, the extent to which the poem of Lucretius, all unknown to himself, and indeed contrary to his intent, yet in deed and truth serves the cause of religion. First, then, is it not clear that he lays the foundation for far higher things than his master Epicurus could conceive, when he deplores in such pathetic language and such mournful numbers the wretched and miserable lot of human life?
Did men perceive what 'tis disturbs their rest,
Whence rise their fears, and that their thoughtful Breast
Is by the Mind's own natural weight opprest;
Did they know this, as they all think they know,
They would not lead such lives as now they do;
Not know their own desires, but seek to find
Strange places out, and leave this weight behind. 1822
[Page 351]
It is true that almost all poets have expatiated on this theme. To sing in mournful strain of human life as being 1823 transient and fragile as a flower, is a subject common to the noblest poets. But, unless I am mistaken, Lucretius has this special and almost unique characteristic, that he does not so much chafe at the brief and narrow bounds of our course on earth, as at the necessary conditions of life, even if lived under the best possibilities: he implies that life itself has been, and ever is, the most grievous of burdens to all men at all times. Remember, for instance, how utterly different from all this are the Elegiac lines of Moschus on the death of Bion, though certainly full of charm:
Though fade crisp anise, and the parsley's green,
And vivid mallows from the garden-scene;
The balmy breath of spring their life renews,
And bids them flourish in their former hues!
But we, the great, the valiant, and the wise,
When once the seal of death hath clos'd our eyes,
Lost in the hollow tomb obscure and deep,
Slumber, to wake no more, one long unbroken sleep! 1824
This poet complains of life's too rapid flight: that, the tomb once passed, there is no power of revisiting the light of day. He says not a word of the sadder fate that even in the midst of enjoyment men do not find life worth living.
Moreover, the poet discharges his function of lament in such wise that he seems, after all, to roam at ease and in peace through some pleasant region rich with fresh verdure: while Lucretius deals with the subject in language direct and unadorned, as men do who, when their heart is full, use every-day speech to express their feelings.
Now see how the passage continues in the same strain as before, and I would especially ask you to note how
[Page 352]
great is the effect produced by the restrained simplicity, by what the grammarians call the Litotes , of the diction:
One tir'd at home, forsakes his stately Seat,
And seeks some melancholy close Retreat,
But soon returns; for prest beneath his load
Of cares, he finds no more content abroad:
Others, with full as eager haste, retire,
As if their Father's house were all on fire,
To their small Farm; but yet scarce entred there,
1825 They grow uneasie with their usual care;
Or seeking to forget their grief, lie down
To thoughtless Rest or else return to Town. 1826
Assuredly this is in the tone of ordinary daily talk, and ‘more fitted to the poet of comedy' (to use Horace's phrase): so truthful the action; so heartfelt the words that burst from the breast. Sophocles' lines have somehow a loftier ring:
Happiest beyond compare
Never to taste of life;
Happiest in order next,
Being born, with quickest speed
Thither again to turn
From whence we came.
When youth hath passed away
With all its follies light,
What sorrow is not there?
What trouble then is absent from our lot?
Murders, strifes, wars, and wrath and jealousy,
And, closing life's long course, the last and worst,
An age of weak caprice,
Friendless, and hard of speech,
Where, met in union strange,
Dwell ills on ills. 1827
With him, you perceive, life is intolerable because of the restless play of Fortune and the ills that menace it from without; while in Lucretius’ view, on the other hand, it
[Page 353]
has nothing which can really tranquillize the soul, not even when passed in peace and quiet. More gently pathetic are Virgil's lines:
In youth alone, unhappy mortals live;
But ah! the mighty bliss is fugitive:
Discolour'd sickness, anxious labour, come,
And age, and death's inexorable doom. 1828
Nothing could be more gracefully said: but they hardly approach the vivid directness of Lucretius. Virgil generalizes as a philosopher might: while, when we listen to Lucretius, the very facts of life stand before our eyes.
And finally, are we far from genuine religion when he thus proceeds to emphasize the causes of this terrible evil?—
They all do strive to shun themselves; in vain,
For troublesome he sticks close, the cares remain, 1829
For they ne'er know the cause of all their pain:
Which if they did, how soon would all give o're
Their fruitless toys, and study Nature more?
That is a noble search and worth our care;
On that depends eternal Hope, or Fear;
That teaches how to look beyond our Fate,
And fully shows us all our future state. 1830
Would not any one, I ask, almost be sworn that some advocate of a diviner philosophy speaks here?
For in these lines he plainly implies that, wearied of this mortal life, he thirsts for immortality; and those that follow evince a distaste even for that very pleasure so highly vaunted by his master Epicurus:
Our Life must once have end, in vain we flie
From following Fate; e'en now, e'en now we die.
Life adds no new delights to those possest.
But since the absent pleasures seem the best,
With wing'd desire and haste we those pursue,
[Page 354]
But those enjoy'd, we streight-ways call for new.
Life, Life we wish, still greedy to live on;
And yet what Fortune with the following Sun
Will rise, what chance will bring, is all unknown. 1831
Consider, too, those celebrated lines about the cries and wailings of new-born infants. Do they not declare more clearly than all that Plato or Pythagoras ever taught, that either our souls must be raised to better than mortal and earthly things, or we must utterly despair of a happy life?—
A Man, when first he leaves his primitive Night,
Breaks from his Mother's womb to view the Light,
Like a poor carcass tumbled by the flood,
He falls all naked, but besmear'd with blood,
An Infant, weak and destitute of food:
With tender cryes the pittying Air he fills,
A fit presage for all his coming Ills. 1832
Let me add, too, the passage where he represents Nature as rallying discontented human beings who spurn the good things they have:
Then why, fond Mortal, do'st thou ask for more,
Why still desire t' increase thy wretched store,
And wish for what must waste like those before?
Not rather free thyself from pains and fear,
And end thy Life and necessary care?
Thy Pleasures always in a Circle run,
The same returning with the yearly sun. 1833
1834 And again in another place:
Lastly since Nature feeds with gay delight,
And never fills the greedy Appetite;
Since every year, with the returning springs,
She new delights, and joys, and pleasures brings:
And yet our minds, amidst this mighty store,
Are still unsatisfied, and wish for more:
[Page 355]
Sure this they mean, who teach that Maids below
Do idle pains and care and time bestow,
In pouring streams into a leaky Urn,
Which flow as fast again, as fast return. 1835
True and heartfelt words these beyond question! But, on the contrary, there is something plainly cold and perfunctory about what the poet has to say, elsewhere, by way of comfort. Only consider this oft-repeated formula after he has been levelling bitter reproaches against religions of all kinds or any kind:
These Fears, that darkness that o'erspreads our souls
Day can't disperse, but those Eternal rules
Which from firm Premises true Reason draws,
And a deep insight into Nature's laws. 1836
Magnificent promises these, leading us to expect great things: but now see what follows. He actually lays it down as being a safeguard against fear and error, when we once perceive and realize either that
Nothing was by the Gods of Nothing made; 1837
or
First then, the Mind, in which the Reason lies,
Is part of Man, as Hands and Feet and eyes
Are parts of Animals; 1838
or finally:
                                         How Seed
Doth move to make, and to dissolve things made.
What drives them forward to their tedious race,
What makes them run thro' all the mighty space. 1839
Surely a magnificent source of solace to men's minds, when restless or despondent, to take a hand in a game played by formless molecules, and to get by heart the fine-spun theories of natural philosophers!
[Page 356]
The result of all this is, that whenever Lucretius addresses himself to these attempts at consolation, his language all 1840 at once becomes perfunctory and ineffective: until he chances upon some reference to the familiar beauty of sky and earth which can be visibly seen. In short, he expatiates on the ills of life with keen ardour, but flags when he comes to their remedy. And how else could it be, seeing that the only expedient which occurred to him was to endeavour to remove heart-sickness by means of the idle theories of those who wrangle in the schools of philosophy, or rather in the laboratories of physical science?
‘But,’ it may be objected, ‘there have always been some, and in our own time especially, the class is a fairly large one, who do not hesitate to support this view with all their might and main, as the phrase goes: the view, namely, that the whole hope and fortune of the race turns pre-eminently on successful study and inquiry concerning the movements of the stars, on precision of measurement, and on the discoveries of mathematicians and physicists.’ Be it so: but I should like to know this: whether those who laud these studies so zealously ever show the least sign that they are oppressed by the weariness of life, and have any deep sense of the suffering common to all humanity. Whence we conclude that their case is wholly different from that of Lucretius. They betray no trace of sickness of heart: there is no attempt in them to combine real sorrow with a remedy that proves most futile. Thus they, for their part, are at all events no bar to the correctness of the conclusion that Lucretius, in his own person, supplies strong evidence against himself and his own teaching. He plainly betrays that he is talking at random, that all his expedients are futile and only to be accepted because nothing better occurs to him. His tone is nearly always that of a man who fears he may be suspected of offering remedies worse than the disease itself.
[Page 357]
And it seems pertinent in this connexion to cite the very last lines of the whole poem, which breaks off abruptly, as if the thread had been cut, in the middle of his account of the celebrated plague at Athens:
But as the state of Things would then permit,
Men burnt their Friends, nor lookt on just and fit:
And Want and Poverty did oft ingage 1841
A thousand Acts of Violence and Rage.
Some (O imperious Want!) a carcass spoyl,
And burn their Friend upon another's Pile;
And then would strive, and fight, and still defend,
And often rather die than leave their Friend;
The Other lost his Pile by pious Theft,
A poor possession, all that Fate had left. 1842
Surely a strange conclusion to a production of such ample scope, and so deeply concerned with the most crucial questions of philosophy and life! Unless, indeed, which is credible enough, the author, tired of his own theme, was not even sufficiently in earnest to be at the pains of bringing an unsatisfactory and disappointing work to a worthy completion. For there is no real reason to suppose that he wrote more than has survived to our day: especially since he himself, towards the beginning of the Sixth Book, declares he is now ‘hastening to the white boundary-line of the final goal’. 1843
We may now, then, take it for granted that Lucretius, when writing in such a sorrowful strain concerning the general hopes of mankind, and not merely of the vulgar herd but even of those who shared his own theories, was preparing the way in some fashion for true religion. Let me add now a point even more important: it is this, that he exhibits some indications, vague and obscure though they are, that his mind was really rising to higher things. I admit, however, that when he does so he seems more
[Page 358]
like a man feeling his way while asleep than like one who is wide awake and guided by a clear hope of reaching his goal. For, first, those Infinities, to which we have referred so often, and which do indeed contain the central feature of his poetry, are, as it were, the very traces (with all reverence be it spoken) of God Himself, impressed on the being and nature of man. For can any one believe that we should ever dream, either of the immense and limitless range of the heavens, or of light unspeakably pure, or, finally, of motion rapid beyond all calculation, were it not for some mysterious notion of divine greatness impressed on all men's minds? And so we may say confidently, that one who is much exercised with such thoughts as these is, though he knows it not, occupied in the quest of holiness and truth.
1844 It is certainly striking how Lucretius' poem, again and again, rings of religion and goodness, especially when he seems to give himself full play in the wild speculations of his master. For instance, praising Epicurus, he writes as follows:
For when I hear thy mighty Reasons prove
This world was made without the powers above,
All fears and terrors waste, and fly apace.
Thro' parted Heavens I see the Mighty Space ,
The Rise of Things, the Gods, and Happy seats ... .
But that which senseless we so grossly fear,
No Hell, no sulphurous Lakes, no Pools appear;
And thro' the Earth I can distinctly view
What underneath the busie Atoms do. 1845
Thus he conceives his imagined void as the very abode and habitation of some vague Power, infinite and boundless.
And there is another passage, where he speaks of human life and the whole state of man in such fashion as to show
[Page 359]
that he is, really and truly, trying to approach that very conception of Providence which he frequently denies with his lips:
And hence we fancy unseen Powers in Things,
Whose Force and Will such strange Confusion brings,
And spurns and overthrows our greatest Kings. 1846
Moreover, he all but declares thunder and storms to be the work of some Divine Power:
                                         Besides,
What Mind's unshaken, and what soul not aw'd,
And who not thinks the angry Gods abroad,
Whose limbs not shrink, when dreadful Thunder hurled
From broken clouds shakes the affrighted World?
What, do not Cities, do not Nations fear,
And think their dismal dissolution near?
Why, do not Tyrants then and Mighty Lords
Recall their wicked deeds and boasting words,
And fear that now Revenge is surely come?
Do they not tremble at approaching Doom? 1847
And we must by no means omit here the splendid lines concerning the destined destruction of the world:
But now to prove all this: First cast an eye,
And look on all below, on all on high, 1848
The solid earth, the seas and arched sky;
One fatal hour (dear Youth) must ruine all,
This glorious Frame, that stood so long, must fall. 1849
Nor without bearing on religion, truly, is the fact that he seeks wholly to withdraw and recall men's minds from the average round of life and from those pursuits which the generality hold in delight:
Blind, wretched Man! In what dark paths of strife
We walk this little journey of our life! 1850
[Page 360]
And a few lines further on:
If then before such Martial shows as these,
Disperse not all black Jealousies and cares,
Vain dread of Death, and superstitious fears,
Nor leave thy mind: but if all this be vain,
If the same cares and dread and fears remain,
If Traytor-like they seize on e'en the Throne,
And dance within the circle of a crown;
If noise of Arms, nor Darts can make them flie,
Nor the gay sparklings of the Purple Die;
If they on Emperours will rudely seize;
What makes us value all such things as these,
But folly and dark ignorance of Happiness? 1851
Can we, on review, find a single moralist who insists more strongly upon plain living and contentment with a little? 1852
Moreover, again and again with a real delight he expresses a longing to look upon the blissful and serene aether:
The divinity of the gods is revealed and their tranquil abodes.
And in another verse, too, he marshals in array
Moon, day and night and night's austere constellations. 1853
Though why he should call the constellations austere (severa) I am at a loss to comprehend, unless he himself was wont to be awed by the sight of them as if in presence of some more than human Power.
And then compare the picture drawn by Lucretius, when 1854 he celebrates rural quiet or philosophic calm and ease, with the blessings assured by the Divine Word to those who earnestly follow goodness and piety:
None planted fruitful Trees, none drest the Vine,
None prun'd decaying boughs, none prest the wine;
[Page 361]
Contented they with the poor easie store
That Sun and Earth bestow'd, they wish no more.
Soft Acorns were their first and chiefest food,
And those red Apples that adorn the wood,
And make pale Winter blush: such Nature bore
More numerous then, beside a thousand more,
Which all supply'd poor Man with ample store. 1855
And as for Philosophy, let the oft-quoted lines suffice:
But above all 'tis pleasantest to get
The top of high Philosophy, and sit
On the calm, peaceful, flourishing head of it;
Whence we may view, deep, wondrous deep below,
How poor mistaken Mortals wandring go,
Seeking the path to Happiness. 1856
How little need be changed here to make this counsel in harmony with our own, the one true and holy discipline!
And, finally, I approach a consideration which has always seemed to me of the very greatest importance in this connexion. Although Lucretius, in strict argument, denies that anything human survives after death, yet he, too, recognizes, after his own fashion, assemblies of departed Heroes, and shades of the dead, whose vision and converse, he more than once implies, gave him, even in dream, unmeasured delight. Just observe the penalty which he threatens to any who fancy that the Gods are troubled about the fortunes of men:
                                         If you refuse to flie
Such thoughts, unworthy of the Deity:
But think they act such things as break their ease,
And opposite to joy and happiness
Then thou shalt surely smart, and fancying still
The Gods are angry, fear a coming ill:
Tho’ no revengeful thoughts their Minds imploy,
No thirst to punish Man disturbs their joy;
Yet thou dost think their happy quiet Age
Still vext with waking cares, and violent rage. 1857
[Page 362]
   Nor shalt thou visit on the Sacred days
Their shrines with quiet mind, or sing their praise.
Besides, the Images, the Forms that rise
From their pure limbs, and strike thy Reason's eyes,
And constantly present the Deities,
Those Images will still disturb thy Mind,
Strike deep, and wound, and leave despair behind. 1858
Plainly life is not really life unless men enjoy some communion or intercourse with the divine race of Heaven.
Further still, the very man who contemptuously dismisses the legends of Bacchus, Hercules, and the rest, does not hesitate to enroll his master Epicurus among the company of the immortal Deities:
   Well then, that Man, who thus reform'd our Souls,
That slew these monsters, not by Arms but Rules,
Shall We, ungrateful We, not think a God? 1859
So we see that even the high priest of an impious creed cannot do without some object of worship, which, though far withdrawn from mortal eye, he may honour with reverent and loving regard.
We have now dealt with the substance of the poem, and found it such that we may venture almost exactly to reverse what was said about the teaching of Epicurus, and to say that Lucretius in words denies a Providence but in reality leaves it to us.
I now pass to the style and form of his argument, ways of thought, and expression. For, in this respect too, a man may evince clear proof of a mind really religious and devoted to the things which transcend humanity. From this point of view it is important to notice the skill which writers show in finding topics that suit them and bringing the truth out of unlikely places, if they can see anything anywhere that reminds them of that which they have at heart. And in this skill or faculty, Lucretius, by general consent,
[Page 363]
always shows himself pre-eminent. Even those who are little attracted by his poetry, as such, are wont to admire him for his ingenuity in pressing the most trifling and plainly fortuitous occasions to support his own philosophy 1860 and glorify his master Epicurus. Take as an instance the passage where he finds an illustration of his primordial atoms, in the particles of dust floating in the sunlight:
For look where e're the glittering sun-beams come,
Thro’ narrow chinks into a darkned room,
A thousand little bodies strait appear
In the small beams of light, and wander there;
For ever fight, reject all shews of peace,
Now meet, now part again, and never cease.
Whence we may estimate how Atoms strove
Thro’ the vast empty space, and how they move:
Such knowledge from mean Images we get,
And easily from small things rise to great. 1861
And there are numbers of similar examples: no characteristic of Lucretius can be more widely illustrated. But this one is alone enough to evidence the man's wonderful instinct for detecting in the commonest daily experiences, points of resemblance to his cherished theories. Obviously, too, nothing is more useful in all religious appeal than such a faculty.
Upon the quality of his style I need not spend many words, since he is universally adjudged one to whom Horace's words may be applied:
And when the Subject's found, words freely flow. 1862
Doubtless, with all his wealth of language, his subtlety and charm, there is nevertheless mingled a certain simple directness, admirably suited to a writer who never once subordinates truth to eloquence. And can anything be suggested more thoroughly accordant with the bounden duty of those concerned with things immortal and divine?
[Page 364]
And here I will not shrink from expressing another thought which has occurred to me: trifling as it is, it is not perhaps wholly without its own importance. Lucretius more than once indicates that he chafes at the inadequacy of the Latin tongue: the ‘poverty of our native speech’, 1863 as he himself expresses it. 1864 . Now is not this very like the feeling which all have who argue about any grave and important subject: and especially about the deepest of all subjects, religion? Do they not often reproach their lack of words, and show themselves solicitous lest blame may attach to their subject, when it is really due to their own inadequacy or that of their mother tongue? And thus in this respect, too, we may detect some slight traces of a tone and temper which would eagerly seize upon and loyally hold the teaching of true piety, if once brought to its knowledge.
The same conclusion should be drawn, too, from that ‘severity’ once or twice previously referred to. For certainly, since nothing is so alien to laughter and jest as sacred religion, a writer who seems to utter every word earnestly and from his very soul, shows himself, so far, at all events, a religious and pious man.
Finally, the most weighty and prominent fact on this whole question will be found to be that the poet, even when he has occasion to argue his case most closely and to put things with unusual precision, indeed, almost with mathematical exactness, still associates with his scientific reasoning a sense of some profound depth spreading around us on all sides: we may be unable to fathom its deeps, yet we never readily surrender the hope that we may, some time or other, expatiate there in fullest freedom. Lucretius, if I rightly read him, betrays the existence of this deep-seated instinct, so closely bound up with religious feeling, even at the very time he is exultingly declaring
[Page 365]
that no region of all Nature remains untrodden by Epicurus:
‘At all this a kind of godlike delight mixed with shuddering awe comes over me to think that Nature by thy power is laid visibly open, is thus unveiled on every side.’ 1865
And all the pageant goes; whilst I, with awe,
See in its place the things my master saw;
   See in its place the three eternal things—
The only three—atoms and space and law.
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
All things but these arise and fail and fall,
From flowers to stars—the great things and the small;
   Whilst the great Sum of all things rests the same,
The all-creating, all-devouring All. 1866
Now what ground is there, I ask, for this ‘shuddering 1867 awe’ or pious fear, which he declares to be bound up with the pleasure arising from the master's doctrine, if it be not that our minds instinctively imagine for themselves some mysterious and infinite power existent everywhere and always? But what else is this than, vaguely and implicitly, to acknowledge a Deity? and such a Deity as is not wholly careless or unmindful of human affairs. Otherwise, I certainly fail to understand why any one should be troubled by fear, when the thought of that great Deep of Nature and of True Philosophy presses itself on his mind. For I do not see that anything of the kind affects those who in our own days consider themselves great and distinguished, because they, too, weigh and measure the nature of things after the principles of Epicurus. Not one of them, so far as I know, is filled with awe, not one of them gazes at sky, land, and sea, overwhelmed with pious terror: you would suppose that in all the vast range of the universe there was not even a nook or corner which they do not hope to penetrate, if only
[Page 366]
long enough life is granted them. And thus it follows that each of them just fails to reach the highest pleasure and the greatest distinction of which he is capable. For who that is genuinely human would not rather expatiate even in the first elements of a science which has infinite possibilities, than put the crowning touch, perfect as it might be, to one which is finite and narrow?
Surely it is true that in this respect, not even the abstruse art and science of mathematicians, still less of those who are concerned with natural philosophy and all the outward beauty of earth and sky, are lacking in a certain poetry of their own. Both include an element which can appeal with growing strength to their power of admiration, which can be pursued with eagerness and delight, and under whose influences the mind may surrender itself to be carried away and withdrawn into I know not what mysterious regions: mathematicians have their rational symmetry, as it is called, and their subtle schemes of numbers and magnitudes, endlessly branching out one upon another: natural philosophers, their vast wealth of comparisons, their oft-encountered tokens of latent and mysterious forces. Whosoever cultivates either of these 1868 two fields in a reverent and sober spirit, finding an even greater pleasure in rapt contemplation than in mere discovery, possesses, I should say, a heart not ill prepared either for poetry or even for religion itself.
I hardly know whether it is justifiable to associate, with such important considerations as these, the exquisite clearness of Lucretius’ style, which, like a clear atmosphere, makes all his theories stand out in such clear sequence and proportion. It is very difficult to offer examples of this quality, since its peculiar power consists less in illuminating particular passages than in its power of filling the whole with a brilliant and steady light. We may say, indeed, that this faculty much resembles the
[Page 367]
cunning art of Nature herself, whenever she is pleased to fashion anything with an unwonted grace: a leaf, say, of some delicately framed plant, or the just harmony of sounds: any one who lovingly ponders such things as these will assuredly at times be wellnigh rapt beyond himself by the simple sense of their absolute beauty. How much the more likely, then, that Lucretius himself, instructed in these splendours by long experience, should revel in a certain secret sense of Nature's loftier ranges whensoever he shadows forth some picture with peculiar felicity!
Perhaps, however, this prologue may indicate this unique power:
For first I teach Great Things in lofty strains,
And loose men from Religion's grievous chains.
Next, tho' my subject's dark, my verse is clear,
And sweet, with Fancy flowing everywhere:
And this design'd. 1869
And we may add the following lines, which he more than once introduces:
In few, but sweetest Numbers, Muse reherse:
My few shall far exceed more numerous verse.
Thus dying swan's, tho' short, yet tuneful voice
Is more delightful than a World of Noise. 1870
Can any one suppose that Lucretius, being the man he was, merely indulges himself in vain conceit? do we not, 1871 rather, freely excuse him for praising his own work somewhat unstintedly, in that it suggests the high secrets of Nature?
To resume then, briefly, what has been said in the present discourse. Since we have established that Lucretius, first in his subject, next in his way of treating and discussing it, sought out, for himself, with special pleasure all that is mysterious and abstruse, all that is immense, all that is untrammelled by bounds (a characteristic which
[Page 368]
itself, beyond all others, lifts the mind from the common and ordinary routine of life): further, seeing that he everywhere seeks comparisons which, by their vastness or elegant beauty, carry the suggestion of Deity: and gives fullest expression to those great scientific and mathematical conceptions which ever lift the mind to the heights and mysteries of far-reaching space: seeing all this, it need not surprise us that he affords more lines than the whole circle of ancient poets capable of being applied to ends and offices truly divine. And so, Epicurean though he was, and forbidden by his school's decree to worship Deity with fear and reverence, he betook himself as by natural instinct to the far-withdrawn deeps of Nature and mysterious theories concerning infinite things. From such material he shaped for himself, so far as he could, a religion. For, not daring to enter the inmost shrine, he wandered, one may say, near the doors and thresholds with sadness and longing desire:
And stretches out his helpless hands
   In yearning for the further shore. 1872
And finally (if such imagination may be forgiven), the Great and Good God ordained him to be a shining witness, in what high and special reverence we should hold both all the form and feature of the world around us, and that region of Poetry, in particular, which is most deeply concerned with them. In truth, I firmly believe that all these were granted as a solace to sorrowing mortals till such time as true Religion should be revealed, and that minds which have been imbued with divine truth should still look on them as a valuable means, for they are fraught with the sense of piety, are a refuge for a full heart, and, for thankful, chastened spirits, a marvellous linking with that glorious region of the blest.
[Page ]
LECTURE XXXVI 1873
Virgil, on his own confession, looked up to Lucretius as a master. He is to be ranked among the poets who delight in country life, not in action. It is clear that he wrote the Aeneid somewhat against the grain: for, first, he is quite uninterested in the character of Aeneas himself: next, he gladly catches at every opportunity of digressing into the quiet charms of Nature: finally, he makes it clear that he thoroughly detested war and warlike affairs.
Next to Lucretius, we have to address ourselves to the poetry of Virgil: the fact, indeed, speaks for itself: first of all, because they are so intimately connected as to time and place. We cannot easily believe that distinguished poets appeared independently of a kind of natural sequence and defined law, if only we can, even to a slight extent, conjecture what the law is. Can we really believe that the issue of wars, the fate and fortune of kings and princes, are under governance of method and order, but that no rational association is traceable between those great men who by their genius and writings have proved a blessing not only to their own age, but to all that follow? Surely, a hard and scarcely human view! and if we refuse to accept it, then it follows at once that we cannot find any more suitable thread on which to string together the various changes and advances in the history of Poetry than the simple order of time. This is precisely the rule we have 1874 adhered to in our attempt to deal with ancient poetry; whether quite successfully I know not: but at all events, to my mind, each order of poetry seems, in its own time and place, to accord most appropriately with human needs and human desires: I mean that of Homer, of Pindar, of Aeschylus, and of Lucretius, provided that I have not
[Page 370]
entirely failed to grasp the essential quality and main principle of each.
And so, in my opinion, we must proceed by the same path in our remarks upon Virgil: particularly as he himself not doubtfully implies that he always had Lucretius before his eyes, though he would not venture to imitate him and did not consider himself as working in the same field. In support of this, one passage already cited, towards the close of the second Georgic , will suffice: the passage in which he declares that the chief reason why he wishes to win the favour of the Muses is that he may be taught Nature's secrets:
Teach me the various labours of the moon,
And whence proceed th' eclipses of the sun;
Why flowing tides prevail upon the main,
And in what dark recess they shrink again;
What shakes the solid earth; what cause delays
The summer nights, and shortens winter days. 1875
And a few lines later he styles ‘happy’—
   The man, who, studying Nature's laws,
Through known effects can trace the secret cause—
His mind possessing in a quiet state,
Fearless of Fortune, and resign'd to Fate!
Here we have an undisguised tribute to the Epicurean poet: what his view may have been concerning Epicurus himself and his teaching, he has, unless I am mistaken, left uncertain. Probably the song of Silenus has a similar reference:
He sung the secret seeds of Nature's frame;
How seas, and earth, and air, and active flame,
Fell through the mighty void, and, in their fall,
Were blindly gather'd in this goodly ball. 1876
1877 A strange subject, one would think, for a poem, had
[Page 371]
not a recent splendid example been already at hand in the poem of Lucretius.
The verses which follow again recall Lucretius, where, towards the beginning of his Fifth Book he describes the wild solitude of primitive man and of the desert world:
The rising trees the lofty mountains grace:
The lofty mountains feed the savage race,
Yet few and strangers, in Th' unpeopled place.
Moreover, I fancy that there is an underlying tribute to the De Rerum Natura , when Virgil pictures Iopas with harp and song gracing the royal banquet:
                                         Iopas brought
His golden lyre, and sung what ancient Atlas taught—
The various labours of the wandering moon,
And whence proceed Th' eclipses of the sun;
Th' original of men and beasts; and whence
The rains arise, and fires their warmth dispense,
And fixed and erring stars dispose their influence. 1878
And then he adds what he had already said in the Georgics , and in exactly the same words—
                                         What cause delays
The summer nights, and shortens winter days—
lest there should be any room for doubt that he has in mind the same order of poetry in both cases.
And thus we come to the conclusion that in Virgil's own opinion there subsisted between Lucretius and himself a certain fellow feeling, not superficial or accidental, but deeply seated and engrained in both their hearts: and that he therefore is far more justly reckoned among Pastoral than among Epic poets: consequently, that his special gift and vein are to be sought less in the Aeneid than in the poems produced when he was younger and lived and sung as he himself willed.
[Page 372]
But why spend time on this? If there is any point on which we may dispense with long argument, it is this about Virgil. No one need proceed here cautiously, with hesitating step, as in dark and difficult paths; no need of subtle conjecture and the keen-scented instinct of a patient and acute investigator. Even if it were true that the fact 1879 does not force itself on the reader's eye: even if a doubt can be raised whether any other note is struck more often in his poems than the praise of country and nature: we have, after all, the poet's own direct and unconcealed testimony concerning himself and his true temperament, in those lines, which have already been quoted more than once, and of which this is the sum:
My next desire is, void of care and strife,
To lead a soft, secure, inglorious life—
A country cottage near a crystal flood,
A winding valley, and a lofty wood. 1880
In these verses, I say, the poet declares in a way from which there is no appeal, what is the goal of his ambition, and what the part he conceives himself to play in the sacred ring and company of the Muses. The significance in a matter concerning poetry of a declaration so expressed is exactly the same as often happens in the deeper matters of religion where a man prefers to utter his feelings in some fixed form of words.
In these lines, indeed, written when riper both in years and literary experience, he would seem to have pronounced judgement upon himself, in a spirit of detachment, as if looking down upon himself from above: but such was his prevision, he had foreshadowed the same opinion when he first produced the Bucolics :
But when I try'd her tender voice, too young,
And fighting kings and bloody battles sung,
Apollo check'd my pride, and bade me feed
My fatt'ning flocks, nor dare beyond the reed. 1881
[Page 373]
It will be remembered perhaps that a certain Varus, a man of high rank, had urged the poet to forsake poetry of rural life and quiet, and rather devote himself to writing some work in the Homeric vein. Some such meaning, I take it, is implied in the lines which immediately follow:
Admonish'd thus, while every pen prepares
To write thy praises, Varus, and thy wars,
My past'ral Muse her humble tribute brings;
And yet not wholly uninspir'd she sings.
In fact, Virgil lightly replies to such exhortations, that at one time in his early life warlike themes had exercised his mind and ambition, but that he obeyed the plain 1882 warnings of his better judgement, and did not attempt a task for which he was little fitted, but had betaken himself willingly and gladly to his rural haunts as to a harbour of refuge.
Moreover, it should be noted that the poet in this Eclogue presents himself under the name of Tityrus: whence we may infer that the several views and opinions which are fathered upon the same character in other Eclogues may all be fairly taken as those of Virgil himself. The importance of this fact in connexion with the present discussion will appear later. Here, I will note a different point, that Virgil, while frequently professing himself as a follower of some one or other of his predecessors, yet never, so far as I know, suggests that he modelled himself after Homer. As regards the pastoral poems, he claims Theocritus as his master:
I first transferr'd to Rome Sicilian strains;
Nor blush'd the Doric Muse to dwell on Mantuan plains. 1883
Sicilian Muse, begin a loftier strain! 1884
I will go: and the lays that in Chalcidian verse I have composed will attune upon the pipe of the Sicilian swain. 1885
[Page 374]
Thy sacred succour, Arethusa, 1886 bring,
To crown my labour ('tis the last I sing). 1887
And I might cite other passages, wherein, as if going out of his way, and indeed with a sort of delight, he insists that he is a follower of the Sicilian muse and the School of Theocritus. And so, too, when he comes to compose the Georgics , this most circumspect of poets does not hesitate to take up Hesiod's mantle:
And old Ascraean verse in Roman cities sing. 1888
And yet, throughout the whole length of the Aeneid , though he not only diligently imitates, but even translates Homer, we never once find him naming that great father and creator of poetry: one might almost say some religious scruple forbade it. In truth, as we should expect from his simple and transparent character, he shrunk from appearing 1889 to claim even the very last place in the circle of Epic poets: being, very rightly, conscious that in this sphere he was exerting himself, I will not say in defiance of his genius, but yet in a way that ran counter to his natural instincts, which turned naturally to other themes. Moreover, Virgil was, in my opinion, a critic of unrivalled judgement, gifted with a most delicate and exquisite literary instinct: so that we are the more inclined to fall in with his own verdict as to himself. Then, too, do not his contemporaries seem to have felt precisely the same thing? At all events, a celebrated antithesis in one of Horace's satires thus contrasts him with Varius:
Varius outsoars us all on Homer's wings:
The Muse that loves the woodland and the farm
To Virgil lends her gayest, tenderest charm. 1890
Observe that Horace not merely assigns to Virgil, then
[Page 375]
a new poet, as his special domain, the country-side and the delights of natural things, but also, at least as compared with the gifts of Varius, then at the height of his popularity, denies him an active and heroic vein.
It would, assuredly, be arrogant and foolish to throw doubt and uncertainty on the clearly expressed judgement of these two distinguished poets, one of whom, moreover, was speaking of himself and the other of his intimate friend.
Now, having once established this principle, we may well dispense with any further inquiry as to the main essence of Virgil's poetry, and pass on to other subjects which will prove highly interesting, be of richer fruitfulness, and capable of more definite decision: namely, how it has come about that this one poet stands out beyond all others as the type and model of his own peculiar class: what temper of mind, what worldly fortunes, and, more than all, what philosophic creed, severally contributed to develop him and make him the most delightful priest and interpreter of Nature.
Yet it may still be urged that most critics have always relegated Virgil to a totally different poetic class. They are wont to be extraordinarily impressed by the mere form, 1891 appearance, and name of an Epic. As soon as they read of heroes, wars, a burning city, household gods carried away in flight, fate leading the fugitives to Italy, the conquest of that country by war, and all the rest which goes to make up the apparatus of a poem in the great style, forthwith they proceed to imagine for themselves another Homer. Nor can they easily be led to believe it possible, that in the midst of all this martial and civil turmoil, a passionate love for rural peace should both live and flourish, and indeed be subtly intermingled with warlike strains: and this in such a way that in dealing with almost exactly the same themes we find two poets,
[Page 376]
yes, and both primary poets, belonging to two opposite classes.
Nor are there wanting some plausible grounds which may be urged in support of their opinion. I pass by the fact that certain particular episodes in the Aeneid present almost an exact copy of particular parts of the Iliad or the Odyssey —since the school and quality of a writer are not to be assigned merely by the fact that he imitates another, but much more by the way and spirit in which he imitates him: yet, leaving all this out of the question, who will deny that Virgil duly decks and sets off both naval and martial descriptions, with most forceful diction, with wealth of imagery, and with appropriate rhythm, now smooth, now animated, as occasion demanded? and all of this is suggestive of a writer ranging over his own true field, not struggling and making head against his natural bent. Let us take by way of example the first lines that meet us on turning over the leaves:
And now the trumpets terribly, from far,
With rattling clangor, rouse the sleepy war.
The soldiers' shouts succeed the brazen sounds;
And heav'n, from pole to pole, the noise rebounds.
The Volscians bear their shields upon their head,
And, rushing forward, form a moving shed.
These fill the ditch; those pull the bulwarks down:
Some raise the ladders; others scale the town.
But, where void spaces on the walls appear,
Or thin defence, they pour their forces there.
With poles and missive weapons, from afar,
The Trojans keep aloof the rising war. 1892
1893 Could Homer, it is asked, or even the warlike Tyrtaeus himself, exhibit greater eagerness and enthusiasm in the midst of carnage and tumult? And indeed that is true: for I quite believe, whatever his theme, Virgil was never wanting either in that unfettered rush and resonance of
[Page 377]
language or poetic ‘vividness’, which always brings the whole scene visibly before us. He was a most consummate artist, and so habituated in all that sort of machinery and apparatus that he could not, I apprehend, easily relinquish it even in the most trivial description; still less when engaged on a theme, undertaken (so we are told) at the instance of Augustus, upon which he lavished all his art and devotion. So, too, in our own times great poets have sung on any trifling subject which came their way: one on a fly snared in a spider's web; 1894 another on a stolen tress of a lady's hair; 1895 a third, as it happened, on some other chance text: nor did they stint a jot of their accustomed grace and genius in dealing with it; and yet no one would ever dream of supposing they attached any grave importance to such things, or that therein lay the essence of their poetry. It is a mistake, therefore, to assume that a poet's real quality and disposition can be inferred unmistakably, either from the magnificent roll of the words or the splendour of the imagery.
Let us rather direct our attention to such characteristics as appeal, not to the eye and ear, but to the intellect. Now an epic, like a drama, may be fairly tested in the personages who play the leading parts; and when we find that nearly all that concerns some chief actor seems to be coldly and perfunctorily conceived, it is hard to believe that the task in hand was heartily congenial to the composer: nor, as Horace jestingly declares of himself, that he took it seriously in hand because unable to sleep till he had delivered his soul. 1896
You see the point at which I am aiming: you scarcely need that I should point out to you how widely the two 1897 chief ancient epic poets differ in this respect. In the Iliad everything is redolent of Achilles: not merely of any typical warrior, but of Achilles, brilliant in his own special
[Page 378]
and peculiar radiance, as the poet himself conceived him: the Achilles who, when hardly more than a boy, knowingly and willingly dedicated himself to death rather than lose complete and perfect renown, and upon whom, therefore, not merely his own comrades, not merely mortal men, but even the assemblies of the immortal Gods, and the world of dumb animals, lavished their favouring regard. Upon this one man hangs the fate and fortune of all Asia and of Greece: while he is wrathful, the downfall of Troy is delayed: when he is pacified, all goes forward apace: when off the stage, we long for him to reappear: we silently test by his standard all other men, the moment they come forward. Finally, no one could possibly doubt for a moment that the poet himself held Achilles in highest regard: while on the contrary, as to Virgil's opinion of Aeneas, judgement is neither easy nor decisive. He calls him ‘Pious’ and ‘Father’, indeed, with scrupulous care: brings him on the scene with much grandeur of phrase and pomp of imagery: indeed, represents Heaven and Earth, the universal quire of Nature, and Gods above and spirits below as alike in sympathy with him. Yet at every moment we seem in presence of laboured and conscientious effort: everything seems the outcome of a duty and a task rather than the spontaneous flow and impulse of the poet's inmost heart.
The Aeneid , moreover, is marked by the serious blemish, that not even at the very end of the whole poem does it leave us with any defined and clearly-drawn portrait of the man who plays the chief part in it. What impression others derive, indeed, I know not: but to myself, at all events, going back on Aeneas’ character, no absolute personality emerges which can be said to be drawn and sketched even in barest outline. I find myself wholly 1898 unable to infer what, under any given circumstance, this hero would either say or do: so that at times I am almost
[Page 379]
driven to conclude that Virgil hardly troubled himself to think out and conceive the qualities and disposition of his own Aeneas at all: he seems to have treated him as nothing more than the shadow of a glorious name on which might be hung all that the earliest traditions had handed down concerning the early history of the Romans and the Julian race. And so it comes about that the Trojan hero speaks and acts all through much after the fashion of those who have taken up a part, whether in politics or in any other form of human co-operation, and feel bound to maintain it at all costs. Such a man is never independent, never wholly a free agent. No ‘words of truth are forced out from the bottom of his heart’. 1899 And, just as in the ordinary intercourse of life men of this kind present but small attraction, so, I apprehend, the character of Aeneas leaves most readers cold.
More than this, may we not even affirm that on certain occasions the poet himself spontaneously visits his hero with highest reprobation and resentment? In fact, all that relates to Dido admits of no other construction. For the episode is so conceived that it would manifestly seem a shameful and repulsive case of injustice should Aeneas go scot-free. And therefore Virgil, now and again, deliberately seeks to reassure us with the happy prediction of some ultimate retribution:
If so the Fates ordain, and Jove commands,
Th' ungrateful wretch shou'd find the Latian lands,
Yet let a race untam'd, and haughty foes,
His peaceful entrance with dire arms oppose;
Oppress'd with numbers in Th' unequal field,
His men discourag'd and himself expell'd,
Let him for succour sue from place to place,
Torn from his subjects, and his son's embrace:
First let him see his friends in battle slain,
And their untimely fate lament in vain:
[Page 380]
And when, at length, the cruel war shall cease,
On hard conditions may he buy his peace;
Nor let him then enjoy supreme command,
But fall, untimely, by some hostile hand,
And lie unbury'd on the barren sand!
These are my pray'rs, and this my dying will. 1900
A divinely inspired utterance truly, since ‘truth sits 1901 upon the lips of dying men’: and wholly acceptable to all who demand the punishment of a perjured oath. Moreover, it may fairly be suggested that the same instinctive feeling is traceable in the memorable colloquy with the shade of Dido when Aeneas passes through the Lower World; if indeed we may call it a colloquy, for, following the hero's humble greeting and unmistakable betrayal of an uneasy conscience, we read:
Disdainfully she look'd; then turning round,
She fix'd her eyes unmov'd upon the ground,
And, what he says and swears, regards no more,
Than the deaf rocks, when the loud billows roar;
But whirl'd away, to shun his hateful sight,
Hid in the forest, and the shades of night.
Then sought Sichaeus thro' the shady grove,
Who answer'd all her cares, and equall'd all her love.
Some pious tears the pitying hero paid,
And followed with his eyes the flitting shade. 1902
This sounds somehow more humiliating treatment than consists with the proper dignity of a brave and good man, to say nothing of the pioneer and founder of the Roman name. Virgil, I apprehend, inclined (whether instinctively or of set purpose who can say?) to represent Aeneas as utterly cast down and ashamed: but how solemn a truth, how calculated to fill the sinner with remorse, that there should be no forgiveness even in the shades below!
Let us, however, pass on into Latium with the Trojans: for there, too, the poet shows himself somewhat harsh to
[Page 381]
Aeneas: since he endows Turnus, his rival, not only with a natural and single-hearted character, but also with that which is more attractive still, an unaffected and youthful enthusiasm: moreover, he clearly implies that he won the love of Lavinia herself: and, most important of all, gives him a just and righteous ground for hostilities: so just and righteous indeed that any one opposing it must inevitably plead the manifest and direct command of God—that customary cloak of fraud throughout the Aeneid .
In short, let any one compare the death of Hector at the hands of Achilles with that of Turnus at the hands of 1903 Aeneas, and all that is said about each before or after his death, and he will, I apprehend, feel instinctively how wide is the gulf between the Iliad and the Aeneid . With all our compassion for Hector, yet we feel no resentment that he should fall before an Achilles, a man to whom Destiny has given his power and who is more like a God than a man; but we feel nothing but sorrow as Turnus falls, shamefully cut off as he was by one who utterly fails to captivate us by the least brilliance of personality. And here, too, I feel, as I have pointed out before, that Homer skilfully tempers and softens the effect of a savage and cruel deed. For by addition of two episodes he has deliberately carried on the story somewhat further than is consistent with the well-known rule of Aristotle: the first describes the funeral rites of Patroclus, the other the meeting of Priam and Achilles: and thus the savage temper of Achilles is softened in two ways: we are made to see that it was passionate loyalty to his dead comrade which at the outset kindled his fury, yet that at the end, when once he has given satisfaction to the spirit of the Dead, his anger gives way to compassion. But however highly Virgil's artistic judgement may be applauded in rounding off his whole poem with the death of Turnus, I greatly suspect that this circumstance has tended in no small degree to discredit
[Page 382]
Aeneas. The last act in any history has vast influence on our sympathies one way or another: and few indeed will follow Aeneas, when he finally leaves the stage after such an event as this, with good wishes and happy augury.
Dismissing, however, what specially concerns Aeneas, I fail to recognize, either in his character, in that of Turnus, or in any single one of all those whom Virgil brings upon his stage, the quality so conspicuous in Homer: namely, that the issue and essence of each deed wholly depend on the conduct and temper of the actors. What is called the knot, or critical point, of the Iliad consists, as we know, solely in the wrath of the two leading heroes: but, as for the Aeneid , I doubt if any single part of it would need 1904 alteration, if the characters of the actors were altered. In the Iliad the issues not only of the whole war, but even, one might almost say, of individual combats, admirably bear witness to the character of each combatant: and not only those of the first rank, but those of secondary and third-rate importance. Virgil, I will not deny, diversifies the fortunes and hazards of his characters with consummate skill and care: yet it is only done either by relieving the strain upon us with the help of similes drawn from more peaceful scenes, or by touching the chord of sympathy for the sad lot of humankind: on the individualities of the warriors themselves, he either bestows little trouble, or at all events produces no happy result: one or two instances to the contrary alone excepted.
In the next place, let us ask this: is there any one character in the Aeneid , with the solitary exception perhaps of Turnus, whom we are wont to recall with silent affection, and of whom, we can create any clear picture in our minds? does the poem afford any human portraits such as readily come to mind to help us when we are oppressed with affairs and the daily tenor of life? Whereas in the Iliad and the Odyssey each man's quality is vividly
[Page 383]
expressed, not merely ‘the chosen chieftains of the Danai foremost of men’, 1905 but even some obscure Cebriones and Automedon and Euryclea and many more who play even for a moment some most insignificant parts.
Nor in passing this judgement do I forget Euryalus and Nisus, nor Pallas and Evander, nor Dido, that most pathetic figure of all, nor any other character like these which we find in Virgil. But this is my deliberate opinion: Virgil's men and women, as a rule, excite and touch our minds, not so much for their own sakes as on account of their fates and fortunes: they seem cast in a mould which belongs rather to a general class, as logicians call it: while Homer's characters, even to minutest detail, are so hit off that each of them exhibits characteristic and peculiar 1906 individuality: it is never, for example, merely some wanton youth, nor modest matron, nor kingly old man who appears, but a living person, Paris, Andromache, or Priam.
Homer's surpassing merit and highest charm lie in the personality of his heroes and in dramatic action. It is true that he treats of the whole field of country life and of Nature, and that with abundant variety, but it is always with intent to illustrate the parts played by his characters and the scheme of the action. Virgil, on the other hand, only seems really happy in his theme when its scene lies in some lovely spot. Homer describes stream and forest in their relation to human life; Virgil, the fortunes and ways of men, for the sake of stream and wood. The name of Homer immediately summons to imagination not Xanthus and Simois nor the Trojan shore, but the warriors themselves, Achilles, Hector, and the rest. Those, on the other hand, who revel in Virgilian memories, will instinctively revert to some coast or river, some delightful or sacred spot which he has pictured in association with his heroes. And this view has the support, I think, of the
[Page 384]
refined judgement of painters and artists. Those who tak subjects out of Homer depict, as a rule, kings, battles, and noble dames; while those inspired by Virgil paint country scenes, mountain passes, water-ways, cloudland splendours, and whatsoever belongs to Nature's quiet charm. Is there, or could there be, throughout the whole Aeneid any more impressive incident than the first approach of Aeneas and his Trojans to the Latin shore? or any situation affording finer scope for a poet who aimed at depicting the deeds of kings and chiefs, whether by pencil or brush? Yet Claude Lorraine, a skilled and learned painter assuredly, in his representation of it, elected, you will remember, to expend his whole pains on the charms of the delicious 1907 scenery. Nor has he wronged Virgil by such treatment, for it is clear that nothing lay so near the heart of the poet himself. Just listen, if quotation of such well-known lines may be forgiven me:
Now, when the rosy morn began to rise,
And wav'd her saffron streamer through the skies,
When Thetis blush'd in purple, not her own,
And from her face the breathing winds were blown,
A sudden silence sate upon the sea,
And sweeping oars, with struggling, urge their way.
   The Trojan, from the main, beheld a wood,
Which thick with shades, and a brown horror stood:
Betwixt the trees the Tyber took his course,
With whirlpools dimpled: and with downward force
That drove the sand along, he took his way,
And roll'd his yellow billows to the sea.
About him, and above, and round the wood,
The birds that haunt the borders of his flood,
That bath'd within, or bask'd upon his side,
To tuneful songs their narrow throats apply'd.
The captain gives command: the joyful train
Glide through the gloomy shade, and leave the main. 1908
Obviously the poet is completely charmed and carried
[Page 385]
away by the lovely banks of the river, by the windings of the forest, and by the cries of the sea-birds, whose song, though not pleasing in itself, yet is by no means without its own attraction as closely associated with memories of beautiful regions: so that we need not be surprised at Virgil's phrase that ‘the air is charmed’ by it. But the poet, I repeat, is fascinated by these delights: for the moment he forgets war and policy and the Rome that was so soon to be: so greatly does he revel in the loneliness of grove and sea and stream.
And before long he again takes up the same strain, when Aeneas approaches the Arcadian colony: joyfully and thankfully the poet escapes from the strife of camps to the banks and deeps of the silent stream. An embassy is on its way to Evander:
The following night, and the succeeding day,
Propitious Tyber smooth'd his wat'ry way:
He roll'd his river back, and pois'd he stood,
A gentle swelling, and a peaceful flood.
The Trojans mount their ships: they put from shore,
Borne on the waves, and scarcely dip an oar,
Shouts from the land give omen to their course; 1909
And the pitch'd vessels glide with easy force.
The woods and waters wonder at the gleam
Of shields and painted ships that stem the stream.
One summer's night and one whole day they pass
Betwixt the green-wood shades, and cut the liquid glass. 1910
Surely any one may see that Virgil does not merely touch these summer delights in passing, but lingers lovingly over them, and is unwillingly recalled to war and state affairs.
Such verses as these have, moreover, the distinguishing quality that each detail is beautiful in itself, and all combine to form one beautiful whole. Those are mistaken, therefore, who deny this power of painting scenes from
[Page 386]
nature to the ancients. Without looking further afield, a fine example is furnished by the exordium which prefaces the account of the approach to the Latian shore:
And thou, O matron of immortal fame!
Here dying, to the shore hast left thy name:
Caieta still the place is called from thee,
The nurse of great Aeneas' infancy.
Here rest thy bones in rich Hesperia's plains:
Thy name ('tis all a ghost can have) remains.
   Now, when the prince her fun'ral rites had paid,
He plough'd the Tyrrhene seas with sails display'd.
From land a gentle breeze arose by night;
Serenely shone the stars; the moon was bright;
And the sea trembled with her silver light.
Now near the shelves of Circe's shores they run
(Circe the rich, the daughter of the sun),
A dang'rous coast!—The goddess wastes her days
In joyous songs: the rocks resound her lays.
In spinning, or the loom, she spends the night;
And cedar brands supply her father's light. 1911
What one element, I would ask, of a delightful and perfect picture is here wanting? Seen from afar, there is the funeral mound on the shore! we see the vessels, on the one hand, borne along the night-shadowed tranquil deep! and the full radiance of the moon shines down on it all! on the other there are the steep rocks, the pathless wood, the smoke rising from the palace summit. And I rather fancy these two books are more than ordinarily rich in such pictures: the poet, perhaps, feeling the near approach of battle array and arms and the hideous tumult 1912 of war: and so lingering the more affectionately in some peaceful nook. Thus on the very eve of combat:
The cheerful morn salutes Evander's eyes,
And songs of chirping birds invite to rise. 1913
Or again, when Vulcan rouses himself to make armour, the hour is thus charmingly marked:
[Page 387]
Now when the Night her middle course had rode,
And his first slumber had refresh'd the god—
The time when early housewives leave the bed,
When living embers on the hearth they spread,
Supply the lamp, and call the maids to rise;—
With yawning mouths and with half-open'd eyes,
They ply the distaff by the winking light,
And to their daily labour add the night:
Thus frugally they earn their children's bread,
And uncorrupted keep their nuptial bed. 1914
Some critics find fault with this simile as ill-suited to such a context: but why should not Virgil when about to enter, reluctantly, upon the field of war, indulge his abiding passion for rural life by interpolating this little picture of household duty?
And he has, in fact, taken it out of Homer: as he has many illustrations and pictures whereby, as we know, he was wont to escape from scenes of war and slaughter, and withdraw himself among the safe recesses of Nature. For instance, he tells us how the wearied Latins were thrown into confusion:
Thus, when the swain, within a hollow rock,
Invades the bees with suffocating smoke,
They run around, or labour on their wings,
Disus'd to flight, and shoot their sleepy stings;
To shun the bitter fumes, in vain they try;
Black vapours, issuing from the vent, involve the sky. 1915
Again, he interposes the following lines in the midst of a most savage scene of combat:
The Trojan chief who, held at bay from far,
On his Vulcanian orb sustain'd the war.
   As, when thick hail comes rattling in the wind,
The ploughman, passenger, and lab'ring hind,
For shelter to the neighb'ring covert fly,
Or hous'd, or safe in hollow caverns, lie:
[Page 388]
But that o'erblown, when heaven above them smiles,
Return to travail, and renew their toils:
1916 Aeneas thus, o'erwhelm'd on every side,
The storm of darts, undaunted, did abide. 1917
In such lines as these, and others of like quality, the Mantuan shepherd, as one may say, has woven his Georgics into the midst of the Aeneid . But, as I said, this is a habit which he shares with Homer. Virgil's distinguishing peculiarity lies in the fact that he not merely passionately and longingly pines after rural pleasures when separated from them, but evinces, moreover, a most absolute loathing and detestation for warlike affairs: this is shown silently and unobtrusively, no doubt, yet it is quite unmistakable. Does he not carefully devise, when narrating battle-scenes, that the final end of each of those who fall shall in the highest degree excite our compassion, so that none may indignantly or angrily complain that, in any particular tragedy, the general fate of wretched mortals, and therefore our own too, is viewed with unconcern? Nor do his lines and rhythm exhibit any triumph or exultation even in the fall of Mezentius, cruel savage and scorner of the Gods as he was; in fact, the poet, in many ways, took care before-hand to mitigate the sense of his ferocity, partly by those sympathetic traits relating to Lausus, partly, in that he shows remorse for his wickednesses:
My guilt thy growing virtues did defame;
My blackness blotted thy unblemish'd name.
Chas'd from a throne, abandon'd, and exil'd
For foul misdeeds, were punishments too mild:
I ow'd my people these, and from their hate,
With less resentment could have borne my fate. 1918
And then there is his address to his sorrowing horse:
O Rhoebus! we have liv'd too long for me—
If life and long were terms that could agree.
[Page 389]
This day thou either shalt bring back the head
And bloody trophies of the Trojan dead—
This day thou either shalt revenge my woe
For murder'd Lausus, on his cruel foe:
Or if inexorable Fate deny
Our conquest, with thy conquer'd master die:
For after such a lord, I rest secure
Thou wilt no foreign reins, or Trojan load, endure.
He said: and straight Th' officious courser kneels,
To take his wonted weight. 1919
It is commonly remarked, indeed, that men notorious 1920 for hatred of their kind almost always cherish some object of affection: either a dog, or a horse, or a bird, perchance. This fact too, therefore, is meant to lead his readers to pass a kindlier judgement on Mezentius, Virgil's narrations never allowing us to rejoice unqualifiedly in any man's death.
Further, whenever compelled to describe some terrible scene of wounded and slaughtered foes, whereby his heroes are wont to force a path for themselves, the poet contrives most ingeniously to impress on us, that this plague of martial glory touches every rank of life and all fortunes. Not to lay stress on the downfall of Troy, where among others:
Then Ripheus followed, in Th' unequal fight;
Just of his word, observant of the right:
Heav'n thought not so: Dymas their fate attends,
With Hypanis, mistaken by their friends.
Nor, Pantheus, thee thy mitre nor the bands
Of awful Phoebus saved from impious hands. 1921
nor, to dwell on the burning of Priam's palace and the scornful wrecking of the bridal chambers of royal ladies: what a frightful thing it is, that in the Latian battles, so many whole families are destroyed, so many bands of
[Page 390]
brothers blotted out! For example, when Aeneas is filled with rage to avenge Pallas:
Four sons of Sulmo, four whom Ufens bred,
He took in fight, and living victims led,
To please the ghost of Pallas, and expire
In sacrifice before his fun'ral fire. 1922
Truly, one would say that here, as often elsewhere too, revenge appears, to the poet, slight and of little worth, unless brothers perish in one fell attack.
And finally, those oft-recurring passages in which he 1923 recalls the family, country, tastes, and pursuits, and, it may be, the grievous lot of those who fall, are well calculated to excite compassion. Such is his intent, I imagine, when he chronicles among the slain, at one time:
Cretheus, whom the Muses held so dear:
He fought with courage, and he sung the fight:
Arms were his business, verses his delight; 1924
and at another time:
Antores had from Argos travell'd far,
Alcides' friend, and brother of the war;
Till, tir'd with toils, fair Italy he chose,
And in Evander's palace sought repose:
Now falling by another wound, his eyes
He casts to heav'n, on Argos thinks, and dies. 1925
And here it would be inexcusable to pass by one whom Virgil seems to name with particular affection:
Peaceful Menoetes after these he kill'd,
Who long had shunn'd the dangers of the field:
On Lerna's lake a silent life he led.
And with his nets and angle earn'd his bread,
Nor pompous cares nor palaces he knew,
But wisely from Th' infectious world withdrew.
Poor was his house: his father's painful hand
Discharg'd his rent, and plough'd another's land. 1926
[Page 391]
Assuredly this reads as if the poet had in his mind some Mantuan settler, whom he had known when a boy. And there is an ample harvest of such traits: all of them clearly evincing a disposition which, to use his own words, ‘thoroughly detested wars’. Never with Virgil do we feel ourselves—as we do when following Homer's Achilles—carried away with the rush and excitement of glorious combat: nor are our eyes so dazzled by its glamour as to ignore the savage and wholly detestable character of the whole scene.
But let us leave the Aeneid for a while and turn to his other poems: here at least we shall find every mark and quality whereby a temper devotedly attached to rural life can possibly declare itself, and we shall trace besides the real reason which made the poet so bitterly and thoroughly detest war: it was simply because nothing more grievously hinders and interferes with the pleasures and tranquil enjoyments of those who toil in the country than war and 1927 arms. Only hear his passionate outburst:
Where fraud and rapine right and wrong confound,
Where impious arms from every part resound,
And monstrous crimes in every shape are crown'd.
The peaceful peasant to the war is press'd;
The fields lie fallow in inglorious rest;
The plain no pasture to the flock affords;
The crooked scythes are straighten'd into swords. 1928
And, a few verses before, he had displayed a kind of exultation when indulging the prophecy that a time would come when none but weapons of husbandry should once more bear sway throughout the plains of Philippi:
Then, after length of time, the lab'ring swains,
Who turn the turf of those unhappy plains,
Shall rusty piles from the plough'd furrows take,
And over empty helmets pass the rake,—
Amaz'd at antique titles on the stones,
And mighty relics of gigantic bones. 1929
[Page 392]
And remember, too, how Meliboeus, when he deplores his exile, assigns as the bitterest and most humiliating drop in his cup, that his patrimonial fields would fall by lot as spoil to some legionary:
Did we for these barbarians plant and sow?
On these, on these, our happy fields bestow?
Good heav'n! what dire effects from civil discord
flow! 1930
Had any one else seized on his property he could somehow have borne it better: that is just the feeling which those husbandmen would feel who have learnt by experience what it is to have soldiers quartered in their neighbourhood.
It certainly is strange that hatred of war should be so deeply engrained in a Roman: especially as Virgil himself was by no means wanting in the characteristic Roman spirit, nor is he ever slow to chant the wonted paeans about the seven hills and the conquered world: indeed, sometimes he makes skilful mention of this theme in contexts which are very remote from it. For instance:
                                         The shepherd last appears,
And with him all his patrimony bears,
His house and household gods, his trade of war,
His bow and quiver, and his trusty cur.
1931 Thus, under heavy arms, the youth of Rome
Their long laborious marches overcome,
Cheerly their tedious travels undergo,
And pitch their sudden camp before the foe 1932
In fact, the more the achievement of his countrymen rejoiced his heart, the stronger is the evidence of his thorough abhorrence of war: since not even the honour and glory of his country can restrain his condemnation of it.
[Page 393]
In fine, gentlemen, Virgil—if I interpret him aright— will withdraw from any claim to a primary rank in the proud hierarchy of Epic poets without regret, indeed, joyfully and gladly: for, to begin with, he has not drawn one single leading character—not even Aeneas himself— with any real zest: in the second place, he narrates action and affairs in such wise as to show that his main interest lay in recollections of well-loved regions and Nature's charms; lastly, he has plainly declared that all the world of affairs, and especially of military affairs, is alien to him, and that not without disgust does he engage in it. So that I can easily believe the statement which is made by some scholiasts, that Virgil, when near death, by his will directed that the Aeneid should be burned: not merely (as they suggest) because the work was imperfect, but—what was far more important—because of a certain weariness and dislike in regard to an unsatisfactory task, which he was conscious had been undertaken against his own true bent, and was far from being wrought after the ideal he had shaped for himself.
It may be asked, perhaps, how it could possibly have happened that a man endowed, if ever man was, with a keen and subtle judgement, and, moreover, of the most delicate modesty, should labour unwillingly on an uncongenial subject. And therefore I propose, in my next lecture, to attempt some explanation of this: and the discussion will, I apprehend, not a little assist our judgement as to the essence of the poetic art and faculty.
To-day, as a last request, I would ask thinking men to reflect whether it may not have been providentially ordered that the first place in Latin poetry should have been assigned to a poet who was as far as possible remote and alien from the instincts and disposition of that warlike race. Who knows but this very circumstance may not 1933 have subtly tempered the manners and tastes, not only
[Page 394]
of the Romans themselves, but of all those nations too who, to a very great extent, have claimed the Romans as their masters and their models? And this, just in the same way as the bracing and virile note of Homer contributed not a little, as I suppose, to the manly courage of his Greek countrymen.
[Page 395]
LECTURE XXXVII 1934
A suggestion as to the origin of the Aeneid: it was written by the poet in gratitude for the preservation of his farm. Illustrations of Virgil's extraordinary sympathy with rural folk: his method of describing the different hours of the day: his theories of husbandry, and interest in cattle and in bees. All these he often refers to with playful humour. And throughout there is present in his recollection beyond all else the thought of his all but lost farm.
Do not, gentlemen, I beg, suppose that we are going over trodden ground and wasting time away with mere word-play, if we devote another lecture to the consideration of the central vein and spring of Virgil's poetry. You may be assured it is not my object to prove that he was more willingly the poet of pastoral than of heroic themes. Enough has, I think, been said on that head. But it will be worth while to explain at length how it came about that his gentle and delicate genius came to bid farewell to the rustic muse and betook itself to the dreadful panoply of war and the frigid artificial character of Aeneas.
Now, if any one should turn away at once from such a question on the ground that it can only lead to a doubtful and uncertain answer, I fear that all discussion about poetry will seem of little worth to such a person; for, as a rule, poetry is far too subtle and complex to be limited and defined with all the exactness of the natural sciences. It deals almost exclusively with men's feelings and affections; 1935 so that we must not imagine that our time is wholly lost, if only we can produce some probable theory, though the exact truth, it may be, remains undiscovered. Moreover, the decision in such a matter belongs, as by a kind of special right, to such as are thorough devotees of Nature
[Page 396]
and rural life. If their judgements and instincts tally well with our theories—if they feel, with me, that it may well have been that Virgil became an Epic poet in the way that I shall suggest—I shall be quite content with that support. As for others, I hardly expect to prove my case to them.
But, to confess the truth, the views I now submit are by no means my own. For, if the question be asked, ‘what obligation was strong enough to induce Virgil—whose spirit was so gentle, so delicately strung, so bent on the pleasures of the country—to expend so great labour, over so long a period, upon a thoroughly alien and unsatisfying task?’ we may well reply, in terms which commended themselves not long since to one whose loss was deeply mourned and who was devoted to these studies: namely, that Virgil was a well-known figure at the court of Augustus Caesar, whither he had betaken himself under deep sense of gratitude for many great kindnesses: and that as he was held in high honour there, on account of his poems, and Augustus was intensely anxious that his own name should, like the name of the great kings and warriors of the past, be handed down in song to posterity, some of the courtiers, such as Maecenas perhaps and Horace, beset Virgil urgently with demand for an Epic poem: which is the more probable as the example of the Greeks and of Homer furnished a powerful stimulus,—witness those well-known lines of Propertius: ‘Give place, ye Roman writers: give place, ye Greeks; something greater than the Iliad is being brought to birth’ 1936 —so it was that Virgil, diffident and good-natured as he was, undertook a task which was a heavy burden to him, and to which his own bent did 1937 not lead him; yet throughout the whole poem he was constantly trying to escape from the affairs of State and the turmoil of war into his beloved rural scenes and solitudes,
[Page 397]
and finding comfort for himself whensoever any chance reference to Nature offered: lastly, Aeneas is drawn by him after a manner which suggests a laborious search on all sides for the character and qualities appropriate to a figure in which he took little interest and indeed hardly realized himself. 1938
Such was the view of one who was no mean authority on poetry, and on the tastes and pursuits of the lovers of stream and wood. It is obvious that his judgement most aptly agrees with the view about Virgil adopted in our last lecture, nor do I see anything in his theory either fanciful or plainly improbable.
But there is another point which I desire to lay stress upon in this connexion, because it helps more than anything else to show us that Virgil exhibits, throughout his whole work, an extraordinary self-consistency: and this is really the essence of what I may call our fundamental principle: that all poets who are ‘born not made’, without exception, possess some special taste or tendency, from whence their poetry is drawn as from a fount, they themselves being for the most part unaware of it: but this special tendency, while it always exists, does not always come to view. Now let us assume the case to have been really something like what has just been suggested.
Forthwith we begin to speculate how it could possibly have come about that Virgil was so deeply attached to Augustus, a poet to an emperor, a man of retirement to a man essentially of affairs and politics: and what can have been the real secret of so close a tie. Virgil was not the man, I apprehend, to seek public office, nor of his own will and wish to frequent royal courts and palaces: nor was Augustus so overbearing and imperious as to urge the poet to an ungrateful task under fear of any serious penalty. 1939 But suppose that Virgil betook himself to a burdensome
[Page 398]
labour as an evidence of gratitude for the kindness of Augustus which had allowed him to retain his farm and his hearth and home at a time when the homesteads of Mantua were being parcelled out among the soldiery. It would then follow that the poet never willingly abandoned his devotion to the rural Muse: not even when he suffered himself, most completely, to be drawn to totally different subjects. In fact, I maintain that he wrote, for a time, of other than rural delights, simply from his very devotion to the country, which burnt so strongly in his breast that he could deny nothing to the protector to whom he owed the preservation of his loved homestead.
But this view opens out a large field of inquiry, for out of it as a fountain-head flows, one may say, the whole scheme and principle of Virgil's poetry. This, with your permission, I now propose to develop as completely as I can.
First of all, the central fact is his extraordinary and genuine sympathy with all sorts of country-folk; he did not, like most other writers, especially those of modern times, merely wander vaguely and at random, up and down gloomy or pleasant scenes, in search of something to respond to his own mood and emotions. Not a few, indeed, we have known, who look on Nature just as some disciple of Socrates might, who had strolled somewhat further than usual beyond the bounds of Academus: and subsequently, as is the way with clever minds, returned to the school with a note-book full of similes.
Far other and better too was the way of our poet. His poems carry the impress, not of one who is merely taking a trip into the country, but of one to whom country life is really and in fact a part of his nature. Note how easily and naturally, in the Eclogues , he enters into the various characters of each and all of his shepherds. He recalls all that is gentle and sweet to listen to amid the country-folk,
[Page 399]
yet he does not ignore the less pleasing side of things: in fact, he shows that he enters gladly into the whole of their life just as he knows it. Even the abuse bandied between a Damoetas and Menalcas gains, in his hands, 1940 a certain grace of its own: simply because this rough jesting is not the least untrue to the well-known character of such peasants.
So, too, throughout the whole Aeneid , whenever any action takes place in the open air, he drops at once quite naturally, almost it would seem accidentally, into a style which proves the writer's heart bound up with the interests of rural life. The Latins, for instance, observe Aeneas, afar off, in the act of advance in line of battle:
As, when a whirlwind, rushing to the shore
From the mid-ocean, drives the waves before:
The painful hind with heavy heart foresees
The flatted fields, and slaughter of the trees;
With such impetuous rage the prince appears,
Before his doubled front, nor less destruction bears. 1941
As for the Georgics , need we say even a single word? for the main, if not the sole, aim of the poem is to exhibit and illustrate the inner mind of husbandmen, and to commemorate the round of toils and of hopes which recur every year of their lives. We may realize his success in this by simply comparing it a little carefully with the work of others who have attempted to describe rural arts in poetry, either in ancient or modern times. I mean writers such as Aratus, Manilius, or Oppian: and those, among ourselves, who have sung the praises of gardens, of orchards, of hunting, and even (strange them!) of spinning. Notable writers, assuredly, whom I would by no means exclude from the noble band of poets: but who are, nevertheless, not to be named with Virgil in this connexion, since it is clear they only took up these subjects temporarily, as
[Page 400]
a pastime, while he was manifestly absorbed night and day in his country life.
There is scarcely a period of the year or an hour of the day which he has not distinguished by some mark taken 1942 from rustic labours, such marks as are, I imagine, regularly used by husbandmen. Painting the dawn, for instance, he begins thus: ‘Whilst the dawn is fresh, whilst the grass is white with hoar frost.’ 1943 This is beautiful enough; but it could be paralleled in any poet. We have not, as yet, the characteristic note of the husbandmen. But listen to the next line: ‘whilst the dew on the tender herb is most grateful to the cattle.’ There you can hear the shepherd or the owner of the sheep speaking! And a little further on he adds,—advancing with the day—‘when the fourth hour of the day has collected the thirsty heat of the sky, and the plaintive grasshoppers seem to burst the trees of the vineyard with their chirping song.’ Again we recognize the touch of one who well knows what it means to toil under a burning sun: and how travellers or labourers, oppressed with the heat, are sometimes almost furious at the harsh insistent chirping of the grasshoppers.
Let us notice how he marks high noon:
'Twas noon; the sultry Dog-star from the sky
Scorch'd Indian swains; the rivel'd grass was dry;
So far there is nothing which decisively marks the rustic: but go on:
The sun with flaming arrows pierc'd the flood,
And, darting to the bottom, bak'd the mud. 1944
Virgil could, I well believe, have described some more beautiful effect, but then perhaps he was looking around with the same vision as do those who dread excessive heat for the sake of their flocks: and all these are just the things upon which their common talk is wont to lay stress.
[Page 401]
And finally, do not let us omit his description of evening, for there we have the real Virgil at his best. Who but 1945 Virgil ever elected to indicate that hour by the murmur of bees returning from their day's harvesting?
Then, having spent the last remains of light,
They give their bodies due repose at night,
When hollow murmurs of their evening bells
Dismiss the sleepy swains, and toll them to their cells.
When once in beds their weary limbs they steep,
No buzzing sounds disturb their golden sleep.
'Tis sacred silence all. 1946
I might quote many other passages all of like indication: as where he shows a kind of irritation, when referring to things which are injurious to corn and grain:
Nor yet the ploughman, nor the lab'ring steer,
Sustain alone the hazards of the year;
But glutton geese, and the Strymonian crane,
With foreign troops invade the tender grain:
And tow'ring weeds malignant shadows yield;
And spreading succ'ry chokes the rising field; 1947
or the lines a little further on:
Tough thistles chok'd the fields, and kill'd the corn,
And an unthrifty crop of weeds was born;
Then burs and brambles, an unbidden crew
Of graceless guests, Th' unhappy field subdue;
And oats unblest, and darnel domineers,
And shoots its head above the shining ears.
In describing the press of weeds as a ‘crop’ (or ‘forest’, sylva ) and declaring that the fields are domineered , he seems to use just the very words which would instinctively occur to a husbandman when he saw the hope of the year overwhelmed by these pests and plagues.
Moreover, when, as in many passages, he expresses himself either more grandiloquently, or more meanly, than
[Page 402]
the nature of the subject demands, I apprehend he is not simply ironical; but rather fits his phrase to the realism of country talk, and intentionally imparts a tone of uncertainty to it: for Virgil was perhaps unconscious himself, and at all events would have his readers unconscious, how far he was merely playing in a poem of this kind and how far he was really and truly sympathizing with country-folk. Indeed, I quite believe that, just as the renowned Spanish romancer 1948 is said to be most serious precisely when he 1949 seems to be ridiculing the fancies and boastings of chivalry so rife in his day: so Virgil, not unwillingly indulged sometimes in over-lofty phraseology. Thus having described the various parts of the plough he enjoins: ‘all which remember well to provide and store up long before, if the well-earned honours of the divine country are to be yours.’ 1950 In another place, when mentioning the extraordinary number of kinds of vine, he describes it with high-flown similes:
I pass the rest, whose ev'ry race and name,
And kinds, are less material to my theme;
Which who would learn, as soon may tell the sands,
Driven by the western wind on Libyan lands:
Or number, when the blust'ring Eurus roars,
The billows beating on Ionian shores. 1951
Not without a certain stamp of the country, too, are those freely-scattered proverbs or short pithy sentences, in which he is wont to clothe the principles and rules of his art. ‘Plough stripped, stripped sow: winter is a time of idleness for the husbandman!’ 1952 ( Georg. i. 299). ‘Never unwarned are men when rain does them a mischief’ 1953 ( Georg. i. 373). ‘Praise great estates: cultivate a small
[Page 403]
one’ ( Georg. ii. 413). We all know how old farm folk especially delight in aphorisms of this kind, and, in this respect at all events, show much real wit: especially when some idle hand needs admonition, some meddlesome city spark or pedantic student a hint to mind his own business. Probably this is the tone that underlies those familiar precepts:
So that, unless the land with daily care
Is exercis'd, and with an iron war
Of rakes and harrows the proud foes expell'd
And birds with clamours frighted from the field—
Unless the boughs are lopp'd that shade the plain,
And heav'n invok'd with vows for fruitful rain—
On other crops you may with envy look,
And shake for food the long-abandoned oak. 1954
Moreover, he has taken special care that the stories here and there interspersed throughout his poems should be peculiarly adapted to his favourite rustics, whose constant 1955 custom it is to gossip of such things at the end of their day's work:
In winter shall the genial feast be made
Before the fire: by summer in the shade. 1956
Such stories occur, partly when the name of a place where some notable deed was accomplished is mentioned; but generally in connexion with some happy invention, or some department of agriculture which calls for special eulogy.
Of his mention of places we speak elsewhere. The story of Aristaeus, towards the conclusion of the poem, will give us a notable instance of his glorification of the art of husbandry. But there are many other cases where Virgil has lightly touched upon, rather than elaborated a story. Having shown, for instance, how vitally important it is that sheep should be of purest whiteness, he glances at some old love-legend of the Gods:
[Page 404]
'Twas thus, with fleeces milky white (if we
May trust report) Pan, god of Arcady,
Did bribe thee, Cynthia; nor didst thou disdain,
When call'd in woody shades, to cure a lover's pain. 1957
And, after describing minutely a colt of fine breed, he adds:
Such was the steed in Grecian poets famed,
Proud Cyllarus, by Spartan Pollux tam'd;
Such coursers bore to fight the god of Thrace,
And such, Achilles, was thy warlike race. 1958
Nor do we only give him praise for introducing these little stories just in the very style and fashion of countrymen: but we admire, too, the art with which he selects, in each particular tale, just those very points which would naturally occur to country-folk if telling the same story. Thus when the Nile overflows, he tells us that the people ‘are carried round their fields in painted barges’. 1959 Does he not here carefully seize on just the feature of the picture which would most powerfully strike and stimulate the imagination of simple country-folk?
1960 Again, in describing the life of the Libyan shepherds:
Why should my Muse enlarge on Libyan swains,
Their scatter'd cottages, and ample plains,
Where oft the flocks without a leader stray,
Or thro' continu'd deserts take their way,
And, feeding, add the length of night to day?
Whole months they wander, grazing as they go:
Nor folds nor hospitable harbour know:
Such an extent of plains, so vast a space
Of wilds unknown, and of untasted grass,
Allures their eyes: The shepherd last appears,
And with him all his patrimony bears,
His house and household gods, his trade of war,
His bow, his quiver, and his trusty cur. 1961
[Page 405]
Why does he emphasize ‘Such an extent of plains, so vast a space’? I fancy he is imitating the natural language of the shepherds of Italy, who, accustomed to fixed and distinct bounds, with frequent breaks in the landscape, are amazed when they gaze over vast open spaces.
And I rather think we should rank in the same category those many lovely passages in which he betrays the high delight which he takes in the qualities and ways of all animals, especially cattle and bees: indeed, he dwells on all of them with a real affection: and this is one true test which distinguishes the true and sincere lover of rustic life from such as pursue the same means and ends, through a low, mercenary motive. These last look upon all sorts of cattle as an instrumental accessory contributing to the market value of the estate: thus they rear and protect their herds, their flocks, their dogs, just in the same way as they would take pains to repair their ploughs and their harness, or to replace them when worn out: and when finally past work and useless they send them away without pang or scruple. The former, on the other hand, live with their dumb animals almost as if they were friends and comrades: detect and divine with anxious care their needs, their troubles, their comforts, indeed (if I may say so) their utterances. In short, Virgil seems to ascribe personality to wild animals as well as to cattle, not, as most do, for the sake of poetic charm, but far more that he might satisfy the real affection which he always felt for those who ministered to and shared his country pleasures.
There was, however, I apprehend, a twofold reason why 1962 Virgil's poetry is so deeply imbued with this tone and spirit. I believe that part of what he has said is due to the teaching of a high philosophy: part to his simple innate affection for country-folk. Of the first I hope to speak elsewhere. Now I will consider briefly a few characteristics which manifest his rural affections.
[Page 406]
And yet (to speak the truth) these two causes—simple country instincts and a sound philosophy—are bound together by a common tie, and that of the closest: so that the more decisive confirmation of any view or opinion there can hardly be, than if the better and wiser of the peasant folk have felt their way by wish and instinct to the same conclusion. Thus the Pythagorean, or rather Platonic, fables which Virgil adopts concerning the genesis and destruction of animals show much in common with the views which I am about to quote. But I shall deal with this subsequently. Let us now carefully consider whether his touching lines concerning the tending of goats are not well in keeping with the instincts of country rustics. He imagines himself—a common device with him—discussing the case with some one rather inclined to undervalue goats, and replies to him as follows:
This during winter's drisly reign be done,
Till the new Ram receives Th' exalted sun:
For hairy goats of equal profit are
With woolly sheep, and ask an equal care.
'Tis true, the fleece, when drunk with Tyrian juice,
Is dearly sold; but not for needful use:
For the salacious goat increases more,
And twice as largely yields her milky store. ....
Meantime the pastor shears their hoary beards,
And eases of their hair, the loaden herds.
Their camelots warm in tents the soldier hold,
And shield the shivering mariner from cold.
On shrubs they browse, and on the bleaky top
Of rugged hills the thorny bramble crop.
Attended with their bleating kids, they come
At night, unask'd, and mindful of their home;
And scarce their swelling bags the threshold overcome. 1963
1964 How full of true affection are those few words—
At night, unask'd, and mindful of their home,
[Page 407]
worked in with consummate art among arguments based on gain and utility. As who should say: The faithful, duteous creatures! spontaneously they trust themselves to man! do they hesitate to care for man and to protect him? And then how tender, and how true to pastoral life, are the lines next following:
So much the more thy diligence bestow
In depth of winter, to defend the snow,
By how much less the tender helpless kind,
For their own ills, can fit provision find.
Then minister the browse with plenteous hand;
And open let thy stacks all winter stand.
‘Do not let them,’ he says, ‘go without the one reward for their labour which is all they ask of us.’
I now pass to the much-praised lines which describe a cattle-plague in the Alpine province. One would anticipate that such a subject would appeal to us by its dreadful character and by the varied picture of bodily agony. But such is Virgil's skill, that he has taken care that these should be wonderfully relieved by the side picture where an ox toiling at the plough is supposed to fall down and immediately expire: whereupon—
The clown, who, cursing Providence, repines,
His mournful fellow from the team disjoins:
With many a groan forsakes his fruitless care,
And in th' unfinish'd furrow leaves the share. 1965
That the plough should lie in the furrows in full public gaze, a daily witness to the wide-spreading plague, would be of grave import to the husbandman, though not to others.
And let us just recall what he tells us of the ox that survived his fellow:
The pining steer nor shades of lofty woods
Nor flow'ry meads can ease, nor crystal floods
[Page 408]
Roll'd from the rock: his flabby flanks decrease:
His eyes are settled in a stupid peace;
His bulk too weighty for his thighs is grown;
And his unwieldy neck hangs drooping down. 1966
All these details, no doubt, point to rapidly encroaching disease. But, with exquisite adroitness, the poet makes 1967 them appear to be proofs of the animal's sorrow for his lost companion. And thus, advisedly but unobtrusively, he attributes almost human affection to the chief of the herd. Then he offers reasons for holding their fate to be unwontedly hard:
Now what avails his well-deserving toil
To turn the glebe or smooth the rugged soil?
And yet he never supp'd in solemn state,
(Nor undigested feasts did urge his fate),
Nor day to night luxuriously did join,
Nor surfeited on rich Campanian wine.
Simple his beverage, homely was his food:
The wholesome herbage and the running flood:
No dreadful dreams awak'd him with affright;
His pains by day secur'd his rest by night.
The force of the lines is obviously to impress on us that the ox suffered, not merely innocently but more than that, even though, as one may say, a plain liver and worker: for the tone of the lines is intentionally such as might apply to a man just as well as to a dumb animal. And who does not know that country-folk often speak in like fashion of their dogs, their oxen, of all their cattle?
Here all is grave and serious. But in like connexion Virgil usually plays lightly, and indulges in a kind of irony: just as parents sometimes rally their children, at once veiling and indulging the abounding strength of their affection. The feeling itself bubbles up naturally, of course: but they wish it veiled, well aware that, to others, it may
[Page 409]
seem extravagant and foolish. May we not put in the like category all those frequent touches in Virgil's work, preeminently tender and humorous, upon the ways and characters of animal life? Often, believe me, beneath this show of levity, there lies something graver and more tender than most readers of poetry would be likely to sympathize with or understand. For instance: among the signs of fair weather the poet reckons the flight of birds returning to their homes and nestlings:
Then, thrice the ravens rend the liquid air, 1968
And croaking loud proclaim the settled fair.
Then, round their airy palaces they fly,
To greet the sun; and, seiz'd with secret joy,
When storms are over-blown, with food repair
To their forsaken nests, and callow care. 1969
Into a perfectly ordinary occurrence he reads a far from ordinary affection. We recognize the hand of the same Virgil who elsewhere stigmatizes the ploughman as cruel , because he has rifled the nightingale's nest, and she pours forth her mournful note through the live-long night. And why not? for indeed he ever contemplates the gambolling of birds, their homes, their flights, with almost exactly the same pleasure as kindly elders watch boys and girls at play. In fact, he recounts the habits and ways of all kinds of cattle and wild animals, like a man amusing himself with rallying his friends and cronies:
Besides, the several sorts of wat'ry fowls,
That swim the seas or haunt the standing pools,
The swans that sail along the silver flood,
And dive with stretching necks to search their food,
Then lave their backs with sprinkling dews in vain,
And stem the stream to meet the promis'd rain.
The crow with clam'rous cries the show'r demands,
And single stalks along the desert sands. 1970
But nowhere is he more delicate in touch or truer to
[Page 410]
nature than where there chances to be mention of the dove: for this bird, beyond all others it would seem, he specially loved. Listen to this:
As, when the dove her rocky hold forsakes,
Rous'd in a fright, her sounding wings she shakes;
The cavern rings with clatt'ring; out she flies,
And leaves her callow care, and cleaves the skies;
At first she flutters: but at length she springs
To smoother flight, and shoots upon her wings. 1971
He first of all highly resents the bird's disturbance from its quiet corner: and then with delighted gaze watches it rejoicing in even and gentle flight.
1972 But Virgil's chiefest characteristic in this connexion is his constant humorous play upon animals, with implied ridicule at the expense of us poor mortals, whose manners and little ways are brought in to illustrate the animal life. Consider the part of his poem where he lays down rules as to ‘bullocks able to draw the plough’. 1973 He selects advisedly, does he not? words which apply to the discipline of youth:
The calf, by nature and by genius made
To turn the glebe, breed to the rural trade:
Set him betimes to school: and let him be
Instructed there in rules of husbandry,
While yet his youth is flexible and green
Nor bad examples of the world has seen. 1974
And a few lines on, he speaks of ‘untamed youth’, and advises accustoming ‘the freedom of their necks to bondage’. Here he strikes, under cover, at the boastful bluster of rude and violent men: implying that there can be nothing laudable or great in defying law and government, since even calves do just the same. But if any reader would amuse himself yet more fully with by-play of this
[Page 411]
kind, let him turn to that most graceful poem concerning bees and bee nature, which closes the series of Georgics. Nothing, not even in Virgil himself, is so thoroughly Virgilian. The whole point and force lies mainly in a comparison between the great leaders, the populace, the civil wars, of the Romans, with those of the bees. Hence we have warlike verse of swelling sound such as this:
But, if intestine broils alarm the hive,
(For two pretenders oft for empire strive),
The vulgar in divided factions jar;
And murm'ring sounds proclaim the civil war.
Inflam'd with ire, and trembling with disdain,
Scarce can their limbs their mighty souls contain.
With shouts the cowards' courage they excite,
And martial clangors call them out to fight:
With hoarse alarms the hollow camp rebounds,
That imitate the trumpets' angry sounds: ...
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
... Full in the midst the haughty monarchs ride;
The trusty guards come up, and close the side;
With shouts the daring foe to battle is defy'd. 1975
Hence, too, those many passages which credit the bees 1976 with possessing all the formal elements of a civil government:
Of all the race of animals, alone
The bees have common cities of their own,
And common sons: beneath one law they live,
And with one common stock their traffic drive. 1977
And hence the popular belief as to their mode of propagation:
But in their mouths reside their genial pow'rs:
They gather children from the leaves and flow'rs.
Thus make they kings to fill the regal seat,
And thus their little citizens create. 1978
[Page 412]
The whole scene is meant to be a humorous skit, though this is expressed only in the one word ‘citizens’; and in adapting formal phrases from the Roman Forum, from the camp and law-courts, to so trivial a detail, he was perhaps laughing at his countrymen's pride in their civic life, just as he had previously satirized their warlike spirit in the combats of the bees.
But while I certainly suggest that this purpose was vaguely present to the mind of the great poet, I am far from maintaining that he completely realized whither it tended, and how widely it might apply. Rather (as is often the case with many people) it was through a scarcely conscious instinct that Virgil let drop phrases which exactly fitted the occasion; in this too not unlike the more intelligent countrymen, whose speech is often more wise and weighty than the men themselves.
Some may expect that we should note under this head the injunctions Virgil carefully lays down too, with regard to the culture of vines, inasmuch as he was just as zealous for the care and management of trees as of animals, and was herein, too, wonderfully in sympathy with husbandmen. I mean where he enjoins almost the same precautions in the case of vines as he has prescribed for young oxen:
Yet these, receiving graffs of other kind,
Or thence transplanted, change their savage mind:
Their wildness lose, and, quitting Nature's part,
Obey the rules and discipline of art. 1979
But, in their tender nonage, while they spread
Their springing leaves, and lift their infant head,
And upward while they shoot in open air,
Indulge their childhood and the nurselings spare. 1980
But, when the rooted vines, with steady hold,
1981 Can clasp their elms, then, husbandman, be bold
[Page 413]
To lop the disobedient boughs, that stray'd
Beyond their ranks: let crooked steel invade
The lawless troops, which discipline disclaim,
And their superflous growth with rigour tame. 1982
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
While yet the tender gems but just appear,
Unable to sustain the uncertain year. 1983
Many poets and writers have ascribed feeling to seed and plant, showing that they themselves joyed and sorrowed with them. But Virgil has dwelt upon this fancy with an exceptional, one may say indeed, tutelary love. Thus:
‘The plants you sow will revive their spirits’. 1984
The tender twig shoots upward to the skies,
And on the faith of the new sun relies.
The swerving vines on the tall elms prevail;
Unhurt by southern showers or northern hail,
They spread their gems the genial warmth to share,
And boldly trust the buds in open air. 1985
Nor should his account of grafting be unnoticed:
And in short space the laden boughs arise, With happy fruit advancing to the skies. The mother-plant admires the leaves unknown Of alien trees, and apples not her own. 1986
And here another common trait of husbandmen must not be overlooked, their indulgence, namely, in a kind of triumph, and, as it were, delighted exaltation on the successful issue of their art and effort. Such as these, for instance:
A madness so devout the vineyard fills;
In hollow vallies and on rising hills,
On whate'er side he turns his honest face,
And dances in the wind, those fields are in his grace.
To Bacchus, therefore, let us tune our lays,
And in our mother tongue resound his praise. 1987
[Page 414]
To quit his care, he gather'd, first of all,
In spring the roses, apples in the fall. 1988
His limes were first in flow'rs; his lofty pines,
With friendly shade, secured his tender vines.
For ev'ry bloom his trees in spring afford,
An autumn apple was by tale restor'd. 1989
And this autumnal song, though of gentler and quieter strain, yet is in true keeping with the feelings of rustics, of the older men especially:
Thus every sev'ral season is employ'd:
Some spent in toil, and some in ease enjoy'd.
The yeaning ewes prevent the springing year:
The laded boughs their fruits in autumn bear:
'Tis then the vine her liquid harvest yields,
Bak'd in the sunshine of ascending fields.
The winter comes; and then the falling mast
For greedy swine provides a full repast:
Then olives, ground in mills, their fatness boast,
And winter fruits are mellow'd by the frost. 1990
1991 On the other hand, there are sketches too of vinegrowers and gardeners grumbling when the season is bad:
And, when cold winter split the rocks in twain,
And ice the running rivers did restrain,
He strip'd the bear's-foot of its leafy growth,
And calling western winds, accused the spring of sloth. 1992
Or if Aurora, with half-open'd eyes,
And a pale sickly cheek, salute the skies;
How shall the vine, with tender leaves, defend
Her teeming clusters, when the storms descend,
When ridgy roofs and tiles can scarce avail
To bar the ruin of the rattling hail? 1993
The rustic pretends to be filled with a kind of sympathizing pity: as if leaf and fruit were conscious that they were being harshly and unworthily treated.
[Page 415]
Bearing all this in mind, we need feel no surprise that Virgil fully shared the common feeling of country-folk in this respect also, that he craved and pined not merely for the country , but for his own fields and haunts: and cherished so particular and pre-eminent a love for his paternal fields, that, if they were safe, he was: were they ruined, so was he. And thus, as I have already said, he could not find it in his heart to refuse anything to the powerful friend, whose unassisted favour had preserved his little estate to him: whether it were Augustus, or, as seems more likely perhaps, Maecenas. Moreover, how deeply this affection for home had struck root in Virgil's mind, is amply proved by that well-known eclogue which deservedly ranks first: both in point of date (for all the rest, except the second and seventh, were demonstrably written later), and, because, by its means, we penetrate to the very essence and secret spring of his poetry. For, beyond question, whether Meliboeus is lamenting his own sad fate or is congratulating Tityrus on his better fortune, we are conscious that the poet is deeply moved; it is no light and trivial tale, but issues from his own life and inmost heart. A cruel and serious danger, seen close at 1994 hand, from which he had escaped almost by a hair's breadth, fanned, as often chances, the slumbering seeds of fire into flame: and thus, in addition to its accustomed charm, every trivial detail which was in any way connected with the little farm estate became thenceforth treasured and venerable. Moreover, in this would be included all that suggested the picture and recollection of it, especially the general accessories and apparatus of country life and rural things. Consequently Virgil would treat this whole theme with the same tender reverence which true-hearted and religious people feel for some one near or dear to them whom they have received back beyond all hope from death's door.
[Page 416]
In short: just as we may readily believe that Virgil set himself to compose the Aeneid , lest he might appear wanting in gratitude to Augustus for his restored farm: so, when he wrote the Georgics , there was ever present to eye and thought, I conjecture, the vivid and delightful recollection of his little patrimony, all but lost to him for ever, perhaps not yet wholly and thoroughly secure: and as a result of this, his whole treatment was the more loving, his grasp, as it were, the more intense. For, certainly, even things of little worth in themselves gain a value and become precious, if any attempt be made to wrest them from us: much more is this true of our very hearth and home and all the delightsome atmosphere of rural bliss, sacred springs, and familiar streams.
If examples are needed: passing by the well-known lines in the Eclogues :
O fortunate old man! whose farm remains 1995 —
and
Farewell, my pastures, my paternal stock 1996 —
with what feelings, think you, did he touch upon Mantua, when discussing the genius of different soils?—
1997 Then seek Tarentum's lawns and furthest coast,
Or such a field as hapless Mantua lost;
Where silver swans sail down the wat'ry road,
And graze the floating herbage of the flood. 1998
Again, what is the meaning of that piteous strain of Aristaeus, as he pours into his mother's ears his plaint for the loss of his bees?—
O! where is all thy boasted pity gone,
And promise of the skies to thy deluded son?
Why didst thou me, unhappy me, create?
Odious to gods, and born to bitter fate?
[Page 417]
Whom, scarce my sheep, and scarce my painful plough,
The needful aids of human life allow:
So wretched is thy son, so hard a mother thou. 1999
Does not the poet clearly betray his feeling, that his case had been nearly the same? that his whole being trembles whenever he casts his memory back to his threatened farm?
Of like import, too, are the passages where he pictures any one working in his own garden, with his own hand, about his own bee-houses:
With his own hand, the guardian of the bees
For slips of pines may search the mountain trees;
And with wild thyme and sav'ry plant the plain,
'Till his hard horny fingers ake with pain;
And deck with fruitful trees the fields around,
And with refreshing waters drench the ground. 2000
Time after time he gives expression to his abiding consciousness, how nearly he had once been to losing for ever all these delights. Can any one doubt that under all his poetry there lurks a feeling, a kind of dim instinct of this same passion? that his attachment to the fields and rural life is repeatedly heightened by its painful sting?
This, then, is the unifying bond which, in my opinion, links together the various works of this great poet. It remains to inquire if these views do not notably support our theories concerning the whole principle and origin of poetry. I conjectured, you will remember, that the one quality by which it could best be defined was its power to relieve breasts surcharged with emotion. And it thus follows that high renown in this art and faculty has been 2001 won by few but those of troubled spirit, whether because their desires are unsatisfied, or because, as one poet has said:
      still some bitter Thought destroys
His fancy'd Mirth, and poysons all his Joys. 2002
[Page 418]
Then it is that they burst forth into passionate verse, when utterly bereft of their beloved object or when at least they apprehend that, at some time, they may be so bereft.
And now pass in review the great series of Virgil's poems. First, when he wrote the Eclogues , the soldiers had barely, or perhaps not even that, departed from his fields. Next, the keen memory of his anxious apprehension is felt throughout the Georgics (not to mention that he had then been some time resident at Naples and had not seen his loved home for months). And when, moved by courtesy, and especial gratitude to his benefactors, he undertook the task of the Aeneid , even then he was loath to relinquish the pastoral muse: and so sought all occasions and seized every opportunity to scent the breeze that blew from his country and his homestead.
So that it is hard to say which of his poems more deeply penetrates to the very inmost sanctuary of the pastoral Muses: that in which he, avowedly and of purpose, celebrates themselves: or that in which, at frequent intervals, he returns to them out of the strife and tumult of war. In both, at all events, what we have called his master passion served as a powerful stimulus. He missed what he could not live without: and so tried to cheat its absence by song.
[Page 419]
LECTURE XXXVIII 2003
Virgil, though an admirer of Lucretius, and almost his contemporary, must nevertheless be clearly distinguished from him in two points, first, in the grounds of consolation which he invariably urges as regards our chequered mortal life; secondly, in his constant precision in definitely naming particular regions, especially such as were familiar to him, or which, at all events, he had seen. Some few remarks as to his reference to places he had never seen, especially those associated with religion.
Enough and to spare has now been urged to prove our chief point that needed consideration, namely, that the whole range of Virgil's poetry, both through the Aeneid and through those poems which avowedly treat of country scenes and tasks, can be traced back to one single thread, to his attachment to Nature and rural life. Indeed, we came to the conclusion that even the product of his genius which is apparently farthest removed from rural ease and quiet—I mean that which has to do with wars and monarchs and the foundation of the Roman name—was undertaken by him for the sole and simple reason that he felt called upon to attempt that special theme out of gratitude to Caesar and Maecenas; when once his farm and hearth and home had been preserved to him, there was no request from such powerful friends which he could deny.
In the next place, another question suggests itself: namely, what is the essential distinction between Virgil 2004 and Lucretius? And although, to a large extent, we have already sufficiently dealt with it, yet there remain some few further remarks, which it may perhaps be worth while to set down.
And, first of all, we must not forget this: simple considerations of time and place make it almost inevitable
[Page 420]
that Virgil must have had Lucretius often in his mind, and have been conscious of that undefined subtle bond which links together great writers in kindred subjects. We are told 2005 that in the very year in which Lucretius died, at Athens as seems most likely, Virgil came of age at Cremona, and subsequently proceeded to Rome. Can we conceive it possible that such a youth as Virgil should not have been deeply touched by the death of Lucretius, by that time a poet of renown: and even more by the manner of that death, if the story is true that he died by his own hand? It is certainly the case that those pathetic lines touching the melancholy fate of suicides are inspired, as much as any lines in Virgil, by a deeply personal feeling:
Next comes their portion in the gloom
Who guiltless sent themselves to doom,
And all for loathing of the day
In madness threw their lives away:
How gladly now in upper air
Contempt and beggary would they bear,
   And labour's sorest pain!
Fate bars the way: around their keep
The slow unlovely waters creep
   And bind with ninefold chain. 2006
One might almost fancy that the poet intentionally wrote thus by way of antidote to those well-known and pernicious lines of Lucretius in which he praises Democritus's death by his own act:
Democritus, as feeble age came on,
And told him, that 'twas time he should be gone,
(For then his Mind's brisk powers grew weak) he cry'd,
I will obey thy summons, Fate, and dy'd. 2007
Even the open and direct commendation of such self-chosen voluntary death could find a welcome in his mind:
[Page 421]
For if the Race thou hast already run 2008
Was pleasant, if with joy thou saw'st the sun;
If all thy pleasures did not pass thy mind
As thro' a sieve, but left some sweets behind:
Why do'st thou not then like a thankful Guest
Rise chearfully from Life's abundant Feast,
And with a quiet mind go take thy rest?
But if all those Delights are lost and gone,
Spilt idly all, and Life a burthen grown;
Then why, fond Mortal, do'st thou ask for more,
Why still desire t' increase thy wretched store,
And wish for what must waste like those before?
Not rather free thy self from pains and fear,
And end thy Life and necessary care? 2009
These lines sound the mournful and bitter note so characteristic of Lucretius' poetry, who can look with cool and apathetic eye upon both the comforts and troubles of life. Virgil's brief but sweet and tender words, on the other hand, while without the least attempt to deny that the order of our life here is full of calamity, yet take on a kindly and mellow tone which freely and easily penetrates the soul, and by its silent, quiet influence, helps us to bear the burden.
And this should be well weighed by those who maintain that Virgil had leanings towards Epicureanism. I refer to this now, merely because I do not wish to omit any fact in Virgil which shows that he bore Lucretius in mind.
But let us ask ourselves whether this one topic of voluntary death does not aptly illustrate the whole range of distinction between the two poets. Each alike drew his main interest and inspiration from the marvels of Nature and country life; yet we have seen that their characters and their worldly fortunes differed greatly, and consequently that there is a great gulf between the two, and they look upon the same objects with very different eyes. Lucretius, after long and weary toil in the quest of truth, with little or
[Page 422]
no result, as he deemed, finally found refuge for his wearied spirit in the mysteries of Nature, as in a kind of haven where he might for a while find delight in great and wonderful imaginations drawn from all sides; and might, so to speak, revel in an order of dreaming speculations, that lost 2010 themselves in boundless infinities. Virgil, on the other hand, who had been accustomed from earliest boyhood to rustic life and to stream and forest, through the whole of his life cheerfully and gladly escaped from camp and town to his beloved country haunts, as if to his own true home circle in which he might make sure of putting off all apprehensions, pain, and trouble. Lucretius was satisfied if he could for one short hour rest and soothe his fevered soul by contemplation of the majesty of Nature, or its gentle movements, or alluring aspects of form and colour. Virgil held converse with hill, wood, and stream, as with dear friends, seen once more after long absence. Consequently with Lucretius, though Nature often seems to smile and rejoice in the pictures which he paints of her, as in those triumphant and splendid lines concerning the delights of spring-time:
First spring and Venus, kindest powers, inspire
Melting Thoughts, soft Wishes, gay Desire,
And warm Favonius fans the Amorous fire:
Then Mother Flora, to prepare the way,
Makes all the Field look glorious, green and gay,
And freely scatters with a bounteous hand
Her sweetest, fairest Flowers o're the Land: 2011
yet you will never find him resting satisfied in such rural repose: nor does he suffer himself to be so borne and led by some powerful impulse to country solitude, as ever to forget his own bitter experience, and his harsh creed touching the whole human race. On the other hand, in Virgil, though there are again and again thoughts and scenes of sadness, yet they are never without some special consolation
[Page 423]
of their own, being closely coupled with a pleasing memory of bygone days. Indeed, this is the peculiar and most welcome blessing that springs from the recollection of a happily-spent youth, that it keeps alive a sure and certain belief in the existence, in some far-off, unknown region, of a benevolent Power which tempers the ills of life, and therefore, perhaps, will not suffer all things to rush headlong to disaster. A certain unexpressed and healthful vein of some such hope as this runs even through 2012 those passages of Virgil which, plainly and unconcealedly, evince a sick and disturbed mind. For instance:
Now falling by another's wound, his eyes
He casts to heaven, on Argos thinks , and dies. 2013
Or the lines describing Dido's mien, at the very point of death:
Thrice op'd her heavy eyes, and saw the light ,
But, having found it, sickened at the sight;
And clos'd her lids at last in endless night. 2014
The suggestion is clear, that after the many calamities and distresses, either of banishment from home or of unrequited love, there still remains some blessing on which each may lay hold amid the changes and chances of this mortal life.
Then, does he not ever seek to palliate his frequent references to ‘sick mortality’, ‘wretched men’, and suchlike phrases, with some words of better omen? as where he tells us that all heaven is divided into five parts, or zones:
Five girdles bind the skies: the torrid zone
Glows with the passing and repassing sun:
Far on the right and left, th' extremes of heav'n
To frosts and snows and bitter blasts are giv'n;
Betwixt the midst and these, the gods assign'd
Two habitable seats for human kind. 2015
[Page 424]
With these lines may be coupled that which he says in praise of the flocks of goats:
Meantime the pastor shears their hoary beards,
And eases of their hair the loaden herds.
Their camelots warm in tents the soldier hold,
And shield the shivering mariner from cold. 2016
He seems not quite satisfied that the sailor should be described as ‘shivering’, without pointing to the protection which Nature herself spontaneously affords against the cold.
The next passage I quote is more austere:
In youth alone, unhappy mortals live;
But, ah! the mighty bliss is fugitive:
Discolour'd sickness, anxious labour, come,
And age, and death's inexorable doom. 2017
2018 Yet from the very spring from which these sorrows come there rises also a thought which may give consolation; there is the suggestion of a generation yet to come, and there is the vivid and proud picture of a colt of noble breed:
Upright he walks, on pasterns firm and straight;
His motions easy: prancing in his gait:
The first to lead the way, to tempt the flood,
To pass the bridge unknown, nor fear the trembling wood. 2019
Could he have hit upon anything better fitted to stand in contrast over against those lines of sadness and of bitterness than the sportive gambols of an untamed colt?
Again, there is such method in these allusions that one might almost say Virgil deliberately set himself to contradict the conclusions of Epicurus and Lucretius, published as they were with most imposingly high-sounding phrase, concerning the shortcomings of Nature and the universe. Lucretius, for instance, echoing Epicurus, declares:
[Page 425]
For were I ignorant how Beings rise,
How Things begin; yet reasons from the Skies,
From every Thing deduc't, will plainly prove
This World ne're framed by the wise Powers above,
So foolish the Design, contriv'd so ill.
And note what it is he, first of all, fastens upon:
For first: those tracts of Air what creatures fill?
Why Beasts in every Grove, and shady Hill?
Vast Pools take part, and the impetuous Tide,
Whose spreading Waves the distant Shores divide:
Two parts in three the Torrid Zone doth burn,
Or Frigid chill, and all to Desarts turn. 2020
To all this, Virgil, as we have seen, opposes by way of antidote:
Betwixt the midst and these, the gods assigned
Two hospitable seats for human kind.
But to follow Lucretius:
And all the other Fields, what would they breed,
If let alone, but Bryars, Thorns and Weed?
These are their proper fruits, this Nature wou'd,
Did not laborious Mortals toyl for food,
And tear and plough, and force them to be good.
   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
Nay often too, when Man with pains and toil 2021
Hath plough'd and conquer'd the unwilling soil:
When flowers put forth, and budding branches shoot,
Look gay and promise the desired Fruit;
The scorching Sun, with his too busie beams,
Burns up the fruits, or clouds do drown with streams;
Or chill'd by too much Snow they soon decay,
Or storms blow them and all our hopes away.
This is a powerful indictment: yet Virgil traverses it in a few lines:
The Sire of gods and men, with hard decrees,
Forbids our plenty to be bought with ease,
And wills that mortal men, inur'd to toil,
Should exercise, with pains, the grudging soil:
[Page 426]
Himself invented first the shining share,
And whetted human industry by care;
Himself did handicrafts and arts ordain,
Nor suffered sloth to rust his active reign. 2022
The yield of such instances is almost endless: and the point of them all is to prove that Virgil interpreted with a kindlier judgement much that Lucretius deemed wholly intolerable. And this kindliness was not a little due, I apprehend, to the tender recollections which Virgil ever affectionately cherished of his early years. On the other hand, I trace nothing of the kind in Lucretius: never did he, as far as I can discover, recall with pleasure and delight the games and joys of childhood. And this, to my mind, was no doubtful symptom of the madness that was one day to come upon him.
Let us now consider whether these two distinguished Latin poets may not be contrasted in a second respect; namely, that Lucretius, for the most part, dispenses with any mention of familiar localities, while there is nothing which gives Virgil greater delight than such allusions. Turn over the whole poem of Lucretius from beginning to end, and not once (I venture to say) will you light on the name of a hill or stream introduced, as poets often do, simply for the pleasure of referring to it: the poet all through mentions by their individual names merely such regions as must of necessity be named, if the development of his philosophy is not to halt or falter in some of its details: thus he alludes to the fount of Ammon, or to Helicon, because of some tree that grew there, or ‘the spot at Cumae, where the mountains are charged with 2023 acrid sulphur’. 2024 In striking contrast to this Virgil at once hastens to give the names of places; thus at the outset of the Georgics :
[Page 427]
Liber and Ceres who sustainest life, if by your bounty the earth received the rich ear for the acorn of Dodona, and mixed the draughts of the water of Achelous with the juice of the newly discovered grape. 2025
And a few lines later:
And thou of groves the dresser, for whom three hundred milk-white steers crop the fruitful bushes of Caea.
And again:
And do thou, great god, leaving thy native grove and lawns of Lycaeus, Pan, thou guardian of the sheep, as thou lovest thine own Maenalus, come to my help, gracious lord of Tegea.
when he comes to treat of the care of flocks and herds, we see the same method is observed:
Thee too, great Pales, and thee, shepherd from the river Amphrysus, worthy of all remembrance, will we praise in verse: ye too, woods and rivers of Lycaeus. 2026
In fact, it is the constant practice, first and chiefest with Virgil, and then with almost all who cultivated the same field of Poetry after him, to employ often what are called ‘proper’ and individual rather than ‘common’ nouns. For instance, he details the ways and instincts of goats:
They are content to feed in woods and on the very peaks of Lycaeus, and browse on prickly briars, and on bushes that love steep heights. 2027
And again he insists on the paramount importance of recognizing the special fitness of particular regions:
Then let the learned gard'ner mark with care
The kinds of stocks, and what those kinds will bear;
Explore the nature of each sev'ral tree,
And, known, improve with artful industry:
[Page 428]
And let no spot of idle earth be found,
But cultivate the genius of the ground:
For open Ismarus will Bacchus please;
Taburnus loves the shade of olive-trees. 2028
In all these passages, I confess there is a reason involved, 2029 and an obvious one, for indicating localities by name. It marks the observant and painstaking husbandman. But oftener still a name is given, with scarcely any reason that springs out of the context, but merely to add a pleasing note and a poetic charm. What other reason could there be, pray, for introducing into those golden lines celebrating the rural life the names of particular places?
Yet ease with wide domains, caverns and living lakes, and Tempe's cool vale, and the lowing of oxen, and soft slumber beneath the trees are theirs. ... Oh, where are those plains, and the stream of Spercheus, and Taygetus haunted by the revels of Spartan maids! Oh! who will set me down in the cool dells of Haemus, and shield me with the branches' boundless shade? 2030
Certainly, a marvellous conglomeration of places widely separated from one another: so that obviously special names are not assigned in order to blend the whole into a single picture: that indeed is a result not unfrequently attained, if names of places which are familiar and not too remote from each other are introduced. But what possible association can there be between Spercheus and Taygetus? or between Haemus and either of them? Clearly we must seek some other explanation of this poetic ornamentation.
Let us, however, first consider one or two further examples. For those hitherto cited are, for the most part, embraced in a single word hastily caught up, as it were, in passing. But there is another class where the adoption of proper names seems intended to evoke a complete picture
[Page 429]
of a particular place, with a certain consequent realism. Should it fall short of this, an otherwise exquisite piece of work will be maimed and pointless. For instance: ‘For I remember that beneath Oebalia's stately towers where 2031 black Galesus soaks the golden fields, I saw an old Corycian swain’ 2032 —and so forth—lines familiar to us all. But what I wish to emphasize with regard to this beautiful passage is the forcible impression conveyed by localities if mentioned by name. Assuredly they suggest that the story is not wholly fictitious: just as in ordinary conversation we can hardly refrain from giving credit to a narrative when set off with all the detail of day, hour, and place. And this depends simply upon introducing the very names: and adding, to complete the effect, any special charm connected with each place, such as its natural beauty or its historic association, or, best of all, its religious sanctity.
Let us pass to another picture which owes its beauty, as I think, in no small degree to the exact and skilful introduction of actual places. For when the poet describes how one of the Furies ‘blows to give the shepherd's signal’ and ‘strains her hellish voice, at which forthwith all the wood shook and the forests echoed from their depths’, what is it leads him to add the name of this and that special nook?
The sacred lake of Trivia from afar,
The Veline fountains, and sulphureous Nar
Shake at the baleful blast, the signal of the war. 2033
For my part, I confidently conjecture we should be extraordinarily impressed with this clever device of our poet, if we saw with our own eyes the actual spots, and could calculate the distance of spot from spot, and follow up the echoes through the winding cliffs and woods and torrent streams.
[Page 430]
And it sometimes occurs to me whether the poet intended in these lines to suggest what is said to be a common experience of those accustomed to wide expanses of sea or 2034 river: the extraordinary manner, namely, in which sounds carry and are borne over water, even to places remote beyond belief. For observe, he only mentions water. But whatever may be the reason for the choice of these names, every one, I suppose, will agree that the description would largely lose its beauty and charm if the names of the places, even though unknown to us, were struck out.
I will quote another, and even finer, example: in fact, hardly anything more exquisite can be found in all this most pathetic poet's work. He describes the arrival on the battle-field of a certain priest, who was also skilled in medicine:
His wand and holy words, the viper's rage,
And venom'd wounds of serpents, could assuage.
He, when he pleased with powerful juice to steep
Their temples, shut their eyes in pleasing sleep.
But vain were Marsian herbs, and magic art,
To cure the wound giv'n by the Dardan dart.
Instantly availing himself of this mention of well-known hills he imagines the lamentation of all the haunts the priest had been wont to frequent:
Yet his untimely fate Th' Angitian woods
In sighs remurmur'd to the Fucine floods. 2035
Nothing could be more concise, yet nothing more pathetic: but note that the whole charm of it turns on the use of the actual names of places: unless perhaps we include too the abrupt ending of the line in the middle. Virgil has, we all know, many such lines: but as a rule they give the impression of being left unfinished by some accident rather than of being intended to correspond to some deep feeling, which perhaps is the case in this instance.
[Page 431]
We now come to consider the numerous similes and images which the poet has formed on the same principle: that is to say, he directly names rivers, mountains, forests, 2036 and is not content with the mere description of them, however ornate.
Like wild boar, driven from mountain height
By cries that scare and fangs that bite,
In Vesulus' pine-cinctured glen
Long fostered, or Laurentum's fen ,
   'Mid reeds and marish ground. 2037
Why this precise naming of Vesulus and the Laurentian marsh, if not to bring the whole scene vividly before our eyes and show the chase in its living reality? The same effect is sought, I apprehend, in that the reference is not ‘ a wild boar’ but (as it is in the Latin) to ‘ the wild boar’: meaning, doubtless, some renowned and dreaded beast which hunters had known for years as specially haunting these retreats.
And here, as again and again, Virgil betrays his intimate fellow-feeling with the rustic class, by his thorough delight in all kinds of chase and sport, and even in the cries and shouts wherewith hunters cheer themselves on. For besides the express injunctions, or ‘decrees’, as we may call them, in the Georgics , as to training hounds, and making winter joyous by this kind of recreation, there is, too, in the Aeneid , much imagery of just the same tenor:
Thus, when a fearful stag is closed around
With crimson toils, or in a river found,
High on the bank the deep-mouth'd hound appears,
Still opening, following still, where'er he steers:
The persecuted creature, to and fro,
Turns here and there, to 'scape his Umbrian foe:
Steep is Th' ascent, and, if he gains the land,
The purple death is pitch'd along the strand:
His eager foe, determin'd to the chase,
Stretch'd at his length, gains ground at ev'ry pace:
[Page 432]
Now to his beamy head he makes his way,
And now he holds, or thinks he holds his prey:
Just at the pinch, the stag springs out with fear;
He bites the wind, and fills his sounding jaws with air. 2038
And, in this respect, the poets of pastoral life strikingly accord with the Homeric poets of action: both highly delight in describing hunters and the chase, but from widely contrasted motives: a Homer delights in it as in a mimicry of war: a Virgil delights in the charm of river and wood, and of adventurous exploration amid trackless ways.
2039 Returning, however, to the question already partly discussed, as to naming localities, let me explain, as far as I am able, how it is that nearly every one finds it give pleasure. Of its truth and realism I have already spoken: and of the way in which things seem to come home to us more closely, if described by name. Now I want you to consider whether such local allusions in poetry may not conveniently be divided into three classes. The first, and in a sense the fount and origin of the other two, is the mention of spots well known to the poet in his boyhood. For, just as in our childish years we are, all of us, wont to advance from the familiar sight of father and mother, to notice and care for other persons as we meet them, so with places, we begin by caring for those spots which met our gaze on our first flight from the nest, when we were first trying our wings: afterwards, owing to some resemblance to these spots or to some feature which suggests the memory of them, we extend to other places some measure of the same affection. Consequently, I should advise any one who wishes to examine Virgil's poetry in this respect to begin with the allusions to Mantua or Cremona: to the neighbouring rivers, Mincius, Athesis,
[Page 433]
Eridanus, even to the outline of the distant mountain ranges of the Alps or Apennines: here it was that Nature took him when a boy into her school; here he learnt the first lessons which enabled him to go forward to a full knowledge of her charms; here, at least, he formed a standard by which to test every scene which he might meet with in later years. Why is it, think you, that there is such a special charm and appeal in the first and ninth Eclogues, if not that each of them moves within a definite and familiar neighbourhood and is bounded on all sides by known and loved landmarks? Then again in that magnificent 2040 and triumphant passage, in which for the sake of Augustus and his court he adopts a somewhat boastful tone, is not the effect exquisitely toned down by the skill which associates it all with Mantua and the banks of the Mincian river?—
I, first of Romans, shall in triumph come
From conquered Greece, and bring her trophies home,
With foreign spoils adorn my native place,
And with Idume's palms my Mantua grace.
Of Parian stone a temple will I raise,
Where the slow Mincius through the valley strays,
Where cooling streams invite the flocks to drink,
And reeds defend the winding water's brink. 2041
The mere mention of actual spots adds a sweet charm to a passage which would otherwise have been merely beautiful and splendid.
Again, does he not plainly consider that even his praise of Elysium and its happy groves would be tame and incomplete, did he not accord to the company of blissful dwellers there the charms not merely of the country, but actually of the Cisalpine country? For he not merely insists that their happiness is due, in great part, to the rustic freedom which allows them to roam at will along
[Page 434]
the fair grassy swards,—as Musaeus declares when asked about Anchises above:
In no fix'd place the happy souls reside,
In groves we live, and lie on mossy beds,
By crystal streams, that murmur through the meads; 2042
—but he even makes no scruple of introducing his own country's familiar Eridanus into the very heart of sacred Elysium. Thus a whole company of departed heroes is seen:
Some cheerful souls were feasting on the plain;
Some did the song, and some the choir, maintain,
Beneath a laurel shade, where mighty Po
Mounts up to woods above, and hides his head below. 2043
Had he merely sought some river famed in story, the Rhone, the Tagus, the Arethusa, and many others which poets before him had described in their romances, were 2044 ready to his hand. Why he preferred Eridanus to all others I know not, unless because it flows near Mantua: it is nearer than all others except the Mincius: but that river had never been associated in legend with any Nymph or Hero.
Much the same reason probably led him to compare Aeneas, when rousing himself afresh, and prepared for his final combat, not to any chance mountain, but to that which he himself had best known as a boy:
Like Eryx, or like Athos, great he shows,
Or father Apennine, when, white with snows,
His head divine obscure in clouds he hides,
And shakes the sounding forest on his sides. 2045
I quite believe that Virgil joyfully and eagerly grasped the chance of handing down to fame, with such a crown
[Page 435]
of honour, the mountain range, of which for so many years he had been able to catch distant glimpses from his own home and loved farm.
But it is to rivers that he most often returns, being, if ever there was one, a devoted admirer of flowing waters:
So two fair oaks that proudly grow
On banks of Athesis or Po
Their unshorn heads aloft display
   And tower into the sky. 2046
Note the significance of the mention of actual streams, especially of those in his own neighbourhood: for as far as the imagery is concerned the picture would be equally effective, were they left out altogether.
But returning once more to the Mincian river: just consider whether there is not an unusual note of pride and exultation in the lines where he makes mention of the levy sent by Mantua to oppose Mezentius:
Hate to Mezentius arm'd five hundred more,
Whom Mincius from his sire Benacus bore—
Mincius with wreaths of reeds his forehead cover'd o'er. 2047
The second class comes very close to the first both in strength of feeling and in beauty of treatment. It consists 2048 of the names of places not entirely unknown to him, but nevertheless more remote from his native soil and the home of his boyhood. For, just as it is a common remark, that a traveller never so completely loses recollection of places that he has once seen, that he does not feel a certain half-conscious pleasure in seeing them once more, if by chance he travels the same way again; in the same way, we may expect to find that poets generally take particular pleasure in referring to places which they have themselves at some time or other actually seen with their own eyes.
[Page 436]
For such experiences awake and revive recollections, however feeble and however dreamy they may be: like musical strains heard once perchance, even at a distance, which subsequently at long interval recur to ear and mind: or perhaps one might better compare the case to the recognition of the features and gesture of some one, whom we have, indeed, seen years before, though hardly conscious of it at the time. On such occasions there is instantly stirred in our mind a vague recollection of our childhood or of our native place or of comrades of past days: much like the reminiscence, which, to Plato, seemed a certain pledge of a former existence. Thus it often happens, that a note of greater tenderness and some slight trace of emotion often seem to associate themselves with the names of these places: just as we sometimes detect a slight tremor in the voice and accent of those with whom we converse, while they themselves perhaps are wholly unconscious of it. An example of this will be found in that passage of the Aeneid where the names, number, and native country of certain warriors are set out in order:
Who Tiber's lawns with furrow score
And pure Numicius' sacred shore,
Subdue Rutulian slopes, and plough
Circeius' steep reluctant brow:
Where Anxur boasts her guardian Jove
And greenly blooms Feronia's grove;
Where Satura's unlovely mere
   In sullen quiet sleeps,
And Ufens gropes through marshland drear
   And hides him in the deeps. 2049
Here Virgil is describing a region, assuredly not wholly 2050 unknown to him: for all travellers from Rome to Naples must pass through it. But in that gloomy and austere route the one feature which seized his fancy (lover of rivers
[Page 437]
as he ever naturally was), was the way in which the Ufens, while pursuing its secret path, as if it would fain hide itself from view, yet again and again would come into sight. And, consequently, he instinctively associates with its name a touch which betrays his lingering recollection: nay, which even suggests that he himself shares the river's desire to hide itself from view.
This fact also suggests, I think, the real reason why the concluding books of the Aeneid have a new beauty and a special charm of their own: it is because in them Virgil finds himself in regions which recall at every turn the memories of his country, his home, and his boyhood. Certainly, to my mind, once he reaches the Sixth Book, or the Seventh at all events, his descriptions become, as one may say, more tender and sympathetic; indeed, the very names of the places alone, enumerated one after another, betray this:
So cries he while the tears run down,
   And gives his fleet the rein,
Till, sailing on, the Euboic town
   Of Cumae they attain. 2051
And again:
And thou, O matron of immortal fame!
Here dying, to the shore hast left thy name:
Caieta still the place is call'd from thee,
The nurse of great Aeneas' infancy. 2052
I cannot tell whether some shadow of a charm, not really there, affects my judgement: but, when once Virgil reaches the Italian soil and those shores he knew so well, I feel that he is more keenly interested, as if, like Antaeus of the fable, he borrowed strength and power from contact with his native land. So strong, indeed, is the influence of this delight upon him, that, in large degree, it modifies
[Page 438]
the reluctance with which he, a devoted lover of peace and quiet, usually schools himself to treat of
Wars, horrid wars—a field of blood,
And Tyber rolling with a purple flood. 2053
2054 But now let us test our view as to this power of names by lines of a character somewhat different from those already quoted:
Beneath him march his rural train,
Whom high Praeneste's walls contain,
Who dwell in Gabian Juno's plain,
Whose haunt is Anio's chilly flood,
And Hernic rocks, by streams bedewed,
Who till Anagnia's bosom green,
Or drink of father Amasene. 2055
Nothing here, as far as I see, specially suggests strong feeling: but then we have no reason to believe that Virgil had ever travelled in these regions: and thus the lines would seem to belong to the last of the three classes to which I referred; the class in which writers picture to their mind's eye and describe places which they have never seen, following either some traditional description or an idea conceived by their own imagination. In the same way, when we look at maps of countries, we naturally fill in for ourselves the sites, the distances, and even the colour of the landscape, the rising ground, the sloping valleys, and all the detail in which artists delight: and in this process we are wont, I fancy, to be assisted by vague and unconscious memories of places familiar to us. So again, those who travel by night in unknown regions, when the light is dim or there is no light at all, nevertheless do not fail, as a rule, to frame some conjecture as to the general outline and appearance of the rivers, cities, and hills which they know that they are passing through, although they but barely, if at all, discern them with the outward eye.
[Page 439]
Now, I apprehend, not much different from their experience is the pleasure realized by both writers and readers of poems, whenever localities on which they have never once set eyes have to be described. They press into their service, to suit the new place, the form and feature of regions familiar and dear to them: and by variously combining these memories, fancy they effect a picture wholly new. This is true even of references to the Gods, especially 2056 to Apollo and Diana, introduced in similes, to honour some hero:
Such on Eurotas' banks, or Cynthus' height,
Diana seems: and so she charms the sight,
When in the dance the graceful goddess leads
The choir of nymphs, and over-tops their heads. 2057
Like fair Apollo, when he leaves the frost
Of wint'ry Xanthus, and the Lycian coast,
When to his native Delos he resorts,
Ordains the dances, and renews the sports:
Where painted Scythians, mix'd with Cretan bands,
Before the joyful altars join their hands:
Himself, on Cynthus walking, sees below
The merry madness of the sacred show. 2058
These passages owe much of their grace, and of that ‘vividness’ which all praise so highly, to the mention by name of Delos, Lycia, Xanthus, Eurotas, and above all Cynthus, a hill held in high reverence. In fact, the principle we have laid down, that narratives of this kind gain much greater appearance of truth, if names are given, is specially true if the names are connected with miraculous actions or visions of the Gods. The mysterious Presence of Deity seems not only to be more true, but seems also to be actually nearer to us, when confined within some definite spot, especially within a spot familiar to us. This quality seems, even in religion itself, and in the honour accorded to
[Page 440]
temples, shrines, oracles, and other like objects of reverence, to stand out, by a kind of natural law, as of the very first importance. When a particular spot is named, though far remote, as the scene of some sacred mystery and wonder, we instinctively feel that it is only a definite distance—a great distance perhaps, yet none the less one that can be measured—which separates us mortals from the abode of the Deity, and therefore from the Deity itself. What single student, who carefully and piously reads the books of Holy Scripture, does not feel himself deeply moved by the mere mention of cities, rivers, hills, where 2059 God has approached unwontedly near to man? especially as there are clear indications that He in some sort favours defined localities, and that wheresoever He has at any time manifested Himself, there, generally, sooner or later, He is wont to return. But, in short, we know by simple experience that hardly anything roots the sense of an ever-present Deity so deeply in the beliefs and feelings of mankind, as the reverence for places; this is why the Divine Providence ordained, in time past, that his own people should be schooled in true religion in this way, by means of the very names themselves, which were given by His own command to certain villages and districts. No expositor of the Holy Scriptures but well knows how largely their teaching turns and depends upon details of this kind. We may well believe, therefore, that Virgil's use of names and places connected with religion is in some sense a reflection from this genuine truth; and though it falls far short, both in dignity and in beauty, yet it has a strange power to affect men's minds, since the places impart a belief in the portents, and the portents create a religious awe for the places.
But most notable of all is the effect when it happens that the memories and the names of places are those closely interwoven with the sacred ritual and the first beginnings
[Page 441]
of Virgil's native land. Under this head I believe that ancient poetry can show nothing that can equal, or even approach to, that renowned passage which tells the story of Evander and the site of the Roman city, and in this passage, so full of the work of a consummate artist, there is no touch so attractive as the fact that, little by little, the narrative rises with the theme, and approaches nearer and nearer the highest and loftiest majesty of utterance. At the outset Evander declares:
These woods were first the seat of Silvan pow'rs,
Of nymphs and Fauns; 2060
so far it is only a race of demi-gods rather than deities. Then after a notice of the Carmental gate and altar
                                         Sacred to the name
Of old Carmenta, the prophetic dame,
Who to her son foretold Th' Aenean race,
Sublime in fame, and Rome's imperial place. 2061
Having pointed out, too, the forest of Romulus and the 2062 grove of holy Argiletum, he then crowns all with this splendid climax:
Thence, to the steep Tarpeian rock he leads—
Now roof'd with gold, then thatch'd with homely
reeds.
A rev'rent fear (such superstition reigns
Among the rude) ev'n then possess'd the swains.
Some god, they knew—what god they could not tell—
Did there among the sacred horror dwell.
Th' Arcadians thought him Jove: and said they saw
The mighty thund'rer with majestic awe,
Who shook his shield, and dealt his bolts around,
And scatter'd tempests on the teeming ground.
Do we not now clearly see the drift and meaning of all this care shown by great poets in the naming of places? and what is its real aim and upshot? It rests upon the verdict of all true-hearted and good men, that there is
[Page 442]
not a nook or corner of tho world in which something cannot be found which will touch or comfort men's minds with the sense of a divine presence; and he who can readily and happily seize upon this will assuredly take high rank as a real and genuine poet.
Thus we see that in relation to places, as well as in relation to men's sympathies and pursuits, Virgil is separated from Lucretius by a very striking difference. Nor is this to be wondered at: for clearly it is natural to one and the same character, both to treat nothing that is human as foreign to itself, and to regard scenes and localities which are fraught with human associations with a special affection. In each case there is present to the mind's eye, with power to stimulate and elevate, the solemn thought ‘ God is in this place ’; near and round about us, is a mysterious Power, not only infinite and tremendous, but also beneficent to man and caring for our concerns. On the other hand, those who, like Lucretius, are unable to confess or even to tolerate this truth, and yet follow Nature with a genuine passion, as soon as they plunge into its secret deeps, readily fling aside all memories 2063 of places and of men, in fear lest, if their mind falls back on such associations, the shadow of that Providence which they detest should obtrude itself upon them. These unfortunate men are ever seeking out new hiding-places and wandering through fresh mazes of thought, lest they be compelled to acknowledge the one Cause and Lawgiver presiding over all. And thus, even these very men serve the cause of truth by their reluctant witness, and by the worship which they unconsciously offer; but as for themselves they assuredly appear to wander aimlessly in chill and forbidding regions, like men who possess neither country nor household sanctities, and reject, at one and the same time, not only concern for the things of heaven, but even delight in the things of earth.
[Page 443]
Now this whole discussion rests upon what we believe to be one essential note of Virgil's poetry, namely, that it pre-eminently inculcates the worship and whole-hearted adoration of a Provident and Benevolent Power. But inasmuch as there are some who hold that Virgil was a sympathizing follower of the school of Epicurus, and since, having them in regard, we have hitherto left untouched that side of his poetry which proves him to have been imbued with a better creed, it now remains for us to examine, formally, which of the two—Epicurus or Plato —was really his master. A wide and weighty question no doubt, but, as I trust, by no means difficult of solution.
[Page 444]
LECTURE XXXIX 2064
Was Virgil an Epicurean? Very slight grounds for the supposition. On the contrary, he is shown to be a true disciple of Plato, for (a) he prefers reminiscences of the past to anticipations of the future; (b) he implies that all living creatures, indeed all nature, bear witness to the presence of Deity ; (c) he uses a true Platonic ‘irony’, and maintains the highest reverence in regard to sacred and eternal things.
Those who hold that Virgil is to be ranked as a follower of Epicurus appear to support their case, mainly, on these two grounds: first, that he, now and again, refers to Lucretius in terms of singular admiration and, not doubtfully, declares that he could wish, at all events, to follow in his footsteps; and secondly, that he repeatedly inveighs against death in the tone common to the ordinary run of mankind: as if, this life once ended, no hope of a future remained to mortals. But both these arguments can be easily answered if we will only consider Virgil's tone and method with a little care.
As for his panegyric on Lucretius—when we remember how great a man Lucretius was, and how nearly contemporary with himself, such praise was quite natural in one of his candid and ingenuous spirit, which instinctively accorded praise wheresoever praise was due. But he plainly and openly denies that he recognizes him as his 2065 master. This is the construction I put on those well-known lines we have more than once quoted:
Happy the man, who, studying Nature's laws,
Through known effects can trace the secret cause— ...
But if my heavy blood restrain the flight
Of my free soul, aspiring to the height
Of Nature, and unclouded fields of light—
[Page 445]
My next desire is, void of care and strife,
To lead a soft, secure, inglorious life. 2066
It seems to me, I confess, that in these lines the writer has, with his usual subtlety, hinted at two different schools of philosophy equally with two different kinds of poetry, as allotted by nature to himself and to Lucretius, and he has done this with a touch of humour and an ironical modesty almost worthy of Socrates. For Socrates, as you know, is represented by Plato as habitually professing himself inferior in reasoning power and skill to his opponents, and never more so than when about to upset completely their whole argument.
Remember, too, that he describes as ‘blest’ the man ‘who knows the rural gods’: whose mind and soul instinctively feel the near and almost palpable presence in all places of a mysterious and more than human power: and who for that very reason prays ‘may I love the rivers and forests, all inglorious though I be’—since, amid such solitudes, ‘we are conscious of present Deity.’
In the second place, if we find Virgil now and again expressing himself in Epicurean tone concerning the departed —as, for instance, in those lines on which stress is always laid by those who criticize him in this respect:
A heavy slumber iron-bound
Seals the dull eyes in rest profound:
   They close in endless night. 2067
I reply that this is really an adaptation of Homer's lines:
Stretch'd in the dust, Th' unhappy warrior lies,
And sleep eternal seals his swimming eyes. 2068
And no one, I apprehend, ever suspected Homer of holding the desolate creed that the souls of the dead forthwith are dissolved in thin air and so annihilated. Indeed,
[Page 446]
who is there but well knows that expressions of this sort 2069 do not, as a rule, indicate any fixed and definite belief of the speaker: but are rather intended to depict Nature as spontaneously confessing her own weakness, and show how, carried away by sorrow, she is apt to follow the judgement of the eye rather than the mind? The Bible itself affords many such passages: especially when divine Goodness unbends, so to say, of set purpose, and scruples not to condescend to enter into the everyday anxieties and sympathies of mortal men.
We may, then, put aside these objections, and proceed to consider those passages where Virgil openly professes himself a follower, not of Epicurus, but of Plato, or rather of Pythagoras. In this connexion, two passages, as we all know, are of first importance. In the scene in the other world Anchises teaches his son, almost in the set phrase of the Academy, the noble creed which maintains the being of a world-soul, of a spirit pervading all things: and, in the last book of the Georgics , the poet himself, in no dubious language, impresses the same teaching:
Induc'd by such examples, some have taught
That bees have portions of ethereal thought—
Endu'd with particles of heav'nly fires;
For God the whole created mass inspires.
Through heav'n, and earth, and ocean's depth, he throws
His influence round, and kindles as he goes.
Hence flocks, and herds, and men, and beasts, and fowls,
With breath are quicken'd, and attract their souls;
Hence take the forms his prescience did ordain,
And into him at length resolve again.
No room is left for death: they mount the sky,
And to their own congenial planets fly. 2070
He has managed in each passage to infuse into his account a lofty strain of piety: for he assigns to his bees,
[Page 447]
the objects, as he has declared, of his special admiration, an origin and a destiny which link earth to heaven in closest union: and throughout all the long procession of departed heroes, the one point on which he insists is that no mortal man may treat either his own life or his own century as a possession for himself alone, and that humanity may never at any moment regard itself as isolated from its ancestry or its posterity. You can see in each passage 2071 that the writer treats his theme as one of no slight importance—nay, rather as the very heart and soul of the task that he has undertaken. Indeed, so far as the passage from the Georgics is concerned, the same spirit which ruled and inspired the bees was destined to inform and penetrate with its own sacred and secret power all those other objects among which, amid field and forest, country-folk familiarly live. This is the reason why in his picture of Elysium the poet praises so highly that which suggests the country:
The verdant fields with those of heav'n may vie,
With aether vested, and a purple sky—
The blissful seats of happy souls below:
Stars of their own, and their own suns, they know. 2072
In short, he means that nothing exists which does not shine more beauteously, and move men's minds more powerfully when once it is associated with the idea of a divinity diffused through all things.
Moreover, the feeling with which we follow the fate and fortune of Aeneas is very different when we no longer regard him merely as an individual, but, as the poet treats him, as summing up in himself the whole long line of future heroes and patriots: one whom, indeed, not merely men, but Gods, both celestial and infernal, hold in deep and serious regard. Consequently, if any there be who maintain that the poet was here merely deceiving his readers in this description of the lower world, I would
[Page 448]
have them reflect what is the nature of the charge they make against him: it deals with no mere side issue, but rather it affects, not only Virgil's own reputation as a poet, but even the dignity of Poetry itself. For how can any man, endowed with generous feeling, make any real account of an art whose highest glory and triumph could be associated with such glaring deceit? Truly, he who once permits such a thought to enter his mind will, I fear, before long, develop into what Plato terms ‘a confirmed hater of all ideas’; and refuse to regard anything whatever as serious, even in the writings of philosophers, much more in those of poets.
‘But,’ it may be objected, ‘Aeneas is dismissed by the ivory gate, out of which only deceiving dreams issue, and 2073 this is the clearest possible proof’ (so they infer) ‘that all those details just set forth poetically, whether as to the Infernal regions or the nature of the universe, were baseless inventions.’ But reflect, pray, where reasoning of this kind leads us. How many writers have at different times imagined for themselves divers visions whereby they sought to impress upon us their views, either about religion or about life and character! Can we believe for a moment that any one of these writers, not merely was destitute of all belief in what he taught, but designedly emphasized his own deception? as if he said in so many words: ‘Take care not to accept these things with approval: for they are all highly-coloured and artificial, and merely meant as ornament.’ Whoever would conclude a serious poem—‘the master-piece of all his writings’ 2074 — in such a style as this?
Why not rather hold that the real reason why such incidents are narrated in the form of visions is that they belong to a world seen by the mind, not the eye: the world with which men are wont to have intercourse most completely,
[Page 449]
when they are awake in mind only, and their senses are lulled to rest. In such case it follows that the significance of ‘the ivory gate’ is just the same as if Virgil had stated in terms that Aeneas, awakened from his slumber, realized that all these marvels of sacred mystery had been shown to him in a dream: not because they are false and fictitious, but because he wished to preserve a law which affects all things transcending this world and our material senses. In short, in styling ‘dreams’ as ‘false’, he does not, in my view, deny the truth of the things seen as such, but implies that their images, not the actual things, appeared to Aeneas.
And, indeed, there are many reasons which lead me to believe that Virgil accepted a doctrine of this kind from the bottom of his heart and was not merely ‘maintaining a thesis’ as the Greeks say. In the first place, I would 2075 ask you to note how aptly this Platonizing, as I have called it, harmonizes with that one leading characteristic of Virgil's poetry, I mean his tendency to associate all things with memories of the past, rather than with anticipations of the future. We know by experience how those who are sympathetically drawn to Lucretius are ever carried forward further and further with the hope of learning some new thing, and thus stretch their gaze, as it were, over some infinite, immense, ocean: but lovers of Virgil gladly turn their eyes back to their infant days, their childish sports, and all that belongs to their past life. Memory holds the one class, expectation the other. To quote some instances, Virgil—(for I have already dealt sufficiently with Lucretius)—glories pre-eminently in the praises and the delights of spring time:
                                         When golden suns appear
And under earth have driv'n the winter year. 2076
[Page 450]
Yet never does he so fully revel in its charm as when he chances on some reference to a primitive age:
In this soft season (let me dare to sing)
The world was hatch'd by heaven's imperial king—
In prime of all the year, and holy-days of spring.
Then did the new creation first appear;
Nor other was the tenor of the year,
When laughing heav'n did the great birth attend,
And eastern winds their wint'ry breath suspend. 2077
Nay, he saw that even his praise of agriculture, the one great theme of his poem, would be but flat and incomplete, unless he could blend with it the memory of the happy days of old:
Such was the life the frugal Sabines led:
So Remus and his brother god were bred,
From whom Th' austere Etrurian virtue rose;
And this rude life our homely fathers chose.
Old Rome from such a race deriv'd her birth
(The seat of empire, and the conquer'd earth),
Which now on sev'n high hills triumphant reigns,
And in that compass all the world contains.
Ere Saturn's rebel son usurp'd the skies,
When beasts were only slain for sacrifice,
While peaceful Crete enjoy'd her ancient lord,
Ere sounding hammers forg'd Th' inhuman sword. 2078
But it may be urged: ‘How can it possibly be maintained that the memory of the past holds first place in 2079 Virgil's poetry, seeing that there is no single poet who has more lovingly fostered a sure and certain hope of times to come, whether by direct prophecy or by other kinds of anticipation? what of the splendid Eclogue about Pollio? what of the many assurances of Gods and augurs which are scattered, here and there, throughout the Aeneid , especially concerning Caesar and the Roman city? not to mention the famous pictures of its future, containing, as they do, the very essence of the whole poem, which are
[Page 451]
partly represented in the world below, partly worked upon the shield of Aeneas.’ But the truth is, that Virgil's subtle genius so treated all such anticipations that in them more than in any other part of the poem can the affectionate reminiscence of the past be seen.
To begin with, in the ‘Pollio’ the poet really does nothing more nor less than, under the guise of prophecy, recall the first golden age of the world and the delightful visions of primitive life. He offers nothing new, nothing unheard of, whereby men's minds may be stimulated to greater expectancy: once having called to mind the rule and order of centuries to come, his mind turns back at once to Saturn's reign and the much-vaunted delights of the infant world:
Unlabour'd harvests shall the fields adorn,
And cluster'd grapes shall blush on ev'ry thorn;
The knotted oaks shall show'rs of honey weep. 2080
And observe, too, how cunningly, seizing his opportunity, he interjects a mention of the heroes of old, seeing, as he did, that the world was still in throes of conflict and not yet wholly peaceful:
Another Tiphys shall new seas explore;
Another Argo land the chiefs upon Th' Iberian shore;
Another Helen other wars create,
And great Achilles urge the Trojan fate. 2081
He implies that even now, in the fullness of time, his theme can only be fitly and worthily sung with the help of the bards of old: joyfully, indeed, does he name Linus and Orpheus with high honour, and pretends to challenge them to a poetic tourney.
And thus, although in appearance the poem is wholly 2082 concerned with anticipation of the future, we perceive that its exquisite charm resides in affectionate retrospect of the
[Page 452]
past. I touch not the question whether something of holier and more sacred association may not blend with these prophecies—though I certainly think that this is so: such a quality would, at all events, by suggesting a flavour of antiquity commend itself to any lover of ancient times, even though he might be ignorant of the Hebrew prophets.
In the next place, with regard to the contention that Virgil took special interest in omens and prophecies, we should bear well in mind what all such prophecies point to in his poetry. All the visions of Anchises, the Sibyl and the rest simply centre in this:
The subject world shall Rome's dominion own,
And, prostrate, shall adore the nation of the gown. 2083
And, leaving aside the Caesars, Julius and Augustus, I do not recollect that they ever laud any hero but such as in the age of the writer himself were already of hoary antiquity: one or two, of later times, he barely names, but it is on the procession of the Alban kings, on a Romulus or a Tarquin, and others who all but belong to the region of fable, that his affection loves to linger. And in this way it has come about, that even in his very forecasting, he manifests and emphasizes his zeal for bygone times.
Let it therefore be taken as settled and established, that the poetry of Virgil is ever affectionately turning back to memories of the early world and the first beginnings of life. And let me now proceed to show what is the link between this and Platonism. We have already said that the sterner muse of Lucretius sought out for itself, as its favourite theme, whatever Nature suggests of mystery, profundity, and infinity. Now let us examine whether the Virgilian muse has not also its element of mystery. If we try to pierce through to the real grounds of this instinctive attraction towards long past ages, there is bound to occur
[Page 453]
to us before long the famous speculation of Pythagoras, which teaches that our souls did not have their beginning 2084 when born into this world, but that they came from some unknown region, each to dwell in a human body; nor have they so deeply drunk of the waters of oblivion, but that some tinge and temper of their past existence still lingers with them: and, moreover, that this recollection is constantly revived, and made conscious, by some kind of special sense, implicit and dim, no doubt, but none the less real. The finest poem of the greatest poet within our own times is mainly based on this belief: namely, that our recollections of childhood are touched with their peculiarly exquisite and far-reaching charm, simply because of its dim feeling of a former existence and of a life closer to divine influence. 2085
Now, although the teaching and principles of religion hardly countenance this doctrine, it must nevertheless be allowed to border on truth, in so far as it attributes something sacred and solemn to the memories and affections of our childish years. We ourselves know, at all events, how closely Divine Benevolence seemed to us when of tender years: and who can say if all this charm of bygone time may not also speak of that mighty Presence? But it suffices just to touch upon these things in passing: more especially since they are copiously developed and explained by an author who, as far as my knowledge goes, was the first to declare such a view publicly. 2086 Let me quote a few sentences, though indeed many might be given, from him:
‘We received pleasure, because we were in the presence of God, but we knew it not: we knew not what we received: we did not bring home to ourselves or reflect upon the pleasure we were receiving: but afterwards, when enjoyment is past, reflection comes in. We feel at the time: we recognize and reason afterwards. Such, I say,
[Page 454]
is the sweetness and softness with which days long passed away fall upon the memory, and strike us. The most ordinary years, when we seemed to be living for nothing, 2087 these shine forth to us in their very regularity and orderly course. ... Such are the feelings with which men often look back on their childhood, when any accident brings it vividly before them. Some relic or token of that early time, some spot, or some book, or a word, or a scent, or a sound, brings them back in memory to the first years of their discipleship, and they then see, what they could not know at the time, that God's presence went up with them and gave them rest.’ 2088
Moreover, in connexion with this delighted retrospect on our early years, it is worth while noting how Virgil, partly by special choice of particular words, partly by a certain delicate and elaborated tone of description, sometimes makes us conscious that some one impression has sunk deep into his being: no doubt by reason of childish memories with which the thing may perhaps have been associated. Among these (and I will only mention a few instances, and such as first occur to mind) I think that we may reckon this sketch of the paces of the horse:
                                         taught the steed to bound,
To run the ring, and trace the mazy round (glomerare) . 2089
This word glomerare is more felicitously true to nature than would be likely to occur to any one not accustomed by long experience, indeed from childhood, to a horse's ways.
Another word admirably suggests the course of the wind advancing with a sort of steady sweep:
‘The wind flies sweeping (verrens) in its course the fields and the seas alike.’ 2090
[Page 455]
But the whole picture presents many striking details with like quality:
‘As when a steady (densus) north-wind comes down (incubuit) from the Hyperborean coasts, scattering the storms of Scythia and the dry clouds; the tall corn and waving (natantes) fields are ruffled (horrescunt) with the gentle blasts, and the tops (summae) of the trees of the forest roar (sonorem) , and long waves press onwards to the shore.’ 2091
It is clear that one thing alone pressed on the poet's vision when he wrote these lines: namely, that when the north-wind rages, fields of standing corn roll and swell like 2092 the waves of a stormy sea: a sight specially apt to fascinate children.
I might adduce other appearances which, as I suppose, would, even if seen but once, be riveted on his imagination: for instance, the great rainbow drinks up (bibit) moisture: 2093 goats hang (pendere) afar from a bushy crag: 2094 bees lightly sip (libant) the surfaces of streams: 2095
The dewy moon gives the lawns new life. 2096
In the foregoing cases, all the point and force of the illustrations are centred in a word or two: but there are, besides, not a few instances, where we are not so much struck by individual words, as by the consummate and rare combination of many various details, all tending to produce one picture. Without quoting the passages themselves, let us merely call to mind the dwelling-place suitable for bees as described at the beginning of the fourth Georgic: the cool shady vale whither the poet advises that flock and herd should be led during the mid-day heat: or that renowned harbour and its cave, the home of the Nymphs, with its pendent rocks, in the first Aeneid. These, and many more of like kind, seem drawn, as if the poet had,
[Page 456]
in each detail, indulged his affectionate recollection of some spot well known and very dear to him.
Now, let us press on to consider another trait of the Socratic philosophy, and that a decisive one. While Lucretius hardly refers more than once or twice to Pan, to the Nymphs, and to Venus, Virgil, as we know, always and everywhere dwells on such themes with keen delight: from the very commencement of the travels of Aeneas the Gods are represented as his companions, in such a way that we feel that they are never really absent, though, according as need and occasion demand, they at one time withdraw from sight, at another show themselves openly. What else can we infer from such expressions as these?—
Thus having said, she turn'd and made appear
Her neck refulgent ...
And by her graceful walk the queen of love is known. 2097
And a few lines later:
They march obscure: for Venus kindly shrouds,
With mists, their persons, and involves in clouds.
2098 Just as a little before, while Troy was in flames, a mist had veiled herself from view, but now—
   she stood reveal'd before my sight—
(Never so radiant did her eyes appear:
Not her own star confess'd a light so clear)—
Great in her charms, as when on gods above
She looks, and breathes herself into their love. 2099
But why delay over a point so obvious? the Aeneid is full of such indications. I lay no stress on the fact that in his poems the woods and shores are described as peopled by sportive Nymphs, and other deities of like quality, such as were termed the deities of second rank. For this, certainly, was not out of harmony with the theories of Epicurus, who was far from denying that certain images,
[Page 457]
which have power to touch men's senses, emanate from the sacred personalities of his Deities. But these Virgilian Powers spontaneously associate with mortals, not merely as friendly companions, but as sharers of each man's care and labour. Their duty is concerned to see that men neither do or suffer anything, either heinous or glorious, without their cognizance and assent. Indeed, Virgil has encompassed human life with spiritual personalities, as with ‘a cloud of witnesses’, always close at hand to protect man: since he teaches unmistakably that they are present and manifest themselves to any one who is travelling through dark and unknown regions:
Obscure they went through dreary shades, that led
Along the waste dominions of the dead.
Thus wander travellers in woods by night,
By the moon's doubtful and malignant light,
When Jove in dusky clouds involves the skies,
And the faint crescent shoots by fits before their eyes. 2100
The poet, moreover, holds the characteristic doctrine of the Pythagorean creed, which, to use his own words, attributes even to animals without reason,
‘a share of the divine mind, and the breath of heaven.’ 2101
I say no more here concerning the bees, but should like to suggest for consideration whether something of the kind be not implied when the poet applies a simile drawn from flocks of birds to the shadowy ghosts:
Th' infernal troops like passing shadows glide,
And, list'ning, crowd the sweet musician's side—
(Not flocks of birds, when driv'n by storms or night, 2102
Stretch to the forests with so thick a flight). 2103
The simile was scarcely needed, merely to emphasize
[Page 458]
number: but how if the poet advanced it, as having learned by constant experience the meaning of that deep saying of Plato's,—‘Everything in this life gives to wise men some suggestion of the thought of death’?
Another indication, about which there can be no doubt, is to be found in the way in which birds and other animals are used to interpret the will of the Gods. The fact is due to the religious belief of Virgil's time: what is characteristic of the poet is the notable pleasure he evinces in dwelling upon it. I doubt whether anywhere Virgil seems happier in his theme than when he has to celebrate these oracles. A pair of doves, for instance, suddenly appearing to Aeneas, show him the path to the Golden Bough:
Scarce had he said, when, full before his sight,
Two doves, descending from their airy flight,
Secure upon the grassy plain alight ... .
They fed, and, fluttering, by degrees withdrew
Still further from the place: but still in view;
Hopping and flying thus they led him on
To the slow lake. 2104
And then:
                                         whose hateful stench to shun,
They wing'd their flight aloft, then, stooping low,
Perch'd on the double tree, that bears the golden bough;
Through the green leaves the glittering shadows glow. 2105
Nothing could be more graceful, nor, I apprehend, truer to nature, so far as the habits and aspect of this bird are concerned: but what is most beautiful of all, and truest to Platonism, is the fact that they are described as ‘his mother's birds’: thus, free as their flight was, there was a divine instinct that guided them to help her son.
Now, as in this case a pair of doves, so in the story of
[Page 459]
Laocoon that celebrated pair of serpents well shows with what eyes and with what feelings Virgil looked upon the whole race of animals. In the latter instance all is harmful, repulsive, and so described as to suggest a stern act of 2106 judgement; in the former all is attractive and gentle, full of tenderest movement and tone: yet in each case there is implied the presence of a more than human power. Both, it is to be noticed, speak of a pair—two doves, two serpents: which fact alone tends to impress men's minds and to rouse their expectation with the belief that so striking a fact is not due to mere chance. However, much has been written about the Laocoon, and I do not propose to repeat it here. There is one point, though, which I should like to make: grant, if you will, that Virgil, when writing, had the well-known statue in his mind's eye, yet, in many respects, the sculptor has been surpassed by the poet: or, perhaps, it would be more correct to say, the art of sculpture by the poet's art: since the sculptor could only express the keen sense of anguish, while the poet has infused into the whole scene a certain vague terror, plainly suggestive of some mysterious Deity wrathful and in act to strike.
But since our subject has led us to the mention of serpents, it would be inexcusable to overlook that celebrated snake, which, creeping harmlessly and quietly along, tasted the sacrificial offerings at the tomb of Anchises, and then disappeared into the tomb itself. Aeneas, witnessing this spectacle,
The fun'ral honours with more zeal renew'd,
Doubtful if this the place's genius were,
Or guardian of his father's sepulchre. 2107
Do we not here recognize Platonic teaching? for the poet not only speaks of the genius of the place, but of
[Page 460]
the man, and implies that, to good and religious men like Anchises, such a genius would become after death their attendant spirit; or rather their ‘Daemon’, if we prefer the language of Socrates.
We must remember, too, the fact that at times he represents Nature as in real sympathy with mankind, and this outward face of the world as responding to men's inner thoughts. Let these fine lines, describing the first approach of Aeneas to the Italian shore, illustrate my 2108 meaning: and forgive me if I quote at length: it is the only method of exhibiting the full strength of the passage:
Near the Ceraunian rocks our course we bore—
The shortest passage to Th' Italian shore.
Now had the sun withdrawn his radiant light,
And hills were hid in dusky shades of night:
We land, and, on the bosom of the ground,
A safe retreat and a bare lodging found.
Close by the shore we lay; the sailors keep
Their watches, and the rest securely sleep.
The night, proceeding on with silent pace,
Stood in her noon, and view'd with equal face
Her steepy rise, and her declining race.
Then wakeful Palinurus rose, to spy
The face of heav'n and the nocturnal sky;
And listen'd every breath of air to try;
Observes the stars and notes their sliding course,
The Pleiads, Hyads, and their wat'ry force;
And both the Bears is careful to behold,
And bright Orion, arm'd with burnish'd gold.
Then, when he saw no threat'ning tempest nigh,
But a sure promise of a settled sky,
He gave the sign to weigh: we break our sleep,
Forsake the pleasing shore, and plough the deep.
And now the rising morn with rosy light
Adorns the skies and puts the stars to flight;
When we from far, like bluish mists, descry
The hills and then the plains of Italy. 2109
[Page 461]
There we have a description of the expedition by night, which is not only distinguished, unless I am mistaken, by a sense of tranquil peace, but also by a kind of majesty; such as was worthy to conduct to their destined goal this band of settlers, whom fate had marked out to be the imperial rulers of the world. Truly, in just accord with such foreshadowed destinies are the descriptions of Orion armoured with gold, and the vision of the stars declining in the silent heavens—an augury to all of the steady and immovable decree of the Fates concerning the Roman state.
I might, too, adduce the passages which describe the settlement of Aeneas in Latium itself, and then his introduction to Evander; in each, sea and shore, river and woods, breezes and birds, all further him with their aid. All nature is described by the poet in these scenes as being genial, gladsome, and beautiful; and this, as it seems to me, not without design. Great is the importance, believe me, in a poem, as well as in a picture, of this harmony of sky, sea, land, and of all which meets the view, with the fortunes and the aims of men: not merely on the score 2110 of beauty, but also because of its suggestion of a secret and profound truth.
But let us now pass on to our third proof of Virgil's Platonic sympathies, which is that he frequently makes use of very obvious ‘irony’; and we know how closely this harmonizes with the Socratic temper. I mean by irony , an appearance of playful raillery which a writer employs when he has to praise the ways and habits of living creatures or of any other object of special affection, the strength of which men like to conceal: and on this obvious use of such irony others have spoken sufficiently. But it may be questioned if we should not seek the principle of Virgil's irony in a deeper foundation: seeing that it is closely associated with a true and sincere modesty, and
[Page 462]
with what is called learned ignorance, which ever professes, and genuinely believes, itself ignorant of many things. This is the secret, I apprehend, which explains the fact that Virgil, great poet as he was, yet had no scruple in classing himself among the swarm of imitators. He would have us believe, for instance, that in such and such a poem he echoed the Ascraean or the Sicilian or the Homeric Muse; while, really, whatever he has borrowed he has borrowed in such a way that he has made it wholly his own and far better than the original. But owing to a certain modesty and love of concealment, he preferred that nothing should go forth simply as his own. And thus he presents a type of Socratic disposition, both sincere and graceful. We need feel no surprise, therefore, if he evinces this modesty, even in connexion with serious and grave subjects; and, especially, when dealing with things mysterious and sacred. As, for example, when he touches the question of the final punishment of bad men, he does not permit Aeneas even to inquire curiously concerning that dreadful and terrible place of punishment; far less to penetrate thither or see its mysteries with his own eyes:
                                         The chaste and holy race
Are all forbidden this polluted place ...
Ask not what pains: nor further seek to know
2111 Their process, or the forms of law below. 2112
See how timidly, with what religious awe, the poet shrinks back as soon as he approaches those things which, in his judgement, the Gods have shrouded in mystery. But his instinctive feeling of the eternity of punishment appears in the following lines describing the walls of that dreadful dungeon:
Wide is the fronting gate, and, rais'd on high
With adamantine columns, threats the sky.
Vain is the force of man, and heav'n's as vain,
To crush the pillars which the pile sustain. 2113
[Page 463]
Not that he really deemed that the power of the Gods was limited, but he was anxious, it seems to me, to emphasize the real meaning of the future, as neither limited nor to be limited by any bounds—even those assigned by the Gods: and then he implies that the punishment of the wicked is co-extensive with it. How thoroughly consonant is this with Plato's views may be seen by any one who will take the trouble to refer, either to that philosopher's Republic or that golden dialogue entitled Gorgias . But we are here concerned, not so much to inquire what views these great men held concerning these questions, as to point out how modestly, how reverently, they both approached them. And we know that there is no topic more fitted to test such reverent modesty than the problem of divine retribution and the last great dread of all: so much, then, the more worthy of honour is Virgil, who with a religious self-restraint has superadded nothing of his own to the traditional beliefs concerning this dread place of doom, but has simply touched with his poetic power the conceptions commonly handed down.
Not to dwell upon single instances, however, we may say generally that he maintains throughout, with regard to religious and eternal things, the attitude which he himself inculcates in the Allegory of the prophetic Sibyl. The story has indeed become almost a proverb, the story of her leaves, inscribed with divine prophesyings, and blown and scattered hither and thither by the wind. We can 2114 draw no more fitting meaning from this fable, in my judgement, than to suppose the poet to imply that the sole way by which the knowledge of divine things is conceded to mortal men, is that they shall collect from every quarter the traces and fragments of it which have been thrown into confusion by the storm and stress of our daily lives and have been scattered in all directions. Moreover, he not obscurely implies that there will be no repairing of
[Page 464]
this disaster, nor will these fragments of truth ever be arranged and made serviceable to mankind, save by constant, devoted prayerfulness. Thus, when Aeneas reaches the threshold of the shrine the prophetess adjures him in these words:
‘Why this delay?’ she cry'd—‘the pow'rs invoke.
Thy prayers alone can open this abode,
Else vain are my demands, and dumb the god.’ 2115
And then when prayers have been duly offered, the oracles flow forth.
Therefore, since Virgil, in all his poems, ever holds in mind the reverence due to the Gods, the hope of immortality, and, lastly, the belief that virtue is impressed on us, not by laws alone, but by Nature herself: since, moreover, his own spirit was in sympathy with the Platonic teaching in these respects—that he found his chief pleasure in reminiscence of the past; that he, always and everywhere, delighted to recognize the vestiges of a power higher than human; and finally, that he displayed a pious and wise reserve in treating of things of special sacredness: what course is open to us but gladly and unhesitatingly to enrol the great poet among those who sincerely, and not merely in show, desired to defend religion so far as revealed to them? And the vast importance of this fact, even as bearing on the divine teaching in which we now rest, I will indicate, to the best of my power, in another and concluding lecture.
[Page 465]
LECTURE XL
Reasons suggested for concluding the list of Primary Poets with Virgil. 2116 A few critical remarks upon Horace. High estimate of Virgil held by those who followed him, especially Christians; an influence felt even to our own times: we may see a providence herein. Indeed, all poetry was given as a kind of preparation for Sacred Truth: poets were to the Gentiles what prophets were to the Jews. Views of the Fathers of the Church on this point. Examples taken from later poets. In conclusion many reasons are adduced for holding that Poetry and Theology have to a great extent drawbacks and compensations in common.
It is the usual experience of those who have taken in hand some great and noble task to which their strength is unequal, that they have to confess that the result is far different from their hope and expectation: since they are conscious of having constantly treated lofty themes in meagre fashion, things of beauty, awkwardly, and important subjects, inadequately. I fully admit this feeling in my own case, and yet at the conclusion of my labours I still maintain my original convictions concerning the main essence of Poetry. Not that I flatter myself that I have in any way really portrayed the very essence and form of that divine art: I see now that I have only been a worker in a small corner of a very wide territory, and that I have not explained what Poetry is in itself, but rather have pointed to certain sure marks and attributes of it. I started with noticing that, both in ordinary daily life and in the other arts which are styled liberal, those 2117 qualities are peculiarly denominated poetic which give an indirect expression to the feelings of an eager and overflowing heart, and that such expression is wont to afford the greatest solace to men sorely exercised in mind:
[Page 466]
straightway, I was led to speculate whether it might not well be that the poetic art itself, properly and specially so called, might too be due to some such law and principle. Following this idea, I recognized that poets can, in the main, be divided into two classes: for some who write verse seek relief for some disturbing emotion, and, as one may say, a free course for it: while others merely imitate those who are really moved by such incitements. Then, after having indicated certain marks, whereby Primary and true-born poets can be recognized, we proceeded to deal with the work of individual poets, choosing those whom all allow to be the greatest—Homer, Pindar, Aeschylus, as well as those others among the ancients who have won for themselves a place in that circle. In describing each one of these, according to our method, by his peculiar qualities, it appeared that the whole might be conveniently divided into two classes: some celebrating the anxieties and affairs of men, others the aspects of heaven and earth: the former active, the latter reflective. Greece, we found, produced poets of action, Rome (which was somewhat surprising) mainly contemplative poets. Finally, we were led to see that our whole review supported the belief that some guidance, higher than human, influenced the rise and decline, each in its due order, of the two poetic classes: such a guidance, I say, as may be easily detected, even by ourselves, if we will look for its traces.
In this great assembly of poets we assigned the last place to Virgil: and this was due partly to the limited time at our disposal, but the main motive was the belief that his poems would be found the most suitable transition to things more sacred and divine: for it was no mere accident that this last of the pagans composed his poems not formally and artificially but from the genuine feelings of his heart.
2118 But I am afraid that all the admirers of Horace, with one accord, may take me somewhat severely to task,
[Page 467]
because that graceful poet is excluded from the ranks of Primary poets. Certainly, if, in a question of this kind, decisive weight should be allowed to the pleasure enjoyed by those who take up poetical writings for amusement, no one could refuse to Horace the very highest place, or, at all events, one only next to the highest: seeing that he is the most joyous and gay of them all, one who finely tempers gravest themes with jest and laughter: and that not coarse or uncouth, but such as becomes a man of taste and refinement; and who, when once appreciated, ‘plays lightly’ (in Persius' phrase) ‘round every one's heart.’ 2119 Moreover, there pleasingly lingers, I dare say, in the memory of each one of us, some ode, or, at any rate, a few verses of Horace, powerful to recall by the sound of words, or even syllables, the delights of our youthful years, and whatever visionary fancies, grave or gay, pleasured us in those days. Further (quite contrary, I rather think, to the fate of the greater part of Poetry), as we grow older, we take increasing pleasure in reverting to the poetry of Horace: possibly by reason of the wonderful insight he exhibits into human life and manners: which led an acute judge of literature to insist that no one ever fully appreciates Horace's Epistles till, by long experience, by vigorous effort of his mind, and by sympathetic study, he reaches the standpoint from which Horace set himself to write. 2120
But though allowing all this, and more than this, yet I reluctantly confess myself hitherto unable to discover any peculiar and dominating spring of Horace's poetry. In fact, I suspect his light touch of all subjects betrays to us that he dwelt with no serious regard on any one of 2121 them. He professes at times a notable enthusiasm for the country and rural life: yet one always feels that his interest was rather after the manner of those who merely seek recreation there, than of the country-folk themselves; that
[Page 468]
Rome was all the time in his thoughts: that he cherished his little farm and his homely belongings, less for their own sake, than for their restful repose, their elegant hospitalities, and whatsoever other like attractions they offered. In brief: he enrolled himself—which Virgil for his part shrunk from doing—without misgiving, in the ranks of the Epicureans: setting before him as his sole rule of life the hope of grasping the gifts of the passing hour, whatever they might chance to be. Nor did he, like Lucretius, feel conscious of restless disquiet in the midst of all his pleasure, and of a vague longing after an outlook vast and boundless. We see, then, in him a genial gentleman, one too nearly in sympathy with the crowd who indulge their own bent, to be deeply influenced by any tender regard for things far away, and the latter is the instinct which on our principles preeminently stamps the genuine poet.
Of Horace, however, let men judge as they please: it will be fully granted by all, that it was especially to Virgil that such Roman literature as developed after his time owed its form and tone. Not one of all those who, in Rome's decline, composed Epics or Pastorals, but shaped himself after Virgil's model. I do not even except Lucan, who, though of a genius and temperament strikingly differing from Virgil's, yet in his style and tone of narrative, and often, too, in the very workmanship and resonance of his phrase, seems intentionally to imitate him.
Moreover, what is more important, we are told that the Roman youth were from earliest boyhood specially educated in the works of Virgil. So reports Quintilian, an 2122 undeniable authority on such a point: ‘Wisely’, says he, ‘has it been decided that reading should begin with Homer and Virgil, even though an appreciation of their beauties will demand a riper judgement.’ 2123 This is the testimony of a teacher born in Spain and writing at Rome, probably
[Page 469]
during the reign of Domitian. Let me quote another witness, this time from Africa, a witness of very different date and different opinions—St. Augustine; he affords precisely the same evidence, that the works of Virgil formed the elementary reading of boys at school. For we gather from many of his writings, and especially from the memoirs of his own life which he has left us, that, in his time and country, Virgil was so largely drawn upon in the instruction of youth, that his tone and temper penetrated into the very heart and soul of every intelligent young man. Augustine, 2124 for instance, tells us how Virgil's story of Aeneas pleased his boyish taste beyond all his other studies, and we can easily see from the tone in which he refers to it that tender recollections of that reading were deeply fixed in his mind, even when the follies of that time in his life caused him most shame and regret. Moreover, he often shows real pleasure in quoting in support of Christian hopes those lines of Virgil in which he, though ignorant of the truth, seems to prophesy of a golden race and a new cycle of the ages. 2125 Indeed, in one passage Augustine 2126 lauds the poet for clearly and openly speaking of ‘kingdoms doomed to fall’ 2127 in connexion with the Roman State, and that, too, in his own proper person; whereas, when he has occasion to forecast an eternal future for the proud city, it is not he who utters the prophecy, but Jupiter who solemnly declares:
To them no bounds of empire I assign,
Nor term of years to their immortal line. 2128
He dwells with eager delight on anything which falls from his beloved author which seems near akin to any Christian truth.
From this alone we may realize how large was Virgil's 2129 share in forming the tone and temper of those whom the
[Page 470]
Church herself educated: and still more of those who had not yet joined her ranks, as was the case with Augustine himself until middle life. For even those who, like Jerome, sternly set their face against ancient literature, nevertheless realized it to be impossible to educate children of the cultured classes without the study of Virgil. Thus he complains: ‘Some of God's priests, laying aside the Gospels and the Prophets, read stage plays, recite verses from Pastoral Eclogues, are constant students of Virgil, and make, what is for youths a necessity, a ground of indulgence for themselves.’ 2130 Clearly, in his judgement, at all events, the study of Virgil must have been necessary enough in those days!
Now, if we rightly hold that it was the chief and peculiar glory of Plato that the Greeks imbibed from his writings a philosophy, which in a manner prepared the way for the pure Truth of the Gospel—an adequate proof of which, indeed the best of all proofs, is to be found in the life of Justin Martyr—why may we not believe the like power to have resided even in the poems of Virgil, full as they are of Platonic philosophy: and that he imbued his Roman countrymen with a certain vague sense of a better world and of a Truth to be revealed from heaven? And Virgil's influence was found to be the more potent and effective by reason of his poetic charm, and the fact that his poems were constantly studied by all men from their earliest youth. Thus they were the more easily led to believe that human souls might live after death, and, being first purified, return at some time to God, unless some heinous wickedness of their past life and a nature hardened in sin should intervene and bar the way. And what is worth all the rest, the nobler minds were taught by Virgil, as by Plato, that not far from any one of us, there is a mysterious 2131 Divinity which by no uncertain tokens makes its presence
[Page 471]
felt even in the humble round of our fleeting life: and that, therefore, we should all of us live our lives reverently, and in holy fear, as if living in the sacred antechamber of a more sacred shrine.
In saying this I must nevertheless not be taken to suggest that our ancestors conceded a final authority, even to any of the poets and philosophers. We simply deny that men have corrupted Truth divinely entrusted to them by an over-zealous devotion to literature. Indeed, the Fathers plainly and avowedly discountenance pagan writers, so far as their false opinions are concerned: but are far from denying that they contain many natural truths upon which they themselves were nourished by long experience, and thereby silently prepared for reception of higher knowledge.
But, in still later times, how great was the honour paid to Virgil, though in a simple and unlearned age, may be seen from the widespread tradition of his magical power and skill. In fact, there was no more favourite theme among the story-tellers of that age: just as in the East, even nowadays, the name of Solomon is said to be associated with similar legends. Certainly, it is consistent and natural enough, that those great men who, with a skill like that of Orpheus, could sway and bend to their will the minds even of the learned, should in the minds of the unlearned be associated with magical arts. Moreover, all such as, either in the ages which are peculiarly styled Dark , or subsequently, made a name in literature—at first few and far between, and after the year A.D. 1000 more numerous—were certainly, one and all, influenced through and through by Virgil. They have a deep admiration for him: delight to quote splendid passages from his writings: accord to him, without question, the very first place among heathen writers. Does not the renowned Dante, who was a ‘primary’ philosopher no less than a ‘primary’ poet, specially single out Virgil as his guide through the mysterious 2132
[Page 472]
lower regions? Does he not openly declare that his Master Virgil, among all the writers of antiquity known in his own times, best prepared the way for the seekers after truth? It cannot be supposed that it was merely the poetic power and beauty which influenced so serious a poet as Dante, in choosing Virgil's guidance on such an enterprise. The truth is, I feel sure, that Virgil's Platonic visions, and vague auguries concerning the Infernal Regions and the state of the departed, had sunk deep into the heart of that great and noble poet: nor could he in any wise restrain himself from the conclusion that Virgil was divinely sent into the world to lead all refined minds to true and sound piety.
Again, think of those later poets who, either in Italy or in our own country, have won for themselves the highest renown, after having been, by early training, thoroughly steeped in Latin literature, such as Spenser in England and Tasso in Italy: do not most of them show on almost every page that they had taken Virgil as their master? and have not these poets served as a channel through which a certain Virgilian tone and an almost religious reverence for Nature and her charms have flowed down, in large measure, to poets of our own day? So that as the great poet reclaimed his Roman countrymen from their former savage and warlike fierceness, in like manner he emancipated our writers from pedantic affectation, combining genius with sound judgement, and preventing them being led astray by a superficial appearance of excellence.
‘But,’ it may be objected, ‘when compared with the ancients, most of these later poets prove far inferior.’ That is quite true, and it is partly due to the mere fact that they are imitating, for imitation is wont to take the fire out of gifts which would otherwise be effective enough: partly also it is the result of the wide diffusion of liberal education; for in the present day there is scarcely any
[Page 473]
one, in any class, who has not the free right of entry into the enjoyment of culture. The consequence is, that we 2133 have large numbers who indulge themselves in the empty affectation of delight in the things of the country—indeed, profess whole-hearted sympathy with the poet who celebrates pastoral life, and pretend to be deeply affected when he touches upon the wonders of the world or the charms of nature and the country: though, in deed and truth, their real interests are in far other concerns. And we observe much the same state of things with regard to religion. Once let some new view obtain a little popularity, forthwith the herd of imitators throng forth, one and all repeating the popular phrases and catchwords ad nauseam , without any real belief and merely to be in the fashion. Now, as in religious matters such noisy applause is repellent to all pious and serious people, so we can understand with regard to Poetry how the very best kind runs a real danger, when it has become popular with the crowd and the ordinary run of mankind: and how great our indebtedness is to the man who, more than any one other poet, has, by the example and tone of his poetry, moderated this pernicious effect.
Not, however, to rest the case upon Virgil alone, let us trace the whole question up to its fundamental principles: what more conceivable than that all poetry may have been providentially bestowed on man as the first elements, the prelude, so to speak, of genuine piety? since, for one thing, ancient records as a rule bear out the conclusion that there has seldom been a revival of religion unless a high and noble order of poets has first led the way: and, for another, both in effect and in character, real Religion is in striking accord with true poetry.
First, then (and I ask it, as being concerned with holiest things, with deepest reverence and awe), does it not seem that the history of Jewish literature was providentially
[Page 474]
2134 guided and that a long series of prophets and poets were sent to mould men's minds to be ready to receive the fuller revelation of wisdom and goodness that was to come? Certainly any one would be surprised to find how large a part Poetry plays in the Holy Scriptures. For, if I am not mistaken, nearly half the sacred volume was written in metre. Even where measure is absent we are conscious of a certain poetic tone: whether in the stories of the fortunes and deeds of the men of earliest time, especially of country-folk, living their simple lives; or in the mysteries of sacrifices, festivals, holy days, and the other details of the Mosaic law. And both these parts of the Bible have ever had a special attraction for those who are known to be most devoted to the Muses. Hence it is sufficiently clear that a kind of relationship exists between those subjects which God has ordained to prepare the way for his Gospel and the dispositions and tone of mind of those whom we honour pre-eminently as poets, or at least as disciples of the poets. And this is quite natural, for in each case there is the same characteristic: the mind is carried in its desires beyond the things of this world: its hope lays hold upon something far better, and it puts aside the thought of visible and material blessings. For the Jews always felt that their religion bound them to look forward to a better dispensation: and in the whole realm of Poetry, though poets may not be able to point to anything higher, yet there is always a certain implicit suggestion of aims and aspirations unfulfilled, as if throughout life they felt that ‘works all slack and aimless lie’, 2135 yes, works more divine than they can grasp and comprehend. Therefore I cannot help believing that it was in more than one way that the Hebrew seers and poets prepared their nation to receive the later revelation of Truth. Over and above the direct teaching of their words, they indoctrinated
[Page 475]
the whole race with an undefined expectation, stimulating it to speculate about the future even by that characteristic tone of Poetry, which they ever maintain in their prophecies.
But if the study of their prophets silently moulded the 2136 minds of the Jews for a reception of truth, we may well believe that the other race, whose members first joined the ranks of Christians, by no means lacked its own special schooling; that their minds, too, were not left untrained and unprepared to welcome the pungent flavour of the heavenly doctrine. Therefore we fully endorse the reasoning of those who hold that Greek and Latin literature fulfilled nearly the same office, as far as regards those races, as did the visions of the Prophets for the Jews. It will be remembered that we were led towards such a view when specially considering the work of Virgil. But that the principle has a wider application, embracing the whole range of ancient literature, we may learn from the teaching of most of the great students and teachers of the early Church. They are wont to compare the ancient literature to the treasures and splendid ornaments of the Egyptians, which having, by divine decree, fallen as spoil into the hands of the Hebrews, supplied that indigent people with the means of worthily adorning the temple of God. Indeed, one writer, a distinguished representative both of philosophy and of theology, does not hesitate to compare, in express terms, Philosophy with the Mosaic Law, as if, in his view, each had the same office assigned to it by a benevolent providence. ‘For,’ says he, ‘just as, in their own due time, have come to light the truths we preach to-day, so in their due time God's gifts were given to each nation: to the Barbarians, as the Greeks call them, the Law and the Prophets, to the Greeks, philosophy, whereby their ears were little by little prepared to receive the Gospel.’ 2137 And a little further on he writes: ‘The Law was given
[Page 476]
to the Jews, philosophy to the Greeks until the Advent of Christ: and thereafter one general invitation was offered to all.’ 2138 But why spend time on proving this point? the same father is wont, in discussing Philosophy, to adopt without scruple all those words and phrases which by 2139 common assent are specially associated with religion. For he says that Philosophy stood to the ancient Greeks in stead of a Testament , 2140 that by Philosophy those who died without knowledge of Christ are in some sort justified : 2141 and he even styles Prophets 2142 all who sought to raise men's thoughts to higher things, such as Socrates, Plato, Pythagoras: all of whom, he declares, were divinely sent for the sake of the Greeks, that they might prophesy to them in their own tongue. Moreover, he supports his view by the very weighty authority of him who spoke of Epimenides as ‘a prophet of the Cretians’. 2143
‘But,’ it is urged, ‘there have been distinguished Christian writers who have anathematized secular literature, and banished Poetry as being “wine of devils” from the pure confines of the Church and who even ascribe the works of Homer and Pindar to evil spirits.’ 2144 I grant this is so; but you will also find that most of these very men have quoted many passages from heathen writers when it suited their own purpose: that they have sometimes recommended the study of them to the clergy: and that, while ascribing such works to Demons, they yet allow that the whole range of fictions of this kind has been providentially
[Page 477]
framed to foreshadow and resemble the facts of sacred truth. In short, the Fathers of the Church proscribe, it seems to me, this class of literature, much in the same spirit which long ago led the most devoted of Homer's admirers to banish all poetry from his Republic. They, like Plato, felt the immense influence which the divine art of Poetry must wield in any society: and so they strove with might and main to prevent this influence from doing harm, and to make sure that the Gentiles might not be misled, as they saw the Jews had been, and their minds distracted from truth by care for what was only a type and a shadow of it. There is, then, nothing in their teaching inconsistent with the belief that all that array of poets and poetry, upon which Greeks and Romans prided themselves, 2145 pointed forward in God's Providence to a coming order of things, even though the writers themselves were unconscious of it.
And, if they truly possess this quality, we may heartily approve the policy of our forefathers in assigning so great a share and influence in the education of youth to the ancient Greek and Latin poets. In this they do no more than follow in the footsteps of the Providence which, so many ages ago, saw fit to train the opening minds of God's own people in studies of the same kind: and, just as it gave to the Jews the oracles of the prophets, so to the rest of the world, though under a different dispensation, accorded Homer, Plato, and Virgil as first elements of wisdom and truth. Finally, let us be well assured of this: it vitally concerns the interests of sacred truth to maintain the usage which has survived in our Universities up to the present time, of requiring from our students a close and constant study of the writings of the classic poets, philosophers, and historians: who may all be considered poets, so far at least as they are wont to elevate the mind by the clear light either of memory or lofty speculation.
[Page 478]
One word more: some may feel surprised that we ascribe a serious and almost religious function to a literature, in which there is so much that is degrading, so much that is trivial; but I would ask such to remember that (if I may be pardoned for saying so) there are many things found in the Scriptures strikingly out of accord with what we weak men should have antecedently expected. Let us rest in the assurance that on such a question human anticipations are almost worthless, all being ordered by the will of Him who alone knows and directs the secret cause of all things.
But, to return to my argument: since it is clear, or at least a probable hypothesis, that in the highest of all interests, on which alone depends the final happiness of 2146 the race of man, poetry was providentially destined to prepare the way for Revealed Truth itself, and to guide and shape men's minds for reception of still nobler teaching, it is consistent to see the same principle at work in what I may call less important departments of its influence. I cling to the belief that, in each several age of the world, in each several region of the earth, true and genuine Poetry has, by its silent influence, fostered sincere and grave piety. We shall not readily find an instance of any state, provided indeed it enjoy the advantage of stable law and morality, which has changed its existing religious belief for a more serious and holier creed, unless the tone of its favourite poets has first undergone a change. And assuredly, wherever religion has been weakened, there men fall back into the condition in which our ancestors were before embracing Christianity. There is no reason, then, why they should not be raised gradually to a better life by the same means and method, namely, by a new order of Poetry.
For instance (to keep to our own country), remember that renowned circle of writers who flourished among ourselves in the time of Elizabeth. Was not the tone and temper
[Page 479]
of poets and of poetry such as, even though the writers were unconscious of it, exactly accorded with the healthier religious spirit which was destined to prevail in the reign of Charles? To particularize—Shakespeare, the greatest of them all, the delight of all the world, especially of young England, did he effect nothing, who sometimes by jest, sometimes by bitter satire, lashed chiefly those very mischiefs which, in the age immediately following, were to work such fatal harm in our State? who always seems to be in his best and happiest mood when some hypocrite in religion or some disloyal subject is being put to shame. And did not the youth who grew up in studious love of Spenser enter with well-prepared minds into the contest with those turbulent foes who were wont to assail royal ladies and priests of religion with insult and abuse?
I say nothing of another fact, which nevertheless must 2147 have had great influence; on the one side we see men who estimate all things after a certain inborn sense of right and fitting; and, on the other, those who, like all the Epicurean school, look for some visible and material gain from every action. Now the noble poems of Shakespeare and Spenser had not merely taught men to shun the multitude, but, much more important, lifted their minds to piety and religion: for each of them always tests what can be seen by reference to a standard of heavenly truth, whether he is treating of the deeds and affairs of men or the splendid charm of earth and sky: and this has always been the chief aim of the Catholic Church, though after her own mystical and lofty fashion. And so, in this respect also I should hold that splendid harvest of great poems to have led the way to a sounder religious belief.
Thus much as to the fact itself: let us now briefly consider the causes of it. For it is hard to believe that these two—Poetry and Theology—would have proved such true allies unless there was a hidden tie of kinship between
[Page 480]
them; nor could we possibly place a nobler crown upon our whole work, than by briefly developing the essential principle and quality which they have in common.
And here, as so often before, we must go back to the very beginning and foundation of all Poetry. Our conclusion was, that this divine art essentially consisted in a power of healing and restoring overburdened and passionate minds. It follows that the more deeply any feeling penetrates human affections, and the more permanently it influences them, the closer are its relationships and associations with Poetry. Now, partly the very nature of religion in itself, partly the actual confession of all who can be supposed to have the faintest sense of true piety, 2148 impress on us the fact that nothing takes such entire possession of the human heart, and, in a way, concentrates its feeling, as the thought of God and an eternity to come: nowhere is our feeble mortal nature more conscious of its helplessness; nothing so powerfully impels it, sadly and anxiously, to look round on all sides for remedy and relief. As a result of this, Religion freely and gladly avails itself of every comfort and assistance which Poetry may afford: such as the regularity, the modulations, the changes of rhythm; the use of language sometimes restrained, sometimes eager and passionate; and all those other methods which all men feel after, but only a few can express. Moreover, a true and holy religion will turn such aids to the fullest account, because it, most of all, feels itself overwhelmed in the presence of the boundless vastness of the Universe: and this is so both when in early days, before Truth itself was fully revealed, simple untrained races were being taught by some dim outlines and types, and when more advanced believers are being trained to find utterance and language worthy to express their gratitude for God's great mercies to them.
Moreover, from this common weakness there springs
[Page 481]
a common use of this external world and of all objects which appeal to the senses. And in this regard it is marvellous how Piety and Poetry are able to help each other. For, while Religion seeks out, as I said, on all sides, not merely language but also anything which may perform the office of language and help to express the emotions of the soul; what aid can be imagined more grateful and more timely than the presence of Poetry, which leads men to the secret sources of Nature, and supplies a rich wealth of similes whereby a pious mind may supply and remedy, in some sort, its powerlessness of speech; and may express many things more touchingly, many things more seriously and weightily, all things more truly, than had been possible without this aid? Conversely, should we ask how, preeminently, 2149 ‘came honour and renown to prophetic bards and their poems’, 2150 it is Religion that has most to be thanked for this. For, once let that magic wand, as the phrase goes, touch any region of Nature, forthwith all that before seemed secular and profane is illumined with a new and celestial light: men come to realize that the various images and similes of things, and all other poetic charms, are not merely the play of a keen and clever mind, nor to be put down as empty fancies: but rather they guide us by gentle hints and no uncertain signs, to the very utterances of Nature, or we may more truly say, of the Author of Nature. And thus it has come to pass, that great and pre-eminent poets have almost been ranked as the representatives of religion, and their sphere has been treated with religious reverence. In short, Poetry lends Religion her wealth of symbols and similes: Religion restores these again to Poetry, clothed with so splendid a radiance that they appear to be no longer merely symbols, but to partake (I might almost say) of the nature of sacraments.
There is, too, another strong tie of kinship which binds
[Page 482]
these two together, in that each is controlled by a tone of modest and religious reserve. For, on the one hand, all who carefully try to imitate Nature are forced to observe a certain restraint and reserve: at least thus far, that, like her, they approach each stage of beauty by a quiet and well-ordered movement, not suddenly or, to use a mathematical phrase, per saltum (as do those who have no scruple in appearing boldly in public); and, on the other hand, the whole principle of piety, such at least as is wisely governed, is ordered by the rule divinely laid down in Holy Scripture, that things of highest worth should, for the most part, not be offered to listless and unprepared minds; but only be brought into the light when the eyes of those who gaze on them have been disciplined and 2151 purified. Thus the controlling Power which tempers and orders all things has compelled each, by a kind of decree, not to permit any one to have full fruition of the beauteous form and features of Truth, except his devotion be such as leads him to take zealous pains to search her out. Certainly no one who has been trained in this principle from his earliest years and into whose mind it has sunk deeply will ever allow himself to expose the sacred mysteries either of Nature of Religion to public view without regard to the temper and training of his hearers. He would rather be charged with obscureness than pour forth all truths, secret and open alike, without restraint; he would rather be criticized as wanting in ability than wanting in reserve.
Lastly, both in Poetry and in Religion, an indefinably tender and keen feeling for what is past or out of sight or yet to come, will ever assert and claim a high place of honour for itself. For those who, from their very heart, either burst into poetry, or seek the Deity in prayer, must needs ever cherish with their whole spirit the vision of something more beautiful, greater and more lovable, than all that mortal eye can see. Thus the very practice and
[Page 483]
cultivation of Poetry will be found to possess, in some sort, the power of guiding and composing the mind to worship and prayer: provided indeed the poems contain nothing hurtful either to religion or morality.
I think we have now shown ample reason for believing that, since the relationships between Poetry and Religion are so close and so varied, it was by no mere accident, but by divine providence, that the former has often paved and prepared the way for the latter. And it follows that whatever is wont to corrupt and undermine Religion will to a great degree correspond with that which injures and degrades poets and poetry. For men may either praise in their poems things unworthy: and this may be compared with the error of those who make gods of earthly and perishable things: or they may praise worthy things not whole-heartedly, but rather out of imitation and fashion: and this is, as you know, the most discreditable of all 2152 faults in matters of piety or religion. Such men are called hypocrites, the term being borrowed from the stage: and hence we may infer that as these have only the empty show of virtue, so the others have only an empty form of Poetry, and that each is very far indeed from the reality.
Now as the faults in the two are so much alike, we may well consider whether the remedy will not be much the same in each case. In each the most important precept is this: be on your guard against the belief that anything is effected by mere admiration, without effort and action on your own part. No poet will ever be great who does not constantly spend time and toil in studying the beauty of earth and sky so as to make every detail of the whole bear upon the object of his own love and enthusiasm: nor will any one make the slightest progress in holiness and piety who is content with the empty praises of good books or good men and makes no attempt to imitate them in his own life. In the second place, when a man has
[Page 484]
once chosen the field of work for which his true bent best fits-him, let him keep bravely and persistently to it: let him not, by restlessly flitting from subject to subject, waste his powers and fail of all result: and, most important of all, let him not stain good with evil, pure with impure. These are the mottoes for those who aim either at being wise men in life or at winning renown in literature as poets. To both alike will apply the saying, ‘Put your whole heart into what you are doing’: let it be something simple and clearly defined, something for which eye and mind will be on the watch at all times.
But on so well known a theme I am afraid that I may easily weary you by saying too much, and, indeed, I am under some apprehension that the same criticism may be made upon the greater part of these lectures. And so, at length to place some sort of crown upon the whole work, and at the same time not to end without a word of happy augury and a kindly hope—that would indeed be very unfitting in one whom, unworthy as he is, you have so highly honoured and with whose imperfect performance you have borne so indulgently—this one thing I desire to impress upon, and commend to all my younger hearers.
2153 Only then will Poetry be fitly followed and studied, when those who love it remember that it is a gift to mankind, given that, like a high-born handmaid, it may wait upon and minister to true Religion; and therefore it is to be honoured, not with lip-service, but really and truly, with all modesty, constancy, and purity. On this wholly depends the hope we venture to cherish to-day, that, in years to come, that deeper loftier note of Poetry which has for so many years been sounded in our ears may have good fruit and issue to the happy increase of those studies which are peculiarly termed Divine. May God grant, if this may perchance be His own will, that it be not hindered, even in the smallest degree, by fault or failure on the part of any one of us!
NOTE The ‘Persae’ of Aeschylus 2154 After I had sent to press the lecture (xvii) in which I discussed the theory that Aeschylus intentionally held up the fortunes of the Persians to ridicule in the Persae , a learned friend of mine, whose name would be received with great respect if I were allowed to mention it, wrote to me that he felt considerable doubt as to my conclusion. As I was much impressed by his arguments, I asked him if he would allow his letter on the subject to be printed, and he has kindly given permission. Accordingly I give here his own words, most worthy as they are to be carefully weighed by every reader who wishes to form a just estimate of the spirit and tone, not only of Aeschylus and his Athenian countrymen, but of all writers and of all nations who have at any time won so striking a success. As for the point at issue between us, I do not attempt to decide it, as I should not wish to seem at all unkindly in my judgement either to that illustrious poet or to the famous Persian people—a people which seems to me to have been dearer to the Most High than any other save his own chosen Jewish race.
‘I do not feel that I have any right to venture to oppose with any great confidence a view of yours about the Persae of Aeschylus. Yet I cannot help suspecting that you have been somewhat too severe in your criticism of those scholars who hold that there is a comic vein running through the whole of the play. No sane man, I suppose, will believe for a moment that a work so correct, so splendid, and so highly finished, was treated as an opportunity for empty jeers and insults, and similar banalities. But why may not Aeschylus, exulting with manly pride and congratulating his countrymen just after 2155 a triumphant struggle, have written this play as a kind of solemn paean ( Persae , 393)? If that were his design, it would, in my judgement, be quite in harmony with it that the poet should have intended to represent dramatically and to ridicule all excitable moods and vainglorious bragging of the barbarians, their countless hordes of soldiers, their luxurious dissipation and wealth, while, nevertheless, holding it fitting and right to treat Atossa and Darius, and any other Asiatic who
[Page 486]
really showed courage, with all honour as generous victors are wont to do. I suspect that the “triumphs” of the Roman generals were ordered in much the same spirit: they made their captive kings and subject peoples pass under the yoke, yet they took care not to tarnish the glory of their own exploits by too great humiliation of their foes.
‘You have referred to certain passages in the Persae , which the critics in question have quoted, and, as you urge, without sufficient reason, in support of their view: with regard to these, I imagine that those who agree with me would be able to find arguments that they could urge in reply. But I do not pause to consider them, since there are, besides, many details scattered throughout the whole play, on which I prefer to base my reasoning. Why is it, do you think, that even in the most high-flown language of the Persian elders Aeschylus has introduced so frequently allusions which annoy us by the suggestions of effeminacy, and which even at times imply scorn and contempt? Such as these:
And there follow crowds of Lydians,
Very delicate and stately. 2156
Babylon too, gold abounding,
Sends a mingled cloud, swept onward. 2157
What man is of power, what army of strength or size
To stem that torrent, or bar the invincible wave? 2158
Who does not here detect Athenian sentiment and feeling speaking through Persian tongues? This is not the language of venerable elders following their absent armies, with favourable auguries and hopes for their success, but, obviously, the poet is holding up to ridicule that vast rabble of barbarians in conflict against whom one single state of brave men had maintained the rights and liberty of Greece. When, however, we come to the Messenger's account of the battle and its issue, no one is so untrained as not to feel at once that everything— language, sentiment, tone, feeling—is thoroughly Athenian. The account is almost like the “Parabasis” in a comedy:
And when day, bright to look on with white steeds,
O'erspread the earth, then rose from the Hellenes
Loud chant of cry of battle, and forthwith
Echo gave answer from each island rock;
And terror then on all the Persians fell,
Of fond hopes disappointed. Not in flight
The Hellenes then their solemn paeans sang:
But with brave spirit hasting on to battle. &c. 2159
[Page 487]
‘Then, too, those numerous passages in this tragedy in which 2160 the poet, contrary to his wont, plays upon the endings of words and sounds, seem to me very pertinent to a right solution of this question. Such as these, for instance:
'Twas Xerxes led them forth, woe! woe!
'Twas Xerxes lost them all, woe! woe!
'Twas Xerxes who with evil counsels sped
   Their course in sea-borne barques. 2161
Every one will here be reminded of the satirical passage in Aristophanes, where the comic dramatist composes a solemn dirge over a poultry-cock in the form of a burlesque on the dirges in Euripides:
   Now tears alone are left me,
   My neighbour hath bereft me,
Of all—of all—of all—all but a tear!
Since he, my faithful trusty chanticleer,
   Is flown—is flown!—is gone—is gone. 2162
There are, besides, many other touches in respect of choice and setting of phrase, well calculated to move the derisive contempt of free men, or, at any rate, characteristic of a barbaric and servile character. You have quoted in your favour, and rightly quoted, the passage in which the ghost of Darius is evoked by the Chorus. But it is questionable whether even here, the guardians of the Persian kingdom, Xerxes' vicegerents, are not, designedly, made so to speak that their very language makes them ridiculous to the Athenians:
Doth he, the blest one, hear,
The king, like Gods in power,
Hear me, as I send forth
My cries in barbarous speech? 2163
Beautiful and full of all respect are the lines which immediately follow, yet what must have been the feelings moving the citizens of the freest state in Greece, when the venerable Chorus speaks in this style of the truly “Persian pomp” of the dead king?
Monarch, O ancient monarch, come, oh, come,
Come to the summit of sepulchral mound,
   Lifting thy foot encased
   In slipper saffron-dyed,
   And giving to our view
   Thy royal tiara's crest. 2164
Does not a comparison of the effeminate manners of those under
[Page 488]
absolute rule with the manly character fostered by independence at once force itself on our mind?
‘Finally, there remains one argument which I cannot allow myself to pass over. In questions of this kind scarcely anything is more important than a nice appreciation of the metre and verse. Well, it is very noticeable that all through the Persae , the Chorus generally employs Anapaests: which agree, beyond all others, with the tone and temper of triumphal poetry: for the very lines seem to share the sense of triumph and to let the full heart express itself in joyous forms. On the other 2165 hand, when Atossa, Darius, and Xerxes are on the stage, the dialogue is for the most part in trochaic verse. Now the main and almost peculiar force of trochees is seen in jest and comedy, or in short and quick dialogue about trivial things. One may well be struck, therefore, with the fact that, in the Persae , the chief characters, while treating of most important and grievous events, use trochaic measure: unless, indeed, we conclude (as I do for my part) that the poet with his consummate art and skill, meant to temper all tragic and sorrowful emotion on the part of the audience by using a measure little according with grief; he has aimed at keeping one and the same note throughout the whole poem, unbroken by interruption or change or through too strong an appeal to pity.’
NOTES
1 [1] The Oxford Movement, p. 273.
2 [2] Preface to J. K.'s Miscellaneous Poems, p. xxi.
3 1
4 2
5 3
6 4
7 5
8 [1] Thucyd. ii. 35, tr. Jowett.
9 6
10 7
11 8
12 9
13 10
14 [1] Epist. ad Div. v. 21.
15 [2] Aen. ix. 186.
16 11
17 [1] Aen. iv. 433 (Conington).
18 12
19 13
20 14
21 15
22 16
23 [1] Herod. viii. 137.
24 [1] Odes. iii. 4. 20.
25 17
26 [2] Juvenal, vii. 59–62 (Gifford).
27 [1] Hor. Ep. i. 6. 3 (Conington).
28 [2] Cf. Hor. Ep. i. 10. 22.
29 18
30 [3] iii. 57.
31 19
32 [1] Georg. ii. 485.
33 [2] Georg. ii. 280.
34 20
35 [1] I look to the West when I gae to rest,    That happy my dreams and my slumbers may be: For far in the West, is he I lo'e best,    The lad that is dear to my baby and me. Burns's Letters, No. 116, March 12, 1791.
36 21
37 22
38 [1] Aen. x. 493.
39 23
40 24
41 25
42 26
43 27
44 [1] Virg. Aen. v. 647 (Conington).
45 28
46 [1] Reynolds,Works, ii. 163.
47 [2] Ibid. ii. 158.
48 [3] Ibid. ii. 234.
49 29
50 [4] Ibid. i. 347.
51 30
52 31
53 32
54 33
55 34
56 [1] Aen. vi. 268.
57 35
58 36
59 37
60 38
61 [1] Cicero, Ad Fam. vii. 251.
62 [2] Pindar, Ol. ii. 154 (Moore).
63 [1] Burke, On the French Revolution, Works, vol. v, p. 143, Lond. 1803.
64 39
65 [2] Taylor, Funeral Sermon on Lady Carbery, Works, vol. vi, p. 476.
66 40
67 [1] De Orat. iii. 6; Plato, Epinom., sub fin.
68 41
69 42
70 [1] Pindar, Ol. ii. 87 (Tremenheere).
71 [2] De Orat. i. 3.
72 43
73 [1] Hor. A. P. 296.
74 [2] Phaedrus, 49.
75 [3] Midsummer Night's Dream
76 44
77 [1] Poet. c. 30 (Twining).
78 45
79 46
80 47
81 [1] Gen. iv. 23. See Lowth, Sacred Poetry of the Hebrews, Lect. IV, p. 50, ed. 1763.
82 48
83 [1] Gen. iv. 21.
84 [1] Gen. iii. 14, &c., A. V.
85 49
86 [2] Gen. ix. 25, &c.
87 [1] Gen. xxvii, xlix; Deut. xxxiii.
88 50
89 [2] Ps. xxxix. 1–3, A.V.
90 [3] Jer. xx. 9, A. V.
91 51
92 [1] See Ol. Wormius, Antiq. Dan., pp. 225–6.
93 [1] Charlevoix, La France Nouvelle, iii. 243.
94 [2] Pindar, Ol. ii. 72.
95 [3] Ellis, Polynesian Researches, i. 531.
96 52
97 [1] Scheffer, Lapponia, 284. Englished in the Spectator, No. 366 (which is the version given in this translation).
98 [2] Keble quotes and translates ‘morn’.
99 [3] Thomas Moore.
100 53
101 54
102 [1] Georg. ii. 105 (Dryden).
103 [1] Juvenal, vii. 56.
104 55
105 56
106 57
107 58
108 [1] Hor. Ep. i. 17–23.
109 59
110 [1] Hor. Od. iii. 25–7 (Francis).
111 60
112 61
113 [1] Aen. iv. 76 (Dryden).
114 62
115 [1] Hor. Od. iii. 2. 26 (Conington).
116 63
117 64
118 [1] 119 Ahr.
119 65
120 [1] Georg. iii. 331. ‘In midday heat let them hunt out a shady vale where, belike, Jove's mighty oak, strong in time-honoured power, spreads its enormous boughs, or where the grove, black with countless ilexes reposes (accubet) in hallowed shadow’ (Conington).
121 [1] Odes, i. 17.
122 [2] Francis.
123 66
124 [3] Aen. iv. 173–97.
125 [4] Ibid. iii. 567–87.
126 [5] Ibid. vii. 404–74.
127 [1] Phars. ix. 743 (Rowe).
128 67
129 [1] Lam. ii. 11, 12.
130 [2] Jer. xiv. 3.
131 68
132 [1] Odes, iii. 4 (Francis).
133 [2] Pindar, Ol. vi. 73–95 (43–57) (Moore).
134 69
135 70
136 [1] Aen. x. 871, xii. 668 (Dryden).
137 [2] I Kings xxii. 15.
138 [3] Ezek. xx. 39.
139 71
140 [1] Isa. v. 7.
141 [2] e.g. Judges vi. 32; Ruth i. 20; Hos. x. 5, Beth-aven (‘house of vanity’) for Bethel (‘house of God’).
142 [3] Nic. Eth. vii. 7. 8.
143 [4] Georg. iv. 1.
144 72
145 73
146 74
147 75
148 [1] Quint. Inst. vi. 2. 2.
149 76
150 [1] George Buchanan's Paraphrase, Psalm lii, ‘Why boastest thou thyself, thou tyrant: that thou canst do mischief: whereas the goodness of God: endureth yet daily? Thy tongue imagineth wickedness: and with lies thou cuttest like a sharp razor. Thou hast loved unrighteousness more than goodness: and to talk of lies more than righteousness. Thou hast loved to speak all words that may do hurt: O thou false tongue. Therefore shall God destroy thee for ever: he shall take thee, and pluck thee out of thy dwelling, and root thee out of the land of the living.’—Prayer Book
151 77
152 78
153 79
154 80
155 [1] Soph. Electr. 687 (Plumptre).
156 [1] Arist. Poet. viii, xliv (Twining).
157 81
158 82
159 [1] i. 3.
160 [2] Hesiod, Works and Days, 122 (Elton).
161 83
162 [1] Il. v. 451 (Chapman).
163 84
164 [1] Arist. Poet. xlvii (Twining).
165 85
166 86
167 87
168 88
169 [1] A. P. 137.
170 [2] Odes, ii. 4. 10 (Francis).
171 [3] Il. xxii. 507 (Chapman).
172 [4] Il. xxii. 56 (Chapman).
173 89
174 [1] Il. ix. 353 (Chapman).
175 [1] Thucydides, i. 3 (Hobbes).
176 90
177 91
178 [1] Thucydides, vii. 71.
179 92
180 [1] Il. iv. 427 (Pope).
181 [1] Il. vi. 1 (Chapman).
182 [2] Il. vi. 73 (Chapman).
183 [3] Il. viii. 130 (Chapman).
184 93
185 [4] Il. vi. 327 (Chapman).
186 [1] Il. xxii. 111 (Chapman).
187 94
188 [2] A. P. 120 (Francis).
189 [1] Il. ix. 410 (Pope).
190 [2] Il. xviii. 95 (Pope).
191 95
192 [1] Il. i. 349 (Chapman).
193 [2] Il. i. 414 (Chapman).
194 96
195 [1] Il. xviii. 86 (Chapman).
196 [1] Il. xviii. 114 (Chapman).
197 [2] Il. xxi. 106 (Pope).
198 [3] Il. xxii. 358 (Pope).
199 97
200 [4] Il. xvii. 195.
201 [1] Il. xviii. 438 (Pope).
202 [2] Il. xviii. 464 (Pope).
203 98
204 [1] Il. xix. 384 (Pope).
205 [1] Il. xix. 404 (Pope).
206 99
207 [2] Virg. Aen. i. 462 (Conington).
208 [1] Il. vi. 276.
209 [2] Il. xix. 321 (Pope).
210 100
211 [1] Il. xvii. 670 (Pope).
212 101
213 [1] Il. ix. 316 (Pope).
214 [2] Il. xvi. 126 (Pope).
215 [3] Il. xxi. 100 (Chapman).
216 102
217 [4] Il. xxiv. 515 (Pope).
218 [1] Il. xxiv. 615 (Pope).
219 [2] Il. xxiv. 628 (Pope).
220 [3] Il. xxiii. 647 (Pope).
221 [1] Il. i. 156 (Pope).
222 103
223 [2] Il. ix. 186 (Pope).
224 [3] Il. i. 358 (Pope).
225 [1] Il. xxiii. 198.
226 104
227 [2] Il. xxiii. 140 (Pope).
228 105
229 106
230 107
231 [1] Aen. iv. 3 (Dryden).
232 [2] Il. ii. 768 (Chapman).
233 108
234 [1] Il. ii. 673 (Pope).
235 [2] Il. vii. 226 (Chapman).
236 [1] Il. xi. 602 (Chapman).
237 109
238 [2] Horace, A. P. 140 (Conington).
239 [1] Il. xvi. 269 (Chapman).
240 110
241 [2] Il. v. 1 (Chapman).
242 [1] Il. xviii. 203 (Chapman).
243 111
244 112
245 113
246 [1] Aen. viii. 731.
247 [2] Seven against Thebes, 387, &c.
248 114
249 [1] Il. xx. 24 (Pope).
250 115
251 [1] Il. xxi. 233 (Chapman).
252 116
253 117
254 [1] Il. xxiii. 59 (Chapman).
255 118
256 119
257 [1] Il. xxiii. 239 (Chapman).
258 [1] Il. xxiv. 12 (Chapman).
259 120
260 [2] Il. xxiv. 592 (Chapman).
261 121
262 [1] Il. xv. 494 (Chapman).
263 [1] Il. vi. 526 (Chapman).
264 [2] Il. ix. 692 (Chapman).
265 122
266 [1] Il. vi. 234 (Chapman).
267 [1] Il. ix. 621 (Chapman).
268 123
269 [2] Il. xvii. 645 (Chapman).
270 124
271 [1] Aen. vi. 640 (Dryden).
272 125
273 126
274 127
275 [1] Il. ii. 87 (Chapman).
276 128
277 129
278 [1] Il. x. 5–16 (Chapman).
279 130
280 [1] Il. x. 61 (Chapman).
281 [2] Il. x. 74 (Chapman).
282 [1] Il. x. 150 (Chapman).
283 131
284 [2] Il. x. 199 (Chapman).
285 [3] Il. ii. 453 (Pope).
286 [4] Ibid. (Lord Derby).
287 132
288 [1] Il. xii. 310 (Chapman).
289 [2] Il. xi. 62 (Chapman).
290 133
291 [1] Cf. Macaulay's Ivry: The King is come to marshal us, in all his armour drest, And he has bound a snow-white plume upon his gallant crest. ——— ‘And if my standard-bearer fall, as fall full well he may, For never saw I promise yet of such a bloody fray, Press where ye see my white plume shine, amidst the ranks of war, And be your oriflamme to-day the helmet of Navarre.’
292 [2] Il. xv. 704 (Chapman).
293 [1] Il. xv. 707 (Chapman).
294 134
295 [2] Il. xv. 716 (Chapman).
296 135
297 [1] Il. xiii. 184 (Derby).
298 [1] Il. iv. 148 (Chapman).
299 [2] Lucretius, i. 87.
300 [3] Il. vii. 93 (Derby).
301 [4] Il. vii. 210 (Chapman).
302 [1] Il. iv. 539 (Pope).
303 136
304 [2] Il. v. 663 (Derby).
305 [3] Il. vl. 794 (Chapman).
306 [1] Il. x. 489 (Chapman).
307 [2] Il. xii. 457 (Derby).
308 [3] Il. xvi. 733 (Derby).
309 137
310 [4] Il. xxi. 556 (Derby).
311 [1] Mém. de Madame de la Roche Jacquelein, chap. xiv.
312 138
313 [2] Il. i. 464 (Derby).
314 [3] Il. vii. 321 (Chapman).
315 [1] Il. xix. 315 (Derby).
316 139
317 [2] Il. ix. 211 (Derby).
318 140
319 [1] Il. xix. 12 (Pope).
320 [1] Il. xix. 357 (Pope).
321 141
322 [1] Il. viii. 41 (Chapman).
323 [2] Il. v. 733 (Chapman).
324 142
325 [1] Il. vi. 506 (Pope).
326 [1] Il. v. 260 (Chapman).
327 143
328 [2] Il. viii. 105 (Chapman).
329 [3] Il. viii. 186 (Chapman).
330 [1] Il. xix. 400 (Pope).
331 144
332 [2] Il. xvii. 426 (Chapman).
333 [1] Il. xvii. 434 (Chapman).
334 [2] Twelfth Night, Act 11, sc. iv.
335 [3] Il. xvii. 436 (Chapman).
336 145
337 [1] Il. xvii. 443 (Chapman).
338 146
339 147
340 148
341 [1] Il. v. 864 (Chapman).
342 [2] Il. ix. 4 (Chapman).
343 [3] Il. ii. 459 (Chapman).
344 149
345 [1] Il. xvii. 132 (Chapman).
346 [2] Ad. Fam. viii. 9 and elsewhere.
347 150
348 [1] Il. xxi. 571 (Chapman).
349 151
350 [1] Il. viii. 549 (Chapman).
351 [1] Il. iii. 10 (Chapman).
352 152
353 [2] Il. iv. 275 (Chapman).
354 [1] Poet. 111. iii (Twining).
355 [2] Il. xxi. 343 (Chapman).
356 [3] Il. xii. 451 (Pope).
357 [1] Il. xiii. 588 (Pope).
358 153
359 [2] Il. xiii. 701 (Chapman).
360 [1] Il. xxi. 256 (Chapman).
361 [2] Il. xx. 495 (Chapman).
362 [3] De Sacr. Poes. Hebr., Prael. vii, p. 81, ed. 1763.
363 154
364 [1] Il. x. 351 (Pope).
365 [2] 1 Sam. xiv. 14: ‘And that first slaughter, which Jonathan and his armourbearer made, was about twenty men, within as it were an half acre of land, which a yoke of oxen might plow’ (A. V.).
366 155
367 [3] Il. xxiii. 845 (Pope).
368 [1] Il. v. 770 (Pope).
369 [2] Il. xi. 84 (Pope).
370 156
371 [1] Aen. viii. 407 (Dryden).
372 [2] Il. xii. 432 (Chapman).
373 [1] Il. vi. 236 (Chapman).
374 157
375 [2] Il. xxi. 75 (Pope).
376 [1] Il. xi. 241 (Chapman).
377 [2] Il. xvi. 221 (Pope).
378 158
379 [1] Il. xii. 310 (Chapman).
380 [2] Il. ix. 576.
381 [3] Il. vi. 394; xxii. 88.
382 [4] Il. xx. 220.
383 [5] Il. iv. 433 (Chapman).
384 [6] Il. xxiv. 317 (Chapman).
385 159
386 [1] Od. iii. 29. 15 (Conington).
387 [2] Il. xxi. 450 (Chapman).
388 160
389 [1] Deut. xxiv. 15.
390 161
391 [1] Il. iv. 383 (Derby).
392 [1] Il. xxi. 449 (Derby).
393 162
394 [2] Il. xv. 170 (Derby).
395 [3] Job xxxvii. 22.
396 [4] Il. xi. 162 (Pope).
397 [5] Il. iii. 56 (Chapman).
398 [1] Il. v. 150 (Pope).
399 163
400 [2] Od. iii. 2 (Conington).
401 164
402 165
403 [1] Il. xxiii. 114 (Pope).
404 [2] Il. xxiii. 123 (Pope).
405 [3] Il. xxi. 35 (Chapman).
406 166
407 167
408 168
409 [1] Longinus, De Sublimitate, sect. ix. translated by A. O. Prickard (Oxford Translation Series, 1906).
410 169
411 170
412 171
413 172
414 [1] Georg. iii. 83 (Dryden).
415 [1] Od. xviii. 376 (Cowper).
416 [2] Od. xii. 226 (Cowper).
417 [3] Od. viii. 500.
418 173
419 [1] Od. iii. 233 (Chapman).
420 [2] Il. xix. 219 (Chapman).
421 174
422 [1] Od. ix. 296 (Cowper).
423 [2] Od. xi. 86 (Cowper).
424 175
425 [1] Od. i. 48 (Butcher and Lang).
426 [2] Il. xviii. 104.
427 [3] Od. i. 57 (Butcher and Lang).
428 176
429 [1] Od. v. 203 (Cowper).
430 177
431 [1] Od. ix. 21 (Chapman).
432 [2] Od. x. 410 (Chapman).
433 178
434 [3] Mal. iv. 2.
435 [1] Od. ix. 79 (Cowper).
436 179
437 [1] Od. x. 28 (Cowper).
438 [2] Od. xiii. 187 (Cowper).
439 [3] Od. xiii. 250 (Chapman).
440 180
441 [1] ‘Thou behold'st’ should probably be ‘there is found (or placed)’. See infra
442 [2] Od. xiii. 344 (Cowper).
443 [3] See note supra
444 [1] Od. xiii. 105 (Cowper).
445 181
446 [2] Cowper, ubi supra
447 [1] Od. ix. 83 (Cowper).
448 182
449 [2] Od. ix. 182 (Cowper).
450 [1] Od. ix. 219, 222 (Cowper).
451 [2] Od. ix. 244 (Cowper).
452 [3] Od. ix. 307 (Cowper).
453 [4] Od. ix. 315 (Cowper).
454 [5] Od. ix. 336 (Cowper).
455 183
456 [1] Od. ix. 447 (Cowper).
457 [1] Aen. x. 861.
458 184
459 [2] Od. x. 3 (Cowper).
460 [1] Od. x. 297 (Cowper).
461 185
462 [2] Od. x. 457 (Cowper).
463 [3] Il. iv. 361 (Chapman).
464 [4] Od. x. 148 (Cowper).
465 [1] Od. x. 220 (Cowper).
466 [2] Od. x. 226 (Cowper).
467 186
468 [3] Od. v. 55 (Cowper).
469 [4] Od. x. 208.
470 [5] Od. x. 220.
471 [6] Od. x. 230.
472 [1] Od. v. 65 (Cowper).
473 [2] Od. v. 68 (Cowper).
474 187
475 [3] Robinson Crusoe
476 [1] Od. v. 233 (Cowper).
477 188
478 189
479 190
480 [1] Od. vi. 93 (Cowper).
481 [2] Aen. iv. 137.
482 191
483 [1] Il. xxii. 153 (Chapman).
484 192
485 [1] Hymn in Apoll., 165: Thucyd. iii. 104 (Chapman).
486 [1] Od. vi. 291 (Cowper).
487 193
488 [1] Od. vii. 108 (Cowper).
489 [2] Od. viii. 246 (Chapman).
490 194
491 [3] Od. viii. 111 (Cowper).
492 [1] Od. viii. 557 (Cowper).
493 [2] Hor. Ep. i. 2. 29.
494 [3] Od. vi. 273 (Chapman).
495 195
496 [1] Od. viii. 457 (Cowper).
497 [2] Od. vii. 311 (Cowper).
498 196
499 [3] Od. viii. 93 (Cowper).
500 [1] Od. viii. 577 (Cowper).
501 197
502 [1] Od. iv. 561 (Cowper).
503 [2] Od. iv. 556 (Cowper).
504 198
505 [1] Od. vi. 41 (Cowper).
506 [2] Lucr. iii. 18 (Creech). ‘The divinity of the gods appears, and their tranquil seats, which no winds shake nor clouds sprinkle with mist, nor the white falling snow, congealed with sharp frost, violates; but the pure air is cloudless ever, and laughs with diffused light. Nature, too, provides the gods with all things: nor does anything ever take their peace of heart away from them.’—Lucretius on Life and Death, London, 1900, p. 57, by kind permission of Mr. W. H. Mallock.
507 199
508 [1] Od. xi. 488 (Cowper). Plato, Republic, iii. ad init
509 [2] Arist. Rhet. ii. 15.
510 [3] Od. xxiv. 14, x. 521, 536.
511 [1] Aen. vi. 652 (Dryden).
512 200
513 [2] Od. xi. 605 (Cowper).
514 [3] Od. xi. 601 (Cowper).
515 201
516 [1] Mistaking the oar for a corn-van. A sure indication of his ignorance of maritime concerns.
517 [2] Od. xi. 119 (Cowper).
518 202
519 [1] Od. xi. 134 (Butcher and Lang).
520 203
521 [1] Arist. Poet. 30 (Twining).
522 204
523 [1] i.13.
524 205
525 [1] Mitford, Hist. Greece, c. ii. § 2.
526 [2] Mitford, Hist. Greece, c. iv. § I.
527 206
528 [1] Works and Days, 172 (Elton).
529 207
530 208
531 [1] Od. v. 215 (Cowper).
532 209
533 [2] Od. i. 384 (Cowper).
534 [1] Od. i. 389 (Cowper).
535 [2] ubi supra (Cowper).
536 210
537 [1] ubi supra
538 211
539 [1] Od. ii. 25 (Cowper).
540 [2] Od. ii. 242 (Chapman).
541 [1] A mistake: it is Liocritus who speaks here.
542 212
543 [1] Od. i. 113 (Cowper).
544 213
545 [2] Od. i. 130 (Cowper).
546 [1] Od. i. 405 (Cowper).
547 214
548 [2] Od. xvii. 375 (Cowper).
549 [1] Od. xvii. 446 (Cowper).
550 [2] Od. xvii. 483 (Cowper).
551 215
552 [1] Od. vi. 207, xiv. 57 (Cowper).
553 [2] Od. ii. 178 (Cowper).
554 216
555 [1] Od. xx. 345 (Cowper).
556 217
557 [1] Od. xx. 358 (Cowper).
558 [2] Od. xxi. 82 (Cowper).
559 218
560 [1] Od. xiv. 32 (Cowper).
561 [1] Od. xiv. 56 (Cowper).
562 [2] Od. xiv. 402 (Cowper).
563 219
564 [3] Georg. ii. 471 (Dryden).
565 220
566 [1] Hor. Ep. i. 1. 53.
567 221
568 [1] Trachiniae, 527–9 (Plumptre).
569 222
570 [2] Lord Byron.
571 223
572 [1] Shakespeare, King Rich. II, iv. i. 121–31.
573 [2] Il. ii. 204 (Chapman).
574 224
575 224
576 225
577 [1] Od. xiii. 31 (Cowper).
578 [2] Od. xii. 439 (Chapman).
579 226
580 [3] Od. ix. 240 (Cowper).
581 [1] Od. ix. 319 (Cowper).
582 [2] Paradise Lost, i. 292.
583 [3] Od. i. 255 (Cowper).
584 227
585 [1] Od. xiv. 453 (Cowper).
586 [2] Od. x. 84 (Cowper).
587 [3] Juvenal, i. 86 (Gifford).
588 228
589 [1] Od. x. 34.
590 [2] Od. xiv. 459.
591 [3] Od. xvii. 569 (Cowper).
592 229
593 [1] Od. xx. 1 (Cowper).
594 [2] Od. xx. 25 (Cowper).
595 230
596 [1] Od. xx. 105 (Cowper).
597 [1] Od. xiv. 414 (Pope).
598 231
599 [2] Od. xv. 374 (Cowper).
600 [3] Od. xvii. 320 (Cowper).
601 232
602 [1] Od. iv. 43 (Cowper).
603 [1] Od. iv. 68 (Cowper).
604 [2] Od. xxiv. 87 (Cowper).
605 233
606 [1] Od. viii. 438 (Cowper).
607 [2] Od. xiii. 20 (Cowper).
608 [3] Od. xiii. 366 (Cowper).
609 [4] Od. xv. 88 (Cowper).
610 234
611 [1] Od. xix. 4 (Cowper).
612 [1] Od. xviii. 48 (Cowper).
613 235
614 236
615 [1] Od. xvii. 360 (Cowper).
616 [2] Od. iii. 346 (Cowper).
617 [1] Od. xiv. 80 (Cowper).
618 237
619 [2] Od. iii. 479 (Cowper).
620 [3] Od. vii. 98 (Chapman).
621 [1] Od. xv. 488 (Cowper).
622 238
623 [2] Burns, Man was made to Mourn, stanza ix.
624 [1] Hor. Ep. i. 18. 102.
625 239
626 [2] Thucyd. iii. 104.
627 [1] Hymn to Apollo, 174 (Chapman).
628 240
629 [2] Hymn to Apollo, 440 (Chapman).
630 241
631 242
632 [1] Od. viii. 62 (Cowper).
633 243
634 [1] Sonnet XVI, On his Blindness
635 244
636 245
637 246
638 247
639 [1] Od. i. 28 (Cowper).
640 [2] Il. i. 11.
641 248
642 [1] Od. i. 296 (Cowper).
643 [2] Od. iii. 193 (Cowper).
644 [3] Od. iii. 262.
645 [4] Od. iv. 512.
646 [1] Od. xi. 405.
647 249
648 [2] Od. xi. 494 (Cowper). Another most beautiful stroke of nature. Ere yet Ulysses has had time to answer, the very thought that Peleus may possibly be insulted, fires him, and he takes the whole for granted. Thus is the impetuous character of Achilles sustained to the last moment. (Cowper's Note.)
649 250
650 [1] Aen. i. 58 (Dryden).
651 [1] Od. xxii. 407 (Cowper).
652 251
653 [1] Od. xxiv. 443 (Cowper).
654 252
655 [1] Od. xxiv. 528 (Cowper).
656 [2] Num. xvi. end.
657 253
658 [1] Hor. A. P. 190 (Francis).
659 [1] Od. i. 362, xix. 602, xxi. 356, &c. (Cowper).
660 254
661 [2] Od. ii. 382 (Cowper).
662 [3] Od. xxiv. 365 (Cowper).
663 255
664 [1] Od. viii. 189 (Cowper).
665 256
666 [1] Od. x. 569 (Cowper).
667 257
668 [2] Od. xiii. 187 (Cowper).
669 [1] Od. xxiii. 241 (Cowper).
670 258
671 [2] Od. xvii. 483 (Cowper).
672 [3] Il. i. 63.
673 [1] Od. vii. 199 (Cowper).
674 [2] Od. xix. 40 (Cowper).
675 259
676 [3] Od. i. 319 (Cowper).
677 260
678 [1] Od. iii. 237 (Cowper).
679 [1] Od. i. 32 (Cowper).
680 [2] Od. xvii. 362 (Cowper).
681 261
682 [1] Od. xviii. 136 (Cowper).
683 262
684 [1] Od. xx. 345 (Cowper).
685 263
686 264
687 265
688 [1] S. Clem. Alex. Strom. i. § 139; see Clinton, Fast. Hellen. Introd., p. vi.
689 [2] See Mitford, Hist. of Greece, chap. iii, App.
690 [3] i. 12.
691 [4] Mitford, ubi supra
692 266
693 [1] Lib. x. 6.
694 [2] e.g. i. I; viii. I. 1; 3. 23.
695 [3] Il. xii. 10 (Pope).
696 267
697 [1] Lib. x. 15.
698 268
699 [1] Panathenaic, c. 32. Cf. Clinton, Fast. Hellen. Introd. v.
700 [2] ii. 53.
701 269
702 [1] Attic, chap. 2, p. 6, ed. Kuhn, 1696.
703 270
704 271
705 [1] Herod. ii. 53.
706 272
707 273
708 274
709 [1] Hor. Sat. i. 4. 44 (Francis).
710 275
711 [1] Choerilus ap. Arist. Rhct. iii. 14. I; Sir J. E. Sandys, Hist. of Classical Scholarship, vol. i. p. 40; by his kind permission.
712 276
713 277
714 278
715 279
716 280
717 281
718 282
719 283
720 [1] Gaisford, Heph., p. 336; Bland, p. 29 (Merivale).
721 [1] Bland, 22; Anon. (Edin. Rev.); see Arist. Rhet. i. 9, ix. 3; Gaisford, in Heph. above.
722 284
723 [2] Art of P., 79 (Francis).
724 [1] Fragm. xiv, Gaisford, Poet. Min., t. i. 294. (Bland, p. 7.)
725 [2] Ibid. xiii. P. 293 (Bland, P. 7.); Merivale.
726 285
727 [1] A. P. 77.
728 [2] Cp. Virg. Georg. i. 237.
729 [3] Juv. xv. 131.
730 [4] Gaisford, Poet. Min. i. 386. (Bland, p. 72.)
731 [5] ibid. 387. (Bland, p.72.)
732 286
733 287
734 [1] Nem. ii. 1.
735 288
736 289
737 [1] Frogs, 1004 (Frere).
738 [2] Aen. v. 217 (Dryden).
739 290
740 [1] Theb. 717 (Plumptre).
741 [2] Agam. 144 (Plumptre).
742 291
743 [1] Clinton, Fast. Hellen., Ol. 77. I.
744 292
745 [1] Arg. in Persae
746 293
747 [2] Frogs, 1026.
748 294
749 [1] Prom., 1110 (Plumptre).
750 [2] Choeph. 1075 (Plumptre).
751 295
752 [1] Clinton, Fast. Hellen., Ol. So. 1; 81. I.
753 [1] Clinton, Fast. Hellen., Ol. 79. 4.
754 [2] Müller, quoted in Butler's Notes to The Suppliants, p. 98. 1282.
755 296
756 297
757 [1] Life of Aeschylus, quoted in Butler's Aeschylus, viii. 3.
758 [2] Clinton, Fast. Hellen., Ol. 72. 3.
759 [3] Attic. c. 21.
760 [4] Life, 4; Paus. Attic. 14.
761 [5] C. M. (Bland, p. 94).
762 298
763 [1] Cap. viii, § 5.
764 [2] Persae, 152 (Plumptre).
765 [3] Persae, 864 (Plumptre).
766 299
767 [1] Persae, 507 (Plumptre).
768 300
769 [1] Persae, 105 (Plumptre).
770 [2] Persae, 380 (Plumptre).
771 [1] Persae, 314, 430, 279, 582 (Plumptre).
772 301
773 [2] Persae, 89 (Plumptre).
774 [3] See Note at end of vol. ii.
775 302
776 [1] Persae, 65 (Plumptre).
777 [2] Persae, 560 (Plumptre).
778 303
779 [1] Persae, 868 (Plumptre).
780 [2] Persae, 639 (Plumptre).
781 304
782 [1] Persae, 663 (Plumptre).
783 [2] Persae, 700 (Plumptre).
784 305
785 306
786 [1] Persae, 812 (Plumptre).
787 307
788 [1] Persae, 527 (Plumptre).
789 308
790 [1] Persae, 609 (Plumptre)
791 309
792 310
793 [1] Prom. 231 (Potter).
794 311
795 [1] Wisdom of the Ancients, c. 26.
796 312
797 [1] Georg. i. 129 (Dryden).
798 [2] Eccles. i. 18.
799 313
800 [1] Prom. 194 (Plumptre).
801 [2] Prom. 49 (Plumptre).
802 [3] Prom. 409 (Plumptre).
803 [4] Prom. 33 (Plumptre).
804 [5] Prom. 153 (Plumptre).
805 [6] Persae, 215 (Plumptre).
806 314
807 [1] Persae, 590 (Plumptre).
808 [2] Persae, 756 (Plumptre).
809 315
810 [1] Aen. vi. 270 (Dryden).
811 [1] Prom. 516 (Plumptre).
812 316
813 [2] Prom. 520 (Plumptre).
814 317
815 [1] Eum. 307 (Plumptre).
816 [1] Eum. 906 (Plumptre).
817 318
818 319
819 [1] Agam. 1086 (Plumptre).
820 [2] Agam. 1095 (Plumptre).
821 [1] Agam. 975 (948) (Plumptre).
822 320
823 [1] Agam. 1451 (1475) (Plumptre).
824 321
825 [2] Agam. 1457 (1481) (Plumptre).
826 [1] Agam. 1497 (Plumptre).
827 [2] Agam. 1505 (Plumptre).
828 [3] Choeph. 910 (Plumptre).
829 322
830 [1] Analogy, Part I, chap. vi.
831 323
832 [1] Prom. 559 (544) (Plumptre).
833 [1] Prom. 285 (277) (Plumptre).
834 324
835 [1] Prom. 10(Plumptre).
836 325
837 [2] Prom. 234 (226) (Plumptre).
838 [3] Prom. 355 (344) (Plumptre).
839 [1] Prom. 103 (105) (Plumptre).
840 326
841 [2] Virg. Georg. i. 469.
842 [1] Prom. 88 (Plumptre).
843 327
844 [1] Prom. 112 (Plumptre).
845 [2] Prom. 152 (Plumptre).
846 328
847 [3] Prom. 306 (298) (Plumptre).
848 [1] Prom. 124 (Plumptre).
849 329
850 [1] Prom. 292 (284) (Plumptre).
851 [2] Prom. 402 (394) (Plumptre).
852 330
853 [1] Prom. 440 (431) (Plumptre).
854 [2] Prom. 174 (167) (Plumptre).
855 [3] Prom. 913 (906) (Plumptre).
856 331
857 [1] Southey.
858 332
859 333
860 [1] Sen. Ep. 115; Plutarch, de Audiendis Poetis, c. 4, i. 50, ed. Wyttenbach.
861 334
862 [1] Prom. 1080 (Plumptre).
863 335
864 [1] ‘The Prometheus Unbound of Aeschylus supposed the reconciliation of Jove with his victim as the price of the disclosure of the danger threatened to his empire by the consummation of his marriage with Thetis.’—Shelley, Preface to Prometheus Unbound
865 [2] Apollod. Biblioth. ii. 5, 11, 12.
866 336
867 [1] Agam. 11 (Plumptre).
868 337
869 [2] Ibid. 35 (Plumptre).
870 [3] Eum. 1 (Plumptre).
871 [4] Ibid. 35 (Plumptre).
872 [1] Macbeth, 11. iii.
873 338
874 [2] Hamlet, v.i.
875 [3] Scott, Life of Napolcon, ch. lxxxi.
876 339
877 [1] Agam. 110 (Plumptre).
878 [1] Agam. 137 (Plumptre).
879 340
880 [2] Sir Walter Scott.
881 [1] Suppliants, 354 (349) (Plumptre).
882 341
883 [2] Agam. 1139 (Plumptre).
884 [1] Georgics iv. 511 (Dryden).
885 342
886 [2] Od. xix. 518 (Cowper).
887 [1] Agam. 1146 (Plumptre).
888 [2] Ps. Iv. 4–7.
889 343
890 [1] Suppliants, 59 (Plumptre).
891 344
892 [1] Agam. 137 (Plumptre).
893 [2] Agam. 696, 717 (Plumptre).
894 [1] Agam. 49 (Plumptre).
895 345
896 [2] Tusc. Quaest. ii. 10.
897 [1] Aen. vi. 745 (Dryden).
898 346
899 347
900 [1] Ovid, Metam. xv. 158 (Dryden).
901 348
902 [1] Ps. civ. 20–24.
903 [2] Ps. civ. 29
904 [3] Ps. xxxvi. 6.
905 349
906 [1] Rom. viii. 22.
907 [2] Isa. xi. 6.
908 350
909 [1] Agam. 155 (Plumptre).
910 351
911 352
912 [1] Ps.ix. 5–8.
913 [1] Agam. 170 (Plumptre).
914 [2] Ibid. (Plumptre).
915 [3] Ibid. (Plumptre).
916 353
917 354
918 355
919 356
920 [1] Agam. 891 (918) (Plumptre).
921 [1] Agam. 908 (935) (Blackie).
922 [2] Agam. 642 (659) (Plumptre).
923 357
924 [1] Eum. 556 (Plumptre).
925 [2] Agam. 1149 (1178) (Plumptre).
926 358
927 359
928 [1] Agam. 175 (182) (Plumptre).
929 360
930 [1] Agam. 1388 (1415) (Plumptre).
931 [2] Agam. 1499 (1521) (Plumptre).
932 361
933 [1] Agam. 177 (184) (Plumptre).
934 [1] Agam. 211 (217) (Plumptre).
935 362
936 [1] Lucretius, i. 88 (Creech). [Soon as the fillet encircling her maiden tresses shed itself in equal lengths adown each cheek, and soon as she saw her father standing sorrowful before the altars, and beside him the ministering priests hiding the knife, and her countrymen at sight of her shedding tears, speechless in terror she dropped down on her knees and sank to the ground. Nor aught in such a moment could it avail the luckless girl that she had first bestowed on the king the name of father.—Munro.]
937 [2] Iph. in Aul. 1477 (Potter).
938 363
939 [1] Agam. 220 (Plumptre).
940 [1] Agam. 239 (Plumptre).
941 [2] Agam. 215 (222) (Plumptre).
942 364
943 [3] Agam 60 (Plumptre)
944 [1] Agam. 353 (Plumptre).
945 [2] Ibid. (Plumptre).
946 365
947 [3] Agam. 680 (699) (Plumptre).
948 [1] Agam. 727 (750) (Plumptre).
949 366
950 [1] Agam. 783 (810) (Plumptre).
951 [2] Agam. 794 (821) (Plumptre).
952 [3] Agam. 824 (851) (Plumptre).
953 [4] Agam, 879 (905) (Plumptre).
954 367
955 [1] Il. iv. 43 (Derby).
956 [1] Agam. 329 (338) (Plumptre).
957 [2] Agam. 336 (345) (Plumptre).
958 368
959 [3] Agam. 339 (348) (Plumptre).
960 [4] Agam. 445 (458) (Plumptre).
961 [1] Agam. 453 (466) (Plumptre).
962 [2] Agam. 631 (648) (Plumptre).
963 369
964 [3] Agam. 340 (349) (Plumptre).
965 [4] Agam. 883 (910) (Plumptre).
966 [1] Agam. 664 (681) (Plumptre).
967 370
968 [1] Agam. 570 (587) (Plumptre).
969 371
970 [2] Agam. 568 (585) (Plumptre).
971 [1] Agam. 828 (855) (Plumptre).
972 [2] Agam. 839 (866) (Plumptre).
973 [3] Agam. 869 (896) (Plumptre; and see Plumptre's note).
974 372
975 [4] Agam. 598 (615) (Plumptre).
976 [1] Agam. 993 (1025) (Plumptre).
977 [2] Agam. 810 (Plumptre).
978 373
979 [1] Agam. 1413 (1438) (Plumptre).
980 [2] Agam. 1502 (1525) (Plumptre).
981 374
982 [1] Agam. 1529 (1552) (Plumptre).
983 [2] Agam. 1372 (1401) (Plumptre).
984 375
985 [1] Agam. 1557 (1568) (Plumptre).
986 [2] Agam. 1022 (1055) (Plumptre).
987 [3] Agam. 1355 (1384) (Plumptre).
988 [1] Agam. 1477 (1500) (Plumptre).
989 [2] Agam. 1644 (1655) (Plumptre).
990 376
991 [1] Agam. 1002 (1035) (Plumptre).
992 377
993 [1] Agam. 1284 (1313) (Plumptre).
994 [2] Agam. 1266 (1295) (Plumptre).
995 [3] Agam. 1287 (1316) (Plumptre).
996 [4] Agam. 1287 (1321) (Plumptre).
997 378
998 [1] Agam. 1298 (1327) (Plumptre). [‘Her own doom, hard as it was, touches her less than the common lot of human suffering and mutability.’ Plumptre's note.—But see Campbell's translation, which assigns these lines to the Chorus.]
999 [2] Agam. 1146.
1000 379
1001 [1] Agam. 1125 (1156) (Plumptre).
1002 [2] Agam. 1137 (1167) (Plumptre).
1003 [3] Agam. 1257 (1286) (Plumptre).
1004 [1] Jer. xlv. 2–5, A.V.
1005 380
1006 [2] Agam. 1276 (1305) (Plumptre).
1007 [1] Agam. 250 (Plumptre).
1008 381
1009 382
1010 385
1011 [1] The Professorship of Poetry is held for five years; Mr. Keble's tenure of it ceased after Lecture XX, but he was re-elected for a second period.
1012 386
1013 [1] Agam. 1030 (Plumptre).
1014 [2] Choeph. 462 (Plumptre).
1015 387
1016 [1] Choeph. 1 (Plumptre).
1017 388
1018 [1] Choeph. 720 (Plumptre).
1019 389
1020 [2] Choeph. 104 (Plumptre).
1021 390
1022 [1] Choeph. 379 (381) (Plumptre).
1023 391
1024 [1] Choeph. 387 (Plumptre).
1025 392
1026 [1] Choeph. 973 (Plumptre).
1027 [2] Choeph. 6 (Plumptre).
1028 393
1029 [1] Choeph. 240 (244) (Plumptre).
1030 [1] Choeph. 244 (246) (Plumptre).
1031 394
1032 [2] Choeph. 252 (Plumptre).
1033 [1] Choeph. 585.
1034 395
1035 [2] De Officiis, ii. 5. 16.
1036 [1] Choeph. 585 (Plumptre).
1037 396
1038 [2] Jas. iii. 7–8.
1039 [1] Choeph. 825 (827) (Plumptre).
1040 397
1041 [1] Choeph. 935 (Plumptre).
1042 [2] Hor. Odes, IV. 2. 7 (Conington).
1043 398
1044 399
1045 [1] Eum. 22 (Plumptre).
1046 [1] Eurip. Ion, 82 (Wodhull).
1047 400
1048 [1] Choeph. 267 (269) (Plumptre).
1049 [2] Choeph. 284 (Plumptre).
1050 401
1051 [1] Choeph. 554 (Plumptre).
1052 [2] Choeph. 899 (Plumptre).
1053 402
1054 403
1055 [1] Choeph. 1029 (Plumptre).
1056 [1] Choeph. 1034 (Plumptre).
1057 404
1058 [1] Rich. III, III, iii.
1059 [2] Macbeth, III. iv.
1060 [1] Julius Caesar,IV. iii.
1061 405
1062 406
1063 407
1064 [1] Hamlet, 1. v.
1065 [2] Hamlet, 111. iv.
1066 408
1067 [1] Choeph. 472 (489) (Plumptre).
1068 [2] Virg. Aen. xi. 266.
1069 409
1070 [1] Choeph. 546 (Plumptre).
1071 410
1072 [2] Choeph. 432 (Plumptre).
1073 [1] Choeph. 423 (Plumptre).
1074 411
1075 [2] Choeph. 429 (Plumptre).
1076 [3] Choeph. 140 (Plumptre).
1077 [1] Choeph. 84 (Plumptre).
1078 412
1079 413
1080 414
1081 [1] Hor. Sat. ii. I. 71.
1082 [2] Hesiod, Works and Days, i. 287 (Elton).
1083 415
1084 [1] Acad. i. 2. 8.
1085 416
1086 417
1087 [1] Eum. 40 (Plumptre).
1088 [2] Eum. 31 (Plumptre).
1089 418
1090 [3] Ibid.
1091 [1] Eum. 244 (Plumptre).
1092 419
1093 [2] Eum. 329 (Plumptre).
1094 [1] Eum. 139 (Plumptre).
1095 [2] Juv. xiii. 195 (Gifford).
1096 420
1097 421
1098 [1] Eum. 51 (Plumptre).
1099 [2] Choeph. 1049 (Plumptre).
1100 [1] Eum. 181 (Plumptre).
1101 [2] Eum. 264 (Plumptre).
1102 422
1103 [1] Eum. 269 (Plumptre).
1104 [2] Eum. 299 (Plumptre).
1105 [3] Eum. 131 (Plumptre).
1106 [4] Eum. 71 (Plumptre).
1107 423
1108 [1] Eum. 322 (Plumptre).
1109 [2] Eum. 335 (Plumptre).
1110 [3] Eum. 348 (Plumptre).
1111 [1] Eum. 493 (Plumptre).
1112 424
1113 [2] Eum. 727 (Plumptre).
1114 425
1115 [1] Eum. 67 (Plumptre).
1116 426
1117 [2] Eum. 179 (Plumptre).
1118 [3] Eum. 96 (Plumptre).
1119 [1] Eum. 601 (598) (Plumptre).
1120 427
1121 [2] Eum. 280 (Plumptre).
1122 [3] Judges xiii. 23 (A.V.).
1123 [1] Eum. 598 (595) (Plumptre).
1124 [2] Eum. 599 (596) (Plumptre).
1125 428
1126 [3] Eum. 240 (Plumptre).
1127 [1] Eum. 612 (609) (Plumptre).
1128 429
1129 430
1130 [1] Eum. 693 (690) (Plumptre).
1131 431
1132 [2] Eum. 28 (Plumptre).
1133 [3] Eum. 232 (Plumptre).
1134 [1] Cic. de Leg. i. 18.
1135 432
1136 [2] Eum. 406 (403) (Plumptre).
1137 [3] Il. v. 778 (Pope, 971).
1138 433
1139 [1] Eum. 619 (616) (Plumptre).
1140 [1] Eum. 760 (757) (Plumptre).
1141 [2] Eum. 800 (797) (Plumptre).
1142 434
1143 [3] Eum. 829 (825) (Plumptre).
1144 [4] Aen. i. 135.
1145 435
1146 [1] Eum. 739 (736) (Plumptre).
1147 436
1148 [1] Eum. 797 (794) (Plumptre).
1149 [1] Eum. 807 (804) (Plumptre).
1150 [2] Eum. 388 (385) (Plumptre).
1151 [3] Eum. 835 (832) (Plumptre).
1152 437
1153 [4] Eum. 348 (Plumptre).
1154 [1] Eum. 993 (990) (Plumptre).
1155 438
1156 [1] Eum. 1004 (1001) (Plumptre).
1157 [2] Theocritus, xvi. 1.
1158 439
1159 [1] Frogs, 1075 (Frere, 1335).
1160 [2] Ibid.
1161 440
1162 441
1163 [1] Rhet. i. 5. 6 (Oxford Translation, p. 32).
1164 442
1165 [1] Prom. 645 (Plumptre).
1166 443
1167 [1] Prom. 829 (Plumptre).
1168 444
1169 [1] Prom. 877 (Plumptre).
1170 445
1171 [1] Prom. 570 (Plumptre).
1172 [2] Hor. De Art. Poet., 123 (Conington).
1173 446
1174 [1] Prom. 643 (Plumptre).
1175 [1] Prom. 656 (Plumptre).
1176 447
1177 [2] Prom. 884 (Plumptre).
1178 [3] Prom. 579 (Plumptre).
1179 [4] Ibid.
1180 [1] Prom. 591 (Plumptre).
1181 448
1182 [2] Ibid.
1183 [3] Prom. 614 (Plumptre).
1184 449
1185 [1] Prom. 845 (Plumptre).
1186 [2] Prom 850 (Plumptre).
1187 [1] Suppl. 43 (Plumptre).
1188 [2] Ol. vi. 52.
1189 [3] Suppl. 318 (312) (Plumptre).
1190 450
1191 [4] Suppl. (544) 535 (Plumptre).
1192 [1] Suppl. 580 (571) (Plumptre).
1193 451
1194 [1] Muller, Eumenides, p. 237, English Translation.
1195 452
1196 453
1197 [1] Suppl. 145 (139) (Plumptre).
1198 [2] Suppl. 397 (392) (Plumptre).
1199 [3] Suppl. 537 (528) (Plumptre).
1200 [4] Suppl. 647 (637) (Plumptre).
1201 [5] Suppl. 30 (Plumptre).
1202 454
1203 [1] Suppl. 150 (144) (Potter).
1204 [2] Suppl. 1038 (1031) (Plumptre).
1205 [3] Suppl. 208 (Plumptre).
1206 [4] Suppl. 756 (748) (Plumptre).
1207 [5] Suppl. 975 (968) (Plumptre).
1208 [1] Suppl. 299 (291) (Plumptre).
1209 455
1210 [2] Suppl. 565 (555) (Plumptre).
1211 [1] Suppl. 65 (63) (Plumptre).
1212 456
1213 [2] Suppl. 71 (69) (Plumptre).
1214 [1] Suppl. (20 Plumptre).
1215 457
1216 [2] Suppl. 51 (Plumptre).
1217 [1] Suppl. 545 (536) (Plumptre).
1218 [2] Suppl. 1030 (1023) (Plumptre).
1219 458
1220 [3] Suppl. 356 (351) (Plumptre).
1221 [1] Psalm xxxvi. 7 (P.B.).
1222 [2] Suppl. 123 (127) (Plumptre).
1223 [3] Suppl. 664 (656) (Plumptre).
1224 [4] Suppl. 140 (134) (Plumptre).
1225 459
1226 [1] Suppl. 33 (Plumptre).
1227 [2] Suppl. 126 (131) (Plumptre).
1228 [3] Suppl. 221 (213) (Plumptre).
1229 [4] Suppl. 219 (Plumptre).
1230 [1] Suppl. 221 (Plumptre).
1231 460
1232 [2] Matt. xv. 27.
1233 [3] Suppl. 205 (197) (Plumptre).
1234 [1] Suppl. 1003 (996) (Plumptre).
1235 [2] Suppl. 1012 (Plumptre).
1236 461
1237 [3] Suppl. 25 (Plumptre).
1238 [4] Suppl. 27 (Plumptre).
1239 [1] Suppl. 740 (732) (Plumptre).
1240 [2] Suppl. 143 (136) (Plumptre).
1241 462
1242 [3] Suppl. 90 (86) (Plumptre).
1243 [4] Suppl. 101 (95) (Plumptre).
1244 [1] Suppl. 106 (100) (Plumptre).
1245 463
1246 [2] Suppl. 160 (154) (Plumptre).
1247 [3] Exod. xxxii. 12; Num. xiv. 13; Joshua vii. 9; Rom. ix. 3.
1248 [1] Suppl. 175 (168) (Plumptre).
1249 [2] Seeante, p. 55.
1250 464
1251 [1] Hor. Odes, iii. II. 26 (Conington).
1252 465
1253 [1] Juv. i. 85.
1254 466
1255 467
1256 468
1257 [1] The Cotter's Saturday Night.
1258 [2] Hor. Ep. ii. I. 139 (Conington).
1259 469
1260 [1] Cic. de Amic. xxvi. 97.
1261 470
1262 471
1263 [1] Virg. Ed. i.
1264 [2] The Mourning Muse of Thestylis is supposed to have been written by Lodowick Bryskett.
1265 472
1266 473
1267 474
1268 475
1269 476
1270 [1] Hor. Odes, IV. ii. 10 (Conington).
1271 477
1272 [2] Ibid.
1273 478
1274 [1] Olymp. i. I (A. Moore).
1275 [1] Olymp. i. 14 (A. Moore).
1276 [2] Ibid
1277 479
1278 480
1279 [1] Hor. Ep. I. xvii. 24 (Conington).
1280 481
1281 [1] Isthm. iii. 51 (Moore).
1282 [2] Ibid.
1283 [3] Pyth. ii. 14 (12) (Moore).
1284 [1] Isthm. ii. 31 (20) (Moore).
1285 482
1286 [2] Olymp. ix. 120 (80) (Moore).
1287 [3] Olymp. vi. 37 (22) (Moore).
1288 [1] Pyth. v. 44 (30) (Moore).
1289 483
1290 [2] Isthm. iv. 76.
1291 [3] Nem. iv. 150 (Moore).
1292 [1] Pyth. i. 81 (Moore).
1293 [2] Isthm. ii. 51 (35) (Moore).
1294 484
1295 [3] Olymp. ii. 150 (83) (Moore).
1296 [1] Olymp. xiii. 132 (93) (Moore).
1297 [2] Nem. vii. 106 (72) (Moore).
1298 [3] Pyth. viii. 119 (83) (Moore).
1299 485
1300 [4] Ibid
1301 [1] Pyth. x. 95 (60) (Moore).
1302 486
1303 [1] Isthm. vi. I (Moore).
1304 [2] Nem. ii. 9 (6) (Moore).
1305 [1] Nem. x. 46 (25) (Moore).
1306 487
1307 [2] Olymp. v. 55 (23) (Moore).
1308 [3] Isthm. v. 14 (12) (Moore).
1309 [4] Nem. iii. 31 (19) (Moore).
1310 [1] Pyth. x. 41 (27) (Moore).
1311 [2] Isthm. vi. 60 (43) (Moore).
1312 488
1313 489
1314 490
1315 491
1316 492
1317 [1] Anal. Part I, ch. vii. p. 173, Ed. Oxf. 1807.
1318 493
1319 [1] Olymp. xiii. 100.
1320 [2] Pyth. i. 59 (31) (Moore).
1321 494
1322 [1] Pyth. v. 141 (98) (Moore).
1323 [2] Olymp. vi. 130 (77) (Moore).
1324 [3] Ibid.
1325 [4] Nem. iv. 119 (74) (Moore).
1326 495
1327 [1] Olymp. vi. 31 (19) (Moore).
1328 [2] Nem. xi. 27 (Moore).
1329 [3] Olymp. iii. 20 (11) (Moore).
1330 [1] Nem. vii. 112 (77) (Moore).
1331 [2] Olymp. iii. 22 (13) (Moore).
1332 496
1333 [3] Fragm. Dithyr. iii. 12, p. 125 (Mr. Ernest Myers's translation, p. 173; by kind permission of Messrs. Macmillan & Co., Ltd.).
1334 497
1335 [1] Olymp. vii. 1 (Moore).
1336 [1] Isthm. vi. 1 (Moore)
1337 498
1338 [1] Nem. ix. 115 (48) (Moore).
1339 [2] Nem. iv. 7 (Moore).
1340 499
1341 [1] Aen. vii. 711 (Dryden)
1342 500
1343 [2] Il. ii. 496 (Chapman).
1344 [3] Nem. iii. 1 (Moore).
1345 [1] Olymp. vii. 20 (11) (Moore).
1346 501
1347 [1] Pyth. iii. 111 (63) (Moore).
1348 502
1349 [2] Olymp. iv. 1 (Moore).
1350 [1] Cowley, Pindaric Odes: The Resurrection.
1351 [2] Olymp. vi. 149 (Moore).
1352 503
1353 [1] Olymp. vi. 149 (Moore).
1354 [2] Ibid.
1355 504
1356 [1] Ibid.
1357 [2] Ibid.
1358 505
1359 [1] Olymp. xii. (xiv), 19 (13) (Moore).
1360 [1] Pyth. xi. 1 (Moore).
1361 [2] Pyth. ii. 1 (Moore).
1362 [3] Pyth. iv. 14 (Moore).
1363 506
1364 [4] Pyth. v. 120 (84) (Moore).
1365 [1] Olymp. v. 20 (9) (Moore).
1366 [2] Isthm. iv. 106 (79) (Moore).
1367 507
1368 [1] Hor. Odes, iv. 8. 27.
1369 508
1370 [1] Nem. i. 26 (18) (Moore).
1371 [2] Olymp. ix. 151 (100) (Moore).
1372 [3] Olymp. ii. 155 (86) (Moore).
1373 [4] Nem. iii. 140 (80) (Moore).
1374 509
1375 [1] Nem. v. 1 (Moore).
1376 [2] Nem. iv. 11 (6) (Moore).
1377 [1] Pyth. i. 184 (94) (Moore).
1378 510
1379 [2] Pyth. vi. 5 (Moore).
1380 [1] Isthm. vii. 11 (Moore).
1381 511
1382 [2] Nem. iii. 31 (19) (Moore).
1383 [3] Pyth. v. 19 (14) (Moore).
1384 [1] Pyth. x. (85) 55 (Moore).
1385 [2] Pyth. ix. 171 (96) (Moore).
1386 512
1387 [3] Pyth. i. 173 (88) (Moore).
1388 [1] Isthm. ii. 56 (39) (Moore).
1389 [2] Olymp. xiii. 17 (14) (Moore).
1390 513
1391 [1] Pyth. i. 156 (81) (Moore).
1392 [2] Pyth. ix. 133 (76) (Moore).
1393 [3] Olymp. xiv. 28 (20) (Moore).
1394 514
1395 515
1396 [1] Cf. Hor. Sat. ii. 1. 33.
1397 516
1398 [1] Lockhart, Life of Sir Walter Scott, i. 18.
1399 [2] Georgics, iii. 45.
1400 517
1401 [1] Probl. 30.
1402 [2] Pyth. viii. 131 (92) (Moore).
1403 [3] Olymp. ii. 29 (15) (Moore).
1404 518
1405 [1] Olymp. ii. 34 (18) (Moore).
1406 [2] Nem. vii. 65 (44) (Moore).
1407 [1] Hor. Odes, iv. 2. 27 (Conington).
1408 519
1409 [2] Olymp. x (xi), 14 (9) (Moore).
1410 [3] Nem. iv. 54 (33) (Moore).
1411 [1] Pyth. iv. 440 (247) (Moore).
1412 520
1413 [1] Olymp. vi. 37 (22) (Moore).
1414 [2] Pyth. v. 34 (24) (Moore).
1415 521
1416 [3] Nem. iii. 16.
1417 522
1418 [1] Olymp. ii. 130 (72) (Moore).
1419 523
1420 [2] Olymp. vi. 89 (53) (Moore).
1421 [1] Clorinda, stanzas 12 and 13. Supposed to have been written by Mary, Countess of Pembroke, sister to Sir Philip Sidney
1422 524
1423 [2] Hor. Odes, iii. 4. 11 (Conington).
1424 525
1425 [1] Nem. i. 61 (41) (Moore).
1426 [1] Nem. iii. 75 (43) (Moore).
1427 526
1428 527
1429 [1] Isthm. viii. 17 (9) (Moore).
1430 [2] Pyth. i. 136 (71) (Moore).
1431 528
1432 [1] Hor. Odes, ii. 13. 31 (Conington).
1433 529
1434 [1] Isthm. vi (vii), 1 (Moore).
1435 [2] Isthm. vi (vii), 19 (13) (Moore).
1436 [1] Isthm. vi. (vii), 31 (23) (Moore).
1437 530
1438 [1] Isthm. vi (vii), 51 (37) (Moore).
1439 [2] Isthm. vi (vii), 70 (49) (Moore).
1440 [3] De Senect. ix. 28.
1441 531
1442 [1] Pyth. xi. 1 (Moore).
1443 [2] Isthm. v (vi), 107 (74) (Moore).
1444 [3] Pyth. ix. 151 (87) (Moore).
1445 532
1446 [1] Pyth. iii. 137 (77) (Moore).
1447 533
1448 [1] Nem. vii. 43 (30) (Moore).
1449 [2] Olymp. vi. 142 (84) (Moore).
1450 534
1451 [1] Pyth. v. 96 (68) (Moore).
1452 [2] Dissen.
1453 [3] Isthm. vii (vii:), 35 (17) (Moore).
1454 535
1455 [1] Nem. iv. 31 (20) (Moore).
1456 [2] Nem. vii. 136 (93) (Moore).
1457 [1] Isthm. iv (v), 60 (48) (Moore).
1458 [2] Isthm. iv (v), 24 (19) (Moore).
1459 536
1460 [1] Pyth. iv. 327 (184) (Moore).
1461 537
1462 [2] Pyth. iv. 340 (191) (Moore).
1463 538
1464 [1] De Senect., ch. ii.
1465 [2] Juv. vii. 56.
1466 539
1467 540
1468 [1] Lucret. ii. 10 (Creech).
1469 [2] Mark x. 14.
1470 541
1471 [1] Nem. viii. 60 (35) (Moore).
1472 [2] Pyth. iii. 182 (103) (Moore).
1473 [3] Cic. Fam. v. 13.
1474 [1] Pyth. ii. 157 (86) (Moore).
1475 542
1476 [2] Olymp. xiii. 6 (Moore).
1477 [1] Isthm. iii. 30 (18) (Moore).
1478 543
1479 [2] Olymp. i. 181 (113) (Moore).
1480 544
1481 [1] Isthm. i. 62 (45) (Moore).
1482 [1] Isthm. iii. (iv) 25 (34) (Moore).
1483 [2] Olymp. ii. 141 (78) (Moore).
1484 545
1485 [1] Ad Pis. 196.
1486 546
1487 [1] Pyth. iv. 467 (263) (Moore).
1488 [1] Pyth. iv. 481 (271) (Moore).
1489 547
1490 [2] Pyth. iv. 510 (287) (Moore).
1491 [1] Pyth. ii. 125 (67) (Moore).
1492 548
1493 [2] Pyth. i. 162 (84) (Moore).
1494 [1] Pyth. i. 172 (89) (Moore).
1495 549
1496 [2] Pyth. ix. 206 (117) (Moore).
1497 [1] The Border Minstrelsy.
1498 [2] Pyth. iv. 162 (92) (Moore).
1499 [3] Nem. v. 56 (31) (Moore).
1500 550
1501 [1] Od. iii. 265 (Pope).
1502 551
1503 552
1504 553
1505 [1] Pyth. i. 5 (Moore).
1506 [1] Pyth. i. 25 (Moore).
1507 554
1508 [1] Olymp. ii. 105 (57) (Moore).
1509 555
1510 [2] Ibid.
1511 [1] Olymp. ii. 96 (53) (Moore).
1512 556
1513 [2] Pyth. vi. 23 (Moore).
1514 [1] Olymp. i. 115 (71) (Moore).
1515 [2] Olymp. vi. 95 (57) (Moore).
1516 557
1517 [1] Olymp. xiii. 94 (67) (Moore).
1518 [2] Pyth. iv. 28.
1519 [3] Pyth. iv. 151 (87) (Moore).
1520 [4] Eclog. iv. 16.
1521 558
1522 [1] Pyth. viii. 79 (56) (Moore).
1523 [2] Olymp. viii. 101 (77) (Moore).
1524 [1] Olymp. xiv. 29 (20) (Moore).
1525 559
1526 [2] Acts xiv. 17.
1527 560
1528 561
1529 562
1530 [1] Eclog. viii. 10.
1531 563
1532 564
1533 [1] Ajax, 363 (Francklin).
1534 565
1535 566
1536 [1] Trachiniae, 1070 (1053) (Plumptre).
1537 567
1538 568
1539 [1] Oedipus. Tyr. 1092 (1073) (Plumptre).
1540 569
1541 [2] Antigone, 1258 (1244) (Plumptre).
1542 [3] Trachiniae, 826 (813) Plumptre).
1543 [4] Frogs, 82 (Frere).
1544 570
1545 [1] Oed. Col. 14 (Plumptre).
1546 571
1547 [2] Oed. Col. 1661 (1590) (Plumptre).
1548 572
1549 [1] Ajax, 888 (879) (Plumptre).
1550 [2] Ajax, 1232 (1215) (Plumptre).
1551 [1] Ajax, 601 (596) (Plumptre).
1552 573
1553 [2] The Prisoner of Chillon.
1554 [1] Ajax, 411 (Plumptre).
1555 574
1556 [1] Phil. 15 (Plumptre).
1557 [2] Phil. 959 (936) (Plumptre).
1558 575
1559 [1] Phil. 1109 (1081) (Plumptre).
1560 [2] Phil. 1146 (Plumptre).
1561 [1] Phil. 1498 (1451) (Plumptre).
1562 576
1563 577
1564 [1] Anthol. (Macgregor).
1565 [2] Hor. Odes, i. 1. 29.
1566 578
1567 [1] Arist. A. P. vi. 17 (Twining).
1568 579
1569 580
1570 581
1571 582
1572 583
1573 584
1574 [1] Hor. A. P. 361.
1575 [1] Eurip. Hipp. 436.
1576 585
1577 586
1578 [1] Medea, 216 (Wodhull).
1579 [1] Medea, 1320 (Wodhull).
1580 587
1581 [2] Macbeth, IV. iii.
1582 [3] Androm. 419 (Wodhull).
1583 [1] Androm. 184 (Wodhull).
1584 588
1585 [2] Medea, 1074 (1078) (Wodhull).
1586 589
1587 [1] Medea, 820 (824) (Wodhull).
1588 [1] Suppl. 508 (Wodhull).
1589 590
1590 [1] Suppl. 198 (Wodhull).
1591 [2] Poet. c. 32 (Twining).
1592 591
1593 [1] Hec. 444 (Wodhull).
1594 592
1595 [1] Poet. 26 (Twining).
1596 593
1597 [1] Juv. i. 86 (Gifford).
1598 [1] Androm. 103 (Wodhull).
1599 594
1600 [2] Androm. 207 (Wodhull).
1601 [3] Od. xvii. 322 (Cowper).
1602 [1] Ran. 1095–1101 (1063–9) (Frere).
1603 595
1604 [1] Androm. 86 (Wodhull).
1605 596
1606 [2] Hipp. 1263 (1249) (Wodhull).
1607 597
1608 [1] Medea, 1065 (1069) (Wodhull).
1609 [1] Alc. 962 (941) (Potter).
1610 [2] Iph. in Aul. 634 (Potter).
1611 598
1612 [1] Poet. c. 28.
1613 599
1614 [1] Iph. in Aul. 1385 (Potter).
1615 [1] Iph. in Aul. 1222 (Potter).
1616 600
1617 601
1618 [1] Androm. 147 (Wodhull).
1619 602
1620 [1] Phoen. 107 (Wodhull).
1621 [2] Phoen. 157 (Wodhull).
1622 603
1623 [1] Phoen. 1289 (Wodhull).
1624 [2] Phoen. 1765 (Wodhull).
1625 604
1626 [1] Hec. 547 (Wodhull).
1627 [1] Hec. 370 (Wodhull).
1628 [2] Hec. 379 (Wodhull).
1629 605
1630 [1] Androm. 943 (Wodhull); cf. Medea, 408.
1631 606
1632 [2] Phoen. 1392, &c.
1633 [3] Hor. A. P. 413 (Conington).
1634 [1] Hipp. 73 (Wodhull).
1635 607
1636 [1] Hipp. 656 (651) (Wodhull).
1637 [2] Hipp. 1006 (Wodhull).
1638 [1] Hipp. 1407 (1392) (Wodhull).
1639 608
1640 [2] Hipp. 91 (Wodhull).
1641 [4] Hipp. 927 (915) (Wodhull).
1642 [1] Hipp. 1422 (1405) (Wodhull).
1643 609
1644 [2] Ion, 657 (645) (Wodhull).
1645 610
1646 611
1647 612
1648 [1] Georg. ii. 485
1649 613
1650 [1] Hor. Ep. i. 6. 3.
1651 614
1652 615
1653 616
1654 [1] Based on Wordsworth's Excursion, Book IV, 11. 717–44, 851–87.
1655 [2] Phaedrus, 9 (Cary).
1656 617
1657 [1] Thucyd. ii. 14–16 (Hobbes).
1658 618
1659 619
1660 620
1661 [1] De Rerum Nat. iii. 28 (Creech).
1662 621
1663 622
1664 623
1665 [1] Aen. vi. 730 (Dryden).
1666 624
1667 625
1668 626
1669 627
1670 628
1671 629
1672 [1] I have borrowed this phrase from The Christian Year for the Fourth Sunday in Advent, the thought of which poem is reproduced here.—W. L.
1673 630
1674 631
1675 [1] ‘Mcatus caeli,’ Aen. vi. 850.
1676 632
1677 [1] Tusc. Disp. v. 4. 10
1678 [2] Ibid.
1679 633
1680 634
1681 [1] Aen. vi. 870 (Dryden).
1682 [1] Poet. 3.
1683 635
1684 [1] Lucr. i. 717 (Creech, 3rd ed., 1683).
1685 [2] Lucr. i. 933.
1686 636
1687 [3] Eclog. vi. 1 (Dryden).
1688 637
1689 [1] Eclog. iii. 40 (Dryden).
1690 [2] Ibid. 46.
1691 [3] Theoc. Idyll. i. 39 (Polwhele).
1692 638
1693 [1] Theoc. Idyll. vi. 6 (Polwhele).
1694 [1] Theoc. Idyll. vii. 78 (Polwhele).
1695 639
1696 [1] Idyll. xv.
1697 640
1698 [2] Theoc. Idyll. xv. 118.
1699 641
1700 [1] Juvenal, vii. 56.
1701 642
1702 643
1703 [1] Theocr. Idyll. vii. 131.
1704 [1] Aen. i. 739 (Dryden).
1705 644
1706 [1] Theoc. Idyll. viii. 6. 5 (Polwhele).
1707 645
1708 646
1709 [1] Juvenal, vii. 56.
1710 647
1711 [1] Arist. Rhet. i. 11.
1712 648
1713 [1] Virg. Georg. ii. 490 (Dryden).
1714 649
1715 [1] Virg. Georg. ii. 475 (Dryden).
1716 [2] Virg. Georg. ii. 483 (Dryden).
1717 650
1718 651
1719 [1] Lucr. i. 997 (Creech).
1720 652
1721 [2] Lucr. i. 967 (Creech).
1722 653
1723 [1] Lucr. ii. 1027 (Creech).
1724 [2] Hor. Ep. i. 6. 3.
1725 654
1726 [1] Lucr. v. 458 (Creech).
1727 655
1728 [1] Lucr. v. 498 (Creech).
1729 [2] De Caelo, i. c. 9.
1730 [3] Lucr. i. 57 (44) (Creech).
1731 [1] Lucr. v. 276 (Creech).
1732 656
1733 [2] Lucr. v. 518 (Creech).
1734 657
1735 [1] Lucr. ii. 143 (Creech).
1736 658
1737 [1] Lucr. i. 272 (Creech).
1738 659
1739 [2] Lucr. i. 73 (Creech).
1740 [1] Lucr. iii. 16 (Creech).
1741 [2] Lucr. iii. 26 (Creech).
1742 660
1743 [1] i. 1088: ‘the whole ether round bickers with signs.’ (Munro.)
1744 [2] v. 299: ‘are eager to bicker with fires, eager I say: nor is the light ever broken off nor does it quit the spots illuminated.’ (Munro.)
1745 [3] v. 267: ‘The seas are lessened by the strong winds sweeping over them and by the ethereal sun decomposing them with his rays.’ (Munro.)
1746 661
1747 [1] Lucr. ii. 24 (Creech).
1748 662
1749 [1] Lucr. iii. 907 (Creech).
1750 663
1751 664
1752 [1] See The Curse of Kehama, xiii.
1753 665
1754 666
1755 [1] Aen. ii. 715.
1756 [2] Aen. iv. 23.
1757 [1] Ars Poetica, 128 (Conington).
1758 667
1759 [1] Georg. iii. 425 (Dryden).
1760 668
1761 [1] Georg. iii. 436 (Dryden).
1762 [1] Ovid, Metam. ii. 1 (Addison).
1763 [2] Ovid,Metam. ii. 24 (Addison).
1764 669
1765 670
1766 [1] Georg. iv. 358 (Dryden).
1767 [1] Aen. i. 167.
1768 671
1769 [1] Lucr. ii. 629 (Creech).
1770 [2] Lucr. vi. 585 (Creech).
1771 672
1772 673
1773 674
1774 [1] Lucr. iv. 130 (Creech). Munro: ‘But lest haply you suppose that only those idols of things which go off from things and no others wander about, there are likewise those which are spontaneously begotten and are formed by themselves in this lower heaven which is called air: these fashioned in many ways are borne along on high, and being in a fluid state cease not to alter their appearance and change it into the outline of shapes of every possible kind: as we see clouds sometimes gather into masses on high and blot the calm clear face of heaven, fanning the air with their motion.’
1775 [2] Ibid. (Creech).
1776 675
1777 [1] Aristophanes, Clouds, 345.
1778 676
1779 [1] Lucr. vi. 107 (Creech). Munro: ‘They also give forth a sound over the levels of the wide-stretching upper world just as at times a canvas-awning stretched over large theatres makes a creaking noise, when it tosses about among the poles and beams; sometimes, too, rent by the boisterous gales, it madly howls and closely imitates the crackling noise of pieces of paper: this kind of noise, too, you may notice in thunder, when the winds whirl about with their blows and buffet through the air a hanging cloth or flying bits of paper.’
1780 [2] Lucr. vi. 132 (Creech).
1781 [1] vi. 149 (Creech). Munro: ‘Again, if the cloud which receives the fire is drier, it is set on fire in an instant and burns with a loud noise, just as if a flame should range over the laurel-covered hills through a whirlwind and burn them up with its impetuous assault: and there is not anything that burns in the crackling flame with a more startling sound than the Delphic laurel of Phoebus.’
1782 677
1783 [2] Lucr. iv. 1 (Creech).
1784 [1] Lucr. iv. 584 (Creech).
1785 [2] Lucr. i. 896 (Creech). Munro: ‘But it often comes to pass on high mountains,’ you say, ‘that contiguous tops of tall trees rub together, the strong south winds constraining them so to do, until the flower of flame has broken out and they have burst into a blaze.’ Quite true, and yet fire is not innate in woods: but there are many seeds of heat, and when they by rubbing have streamed together, they produce conflagrations in the forests. But if the flame was stored up ready made in the forests, the fire could not be concealed for any length of time, but would destroy forests, burn up trees indiscriminately.’
1786 678
1787 [1] Paradiso, ii. 22–30 et alibi.
1788 [2] Ibid. v. 106.
1789 [3] Ibid. xviii. 100–108; x. 64.
1790 679
1791 [1] Purgatorio, xxviii.
1792 680
1793 681
1794 682
1795 [1] Lucr. i. 63 (Creech).
1796 683
1797 684
1798 [1] Tusc. Disp. iv. 3.
1799 [2] Ad Quint. Frat. ii. 11.
1800 685
1801 686
1802 [1] Eusebius, quoted by Jerome, Ol. 171. 4, t. 8, 591.
1803 [2] Sylv. ii. 7. 35.
1804 687
1805 688
1806 [1] Byron and Shelley. This should be compared with the Poem in The Christian Year for Palm Sunday.—W. L.
1807 689
1808 690
1809 691
1810 [1] Lucr. iii. 1 (Creech).
1811 [2] Lucr. iii. 1055 (Creech).
1812 692
1813 [1] Lucr. iii. 131 (Creech).
1814 [2] Lucr. iii. 204 (Creech).
1815 693
1816 [3] De Nat. Deor. i. 8.
1817 694
1818 695
1819 696
1820 697
1821 698
1822 [1] Lucr. iii. 1066 (Creech).
1823 699
1824 [1] Moschus, Idyll. iii. 106 (Polwhele).
1825 700
1826 [1] Lucr. iii. 1072 (Creech).
1827 [2] Oed. Col. 1289 (1225) (Plumptre).
1828 [1] Georg. iii. 66 (Dryden).
1829 701
1830 [2] Lucr. iii. 1081 (Creech).
1831 [1] Lucr. iii. 1093 (Creech).
1832 [2] Lucr. v. 222 (Creech).
1833 [3] Lucr. iii. 954 (Creech).
1834 702
1835 [1] Lucr. iii. 1016 (Creech).
1836 [2] Lucr. i. 149; ii. 58; iii. 91; vi. 38 (Creech).
1837 [3] Lucr. i. 151 (Creech).
1838 [4] Lucr. iii. 94 (Creech).
1839 [5] Lucr. ii. 61 (Creech).
1840 703
1841 704
1842 [1] Lucr. vi. 1281 (Creech).
1843 [2] Lucr. vi. 91 (Munro).
1844 705
1845 [1] Lucr. iii. 14 (Creech).
1846 [1] Lucr. v. 1231 (Creech).
1847 [2] Lucr. v. 1217 (Creech).
1848 706
1849 [3] Lucr. v. 93 (Creech).
1850 [4] Lucr. ii. 14 (Creech).
1851 [1] Lucr. ii. 46 (Creech).
1852 [2] Cf. Cic. De. Am. xxiii. 86.
1853 [3] Lucr. v. 1189 (Munro).
1854 707
1855 [1] Lucr. v. 935 (Creech).
1856 [2] Lucr. ii. 6 (Creech).
1857 708
1858 [1] Lucr. vi. 67 (Creech).
1859 [2] Lucr. v. 50 (Creech).
1860 709
1861 [1] Lucr. ii. 113 (Creech).
1862 [2] Hor. A. P. 311 (Creech).
1863 710
1864 [1] i. 832
1865 [1] Lucr. iii. 28 (Munro).
1866 [2] Lucretius on Life and Death, London, 1900; by kind permission of Mr. W. H. Mallock.
1867 711
1868 712
1869 [1] Lucr. i. 930 (Creech).
1870 [2] Lucr. iv. 181; 907 (Creech).
1871 713
1872 [1] Aen. vi. 314 (Conington).
1873 715
1874 716
1875 [1] Georg. ii. 478 (Dryden).
1876 [2] Ecl. vi. 31 (Dryden).
1877 717
1878 [1] Aen. i. 740 (Dryden).
1879 718
1880 [1] Georg. ii. 485 (Dryden).
1881 [2] Ecl. vi. 2 (Dryden).
1882 719
1883 [1] Ecl. vi. 1.
1884 [2] Ecl. iv. 1.
1885 [3] Ecl. x. 50.
1886 [1] Addressed here as the nymph of the Syracusan fountain, with reference to Theocritus.
1887 [2] Ecl. x. 1.
1888 [3] Georg. ii. 176 (Dryden).
1889 720
1890 [4] Sat. I. x. 43 (Conington).
1891 721
1892 [1] Aen. ix. 503 (Dryden).
1893 722
1894 [1] Spenser, Muiopotmos.
1895 [2] Pope, Rape of the Lock.
1896 [3] Ep. ii. 2. 54.
1897 723
1898 724
1899 [1] Lucr. iii. 58.
1900 [1] Aen. iv. 612 (Dryden).
1901 725
1902 [2] Aen. vi. 469 (Dryden).
1903 726
1904 727
1905 [1] Lucr. i. 87.
1906 728
1907 729
1908 [1] Aen. vii. 25 (Dryden).
1909 730
1910 [1] Aen. viii. 86 (Dryden).
1911 [1] Aen. vii. 1 (Dryden).
1912 731
1913 [2] Aen. viii. 455 (Dryden).
1914 [1] Aen. viii. 407 (Dryden).
1915 [2] Aen. xii. 587 (Dryden).
1916 732
1917 [1] Aen. x. 802 (Dryden).
1918 [2] Aen. x. 851 (Dryden).
1919 [1] Aen. x. 861 (Dryden).
1920 733
1921 [2] Aen. ii. 427 (Dryden).
1922 [1] Aen. x. 517 (Dryden).
1923 734
1924 [2] Aen. ix. 774 (Dryden).
1925 [3] Aen. x. 779 (Dryden).
1926 [4] Aen. xii. 517 (Dryden).
1927 735
1928 [1] Georg. i. 505 (Dryden).
1929 [2] Georg. i. 493 (Dryden).
1930 [1] Eclog. i. 71 (Dryden).
1931 736
1932 [2] Georg. iii. 344 (Dryden).
1933 737
1934 738
1935 739
1936 [1] Propertius, ii. 34. 65.
1937 740
1938 [1] See Remains of R. H. Froude, vol. ii, pp. 317, 318 (Lond. 1838).
1939 741
1940 742
1941 [1] Aen. xii. 451 (Dryden).
1942 743
1943 [1] Georg iii. 325.
1944 [2] Georg. iv. 425 (Dryden).
1945 744
1946 [1] Georg. iv. 186 (Dryden).
1947 [2] Georg. i. 118 (Dryden).
1948 [1] Cervantes.
1949 745
1950 [2] Georg. i. 167.
1951 [3] Georg. ii. 103 (Dryden).
1952 [4] Plough naked, swain, and naked sow the land, For lazy winter numbs the lab'ring hand (Dryden).
1953 [5] Wet weather seldom hurts the most unwise, So plain the signs, such prophets are the skies (Dryden).
1954 [1] Georg. i. 155 (Dryden).
1955 746
1956 [2] Eclog. v. 70 (Dryden).
1957 [1] Georg. iii. 391 (Dryden).
1958 [2] Georg. iii. 89 (Dryden).
1959 [3] iv. 289. And where in pomp the sun-burnt people ride, On painted barges, o'er the teeming tide (Dryden).
1960 747
1961 [4] Georg. iii. 341 (Dryden).
1962 748
1963 [1] Georg. iii. 305 (Dryden).
1964 749
1965 [1] Georg. iii. 517 (Dryden).
1966 [1] Georg. iii. 520 (Dryden).
1967 750
1968 751
1969 [1] Georg. i. 410 (Dryden).
1970 [2] Georg. i. 383 (Dryden).
1971 [1] Aen. v. 213 (Dryden).
1972 752
1973 [2] Georg. iii. 50.
1974 [3] Georg. iii. 163 (Dryden).
1975 [1] Georg. iv. 67 (Dryden).
1976 753
1977 [2] Georg. iv. 153 (Dryden).
1978 [3] Georg. iv. 200 (Dryden).
1979 [1] Georg. ii. 51 (Dryden).
1980 [2] Georg. ii. 363 (Dryden).
1981 754
1982 [1] Georg. ii. 367 (Dryden).
1983 [2] Ibid.
1984 [3] Georg. ii. 350.
1985 [4] Georg. ii. 332 (Dryden).
1986 [5] Georg. ii. 81 (Dryden).
1987 [6] Georg. ii. 390 (Dryden).
1988 [1] Georg. iv. 134 (Dryden).
1989 [2] Ibid. 141.
1990 [3] Georg. ii. 516 (Dryden).
1991 755
1992 [4] Georg. iv. 135 (Dryden).
1993 [5] Georg. i. 446 (Dryden).
1994 756
1995 [1] i. 47.
1996 [2] i. 75.
1997 757
1998 [3] Georg. ii. 197 (Dryden).
1999 [1] Georg. iv. 325 (Dryden).
2000 [2] Georg. iv. 112 (Dryden).
2001 758
2002 [3] Lucr. iv. 1127 (Creech).
2003 759
2004 760
2005 [1] Donat. Vit. Virg. See Fast. Hell. ii. 193.
2006 [2] Aen. vi. 434 (Conington).
2007 [3] Lucr. iii. 1052 (Creech).
2008 761
2009 [1] Lucr. iii. 948 (Creech).
2010 762
2011 [1] Lucr. v. 736 (Creech).
2012 763
2013 [1] Aen. x. 781 (Dryden).
2014 [2] Aen. iv. 691 (Dryden).
2015 [3] Georg. i. 233 (Dryden).
2016 [1] Georg. iii. 311 (Dryden).
2017 [2] Georg. iii. 66 (Dryden).
2018 764
2019 [3] Georg. iii. 76 (Dryden).
2020 [1] Lucr. v. 197 (Creech).
2021 765
2022 [1] Georg. i. 121 (Dryden).
2023 766
2024 [2] Lucr. vi. 747.
2025 [1] Georg. i. 7 (Lonsdale and Lee).
2026 [2] Georg. iii. 1.
2027 [3] Georg. iii. 314.
2028 [1] Georg. ii. 35 (Dryden).
2029 767
2030 [2] Georg. ii. 468 (Lonsdale and Lee).
2031 768
2032 [1] Georg. iv. 125.
2033 [2] Aen. vii. 513 (Dryden).
2034 769
2035 [1] Aen. vii. 753 (Dryden).
2036 770
2037 [1] Aen. x. 707 (Conington).
2038 [1] Aen. xii. 749 (Dryden).
2039 771
2040 772
2041 [1] Georg. iii. 10 (Dryden).
2042 [1] Aen. vi. 673 (Dryden).
2043 [2] Aen. vi. 656 (Dryden).
2044 773
2045 [3] Aen. xii. 701 (Dryden).
2046 [1] Aen. ix. 679 (Conington).
2047 [2] Aen. x. 205 (Dryden).
2048 774
2049 [1] Aen. vii. 797 (Conington).
2050 775
2051 [1] Aen. vi. 1 (Conington).
2052 [2] Aen. vii. 1 (Dryden).
2053 [1] Aen. vi. 86 (Dryden).
2054 776
2055 [2] Aen. vii. 681 (Conington).
2056 777
2057 [1] Aen. i. 495 (Dryden).
2058 [2] Aen. iv. 143 (Dryden).
2059 778
2060 [1] Aen. viii. 314 (Dryden).
2061 [2] Aen. viii. 340 (Dryden).
2062 779
2063 780
2064 781
2065 782
2066 [1] Georg. ii. 490, 483 (Dryden).
2067 [2] Aen. x. 745 (Conington).
2068 [3] Il. xi. 241 (Pope).
2069 783
2070 [1] Georg. iv. 219 (Dryden).
2071 784
2072 [1] Aen. vi. 640 (Dryden).
2073 785
2074 [1] Cf. Warburton, Divine Legation, Bk. II, sect. 4.
2075 786
2076 [1] Georg. iv. 51 (Dryden).
2077 [1] Georg. ii. 336 (Dryden).
2078 [2] Georg. ii. 532 (Dryden).
2079 787
2080 [1] Eclog. iv. 28 (Dryden).
2081 [2] Eclog. iv. 34 (Dryden).
2082 788
2083 [1] Aen. i. 282 (Dryden).
2084 789
2085 [1] Wordsworth, Ode on Intimations of Immortality.
2086 [2] Newman, Parochial Sermons, iv. 17.
2087 790
2088 [1] Newman, Parochial Sermons, iv. 298.
2089 [2] Georg. iii. 117 (Dryden). ‘Teaching the armed rider how to manage his horse bounding in the plain and proudly prancing in many a mazy tread’ (Lonsdale and Lee).
2090 [3] Georg. iii. 201 (Lonsdale and Lee).
2091 [1] Georg. iii. 196 (Lonsdale and Lee).
2092 791
2093 [2] Georg. i. 380.
2094 [3] Eclog. i. 77.
2095 [4] Georg. iv. 54.
2096 [5] Georg. iii. 337.
2097 [1] Aen. i. 402 (Dryden).
2098 792
2099 [2] Aen. ii. 589 (Dryden).
2100 [1] Aen. vi. 268 (Dryden).
2101 [2] Georg. iv. 220 (Lonsdale and Lee).
2102 793
2103 [3] Georg. iv. 472 (Dryden).
2104 [1] Aen. vi. 191 (Dryden).
2105 [2] Ibid.
2106 794
2107 [1] Aen. v. 94 (Dryden).
2108 795
2109 [1] Aen. iii. 506 (Dryden).
2110 796
2111 797
2112 [1] Aen. vi. 563, 614 (Dryden).
2113 [2] Aen. vi. 552 (Dryden).
2114 798
2115 [1] Aen. iv. 51 (Dryden).
2116 799
2117 800
2118 801
2119 [1] i. 117.
2120 [2] Davison's Remains, p. 437.
2121 802
2122 803
2123 [1] i. 5.
2124 [1] Conf. i. 20-2.
2125 [2] Eclog. iv. 5.
2126 [3] Serm. 136. 10, vol. v, p. 380 (Antwerp, 1700).
2127 [4] Georg. ii. 498.
2128 [5] Aen. i. 278 (Dryden).
2129 804
2130 [1] Ad Damasum, Ep. 21. 13, vol. i. 76 (Venice, 1766).
2131 805
2132 806
2133 807
2134 808
2135 [1] Aen. iv. 88 (Conington).
2136 809
2137 [1] S. Clem. Alex. Strom. vi. 44.
2138 [1] S. Clem. Alex. Strom. vi. 159.
2139 810
2140 [2] Ibid. vi. 67.
2141 [3] Ibid. i. 99.
2142 [4] Ibid. i. 59.
2143 [5] Titus i. 12.
2144 [6] See Bacon, Advancement of Learning, II, xxii. 13. Augustine speaks of some lines of the Eunuchus alluding to Jupiter and Danae as ‘vessels’ containing the ‘wine of error’. Jerome also calls the works of poets the ‘food of demons’. Elsewhere Bacon says ‘one of the fathers in great severity called poesy vinum daemonum.’
2145 811
2146 812
2147 813
2148 814
2149 815
2150 [1] Hor. A. P. 400.
2151 816
2152 817
2153 818
2154 819
2155 820
2156 [1] Pers. 41 (Plumptre).
2157 [2] Pers. 52 (Plumptre).
2158 [3] Pers. 87 (Campbell).
2159 [4] Pers. 386-94 (Plumptre).
2160 821
2161 [1] Pers. 550 (Plumptre).
2162 [2] Frogs, 1352 (Frere).
2163 [3] Pers. 633 (Plumptre).
2164 [4] Pers. 658 (Plumptre).
2165 822
$$$
