Lalla Rookh; an Oriental Romance
Author: Jeffrey, Francis.
Publication info: Contributions To the Edinburgh Review . vii, 536 p. London: Longman, Brown, Green, And Longmans, 1844.

Lalla Rookh; an Oriental Romance. By Thomas Moore [in, Contributions to the Edinburgh Review. By Francis Jeffrey ... In Four Volumes. Vol. III]
[Page 199]
Lalla Rookh; an Oriental Romance. There is a great deal of our recent poetry derived from the East: But this is the finest Orientalism we have had yet. The land of the Sun has never shone out so brightly on the children of the North—nor the sweets of Asia been poured forth, nor her gorgeousness displayed so profusely to the delighted senses of Europe. The beauteous forms, the dazzling splendours, the breathing odours of the East, seem at last to have found a kindred poet in that Green Isle of the West; whose Genius has long been suspected to be derived from a warmer clime, and now wantons and luxuriates in those voluptuous regions, as if it felt that it had at length regained its native element. It is amazing, indeed, how much at home Mr. Moore seems to be in India, Persia, and Arabia; and how purely and strictly Asiatic all the colouring and imagery of his book appears. He is thoroughly embued with the character of the scenes to which he transports us; and yet the extent of his knowledge is less wonderful than the dexterity and apparent facility with which he has turned it to account, in the elucidation and embellishment of his poetry. There is not, in the volume now before us, a simile or description, a name, a trait of history, or allusion of romance which belongs to European experience; or does not indicate an entire familiarity with the life, the dead nature, and the learning of the East. Nor are these barbaric ornaments thinly scattered to make up a show. They are showered lavishly over all the work; and form, perhaps too much, the staple of the poetry—and the riches of that which is chiefly distinguished for its richness.
We would confine this remark, however, to the descriptions
[Page 200]
of external objects, and the allusions to literature and history—or to what may be termed the materiel of the poetry before us. The Characters and Sentiments are of a different order. They cannot, indeed, be said to be copies of European nature; but they are still less like that of any other region. They are, in truth, poetical imaginations;—but it is to the poetry of rational, honourable, considerate, and humane Europe, that they belong—and not to the childishness, cruelty, and profligacy of Asia. It may seem a harsh and presumptuous sentence, to some of our Cosmopolite readers: But from all we have been able to gather from history or recent observation, we should be inclined to say that there was no sound sense, firmness of purpose, or principled goodness, except among the natives of Europe, and their genuine descendants.
There is something very extraordinary, we think, in the work before us—and something which indicates in the author, not only a great exuberance of talent, but a very singular constitution of genius. While it is more splendid in imagery—(and for the most part in very good taste)—more rich in sparkling thoughts and original conceptions, and more full indeed of exquisite pictures, both of all sorts of beauties and virtues, and all sorts of sufferings and crimes, than any other poem that has yet come before us; we rather think we speak the sense of most readers when we add, that the effect of the whole is to mingle a certain feeling of disappointment with that of admiration! to excite admiration rather than any warmer sentiment of delight —to dazzle, more than to enchant—and, in the end, more frequently to startle the fancy, and fatigue the attention, by the constant succession of glittering images and high-strained emotions, than to maintain a rising interest, or win a growing sympathy, by a less profuse or more systematic display of attractions.
The style is, on the whole, rather diffuse, and too unvaried in its character. But its greatest fault, in our eyes, is the uniformity of its brilliancy—the want of plainness, simplicity and repose. We have heard it
[Page 201]
observed, by some very zealous admirers of Mr. Moore's genius, that you cannot open this book without finding a cluster of beauties in every page. Now, this is only another way of expressing what we think its greatest defect. No work, consisting of many pages, should have detached and distinguishable beauties in every one of them. No great work, indeed, should have many beauties: If it were perfect, it would have but one ; and that but faintly perceptible, except on a view of the whole . Look, for example, at what is perhaps the most finished and exquisite production of human art—the design and elevation of a Grecian temple, in its old severe simplicity. What penury of ornament—what rejection of beauties of detail!—what masses of plain surface—what rigid economical limitation to the useful and the necessary! The cottage of a peasant is scarcely more simple in its structure, and has not fewer parts that are superfluous. Yet what grandeur—what elegance—what grace and completeness in the effect! The whole is beautiful— because the beauty is in the whole: But there is little merit in any of the parts, except that of fitness and careful finishing. Contrast this, now, with a Dutch pleasure-house, or a Chinese—where every part is meant to be separately beautiful—and the result is deformity!—where there is not an inch of the surface that is not brilliant with varied colour, and rough with curves and angles,—and where the effect of the whole is monstrous and offensive. We are as far as possible from meaning to insinuate that Mr. Moore's poetry is of this description. On the contrary, we think his ornaments are, for the most part, truly and exquisitely beautiful; and the general design of his pieces very elegant and ingenious: All that we mean to say is, that there is too much ornament—too many insulated and independent beauties—and that the notice, and the very admiration they excite, hurt the interest of the general design; and not only withdraw our attention too importunately from it, but at last weary it out with their perpetual recurrence.
It seems to be a law of our intellectual constitution,
[Page 202]
that the powers of taste cannot be permanently gratified, except by some sustained or continuous emotion; and that a series, even of the most agreeable excitements, soon ceases, if broken and disconnected to give any pleasure. No conversation fatigues so soon as that which is made up of points and epigrams; and the accomplished rhetorician, who
“—could not ope
His mouth, but out there flew a trope,”
must have been a most intolerable companion. There are some things, too, that seem so plainly intended for ornaments and seasonings only, that they are only agreeable, when sprinkled in moderation over a plainer medium. No one would like to make an entire meal on sauce piquante ; or to appear in a dress crusted over with diamonds; or to pass a day in a steam of rich distilled perfumes. It is the same with the glittering ornaments of poetry—with splendid metaphors and ingenious allusions, and all the figures of speech and of thought that constitute its outward pomp and glory. Now, Mr. Moore, it appears to us, is decidedly too lavish of his gems and sweets;—he labours under a plethora of wit and imagination—impairs his credit by the palpable exuberance of his possessions, and would be richer with half his wealth. His works are not only of costly material and graceful design, but they are everywhere glistening with small beauties and transitory inspirations —sudden flashes of fancy, that blaze out and perish; like earth-born meteors that crackle in the lower sky, and unseasonably divert our eyes from the great and lofty bodies which pursue their harmonious courses in a serener region.
We have spoken of these as faults of style: But they could scarcely have existed in the style, without going deeper; and though they first strike us as qualities of the composition only, we find, upon a little reflection, that the same general character belongs to the fable, the characters, and the sentiments,—that they all sin alike in the excess of their means of attraction,— and fail to interest, chiefly by being too interesting.
[Page 203]
In order to avoid the debasement of ordinary or familiar life, the author has soared to a region beyond the comprehension of most of his readers. All his personages are so very beautiful, and brave, and agonizing— so totally wrapt up in the exaltation of their vehement emotions, and withal so lofty in rank, and so sumptuous and magnificent in all that relates to their external condition, that the herd of ordinary mortals can scarcely venture to conceive of their proceedings, or to sympathize freely with their fortunes. The disasters to which they are exposed, and the designs in which they are engaged, are of the same ambitious and exaggerated character; and all are involved in so much pomp, and splendour, and luxury, and the description of their extreme grandeur and elegance forms so considerable a part of the whole work, that the less sublime portion of the species can with difficulty presume to judge of them, or to enter into the concernments of such very exquisite persons. The incidents, in like manner, are so prodigiously moving, so excessively improbable, and so terribly critical, that we have the same difficulty of raising our sentiments to the proper pitch for them;—and, finding it impossible to sympathize as we ought to do with such portentous occurrences, are sometimes tempted to withhold our sympathy altogether, and to seek for its objects among more familiar adventures. Scenes of voluptuous splendour and ecstasy alternate suddenly with agonizing separations, atrocious crimes, and tremendous sufferings;—battles, incredibly fierce and sanguinary, follow close on entertainments incredibly sumptuous and elegant;—terrific tempests are succeeded by delicious calms at sea: and the land scenes are divided between horrible chasms and precipices, and vales and gardens rich in eternal blooms, and glittering with palaces and temples—while the interest of the story is maintained by instruments and agents of no less potency than insanity, blasphemy, poisonings, religious hatred, national antipathy, demoniacal misanthropy, and devoted love.
We are aware that, in objecting to a work like this,
[Page 204]
that it is made up of such materials, we may seem to be objecting that it is made of the elements of poetry,— since it is no doubt true, that it is by the use of such materials that poetry is substantially distinguished from prose, and that it is to them it is indebted for all that is peculiar in the delight and the interest it inspires: and it may seem a little unreasonable to complain of a poet, that he treats us with the essence of poetry. We have already hinted, however, that it is not advisable to live entirely on essences; and our objection goes not only to the excessive strength of the emotions that are sought to be raised, but to the violence of their transitions, and the want of continuity in the train of feeling that is produced. It may not be amiss, however, to add a word or two more of explanation.
In the first place, then, if we consider how the fact stands, we shall find that all the great poets, and, in an especial manner, all the poets who chain down the attention of their readers, and maintain a growing interest through a long series of narrations, have been remarkable for the occasional familiarity, and even homeliness, of many of their incidents, characters and sentiments. This is the distinguishing feature in Homer, Chaucer, Ariosto, Shakespeare, Dryden, Scott—and will be found to occur, we believe, in all poetry that has been long and extensively popular; or that is capable of pleasing very strongly, or stirring very deeply, the common sensibilities of our nature. We need scarcely make an exception for the lofty Lyric, which is so far from being generally attractive, that it is not even intelligible, except to a studious few—or for those solemn and devotional strains which derive their interest from a still higher principle: But in all narrative poetry—in all long pieces made up of description and adventures, it seems hitherto to have been an indispensable condition of their success, that most of the persons and events should bear a considerable resemblance to those which we meet with in ordinary life; and, though more animated and important than to be of daily occurrence, should not be
[Page 205]
immeasurably exalted above the common standard of human fortune and character.
It should be almost enough to settle the question, that such is the fact—and that no narrative poetry has ever excited a great interest, where the persons were too much purified from the vulgar infirmities of our nature, or the incidents too thoroughly purged of all that is ordinary or familiar. But the slightest reflection upon the feelings with which we read such poetry, must satisfy us as to the reason of our disappointment. It may be told in two words. Writings of this kind revolt by their improbability; and fatigue, by offering no points upon which our sympathies can readily attach.—Two things are necessary to give a fictitious narrative a deep and commanding interest; first , that we should believe that such things might have happened; and secondly , that they might have happened to ourselves, or to such persons as ourselves. But, in reading the ambitious and overwrought poetry of which we have been speaking, we feel perpetually, that there could have been no such people, and no such occurrences as we are there called upon to feel for; and that it is impossible for us, at all events, to have much concern about beings whose principles of action are so remote from our own, and who are placed in situations to which we have never known any parallel. It is no doubt true, that all stories that interest us must represent passions of a higher pitch, and events of a more extraordinary nature than occur in common life; and that it is in consequence of rising thus sensibly above its level, that they become objects of interest and attention. But, in order that this very elevation may be felt, and produce its effect, the story must itself, in other places, give us the known and ordinary level,—and, by a thousand adaptations and traits of universal nature, make us feel, that the characters which become every now and then the objects of our intense sympathy and admiration, in great emergencies, and under the influence of rare but conceivable excitements, are, after all, our fellow creatures—made of the same flesh and blood with ourselves, and acting, and
[Page 206]
acted upon, by the common principles of our nature. Without this, indeed, the effect of their sufferings and exploits would be entirely lost upon us; as we should be without any scale by which to estimate the magnitude of the temptations they had to resist, or the energies they had exerted. To make us aware of the altitude of a mountain, it is absolutely necessary to show us the plain from which it ascends. If we are allowed to see nothing but the table land at the top, the effect will be no greater than if we had remained on the humble level of the shore—except that it will be more lonely, bleak, and inhospitable. And thus it is, that by exaggerating the heroic qualities of heroes, they become as uninteresting as if they had no such qualities—that by striking out those weaknesses and vulgar infirmities which identify them with ordinary mortals, they not only cease to interest ordinary mortals, but even to excite their admiration or surprise; and appear merely as strange inconceivable beings, in whom superhuman energy and refinement are no more to be wondered at, than the power of flying in an eagle, or of fasting in a snake.
The wise antient who observed, that being a man himself, he could not but take an interest in every thing that related to man—might have confirmed his character for wisdom, by adding, that for the same reason he could take no interest in any thing else. There is nothing, after all, that we ever truly care for, but the feelings of creatures like ourselves:—and we are obliged to lend them to the flowers and the brooks of the valley, and the stars and airs of heaven, before we can take any delight in them. With sentient beings the case is more obviously the same. By whatever names we may call them, or with whatever fantastic attributes we may please to invest them, still we comprehend, and concern ourselves about them, only in so far as they resemble ourselves. All the deities of the classic mythology—and all the devils and angels of later poets, are nothing but human creatures—or at least only interest us so long as they are so. Let any one try to imagine what kind of
[Page 207]
story he could make of the adventures of a set of beings who differed from our own species in any of its general attributes—who were incapable, for instance, of the debasing feelings of fear, pain or anxiety—and he will find, that instead of becoming more imposing and attractive by getting rid of those infirmities, they become utterly insignificant, and indeed in a great degree inconceivable. Or, to come a little closer to the matter before us, and not to go beyond the bounds of common experience—. Suppose a tale, founded on refined notions of delicate love and punctilious integrity, to be told to a race of obscene, brutal and plundering savages—or, even within the limits of the same country, if a poem, turning upon the jealousies of court intrigue, the pride of rank, and the cabals of sovereigns and statesmen, were put into the hands of village maidens or clownish labourers, is it not obvious that the remoteness of the manners, characters and feelings from their own, would first surprise, and then revolt them—and that the moral, intellectual and adventitious Superiority of the personages concerned, would, instead of enhancing the interest, entirely destroy it, and very speedily extinguish all sympathy with their passions, and all curiosity about their fate?—Now, what gentlemen and ladies are to a ferocious savage, or politicians and princesses to an ordinary rustic, the exaggerated persons of such poetry as we are now considering, are to the ordinary readers of poetry. They do not believe in the possibility of their existence, or of their adventures. They do not comprèhend the principles of their conduct; and have no thorough sympathy with the feelings that are ascribed to them.
We have carried this speculation, we believe, a little too far—and, with reference to the volume before us, it would be more correct perhaps to say, that it had suggested these observations, than that they are strictly applicable to it. For though its faults are certainly of the kind we have been endeavouring to describe, it would be quite unjust to characterize it by its faults—which are beyond all doubt less conspicuous than its beauties. There is not only a richness and brilliancy of diction
[Page 208]
and imagery spread over the whole work, that indicate the greatest activity and elegance of fancy in the author; but it is everywhere pervaded, still more strikingly, by a strain of tender and noble feeling, poured out with such warmth and abundance, as to steal insensibly on the heart of the reader, and gradually to overflow it with a tide of sympathetic emotion. There are passages indeed, and these neither few nor brief, over which the very Genius of Poetry seems to have breathed his richest enchantment—where the melody of the verse and the beauty of the images conspire so harmoniously with the force and tenderness of the emotion, that the whole is blended into one deep and bright stream of sweetness and feeling, along which the spirit of the reader is borne passively away, through long reaches of delight. Mr. Moore's poetry, indeed, where his happiest vein is opened, realizes more exactly than that of any other writer, the splendid account which is given by Comus of the song of
“His mother Circe, and the Sirens three,
Amid the flowery-kirtled Naiades,
Who, as they sung, would take the prison'd soul,
And lap it in Elysium!”
And though it is certainly to be regretted that he should so often have broken the measure with more frivolous strains, or filled up its intervals with a sort of brilliant falsetto , it should never be forgotten, that his excellences are at least as peculiar to himself as his faults, and, on the whole, perhaps more characteristic of his genius.
The volume before us contains four separate and distinct poems—connected, however, and held together “like orient pearls at random strung,” by the slender thread of a slight prose story, on which they are all suspended, and to the simple catastrophe of which they in some measure contribute. This airy and elegant legend is to the following effect. Lalla Rookh, the daughter of the great Aurengzebe, is betrothed to the young king of Bucharia; and sets forth, with a splendid train of Indian and Bucharian attendants, to meet her enamoured bridegroom in the delightful valley of Cashmere. The progress
[Page 209]
of this gorgeous cavalcade, and the beauty of the country which it traverses, are exhibited with great richness of colouring and picturesque effect; though in this, as well as in the other parts of the prose narrative, a certain tone of levity, and even derision, is frequently assumed—not very much in keeping, we think, with the tender and tragic strain of the poetry of which it is the accompaniment—certain breakings out, in short, of that mocking European wit, which has made itself merry with Asiatic solemnity, ever since the time of the facetious Count Hamilton—but seems a little out of place in a miscellany, the prevailing character of which is of so opposite a temper. To amuse the languor, or divert the impatience of the royal bride, in the noon-tide and night-halts of her luxurious progress, a young Cashmerian poet had been sent by the gallantry of the bridegroom; and recites, on those occasions, the several poems that form the bulk of the volume now before us. Such is the witchery of his voice and look, and such the sympathetic effect of the tender tales which he recounts, that the poor princess, as was naturally to be expected, falls desperately in love with him before the end of the journey; and by the time she enters the lovely Vale of Cashmere, and sees the glittering palaces and towers prepared for her reception, she feels that she would joyfully forego all this pomp and splendour, and fly to the desert with her adored Feramorz. The youthful bard, however, has now disappeared from her side; and she is supported, with fainting heart and downcast eyes, into the hated presence of her tyrant! when the voice of Feramorz himself bids her be of good cheer—and, looking up,—she sees her beloved poet in the Prince himself! who had assumed this gallant disguise, and won her young affections, without deriving any aid from his rank or her engagements.
The whole story is very sweetly and gaily told; and is adorned with many tender as well as lively passages —without reckoning among the latter the occasional criticisms of the omniscient Fadladeen, the magnificent and most infallible grand chamberlain of the Haram—
[Page 210]
whose sayings and remarks, we cannot help observing, do not agree very well with the character which is assigned him—being for the most part very smart, sententious, and acute, and by no means solemn, stupid, and pompous, as was to have been expected. Mr. Moore's genius, however, we suppose, is too inveterately lively, to make it possible for him even to counterfeit dulness. We come at last, however, to the poetry.
The first piece, which is entitled “The Veiled Prophet of Khorassan,” is the longest, we think, and certainly not the best, of the series. It has all the faults which we have, somewhat too sweepingly, imputed to the volume at large; and it was chiefly, indeed, with a reference to it, that we made those introductory remarks, which the author will probably think too much in the spirit of the sage Chamberlain. The story, which is not in all its parts extremely intelligible, is founded on a notice, in D'Herbelot, of a daring impostor of the early ages of Islamism, who pretended to have received a later and more authoritative mission than that of the prophet, and to be destined to overturn all tyrannies and superstitions on the earth, and to rescue all souls that believed in him. To shade the celestial radiance of his brow, he always wore a veil of silver gauze, and was at last attacked by the Caliph, and exterminated, with all his adherents. On this story, Mr. Moore has engrafted a romantic and not very probable tale of two young lovers, Azim and Zelica; the former of whom having been supposed to perish in battle, the grief of the latter unsettles her understanding; and her distempered imagination is easily inflamed by the mystic promises of the Veiled Prophet, which at length prevail on her to join the troop of lovely priestesses who earn a blissful immortality in another world, by sharing his embraces upon earth. By what artful illusions the poor distracted maid was thus betrayed to her ruin, is not very satisfactorily explained; only we are informed that she and the Veiled Apostle descended into a charnel-house, and took a mutual oath, and drank blood together, in pledge of their eternal union. At length Azim, who had not
[Page 211]
been slain, but made captive in battle, and had wandered in Greece till he had imbibed the love of liberty that inspired her famous heroes of old—hears of the proud promises of emancipation which Mokanna (for that was the prophet's name) had held out to all nations, and comes to be enrolled among the champions of freedom and virtue. On the day of his presentment, he is introduced into a scene of voluptuous splendour, where all the seductive influences of art and nature are in vain exerted to divert his thoughts from the love of Zelica and of liberty. He breaks proudly away from these soft enchantments, and finds a mournful female figure before him, in whom he almost immediately recognises his long-lost and ever-loved Zelica. The first moment of their meeting is ecstasy on both sides; but the unhappy girl soon calls to mind the unutterable condition to which she is reduced—and, in agony, reveals to him the sad story of her derangement, and of the base advantages that had been taken of it. Azim at first throws her from him in abhorrence, but soon turns, in relenting pity, and offers at last to rescue her from this seat of pollution. She listens with eager joy to his proposal, and is about to fly with him in the instant, when the dread voice of Mokanna thunders in her ear her oath of eternal fidelity. That terrible sound brings back her frenzy. She throws her lover wildly from her, and vanishes at once, amidst the dazzling lights of that unholy palace. Azim then joins the approaching army of the Caliph, and leads on his forces against the impious usurper. Mokanna performs prodigies of valour—but is always borne back by the superior force and enthusiasm of Azim: and after a long course of horrors and illusions, he poisons the remnant of his adherents, and himself plunges into a bath, of such corrosive quality, as instantly to extinguish life, and dissolve all the elements of the mortal frame. Zelica then covers herself with his fatal veil, and totters out to the ramparts, where, being mistaken for Mokanna, she rushes upon the spear of her Azim, and receives his forgiveness in death! while he survives, to pass the rest of his life in
[Page 212]
continual prayer and supplication for her erring spirit; and dies at last upon her grave, in the full assurance of rejoining her in purity and bliss.
It is needless to enlarge on the particular faults of this story, after the general observations we hazarded at the outset. The character of Mokanna, as well as his power and influence, is a mere distortion and extravagance: But the great blemish is the corruption of Zelica; and the insanity so gratuitously alleged by the poet in excuse of it. Nothing less, indeed, could in any way account for such a catastrophe; and, after all, it is painful and offensive to the imagination. The bridal oath, pledged with blood among the festering bodies of the dead, is one of the overstrained theatrical horrors of the German school; and a great deal of the theorising and argumentation which is intended to palliate or conceal those defects, is obscure and incomprehensible. Rich as it is, in short, in fancy and expression, and powerful in some of the scenes of passion, we should have had great doubts of the success of this volume, if it had all been of the same texture with the poem of which we are now speaking. Yet, even there, there is a charm, almost irresistible, in the volume of sweet sounds and beautiful images, which are heaped together with luxurious profusion in the general texture of the style, and invest even the absurdities of the story with the graceful amplitude of their rich and figured veil. What, for instance, can be sweeter than this account of Azim's entry into this earthly paradise of temptations?
“Meanwhile, through vast illuminated halls,
Silent and bright, where nothing but the falls
Of fragrant waters, gushing with cool sound
From many a jasper fount, is heard around,
Young Azim roams bewilder'd; nor can guess
What means this maze of light and loneliness!
Here, the way leads, o'er tesselated floors
Or mats of Cairo, through long corridors,
Where, rang'd in cassolets and silver urns,
Sweet wood of aloe or of sandal burns;
And here, at once, the glittering saloon
Bursts on his sight, boundless and bright as noon!
[Page 213]
Where, in the midst, reflecting back the rays
In broken rainbows, a fresh fountain plays
High as th'enamell'd cupola; which towers
All rich with Arabesques of gold and flowers:
And the mosaic floor beneath shines through
The sprinkling of that fountain's silvery dew,
Like the wet, glist'ning shells, of ev'ry dye;
That on the margin of the Red Sea lie.
“Here too he traces the kind visitings
Of woman's love, in those fair, living things
Of land and wave, whose fate—in bondage thrown
For their weak loveliness—is like her own!
On one side gleaming with a sudden grace
Through water, brilliant as the crystal vase
In which it undulates, small fishes shine,
Like golden ingots from a fairy mine!—
While, on the other, lattic'd lightly in
With odorif'rous woods of Comorin,
Each brilliant bird that wings the air is seen;—
Gay, sparkling loories, such as gleam between
The crimson blossoms of the coral tree
In the warm isles of India's sunny sea:
Mecca's blue sacred pigeon; and the thrush
Of Hindostan, whose holy warblings gush,
At evening, from the tall pagoda's top;—
Those golden birds that, in the spice-time, drop
About the gardens, drunk with that sweet food
Whose scent hath lur'd them o'er the summer flood;—
And those that under Araby's soft sun
Build their high nests of budding cinnamon.” —p. 53—56.
The warrior youth looks round at first with disdain upon those seductions, with which he supposes the sage prophet wishes to try the firmness of his votaries.
“While thus he thinks, still nearer on the breeze
Come those delicious, dream-like harmonies,
Each note of which but adds new, downy links
To the soft chain in which his spirit sinks.
He turns him tow'rd the sound; and, far away
Through a long vista, sparkling with the play
Of countless lamps—like the rich track which Day
Leaves on the waters, when he sinks from us;
He sees a group of female forms advance,
Some chain'd together in the mazy dance
By fetters, forg'd in the green sunny bowers,
As they were captives to the King of Flowers,” &c.
    “Awhile they dance before him; then divide,
Breaking, like rosy clouds at even-tide
[Page 214]
Around the rich pavilion of the sun—
Till silently dispersing, one by one,
Through many a path that from the chamber leads
To gardens, terraces, and moonlight meads,
Their distant laughter comes upon the wind,
And but one trembling nymph remains behind,
Beek'ning them back in vain,—for they are gone,
And she is lest in all that light, alone!
No veil to curtain o'er her beauteous brow,
In its young bashfulness more beauteous now;
But a light, golden chain-work round her hair
Such as the maids of Yezd and Shiraz wear,
While her left hand, as shrinkingly she stood,
Held a small lute of gold and sandal wood,
Which, once or twice, she touch'd with hurried strain,
Then took her trembling fingers of again.
But when at length a timid glance she stole
At Azim, the sweet gravity of soul
She saw through all his features, calm'd her fear;
And, like a half-tam'd antelope, more near,
Though shrinking still, she came;—then sat her down
Upon a musnud's edge, and, bolder grown,
In the pathetic mode of Ispahan
Touch'd a preluding strain, and thus began:—”
The following picture of the grand armament of the Caliph shows the same luxuriance of diction and imagination, directed to different objects:—
“Whose are the gilded tents that crowd the way,
Where all was waste and silent yesterday?
This City of War which, in a few short hours,
Hath sprung up here, as if the magic powers
Of Him who, in the twinkling of a star,
Built the high pillar'd halls of Chilminar,
Had conjur'd up, far as the eye can see,
This world of tents and domes and sun-bright armory!—
Princely pavilions, screen'd by many a fold
Of crimson cloth, and topp'd with balls of gold;—
Steeds, with their housings of rich silver spun,
Their chains and poitrels glitt'ring in the sun;
And camels, tufted o'er with Yemen's shells,
Shaking in every breeze their light-ton'd bells!
    “Ne'er did the march of Mahadi display
Such pomp before;—not ev'n when on his way
To Mecca's Temple, when both land and sea
Were spoil'd to feed the Pilgrim's luxury;
When round him, mid the burning sands, he saw
Fruits of the North in icy freshness thaw,
[Page 215]
And cool'd his thirsty lip, beneath the glow
Of Mecca's sun, with urns of Persian snow:—
Nor e'er did armament more grand than that
Pour from the kingdoms of the Caliphat.
First, in the van, the People of the Rock,
On their light mountain steeds, of royal stock;
Then, Chieftains of Damascus, proud to see
The flashing of their swords' rich marquetry,’ &c. —p. 86—89.
We can afford room now only for the conclusion— the last words of the dying Zelica; which remind us of those of Campbell's Gertrude—and the catastrophe of Azim, which is imaged in that of Southey's Roderick.
“‘But live, my Azim;—oh! to call thee mine
Thus once again!— my Azim—dream divine!
Live, if thou ever lov'dst me, if to meet
Thy Zelica hereafter would be sweet,
Oh live to pray for her!—to bend the knee
Morning and night before that Deity,
To whom pure lips and hearts without a stain,
As thine are, Azim, never breath'd in vain—
And pray that He may pardon her—may take
Compassion on her soul for thy dear sake,
And, nought rememb'ring but her love to thee,
Make her all thine, all His, eternally!
Go to those happy fields where first we twin'd
Our youthful hearts together—every wind
That meets thee there, fresh from the well-known flowers,
Will bring the sweetness of those innocent hours
Back to thy soul, and thou may'st feel again
For thy poor Zelica as thou didst then.
So shall thy orisons, like dew that flies
To heav'n upon the morning's sunshine, rise
With all love's earliest ardour to the skies!’
Time fleeted! Years on years had pass'd away,
And few of those who, on that mournful day,
Had stood, with pity in their eyes, to see
The maiden's death, and the youth's agony,
Were living still—when, by a rustic grave
Beside the swift Amoo's transparent wave,
An aged man, who had grown aged there
By one lone grave, morning and night in prayer,
For the last time knelt down! And, though the shade
Of death hung dark'ning over him, there play'd
A gleam of rapture on his eye and cheek,
That brighten'd even death—like the last streak
Of intense glory on th'horizon's brim,
When night o'er all the rest hangs chill and dim!—
[Page 216]
His soul had seen a Vision, while he slept;
She, for whose spirit he had pray'd and wept
So many years, had come to him, all drest
In angel smiles, and told him she was blest!
For this the old man breath'd his thanks,—and died!—
And there, upon the banks of that lov'd tide,
He and his Zelica sleep side by side.” —p. 121—123.
The next piece, which is entitled “Paradise and the Peri,” has none of the faults of the preceding. It is full of spirit, elegance, and beauty; and, though slight enough in its structure, breathes throughout a most pure and engaging morality. It is, in truth, little more than a moral apologue, expanded and adorned by the exuberant fancy of the poet who recites it. The Peris are a sort of half-fallen female angels, who dwell in air, and live on perfumes; and, though banished for a time from Paradise, go about in this lower world doing good. One of these—But it is as short, and much more agreeable, to give the author's own introduction.
“One morn a Peri at the gate
Of Eden stood, disconsolate;
And as she listen'd to the Springs
    Of Life within, like music flowing;
And caught the light upon her wings
    Through the half-open portal glowing!
She wept to think her recreant race
Should e'er have lost that glorious place!” —p. 133.
The Angel of the Gate sees her weeping, and—
“‘Nymph of a fair, but erring line!’
Gently he said—‘One hope is thine.
'Tis written in the Book of Fate,
    The Peri yet may be forgiven
Who brings to this Eternal Gate
    The gift that is most dear to Heaven!
Go, seek it, and redeem thy sin;—
'Tis sweet to let the Pardon'd in!’” —p. 135.
Full of hope and gratitude, she goes eagerly in search of this precious gift. Her first quest is on the plains of India—the luxuriant beauty of which is put in fine contrast with the havoc and carnage which the march of a bloody conqueror had then spread over them. The Peri comes to witness the heroic death of a youthful patriot, who disdains to survive the overthrow of his country's
[Page 217]
independence. She catches the last drop which flows from his breaking heart, and bears that to heaven's gate, as the acceptable propitiation that was required. For
“‘Oh! if there be, on this earthly sphere,
A boon, an offering Heaven holds dear,
'Tis the last libation Liberty draws
From the heart that bleeds and breaks in her cause!’” —p. 140.
The angel accepts the tribute with respect: But the crystal bar of the portal does not move! and she is told that something holier even than this, will be required as the price of her admission. She now flies to the source of the Nile, and makes a delighted but pensive survey of the splendid regions which it waters; till she finds the inhabitants of the lovely gardens of Rosetta dying by thousands of the plague—the selfish deserting their friends and benefactors, and the generous, when struck with the fatal malady, seeking some solitude where they may die without bringing death upon others. Among the latter is a noble youth, who consoles himself, in the hour of his agony, with the thought, that his beloved and betrothed bride is safe from this mortal visitation. In the stillness of his midnight retreat, however, he hears a light step approaching.
“'Tis she!—far off, through moonlight dim,
    He knew his own betrothed bride,
She, who would rather die with him,
    Than live to gain the world beside!—
Her arms are round her lover now!
    His livid cheek to hers she presses,
And dips, to bind his burning brow,
    In the cool lake her loosen'd tresses.
Ah! once how little did he think
An hour would come, when he should shrink
With horror from that dear embrace,” &c.
“‘Oh! let me only breathe the air,
    The blessed air, that's breath'd by thee!
And, whether on its wings it bear
    Healing or death, 'tis sweet to me!
There—drink my tears, while yet they fall—
    Would that my bosom's blood were balm,
And, well thou know'st, I'd shed it all,
    To give thy brow one minute's calm.
Nay, turn not from me that dear face—
    Am I not thine—thy own lov'd bride—
The one, the chosen one, whose place,
    In life or death, is by thy side!
[Page 218]
When the stem dies, the leaf that grew
Out of its heart must perish too!
Then turn to me, my own love! turn
Before like thee I fade and burn;
Cling to these yet cool lips, and share
The last pure life that lingers there!’
She fails—she sinks!—as dies the lamp
In charnel airs or cavern-damp,
So quickly do his baleful sighs
Quench all the sweet light of her eyes!
One struggle—and his pain is past—
    Her lover is no longer living!
One kiss the maiden gives,—one last,
    Long kiss—which she expires in giving.” —p. 146—148.
The gentle Peri bids them sleep in peace; and bears again to the gates of heaven the farewell sigh of pure, self-sacrificing love. The worth of the gift is again admitted by the pitying angel; but the crystal bar still remains immovable; and she is sent once more to seek a still holier offering. In passing over the romantic vales of Syria, she sees a lovely child at play among dews and flowers, and opposite to him a stern wayfaring man, resting from some unhallowed toil, with the stamp of all evil passions and evil deeds on his face.
“But hark! the vesper-call to prayer,
    As slow the orb of daylight sets,
Is rising sweetly on the air,
    From Syria's thousand minarets!
The boy has started from the bed
Of flowers, where he had laid his head,
And down upon the fragrant sod
    Kneels, with his forehead to the south
Lisping th'eternal name of God
    From purity's own cherub mouth,
And looking, while his hands and eyes
Are lifted to the glowing skies,
Like a stray babe of Paradise,
Just lighted on that flowery plain,
And seeking for its home again!
“And how felt he , the wretched Man
Reclining there—while mem'ry ran
O'er many a year of guilt and strife?
Flew o'er the dark flood of his life,
Nor found one sunny resting place,
Nor brought him back one branch of grace!
[Page 219]
‘There was a time,’ he said, in mild,
Heart-humbled tones— ‘thou blessed child!
When young and haply pure as thou,
I look'd and pray'd like thee!—but now!’—
He hung his head—each nobler aim
    And hope and feeling, which had slept
From boyhood's hour, that instant came
    Fresh o'er him, and he wept—he wept!” —p. 156, 157.
This tear of repentance is the acceptable gift for the Peri's redemption. The gates of heaven fly open, and she rushes into the joy of immortality.
“The Fire Worshippers” is the next in the series, and appears to us to be indisputably the finest and most powerful. With all the richness and beauty of diction that belong to the best parts of Mokanna, it has a far more interesting story; and is not liable to any of the objections we have been obliged to bring against the contrivance and structure of that leading poem. The outline of the story is short and simple.—Al Hassan, the bigotted and sanguinary Emir of Persia, had long waged a furious and exterminating war against the votaries of the ancient religion of the land—the worshippers of Mithra, or his emblem, Fire—then and since designated by the name of Ghebers. The superior numbers of the invader had overcome the heroic resistance of the patriots, and driven them to take refuge in a precipitous peninsula, cut off from the land by what was understood to be an impassable ravine, and exposing nothing but bare rocks to the sea. In this fastness the scanty remnant of the Ghebers maintain themselves, under the command of their dauntless leader, Hafed, who is still enabled, by sudden and daring incursions, to harass and annoy their enemy. In one of those desperate enterprises, this adventurous leader climbs to the summit of a lofty cliff, near the Emir's palace, where a small pleasure-house had been built, in which he hoped to surprise this bigotted foe of his country; but found only his fair daughter Hinda, the loveliest and gentlest of all Arabian maids—as he himself expresses it.
“He climb'd the gory Vulture's nest,
And found a trembling Dove within!”
[Page 220]
This romantic meeting gives rise to a mutual passion— and the love of the fair Hinda is inevitably engaged, before she knows the name or quality of her nightly visitant. In the noble heart of Hafed, however, love was but a secondary feeling, to devotion to the freedom and the faith of his country. His little band had lately suffered further reverses, and saw nothing now before them but a glorious self-sacrifice. He resolves, therefore, to tear all gentler feelings from his breast, and in one last interview to take an eternal farewell of the maid who had captivated his soul. In his melancholy aspect she reads at once, with the instinctive sagacity of love, the tidings of their approaching separation; and breaks out into the following sweet and girlish repinings:—
“‘I knew, I knew it could not last—
'Twas bright, 'twas heavenly—but 'tis past!
Oh! ever thus, from childhood's hour,
    I've seen my fondest hopes decay;
I never lov'd a tree or flower,
    But 'twas the first to fade away.
I never nurs'd a dear gazelle,
    To glad me with its soft black eye,
But when it came to know me well,
    And love me, it was sure to die!
Now too—the joy most like divine
    Of all I ever dreamt or knew,
To see thee, hear thee, call thee mine,—
    Oh mis'ry! must I lose that too?
Yet go!—on peril's brink we meet;—
    Those frightful rocks—that treach'rous sea—
No, never come again—though sweet,
    Though heav'n, it may be death to thee.’” —p. 187,188.
When he smiles sternly at the idea of danger, she urges him to join her father's forces, and earn her hand by helping him to root out those impious Ghebers whom he so much abhors. The spirit of the patriot bursts forth at this; and, without revealing his name or quality, he proudly avows and justifies the conduct of that luckless sect; and then, relenting, falls into a gentler and more pathetic strain.
“‘Oh! had we never, never met!
Or could this heart e'en now forget!
[Page 221]
How link'd, how bless'd we might have been,
Had fate not frown'd so dark between!
Hadst thou been born a Persian maid;
    In neighb'ring valleys had we dwelt,
Through the same fields in childhood play'd,
    At the same kindling altar knelt—
Then, then, while all those nameless ties,
In which the charm of Country lies,
Had round our hearts been hourly spun,
Till Iran's cause and thine were one;—
While in thy lute's awak'ning sigh
I heard the voice of days gone by,
And saw in ev'ry smile of thine
Returning hours of glory shine!—
While the wrong'd Spirit of our Land
    Liv'd, look'd, and spoke her wrongs through thee!—
God! who could then this sword withstand?
    Its very flash were victory!
But now! Estrang'd, divorc'd for ever,
Far as the grasp of Fate can sever;
Our only ties what love has wove—
    Faith, friends, and country, sunder'd wide;—
And then, then only, true to love,
    When false to all that's dear beside!
Thy father Iran's deadliest foe—
Thyself, perhaps, ev'n now—but no—
Hate never look'd so lovely yet!
    No!—sacred to thy soul will be
The land of him who could forget
    All but that bleeding land for thee!
When other eyes shall see, unmov'd,
    Her widows mourn, her warriors fall,
Thou'lt think how well one Gheber lov'd,
    And for his sake thou'lt weep for all!’” —p.193, 194.
He then starts desperately away; regains his skiff at the foot of the precipice, and leaves her in agony and consternation. The poet now proceeds to detail, a little more particularly, the history of his hero; and recounts some of the absurd legends and miraculous attributes with which the fears of his enemies had invested his name.
“Such were the tales, that won belief,
    And such the colouring fancy gave
To a young, warm, and dauntless Chief,—
    One who, no more than mortal brave,
Fought for the land his soul ador'd,
    For happy homes and altars free;
His only talisman, the sword,—
    His only spell-word, Liberty!
[Page 222]
'Twas not for him to crouch the knee
Tamely to Moslem tyranny;—
'Twas not for him, whose soul was cast
In the bright mould of ages past,
Whose melancholy spirit, fed
With all the glories of the dead;—
'Twas not for him, to swell the crowd
Of slavish heads, that shrinking bow'd
Before the Moslem, as he pass'd,
Like shrubs beneath the poison-blast—
No—far he fled—indignant fled
    The pageant of his country's shame;
While every tear her children shed
    Fell on his soul, like drops of flame;
And, as a lover hails the dawn
    Of a first smile, so welcom'd he
The sparkle of the first sword drawn
    For vengeance and for liberty!” —p. 206, 207.
The song then returns to Hinda—
“Whose life, as free from thought as sin,
Slept like a lake, till Love threw in
His talisman, and woke the tide,
And spread its trembling circles wide.
Once, Emir! thy unheeding child,
Mid all this havoc, bloom'd and smil'd,—
Tranquil as on some battle-plain
    The Persian lily shines and towers,
Before the combat's reddening stain
    Has fall'n upon her golden flowers.
Far other feelings Love has brought—
    Her soul all flame, her brow all sadness,” &c.
“Ah! not the Love, that should have bless'd
So young, so innocent a breast!
Not the pure, open, prosp'rous Love,
That, pledg'd on earth and seal'd above,
Grows in the world's approving eyes,
    In friendship's smile, and home's caress,
Collecting all the heart's sweet ties
    Into one knot of happiness!” —p. 215—217.
The Emir now learns, from a recreant prisoner, the secret of the pass to the Gheber's retreat; and when he sees his daughter faint with horror at his eager anticipation of their final extirpation, sends her, in a solitary galley, away from the scene of vengeance, to the quiet of her own Arabian home.
[Page 223]
“And does the long-left home she seeks
Light up no gladness on her cheeks?
The flowers she nurs'd—the well-known groves,
Where oft in dreams her spirit roves—
Once more to see her dear gazelles
Come bounding with their silver bells;
Her birds 'new plumage to behold.
    And the gay, gleaming fishes count,
She left, all filleted with gold,
    Shooting around their jasper fount—
Her little garden mosque to see,
    And once again, at ev'ning hour,
To tell her ruby rosary,
    In her own sweet acacia bower.—
Can these delights, that wait her now,
Call up no sunshine on her brow?
No—silent, from her train apart—
As if ev'n now she felt at heart
The chill of her approaching doom—
She sits, all lovely in her gloom
As a pale Angel of the Grave.” —p. 227, 228.
Her vessel is first assailed by a violent tempest, and, in the height of its fury, by a hostile bark; and her senses are extinguished with terror in the midst of the double conflict. At last, both are appeased—and her recollection is slowly restored. The following passage appears to us extremely beautiful and characteristic:—
“How calm, how beautiful comes on
The stilly hour, when storms are gone;
When warring winds have died away,
And clouds, beneath the glancing ray,
Melt off, and leave the land and sea
Sleeping in bright tranquillity—
Fresh as if Day again were born,
Again upon the lap of Morn!
    When, 'stead of one unchanging breeze,
There blow a thousand gentle airs,
And each a different perfume bears—
    As if the loveliest plants and trees
Had vassal breezes of their own
To watch and wait on them alone,
And waft no other breath than theirs!
When the blue waters rise and fall,
In sleepy sunshine mantling all;
And ev'n that swell the tempest leaves
Is like the full and silent heaves
Of lover's hearts, when newly blest;
Too newly to be quite at rest!—
[Page 224]
    “Such was the golden hour, that broke
Upon the world, when Hinda woke
From her long trance; and heard around
No motion but the water's sound
Rippling against the vessel's side,
As slow it mounted o'er the tide.—
But where is she?—Her eyes are dark,
Are wilder'd still—is this the bark,
The same, that from Harmozia's bay
Bore her at morn—whose bloody way
The sea-dog tracks?—No!—Strange and new
Is all that meets her wond'ring view.
Upon a galliot's deck she lies,
    Beneath no rich pavilion's shade,
No plumes to fan her sleeping eyes,
    Nor jasmin on her pillow laid.
But the rude litter, roughly spread
With war-cloaks, is her homely bed,
And shawl and sash, on javelins hung,
For awning o'er her head are flung.” —p. 233—236.
She soon discovers, in short, that she is a captive in the hands of the Ghebers! and shrinks with horror, when she finds that she is to be carried to their rocky citadel, and to the presence of the terrible Hafed. The galley is rowed by torchlight through frightful rocks and foaming tides, into a black abyss of the promontory, where her eyes are bandaged—and she is borne up a long and rugged ascent, till at last she is desired to look up, and receive her doom from the formidable chieftain. Before she has raised her eyes, the well known voice of her lover pronounces her name; and she finds herself alone in the arms of her adoring Hafed! The first emotion is ecstasy.—But the recollection of her father's vow and means of vengeance comes like a thundercloud on her joy;—she tells her lover of the treachery by which he has been sacrificed; and urges him, with passionate eagerness, to fly with her some place of safety.
“‘Hafed, my own beloved Lord,’
She kneeling cries—‘first, last ador'd!
If in that soul thou'st ever felt
    Half what thy lips impassion'd swore,
Here, on my knees, that never knelt
    To any but their God before!
[Page 225]
I pray thee, as thou lov'st me, fly—
Now, now—ere yet their blades are nigh.
Oh haste!—the bark that bore me hither
    Can waft us o'er yon dark'ning sea
East—west—alas! I care not whither,
    So thou art safe,—and I with thee!
Go where we will, this hand in thine,
    Those eyes before me beaming thus,
Through good and ill, through storm and shine,
    The world's a world of love for us!
On some calm, blessed shore we'll dwell,
Where 'tis no crime to love too well!—
Where thus to worship tenderly
An erring child of light like thee
Will not be sin—or, if it be,
Where we may weep our faults away,
Together kneeling, night and day,—
Thou, for my sake, at Alla's shrine,
And I—at any god's, for thine!’
Wildly these passionate words she spoke—
    Then hung her head, and wept for shame;
Sobbing, as if a heart-string broke
    With ev'ry deep-heav'd sob that came.” —p. 261, 62.
Hafed is more shocked with the treachery to which he is sacrificed than with the fate to which it consigns him: —One moment he gives up to softness and pity—assures Hinda, with compassionate equivocation, that they shall soon meet on some more peaceful shore—places her sadly in a litter, and sees her borne down the steep to the galley she had lately quitted, and to which she still expects that he is to follow her. He then assembles his brave and devoted companions—warns them of the fate that is approaching—and exhorts them to meet the host of the invaders in the ravine, and sell their lives dearly to their steel. After a fierce, and somewhat too sanguinary combat, the Ghebers are at last borne down by numbers; and Hafed finds himself left alone, with one brave associate, mortally wounded like himself. They make a desperate effort to reach and die beside the consecrated fire which burns for ever on the summit of the cliff.
“The crags are red they've clamber'd o'er,
The rock-weed's dripping with their gore—
[Page 226]
Thy blade too, Hafed, false at length,
Now breaks beneath thy tott'ring strength—
Haste, haste!—the voices of the Foe
Come near and nearer from below—
One effort more—thank Heav'n! 'tis past,
They've gain'd the topmost steep at last.
And now they touch the temple's walls,
    Now Hafed sees the Fire divine—
When, lo!—his weak, worn comrade falls
    Dead, on the threshold of the Shrine.
‘Alas! brave soul, too quickly fled!
    And must I leave thee with'ring here,
The sport of every ruffian's tread,
    The mark for every coward's spear?
No, by yon altar's sacred beams!’
He cries, and, with a strength that seems
Not of this world, uplifts the frame
Of the fall'n chief, and tow'rds the flame
Bears him along!—With death-damp hand
    The corpse upon the pyre he lays;
Then lights the consecrated brand,
    And fires the pile, whose sudden blaze
Like lightning bursts o'er Oman's Sea.—
‘Now, Freedom's God! I come to Thee!’
The youth exclaims, and with a smile
Of triumph, vaulting on the pile,
In that last effort, ere the fires
Have harm'd one glorious limb, expires!” —p. 278, 279.
The unfortunate Hinda, whose galley had been detained close under the cliff by the noise of the first onset, had heard with agony the sounds which marked the progress and catastrophe of the fight, and is at last a spectatress of the lofty fate of her lover.
“But see—what moves upon the height?
Some signal!—'tis a torch's light.
    What bodes its solitary glare?
In gasping silence tow'rd the shrine
All eyes are turn'd—thine, Hinda, thine
Fix their last failing life-beams there!
'Twas but a moment—fierce and high
The death-pile blaz'd into the sky,
And far away o'er rock and flood
    Its melancholy radiance sent;
While Hafed, like a vision, stood
Reveal'd before the burning pyre!
Tall, shadowy, like a Spirit of Fire
    Shrin'd in its own grand element!
[Page 227]
    ‘'Tis he!’—the shudd'ring maid exclaims,—
    But, while she speaks, he's seen no more!
High burst in air the fun'ral flames,
    And Iran's hopes and hers are o'er!
One wild, heart-broken shriek she gave—
    Then sprung, as if to reach that blaze,
    Where still she fix'd her dying gaze,
And, gazing, sunk into the wave!—
Deep, deep!—where never care or pain
Shall reach her innocent heart again!” —p. 283, 284.
This sad story is closed by a sort of choral dirge, of great elegance and beauty, of which we can only afford to give the first stanza.
“Farewell—farewell to thee, Araby's daughter!
    (Thus warbled a Peri beneath the dark sea)
No pearl ever lay, under Oman's green water,
    More pure in its shell than thy Spirit in thee.” —p. 284.
The general tone of this poem is certainly too much strained. It is overwrought throughout, and is too entirely made up of agonies and raptures;—but, in spite of all this, it is a work of great genius and beauty; and not only delights the fancy by its general brilliancy and spirit, but moves all the tender and noble feelings with a deep and powerful agitation.
The last piece, entitled “The Light of the Haram,” is the gayest of the whole; and is of a very slender fabric as to fable or invention. In truth, it has scarcely any story at all; but is made up almost entirely of beautiful songs and descriptions. During the summer months, when the court is resident in the Vale of Cashmere, there is, it seems, a sort of oriental carnival, called the Feast of Roses, during which every body is bound to be happy and in good humour. At this critical period, the Emperor Selim had unfortunately a little love-quarrel with his favourite Sultana Nourmahal,—which signifies, it seems, the Light of the Haram. The lady is rather unhappy while the sullen fit is on her; and applies to a sort of enchantress, who invokes a musical spirit to teach her an irresistible song, which she sings in a mask to the offended monarch; and when his heart is subdued by its sweetness, throws off her mask, and springs with
[Page 228]
fonder welcome than ever into his repentant arms. The whole piece is written in a kind of rapture,—as if the author had breathed nothing but intoxicating gas during its composition. It is accordingly quite filled with lively images and splendid expressions, and all sorts of beauties, —except those of reserve or simplicity. We must give a few specimens, to revive the spirits of our readers after the tragic catastrophe of Hafed; and we may begin with this portion of the description of the Happy Valley.
“Oh! to see it by moonlight,—when mellowly shines
The light o'er its palaces, gardens and shrines;
When the waterfalls gleam like a quick fall of stars,
And the nightingale's hymn from the Isle of Chenars
Is broken by laughs and light echoes of feet,
From the cool shining walks where the young people meet.—
Or at morn, when the magic of daylight awakes
A new wonder each minute, as slowly it breaks,
Hills, eupolas, fountains, call'd forth every one
Out of darkness, as they were just born of the Sun.
When the Spirit of Fragrance is up with the day,
From his Haram of night-flowers stealing away;
And the wind, full of wantonness, woos like a lover
The young aspen-trees till they tremble all over.
When the East is as warm as the light of first hopes,
    And Day, with his banner of radiance unfurl'd,
Shines in through the mountainous portal that opes,
    Sublime, from that Valley of bliss to the world!” —p. 296.
The character of Nourmahal's beauty is much in the same taste: though the diction is rather more loose and careless.
“There's a beauty, for ever unchangingly bright,
Like the long sunny lapse of a summer day's light,
Shining on, shining on, by no shadow made tender,
Till Love falls asleep in its sameness of splendour.
This was not the beauty—oh! nothing like this,
That to young Nourmahal gave such magic of bliss;
But that loveliness, ever in motion, which plays
Like the light upon autumn's soft shadowy days,
Now here and now there, giving warmth as it flies
From the lips to the cheek, from the cheek to the eyes,
Now melting in mist and now breaking in gleams,
Like the glimpses a saint has of Heav'n in his dreams!
When pensive, it seem'd as if that very grace,
That charm of all others, was born with her face.
[Page 229]
Then her mirth—oh! 'twas sportive as ever took wing
From the heart with a burst, like the wild-bird in spring;—
Illum'd by a wit that would fascinate sages,
Yet playful as Peris just loos'd from their cages.
While her laugh, full of life, without any controul
But the sweet one of gracefulness, rung from her soul;
And where it most sparkl'd no glance could discover,
In lip, cheek or eyes, for she brighten'd all over,—
Like any fair lake that the breeze is upon,
When it breaks into dimples and laughs in the sun.” —p. 302, 303.
We can give but a little morsel of the enchanting Song of the Spirit of Music.
“‘For mine is the lay that lightly floats,
And mine are the murm'ring, dying notes,
That fall as soft as snow on the sea,
And melt in the heart as instantly!
And the passionate strain that, deeply going,
    Refines the bosom it trembles through,
As the musk-wind, over the water blowing,
    Ruffles the wave, but sweetens it too!
‘The warrior's heart, when touch'd by me,
Can as downy soft and as yielding be
As his own white plume, that high amid death
Through the field has shone—yet moves with a breath.
And, oh how the eyes of Beauty glisten,
    When Music has reach'd her inward soul,
Like the silent stars that wink and listen,
    While Heav'n's eternal melodies roll!’” —p. 318. 319.
Nourmahal herself, however, in her Arabian disguise, sings a still more prevailing ditty—of which we can only insert a few stanzas.
“‘Fly to the desert, fly with me!
Our Arab tents are rude for thee;
But oh! the choice what heart can doubt
Of tents with love, or thrones without?
‘Our rocks are rough; but smiling there
th'acacia waves her yellow hair,
Lonely and sweet—nor lov'd the less
For flow'ring in a wilderness!
‘Our sands are bare; but down their slope
The silv'ry-footed antelope
As gracefully and gaily springs
As o'er the marble courts of Kings.
[Page 230]
‘Then come! thy Arab maid will be
The lov'd and lone acacia-tree,
The antelope, whose feet shall bless
With their light sound thy loneliness!
‘Come! if the love thou hast for me
Is pure and fresh as mine for thee,—
Fresh as the fountain under ground,
When first 'tis by the lapwing found.
‘But if for me thou dost forsake
Some other maid,—and rudely break
Her worshipp'd image from its base,
To give to me the ruin'd place:—
‘Then, fare thee well!—I'd rather make
My bow'r upon some icy lake
When thawing suns begin to shine,
Than trust to love so false as thine!’”
This strain, and the sentiment which it embodies, remind the offended monarch of his charming Nourmahal; and he names her name in accents of tenderness and regret.
“The mask is off—the charm is wrought!—
And Selim to his heart has caught,
In blushes, more than ever bright,
His Nourmahal, his Haram's Light!” —p. 334.
We have now said enough, and shown enough, of this book, to let our readers understand both what it is, and what we think of it. Its great fault certainly is its excessive finery, and its great charm the inexhaustible copiousness of its imagery—the sweetness and ease of its diction—and the beauty of the objects and sentiments with which it is concerned. Its finery, it should also be observed, is not the vulgar ostentation which so often disguises poverty or meanness—but the extravagance of excessive wealth. We have said this, however, we believe before—and suspect we have little more to say.
All poets, who really love poetry, and live in a poetical age, are great imitators; and the character of their writings may often be as correctly ascertained by observing whom they imitate and whom they abstain from imitating, as from any thing else. Mr. Moore, in the volume before us, reminds us oftener of Mr. Southey
[Page 231]
and Lord Byron, than of any other of his contemporaries. The resemblance is sometimes to the Roderick of the first-mentioned author, but most frequently to his Kehama. This may be partly owing to the nature of the subject; but, in many passages, the coincidence seems to be more radical—and to indicate a considerable conformity, in taste and habits of conception. Mr. Southey's tone, indeed, is more assuming, his manner more solemn, and his diction weaker. Mr. Moore is more lively—his figures and images come more thickly; and his language is at once more familiar, and more strengthened with points and antitheses. In other respects, the descriptive passages in Kehama bear a remarkable affinity to many in the work before us—in the brightness of the colouring, and the amplitude and beauty of the details. It is in his descriptions of love, and of female loveliness, that there is the strongest resemblance to Lord Byron—at least to the larger poems of that noble author. In the powerful and condensed expression of strong emotion, Mr. Moore seems to us rather to have imitated the tone of some of his Lordship's smaller pieces—but imitated them as only an original genius could imitate—as Lord Byron himself may be said, in his later pieces, to have imitated those of an earlier date. There is less to remind us of Scott than we can very well account for, when we consider the great range and variety of that most fascinating and powerful writer; and we must say, that if Mr. Moore could bring the resemblance a little closer, and exchange a portion of his superfluous images and ecstasies for an equivalent share of Mr. Scott's gift of interesting and delighting us with pictures of familiar nature, and of that spirit and energy which never rises to extravagance, we think he would be a gainer by the exchange. To Mr. Crabbe there is no resemblance at all; and we only mention his name to observe, that he and Mr. Moore seem to be the antipodes of our present poetical sphere; and to occupy the extreme points of refinement and homeliness that can be said to fall within the legitimate dominion of poetry. They could not meet in the middle,
[Page 232]
we are aware, without changing their nature, and losing their specific character; but each might approach a few degrees, we think, with great mutual advantage. The outposts of all empires are posts of peril:—though we do not dispute that there is great honour in maintaining them with success.
There is one other topic upon which we are not quite sure whether we should say any thing. On a former occasion, we reproved Mr. Moore, perhaps with unnecessary severity, for what appeared to us the licentiousness of some of his youthful productions. We think it a duty to say, that he has long ago redeemed that error; and that in all his latter works that have come under our observation, he appears as the eloquent champion of purity, fidelity, and delicacy, not less than of justice, liberty, and honour. Like most other poets, indeed, he speaks much of beauty and love; and we doubt not that many mature virgins and careful matrons may think his lucubrations on those themes too rapturous and glowing to be safely admitted among the private studies of youth. We really think, however, that there is not much need for such apprehensions: And, at all events, if we look to the moral design and scope of the works themselves, we can see no reason to censure the author. All his favourites, without exception, are dutiful, faithful, and self-denying; and no other example is ever set up for imitation. There is nothing approaching to indelicacy even in his description of the seductions by which they are tried; and they who object to his enchanting pictures of the beauty and pure attachment of the more prominent characters would find fault, we suppose, with the loveliness and the embraces of angels.
$$$
