Language
Author: De Quincey, Thomas.
Publication info: The Collected Writings Of Thomas De Quincey . viii, 455 p. Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black, 1890.

Language [in, The Collected Writings of Thomas De Quincey; New And Enlarged Edition; By David Masson ... Vol. X. Literary Theory And Criticism]
[Page ]
LANGUAGE 1 No language is stationary, except in rude and early periods of society. The languages of nations like the English and French, walking in the van of civilization, having popular institutions, and taking part in the business of the earth with morbid energy, are placed under the action of causes that will not allow them any respite from change. Neologism, in revolutionary times, is not an infirmity of caprice, seeking (to use the proverb of Cervantes) “for better bread than is made of wheat,” but is a mere necessity of the unresting intellect. New ideas, new aspects of old ideas, new relations of objects to each other, or to man—the subject who contemplates those objects,—absolutely insist on new words. And it would not be a more idle misconception to find a disease in the pains of growth than to fancy a decay of vernacular purity in the multitude of verbal coinages which modern necessities of thought and action are annually calling forth on the banks of the Thames and the Seine.
Such coinages, however, do not all stand upon the same basis of justification. Some are regularly formed from known roots upon known analogies; others are formed licentiously. Some again meet a real and clamorous necessity of the intellect; others are fitted to gratify the mere appetite for innovation. They take their rise in various sources, and are moulded with various degrees of skill. Let us throw a hasty glance on the leading classes of these coinages, and of the laws which appear to govern them, or of the anomalies
[Page 247]
with which they are sometimes associated. There are also large cases of innovation in which no process of coinage whatever is manifested, but perhaps a simple restoration of old words, long since obsolete in literature and good society, yet surviving to this hour in provincial usage, or, again, an extension and emancipation of terms heretofore narrowly restricted to a technical or a professional use—as we see exemplified in the word ignore ; which, until very lately, was so sacred to the sole use of grand juries that a man would have been obscurely suspected by a policeman, and would indeed have suspected himself, of something like petty larceny in forcing it into any general and philosophic meaning,— which, however, it has now assumed, with little offence to good taste, and with yeoman service to the intellect. Other cases, again, there are, and at present far too abundant, in which the necessities of social intercourse, and not unfrequently the necessities of philosophic speculation, are provisionally supplied by slang , and the phraseology that is born and bred in the streets. The market-place and the highway, the forum and the trivium , are rich seed-plots for the sowing and the reaping of many indispensable ideas. That a phrase belongs to the slang dictionary is certainly no absolute recommendation; sometimes such a phrase may be simply disgusting from its vulgarity, without adding anything to the meaning or to the rhetorical force. How shocking to hear an official dignitary saying (as but yesterday was heard) “What on earth could the clause mean?” Yet neither is it any safe ground of absolute excommunication even from the sanctities of literature that a phrase is entirely a growth of the street. The word humbug , for instance, rests upon a rich and comprehensive basis: it cannot be rendered adequately either by German or by Greek, the two richest of human languages; and without this expressive word we should all be disarmed for one great case, continually recurrent, of social enormity. A vast mass of villainy, that cannot otherwise be reached by legal penalties, or brought within the rhetoric of scorn, would go at large with absolute impunity, were it not through the stern Rhadamanthian aid of this virtuous and inexorable word.
Meantime, as it would not suit the purposes of a sketch
[Page 248]
to be too systematic in the treatment of a subject so inexhaustible as language and style, neither would it be within the limits of just proportion that I should be too elaborate in rehearsing beforehand the several avenues and classes of cases through which an opening is made for new words amongst ourselves or the French. I will select such cases for separate notice as seem most interesting or most seasonable. But, previously, as a proper mode of awakening the reader into giving relief and just prominence to the subject, I will point attention to the varying scale of appreciation applied to the diction and the national language, as a ground of national distinction and honour, by the five great intellectual nations of ancient and modern history: viz. the Greeks, the Romans, the French, the English, and the Germans. In no country, except one, is such a preface more requisite than in England, where it is strange enough that, whilst the finest models of style exist, and sub-consciously operate effectively as sources of delight, the conscious valuation of style is least perfectly developed.
Every nation has reason to feel interested in the pretensions of its own native language, in the original quality of that language or characteristic kind of its powers, and in the particular degree of its expansions at the period in question. Even semi-barbarous tribes sometimes talk grandiloquently on this head, and ascribe to uncultivated jargons a fertility or a range of expressiveness quite incompatible with the particular stage of social development which the national capacities have reached. Not only in spite of its barbarism, but oftentimes in mere virtue of its barbarism, we find a language claiming, by its eulogists, to possess more than ordinary powers of picturesque expression. Such a claim is continually put forward on behalf of the Celtic languages,— as, for instance, the Armoric, the Welsh, the Irish, the Manx, the Gaelic. Such a claim is put forward also for many oriental languages. Yet in most of these cases there is a profound mistake committed, and generally the same mistake. Without being strictly barbarous, all these languages are uncultured and rude in a degree corresponding to the narrow social development of the races who speak them. These races are precisely in that state of imperfect expansion,
[Page 249]
both civilly and intellectually, under which the separation has not fully taken place between poetry and prose. Their social condition is too simple and elementary to require much cultivation of intellectual topics. Little motive exists for writing, unless on occasions of poetic excitement. The subdued colouring, therefore, of prose has not yet been (to speak physiologically) secreted. And the national diction has the appearance of being more energetic and sparkling simply because it is more inflated,—the chastities of good taste not having yet been called forth by social necessities to disentangle the separate forms of impassioned and nonimpassioned composition. The Kalmuck Tartars, according to a German traveller, viz. Bergmann, long resident amongst them, speak in rapturous terms of their own language 2 ; but it is probable that the particular modes of phraseology which fascinate their admiration are precisely those which a more advanced civilisation, and a corresponding development of taste, would reject as spurious. Certainly, in the case of a language and a literature likely to be much in advance of the Kalmuck,—viz. the Arabic at the era of Mahomet,—we find this conjecture realized. The Koran is held by the devout Mahommedan to be the most admirable model of composition; but exactly those ornaments of diction or of imagery which he regards as the jewels of the whole are most entirely in the childish taste of imperfect civilisation. That which attracts the Arab critic or the Persian is most of all repulsive to the masculine judgment of the European.
Barbarism, in short, through all degrees, generates its own barbaresque standards of taste, and nowhere so much as in the great field of diction and ornamental composition. A high civilisation is an indispensable condition for developing the full powers of a language; and it is equally a condition for developing the taste which must preside over the appreciation of diction and style. The elder civilisations of Egypt and of Asiatic empires are too imperfectly known at this day to furnish any suggestions upon the subject. The earliest
[Page 250]
civilisation that offers a practical field of study to our own age is the superb one of Greece.
It cannot be necessary to say that from that memorable centre of intellectual activity have emanated the great models in art and literature which, to Christendom, when recasting her mediæval forms, became chiefly operative in controlling her luxuriance, and in other negative services, though not so powerful for positive impulse and inspiration. Greece was, in fact, too ebullient with intellectual activity—an activity too palestric and purely human—so that the opposite pole of the mind, which points to the mysterious and the spiritual, was, in the agile Greek, too intensely a child of the earth, starved and palsied; whilst in the Hebrew, dull and inert intellectually, but in his spiritual organs awake and sublime, the case was precisely reversed. Yet, after all, the result was immeasurably in favour of the Hebre. Speaking in the deep sincerities of the solitary and musing heart, which refuses to be duped by the whistling of names, we must say of the Greek— laudatur et alget : he has won the admiration of the human race, he is numbered amongst the chief brilliancies of earth, but on the deeper and more abiding nature of man he has no hold. He will perish when any deluge of calamity overtakes the libraries of our planet, or if any great revolution of thought remoulds them, and will be remembered only as a generation of flowers is remembered; with the same tenderness of feeling, and with the same pathetic sense of a natural predestination to evanescence. Whereas the Hebrew, by introducing himself to the secret places of the human heart, and sitting there as incubator over the awful germs of the spiritualities that connect man with the unseen worlds, has perpetuated himself as a power in the human system: he is co-enduring with man's race, and careless of all revolutions in literature or in the composition of society. The very languages of these two races repeat the same expression of their intellectual differences, and of the differences in their missions. The Hebrew, meagre and sterile as regards the numerical wealth of its ideas, is infinite as regards their power; the Greek, on the other hand, rich as tropic forests in the polymorphous life, the life of the dividing and distinguishing intellect, is weak
[Page 251]
only in the supreme region of thought. The Hebrew has scarcely any individuated words. Ask a Hebrew scholar if he has a word for a ball (as a tennis ball, pila lusoria ); he says, “O yes.” What is it then? Why, he gives you the word for globe . Ask for orb , for sphere , &c., still you have the same answer; the individual circumstantiations are swallowed up in the generic outline. But the Greek has a parity of wealth alike in the abstract and the concrete. Even as vocal languages, the Hebrew and the Greek obey the same prevailing law of difference. The Hebrew is a sublime monochord, uttering vague vowel sounds as indistinct and shy as the breathings of an Æolian harp when exposed to a fitful breeze. The Greek is more firmly articulated by consonants, and the succession of its syllables runs through a more extensive compass of sonorous variety than can be matched in anywother known language. The Spanish and the Italian, with all the stateliness of their modulation, make no approach to the canorous variety of the sounds of the Greek. 3 Read a passage from almost any Greek poet, and each syllable seems to have been placed in its present position as a relief, and by way of contrast, to the syllable which follows and precedes.
Of a language thus and otherwise so divinely endowed the Greeks had a natural right to be proud. Yet were they so? There is no appearance of it: and the reason, no doubt, lay in their insulated position. Having no intellectual intercourse
[Page 252]
with foreign nations, they had virtually no intercourse at all—none which could affect the feelings of the literary class, or generally of those who would be likely to contemplate language as a subject of æsthetic admiration. Each Hellenic author might be compared with others of his compatriot authors in respect to his management of their common language, but not the language itself compared as to structure or capacities with other languages; since these other languages (one and all) were in any practical sense hardly assumed to exist. In this there was no arrogance. Aliens, as to country and civil polity, being objects of jealousy in the circumstances of Greece, there could be no reason for abstaining from any designation, however hostile, which might seem appropriate to the relation between the parties. But, in reality, the term barbarians 4 seems, for many ages, to have implied nothing either hostile or disrespectful. By a natural onomatopœia , the Greeks used the iterated syllables barbar to denote that a man was unintelligible in his talk; and by the word barbarian originally it is probable that no sort of reproach was intended, but simply the fact that the people so called spoke a language not intelligible to Greeks. Latterly, the term seems to have been often used as one of mere convenience for classification, indicating the non-Hellenes in opposition to the Hellenes ; and it was not meant to express any qualities whatever of the aliens—simply they were described as being aliens. But in the earliest times it was meant, by the word barbarians , to describe them under the idea of men who were ἑτΕρογλωττοι , men who, speaking in a tongue different from the Grecian, spoke unintelligibly; and at this day it is not impossible that the Chinese mean nothing more by the seemingly offensive term outside barbarians . The mis-translations must be many between ourselves and the Chinese; and the probability is that this reputedly arrogant expression means only “the aliens, or external people, who speak in tongues foreign to China.” Arrogant or not arrogant, however, in the mouth of the Greeks, the word barbarians included the whole human race not living
[Page 253]
in Hellas, or in colonies thrown off from Hellas. 5 Having no temptation or facilities for holding any intellectual intercourse with those who could not communicate through the channel of the Greek language, it followed that the Greeks had no means or opportunity for comparing their own language with the languages of other nations; and together with this power of mutual comparison fell away the call and excitement to vanity upon that particular subject. Greece was in the absolute insulation of the phœnix, the unique of birds, that dies without having felt a throb of exultation or a pang of jealousy, because it has exposed its gorgeous plumage and the mysterious solemnities of its beauty only to the dusky recesses of Thebaic deserts.
Not thus were the Romans situated. The Greeks, so profound and immovable was their self-conceit, never in any generation came to regard the Romans with the slightest tremor of jealousy, as though they were or ever could be rivals in literature. The Roman nobles, as all Greece knew, resorted in youth to Athens as to the eternal well-head of learning and eloquence; and the literary or the forensic efforts of such persons were never viewed as by possibility efforts of competition with their masters, but simply as graceful expressions of homage to the inimitable by men whose rank gave a value to this homage. Cicero and other Romans of his day were egregiously duped by their own vanity when they received as sincere the sycophantic praises of mercenary Greek rhetoricians. No Greek ever in good faith admired a Roman upon intellectual grounds, except indeed as Polybius did, whose admiration was fixed upon the Roman institutions,
[Page 254]
not upon their literature: though even in his day the Roman literature had already put forth a masculine promise, and in Plautus at least a promise of unborrowed excellence. The Greeks were wrong: the Romans had some things in their literature which a Greek could neither have rivalled nor even understood. They had a peculiar rhetoric for example, such as Ovid's in the contest for the arms of Achilles—such as Seneca's, which, to this hour, has never been properly examined, and which not only has no parallel in Grecian literature, but which, strangely enough, loses its whole effect and sense when translated into Greek: so entirely is it Roman by incommunicable privilege of genius.
But, if the Greeks did no justice to their Roman pupils, on the other hand, the Roman pupils never ceased to regard the Greeks with veneration, or to acknowledge them for their masters in literature: they had a foreign literature before their eyes challenging continual comparison; and this foreign literature was in a language which also challenged comparison with their own. Every Roman of distinction, after Sylla and Marius, understood Greek,—often talked it fluently, declaimed in it, and wrote books in it. But there is no language without its own peculiar genius, and therefore none without its separate powers and advantages. That the Latin language has in excess such an original character, and consequently such separate powers, Romans were not slow to discover. Studying the Greek so closely, they found by continual collation in what quarter lay the peculiar strength of the Latin. And, amongst others, Cicero did himself the greatest honour, and almost redeems the baseness of his political conduct, by the patriotic fervour which he now and then exhibits in defending the claims of his native language and native literature. He maintains, also, more than once, and perhaps with good reason, the native superiority of the Roman mind to the Grecian in certain qualities of racy humour, &c. 6
[Page 255]
Here, viz. in the case of Cicero, we have the first eminent example (though he himself records some elder examples amongst his own countrymen) of a man's standing up manfully to support the pretensions of his mother-tongue. And this might be done in a mere spirit of pugnacious defiance to the arrogance of another nation,—a spirit which finds matter of quarrel in a straw. But here also we find the first example of a statesman's seriously regarding a language in the light of a foremost jewel amongst the trophies of nationality.
Coming forward to our own times, we find sovereign rulers, on behalf of great nations, occasionally raising disputes which presume some weak sense of the value and dignity attached to a language. Cromwell, for instance, insisted upon Cardinal Mazarin's surrendering his pretension to have the French language used in a particular negotiation; and accordingly Latin was substituted. 7 But this did not argue in Cromwell any real estimation of the English language. He had been weak enough to wish that his own life and annals should be written in Latin rather than in English. The motive, it is true, might be to facilitate the circulation of the work amongst the literati of the Continent. But vernacular translations would more certainly have been executed all over the Continent in the absence of a Latin original; for this, by meeting the demand of foreigners in part (viz. of learned foreigners), would pro tanto have lessened the motives to such translations. And, apart from this preference of a Latin to a domestic portraiture addressing itself originally to his own countrymen, or, if Latin were otherwise the preferable language, apart from Cromwell's preference of a Latin Casaubon 8 to a Latin Milton, in no instance did Cromwell testify any sense of the commanding rank due to English Literature amongst the contemporary 9
[Page 256]
Literatures of Christendom, nor any concern for its extension.
In the case of resisting the French arrogance, Cromwell had seemed to express homage to the language of his country, but in reality he had only regarded the political dignity of his country. A pretension may be lighter than a feather; and yet in behalf of our country we do right to suffer no insolent aggression upon it by an enemy. But this argues no sincere regard for that feather on its own account. We have known a sailor to knock an Italian down for speaking disrespectfully of English tenor voices. The true and appropriate expression of reverence to a language is not by fighting for it as a subject of national rivalry, but, by taking earnest pains to write it with accuracy, practically to display its beauty, and to make its powers available for commensurate ends. Tried by this test, which of the three peoples that walk at the head of civilization—French, Germans, or English —have best fulfilled the duties of their position?
To answer that the French only have been fully awake to these duties is painful, but too manifestly it is true. The French language possesses the very highest degree of merit, though not in the very highest mode of merit; it is the unique language of the planet as an instrument for giving effect to the powers, and for meeting the necessities, of social gaiety and colloquial intercourse. This is partly the effect, and partly the cause, of the social temperament which distinguishes the French: partly follows the national disposition, and partly leads to it. The adaptation of the language to the people, not perhaps more really prominent in this case
[Page 257]
than in others, is more conspicuously so; and it may be in a spirit of gratitude for this genial co-operation in their language that the French are in a memorable degree anxious to write it with elegance and correctness. They take a pride in doing so; and it is remarkable that grammatical inaccuracies, so common amongst ourselves, and common even amongst our literary people, are almost unknown amongst the educated French. 10
But mere fidelity to grammar would leave a negative impression: the respect which the French show to their language expresses itself chiefly in their way of managing it,—that is, in their attention to style and diction. It is the rarest thing possible to find a French writer erring by sentences too long, too intricate and loaded with clauses, or too clumsy in their structure. The very highest qualities of style are not much within the ideal of French composition; but in the executive results French prose composition usually reveals an air of finish, of self-restraint under any possible temptation to des longueurs , and of graceful adroitness in the transitions.
Precisely the reverse of all this is found in the compositions of the German; who is the greatest nuisance, in what concerns the treatment of language, that the mind of man is capable of conceiving. Of his language the German is proud, and with reason, for it is redundantly rich. Even in
[Page 258]
its Teutonic section, it is so rich as to be self-sufficing, and capable, though awkwardly, of dispensing with the Greek and Latin counter-section. This independence of alien resources has sometimes been even practically adopted as the basis of a dictionary, and officially patronized by adoption in the public bureaus . Some thirty years ago the Prussian government was said to have introduced into the public service a dictionary 11 which rejected all words not purely vernacular. Such a word, for instance, as philosophie was not admissible; the indigenous word weltweisheit was held to be not only sufficient, which it really is , but exclusively legitimate. Yet, with all this scrupulosity and purism of veneration for his native language,—to which he ascribes every quality of power and beauty, and amongst others— credite posteri! —sometimes even vocal beauty 12 and euphony,—the true German has no sense of grace or deformity in the management of his language. Style, diction, the construction of sentences, are ideas perfectly without meaning to the German writer. If a whole book were made up of a single sentence, all collateral or subordinate ideas being packed into it as parenthetical intercalations,—if this single sentence should even cover an acre of ground,—the true German would see in all that no want of art, would recognise no opportunities thrown away for the display of beauty. The temple would in his eyes exist, because the materials of the temple—the stone, the lime, the iron, the timber—had been carted to the ground. A sentence, even when insulated and viewed apart for itself, is a subject for complex art: even so far it is capable of multiform beauty, and liable to a whole nosology of malconformations. But it is in the relation of sentences, in what Horace terms their “ junctura ,” that the true life of composition resides. The
[Page 259]
mode of their nexus , the way in which one sentence is made to arise out of another, and to prepare the opening for a third: this is the great loom in which the textile process of the moving intellect reveals itself and prospers. Here the separate clauses of a period become architectural parts, aiding, relieving, supporting each other. But how can any approach to that effect, or any suggestion of it, exist for him who hides and buries all openings for parts and graceful correspondences in one monotonous continuity of period, stretching over three octavo pages? Kant was a great man, but he was obtuse and deaf as an antediluvian boulder with regard to language and its capacities. He has sentences which have been measured by a carpenter, and some of them run two feet eight by six inches. Now, a sentence with that enormous span is fit only for the use of a megatherium or a pre-Adamite. Parts so remote as the beginning and the end of such a sentence can have no sensible relation to each other: not much as regards their logic, but none at all as regards their more sensuous qualities—rhythmus, for instance, or the continuity of metaphor. And it is clear that, if the internal relations of a sentence fade under the extravagant misproportion of its scale, a fortiori must the outer relations. If two figures, or other objects, are meant to modify each other visually by means of colour, of outline, or of expression, they must be brought into juxtaposition, or at least into neighbourhood. A chasm between them, so vast as to prevent the synthesis of the two objects in one co-existing field of vision, interrupts the play of all genial comparison. Periods, and clauses of periods, modify each other, and build up a whole then only when the parts are shown as parts, cohering and conspiring to a common result. But, if each part is separately so vast as to eclipse the disc of the adjacent parts, then substantially they are separate wholes, and do not coalesce to any joint or complex impression.
We English in this matter occupy a middle position between the French and the Germans. Agreeably to the general cast of the national character, our tendency is to degrade the value of the ornamental, whenever it is brought before us under any suggestion of comparison or rivalry with the substantial or grossly useful. Viewing the thoughts as
[Page 260]
the substantial objects in a book, we are apt to regard the manner of presenting these thoughts as a secondary or even trivial concern. The one we typify as the metallic substance, the silver or gold, which constitutes the true value that cannot perish in a service of plate; whereas the style too generally, in our estimate, represents the mere casual fashion given to the plate by the artist—an adjunct that any change of public taste may degrade into a positive disadvantage. But in this we English err greatly; and by these three capital oversights:—
1. It is certain that style, or (to speak by the most general expression) the management of language, ranks amongst the fine arts, and is able therefore to yield a separate intellectual pleasure quite apart from the interest of the subject treated. So far it is already one error to rate the value of style as if it were necessarily a secondary or subordinate thing. On the contrary, style has an absolute value, like the product of any other exquisite art, quite distinct from the value of the subject about which it is employed, and irrelatively to the subject; precisely as the fine workmanship of Scopas the Greek, or of Cellini the Florentine, is equally valued by the connoisseur, whether embodied in bronze or marble, in an ivory or a golden vase. But
2. If we do submit to this narrow valuation of style, founded on the interest of the subject to which it is ministerial, still, even on that basis, we English commit a capital blunder which the French earnestly and sincerely escape; for, assuming that the thoughts involve the primary interest, still it must make all the difference in the world to the success of those thoughts whether they are treated in the way best fitted to expel the doubts or darkness that may have settled upon them, and, secondly, in cases where the business is not to establish new convictions, but to carry old convictions into operative life and power, whether they are treated in the way best fitted to rekindle in the mind a practical sense of their value. Style has two separate functions: first, to brighten the intelligibility of a subject which is obscure to the understanding; secondly, to regenerate the normal power and impressiveness of a subject which has
[Page 261]
become dormant to the sensibilities. Darkness gathers upon many a theme, sometimes from previous mistreatment, but oftener from original perplexities investing its very nature. Upon the style it is, if we take that word in its largest sense,—upon the skill and art of the developer,—that these perplexities greatly depend for their illumination. Look, again, at the other class of cases, when the difficulties are not for the understanding but for the practical sensibilities as applicable to the services of life. The subject, suppose, is already understood sufficiently; but it is lifeless as a motive. It is not new light that is to be communicated, but old torpor that is to be dispersed. The writer is not summoned to convince, but to persuade. Decaying lineaments are to be retraced, and faded colouring to be refreshed. Now, these offices of style are really not essentially below the level of those other offices attached to the original discovery of truth. He that to an old conviction, long since inoperative and dead, gives the regeneration that carries it back into the heart as a vital power of action—he, again, that by new light, or by light trained to flow through a new channel, reconciles to the understanding a truth which hitherto had seemed dark or doubtful—both these men are really, quoad us that benefit by their services, the discoverers of the truth. Yet these results are amongst the possible gifts of style. Light to see the road, power to advance along it—such being amongst the promises and proper functions of style, it is a capital error, under the idea of its ministeriality, to undervalue this great organ of the advancing intellect—an organ which is equally important considered as a tool for the culture and popularization of truth and also (if it had no use at all in that way) as a mode per se of the beautiful and a fountain of intellectual pleasure. The vice of that appreciation which we English apply to style lies in representing it as a mere ornamental accident of written composition—a trivial embellishment, like the mouldings of furniture, the cornices of ceilings, or the arabesques of tea-urns. On the contrary, it is a product of art the rarest, subtlest, and most intellectual; and, like other products of the fine arts, it is then finest when it is most eminently disinterested—that is, most conspicuously detached from gross palpable uses. Yet, in very many cases,
[Page 262]
it really has the obvious uses of that gross palpable order; as in the cases just noticed, when it gives light to the understanding, or power to the will, removing obscurities from one set of truths, and into another circulating the life-blood of sensibility. In these cases, meantime, the style is contemplated as a thing separable from the thoughts; in fact, as the dress of the thoughts—a robe that may be laid aside at pleasure. But
3. There arises a case entirely different, where style cannot be regarded as a dress or alien covering, but where style becomes the incarnation of the thoughts. The human body is not the dress or apparel of the human spirit: far more mysterious is the mode of their union. Call the two elements A and B; then it is impossible to point out A as existing aloof from B, or vice versa . A exists in and through B; B exists in and through A. No profound observer can have failed to observe this illustrated in the capacities of style. Imagery is sometimes not the mere alien apparelling of a thought, and of a nature to be detached from the thought, but is the coefficient that, being superadded to something else, absolutely makes the thought as a third and separate existence.
In this third case, our English tendency to undervalue style goes more deeply into error than in the other two. In those two we simply underrate the enormous services that are or might be rendered by style to the interests of truth and human thinking; but in the third case we go near to abolish a mode of existence. This is not so impossible an offence as might be supposed. There are many ideas in Leibnitz, in Kant, in the schoolmen, in Plato at times, and certainly in Aristotle (as the ideas of antiperistasis, entelecheia, &c.), which are only to be arrested and realized by a signal effort —by a struggle and a nisus both of reflection and of large combination. Now, where so much depends upon an effort—on a spasmodic strain,—to fail by a hair's breadth is to collapse. For instance, the idea involved in the word transcendental, 13 as used in the critical philosophy, illustrates the metaphysical relations of style.
NOTES
1 [1] Place of original not ascertained: reprinted by De Quincey in 1858 in vol. ix of his Collective Edition of his Writings.—M.
2 [1] For Bergmann and his acquaintance with the Kalmuck Tartars, and De Quincey's acquaintance with his book about them, see ante, Vol. VII, pp. 8–10.—M.
3 [1] The Romans discover something apparently of the same tendency to a vague economy of abstraction. But in them it is merely casual, and dependent on accidental ignorance. Thus, for instance, it is ridiculous to render the Catullian Passer meæ puellæ by sparrow. As well suppose Lesbia to have fondled a pet hedgehog. Passer, or passerculus, means any little bird whatever. The sternness of the Roman mind disdained to linger upon petty distinctions; or at least until the ages of luxurious refinement had paved the way for intellectual refinements. So, again, malum, or even pomum, does not mean an apple, but any whatever of the larger spherical or spheroidical fruits. A peach, indeed, was described differentially as malum Persicum; an apricot, had the Romans known it, would have been rendered by malum apricum, or malum apricatum; but an apple also, had it been mentioned with any stress of opposition or pointed distinction attached to it, would have been described differentially as malum vulgare or malum domesticum.
4 [1] There is a short note by Gibbon upon this word; but it adds nothing to the suggestions which every thoughtful person will furnish to himself.
5 [1] In the later periods of Greek Literature, viz. at and after the era of Pericles, when the attention had been long pointed to language, and a more fastidious apprehension had been directed to its slighter shades of difference, the term “barbarous” was applied apparently to uncouth dialects of the Greek language itself. Thus, in the Ajax of Sophocles, Teucer (though certainly talking Greek) is described as speaking barbarously. Perhaps, however, the expression might bear a different construction. But in elder periods it seems hardly possible that the term barbarous could ever have been so used. Sir Edward B. Lytton, in his “Athens,” supposes Homer, when describing the Carians by this term, to have meant no more than that they spoke some provincial variety of the Ionic Greek; but, applied to an age of so little refinement as the Homeric, I should scarcely think this interpretation admissible.
6 [1] Where, by the way, the vocabulary of æsthetic terms, after all the labours of Ernesti and other German editors, is still far from being understood. In particular, the word facetus is so far from answering to its usual interpretation that nostro periculo let the reader understand it as precisely what the French mean by naïve.
7 [1] Latin had been adopted as the language for the foreign correspondence of the English Commonwealth from its institution in 1649; and Milton, as secretary for the foreign correspondence of the Commonwealth Government, and then of Cromwell, was known indifferently as the Foreign Secretary or the Latin Secretary.—M.
8 [2] Meric Casaubon (1599–1671), though by birth a Genevese, was for most of his life resident in England.—M.
9 [3] At this era, when Chaucer, Spenser, Shakspere, and the contemporary dramatists, when Lord Bacon, Selden, Milton, and many of the leading English theologians (Jewel, Hooker, Chillingworth, and Jeremy Taylor), had appeared—in fact, all the optimates of the English Literature—it must be remembered that the French Literature was barely beginning. Montaigne was the only deceased author of eminence; Corneille was the only living author in general credit. The reader may urge that already, in the times of Catherine de Medici, there were eminent poets. In the reign of her son Charles IX were several; and in the reign of her husband there was even a celebrated Pleiad of poets. But these were merely court poets; they had no national name or life, and were already forgotten in the days of Louis XIII. As to German Literature, that was a blank. Germany had then but one tolerable poet, viz. Opitz, whom some people (chiefly his countrymen) honour with the title of the German Dryden!
10 [1] This the reader might be apt to doubt, if he were to judge of French grammar by French orthography. Until recently—that is, through the last thirty years—very few people in France, even of the educated classes, could spell. They spelt by procuration. The compositors of the press held a general power-of-attorney to spell for universal France. A facsimile of the spelling which prevailed amongst the royal family of France at the time of the elder Revolution is given in Cléry's Journal: it is terrific. Such forms occur, for instance, as J'avoient (J'avois) for I had: J'été (étois) for I was. But, in publishing such facts, the reader is not to imagine that Cléry meant to expose anything needing concealment. All people of distinction spelled in that lawless way; and the loyal valet doubtless no more thought it decorous for a man of rank to spell his own spelling than to clean his own shoes or to wash his own linen. “Base is the man that pays,” says Ancient Pistol; “Base is the man that spells,” said the French of that century. It would have been vulgar to spell decently; and it was not illiterate to spell abominably; for literary men spelled not at all better; they also spelled by proxy, and by grace of compositors.
11 [1] By Heinze, if I recollect; and founded partly on that of Wolf.
12 [2] Foreigners do not often go so far as this; and yet an American, in his “Sketches of Turkey” (New York, 1833), characterizes the German (p. 478) not only as a soft and melodious language, but absolutely as “the softest of all European languages.” Schiller and Goethe had a notion that it was capable of being hammered into euphony, that it was by possibility malleable in that respect, but then only by great labour of selection, and as a trick of rope-dancing ingenuity.
13 [1] “Transcendental”:—Kant, who was the most sincere, honourable, and truthful of human beings, always understood himself. He hated tricks, disguises, or mystifications, simulation equally with dissimulation; and his love of the English was built avowedly on their veracity. So far he has an extra chance of intelligibility. On the other hand, of all men, he had the least talent for explaining himself, or communicating his views to others. Whenever Kant undertakes to render into popular language the secrets of metaphysics, one inevitably thinks of Bardolph's attempt to analyse and justify the word accommodation:—“Accommodation—that is, when a man is (as they say) accommodated; or when a man is being whereby he may be thought to be accommodated, which is an excellent thing.” There are sometimes Eleusinian mysteries, sealed by nature herself, the mighty mother, as aporreta, things essentially ineffable and unutterable in vulgar ears. Long, for instance, he laboured, but vainly he laboured, to render intelligible the scholastic idea of the transcendental. This should have been easy to deal with; for, on the one side lay the transcendent, on the other the immanent, two buoys to map out the channel; and yet did Kant, throughout his long life, fail to satisfy any one man who was not previously and independently in possession of the idea. Difficulties of this nature should seem as little related to artifice of style and diction as geometrical difficulties; and yet it is certain that, by throwing the stress and emphasis of the perplexity upon the exact verbal nodus of the problem, a better structure of his sentences would have guided Kant to a readier apprehension of the real shape which the difficulty assumed to the ordinary student.
$$$
