Lord Byron---Mr Moore---and Mr Leigh Hunt
Author: Hunt, Leigh.
Publication info: The Tatler : A Daily Journal of Literature and the Stage; London (1831): 1028, iv p.

Lord Byron—Mr Moore—and Mr Leigh Hunt ... [in, The Tatler. A Daily Paper of Literature, Fine Arts, Music, and the Stage ..]
[Page ]
No. 111] THE TATLER. TUESDAY, JANUARY 11, 1831 Letters and Journals of Lord Byron: with Notices of his Life, by Thomas Moore. Two vols. 4toMurray. LORD BYRON—MR MOORE—AND MR LEIGH HUNT, WITH ORIGINAL LETTERS, NOT IN MR MOORE'S WORK. We do not pretend to give a notice of this book after the usual fashion. We shall comment on it, as it may happen; but our great object is to shew that the author is an insincere man of the world, and that neither he nor his hero have a right to scatter charges of vulgarity and unworthiness. Had Mr Moore's second volume contained no more offence than the first, we should have passed it over, content to let him enjoy the airs he gives himself, and his harmless Irish metaphor of “venom on a grave.” Nor do we now pay attention to the work, out of any regard for his opinion, as far as he is concerned; but we have resolved, for certain weighty reasons, self-love apart, never to let another attack on us pass without notice. It is a plan we determined on pursuing, when we set up The Tatler , and we have already found the benefit of it. Our wish, as we said before, is to attack nobody in person, but to lead quiet tattling lives, if we are allowed to do so; but if not, we shall do our best, for far more sakes than our own, to make the blow recoil on the assailant. We have suffered enough upon all points; we have conceded enough in the case of Lord Byron. We shall concede no more. Our business will now be to give specimens of the blows we have withheld. As to Mr Moore's opinion of us or our writings the reader will see why we have long ceased to care for it, and we will here briefly tell him the reason, before we give him the proofs. We shall not deny him justice; but justice will be amply sufficient for our purpose.
Mr Moore is a songster and a man of wit. He is nothing more, nor ever will be, should he try for it till he burst. To be a man of wit, however, and a genuine one, as we allow him to be, is much; and to be a wit and a genuine songster too, has contented the ambition of the French patriot. Beranger, who has got fame by it, and admiration, and love. But then Beranger has been prepared to suffer, and to go to prison; nay, he has been even content (when time was) to wear a poor coat (mention it not in the Squares!); and he has laughed at intimacies with the great, and shown that he laughed sincerely. In one word, he has had faith in disinterestedness, and practised it. Now Mr Moore has no faith except in a joke, and a lord, and a good dinner; and yet he must needs try to win a serious reputation. For this purpose he has written volumes of bad prose, full of insincerity, and poems which are “three-piled hyperboles” of sugar-plums. He is one of those who must
                                         paint the lily
And throw a perfume on the violet.
He paints and plasters, because he has no faith in his materials. He cannot give us the soul of what he describes; he despairs of being able to make us love it in its simplicity; so he brings a heap of gaudy colours and gilding to stick upon it, that we may partake of the benefits of his obtuseness. Even in his songs, he can rarely get beyond a stanza with any real gravity. His table-songs are inimitable: his lampoons have been the just dread of dowagers and Whig-rats. But with the exception of a few lyrics upon recollections connected with Ireland, and probably with the best part of his childhood, which are affecting and beautiful, he cannot get a good serious thought in the first verse of a song, but he must spoil it in the next with some conceit or pedantry. He set about spoiling his prose, in the same manner, with classical names lugged in to bear company with modern, like a schoolboy's theme, with degrading prettinesses, and remote, half-witted metaphors; such as when he talks of Burke “ perching himself on the remotest branch from popular contact;” as if Burke, and the thick of politics, had anything to do with a linnet in a bush. The ridicule of the critics made him doubt this style; so in his new work he has done his best to alter it, though it was evidently a hard task: and not knowing how to be in earnest, he has taken to as ludicrous a formality; talks of “the poet Dryden” and “the poet Ariosto,” as if there were Drydens and Ariostos who were potters; and puts on so many strange, bridling, cosy, motherly, moral airs, betwixt love for his naughty young master, and zeal for the chaplain, that we almost fancy him with a mob-cap on, and a cup of “the creature” by his side. In short, Mr Moore is no real biographer, no prose-writer, no thinker; there is not one original reflection in all his remarks, nor one that has not been made in a better manner before him by writers of his own time; and his poetry is just as good as wit and festivity can make it, and nothing else. His world is the little world of fashion; his notions of liberty those of a Whig-Aristocrat, without the excuse; and the whole secret of his deification of Lord Byron is, that their intercourse was one of flattery and convenience, and that in trumpeting his great craft down the stream, he hopes his “little sail”
Will join the triumph and partake the gale.
He is mistaken. His huge book will go down to posterity like many others, for anybody to dig out of the book-shelves who chooses; but it will assuredly be left there, with a great deal even of what Lord Byron has supplied, like the letters of Rochester and others, which nobody now cares about. Extracts will do very well for the collections of those days, but none of Mr Moore's heavy common-places will accompany them; nor will Lord Byron, though a far greater genius than he, be regarded with anything like his biographer's wholesale astonishment. Does he think that the mighty mind of posterity will busy itself with his bustling details, unless it be as we do with Mr. Pepys; or look upon a lord with his little eyes? Even now, Lord Byron is not regarded by thousands, in any point of view, as he supposes, or would have us think he supposes. The bad opinion of the Noble Lord that was entertained years ago by multitudes, even among the aristocracy, is changed—for the worse. The grounds of this deterioration remain undisproved. The very lapse of a few short months has made a difference as to the impression which Mr Moore might have expected from his book; and to us, the difference has been an enormous one. The second French Revolution has drawn its golden line between the past and the future. Humanity and its rights have emerged into the sunshine: we have beheld the marvellous spectacle (Mr Moore called the impulse that produced it an “awful” one, and doubtless must have felt it so) of un-worldly power taking its seat on the throne of worldly: and everything in future is not to be construed in favour of the great, and disfavour of those they differ with, upon the strength of the old slavish misbelief.
Observe. Two years ago, if you had been a suffering Reformer, if you had persevered in one long work of endeavour for human good, or what you believed to be such, and in the belief that a time would come after you were dead and gone, when the dream should be realized,—if you had sacrificed “health, fame, and fortune” in the endeavour; if you had encountered every species of opposition and calumny: if your cheeks had sunk; if your heart had been torn to pieces for your children; and if with a weakened frame, and no resources but of your tired thoughts, not even with a sixpence in the world before you, you had been compelled to begin life again, at an age when others begin to look forward to some repose; and if during this time, you had been deceived by false patrons, and forsaken by false friends, and at the close of it had been worked up by a combination of circumstances and of pangs infinite, to utter a syllable of complaint which might have been less excusable in happier hours, and which you yourself should regret,—that one offence would be turned against you as if you had committed a thousand crimes; all that you had ever said, done, or endured in behalf of generous sentiments would be forgotten; and nobody be so loud in your condemnation, as the men whose desertion had helped to sting you into the impulse.
Now mark on the other hand. If, instead of the enduring Reformer, thus beset with misfortunes, you had been a Lord,—rich, noted, and
[Page ]
spoiled,—with every humour upon earth to indulge, and with the power to indulge it; if you had had no object in life, even when you seemed to have a better one, but to make a show and be talked of: ;—and if this Lord, so spoiled and perverted, partly by the flatteries of the very men who forsake the unfortunate, had been thought to commit almost every crime under the sun; was known to have been guilty of a thousand painful ebullitions of will and selfishness; to have disgusted the class that would have been proud of him, and the, reformers with whom he pretended to sympathize; to have calumniated his friends; betrayed his guests to derision; hastened the ruin of the fortunes he pretended to raise, by giving them up to their enemies; and spared neither age nor sex in his resentment;—yet being a Lord, and having a table, and possessing other worldly advantages as well as genius enough to make his opinions and his favour of consequence; what excuse should not be found for him ? How would not the doctrines of charity, which the other man had preached till he was hoarse, be brought up, solely in his favour? How would not some of his offences be denied with indignation, others contrasted with his good qualities, others secreted, others philosophized upon and excused, and all recommended to the consideration of our modesty, as the errors of a man of genius, without which, perhaps, he would not have been so great as he was? How many generous sentiments would not be expressed in pity to the man of excessive sensibility, who wounded everybody's feelings? How would not fond servility have trembled at his displeasure, and been glad to take his blows? How would not all his claims, however ostentatious, have been admitted? How his satires and private libels have been treasured up? How his friends resolved not to forsake him, in spite of the insults he dealt to them all round? Nay, how would not his very confessions of offence have been received with fond deprecating smiles as whims of his Lordship's not to be thought of,—mystifications, of dull rogues, merely at the expence of a few women,—singular, jocose humours, in which it pleased his Lordship to be tragic,—and generous instances of that desire to be thought ill of, which marked his hatred of hypocrisy, and the extreme simplicity and goodness of heart which was so natural to him.
Times are changed. They are changed, not because the case itself is altered, but because the assumptions of privileges and worldliness have received a blow such as was thought impossible, and men's hearts have expanded before their new hopes, and will not suffer those who believed in truth and public virtue, to be any longer at the mercy of their calumniators.
Mr Moore, in his second volume, has ventured to speak of the “unworthy alliance” which Lord Byron made with Mr Leigh Hunt when he set up The Liberal , of the “dross” of which that work was compounded, and of the “taint” with which his Lordship's purities were to be infected by being mixed up in the same “ pot-au-feu .” These images of the pot and sauce-pan are natural to Mr Moore, though in his show-shops he takes care to put his fillagree in the window. It is furthermore to be gathered from Lord Byron's correspondence, that Mr. Moore represented the faculties of Mr Leigh Hunt for periodical writing as “dead weight;” and wherever the name of that person is mentioned, Mr Moore does it with infinite airs and assumptions. We have observed, that we do not care for Mr Moore's opinion with regard to our writings. We should value it if we thought it sincere, upon a song or a squib. But whatever it may be in our power to do in other matters, we have a poor opinion of his knowledge of what ought to be done. We shall bring additional reasons for it before we have finished these notices. Our immediate object is to shew the inconsistency between the opinion which Mr Moore gave of Mr Leigh Hunt to Lord Byron after his former friend had fallen into adversity, and lost his public influence, and the one which he expressed to Mr Leigh Hunt himself when lords came to visit him, and when Mr Moore thought his good word of consequence. We again request the reader to keep in mind what we have stated respecting the object of these articles. We do not wish to “Sir,” or to bandy charges of this and that with Mr Moore, as the ladies “Madam” each other in the Beggar's Opera , when Macbeath is found out between them. We concede with hearty good-will his hero to Mr Moore, and the honours of what we suppose we are to call a “worthy” alliance. But we do not choose to risk any detriment possible to this new “dead-weight” of ours, The Tatler ,—a germ, however poor, of precious promise of shelter to many heads: and in order to take away the last remaining chance of an ill-effect of Mr Moore's opinions upon those of the public, we shall shew how little they are to be depended upon. His first volume may be forgotten by this time, and even in that volume, though there is the wish to think ill and to ridicule, Mr Moore has been compelled to be inconsistent by certain politic retrospections. He knew what his own conduct had argued in the first instance: he was aware that Lord Byron possessed letters; though, perhaps, he had forgotten those in the possession of Mr Leigh Hunt: at all events he has hampered his reputation for sincerity beyond retrieval. The reader will see, by the letters we are about to lay before him, that he who talked to Lord Byron about “dross,” and “taint,” and “dead weight,” must, either to his Lordship or Mr Leigh Hunt, have been grossly insincere. Yet even this light is nothing to what he must appear in, when the reader sees his expressions of gratitude contrasted with the warnings he afterwards gave the noble lord against a connection with his former friend, on account of his being at a disadvantage with the world.
The letters commence in the year 1810, when Mr Leigh Hunt was Editor of The Examiner , and wrote the dramatic criticisms in that paper. The signature of the first was cut out to give away.
LETTER I. On receiving a letter and some books. 1 My Dear Sir ,—I am just about to step into the mail for a week's absence from town, and have only time to say that I have received your letter, which I have read with gratitude and admiration.—How you, who write so much in public, can afford to write so well in private, is miraculous—I shall take your books with me, and hope to tell you all I think and feel about them at Beckenham.
Bury Street, Monday Evening.
LETTER II. On Mr Moore's Opera of M. P.; or Blue Stocking—Mr Leigh Hunt's Feast of the Poets, &c. [Post-mark, 1811.]
My Dear Sir ,—It was my intention upon receiving the last letter with which you favoured me, to answer it by a visit, and that immediately; but I was hurried off to the country by the sickness of a friend; and since my return, I have been occupied in a way that makes me very unfit society for you —namely, in writing bad jokes for the galleries of the Lyceum. To make the galleries laugh, is in itself sufficiently degrading, but to try to make them laugh and fail (which I fear will be my destiny) is deplorable indeed. The secret of it however is, that, upon my last return from Ireland, in one of those moments of weakness to which poets and their purses are too liable, I agreed to give Arnold a piece for the summer, and you may perceive by the lateness of my appearance, with what reluctance I have performed my engagement.
It will no doubt occur to you, upon reading the first page of this note, that the whole purport of it is to ask for mercy ; but the kind terms in which you have spoken of some things. I have written, make me too much interested in your sincerity to ask for, or wish , the slightest breach of it. I have no doubt that, in this instance you will treat me with severity, and I am just as sure that, if you do, I shall have deserved it. Only say that you expected something better from me, and I shall be satisfied.
I must (though late) thank you for your last Reflector —the poem to which you were good enough to direct my attentions, interested me extremely; there is nothing so delightful as those alternate sinkings and risings, both of feeling and style, which you have exhibited in those verses, and you cannot think how gracefully it becomes the high philosophy of your mind to saunter now and then among the flowers of poetry. Do indulge her with a few more walks, I beseech you.
I am afraid you look upon me as a bad politician, or you would likewise have bid me read the fine article, entitled (if I recollect right) “A Retrospect of Public Affairs.”—It is most ably done—but you write too well for a politician—and it is really a pity to go to the expence of fulminating gold , when common gunpowder serves the purpose just as well.
I shall not call upon you now till I have passed the ordeal—but till then, and ever, believe me, my Dear Sir, Your's with much esteem, Bury street, Saturday.
Thomas Moore.
The fragment which Carpenter told you I had for the Reflector was wickedly political—Some of the allusions have now lost their hold, but you shall see it, and perhaps something may, with your assistance, be yet made of it.
LETTER III. On M. P. or the Blue Stocking. My Dear Sir ,—I have not the least fear that you will make any ungenerous use of the anxiety which I express with respect to your good opinion of me. I dare say you have read in the Times of yesterday the very well-written, and (I confess), but too just account which they give of the shooting of my fool's-bolt on Monday. The only misrepresentation I can accuse them of (and that I feel very sensibly) is the charge of Royalism and courtiership which they have founded upon my foolish clap-trap with respect to the Regent,—this has astonished me the more, as the Opera underwent a very severe cutting from the Licenser for a very opposite quality to courtier-ship, and it is merely lest you should be led into a mistake (from the little consideration you can afford to give to such nonsense) that I trouble you with this note.
If the child's plea.—“I'll never do so again,” could soften criticism, I may be depended upon from this moment, for a most hearty abjuration of the stage, and all its heresies of pun, equivoque, and clap-trap:—however humble I may be in other departments of literature, I am quite conscious of being contemptible in this Your's, my Dear Sir, very truly, 27 Bury street, Wednesday. Thomas Moore.
Did you receive a note I sent you about a week ago?
LETTER IV. On the Feast of the Poets—Lord Moira, &c. [Post-mark, August 1812.]
My Dear Sir ,—I am sorry to find by your Examiner of last Sunday that you are ill, and I sincerely hope, both for the sake of
[Page ]
yourself and the world, that it is not an indisposition of any serious nature.—I have very often since I left town had thoughts of writing to you; not that I had anything to say, but merely to keep myself alive in your recollection, till some lucky jostle in our life's journey throws us closer together than we have hitherto been. It is not true, however, that I have had nothing to say to you, for I have to thank you for your poem in the Reflector , which I would praise for its beauty, if my praises could be thought disinterested enough to please you—but it has won my heart rather too much to leave my judgment fair play; and the pleasure of being praised by you , makes me incapable of returning the compliment:—all that I can tell you is, that your good opinion of me in general is paid back with interest ten-fold, and that my thoughts about you are so well known to those I live with, that I have the pleasure of finding you acknowledged among them by no other title than “Moore's Friend.” I suppose you have heard that I suddenly burst upon my acquaintances last spring, in the new characters of husband and father, and I hope you will believe me, when I say that (though my little intercourse with you might have made such a confidence impertinent on my side,) I often wished to make you one of the very few friends who knew the secret of my happiness, and witnessed my enjoyment of it. I rather think too, that if you were acquainted with the story of my marriage, it would not tend to lower me from that place, which I am proud to believe, I hold in your esteem. I have got a small house and large garden here in the neighbourhood of Lord Moira's fine library, and feel happy in the consciousness that I have indeed “mended my notions of pleasure,” and that I am likely, after all, to be what men like you approve. Mrs Moore and I have been for these ten days past on a visit to our noble neighbour, who is at length preparing for an old age of independence , by a manly and summary system of retrenchment. He has dismissed nearly all his servants, and is retiring to a small house in Sussex, leaving his park and fine library here to solitude and me . How I have mourned over his late negotiation! A sword looks crooked in water, and the weak medium of Carlton House has given an appearance of obliquity even to Lord Moira—but both the sword and he may be depended on still—at least I think so.
I was very much flattered by your taking some doggrel of mine out of the Morning Chronicle some months since, called “The Insurrection of the Papers.” I don't know whether you saw “The Plumassier” about the same time. It was mine also, but not so good. I hope next year, when I have got over a work I am about, to help you with a few shafts of ridicule in the noble warfare you are engaged in, since I find that you have thought some of them not unworthy your notice.
With best regards to Mrs Hunt and your little child , for whom I could supply a companion picture ; I am, my Dear Sir, Most truly your's, Wednesday. Thomas Moore.
I shall take the liberty of paying the postage of this, lest it might not be received at the Office.
[To be continued to-morrow, with further remarks.]
[Page ]
No. 112.] THE TATLER. WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 12, 1831 Letters and Journals of Lord Byron: with Notices of his Life, by Thomas Moore. Two vols. 4to. Murray. LORD BYRON—MR MOORE—AND MR LEIGH HUNT, WITH ORIGINAL LETTERS, NOT IN MR MOORE'S WORK. [Continued from our last] In the year 1812, the then Editor of the Examiner had been provoked by the Prince Regent's tergiversation towards Ireland, and the adulation of the Morning Post , into jesting about a large “Adonis of fifty,” and saying, that his Royal Highness had lived half a century without doing anything for the good of the people or the respect of posterity. For these words (or something like them) he and his brother, the joint proprietors of the Examiner , were sent to prison, and fined a thousand pounds. The sentence might have been escaped, the fine might have been escaped, had they consented to promise that they would say no more about the Prince. They refused. The fine was offered to be collected for them among friends,—among the people. They with gratitude declined. Some years after, Lord Byron, who thought himself obliged to Mr Leigh Hunt for his sticking by him in adversity, offered, through Mr Shelley, to lend him five hundred pounds to bring him over to Italy, that he might endeavour to repair his broken health and fortunes. He thanked his Lordship, but as he could not go to Italy, he of course could not avail himself of the offer. We speak of these money matters in a lump, to let the reader see, that when Mr Leigh Hunt thought himself bound at last to apply to his friends, and his adherence to the Good Cause helped to keep him poor notwithstanding, the necessity did not imply a habit of mind which the generous would have met with ill-construction, whatever occasion might have been taken of his diminished influence, for the mean to insult him and the selfish to forsake.
The next of Mr Moore's letters was written soon after his going to prison, in February 1813. At that time, everything from Mr Moore's pen, whether he praised or objected, had in his correspondent's eyes a hue of “favour and of prettiness;” nor did Mr Hunt ever afterwards say one word against him, or think it, till he found him insincere. What he now sees in some passages of his letters, he leaves the reader to guess. The one upon his patron Lord Moira in the following will surely be held a curiosity by those who think of the different positions of Mr Hunt as Editor of the Examiner and visitor of Lord Byron. The reader has been already told that the Italics in these letters are of the writers own marking, not ours.
LETTER V. On Mr Hunt's Imprisonment; Lord Moira, &c. Kegworth; Leicestershire, Thursday.
My Dear Sir ,—I was well aware that, on the first novelty of your imprisonment, you would be overwhelmed with all sorts of congratulations and condolences, and therefore resolved to reserve my tribute both of approbation and sympathy till the gloss of your chains was a little gone off, and both friends and starers had got somewhat accustomed to them. If I were now to tell you half of what I have thought and felt in your favor during this period, I fear it would be more than you know enough of me to give me credit for; and I shall therefore only say in true Irith phrase and spirit, that my heart takes you by the hand most cordially, and that I only wish heaven had given me a brother, whom I could think so well of and feel so warmly about. I hope to be in London in about four or five weeks, when one of my first visits shall be to Horse-monger-lane, and I trust I shall find your restrictions so far relaxed as to allow of my not merely looking at you through the bars, but passing an hour or two with you in your room.
I have long observed, and (I must confess) wondered at your retenue , about Lord Moira, and have sometimes, flattered myself (forgive me for being so vain, and so little just, perhaps, to your sense of duty) that a little regard for me was at the bottom of your forbearance, for you have always struck me as one whom nature never destined “accusatoriam vitam vivere,” and who, if you were to live much among us Lilliputians of this world, would soon find your giant limbs entangled with a multitude of almost invisible heart -strings; but be this as it may, I must acknowledge (with a candour which is wrung from me) that Lord Moira's conduct no longer deserves your approbation, and when I say this, I trust I need not add, that it no longer has mine . His kindnesses to me of course I can never forget, but they are remembered as one remembers the kindnesses of a faithless mistress, and that esteem, that reverence, which was the soul of all, is fled. His thoughtfulness about me, indeed, remained to the last, and in the interview which I had with him immediately on his coming down here after his appointment ho said that, though he had nothing sufficiently good in his Indian patronage to warrant my taking such an expensive voyage, yet it was in his power, by exchange of patronage with Ministers, to serve me at home, and that he meant to provide for me in this way; to which I answered, with many acknowledgements for his friendship, that “I begged he would not take the trouble of making any such application, as I would infinitely rather struggle on as I am, than accept of anything under such a system.” I must add (because it is creditable to him) that this refusal, though so significantly conveyed, and still more strongly afterwards by letter, did not offend him, and that he continued the most cordial attentions to us during the remainder of his stay. I know you will forgive this egotism, and would perhaps trouble you with a little more of it, if the unrelenting post time were not very nearly at hand.
∗   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗   
∗   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗    From your's ever, Thomas Moore.
In Mr Moore's first volume is an account of his coming with Lord Byron to dine in the prison, and a copy of verses from his lordship to his friend, in which the Editor of the Examiner is designated as “the wit in the dungeon.” How comes it by the way, that Mr Moore never showed Mr Hunt any of these flattering phrases from the Noble Poet? And what is the probable reason why they are now produced, after Mr H. has known Lord Byron, and suffered from the advice given him by Mr Moore? Mr M. says in this account of the dinner, that Lord Byron “good naturedly” accepted Mr Hunt's invitation, and that the “wishes” of his lordship's introducer were “attended to,” as far as the visitors at table were concerned; though it is intimated that a sad breach of politeness was manifested, when other visitors dropped in during the evening; Mr M. implying, that he had expressed “wishes” to the contrary. Our quondam friend must excuse us, if we think that a sincere man is likely to have a better memory than an insincere one, and that Mr Moore is mistaken in thinking that he expressed any such wish;—that is to say, meaning by the word “wish” a direction understood and received by the entertainer of the Noble Lord. We ask the reader whether the patronising style of this passage in Mr Moore's “reminiscences,” accords with the letters his host received from him at that period. As to “good-nature,” the host thought it good-natured enough certainly in Lord Byron to come to see him; and he had higher notions of lords then than he has learnt to have since. But he might have had fifty lords for his visitors, if he chose. Lords are never wanting: though patriots who can dispense with them are a little scarce, except in Paris. And with regard to friends dropping in, during this visitation by which the host was bound to die of honour and his monopoly, how was a man who has been such a student in truth as never to deny himself to a visitor in his life, to begin by not being at home in prison? Or how was he to excuse himself to friends who had come from a distance to see him, by telling them that he had a lord with him, and the invisible dignity of Mr Moore?
But all this is harmless, and we are sorry to waste the reader's time upon it. The letter containing the following passage was written a month or two after this visit. Lord Byron's other visits have been mentioned elsewhere; nor is it necessary to recur to them. Mr Leigh Hunt forgets how many letters he received at various times from Mr Moore, having lost or mislaid several; but such as he can find that have anything to do with the object of these articles, are here continued.
[Page ]
LETTER VI. Mayfield Cottage, Monday Evening. [Post mark, August 1813]
My Dear Hunt , I hope you see my friend Lord Byron often: one of the very few London pleasures I envy him is the visit to Horsemonger-lane now and then.
Faithfully your's Thomas Moore.
[We have been compelled to cut short the article of to-day. Amends will be made for it in our next]
[Page ]
No. 113.] THE TATLER. THURSDAY, JANUARY 13, 1831 Letters and Journals of Lord Byron: with Notices of his Life, by Thomas Moore. Two vols. 4to. Murray. LORD BYRON—MR MOORE—AND MR LEIGH HUNT, WITH ORIGINAL LETTERS, NOT IN MR MOORE'S WORK. [Continued from our last.] We forget the subject alluded to at the commencement of the ensuing letter, having lost the one that explained it; but Mr Moore and his correspondent used to send critical opinions to one another on their writings, and the latter recollects having elicited some pleasant reproaches from him for objecting to his too frequent use of the words “dews” and “flowers.” Mr Moore said, that he was in the act of writing some verses with those words in them, when the objection came in by the post: and that he had struck out one in consequence, but kept the other to spite his friend. Let the reader imagine the delightfulness of such a correspondent, if he had been but sincere. Whether the allusion was to any tirade against criticism arising out of this circumstance, or from some less friendly assault, we cannot say: for Mr Moore has not been slow to complain of the critics, nor to secure interest against them, though he will do nothing to assist you in turn. We do not believe that there is any mention in his writings of one single author, however acquainted he may have been with him in private, or however distinguished even the author may have been himself, unless he has been a man of influence in the circles. This it is to be “ diner-out !”. He does not know on what tender toes of aristocracy he may tread, till his footing is secure.
LETTER VII. On Mr Moore's pleasure in being what he never was, and his pride in letting the world know what he never did. Mayfield Cottage. Monday Morning.
My Dear Hunt ,—I have had an unquiet conscience ever since I sent off my last letter to you—because in my flippant tirade against critics, I was led into a forgetfulness of two or three kind things you have said, which are of more value to me than a whole legion of Aristotles—In the first place, though you bid me not think any more of the little glimpse of future glorification you have opened upon me, you could not seriously expect that I should obey you—you may be very sure I shall treasure up the promise most proudly, and if you depend upon my bad memory for an escape from it, you have but a very poor chance indeed.—Next to my pleasure in being your friend, is the pride I should feel in letting the world know that I am so.
∗   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗    The rest of this letter is omitted. It alludes to another critic who had just then given the world intimation of a mind destined to have considerable influence on the times, and who afterwards became a friend of Mr Moore as well as Mr Leigh Hunt. A doubt as to whether it would be proper to publish the passage, withholds it; but it is proper to add, that the doubt has nothing in it which tells against Mr Moore. It was only some occasional sentences in the passage that went to corroborate the object of these articles.
∗   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗    I intended to have told you something about my poem, which, though often pulled down and rebuilt again, is now in a fair way of progress, but I have not left myself room in this sheet, and it is not worth beginning another; so good bye.
Ever your's, T. Moore.
In the letters of Lord Byron, published by Mr Moore, are various notices of a poem written by Mr Leigh Hunt, called the Story of Rimini. In his Lordship's first mention of it in a letter to Mr Moore, he calls it “a real good, and very original poem;” says he thinks it will be “a great hit;” and adds, “you can have no notion how very well it is written, nor should I, had I not redde 2 it.” In a letter of the same date to Mr Murray the bookseller, he describes it as a “very wonderful and beautiful performance, with just enough of fault to make its beauties more remarked and remarkable.” The Story of Rimini was published; the Quarterly Review damned a poem written by the Editor of the Examiner ; and the damnation was the signal for a series of attacks and calumnies from all the quarters of Toryism, which conspiring with its ascendancy in those times, with the natural tendency of the mob of small writers to side against a losing cause, and with the Author's culpable carelessness in neglecting his fortunes while he aggravated his opinions, ultimately succeeded in depriving him of all influence. The Bourbons had just been reinstated then; every insult and injury was meditated to the cause of mankind; and every one of its advocates was to be sacrificed at any price. Those were not the times of Lafayette and Philip of Orleans, of the good natured William the Fourth, of the sounds of the ice of tyranny breaking up in all quarters, of the heavenly summer of hope, and of all England calling out for that Reform, which in recommending them to call for, the Editor of the Examiner had lost “health, fame and fortune.” The same signal which roused his enemies was the signal for the terrors and desertions of false friends. We shall not pain ourselves by dwelling upon graver instances, but not long afterwards the faults of Mr Leigh Hunt's poem became uppermost in the mind of his noble eulogizer; his friendship with Mr Shelley (always beloved by his friends, and now so praised by those who have been taught to know him, as well as by those who are eager to reconcile themselves to the memory of a man of rank,) was a new offence to the Anti-liberals, and to those who fear them; and his admiration of the genius of another young poet, Mr Keats, besides aggravating the offence, completed the impatience of the noble bard, who never liked Mr Hunt's homage to Mr Wordsworth as the first poet of the age. As to Mr Moore to go counter to the circles at all, except under circumstances which extorted their respect, or happened to suit the immediate policy of the Whig part of them, was a committal of a man's self, which, it seems, neutralized the merit of the exceptions, and not only precluded all public recognition of his friend, or even that hazardous assistance of a political squib or two, which his “gratitude” promised, and his expediency took such care not to perform, but enabled him to write in two sorts of style upon one subject, to two different friends; as the reader will see presently. Mr Moore cannot say his soul is his own, out of the pale of what is “received.” He has no notion even of a pathos which is not dressed, as he thinks, in a manner fit to go to court. His sphere is a round of dinners: his universal empyrean the roof of the Opera House. Yet the annals of fashion might have taught him, that tears are to be shed even there; and nature, in spite of mistake, still find a sympathy. Lord Byron spoke too partially, in the first instance, of the faults in the ‘Story of Rimini.’ We are very sincere in saying so; and any reader may believe us, when we add, that he confounded them too much with the poem afterwards. The truth is, that the critics were right when they objected to certain coinages, cant phrases, and other defects in the poem, generated, not as they thought by affectation, but by a mistaken notion of avoiding the cant of common-place. These can be easily taken away. But the author has been allowed to persuade himself by other reasons than his own, that there is a heart beating underneath those trivialities of the poem, which might have saved Mr Moore the duplicity of speaking of it in one way to the author, and another to his Noble Friend. To cite testimonies in favour of his own work, is a suing for opinions in formâ pauperis , which no decent author can be inclined to. The next generation is sure to do justice to the Poem one way or other; either by restoring it to perusal, or forgetting it altogether. Suffice it meanwhile to say, in observing the strange attempt of Mr Moore to throw ridicule one
[Page ]
day on what he has praised the day before, that in quarters fashionable as well as unfashionable, the pages of the ‘Story of Rimini’ have been embalmed in the most welcome of all criticisms, —tears. Let this bit of superfluousness be pardoned in a writer who would fain have devoted his whole life to poetry, had not circumstances and the times compelled his conscience to serve truth in a less pleasing shape. In 1816, after the first outcry had been raised against the Story of Rimini, Lord Byron intimated to Mr Moore, who had then become a critic himself, that a favourable notice of it in the Edinburgh Review would be useful, and “do it justice.” But Mr Moore, besides, discovering that Mr Hunt was no wholesale flatterer, had found out that the once potent editor of a newspaper, and critic of new operas, could be quizzed by a court dependent, and had thus become an object of ridicule to all who valued the gravity of their reception In his first quarto, therefore, we find the following note on the above intimation of his lordship's:—
“My reply,” says Mr Moore, “to this part of his letter, was, I find, as follows: with repect to Hunt's poem, though it is, I own, full of beauties, and though I like himself sincerely, I really could not undertake to praise it seriously . There is so much of the quizzible in all he writes, that I never can put on the proper pathetic face in reading him.”—Vol. i. p. 644.
Now mark the following letter, written a year before.
LETTER VIII. On the Story of Rimini. Mayfield Cottage, March 7th, 1814.
My Dear Hunt ,—I do forgive you for your long silence, though you have much less right to be careless about our non-intercourse than I have—if I knew as little about you and your existence as you know of me. I should not feel quite so patient under the privation—but I have the advantage of communing with you, for a very delightful hour, every Tuesday evening: of knowing your thoughts upon all that passes, and of exclaiming “right!—bravo!—exactly!” to every sentiment you express—whereas, from the very few signs of life I give in the world, you can only take my existence for granted, as we do that of the
                                         little woman under the hill,
Who, if she's not gone, must live there still.
However, I do forgive you—and only wish I could pay you back a millesimal part of the pleasure which—in various ways—as poet, as politician, as partial friend, you have lately given me. Your Rimini is beautiful, and its only faults such as you are aware of, and prepared to justify—there is that maiden charm of originality about it—that “ integer, illibatusque succus ,” which Columella tells us the bees extract—that freshness, of the living fount, which we look in vain for in the bottled-up Heliconian of ordinary Bards—in short, it is poetry—and notwithstanding the quaintnesses, the coinages, and even affectations, with which, here and there —
I had just got so far, my dear Hunt, when I was interrupted by a prosing neighbour, who has put everything I meant to say out of my head—so, there I must leave you, impaled on the point of this broken sentence, and wishing you as little torture there as the nature of the case will allow. I have only time to say again, that your poem is beautiful, and that, if I do not exactly agree with some of your notions about versification and language, the general spirit of the work has more than satisfied my utmost expectations of you. If you go on thus, you will soon make some of Apollo's guests sit “below the salt.” The additions to this latter Poem 3 are excellent, and the lines on Music at the end are full of beauty.
There are many of the lines of Rimini that “haunt me like a passion”—I don't know whether I ought to own that these are among the number—I quote from memory:—
The woe was short, was fugitive, is past!
The song that sweetens it may always last.
I am afraid you will set this down among your regular, sing-song couplets—to me it is all music.
Is it true that your friend Lord B. has taken to the beautifully “mammosa” Mrs ---? Who, after this, will call him a “searcher of dark bosoms.” Not a word to him, however, about this last question of mine. Ever, my dear Hunt, most faithfully your's, Thomas Moore.
I hope to deliver my mighty work into Longman's hands in May, but, of course, it will not go to press till after the summer.
We leave the foregoing to the reader without further comment.
The next letter is dated four years afterwards, by which time Mr Moore had got a considerable access of dread respecting the progress of liberalism. He has a pretty alliteration somewhere in one of his quartos about “rank, riches, and religion.” We know not whether the alteration of times would have modified that particular passage, for we do not remember the context; but we are very firmly persuaded that if the second French Revolution had happened before the publication of Mr Moore's prose works, the author would not have thought it necessary to express so much anxiety respecting the dangers of plain speaking; nor are we sure that the word religion would have been found in his writings. It was not to be expected perhaps under any circumstances, that Mr Moore would be found in the van of opinion. We do not believe that he has given up to a party what was “meant for mankind.” People are generally meant for what they do. But at all events, we beg the reader to compare the coy and devout publicities of Mr Moore, with the words marked in capitals in the following letter. We need not add that the words are so marked by ourselves.
LETTER IX. Sloperton Cottage, Devizes, January 21, 1818.
My Dear Hunt ,—Having the opportunity of a frank; I must write you a line or two to thank you for your very kind notices of me, and still more, to express my regret that in my short and busy visit to town, I had not the happiness, to which I looked forward, of passing at least one day with you and your family. I am always so thrown “in medias res” when I go to London, that I have never a minute left for anything agreeable—but my next visit will, I hope, be one of pleasure, and then you are sure to be brought in among. the ingredients. For the cordiality with which you have praised and defended me, I am, I assure you, most deeply grateful; and though less alive, I am sorry to say, both to praise and blame, than I used to be yet coming from a heart and a taste like your's, they cannot fail to touch me very sensibly. You are quite right about the conceits that disfigure my poetry; but you (and others) are quite as wrong in supposing that I hunt after them—my greatest difficulty is to hunt them away. If you had ever been in the habit of hearing Curran converse—though I by no means intend to compare myself with him in the ready coin of wit—yet, from the tricks which his imagination played him while he talked, you might have some idea of the phantasmagoria that mine passes before me while I write—In short, St Anthony's temptations were nothing to what an Irish fancy has to undergo from all its own brood of Willio-th'-wisps and hobgoblins.
I was sorry to find that Cobbett found such a sturdy defender in your correspondent of last week; indeed, I am grieved to the heart at many things I see among the friends of liberty, and begin to fear much more harm from the advocates of the cause than from its enemies. You, however, are always right in politics ; and if you would but keep your theories of religion and morality a little more to yourself (the MANIA on these subjects being so universal and congenital , that he who thinks of curing it is as mad as his PATIENTS) you would gain influence over many minds that you unnecessarily shock and alienate. I would not say this of you in public (for I cannot review my friends) but I say it to you thus privately, with all the anxious sincerity of a well-wisher both to yourself and the cause you so spiritedly advocate. I intended to have written you a long letter, but the post- belle (an old woman whom I employ for that purpose) is ringing her alarum below, and I must finish. My best regards to Mrs Hunt. Your's very faithfully. Thomas Moore.
LETTER X. Sloperton Cottage. Devizes, Oct. 10th, 1818.
My Dear Hunt ,—I intended that a letter from me should accompany your copy of the 7th number of my Melodies; but I rather think, from your paper of Sunday last, that Power has had the start of me; and I only write now to get a little credit from you for my intentions , which, in general indeed, are the best things about me, but which, unfortunately, the matter-of-fact people of the world are never satisfied with. At you have imagination, however, as well as heart, I shall leave you to fancy all the kind things I have felt towards you, during the long, long time I have passed in saying nothing whatever about them; and I am the more inclined just now to trust a good deal to your imaginative power, as I am disabled from writing much from a slight strain in my shoulder, which I received the night before last—when the world was near being a bad poet out of pocket by the upsetting of a carriage in which I was returning from Bowood.
Shall you be in London about the latter end of November? I hope to be there about that time, and we must meet; for I have much to say to you, much to give and receive sympathy about. I suppose that you have heard of the calamity that has befallen me through the defalcation of my deputy at Bermuda, who has made free with the proceeds of two or three ships and cargoes deposited in his hands, and I am likely to be made responsible for the amount. You will, it is most probable, have an opportunity of returning my prison visits ; as, if it comes to the worst, the Rules must be my residence. However, (as I have just written to Lord Byron) Unity of Place is one of Aristotle's Rules , and, as a poet, I must learn to conform to it. By the bye he has made many enquiries about you in his two last letters to me, and I should be glad to hear from you before I write to him again. I hope you will like my Irish Melodies better than you liked Lalla Rookh.
You were right about the verses to Sir H. Lowe, Your's, my dear Hunt, very truly, Thomas Moore.
[Page ]
By the way, in turning over a bundle of letters, we have met with another, the beginning of which, from the writer who could praise nothing seriously, is edifying. Mr Moore is thanking Mr Leigh Hunt for sending him a Mask, called the ‘Descent of Liberty,’ which, to say the truth, was not worth his praises; and he writes as follows:—
‘You already know my opinion of it—it will live in spite of the Congress and Buonaparte—and though the principal maskers have shifted dresses a good deal since, your poetry is independent of the politics—it has that kind of general and fanciful character of Sir Joshua Reynold's portraits, which will make it long outlive the frail and foolish heads that sat for it.”
To return a moment to the “pathetic face,” we must relate a characteristic touch of the late Mr Hazlitt. When he read the note in Mr Moore's book, containing those words about “putting on” the face, as aforesaid, he exclaimed, with one of his “looks,” —“ Damn his face! What has that to do with it? Does he always put on a face when he goes to read anything serious?”
The next and last letter is dated August 20, 1821, that is say, only a few months before Mr Moore wrote to Lord Byron to warn him against any connexion of authorship with Mr Leigh Hunt and Mr Shelley on accounts of its being a “bankrupt” “unequal” and “unholy” alliance. For the “unholy,” we refer the readers to Mr Moore's opinion respecting the “mania” prevalent on the subject of religion and morality; for the “unequal” (keeping in mind that the work proposed to be set up was a periodical one), to all that he has said in the previous letters respecting Mr Hunt as a periodical writer, and to the close of the first paragraph of the following letter, written, as we have just observed, but a few months before his admonitions to Lord Byron. For the “bankrupt” we refer to his “gratitude,” and perhaps we may add with a little better chance of the existence of such a thing, his shame. Such is the “gratitude” of a man of the world! A losing cause is with him cause of offence, and a sufficient reason why he should warn one friend who never appears up to that period to have done him any service, against connexion with another to whom he had repeatedly expressed himself under obligation. But the reader shall have this matter sifted in our next.
We conclude with introducing to him the harbinger of Mr Moore” good offices:—
LETTER XI. Paris, August, 20, 1821.
My Dear Hunt ,—I take the opportunity of a frank to send you a hasty line of acknowledgment for your kind mention of me. I was indeed most happy to see the announcement of your recovery, for public as well as private reasons—for, though you have right good auxiliaries, there is but one Richmond in the field after all.
This is a very delightful place to live in, and if I was not obliged to stay in it, I should find the time pass happily enough; for were
“Ev'n Paradise itself my prison,
Still I should long to leap the crystal walls.”
Your friend Mr Bowring and I were rather unlucky in our attempts to meet, but we did meet at last, and I liked him exceedingly.”
All the insincere will of course secretly love Mr Moore the better for these letters. His double dealing will help to reconcile them to their own. But what will the sincere say to him? And they are a rising party now in the world! Perhaps he might have found it better for him in the end to stick to them.
[Page ]
No. 114.] THE TATLER. FRIDAY, JANUARY 14, 1831 Letters and Journals of Lord Byron: with Notices of his Life, by Thomas Moore Two vols. 4to. Murray. LORD BYRON—MR MOORE—AND MR LEIGH HUNT, WITH ORIGINAL LETTERS, NOT IN MR MOORE'S WORK. [Continued from our last.] We are now arrived at the period of Mr Leigh Hunt's junction with Lord Byron in the ‘Liberal.’ Let it be allowed us to recapitulate a little. For the last ten years, from 1811, up to August 1821, Mr Moore has been complimenting Mr Leigh Hunt as an author who wrote “too well for a politician;” as a “fulminator of gold;” as a man whom he should “like for a brother;” as a companion, the power to visit whom “he envied Lord Byron;” as a friend who had warmly excited his “gratitude,”—whose friend it was his “pleasure to be, and his proud wish to let the world know for such;” as a “beautiful” and “original” poet, not to be compared with “ordinary bards;” and as the sole “Richmond in the field,” in a certain line of writing.
These last words are scarcely out of his mouth, when Mr Moore writes to Lord Byron to warn him against any connexion with Mr Leigh Hunt, as it was a “bankrupt” one, an “unequal” one, “unholy,” and would render him an object of “ridicule.”
If we had Mr Moore's insincerity, we should speak of the above eulogies with the usual modest common places, and nobody would believe us. As it is, we can only trust, that the reader, for the sake of his own sincerity and ours, will believe us when we say, that nothing but inexperience and the cordiality with which we supposed. Mr Moore to write them at the time, could have induced us to receive them without blushing then ; and that it is only with feelings of pain, shame, and disgust, that we now contrast them with his abuse, and can reflect we ever did receive them.
In the last but one of the letters from Mr Moore to Mr Leigh Hunt, which we have laid before the public, the writer says, that Lord Byron had lately been making many inquiries after Mr Hunt, and an answer is requested from him, before another letter is written to the Noble Lord. This has a friendly look: and conveys an impression, that Mr Hunt was mentioned in a friendly way in the correspondence of his two acquaintances. Yet it would seem from Mr Moore's late work, that such was not the fact. On the part of Lord Byron, it certainly was not. The most bitter things his Lordship ever said of Mr Hunt, are contained in a letter of June. 1818, four months previous to the kind inquiries intimated by Mr Moore; and these bitter things are introduced by certain stars, evidently referring to something which Mr. Moore had said, and which he had apparently said, with no great respect towards the man, for whom he was professing gratitude and admiration. Be this as it may, what induced Lord Byron at that time to write such things of the man towards whom he also had expressed gratitude? Part of the reason must perhaps, remain in obscurity, in default of an elucidation from Mr Moore. The rest we can explain: and in explaining these, we elucidate all the real grounds of objection which Lord Byron had against Mr Leigh Hunt, then or afterwards. The reader will be good enough to bear in mind, that Mr Hunt had never said anything against Lord Byron, either publicly or in private: thus he was no double-dealing correspondent, who wrote one thing to one man and another to another; that he was notoriously scrupulous among his friends in saying nothing behind a man's back which he had not thought it right to say to his face; and that the public are in possession of all his sins of accusation. But, in the first place, he had become, as before observed, an object of attack to all the agents of Toryism, whose cause was then flushed with power, in consequence of the triumph of the allies; and Lord Byron, besides being in want of an influential advocate with the public, never surmounted that reverence for the circles, and dread of worldly ridicule, with which he was hampered by his rank. This was one of the reasons why he had begun to fall off in his notions of respect for Mr Leigh Hunt. A second reason was, that Mr Hunt had become poor, and poverty is an unpleasant object of contemplation to a luxurious man of the world. especially as it diminishes influence with the worldly. Thirdly, Mr Leigh Hunt was falling off more and more from his respect for titles,—not to mention that he had paid Lord Byron the awkward compliment of supposing him to be above his rank, which he was not. Fourthly, and lastly, (and this was the greatest reason of all, as far as the literary part of the business was concerned.) Mr Leigh Hunt, besides not being a flatterer of his lordship in private, and not saying much about his writings in public, (the poetry he was fondest of being of another kind, and Lord Byron's being seldom in his thoughts), was guilty of the unpardonable offence of thinking Mr Wordsworth the first poet of the day, and of being the first to hail the rise of a young poet, Mr Keats, who promised, he thought, to rival Mr Wordsworth. Lord Byron had always objected, with an appearance of spleen, to Mr Hunt's high estimation of Mr Wordsworth; and it seems by the letters which his kind friend Mr Moore has published, that he became absolutely furious about Keats. The reason was, that he had an instinctive sense of the truth of a great deal that was said about those two poets; and he had got a notion, that Keats spoke of him with contempt. On seeing a miniature of Mr Keats put up in Mr Hunt's study at Pisa, he could not help expressing his astonishment, how the other could admire him. Mr Hunt said, that Mr Keats would be sorry to hear him talk so, as he (Mr Keats) was an admirer of Don Juan. The noble poet softened immediately, turned the conversation upon that point, and upon the merits discernible in Mr Keats's poetry; and took the first opportunity of mentioning his genius with honour in Don Juan. This is the reason, why, after all the vituperations of him published in Mr Moore's correspondence, he speaks of Mr Keats's ‘Hyperion’ as a wonderful production, and says it was superior to ‘Eschylus!’
The ‘Liberal’ was set up in spite of the good offices of the grateful Mr Moore.
We will here quote a passage on that matter from the masterly pages of Mr Hazlitt:
‘Mr Moore has been so long accustomed to the society of Whig Lords, and so enchanted by the smile of beauty and fashion, that he really fancies himself one of the set , to which he is admitted on sufferance, and tries very unnecessarily to keep others out of it. He talks familiarly of works that are or are not read “in our circle;” and seated smiling and at his ease in a coronet-couch, enlivening the owner by his brisk sallies and Attic conceits, is shocked, as he passes, to see a Peer of the realm shake hands with a Poet. There is a little indulgence of spleen and envy, a little servility and pandering to aristocratic pride in this proceeding. Is Mr Moore bound to advise a Noble Poet to get as fast as possible out of a certain publication, lest he should not be able to give an account at Holland or at Lansdown House, how his friend Lord Byron had associated himself with his friend Leigh Hunt? Is he afraid that the “Spirit of Monarchy” will eclipse the “Fables for the Holy Alliance” in virulence and plain speaking? Or are the members of the “Fudge Family” to secure a monopoly for the abuse of the Bourbons and the doctrine of Divine Right? Because he is genteel and sarcastic, may not others be paradoxical and argumentative? Or must no one bark at a Minister or General, unless they have been first dandled, like a little French pug-dog, in the lap of a lady of quality? Does Mr Moore insist on the double claim of birth and genius as a title to respectability in all advocates of the popular side—but himself? Or is he anxious to keep the pretensions of his patrician and plebeian friends quite separate, so as to be himself the only point of union, a sort of double meaning , between the two? It is idle to think of setting bounds to the weakness and illusions of self-love as long as it is confined to a man's own breast; but it ought not to be made a plea for holding back the powerful hand that is stretched out to save another struggling with the tide of popular prejudice, who has suffered shipwreck of health, fame and fortune in a common cause, and who has deserved the aid and the good wishes of all who are (on principle) embarked in the same cause by equal zeal and honesty, if not by equal talents to support and to adorn it!’ 4
[Page ]
An account of the opposition made to this work has been given in other places and the secret of it admirably sifted by the above writer, of whom we shall have more to say presently. Mr Moore speaks of the “dross” in the ‘Liberal,’ and intimates that it was compounded of nothing else, with the exception of the noble lord's contributions. He tries hard at the same time to impress upon the reader, that he has a sort of genteel ignorance of what was in it. Part of this “dross” was furnished by Mr Hazlitt, who, now he is dead, is acknowledged on all hands, except Mr Moore's, to have been one of the most powerful writers of his time. His articles in the ‘Liberal’ (of which more hereafter) are almost as good as any he ever wrote; and that is the reason why Mr Moore and others had such a horror of them. Mr Hazlitt is mentioned once ,—we believe no oftener,—in the ‘Life and Correspondence’ published by Mr Moore, and is described by Lord Byron as one who “ talks pimples —a red and white corruption rising up (in little imitation of mountains upon maps) but containing nothing, and discharging nothing, but their own humours.” For the suggestion of this piece of grossness and absurdity, the Noble Lord was indebted to some Tory magazine, which in the personalities allowed to Toryism but to nothing else, falsely represented Mr Hazlitt as having a pimpled face. It pleased the jealous spleen of the noble anti-republican to take the misrepresentation for granted; and it has no less pleased Mr Moore to repeat his use of it. We have already presented the reader, in Mr Hazlitt's own words, with one reason for this proceeding of Mr Moore's; and we shall lay before him another below.
Mr Moore has a little mistaken the art of poetry for the cosmetic art . He does not compose an historic group, or work out a single figure; but throws a variety of elementary sensations, of vivid impressions together, and calls it a description. He makes out an inventory of beauty—the smile on the lips, the dimple on the cheeks, item , golden locks, item , a pair of blue wings, item , a silver sound, with breathing fragrance and radiant light, and thinks it a character or a story. He gets together a number of fine things and fine names, and thinks that, flung on heaps, they make up a fine poem. This dissipated, fulsome, painted, patch-work style may succeed in the levity and languor of the boudoir , or might have been adapted to the Pavilions of royalty, but it is not the style of Parnassus, nor a passport to Immortality. It is not the taste of the ancients, “ 'tis not classical lore”—nor the fashion of Tibullus, or Theocritus, or Anacreon, or Virgil, or Ariosto, or Pope, or Byron, or any great writer among the living or the dead, but it is the style of our English Anacreon, and it is (or was) the fashion of the day! Let one example (and that an admired one) taken from ‘Lalla Rookh,’ suffice to explain the mystery and soften the harshness of the foregoing criticism.
Now upon Syria's land of roses.
Softly the light of eve reposes,
And like a glory, the broad sun
Hangs over sainted Lebanon:
Whose head in wintry grandeur towers,
And whitens with eternal sleet,
While summer, in a vale of flowers,
Is sleeping rosy at his feet.
To one who look'd from upper air;
O'er all th' enchanted regions there,
How beauteous must have been the glow,
The life, the sparkling from below!
Fair gardens, shining streams, with ranks
Of golden my lons on their bank.
More golden where the sun-light falls,—
Gay lizards, glittering on the walls
Of ruin'd shrines, busy and bright
As they were all alive with light:—
And yet more splendid, numerous flocks
Of pigeons, settling on the rocks,
With their rich, restless wings, that gleam
Variously in the crimson beam
Of the warm west, as if inlaid
With brilliants from the mine, or made
Of tearless rainbows, such as span
The unclouded skies of Peristan!
And then, the mingling sounds that come
Of shepherd's ancient reed, with him
Of the wild bees of Palestine,
Bahaquetting through the flowery vales—
And Jordan, those sweet banks of thine,
And woods, so full of nightingales.—
The following lines are the very perfection of Della Cruscan sentiment, and affected orientalism of style. The Peri exclaims on finding that old talisman and hackneyed poetical machine, “a penitent tear”—
‘Joy, joy forever! my task is done—
The gates are pass'd, and Heaven is won!
Oh! am I not happy? I am, I am—
To thee, sweet Eden! how dark and sad
Are the diamond turrets of Shadukiam,
And the fragrant bowers of Amberabad.’
Mr Shelley's masterly translation of the ‘May-day Night’ from Faust; appeared in the ‘Liberal;’ and Mr Moore, enlightened by the fact of Mr. Shelley's having been heir to a title, and of his condescending to pay him (as he truly says) an “undeserved compliment,” pronounces him to have been a man of real genius.” One of the most genuine wits now living, whose name we do not feel ourselves at liberty to mention without applying to him, and from whom (we are not sure) perhaps Mr Moore has heard in one of the Reviews, was a writer in the ‘Liberal’. Others to whom we also feel under a like delicacy, and who are at a distance contributed articles which might help Mr Moore to some truer notions on the side of refinement. And gallantry, as well as respect for her powers, might have induced him to except from the charge of “dross” the contributions of Mrs Shelley, the authoress of Frankenstein, which he has pronounced to be “one of those original conceptions, that take hold of the public mind at once and for ever.” Mr Leigh Hunt willingly concedes that the articles from his own pen in the ‘Liberal’ are far inferior to what he could have wished them, and were not worthy of the occasion. Ill health; and the calamitous death of his friend, and the new, unlooked for, and most unpleasant circumstances under which he found himself situated with Lord Byron, may perhaps excuse his doing no better. Yet his lordship would fain have persuaded him, that there was one article of his writing which Mr Moore would look upon with serious eves. This was a trifle called “Rhyme and Reason,” proposing to modern versifiers to omit all but their rhymes in future, as matter superfluous. But as Lord Byron (we do not say with what truth) considered it likely to make his friend look so grave, we will insert the commencement of it.
‘A friend of ours, the other day, taking up the miscellaneous poems of Tasso, read the title-page into English, as follows: “The Rhymes of the Lord Twisted Yew, Amorous, Bosky, and Maritime. 5 The Italians exhibit a modesty worthy of imitation, in calling their miscellaneous poems, rhymes. Twisted Yew himself, with all his genius, has put forth an abundance of these terminating blossoms, without any fruit behind them: and his countrymen of the present day do not scruple to confess, that their living poetry consists of little else. The French have a game at verses, called Rhymed Ends, (Bouts Rimes) which they practise a great deal more than they are aware; and the English, though they are a more poetical people, and lay claim to the character of a less vain one, practice the same game to a very mean lid extent without so much as allowing that the title is applicable to any part of it.
‘Yet how many “Poems” are there among all these nations, of which we require no more than the rhymes, to be acquainted with the whole of them? You know what the rogues have done, by the ends they come to. For instance,
Grove,
    Night,
Rove,
    Delight,
Heart,
    Prove,
Impart,
    Love,
Kiss,
    Blest,
Bliss,
    Rest.
There is in all this a play of fancy, a glitter of words, a shallowness of thought, and a want of truth and solidity that is wonderful, and that nothing but the heedless, rapid glide of the verse could render tolerable:—it seems that the poet, as well as the lover,—
‘May bestride the Gossamer,
That wantons in the idle, summer air,
And yet not fall, so light is vanity!’
‘Mr Moore ought not to contend with serious difficulties or with entire subjects. He can write verses, not a poem. There is no principle of massing or continuity in his productions—neither height nor breadth nor depth of capacity. There is no truth of representation, no strong internal feeling—but a continual flutter and display of affected airs and graces, like a finished coquette, who hides the want of symmetry by extravagance of dress, and the want of passion, by flippant forwardness and unmeaning sentimentality. All is flimsy, all is florid to excess. His imagination may dally with insect beauty, with Rosierueian spells; may describe a butterfly's wing, a flower-pot, a fan: but it should not attempt to span the great outlines of nature, or keep pace with the sounding march of events, or grapple with the strong fibres of the human heart. The great becomes turgid in his hands, the pathetic insipid. If Mr Moore were to describe the heights of Chimboraco, instead of the loneliness, the vastness, and the shadowy might, he would only think of adorning it with roscate tints, like a strawberry-ice; and would transform a magician's fortress in the Himmalaya (stripped of its mysterious gloom and frowning horrors) into a jeweller's toy, to be set upon a lady's toilette. 6
[Page ]
Was there ever per-oration more eloquent? Ever a series of catastrophes more explanatory of their previous history? Did any Chinese gentleman ever show the amount of his breeding and accomplishments more completely, by the nails which he carries at his finger's ends?
There is a specimen of a Pastoral to the same purpose, a Prologue, &c. and mention is made of “tinkling old gentlemen about town;” in which venerable class Mr Hunt certainly did not mean to include Mr Moore. He can safely add, that he had no intention whatsoever against Mr Moore in writing the article; though Lord Byron was always insisting that he had ; and as his lordship now began to let his visitor into the secrets of intercourse between the insincere, to laugh at Mr Moore's love-poetry (which he was in the habit of calling “Looks and Tones,”) to say how angry the author of ‘Lalla Rookh’ was at Mr Hunt's not holding it in greater admiration, and at Mr Hazlitt's having said that he “ought not to have written it even for three thousand pounds,” and finally to describe him as a man who could express two different opinions of his friends, before them and behind their backs, (which he charged him with doing to himself, and which the reader has seen but too lamentably how capable he was of doing) Mr Leigh Hunt afterwards said, when the Loves of the Angels appeared, that he might have exemplified the subject of ‘Rhyme and Reason,’ out of that poem, and Lord Byron was always archly inciting him to do it, under pretence of requesting him not. Day after day, he used to say to his visitor, “Well, have you begun? Are ‘Looks and Tones’ getting on? Mind, you must not publish:—You know I'm his friend .” And then he used to chuckle, and shake for glee.
[We are compelled to leave off here, like an Eastern reciter, at an interesting part of our story. We shall resume it to-morrow.]
[Page ]
No. 115.] THE TATLER. SATURDAY, JANUARY 15, 1831. Letters and Journals of Lord Byron: with Notices of his Life, by Thomas Moore. Two vols. 4to Murray. LORD BYRON—MR MOORE—AND MR LEIGH HUNT, WITH SOME ORIGINAL ANECDOTES OF HIS LORDSHIP. [Concluded.] If Mr Moore supposes that Lord Byron made him an exception to the way in which he used to talk of his “friends,” he is mistaken. We do not believe that he does suppose it; though he would fain make a different impression on the public mind, and represent Lord Byron as being in a strange state of momentary waywardness, when he was not ranking him among those he loved best. The fact is, that Lord Byron laughed at him. He was inclined to love him heartily enough, as long as he believed his flatteries sincere. His respect for the circles induced him to have a certain respect for one who could lampoon: and in addition to Mr Moore's flatteries of him as a Poet, there was one other ground of regard upon which Lord Byron was particularly inclined to like him, because it enabled him to undervalue him at the same time; and that was Mr Moore's veneration for lords. But as all these “friends” were in the habit of talking against one another behind their backs, in a style which they did not think so well for their faces, he had found out, as Mr Hunt has done, that his earnest, anxious, and delighted correspondent, Mr Moore, could have his word against him as well as the rest. Lord Byron said to Mr Hunt one day, with a very bitter face, when the latter was expressing his surprise at discovering Moore to be double tongued,—“Surprised at Moore! Why, do you know what he says of me ?” I did not tell him that I had heard something Mr Moore had said, nor from whom I had heard it; and the recollection mortified him so much, that he was fairly unable to get the words out. Mr Hunt had never shown an inclination for hearing him talk against his friends; in fact, he had shown a reverse feeling: and this was one of the reasons why Lord Byron never took heartily to his society. But his Lordship could not contain himself, nevertheless. He saw that his visitor was justly offended with Mr Moore's duplicity, against which, however, no retaliation was meditated, not even in jest. Mr Hunt felt too much hurt by it, and was not aware of the extent to which he should have to struggle against the effects of his tergiversation. The talk, therefore, alluded to in our last, about turning the ‘Loves of the Angels’ into an exemplication of the joke upon Rhyme and Reason, was mere talk; though his Lordship tried hard that it should not be: he did not let the subject drop for weeks; was always returning to his pleasantry about “Looks and Tones;” and as he saw that Mr Hunt could not help laughing at his malicious piece of wit about being Mr Moore's friend, he took an especial delight in repeating it:—“Well, are we never to have the Rhymes?—the Looks and Tones?—
‘Oh , there are looks and tones!”
(We believe this is a line of Mr Moore's). And then he would retreat a little, doubling himself up in his peculiar manner, and uttering a kind of goblin laugh, breathing and grinning, as if, instead of his handsome mouth, he had one like an ogre, from ear to ear. Then came the inevitable addition,—“But mind, you must not publish. You know I'm his friend .” We do not remember him to have praised Mr Moore's poetry but once. The poem he eulogized was one of the Irish Melodies, beginning,—
“When first I knew thee, warm and young,
There shone such truth about thee.
On the other hand, he was never backward to let you see that he had a poor notion of his serious poetry in general. He did not think that there shone much truth about that, either of style or sentiment. He says in a letter to Mr John Hunt, in alluding to the ‘Loves of the Angels,’ and observing that he should not alter his poem on that subject, “I leave it to others to circumcize their Angels with their ‘bonnes fortunes’ to the drawing-room and clerical standard.” In this passage, the words, others and theirs have been substituted very plainly for the words Mr Moore and his :—so cautious was he of committing himself on paper, and yet so desirous of saying all. His care in this respect was a circumstance worthy notice, considering the incontinence of speech for which he was famous. He used to observe, with a look of gravity, that “you could not deny what you had written.” Yet this was the writer of an autobiography said to have been committed to the flames; and enough remains both in Mr Moore's work and in private letters, to show that his scruples had come late, and to alarm his “friends” all round. We have letters ourselves which we shall withhold except in case of aggression: others we have burnt: and we beg it to be understood, that in those which remain, there is nothing to implicate a woman. No outrage ever did or could induce us to ward off a blow at the expense of the other sex. We have particular reasons for saying this, and therefore hope the reader will excuse the apparent supererogation.
Lord Byron thought Mr Moore a tuft-hunter 7 and a smell-feast. On Mr Hunt's expressing his surprise one day at an account of Mr Moore's veneration for good dinners, Lord Byron exclaimed,— “He! why he finds out your bill of fare, and his countenance falls if it is not of the first order. You should have seen how distressed he looked one day at Venice, because the dinner did not suit him.”—“That then,”said the other, “accounts for an expression I once saw in his face when the covers were taken off from some dishes. I had a suspicion of it, but could hardly believe it possible.”—“Do but give Tom a good dinner, and a lord,” returned the noble poet, “and he is at the top of his happiness.— Oh!” added he, in the most emphatic manner, with a face full of glee as above described, doubling himself up as he walked, lifting up his arm, and bringing it down with a doubled fist upon the word in Italics, “TOMMY loves a Lord!”
These are surely not the refinements and the just pride, any more than the previous specimens of duplicity are the single-heartedness, which give Mr Moore a right to speak of “unworthiness,” of the vanity of dependants, and to repeat charges of “vulgarity.” To know every fugitive mode of the world of fashion, is no proof of being unvulgar. It is no more than the footman may know. Refinement, we thought, consisted in freedom from grossness, which Mr Moore is certainly not free from it: and vulgarity in an overweening sense to what is common to many, whether of the great vulgar or the small (a sense which Mr Moore certainly has.) To be too fond of good eating is gross: to write like Swift is gross. False refinement itself is a symptom of grossness; and so it is of vulgarity. To hunt the company of lords is vulgar. To call Rousseau “low, bad,” and “a pauper” was vulgar. There is no word so common in the mouth of vulgar people as low . Nor did Mr Moore make a very polite pun, when, in one of his letters to Lord Byron, he designated two different spheres he had been dining in, one at the west-end, and one in the city, as “High-life and Row-life .” As to “vanity,” what is all this but vanity? And as to being a dependant, the term belongs to the man who depends in any shape for the comfort of his existence upon those of whom he might be independent: not to him, who goes into another country to set up a joint speculation, and is forced to obtain fugitive aid from the partner that deserts him.
With respect to Lord Byron's refinement, one specimen shall serve for many. In writing once to a friend, to request him to prepare accommodations for a lady who expected to be confined, he delicately intimated the condition she was in, by saying she was about to “pig.” This, we suppose, is the elegant melancholy of Hamlet.
One anecdote also will suffice with regard to “vanity,” especially
[Page ]
as it betrays his secret soul on that point, and illustrates the most plausible action of his life. It was said in the Times newspaper (we forget exactly when, for we quote from memory, but we can refer to the passage, and will correct it, if necessary) that after all which had been said of this noble “apostle and martyr of freedom, his exertions in the cause of Greece were limited to a six months’ talk about an expedition to Lepanto, and a loan of some thousands of pounds which were repaid to his executors.” Mr Leigh Hunt was walking with his lordship one day in the garden of the Casa Saluzzi at Genoa, when it pleased the noble bard to fall foul on the character of Milton, whose republicanism, patriotism, poetry, and everything else; be attributed to sheer “vanity.” His companion said, that he supposed he meant to include in Milton's aspirations the love of glory, which was not to be denied; but Lord Byron would not allow the matter to be so qualified. He said it was all pure vanity, and nothing else; and that such was the motive of all public men, not excepting the greatest, let them do or suffer what they might. In short, he insisted on driving the proposition so far, that Mr Hunt said he hoped he would not give such an opinion the sanction of his book, and put it in Don Juan; and asked him what he would say, if the world should turn round upon him, and in requital of what he was going to do for Greece, attribute all that he did to vanity. His face turned of the colour of scarlet ; and he said no more.
We conclude these most disagreeable subjects for the present, and if not compelled to take further notice of them, for ever, by laying before our readers, the promised quotation from the ‘Plain Speaker.’ It is a book, like all Mr Hazlitt's other works, not half enough known; because the author wrote under every species of disadvantage, and died just at the moment when he might have had the attention he deserved. But if Mr Moore wishes to know how a man can write so as to secure the attention of posterity, let him compare his own flimsy common-places with the following flail of gold :—
‘I was sorry to find, the other day, on coming to Vevay, and looking into some English Books at a library there, that Mr Moore had taken an opportunity, in his ‘Rhymes on the Road,’ of abusing Madame Warens, Rousseau, and the men of genius in general. “It's an ill bird,” as the proverb says. This appears to me, I confess, to be pickthank work, as needless as it is ill-timed, and, considering from whom it comes, particularly unpleasant. In conclusion, he thanks God, with the Levite, that “he is not one of those,” and would rather be anything—a worm, the meanest thing that crawls—than numbered among those who give light and law to the world by an excess of fancy and intellect. Perhaps posterity may take him at his word, and no more trace be found of his “Rhymes” upon the onward tide of time, than of
                     “The snow falls in the river,
A moment white, then melts for ever!”
‘It might be some increasing consciousness of the frail tenure by which he holds his rank among the great heirs of Fame, that urged our Bard to pawn his reversion of immortality for an indulgent smile of Patrician approbation, as he raised his puny arm against “the mighty dead,” to lower, by a flourish of his pen, the aristocracy of letters nearer to the level of the aristocracy of rank—two ideas that keep up a perpetual see-saw in Mr Moore's mind, like buckets in a well, and to which he is always ready to lend a helping hand, according as he is likely to be hoisted up, or in danger of being let down, with either of them.
‘The mode in which our author proposes to correct the extravagance of public opinion, and qualify the interest taken in such persons as Rousseau and Madame de Warens, is singular enough, and savours of the late unlucky bias of his mind:—it is by referring us: to what the well-bred people in the neighbourhood thought of Rousseau and his pretensions a hundred years ago or thereabouts. “So shall their anticipation prevent our discovery !’
“And doubtless mong the grave and good
And gentle of their neighbourhood.
If known at all, they were but known
As strange, low people, low and bad;
Madame herself to footmen prone.
And her young Pauper, all but mad.”
‘This is one way of the reversing the judgment of posterity, and setting aside the ex-post-facto evidence of taste and genius. So, after “all that's come and gone yet”—after the anxious doubts and misgivings of his mind as to his own destiny—after all the
“Out on the craft—I'd rather be
One of those hinds that round me tread,.
With just enough of sense to see
The noon-day sun that's o'er my head,
Than thus, with high-built genius curs'd,
That hath no heart for its foundation;
Be all at once that's brightest—worst—
Sublimest—meanest in creation.” Rhymes on the Road.
pains he took to form himself in solitude and obscurity—after the show dawn of his faculties, and their final explosion, that like an eruption of another Vesuvius, dazzling all men with its lights, and leaving the burning lava behind it, shook public opinion, and overturned a kingdom—after having been “the gaze and show of the time,” after having been read by all classes, criticized, condemned, admired in every corner of Europe—after bequeathing a name that at the end of half a century is never repeated but with emotion, as another name for genius and misfortune—after having given us an interest in his feelings as in our own, and drawn the veil of lofty imagination or of pensive regret over all that relates to his own being, so that we go a Pilgrimage to the places where he lived and recall the names he loved with tender affection (worshipping at the Shrines where his fires were first kindled, and where the purple light of love still lingers—“Elysian beauty, melancholy grace!’)— after all this, and more, instead of taking the opinion which one half of the world have formed of Rousseau, with an eager emulation, and the other have been forced to admit, in spite of themselves, we are to be sent back by Mr Moore's eaves-dropping muse, to what the people in the neighbourhood thought of him (if ever they thought of him at all); before he had shown any one proof of what he was, as the fairer test of truth and candour, and as coming nearer to the standard of greatness, that is, of something asked to dine out, existing in the author's own mind.
“This, this is the unkindest cut of all.”
‘Mr Moore takes the inference which he chooses to attribute to the neighbouring gentry concerning “the pauper lad,” namely, that “he was mad,” because he was poor , and flings it to the passengers out of a laudau and four, as the true version of his character, by the fashionable and local authorities of the time. He need not have gone out of his way to Charmettes merely to drag the reputations of Jean Jacques and his mistress after him, chained to the car of aristocracy, as “people low and bad,” on the strength of his enervated sympathy with the genteel conjectures of the day, as to what and who they were. We have better and more authentic evidence. What would he say, if this method of neutralizing the voice of the public were applied to himself, or to his friend; Mr Chantrey: if we were to deny that the one ever rode in an open carriage tete-à-tete with a lord, because his father stood behind a counter, or were to ask the sculptor's customers, when he drove a milk-cart, what we are to think of his bust of Sir Walter? It will never do . It is the peculiar hardship of genius, not to be recognized with the first breath it draws—often not to be admitted even during its life-time—to make its way slow and late, through good report and evil report, “through clouds of detraction, of envy and lies”—to have to contend with the injustice of fortune, with the prejudice of the world.
“Rash judgments amid the sneers of selfish men’
to be shamed by personal defects, to pine in obscurity, to be the butt of pride, the just of fools, the bye-word of ignorance and malice—to carry on a ceaseless warfare between the consciousness of inward worth and the slights and neglect of others, and to hope only for its reward in the grave and in the undying voice of fame:—and when, as in the present instance, that end has been marvellously attained, and a final sentence has been passed, would any one but Mr Moore wish to shrink from it, to revive the injustice of fortune and the world, and to abide by the idle conjectures of a fashionable coterie empannelled on the spot, who would come to the same shallow conclusion whether the individual in question was an Idiot or a God? There is a degree of gratuitous impertinence and frivolous servility, in all this, not easily to be accounted for, or forgiven.
‘There is something more particularly offensive in the cant about “people low and bad ” applied to the intimacy between Rousseau and Madame Warens, inasmuch as the volume containing this nice strain of morality is dedicated to Lord Byron, who was at that very time living on the very same sentimental terms with an Italian Lady of Rank, and whose Memoirs Mr Moore has since thought himself called upon to suppress, out of regard to his Lordship's character and to that of his friends, most of whom were not “low people.” Is it quality, not charity, that with Mr Moore covers all sorts of slips?
“But ‘tis toe fall degrades her to a whore;
Let Greatness own her, and she's mean no more!”
‘What also makes the dead set at the Heroine of the ‘Confessions’ seem the harder measure, is, that it is preceded by an effusion to Mary Magdalen, in the devotional style of Madame Guyon, half amatory, half pious, but so tender and rapturous that it dissolves Canova's marble in tears, and heaves a sigh from Guido's canvas. The melting pathos that trickles down one page, is frozen up into the most rigid morality, and hangs like an icicle upon the next. Here Thomas Little smiles and weeps in ecstacy; there Thomas Brown (not “the younger,” but the elder surely) frowns disapprobation, and meditates dislike. Why, it may be asked, does Mr Moore's insect muse always hover round this alluring subject, “now in glimmer, and now in gloom”—now basking in the warmth, now writing in the smart, now licking his lip at it, now making wry faces, but always fidgetting and fluttering about the same gaudy luscious topie, either in flimsy raptures or trumpery horrors? I hate for my own part, this alternation of meretricious rhapsodies and methodistical cant, though the one generally ends in the other’— Plain Speaker , Vol.II. Article On the Spleen of Party
NOTES
1 The Italics in all the following letters are the writer's own.
2 Lord Byron was in the habit of spelling the past tense of the verb read in this manner.
3 The Feast of the Poets.
4 See more and stronger remarks on this subject in the scond volume of the Plain Speaker:—Art On the Spleen of Party
5 Rime del Signor Torquato Tasso, Amorose, Boschereccie,: Marittime, &c.
6 There is a passage from the same hand in another work, stil better than this; which will be given by and by.
7 Tuft-hunter is a college term for one who seeks the company of men of noble families; their caps being distinguished by a tuft of gold.
$$$
