Madame de Stael's New Work
Author: Hazlitt, William.
Publication info: The Morning Chronicle ; Halifax [Halifax]. 01 Jan 1813.

Madame de Stael's New Work [in, The Morning Chronicle, Saturday 13 November 1813]
[Page ]
MADAME DE STAEL'S NEW WORK .
[Page ]
We do not wonder that the censors of the press did not permit this very able production to appear in France. Its chief object seems to be to mortify the national prejudices and exclusive egotism of the French in literature, by a systematic and galling comparison with the works of the most celebrated German writers, and to establish that balance of power which they are as little inclined to admit in matters of taste and opinion as in political questions. Her work may be considered an the best analysis that has been given of the literary and philosophical productions of the modern Germans, and as the best and most intelligible translation of their literary and philosophical creed. She has very successfully employed the principles of philosophical criticism advanced by Schlegel, Schiller, Goethe, and others, in exposing the necessary defects of French poetry, and has not unfrequently turned their own weapons against themselves. Her opinions and reasonings are undoubtedly for the most part those of the German school; but she has added to them a point, a brilliancy, and lightness, which they exceedingly wanted before. A work which unites the originality and profundity of German research with the elegance and rapidity of French composition, must be no unimportant accession to European literature. This work is, however, more critical than historical or descriptive—more philosophical than popular; but it is philosophy and criticism in a very graceful and animated form. The political reflections in the work are very few, and their application is by no means direct or obvious. In the analysis of the character of the people of Germany, she seems disposed to reproach them with the contemplative indifference and abstraction of their pursuits, and anxious to rouse them from the lethargy of thought to life and action. She has with great ingenuity commented on the text of one of their own authors, who said that the dominion of the sea belonged to the English, that of the land to the French, and that of the air to the Germans . She justly considers the general disposition of the people of Germany as contemplative, as delighting in what is remote and ideal, and as tending little to action; and very distinctly accounts for this predominant character from the political circumstances and individual habits of the people, the want of a general impulse and interest in the different states, the number of literary institutions, &c.
“These small capitals of the north of Germany, where we meet with so many men of the highest character for learning, occupied exclusively with past history and abstract ideas, often afford no kind of amusement; there are no public exhibitions, and little society; time there runs out, as it were, drop by drop, and does not interrupt by its sound the silence and the solitude of thought. The Germans have succeeded in establishing a republic of letters, animated and independent. They supply the want of the interest arising from events, by the interest attached to ideas. The citizens of this contemplative republic, disengaged from almost every kind of connection with public or private affairs, labour in obscurity like miners; and like them, surrounded with hidden treasures, explore in silence the intellectual riches of the human race.”
The inconsequentiality of action to thought is strongly depicted by the author as a part of the German character: the theory is at least correct; but she afterwards forgets herself, and represents the seriousness of this people, as identifying the two together. Werter, she says, has produced numberless suicides, and the Robbers of Schiller, systematic, sentimental gangs of banditti.
Madame de Staël has pointed out, with great subtilty and clearness the distinctive characters of the French and German drama, as connected with the knowledge of the world and the spirit of conversation on one hand, or with contemplation and intellectual refinement on the other. She very happily ridicules the imitation of the French school by the German poets, and applies to these servile and lifeless copies the praise which Orlando, in Ariosto, bestows upon his horse, “who possessed all imaginable excellences, but had one fault, that he was dead.” With equal felicity she has observed of Kant, whose popular writings were exceedingly obscure, compared with the force and precision of his logical disquisitions, “That he resembled the Israelites, who were guided by a pillar of fire by night, and by a cloud by day!”
In her remarks on the German poets, she evidently gives a decided preference to Goethe. In this preference we cannot help suspecting her to have been a little influenced by the extreme reputation of Goethe among his countrymen, as well as by the power of his talents in conversation, which appear to be of a very high order. She gives a very amusing description of her first interview with Schiller, in which she undertook, with much warmth, to shew the absolute superiority of the French tragedy over every other. Schiller, who had never spoken French, defended himself with such modesty and strength of reasoning, that M. de Staël immediately conceived equal admiration for his understanding and character. Should it not almost seem by this as if she was willing to maintain the prejudices of the French in Germany, and to retort the discoveries of the Germans upon the French? A little coquetry is perhaps as inseparable from female authorship as from female sovereignty; and women are generally disposed to exact more deference to their caprices, than is reasonable in cases which have nothing to do with gallantry. Much of the tone of French literature may undoubtedly be traced to this circumstance.
Except Werter, the translations from Goethe into English have not been popular; and Werter, Goethe himself, and his admirers, affect to despise. The only passage we could find in Madame de Staël's work, which conveys an idea of the powers of this author, at all adequate to those which are ascribed to him, is the following:—
“Among the great number of beautiful passages which might be cited from this work, (Iphigenia in Tauris) there is one without parallel any where else; Iphigenia, in her grief, recollects an old song known in the family, and which her nurse had taught her from her cradle; it is the song which the Fates sing to Tantalus in hell. They recal to him his former state, when he sat as a guest with the Gods at their golden tables. They describe the dreadful moment when he was hurled from his throne, the punishment inflicted on him by the Gods, the tranquillity which these same Gods enjoy who govern the universe, and which the lamentations of the damned cannot disturb. The Fates announce to the grand-children of Tantalus, that the Gods will avert their countenance from them, because their features recal those of their father. The aged Tantalus hears the mournful song in the eternal night that surrounds him, thinks of his children, and bows his guilty head. The most striking images, the metre which accords exactly with the sentiments, give to this poem the air of a national tradition. It is one of the greatest efforts of genius thus to identify itself with antiquity, and to combine at the same time all that would have been popular among the Greeks, with all that conveys, after the lapse of ages, the most dreadful solemnity.” If the original passage answers to this description, it is fine indeed!
That Mad. de Staël is not blind to the faults of her favourite author, the following remarks will sufficiently shew.
“By a singular vicissitude in taste, it has happened that the Germans, at first attacked our dramatic writers as converting all their heroes into Frenchmen. They have with reason insisted on historic truth as necessary to contrast the colours, and give life to the poetry.— But then, all at once, they have been weary of their own success in this way, and have produced abstract representations in which the relations of mankind were expressed in a general manner, and in which time, place and circumstance passed for nothing. In a drama of this kind by Goethe, the author calls the different characters, the Duke, the King, the Father, the Daughter, &c. without any other designation.”
“Such a tragedy is only calculated to be acted in the Palace of Odin, where the dead still continue their different occupations on earth: where the hunter, himself a shade, eagerly pursues the shade of a stag, and fantastic warriors combat together in the clouds. It should appear that Goethe at one period, conceived an absolute disgust to all interest in dramatic compositions. It was sometimes to be met with in bad works; and he concluded that it ought to be banished from good ones. Nevertheless, a man of superior mind ought not to disdain what gives universal pleasure; he cannot relinquish his resemblance with his kind, if he wishes to make others feel his own value. Granting that the tyranny of custom often introduces an artificial air into the best French tragedies, it cannot be denied that there is the same want of natural expression in the systematic and theoretical productions of the German muse. If exaggerated declamation is affected, there is a certain kind of intellectual calm which is not less so. It is a kind of arrogated superiority over the affections of the soul, which may accord very well with philosophy, but is totally out of character in the dramatic art. Goethe's works are composed according to different principles and systems. In the Tasso and Iphigenia, he conceives of tragedy as a lofty relic of the monuments of antiquity. These works have all the beauty of form, the splendour and glossy smoothess of marble, but they are as cold and as motionless.”
These remarks are a model of philosophical criticism. We shall only add, that they appear to us to apply in all their force to the Herman and Dorothea, and to Count Egmont, which are here however highly praised. Both these works, which are known to the English reader, are throughout a studied suppression of imagination and natural passion. The author is a poetical ascetic, who avoids the indulgence of his own feelings, and whatever can excite emotion in others, as a violation of the severe rules of composition which he has imposed upon himself. Finding that to produce an effect was not every thing, he supposed that not to produce an effect was every thing. Finding that Shakspeare had something which Schiller and Kotzebue wanted, he seemed to imagine that not to be Schiller or Kotzebue was to be Shakspeare;—as if a work of genius, like a work of criticism, could be composed of merely negative quantities, or as if the tragic muse should be invoked only in the spirit of contradiction. Goethe in this determination to please the public in spite of themselves, reminds us of the pedantic lover in the Inconstant, who tries to succeed with his mistress “by philosophical ogling and amorous frows!”
The style of Mad. de Staël in these volumes, is a happy mixture of the two classes of composition, which she herself has so well distinguished as characteristic of different nations, the classical and the romantic . She writes like a Frenchwoman, but like the daughter of Susan Kurchod.
$$$
