rnjin^c: neiurn or renew an uorary maienaisi 
each Lost Book is $50.00. 


1 ne Minimum i-ee tor 


The person charging this material is responsible for 
its return to the hbrary from which it was withdrawn 
on or before the Latest Date stamped below. 


Theft, mutilation, and underlining of books are reasons for discipli- 
nary action and may result in dismissal from the University. 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS LIBRARY AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


ocn7m 


\ 




n\^'^l 


-iO 




vxc < 


WLZJ-aD 




TJIC REC 


D JUL 2 3 '30 




JUL 28 


930 




'APR 1 7 I 


IT'D 


L161— O-1096 



MANDEVILLK 

A TALE 

OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY 

IN 

ENGLAND. 

» 

BY AVILLIAM GODWIN. 



Ajid the waters of that fountain were bitter : and they said, Let the 

name of it be called Marah. 

Exodus, Cap. xv. 



IN THREE VOLUMES, 



VOL. I. 



EDINBURGH: 

PRINTED FOR ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE AND CO. 

AND LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, AND BROWN, 

LONDON. 



1817. 



TO THE 

MEMORY 

OF THE 

SINCEREST FRIEND I EVER HAD, 

THE LATE 

JOHN PHILPOT CURRAN, 

(who a few pays SINCE QUITTED THIS MORTAL STAGE) 
I AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBE 

THESE VOLUMES. 

October 25, 1817. 



15660 i 



PREFACE. 



Approaching, as I now very rapidly 
do, to the period when I must bid the 
world an everlasting farewel, I am 
not unwilling to make up my accounts 
with it, as far as relates to this Kghter 
species of composition. On this oc- 
casion, I am contented to talk, to that 
small portion of the world whose eye 
is ever likely to light upon these prefa- 
tory pages, with the communicative- 
ness of an intimate friend. 

Eight years ago I began a novel. 
The thought I adopted as the germ of 
my work, was taken from the story of 
the Seven Sleepers in the records of the 
first centuries of Christianity, or rather 



Vlll PREFACE. 

from the Sleeping Beauty in the Wood, 
in Perrault's Tales of Ma Mere V Oie. I 
supposed a hero who should have this 
faculty, or this infirmity, of falling asleep 
unexpectedly, and should sleep twen- 
ty, thirty, or a hundred years at a time, 
at the pleasure of myself, his creator. 
I knew that such a canvas would na- 
turally admit a vast variety of figures, 
actions, and surprises. 

When my respectable friend, the 
publisher of the present work, found 
means to put in activity the suspended 
faculty of fiction within me, I resolved 
to return to the tale which, eight years 
before, I had laid aside. But the near- 
er I looked at it, the more I was fright- 
ened at the task. Such a work must 
be made up of a variety of successive 
tales, having for their main point of 
connection, the impression which the 



PREFACE. IX 

events brought forward should produce 
on my sleeping-waking principal per- 
sonao-e. I should therefore have had 
at least a dozen times to set myself to 
the task of invention, as it were, deno- 
vo, I judged it more prudent, parti- 
cularly regarding certain disadvantages 
under which I found myself, to choose a 
story that should be more strictly one, 
and should so have a greater degree of 
momentum, tending to carry me for- 
ward, after the first impulse given, by 
one incessant motion, from the com- 
mencement to the conclusion. Such 
was my motive for rejecting my former 
subject, and adopting that which is 
here treated. 

Every author, at least for the last 
two thousand years, takes his hint from 
some suggestion afforded by an author 
that has gone before him, as Sterne has 



X . TREFACE. 

very humorously observed * ; and I da 
not pretend to be an exception to this 
rule. The impression, that first led 
me to look with an eye of favour upon 
the subject here treated, was derived 
from a story-book, called Wieland, 
written by a person, certainly of dis- 
tinguished genius, who I believe was 
born ^nd died in the province of Penn- 
sylvania in the United States of North 
America, and who calls himself C. B. 
Brown. This impression was further 
improved from some hints in De Mont- 
fort, a tragedy, by Joanna Baillie. Hav- 
ing signed these bills against me, I hold 
myself for the present occasion dis- 
charged from all claims of my literary 
creditors, except such as are purely 
transient and incidental. 

* Tristram Shandy, Vol. I. chap. xxi. Edition 1775. 



PREFACE. Xl 

To proceed in the same style of con- 
fession and unreserve. I am not aware 
that, in my capacity as an author, I owe 
any considerable thanks to the kindness 
of my contemporaries ; yet I part from 
them without the slightest tinge of ill- 
humour. If ever they have received my 
productions with welcome, it has been 
because the same public impression, or 
the same tone of moral feeling, had 
been previously generated in the minds 
of a considerable portion of my species, 
and in my own. When I have written 
merely from a private sentiment, and 
thought to try whether, as Marmontel 
says, they valued me for myself, [which 
I did in the Essay on Sepulchres, and 
the Lives of the Nephews of Milton] 
my reception has been such, as might 
be well calculated to cure me, if I had 
been constitutionally liable to the in- 



Xll PREFACE. 

toxications of vanity. Yet I have ne- 
ver truckled to the world. I have ne- 
ver published any thing with the slight- 
est purpose to take advantage of the 
caprice of the day, to approach the 
public on its weak side, or to pamper 
its frailties. What I have produced, 
was written merely in obedience to that 
spirit, unshackled and independent, 
whatever were its other qualities, that 
commanded me to take up my pen. 

There are two or three things, which 
I still meditate to perform in my cha- 
racter of an author. But whether life, 
and health, and leisure will be granted 
me sufficient for the execution of what 
I design, is among the secrets of " time 
not yet in existence." In either event 
I feel myself altogether satisfied and 
resigned. 



MANDEVILLE. 



VOL. !• 



MANDEVILLE. 



CHAPTER I, 



J WAS born in the year 1638. The place 
of my birth was the borough of Charlemont, 
in the north of Ireland. My great uncle 
passed over to that country in the train of 
the Earl of Essex, in his famous and unfor- 
tunate expedition thither undertaken forty 
years before. The military reputation of my 
great-uncle was considerable, and he died 
full of years and of honour, under the pa- 
cific administration of Sir Arthur Chiches- 
ter. My father, who, as well as my great- 
uncle, was a younger brother, was bred to 



4) MANDEVILLE. 

the same profession, was sent over to Ire- 
land for the advantage of being under his 
uncle's eye, and was at this time an officer 
in the garrison of Charlemont under Wil- 
liam Lord Caulfield, a brave officer, now 
grown old in the service of his sovereign. 

Ireland was a country that had been for 
ages in a state of disturbance and violence. 
No people were ever more proud of their 
ancestry and their independence than th€ 
Irish, or more wedded to their old habits of 
living ; — and the policy of the English ad- 
ministration had not been such as to wean 
them in any degree from the partialities to 
which they were prone. The latter years 
of Elizabeth however had conduced much 
to the enfeebling of their military strength ; 
and the pacific system of James seemed, 
for a long time, to be no where attended 
with so much success as in this island. His 
system in Ireland, was that of colonization, 
of placing large bodies of civilized strangers 
in every great station through the country, 



MANDEVILLE. O 

and undertaking, by a variety of means, to 
reclaim the wild Irish from what might al- 
most be called their savage state. The 
government of his lieutenants and deputies 
was not exactly that of benignity ; — it was 
characterized by many forfeitures, and by 
a vexatious inquiry, in every direction sue- 
eessively, into the titles by which the Irish 
chieftains held their estates; but it was sa 
equally tempered with severity and firm- 
ness, as to produce the spectacle, scarcely 
before known, of a profound peace in the 
island for almost forty years. 

It was towards the close of this period 
that Thomas Lord Strafford was appointed, 
by Charles I, to the office of Lord- Lieu- 
tenant. In his government there was a 
greater proportion of sternness than in that 
of his predecessors ; his character was in 
the highest degree arrogant and imperious, 
but there was a steadiness in his measures, 
and his proceedings were stamped with the 
features of intellect and ability, — so as to 



() MAKDEVI1.LK. 

appear well calculated to impress a people 
like the Irish with awe and respect. They 
hated him, but you could scarcely see that 
they hated him. They did not, even to 
their own thoughts, fully analyze and con- 
fess their passions ; they felt towards him 
the sensations inspired b}^ a sort of superior 
nature,— the core of their thoughts was 
dread and aversion ; but their gestures were 
paralyzed; the expression of these senti- 
ments died away upon their tongue ; the 
public language that followed him was that 
of approbation and honour. Ireland was 
substantially less tranquillized than under 
Sir Arthur Chichester, and the other pre- 
decessors of their present austere ruler ; but 
it exhibited every external indication of 
tranquillity and submission. 

Strafford was finally withdrawn from the 
government of Ireland in the beginning of 
the year 1640. His absence was nitended 
to be short ; but the growing convulsions of 
his native country detained him, and he 



MANDEVILLE. 7 

never returned. This produced a very nev^ 
state of things in the country where he had 
presided. His successors were not of a cha- 
racter to impress either respect or terror 
upon the people they governed, and the 
Irish began to reflect in an independent 
spirit upon their condition. An unex- 
pected view of things opened upon their 
thoughts. They had contemplated the as- 
cendancy of the English government as a 
detested thing ; but, at the same time, as 
an evil that it was as much in vain to 
struggle against, as the laws of nature, or 
the convulsions of the elements. The other 
subjects of this government had, for some 
time, been under difierent impressions. The 
people of INorth Britain, offended with the 
injudicious and narrow-minded efforts that 
had been employed to impose upon them 
episcopacy and a liturgy, had risen in open 
resistance against the tyranny, and had 
quelled the oi)pressor. Tiie English, who 
had long despised the naked and unvarnish- 



8 MANDEVILLE. 

ed despotism that had been attempted over 
them, were now ripe for the combined and 
irresistible assertion of their rights. The 
Long Parhament assembled towards the 
close of 1640 ; and they began their opera- 
tions with an open attack on the confidential 
ministers of Charles I. Strafford in particu- 
lar was the object of their unrelenting pro- 
secution, and he was put to death by the 
sentence of the highest court of judicature, 
in the spring of the following year. 

All this was greatly encouraging to the 
Irish. The period was favourable ; and if 
they neglected to improve it, they would 
deserve to be slaves. They had both ex- 
ample and opportunity to animate their ef- 
forts. What they had suffered before, they 
now ventured to shape into thoughts; and 
what they thought, they dared to speak. 
Their murmurs were audible ; and the 
stream of the population was agitated, like 
ocean before a storm. 

The discontents of Ireland were first pub- 



MANDEVILLE. 9 

lished through the constitutional medium, 
her parliament. This assembly sent over 
her commissioners, to assist the English le- 
gislature with additional charges against 
Strafford. They called loudly for the re- 
dress of some of the most oppressive griev- 
ances that had been imposed by the stern 
lord-lieutenant. They demanded the esta- 
blishment of certain ^rac^5, which had long 
been promised by the crown, and the ob- 
ject of which was to quiet the litigious 
and technical inquiries at law, that had too 
frequently been set on foot to disturb the 
Irish landed proprietors in their possessions. 
Thus far all was well; and the pm'itan and 
the papist had gone hand in hand in the 
assertion of general right. 

But there was another and a deeper dis- 
content at work in this unhappy country* 
The majority of its population was Catho- 
lic, and all the religious emoluments of Ire- 
land were reserved for the Protestants. The 

country had struggled for ages for her in- 

a2 



10 MANDEVILLE. 

dependence ; it was a war of the oppressor 
against the oppressed ; of civilized man, or 
man claiming to be such, against man al- 
most in a state of barbarism ; and, inciden- 
tally only, for nearly a century past, of the 
two great denominations of the Christian 
religion against each other. The party, or 
rather the great mass of the population of 
the country, who were in opposition to the 
government, felt that they were the ancient 
proprietors of the .^^oil. Irish manners and 
Iri^h sentiments, every thing that was local 
in human society, was with them; the 
party that, in a great majority of cases, lord- 
ed it over them, they regarded as aliens. 
And when we add to this general view of 
the case, the recollection that must neces- 
sarily accompany it, of all the individual cir- 
cumstances, and all the bitter aggravations 
that attended each act of oppression, we 
may easily conceive what must have been 
the state of the Irish mind. But all this 
would have been a matter of infinitely less 



MANDEVILLE. 11 

magnitude than it actually was, had it not 
been inextricably bound up with considera- 
tions of religion. The arlifices, or rather 
the mistakes and bigotry of the priesthood, 
infused a venom into the hostility existing 
on either side, that all together gave " note 
of a fearful preparation." These things I 
can state impartially now ; but it is through 
a course of incredible ixiischief and suflTer- 
ing only that I have learned this impar- 
tial itj^ 

The calamities that overwhelmed Ire- 
land towards the close of the year 1641, 
might in part have been foreseen by a 
skilful observer, but not by such men as 
then sat at the helm of her government. 
There is no instance peihaps in the re- 
cords of mankind, of such profound supine- 
ness and security upon the eve of so terrible 
a storm. I am not, however, writing a 
piece of national history ; and therefore I 
shall only say, that the conspirators had 
finally chosen the )2i3d of October, as tiie 



IS MANDEVILLE. 

day on which their insurrection should 
break out through a very extensive line of 
country. 

The principal leader of the conspira- 
tors in the province of Ulster, was Sir Phe- 
lim 0*Neile. He was of a licentious and 
brutal temper, oppressed with debts, stirred 
up with the ambition of standing at the 
head of his name and figuring as the 
O'Neiles his predecessors had done, and 
unscrupulous as to the means by which his 
purposes were to be achieved. The first 
exploit marked out for him, was the gain- 
ing possession of Charlemont. The most 
obvious step towards that end that sug- 
gested itself to his thoughts, was to invite 
himself to sup in the castle, with Lord 
Caulfield and the principal officers of the 
garrison, on the night of the 2^d of October. 
This nobleman, who was accustomed to 
live with his Irish neighbours on terms of 
unsuspecting confidence, cheerfully accept^ 
ed the proposal. No symptom of hostility 



MANDEVILLE. 13 

had shown itself; every thing was as in a 
state of the most perfect peace and securi- 
ty. Sir Phelim came, attended with a numer- 
ous train of followers ; but this occasioned 
no surprise ; it was the custom of the times. 
His manner was frank, companionable and 
courteous. Lord Caulfield was particular- 
ly desirous to do honour to his guest. The 
rugged chieftain was gifted with a consider- 
able vein of convivial humour; and the 
officers of the garrison exerted themselves 
to catch his tone, and be as easy, mirthful, 
unrestrained and confiding, as he apparent- 
ly was. The wine circulated ; a general 
face of festivity prevailed ; the song, the 
jest, the tale, was occasionally interspersed ; 
every thing bespoke the fair and friendly 
meaning both of the entertainer and his 
guests. Lord Caulfield expressed himself 
as conceiving a happy omen, from this so- 
ciable meeting of the ancient Irish and the 
English settlers ; and Sir Phelim echoed 
his sentiment, and devoutly prayed that no 



l4 MANDEVILLE. 

future misunderstanding might ever occur 
to disturb so edifying a harmony. 

The entertainment had at length advan- 
ced to that point, that the good humour of 
those who feasted was not unproductive of 
some obstreperous sj^mptoms of hilarity ; 
yet a noise was suddenly heard from with- 
out, that fixed the attention of all, and over- 
powered for a moment the mirth that went 
round the board. It was the sound of a 
scujffle ; but that speedily subsided, and was 
succeeded by the sound of many feet as in 
military movement. The eyes of those at 
the table were turned on each other. The 
visaues of Sir Plielim and his friends were 
evidently firm and unruffled ; not so the 
governor and his English oflHcers. The 
apartment where they sat had doors at 
the two' opposite ends ; tht se doors sudden- 
ly flew open; and a file of hi^\\, appro- 
pr>ately arnu d, entered at each. Lord Caul- 
field rose to expobtulate ; but Su' Phelim 
suddenly slopped him, with the air of a 



MANDEVILLE. 15 

man who feels that he has the game in his 
own hands. 

*• Lord governor," said he, '' and as many 
of the officers of the garrison as I see ht-re, 
I have come among you in froHc and merri- 
ment, but the purpose of my visit is serious. 
You are my prisoners. It is in vain to re- 
sist ; your men are ah'eady secured ; you 
shall have no reason to complain of your 
treatment ; we mean you no harm. Bat 
to-morrow all Ireland rises in the assertion 
of her rights. Our plan is entire and un- 
broken ; Dublin is ours ; every fort and 
garrison in Ulster, Leinster, Minster, and 
Connaught, is ours. We meditate no in- 
jury ; not a drop of bhmd shall be shed, if 
it is in our power to avoid it. But we will 
have our rights. We will not be tra,i«pled 
upon as we iiave been by a handful of 
foreigners ; we will not submit to have our 
estates turn from us, because we or our an- 
cestors have meritoriously drawn our swords 
in the sacred cause of our couniry ; v\e will 



l6 MANDEVILLE. 

not allow our inability to produce certain 
deeds and musty parchmentSj to be set up 
against immemorial possession to oust us 
of our lands ; we are resolved that the holy 
Catholic faith, to which every man of Ire- 
land is a sincere adherent, shall no longer 
go naked, like a dishonoured wanderer, but 
shall be clothed again in all her pristine 
magnificence and splendour. I repeat, we 
bear you no hostility; we mean you no 
harm ; but this castle of Charlemont we 
claim for us and our cause; and you must 
be contented for the present to remain my 
prisoners.*' 

Lord Caulfield felt the indignation of a 
soldier at the language addressed to him. 
He reminded Sir Phelim that he had him- 
self nothing to complain of, that could in 
any degree excuse his revolt from his sove- 
reign. His family had experienced no 
severity from the government, nor been de- 
prived of any of their possessions. He had 
been bred a Protestant, and must first be a 



MANDEVILLE. 17 

recreant to the religion in which he had 
been instructed, before he could be a traitor 
to his king. The governor added, with 
emphasis and fervour, that no cause could 
be honourable that was served by such 
means. '* You came under my roof as a 
friend ; I exerted myself to receive you, a^ 
became your rank and your former life. 
You have abused my hospitality ; you have 
treacherously used the language of kind- 
ness, and the professions of good faith. 
Fairly you could never have overpowered 
me and the brave men that stand beside me, 
I received a trust from my royal master j 
wrest it from me by the open means of a 
soldier, and welcome ! But you have taken 
advantage of my weakness, or rather of my 
sincere and honourable mind, which, in- 
capable of deception in itself, knew not to 
suspect it in another. You have made 
me," and a tear burst into the old man's 
eyes as he spoke, " a worthless servant to 
my king. You have disarmed me by a 



18 MANDEVILLE. 

paltry device, and prevented me from that 
which it was my duty to do, discharging 
faithfully the trust reposed in me, and 
either conquering his foes by my own va- 
lour and that of those under my command, 
or dying with the sword in my hand, and 
being overcome after I had exerted every 
energy of an officer and a man in vain.'' 

It was a singular concurrence of circum- 
stances that enabled Sir Phelim and his fel- 
low-conspirators to commence their revolt 
in so formidable a manner. Lord Strafford 
had raised an army of eight thousand Irish, 
principally Catholics, to assist his master 
in subduing the Scottish revolt. Charles 
however, from the joint imbecility of him- 
self and his counsellors, Strafford excepted, 
after having marched his forces to the bor- 
ders of Scotland, yielded the whole ques- 
tion to his rebellious subjects, and sub- 
scribed to all the conditions they thought 
proper to impose upon him, without draw- 
ing a sword. Thus his Irish levies were 



MANDEVILLE. 19 

rendered useless. They were consequent- 
ly disbanded ; and that no ill effects might 
result from their being turned loose on the 
public, it was agreed with the Spanish 
minister, that they should immediately be 
re-enlisted for the service of his master. 
Sir Phelim and his fellow- conspirators were 
among the most active for the execution of 
this measure. But the companies being 
enrolled, various pretences were raised to 
baffle the embarkation of these troops for 
the Spanish service. It unfortunately hap- 
pened, that both the English and Irish par- 
liament forbade the transport of these troops ; 
and merchants were even obliged to give 
security, that they would not lend their ves- 
sels for this purpose. Thus formidable bo- 
dies of men were left at large under the 
most dangerous leaders; and those who com- 
manded them, were in some sort invited to 
meditate for themselves the destination 
upon which they should be employed. 
Lord Caulfield and his garrison, officers 



^0 MANDEVILLE. 

and soldiers, of which my father was oiie^ 
were marched under a sufficient guard to 
Kinnard, in the neighbouring county of 
Tirone, the principal seat of the insurgent 
into whose hands they had fallen. Here 
they were at first treated, as Sir Phelim 
had promised they should be, with as much 
courtesy and humanity as circumstances 
would admit. 

But a war of this sort is never carried on 
with those decorums, and that spirit of for- 
bearance and accommodation towards an 
enemy, which ia sometimes practised be- 
tween civilized and pohshed nations. The 
plan originally laid down by the insurgents 
was to seize all forts and garrisons, to retain 
the gentry as hostages in their hands, the 
better to secure a degree of moderation on 
the part of government, and to shed as 
little blood as possible. But they resolved 
to possess the land of their ancestors, and 
not to suffer any settlers from the superior 
island to remain in their borders. This 



MANDEVILLE. 21 

immediately led to much cruelty. The 
British had made for themselves comfortable 
and pleasant habitations, abounding with 
corn, cattle, and every other accommoda- 
tion, that an industrious people could draw 
out of a picturesque country and a fertile 
soil. They had lived among their Irish 
neighbours with every appearance of good 
fellowship ; and the demonstrations of love 
and affection on either part had been mutual. 
Hostilities between them had ceased, for 
almost as long a time as the memory of 
any one living could reach ; and nothing 
€ould exceed the quietness and security 
with which the new settlers enjoyed their 
possessions. It may easily be imagined 
with what feelings they received the man- 
date, that they must dwell there no longer. 
The success of the Irish in Ulster however 
was such, that nothing could resist their 
pleasure. The whole province, together 
with the couQties of Longford in Leinster, 
and Leitrim in Connaught, with the excep- 



22 MANDEVILLE. 

tion of a very few strong places^ fell into 
the power of the rebels. All this was 
achieved in the short space of a week ; and, 
at the same time, O'Neile saw himself at the 
head of thirty thousand men. If any of 
the British repaired to a spot where they 
conceived they should be able to defend 
themselves, they were, for the most part, 
tempted to give up the undertaking, by 
the offer, on the part of their assailants, of 
assurance for their lives, and whatever they 
could take away with them, with free pas- 
sage and a safe conduct to any place to 
which they might think proper to retire. 



MANDEVILLE. 23 



CHAPTER II. 



. All this was calamitous enough ; but 
the evil did not end here. Their enemies 
were, for the most part, men of barbarous 
habits, miserably accoutered, and unaccus- 
tomed to obedience. It would need the 
most exact discipline to keep in order bo- 
dies of men, circumstanced as the Irish 
were on the present occasion. The British 
were of course disarmed, and ignominious- 
\y led away in herds, as totally disqualified 
and unworthy to live any longer inter- 
mingled with the people by whom they 
were now conveyed into banishment. The 
Catholic priests, who had been the princi- 



24 MANDEVILLE. 

pal instigators of the insurrection, sedu- 
lously taught their hearers, that a Protest- 
ant was a sort of being whose neighbour- 
hood was pestilential to the true votaries of 
the cross, and that, wherever he dwelt, he 
brought down the displeasure and curse of 
the Almighty upon the country in which 
he was harboured. Hatred and contempt 
are powerful inciters to cruelty. The Bri- 
tish, circumstanced as they were, were 
hated as heretics, and despised, because 
they were in the power of their enemies, 
and could make no retaliation to any con- 
tumely that might be heaped upon them. 
Insult went first, and plunder speedily fol- 
lowed. The Irish took from the fugitives 
the valuables they were carrying away 
with them y they next stripped them of 
their clothes. The season was now be- 
come inclement and severe. The unhap- 
py wretches, who were suffering every 
species of privation and inconvenience, 
could not always help, in the bitterness of 



MANDEVILLE. £5 

their hearts, reproaching their conductors 
with perfidy, who had first disarmed them 
on the faith of the most solemn engage- 
ments, and now took advantage of their 
helpless condition to rob them of all that 
remained to them. The Irish, in the to- 
pics of heresy, and the assured damnation 
of their victims in another world, found 
copious matter for recrimination. From 
words they proceeded to blows. The vi- 
gorous and the infirm, men, women and 
children of the English, were mingled to- 
gether in this calamitous march. The re- 
bels had, of course, no consideration for 
the infirmity or inability of those they con- 
ducted, but goaded them along like beasts. 
In every thing that is most horrible and 
revolting to an ingenuous mind, such is the 
constitution of human nature, it is often 
the first step only that is difficult. A child, 
a woman, a sick or infirm old man among 
the fugitives, became incapable of proceed- 
ing any further : the cavalcade could not 

VOL, I. B 



26 MANDEVILLE. 

stop for this ; and they were left to perish 
with hunger and cold by the side of the 
highway. Such an event must either melt 
the most untutored heart to pity, or the 
emotion that spontaneously arises, must be 
subdued by an antagonist sentiment of 
careless barbarity and sanguinary scorn. 
Hard words were mutually given and re- 
turned between the persecutor and the vic- 
tim. The debate which began in words, 
did not always end so. The skein, or Irish 
dagger, was an ever-ready instrument ; and 
an uneducated and hot-blooded kern found 
no difficulty in consummating his invec- 
tives and his rage with a mortal wound. 
The first drop of blood that was shed seem- 
ed to be the signal for every kind of barba- 
rity. Murder, when it had once unfurled 
Its standard, did not satiate its impulse with 
one, but with hundreds of victims. Boys 
of seven and eight years of age, children 
at the breast, women far advanced in their 
pregnancy, seemed often to be made the 



MANDEVILLE. 2'/ 

preferred objects of destruction. He that 
has once dipped his hands in blood, ap- 
pears to have no more obvious way of sti- 
fling the whispers of remorse, than by wad- 
ing deeper and more deep in pitiless cruel- 
ty. Presently the dagger was found ton 
slow and powerless an instrument, to grati- 
fy the barbarity that wantoned round. 
Drowning was a commodious means for 
wholesale destruction, and was resorted to 
on multiplied occasions. The most tragi- 
cal scene of these inflictions was the bridge 
of Portnedown, in the county of Armagh, 
The bridge was first broken down in the 
middle by the rebels, and the fugitives 
were then driven upon it from one end and 
the other. With pikes and swords they 
were forced over into the water, and as 
many as attempted to save their lives by 
swimming were knocked on the head with 
poles, or shot at from the banks. One 
hundred and eighty persons perished thus 
in one day ; and these executions were fre- 



28 MANDEVILLE. 

quently repeated. An extraordinary con- 
sequence followed upon this. The appa- 
ritions of several of the persons thus mur- 
dered, were shortly after seen nightly on 
the surface of the river in which they 
perished. The shapes of men and women 
suddenly bolted out of the water, showing 
themselves naked waist- high, and upright 
in the stream. This vision continued for 
many days ; the spirits uttered horrible 
and terrifying cries, and imprecated re* 
venge on their murderers ; so that many of 
those persons who had not shrunk from the 
destruction of the Protestants while alive, 
could not endure the presence and the 
voice of their ghosts after death. All who 
lived near the scene fled from the fatal spot 
with affright, and took shelter in the neigh- 
bouring towns, from the hearing of sounds 
which it was not in mortal hardihood to 
endure and live. * 



♦ These facts are attested by many witnesses on oath ; 
and Dr Ferriar, in an Essay on the Theory of Appari- 



MANDEVILLE. 29 

Such were the tales that were daily, and 
sometimes hourly, brought to my father and 
his comrades in their confinement at Kin- 
nard ; and it was soon manifest that this 
war, which began with professions of cle- 
mency, was rapidly degenerating into a 
scene of cruelty and massacre, such as has 
rarely occurred in the annals of the world. 
The first excesses commenced among the 
rudest of the people, and were perpetrated 
by boors, unacquainted with almost the 
slightest tincture of civilization. Yet, once 
begun, it would have been difficult to stay 
their progress, especially in a case like this, 
where the affair was strictly a rising of the 
population to give law to the land. But, 
difficult or easy, the experiment never was 
tried. 0*Neile, and most of the other heads 
of the conspiracy, were as bigoted, as har- 
dened, and as brutal, as the lowest of their 

tions, has endeavoured to account for them, from natural 
causes. 



So MilkNDEVlLLE. 

followers. Sir Phelim himself was totally 
without that firmness and serenity of spirit, 
which, in souls of a happier temper, pre- 
serves them from being too much elevated 
by prosperity, or cast down by adverse 
events. When he looked on the number 
of his forces, and the extent of territory 
that lay unresisting before him, his heart 
dilated with pride, and he believed that he 
had only to show himself in his strength on 
this side or on that, and all would yield be* 
fore him. On the other hand, he was too 
impatient and arrogant, to be able to en- 
counter with equanimity anything that 
thwarted him. Amidst all the great and 
mighty victories of which he boasted, he 
did not fail to experience some reverses. 
These rendered him frantic, in proportion 
to the unmeasured joy that showed itself in 
him on other occasions. He was repulsed 
before the castle of Augher ; and he im- 
mediately ordered ll e Protestants of three 
adjacent parishes to be massacred- 



MANDEVILLE. 31 

But the most considerable check he ex- 
perienced at this time was at Lisnegarvy 
(now called Lisburne). He could not en- 
dure that, while he had gained possession 
of the whole open country of Ulster, a few 
principal places still had the audacity to 
defy his arms-. Of these Carrickfergus 
was the chief; and, to reach this place with 
effect, it appeared necessary first to take 
in the intermediate garrison of Lisnegarvy, 
For this expedition he drew out four thou- 
sand of the choicest troops from the my- 
riads that followed his standard. The at- 
tack was sustained and repelled with stea- 
diness and vigour. But in this affair the 
British proved the superior. The repeated 
assaults of the besiegers only served to 
swell the heaps of their slain ; and the 
English boasted, that the number of the 
enemy killed on this occasion, trebled the 
amount of their whole garrison. 

The disappointment sustained by O'Neile 
in this attempt drew out all the savagenes^ 



32 MANDEVILLE. 

of his nature. His ferocious spirit seem- 
ed to search, how he could most signaUze 
his vengeance, and leave the most memor- 
able record of what a man, possessed of un- 
limited power, and cursed with the utmost 
depravity of will, could do. Among the 
rest, he recollected Lord Caulfield. This 
nobleman was the first victim that had fal- 
len into his savage grasp. He had been 
drawn within the sphere of his power, by 
the modesty of Sir Phelim's carriage, and 
the ostentatious exhibition he had made of 
the gestures of peace and good faith. He 
was the first man that had received the 
pledge of Sir Phelim's honour, that he 
should suffer no injury. Lady Caulfield 
and his children, together with the wives 
and families of several of the officers of the 
garrison of Charlemont, had been made pri- 
soners at the same time, and were all con- 
fined within the same walls. The house 
was the house of Sir Phelim, which had 
been assigned them for their protection. 



MANDEVILLE. S3 

The master of this house gave orders, that 
they should all, without distinction of sex 
or age, be put to the sword. There was 
not a man of 0*Neile's staff, that lifted his 
voice to remonstrate against so diabolical 
an outrage. The satelHtes of this monster 
were too faithful in their obedience, and 
too much sympathized with the spirit of 
their master, not to execute his mandate to 
the minutest letter. My father and mother 
were numbered among the corses of this 
bloody day. 

I was a little more than three years of 
age, at the time when this tragedy was acted. 
I do not remember the scene distinctly in 
all its parts ; but there are detached cir- 
cumstances that belong to it, tHat will live 
in my memory as long as my pulses conti^ 
nue to beat. My father. Lord Caulfield, 
and the other officers, would doubtless have 
met their fate with firmness, if they alone 
had been concerned in the catastrophe. 

The scene would have resembled what we 

B 9 



34 MANDEVILLE. 

read of the sack of Rome by the Gauls, when 
the fathers of the senate sat each man in his 
ivory chair in the porch of his own house, 
and, without changing the position of fea- 
ture or limb, expected their fate, while, to 
the barbarians that traversed the city, they 
appeared rather divinities than men. The 
prisoners of Kinnard had, for many days, 
looked forward to their death. The sue* 
Cessive accounts of barbarities that reached 
them, were like the distant thunder, and 
taught them to anticipate the moment when 
the storm would fall with accumulated vio- 
lence on their own heads. 

But within the narrow bounds of their 
imprisonment they were not alone. The 
ruthless cWieftain into whose hands they 
had fallen, had hurried along every creature 
he had found of the better class in the castle 
of Charlemont, and hemmed them round in 
this devoted spot. Who could behold with 
unaltered eye the entrance of the barbarians, 
that already in their purpose devoted the 



MANDEVILLE; 3S 

women and children shut up in Kinnard, as 
victims to expiate the destructive bravery 
of their countrymen in the defence of Lis- 
negarvy ? The prisoners were unarmed, 
not unresisting. They seized every weapon 
of offence that chance threw in their way, 
and determined to procrastinate their des- 
tiny, or to sell their lives at a high rate. 
Several of the savages fell in the first as- 
sault. Their reception taught them cau- 
tion ; they retired to somewhat a greater 
distance, and fired vollies into the midst of 
us. Every shot told. I cannot go on with 
the narrative. Dying groans, and piercing 
shrieks, and the fierce and tremendous cry 
of insult and triumph on the part of our 
invaders, made up the horrible concert. 
They pursued the unhappy wretches they 
were sent to destroy, to garrets, and along 
the roofs of the building. They ceased not, 
till the funereal and agonizing cries which 
had lately tormented the air, gave place to a 
still more funereal and awe-creating silence. 



56 MANDEVILLE. 

Murder had done his work, and there no 
longer remained a victim to destroy. 

From the general massacre of the English 
within the walls of Sir Phelim's residence 
this day, I was the only one that escaped. 
My preservation was owing to the fidelity 
and courage of an Irish woman-servant, to 
whose charge I had been committed. Her 
mistress and family she could not save ; 
but me she caught up in her arms with a re- 
solution that nothing could subdue. " What 
have you there ?'* said one of the murderers ; 
" that child is an English child.'' " By the 
Virgin/' replied the woman, " it is my own 
flesh and blood ; would you go for to con- 
found this dear little jewel, as true a Ca- 
tholic as ever was born'd, with the carcases 
of heretics ?" " Let the child speak," an- 
swered the ruffian, " he is old enough ; who 
do you belong to ?" " To me ! to me 1'* 
shrieked the woman, in an agony of teiror. 
" Speak ]" repeated the assassin, and lifted 
over me the instrument of death. I hid my 



MANDEVILLK. 3? 

face in my nurse's bosom. I did not com- 
prehend the meaning of the question, but I 
felt that the faithful creature who embraced 
me was my protector. *' To Judy," said I; 
" Judy is my mammy/* " Begone/' said 
the murderer sternly, drawing back his 
skein, " and mix no more with this dunghil 
of Protestant dogs/' 

Judith carried me away, with the inten- 
tion of retiring with me to her native vil- 
lage, and bringing me up as her own child. 
On any other occasion this might easily 
have been done, but not now. The insur- 
gents, who had begun, as I have said, with 
vows of moderation, and a resolution to 
avoid as much as possible the imbruing 
their hands in blood, having once overstep- 
ped this limit, and dipped their hands in 
one murder after another, felt that there 
was no retreat ; and avowed their determi- 
nation not to leave one Briton, man, wo- 
man or child, alive in the districts where 
their power was supreme. Judith was 



38 MANDEVILLE. 

questioned about me again and again, in 
different places through which she passed ; 
and all her self-command, fervour, and 
quick turns of ingenuity, were scarcely suf- 
ficient to preserve me from the hostile sword. 
Convinced but too fully of the imminent 
dangers that hung over my life, she turned 
her steps in the direction of Dublin. 

At length, at the town of Kells, it was 
her fortune to fall in with the reverend 
Hilkiah Bradford, who had for several pre- 
ceding years been chaplain to the garrison 
in which I was born. He immediately knew 
her. He suspected the meaning of her ex- 
pedition, and felt that he had some recollec- 
tion of my own features. Judith shewed 
the since rest transports of joy in meeting 
him, and thought that all her troubles would 
now be at an end. She was however mis- 
taken in her calculations. Hilkiah, who 
was a man of the utmost integrity and pu- 
rity of heart, willingly took me under his 
protection, but insisted on an immediate 



MANDEVILLE. 39 

and irrevocable separation between me and 
my faithful preserver. The reverend cler- 
gyman was imbued with all the prejudices, 
that belong to the most strait-laced of the 
members of his sacred profession. His 
continual theme was that the church of 
Rome was no other than the spiritual 
Babylon, prophesied of in the book of 
Revelations ; and the text of scripture on 
which he was ever most prone to descant, 
was, " Come out of her, my people, that ye 
be not partakers of her sins, and that ye 
receive not of her plagues/' He was fully 
convinced that a Papist was more especially 
an object of tlie hatred of the almighty 
creator, than either a Heathen or a Maho- 
metan. And, if such were the sentiments 
familiar to his youth, and in which he had 
been too fatally confirmed by the conspi- 
racy of the Gunpowder Treason, and the 
diabolical crime of the infatuated Ravail- 
lac, it may easily be supposed how much 
strength this opinion gained in him, by th€ 



40 MANDEVILLE. 

dreadful scenes with which he was at this 
moment surrounded. 

Fearful was the contention between Ju- 
dith and the reverend Hilkiah, as to the 
destiny to which I was now to be consign- 
ed. The exertions of this uninstructed ma- 
tron were not less strenuous, than those of 
the woman whose the living child really 
was, when she pleaded before Solomon. 
She, who had shielded me again and again 
from the daggers, already dropping with 
gore, of her savage countrymen, thought 
foul scorn to be baffled by an unarmed he- 
retical priest. She had congratulated her- 
self on her success, when she had escaped 
from the lines of the rebel Irish, into a town 
that was at this moment filled with Eng- 
lish, fugitives and others. But she found 
herself further from the purpose of her af- 
fectionate heart here than before. My life, 
indeed, was now in safety. In that thought 
she truly rejoiced. But was it to be en- 
dured that she, who had nursed and fed me 



MANDEVILLE. 41 

from her own breast from the hour of my 
birth, and who had just brought me hither 
unhurt through a thousand hair-breadth 
escapes, should now be thrust out from me 
with contumely, as one whose touch hence- 
forth would be contamination and pesti- 
lence to me ? She raved ; she intreated. 
*' And was not it myself that saved him ? And 
has not he owed his life to me times with- 
out number ? And am not I ten times his 
mother ? Jewel, dear^ you have no mother; 
you have no father; suddenly, fearfully, 
they have been taken from you ; there is 
nobody now in all the world that can do 
for you but Judy. Mr Bradford, you can- 
not be so cruel ; you are a priest, though 
your are not a Roman; I have always 
thought you a good man. Who shall take 
care of the poor helpless wretch, if I am put 
away from him, who am his natural foster- 
er ? You do not mean to be the death of 
him ! Kill me, cut me to pieces, but do not 
ye, do not ye, be so barbarous as to put 



4S MANDEVILLE. 

me away from him, and leave me alive. 
My child ! my child I my child V 

It will easily be imagined, that I was 
moved to the utmost degree with the ago- 
nies of my nurse, and that I joined my an- 
guish, my tears, my cries, my intreaties, to 
hers. Bui this was a portentous moment, 
in which all human emotions, except with- 
in a certain definite limit, were utterly 
extinguished. Bigotry was lord paramount 
on every side, and strode along triumphant, 
wn hearing, and cased in triple adamant, 
over the ruins of every feeling of the heart. 
Had the contention been only between 
Judith, and the reverend divine who claim- 
ed to take me under his protection, without 
doubt her more energetic spirit, and her 
more muscular limbs would have borne off 
the prize. But, in the street of Kells, she 
was wholly surrounded with British, — with 
creatures who had just, through every de- 
gree of hardship and misery, escaped with 
life, who had each one left behind a hus- 



MANDEVILLE. 45 

band, a wife, or a child, the prey of this 
bloody pursuit, and to whoai it was agony 
to see among them for a moment a being 
of the race of their destroyers. The more 
clamorous the unhappy woman showed 
herself, the more importunately she forced 
her intreaties and her shrieks upon their 
hearing, by so much the more inexorably 
were they resolved to expel her. Was 
a woman of this accursed, savage, Irish, 
Popish brood, to be supposed to have any 
feelings, or any feelings entitled to the sym- 
pathy and favour of a Protestant heart ? 
They repelled her with every degree of 
contumely ; and, when at length she sunk 
senseless under the protracted contest, they 
flung her out of the town, like some loath- 
some load of contamination, too pestilent 
for wholesome British senses to endure. 

From Kells, my victorious protector bore 
me away in triumph to Dublin, and thence, 
with the least possible delay, procured a 
passage on board a frail and crazy bark 



44 MANDEVILLE, 

for England. The general opinion then 
was, that the insurgents would in a few 
dajs get possession of the melropolisj 
which they would not fail to make a scene 
of greater horror and devastation than any 
that had preceded, and that not one native 
of Great Britain would be left alive in the 
island; at least such was the firm persua- 
sion of those, who had passed through the 
scene of all these horrors, and who felt their 
escape, and their continuing to exist, as an 
incredible miracle. All who could provide 
themselves with a passage, though at never 
so excessive rates, were eager to quit the 
devoted coast. And, to heighten the cala- 
mity, there was a succession of violent 
winds and impetuous storms, such as had 
never before been known. Our poor fleet 
of barks was slenderly victualled, and load- 
ed with passengers. But no danger, and 
no distress, could induce them to make 
land again, preferring, as they did, all the 
hostility of the elements, to the bare chance 



MANDEVILLE. 45 

of falling into the hands of the infuriated 
enemy. We were in perpetual danger of 
perishing at sea, and much the greater part 
of the vessels that left Dublin at the same 
lime, were actually cast away. Our pas- 
sage was not accomplished under three 
months ; a great number of the persons on 
board had expired with hunger ; and those 
who reached the British coast alive were so 
much enfeebled with the extremities they 
had endured, as scarcely to be able to drag 
theqr bodies on shore. 



4$ MANDEVILLE. 



CHAPTER Iir. 



Mr Bradford, on his arrival, immediate- 
ly hastened to London, and from thence 
wrote to my uncle, my father's elder bro- 
ther, wlo in consequence of the late ca- 
lamity was become my natural guardian, 
to ask his directions hovv he was to dispose 
of me. The answer he received expressed 
my uncle's wish that I should be brought 
to him without delay, and adiled a request 
that my preserver would have the goodness 
to accompany me. These directions were 
no sooner known, than they were carried 
into execution; and, at the end of the second 
day from our leaving London, we reached 



MANDEVILLE. 4? 

in safety the place of our destination, which 
lay immediately on the verge of the sea, on 
the shores of the Eni^jli^h channel. 

1 resided constantly under the roof of this 
uncle for the next following eight or nine 
years of my life ; and it is therefore neces- 
sary that I should here describe the most 
remarkable features of this residence. I 
did not immediately see and feel these par- 
ticulars, in such a manner as to have en- 
abled me to describe them, if I had been 
early removed from the observation of them; 
but they insensibly incorporated themselves 
as it were with the substance of my mind ; 
and my character, such as it was afterwards 
displayed, owed much of its peculiarity to 
the impressions I here received. 

The dwelling-place of my uncle was an 
old and spacious mansion, the foundation 
of which was a rock, against which the 
waves of the sea for ever beat, and by 
their incessant and ineffectual rage were 
worked into a foam, that widely spread it- 



48 MANDEVILLE. 

self in every direction. The sound of the 
dashing waters was eternal, and seemed 
calculated to inspire sobriety, and almost 
gloom, into the soul of every one who 
dwelt within the reach of its influence. 
The situation of this dwelling, on that side 
of the island which is most accessible to an 
enemy, had induced its original architect 
to construct it in such a manner, as might 
best enable it to resist an invader, though 
its fortifications had since fallen into decay. 
It was a small part of the edifice only that 
was inhabited in my time. Several magni- 
ficent galleries, and a number of spacious 
apartments, were wholly neglected, and suf- 
fered to remain in a woful state of dila- 
pidation. Indeed it was one wing only 
that was now tenanted, and that imperfect- 
ly ; the centre and the other wing had 
long been resigned to the owls and the 
bitterns. The door which formed the 
main entrance of the building was never 
opened j and the master and all that be- 



MAKDEVILLE. 49 

longed to him were accustomed to pass 
by an obscure postern only. The court- 
yard exhibited a striking scene of desola- 
tion. The scythe and the spade were never 
admitted to violate its savage character. 
It was overgrown with tall and rank grass 
of a peculiar species, intermingled with 
elder trees, nettles, and briars. 

The dwelling which I have thus describ- 
ed was surrounded on three sides by the 
sea; it was only by the north- west that I 
could reach what I may call my native 
country. The whole situation was emi- 
nently insalubrious. Though the rock oa 
which our habitation was placed was, for 
the most |)art, of a perpendicular acclivity, 
yet we had to the west a long bank of sand, 
and in different directions various portions 
of bog and marshy ground, sending up an 
endless succession of vapours, I had almost 
said steams, whose effect holds unmitigat- 
ed war with healthful animal life. The 
tide also threw up vast quantities of sargas- 

VOL. I. c 



50 MANDEViLLE. 

SOS and weeds, the corruption of which was 
supposed to contribute eminently to the 
same effect. For a great part of the year 
we were further involved in thick fogs and 
mists, to such a degree as often to render 
the use of candles necessary even at noon- 
day. 

The open country, which, as I have said, 
lay to the north-west of us, consisted for 
the most part of an immense extent of bar- 
ren heath, the surface of which was broken 
and unequal, and was scarcely intersected 
with here and there the track of a rough, 
sandy, and incommodious road. Its only 
variety was produced by long stripes of 
grass of an unequal breadth, mingled with 
the sand of the soil, and occasionally adorn- 
ed with the plant called heath, and with 
fern. A tree was hardly to be found for 
miles. Such was the character of the firm 
ground, which of course a wanderer like 
myself, avoiding as carefully as might be 
a deviation into quaggy and treacherous 

19 



MANDKVILLK. 51 

paths, selected for his rambles. The hut 
of the labourer was rarely to be found ; the 
chief sign of animal life was a few scattered 
flocks of sheep, with each of them its shep- 
herd's boy and his dog ; and the nearest 
market-town was at a distance of seventeen 
miles. Over this heath, as I grew a little 
older, I delighted to extend my peregrina- 
tions ; and though the atmosphere was for 
the greater part of the year thick, hazy 
and depressing, yet the desolateness of the 
scene, the wideness of its extent, and even 
the monotonous uniformity of its character, 
favourable to meditation aad endless reverie, 
did not fail to be the source to me of many 
cherished and darling sensations. 

My uncle was the eldest son and lineal 
representative of the opulent family of the 
Mandevilles, and could boast that he was 
proprietor of four or five splendid and deli- 
cious mansions in different counties of Eng- 
land. It will naturally be asked therefore, 
how he came to chuse the most uninviting 



5^ MANDEVILLE. 

of them all, and to live in it in so obscure 
and unlordly a style ? The answer is simple : 
because so to live suited the frame of his 
mind, 

Audley Mandeville, my uncle, had from 
the hour of his birth been the object of his 
father's persecution. There was an opposi- 
tion of tempers between them, that seemed 
to render harmony for any length of time 
impossible. My grandfather was a naval 
adventurer, and had twice sailed with Sir 
Francis Drake round the world. His 
countenance and figure bore strongly the 
marks of the hardships he had endured. 
His manners had all the rudeness which is 
supposed characteristic of. a sailor. He 
"was not without some proficiency in the 
line of his profession ; but in all other mat- 
ters he was as ignorant as a Hottentot; and 
every kind of knowledge and refinement 
with which he was unacquainted, he thought 
himself entitled to hold in utter contempt. 
It will scarcely be regarded as an excep- 



MANDEVILLR. 65 

tion to this character, that he considered 
rank and fortune with the utmost partiality, 
and set no small value on those advantages, 
in this respect, with which he was himself 
endowed. He had particularly the highest 
notions of the prerogatives annexed to the 
paternal character, and the obedience he 
was entitled to exact from his offspring. He 
had a Herculean frame, and a robust con- 
stitution ; and in this arlicle, as well as the 
rest, he seemed to regard his own endow- 
ments as the standard of human excellence. 
Audley, his eldest born, was precisely 
such a son as would be most unwelcome to 
such a father. He came into the world in 
the seventh month of his mother's pregnan- 
cy. It was with the greatest difficulty, and 
by dint of the most unremitted tenderness and 
attentions on her part, that he could be 
reared to man s estate. He was deformed 
in his person.' He was, as the poet lex- 
presses it, 

" A puny insect, trembling at a breez?." 



04! MANDEVILLE. 

He was scarcely equal to the most ordina- 
ry corporal exertions ; and the temper of 
his mind corresponded to the frame of his 
body, tender as a flower, deeply suscep- 
tible of every unkindness and whatever 
thwarted his views and propensities, un- 
equal to contentiorr, and sinking, as with- 
out power of resistance, under any thing 
that presented itself in the form of hostility. 

Yet this delicate creature was not slen- 
derly furnished with intellectual endow- 
ments. Unqualified as he was for every 
species of hardihood, his happiness was 
placed in sedentary pursuits, He was an 
elegant scholar, and displayed the most live- 
ly and refined taste as to all those objects 
which address themselves to that facnlly. 
He was, in particular, a most admirable 
musician. 

All these qualities, which, to a person 
capable of appreciating them, would have 
rendered him an object of love and esteem, 
were lost, and worse than lost, upon my 



MANDEVILLE. ,55 

grandfather. He was not satisfied to re- 
gard them with negligence and contempt ; 
they became to him every day more and 
more the objects of inextinguishable ab- 
horrence. The consequence of all this 
was, that, after a trial of some years, my 
grandfather and my uncle seldom met. 
The son shrunk with unconquerable terror 
from the presence of his father ; and the fa- 
ther exerted himself to forget that he had 
such a son, and was inexpressibly morti- 
fied at any thing that brought back the 
fact to his recollection. Meanwhile, the 
education of Audley Mandeville was en- 
tirely domestic ; he was supposed not to 
have strength to contend with the difficul- 
ties of a public seminary. He was there- 
fore in some sort a prisoner in the pater- 
nal mansion ; he took no exercise without 
being previously informed that his father 
was from home ; and he had continually 
present to his thoughts the depressing con- 
viction (for in that way it certainly ope- 



56 ^ANDEVILLl. 

rated upon him) that he was the object of 
his father's detestation. 

The consolations he possessed to sup- 
port him under these melancholy circum- 
stances were few. His mother was his 
principal comfort, and her he regarded 
with sentiments scarcely short of adoration. 
His mother had also a niece, who was be- 
come an inmate in the house. This young 
lady was the progeny of my grandmother's 
sister, who had married unhappily, against 
the consent of all her family, and whose 
husband had turned out a profligate, and 
had deserted her. The young lady I have 
mentioned was the only offspring of this 
marriage, and was now completely an or- 
phan. 

Amelia Monlfort had, in the result of 
these accidents, been m ide the equal and 
almost constant companion of her more 
high-born cousin. They had a similarity 
of tastes, and their studies were in many 
respects the same. Like Audley, she had 



MANDEVILLE. 5? 

a keen relish for music, and had studied 
under the same masters. They often there- 
fore joined their respective performances, 
either with the voice or the instrument. 
My uncle had a voice so singularly melo- 
dious, as to have gained him the appella- 
tion of the little nightincrale. Though de- 
formed in his person, his eyes were re- 
markably beautiful ; and his countenance 
had an expression of sweetness, modesty 
and diffidence, tliat seemed irresistible. 
While Amelia laboured with her needle, 
the tediousness of her employment was of- 
ten relieved to her, as Audley read aloud 
some favourite author, while she plied the 
sempstress' toil. She was not permitted 
the advantage of masters for language • but 
this privation was made up to her, particu- 
larly in Italian, by the instructions of Aud- 
ley. As he had scarcely any other com- 
panion, the society of Amelia was singu- 
larly dear to him. Yet much of his time 
was spent in sequestered solitude. His li- 
c2l 



58 MANDEVILLE. 

terary diligence was often too severe and 
unremitted to allow of an associate ; but 
this separation and study only made the 
conversation of his confidential and con- 
stant friend the more precious to him, when 
his hours of study were at an end. 

It was scarcely to be imagined, that two 
young persons of different sexes, whose 
tastes were in many respects the same, 
should be so constantly together, without 
their being impressed with a mutual pas- 
sion. To Audley Amelia was all the 
world, as for weeks together he often saw 
no other human creature, except his mo- 
ther, his instructors, and the servants. His 
mother however died, before he w^as of an 
age when vigilance on this subject is usual- 
ly resorted to. Commodore Mandeville, 
now a widower, substituted in the place of 
his wife, as superintendent of his house- 
hold, a maiden sister of his own, Mrs Do- 
rothy Mandeville, a person of a very not- 
able character, who, as soon as the duties 



MANDEVILLE. 59 

of her function were performed, always-' 
found relaxation and refreshment in books. 
Her library however was not numerous, 
being entirely confined to two subjects, — 
books of devotion, and books of genealogy 
and heraldry. Between her active and her 
sedentary occupations her time was fully 
engrossed ; and she was a person of so 
much importance in her own eyes, that 
there was scarcely any other living being 
that she could think entitled to much place 
in her thoughts. Audley and Amelia 
therefore, now growing towards man's and 
woman's estate, went on in the same train 
to which they had been accustomed while 
children, or rather with a greater degree of 
attachment and effusion of soul than ever, 
without awakening the smallest suspicion 
in the elevated mind of Mrs Dorothy. 

Audley Mandeville however had not 
contented himself with expressing the par- 
tiality he felt, in general terms. Even from 
his boyish days he had been accustomed to 



60 MANDEVILLE. 

talk to Amelia of love and marriage ; and 
she listened to the tale with no less delight, 
than that which he felt in giving it utter- 
ance. This was the sacred secret of their 
privacy ; they never alluded to it in words, 
but when all witnesses were far removed 
from their discourse ; and they found in 
the joys they anticipated, and the plan of 
secluded and noiseless life they purposed 
for the future, a topic of conversation that 
could never be exhausted. Audley fer- 
vently protested, that, knowing no other 
life than this, being, by the infirmity of his 
constitution, shut out from more active and 
boisterous scenes, and having learned, from 
the inhumanity of his father, to detest the 
sentiments and manners of his species in 
general, he would never yield to mutability 
and alteration, would never give ear to any 
other scheme of existence than that which 
his heart told him was the only one worthy 
of his adoption, and would either live for 
his Amelia, or cease to live at all. 



MANDEVILLE. 61 

The first person who was induced to re- 
mark the nature of the communication go- 
ing on betw^een Audley and Ameha was a 
servant-maid ; and, as this female was of a 
fretful and malignant temper, to which no- 
thing was so distressing as to see other per- 
sons delighted and happy, she did not fail 
officiously to communicate her observa- 
tions to Mrs Dorothy. The old lady was 
astonished ; she never could have believed 
it. It never could have come into her 
head, that the blood of the Mandevilles 
could degrade itself by an ill-assorted wed- 
lock. She had indeed allowed herself to 
doubt, whether her brother, the commo- 
dore, had conducted himself with his usual 
propriety, in matching with the mother of 
Audley. But, that iVudley himself should 
fix his choice on a degraded branch of his 
mother's family, a girl without a shilling, 
and whose father, if he had met with his 
deserts, would have paid the forfeit of his 
life to the injured laws of his country, — she 



62 MANDEVILLE. 

would as soon have thought of the lord of 
the forest engendering with a serpent, or 
the eagle with the wren. 

After some deliberation however, and 
having satisfied herself by mute observa- 
tions that the suggestion was something 
more than the groundless garrulity of a 
chamber-maid, she hastened to impart all 
she knew to the ear of the commodore. 
The commodore was still more astonished 
than his sister. His son indeed was the 
object of his aversion, and he never liked 
to be reminded of his existence. He re- 
garded him with ineffable contempt, as 
concentring in his person and habits every 
thing that the naval hero most empha- 
tically despised. The tale however of 
Mrs Dorothy, placed poor Audley in a 
new light in his eyes. He now for the first 
time confessed to himself, that the eldest 
son of an ancient and opulent family stood 
for something. He would have been glad 
to regard this child of his wrath as a mere 



MANDEVILLE. 63 

zero ; but that he should marry at all, 
and still more that he should join himself 
in wedlock to the lowest fgnominy and dis- 
grace, for such he regarded the match that 
was suggested, was indeed a shock he was 
little able to sustain. 

Presently however he recovered him- 
self. " No, no," he exclaimed, '^ it cannot 
be. I see how it is. The knave has been 
playing his waggish tricks with the girl. 
They have been making a scholar of him ; 
and if scholarship is good for nothing else, 
it will teach him not to throw himself away 
like a natural. But this must not be. It 
is too bad, in one's own house, and among 
one's own kin. We must send the girl 
away. If the fool will be sowing his wild 
oats, he must contrive to do it as his betters 
did before him, and in a way not to make 
a noise in the world.'* 

In answer to this harangue, Mrs Doro- 
thy produced to the commodore a copy of 
verses in Audley's hand-writing, in which 



64 MANDEVILLE. 

Amelia stood for the object of his devotion, 
and all the sentiments were expressive of 
the happiness of a wedded life, however 
frugal, rustic and obscure, where love 
spread the board, and a union of hearts 
sweetened the cup. The commodore, not 
without difficulty and hesitation, construed 
the scroll ; Mrs Dorothy's annotations were 
of considerable service ; the studies of the 
naval hero had not laid among the votaries 
of the Muse. At length however he be- 
gan to apprehend something, and inclined 
to the opinion, that all might not be lies, 
even though the tale was told in verse. 

Fury succeeded to scepticism and inves- 
tigation. He sent to summon this ill- omen- 
ed son to his presence. This was an inci- 
dent that scarcely occurred once in a num- 
ber of j^ears, and it threw poor Audley into 
a fit of trembhng. There was nothing ser- 
vile and cringing in the temper of the 
youth ; and his tremors did not flow from 
any infirmity of his intellectual nature, but 



MANDEVILLE. 65 

from the delicacy of his frame, his total 
want of experience in the tempesJs of llie 
world, and the terror which always seized 
him, when he heard his father's name, and 
still more when he was placed within the 
sound of his voice. 

*' Well, Sir," said the commorlore, ^' here 
is a pretty story I have heard. Do you 
know that paper?" throwing down the 
copy of verses which Mrs Dorothy had in- 
troduced to his notice. Audley took tliem 
up, and seated himself with the paper in 
his hand, that he might ruminate on the 
scene in which he was engaged, and hs- 
ten with the more convenience to what- 
ever his father should thuik proper to de- 
liver. 

*' You are a hopeful youth to think of mar- 
rying ! Why, are you arrived at these years, 
and understand nothing of such matters 
yet? Do not you know, that the marriage 
of the heir is the most considerahle event 
that can happen in a family like ours ? 



66 MANDEVILLE. 

Have you never heard, that the king is al- 
ways consulted upon it, and that, if you 
were left without a father, he would be 
your guardian, and could give you in mar- 
riage to whomever he pleased, without your 
having the smallest voice in the matter? 
The power that would be vested in him, if 
you were an orphan, while I live, is fully 
in me. Do you think, because I take but 
little notice of you, and judge it a misfor- 
tune to my race that I should have such a 
son, that I will allow you to run your own 
course, and be the ruin of our bouse to the 
latest posterity ? 

" I know however how to act in such a 
case. I shall instantly send away the minx,, 
where you shall never hear of her again as 
long as you live. I am indeed quite com- 
petent to act in the affair ; and it is only a 
mark of my condescension, that I trouble 
myself to say a word to you about the mat- 
ter. But I wish, once for all, that you 
should be thoroughly informed of the na- 



MANDEVILLE. 6? 

ture of the case. As you have once gone 
wrong, it is fitting you should be put upon 
your guard, that there may be no danger of 
your committing such an error a second 
time. And therefore I now expect, that 
you will profess your entire contrition for 
the offence of which you have been guihy, 
and sign a paper, declaring that you will 
never think of thia Amelia, and that yoti 
will never take the remotest step upon the 
sacred subject of marriage, without having 
previously obtained my full sanction and 
concurrence. It is out of my fatherly 
kindness, thajt I have taken the pains thus 
largely to explain the subject to you. I 
am not used thus to take my child, over 
whom I hold an absolute and uncontrolable 
power, into a participation of my counsels ; 
and, I trust, in the present instance I shall 
see the visible effects of all this condescen- 
sion and consideration I have had for you/ 
Audley Mandeville, as I have already 
said, was one of the most timid and uncon«» 



68 MANDEVILLE. 

tending of human creatures, and of all per- 
sons existing on the face of the earlh, stood 
the most in awe of his father. You would 
have thought, that a harangue of this orien- 
tal and unsparing - sort, would have sunk 
him into earth, or shivered his delicate 
frame into a thousand atoms. It proved 
otherwise. What cannot tlie powers of 
almiiihty love etlect ? He shook off his in- 
firmities, and appeared altogether another 
creature from what he had been from his 
birth up to the present moment. 

" Sir," said he, " do not think to awe me 
by the severity of y ur tones, or tliesiernness 
of your aspect. Witai have you ever done 
for me? When have you ever exerted the 
smallest ca'^e in my behalf? You have de- 
serted me from tlie hour »»f my birth, as 
the bird of the wilderness deserts her eggs, 
leaving them to be hatched as ihey may. 
When I was a child, did you ever hold me 
in your arms ? Did I ever experience from 
you one caress, or so much as a smile ? 



MANDEVILLE. 69 

Have not your voice and your presence 
always been to me a source of unmingled 
terror ? Did you ever wish me to live ? 
Did you ever love me for a moment? I 
have a conception of the character of a 
father ; and had it been my lot to have 
been blessed in such a relation, I think I 
could even have adored the being, who was 
the source to me of unspeakable sensations. 
But I am the outcast of the worhl, cut off 
from every h'iend. I have been a prisoner 
under the paternal roof, and havemoredread- 
ed to approach you, than the vilest slave to 
the most cruel eastern tyrant. Thus blight- 
ed and forlorn, what could I do ? 1 have 
found a friend, a friend that is more than 
all the world to me. I have but one con- 
solation : there is but one tie by which I 
hold to the present scene of existence. 
But that consolation has now for years 
made up to me the loss of every thing else. 
My cousin is to me a spring of inconceiva- 
ble delights. When 1 am fatigued, she 



70 MANDEVILLE. 

cherishes me \ when I am sick, she is my 
nurse ; when I am overwhehiied with all 
the griefs that my state and constitution 
cast upon me, her smiles are the only thing 
that make existence supportable. She calms 
my impatience ; she drives away my in- 
ward distress by the sweetness of her coun- 
tenance; her power over me is without a 
limit, I cannot part with her. She is the 
pole-star by which I steer through the 
voyage of life ; and if you put out her light, 
my days and nights to come will be pur- 
poseless, and wrapped in everlasting dark- 
ness. You have done me no good ; you 
have scarcely at any time troubled yourself 
with anything that concerns me 3 in this, 
which is every thing to my poor desolate 
heart, I conjure you let me alone. 1 will 
not be awed ; I will not be cajoled ; no- 
thing shall turn me aside from the part I 
have chosen for myself. I know not why 
I speak this ; not with the hope to move 
your inflexible spirit 3 but I speak it to 



MANDEVILLE. 71 

lighten my heart. All my paths shall be 
direct ; and the few words I shall utter — 
few certainly shall I ever address to a father 
—-shall at least be unstained with duplicity 
and falsehood." 

In these artless strains did this poor in- 
experienced youth pour out his sentiments 
to his flinty -hearted father. The commo- 
dore was inexpressibly astonished at all 
that he heard. He had not doubted that 
his son, every thing that he had ever yet 
known of him being made up of a shrink- 
iig and sensitive diffidence, would have felt 
annihilated, and incapable ofuttering a word, 
before the anger of his father. The com- 
modore had cruelly wasted his great guns 
upon him, at the same time that he believed, 
that the smallest intimation of his pleasure 
would have deprived Audley of all power 
of resistance, and that, where he conde- 
scended to interfere, the whole question 
was settled in a moment. 



7^ MANDEVILLE. 



CHAPTER IV. 



Mranwhile, though the commodore 
was absolute and dictatorial in his temper, 
he was not at the same time without his 
wiles. The enemy that he could not con- 
quer by force, he was not indisposed to 
take in by stratagem. A view had just 
opened upon him, that he had not in the 
smallest degree anticipated ; aiid he drew in 
his fierceness. He had the prudence to 
stop in his career, and allow himself time 
to revise his measures. He muttered words 
of resentment and menace ; but what he 
said was confused and incoherent ; and he 
abrupdy ordered the youth from ids pre- 
sence. 



MANDEVILLE. 73 

All that had passed thus far, had pro- 
ceeded without impediment or reflection. 
The commodore no sooner heard the un- 
welcome information from his sister, than 
he acted upon it. It was most congenial 
to his temper to use decisive measures ; and, 
where he thought he could settle a business 
at once, he did not relish the subjecting 
himself to protracted trouble. But, before 
his interview with his son was over, he re- 
collected an appointment that had been 
made with a distant relation of his late wife, 
who had undertaken to conduct Audley to 
London, and initiate him in those scenes of 
populous and busy life, which were so re- 
markably contrasted with any thing the 
youth had yet witnessed. From the scene 
which had just passed, and the unexpected 
resoluteness Audley had displayed, the com-? 
modore began to think, that whatever steps 
might be taken for the summary removal 
of Amelia, it might be more prudent to take 
in his son's absence. Every thing now 

VOL. I. D 



74 MANDEVILLE. 

passed in quiet for several days -, the com- 
modore's fury seemed to have evaporated 
itself in threats ; and Audley, unskilled in 
the treachery of the world, suffered himself 
to be lulled into the same security, as before 
this explanation had taken place. He 
thought of his father only at rare intervals ; 
but Amelia was always before him ; he was 
in her presence as often as he pleased ; he 
dreamed of her every night, and in these 
few days he had advanced whole years in 
love. The affection that reigned in his 
bosom, contracted in some nameless way 
new sweetness, from being now looked upon 
as a thing forbidden ; at the same time that 
he had so little meditation and calculation 
for the future, that he lived with his whole 
soul in the present time, and was contented. 
To say all in a word, Audley was constitu- 
tionally a dreamer ; and his day-dreams, as 
always happens in this disease, moulded 
themselves in correspondence to the pro- 
pensity of his mind. 



MANDEVILLE. 7^ 

At length the cousin arrived with whom 
his journey was to be taken. The course 
of Audley's life had been uniform; and this 
had infused into him a sort oi vis inerticB^ a 
disposition opposite to that of '' such as are 
given to change.'* When he thought of 
London as a vision only, the thought was 
by no means without its attractions ; but 
when the time came that was to turn it into 
reality, he shrunk instinctively away, and 
wished the engagement had never been 
contracted. He could scarcely remember 
the time when he had slept out of his owA 
bed ; the sort of prison-life he led under his 
father's roof, made him but so much the 
more completely master of the arrangement 
of his time ; all the little machinery of his 
studies was about him ; but, most of all, 
he must leave Amelia behind him ; and he 
felt that the whole world would be a blank 
to him, where she was not present. Amelia 
however was zealous to press him to the 
expedition ; she declaimed earnestly, but 



76 MANDEVILLE. 

sweetly, against the supineness and indo- 
lence that she saw was growing upon him ; 
she told him, that now was the age at which 
he ought to store his mind with observations, 
and make trial of that activity which ta- 
lents like his required from their possessor. 
What could not the exhortations of Amelia 
achieve ? He set out on his journey with a 
heavy and foreboding heart; and when the 
time of leave-taking came, he seemed to 
have a melancholy presentiment that he 
was parting from the idol of his soul for 
ever. 

The stage was now free for the machina- 
tions of the old commodore and his sister 
Dorothy. They had cabaled and coun- 
selled together, previously to the departure 
of Audley; if that can be called counsel, 
where the veteran seaman laid down the 
law never to be contradicted, and his obse- 
quious minister applied all the energy and 
activity of which she was mistress, to carry 
his mandates into execution. The wing of 



MANDEVILLE. 77 

Mandeville House in which Audley and 
the ladies resided, was the very mansion of 
tranquillity ; not so that portion of the 
building which was occupied by the mas- 
ter. He had for his chosen companions 
two of his sea-mates that had been disabled 
in the service, — one that had lost an arm, 
and another that, from a fracture of the 
knee-pan, was not able to support him- 
self without a crutch ; and their midnight 
orgies were occasionally turbulent and cla- 
morous. Dorothy and the commodore had 
agreed, considering the dangerous turn of 
mind that Audley betrayed, that the only 
way of putting to rest the question of 
Amelia, and freeing themselves from all 
further trouble on the subject, was to marry 
her ; the two gentlemen that dwelt at Man- 
deville House, both bachelors, presented 
themselves most conveniently for the pur- 
pose ; and it was canvassed with all due 
formality, whether the cripple, or he that 
was maimed of an arm only, was most eli- 



78 MANDEVILLE. 

gible for the purpose. The lot at length 
fell upon Thomson, the cripple ; he was 
completely a man in every dimension ; 
•when he sat, or when he stood, there was 
nothing to object to in his figure ; it was 
only when he moved, that he was deficient. 
Beside that, he was ten years younger than 
his companion, having only reached the 
thirtieth year of his age. 

Amelia was in reality far from being 
that paragon of perfection, which the ima- 
gination of her fond lover had painted her. 
She had a considerable talent for music; 
she had a soft and flexible temper ; lent an 
accommodating ear to every thing that was 
said to her, and was not without the power 
of comprehending to a certain extent the 
notions of her favourite Audley. She was 
daily in his society ; and perpetual oppor- 
tunity had increased her capacity of follow- 
ing the peculiar train of his ideas. Add to 
which, she had an ingenuousness of counte- 
nance, which, paradoxical as it may sound, 



MANDEVILLE. 79 

deluded the spectator ; it made him give 
her credit for more than actually passed in 
iier mind. All together, she was not in all 
probability the woman that would have fix- 
ed Audley's choice, if he had lived in the 
world, where a number of other candidates 
would have continually passed before his 
eyes. But what could be expected ? They 
sang together ; they read together 5 he was 
her zealous and affectionate preceptor; and 
love rendered her three times a more im- 
proving and promising pupil to him, than 
she would have been under any other 
master. In his life he had never seen an- 
other female of his own age, v.'ith whom he 
had held even one hour*s familiar communi- 
cation. And it was the characteristic of 
Audley's mind, that whatever impression 
was once strongly fixed upon it, was in- 
delible. No time could efface it ; no illu- 
sions, no machinations, however artful, had 
power over it ; his soul remained for ever 
faithful to its first predilection ; and though 



80 MANDEYILLE. 

shattered, so to express myself, into ii thou- 
sand pieces, the image was but muUipHed 
by the violence it received. 

The business was now, as we have said, to 
marry Amelia; and Lieutenant Thomson 
was fixed upon for the husband. The com- 
modore opened the plan in the first place 
to his young friend. The two divisions of 
the family lived in a state of so great separa- 
tion, that Thomson had scarcely seen Ame- 
Ha; but he had seen her. The commodore 
inquired of him, in the first place, how he 
stood inclined to marriage, and, next, what 
he thought of the niece of his patron ? — to 
both these questions the answer was en- 
couraging. Amelia was not destitute of the 
advantages of youth and beauty; and Thom- 
son considered it as no small benefit, to be- 
come in some sort a member of the Man- 
deville family. The commodore spoke of 
settling him in a comfortable independence, 
andtalkedof bestowing one thousand pounds 
upon his niece as her portion in marriage. 



MANDEVILLE. 81 

These were considerations that by no means 
operated to induce the lieutenant to slight 
the proposal. 

" But I must be frank with you, Jack," 
continued the commodore. " I am your 
friend ; I hope you know that. I will not 
therefore deceive you ; I will tell you the 
whole truth. This girl has been brought 
up in my house ; she was the niece of my 
poor wife that is gone ; she was the orphan 
child of a worthless father, and we could 
do no less ; she has been brought up with 
my son Audley. You know my son Aud- 
ley ; I believe you have seen him ; a poor 
unfortunate being, deformed, and that never 
had a day's health. He has lived shut up 
in a band- box; knows no more of the 
world than a child. He never spoke to a 
woman in his life but this girl and his own 
mother ; yet this poor wretch has taken it in 
his head, forsooth, that he must have a wife. 
Amy, to do her justice, is a likeJy girl ; he 
has seen her every day, and thinks himself 
D 2 



82 AlANDEVILLE. 

in love with her. The girl very naturally 
would have no objection to marry the heir 
of the Mandeville estate ; and so, if we do 
not mind and look about us. thev think to 
make a match of it. 

" I need not tell you, my dear Thomson, 
that that must not be. The girl is a likely 
and a good girl ; but she is no match for 
a son of mine. Nor indeed is it my wish 
that this poor creature should marry at all. 
He has not the wit to govern himself; he 
must always be in leading strings 5 and is 
there any sense in placing such an object at 
the head of a great family ? His children, I 
dare swear, would be all such poor helpless 
creatures as himself. But his brother Henry 
[my father], whom I have just put into the 
army, is as likely a young fellow as you shall 
see on a summer's day. The King himself 
[James I.], who is- an admirer of fine young- 
men, 1 assure you, took a great deal of no- 
tice ot him, when he was introduced at 
court on his appointment : and it is him I 



MANDEVILLE. 83 

look to for the continuance of the Man- 
deville family. 

" And now I have laid open my heart to 
you, Jack. You have made the circumna- 
vigation of the globe, and are not a poor 
ignoramus like this hopeful heir of mine ; 
but (I say it without flattery) must know 
something of the world. You know that 
such things as this boy and girl have taken 
into their heads must not be ; but that we, 
who are older and wiser, must take care 
and see every thing right. Now then, 
Thomson, what I ask of you is an act of 
friendship ; and as I have been always 
kind and faithful to you, I hope you will 
not deny me -, and I assure you, you shall 
be never the worse for it in the end. It is 
natural, as I said, that the girl should like 
to marry the heir, and be at the head of Man- 
deville estate. But she is a good girl in the 
main, and will make a good wife. She shall 
be set right in this freak of hers ; I will take 
care of that. What say you?" 



84 MANDEVILLE. 

Lieutenant Thomson was a good-heart- 
ed, generous young man, and regarded the 
being serviceable to his friend as the first 
of human virtues. He had no objection to 
marriage ; he liked the person of Amelia ; 
and he was not displeased with what the 
commodore had dropped about an esta- 
blishment and a portion. Thus far his mo- 
tives were selfish ; but it was not a small 
recommendation of the plan in his eyeSy 
that, in pursuing it, he was to confer an es- 
sential benefit on his patron. He entered 
thoroughly into the ideas that had been 
stated to him -, he was convinced that the 
heir of a great family ought not to be thrown 
away upon an unequal marriage -, and he 
saw all that had yet passed between the 
young people, as an idle and unauthorized 
fancy, which it became their elders warily 
to counteract. He answered therefore, 
that, provided Miss Amelia could be tho- 
roughly cured of this foolish notion of hers, 
and could approve of him for a husband. 



MANDEVILLE. 85 

it would give him the greatest pleasure to 
adopt the commodore's proposal. 

The negociation having been thus far 
successfully conducted, the harder task re- 
mained, of reconciling the mind of Amelia 
to the project. This part of the business 
was devolved upon Mrs Dorothy. The 
influence of the commodore was reserved, 
like that of the descent of a god by the 
Greek tragedians, as a last resource, to be 
used only in an embarrassment that no- 
thing but the descent of a god could solve. 
Mrs Dorothy could reason with her niece ; 
and Amelia would feel herself free, with a 
person of her own sex, to express her ob- 
jections. If the commodore had spoken, 
what he said would of course have been 
received in silence ; and that consent is 
most to be relied on, and by consequence 
is most acceptable to the party by whom 
consent is desired, which is given in words. 

Mrs Dorothy took the young lady round- 
ly to task. She first communicated to her 



8^ MANDEVILLE. 

all the observations she had made. i\me- 
lia blushed abundantly. She had flattered 
herself, that whatever had passed between 
her and Audley, as it had constantly passed 
in the sacredness of privacy, had been a 
secret to all but themselves. Maiden mo- 
desty always feels the discovery that a par- 
tial sentiment has been nourished towards 
a person of the other sex, with a sensation 
like guilt. 

Mrs Dorothy proceeded to enlarge on 
the unsuitableness and enormity of such a 
match. She could not have believed that 
Amelia, who had been admitted under the 
roof of Mandeville House out of charily, 
could have been guilty of so ungrateful and 
treacherous a return, as that of seducing the 
heir. It could only be ignorance, that 
caused her for a moment to harbour the 
idea of such a union. The laws of Eng- 
land, and of the whole civilized world, ren- 
dered the thing impossible. A crowned 
head might as well be expected to be join- 



MANDEVILLE. 87 

ed in wedlock to a shepherdess, — a thing 
that did well enough in a romance, but was 
not to be found anywhere else. She told 
her niece the story of the Earl and Count- 
ess of Hertford, who lay in separate im- 
prisonment for nine years, in consequence 
of having contracted an unauthorized mar- 
riage, till at length the death of the lady 
finally restored the Earl to his liberty ; to 
which she added many other anecdotes, 
which plentifully occur in the instructive 
annals of Queen Elizabeth. She added, 
that the commodore had resolved to apply 
to the government of his country for an in- 
terdiction against so disgraceful an act j 
but that he had kindly allowed her first to 
try the strength of expostulation with Ame- 
lia, before he had recourse to so terrible an 
expedient. The consequence of the idea 
being persisted in, and, still more, if the 
rites of the church were resorted to, to 
sanction a thing in its own nature so abo- 
minable, would be the utter ruin of Aud- 



88 MANDEVILLE, 

ley. He would undoubtedly be committed 
for life to a solitary imprisonment, and cut 
off from every shilling of his inheritance, 
by a decree of the court of Star-Chamber* 
Mrs Dorothy here overwhelmed her poor 
unprotected hearer with an account, alto- 
gether unknown before, of the delinquen- 
cies of her father, which, as the ancient 
maiden set them forth, subjected him to 
the penalty of an ignominious public exe- 
cution, and cut off his posterity from the 
possibility of ever becoming mixed with 
the better orders of society. 

This eloquent harangue was finally wound 
up with an appeal to every generous feel- 
ing in the heart of Amelia. The fate of 
her beloved Audley was placed completely 
at her disposal. The young man, like all 
persons brought up with the notion of be- 
coming heirs to a great estate, was head- 
strong and obstinate, inaccessible to the so- 
ber suggestions of reason, and obstinately 
bent to run on destruction. It was in the 



MANDEVILLE. 89 

power of Amelia only to save him. By 
marrying another she would preserve him 
for ever from the possibility of fatal mis- 
chief; while he himself, seeing that there 
was no hope for him in the pursuit of this 
destructive scheme, would soon be restored 
to quiet and self-possession, and would fi- 
nally, by the innocence of his mind, and 
the eminent talents with which he was en- 
dowed, become a comfort to himself, and 
an ornament to his family and his country. 
The discourse of Mrs Dorothy drowned 
the fair face of Amelia in tears. A thou- 
sand varying emotions contended in her 
bosom as it proceeded. She saw all the 
fond hopes with which the sweet music of 
Audley*s voice had inspired her, withered 
for ever by the pestilential breath of her 
aunt. The first impulse of her soul how- 
ever was a generous one. She would ne- 
ver, no never, be a cause of calamity to her 
cousin. For herself, it did not signify what 
became of her. She had never thought 



90 MANDEVILLE. 

herself of much importance in the world; 
and now, that it was discovered to her that 
she was at best only a dishonoured branch 
of a respectable family, her depression was 
complete. She had never flattered herself 
to be more than the ivy that might be sup- 
ported by the nobler stem of her illustrious 
lover ; but that she should injure him, and 
wither the honours that were so truly his, 
she could die a thousand deaths rather th m 
endure the idea. She was now altogether 
worthless and nothing ; and let her be sa- 
crificed. 

The situation of this generous girl was 
truly a pitiable one. By the unfeeling con- 
trivances of the commodore and his sister, 
she was attacked in this point, that was 
every thing to her, with her only protector 
at a distance. They did with her what 
they pleased. They made her believe what 
they pleased. What chance had she, in a 
contest with these grey-headed conspira- 
tors ? The very pith of all they insisted on 



MANDEVILLE. ^1 

was, that whatev^er measure it was neces- 
sary for them to pursue, must be taken 
without exciting the smallest suspicion in 
the mind of her beloved admirer. . 

It was so arranged, that the moment Mrs 
Dorothy had exhausted the whole artillery 
of her eloquence upon her niece, the com- 
modore entered the room where they were 
sitting. This completed the defeat of Ame- 
lia. She might have expostulated with her 
aunt ; she might have ventured upon a few 
timid questions and objections. But the 
presence and the voice of the commodore 
struck her dumb. She threw herself at his 
feet. " Oh, sir," said she, " dispose of me as 
you please. I grieve for my offence ; I 
intreat you to pardon any confusion and 
mischief I may have occasioned in your 
family. I would not for the world be a 
cause of injury to your son.** 

The commodore, finding her in this 
tractable and humble frame of spirit, en- 
deavoured to vsoothe her. His soothings 



Sfa MANDEVILLE. 

were like the softened roarings of a bear 
murmuring her maternal regard to her 
cubs. This was a style of address to which 
his rugged nature was altogether unsuited ; 
he could afford little more than some inar- 
ticulate indications of what he meant; and 
it was incumbent on Amelia, to take the will 
for the deed. 

Whatever remained to be done was 
speedily effected. Short courtship suited 
best, with such a marriage as was now in 
hand. The poor lieutenant, was little 
versed in the temper and manners of the 
frailer sex ; and all that was coldness, and a 
certain unconquerable horror at the sacri- 
fice Amelia was making, he unsuspectingly 
set down to maiden coyness and reserve. 
She was of a nature so gentle and so mild, 
that she could not deport herself disdainful- 
ly to any one. Add to which, Thomson 
was not of a romantic temper. He knew, 
that the wedlock he was contracting was 
not a match of love. He took to wife a 



MANDKVILLE. 93 

beautiful and amiable young woman, with 
a handsome portion, and, by so doing, con- 
ferred an essential benefit on his patron ; 
and he saw no reason to be discontented 
with his lot. As to Amelia, the painful 
duty (for duty she esteemed it) in which 
she was engaging, she wished to have over 
as soon as possible. When it was done, 
and could not be recalled, she hoped she 
should feel more resigned to her fate. But 
all the interval was nameless repinings, and 
horror, and anguish, — a state of mind too 
terrible long to be endured. 

Audley in the mean time had been led 
away to London. For a few days he was 
amused with the journey, and the multifa- 
rious objects which the metropolis present- 
ed to his observation. He saw the king, 
and the Duke of Buckingham, and Prince 
Charles. It was at the time that the two 
latter were just returned from Spain ; tiiey 
were at the height of their short-lived po- 
pularity ; and the nation overflowed with 



94 MANDEVILLE. 

gratitude to theai, for not having brought 
over the infanta to be their future queen. 
Audley received a letter from Amelia, full 
of tenderness and love ; and he was delight- 
ed. One of the conditions arranged by the 
old people with his mistress, when they 
terrified her from her loyalty and her vows, 
was, that she should receive no more letters 
from her lover. She admitted that this was 
best ; she knew she could not read the ar- 
dent effusions of his unsuspecting soul, in 
her present state of mind, and live. She 
even made it her own request, that she 
might not so much as know when a letter 
from him was brought. She prescribed to 
herself for the present the impossible task, 
of forgetting that he existed. Ah, how lit- 
tle was her acquaintance with the subtlety 
of love, and how much did she overrate the 
firmness and resolution of which she was 
capable ! 

For Audley, he lived a few days upon 
her first letter j but it was not long, before 



MANDEVILLE. Q5 

he began to pine for another and another. 
No second letter ever came to his hand. 
He wrote under a still increasing anxiety 
and perturbation of mind. What he wrote 
contained so ingenuous and unaffected a 
picture of a beating and a bleeding heart, 
that even the persons who had conspired 
the death of all his hopes on this side the 
grave, began to be moved. The commo- 
dore ordered the man of business who was 
his agent in London, to wait upon his son, 
and acquaint him with the marriage that 
had taken place. Audiey listened to the 
man ; but he did not understand him. It 
was as if the fellow had used words, wholly 
unconnected with the possibility of a mean- 
ing. In all the vocabulary of poor Audiey, 
there was no phrase that could express the 
marriage of Amelia with another. 

There was a sensible portion of time in 
which the mind of the young man remain- 
ed in this state of stupefaction, and he real- 
ly could not understand what his visitor 



96 MANDEVILLE. 

came to announce to him. The posture 
which succeeded, was that of unbelief, a 
firm rejection, as of an impudent invention 
that was sought for some reason or other to 
be imposed upon him. In sentiment, he 
relied upon the fidelity of Amelia, as upon 
the pillars of creation. In reasoning, he 
knew how possible it was that one should 
lie ; that his father or another should seek 
to deceive him in this point -, but that the 
tale should be true — was impossible. 

He ordered without a moment's pause 
the quickest mode of conveyance to be 
provided for him, and he set out for the 
Mandeville estate. During the journey, 
his mind was in the greatest agitation. He 
adhered most constantly and inflexibly to 
his first conclusions; but from the region 
of the brain, where thought succeeds 
thought with such trackless swiftness, he 
could not wholly shut out ideas of an oppo- 
site kind. He reached Mandeville House, 
fevered, and burnt up with a thousand emo- 



MANDEVILLE. 97 

tions. He thought only of his cousin 5 he 
inquired for no one else. There is some- 
thing in the supernatural tone of an anxious 
mind, that awes even the most brutish. 
The servants dared not speak to him, or 
answer his questions ; they could only tell 
him that Miss Montfort was not there. 
He hastened to her apartment ^ — all was si- 
lent and deserted, and spoke death to his 
spirit. Nothing appeared, as it used to ap- 
pear. Her bed looked as if it had not late-, 
ly been occupied ; her books and her desk 
were gone ; he saw only the virginals 
[harpsichord] with which she had been ac- 
customed to soothe his cares. He called 
for his father ; but the habitual tempera- 
ture of both was reversed ; the commodore 
had seen him unseen as he passed along the 
gallery, had marked the wildness of his eye, 
and the vehemence of his gestures, and had 
not the courage to approach him. 

The fatigue of mind and body which 
Audley had undergone, was a thing to 

VOL. I. E 



98 MANDEVILLE. ' 

which he was ahogether unused -, he sunk 
under it, was no longer able to support 
himself, and was quietly conducted to his 
bed. In the night he was seized with a 
strong fev€r ; in the morning he became 
delirious. He called incessantly for Ame- 
lia. Shortly after, in fancy he beheld her 
before him ; he then saw her torn away by 
ruffians ; he heard her screams ; his own 
screams were agonizing, and pierced to the 
soul ; it was by force only that he could be 
confined to his bed. When the first vio- 
lence of his delirium subsided, he expostu- 
lated with his attendants with an incon- 
ceivable flow of eloquence ; he intreated 
them to attempt to deceive him no longer ; 
it was ineffectual and impotent ; he knew 
that Amelia would never give him up ; 
nothing could diminish this confidence in 
him. " Then, oh, bless me with the truth ! 
let my ear hear words responsive to those 
that repose in my heart ! bring her to my 
presence ; let my eyes once more be made 

10 



MANDEVILLE. 99 

happy with the hght of her countenance ; 
let my hand once more be pressed in the 
hand of Amelia ! I will give up my fami- 
ly; I will renounce all claims to my in- 
heritance ; I will maintain her with the la- 
bours of my hands ; I will dwell with her 
in the wilds of America; and no one that 
has known me, shall ever again be annoyed 
with the mention of my name." 

The commodore was inexpressibly as- 
tonished with the incredulity of his son, and 
thought it became him to put an end to it. 
For this purpose he caused a letter to be 
written by Amelia herself, announcing the 
event. Its contents were as follow : 

" Audley, I am married. It is for your 
sake I have done this. Nothing but the 
consideration of your welfare, could have 
prevailed with me. If I had not complied, 
your ruin would have been inevitable. I 
have removed the only obstacle that could 
turn you aside from that career of honour 
and virtue, for which nature designed you. 



100 MANDF.VILLE. 

Do not be angry with me. The act by 
which I have sealed our separation, was 
not the act of infidehty or indifference. 
Forgive it I But, above all, be happy, my 
1 ! Be happy !" 

This letter was speedily conveyed to the 
young man's hands ; and it effected in him 
an entire revolution. He gazed upon it 
earnestly. He studied it intently, as if his 
whole soul were riveted upon its contents. 
In the hand-writing he could not be mis- 
taken. His knowledge of it was as intimate, 
as his acquaintance with the features and 
voice of the writer. It was that evidence, 
which alone could convince him of the rea- 
lity of his calamity. 

All his agitation was now past. No more 
of violence, or raving, or impatience, was 
ever again discovered in Audley. The 
tears at ^rst rolled in streams down his 
cheeks ; but not a muscle of his face was 
moved. He remained the statue of despair. 
No smile from that day ever lighted his 



MANDEVILLE. 101 

countenance ; no accident ever raised up 
his head, or prompted him to laok upon the 
heavens, or with a direct view to behold 
the sun or the stars. Narrow as had been 
the scene of his education, in this one event 
he had lost every thing. The society of 
Amelia, the being for ever united to her, 
was the only boon in the globe of the living 
world that he had ever desired. And now all 
things were the same to him, — except that 
he had a preference for looking on desola- 
tion. All within him was a blank ; and he 
was best pleased, or rather least chagrined, 
when all without was a blank too. There 
never perhaps was an example of a human 
being so completely destroyed at once. He 
was the shadow of a man only. 

I know not whether the commodore him- 
self did not sometimes almost repent the 
work of his hands. One thing however is 
certain, that, much as he disliked this son 
before, he was now exceedingly anxious to 
alter the succession of the estate, and fix 



102 MANDEVILLE, 

the inheritance upon my father, Audley's 
younger brother. My father however al- 
ways steadily opposed the project. Whe- 
ther, in spite of this opposition, it would 
have been effected if the commodore had 
lived, I cannot determine. An accident 
however, the consequence of inebriety, cut 
him off, shortly after the events of which I 
am speaking. Another chance happened 
in no long time following, which completed 
the tragedy. Amelia died in childbed of 
her first child, and the infant did not survive 
her. Thus every thing was wound up with 
Audley at once. He was left uncontroled, 
the master of himself and of an ample for- 
tune, with no other disadvantage, than that 
he totally wanted the spirit to enjoy the 
one, or to use the other. This was the state 
of mind in my unfortunate kinsman, which 
solves the riddle that occurred, and shows 
why, being the lineal representative of an 
opulent family, and proprietor of four or five 
splendid and delicious mansions indifferent 



MANDEVILLE. 103 

counties of England, he was induced to 
choose the most uninviting of them all, and 
to live in it in so obscure and unlordly a 
style. 

My uncle had felt much regard for my 
father, — as much as w^as compatible v^ith 
the peculiar turn his mind had taken; which 
was to dwell for ever on one event, to con- 
sider that in relation to himself as the only 
reality, and scarcely to bestow so much re- 
gard on every thing that existed in the world 
beside, as an ordinary human creature would 
bestow upon the shadows of a magic Ian- 
thorn. Years rolled over the head of this 
unfortunate man in vain. While he was 
young, the amiable object of his early love 
was all that interested him on earth; and, 
as he grew older, habit produced upon him 
the same effect, which had at first been the 
child of passion. He loved his sadness> 
for it had become a part of himself. AH 
his motions had for so long a time been lan- 
guid, that, if he had been excited in any 



104 MANDEVILLE. 

instance to make them otherwise, he would 
scarcely have recognized his own identit3% 
He found a nameless pleasure in the ap- 
pendages and forms of melancholy, so great, 
that he would as soon have consented to cut 
off his right hand, as to part with them. In 
reality he rather vegetated than lived -, and 
he had persisted so long in this passive 
mode of existence, that there was not nerve 
and spring enough left in him, to enable 
him to sustain any other. 

My uncle felt a marked kindness for me 
for my father^s sake. Though fortune was 
of no value to this victim of sorrow, yet he 
could not help being conscious that his 
brother's conduct had been peculiarly ho- 
nourable, when he refused to concur in the 
commodore's plan for disinheriting his eldest 
son, and rather chose to expose himself to 
his severest displeasure, than aid in the in- 
juring a person so near to himself, so inof- 
fensive in his manners, and who had in him- 
self no powers of defence against the medi- 



MANDEVILLE. 105 

tated wrong. My uncle therefore received 
me with kindness, and immediately ap- 
pointed for me and Mr Bradford, who was 
prevailed on to become my tutor, an a- 
partment in his house. Beside the indivi- 
duals of the family I have already named, 
I had also a sister ; but she for the present 
resided with her mother's relations. 



E ^ 



106 MANDEVILLE. 



CHAPTER V. 



I WAS too young in years when I enter- 
ed my uncle's nnansion, to have a clear no- 
tion of what were the first impressions I re- 
ceived there. I remember only the silence, 
the monotony, and the gloom, that per- 
vaded it. My uncle had his apartments -, 
and I and ray tutor had ours. It was a gene- 
ral rule through the house, that no one was 
to intrude himself on the master uncalled 
for. If by any rare accident I came with- 
in sight of him unexpectedly, I was instruct- 
ed to hide myself, to steal away with 
cautious steps, and to do nothing that might 
excite observation. My education was 



MANDEVILLE. 107 

grave and sad ; but if the restlessness of 
boyisli years chanced at any time to awake 
me to a gayer tone, the sight of my uncle 
checked my buoyant spirits at once, my 
countenance fell, and my thoughts became 
solemn. No emotion however of aver- 
sion or dislike ever accompanied this. A 
harsh word never fell from his lips; an 
angry tone never escaped him. The only 
expression of displeasure of which he seem- 
ed capable, was some gesture showing that 
he suffered and was distressed, but always 
without any token of resentment, or word 
of reproof. I thought therefore of my 
uncle with awe, never with fear. I saw in 
him a mysterious being exciting my won- 
der, and in whom I was ever most unwilling 
to occasion displeasure ; but at the same 
time a being incapable of inflicting the 
smallest mischief. It is strange, but from 
my own experience I can aver it to be true, 
that this silent, inoffensive, and mournful 
carriage, rendered it a thousand times more 



108 MANDEVILLE. 

impossible for me ever to forget the atten- 
tion that was due to him, than the fiercest 
tones and the most passionate demeanour 
could have established in my mind. 

Still my uncle was not so altogether dead 
to all that passed around him, but that he 
considered himself as my natural guardian, 
and held it his duty that at certain inter- 
vals I should be summoned to his presence. 
These intervals gradually settled themselves 
into a distance of one month from each 
other. On the first Sunday in every month 
I looked to visit his apartment. I was con- 
ducted thither by my tutor, and generally 
received from him before we set out, an ad- 
monition as to the behaviour it would be 
proper for me to observe. Our visit seldom 
lasted more than two minutes, and was al- 
ways attended with a small donation, which 
to my youthful mind associated it with 
ideas of pleasure. My reverend preceptor, 
who knew his cue, constantly said some- 
thing, without being asked, upon the topic 



MANDEVILLE. 10& 

of my proficiency. The good man how- 
ever, who displayed surprising powers of 
copiousness and amphficalion on all other 
occasions, seemed at these times like one 
rigidly formed in the discipline of Lycurgus. 
My uncle I am sure would have expired 
on the spot under one of the ordinary 
homilies of Hilkiah. Commonly, when 
approached, my uncle held out his hand to 
receive me. Sometimes he would withdraw 
the hand already held out, as if the touch 
of hand to hand had something too much of 
life in it for him to be able to endure, and 
would take hold of my coat. I have known 
him lay his hand upon my head ; but for him 
to kiss me, or seat me on his knee, was im- 
possible. That would have been utterly in 
contradiction with the unenterprising apathy 
that constituted his existence. 

I was my uncle's only visitor, and my 
visits were uniformly such as I have de- 
scribed. He would no doubt have preferred 
receiving me alone, had he not feared, that 



110 MANDEVILLE, 

the thoughtlessness of my years might 
sometimes make me overstep the limits of 
quietism which he found necessary, and 
that the restraint of my tutor's presence 
might be requisite. Beside, that in receiv- 
ing us together, he considered himself as 
discharging two duties, extending towards 
me the notice of a parent, and giving en- 
couragement to my preceptor in the ex- 
ercise of his functions. But it is not to be 
conceived to what a degree my uncle found 
these visits exhausting to his spirits. He 
continued indeed inflexible in the resolu- 
tion to go through this painful duty ; but 
he was sometimes obliged to defer the visit 
for several days, before he could summon 
up energy and firmness enough to receive 
us. 

The precautions of my uncle against the 
turbulent and boisterous spirits he antici- 
pated in a boy, were scarcely necessary in 
my instance, I never was a boy. It will 
easily be supposed from the description I 



MANDEVILLE. Ill 

have given of the house and its neighbour- 
hood, that I did not meet with many occa- 
sions to excite my hilarity. The entire 
household, as always happens to a certain 
degree in the mansion of an opulent coun- 
try-gentleman, were moulded after the fa- 
shion of their master. You might have 
thought yourself in the monastery of La 
Trappe, or the withdrawing-room prepared 
to receive those who had visited the cave 
of Trophonius. To an observer of a satiri- 
cal and biting vein, which was not my case, 
it would have appeared a ludicrous spec- 
tacle to see how every one, from the stew- 
ard down to the scullion, seemed to ape 
the manners of the master. They had all 
and severally a solemn countenance, and a 
slow and measured step. When you spoke 
to them, they seemed to hesitate whether 
they should answer you ; and if the final 
decision was in your favour, the answer 
was framed by the most concise and sen- 
tentious model, Mr Bradford formed the 



112 MANDEVILLE. 

only exception to this rule. He was of im- 
portance enough in his own eyes, to make 
it unbecoming that he should shrink into 
the mere imitator of another. Except in 
the presence of his patron, as I have al- 
ready stated, he had therefore a great deal 
to say for himself. It will presently be 
seen, how far his discourses are to be con- 
sidered as discordant with the general tone 
of this silent mansion. 

The sort of intercourse in which I thus 
lived with my fellow- beings, formed me 
early to a habit of reverie. I delighted 
to wander ; but I was not delighted with 
objects of cheerfulness. It will already 
have been seen, that I was not often in- 
truded on with impressions of this sort. I 
loved a hazy day, better than a sunshiny 
one. My organs of vision, or the march 
of my spirits, gave me an aversion to what- 
ever was dazzling and gaudy. I loved to 
listen to the paltering of the rain, the roar- 
ing of the waves, and the pelting of the 



MANDEVILLE, 115 

Storm. There was 1 know not what in the 
sight of a bare and sullen heath, that afford- 
ed me a much more cherished pleasure, 
than I could ever find in the view of the 
most exuberant fertility, or the richest and 
most vivid parterre. Perhaps all this proves 
me to be a monster, not formed with the 
feelings of human nature, and unworthy to 
live. I cannot help it. The purpose of 
these pages is, to be made the record of 
truth. 

One thing is particularly worthy of ob- 
servation in this place. It is strange, 
young as I was, how the scenes which im- 
mediately preceded my quitting the shores 
of Ireland, lived in my mind. I thought 
of them by day ; I dreamed of them by 
night. No doubt, the silence which for the 
most part pervaded my present residence, 
contributed to this. All was monotonous, 
and composed, and eventless here; all that 
I remembered there, had been tumultuous, 
and tragic, and distracting, and wild. I 



114 MANDEVILLE. 

saw in my dreams — but indeed my days, 
particularly that part of them which was 
passed in wandering alone upon the heath, 
were occupied to a great degree in vision- 
ary scenes — I saw, I say, in my dreams, 
whether by night or by day, a perpetual 
succession of flight, and pursuit, and an- 
guish, and murder. I saw the agonising 
and deploring countenances of Protestants, 
and the brutal and infuriated features 
of the triumphant Papist. I recollected 
distinctly the expiring bodies I had beheld 
along the road-side in my flight, some 
perishing with hunger and cold, and some 
writhing under the mortal wounds and tor- 
tures that had been inflicted by their pur- 
suers. All this of course came mixed up, 
to my recollection, with incidents that 1 
had never seen, but which had not failed to 
be circumstantially related to me. It 
would indeed have been difficult for me to 
have made a separation of the two; what I 
had heard, had been so fully detailed to me. 



MANDEVILLE. 115 

and had made such an impression upon my 
juvenile fancy, that it stood out not less dis- 
tinctly pictured to my thoughts, than if I 
had actually seen it. This was all the 
world to me. I had hardly a notion of any 
more than two species of creatures on the 
earth, — the persecutor and his victim, the 
Papist and the Protestant ; and they were 
to my thoughts like two great classes of 
animal nature, the one, the law of whose 
being it was to devour, while it was the un- 
fortunate destiny of the other to be mangled 
and torn to pieces by him. 

It is now necessary that I should intro- 
duce my reader to a more intimate ac- 
quaintance with the reverend Hilkiah 
Bradford, the instructor of my youth. His 
figure was tall and emaciated ; his com- 
plexion was of a yellowish brown, without 
the least tincture of vermillion, and was 
furrowed with the cares of study, and the 
still more earnest cares of devotion ; his 
clothes were of the cut that was worn about 



116 MANDEVILLE. 

forty years before ; and his head was al- 
v/Siys decorated with a small velvet skull- 
cap, which set close to the shape, and be- 
yond which the hair, though itself kept 
short, protruded above, below, and all 
around. His gait was saintly and solemn. 
He conformed himself not at all to the ce- 
lebrated maxim of Plato, of " sacrificing 
to the Graces." He went on directly to 
the great end of his calling, his duty to his 
Heavenly Father, without ever condescend- 
ing to think how his manner might im- 
press, favourably or unfavourably, his fel- 
low-mortals, mere " earth and worms.** 
He was, as I find it expressed by an emi- 
nent historian,* speaking of an individual 
who seems to have had a striking resem- 
blance to my tutor, " a person cynical 
and hirsute, shiftless in the world, yet abso- 
lutely free from covetousness, and I dare 
say from pride.*' Like that person also, 

^ Wood, Athenae Oxonienses, Vol. II. col. 671. 



MANDEVILLE. 117 

ire seemed to have a peculiar vocation for, 
and delight in, the instruction of youth. 
In this occupation, he laid aside that blunt- 
ness that accompanied him upon other oc*- 
casions ; and if he was not critically per- 
suasive, yet there was something so une- 
quivocally zealous and affectionate in his 
manner, as answered all the purposes of 
persuasion. 

He was familiarly conversant with the 
Greek and Latin languages, and with 
poetry ; yet he did not disdain to com- 
mence with me in the first rudiments of in- 
fant learning, and gradually and gently 
led me on, from the knowledge of the al- 
phabet, and the union of two letters in a 
syllable, to an acquaintance with many of 
the sweetest and the sublimest monuments 
of ancient lore. In these respects I found 
myself most fortunate underhis guidance;— 
yet I must own that he did not receive ex- 
actly the same sensations from Ovid and 
Virgil that I did. He had a clear appre- 



118 MANDEVILI.li. 

hension of their grammatical construction ; 
but he was not electrified, as I often was, 
with their beauties. The parts in which- 
he most seemed to delight, were those, in 
which these poets bore the most resem- 
blance to certain passages of sacred writ ; 
So that, r.s Mr Bradford persuaded himself 
to believe, they must have had some un- 
discovered access to the fountains of in- 
spired wisdom. He found the Mosaic ac- 
count of the creation in the commencement 
of the Metamorphoses, and the universal 
deluge in Deucalion's flood. But, above 
all, he was struck with the profoundest ad- 
miration in reading the PoUio of Virgil ; 
he saw in it clearly a translation of the in- 
spired raptures of the prophet Isaiah fore* 
telling the coming of the Messiah ; and he 
exclaimed, as he went on, with a delight, a 
thousand times repeated, and never to be 
controled, " Almost thou persuadest me 
that thou art a Christian !" 

The gloominess of my character might 



MANDEVILl.E. 119 

llave made me an unpleasing or unpromis- 
ing pupil to many instructors, but not so to 
the reverend Hilkiah. In the premature 
gravity of my features he read a vocation 
to the crown of martyrdom, if such should 
be the fortune of the Protestant church in 
our time as to demand of its faithful ad- 
herents the sealing their sincerity u'ith 
their blood : and, as my tutor regarded 
light laughter, and merriment, and the fro- 
lics of youth, as indications of the sons of 
Belial and heirs of destruction, he hailed 
with proportionable delight my inflexible 
seriousness as the token of a happier desti- 
nation. Nor did I fail to entertain a re* 
gard for my preceptor, fully correspondent 
10 that by which he was animated towards 
me. I saw the singleness and simplicity 
of his heart; I felt his entire innocence of 
those tricks, and that hollow and hypocri- 
tical personation of an assumed part, which, 
with young persons of any discernment, so 
early introduces an opposition of interests, 



V20 MANDEVILLE. 

and a trial of skill between the master and 
scholar, which shall prove hiixiself the most 
successful deceiver. My preceptor never 
treated me like a child -, he considered me 
as a joint candidate with himself for the 
approbation of the Almighty in a future 
state ; and this habit of thinking is calcu- 
lated, probably beyond any other (when 
sincerely cultivated), to level all distinctions 
between the rich and the poor, the young 
and the old, and to introduce a practical 
equality among the individuals of the hu- 
man race. 

This just and upright man had all his 
passions subdued under the control of his 
understanding : there was but one subject, 
that, whenever it occurred, inflamed his 
blood, and made his eye sparkle with pri- 
mitive and apostolic fury ; and that was, 
the corruption of evangelical truth, and the 
grand apostacy foretold to us in the Scrip- 
tures. In a word, the spring and main 

movement of his religious zeal lay in this 
u 



MANDEVILLE. 121 

proposition, " that the Pope is Antichrist.'* 
I was well prepared to be a ready hearer of 
this doctrine : for, had not my father and 
my mother fallen untimely victims under 
the daggers of Irish Catholics ? He was, if 
I may so express myself, the more like one 
possessed in speaking on this topic, for he 
claimed to be collaterally descended from 
John Bradford, the famous martyr in the 
reign of Queen Mary, — a man who, in the 
flower of his life, defied all the torments of 
fire for the sake of Jesus, and who scorned 
to purchase the clemency of his persecu- 
tors, by an engagement in the smallest de- 
gree to remit his exertions to convert his 
fellow-creatures from the errors of Popery. 

Mr Bradford took care, that I should be 
early initiated in the main topics of con- 
troversy between the church of England 
and the church of Rome. Idolatry — this 
was the first and favourite subject of charge 
against the professors of Popery. The 
first of the ten commandments, the basis of 

VOL. I. F 



1^52 MANDIiVILLE, 

all Christian morality and duty, was that 
<' God alone should be worshipped." The 
second, which the adherents of Antichrist 
found it necessary to blot out of the cata- 
logue, was, that we should " make to our- 
selves no graven image, or the likeness of 
any thing in heaven above or earth be- 
neath, to bow down to it, and worship it." 
But the Papists, in defiance of these prohi- 
bitions, had saints for every day in the ca- 
lendar, and addressed their prayers to all 
the host of heaven, beseeching their inter- 
position with the Almighty, and vainly 
imagining that they would be more near to 
hear, or more inclined to favour, than the 
omnipresent and all-merciful Creator. Add 
to this, their crucifixes, and their images 
and pictures of God and his saints, which 
they employed as incitements to devotion, 
in express defiance of the revealed will of 
the Most High. Yet is there no sin, against 
which the denunciations of God's word are 
more frequent and terrible, than the sin of ^ 



xMANDEVILLE. 123 

idolatry ? In the Bible we are forbidden to 
" call any man master on earth ;" yet the 
Pope has been erected into the infallible 
head of the church. In the Bible we are 
told, " If any man shall add to the words 
of his revealed will, God shall add to him 
the plagues that are written in the book; 
and if any man shall take away from 
them, God shall take away his part out 
of the book of life ;*' and we are specially 
warned, that we adhere to the commu- 
nications we have '' received from Christ 
Jesus, and beware lest any man spoil us af- 
ter the traditions of men." Yet the Papists 
have both added to and taken from the 
written word of God, and have expressly 
placed their vain traditions upon a level 
with the inspired writings themselves. It 
is clear therefore, that '* God has given 
them up to a reprobate mind, and aban- 
doned them to a strong delusion that they 
should believe a lie ; that they may perish 
with the children of this world, and not be 



124 MANDEVILLE. 

made partakers with the heirs of light :"— 
in fine, thslt every one who died unre- 
clairiied from the errors of Popery, would 
be the object of God's wrath and condem- 
nation in a future world. 

Mr Bradford was particularly shocked 
with the unbounded usurpations and arbi- 
trary power of the church of Rome. He 
found in her the " beast with seven heads 
and ten horns, and upon his horns ten 
crowns, and upon his heads the name of 
Blasphemy." Under another figure she 
was typified by the " woman, arrayed in 
purple and scarlet colour, that sat upon 
this beast, drunk with the blood of the 
saints and the martyrs, and having a gold- 
en cup in her hand, from which she made 
all nations, and all the kings of the earth, 
drunk with the wine of her fornications." 
" How unlike was all this/' exclaimed my 
preceptor, " to the simplicity of the divine 
author of our religion, who declared that 
his kingdom was not of this world/ and 



MANDEVILLi:. 125 

who, while on earth, liad not ' where to 
lay his head!' The Popes on the other 
hand claimed, that ' whatsoever they bound 
on earth should be bound in heaven, and 
whatsoever they loosed on earth should be 
loosed in heaven.' Tliey usurped the 
power of giving away crowns, and setting 
up and deposing kings, and in the height 
of their intoxication set their foot upon the 
neck of emperors. There was no end to 
their pride, their pomp, and their temporal 
magnificence. They claimed the whole 
wealth of the world as theirs. They, * as 
God, seated themselves in the temple of 
God, showing themselves that they were 
God.'^' 

My preceptor was further revolted at the 
sanguinary character of the church of Rome. 
She put the dagger into the hands of her 
votaries, and caused them to commit innu- 
merable massacres. Assassination was one 
of her favourite means for achieving her 
purposes. He loved to expatiate upon the 



126 MANDEVILLE. 

examples of Ballhasar Gerard, Clement, and 
Ravaillac, beside others with whose stories 
he was accurately furnished. The Gun- 
powder Plot, if it had been completed as it 
had been designed, would have exceeded 
all these in horror. The cruelties of the 
Inquisition furnished also a copious field 
of declamation to Mr Bradford. To these 
he added the wholesale extermination of 
the unresisting Albigenses and Waldenses. 
The idea of burning a man alive for his 
opinions, was the most infernal, that cruelty 
had ever devised. No bigotry perhaps 
could persuade its adherent, that a man at- 
tached even to death to the religious opi- 
nions he had formed, was a criminal, in the 
same sense as a murderer, or a robber, a 
man who broke through all the restraints 
of morality, or violated all the securities of 
society, that he might indulge in depravity 
and excesses. The unfortunate victim of 
the law against heretics, was usually a man 
of exemplary moral habits, and who sacri- 



MANDEVILLE. 1Q7 

■^ficed every baser and sensual inticement 
to the dictates of his conscience. He was 
therefore, if erroneous, rather an object of 
pity, than of ferocious vengeance. Mr 
Bradford usually wound up his argument 
on this particular head, with the favourite 
maxim of the most liberal at the time of 
which I am speaking, — -that all sects and 
every denomination of creed were entitled 
to toleration, except the Papist, who obsti- 
nately refused, when in power, ta grant to- 
leration to those that differed from him, 
and who therefore deserved that the "measure 
which he dispensed, should be rigorously 
measured to him again." 

But if Mr Bradford regarded the whole 
church of Rome with horror, and all her 
members as obnoxious to the pains of eter- 
nal damnation, the Popish priesthood, 

eremits and friers, 
White, black, and grey, with all their trumpery, 

were particularly the objects of his aver- 



128 MANDEVILLE. 

sion. He considered the craft of Popery 
as calculated with infernal subtlety, to en- 
slave the minds, and subjugate the under- 
standings of all its lay-adherents. The ce- 
libacy of her clergy had the immediate ef- 
fect of creating a vast body of men, dis- 
persed in all kingdoms, provinces, parishes 
of the Christian world, with few considera- 
tions to bind them to their particular coun- 
try or neighbourhood, and who therefore 
to an astonishing degree formed part of 
the wheels and pins of the vast mechanism, 
by which the conclave of Rome undertook 
to control the civilized world. By means 
of her dignitaries, she did not fail to super- 
intend the education of all persons of royal 
or elevated birth, and to have some of her 
clergy admitted to political offices, and pos- 
sessing the secrets of all cabinets. Auricu- 
lar confession, and the sacrament of absolu- 
tion, was a stupendous device for subject- 
ing the consciences of all, men, women 
and children, to her despotic authority. 



MANDEVILLE. 129 

The doclrine of indulgences, dispensations, 
and pardons for sin, to be issued from the 
Papal chamber, strongly inforced this, and 
brought vast sums of money into the dispo- 
sal of the Visible Head of the church. The 
first encouraging men to sin by the hopes 
of forgiveness, and then granting them ab- 
solution, was a nice game, by which the 
power of the clergy over their illiterate fol- 
lowers was increased to an incalculable de- 
gree. The doctrine of purgatory, and of 
masses for the dead, was another admirable 
machine, for raising to the utmost height 
the power of the church. Every man who 
was anxious for his state in the future world, 
could not fail to feel strongly excited, to ap- 
propriate a part of his possessions for the 
delivery of his soul ; and every child or 
heir to an estate would be influenced by 
the same motive, whetlier out of affection 
to his predecessor, or from ostentation, that 
he might appear to have that grace of piety 
and natural affection, to w^hich he was real- 
V 2 



130 MANDEVILLE. 

ly a stranger. The vast armies of monks, 
nuns and friars, with their mitred abbeys 
and convents of all sorts, were another 
great reinforcement to the church of Rome, 
andj by forming a part of the national man- 
ners of the different countries in which 
they were established, seemed to afford a 
security to the church, that could never be 
overturned. Neither did my preceptor fail 
to be furnished with a copious collection 
of the frauds of the clergy, by which they 
seemed arrogantly to insult the understand- 
ings of mankind, from the holy house of 
Loretto, and the transformation of the bread 
and wine in the sacrament into the body 
and blood of Christ, to the relics of the 
saints, and the milk of the virgin exhibited 
in a thousand churches. Thus insolently 
were the best energies of our nature tram- 
pled on by a set of hardened impostors; 
and the flock of Christ (for such they ought 
to have been found) cajoled and terrified 
out of the use of their own eyes and their 



MANDEVILLE. 131 

own judgQients, at the same time that, by 
the mortal sin of idolatry, they were made 
to consign themselves over to eternal dam- 
nation. 

Mr Bradford was singularly delighted 
with those tremendous stories which are to 
be found in the history of the Reformation 
of Religion in Scotland, particularly relating 
to the eminent confessors, Patrick Hamil- 
ton, and George Wishart. Hamilton, a 
young man of noble birth and extraordi- 
nary talents, was betrayed to the stake by 
Alexander Campbell, prior of the Domini- 
cans, who, under the cloak of friendship 
and a desire to be better instructed, extort- 
ed from him a full confession of his senti- 
ments, and then accused him before Chan- 
cellor Beaton, primate of Scotland. Far 
from relenting at the tragic catastrophe thus 
treacherously occasioned, Campbell was 
present at the execution, and still insulted 
Hamilton at the stake ; when the martyr, 
seized with a prophetic afflatus, turned to- 



132 MANDEVILLE. 

wards his tormentor, reproached him with 
his faithlessness and his hypocritical pro- 
fessions of favour to the principles of the 
Reform, and then, with a solemn and awe- 
striking accent, cited him to answer this 
within forty days, before the judgment-seat 
of Christ. The consequences were memo- 
rable. Campbell is related to have been 
immediately seized with a supernatural hor- 
ror, which he was by no means able to 
shake off, to have declined shortly into an 
incurable frenzy, and presently after to 
have died, to the terror of every beholder. 

'The concluding scene of the life of 
Wishart is not less impressive. He was 
condemned to be burned alive by the sen- 
tence of Cardinal Beaton, nephew and suc- 
cessor to him who had tried Hamilton ; 
and the cardinal had the inhumanity to 
cause a gallery to be prepared in his castle 
of St Andrews, with tapestry, silk hangings, 
and cushions of velvet, that he might gratify 
himself with beholding the execution. But, 



MANDEVILLE* 133 

while a priest appointed for that purpose ex- 
horted Wishart, now surrounded with flames, 
to repent of his heresies, and ask pardon of 
the Almighty, tiie victim imperiously com- 
manded him to be silent, adding, " This Are 
occasions trouble to my body indeed, but 
it has in no wise broken my spirit ; but he 
who now looks down so proudly upon me 
from yonder place, (pointing to the cardi- 
nal), within a few days shall be as igno- 
miniously thrown down from it, as he now 
proudly reposes himself there." All which 
was punctually fulfilled. A courtier, to 
whom the cardinal had refused a boon 
which he earnestly solicited, in revenge as- 
sassinated the prelate in his bedchamber, 
and threw his dead body into the streets, 
from tlie very balcony which he had shortly 
before occupied at the execution of this 
holy martyr. 

My preceptor was profoundly addicted 
to cabalistical divinity, and especially to 
that branch of this science which he deem- 



134 MANDEVILTwE* 

ed applicable to the church of Rome. 
He was particularly gravelled with that 
triumphant argument of the Catholics, 
built upon the concluding promise of 
our Saviour to his church, " Lo, I am 
with. you always, even to the end of the 
xvorld," and the insulting tone whh which 
her votaries demanded of the Protestant, 
What becomes of this promise, if, as you 
say, the visible church of Christ for more 
than a thousand years has been universally 
plunged in damnable error, so as to deserve 
to have applied to her the description of 
" Babylon the Great, the mother of harlots 
and abominations of the earth ?'* Against 
this attack Mr Bradford had no other re- 
source, than an attempt to trace in eccle- 
siastical history, the " two witnesses clothed 
in sackcloth, that were to prophecy one 
thousand two hundred and sixty days j'* 
and to show that, in the intervals of greatest 
darkness and most universal apostacy, God 
" had yet reserved to himself seven thou- 



MANDEVILLE. 135 

sand men, who had not bowed the knee to 
the image of Baal/' But the study to 
which the reverend Hilkiah most indefa- 
tigably applied himself, was the *' number 
of the beasl, which is the number of a man ; 
and his number is six himdred and sixty- 
six." This he had turned in a thousand 
ways ; he had tried it in arithmetic ; he had 
essayed it in anagram ; every way it af- 
forded him conclusions, that seemed to point 
at the latitude of Rome. Still my precep- 
tor had a secret misgiving, that he had not 
arrived at the right solution. We were at 
one time not without some apprehension, 
that, by the severity of this inquiry, his wits 
Would have been unsettled, and that he 
would have been rendered a qualified can- 
didate for the cells of Bedlam. 

A book that my preceptor particularly 
recommended to my attention, was Fox's 
Acts and Monuments of the Church ; nor 
did I need much persuasion to a study, to 
which my temper inclined me, and which 



136 MANDEVILLE. 

occasions that sort of tingling and horror, 
that is particularly inviting to young per- 
sons of a serious disposition. In this tre- 
mendous volume the engravings eminently 
help to iiiforce the dead letter of the text. 
The representation of all imaginahle cruel- 
ties, racks, pincers and red-hot irons, cruel 
mockings and scourgings, flaying alive, 
with every otlier tormenting method of de- 
struction, combined with my deep convic- 
tion that the beings thus treated, were God's 
peculiar favourites, tiie ornaments of th^ 
earth, the boast and miracle of our mortal 
nature, men " of whom the world was not 
worthy," — ^produced astrange confusion and 
horror in my modes of thinking, that kept 
me awake whole nights, that drove the co- 
lour from my cheeks, and made me wander 
like a meagre, unlaid ghost, to the wonder 
and alarm of the peaceable and weiUcJis* 
posed inhabitants of my uncle*s house. 



MANDKVILLE. 13? 



CHAPTER VI. 



In advancing thus far, I have, for the 
sake of presenting in one view ideas of a 
particular kind, outrun the course of my 
narrative, and must now return to bring up 
some smaller anecdotes of my early years, 
which, by this method of arranging my 
materials, have been put somewhat out of 
their place. Amidst the dreary uniformity 
of my uncle's residence, every arrival of a 
stranger was hailed, like a festival day in a 
school-boy's almanack. It promised some 
novelty: it was solemnly announced; and 
with no less effect, than when the pedant, 
from his eminence apart, " and in his own 



138 MANDEVILLE. 

dimension like himself," makes proclama- 
tion of a holiday. Though I was of a 
gloomy and saturnine cast, it is not to be 
understood that my heart did not beat, and 
my blood did not tingle, like those of my 
fellow-creatures. There was this difference 
between me and my uncle, though in the 
gravity of our dispositions we considerably 
resembled each other. To judge from ap- 
pearances at least, he desired no novelty, 
or none of an extrinsic sort, and shrunk 
from all disturbance. He was used up as 
to the views and prospects of life, and che- 
rished hope in his bosom no longer. Not 
such was the condition of my existence. 
I hoped for, and I dreamed of, pleasures yet 
untasted. I was no friend to light laughter 
and merriment; but my heart was suscep- 
tible of attention and curiosity ; and the 
novelties that presented themseh^es to my 
senses I was well disposed to investigate. 
The world to me was yet in its nonage, — had 
all the freshness and vi2:our of youth; I 



MANDEVILLE. 139 

had much to see, much to learn, much to 
make trial of, and much to taste. I felt 
like one for whom adventures and great 
events are reserved, and, as we find it ex- 
pressed in the common story-books, who is 
"to go out, and seek his fortune/' When 
the arrival of a stranger was announced, I 
felt again and again a sort of prophetic an- 
ticipation, This may be to me the eventful 
moment, big with a thousand causes of ad- 
miration. 

Many a stranger arrived at our postern, 
who, to the nicety of a critic in language, 
would have been a stranger no longer. 
But it was not so to me. The very butcher 
who came once a week to bring us pro- 
visions, did not, even by the unvaried re- 
gularity of his approaches, altogether di- 
vest himself of the grace of novelty. The 
chimney-sweeper was another of those rare 
phenomena, who, by the repulsiveness 
of his sable hue, and the cry by which he 
proclaimed that he had reached his unen- 



140 MANDEVILLE. 

vied height, communicated some sensation 
to my childish organs. Bat the visitor 
dearest to my youthful curiosity, was the 
pedlar. Pedestrian as he was, the pack 
which he bore on his shoulders, displayed, 
when unfolded, a multiplicity of tempta- 
tions to expence that was truly astonishing. 
Besides gloves, and stockings, and handker- 
chiefs, and ribbands, and linens, and stuffs, 
for the men and the maidens, I generally 
found among his treasures some toys, or im- 
plements of childish industry, upon which 
I did not fail to set an immeasurable value. 
The vender himself was ordinarily a Jew, 
and was in my eyes the greatest curiosity 
in his whole collection. I watched his 
physiognomy with sly and sensitive vigi- 
lance. I asked him questions about him- 
self, his travels, his language, and his coun- 
trymen, and not only gained information 
that furnished to me a copious field for 
fancy and rumination, but found also con- 
siderable entertainment in his jargon, and 



MANDEVILLE. 141 

the uncouth accent and articulation with 
which he delivered his answers. 

I have already done full justice to the 
virtues of my preceptor ; I have shown my 
esteem for him, and the ascendancy he 
possessed over my mind. In matters of 
opinion that was complete. I was con- 
vinced of his integrity ; I admired his in- 
tellectual powers ; I was lost in astonish- 
ment at the greatness of his attainments. 
I was conscious of the limited sphere of 
my own knowledge; I distrusted my judg- 
ment ; I looked up to him as an oracle. 
Such is the natural indolence of the ma- 
jority of human minds ; we love to have 
some one at hand, upon whose decision, in 
questions of truth and falsehood, of good 
and erroneous taste, of prudence or the 
contrary, we can rely, and thus save our- 
selves from the fatigue of investigation, and, 
as we fondly hope, from the dangers of 
being misled and erroneous. 

Most men, after this ample confession. 



149 MANDEVILLE. 

will be surprised when I add, that I scarce- 
ly loved Hilkiah. I am ashamed of the 
perverseness of my own heart when I speak 
it; but it is the truth. Hilkiah was my 
instructor, with powers much more ample 
than those of an ordinary instructor, I had 
no parent ; and my uncle, who stood to me 
in the room of one, was of too passive and 
retired a character, to be appealed to, or to 
be expected to interfere as an umpire be- 
tween us. I felt the extraordinary powers 
with which my tutor was invested, at the 
same time that I felt he had not those 
claims over me, which the mysterious ties 
of nature instinctively impart, or by pre- 
judice and long established custom impose 
on the unformed mind. Hilkiah too was 
aware of the full extent of his trust, and 
was well disposed to avail himself of. its 
prerogatives. Add to which, there is some- 
thing in the sacerdotal character, that scarce- 
ly fails to inspire into him in whom it is 
vested, a magisterial tone, and a disposition, 



MAN DEVI LLE. 143 

such as I have already described m Mf 
Bradford, amply to uarol the volume of his 
lessons, and to accompany his instructions 
with a full statement of the causes and con- 
siderations by which they are inforced. 

All this was insupportably galling to me.^ 
When my instructor dwelt upon those con- 
ceptions which had no special application 
to myself, and which seemed to me branches 
of the great code of immutable truth, I 
was patient, submissive and docile ; but 
when this elaborate style was applied to 
things that thwarted my inclination, or 
was made the vehicle of pointed reproof 
upon my character or actions, I was by 
no means equally tame. The extremely 
unfavourable impression which was thus 
made upon me, was perhaps partly owing 
to the solitary nature of my education. I 
did not find myself one of a tribe, whose 
feehngs were common with each other, and 
who might have afforded me the example 
«f a cheerful or a careless submission ; I 



144 MANDEVILLE. 

dwelt in a monarchy, of which I was the 
single subject. I was not indeed a tumultuous 
and refractory pupil; I did not give much 
trouble to my preceptor ; but on that very 
account these things revolved incessantly 
in my mind, and worked themselves more 
deeply into the substance of my character. 

The part of my narrative in which I am 
now engaged, would perhaps to many men 
appear tedious and frivolous. It was not 
frivolous to me ; and the history of my 
maturer years would be very imperfectly 
understood, without the explanations I am 
here endeavouring to give. 

One of the subjects on which Mr Brad- 
ford thought proper to lecture me, was my 
pride and self-conceit. In my own opinion, 
I had no pride but what was becoming, and 
no esteem for myself greater than that in 
which I was amply justified. But my pre- 
ceptor thought otherwise. He explained 
to me with great emphasis, that humility 
was the cardinal virtue of a Christian, with- 



MANDEVILLE. 145 

©lit which it was impossible to enter into 
the kingdom of God. It was the dis- 
tinguishing feature of evangelical religion, 
that its professors owed, and confessed they 
owed every thing, to the mere mercy and 
unmerited favour of their creator. He re- 
quired nothing at our hands but the ex- 
plicit and unequivocal acknowledgment of 
his sovereign grace; and unless we emp- 
tied our hearts of all merit and presump- 
tion, and confessed that in ourselves we 
w^ere entirely abominable and worthless, 
we could form no expectation of his favour. 
— T found this doctrine hard to flesh and 
blood. 

Hilkiah went on to insist, that the most 
ragged and shivering beggar stood an equal 
chance with myself, to receive the most 
exalted marks of divine favour in the king- 
dom of heaven. He plainly told me, that 
a person of the most loathsome and offen- 
sive appearance might, in the sight of God, 
be among the excellent of the earth, and be 

VOL. I. G 



146 MANDEVILLE. 

ranked by omniscience with his most cho- 
sen saints. 

If all this had been delivered as doctrine 
merely, I should have been content. What 
my preceptor offered to my consideration 
would have passed as words, and I should 
have been a good Christian upon as cheap 
terms as most of my neighbours. But 
Hilkiah did not stop here. It may be that 
he was actuated towards me by a parental 
affection ; certain it is that he commented 
with great rigour upon my supposed de- 
fects in this nature ; and what was worse, 
in a style so general and loose, as convey- 
ed no distinct ideas to my mind. If my 
preceptor had so designated my faults, that 
I could have had a clear apprehension 
where the error lay, I have that conviction 
of my own candour, particularly at this 
early stage of human life, as to be per- 
suaded that I should have ingenuously and 
sedulously applied myself to the remedy. 
But it is so easy to rail, and so delightful 



MANDEVILLE. 14? 

to the majority of declaimers to unburthen 
themselves " in good set terms," and yet 
with a reasonable absence of thinking and 
precision, that it is not to be wondered at 
that Hilkiah became tickled with the speei- 
ousness of his discourse, without adverting 
to that radical defect, which made it wholly 
unsusceptible of being applied to use. The 
discourse of my preceptor, though shaped, 
it may be, into specious and well sounding 
periods, was vague and indefinite. If I de- 
sired to correct myself in conformity to its 
admonitions, I knew not where to begin. 
I understood that it was querulous and 
severe, but that was all. It inspired into 
me painful emotions ; but it furnished me 
with no light to direct my course. I regard- 
ed my tutor as censorious and cynical ; I 
believed him to be unreasonable and un- 
just; and by degrees came to view him as 
an enemy, that misconstrued my disposi- 
tions, that traversed my pleasures, and 
sought to rob me of that self-complacency 



148 MANDEVILLE. 

which is the indefeasible adjunct of an 
honourable mind. 

It must be admitted that I was not at this 
time uncharacterized by a certain loftiness 
of mind and disdainfulness of spirit. Whe- 
ther these features were consistent with the 
purity of a gospel religion, I must leave to 
the casuists. No doubt this frame of soul 
in me was rendered somewhat more palpa- 
ble and systematical, by the habitual gravity 
of my character. By that gay and frolic- 
some mood which is for the most part inci- 
dent to our early years, it would in some 
degree have been smoothed down ; and, 
amidst the bursts and sallies of a buoyant 
spirit, I should often have forgotten my 
self-respect, and dismissed the idea of my 
own importance. But to the uniform se- 
dateness, not to say sadn-ess of temper, which 
characterized me, this self-oblivion was more 
difficult. I was proud, because I felt my 
value. 1 was conscious that my intellectual 
powers far exceeded the common rate ; I 



MANDEVILLE. 149 

was not unaware of the quickness of my 
apprehension, and the clearness and subtlety 
with which I distinguished the differences 
of things ; 1 felt ambition, and the secret 
anticipation of a high destiny, which sub- 
sequent calamities have at length succeeded 
to extinguish within me ; I felt the ardour 
and generosity of my spirit, which, as I 
believed, made me capable of great things ^ 
I felt an inborn pride of soul, which, like an 
insurmountable barrier, seemed to cut me 
off for ever from every thing mean, despi- 
cable and little. My bosom was fraught 
with that principle which Pythagoras so 
emphatically recommends to his pupils, of 
self- reverence, — a determination of mind by 
which he who has it, is irresistibly impelled 
to reject whatever might stain the integrity 
of his spirit, or oblige him to part in any 
degree with the approbation of his own 
heart. When my preceptor, with that pri- 
meval simplicity and innocence for which 
he was so remarkable, pointed to the beggar- 



150 MANDEVILLE. 

boy or the scullion, and bid me ask myself, 
What was I better than they ? I perceived 
my soul revolt from the ignoble compari- 
son, and believed I must dismiss all the dis- 
cernment with which my reason inspired 
me, before I could subscribe to the humi- 
liating conclusions which he called on me 
to draw. It is not impossible that my birth 
and fortune, my being heir to the honourable 
name and opulent property of Mandeville, 
contributed their share to the disdain with 
which my bosom swelled against Mr Brad- 
ford's insinuations. 

One of Hilkiah*s whims was, that iq 
order to subdue the carnal pride of an un- 
regenerate nature, it was good for me to be 
called occasionally to the exercise of those 
vulgar offices, which in the houses of people 
of family are ordinarily reserved for menials. 
Why should not I brush my own clothes, 
or black my own shoes ? The Saviour of the 
world condescended to wash his disciples' 
feet j and the pope (though this was no re- 



MANDEVILLE. 151 

commendation to my preceptor) has his 
anniversary, when he observes the same 
ceremony to this day. To the evangehcal 
motives for this disciphne, Hilkiah added 
others drawn from the stores of philosophy. 
Nothing could be more precarious tlian the 
favours of fortune ; and, if I might some 
day fall into the situation of being obliged 
to subsist by the exertions of my own in- 
dustry, why should I not now, in the pliant 
years of youth, anticipate this necessity ? 
I was a man, before I was a gentleman; it 
was good therefore, that I should not be 
wholly ignorant of the true condition of man 
on this sublunary stage, that I should be 
somewhat acquainted with his plain and ge- 
nuine state, and not only with the refine- 
ments of artificial society. We lived in the 
midst of the confusions of a civil war ; who 
could tell at what point all this violence 
might terminate? As the presbyterian had 
subdued the episcopalian, and the indepen-* 
dent the presbyterian, might not the fifth 



152 MANDEVILLB. 

monarchy-man finally get the start of all, 
and level the proud fortunes of the noble 
and the gentlenian with the dust ? Was it 
not good to be prepared for these changes ? 
The most enviable character that could fall 
to the lot of man, was independence ; this 
was the goal, however mistakingly pur- 
sued, which men aspired to, when they 
sought after wealth, and ** joined house to 
house, and field to field,'* with insatiable 
greediness. But the man of true indepen- 
dence is he that suffices to himself, and 
stands in no need of another^ And this 
doctrine my preceptor illustrated by the 
known story of Diogenes, who, when he 
was told that Menas, his slave, had turned 
runaway, exclaimed, '' Aha ! can Menas do 
without Diogenes, and cannot Diogenes do 
without Menas ?" 

It may seem but a childish tale ; but I 
cannot express with what loathings I was 
seized, when I was called upon to put in 
practice this lesson of humility. I remem- 



MANDEVILLE. 163 

ber an occasion when it was necessary to 
remove some logs of wood from one side of 
the farm-yard, the only creditable and well 
arranged appendage to our mansion, to an- 
other side. This appeared to my precep- 
tor a desirable opportunity for the practical 
illustration of his lessons. 1 was yet a mere 
urchin ; and the task assigned me was 
considerately apportioned to my strength. 
— After all, this was certainly an injudicious 
mode of inforcing moral truth. An ac- 
countable and voluntary being cannot be 
made better, but by enlightening his under-. 
standing. Morality has nothing to do, but 
with actions chosen by their performers.. 
Where there is absolute command on one 
side, and unconditional submission on the 
other, a useful result as to external circum- 
stances may be achieved ; but there cannot 
be a particle of good moral sense implanted 
by what is thus done under the bare influ-» 
ence of authority. 

No doubt I was a proud creature ; and,. 
G 2 



154 MANDEVILLE. 

as I have already said, T never was a boy. 
As I did not appear born to feel the hard 
hand of necessity, I expected to bend only 
to my own will, and to consult my own 
judgment, in every thing I did. I under- 
stood something of the importance of les- 
sons, and I willingly complied in v>^hatever 
related to that point. I was desirous of 
possessing all the advantages of ediication, 
and all the information that falls to the lot 
of an ingenuous youth, destined to fill an 
honourable station in life. And lessons, a 
progress to be made in languages or in 
science, possess all the character of a sys- 
tem of mechanism, and accordingly are as 
readily submitted to, as the order of our 
meals, or the putting on of our clothes. It 
is principally where the caprice of him who 
has authority shows itself, where the wand 
of command is exhibited in abrupt naked- 
ness, that the heart of the proud one revolts. 
Whatever proceeds in unvaried uniformity, 
or in stated and regular progression, we 



MANDEVILLE. 155 

subscribe to without a murmur. What is 
thus prescribed, we acknowledge to be in- 
tended for our benefit ; and the reason of 
the thing having once been known, or sup- 
posed to be known, we continue to act upon 
that reason, without insisting that it should 
be submitted to an examination perpetual- 
ly to be repeated. But when Mr Brad- 
ford, no longer seated in the chair of the 
pedagogue, issued his imperious mandates 
of Go there, or Do this, whenever what he 
required related not to my abstract advan- 
tage, but to the common usefulness of life, 
my spirit refused to submit ; I felt convin- 
ced that I was treated in a manner unbe- 
coming and unjust; and, my neck never 
having been bowed to the condition of a 
slave, my whole soul revolted at the usur- 
pation. Hilkiah saw something, but im- 
perfectly, of the state of my mind on these 
occasions ; but, instead of modifying and 
adapting his proceedings to my tone of 
feeling, he took the contrary course. He 



156 MANDEVILLE. 

held it for " stuff of the conscience/* that 
he should subdue my refractoriness, and 
bring down a stubbornness of soul, so op- 
posite, as he imagined, to the temper of a 
true Christian. Alas, good man, he little 
understood the tendency aad nature of the 
task he had undertaken ! My pride was 
not perhaps so great, that it would not have 
yielded to severe calamity, or to ferocious 
and unmitigated tyranny : I cannot tell. 
But there was no power that could be ex- 
ercised by Hilkiah, who was a man sub- 
stantially of a gentle temper, and under the 
roof of my nearest relation, that had any 
chance of rendering him victorious in this 
contest. I submitted indeed outwardly, 
for my nature did not prompt me to scenes 
of violence; but I retained the principle of 
rebellion entire, shut up in the chamber of 
my thoughts. If at any time I manifested 
tardiness, (and how could it be otherwise, 
when the soul was averse ?) this called 
down from my preceptor a bitterness of re- 



MANDEVILLE. 157 

mark, or a dryness of irony, that filled my 
bosom with tumults, and was calculated to 
make me understand something of the tem- 
per of a fiend. Hilkiah, as I have said, 
felt disposed to multiply his experiments in 
proportion as he found me restive. And it 
grieves me to confess that this ill- contrived 
and senseless proceeding, at length drove 
me into a rooted aversion of heart from this 
good man, to whose industry and care I 
owed so much, and the parity and zeal of 
whose intentions entitled him still more to 
my regard. It was Hilkiah, that first made 
me acquainted with the unsavouriness of an 
embittered soul. From time to time he fil- 
led all my thoughts with malignity. I can 
scarcely describe the frame of my temper 
towards him. I would not have hurt him ; 
but I muttered harsh resentment against 
him in sounds scarcely articulate ; and I 
came to regard him as my evil genius, 
poisoning my cup of life, thwarting my 
most innocent sallies, watching with a 



158 MANDEVtLLE. 

jaundiced eye for faults in me which my 
heart did not recognize, and blasting that 
sweet complacency, in which a virtuous 
mind is delighted to plunge itself and to 
play. 

I said little ; but this circumstance only 
deepened the effect on my mind. " Give 
sorrow words," says the great master of the 
human soul. Whatever sentiment finds its 
way to the lips, and vents its energies 
through the medium of language, by that 
means finds relief. " Out of the abundance 
of the heart the mouth speaketh ;" and we 
feel satisfied, if we have told, even to the 
desert air, but much more in the hearing of 
an intelligent creature, the story of our 
griefs. But my silent nature was an ever- 
living and incessant curse to me. My dis- 
pleasures brooded, and heated, and inflam- 
ed themselves, at the bottom of my soul, 
and finding no vent, shook so my single 
frame of man, like to an earthquake. 
I know there are rugged and brutal na- 



MANDEVrLLE. 159 

tures, who would interrupt me here, and 
cry out, that there is an easy remedy for all 
this. The boy whose thoughts are here 
described, was too much indulged; an ef- 
fusion of wholsome severity would soon 
have dispersed these clouds of the mind, 
and have caused him to know, that there 
was nothing but ground for congratulation, 
where he found so much occasion for com- 
plaint. And let these brutal natures go on 
in the exercise of their favourite discipline I 
There will always be crosses, and opposi^* 
tion, and mortifications enough in the march 
of human life, from the very principles 
upon which society is built, and from the 
impatience our imperfect nature is too apt 
to conceive, of the imputed untowardness 
and absurd judgments, of those that are 
placed under our control. But let those of 
happier spirit know, that this imperious dis- 
cipline is not the wholsome element of the 
expanding mind, and that the attempt to 
correct the mistaken judgments of the 



160 MANDEVILLE. 

young by violent and summary dealing, 
can never be the true method of fostering 
a generous nature ; in a word, that to make 
the child a forlorn and pitiable slave, can 
never be the way to make the man worthy 
of freedom, and capable of drawing the no- 
blest use from it ! 

I have said that I was habitually a vi- 
sionary. My visions were frequently of 
long duration, and branched out into a va- 
riety of minuter circumstances. In these 
moods I sometimes imagined that every 
thing around me was engaged in a conspi- 
racy against me, that I was, in some inex- 
plicable way, a captive, whose genuine des- 
tiny led to higher things, but who, like 
some imperial bird that had fallen into the 
hands of lawless men, was shorn of its 
strongest feathers, and deprived of its ge- 
nuine and heart-awakening element, shut 
out from the sublimer scenery for which 
its nature fitted it, and robbed of that mys- 
terious and inestimable freedom in which it 



MANDKVILLE. 161 

could feel at home, at its ease, and resting, 
so to express it, upon its proper centre. 

However strange it may appear, I am al- 
most inclined to say, that the boy, particu- 
larly in these visionary moods, feels a more 
earnest aspiring than even the man, after 
true freedom, with all its adjuncts and re- 
tinue of inexplicable events. The com- 
parison is the same, as between the colt, 
whose mouth has never known control, 
who frolics in a thousand wild gestures and 
attitudes, and has nothing to do but to prance 
along the plains, — and the horse. Man by 
degrees has bowed the neck to the hard yoke 
of necessity, has looked through human life 
and the conditions of existence, and has 
reasoned himself into submission, to those 
distasteful, but inevitable evils which are 
inseparably interwoven in the web of mor- 
tal life. Not so the boy : he has seen no- 
thing of this ; nor have any considerations 
occurred to his mind, leading him to choose 



162 MANDEVILLE. 

subjection, and voluntarily and resolutely 
to resign the sweets of liberty. 

I am aware, that in what I now record I 
am relating a strange story ; but it is neces- 
sary to the illustration of my future life. 
The moral of iEsop's fable of the lion and 
the man is applicable here. We see every 
where the monuments of human achieve- 
ments ; but the lions have no historians 
and no statuaries of their own. All those 
persons who have produced practical trea- 
tises on the art of education, have been 
men. The books are always written by 
those who are the professors of teaching, 
never by the subjects. Every author in- 
deed was once a boy ; but he seems to ab- 
jure the recollection of what he was, when 
he puts on the manly gown, and to have no 
consideration and forbearance for that state 
through which every man has passed, but 
to which no man shall return. I have been 
obliged, by the tenour of what I have to re- 
cord, to take a contrary course. It has 



MANDEVILLE. 163 

been necessary for me, to resume the cha- 
racter of my early years, and to forget for 
the moment that those years have passed 
away. I have committed to paper what, 
during those years, passed through my 
mind ; I have nothing to do with either 
vindicating or condemning that of which I 
am the historian. I may thus perhaps have 
performed a task of general utility ; it sure- 
ly is not unfitting, that that which forms one 
considerable stage in the history of man, 
should for once be put into a legible and a 
permanent form. Far be it from me to im- 
pute my own feelings during this period, to 
every youth that is placed under the direc- 
tion of a preceptor. 1 know that my feel- 
ings were solitary, unsocial, exaggerated, 
wicked. Still I regard myself on the whole 
as a member of the great community of 
man ; and I cannot be persuaded that feel- 
ings, which were so familiar and habitual 
with me, do not under some modification 
exist in the majority of human minds^ dur-^ 



164 MANDEVILLE* 

ing that period of life which in my own case 
I have been attempting to describe. 

But to return. I may sum up the vievir 
of my situation, so far as Mr Bradford is 
concerned, by saying that it consisted of 
two features principally. 1 had the most 
unbounded deference for this good man in 
all his speculative decisions. His religion 
was my religion ; his prejudices were my 
prejudices. As an essential characteristic 
of my nature was energy, I could have died 
for the faith in which he had instructed me; 
I could not bear to hear his tenets contra- 
dicted or opposed. At the age of which I 
am speaking I was but little of an intellec- 
tual gladiator ; I therefore made up in 
zeal, what I wanted in skill ; my blood boil- 
ed, my flesh trembled, and my mdignation 
exceeded all ordinary pitch, when I heard 
sentiments uttered, which my education 
had taught me to regard as the pernicious 
suggestions of a blasphemous spirit. Yet, 
at the same time that I regarded Hilkiah 



MANDEVILLE. 165 

in this point of view with unmingled reve- 
rence, I never wished to behold his face. 
His countenance, his figure, his gestures, 
the very tone of his voice, were all subjects 
of aversion to me. My understanding, my 
opinions, were at his devotion : but my 
heart took a different course. " It came 
not into his secret ; and to his counsels it 
was not united.'* In all that was most 
cordial and consolatory to the spirit it stood 
off from him, as wide as the poles from each 
other. In my wishes and cherished visions 
he had no part. This was a peculium that 
I carefully shut up in my own bosom, and 
of which no creature that lived was a par« 
taker. 



166 MANDEVILLE* 



CHAPTER VII. 



Such was the monotony of my life during 
the years in which I resided under the roof 
of my uncle. Few were the occasions 
that were calculated to awaken in me the 
social affections, in their purest and most 
fascinating tone. To all this however 
there was one exception. I have already 
said that I had a sister. This sister I had 
scarcely seen ; and I almost forgot that she 
existed. One morning Hilkiah communi- 
cated to me the intelligence that she was 
expected on a visit ; my uncle had invited 
her to spend a week or ten days under his 
roof. It cannot be imagined what pleasure 



MANDEVILLE. l67 

I derived from the information. The en- 
trance of one stranger, and that stranger a 
visitor, under the battlements of our man* 
sion, was an event as menioi able, as a con- 
gress of half the sovereigns of Europe, and 
all the splendours of their reception, would 
be to the fashionable and the gay. 

My sister was one year younger than 
myself. She had regular features, a trans- 
parent complexion, and a most preposses- 
sing countenance. " Her pure and elo- 
quent blood spoke in her cheeks." Her 
eyes were dark and expressive ; and her 
smiles were bewitching. Her form was 
light and airy, like that of a sylph. Her 
motions had a naivete and grace, that I can- 
not conceive to be exceeded. She made 
me a painter. Whenever I shut my eyes, 
I saw her t whenever I let my thoughts 
I loose in imagination, I pictured to myself 
' her gestures and her air. The tone of her 
voice was thrilling; and there was a beau- 
ty in her articulation, that made my soul 



l68 MANDEVILLK^ 

dance within me, and without the laboiif 
and weight of emphasis, gave to every thing 
she said an impression beyond the power 
of emphasis to convey. Oh, Henrietta, 
thou dearest half of my soul, how can I re- 
collect thee, such as I now saw thee, with- 
out rapture ! 

There is something in the prejudice of 
kindred, that has an uncontrolable power 
over the soul. I was alone in the world ; I 
had neither father, nor mother, nor brother ; 
but Henrietta was father, and mother, and 
every thing to me in one. We had a thou- 
sand things to talk about ; and it seems to me, 
at this distance of time, as if we had pos- 
sessed a power of dividing and multiply- 
ing the thoughts we expressed, and of giv- 
ing to every one a fineness and subtlety, 
that the grossness and earthiness of more 
advanced years can never reach. We de- 
livered our ideas with frankness; we had 
none of the false reserve, that makes older 
persons warily examine the recollections 



MANDEVILLE. 169 

and sallies that press to the tongue, and 
throw away one, and mangle another ; lest 
they should say any thing, that should sub- 
tract from the consideration they aim at, 
and of which afterward they might see 
reason to repent. 

We walked together ; and wherever we 
walked, the place seemed to invest itself in 
inexpressible charms. Nothing could be 
more dreary and desolate than the scenery 
in the midst of which I lived ; but the pre- 
sence of Henrietta gave to it the beauty of 
the Elysian fields ; and when she was gone, 
yet I could not visit the well-known haunts 
without their reviving in me the same ra- 
vishing sensation. She talked ; and my 
soul hung on the enchanting sounds. To 
the little tales of the place from whence she 
came and its inhabitants, I could listen for 
ever. Her observations were so unlike to 
any thing I had ever heard before. What 
a contrast to Hilkiah, and my uncle, and 
the gloomy and formal estabhshment of 

VOL. I. H 



170 MANDEVILLE. 

Mandeville House ! My sensations were 
not less surprising, than those of Shake- 
spear's maiden in the desert island, when 
first she saw and contrasted the features 
and figure of the graceful Prince Ferdi- 
nand, with those of the aged Prospero and 
the hag*born Caliban. I seemed now for 
the first time to associate with a being, with 
whom I felt an affinity, and whom I recog- 
nized as of the same species as myself. 
This was indeed a memorable era in my 
existence. I was never weary of my sister's 
company ; no sooner by any accident did I 
lose it, but I instantly felt as if some insup- 
portable period of separation had inter- 
vened, and I sought her presence again 
with uncontrolable eagerness ; by night in 
my dreams Henrietta was sure to appear, 
and in some way to be the principal per- 
sonage in their incoherent and fantastical 
drama. 

The character of my preceptor was en- 
tirely artificial, and yet of an artifice difficult 



MANDEVILLE. 171 

to express. Nothing on earlli could be 
more void of what is commonly understood 
by artifice and design ; he was of a sim- 
plicity the most perfect and unsoiled ; he 
stood defenceless and unarmed, the ready 
prey of any one who should think it worth 
while to play upon the unsuspiciousness of 
his nature. But his character was the crea- 
ture of colleges and of books, of monastic 
discipline and theological debates, and bore 
little resemblance to nature, as she shows 
herself in those parts of the world, or those 
classes of society, where these causes have 
no operation. My uncle was a mere sha- 
dow, the semblance of a man, where no- 
thing seemed to bear the impression of sub- 
stance. But the sallies of Henrietta were the 
pure effusions of an unsophisticated spirit, 
and were like the first breathings of the 
morning in nature's sweetest climate ; they 
carried with them the freshness of untainted 
air, the mild moisture of the dew, and the 
resistless charm of a thousand odours and 



17^ MANDEVILLE. 

perfumes, 1 know, that in thus describing 
them 1 may seem to rave, and that the 
majority of readers will consider all this, as 
mere bombast, and high sounding words 
without a meaning. But, in fact, the sen- 
sations 1 felt were such as all words that I 
have the power to command, must sink 
under the endeavour to convey to another. 

My uncle, being duly informed of the 
arrival of his niece, in a day or two after 
sent to summon her to his apartment. Hen- 
rietta, curious about so near a relation, the 
representative of the elder branch of our 
family, tasked me to give her a faithful ac- 
count of his manner, his character, and all 
those peculiarities of which she had not 
failed already to hear so much. They had 
of course been greatly the object of my 
youthful wonder and remark ; and, to grati- 
fy so dear a friend, I conquered the natural 
brevity of my sentences, and placed before 
her in a vivid light, those circumstances, 
which had impressed so strong a picture in 



MANDEVILLE. IfS 

my mind. When she received the sum- 
mons I have mentioned, she exclaimed, 
*' Must I go alone ? And will not you, 
Charles, accompany me to my uncle ?" But 
she was speedily convinced, that his direc- 
tions must be literally obeyed, and that his 
spirits were too tender to enable him to 
sustain an interview with both of us at 
once. When Henrietta was introduced to 
him, he uttered a few short sentences, with 
apparent effort, and with intervals between, 
" You are welcome" — *' I am glad to see 
you" — "A fine girl !'* while the singularity 
and mournfulness of his manner bereaved her 
of speech : and thus the interview ended. 

Some days after, my uncle made the 
cardinal and mighty effort of receiving us 
both together: but this was never repeat- 
ed. He looked at us tenderly. " Love one 
another,'* he said ; " be a comfort to each 
other ; assist each of you the other in the 
various trials of life !" 

" What a man 1" said Henrietta, as we left 



174 MANDEVILLE. 

the room. " I am sure I love him. It is 
impossible to feel any other sentiment to- 
wards him. How much he must have 
suffered ! What a life ! Poor, dear uncle !'* 

" But, Charles," she proceeded," we must 
be all in all to each other. We have no 
parents; we have no relation in the world, 
but the owner of this house. And he lives 
among the dead. I cannot think of this 
mansion, but as of one of the Pyramids of 
Egypt ; and its master is like a deceased 
prince I have somewhere read of, whose 
body rose at a certain hour every night out 
of its coffin, and having passed through 
several apartments of state in silence and 
sadness, returned to its place, and laid down 
again in death, till the same hour came 
round on the following night. 

" Our poor uncle ! He has done with the 
world. All his thoughts and hopes are 
buried in the tomb. Though he exists on 
the face of the earth, he has no longer any 
concern or interest with the inhabitants of 



MANDEVILLE. 175 

th€ earlh. But we, Charles, — we are young. 
It is the fate of all living creatures, to have 
at some periods quick feelings and a heart 
unwouiided ; and our turn is to come. We 
know not what destiny is reserved for us. 
But we shall meet it with quick imagina- 
tions and a beating bosom ; and the dis- 
appointment of all that have gone before 
us, will not prevent us from anticipating 
joy, with as sanguine a spirit, as inspired 
the first man, before iiistory had yet written 
one solitary page of warning and example." 
Swift flew the hours during this ecstatic 
visit, and the ten days limited for its dura- 
tion were speedily at an end. The day 
before the departure of Henrietta, and the 
day before that, we began to look towards 
the misery of separation. For a time 
however this recollection merely gave bit- 
terness to a moment 5 and we seemed to 
use it, only to give zest to our never-ending 
conferences, and as an inducement to plunge 
so mucli the more desperately into the 



\76 MANDEVILLE. 

sweets of each others society. Gradually 
it became otherwise. The morning of the 
last day we were to spend together made 
us sober; and as we watched the setting of 
the sun that evening beneath the ocean- 
^vave, without speaking a word, the eyes of 
both of us filled with tears. 

*' Well !" said Henrietta, rousing herself, 
" it cannot be helped; we must submit to 
our fortunes. The day, I am confident, will 
come, when we shall meet again ; no one 
knows how soon ; no one knows for how 
long. At this moment I feel that I do not 
love any human creature so well as my 
brother; the recollection ofyou, my Charles, 
will charm away many a sorrow, and will 
speak consolation and pride to my heart. 
Still too we have something left ; we can 
write letters. You will write to me, will 
you not ? And when I have the pen in my 
hand, and my chattering vein comes upon 
me, with which I have already tried your 
patience, I will think you are present 



MANDEVILLE. 177 

You know I have always been the princi- 
pal talker, and you have answered me with 
silence or few words ; so I will think I 
have got you beside me, your arm under 
my arm ; that will do very well, will it not? 
I see by your looks, that you think it will 
do but poorly ; I know that too, Charles. 
Heigh ho ! but we will make the best of 
it, and be glad of that, when we can get 
nothing better.'* 

Was not this charming talk ? and could 
I help loving such a sister as this ? I could 
not talk thus; I could only look the things, 
which she clothed in such bewitching words. 
But, oh ! every syllable and every articu- 
lation penetrated to my heart. No, I can- 
not but think, that never creature loved as 
1 loved. And the innocence and simpli- 
city of our affection, which was all soul, 
and had no alloy of grossness, turned it into 
a purer, a brighter, and a more heavenly 
flame. We loved, as the angels may be 
supposed to love above the cerulean sky. 
H 2 



178 MANDEVILLE. 

Some persons will affirm, that the senti- 
ments and ideas I express are above the 
age of the actors. It may be so : I only 
know that all I have related comes far short 
of the reality. It was with us, as it is said 
sometimes to be with a person at the point 
of death, who already breathes of heaven, 
who seems to have put off this cumbrous 
load of flesh, and to partake by anticipa- 
tion, of the prophetic spirit and the un- 
earthly vision that characterise the state of 
saints above. The situation was new to 
us, to me especially ; and what was felt by 
one of us, was imparted as it were by elec- 
tricity to the other. My life had been so 
monotonous, and its course had had so 
little in it to awaken the finer feelings. If 
I dared hazard an idea, which after all may 
not be true, I should say, Henrietta talked 
best, but I loved the most. But in both of 
us the situation was such, that it awakened 
in us faculties which otherwise might have 
slept for another climacteric. We leaped 



MANDEVILLE. 179 

a gulf of years, and seemed to understand, 
what ordinary mortals do not understan'd 
till they have celebrated many more anni- 
versaries at the altar of life. 



180 MANDEVILLE, 



CHAPTER VI I r. 



My sister had not long left us, when Mr 
Bradford was seized with a distemper, that 
threatened to put a speedy end to his life. 
A physician was called in from the nearest 
town, and all proper assistance was afford- 
ed. But it speedily appeared that the dis- 
ease was too strong for the power of medi- 
cine to baffle ; and its virulence was such, 
that in a few days it put an end to the life 
of this venerable and innocent being. In 
one of those intervals which afforded him 
a comparative degree of composure and 
ease, he caused me to be called to his bed- 



MANDEVILLt, 181 

side. He desired me to sit near him ; and 
he took one of my hands in his. 

" My dear Charles/' said he, " in the so- 
litude in which we have lived, you have 
been for years the principal subject of my 
anxiety. Your parents you lost early by 
the most dreadful calamity ; the state of 
your uncle's heaUh and spirits have long 
incapacitated him from supplying their 
place ; Providence seemed to have cast you 
entirely on my care. I have done my duty 
according to the best of that light that was 
afforded me ; and 1 am thankful that I have 
been spared so long for that purpose. It is 
now the will of the Lord, that I should be 
taken from you y and it is not given to me 
to foresee what will be your destiny, when I 
am no more with you. All that remains is, 
that I charge you, * in the sight of God who 
quickeneth all things, and before Jesus 
Christ/ that you hold fast the truth that has 
been committed to you. I foresee that 
great trials are yet reserved for the people 



182 MANDEVILLE. 

of this unhappy land. The power of An- 
tichrist is not at an end ; and the cup of his 
enchantments still retains all its pernicious 
ingredients. There shall come a falling 
away and an apostacy, even in this chosen 
land of Great Britain. But be j^ou fast in 
the faith. Eschew the persuasions of the 
' scarlet whore that sitteth upon the moun- 
tains.* Let not your soul come into her 
secrets, neither be you a partaker in her 
blasphemies. 

*' For myself I go to the blessed few, 
whom Christ has chosen out of the world. 
I go to the little flock of his saints, whom 
he shall bring with him in his glory. There 
I shall see my excellent namesake, who 
when threatened with the flames, defied the 
power of the evil one. There I shall asso- 
ciate with the glorified spirits of Wishart 
and Hamilton, who amidst the pangs of 
death, with pious fervour predicted, the one 
the assassination of his judge, while the 
other summoned his accuser to meet him 



MANDEVILLE. 183 

without delay before the judgment-seat of 
Christ. Where 1 am, no pope, nor cardi- 
nal, not one member of the vast Anti- 
christian hierarchy shall ever come. 

'' But I do not so far rejoice in the glory 
that awaits me, my dear Charles, as to 
make me in any degree unmindful of 
whatever appertains to your welfare. I 
have endeavoured to do my duty by you ; 
but at this awful moment, when I am com- 
pelled to review for the last time what I 
have done, I am filled with apprehensions 
and fears, lest, with the sincerest anxiety for 
your good, I may at any time have chosen 
erroneous means. I may have assumed an 
undue authority ; I may have mistaking- 
ly awakened evil passions in your bosom. 
If I have done so, I ask your forgiveness. 
We are all of us fallible creatures, and 
ought at all times to fear the errors we 
may commit. Do not then, my sweet 
Charles, remember these things against me ; 
treasure up only those truths I have de- 



184 MANDEViLLR. 

livered to you for your everlasting benefit. 
Remember me as your friend; and let the 
eye that looks upon my tomb, and the 
tongue that [ have taught to repeat the les- 
sons of human and divine learning, con- 
tinue to bless me !" 

My heart melted at the ingenuous con- 
fessions and the earnest affection of this ve- 
nerable man. I recollected all the dis- 
pleasure and the animosity I had felt against 
him, and I was ashamed. The eye that 
had darted at me glances of reproach, was 
now closed in death; the tongue that had 
overwhelmed me with sharp rebuke and 
bitter homilies of reproof, was silent for 
ever. I shed a torrent of sincere tears over 
his remains. I accused myself of a per- 
verse and a wicked nature, that where all 
was meant so sincerely, 1 could have har- 
boured such stormy resentments. 

This good man, the friend of my earliest 
youth, did not many hours survive the last 
iadmonitions and expressions of kindness he 



MANDEVILLE. 185 

had addressed to me. I looked on his in- 
sensible corpse ; it was the first time I had 
ever viewed the human form, after death 
had already extinguished the intellectual 
spark ; and it was an awful meditation to 
me — to me, more than to many others; 
for the habit of my soul was endless rumi- 
nation, in which the tongue was chained up 
in silence, and the limbs almost forgot their 
office, but the thinking part of the machine 
worked incessantly, like the members and 
wheels of a vast machine, or like the eter- 
nal descent of the waters in a foaming cata- 
ract. 

The funeral of Mr Bradford followed 
soon. Thoujjh the nearest market-town 
was at a distance of seventeen miles, we 
had a diminutive parish church and its lit- 
tle churchyard, that was only six miles from 
us. I had seldom visited it ; for Mr Brad- 
ford, while he lived, filled the joint offices 
of my preceptor in learning, and the chap- 
lain to Mandeville House ; and every Lord's 



186 MANDEVILLE. 

day duly pronounced a discourse, and be* 
came the organ of the houshold in prayer^ 
in a little chapel, which was preserved ia 
a state of decent repair for that purpose. 
I knew the church however; it had occa- 
sionally formed a centrical point in my 
rambles; I was not unfamiliar with its un-. 
pretending architecture and its scanty con- 
gregation of graves. At the west end, near 
the outer wall of the chancel, was a vault 
which had been built by one of the ances- 
tors of the Mandeville family ; and to this 
repository were the remains of Hilkiah 
conveyed. The steward of my uncle mar- 
shalled the ceremony; a hearse was procured 
for the occasion ; and the mourners, myself 
in chief, followed on horseback. The day 
was gloomy ; the whole hemisphere was 
wrapped in a thick grey cloud, yet without 
rain. My soul became satisfied in this 
seeming harmony of the elements with the 
melancholy of the scene. 

I have described the feelings which sue- 



MANDEVlLLb:. ' 187 

ceeded within me immediately upon the 
death of my preceptor. But these feelings 
were temporary. While the grave of Hil- 
kiah was freshlv closed, and his last scene 
was vividly impressed on my memory, I 
repented most truly of all the anger I had 
conceived against him. But when the 
impression of his last moments was some- 
what faded, and^ what passed at that time 
only ranked with the other recollections of 
our protracted intercourse, my original no* 
tions returned to me. While the remem- 
brance of his last benedictions was new to 
me, I loved him ; at all times, in a certain 
sense I honoured him ; but finally the 
habit returned to me, of considering him as 
the being, who had poisoned the first plea- 
sures of my infancy, and who had fust caused 
me to feel the pains of mortification and 
contempt. His image, the figure which 
my fancy conjured up of his person and his 
countenance, was displeasing to me. In 
my dreams the idea of Hilkiah always came 



188 MANDEVILLE. 

associated with painful sensations. Yet, 
along with this, he was not the less my 
oracle and guide, the master of my theories, 
and the regulator of my faith. 



MANDEVILLE. 189 



CHAPTER IX. 



It has sufficiently appeared that my 
situation was a sohtary one, while Hilkiah 
lived; what did it become when my vene- 
rable preceptor was no more ? If freedom 
could make happiness, I was free. My 
uncle was a mere cypher in the economy 
of his own houshold. Having already- 
reached the twelfth year of my age, and 
being considered as the immediate heir to 
the Mandeville estate, none of the servants 
had the boldness to control me in my 
caprices. Happily those caprices were 
neither violent nor adventurous. Still more 
happily for me, this period of my interreg- 



190 MANDEVJLLE. 

num was short. What effect would have 
been produced, if the interval in which I 
was my own master had been protracted, I 
can scarcely venture to say. I shut my 
books. This had been the case during the 
short season of Hilkiah's mortal sickness. 
But then my thoughts were much occupied 
with his precarious state, and the melan- 
choly catastrophe that seemed to impend. 
When that was decided, and still more 
when the remains of my preceptor had been 
finally carried forth from the mansion in 
which he had enacted so considerable a 
personage, I felt that I was entering on a 
new epoch. The apartment in which we 
had sat together, was now entirely mine. 
The easy chair, in which in his character 
of my pedagogue he had delighted to re- 
pose himself, was vacant. 

I shut my books. Probably after some 
interval, if the experiment had been tried 
upon me, I should have returned to them. 
But for the moment I was delighted with 

4 



Mandeville. 191 

the change. That which had for years 
been imposed upon me as a task, could not 
immediately convert itself into a pleasure. 
Greek and Latin, the historian equally and 
the poet of antiquity, avaunt ! It was the 
badge of my liberation, that I no longer 
pored upon pages, rich with the spoils 
of time. This short period had a memor- 
able effect upon me. If before I had been 
a lover of liberty, and had felt the deepest 
repugnance to every species of contradic- 
tion and control, I now seemed to myself 
to have actually entered upon the privileges 
and immunities, that are the just inheritance 
of the maturer part of my species. 

For a few days I was contented with the 
simple fruition of these privileges. To 
Bavour the condition in which I was placed, 
to me was happiness enough. But, after a 
short time, this pleasure became familiar to 
the sense, and stood in need of further ex- 
citement to give it pungency. How far 
did my liberty extend r I went into and out 



IQQ MANDEVILLE. 

of my uncle's house as I pleased. But was 
this the boundary of my discretion ? Could 
I wander no farther than my legs could 
carry me; and were my rambles confined 
to so much as might be accomplished be- 
tween sun and sun ? 

It was my own voluntary choice, that 
brought me back each successive evening, 
to the house in which I had resided ever 
since my escape from Ireland. I might 
emancipate myself from this restriction 
whenever I pleased. I might contrive the 
scheme of a secret elopement. But, if I 
desired to use my freedom with this addi- 
tional enlfirgement, would elopement be the 
wisest way ot accomplishing that? Might I 
not form a project of departure and absence, 
to which it should not be difficult to obtain 
my uncle's consent ? When I thought of 
absenting myself for a time from this scene 
of my early years, the first suggestion that 
offered to me was tiiat of paying a visit to 
my beloved sister. How much further the 



mandevillr. 193 

genius of romance, when I had put myself 
under his guidance, might conduct me, I 
could not tell. But, if I were enabled to 
execute any part of the project that now 
rose to my thoughts, I determined that the 
first stage in my journey ings, the first branch 
of the inheritance of pleasure I proposed to 
myself, should be, once again to embrace 
my dear Henrietta. 

1 endeavoured in another way to antici* 
pate the events of my future history. I 
was left to my own devices. No one of 
the houshold had the presumption to talk 
to me of my future destination ; and the 
silence and reserve of my own nature pre- 
vented me from inviting them to enter on 
the topic. But was my education ended ? 
I was not so ignorant of the rules of politi- 
cal society, as not to know that ten years 
more must elapse, before I should be 
acknowledged by the laws of my country 
as my own master. How was this pe- 
riod to be filled up ? Sh jitld I receive no 

VOL I. I 



194 MANDEVILLE. 

more instruction in learning ? Would some 
reverend divine, hitherto a stranger, be in- 
troduced as the successor of Hilkiah, to 
superintend my studies, and keep alive the 
devotions of Mandeville House ? This was 
a very anxious question to me. If .the 
authority and the magisterial rebukes of 
Mr Bradford, familiarised as I had been 
to them from my earliest years, had proved 
an intolerable torment, vi'ith what patience 
could I think of being subjected upon the 
same terms to an entire stranger ? 

These reflections, as of a bird escaped 
from his cage, that seems to ask himself to 
what woods and coverts he shall presently 
make his resort, and that, while he flutters 
his wings, has the whole cope of heaven 
before him to dart himself to the east or the 
west as he pleases, were speedily put an end 
to in my case, by a communication from 
the steward, that it was my uncle's determi- 
nation to send me to Winchester school, I 

had once seen Winchester, and its cathedral, 
11 



MANDEVILLE. 195v 

the venerable repository of the remains of 
our Saxon kings. I was not displeased at 
the new scene of life that was now chalked 
out for me. I had made a sufficient expe- 
riment of the system of a private education, 
and I detested it. I easily conceived that, 
in a numerous school, the masters were in 
some sort a mere appendage to the esta- 
blishment, and that the whole was a species 
of commonwealth, in which each member 
had his own rights of equality, or claims of 
empire, to assert, and each supported either 
the one or the other as he could. I had 
never had experience of a similar scene, 
and knew not how I should find myself 
adapted for the combat. My imagination 
sparkled, and my blood tingled, at the 
thought of it. But I did not shrink. 1 felt 
that I was at the age for experiments; and 
I did not find myself willing to pass through 
the scene of existence inglorious, without 
once having asserted myself, or dared to 
mix among my equals. 



196 MANDEVILLE. 

I only suggested one condition, at the 
price of which I was willing to yield with- 
out a repining word, to my uncle's decision ; 
this was, that I might first be permitted to 
spend a few days on a visit to Henrietta. 
My request was immediately granted. The 
place of her residence was in the New Forest, 
not far from the Southampton Water. It is 
not possible to conceive any thing more 
beautiful than the surrounding scenery. 
To me, who had been accustomed for years 
to look only on sands and morasses, and 
all that was dreary and neglected, it was 
transporting. 

I entered the New Forest by way of Ly- 
mington, and penetrated to Beaulieu. It 
was in the neighbourhood of this charming 
village that my sister resided. The whole 
of the ride, which was of nine miles in ex- 
tent, was exquisitely beautiful. It was a 
lovely evening towards the latter end of 
summer; and the recollection of the purpose 
of my journey was scarcely necessary to 



MANDEVILLE. 197 

heighten the dehght of the senses, though 
that certainly bestowed upon it an addition- 
al zest. The country was hixuriant, and 
richly covered with wood. Through a 
great part of the way, the road lay among a 
thousand venerable trees, that seemed for 
ages to have defied the rage of the element.^ 
and whose branches were barely sufficiently 
apart to afford an opening, amidst multi- 
plied meanders, for the traveller to pass. 
Sometimes however a rising ground over 
which the road conducted me, opened a 
more extensive prospect, and I viewed the 
Isle of Wight, with its fields, its towns, and 
its variegated scenery, and the arm of the 
sea which flowed between, and divided me 
from this seeming terrestrial paradise. The 
stilness and silence of Sowley Water, a fresh- 
water lake by the margin of which my road 
partly conducted me, agreeably contrasted 
with the eternal mobility, and never end- 
ing murmur, of the majestic tide beyond. 
Further on, a considerable extent of ruins 



iQB MANDEVILLE. 

presented itself, known by the name of 
Beaulieu Grange, which formerly afforded 
residence to the cultivators, and storehouses 
for the produce, that belonged to the monks 
of Beaulieu Abbey. One wall in particu- 
lar, eighty feet in width, and of proportion- 
able height, appeared to have formed the 
gable end of a vast barn, and was now 
mantled v/ilh ivy in vast profusion, the 
clusters of which depended thick and wide 
from the edifice which formed their sup- 
port. At length I discovered the village 
upon the banks of a romantic stream, which 
owes its name to the beauty of its situation. 
My sister lived with a family of the 
name of Willis. The husband had been in 
the sea-service, but having sustained con- 
siderable injury from an accident, became a 
cripple for life, and had retired on a small 
pension. The wife had been a school- 
fellow of my mother's, was a very notable 
woman, possessed various accomplishments, 
and was eminent for her intellectual powers. 



MANDEVILLE, 199 

She had however been a girl of no fortune, 
and was considered as having married be- 
neath her pretensions. The friendship that 
had begun between my mother and her at 
school, had continued through life ; Mrs 
Willis had paid us a visit in the summer 
immediately preceding the Irish rebellion, 
and having conceived a romantic affection 
for the little Henrietta, and having no chil- 
dren of her own, had prevailed on my mo- 
ther, to allow her to take the child over to 
England with her on her return. It was 
probably owing to this circumstance that I 
now had a sister. After the dreadful convul- 
sion in which my father and mother perished, 
my uncle Audley Mandeville, as the repre- 
sentative of the family, had taken their chil- 
dren into his protection, and myself having 
been received under his roof, he paid a 
handsome pension to Mrs Willis for the 
maintenance and education of Henrietta. 
The cottage in which the Willises resid- 
\ ed was the most beautiful I had seen, in the 



200 MANDEVILLE. 

whole course of my excursion. It was or- 
namented throughout by the taste and ma- 
nual ingenuity of its mistress; and nothing 
could be more lively and agreeable than the 
whole of its finishing and furniture. It 
struck me like a tenement in fairy -land. Of 
one room the walls were entirely covered 
with feather- work ; the soft plumage of 
the swan, the partridge, the goldfinch, and 
the bullfinch, being interspersed with the 
master-feathers of the peacock, the ostrich, 
and the pheasant, so as to compose a thou- 
sand ingenious figures, with the softest and 
the most brilliant tints, that nature in all her 
prodigality ever engendered. The disabled 
sailor, though his accident had unfitted him 
for strong and athletic exertions, was fully 
capable of amusing himself in his own 
petty domain, and under the instructions 
and superintendence of his wife, had be- 
come an admirable gardener. The par- 
terres, the arbours, and the little orchard, 
appended to his cottage, exhibited every 



MANDEVILLE. 201 

kind of beauty and rustic wealth of which 
such a domain was susceptible. The gar- 
den was terminated on the bank of the 
Beaulieu river ; and here Mrs WilHs had 
erected a grotto of several compartments, 
cool, shady, and refreshing, a most agree- 
able retreat from the meridian heat of an 
August sun, lined with many-coloured spars 
in a thousand fantastic forms, which spark- 
led like a mighty assemblage of jewels and 
diamonds. 

The reader must not suppose however 
that all this splendour in any degree de- 
praved and stained the character of simpli- 
city, which so well accorded with this ob- 
scure and solitary retreat. The wealth I 
observed around me, was nature*s wealth, 
uncorrupted by the hand of man, not 
bought with the tears, and groans, and blood 
of a hundred miserable victims, as cheap 
and ordinary in its materials, as it was 
beautiful from the elegance and taste of the 
hand that had arranged it. The trees were 
I 2 



20^ MANDEVILLE. 

unshorn ; the walks were neither straight, 
nor forced into strange serpentizing involu- 
tions, but simply accommodated themselves 
to the inequalities of the surface. Every 
thing was tended with an exquisite neat- 
ness ; yet the hand of art never protruded 
itself, but was employed with that modesty 
which so well becomes it, as the silent and 
observant hand-maid of nature. The poul- 
try-yard was well stocked with fowls of 
various sorts ; and whichever way I looked, 
all appeared clean, healthful, blithsome, and 
contented. 

My soul was harmonized to almost para- 
disaical joy, as I alighted at the door of the 
cottage. To have seen my sister, whom I 
so entirely loved, would have been to me a 
happiness, ample and overpowering. But 
I could not be insensible to the quiet con- 
tentment, the cheerful tone, and the alacri- 
ty of kindness, of Beaulieu Cottage, so op- 
posite to every thing I could remember to 
have seen. Here every thing seemed to 



MANDEVILLE. 203 

rejoice in the mere feeling of existence ; 
there (at Mandeville House) all was formal 
and slow; and you would have thought they 
continued to live, from mere apprehension in 
lifting the latch of the door which dismisses 
man from this mortal stage, or want of that 
energy necessary to the individual who shall 
resolve to die. AVhat I saw gave me a new 
existence; my blood circulated with a brisker 
flow ; my eyes sparkled ; my cheeks glowed; 
and I felt as if this were the first day in which 
I had known what it was to be truly alive. 
Not that I had not experienced mighty 
pleasures in my rambles and reveries during 
the life of my preceptor ; but they were of 
so different a nature ! They were solemn ; 
they were even sublime ; but they were 
deeply steeped in, or rather entirely pene- 
trated with, melancholy. What 1 now felt, 
appeared to be similar to the sensations 
that might have been habitual to all man- 
kind, if Adam had never fallen, and if the 
human species had universally retained the 



^04i MANDEVILLE. 

innocence in which they were originally 
created. 

Mrs Willis was a perfect royalist. Not 
that she was much accessible to the angry, 
and not at all to the malignant passions. But 
lovalty to her was of the same nature and 
substance, as her religion. She had learned 
both from her father and grandmother, and 
she would have felt it like sacrilege to call 
either in question. She felt that neither of 
them produced in her any but the best 
feelings ; and as she stood in need of a God 
to look up to in Heaven, so it was a solace 
to her mind to think of the king, as the 
protector and compassionate father of his 
people. The saint-like simplicity of Charles 
the First (at least as she read his character), 
and the exemplary purity of his domestic 
morals, particularly fitted him to till the 
place in the scale of being, which her ima- 
gination had previously provided for him : 
and Mrs Willis had in one instance been 
deeply implicated in a contrivance to free 



MANDEVILLE. 205 

him from his imprisonment in the Isle of 
Wight. 

The understanding, the accomplishments, 
and the principles of this admirable matron, 
all of them strongly recommended her to 
the acquaintance and friendship of thie loyal 
nobility of these times. Lord Montagu of 
Bonghton was her nearest distinguished 
neighbour ; and though his more splendid 
and magnificent residence was in North- 
amptonshire, yet he spent a few months of 
every year at his rustic mansion of Beau- 
lieu. The elder Lord Montagu, by no means 
a public character, was however reported 
to have expressed himself in terms of so 
strong censure of the proceedings of the 
parliament, as induced them to issue an or- 
der that he should be brought up a prisoner 
from Northamptonshire, though already 
eighty years of age, and committed to the 
Savoy in London. As he was on the road 
near Barnet, he chanced to meet the Earl 
of Essex, commander in chief of the parlia- 



206 MANDEVILLE. 

mentary forces, who was newly setting for- 
ward on his expedition, and who expressed 
a wish to pay his respects to this venerable 
character; but Lord Montagu, understand- 
ing who it was that approached, roughly or- 
dered his coachman to drive on, with the bit- 
ter remark, that " this was no time for com- 
pliments!*' The elder Lord Montagu died in 
confinement in 1644 : and the present lord, 
who lived entirely retired from public af- 
fairs, was principally distinguished for the 
beauty, the promising character, and high 
expectations men formed, of his children. 
Lady Montagu, daughter to Sir Ralph 
Winwood, formerly secretary of state, was 
Mrs AVillis's most intimate and particular 
friend. 

This, and other siaiilar connections of 
the mistress of Beaulieu Cottage, were of 
the greatest service to Henrietta. She was 
not like me, a wild and undisciplined savage, 
with that mixture of timidity and spirit that 
is to be found in an unbroken colt 3 but, be- 



MANDEVILLE. 207 

ing accustomed to the best and most polish- 
ed society, was herself, in proportion to her 
years, a pattern of whatever was most per- 
fect in that kind. Yet, as I have already 
shown, the cultivation she had received was 
for from having converted her into a courtly 
automaton. She expressed herself with the 
greatest ease 5 her sentiments were unpar- 
rotted and unstudied ^ and they were utter- 
ed by her with the utmost gaiety, grace and 
unreserve. 

One part of the scenery at Beaulieu I 
have not yet mentioned : the ruins of the 
Abbey. Several portions of this formerly 
immense structure, were still applied to use- 
ful purposes ; what had been the refectory, 
was now the parish-church ; and the house 
of the prior was still a dwelHng-house, te- 
nanted by one of the best families of the 
vicinity. These circumstances took away 
the feeling of desolation, which usually ac- 
companies a heap of ruins ; and the recol- 
lection of the devotion, the habits, and the 



208 MANDEVILLE. 

vast undertakings of past ages, was plea- 
singly mingled with the neatness, the ac- 
tivity, and the civilization, that continued to 
occupy the scene. Thus, whether I sat in 
the well-economized apartments of Mrs 
Willis's house, or wandered amidst the 
hanging woods which cast their brown and 
solemn shadows upon the expanded stream 
beneath, or reposed among the ruins them- 
selves, every thing was soothing and agree- 
able, and strikingly addressed itself to the 
better and more beneficent passions of the 
soul. 

My visit to my sister and her protectress 
was short ; but it has often occurred to me 
since, to imagine what a different being I 
should have been, if it had been my lot to 
have been brought up at Beaulieu Cottage, 
instead of at Mandeville House. As it was, 
I belonged to no one ; T hung loose upon 
society, or rather had never entered into 
its circumference ; never, except in one in- 
stance, and that for a very short time, had 



MANDEVILLK. 209 

I seen a friend, a creature that irresis- 
tibly called forth my sympathies and my 
confidence. I ran wild in the woods ; I told 
no tale ; 1 utlered no sound that partook of 
equal communication ; every thought I har- 
boured in my soul, was a reverie ; every 
passion was a monopoly, and fied from part- 
nership, as from a pestilence. Oh, had I 
spent my earlv years at Beaulieu, had I 
passed a part of every day with Mrs Willis, 
a woman whose every word was a spark de- 
tached from the storehouse of wisdom, whose 
every look was benevolence, who had that 
grace for ever attending her, that won your 
confidence, and with an irresistible power 
drew forth your soul, — had I lived with my 
Henrietta, had I associated with the noble 
scions of the house of Montagu, and the re- 
spectable family that dwelt at the priory, 
I also should have been a human creature, 
Ishould have been the member of a com- 
munity, I should have lived with my fellow 
mortals on peaceful terms, I should have 



210 MANDEVILLE. 

been as frank, as I now was invincibly re- 
served, suspicious, and for ever disposed to 
regard my neighbour with thoughts of hos- 
tility ! I should then have been amiable ; 
and I should have been happy ! "But my 
fate was determined, and my character was 
fixed. The effects of living under such a 
master of a houshold as ujy uncle, with 
such a preceptor as Mr Bradford, and in 
the midst of such an establishment as that 
of Mandeville House, v/ill never be obli- 
terated, as long as one thought exists within 
this brain, and one pulse beats within my 
frame of man. 

I passed an entire week at Beaulieu ; and, 
if I had passed an eternity, it would have 
seemed like a single day. Every thing I 
saw was amiable ; and I threw myself with- 
out apprehension into the arms of every one 
I met. Every thing I saw was frank, and 
easy, and communicative, and sensitive, and 
sympathetic. It was like the society of 
"just men made perfect/' where all sought 



MANDEVILLE. 211 

the good of all, and no one lived for himself, 
or studied for himself. Mr Willis, the owner 
of the cottage, had been bred, as I have 
said, to the sea-service : but he retained 
nothing of his original profession but its in- 
genuous, unvarnished manners, and a blunt- 
ness, in no way connected with indifference 
to another's feelings or another's happiness, 
but that served only to convey in a more 
unequivocal manner the truth of his bene- 
volence. Ke had been instructed by his 
wife ; c!nd, as he regarded her with a love 
approaching to adoration, he was in some 
sense a copy of this exemplary matron, with 
inferior intellects, and whimsically qualified 
and dashed with the phraseology and gait 
of an English sailor. His very lameness 
seemed to give him an additional interest 
with the spectator : the goodness of his 
heart blended, in a way 1 am not able to 
describe, with his infirmity; and you loved 
him the more, because he was feeble and 
helpless, and joined the sentiment of a true 



212 MANDEVILLE. 

philanthropy, with an apparent want of 
power, as well as of will, to do you harm. 

The Montagus were at Beaulieu the 
whole time of my visit ; and the two sons 
of Lord Montagu in particular seemed to 
me a perfect specimen of all that is most 
admirable in character, and most engaging 
and excellent in boyish years. Edward was 
particularly praised for the beauty of his 
person, the united lire and sweetness of his 
disposition, and the gallantry of his temper. 
He contributed afterwards in an eminent 
degree to the bringing about the Restora- 
tion, and was slain, at twenty-five years of 
age, in the attack on the Dutch East India 
ships in the port of Bergen in Norway, un- 
der his kinsman, the Earl of Sandwich. 
Ralph, the younger brother, was a no less 
perfect creature, but of a different cast. 
AVhile Edward was all fire and activity, 
with an arch, yet affectionate smile for ever 
coming and going on his lovely features, 
while he played, and danced, and fenced, 



MANDEVILLE. 213 

and rode, like a creature that never knew 
satiety or taiii^Mie, Ralph was sober, calm 
and reported, equable in temper, but more 
proi»e tf) med'tJlion and study and the gra- 
tification o( a liberal curiosity, than to the 
exercises of the field. 

But it is in vain that I dvvell on the Wil- 
lises and the Montagus. These amused 
me for a moment, and produced a tempo- 
rary improvement to my temper. But 
Henrietta was the whole world to me. In 
every thing I thought of her approbation j 
and I resolved to accomplish myself in 
whatever was praise-worthy, because 1 felt 
that she was capable of being my umpire 
and my judge. I knew that she would be 
a friendly and a partial judge ; but I was re- 
solved against the interterence of partiality ; 
I lixed it as my purpose to satisfy her most 
enlightened discernment. Henrietta was the 
universal subject of eulogy to all that knew 
her ; the daughters of the hous^of Montagu 
yielded her the superiority without a repin- 



214 MANDEVILLE. 

ing thought. Her gaiety was more irresis- 
tible, her naivete more touching, her car- 
riage more graceful, than that of any of her 
companions. She sung with a more thrilling 
and heart-felt tone, and danced with a more 
sylphlike and etherial air. What should I 
do to make myself the worthy mate of such 
a sister, was therefore the perpetual burthen 
of my thoughts. 



MANDEVILLE. 2J15 



CHAPTER X. 



From Beaulieu I proceeded to Win- 
chester. This was a scene no less new to 
me ; but how different from that which I 
had just quitted ! Dr Pottinger, the head- 
master, had been the acquaintance and fel- 
low-collegiate of Mr Bradford. He felt 
therefore some respect for me on that ac- 
count ; but still more perhaps because I 
wasthesolepresumptiveheir tothe property 
of Mandeville. He examined me in my 
progress ; he assigned me a class, and pro- 
vided me with the implements of study. 
The school-room was a spacious and lofty 
building, and I looked round me, astonish- 



216 MANDRVILLE. 

ed at every thino I saw. 'J'he piij>ils were 
about one hundn d and fifty ; and never in 
my life h,id 1 see so numerous an assem- 
bly. But this was not an assembly, thrown 
together promiscuously and for a moment ; 
but an assembly (subject to those changes 
incident to all human societies), with which 
I was to associate, with few interruptions, 
for several years to come. Some of the 
boys had already reached the full stature 
of manhood ; and others were so young, 
that they seemed to hold their books with 
a faltering and uncertain hand, and rather 
to lisp, than articulately to pronounce, the 
inflections of their accidence. I also ad- 
mired the garb of the scholars on the foun- 
dation, who wore black gowns of crape, 
and, when they went out into the air, 
placed upon their heads trencher-caps, 
like those belonging to the students in the 
universities. 

This was indeed a busy scene. The 
murmuring labours of the boys, proceeding, 



MANDEVILLE. 217 

as it did, from the half-closed lips of one 
hundred and fifty human creatures, produ- 
ced a united sound, low, monotonous, in- 
distinct and perpetual, unlike every other 
sound, but more resembling the rustling of 
the waves under the dominion of a mode- 
rate breeze, than any thing else to which 1 
can compare it. The loud, authoritative, 
stentor voice of the master, in its suddi n 
impulses, made me start again, till practice 
had accustomed me to this abrupt breach 
of the ambient air. The character person- 
ated by the director of a great school, if re- 
ferred to the nature of man, is wholly arti- 
ficial ; but in him it becomes in a short 
time a second nature, which it is almost 
impossible for him ever after to lay aside. 
The withdrawing of the head-master at any 
time, produced a sudden revolution ; and 
the voices from every quarter became more 
acute, with a stirring and lively note. The 
government of a seminary of this sort is a 
curious theme for meditation : its subjects 

VOL. I. K 



218 MANDEVILLE, 

are for the most part the most elastic, wild 
and thoughtless animals that can be con- 
ceived ; yet they are governed, if you re- 
gard external appearances only, much like 
a machine ; the machinist has to touch a 
spring only, and the whole is obedient. 

After a few hours^ labour, the assembly 
was dismissed. All care was then at an 
end ; the signal was given for universal 
thoughtlessness and hilarity. The elder 
boys had an air of erectness, fearlessness 
and independence, that you would have 
thought they had never known restraint. 
Eut, in reality, their gait and their air were 
in part the growth of the restraint they 
had passed through. They were prisoners, 
dismissed indeed, but with some links of 
the chain still adhering to them. Their 
motions had not the ease and the grace of 
a creature in the state of nature ; they had 
a stamp of pertness and insolence and pe- 
tulance, that said, We are servants, but 
this is our Saturnalia. They had felt the 



MAXDEVILLK. 219 

weight of the yoke upon their own necks ; 
and they were resolved to retaliate their 
sufferings at the expence of the first vic- 
tim they met. Thus they played alter- 
nately, from hour to hour, the parts of the 
despot and the subject, the commanded 
and the commander. 

I, as a new comer, was exposed to a 
thousand ridiculous questions. The in- 
quiries were wanton, and the inquirers had 
small care of the answers they received. 
All that I experienced in this sort was fro- 
licsome ; it had little consideration for the 
feelings of the person to whom it was ad- 
dressed ; but I must on the other hand 
confess, that it had little in it of malice or 
deliberate cruelty. 

Many readers will consider the detail I 
have here given as frivolous and common- 
place. Who has not had experience of the 
interior of a numerous school ? The propo- 
sition however insinuated in this question, 
is not true. One half of the human spe- 



220 MANDEVILLK. 

cies (the female sex), to which I may add 
a considerable portion of the other, have 
had no opportunity of experiencing what I 
have described. But it is not for that rea- 
son that it is introduced here. It is the 
express purpose of the narrative in which 
I am engaged, to show how the concur- 
rence of a variety of causes operate to form 
a character : and if 1 were to omit any cir- 
cumstance that possessed a very strong in- 
fluence on my mind, the person into whose 
hands this story may haj)j)en to fall, would 
have an imperfect picture of the man who 
is set before him, and would want some of 
the particulars necessary to the develope- 
ment of the tale. 

Another circumstance made a very es- 
sential part of the scene into which 1 was 
now introduced. I was entered a student 
of Winchester College in August 1650. 
Parties at this time ran very high in the 
English nation ; nor was the society of which 
I was now a member without its share of 



MANDBVILLE. 221 

this spirit. A year and a half before this 
period King Charles had passed through 
Winchester in his journeNS as he was con- 
ducted from Hurst Castle to London for 
his trial. In this ancient city in particular, 
he had been received with great respect ; 
the mayor and aldermen had waited upon 
him in form, as if this had been the period 
of his highest prosperity, to present him 
with the keys of the town ; and the neigh- 
bouring gentry had flocked from all sides 
to welcom.e him, some out of curiosity to 
see him, but more out of zeal, either from 
original affection to his person, or compas- 
sion for the low estate into which he was 
fallen. This was a memorable period at 
Winchester school. The boys had asked 
and obtained permission to become specta- 
tors of the scene. And the melancholy ca- 
tastrophe that so shortly after followed, 
caused the whole to make an indelible im- 
pression on their memory. People had 
but a confused idea why the king was 



^22 MANDEVILLE^ 

conducted to London on the present occa- 
sion. It was sufficiently known, that the 
power was at this time in the hands of his 
bitterest enemies. But so many negocia* 
tions had been entered into by all parties 
in turii;, for his being restored with a limited 
power, that no one, out of the secret, could 
prevail upon himself to look upon him as 
any other than the king. It was therefore 
with astonishment and terror, that they 
heard of his being brought to the block ; 
.and it was with effort, and by dint of medi- 
tation, so to express myself, that they could 
be induced to believe the news. Mankind 
is so weak an animal, that they cannot be 
prevented from looking upon a king as a 
species of god ; comets appear in the hea- 
vens to illustrate his birth, and the world 
labours with tempests and earthquakes 
■when a monarch dies; that violence should 
be exercised on his person, that he should 
be imprisoned and put to death, is a thought 
to which the vulgar imagination can never 



MANDEVILLE. S23 

reconcile itself; and when such a profana- 
tion is actually committed, men feel as if a 
violation was perpetrated on our general 
nature, that they were " themselves amiss, 
and did not know it/' and that the " foun- 
tain of their blood, *^ the source from which 
they derived their existence, was "stop- 
ped." 

There was not I believe one boy in Win- 
chester school that was not a royalist. By 
this I mean no more, than that we all felt 
indignant at the fate of Charles the First, 
and were friends to the house of Stuart. 
It was otherwise with public sentiment, 
even in that class of society to which we 
for the most part belonged, some few years 
afterwards. Men are commonly governed, 
even in the opinions they shall entertain, 
by feeling and imagination. In this re- 
spect the fate of King Charles took strong 
hold on the mind. He was a tyrant ; he 
had no consideration for any human being, 
beyond the circle of his own family, and a 



^24 MAKDEVILLir. 

few personal connections to whom he was 
partial. Meanwhile, the decorum of his 
manners, the equability of his temper, his 
apparent mildness and resignation, totally 
free as they seemed from the least imputa- 
tion of cowardice, were qualities that ex- 
actly fitted him to be the hero of a cavalier 
or a woman. But the recollection of the 
last scenes of the life of this unfortunate 
monarch gradually faded from the mind ; 
and the successes of the republic, and stiil 
more the splendid character of Cromwel, 
as a statesman, and a firm assertor of the 
honour of his country, subsequently ba- 
lanced the feeling I speak of, and seemed 
hastening to obliterate that popular senti- 
ment of loyalty, of which a few continued 
to be proud. Cromwel appeared to be a 
monarch of Nature's own appointing ; no 
one that ever wore a crown, knew better 
how to speak the language, that became the 
representative of a mighty nation. It was 
at the time to which I allude, that Cowley 



MANDEVILLE. 225 

wrote his celebrated Preface, disclaiming 
all opposition to the government establish- 
ed. The death of Cromwel however 
in the flower of his age, which speedily 
followed, and perhaps some untoward cir- 
cumstances that occurred in the conten- 
tion of the representative system and the 
protectoral power, overturned to the very 
foundation that fabric of government which 
he had so ably begun to erect. 

There was not a boy in Winchester 
school that was not a royalist. Yet poli- 
tical party ran very high among us; and 
the contention between opposite sentiments 
was animated and fierce. The master was 
a presbyterian. The civic sentiments of 
the presbyterians are well known. They 
were the original stirrers of the war between 
the king and the parliament. They were 
indignant against the acts of arbitrary 
power and cruelty, by which the king and 
his ministers seemed to intend to break 
the spirit of their opponents. Their lead- 



226 MANDEVILLE. 

ers were deeply studied in the theory of 
government, and had firmly resolved to 
place the privileges of parliament, and the 
rights of the people, on an immoveable 
basis. In the early part of the war they 
ran a splendid career. But they were in 
the sequel outwitted by the independents. 
Cromwel and his cabal, with infinite dex- 
terity and address, finally engrossed all 
power in their own hands. 

From this time the purpose of the cava- 
liers and the Presbyterians became nomi- 
nally the same, the restoration of the mo- 
narchy in the family of Stuart. But the 
nearer they drew to a seeming agreement, 
the greater was their fundamental antipa- 
thy to each other ; at least it was so with- 
in the walls of our college. The cavaliers 
devoutly aspired to the object for which 
they had fought in the beginning, the esta- 
blishment of the monarchy, unshorn of its 
beams, and invested with all the preroga- 
tives of an eastern sultan. They scorned 

4 



MANDEVILLE. 227 

to take less than that, for which they had 
contended in the field, and bled on the 
scaffold. The Presbyterian on the other 
hand, true to his original principles, aimed 
at the establishment of a constitutional 
monarchy, without any other alteration, 
than what should consist in clearly defin- 
ing those public rights, which naturally 
grew out of the feudal system when ac- 
commodated to the changes that had arisen 
in the order of society, which had been 
with no equivocal voice asserted under 
the house of Lancaster, and the sentiments 
of which had been strongly inforced by the 
event of the Reformation. 

It is astonishing with what abhorrence 
and contempt the cavaliers at this time 
regarded their new allies. They charged 
them with being the first authors of all the 
calamities that followed, and held them as 
more criminal than the independents, who 
had merely stepped into the scene which 
the others had begun, and conducted it to 



228 MANDEVILLE. 

its natural conclusion. They spoke with 
the utmost asperity of those, who had first 
drawn their swords against the king, and 
then pretended to be his hiends. The 
tears which the Presbyterians affected to 
shed for the catastrophe of Charles, they 
compared to the tears of the crocodile, 
which are said to overflow wnth every 
demonstration of tenderness, while the heart 
of the animal is remorselessly bent upon 
cruelty and blood. The Presbyterians on 
the other hand, as no party is wanting in 
common-places for setting their own con- 
duct in the fairest point of view, regarded 
the cavaliers, as unnatural children to their 
mother-country, as men who, when every 
privilege to the inheritance of which they 
were born was trampled on, and when the 
sagest and gravest plans were put forward 
for preserving their birth-rights, yet abetted 
the tyrant, and drew their swords to put 
dowa the cause of freedom. Such men, 
they held, were a curse to their brethren, 



xMANDEVILLE. 5^29 

and by their own admission deserved to be 
slaves. In addition to this, they were per- 
suaded that the cause of popery and slavery 
were intioiately united. The cavaliers 
therefore were a party, who were willing 
to barter away that sacred freedonn in mat- 
ters of religion, for the assertion of which 
so many of their ancestors had died at the 
stake, — to return to ihe flesh-pots of Egypt, 
and tamely to receive " the mark of the 
beast in their foreheads.*' The Presbyteri- 
ans, according to tlieir own account, had 
embraced that middle and temperate course, 
which best became the character of English- 
men, steering alike clear of that self-aban- 
donment and sycophancy which marked 
the cavaliers, and the extreme, equally 
worthy to be abhorred, of republicanism. 
And they would easily have succeeded in 
their generous plan, had not the senseless 
and self'destroying measures pu)sued by 
the cavaliers afforded scope to the artifice 
and conspiracy of the independents. But 



230 MANDEVILLE. 

the wisdom of the measures of the Presby- 
terians, was not to be judged of by a mo- 
mentary failure : they had not indeed 
been crowned with success; but they had 
merited it. The system upon which they 
had acted was alone worthy of Englishmen, 
and must finally prevail. — It will presently 
be seen in what way these political discus- 
sions influenced my fate in Winchester 
College. 



MANDEVILLE. 231 



CHAPTER XI 



I NO sooner became a personage in this 
moving and busy scene, than among all 
my school-fellows one individual instantly 
fixed my attention and observation. His 
name was Clifford. To me, who had seen 
so little of the varieties of human charac- 
ter, he was an extraordinary creature in- 
deed. He seemed both to attract all eyes, 
and to win all hearts. There was some- 
thing in him perfectly fascinating and ir- 
resistible. His countenance was beautiful, 
and his figure was airy. The bloom of 
health revelled in his cheeks. There was 
a vivacity in his eye, and an inexpressible 



232 MANDEVILLIi:. 

and thrilling charm in the tone of his voice, 
that appeared more than human. His gaiety 
was never-ceasing and eternal ; and it was 
sustained by such lively fancies, such 
whimsical and unexpected sallies, and so 
inexhaustible a wit, that 

The air, a chartered libertine, was still ; 
And the mute wonder lurked in men's ears, 
To steal his sweet and honied sentences. 

For a short time envy itself was disarm- 
ed; and I, like the rest, admired a specta- 
cle, so new to me, and so beautiful in itself j 
that I was wrapt in self-oblivion, and pos- 
sessed no faculties, but an eye to remark 
his graces, and an ear to drink in every 
sound he uttered. The iihision lasted for 
days, and I returned to the feast with an 
appetite that seemed as if it would never 
be sated. 

But this was a brief intoxication. The 
solemn tone of my true character speedily 



MANDEVILLE. ^33 

retained to me ; and, though for a time I 
relished the vein of Clifford with a genuine 
zest, it was in the main too ahen from the 
settled temper of my mind, for it to be 
possible i bhould enjoy it long. It held 
me in an unnatural state of feeling; and 
my thoughts soon fell back to the train to 
which they had been accustomed. My 
rooted habits were those of reflection, 
silence, and reverie. To follow, as I had 
done at first, th^ brilliant sparklings of 
Clifford's wit, had an effect upon me simi- 
lar to that produced by the rattling pro- 
gress of a vehicle at full speed. It made my 
brain giddy, and my head ache, with its vio- 
lence. And, when I looked back upon the 
pleasure I had for a time enjoyed, I scorned 
or imagined I scorned, the cause that pro- 
duced it. Was man made for no higher a 
purpose, than to laugh, be amused, and 
wonder at the jugglings and dexterities of 
another's wit? — I did Clifford injustice. 
His wit was rational ; and his most sportive 



234 MANDEVILLE, 

sallies were worthy to abide the test of 
examination, and were pregnant with dis- 
crimination and good sense. 

I have called the feelings, which thus at 
second thoughts arose in my mind, by the 
name of envy. The root of my sentiment 
however was a sort of moral disapprobation. 
I considered Clifford as a kind of mounte- 
bank, debauching the character of his 
equals, and destroying that sobriety and 
concentration of soul, without which there 
can be no considerable virtue. I looked 
into myself, and was conceited enough to 
imagine, that I was a better sample of our 
general nature than he. I felt therefore, 
that much false judgment was made, and 
much injustice committed. I sat silent 
and obscure in my nook, and was silly 
enough to be angry, that the common route 
of my schoolfellows crowded round Clif- 
ford, and neglected me. W any one de- 
sired to be amused, to whom did he ever 
think of resorting to gratify that desire. 



MANDEVILLE. ^35 

but to ClifFord ? If any one wished to be 
directed in his choice of amusements, or to 
obtain a just solution of any of those knotty 
points that are the subject of a school-boy's 
noisy controversies, still ClifFord was the 
only person that was thought of. If the 
business was to get some crabbed passage 
in a lesson explained, or even to have an 
exercise performed for some boy who was 
too lazy or too dull to achieve it himself, 
ClifFord was sure to be the resource and 
the oracle. The talents of Clifford were 
equally adapted for every thing that was 
required of him ; and his good-nature and 
kindness did not fall short of his talents. 
His wit was sportive and good-humoured ; 
and it was an unknown thing for him wil- 
lingly to give pain to a human creature. 

There was another boy in the school, 

whose name was Mallison. He was very 

unlike Clifford, and yet he was perpetual- 

lly found in his train. He was of a dark, 

i sallow complexion. It was Cliftbrd*s foible 



9.3G MANDEVILLE. 

to be too fond ofamusiiig others and him- 
self, and to say things surprising and un- 
expected, yet always, as 1 have observed, 
with the most innocent intentions, and 
without the most distant thought of wound- 
ing or humbhng another. Mallison, on 
the other hand, Imd a singular gratification 
in seeing his fellows writhe with mental 
pain. His conduct was something like 
what 1 have heard related of a village-sa- 
tirist, who in reading the Whole Duty of 
Man, found means to turn that upright 
and honourable work into a collection of 
libels, by writing in the margin of the dif- 
ferent vices, prodigality, avarice, extortion, 
cruelty, lying, lewdness, which the author 
innocently declaims against, the names of 
different persons, his neighbours and fel- 
low-parishioners. Just so, Mallison pos- 
sessed the art to turn the careless and 
good-humoured effusions of Clifford into 
lampoons, and the devilish chymistry, from 
honey itself to extract a poison. — I will 
give some instances of this, 



MANDEVILLE. 237 

Clifford, though desccMided of a noble 
family, was immediately of a very im- 
poverished branch of that family. The 
marriage of his father and mother was entire- 
ly a mirria^e of love. She had been extreme- 
ly beautiful ; but she brought no portion 
to her hus:-and. He had entered a volun- 
teer into the king's service at tue beginning 
of ti.e civil wars, and was among the slain 
in the first batlle, of Kdgehill near Keinton 
iji Warwickshire. His widow was left 
with this (>ne son, totally destitute of pro- 
vision, either for his education, or her own 
subsistence. Sucli was her affection for 
her husband, and her tender regard for this 
his only child, that she could never be pre- 
vailed upon again to enter into the ties of 
wedlock. In more prosperous times, no 
doubt, some stipend would have been as- 
signed for the widow and child of a gentle- 
man-adventurer, who had fallen fighting 
for his king. But amidst the public dis- 
asters of her country, she had been much 



238 MANDEVILLE. 

overlooked ; and almost the only thing 
done for her, was the obtaining a nomina- 
tion for her son upon the foundation of 
Winchester College. 

The situation therefore of this wonder 
and ornament of our establishment, was 
what would have been vubarlv lelt as de- 
pressing. But it was not so to Clifford. 
He was in the midst of the sons of noble- 
men, and wealthy knights and franklins. 
His prospects and his expectations for the 
years of maturity and manhood, were no- 
thing. But his soul was elastic; and the 
spring that kept all his thoughts in activity 
and motion, was always working, and 
never went down. How did he maintain 
this incessant gaiety and carelessness ? 
Not as a school-boy might be expected to 
do, by the oblivious draught which the 
sports of that period so readily supply. 
No, he looked the enemy in the face, and 
threw out a bold defiance to his host of 
terrors. He wantoned with sorrow, and 



^MANDEVILLE. 239 

laughed at those things which break the 
hearts of many. 

** Well ;'* he would say ; *' I am des- 
tined to be poor. And what is poverty ? As 
Jong as my blood flows cheerily in my veins, 
and a light heart dimples in my cheeks, I 
shall be the truly enviable man. I know, 
some vv^ill tell me, riches are the genuine 
means of independence and liberty. But 
it is all a cheat. The rich man is the only 
slave. He cannot move without scores of 
menials to attend him. He cannot dine 
without twenty dishes before him. He 
cannot sleep, but on thrice-driven beds of 
down, 

Under fringed canopies of costly state. 
And lulled with sounds of sweetest melody. 

He calls himself the master of all these, 
and he is the slave of all. He cannot go 
forth, and take the air, until his servants 
please. He is at the men^y even of his 
horses. If one of them meets with an ac- 



240 MANDEVILLE. 

cidcnt, or is taken sick, the rich man is im- 
mediately a prisoner, and at best must 
wait till a relay of fresh horses is procured. 
Upon what an accumulatisn of circum- 
stances does the tranquillity of every day 
of his life depend ! How is every climate 
under Heaven searched and put under con- 
tribution, before his slightest meal can be 
supplied ! And, if the minutest of these 
circumstances goes wrong, how is your 
fancied god immediately turned into a 
wretch ! How does he fret and frown, 
and how in his peace of mind puffed away 
by the weakest breeze ! Take my word 
for it, the rich man is the veriest slave 
that lives. 

*' But does nature require all these things ? 
No : a vvholsome crust of bread, and water 
from the spring, give the freest health, and 
the most elastic mind. He is the truly 
independent man, that has the fewest 
wants. He fears no change of fortune, 
has no anxieties about the sufficiency of 



MANDFVILLE, 241 

his income, the honesty of his dependents, 
the strength of his locks and chests, the 
security of goldsmiths, the uncertainty of 
the elements, or the revolution of empires. 
Every state and clime will supply him with 
what he needs. Nor is he the slave of any 
habits or indulgencies. What he had to- 
day, he can dispense with to-morrow. He 
can wake when others sleep, and eat at 
whatever hour that the occasion offers to 
him. He can rest as well in a cabin as a 
palace, and as soundly, covered with his 
cloke on the naked earth, as on beds of 
sattin, and under canopies of velvet. 

" This man is the only free man. He 
starts from his flinty couch, and dresses 
himself. No ceremony more ; and he is 
ready to perform whatever his mind impels 
him to do. He does not wait, till the train 
is ready that is to accompany his march. 
He is not subservient to any man's hu- 
mour and caprice, and is not obliged to 
calculate the ability or convenience of his 

VOL. I. L 



242 MANDEVILLE. 

dependents, two conditions, from neither 
of which the lordliest despot is exempt. 
His legs are his footmen ; and his arms are 
ever ready and prompt to perform all he 
wishes. His eyes are his avant couriers^ 
and make plain the road for him wherever 
he desires to go. Fancy is his charioteer ; 
and health, the best physician, maintains 
the evenness of his spirits through every 
stage of his journey. Appetite is his cook ; 
and thirst his butler.. Of this miscellaneous 
houshold he is thoroughly master, and has 
all his passions under subjection. 

" What a state is that of mortal man in 
every civilized climate ! The earth sup- 
plies us freely with her productions, and 
industry multiplies them. These produc- 
tions are then divided among the inhabi- 
tants of the earth. But how divided? One 
man gets the share of ten thousand, which 
he wastes and dissipates in thoughtless 
profusion, as far as he can, and then gives 
away the remainder with niggard hand, to 



MANDEVILLE. 243 

the pining and anxious wretches to whom 
the whole was indebted for existence. I 
have heard it said. If the rich man could 
but know the miseries, the agonies of pain, 
the anguish of heart, and the dreadful 
paroxysms of despair, that are going on, 
perhaps in the next poor street to that which 
his lordly palace occupies, he would find 
but little relish in his dainties. But I wish 
that were the worst of it. He is not only 
the neighbour of misery; but he is the 
author of innumerable instances of it. 
Every costly morsel that he eats, is mixed 
with the tears and the curses of the poor by 
whose labours it was procured. What 
right have you to the share of ten thou- 
sand ? Would I could muster up and 
marshal the legion, by whose oppression 
you are so delicately fed ! 

If every just man, that now pines with want, 
Had but a moderate and beseeming share 
Of that which lewdly-pampered luxury 
Now heaps upon some few with vast excess, 



244 MANDEVILLE. 

Nature's full blessings would be well dispensed 

In unsuperfluous, even proportion, 

And she no whit incumbered with her store. 

For my part I am determined always to 
live so, that 

ny^tft No widow's curse cater a dish of mine ; 
^ '' I'll drink no tears of orphans in my wine. 

*' And do you think my enjoyments will 
be the fewer for that ? How senseless a 
distinction is that which the world has 
agreed to express by the word, property ! 
When we go to an inn, do we enjoy our- 
selves the less, because the walls were not 
raised by our ancestors, and we are no one 
of us the landlords of the house? On the 
contrary, we regard the landlord as a la- 
borious drudge, overwhelmed with business 
and fatigue, that we may enjoy ourselves 
at our ease. The landlord it is true he is ; 
but 1, his guest, am the master of the house. 
Can any truth be more self-evident, than 



MANDEVILLE. 245 

that he that most perfectly enjoys a thing, 
is the real possessor? Well then ; if I am 
the guest of some noble lord, the proprietor, 
as it is called, of a magnificent mansion, 
who is the true possessor of the luxuries 
that offer themselves to my acceptance? 
Why I, the occupier, or the consumer. His 
lordship is no more to me, than the land- 
lord of an inn, the patentee of a play-house, 
or the tenant on lease of a set of apartments 
for concerts, balls, and masquerades. His 
is the labouring oar; his business it is to 
provide whatever may give me pleasure; 
his is all the care, theanxiety and foresight; 
that I may enjoy the whole without 
troubling myself about the matter. 

But I do not chuse to be his guest. I 
like simple pleasures, better than luxurious 
ones ; and I know that the landlord who 
does not make me out a bill, may put an 
end to my visit, not when I please, but 
when he pleases. My lord's house is 
completely decorated with costly furniture, 



246 MANDEVILLE. 

and the galleries are adorned with land- 
scapes, history-pieces and statues. I Hke 
a plainer furniture better, and feel more at 
my ease with it. My taste is so un in- 
structed, that I have more pleasure from 
a landscape of Nature's painting, than even 
from those of Rubens or Claude. Fair 
weather is the joy of my soul ; when the 
sun bursts out in all its splendour, and 
flings its radiance on the neighbouring hills, 
my mind is tuned to rapture; and my 
bosom is sweetly soothed, by the rosy 
dashes of light, which so beautifully streak 
the clouds in a summer's evening. When 
I am lost in the leafy maze of trees in the 
New Forest, I do not envy a minister of 
state in the midst of his crowded levee. 
And my heart decisively prefers to all the 
brilliancy of a ball room, a serene ramble 
in a fine night, with thousands of stars 
sparkling over my head, that by my rule I 
look upon as part of my possessions, not 
without some indignation at the tasteless- 



MANDEVILLE. 24? 

ness of mankind, who run the race of life 
without once adverting to its real enjoy- 
ments. * 

" Another cursed thing which rises from 
this inexhaustible source of evils, called 
wealth, is that every man thrives by the 
ruin of another, and that death, which 
sweeps away all of us in our turn, and is 
in contemplation one of the main stimu- 
lants to love, and in approach one of the 
greatest incitements to sympathy, is chang- 
ed into an object of aspiration, and an oc- 
casion of joy. Thank God, I am not the 
son of a wealthy father ! If I were, I be- 
lieve I should abhor my own soul every 
morning that I rose. My father fell in the 
battles of his king ; but my mother still 
lives; and long and peaceful may her days 
be upon earth ! Filial affection is one 
of the purest of all sentiments ; and my 



♦ Guardian, No. 



248 MANDEVILLE. 

father was one of the noblest creatures, 
that God ever made to beautify his crea- 
tion withal. But, if he were living, and 
possessed ten thousand a-year, how am I 
sure, that, as I grew up, and became 
twenty, thirty, forty years of age, I should 
not wickedly think that he had enjoyed 
his property long enough, and that it was 
time my turn was come? For ten thou- 
sand worlds, I would not connect any 
source of joy, or find any balance of good 
with the sacred sorrows of a father's death- 
bed! Oh, how treacherous is the human 
soul, and how much selfishness insidiously 
mingles itself with our kindest and most 
generous feelings! And, if such were my 
lot once, I must expect thereafter, that the 
tables would be turned, and that, when 
stooping in the vale of years, the lingering 
of my decay would be looked on askance 
with an impatient eye ! Though I am a 
boy^ 1 can put myself forward in fancy into 
future time, and imagine that I have that 



MANrVEVILLEL,/ 249 

solace of human vicissitudes, a child of my 
love. And shall I mix that solace, with 
believing that my child grudges me those 
added years that the bounty of nature gives, 
and that he is in heart and inclination the 
murderer of the parent that begot him? 
Oh, how sacred and how lovelv-are the 
charities of kindred and blood, to the 
humble sons of Nature ! 

" But, of ail the evils with which a 
human being can be afflicted, not being 
born to wealth, I will not involve myself 
in the guilt and meanness of pursuing it. 
What, shall I devote my life to trade, and 
\arter away rny honesty and my soul for 
the turning a penny ? Shall I decry the 
thing I want to buy, and praise the thing 
I want to sell? Shall my whole soul be 
devoured with the anxieties of gain, and 
my precious hours of solitude be devoted 
to calculation and computing? And for 
what? That, when all the finer sensibilities 
of my nature have evaporated, and there is 
L 2 



250 MANDEVILLE. 

nothing left of heart within me, but what is 
as dry and impenetrable as an Egyptian 
mummy, then truly I may sit down, and 
enjoy myself. 

'* But there is another and genteeler re- 
cipe, I have been told, for turning a poor 
man into a rich one ; and that is, by worm- 
ing himself into the affections of the weal- 
thy and the great. Oh, this is admirable 
indeed \ The supple expectant at the 
board of a great man, is the slave of a slave, 
and is even a much more wretched thing 
than his master. His eyes, and his very 
thoughts, are not his own, and are wholly 
devoted to a gilded, nauseous, ill-odoured 
idol. How his hopes and fears rise and 
fall with the insulting good and ill humour 
of the animal he worships ! How omni- 
potently he must hate the being he affects 
to reverence and value ! 

" For, what is this wealth and rank, that 
the world agrees so obsequiously to bow 
down to ? Fortune distributes her favours 



MANDEVILLET. Q^Sl 

blindly. Most estates have their begin- 
nings in griping commerce, or, what is in- 
finitely worse, in the confiscation and ruin 
of thousands, that their possessions, freight- 
ed with the curses of those who are stripped 
of them and turned out to beggary, may be 
conferred on some courtier, as worthless as 
he is servile. The king bestows nobility; 
he is the fountain of honour. And, I take 
it for granted, he means well : but his fa- 
vours are dispensed here and there, not as 
he would choose, but by the breath of cabal 
and the basest intrigue. There is but one 
true nobility, and that is bestowed by the 
Almighty ruler of the universe. It has its 
seat in the soul. It is that inspiration, 
that makes the generous man, the inventor 
of arts, the legislator of the mind, the 
spirit formed t€ act greatly on the theatre 
of the world, and the poet who records the 
deeds of such spirits. Put one of God's 
nobility by the side of one of the king's : 
who does not laugh at the comparison? 



^52 MANDEVILLE. 

They are not of the same class of beings, 
scarcely belong to a common nature. 
Turn the former out naked to the world ! 
His worth is intrinsic ; his qualities are 
such as must excite reverence, wherever 
there is sense to perceive, or discernment 
to judge of such qualities. The king 
cannot bestow this : it cannot come down 
to a man by hereditary succession : it de- 
scends from Heaven alone/* 

I feel, while I am putting down these 
discourses of my school-fellow, how much 
injustice I am doing him. I am aware 
that, as they stand upon paper, they will 
read vapid and tedious. I must observe 
here, as ^Eschines did, when he recited to 
a circle of auditors the speech of Demos- 
thenes that had procured his own banish- 
ment, '* What a piece of work you would 
have thought it, if you had heard it from 
his own lips!" So these discourses of 
Clifford, while he spoke them, appeared 
almost divine. He charmed, as it were. 



MANDETILLE. 253 

our very souls out of our bodies, and might 
have led us through the world. It was like 
what is fabled of Orpheus ; mute things 
seemed to have ears ; and you would have 
expected the very beasts of prey to lay 
down their savage natures, and obey him. 
There was something in the very nature of 
his sentiments, calculated to waken a re- 
sponsive chord in every human bosom ; 
and the melody of his voice, and the 
sportive gaiety with which he uttered them, 
made them altogether irresistible. Set down 
in cold lines and paragraphs, they may 
appear long-winded and pedantic ; they 
may be judged beyond the feelings of his 
age; but, if ever tiiere was a creature void 
of affectation and the desire to shine, Clif- 
ford was that creature. He talked like 
one inspired. He spoke, because he could 
not help it, and to give vent to his tuli 
bosom. And his discourses were always 
so well timed, so aptly rose out of the 
occasion in hand, and were so animated 



^54 MANDEVILLE. 

and pithy, that every one longed for the 
occasion, and were delighted to listen to 
the magic of his tongue. 

It was wonderful the effect that this 
system of thinking wrought upon the 
scholars of Winchester school. Wealth in 
their eyes became dross ; and instead of 
considering it, as others do, as a ground 
for vanity and arrogance, those who had 
the greatest pretensions to it became asham- 
ed of them. I have heard that in other 
schools wealth and rank are very much 
overlooked, and that a sort of golden age 
of levelling and equality prevails. But 
with us it went one step farther. The 
captain among us boasted of his poverty^ 
and was proud that he was born to nothing. 
And, with that spirit of imitation so re- 
markable among human creatures, poverty 
accordingly became the fashion ; and those 
among us who were born to other expec- 
tations, pined for this blessed inheritance, 
and held that they carried about them a 



MANDEVILLE. Q55 

brand of slavery. This extraordinary course 
of sentiment was the more easily introdu- 
ced among school-boys ; for school-boys 
have not yet learned the bitter evils which 
poverty sometimes introduces. 

I, I alone, felt no pleasure, and refused 
to feel pleasure from the discourses of 
Clifford. In the first place, I was strongly 
impressed with the notion of their fallacy. 
How 1 came in my own mind to reasort 
differently from my comrades I know not ; 
but such was the fact. I looked upon 
Clifford as an enchanter, who hurled 

His dazzling spells into the spungy air. 

Of power to cheat the eye with blear illusion, 

And give it false presentments. 

I confessed to myself that wealth was preg- 
nant with mischief, both to the possessor, 
and to society in general. But 1 did not 
look upon poverty with the same eyes 
that Clifford did, I saw that man was 



9,56 MANDEVILLE. 

not formed like the animals, to whom un- 
cultivated nature supplies every want. Man 
is not, like them, a stationary creature, as 
perfect in one generation as in all that are 
to succeed, but is capable of infinite im- 
provements. He then, that is so adapted 
to receive and engender arts and sciences, 
to adorn the earth with the works of his 
skill, to scan the heavens, and penetrate 
into the abysses of his own nature, ought 
not to be exposed to unmiiigable poverty. 
In the solitudes of Mandeville House, and 
in my propensity to reveries, I had thought 
more of the condition of human beings, 
than school-boys usually do. I saw that 
in civilized st)ciety, the only state that 
appeared to me worthy of man, he could 
not subsist but upon the fruits of others' 
industry or of his own, and that the very 
attempt to supply himselfj subjected him 
in various ways to the caprice of his fellow- 
creatures, and was in various ways pre- 
carious. I saw that the poor man was 



MANDRVILLE. 25? 

strangely pent up and fettered in his ex- 
ertions, whether their purpose might be to 
unfold the treasury of intellect in the soli- 
tude of his closet, or to collect facts and 
phenomena by wandering on the face of 
the earth. I saw that, when he suffered 
himself to contract the dearer ties of hus- 
band and father, poverty and an uncertain 
subsistence might depress his heart, and 
corrode his vitals. I saw that, if riches 
made a man a slave, entire poverty did the 
same, and perhaps more effectually. It is 
perhaps within the compass of possibility 
for a rich man to be free (though almost as 
hardly, as for " a camel to pass through 
the eye of a needle*') ; but the poor man 
must always wear the marks of his bolts 
about him, and drag at every step a heavier 
and more intolerable chain. 1 saw that 
poverty was environed on all sides with 
temptations, urging and impelling a man, 
to sell his soul, to sacrifice his integrity, 
to debase the clearness of his spirit, and to 



MANDEVILLE, 

become the bond slave of a thousand 
vices. 

All this I knew : but I was not like 
Cliftord. I could not put my soul into 
my tongue, and witch all hearers with my 
eloquence. Envious nature had denied to 
me this privilege. But I felt my deficiency 
with fierce and burning impatience. Why 
should this youth steal away the souls of 
his companions with glozing words, and I 
have no tongue to check his mistakes, and 
expose his sophistries ? Why should error 
thus intrepidly boU forth its apophthegms, 
and I sit timidly in my corner, unable to 
utter the truths that were fermenting in 
my bosom ? It appeared to me that the 
system of the universe was in fault, and 
that the sacred cause of truth was iniqui- 
tously and unfairly dealt by. Jealousy 
thus, day by day, established its empire 
in my bosom ; and Clifford was the male- 
ficent wizard by whom I was hag- ridden, and 
the night-mare, under whose weight I lay 
at the last gasp of existence. 



MANDEVILLE. 259 

Sure I was (no matter how erroneous 
my opinion), in the secret calculations and 
combinings of my own thoughts, that my 
merits fully balanced the merits of Clifford, 
and that, weighed with the beam of a just 
estimation, my scale would prove the 
heavier. He that spends his days in soli- 
tude, and is seldom corrected in his deter- 
minations by the collision of another, has 
almost always an overweening opinion of 
himself. Clifford and I were two lumi- 
naries that could never shine in the same 
sphere ; but I could not bear the idea of 
being under a perpetual eclipse, and that 
they who admired my competitor, should 
never turn a glance of passing approbation 
upon me. 

This was rendered inexpressibly worse 
to me by the mischief-making temper of 
Maliison. The greatest gratification, as I 
have said, of this seemingly unnatural 
being lay in giving pain to another. The 
coruscations of Clifford's wit were a harm- 



260 MANDEVILLE. 

less lightning playing in an evening sky ; 
but Mallison's unremitted aim was to fur- 
nish the bolt, that should succeed as sure- 
ly, as the report follows upon the flash. It 
fell to his office, to turn all Clifford's inno- 
cent sallies into personal satire. With the 
acuteness that malice perhaps always gives, 
he saw that I was the most sensitive lad 
in the school, upon whom his spurts of ill 
humour would be least in danger to be 
wasted. It happened, that the estate to 
which I was heir, was perhaps larger than 
that which any other youth in the esta- 
blishment was entitled to look to. God 
knows, I thought but little upon this. But 
there was a gravity in my carriage, a sort 
of inflexible sadness of gesture and tone, 
which Mallison wickedly perverted into 
the crime of being purse-proud. If my 
manner was somewhat cold, reserved and 
uncommunicative before, it certainly did 
not lose any of these defects under the 
smart of his lashes. There is something in 



MAND£VILLE. 261 

the temper of the unreflecting and grosser 
crowd, that always leads them ambitious- 
ly to join in a hunting of this sort. Un- 
der the tutoring of Mallison, they voted 
me di prig\ 2ifTump, 2ifogram^ and qualified 
me with all the disparaging epithets, that a 
familiaracquaintance with the vulgar tongue 
could supply to the glibness of their eager 
speech. Mallison barbed all these with 
the appellation of Presbyterian. To his 
malicious fancy there was an odd discord- 
ance, between the multiplied manors that 
were to descend to me, the remnant of a 
thousand dazzling exploits and achievements 
of chivalry, and the melancholy and mourn- 
ful carriage of the adherents of this cele- 
brated sect. He would contrast, with im- 
pressive strokes of description, the advan- 
tageous air, and frank and commanding 
language of the preux chevaliers that had 
gone before me, on the one hand, with the 
ambitious plainness, the demure and nasal 
twang, the fixed eye, and the drawling yea 



262 MANDEVILLE. 

and nay^ of the persons to the inheritance 
of whose tenets I was bred. 

It may be imagined with what writhings 
and contortions of soul I stood all these 
attacks. Figure to yourself a being, just 
escaped from the magnificent and moss- 
grown ruins of Mandeville House, from a 
life of silence and reverie, and now thrown 
among all the rude clatter and gabble of 
these unmannerly assaults ! In the whole 
course of my former life I had never been 
spoken to familiarly by any human crea- 
ture, and certainly had never left pain from 
the familiarities of any one, except of the 
venerable Hilkiah. Now I was pointed 
and sneered at, as I passed. A significant 
winking of the eye, or a contemptuous 
shooting of the lip, the various mows and 
gibes of a school-boy's prolific and wanton 
malice, pursued me. The consciousness 
of this withered my heart, and gave an un- 
graciousness and constraint to all my mo- 
tions. What was I? Why was I thus 



MANDEVILLE. 263 

formed ? And by what perverse and malig- 
nant destiny was I thrown on so intoler- 
able a scene ? I had stood out to my own 
apprehension, as a being choicely gallant 
and great ; in the elation of my heart I had 
almost been ready to exclaim like the 
great Roman orator, " Oh, fortunate gene- 
ration of Englishmen, whose lot it has been 
to have me born your contemporary T' 
And here, within the walls of Winchester 
College, I was treated as nothing, a flout- 
ing stock and a make-game, a monstrous 
and abortive birth, created for no other end 
than to be the scoff of my fellows, their 
sport, and their joy, when they stood in 
need of an object to spend their brutal and 
unthinking mirth upon. 

Tremendous were the convulsions and 
earthquakes, which these trials produced 
in my bosom. Sometimes I shut myself 
up in the circle of my own thoughts, and 
scorned to mingle with, or to remark, the 
empty fools who purposed to humble me 



264 MANDEVILLE. 

with their contempt. My brow contracted 
a scowl ; my soul embosomed a ferocity; 
and in my own determined spirit I dug a 
broad and a deep foss, and threw up an 
intrenchment, to cut me off from creatures 
wearing the human form, who seemed to 
me unworthy of my love, beneath my 
hatred, and to whom it was an error and a 
weakness to extend even my notice. 

But this was an effort and struggle, per- 
haps beyond the nature of man, certainly 
beyond the strength of a school-boy. At 
other times T came down from my preca- 
rious elevation. I resolved to assert my- 
self, and to put my opponents to route. It 
was in vain that 1 endeavoured to do this 
by words ; nature, as I have said, denied 
me this faculty. There is another resource, 
well understood among the retainers of an 
academic life. Words, few, but resolule, 
were to be inforced by all that corporal 
confutation and rebuke, which the unaid- 
ed and imperfect strength of a stripling's 

10 



MANDliriLLE. 265 

arm can inflict. I was defeated ; I was 
conqueror by turns. By practice my skill 
became more useful to its master, more for- 
midable to the adversary. On such occa- 
sions I delighted in the sight of blood. 
Whether it flowed from the person of my 
competitor or from my own, in the one case 
no less than the other, it seemed to lighten 
and dilute the impure and substantial fluid 
that weighed on my heart. I gained some, 
but an im})ertect relief to the injustice I 
felt. Few things in the scholastic circle 
obtain for their possessor more respect, than 
courage and power evinced in this species 
of contention. My equals became more 
cautious in provoking me to this retalia- 
tion. Even those of higher standing be- 
gan to entertain a more tolerable opinion of 
me, and mechanically to refrain from those 
aggressions, which they saw I so well knew 
how to repress and to punish in such as 
were in any degree my match. 

But what a situation was this for me, for 

VOL. I. M 



9>6G MANDEVILLE. 

the solitary wanderer of the bleak and ma- 
jestic domains of Mandeville House ? I 
disdained the position in which I stood. 
As I have just said, the subduing of an op- 
ponent gave relief to the depression under 
which my spirit laboured. But this was 
but momentary. I purchased a constrain- 
ed and half-felt respect. But by what 
means ? Not by any qualities I had been 
accustomed to honour : but by the mere 
force of muscles and sinews, by that in 
which the most brutal rustic, nay the very 
beasts of the forest, might overmatch me. 
When I saw myself and my competitor, 
with arms and bosom bare, prepared for 
the disgraceful contest, what feelings of dis- 
gust and loathsomeness would rise in my 
soul ! Hot tears, in spite of pride, not tears 
of cowardice, but of impatient indignation, 
would sometimes swell to my eyes. But I 
dashed them away with scorn, and strung 
myself for the task which I had not the li- 
berty to avoid. 



MANDEVILLE. 26? 

Habits of solitude had given me a pecu- 
liar turn. I liad no respect for the limbs 
and members of my body, and viewed them 
but as an incumbrance upon the activity 
of my spirit. They were mine, not me. 
My arm was but an implement and a tool, 
of the same nature as a hooked stick, and of 
no value but for the commmission in which 
it w^as employed. My creed was akin to 
that of Anaxarchus, of whom it is related 
that one of the Grecian tyrants having or- 
dered him to be pounded in a mortar, he 
cried out under the execution, " Beat on, 
tyrant ! Thou hast no power but on the 
case of Anaxarchus ; himself thou canst not 
hurt:** — though I will not boast that I 
could have carried the principle of the phi- 
losopher to the same extent, as my master. 
Thinking thus, I detested the necessity I 
lay under, of being the captive of my body, 
and that by this means the soul of Mande- 
yille, tuat free spirit that could wander un- 
fettered from pole to pole, should be liable 



Q^6S MANDEVILLE, 

to the dominion of others. The injuries 
of my body therefore seemed to be but the 
mark of my slavery ; and its triumphs af- 
forded me no consolation. 

Guided by these principles, I bitterly 
felt that the walls of our college were not 
my home. The scene in which I was 
placed, was in utter discordance with the 
character of my spirit : And the conscious- 
ness of this, daily increased in me that con- 
centrated and misanthropical spirit, which 
to a certain degree had subsisted within 
me from the earliest period of my remem- 
brance. 

<■ I 



MANDEVILLE. £69 



CHAPTER XII. 



Clifford was a royalist to the core, and 
would often talk affectingly, yet cheerily, 
of the unfortunate Charles. Loyalty had 
been one of the lessons instilled into him 
from his cradle ; and the tenderness of his 
heart would have led him to sympathize 
with the adversities of this victim, if he had 
not been a king, — and a prince, according 
to his creed, that from his birthright, and 
for his virtues, all Englishmen were bound 
to defend to the last drop of their blood. 
As he talked, gaily, but eloquently, on this 
favourite topic, a tear would sometimes start 



270 MANDEVILLE. 

into bis eye, which he dashed away, and 
smiled as he did it, in such a sort, 

As if he mocked himself, and scorned his spirit, 
That could be moved to weep at any thing. 

Clifford had been brought up in reveren- 
tial ideas of kingship and prerogative, and 
with a haired of republicanism. He ad- 
mired the principles of chivalry, and those 
high notions of honour and generous fidelity 
which grew out of these principles. He 
was the creature of love and the affections. 
The splendid descriptions he had met with 
of tilts and tournaments caught hold of his 
fancy ; and the various expeditions on re- 
cord, in which the nobility and gentry of 
different countries associated themselves, to 
put down oppression, or to rescue the 
country and tomb of Christ from the hands 
of the Infidels, were his amusement and his 
joy. All this inspired him with a conge- 
nial relish for whatever was grave, solemn 



MANDEVILLE. 271 

and magnificent, either in the rites of re» 
ligion, or the conduct of civil affairs, and a 
boundless contempt for the cold and unat- 
tractive simplicity and nakedness, whi:ch 
had been patronized and diffused by the 
adversaries of the late unfortunate monarch. 

His talk of this sort, as I have already ob- 
served in another case, was without preme- 
ditation and formality, in starts and effusions 
of the soul, bursting from liim as the occa- 
sion prompted. And, when he detected 
himself in a vein of this sort, he would turn 
away immediately from the thought, crying 
out, " But what am I talking of? I, who am 
but a school-boy ? Older and abler heads 
than mine have laboured, by day and by 
night, in season and out of season, to amend 
these things, and see what it has all come 
to!" 

At another time he would comment on 
his own thoughts in a different fashion, and 
exclaim, " Well, well, the world will have 
its way J and what can I do? I am born in* 



t7^ MANDEVILLE. 

deed in an iron age, and have been called 
on to witness, or to hear of, a multitude of 
crimes : but for all that I will not play the 
weeping philosopher. What I cannot alter, 
I will learn to endure. I have but one life, 
and that, as far as I can without injury to 
others, 1 will make a happy one. When a 
few years have passed over my head, I shall 
never again be a boy. I shall but once be 
a man; and when that time comes, I will 
Wy to play a man's part in the world. I 
cannot have an universe made on purpose 
for me • so I will even make the best of 
that upon which fortune has thrown me. 
Then, hey, boys for a game at foot-ball 1" 

Such was the state of things among us, 
when an accident occurred to me, the im- 
pression of which will never be effaced 
from my mind. Among the other scholars 
at Winchester school, we had with us the 
eldest son of Sir William Waller, the fa- 
mous parliamentary general. Sir William, 
wlien he had been dismissed from his com- 



MANDEVILLE, 273 

mand by the parliament as a Presbyterian, 
received as the reward of his services the 
Castle of Winchester with its appurtenances, 
upon v^'hich he had some claims on the 
score of family alliance. This of course 
rendered him a great man among us : and 
it is well known that the brilliancy of his 
services in one period of the war, gained 
him with his party the familiar appella- 
tion of William the Conqueror. Nicknames 
at all times furnish a favourite sport to 
school-boys ; and as young Waller was in- 
disputably, as far as the rank and station of 
his father was concerned, the most eminent 
of the Presbyterian boys of Winchester Col- 
lege, his fellow-pupils, by general consent, 
fastened upon him in raillery and contempt 
the appellation which his father had earned 
by his exploits. It somehow happened 
that I contracted a particular familiarity 
with this boy. I can'scarcely now account 
for the selection I made. My native taste, 
as I have already said, would have led me 
M 2 



274 MANDEVILLE. 

to Clifford. But such are the caprices of 
human intercourse ! 

Qifford was beautiful and prepossessing. 
Nothing could exceed the sweetness of his 
disposition, or the warmth of his heart. 
Yet I shrunk from Clifford, and attached 
myself to Waller. The solution of this, lies 
in what I have already delineated of my 
character. I was by nature solitary. There- 
fore Waller suited me, and Clifford did not. 
Waller was a lad of diminutive stature, 
and his complexion was a deadly pale. 
His eye sometimes glistened ; but not with 
kindness. He knew not what it was to 
love any creature but himself; the occa- 
sional, rarely occurring, lighting up of his 
looks, was from conceit, the triumph, when 
such triumph fell to his share, of an abor- 
tive specimen of manhood over his happier 
fellows. To finish his portrait, he was in 
some degree, though not violently, deform- 
ed in his person. Such was the JVilliani 
the Conqueror of Winchester College ! 



MANDEVILLE. 275 

It was disdain, and the unsociableness of 
my nature, that dictated this choice. I 
could not unbosom my thoughts ; I could 
not come into contact with another being 
of the same species as myself. Once 1 had 
done so, and yet but imperfectly, with a 
creature of another sex, my sister. But in 
the groupes and the busy scenes of Win- 
chester school I felt that this was impossi- 
ble. Clifford, as I have said, was the sub- 
ject of my first and my sincerest admira- 
tion ; but I could not court him. All beings 
were to me tools that I was to make use of, 
or foes whose destiny it seemed to be to 
thwart my purposes, or to subvert my tran- 
quillity. Yes ; I could court, and accom- 
modate myself to the foibles of another, but 
not as to an equal. At the time that I descend- 
ed lo him, I must feel that it was the sport 
of my humour, not a necessity to which my 
inferiority impelled me. In a word, pride, 
a self-centred and untameable pride, was 
the inseparable concomitant of all my ac- 
tions. 



276 MANDEVILLE. 

It was this feature of my nature, that 
drove me to reject Clifford, and any other 
of the talented and high-minded pupils of 
Winchester College, and to chuse Waller. 
I chose him, because my sullen nature 
would not admit of a friend. I could 
have him by my side, when I did not 
prefer to be alone, and could say to him 
just what I pleased, and no more. There 
was no danger in him of any sally of the 
mind, any spark of an electrical nature be- 
ing struck out, that should set the whole 
man in a blaze. My sobriety, and the so- 
litude of my soul were perfect. I had a 
figure pacing step by step along with me, 
with which I could amuse myself as I 
pleased, without losing the advantage, as 
to every material point, of being totally 
alone. I chose this lad, because I could 
manage him as I pleased. There was no- 
thing commanding or masculine in his turn 
of mind. I was not afraid that he should 
run out of the course, and make me the un- 

5 



MANDEVILLE. 277 

willing associate of any freak of his own 
suggestion. He was of a timid and pusil- 
lanimous nature, and by no means likely to 
abound in his own sense, or to prove stub- 
born and uncontrolable to the mandates of 
one whose superiority he felt. Such at 
least was my interpretation of his charac- 
ter. 

But, to return to the incident I was about 
to relate. A book of prints was found in 
my apartment, of the most odious nature, 
and least of all to be forgiven within the 
walls of Winchester School. It must have 
been the collection of some person, a dead- 
ly foe to monarchy (or, as it was then cal- 
led) the government of a single persoriy and 
to the House of Stuart. The first print 
represented Henry, Prince of Wales, and 
his brother Charles, yet an urchin ; Prince 
Henry being in the act of flouting and up- 
braiding the other, pointing at his crooked 
legs, with a label from his mouth, " Never 
mind j that is a good child 1 We will make 



278 MANDEVILLE. 

thee a bishop, and thy petticoats shall hide 
them :" — while Charles was in tears, weep- 
ing at the bitterness of the taunt. * The 
next print represented Osbaldiston, the 
master of Westminster School, at a time 
when there were above fourscore doctors 
of the three great faculties in the two uni- 
versities, who gratefully acknowledged their 
education under him, f set in the pillory 
in the front of his own school ; while Laud 
and the king were seen laughing and ii) 
triumph at a neighbouring window. [This 
scene never really took place; as Osbaldis- 
ton absconded and hid himself from his 
sentence, till the period of general emanci- 
pation.] Another print represented Charles 
with a sword drawn, a dragon with many 
heads opposite, and Strafford standing near 
the king, to lend him his aid. The dragon 
erected its crest with conscious superiority, 
and thrust out its forked tongue ; while the 

* Osborn : James I. § 45. t Echard. 



xMANDEVILLE. 279 

king shrunk frightened at his own temeri- 
ty, and seenied preparing to seek his safe- 
ty in flight. Underneath was written, " As 
for that hydra, the parliament, take good 
heed I You know I have found it here 
cunning, as well as malicious." * The next 
print was of the irresolute and ill-fated 
prince, immediately before his attempt to 
seize the f[\e members, the queen stand- 
ing over him in his closet, in a contemp- 
tuous and threatening attitude, with these 
words, " Va-t-en, poltron ! Arrache nio'i ces 
coqmns-ld par les oreilles^ oii ne me voir 
plus de tes jours.' ^ f Another represented 
Charles in the act of finishing his letter to 
the House of Lords, intreating them to save 
the life of Strafford ; to which the queen was 
seen, with her right leg extended, and her 
left hand clenched and firmly pressed on her 

* Strafford's Letters : Charles to the Lord -Deputy, 
April 1634. 

f Echard. " Begone, coward : pull me those rogues 
out hy the ears, or never see my face again." 



280 MANDEVILLE. 

hip, compelling him to add the memorable 
postscript, " If he must die, it were charity 
to reprieve him till Saturday/* * Another 
print represented Charles on horseback, in 
the act of receiving a distasteful petition, 
the petitioners being on their knees, while 
the king turns his horse suddenly upon 
them, with the purpose to throw them pro- 
strate in the mire, f In another he was 
represented thrusting his head between the 
bars of a window in Carisbrook Castle, with 
a boat and horsemen in the distance to aid 
his escape, and these words, " Alas ! where 
my head would go through, who would 
have thought that my shoulders would stay 
behind r" The king stuck in this attitude, 
so as to make a considerable force necessary 
to extricate him from it» J There were other 
prints not less satirical than these. 



* Burnet. 

+ Traditional, from Mr Thomas Hollis. 

J Firebrace, apud Herbert, 



MANDEVILLE. 281 

The book was found by Mallison, and 
shewn to Clifford. The prefects of the 
school (a denomination assigned to the boys 
of the sixth, or head form,) at this time 
twelve in number, held a concio or assem- 
bly, on the subject, to deliberate as to the 
way in which it was proper to proceed 
respecting so flagrant a delinquency. It 
was one of the maxims of this senate, that 
they were in no case to call in the in- 
terference of the masters respecting any 
thing that was not a school offence, and 
that they were a body, perfectly capable of 
redressing their own wrongs, and admini- 
stering justice among themselves. Such was 
the spirit of loyalty at this time in our es- 
tablishment, that no boy, excepting the 
two 1 have mentioned, so much as looked 
on the book. It was enough that it was re- 
ported to the sitting as infamous, by two 
credible witnesses. A jury of virgins would 
as soon have thought of satisfying them- 
selves by minute inspection, that a set of 



S82 MANDEVILLB. 

prints of another sort was obscene. The 
heart revohed at the thought; and they 
believed that no patience, where the mind 
was yet undepraved, could sustain the ex- 
amination. 

Before this awful body, I was myself 
summoned, together with Waller, to account 
for the possession of this book. It was 
found under such circumstances,- as were 
thought clearly to prove that it belonged to 
one of us. The nature of the book was 
briefly explained. We stood there as two 
persons, between whom at present the 
charge equally lay •, but who might very 
probably, one of us be guilty, and the other 
innocent. 

I was as ignorant of every thing that re- 
lated to the affair, as the child unborn. I 
stood therefore in mute astonishment. I 
looked upon Waller, and saw that he was 
extremely distressed; he turned pale, and 
was scarcely able to support himself. I 
pitied him from my soul. It was not my 



MANDEVILLE. 28S 

business to speak to justify myselj\ and still 
Jess to cast the charge upon him ; and I left 
my companion to explain the matter as he 
could. 

Our judges like me, observed the greater 
distress of Waller, and therefore applied 
themselves principally to him. He stam- 
mered, looked wild, and seemed hardly able 
to bring out a word. At length he some- 
what recovered his composure. He in- 
treated that he might not be urged any 
further 5 he protested his own innocence; 
he begged to be excused from speaking. 
The manner with which he expressed him- 
self, turned the inquisitive gaze of all upon 
me. He was told that all false delicacies 
must be put aside in this case ; the offence 
was a crying one; and it must be sifted to 
the bottom. 

Waller now apparently roused himself 
with an effort. He confessed, that he was 
not wholly unacquainted with the matter. 



284 MANDEVILLE. 

He said, the thing had been introduced to 
his knowledge by me. 

" By me /" I uttered an interjection of as- 
tonishment merely. — But what an age of 
experience and horror was in that moment 
communicated to me ! 

Our intimacy, or rather the frequency 
with which we were in each other's society, 
was known ; and he stated, that in one of 
our private walks, I had boasted to him 
with much apparent complacency, that I 
had such a book in my possession. In 
proportion as I had explained to him its 
contents, he had felt shocked, and had con- 
stantly refused so much as to cast his eye 
upon it. He remonstrated with me on the 
indecency and wickedness of giving har- 
bour to or preserving such an article, which 
1 had at first appeared inclined to dispute; 
but afterwards he had succeeded in convin- 
cing me of my error, and he sincerely be- 
lieved it was my intention to have destroyed 
it. 



MANDEVILLE. 285 

Waller now seemed frightened at what 
he had done. He expressed the utmost 
distress. He appealed to themselves, whe- 
ther they had not extorted the confession 
from him ; he trusted that they would not 
stamp him in the records of the school with 
the odious character of an informer; and he 
in treated, that if not for my sake, who he 
was sure had seen my error, at least for his, 
and that he might not labour under so base 
an imputation, they would pass over and 
dismiss the offence. 

It is impossible to utter the feelings with 
which I witnessed this detail. That Waller 
of all creatures should have dared to set 
himself in opposition to me ! — that 1 should 
been infatuated enough, to have nursed such 
a viper in my bosom ! — was to me a thought 
insupportable. 

I was not eloquent. My nature refused 
to supply me with the stream of a copious 
discourse on any occasion. But, had it 
been otherwise, could I have stooped to 



2186 MANDEVILLE. 

make an elaborate defence against an in- 
famous charge, which I felt within myself 
to be void of the slightest foundation ? In- 
experienced as I was, and unknowing in 
the mazes and perplexities of the human 
heart, I believed that no one could be de- 
ceived with regard to the innocence of ano- 
ther, but he that was wilfully deceived. I 
therefore simply answered, but with the em- 
phasis of truth, that the hook was not mine, 
that I had never seen it, — and I expected 
my judges instantly to credit my assertion. 

What then was my astonishment, when 
I plainly saw that the whole assembly lean- 
ed to the story of Waller? Could any thing 
indeed have been more unavoidable ? His 
speciousness, his distress, his fervent inter- 
cession in my favour, had the greatest 
weight with them. Add to which, the 
gentlemen of Winchester school knew no- 
thing of my family or connections. But 
the celebrated Sir William Waller, the fa- 
ther of my antagonist, and who still bore 

4 



MANDEVILLE. 287 

liie style of governor of Winchester Castle, 
had for years been the firm and acknow- 
ledged leader of the presbyterian royalists, 
and was at this moment a prisoner for his 
adherence to the king's party. It was not 
to be believed therefore, that his son should 
be in possession of a scurrilous republican 
libel, and pamper himself with the record 
of royal imbecility and dishonour. 

But all this I did not at the time under- 
stand. I could not put myself in the place 
of my judges, and estimate the various pre- 
sumptions that guided their decision. I 
remained in my own place, and saw only 
the justice of my own cause. Agreeably to 
the misanthropical and savage character of 
my mind, I could see nothing in all that 
v\^as passing but a combination to disgrace 
and to injure me. I could not conceive, 
that they should not know my innocence, 
when I told them of it. The picture there- 
fore to my mind was, that all that I saw 
was a trick, that the book had been mali- 



288 MANDEVILLE. 

ciously procured for the purpose of fastening 
the guilt that related to it on me, and that 
the whole scene of the trial, the accusation, 
and the impending judgment, was precon- 
certed, with a view to trample me in the 
dust. 

In this situation my misanthropy was no 
shield to preserve the severity of my mind. 
My nature was ambition personified. All 
my habits had been those of self-reverence. 
I felt that ardour and generosity of spirit, 
which, as I believed, made me capable of 
great things. I felt that inborn pride of 
soul, which, like an insurmountable barrier, 
seemed to cut me off for ever from every 
thing mean, despicable and little. With all 
this pride, I could not endure the thought 
of a slur or an inglorious imputation, and, as 
is said of the ermine, I could die for very 
spite and shame at the bare idea, that any 
thing sordid and vile should pollute the 
whiteness of my name. And now " the 
thing which I feared was come upon me !*' 



MANDEVILLE. 289 

Was this to continue ? Was this to cramp 
and control all my future efforts, and put 
an end to my aspiring thoughts for ever ? 
1 cannot express the agonies of my soul. 

It is true, that in a certain sense this was 
no disappointment. Habitually I shut my- 
self up in the storehouse of my own spirit ; 
and intuitively I expected no justice from 
the world, whether a wider or a narrower 
world, in the midst of which I lived. No 
matter I For a human creature to find his 
worst imaginations confirmed — imagina- 
tions, wantonly formed in all the luxuriance 
of a gloomy spirit, to which, while bodied 
forth, the heart refuses its assent, and which 
seem conjured up in wilful determination to 
exceed the possibilities of an actual scene-^ 
— to find these realised, I say, in their 
utmost extent, — is no lulling and tranquil 
sensation. On the contrary, the very no- 
lion of having met with the thing before, 
amidst the incoherent creations of delirium, 
or in the fancy- formed route of hell broke 

VOL. I. N 



290 MANDEVILLE. 

loose, seems to give to its sudden and per- 
fect existence a more exquisite pang. 

The whole of the evidence having been 
gone through, Waller and myself v^^ere or- 
dered to w^ithdraw. We remained alone 
in an adjoining apartment. I looked upon 
my accuser ; I could not speak. I ex- 
amined curiously whether he had the 
lineaments of a human creature, and even, 
with a vulgar superstition, looked down at 
his feet, to see whether the demon did not 
betray himself by his cloven heel. 

At length I recovered the power of utter- 
ance. With a haughty and imperious ac- 
cent I said, *' Waller, am I guilty of the 
crime with which you have charged me? 
Or what have I done, that you should fa- 
bricate so foul an accusation against me?'* 

He replied : " I cannot ask you to for- 
give me. You have done nothing to me; 
1 bear you no malice. But — you are en- 
dowed with courage ; and I am a coward. 
The guilt is mine. I saw the book in the 



MANDfiVILLE. 2i)l 

house of a bloody regicide, whither I had 
been allowed some time ago to attend some 
messengers of my father ; and, while they 
sought grounds of another kind to criminate 
the owner, I made prize of this. With 
a boyish love of amusement, I studied it at 
home, and brought it to the school. I 
thought the prints well done, and I laughed 
at the witty malice of the rogue that made 
it, without suspecting that I was doing any 
thing wrong. But when I found that the book 
had fallen into the hands of the prefects, and 
that they considered it as an affair of so 
heinous a nature, I could not own it ; and 
I threw it upon you, because I had no 
other way of clearing myself." 

" Well, Sir, and now go instantly to the 
prefects, and repeat all you have just said 
to me." 

Waller drew back with the greatest ter* 
ror. 

« Oh, for God's sake !*' said he, « The 
imputation will do you no harm ^ you are 



29S MANDEVILLE. 

accountable to nobody. But my father, if 
it were known, would resent my fault so 
much, that he would turn me adrift to the 
world, and never speak to me again." 

" Take then," answered I, '* the results 
of your folly. I am innocent ; and I will 
not submit to the consequences of being 
pronounced guilty." 

" Oh, Mandeville," replied Waller, " in- 
deed you must. The original charge of 
having such a book in my possession I 
could not support ; and what will become 
of me now ? If now I am exposed, I shall 
not only be found to be the real criminal, 
but shall further labour under the compli- 
cated dishonour of being a false accuser, of 
having with cool and unabashed effrontery 
told a tale, no word of which was true, and 
that with the fixed purpose of transferring 
a fault to you, of which I was the real per- 
petrator. It is all over ! I am ruined for 
ever ! I shall be hunted out, not from the 
Wiccamists merely, but out of the world. 



MANDEVILLE. 2^3 

My father, my brave and gallant father, 
will break his heart to think that he had 
such a son. I shall have a brand upon me 
like Cain, to mark me out to every creature 
that lives. I shall have a stain, that no pe^ 
nitence or penance can ever remove. — Yes, 
Mandeville, do your pleasure with me ! I 
have deserved it. I am entitled to no mer- 
cy. Let me perish in unimagined tor- 
ments, sa that the least hair of your head 
may go uninjured 1" 

I know not what came over me at tiiis 
moment. This was a worthless fellow. His 
act had been that of a finished scoundrel, 
and showed that there was no rational hope, 
that he could ever prove a credit to his 
species. Yet I determined that I would be 
his preserver. There is something in the 
accent of genuine anguish, that a well con- 
stituted human heart (and yet mine was 
not such 1) can scarcely resist. Much of 
the emotion he expressed was allied to vir- 
tuous feeling, and struck upon a chord that 



f9^^ MANDEVILLE. 

is unbounded in its potency. Add to this, he 
was in my power, and therefore 1 could not 
resolve to use that power against him. 1 
would not be his destroyer. 1 would not 
have that to recollect. However small 
might be his chance to act an honourable 
part in human society, I would not deprive 
him of it. 

Beside that, there was something gal- 
lant, that at this time suited my savage tem- 
per, in braving the imputation of guilt, 
when secretly, in the chambers of my own 
heart. I knew, that I was innocent, and 
more than innocent. It accorded with the 
disdain which, without yet knowing why, 
I entertained fcr my species. I could brave 
the imputation of guilt, when it was in my 
choice to do so, though, when the imputa- 
tion appeared unavoidable, it struck me as 
the greatest of calamities. 1 could " doff 
the world, and let it pass." 1 could " make 
mouths at the invisible event." There ap- 
peared to me^ while I thought of it, a sort 



MANDEVILLE, 295 

of lordly delight in standing the scorns and 
reproaches of my companions, when all the 
time in my own reflections I smiled con- 
temptuously at their error, and rose serene 
above the clouds in which their miscon- 
structions sought to envelop me. It will 
presently be seen that I overestimated my 
own powers. 

I said, " Waller, be satisfied. You have 
acted a foul and ignominious part : but I 
will carry you through."' 

I had scarcely uttered the words, before 
we were called to appear again before the 
council of the prefects. 

*« Mandeville," said Clifford, « the act of 
which you have been tound guilty, is un- 
worthy of a subject of Great Britain, and 
still more of a Wintonian ; and the charac- 
ter of the college requires that it should be 
expiated." 

" Shame on the wretch !" said Mallison. 
" To trample upon the ashes of a fallen 
monarch ! secretly to find delight in con* 



29^ MANDEVILLE. 

templating the scandalous lies, that have 
been invented against the name and repu- 
tation of a murdered king ! I vote that he 
be required to eat the book on the spot.'* 

I started. I had been far from anticipat- 
ing the possibility of such ingenuity of ma- 
lice and degradation. My countenance 
sufficiently showed, that to persist in such a 
sentence would be to no purpose. Even 
[he generosity of boys of noble and honour- 
able birth, such as were those that tried us, 
was alarmed at the idea of awarding against 
me, of whom they knew no other fault, any 
thing so brutal and so detestable. I already 
began to repent of the concession, which in 
the vehemence of my compassion I had 
made to tlie wretched Waller. 

*' No,"' said another ; " let his punish* 
ment be with his own hand to commit it to 
the flames.'* 

" Prefects !" cried I, with uncontrolable 
impatience, " it is in vain that I am treated 
with this ferocity of contempt. How the 



MANDEVILLE. 297 

book came here, it is no matter. I am as 
free from any disloyalty of sentiment as the 
best of you. I acknowledge nothing un- 
worthy or mean. My limbs and the mem- 
bers of my body are my own. One and 
another of you may dishonour yourselves 
by such barbarous and uncivil suggestions : 
but you cannot dishonour me. I cannot 
truly suffer disgrace and ignominy, unless 
by my own act." 

While I spoke thus, Clifford caught up 
the book, the subject of our debate, thrust 
it in the fire, and in a moment it was m 
flames. He then turned to me. 

" My lad,'' said he, " you put on here 
something too much of the brave. You 
should be conscious of your fault, and ap- 
pear a little humbled for it. You should 
remember that you were so sensible of it at 
first, that at first you denied it. But let 
this be your punishment; not that with 
your own hand you commit it to the flames j 
but that with your own eyes, as is fitting) 
you see it consumed. 
n2 



^98 MANDEVILLE. 

This to me was a heart-breaking trial. 
When I found myself pressed by the 
agonies of the wretched Waller, I had 
thought, like a boy, only of the thing im- 
mediately before me, and had yielded to 
his intreaties. I deemed, as I have said, 
that there was something gallant, and well 
suited to my disdainful temper, in suf- 
fering in silence the imputation of a guilt, 
from which I secretly knew myself to be 
free. But my imagination had proved 
sluggish on the occasion. I had taken the 
thing only in gross. I had not shaped out 
to myself the idea of actual punishment, 
and still less had conceived all the insulting 
words and things, that might be addressed 
to me. I flinched and writhed with an- 
guish at these, as they successively rose 
before my unanticipating spirit; and, to 
say the truth, utterly repented the gene- 
rosity I had practised. I would have given 
the world, to have published the undisguised 
truth at once. But it was too late. I had 



MANDEVILLE. 299 

returned to the concio with all the rashness, 
but not with the firrn resolution and deli- 
berate desperateness, of a martyr. 

That any creature that breathed, should 
have dared to give words in my hearing to 
the idea of my being condemned to eat by 
compulsion the substance of that by which 
my fellows had been offended, a degrada- 
tion that at any rate could be awarded only 
against the most abhorred and recorded 
coward, was an insult that could only be 
expiated with blood. That I, descended 
from one of the first families, and in im- 
mediate succession to one of the largest 
estates in England, should have been ad- 
dressed with this indignity, was a thought 
that could never be blotted out from the 
record of my brain ; by day and by night 
it accompanied me ; in solitude and society 
it haunted me ; it mixed with all my dreams 
and all my reveries ; if a moment of festi- 
vity or peace came over me at unawares, it 
was presently poisoned by the withering 



300 MANDRVILLE. 

recollection — " I am a blasted branch — 
the tremendous gale of public disgrace has 
passed over all the buds of my promise, 
and I am nothing !" 

It will hardly be thought how fierce a 
havock this event made with my constitu- 
tion. It was exactly as if an envenomed 
arrow had entered my flesh. My blood 
boiled within me. The whole surface of my 
body burned, so that every one that ap^ 
proachedme, and touched my flesh, sudden* 
ly snatched away his hand, as if it had been 
scorched with fire. I was in a raging fever. 
Before the close of the day I was conducted 
to my bed, which I did not leave for weeks. 
My agonies, and the distress both of my 
mind and body, were insupportable. And, 
when at length my disorder subsided, as it 
seemed, for want of further fuel to feed on, I 
was totally an altered creature. My colour 
and my flesh were gone. I seemed like a 
meagre, unlaid ghost. All my motions 
were languid, and all my thoughts were 
spiritless. 



MANDEVILLE. 301 

But what was most strange, and will be 
thought altogether unaccountable and per- 
verse, the whole force of my resentment 
fastened upon Clifford. His part in the 
scene I have just described, was really a 
generous one. Pie saw how hardly some 
of his brother-prefects were disponed to 
bear on me ; he was shocked at the inhu- 
man suggestion of Mallison ; and by seizing 
the book, the subject of debate, and thrust- 
ing it in the fire at once, he was really 
sparing my feelings, and putting an end to 
my misery. 

But I could not persuade myself to view 
it in that light. His act was the crown 
and finishing of this whole ; and the scene, 
as it stood in my memory, melted all into 
one mass, and belonged, without reserve or 
distinction, to the individual that had con- 
summated it. Why did Clifford, thus un- 
reasonable and unjust were my reflections 
on the subject, join in the cry against me? 
Was I not already brought low enough? 



502 MANDEVILLE. 

Was not the whole school united, as in one 
faction, against me alone ? How inhuman 
then, that he should have spoken to me 
after the same tone, — that he should have 
acted, what ihey only threatened ! 

My naiure would not permit me to hate 
the rabble, the mere chaff and refuse of the 
threshing-floor. AValler and MalHson came 
not near me. They might deport them- 
selves as ihey would; what was that to me? 
It is true, while the scene was actually pass- 
ing, 1 thought otherwise ; but they flitted 
away, as fast as the living scene in which 
they acted a part ; and it must be something 
of more muscle and substance, that should 
fasten itself on my memory. CiiflV)rd was 
a name with which my soul could grapple: 
he was an obstacle interposed in my path 
that must be removed ; or else all that I 
loved to contemplate and dream of for fu- 
ture time, was lost to me for ever. For 
these reasons, all the offences I received 
from inferior opponents, left the figures and 



MANDEVILLE. 305 

features to which they properly belonged, 
and centred in him. 

My pride was unbounded : what stood in 
the way of that pride ? It was perhaps but 
an ill regulated and abortive passion. My 
temper was reserved and sullen ; my speech 
was slow and sparing ; I hardly communi- 
cated myself to a human creature : what 
chance had I for popularity and admira- 
tion ? If all had been smooth and level be- 
fore me, if no eminence had interposed it- 
self through the vast plain of my existence, 
my hopes would, very likely, not have been 
the less abortive. No matter : whatever I 
was compelled to admire, I was compelled 
to hate. I was a disappointed and discon- 
tented soul; and all the wholesome juices 
and circulations of my frame converted 
themselves into bitterness and gall. 

Clifford was the great luminary of the 
sphere in which I lived. Every one ad- 
mired him ; every one hung on his accents. 
He bewitched all that knew him by the 



304 MANDEVILLE. 

nobleness and gallantry of his spirit. He 
charmed, without a purpose to charm ; the 
walk of his soul was free and unconstrained 
and graceful ; his happiest impulses ex- 
pressed themselves with such tranquillity, 
and so without an effort, that you wondered 
in what their happiness consisted. It is 
like what we hear described of the benig- 
nity of the Deity, that diffuses life and en- 
joyment every where, and produces theasto- 
nishing miracles that even the very " angels 
desire to look into" and understand, in per- 
fect repose, and is as one, in doing every 
thing, that does nothing. What then was 
I ? A dark and malignant planet, that no 
eye remarked, that fain would shine, but 
that, as long as the sun of Clifford was 
above the horizon, was cut off from every 
hope of gratification. 

At this distance of time I can sit down, 
and deliberately calculate my small hopes 
of success, even if Clifford had been re- 
moved from the scene. But such were not 



MANDEVILLE. 305 

my reasonings at the moment. It seenied 
to me, that he was my only obstacle ; that 
he was my evil genius; and that, while my 
merits were in reality more sterling than 
his, he always crossed my path, and thwart- 
ed my success, and drew off all eyes, not 
only from perceiving my worth, but in a 
manner from recognising my existence. 

Is it not surprising that all this should 
have ripened into hatred ? What enormous 
and unmeasured injustice ! What had I to 
do to hate him? He never injured me in 
the minutest article. He nev^r conceived 
a thought of injury. Yet all my passions 
seemed to merge in this single passion. I 
must kill him ; or he must kill me. He 
was to me, like the poison-tree of Java : the 
sight of him was death ; and every smallest 
air that blew from him to me, struck at the 
very core of my existence. He w^as a mil- 
stone hanged about my neck, that cramped 
and bowed down my intellectual frame, 
worse than all the diseases that can afflict a 



306 maKdeville. 

man, and all the debility of the most im- 
becil and protracted existence. He was 
an impenetrable wall, that reached up to 
the heavens, that compassed me in on every 
side, and on every side hid me from my 
fellow mortals, and darkened to me the me- 
ridian day. Let this one obstacle be re- 
moved (so I fondly thought), and I shall 
then be elastic, and be free ! Ambition shall 
once more revisit my bosom ; and compla- 
cence, that stranger, which, like Astrsea, 
bad flown up to heaven, and abandoned 
me for ever, shall again be mine. In a 
word, no passion ever harboured in a hu- 
man bosom, that it seemed so entirely to 
fill, in which it spread so wide, and mount- 
ed so high, and appeared so utterly to con- 
vert every other sentiment and idea into its 
own substance. 

END OF VOLUME FIRST. 



Printed by Geor^^e Ramsay aod Compaiiy> 
Ediobingti, 1S17. 



