Maud, and other Poems [Review]
Author: Masson, David.
Publication info: The British Quarterly Review ; Edinburgh  : [32] p. Edinburgh (1855)

Art. VII.—Maud, and other Poems. By Alfred Tennyson ... [Review] [in, The British Quarterly Review ...]
[Page 467]
Art. VII. — Maud, and other Poems . By Alfred Tennyson , D.C.L., Poet Laureate. London: Moxon. As is natural and proper when a man like our Laureate puts forth a new work upon which he is known to have been engaged for some considerable time, there has been a great deal of speculation as to the real purpose and meaning of Maud . It has been foolishly argued by some that the poem is an allegory in which, by certain subtle devices, the poet means to propound his notion of the social function and effects of war. The healthy instinct of most readers, however, while fully admitting that the poem does contain an exposition of what may be called the poet's philosophy of war, decidedly rejects the idea that there is any hidden allegory in the form of the exposition, and also denies that this exposition, such as it is, forms the sole purpose of the poem. We quite agree with this view. The poem appears to us to be an allegory in no other sense than that in which every work of imagination may be said to be an allegory, or translation into a tissue of representative fancies, of the entire mood of the poet's mind at the time when it was written; and though there is much reference to war in the poem, the proportion of such reference does not seem to us to be greater than was to be expected in any song which such a man as our Laureate would choose to send forth, or would even allow to possess his solitude, at a time when the nation, whose elected spokesman he is, has war in all its thoughts, and mingling, as it were, with each day's existence. A prose-analysis of the poem will perhaps make this more clear.
The poem consists of twenty-six short strains or pieces, in very various metres, each of which, while it has independent beauty and completeness, carries forward a little the story of the poem.
In the first strain the scene of the story is brought before us, the antecedents of the personages involved in it are hinted, and the character of the principal personage, who is also the speaker, is indicated. The speaker is a young man of twenty-five, living alone in a sequestered country neighbourhood somewhere on the English sea-coast. He is the son of the former proprietor of the land round about, and of the manorial hall which is its centre. He has lived in the place from his infancy, and every spot in it is familiar to him—the hall and its grounds, the village hard by, the line of beach, the fields, woods, and moors stretching inland. There is one spot, however, which has a peculiar and ghastly fascination for him, and indeed for the whole neighbourhood. This is a ‘dreadful hollow’ behind a little wood—a spot physically horrible even to the casual eye.
[Page 468]
‘I hate the dreadful hollow behind the little wood,
Its lips in the field above are dabbled with blood-red heath
The red-ribb'd ledges drip with a silent horror of blood,
And Echo there, whatever is ask'd her, answers ‘Death,’’
This spot, so ghastly in itself, is doubly ghastly as having been the scene of a local tragedy still well remembered in the neighbourhood, and most of all by him who speaks. In that hollow, exactly where a fallen block of rock is still to be seen, there had been found, one stormy autumn day, many years ago, when the speaker was a child, the mangled body of his father. The local belief was that, ruined and maddened by the failure of a great speculation, he had flung himself down into the pit from the field above; but with this belief were connected suspicions that he had not been fairly dealt with. Had not the very scheme which ruined him made the fortune of one who had been his friend and partner in it? and was not this friend and partner, so suddenly and mysteriously enriched, the present owner of the broad estate and the Hall which had once belonged to the suicide? Sharing these suspicions, the son of the dead man had grown up, scarcely ever quitting the scene of his sad family history, but living in a small solitary house on what had once been his father's estate, first with his widowed mother, and, after her death, by himself. What from constitutional tendency, and what from his solitary life and continual brooding over the tragic facts of his history, he has grown up into a melancholy unsocial being, morbidly alive to all that is little, mean, and villanous in men and their ways, and full of a kind of speculative disgust with the entire circumstance of the time in which he lives. In a subsequent part of the poem this fixed and habitual mood of his mind is expressly defined by himself.
‘Am I not, am I not, here alone,
So many a summer since she died,
My mother, who was so gentle and good?
Living alone in an empty house,
Here half-hid in the gleaming wood,
Where I hear the dead at midday moan,
And the shrieking rush of the wainscot-mouse,
And my own sad name in corners cried,
When the shiver of dancing leaves is thrown
About its echoing chambers wide,
Till a morbid hate and horror have grown
Of a world in which I have hardly mixt,
And a morbid eating lichen fixt
On a heart half-turn'd to stone?’
In the gratification of this morbid hate and scorn of the world
[Page 469]
he has accustomed himself to dwell upon, and, as it were, to collect all instances of contemporary social wrong, fraud, and crime. Peace! they prate of the blessings of peace; but what kind of peace is that in which all are but pickpockets, lusting for gain; in which we all cheat and are cheated; in which the poor are hovelled and hustled together like swine; in which only the ledger lives, and the man who does not lie is the exception; in which no one can believe the tradesman's ware or his word; in which chalk, and alum, and plaster are sold to the poor for bread, and ruffians drunk with vitriol fill the filthy lanes with the yells of trampled women, and men must lie down armed against the housebreaker, and mothers murder their children for burial fees? Better surely than such a peace, war with all its terrors; nay, what cure for the universal rottenness of such a time so likely as war? Such is one train of reflection to which the speaker has so accustomed himself that he is ever recurring to it when alone; and he is again for the thousandth time going over it in one of his moody walks near the ‘dreadful hollow,’ when, casting his eyes in the direction of the Hall, he sees the workmen about it, and remembers that, after long absence, the millionaire and his son and daughter are returning to it. The daughter, Maud, he remembers when a child; she promised then to be fair, and he has heard since of her singular beauty. He wonders what she is like, and has half a presentiment that her coming will not be without consequence to him.
‘What is she now? My dreams are bad. She may bring me a curse.
No, there is fatter game on the moor; she will let me alone.
Thanks, for the fiend best knows whether woman or man be the worse.
I will bury myself in my books, and the devil may pipe to his own.’
So ends strain the first. In strain the second, he has seen Maud as she passed in her carriage; and she can be nothing to him! Perfectly beautiful, he grants, all that he saw; but without savour or salt—a cold and clear-cut face, ‘faultily faultless, icily regular.’ No, she can be nothing to him! Dead perfection —nothing more—save perhaps for a slight paleness from travel,
‘Or an underlip, you may call it a little too ripe, too full,
Or the least little delicate aquiline curve in a sensitive nose,
From which I escaped heart-free, with the least little touch of spleen.’
Ah! it is too hastily concluded; for in strain the third, that cold and clear-cut face is still haunting him, growing and fading and growing upon him in the gloom of the night, luminous, gem-like, ghost-like, death-like, till, unable to bear it more, he arises and walks all by himself in his little dark garden ground,
[Page 470]
listening to the roar of the sea and the wintry wind till morning begins to glimmer.
In strain the fourth, it is spring; and the speaker, sitting in a little grove in which the ruby buds of the lime are putting forth their green shoots, is for a moment soft and tranquil, but soon, moved by his own thoughts and by the objects within his vision, relapses into his accustomed mood. There, below him, is the village; how quiet and small it looks; and yet, like any city, it bubbles over with gossip, scandal, and spite; and Jack, sitting on the ale-house bench, will tell his lies by the score like any czar. Here, on the other side, glimmers the Hall; ah! and there, passing like a light through the Hall garden, is Maud herself. Maud, what is she to him? Never to her wrinkled father had he spoken; and when he had met her abroad with her brother on the moor, it was to her and not to her brother that he had bowed. And, as she rode past without any return of the salutation, had not the fire of a foolish pride flashed up in her face? How else could it have been? Was not she the rich and great beauty, and he nameless and poor, half the pity, and half the sport of the neighbourhood, robbed before his eyes by his own man and maid? Robbed, of course; robbery and slander were one with nature; existence itself was founded on mutual rapine; and half the speech of men, on their way to the grave, consisted in mutual slanders, and whisperings, and chucklings over each other's shames and reverses! Protracting this, his habitual train of thought, with even more bitterness than usual, the speaker ends by desiring a temper of philosophic indifference, and a life of passionless peace, far from the clamour of liars, and the long-necked geese of the world. Most of all would he escape the honeyed poison of love! And in the act of this wish, Maud is again all too fondly before his fancy, and he softens even as he bids her away.
‘Ah, Maud, you milk-white fawn, you are all unmeet for a wife,
Your mother is mute in her grave as her image in marble above;
Your father is ever in London; you wander about at your will;
You have but fed on the roses, and lain in the lilies of life.’
In the next strain, Maud is heard singing by the cedar-tree in the meadow under the Hall, singing a passionate old song of chivalry, about men marching in battle array with banner and bugle and fife. Her wild voice pealing up to the sky is heard by her lover, and has a twofold effect upon him. This song of war and of death in the cause of honour pealing from the lips of a young and graceful girl seems to him like a keen reproach of the sordid meanness of the times, and of his own languor and whining.
[Page 471]
And then, as he listens to the voice, he is touched also to tenderness and tears, and, with all his recollection of Maud's pride and discourtesy to him, he has hardly a choice left but to move to the meadow and fall at her feet, adoring, if not her, at least the voice.
Another strain, and he and Maud are still nearer to each other. He has met her in the summer sunset at the head of the village-street, and her seeming pride in the former meeting is all atoned for by her courtesy in this. She had remembered their old childish days together, and had spoken to him and given him her hand. Overcome by the new strong wine of love, his tongue had stammered and tripped in his acknowledgment of this courtesy; and all through the night the spark of warm hope kindled by so sweet an incident had burned and glowed in his heart. Morning had come, however—a wan, cloudy, and cheerless morning; and the fire had faded into grey ashes. What if Maud's smile and courtesy were but the snare of some coquettish deceit—the deceit of a heartless maiden to entangle a poor fool like him? Or what if that dandy despot brother of hers, unable himself to veil his insolence so far as even to assume courtesy, had deputed her to be his substitute, that so, by a woman's trick of seeming interest, a wretched vote might be gained for his highness at the next election? Or what if it were mere womanly pity for his forlorn condition? All these chances present themselves to him, not without a feeling of shame at his morbid habit of suspicion; and, on the whole, he can but end in a wish—
‘Ah, well, well, well, I may be beguiled
By some coquettish deceit;
Yet, if she were not a cheat,
If Maud were all that she seem'd,
And her smile had all that I dream'd,
Then the world were not so bitter
But a smile could make it sweet.’
In the next strain, the progress of the love is curiously indicated. Nothing new has apparently occurred; and the sole progress, therefore, is in the lover's thoughts respecting what has occurred already. But these thoughts, shaped by fancy, take a rapid form of hope; and as the lover, in the boldness of this hope, dares to anticipate the future, his anticipation, by some strange trick of memory, strikes upon and disturbs an old and half forgotten association of his childhood. Out of the depths of his long past childhood there starts up a shadowy image of two men drinking together and talking over a table—talking, too, of him.
[Page 472]
‘Strange that I hear two men
   Somewhere, talking of me;
‘Well, if it prove a girl, my boy
   Will have plenty: so let it be.”
What is this? Is it an actual recollection, or a dream of the moment, or a confused echo of something read in boyhood about viziers nodding together in the Arabian Nights ? So asks the speaker, leaving it to be explained by the prose interpreter that it is an actual recollection—that the two old men are Maud's father and the speaker's father, talking together over their wine one day in the far distance before Maud's birth, while the speaker, then a boy, is present in the room; that the words quoted are the actual words of a kind of arrangement made by the two men with reference to himself, as the son of the richer; which words, overheard by him as he played about the room, have remained stored up in his memory till now that, as he is blessing himself with the fond phantasy that at some future day Maud may be his, they find themselves sympathetically called for and leap once more into hearing.
In the eighth measure there is still progress; but this time by means of a fresh incident. In the village church, gazing at Maud sitting alone by a pillar, he has seen her suddenly and sweetly blush, on finding her eyes, on looking up, met by his. This blush in the church interprets or cancels the former blush on the moor. ‘No, surely, now it cannot be pride.’
The ninth measure narrates a little new incident, involving also an advance in the story. Walking at sunset, a mile or more from the shore, he has seen Maud riding at a distance over the dark moorland. She waved her hand to him; there were two horsemen with her; and as they rode down by the hill, something flashed in the sunlight. In a moment they were gone; and the flash typifies the whole incident.
The incident remains unexplained till the next measure. He has now found it out. There were two horsemen with Maud on the moor; one, of course, was her brother; and the flash—who could that be but the splendid new-made lord, the grandson of the great deceased coal-owner, whose gewgaw castle, built with his grandfather's wealth, could be seen pricking its ears amid perky larches and pine over the moor, and who had come down to the country with his new title, his bought commission, his waxen face, his rabbit mouth, and his untold fortune, to amaze the natives, and perhaps to seek a wife? And this rabbit-mouthed lord was riding with Maud and her brother, and was bound for the Hall on a visit! Ah! and here, in the very beginning of love, comes jealousy! And with this thought the
[Page 473]
lover falls back once more out of his recent hours of new and sweeter mood into his old strain and humour. He himself, touched in a dear interest, finds himself all at once splenetic, personal, base, full of selfish hatred, and almost eager for a quarrel. Thus are baseness, quarrel, strife, inwound with all things human; and yet, forsooth, only last week there came down among us a sleek Quaker from his mammon home in the north with his demonstration of the uselessness of our armies all so pat and ready, and fully convinced that he had a mission to put down war, and could fulfil it, if people would but take his advice! Most sublime conceit, most idiotic world!
Strains eleven and twelve are of a kind too aërial, too lyrical and musical, to be pressed into solid narrative by the rude fingers of prose. The first is an aspiration—a prayer that Maud may love him, that he may not die till he has been loved and had his day. The second is a song of glee and beauty, in which the prayer is already answered. ‘Maud, Maud, Maud, Maud,’ cry the birds in the high Hall-garden; and while they are thus crying and calling, he and Maud are together in the wood gathering woodland lilies. He has kissed her slender hand; and she, though not seventeen, has taken the kiss sedately. Back she has now gone over the meadows with her posy of lilies; the birds in the high Hall-garden welcoming her with ‘Maud, Maud, Maud,’ said more slily than before. The lover exults; Maud is his; and he watches her arrive at the Hall door with a smile in his heart at what she finds there.
‘Look, a horse is at the door,
   And little King Charles is snarling;
Go back, my lord, across the moor,
   You are not her darling.’
This happiness, this glee of the lover, is interrupted in the next measure. In crossing the lands of the Hall, he has met Maud's brother; and, notwithstanding his natural dislike to that magnificent and Herculean fop, he longed, in the fulness of his heart, to give him, as Maud's brother, the grasp of fellowship. He turned with this intention to where the Hercules stood, six feet two in height, a little aside from the path to let him pass. But what was the response of Hercules?
‘While I past he was humming an air,
Stopt, and then with a riding whip
Leisurely tapping a glossy boot,
And, curving a contumelious lip,
Gorgonized me from head to foot
With a stony British stare.’
[Page 474]
And the man who had thus insulted him was Maud's brother! Her father too, that grey and lean old wolf who was so seldom seen in the place, was the man whose fraud had been his father's ruin! Ah! but Maud's mother was good, and none of the sin of the race had descended to her! And so, for her sake, let the brother be.
In the next strain, the lover, in his privilege as a lover, is spiritually nearer Maud, and will spy more closely into the actual grounds where she walks, and into the stony cincture which encloses her, and is familiar with her and her voice. Never to be admitted there as a guest, he can but steal his knowledge from the outside. And so at early dawn he climbs into what he knows to be Maud's own garden, where she tends her roses and lilies; he stands by the gate, and, watching, knows that that window must be the window of Maud's little oak room where she remains by herself with her music and books when her brother sits late with his roystering companions. Ah, if ever she would, there would be but a step from that window, and she would be at his side in the garden! Half flattered by this overbold thought, he looks round in the silent and dim grey light, and lo, all round the house the white curtained windows strike his eye. There is something spectral and death-like in the quietude and the whiteness; the sign of sleep seems a boding of death, and he shudders.
Something of this presentiment of evil passes into the next short strain of ten lines, in which the lover thinks of himself as one so cheerless as to be doomed to bring woe wherever he is loved, and then again thinks that if he is loved—if he is dear to some one else—he need not be so cheerless, and so need not bring so much woe.
The next, or sixteenth, measure proclaims the lover's resolution that very day (the suitor-lord having taken his departure for town) to end his suspense by telling Maud all and hearing her reply. Then, in sure anticipation of the sweet issue, comes a glad herald-song of triumph—a song in which, by a marvellous use of coloured words, the poet, speaking for the joyous lover, bathes the whole universe, during the expected moment of Maud's answer, in a uniform passionate blush of rosy red. This wonderful song of rose-colour, as it may be called, has already passed into the memories of all readers of the poem, and will hereafter always be quoted as exquisitely Tennysonian. It ends thus:—
‘Rosy is the West,
   Rosy is the South,
Roses are her cheeks,
   And a rose her mouth.’
[Page 475]
To our mind, however, the strain which follows is quite as Tennysonian. It may be called the hymn of the accepted lover, and it has all the grandeur of a hymn. It is to be supposed that the great expectation of the day is over, that Maud and her lover have met, that the happy ‘Yes’ has faltered from her lips, that the blush of consequent rose-colour has passed at the due moment over the whole sympathetic earth, and that, after the hour of rapture and first lovers’ exchange of endearing and intimate words, the lover has led his betrothed home, and is again alone. It is late night, the stars are out, and the lover, reclining near the tall cedar-tree in the meadow, pours out the completed bliss of that day's fate in praise of her who is now for ever his, and alternate apostrophe to tree and stars as witnesses of his joy, and calm soliloquy over his own fitful past and his now serener future, and earnest prayer for all good to her who has so blessed and changed him. We know nothing finer in all that Tennyson has written than this nocturnal hymn of the accepted lover. If the last strain was a triumph of exultation and colour, this is a triumph of solemnity and sound. Let the following, the concluding passage of the strain, be read aloud:—
‘Is that enchanted moan only the swell
Of the long waves that roll in yonder bay?
And hark the clock within, the silver knell
Of twelve sweet hours that past in bridal white,
And died to live, long as my pulses play.
But now by this my love has closed her sight,
And given false death her hand, and stol'n away
To dreamful wastes, where footless fancies dwell
Among the fragments of the golden day.
May nothing there her maiden grace affright!
Dear heart, I feel with thee the drowsy spell.
My bride to be, my evermore delight,
My own heart's heart and ownest own, farewell!
It is but for a little space I go:
And ye meanwhile far over moor and fell
Beat to the noiseless music of the night!
Has our whole Earth gone nearer to the glow
Of your soft splendours, that you look so bright?
I have climb'd nearer out of lonely Hell.
Beat, happy stars, timing with things below,
Beat with my heart more blest than heart can tell,
Blest, but for some dark undercurrent woe
That seems to draw—but it shall not be so:
Let all be well, be well.’
Is not this a hymn? Is it not as if, by the marvellous power of
[Page 476]
the poet working consciously or unconsciously, the whole hollow vault of the night, from the pale outstretching floor of meadow on which the lover was lying during his soliloquy, up to the stars he was contemplating, were filled and made to peal and tremble in our hearing with the sound of a mystic bell? Observe how, as if to secure this effect, the very rhyme that would suggest the word bell is nine times repeated, and made to die out double at the close. Admire this skill of the artist, if you choose; but better, reader, dismiss at once the thought that it is by any mere trick of rhyme that such effects on your ear and soul are accomplished, and accept instead the conclusion, that when a man can so affect you, it is because his nature itself is noble, and his thoughts beat habitually to a higher and more solemn music than most men know.
The story has now reached its climax, and verges towards the catastrophe. The ‘dark undercurrent woe’ of which, in his hour of fullest calm, the lover had been conscious, now reveals its force, and draws all swiftly along. Three strains, indeed, intervene before the stroke of evil descends. All three, however, refer to an incident which constitutes the preparation for it. In the first of these—the nineteenth of the poem—we are told gaily how Maud's majestic brother is to give on the morrow a grand political dinner, at which all the Tory squirelings near are to be present; and how, though he is not invited, he has contrived still to turn the occasion to account, by making Maud promise that, when the dancing and festivities are over, she will steal out into her own little rose-garden, where he will be waiting to see her in the splendour of her dress and jewels. In the next—the twentieth—the lover, walking in his own garden-ground on the day of the promised pleasure, picks up from the rivulet which crosses it, flowing from the Hall, a rose which has come from Maud's rose-garden, and which he reads as a message that she remembers her promise. Lastly, in the next—the twenty-first— we see the lover waiting towards dawn in the rose-garden, the sounds of the revel and music within having at length been exchanged for those of the departing wheels, though the late lights still linger. The moment has come for Queen Maud to come out in all her splendour; and the lover, who has been communing with the flowers all night, finds that they and he are now thinking in unison:—
‘There has fallen a splendid tear
   From the passion-flower at the gate.
She is coming, my dove, my dear;
   She is coming, my life, my fate;
[Page 477]
The red rose cries, ‘She is near, she is near;’
   And the white rose weeps, ‘She is late;’
The larkspur listens, ‘I hear, I hear;’
   And the lily whispers, ‘I wait.”
Passing from the beautiful lyric of the waiting lover among the flowers, of which this is one of the stanzas, to the strain which immediately succeeds it, one is aware, from the abruptly altered metre, that the catastrophe has come:—
“The fault was mine—the fault was mine:’
Why am I sitting here so stunn'd and still,
Plucking the harmless wild-flower on the hill?
It is this guilty hand!’
What has happened may be guessed. Maud had come out to her lover in the rose-garden, but they had hardly exchanged a word when her brother had run in rage to the gate, accompanied by the babe-faced lord. High words had followed, Maud weeping by, till at last, in his fit of uncontrollable passion, the brother had struck him over the face. O evil stroke! O, irredeemable woe! Within an hour they two were standing front to front near the dreadful red-ribbed hollow, from which, as they exchanged pistol-shots, a million horrible bellowing echoes thundered up to heaven. ‘The fault was mine,’ the wounded man had whispered as he lay on the turf; and now, with the passionate cry of Maud over her brother's body still ringing in his ears, the wretched outcast is wailing his deed, cursing himself, and cursing the devilish human fiction which had invented the bloody code of private revenge. Where he is one hardly knows; but one fancies him in the first stage of his flight, sitting on a hill not far from the scene of his duel. Maud's wraith seems to chase him.
In the next strain the scene is changed. The outcast is safe on the shore of Brittany, lying on the beach, gazing now at a minute shell which has attracted his eye, and which he examines with a curiosity preternaturally intense; now at the blue sea-line towards Britain, behind which he has left such woe. He wonders whether his victim is dead—whether he need have fled; but on the whole is borne down with utter misery. Maud's ghost is ever before him, flitting as his eye flits; and for Maud herself, now lost to him for ever, he prays in sobs and tears.
The succeeding strain—the twenty-fourth of the poem—is one from which all certainty of form, place, and fact, is singularly absent. It is a kind of vague reflection in miniature, as in a blurred convex mirror, of the whole preceding story, with casual gleams across the reflection of something that was not in the
[Page 478]
original. One seems to see the speaker no longer on the quiet Breton strand, but in some great city abroad, haunted, amid its glare and noise, by the cold, remorseless phantom which ever pursues him. Now, in a broken gush of the heart, all the sweet past comes back, and he sighs—
‘O that 'twere possible
After long grief and pain
To find the arms of my true love
Round me once again!’
Again, at evening, he is led forth by the phantom through the streets, winding about, aimless and with reeling brain, through the shouts, the long lines of lights, and the roaring wheels of the city. Again he is tossing all night long, starting from dreams of the meadow, the old walls and turrets, and the never-returning delights of those happy home-scenes, to the horrors of reality and the wan, foreign city-morning. Again all day he is roaming aimless through the streets and markets, the abiding phantom with him. In no poem that we know is that physical impatience of rest in one place, that aimless, ceaseless, wasting desire of locomotion which is one of the characteristics of intense mental agony, on this side of actual madness, but tending to it, so well conveyed. There is a kind of intimation, too, that the reason why the agony has reached this intensity is, that the outcast has heard in the meantime both of Maud's death and of that of her brother. The intimation is so vague that it appears as if the poet had not cared to convey to the reader any certainty in this respect. Indeed, it might remain doubtful to the end whether Maud's brother died or recovered, though the death of Maud herself must be taken as sure.
In the next strain reason has given way, and the outcast is in a madhouse. The strain, accordingly, may be described as the lyric of the mad lover. The prevailing phantasy in the madman's mind is that he is dead and buried, but that they have not buried him deep enough, and that he has no rest in the grave. Within this fancy as a ghastly circumference are jumbled together, as it were, by the wild and incoherent action of a madman's imagination, all the wrecks and relics of his past memory, as well as the sights and sounds that are passing around him among his fellowmaniacs. The red-ribbed hollow, his father's suicide, the old Hall, the garden, and the music of that festive night, Maud's image, that of her lean, grey father, that of her brother lying with the would in his side, the Quaker preaching peace, the duel, his own old thoughts about war and social wrong—all are commingled, with the gabble and noise of the other madmen, into one hideous,
[Page 479]
inextricable phantasmagory. One notes throughout it the still remaining strength of the old vein of misanthropy and scorn; and from the jumble of the maniac's allusions one picks out the fixed ideas and collected observations of the sane man.
This strain is the prelude to the concluding one. In it the maniac has at length recovered. He awakens from his long dream of horror and frenzy to find his native land engaged in the beginnings of a great war of liberty. It seems to him, in the languor of his first returning sanity, as if the beatified spirit of Maud had parted from the company of the blessed, and descended to him like silent lightning under the stars, to tell him of a coming hope for the world in these wars:—
‘She seem'd to divide in a dream from a band of the blest,
And spoke of a hope for the world in the coming wars—
‘And in that hope, dear soul, let trouble have rest,
Knowing I tarry for thee;’ and pointed to Mars,
As he glowed like a ruddy shield on the lion's breast.’
He accepts the revelation made to him by the blessed spirit of her he loved on earth; and saying to himself that it is time that his morbid melancholy should cease, that ‘that old hysterical mockdisease should die,’ he joins in the throng of his countrymen arraying themselves for battle. And lo, in a little while, there he stands on a giant deck, mixing his breath with the shouts of a loyal people crying for war; and the great ship moves off from the shore, and it and he are lost in the distance. And now, as from the Black and the Baltic Seas there come ever and anon the news of victories, and of roarings of cannon, and of fortresses on fire, we may know that still on the deck of that great ship stands the form of this British Dante of our day, his eye all aglare against the Russ, his great chest bare, and his huge arm wielding the ramrod. What a metamorphosis, this hero of smoke and war, from him who lately in the foreign city was sighing—
‘Alas for her that met me,
That heard me softly call,
Came glimmering through the laurels
At the quiet evenfall,
In the garden by the turrets
Of the old manorial hall.’
And yet in this metamorphosis, we are to understand, lies the moral of the poem; and this patriot-warrior, with his eye aglare against the Russ, is the true Tennyson-Dante to the modern Maud-Beatrice.
From this prose-analysis of Maud , which we have purposely made rather detailed, in order to evolve (more distinctly than the
[Page 480]
reader may perhaps have been able to do for himself, unless he has studied the poem as well as read and enjoyed it) the actual and sometimes occult connexion of its parts, it will be evident, we think, that the poet has not offered the work as an allegory, but as a direct little poetic creation, all the personages and incidents of which are to be taken literally as they stand. That there is a meaning in the poem as a whole,—that this imaginary history of Maud and her lover is representative of some general thought of the poet, which he leaves to make its own impression,—is a matter of course. Every imaginative work is so representative, whether the writer intends it or not; but in this case the intention is almost avowed, and the interpretation is solicited.
The poem, as a whole, seems to us an extremely beautiful one. We do not know that we should call it equal either to the Princess or to In Memoriam . It is not so extensive or sustained an exercise of narrative phantasy as the one, bearing about the same relation to it in this respect that a short, but keen, sentimental story bears to a developed novel; and it has not the dark depths, the great continuous sorrow, the solemn, speculative significance of the other. This, however, is only saying that the Princess was the Princess , that In Memoriam was In Memoriam , and that Maud is Maud . The same poet who once gave us that exquisite fancy of the Princess Ida and her College of Women, and who again gave us, in those wonderful elegies on his dead friend, a book the precise like of which the world never had before and never will have again, and which even the high and extreme spirits of our age are disposed to keep by them as a solemn metaphysical manual—this same poet has now put forth another composition, which he naturally offers as different from either of the former. The composition may not be precisely what the public anticipated from him; and they may be disappointed in finding it both slighter in bulk and inferior, as regards the general interest of the subject and the elements involved, to its two predecessors. When these feelings have passed away, however, and when the poem is accepted, as the poet probably intends it to be, simply as one in the series of his productions, to be read and enjoyed for what it is, rather than contrasted with what it is not, we believe that then it will be universally acknowledged by the judicious to be a most beautiful poem, and worthy of Tennyson. For our part, not accepting it as an equivalent for that great master-work, whether the epic of Arthur , or any other, which the world expects from him, and ranking it, in respect of its size and its subject, as a minor work of the author in comparison with two of those he has already published, we yet consider it a gem of art, and perfect in its kind.
[Page 481]
What the kind of the poem is, however, it might be difficult to define. Critics recognise three essential kinds of poetry—the epic or narrative, the dramatic, and the lyrical; and under one or other of these kinds, or under some combination of them, it is considered that all poetical compositions, as such, may be classed. Accepting this as a useful statement, one finds, by a reference to Tennyson's former writings, that he has given evidence of power both in narrative and in lyrical poetry, but that, in the main, the bent of his genius seems to be to the lyrical. The most admired of his earlier poems are lyrical, and written in the various measures which only the lyrist is allowed to use or to invent; and even where he has had a narrative to evolve he has often, as in Locksley Hall , followed the law of his genius by inweaving the narrative in a lyric. Dora may indeed be cited as an exquisite specimen of pure poetic narration. The Princess , also, is a sustained effort of pure narrative poesy, written in that wellknown heroic, or five-accent verse which, either in its blank or in its rhymed form, English custom has consecrated for the purposes of narrative poetry, with little option of any other, unless it be occasionally the Spenserian stanza, or the short four-accent verse of Scott; and the poet's success in this fine composition amply proves his perfect mastery of pure narration and of blank narrative verse whenever he chooses, and to any extent that he may choose. Even in this poem, however, it is significant that the poet has interspersed songs, so as to break the continuity of the narrative form, and impart to the poem a dash of the lyrical. In In Memoriam we have a still more remarkable illustration of the same fact—the tendency of Tennyson's genius to the lyrical form of expression as that best suited to it. For the peculiarity of this work is, that here, in a series of elegies which are essentially lyrical, the poet not only involves snatches of description and narration, so as to make the work in part autobiographical, but also makes the song bear along with it, in unaltered lyrical cadence, whole masses of rare and deep intellectual speculation. Something of this power of conveying doctrine or speculation as well as fact and incident, and so of being didactic as well as descriptive or narrative, under the forms of verse essentially lyrical, might have been observed previously in Locksley Hall , and other poems.
Applying all this to Maud , one appreciates better a certain title which it possesses, even at first sight, to the favourable regards of critics. It is an interesting experiment in a new, or all but new, species of poetical composition—being, in fact, a poem, the substance of which is connectedly narrative, the immediate purpose expressly didactic, and yet the form entirely
[Page 482]
lyrical. This originality in the construction of the poem was doubtless contemplated by the poet as constituting one of its distinctive features in comparison with most of his previous compositions. He seems to have resolved in this instance to make the attempt, suggested by the partial example of some of his former poems, to write a work in which a continuous story, implying a certain moral lesson, should be evolved, not in the usual narrative manner, but in a series of songs or lyrical effusions. This he has accomplished by the simple and yet happy device of concentrating the attention on the principal personage of the supposed history, and representing the facts of the history itself through the medium of twenty-six lyrical soliloquies, each imagined as being uttered at a critical moment in the progress of the history. It would be well if those critics who have been accusing the poet of diseased ‘subjectivity’ and what not, were to attend to this peculiarity of the present poem. All songs or lyrical pieces are, in their very nature, ‘subjective,’ being expressions either of the poet's personal feelings or of feelings imagined by him as belonging to such and such circumstances; and the positive peculiarity of Maud is, that the poet has there contrived to weave together a poem which, though ‘subjective’ in its parts, is as ‘objective’ as any one could desire in its total impression. For our part we regard the poem, on this very account, as something of a novelty in English poetry, and as a new proof of Tennyson's exquisite skill as an artist.
Not only, however, is the form of the poem original or unusual; but the execution is singularly perfect. The story is a simple and natural one—poetical, and yet not inconsistent with contemporary English manners; and it is distinctly conceived and developed. Of course there is none of that interest which arises from elaborate, involved, and exciting plot—a species of interest which, though it has been attained by Scott and other narrative poets, is really proper to the novel, and is not, in general, so much as looked for in poems. It is enough if, in most metrical compositions, even of a narrative character, there is a clear story of a few connected incidents of a natural and impressive kind; and the art of the poet is shown rather in sweetly prolonging these incidents, and surrounding each with all the subsidiary beauties of invented circumstance and imagery, and making such a picture of each that the memory delights in recalling it again and again for leisurely contemplation, and imparting to the whole so definite and significant a meaning that it is felt to be a new literary creation. Our prose-analysis of Maud will have shown that in these respects it is as perfect as possible. How beautifully each incident is made to stand out before the fancy, and with what
[Page 483]
skill is each made complete in itself, and yet inwoven into the story! What exquisite passages of scene and object painting there are in the poem! Who will ever forget, for example, that ghastly ‘red-ribb'd hollow’ which figures so much in the scenery of the poem, or will ever see a solitary pit or quarry in a sequestered country neighbourhood without thinking of it? Or, to take an instance of a very different kind, what fair conchologist is there who would not willingly subscribe for a piece of plate to be presented to the poet for that memorable description of a marine shell which occurs in the twenty-third strain of the poem; and what malacologist so prosaic as not to feel the worth, were it but for popular quotation, of those lines in the same passage in which the poet, while gazing on the shell, remembers so kindly the living little mollusc which had tenanted it:—
‘The tiny cell is forlorn,
Void of the living will
That made it stir on the shore.
Did he stand at the diamond door
Of his house in a rainbow frill?
Did he push, when he was uncurl'd,
A golden foot or a fairy horn
Through his dim water-world?’
Or, to pass from this instance of the minute and the coloured to one of the vast and sonorous, take the following description of the sea heard in the open air near the shore at night:—
                                         ‘I could bear it no more,
But arose, and all by myself in my own dark garden ground,
Listening now to the tide in its broad-flung ship-wrecking roar,
Now to the scream of a madden'd beach dragg'd down by the wave,
Walk'd in a wintry wind by a ghastly glimmer, and found
The shining daffodil dead, and Orion low in his grave.’
Again, if distinct imagination of costume, physiognomy, and character, as well as of inanimate objects and scenery, is sought for in a narrative poem, have we not such in Maud ? The persons of the poem are few, but they are all perfectly distinct to the fancy. Maud herself, indeed, though now and then there are sweet and even rosy glimpses of her actual maidenly beauty, is suffered on the whole, to remain ‘luminous, gemlike, ghostlike,’ as befits the image of one who has been on earth only to pass, like Beatrice, to a higher and invisible function in heaven. Maud's lover, the hero, also is more strongly defined in his moral than in his physical lineaments, as becomes a personage typical rather than individual; and yet one figures him without difficulty. To our imagination he is dark-visaged, almost swarthy,
[Page 484]
proud, luxuriously moody, and altogether such that, in spite of a certain traditional sympathy with him felt in a neighbourhood where his history was known, he had, until his meeting with Maud, few who cared for him personally, or who did not even rather dislike him as an ungenial, unintelligible fellow, who spent his days in sauntering about sulkily and speaking to nobody. Herein he differs greatly from Hamlet, with whom, we believe, the critics have compared him. Hamlet was popular at Elsinore, the ‘observed of all observers,’ ‘the expectancy and rose of the fair state,’ whom all Denmark would have been glad to see on his father's throne instead of his uncle; and his melancholy was that of a mind morbidly intellectual and speculative, rather than unsocial. In the melancholy of Maud's lover there is more of hate, and of hate in fixed forms; and the effect on his whole demeanour is such, that the villagers, as they see him pass, look rather sneeringly after him, and, though remembering his father's days, feel no wish to see the present proprietors of the estate turned out in his favour. One understands even how Maud's brother, not being the kind of man to penetrate beneath the surface and discern a noble soul under a sulky and rather slovenly exterior, conceived a dislike for our hero at first sight, and stood aside superciliously as he saw him approach by the field path. For in the description of Maud's brother, is there not an element of unnecessary rancour, which almost excuses the conduct of that gentleman towards his describer?
                                         ‘That dandy-despot, he,
That jewell'd mass of millinery,
That oil'd and curl'd Assyrian Bull,
Smelling of musk and of insolence.’
From the speaker, we say, this is rather rancorous, showing that the Bull's superciliousness was but the instinctive return for an unfriendly feeling already existing on the other side. From the poet, however, it is capital, and the portrait is doubtless already doing service as a satirical likeness of many a man about the aristocratic clubs. Then again how distinctly does one see the ‘lean and grey old wolf,’ the father of Maud and her brother, and the ‘babe-faced lord,’ Maud's suitor, with his ‘rabbit mouth’ ever agape, the grandson of the great coal owner. The coal owner himself is likely to be remembered:
‘Gone to a blacker pit, for whom,
Grimy nakedness dragging his trucks
And laying his trams in a poison'd gloom
Wrought, till he crept from a gutted mine,
[Page 485]
Master of half a servile shire,
And left his coal all turn'd to gold
To a grandson, first of his noble line.’
It is another merit in a poem when, in addition to such descriptive passages and sketches of physiognomy and character, it contains powerful reflective passages, weighty thoughts expressed musically in metre, so as to dwell easily in the memory. In this kind of merit, Maud , though not possessing it in so high a degree as some of Tennyson's previous poems, is by no means deficient. Here is a golden passage, the second stanza in particular, expressing an idea, derived from geology, which must often have presented itself to contemplative minds, but which we have never seen rendered by a poet before with so much force and precision.
‘We are puppets, Man in his pride, and Beauty fair in her flower;
Do we move ourselves, or are moved by an unseen hand at a game
That pushes us off from the board, and others ever succeed?
Ah, yet we cannot be kind to each other here for an hour;
We whisper, and hint, and chuckle, and grin at a brother's shame;
However we brave it out, we men are a little breed.
‘A monstrous eft was of old the Lord and Master of earth,
For him did his high sun flame, and his river billowing ran,
And he felt himself in his force to be Nature's crowning race.
As nine months go to the shaping an infant ripe for his birth,
So many a million of ages have gone to the making of man:
He now is first, but is he the last? is he not too base?
‘The man of science himself is fonder of glory, and vain,
An eye well-practised in Nature, a spirit bounded and poor;
The passionate heart of the poet is whirl'd into folly and vice.
I would not marvel at either, but keep a temperate brain;
For not to desire or admire, if a man could learn it, were more
Than to walk all day, like the sultan of old, in a garden of spice.’
Of the highly-finished style and composition of the poem, it is unnecessary to speak. Like all Tennyson's writings—which, in this respect at least, contrast so favourably with those of some of the poets of the last generation, such as Byron and Scott— the language is careful, compact, nervous, and free from those weak expletives, slovenly phrases, and confusions of metaphor which poets often permit themselves as passable in verse, though in prose they would be intolerable. Some of the passages are perfect studies of pure, monosyllabic, Saxon English.
One peculiarity, noticeable in all Tennyson's verse, may here be particularly alluded to as noticeable also in the present poem—to wit, that the order of words is invariably the same as it would be,
[Page 486]
or at least as it might with propriety be, if the writing were prose. Let the reader make the experiment for himself. Let him repeat vocally, or let him write out any of the passages we have quoted from Maud or indeed any passage from any poem of Tennyson's, and he will find that, however poetical the thought may be, the words in which it is couched follow each other in the exact grammatical order in which they would occur in equivalent prose. This is no slight peculiarity in Tennyson. In spite of all that Wordsworth taught and practised to the contrary, our poets do not seem yet to have thoroughly freed themselves from the idea that it is lawful at a pinch to make verse by distorting the natural prose order of their words; and it will require much severe critical chastisement of daily offences in this respect to impress upon them that, however much the public may like verse, it would be better for it to have no fresh supplies of the article at all, than to have it manufactured on any such sluttish principle. True verse is not prose; but it differs from prose in being something more than prose, and not in being dislocated prose. In true verse the poet shows his art precisely in this, that, without deviating at all from the established conditions of good prose construction, but only by submitting his genius at the same time to certain other conditions purely additional to these, he attains to those more subtle effects which distinguish verse from prose-writing.
In addition, however, to this general merit possessed by Maud in common with the rest of Tennyson's poems, the poem possesses special attractions for those who are curious in versification, or peculiarly susceptible of pleasure from it. The poet appears to have resolved in this poem to show the full range of his powers as an artist in verse. His purpose seems to have been to show how wild, and wayward, and varied he could be in his choice of measures, and yet how perfectly beautiful and finished he could make the whole. The lyrical character of the poem of course exempted him from the necessity of adhering to one measure throughout, and permitted him, consistently with ordinary lyrical practice, a certain range of selection. But he has far transcended this range. Hardly any two of the twenty-six strains composing the poem, are metrically alike—the metre in each strain being light, sweet, and fantastic, or great, grave, and masculine, according to the mood represented; nay, sometimes the metre varying much within the limits of the same strain. Even where the single line is metrically the same, the combinations of the lines by rhyme, stanza, &c., are varied. Moreover, as if expressly to mark the poet's intention to shake himself free in this poem from all shackles of customary prosody, he has done two things far more significant in their nature than merely passing at will from
[Page 487]
measure to measure, and from one rhythmical combination to another: he has shown a preference throughout the whole poem for verse constructed on what prosodians call the unsymmetrical principle, that is, for verse in which the syllables are not multiples of the accents; and he has also written a considerable part of it in a totally new species of such verse invented by himself for the occasion. The first by itself might not be so strange, for ever since the time of Coleridge's Christabel , the consistency of unsymmetrical verse with the genius of the English language, and its special fitness for the purposes of lyrical narration, have been known, and in Tennyson's earlier poems not unfrequent use is made of verse of this kind. Still, the extent to which in Maud the principle of versification by accent alone has been adopted, in preference to the old-fashioned one of versification by reference to the number of syllables, proves that the poet had an experimental intention in writing it,—meant it, in fact, to be a new appeal to the English ear. Were there any doubt on the subject, it is removed by the circumstance of the totally new metre introduced into the poem at the very beginning, and extending through onefourth of its entire bulk, as if on purpose to test in the most decisive manner the susceptibility of the English ear to new metrical pleasures, if it could get them. Tennyson has already distinguished himself, as every true lyrist ought, by new instinctive metrical combinations to suit his thoughts; but certainly he has never innovated so much as in this case. Let us quote a line or two of the new measure, that we may examine it the better:
‘The mán of scíence himsélf, is fónder of glóry, and vaín,
An éye well-práctised in náture, a spírit bóunded and póor;
The pássionate héart of the póet is whírl'd into fólly and více.
I wóuld not márvel at eíther, but kéep a témperate bráin;
For nót to desíre or admíre, if a mán could léarn it, were móre
Than to wálk all dáy like the súltan of óld in a gárden of spíce.’
The first of these lines contains fifteen syllables, the second also fifteen, the third seventeen, the fourth again fifteen, the fifth sixteen, and the sixth again seventeen. Or take the opening lines of the whole poem:—
‘I háte the dréadful hóllow behínd the líttle wóod,
Its líps in the fiéld abóve are dábbled with blóod-red héath,
The réd-ribb'd lédges dríp with a sílent hórror of blóod,
And Echo thére, whatéver is ásk'd her, ánswers ‘Déath.”
Here, though the verse is the same, the first line has but thirteen syllables; the second has fourteen; the third has fourteen; and the fourth has again only thirteen. The number of syllables, then, varies in the verse, without affecting its essential character, which is determined by the uniform number of the accents . Every
[Page 488]
line, it will be observed, has six accents. The verse is, therefore, unsymmetrical six-accent verse—in other words, it differs from the ordinary English heroic, first, in having an accent more, and, secondly, in not having any uniform proportion between its syllables and its accents. Both these differences, however, bring it near the classical hexameter, and suggest a close comparison of it with that measure. On such a closer examination, it will be found that the verse (the rhyme excepted) is very like that produced by English scholars, and by Longfellow and some other poets, in imitation of classic hexameters. For example, let us only slightly disturb the arrangement of the passage just quoted:—
                     ‘The
Man of | science him | self is | fonder of | glory and | vain, An
Eye well- | practised in | nature, a | spirit | bounded and | poor; The
Passionate | heart of the | poet is | whirl'd into | folly and | vice. I
Would not | marvel at | either, but | keep a | temperate | brain; For
Not to de | sire or ad | mire, if a | man could | learn it, were | more than
(To) Walk all | daylike the | sultan of | old in a | garden of | spice.∗’
Here, by simply transferring the syllable beginning each line to the close of the preceding line, we torture the measure into what is usually offered us as English hexameter—the only exception being in the adjustment of the fifth and sixth lines, where there is a supernumerary syllable in the word ‘to.’ And so throughout the whole portion of the poem written in the same measure, there is not, we believe, a single line which, with the addition of a single syllable at the close (in most cases to be supplied from the next line), or by some change equally trivial, might not be made to read as an English hexameter. Thus:—
                     ‘I
Hate the | dreadful | hollow be | hind the | little | wood. Its
Lips in the | field a | bove are | dabbled with | blood-red | heath; The
Red-ribb'd | ledges | drip with a | silent | horror of | blood, And
Echo | there, what | ever is | ask'd her, | answers ‘Death.’∗’
Here three of the lines—the first, second, and fourth—would, in the language of classical prosody, be spondaic lines, i.e. , lines háving a spondee (in so-called English hexameter-writing, the trochee must pass for the spondee), instead of a dactyl for the penultimate foot. In short, by little more than a trick of the voice in reading, with the liberty now and then of introducing a supernumerary syllable at the end, or rejecting one at the beginning of a line, all the parts of the poem written in the measure under notice might be made to pass for so-called English hexameters. There, however, lies the important particular. It is only by a trick in reading, and by a trick that would be horrible to the poet
[Page 489]
and murderous to the whole spirit and music of his verse, that this feat could be accomplished. In other words, although the verse is six-accent verse, and transmutable by physical force into that species of six-accent verse which is usually offered as an imitation of the classic hexameter, the poet, by the very fact that he has so arranged it as to make this transmutation possible only by physical force, and a violation of his pauses and rhythm, intimates that he does not offer the verse as so-called English hexameter at all, but as something totally different. And it is something totally different, even when the apparent difference is least. Thus:—
‘Maud with her | venturous | climbings and | tumbles and | childishes | capes;
Maud the de | light of the | village, the | ringing | joy of the | Hall;
Maud with her | sweet purse- | mouth, when my | father | dangled the | grapes;
Maud the be | loved of my | mother, the | moon-faced | darling of | all.’
Here all that is wanted in order to turn each of these lines into what would be considered a perfect English hexameter, is a single additional syllable at the close; so that if we chose we might call the lines, as they stand, imperfect hexameters, or hexameters catalectic. Yet this very fact of the syllable wanting at the close, makes the entire character of the line different from that of a complete hexameter. Tennyson, therefore, in introducing this measure so largely into his Maud , and in doing so, as we conceive, with such effect and beauty, has accomplished two distinct things; he has achieved a metrical triumph by at once pleasing the English ear with a measure previously new to it; and he has at the same time, in the seemingly slight and yet really important difference of this measure from the so-called hexameter, revealed the true cause of the incompatibility of this latter measure (if it is incompatible) with the genius of English verse. That cause, we think, is the tendency of the English ear, except by way of occasional variety, to pause metrically only on a fully accented syllable.
All this is very mechanical; but the critic is often bound to be mechanical where the poet acted from the sheer instinct of life and power; and besides, it is well, seeing that the poem has been depreciated in some quarters, to point out all its titles to consideration. Of these its metrical originality is not the least.
After all, however, the question recurs, Is this poem, with all its merits, metrical and other, a worthy emanation from the genius of our Laureate at a time like the present? Every poem
[Page 490]
or work of imagination, we have already said, is necessarily an allegory of the whole mental state of the poet at the time at which it is written: is, then, the state of mind which this poem allegorizes, the single general thought which pervades it, such as was to be expected considering who the author is, and at what time the poem has appeared? All Britain being on the alert and agitated from end to end on account of a war the greatest perhaps, as it may turn out, that the world has for ages seen, and this elected singer and spokesman of Britain walking meanwhile over the green fields and by the cliffs of one of England's pet islands on her southern shore, set there and chained there, as it were, that he might ruminate in his great mind, vicariously for the nation at large, all that was passing around, and that at last, amid the sound of the sea-roar, he might roll the rude noise into music, and give forth the fitting song—such being the theme and such the singer, is this sentimental tale of a maiden and a manorial hall and a moody lover, this phantasy of poesy and metre, this specimen of the exquisite in colour and sound, the proper and sufficient issue?
Questions of this kind are, in their nature, somewhat unfair, suggesting as they do the trial of works by a standard not generally applied—namely, that of comparison between what has been produced, and what might possibly have been produced in its stead. In this case, however, an answer may be given without much difficulty. It is quite conceivable that a poet like Tennyson should have given us a poem that would have been strictly a poem for the times, and yet totally unlike the present one—more massive, more deep, more rugged; with characters more vast and Titanic, incidents more mighty and involved, a physical theatre more extensive, and an undercurrent of meaning more elaborate, strong, and philosophic. When Tennyson chooses to throw all his thoughts about his own time, to shape all his meditations about man and life as they now are, into one master work, it will probably be nearer to this ideal. In such a work, were, it to be published now, there need not, in order to its being a work for the times, be even one word of allusion to Russia or the war. After all, there are deeper things about the age which a poet, studying its spirit, might seek to speak about, than this war with Russia; and looked at by a poet from a sufficiently high point of view, the war with Russia, even as a phenomenon of the present, might seem by no means the thing to require notice. “The French are drawing near Paris,” said an excited visitor at Goethe's house in Weimar, one morning in 1796, repeating the day's news, of which all were then brimfull, in order that Goethe might speak his mind upon it. ‘Hm!’ was Goethe's expressive commentary
[Page 491]
on the fact thus submitted to him; and he went on to discourse on art and books, and to read, for the pleasure of the company, his last love poem. And really, ‘Hm’ is often about as ample and as intelligent an expression of opinion as a man can safely venture upon in connexion with many an event which is the week's talk of the newspapers; and there is no such incongruity, after all, as some pretend to see and be shocked at, in the publication of love-poems, and discourses on art, and works on osteology, in the midst of social convulsion and the din of national warfare. What seems cold-heartedness in such matters may be but superior wisdom. Now, for example, that that march of the French to Paris which was the great news in Weimar that morning, sixty years ago, is past, and done, and over, and every drummer in it dead, and the whole thing so thoroughly vanished that, for aught we know, it may never have taken place, what possible speech that Goethe could have made on the subject could have been truer to the spirit of the fact, than that semiarticulate ‘Hm’ with which he dismissed it? or how could he have tinged his day's work and conversation more largely with that fact, and yet have remained sober and proportionate? So, also, if Tennyson had chosen to put forth a poem in which there had been no allusion whatever to the Russian war, that poem might, in a certain sense, even had it been a mere phantasy about a lover and a maiden, have been a poem in the true spiritual key of the moment; and the public might in justice have had no right to complain. And yet, popular instinct is all the other way. Say what we will, the public does find something intolerable in the spectacle of a man strumming his guitar, while all around him are blowing the bugle and beating the drum. Even in Goethe, his greatest contemporaries being judges, it was difficult to bear with such poetic imperturbability. ‘In such stormy times,’ wrote Jean Paul to a friend, about the very year above mentioned, in allusion to the nature of Goethe's literary employments, ‘we need a Tyrtæus rather than a Propertius;’ and Goethe, when he heard of the remark, is said to have been nettled at ‘this manifestation of arrogance in Herr Richter.’ Much more, and perhaps more justly at the present time, and at the commencement of a war so grand in itself and so ominous for Britain, would there be an outcry against the British Laureate were he to offer us, as the fruits of his leisure, nothing but elegies and epithalamiums. High indeed must be that point of view from which such a phenomenon as the Russian war could seem a small part of the essence of the present to a British poet.
All this has been perceived, or at least felt, by Tennyson;
[Page 492]
and in our opinion he has worthily performed his duty at the moment. On the one hand, he has not attempted any poem to the times, in the sense of that great master-work, in which, as a poet, he might try to represent the age in its essence and spirit, and from which it is quite possible that all express allusion to the Russian war and other such phenomena should be absent. On the other hand, he has not been content with merely pleasing himself with common and usual strains of love and fancy, indifferent to the spirit of what is passing around him. Even if he had done so, we may know from his past writings that his strains would have been of a higher and more solemn nature than those of any mere amorous Propertius. But even the consciousness of this has not prevented him from yielding himself up to the enthusiasm of the hour, and becoming for the time such a poet as his countrymen would have him to be. He has managed the matter well. He has really produced a poem for the times, and powerfully suited to the times; but he has done this by restricting himself, by not aiming at the highest ideal of such a poem, in which, as we have said, only the deepest and most general facts of the age would have to be rendered, but composing a minor and more obvious kind of poem, in which the one apparent theme of the day is poetically treated. There was some difficulty in this task, as may be seen from the poor results of all those efforts which our poets have been making to get up a ‘minstrelsy of the war.’ The public enthusiasm for the war is unquestionable, and our poets have been puffing and blowing, with laudable zeal, and striding up and down in their rooms, and beating their brains for rhymes; and yet somehow or other, with one or two exceptions, all the poetry we have yet got out of this subject of the Muscovite is terribly wooden. Some subtle law is involved in this—a law illustrated often before, as in the case of the death of the Duke of Wellington. The Muse is coy of contemporary themes, however impressive; and it requires rare genius in a poet to overcome this coyness. Tennyson has been able to do so. As before, in his Ode on the Death of the Duke of Wellington , he succeeded where inferior men failed—producing a poem which, though not rich or splendid, had a kind of severe iron-grey beauty about it that one could regard as distinctive—so now, on this theme of the Russian war, his success is as undeniable, and far more remarkable. The poem is a genuine warpoem; a genuine offering of the Laureate to the cause of British patriotism at the present hour: and yet it is truly and purely a work of creative art. The manner in which this has been accomplished is worthy of notice. Instead of coming forward, directly and ostensibly, in the character of Tyrtæus, singing war-songs
[Page 493]
about the British Lion, and cheering our soldiers and sailors on by sonorous rhymes about ‘war’ and ‘Czar,’ he has been our Tyrtæus in a far more subtle and characteristic fashion. He has seized, as it were, on the philosophic essence of the theme; he has caught, as it were, the innermost doctrine of the war, as it presents itself to the highest minds of the country; and this doctrine he has rendered poetically into a beautiful tissue of ideal scenes, personages, incidents, and actions, all created more or less in its service, and which, first passing before the imagination as a phantasmagory, pleasing in itself, yet leave behind them as they vanish a certain fixed impression or sense of the doctrine intended. Thus, it is primarily the most thoughtful minds of the country that the poem is meant to impress; and it is only as acting through these upon the general tone of the public sentiment, or perhaps, also, as containing occasional bursts of warmusic, intelligible at once to all, that the poem can be called a poem of the war. It is even possible, we think, that much of the story of the poem was conceived, and that some of its finest passages were written, before the war was heard of; and that the idea of surrounding the little luminous phantasy thus shaping itself with a dark war-cloud, was an afterthought. This would only make the art of the poem more natural and simple.
The poem, we said, is a true British lyric for the times, inasmuch as it propounds the poet's philosophy of the war, for the consideration of the highest minds of the country. What, then, is that philosophy? What is the doctrine of the poem respecting the war and the present crisis of Great Britain? It is plainly enough announced in the very first strain of the poem, during that opening soliloquy in which the hero, before he sees Maud, reveals his character:—
‘Why do we prate of the blessings of Peace? We have made them a curse,
Pickpockets, each hand lusting for all that is not its own;
And lust of gain, in the spirit of Cain, is it better or worse
Than the heart of the citizen hissing in war on his own hearthstone?
‘But these are the days of advance, the works of the men of mind,
When who but a fool would have faith in a tradesman's ware or his word?
Is it peace or war? Civil war, as I think, and that of a kind
The viler, as underhand, not openly bearing the sword.
‘Sooner or later I too may passively take the print
Of the golden age—why not? I have neither hope nor trust;
May make my heart as a millstone, set my face as a flint,
Cheat and be cheated, and die: who knows? we are ashes and dust.
[Page 494]
‘Peace, sitting under her olive, and slurring the days gone by,
When the poor are hovell'd and hustled together, each sex, like swine,
When only the ledger lives, and when only not all men lie;
Peace in her vineyard—yes!—but a company forges the wine;
‘And the vitriol madness flushes up in the ruffian's head,
Till the filthy by-lane rings to the yell of the trampled wife;
While chalk, and alum, and plaster are sold to the poor for bread,
And the spirit of murder works in the very means of life;
‘And Sleep must lie down armed, for the villanous centre-bits
Grind on the wakeful ear in the hush of the moonless nights;
While another is cheating the sick of a few last gasps, as he sits
To pestle a poison'd poison behind his crimson lights.
‘When a Mammonite mother kills her babe for a burial fee,
And Timour-Mammon grins on a pile of children's bones,—
Is it peace or war?—better war! loud war by land and by sea,
War with a thousand battles, and shaking a hundred thrones:
‘For I trust if an enemy's fleet came yonder round by the hill,
And the rushing battle-bolt sang from the three-decker out of the foam,
That the smooth-faced snub-nosed rogue would leap from his counter and till,
And strike, if he could, were it but with his cheating yard-wand, home.’
There is no mistaking the doctrine here. It is an emphatic offer of the lie-direct to the doctrine hitherto universally entertained, and now hawked about by a certain school of politicians, under the garb of such specious phrases as ‘the blessings of peace.’ The poet, for his part, declares this phrase to be a wretched and unmitigated fallacy, and maintains that the very opposite phrase, ‘the curses of peace,’ would be, to all intents and purposes, more accurate and descriptive of the facts. It is only men's blindness, he suggests, their slavish habit of repeating words without ever thinking of the realities, that has prevented them long ere this from hooting down the phrase, ‘the blessings of peace,’ as sheer, sanctimonious falsehood. ‘Listen,’ he says, ‘while I repeat some items from the catalogue of these so-called blessings.’ And then follows his enumeration of some of the more glaring forms of contemporary social fraud and wrong. The effect is certainly striking. One feels, at least, that if a state of peace has its blessings, it has also its drawbacks, and consequently, that the usual complacency with which we regard our highly ‘enlightened’ and ‘peaceful’ age may very well be somewhat abated. All that we can offer by way of reply is, that possibly
[Page 495]
those social wrongs and anomalies which exist even during peace, might exist to as great an extent, or to a greater, during war, so that peace is a more blessed state than war by at least all the difference between tranquillity and its opposite. But the poet anticipates this reasoning. If it were a real state of peace that the world has been in, he seems to say, then he might acquiesce. But it is not so. What conventionally has been called peace has been really a state of war, and of war of the worst kind —a vile, underhand, civil war, in which quite as much animosity has existed, and quite as much suffering and death has been inflicted, as in so-called war itself, only in a more venomous and infinitesimal manner. And then, as regards the chance that, if open war were to break out, all these social evils would still continue to exist, with the superaddition of others proper to war itself, he hints that this would not be the case. Just as a cheating shopkeeper, rushing to the defence of himself and his property against a foreign invasion, would, in that very act, rise, for the moment into a higher state of moral being, and have his meanness melted out of him for the moment by the fervour of a stronger feeling, so, he hints, in the hot emotion of war, would the nation at large beat with a nobler pulse, and be educated out of some of its lower villanies.
The same train of thought recurs throughout the poem, with occasional variation. Thus, in the passage in which the hero, taking himself to task for his own jealousy and rancour, is led to generalize the application:—
‘Last week came one to the county town,
To preach our poor little army down,
And play the game of the despot kings,
Tho' the state has done it, and thrice as well:
This broad-brimm'd hawker of holy things,
Whose ear is stuft with cotton, and rings
Even in dreams to the chink of his pence,
This huckster put down war! Can he tell
Whether war be a cause or a consequence?
Put down the passions that make earth Hell!
Down with ambition, avarice, pride,
Jealousy, down! Cut off from the mind
The bitter springs of anger and fear;
Down too, down at your own fireside,
With the evil tongue and the evil ear,
For each is at war with mankind.
Ah, God, for a man with heart, head, hand,
Like some of the simple great ones gone
For ever and ever by,
One still strong man in a blatant land,—
[Page 496]
Whatever they call him, what care I,
Aristocrat, democrat, autocrat—one
Who can rule, and dare not lie.’
The Laureate cannot mean this denunciation to fall upon Mr. Bright personally, whom no honourable antagonist will call a ‘huckster,’ or depreciate as a man acting from unworthy motives. The passage is doubtless meant as a denunciation of that mode of thinking of which Mr. Bright is the most distinguished representative in this country—that shallow peace-philosophy which regards war as a mere voluntary and causeless sport, in which a nation may indulge or not, as it chooses, forgetting that the seeds and roots of war exist in human nature and in human society, and that to talk of the abolition of war while these remain is to avoid the whole difficulty.
That the passages above quoted, though they are put into the mouth of a man who is represented as morbid and unfair in his views of things, yet really express the poet's own philosophy, is evident from the manner in which the poem is concluded. The following passage, in which the hero, recovering from his madness, is represented as exulting in the approach of war, and as plunging into it with the full assurance that in the course of activity thus opened up to him he is to find rest for his sorrows and the restoration of healthy manhood, forms also, so to speak, the Laureate's peroration at the close of his address to the British people on their present prospects and duties. The hero, awaking from his insanity, seems to see a vision of his beatified Maud beckoning from heaven, and pointing to the then rising storm of war as the probation through which he is to pass on his way to moral and intellectual peace:—
‘And it was but a dream, yet it yielded a dear delight,
To have look'd tho' but in a dream, upon eyes so fair,
That had been in a weary world my one thing bright;
And it was but a dream, yet it lighten'd my despair
When I thought that a war would arise in defence of the right,
That an iron tyranny now should bend or cease,
The glory of manhood stand on his ancient height,
Nor Britain's one sole god be the millionaire:
No more shall commerce be all in all, and Peace
Pipe on her pastoral hillock a languid note,
And watch her harvest ripen, her herd increase,
Nor the cannon-bullet rust on a slothful shore;
And the cobweb woven across the cannon's throat,
Shall shake its threaded tears in the wind no more.
‘And as months ran on, and rumour of battle grew,
‘It is time, it is time, O passionate heart,’ said I,
[Page 497]
(For I cleaved to a cause that I felt to be pure and true,)
‘It is time, O passionate heart and morbid eye,
‘That old hysterical mock-disease should die.’
And I stood on a giant deck, and mixed my breath
With a loyal people shouting a battle cry,
Till I saw the dreary phantom arise and fly
Far into the North, and battle, and seas of Death.
‘Let it go or stay, so I wake to the higher aims
Of a land that has lost for a little her lust of gold,
And love of a peace that was full of wrongs and shames,
Horrible, hateful, monstrous, not to be told;
And hail once more to the banner of battle unroll'd!
Tho' many a light shall darken, and many shall weep
For those that are crush'd in the clash of jarring claims,
Yet God's just doom shall be wreak'd on a giant liar;
And many a darkness into the light shall leap,
And shine in the sudden making of splendid names,
And noble thought be freer under the sun,
And the heart of a people beat with one desire;
For the long, long canker of peace is over and done.
And now by the side of the Black and the Baltic deep,
And deathful-grinning mouths of the fortress, flames
The blood-red blossom of war with a heart of fire.’
Two things are to be gathered from this peroration of the Laureate to his new poem: first, that he heartily approves of the war in which we are now engaged, and gives his vote for its prosecution; and, secondly, that he intends his poem to be a consolation and encouragement to all who, like him, think the war right and necessary, by suggesting to them that, just as the imaginary hero of the poem is represented by him as finding moral health and spiritual restoration, and a release from jealousies, fears, and maudlin’ meanness, in the prospect of action in this very struggle against despotism and barbarism, so a similar hope of ample compensation in moral and intellectual aggrandizement for whatever of physical loss and pain may have to be borne, is to be entertained for Britain and Europe at large from the same inevitable strife. Such, then, being the purport of the poem, considered as a poem for the times by the British Laureate, what are we to say by way of final judgment on these two interpretations of its meaning? As regards the first—the fact that the poem indicates the Laureate's full adhesion to the war policy of Britain— what can be said but that, at a time when our Gladstones and Lord John Russells and Sir James Grahams are shilly-shallying and sheering off, this hearty adhesion of a man as massive intellectually as any of them, and altogether of a higher order of spirit than that to which they belong, must be most
[Page 498]
effective and welcome? The adhesion being only announced a fact, and not explained by argument, this is all that can be said on that point. As regards the other point—the philosophical exposition submitted by the poet of the social and moral uses of war—we will only say that, though we consider the case in behalf of war as against peace somewhat exaggerated, and the picture of the horrors of peace over-coloured, yet, on the whole, it is well that the Laureate, in the midst of so much inferior declamation on the other side, has reiterated so boldly a faith which is substantially that of all great thinkers and great poets. The greatest minds of the past—even religious minds such as that of Wordsworth —have recognised, through all those horrors of war upon which weaker men dilate as if they formed the whole phenomenon, a certain sacred and even divine function in it; and, if a war is just and necessary, it is surely but piety to believe that good will come out of it. Till the year 1849, the modern Romans were reputed to be about the most hopelessly sunken population of any in Italy or the world—a people cowardly, slavish, slinking, slothful, and licentious, from whom no noble or manly action was to be expected. True or not, such was the belief. Well, in that year Mazzini taught that very people to defend their city for six weeks against the French; and the result, it is said, has been that there is not now a Roman who does not feel himself to be a being of higher capabilities than he ever possessed before, fit to face any danger like a hero, and to fight two Frenchmen. Facts like this seem to corroborate the Laureate's warphilosophy.
$$$
