MEADOWSWEET 

Baroness Orczy 



MEADOWSWEET 



BARONESS ORCZY 



MEADOWSWEET 



BY 

BARONESS ORCZY 

AUTHOR OF "THE SCARLET PIMPERNEL." "THE NOBLE ROGUE," 
" PETTICOAT RULE " 




HODDER & STOUGHTON 

NEW YORK 
GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY 



Copyright, 1912, 
By George H. Doran Company 



Stack 
Annex 

PP- 

CONTENTS 

CHAPTER PAGE 

I A Curious Old Bird 9 

II A Kind Old Soul 22 

III A Provoking Young Wife 33 

IV A Meddlesome Old Busybody 42 

V A Capricious Tyrant 51 

VI A Wild Figure of a Girl 64 

VII A Little Fury of Wrath 78 

VIII A Society Lady 90 

IX An Exquisite Apparition 99 

X A Full-Blown Young Woman 106 

XI A Much- Wronged Woman 115 

XII A Jealous Man 124 

XIII A Fair Temptress 130 

XIV A Thief in the Night I39 

XV A Beloved Sister 148 

XVI An Impertinent Young Man ....... iS7 

XVII A Man in Love 172 

XVIII A Woman in a Rage 181 

XIX An Unseemly Incident ........ 191 

XX A Fairy Tale 196 

XXI A Lie ' . . . .... 207 

XXII A Broken Heart 216 

XXIII A Stormy Petrel 227 

XXIV A Hopeless Outlook 232 

XXV A Sentimental Conversation 238 

XXVI A Bunch of Roses 244 

XXVII A Little Plan 253 



CONTENTS 

CHAPTER PAGE 

XXVIII An Agreeable Surprise 261 

XXIX An Awkward Situation 269 

XXX An Honest Man 278 

XXXI A Little Fool 287 

XXXII A Stroke of Diplomacy 299 

XXXIII A Sublime Conclusion 305 

XXXIV A Simple Way 312 



MEADOWSWEET 



MEADOWSWEET 

CHAPTER I 

A CURIOUS OLD BIRD 

You cannot imagine what a tangle and muddle 
reigned in Uncle Jasper's museum! If you were not 
one of the privileged few, allowed to gaze wide-eyed 
on the countless treasures which positively littered 
every corner of the room — well, then, it would be no 
use to close your eyes and think what it must have 
looked like, because your wildest imaginings would 
fall far short of the reality. 

I went into it once when I was a tiny mite, and Uncle 
Jasper was then very, very old; but the picture of 
that room as I saw it then impressed me more vividly 
than anything I have ever seen since then. 

The room, you must know, was long and low, with 
a raftered ceiling, every beam of which was black with 
age and carved by hand. There were no two beams 
alike, for one had a garland of oak leaves festooned 
along it, another was decorated with trails of brier- 
rose, another with bunches of holly berries tied to- 
gether with true-love knots, and so on, all most beauti- 
fully hand-carved and dating back to the time of 
Henry VH. Then on one side of the room there was 
a huge, deep, mullioned window with tiny panes of 

9 



10 MEADOWSWEET 

greenish glass, through which you couldn't possibly 
see, all held together by lines of lead. The embrasure 
of the window was panelled with oak, quite as black 
as the beams of the ceiling, and these panels, too, were 
beautifully carved, in lovely patterns that represented 
folded linen, with every fold different, as you may 
imagine, for there was nothing conventional in any 
single portion or ornament of Uncle Jasper's museum. 

Even the doors looked askew; though, of course, 
they were made of stout oak, and never creaked when 
you opened them. But their lines seemed to defy 
regularity and positively to sneer at plumb-lines. 

There were two doors to the room, one which gave 
on the rest of the house — about which I must tell you 
later — and the other which was near the embrasured 
window and gave on a little stone porch. 

Now, the best way to appreciate the view of Uncle 
Jasper's museum was not to enter it from the house, 
but rather from this same little stone porch which 
faced a square yard at the back of the house — a yard 
that might once have been a miniature farmyard, for it 
had barns all around it — great, big barns made coal 
black with tar and covered with heather thatch, on 
the top of which pigeons were always sitting, and 
beneath which I strongly suspect owls of holding their 
midnight palavers. 

They were wonderful barns these, and put to many 
uses. One was fitted up roughly with boxes to accom- 
modate two or three horses, if visitors came a-riding ; 
another was used as a cowshed ; a third held the small 
waggonette, wherein Uncle Jasper occasionally drove 
to Canterbury, eleven miles away; and a fourth held 



A CURIOUS OLD BIRD ii 

just all the rubbish and all the lumber that you could 
possibly think of — bits of iron gate and all the old 
hayrakes and the chicken coops that weren't wanted, 
and the pea-sticks that were worth keeping, and pussy's 
latest family that had escaped the scullery bucket, and 
the herd of mice and rats that had evaded the vigi- 
lance of the cat, of the owls, and of the terrier. 

And then, of course, there was the barn which 
belonged exclusively to the chickens, even though the 
chickens did not belong exclusively to it ; for they were 
everywhere, and made their homes in every barn round 
the yard, and scratched up the flooring and the brick 
foundations, and roosted in the waggonette, and gener- 
ally did as much mischief as a colony of self-respecting 
chickens can very well do. 

Finally, there was the barn which adjoined the 
museum, and which held all the superfluous rubbish 
and lumber which no longer could find a place inside 
the house. This barn — it was really a loft — had 
no entrance from the yard, and it was raised some 
seven or eight feet from the ground on brick pillars. 
Its only ingress gave on the museum itself, and when 
you stood in that room looking towards the window 
and the yard, the door into this loft would be in the 
end wall on your right at some height from the floor, 
and a short flight of wooden stairs led up to it. 

But, of course, you don't want to hear just now 
about the yard, or the barn, or the chickens; your 
concern, like mine, is of Uncle Jasper's museum, of 
which I desire to tell you. 

Well, suppose that you — instead of knocking at the 
front door of Old Manor Farm, which, perhaps, would 



12 MEADOWSWEET 

have been more polite, even if more bold — had skirted 
the house, and were now standing in the yard, with the 
barns to your right and left and also behind you, you 
would be facing that same little stone porch of which I 
have already told you, and no doubt you would be 
wondering how the columns, being askew, contrived to 
uphold the quaint architrave. 

The stone was of a delicate mellow colour, a grey 
made up of golds and greens, and in spring it was 
covered with the pale mauve of the wistaria and in the 
summer with the deep purple of the clematis, for these 
two climbers joined tendrils over the porch and never 
quarrelled, the wistaria always making way for the 
clematis when the time came, and the clematis keeping 
small and unobtrusive whilst the wistaria wanted 
plenty of room. 

The door under the porch gave direct on the mu- 
seum, and if you entered it this way you had a splendid 
view of the place. You saw the tall bookshelves op- 
posite to you, with rows upon rows of books ; you saw 
the wooden steps leading up to the loft on your left, 
and all round you saw cases on the walls filled with all 
kinds of eggs; you saw the table in the centre of the 
room, with Uncle Jasper's wig upon its stand, and the 
huge microscope, with its brass fittings shining like 
gold. 

Then in the dark corners at either end you saw the 
skeleton of beasts such as you had never seen before, 
and antlers and horns of every shape and size. I 
could not, in fact, tell you what you did not see ; there 
was a stuffed alligator, that hung by a chain from the 
ceiling, and stuffed lizards, that peered at you from 



A CURIOUS OLD BIRD 13 

every point; and I could not even begin to tell you 
about the stuffed birds, for they were literally every- 
v^here — on the tops of the bookcases and in cases on 
the wall, on the tables, the chairs, and the sofas. 
There were little birds and big birds, song birds and 
birds of prey, British birds and tropical birds, and 
birds from the ice regions, white birds, grey birds, red 
birds, and birds of every tone and colour. 

And, believe me, that by far the most extraordinary 
bird in the whole museum sat in a tall-backed chair, 
covered in large-flowered tapestry, and had name Jas- 
per Hemingford. 

I suppose it was this constant handling of birds and 
being with birds that made Uncle Jasper look so like a 
bald-headed stork. For all day would he sit, with 
glue-pot and stuffing and I don't know what other im- 
plements, turning limp, dead birds into erect, defiant- 
looking ones, with staring eyes that were black in the 
centre and yellow round the rims, and could be bought 
by the thousand in a shop in London city. 

Now, to get those birds into their proper position, so 
that the bird looked straight at you without the sus- 
picion of a squint, required a great deal of skill and of 
precision, and Uncle Jasper would sit by the hour in 
his high-backed chair, bone-rimmed spectacles on nose, 
and his mouth screwed up as if he were perpetually 
whistling. 

And that is the reason, no doubt, why his face was 
so like a bird's. 

I told you that his wig always stood on a stand in 
the very centre of the big table, as if it were presiding 
over the assembly of glue-pots and balls of string, of 



14 MEADOWSWEET 

metal tools and boxes of eyes, and of eggs and dusty 
bottles that surrounded it like a crowd does a popular 
orator. And Uncle Jasper always wore a white cotton 
cap with a tassel to it, in order to protect his bald head 
against the draught. Aunt Caroline always knitted 
these caps for Uncle Jasper, as she did his white cot- 
ton stockings, and Susan washed them when they were 
dirty. 

He invariably slipped off his coat the moment he 
entered the museum, and put it down somewhere 
amongst the litter, and never could find it again when 
he wanted it later on to go to dinner in. But his 
flowered dressing-gown was always laid ready for him 
on the back of his chair, so he found that easily 
enough, and put it on before settling down to work, 
and he would always forget to tie the cord and tassels 
round his waist, and they would trail after him when 
he moved about in the room, and Aunt Caroline's pet 
cat — if she happened to be in the museum — would 
pretend that one of the tassels was a mouse, and she 
would stalk it, and pounce upon it just when Uncle Jas- 
per was about to mount his rickety library steps, and 
cause him to trip, and to break one of the panes of 
glass of his bookshelves, trying to save himself from 
falling. 

But Uncle Jasper never swore when this happened. 
He only quoted Latin at the cat, and, as she didn't 
understand Latin, she went on in just the same per- 
verse way as before. 

Now Susan, the country wench, whom Aunt Caro- 
line dignified by the name of " maid," did not know 
Latin any better than the cat, and I am quite sure that 



A CURIOUS OLD BIRD 15 

in her own mind she thought that her master swore 
more often and more vigorously than was consistent 
with Christian piety. 

On this same afternoon — the events of which 
crowded in so remarkably that that memorable day 
became the turning point in the career of several mem- 
bers of the Hemingford family — on this same after- 
noon, I say, which was on the 2nd of June, in the year 
1835, Susan was sent to the museum by Mrs. Heming- 
ford in order that she should tell the master that tea 
was served. 

Susan, whose cap was always awry, and whose feet 
and hands appeared to have been made for somebody 
else, and clapped on to her arms and shins by mistake, 
invariably became very nervous and excited when she 
had to face the stufifed birds and beasts of the museum. 

" For all the world like the internals," she would 
explain to her follower, Thomas Scrutch, the tea gro- 
cer's son from Birchington. 

And this nervous excitement caused her to be still 
more clumsy than she usually was, her arms becoming 
like the wings of a windmill, her hands like flappers, 
and her feet like fire shovels, whilst her eyes, staring 
out of her round, red face, were very like those that 
lay in boxes on the centre table, and could be bought 
by the thousand in a shop in London city. 

She did her best at first to attract Uncle Jasper's 
attention from the doorway. Of course, he had not 
heard her knock, nor was he conscious of her blue 
print dress and her cap, all awry, with its double row 
of starched frills. 

He had got some ^wful-looking, grey, stark thing in 



i6 MEADOWSWEET 

his hands, and his bone-rimmed spectacles were mid- 
way down his nose, and he was staring through them 
at the nasty-looking thing which he held, and mutter- 
ing to himself all the while. 

" He give me the jumps ! " commented Susan in- 
audibly. 

" Undoubtedly — undoubtedly," murmured Uncle 
Jasper, who was chuckling with delight, " a very fine 
specimen indeed of the Vespertilio ferrum equinum, 
or horseshoe bat." 

" No wonder he be swearing at the horrible thing," 
thought Susan, whose nervousness was gaining more 
and more upon her. She was balancing herself first 
on one huge foot, then on the other, and saying in an 
awed whisper at intervals : 

" An it please you, sir." 

But, of course. Uncle Jasper took no notice of her. 
He just was delighted with the ugly, grey thing, and 
he cocked his head to one side and patted the thing 
with his long, bony fingers all the time. 

" Length from the nose to the tip of the tail," he 
said meditatively, " three and a half inches to three 
and nine-sixteenths at the most." 

An it please you, sir," murmured poor Susan. 
Undoubtedly — undoubtedly ! " — and a deep sigh 
of satisfaction came through the screwed-up lips of 
Uncle Jasper ; " or, as one might more appropriately 
say, non est disputan . . ." 

Now, wasn't it a pity that an elfin chance chose that 
very second in which to make poor, nervous Susan 
lose her equilibrium? She had danced about from one 
foot to another for some time, and during the process 






A CURIOUS OLD BIRD 17 

her cap had sHpped down over her left ear, the perspira- 
tion had fallen from her forehead to the tip of her nose, 
where it formed one ever-increasing drop, and she was 
shedding hairpins like a porcupine sheds his quills. 
Otherwise she had done no mischief. 

But now when Latin once more fell from her mas- 
ter's lips she lurched forward, with arms outstretched; 
her hands, which certainly had been made for some- 
body much larger than herself, clutched at the nearest 
thing to support her falling person. 

That nearest thing happened to be a chair, and on 
the chair were all kinds of funny things, including a 
number of pale blue eggs and a box of eyes ; the chair 
slid on the oak floor, and Susan slid after the chair, 
until the chair and Susan encountered an obstacle and 
could slide no more; then both were turned over to- 
gether, whilst eggs and eyes flew with amazing rapid- 
ity and in every possible direction along the shiny 
floor. 

All that had occurred at the very moment that Uncle 
Jasper said the beginning of his last word of Latin, 
and when the clatter broke in on his meditations he 
paused before finishing his word, for the sudden noise 
had taken his breath away. 

And when he recovered both his breath and his 
Latin it was to emit the last syllable of his interrupted 
phrase, and that was: 

". . . dum!" 

Can you wonder that Susan, who was sprawling on 
the floor like a starfish, had only just strength enough 
to gasp feebly: 

" Yes, sir — please, sir ! " 



i8 MEADOWSWEET 

Then, of course, Uncle Jasper became aware of her 
presence. He looked at her over the rims of his spec- 
tacles, wondering, no doubt, why she had chosen this 
extraordinary method of entering his room. 

" Lord bless my soul, Susan," he murmured in pro- 
found astonishment, " what are you doing there on 
the floor?" 

" I am very sorry, sir — please, sir ! " she stammered 
as she picked herself up and began to chase the fallen 
eggs and the rolling eyes. 

" Go away," said Uncle Jasper mildly ; " go away — 
never mind those things. Can't you see that I'm 
busy?" 

" Yes, sir . . . but please, sir ! . . ." 

But already Uncle Jasper had forgotten the brief 
incident which had distracted him from the examina- 
tion of his beloved specimen. He readjusted his spec- 
tacles, and once more turned his attention to the grey, 
flabby thing in his hand. 

" The upright membrane at the end of the nose," he 
murmured, with every sigh of ecstatic delight visible 
in his glittering eyes and his twitching mouth, " per- 
fect — perfect in shape, just like a horseshoe." 

There is a courage that is born of despair and a 
boldness that comes of intense nervousness. Susan 
suddenly felt both, for she had had orders from her 
mistress not to return from her errand without bring- 
ing the master along with her, and there he was back 
again in the moon or somewheres paying no more heed 
to her than if she were a bit of dirt — and he never 
did mind dirt much. 

So now she no longer muttered, she suddenly 



A CURIOUS OLD BIRD 19 

shouted right at the top of her voice — shouted just 
like people shout when they are very frightened. 

" The mistress sent me to tell you, sir — " 

Uncle Jasper heard the voice, for he looked at her 
over the top of his spectacles ; but he looked just as if 
he had never seen Susan before to-day. 

" Lord bless my soul, Susan," he said mildly, " I 
didn't know you were here! " 

" The mistress says, sir," said Susan, still shouting, 
for having got his attention she didn't want to lose it 
again, " will you please come to tea? " 

" Eh? " queried Uncle Jasper in his funny, absent- 
minded way. " What ? " 

" Tea, sir," yelled Susan at the top of her voice. 
" It's getting cold, and Master Crabtree is eating all the 
muffins ! " 

" All right, all right, Susan ! " said Uncle Jasper 
placidly. " You waste too many words, my girl ! 
Dictum sapienti sat est. ... A word to the wise is 
enough, Susan. And — what were you saying just 
now, my girl ? " he asked absently. 

" I was saying, sir — " 

Uncle Jasper was staring at her in absolute blank- 
ness, whilst in his hand he held that ugly little thing, 
grey and flabby, with tiny claws pointing upwards and 
limp, pointed wings. Susan, too, stared at Uncle Jas- 
per; he sat perfectly still, and his pale, watery eyes 
looked vacantly at her above his big spectacles. 

" For all the world like one of his own mannies," 
thought Susan, whose sudden courage had already 
given way. The creepy feeling which always came 
over her when she was in the museum mastered her 



20 MEADOWSWEET 

now more strongly than ever. " I was that scared," 
she said later on, " my poor back just opened and shut 
when I saw that hugeous thing lying in his hand, for 
all the world like a begum." 

At the time she just threw her apron over her face, 
and crying: 

" The Lord preserve us ! " she fled incontinently 
from the room. 

Uncle Jasper gave a very deep sigh of satisfaction. 
He put down the precious specimen with infinite gentle- 
ness upon the table, then he rose from his chair and 
worked his way round' the several pieces of furniture in 
the room toward the bookshelves against the wall. 
And all the while that he moved he muttered to himself 
in an absent-minded kind of way: 

" Strange how much time is wasted by the unedu- 
cated in idle talk. Yet, fugit irreparabile tempus — 
time flies never to be recalled." 

He took hold of the rickety little wooden steps and 
moved them to that position beside the bookshelves 
which he desired, then he began slowly to mount them. 
And all the while that he mounted his eyes travelled 
with the quickness of vast experience over the rows of 
books behind the glass doors. 

Apparently the book that he required was on the very 
top of the bookcase, so Uncle Jasper mounted slowly 
and carefully until he had reached the top of the rickety 
wooden steps. There he now sat down, and, having 
opened one of the glass doors, he took out a ponderous 
volume bound in calf. He crossed one lean shank over 
the other so as to afford firm support for the book, then 
he opened it, and his bony fingers — so like the claws of 



A CURIOUS OLD BIRD 21 

birds — wandered lovingly over the yellow-stained 
pages. 

" Now, let me see ! " he murmured, for he had a 
habit of talking to himself when he was engrossed in 
his work, " Vespertilio ferrum equinum. Vesper — 
vesper — ah, here we are ! " 

And having totally forgotten all about Susan and 
tea and his wife, he sat perched up there, very like a 
bald-headed old stork. His long, thin nose was bent 
over his book, his lean shanks were encased in white 
cotton stockings, and the tassels of his dressing-gown 
beat an uneven tattoo against the wood of the rickety 
library steps. 



CHAPTER II 

A KIND OLD SOUL 

One of the many fallacies invented by learned people 
with a view to confusing the unlearned is the saying 
that " Nature never makes a mistake." 

Now no one on earth makes more mistakes than 
Dame Nature makes up aloft, or wherever else she 
may dwell. And I will tell you one of the greatest 
mistakes that she ever did make, and that was that 
she put a true mother's heart inside the ample chest 
of Aunt Caroline and then wholly omitted — or forgot 
— to give her children of her own to love, to cosset, 
and to worry out of all patience. 

Aunt Caroline as a mother would have been splendid. 
Her children's faces would have been a bright red, and 
would have shone like apples that have been polished 
against the sleeve of a well-worn smock; their hair 
would have been smooth and glossy, their hands white 
and adorned with well-trimmed nails ; they would have 
been learned in the art of making every kind of wine 
and preserve and pickle that mind of woman can con- 
ceive and stomach of man can digest, and totally igno- 
rant of everything else in the world. 

As an aunt. Aunt Caroline was a failure. For from 
the moment that her sister's children were placed in her 
charge by their dying mother they did exactly as they 

22 



A KIND OLD SOUL 23 

liked at Old Manor Farm, and twiddled Aunt Caroline 
right round their thumbs. 

To be sure Olive, the eldest, had snow-white hands 
with beautifully shaped nails to them; but she did not 
employ them in making cowslip wine and rhubarb pre- 
serve : she employed them chiefly for the decking up and 
the ornamentation of the rest of her lovely person, and 
one of them she employed now in the wearing of the 
golden ring which Sir Baldwin Jeffreys had placed on it 
some three or four years ago. 

Olive, from the time that she left off playing with 
dolls — and that was very early in the history of her 
short life — had made up her mind that she would not 
wear out her youth and her beauty at the Old Manor 
Farm in the company of Uncle Jasper's stuffed abom- 
inations : and since Aunt Caroline could not afford to 
take her up to London, where she might have made a 
suitable match, she looked about her in Thanet itself, 
in search of the most likely gentleman of wealth and 
position who would prove willing and eager to ask her 
to quit the lonely farmhouse, and to grace London 
society in his company and his own house as his mis- 
tress. 

The most likely gentleman turned out to be Sir 
Baldwin Jeffreys, who had a large estate near Ash ford 
and a fine house in town. He had come down to the 
neighbourhood of Minster-in-Thanet for some fishing 
with his friend, Mr. Culpepper, and Mr. Culpepper — 
to while away a fine Sunday afternoon — had driven 
him over to have tea with Mr. and Mrs. Hemingford 
at Old Manor Farm, and to see old Jasper Heming- 
ford's museum, which was the pride and talk of Thanet. 



24 MEADOWSWEET 

Sir Baldwin Jeffreys sat In the oak-rafted parlour of 
Old Manor Farm, and Miss Olive Aldmarshe handed 
him a cup of tea. Sir Baldwin Jeffreys was five-and- 
forty years old, but he looked thirty-five, and on that 
afternoon he felt twenty-two. 

That was more than three years ago now, and in the 
meanwhile Lady Jeffreys had been the bright comet of 
two London seasons, and Old Manor Farm and its 
inhabitants had not seen her since the day when she 
walked out of it, a radiant and beautiful bride, on the 
arm of her middle-aged husband, and entered the smart 
coach, with its white and scarlet liveries and heavy 
Flemish horses, which were to convey her to her new 
home. 

And now she had arrived quite unexpectedly on this 
very morning, and at the moment when Aunt Caroline 
was about to carve Cousin Barnaby's third helping of 
lamb. There had come the noise of a distant coach 
rattling down the hill, the clatter of horses, the jingling 
of harness, the shouts of the postilions. Aunt Caro- 
line had just time to ejaculate : " I wonder now who 
that might be ! " and Barnaby Crabtree to grunt in 
response : " Nobody for us, I hope ! " when the hand- 
some coach was seen to swing in through the narrow 
gates, and — with a great deal more clatter and a vast 
amount more jingling — to come to a halt before the 
front door. 

" Lord bless us all, it must be Olive ! " exclaimed 
Aunt Caroline, as she quickly put down the pair of 
carvers and started fiddling nervously with the strings 
of her apron. 

" That is no excuse, Caroline," remarked Barnaby 



A KIND OLD SOUL 25 

Crabtree acidly, " for not handing me over a further 
portion of lamb as I desired." 

" No, Barnaby," said Aunt Caroline meekly. 

And it was because she was then obliged to resume 
her work of carving and to help Cousin Barnaby with 
two slices of lamb, a roast potato, a spoonful of peas, 
and a sprinkling of mint sauce, that she was not stand- 
ing at the front door to receive Sir Baldwin and his 
lady when the latter descended from her coach. 

Indeed it was Olive who had arrived so unexpect- 
edly. She had come in her coach, together with nu- 
merous boxes, and Sir Baldwin had ridden beside the 
coach all the way from Ashford. 

Soon Olive was standing in the hall, meekly sub- 
mitting to Aunt Caroline's embrace, whilst Uncle Jas- 
per fussed round them both like an old hen, and Susan 
stood in the doorway wide-eyed and open-mouthed, 
gaping at the beautiful lady with the shot silk cloak and 
the five huge feathers in her bonnet, until Aunt Caro- 
line roused her from this state of semi-imbecility by 
giving her arm a vigorous pinch and ordering her back 
into her kitchen to put a couple more plates in the 
Dutch oven. 

In the meanwhile Sir Baldwin Jeffreys, having 
greeted Aunt Caroline and Uncle Jasper with all the 
courtly grace peculiar to gentlemen who live much in 
London, gave directions to his servants and postilions 
to stable his saddle-horse in Mr. Hemingford's stables, 
but to return to Ashford with the coach forthwith, 
since her ladyship would make a stay here for a few 
days. He himself would return home that selfsame 
evening. 



26 MEADOWSWEET 

Aunt Caroline's notions of hospitality, however, 
would not allow her to let Sir Baldwin's servants de- 
part without at least a good cut off that leg of lamb 
when it presently found its way into the kitchen. So 
for at least an hour after that coachman and pos- 
tilions in white and scarlet graced the huge stone- 
walled kitchen with their presence, and made Susan's 
eyes grow larger and larger with the tales they told 
her of the magnificent society in London of which 
their master and mistress were the most feted leaders. 

All this had occurred earlier in the day, of course, 
for twelve o'clock was the dinner hour at Old Manor 
Farm, and since then everyone had had a brief hour's 
rest. Uncle Jasper had retired to his museum, where 
he quickly forgot that he had a niece and that she had 
arrived that day. Aunt Caroline had vainly tried to 
keep awake whilst Sir Baldwin Jeffreys talked politely 
on agricultural subjects ; she nodded over Jersey cows, 
and closed her eyes over late lambs, but when the har- 
vest of sainfoin came on the tapis she frankly lay back 
in her chair and began to snore. 

Olive in the meanwhile had found her way to the 
room which she used to occupy when she was a girl. 
It seemed mightily small and uncomfortable after the 
luxuries of her house in St. James's-street, or of her 
home near Ashford. Aunt Caroline, who had come 
up with her, found herself vaguely apologising for 
these discomforts, even though Olive had occupied that 
selfsame room for fifteen years of her life. 

" Try and rest now, Olive dear," she said, as she pre- 
pared to rejoin Sir Baldwin in the little front parlour, 



A KIND OLD SOUL 27 

" the child will be home by the time you come down 
again." 

" Ah, yes ! " said Olive languidly, smothering a 
yawn. " By the way, where is the child ? " 

" On some bird's-nesting expedition," replied Aunt 
Caroline, with a sigh ; " she is still the tomboy you used 
to scold. I haven't seen her since breakfast time, but 
she'll surely be home to tea." 

Two hours later the little party was gathered around 
the tea-table. Aunt Caroline's best silver teapot had 
come out of its green baize bag for the occasion and 
resplended above the china cups and saucers and the 
plates full of bread and butter and home-made cakes. 
Olive, languid and bored, was sipping her tea. Sir 
Baldwin, looking black as thunder, was busy whacking 
his boot with his riding-crop, and Cousin Barnaby 
Crabtree sat in the most comfortable armchair, with 
the dish of muffins close to his hand, and his third cup 
of tea nearly empty. 

Susan had been sent to fetch the master, but had not 
yet returned. 

" I declare," said Aunt Caroline as she put down the 
heavy silver teapot and rose from her chair — " I de- 
clare that that girl is nothing short of an imbecile. I 
sent her to fetch your uncle," she added, not specially 
addressing Olive, but because she always referred to 
her husband as " your uncle " whoever she might be 
talking to at the time — " I sent her to fetch your 
uncle, and now I hear her moving about in the scullery, 
and he'll already have forgotten all about having been 
sent for, and all about his tea." 

" Even if he comes now," said Barnaby Crabtree 



28 MEADOWSWEET 

placidly, "the !ea will have drawn too much, and 
there are no more muffins left. Leave him alone, 
Caroline," he added more sternly; "he'll come when 
he wants to, and in the meanwhile cut me a piece of 
plum cake." 

However, Aunt Caroline did not like the idea of 
Uncle Jasper going without his tea, so, having cut the 
desired piece of plum cake, she begged to be excused, 
and made her way straight to the museum. 

There she found Uncle Jasper sitting at the top of 
his library steps deeply absorbed in a book. 

Aunt Caroline could have smacked him, so angry 
did she feel. 

" There you go again, Jasper," she cried ; " there 
you go, up in the clouds, and no more heeding your 
own lawful wife than a bunch of woody carrots. Jas- 
per," she added, seeing that indeed he took but scant 
notice of her, " Jasper, I say ! " 

And she rapped with her bunch of keys upon the 
back of the nearest chair. 

"Eh? What?" asked Uncle Jasper meekly. 

" You've scared that silly minx Susan out of her 
wits, and now your tea is getting cold, and Sir Bald- 
win will be going directly." 

" Sir Baldwin ? " queried Uncle Jasper vacantly as 
he stared down at her like an old crow from its perch. 

He had wholly forgotten who Sir Baldwin might 
be, and vaguely wondered what this gentleman's go- 
ing and coming had to do with the Vespertilio ferrum 
equinum, a specimen of which — so rare in the British 
Islands — was even now lying upon his own table. 

" Jasper," ejaculated Aunt Caroline, who you must 



A KIND OLD SOUL 29 

own had grave cause for vexation, " Jasper, you don't 
mean to tell me that you had forgotten that Sir Bald- 
win Jeffreys said at dinner-time that he must leave us 
directly after tea ! " 

" No, no, my dear," replied Uncle Jasper vaguely ; 
" indeed I had not forgotten that circumstance, and 
I am truly sorry that Sir Baldwin is going so soon." 

" A very kind word, my good Hemingford," came 
in pleasing accents from Sir Baldwin Jeffreys, who 
had followed in Aunt Caroline's footsteps and was 
even now standing at the door of the museum. " May 
I enter? " he added courteously. 

" Of course, of course," said Aunt Caroline. " Do 
enter. Sir Baldwin. Jasper was asking after you." 

When he was not scowling, as he had done ever 
since his arrival, Sir Baldwin could be exceedingly 
pleasant in his manner. He came into the room now, 
and at Aunt Caroline's invitation sat on one of the 
chairs that did not happen to be littered with eggs and 
stuffed lizards. 

" A very kind word indeed," he said, " and 'tis pleas- 
ant for the parting guest when * so soon ' waits upon 
* farewell' " 

"Must you really go to-day. Sir Baldwin?" said 
Aunt Caroline. 

" Alas! madam," replied Sir Baldwin, and he sighed 
with becoming regret, " urgent business recalls me 
to London to-morrow, and I must sleep at Ash ford to- 
night." 

" 'Tis a short visit you have paid us," she remarked. 

"I only escorted my wife down from home — and 
now," he said, while with old-fashioned gallantry he 



30 MEADOWSWEET 

raised Aunt Caroline's mittened hand to his Hps, " I 
leave her in the safest and kindest of hands." 

" With a membrane at the end of the nose." 

This from Uncle Jasper, who, absent-minded as 
usual, was reading aloud to himself out of his book. 
Sir Baldwin looked startled, as well he might, seeing 
that Uncle Jasper had but a moment ago appeared to 
be taking part in the conversation ; but Aunt Caroline 
remarked indignantly: 

"Jasper, how can you say such a thing? I am 
sure Olive always had a beautiful nose! " 

Whereupon Sir Baldwin laughed immoderately, and 
for the first time to-day cast off the gloom which had 
been weighing over his spirits. 

" Nay ! " Aunt Caroline went on quite placidly, for 
she did not perceive that anything funny had been 
said; but she was too polite to resent Sir Baldwin's 
levity. " We are happy, of course, to have our Olive 
back with us for awhile. 'Tis sorely we missed her 
when you took her away from us." 

Then she sighed with every appearance of deep sor- 
row, though to be sure no one had desired a marriage 
for Olive more earnestly than had Aunt Caroline. 
But the good soul had always a remarkable store of 
regrets laid down somewhere in the bottom of her 
soul, and whenever occasion demanded she would 
deck out one of these regrets and trot it out for the 
benefit of the beholder; and the regret came out well 
accompanied by sighs and decked out to look very 
real, though in reality it only existed in Aunt Caro- 
line's imagination. 

Having duly sighed over Olive's most longed-for 



A KIND OLD SOUL 31 

departure from Old Manor Farm, she now produced 
yet another fond regret. 

" How I wish," she said, " that her sister were more 
like her ! " 

" Is the child as much a tomboy, then, as ever ? " 
asked Sir Baldwin kindly. 

" Worse, my dear Sir Baldwin," sighed Aunt Caro- 
line — " worse ! Now look at her to-day. Off she 
goes directly after breakfast — and only one piece of 
bacon did she have, though I fried a bit of the streaky, 
of which she is very fond. She'd be hungry — 
wouldn't you think so, now ? But no ! Off she goes, 
Heaven only knows where — all alone — without ask- 
ing her aunt's permission or excusing herself for not 
appearing at dinner. Not in for tea, either. You saw 
me putting a muffin down for her by the hob. No ! 
No dinner, no tea — and now it's nearly four o'clock, 
and the child not home yet, and your uncle and I not 
knowing whether she has broken her neck climbing 
a tree or torn her stockings going through the scrub. 
And it isn't that I don't do my best with her ; but, 
there, she'll never be like Olive, though I do give 
her brimstone and peppermint once a week for her 
complexion ! Such a name, too ! Boadicea ! What- 
ever can her poor mother have been thinking about! " 

" An unusual elongation of the tail," came solemnly 
from the top of the library steps. 

And at this Sir Baldwin was seized with such an 
uncontrollable fit of laughter that his eyes were stream- 
ing and he was forced to hold his sides, for they 
ached furiously. What made him laugh more than 
anything was that Aunt Caroline was apparently under 



32 MEADOWSWEET 

the impression that Uncle Jasper was taking part 
wilHngly in the conversation, and that his remark was 
a comment upon what she had said. For even now 
when Uncle Jasper made the funny statement about 
the elongation of the tail she retorted quite angrily: 

" She was not, Jasper ! I am sure my dear sister 
never thought of such things." 

At which Sir Baldwin, fearing that he would break 
his sides, went quickly out of the room. 



CHAPTER III 

A PROVOKING YOUNG WIFE 

Lady Jeffreys met her husband in the square oak- 
panelled hall, which gave directly on every portion 
of the old house. She was coming out of the little 
parlour on the left, having duly finished tea. 

" Ah, Sir Baldwin," she said in that affected, min- 
cing way which had grown on her in the past two 
years, "your groom has just been round from the 
stables ! He wanted to know at what hour you wish 
to start, since you must return to Ashford to-night." 

In a moment all Sir Baldwin's good humour had 
vanished. He frowned, and his handsome face wore 
an air of deep wrath and also of gloom, and anyone 
could see that to speak politely and quietly now cost 
him no little effort. It required no great power of 
observation to see that a matrimonial storm was effect- 
ually brewing — nay, it even seemed as if the storm 
had already broken out previously, and that the halt at 
Old Manor Farm had been but a momentary lull be- 
tween two vigorous claps of thunder. 

Olive stood in the hall, looking remarkably pert and 
pretty. She was beautifully dressed in a gown of 
emerald-green silk, with trimmings of black braid and 
quaint buttons. She had a very slim waist, and the 
elongated shape of her bodice and full gathers in the 
skirt set off her trim figure to great advantage. 

'33, 



34 MEADOWSWEET 

She had taken off her bonnet, and her fair hair now 
showed all round her head in a maze of innumerable 
curls and puffs, which were richly set off by a high 
comb of pierced tortoiseshell. No doubt she was ex- 
cessively pretty, and so dainty, too, from the tip of her 
dainty leather shoe and her fine white silk stockings 
to the cluster of curls that fell each side of her small 
oval face from the temple to the cheek, and anyone 
who was not observant would naturally marvel how 
any husband could scowl on such a picture. 

She looked very provocative just now, with her head 
cocked on one side like a pert robin, one hand on her 
hip, and the other swinging an embroidered reticule by 
its long delicate chain. 

Sir Baldwin looked on her, and the scowl darkened 
yet more deeply on his face. But he made no com- 
ment in reply to what she had said, until Aunt Caro- 
line's entrance into the hall recalled him to himself; 
then he asked calmly : 

" And what answer did your ladyship give to my 
groom? " 

" That you would start within half an hour," she 
replied flippantly. 

" Nay, Olive," said Aunt Caroline from under the 
lintel of the museum door; " perhaps Sir Baldwin may 
be persuaded to tarry with us until to-morrow at the 
least." 

" That were presumptuous on my part, Madam," 
said Sir Baldwin, " since my wife seems so mightily 
eager to rid herself of me." 

Olive laughed lightly, but I must say that her 



A PROVOKING YOUNG WIFE 35 

laughter sounded a little forced and devoid of true 
mirth. 

" Faith ! " she said, " with your temper at boiling 
point, you have not been an agreeable companion." 

" I intruded as little as I could on your ladyship's 
privacy," he retorted. 

. " I could have come dow^n here alone," she said. 
" The coachman surely knows the way between Ash- 
ford and Birchington. I had a postilion — your pres- 
ence was unnecessary, and 'twas you forced your 
escort on me, remember! " 

" My dear Olive ! " exclaimed Aunt Caroline, who 
was genuinely shocked. 

Sir Baldwin's face had become very pale, but evi- 
dently he was too polite to allow his temper to get the 
better of him in the presence of his hostess. But this 
was not to say that he would permit his wife to aim 
her unpleasant shafts at him without meting her some 
measure of punishment. 

" As your conduct with a young jackanapes has 
lately made your ladyship the talk of the town," he 
said coldly, " I preferred that jou should not travel 
alone." 

" Lest my departure be construed into an elope- 
ment," she retorted, with a show of spite, " perhaps 
with Lieutenant Carrington on board the Dolphin — 
or is it someone else just now? Faith, your insane 
jealousy makes you the talk of the town!" 

" Olive, I pray you," interposed Aunt Caroline, who 
was becoming alarmed both at Olive's spiteful vehe- 
mence and Sir Baldwin's unnatural calm, " remember 
he is your husband ! " 



36 MEADOWSWEET 

" Great Heavens, Aunt," cried Olive at the top of 
her high-pitched voice, " v^rould that I could forget it 
sometimes ! " 

" It would be an evil day for your ladyship if you 
were to do so ! " said Sir Baldwin, who at Olive's last 
words had flushed to the roots of his hair, and now 
had much ado to keep his rage under control. 

He looked so wrathful just then, and his eyes shot 
so much anger upon his wife, that instinctively the 
flippancy of her manner died down. Her oval cheeks 
became quite white, and, though she strove to laugh 
again, it was obvious that she stood somewhat in awe 
of her husband's present mood. But, like all women 
who find pleasure in worrying and teasing a man, she 
would not let him see for a moment that she was 
frightened. Therefore she laughed and pouted and 
shrugged her dainty round shoulders — did many 
things, in fact, to hide the quivering of her lips and 
the trembling of her hands, 

"Oh, ho, ho, ho!" she exclaimed Bj little shrilly. 
"Faith, but this is interesting! And you. Sir Bald- 
win, grow more and more charming, every day! 
Violence and abuse have I suffered in plenty. It is 
threats this time, eh?" 

"I never threaten," said Sir Baldwin quietly, "as 
your ladyship- is well aware — save when I am pre- 
pared to act — " 

" The part of a coward? " she interposed quickly. 

Aunt Caroline threw up her hands in horror. 
Never in all her life had she heard a wife thus address- 
ing her husband. She herself had oft cause to be firm 



A PROVOKING YOUNG WIFE 37 

with Jasper, but never — oh, never ! — would she 
dream of being anything but polite to him. 

"No," Sir Baldwin said quietly; "rather the part 
of a judge, and if necessary that of an — " 

" Sir Baldwin ! " shrieked Aunt Caroline, terrified. 

Olive, too, was very frightened now. No doubt 
she knew her husband well, and knew how much de- 
termination and vindictiveness lay behind his calm and 
gentleman-like manner. She had teased him often 
enough before — teased him until he lost all control 
over himself, and had perforce to fly out of her room 
lest his temper should induce him to do her some 
injury. But to-day she had evidently provoked him 
further than a mere outburst of rage, and the fact that 
he did keep his rage so completely under control 
proved to her that deeper determination lay in him 
now than had ever been there before. 

But, womanlike, she would not even now let him see 
that she was afraid of him: what she did not mind 
his seeing was that she hated him, and this she tried 
to convey to him by a look. She drew up her grace- 
ful figure and tossed her head defiantly, and you 
should have seen her eyes then — narrowed until they 
were mere slits, whilst a row of tiny white teeth buried 
themselves in her lower lip. 

"I hate you!" 

She did not say it, but she looked it. Every line 
in her face spoke of it and every movement of her 
body proclaimed the fact, and Sir Baldwin Jeffreys, 
being no fool, could read those lines plainly enough 
even as she sailed past him straight up the stairs on 
her way to her room. 



38 MEADOWSWEET 

Sir Baldwin as soon as she was out of sight seemed 
to recover his normal balance. The scowl was still 
there on his face, and dark thoughts must indeed have 
been chasing one another behind that frowning brow 
of his. But good breeding prevented his showing 
more of his feelings now, and, moreover, he really was 
very fond of his wife, and put all her coquetries down 
to youth and inexperience. As a rule, when she pro- 
voked him beyond endurance he found that an hour 
or two away from her presence restored his equanim- 
ity and reinflamed his ardour and admiration for her 
beauty. 

And she really could be very engaging when she 
chose. Sir Baldwin still cherished in his heart many 
happy recollections of her affection for him, and of 
her pretty show of gratitude, whenever — after a 
matrimonial tiff — he strove to console her by the 
present of a handsome ring or some other article of 
jewellery which she had previously coveted. Until 
recently she had shown him quite a good deal of defer- 
ence, never flouting him in public, as many fashionable 
women were wont to do to their husbands ; and he 
firmly believed that all her flirtations — and these 
were- many — had been absolutely innocent, and 
merely the result of childlike belief in her own 
charms. 

But Sir Baldwin was a very proud man, and fully 
conscious of his eighty-and-forty years^ and of the 
ridicule which is wont to assail a middle-aged husband 
when the wife happens to be young and pretty. Dur- 
ing the last London season gossip had been over-busy 
with Lady Jeffreys, and this he did not like. In his 



A PROVOKING YOUNG WIFE 39 

own estimation, the wife of Sir Baldwin Jeffreys 
should be beyond suspicion, and for the past few 
months now he had oft heard veiled insinuating talk 
aimed against his wife. 

The name of a certain Lieutenant Carrington, of 
H.MS. Dolphin, had been coupled with that of Lady 
Jeffreys. The young man was well-looking and of 
approved family connections. He had greatly distin- 
guished himself recently in the China seas, and on his 
return home had been much feted in London society. 
Sir Baldwin knew him to be an upright and honour- 
able fellow incapable of vulgar intrigue, but Lady 
Jeffreys had smiled on Lieutenant Carrington in a 
manner calculated to turn the head of any unsophisti- 
cated young man fresh from the China seas. Where- 
upon heads began to nod and tongues to wag. 

Sir Baldwin was very angry, and all through the 
early part of the London season there were many hot 
and bitter quarrels between himself and his lady. 
Now the season was still at its height, and Lady Jef- 
freys's reputation had become a rag in the hands of 
her friends. Sir Baldwin was very wrathful, and sud- 
denly took it upon himself to announce to his wife 
that she must forthwith prepare to quit London, for 
he had decided that she should spend the rest of the 
summer at their country house near Ashford. 

He had expected protestations, tears, even angry 
refusal, at this preposterous notion of quitting London 
the second week in June, when the season was at its 
height and the invitations for Lady Sydney's ball and 
tlie Duchess of Kent's reception were just out. To his 
astonishment, Lady Jeffreys received the dictum in 



40> MEADOWSWEET 

perfect meekness, with downcast eyes and lips slightly- 
twitching, but otherwise in absolute submission to her 
husband's will. All she stipulated as a reward for 
passive obedience — and this, too, came as a humble 
request — was that she should spend the beautiful 
month of June in her old home in Thanet. It would 
ease the sadness of her heart, she said, and raised a 
lace pocket handkerchief to her eyes. 

Sir Baldwin Jeffreys promptly chided himself for 
being a brute and a bully, and — given the slightest 
encouragement — he would then and there have made 
amends for his harshness by changing his intentions 
and allowing his pretty, submissive wife to remain in 
London for as long as she pleased. But, strangely 
enough, Lady Jeffreys discouraged all attempts at 
reconciliation, and, with what seemed to him wilful 
obstinacy, persisted now in her desire to spend a few 
weeks with her uncle and aunt at Old Manor Farm. 

Whilst Sir Baldwin completed his arrangements 
with regard to the care of his London house whilst 
her ladyship would be away, Olive remained perfectly 
charming, even-tempered and gentle. During three 
days Sir Baldwin Jeffreys felt himself once more a 
happy man. Every cloud on the horizon of his matri- 
monial heaven seemed to have been dissipated as if by 
magic, and he realised that in this simple-hearted coun- 
try girl he had absolutely found an ideal mate, and 
that it was his harshness and jealous temper alone that 
had warped her exquisite disposition. 

On the fourth day, when every preparation was 
complete and the caretaker and his family were duly 
installed in the house in St. James's-street, Lady Jef- 



A PROVOKING YOUNG WIFE 41 

freys suddenly changed her tune. Meekness, submis- 
sion, and gentleness seemed to have vanished with her 
boxes, which had been sent on by the luggage chaise. 
Once more she became the capricious, exacting woman 
who in the past three years had well-nigh broken Sir 
Baldwin Jeffreys's heart and certainly soured his dis- 
position. She told him very plainly what her feelings 
were towards him, and these certainly were anything 
but kindly; she derided him for his jealousy, upbraided 
him for his harshness, scorned him for his approach- 
ing middle age, and finally called him a fool for hav- 
ing been so easily gulled into the belief that she would 
ever become the submissive slave of an abominable 
tyrant. 

She posed as a martyr to his brutality, and finally 
entered her coach with wrath expressed in every line 
of her figure and triumph blazing — unseen by him — 
in her eyes. 

Thus they travelled to Ashford — she alone in the 
coach, he riding silently by its side. Thus they spent 
one night in their beautiful country house without 
exchanging one single word of friendship. She 
closed her door on him and refused to respond to 
every overture of peace, until his remorse changed 
once more to wrath, and he brought her silently to 
Old Manor Farm, nursing his wrongs and vaguely 
thinking of revenge. 



CHAPTER IV 

A MEDDLESOME OLD BUSYBODY 

It was a whole hour since tea-time, and Boadicea 
had not yet returned from her birds'-nesting expedi- 
tion. Sir Baldwin Jeffreys would have liked to have 
seen her ere he left Old Manor Farm, because he was 
very fond of the child and was really sorry for her, 
though in a measure she had a very happy home, for 
Aunt Caroline, despite her habit of perpetual scolding, 
was a warm-hearted, kind, and generous woman ; 
nevertheless, the girl's life must of necessity be a very 
lonely one. There were but few neighbours round 
Old Manor Farm, and practically no young people of 
Boadicea's age to consort with her, and since the mar- 
riage of her sister there was no doubt that she must 
have led a very isolated life. 

It was therefore with deep regret that Sir Baldwin 
found himself forced to start his return journey with- 
out having embraced little Boadicea, but the hour was 
getting late if he desired to reach Ash ford before 
evening. He had dispatched the coach homewards 
earlier in the day, and now he asked that his horse 
might be brought round forthwith. 

To Aunt Caroline's hospitable entreaties that he 
should stay at least until the morrow he opposed a 
steady refusal. The brief scene which he had just 

42 



A MEDDLESOME OLD BUSYBODY 43 

had with his wife had told him plainly how wide for 
the moment was the matrimonial breach, and that 
nothing but absence could tighten the bonds of affec- 
tion which were threatening to snap. 

Old Manor Farm, though commodious and soundly- 
built, was none too roomy. If Sir Baldwin now 
elected to stay, he would perforce be thrown greatly 
in his wife's company- — not to say intimacy — and 
he believed that in her present highly irritable mood 
and his own sense of wrong both he and she might be 
tempted to say things which would render the breach 
irreparable. 

Olive had retired to her room after the violent pas- 
sage of arms in the hall. Sir Baldwin could entertain 
no hope that she would come down again before his 
departure in order to bid him farewell. 

But Aunt Caroline fussed round him, garrulous and 
kindly as usual, offering him various kinds of refresh- 
ment, despite the fact that he had not yet had time to 
digest his tea, and incidentally inventing a hundred 
apologies for Olive's conduct, which in her own heart 
she felt had been very blameworthy indeed. 

Just when Sir Baldwin was leaving, his horse being 
at the door with Topcoat — the outdoor man — at his 
head, Bamaby Crabtree came up those few steps which 
lead from the hall to the dining-room and kitchen of 
Old Manor Farm. He had spent the last half-hour 
in polishing off the muffins and tea which had been 
set aside on the hob for Boadicea when she returned. 

Barnaby Crabtree was very dyspeptic, which ail- 
ment made his complexion muddy and the whites of 
his eyes yellow, but It did not make him thin. He 



44 MEADOWSWEET 

was a huge, fat man, with a big bald head, round the 
base of which sparse hair of a faded sandy colour 
made an uneven fringe from ear to ear. 

He had very few teeth in his mouth, which caused 
his jaw to look loose and flabby, and the colour of his 
eyes was of a nondescript yellowish grey. He was 
invariably dressed in loose, ill-fitting clothes, with 
long trousers that reached midway down his shins, 
disclosing four inches of pink and white striped cotton 
socks, and half the day he went about with carpet 
slippers on his feet and with a napkin tied round his 
neck like a bib. 

Sir Baldwin, who had not previous to this day been 
acquainted with him, thought him the most extraordi- 
nary-looking man he had ever seen. During dinner, 
however. Aunt Caroline had so monopolised his atten- 
tion that he had not paid much heed to Mr. Crabtree, 
who, on the other hand, was far too deeply engrossed 
in the business of eating and drinking to bestow any 
attention on Sir Baldwin. 

Thus, meeting in the hall, and with Sir Baldwin just 
on the point of departure, even Barnaby Crabtree — 
ill-mannered though he was — could not help but 
pause a moment in order to bid him farewell. 

" You are wise," he said blandly, " to make an early 
start ; horse exercise is exceedingly unwholesome after 
a heavy meal." 

" Oh, as to that," remarked Sir Baldwin, " I would 
gladly have ridden after supper had the distance been 
less great or the moon at its full ! As it is, and with 
so much thunder in the air, I must make for Ashford 
before nightfall." 



A MEDDLESOME OLD BUSYBODY 45 

"And you are not taking your wife away with 
you?" 

" Certainly not ! " interposed Aunt Caroline. " Sir 
Baldwin, I am happy to say, has brought our dear 
Olive down here for a lengthy stay." 

" Ah ! " said Cousin Barnaby ; *' I am sorry to hear 
that." 

" Sorry! " ejaculated Aunt Caroline in great indig- 
nation. " Well, really, Cousin Barnaby ! . . ." 

And, despite his sorrowful mood, Sir Baldwin 
himself could not help but smile at the man's im- 
pudence. 

" Females in a household are a greatly disturbing 
element, Caroline," rejoined Mr. Crabtree, quite un- 
perturbed, " and it is a strange and regrettable fact 
that, though I came here solely for peace — for this 
place is otherwise neither amusing nor exhilarating — 
I have been troubled on one and the same day with 
the two things I have always tried to avoid." 

"And what may these two things be, sir?" asked 
Sir Baldwin politely. 

" Females and sailors," said Mr. Crabtree curtly. 

"Sailors?" 

" Aye ! Females and sailors, sir, are equally objec- 
tionable, and, like headache and biliousness, you sel- 
dom get one without the other." 

" Sailors ? " reiterated Sir Baldwin, who, indeed, 
now seemed gravely disturbed. The frown on his 
brow had deepened, and his eyes travelled restlessly 
and as if suspiciously from one face to the other. 

" Will you kindly explain, sir? " he said courteously, 
trying his best to appear calm. 



46 MEADOWSWEET 

With her usual garrulousness Aunt Caroline quickly 
interposed. 

" Nay, nay, Sir Baldwin," said she ; " I pray you 
take no heed of Cousin Barnaby. . . . His bark, as 
the saying is, is more vicious than his bite . . ." 

"Oh, is it?" muttered Cousin Barnaby. 

" He is as pleased as we all are that our dear Olive 
will stay with us for awhile." 

"Oh, ami?" 

" But he has been a little upset since yesterday, 
when H.M.S. Dolphin put into Ramsgate Harbour." 

"The Dolphin!" exclaimed Sir Baldwin, and for 
the first time to-day his good manners deserted him, 
and he swore a very ugly oath, which greatly dis- 
tressed Aunt Caroline, for she could not understand its 
cause, though she did know that fashionable gentle- 
men in London had a vv'ay of swearing at all times, 
in and out of season. She supposed that as he was 
gesticulating somewhat vigorously with his riding- 
crop he must have struck his ankle with it ; and every- 
body knows how painful such a blow can be. 

However, she thought it would be more polite to 
pretend not to have heard the vigorous expletive at all, 
so she rejoined quite placidly : 

" Yes, the Dolphin. Some of her officers are lodg- 
ing in the town ; they came ashore yesterday." 

" And demoralised the entire female population of 
Thanet," concluded Mr. Crabtree acidly. 

" As for me," said she, " I am pining to see the son 
of my old friend Mamie Carrington." 

This time Sir Baldwin did not swear, but had Aunt 
Caroline not been so absorbed in her own conversa- 



A MEDDLESOME OLD BUSYBODY 47 

tion she would have been startled by the expression 
on his face. His eyes nearly disappeared under the 
frown, and his lips were set so tightly that they formed 
just one narrow dark streak above his chin. 

" You must remember Mamie Carrington, Sir Bald- 
win," continued Aunt Caroline volubly. " She was 
Mary Janet Calverston, you know — such a pretty girl 
— and she made a splendid match. Squire Carring- 
ton is the richest man in Lincolnshire, so they say, and 
they have an only son. Jack, who is a lieutenant on the 
Dolphin now. When last I saw him he was a baby 
in long clothes, and — But what is the matter, Sir 
Baldwin?" she said, the tone of her voice suddenly 
changing, for she had caught sight of the wrathful 
expression in his face. " You seem upset." 

" Oh, it's nothing, nothing! " he said, trying to mas- 
ter himself and to speak quietly. "I — I must speak 
with my wife." 

He made a movement as if desiring to go upstairs 
to his wife's room, and Aunt Caroline intercepted him, 
saying hurriedly: 

" Let me go and tell her, and do you sit down 
awhile, Sir Baldwin. I declare, you seem to be trem- 
bling all over. I'll go and tell Olive." 

But now it was he who detained her, placing his 
hand on her arm. 

" I thank you," he said. " That is — I pray you do 
not go. V\\ not disturb her now — not just at this 
moment. I — " 

He paused a moment, and then resumed quite 
calmly : 

'' Dear Mrs, Hemingford, you have been so kind, 



48 MEADOWSWEET 

and your kindness renders me presumptuous. I 
think that, in effect, the heat has been rather too much 
for me. I was in the saddle some hours under the 
glare of the midday sun. I think, if you would allow 
me, I would like to change my mind and stay until I 
can get home in the cool of the evening." 

" Change your mind, Sir Baldwin, by all means ! " 
exclaimed Aunt Carolinej who was highly delighted, 
and in the simplicity of her heart never thought of con- 
necting Sir Baldwin's caprice with his curious be- 
haviour of a moment ago. " Glad indeed am I to 
have the pleasure of your company a little longer! " 

" Positively idiotic ! " was Cousin Barnaby's mut- 
tered comment. 

" Won't you," she added, " change your mind yet 
further and stay the night?" 

" No, no ! " said he more cheerily. " Thank you a 
thousand times! And, if I may, I will just tell your 
man to put up my horse again until after supper. 
What time will that be, dear Mrs. Hemingford? " 

" Half-past six, Sir Baldwin, if quite convenient to 
you." 

" Then, if you will allow me, I will order my horse 
for half-past seven o'clock. It will be a beautiful 
bright night, and I can reach Ashford, even with a 
good long rest at Canterbury, well before midnight." 

He seemed to have quite regained his composure, 
and Aunt Caroline — than whom there was not a less 
observant person — never noticed that the angry flush 
still lingered in his cheeks and that the frown had, if 
anything, deepened on his brow. 

Barnaby Crabtree, much disappointed that at least 



A MEDDLESOME OLD BUSYBODY 49 

one of the unwelcome visitors would not be going just 
yet, had unceremoniously walked upstairs in the direc- 
tion of his room. 

Sir Baldwin Jeffreys went to the door and gave Top- 
coat half a sovereign, telling him to bring the horse 
round again at half -past seven. He had a burning de- 
sire in his heart to speak yet once more with his wife. 
He wanted to assure himself that her submission when 
leaving London had not been a clever mask to hide her 
duplicity and her wilfulness. He could not imagine 
that she had prearranged this journey to Thanet with 
a view to meeting young Carrington clandestinely. 

In his heart of hearts he believed her to be incapable 
of such a vulgar intrigue, but he wished to speak with 
her, just once again, in order to make sure. 

At the same time, he did not wish to meet her now 
in the first flush of his anger and whilst jealous sus- 
picions were tearing at his heart, and might cause him 
to say things which he afterwards would regret. His 
friend, Mr. Culpepper, was for the moment in residence 
at the Abbey, distant just over two miles from Old 
Manor Farm. Sir Baldwin in his mind decided that 
the best thing he could do would be to walk down and 
visit his friend, and then to return in about two hours' 
time, sobered from his anger and his temper quite cool. 

He expressed his wish to Aunt Caroline, who, feel- 
ing reassured as to his health, gave him directions how 
to take short cuts through certain fields the sooner to 
reach the Abbey. 

Then she nodded pleasantly to him from the door- 
step, assured him that she would in the meanwhile 
explain to Olive that he had decided to tarry until the 



50 MEADOWSWEET 

cool hours of the evening, and finally, when he walked 
away in the direction of Minster, she waved him a 
last adieu, and then carefully closed the front door. 

After which she went in search of her darning 
basket. 



CHAPTER V 

A CAPRICIOUS TYRANT 

It still wanted an hour or two before supper-time, 
and still Boadicea was from home. 

Aunt Caroline, feeling a little anxious, but not al- 
lowing herself to appear so, or her anxiety to interfere 
with the usual arrangements of the day, had gone — 
as was her wont — to worry Uncle Jasper in his study. 

She always did this between tea-time and supper, 
because, supper being a cold meal at Old Manor Farm, 
she always got it ready earlier in the day, and had 
therefore plenty of leisure between the hours of four 
o'clock and 6 130. Having nothing more important to 
do at that hour, she invariably took her darning basket 
up to the museum, and sat there darning socks and 
plaguing Uncle Jasper with countless interruptions, 
just when he was most deeply immersed in his books. 

She worried him with every subject she could possi- 
bly think of: Susan's misdeeds and Boadicea's edu- 
cation, and lately it had been Cousin Barnaby's selfish- 
ness and greed. 

We must, however, do Aunt Caroline the justice to 
say that she did not greatly upset Uncle Jasper. Her 
talk was so garrulous and so constant that after the 
first few minutes he paid no more heed to it ; he could 
go on reading perched upon his library steps whilst 
her voice went droning on from below. 

51 



52 AlEADOWSWEET 

" You, Jasper, have got to put your foot down ! " 

She had made this remark once or twice before this 
afternoon whilst she sat darning Cousin Barnaby's 
pink and white striped socks; but Uncle Jasper, still 
absorbed in his reading, did not look up from his book. 
She took up her large cutting-out scissors and banged 
the metal gluepot persistently with it, until Uncle 
Jasper was bound to notice her. 

" Yes, yes, my dear," he said gently. " What is 
it?" 

" You must put your foot down ! " she reiterated 
very slowly, accentuating every syllable as she spoke. 
And Uncle Jasper, who always perched cross-legged 
on the library steps, quickly uncrossed his legs and 
put his right foot meekly down beside the left. 

In doing so he lost his balance, and his book slid off 
his thin knees right down on to the floor with a great 
clatter and the raising of a cloud of dust. 

Uncle Jasper quietly came down the steps, picked 
up his book, and once more mounted up to his perch, 
whilst Aunt Caroline went on vigorously darning a 
white stocking, not for a moment thinking of assist- 
ing poor Uncle Jasper, and talking volubly at him all 
the time. 

" Barnaby Crabtree," she said, " has fastened on us 
like a hungry leech. Lord, how that man eats ! Three 
large cups of tea this afternoon, and tea at six shillings 
a pound! I tell ye, Jasper, that if he does not leave 
this house soon you will have to carry me out of it 
in my coffin. . . , The best bedroom, too . . . and 
five weeks to-day since he came. . . . But now that 
Olive has come to stay with us," she added, more 



A CAPRICIOUS TYRANT 53 

loudly and impressively, " Barnaby has got to go ! " 

" Yes, my dear," said Uncle Jasper, who had not 
the remotest idea what his worthy wife was talking 
about. 

Promptly did Aunt Caroline bring up one of her 
most regretful sighs. 

" What I have had to endure in life," she said, 
" through marrying a man who spends his days on the 
top of a ladder, no other woman can possibly know. 
If I had only married Ebenezer Toogood, who wanted 
me at the same time as you did, Jasper, I shouldn't 
have had the whole of an entire household upon my 
shoulders, for Ebenezer did have other thoughts be- 
sides beetles and lizards. . . . And now," she went on 
with her usual irrelevance, " here's Barnaby Crabtree, 
whom you asked to come for three days and who has 
been here five weeks ! " 

The idea of Uncle Jasper asking anybody to stay 
anywhere or to do anything except leave him alone 
was distinctly humorous, but Aunt Caroline abhorred 
humour when household matters were being talked 
about — so she ignored it sedulously. 

" But," she said, " I have quite made up my mind. 
Barnaby has got to go. . . . not to-day, because it is 
too late to order a chaise, though I doubt not but Sir 
Baldwin is so polite he would allow the old toad to 
travel in his coach. . . . No, no ; I had forgotten — 
Sir Baldwin's coach has left already. . . . But no 
matter. To-morrow I can order Hickmott's trap to 
take Barnaby as far as Dover, and from there he can 
journey by stage coach to London. I'll pack all his 



54 MEADOWSWEET 

things — glad shall I be to be rid of him, and — " 

But here Aunt Caroline's flow of eloquence was in- 
terrupted, not by Uncle Jasper, who never interrupted 
anybody, nor yet by Olive, who was still in the dumps 
up in her room, but by no other person than Barnaby 
Crabtree himself, whose stentorian voice was heard 
ringing from end to end of the house. 

" I won't have it! " he shouted from the top of the 
stairs, and he could then be heard coming down them 
as fast as his fat legs would carry his fat body. " I 
won't have it, I tell you ! . . . Cousin Caroline ! . . . 
Cousin Caroline ! " he shouted still more loudly. 
" Where in thunder are you ? " 

Aunt Caroline hastily put down her darning; I do 
believe that her hands were trembling, and that her 
round face had become very white. Uncle Jasper 
even had been startled by all that shouting, and, as 
usual when he was startled, he dropped the book which 
he had been reading, and then meekly ran down the 
library steps to fetch it. 

He got the book, and was about to remount the steps 
again with it when Aunt Caroline simply darted across 
the room, heedless of eggs and stuffed lizards, 
that flew about in all directions as her voluminous 
bombazene skirt knocked them down off tables and 
chairs. 

Just as Uncle Jasper put his foot on the fifth step 
of his ladder she caught him by his white-stockinged 
ankle and held on to it with all her might. 

" Jasper," she whispered eagerly, " Jasper, come 
down — now is the time to put your foot down ! " 

But Uncle Jasper, with the strength of the weak and 



A CAPRICIOUS TYRANT 55 

the courage of intense terror, gave a vigorous jerk with 
his leg. His shabby buckled shoe remained in Aunt 
Caroline's hand, and he scrambled helter-skelter up the 
steps and once more perched himself on the very top, 
for all the world like a frightened crow. 

Before Aunt Caroline could say another word the 
door of the museum was kicked open by a heavy foot 
and Barnaby Crabtree stood upon the threshold. 

*' Caroline," he shouted as he entered the room and 
marched across it with a short, shuffling stride, " have 
you sworn to be the death of me? Have you and 
Jasper entered into a conspiracy to murder me ? I ask 
because if this goes on much longer you will have to 
carry me out of this house in my coffin." 

He now turned and faced Aunt Caroline, wrath ex- 
pressed in every line of his wide, flat face. She was 
standing at the foot of the library steps, still holding 
Uncle Jasper's buckled shoe in her hand. She would 
not have owned it to herself for worlds, but as a point 
of fact her heart was beating furiously and her knees 
were shaking under her. She was so mightily afraid 
of Barnaby Crabtree. 

With the buckled shoe she tapped Uncle Jasper's 
legs, making him very fidgety and uncomfortable. He 
very nearly lost his balance, and twice his knuckles 
caught a rap from the shoe when he was rubbing his 
shins. 

Barnaby Crabtree certainly looked very formidable. 
He was so very fat and big and seemed to take up 
such a lot of room, and he had a way of rolling his 
pale-coloured, fishlike eyes which gave his countenance 
a very weird expression. 



56 MEADOWSWEET 

Uncle Jasper gave a timid little cough as a prelimi- 
nary to more lengthy speech. I suppose that he had 
suddenly made up his mind to this, because all the 
while that he was silent Aunt Caroline kept on rap- 
ping his shins with the shoe. And his shins were 
getting very sore. 

" We should be very sorry, Barnaby," he said, 
" to . . . hem ... if we were to lose you . . . 
hem. . . . Amicum perdere est . . ." 

" Don't quote that abominable Latin, Jasper ! " 
thundered Barnaby in deafening tones. " Do you 
want to see me go into hysterics? " 

"God forbid, Barnaby!" ejaculated Uncle Jasper 
meekly. *' That would indeed be a horrible sight." 

"But what's the matter now, Cousin Barnaby?" 
asked Aunt Caroline, with sudden resolution. 

"What's the matter, ma'am?" retorted Mr. Crab- 
tree. " Everything's the matter. Noise and bustle, 
ma'am. Why did I come here, pray ? " 

" Ego cogito," sighed Uncle Jasper, " I am wonder- 
ing." 

" I came here for peace and quiet," continued 
Cousin Barnaby sternly, " and now that young per- 
son whose cap is always awry tells me that I am to be 
turned out of my room for your niece." 

" Susan told you rightly. Cousin Barnaby," said 
Caroline, who was striving to look dignified, and ill- 
succeeding, poor dear, seeing that she was fidgetting 
nervously with Uncle Jasper's leg in one hand and his 
shoe in the other. " The room is wanted for my 
niece, Lady Jeffreys, who will make a stay here for a 
few days." 



A CAPRICIOUS TYRANT 57 

" A few days — a few days, ma'am ? And who 
asked her, pray? " 

" My niece comes when she likes, Cousin Barnaby. 
She asked herself this time." 

" Dux femina facti . . ." murmured Uncle Jasper 
feebly. 

" Don't do that, Jasper," roared Mr. Crabtree, " you 
give me the gripes." 

" Dandelion roots chopped up fine," suggested Aunt 
Caroline, " with a dash of sweet oil . . ." 

" Ugh ! don't come round doctoring me, ma'am. . . . 
I tell you that all I want is peace. ... I find your 
niece a disturbing person. . . . The sooner she goes 
the better I shall like it. . . . And you can tell her so 
if you like. ... I don't care. I came here for peace. 
Tell that to your niece, ma'am — and peace at all costs 
must I have." 

He went over to the sofa, and before you could 
guess what was his purpose he had calmly swept all 
the specimens on to the floor, and they rolled off and 
scattered about in all directions, whilst two eggs were 
smashed into little pieces. In a moment Uncle Jasper 
had dropped his book and was running helter-skelter 
down the library steps. 

" Heavens, Barnaby," he ejaculated, " a valuable 
pair of eggs! . . , Owl's eggs!" 

He was down on his knees, poor dear, trying to 
rescue the scattered specimens and examining the 
damage done to his precious eggs. But Barnaby 
Crabtree sat himself down placidly upon the sofa. 

" Then," he said coolly, " I ask you, Jasper, in the 



58 MEADOWSWEET 

name of commonsense, is a begad sofa the proper 
place for owl's eggs ? " 

" Put your foot down, Jasper," whispered Aunt 
Caroline close to Uncle Jasper's ear. " Now is your 
time." 

" Yes, my dear," replied he. 

He was then lying flat down on the floor trying to 
arrive at a pair of blown frogs that had slid along the 
polished floor to an impossible spot under some heavy 
piece of furniture, right out of his reach. It was of 
course difficult for him in that position to put his foot 
down, seeing that both his feet, one shod and the 
other only encased in white cotton stocking, were 
quivering in mid-air, the length of his shins from the 
floor. 

" Don't go fidgetting round me like that, Jasper," 
said Barnaby Crabtree irritably. " Can't you leave 
those things alone ? " 

" I am only collecting the scattered remains, Barn- 
aby," said Uncle Jasper, struggling back to a more 
convenient position, " disjecta membra. . . ." 
" Don't do that," thundered Mr. Crabtree. 
" No, Barnaby." 

And with this last meek little saying, Uncle Jasper 
finally relinquished all hope of being able to put his 
foot down, and I must say that Aunt Caroline made 
no grave effort in that direction either. At the back 
of her mind there lingered the thought that Barnaby 
Crabtree was "not strong"— such a favourite ex- 
pression on the tongue of a motherly woman who has 
not a large family on whom to bestow the superfluous 
abundance of her kind heart. 



A CAPRICIOUS TYRANT 59 

Barnaby Crabtree had given Aunt Caroline so much 
trouble in the past five weeks that he had spent in the 
house, she had dosed him so persistently, and — as 
she thought — so successfully, with her home-made 
medicaments, that she took a great interest in his gen- 
eral health, and, believe me, she would greatly have 
missed him if he had suddenly made up his mind 
to go. 

Therefore to-day, as on all previous days, Mr. 
Crabtree was left the master of the situation, and of 
the household. Aunt Caroline had been rendered 
anxious by the state of his health, which verged on 
apoplexy every time that he lost his temper, and Uncle 
Jasper had retreated to his perch, tired of strife, of 
noise, and of distractions, which took his mind away 
from the pleasing realms of romance where owls and 
bats reign supreme and frogs and lizards are of para- 
mount importance. Cousin Barnaby lay back on the 
sofa, crossed his hands over his protruding middle, 
and gave a sigh of satisfaction. 

" Where is that noisy young female," he said after 
awhile, when Aunt Caroline, having given up all 
thoughts of further strife, had quietly resumed her 
darning, " whose name sounds like a cold in the 
head?" 

"Boadicea?" suggested Aunt Caroline. 

" Now I ask you in the name of commonsense," in- 
terposed Barnaby irritably, " is that a proper name for 
a self-respecting young female ? " 

" She can't help her name, poor darling," protested 
Aunt Caroline. 

" She can help spending half her day gyrating on 



6o MEADOWSWEET 

tree-tops and displaying various portions of her person 
which usually are kept from view." 

You may. well imagine how shocked was Aunt 
Caroline at such language. Her work fell into her 
lap, and for a moment was quite speechless, after 
which she merely gasped : 

"Really, Barnaby!" 

Then she picked up her work again, and for awhile 
she plied her needle in silence. But, as we all know, 
silence was not one of Aunt Caroline's most favoured 
virtues. Drawing her needle in and out, she became 
tired of saying nothing, and even Cousin Barnaby 's 
conversation seemed under the circumstance preferable 
to no conversation at all. 

" In the poultry yard," she remarked, " Boadicea is 
my right hand." 

" A hand," he grunted, " that would be all the bet- 
ter for an occasional wash, ma'am." 

Now, though Aunt Caroline devoted a considerable 
portion of the day in scolding and admonishing her 
niece, she could not bear anyone else to criticise either 
Olive or Boadicea, and now she was very indignant 
and said hotly: 

" Barnaby, you are insulting the child — aye, and 
you insult me too, seeing that I have brought her up 
and still see to her hands and complexion. It's bad 
enough that you should eat the muffins which I had 
set aside for the poor child's tea, and now you must 
be adding insult to injury." 

" Flagitio additis damnum ! " murmured Uncle Jas- 
per to the accompaniment of a short, weary sigh. 

" Profane language now," shouted Cousin Barnaby, 



A CAPRICIOUS TYRANT 6i 

who seemed very exasperated. " I cannot endure 
profane language." 

And he who swore, morning, noon, and night! 

" It was Latin, Barnaby," protested Uncle Jasper 
mildly. 

" Then if you can't swear in English, Jasper, you'd 
best leave it alone." 

Then he turned his attention once more to Aunt 
Caroline. 

" There are a few other items, Caroline," he began, 
and I can assure you that this time his voice was quite 
unctuous, like that of a man who has infinite patience 
under most trying ills, " to which I may call your 
attention at a more fitting opportunity. For instance, 
the presence of an animated fly in the raspberry jam 
this morning, a condiment altogether distasteful in a 
preserve, and one that no self-respecting housewife 
should tolerate for a moment." 

" We can't always help the flies getting into sweet 
things this time of year, Cousin Barnaby," she re- 
marked meekly, " and I try to keep all jam and fruit 
well covered. It was you, if you remember, who left 
the raspberry jam uncovered after you had helped 
yourself at breakfast." 

" It was not I who put the fly into it subsequently. 
But let that pass. I am not one to complain, and all I 
want is peace. We'll let the fly pass, Caroline, but 
there is another item to which I think your attention 
should be called, and that is the presence of a parcel 
of kittens underneath my bed. Now, even your own 
fault-finding and criticising disposition could not tax 
me with being the cause of the increase in your cat's 



62 MEADOWSWEET 

family, nor yet with persuading her to deposit that 
increase under my bed." 

" Poor pussy ! she looks upon your room, Cousin 
Barnaby, as her special stronghold. The dogs never 
go In there, and she feels that her little family is 
safe." 

" Well ! I have had the little family swept up into a 
basket and ordered Susan to deliver them over to Top- 
coat, with strict injunctions to drown the lot." 

" You haven't done that, Barnaby ? " 

" Indeed, I have, and if Topcoat knows his business 
the drowning will have been effectually done by now." 

"Oh!" 

When Aunt Caroline was speechless it meant that 
she was very indignant indeed. She was quite speech- 
less now, even though a few words did appear to be 
struggling upwards, out of her heart, and perished in 
the attempt. She collected all the socks and stockings 
into her basket, put down her needle and her thimble, 
and, still unable to speak, she flounced out of the room, 
to find Susan and Topcoat — Topcoat was the out- 
door man, the one who swept the gutters, and kept the 
yard tidy, and attended to the horse and the wag- 
gonette. 

If Topcoat had drowned the entire family of kit- 
tens without asking Aunt Caroline's permission and 
merely at the bidding of Barnaby Crabtree, well then 
Topcoat should be told that he was no longer a serv- 
ant of Mr. Hemlngford, and that the sooner he and 
his wife packed up their belongings and engaged them- 
selves as servants to Mr. Crabtree the better pleased 
would Mrs. Hemlngford be. 



A CAPRICIOUS TYRANT 63 

But then Topcoat had not drowned the entire family 
of kittens. 

Still he got his scolding just the same : it would 
serve for another time, when he would be sure to 
deserve it. 



CHAPTER VI 

A WILD FIGURE OF A GIRL 

When Aunt Caroline sailed indignantly out of the 
room Cousin Barnaby was not in the least disturbed. 
He may, perhaps, have been slightly vexed at her thus 
quitting him summarily when he had at least two more 
grievances to put before her — such as the noise which 
her guinea-fowls made in the early morning, a noise 
not unlike that of a blunt saw going through knotty 
wood, and which prevented his enjoying the quietude 
of early morning sleep. 

" But," he remarked placidly, after the door had 
closed upon Aunt Caroline, " I am not a man who 
often complains. I came here for peace — and all 
that I want is peace." 

Uncle Jasper was now once more deeply absorbed 
in his book and wholly unconscious of everything that 
went on around him. Barnaby Crabtree, though he 
greatly objected to self-absorption in anybody — see- 
ing that people who were self-absorbed could not at- 
tend to him — knew that it was no use trying to drag 
Jasper's absent mind away from his books. 

The afternoon, too, had turned very close. There 
certainly was thunder in the air, for Barnaby had a 
slight headache and a disturbed stomach, and he 
always knew that there was thunder in the air when 
he had a disturbed stomach. 

64 



A WILD FIGURE OF A GIRL '65 

He proceeded now to untie his neckcloth, and from 
his pocket he took a large, many-coloured bandana 
handkerchief. He shook it out and then spread it 
over his head, and finally folded his hands in front of 
him. 

•* Half an hour," he murmured behind the folds of 
the handkerchief. " I will compose myself. I trust 
that Caroline will have the good sense not to come and 
disturb me again about those damnable kittens. 
Females are so unreasonable where increases in fami- 
lies are concerned." 

He went on muttering like this for quite a consider- 
able time, but Uncle Jasper, of course, was quite un- 
conscious of him and of his mutterings. He went on 
reading, and Cousin Barnaby sought refreshment in 
a little sleep. 

The whole house became quite still, lulled into 
drowsiness by the closeness of the atmosphere. In 
the museum only Cousin Barnaby's snores were heard 
or the droning of blue-bottles against the small win- 
dow-panes, and at regular intervals the flutter of paper 
when Uncle Jasper turned over a leaf of his book. 

Suddenly this quietude was disturbed. From the 
yard there came the sound of a man's voice, raised 
angrily and insistently. 

Cousin Barnaby awoke, and from behind his hand- 
kerchief he asked with great indignation: 

"What in thunder is that?" 

Then, as he received no reply to his peremptory 
question — which, by the way, he repeated at least 
twice — he tore the handkerchief from his face and 
shouted at the top of his voice : 



66 MEADOWSWEET 

"Jasper! Did you hear me ask what in thunder 
was that disturbing noise?" 

" I heard nothing, Barnaby," said Uncle Jasper. 

"Nothing? Am I deaf, Jasper, or am I a begad 
idiot?" 

" Ego cogito ! " murmured Uncle Jasper, " I am 
wondering." 

But outside the voice had become even more loud 
and more peremptory. It was a man's voice • — seem- 
ingly a young man's voice — and certainly it meant to 
make itself heard and its owner to be obeyed. 

" Do I or do I not hear a most disturbing noise? " 
queried Cousin Barnaby triumphantly. 

Uncle Jasper felt very worried and very nervous. 
He hated such interruptions, which, fortunately, were 
very rare at Old Manor Farm, and hated them still 
more when they came from the yard, for this gener- 
ally meant that presently somebody would be knock- 
ing at the door of the museum, and probably would 
want to come in. It was therefore specially distress- 
ing at this moment to hear that tiresome voice outside 
saying peremptorily: 

" I tell you, man, that I must speak with Mr. Hem- 
ingf ord at once ! " 

Fortunately Aunt Caroline, who had been adminis- 
tering the above-mentioned scolding to Topcoat, had 
lingered for awhile in the yard, examining the chickens 
and also the cart shed, and other places where untidi- 
ness might find a home, and a reproof be needed, 
which she might just as well administer since she was 
on the spot. 

She it was' now who came forward, and it was to 



A WILD FIGURE OF A GIRL 6y 

Her apparently that the voice of the unknown young 
man now addressed himself. 

" I beg ten thousand pardons, ma'am," it was heard 
to say agitatedly, " for this seeming intrusion, but a 
young girl's life is in peril. I ran here to get imme- 
diate assistance, but your man seemed not to under- 
stand." 

"Good heavens! " Aunt Caroline was heard to ex- 
claim. " What is it ? Do come in, I beg, sir — just 
under the porch — yes, that's it ! The door is on the 
latch. Mr. Hemingford is there." 

And the next moment a young man stepped hur- 
riedly into the room. Of course. Uncle Jasper 
dropped his book — he always did when he was dis- 
turbed — and equally, of course, Cousin Barnaby 
grunted with dissatisfaction. 

Aunt Caroline had bustled in after the young man, 
administering a final scolding from the porch to Top- 
coat for having parleyed so long with a gentleman 
who evidently was in a great hurry. 

The young man in the meanwhile had saluted Uncle 
Jasper and Barnaby Crabtree. Apparently he was 
very excited, for his good-looking face was flushed and 
he did not trouble to speak the polite words which the 
usages of society would demand of a stranger who 
was thus making intrusion in another gentleman's 
house. At once he began talking volubly, and paying 
no attention to Mr. Crabtree, who had muttered 
audibly : 

" This man is a begad fool ! " 

" Sir, Madam," said the stranger excitedly, " I beg 
of you both to pardon my unwelcome appearance here. 



68 MEADOWSWEET 

Let me tell you what happened : I was walking along 
the lane, having come up from Minster and being on 
my way to Ramsgate, and just as I was going past 
your gates a young girl darted right across the road 
in front of me. She was so quick and so nimble on 
her feet that I followed her movements with much in- 
terest. Suddenly, even before I realised what she was 
doing, she climbed like a cat up an old elm tree, and 
thence on to the sloping roof of a barn which abuts 
on this house. The roof is a thatched one, and its 
angle very acute. She may lose her footing any 
moment, and — •'* 

Even as he spoke, and before the next word escaped 
his lips, there was a terrific crash, followed by the 
noise of broken glass, all of which appeared to pro- 
ceed from the loft at the end of the museum. The 
young man's face became pale with fright and Aunt 
Caroline gave one wild scream. 

" The child ! " and fell back, half fainting, against 
the back of the sofa, to which she clung now with 
one trembling hand, whilst with the other she picked 
up the corner of her apron and fanned herself with it 
vigorously. 

Cousin Barnaby in the meanwhile had lost his bal- 
ance; the impact of Aunt Caroline's body against the 
sofa had caused him to roll off it, like a big indiarub- 
ber ball, on to the floor. 

Everyone was dumbfounded, and even Uncle Jas- 
per realised that there was something wrong, for he 
ran very quickly down the library steps and stopped 
short at the bottom, his pointed knees shaking one 
against the other. 



A WILD FIGURE OF A GIRi: 69 

After the crash there had been an ominous, silence 
in the loft, and the young stranger, who was the first 
to regain his presence of mind, had, with a curt 
" Allow me ! " made his way to the wooden stairs that 
led up to it, when a girl's voice suddenly rang out, 
triumphant and clear: 

" Got you ! — got you ! Shoo ! — shoo ! Go away ! 
Mine ! — mine ! Got him ! Go away ! '' 

The next moment the door of the loft was thrown 
violently open, and a young girl's form appeared for 
one second on the top of the rickety wooden steps. 
She was dressed in something white that fluttered 
round her legs owing to the draught from behind. 
Her head was bare, but a wealth of brown hair flew 
all around it in a tangled mass of waves and curls. 
She was looking at something above and behind her, 
and in her two hands clasped in front of her she 
seemed to be holding something which she was en- 
deavouring to protect. Only for one instant did she 
stand there, white and wild, like a woodland fairy; 
the next she had striven to run down the steps, had 
missed her footing, and come tumbling down the 
rickety flight, landing on the floor with feet out- 
stretched, hair dishevelled, one shoe flying halfway 
across the room, and a piece of her skirt remaining 
fastened to a protruding nail on the steps. 

" God help us all I " shrieked Aunt Caroline ; " the 
child has killed herself!" 

As if to belie these words then and there, the young 
girl burst into a prolonged fit of laughter. 

She laughed and laughed until every dark oak beam 
shook with the echo of that whole-hearted mirth. 



70 MEADOWSWEET 

" Bless all your hearts ! I am not killed ! " she said, as 
soon as she was able to speak, which was not for some 
time, as laughter took away her breath. " How 
scared you all look — and there's Cousin Barnaby go- 
ing to have a fit ! " 

And truly Cousin Barnaby did present a most piti- 
able spectacle. He had been scared out of his wits 
after being roused from placid slumbers, and his yel- 
.lowish complexion was blotched with purple, whilst 
his pale-coloured eyes seemed to be starting out of his 
head. 

" And I who came here for peace ! " he said, as he 
groaned aloud, and looked with unmitigated disgust 
at the wild, dishevelled figure still sitting with out- 
stretched legs and shoeless feet on the floor. 

"The fright you gave us, Boadicea! " sighed Aunt 
Caroline, who had not yet recovered her evenness of 
mind. 

" The bumps I gave myself ! " retorted the young 
girl, still laughing. " By George, but I do feel sore ! " 

She picked herself up rather slowly, and holding one 
hand to her hip, which, indeed, must have ached con- 
siderably. She looked a little wide-eyed and pale, 
though she would not admit that she was hurt, and in 
the other hand she still held against her breast that 
which she seemed desirous to protect. 

As the stranger stood back toward the door, she had 
not yet seen him; but he was watching her with con- 
siderable amusement, for, indeed, she looked a wild 
figure of a girl with her brown hair flying in all direc- 
tions, her skirt torn, and her stockings full of holes. 

Indeed, now that she was standing up, she pre- 



A WILD FIGURE OF A GIRL 71 

sented rather a woebegone appearance. Her face Was 
scratched and smeared with black and her hands were 
covered with grey dust. 

" But where have you been ? " exclaimed Aunt Caro- 
line, with as much sternness as she could command. 

*' I'll tell you," began the girl, talking excitedly and 
volubly, and turning deliberately to Uncle Jasper. 
" You remember, Uncle, that short-eared owl you and 
I saw on the top of Farmer Upchin's barn an evening 
or two ago ? " 

" Yes, yes ! " said Uncle Jasper, whose wrinkled, 
birdlike face had lighted up at mention of the memor- 
able event. " Yes, yes ! The Strix brachyotus, or 
short-eared owl." 

" Well," she continued eagerly, " now I knew there 
must be a nest of them somewhere. I thought you 
would like the eggs." 

"Yes, yes!-" 

" So I got them ; but, by George, I did have a tear • 
round I " 

" A tear round ! " groaned Cousin Barnaby. 
" Look at her stockings ! " 

" My dear child ! " exclaimed Aunt Caroline, horri- 
fied. 

But Miss Boadicea, wholly unconcerned, looked 
down calmly on her shapely feet and ankles encased 
in coarse cotton stockings, through which her great; 
toe peeped out unblushingly. 

" Ever seen a great toe before. Cousin Barnaby?" 
she said, as she suddenly held up her foot right under 
Mr. Crabtree's nose. 

" Don't do that ! " he shouted, for Indeed he was 






>j2 MEADOWSWEEX 

yery furious, &nd we must admit that He had every 
cause to be exceedingly vexed, since he had come to 
Old Manor Farm for peace, and this June afternoon 
had been the scene of quite a number of disturbances. 

"But the eggs, child?" said Uncle Jasper, with 
quite a show of eagerness and impatience; " have you 
got the eggs ? " 

" Hm — hm ! " nodded Boadicea in response. " I 
climbed on to Upchin's barn after Mother Owl. She 
flew off. I scrambled down and then on to the pop- 
lars after her. But, Uncle Jasper, where do you think 
the nest was ? " 

Well, my dear?" 

In our loft — just under the thatch by the sky- 
light! Oh, I had a scramble for it, I can tell you! 
The thatch was so slippery after all this dry weather. 
I slid now up, now down. Scratched my knees, too ! 
I tell you. Mother Owl was furious. She knew I was 
after her nest. But I got it at last — when, bang! I 
slid down again — this time on to the skylight, and 
through I went with a crash ! " 

She was quite breathless, for she had talked very 
fast, undisturbed by Cousin Barnaby's groans of dis- 
gust and Aunt Caroline's exclamations of horror. 
Now she paused a moment, and her face assumed an 
expression of pride and of triumph. 

" But I've got the eggs for you. Uncle Jasper," she 
said. 

And she looked down upon the precious thing which 
she was still holding to her breast. Suddenly as she 
looked the expression of triumph fled from her face, 
a look of dismay spread all over it. 



A WILD FIGURE OF A GIRi: 73 

" Yes, child, the eggs ? " said Uncle Jasper ex- 
citedly. 

A tangled bundle of brickdust and mortar, of twigs 
and dried grass, together with fragments of some- 
thing white and a yellowish liquid, fell in a heap; on 
the floor. 

" They are smashed ! " she exclaimed, as her eyes 
filled with tears and her arm dropped down to her 
side. 

" Scrambled eggs ! " remarked Cousin Barnaby 
placidly. 

He really did enjoy her disappointment. 

" Smashed? " cried Uncle Jasper in a piping treble, 
for he was truly horrified at the awful calamity; " no, 
no, child, not smashed ? " 

And while Boadicea nodded ruefully he was down 
on his knees turning over the remains of the destroyed 
nest, trying to find some fragment at least large 
enough to preserve. 

" No, not smashed," remarked Cousin Barnaby, 
who knew how to be sarcastic ; " eggs are usually much 
improved by being hurled six feet through a skylight." 

" I am so sorry, Uncle ! " murmured Boadicea. 

She looked so conscience-stricken and with it all so 
quaint and funny in her torn skirt and stockings that 
the young stranger — who hitherto had politely kept 
in the background — betrayed his presence now by a 
loud and genuine outburst of laughter. 

Boadicea quickly looked round, and, seeing him 
thus laughing whilst trying to regain his composure 
under her stern eye, she gazed on him for awhile in 
mute astonishment. Then she said curtly : 



74 MEADOWSWEET 

"Who is he?" 

At her words everyone Seemed suddenly to become 
aware of the stranger. Aunt Caroline, very flustered, 
hastily smoothed down her apron and put her hands 
to her head to see if her cap were on straight. 

" Indeed, child," she said, " your wild mischief 
makes us forget our manners." 

She turned to the young man, and bobbed him an 
old-fashioned curtsey. 

"Sir? . . ." she said, half interrogatively. 

" Lieutenant Carrington, of H.MS. Dolphin/' he 
replied, standing very upright and giving Aunt Caro- 
line a real naval salute, " at your service, Madam ! " 

" Lieutenant Carrington ! " exclaimed Aunt Caro- 
line. " Not Mamie Carrington's son ? Mamie who 
was Mary Janet Culverston?" 

" My dear mother," said the young man. 

" Mamie's son ! — Mamie's son ! " reiterated Aunt 
Caroline, as with scant ceremony she placed her podgy 
hands on the young lieutenant's shoulders and drew 
him down until she could plant a kiss on both his 
cheeks. " Right welcome you are, sir, for your dear 
mother's sake! She'll have told you about me, I 
know. Caroline Pettigrew I was before I married 
Jasper Hemingf ord. Mamie's son, to be sure ! Why, 
you were a mere lad when I saw you last at Crack- 
mansthorpe. My 1 how you have grown since then ! 

" And this is Mr. Hemingford," she continued with 
eager volubility, and waved one hand toward Uncle 
Jasper and the other toward the young man. " Lieu- 
tenant Carrington, Jasper, of H.M.S. Dolphin; my 
friend Mamie Carrington's son. You remember her; 



A WILD FIGURE OF A GIRL 75 

she was one of my bridesmaids. And you remember 
Mr. Hemingford, I am sure, Lieutenant Carrington." 

"Jack you must call me, Mrs. Hemingford, 
please ! " said he. 

" Then Jack it shall be ! " rejoined she, blushing 
with pleasure. " You remember Uncle Jasper, don't 
you?" 

"Remember Uncle Jasper? Why, of course I 
do!" 

And he shook Uncle Jasper cordially and very vig- 
orously by the hand, whilst Uncle Jasper, rather 
absent, and certainly vague as to who the young man 
was and Who was Mamie Carrington, murmured pleas- 
ing " How de do's ? " and declared how well he re- 
membered. 

" By gad ! " said Lieutenant Carrington gaily, " I 
remember this museum perfectly now. Though I 
only was brought here once in my nurse's arms, 
I thought it then the most wonderful spot on earth — 
in fact, it was my idea of heaven in those days." 

" It is my idea of a rubbish heap now," grunted 
Cousin Barnaby, who thought it was fully time some- 
one paid attention to himself. 

"And this," said Aunt Caroline, politely turning 
toward him, " is our cousin, Barnaby Crabtree, who 
is paying us a short visit." 

" Your servant, sir ! " said the lieutenant. 

" And now," continued Aunt Caroline, " I hope 
that you find yourself quite at home, sir." 

" You are too kind, Mrs. Hemingford," said he. 

" I don't know where you lodge, sir — I mean 
Jack," said she. 



76 MEADOWSWEET 

" On board the Dolphin, Madam." 

" At any rate, then, I hope that you will give us the 
pleasure of sharing our homely supper with us to- 
night." 

" I'll be greatly honoured, Mrs. Hemingford," said 
he, making her an elegant bow. 

" Then you'll excuse me, sir — I mean Jack — I'll 
tell my niece Lady Jeffreys that you are here." 

She had made this remark quite casually, having 
for the moment forgotten that Boadicea had been 
absent all the day, and knew nothing of her sister's 
arrival; and she was calmly sailing toward the door 
when the young girl was after her like a whirlwind, 

"Olive!" she cried, "Olive here, Aunt? Where 
is she? When did she come? Why didn't you tell 
me she was here? Where is she? I'll go tell her! " 

And she made impetuously for the door. But Aunt 
Caroline restrained her, putting on her most stern and 
most commanding manner. 

" No, no, child ; not just now," she Said. " Olive h 
dressing, I think, and you know that she always hated 
being disturbed whilst she was so engaged. And I 
should hate her to see you in this state, too ; she looks 
so lovely herself — and you, child, you look a perfect 



savage." 



" I have always maintained that she is a begad sav- 
age," grunted Cousin Barnaby, who had no love for 
little Boadicea. 

The child hung her head now, looking very penitent. 
Her sister Olive was the great love of her lonely life. 
She had a passionate admiration for the dainty and 
exquisite sister, who had gone out of her life, even at 



A WILD FIGURE OF A GIRL ^y^ 

the time that she herself was emerging out of girl- 
hood. Just for the moment she felt ashamed of her 
torn clothes and ragged stockings, and would have 
liked to hide herself somewhere, so that Olive should 
not see her until she was more tidy. 

" Wait a moment here," said Aunt Caroline, " and 
I'll see where Olive is. If she is in her room dress- 
ing, as I think she may be, you can slip quietly up- 
stairs and smooth your hair and change your dress, 
so that you may look your best when she first sees 
you. Don't cry now, that's silly!" she added in a 
very low whisper, as she saw that Boadicea was on the 
verge of tears. " Lieutenant Carrington is looking at 
you." 

" Caroline," came in reproachful accents from 
Cousin Barnaby, " are you forgetting that this is the 
hour for my glass of bitters? I shall have no appe- 
tite for supper if you neglect me like this. Not that 
I ever complain; but really I don't see why the pres- 
ence of a stranger should thus make you forget your 
most elementary duties to me."' 

" Oh, come along, then. Cousin Barnaby ! " said 
Aunt Caroline with some impatience. " I had for- 
gotten you, it's true; but Susan will have put the 
bitters on the parlour table. Come along, then — 
and you, child, wait just five minutes, and then make 
no noise as you slip upstairs." 

After which Aunt Caroline, with a final " I pray 
you to excuse me, sir — I mean Jack/' went out of 
th^ room, followed by Cousin Barnaby. 



CHAPTER VII 

A LITTLE FURY OF WRATH 

'Aunt Caroline's high-pitched tones and Cousin 
Barnaby's loud-voiced grumbhngs were heard dying 
away across the oak-panelled hall and then in the small 
parlour which lay on the left. 

In the museum where a little while ago there had 
been so much noise, so much bustle and also such loud 
laughter, there now reigned absolute silence. 

Uncle Jasper, quite happy that for the moment 
neither his wife nor his Cousin Barnaby were likely 
to disturb him, had incontinently clambered up hisi 
favourite perch, and crossing one lean leg over the 
other, he had propped up his book on his bent knee 
and was once more absorbed in the wonders of 
science. 

Boadicea — when Aunt Caroline and Cousin Barn- 
aby had gone — remained standing beside the door, 
with her back to the rest of the room, which, you will 
say, was not polite, seeing that Lieutenant Carring- 
ton was there and he a guest in the house. But I 
think that for the moment Boadicea had forgotten his 
presence. She was thinking only of Olive and of the 
joy that would come to her presently, when she could 
embrace the dear beautiful sister, and hear from her 
all about her triumphs in London society, and admire 

78 



A LITTLE FURY OF WRATH 79 

all her lovely "dresses, and her jewels of which the wife 
of Sir Baldwin Jeffreys had, of course, a good 
number. 

Boadicea was only thinking of Olive, and straining 
her ears to hear Aunt Caroline's footsteps going up- 
stairs, and the opening and closing of a door, which 
would be the signal for her to make her escape, and to 
creep to her room, there to wash her face and hands 
and generally make herself look less like a savage, 
and more pleasing to Olive. 

" Can't I get you a chair ? " 

Boadicea turned round very sharply : her mind was 
so full of Olive that she was quite startled when she 
found herself face to face with a young gentleman, 
whom she hardly knew, and who was smiling at her 
now in an amused kind of way which she did not like 
at all. It was he who had offered to get her a chair, 
and now he said quite kindly : 

"You must be so tired after your prowess just 
now, and I have an idea that you must have hurt 
yourself when you fell down those stairs." 

" I am not hurt," she said curtly. 

" Perhaps only bruised," he went on, still smiling. 
"By gad! I thought you'd have killed yourself when 
you jumped from that elm on to a sloping roof. 
Scrums, little one, it was a jump, eh? " 

She looked straight at him then, for his tone did not 
seem so sarcastic as before: and as she looked, she 
encountered a pair of grey eyes which twinkled with 
merriment, as well as with intense good-nature, and 
also with boyish enthusiasm at the recollection of her 
feat. 



8o MEADOWSWEET 



(f 



I suppose I did give you a fright," she said. 

He nodded in response : and suddenly for no reason 
whatever, she felt her blood rushing up to her cheeks 
causing them to glow with heat. She was very angry 
with herself for this, and still more so for the feeling 
of shyness which suddenly possessed her. However, 
she was not going to let this young man see that she 
was shy, nor think that her blushing cheeks had any- 
thing to do with the twinkling look in his eyes. 

" I saw you," she said as curtly as before, " from 
the elm. I could see that you were scared." 

" I would have climbed the elm after you," he re- 
joined, " but you were as agile as a cat, and I feared 
that I would do more harm than good." 

He talked to her lightly and gaily as one does to a 
child, and his grey eyes travelled from time to time 
over her torn frock and her dusty hands, and after 
they had done so they again rested on her face, and 
she then felt that the blush in her cheeks deepened 
because the twinkle in his eyes became more pro- 
nounced. 

" I suppose that you think me a savage, too," she 
said defiantly. 

** I think that you are a very foolhardy and very 
naughty child," he replied, and just for a moment 
merriment died out of his face, and it looked earnest, 
whilst his voice sounded quite stern, 

" I am not a child," she retorted. 

"What else?" 

" Miss Aldmarshe," said she, trying to look very 
dignified. 

But at this earnestness fled quickly from his face, 



A LITTLE FURY OF WRATH 8i 

and back came the merry smile round the clean-shaved 
lips, and that amused twinkle in the grey eyes. 

" I beg your pardon," he said politely. 

" Or Miss Boadicea," she conceded. 

*' Queen of ancient Britain! " 

And he made her a deep bow, in the old-fashioned 
style, putting out his hand that she might rest hers 
upon it. She was about to do so, when looking down 
upon her hand — already extended toward him — she 
saw that it was very dirty, and covered with the con- 
tents of an owl's egg. 

"Wants washing — ^eh, your majesty?" he re- 
marked with that irritating pleasing humour of his, 
when he saw her look of dismay, and the quick with- 
drawal of the grimy little hand. 

This time she felt an angry flush rising to the very 
roots of her hair. 

" Well ! " she said sullenly, " I suppose that a sav- 
age — even a Queen — would have sticky hands some- 
times." 

" Undoubtedly," he replied. 

" I dare say," she continued with what she felt and 
meant to be biting sarcasm, " I dare say that the 
young ladies whom you know in London have beauti- 
ful white hands." 

" Well, usually! " he admitted. 

" And you like to take their hands — their beautiful 
white hands," she said, whilst in spite of herself her 
voice shook, and there was a silly, uncomfortable little 
lump in her throat, she would have given worlds to be 
able to swallow, " and would be ashamed to take the 
hand of a — of a savage ! " 



B2 MEADOWSWEET 

" By gad ! " he exclaimed, " but you are a funny 
child — I! ashamed to take your little sticky hands? 
— not I — give me both of them — there — at once." 

And he held out his hands, and looked on her with 
great kindliness : he was very fond of children and of 
young animals, and this quaint girl seemed a happy 
blend of both : and just now her obvious timidity, that 
first beginning of self-consciousness which only comes 
when the child has become a woman, rendered her ex- 
cessively winning and charrning to look at. 

Having imprisoned both her small, sticky hands in 
his own strong ones, he drew her to him with a quick, 
masterful gesture, and in a jovial, brotherly way kissed 
her heartily on both cheeks. 

To his astonishment, she became as red as a poppy 
and then equally suddenly all the blood seemed to 
leave her cheeks, and she looked frail and pale: and 
then heavy tears gathered in her eyes. 

" How dare you? " she said almost viciously, whilst 
with all her might she tried to free her hands from his 
grasp. " How dare you ? " 

" I don't know how I dare," he rejoined gaily 
laughing, much amused at her indignation and at her 
futile efforts to rid herself of him, " but so bold am I 
that I'll dare again." 

And again he kissed her, despite her struggles : but 
now her head was bent because of the effort which she 
made, and thinking to kiss her cheeks his lips en- 
countered her soft, round neck. 

*' How dare you? " she cried again and again, "let 
me go ! let me go ! — I hate you ! " 

But men are such curious beings. In the best of 



A LITTLE FURY OF WRATH 83 

them there Is always something of the tyrant, and 3. 
great deal of the Turkish pasha. Lieutenant Car- 
rington had no compunction whatever in thus teasing 
this child. She was only a child, and a tomboy, too, 
whom he had seen climbing trees and sloping roofs 
just like a cat, and he liked to hold her now, while she 
struggled, just in the same way as he would imprison 
a kitten that pleased him, and wanted to get away 
from him. 

The more she struggled, the more gaily did he 
laugh, the more she showered her hatred on him, the 
more determined was he to snatch yet another kiss — 
to punish her because she was so silly and shy, and 
would not receive his brotherly kiss in the spirit in 
which he meant her to receive it. 

And whilst they were struggling like this, he laugh- 
ing, she almost in tears, the door flew open and beauti- 
ful Olive Jeffreys entered the room. 

For a moment she stood quite still, and I assure you 
that just then her expression of face was anything but 
pleasant. There was a deep furrow between her 
brows, and as was habitual with her when she was 
vexed, she was worrying her under lip with her teeth. 

But her general appearance was very beautiful, for 
she had exchanged her emerald silk gown for one en- 
tirely composed of shot silk in colour like an iridescent 
pearl, neither mauve nor rose, nor grey, but partaking 
of all these delicate tints, and with a satin stripe of 
pale golden yellow running down the delicate fabric, 
and tiny bunches of pink rosebuds with their leaves 
scattered here and there. 

Filmy lace veiled the edge of the bodfce and blended 



84 MEADOWSWEET 

in exquisite harmony with the tender flesh tones of her 
bosom. Round her neck she wore three rows of per- 
fectly matched pearls, and in her ears she had long 
earrings of beautiful gold work set with pearls. 

So charming an apparition was she that in a mo- 
ment both Miss Aldmarshe and Lieutenant Carring- 
ton mutely and tacitly called a cessation of hostilities.' 
He dropped her wrists, and she gave a quick exclama- 
tion of delight. 

[But already Lady Jeffreys's high-pitched voice had 
resounded across the museum. 

" Fie, Lieutenant Jack," she said reprovingly, " I 
pray you leave the child alone! See! she looks of- 
fended like a bedraggled chicken. And you will be 
disturbing the entire household by making her howl." 

She advanced into the room with her pretty, minc- 
ing step, toying with her lace fan as she walked, and 
anon she stood before the two young people who I 
must say were looking somewhat shamefaced. 

Boadicea, still as red as a poppy, hung her head 
down heartily ashamed thus to appear after all before 
the beautiful sister, having wholly forgotten Aunt 
Caroline's stern admonition. 

Olive gave the glowing cheeks a kindly, patronising 
tap with her fan. 

" There, there, child," she said with a light laugh, 
" do not look so scared. Lieutenant Carrington was 
only trying to frighten you — he really does not care 
to kiss little girls — or even to look at them — eh, 
Jack?" 

And she turned fully towards Lieutenant Carring- 
ton, standing — quite accidentally I have no doubt — • 



A LITTLE FURY OF WRATH 85 

quite dose to her sister, her daintily bedecked person 
in charming contrast to Boadicea's tattered appear- 
ance, her beringed and well-trimmed hands looking 
almost fairylike beside the grimy, sun-tanned ones of 
the younger girl. 

No doubt Lieutenant Carrington realised the, enor- 
mity of his offence, the sin which his eyes had com- 
mitted by resting if only in brotherly kindness and 
gentle irony on any woman, save the most beautiful 
amongst all. The tone of familiarity with which 
Lady Jeffreys addressed him, showed that she was 
well-acquainted with him, and now he turned quite 
away from Boadicea and bowed with consummate gal- 
lantry to the beautiful lady, just as he would to the 
Queen, if she happened to be present. 

She gave him the tips of her fingers to kiss, and this 
he did, having previously said most politely : 

" When the sun appears, all lesser stars must neces- 
sarily pale." 

Certainly the lesser star — if by that appellation he 
meant Boadicea — had paled very considerably. The 
child now looked white and sullen, and her eyes 
watched every elegant movement of Lieutenant Car- 
rington, and every expression of his face with a glow- 
ering, wrathful look. How differently did he behave 
when Olive was present, how courteous was his man- 
ner, how delicate his speech ! He seemed quite a dif- 
ferent man to the easy-mannered, boyish fellow -of a 
while ago, with his laughing eyes and sarcastic lips. 

" There, little one," said Olive, whose melting 
glance had duly rewarded Lieutenant Carrington for 
his gallantry, " what did I tell you. He was only^ 



86 MEADOWSWEET 

teasing you — as he would have teased a kitten — 
without any ill-intention. Come ! " she added, seeing 
that Boadicea still hung her head, " let me see you 
smile. Have you forgotten, child, that twelve months 
have gone by since last you saw me in London ? Are 
you then not pleased to see me? " 

But at this appeal Boadicea's sulkiness vanished, she 
threw her arms with loving impetuosity round the 
dainty fonn of her fair sister. 

" Pleased ? " she exclaimed, " Pleased ? Why, 
Olive, I have been nearly crazy with joy, since I heard 
that ygu were here." 

Her cheeks were once more aflame, for with this 
child who had never been taught to restrain the dis- 
play of her feelings, the blood came and went in her 
cheeks, just as emotion carried her away or left her 
cold. Olive had great difficulty in extricating herself 
from the violent embrace and in rescuing her delicate 
coloured gown from the affectionate pattings of eager, 
grimy hands. 

" Child ! child ! " she cried somewhat crossly, for 
she hated the harmony of her attire to be disarranged, 
" not so fast, and not so furiously. I am convinced 
of the depth of your affection, but that is no reason 
why you should crush my gown. It cost me over 
thirty guineas last week, and now your dirty hands 
will ruin it in a trice." 

In a moment Boadicea's enthusiasm cooled down. 
Her arms dropped away from her sister's shoulders, 
and she looked down ruefully at her grimy hands. 

" I am so sorry, Olive," she murmured. 

" There! " said Olive impatiently, " do go and clean 



A LITTLE FURY OF WRATH 87 

yourself, child. You look like a little savage still, 
despite your growing years, and I must say that you 
still seem to behave like one. Does she not, Captain 
Jack?" 

" No, no," he said in an absent, bored kind of way, 
as if the subject had no interest for him. " Miss — 
er — Miss Boadicea Aldmarshe was seriously trying 
just now to behave like a young lady." 

" Behave like a young lady," retorted the young- 
girl, with a wealth of scorn expressed in the quiet 
tremor of her voice, "Behave like a young lady? 
Not I ! I hate your simpering, affected, odious young 
ladies with white hands and chicken livers. I can 
ride an unbroken colt — -can they?" she continued, 
gradually working herself up to a passion of con- 
tempt and of wrath, her voice quivering, sobs gather- 
ing in her throat and tears in her eyes. " I can sit on 
a bucker, saddleless and bridleless, and not lose my 
seat — ■ can they ? I can handle a gun, and a spade 
and a rake, I can run a mile without losing my breath 
■ — can they? can they? I ask you! Can they rise 
with the lark, and plunge into the sea and swim half 
way to France? I can. But no doubt you admire 
their silly, mincing ways, their ' Oh's ' and their 
*Ah's' and their 'Fies'sM Well, I do notl I do 
not! I do not! I would not be like them. No! 
not for all the gowns that cost thirty guineas and for 
all the soft speeches and hand-kissings the popinjays 
of Pall Mall can give them! " 

Her voice now was almost choked with tears of rage 
and shame that had gathered to her eyes. Lieutenant 
Carrington stood quite speechless! never had he 



88 MEADOWSWEET 

heard such a torrent of passionate wrath flowing from 
a woman's lips. Olive, too, while the child spoke was 
silent with amazement. And now when Boadicea 
paused either from want of breath or because her 
emotion was really choking her, all that Lady Jef- 
freys could say was a mild admonitory, 

"Child! child!" 

In a moment Boadicea's arms were round her sis- 
ter's neck. 

"Forgive me, Olive," she pleaded through her 
tears, "Olive, dear, darling, my beautiful Olive? you 
iare different to anybody else, quite different, and I 
love you ! I love you ! I love you I " 

Then she kissed Olive passionately, and the next 
second had run quickly to the door. Here, however, 
she turned, just as her hand was on the latch, and 
faced Lieutenant Carrington, who was still standing 
amazed, and supremely uncomfortable as many men 
appear when women are in tears. 

She looked him straight in the face, her eyes 
glowing, her cheeks aflame, her lips red and moist: a 
most veritable little fury of wrath, 

" But I hate him! " she said. 

Then she opened the door, and flounced out of the 
room, banging the door to behind her, so that Uncle 
Jasper started from his absorption and looked down 
in alarm from his perch. 

" Lord bless my soul, what was that ? " he queried 
vaguely. 

. " Nothing, Uncle, nothing," replied Olive, " a little 
childish tantrum, that is all. Lieutenant Jack," she 
added, once more turning to the young man a serene 



A LITTLE FURY OF WRATH 89 

and smiling face, "won't you sit awhile? We can 
have a pleasant talk before supper, and Uncle Jasper 
need not disturb us." 

And as a matter of fact Uncle Jasper, after the 
momentary interruption, had once more busied him- 
self in his book, and was taking no notice of anything 
that might be going on. 



CHAPTER VIII 

A SOCIETY LADY 

" There," said Lady Jeffreys, as she disposed her 
graceful person to its best advantage upon the sofa, 
and gave the cushions an inviting Httle pat, " come 
and sit beside me, Jack. You fooHsh boy," she added, 
seeing a quick bkish mount to his cheeks, " it is 
quite proper. We are both guests in my aunt's 
house, and there's dear Uncle Jasper playing goose- 
berry." 

She frowned a little as she spoke, for Lieutenant 
Carrington did not appear to be so eager to sit beside 
her as she w^ould have w^ished, not even though she 
cocked her head on one side, like a pretty bird, and 
beamed an invitation at him through her shining blue 
eyes. 

It would have been very Ill-manilered not to re- 
spond. Lieutenant Carrington, trained in the best 
school of good breeding, could not at this juncture do 
less than bow gallantly and take his seat beside the 
fair temptress on the sofa. But he was obviously ill 
at ease, as young men are apt to be when a beautiful 
woman is kind and has a desire to be entertained. 

Lieutenant Carrington was racking his brain to find 
an opening for polite conversation. 

" Your sister is a curious child," he said at last, 
thinking to; find si, topic of unusual interest. 

90 



A SOCIETY LADY 91 

"Oh!" said Olive with a pout that became her 
pretty mouth remarkably well, " she is only the un- 
civilised product of barbaric surroundings. What can 
you expect from education that has been confined 
within the boundaries of Thanet?" 

Then, as he made no comment, she said archly : 

" Jack ! you have forgotten to say that you are 
pleased to see me." 

" Does so obvious a fact need stating? " he asked 
gallantly. 

She gave him her hand, murmuring, " Flatterer ! " 
and rewarded him for his gallant speech by a look 
through the veil of her eyelashes; a look which her 
admirers had oft told her was irresistible. 

But Lieutenant Carrington having kissed the hand 
and withstood the look, appeared quite calm when he 
said: 

" You have not yet told me what brings the beau- 
tiful Lady Jeffreys out of London in the height of 
the season." 

" Did you wish to know ? " she asked. 

"Of course," replied he. 

" Why," said she, " it was in order to see you. 
Jack." 

" Your ladyship is pleased to jest." 

"Do you doubt it then?" 

"Oh!" he said, with a slight shrug of his broad 
shoulders. 

A look of tenderness crept into her eyes. 

" You know that I am in earnest. Jack." 

" I entreat you, Lady Jeffreys," he pleaded, point- 
ing to Uncle Jasper. 



92 MEADOWSWEET 

But she shrugged her shoulders and laughed. 

" Oh ! " said she, " he heeds nothing but his Latin 
and his beetles. Why have you become so cautious, 
Jack?" she added more seriously, "Why did you 
leave London so suddenly?" 

" I had to rejoin my ship. ... I — " 

" Your leave does not expire for another month —> 
your own sister told me this in London. Why won't 
you speak the truth ? " 

" I have told you the truth, Lady Jeffreys," he said, 
" before I left town." 

" I thought that you cared for me. Jack," she 
sighed. 

Now we all know that to play the part of a Joseph 
in commonplace, every day life, is not a pleasing task 
for any young man ; and when the lady is very beau- 
tiful and very young and the man is chivalrous, it 
becomes indeed a very invidious one. Lieutenant 
Carrington would at this moment I believe have given 
up half his fortune to be safely back in his bunk on 
board the Dolphin. The harmless ballroom flirtation 
into which he had drifted quite unconsciously in Lon- 
don was threatening to assume proportions of which 
he had never dreamed and which almost frightened 
him. It is a fact that some of the bravest men have 
been cowards where women are concerned. 

Lieutenant Carrington had distinguished himself by 
conspicuous bravery in the China seas, and yet now he 
felt an insane desire to take to his heels, and to run 
away as hard as he could go. For a moment the wild 
thought came into his brain to shout at the top of his 
yoice and thus attract Uncle Jasper's attention, who 



'A SOCIETY LADY 93 

indeed was a most inefficient gooseberry, but I think 
you will agree that this would have been most unchiv- 
alrous behaviour, altogether unfitting a sailor and a 
gentleman. 

So when Lady Jeffreys said languishingly, " I 
thought that you cared for me, Jack," all that he could 
think of to say in reply was : 

" It is because I feared that I might soon do so, 
Lady Jeffreys, that I came away." 

** To run away — like a coward ! " she pleaded, 
" It does not seem like you." 

" There are certain dangers which it were cowardly 
to court," he protested, 

" Love is not a danger," she urged, " love is happi- 



ness," 



Poor Jack Carrington felt that the air was getting 
sultry. He would now have given his very next 
chance of promotion for the chance of running away, 
and quite a good deal for permission to open the win- 
dow. Never had he felt so completely at a disad- 
vantage. Perspiration was running down his back, 
and his hair felt as if it had been fastened with gum 
arable to his temples. 

But Olive appeared quite cool; her skin was like 
ivory, and her cheeks had only a sufficiency of colour 
in them to make her eyes seem brighter by contrast, 
and her lips more red. 

" You will come back to town with me, Jack ! " she 
pleaded. 

" Impossible, Lady Jeffreys," he said earnestly. 

*'Jack!" 

" No." 



94 MEADOWSWEET 

There was a slight pause, during which OHve 
thought it best to sigh, and to produce a tiny bit of 
cambric edged with dainty lace. 

"Then," she murmured, and up went the bit of 
cambric to the brightest possible pair of blue eyes, 
" it is all — at an end ? " 

"If what had no beginning," he rejoined gently, 
** can be said to have an end." 

She looked at him over the diminutive pocket- 
handkerchief, and for the next few seconds appeared 
to be studying him very closely. She saw a young 
and good-looking face, with kindly grey eyes that 
seemed more accustomed to twinkle than to look stern, 
she also saw a well-cut mouth with lips firmly pressed 
together, and a strong jaw which showed no sign of 
a yielding disposition. 

All this she took in with a scrutinising glance of 
her bright eyes, even though they were veiled with 
tears. It is wonderful how much a woman can ob- 
serve through tears, and no doubt Olive saw every- 
thing that she wished to see, or rather everything 
which she would rather not have seen just now. 

And then a very curious thing happened. But a 
few seconds ago there had sat upon the sofa an ex- 
quisitely beautiful woman with tear-dimmed eyes and 
a mellow voice half -choked by tender emotions, and 
the poignancy of regrets. Suddenly that woman was 
changed as if by the touch of a magician's wand, and 
Jack Carrington saw still sitting beside him a very 
handsome woman of the world, with stern, impassive 
face, and eyes darkened by an angry frown. 

The voice too had changed. It was hard and tren- 



A SOCIETY LADY 95 

chant now ; and the languishing manner had gone, giv- 
ing place to the collected and calm demeanour of a 
society lady who has just cause to rebuke an insolent 
admirer. 

" But my letters ! " said this same society lady in 
a harsh voice. 

" Your letters . . ." stammered Jack Carrington. 
He was greatly bewildered at this sudden change for 
he was a young man and had had little or no experience 
of the curious ways of women. 

" Yes ! " she said impatiently, *' my letters ! I 
wrote to you often, and often injudiciously. I be- 
lieved in your honour and poured out my heart some- 
times in my epistles to you. Yours in response were 
very brief and cold. I see now, alas ! how foolish and 
trusting I was; how cold and callous you were. 
There's enough matter in my letters to destroy the rep- 
utation of a duchess. Have you kept them? " 

" Indeed," he stammered, still feeling very dazed 
and bewildered and vaguely wondering how much of 
this interesting conversation came to the ears of Uncle 
Jasper. " I may have kept a few." 

" A few ! " she exclaimed. " Hark ! at the vanity 
of the man! A woman pours out the secrets of her 
heart to him in some impassioned letters, and he 
calmly keeps a few ! " 

" I swear to you, Lady Jeffreys," said Jack Car- 
rington, who now felt sincerely sorry for her, " that 
those which I have kept — so presumptuously I own — 
shall be destroyed this very night." 

" Pshaw! a man's vow to a woman! " she retorted. 
" I'll not believe you." 



96 MEADOWSWEET 

" But, Lady Jeffreys . . ." he protested. 

" Unless I have my letters in my own hands, I'll 
never again know a moment's peace." 

" Then I'll place them in your hands myself." 

"When?" 

" To-morrow." 

" Too late. I must leave for town at break of day," 
she asserted unblushingly. " You could not present 
yourself in this house at such an early hour." 

" Then I will send them to you by a trusted messen- 
ger." 

" That they may fall into wrong hands ! " 

" Then what can I do ? " he cried in genuine dis- 
tress. 

"Think! think!" she urged. 

" Let me fetch them now and bring them back. I 
am lodging in Ramsgate, I could be back in less than 
two hours." 

" Impossible. Supper will be served in a few mo- 
ments ; what excuse could you make for thus running 
away? " 

" Then what can I do ? " he reiterated again In com- 
plete despair. 

She waited a moment, watching him with narrowed 
eyes, that certainly held no tears. Then suddenly she 
leaned forward, with an eager and bright look, and 
placed her hand upon his sleeve. 

"Listen, Jack," she said, speaking low and fast. 
"I shall not know a moment's peace until those let- 
ters of mine are back in my hands. So this is what 
I think would be best. To-night, after supper, leave 
as early as you can with convenience and politeness. 






A SOCIETY LADY 97 

but be careful to leave something behind — your man- 
tle or your gloves. Then go back to your lodgings, 
fetch all my letters, and bring them to me." 

" But, Lady Jeffreys . . ." he protested. 

" Tush, man," she said, " it's quite simple. You 
can walk to Ramsgate in an hour, can't you? " 
In less — for I would run all the way." 
A quarter of an hour to get my letters, and order 
a horse to be saddled — you can do that? " 

" Of course." 

"And half an hour for the return journey," she 
concluded eagerly. " You would not be gone two 
hours, and Uncle Jasper never goes to bed before ten. 
If you will leave here soon after seven — you can 
easily find a pretext — your duty — or — or some im- 
portant letters to write. ,When you return you will 
find me sitting in this room with Uncle Jasper for 
gooseberry. I will watch for you, and if you rap at 
the back door I will open it — Uncle Jasper will ask 
no questions, and if he does there wall be your mantle 
left behind to account for your return. By to-mor- 
row morning he will have forgotten all about you — 
so you see how simple it all is." 

It certainly did sound very simple, and though at 
the bottom of his heart Jack Carrington strongly dis- 
approved of the adventure, he could not think of any 
serious objection to make to it, nor of any strong ex- 
cuse for refusing to obey Lady Jeffreys's commands. 
Inwardly he was cursing himself for having been so 
foolish as to keep those silly letters, which were noth- 
ing but the senseless ebullitions of a self-willed and 
headstrong woman. He was indeed being severely 



98 MEADOWSWEET 

punished for the harmless ballroom flirtation into 
which he had allowed himself to drift without thought 
of consequences. To him the whole thing had meant 
nothing but momentary amusement, and a certain sat- 
isfaction to masculine vanity, whilst she of course 
seemed to have forgotten how quickly a woman's rep- 
utation becomes the prey of the envious gossip- 
mongers. Would to God that she felt that she could 
trust him; he was only too ready to destroy the let- 
ters, if only she would allow him to do so quietly in 
his own lodgings. But to this simple course she ap- 
parently would not give her consent. She now 
refused to trust him whom she had already so com- 
pletely trusted. Perhaps she thought that he had 
acted dishonourably towards her — perhaps — oh ! the 
awful thought — he had acted dishonourably, and was 
not worthy of a woman's trust. 

You see that Lieutenant Carrington's meditations, 
whilst Olive urged her plan on him, were none too 
pleasant. A vague feeling of remorse weakened his 
will, and broke down the last barrier of resistance. 

" Jack," she pleaded finally, seeing plainly that at 
last he was ready to give way, " I must trust to your 
honour in this. You won't deceive me again." 

" Lady Jeffreys . . ." he stammered helplessly. 
You will do as I ask you, Jack? " 
I have no option, Lady Jeffreys." 
To-night, then, at about half -past nine, I will be 
here with Uncle Jasper. You will see the light in the 
window. You'll not fail to come. Jack. Promise 
me!" 

And he promised. 



{{ 



it 



CHAPTER IX 

AN EXQUISITE APPARITION* 

Xt last the victory had remained with Olive Jef- 
freys. But she was far too clever a woman to press 
it further home. Jack Carrington was one of those 
men whose promises always seem binding on them- 
selves, whatever might betide. 

She gave a short sigh of satisfaction and leaned 
back against the cushions of the sofa. She re- 
arranged the folds of her gown with a careless hand 
and so settled down for ordinary conversation. 

To begin with she told Lieutenant Carrington that 
Sir Baldwin Jeffreys had elected to ride home only 
in the cool of the evening. Aunt Caroline had told 
her awhile ago of Sir Baldwin's changed intentions, 
and that he had gone to Minster to spend an hour or 
two before supper with Mr. Culpepper who was-a very 
old friend. She was talking quite coolly, even 
though she could see that Lieutenant Carrington had 
frowned and flushed. No doubt the thought of meet- 
ing Sir Baldwin at supper to-night was not a pleasant 
one. But to the capricious, self-willed woman the 
announcement had not been altogether unwelcome. 
Excitement and intrigues were as the breath of her 
body to her, and she was not at all displeased when 
the thought crossed her mind that Sir Baldwin's 

99 



100 MEADOWSWEET 

changed intentions might have been coincident with 
his hearing casually that the Dolphin lay at anchor 
in Ramsgate Harbour. 

She was never averse to exciting his jealousy, 
which in a way seemed a homage rendered by him 
to her powers of fascination, and though at times she 
was a little afraid of him, yet she knew herself to 
be far too cautious and too clever to place herself 
thoroughly in the wrong before him when violence on 
his part might have been justified. 

The thought that Sir Baldwin would be riding away 
to-night with the full knowledge that despite his 
machinations and his tyranny, she would still be 
thrown in the society of Jack Carrington, caused her 
infinite amusement; and if he further changed his in- 
tentions and did elect to spend the night at Old Manor 
Farm, she still meant so to manipulate the threads of 
her intrigue, that they would never enmesh her, but 
leave her triumphant, and happy in her role of an in- 
nocent and much maligned woman. 

How she would manage all that, she did not at 
present know, but the thought of supper with Sir 
Baldwin sitting opposite to her and Jack Carrington 
by her side was distinctly exhilarating. 

She heard her husband's heavy footsteps in the 
hall, a few moments after a loud toned bell had pro- 
claimed the fact tliat supper was about to be served. 
Lady Jeffreys, satisfied that the young man seemed 
duly disturbed in his mind, began talking calmly about 
the weather and of the London season, and Lieutenant 
Carrington gave reply as best he could. 

Soon Aunt Caroline came in, fussy and garrulous as 



AN EXQUISITE APPARITION loi 

usual, dressed in her best puce silk and with a new 
lace cap on her head. 

Sir Baldwin Jeffreys entered the room five minutes 
later. He was perfectly calm and self-possessed, and 
Olive had not even the satisfaction of seeing a look of 
jealous wrath in his eyes. He did not appear at all 
surprised at seeing Jack — perhaps Aunt Caroline or 
even Susan had told him that Lieutenant Carrington 
was here. Be that as it may, he bowed most politely 
if somewhat stiffly to the young man, and then ad- 
dressed himself quite pleasantly to his wife, 

Barnaby Crabtree's entrance, however, soon caused 
a diversion. He came in, grumbling as usual. 

" Nothing so bad for the digestion, Caroline, as un- 
punctuality. . . . That wench of yours must be given 
a month's wages in lieu of notice if she does not 
learn to dish up to time." 

Even before Aunt Caroline could enter her habitual 
meek protest, Susan, with her cap awry as usual, and 
her hands and feet very much in the way, came to the 
door and announced loudly : 

" I've dished up, ma'am ! " 

Whereupon she appeared to have been scared by 
her own voice, for she fled back across the hall as if 
she had been shot out of a gun. 

*' Ten minutes late ! " was Mr. Crabtree's parting 
shot at the flying Susan. 

" I hope. Sir Baldwin, that you will excuse a very 
simple supper," said Aunt Caroline, whose cap was 
beginning to emulate Susan's in its gyrations down the 
slope of her head, " and you too, sir — I mean Jack; 
we are only country folk." 



102 MEADOWSWEET 

" Don't make excuses to Sir Baldwin, Kunt," said 
Olive lightly, " since he must make a start soon after 
supper he will be glad of a simple menu." 

Aunt Caroline now went up fussing to Uncle Jaspef , 
mounting half-way up the steps, and shaking him vig- 
orously by the leg. 

** Jasper! Jasper!" she ishouted. "Lord bless us 
all, he'd starve up there first, before he took any 
notice. Jasper! Jasper! we are all waiting." 

" Waiting," said Uncle Jasper blandly, *' oh, don't 
wait, Caroline, I've often told you not to wait tea 
for me." 

" The man is a begad idiot," muttered Cousin Bar- 
naby. 

" It's not tea, Jasper," said Aunt Caroline, impa- 
tiently, " it's supper — supper, and you've had no tea. 
Do please lead the way with Lady Jeffreys, sir — I 
mean. Jack, and you, too. Sir Baldwin, I pray you 
walk to the dining-room. I'll get your uncle down 
from his perch presently and bring him along with 
me. . . . But Where's Boadicea?" she added, notic- 
ing for the first time that the child was absent. 

" Are we going to have supper to-night, Caroline,'* 
interposed Mr. Crabtree, " or are we not ? " 

" Of course we are, Cousin Barnaby," retorted she, 
"but I must know why Boadicea isn't down yet — ■ 
I hope she didn't hurt herself falling this afternoon." 

" Tush, Aunt," said Olive lightly, " the child was 
shy. She's not used to strangers; she'll slip down- 
stairs presently when we are all seated." 

But this idea found no favour with Aunt Caroline. 
The traditions of Old Manor Farm demanded that 



AN EXQUISITE APPARITION 103 

everyone should assemble in the museum before the 
principal meals of the day, and file in from there all to- 
gether into the dining-room. 

Therefore she now went to the door and called 
loudly at the top of her voice: 

" Boadicea, child — are you coming? " 

And from upstairs came the young girl's voice in 
response : 

" At once, Aunt Caroline." 

There was a patter of light feet on the polished oak 
staircase and a minute later the door of the museum 
was thrown open and Boadicea entered the room. 

When I say that Boadicea entered the room I must 
admit at once that no one there present recognised at 
first who it was that was standing there in the door- 
way, framed by the heavy dark oak, and with the 
vague dark background of the hall behind like some 
picture of Sir Thomas Lawrence. 

Anything more unlike the tattered, hoydenish appa- 
rition which Boadicea usually presented could not well 
be imagined. No wonder that Aunt Caroline and 
Olive, Lieutenant Carrington, and even Sir Baldwin, 
stared upon her quite speechless with wonder. 

She had donned a high-waisted silk dress in colour 
like the ripe fruit of the lime, in cut somewhat old- 
fashioned, suggestive of the time when Boadicea's 
mother clasped her youngest baby girl to her heart. 
She had dressed her soft brown hair in a multitude of 
puffs and curls, which fell all round her young face, 
and were held up at the back of her head with a tall 
comb of filigree gold. On her feet she had a pair of 
transparent silk stockings and tiny bronze shoes with 



104 MEADOWSWEET 

fcross-strapS over the ankles. A soft ficHu of muslin 
was crossed over her shoulders, and she had lace mit- 
tens on her hands. A bunch of pale blush roses nes- 
tled in her bosom, and a delicate blush suffused her 
cheeks. 

She was as pretty and dainty an apparition as the 
fusty old museum had ever seen. The exquisite youth 
and girlishness which exhaled like fragrant flowers 
from her whole personality fascinated every beholder, 
save, perhaps, Olive, Lady Jeffreys, whose complexion 
had had to stand the wear and tear of two London 
seasons. 

But Boadicea appeared quite unconscious of the 
sensation which she had caused. With mincing steps 
she advanced further into the room, toying with her 
fan and casting languishing glances on everyone 
around. 

"Supper?" she said in a slow drawly tone to 
which her fresh clear voice seemed not altogether at- 
tuned, " Supper? Lud! I had forgotten — I am sure 
I could not eat a morsel — these hot days play havoc 
with one's appetite. Ah! Sir Baldwin Jeffreys! 
This is an unexpected pleasure. Glad will I be to hear 
the latest news from town. Cousin Barnaby, please 
lead the way — you, no doubt, are dying of hunger." 

Then she turned with a smile and a simper to Lieu- 
tenant Carrington and holding out her hand she said : 

" Shall we follow, Lieutenant Carrington?" 

And he, smiling and bowing, and with a wealth of 
amusement dancing in his eyes, offered her his arm, 
which she took with the consummate grace of an ele- 
gant lad^ of fashion. 



AN EXQUISITE APPARITION "105 

As Aunt Caroline would not let go of Uncle Jas- 
per's sleeve, Olive v^as left to follow on her husband's 
arm, which she did with none too good a grace, whilst 
across the hall she could hear Lieutenant Carrington's 
whole-hearted laugh in response to some witty sally; 
apparently made by transformed Boadicea. 



CHAPTER X 

A FULL-BLOWN YOUNG WOMAN 

Supper that night in the flagged dining-room of 
Old Manor Farm had been extremely lively, and 
everyone who was unprejudiced would be bound to 
admit that the merriment which reigned around the 
table was entirely due to Boadicea. 

She was vivacious in the extreme, keeping up a 
flow of small talk with Lieutenant Carrington and 
with Sir Baldwin Jeffreys which caused the latter no 
small measure of astonishment. Little Boadicea — 
whom he had known as a tomboy, usually with a 
grimy face and invariably with dirty hands — had 
suddenly developed into a full-blown, self-possessed 
young woman, with an endless fund of conversation 
and a marked talent for fresh repartee. 

She looked remarkably pretty, too, now that her 
face became more and more animated as supper pro- 
gressed and she felt herself an object of attraction 
and of praise. 

Aunt Caroline had not begun to get over her aston- 
ishment. What had come to the child she could not 
think, nor why she should have chosen this particular 
evening on which to unearth from the bottom of an 
old oak chest, where it had lain in lavender for fifteen 
years, the lime-coloured silk gown in which poor dear 
Lucy had been presented to King George IV, 

1 06 



A FULL-BLOWN YOUNG WOMAN 107 

For the moment, however, Aunt Caroline was far 
too busy at her end of the table to study this puzzle 
deeply. She had Cousin Barnaby on her right, who 
was eating enormously, and Sir Baldwin on her left, 
who was eating nothing, and, what with urging Sir 
Baldwin to take a little more cold beef and Cousin 
Barnaby not to eat so much veal and ham pie, she 
grew redder and hotter every moment, until the seams 
of the magnificent puce silk gown seemed to be creak- 
ing and crackling all at once. 

At intervals she scolded Susan in an audible whis- 
per. 

" You mustn't nudge that gentleman when you are 
handing the vegetables, Susan ! Be careful not to put 
your thumb into the salad when you hold the dish — 
put your hand underneath ! Don't offer the cream to 
Miss Boadicea; you know she doesn't really care for 
it, and there isn't enough to go round! Don't 
go breathing so loud when you are waiting at 
table — one would think you'd got asthma or some- 
thing!" 

Olive alone in the midst of this lively company ap- 
peared glum and silent. She ate very little, and once 
or twice she complained of the heat, asking for the 
window to be opened. She certainly had Sir Baldwin 
opposite to her and Lieutenant Carrington by her side, 
but both these gentlemen seemed to pay more attention 
to Boadicea than they did to herself — a demeanour 
which was wholly unpardonable. 

It was she who gave the signal for the ladies to 
retire to the parlour, and she sailed majestically out 
of the room, followed by Boadicea and Aunt Caroline, 



io8 MEADOWSWEET 

and with Uncle Jasper bringing up tKe rear. Uncle 
Jasper never cared to sit with the gentlemen over their 
wine; he never drank wine himself, and thought every 
meal such a bore that he never had the slightest desire 
to linger over it. 

But it was the custom at Old Manor Farm that after 
supper Uncle Jasper should sit with the ladies in the 
little parlour, which was situated to the left of the 
front entrance door, and immediately faced the way 
into the dining-room opposite. In this little parlour 
there was an old-fashioned spinet, and Boadicea, who 
had had lessons for a year or two from the organist 
of Minster Church, used to play old airs upon it and 
accompany herself when she sang. 

Tradition at Old Manor Farm also demanded that 
after supper she should sit at the spinet and sing Aunt 
Caroline's favourite tunes. These were, " I Asked my 
Fair One," and " Auld Robin Gray," and "Home, 
Sweet Home," which Mr. Bishop had composed. 
While she played and sang Aunt Caroline invariably 
went to sleep and Uncle Jasper fished a book out of 
his pocket and immersed himself in bats and beetles. 
Lately, too, Cousin Barnaby had added the bass of 
his snores to the treble of Aunt Caroline's, but this 
did not upset Boadicea's singing in the least. 

She sang for herself more than she did for the oth- 
ers, as the birds sing in spring, because they are 
young, and gay, and alive, and not because anyone else 
is listening. 

And to-night she went to the spinet as usual, uncon- 
scious of the pretty picture which she made there 
against the dull greyish white of the walls, and with 



A FULL-BLOWN YOUNG WOMAN 109 

the light of the lamp just illumining her delicate pro- 
file, the curled lashes, and the moist lips parted as she 
sang. 

Olive, who sat on the sofa beside Aunt Caroline, 
frowned whenever she looked across the room toward 
the spinet, and the tip of her foot beat an impatient 
tattoo on the floor. Aunt Caroline, as usual, was full 
of regrets and sighs, and she indulged in these whilst 
counting the stitches of her knitting. 

The door which gave on the hall was open, and 
from the dining-room beyond came the drone of the 
men's voices talking over their wine. From time to 
time Mr. Crabtree's rose in a high-pitched alto. 

" Will you be so kind," he would say loudly, " as 
to pass me the port. Sir Baldwin? People in this 
house are ignorant of the elements of hospitality." 

Then Aunt Caroline would endeavour to catch 
Olive's glance ere she sighed resignedly. 

" Come, Aunt," said Olive impatiently, on one occa- 
sion when Cousin Barnaby's remark from the dining- 
room sounded peculiarly rude, " it's no use making 
sheep's eyes at me like this, and sighing like one of 
those new railway engines. I can do nothing to help 
you. You and Uncle Jasper only get what you de- 
serve ! " 

"But what can I do, Olive?" again sighed Aunt 
Caroline in utter helplessness. 

"Two things," replied Lady Jeffreys resolutely; 
" Give that old Crabapple the go-by and send Boadicea 
to school ! " 

" With no less than three hairless offsprings," mur- 
mured Uncle Jasper, lost in his book. 



no MEADOWSWEET 

Aunt Caroline gave a start, and Her knitting fell 
on the floor. 

" To school? " she ejaculated, in a state of complete 
bewilderment, " and with what ? " 

" In heaven's name, don't be so stupid, Aunt ! " re- 
torted Olive, whose temper was none of the best just 
now ; " the matter is far too serious not to be seriously 
discussed. I said that Boadicea ought to go to board- 
ing school for at least a year, just as I did at her age. 
The child has no manners. Either she behaves like 
a tomboy or like a pert minx ! '* 

She had spoken acidly and at the top of her voice. 
Boadicea's hands dropped from the spinet. She 
turned on the music stool and looked straight at Olive, 
with eyes wide open in astonishment. 

" Look at the way she behaved to-night ! " contin- 
ued Olive, whom the sight of Boadicea thus facing her 
seemed to exasperate still further. 

" How did I behave to-nightj Olive ? " queried 
Boadicea. 

" In a perfectly ridiculous fashion I The way you 
threw yourself at Lieutenant Carrington's head was 
positively indecent ! " 

" Olive! " exclaimed the younger girl reproachfully. 

But Olive felt spiteful, and was not inclined to 
mince her words or to spare her sister's feelings. 

" He was quite bewildered," she said. " I could 
see it on his face. He did not know how to respond 
to your bold advances. Gentlemen who are accus- 
tomed to the usages of good society and to the man- 
ners of well-educated young ladies don't always know 
how to deal with the embarrassing attentions whicH 



A FULL-BLOWN YOUNG WOMAN iii 

they get from country girls. No wonder Lieutenant 
Carrington left so soon after supper! " 

" He said quite early in the evening that he would 
have to rejoin his ship the moment he had swallowed 
his supper," protested Boadicea. 

" Oh, he would not have gone so soon, I feel sure, 
if your behaviour had not rendered his stay uncom- 
fortable." 

" He certainly seemed in a great hurry to depart," 
commented Aunt Caroline. 

Whereupon Boadicea ran to her sister in an agony 
of repentance. She fell on her knees, and, in her ha- 
bitual impulsive way, put her arms around Olive's 
shoulders. 

" I did not think that I had done any wrong! " she 
cried tearfully. " Oh, Olive dear, I wish you could 
teach me to be more like you ! " 

"There, there, child!" said Olive, somewhat molli- 
fied, though still rather acid and impatient. " For 
gracious sake, don't cry! Your nose is inclined to be 
red at all times; it will look swollen if you cry after 
a meal. They'll teach you manners at boarding 
school, and after that you must exercise proper self- 
restraint." 

" Yes, Olive," murmured the girl meekly. 

" It is not a bit of good showing a man that you 
like him. The more you try to run after him, the 
quicker he will evade you," continued Lady Jeffreys 
sententiously. 

" I am sure," protested Boadicea, " that I neither 
like Lieutenant Carrington, nor did I have any desire 
to run after him, as you put it." 



112 MEADOWSWEET 

^ " Well, cliild, you acted as if you did ! But there, 
in heaven's name, don't start whimpering again, and 
don't hang round me Hke this ! You would ruin any- 
one's clothes ! " 

" Go back to your spinet, child ! " concluded Aunt 
Caroline. *' Olive and I have many things to talk 
over, and your uncle gets fidgetty at this hour if you 
stop singing." 

Boadicea rose obediently and went back to the 
spinet. Tears still hovered on her lashes, for she was 
finding life more bewildering than she had anticipated. 
It did not seem quite so easy as she had thought to 
step from out the guise of a savage into that of a 
young lady. A silk frock and mincing ways were not 
sufficient, it appears. With humiliating self-depreca- 
tion Boadicea reviewed her own conduct most unfa- 
vourably, and, though she was quite sure that she did 
not care the least little bit what Lieutenant Carring- 
ton thought of her or her behaviour, she was equally 
convinced that she cared a great deal for Olive's opin- 
ion of her. 

Her fingers now wandered idly over the yellow 
keys. She had not the heart to sing a lively song, and 
the only song for which she seemed to have a fancy 
just now was " On the Banks of Allan Water," and 
her voice lingered lovingly over the last line : " There 
a corpse lay she." 

Tears came to her eyes whilst she sang; for some 
reason, which she could not have explained, she felt 
inexpressibly sad. The delight of seeing Olive had 
been marred in some way which she did not altogether 
understand. Her own behaviour, shq thought, must 



A FULL-BLOWN YOUNG WOMAN 113 

have had something to do with it, for the young girl 
was far too loyal to admit even to herself that there 
was any coldness or ill-temper in the sister whom she 
idolised. 

For awhile the low hum of conversation between 
Aunt Caroline and Olive reached her ears, even 
through the melancholy music of " The Banks of 
Allan Water." Then after awhile there was silence in 
that part of the room; Aunt Caroline was busy with 
her knitting and OHve was wrapped in meditations of 
a pleasant nature, no doubt, for her ill-temper seemed 
to have vanished and there was a satisfied smile 
around her lips. 

In the meanwhile Cousin Barnaby was making his 
presence felt in the house; in fact, he never allowed 
anyone to forget his existence for long. Now he was, 
as usual, calling for Aunt Caroline in a loud and un- 
mannerly voice right across the hall. 

"Cousin Caroline! Where the deuce are you?" 

Uncle Jasper clutched his book. Cousin Barnaby 
had always the power to rouse him from his medita- 
tions, and now he half rose from his chair, obviously 
prepared to beat a precipitate retreat. But Aunt Car- 
oline guessed his purpose, and before he could move 
out of his chair she had pinned him down again into 
it by vigorously pressing on his shoulder with a de- 
termined hand. 

" No, no, Jasper ! " she said resolutely, " you shan't 
go and perch upon that ladder of yours just now. I 
want you here. Now is the time." 

" Tempus edax verum," murmured Uncle Jasper 
with a melancholy sigh. 



1 14 MEADOWSWEET 

" I said," rejoined Aunt Caroline sternly, " that now 
is the time to put your foot down, instead of quoting 
Latin to your lawful wife! " 

In the meanwhile Cousin Barnaby had waddled 
across the hall, still calling loudly : 

"Caroline, where the devil are you?" which, of 
course, was excessively ill-mannered and impolite of 
him, considering that he was a most unwelcome guest 
in Uncle Jasper's house. He now entered the parlour, 
looking for all the world like an over-fed drake; his 
napkin was still tied around his neck and hung down 
his chest like a bib. He had certainly overeaten him- 
self, for his face was very red and his fishy eyes 
looked bleary. 

" Strange," he said as he entered the room, " that 
women are never to be found when they are most 
wanted, and always about the place when you least de- 
sire their presence." 

Uncle Jasper, egged on by Aunt Caroline, appeared 
to be making a gigantic effort to put his foot down; 
but the effort only resulted in the meek remark : 

" Exceptio probat regulam ! " which brought forth 
an irritable " Don't do that, Jasper ! " from Cousin 
Barnaby. 

At this point Sir Baldwin entered the room. He 
had given orders that his horse be brought round, for 
now he had no longer any excuse for lingering at Old 
Manor Farm, and he really did want to reach Ash ford 
well before midnight. 

As his wife made no motion to go up and speak to 
him, he made his way to the spinet, where Boadicea 
etill sat idly fingering the keys. 



CHAPTER XI 

A MUCH-WRONGED WOMAN 

Cousin Barnaby had not yet completed his list of 
grievances ere he retired for the night. 

" And I have an idea, Caroline, that Susan has again 
forgotten to put a hot bottle in my bed." 

" But I thought — " she protested. 

" Then you shouldn't think ! " he interposed rudely. 
" I hate women to think of anything — except of mak- 
ing people comfortable! And I still think that when 
I go upstairs I may find that there's no hot bottle in 
my bed." 

" I'll see to it, Barnaby," said Aunt Caroline meekly. 

" And put Jasper to bed. If I hear any more of 
his abominable Latin I shan't sleep a wink all night ! " 

" Yes, Barnaby." 

All her determination seemed to have vanished, and 
she was no more likely to put her foot down than poor 
Uncle Jasper himself. Cousin Barnaby 's tyranny 
over her good nature and her weak will had, in spite 
of all resolutions to the contrary, not received the 
slightest check throughout the day; in fact, it had as- 
serted itself more overpoweringly than ever, and to 
such an extent that now, when he calmly ordered his 
hostess to take his host up to bed, neither of them even 
thought of disobeying. 

Come along, Jasper," said she, taking Uncle Jas- 

115 



(( 



ii6 MEADOWSWEET 

per's arm ; " your bedtime has come and gone by long 
ago. Come to bed now! Sir Baldwin will excuse 
you." 

Thus appealed to, Sir Baldwin Jeffreys came for- 
ward and put out his hand with cordial farewell. 

" I'll say good-night and farewell," he said pleas- 
antly, " and thank 'ee again, Mr. Hemingford, for all 
your kindness." 

" Good-night, good-night ! " murmured Uncle Jas- 
per absently. " It is very early yet to say good- 
night ! " 

" The hour is getting late," he said kindly. " Mrs. 
Hemingford, will you forgive me if I now take my 
leave?" 

"Must you really be going, Sir Baldwin?" she 
asked. 

" By your leave, Mrs. Hemingford." 

" Your horse is saddled," she said, " and Topcoat 
has brought him round; but won't you change your 
mind again and wait until the morning? " 

" Not this time, thank you, Mrs. Hemingford. I 
must indeed be going. If I do not reach Ash ford to- 
night I cannot start for London early to-morrow, and 
my business is pressing." 

" You must have something hot to drink before you 
start." 

"No, no; I thank you!" he said, laughing; "your 
kind hospitality has dealt over generously with me 
already. I'll just say good-night to Mr. Hemingford 
and then make an immediate start. Please don't trou- 
ble further about me. I hate to give you all this 
trouble just when you are all going to bed! " 



A MUCH-WRONGED WOMAN 117 

" It would have been better to make an earlier 
Start," said Cousin Barnaby blandly. 

" Not at all ! ■ — not at all ! " rejoined Aunt Caroline. 
" We have been delighted to have Sir Baldwin's com- 
pany ! If you will excuse me, sir, I'll just see my hus- 
band up to his room, else he would be giving me the 
slip, and I would find him an hour hence perching on 
the top of a ladder and quoting Latin at a pack of 
stuffed lizards. Jasper," she added, " Sir Baldwin 
Jeffreys is bidding you farewell ! " 

" Ah ! " said Uncle Jasper kindly, " I am sorry you 
must go, Sir Baldwin! You must come over some 
day when you have more leisure, and go through my 
collection of British beetles. It is the finest in Eng- 
land ! " 

"Thanks, Mr. Hemingford; I shall be delighted!" 

*' Come along to bed now, Jasper ! " said Aunt Car- 
oline. 

" But my foot, Caroline ! " he protested meekly ; 
**my foot — 'cr — you said I was to put my foot 
down." 

" Oh, go to bed ! " muttered Cousin Barnaby irrita- 
bly. 

"Yes, Barnaby. Good -night — good -night all! 
Nunquam non paratus — ever ready — ever ready ! " 

Boadicea ran up to him and kissed him tenderly, for 
she and Uncle Jasper were the best of friends. Olive 
yawned as she kissed him good-night, and as Aunt 
Caroline led him away he murmured pleasantly : 

" Cedant arma togae ■ — we yield to authority — to 
authority ! " 



ii8 MEADOWSWEET 

At the doof Aunt Caroline turned back once more 
to Sir Baldwin. 

" I'll not say good-night yet, Sir Baldwin/' she said. 
" I'll be back to see you start." 

Then the door finally closed on them, and Cousin 
Barnaby gave a final grunt : 

" What a deal of fuss there is," he said, " when a 
married man goes to bed ! " 

" The only thing," interposed Lady Jeffreys, with a 
yawn, " worth doing in the country is to go to bed. 
Good-night, child I " she added, turning to her sister, 
" I'll to my room." 

" May I come with you, Olive? " pleaded the young 
girl softly. " I would love to help you undress. 
May I?" 

"If you like," replied the other carelessly. 

" I'll run and see that your room is in order, then." 

And away she ran, grateful even for this careless 
^vord of approval, happy to be of service and to bask 
in the presence of the sister whom she loved. Here 
was the nature that was always prepared to give of 
the fulness of love, and content to take the crumbs 
of affection which fell from a careless and a barren 
heart. From childhood upwards she had been taught 
to worship and admire the beautiful elder sister, and 
it had never even entered her young mind to expect 
anything from Olive in return, save perhaps occasional 
approval and a tacit acceptance of her whole-hearted 
devotion. 

She was a woman born to love, rather, perhaps, 
than to be loved. Her heart wa^ too generous to ac- 
cept ; it was forever giving. 



A MUCH-WRONGED WOMAN 119 

Sir Baldwin's glance followed her somewhat wist- 
fully. He could not help at this moment contrasting 
the two sisters in his mind. And yet — how strange 
and perverse is human nature ! — whilst giving un- 
grudging admiration to little Boadicea's splendid 
qualities, his heart found a hundred excuses for Olive's 
selfishness and egoism. His love for her had never 
cooled, in spite of the hard trials to which she put his 
devotion, and at any moment, even now that she had 
so wilfully deceived and angered him, he was only too 
ready to own himself in the wrong and to sue for par- 
don, there where forgiveness should really have come 
from him. 

He had stepped out into the hall to see the last of 
little Boadicea, for she had already taken more formal 
leave of him, and he was standing there, still and with 
sorrow and doubt in his heart, when Lady Jeffreys 
casually brushed past him. 

" Farewell, Sir Baldwin, since you must go," she 
said lightly, and, smothering a yawn, " I wish you a 
pleasant journey and a more comfortable sojourn in 
town now that you are so happily rid of me." 

" Surely, Olive," he retorted earnestly, even whilst 
he stretched out to her a kindly, generous hand, into 
which she, after a moment's hesitation, carelessly 
placed her own, " surely you'll take kinder leave of me 
than this?" 

She shrugged her shoulders with bored indifference. 

" What would you like me to say ? " she asked 
coldly. 

" Anything that your heart might dictate." 
My heart is too sore," she said, " and too deeply 



<c 



120 MEADOWSWEET 

wounded to dictate anything more to me than an in- 
different farewell." 

" Wounded ? " he retorted. " Great God ! you can 
talk of a wounded heart when for months now you 
have done nothing but trample on my devotion, 
sneered at my love, and made of me the most wretched 
of men? " 

" And what have you done, pray, for the past two 
years but angered me till I could bear it no longer? 
What have you done recently but flout me and insult 
me at every turn until I have become the laughing- 
stock of society and an object of pity to my friends? 
Truly," she added, whilst wrathful tears rose to her 
eyes, " if marriages are made in Heaven, some of 
them at any rate are finished up in hell ! " 

Her voice, always somewhat high-pitched, had risen 
in her anger until it echoed right round the oak-pan- 
elled hall. Sir Baldwin cast a quick, apprehensive 
glance round him, and, seeing that the door into the 
parlour was open, he said hastily : 

"Olive, I pray you — be careful in what you say! 
Someone may hear you." 

" Please don't mind me ! " came in placid accents 
from Cousin Barnaby in the parlour ; " there's nothing 
I enjoy more than overhearing a matrimonial squab- 
ble. It causes me to appreciate more keenly the fact 
that I am a bachelor." 

" And I do not care who hears me ! " retorted Olive 
defiantly. " I have no cause to hide my misery from 
anyone's eyes. You make it patent enough to every- 
body!" 

" I? " he ejaculated in surprise. 



A MUCH-WRONGED WOMAN 121 



tc 



Yes, you ! " she said in tearful anger, whilst sobs 
seemed to be choking her throat. " Why am I here 
now, I ask you, to the derision of half London and 
the pity and contempt of all my friends? You 
dragged me away from town in the height of the sea- 
son, whether I wished to come away or not, just like 
a child who has been naughty and is being sent back 
to school ! And all because of your senseless, insane 
jealousy ! I cannot look at a man or speak to anyone 
in a friendly manner without your suspicions of my 
honesty being immediately aroused. You do not seem 
to realise that such suspicious jealousy is offensive and 
insulting in the extreme, and that no woman with the 
least sense of pride and dignity would fail bitterly to 
resent it. Look at your conduct to-night ! " she 
added, lashing herself more and more into emotional 
fury, and becoming more and more unguarded in her 
language ; *' because Lieutenant Carrington — quite 
unknown to me, on my honour ! — happens to be on 
matters of duty in this neighbourhood, and to be in 
this house to-night, your conduct becomes so offensive 
to me and to him that he is obliged to leave directly 
after supper, and all the servants' tongues now are 
wagging at my expense ! " 

This last attack was so unexpected that It left Sir 
Baldwin wholly unprepared and very much bewil- 
dered. He thought that he had done his best to hide 
the mortification which he had felt when first he heard 
that Lieutenant Carrington was in the immediate 
neighbourhood of Old Manor Farm. He had even 
prided himself on how well he had succeeded in this, 
and succeeded in persuading his over indulgent heart 



122 MEADOWSWEET 

that Olive's desire to spend some weeks at her aunt's 
house was a pure matter of coincidence, and that she 
had known nothing of Lieutenant Carrington's pres- 
ence in Thanet when she made the arrangement. 

He had also been so much amused by Boadicea's 
suddenly altered demeanour that he had really paid 
but little heed to Lieutenant Carrington. His wife's 
accusations, therefore, took him wholly by surprise. 
He thought that indeed he must have shown remark- 
able ill-temper quite unbeknown to himself. 

" Surely," he stammered, feeling profoundly apolo- 
getic, "your ladyship is pleased to exaggerate? Be- 
lieve me, I — " 

*' No, no ! " she broke in vehemently, " I'll take no 
excuse! My heart, as I remarked before, is too 
deeply grieved for words. Your horse is saddled," 
she continued a little more calmly, " and it is best 
that you should go now — your absence may ease the 
burden of my sorrow and heal the wounds which your 
cruel jealousy has dealt me. I'll try and forget! " 

Here she almost broke down. The tears were 
trickling down her cheeks and emotion had gripped 
her by the throat. She paused a moment, making 
noble efforts to control herself, and her face now 
looked singularly pathetic in its grief. 

" But please go now," she whispered with sorrow- 
ful gentleness. " It is best, I think, that we should 
be parted for a little while, and I am afraid that I 
might break down under the strain of so much trouble. 
No, no ; please do not approach me ! " for he had in- 
stinctively drawn near to her as she spoke. " I could 
not bear it ! — not now. ,Good-night ! Good-bye ! " 



A MUCH-WRONGED WOMAN 123 

Pressing her handkerchief to her eyes, for she was 
crying bitterly, she turned away from him and slowly 
walked upstairs. Sir Baldwin himself felt overcome 
by emotion. Her pathetic appeal had gone to his 
heart; he felt himself to be a brute and a tyrant, who 
had wholly misunderstood the simple and childlike 
nature of an innocent young girl, who knew nothing 
of the world, and whom it was his duty to protect and 
not to render miserable. 

He watched his wife's retreating figure with an ever- 
increasing feeling of remorse and of tenderness, chid- 
ing himself for an ill-mannered lout and a cruel task- 
master. He made resolve better to understand her in 
future, to be more forbearing and more trustful. It 
was terrible to hear her sobs dying away in the dis- 
tance as she mounted the stairs. 

"Is she often taken like that?" queried a bland 
voice close at his elbow. 



CHAPTER XII 

A JEALOUS MAN 

Cousin Barnaby had come out of the parlour, and 
was standing beside Sir Baldwin. He, too, seemed 
to have been watching Lady Jeffreys's retreating figure 
as she went upstairs. 

"Is she often taken like that?" he reiterated, nod- 
ding in the direction of the door through which Olive 
had disappeared. 

" No, no ! " replied Sir Baldwin, who seemed some- 
what absent, and like a man talking to himself rather 
than to an indifferent listener. " No, I have never 
seen her like this before — so emotional — so appeal- 
ing and gentle — as if she really cared ! It is a new 
phase in her complex character which I had not ob- 
served before." 

" A new fiddlesticks ! " rejoined Cousin Barnaby 
calmly. "As for me, sir, when a woman begins to 
cry, I immediately begin to suspect ! " 

" To suspect what? " queried Sir Baldwin abruptly. 

"Mischief!" replied Mr. Crabtree curtly. 

"Mischief?" 

".Yes, sir — mischief! Women live in mischief 
as a bird does in feathers. If you suspect them, you 
deceive yourself; if you don't, they deceive you! " 

Now, we all know that there is nothing on earth so 
eas;^ to arouse as dormant jealousy. If it is there, 

124 



A JEALOUS MAN 125 

iand it sleeps, the merest whisper will awaken it. In 
a moment the remorse and good resolutions of a while 
ago fled to the four winds. The poisoned sting of a 
venomous wasp had wrought its evil already. 

" But surely you don't think — " murmured Sir 
Baldwin. 

Then he paused, for he was ashamed to display his 
jealous suspicions before this vulgar, obese creature, 
who seemed to wallow in mischief -making as a fly 
does in honey. 

"Oh!" said Mr. Crabtree blandly, "I don't think 
anything! I came here for peace, and the very 
thought of clandestine meetings and lovers' intrigues 
is abhorrent to me. The worst of it is, sir, that there 
are too many women about the place. Women and 
sailors, as I have remarked to you before, are the most 
peace-disturbing elements in the world ! That fool 
Jasper shouldn't live so near the sea. Inland you get 
the women, but not the sailors. I had a bilious attack 
once, but no headache. It was quite tolerable." 

But he might have gone on rambling along in his 
talk like this for hours. Sir Baldwin was paying no 
attention to him; he was nursing the aching sting 
which the poisonous wasp had left in his heart. 

" Tears," he murmured, " tears ! " 

Then, with sudden fury, he muttered through 
clenched teeth: 

"Oh, if I thought that!" 

All his wrath had returned, and his jealous suspi- 
cions were fully aroused. It was strange that for the 
second time to-day these strong suspicions should 
have come to him just when his horse had been 



126 MEADOWSWEET 

brought rouncl, iand he had been ready to start. It 
almost seemed as if Fate was giving him a warning, 
telHng him not to go. 

But now surely he could frame no excuse for delay- 
ing his departure. He would become the laughing- 
stock of the household by remaining here another 
twenty- four hours. He could not stay at Old Manor 
Farm, guarding his wife until the Dolphin had raised 
anchor, and in the meanwhile he would be incurring 
still further the hatred and contempt of Olive. 

Aunt Caroline was even now coming down the 
stairs with Sir Baldwin's mantle on her arm and his 
hat in her hand. 

*' I hope I haven't kept you waiting? " she said as 
she descended ; " your mantle and hat were so covered 
in dust I had to give them a brushing." 

" Oh, thank you so much, Mrs. Hemingford ! " said 
Sir Baldwin, rousing himself from his unpleasant 
meditations ; *' indeed, I seem to have been giving you 
a great deal of trouble to-day! '* 

" No, no ; it was no trouble 1 " she said in her usual 
fussy way. " Do come into the dining-room now. A 
hot stirrup-cup awaits you there." 

" No, no ! A thousand thanks, dear Mrs. Heming- 
ford, I really could not take it ! " 

" But you don't look well, Sir Baldwin ! Really you 
should just take something- — you have looked upset 
all the day." 

" Yes, yes ; just a little upset, dear Mrs. Heming- 
ford ! I — I haven't felt quite myself all to-day. The 
heat, I think. It's nothing, I assure you, and please 
don't think any more about it." 



A JEALOUS MAN 127 

" A little dandelion root," she suggested, " with a 
dash of sweet oil ? " 

" Yes, that is it ! " he said more cheerily ; " a good 
household remedy is all I want. And now it is fully 
time that I went. A thousand pardons, dear Mrs. 
Hemingford! I ought not to have kept you up so 
late!" 

She helped him on with his mantle and he took his 
hat from her. 

" I ought to have gone half an hour ago ! " he added, 
cordially shaking hands with Aunt Caroline first and 
then with Mr. Crabtree, who responded very coolly. 
" Good-night again, and good-bye, dear Mrs. Heming- 
ford! And — and — " 

He drew nearer to her, and at the same time cast a 
quick glance at Barnaby Crabtree, to see if he were 
out of earshot. 

" Yes, Sir Baldwin? " said Aunt Caroline, who felt 
still a little anxious about him, owing to his agitated 
manner. 

" You will look after Olive, won't you? " he whis- 
pered. 

" Of course we will! " 

" You don't think — you don't really think that she 
would — " 

"That she would what?" 

" Nothing, nothing ! " he concluded hastily, once 
more shaking her by the hand. " Good-night, Mrs. 
Hemingford ! " 

She felt a little puzzled, and gravely shook her head 
as she went to open the front door for him. 



128 MEADOWSWEET 

He raised his hat and made her a final bow, and at 
last went out into the night. 

The full moon lit up the narrow white lane as it 
went winding upwards in ribbonlike curves towards 
the main Ramsgate road. Every tree and every leaf 
upon the trees stood clear and distinct against the in- 
tense blue of the sky. From afar came the soft, in- 
cessant murmur of the sea, dashing her breakers 
against the white cliffs far away. Intense peace 
reigned all round; only the south wind, which came 
breathing gently from the coast, stirred the delicate 
leaves of the poplars, till they glittered like silver in 
the moonlight. 

When Sir Baldwin Jeffreys had given Topcoat half 
a sovereign, and was mounted ready to start, he caught 
Aunt Caroline's anxious eyes fixed curiously upon 
him. She was standing in the doorway, and he bent 
down from his saddle as if he desired to say a final 
word to her. 

She came up to him, and patted his horse's neck, 
whilst he whispered very earnestly to her : 

" Dear Mrs. Hemingford, take care of Olive! She 
is very young and — and — a little thoughtless. I 
beg of you to keep an eye on her! " 

The tears were gathering in her eyes, for he spoke 
very gently and sorrowfully; and, indeed, she was 
quite sure that he was a kind man and Olive very 
thoughtless and wilful. 

She made him the promise which he asked of her; 
then he once more bade her farewell, and, pressing 
his knees against his saddle, he turned out of the 
drive. 



A JEALOUS MAN 129 

Aunt Caroline watched him for awhile from the 
doorway with the puzzled look still in her face. 

" Dear me ! " she sighed, " I wonder what has dis- 
turbed him? What a strange temper he was in all 
day, to be sure ! — at times so furious and the next 
moment quite sad and gentle. There he goes ! " she 
added, as Sir Baldwin, having turned out of the gates 
into the lane, set spurs to his horse and set off at a 
gallop — " there he goes, lashing into his poor horse I 
I wonder now what has upset him? " 

" His liver, most likely," said Mr. Crabtree placidly. 
" I found him a most disturbing person. I am glad 
that he, at least, has gone away." 

And Aunt Caroline having lighted his candle for 
him, he waddled off with it like a big, fat drake to- 
wards the stairs, and then up to that part of the house 
where his bedroom was situated. 

But Aunt Caroline shook her head. She was not 
altogether satisfied in her own mind. However, for 
the moment she carefully shut and bolted the front 
door, then she called loudly to Susan. 



CHAPTER XIII 

A FAIR TEMPTRESS 

Susan was already standing at the foot of the 
stairs, candle in hand. 

"What are you doing there, Susan?" asked Aunt 
Caroline sharply. 

" Nothing, ma'am! " replied Susan with a grin. 

" Then leave off at once, and close up for the night." 

"Yes, ma'am!" 

Nominally it was Susan who closed up for the night 
at Old Manor Farm, but actually it was Aunt Caro- 
line who saw that every shutter was put up and every 
bolt gone home. Topcoat fastened all the outside 
gates and made the round of the house, lanthorn in 
hand, to see that everything was safe before he finally 
retired for the night in the little cottage which closely 
adjoined the old house. 

From the floor upstairs there came from time to 
time the sound of Cousin Barnaby's raucous voice, 
calling loudly: 

"Caroline!" 

" Yes, Barnaby ! " she would shout in response ; but 
she made no attempt to go upstairs until she was satis- 
fied that all the closing up had been conscientiously 
done. 

Then she ordered Susan up to bed, and she followed 
-— the last to go up — first paying a visit to Cousin 

130 



A FAIR TEMPTRESS 131 

Barnaby's room to see that he had everything he 
wanted, then knocking at Olive's door to ask if she 
was all right, then going into Boadicea's room to kiss 
her " good-night," and finally going to her own room, 
where she had to scold Uncle Jasper, who was sitting 
up reading by the light of a candle, which everyone 
knows is a very dangerous thing to do with so much 
dry woodwork about. 

At last every noise in the house was hushed. It was 
dark from attic to cellar, and soon even the lights which 
peeped through the narrow chinks of the doors of 
various bedrooms were extinguished one by one. 

Apparently everybody inside Old Manor Farm was 
asleep. From Cousin Barnaby's bedroom came the 
sound of vigorous snoring, but otherwise everything 
was still. From outside there only came the soft 
sighing of the breeze through the quivering poplar 
leaves, and at times from the distant marshes the call 
of bittern or heron, or perhaps the lowing of a cow 
in distress. 

The footsteps of Topcoat had resounded for awhile 
as he made his tour of inspection round the house; 
then these, too, died away, and the silence of the night 
fell upon the old house and its sleeping inmates. 

Downstairs in the hall the old grandfather clock 
struck ten. 

Two minutes later a door on the upstairs floor was 
very softly opened, and a figure, clad in diaphanous 
white, emerged tip-toeing upon the landing. Through 
the windows the rays of the moon struck full on this 
part of the house, throwing into bold relief the top 
of the staircase, with the closed dog-gate, and the 



132 MEADOWSWEET 

richly carved balustrade, and the dark oak doors with 
their knobs of shining brass, which gave on the sev- 
eral bedrooms on this landing. 

Now it also lit up with its soft, silvery light the 
figure of Lady Jeffreys, candle in hand, silently cross- 
ing the landing and noiselessly descending the stairs. 

From outside came the muffled sound of a horse's 
hoofs on the sandy lane. Olive paused halfway down 
the stairs, listening intently. The horse's steps had 
halted just outside the gates of the drive. She waited 
a moment until she heard a man's footsteps on the 
gravel, then she ran quickly down the last flight of 
stairs, shielding the light of the candle with her hand 
against the draught, and found herself in the hall op- 
posite the door which gave on the museum. 

This was locked, of course, and bolted. Olive had 
to put the candle down before she could manage to 
unfasten all the bolts; these gave her a good deal of 
trouble, for she had to push them very gently, lest 
anyone should hear. The dogs had started barking in 
the distant cottage gardens, and, to Olive's anxious 
mind, it seemed as if presently the entire household 
would be astir. She had no idea that a nocturnal visit 
in a country house would be fraught with quite so 
much danger of discovery. 

At last she had contrived to open the door of the 
museum, and she now found herself in the long, nar- 
row room with fantastic shapes of birds and beasts all 
round her, the tallow candle flickering in her hand 
and throwing huge grim shadows against the white- 
washed walls and the raftered ceiling. 

A slight sense of superstitious terror sent a cold 



A FAIR TEMPTRESS 133 

shiver down her spine. Great, gaunt arms seemed to 
be pointing at her from every corner of the room, and 
wide-open jaws to be gaping at her, showing polished 
white teeth. 

One of the dogs at Topcoat's cottage was still 
growling, but the others further away had apparently 
gone to sleep, satisfied. Shaking off her nervousness, 
Olive put down her candle and boldly went to the 
outer door. Here she found less difficulty in undoing 
the bolts ; though large and heavy, they worked easily 
in their sockets. In a few moments she had undone 
them, and also the chain. But she did not open the 
door; she went back to the centre of the room and 
calmly proceeded to light the lamp which stood upon 
the table. 

Whilst she was thus occupied, there came a knock 
at the outer door. She said " Come in! " in an even 
voice, and finished adjusting the wick of the lamp 
until it burned clear and bright. 

In the meanwhile Lieutenant Carrington had en- 
tered. He was looking round him now, somewhat 
bewildered, and when Lady Jeffreys turned to him, 
and impulsively held out both her hands, he said apolo- 
getically : 

" A thousand pardons, Lady Jeffreys ! Am I very- 
late? You said ten o'clock, did you not? and it is 
only a few minutes since I heard the hour strike on 
Minster tower." 

" No," she said with a winning smile, " you are not 
late. Jack ! Just in time, in fact, for Mr. Crabtree is 
snoring and everyone is fast asleep." 

*' Then let me acquit myself of my duty," he re- 



134 MEADOWSWEET 

joined. " I have brought your letters, Lady Jeffreys. 
I came as quickly as I could, but when I saw the house 
looking so dark and quiet I was half afraid to come 
near." 

Whilst he spoke he was fumbling in the pocket of 
his coat, and presently he drew from it a packet of 
letters held together by a rose-coloured band. 

" It was very presumptuous of me to keep them at 
all, Lady Jeffreys, and do please try and believe me 
when I give you my word that at your command I 
would have destroyed them to-night, and thus spared 
you the annoyance of this visit if I could." 

He was still holding the letters, but she made no 
movement to take them from him; she stood for 
awhile looking at him with eyes that seemed to shim- 
mer in the lamplight, and then she walked deliberately 
to the sofa and sat down. 

" Come and sit by me, Jack ! " she said invitingly. 

" But, Lady Jeffreys," he urged, " do you not think 
that I ought to be going? On my honour, I should 
not have come at all, had I not pledged my word to 
you! You have said yourself that the household was 
abed." 

" Well ! " she retorted with gentle Irony, " and are 
you frightened to spend a little time alone with me? " 

" No ! But I think that Mr. and Mrs. Hemingford 
would ill approve of my being here at this hour. I 
feel that I am repaying like a cad their kindness and 
hospitality." 

" And has it never struck you. Jack," she said 
earnestly, " that there is someone in the world more 
Important than yourself?" 



A FAIR TEMPTRESS 135 



(( 



There are thousands of people in the world more 
important than myself, Lady Jeffreys! " 

" Yet you only think of yourself at this moment! " 

" I don't quite understand." 

" I mean," she said, with increased vehemence, 
"that, manlike, you have talked of nothing since you 
came into this room but of your honour, and your 
promise, and your feelings when you found that the 
household was abed, and your return for Aunt Caro- 
line's hospitality. For me you have not one thought, 
not one consideration. Think what I have risked in 
the past few months in order to give you pleasure! 
The letters which now lie on the table, which you have 
60 carelessly thrown aside, testify to a woman's self- 
lessness as against man's egotism. I did not give a 
thought to my own reputation, my own peace of mind, 
or the opinion of other people; but I thought a great 
deal of you. Jack, and of making you happy." 

" You have made me very proud, Lady Jeffreys, 
both in the past and at the present moment; but I 
should prove the blackest ingrate, as well as an arrant 
scoundrel, if I did not now beg your leave to go! " 

Unconsciously Jack Carrington's voice had become 
more trenchant and hard. He was not by any means 
the unsophisticated young bumpkin whom Lady Jef- 
freys could hold under her thumb. He had realised 
by now that he had been trapped into this anomalous 
position, humiliating to any man of feeling and of 
honour, and that he had fallen stupidly into the trap 
from which now he would find it very difficult to 
extricate himself without leaving behind him a few 
shreds of his own self-respect. 



136 MEADOWSWEET 

" You shall go directly, Jack," she said, holding out 
her hand to him with a winning gesture ; " but not just 
yet. Come and sit down here and let us talk. Five 
minutes," she pleaded ; " there, and I promise you that 
you shall go ! " 

Then as he very reluctantly complied, and sat down 
next to her, feeling angry with himself for what he 
termed his weakness, chiding himself for his stupidity, 
she settled herself down amongst the cushions like a 
kitten that has found a comfy, downy place in which 
to curl up contentedly. 

" There now ! " she said, " am I such a formidable 
ogress that you should be afraid of spending half an 
hour alone with me? Come now! tell me, did you 
not guess that I could not bear to part from you whilst 
jealous eyes watched our every movement? " 

" There was no question of parting. Lady Jeffreys. 
I hope that we may often meet again." 

" How cold you are ! I thought that you cared for 
me. Jack ! " 

"Lady Jeffreys!" 

" Why not call me Olive ? " 

" Lady Jeffreys ! " he said firmly, " may I go now? " 

"Yes, yes! You may go — directly; but not just 
yet, and not — not like this ! " 

She was leaning towards him, her eyes seeking his, 
the tendrils of her hair brushing against his cheek, 
her hand stealing forward to meet his. 

" We could be so happy together. Jack," she mur- 
mured, " if only you thought a little less of yourself 
and a little more of me! You don't seem to under- 
stand how a woman can thirst for happiness — how 



A FAIR TEMPTRESS 137 

she longs for some response to the burning wishes of 
her heart ! Oh, if you only would listen to your heart, 
Jack, which — I know it — I feel it — already beats 
for me! " 

And two lovely white arms crept round Jack Car- 
rington's neck and a pair of red lips asked for a kiss. 
He was young and she was beautiful; \vho would be 
Pharisaic enough to condemn him if just then his heart 
was softened and his resolutions gave way before this 
charming temptress, who offered her beauty so un- 
reservedly to his caress? 

Jack Carrington was only a man ; there was nothing 
of the saint about him, and he was heart-whole. No 
other woman's image interposed itself between him 
and the exquisite ripe and luscious fruit which only 
asked to be plucked and enjoyed. 

"Tell me — just once, Jack — that you love me!" 
she whispered, " and the memory of your voice will 
make me happy through all the misery of loneliness 
which I have to endure ! Tell me — just this once — 
that you love me, and then I promise you that, if you 
still wish it, you shall go ! " 

It is said — and oft with truth — that the whisper 
of a beautiful woman is heard above the loudest call 
of duty. In this case, though the woman was very 
beautiful, duty had not troubled herself much about 
calling. But now a slight noise — a creak upon the 
stairs — suddenly recalled Jack Carrington to himself, 
even w^hen temptation seemed to be stronger than he 
could withstand. 

" Hush ! " he said quickly. " Listen ! " 

" What is it, Jack ? " she whispered, and her en- 



138 MEADOWSWEET 

circling arms tried to keep him by her side. " Is it 
so difficult to say the three magic words which will 
make a lonely woman happy? Only three words, 
Jack — * I love you ! ' — and I shall be satisfied ! " 

" Hush, I say ! " he said, suddenly wrenching him- 
self free and jumping to his feet, " there's someone 
at that door ! " 

This time she obeyed, and the passionate words of 
reproach died upon her lips. Thus for a moment did 
they both remain silent, he standing, she half-cower- 
ing on the sofa, listening intently, with every sense 
strained, scenting the danger which threatened them, 
both from that creaking stair and the muffled footsteps 
which were heard descending. 

Resolutely Jack walked to the door and opened it. 
The next second he had drawn instinctively away 
from that open doorway back into the shadow. 

Boadicea, clad in a loose white robe, her brown hair 
falling in heavy masses over her shoulders, was stand- 
ing on the threshold. 



.CHAPTER Xiy 

A THIEF IN THE NIGHT 

Olive saw her sister and quickly smothered a cry 
of alarm. She stared at Boadicea for a moment or 
two as if she were seeing an apparition, or perhaps a 
somnambulist whose mental consciousness was not 
present; the young girl certainly made no movement 
to enter the room. She could not from where she 
stood see Lieutenant Carrington, but she could see 
her sister, and was gazing on her with wide, terrified 
eyes, which gradually softened as she gazed until they 
became appealing and gradually filled with tears. 

"You?" gasped Olive at last, when she realised 
that the young girl was indeed here with her full con- 
sciousness, and obviously with some definite and 
earnest purpose. " What are you doing here? " 

" I heard your voice, Olive," murmured Boadicea, 
as she took a step forward into the room. " I 
knocked at the door once or twice, but you didn't hear 
me, and I didn't like to come in." 

Now she had seen Jack Carrington, for she had 
turned her head for a moment, and looked him straight 
in the face. Her eyes expressed nothing as she did 
so but amazement, and they wandered from her sis- 
ter's face to that of the young man, as if trying to 
understand something which was beyond her compre- 
hension, 

139 



140 MEADOWSWEET 

Olive was the first to recover complete mastery 
over herself. She had been a little scared by her 
sister's sudden advent, but this feeling soon gave way 
under a sense of irritation; she was angry with Boa- 
dicea for having succeeded in frightening her. 

" So you thought you would do a little eavesdrop- 
ping, eh, little one? " she said acidly. 

" No, no, Olive ! " replied the girl, who indeed now 
seemed the most frightened of the three. " I came 
because — " 

She checked herself, for her voice was trembling, 
and she made a sudden effort to speak more calmly. 
She came up to the centre table, taking no notice what- 
ever of Jack, and quietly facing her sister. 

" I couldn't sleep to-night," she said, " and sat by 
my open window — until just now. I saw a man on 
horseback in the lane — he dismounted at the gate and 
came stealthily round the house to the yard." 

" We know all that, child ! " rejoined Olive care- 
lessly. "Lieutenant Carrington forgot his mantle 
when he left earlier in the evening, and he came back 
to fetch it. I also happened to have been sitting at 
the open window, and, seeing him arrive at so late an 
hour, guessed that something serious had brought him 
back, and ran down to open the door for him before 
he roused the entire household, which he had been on 
the point of doing." 

Boadicea listened to her sister's peroration quite 
calmly, then she gravely shook her head. 

"No, no; I was not thinking of Lieutenant Car- 
rington's arrival, for that, too, did I see ; but that was 
some time before. It was only a quarter of an hour 



A THIEF IN THE NIGHT 141 

ago that I saw this second horseman in the lane — 
saw him dismount at the gate and then steal round to 
the yard. He has been prowling round the house for 
some time. I meant to call Susan at first ; then, when 
I was on the landing, I thought that I heard your voice 
coming from the museum." 

" Tush, child, you've been dreaming ! " said Olive, 
with a shrug of her comely shoulders. " Thieves do 
not arrive on horseback ! " 

" Hark ! " broke in Boadicea hurriedly, " I can hear 
his footstep on the gravel now. He is at the front 
door." 

*' Miss Boadicea is right!" now interposed Jack 
Carrington firmly. " There is someone in the drive 
at this moment." 

Olive suddenly became as white as her gown. 
There are moments in life when the coming danger is 
so potent, so terrible, that it casts the shadow of an 
awful prescience over the mind. Olive now saw 
through the thick walls of this house — saw right 
through the darkness of the night the owner of those 
footsteps upon the moonlit drive. She saw the ap- 
proaching danger, and fear gripped her so suddenly 
and so overwhelmingly that her heart stood still and 
her limbs felt weighted with the terrible weight of 
unreasoning terror. 

" Jack ! " she murmured in a hoarse whisper, " if 
it should be—" 

She dared not breathe the name, lest its very sound 
realised all the nameless horror which held her almost 
physically by the throat. 



142 MEADOWSWEET 

** I'll go and see ! " said Jack Carrington, resolutely 
turning toward the hall. 

But this Olive would not allow — not without a 
struggle at any rate ; she would not see her fears made 
real, her terror become tangible. As Jack with a firm 
step walked towards the door she ran to him, stretch- 
ing out both her arms and clinging to him, forcing 
him to pause. At first she could not speak; a half- 
inarticulate cry escaped her from time to time, an ap- 
pealing " No, no ! " and a vigorous, entreating shake 
of the head. 

Her lips and tongue were so dry that she did not 
seem able to frame the words, and Boadicea, forget- 
ting her own puzzlement and her own fears, ran to the 
loved sister and put her own protecting arms round 
the trembling figure with a gesture that was quite 
motherly in its encouraging tenderness. 

" Olive ! " she said softly, " Olive, dear, what is the 
matter?" 

" Don't go, Jack ! " the poor frightened woman now 
contrived to say; " don't go to the door! If it should 
be Sir Baldwin! He was mad with jealousy to-day; 
he suspected me, perhaps, and has set a watch on me. 
My God! If it should be he! " 

Jack Carrington stood for a moment irresolute. It 
was pathetic to see this wretched woman clinging in 
such terror to him. Instinctively his glance sought 
that of Boadicea, as if mutely asking her advice as to 
what was best to be done. 

There came a loud knocking against the front door. 
The midnight prowler, whoever he was, was tired of 



A THIEF IN THE NIGHT 143 

waiting outside, he desired to enter. Olive smoth- 
ered a cry of anguish. 

" Listen ! " she murmured. " It is Sir Baldwin, I 
am sure ! " 

" But why should you thinic, Olive, that it is Sir 
Baldwin ? " urged Boadicea, in a quick, encouraging 
whisper. " Let me go and see." 

" No, no, child ! " pleaded Olive ; " don't leave me, 
don't leave me ! I am in danger, little one — in great 
danger! If my husband finds me here at night — 
alone with Jack — he may kill me! — he may kill 
me!" 

" Olive ! " exclaimed the young girl, horrified. 

The knocking at the front door was repeated. This 
time it was more loud and more peremptory. Lieu- 
tenant Carrington and Boadicea looked at one another 
with a feeling of utter helplessness, for Olive was 
clinging to the young man, clutching at his arm with 
the frenzied strength of terror, so that he could not 
move from where he stood. 

" Lady Jeffreys," he urged, " I do entreat you to 
let me go and open that door! Whoever is knocking 
there will rouse the house if I do not." 

But she paid no attention to him, and whilst cling- 
ing to him she made heartrending and incoherent ap- 
peals to Boadicea. 

" I've done no wrong ! " she pleaded ; " but Sir 
Baldwin won't understand. I swear to you that I've 
done no wrong! You believe me, little one, don't 
you ? Say that you believe me ! " 

" Of course, I believe you, Olive dear; but do allow 



144 MEADOWSWEET 

Lieutenant Carrington to go to the door. I am sure 
Aunt Caroline will hear, and will be coming down 
directly." 

" Promise me — promise me first that you will 
agree with everything I say to Sir Baldwin." 

" Yes, yes, I promise ! Do go and open the door. 
Lieutenant Carrington. I can hear Aunt Caroline 
moving overhead." 

The knocking now was peremptory and incessant; 
obviously it was bound to rouse the household sooner 
or later. At Boadicea's promise Olive released Lieu- 
tenant Carrington's arm; he went out of the room 
quickly, and his firm step was heard crossing the hall. 
Within the next few seconds he was busy with the 
bolts and bars of the front door. 

" Hush ! Listen ! " whispered Olive, when Jack 
Carrington slipped the chain, and said in an audible 
whisper : 

" Who are you ? What do you want ? " 

" I am Sir Baldwin Jeffreys ! " came the loud re- 
sponse. " Open the door before I smash it in! " 

A shiver ran through Olive's frame, and she gath- 
ered up round her shoulders the filmy folds of a lace 
scarf which she wore. Her cheeks and lips were of 
a dull ashen hue and her eyes were dilated so that they 
looked dark and cavernous in her pale face. 

"It is Sir Baldwin!" she murmured. "You will 
help me, child. You swear it?" 

" I swear it, Olive ! " said the girl simply. 

Now the sound of men's voices speaking in anger 
and contempt rang right through the house. 

"Sir Baldwin Jeffreys?" 



A THIEF IN THE NIGHT 145 

" Stand back, man ; stand back ! " 

" One moment, Sir Baldwin ! " 

" Not one instant, man ! Let me pass ! " 

" Not before I know — " 

" You shall know nothing until I have dealt with 
her ! Let me pass, or — " 

But during this brief colloquy Olive had quite re- 
gained her calm. Hastily, whilst this brief passage of 
arms went on in the hall, she had readjusted the tum- 
bled folds of her gown and passed her fingers over 
the lines of her face, as if instinctively trying to 
smooth them away. She composed her lips into a 
conventional smile, and with a great effort she steadied 
the trembling of her limbs. 

Thus Sir Baldwin saw her, when, with a loud curse 
and a volent gesture of uncontrollable rage, he pushed 
past Lieutenant Carrington and strode to the door of 
the museum. 

" Olive ! " he thundered loudly, as soon as he caught 
sight of her, "Olive! — as I suspected, by all that's 
damnable ! " 

She confronted him quite calmly, allowing him a 
full view of her clear eyes and the contemptuous smile 
on her lips. He looked wretched and over-tired, his 
eyes had dark rings round them, and a slight foam ap- 
peared at the corners of his mouth. He was hatless, 
and his iron-grey hair was matted against his temples. 
His clothes and boots were covered with mud, and in 
his clenched hand he grasped his heavy hunting crop. 

So evil and wrathful did he look that Boadicea's 
fears all returned to her; she no longer wondered that 
Olive had been so frightened when first she suspected 



146 MEADOWSWEET 

that it was Sir Baldwin who had unexpectedly re- 
turned. There was such a wild look in his eyes that it 
was obvious that he had not full consciousness of his 
actions, and the expression of fury in his face, to- 
gether with his threatening gestures, showed that a 
dangerous mood was on him, which might drive him to 
some awful and desperate deed. 

He looked at no one except at his wife, and as he 
looked on her the whites of his eyes became bloodshot 
and a curious hissing sound escaped from his throat. 

There was silence for a second or two whilst he 
stood in the doorway, preparing, no doubt, for ven- 
geance, whilst Boadicea felt that the beatings of her 
heart must be heard through this awful, this appalling 
stillness; then suddenly Olive's high-pitched voice 
broke the solemn silence with a long, rippling laugh. 

" Well, upon my word ! " she said lightly, " this is 
a surprise! Where are your manners. Sir Baldwin, 
falling into my uncle's house at this hour of the night? 

— and in such guise, too ! Why, look at your boots I 

— and what in the world have you done with your 
hat?" 

" I'll apologise for my manners. Lady Jeffreys," he 
replied, trying to contain himself, and speaking in a 
voice that trembled with rage, " when you have ex- 
plained to my satisfaction how you happen to be alone, 
and at this hour of the night, with Lieutenant Car- 
rington, when the rest of the house is in bed! " 

*' The rest of the house! " she exclaimed, with well- 
feigned astonishment; "and do you quite ignore my 
sister Boadicea? " 

" Truce to this nonsense, Lady Jeffreys ! " he re- 



A THIEF IN THE NIGHT 147 

torted roughly; "and if you have any shame left in 
you, leave your innocent sister's name out of this 
matter!" 

She shrugged her shoulders with contemptuous in- 
difference. 

" My aunt and uncle are coming downstairs," she 
said; " are you proposing to insult me before the en- 
tire household? " 

" What explanation is necessary, sir," here inter- 
posed Lieutenant Carrington, " I am prepared to make. 
I hold myself entirely at your service; but, for the 
ladies' sake, I entreat you — " 

" Sir," broke in the irate man, " with you I mean to 
deal later! For the moment I demand an answer 
from her ! " 

And he pointed a resolute hand at his wife. The 
next moment he took a quick step forward, and with 
that same hand seized her wrist so violently that she 
gave a quick cry of pain. 

" My God ! " he exclaimed hoarsely, " I mean to 
have that answer now ! " 

" You shan't touch her ! " cried Boadicea defiantly, 
as she put her arms round her sister, and, like a young 
cat, was ready with fingers and nails to defend her 
against her assailant, whoever he might be; "you 
shan't touch her! She's done no wrong! I tell you, 
she has done no wrong ! You shan't hurt her ! — you 
shan't!" 



CHAPTER XV 

A BELOVED SISTER 

Even whilst Boadicea was screaming defiance at 
Sir Baldwin, like a wild animal protecting its young, 
heavy footsteps were heard coming down the stairs. 
The household, aroused originally by Sir Baldwin's 
knocking at the door, had quickly tumbled into some 
clothes. Aunt Caroline was the first to seize a candle 
and to drag Susan out of her room after her. She 
picked up a poker, prepared to fight an army of bur- 
glars, not recognising the voice of Sir Baldwin Jeff- 
reys, and thinking that wholesale murder was being 
done downstairs. Uncle Jasper, too, had struggled 
into his breeches, vaguely wondering what all this dis- 
turbance was about; but, since his wife had called him, 
he followed her meekly down the stairs. Barnaby 
Crabtree, furious at being disturbed, had also jumped 
out of bed, and he now stood on the threshold of his 
own room, volleying a string of expletives at every- 
body. 

" What the — why the — how the — " 
Curiosity getting the better of his laziness, he, too, 
followed in the wake of Uncle Jasper, and it was a 
motley crowd of terrified humanity that poured into 
the museum, and stood there gaping in hopeless be- 
wilderment at Sir Baldwin Jeffreys and Olive, at Lieu- 
tenant Carrington and Boadicea, Aunt Caroline, in a 

148 



A BELOVED SISTER 149 

crimson flannel dressing-gown, with her hair done up 
in innumerable tiny plaits, which, being tight and stiff, 
stood out all round her head like the prickles of a 
porcupine ; Uncle Jasper, in tight black knee-breeches, 
his thin, bare feet shoved into a pair of buckled shoes, 
his high-crowned bald head adorned with a white cot- 
ton nightcap, his pale eyes blinking in the glare of the 
lamp. 

And Barnaby Crabtree, like an angry turkey-cock, 
muttering incessantly : 

" Why the — what the — 

"Why in thunder does not someone explain?" he 
shouted at last. 

" The explanation is simple enough," said Olive 
calmly. " Sir Baldwin Jeffreys, having left his com- 
monsense and his manners behind, has chosen this ex- 
traordinary hour and place in which to insult me ! " 

"Insult you?" retorted Sir Baldwin scornfully. 

He looked somewhat like a bear in a pit now, who 
has been chained up and is unable to do all the mischief 
which it had intended. Clearly he could not murder 
his wife in the presence of all these people. But his 
wrath had not abated, even though it could not find 
sufficient vent for the moment. 

" Insult you? " he reiterated savagely. 

" Yes," she retorted, " to insult me ! Your insane 
jealousy has put us all into a ridiculous and anomalous 
position. Boadicea, child," she continued, quietly 
turning to her sister, and taking her by the hand, 
" will you explain to this — this raving madman — 
that I came down here half an hour ago in order to 
play gooseberry to you ? " 



150 MEADOWSWEET 

" For Boadicea? " exclaimed Sir Baldwin. 

" Yes, for Boadicea. Is there anything very ex- 
traordinary in this? Come, little one, don't be shy! 
Sir Baldwin apparently does me the honour to imagine 
that I am lying. Will you assure him that I speak the 
truth?" 

" Olive is speaking the truth, Sir Baldwin," said 
Boadicea firmly. 

Her cheeks were very pale, but her voice was quite 
steady. She understood at once what her sister de- 
sired of her, and she accepted the humiliating role 
without demur. 

*' But what does it all mean ? " exclaimed Aunt 
Caroline, whose brain worked very slowly at all times, 
but more especially at this hour of the night, when all 
self-respecting folk should be in bed. 

" Dictum sapienti sat est," murmured Uncle Jasper, 
who felt it incumbent on himself to assert his author- 
ity at this juncture — " a word to the wise is enough." 

" Don't fuss, Aunt Caroline ! " said Olive ; " there's 
no harm done in this except the irreparable harm done 
to me through Sir Baldwin's unjustifiable conduct! 
As for Boadicea, I assure you that she was quite all 
right — were you not, little one ? " 

" Yes, Olive, I was quite all right." 

" Is it to be wondered at that her head was turned 
by Lieutenant Carrington's attentions? She gave him 
this rendezvous ; but I am sure she meant no harm." 

She was quite motherly in her manner toward 
Boadicea, stroking the child's loose hair with a gentle 
hand. But across Boadicea's bowed head she threw 
warning looks to Jack Carrington, who seemed every 



A BELOVED SISTER 151 

moment on the verge of giving away the whole infa- 
mous trickery, which aimed at a pure woman's repu- 
tation, in order to safeguard that of a miserable co- 
quette. 

" You gave Lieutenant Carrington this rendezvous, 
did you not, little one?'* she insisted with tender so- 
licitude. 

"Yes!" 

" Fortunately, I could not sleep to-night. I heard 
the child creep out of her room, and I followed, so, of 
course, there was no harm done. These two young 
people are very thoughtless. Aunt Caroline; but they 
acted in the innocence of their hearts. At any rate, I'll 
vouch for Boadicea ! " 

" Child, child ! " said Aunt Caroline sternly, " how 
could you so far forget your modesty? " 

" And then get caught in the act ! " growled Mr. 
Crabtree spitefully. 

" Deprendi miserum est — it is sad to be found out," 
said Uncle Jasper under his breath. 

Olive now turned triumphantly to Sir Baldwin Jeff- 
reys. 

" You see," she said coldly, " how simple it all is, 
and how your furious jealousy has brought scandal 
on the child." 

" It will be the talk of Thanet!" said Cousin Bar- 
naby placidly. 

"I'll never survive It!" murmured Aunt Caroline 
through her tears. 

Boadicea said nothing. She hung her head, endur- 
ing passively Olive's motherly caresses, and wondering 
in her heart why this public disgrace had been put upon 



152 MEADOWSWEET 

her, and why Olive — beautiful, exquisite, perfect 
Olive — should have taken the trouble to tell such a 
lie about her, seeing that from this time forth the 
whole countryside would know that she was a forward 
minx, who gave rendezvous to young men at dead of 
night. But for this she cared little. Olive had been 
in grave danger at the hands of her husband. She 
had done no wrong, and yet her life had been threat- 
ened by him, and it was only this tale of Boadicea's 
disgraceful conduct which had averted a terrible catas- 
trophe. 

Therefore, though she wondered at the cruelty of 
the whole thing, she was quite willing to endure it, so 
long as Olive's safety required it. She was a little 
ashamed to meet Lieutenant Carrington's eyes, but at 
the same time she felt bitterly resentful against him. 
If Olive had done no wrong, he certainly had by com- 
ing to this house at night, since coming to a house at 
night was more wrong than coming to it in the day- 
time. 

But for his presence here and now, Sir Baldwin's 
advent would not have mattered in the least. Olive 
would not have been so frightened, and Boadicea 
would never have been put face to face with the terri- 
ble alternative either of betraying her own sister or of 
standing ashamed before all these people. 

"And now that we have cleared this simple mat- 
ter," concluded Olive finally, " perhaps you, Sir Bald- 
win, will be pleased to depart, and allow this respecta- 
ble household to go peaceably back to bed." 

" Simple matter, do you call it? " retorted Sir Bald- 
win, who throughout this while had been still nursing 



A BELOVED SISTER 153 

his jealous suspicions ; '' a simple matter that a young 
girl — my wife's own sister, and scarce out of the 
nursery — should have been thus ready to cast aside 
her honour, and but for your interference might have 
brought lasting disgrace upon us all! " 

" Hold on, man ! " protested Lieutenant Carrington 
in a loud voice ; " hold on, or I'll make you swallow 
your own words ! " 

" I'll not hold on, sir ! " retorted Sir Baldwin hotly ; 
" and 'tis you should be made to swallow every lying 
word with which you induced a thoughtless girl to 
forget her duty. You came like a thief in the night, 
prowling about a respectable house in order to rob it 
of its most precious possession — the honour of its 
child ! " 

'* Nay, here do I brand you a liar, Sir Baldwin, and 
stand at your service when you will! But before I 
have the opportunity of making you eat your words, 
understand from me that Miss Aldmarshe deigned to 
grant me an interview to-night in the presence of Lady 
Jeffreys, her sister, because I had told her that to-mor- 
row my ship will raise anchor and sail for the Medi- 
terranean, and ere I left Thanet I desired to beg from 
her the honour of her hand in marriage." 

"And she refused you?" sneered Sir Baldwin, 
whilst his mirthless, harsh laugh echoed along the old 
oak rafters. " Ah, I have you there ! — the pretty 
story indeed ! It's not true, I tell you ! — it's not true ! 
You are all lying — every one of you ! And I am not 
to be fooled with such a likely tale. You asked for an 
interview at dead of night? You asked for her hand 



154 MEADOWSWEET 

in marriage, and she refused you? It's not true, I 
say ! — it's not true ! " 

" It is quite true, Sir Baldwin,'' said Boadicea very 
quietly. " Lieutenant Carrington did ask for my hand 
in marriage — and I have accepted him." 

There was dead silence after that. The young girl 
stood alone in the midst of a circle of gaping faces, six 
pairs of eyes gazed on her in mute astonishment. But 
she never flinched. Olive's life and happiness had 
been in danger, and she had been shown the way how 
to avert the catastrophe. It was no use making any 
sacrifice by halves. As to the future — well, that was 
in God's hands! He would see to it that no grave 
harm came to her through the intensity of her love for 
her sister. On the whole, the situation which she her- 
self had so boldly created at the last moment was more 
endurable than the former one, and she would not al- 
low Lieutenant Carrington to be more ready for sacri- 
fice than she was herself. After this, though she 
would still be blamed, her reputation would not be 
irretrievably tarnished, and Aunt Caroline and Uncle 
Jasper could still hold up their heads among the neigh- 
bours; and she felt that she had earned Olive's love 
quite completely now, for Sir Baldwin hung his head, 
thoroughly himiiliated, and even began murmuring 
vague words of apology. 

Tis no use doing that now," said Olive coldly; 
the sooner you return to Ashford, the kinder it will 
be to my uncle and aunt, whom your jealous temper 
has so unwarrantably disturbed. As for me, only 
your prolonged absence could teach me how to forgive 
you!" 



(t 



A BELOVED SISTER 155 

These were the last words which reached Boadicea's 
consciousness. After that everything became blurred. 
She felt just as if she were in a dream. Aunt Caro- 
line and Cousin Barnaby were dream-people, so were 
Olive and Sir Baldwin, and she herself felt as if she 
were one of those dolls that are made to move by in- 
visible hands pulling the strings. She seemed to have 
no wish, no thought, no feeling, save one immense 
longing to fly to her room, to lock the door, and to 
throw herself on her bed — not to sleep, but to cry. 
She felt terribly sad, with a great, big ache in her 
heart, just as if she had lost something that was in- 
finitely dear to her. The worst of it was that she did 
not know what it was that she had lost; all that she 
knew was that something was gone — something that 
had made everything much more beautiful than it had 
ever been before, something that had gilded the sunset 
and flicked the tiny clouds with rose, something that 
had tinged the meadows with glorious colour, and 
caused the tone of the nightingale's voice to sound 
infinitely sweet. 

But that was long, long ago; now that something 
was gone. She knew that it would never come back ; 
that in the future the sunset would be grey and the 
meadows brown, and that she could never again bear 
to hear the song of the nightingale without the big 
ache coming back to her heart. 

She did not know that what she had lost was just a 
girlish illusion — the first peep into that land where 
love dwells, a land where everything is covered with 
glory, where every cloud is of a roseate hue and every 
song is a " Hosanna ! " She had had just one little 



156 MEADOWSWEET 

peep through the curtains of life, and had seen just 
enough to guess how beautiful was that land of love. 
Now the curtains had fallen back with a swish, and 
she had drawn back, miserable and deceived. 

All that night she lay back on her pillows, wide-eyed 
and wrapped in thought. She could not understand 
why she was so sad. 

Her engagement to Lieutenant Carrington would 
only be a farce. She would only make it last for as 
long as Olive thought it desirable, for the sake of ap- 
pearances, and to allay completely Sir Baldwin's sus- 
picions. After that — Lieutenant Carrington being 
probably away on the Mediterranean with his ship — 
the mock engagement would be comfortably broken off 
without any fuss, and everything would be just as it 
had been before. 

But Boadicea knew all the time that nothing would 
ever be again just as it had been before. 



CHAPTER XVI 

AN IMPERTINENT YOUNG MAN 

'After that there came for Boadicea many days of 
blank weariness, days when Aunt Caroline fussed 
round her, talking of trousseaux and a house in town, 
whilst Olive would scarcely say a kind word to her. 

Lieutenant Carrington would call every afternoon at 
about five o'clock and stay to supper, and then ride 
away again at eight o'clock. During those two or 
three hours he would either sit in the museum talking 
to Uncle Jasper, or Olive would insist on his walking 
out with her in the orchard, 

Boadicea would take her sewing into the museum, 
whilst Jack was there, and make an occasional remark 
when he addressed himself directly to her. But she 
did not join him and Olive when they walked together 
in the orchard. She had a great deal to do in the 
house helping Aunt Caroline with jams and pickle- 
making, and she really felt in the way when Olive and 
Jack were together. 

She never knew what to talk about, especially when 
Olive was present, for then the conversation ran chiefly 
on town topics, the balls and receptions of the season, 
the health of the King, or bits of scandal about people 
whom she did not know. When Olive was not there 
it was a little easier, for Jack was interested in birds 
and their nests, and could tell her about tropical birds 

157 



158 MEADOWSWEET 

which he had perceived in the distant lands which he 
had visited, and about nests which were good to eat. 

In fact, it was when Lieutenant Carrington told her 
about the Chinese people eating birds' nests that she 
looked him straight in the face, being highly interested 
and very much amused, and that she saw his twinkling 
grey eyes fixed upon her in such a manner that the 
blood rushed up to her cheeks, and she was obliged to 
put her work down very suddenly, and to run out of 
the room on some paltry pretext. 

She did not, of course, know how long this mock 
engagement was to last. Once she spoke about it to 
Olive, who said that a month would be quite sufficient, 
and that it would be best to wait until Lieutenant Car- 
rington's leave was up and he went away on his ship in 
the first week of July. Olive declared then that the 
matter would be quite easy; no one, she said, disliked 
the present silly position more than Lieutenant Car- 
rington, and he would arrange to break off the mock 
engagement quite easily from Malta. He would find 
some suitable pretext, and write the usual letter of 
regret. 

At the back of Old Manor Farm, beyond the yard 
and all the barns, there was a small orchard, with a 
strawberry bed that sloped to the south, and was in 
full bearing long before any other strawberry bed in 
the whole of Thanet. Beyond the strawberry bed 
came the cherry and the plum trees, and these in spring 
were like a fairy garden. Now the cherries were ripe, 
and soon it would be the turn of the plums. 

By the time that the plums were ripe Boadicea's en- 
gagement would have been a thing of the past, and by 



AN IMPERTINENT YOUNG MAN 159 

the time that the apples were stored in the fruit-room 
she would no doubt have forgotten all about this 
weary, dreary time. 

It was now the second day of July, and the very 
hottest weather that Thanet had experienced within 
memory of man. Fruit was very plentiful and very 
early, strawberries had been a glut in the market, and 
now cherries were threatening to be the same. It 
seemed hardly worth while picking, when cherries in 
Covent Garden Market only fetched twopence a 
pound. 

But then Aunt Caroline cared nothing about Covent! 
Garden Market, nor about the price of fruit. Cherries 
were ripe and plentiful and made excellent jam, and as 
Topcoat had to dig up some early potatoes, Boadicea 
had to gather cherries for jam. 

She had been gathering for over an hour, and the 
weather was terribly hot. Aunt Caroline had said 
that tea would be in the orchard, and Susan had com- 
menced operations in that direction by bringing a huge 
tray on which was laid out Aunt Caroline's best tea- 
service, the one with the tiny rosebuds dotted all over 
it, even over the inside of the cups. 

A very large basket filled to the brim with cherries 
was deposited at the foot of the biggest cherry-tree in 
the orchard. It was a big grand fatherly kind of tree, 
with huge gnarled branches and a massive trunk which 
you could not span round with your two arms. 
Against this grandfatherly old tree was propped a lad- 
der, and on the most solid branch of the tree with her 
back resting against the trunk sat Boadicea, reading a 
book. 



i6o MEADOWSWEET 

She was very tired and very hot, for she had been 
on the top of the ladder for over an hour; the book 
was very interesting. It was called " The Last Days 
of Pompeii," and had just been published by Sir Ed- 
ward Bulwer. Lieutenant Carrington had brought it 
one day for her, and she was deeply absorbed in the 
thrilling tale of love and adventure, and for the mo- 
ment quite oblivious of the fact that to-morrow, the 
third of July, H.M.S. Dolphin would set sail for the 
Mediterranean, and her mock engagement to Lieuten- 
ant Carrington would then be virtually at an end. 

She had really been counting the days ever since she 
had first known that Lieutenant Carrington would be 
leaving definitely on the third of the month. She had 
even reckoned that he would be in Thanet just long 
enough to taste Aunt Caroline's strawberry jam, and 
to hold the ladder whilst she, Boadicea, climbed up to 
gather the cherries. Now he had held the ladder for 
her to-day, Aunt Caroline was going to open the first 
of her pots of strawberry jam for tea, and Lieutenant 
Carrington was going away to-morrow for good. 

Boadicea up in the fork of the cherry-tree was very 
busy forgetting all about Glaucus and Nydia, the blind 
girl, and the marble halls of Pompeii. She was also 
extremely busy in watching Lieutenant Carrington, 
who, in his turn, was very earnestly occupied in carry- 
ing Aunt Caroline's best china tea-service from the 
place where Susan had deposited it to another spot, 
immediately at the foot of the grand fatherly cherry 
tree on the branch of which perched Miss Boadicea. 

He had arrived to-day a little earlier than usual, 
seeming very exhilarated, like a schoolboy who has 



AN IMPERTINENT YOUNG MAN i6i 

had an extra holiday allotted to him. The twinkle of 
merriment in his grey eyes had been more pronounced 
than it had been for a long time, a circumstance which 
Boadicea immediately attributed to his rejoicing at 
thought of his getting away from the anomalous posi- 
tion which — as Olive said — he so heartily disliked. 

However, she had taken but very little notice of him, 
and soon left him talking with Olive in the museum, on 
the subject of Lady Something-or-Other's partiality 
for Captain Something-Else. That is to say, that 
Olive talked about Lady Something-or-Other, whilst 
Jack listened with apparent interest, and always with 
that bright tw^inkle in his eyes. 

Boadicea had thus left them and went to gather cher- 
ries, until she was tired, when she took up her book 
which she had taken out with her, and settled herself in 
the branches of the cherry-tree. 

Cousin Barnaby Crabtree, who wallowed In heat like 
a frowsy torn cat, usually took his afternoon siesta in 
the orchard, sitting at the foot of that same grand- 
fatherly tree which sheltered Boadicea; he was sitting 
there now, with handkerchief over his head, snoring 
like one of those new steam engines which dragged car- 
riages along between Stockton and Darlington. 

It was, therefore, all the more remarkable why Lieu- 
tenant Carrington, the moment he came out into the 
orchard — which he did half an hour before tea time 
— should busy himself in placing Aunt Caroline's best 
china tea-set at the foot of this self-same tree. 

However, Lieutenant Carrington and his doings 
were no concern of Boadicea's, and for quite a long 
while she watched him as he carefully disposed the 



i62 MEADOWSWEET. 

cups and saucers and the plates all round the foot of 
the tree, some quite close to Cousin Barnaby, who 
would be sure to knock the cups over if he stirred. At 
last curiosity got the better of indifference. 

" Might I inquire, Lieutenant Carrington," she asked 
politely, "what you are doing? " 

"As you see, Miss Aldmarshe," he replied with 
equal politeness, " I am disposing of your aunt's best 
china in a convenient place." 

" I do not think it at all a convenient place," she 
said stiffly. 

" Extremely convenient. Miss Aldmarshe, I assure 
you." 

"For tea?'* 

" Exactly. For tea. The tree is shady, the ground 
flat around it. It is, indeed, a most convenient spot." 

" But there is no cloth laid here for tea." 

" True ! " he said ; " but I can soon remedy that," 

And he turned back to where some few yards higher 
up Susan had originally deposited the tray, and from 
whence the gleam of a folded white cloth could be seen 
among the trees. 

He went to fetch the cloth, and was back again with 
it in a few seconds. Then he once more busied him- 
self with the china. 

" Please don't tire yourself. Lieutenant Carrington," 
said Boadicea from above, " if you desire to have tea 
under this tree, we can, of course, have it here. But 
Susan can lay the cloth. She will be back directly. 
Please do not tire yourself doing her work." 

" I feel no fatigue, I assure you." 

But his work had become somewhat aimless. At 



AN IMPERTINENT YOUNG MAN 163 

least so it appeared to Boadicea. He moved the cups, 
and the saucers and the plates from one place to an- 
other and back again, but he was not really attempting 
to lay the cloth for tea in a proper and methodical 
manner. It irritated her to see him fussing about like 
this, and yet he would not give up, in spite of what she 
said. And he seemed quite happy in his task, for his 
eyes twinkled with merriment every time they met 
hers. 

" Why doesn't Susan come back ? " she said, and 
sighed audibly with impatience. 

" I wonder I " he said calmly, and went on rattling 
the cups and saucers. 

*' I told her to come back at once with the toast and 
bread and butter." 

" And I told her just now not to let me see her face 
for at least ten minutes." 

" Why should you have told her that ? " 

" For private reasons of my own." 

" Then it was extremely foolish to give her such or- 
ders. And I doubt if she will obey them." 

" Oh ! she will obey them, I'll warrant. I took good 
care of that. I should call Susan a discriminating 
young female." 

" And I should call you most impertinent for Inter- 
fering with the orders which I gave to Susan." 

Now, Boadicea must have been feeling very cross 
indeed, or she would not thus have departed from the 
customs of politeness prescribed by good breeding to- 
wards a gentleman who but a little while ago had been 
and who in another twenty- four hours would once 
more become a complete stranger. 



i64 MEADOWSWEET 

But Lieutenant Carrington seemed totally unaware 
of the fact that he had offended Miss Aldmarshe, for 
he did not show that due sense of humility which her 
reproof should have called forth in him; on the con- 
trary, he said quite imperturbably, and with consum- 
mate politeness : 

" Miss Boadicea Aldmarshe, you are a marvellous 
judge of character: I am extremely impertinent." 

" Then I pray you mend your ways ! " she retorted. 

" Not while you are perched on that tree." 

"Why not?" 

He came close to the foot of the ladder, and as it 
was leaning against the tree, so did he lean up against 
it, and his merry grey eyes were fixed on a point some 
three or four feet lower than Miss Boadicea's face. 

" Because," he said, and she could see his lips, and 
could see that they twitched — not with shame or re- 
gret, I'll be bound — *' because if I were not imperti- 
nent I would not dare to watch at this moment the 
daintiest pair of . , ," 

" Lieutenant Carrington ! " she broke in sternly. 

And still he was neither rebuffed nor ashamed. 

"If you wriggle about so much," he said, " you will 
surely fall." 

And he actually mounted two rungs of the ladder. 

" I wish to descend," she said stiffly ; " I pray you 
stand aside." 

But he did not stand aside. He so far misconstrued 
her commands that he mounted two further rungs of 
the ladder. 

" I have not the remotest desire to stand aside," he 
said. " You don't know, perhaps, what a charming 



AN IMPERTINENT YOUNG MAN 165 
picture you make perched up there among the cher- 



ries ! " 



" I wish Susan would come back I " retorted she, 
With a sigh. 

"If she does, before I have told you something that 
IS in my mind, I will either commit murder or . . ." 

"Or what?" 

By way of a reply, he mounted several further rung,3 
of the ladder, until his head was just below the level 
of Boadicea's knees. 

"On the whole," he said, looking boldly into her 
face, " I think that this is the wiser course." 

" Lieutenant Carrington," she commanded, " I re- 
quest you to descend." 

" I will not descend until you have heard what I 
have got to say." 

" There Is nothing that you could say to me at this 
moment that would interest me." 

And, very ostentatiously, she spread her book upon 
her knees, and began once more to read about Glaucus 
and Nydia, and the marble halls of Pompeii. 

"Oh I I can wait!" said Lieutenant Carrington 
airily. 

And he settled himself down on the top of the lad- 
der, astride on the branch against which it rested, and 
leaned back his head against the trunk. He took off 
his hat and threw it down amongst the china cups and 
saucers. Then he actually began to whistle! — yes, 
whistle ! and with Miss Aldmarshe bubbling over with 
wrath by his side. 

"Very warm summer we are having," he said 
lightly. 



1 66 MEADOWSWEET 

" Very/' 

She was absorbed in her book, and he was absorbed 
in the contemplation of her. Never had she looked so 
pretty, not even to him, who had been feasting on her 
beauty these weeks past, whenever chance or her wil- 
fulness allowed him to gaze upon her undisturbed. 
She had on a white muslin frock, and the strong after- 
noon sun striking through the leafy branches of the 
tree made patches of gold upon it, and caused blue 
shadows to nestle in the folds. Her soft brown hair 
was a little wild after the fruit-picking, and a very 
gentle breeze stirred the curly tendrils all round her 
head, making them shimmer and quiver in the intense 
brilliancy of the light. 

. Her face now was bent down to her book, and he 
could just see the still childish contour of cheek and 
chin, with the vivid red lips and the pearly shadows 
cast by the drooping lashes. 

Pretty? My God! but she was pretty! and Lieu- 
tenant Carrington was no longer heart-whole. For 
days and weeks now she had filled his entire heart and 
mind and soul until he positively ached with the wild 
desire to fold her in his arms, to raise her chin up with 
his hand until her eyes looked straight into his ; those 
eyes that were so true, so pure, so full of the knowl- 
edge of nature and of God, so ignorant of the world. 

But up to now he had never dared speak to her of 
love. She seemed such a child that he almost feared 
to trust his happiness to words that might scare her, 
that might not reach her soul. For days and weeks he 
had waited patiently for the tiny, almost impercepti- 
ble sign that would tell him that he might speak. Her 



AN IMPERTINENT YOUNG MAN 167 

blush the other day when he was talking about Chinese 
birds' nests, her confusion when some of his worship- 
ful admiration had on that occasion spoken mutely 
through his eyes, her quaint stiffness when first she 
met him again after that episode, and her subsequent 
avoidance of him was the first of encouragement which 
he had received. 

With it had come hope, and to-day Chance had 
played into his hands. Lady Jeffreys had a bad head- 
ache and had gone to her room for half an hour's rest 
before tea, and Boadicea was alone perched like a 
w^ood-nymph in the branches of a tree. 

The orchard was silent, too, in the heat of this after- 
noon; the buzz of bumble bees alone disturbed the 
peaceful stillness around. Lieutenant Carrington was 
lost in a dream from which he was suddenly awak- 
ened by a loud and prolonged snore which came from 
below. 

Boadicea, too, was startled, and nearly dropped her 
book, which would have been calamitous to Aunt Caro- 
line's best china tea-service. 

" Mr. Crabtree makes a pretty picture down there, 
does he not?" said Jack Carrington, in an easy con- 
versational tone. 

" Lieutenant Carrington," she rejoined Impatiently, 
" did you hear me remark that I wished to descend? " 

" I did hear you make that observation. Miss Ald- 
marshe," he replied. 

" Yet you have made no attempt at letting me pass." 

" The attempt would be beyond my humble capaci- 
ties." 

I wish to use that ladder, Lieutenant Carrington." 



(( 



i68 MEADOWSWEET 



(( 



It is at your service, Miss AldmarsHe, if you will 
put that book aside and listen to me quietly for ten 
minutes." 

" That were beyond my humble capacities ! *' she re- 
torted. 

" In that case, I fear me that the ladder will remain 
inaccessible to the prettiest little feet in England." 

" Then I'll jump ! " she said resolutely, and turning 
her back on him and on the ladder. 

But with a comical air of reproach, he pointed down- 
wards to his own elaborate arrangement of tea-cups 
and saucers round the foot of the tree. 

" What ! " he exclaimed — " on Aunt Caroline's best 
china? ... or into Mr. Crabtree's lap — which?" 

" I think you are odious ! " she said. 

" Absolutely odious ! " he assented. " Hadn't you 
better listen to what I have to say ? " 

" I cannot ! You are sure to talk nonsense, and 
Cousin Barnaby hates to hear nonsense talked." 

Whereupon Cousin Barnaby gave forth a mighty 
snore. 

" * Out of their own mouths thine enemies confound 
thee'!" quoted Jack, triumphantly; "and out of my 
mouth only wisdom shall come, I promise you." 



" Another time ! " urged Boadicea. 



There never is another time. You make a point of 
never being alone with me." 

" I do not see that there is any occasion for you to 
see me alone." 

" But I go away to-morrow." 

" I know that. All the more reason why we should 
not see too much of one another to-day. The less we 



AN IMPERTINENT YOUNG MAN 169 

are together, the easier it will be to carry on this foolish 
pretence another twenty-four hours." 

*' Foolish pretence? " he asked. 

" Indeed, what else is it? " 

" A serious engagement." 

" Pshaw ! " and she tried by the expression in her 
face to show him all the contempt which she felt for 
that so-called engagement. 

" I asked you in the presence of several witnesses," 
he persisted, " for the honour of your hand in mar- 
riage, and in the presence of several witnesses you 
accepted me as your future husband." 

" You know quite well, Lieutenant Carrington, that 
you only asked me, and I only accepted as you say, in 
order to save Olive from Sir Baldwin's unreasoning 
jealousy. We are going through the pretence of an 
engagement to save appearances; and you will, of 
course, be glad when that pretence no longer binds 
you. As we are going to break off this mock engage- 
ment in a few days, there is no cause to hold conversa- 
tions about it." 

" There is every cause for me to tell you some time 
during the next few hours exactly how pretty you are." 

" Your original estimate of me was that I was a 
young savage." 

" That was a long time ago." 

" One month ago exactly, to the day." 

" Is it as long? Well, since then many things have 
changed." 

" Including your estimate of me? " she asked iron- 
ically. 

"No! Not that" 



170 MEADOWSWEET 

" You've not come to the conclusion that I am not a 
savage ? " 

" No. I've merely discovered that there's nothing 
in the world so fascinating as a young savage." 

Again that look in his eyes ; they did not only twin- 
kle, they glowed, and — worse still — they caused her 
cheeks to glow. She would have given worlds to be 
able to run away; but he had possession of the ladder, 
and Aunt Caroline's best china was down below. 

"Ah!" she exclaimed suddenly; "there's someone 
coming at last." 

" The devil ! " he retorted. 

" And Cousin Barnaby is awake ! " she added tri- 
umphantly. 

This was true. Cousin Barnaby even at this mo- 
ment was heard to yawn, and was seen to remove the 
handkerchief from the top of his head. 

I am afraid that this time Jack emphatically said : 
"Damn!" 

" Kindly allow me to descend," resumed Boadlcea 
quietly. 

He made pretence to be making way for her. 

" On one condition," he said. 

"What is it?" 

" That you give me ten minutes' private interview 
in this orchard some time this afternoon." 

" There's no necessity," she said firmly. 

" Very well." 

And once more he Installed himself on the top of the 
ladder as if he had no intention of stirring from that 
uncomfortable position. 

Tears of vexation rose to Boadicea's eyes. 



AN IMPERTINENT YOUNG MAN 171 

" Olive is coming this way ! " she pleaded. 

" Ten minutes ! " he pronounced resolutely. 

"Oh, very well!" 

The citadel had capitulated. Lieutenant Carring- 
ton began descending the ladder, whilst Boadicea 
watched him impatiently. Midway down the ladder 
he paused : 

" Alone," he said. 

"If you insist." 

" I insist. You promise ? " 

"I . , . ohl here's Olive!" 

" You promise ? " 

** I promise. There 1 " 



CHAPTER XVII 

'A MAN IN LOVE 

Olive came walking down the orchard in her pret- 
tiest afternoon gown, and with a rose-coloured sun- 
shade held above her head. 

She was looking her best just now and she knew it, 
and when a woman knows that she is pretty, that 
knowledge makes her a thousand times prettier than 
before. Lieutenant Carrington was going away to- 
morrow; he would be absent some months, during 
which time that silly mock engagement with Boadicea 
would be broken off, and on his return Lady Jeffreys 
could resume with him that pleasing flirtation, that 
agreeable toying with the flames of passion, which was 
her idea of supreme enjoyment in life. 

But to-day being the last which Lieutenant Jack 
would spend in her company for many months to 
come, it would have to be one fraught with many de- 
lights, with graciousness tempered with a measure of 
coquetry, just sufficient to leave in its trail a happy 
memory of the past, and an exciting longing for the 
future. 

Therefore she had put on her most becoming gown, 
and retired to her room during the hottest part of the 
day so that she should appear fresh as spring blossom 
to dazzle Jack's eyes at tea time. 

She thought to find him alone in the orchard lan- 

172 



A MAN IN LOVE 173 

guishing for her company, and listening with bored 
attention to Boadicea's few remarks. In her mind she 
had apprised the young couple's attitude to one an- 
other, entirely to her own satisfaction. On the part 
of Boadicea there was just childish ignorance of the 
world, a total want of knowledge of the art how to 
captivate and hold a man. She may originally have 
been flattered by Lieutenant Carrington's notice of her, 
but seeing him tired and bored, as he undoubtedly 
was in her presence, she must very quickly have given 
up all thoughts of trying to please him. 

As for Lieutenant Jack, why, of course, his attitude 
was plain enough to the eyes of the lady who desired 
to keep him dangling round her skirts. He looked 
upon Boadicea with eyes of contemptuous pity. How 
could he fail to do so, seeing that he must for ever be 
comparing her with her beautiful and fascinating 
sister. 

Having thus disposed of the feelings of two young 
people Lady Jeffreys felt herself at liberty to give free 
rein to her own. She liked Lieutenant Jack. He was 
good looking, and had distinguished himself above the 
herd of idle young men about town. There was a 
certain amount of social glory to be derived from hav- 
ing a temporary society lion dallying round her skirts ; 
moreover, it continued to vex Sir Baldwin Jeffreys, 
who — heartily ashamed of his violent outburst of 
jealousy — had not put in an appearance at Old Manor 
Farm since then. 

Olive — thinking to find Lieutenant Jack listless and 
bored in her absence — was very disagreeably sur- 
prised when she saw him standing at the bottom of a 



174 MEADOWSWEET 

ladder watching with unmistakable attention Boadi- 
cea's descent from a cherry tree. So absorbed did he 
seem in the contemplation of a pair of ankles encased 
in white cotton stockings that he did not even perceive 
the swish of silk skirts on the grass, nor the affected 
little cough which should have told him that a very 
beautiful lady was close by, 

Olive frowned. She was not pleased with the pic- 
ture, which in itself would have delighted the eye of 
any artist or dreamer or poet who happened to revel 
in brilliant sunshine and dense blue shadows, in wild 
brown hair on which the afternoon light threw gleams 
of ruddy gold, in youth and grace, and that subtle 
aroma of delight which emanates from young people 
who are in love, and do not yet know the full meaning 
of the passion. 

Still frowning, Olive approached the grand fatherly 
cherry-tree, at the foot of which Barnaby Crabtree was 
just awakening from his midday slumber. 

" Child," said Lady Jeffreys through pursed lips, 
" what are you doing here ? " 

She was still talking from some little distance, and 
no doubt that was the reason why her high-pitched 
soprano voice sounded shrill and out of tune on this 
exquisitely harmonious afternoon* 

" I thought," she added, " that aunt had deputed you 
to set the china straight." 

Boadicea was a little confused, as well she might be, 
seeing that Olive was angered with her, and Lieutenant 
Carrington's searching grey eyes seemed brimming 
over with amusement. 

I . . ." she stammered, "that is . . . we . . . 



a 



A MAN IN LOVE 175 

Lieutenant Carrington and I . . . did busy ourselves 
in . . . 

" Looking for begad caterpillars on a tree-top, I sup- 
pose ! " muttered Cousin Barnaby irritably. 

Olive was surveying Aunt Caroline's best china tea- 
set with frowning eyes. 

" You had better busy yourself to better purpose 
now," she said. " Lieutenant Carrington, please 1 — 
a branch of thorn has caught the hem of my gown. 
Might I trouble you to disentangle it ? " 

" At your service, Lady Jeffreys." 

And Boadicea had the mortification to see with what 
alacrity he ran to do Olive's bidding, leaving her to 
struggle with the china, which he himself had so clum- 
sily ranged round the foot of the cherry-tree. He 
knelt at Olive's feet and busied himself laboriously — 
and very lengthily, she thought — with the bit of 
bramble that was tearing a filmy lace flounce, whilst 
Olive was looking down on him, smiling and quite 
good-humoured now. 

Obviously the disentangling of a bit of thorn from a 
silk gown could not last an indefinite length of time. 
Boadicea was watching the process through the cor- 
ners of her eyes, which caused her once or twice to 
stumble against Cousin Barnaby's outstretched legs, 
whereupon he said something very rude under his 
breath. 

" Child," said Olive after a while in that high-pitched 
tone which she usually affected. " I can see aunt com- 
ing from the house with a pile of cakes and Susan be- 
hind her, more clumsy than a cow. Had you not best 
goto her? " 



176 MEADOWSWEET 

" Allow me to go," said Lieutenant Carrington, ris- 
ing to his knees with truly marvellous alacrity, consid- 
ering the pleasing occupation in which he had just been 
engaged. 

" Ah, Lieutenant Carrington ! " pleaded Olive, with 
captivating grace, " please do not vote me a nuisance, 
but the string of my shoe has come undone, and I can- 
not fasten it myself without grave discomfort." 

Jack looked undecided. On the one hand he did not 
want Boadicea to go away from him at this moment, 
or at any other when he could persuade her to remain 
close by, and on the other he could not with politeness 
refuse to render a lady the service of tying up her shoe. 
Boadicea, trying to conceal her vexation under a mask 
of indifference, decided the point for him. 

" I pray you, Lieutenant Carrington," she said in a 
high-pitched, affected tone of voice like that of her sis- 
ter, "attend to Lady Jeffreys' shoe-string. I have 
business elsewhere." 

And before Jack could make a movement to stop her, 
she had darted away like some elfish creature of woods 
and orchards, her muslin gown flying out behind her, 
her brown hair gleaming in the sun. 

" Jack ! " whispered Lady Jeffreys tenderly. 

He knelt down once more and busied himself with 
her shoe, whilst Cousin Barnaby murmured rude things 
in the rear. 

When he had finished tying the shoe, he rose to his 
feet, and she took his arm with easy familiarity and 
led him away among the cherry-trees. He went quite 
submissively, for indeed his thoughts were not here at 
all : they were following the graceful fairy -like figure 



A MAN IN LOVE 177 

that had run away from him just now, and his mind 
was busy recalHng every line that had enchanted him 
while she ran, dwelling on the memory of her as she 
sat there in the cherry-tree with the sunshine playing 
on her hair, the soft blush mantling on her downy 
cheek. . , . 

And Olive went rambling on, talking of Lady 
Medenham's rout, and of the Queen's latest whim in 
bonnets. He listened without hearing, and gave an- 
swers without heeding, thankful that Lady Jeffreys 
was too absorbed in her own charming personality to 
notice his absent gaze and his crooked remarks ; appar- 
ently she had succeeded in. persuading herself that 
he was so filled with sorrow at his coming departure 
from her side that he had no heart for society small 
talk. 

He did not mind walking round the orchard like this, 
and indeed, the beautiful Lady Jeffreys hardly existed 
for him. He was living through that halcyon time 
that only comes once in life — and not in every life — ■ 
the halcyon time of newly awakened love, when every 
blade of grass whispers of one foot, and every bird 
throat sings the praise of one divinity. 

Whilst Jack Carrington wandered round the orchard' 
with Olive he saw Boadicea at every turn and behind 
every tree, her voice spoke to him through that of the 
thrush, her brown hair glittered for him in every ray 
of sunshine. 

And now Aunt Caroline really came bustling out 
with a tray in her hands on which were laid plates filled 
with cakes, bread and butter, and all manner of things 
to eat. She was scolding Susan as hard as she could 



178 MEADOWSWEET 

go, her tongue and her feet going along at an equally 
quick rate. 

" Lord bless my soul, did anyone ever see the like? 
Truly servants were specially invented by Providence 
to plague us. There is nothing this girl does that I 
could not do a thousand times better than she, or a 
thousand times quicker. Susan ! Susan ! where in the 
name of common-sense are you? " 

And Susan, who was following very closely on her 
mistress's heels with another tray on which were set 
the tea-pot, milk and cream jugs, and other appur- 
tenances of the homely brew, said pertly: 

" Here, ma'am." 

" Bustle up, then ! bustle up ! " admonished Aunt 
Caroline. " The tea should have been here long ago." 

" It is half an hour late," said Cousin Barnaby, who 
made no attempt to give a hand in the laying-out of the 
picnic tea. 

Aunt Caroline and Susan were very busy for the 
next five minutes in setting out the best china tea-serv- 
ice, and making arrangements for the comfort of 
everyone else. 

" There ! that will do," said Aunt Caroline, when all 
had been arranged to her satisfaction. " Run and find 
your master now, Susan." 

"Yes, ma'am. Master was in the orchard just 



now." 



" Well ! and did you tell him that tea was ready ? " 

" Yes, ma'am." 

" Did he say he was coming? " 

" He said something like mixed biscuits, ma'am ! " 

" Mixed biscuits ? " 



A MAN IN LOVE 179 

" Some of his confounded Latin, I suppose! " con- 
cluded Cousin Barnaby, with a grunt. 

But even at this moment Uncle Jasper was coming 
along. He had his coat on with the brass buttons, and 
the wig with the full curls over the temples, a specimen 
case made of shining brass was slung round his shoul- 
ders by a strap, and he had his butterfly-net in his 
hand, showing that he had not spent an idle after- 
noon. 

" Qui utile 'dulci miscuit," he said, when he saw the 
tea-things so temptingly laid out in the shade of the 
cherry-tree on the grass. 

" Mixed biscuits ! " commented Cousin Barnaby 
'drily. 

" * Who mixes the agreeable with the useful,' is the 
correct translation from the Latin adage, Barnaby," 
said Uncle Jasper blandly. 

Though he saw the tea laid out before him, and Aunt 
Caroline raising the heavy tea-pot preparatory to pour- 
ing out, he said, with his usual vagueness : 

" Tea did you say, my dear? " 

"Why, of course, tea, Jasper! " said Aunt Caroline 
impatiently; "didn't you hear me say at dinner time 
that we would have tea in the orchard to-day ? " 

" A most inconvenient spot ! " remarked Cousin 
barnaby. 

He was stuffing the corner of a napkin into the open- 
ing of his collar. Already he had taken possession of 
the most shady and most comfortable seat at the im- 
provised tea-table, with his back against the trunk of 
the tree, and his favourite cakes and scones disposed 
conveniently to his hand. 



i8o MEADOWSWEET 

" I hate meals out-of-doors/' he said, " like a begad 
earwig ! " 

" But in beautiful weather like this, Cousin Bar- 
naby," retorted Aunt Caroline, " it would be a sin to 
remain indoors ! " 

Lady Jeffreys and Lieutenant Carrington were now 
seen walking among the trees. They were hailed by 
Aunt Caroline, and soon joined the party at tea. Olive 
looked prettier than ever, for her cheeks were aglow 
with pleasure. She had thoroughly enjoyed her walk, 
and comfortably attributed Jack's abstraction to sor- 
row at parting from her. 



CHAPTER XVIII 

A WOMAN IN A RAGE 

Aunt Caroline was already busy pouring out tea. 
She was excessively hot, because she thought it right 
and proper to put on her silk dress every time Lieu- 
tenant Carrington paid an afternoon visit at Old 
Manor Farm. 

*' Olive, dear, where will you sit ? " she asked, seeing 
that the two newcomers — both for reasons of their 
own — were standing by, irresolutely, before joining 
in the circle on the grass. 

" On a clean pocket-handkerchief, Aunt, if there is 
one," replied Olive, with a supercilious lift of her 
arched eyebrows. 

"Come, Susan, bustle up, then, bustle up!" said 
Aunt Caroline fussily, " a clean handkerchief for her 
ladyship. . . . Lord ! bless my soul I how stupid these 
girls are nowadays." 

Which obviously was a very unfair accusation 
against Susan just at this moment, for how in the 
world was a girl to find a clean pocket-handkerchief in 
the middle of an orchard? Mr. Crabtree had one in 
his pocket, and the corner of it protruded under the 
flap ; Susan did try to obey her mistress and incident- 
ally to show her cleverness by seizing the corner of 
that handkerchief, whereupon, of course, Mr. Crab- 
tree was very angry. 



i82 MEADOWSWEET 



te 



« 



Don't do that ! " he cried. " Am I a begad laun- 
dry?" 

This made everyone laugh, and it also gave Lieu- 
tenant Carrington the very opportunity which he had 
longed for. 

" Will you allow me, Lady Jeffreys ? " he said, and 
turned toward the house. 

"What to do?" she said. 
Find a handkerchief for you." 
But ..." she protested. 

But it was too late to protest. Lieutenant Jack 
was already half way to the house. 

" So attentive, Lieutenant Carrington," said Aunt 
Caroline placidly. " His manners are quite irre- 
proachable." 

"A foolish thought to run after a handkerchief!" 
said Olive stiffly; *' I had one by me, after all." 

She felt suddenly out of temper; quite unaccountably 
so, surely, for Jack had hurried off in her service. But 
she would have been more pleased had Boadicea been 
in the orchard at the present moment, instead of in the 
house, where she certainly would be meeting Lieutenant 
Carrington. 

Aunt Caroline was handing Barnaby Crabtree hig 
second cup of tea. He gave a grunt of satisfaction. 

" Let us be thankful for small mercies ! " 

" How so? " questioned Olive. 

" To have a meal in comparative peace." 

" Surely, Cousin Barnaby," she said, " you find the 
country peaceful, this beautiful midsummer time? " 

" I might, ma'am, if it were not for that begad love- 
making ! 



>r 



A WOMAN IN A RAGE 183 

" Love-making?" 

" Aye ! No sooner have Caroline's confounded 
guinea-fowls ceased their abominable screeching, be- 
ing, I suppose, busy with their food, and I have settled 
down at last to a few moments' quiet rest in the heat 
of the afternoon, than I am disturbed . . . disgrace- 
fully, unwarrantly disturbed ! " 

" But how. Cousin Barnaby ! " exclaimed Aunt Caro- 
line. " I thought that in the afternoon both the 
house and the orchard were particularly quiet and 
peaceful." 

" Ah ! " he retorted crossly, " you thought, then, 
that it was quiet and peaceful for me yesterday after- 
noon to be aroused from my gentle meditations by 
sickly sounds of ' Meadowsweet ! Meadowsweet ! ' " 
— and he mimicked the sentimental voice of a young 
man who might be in love. " * My little Meadow- 
sweet, come out ! ' Ugh ! disgusting, I call it." 

" You were dreaming. Cousin Barnaby," said Olive, 
whose irritation and ill-temper were perceptibly grow- 
ing. 

"Dreaming? eh? And was I dreaming just now 
when those two you-ng jackanapes were perching 
on that tree-top talking of ankles like two begad 
idiots?" 

" I don't know whom you mean, Cousin Barnaby," 
she rejoined. " Who is Meadowsweet, and who are 
the two jackanapes to whom you refer? " 

" I am talking of your sister, ma'am, and of that 
begad sailor." 

" Then you are talking nonsense, Cousin Barnaby. 
I am sure that Lieutenant Carrington is most moderate 



i84 MEADOWSWEET 

in his courtship. Anyone can see that he is not in the 
least in love." 

" Anyone can see that he is a fool." 

" Omnis amans, amens ! " murmured Uncle Jasper. 

" Jasper used to be the only insane person in this 
house," said Mr. Crabtree blandly; "but now, ma'am, 
your sister and her sailor are two begad lunatics." 

" I feel sure you exaggerate, Cousin Barnaby ! " re- 
torted Olive, who by now had great difficulty in con- 
cealing her irritation. 

" I feel sure," he rejoined placidly, " that I shall get 
a bad bilious attack if this begad cooing and billing is 
allowed to go on." 

But this was more than any woman could stand. 
Olive jumped up from the tea-table, for she felt that if 
she stood still any longer listening to all this vapid 
talk she would surely have an attack of hysteria. 

" Did a wasp sting you? " queried Barnaby Crabtree 
blandly. 

" Yes," she replied viciously. 

" You have spilt your tea, ma'am, and upset my 
peaceful enjoyment of this repast." 

Olive now was walking up and down on the grass in 
a state of great agitation. Aunt Caroline, at the bare 
suggestion of a wasp sting, had come forward with all 
manner of remedies — milk, salt, soil made into a 
messy pap with water and sugar — and was mortally 
offended because Olive would have none of these 
things applied to the imaginary sting, 

" No, no, Aunt, let me be ! " said Olive irritably, 
" for gracious' sake, don't fuss ! You'll get on my 
nerves if you fidget round me like this." 



A WOMAN IN A RAGE 185 

" I don't believe that it was a wasp, after all," said 
Aunt Caroline; "perhaps it was only a gnat." 

" Yes! that's it. Aunt," rejoined Olive, with a harsh 
little laugh; " it was only a poisonous little gnat! " 

" Won't you come and finish your tea, then ? " 

Was ever woman so plagued before? Olive would 
gladly have indulged in a screaming fit ; she felt that it 
would have eased the tension of her nerves. As it 
was, the bland platitudes of Aunt Caroline and the 
venomous shafts of Cousin Barnaby were equally driv- 
ing her to desperation. 

" As for me," said Mr. Crabtree, who was con- 
tentedly eating plum cake, " I came here for peace. 
This afternoon I settled down in this orchard for peace. 
Love-making is disturbing at all times, especially on a 
warm afternoon. And now I come to think of it, 
Caroline, I'll go indoors directly after tea, ere I get 
more of it." 

" More of it! " exclaimed Olive- 
Mr. Crabtree once more mimicked the voice of some 
young man supposed to be sick with love. 

" ' Ten minutes with you — alone — to-day ! ' 
Bah ! ! ! It makes me sick ! " 

" I'll not allow it ! " cried out Olive impulsively, for- 
getting all prudence in this sudden access of jealousy. 
"I'll not allow it!" 

" And why not, Olive ? " queried Aunt Caroline. 
" Indeed, I think Cousin Barnaby's remarks most un- 
seemly. As for me, I like to see two young people in 
love. Lord bless my soul! it reminds me of the days 
when your uncle came courting me ! " 

" Did he come along with a butterfly-net ? " asked 



i86 MEADOWSWEET 

Mr. Crabtree, glancing at Uncle Jasper, who, indeed, 
had finished his tea, and was hovering about behind a 
cherry-tree, butterfly-net in hand, intent on the gyra- 
tions of a magnificent butterfly which seemed to have 
strayed from the flower-garden, 

"Jasper was better-looking than you ever were, 
Barnaby," said Aunt Caroline hotly. 

" Then you think. Aunt," interposed Olive, who now 
tried to speak more gaily and unconcernedly, " you 
think that Lieutenant Carrington has fallen in love 
with Boadicea ? " 

" I am sure of it," replied Aunt Caroline. " At first 
I thought that he seemed rather cold towards her." 

" No wonder. Since she inveigled him into this en- 
gagement," assented Olive spitefully. 

"Her conduct that evening was certainly unmaid- 
enly," conceded Aunt Caroline. "I think that she 
must have fallen in love with him at first sight, and 
that she — being very young — did not know how to 
conceal her feelings towards him. He, on the other 
hand, was at first only flattered." 

" Flattered ! " ejaculated Olive under her breath, " at 
the attentions of a pert country minx. I should have 
thought that they would have disgusted him." 

" Not a bit of it, my dear. Men are like wasps. 
Honey will always attract them ... the honey of soft 
speeches and pretty glances. He may have been cold 
at first, but now things are altogether reversed." 

"How so?" 

" 'Tis Boadicea who holds aloof, whilst Lieutenant 
Carrington is as keen as a fly after jam." 

" Ug:h ! 1 " grunted Mr. Crabtree. 



A WOMAN IN A RAGE 187 

" Then, 'tis for you, Aunt, to put an end to this 
ridiculous engagement ! " exclaimed Olive excitedly. 

" I wish she could ! " said Cousin Barnaby. 

" Ridiculous engagement ! " — and Aunt Caroline's 
hands went up in token of supreme astonishment. 
** Why, it will be the joy of my life to see the child 
married to Mamie Carrington's boy! She was my 
dearest friend. He is rich, well-favoured, a perfect 
gentleman. . . ." 

" I call the whole thing unseemly, silly, senseless ! " 
cried Olive hotly. " She is far too young, too stupid 
. . . she is nothing better than an uneducated school- 
girl, quite unfit to go into society ... or to the altar, 
for a matter of that ... I call it wicked to allow such 
an engagement to go on." 

" But, my dear, at the time . . ^ 

" At the time we all had to save the child's reputa- 
tion, which she had so gravely compromised by her im- 
modest conduct. Lieutenant Carrington behaved just 
as a gentleman should, and averted the scandal which 
would for ever have disgraced us all. But he had no 
intention to entangle himself in the meshes of an en- 
gagement with a girl for whom he could have nothing 
but contempt, and for his sake — since he behaved so 
nobly at the time — that senseless engagement must be 
put an end to at once I " 

" But, my dear," protested Aunt Caroline meekly, 
for Olive was waxing very vehement, and Aunt Caro- 
line was greatly afraid of her niece's tantrums, " be- 
lieve my old experience I I don't believe that either of 
those two young people would wish to break the en- 
gagement off now 1 '* 



i88 MEADOWSWEET 

" Then you should interfere, Aunt ! " cried Olive, 
completely losing control over her nerves, and shriek- 
ing at the top of her voice like some virago in a rage. 
** Someone ought to interfere — the whole thing is 
monstrous, infamous, silly and wicked! I'll not allow 
it ... I won't ... I wont ! " 

" Olive ! " exclaimed Aunt Caroline in astonishment, 
" what in the world is the matter? . . . I've never seen 
you like this. . . ." 

" Most disturbing! " muttered Cousin Barnaby. 

Aunt Caroline's exclamation of astonishment had 
recalled Olive to herself. She had a sufficiency of 
common-sense and also of conceit not to wish to expose 
her feelings before her aunt and this disagreeable, mis- 
chief-making old man. Her jealousy had rendered 
her not only spiteful, but careless of appearances; and 
appearances were the beginning and end of Olive's rule 
of conduct. So, seeing her aunt's round eyes fixed in 
amazement upon her, she pulled herself together reso- 
lutely, and said, with a quick, anxious little laugh : 

" Oh ! ... I ... I beg your pardon, Aunt. . . . 
I must have been dreaming . . ." 

" Funny dreams ! " muttered Cousin Barnaby. 

" It is so hot — and the flies are so upsetting," con- 
tinued Lady Jeffreys. " I was disturbed. . . ." 

" So was I, gravely disturbed." 

" I think it must have been the heat . . . and 
Cousin Barnaby 's silly remarks.. . . Please, Aunt, ex- 
cuse me! ... I think I'll go and lie down for a 
while. Boadicea shall bathe my head with vinegar 
and water. . . . Cousin Barnaby was too funny . . . 
mimicking a love-sick youth . . . Cousin Barnaby, I 



A WOMAN IN A RAGE 189 

suspect you of being in love yourself, the pretty way 
you said ' Meadowsweet ! my little Meadowsweet ! * 
... I thought I should have died with laughter. . . . 
What time is supper to-night, Aunt? — as usual, I 
suppose. ... I don't think that I'll come down be- 
fore then . . . my headache will be better by that 
time, if I keep quiet. So long, Cousin Barnaby. . . . 
I hope you'll enjoy your fourth cup of tea . . . un- 
disturbed." 

She was laughing hysterically, whilst short, sharp 
sobs shook her throat and brought tears of anger to 
her eyes. 

" Shall I come with you, Olive ? " asked Aunt Caro- 
line, feeling very concerned at this strange outburst of 
rage, which she was too simple to understand. 

" No, no. Aunt, thank you ! I shall find Boadicea 
indoors, shall I not? In the arms of Lieutenant Car- 
rington probably? Really, Aunt, I think you might 
"watch a little more carefully over the child. With 
her disregard of conventionalities, she might yet 
bring lasting disgrace upon us all." 

With this parting shaft aimed at poor, unsophisti- 
cated Aunt Caroline, Lady Jeffreys gathered up her 
flounced skirts and, interposing her sunshade between 
herself and Cousin Barnaby 's rude stare, she walked 
rapidly away in the direction of the house. 

" At last we may indulge in a little peace," said 
Mr. Crabtree calmly, as soon as Olive's pretty figure 
had vanished in the distance. " Caroline, both your 
nieces are a disturbing element in this household. You 
will have to rid yourself of them." 



190 MEADOWSWEET 

" I wonder now what was the matter with Olive," 
mused Aunt Caroline thoughtfully. 

"Her liver probably. Most disturbances can be 
ascribed to the liver. Caroline," he added, handing 
over his cup for refilling, " this tea has become cold. 
I'll partake of another more^ palatable cup — and this 
time, I hope, in peace." 

And he did finish his tea in peace, even though a 
few moments later Lieutenant Carrington came down 
from the house, and after a few polite words of excuse 
sat down and had his tea in silence. Aunt Caroline 
asked after Boadicea. But Lieutenant Carrington 
said that he had sought for her in vain for a long 
while, and only caught sight of her a moment ago, 
when she was running upstairs in response to a per- 
emptory call from Lady Jeffreys. 

Whereupon Aunt Caroline was greatly upset that the 
child should be missing her tea. 



CHAPTER XIX 

AN UNSEEMLY INCIDENT 

I DON^T know whether Aunt CaroHne actually sug- 
gested that Boadicea should go out into the orchard 
and see if that silly girl Susan had left one of the best 
silver spoons behind, or whether Aunt Caroline did 
no such thing, and the suggestion came from Boadicea. 

This I do know, that about an hour later, when the 
tea-things had been washed up and Aunt Caroline 
had as usual gone to the museum for the express pur- 
pose of worrying Uncle Jasper in the intervals of 
darning his socks, Boadicea did go into the orchard 
to see if Susan had left one of the best silver spoons 
on the grass. 

Now Susan had done no such thing, and the orchard 
at this hour was quite peaceful and deserted. The 
birds were gathering up the crumbs which had fallen 
from the merrymakers' table, and except for the fact 
that the grass around the foot of the grand fatherly 
cherry-tree was trodden down and limp from the im- 
press of the recent tea-party, there was no sign that the 
peace of this midsummer's afternoon had ever been 
disturbed. 

The tea-party had, as a matter of fact, come to an 
abrupt and somewhat unseemly ending, which circum- 
stance it is my duty to chronicle, seeing that it will 
more fully explain the reason why the orchard gener- 

191 



192 MEADOWSWEET 

ally and the neighbourhood of the grandfatherly 
cherry-tree most particularly were quite so deserted at 
this early hour of the day. 

Aunt Caroline and Lieutenant Carrington were con- 
versing politely on indifferent topics, such as the 
weather, and the prospects of the apple crop, whilst 
Mr. Crabtree partook of a copious meal, which in- 
cluded all the muffins and most of the cake which had 
been intended for the rest of the party. Strangely 
enough. Aunt Caroline, by some intuition which she 
herself could not have explained, refrained from men- 
tioning either Olive's or Boadicea's name; this reti- 
cence was all the more remarkable as she must have 
felt worried at the thought that both were missing their 
tea. 

To miss a meal was in Aunt Caroline's opinion the 
most blameworthy act on the part of any well-regu- 
lated constitution, and it was therefore greatly to her 
credit that tact and discretion got the better of her 
usual fussiness. I think that Lieutenant Carrington 
would have liked to talk about Boadicea just then; 
there are strange and subtle wishes in the heart when 
love holds its full sway in it, curious reticences, and 
unaccountable timidities, which are very delicious to 
experience, for Love creates them, and the sensations 
that Love creates have all a foretaste of heaven. So 
Lieutenant Carrington was quite content to sit quietly 
beneath the cherry-tree and to listen to Aunt Caroline's 
mild efforts at conversation, for his memory held the 
promise which Boadicea had given him, to meet him 
in the orchard — alone — presently and to listen to 



AN UNSEEMLY INCIDENT 193 

what he had to say, and his heart was feeding on the 
dehghts of anticipation. 

During this time, Susan, sitting at a respectful dis- 
tance from her betters, was consuming everything that 
Aunt Caroline had set aside for her, the outside pieces 
of the cake and the middle pieces of the muffin, which 
Cousin Barnaby did not care about ; and Uncle Jasper 
was stalking a beautiful large butterfly with his net. 

As luck would have it, the butterfly settled for one 
moment on the top of Mr. Crabtree's bald head, and 
unfortunately Uncle Jasper, being very short-sighted 
as well as very enthusiastic in the pursuit of science, 
brought his net down somewhat suddenly over the 
butterfly and Mr. Crabtree's head. 

The immediate result was only what could be ex- 
pected. The cup full of tea, which Mr. Crabtree was 
about to convey to his lips, fell from his hand, the 
tea was spilt all over Aunt Caroline's best table-cloth 
and drowned the remainder of an excellent plum-cake 
which, after such an immersion, would be wholly unfit 
to eat, and of course Cousin Barnaby swore profusely. 

" Thunder and flame ! . . . what the . . . why 
the ., . ." 

"Jasper, how could you?" exclaimed Aunt Caro- 
line, horrified. 

Then she loudly called to Susan, who, I am sorry to 
say, was rolling over in the grass, at a respectful dis- 
tance, of course, holding her sides with laughter. 

" Susan ! Susan ! Lord bless my soul, where's that 
girl now! Susan! " 

Yes, ma'am!" Susan contrived to say, after she 



i( 



194 MEADOWSWEET 

had stuffed her mouth full of muffin to choke back the 
immoderate laughter. 

And while Aunt Caroline fussed round Cousin Bar- 
naby with a serviette, and Susan tried to rescue the 
bread and butter from the flood of tea. Uncle Jasper 
said reproachfully : 

" You have scared him away, Barnaby ! A beautiful 
Red Admiral!" 

" On my head? " roared Mr. Crabtree, whose indig- 
nation was at its height. "On my head? . . . Jasper, 
I ask you, am I a begad geranium? " 

" Aliusque et idem," murmured Uncle Jasper plac- 
idly; " another yet the same." 

And not waiting to hear further abuse from irate 
Cousin Barnaby, he calmly continued to stalk the Red 
Admiral. Presently he caught it, and carried it off in 
triumph to the museum, whilst Mr. Crabtree muttered 
indignantly : 

" I shall have to change my pantaloons ! " 

" Aye, aye, come with me. Cousin Barnaby ! " said 
Aunt Caroline in a kindly spirit of conciliation. 
" Take no heed of Jasper ; he meant no harm." 

" He ought to be in a lunatic asylum ! " 

He kindly allowed Aunt Caroline to lead him away 
from the scene of this outrageous catastrophe, whilst 
Susan, busy clearing away the mess, muttered under 
her breath : 

" If we all was . . ." 

"Stop muttering!" said Mr. Crabtree, who was 
still very cross. " I hate muttering . . . What did 
you say, girl ? " 

But Susan now was dumb. She bent her head 



AN UNSEEMLY INCIDENT 195 

down to the tea-things, pretending to be very absorbed 
in her work. She waited until Mr. Crabtree and Aunt 
CaroHne were well out of earshot, then she said as 
loudly as she dared, nodding her head in the direction 
of the dyspeptic old man : 

" What I say is, some of us ought to be in a wild 
beast show ! " 

After which exclamation she felt that her feelings 
had been relieved. She concluded her own tea in 
peace and then set to to clear away all the tea-things, 
and honestly I do not think that she left any silver 
spoon on the grass. 

And yet, an hour later, Boadicea declared to Aunt 
Caroline that one of the spoons was missing and that 
she was quite sure she would find it in the long grass 
under the cherry-tree where the tea had been laid out, 
which I must tell you was not at all unlikely, seeing 
that that spoon was at this moment quietly reposing 
in Boadicea's pocket, and that as she went straight 
away and put it in the long grass under the cherry- 
tree, she would surely find it there again after a ten 
minutes' search. 

All of which of course is most reprehensible ; nor 
did the manoeuvre deceive Aunt Caroline, who had 
counted the spoons over before they were washed up, 
and knew that they were all together then, and who 
had, moreover, taken special note of the fact that Lieu- 
tenant Carrington was nowhere about the house and 
was most probably in the orchard at this moment, 
waiting for that spoon to be discovered in the long 
grass under the cherry-tree. 



CHAPTER XX 

A FAIRY TALE 

Six o'clock in the afternoon at the beginning of 
July is one of the most exquisite moments in an Eng- 
lish orchard, when the shadows are beginning to length- 
en, and the rays of the sun come slanting through the 
network of boughs, and on the west side every leaf 
on every damson or cherry tree is a tiny mirror that 
reflects the glory of the sky. 

In the shadow of the house there was a bed of white 
tobacco in full bloom, and just at this hour the sweet 
pungent scent filled the orchard from end to end, and 
lazy bumble bees hovered above the waxen flowers and 
gave forth that dull, quaint sound of buzzing and dron- 
ing which is so soothing and so suggestive of peace. 

Boadicea walked towards the orchard from the 
house. She was hatless, and her brown hair, ever 
inclined to unruliness, escaped all round her head 
from the trammels of a big black satin bow which at- 
tempted to fetter it at the nape of her neck. Close 
by the bed of tobaccos she paused a moment, and 
drew one long breath, drinking in with both nostrils 
the delicious, almost intoxicating fragrance of the 
flowers. 

She could see no one in the orchard for the moment, 
and she was glad of this respite, for her heart was 
beating furiously; she really could not have told you 

196 



A FAIRY TALE 197 

why. She turned her steps toward the grand fatherly 
cherry-tree, and the next moment two strong arms 
encircled her from behind, and she had the greatest 
possible difficulty in extricating herself from these in- 
sistent bonds. 

*' How dare you ? " she exclaimed as soon as she 
was free again, and stood facing the bold assailant, 
who, with glowing eyes, was looking into her own. 

** I wonder how I dare," he replied, unabashed. 

*' I was looking for aunt," she said stiffly. But she 
made no attempt to move away. 

" Oh, no ! " he said quite seriously. " Surely for old 
Crabtree ? " 

And that light of merriment twinkled impertinently 
in his grey eyes. 

" I'll go and find aunt elsewhere," she rejoined lof- 
tily, and walked further into the orchard in the direc- 
tion of the cherry-tree. 

" I swear to you that you shall not ! " he said. 

And he walked quicker than she did, and was the 
first to reach the tree. There he stopped, and threw 
himself down on the grass in the long cool shadow, 
and whilst she said haughtily: " Indeed? " he looked 
on her approaching figure with eyes that literally 
drank in every graceful line, from the exquisitely 
poised little head, with the brown hair gleaming like 
gold in the sunshine, down to the small feet that trod 
the ground so firmly. 

" You are going to stay here for ten minutes — 
alone with me — as you promised," he said. 

And his eyes invited her to sit beside him on the cool 
grass, and, believe me, that when presently she did 



198 MEADOWSWEET 

so, putting on a quaint air of resignation and of dis- 
dain which the soft blush in her cheeks disclaimed, he 
had to clasp his hands tightly together, pressing his 
nails into his flesh, in an endeavour to repress that 
overmastering desire to seize her then and there in 
his arms and to press her closely to him, whilst his 
lips sought the delicious fragrance of her hair, her 
eyes, her lips. 

" Ah, yes ! I promised ! " she said, with whimsical 
affectation. " Well, then, you must be brief. . . ." 

Then as he said nothing, but continued to look on 
her with an ardent gaze that sent the hot blood rush- 
ing up to her cheek, she said impatiently : 

" Well ! why don't you begin? I can only give you 
ten minutes, you know." 

He saw the blush in her cheek, and wondered how 
much of it came from girlish coquetry and how much 
from ignorance of what his glance had desired to 
convey. Now that he had her so near to him, so 
thoroughly at the mercy of the passionate appeal 
which he wished to make to her, a strange diffidence 
seized him. She seemed so very young, so wholly 
unsophisticated, so far removed in her purity and her 
innocence from the scorching breath of a man's pas- 
sion. He was afraid that he would scare her, that she 
would not understand all that lay in his heart, and that 
he wished to convey to her in a few glowing words 
which already seared his lips. 

Therefore he called forth his strongest will-power 
now, and forced back the words of love which were 
rushing up, helter-skelter, from his heart, in mad dis- 
order, and glowing, wild, delicious nonsense. He was 



A FAIRY TALE i99 

longing just to lie down close beside her, with his lips 
pressed against her feet, and to pour out all the flood 
of love, of worship and ecstasy which filled his heart 
to bursting. But will-power was strong in him, for 
on its strength, perhaps, depended all future happiness, 
both for him and for this child. It called back his 
unruly senses to calm and to self-control, and after a 
moment's pause during which he closed his eyes, for 
he could not bear to look on her and not tell her at 
once of his love, he said, quite quietly: 

"May I tell you a tale?" 

"A tale?" she asked, in astonishment. "What 
kind of a tale? " 

" A fairy tale," he replied. 

" Why should you want to tell me a tale now ? " 

" You will understand the reason after my tale has 
been told. May I begin? " 

"If you like," she said, with an indifferent shrug of 
the shoulders. 

" Once upon a time," he began, " all the flowers of 
the field rebelled against the Fairy Queen, They had 
got tired of the country, and wished to go up to town. 
* We'll go to London,' said they, * and see the world, 
and be seen and admired by all the townsfolk. We're 
tired of being looked on merely by stupid country 
folk ! ' This, mind you, is what the flowers of the 
field said to the Fairy Queen." 

" Did you invent this tale. Lieutenant Carrington? " 
she asked. 

" Yes, partly. Do you care for it ? " 

" Not very much so far. It seems to be rather 
pointless." 



200 MEADOWSWEET 

" How can you tell ? I have only just begun." 

"Will it take long?" 

" Ten minutes. May I go on? " 

"If you like," she reiterated, with still the same 
indifference. 

" The Fairy Queen," he then went on, " could not 
very well stop them if they wished to go, so all the 
flowers of the field went to town — briar-rose and 
toad-flax, purple vetch and ox-eyed daisies. They 
were clipped and trimmed and put into vases and 
openly displayed in shops and markets. They suffered 
tortures with wires and string, but they didn't mind. 
They had had their way and had become town flow- 



ers." 



" I still don't see the point of the story. Lieutenant 
Carrington," she said. 

" You must have a little patience. I am coming to 
the point. In the general exodus from the fields, one 
little flower was forgotten. She was dainty and shy 
and hid under the hedgerows, and so her prouder 
sisters failed to notice her." 

" What was her name? " 

" I'll tell it you presently. The Fairy Queen saw 
her as she passed, she was touched by the flower's 
freshness and her grace, and then and there endowed 
her with all the attributes which the other flowers had 
disclaimed. She gave her scent so sweet that the bees 
and butterflies fight for a kiss from her, she gave her 
a white gown with dainty frills, and finally she gave 
her a name so beautiful and so pure that ever after it 
remained the emblem of tender womanhood." 

" And what was that name, Lieutenant Carring- 



A FAIRY TALE 201 

ton?" she asked, shyly, timidly, almost in a whisper, 
for her voice had lost its quaint note of affectation, and 
her head was drooping as if under the weight of the 
gold in her hair. 

" The name," he said — also in a whisper — " which 
always springs to my lips when I look at you . . . 
Meadowsweet ! " 

" My name is Boadicea Aldmarshe." 

" Not to me ! . . . Ever since that day when Fate 
thought fit to shuffle her cards and made us partners 
in this game of life, ever since then you have meant 
to me all that is fresh and pure in life — just a little 
sprig of meadowsweet." 

" But the game is ended," she said. " Fate is shuf- 
fling her cards again." 

He could not see her eyes, for they were downcast, 
but it seemed to him as if dewy moisture lingered on 
their lashes, and certainly there had been a tremor in 
her voice, as of tears that would rise to her throat. 

" Is it ended? " he asked. 

" Why, of course," she said ; " we were partners not 
of our own free will." 

"Yes, then. But now?" 

" I don't know what you mean ! " 

" I could explain if . . ." 

"If what?" 

"If you would look at me." 

She raised her eyes to his, and he saw that they were 
full of tears, and so bright, so bright that an infinity 
of promise lay within their luminous depths. 

He could have fallen down and worshipped her then. 



202 MEADOWSWEET 

Never had he seen such innocence, such purity in any 
woman's eyes. From her whole personality there 
emanated such perfect trust, and such simplicity of 
soul, that even the ardent breath of passion must cool 
ere it touched her. Later on she would become a 
woman, no doubt; later on she would understand a 
man's love better, know all its ardour, and forgive all 
its sins; but now she was only a child, and it almost 
seemed sacrilege to disturb her serenity. 

" May I go on with the fairy tale? " he asked. 

"If you like," she said simply. 

" One midsummer's day — while all the gayer jflow- 
ers were parading the streets — the meadowsweet fell 
asleep under the hedgerow. The air was full of the 
song of birds, and the flap of butterflies' wings. And 
the West Wind came playing round that hedgerow. 
He peeped beneath and saw the Meadowsweet, so pure, 
so sweet, so exquisitely fair. He blew upon the blos- 
som . . . and whispered words to waken the soul of 
the flower . . . words of tenderness . . . and 
of love. . . ." 

The long lashes were once more veiling the glory of 
the eyes. She could not have gone on looking at him, 
whilst he spoke like that. 

How exquisite was his voice ! how tender the glance 
of his eyes. A delicious sense of happiness, of confi- 
dence and of faith crept into her heart. Something 
thrilled her, too, something that she did not under- 
stand; perhaps it was the scent of those white flowers 
in the shadow, for the very air seemed quivering with 
their fragrance. 

" I don't suppose," she murmured shyly, " that the 



A FAIRY TALE 203 

Meadowsweet understood . . . tenderness, perhaps 
. . . but love? . . ." 

" My Meadowsweet — the one of whom I speak — 
asked the birds and the bees, and they told her what 
the West Wind meant." 

" But you say that she was asleep." 

" Ah ! but the West Wind woke her." 

"How?" 

He put his arms round her suddenly, without 
further thought, and only because he could no longer 
contain himself and his very body ached with the in- 
tensity of his desire for that first kiss. He took her 
in his arms, and his lips sought hers. 

" Like this ! " he said. 

She yielded her lips to him, just like a child that 
would give all it has, for sheer love, for sheer happi- 
ness, for sheer desire to give. She yielded her lips 
and gave him kiss for kiss. 

" Meadowsweet, my little Meadowsweet! " he mur- 
mured through broken sobs that came to his throat 
with the very intensity of his happiness. " It is too 
good, too good to be true! . . . You so beautiful, 
so dear, so sweet, do you ... do you really love 
me?" 

She smiled at him through her tears, and whispered 
timidly : 

" The West Wind woke the Meadowsweet, you see 
. . . she has asked the birds and bees, and now . . ." 

"Yes! And now?" 

" I think that she understands." 

She hid her face, which was covered with blushes. 
Then as he was about to pour into her ear all the words 



204 MEADOWSWEET 

of passionate adoration which he had held in check 
for so long, she quickly put up her small brown hand 
and her fingers were pressed against his lips. 

And now she looked at him again, half shyly, and 
with a curious, questioning glance. 

"Hush! sh! sh!" she said. "Don't speak now 
. . . don't tell me anything more. ... It is all so 
new, so wonderful! I had never loved before," she 
added naively ; " I never even knew what love meant. 
It must be so different for you." 

" Until I looked into your dear eyes," he said ear- 
nestly, " until I scented the meadowsweet in the hedge- 
rows, I never knew what love could mean." 

She sighed with infinite content; you see, she had 
no idea that the world could be quite so beautiful as it 
was now; she had no idea how glorious could be the 
sunshine peeping through the branches of cherry-trees, 
how green could be the grass, how sweet the note of 
the cuckoo which came from far away. Everything 
in nature which she had seen and felt and heard, every- 
thing that she had admired and loved, was infinitely 
more lovable, more admirable now that she sat with 
a man's arms round her, and the savour of his kiss 
still lingered on her lips. 

How long they sat together like this, neither of 
them did know; what they said to one another only 
the birds and bees could hear. I'll not plague you 
with telling you of that delicious nonsense which they 
talked, the tender, inane, sublime babblings of newly 
awakened love. Only those who remember their own 
first babblings would forbear to smile, and those who 
choose to remember are fewer and fewer every day. 



A FAIRY TALE 205 

In every human heart there is such a memory; 
every human soul has once been an infant suckling at 
the breast of Love, inarticulate, ecstatic, sublime in its 
inanity. But the strenuous exigencies of modern life 
have thrown a thick grey veil over the memory of that 
halcyon hour, and the veil has been allowed to cling 
to and to choke up memory until it has faded out of 
ken. 

But those who have kept such memory green will 
understand, without being told, all that Jack Carring- 
ton and Boadicea said to one another under the cherry- 
tree that afternoon; as for the others, they would not 
care. 

The hours slipped by and the shadows grew longer. 
From Minster tower far away came the sound of 
church bells ringing for evening prayer. Boadicea 
was the first to wake from an enchanting dream. 

" And now I must go, my dear, my love ! " she said, 
still shyly. " Aunt Caroline will be wondering . . . 
and, oh ! it must be near supper-time." 

" Not yet ! " he pleaded. 

" Oh, but I must go I I ... I want to be alone — 
just for a little while . . . before I meet the others 
... I want to think ... to live my happiness." 

" Live it awhile longer in my arms." 

" No ... no ... I must go ... I really 
must ! " 

And she disengaged herself from those clinging 
arms, and, rising to her feet, she stood before him, 
demure and tall, with just that soft, rosy blush in her 
cheeks to betray her womanhood, to show that a man's 
kiss had blown the spirit of childhood away. 



2o6 MEADOWSWEET 

She meant to turn away from him without a word 
of parting, for it seemed to her that everything had 
been said that could possibly be said, and that the time 
had come now for a long and delicious silence. 

But just as she was about to turn away, some 
thought seemed to flash through her mind, and it was 
she now who, with a sudden impulse, had put her arms 
on his shoulders. 

" My dear," she said earnestly, " if anything should 
part us now . . ." 

" What could part us, little Meadowsweet ? " he 
asked exultantly, triumphant in his love. 

" I don't know," she replied; " but if it should . . ." 
She paused a moment, then added slowly : 

" It would break my heart! " 

" Nothing on earth can part us now. I have held 
you in my arms, my Meadowsweet, and I have felt the 
magic of your kiss ... do you think that I could 
after that allow anything to part us? " 

" No! no! of course not," she said simply; "but it 
seems so strange! it seems as if this happiness was 
really too great to last ! " 

Then she turned away quickly, and ran towards the 
house, and he stood still under the cherry-trees, look- 
ing after her retreating figure as a man would on the 
embodiment of earthly happiness. 

And the intoxicating fragrance of many blossoms 
was in the air. Overhead a thrush was singing to its 
mate; the swallows were circling high up above the 
trees, and tiny fleecy clouds raced across the sky. 

Jack Carrington fell on his knees and thanked God 
for it all. 



CHAPTER XXI 

A LIE 

What a beautiful world it was! 

The air was balmy and soft, not too hot and not 
too cool; never had the thrushes sung so beautifully; 
their incessant "He did it! he did it! he did it!" 
sounded just the right note in tune with this glori- 
ous afternoon. Had the sky ever been more brilliant 
and more filmy ? had the flowers ever been so fragrant 
before, or the strawberries looked more luscious? 

Of course they had not. Nothing had ever been 
so beautiful, so fragrant, or so luscious; in fact, one 
came to wonder how the world had got on at all be- 
fore . . . before this . . . this wonderful thing hap- 
pened. 

The most wonderful thing that ever was had sud- 
denly come to pass, and therefore the swallows twit- 
tered so merrily and circled round and round high up 
above the trees, in a manner indicative of their great 
joy, and therefore the thrushes said : ** He did it, he 
did it, he did it!" over and over again because, of 
course, they knew that the one and only He in all the 
world had done it. The one and only He had opened 
the book of life and told Boadicea to read in it the 
great opening chapter — the chapter of Love. 

Would you laugh in a very superior way if yoit 
heard that Boadicea ran straight up to her room and 

207 



2o8 MEADOWSWEET 

threw herself on her narrow bed face downwards, and 
that she buried her hot Httle face in her hands, and 
cried, and cried as if her heart would break? 

It was breaking, you know, with the intensity of her 
happiness. That happiness seemed really greater than 
her young heart could hold. 

She cried for a while, and then she smiled through 
her tears, and kissed the palms of her hands, because 
they had touched his hair and his cheeks. Then she 
laughed at herself for being such a goose, and blushed 
at the thought of what he would say and do if he saw 
her now. 

She jumped up from the bed and washed her face 
and eyes with cold water; and all the while she was 
singing merrier than any bird : " He did it ! he did it ! 
he did it! " He had opened up the store-house of her 
heart, and had put his own image there into a shrine. 
There it would remain for ever; it would take very 
cruel hands to tear it right out, hands that would lac- 
erate the heart before ever they succeeded in their 
cruel purpose. 

And he had done more than that ; he had made the 
world beautiful for her, he had decked the lily and 
painted the sky, and taught her a great and wonderful 
lesson. 

She knew now how dellciously sweet a kiss could be ! 

The old grandfather clock in the hall below struck 
six most solemnly. Though the world was so beauti- 
ful, time did not stand still. Boadicea gave a little 
sigh of disappointment. She had so wanted to spend 
a few happy hours contemplating her dream. But 
habit and a sense of housewifely duties still held pow- 



A LIE 209 

erful sway, even over her excitement. Hastily she 
smoothed down the last rebellious brown curls, then 
she donned her housekeeping apron and was ready to 
go downstairs. 

Half an hour before supper, and the cloth was not 
yet laid unless Susan had been more than usually ac- 
tive. 

As she opened the door of her room, she saw Olive 
coming up the stairs. She was apparently going to 
her own room, but was moving with a languid step, 
as if she were tired or else very troubled. She paused 
on the landing, and looked with obvious surprise on 
Boadicea, whose glowing face, bright eyes, and whole 
personality quivering w^ith joy and excitement be- 
trayed a secret that was not difficult to guess. 

Olive's eyes were sharp, and her intuition in such 
matters unerring. The child w^as simply brimming 
over with happiness, and Lieutenant Carrington had 
not yet come in from the orchard. It required no 
great penetration to fit these two facts into one very 
obvious whole. 

" Why, child, where have you been? " exclaimed the 
older sister, feigning complete astonishment. " Aunt 
Caroline has been looking for you everywhere." 

" I have been in the orchard," said Boadicea simply. 

She had no occasion or desire to conceal the one 
great fact, though in her heart of hearts she would 
have loved to guard her secret just a little while longer, 
to feast on it, like a little glutton that would devour 
a world of happiness. 

" In the orchard ? " queried Olive, with just that 
delicate lifting of arched eyebrows which indicated 



210 MEADOWSWEET 

displeasure as well as surprise. " Were you alone? " 
" No. Lieutenant Carrington was with me." 
" Oh ! " said the other indifferently. " By the way, 
child, just run down a moment to Aunt Caroline and 
see if she wants anything, then come and talk to me 
in your own room, will you? There is something I 
want to say to you." 

Olive was smiling, and she spoke quite kindly. 
" Run along, child. Don't be long," she added, as 
Boadicea, submissive and willing as usual, had already 
turned to obey. Her white skirt soon disappeared 
round the angle of the stairs. Olive watched her sis- 
ter's retreating figure, until the light patter of her feet 
ceased to echo from below, then she turned and went 
into Boadicea's room. 

She sat down at the dressing-table, in front of the 
old-fashioned mirror. Leaning forward she studied 
for awhile with grave attention the dainty image which 
the glass held before her; the tiny head crowned with 
curls of a pale golden hue, the colour of ripe corn, 
shimmering in the sunlight; the blue eyes and arched 
eyebrows, the softly-rounded cheek on which nature 
carefully aided by art had spread a delicate rosy tint. 

The image was winning and charming in the ex- 
treme. No one who looked could deny this ; no won- 
der that on Olive's face, as she gazed, there came an 
expression of deep puzzlement. Surely a man must 
be blind to look with favour on any other face but that 
which the mirror so kindly reflected. And being blind, 
he must, of course, be cured, and you may be certain 
that he will presently be thanking God on his knees 
for having been cured from his malady. 



A LIE 211 

The resolution of perfonning this surgical operation 
was quickly come to. Olive now only chided herself 
for having been so considerate, so tender-hearted all 
this while. Lieutenant Jack had no doubt been miser- 
able at her seeming indifference, and — almost in des- 
peration — 'Was turning to Boadicea for solace and 
consolation. 

Well! all that could be put right with very little 
trouble. Olive marvelled that she had never thought 
of it before. Fortunately it was not too late; Lieu- 
tenant Jack's affections were not really engaged, and, of 
course, a child like Boadicea would soon forget her 
own silly sentimentality. 

There came the sound of light feet upon the stairs. 
Olive went to the door and opened it, and the next 
moment the same excited, quivering, glowing Boadicea 
had followed her sister back into the room. 

" Aunt did not really want me," she said. " I told 
her that you wished me to come to you, so, of course, 
she told me at once to run along, for she and Susan 
had nearly finished laying the cloth for supper." 

She talked rather breathlessly and quickly, like one 
who has been running very fast. Olive put out an in- 
viting hand to her, and in her childlike, impulsive way, 
Boadicea ran to the dearly loved sister, and in the 
exuberance of her joy kissed her tenderly. 

She had no doubt but that Olive wished to question 
her, and she was looking forward to entrusting her 
precious secret to the one being in the world who she 
believed would understand her. 

" Sit down near me, little one," said Olive gently, as 



212 MEADOWSWEET 

she sat down on one chair and drew another close to 
hers. 

But Boadicea disdained the chair. She knelt down 
on the floor beside Olive and had her arms round 
Olive's waist, and her head against Olive's shoulder. 
She sighed with absolute content and also with excite- 
ment. 

" I told you, dear, did I not," began Lady Jeffreys, 
after a slight pause, " that there was something which 
I wished to say to you ? " 

"Yes, Olive. What is it?" 

" Well, little one, it is a confession which I feel 
bound in honour to make to you." 

" A confession ? " queried the girl, very puzzled. 

" Yes, dear. One which I ought to have made to 
you long ago. ... I mean a month ago." 

" Is it very serious, then ? " asked Boadicea play- 
fully. 

She was still so far from guessing what would come. 

" Very serious to me," replied Olive earnestly. " I 
do not think that it will affect you much . . . only, 
perhaps," she added, whilst tears seemed to be on the 
point of gathering to her eyes, " in your estimate of 
me." 

The arms round Olive's shoulders tightened their 
embrace. The face that was hidden against her bosom 
was raised to her with an expression of enduring affec- 
tion and of boundless trust. 

" Nothing could affect my estimate of you, Olive," 
said Boadicea tenderly ; " you know that ever since I 
was a baby I have always looked up to you as the most 
beautiful, the most clever, the most perfect being in all 



A LIE 213 

the world. And to this day you are my ideal — and 
the pattern whom I long to emulate." 

" Well, dear, that is just what I cannot bear any 
longer . . . your innocent admiration, your loving 
faith weighs on me like a burden. ... I am not wor- 
thy of it, little one . . ." 

And this time two genuine tears ran down the deli- 
cately-rouged cheeks, making pathetic little rivulets 
which Olive did not even try to obliterate. 

" Then what is this serious confession," asked 
Boadicea quite gaily, " which you feel called upon to 
make to me ? " 

" It is so hard to make," said Olive, with a sigh. 

" Shall I turn my back? It might be easier." 

" No, no ! don't jest, little one. It hurts me to see 
you laugh." 

"Olive darling!" exclaimed Boadicea, and for the 
first time since that wonderful moment this afternoon 
a curious pang of pain shot right through her heart. 

" You know, dear," began Olive, after some hesita- 
tion, " a month ago . . . when Sir Baldwin came on 
us unexpectedly. . . ." 

"Yes?" 

" And I was alone with Lieutenant Carrington, you 
remember? " 

" Yes, Olive." 

The voice was a little harder now, and the arms 
that encircled Olive's shoulders dropped limply to the 
girl's side. Boadicea was still kneeling beside her sister, 
but her head was no longer pillowed on the sister's 
breast. She was squatting back, sitting on her heels ; 
the glow had died from her cheeks, and left them wliite 



214 MEADOWSWEET 

and drawn ; her eyes were fixed upon her sister's face, 
and her Hps were tightly set and hard. 

" Go on, Olive," she said quietly, 

" I ... I asked you, then, did I not, little one ? to 
stand by me and to save me from my husband's jeal- 
ousy ? " 

" I did it heartily and willingly, Olive, and I have 
not repented since." 

" I swore to you then that I had done no wrong . . . 
that Sir Baldwin's jealousy was baseless and insane. 
... I led you to believe, in fact, that I had been 
merely thoughtless, and that Lieutenant Carrington 
had never made love to me . . . you believed this at 
the time, little one . . . did you not ? " 

" Yes, Olive ... I believed this ... at the time." 

" Well, child, I ... I lied to you then ... I lied 
because I was afraid . . . but Sir Baldwin's jealousy 
was quite justified. . . . Lieutenant Carrington and I 
fully deserved his wrath. . . . Jack and I had loved 
one another for some time . . . and that night. . . ." 

Almost against her will she paused. She had meant 
to put facts crudely, to plunge the poisoned dagger 
into the child's innocent heart, and then to turn it in 
the wound, so as to be quite sure that it had done its 
deadly work; but Boadicea's eyes had compelled her 
suddenly to silence, and for the next few moments 
silence absolute reigned in the small narrow room. 
Through the open window came still the hum of bees 
and the song of birds; but, oh! how out of tune wefe 
they. There was a peep of sky and of sunshine 
through that same window, and tiny, fleecy clouds 
chased one another across the canopy of blue, but they 



A LIE 215 

were grey and dark, and the blue of the sky had faded 
into dreary dullness. 

" I ought to tell you, child," resumed Olive at last, 
with an effort — for the silence had become oppressive. 

" Tell me nothing now," said Boadicea in an even, 
toneless voice ; " you have said enough . . . and I un- 
derstand. . . . Now please go ! " 

She seemed suddenly to have grown older. Olive 
noted, not without satisfaction, how hard were the lines 
of the young face now. The sun struck full in through 
the open window, but Boadicea appeared not to notice 
it, she was staring straight in front of her, her face 
was the colour of grey ashes, and her lips were blood- 
less. Her arms hung limply by her side. She had 
forgotten Olive's presence, she had forgotten that she 
lived, and that the world existed, In this awful cata- 
clysm which had destroyed her happiness. 

Olive tried to reason with her. She was almost 
frightened at the havoc which she had wrought. 

" Child, listen to me . . ." she urged. 

But Boadicea, without moving from her position, 
murmured through her half-closed lips: 

" Go . . . go . . . Oh ! can't you see that you must 
go now ! " 

And Olive, without a word, slunk quietly out of the 
room. 



CHAPTER XXII 

A BROKEN HEART 

It had all been lies! lies! lies! 

He had lied to her : that was the great, the dominat- 
ing fact which reared its grim head above the ashes of 
her joy. 

He was a liar and had been Olive's lover ! The lips 
which had murmured words of love into Olive's ear 
had come to whisper lies into her own. 

The shame of it! The awful, awful shame! The 
desecration! The sacrilege! To talk of love and 
pollute it ! To kiss, to embrace, and to be lying all the 
time! To sneak like a coward, afraid of Sir Bald- 
win's wrath ; and then to sneak further like a liar and a 
cheat, stealing love and stealing kisses ! Oh, the misery ! 
The shame of it all! 

It was not so much the sense of a cruel wrong done 
to herself that oppressed Boadicea's heart at this mo- 
ment, but the knowledge that he was a liar, a sneak, 
and a coward! It was the shattering of her illusions 
that hurt her so terribly ; it was the ruthless hand that 
tore at the image which she had enshrined that caused 
her physical and mental agony, so great that she could 
have rolled .on the floor and cried out in bitterness of 
pain. 

For the first few moments after Olive left her, life in 

216 



A BROKEN HEART 217 

her seemed almost suspended. She was so stunned 
that her brain reeled. She saw nothing but blackness 
before her, blackness through which came voices mock- 
ing her and screaming shrilly : " He is a liar ! He is 
a cheat!" 

And now the thrush kept on repeating in a senseless, 
monotonous fashion : " He did it ! He did it ! He 
did it!" 

He broke her heart by telling her lies without end ; 
he cheated her into thinking him good, upright, hon- 
ourable — he, her sister's lover, whom Sir Baldwin 
might, if he would, have thrashed like a dog with im- 
punity. 

The shame! The shame of it all! The cruel cow- 
ardly lies ! 

She stopped her ears, for that silly thrush would 
keep on saying : " He did it ! He did it ! He did it ! " 
And when she could not shut out that monotonous 
sound she began to laugh. It really was too ridiculous ! 

She laughed and she laughed — loudly and jerkily. 
She could not stop herself from laughing, because that 
thrush was so very ridiculous. 

And suddenly while she was still laughing, and her 
chest and throat were torn to pieces by painful sobs, 
the thrush ceased to talk nonsense. It seemed to 
pause and to be listening. 

And Boadicea, too, listened. 

From the orchard which lay not far from her win- 
dows there came the sound of a fresh, deep voice sing- 
ing an old English song. 

The refrain was quaint, and had in it a dreamy lilt, 
and the words rang out clear and distinct. 



2i8 MEADOWSWEET 

Queen of my heart, unquestioned and alway, 
Till death consume me, thou shalt be indeed ! 
Reason ordains that I should ne'er be freed 
(And there withal my pleasure doth agree) 
From thy sweet service, while the years succeed, 
And to this end we twain together be ! 

The sobs and laughter in the girl's throat were 
stilled. She squatted on the floor, there where she had 
knelt when Olive first told her the ugly, unvarnished 
truth. 

She neither wept nor laughed now. Pain itself had 
subsided. It seemed as if that song sung by him in 
the orchard where he had lied to her had severed the 
last cords which bound her to illimitable regret. 

She was no longer a child. The last half-hour had 
made her into a woman — a miserable, disillusioned, 
suffering woman : a woman conscious of abiding deceit 
and of abiding shame. But the paroxysm of grief 
had gone by, leaving her physically a wreck and men- 
tally numb. It was a long time before she could bring 
her mind back to the realities of life and to its many 
puerilities. 

Supper would be served almost directly. It was 
close on seven, and vaguely through her inert brain 
there had passed the consciousness of various familiar 
noises in and about the house — the rattling of pots 
and pans in the kitchen, Aunt Caroline going up to her 
room to tidy herself for supper. Cousin Barnaby 
clamouring for something or other that he wanted. 

Boadicea rose to her feet ; but she had to steady her- 
self as she did so, for the walls of the room were danc- 
ing a merry-go-round in front of her. Cold water to 
her face and wrists brought a little sense of freshness. 



A BROKEN HEART 219 

She was soon able to master herself and to steady her 
limbs. She even said a few words aloud to herself to 
see if her voice trembled or not. 

Then from the wardrobe she took out the high- 
waisted silk dress — the one which she had worn that 
first evening when Lieutenant Carrington stayed to 
supper, and then rode away, returning late at night for 
the pre-arranged rendezvous with Olive. She had not 
worn the dress since ; it had seemed sacred to that one 
day when love was first bom and peeped out shyly into 
the world. 

Now love was dead, a liar's hand had smothered it 
with cruel embraces, a liar's tongue had spoken its 
funeral oration. Boadicea put on the high-waisted 
dress again ; it had ceased to be sacred — it was just a 
rag that would help to mock the dying throes of agon- 
ising love. 

Just as carefully as she had done on that memorable 
evening, she dressed herself in her mother's silken 
gown; she arranged her hair in puffs and curls with 
the high comb of filigree fold, and donned the long lace 
mittens and the narrow-pointed shoes with the crossed 
straps over the ankles. After that she studied her 
appearance in the mirror. She thought that she looked 
rather pale, and that her eyes seemed unnaturally 
large, for they had wide purple rings round the lids, 
,_but she hoped that her pallor would be generally 
ascribed to the heat, and in any case she felt the power 
in her to make light of it and to smile. 

She took up the lace handkerchief and the tiny shell 
fan which she had carried before, and thus arrayed 
and equipped, she went downstairs. 



220 MEADOWSWEET 

Lieutenant Carrington was standing in the hall, 
smiling up at her as she descended. She looked a per- 
fect picture of dainty girlishness, and his twinkling 
eyes told very plainly into what a fever of passionate 
admiration her very appearance had thrown him. 

He ran to the foot of the stairs with both arms out- 
stretched, ready to catch her the moment her small foot 
had touched the lowest step. 

She paused, however, midway down the stairs and, 
with admirable self-control, forced her face and eyes 
to express nothing but lively unconcern, even whilst 
within her innermost heart she marvelled how true 
and loyal a miserable liar could contrive to look. 

Half afraid that the contempt and loathing which 
she felt for him would betray itself within the next 
few moments, she gave a merry, affected laugh and 
ran so quickly down the stairs that his arms failed to 
catch her as she ran, and she escaped from him to the 
museum door. 

He overtook her just as she was inside the room and 
was about to close the door on him. 

" My Meadowsweet," he said gaily as he caught at 
her hand and held it imprisoned between his own, 
" queen of my heart, whither away? " 

" A white-throat has nested in the mulberry-tree," 
she retorted as gaily as he. " I have just time before 
supper to steal the eggs for Uncle Jasper." 

" But not in this gown," he said, with a smile that 
had something of triumph in it, and he tried to draw 
her closer to him, but she contrived to free herself 
and to interpose the big table with all the glue-pots and 



A BROKEN HEART 221 

brushes, the boxes of eyes and reels of wire, between 
herself and him. 

*' The gown will not suffer," she said lightly, " and 
this is the best hour of the day for birds'-nesting." 

But she made no attempt to go, seeing which Jack 
Carrington's heart gave a wild thump of delight. He 
was feasting his eyes on the exquisite apparition be- 
fore him, and was longing for Old Father Time to 
stand still for awhile, so that he might look and look 
until he was really satiated with the sight of her. 

He thought that she looked pale and that her eyes 
were circled as if she had been crying, but at this he 
was not astonished. He, too, out in the orchard, in 
the shadow of the cherry-tree, had felt as if he could 
have cried out his heart for sheer happiness; he, too, 
felt as if all his blood had rushed back to his heart, 
causing it almost to burst with the greatness of his joy. 

And her pale cheeks and purple-circled eyes made 
her seem a thousand times more beautiful to him than 
she had been before, for these touches of pathos gave 
to her strong personality an enchanting touch of child- 
ish weakness, which rendered her infinitely dear. 

Uncle Jasper up on his perch was immersed in a 
ponderous book; through the open window came the 
soft sighing of the west wind through the drooping 
leaves of the cherry-trees. 

" Will you come out into the orchard for ten min- 
utes, little Meadowsweet?" he pleaded in a tender 
murmur. 

She raised her eyebrows with an expression of af- 
fected surprise. 



222 MEADOWSWEET 

"What," she said, with a harsh Httle laugh, 
"again?" 

" The sun is just beginning to set. It will be glori- 
ous through the trees. Come and look at it with me." 

" How can I, in this gown? " she said coquettishly. 

" The gown will not suffer. We'll walk through 
the grass, and the dew has not yet fallen. Do come, 
little Meadowsweet, there is so much that I have to 
say to you." 

" Much to say to me ? " she retorted. " Lord bless 
my soul, Lieutenant Carrington, I thought you had 
told me everything that you could possibly think of, 
and that you had exhausted the storehouse of your 
eloquence." 

" I had not even begun," he said earnestly. 

He was looking at her almost inquiringly now; he 
did not quite understand her. All the merry twinkle 
had gone from his eyes; they looked sorrowful and 
puzzled. 

The eyes of a liar, she thought, who begins to fear 
that his lies have found him out. 

She smothered a yawn, and turned her back on him. 

" Then I am afraid," she said lightly, " that you will 
have to find some other listener now. I am tired of 
your rodomontades ! " 

For a moment he thought that excitement must have 
turned her brain. She looked absolutely a different 
woman; when she turned once more to him now, and 
faced him with that affected curl on her lips, that un- 
natural expression of empty coquetry in her eyes, he 
had to close his own just for a moment, for he really 
thought that he must be dreaming some ugly, horrible 



A BROKEN HEART 223 

dream, and that he must make a supreme effort to 
dispel it before it caused his own brain to reel. 

When he opened his eyes again she was looking just 
the same — smiling, affected, distinctly bored. 

"I — I did not think, dear, that I had tired you," he 
said gently. ** You listened so patiently . . . that I 
hoped . . ." 

" What ? " she exclaimed, with a laugh. " What 
did you hope ? That I should be willing to go on lis- 
tening for another long ten minutes to your stale gal- 
lanteries? We may be fools in the country, Lieu- 
tenant Carrington, and uneducated savages, but we are 
not quite such fools as that ! " 

Then suddenly he thought that he held the key to 
this new mood of hers : she was just teasing him, play- 
ing with him like a kitten with a mouse. The game 
was cruel enough ; the suffering which she was inflict- 
ing on him was greater than she could gauge, but he 
loved her so dearly that He could find it in his heart to 
forgive her readily, and to endure patiently any tor- 
ment which she might think fit to impose upon him. 

" My dear little Meadowsweet," he said, speaking 
with utmost tenderness, " I don't suppose that you 
realise for a moment quite how cruel is the game which 
you are playing with me." 

" The game? " she asked. " What game? " 

" You have a perfect right, of course, to tease and 
hurt me as much as you like if it gives you pleasure; 
but just now, when my happiness is so new and so 
unexpected, and I have not actually grasped the fact 
yet that your dear lips have really touched mine, just 
now, my beautiful Meadowsweet, the game is doubly 



224 MEADOWSWEET 

cruel. . . . And every word which you speak in jest 
cuts through my heart Hke a knife." 

" Your heart? " And she laughed loudly and mer- 
rily. "Your heart? Oh, how funny! Lieutenant 
Carrington, do tell me where you keep your heart ? " 

" I am afraid that it has been in your keeping, dear, 
for a long time now . . . and I had hoped that it 
would remain there always." 

" Always is such a long word. . . . What do you 
mean by ' always,' Lieutenant Carrington? " 

" Until death," he said earnestly. 

" But I have no intention of dying for a long while 
to come." 

" I pray to God to fulfil that intention for you." 

" Then how can your heart — as you are pleased to 
call it — remain in my keeping for that long while ? 
. . . Whilst you are in the Antipodes and I in Thanet 
... it will get lost midway ... in the great open 
sea." 

" The great open sea will not always be between us, 
dear, will it?" 

" I don't know. I should imagine that it would be 
. . . most of the time. . . . You are going to the 
Antipodes to-morrow, are you not ? " 

" I am going to Malta . . . but I shall soon be 
back." 

"Indeed? How interesting ! " 

And she sank languidly upon the sofa. But in a 
moment now he was near her, kneeling beside her, and 
trying to imprison her hands. Gone was the merri- 
ment, the patience, the softness from his eyes, passion, 
anger, and reproach glowed within their depths. 



A BROKEN HEART 225 

" Meadowsweet," he said, and his voice was harsh, 
for she had wounded him cruelly and unwarrantably, 
and he no longer could bear the pain of that wound, 
" in the name of God cease this fooling, dear! I am 
only a man . . . nothing of a saint . . . I'll bear a 
great deal from you . . . but not this . . . not this. 
. . . This is beyond my strength." 

" What is beyond your strength. Lieutenant Car- 
rington? " she queried gaily. " Why are you so sol- 
emn ? I don't understand you." 

" Meadowsweet ..." 

" Why do you go on calling me that? It is so sense- 
less; my name is Boadicea . . . and for Heaven's 
sake do sit down properly, and leave my hands alone. 
. . . Aunt Caroline will be here directly. . . ." 

" To me you are Meadowsweet," he said slowly, 
trying to control himself, to keep calm in face of this 
awful nightmare, which was fast becoming reality; 
" you were Meadowsweet until just now, when you 
started playing so cruelly with me. You were Mead- 
owsweet when you lay in my arms. . . ." 

" In your arms ? . . ." she ejaculated in mock sur- 
prise. " Come, come, you must not exaggerate. . . ." 

" In my arms," he reiterated fervently. " You 
were my Meadowsweet when my lips sought and found 
your own . . . when you returned my kiss and quiv- 
ered with passion like a rose under the subtle touch 
of the bee. . , ." 

" Really, Lieutenant Carrington ! . . ." 

" You were my Meadowsweet when you told me that 
you loved me. ..." 

"I?" 



226 MEADOWSWEET 

*' When you promised to be my wife." 
"I? Your wife? . . . Your wife? . . ." And 
once more her ringing laugh echoed from end to end 
of the room. " Really, that is the funniest thing I 
have heard for a long time. I promised to be your 
wife? When?" 

" In the orchard. Half an hour ago." 



" You were dreaming." 



*' Indeed, it seems as if I must have been." 

" Then I really must ask you, Lieutenant Carring- 
ton, to wake up from a dream which has such very 
unpleasant consequences for me. ... I, your wife? 
Did you ask me to be your wife? " 

" Have you forgotten ? " 

" No. But did you? " she insisted. 

" I still ask you on my knees to leave off torturing 
me." 

" And to be your wife? " 

" And to be my wife." 

" Then stay on your knees just half a minute longer, 
Lieutenant Carrington, for here comes Aunt Caroline 
with Cousin Barnaby, and I don't think that they 
ought to miss the fun." 



CHAPTER XXIII 

A STORMY PFTREL 

He would then and there have risen from his knees 
if he could, but he seemed rooted to the ground. His 
limbs were paralysed; he was unable to move, for he 
felt just like a man who has received a stunning blow 
on the head. 

She had risen to her feet — calm, smiling and self- 
possessed — just when Aunt Caroline entered the 
room with Cousin Barnaby at her heels. 

When Aunt Caroline saw the pretty picture — 
Boadicea in her quaint old-fashioned dress, standing 
there laughing gaily, and Lieutenant Carrington kneel- 
ing at her feet, she sighed with utmost satisfaction. 
It was delicious to see these two beautiful creatures in 
love with one another, and the wedding-cake would be 
the finest that Aunt Caroline had ever baked. 

" Oh, Aunt Caroline, there 3^ou are ! " exclaimed • 
Boadicea. " I am so glad you have come. Lieu- 
tenant Carrington was just busy making violent love 
to me." 

" Of course he was, child, of course he was ! " said 
Aunt Caroline, somewhat taken aback and not a little 
shocked. " But you must not shout about it like 
that." 

" Why not ? It is so funny ! " 

"Funny? . . . My dear child! 

22^ 



>> 



228 MEADOWSWEET 

" Yes, Aunt. Don't you see how funny It is ? 
Here's this gallant officer who asks the young savage 
from the country to be his wife. What do you think 
the birds will say to it ... or the frogs or the beetles 
or the bees. . . . They'll laugh, of course. . . . We'll 
all laugh here . . . even the toads and bats will wink, 
for we in the country have fooled the man from town." 

" Meadowsweet, have you no pity?" murmured the 
broken-hearted man. 

" Child, child ! " exclaimed Aunt Caroline in utter 
bewilderment. "What in the world are you talking 
about? What does it all mean? I don't understand 
you?" 

" It's not at all difficult to understand. Aunt dear. 
Here's a fine gentleman who had it in his head that I 
cared for him, and that I really meant to be his wife." 

" So you did ! " retorted Aunt Caroline. 

" H she didn't, she ought to be stuffed and kept in 
this museum as a stormy petrel ! " growled Cousin 
Barnaby. 

" I never intended to marry him," said Boadicea 
firmly — "never! I never meant to be his wife . . . 
the wife of an empty-headed, smooth-tongued gallant 
— never ! never ! . . . I fooled him as much as ever I 
could — because he called me a savage and I wanted to 
be revenged on him. . . . And I think that it is the 
funniest thing In all the world to see how I suc- 
ceeded! . . ." 

Then as Aunt Caroline remained speechless with 
horror and confusion, and Cousin Barnaby sat down 
in utter resignation at this new disturbance of his 
peace, Carrington rose to his feet. 



A STORMY PETREL 229 

" It is unnecessary to say more, Miss Aldmarshe," 
he said quite calmly. " Am I to understand that your 
desire is to intimate to me . . ." 

" That I decline the honour of your hand in mar- 
riage, Lieutenant Carrington. Yesl that is my de- 
sire," she said. 

And she swept him a deep and ironical curtsey. 

" My dear child ! " murmured Aunt Caroline. 

"Oh, Aunt! isn't it funny?" cried Boadicea, whose 
voice now had become almost as shrill as Olive's, be- 
cause she found the present game terribly difificult to 
play, and sobs were fighting laughter for mastery over 
her. " Lieutenant Carrington, I do wish you could 
see yourself, how foolish you look! But you looked 
still more foolish in the orchard, let me tell you, when 
with sheep's eyes, and sickly sighs, you told your won- 
derful legend of fairy flowers and meadowsweet and 
— what was it ? — the West Wind I . . . You were so 
engrossed in your story that you did not notice 
how the young savage was laughing at you all the 
time." 

" At any rate I know it now. Miss Aldmarshe," he 
said quietly. " Have I your permission to go ? " 

His face was so ravaged with grief that Boadicea 
herself would have been struck by it had she dared to 
look at him. But she w^ould not trust herself to do 
that; she was terribly afraid of breaking down, of 
letting him see how terribly she suffered, how terribly 
she had been shamed. 

He was a liar and a cheat, and no doubt for the mo- 
ment his fatuous vanity was smarting under the blow ; 
at best he might be feeling relieved at thought that he 



230 MEADOWSWEET 

was free once more, free to break other hearts, to He 
to other women who trusted him as she had done. 

Therefore she would not look at him, but poured out 
words which she hoped would lash him like a whip; 
she made fun of every word he uttered, taking a sort 
of grim pleasure in heaping odium and desecration on 
the smouldering ashes of her love. 

"His wife?" she reiterated again and again, now 
addressing Aunt Caroline, now speaking to the empty- 
air, to Cousin Barnaby, or to absent-minded Uncle 
Jasper. "Really, I think I shall die of laughter! 
Why don't you laugh, Aunt? ... I fooled him, you 
know . . . made him think that I cared . . . and he 
talked sentiment and poetry to me, the little savage 
whom he despised . . . why don't you laugh, Cousin 
Barnaby?" 

And she ran up to Mr. Crabtree, seized him by the 
coat-tails, just like the boisterous little madcap she 
used to be, and she dragged him up from his chair and 
twirled him and whirled him round and round, laugh- 
ing all the time, as if she was the maddest, merriest 
creature on the whole of God's earth. 

Aunt Caroline looked at her almost in fear. She 
thought that the child had gone mad. Even Uncle 
Jasper woke from his absorption and stared down at 
the strange bacchanalian dance. But he did not think 
that little Boadicea was mad, he had often seen her in 
these boisterous moods. She had always been a 
strange and a wilful child! 

Then suddenly, in the very midst of her maddest 
frolic, Boadicea stopped short. Her eyes had met 
those of Jack Carrington. Her whole figure stiffened, 



A STORMY PETREL 231 

the hysterical laughter died on her lips; her face be- 
came stern and set and her cheeks deadly pale. 

With one quick, imperious gesture, she pointed to 
the door, and looking straight at him, she said loudly : 

" Go 1 " 



CHAPTER XXIV 

A HOPELESS OUTLOOK 

And after that came dreary, dreary days in endless 
succession, dreary days the Hke of which had never 
been in this world before. 

Everything became a hopeless, colourless blank, life 
was just one dreary thing after another; getting up in 
the morning, helping Aunt Caroline about the house, 
and going to bed in the evening. There was nothing 
else, nothing to look forward to in the morning, noth- 
ing to look back upon in the evening. Birds'-nesting 
was uninteresting, the old mare slow in her trot, the 
nightingales had ceased to sing, and only the weari- 
some cuckoo sent his monotonous tune through the 
flower-scented air. 

Of course, it was impossible to go into the orchard 
now; that was beyond the capacity of any human soul. 
It was impossible to stroll in the long grass, or to sit 
in the forked branches of the old cherry-tree; the 
plums were ripening fast; there would soon come the 
awful moment when they, too, must be gathered for 
jam-making. 

Boadicea, thinking of the day when she would per- 
force have to go into the orchard, and perch upon a 
ladder that would be resting perhaps against the very 
tree where he . . . Boadicea, thinking of that, felt 
that life could not hold worse tortures for any living 

232 



A HOPELESS OUTLOOK 233 

heart than the revisiting of places where Happiness 
and Love had paid such fleeting visits. 

And the worst of it was that in the midst of all this 
weariness and monotony there was a part to play. 
Boadicea was not the woman — she was a woman now 
— to wear her sorrows, the signs of her broken heart, 
upon her face. Neither Aunt Caroline nor Uncle Jas- 
per nor Cousin Barnaby should see that she was a mis- 
erable, broken-hearted creature, who cried half the 
night in unspeakable wretchedness, and was wearing 
out her young life in bitter regrets. No! they should 
see nothing of her misery, and neither should Olive. 
Oh, above all, Olive should see nothing, Olive who also 
had lied, who also had cheated, Olive who had at last 
fallen from the pedestal where her adoring sister had 
enshrined her all these years. 

Uncle Jasper and Cousin Barnaby were, of course, 
too much absorbed — one in his books, the other in 
himself — to notice any change in Boadicea. She ac- 
companied Uncle Jasper in his birds'-nesting expedi- 
tions, and looked after Cousin Barnaby's hot water 
bottle, just the same as she had always done. 

Aunt Caroline, however, was not quite so blind. 
She could not help noticing that the child's eyes were 
now always circled with dark lines, that she ate very 
little, and that her cheeks and chest were rapidly falling 
in. She prescribed rhubarb and treacle and dandelion 
root, all of which Boadicea obediently and cheerfully 
took, but the girl's appetite did not return, nor did her 
cheeks regain their roundness. 

All of which greatly puzzled Aunt Caroline. The 
situation was altogether beyond her comprehension. 



234 MEADOWSWEET 

It was Boadicea who had behaved shamefully towards 
Lieutenant Carrington — Mamie Carrington's boy — 
and yet it was Boadicea who seemed miserable, and 
who had lost her appetite; therefore the child's pale 
cheeks and loss of appetite could not on the face of it 
have anything to do with the broken engagement: 

Aunt Caroline tried to question Boadicea, but her 
anxiety was met with such placid serenity, and with 
such gentle obstinacy that she soon gave up trying to 
find out anything from the child. 

After that highly improper, unladylike scene in the 
museum that evening. Lieutenant Carrington had 
called — only once — on the following morning to 
proffer his respectful adieux to Mr. and Mrs. Heming- 
ford. Boadicea had not come down to see him, and 
he went away, after staying exactly ten minutes by the 
museum clock, and Aunt Caroline declared that they 
were the most uncomfortable ten minutes which she 
had ever spent. 

H.M.S. Dolphin made tracks for the Mediterranean 
that self -same afternoon, and since then one letter had 
come from Lieutenant Carrington for Mrs. Heming- 
ford, and one for Boadicea. Both letters had been 
posted from Cherbourg; in the one written to Aunt 
Caroline Jack had endeavoured to express his grati- 
tude for all the kindness which had been showered upon 
him at Old Manor Farm. 

Aunt Caroline had cried when she read the letter ; it 
was so beautifully written, she said, and showed what 
a noble-hearted fellow Mamie Carrington's boy had 
proved himself to be. She expressed the fervent wish 



A HOPELESS OUTLOOK 235 

that some day he would meet a really nice girl, who 
would make him as happy as he deserved to be. 

Olive had been in the hall when the postman brought 
the two letters ; she it was who persuaded Aunt Caro- 
line not to give the other one to Boadicea. 

" The child is so very determined," she said, " and 
so bitter on the subject of Lieutenant Carrington just 
now, that to allow a correspondence to be started be- 
tween them at this juncture would only aggravate the 
situation and cause a great deal of unhappiness to 
both sides." 

Aunt Caroline would have demurred, but Olive al- 
ways had an irresistible way with her. 

" I shouldn't give this letter to Boadicea just now, 
Aunt," she said, with that authoritative air of hers 
which Aunt Caroline never could disregard. " Let me 
put it by for a little while — say, for a month or two 
— until the child's curious temper has had time to calm 
down, and she is able to look at things a little more 
coolly. I do firmly believe that if you will only give 
her time, and in the meanwhile do not even mention 
Lieutenant Carrington's name to her, everything may 
yet be well." 

" Do you really think so, Olive ? " said Aunt Caro- 
line, with a sigh. 

" I do really. I am sure you would be doing an 
infinity of harm by giving the child this letter at the 
present moment. You know what she is: impulsive 
and wilful to a degree! She would, in her present 
mood, probably send an answer back to Lieutenant 
Carrington which would offend him beyond the hope 



236 MEADOWSWEET 

of his ever forgiving her. Silence and his continued 
absence are the best chances of reconcihation." 

Of course, Aunt CaroHne was far too unsophisti- 
cated to see through OHve's clever machinations. She 
firmly believed that her worldly niece's advice could 
not help but be sound, and never for a moment did it 
enter her head that Olive's desire to gain time and to 
keep Boadicea and Lieutenant Carrington apart was 
solely actuated by her selfish hope that she in the 
meanwhile would succeed in regaining Jack's regard 
and in once more enchaining his truant allegiance to 
herself. 

" Very well," said Aunt Caroline after a brief mo- 
ment of hesitation, " I'll put the letter by, and only 
give it to Boadicea when I see that she is in a better 
frame of mind." 

" No, no," protested Olive. " If you put that let- 
ter by. Aunt, you will never be able to find it when the 
time comes for giving it to the child. Let me take 
charge of it. I'll give it her just at the right moment, 
you may be sure of that." 

Thus did Olive's scheme succeed most admirably. 
After a little more persuasion she got Aunt Caroline 
round to her way of thinking, nor had the good soul 
any thought of seriously opposing her niece in such a 
matter. Lady Jeffreys, who was one of the most 
prominent members of London society, would be sure 
to know exactly what had best be done under these 
very trying conditions. Aunt Caroline soon became 
convinced that it was distinctly her duty to withhold 
Lieutenant Carrington's letter from Boadicea, at any 



A HOPELESS OUTLOOK . 237 

rate, temporarily, whereupon she handed it over with- 
out further demur to OHve. 

After the episode Aunt Caroline became greatly ab- 
sorbed in the making of jams, pickles, and preserves, 
and it was small wonder that, in the midst of these 
important duties, she wholly forgot all about Lieu- 
tenant Carrington's letter. In fact, after a while she 
managed to forget all about Lieutenant Carrington 
himself and his engagement to Boadicea. A day or 
two after the incident of the letter Olive announced 
her intention of leaving Old Manor Farm at the end 
of her prolonged visit. She proposed to spend the re- 
mainder of the summer at a fashionable watering-place 
on the Continent. 

Boadicea took farewell of the sister — whom she 
had so dearly loved — almost with a feeling of relief. 
Olive's presence in the house had greatly added to her 
misery. She felt how completely shipwrecked were 
all her illusions and all her joys of life. The man 
whom she had loved, the sister whom she had trusted, 
had been the two first teachers who had taught her 
how base and deceitful human creatures could be. It 
was a lesson which she was not likely to forget. The 
shadow which now hung over her life would no doubt 
never be lifted. It had altered her entirely, her soul 
and her mind were alike different to what they had 
been before, even her body had undergone a change. 
She felt no longer young, no longer full of life and 
joy, things which before had delighted her no longer 
pleased her now. She did not care what happened, 
for nothing could happen that would ease the load of 
sorrow and of disappointment from her heart. 



CHAPTER XXV 

A SENTIMENTAL CONVERSATION 

And then the summer and the autumn went by. 

Aunt CaroHne had made strawberry jam, then 
cherry jam, then walnut pickle, and finally damson 
cheese, after which came the curing of bacon, the fat- 
tening of the Christmas turkey, the making of the 
twelve Christmas puddings — one for the first Sunday 
of every month, to be eaten throughout the year when 
the Vicar of Minster came over to dine at Old Manor 
Farm after the Communion service. 

Sir Baldwin and Lady Jeffreys had spent a couple 
of months on the Continent, then they settled down 
at Ashford Great Court — their country residence — 
for the shooting, and Lady Jeffreys gave some very 
smart parties there during the autumn. The echo of 
these fashionable entertainments did reach sometimes 
as far as Old Manor Farm, Mr. Culpepper riding over 
every now and again from the Abbey to take tea with 
Mr. Hemingford, and bringing over the news with 
him, but Aunt Caroline was too busy about the house 
to take a great deal of interest in social events, and it 
really seemed now as if Olive and her world were very 
far removed from the humble folk in Thanet. 

Though Ashford was distant from Old Manor 
Farm only twenty-two miles. Lady Jeffreys never 
came throughout the autumn to visit her uncle and 

?38 



A SENTIMENTAL CONVERSATION 239 

aunt. She wrote several pleasant and chatty letters to 
Boadicea, and made many agreeable, if somewhat 
vague, suggestions that the child should come and 
spend a few days at Ash ford Great Court. But to 
these Invitations Boadicea gave no reply, nor did Olive 
seem to expect any; she never fixed any definite time 
for the visit, and so it never came about. 

Twice during that autumn did Sir Baldwin come 
riding over in the morning, having made an early start 
from home ; but he only stayed to dinner and returned 
in the afternoon. He seemed more morose even than 
usual, and was apparently very wrathful with Boadi- 
cea for her treatment of Lieutenant Carrington. But 
he was far too well-bred and far too reserved In his 
speech to make open allusion to such matters, since he 
would not consider it his business to do so. 

Directly after Christmas he and Lady Jeffreys went 
to Bath, as was customary with them and a great many 
fashionable folk. They stayed there some little time, 
Sir Baldwin being greatly troubled with gout that 
year ; but exactly how long they were there I could not 
tell you, nor where they went to after that. All 
I know Is that In May they had once more returned 
to their town house In St. James's-street, which had 
been beautifully redecorated in view of the coming 
season, and that all the fashionable journals of that 
year speak In glowing terms of Lady Jeffreys' entranc- 
ing beauty, and of her charm as one of the leading 
hostesses of the day. 

The King and Queen, as you know, graced her 
house with their presence on one occasion, and she con- 
stantly entertai)l?4 the elite of fashionable London 



240 MEADOWSWEET 

society. Never, in fact, had Olive more cause to be 
satisfied with her own dainty person and with the cir- 
cumstances of Hfe which rendered all things extremely 
pleasant to her. 

Jack Carrington was home on leave after nine 
months spent in Malta. He had been invalided home, 
as he had greatly suffered from low fever, a fact not 
to be wondered at, considering the heat of the climate 
of Malta and the primitive methods of sanitation dis- 
played at that otherwise delightful station. 

At first Olive had been greatly shocked at Lieuten- 
ant Jack's altered appearance. He looked like a mid- 
dle-aged man, with bowed shoulders, and a touch of 
grey on the temples. Low fever was evidently a very 
trying complaint, one that affects the mind as well as 
the body, for Jack's spirits had lost all their buoyancy. 
He seemed listless and apathetic even in the presence 
of the prettiest woman in London, and Olive vainly 
waited for those charming tokens of gallantry with 
which Lieutenant Jack had delighted her and won her 
regard a year ago. 

Of course, the task of looking after the bodily wel- 
fare of a young and well-looking naval lieutenant is 
often a pleasing one, more especially when that naval 
lieutenant is interesting to a large circle of ladies, who 
become rivals for his attentions. Jack Carrington was 
always popular in London society, but seemed doubly 
so now that his appearance suggested something of 
sorrowful romance. Olive — • whose powers of hint- 
ing and insinuating were far above the average — 
soon drew these suggestions of romance toward her- 
self. 



A SENTIMENTAL CONVERSATION 241 

She quickly managed to persuade her friends that 
Jack Carrington's altered appearance and listless man- 
ner were due to his hopeless attachment for her; and 
from persuading her friends in this manner she soon 
succeeded in persuading herself. 

She became quite convinced that Lieutenant Jack 
was pining himself into an early grave because of his 
thwarted love for her, and his chivalrous sense of 
duty as opposed to his burning passion. 

Whereupon she increased her show of kindness to- 
ward him. She was in turn motherly, sisterly, 
friendly, tender, sorrowing, pitying, until he — over 
grateful for her charity and hating that very society 
which he used formerly to enjoy — found pleasure 
only in his visits to her. 

During all this while he never once mentioned 
Boadicea in his conversation, and on this Lady Jeff- 
reys looked as a good sign. But in her work of re- 
capturing his wandering allegiance she went charily 
to work. She had almost alienated him once by over- 
impulsive actions, and she was far too great an adept 
in the art of winning an admirer to fall twice into the 
same error. 

It was one evening in the conservatory, during one 
of her most brilliant receptions, that Olive received the 
first shock which told her that everything was not go- 
ing on quite as well as she could have wished. 

She was looking radiantly beautiful that night, and 
was conscious of her own irresistible charm. Whilst 
a string-band was discoursing a dreamy motet by 
Lully, she lured Jack Carrington into the conservatory. 
It was filled with lilies, and the air all round was soft 



242 MEADOWSWEET 

and fragrant. The sound of the music penetrated 
faintly to this distant part of the room, and dim hghts 
burned low among the fronds of ferns and the gently 
swaying curtains of maiden-hair or of grevillea. 

Olive chose a low seat on which to recline, a seat 
nestling in a clump of palms and lilies artistically 
grouped, and she allowed Jack to sit close beside her, 
so that the perfume from her hair and her handker- 
chief mingled agreeably with that of the flowers. 

The folds of her pretty gown fell gracefully across 
his knee, and her hand fell listlessly to her side and 
came in gentle contact with his. 

Everything, as you see, was well disposed for senti- 
mental conversation. Olive sighed with satisfaction 
and pleasurable anticipation, and wielded her fan pre- 
paratory to embarking on those delightful paths where 
the ice is very thin indeed, and every footstep might 
lead to dangerous falls. And yet, in spite of the lilies 
and of the fragrance in the air, in spite of the folds of 
her gown and the proximity of her hand, Lieutenant 
Carrington engaged the conversation by a reference 
to Old Manor Farm. He would talk of Aunt Caro- 
line and of her excellent dinners, of Cousin Barnaby's 
ill temper and Uncle Jasper's eccentricities, and this 
despite the fact that Olive looked bored from the first 
and subsequently grew markedly impatient. 

Time was getting on. An attentive hostess could not 
absent herself from her guests for more than fifteen 
minutes, and ten had already gone by in a discussion 
of Aunt Caroline's pickles. It was truly exasperating. 
A daintily shod foot was tapping the ground in angry 
impatience. But Lieutenant Carrington seemed quite 



A SENTIMENTAL CONVERSATION 243 

oblivious of this fact; his conversation rambled on, and 
presently he mentioned Boadicea's name. 

He did not say much, and while he spoke of the girl 
his voice certainly had none of that softness of tone 
which might suggest latent tenderness. Olive, there- 
fore, had no cause for pique, and yet she bit her lower 
lip almost viciously, so angry was she at Jack's want of 
tact. 

Soon the subject was dropped. Two or three other 
couples had wandered into the conservatory, and there 
was no longer any chance on this perfect occasion for 
the sentimental conversation which Olive had desired. 

She felt very provoked and dismissed Lieutenant 
Jack with unusual curtness. He seemed quite uncon- 
scious of having offended her, and at the last, when he 
kissed the tips of her fingers bidding her adieu, he 
actually had the effrontery to beg of her to use her 
influence with Boadicea, that the young girl should 
grant him a personal interview. 

" I cannot help feeling convinced," he had said 
earnestly, " that her extraordinary attitude towards 
me is the result of a grave misunderstanding, which 
perhaps two words freely exchanged would put right. 
I would kneel to you now, Lady Jeffreys, if I dared, 
and thus beg you to use your influence with her that 
she should grant me one short interview." 

It would not have been either dignified or politic to 
refuse. Olive promised him that she would do what 
she could. 



CHAPTER XXVI 

A BUNCH OF ROSES 

That was a week ago, and since then Olive had met 
Jack Carrington several times, and never once did he 
allude to Boadicea or to his request for an interview 
with her. Of course, he knew that some days must 
elapse for letters to pass between the sisters to and fro, 
but Olive consoled herself with the thought that if he 
really cared for the interview he would not keep such 
persistent silence about it. 

He came to see her on the morning of her birthday, 
having taken the gallant precaution to send a bouquet 
of La France roses to propitiate the goddess who he 
hoped would do so much for him. On Olive alone — 
so he thought — depended his chances of an interview 
with his dear little Meadowsweet — still infinitely dear 
despite the hurt which she had so wantonly inflicted 
upon him. From Olive he hoped at last to get the 
welcome news that he might journey down to Thanet 
with the certainty of seeing once more that exquisite 
childlike face, the great wondering eyes, and tender 
mouth that meant earthly happiness to him. 

But Olive had no idea that La France roses sent on 
her birthday morning could possibly mean anything 
but discreet and respectful admiration for herself, and 
when presently Jack Carrington was shown into her 

244 



A BUNCH OF ROSES 245 

pretty mauve and blue room, she extended a very 
gracious hand to him. 

" How kind of you to come, Jack ! " she said, with 
one of her most bewitching smiles. 

" Kind? " he exclaimed. " I should be an ungrate- 
ful wretch, indeed, if I did not at least pay my respects 
to you, Lady Jeffreys, on your birthday. You have 
always been such a good friend to me." 

" So many women have been that to you. Jack ! " 

" Friends ? No, I think not. People in London 
have been more than kind. But on the whole I shall 
not be sorry to leave England. Society is not much 
in my line now, is it. Lady Jeffreys ? " 

" Oh, I don't know ! You seem to get on in it 
remarkably well. But what makes you talk of leaving 
England ? You are not going away ? " 

" Indeed I am. The Dolphin leaves for the China 
seas early in next week." 

" But you are not going in her? " 

"Please God, lam!" 

" But you have been offered an appointment in the 
Admiralty?" 

" Yes. Entirely through your kind influence. Lady 
Jeffreys, and no one could be more profoundly grateful 
than I am to you, but . . ." 

He paused, hesitating somewhat, knowing instinc- 
tively — though Heaven knows he was not proud of it 
— that the announcement which he was about to make 
would affect her very unpleasantly. 

He questioned her with a look, and saw that she 
was frowning, and that her face was hard and set, just 



246 MEADOWSWEET 

as it often was when anything in Hfe occurred in op- 
position to her wishes. 

"You have refused the appointment?" she asked 
curtly. 

" My letter of refusal and of thanks goes in to- 
night." 

" Don't post that letter, Jack ! " she entreated. 

" I really must, Lady Jeffreys." 

"But why?" she asked. 

" I can't bear to stay in England," he replied dully. 
" I cannot bear it. I would far rather go away, un- 
less . . ." 

"Unless what?" 

" Can't you guess ? " 

" No. I cannot," she said more softly, thinking in- 
deed that she could guess how her own harshness was 
driving him away from England. " Tell me, Jack, 
what is it that would keep you in London ? " 

Then as he did not reply immediately, she said 
more languishingly still : 

" Why do you hesitate, Jack ? Tell me. I might 
be able to help you." 

" You can help me, Lady Jeffreys," he said eagerly. 
" That brief interview with Boadicea. . . . Have you 
asked her? " 

" Yes," replied Olive drily. 

Gone was all the softness in her voice, the languor- 
ous look in her eyes. Her sister's name, spoken by 
Jack at this moment, had acted like a shower of icy 
water upon her temperament, so ready to yield and to 
sentimentalise. But Jack was quite unconscious of 
the change in her voice. He did not notice her annoy- 



A BUNCH OF ROSES 247' 

ance any more than he had understood her more pas- 
sionate mood. His thoughts were of Meadowsweet, 
and of the hope of seeing her, and everything else was 
as if it never existed at all. 

" Will she . . . will she grant me the interview ? " 
he asked. 

" She refuses to see you." 

"But why — in Heaven's name? Why?" he 
urged. 

" I cannot tell you," she replied harshly. " Boadi- 
cea is a curious child, as you know. She lent herself 
readily enough at first to the brief farce of an engage- 
ment with you ; but she only did it for my sake, and 
because she really thought that Sir Baldwin was at 
that moment capable of doing me an injury. She 
never cared for you . . . you know." 

" I thought that she did," he murmured almost in- 
voluntarily, for his thoughts had quickly flown back 
to that glorious day in June, to the orchard fragrant 
with spring flowers, to the old cherry-tree in the forked 
branch of which had sat his little Meadowsweet with 
the bright, wondering eyes, and the red lips that were 
so good to kiss. 

" Ah!" said Olive more gently, as she put a hand 
upon the young man's shoulder; "that is where a 
man's heart is so strange. Jack. It so often seeks love 
where none exists, and passes true love indifferently 
by." 

" You think, Lady Jeffreys," he insisted with that 
sublime tactlessness of a heart filled with the image of 
another woman, " you really think that there is no 
hope for me? " 



248 MEADOWSWEET 

" Hope ? " she retorted. " Why should you speak 
of hope in connection with a heartless, wayward 
child ? The sooner you forget her the better for your 
own dignity, I should imagine. Your vanity alone is 
wounded, Jack, believe me. You will soon get over 
it. There are others, you know, who could well show 
you of what depths of affection a woman's heart is 
capable." 

" But the whole thing puzzles me so hopelessly. 
Lady Jeffreys. ... It seems to me as if I should 
never know another happy hour until I have seen 
daylight through that amazing veil of mystery. It is 
all so unlike Boadicea . . . she is so simple-hearted 
... so true and loyal in her disposition. I no more 
can think of her playing such a cruel game as she 
seems to have done than I would think of a Madonna 
being a fickle coquette." 

" Lord bless my soul, man," exclaimed Olive, whose 
patience was now utterly exhausted, and who took no 
longer any pains to hide her anger, " did you come to 
see me to-day for the sole purpose of gushing over my 
sister's perfections? For, if so, let me tell you that 
your rodomontades are not at all to my liking." 

" A thousand pardons. Lady Jeffreys ! " he rejoined 
quite humbly. " I seem, indeed, to have lost myself 
as well as my manners recently. You are quite right. 
I must not plague you with my troubles. May I take 
my leave now ? " 

She hesitated for a moment, then thought it best to 
accede. Jack took his leave without another word. 
He was evidently not in the mood in which she would 
have liked to see him, and, moreover, she wanted to 



A BUNCH OF ROSES 249 

think matters out now, for they had shaped themselves 
altogether differently to what she had anticipated. 

And as soon as she was alone she did begin to 
think. 

Though nothing of very serious import had hap- 
pened, yet somehow she felt that the last half-hour 
had sounded the death-knell of her own hopes. Ob- 
viously she had never really cared for Jack Carring- 
ton, not in the same sense in which good women un- 
derstand the words " to care." Hers was an essen- 
tially shallow nature, wholly incapable of lasting or 
genuine feeling beyond sympathy for and love of self. 
Her own amusement and pleasure was the ultimate 
aim of every one of her actions. Jack Carrington' 
had been the lion of London society, and it had 
amused her to chain him to her triumphant chariot. 
She liked his unsophisticated gallantries, the atten- 
tions which he paid her, but above all she liked the 
other women of her own set to envy her her conquest 
of the most popular man in London. 

It had amused her to render Sir Baldwin jealous, 
to play him the trick of outwitting him when he had 
tried to stop the scandal that coupled her name with 
that of Lieutenant Carrington by taking her away 
from London in the height of the season; but she was 
as incapable of genuine passion as of sacrificing her 
reputation and position for any man in the world. 

It all was only amusement. If Jack Carrington 
had broken his heart over her she would have been still 
more highly amused. 

The engagement between Boadicea and Lieutenant 
Carrington she had looked upon as a necessity. Her 



250 MEADOWSWEET 

own bodily safety and the upholding of her own repu- 
tation were of far greater moment than the feelings 
of two young people whose obvious duty it was to 
protect her at a critical moment against her husband's 
violence. But when the first breath of sentiment 
mingled with the prosiness of the mock engagement, 
then the situation ceased to be amusing. The only 
strong feeling of which Olive was capable was that 
of supreme egoism. Her position as elder sister chap- 
eroning a younger one did not please her in the least, 
and she certainly would not allow another woman to 
wrest from her the conquest which she firmly believed 
she herself had made, even if that other woman hap- 
pened to be her own sister. 

No, there certainly was no affection in her heart for 
Jack Carrington, but there was a vast deal of vanity, 
and that vanity had received a severe blow when she 
first noticed signs of awakening love for another 
woman in the man whom she would have liked to tie in 
perpetuity to her own apron strings. 

She fought with all the armoury at her command to 
regain possession of Carrington's allegiance, and her 
foremost weapon she had used with complete effect. 
She had succeeded in parting Jack from Boadicea, 
and she knew her sister well enough to be quite satis- 
fied that the blow which a callous and lying tongue had 
dealt would remain incurable so long as Boadicea had 
no opportunity of a calm explanation with Lieutenant 
Carrington. The subject, of course, was one which 
the young girl was not likely to put into crude words 
at any time; still, an interview might certainly prove 
dangerous, fraught with the risk that Olive might 



A BUNCH OF ROSES 251 

stand before her sister and before the man whom she 
still desired to conquer as a shameless and miserable 
liar. 

However, there was certainly no fear just now that 
that interview would take place. Boadicea was safely- 
stowed away in the wilds of Thanet, and was no doubt 
busy forgetting in the midst of jams and pickles that 
she had ever been engaged to marry Lieutenant Car- 
rington. 

As for Jack, well, I must confess that Lady Jeffreys' 
thoughts became somewhat troubled on that subject. 
H she had made no headway in his affections in the 
past few weeks, was she very likely to succeed in doing 
so as time went on? Her vanity — which was ab- 
normal — certainly demanded that she should not give 
up even this semblance of conquest. Some women 
she knew of, in her own set, would indeed jeer at her 
if Lieutenant Carrington did finally break away from 
her apron strings. But her desire to keep him in 
London was certainly not so great as it used to be. 
If Jack no longer dangled round her skirts, then he 
might as well go to the China seas. Lady Jeffreys 
had but to lift a finger and she would soon find a sub- 
stitute for that very indifferent admirer. 

Jack was not amusing when he talked of Aunt 
Caroline's pickles and of Boadicea's eyes; and as he 
ceased to be amusing so his personal value went down 
in Olive's estimation. 

Moreover, if he still did hanker in a half-hearted 
manner after the little savage from Thanet, he would 
with characteristic masculine obstinacy persist in his 
desire for an interview with her. 



252 MEADOWSWEET 

And that interview must not take place. 

On that — if on nothing else — was Lady Jeffreys 
absolutely determined. 

She preferred the China seas for Jack and a new 
admirer for herself. 



CHAPTER XXVII 

A LITTLE PLAN 

" I HAVE just met Carrington on your doorstep, 
m'dear!" 

" Yes, he called to wish me a happy birthday and he 
brought me some lovely roses." 

Sir Baldwin had spoken quite pleasantly, and she 
indifferently. We may safely assume that neither 
tone was wholly sincere. Sir Baldwin — though his 
jealousy no longer fastened itself on Lieutenant Car- 
rington — was never very pleasant when the young 
man called at the house in St. James's-street, nor was 
Olive ever indifferent when her husband mentioned 
the name of Jack. 

But to-day Sir Baldwin's mood appeared most se- 
rene. He did not frown at sight of the roses, and 
presently he took possession of one of the most com- 
fortable chairs in the room, and lounging in it he 
looked for all the world as if he meant to stay and 
have a long chat with his wife — a thing which, be- 
lieve me, he very seldom did. 

" I understood from Lieutenant Carrington," he 
said complacently, " that he had been paying you his 
farewell visit." 

" Yes," she replied drily. " Lieutenant Carrington 
proposes to refuse the splendid appointment offered 

253 



254 MEADOWSWEET 

him in the AdmiraUy, and to sail in his old ship next 
week." 

" And all because a flirty miss is making a fool of 
him." 

" I pray you, Sir Baldwin, not to be so coarse in 
your references to my sister." 

" I only speak of her as she deserves. I have no 
patience with the girl, and only wish it were my busi- 
ness to give her a sound talking to. But I shall get 
an opportunity one of these days. . . . Why don't you 
speak to her, Olive? . . . You would have some in- 
fluence over her — curse her obstinacy ! " 

" Boadicea prefers not to see Lieutenant Carring- 
ton — she does not want to discuss the subject at all. 
She has told me so in her letters over and over again." 

"The heartless little reprobate! . . . You women 
are all alike . . . and we men are just a lot of silly, 
gullible fools!" 

"You wrong yourself, at any rate, Sir Baldwin!" 

He took no heed of the obvious sarcasm, but con- 
tinued in the same pleasant, even, conversational tone : 

" I must say, though, that I had thought better of 
little Boadicea." 

" And did you tell Lieutenant Carrington so ? " 

" Yes. Frankly, I did." 

" And what was his remark on the subject? " 

" He merely said that it would obviously be best for 
him to sail to China. He thanked me for my solici- 
tude, and he desired to remain your ladyship's and my 
most humble and most devoted servant." 

Sir Baldwin Jeffreys was in the habit of taking 
snuff, a habit which became him remarkably well, for 



A LITTLE PLAN 255 

he had fine, aristocratic hands, and a selection of 
beautiful gold and enamelled snuff-boxes. He took 
a pinch of snuff now, an act which left him free quietly 
to observe his wife, to note her impatient frown, and 
to chuckle to himself at private thoughts of his own 
which he was on the point of imparting to her. 

" I must tell you that I did give Lieutenant Carring- 
ton the advice not to decide about that Admiralty ap- 
pointment just yet," he said when he had once more 
restored his gold snuff-box to his pocket, and was 
again lounging in the luxurious chair. 

" Indeed ? " she remarked casually. " I thought 
that he was obliged to give his decision in that matter 
to-day." 

" Yes. But I told him that so much can happen in 
one day . . . say, between dawn and sunset." 

" A very poetical way of putting it, but I don't sup- 
pose that your eloquence. Sir Baldwin, would cause 
Lieutenant Carrington to change his plans." 

" I don't know so much about that," retorted Sir 
Baldwin, with marked complacency. " I certainly 
know of one thing that would keep Carrington hang- 
ing about in London." 

" And what may that be? " 

She was getting a little impatient with his obvious 
contentment with himself, and slightly on the alert for 
something unpleasant which might be lurking behind 
his unaccustomed good-humour. 

" The hope of an interview with Boadicea," he re- 
plied. 

"Ah? I doubt if Lieutenant Carrington has any 
such hope." 



256 MEADOWSWEET 

" He hadn't until just now, when I asked him to 
come back here at sunset. . . ." 

She turned her own chair right round, so that she 
could look him full in the face. He sat there smiling 
blandly, with his finger-tips tapping against one an- 
other, his head slightly cocked on one side, and regard- 
ing his wife with a look of distinct triumph. 

An awful fear caused her heart suddenly to stand 
still. Every drop of blood fled from her cheeks, her 
eyes were dilated and her lips quivering. But she 
forced herself to speak quite calmly, vaguely hoping 
that her face was not betraying all that she felt. 

" May I take the liberty of inquiring, Sir Baldwin, 
why you should have asked Lieutenant Carrington to 
return here at sunset ? " 

" A little plan," he said airily — " a little plan for 
which I entertain the greatest hope." 

" Indeed?' May I ask what this little plan is? " 

" Certainly, my dear. Originally it was a desire — 
a not very unusual one with me — of pleasing you." 

" In what way ? " 

" I arranged a surprise for your birthday." 

" A surprise ! " 

" A visit, my dear, from your sister," he said tri- 
umphantly. 

To Olive's credit be it said that she did not wince 
under this sudden blow. On the contrary, she pulled 
herself very quickly together and appeared even more 
tmconcerned than she had been before. But the blow 
was all the more cruel as it was quite unexpected. 
She seemed in one moment to see the entire edifice of 
her fabric of falsehoods tottering beneath her feet. 



A LITTLE PLAN 257' 

There might in the near future be nothing for her but 
more and more lies, under most humihating condi- 
tions, or the tacit acknowledgment of the original lie 
before her young sister and before Jack. 

The position would be intolerable. For the mo- 
ment, of course, she had no time to give it further 
thought. Sir Baldwin was gazing on her with that 
same irritating self-complacency, and it would be mad- 
ness to let him see now that she was in any way dis- 
turbed by his news. 

" A visit from Boadicea ! " she said, feigning pleased 
surprise. " Do you really think that she would 
come? " 

" I am sure she will," he replied. " I wrote her 
some days ago saying that you seemed very dull and 
lacking in spirits, suffering somewhat from megrims, 
and so on ; and I begged her for my sake to come over 
for two or three days and to reassure me, if possible, 
about your general health." 

"Admirable, admirable, I must say! Your inven- 
tive powers do you the greatest credit." 

" Well, I was afraid that she might not come unless 
I put it that way." 

" Quite so. And has she accepted your invita- 
tion?" 

"Yes, she has!" 

" And let me know nothing about it? " 

" I told her that I wished her coming to be a sur- 
prise for your birthday. . . . The thought pleased her, 
I think. . . . Anyway, she is coming," he concluded 
jovially. 

"When?" she asked. 



258 MEADOWSWEET 

" Almost Immediately. I sent the coach with re- 
lays to fetch her. I reckoned that she would arrive 
in time for luncheon." 

Then as Olive remained silent, too much absorbed 
in her own thoughts and fears now to make an at- 
tempt at cheerfulness, he asked, with sudden concern: 

" You are glad, Olive, are you not ? " 

"Glad? . . . Glad?" she replied vaguely. "Of 
course I am glad! What else should I be? It is a 
pleasant surprise, as you say." 

" And then you see my plan ? . . . A final visit 
from Carrington. . . . Eh? . . . Boadicea here . . . 
alone, for you must arrange that. . . . What do you 
think of it all?" 

"Think? Think?" she said as quietly as she 
could, for her voice was trembling and every moment 
angry tears threatened to rise to her eyes. " I think 
it an admirable plan ... to force my sister into an 
unfortunate marriage, now that she has found out her 
mistake and realised that she does not care for the 
man. . . . Admirably thought out, indeed ! " she added 
more vehemently, whilst a tone of bitter spite crept 
into her voice. " Our own marriage has been so bril- 
liant a success! . . . No wonder you desire to see 
another equally such perfectly ill-assorted pair!" 

" But, my dear . . ." protested Sir Baldwin feebly, 
for he had been wholly taken aback by his wife's ex- 
traordinary attitude. 

" Well, what is it ? You don't expect me, I pre- 
sume, to be over-delighted at the prospective unhappy 
marriage which you desire to force upon my sister." 

" But . . ." 



A LITTLE PLAN 259 

" We will not discuss it any further, Sir Baldwin," 
she said, with injured dignity. " You have chosen to 
take my sister's fate into your own hands. I suppose 
that when the inevitable occurs and she flies to me for 
protection against the husband whom you will have 
forced upon her, you will be prepared to give her a 
home." 

She rose from her chair and went up to a small 
writing-desk, where she stood for awhile with her back 
towards her husband, fidgetting with some papers, 
trying to compose herself into some semblance of 
serenity. 

She had the satisfaction of knowing that her tirade 
had left poor Sir Baldwin hopelessly bewildered. He 
was certainly wishing to goodness that he had never 
meddled in women's affairs, for such meddling seemed 
invariably to lead to most unpleasant tantrums. 

" Will you leave me here now," she said after awhile, 
" to receive poor Boadicea ? I must prepare her for 
the ordeal which she will have to go through, poor 
child." 

Sir Baldwin rose somewhat awkwardly. Though 
he felt rather sheepish and subdued, he had not by any 
means given up the belief that his plan was an excel- 
lent one, and that he was doing the right thing by 
bringing two young people together who were labour- 
ing under a misunderstanding. 

He did not suggest that he would go and tell Car- 
rington not to come to St. James's-street to-night. 
Olive had half hoped that he would do so. She did 
not dare, however, to make the suggestion herself. 
Sir Baldwin had a curious disposition, and suspicions 



26o MEADOWSWEET 

were only dormant in him; they might be aroused at 
the sHghtest false move on Olive's part. 

She allowed him to go without any further com- 
ment. 

Then she sat down at her desk, and with her chin 
resting in her hand she had a good hard " think." 

She thought, and thought, and thought for the one 
way possible out of the terrible plight in which her 
husband's tactless blunder had placed her. 

Should she own to Boadicea that she had told her 
a lie, or should she persist in the lie, even, if necessary 
in the face of Lieutenant Carrington's denial? Or 
would Fate be kind to her and help her effectually to 
keep those two young people apart ? 



CHAPTER XXVIII 

AN AGREEABLE SURPRISE 

The luncheon-bell had just been rung. 

Sir Baldwin had joined Lady Jeffreys in the draw- 
ing-room, and the solemn butler had thrown the dou- 
ble doors wide open and announced in a cadaverous 
voice that " Luncheon was served," when the cheerful 
noise of a fanfare upon a coach-horn rang clearly from 
the further end of the aristocratic street. 

" Your guest, Sir Baldwin," said Olive drily. " We 
must wait now until my sister has had time to tidy 
herself after her journey." 

She sat down and took up a fashion paper, seeming 
absorbed in her reading and totally indifferent to the 
rattle of coach wheels, the clatter of horses' hoofs on 
the stone pavement, the jingle of harness and shouts 
of ostlers and grooms, as Sir Baldwin's heavy travel- 
ling coach swung round the corner from Piccadilly and 
came to a halt with magnificent precision immediately 
in front of the stately front door of the Jeffreys' town 
mansion. 

Sir Baldwin seemed agitated. He did not go to the 
window to see the arrival, but walked up and down the 
room, with his hands behind his back, and his eyes 
wandering from time to time furtively in the direction 
of his wife. 

" I shall have to put luncheon back at least half an 

261 



262 MEADOWSWEET 

hour," said Olive coolly, as she stretched her shapely 
arm toward the bell. " From the noise that is going 
on outside I imagine that Boadicea has brought either 
an enormous quantity of luggage with her or else some 
members of the Thanet household." 

There certainly was an extraordinary amount of 
noise going on outside. Half a dozen people seemed 
to be talking at one and the same time and at the top 
of their voices. Sir Baldwin apparently had some 
misgivings on the subject, for he went to the door and 
opened it. 

All doubts were set at rest then and there, for Aunt 
Caroline's shrill voice, giving confused directions 
anent a multitude of boxes, was quite unmistakable, 
and two or three other voices also rose from below. 
Sir Baldwin turned rather sheepishly toward his wife, 

" They've come, my dear," he said haltingly. 

" You mean that my sister has come, do you not, 
Sir Baldwin?" rejoined Olive, who seemed unac- 
countably absorbed in the perusal of her fashion paper. 
" Will you not go down and receive her ? She is more 
your guest than mine, you know." 

" I mean, my dear . . . er . . . that is . . . they 
all seem to have come. . . ." 

Sir Baldwin felt distinctly at a disadvantage, and 
knew that his wife was laughing at him. She was 
not likely under the circumstances to help him out of 
a very awkward situation which he certainly had 
never foreseen. 

He had looked forward to Boadicea's visit, but the 
entire family, including Cousin Barnaby, installed per- 



AN AGREEABLE SURPRISE 263 

haps for an indefinite time in a London house was 
more than he had bargained for. 

The well-drilled footman now appeared on the land- 
ing. His face, set on approved conventional lines, be- 
trayed nothing of what he thought of the remarkable 
visitors that were trooping up the stairs at his heels. 
It certainly betrayed nothing of what he would say 
presently in the servants' hall on that subject. 

With scanty ceremony. Aunt Caroline, who was 
leading the little party, pushed the solemn footman 
out of her way. In one hand she had a bandbox 
which contained her best bonnet, and in the other she 
carried a gargantuan umbrella, and a small cardboard 
box on which was displayed the legend : " Eggs. 
With care." 

" Here we are, my dear Sir Baldwin ! " she said 
cheerfully. " And right glad to see something of 
London. I cannot shake hands till I have put some 
of these things down. Here, young fellow," she 
added, turning to the solemn footman, who stood 
there in resplendent livery, " take these, and be careful 
not to drop this box; there are three turkey's eggs in 
it." 

She thrust umbrella and egg-box into the hands of 
the highly indignant footman, deposited her bandbox 
on the floor, shook Sir Baldwin vigorously by the 
hand, and with a perfectly self-possessed " Come along, 
Barnaby ! " she marched straight into the drawing- 
room. 

Olive rose languidly to receive her, but Aunt Caro- 
line was always self-possessed and always at her ease. 



264 MEADOWSWEET 

She was quite unconscious of the coolness of the re- 
ception or of Sir Baldwin's embarrassment. 

" So kind of Sir Baldwin to ask us," she said with 
the same persistent cheerfulness, after she had depos- 
ited two well-sounding kisses on Olive's delicately 
rouged cheeks. 

She undid her bonnet strings and sat down with an 
obvious sense of satisfaction. Cousin Barnaby had 
entered in her wake, also Uncle Jasper. The latter 
had his tin specimen-case slung round his shoulder, and 
clung to his butterfly-net with an obvious sense of se- 
curity. He was smiling benignly on the world in gen- 
eral, and his eyes had already fastened themselves on a 
glass case which adorned one of the walls, and which 
contained a fine stuffed eagle, the product of one of Sir 
Baldwin's shooting expeditions in the north of Scot- 
land. 

Cousin Barnaby, muffled up to the eyes, had a rug 
over one arm and a travelling pillow in his hand; he 
made somewhat gauche efforts at greeting Sir Baldwin 
and Lady Jeffreys in a becoming manner. 

" So you see, my darling Olive, here we are ! " said 
Aunt Caroline airily, when she was satisfied that her 
little party had all assembled; Cousin Barnaby and 
Uncle Jasper in the drawing-room, Boadicea talking to 
Sir Baldwin, and Susan still on the landing. " I could 
not allow the child to travel alone, could I ? " 

" No, no. Aunt, of course not," assented Olive, who 
was feeling almost hysterical with an access of rage 
mingling with one of uncontrollable laughter. Really 
the situation was almost too funny to be infuriating, 
and too infuriating to be genuinely funny. 



AN AGREEABLE SURPRISE 265 

And Sir Baldwin — the creator of this stupid, in- 
sane, idiotic pHght into which he had placed his wife as 
well as himself — looked the picture of hopeless be- 
wilderment. 

It was enough to send any woman, suffering already 
from nerves, clean out of her senses. 

" Your arrival is a charming surprise for my birth- 
day," she said with bitter irony, which was wholly lost 
on Aunt Caroline, but not on Sir Baldwin. '' I am 
delighted to see you . . . and dear Uncle Jasper." 

" Well," said Aunt Caroline complacently, " I could 
not very well allow your uncle to stay in the house 
alone . . . and Susan such a careless minx . . ." 

"Of course not . . . of course not . . . dear Uncle 
Jasper . . . this is really a surprise. ... Is it not. 
Sir Baldwin? . . . You could not have given me a 
more delightful surprise for my birthday . . . could 
you?" 

" How de do, Mr. Hemingford . . . very pleased to 
see you," murmured Sir Baldwin. ' 

" How de do," responded Uncle Jasper. " Er . . . 
er . . . mayhap you could tell me the way to the 
Royal Society's museum, my dear Olive ... I have 
heard that there is a wonderful collection there of 
British song birds. . . ." 

" Yes, yes, Uncle Jasper, there is . . . and Sir Bald- 
win will take an early opportunity of taking you there, 
will you not. Sir Baldwin? " 

"Of course, of course ! " 

" And fancy Cousin Barnaby making up his mind to 
pay us townsfolk a visit," said Olive, who was ap- 
proaching nearer and nearer to the verge of hysteria, 



266 MEADOWSWEET 

and talked glibly and gaily in a very loud, high-pitched 
voice. 

Aunt Caroline, a little shame-faced, was smoothing 
out her bonnet strings. 

" I could not ver^ well allow Barnaby to . . . er 
. . ." she muttered, " to . . ." 

" I could not allow you, Caroline, to leave me alone 
in the house," rejoined Mr. Crabtree, settling himself 
down placidly in a corner of the sofa; *' you are well 
aware of the fact that I could not remain unattended 
in an empty house. The matter was fully discussed 
before we left." 

" Besides which," said Olive, " my birthday surprise 
would not have been complete without you, dear Cousin 
Barnaby. And Sir Baldwin would have been so dis- 
appointed if you had not come. Would you not, Sir 
Baldwin?" 

"Certainly, certainly!" murmured the unfortunate 
man. 

" Lis liten generat," said Uncle Jasper calmly. 

" Jasper even brought his abominable Latin away 
with him," said Mr. Crabtree, " and we found that 
there would be less inconvenience for me to undertake 
this tiresome journey than to be left alone in company 
with Caroline's clucking hens." 

" But what about Susan ? " asked Olive. 

" Oh, we brought her along with us," replied Aunt 
Caroline. 

" She had to see after my bed warmer," said Cousin 
Barnaby in tone of stern reminder. 

"Of course she has, I had nearly forgotten. And 
also she had to complete the birthday surprise! It is 



AN AGREEABLE SURPRISE 2^-] 

all too delightful, and I don't know how to thank Sir 
Baldwin for his kindness in thinking out all the details 
of this delightful visit." 

"But where is Boadicea?" interposed Aunt Caro- 
line. 

" On the landing. Sitting on her boxes ! " rejoined 
Mr. Crabtree airily. 

Everyone had forgotten little Boadicea. Sir Bald- 
win had greeted her kindly, but she did not follow Aunt 
Caroline into the drawing-room. She had just caught 
sight of her sister — beautiful as usual, exquisitely 
dressed, angered at this invasion of her fashionable 
house by this set of country bumpkins, but otherwise 
perfectly serene — and the sight of Olive's face, of 
those lips that had lied, those eyes that had so cruelly 
deceived, brought back in a moment all the acuteness of 
the heart ache which had become almost numb in the 
past few months. 

Boadicea would at that moment have given all she 
had in the world to be allowed to run away from here 
at once, to go back to lonely sea-girt Thanet, to the old 
house and the orchard, which were so full of memories, 
but also so full of peace. She could not then have 
come forward to greet her sister, to kiss her again, to 
lie by word and look again and again. 

Nor was Olive any more eager to greet her. She 
had caught sight of the little face, so pale now, so dif- 
ferent to the childish face of a year ago. It looked 
almost wan and quite tiny, with bloodless cheeks and 
eyes that seemed unnaturally large. After that quick 
exchange of looks the sisters, by tacit consent, turned 
away one from the other. On the pretext of giving a 



268 MEADOWSWEET 

few final directions to Susan, Boadicea went back on to 
the landing, and for the moment, luckily, both Sir 
Baldwin and Olive were far too deeply absorbed in a 
ridiculous situation to pay much attention to her. 

She was very tired, so she sat down quietly on one of 
Aunt Caroline's boxes, and waited patiently for the 
time when some degree of silence would follow the 
present babel of talk and of hysterical laughter, and in 
the meanwhile screwing up her courage for the ordeal 
of meeting Olive — as she would have to do presently 
— just as if nothing had happened either to wreck her 
life or to destroy her illusions'. 

In a moment of impulse she had decided to come to 
London because Sir Baldwin had written to say that 
Olive was ill, and at that thought all the old fondness 
for the beautiful sister had revived. She had come feel- 
ing that Olive was ill and had need of her. If Olive had 
been really ill, Boadicea could have found it in her heart 
to forget and to forgive everything ; but Olive was not 
ill and had no need of a sister's sympathy, and in her 
eyes there was just that look of hard selfishness which 
Boadicea had discovered in them on that one hideous 
afternoon when all the world suddenly became black 
and ugly with the stains of sin and deceit. 



CHAPTER XXIX 

AN AWKWARD SITUATION 

There was. grave consultation with Thompson, the 
majordomo of Lady Jeffreys's household, as to how 
the unexpected guests were to be housed. 

Though the mansion was fairly large and roomy, 
there was no superabundance of space in it, and, as in 
most London houses, there were but few spare bed- 
rooms. Thompson gravely shook his head when her 
ladyship asked him what rooms could be placed at the 
disposal of Sir Baldwin's guests. 

" If you please, my lady," he said, " there is only the 
blue room free now. We thought that Miss Ald- 
marshe alone was coming." 

''Only the blue room?" 

" That's all, my lady. Miss Aldmarshe can then 
have the small green room on the east side." 

" And," interposed Mr. Crabtree quietly, " Caro- 
line and Jasper can go to an adjacent hotel." 

"To an hotel," exclaimed Aunt Caroline, a little 
horrified at the proposal. 

" Yes," interposed Uncle Jasper, with alacrity, 
" somewhere near the Royal Society's museum. . . ." 

" Shall I tell Cutler, my lady, that that arrangement 
will suit?" asked Thompson, who was showing a 
lofty contempt for these savages from the country. 

" Yes. Send her down here to me." 

269 



270 MEADOWSWEET 

Thompson retired and Mr. Crabtree concluded with 
perfect complacency: 

" The blue room will do very well for me . . . 
though I must tell you, Olive, that I hate blue. . . ." 

" But, Cousin Barnaby," protested Olive, " I have 
only the one room, and Aunt Caroline . . ." 

" She can sleep at the hotel with Jasper, of 
course . . . and I can make the blue room do . . ." 

" But really, Cousin Barnaby . . ." 

" No matter," he interposed loftily. " I can make 
it do. Don't apologise. ... I hate blue, but I can 
make it do." 

Cutler, the housekeeper, In splendid black silk and 
lace-edged apron, was already at the door ready to 
confirm Thompson's assertion that no other room but 
the blue one would be available, and Miss Aldmarshe 
would then have to have the smaller green room on 
the east side. 

Aunt Caroline thought that the majestic house- 
keeper looked a pert minx, and tried to tell her so by 
a withering look. Mr. Crabtree had risen from the 
sofa. Totally una wed by the glance of contemptuous 
astonishment which Cutler threw at him, he stalked up 
to her, rug and travelling-pillow in hand. Without 
more ado he thrust these things into the indignant 
housekeeper's arms. 

" Here, woman, take my things into the blue room," 
he said. 

Poor Cutler nearly dropped the things on to the 
floor. She had never been so insulted in all her life. 
Nothing but respect for her master and mistress pre- 
vented her making a scene then and there, and in her 



AN AWKWARD SITUATION 271 

mind she determined that if these people stayed more 
than one night in the house she herself would promptly 
give a month's notice. For the moment she vainly 
looked to Sir Baldwin — whom she had served faith- 
fully for twenty years — for support against this in- 
sult. 

" Mr. Crabtree," said Sir Baldwin, somewhat fee- 
bly, for, poor man, his spirits had been somewhat 
cowed during the past half hour — "Mr. Crabtree, I 
really must ask you to . . ." 

" Don't apologise, don't apologise ! " broke in Cousin 
Barnaby in his usual summary manner. " I hate blue, 
but I can stand it for a few days. Let your woman 
show the vv^ay. Get along, girl, can't you ? " 

"What am I to do, my lady?" asked Cutler, who 
was on the point of bursting into tears. 

" Show me the way to the blue room, and don't 
argue," concluded Mr. Crabtree. 

It is a very curious fact in life that very selfish and 
very self-assertive persons invariably succeed in im- 
posing their wishes on others. In this case Mr. Crab- 
tree had it entirely his own way. Sir Baldwin felt far 
too bewildered and far too sheepish to do his duty as 
host or master of the house. Olive, on the other 
hand, was much too resentful and really not in a nor- 
mal state of mind to attend to the most elementary 
duties of hospitality towards her uncle and aunt. 

Thus the perplexed and irate housekeeper, finding 
no support from her master or mistress, was obliged 
to obey that muffled-up scarecrow who insulted her 
and ordered her about as if she had been a kitchen- 
maid. 



272 MEADOWSWEET 

Wrapping herself up in a perfect mantle of offended 
dignity, she threw one withering glance on Barnaby 
Crabtree, and asked him, with ironical deference, 
kindly to follow her up the stairs. This he did quite 
contentedly, whilst Aunt Caroline said blandly : 

" Cousin Barnaby insisted on coming, you know, 
my dear Olive; I do hope that it is not inconvenient? " 

" Oh, not at all — not at all, my dear Aunt ! We 
are charmed, I assure you. . . . Are we not. Sir Bald- 
win?" 

" Delighted. Delighted, of course! " 

" But," rejoined Olive, with a laugh, " unless you 
and Uncle Jasper will sleep on the drawing-room floor 
I am afraid that you will have to go to an hotel." 

" Somewhere near the Royal Society's museum," 
murmured Uncle Jasper mildly. 

"At any rate, we'll see to that later on. For the 
moment we must have some luncheon. The bell will 
ring in a quarter of an hour. Come to my room, 
Aunt, will you? Sir Baldwin, will you see to Uncle 
Jasper in the meanwhile ? " 

" And that poor child ! " exclaimed Aunt Caroline, 
suddenly recollecting Boadicea. 

" She is still sitting on her boxes, I suppose." 

But Boadicea was no longer on the landing. She 
and Susan had found their way upstairs. They had 
enlisted the housekeeper's sympathy, and had been 
shown into their rooms. 

The meeting between the two sisters had again been 
postponed, but, of course, it could not be put off in- 
definitely. Olive frowned with impatience at herself 
for being so strangely disturbed in her younger sis- 



AN AWKWARD SITUATION 273 

ter's presence. She deposited Aunt Caroline in front 
of a basin full of hot water in her own room, and then 
deliberately went upstairs to the small green room on 
the east side which Boadicea would have to occupy, if 
she stayed in St. James's-street. 

She knocked at the door and went in. Boadicea 
was standing beside her boxes looking listless and 
apathetic. She made no movement to embrace her 
sister, and Olive felt strangely ill at ease at sight of 
the thin, pinched little face so different to the apple- 
cheeked, rosy one of awhile ago. 

Not that there was any feeling of remorse or of 
shame in her. She was not in the least ashamed of 
what she had done, either of the lie which she had told 
or of what that lie implied with regard to herself; nor 
was she remorseful, for she had no conception of the 
gravity of her action. Being wholly incapable of 
deep and passionate attachment, she did not believe in 
the existence of it. She thought that Boadicea — at 
most — had had just the same passing fancy for Lieu- 
tenant Carrington as she had had herself, that her 
vanity had been agreeably tickled by the young man's 
attentions, and that a sense of pique and of disap- 
pointment was all that the young girl could possibly 
feel at the present moment. 

Not anything to make a fuss over, surely. 

She thought that the child was exhibiting a sulki- 
ness of temper altogether unwarranted under the cir- 
cumstances, and it was almost with a feeling of ag- 
grieved dignity that she said : 

" Good gracious, child, are you so tired as all that ? 
You don't seem overjoyed at seeing me." 



274 MEADOWSWEET 

She made pretence to kiss Boadicea with some show 
of affection, and immediately afterwards began to talk 
glibly of the present ridiculous situation. 

" It is quite intolerable. You see that for yourself, 
don't you, little one?" she said. "I am, of course, 
delighted to have you, but what in the world shall I do 
with Aunt and Uncle, and that odious Crabtree? I 
haven't the room in this house, and Barnaby will up- 
set all my servants." 

" I am very sorry, Olive," said Boadicea, and for 
the first time for many months a twinkle of amuse- 
ment crept into her large, purple-circled eyes. " I did 
what I could to stop the crowd of us coming all to- 
gether. But Aunt made all the arrangements. ... I 
was not allowed to speak a word." 

" Aunt is really in her dotage. As for Uncle, he has 
no business to be let loose in London like that." 

" Aunt will do her best to look after him." 

" They'll both come to grief in London," was 
Olive's decided pronouncement. "And I am obliged 
to send them to an hotel where Aunt will quarrel with 
the chambermaid and the head waiter and set the man- 
agement by the ears. As for paying her bill without 
a terrible row with the cashier, she is simply incapable 
of it. Little one, I am very, very sorry, but much as 
I would like to have you here with me, I honestly 
think that it is your duty to go to the hotel with them." 

"Yes, Olive?" 

" You will have to come back to me later on in the 
season; and then I must see that you come alone. 
Your visit this time has been spoilt, anyhow ; and I do 



AN AWKWARD SITUATION 275 

think that it is not safe for Aunt and Uncle to be alone 
in a London hotel." 

Boadicea cared so little as to where she went or 
what she did, that she acquiesced readily in her sister's 
wish. 

, " I won't unpack my box, then," she said simply, 
" and after luncheon we can all go to some hotel near 
the Museum, as Uncle Jasper wishes." 

" Yes, dear. And I wouldn't stay in London longer 
than a few days. You could easily make Aunt under- 
stand that London does not agree with you. And 
then, you see, little one, the sooner you and the family 
go back this time, the sooner you can return to me, 
say, at the beginning of July, when the season is still 
at its height, and we can spend a nice time together." 

Boadicea could not help smiling, in spite of the pain 
which Olive was causing her by her shallow pretences. 
Oh, how well she had learnt to read in her sister's 
heart! How clearly she saw the deceit that pierced 
through this show of affection! She knew that Olive 
no more meant what she said, no more meant her to 
come back to London this year or any other year than 
she had done in the years that were past. 

" You need not be afraid, Olive," she said, gently. 
" I won't stay in London a day longer than I can 
help." 

" My dear child . . ." 

"No, no, dear! Never mind about trying to pro- 
test what you don't feel. It's no good, Olive, things 
will never be quite the same between us as they were 
in the past." 

" You are such a country ninny, child. You judge 



2y(y MEADOWSWEET 

me harshly because of what I told you. Why, every 
woman in London — if she be good-looking — has 
more than one lover. Let me tell you that, and no 
one thinks any the worse of her for that." 

" I am not judging you, Olive, or thinking harshly 
of you. I only judge myself for having been silly and 
vanity-stricken. But don't let us talk about all that. 
It is all over and done with." 

" That is a very sensible way of looking at it, child. 
It is all over and done with, as you say. Lieutenant 
Carrington has forgotten all about you by now, I dare 
say, and you are very wise to forget all about him. 
And you are sure you don't mind going to an hotel 
with Aunt and Uncle ? " 

*' Of course I don't mind." 

" And after to-day you must all come over for 
meals. To-night, I am sorry to say, I shall not be 
able to entertain you. I have a dinner-party first and 
go to a rout afterwards. You wouldii't care for 
either, would you, dear?" 

" No, Olive, I should not." 

" Then perhaps we can arrange for you to leave 
London to-morrow. Sir Baldwin has any number of 
horses in town. I am sure that he will readily send 
you back in his coach." 

" It would be very kind of him." 

" And, really, dear, I ask you, in all fairness, what 
could I do with that odious Crabtree for more than 
one day? " 

The luncheon-bell sounded now for the second time. 
Boadicea had already smoothed her hair and washed 
her face and hands. She was quite ready to go down- 



AN AWKWARD SITUATION ^-jy 

stairs with her sister. On the whole she was not 
greatly hurt at her sister's obvious desire to be rid of 
her again as quickly as possible. Was she herself not 
conscious of a strong desire to put mile upon mile of 
road between her and Olive ? 

She had only come because she believed that Olive 
was ill. Now she realised how impossible it would be 
for her to be constantly with her sister day after day, 
in the same house, at meals, at all times. 

But Olive was triumphant. Her strategy had suc- 
ceeded beyond her fondest hopes. Sir Baldwin's 
clumsy plan had been most cleverly outwitted, and if 
Lieutenant Carrington, acting upon the hint dropped 
to him, did turn up at sunset this evening, it would be- 
come a very easy matter indeed to persuade him that 
Boadicea had fled because of his approach. In fact, 
chance had been so kind that she had arranged the 
situation altogether for the best. 

Boadicea in London and to all appearances refusing 
to meet Lieutenant Carrington, was a far more satis- 
factory asset in Olive's schemes than she had been in 
distant Thanet. 

Olive was quite longing for Jack's visit this even- 
ing; there would be no need for him now to go to the 
China seas. He could accept the appointment at the 
Admiralty and remain in London, worshipping com- 
fortably at the feet of beautiful Lady Jeffreys, for she 
would make him understand how thoroughly at an 
end was that silly romance, which — surely against his 
own will and judgment — had kept him bound in a 
cold spirit of chivalry to the little savage whom he 
had met in Thanet. 



CHAPTER XXX 

AN HONEST MAN 

After luncheon Mr. Crabtree retired to the blue 
room for rest until tea-time. He hated blue, but pro- 
fessed himself willing to sacrifice his prejudices for 
the sake of peace, which he hoped to find in London. 

It was arranged that Sir Baldwin's barouche would 
conduct the rest of the Thanet party to a good hotel 
in the neighbourhood of the Royal Society's museum, 
which was situated at some little distance from St. 
James's-street, and Olive — an irreproachably charm- 
ing hostess now, full of spirits and brimming over 
with smiles — was dispensing coffee in the drawing- 
room whilst waiting for the advent of the barouche. 

No wonder that she was in a good humour. In 
less than a quarter of an hour from now Boadicea 
would be safely out of the house, after which the 
manoeuvring of keeping her and Lieutenant Jack apart 
for a day or two longer would become a very simple 
matter. No one had mentioned Lieutenant Carring- 
ton at luncheon, and now Aunt Caroline and Boadicea 
had their bonnets on, ready to start, and if all went 
well the whole party would have left London in less 
than forty-eight hours from now. 

Sir Baldwin was making vigorous efforts to enter- 
tain Uncle Jasper with travellers' tales. Aunt Caro- 

278 



AN HONEST MAN 279 

line talked volubly and incessantly whilst stirring her 
coffee. 

She talked of Susan's misdeeds, of jams and of 
pickles, of Topcoat's rheumatism, and Mr. Friday, the 
Minster grocer's bankruptcy. Finally, she talked of 
Boadicea's lack of appetite, which had sat heavily on 
her own mind of late. 

" But now," she said cheerfully, " that she will be 
near you, Olive, I dare say that the roses will soon 
return to her cheeks. Not that I believe in London 
air, mind you, but I have done my best with her, giv- 
ing her dandelion tea and liquorice, before every meal, 
and no woman can do more." 

" But I am very well. Aunt," said Boadicea in that 
listless way which seemed to have become habit- 
ual with her. " I am sure that I have no need of 
physic." 

Whereupon Sir Baldwin broke off in his conversa- 
tion with Uncle Jasper, and said tartly, his temper be- 
ing none of the best by now: 

" The physic the chit wants is a contented mind." 

" Good, Sir Baldwin ! " protested Aunt Caroline. 

" Aye, you'll have to excuse me, ma'am ! " he con- 
tinued, speaking loudly and bluntly. " I had intended 
speaking straight words to the minx when she came. 
It is time, I say, that heartless coquettes heard the 
truth spoken openly to them by honest men." 

" Pay no attention, Aunt," interposed Olive hastily, 
for she did not like the turn which the conversation 
had taken so unexpectedly. " Sir Baldwin is aiming 
a shaft at me: a pleasing practice to which he is often 
addicted." 



28o MEADOWSWEET 

Then she turned with a sad and patient smile to her 
sister. 

" Dear child," she said, sighing prettily, " I hope for 
your sake that you will never be plagued with a jealous 
husband." 

But Boadicea replied very earnestly, and turning 
large, sad eyes on Sir Baldwin : 

" No, no, Olive ! Sir Baldwin is quite right in what 
he says, though of course he does not understand." 

"Understand?" exclaimed Sir Baldwin hotly. 
" What is there to understand, if you please, save that 
like a wanton chit you amused yourself by toying with 
the love of an honest man, and now go about your 
business smiling and contented whilst he is breaking 
his heart? " 

" Breaking his heart ? " she protested, with a con- 
temptuous shrug of the shoulders. " Oh, as to 
that . . ." 

" Well, you know, child," broke in Aunt Caroline, 
with her usual complacency, " I have always told you 
that you did not treat Lieutenant Carrington quite 
fairly." 

" For gracious' sake," cried Olive, with angry im- 
patience, " do not revive that old, forgotten story now, 
Aunt. It is all past and forgotten. It certainly did 
not redound to anybody's credit, so I really do not see 
why you should wish to dig it up again." 

" The story is not past and forgotten," protested Sir 
Baldwin vigorously. 

" At any rate, it never concerned you. Sir Baldwin." 

" A story of that type concerns every honest man." 

" There's too much talk of honest men, it seems to 



AN HONEST MAN 281 

me," concluded Olive, trying to conceal beneath the 
appearance of indifference, the fear and anger which 
she now felt. " Good wine needs no bush. More- 
over, the barouche is at the door." 

" It can wait," rejoined Sir Baldwin curtly ; " at any 
rate, until I, too, have told Miss Boadicea that she 
did not treat Lieutenant Carrington fairly. Fairly ! " 
he reiterated, with a suppressed oath, " Heaven's 
sakes alive, girl ! Is it fair to send such heartless mes- 
sages to a man so sorely stricken with grief already? " 

" Sir Baldwin," said Olive in a harsh, high-pitched 
voice, " I must insist on your ceasing to interfere in 
my sister's affairs." 

But Boadicea, very bewildered, had frowned in 
obvious puzzlement, and was murmuring : 

" Messages ? What messages ? " 

She gazed inquiringly from her sister to Sir Bald- 
win, and then back to her sister again. Olive was 
flushed and looked more and more angered, her eyes, 
too, appeared restless, avoiding Boadicea's direct gaze. 
Something of the truth — a mere glimmer, of course 
— struggled to the young girl's comprehension. 
There was no mistaking Olive's furtive looks, and Sir 
Baldwin seemed very sure of his assertion. 

" In your letters to your sister," he said hotly, " your 
messages were positively heartless. How many times 
did you send Carrington a message, pray, saying that 
you never wish to look on his face again ? " 

" Poor young man," murmured Aunt Caroline, 
" M'hy did you say that, child? " 

" I . . . don't know . . ." said Boadicea slowly, 
for she was beginning to understand that some kind 



282 MEADOWSWEET 

of treachery had been at work. What it was or who 
had been guilty, and for what object she could not at 
present conceive, but Olive looked frightened, as she 
had done on that memorable evening a year ago, and 
Boadicea now, as then, was far too loyal to give her 
away. 

" You don't know ? " queried Sir Baldwin. 

"Sir Baldwin," protested Olive, "the barouche is 
at the door. This is not the time . . ." 

But Sir Baldwin once launched on the subject which 
he had so much at heart, was not in a humour to be 
interrupted. He turned to Boadicea and once more 
demanded sternly : 

"You don't know?" 

" I had forgotten," she replied meekly. 

" Forgotten, have you ? " he retorted. " Lord bless 
my soul, girl, have you no heart, no feeling, no honest 
sentiment in you ? And you a mere child, and already 
so versed in the perverse arts of wanton coquettes ! " 

" Sir Baldwin ..." cried Olive. 

" Let me talk to her, I tell you. I must talk to her, 
and she has got to listen. It is time someone spoke a 
brave mind to her. You, Miss Boadicea, have broken 
an honest man's heart, let me tell you that. You have 
ruined his hopes and blighted his career. He is in 
London at the present moment looking the very wreck 
of his former self, old before his time, sober in mien, 
pale and gnawed by fever. He had to be invalided 
home from Malta. He, a young man, not eight-and- 
twenty, who should enjoy the best of healths. All 
that is your work, let me tell you. Yours, and you 
don't seem to care ! You calmly say that you never 



AN HONEST MAN 283 

wish to see his face again. Well, you won't, for he 
will be underground before you have time to repent of 
your heartlessness. Next week he sails for the China 
seas, far away from home, from kindred, and from 
friends. In his present state of apathy and feeble 
health, I doubt if he will ever come back from there. 
Shame on you, child, I say — shame on you! If you 
have no pity on a man whose life you have ruined, at 
least you must have shame for your unwarrantable 
conduct. What harm had he done you? What sin 
had he committed ? And now, when a poor, innocent 
man's heart is broken by your indifference and your 
cruelty, you stand calmly here and say stolidly, * I do 
not know — I had forgotten ! ' Shame, I say — 
shame ! " 

Sir Baldwin Jeffreys had worked himself up into a 
violent state of anger — a state which rendered him 
unusually persuasive and eloquent. Olive had once or 
twice during his loudly-spoken tirade endeavoured to 
stop his flow of eloquence, but in vain. He was just 
letting himself go. He had in many ways suffered as 
much as the man whose cause he was pleading. He, 
too, had been treated with cruel indifference, mocked 
at, ignored, deeply wronged, and it was his own griev- 
ances so long held secret in his heart that gushed forth 
now clothed in vigorous words. 

Olive had become pale to the lips. She would — if 
she could then have done it — have annihilated her 
meddlesome husband, with her looks of anger border- 
ing on absolute hatred. The crisis, which she had 
really hoped would now be avoided, was being precipi- 
tated by what she termed Sir Baldwin's impudent in- 



284 MEADOWSWEET 

terference. An explanation with Boadicea would 
now, she feared, be inevitable, and what the outcome 
of that would be she hardly dared to guess. 

" 'Twas well said, Sir Baldwin," said Aunt Caro- 
line, with her usual cheerful complacency. " I've been 
much too weak all this time past, else I would have 
given her a good straight talk myself." 

" I thank you for what you have said, Sir Baldwin," 
said Boadicea coldly. " But unfortunately what is 
done cannot now be undone." 

" It can be mended, at any rate," he retorted. 

"How?" 

" You talk it over with your sister. She under- 
stands young men and their ways. She'll be of good 
counsel to you, eh, Olive?" 

" Yes, yes, of course. I'll talk it all over with 
Boadicea some time," said Olive impatiently; "but 
surely not now when the barouche is at the door. 
Unless they go soon to seek for rooms, every decent 
hotel will be closed against them. Hotel-keepers have 
no liking for travellers who arrive too late." 

" Yes, yes," said Aunt Caroline, " let us go now, 
Sir Baldwin, we may have to visit several hotels be- 
fore we find suitable rooms. I must be on the south 
side, you know, because of my asthma." 

" Yes, yes," assented Sir Baldwin, " I will accom- 
pany you, ma'am, if you will allow me, on your tour 
of inspection. Our desire would have been to enter- 
tain you here, you know, only that Mr. Crabtree has 
unfortunately interfered with that pleasant arrange- 
ment." 

" He would come, dear Sir Baldwin, though I tried 



AN HONEST MAN 285 

to persuade him to return to his sister's, poor dear, 
who usually looks after him, and who is glad, I dare 
swear, to be rid of him for a while. However, he 
simply insisted on coming with us. But never you 
worry about it. Sir Baldwin, your uncle and I will do 
very well in lodgings, now that Boadicea has also de- 
cided on being with us. Eh, Jasper? Do set Sir 
Baldwin's mind at ease, and tell him that we shall do 
very well in lodgings." 

Thus roused from the perusal of a book which he 
had surreptitiously concealed in his pocket at the last 
moment when leaving home, Uncle Jasper assented 
meekly : 

" Somewhere near the Royal Society's museum," 
he said. 

" We'll find something close by, at any rate," con- 
cluded Sir Baldwin. 

He rang the bell, and Thompson, the solemn major- 
domo, opened the doors for the party to file out. 

" We shall be quite comfortable wherever you put 
us. Sir Baldwin," said Aunt Caroline who had got 
Uncle Jasper by the arm, and was forcibly taking him 
along. "Are you coming, Boadicea?" she added, 
turning back to the young girl, who had made no 
movement to follow. 

Boadicea was deliberately undoing her bonnet 
strings. She looked frail and tired, but very resolute. 
Olive was watching her with ever-growing apprehen- 
sion. The inevitable explanation was closer at hand 
than she had imagined, and it was not likely to prove 
an easy one for her. 

*' I think, Aunt, if you will excuse me," said Boadi- 



286 MEADOWSWEET 

cea, taking off her bonnet and settling down on a cor- 
ner of the sofa, " I would rather stay with Olive for a 
little while. Someone no doubt will later on pilot me 
to the hotel which you will have chosen, once Sir Bald- 
win returns and tells us where it is." 



CHAPTER XXXI 

A LITTLE FOOL 

Silence reigned in the large elegantly-furnished 
drawing-room of the stately house in St. James's- 
street. The party from Thanet was heard descending 
the stairs, and presently entering the barouche and be- 
ing driven away in the direction of Piccadilly. 

Olive was at the window, with her back towards her 
sister, apparently deeply immersed in watching Aunt 
Caroline and Uncle Jasper and after them Sir Baldwin 
— finally followed by Susan — getting into the car- 
riage; but in reality she w^as wondering in her own 
mind how in the world she could get out of the pres- 
ent extremely uncomfortable situation without too 
much hurt to her vanity and to her self-esteem. 

Boadicea still sat on the corner of the sofa, very 
still, with her hands folded in her lap and her eyes 
fixed upon her sister, as if from right through the 
back of Olive's head she would wish to extract the 
solution of that riddle which was puzzling her own 
mind so painfully. 

The silence became oppressive. 

With a forced little laugh Olive suddenly turned 
and faced Boadicea. 

"Thank goodness!" she said lightly, "they have 
driven off at last. Some of that eloquent sermon was, 
of course, meant for me. Oh, dear me, what we poor 

287 



288 MEADOWSWEET 

women have to suffer when we are bound for Hfe 
to a veritable walking dictionaiy of whole-hearted 
abuse." 

She yawned affectedly, and, going to the nearest, 
most conveniently placed mirror, she readjusted the 
curls of her elaborate chignon. 

" Well, child," she said after awhile, " I am afraid 
that you have not chosen the most pleasant way of 
spending your first afternoon in London ! I am truly 
sorry, but I cannot possibly entertain you. I have 
promised to put in an appearance at Lady Malvern's 
concert this afternoon, and it is already unconsciona- 
bly late. I must go and put on my hat now. Will 
you wait for me here till I come down again ? " 

" Don't go yet, Olive," said Boadicea, with a wistful 
little tone of entreaty. "I want to ask you some- 
thing." 

" Well, what is it ? " queried Olive, with an indif- 
ference which she was very far from feeling. She 
was wishing with all her might that some one or other 
of her numerous fashionable friends would take this 
opportunity of paying her an afternoon call and inter- 
rupt this unpleasant tcte-a-tete. On most days during 
the season her drawing-room was filled with visitors 
who were not always welcome. It was more than 
provoking, therefore, that just to-day, when she pined 
for interruption, she should be left so severely alone. 

Across the younger girl's smooth forehead there had 
appeared a deep frown of puzzlement. 

" What did Sir Baldwin mean," she asked, " about 
those messages which he says I sent to — to Lieuten- 
ant Carrington? " 



A LITTLE FOOL 289 

" I am sure I don't know, child," replied Olive im- 
patiently. " How should I ? Sir Baldwin was talk- 
ing at random. He often does when he has an imagi- 
nary grievance against me." 

" But Sir Baldwin said that my messages were sent 
in my letters to you." 

" Well, yes, he did say that. I tell you, child, that 
he was talking at random." 

"Yes, now! But, then?" 

" What do you mean by * then ' ? " 

" When those messages were delivered to Lieuten- 
ant Carrington: was someone talking at random 
then?" 

" Oh," said Olive, with yet a greater show of indif- 
ference, " I thought that surely you would not wish 
to see Lieutenant Carrington." 

"Why not?" 

" It seems to me that your own good sense ought to 
tell you why not. I should have imagined that you 
would see for yourself that an interview could not 
possibly lead to anything, but would only be painful to 
you both." 

" An interview ? Sir Baldwin did say something 
about my refusing to see Lieutenant Carrington. Had 
he asked for an interview then ? " 

" Well, he did say something about it. But really, 
child, I haven't got the time to waste over all this silly 
talk. I am due at Lady Malvern's now." 

" One moment, Olive. I won't keep you long. 
You have just told me that Lieutenant Carrington said 
something about an interview. What did he say ? " 

" He only spoke vaguely, I tell you." 



290 MEADOWSWEET 

" But you were not going to tell me anything about 
it?" 

Olive was getting nervous and fidgetty. This close 
questioning under her younger sister's calm gaze had 
taken all her self-assurance from her. Yet, strangely 
enough, she made no attempt to run away. Instinc- 
tively she felt that the situation had become so acute, 
and Boadicea so determined, that to evade both would 
only mean disaster to herself, to all her desires and, 
above all, to her position before her sister, before 
Jack, and even perhaps before her husband. 

On the whole she thought it best to hold her ground 
now, trusting to her kind ally Chance, and to her own 
wits to lead her triumphantly out of this unpleasant if 
temporary cul-de-sac. 

" You took it upon yourself to refuse him then and 
there in my name ? " asked Boadicea, whose voice had 
suddenly become hard and trenchant even as her face 
became more calm and set. " You took it upon your- 
self without consulting me? " 

" I thought it best," retorted Olive boldly, " so did 
Sir Baldwin at the time. He was present when Lieu- 
tenant Carrington made his request, and we both 
thought ..." 

Boadicea quickly interrupted her. 

" His request? " she said. " He did request an in- 
terview then? Just now you said that he merely 
spoke vaguely about it." 

" Tush, child ! " said Olive, with angry impatience. 
" I'll not be cross-examined like this ! The whole 
thing only amounts to a row of pins, and why you 
should make such a fuss now and behave so rudely to 



A LITTLE FOOL 291 

me, I can't think. Lieutenant Carrington did make 
the suggestion that an interview between him and you 
might be desirable before he left for China. Sir Bald- 
win was present at the time, as I told you, and 
so . . ." 

" And so you told a lie," broke in Boadicea calmly. 

" Pshaw ! . . . What would be the good of such an 
interview? " 

" I don't know. Lieutenant Carrington may really 
be puzzled at my attitude towards him. He may not 
have understood things clearly, and may have wished 
for an explanation." 

" What nonsense, child ! You are a regular country 
ninny! Lieutenant Carrington knows as well as you 
and I the real cause of the rupture between you." 

" He knows? . . . That you have told me? . . ." 

" Or that you guessed . . ." 

" That he had been your . . ." 

" Why . . . yes. . . ." 

" One does not guess such things all of a sudden. 
... If one guessed one would wish to make sure." 

^ " That's just it. Lieutenant Carrington, I think, 
only wanted to assure himself that you were not quite 
sure." 

"Then he really wished for that interview?" 

" Only because of that, I think." 

" And was he disappointed at your refusal ? " 

" I don't think so." 

" But Sir Baldwin said just now that he had never 
seen a man so broken-hearted and so altered in appear- 
ance as was Lieutenant Carrington. . . . Why do you 
go on lying to me, Olive ? " 



292 MEADOWSWEET 

" Bah, child ! " retorted Olive in uncontrolled exas- 
peration. " You are excited and very impertinent. I 
really have no time to listen to all this nonsense. I 
am over late now for Lady Malvern's concert. You 
have really been too provoking." 

" I am sorry, Olive," rejoined the young girl quietly. 
" Do go and put on your hat now. I won't detain you 
any longer." 

" Ah, that's better ! Really you have been very ex- 
asperating, child, keeping me here all this while with 
all that senseless talk. What will you do with your- 
self while I am gone? " 

" I'll wait for Sir Baldwin." 

"And then?" 

"Ask him to kindly take a message from me to 
Lieutenant Carrington." 

" A message ? What message ? " 

" That I will grant him the interview which he de- 
sires." 

" Oh, he no longer desires it ! " 

" Perhaps not. But I do ! " 

" My dear child ! You cannot ask for an interview 
with a gentleman. It would be a most improper thing 
to do." 

" Then I'll do an improper thing." 

" Listen to me, child . . ." urged Olive, whose 
nervous excitement was growing with every new 
phase of her sister's sudden determination. 

" I'll not listen to you, Olive," replied Boadicea. 
" I'll wait for Sir Baldwin. You go and get your hat 
on, or you'll be late for Lady Malvern's concert." 



A LITTLE FOOL 293 



(( 



But, my dear child, Sir Baldwin won't be able to 
help you." 

"Why not?" 

" He does not know where Lieutenant Carrington 
lodges. ^ He cannot go and look for him in the Lon- 
don streets." 

" I'll write a letter to Lieutenant Carrington, and 
Sir Baldwin will give it to him when next he sees 
him." 

" Sir Baldwin is not the proper person to deliver a 
young girl's letter to another man." 

" I think that Sir Baldwin would be willing for once 
to override the conventions." 

" Moreover, it's too late, anyway. Lieutenant Car- 
rington leaves London to-night and England to-mor- 



row." 



" Then my letter addressed to H.MS. Dolphin will 
reach him without fail." 

" Too late for the interview which you seem to de- 
sire," cried Olive, with a mighty effort at self-restraint. 

" But not too late for him to hear the truth," re- 
torted Boadicea simply. 

"The truth? What truth?" 

Boadicea had risen. Looking round the room she 
saw the bureau that stood at one angle, with blotter, 
pen and ink and sandbox ready to hand. She walked 
quietly up to the bureau, and sat down in front of it, 
Olive watching her the while with eyes that looked 
black with anger, and with a sense of impotence and 
of fear. 

Boadicea opened the blotter, found paper and enve- 
lope, and taking up a pen she began to write. 



294 MEADOWSWEET 



(( 



Lieutenant Carrington may be killed in some en- 
gagement," she said quietly, even whilst the sound of 
her pen scraping against the paper set every one of 
Olive's nerves tingling. " He must not die under the 
misapprehension that I do not know the truth." 

The callousness — not to say the effrontery of this 
pronouncement on the part of her young, unsophisti- 
cated sister, struck Olive dumb with amazement. She 
stood there in the middle of the room almost like a 
person dazed with a sudden blow on the head. Her 
■wide-open eyes watched as if fascinated with the hor- 
ror of it, her sister's small, sun-tanned hand running 
rapidly from left to right of the sheet of notepaper in 
front of her. The scraping of the quill pen alone dis- 
turbed the silence that had fallen between these two 
women ; outside cabriolets and barouches rattled along 
the stone pavement, street-criers proclaimed their 
wares : " Sweet lavender ! Won't you buy sweet 
lavender?" or "Knives and scissors to grind!" or 



" All a-blowin' and a-growin'." 



People went about on their business or their pleas- 
ure, the indifferent, the gay, the sad, they all went on 
just the same, whilst one sister in her innocence was 
calmly writing the condemnation of the other. 

It was some time before Olive could again trust her- 
self to speak, and even then her voice sounded harsh 
and hollow, as if her throat were parched. 

And by that time the letter was nearly finished. 

" Are you . . . are you telling Lieutenant Carring- 
ton the reason why you broke your engagement off 
with him ? " she asked at last. 



A LITTLE FOOL 295 

" Certainly ! " replied the other, without looking up 
from her writing. 

" That . . . that you knew that his relations with 
me . . . had not been quite . . . quite innocent?" 

"Yes!" 

" And that I had told you so? " 

" That you had confessed this to me. Yes ... I 
am telling him that." 

** And you propose to entrust a letter like that — a 
letter which would compromise me hopelessly . . . 
you propose to entrust it to Sir Baldwin ? " stammered 
Olive, who now was forced to give up all attempt at 
concealing her own agitation, for she no longer could 
control her voice, which was trembling, or her blood, 
which fled from her cheeks and left them visibly grey 
even beneath the delicate coating of rouge. 

" It is monstrous . . . abominable ..." she gasped 
and incontinently burst into tears. 

But Boadicea finished her letter very calmly. She 
signed her name boldly and with an elegant flourish, 
then she addressed the envelope, and finally strewed 
sand over the wet ink. 

" Don't disturb yourself, Olive dear," she said 
quietly, and — her sister thought — very callously. 
" Sir Baldwin is an honourable gentleman. I will 
close and seal the envelope myself; he would never 
think of tampering with a closed letter." 

" Oh, you never know what Sir Baldwin might or 
might not do ! " said Olive through her tears. " His 
jealousy is always there ; even when it seems quite dor- 
mant the merest suspicion calls it back to life." 

" You need not worry, dear ; I have so worded the 



296 MEADOWSWEET 

letter that no one but Lieutenant Carrington himself 
could read your name between the lines." 

" You don't know Sir Baldwin as I do." 

Boadicea was even now folding the letter, prepara- 
tory to slipping it into its envelope. She paused in 
the act, and, rising from her chair, she turned quickly 
towards her sister. 

" Would you like to see the letter? " she asked. 

The change of front was so sudden, the suggestion 
so unexpected that for the moment Olive was quite 
thrown off her balance. The blood rushed back to her 
cheeks. She was alternately pale and then flushed, 
and her eyes gave a quick flash of eagerness. 

But Lady Jeffreys was essentially a woman of the 
world, and primarily now she was a woman fighting 
for her own prestige in the eyes of others, and for the 
realisation of her own desires. If for a moment she 
had lost control over herself, it was only because every 
phase of this extraordinary interview with her sister 
had been so wholly unexpected. 

Boadicea within the last quarter of an hour had not 
only been a totally different woman to the ignorant 
tomboy whom Olive had known so superficially, but 
she had been many women in turns. She had been a 
hard, determined woman, with a cross-examining legal 
mind ; she had been a callous one, unresponsive to the 
feelings of her sister, of the man whom she had pre- 
tended to love; she had been a bold woman, too, for 
she had done a thing which no young girl with any 
sense of shame could possibly have done when she 
wrote what she called " the truth " to a man who in the 
future would remain an utter stranger to her. 



A LITTLE FOOL 297 

But now equally suddenly the unsophisticated coun- 
try ninny reappeared. With her own hands she was 
handing over to her sister the very letter which Olive 
had every intention should never reach the man for 
whom it was intended. 

No wonder that for a second or two the clever 
woman of the world was thrown off her balance by^ 
this naive- move. But she recovered herself quickly 
enough, and made no movement to take the letter from 
her sister. 

" Oh, I'll read it if you like ! " she said, with perfect 
indifference. 

"Just as you like," rejoined Boadicea, not a whit 
less self-possessed or less indifferent. " It is no secret 
from you. If I may, I'll just run up to your room, 
and put on my bonnet there, in front of your glass. 
Perhaps Sir Baldwin will have returned by the time I 
am down again." 

Olive took the letter from her. Truly the girl was 
astonishing — astonishing by her very trustfulness, 
which, in Olive's opinion, was not far removed from 
idiocy. She picked up her bonnet, and as she did so 
she was humming some song or other quietly to her- 
self. She certainly looked a little flushed, but then 
she had been very pale before, and the argument had 
been lengthy and exciting. 

Olive watched her almost In amazement, whilst 
twirling between her fingers that compromising letter 
which had caused her so much agitation, and such un- 
reasoning terror. Boadicea was actually leaving It in 
her hands, and was preparing to go out of the room 
with her bonnet swinging by its ribbon on her arm. 



298 MEADOWSWEET 

" I think I'll take a peep at Cousin Barnaby," she 
said as she was about to go. " Aunt Caroline will be 
sure to worry me with questions about him." 

" Don't be long, dear," said Olive calmly. 

" I shan't be ten minutes. I must just take the 
ink off my fingers. If you think the letter is all right, 
will you close it? It is addressed." 

And she went out of the room. 

Olive could hear her running upstairs to the room 
immediately overhead, she could hear her open and 
shut the door of that room, and immediately after- 
wards handling ewer and basin and singing all the 
time. 

And the letter, with the envelope fully addressed was 
in Olive's hand. She took it out of the envelope and 
read it quickly from beginning to end. 

And all that she said was : 

" The little fool ! The little fool ! " 



CHAPTER XXXII 

A STROKE OF DIPLOMACY 

And Olive went on repeating those three words: 
"The little fool!" over and over again to herself. 
Thus to express her contempt of Boadicea's naive con- 
duct seemed to ease her mind and to calm her nerves. 
The fact that the young girl had by that same conduct 
really played Olive's game for her did not in the least 
mitigate the latter's contempt. 

Thank goodness, that silly letter need never reach 
Lieutenant Jack now. Olive was twirling and turning 
it between her fingers, quite enjoying the sudden and 
unexpected respite from the terrible anxiety of awhile 
ago. 

Overhead she could hear her sister's light footstep 
moving about the room, and her voice humming one of 
those eternal old songs of which she was so fond. 

" Little fool ! " murmured Olive once more, as she 
folded up the compromising letter and thrust it into 
the pocket of her gown. " What would Jack have 
thought of me, if he had read this impudent epistle? 
. . . For an unsophisticated country wench I must say 
that my young sister puts matters very clearly." 

To have lied on such a subject, and then to be found 
out in the lie, would have been an humiliation which 
Lady Jeffreys had hardly dared to contemplate. 

She now sat down at the bureau, and drew pen and 

299 



300 MEADOWSWEET 

paper towards her. The letter which she meant to 
write needed no great effort in composition. It should 
be crisp and to the point. 

" Miss Aldmarshe desires to inform Lieutenant Car- 
rington that she has no desire for a personal interview 
with him." 

There, nothing could be better! Olive contem- 
plated her handiwork with supreme satisfaction. She 
had not even taken the trouble to imitate Boadicea's 
handwriting; to do so would have been both clumsy 
and unnecessary. All being well, the girl would with 
her own hands give the letter to Sir Baldwin, who, of 
course, would transmit it to Lieutenant Carrington this 
very evening. 

" Boadicea gave me this letter for you ! " Sir Bald- 
win would be bound to say that. Olive closing her 
eyes could picture the whole scene as it would be en- 
acted presently. Sir Baldwin, pompous and correct, 
handing over the letter, she herself, trying to look 
calmly sympathetic, whilst Jack, of course, would be 
somewhat disturbed and even gloomy after he had 
mastered the contents of the curt epistle. 

"She gave you this herself?" he would probably 
insist. "With her own hands?" 

And, of course. Sir Baldwin would be bound to an- 
swer " Yes ! " to both these questions. 

It really was all too delightful and almost funny. 
Even Olive's somewhat dormant sense of humour 
woke to the comical side of the situation. And she 
felt no genuine sympathy for Jack. 

" He will have forgotten her in three months," she 
concluded as she folded up the missive, slipped it 



A STROKE OF DIPLOMACY 301 

back into the same envelope which had been addressed 
by Boadicea and finally folded and fastened the whole 
thing up neatly. 

" There's no reason for him to go to the China seas 
now." And instinctively Olive's fingers went up to 
the golden curls that needed slight readjustment, and 
her eyes wandered to the nearest mirror. " That ap- 
pointment at the Admiralty will keep him in London 
and . . ." 

And at the lady's feet, no doubt. That would be 
the final outcome of the stormy interview which had 
ended so satisfactorily. 

A few moments later Sir Baldwin's voice was heard 
down in the hall. A thrill of pleasure went right 
through Olive's heart; the curtain was about to be 
raised on one of the most exciting little bits of drama 
that she had ever witnessed ; and the charm of it all was 
that, though she would be sitting by as an apparently 
indifferent spectator, she would really be the chief 
actor, the chief mover in the scene; the other two — 
Sir Baldwin and Boadicea — would be the marion- 
ettes, she — Olive Jeffreys — would be pulling the 
strings that made those marionettes dance to her tune. 

Sir Baldwin came straight upstairs to the drawing- 
room. He had escorted Aunt Caroline and Uncle 
Jasper to a nice quiet hotel he knew of in Bloomsbury 
— The Coptic. He had deposited them there with 
Susan, and himself had returned in his barouche, 
which he now wished to place at Boadicea's disposal, 
that she might rejoin her uncle and aunt. 

" It is almost a pity that the child is not going to 
stop in the house," he said. " Curse that interfering 



302 MEADOWSWEET 

old Crabtree! She must come back here to-night, 
though. I have practically arranged that Carrington 
should be here." 

" She has written to Carrington." Olive was quite 
calm and indifferent. She had Boadicea's letter in her 
hand and the child was even now coming downstairs. 

"Ah! What did she say?" 

" Oh, I think she only asks for a few hours' time in 
which to consider her decision. She probably means 
to grant Lieutenant Carrington the interview which he 
desires ; but I wouldn't worry her any more just now, 
Baldwin, if I were you. She seems to have written a 
nice letter to Jack and if you don't interfere I have no 
doubt that everything will be for the best. I have her 
letter here; she shall give it to you herself." 

Boadicea, who looked her best just now, with eyes 
very bright with excitement, and curved lips quivering 
with eagerness, was even now at the door. 

" Here, child, come in," said Olive lightly. " Sir 
Baldwin thinks he may be seeing Lieutenant Carring- 
ton to-day. He can take your letter to him, if you 
like." 

" Yes, Olive. Have you read my letter? " 

" I only glanced at it." And Olive was handing the 
letter to Sir Baldwin, who was about to take it from 
her when Boadicea put out her hand and quietly took 
possession of it herself. 

" On the whole," she said, " I think I had best not 
send this letter. H Sir Baldwin will be seeing Lieu- 
tenant Carrington to-day, he may as well take a verbal 
message." 

She folded the envelope in half and slipped it into 



A STROKE OF DIPLOMACY 303 

her pocket. Olive thought that her brain must be 
reeHng. The wahs of the room were spinning round 
and round ; her throat seemed to be closing up so that 
for the moment she could not draw her breath. 

Fortunately Sir Baldwin was not looking at her. 
He had turned to Boadicea, and was saying with his 
habitual pompous complacency : 

" Of course a much wiser plan, my dear; or, better 
still, let me send the carriage for you this evening. 
Lieutenant Carrington will be here then, and a verbal 
message will come far better from your own lips than 
from mine." 

" I thank you, Sir Baldwin ! " said Boadicea de- 
murely. 

Olive, had she dared, would have gasped with hor- 
ror, she would have raved, she would have protested. 
But fortunately for herself she had just a sufficiency 
of commonsense left in her to make a supreme effort 
to control both her rage and her fears. 

" I think " — and she contrived to speak calmly, so 
that Boadicea alone saw the awful effort which it cost 
her to do so — " I think that it would be better for 
your letter to go first, child." 

" Do you really think so, Olive ? " asked Boadicea. 

No one, I think, will begrudge her this tiny pin-prick 
of malice which she administered to her sister. She 
was but a girl after all, and was holding the trump card 
now. Triumph had exhilarated her, and it was she 
now who felt contempt for her sister, and who could 
readily have murmured : " You little fool ! " 

" Yes," said Olive, catching at this feeble straw of 
hope — " yes. Let Sir Baldwin take your letter now. 



304 MEADOWSWEET 

You can then easily arrange to see Lieutenant Carring- 
ton to-morrow." 

Boadicea seemed to be hesitating for a moment, 
whilst Sir Baldwin remained coldly neutral, determined 
not to interfere again in women's affairs; his interfer- 
ence not having succeeded overwell hitherto. Olive 
was thus kept on tenterhooks for a few minutes. 
Boadicea was not cruel, but she enjoyed this moment 
of mental torture which she was deliberately inflicting 
on her sister. And even then Olive's punishment was 
in no way commensurate with her fault ; and the worst 
of it for Olive was that she knew that her sister was 
punishing her, and that she had not the power of re- 
taliation either now or for the future. 

" I have changed my mind ! " Boadicea's decision 
came almost as a relief ; the suspense had been agonis- 
ing, even the worst — and this undoubtedly was the 
worst that could happen — was better than the horror 
of anticipation. 

" That's a good girl ! " said Sir Baldwin cheerfully. 
" Now I think I had better drive back to the hotel and 
tell Mr. and Mrs. Hemingford that you will not join 
them until this evening. You stay here quietly with 
Olive. Have a good talk with her; she seems a little 
nervy this afternoon." 

He was very fussy and excited. His diplomacy was 
succeeding overwell, after all. Olive made no at- 
tempt to stop him from going ; events had come to such 
a pass that it did not greatly matter now who came or 
stayed, what anybody did or did not do. 

And once more the two sisters were left alone to- 
gether. 



CHAPTER XXXIII 

A SUBLIME CONCLUSION 

Olive no longer made attempt to hide either her 
wrath or her fears. As soon as Sir Baldwin was 
safely out of earshot her piercing voice rang out, shrill 
and quivering. 

"What is the meaning of all this nonsense?" she 
cried. 

There was no mistaking the look of rage, nor even 
that of hate with which she met Boadicea's quiet 
glance. 

" It means that I have been seeking for the truth," 
And Boadicea took the letter out of her pocket and 
held it tightly clasped between her hands. *' It lies 
here," she said, " in this letter." 

" What do you mean? Give me that letter." 

" Yes. I will give it you, Olive, directly. I need 
not read it now." 

She sat down on the corner of the sofa, just as she 
had done before, when some hidden power in her sug- 
gested this stroke of diplomacy v^^hich had culminated 
in the present situation. The letter she still clutched 
with both her hands. Her cheeks were glowing with 
suppressed excitement, her large, eager eyes followed 
her sister's restless walk up and down the room. 

" I need not read this letter, Olive," she said. " I 
can read all I want in your disturbed face and in your 

305 



3o6 MEADOWSWEET 

shrinking eyes. You lied to me, Olive. You lied 
when you tried to part me from the man whom I loved, 
and who loved me. . . . You lied when you tried to 
prove him false and base, a liar and a cheat. . . . You 
trapped and duped me — me, your own sister — the 
country wench whom you used as a tool for just as 
long as you needed her, and whose heart you broke 
once she herself became useless." 

" Be quiet, girl ! " cried Olive, in a last futile attempt 
to gain the mastery over the silly wench whom she 
used to dominate long ago. " I will not listen to all 
this nonsense, this impudence. . . ." 

" You must listen, Olive," broke in Boadicea firmly ; 
" you have got to listen, for it is my turn now. You 
have had the upper hand for so long, for you are clever 
and you always know what you want, and what you 
want that you make up your mind to get. But God 
gave me country wits, not much of these, I dare say. 
You think me a ninny and an unsophisticated savage, 
but I have pitted my wits against your intrigues, and it 
seems that my wits were the keener. I wished to 
know who — you or he — had lied to me. You or 
he! The alternative was horrible, for I loved you, 
Olive, and believed in you ; but to him I had given my 
whole heart. Do you think that I really meant to 
send a letter to him? Not I ... I only wanted to 
know, and it was my turn to lay a trap for you and 
to make a fool of you. . . . Yes, a fool — a miser- 
able, cringing fool; and see how I succeeded! Your 
excitement, your terror, the many purposeless little 
lies which you had already told, had roused my sus- 
picions — and somehow I thought of writing the letter 



A SUBLIME CONCLUSION 307 

and then of leaving it — open — in your hands to see 
what you would do. I never meant to give the letter 
to Sir Baldwin. I had only thought out a way of 
finding out whether Jack Carrington had been lying to 
me last year, or whether you were lying to me now. 
Now you see that country wits are sometimes keener 
than town wits. You fell into my trap just like a 
bird. When my back was turned you stole my letter. 
You were terror-stricken lest he — the man whose ad- 
miration you covet for the mere gratification of your 
own vanity — should know how you had lied to me, 
and shamed yourself before me so as to part me from 
him. You stole my letter, Olive, and in its place you 
wrote another — another — with your hand. I don't 
know what you wrote. ... I don't care how you put 
it . . . but this I know that in this envelope now lies 
the proof of your falsehood and of his loyalty." 

It was a severe ordeal for a young girl, this act of 
accusation, spoken with a great effort at self-control 
and at dignity. Nor, whilst she was actually speaking, 
did that self-control and dignity forsake her. Her 
voice perhaps had gradually become a little more 
trenchant as excitement took stronger and yet stronger 
hold of her. She had risen to her feet, and it was 
Olive now who sat cowering and weeping, unable to 
find the requisite words with which to silence her sis- 
ter's indictment against her. 

But when Boadicea had finished speaking, when 
with every moment the conviction grew upon her that 
she had not been mistaken, that her sister had lied, 
deliberately lied to her, but that the man whom she 
loved had been loyal and very deeply wronged, then 



3o8 MEADOWSWEET 

for an instant her self-control entirely left her. She 
was only a young girl, after all — little more than 
a child, with a heart filled with passionate love for a 
man whom for a whole year she had believed a liar 
and a cheat. 

The load of intense misery, of bitter disillusionment 
which she had borne silently for so long was lifted 
from her with amazing suddenness, and she who had 
never given way under the weight of so much sor- 
row, and such cruel disappointment, did so now with 
the completeness of her relief. 

Her voice broke down in a great sob. Hot tears 
rushed to her eyes. She covered her face with her hands 
and crying and laughing hysterically she fell on her 
knees beside the sofa and murmured through her 
tears : 

" I knew it. ... I really knew it all the time. . . . 
Oh, my God, my God! I thank thee! I thank thee 
that he has not lied to me ! " 

That was the great hosanna, the heavenly paeon of 
gratitude that went up from her overburdened heart, 
straight to God the Maker of all things good. He 
had not lied — he was true and loyal, for this she 
thanked God on her knees. Nothing else mattered 
now, not the pain and misery of the past year, not the 
sister's treachery, not even the hopeless dreariness of 
future years! All that was as nothing, for he was 
just as she had thought him, true and loyal. The 
sky once more was beautiful and blue, the clouds but 
filmy gossamer of silver tissue, the nightingale had 
an exquisite note in its tiny throat, and the scent of 
cherry blossom was exquisite in its fragrance. 



A SUBLIME CONCLUSION 309 

" Thank God, thank God, he did not lie to me ! " 

This mood of Boadicea's was wholly incomprehen- 
sible to the older sister, so incomprehensible, in fact, 
that it irritated her. She ceased her own crying, the 
tears of shame and of rage died in her eyes, even be- 
fore they fell. At first she gazed on her sister as she 
would on a person who had suddenly become demented. 
She wiped her eyes and sat straight up in her chair. 
Then contempt — that innate contempt which she had 
always felt for the country-bred ninny — once more 
reasserted itself. 

Bah! the child was, after all, nothing but a fool, and 
she — Olive — had been but a silly dolt, thus to allow 
herself to be cowed by a wench like that. The child 
was a fool, of that there was no doubt, else why should 
she now seem so overwhelmed with joy when in reality 
there was nothing yet to exult over. Nay, what's 
more, Olive would — even at this eleventh hour — see 
that nothing should occur to justify tears of gratitude 
and of joy. 

She was not one to take a beating easily, and did not 
by any means consider herself beaten yet. Check to 
her queen — perhaps — her queen who was called self- 
love — but not checkmate by a long way yet. 

But she waited patiently until Boadicea's paroxysm 
had somewhat calmed down. At last the girl rose to 
her feet again, and still a little hysterical, still quiver- 
ing with excitement, she was drying her tears, and 
making quick, jerky attempts to smooth the tendrils of 
brown hair that clung, moist, to her temples. 

By this time Olive had wholly composed herself. 
She was well-schooled in the art of passing from parox- 



3IO MEADOWSWEET 

ysm of tears or anger to apparent complete indiffer- 
ence. She embraced her sister's elegant young figure 
with one contemptuous and comprehensive glance, then 
she said lightly : 

" My dear child, let me congratulate you ! Your 
heroics are positively wonderful ! " 

This sobered Boadicea completely. She was not 
really ashamed of her outburst before the sister who 
was so uncomprehending and so profoundly cynical, 
but she was angry with herself for having allowed that 
sister a peep into her simple, ardent soul. Her young 
face, tanned by sun and sea, beaten by the breezes of 
Thanet, had not learnt the art of concealing the strong 
emotions which surged up from the depths of her pas- 
sionate and unsophisticated heart. 

Olive — had she been more keenly observant — 
could easily have read in her sister's glowing eyes every 
thought that coursed through the young brain. But 
she cared so little what that sister thought and felt that 
now she merely shrugged her shoulders and said flip- 
pantly : 

" Well, I admit that I have lied. What, then ? I 
admit that I was fond of Jack Carrington. I am fond 
of Jack Carrington, and he is fond of me. He may 
have paid you some attention which your silly childish 
vanity construed into declarations of love, but he was 
and is fond of me. I lied in order to keep you away 
from him. What then? I admit it. There! You 
can call me a liar, and despise me as much as you like. 
But all your weeping will not bring him back to you 
now. I'll see to that." 

Boadicea listened to Olive's cynical tirade with a 



A SUBLIME CONCLUSION 311 

smile on her lips, and a look of supreme joy on her 
face. Neither joy nor smile fled from her when Olive 
ceased speaking. 

" But he did not lie to me," she said simply. 

" To-morrow he leaves in the Dolphin for China, 
You cannot stay in my house against my wish. You 
must go now, for I shall send you away, and you will 
not have the chance of seeing Lieutenant Carrington 
before he leaves." 

Still smiling and triumphant, Boadicea repeated: 

" But he did not lie to me ! " 

" Bah ! You may never see him again. He may 
never return from China." 

And once again came the sublime, all-embracing an- 
swer: " But he did not lie to me! " 



CHAPTER XXXIV 

A SIMPLE WAY 

After awhile Olive left her to herself. There was 
nothing to be done with the girl. I think that for the 
first time in all these months of many and of varied 
intrigues she felt herself on the verge of being check- 
mated. 

But she could no longer remain in the presence of 
her sister. That optimistic exultation irritated her be- 
yond her powers of endurance. She still clung to the 
hope that Carrington and Boadicea need not meet this 
evening, and to the determination that Jack now should 
follow his original intention and leave for China the 
next day. 

At any rate, she had a good many hours during 
which she could think things out. 

Sir Baldwin had gone to Bloomsbury. At the 
quickest computation he could not go there and back 
and have a brief talk with Aunt Caroline under about 
an hour. No one could have a brief talk with Aunt 
Caroline, for she saw to it that it was anything but 
brief, so that in all probability Sir Baldwin would be 
gone over an hour, and he had left the house a quarter 
of an hour ago. 

If Boadicea left St. James's-street in half an hour 
from now in a hackney coach which moved very slowly 
indeed she' would be well out of the way before Sir 

312 



A SIMPLE WAY 313 

Baldwin could possibly return, and would reach the 
Bloomsbury hotel some time after Sir Baldwin had 
left it. 

And surely whilst Lady Jeffreys in the meanwhile 
sat listening to Lady Malvern's musicians she could 
think out some little scheme whereby she could keep 
Sir Baldwin from interfering this evening when Lieu- 
tenant Carrington paid his promised visit. 

Carrington would be in St. James' s-street this even- 
ing, Boadicea at the Bloomsbury hotel, and that Fate 
would be a very malignant one indeed that did not 
keep those two young people apart for another twenty- 
four hours. As Olive had harshly intimated to her 
sister, the latter could not possibly remain in the house 
when the hostess had bade her go. 

After to-night Lieutenant Jack could start for China 
and Boadicea for Thanet, leaving Lady Jeffreys's repu- 
tation still immaculate in Jack's eyes, even if it had 
been irretrievably sullied in those of her sister. 

Twenty- four hours ! Surely Fate was not going to 
deal cruelly with the prettiest woman in London at this 
important crisis in her life? 

A little buoyed up by hope again, a little fearful, 
and very irate against her sister, Olive made up her 
mind that by far the best and simplest thing to do now 
would be, firstly, to order Thompson to call a hackney 
coach for Miss Aldmarshe in half an hour, and to 
direct the driver to take the young lady quietly as far 
as the Coptic Hotel in Bloomsbury, and after that for 
herself to endeavour to forget her w'orries in the social 
triumphs which awaited her at Lady Malvern's re- 
ception. 



314 MEADOWSWEET 

Therefore she tried resohitely to conquer that In- 
tense sense of irritation which was in her still, and 
which might even now have betrayed to Boadicea the 
fact that her sister's intriguing mind was once more in 
activity. 

Resolutely she went to the door as if by her de- 
parture she meant to imply that she was vacating the 
battlefield and leaving Boadicea there alone and tri- 
umphant. At the door, however, she turned to her 
sister and spoke to her acidly over her shoulder : 

" You will understand, child," she said, " that your 
presence in my house can no longer be very agreeable 
to me. I will instruct Thompson to call a hackney 
coach for you. It may be some time before he can 
get one, but when he does, he will instruct the driver 
to take you straight to the Bloomsbury hotel, where 
Aunt and Uncle must be getting anxious about you. 
You have the address, I think." 

" Yes, Olive," replied Boadicea, " I have the address 
Sir Baldwin mentioned — the name of the hotel, the 
Coptic, wasn't it ? I have no doubt that the coachman 
can find it." 

** Of course he can. Good-bye, then! I may bring 
myself to go and see you again before you leave, for 
Aunt's sake, of course. She need not know how im- 
pertinently you have treated me, and how angry I am 
with you for your rough, bullying ways. Outwardly 
we can yet remain friends." 

" Yes. Outwardly, Olive." 

" I must go now. Your impertinence and all the 
nonsense that you have talked have made me miss one 
of the finest concerts of the season." 



A SIMPLE WAY 315 



(( 



I am sorry! " 

" And I cannot help thinking, child, that your pri- 
mary object in making all this fuss was to make mis- 
chief between Sir Baldwin and me." 

" I don't think, Olive, that you will seriously believe 
that when you have thought the whole matter over 
seriously." 

" I may or I may not. Good-bye now ! " 

"Good-bye, Olive!" 

The door was opened and shut again. There was a 
frou-frou of silk skirts and a tripping of lightly shod 
feet up the carpeted stairs; and one sister passed en- 
tirely out of the life of the other. 

For a second or two Boadicea was conscious of the 
irresistible impulse to run to the door to call after the 
sister whom she had once loved so dearly, whom even 
now she was willing, even eager to forgive. But she 
fought that impulse down. Nothing at this moment 
could be gained by making appeal to Olive's finer feel- 



ings. 



With a sigh Boadicea was bound to admit that Olive 
had very few fine feelings in her. But what did that 
matter? What did anything matter since he had 
proved himself loyal and true. 

Even if he went to China to-morrow, even if she 
should never see him again in life, she would never 
again be so hopelessly wretched as she had been in the 
past year. Death — his death — the most terrible 
thing now that her mind was able to contemplate, 
would not seem such a cruel thing, since she knew that 
he was true and loyal, and that he had not lied to her. 

As — a year ago — she had sat alone in her little 



3i6 MEADOWSWEET 

room at Old Manor Farm gazing on the very abject- 
ness of her own misery, so now she gazed upon that 
one great and glorious fact; he had not lied; he was 
true and loyal. All her belief in him was justified. 
The one terrestrial idol which her virgin heart had 
set up had not fallen to ashes and dust at her feet, and 
her lips had never been defiled by the kiss of a traitor. 

On this she dwelt, on this her heart fed now, as 
probably it might have to feed for many years to come : 
just on the memory of that kiss, in the shadow of the 
big cherry-tree when the thrush sang so exultantly: 
" He did it! He did it! " and when the scent of to- 
bacco flowers, pungent and intoxicating, filled the air 
with its exquisite fragrance. 

She heard her sister's footsteps once more descend- 
ing the stairs, she heard the harsh, high-pitched voice 
ordering a hackney coach to be brought to the door in 
half an hour. She heard the heavy front door opening 
and shutting as the fashionable Lady Jeffreys sallied 
forth into the streets to walk the few hundred steps 
which would lead her to Lady Malvern's mansion. 

Then she felt the silence of the big house. She sat 
in the drawing-room, quite still, waiting for the hack- 
ney coach to arrive which would take her away from 
her sister's house, probably never to return. 

Olive had passed out of her life, so no doubt would 
Sir Baldwin. To-morrow she thought that she could 
persuade Aunt and Uncle to go back to dear old 
Thanet, where there were no intrigues, no lies, no false 
appearance of affection, no lying lips, but where mem- 
ory dwelt under the cherry-trees, and was kept sweet 
and young in the fragrance of spring flowers. 



A SIMPLE WAY 317 

She was content thus to sit quietly, to dream and to 
wait. OHve had apparently ordered the coach to 
be brought round in half an hour. She wondered — 
in the same vague and dreamy way — why Olive 
should have wished her to wait half an hour before 
leaving. But it really did not matter. When thoughts 
are so full and the soul so far away from the body, 
time is of little account, and the small details of life do 
not really exist, 

A coach eventually did drive up to the door. Boadi- 
cea heard it and made ready to go. She felt more 
than ever like a person in a dream, only vaguely realis- 
ing that she must adjust her bonnet, tie its strings and 
slip on her gloves. Equally vaguely the thought 
crossed her mind as to what would become of Cousin 
Barnaby. 

" Olive will turn him out of the house to-morrow 
for certain. She is not in a mood to care about Mr. 
Crabtree's tantrums." And she smiled in an absent, 
dreamy kind of way, as she pictured to herself Bar- 
naby Crabtree being hastily and unceremoniously bun- 
dled out of the house. 

She thought every minute that Thompson would 
come in and tell her that the hackney coach was at the 
door, and she was, in the meanwhile, struggling with a 
recalcitrant glove. 

Presently she heard Sir Baldwin's voice down be- 
low. He had evidently returned once again from 
Bloomsbury. His coachman must have driven very 
quickly, for Boadicea had an idea that Bloomsbury was 
a very long way off. 

Still, she was glad that Sir Baldwin had returned, 



3i8 MEADOWSWEET 

and that she would be able to say " Good-bye " to him 
before she left. Sir Baldwin had been very kind all 
along, and even the severity of his judgment on her 
was due to the kindness of his heart. 

A man's footsteps were heard ascending the stairs 
very quickly. It was Sir Baldwin, of course; and the 
coach was at the door, and she must really go now. 

Then the door was thrown open, and it was not Sir 
Baldwin who was standing there. 

At first Boadicea thought that it was all part of her 
dream, because she was quite sure that in the back- 
ground behind Jack's head she could see the old cherry- 
tree and the sunshine glinting through the fruit-laden 
branches ; she was equally sure that she could smell the 
delicious fragrance of those tobacco plants which were 
planted in the shade over against the north side of Old 
Manor Farm, whilst nobody could doubt that the very 
air was vibrating with the song of innumerable 
thrushes who repeated the glorious' pseon of joy: 
''He did it! He did it!" 

But, of course, all that was nonsense, and Boadicea 
laughed aloud at herself for being so silly and so fan- 
ciful. Did she not know that she was in a London 
house, in her sister's drawing-room, very far away 
from the old orchard in Thanet ? 

But she also was in the arms of the man whom she 
loved, of the man who throughout had been true and 
loyal. It was his kiss that was as sweet as the scent 
of the flowers; it was his voice that murmured in her 



ear: 



My Meadowsweet ! " 

I wonder if you will ever understand? " she whis- 



A SIMPLE WAY 319 

pered shyly. " It was all such a hideous, such a horri- 
ble mistake. But it was all my fault, and I shall never 
be able to explain. I wonder if you will forgive and 
never try to understand ? " 
" I wonder? " he said simply. 

A quarter of an hour later Sir Baldwin ventured to 
disturb them. He sighed a little wistfully when he 
saw them sitting side by side, hand against hand, and, 
unseen by him, soul to soul. 

" I did not go to the hotel after all," he said in ex- 
planation of his sudden return. " I went to fetch Car- 
rington at his lodgings, which were close by. I 
thought it would be the simplest way out of our many 
difficulties." 

And it had been by far the simplest way. 



THE END 



University of California 
SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 
Return this material to the library 
from which it was borrowed. . 



AUG i 6 1988 



A 000 135 171 7 



/W " 




58 01288 2436 



