THE UNIVERSITY 

OF ILLINOIS 

LIBRARY 

U.I 






Return this book on or before the 
Latest Date stamped below. A 
charge is made on all overdue 
books. 

University of Illinois Library 



NOV 12 

DhC 1 9 



m\ 



m\ 



M32 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2010 with funding from 

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 



http://www.archive.org/details/melincourt02peac 



MELINCOURT 



SIR ORAN HAUT-TON. 



LIBRARY 





RJCtt/lRDSTfRiSETT lUl 

cJ.nD€NT ;ic^ /IT AmHi 

LONDON AD.CCCXa 



i-Ui> 



3\> 



2 0,2 
P 3 1 rrAJLy 



CONTENTS. 





Chap. 
XXI. 


The CiTi' OF Novote . 


Page 

7 




XXII. 


The Borough of Onevote . 


i8 




XXIII. 


The Council of War 


30 




XXIV. 


The Barouche 


37 




XXV. 


The Walk 


48 




XXVI. 


The Cottagers 


. 56 




XXVII. 


The Anti-Saccharine Fete . 


62 




XXVIII. 


The Chess Dance 


71 




XXIX. 


The Disappearance . 


81 




XXX. 


The Paper-Mill 


87 




XXXI. 


Cimmerian Lodge 


96 




XXXII. 


The Deserted Mansion 


109 




XXXIII. 


The PhantasxM 


116 




XXXIV. 


The Churchyard 


122 




XXXV. 


The Rustic Wedding 


127 


f 


XXXVI. 


The Vicarage . 


U4 


% 




':a528 





1 



6 

Chap. 
XXXVII. 


Contents. 
The Mountains 


Page 
. 141 


XXXVIII. 


The Fracas 


146 


XXXIX. 


Mainchance Villa . 


. 150 


XL. 


The Hopes of the World . 


171 


XLI. 


Alga Castle . 


. 184 


XLII. 


Conclusion 


. 194 



Melincourt 



K 



SIR ORAN HAUT-TON. 



CHAPTER XXI. 




THE CITY OF NOVOTE. 

|N the evening of the tenth day, the barouche 
rattled triumphantly into the large and 
populous city of Novote, which was 
situated at a short distance from the ancient and 
honourable borough of Onevote. The city con- 
tained fifty thousand inhabitants, and had no 
representative in the Honourable House, the 
deficiency being virtually supplied by the two 
members for Onevote : who, having no affairs to 
attend to for the borough, or rather the burgess, 
that did return them, were supposed to have more 
leisure for those of the city which did not : a 
system somewhat analogous to that which the 
learned author of Hermes calls a method of supply byj 
negation. ' 



8 Melincourt. 

Sir Oran signalized his own entrance by playing 
on his French horn, See the conquering hero comes I 
Bells were ringing, ale was flowing, mobs were 
huzzaing, and it seemed as if the inhabitants of the 
large and populous city were satisfied of the truth 
of the admirable doctrine, that the positive repre- 
sentation of one individual is a virtual representa- 
tion of fifty thousand. They found afterwards, that 
all this festivity had been set in motion by Sir 
Oran's brother candidate, Simon Sarcastic, Esq., 
to whom we shall shortly introduce our readers. 

The barouche stopped at the door of a mag- 
nificent inn, and the party was welcomed with 
some scores of bows from the whole corps d^ hotel, 
with the fat landlady in the van, and Boots in the 
rear. They were shown into a splendid apartment, 
a glorious fire was kindled in a minute, and while 
Mr Hippy looked over the bill of fare, and followed 
mine hostess to inspect the state of the larder. Sir 
Telegraph proceeded to peel^ and emerged from 
his four benjamins, like a butterfly from its 
chrysalis. 

After dinner they formed, as usual, a semicircle 
round the fire, with the table in front supported by 
Mr Hippy and Sir Telegraph Paxarett. 

"Now this," said Sir Telegraph, rubbing his 
hands, " is what I call devilish comfortable after a 
cold day's drive — an excellent inn, a superb fire, 
charming company, and better wine than has fallen 
to our lot since we left Melincourt Castle." 

The waiter had picked up from the conversation 



The City of Novate. 9 

at dinner, that one of the destined members for 
Onevote was in the company ; and communicated 
this intelligence to Mr Sarcastic, who was taking his 
soHtary bottle in another apartment. Mr Sarcastic 
sent his compliments to Sir Oran Haut-ton, and 
hoped he would allow his future colleague the 
honour of being admitted to join his party. Mr 
Hippy, Mr Forester, and Sir Telegraph, undertook 
to answer for Sir Oran, who was silent on the 
occasion : Mr Sarcastic was introduced, and took 
his seat in the semicircle. 

Sir Telegraph Paxarett. — Your future colleague, 
Mr Sarcastic, is a man of few words ; but he will 
join in a bumper to your better acquaintance. — 
{The collision of glasses ensued between Sir Oran 
and Mr Sarcastic.) 

Mr Sarcastic. — I am proud of the opportunity 
of this introduction. The day after to-morrow is 
fixed for the election. I have made some prepara- 
tions to give a little eclat to the affair, and have 
begun by intoxicating half the city of Novote, so 
that we shall have a great crowd at the scene of 
election, whom I intend to harangue from the 
hustings, on the great benefits and blessings of 
v irtua l representation. 

Mr Forester. — I shall, perhaps, take the oppor- 
tunity of addressing them also, but with a different 
view of the subject. 

Mr Sarcastic. — Perhaps our views of the subject 
are not radically different, and the variety is in 
the mode of treatment. In my ordinary intercourse 



lo Melincourt. 

with the world, I reduce practice to theory : it is 
a habit, I beUeve, peculiar to myself, and a source 
of inexhaustible amusement. 

Sir Telegraph Paxarett. — Fill and explain. 

Mr Sarcastic. — Nothing, you well know, is so 
rare as the coincidence of theory and practice. A 
man who " will go through fire and water to serve 
a friend " in words, will not give five guineas to 
save him from famine. A poet will write Odes to 
Independence, and become the obsequious parasite 
of any great man who will hire him. A burgess 
will hold up one hand for purity of election, while 
the price of his own vote is slily dropped into the 
other. I need not accumulate instances. 

Mr Forester. — You would find it difficult, I fear, 
to adduce many to the contrary. 

Mr Sarcastic. — This then is my system. I 
ascertain the practice of those I talk to, and 
present it to them as from myself, in the shape of 
theory : the consequence of which is, that I am 
universally stigmatized as a promulgator of rascally 
doctrines. Thus I said to Sir Oliver Oilcake, 
" When I get into Parliament I intend to make 
the sale of my vote as notorious as the sun at 
noonday. I will have no rule of right, but my own 
pocket. I will support every measure of every 
administration, even if they ruin half the nation 
for the purpose of restoring the Great Lama, or of 
subjecting twenty millions of people to be hanged, 
drawn, and quartered at the pleasure of the man- 
milliner of Mahomet's mother. I will have ship- 



The City of Novate. ii 

loads of turtle and rivers of Madeira for myself, if 
I send the whole swinish multitude to draff and 
husks." Sir Oliver flew into a rage, and swore he 
would hold no further intercourse with a man who 
maintained such infamous principles. 

Mr Hippy. — Pleasant enough, to show a man 
his own picture, and make him damn the ugly 
rascal. 

Mr Sarcastic. — I said to Miss Pennylove, whom 
1 knew to be laying herself out for a good match^ 
" When my daughter becomes of marriageable age, 
I shall commission Christie to put her up to auction, 
'the highest bidder to be the buyer; and if any 
dispute arise between two or more bidders, the lot 
to be put up again and resold.' " Miss Pennylove 
professed herself utterly amazed and indignant, 
that any man, and a father especially, should im- 
agine a scheme so outrageous to the dignity and 
delicacy of the female mind. 

The Honourable Mrs FintJiofiey^ and Miss Dan- 
aretta. — A most horrid idea certainly. 

Mr Sarcastic. — The fact, my dear ladies, the 
fact : how stands the fact ? Miss Pennylove after- 
wards married a man old enough to be her grand- 
father, for no other reason but because he was rich; 
and broke the heart of a very worthy friend of 
mine, to whom she had been previously engaged, 
who had no fault but the folly of loving her, and 
was quite rich enough for all purposes of matri- 
monial happiness. How the dignity and delicacy 
of such a person could have been affected, if the 



1 2 Melinco7crt. 

preliminary negotiation with her hobbhng Strephon 
had been conducted through the instrumentality 
of honest Christie's hammer, I cannot possibly 
imagine. 

Mr Hippy. — Nor I, I must say. All the differ- 
ence is in the form, and not in the fact. It is a 
pity that form, does not come into fashion : it would 
save a world of trouble. 

Mr Sarcastic. — I irreparably offended the Rev- 
erend Doctor Vorax by telling him, that having a 
nephew, whom I wished to shine in the church, I 
was on the look-out for a luminous butler, and a 
cook of solid capacity, under whose joint tuition 
he might graduate. "Who knows," said I, "but 
he may immortalize himself at the University, by 
giving his name to a pudding?" — I lost the ac- 
quaintance of Mrs Cullender, by saying to her, 
when she had told me a piece of gossip as a very 
particular secret, that there was nothing so agree- 
able to me as to be in possession of a secret, for I 
made a point of telHng it to all my acquaintance ; 

Intrusted under solemn vows, 
Of Mum, and Silence, and the Rose, 
To be retailed again in whispers, 
For the easy credulous to disperse. * 

Mrs Cullender left me in great wrath, protesting 
she would never again throw away her confidence 
on so leaky a vessel. 

Sir Telegraph Paxarett. — Ha ! ha ! ha ! Bravo ! 
Come, a bumper to Mrs Cullender. 

* Hudibras, Part III. ii. 1493. 



The City of Novote. 1 3 

Mr Sarcastic. — With all my heart ; and another 
if you please to Mr Christopher Corporate, the 
free, fat, and dependent burgess of Onevote, of 
which " plural unit " the Honourable Baronet and 
myself are to be the joint representatives. — {Sir 
Ora7i Ha2d-t07i bowed.) 

Mr Hippy. — And a third, by all means, to his 
Grace the Duke of Rottenburg. 

Mr Sarcastic. — And a fourth, to crown all, to 
the blessings of virtual representation^ which I shall 
endeavour to impress on as many of the worthy 
citizens of Novote, as shall think fit to be present, 
the day after to-morrow, at the proceedings of the 
borough of Onevote. 

Sir Telegraph Paxarett. — And now for tea and 
coffee. Touch the bell for the waiter. 

The bottles and glasses vanished, and the 
beautiful array of urns and cups succeeded. Sir 
Telegraph and Mr Hippy seceded from the table, 
and resigned their stations to Mrs and Miss 
Pinmoney. 

Mr Forester, — Your system is sufficiently amus- 
ing, but I much question its utility. The object of 
moral censure is reformation, and its proper vehicle 
is plain and fearless sincerity : Verba animi pro- 

FERRE, ET VITAM IMPENDERE VERO. 

Mr Sarcastic. — I tried that in my youth, when 

I was troubled with the passion for reforming the 

world ;'^ of which I have been long cured, by 

the conviction of the inefficacy of moral theory 

* See Forsyth's Principles of Moral Science, 



14 Melincourt. 

with respect to producing a practical change in 
the mass of mankind. Custom is the pillar round 
which opinion twines, and interest is the tie that 
binds it. It is not by reason that practical change 
can be effected, but by making a puncture to the 
quick in the feelings of personal hope and personal 
fear. The Reformation in England is one of the 
supposed triumphs of reason. But if the passions 
of Henry the Eighth had not been interested in 
that measure, he would as soon have built mosques 
as pulled down abbeys : and you will observe that, 
in all cases, reformation never goes as far as reason 
requires, but just as far as suits the personal 
interest of those who conduct it. Place Temper- 
ance and Bacchus side by side, in an assembly of 
jolly fellows, and endow the first with the most 
powerful eloquence that mere reason can give, 
with the absolute moral force of mathematical 
demonstration, Bacchus need not take the trouble 
of refuting one of her arguments ; he will only 
have to say, " Come, my boys, here's Damn 
Temperance in a bumper," and you may rely on the 
toast being drank with an unanimous three times 
three. 

{At the sound of the word bumper, with which 
Captai?t Hawltaught had made him very familiar, 
Sir Oran Haut-ton looked round for his glass, but, 
finding it vanished, comforted himself with a dish 
of tea from the fair hand of Miss Da?iaretta, which, 
as his friend Mr Forester had interdicted him from 



The City of Novate. 1 5 

the use of sugar, he sweetened as well as he could with 
a copious infusion of cream. Y" 

Sir Telegraph Paxarett. — As an Opposition 
orator in the Honourable House will bring for- 
ward a long detail of unanswerable arguments, 
without even expecting that they will have the 
slightest influence on the vote of the majority. 

Mr Sarcastic. — A reform of that honourable 
body, if ever it should take place, will be one of 
the " tritunphs of reason'' But reason will have 
little to do with it. All that reason can say on the 
subject has been said for years, by men of all 
parties — while they were out: but the moment 
they were in, the moment their own interest came 
in contact with their own reason, the victory of 
interest was never for a moment doubtful. While 
the great fountain of interest, rising in the caverns 
of borough patronage and ministerial influence, 
flowed through the whole body of the kingdom in 
channels of paper-money, and loans, and contracts, 
and jobs, and places either found or made for 
the useful dealers in secret services, so long the pre- 
dominant interests of corruption overpowered the 
true and permanent interests of the country : but as 
those channels become dry, and they are becoming 
so with fearful rapidity, the crew of every boat that 
is left aground are convinced, not by reason — that 
they had long heard and despised — but by the 

* *' II buvoit du vin, mais le laissoit volontiers pour du 
lait, du the, ou d'autres liqueurs douces." — BuFFON of the 
Qran Ozitang^ whom he saw himself in Paris, 



1 6 Melincourt. 

unexpected pressure of personal suffering, that 
they had been going on in the wrong way. Thus 
"the re-action of interest takes place ; and when the 
concentrated interests of thousands, combined by 
the same pressure of personal suffering, shall have 
created an independent power, greater than the 
power of the interest of corruption, then, and not 
till then, the latter will give way, and this will be 
called the triumph of reason ; though, in truth, like 
all the changes in human society that have ever 
taken place from the birthday of the world, it will 
be only the triumph of one mode of interest over 
another : but as the triumph in this case will be 
of the interest of the many over that of the few, it 
is certainly a consummation devoutly to be wished. 
M7' Forester. — If I should admit that " the hope 
of personal advantage, and the dread of personal 
punishment," are the only springs that set the 
mass of mankind in action, the inefficacy of reason, 
and the inutility of moral theory, will by no means 
follow from the admission. The progress of truth 
is slow, but its ultimate triumph is secure j though 
its immediate effects may be rendered almost 
imperceptible, by the power of habit and interest. 
If the philosopher cannot reform his own times, he 
may lay the foundation of amendment in those 
that follow. Give currency to reason, improve the 
moral code of society, and the theory of one 
generation will be the practice of the next. After a 
certain period of life, and that no very advanced one, 
men in general become perfectly unpersuadable to 



The City of Novate, 1 7 

all practical purposes. Few philosophers, there- 
fore, I believe, expect to produce much change in 
the habits of their contemporaries, as Plato pro- 
posed to banish from his republic all above the 
age of ten, and give a good education to the 
rest. 

Mr Sarcastic. — Or, as Heraclitus the Ephesian 
proposed to his countrymen, that all above the age 
of fourteen should hang themselves, before he 
would consent to give laws to the remainder. 




II. 




CHAPTER XXII. 

THE BOROUGH OF ONEVOTE. 

•HE day of election arrived. Mr Sarcastic's 
rumoured preparations, and the excellence 
of the ale which he had broached in the 
city of Novote, had given a degree of eclat to the 
election for the borough of Onevote, which it had 
never before possessed ; the representatives usually"? 
sliding into their nomination with the same silence ! 
and decorum with which a solitary spinster slides i 
into her pew at Wednesday's or Friday's prayers in^ 
a country church. The resemblance holds good 
also in this respect, that, as the curate addresses 
the solitary maiden with the appellation of dearly 
beloved brethren^ so the representatives always 
pluralized their solitary elector, by conferring on 
him the appellation of a respectable body of con- \ 
stituents. Mr Sarcastic, however, being determined 
to amuse himself at the expense of this most 
"venerable feature'' in our old constitution, as 
Lord C* calls a rotten borough, had brought 
Mr Christopher Corporate into his views, by the 

* Castlereagh, whose malapropisms afforded continual 
merriment to his political opponents. — G. 



The Borough of Onevote. 19 

adhibition of persuasion in a tangible shape. It 
was generally known in Novote, that something 
would be going forward at Onevote, though no- 
body could tell precisely what, except that a long 
train of brewer's drays had left the city for the 
borough, in grand procession, on the preceding 
day, under the escort of a sworn band of special 
constables, who were to keep guard over the ale all 
night. This detachment was soon followed by 
another, under a similar escort, and with similar 
injunctions : and it was understood that this second 
expedition o{ frothy rhetoric \v2i's, sent forth under the 
auspices of Sir Oran Haut-ton, Baronet, the brother 
candidate of Simon Sarcastic, Esquire, for the repre- 
sentation of the ancient and honourable borough. 

The borough of Onevote stood in the middle of a 
heath, and consisted of a solitary farm, of which 
the land was so poor and untractable, that it would 
not have been worth the while of any human being 
to cultivate it, had not the Duke of Rottenburgh 
found it very well worth his to pay his tenant for 
Hving there, to keep the honourable borough in 
existence. 

Mr Sarcastic left the city of Novote some hours 
before his new acquaintance, to superintend his 
preparations, followed by crowds of persons of all 
descriptions, pedestrians and equestrians; old ladies 
in chariots, and young ladies on donkeys; the 
farmer on his hunter, and the tailor on his hack ; 
the grocer and his family six in a chaise ; the 
dancing-master in his tilbury ; ^^ 



LIBRARY 



V 



20 Melincourt. 



V 



tandem ; mantua-makers and servant-maids twenty- 
four in the waggon, fitted up for the occasion with 
a canopy of evergreens; pastry-cooks, men-milliners, 
and journeymen tailors, by the stage, running for 
that day only, six inside and fourteen out; the 
^:^ sallow artisan emerging from the cellar or the 
^ furnace, to freshen himself with the pure breezes 
of Onevote Heath ; the bumpkin in his laced boots 
^ and Sunday coat, trudging through the dust with 
'"O his cherry-cheeked lass on his elbow ; the gentleman 
coachman on his box, with his painted charmer by 
his side ; the lean curate on his half-starved Rosin- 
ante ; the plump bishop setting an example of 
Christian humility in his carriage and six; the 
doctor on his white horse, like Death in the 
Revelation ; and the lawyer on his black one, 
like the devil in the Wild Huntsmen. 

Almost in the rear of this motley cavalcade went 
the barouche of Sir Telegraph Paxarett, and rolled 
up to the scene of action amidst the shouts of the 
multitude. 

The heath had very much the appearance of a 
race-ground ; with booths and stalls, the voices of 
pie-men and apple-women, the grinding of barrel 
organs, the scraping of fiddles, the squeaking of 
ballad singers, the chirping of corkscrews, the 
vociferations of ale-drinkers, the cries of the " last 
dying speeches of desperate malefactors," and of 
" The History and Antiquities of the honourable 
Borough of Onevote, a full and circumstantial 
account, all in half a sheet, for the price of one 
halfpenny ! " 



The Borough of Onevote. 2 1 

The hustings were erected in proper form, and 
immediately opposite to them was an enormous 
marquee with a small opening in front, in which 
was seated the important person of Mr Christopher 
Corporate, with a tankard of ale and a pipe. The 
ladies remained in the barouche under the care of 
Sir Telegraph and Mr Hippy. Mr Forester, Mr 
Fax, and Sir Oran Haut-ton joined Mr Sarcastic on 
the hustings. 

Mr Sarcastic stepped forward amidst the shouts 
of the assembled crowd, and addressed Mr Christo- 
pher Corporate : 

" Free, fat, and dependent burgess of this ancient 
and honourable borough ! I stand forward an un- 
worthy candidate, to be the representative of so 
important a personage, who comprises in himself 
a three-hundredth part of the whole elective capacity 
of this extensive empire. For if the whole popu- 
lation be estimated at eleven millions, with what 
awe and veneration must I look on one, who is, as 
it were, the abstract and quintessence of thirty-three 
thousand six hundred and sixty-six people ! The 
voice of Stentor was like the voice of fifty, and the 
voice of HarrjLjGill^ was like the voice of three ; 
but what are these to the voice of Mr Christopher 
Corporate, which gives utterance in one breath to 
the concentrated power of thirt^three thousand 
six hundred and sixty-six voices ? Of such an one 
it may indeed be said, that he is himself a?t ho^ 
and that none but hi77iselfcan be his parallel. 
* See Mr Wordsworth's Lyrical Ballads. 



22 Melinconrt. 

" Most potent, grave, and reverend signor ! it is 
usual on these occasions to make a great vapouring 
about honour and conscience : but as those words 
are now generally acknowledged to be utterly desti- 
tute of meaning, I have too much respect for your 
understanding to say anything about them. The 
vionied interest^ Mr Corporate, for which you are 
as illustrious as the sun at ?toon-day, is the great 
point of connection and sympathy between us ; and 
no circumstances can throw a wet blanket on the 
ardour of our reciprocal esteem, while the fimda- 
mental feature of our mutual interests presents it- 
self to us in so tangible a shape,"^ How high a 
value I set upon your voice, you may judge by the 
price I have paid for half of it : which, indeed, 
deeply lodged as my feelings are in my pocket, I 
yet see no reason to regret, since you "will thus con- 
fer on mine, a transmutable and marketable value 
which I trust by proper management will leave me 
no loser by the bargain." 

" Huzza ! " said Mr Corporate. 

" People of the city of Novote ! " proceeded Mr 
Sarcastic, " some of you, I am informed, consider 
yourselves aggrieved, that while your large and 
populous city has no share whatever in the forma- 
tion of the Honourable House, the plural unity of 
Mr Christopher Corporate should be invested with 
the privilege of double representation. But gentle- 
men, representation is of two kinds, actual and 

*The figures of speech marked in Italics are familiar to the 
admirers of parliamentary rhetoric. 



The Borough of Onevote. 23 

virtual : an important distinction, and of great 
political consequence. 

"The Honourable Baronet and myself being the 
actual representatives of the fat burgess of Onevote, 
shall be the virtual representatives of the worthy 
citizens of Novote ; and you may rely on it, 
gentlemen {with his hand on his heart), we shall 
always be deeply attentive to your interests, when 
they happen, as no doubt they sometimes will, to 
be perfectly compatible with our Jiwn. 

" A member of Parliament, gentlemen, to speak 
to you in your own phrase, is a sort of staple 
commodity, manufactured for home consumption. 
Much has been said of the improvement of machin- 
ery in the present age, by which one man may do 
the work of a dozen. If this be admirable, and ad- 
mirable it is acknowledged to be by all the civi- 
lized world, how much more admirable is the 
improvement of political machinery, by which one 
man does the work of thirty thousand ! I am sure, 
I need not say another word to a great manufac- 
turing population like the inhabitants of the city of 
Novote, to convince them of the beauty and utility 
of this most luminous arrangement. 

'' The duty of a representative of the people, 
whether actual or virtual, is simply to tax. Now 
this important branch of public busine'ss'ls much 
more easily and expeditiously transacted by the 
means of virtual, than it possibly could be by that 
of actual representation. For when the minister 
draws up his scheme of ways and means, he will do 



24 Melincourt. 

it with much more celerity and confidence, when 
he knows that the propitious countenance of vircual 
representation will never cease to smile upon him 
as long as he continues in place, than if he had to 
encounter the doubtful aspect of actual representa- 
tion, which might, perhaps, look black on some of 
his favourite projects, thereby greatly impeding the 
distribution of secret service money at home, and 
placing foreign legitimacy in a very awkward pre- 
dicament. The carriage of the state would then be 
like a chariot in a forest, turning to the left for a 
troublesome thorn, and to the right for a sturdy 
oak ; whereas it now rolls forward like the car of 
Juggernaut over the plain crushing whatever offers 
to impede its way. 

/ "The constitution says that no man shall be 
[taxed but by his own consent : a very plausible 
'theory, gentleman, but not reducible to practice. 
Who will apply a lancet to his own arm, and bleed 
himself? Very few, you acknowledge. Who 
then, a fortiori, would apply a lancet to his own 
pocket, and draw off what is dearer to him than 
his blood — his money ? Fewer still, of course : 
I humbly opine, none. — What then remains but to 
appoint a royal college of state surgeons, who may 
operate on the patient according to their views of 
his case ? Taxation is political phlebotomy : the 
Honourable House is, figuratively speaking, a royal 
college of state surgeons. A good surgeon must 
have firm nerves and a steady hand ; and, perhaps, 
the less feeling the better. Now, it is manifest, 



The Borough of Onevote. 25 

that, as all feeling is founded on sympathy, the 
fewer constituents a representative has, the less 
must be his sympathy with the public, and the 
less, of course as is desirable, his feeling for his 
patient — the people : — who, therefore, with so 
much sang f raid, can phlebotomize the nation, as 
the representative of half an elector ? 

" Gentlemen, as long as 3. full Gazette is pleasant 
to the quidnunc ; as long as an empty purse is 
delightful to the spendthrift ; as long as the cry 
of Question is a satisfactory answer to an argument, 
and to outvote reason is to refute it ; as long as 
the way to pay old debts is to incur new ones of 
five times the amount : as long as the grand recipes 
of political health and longevity are bleeding and 
hot water — so long must you rejoice in the privi- 
leges of Mr Christopher Corporate, so long must 
you acknowledge from the very bottom of your 
pockets, the benefits and blessings of virtual 
representation^ 

This harangue was received with great applause, 
acclamations rent the air, and ale flowed in torrents. 
Mr Forester declined speaking, and the party on 
the hustings proceeded to business. Sir Oran 
Haut-ton, Baronet, and Simon Sarcastic, Esquire, 
were nominated in form. Mr Christopher Corporate 
held up both his hands, with his tankard in one, 
and his pipe in the other : and neither poll nor 
scrutiny being demanded, the two candidates were 
pronounced duly elected as representatives of the 
ancient and honourable borough of Onevote. 



26 Melincourt. 

The shouts were renewed : the ale flowed 
rapidly : the pipe and tankard of Mr Corporate 
were replenished. Sir Oran Haut-ton, Baronet, 
M.P., bowed gracefully to the people with his hand 
on his heart. 

A cry was now raised of "Chair 'em! chair 
'em ! " when Mr Sarcastic again stepped forward. 

''Gentlemen," said he, "a slight difficulty 
opposes itself to the honour you would confer on 
us. The members should, according to form, be 
chaired by their electors ; and how can one elector, 
great man as he is, chair two representatives ? But 
to obviate this dilemma as well as circumstances 
admit, I move that the 'large body corporate of 
one ' whom the Honourable Baronet and myself 
have the honour to represent, do resolve himself 
into a committee." 

He had no sooner spoken, than the marquee 
opened, and a number of bulky personages, all in 
dress, aspect, size, and figure, very exact resem- 
blances of Mr Christopher Corporate, each with 
his pipe and his tankard, emerged into daylight, 
who encircling their venerable prototype, lifted 
their tankards high in air, and pronounced with 
Stentorian symphony, " Hail, plural unit ! " 
Then, after a simultaneous draught, throwing away 
their pipes and tankards, for which the mob 
immediately scrambled, they raised on high two 
magnificent chairs, and prepared to carry into 
effect the last ceremony of the election. The 
party on the hustings descended. Mr Sarcastic 



The Borough of Onevote. 27 

stepped into his chair ; and his part of the proces- 
sion, headed by Mr Christopher Corporate, and 
surrounded by a multiform and many-coloured 
crowd, moved slowly off towards the city of Novote, 
amidst the undistinguishable clamour of multitu- ' ^ 
dinous voices. ^ 

Sir Oran Haut-ton watched the progress of his 3 

precursor, as his chair rolled and swayed over the ^^n 
sea of heads, like a boat with one mast on a stormy 
ocean ; and the more he watched the agitation of 
its movements, the more his countenance gave 
indications of strong dislike to the process : so that 
when his seat in the second chair was offered to 
him, he with a very poUte bow declined the 
honour. The party that was to carry him, think- 
ing that his repugnance arose entirely from diffi- 
dence, proceeded with gentle force to overcome 
his scruples, when not precisely penetrating their 
motives, and indignant at this attempt to violate 
the freedom of the natural man, he seized a stick 
from a sturdy farmer at his elbow, and began to lay 
about him with great vigour and effect. Those 
who escaped being knocked do^^^l by the first sweep 
of his weapon, ran away with all their might, but 
were soon checked by the pressure of the crowd, ._- 
who hearing the noise of conflict, and impatient -i^ 
to ascertain the cause, bore down from all points 
upon a common centre, and formed a circum- 
ferential pressure that effectually prohibited the 
egress of those within; and they, in their turn, 
in their eagerness to escape from Sir Oran (who 



28 Melincourt. 

like Artegall's Iron Man, or like Ajax among the 
Trojans, or like Rodomonte in Paris, or like 
Orlando among the soldiers of Agramant, kept 
clearing for himself an ample space in the midst 
of the encircling crowd), waged desperate conflict 
with those without ; so that from the equal and 
opposite action of the centripetal and centrifugal 
forces, resulted a stationary combat, raging between 
the circumferences of two concentric circles, with 
barbaric dissonance of deadly feud, and infinite 
variety of oath and execration, till Sir Oran, 
charging desperately along one of the radii, fought 
a free passage through all opposition ; and rush- 
ing to the barouche of Sir Telegraph Paxarett, 
sprung to his old station on the box, from whence 
he shook his sapling at the foe with looks of 
mortal defiance. Mr Forester, who had been 
forcibly parted from him at the commencement 
of the strife, had been all anxiety on his account, 
mounted with great alacrity to his station on the 
roof : the rest of the party was already seated : 
the Honourable Mrs Pinmoney, half-fainting with 
terror, earnestly entreated Sir Telegraph to fly : 
Sir Telegraph cracked his whip, the horses sprang 
forward like racers, the wheels went round like 
the wheels of a firework. The tumult of battle 
lessening as they receded, came wafted to them 
on the wings of the wind : for the flame of discord 
having been once kindled, was not extinguished 
by the departure of its first flambeau — Sir Oran ; 
but war raged wide and far, here in the thickest 



The Borough of Onevote. 29 

mass of central fight, there in the light skirmishing 
of flying detachments. The hustings were de- 
molished, and the beams and planks turned into 
offensive weapons : the booths were torn to pieces, 
and the canvas converted into flags floating over 
the heads of magnanimous heroes that rushed to 
revenge they knew not what, in deadly battle 
with they knew not whom. The stalls and 
barrows were upset ; and the pears, apples, 
oranges, mutton-pies, and masses of gingerbread, 
flew like missiles of fate in all directions. The 
sa7ictiim sajidorum of the ale was broken into, 
and the guardians of the Hesperian liquor were 
put to ignominious rout. Hats and wigs were 
hurled into the air, never to return to the heads 
from which they had suffered violent divorce 
The collision of sticks, the ringing of empty ale 
casks, the shrieks of women, and the vociferations 
of combatants, mingled in one deepening and 
indescribable tumult : till at length, everything 
else being levelled with the heath, they turned the 
mingled torrent of their wrath on the cottage of 
M^ Corporate, to which they triumphantly set 
fire, and danced round the blaze like a rabble of 
village boys round the effigy of the immortal 
Guy. In a few minutes the ancient and honour- 
able borough of Onevote was reduced to ashes : 
but we have the satisfaction to state that it was 
rebuilt a few days afterwards, at the joint expense 
of its two representatives, and His Grace the 
Duke of Rottenburgh. 




CHAPTER XXIII. 

THE COUNCIL OF WAR. 

HE compassionate reader will perhaps 
sympathize in our anxiety, to take one 
peep at Lord Anophel Achthar and the 
Reverend Mr Grovelgrub, whom we left perched 
on the summit of the rock, where Sir Oran had 
placed them, looking at each other as ruefully as 
Hudibras and Ralpho in their " wooden bastile," 
and falling by degrees into as knotty an argument, 
the quceritur of which was, how to descend from 
their elevation — an exploit which to them seemed 
replete with danger and difficulty. Lord Anophel, 
having, for the first time in his life, been made 
acquainted with the salutary effects of manual 
discipline, sate boiling with wrath and revenge ; 
while the Rev. Mr Grovelgrub, who in his youth- 
ful days had been beaten black and blue in the 
capacity of fag (a practice which reflects so much 
honour on our public seminaries), bore the in- 
fliction with more humility. 

Lord Anophel Achthar {rubbing his shoulder) — 
This is all your doing, Grovelgrub — all your fault, 
curse me ! 



Tlie Council of War, 3 1 

The Rev. Mr Grovelgrub. — Oh, my Lord ! my 
intention was good, though the catastrophe is ill. 
The race is not always to the swift, nor the battle 
to the strong. 

Lord A?tophel Achthar. — But the battle was to 
the strong in this instance, Grovelgrub, curse me ! 
though from the speed with which you began to 
run off on the first alarm, it was no fault of yours 
that the race was not to the swift. 

The Rev. Mr Grovelgrub. — I must do your 
Lordship the justice to say, that you too started 
with a degree of celerity highly creditable to your 
capacity of natural locomotion ; and if that ugly 
monster, the dumb Baronet, had not knocked us 
both down in the incipiency of our progres- 
sion 

Lord Anophel Achthar, — We should have 
escaped as our two rascals did, who shall bitterly 
rue their dereliction. But as to the dumb Baronet, 
who has treated me with gross impertinence on 
various occasions, I shall certainly call him out, 
to give me the satisfaction of a gentleman. 

The Rev. Mr Grovelgrub. — Oh, my Lord. 

Though with pistols 'tis the fashion 
To satisfy your passion ; 
Yet where's the satisfaction, 
If you perish in the action ? 

Lord Anophel Achthar. — One of us must perish, 
Grovelgrub, 'pon honour. Death or revenge ! 
We're blown, Grovelgrub. He took off our 
masks; and though he can't speak, he can 



32 Melinco2irt. 

write, no doubt, and read too, as I shall try with 
a challenge. 

The Rev. Mr Grovelgriib. — Can't speak, my 
Lord, is by no means clear. Won't speak, per- 
haps : none' are so dumb as those who won't 
speak. Don't you think, my Lord, there was a 
sort of melancholy about him — a kind of sullen- 
ness. Crossed in love, I suspect. People crossed 
in love, Saint Chrysostom says, lose their voice. 

Lord Anophel Achthar. — Then I wish you 
were crossed in love, Grovelgrub, with all my 
heart. 

The Rev. Mr Grovelgrub. — Nay, my Lord, 
what so sweet in calamity as the voice of the 
spiritual comforter? All shall be well yet, my 
Lord. I have an infallible project hatching here : 
Miss Melincourt shall be ensconced in Alga 
Castle, and then the day is our own. 

Lord Anophel Achthar. — Grovelgrub, you know 
the old receipt for stewing a carp : " First, catch 
your carp." 

The Rev. Mr Grovelgrub. — Your Lordship is 
pleased to be facetious : but if the carp be not 
caught, let me be devilled like a biscuit after the 
second bottle, or a turkey's leg at a twelfth night 
supper. The carp shall be caught. 

Lord Anophel Achthar. — Well, Grovelgrub, only 
take notice that I'll not come again within ten 
miles of dummy. 

The Rev. Mr Grovelgrub. — You may rely upon 
it my Lord, I shall always know my distance from 



4 



The Council of War. 33 

the Honourable Baronet. But my plot is a good 
plot, and cannot fail of success. 

Lord Aftophel Achthar. — You are a very skilful 
contriver, to be sure : this is your contrivance, our ; 

perch on the top of this rock. Now contrive, if ? 

you can, some way of getting to the bottom of it. 

The Rev. Mr Grovelgrub. — My Lord, there is a 
passage in ^schylus very applicable to our situa- ^ 

tion, where the chorus wishes to be in precisely '^ 

such a place. ;; 

Lord Afwphel Achthar. — Then I wish the chorus ^ 

were here instead of us, Grovelgrub, with all my - 

soul. 

The Rev. Mr Grovelgrub. — It is a very fine ^^' 
passage, my Lord, and worth your attention : the 
rock is described as 

Xi(r(ras dLyiKi\f/ dvpoadeiKTOi 
dco(f>p<j}v eprj/xas 7U7rias irerpa, 
^adv TTTWfjLa fxapTvpovaa fioL.* 

That is, my Lord, a precipitous rock, inaccessible 
to the goat — not to be pointed at (from having, as 
I take it, its head in the clouds), where there is 
the loneliness of mind, and the soHtude of desola- 
tion, where the vulture has its nest, and the 
precipice testifies a deep and headlong fall. 

Lord Anophel Achthar. — I'll tell you what, 
Grovelgrub ; if ever I catch you quoting ^schylus 
again, I'll cashier you from your tutorship — that's 
positive. 

* Supplices. 807. Ed. Schutz. 
II. C 



34 Melincourt. 

The Rev. Mr Grovelgrub. — I am dumb, my 
Lord. 

Lord Aiiophel Achthar. — Think, I tell you, of 
some way of getting down. 

The Rev. Mr Grovelgrub. — Nothing more easy, 
my Lord. 

Lord Anophel Achthar. — Plummet fashion, I 
suppose? 

The Rev. Mr Grovelgrub. — Why, as your Lord- 
ship seems to hint, that certainly is the most ex- 
peditious method ; but not, I think, in all points of 
view, the most advisable. On this side of the rock 
is a dumetu7n: we can descend, I think, by the 
help of the roots and shoots. O dear ! I shall be 
like Virgil's goat : I shall be seen from far to hang 
from the bushy rock Du7nosd pendere procul de rupe 
videbor ! 

Lord Anophel Achthar. — Confound your Greek 
and Latin ! you know there is nothing I hate so 
much ; and I thought you did so too, or you have 
finished your education to no purpose at college. 

The Rev. Mr Grovelgrub. — I do, my Lord : I 
hate them mortally, more than anything except 
philosophy and the dumb Baronet. 

Lord Anophel Achthar proceeded to examine 
the side of the rock to which the Reverend Mr 
Grovelgrub had called his attention; and as it 
seemed the most practicable mode of descent, it 
was resolved to submit to necessity, and make a 
valorous effort to regain the valley ; Lord Anophel, 
however, insisting on the Reverend Mr Grovelgrub 



TJie Council of War. 35 

leading the way. The reverend gentleman seized 
with one hand the stem of a hazel, with the other 
the branch of an ash ; set one foot on the root of 
an oak, and deliberately lowered the other in 
search of a resting-place ; which having found on 
a projecting point of stone, he cautiously dis- 
engaged one hand and the upper foot, for which 
in turn he sought and found a firm appui ; and 
thus by little and little he vanished among the 
boughs from the sight of Lord Anophel, who pro- 
ceeded with great circumspection to follow his 
example. 

Lord Anophel had descended about one third of 
the elevation, comforting his ear with the rustling 
of the boughs below, that announced the safe 
progress of his reverend precursor : when suddenly, 
as he was shifting his right hand, a treacherous 
twig in his left gave way, and he fell with fearful 
lapse from bush to bush, till, striking violently on 
a bough to which the unfortunate divine was ap- 
pended, it broke beneath the shock, and down 
they went, crashing through the bushes together. * 
Lord Anophel was soon wedged into the middle of 
a large holly, from which he heard the intermitted 
sound of the boughs as they broke, and were 
broken by the fall of his companion : till at length 
they ceased, and fearful silence succeeded. He 

* Dr Gryffydh, the other night, trusting to a rotten branch, 
had a fall of fifteen feet perpendicular, and, but for an inter- 
vening hazel, would infallibly have been hurled to the bottom. 
Peacock to Hookham^ March 22, 1810. — G. 



36 Melincourt. 

then extricated himself from the holly as well as he 
could, at the expense of a scratched face, and 
lowered himself down without further accident. 
On reaching the bottom, he had the pleasure to 
find the reverend gentleman in safety, sitting on a 
fragment of stone, and rubbing his shin. " Come, 
Grovelgrub," said Lord Anophel, "let us make^ 
the best of our way to the nearest inn." — " And / 
pour oil and w^ine into our wounds," pursued the ^ 
reverend gentleman, " and over our Madeira and ; 
walnuts lay a more hopeful scheme for our next I 
campaign." 





CHAPTER XXIV. 

THE BAROUCHE. 

HE morning after the election Sir Oran 
Haut-ton and his party took leave of Mr 
Sarcastic, Mr Forester having previously 
obtained from him a promise to be present at the 
anti-saccharine fete. The barouche left the city of 
Novote, decorated with ribands : Sir Oran Haut- 
ton was loudly cheered by the populace, and not 
least by those whom he had most severely beaten ; 
the secret of which was, that a double allowance of 
ale had been distributed over-night, to wash away 
the effects of his indiscretion : it having been as- 
certained by political economists, that a practical I 
appeal either to the palm or the palate, will induce/ 
the friends of things as they are to submit tcy 
anything. 

Autumn was now touching on the confines of 
winter, but the day was mild and sunny. Sir 
Telegraph asked Mr Forester, if he did not think 
the mode of locomotion very agreeable ? 

Mr Forester. — That I never denied : all I ques- 
tion is, the right of any individual to indulge him- 
self in it. 



38' Melincourt, 

Sir Telegraph Paxarett. — Surely a man has a 
right to do what he pleases with his own money. 

Mr Forester. — A legal right, certainly, not a 
moral one. The possession of power does not 
justify its abuse. The quantity of money in a 
nation, the quantity of food, and the number of 
animals that consume that food, maintain a trian- 
gular harmony, of which, in all the fluctuations of 
time and circumstance, the proportions are always 
the same. You must consider, therefore, that for 
every horse you keep for pleasure, you pass sentence 
of non-existence on two human beings. 
^ Sir Telegraph Paxarett. — Really, Forester, you 
1 are a very singular fellow. I should not much mind 
what you say, if you had not such a strange habit 
of practising what you preach ) a thing quite unpre- 
cedented, and, egad, preposterous. I cannot 
think where you got it : I am sure you did not 
learn it at college. 

Mr Fax. — In a political light, every object of 
perception may be resolved into one of these three 
heads : the food consumed — the consumers — and 
money. In this point of view all convertible pro- 
perty that does not eat and drink, is money. 
Diamonds are money. When a man changes a 
bank-note for a diamond, he merely changes one 
sort of money for another, differing only in the 
facility of circulation and the stability of value. 
None of the produce of the earth is wasted by the 
permutation. 

Mr Forester. — The most pernicious species of 



The Barouche. 39 

luxury, therefore, is that which appHes the fruits of 
the earth to any other purposes than those of 
human subsistence. All luxury is indeed per- 
nicious, because its infaUible tendency is to ener- 
vate the few, and enslave the many : but luxury, 
which, in addition to this evil tendency, destroys 
the fruits of the earth in the wantonness of idle 
ostentation, and thereby prevents the existence of 
so many human beings, as the quantity of food so 
destroyed would maintain, is marked by criminality 
of a much deeper dye. 

Mr Fax. — At the same time you must consider, 
that, in respect of population, the great desideratum 
is not number, but quality. If the whole surface 
of this country were divided into gardens, and in 
every garden were a cottage, and in every cottage 
a family living entirely on potatoes, the number of 
its human inhabitants would be much greater than 
at present : but where would be the spirit of com- 
mercial enterprise, the researches of science, the 
exalted pursuits of philosophical leisure, the com- 
munication with distant lands, and all that variety 
of human life and intercourse, which is now so 
beautiful and interesting ? Above all, where would 
be the refuge of such a population in times of 
the slightest defalcation ? Now, the waste of 
plenty is the resource of scarcity. The canal that 
does not overflow in the season of rain, will not be 
navigable in the season of drought. The rich have 
been often ready, in days of emergency, to lay their 



40 Melincoiirt. 

superfluities aside ; but when the fruits of the 
earth are applied in plentiful or even ordinary 
seasons, to the utmost possibility of human subsis- 
tence, the days of deficiency in their produce must 
be days of inevitable famine. 

Mr Forester. — What then will you say of those, 
who in times of actual famine persevere in their old 
course, in the wanton waste of luxury ? 

Mr Fax. — Truly I have nothing to say for them 
but that they know not what they do. 

Mr Forester. — If, in any form of human society, 
any one human being dies of hunger, while another 
wastes or consumes in the wantonness of vanity as 
much as would have preserved his existence, I 
hold that second man guilty of the death of the 
first. 

Sir Telegraph Faxarett. — Surely, Forester, you 
are not serious. 

Mr Forester. — Indeed I am. What would you 
think of a family of four persons, two of whom 
should not be contented with consuming their own 
share of diurnal provision but, having adventitiously 
the pre-eminence of physical power, should either 
throw the share of the two others into the fire, or 
stew it down into a condiment for their own ? 

Sir Telegraph Faxarett. — I should think it 
very abominable, certainly. 

Mr Forester. — Yet what is human society but one 
great family ? What is moral duty, but that precise 
line of conduct which tends to promote the greatest 
degree of general happiness ? And is not this 



TJie Barouche. 41 

duty most flagrantly violated, when one man ap- 
propriates to himself the subsistence of twelve ; 
while, perhaps in his immediate neighbourhood 
eleven of his fellow-beings are dying with hunger ? 
I have seen such a man walk with a demure face 
into church, as regularly as if the Sunday bell had 
been a portion of his corporeal mechanism, to 
hear a bloated and beneficed sensuahst hold forth 
on the text of Do as ye would be done by, or Inas- 
much as ye have done it unto the least of these my 
brethren ye have done it unto me : whereas, if he had 
wished his theory to coincide Avith his practice he 
would have chosen for his text, Behold a 7nan 
gluttonous aiid a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans 
and sinners:"^ and when the duty of words was 
over, the auditor and his ghostly adviser, issuing 
forth together, have committed poor Lazarus to 
the care of Providence, and proceeded to feast in 
the lordly mansion, like Dives that lived in 
purple, t 

* Matthew xi. 19. 

+ " He that will mould a modern bishop into a primitive, 
must yield him to he elected by the popular voice, undio- 
cesed, uurevenued, unlorded, and leave him nothing but 
brotherly equality, matchless temperance, frequent fasting, 
incessant prayer and preaching, continual watchings and 
labours in his ministry, which, what a rich booty it would be, 
what a plump endowment to the many-benefice-gaping mouth 
of a prelate, what a relish it would give to his canary-sucking 
and swan-eating palate, let old bishop Mountain judge for 
me. — They beseech us, that we would think them fit to be 
our justices of peace, our lords, our highest officers of state, 
though they come furnished with no more knowledge than 



42 Melincourt. 

Sir Telegraph Paxarett. — Well, Forester, there 
I escape your shaft; for I have "forgotten what 
the inside of a church is made of," since they made 
me go to chapel twice a day at college. But go 
on, and don't spare me. 

Mr Fax. — Let us suppose that ten thousand 
quarters of wheat will maintain ten thousand 
persons during any given portion of time : if the 
ten thousand quarters be reduced to five, or if the 
ten thousand persons be increased to twenty, the 
consequence will be immediate and general dis- 
tress : yet if the proportions be equally distributed, 
as in a ship on short allowance, the general per- 
ception of necessity and justice will preserve 
general patience and mutual good-will; but let 
the first supposition remain unaltered, let there be 
ten thousand quarters of wheat, which shall be full 
allowance for ten thousand people; then, if four 
thousand persons take to themselves the portion of 
eight thousand, and leave to the remaining six 
thousand the portion of two (and this I fear is even 
an inadequate picture of the common practice of 
the world), these latter will be in a much worse 
condition on the last than on the first supposition : 
while the habit of selfish prodigality deadening all 
good feelings and extinguishing all sympathy on 
the one hand, and the habit of debasement and 

they learnt between the cook and the manciple, or more 
profoundly at the college audit, or the regent house, or to 
come to their deepest insight, at their patron's table." — 
Milton : Of Reformation in England. 



The Barouche. 43 

suffering combining with the inevitable sense of 
oppression and injustice on the other, will produce 
an action and re-action of open, unblushing, cold- 
hearted pride, and servile, inefficient, ill-disguised 
resentment, which no philanthropist can contem- 
plate without dismay. 

Air Forester. — What then will be the case if the 
same disproportionate division continues by regular 
gradations through the remaining six thousand, till 
the lowest thousand receive such a fractional pit- 
tance as will scarcely keep life together ? If any 
of these perish with hunger, what are they but the 
victims of the first four thousand, who appropriated 
more to themselves than either nature required or 
justice allowed? This, w^hatever the temporizers 
with the world may say of it, I have no hesitation 
in pronouncing to be wickedness of the most atro- 
cious kind : and this I make no doubt was the 
sense of the founder of the Christian religion when 
he said. It is easier for a camel to pass through 
the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter 
t/ie kingdom of heaven. 

Mr Fax. — You must beware of the chimsera of 
an agrarian law, the revolutionary doctrine of an 
equality of possession: which can never be possible 
in practice, till the whole constitution of human 
nature be changed. 

Mr Forester. — I am no revolutionist. I am no 
advocate for violent and arbitrary changes in the 
state of society. I care not in what proportions 
property is divided (though I think there are 



44 Melincourt. 

certain limits which it ought never to pass, and 
approve the wisdom of the American laws in re- 
stricting the fortune of a private citizen to twenty 
thousand a year), provided the rich can be 
made to know that they are but the stewards of 
the poor, that they are not to be the monopolizers 
of solitary spoil, but the distributors of general pos- 
session ; that they are responsible for that distribu- 
tion to every principle of general justice, to every 
tie of moral obligation, to every feeling of human 
sympathy : that they are bound to cultivate simple 
habits in themselves, and to encourage most such 
arts of industry and peace, as are most compatible 
with the health and liberty of others. 

Mr Fax. — On this principle, then, any species 
of luxury in the artificial adornment of persons and 
dwellings, which condemns the artificer to a life of 
pain and sickness in the alternations of the furnace 
and the cellar, is more baleful and more criminal 
than even that which consuming in idle prodigality 
the fruits of the earth, destroys altogether in the pro- 
portion of its waste, so much of the possibility of 
human existence : since it is better not to be than 
to be in misery. 

Sir Telegraph Paxarett. — That is some consola- 
tion for me, as it shows me that there are others 
worse than myself: for I really thought you were 
going between you to prove me one of the greatest 
rogues in England. But seriously, Forester, you 
think the keeping of pleasure-horses, for the,reasons 
you have given, a selfish and criminal species of 
luxury ? 



The Barouche. 45 

Mr Forester. — I am so far persuaded of it, that 
I keep none myself. 

Sir Teleg7'aph Paxa?'eti. — But are not these four 
very beautiful creatures? Would you wish not to 
see them in existence, living as they do, a very 
happy and easy kind of life ? 

Mr Forester. — That I am disposed to question, 
when I compare the wild horse, in his native 
deserts, in the full enjoyment of health and 
liberty, and all the energies of his nature, with 
those docked, cropped, curtailed, mutilated animals, 
pent more than half their lives in the close con- 
finement of a stable, never let out but to run in 
trammels, subject, like their tyrant man, to an 
infinite variety of diseases, the produce of civiliza- 
tion and unnatural life, and tortured every now and 
then by some villain of a farrier, who has no more 
feeling for them than a West Indian planter has for 
his slaves ; and when you consider, too, the fate of 
the most cherished of the species, racers and 
hunters, instruments and often victims of sports 
equally fooHsh and cruel, you will acknowledge 
that the life of the civilized horse is not an 
enviable destiny. 

Mr Fax. — Horses are noble and useful animals ; 
but as they must necessarily exist in great numbers 
for almost every purpose of human intercourse 
and business, it is desirable that none should 
be kept for purposes of mere idleness and osten- 
tation. A pleasure-horse is a sort of four-footed 
sinecurist. 



46 Melincourt. 

Sir Telegraph Paxaretf. — Not quite so mischiev- 
ous as a two-footed one. 

Mr Forester. — Perhaps not : but the latter has 
ahvays a large retinue of the former, and therefore 
the evil is doubled. 

Sir Telegraph Paxaretf. — Upon my word, 
Forester, you will almost talk me out of my 
barouche, and then what will become of me? 
What shall I do to kill time? 

Mr Forester. — Read ancient books, the only 
source of permanent happiness left in this degener- 
ate world. 

Sir Telegraph Paxarett. — Read ancient books ! 
That may be very good advice to some people : but 
you forget that I have been at college, and finished 
my education. By-the-by I have one inside, a port- 
able advocate for my proceedings, no less a person- 
age than old Pindar. 

Mr Forester. — Pindar has written very fine odes 
on driving, as Anacreon has done on drinking ; but 
the first can no more be adduced to prove the 
morality of the whip, than the second to demonstrate 
the virtue of intemperance. Besides, as to the 
mental tendency and emulative associations of 
the pursuit itself, no comparison can be instituted 
between the charioteers of the Olympic games, and 
those of our turnpike roads ; for the former were 
the emulators of heroes and demigods, and the 
latter of grooms and mail coachmen - 

Sir Telegraph Paxarett. — Well, Forester, as I 
recall to mind the various subjects against which I 



The Bai'ouche. 47 

have heard you declaim, I will make you a promise. 
When ecclesiastical dignitaries imitate the temper- 
ance and humility of the founder of that religion by 
which they feed and flourish : when the man in 
place acts on the principles which he professed 
while he was out : when borough electors will not 
sell their suffrage, nor their representatives their 
votes : when poets are not to be hired for the 
maintenance of any opinion : when learned divines 
can afford to have a conscience : when universities 
are not a hundred years in knowledge behind all 
the rest of the world : when young ladies speak as 
they think, and when those who shudder at a tale 
of the horrors of slavery will deprive their own 
palates of a sweet taste, for the purpose of con- 
tributing all in their power to its extinction : — why 
then. Forester, I will lay down my barouche. 



CHAPTER XXV. 



THE WALK. 




^HEY were to pass, in their return, through 
an estate belonging to Mr Forester, for 
the purpose of taking up his aunt Miss 
Evergreen, who was to accompany them to Red- 
rose Abbey. On arriving at an inn on the nearest 
point of the great road, Mr Forester told Sir Tele- 
graph, that, from the arrangements he had made, 
it was impossible for any carriage to enter his 
estate, as he had taken every precaution for pre- 
serving the simplicity of his tenants from the con- 
tagious exhibitions and examples of luxury. " This 
road," said he, " is only accessible to pedestrians 
and equestrians : I have no wish to exclude the 
visits of laudable curiosity, but there is nothing I so 
much dread and deprecate as the intrusion of those 
heartless fops, who take their fashionable autumnal 
tour, to gape at rocks and waterfalls, for which 
they have neither eyes nor .ears, and to pervert the 
feelings and habits of the once simple dwellers of 
the mountains.* Nature seems to have raised her 

* "Much have those travellers to answer for, whose 
casual intercourse with this innocent and simple people tends 



The Walk. 49 

mountain-barriers for the purpose of rescuing a few 
favoured mortals from the vortex of that torrent of 

to corrupt them : disseminating among them ideas of ex- 
travagance and dissipation — giving them a taste for pleasures 
and gratifications of which they had no ideas — inspiring them 
with discontent at home — and tainting their rough indus- 
trious manners with idleness and a thirst after dishonest 
means. 

" If travellers would frequent this country with a view to 
examine its grandeur and beauty, or to explore its varied and 
curious regions with the eye of philosophy — if, in their 
passage through it, they could be content with such fare as 
the country produces, or at least reconcile themselves to it, 
by manly exercise and fatigue (for there is a time when the 
stomach and the plainest food will be found in perfect har- 
mony) — if they could thus, instead of corrupting the manners 
of an innocent people, learn to amend their own, by seeing in 
how narrow a compass the wants of human life may be 
compressed — a journey through these wild scenes might be 
attended, perhaps, with more improvement than a journey 
to Rome or Paris. Where manners are polished into vicious 
refinement, simplifying is the best mode of improving ; and 
the example of innocence is a more instructive lesson than 
any that can be taught by artists and literati. 

" But these parts are too often the resort of gay company, 
who are under no impressions of this kind — who have no 
ideas but of extending the sphere of their amusements, or of 
varying a life of dissipation. The grandeur of the country 
is not taken into the question, or at least it is not otherwise 
considered than as affording some new mode of pleasurable 
enjoyment. Thus, even the diversions of Newmarket are 
introduced — diversions, one would imagine, more foreign to 
the nature of this country than any other. A number of 
horses are carried into the middle of the lake in a flat boat : 
a plug is drawn from the bottom : the boat sinks, and the 
horses are left floating on the surface. In different directions 
II. D 



50 Melincourt. 

physical and moral degeneracy, which seems to 
threaten nothing less than the extermination of the 
human species : * but in vain, while the annual 
opening of its sluices lets out a side stream of the 
worst specimens of what is called refined society, 
to inundate the mountain valleys with the corrup- 
tions of metropolitan folly. Thus innocence, and 
health, and simplicity of life and manners, are 
banished from their last retirement, and nowhere 
more lamentably so than in the romantic scenery 
of the northern lakes, where every wonder of 
nature is made an article of trade, where the 
cataracts are locked up, and the echoes are sold : so 
that even the rustic character of that ill-fated region 
is condemned to participate in the moral stigma 
which must dwell indelibly on its poetical name." 

The party alighted, and a consultation being 
held, it was resolved to walk to the village in a 

they make to land, and the horse which arrives soonest 
secures the prize." — Gilpin's Picturesque Observations on 
Cumberland and IVestmoreland, vol. ii. p. 67. 

* " The necessary consequence of men living in so unnatural 
a way with respect to houses, clothes, and diet, and continu- 
ing to live so for many generations, each generation adding to 
the vices, diseases, and Aveaknesses produced by the unnatural 
life of the preceding, is, that they must gradually decline in 
strength, health, and longevity, till at length the race dies out. 
To deny this would be to deny that the life allotted by 
nature to man is the best life for the preservation of his 
health and strength ; for, if it be so, I think it is demonstra- 
tion that the constant deviation from it, going on for many 
centuries, must end in the extinction of the race." — Ancient 
Metaphysics^ vol. v. p. 237. 



The Walk. 51 

body, the Honourable Mrs Pinmoney lifting her 
hands and eyes in profound astonishment at Mr 
Forester's old-fashioned notions. 

They followed a narrow winding path, through 
rocky and sylvan hills. They walked in straggling 
parties of ones, twos, and threes. Mr Forester 
and Anthelia went first. Sir Oran Haut-ton 
followed alone, playing a pensive tune on his 
flute. Sir Telegraph Paxarett walked between 
his aunt and cousin, the Honourable Mrs Pin- 
money and Miss Danaretta. Mr Hippy, in a 
melancholy vein, brought up the rear with Mr 
Fax. A very beautiful child which had sat on 
the old gentleman's knee, at the inn where they 
breakfasted, had thrown him, not for the first 
time on a similar occasion, into a fit of dismal 
repentance, that he had not one of his own : he 
stalked along accordingly, with a most ruefully 
lengthened aspect, uttering every now and then 
a deep-drawn sigh. Mr Fax in philosophic 
sympathy determined to console him, by pointing 
out to him the true nature and tendency of the 
principle of population, and the enormous evils 
resulting from the multiplication of the human 
species : observing that the only true criterion of 
the happiness of a nation was to be found in the 
number of its old maids and bachelors, whom he 
venerated as the sources and symbols of prosperity 
and peace. Poor Mr Hippy walked on sighing 
and groaning, deaf as the adder to the voice of 
the charmer : for, in spite of all the eloquence of 



52 Melincourt. 

the antipopulationist, the image of the beautiful 
child which he had danced on his knee, continued 
to haunt his imagination, and threatened him with 
the blue devils for the rest of the day. 

" I see," said Sir Telegraph to Mrs Pinmoney, 
" my hopes are at an end. Forester is the happy 
man, though I am by no means sure that he 
knows it himself." 

" Impossible," said Mrs Pinmoney, " Anthelia 
may be amused a little while with his rhapsodies, 
but nothing more, believe me. The man is out 
of his mind. Do you know, I heard him say the 
other day, ' that not a shilling of his property was 
his own, that it was a portion of the general 
possession of human society, of which the distri- 
bution had devolved upon him : and that for 
the mode of that distribution he was most rigidly 
responsible to the principles of immutable justice,""^ 
If such a mode of talking " 

" And acting too," said Sir Telegraph ; " for I 
assure you he quadrates his practice as nearly as 
he can to his theory." 

" Monstrous !" said Mrs Pinmoney, " what would 
our reverend friend, poor dear Doctor Bosky, say 
to him ? But if such a way of talking and acting 
be tlje way to win a young heiress, I shall think 
the whole world is turned topsy-turvy." 

* That I should entail ^^ 120,000 of command over labour, 
of power to remit this, to employ it for beneficent purposes, 
on one whom I know not — who might, instead of being the 
benefactor of mankind, be its bane ! " — Shelley to Miss 
Hitchener, Dec. 15, 1811.— G. 



The Walk. 53 

"Your remark would be just," said Sir Telegraph, 
" were that young heiress any other than Anthelia 
Melincourt." 

" Well," said Mrs Pinmoney, " there are 
maidens in Scotland more lovely by far " 

" That I deny," said Sir Telegraph. 

" Who will gladly be bride to the young 
Lochinvar," proceeded Mrs Pinmoney. 

" That will not do," said Sir Telegraph : "I 
shall resign with the best grace I can muster to 
a more favoured candidate, but I shall never think 
of another choice." 

"Twelve months hence," said ]\Irs Pinmoney, 
"you will tell another tale. In the meantime you 
will not die of despair as long as there is a good 
turnpike road and a pipe of Madeira in England." 

" You will find," said Mr Forester to Anthelia, 
"in the little valley we are about to enter, a few 
specimens of that simple and natural life which 
approaches as nearly as the present state of 
things will admit, to my ideas of the habits and 
manners of the primaeval agriculturists, or the 
fathers of the Roman republic. You will think 
perhaps of Fabricius under his oak, of Curius in 
his cottage, of Regulus, when he solicited recall 
from the command of an army, because the man 
whom he had intrusted, in his absence, with the 
cultivation of his field and garden, had run away 
with his spade and rake, by which his wdfe and 
children were left without support ; and when the 



54 Melincourt. 

senate decreed that the implements should be 
replaced, and a man provided at the public 
expense to maintain the consul's family, by culti- 
vating his fields in his absence. Then poverty 
was as honourable, as it is now disgraceful : then 
the same public respect was given to him who 
could most simplify his habits and manners, that 
is now paid to those who can make the most 
shameless parade of wanton and selfish pro- 
digality. Those days are past for ever : but it 
is something in the present tiuie to resuscitate 
their memory, to call up even the shadow of the 
reflection of republican Rome — Rome the seat of 
glory and of vt7'ttie, if ever they had 07ie on earth* 

"You excite my curiosity very highly," said 
Anthelia, " for, from the time when I read 

' in those dear books that first 

Woke in my heart the love of poesy, 
How with the villagers Erminia dwelt, 
And Calidore, for a fair shepherdess, 
Forgot his guest to learn the shepherd's lore ; ' 

how much have I regretted never to discover in 
the actual inhabitants of the country, the realization 
of the pictures of Spenser and Tasso ! " 

" The palaces," said Mr Forester, " that every- 
where rise around them to shame the meanness of 
their humble dwellings, the great roads that every- 
where intersect their valleys, and bring them 
continually in contact with the overflowing corrup- 

* '* Rome, le sifege de la gloire et de la vertu, si jamais 
elles en eurent un sur la terre."— RoussEAU. 



The Walk. 55 

tion of cities, the devastating monopoly of large 
farms, that has almost swept the race of cottagers 
from the face of the earth, sending the parents to 
the workhouse or the army, and the children to 
perish like untimely blossoms in the blighting 
imprisonment of manufactories, have combined to 
diminish the numbers and deteriorate the character 
of the inhabitants of the country : but whatever be 
the increasing ravages of the Triad of Mammon, 
avarice, luxury, and disease, they will always be 
the last involved in the vortex of progressive 
degeneracy, realizing the beautiful fiction of 
ancient poetry, that, when primaeval Justice de- 
parted from the earth, her last steps were among 
the cultivators of the fields.""^ 

* *' extrema per illos 

Justitia, excedens terris, vestigia fecit." — ViRG. 




CHAPTER XXVL 



THE COTTAGERS. 




HE valley expanded into a spacious amphi- 
theatre, with a beautiful stream winding 
among pastoral meadows, which, as well 
as the surrounding hills, were studded with 
cottages, each with its own trees, its little garden, 
and its farm. Sir Telegraph was astonished to 
find so many human dwellings in a space that, on 
the modern tactics of rural economy, appeared only 
sufficient for three or four moderate farms ; and Mr 
Fax looked perfectly aghast to perceive the 
principle of population in such a fearful state of 
activity. Mrs and Miss Pinmoney expressed their 
surprise at not seeing a single lordly mansion 
asserting its regal pre-eminence over the dwellings 
of its miserable vassals; while the voices of the 
children at play served only to condense the 
vapours that obfuscated the imagination of poor Mr 
Hippy. Anthelia, as their path wound among the 
cottages, was more and more delighted with the 
neatness and comfort of the dwellings, the exquisite 
order of the gardens, the ingenuous air of happi- 



TJie Cottagers. 57 

ness and liberty that characterized the simple 
inhabitants, and the health and beauty of the little 
rosy children that were sporting in the fields. Mr 
Forester had been recognized from a distance. 
The cottagers ran out in all directions to welcome 
him : the valley and the hills seemed starting into 
life, as men, women, and children poured down, 
as with one impulse, on the path of his approach, 
while some hastened to the residence of Miss 
Evergreen, ambitious of being the first to announce 
to her the arrival of her nephew. Miss Evergreen 
came forward to meet the party, surrounded by a 
rustic crowd of both sexes, and of every age, from 
the old man leaning on his stick, to the little child 
that could just run alone, but had already learned 
to attach something magical to the sound of the 
name of Forester. 

The first idea they entertained at the sight of 
his party was that he was married, and had brought 
his bride to visit his little colony \ and Anthelia 
was somewhat disconcerted by the benedictions 
that were poured upon her under this impression 
of the warm-hearted rustics. 

They entered Miss Evergreen's cottage, which 
was small, but in a style of beautiful simplicity. 
Anthelia was much pleased with her countenance 
and manners ; for Miss Evergreen was an amiable 
and intelligent woman, and was single, not from 
having wanted lovers, but from being of that order 
of minds which can love but once. 

Mr Fax took occasion, during a temporary 



58 Melincourt. 

absence of Miss Evergreen from the apartment in 
which they were taking refreshment, to say, he 
was happy to have seen so amiable a specimen of 
that injured and calumniated class of human 
beings commonly called old maids, who were 
often so from possessing in too high a degree the 
qualities most conducive to domestic happiness ; 
for it might naturally be imagined that the least 
refined and delicate minds would be the soonest 
satisfied in the choice of a partner, and the most 
ready to repair the loss of a first love by the substi- 
tution of a second. This might have led to a 
discussion, but Miss Evergreen's re-entrance pre- 
vented it. They now strolled out among the 
cottages in detached parties and in different 
directions. Mr Fax attached himself to Mr Hippy 
and Miss Evergreen. Anthelia and Mr Forester 
went their own way. She was above the little 
affectation of feehng her dignity offended, as our 
female novel-writers express it, by the notions 
which the peasants had formed respecting her. 
"You see," said Mr Forester, "I have en- 
deavoured as much as possible to recall the images 
of better times, when the country was well peopled, 
from the farms being small, and cultivated chiefly 
by cottagers who lived in what was in Scotland 
called a cottar toivn."^ Now you may go over vast 
tracts of country without seeing anything like an 
old English Cottage^ to say nothing of the fearful 
difference which has been caused in the interior of 
* Ancient Metaphysics, vol. v. book iv. chap. 8. 



The Cottagers. 59 

the few that remain by the pressure of exorbitant 
taxation, of which the real, though not the nominal 
burden, always falls most heavily on the labouring 
classes, backed by that canker at the heart of national 
prosperity, the imaginary riches of paper-credit, of 
which the means are delusion, the progress mon- 
opoly, and the ultimate effect the extinction of the 
best portion of national population, a healthy and 
industrious peasantry. Large farms bring more 
rent to the landlord, and therefore, landlords in 
general make no scruple to increase their rents by 
depopulating their estates,* though Anthelia Melin- 
court will not comprehend the mental principle in 
which such feelings originate." 

"Is it possible," said Anthelia, " that you, so 
young as you are, can have created such a scene 
as this ? " 

" My father," said Mr Forester, " began what 
I merely perpetuate. He estimated his riches, not 
by the amount of rent his estate produced, but the 
number of simple and happy beings it maintained. 
He divided it into little farms of such a size as 
were sufficient, even in indifferent seasons, to pro- 
duce rather more than the necessities of their 
-cultivators required. So that all these cottagers 
are rich, according to the definition of Socrates ; t 
for they have at all times a little more than they 
actually need, a subsidiura for age or sickness, or 
any accidental necessity." 

* Ancient Metaphysics, vol. v. book iv. chap. 8. 
t See Xeyiophons Memorabilia. 



6o Melincourt. 

They entered several of the cottages, and found 
in them all the same traces of comfort and con- 
tent, and the same images of the better days 
of England : the clean-tiled floor, the polished 
beechen table, the tea-cups on the chimney, the 
dresser with its glittering dishes, the old woman 
with her spinning-wheel by the fire, and the 
old man with his little grandson in the garden, 
giving him his first lessons in the use of 
the spade, the good wife busy in her domestic 
arangements, and the pot boiling on the fire 
for the return of her husband from his labour in 
the field. 

" Is it not astonishing," said Mr Forester, " that 
there should be any who think, as I know many 
do, the number of cottagers on their land a 
grievance, and desire to be quit of them,"^ and 
have no feeling of remorse in allotting to one 
solitary family as much extent of cultivated land 
as was ploughed by the whole Roman people in 
the days of Cincinnatus ? f The three great 
points of every political system are the health, 
the morals, and the number of the people. With- 
out health and morals, the people cannot be 
happy ; but without numbers they cannot be a 
great and powerful nation, nor even exist for any 
considerable time.J And by numbers I do not 

* Ancient Metaphysics, vol. v. book iv. chap, 8. 
t Si tantum culti solus possederis agri, 

Quantum sub Tatio populus Romanus arabat. — ^Juv. 
\ Ancient Metaphysics, vol. v; book iv. chap. 8. 



The Cottagers. 6 1 

mean the inhabitants of the cities, the sordid and 
sickly victims of commerce, and the effeminate and 
enervated slaves of luxury ; but in estimating the 
power and the riches of a country, I take my only 
criterion from its agricultural population." 





CHAPTER XXVII. 



THE ANTI-SACCHARINE FETE. 




ISS EVERGREEN accompanied them in 
their return, to preside at the Anti-sac- 
charine fete. Mr Hippy was turned out 
to make room for her in the barouche, and took 
his seat on the roof with Messieurs Forester and 
Fax. Antheha no longer deemed it necessary to 
keep a guard over her heart : the bud of mutual 
affection between herself and Mr Forester, both 
being, as they were, perfectly free and perfectly 
ingenuous, was rapidly expanding into the full 
bloom of happiness : they dreamed not that evil 
was near to check, if not to wither it. 

The whole party was prevailed on by Miss Ever- 
green to be her guests at Redrose Abbey till after 
the Anti-saccharine fete, which very shortly took 
place, and was attended by the principal members 
of the Anti-saccharine Society, and by an illustrious 
assemblage from near and from far : amongst the 
rest by our old acquaintance, Mr Derrydown, Mr 
O'Scarum, Major O'Dogskin, Mr Sarcastic, the 
Reverend Mr Portpipe, and Mr Feathernest the 



The Anti- Saccharine Fete. 63 

poet, who brought with him his friend Mr Vamp 
the reviewer. Lord Anophel Achthar and the 
Reverend Mr Grovelgrub deemed it not expedient 
to join the party, but ensconced themselves in 
Alga Castle, studying michin vialicho^ which means 
mischief. 

The Anti-saccharine fete commenced with a 
splendid dinner, as Mr Forester thought to make 
luxury on this occasion subservient to morality, by 
showing what culinary art could effect without the 
intervention of West Indian produce; and the 
preparers of the feast, under the superintendence 
of Miss Evergreen, had succeeded so well, that 
the company testified very general satisfaction, 
except that a worthy Alderman and Baronet from 
London (who had been studying the picturesque at 
Low-wood Inn, and had given several manifesta- 
tions of exquisite taste that had completely won 
the hearts of Mr O'Scarum and Major O'Dogskin) 
having just helped himself to a slice of venison, 
fell back aghast against the back of his chair, and 
dropped the knife and fork from his nerveless 
hands, on finding that currant-jelly was prohibited: 
but being recovered by an application of the 
Honourable Mrs Pinmoney's vinaigrette, he pro- 
ceeded to revenge himself on a very fine pheasant, 
which he washed down with floods of Madeira, 
being never at a loss for some one to take wine 
with him, as he had the good fortune to sit opposite 
to the Reverend Mr Portpipe, who was toujours 
pret on the occasion, and a coup-cVoiil between 



64 Melincourt. 

them arranged the whole preliminary of the com- 
potatory ceremonial. 

After dinner Mr Forester addressed the company. 
They had seen, he said, that culinary luxury could 
be carried to a great degree of refinement without 
the intervention of West Indian produce : and 
though he himself deprecated luxury altogether, 
yet he would waive that point for the present, and 
concede a certain degree of it to those who fancied 
they could not do without it, if they would only in 
return make so very slight a concession to philan- 
thropy, to justice, to liberty, to every feeling of 
human sympathy, as to abstain from an indulgence 
which was obtained by the most atrocious violation 
of them all, an indulgence of which the foundations 
were tyranny, robbery, and murder, and every form 
of evil, anguish, and oppression, at which humanity 
shudders ; all which were comprehended in the 
single name of Slavery. " Sugar," said he, " is 
economically superfluous, nay, worse than super- 
fluous : in the middling classes of life it is a 
formidable addition to the expenses of a large 
family, and for no benefit, for no addition to the 
stock of domestic comfort, which is often sacrificed 
in more essential points to this frivolous and wanton 
indulgence. It is physically pernicious, as its 
destruction of the teeth, and its eff"ects on the 
health of children much pampered with sweet- 
meats, sufficiently demonstrate. It is morally 
atrocious, from being the primary cause of the 
most complicated corporeal suffering and the most 



The Anti-Saccharine Fete. 65 

abject mental degradation that ever outraged the 
form and polluted the spirit of man. It is politi- 
cally abominable, for covering with every variety of 
wretchedness some of the fairest portions of the 
earth, which, if the inhabitants of free countries 
could be persuaded to abstain from sugar^ till it 
were sent to them by freemen^ might soon become 
the abodes of happiness and liberty. Slaves cannot 
breathe in the air of England : ' They touch our 
country and their fetters fall.' Who is there among 
you that is not proud of this distinction ? — Yet this 
is not enough : the produce of the labour of 
slavery should be banished from our shores. Not 
anything, not an atom of anything, should enter 
an Englishman's dwelling, on which the Genius 
of Liberty had not set his seal. What would be- 
come of slavery if there were no consumers of its 
produce ? Yet I have seen a party of pretended 
philanthropists sitting round a tea-table, and while 
they dropped the sugar into their cups, repeat some 
tale of the sufferings of a slave, and execrate the 
colonial planters, who are but their caterers and 
stewards — the obsequious ministers of their unfeel- 
ing sensuality ! O my fair countrywomen ! you 
who have such tender hearts, such affectionate 
spirits, such amiable and delicate feelings, do you 
consider the mass of mischief and cruelty to which 
you contribute, nay, of which you are among the 
primary causes, when you indulge yourselves in so 
paltry, so contemptible a gratification as results 
from the use of sugar? while to abstain from it 
II, E 



66 Melincoitrt. 

entirely, is a privation so trivial, that it is most 
wonderful to think that Justice and Charity should 
have such a boon to beg from Beauty in the name 
of the blood and the tears of human beings. Be not 
deterred by the idea that you will have few com- 
panions by the better way : so much the rather 
should it be strictly followed by amiable and bene- 
volent minds.* Secure to yourselves at least the 
delightful consciousness of reflecting that you are 
in no way whatever accomplices in the cruelty and 
crime of slavery, and accomplices in it you cer- 
tainly are, nay, its very original springs, as long as 
you are receivers and consumers of its iniquitous 
acquisitions." 

" I will answer you, Mr Forester," said Mr Sar- 
castic, " for myself and the rest of the company. 
You shock our feelings excessively by calling us 
the primary causes of slavery ; and there are very 
few among us who have not shuddered at the 
tales of West Indian cruelty. I assure you we are 
very liberal of theoretical sympathy ; but as to prac- 
tical abstinence from the use of sugar, do you con-/ 
sider what it is you require ? Do you consider how 
very agreeable to us is the sensation of sweetness 
in our palates ? Do you suppose we would give up 
that sensation because human creatures of the same 
flesh and blood as ourselves are oppressed and 
enslaved, and flogged and tortured, to procure it for 

* " Pochi compagni avrai per I'altra via : 
Tanto ti prego piu, gentile spirto, 
Non lasciar ia raagnanima tua impresa." — Petrarca. 



The Antz-Saccharme Fete. 6y 

us ? Do you consider that Custom* is the great lord 
and master of our conduct ? And do you suppose 

* " If it were seriously asked (and it would be no untimely 
question), who of all teachers and masters that have ever 
taught hath drawm the most disciples after him, both in 
religion and in manners, it might be not untruly answered, 
Custom. Though Virtue be commended for the most per- 
suasive in her theory, and Conscience in the plain demon- 
stration of the spirit tinds most evincing ; yet, whether it be 
the secret of divine will, or the original blindness we are 
bom in, so it happens for the most part, that Custom still is 
silently received for the best instructor. Except it be be- 
cause her method is so glib and easy, in some manner like to 
that vision of Ezekiel, rolling up her sudden book of im- 
plicit knowledge, for him that will to take and swallow 
down at pleasure ; which proving but of bad nourishment 
in the concoction, as it was heedless in the devouring, puffs 
up unhealthily a certain big face of pretended learning, 
mistaken among credulous men for the wholesome habit of 
soundness and good constitution, but is, indeed, no other 
than that swoln visage of counterfeit knowledge and litera- 
ture which not only in private mars our education, but also 
in public is the common climber into every chair where 
either religion is preached or law reported, filling each estate 
of life and profession with abject and servile principles, de- 
pressing the high and heaven-born spirit of man, far beneath 
the condition wherein either God created him, or sin hath 
sunk him. To pursue the allegory, Custom being but a mere 
face, as Echo is a mere voice, rests not in her unaccomplish- 
ment, until by secret inclination she accorporate herself with 
Error, who being a blind and serpentine body, without a head, 
willingly accepts what he wants, and supplies what her in- 
completeness went seeking : hence it is that Error supports 
Custom, Custom countenances Error, and these two, between 
them, would persecute and chase away all tmth and solid 
wisdom out of human life, were it not that God, rather than 



68 Melincourt. 

that any feeling of pity, and sympathy, and charity, 
and benevolence, and justice, will overcome the 
power of Custom, more especially where any 
pleasure of sense is attached to his dominion ? In 
appealing to our pockets, indeed, you touched us 
to the quick : you aimed your eloquence at our 
weak side — you hit us in the vulnerable point; but 
if it should appear that in this particular we really 
might save our money, yet being expended in a 
matter of personal and sensual gratification, it is 
not to be supposed so completely lost and wasted 
as it would be if it were given either to a friend or 
a stranger in distress. I will admit, however, that 
you have touched our feelings a little, but this dis- 
agreeable impression will soon wear off: with some 
of us it will last as long as pity for a starving 

man, once in many ages calls together the prudent and reli- 
gious counsels of men deputed to repress the encroachments, 
and to work off the inveterate blots and obscurities wrought 
upon our minds by the subtle insinuating of Error and Custom, 
who, with the numerous and vulgar train of their followers, 
make it their cliief design to envy and cry down the industry 
of free reasoning, under the terms of humour and innovation, 
as if the womb of teeming Truth were to be closed up, if she 
presume to bring forth aught that sorts not with their un- 
chewed notions and suppositions ; against which notorious 
injury and abuse of man's free soul, to testify and oppose the 
utmost that study and true labour can attain, heretofore the 
incitement of men reputed grave hath led me among others, 
and now the duty and the right of an instructed Christian 
calls me through the chance of good or evil report to be 

THE SOLE ADVOCATE OF A DISCOUNTENANCED TRUTH." — 

Milton : The Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce, 



"^ 



TJic A7iti-SaccJiarine Fete. 69 

beggar, and with others as long as grief for the 
death of a friend ; and I find, on a very accurate 
average calculation, that the duration of the former 
may be considered to be at least three minutes, 
and that of the latter at most ten days." 

" IMr Sarcastic," said Anthelia, " you do not 
render justice to the feelings of the company ; nor 
is human nature so selfish and perverted as you 
seem to consider it. Though there are undoubt- 
edly many who sacrifice the general happiness of 
human kind to their own selfish gratification, yet 
even these, I am willing to believe, err not in 
cruelty but in ignorance, from not seeing the con- 
sequences of their own actions \ but it is not by 
persuading them that all the world is as bad as 
themselves, that you will give them clearer views 
and better feelings. Many are the modes of evil 
— many the scenes of human suffering ; but if the 
general condition of man is ever to be ameliorated, 
it can only be through the medium of belief in 

HUMAN VIRTUE." 

" Well, Forester," said Sir Telegraph, " if you 
wish to increase the numbers of the Anti-saccharine 
Society, set me down for one." 

" Remember," said Mr Forester, " by enroUing 
your name among us you pledge yourself to per- 
petual abstinence from West Indian produce." 

" I am aware of it," said Sir Telegraph, " and 
you shall find me zealous in the cause." 

The fat Alderman cried out about the ruin of 
commerce, and Mr Vamp was very hot on the 



70 Mclincourt. 

subject of the revenue. The question was warmly 
canvassed, and many of the party who had not 
been quite persuaded by what Mr Forester had 
said in behalf of the Anti-saccharine system, were 
perfectly convinced in its favour when they had 
heard what Mr Vamp and the fat Alderman had 
to say against it ; and the consequence was, that, 
in spite of Mr Sarcastic's opinion of the general 
selfishness of mankind, the numbers of the Anti- 
saccharine Society were very considerably aug- 
mented. 

'' You see," said Mr Fax to Mr Sarcastic, " the 
efficacy of associated sympathies. It is but to 
give an impulse of co-operation to any good and 
generous feeling, and its progressive accumulation, 
like that of an Alpine avalanche, though but a 
snow-ball at the summit, becomes a mountain in 
the valley." 





CHAPTER XXVIIL 



THE CHESS DANCE. 




HE dinner was followed by a ball, for the 
opening of which Sir Telegraph Paxarett, 
who officiated as master of the ceremonies, 
had devised a fanciful scheme, and had procured 
for the purpose a number of appropriate masquer- 
ade dresses. x\n extensive area in the middle of 
the ball-room was chalked out into sixty-four 
squares of alternate white and red, in lines of eight 
squares each. Sir Telegraph, while the rest of the 
company was sipping, not without many wry faces, 
their anti-saccharine tea, called out into another 
apartment the gentlemen whom he had fixed on 
to perform in his little ballet ; and Miss Evergreen 
at the same time withdrew with the intended 
female performers. Sir Telegraph now invested 
Mr Hippy with the dignity of White King, Major 
O' Dogskin with that of Black King, and the 
Reverend Mr Portpipe with that of White Bishop, 
which the latter hailed as a favourable omen, not 
precisely comprehending what was going forward. 
As the reverend gentleman was the only one of his 



72 Melincourt. 

cloth in the company, Sir Telegraph was under the 
necessity of appointing three lay Bishops, whom he 
fixed on in the persons of two country squires, Mr 
Hermitage and Mr Heeltap, and of the fat Alder- 
man already mentioned, Sir Gregory Greenmould. 
Sir Telegraph himself, Mr O'Scarum, Mr Derry- 
down, and Mr Sarcastic, were the Knights : and 
the Rooks were Mr Feathernest the poet; Mr 
Paperstamp, another variety of the same genus, 
chiefly remarkable for an affected infantine lisp in 
his speech, and for always wearing waistcoats of a 
duffel gray ; Mr Vamp the reviewer ; and Mr 
Killthedead, from Frogmarsh Hall, a great com- 
pounder of narcotics, under the denomination of 
Battles, for he never heaid of a deadly field, 
especially if dotage and superstition, to which he 
was very partial, gained the advantage over 
generosity and talent, both of which he abhorred, 
but immediately seizing his goosequill and foolscap. 

He fought the Battle o'er again, 
And twice he slew the slain. 

Mr Feathernest was a little nettled on being told 
that he was to be the King's Rook, but smoothed 
his wrinkled brow on being assured that no 
maiwaise plaisanterie was intended. 

The Kings were accordingly crowned, and 
attired in regal robes. The Reverend Mr Portpipe 
and his three brother Bishops were arrayed in full 
canonicals. The Knights were equipped in their 
white and black armour, with sword, and dazzling 



The Chess Dance. 



73 



helm, and nodding crest. The Rooks were 
enveloped in a sort of mural robe, with a headpiece 
formed on the model of that which occurs in the 
ancient figures of Cybele ; and thus attired, they 
bore a very striking resemblance to the walking 
wall in Pyramus and Thisbe. 

The Kings now led the way to the ball-room, 
and the two beautiful Queens, Miss Danaretta 
Contantina Pinmoney, and Miss Celandina Paper- 
stamp, each with eight beautiful nymphs, arrayed 
for the mimic field in light Amazonian dresses, 
white and black, did such instant execution among 
the hearts of the young gentlemen present, that 
they might be said to have " fought and conquered 
ere a sword was drawn." 

They now proceeded to their stations on their 
respective squares ; but before we describe their 
manoeuvres, w^e will recapitulate the 

TRIPUDII PERSONyE. 

WHITE. 



King . . Mr Hippy. 

Qi^een . Miss DAXARErxA Contantina 

Pinmoney. 
King^s Bishop The Reverend Mr Portpipe. 
Queen's Bishop Sir Gregory Greenmould. 
King's Knight Mr O'Scarum. 
Queen's Knight Sir Telegraph Paxarett. 
King's Rook Mr Feathernest. 
Queen's Rook Mr Paperstamp. 
Eight Nymphs. 



% 



^mrf 



Of 



74 Melincourt. 

BLACK. 

King . . Major O'Dogskin. 

Qzieen . Miss Celandina Paperstamp. 

King's Bishop Squire Hermitage. 

Queen's Bishop Squire Heeltap. 

King's Knight Mr Sarcastic. 

Queen's Knight Mr Derrydown. 

Kings Rook Mr Killthedead. 

Queeti's Rook Mr Vamp. 

Eight Nymphs. 

Mr Hippy took his station on a black square, 
near the centre of one of the extreme lines, and 
Major O'Dogskin on an opposite white square of 
the parallel extreme. The Queens, who were to 
command in chief, stood on the left of the Kings : 
the Bishops were posted to the right and left of 
their respective sovereigns ; the Knights next to 
the Bishops; the corners were occupied by the 
Rooks. The two lines in front of these principal 
personages were occupied by the Nymphs ; — a 
space of four lines of eight squares each being left 
between the opposite parties for the field of action. 

The array was now complete, with the exception 
of the Reverend Mr Portpipe, who being called by 
Miss Danaretta to take his place at the right hand 
of Mr Hippy, and perceiving that he should be 
necessitated, in his character of Bishop, to take a 
very active part in the diversion, began to exclaim 
with great vehemence. Nolo episcopari ! which is 
probably the only occasion on which these words 
were ever used with sincerity. But Mr O'Scarum, 
in his capacity of White Knight, pounced on the 



The CJiess Dance. 75 

reluctant divine, and placing him between himself 
and Mr Hippy, stood by him with his sword drawn, 
as if to prevent his escape ; then clapping a sword 
into the hand of the reverend gentleman, exhorted 
him to conduct himself in a manner becoming an 
efficient member of the true church militant. 

Lots were then cast for the privilege of attack ; 
and the chance falling on Miss Danaretta, the 
music struck up the tune of The Triumph, and the 
whole of the white party began dancing, with their 
faces towards the King, performing at the same 
time various manoeuvres of the sword exercise, 
with appropriate pantomimic gestures, expressive 
of their entire devotion to His Majesty's service, 
and their desire to be immediately sent forward on 
active duty. In vain did the Reverend Mr 
Portpipe remonstrate with Mr O'Scarum that his 
dancing days were over : the inexorable Knight 
compelled him to caper and flourish his sword, 
"till the toil-drops fell from his brows like rain." 
Sir Gregory Greenmould did his best on the 
occasion, and danced like an elephant in black 
drapery; but ^liss Danaretta and her eight 
lovely Nymphs rescued the exertions of the male 
pertormers from too critical observation. King 
Hippy received the proffered service of his army 
with truly royal condescension. Miss Danaretta 
waved her sword with inimitable grace, and made 
a sign to the damsel in front of the King to 
advance two squares. The same manoeuvres now 
took place on the black side ; and Miss Celandina 



yG Melincourt. 

sent forward the Nymph in front of Major O'Dog- 
skin to obstruct the further progress of the white 
damsel. The dancing now recommenced on the 
white side, and Miss Danaretta ordered out the 
Reverend Mr Portpipe to occupy the fourth square 
in front of Squire Heeltap. The reverend gentle- 
man rolled forward with great alacrity, in the secret 
hope that he should very soon be taken prisoner, 
and put hors de coinbat for the rest of the evening. 
Squire Hermitage was detached by Miss Celandina 
on a similar service ; and these two episcopal 
heroes being thus brought together in the centre of 
the field, entered, like Glaucus and Diomede, into 
a friendly parle, in the course of which the words 
Claret and Burgundy were repeatedly overheard. 
The music frequently varied as in a pantomime, 
according to circumstances : the manoeuvres were 
always directed by the waving of the sword of the 
Queen, and were always preceded by the dancing 
of the whole party, in the manner we have 
mentioned, which continued ad libitum, till she 
had decided on her movement. The Nymph in 
front of Sir Gregory Greenmould advanced one 
square. Mr Sarcastic stepped forward to the third 
square of Squire Hermitage. Miss Danaretta's 
Nymph advanced two squares, and being im- 
mediately taken prisoner by the Nymph of Major 
O'Dogskin, conceded her place with a graceful 
bow, and retired from the field. The Nymph in 
front of Sir Gregory Greenmould avenged the fate 
of her companion ; and Mr Hippy's Nymph with- 



TJie Chess Dance. 77 

drew in a similar manner. Squire Hermitage was 
compelled to cut short his conversation with Mr 
Portpipe, and retire to the third square in front of 
Mr Derrydown. Sir Telegraph skipped into the 
place which Sir Gregory Greenmould's Nymph had 
last forsaken. Mr Killthedead danced into the 
deserted quarters of Squire Hermitage, and Major 
O'Dogskin swept round him with a minuet step 
into those of Mr Sarcastic. To carry on the detail 
would require more time than we can spare, and, 
perhaps, more patience than our readers possess. 
The Reverend Mr Portpipe saw his party fall 
around him, one by one, and survived against his 
will to the close of the contest. Miss Danaretta 
and Miss Celandina moved like light over the 
squares, and Fortune alternately smiled and 
frowned on their respective banners, till the heavy 
mural artillery of Mr Vamp being brought to bear 
on Mr Paperstamp, who fancied himself a tower of 
strength, the latter was overthrown and carried off 
the field. Mr Feathernest avenged his fate on the 
embattled front of Mr Killthedead, and fell him- 
self beneath the sword of Mr Sarcastic. Squire 
Heeltap was taken off by the Reverend Mr Port- 
pipe, who begged his courteous prisoner to walk to 
the sideboard and bring him a glass of Madeira ; for 
Homer, he said, was very orthodox in his opinion 
that wine was a great refresher in the toils of war."*^ 
The changeful scene concluded by Miss Danar- 
etta, with the aid of Sir Telegraph and the Rev- 
* IX. z. 261, 



78 Melincourt. 

erend Mr Portpipe, hemming Major O'Dogskin 
into a corner, where he was reduced to an in- 
capacity of locomotion : on which the Major 
bowed and made the best of his way to 
the sideboard, followed by the reverend gentle- 
man, who, after joining the Major in a 
pacific libation, threw himself into an arm-chair, 
and slept very comfortably till the annunciation of 
supper. 

Waltzes, quadrilles, and country dances followed 
n succession, and, with the exception of the inter- 
val of supper, in which Miss Evergreen developed 
all the treasures of anti-saccharine taste, were kept 
up with great spirit till the rising of the sun. 

Anthelia, who of course did not join in the 
former, expressed to Mr Forester her astonishment 
to see waltzing in Redrose Abbey. " I did not 
dream of such a thing," said Mr Forester ; " but I 
left the whole arrangement of the ball to Sir 
Telegraph, and I suppose, he deemed it incum- 
bent on him to consult the general taste of the 
yotmg ladies. Even I, young as I am, can re- 
member the time when there was no point of 
resemblance between an EngHsh girl in a private 
ball-room, and a French jigurajite in a theatrical 
ballet: but waltzing and Parisian drapery have 
levelled the distinction, and the only criterion of 
the difference is the place of the exhibition. Thus 
every succeeding year witnesses some new inroad 
on the simple manners of our ancestors ; some 
importation of continental vice and folly ; some 



The Chess Dance. 79 

unnatural fretwork of tinsel and frippery on the old 
Doric column of the domestic virtues of England. 
An Englishman in stays, and an Englishwoman 
waltzing in treble-flounced short petticoats, are 
anomalies so monstrous, that till they actually 
existed, they never entered the most ominous 
visions of the speculators on progressive degene- 
racy. What would our Alfred, what would our 
third Edward, what would our IMilton, and Hamp- 
den, and Sidney, what would the barons of Runny 
mead have thought, if the voice of prophecy had 
denounced to them a period, when the perfection 
of accomplishment in the daughters of England 
would be found in the dress, manner, and action 
of the dancing girls of Paris ? " 

The supper, of course, did not pass off without 
songs ; and among them Anthelia sang the follow- 
ing, which recalled to Mr Forester their conversa- 
tion on the sea-shore. 

THE MORNING OF LOVE. 

O ! the spring-time of life is the season of blooming, 
And the morning of love is the season of joy ; 
Ere noontide and summer, with radiance consuming, 
Look down on their beauty, to parch and destroy. 

O ! faint are the blossoms life's pathway adorning, 
When the first magic glory of hope is withdrawn ; 
For the flowers of the spring, and the light of the morning, 
Have no summer budding, and no second dawn. 

Through meadows all sunshine, and verdure, and flowers, 
The stream of the valley in purity flies ; 



8o Melincourt. 

But mix'd with the tides, where some proud city lowers, 
O ! where is the sweetness that dwelt on its rise ? 

The rose withers fast on the breast it first graces ; 
Its beauty is fled ere the day be half done : — 
And life is that stream which its progress defaces 
And love is that flower which can bloom but for one. 




CHAPTER XXIX. 



THE DISAPPEARANCE. 




HE morning after the fete Anthelia and her 
party returned to IMehncourt. Before 
they departed she conversed a few min- 
utes alone with Mr Forester in his library. What 
was said on this occasion we cannot precisely 
report ; but it seemed to be generally suspected 
that Mr Hippy's authority would soon be at an 
end, and that the services of the Reverend Mr 
Portpipe would be required in the old chapel of 
Melincourt Castle, which, we are sorry to say, had 
fallen for some years past very much into disuse, 
being never opened but on occasions of birth, 
marriage, and death in the family; and these 
occasions, as our readers are aware, had not of 
late been very numerous. 

The course of mutual love between Anthelia and 
Mr Forester was as smooth as the gliding of a skiff 
down a stream, through the flowery meadows of 
June : and if matters were not quite definitely 
settled between them, yet, as Mr Forester was 
shortly to be a visitor at the Castle, there was a 

II. F 



82 Melincoiirt. 

very apparent probability that their intercourse 
would terminate in that grand climax and finale of 
all romantic adventure — marriage. 

After the departure of the ladies, Mr Forester 
observed with concern, that his friend Sir Oran's 
natural melancholy was visibly increased, and Mr 
Fax was of opinion that he was smitten with the 
tender passion : but whether for Miss Melincourt, 
Mrs Pinmoney, or Miss Danaretta, it was not so 
easy to determine. But Sir Oran grew more and 
more fond of solitude, and passed the greater part 
of the day in the woods, though it was now the 
reign of the gloomy November, which, however, 
accorded with the moody temper of his spirit ; and 
he often went without his breakfast, though he 
always came home to dinner. His perpetual com- 
panion was his flute, with which he made sad re- 
sponse to the wintry wind. 

Mr Forester and Mr Fax were one morning 
consulting on the means to be adopted for divert- 
ing Sir Oran's melancholy, when Sir Telegraph 
Paxarett drove up furiously to the door — sprang 
from the box — and rushed into the apartment with 
the intelligence that Anthelia had disappeared. 
No one had seen her since the hour of breakfast 
on the preceding day. Mr Hippy, Mr Derrydown, 
Mr O'Scarum, and Major O' Dogskin were scouring 
the country in all directions in search of her. 

Mr Forester determined not to rest night or day 
till he had discovered Anthelia. Sir Telegraph 
drove him, with Mr Fax and Sir Oran, to the 



The Disappearance. 83 

nearest inn, where leaving Sir Telegraph to pursue 
another track, they took a chaise-and-four, and 
posted over the country in all directions, day after 
day without finding any clue to her retreat. Mr 
Forester had no doubt that this adventure was 
connected with that which we have detailed in the 
eighteenth chapter ; but his ignorance of the actors 
on that occasion prevented his deriving any light 
from the coincidence. At length, having investi- 
gated in vain all the main and cross roads for fifty 
miles round Melincourt, Mr Fax was of opinion 
that she could not have passed so far along any of 
them, being conveyed, as no doubt she was, against 
her will, without leaving some trace of her course, 
which their indefatigable inquiries must have dis- 
covered. He therefore advised that they should 
discontinue their system of posting, and take a 
thorough pedestrian perlustration of all the most 
bye and unfrequented paths of the whole moun- 
tain-district, in some secluded part of which he 
had a strong presentiment she would be found. 
This plan was adopted ; but the season was 
unfavourable to its expeditious accomplishment; 
and they could sometimes make but little pro- 
gress in a day, being often compelled to turn 
aside' from the wilder tracks, in search of a town 
or village, for the purposes of refreshment or 
rest : — there being this remarkable difference 
between the lovers of the days of chivalry, and 
those of modern times, that the former could pass 
a week or two in a desert or a forest, without meat, 



84 Melincoiirt. 

drink, or shelter — a very useful art for all travellers, 
whether lovers or not, vvliich these degenerate days 
have unfortunately lost. 

They arrived in the evening of the first day of 
their pedestrianism at a little inn among the moun- 
tains. They were informed they could have no 
beds ; and that the only parlour was occupied by 
two gentlemen, who meant to sit up all night, and 
would, perhaps, have no objection to their joining 
the party. A message being sent in, an affirmative 
answer was very politely returned : and on entering 
the apartment, they discovered Mr O'Scarum and 
Major O'Dogskin engaged in a deep discussion over 
a large jug of wine. 

'■Troth, now," said Mr O'Scarum, "and this is a 
merry meeting, sure enough, though it's on a dismal 
occasion, for it's Miss Melincourt you're looking 
for, as we are too, though you have most cause, Mr 
Forester ; for I understand you are to be the happy 
man. Troth, and I did not know so much when I 
came to your fete, or, perhaps, I should have been 
for arguing the point of a prior claim (as far as my 
own consent was concerned) over a bit of neat turf, 
twelve yards long ; but Major O'Dogskin tells me, 
that by getting muzzy, and so I did, sure enough, 
on your old Madeira, and rare stuff it is, by my 
conscience, when Miss Melincourt was in your 
house, I have sanctioned the matter, and there's 
an end of it : but, by my soul, I did not mean to 
have been cut out .quietly : and the Major says, 
too, you're too good a fellow to be kilt, and that's 



The Disappearance. 85 

true enough : so I'll keep my ammunition for other 
friends ; and here's to you and Miss Melincourt, 
and a happy meeting to you both, and the devil 
take him that parts you, says Harum O'Scarum." — 
" And so says Dermot O'Dogskin," said the Major. 
"And my friend O'Scarum and myself will ride 
about till we get news of her, for we don't mind a 
little hardship. — You shall be wanting some dinner, 
joys, and there's nothing but fat bacon and potatoes ; 
but we have made a shift with it, and then here is 
the very creature itself, old sherry, my jewels ! 
troth, and how did we come home by it, think you? 
I know what it is to pass a night in a little inn in 
the hills, and you don't find Major O'Dogskin 
turning out of the main road, without giving his 
man a couple of kegs of wine just to balance the 
back of his saddle. Sherry's a good traveller, and 
will stand a httle shaking ; and what would one do 
without it in such a place as this, where it is water 
in the desert, and manna in the wilderness?" 

Mr Forester thanked them very warmly for their 
good wishes and active exertions. The humble 
dinner of himself and his party was soon de- 
spatched ; after which, the Major placed the two 
little kegs on the table and said, " They were both 
filled to-day; so, you see, there is no lack of the 
good creature to keep us all alive till morning, and 
then we shall part again in search of Miss Melin- 
court, the jewel ! for there is not such another 
on the face of the earth. Och ! " continued the 
INIajor, as he poured the wine from one of the kegs 



86 Melincoiirt. 

into a brown jug : for the house could not afford 
them a decanter, and some Httle ale tumblers 
supplied the place of wine-glasses. " Och ! the 
ould jug that never held any thing better than sour 
ale : how proud he must feel of being filled to the 
brim with sparkling sherry, for the first and last 
time in the course of his life ! " J 




CHAPTER XXX. 



THE PAPER-MILL. 




:AKING leave of Mr O'Scarum and Mr 
O'Dogskin, they continued their wander- 
ing as choice or chance directed : some- 
times penetrating into the most sequestered valleys; 
sometimes returning into the principal roads, and 
investigating the most populous districts. Passing 
through the town of Gullgudgeon, they found an 
immense crowd assembled in a state of extreme 
confusion, exhibiting every symptom of hurry, 
anxiety, astonishment, and dismay. They stopped 
to inquire the cause of the tumult, and found it to 
proceed from the sudden explosion of a paper-mill, 
in other words, the stoppage of the country bank 
of Messieurs Smokeshadow, Airbubble, Hopthe- 
twig, and Company. Farmers, bumpkins, artisans, 
mechanics, tradesmen of all descriptions, the inn- 
keeper, the lawyer, the doctor, and the parson ; 
soldiers from the adjoining barracks, and fishermen 
from the neighbouring coast, with their shrill-voiced 
and masculine wives, rolled in one mass, like a 
stormy wave, around a little shop, of which the 
shutters were closed, with the word BANK in 



88 Melincourt 

golden letters over the door, and a large board on the 
central shutter, notifying that " Messieurs Smoke- 
shadow, Airbubble, Hopthetwig, and Company had 
found themselves under the disagreeable necessity 
of suspending their payments ; " in plain English, 
had found it expedient to fly by night, leaving all 
the machinery of their mill, and all the treasures of 
their mine, that is to say, several reams of paper, 
half a dozen account-books, a desk, a joint-stool, 
and ink-stand, a bunch of quills, and a copper- 
plate, to satisfy the claims of the distracted multi- 
tude, who were shoaling in from all quarters with 
promises to pay, of the said Smokeshadow, Air- 
bubble, Hopthetwig, and Company, to the amount 
of a hundred thousand pounds. 

Mr Fax addressed himself for an explanation 
of particulars to a plump and portly divine, who 
was standing at a little distance from the rest of 
the crowd, and whose countenance exhibited no 
symptoms of the rage, grief, and despair which 
were depicted on the physiognomies of his dearly- 
beloved brethren of the town of Gullgudgeon. 

"You seem, sir," said Mr Fax, "to bear the 
general calamity with Christian resignation." 

" I do, sir," said the reverend gentleman, " and 
for a very orthodox reason — I have none of their 
notes — not I. I was obliged to take them now 
and then against my will, but I always sent them 
off to town, and got cash for them directly." 

" You mean to say," said Mr Forester, " you got 
a Threadneedle Street note for them." 



The Paper-Mill. 89 

"To be sure, sir," said the divine, " and that is 
the same thing as cash. There is a Jacobin rascal 
in this town, who says it is a bad sign when the 
children die before the parent, and that a day of 
reckoning must come sooner or later for the old 
lady as well as for her daughters ; but myself and 
my brother magistrates have taken measures for 
him, and shall soon make the town of Gullgudgeon 
too hot to hold him, as sure as my name is Pepper- 
toast." 

" You seriously think, sir," said Mr Fax, " that 
his opinion is false ? " 

"Sir," said the reverend gentleman, somewhat 
nettled, " I do not know what right any one can 
have to ask a man of my cloth what he seriously 
thinks, when all that the world has to do with is 
what he seriously says." 

" Then you seriously say it, sir ? " said Mr Fax. 

" I do, sir," said the divine ; " and for this very 
orthodox reason, that the system of paper-money is 
inseparably interwoven with the present order of 
things, and the present order of things I have made 
up my mind to stick by, precisely as long as it lasts." 

" And no longer ? " said Mr Fax. 

"I am no fool, sir," said the divine. 

" But, sir," said Mr Fax, " as you seem to have 
perceived the instability of what is called (like 
lucus a non lucendo)^ the firm of Smokeshadow, 
Airbubble, Hopthetwig, and Company, why did 
not you warn your flock of the impending 
danger ? " 



90 Melinconrt. 

" Sir," said the reverend gentleman, " I dined 
every week with one of the partners." 

Mr Forester took notice of an elderly woman 
who was sitting with a small handful of dirty paper, 
weeping bitterly on the step of a door. " Forgive 
my intrusion," said he ; "I need not ask you why 
you weep : the cause is in your hand." — " Ah, sir ! " 
said the poor woman, who could hardly speak for 
sobbing, " all the savings of twenty years taken 
from me in a moment : and my poor boy, when he 

comes home from sea " She could say no 

more : grief choked her utterance. 

" Good God ! " said Mr Fax, " did you lay by 
your savings in country paper ? " 

"O sir ! " said the poor woman, " how was I to 
know that one piece of paper was not as good as 
another ? And everybody said that the firm of 
Smokeshadow, Airbubble, Hopthetwig, and Com- 
pany was as good as the Bank of England." She 
then unfolded one of the promises to pay, and fell 
to weeping more bitterly than ever. Mr Forester 
comforted her as well as he could ; but he found 
the purchasing of one or two of her notes much 
more efficacious than all the lessons of his philo- 
sophy. 

" This is all your fault," said a fisherman to his 
wife : " you would be hoarding and hoarding, and 
stinting me of my drop of comfort when I came in 
after a hard day's work, tossed and beaten, and wet 
through with salt-water, and there's what we've got 
by it." 



The Paper- Mill 91 

" It was all your fault," retorted the wife ; " when 
we had scraped together twenty as pretty golden 
guineas as ever laid in a chest, you would sell 
'em, so you would, for twenty-seven pounds of 
Mr Smokeshadow's paper ; and now you see the 
difference'' 

" Here is an illustration," said Mr Fax to INIr 
Forester, " of the old maxim of experience teaching 
wisdom, or, as Homer expresses it, ^i'lyj^v ds n 

" We ought noiv to be conzdnced, if not before^' 
said Mr Forester, " that what Plato has said is 
strictly true, that there will be no end of human 
?jiisery till governors become philosophers, or philo- 
sophers governors ; and that all the evils which this 
country suffers, and, I fear, will suffer to a much 
greater extent, from the bursting of this fatal 
bubble of paper-money — this chimerical symbol of 
imaginary riches — are owing to the wa7it of philo- 
sophy a7id true political wisdo7n in our rulers, by 
which they ?night have seen things in their causes, 
not felt them only in their effects, as every the most 
vulgar man does : and by which foresight, all the 
mischiefs that are befallifig us might have been pre- 
ventedy * 

" Very hard," said an old soldier, " very, very 
hard : — a poor five pounds, laid up for a rainy day, 
— hardly got, and closely kept — ver)% very hard." 

" Poor man ! " said Mr Forester, who was in- 

* The words in italics are Lord Monboddo's : Ancient 
Metaphysics, vol. iii. preface, p. 79. 



92 Melincoiirt. 

terested in the soldier's physiognomy, "let me 
repair your loss. Here is better paper for you ; 
but get gold and silver for it as soon as you can.'' 

" God bless your honour," said the soldier, " and 
send as much power as good-will to all such gener- 
ous souls. Many is the worthy heart that this day's 
work will break, and here is more damage than 
one man can mend. God bless your honour." 

A respectable-looking female approached the 
crowd, and addressing herself to Mr Fax, who 
seemed most at leisure to her, asked him what 
chance there seemed to be for the creditors of 
Messieurs Smokeshadow, Airbubble, Hopthetwig, 
and Company. "By what I can gather from the 
people around me," said Mr Fax, '•' none whatever." 
The lady was in great distress at this intelligence, 
and said they were her bankers, and it was the 
second misfortune of the kind that had happened 
to her. Mr Fax expressed his astonishment that she 
should have been twice the victim of the system of 
paper-coinage, which seemed to contradict the old 
adage about a burnt child ; and said it was for his 
part astonishing to him how any human being 
could be so deluded after the perils of the system 
had been so clearly pointed out, and amongst other 
things, in a pamphlet of his own on the Insub- 
stantiality of Smoke. " Indeed," she said, " she 
had something better to do than to trouble herself 
about politics, and wondered he should insult her 
in her distress by talking of such stuff to her." 

" Was ever such infatuation ? " said Mr Fax, as 



The Paper-MilL 93 

the lady turned away. "This is one of those 
persons who choose to walk blindfold on the edge 
of a precipice, because it is too much" trouble to 
see, and quarrel with their best friends for re- 
questing them to make use of their eyes. There 
are many such, who think they have no business 
with politics : but they find to their cost that 
politics will have business with them." 

"A curse light on all kite-flyers !" vociferated a 
sturdy farmer. "Od rabbit me, here be a bundle 
o' trash, measters ! not worth a voive-and-zixpenny 
dollar all together. This comes o' peaper-mills. 
' I promise to pay,' ecod ! O the good old days 
o' goulden guineas, when I used to ride whoame 
vrom market wi' a great heavy bag in my pocket ; 
• an'd when I whopped it down on the old oak 
teable, it used to make zuch a zound as did one's 
heart good to hear it. No promise to pay then. 
Now a man may eat his whole vortin in a zand- 
wich, or zet vire to it in a vardin rushlight. Pro- 
mise to pay ! — the lying rascals, they never meant 
to pay: they knew all the while they had no effects 
to pay : but zuch a pretty, zmooth-spoken, pala- 
vering zet o' fellers ! why. Lord bless you ! they'd 
ha' made you believe black was white I and though 
you could never get anything of 'em but one o' 
their own dirty bits o' peapcr in change vor another, 
they made it out as clear as daylight that they 
were as rich as zo many Jews. Ecod ! and we 
were all vools enough to believe 'em, and now 
mark the end o't." 



94 Melhicoiirt. 

"Yes, father," said a young fop at his elbow, 
" all blov.-n, curse me ! " 

" Ees," said the farmer, " and thee beest blown, 
and thee mun zell thy hunter, and turn to the 
plough-tail ; and thy zisters mun churn butter, and 
milk the cows, instead of jingling penny-vorties, 
and dancing at race-balls wi' squires. We mun 
be old English varmers again, and none o' your 
voine high - flying promise - to - pay gentlevolks. 
There they be — spell 'em : I promise to pay to Mr 
Gregory Gas, or hearer, on demand, the zum <?' voive 
pounds. Gullgudgeon Bank, April the virst. Vor 
Zmokeshadow, Airlrubhle, Zelf, and Company, Henry 
Hopthetwig. Entered, William Walkoff. And 
there be their coat o' arms : two blacksmiths 
blowing a vorge, wi' the chimney vor a crest, and 
a wreath o' smoke coming out o't ; and the motto, 
'■ You can't catch a bowl-full.' Od rabbit me! 
here be a whole handvul of 'em, and I'll zell 'em 
all vor a voive-and-zixpenny dollar." 

The "Jacobin rascal," of whom the reverend 
gentleman had spoken, happened to be at the 
farmer's elbow. "I told you how it would be," 
said he, " Master Sheepshead, many years ago ; 
and I remember you wanted to put me in the 
stocks for my trouble." 

"Why, I believe I did, Measter Lookout," said 
the farmer, with a very penitent face ; " but if 
you'll call on me zome day we'll drown old grudges 
in a jug o' ale, and light our poipes wi' the 
promises o' Measter Hopthetwig and his gang." 



The Paper-MilL 95 

" Not with all of them I entreat you," said Mr 
Lookout. " I hope you will have one of them 
framed and glazed, and suspended over your 
chimney, as a warning to your children, and your 
children's children for ever, against ^ the blessed 
comforts of paper money' " 

" Why, Lord love you, Measter Lookout," said 
the farmer, "we shall ha' nothing but peaper-money 
still, you zee, only vrom another mill like." 

"As to that. Master Sheepshead," replied Mr 
Lookout, "I will only say to you in your own 
phrase, Mark the end o't." 

"Do you hear him?" said the Reverend Mr 
Peppertoast ; "do you hear the Jacobin rascal ? 
Do you hear the libellous, seditious, factious, 
levelling, revolutionary, republican, democratical, 
atheistical villain ? " 




CHAPTER XXXI. 

CIMMERIAN LODGE. 

;FTER a walk of some miles from the 
town of GuUgudgeon, where no infor- 
mation was to be obtained of Anthelia, 
their path wound along the shores of a lonely lake, 
embosomed in dark pine-groves and precipitous 
rocks. As they passed near a small creek, they 
observed a gentleman just stepping into a boat, 
who paused and looked up at the sound of their 
approximation ; and Mr Fax immediately re- 
cognized the poeticopolitical, rhapsodicoprosaical, 
deisidsemoniacoparadoxographical, pseudolatreio- 
logical, transcendental meteorosophist, Moley 
Mystic, Esquire, of Cimmerian Lodge. This 
gentleman's Christian name, according to his 
own account, was improperly spelt with an ^, and 
was in truth nothing more nor less than 

That Moly, 
Which Hermes erst to wise Ulysses gave ; 

and which was, in the mind of Homer, a pure 
anticipated cognition of the system of Kantian 
metaphysics, or grand transcendental science of 



Cimmerian Lodge. 97 

the luminous obscure ; for it had a dark roof,'*' 
which was mystery ; and a white flower, which 
was abstract truth : it was called Moly by the gods, 
who then kept it to themselves ; and was difficult 
to be dug up by mortal men, having, in fact, lain 
perdu in subterranean darkness till the immortal 
Kant dug for it under the stone of doubt, and pro- 
duced it to the astonished world as the root of 
human science. Other persons, however, derived 
his first name differently; and maintained that 
the e in it showed it very clearly to be a corrup- 
tion of Mole-eye, it being the opinion of some 
naturalists that the mole has eyes, which it can 
withdraw or project at pleasure, implying a faculty 
of wilful blindness, most happily characteristic of 
a transcendental metaphysician ; since, according 
to the old proverb, None are so blind as those who 
ivon't see. But be that as it may, Moley Mystic 
was his name, and Cimmerian Lodge was his 
dwelling. 

Mr Mystic invited Mr Fax and his friends to 
step with him into the boat, and cross over his 
lake, which he called the Ocean of Deceitful Form, 
to the Island of Pure Intellige?ice, on which 
Cimmerian Lodge was situated : promising to 
give them a great treat in looking over his 
grounds, which he had laid out according to the 
topography of the human mind ; and to enlighten 

* 'Pii'77 ii^v fxeXau eari, yaXaKTi de iiKeXov dvdos, 
MOAT 8e fiLv KoKeovcTL deoi, xaXeTro;/ oe t' opuaacLv 
QurjTOis avOptaiTOLffL. 
II. G 



98 Melincourt. 

them, through the medium of " darkness visible," 
with an opticothaumaturgical process of transcen- 
dentaUsing a cylindrical mirror^ which should 
teach them the difference between objective and 
subjective reality ^ Mr Forester was unwilling to 
remit his search, even for a few hours : but Mr 
Fax observing that great part of the day was 
gone, and that Cimmerian Lodge was very remote 
from the human world ; so that if they did not 
avail themselves of Mr Mystic's hospitality, they 
should probably be reduced to the necessity of 
passing the night among the rocks, sub Jove frigido, 
which he did not think very inviting, Mr Forester 
complied ; and with Mr Fax and Sir Oran Haut- 
ton, stepped into the boat. The reader who is 
deficient in taste for the bombast^ and is no 
admirer of the obscure^ may as well wait on the 
shore till they return. But we must not enter the 
regions of mystery without an Orphic invocation. 

'TniXE o.va.^, KaXeio, <xe nokeiv KexaprjOTa MTSTAIS' 
Kai ere, fiaKap, XtTO/.tai, TavvaLTrrepe, ov\e ONEIPE" 
Kat XE<J>EAAS KoKeoj, dpoaoeijxovas, rjepoirXayKTovs' 
NTKTAre Trpec^Lar-qv, TroXvrjpaTov 0Pri0*ANTAI2, 

* The reader who is desirous of elucidating the mysteries 
of the words and phrases marked in itahcs in this chapter 
may consult the German works of Professor Kant, or Pro- 
fessor Born's Latin translation of them, or M. Villar's 
Philosophie de Kant, oti Principes fondameniaux de la 
Philosophic Ti'anscendentale ; or the first article of the 
second number of the Edinburgh Review, or the article 
Kant, in the Encyclopaedia Londinensis, or Sir William 
Drummond's Academical Questions, Book II. chap. ix. 



Cimmerian Lodge. 99 

NTKTEPIOTS tc 0EOTS, v-ko Kevdeaiv olkI exoiras, 
AvTpii) ev TjepoevTL, irapa ZTTFOS lepov vdoip' 
nPfiTEI (7VV TToXv^ovXip, bv OABOAOTHX"^ KoKeoxjatv. 

O sovereign Sleep ! in whose papaverous glen 

Dwell the dark Muses of Cimmerian men ! 

O Power of Dreams ! whose dusky pinions shed 

Primaeval chaos on the slumberer's head ! 

Ye misty Clouds ! amid whose folds subUme 

Blind Faith invokes the Ghost of Feudal Time ! 

And thou, thick night ! beneath whose mantle rove 

The Phantom Powers of Subterranean Jove ! 

Arise, propitious to the mystic strain, 

From Lethe's flood, and Zeal's Tartarian fane ; 

Where Freedom's Shade, 'mid Stygian vapours damp, 

Sits, cold and pale, by Truth's extinguished lamp ; 

While Cowls and Crowns portentous orgies hold. 

And tuneful Proteus seals his eyes with gold ! 

They had scarcely left the shore when they were 
involved in a fog of unprecedented density, so that 
they could not see one another ; but they heard 
the dash of Mr IMystic's oars, and were consoled 
by his assurances that he could not miss his way 
in a state of the atmosphere so consentaneous 
to his peculiar mode of vision ; for that, though, 
in navigating his little skiff on the Oceajt of Deceit- 
ful Form^ he had very often wandered wide and 
far from the Island of Pure Intelligence, yet this 
had always happened when he went with his eyes 
open, in broad daylight ; but that he had soon 
found the means of obviating this little incon- 

* Il/aarrei's OXjSoootjjs, Proteus the giver of riches^ certainly 
deserves a place among the Lares of every poetical and 
political turncoat. 



1 00 Melincou rt. 

venience, by always keeping his eyes close shut 
whenever the sun had the impertinence to shine 
upon him. 

He immediately added, that he would take the 
opportunity of making a remark perfectly in point : 
" that Experience was a Cyclops, with his eye in 
the back of his head ; " and when Mr Fax re- 
marked, that he did not see the connection, Mr 
Mystic said he was very glad to hear it ; for he 
should be sorry if any one but himself could see 
the connection of his ideas, as he arranged his 
thoughts on a new principle. 

They went steadily on through the dense and 
heavy air, over waters that slumbered like the 
Stygian pool ; a chorus of frogs, that seemed as 
much delighted with their own melody, as if they 
had been an oligarchy of poetical critics, regaling 
them all the way with the Aristophanic symphony 
of Brek-ek-ek-ex ! KO-Ax ! KO-AX l"^ till the boat 
fixed its keel in the Island of Pure Intelligence ; and 
Mr Mystic landed his party, as Charon did ^neas 
and the Sibyl, in a bed of weeds and mud :t after 
floundering in which for some time, from losing 
their guide in the fog, they were cheered by the 
sound of his voice from above, and scrambling up 
the bank, found themselves on a hard and barren 
rock ; and, still following the sound of Mr Mystic's 
voice, arrived at Cimmerian Lodge. 

The fog had penetrated into all the apartments : 

* See the Barpaxoi of Aristophanes. 

t Inform! limo glaucaque exponit in ulva. 



Cimmerian Lodge. lOl 

there was fog in the hall, fog in the parlour, fog on 
the staircases, fog in the bedrooms ; 

The fog was here, the fog was there, 
The fog was all around. 

It was a little rarefied in the kitchen, by virtue of 
the enormous fire ; so far, at least, that the red 
face of the cook shone through it, as they passed 
the kitchen-door, like the disk of the rising moon 
through the vapours of an autumnal river : but to 
make amends for this, it was condensed almost 
into solidity in the library, where the voice of their 
invisible guide bade them welcome to the adytum 

of the LUMINOUS OBSCURE. 

Mr Mystic now produced what he called his 

syjithetical torc/i, and requested them to follow 

him, and look over his grounds. Mr Fax said it 

was perfectly useless to attempt it in such a state 

of the atmosphere ; but ]Mr Mystic protested that 

/ it was the only state of the atmosphere in which 

j they could be seen to advantage : as daylight and 

I sunshine utterly destroyed their beauty. 

L- They followed the " darkness visible " of the 

syfithetical torch, which, according to Mr Mystic, 

shed around it the rays of transcendental ilhwiina- 

tion ; and he continued to march before them, 

walking, and talking, and pointing out innumerable 

images of singularly nubilous beauty, though Mr 

Forester and Fax both declared they could see 

nothing but the fog and " la pale lueur du magique 

flambeau : " till Mr Mystic observing that they 



102 Melincourt. 

were now in a Spontaneity free from Tinie or Space ^ 
and at the point of Absolute Li?nitation^ Mr Fax 
said he was very glad to hear it \ for in that case 
they could go no farther. Mr Mystic observed 
that they must go farther ; for they were entangled 
in a maze, from which they would never be able to 
extricate themselves without his assistance ; and he 
must take the liberty to tell them, that the categories 
of modality were connected iiito the idea of absolute 
necessity. As this was spoken in a high tone, they 
took it to be meant for a reprimand; which carried 
the more weight as it was the less understood. At 
length, after floundering on another half-hour, the 
fog still thicker and thicker, and the torch still 
dimmer and dimmer, they found themselves once 
more in Cimmerian Lodge. 

Mr Mystic asked them how they liked his 
grounds, 'and they both repeated they had seen 
nothing of them : on which he flew into a rage and 
called them empirical psychologists, and slaves of 
definition, induction, and analysis, which he in- 
tended for terms of abuse, but which were not 
taken for such by the persons to whom he ad- 
dressed them. 

Recovering his temper, he observed that it was 
nearly the hour of dinner ; and as they did not 
think it worth while to be angry with him, they 
contented themselves with requesting that they 
might dine in the kitchen, which seemed to be 
the only spot on the Islajid of Pure hitelligence in 
which there was a glimmer of light. 



Cimmerian Lodge. 103 

Mr Mystic remarked that he thought this very 
bad taste, but that he should have no objection if 
the cook would consent; who, he observed, had 
paramount dominion over that important division 
of the Isla?id of Pure hitelligence. The cook, with 
a httle murmuring, consented for once to evacuate 
her citadel as soon as the dinner was on table ; 
entering, however, a protest, that this infringement 
on her privileges should not be pleaded as a 
precedent. 

Mr^ax was afraid that Mr Mystic would treat 
them as Lord Peter treated his brothers : that he 
would put nothing on the table, and regale them 
with a dissertation on the pure idea of absolute 
subsia?ice ; but in this he was agreeably disap- 
pointed; for the a7iHcipated cognition of a good 
dinner very soon smoked before them, in the 
relation of determinate co-existence ; and the objec- 
tive phcenomenon of some super-excellent Madeira 
quickly put the whole party in perfect good- 
humour. It appeared, indeed, to have a diffusive 
quality of occult and mysterious virtue ; for, with 
every glass they drank, the fog grew thin, till by 
the time they had taken off four bottles among 
them, it had totally disappeared. 

My Mystic now prevailed on them to follow him 
to the library, where they found a blazing fire and 
a four-branched gas lamp, shedding a much brighter 
radiance than that of the synthetical torch. He 
said he had been obliged to light this lamp, as it 
seemed they could not see by the usual illumina- 



I04 Melincourt. 

tion of Cimmerian Lodge. The brilliancy of the 
gas lights he much disapproved ; but he thought 
it would be very unbecoming in a transcendental 
philosopher to employ any other material for a 
purpose to which smoke was applicable. Mr Fax 
said, he should 'have thought, on the contrary, that 
ex fumo dare lucem would have been, of all things, 
the most repugnant to his principles; and Mr 
Mystic replied, that it had not struck him so 
before, but that Mr Fax's view of the subject " was 
exquisitely dusky and fuliginous : " this being his 
usual mode of expressing approbation, instead of 
the common phraseology of bright thoughts and 
lumi7tous ideas, which were equally abhorrent to 
him both in theory and practice. However, he 
said, there the light was, for their benefit, and not 
for his : and as other men's light was his darkness, 
he should put on a pair of spectacles of smoked 
glass, which no one could see through but himself. 
Having put on his spectacles, he undrew a black 
curtain, discovered a cyliftdrical mirror, and placed 
a sphere before it with great solemnity. " This 
sphere," said he, " is an oblong spheroid in the 
perception of the cylindrical mirror : as long as the 
mirror thought that the object of his perception 
was the real external oblong spheroid, he was a 
mere empirical philosopher ; but he has grown wiser 
since he has been in my library ; and by reflecting 
very deeply on the degree in which the manner of 
his construction might influence the forms of his 
perception, has taken a very opaque and tenebricose 



Cimmerian Lodge. 105 

view of how much of the spheroidical perception 
belongs to the object, which is the sphere, and how 
much to the subject, which is himself, in his quality 
of cylindrical mirror. He has thus discovered the 
difference between objective and subjective reality: 
and this point of view is transcendentalism." 

"A very dusky and fuliginous speculation, in- 
deed," said Mr Fax, complimenting Mr Mystic in 
his own phrase. 

Tea and coffee were brought in. "I divide 
my da)'," said Mr Mystic, ^^ on a 7iew principle : 
I am always poetical at breakfast, moral at 
luncheon, metaphysical at dinner, and political at 
tea. Now you shall know my opinion of the 
hopes of the world. — General discontent shall 
be the basis of pubhc resignation ! ^ The 
materials of political gloom will build the steadfast 
frame of hope, t The main point is to get rid of 
analytical reason, which is experimental and practi- 
cal, and live only by faith,;}: which is synthetical 
and oracular. The contradictory interests of ten 
millions may neutralize each other.§ But the 
spirit of Antichrist is abroad : !| — the people 
read ! — nay, they think ! ! The people read 
and think ! ! ! The public, the public in general, 
the swinish multitude, the many-headed monster, 
actually reads and thinks ! ! ! ! 11 Horrible in 

* Coleridge's Lay Ser?)ion, p. lo. + Ibid. 

Xlbid. p. 21. § Ibid. p. 25. II Ibid. p. 27. 

\ Ibid. pp. 45, 46 (where the reader may find in a note 
the two worst jokes that ever were cracked). 



io6 Melinco7ii't. 

thought, but in fact most horrible ! Science 
classifies flowers. Can it make them bloom where 
it has placed them in its ' classification ! * No. 
Therefore flowers ought not to be classified. This 
is transcendental logic. Ha ! in that cylindrical 
mirror I see three shadowy forms : — dimly I see 
them through the smoked glass of my spectacles. 
Who art thou ? — Mystery ! — I hail thee ? Who 
art thou ? — Jargon — I love thee ! Who art 
thou? — Superstition! — I worship thee! Hail, 
transcendental triad ! " 

Mr Fax cut short the thread of his eloquence by 
saying he would trouble him for the cream-jug. 

Mr Mystic began again, and talked for three 
hours without intermission, except that he paused 
a moment on the entrance of sandwiches and 
Madeira. His visitors sipped his wine in silence 
till he had fairly talked himself hoarse. Neither 
Mr Fax nor Mr Forester replied to his paradoxes ; 
for to what end, they thought, should they attempt 
to answer, what few would hear, and none would 
understand ? 

It was now time to retire, and Mr Mystic showed 
his guests to the doors of their respective apart- 
ments, in each of which a gas-light was burning, 
and ascended another flight of stairs to his own 
dormitory, with a little twinkling taper in his 
hand. Mr Forester and Mr Fax stayed a few 
minutes on the landing-place, to have a word of 
consultation before they parted for the night. Mr 
* Coleridge's Lay Sermon^ p. xvii. 



I 



Cimmerian Lodge. 107 



Mystic gained the door of his apartment — turned 
the handle of the lock — and had just advanced 
one step — when the whole interior of the chamber 
became suddenly sheeted with fire : a tremendous 
explosion followed ; and he was precipitated to the 
foot of the stairs in the smallest c07iceivable fraction 
of the i7ifinite divisibility ofti7?ie. 

Mr Forester picked him up, and found him not 
much hurt ; only a little singed, and very much 
frightened. But the whole interior of the apart- 
ment continued to blaze. Mr Forester and Sir 
Oran Haut-ton ran for water : Mr Fax rung the 
nearest bell : Mr Mystic vociferated " Fire ! " with 
singular energy : the servants ran about half- 
undressed : pails, buckets, and pitchers, were in 
active requisition ; till Sir Oran Haut-ton ascend- 
ing the stairs with the great rain-water tub, contain- 
ing one hundred and eight gallons of water,* threw 
the whole contents on the flames with one sweep 
of his powerful arm. 

The fire being extinguished, it remained to 
ascertain its cause. It appeared that the gas-tube 
in Mr Mystic's chamber had been left unstopped, 
and the gas evolving without combustion (the 
apartment being perfectly air-tight), had condensed 
into a mass, which, on the approach of Mr Mystic's 
taper, instantly ignited, blowing the transcendent- 
alist downstairs, and setting fire to his curtains and 
furniture. 

* " Some travellers speak of his strength as wonderful ; 
greater they say, than that of ten men such as we." — Ancient 
Metaphysics, vol. iii. p. 105. 



r 



1 08 Melincourt 

Mr Mystic, as soon as he recovered from his 
panic, began to bewail the catastrophe : not so 
much, he said, for itself, as because such an event 
in Cimmerian Lodge was an infalHble omen of 
evil — a type and symbol of an approaching period 
of public light — when the smoke of metaphysical 
mystery, and the vapours of ancient superstition, 
which he had done all that in him lay to consoli- 
date in the spirit of man, would explode at the 
touch of analytical reason, leaving nothing but the 
plain common sense matter-of-fact of moral and 
political truth — a day that he earnestly hoped he 
might never live to see. 

" Certainly," said Mr Forester, "it is a very bad 
omen for all who make it their study to darken the 
human understanding, when one of the pillars of 
their party is blown up by his own smoke ; but the 
symbol, as you call it, may operate as a warning to 
the apostles of superstitious chimera and political 
fraud, that it is very possible for smoke to be too 
thick ; and that, in condensing in the human 
mind the vapours of ignorance and delusion, they 
are only compressing a body of inflammable gas, 
of which the explosion will be fatal in precise pro- 
portion to its density." 



CHAPTER XXXII. 



THE DESERTED MANSION. 




HEY rose, as usual, before daylight, that 
they might pursue their perlustration ; 
and, on descending, found Mr Mystic 
awaiting them at a table covered with a sumptuous 
apparatus of tea and coffee, a pyramid of hot rolls, 
and a variety of cold provision. Cimmerian 
Lodge, he said, was famous for its breed of tame 
geese, and he could recommend the cold one on 
the table as one of his own training. The break- 
fast being dispatched, he rowed them over the 
Ocean of Deceitful Form before the sun rose to 
disturb his navigation. 

After walking some miles, a ruined mansion at 
the end of an ancient avenue of elms attracted 
their attention. As they made a point of leaving 
no place unexamined, they walked up to it. 
There was an air of melancholy grandeur in its 
loneliness and desolation which interested them to 
know its history. The briers that choked the 
court, the weeds that grew from the fissures of the 
walls and on the ledges of the windows, the 



1 10 Melincourt. 

fractured glass, the half-fallen door, the silent and 
motionless clock, the steps worn by the tread of 
other years, the total silence of the scene of 
ancient hospitality, broken only by the voices of 
the rooks whose nests were in the elms, all carried 
back the mind to the years that were gone. There 
was a sun-dial in the centre of the court : the sun 
shone on the brazen plate, and the shadow of the 
index fell on the line of noon. " Nothing 
impresses me more," said Mr Forester, " in a ruin 
of this kind, than the contrast between the sun- 
dial and the clock, which I have frequently 
observed. This contrast I once made the basis of 
a little poem, which the similarity of circumstances 
induces me to repeat to you though you are no 
votary of the spirit of rhyme." 

THE SUN-DIAL. 

The ivy o'er the mouldering wall 
Spreads like a tree, the growth of years : 
The wild wind through the doorless hall 
A melancholy music rears, 
A solitary voice, that sighs, 
O'er man's forgotten pageantries. 

Above the central gate, the clock, 
Through clustering ivy dimly seen, 
Seems, like the ghost of Time, to mock 
The wrecks of power that once has been. 
The hands are rusted on its face ; 
Even where they ceased, in years gone by. 
To keep the flying mom.ents pace : 
Fixing, in Fancy's thoughtful eye, 
A point of ages passed away, 



The Deserted Mansion. 1 1 1 

A speck of time, that owns no tie 

With aught that lives and breathes to-day. 

But 'mid the rank and towering grass, 
Where breezes wave, in mournful sport, 
The weeds that choke the ruined court, 
The careless hours, that circling pass, 
Still trace upon the dialled brass 
The shade of their unvarying way : 
And evermore, with every ray, 
That breaks the clouds and gilds the air. 
Time's stealthy steps are imaged there : 
Even as the long-revolving years 
In self-reflecting circles flow. 
From the first bud the hedge-row bears, 
To wintry nature's robe of snow. 
The changeful forms of mortal things 
Decay and pass ; and art and power 
Oppose in vain the doom that flings 
Oblivion on their closing hour ; 
While still, to every woodland vale, 
New blooms, new fruits, the seasons bring. 
For other eyes and lips to hail 
With looks and sounds of welcoming : 
As where some stream light-eddying roves 
By sunny meads and shadowy groves. 
Wave following wave departs for ever. 
But still flows on the eternal river. 

An old man approached them, in whom they 
observed that look of healthy and cheerful an- 
tiquity which showed that time only, and neither 
pain nor sickness, had traced wrinkles on his 
cheek. Mr Forester made inquiries of him on the 
object he had most at heart : but the old man could 
give no gleam of light to guide his steps. Mr Fax 
then asked some questions concerning the mansion 
before them. 



112 Melincoiivt. 

"Ah, zur!" said the old man, "this be the 
zeat o' Squire Openhand : but he doant Hve here 
now ; the house be growed too large vor'n, as one 
may zay. I remember un playing about here on 
the grass-plot, when he was half as high as the sun- 
dial poast, as if it was but yesterday. The days that I 
ha' zeed here ! Rare doings there used to be wi' 
the house vull o' gentlevolks zometimes to be zure : 
but what he loiked best was, to zee a merry- 
making of all his tenants, round the great oak that 
stands there in the large vield by himzelf. He 
used to zay if there was anything he could not 
abide it was the zight of a zorrowful feace \ and he 
was always prying about to voind one : and if he 
did voind one, Lord bless you ! it was not a zorrow- 
ful feace long, if it was anything that he could 
mend. Zo he lived to the length of his line, as 
the zaying is \ and when times grew worse, it 
was a hard matter to draw in ; howsomdever he 
did ; and when the tax-gatherers came every year 
vor more and more, and the peaper-money flew 
about, buying up everything in the neighbourhood ; 
and every vifty pounds he got in peaper wasn't 
worth, as he toald me, vorty pounds o' real money, 
why there was every year fewer horses in his steable, 
and less wine on his board : and every now and 
then came a queer zort o' chap dropped out o' the 
sky like — a vundholder he called un — and bought 
a bit of ground vor a handvul o' peaper, and built 
a cottage horny, as they call it — there be one 
there on the hill zide — and had nothing to do wi' 
the country people, nor the country people wi' he : 



The Deserted Mansion. 113 

nothing in the world to do, as we could zee, but to 
eat and drink, and make little bits o' shrubberies, 
o' quashies, and brutuses, and zelies, and cubies, 
and filligrees, and ruddydunderums, instead o' the 
oak plantations, the old landlords used to plant ; 
and the Squire could never abide the zight o' one 
o' they gimcrack boxes ; and all the while he was 
nailing up a window or two every year, and his 
horses were going one way, and his dogs another, 
and his old zervants were zent away, one by one, 
wi' heavy hearts, poor souls, and at last it came 
that he could not get half his rents, and zome o' 
his tenants went to the workhouse, and others ran 
away, because o' the poor-rates, and everything 
went to zixes and zevens, and I used to meet the 
Squire in his walks, and think to myzelf it was very 
hard that he who could not bear to zee a zorrowful 
feace, should have zuch a zorrowful one of his own ; 
and he used to zay to me whenever I met un : '■ All 
this comes o' peaper money Measter Hawthorn.' 
Zo the upshot was, he could not afford any longer 
to live in his own great house, where his vore- 
vathers had lived out o' memory of man, and went 
to zome outlandish place wi' his vamily to live, as 
he said, in much zuch a box as that gimcrack 
thing on the hill." 

"You have told us a very melancholy story," 
said Mr Forester ; " but at present, I fear, a very 
common one, and one of which, if the present 
system continue, every succeeding year will multiply 
examples." 

JI. H 



1 14 Melincourt. 

" Ah, zur ! " said the old man, " there was them 
as vorezeed it long ago, and voretold it too, up in 
the great house in Lunnon, where they zettles the 
affairs o' the nation : a pretty of zettling it be, to 
my thinking, to vill the country wi' tax-gatherers 
and vunholders, and peaper-money men, that turns 
all the old families out o' the country, and zends 
their tenants to the workhouse : but there was 
them as vorezeed and voretold it too, but nobody 
minded 'em then : they begins to mind 'em now." 

" But how do you manage in these times ? " said 
Mr Forester. 

"I lives, measter," said the old man, "and 
pretty well too, vor myself. I had a little vreehold 
varm o' my own, that has been in my vamily zeven 
hundred year, and we woan't part wi' it, I promise 
you, vor all the tax-collectors and vundholders in 
England. But my zon was never none o' your 
gentleman varmers, none a' your reacing and 
hunting bucks, that it's a shame vor a honest varmer 
to be : he always zet his shoulder to the wheel — 
alway a-vield by peep o' day : zo now I be old, I've 
given up the varm to him ; and that I wouldn't ha' 
done to the best man in all the county bezide : 
but he's my son, and I loves un. Zo I walks 
about the vields all day, and sits all the evening in 
the chimney-corner wi' an old neighbour or zo, 
and a jug o' ale, and talks over old times, when 
the Openhands, and zuch as they, could afford to 
live in the homes o' their vorevathers. It be a 
bad state o' things, my measters^ and must come 



Tile Deserted Mansion, 115 

to a bad end, zooner or later; but it'll last my 
time." 

** You are not in the last stage of a consumption, 
are you, honest friend ? " said Mr Fax. 

" Lord love you, no, measter," said the old 
farmer, rather frightened ; " do I look zo ? " 

" No," said Mr Fax ; " but you talked so." 

" Ah ! thee beest a wag, I zee," said the farmer. 
" Things be in a conzumption zure enough, but 
they'll last my time vor all that ; and if they doan't 
it's no fault o' mine ; and I'se no money in the 
vunds, nor no sinecure pleace, zo I eats my beef- 
steak and drinks my ale, and lets the world sHde." 




CHAPTER XXXIII. 



THE PHANTASM. 



^ 




'HE course of their perambulations brought 
them into the vicinity of Mehncourt, and 
they stopped at the Castle to inquire if 
any intelligence had been obtained of Anthelia. 
The gate was opened to them by old Peter Gray, 
who informed them that himself and the female 
domestics were at that time the only inmates of 
the Castle, as the other male domestics had gone 
off at the same time with Mr Hippy in search of 
their young mistress ; and the Honourable Mrs 
Pinmoney and Miss Danaretta were gone to 
London, because of the opera being open. 

Mr Forester inquired of the manner of Anthelia's 
disappearance. Old Peter informed him that she 
had gone into her library as usual after breakfast, 
and when the hour of dinner arrived she was miss- 
ing. The central window was open, as well as the 
little postern-door of the shrubbery, that led into 
the dingle, the whole vicinity of which they had 
examined, and had found the recent print of 
horses' feet on a narrow green road that skirted 



The Phantasm. 117 

the other side of the glen ; these traces they had 
followed till they had totally lost them, in a place 
where the road became hard and rocky, and divided 
into several branches : the pursuers had then separ- 
ated into parties of two and three, and each party 
had followed a different branch of the road, but 
they had found no clue to guide them, and had 
hitherto been unsuccessful. He should not himself, 
he said, have remained inactive, but Mr Hippy had 
insisted on his staying to take care of the Castle. 
He then observed, that, as it was growing late, he 
should humbly advise their continuing where they 
were till morning. To this they assented, and he 
led the way to the library. 

Everything in the library remained precisely in 
the place in which Anthelia left it. Her chair was 
near the table, and the materials of drawing were 
before it. The gloom of the winter evening, which 
was now closing in, was deepened through the 
stained glass of the windows. The moment the 
door was thrown open, Mr Forester started, and 
threw himself forward into the apartment towards 
x\nthelia's chair; but before he reached it, he 
stopped, placed his hand before his eyes, and 
turning round, leaned for support on the arm of 
Mr Fax. He recovered himself in a few minutes, 
and sate down by the table. Peter Gray, after 
kindling the fire, and lighting the Argand lamp, 
that hung from the centre of the apartment, went 
to give directions on the subject of dinner. 

Mr Forester observed, from the appearance of 



ii8 Melincourt. 

the drawing materials, that they had been hastily 
left, and he saw that the last subject on which 
Anthelia had been employed was a sketch of 
Redrose Abbey. He sate with his head leaning 
on his hand, and his eyes fixed on the drawing in 
perfect silence. Mr Fax thought it best not to dis- 
turb his meditations, and took up a volume that 
was lying open on the table, the last that Anthelia 
had been reading. It was a posthumous work of 
the virtuous and unfortunate Condorcet, in which 
that most amiable and sublime enthusiast, contem- 
plating human nature in the light of his own exalted 
spirit, had delineated a beautiful vision of the future 
destinies of mankind.* 

Sir Oran Haut-ton kept his eyes tixed on the 
door with looks of anxious impatience, and showed 
manifest and increasing disappointment at every 
re-entrance of Old Peter, who at length summoned 
them to dinner. 

Mr Fax was not surprised that Mr Forester had 
no appetite, but that Sir Oran had lost his, appeared 
to him extremely curious. The latter grew more 
and more uneasy, rose from table, took a candle in 
his hand, and wandered from room to room, search- 
ing every closet and corner in the Castle, to the 
infinite amazement of old Peter Gray, who followed 
him everywhere, and became convinced that the 
poor gentleman was crazed for love of his young 
mistress, who, he made no doubt, was the object of 

* Esquisse cPun Tableau historique des Progres de V Esprit 
humain. 



The Phantasm. 119 

his search ; and the conviction was strengthened 
by the perfect inattention of Sir Oran to all his 
assurances that his dear young lady was not in any 
of those places which he searched so scrupulously. 
Sir Oran at length having left no corner of the 
habitable part of the Castle unexamined, returned 
to the dining-room, and throwing himself into a 
chair began to shed tears in great abundance. 

Mr Fax made his two disconsolate friends drink 
several glasses of Madeira, by way of raising their 
spirits, and then asked Mr Forester what it was 
that had so affected him on their first entering 
the library. 

Mr Forester. — It was the form of Anthelia, in 
the place where I first saw her, in that chair by the 
table. The vision was momentary, but, while it 
lasted, had all the distinctness of reahty. 

Mr Fax. — This is no uncommon effect of the 
association of ideas when external objects present 
themselves to us after an interval of absence, in 
their remembered arrangement, with only one form 
wanting, and that the dearest among them, to 
perfect the resemblance between the present 
sensation and the recollected idea. A vivid 
imagination, more especially when the nerves are 
weakened by anxiety and fatigue, will, under such 
circumstances, complete the imperfect scene, by 
replacing for a moment the one deficient form 
among those accustomed objects which had long 
formed its accompaniments in the contemplation 
of memory. This single mental principle will 









1 20 Melincotirt. 

explain the greater number of credible tales of 
apparitions, and at the same time give a very 
satisfactory reason why a particular spirit is usually 
found haunting a particular place. 

Mr Forester. — Thus Petrarch's beautiful pictures 
of the Spirit of Laura on the banks of the Sorga, 
are assuredly something more than the mere 
fancies of the closet, and must have originated in 
that system of mental connection, which, under 
peculiar circumstances, gives ideas the force of 
sensations. Anxiety and fatigue are certainly 
great promoters of the state of mind most favour- 
able to such impressions. 

Mr Fax. — It was under the influence of such 
excitements that Brutus saw the spirit of Caesar ; 
and in similar states of feeling, the phantoms of 
poetry are usually supposed to be visible : the 
ghost of Banquo, for example, and that of 
Patroclus. But this only holds true of the poets 
who paint from nature ; for their artificial imitators, 
when they wish to call a spirit from the vasty deep, 
are not always so attentive to the mental circum- 
stances of the persons to whom they present it. 
In the early periods of society, when apparitions 
form a portion of the general creed ; when the life 
of man is wandering, precarious, and turbulent ; 
when the uncultured wildness of the heath and 
the forest harmonizes with the chimaeras of super- 
stition ; and when there is not, as in later times, a 
rooted principle of reason and knowledge, to 
weaken such perceptions in their origin, and 



The Phantasm. 121 

destroy the seeming reality of their subsequent 
recollection, impressions of this nature will be 
more frequent, and will be as much invested with 
the character of external existence, as the scenes 
to which they are attached by the connecting 
power of the mind. They will always be found 
with their own appropriate character of time, and 
place, and circumstance. The ghost of the warrior 
will be seen on the eve of battle by him who keeps 
his lonely watch near the blaze of the nightly fire, 
and the spirit of the huntress maid will appear to 
her lover when he pauses on the sunny heath, or 
rests in the moonlit cave. 




CHAPTER XXXIV. 



THE CHURCHYARD. 




HE next morning Mr Forester determined 
on following the mountain-road on the 
other side of the dingle, of which Peter 
Gray had spoken : but wishing first to make some 
inquiries of the Reverend Mr Portpipe, they 
walked to his vicarage, which was in a village at 
some distance. Just as they reached it, the 
reverend gentleman emerged in haste, and seeing 
Mr Forester and his friends, said he was very sorry 
that he could not attend to them just then, as he 
had a great press of business to dispose of; 
namely, a christening, a marriage, and a funeral ; 
but he would knock them off as fast as he could, 
after which he should be perfectly at their service, 
hoped they would wait in the vicarage till his 
return, and observed he had good ale and a few 
bottles of London Particular. He then left them 
to dispatch his affairs in the church. 

They preferred waiting in the churchyard. " A 
christening, a marriage, and a funeral ! " said Mr 
Forester. " With what indifference he runs 



The Churchyard. 123 

through the whole drama of human life, raises the 
curtain on its commencement, superintends the 
most important and eventful action of its progress, 
and drops the curtain on its close ! " 

Mr Fax. — Custom has rendered them all alike 
indifferent to him. In every human pursuit and 
profession the routine of ordinary business renders 
the mind indifferent to all the forms and objects of 
which that routine is composed. The sexton 
'•' sings at grave-making ; " the undertaker walks 
with a solemn face before the coffin, because a 
solemn face is part of his trade ; but his heart is 
as light as if there were no funeral at his heels : he 
is quietly conning over the items of his bill, or 
thinking of the party in which he is to pass his 
evening ; and the reverend gentleman who 
concludes the process, and consigns to its last 
receptacle the shell of extinguished intelligence, 
has his thoughts on the wing of the sports of the 
field or the jovial board of the Squire. 

Mr Forester. — Your observation is just. It is 
this hardening power of custom that gives steadi- 
ness to the hand of the surgeon, firmness to the 
voice of the criminal judge, coolness to the soldier 
" in the imminent deadly breach," self-possession 
to the sailor in the rage of the equinoctial storm. 
It is under this influence that the lawyer deals out 
writs and executions as carelessly as he deals out 
cards at his evening whist ; that the gaoler turns 
the key with the same stern indifference on un- 
fortunate innocence as on hardened villany ; that 



1 24 Melincoiirt. 

the venal senator votes away by piecemeal the 
liberties of his country ; and that the statesman 
sketches over the bottle his series of deliberate 
schemes for the extinction of human freedom, the 
enchaining of human reason, and the waste of 
human life. 

Mr Fax. — Contemplate any of these men only 
in the sphere of their routine, and you will think 
them utterly destitute of all human sympathy. 
Make them change places with each other, and 
you will see symptoms of natural feelings. Custom 
cannot kill the better feelings of human nature : 
it merely lays them asleep. 

Mr Forester. — You must acknowledge, then, at 
least, that their sleep is very sound. 

Mr Fax. — In most cases certainly as sound as 
that of Epimenides, or of the seven sleepers of 
Ephesus. But these did wake at last, and, there- 
fore, according to Aristotle, they had always the 
capacity of waking. 

Mr Forester. — You must allow me to wait for a 
similar proof before I admit such a capacity in 
respect to the feelings of some of the characters 
we have mentioned. Yet I am no sceptic in 
human virtue. 

Mr Fax. — You have no reason to be, with so 
much evidence before your eyes of the excellence 
of the past generation, and I do not suppose the 
present is much worse than its predecessors. 
Read the epitaphs around you, and see what 
models and mirrors of all the social virtues have 



The Churchyard. 125 

left the examples of their shining light to guide 
the steps of their posterity. 

Mr Forester. — I observe the usual profusion of 
dutiful sons, affectionate husbands, faithful friends, 
kind neighbours, and honest men. These are the 
luxuriant harvest of every churchyard. But it is 
not strange that even the fertility of fiction should 
be so circumscribed in the variety of monumental 
panegyric ? Yet a few words comprehend the 
summary of all the moral duties of ordinary life. 
Their degrees and diversities are like the shades 
of colour, that shun for the most part the power 
of language : at all events, the nice distinctions 
and combinations that give individuality to his- 
torical character, scarcely come within the limits 
of sepulchral inscription, which merely serves to 
testify the regret of the survivors for one whose 
society was dear, and whose faults are forgotten. 
For there is a feeling in the human mind, that, in 
looking back on former scenes of intercourse with 
those who are passed for ever beyond the limits of 
injury and resentment, gradually destroys all the 
bitterness and heightens all the pleasures of the 
remembrance ; as, when we revert in fancy to the 
days of our childhood, we scarcely find a vestige 
of their tears, pains, and disappointments, and 
perceive only their fields, their flowers, and their 
sunshine, and the smiles of our little associates. 

Mr Fax.—T\\Q history of common life seems 
as circumscribed as its moral attributes : for the 
most extensive information I can collect from 



1 26 Melincourt. 

these gravestones is, that the parties married, 
lived in trouble, and died of a conflict between a 
P disease and a physician. I observe a last request, 
which I suppose was very speedily complied with 
— that of a tender husband to his loving wife not 
to weep for him long. If it be as you say, that 
the faults of the dead are soon forgotten, yet the 
memory of their virtues is not much longer lived ; 
and I have often thought that these words of 
Rabelais would furnish an appropriate inscription 
for ninety-nine grave-stones out of ^every hundred : 

—Sa memoire expira avecque le son des cloches qui 

carillonerent a son enterreme7it. 



L 




CHAPTER XXXV. 

THE RUSTIC WEDDING. 

HE bride and bridegroom, with half a 
dozen of their friends, now entered the 
churchyard. The bride, a strong, healthy- 
looking country girl, was clinging to the arm of 
her lover, not with the light and scarcely percepti- 
ble touch with which Miss Simper complies with 
the request of Mr Giggle, " that she will do him 
the honour to take his arm," but with a cordial and 
unsophisticated pressure that would have made 
such an arm as Mr Giggle's black and blue. The 
bridegroom, with a pair of chubby cheeks, which 
in colour precisely rivalled his new scarlet waist- 
coat, and his mouth expanded into a broad grin 
that exhibited the total range of his teeth, advanced 
in a sort of step that was half a walk and half a 
dance, as if the preconceived notion of the requisite 
solemnity of demeanour were struggling with the 
natural impulses of the overflowing joy of his 
heart. 

Mr Fax looked with great commiseration on this 
bridal pair, and determined to ascertain if they had 
a clear notion of the evils that awaited them in 



1 28 Melincourt. 

consequence of the rash step they were about to 
take. He therefore accosted them with an ob- 
servation that the Reverend Mr Portpipe was not 
at leisure, but would be in a few minutes. " In 
the meantime," said he, " I stand here as the 
representative of general reason, to ask if you have 
duly weighed the consequences of your present 
proceeding." 

The Bridegroom. — General Reason ! I he's no 
soger man, and bea'n't countable to no General 
whatzomecomedever. We bea'n't under martial 
law, be we. Voine times indeed if General 
Reason be to interpose between a poor man and 
his sweetheart. 

Mr Fax. —That is precisely the case which calls 
most loudly for such an interposition. 

The Bridegroom. — If General Reason waits till I 
or Zukey calls loudly vor'n, he'll wait long enough. 
Woa'n't he, Zukey? 

The Bride. — Ees, zure, Robin. 

Mr Fax. — General reason, my friend, I assure 
you, has nothing to do with martial law, nor with 
any other mode of arbitrary power, but with au- 
thority that has truth for its foundation, benevol- 
ence for its end, and the whole universe for its 
sphere of action. 

The Bridegroom. — (Scratching his head.) There 
be a mort o' voine words, but I zuppose you means 
to zay as how this General Reason be a Methody 
preacher ; but I he's true earthy-ducks church, and 
20 be Zukey : bea'n't you, Zukey ? 



The Rustic Wedding. ' 129 

I/ie Bride. — Ees, zure, Robin. 

The Bridegroom. — And we has nothing to do 
wi' General Reason neither on us. Has we, 
Zukey ? 

The Bride. — No, zure, Robin. 

Mr Fax. — Well, my friend, be that as it may, 
you are going to be married ? 

The Bridegroom. — Why, I think zo, zur, wi' 
General Reason's leave. Bea'n't we, Zukey ? 

The Bride. — Ees, zure, Robin. 

Mr Fax. — And are you fully aware, my honest 
friend, what marriage is ? 

The Bridegroom. — Vor zartin I be : Zukey and I 
ha' got it by heart out o' t' Book o' Common Prayer. 
Ha'n't we, Zukey ? ( This time Susan did not think 
proper to answer.) It be ordained that zuch par- 
sons as hav'n't the gift of {Susan gave him such 

a sudden and violent pinch on the arm, that his speech 
ended in a roar.) Od rabbit me ! that wur a 
twinger ! I'll have my revenge, howzomecome- 
dever. {And he i7npri7ited a very emphatical kiss on 
the lips of his bluslmig bride that greatly scandalized 
Mr Fax.) 

Mr Fax. — Do you know, that in all likelihood, 
in the course of six years, you will have as many 
children ? 

The Bridegroom. — The more the merrier, zur. 
Bea'n't it, Zukey? {Susan was mute again.) 

Mr Fax. — I hope it may prove so, my friend ; 
but I fear you will find the more the sadder. What 
are your occupations ? 

II. I 



1 30 Melincourt. 

The Bridegroom. — Anan, zur ? 

Mr Fax. — What do you do to get your living ? 

The Bridegroom. — Works vor Varmer Brown- 
stout : zows and reaps, threshes, and goes to 
market wi' corn and cattle, turns to plough-tail 
when hap chances, cleans and feeds horses, hedges 
and ditches, fells timber, gathers in t' orchard, 
brews ale, and drinks it, and gets vourteen shill'n's 
a week vor my trouble. And Zukey here ha' laid 
up a mint o' money : she wur dairy-maid at Varmer 
Cheesecurd's, and ha' gotten vour pounds zeventeen 
shill'n's and ninepence, in t' old chest wi' three vlat 
locks and a padlock. Ha'n't you, Zukey ? 

The Bride. — Ees, zure, Robin. 

Mr Fax. — It does not appear to me, my worthy 
friend, that your fourteen shillings a week, even 
with Mrs Susan's consolidated fund of four pounds 
seventeen shillings and ninepence, will be altogether 
adequate to the maintenance of such a family as 
you seem likely to have. 

The Bridegroom. — Why, zur, in t' virst pleace I 
doan't know what be Zukey's intentions in that 

respect Od rabbit it, Zukey! doa'n't pinch 

zo and in t' next pleace, wi' all due submission 

to you and General Reason the Methody preacher, 
I takes it to be our look-out, and none o' nobody's 
else. 

Mr Fax. — But it is somebody's else, for this 
reason; that if you cannot maintain your own 
children, the parish must do it for you. 

The Bridegroom. — Vor zartin — in a zort o' way ;j 



The Rustic Wedding. 131 

and bad enough at best. But I wants no more to 
do wi' t* parish than parish wi' me. 

Mr Fax. — I dare say you do not, at present. 
But my good friend, when the cares of a family 
come upon you, your independence of spirit 
will give way to necessity; and if, by any acci- 
dent, you are thrown out of work, as in the 
present times many honest fellows are, what will 
you do then? 

The Bridegroom. — Do the best I can, measter, 
az I always does, and nobody can't do no better. 

Mr Fax. — Do you suppose, then, you are doing 
the best you can now, in marrying, with such a 
doubtful prospect before you ? How will you bring 
up your children ? 

The Bridegroom. — Why, in the vear o' the Lord, 
to be zure. 

Mr Fax. — Of course : but how will you bring 
them up to get their living? 

The Bridegroofu. — That's as thereafter may 
happen. They woa n't starve, I'se warrant 'em, 
iif they teakes after their veyther. But I zees 
mow who General Reason be. He be one o' 
•your sinecure vundholder peaper-money taxing 
! men, as isn't satisfied wi' takin' t' bread out o' 
!t' poor man's mouth, and zending his chilern 
I to army and navy, and vactories, and suchlike, 
but wants to take away his wife into t' bargain. 

Mr Fax. — There, my honest friend, you have 
fallen into a radical mistake, which I shall try to 
elucidate for your benefit. It is owing to poor 



132 Melincourt. 

people having more children than they can main- 
tain, that those children are obliged to go to the 
army and navy, and consequently that statesmen 
and conquerors find so many ready instruments 
for the oppression and destruction of the human 
species : it follows, therefore, that if people 
would not marry till they could be certain of 
maintaining all their children comfortably at 

home 

The Bridegroom. — Lord love you, that be all 
mighty voine rigmarol; but the short and the long 
be this : I can't live without Zukey, nor Zukey 
without I, can you, Zukey? 
The Bride. — No zure, Robin. 
The Bridegroom. — Now there be a plain down- 
right honest-hearted old English girl j none o' your 
quality madams, as zays one thing and means 
another ; and zo you may tell General Reason he 
may teake away chair and teable, salt-box and 
trencher, bed and bedding, pig and pig-stye, but 
neither he nor all his peaper-men together shall 
take away his own Zukey vrom Robin Ruddyfeace ; 
if they shall I'm doomed. 

" What profane wretch," said the Reverend Mr 
Portpipe, emerging from the church, " what profane 
wretch is swearing in the very gate of the temple?" 
and seeing by the bridegroom's confusion that he 
was the culprit, he reprimanded him severely, and 
declared he would not marry him that day. The 
very thought of such a disappointment was too 
much for poor Robin to bear, and, after one or two 



TJie Rustic Weddhig. 133 

ineffectual efforts to speak, he distorted his face 
into a most rueful expression, and struck up such a 
roar of crying as completely electrified the Rev. 
Mr Portpipe, whose wrath, nevertheless, was not to 
be mollified by Robin's grief and contrition, but 
yielded at length to the intercessions of Mr Forester. 
Robin's face cleared up in an instant, and the 
natural broad grin of his ruddy countenance 
shone forth through his tears like the sun through 
a shower. "You are such an honest and warm- 
hearted fellov.'," said Mr Forester, putting a bank- 
note into Robin's hand, " that you must not refuse 
me the pleasure of making this little addition to 
Mistress Susan's consolidated fund." — " Od rabbit 
me ! " said the bridegroom, overcome with joy 
and surprise, " I doa'n't know who thee beest, 
but thee bees'n't General Reason, that's vor 
zartin." 

The rustic party then followed the Reverend Mr 
Portpipe into the church. Robin, when he reached 
the porch, looked round over his shoulder to Mr 
Fax, and said with a very arch look, " My dutiful 
sarvice to General Reason." And looking round 
a second time before he entered the door, added : 
" and Zukey's too." 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 



THE VICARAGE. 




HEN the Rev. Mr Portpipe had despatched 
his "press of business," he set before his 
guests in the old oak parlour of the 
vicarage a cold turkey and ham, a capacious jug 
of "incomparable ale," and a bottle of his London 
Particular; all which, on trial, were approved to 
be excellent, and a second bottle of the latter was 
very soon required, and produced with great 
alacrity. The reverend gentleman expressed much 
anxiety in relation to the mysterious circumstance 
of the disappearance of Antheha, on whom he 
pronounced a very warm eulogium, saying she was 
the flower of the mountains, the type of ideal 
beauty, the daughter of music, the rosebud of 
sweetness, and the handmaid of charity. He pro- 
fessed himself unable to throw the least light on 
the transaction, but supposed she had been spirited 
away for some nefarious purpose. Pie said that 
the mountain road had been explored without 
success in all its ramifications, not only by Mr 
Hippy and the visitors and domestics of Melin- 



The Vicarage. 135 

court, but by all the peasants and mountaineers 
of the vicinity — that it led through a most desolate 
and inhospitable tract of country, and he would 
advise them, if they persisted in their intention of 
following it themselves, to partake of his poor 
hospitality till morning, and set forward with the 
first dawn of daylight. Mr Fax seconded this 
proposal, and Mr Forester complied. 

They spent the evening in the old oak parlour, 
and conversed on various subjects, during which 
a knotty point opposing itself to the solution of an 
historical question, Mr Forester expressed a wish 
to be allowed access to the reverend gentleman's 
library. The reverend gentleman hummed awhile 
with great gravity and deliberation : then slowly 
rising from his large arm-chair, he walked across 
the room to the further corner, where throwing open 
the door of a little closet, he said with extreme 
complacency, " There is my library: Homer, Virgil, 
and Horace, for old acquaintance sake, and the 
credit of my cloth : Tillotson, Atterbury, and 
Jeremy Taylor, for materials of exhortation and 
ingredients of sound doctrine : and for my own 
private amusement in an occasional half-hour 
between my dinner and my nap, a translation of 
Rabelais and the Tale of a Tub." 

Mr Fax. — A well-chosen collection. 

The Rev. Mr Portpipe. — Midttim inparvo. But 
there is something that may amuse you : a little 
drawer of mineral specimens that have been picked 
up in this vicinity, and a fossil or two. Among the 



1 36 Melificoiirt. 

latter is a curious bone that was found in a hill just 
by, invested with stalactite. 

Mr Forester. — The bone of a human thumb, 
unquestionably. 

The Rev Mr Portpipe. — Very probably. 

Mr Forester. — Which, by its comparative pro- 
portion, must have belonged to an individual about 
eleven feet six or seven inches in height ; there 
are no such men now. 

Mr Fax. — Except, perhaps, among the Pata- 
gonians, whose existence is, however, disputed. 

Mr Forester. — It is disputed on no tenable 
ground, but that of the narrow and bigoted vanity 
of civilized men, who, pent in the unhealthy limits 
of towns and cities, where they dwindle from 
generation to generation in a fearful rapidity of 
declension towards the abyss of the infinitely little, 
in which they will finally vanish from the system 
of nature, will not admit that there ever were, or 
are, or can be better, stronger, and healthier men 
than themselves. The Patagonians are a vagrant 
nation, without house or home, and are, therefore, 
only occasionally seen on the coast : but because 
some voyagers have not seen them, I know not why 
we should impeach the evidence of those who have. 
The testimony of a man of honour, like Mr Byron, 
would alone have been sufficient : but all his officers 
and men gave the same account. And there are 
other testimonies : that, for instance of M. de 
Guyot, who brought from the coast of Patagonia a 
skeleton of one of these great men, which measured 



The Vicarage. 137 

between twelve and thirteen feet. This skeleton 
he was bringing to Europe, but happening to be 
caught in a great storm, and having on board a 
Spanish Bishop (the Archbishop of Lima), who was 
of opinion that the storm was caused by the bones 
of this Pagan which they had on board ; and hav- 
ing persuaded the crew that this was the case, the 
captain was obliged to throw the skeleton over- 
board. The Bishop died soon after, and was 
thrown overboard in his turn. I could have wished 
that he had been thrown overboard sooner, and 
then the bones of the Patagonian w^ould have 
arrived in Europe."^ 

The Rev. Mr Portpipe. — Your wish is orthodox, 
inasmuch as the Bishop was himself a Pagan, and 
moreover an Inquisitor. And your doctrine of 
large men is also orthodox, for the sons of Anak 
and the family of Goliath did once exist, though 
now their race is extinct. 

Mr Forester. — The multiplication of diseases, 
the diminution of strength, and the contraction of 
the term of existence, keep pace with the diminu- 
tion of the stature of men. The mortality of a 
manufacturing town, compared with that of a 
mountain-village, is more than three to one, which 
clearly shows the evil effects of the departure from 
natural life, and of the coacervation of multitudes 
within the narrow precincts of cities, where the 
breath of so many animals, and the exhalations 
from the dead, the dying, and corrupted things of 
" Ancient Metaphysics, vol. iii. p. 139. 



138 Melincourt. 

all kinds, make the air little better than a slow 
poison, and so offensive as to be perceptible to 
the sense of those who are not accustomed to it ; 
for the wandering Arabs will smell a town at the 
distance of several leagues. And in this country 
the cottagers who are driven by the avarice of 
landlords and great tenants to seek a subsistence 
in towns, are very soon destroyed by the change."^ 
And this hiving of human beings is not the only 
evil effect of commerce, which tends also to keep 
up a constant circulation of the elements of de- 
struction, and to make the vices and diseases of 
one country the vices and diseases of all.f Thus, 
with every extension of our intercourse with dis- 
tant lands, we bring home some new seed of 
death ; and how many we leave as vestiges of our 
visitation, let the South Sea Islanders testify. 
Consider, too, the frightful consequences of the 
consumption of spirituous liquors : a practice so 
destructive, that if all the devils were again to be 
assembled in Pandemonium to contrive the ruin 
of the human species, nothing so mischievous 
could be devised by them ; % but which it is con- 
sidered politic to encourage, according to our 
method of raising money on the vices of the 
people.§ When these and many other causes of 
destruction are considered, it would be wonder- 
ful indeed, if every new generation were not, as 
all experience proves that it is, smaller, weaker, 
* Ancient Metaphysics^ vol. iii. p. 193. t Ibid,^ p. 191. 
X Ibid., p. 181. § Ibid., p. 182. 



The Vicm-age. 139 

more diseased, and more miserable than the 
preceding. 

Mr Fax. — Do you find, in the progress of 
science and the rapid diffusion of intellectual 
light, no counterpoise to this mass of physical 
calamity, even admitting it to exist in the extent 
you suppose. 

Mr Forester. — Without such a counterpoise the 
condition of human nature would be desperate 
indeed. The intellectual, as I have often observed 
to you, are nourished at the expense of the animal 
faculties. 

Mr Fax. — You cannot, then, conceive the exist- 
ence of mens sana in corpore sano ? 

Mr Forester. — Scarcely in the present state of 
human degeneracy : at best in a very limited 
sense. 

Mr Fax. — Nevertheless you do, nay, you must 
acknowledge that the intellectual, which is the 
better part of human nature, is in a progress of 
rapid improvement, continually enlarging its views 
and multiplying its acquisitions. 

Mr Forester. — The collective stock of know- 
ledge which is the common property of scientific 
men necessarily increases, and will increase from 
the circumstance of admitting the co-operation of 
numbers : but collective knowledge is as distinct 
from individual mental power as it is confessedly 
unconnected with wisdom and moral virtue, and 
independent of political liberty. A man of modern 
times, with machines of complicated powers, will 



y! 



140 Meliii court. 

lift a heavier mass than that which Hector hurled 
from his unassisted arm against the Grecian gates ; 
but take away his mechanism, and what compari- 
son is there between him and Hector? In the 
same way a modem man of science knows more 
than Pythagoras knew : but consider them with 
relation only to mental power, and what compari- 
son remains between them? No more than be- 
tween a modern poet and Homer — a comparison 
which the most strenuous partisan of modern im- 
provement will scarcely venture to institute. 

Mr Fax, — I will venture to oppose Shakespeare 
to him nevertheless. 

Mr Forester. — That is, however, going back two 
centuries, to a state of society very peculiar, and 
very fertile in genius. Shakespeare is the great 
phenomenon of the modern world, but his men 
and women are beings like ourselves; whereas 
those of Homer are of a nobler and mightier race; 
and his poetry is worthy of his characters : it is 
the language of the gods. 

Mt Forester rose, and approached the little 
closet, with the avowed intention of taking down 
Homer. "Take care how you touch him," said- 
the Reverend Mr Portpipe: "he is in a very dusty 
condition, for he^ has not been disturbed these 
thirty years." 




CHAPTER XXXVIL 

THE MOUNTAINS. 

HEY followed the mountain-road till they 
arrived at the spot where it divided into 
several branches, one of which they 
selected on some principle of preference, which 
we are not sagacious enough to penetrate. They 
now proceeded by a gradual ascent of several 
miles along a rugged passage of the hills, where 
the now flowerless heath was the only vestige of 
vegetation ; and the sound of the little streams 
that everywhere gleamed beside their way, the 
only manifestation of the life and motion of 
nature. 

" It is a subject worthy of consideration," said 
Mr Fax, " how far scenes like these are connected 
with the genius of liberty : how far the dweller of 
the mountains, who is certainly surrounded by 
more sublime excitements, has more loftiness of 
thought, and more freedom of spirit, than the 
cultivator of the plains ? " 

Mr Forester. — A modern poet has observed, 
that the voices of the sea and the mountains, are 



142 Melincourt. 

the two voices of liberty : the words mountain- 
liberty have, indeed, become so intimately associ- 
ated, that I never yet found any one who even 
thought of questioning their necessary and natural 
connection. 

Mr Fax. — And yet I question it much ; and in 
the present state of human society I hold the uni- 
versal inculcation of such a sentiment, in poetry 
and romance, to be not only a most gross delusion, 
but an error replete with the most pernicious prac- 
tical consequences. For I have often seen a young 
man of high and aspiring genius, full of noble 
enthusiasm for the diffusion of truth and the 
general happiness of mankind, withdrawn from all 
intercourse with polished and intellectual society, 
by the distempered idea, that he would nowhere 
find fit aliment for his high cogitations, but among 
heaths, and rocks, and torrents. 

Mr Forester. — In a state of society so corrupted 
as that in which we live, the best instructors and 
companions are ancient books ; and these are 
best studied in those congenial solitudes, where 
the energies of nature are most pure and uncon- 
trolled, and the aspect of external things recalls in 
some measure the departed glory of the world. 

Mr Fax. — Holding, as I do, that no branch of 
knowledge is valuable, but such as in its ultimate 
results has a plain and practical tendency to the 
general diffusion of moral and political truth, you 
must allow me to doubt the efficacy of solitary 
intercourse with stocks and stones, however rugged 



The Mountains. 143 

and fantastic in their shapes, towards the produc- 
tion of this effect. 

Mr Forester, — It is matter of historical testimony 
that occasional retirement into the recesses of 
nature has produced the most salutary effects of 
the very kind you require, in the instance of some 
of the most illustrious minds that have adorned 
the name of man. 

Mr Fax. — That the health and purity of the 
country, its verdure and its sunshine, have the 
most beneficial influence on the mental and cor- 
poreal faculties, I am very far from being inclined 
to deny : but this is a different consideration from 
that of the connection between the scenery of the 
mountains and the genius of liberty. Look into 
the records of the world. What have the moun- 
tains done for freedom and mankind? When 
have the mountains, to speak in the cant of the 
new school of poetry, "sent forth a voice of power" 
to awe the oppressors of the world? Mountaineers 
are for the most part a stupid and ignorant race : 
and where there are stupidity and ignorance, there 
will be superstition; and where there is supersti 
tion, there will be slavery. 

Mr Forester. — To a certain extent I cannot but 
agree with you. The names of Hampden and 
Milton are associated with the level plains and flat 
pastures of Buckinghamshire ; but I cannot now 
remember what names of true greatness and un- 
shaken devotion to general liberty, are associated 
with these heathy rocks and cloud-capped moun- 



144 Melincourt. 

tains of Cumberland. We have seen a little horde 
of poets, who brought hither from the vales of the 
south, the harps which they had consecrated to 
Truth and Liberty, to acquire new energy in the 
mountain-winds : and now those harps are attuned 
to the praise of luxurious power, to the strains of 
courtly sycophancy, and to the hymns of ex- 
ploded superstition. But let not the innocent 
mountains bear the burden of their transgressions. 

Mr Fax. — All I mean to say is, that there is 
nothing in the nature of mountain-scenery either 
to make men free, or to keep them so. The only 
source of freedom is intellectual light. The ig- 
norant are always slaves, though they dwell among 
the Andes. The wise are always free, though they 
cultivate a savannah. Who is so stupid and so 
servile as a Swiss, whom you find, like a piece of 
living furniture, the human latch of every great 
man's door? 

Mr Forester. — Let us look back to former days, 
to the mountains of the North : 

Wild the Runic faith, 
And wild the realms where Scandinavian chiefs 
And Scalds arose, and hence the Scald's strong verse 
Partook the savage wildness. And methinks, 
Amid such scenes as these the poet's soul 
Might best attain full growth.'"' 

Mr Fax. — As to the " Scald's strong verse," I 

* From Southey's lines to Amos Cootie, prefixed to the 
latter's " Icelandic Poetry," 1797 : but not reprinted in 
Southey's works. — G. 



TJie Mountains. 145 

must say I have never seen any specimens of it 
that I did not think mere trash. It is little more 
than a rhapsody of rejoicing in carnage, a ringing 
of changes on the biting sword and the flowing of 
blood and the feast of the raven and the vulture, 
and fulsome flattery of the chieftain, of whom the 
said Scald was the abject slave, vassal, parasite, 
and laureat, interspersed with continual hints that 
he ought to be well paid for his lying panegyrics. 

Mr Forester. — There is some justice in your 
observations : nevertheless, I must still contend 
that those who seek the mountains in a proper 
frame of feeling, will find in them images of energy 
and liberty, harmonizing most aptly with the lofti- 
ness of an unprejudiced mind, and nerving the 
arm of resistance to every variety of oppression 
and imposture, that winds the chains of power 
round the free-bom spirit of man. 




CHAPTER XXXVIII. 



THE FRACAS. 




;FTER a long ramble among heath and 
rock, and over moss and moor, they 
began to fear the probability of being 
benighted among those desolate wilds, when for- 
tunately they found that their track crossed one of 
the principal roads, which they followed for a short 
time, and entered a small town, where they stopped 
for the night at an inn. They were shown upstairs 
into an apartment separated from another only by 
a movable partition, which allowed the two rooms 
to be occasionally laid into one. They were just 
sitting down to dinner when they heard the voices 
of some newly-arrived company in the adjoining 
apartment, and distinguished the tones of a female 
voice indicative of alarm and anxiety, and the 
masculine accents of one who seemed to be alter- 
nately comforting the afflicted fair one, and swear- 
ing at the obsequious waiter, with reiterated orders, 
as it appeared, for another chaise immediately. 
Mr Fax was not long in divining that the new- 
comers were two runaway lovers in momentary 



TJu Fracas. 147 

apprehension of being overtaken; and this con- 
jecture was confirmed, when, after a furious rattle 
of wheels in the yard, the door of the next apart- 
ment was burst open, and a violent scream from 
the lady was followed by a gruff shout of — " So, ho, 
miss, here you are. Gretna, eh? Your journey's 
marred for this time; and if you get off again, 
say you have my consent — that's all." Low soft 
tones of supplication ensued, but in undistinguish- 
able words, and continued to be repeated in the 
intervals of the following harangue : " Love in- 
deed ! don't tell me. Aren't you my daughter ? 
Answer me that. And haven't I a right over you 
till you are twenty-one ? You may marry then ; 
but not a rap of the ready : my money's my own 
all my life. Haven't I chosen you a proper 
husband — a nice rich young fellow not above 
forty-five ? — Sixty, you minx ! no such thing. 
Rolling in riches : member for Threevotes : two 
places, three pensions, and a sinecure : famous 
borough interest to make all your children generals 
and archbishops. And here a miserable vagabond 
with only five hundred a year in landed property. 
— Pish ! love indeed ! — own age — congenial minds 
— pshaw ! all a farce. Money — money — money — 
that's the matter : money is the first thing — money 
is the second thing — money is the third thing — 
money is the only thing — money is everything and 
all things." — " Vagabond, sir," said a third voice : 
" I am a gentleman, and have money sufficient to 
maintain your daughter in comfort." — " Comfort ! " 



148 Melincourt. 

said the gruff voice again ; " comfort with five 
hundred a year, ha ! ha ! ha ! eh ! Sir Bonus ? " — 
" Hooh ! hooh ! hooh ! very droll indeed," said a 
fourth voice, in a sound that seemed a mixture of 
a cough and a laugh. — ''Very well, sir," said the 
third voice ; " I shall not part with my treasure 
quietly, I assure you." — " Rebelhon ! flat rebellion 
against parental authority," exclaimed the second. 
"But I'm too much for you, youngster. Where 
are all my varlets and rascals ? " 

A violent trampling of feet, and various sounds 
of tumult ensued, as if the old gentleman and his 
party were tearing the lovers asunder by main 
force ; and at length an agonizing scream from the 
young lady seemed to announce that their purpose 
was accomplished. Mr Forester started up with a 
view of doing all in his power to assist the injured 
damsel ; and Sir Oran Haut-ton, who, as the reader 
has seen, had very strong feelings of natural justice, 
and a most chivalrous sympathy with females 
in distress, rushed with a desperate impulse against 
the partition, and hurled a great portion of it, with 
a violent crash, into the adjoining apartment. 
This unexpected event had the effect of fixing the 
whole group within for a few moments in motionless 
surprise in their respective places. 

The fat and portly father, who was no other than 
our old acquaintance Sir Gregory Greenmould, 
and the old valetudinarian he had chosen for his 
daughter, Sir Bonus Mac Scrip, were directing the 
efforts of their myrmidons to separate the youthful 



The Fracas. 149 

pair. The young lady was clinging to her lover 
with the tenacity of the tendrils of a vine : the 
young gentleman's right arm was at liberty, and he 
was keeping the assailants at bay with the poker, 
which he had seized on the first irruption of the 
foe, and which had left vestiges of its impression, 
to speak in ancient phraseology, in various green L 
wounds and bloody coxcombs. j/ 

As Sir Oran was not habituated to allow any ^ 
very long process of syllogistic reasoning to interfere 
between his conception and execution of the dic- 
tates of natural justice, he commenced operations ,4 
by throwing the assailants one by one downstairs, ^ ' 
who, as fast as they could rise from the ground, 
ran or limped away into sundry holes and coverts. 
Sir Bonus Mac Scrip retreated through the breach, 
and concealed himself under the dining-table in Mr 
Forester's apartment. Mr Forester succeeded in 
preventing Sir Gregory from being thrown after his 
myrmidons : but Sir Oran kept the fat Baronet a 
close prisoner in the corner of the room, while the 
lovers slipped away into the inn-yard, where the 
chaise they had ordered was in readiness ; and the 
cracking of whips, the trampling of horses, and the 
rattling of wheels announced the final discomfiture 
of the schemes of Sir Gregory Greenmould, and the 
hopes of Sir Bonus Mac Scrip. 



^^^^^^^S^ 



1 




CHAPTER XXXIX. 



MAINCHANCE VILLA. 




HE next day they resumed their perquisi- 
tions, still without any clue to guide them 
in their search. They had hitherto had 
the advantage of those halcyon days, which often 
make the middle of winter a season of serenity and 
sunshine ; but, on this day, towards the evening, 
the sky grew black with clouds, the snow fell 
rapidly in massy flakes, and the mountains and 
valleys were covered with one uniform veil of 
whiteness. All vestiges of roads and paths were 
obliterated. They were winding round the side of 
a mountain, and their situation began to wear a 
very unpromising aspect, when, on a sudden turn 
of the road, the trees and chimneys of a villa burst 
upon their view in the valley below. To this they 
bent their way, and on ringing at the gate-bell, and 
making the requisite inquiries, they found it to be 
Mainchance Villa, the new residence of Peter Pay- 
paul Paperstamp, Esquire, whom we introduced to 
our readers in the twenty-eighth chapter. They sent 
in their names, and received a polite invitation to 



Mainchance Villa. 151 

walk in. They were shown into a parlour, where 
they found their old acquaintance Mr Derrydown 
tete-a-tete at the piano with Miss Celandina, with 
whom he was singing a duet. Miss Celandina 
said, " her papa was just then engaged, but would 
soon have the pleasure of waiting on them : in the 
meantime Mr Derrydown would do the honours of 
the house." Miss Celandina left the room ; and 
they learned in conversation with Mr Derrydown, 
that the latter, finding his case hopeless with 
Anthelia, had discovered some good reasons in an 
old ballad for placing his affections where they 
would be more welcome ; he had therefore thrown 
himself at the feet of Miss Celandina Paperstamp j 
the young lady's father, having inquired into Mr 
Derrydown's fortune, had concluded, from the 
answer he received, that it would be a very good 
match for his daughter ; and the day was already 
definitely arranged on which Miss Celandina 
Paperstamp was to be metamorphosed into Mrs 
Derrydown. 

Mr Derrydown informed them, that they would 
not see Mr Paperstamp till dinner, as he was 
closeted in close conference with Mr Feathernest, 
Mr Vamp, Mr Killthedead, and Mr Anyside 
Antijack,* a very important personage just arrived 
from abroad on the occasion of a letter from Mr 
Mystic of Cimmerian Lodge, denouncing an ap- 
proaching period of public light, which had filled 
Messieurs Paperstamp, Feathernest, Vamp, Kill- 
* Canning. — G. 



152 Melincoiirt. 

thedead, and Antijack with the deepest dismay; 
and they were now holding a consultation on the 
best means to be adopted for totally and finally 
extinguishing the light of the human understand- 
ing. "I am excluded from the council," pro- 
ceeded Mr Derrydown, " and it is their intention 
to keep me altogether in the dark on the subject ; 
but I shall wait very patiently for the operation of 
the second bottle, when the wit will be out of the 
brain, and the cat will be out of the bag." 

" Is that picture a family piece ? " said Mr Fax. 

" I hardly know," said Mr Derrydown, " whether 
there is any relationship between Mr Paperstamp 
and the persons there represented; but there is 
at least a very intimate connection. The old 
woman in the scarlet cloak is the illustrious 
Mother Goose ; — the two children playing at see- 
saw are Margery Daw and Tommy with his 
Banbury cake; — the little boy and girl, the one 
with a broken pitcher, and the other with a broken 
head, are little Jack and Jill : the house, at the 
door of which the whole party is grouped, is the 
famous house that Jack built ; you see the clock 
through the window and the mouse running up it, 
as in that sublime strain of immortal genius, en- 
titled Dickery Dock : and the boy in the corner 
is little Jack Horner eating his Christmas pie. 
The latter is one of the most splendid examples 
on record of the admirable practical doctrine of 
' taking care of number one,' and he is therefore 
in double favour with Mr Paperstamp, for his 



Mainchance Villa. 153 

excellence as a pattern of moral and political 
wisdom, and for the beauty of the poetry in which 
his great achievement of extracting a plum from 
the Christmas pie is celebrated. Mr Paperstamp, 
Mr Feathernest, Mr Vamp, Mr Killthedead, and 
Mr Anyside Antijack are unanimously agreed that 
the Christmas pie in question is a type and symbol 
of the public purse ; and as that is a pie in which 
every one of them has a finger, they look with 
great envy and admiration on little Jack Horner, 
who extracted 2, plum from it, and who, I believe, 
haunts their dreams with his pie and his plum, 
saying, ' Go, and do thou likewise ! ' " 

The secret council broke up, and Mr Paper- 
stamp entering with his four compeers, bade the 
new-comers welcome to Mainchance Villa, and 
introduced to them Mr Anyside Antijack. Mr 
Paperstamp did not much like Mr Forester's 
modes of thinking ; indeed he disliked them the 
more, from their having once been his own ; but 
a man of large landed property was well worth a 
little civility, as there was no knowing what turn 
affairs might take, what party might come into 
place, and who might have the cutting up of the 
Christmas pie. 

They now adjourned to dinner, during which, 
as usual, little was said, and much was done. 
When the wine began to circulate, Mr Feathernest 
held forth for some time in praise of himself; and 
by the assistance of a little smattering in Mr 
Mystic's synthetical logic, proved himself to be a 



154 Melincourt. 

model of taste, genius, consistency, and public 
virtue. This was too good an example to be 
thrown away ; and Mr Paperstamp followed it up 
with a very lofty encomium on his own virtues and 
talents, declaring he did not believe so great a 
genius, or so amiable a man as himself, Peter 
Paypaul Paperstamp, Esquire, of Main chance Villa, 
had appeared in the world since the days of Jack 
the Giantkiller, whose coat of darkness he hoped 
would become the costume of all the rising genera- 
tion, whenever adequate provision should be made 
for the whole people to be taught and trained. 

Mr Vamp, Mr Killthedead, and Mr Anyside 
Antijack were all very loud in their encomiums of 
the wine, which Mr Paperstamp observed had been 
tasted for him by his friend Mr Feathernest, who 
was a great connoisseur in '^ Sherris sack." 

Mr Derrydown was very intent on keeping the 
bottle in motion, in the hope of bringing the 
members of the critico-poetical council into that 
state of blind self-love, when the great vacuum of 
the head, in which brain was, like Mr Harris's in- 
definite article, supplied by negation, would be in- 
flated with oenogen gas, or, in other words, with 
the fumes of wine, the effect of which, according 
to psychological chemistry, is after filling up every 
chink and crevice of the cranial void, to evolve 
through the labial valve, bringing with it all the 
secrets both of memory and anticipation, which 
had been carefully laid up in the said chinks and 
crevices. This state at length arrived; and Mr 



Mainchance Villa. 155 

Derrydown, to quicken its operation, contrived to 
pick a quarrel with Mr Vamp, who being naturally 
very testy and waspish, poured out upon him 
a torrent of invectives, to the infinite amusement 
of Mr Derrydown, who, however, affecting to be 
angry, said to him in a tragical tone, 

" Thus in dregs of folly sunk, 
Art thou, miscreant, mad or drunk ? 
Cups intemperate always teach 
Virulent abusive speech." * 

This produced a general cry of "Chair! chair!" 
Mr Paperstamp called Mr Derrydown to order. 
The latter apologised with as much gravity as he 
could assume, and said, to make amends for his 
warmth, he would give them a toast, and pro- 
nounced accordingly : " Your scheme for extin- 
guishing the hght of the human understanding : 
may it meet the success it merits." 

Mr Anyside Antijack. — Nothing can be in a 
more hopeful train. We must set the alarmists at 
work, as in the Antijacobin war : when, to be sure, 
we had one or two honest men among our 
opposers f — {Mr Feathernest and Mr Paperstamp 
smiled and bowed) — though they were for the most 
part ill-read in history, and ignorant of human 
nature.;}: 

Mr Feathernest and Mr Paperstamp. — How, 
sir? 

* Cottle's Edda, or, as the author calls it, Translation of 
the Edda, which is a misnomer. 

t Quarterly Review ^ No xxxi. p. 237. + Ibid. 



1 56 Melincoiivt. 

Mr Anyside Antijack. — For the most part, 
observe me. Of course I do not include my 
quondam antagonists, and now very dear friends, 
Mr Paperstamp and Mr Feathernest, who have 
altered their minds, as the sublime Burke altered 
his mind,* from the most disinterested motives. 

M?- Forester. — Yet there are some persons, and 
those not the lowest in the scale of moral philo- 
sophy, who have called the sublime Burke a 
pensioned apostate. 

Mr Vafjip. — Moral philosophy ! Every man 
who talks of moral philosophy is a thief and a 
rascal, and will never make any scruple of seduc- 
ing his neighbour's wife, or stealing his neighbour's 
property, f 

Mr Forester. — You can prove that assertion of 
course. 

Mr Vamp. — Prove it ! The editor of the 
Legitim.ate Review required to prove an assertion ! 

Mr Anyside Antijack. — The church is in 
danger ! 

Mr Forester. — I confess I do not see how the 
church is endangered by a simple request to prove 
the asserted necessary connection between the 
profession of moral philosophy and the practice of 
robbery. 

Mr Anyside Antijack. — For your satisfaction^ sir, 

and from my disposition to oblige you, as you are 

a gentleman of family and fortune, I will prove it 

Every moral philosopher discards the creed and 

* Quarterly Reviezu, No. xxxi. p. 252. f Ibid. 



Mainchance Villa. 157 

commandments : * the sixth commandment says, 
Thou shalt not steal ; therefore, every moral philo- 
sopher is a thief. 

Mr Feather 7iest, Mr Killthedead and Mr Papet 
stamp. — Nothing can be more logical. The 
church is in danger ! The church is in danger ! 

Mr Vamp. — Keep up that. It is an infallible 
tocsin for rallying all the old women about us 
when everything else fails. 

Mr Vampj Mr Feathernest, Mr Faperstamp, 
Mr Killthedead, and Mr Anyside Antijack. — The 
church is in danger ! the church is in danger ! 

Mr Forester. — I am very well aware that the 
time has been when the voice of reason could be 
drowned by clamour, and by rallying round the 
banners of corruption and delusion a mass of blind 
and bigoted prejudices, that had no real connection 
with the political question which it was the object 
to cry down : but I see with pleasure that those 
days are gone. The people read and think : their 
eyes are opened ; they know that all their griev- 
ances arise from the pressure of taxation far 
beyond their means, from the fictitious circulation 
of paper-money, and from the corrupt and venal 
state of popular representation. These facts lie in 
a very small compass; and till you can reason 
them out of this knowledge, you may vociferate 
" The church is in danger " for ever, without a 
single unpaid voice to join in the outcry. 

Mr Feathe7'nest. — My friend Mr Mystic holds 
* Quarterly Review^ No. xxxi. p. 252. 



158 Melincourt. 

that it is a very bad thing for the people to read : 
so it certainly is. Oh for the happy ignorance of 
former ages ! when the people were dolts, and knew 
themselves to be so.* An ignorant man, judging 
from instinct, judges much better than a man who 
reads, and is consequently misinformed.! 

Mr Vauip. — Unless he reads the Legitimate 
Review. 

Mr Paperstamp. — Darkness ! darkness ! Jack 
the Giantkiller's coat of darkness ! That is your 
only wear. 

Mr Anyside Antijack. — There was a time when 
we could lead the people any way, and make them 
join with all their lungs in the yell of war : then 
they were people of sound judgment, and of 
honest and honourable feelings : % but when they 
pretend to feel the pressure of personal suffering, 
and to read and think about its causes and 
remedies — such impudence is intolerable. 

Mr Fax. — Are they not the same people still? 
If they were capable of judging then, are they not 
capable of judging now? 

Mr A?iyside A?itijack. — By no means : they are 
only capable of judging when they see with our 
eyes ; then they see straightforward ; when they 
pretend to use their own, they squint.§ They saw 
with our eyes in the beginning of the Antijacobin 
war. They would have determined on that war, if 
it had been decided by universal suffrage. || 

* Quarte7-ly Review^ No. xxxi. p. 226. f Ibid. 

X Ibid., p. 236. § Ibid., p. 226. |j Ibid., p. 228, 



■^^-f^ 



Mainchance Villa. 159 

Mr Fax. — Why was not the experiment tried ? 

Mr Aftyside Antijack. — It was not convenient. 
But they were in a most amiable ferment of in- 
tolerant loyalty.* 

Mr Forester. — Of which the proof is to be found 
in the immortal Gagging Bills, by which that 
intolerant loyalty was coerced. 

Mr Anyside Antijack. — The Gagging Bills ? 
Hem ! ha ! What shall we say to that '^—{To Mr 
Vamp.) 

Mr Vaifip. — Say ? The church is in danger ! Cj^ 

Mr Feathernestj Mr Faperstanip, Mr Killthedead, 
and Mr Anyside Antijack. — The church is in 
danger ! the church is in danger ! 

Mr Forester. — Why was a war undertaken to 
prevent revolution, if all the people of this country 
were so well fortified in loyalty ? Did they go to 
war for the purpose of forcibly preventing them- 
selves from following a bad example against their 
own will ? For this is what your argument seems 
to imply ? 

Mr Fax. — That the people were in a certain 
degree of ferment, is true : but it required a great 
deal of management and delusion to turn that 
ferment into the channel of foreign war. 

Mr Anyside Antijack. — Well, sir, and there was 
no other way to avoid domestic reform, which 
every man who desires is a ruffian, a scoundrel, 
and an incendiary, \ as much so as those two rascals 

* Quarterly Revieiv^ No. xxxi., p. 228, 
t Ibid., p. 273, et passim. 



i6o Melincourt. 

Rousseau and Voltaire, who were the trumpeters 
of Hebert and Marat.^ Reform, sir, is not to be 
thought of; we have been at war twenty-five years 
to prevent it ; and to have it, after all, would be 
very hard. We have got the national debt instead 
of it : in my opinion a very pretty substitute. 
Mr Derrydown sings — 

And I'll hang on thy neck, my love, my love, 
And I'll hang on thy neck for aye ! 
And closer and closer I'll press thee, my love. 
Until my dying day, 

Mr Anyside Antijack. — I am happy to reflect 
that the silly question of reform will have very few 
supporters in the Honourable House : but few as 
they are, the number would be lessened, if all who 
come into Parliament by means which that ques- 
tion attempts to stigmatize, would abstain from 
voting upon it. Undoubtedly such practices are 
scandalous, as being legally, and therefore morally 
wrong : but it is false that any evil to the legislature 
arises from them.f 

Mr Forester. — Perhaps not, sir ; but very great 
evil arises through them from the legislature to the 
people. Your admission, that they are legally, and 
therefore morally wrong, implies a very curious 
method of deriving morality from law ; but I suspect 
there is much immorality that is perfectly legal, 
and much legality that is supremely immoral. But 
these practices, you admit, are both legally and 
morally wrong ; yet you call it a silly question to 
* Quarterly Beview^ No. xxxi. p. 258. f Ibid, 



Mainchance Villa. i6i 

propose their cessation j and you assert, that all 
who wish to abolish them, all who wish to abolish 
illegal and immoral practices, are ruffians, scoundrels, 
and incendiaries. 

Mr Killthedead. — Yes, and madmen moreover, 
and villains.* We are all upon gunpowder ! The 

* Quarterly Revieiv, No. xxxi., p. 249. It is curious, that 
in the fourth article of the same number, from which I have 
borrowed so many exquisite passages, the reviewers are very- 
angry that certain " scandalous and immoral practices" in the 
island of Wahoo are not reformed : but certainly, according to 
the logic of these reviewers, the Government of Wahoo is en- 
titled to look upon them in the light of " ruffians, scoundrels, 
incendiaries, lirebrands, madmen, and villains;" since all 
these hard names belong of primary right to those who pro- 
pose the reformation of " scandalous and immoral practices ! " 
The people of Wahoo, it appears, are very much addicted to 
drunkenness and debauchery ; and the reviewers, in the 
plenitude of their wisdom, recommend that a few clergymen 
should be sent out to them, by way of mending their morals. 
It does not appear, whether King Tamaahmaah is a king by 
divute right ; but we must take it for granted that he is not ; 
as, otherwise, the Quarterly Reviewers would either not 
admit that there were any " scandalous and immoral 
practices " under his government, or, if they did admit them, 
they would not be such "incendiaries, madmen, and villains," 
as to advocate their reformation. There are some circum- 
stances, however, which are conclusive against the legitimacy 
of King Tamaahmaah, which are these ; that he is a man 
of great "feeling, energy, and steadiness of conduct ;" that 
he " goes about among his people to learn their wants ;" and 
that he has " prevented the recurrence of those horrid 
murders" which disgraced the reigns of his predecessors : 
from which it is obvious that he has neither put to death 
brave and generous men, who surrendered themselves under 
II. L 



1 62 Melincourt. 

insane and the desperate are scattering firebrands l"* 
We shall all be blown up in a body: sinecures, 
rotten boroughs, secret-service-men, and the whole 
ho7iourable bafid of gentlemen pensioners^ will all be 
blown up in a body! A stand I a stand! it is 
time to make a stand against popular encroachment I 
the faith of treaties, nor re-established a fallen Inquisition, 
nor sent those to whom he owed his crown to the dungeon 
and the galleys. 

In the tenth article of the same number, the reviewers 
pour forth the bitterness of their gall against Mr Warden of 
the Northumberland, who has detected them in promulgating 
much gross and foolish falsehood concerning the captive 
Napoleon. They labour most assiduously to impeach his 
veracity and to discredit his judgment. On the first point, 
it is sufficient evidence of the truth of his statements, that the 
Quarterly Reviewers contradict them : but on the second, 
they accuse him, among other misdemeanours, of having 
called their Review "^ a respectable luork!" which certainly 
discredits his jtidgment completely. 

* Quarterly Review^ No. xxxi., p. 249. — The reader will 
be reminded of Croaker in the fourth act of the Good-natured 
Man : " Blood and gunpowder in every line of it. Blown 
up! murderous dogs! all blown up! {Reads.) 'Our 
pockets are low, and money we must have.' Ay, there's the 
reason : they'll blow us up because they have got low pockets, 
.... Perhaps this moment I'm treading on lighted 
matches, blazing brimstone, and barrels of gunpowder. 
They are preparing to blow me up into the clouds. Murder ! 
. . . Here, John, Nicodemus, search the house. Look into 
the cellars, to see if there be any combustibles below, and 
above in the apartments, that no matches be thrown in at 
the windows. Let all the fires be put out, and let the engine 
be drawn out in the yard, to play upon the house in case of 
necessity." — Croaker was a deep politician. The engine to 
play upon the house : mark that ! 



Mainchance Villa. 163 

Mr Vamp, Mr Feathernest, and Mr Paperstamp. 
— The church is in danger ! 

Mr Anyside Afifijack. — Here is the great 
blunderbuss that is to blow the whole nation to 
atoms ! the Spencea?i blunderbuss ! — {Saying these 
words he produced a pop-gun from his pocket^'*' and 
shot off a paper pellet in the ear of Mr Paper- 
stamps 

WJio in a kind of study sate 
Denominated brown ; 

which made the latter sprifig up in sudde?t fright, to 

* This illustration of the old fable of the mouse and the 
mountain, falls short of an exhibition in the Honourable 
House, on the 29th of January, 1817 ; when Mr Canning, 
amidst a tremendous denunciation of the parliamentary 
reformers, and a rhetorical chaos of storms, whirlwinds, 
rising suns, and twilight assassins, produced in proof of his 
charges — Spence's Plan ! which was received with an eclat 
of laughter on one side, and shrugs of surprise, disappoint- 
ment, and disapprobation on the other. I can find but one 
parallel for the Right Honourable Gentleman's dismay : 
So having said, awhile he stood, expecting 
Their universal shout and high applause 
To fill his ear ; when contrary he hears 
On all sides, from innumerable tongues, 
A dismal universal hiss, the sound 
Of public scorn. — Paradise Lost, x. 504. 
This Spencean chimsera, which is the very foolishness of 
folly, and which was till lately invisible to the naked eye of 
the political entomologist, has since been subjected to a lens 
of extraordinary power, under which, like an insect in a 
microscope, it has appeared a formidable and complicatea 
monster, all bristles, scales, and claws, with a " husk about 
it like a chestnut : " Horridiis, in jaculis et pelle Libystidis 



164 Melincourt. 

the irremediable perdition of a decanter of ^^ Sherris 
sack" over which Mr Feathernest lamented bitterly.) 

Mr Forester. — I do not see what connection the 
Spencean theory, the impracticable chimsera of an 
obscure herd of fanatics, has with the great national 
question of parliamentary reform. 

Mr Anyside A?itijack. — Sir, you may laugh at 
this pop-gun, but you will find it the mallet of Thor.* 
The Spenceans are far more respectable than the 
parliamentary reformers, and have a more distinct 
and intelligible system ! ! ! f 

Mr Vamp. — Bravo ! bravo ! bravo ! There is 
not another man in our corps with brass enough to 
make such an assertion, but Mr Anyside Antijack. 
—{^Reiterated shouts of Bravo I from Mr Vamp, 
Mr Feathernest, Mr Paperstamp, and Mr Killthe- 
dead.) 

Mr Killthedead. — Make out that, and our job is 
done. 

Mr Anyside Antijack. — Make it out ! Nonsense ! 
I shall take it for granted : I shall set up the 
Spencean plan as a more sensible plan than that 
of the parliamentary reformers : then knock down 
the former, and argue against the latter, a fortiori. 
— ( The shouts of Bravo I here becatne perfectly 
deafening, the critico-poetical corps beifig by this time 
much fnore than half-seas-over.) 

Mr Killthedead. — The members for rotten 
boroughs are the most independent members in 

* Quarterly Revieiv, No. xxxi. , p. 271. \ Ibid. 



Mainchance Villa. 165 

the Honourable House, and the representatives ot 
most constituents least so.* 

Mr Fax. — How will you prove that ? 

Mr Killthedead. — By calling the former gentle- 
men, and the latter mob-representatives, f 

Air Vamp. — Nothing can be more logical. 

Mr Fax. — Do you call that logic ? 

Mr Vamp. — Excellent logic. At least it will 
pass for such with our readers. 

Mr Atiyside Antijack. — We, and those who think 
with us, are the only wise and good men.;]: 

Mr Forester. — May I take the liberty to inquire, 
what you mean by a wise and a good man ? 

Mr Any side Antijack. — A wise man is he who 
looks after the one thing needful ; and a good man 
is he who has it. The acme of wisdom and good- 
ness in conjunction, consists in appropriating as 
much as possible of the public money ; and saying 
to those from whose pockets it is taken, " I am 
perfectly satisfied with things as they are. Let well 
alone!" 

Mr Paperstamp. — We shall make out a very 
good case ; but you must not forget to call the 
present public distress an awful dispensation : § a 
little pious cant goes a great way towards turning 
the thoughts of men from the dangerous and 
Jacobinical propensity of looking into moral and 
political causes for moral and political effects. 

Mr Fax. — But the moral and political causes 
are now too obvious, and too universally known, 

* Quarterly Review, No. xxxi., p. 258. f Ibid. 

X Ibid., p. 273. I Ibid., p. 276. 



1 66 Melmcourt. 

to be obscured by any such means. All the arts 
and eloquence of corruption may be overthrown 
by the enumeration of these simple words : boroughs 
taxes, and paper-money. 

Mr Aiiyside Antijack. — Paper-money ! What, is 
the ghost of bullion abroad P"^ 

Mr Forester. — Yes ! and till you can make the 
buried substance burst the paper cerements of its 
sepulchre, its ghost will continue to walk like the 
ghost of Caesar, saying to the desolated nation : " I 
am thy evil spirit ! " 

Mr Afiyside Antijack. — I must say, I am very 
sorry to find a gentleman like you taking the 
part of the swinish multitude, who are only fit for 
beasts of burden, to raise subsistence for their 
betters, pay taxes for placemen, and recruit the 
army and navy for the benefit of legitimacy, divine 
right, the Jesuits, the Pope, the Inquisition, and the 
Virgin Mary's petticoat. 

Mr Papersta77ip. — Hear ! hear ! hear ! Hear 
the voice which the stream of Tendency is utter- 
ing for elevation of our thought ! 

Mr Forester. — It was once said by a poet, whose 
fallen state none can more bitterly lament than I 
do: + 

We shall exult if they who rule the land 
Be men who hold its many blessings dear, 
Wise, upright, valiant ; not a venal band, 
Who are to judge of danger which they fear, 
And honour which they do not understand. 

* Quarterly Review^ No. xxxi., p. 260. 

t Wordsworth. The lines are taken almost verbatim 
from Sir Philip Sidney. — G. 



Mainchance Villa. 167 

Mr Feai/iernest.—VoQ\.s, sir, are not amenable 
to censure, however frequently their political 
opinions may exhibit marks of inconsistency.* 
The Muse, as a French author says, is a mere 
etourdie, a foldtre who may play at her option on 
heath or on turf, and transfer her song at pleasure 
from Hampden to Ferdinand, and from Washington 
to Louis. 

Mr Forester.— \i a poet be contented to con- 
sider himself in the light of a merry-andrew, be it 
so. But if he assume the garb of moral austerity, 
and pour forth against corruption and oppression 
the language of moral indignation, there would at 
least be some decency, if, when he changes sides, 
he would let the world see that conversion and 
promotion have not gone hand in hand. 

Mr Feather7iesf.—\Nh2it decency might be in 
that, I know not : but of this I am very certain, 
that there would be no wisdom in it. 

Mr A7iyside Antijack.—^o\ no! there would be 
no wisdom in it. 

Mr Feathernest. — Sir, I am a wise and a good 
man : mark that, sir ; ay, and an honourable man. 

Mr Vamp.—'"$>o are we all, all honourable 

men ! " 

Mr Anyside Aniijack. — And we will stick by 
one another with heart and hand 

Mr Killthedead. — To make a stand against 
popular encroachment 

* Quarterly Review, No. xxxi., p. 192. 



1 68 Melincourt. 

Mr Feathernest. — To bring back the glorious 
ignorance of the feudal ages 

Mr Paperstainp. — To rebuild the mystic temples 
of venerable superstition 

Mr Vamp. — To extinguish, totally and finally, 
the light of the human understanding 

Mr Afiyside Antijack. — And to get all we can for 
our trouble ! 

Mr Feathernest. — So we will all say. 

Mr Paperstamp. — And so we will all sing. 

QUINTETTO. 

Mr Feathernest, Mr Vamp, Mr Killthedead, Mr 
Paperstamp, and Mr Anyside Antijack. 

To the tune of " Turning, ttirning, turning, as the ivheel 
goes round." 

recitative. — MR PAPERSTAMP. 

Jack Horner's Christmas pie my learned nurse 
Interpreted to mean the public purse. 
From thence a phun he drew. O happy Homer ! 
Who would not be ensconced in thy snug corner ? 

THE FIVE. 

While round the public board all eagerly we linger, 
For what we can get we will try, trj^, try : 
And we'll all have a finger, a finger, a finger, 
We'll all have a finger in the Christmas pie. 

MR FEATHERNEST. 

By my own poetic laws, I'm a dealer in applause 
For those who don't deserve it, but will buy, buy, buy : 
So round the court I linger, and thus \ get a finger, 
A finger, finger, finger in the Christmas pie. 



Mainchance Villa. 169 



THE FIVE. 



And we'll all have a finger, a finger, a finger, 
We'll all have a finger in the Christmas pie. 



MR VAMP. 



My share of pie to win, T will dash through thick and thin. 
And philosophy and liberty shall fly, fly, fly : 
And truth and taste shall know, that their everlasting foe 
Has a finger, finger, finger in the Christmas pie. 



THE five. 

And we'll all have a finger, a finger, a finger. 
We'll all have a finger in the Christmas pie. 

MR KILLTHEDEAD. 

I'll make my verses rattle with the din of war and battle, 
For war doth increase sa-la-ry, ry, ry : 
And I'll shake the public ears with the triumph of Algiers, 
And thus I'll get a finger in the Christmas pie. 

THE FIVE. 

And we'll all have a finger, a finger, a finger. 
We'll all have a finger in the Christmas pie. 

MR PAPERSTAMP. 

And while you thrive by ranting, I'll try my luck at canting. 
And scribble verse and prose all so dry, dry, dry : 
And Mystic's patent smoke public intellect shall choke, 
And we'll all have a finger in the Christmas pie. 

THE FIVE. 

We'll all have a finger, a finger, a finger. 
We'll all have a finger in the Christmas pie. 



170 Melincourt. 

MR ANYSIDE ANTIJACK. 

My tailor is so clever, that my coat will turn for ever 
And take any colour you can dye, dye, dye : 
For all my earthly wishes are among the loaves a fishes, 
And to have my little finger in the Christmas pie. 

THE FIVE. 

And we'll all have a finger, finger, and finger, 
We'll all have a finger in the Christmas pie. 




I 



CHAPTER XL. 

THE HOPES OF THE WORLD. 




^HE mountain-roads being now buried in 
snow, they were compelled, on leaving 
Mainchance Villa, to follow the most 
broad and beaten track, and they entered on a 
turn-pike road which led in the direction of the sea. 
" I no longer wonder," said Air Fax, " that men 
in general are so much disposed, as I have found 
them, to look with supreme contempt on the 
literary character, seeing the abject servility and 
venahty by which it is so commonly debased."* 

* "To scatter praise or blame without regard to justice, 
is to destroy the distinction of good and evil. Many have no 
other test of actions than general opinion ; and all are so far 
influenced by a sense of reputation, that they are often re- 
strained by fear of reproach, and excited by hope of honour, 
when other principles have lost their power ; nor can any 
species of prostitution promote general depravity more, than 
that which destroys the force of praise by showing that it may 
be acquired without deserving it, and which, by setting free 
the active and ambitious from the dread of infamy, lets loose 
the rapacity of power, and weakens the only authority by 
which greatness is controlled. What credit can he expect 
who professes himself the hireling of vanity however profli- 
gate, and without shame or scruple celebrates the worthless, 



172 Melincourt. 

Mr Forester. — What then becomes of the hopes 
of the world, which you have admitted to consist 
entirely in the progress of the mind, allowing, as 
you must allow, the incontrovertible fact of the 
physical deterioration of the human race ? 

Mr Fax. — When I speak of the mind, I do not 
allude either to poetry or to periodical criticism, 
nor, in any great degree, to physical science ; but I 
rest my hopes on the very same basis with Mr 
Mystic's fear — the general diffusion of moral and 
political truth. 

Mr Foi-ester. — For poetry, its best days are 
gone. Homer, Shakspeare, and Milton will 
return no more. 

Mr Fax. — Lucretius we yet may hope for. 

Mr Forester. — Not till superstition and prejudice 
have been shorn of a much larger portion of their 
power. If Lucretius should arise among us in the 
present day, exile or imprisonment would be his 
infallible portion. We have yet many steps to 
make before we shall arrive at the liberality and 
toleration of Tiberius ! * And as to physical 

dignifies the mean, and gives to the corrupt, licentious, and 
oppressive, the ornaments which ought only to add grace to 
truth, and loveliness to innocence ? Every other kind 

OF ADULTERATION, HOWEVER SHAMEFUL, HOWEVER MIS- 
CHIEVOUS, IS LESS DETESTABLE THAN THE CRIME OF 
COUNTERFEITING CHARACTERS, AND FIXING THE STAMP OF 
LITERARY SANCTION UPON THE DROSS AND REFUSE OF THE 

WORLD." — Rambler, No. 136. 

* Deorum injurias diis curse. — Tiberius apud Tacit, Ann. 
/. 73 



The Hopes of the World. 173 

science, though it does in some measure weaken 
the dominion of mental error, yet I fear, where it 
proves itself in one instance the friend of human 
liberty, it will be found in ninety-nine the slave of 
corruption and luxury. 

Mr Fax. — In many cases science is both morally 
and politically neutral, and its speculations have 
no connection whatever with the business of life. 

Mr Forester. — It is true ; and such speculations 
are often called sublime : though the sublimity of 
uselessness passes my comprehension. But the 
neutrality is only apparent : for it has in these 
cases the real practical effect, and a most per- 
nicious one it is, of withdrawing some of the 
highest and most valuable minds from the only 
path of real utility, which 1 agree with you to be 
that of moral and political knowledge, to pursuits 
of no more real importance than that of keeping 
a dozen eggs at a time dancing one after another 
in the air. 

Mr Fax. — If it be admitted, on the one hand, 
that the progress of luxury has kept pace with 
that of physical science, it must be acknowledged 
on the other, that superstition has decayed in at 
least an equal proportion; and I think it cannot 
be denied that the world is a gainer by the 
exchange. 

Mr Forester. — The decay of superstition is 
immeasurably beneficial ; but the growth of luxury 
is not, therefore, the less pernicious. It is lament- 
able to reflect that there is most indigence in the 



1/4 Melincoiirt. 

richest countries ; * and that the increase of super- 
fluous enjoyment in the few is counterbalanced by 

* " Besides all these evils of modern times which I have 
mentioned, there is in some countries of Europe, and particu- 
larly in England, another evil peculiar to civilized countries, 
but quite unknown in barbarous nations. The evil I mean 
is indigence^ and the reader will be surprised when I tell him 
that it is greatest in the richest countries ; and, therefore, in 
England, which I believe is the richest country in Europe, 
there is more indigence than in any other ; for the number 
of people that are there maintained on public or private 
charity, and who may therefore be called beggars^ is pro- 
digious. What proportion they may bear to the whole 
people, I have never heard computed : but I am sure it 
must be very great. And I am afraid in those countries 
they call rich, indigence is not confined to the lower sort of 
people, but extends even to the better sort : for such is the 
effect of wealth in a nation, that (however paradoxical it 
may appear) it does at last make all men poor and indigent ; 
the lower sort through idleness and debauchery, the better 
sort through luxury, vanity, and extravagant expense. Now, 
I would desire to know from the greatest admirers of modern 
times, who maintain that the human race is not degenerated, 
but rather improved, whether they know any other source of 
human misery, besides vice, disease, and indigence, and 
whether these three are not in the greatest abundance in the 
rich and flourishing country of England ? I would further 
ask these gentlemen, whether, in the cities of the ancient 
world, there were poor's houses, hospitals, infirmaries, and 
those other receptacles of indigence and disease which we 
see in the modern cities? And whether, in the streets of 
ancient Athens and Rome, there were so many objects of 
disease, deformity, and misery to be seen as in our streets, 
besides those which are concealed from public view in the 
houses above mentioned ? In later times, indeed, in those 
cities, when the corruption of manners was almost as great as 



The Hopes of the World. 175 

the proportionate diminution of comfort in the 
many. Splendid equipages and sumptuous dwell- 
ings are far from being symbols of general pros- 
perity. The palace of luxurious indolence is much 
rather the symbol of a thousand hovels, by the 
labours and privations of whose wretched inhabit- 
ants that baleful splendour is maintained. Civi- 
lization, vice, and folly grow old together. 
Corruption begins among the higher orders, and 
from them descends to the people; so that in 
every nation the ancient nobility is the first to 
exhibit symptoms of corporeal and mental de- 
generacy, and to show themselves unfit both for 
council and war. If you recapitulate the few 
titled names that will adorn the history of the 
present times, you will find that almost all of 
them are new creations. The corporeal decay of 
mankind I hold to be undeniable : the increase of 
general knowledge I allow : but reason is of slow 
growth ; and if men in general only become more 
corrupt as they become more learned, the progress 
of literature will oppose no adequate counterpoise 
to that of avarice, luxury, and disease. 

Mr Fax. — Certainly, the progress of reason is 
slow, but the ground which it has once gained it 
never abandons. The interest of rulers, and the 
prejudices of the people, are equally hostile to 
everything that comes in the shape of innovation ; 

among us, some such things might have been seen as we are 
sure they were to be seen in Constantinople, under the later 
Greek Emperors." — Ancient Metaphysics^ vol. iii., p. 194. 



176 Melincoiirt. 

but all that now wears the strongest sanction of 
antiquity was once received with reluctance under 
the semblance of novelty : and that reason, which 
in the present day can scarcely obtain a footing 
from the want of precedents, will grow with the 
growth of years, and become a precedent in its 
turn."^ 

Mr Forester. — Reason maybe diffused in society, 
but it is only in minds which have courage enough 
to despise prejudice^ and virtue enough to love truth 
only for itself, \ that its seeds will germinate into 
wholesome and vigorous life. The love of truth 
is the most noble quality of human intellect, the 
most delightful in the interchange of private con- 
fidence, the most important in the direction of 
those speculations which have public happiness for 
their aim. Yet of all qualities this is the most 
rare : it is the Phoenix of the intellectual world. 
In private intercourse, how very very few are they 
whose assertions carry conviction ! How much 
petty deception, paltry equivocation, hollow pro- 
fession, smiling malevolence, and polished hypoc- 
risy combine to make a desert and a solitude of 
what is called society ! How much empty pretence 
and simulated patriotism, and shameless venality, 
and unblushing dereliction of principle, and clamor- 
ous recrimination, and daring imposture, and secret 

* " Omnia, quae nunc vetustissima creduntur, nova fuere. 
Inveterascet hoc quoque : et, quod hodie cxemplis tuemur, 
inter exempla eiit." — Tacitus, Ami XI. 24. 

t DnimmoiicTs Academical Questions — Preface, p. 4. 



TJie Hopes of the World. 177 

cabal, and mutual undermining of " Honourable 
Friends/' render utterly loathsome and disgusting 
the theatre of public life ! How much timid defer- 
ence to vulgar prejudice, how much misrepresenta- 
tion of the motives of conscientious opponents, 
how many appeals to unreflecting passion, how 
much assumption of groundless hypothesis, how 
many attempts to darken the clearest light and 
entangle the simplest clue, render not only nuga- 
tory, but pernicious, the speculations of moral and 
political reason ! Pernicious, inasmuch as it is 
better for the benighted traveller to remain station- 
ary in darkness, than to follow an ignis fatuus 
through the fen ! Falsehood is the great vice of 
the age : falsehood of heart, falsehood of mind, 
falsehood of every form and mode of intellect and 
intercourse : so that it is hardly possible to find a 
7nan of worth and goodness of luhom to make a 
friend : but he who does find such an one will have 
more enjoyment of friendship tha?i in a better age ; 
for he will be doubly fond of him, and will love him 
as Hamlet does Horatio, and with him retinng and 
getting, as it were, under the shelter of a wall, will 
let the storm of life blow over him* 

Mr Fax. — But that retirement must be con- 
secrated to philosophical labour, or, however de- 
lightful to the individuals, it ^vill be treason to the 
public cause. Be the world as bad as it may, it 
would necessarily be much worse if the votaries of 
truth and the children of virtue were all to with- 
* Ancient Metaphysics, vol. iii., p. 280. 
II. M 



1 78 Melincourt. 

draw from its vortex, and leave it to itself. If 
reason be progressive, however slowly, the wise and 
good have sufficient encouragement to persevere ; 
and even if the doctrine of deterioration be true, it 
is no less their duty to contribute all in their power 
to retard its progress, by investigating its causes and 
remedies. 

Mr Forester. — Undoubtedly. But the progress 
of theoretical knowledge has a most fearful counter- 
poise in the accelerated depravation of practical 
morality. The frantic love of money, which seems 
to govern our contemporaries to a degree unprece- 
dented in the history of man, paralyzes the energy 
of independence, darkens the light of reason, and 
blights the blossoms of love. 

Mr Fax. — The amor sceleratus habendi is not 
peculiar either to our times or to civilised life. 
Money you must have., no matter from whence., is a 
sentence, if we may believe Euripides, as old as the 
heroic age : and the mo?ik Rtibruquis says of the 
Tartars^ that^ as parents keep all their daughters 
till they can sell them., their maids are sonietimes 
very stale before they are married."^ 

Mr Forester. — In that respect, then, I must ac- 
knowledge the Tartars and we are much on a par. 
It is a collateral question well worth considering, 
how far the security of property, which contributes 
so much to the diffusion of knowledge, and the 
permanence of happiness, is favourable to the 
growth of individual virtue ? 

* Malthus on Population.^ book i. chap, vii. 



The Hopes of the World. 179 

Mr Fax. — Security of property tranquillizes the 
minds of men, and fits them to shine rather in 
speculation than in action. In turbulent and in- 
secure states of society, when the fluctuations of 
power, or the incursions of predatory neighbours, 
hang like the sword of Damocles over the most 
flourishing possessions, friends are more dear to 
each other, mutual services and sacrifices are more 
useful and more necessary, the energies of heart 
and hand are continually called forth, and shining 
examples of Jthe self- oblivious virtues are produced 
in the same proportion as mental speculation is un- 
known or disregarded : but our admiration of these 
virtues must be tempered by the remark, that they 
arise more from impulsive feeling than from re- 
flective principle ; and that where life and fortune 
hold by such a precarious tenure, the first may be 
risked, and the second abandoned, with much less 
effort than would be required for inferior sacrifices 
in more secure and tranquil times. 

Mr Forester, — Alas, my friend ! I would willingly 
see such virtues as do honour to human nature, 
without being very solicitous as to the comparative 
quantities of impulse and reflection in which they 
originate. If the security of property and the 
diffusion of general knowledge were attended with 
a corresponding increase of benevolence and 
individual mental power, no philanthropist could 
look with despondency on the prospects of the 
world : but I can discover no symptoms of either 
the one or the other. Insatiable accumulators, 



1 80 Melincourt. 

overgrown capitalists, fatteners on public spoil, I 
cannot but consider as excrescences on the body 
politic, typical of disease and prophetic of decay : 
yet it is to these and such as these, that the poet 
tunes his harp, and the man of science consecrates 
his labours : it is for them that an enormous portion 
of the population is condemned to unhealthy 
manufactories, not less deadly but more lingering 
than the pestilence : it is for them that the world 
rings with lamentations, if the most trivial accident, 
the most transient sickness, the most frivolous 
disappointment befall them : but when the prisons 
swarm, when the workhouses overflow, when whole 
parishes declare themselves bankrupt, when 
thousands perish by famine in the wintry streets, 
where then is the poet, where is the man of 
science, where is the elegant philosopher? The 
poet is singing hymns to the great ones of the 
world, the man of science is making discoveries 
for the adornment of their dwellings or the en- 
hancement of their culinary luxuries, and the ele- 
gant philosopher is much too refined a personage 
to allow such vulgar subjects as the sufferings of 
the poor to interfere with his sublime speculations. 
They are married and cannot come ! 

Mr Fax. — E-vj/aucag akynvoraTag ifLot (xipifji^vag ! * 
Those elegant philosophers are among the most 
fatal enemies to the advancement of moral and 
political knowledge; laborious triflers, profound 
investigators of nothing, everlasting talkers about 
* Sophocles, Antigone, 850. (Ed. Erfurdt.) 



TJie Hopes of the World. i8i 

taste and beauty, who see in the starving beggar 
only the picturesqueness of his rags, and in the 
ruined cottage only the harmonizing tints of moss, 
mildew and stonecrop. 

Mr Forester. — We talk of public feeling and 
national sympathy. Our dictionaries may define 
those words and our lips may echo them, but we 
must look for the realities among less enlightened 
nations. The Canadian savages cannot imagine 
the possibility of any individual in a community 
having a full meal while another has but half an 
one : * still less could they imagine that one should 
have too much, while another had nothing. Theirs 
is that bond of brotherhood which nature weaves 
and civilization breaks, and from which the older 
nations grow, the farther they recede. 

Mr Fax. — It cannot be otherwise. The state 
you have described is adapted only to a small 
community, and to the infancy of human society. 
I shall make a very liberal concession to your 
views, if I admit it to be possible that the middle 
stage of the progress of man is worse than either 

* " It is notorious, that towards one another the Indians 
are liberal in the extreme, and for ever ready to supply the 
deficiencies of their neighbours with any superfluities of their 
own. They have no idea of amassing wealth for themselves 
individually ; and they wonder that persons can be found in 
any society so destitute of every generous sentiment, as to 
enrich themselves at the expense of others, and to live in 
ease and afOuence regardless of the misery and wretchedness 
of members of the same community to which they themselves 
belong." — Weld's Travels in Canada; Letter XXXV. 



1 82 Melincourt. 

the point from which he started, or that at which 
he will arrive. But it is my decided opinion that 
we have passed that middle stage, and that every 
evil incident to the present condition of human 
society will be removed by the diffusion of moral 
and political knowledge, and the general increase 
of moral and political liberty. I contemplate with 
great satisfaction the rapid decay of many hoary 
absurdities, which a few transcendental hierophants 
of the venerable and the mysterious are labouring 
in vain to revive. I look with well-grounded con- 
fidence to a period when there will be neither 
slaves among the northern, nor monks among the 
southern Americans. The sun of freedom has 
risen over that great continent, with the certain 
promise of a glorious day. I form the best hopes 
for my own country, in the mental improvement 
of the people, whenever she shall breathe from the 
pressure of that preposterous system of finance 
which sooner or later must fall by its own weight. 

Mr Forester. — I apply to our system of finance, 
a fiction of the northern mythology. The ash of 
Yggdrasil overshadows the world : Ratatosk, the 
squirrel, sports in the branches : Nidhogger, the 
serpent, gnaws at the root.^ The ash of Yggdrasil 
is the tree of national prosperity : Ratatosk the 
squirrel is the careless and unreflecting fundholder : 
Nidhogger the serpent is political corruption, 
which will in time consume the root, and spread 
the branches on the dust. What will then become 
of the squirrel ? 

* See the Edda and the Northern Antiquities. 



TJie Hopes of the World. 



83 



Mr Fax. — Rotatask must look to himself: 
Nidhogger must be killed : andtheashofYggdrasil 
will rise like a vegetable Phoenix to flourish again 
for ages. 

Thus conversing, they arrived on the sea-shore, 
where we shall leave them to pursue their way, 
while we investigate the fate of Anthelia. 





CHAPTER XLL 



ALGA CASTLE. 




iNTHELIA had not ventured to resume her 
solitary rambles after her return from 
Onevote; more especially as she antici- 
pated the period when she should revisit her 
favourite haunts in the society of one congenial 
companion whose presence would heighten the 
magic of their interest, and restore to them that 
feeling of security which her late adventure had 
destroyed. But as she was sitting in her library 
on the morning of her disappearance, she suddenly 
heard a faint and mournful cry, like the voice of a 
child in distress. She rose, opened the window, 
and listened. She heard the sounds more dis- 
tinctly. They seemed to ascend from that part of 
the dingle immediately beneath the shrubbery that 
fringed her windows. It was certainly the cry of a 
child. She immediately ran through the shrubbery 
and descended the rocky steps into the dingle, 
where she found a little boy tied to the stem of a 
tree, crying and sobbing as if his heart would 
break. Anthelia easily set him at liberty, and his 



A/o^a Castle. 185 

grief passed away like an April shower. She 
asked who had the bai-barity to treat him in such a 
manner? He said he could not tell — four strange 
men on horseback had taken him up on the 
common where his father lived, and brought him 
there and tied him to the tree, he could not tell 
why. Anthelia took his hand and was leading him 
from the dingle, intending to send him home by 
Peter Gray, when the men who had made the 
little child their unconscious decoy, broke from their 
ambush, seized Anthelia, and taking effectual 
precautions to stifle her cries, placed her on one of 
their horses, and travelled with great rapidity along 
narrow and unfrequented ways, till they arrived at a 
soHtary castle on the sea-shore, where they conveyed 
her to a splendid suite of apartments, and left her 
in solitude, locking, as they retired, the door of the 
outer room. 

She was utterly unable to comprehend the 
motive of so extraordinary a proceeding, or to 
form any conjecture as to its probable result. An 
old woman of a very unmeaning physiognomy 
shortly after entered, to tender her services ; but to 
all Anthelia's questions, she only replied with a 
shake of the head, and a smile which she meant to 
be very consolatory. 

The old woman retired, and shortly after re- 
appeared with an elegant dinner, which Anthelia 
dismissed untouched. " There is no harm intended 
you, my sweet lady," said the old woman ; " so pray 
don't starve yourself." Anthelia assured her she 



1 86 Melincoiirt. 

had no such intention, but had no appetite at that 
time; but she drank a glass of wine at the old 
woman's earnest entreaty. 

In the evening the mystery was elucidated by a 
visit from Lord Anophel Achthar ; who, falling on 
his knees before her, entreated her to allow the 
violence of his passion to plead his pardon for a 
proceeding which nothing but the imminent peril 
of seeing her in the arms of a rival could have 
induced him to adopt. Anthelia replied, that if 
his object were to obtain her affections, he had 
taken the most effectual method to frustrate his 
own views ; that if he thought by constraint and 
cruelty to obtain her hand without her affections, 
he might be assured that he would never succeed. 
Her heart, however, she candidly told him, was no 
longer in her power to dispose of; and she hoped, 
after this frank avowal, he would see the folly, if not 
the wickedness, of protracting his persecution. 

He now, still on his knees, broke out into a 
rhapsody about love, and hope, and death, and 
despair, in which he developed the whole treasury 
of his exuberant and overflowing folly. He then 
expatiated on his expectations, and pointed out all 
the advantages of wealth and consequence attached 
to the title of Marchioness of Agaric, and con- 
cluded by saying, that she must be aware so 
important and decisive a measure had not been 
taken without the most grave and profound delibera- 
tion, and that he never could suffer her to make her 
exit from Alga Castle in any other character than 



Alga Castle, 187 

that of Lady Achthar. He then left her to medi- 
tate on his heroic resolution. 

The next day he repeated his visit — resumed his 
supplications — reiterated his determination to per- 
severe — and received from Anthelia the same 
reply. She endeavoured to reason with him on 
the injustice and absurdity of his proceedings ; but 
he told her the Reverend Mr Grovelgrub and Mr 
Feathernest the poet had taught him that all 
reasonings pretending to point out absurdity and 
injustice were manifestly Jacobinical, which he, as 
one of the pillars of the state, was bound not to 
hsten to. 

He renewed his visits every day for a week, 
becoming with every new visit less humble and 
more menacing, and consequently more disagree- 
able to Anthelia, as the Reverend Mr Grovelgrub, 
by whose instructions he acted, secretly foresaw 
and designed. The latter now undertook to plead 
his Lordship's cause, and set in a clear point of 
view to Anthelia the inflexibility of his Lordship's 
resolutions, which, properly expounded, could not 
fail to have due weight against the alternatives of 
protracted solitude and hopeless resistance. 

The reverend gentleman, however, had other 
views than those he held out to Lord Anophel, 
and presented himself to Anthelia with an aspect of 
great commiseration. He said he was an unwilling 
witness of his Lordship's unjust proceedings, which 
he had done all in his power to prevent, and 
which had been carried into effect against his will 



1 88 Melincourt. 

It was his firm intention to set her at liberty as 
soon as he could devise the means of doing so ; 
but all the outlets of Alga Castle were so guarded 
that he had not yet been able to devise any feasible 
scheme for her escape : but it should be his sole 
study night and day to effect it. 

Anthelia thanked him for his sympathy, and 
asked why he could not give notice to her friends 
of her situation, which would accomplish the pur- 
pose at once. He replied, that Lord Anophei 
already mistrusted him, and that if anything of the 
kind were done, however secretly he might proceed, 
the suspicion would certainly fall upon him, and 
that he should then be a ruined man, as all his 
worldly hopes rested on the Marquis of Agaric. 
Anthelia offered to make him the utmost compen- 
sation for the loss of the Marquis of Agaric's 
favour ; but he said that was impossible, unless 
she could make him a bishop, as the Marquis of 
Agaric would do. His plan, he said, must be to 
effect her liberation, without seeming to be himself 
in any way whatever concerned in it ; and though 
he would willingly lose everything for her sake, yet 
he trusted she would not think ill of him for wish- 
ing to wait a few days, that he might try to devise 
the means of serving her without ruining himself. 

He continued his daily visits of sympathy, 
sometimes amusing her with a hopeful scheme, at 
others detailing with a rueful face the formidable 
nature of some unexpected obstacle, hinting con- 
tinually at his readiness to sacrifice everything lor 



Alga Castle. 189 

her sake, lamenting the necessity of delay, and 
assuring her that in the meanwhile no evil should 
happen to her. He flattered himself that Anthelia, 
wearied out with the irksomeness of confinement, 
and the continual alternations of hope and dis- 
appointment, and contrasting the respectful tender- 
ness of his manner with the disagreeable system 
of behaviour to which he had fashioned Lord 
Anophel, would at length come to a determination 
of removing all his difficulties by offering him her 
hand and fortune as a compensation for his anti- 
cipated bishopric. It was not, however, very long 
before Anthelia penetrated his design ; but as she 
did not deem it prudent to come to a rupture with 
him at that time, she continued to listen to his 
daily details of plans and impediments, and allowed 
him to take to himself all the merit he seemed to 
assume for supplying her with music and books ; 
though he expressed himself very much shocked 
at her asking him for Gibbon and Rousseau, whose 
works, he said, ought to be burned i?i foro by the 
hands of Carnifex. 

The windows of her apartment were at an 
immense elevation from the beach, as that part of 
the castle-wall formed a continued line with the 
black and precipitous side of the rock on which it 
stood. During the greater portion of the hours of 
daylight she sate near the window with her harp, 
gazing on the changeful aspects of the wintry sea, 
now slumbering like a summer lake in the sun- 
shine of a halcyon day — now raging beneath the 



1 90 Melincou rt. 

sway of the tempest, while the dancing snow-flakes 
seemed to accumulate on the foam of the billows, 
and the spray was hurled back like snow-dust from 
the rocks. The feelings these scenes suggested she 
developed in the following stanzas, to which she 
adapted a wild and impassioned air, and they 
became the favourite song of her captivity. 

THE MAGIC BARK. 



O Freedom ! power of life and light ! 

Sole nurse of truth and glory ! 

Bright dweller on the rocky cliff ! 

Lone wanderer on the sea ! 

Where'er the sunbeam slumbers bright 

On snow-clad mountains hoary ; 

Wherever flies the veering skiff, 

O'er waves that breathe of thee ! 

Be thou the guide of all my thought — 

The source of all my being — 

The genius of my waking mind — 

The spirit of my dreams ! 

To me thy magic spell be taught, 

The captive spirit freeing, 

To wander with the ocean-wind 

Where'er thy beacon beams. 

II. 

O ! sweet it were, in magic bark, 
On one loved breast reclining, 
To sail around the varied world, 
To every blooming shore ; 
And oft the gathering storm, to mark 
Its lurid folds combining ; 



Alga Castle. 19 1 

And safely ride, with sails unfurled, 

Amid the tempest's roar ; 

And see the mighty breakers rave 

On cliff and sand and shingle, 

And hear, with long re-echoing shock, 

The caverned steeps reply ; 

And while the storm-cloud and the wave 

In darkness seemed to mingle. 

To skim beside the surf-swept rock, 

And glide uninjured by. 



And when the summer seas were calm, 

And summer skies were smiling, 

And evening came, with clouds of gold, 

To gild the western wave ; 

And gentle airs and dews of balm, 

The pensive mind beguiling, 

Should call the Ocean Swain to fold 

His sea-flocks in the cave, 

Unearthly music's tenderest spell. 

With gentlest breezes blending 

And waters softly rippling near 

The prow's light course along. 

Should flow from Triton's winding shell, 

Through ocean's depths ascending 

From where it charmed the Nereid's ear, 

Her coral bowers among. 

IV. 

How sweet, where eastern Nature smiles, 

With SM'ift and mazy motion 

Before the odour-breathing breeze 

Of dewy morn to glide ; 

Or 'mid the thousand emerald isles 

That gem the southern ocean, 



192 Melincourt. 

Where fruits and flowers, from loveliest trees, 

O'erhang the slumbering tide : 

Or up some western stream to sail, 

To where its myriad fountains 

Roll down their everlasting rills 

From many a cloud-capped height, 

Till mingling in some nameless vale, 

Mid forest-cinctured mountains, 

The river-cataract shakes the hills 

With vast and volumed might. 



V. 



The poison-trees their leaves should shed, 

The yellow snake should perish, 

The beasts of blood should crouch and cower, 

Where'er that vessel past : 

All plagues of fens and vapours bred. 

That tropic fervours cherish, 

Should fly before its healing power, 

Like mists before the blast. 

Where'er its keel the strand imprest 

The young fruit's ripening cluster. 

The bird's free song, its touch should greet 

The opening flower's perfume ; 

The streams along the green earth's breast 

Should roll in purer lustre. 

And love should heighten every sweet. 

And brighten every bloom. 

VI. 

And, Freedom ! thy meridian blaze 
Should chase the clouds that lower, 
Wherever mental twilight dim 
Obscures Truth's vestal flame. 
Wherever Fraud and Slavery raise 
The throne of blood-stained Power, 



Alga Castle. 193 



Wherever Fear and Ignorance hymn 

Some fabled daemon's name ! 

The bard, where torrents thunder down 

Beside thy burning altar, 

Should kindle, as in days of old, 

The mind's ethereal fire ; 

Ere yet beneath a tyrant's frown 

The Muse's voice could falter. 

Or Flattery strung with chords of gold 

The minstrel's venal lyre. 




II. 




CHAPTER XLII. 

CONCLUSION. 

:ORD ANOPHEL one morning paid 
Anthelia his usual visit. "You must 
be aware, Miss Melincourt," said he, 
" that if your friends could have found you out, 
they would have done it before this ; but they 
have searched the whole country far and near, and 
have now gone home in despair." 

Anthelia. — That, my Lord, I cannot believe ; 
for there is one, at least, who I am confident 
will never be weary of seeking me, and who, 
I am equally confident, will not always seek in 
vain. 

Lord Anophel Achthar. — If you mean the young 
lunatic of Redrose Abbey, or his friend the dumb 
Baronet, they are both gone to London to attend 
the opening of the Honourable House ; and if you 
doubt my word, I will show you their names in the 
Morimig Post^ among the Fashionable Arrivals at 
Wildman's Hotel. 

Anthelia. — Your Lordship's word is quite as 
good as the authority you have quoted. 



Conchisioji. 195 

Lord Ajiophel Achthar. — Well, then, Miss 
Melincourt, I presume you perceive that you are 
completely in my power, and that I have gone too 
far to recede. If, indeed, I had supposed myself 
an object of such very great repugnance to you, 
which I must say {looki?ig at himself in a glass) is 
quite unaccountable, I might not, perhaps, have 
laid this little scheme, which I thought would be 
only settling the affair in a compendious way ; for, 
that any woman in England would consider it a 
very great hardship to be Lady Achthar, and here- 
after Marchioness of x\garic, and would feel any 
very mortal resentment for means that tended to 
make her so, was an idea, egad, that never entered 
my head. How^ever, as I have already observed, 
you are completely in my power : both our char- 
acters are compromised, and there is only one 
way to mend the matter, which is, to call in Grovel- 
grub, and make him strike up " Dearly beloved." 

Aiithelia. — As to your character, Lord Anophel, 
that must be your concern. Mine is in my own 
keeping ; for, having practised all my life a system 
of uniform sincerity, which gives me a right to be 
believed by all who know me, and more especially 
by all who love me, I am perfectly indifferent to 
private malice or public misrepresentation. 

Lord Anophel Achthar, — There is such a thing, 
Miss iMelincourt, as tiring out a man's patience ; 
and 'pon honour, if gentle means don't succeed 
with you, I must have recourse to rough ones, 
'pon honour. 



196 Melhicourt. 

Atithelia. — My Lord ! 

Loi'd Anophel Achthar. — I am serious, curse me. 
You will be glad enough to hush all up, then, and 
we'll go to court together in due form. 

Anthelia. — What you mean by hushing up, 
Lord Anophel, I know not : but of this be assured, 
that under no circumstances will I ever be your 
wife ; and that whatever happens to me in any 
time or place, shall be known to all who are 
interested in my welfare. I know too well the 
difference between the true quality of a pure and 
simple mind, and the false affected modesty which 
goes by that name in the world, to be intimidated 
by threats which can only be dictated by a sup- 
position that your wickedness would be my 
disgrace, and that false shame would induce me to 
conceal what both truth and justice would com- 
mand me to make known. 

Lord Anophel stood aghast for a few minutes, 
at the declaration of such unfashionable sentiments. 
At length saying, " Ay, preaching is one thing, and 
practice another, as Grovelgrub can testify ; " he 
seized her hand with violence, and threw his arm 
round her waist. Anthelia screamed, and at that 
very moment a violent noise of ascending steps was 
heard on the stairs ; the door was burst open, and 
Sir Oran Haut-ton appeared in the aperture, with 
the Reverend Mr Grovelgrub in custody, whom he 
dragged into the apartment, followed by Mr 
Forester and Mr Fax. Mr Forester flew to 
Anthelia, who threw herself into his arms, hid her 



Conclusion, 197 

face in his bosom, and burst into tears : which 
when Sir Oran saw, his wrath grew boundless, and 
quitting his hold of the Rev. Mr Grovelgrub (who 
immediately ran downstairs, and out of the castle, 
as fast as a pair of short thick legs could carry him), 
seized on Lord Anophel Achthar, and was prepar- 
ing to administer natural justice by throwing him 
out at the window ; but Mr Fax interposed, and 
calling Mr Forester's attention, which was totally 
engaged with Anthelia, they succeeded in rescuing 
the terrified sprig of nobility ; who immediately 
leaving the enemy in free possession, flew down- 
stairs after his reverend tutor ; whom, on issuing 
from the castle, he discovered at an immense dis- 
tance on the sands, still running with all his might. 
Lord Anophel gave him chase, and after a long 
time came within hail of him, and shouted to him 
to stop. But this only served to quicken the 
reverend gentleman's speed ; who, hearing the 
voice of pursuit, and too much terrified to look 
back, concluded that the dumb Baronet had found 
his voice, and was then in the very act of gaining 
on his flight. Therefore, the more Lord Anophel 
shouted " Stop ! " the more nimbly the reverend 
gentleman sped along the sands, running and roar- 
ing all the way, like Falstaff on Gadshill ; his Lord- 
ship still exerting all his powers of speed in the 
rear, and gaining on his flying Mentor by very im- 
perceptible gradations : where we shall leave them 
to run ad libitum^ while we account for the sudden 
appearance of Mr Forester and his friends. 



198 Melincourt, 

We left them walking along the shore of the sea, 
which they followed, till they arrived in the vicinity 
of Alga Castle, from which the Reverend Mr 
Grovelgrub emerged in evil hour, to take a medita- 
tive walk on the sands. The keen sight of the 
natural man descried him from far. Sir Oran 
darted on his prey ; and though it is supposed that 
he could not have overtaken the swift -footed 
Achilles,* he had very little difficulty in overtaking 
the Reverend Mr Grovelgrub, who had begun to 
run for his life, as soon as he was aware of the foe. 
Sir Oran shook his stick over his head, and the 
reverend gentleman dropping on his knees, put his 
hands together, and entreated for mercy, saying 
"he would confess all." Mr Forester and Mr Fax 
came up in time to hear the proposal : the former 
restrained the rage of Sir Oran, who, however, still 
held his prisoner fast by the arm ; and the reluctant 
divine, with many a heavy groan, conducted his 
unwelcome company to the door of Anthelia's 
apartments. 

" O Forester ! " said Anthelia, " you have real- 

* " The civilised man will submit to the greatest pain and 
labour, in order to excel in any exercise which is honourable ; 
and this induces me to believe that such a man as Achilles 
might have beat in running even an oran outang, or the 
savage of the Pyrenees, whom nobody could lay hold of, 
though that be the exercise in which savages excel the most, 
and though I am persuaded that the oran outang of Angola 
is naturally stronger and swifter of foot than Achilles was, or 
than even the heroes of the preceding age, such as Hercules, 
and such as Theseus, Pirithousj and others mentioned by 
Nestor." — Ancient Metaphysics^ vol. iii., p. 76. 



Conclusion. 1 99 

ised all my wishes. I have found you the friend of 
the poor, the enthusiast of truth, the disinterested 
cultivator of the rural virtues, the active promoter 
of the cause of human liberty. It only remained 
that you should emancipate a captive damsel, who, 
however, will but change the mode of her durance, 
and become your captive for life." 

It was not long after this event, before the 
Reverend Mr Portpipe, and the- old chapel of 
Mehncourt Castle, were put in requisition, to make 
a mystical unit of Anthelia and Mr Forester. The 
day was celebrated with great festivity throughout 
their respective estates, and the Reverend ]vlr Port- 
pipe was voti compos, that is to say, he had taken a 
resolution on the day of Anthelia's christening, that 
he would on the day of her marriage drink one 
bottle more than he had ever taken at one sittinsj 
on any other occasion ; which resolution he had. 
now the satisfaction of carrying into effect. 

Sir Oran Haut-ton continued to reside with 
Mr Forester and Anthelia, They discovered in 
the progress of time that he had formed for the 
latter the same kind of reverential attachment as 
the Satyr in Fletcher forms for the Holy Shep- 
herdess : * and Anthelia might have said to him in 
the words of Corin : 

* See Fletcher's Faithful Shepherdess. The follow- 
ing extracts from the Satyr's speeches to Corin will explain 
the allusion in the text. 

But behold a fairer sight ! 

By that heavenly form of thine, 



200 Melincourt. 

They wrong thee that do call thee rude : 

Though thou be'st outward rough and tawny-hued, 

Thy manners are as gentle and as fair 

As his who boasts himself born only heir 

To all humanity. 

His greatest happiness was in listening to the 
music of her harp and voice: in the absence oi 

Brightest fair ! thou art divine ! 
Sprung from great immortal race 
Of the gods ; for in thy face 
Shines more awful majesty, 
Than dull weak mortality 
Dare with misty eyes behold, 
And live ! Therefore on this mould 
Lowly do I bend my knee, 
In worship of thy deity. 

Act /., Scene I. 

Brightest ! if there be remaining 
Any service, without feigning 
I will do it : were I set 
To catch the nimble wind, or get 
Shadows gliding on the green, 
Or to steal from the great queen 
Of the fairies all her beauty, 
I would do it, so much duty 
Do I owe those precious eyes. 

Act IV., Scene II. 



Thou divinest, fairest, brightest. 
Thou most powerful maid, and wljitest, 
Thou most virtuous and most blessed, 
Eyes of stars, and golden tressed 
Like Apollo. Tell me, sweetest, 
What new service now is meetest 



Conclusion. 201 

which he solaced himself, as usual, with his flute 
and French horn. He became likewise a proficient 
in drawing ; but what progress he made in the art 
of speech we have not been able to ascertain. 

Mr Fax was a frequent visitor at Melincourt, 
and there was always a cover at the table for the 
Reverend Mr Portpipe. 

Mr Hippy felt half inclined to make proposals 
to Miss Evergreen ; but understanding from Mr 
Forester, that, from the death of her lover in early 
youth, that lady had irrevocably determined on a 
single life,"*^ he comforted himself with passing half 

For the Satyr ? Shall I stray 

In the middle air, and stay 

The sailing rack ? or nimbly take 

Hold by the moon, and gently make 

Suit to the pale queen of night 

For a beam to give thee light ? 

Shall I dive into the sea, 

And bring thee coral, making way 

Through the rising waves that fall 

In sno\^7 fleeces ? Dearest, shall 

I catch thee wanton fawns, or flies 

\Miose woven wings the summer dyes 

Of many colours ? Get thee fruit ? 

Or steal from heaven old Orpheus' lute ? 

All these I'll venture for, and more. 

To do her ser\-ice all these woods adore. 

Act F., Scene V. 

* ** There are very few women who might not have 
married in some way or other. The old maid, who has 
either never formed an attachment, or who has been dis- 
appointed in the object of it, has, under the circumstances 
in which she has been placed, conducted herself with the 
II. N-2 



202 Melincourt. 

his time at Melincourt Castle, and dancing the 
little Foresters on his knee, whom he taught to call 
him "grandpapa Hippy," and seemed extremely 
proud of the imaginary relationship. 

]\Ir Forester disposed of Redrose Abbey to Sir 
Telegraph Paxarett, who, after wearing the willow 
twelve months, married, left off driving, and be- 
came a very respectable specimen of an English 
country gentleman. 

We must not conclude without informing those 
among our tender-hearted readers, who would be 
much grieved if Miss Danaretta Contantina Pin- 
money should have been disappointed in her 
principal object of making a good match, that she 
had at length the satisfaction, through the skilful 
management of her mother, of making the happiest 
of men of Lord Anophel Achthar. 

most perfect propriety ; and has acted a much more virtuous 
and honourable part in society, than those women who 
marry without a proper degree of love, or at least of esteem, 
for their husbands ; a species of immorahty which is not 
reprobated as it deserves." — Malthus on Population, 
book iv. 



TURNBULL AND SPEAKS, FRINTERS, EDINBURGH. 



