







« 







f 



^^^> ^^ 




L I B R_ARY 

OF THE 

U N 1 VER.5ITY 

or ILLI N015 



v3 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2010 with funding from 

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 



http://www.archive.org/details/memoirsofmodernp03hami 



MEMOIRS 



OF 



MODEPvN PHILOSOPHERS. 



W THREE VOLUMES. 



VOL. Ill, 



" Ridiculum acri 
'• Fortius et melius magnas plerunique fccat res." 



*' Ridicule O-.all frequently prevail, 
Aixi cut thekno:, when graver reafors f^iil." 

Frakcji. 



BATH, PRINTED BT R. CRUTTW£iX., 

roR 

O. C. AND ;. ROBIKSON, PATER-MOSTER-ROW, igNOOM, 
ISOO. 






CHAP. I. 



His fpecch was an excellent piece 



" Of patch-work, with (hreds brought from Rome and from 

Greece; 
" But {hould poets and orators try him for theft, 
" Like the jackdaw of old — would a feather be left?" 

Simkin's Letters. 



THE admirable epiftle of our thrice- 
admirable heroine, with which wc 
thought it proper to conclude the lafl: 
chapter, was left by her at Henry's lodg- 
ings, on her way to Mrs. Fielding's. On 
her return from Hanover-fquare, fhe, in 
purfuance of her adopted plan, went to 
look for lodgings in the fame ftreet in 
which Henry had taken up his abode. 
Her attempt was unfuccefsful. 

VOL. 111. B Not 



C 2 1 

Not a houfe in George's-ftreet would 
receive her. 

Her attack upon the heart of Henry 
was from this unfavourable circumflance 
prevented from being turned into a block- 
ade; but ftill ftie refolved to carry on the 
fiege ; and happily for her purpofes, on 
turning by chance into Conduit-flreet, flie 
found a lodging exaflly fuited to her 
wiflies. iShe fixed upon the firfl-floor, 
and afked the price." 

" Two guineas a week, Ma'am, is the 
very lowed at which thefe lodgings were 
ever let." 

' Two guineas a week!' cried Bridge- 
tina, in adonifhment. * What! a hundred 
and four guineas a-year for two palti7 
rooms. You mufl be miflaken, good wo- 
man ; I fliall convince you that you are. 

In my mother's houfe at W , for which 

file pays no more than twenty pounds a- 
year, there are feven better rooms than 
thefe! Do not think I am to be fo eafily 
impofed upon.' c^ rr 



[ 3 ] 

*^ If you can fuit yourfelf cheaper elfe- 
where, I have no objeclion. Ma'am," re- 
turned the miilrefs of the houfe, drily ; 
" but I believe/' added Tne, " you will 
find few fuch lodgings at the price (confi- 
dering the fituation) in London/' 

The fituation was indeed defirable ; not 
that Bridgetina would in itfclf have confi- 
dered it as preferable to Hound's-ditch, 
or even to any of the noble avenues of 
Wapping; but its being in the vicinity of 
Henry gave it a value beyond all price. 
Finding it in vain to argue the good woman 
out of any part of her demand, fhe clofed 
with her terms, and told her ilie fhould 
take immediate poffeilion of the apartments. 
Mrs. Benton curtfeyed, and after a little 
modeft hefitation, informed Mifs Bothe- 
rim, that Ihe made it a rule never to take 
any lodger without a reference for their 
character to fome perfon of refpe<^ability. 

" Mrs. Benton, for that I think is your 

name, I perceive you are a very unen- 

B 2 lightened 



C 4 ] 

lightened perfon," (aid Brldgetina. " A 
regard to the character of any individual 
is one of the immoral prejudices of a dif- 
tcmpered ilate of civilization. I (hall foon 
in{lru£l you better; and out of the choice 
writings of the mod illufbious modern phi- 
lofophers, convince you that there is no 
notion more erroneous than the falfe pre- 
judice entertained againft certain perfons 
of great powers ^ Vvho have happened to 
energize in a direflion vulgarly called vi- 
cious. I, for my part, think it one of the 
peculiar advantages of this great metropo- 
lis, that it happily affords to the philofo- 
pher an opportunity of cultivating an in- 
timacy with liberal-minded perfons of this 
defcription ; and fliall be much obliged to 
you for an introduction to any heroine 
who has nobly facrificed the bauble — repu- 
tation. Pray have you any acquaintance 
in this line?" 

Mrs. Benton flared — ' I really do not 
landerfland you, Ma'am. My acquaint- 
ances 



[ i 1 

ances are all people of ucfpotted reputation. 
Nor, though my lodgings fhould fland 
empty throughout the year, would I ad- 
mit any perfon of fafpeeled chara£ler into 
my houfe. I do not mean to infmuate any 
reflexion upon you, Ma'am ; but you are 
a flranger to m.e, and therefore I mud 
again requefl a reference/ 

*' You are really flrangely invulnerable 
to argument; bur I hope I fliall in time 
convince you of your miftake. Mean- 
while you may apply to Mrs. Fielding, in 
Hanover-fquare, the only perfon I have 
yet vifited m London; and as (he is as 
much the flave of prejudice as yourfelf, 
her teflimony will, I dare fay, pleafe you." 
* Oh, Ma'am, if you vifit Mrs. Fielding, 
I am more than fatisfied. To be honoured 
with her acquaintance is a fufficient recom- 
mendation to me. She is the bed, the 
moft generdus of women! To her good- 
nefs I am indebted for every comfort that 
I now enjoy. I fhould be bafe, indeed, if 

I did 



[ 6 ] 

I did not with gratitude acknowledge that 
fhe has been the faviour of me and mine.* 

" Gratitude is a miftaken notion, Mrs. 
Benton ; and if you feel any extraordinary 
regard towards Mrs. Fielding, on account 
of her being your benefac^refs, you a6t 
in direct oppofition to the principles of 
juftice and virtue." 

' What! Not feel gratitude to my be- 
nefaftrefs ! Not feel a regard for her who 
refcued my hufband from a prifon! Who, 
like a miniftering angel, brought relief to 
our extreme necelTity! Who faved my 
babes from perifhing, and has put us in a 
fituation to earn our bread with comfort 
and with credit ! O, if ever I ceafe to blefs 
her, may tenfold mifery be my portion !' 

" I perceive you have imbibed all the 
pernicious prejudices of fuperflition ; but 
notwithftanding your midaken notions, I 
dare fay you are a good fort of woman at 
bottom; and fo I fball tell Mrs. Fielding, 
when I go to brcakfafl v/ith her to-morrow 
morning." ^^^^ 



[ 7 ] 

Mrs. Benton curtfeyed ; and Bridgetina, 
defiring a coach to be called, ftepped into 
it, and drove to the Golden-Crofs for her 
things. Having paid her bill, and counted 
her remaining flock of cafli, (lie found there 
was only one guinea and a half left ; which 
having reflored to her purfe, flie returned 
to Conduit-ftreet, where (he found her 
apartment diligently prepared by Mrs. 
Benton for her reception. 

As {lie had not given any orders about 
dinner, Mrs. Benton naturally concluded 
it was her intention to dine abroad ; while 
Bridgetina, never accuftomed to pay any 
attention to the affairs of life, and igno- 
rant of all the manners and habits of fo- 
ciety, had taken it for granted that food 
was to be included with her lodging. At 
five o'clock, finding fiie could energize no 
longer, flie pulled the bell, to enquire 
whether dinner was ready. 

' Dinner 1 Ma'am?' fitid the maid-fer- 
vant who attended her-, ' I did not know 

that 



C s ] 

that you were to have any. I received no 
dirc£i:ions to make market for you.' 

"No!" returned Bridgetina; "I per- 
ceive, then, that your miftrefs has conceived 
too exalted an idea o^ my powers. In the 
prefent (late of fociety, no one's ener- 
gies can be fo effectually exerted as to 
elude the phyfical necefTity of eating. I 
therefore defire to have my dinner imme- 
diately.'' 

The demand which followed for money 
CO go to market, brought on an explana- 
lion by no means agreeable to Bridgetina, 
and which very little fuited the ftate of 
h^r finances. After a learned expoftula- 
lion onthepart of our heroine, and a plain 
ilatement on that of Mrs. Benton, it was 
finally fettled, that the maid fhould here- 
after make provifion for Bridgetina's 
meals; which were to be fixed to no re- 
gular hour, but taken pbilosopbically* at 



* See PoJ. Juf. yol. ii. p. 492. 

what 



[ 9 ] 

what time the energies of her ilomach re< 
quired it. 

" You will fay it is more convenient for 
you, that I fhould dine at your table," 
faid Mifs Botherim; " and probably quote 
the example of the Spartans, who, by a 
law of the immortal Lycurgus, were obli- 
ged to common meals. But when the 
progrefs of mind fhall have carried us fur- 
ther on the road to perfe«5lion, all co- 
operation in butchery, in cookery, or in 
eating, fhall be at an end. If, at that happy 
period, the animal oeconomy fhould ftill 
continue (notwithftanding the advanced 
{late of fociety) to demand afupply of food, 
every man will then, when he is hungry, 
knock down an ox for himfelf, and cutting 
out his own (teak, will drefs and devour 
it at the time and place bed fuited to his 
avocation and circumftances. Do you 
think the Gonoquais fit down to table, as 
we do? No, no; focial meals (as they 
are vulgarly called) are an interruption to 

the 



C 10 ] 

the fublime flights of genius, and ought 
to be difcountenanced by every true phi- 
lofopher." 

In this manner did Bridgetina endeavour 
to enlighten her humble and modeft au- 
ditor ; whofe filence flie interpreted into 
profound admiration of her extraordinary 
powers of eloquence, and on whofe mind 
fhe firmly believed every word flie fpoke 
made a deep and lafting imprefhon. 

On the following morning, according 
to appointment, (lie attended Mrs. Fielding 
at breakfaft; when, to her great mortifica- 
tion, inflead of meeting with Henry, as ihc 
had fully expected, (lie received from his 
refpectable friend a very warm expoflula- 
lion on the impropriety of her condu^; 
which, though delivered with all poflible 
gentlenefs of voice and manner, kindled in 
her mind the flame of deep refentment. 

In vain did Mrs. Fielding endeavour to 

perfuade her to return to W '. In vain 

did ihe urge the duty flie owed her aged 

mother ; 



[ 11 3 

mother ; the rifque (he ran of expofing her 
character to reproach, and her name to 
ridicule, by perfifling in a condu6l fo ut- 
terly inconfiftent with the laws of delicacy 
and decorum. Bridgetina was like the 
deaf adder, ' which refufeth to hear the 
voice of the charmer, charm he never fo 
wifely.' Mrs. Fielding was the Have cf 
prejudice; her mind was fettered by fuper- 
ftition; her morals were built upon the 
falfe ftrufture of religious principle. She 
looked to a future world for that flate of 
compleat order, happinefs, and perfection, 
which flie weakly believed would never be 
found in this. She was not enlightened 
enough to conceive how the progrefs of 
mind could be accellerated by cafting off 
all dependance on a Supreme Being, by 
contemning his power, or denying his ex- 
iftence; but on the contrary, adored his 
goodnefs, revered his wifdom, and firmly 
believed in his revelation. How, then, 
couid fhe fail to be the fcorn of onr deep 

and 



[ 12 ] 

and enlightened philofopher! In truth, 
Bridgetina felt for her underftanding the 
moil fovereign contempt; and after an 
harangue, which had too little of novelty 
in it to afford the reader any amufement, 
fhe took her leave of the weak and preju- 
diced Mrs. Fielding, fully refolved never 
more to honour a perfon fo full of preju- 
dices with her confidence. 

Her next attempt was to obtain a con- 
ference with Henry. She was informed 
by his fervant that he was not at home. 
Leaving her addrefs, and defiring the man 
to tell his mafler that (lie ihould be at home 
all the evening, flie ftepped into a hackney- 
coach, and drove to the houfe of Sir 
Anthony Aldgate, in Mincing-lane. 

Here, alfo, her evil ftars feemed to pre- 
ponderate. The knight, his lady, and 
daughter, were on a vifit to Mr. Deputy 
Grilkin, at his villa at Bow-Bridge, and 
were not expefled home till the latter end 
of the week. This was very unwelcome 

intelligence 



L 13 ] 

intelligence to Bridgetina. Sir Anthony 
had been by her father's will appointed 
truitee for her fortune, which confided of 
four thoufand pounds flock in the four per 
cents, the whole of which was to conti- 
nue under his management till the day of 
Bridgetina's marriage ; with power, how- 
ever, to fell, or change the fecurity, (with 
her confent) as might appear mod eligible. 

It was her intention to raife an immedi- 
ate fupply of five hundred pounds for her 
own expences.; and to put five hundred more 
into the hands of Mr. Vallaton, as trea- 
furer for the Gonoquais emigrants, with 
a promife of doubling the fum, fhould the 
fubfcription of the philofophers appear ina- 
dequate to the expences of the expedition. 

Great was her vexation at the delay oc- 
calioned by Sir Anthony's abfence, which 
not only protradled the glory flie expe<fled 
to reap from the applaufes of the enlight- 
cned, but reduced her to the mortification 
of remaining for feveral days with an empty 

purfc 



[ H ] 

purfe. O cheerlefs companion of philo- 
fophy ! too well do we know the torpedo 
cftefts oF thy chilling afpe^l: too often 
have we experienced the fickening languor 
which the contemplation of thy long, lank 
iides occafions, to refufe our fympathy to 
the lucklefs wight who has thee for a 
gueft ! Thy cafual appearance is a trifling 
evil, but where thy form is permanent, 
thou art 

** Abominable, unutterable, and worfe 

" Than fables yet have feign'd, or fear conceiv'd, 

*' G organs, zTidHydraSi and Chhneras dire.'' 

In all the calamities to which life is liable, 
there is no comfort equal to that which 
arifes from being able to fix the blame 
upon that which has occafioned, or is fup- 
pofed to have occafioned it. In the opi- 
nion of many wife men, it is one of the* 
chief advantages of matrimony, that in 
every crofs accident, a conflant refource 
of this nature is provided for in the help- 
mate of the party aggrieved. Even the 

vexation 



C u ] 

Tcxatlon arifmg from the lofs of a game 
at cards is confiderably alleviated by the 
privilege of finding fault with the play of 
a partner ; fo to Bridgetina was it no fmall 
confolation, that in her prefent perplexity 
flie could relieve her mind by bitter in- 
ve£lives againfl the distempered state of ci- 
vilization. Had it not been for the pre- 
fent depraved inflitutions of fociety, her 
father would not have had it in his power 
to make a will. She would not then have 
been fettered by the impertinent interfe- 
rence of this truftee; who had, indeed, by 
his management during her minority, con- 
fiderably increafed the capital of her little 
fortune, and thus, by adding to the wealth 
of an individual, had fmned againil the glo- 
rious fyflem of equality. 

Her foliloquies upon this fubjecl were 
not interrupted by any vifitor. Henry did 
not appear ; neither did he fend any an- 
fwer to her letter. She again \^Tote, but 
to no purpofe. She repeatedly called at 

his 



• [ 16 ] 

his lodgings, but flill he was not at home. 
Another letter, conjuring him to enter into 
her arguments, and either reply to them on 
paper, or come to reafon the fubje6l with 
her in a perfonal interview, met with no 
better fuccefs than the former. Henry 
remained inexorable. 

Mrs. Fielding had, at his requeft, in- 
formed Bridgetina, that as it was impolTible 
for him to anfwer her but in a way that 
mud appear harfli and difagreeable, he 
begged leave to decline waiting. In mufmg 
on this fubjecl, and inveftigating in her 
ufual method the motives of Henry, and 
the condu£i: of his patronefs, it all at once 
occurred to her that Mrs. Fielding herfelf 
was the objeft of Henry's purfuit; and 
that it was in order to get rid of a rival, 
that that lady had fo ftrongly prelTed her 
return to the country. The longef her 
imagination dwelt upon all the circumftan- 
ces which had occurred, the more llrongly 
was flie imprefled wich the truth of her 

fufpicions. 



[ 17 J 

fufpicions. The glaring difparity In point 
of age was in her mind no obflacle, nei- 
ther did fhe make any account of that nice 
propriety of fentiment and of conduct 
which marked the character of Mrs. Field- 
ing, and rendered her eminently fuperior 
to the fufpicion of weaknefs or abfurdity. 
That fhe was attached to Henry, fhe 
thought was evident; and that fhe fhould 
wifli to marry him was not (in her opinion) 
at all extraordinary. She therefore deter- 
mined to change her plan, and to exert all 
her energies to perfuade Mrs. Fielding 
that fhe ought in juflice to rcfign her pre- 
tenfions to one, who, by her fuperior 
powers, was more eminently qualified to 
promote the happinefs of a deferving in- 
dividual. She would immediately have 
written, but apprehenfive that Mrs. Field- 
ing, following the example of Henry, 
would leave the letter unanfwered, fhe 
thought it better to difcufs the fubjeft in 
a perfonal interview j and fet out for 
VOL. III. c Hanover- 



[ 13 ] 

Hanover-fquare with all poffible expe- 
dition. 

As fhe entered the fquare, Mrs. Field- 
ing's carriage drove from her door; fhe 
however proceeded to knock, and had the 
door opened to her by a maid-fervant, 
from whom (he learned, that Mrs. Fielding 
was not expected home till near dinner- 
time. 

" Would flie be at home In the evening?'* 

* Yes y but in the evening fhe was to 
have a party.* 

This intelligence was extremely agree- 
able to Bridgetina, as flie doubted not that 
Henry would be of the number of Mrs. 
Fielding's guefts, of whom (he alfo deter- 
mined to make one ; nor did the w^nt of 
an invitation appear to her any obflacle, as 
that was a mere matter of form, which (lie 
thought might very eafilybedifpenfed with. 

It was now that Bridgetina for the firft 
time felt the abfence of her mother, who 
had from her cradle fupplied the place to 

her 



C 19 ] 

her of maid, milliner, and mantua-raaker; 
and though the good woman's fond wifhes 
of fetting off the perfon of her daughter 
to the bed advantage were but ill feconded 
by her tafle, her officious zeal had reni 
dered the objecft of her affections fo un- 
accuflomed to do any thing for herfelf, 
that (he was helplefs as a baby. Her only 
refource was to confult Mrs. Benton, 
whom flie accordingly fent for; and after 
telling her (he was to go that evening to a 
party at Mrs. Fielding's, intreated her affift- 
ance in the neceffary preparations. Mrs. 
Benton very good-naturedly offered to do 
every thing in her power; and propofed 
fending immediately for a hair-dreffer, as 
really fhe could not help obferving that 
Mifs Botherim's hair flood very much in 
need of cutting. 

Bridgetina replied, that " all unnecef- 

fary co-operaiion was vicious, and that as 

Mrs. Benton and her maid had both offered 

their voluntary affiflancc, fhe would by no 

c 2 means 



[ 20 ] 

means purchafe the fervice of a mercenary, 
Befides," added flie, putting her hand to 
licr forehead, and gently introducing her 
fino^ers betwixt her fkull and the hii;h friz- 
zled locks that towered above, " my hair 
is much more eafily dreffed than you iraa^ 
gine. See, (cried flie, taking off the wig) 
thefe curls want only a little combing, and 
then, as they are fomewhat ftiff, they mull 
be well fmoothed down with hard poma- 
tum, and covered over with a little powder, 
and they will do very well.*' 

Mrs. Benton fhook her head, but de- 
firing Jenny to take the comb, and proceed 
by Mifs Botherim's dire<5i:ions, Ihe went ou 
to the examination of the wardrobe, w^hich 
Bridgetina difplayed for her infpeftionc 
Having laid afide two or three printed cal- 
licoes, and as many ordinary moflins, fhe at 
length arrived at a drefs carefully pinned 
up in a large table-cloth. '' How very 
fortunate," faid fhe, " that my mother 
flaould by miftake have fent me this fa- 
vourite 



C 2.1 ] 

vourlte drefs, in which flie always fays I 
look fo well. It is made up after her own' 
fancy, and admirably fuited to my com- 
plexion. Do you not admire it?" 

' Indeed, Ma'am, the filk is very pretty, 
to be fure, but only — now that filks are 
fo little worn, I fear it will look a little 
particular. The colour, too, fo deep a 
rofe is rather glaring, and I fear it will be 
thought unfalhionable.* 

** Oh, as to the fear of being particu- 
lar, I defpife it. The gown has been very 

much admired at W , and the fancy 

of trimming it with thefe knots of deep 
blue ribbons has been greatly praifed.** 

* I do not doubt it; but you know. 
Ma'am, that in London — indeed, believe 
me that you had better go to Mrs. Field- 
ing's in a plain muflin. I beg pardon for 
the liberty I take, but indeed I cannot 
help wifliingyou to confider, how odd fuch 
a drefs as this will appear in a room full of 
coippany.* 

The 



[ 22 ] 

The predile^ion of Bridgetina for her 
favourite gown was not to be moved by 
the remonflrances of Mrs. Benton, though 
they continued to be urged with increafing 
vehemence till interrupted by Jenny, who 
declared the curls of the wig to be fo in- 
tra£lable as to bid defiance to her utmoft 
PtdW. Again Mrs. Benton hinted thene- 
celilty of procuring a hair-drefler ; but as 
Bridgetina was obftinate in oppofmg it, 
fhe herfelf undertook to fettle the inflexi- 
ble treffes on one fide of the wig, while 
Jenny tugged at the other. At length 
the labours of the toilette were concluded, 
and our heroine, having refufed to permit 
Jenny to call a coach, tripped it on foot 
through George's-ftreet, and reached Mrs. 
Fielding's door at the moment fome la- 
dies, wTio had jufl ftepped from a coroneted 
carriage, were entering, it. She followed 
them without hefitation up (lairs. The 
names of Lady Carblihe and Lady Juliet 
Manners were announced aloud; and im- 
mediately 



[ 23 ] 

tnediately after, that of Mifs Botherim was 
pronounced by the fame fonorous voice. 
Mrs. Fielding darted at the found ; (he was 
ftill fpeaking to Lady Juliet at no great 
diflance from the door, when it reached 
her ears. She inftantly turned round, and 
in fpite of her vexation, could fcarcely for- 
bear fmiling at the ftrange appearance of 
the little outre figure that approached her. 

" Blefs me," cried a young lady who 
flood up to fpeak to Lady Caroline Man- 
ners, " What mafquerade figure has your 
iadyfhip brought in with you? I did not 
hear of any fancy ball this evening?" 

' She did not come with us,' faid Lady 
Caroline, ' nor can I imagine who fhe is ; 
but fhe is dreffed in character fure enough, 
though I am pofitive there is no mafque- 
rade. I dare fay {he is fome oddity, for 
you know Mrs. Fielding does fometimcs 
pick up queer people.' 

Who is fhe? what can flie be? where 
does ftic comefrom? reverberated twenty 

whifpering 



C 24 ] 

wrhifperlng voices at once. Some ima- 
gined her to be a foreigner, but of what 
nation no one could determine. Others 
fagacioufly difcovered it to be fome one 
of their common acquaintance dreffed up 
in difguife, and introduced by Mrs. Field- 
ing for the amufement of the company ; 
but the conclufion made by thofe befl: ac- 
quainted with Mrs. Fielding, and which 
in a fhort time became general, was 
Jiighly in Bridgetina's favour, as it fup- 
pofed her fome perfon of extraordinary 
talents, whofe foaring genius was above 
conformity to the common fafliions of the 
world. 

Time does not permit us at prefent to 
controvert the falfe notion upon which 
this opinion is founded, otherwife we 
ihould not defpair of being able fatisfac- 
torily to prove, that the afFe£i:ation of fm- 
gularity, fo far from being a concomitant 
of real genius, is a certain proof of a con- 
fined and little mind. But without wait- 
ing 



[ 25 ] 

ing to difcufs this fubje(n: any farther, wc 
return to Bridgetina, who, quite uncon- 
fcious of the wonder her appearance ex- 
cited, dreffed her countenance in a gracious 
fmile as fhe waddled up to Mrs. Fielding, 
who waited to be addreffed by her with- 
out fpeaking. 

*' It was extremely fortunate that I heard 
you were to be at home this evening,'* 
faid Bridgetina, after making her curtfey. 

* I fhould have been extremely happy to 

have heard the fame of you from W ,' 

replied Mrs. Fielding, attempting to look 
ferious. 

" I do not doubt that," returned Brid- 
getina; '* but I know your motives, and 
have come with a view to convince you 
that they are erroneous. I wifh to have 
an opportunity of communing with you for 
half an hour or fo in private, and lliall 
wait your time.'* 

* It cannot poifibly be this evening,' 
returned Mrs. Fielding, who hoped, by an 

abfolute 



t 26 3 

abfolute rcfufal, to prevail on her to depart ; 
' yoii fee how I am engaged: 1 cannot 
have ir in my power to fpeak to you for 
five minutes on any account whatever.' 

" Ah!" faid Mr. Sardon, who at that 
moment entered the room, " fee how the 
pcwer of sympathy attra£is me to the fpot 
that contains Mifs Botherim. You can- 
not think. Ma'am,*' continued he, addrefs- 
iDg himfelf to Bridgetina, from whom 
Mrs. Fielding had turned to receive fome 
other company, " You cannot think 
"what a convert you have made of me. I 
have twice walked from Charing-Crofs ta 
Hyde-Park corner, without carting one 
glance on either fhoe-buckles or tea- 
urns ; and though I miifl confefs I neither 
laughed nor cried, I have had fome flights 
of fancy that I hope will entitle me to be 
ranked among your men of genius.*' 

' I make no doubt of your powers, fir,* 
returned Bridgetina, gravely. ' You feem 
a man capable of eftimating, and of ener- 
gizing in no common degree.* ^m 



C 27 3 

Mr. Sardon bowed. " The approba- 
tion of a lady of your penetration is too 
flattering. How much does Mrs. Fielding 
oblige her friends by Introducing among 
them a perfon fo rarely qualified ! But 
pray, do you not intend to enlighten this 
brilliant circle by a le£lure on metaphy- 
ficks? You know no opportunity for in- 
flru6ling mankind ought to be lofl; and I 
dare fay there are many perfons here pre- 
fent to whom your arguments would be 
flrikingly original." 

Mrs. Fielding, who overheard the lat- 
ter part of Mr. Sardon's fpeech, here in- 
terpofed. ^ Mifs Botherim has too much 
fenfe to believe you,' faid fhe, gently tap- 
ping him with her fan. ' Though unac- 
cuflomed to town -circles, flie knows that 
to give a lecture upon any fubjecl in a 
mixed company would be very improper; 
though not fo bad (whifpering Mr. Sar- 
don) as to lead a poor wrong-headed girl 
into the folly of expofmg hcrfclf to the 
ridicule of a whole company.* ^^ ^ 



[ 28 ] 

'' No time can be improper for the 
promulgation of truth," faid Bridgetina. 
" Mr. Sardon fpeaks like a philofopher. 
He knows it is our duty in every company 
to argue, to reafon, to difcufs. But to be 
fufe,'* continued (he, drawing up her head 
with an air of confcious triumph, '' it 
is not every perfon that is qualified to en- 
lighten the world by abftrafl fpeculation.'* 

^ Mifs Botherim fpeaks like an oracle 1* 
cried Mr. Sardon. He was going on, 
but was checked by a frown from Mrs. 
Fielding, who, obferving the eyes of the 
whole room fixed on Bridgetina, defired 
her to fit down in a comer lefs expofed to 
obfervation. Thither (he was followed 
by Mr. Sardon, who continued to amufe 
himfelf with her eccentricity ; while the 
curiofity excited by the fingularity of her 
appearance, and the pedantic formality of 
her manner, attrafted round them a circle 
of ladies who were all eager to liften to 
their converfation. 

Though 



[ 29 ] 

Though cards were not excluded from 
the parties of Mrs. Fielding, they were 
generally declined by the majority of the 
company. Where perfons qualified to 
relifli the pleafures of converfation have 
an opportunity of enjoying it in perfedion, 
they mull:, indeed, be the fettered flaves of 
cuflom, if they prefer an amufement in 
which fools may conquer, and knaves be 
crowned with vi(^ory, to the refined delight 
arifing from the communication of ideas, 
the collifion of wit, and the inftrudive ob- 
fervations of genius. 

From the appearance of Bridgetlna 
fomething very extraordinary was expe<5led. 
Mrs. Fielding's tafte for the converfation 
of people of talents was well known. Her 
folicitude to bring forward extraordinary 
genius from the deprefling fliade of obfcu- 
rity had often been crowned with fuccefs; 
but though talents had her admiration, it 
was goodnefs and virtue that could alone 
enfure her approbation or cfteem. Her 

fituation 



[ 30 ] 

fltuation in life gave her an opportunity of 
fclecSling her acquaintance, and her dif- 
cernment and difcrimination afforded her 
the means of employing this inellimable 
privilege to the bed advantage. No 
fooner, therefore, v/as a new face feen in 
her drawing-room, than her friends antici- 
pated a new fource of pkafure or improve- 
ment ; nor were they often difappointed. 
Sometimes, indeed, it would happen, not- 
withftandmg the art flie difplayed in mixing 
lier guefls, that two learned men would get 
near enough to fall into a tedious argu- 
ment concerning the etymology of a word, 
or fome minute point in hiftory or anti- 
quity, for which not another foul but 
themfelves could care a fmgle fliraw ; and 
fometimes a difpute in politicks v/ould caft 
a temporary cloud over the good-humour 
of the difputants ; but by the management 
of Mrs. Fielding thefe things rarely oc- 
curred. She was at fuch pains to provide 
the talkers with lifteners, and the lifteners 

with 



[ 31 ] 

with talkers, and to fuit the fubje<^ of con- 
verfation to the general tafle, that all 
enjoyed infome degree thepleafure of plea- 
fing, and thehappinefs of being pleafed. 

Bridgetina was at firft afraid to run on 
in the words of her favourite authors, as 
file could not doubt that the fubjecl of her 
ftudies muft be familiar to the greateft part 
of her well-informed audience. Great 
was her furprife, when fhe difcovered that 
the books which (he believed were defined 
to enlighten the whole Vit)rld, and new- 
model the human race, had not been 
thought worthy of a reading by any one 
who heard her. She took advantage of 
the difcovcry to quote page after page, 
while any one would liflen to her; but 
though the novelty of her arguments 
for fome time excited attention, and her 
flow of language did not fail to obtain 
applaufe, (he foon experienced the com- 
mon fate of an haranguer, in wearying the 
patience of thofe (lie pretended to inftrufl. 

Fatigued 



[ 32 ] 

Faticriied with the monotonous founds of 
her difcordant voice, they turned from her, 
and gladly joined the different groupes 
where fubje6ls of general Hterature, or of 
elegant criticifm, gave every one an oppor- 
tunity of contributing their quota to the 
fund of converfation. 

Bridgecinawas now, in her turn, obliged 
to become a liftener, till her patience being 
quite exhaufted, ihe arofe, and walking 
acrofs the room to where Mrs. Fielding 
fat, enquired aloud whether fhe might 
cxpe£t to fee Dr. Sydney there that night? 
Mrs. Fielding told her flie need not expe£l 
to fee him, as he had another engagement. 

" You are acquainted with his engage- 
ments!" cried Bridgetina. " You are 
the confidante of his bofora, the objedl of 
his pafficn! it is for you he rejefts my 
love! but if you have any moral fenfibi- 
lity, if you are at all capable of energifmg, 
I do not defpair of convincing you that 
you owe it to duty, you owe it to every 

principle 



[ S3 ] 

principle of juflice, you owe it to the hap- 
pinefs of an individual to relinquiili your 
defigns on the perfon of this amiable 
young man." 

Mrs. Fielding, (hocked beyond meafure 
at a fpeech which fo flrongly indicated a 
difordered flate of intelleft, thinking it 
better to foothe than to irritate the mind 
of the fpeaker, in a voice of pity told her, 
that if (lie would, on the morning after 
the following, give her the pleafure of 
her company at breakfafl:, flie would en- 
deavour to give her fatisfaction. 

" I ihall not fail to come," faid Bridge- 
tina ; " and as truth is omnipotent, 1 make 
no doubt my arguments will prevail.'* So 
faying fhe took her leave, to the great de- 
light of Mrs. Fielding, who, tho' (he never 
made a practice of being denied, immedi- 
ately ordered that Mifs Botherim fliould ne- 
ver again be admitted with other company. 

As Bridgetina retired, the fervant fta- 
tioned in the anti-room dcfircd the foot- 

VOL. III. D man 



[ 34 J 

man below to call Mifs BorhcrJm*s car- 
riage. " I have no carriage, fir/' laid 
Bridgetina, '' I difdain the ufe of a carri- 
age, which is a contrivance of pampered 
luxury, and altogether unueceffary to a 
phjlofopher.'^ 

The man bow'ed, arid again gravely ad- 
vancing to the head of the flairs, ' Opeii 
the flreet-door to a philofopher,' cried he^ 
with the voice of a Stentor. 

Bridgetina, highly pleafed with the conu 
plimeiit, .thanked him, and defcending, 
made her way- through an avenue of grin- 
ning footmen,' to whom her appearance 
afforded no fmall fubje^l: of merrin^ent. 
The door was opened by the footman who 
had formerly conducted her to the coach, 
and who had the civility again to offer to 
procure: her either coach or chair; but 
(lie declined his fervices, declaring there 
was nothing flie fo much loved as a foli-. 
tary ramble by moon-light. 

Unfortimately 



[ S5 ] 

Unfortunately for Bridgetina, her reply 
to the footman was overheard by a couple 
of girls, who were on their way to Bond- 
ftreet in fearch of adventures, and who 
eagerly feifed the opportunity that pre- 
fented itfelf,- of venting the malignant fpi- 
rit of mifchief in that fort of outrage 
which is vulgarly denominated /z^;?. They 
foon came up with Bridgetina, and getting 
her between them, addrelTed her with pre- 
tended gravity. 

" Do you intend to take a long walk?*' 
cried one. 

* Yes, upon the tight-rope, as you may 
perceive by her drefs,' cried the other. 

" 1 intend to walk no farther than Con* 
duit-ftreet," faid Bridgetina; " and am 
fuch a ftranger in town, that I know not 
where fuch a walk as tight-rope is." 

A loud laugh from her companions very 
much difcompofed our heroine, who, great- 
ly offended by their rudenefs, begged they 
would leave her to her own reflexions." 

'Own 



[ 30" ] 

* Own reflciftions, pretty dear!' iiddthe 
tailed of the girls. ' Do you know, Maria, 
where own reflc£liom is?' 

" ril be hanged if I do," replied the 
other; " unlefs it be in Rag-fair, where 
(he bought that quiz of a wig." 

' My drefs is no concern of yours,* faid 
Bridgetina, angrily; ' and I mufl need tell 
you, it is rather uncivil to intrude upon; me 
in this manner, when I w ifli to be alone*' 

" Why don't you leave us," faid one, 
grving her a pufti, and winking fignificantly 
to the other. " I am fure I don't wifh ta 
keep you." 

'Nor I neither,V faid the other; 'I 
would not be feen walking with, fuch a 
trollopy quiz- for the vorld/ Sjo faying, 
flae gave the unfortunate Bridgctina fuch 
a pufli towards her companion, that botU 
were driven upon the rails. Bridgetlna 
fcrearaed, but before flie could recover 
herfelf, was again puftied with fuch vio- 
lence by the girl againft whom (lie had laft 

been 



I '^7 ] 

been driven, that after reeling a few paces 
flie fell proftrate in the kennel. The girls 
fet up a lliout of vi<flory, while Bridgetina, 
forgetful of the immoral tendency of co- 
ertion, vociferated Murder I help! murder! 
as loud as flie was able to bawl. In an 
inflant the ftreet, which was before ftill as 
midnight, was filled with a croud, which 
as few were feen to ilTue from the houfes, 
feemed as if by inchantment wafted to the 
fpot. The dread found of the watchman's 
rattle gave the fignal for alarm. Three 
or four guardians of the night were foon 
aflembled, who, at the inftance of Bridge- 
tina, would have taken her companions 
into cuftody, had they not by a fmgular 
piece of effrontery contrived to turn the 
popular voice in their favour. 

" Whatl" cried the one who had 
fliovcd Bridgetina into the kennel, *' yoa 
are pretty watchmen, indeed! pretend not 
to know Poll Maddoc! the mod notorious 
wench in London. There's ne'er a boy 

in 



[ 38 ] 

in St. Giles's that don't know fquinting 
Poll. She was condemned at the Old- 
Bailey for picking the pocket of Jerry 
Wapping laft 'fizes, let her deny it if flie 
dare; or that (he nimm'd that wig from 
Mofes the jew in Rag-fair ; or that (he is 
now kept by Peter Puff, the puppet-fhow 
man. She cry out murder, indeed, becaufe 
we would not fuffer her to walk the flreets 
with us. Does fhe think that we would be 
feen in company with fuch a trull ? No, no ; 
it an't come to that yet ; we will let her 
know that v/e are meat for her mafters." 

This oration quickly turned every voice 
againil: the haplefs Bridgetina, who in vain 
protefted that the orator had miftaken 
her perfon. 

The fagacious watchm>an recognifed her 
as an old acquaintance, and declared that 
he fhould provide her a night's lodging in 
rhe watch-houfe. 

Bridgetina expoftulated ; fhe declared 
ftie v/a? going home to her lodgings, when 

accofled 



[ 39 J 

acceded by the two ladies who had given 
fuch an erroneous defcription of her perfon. 

' Your lodgings!' cried the watchman 
with a fneer, ' you intended to llcep with 
mafler punch, did you ? but we lliall lodge 
you as fafe as with the devil, and Do(ftor 
Fauftus to boot; come along, we cannot 
ftay for any more jabber.' So faying, he 
feifed the reluctant arm of Bridgetina, but 
was flopped for a moment by his coadju- 
tor, who, jogging the other arm of his 
prifoner, told her in a whifper, that ' if 
(he would tip them half-a-crown, (lie might 
(till regain her liberty.' 

" Half-a-crown!*' repeated Bridgetina, 
" I have not a fmgle {billing in my pocket ; 
but if you will call upon me to-morrow, I 
(hall pay you the money with pleafure/' 

* To-morrow!' faid the watchman; 
' that's all my eye, d'ye fee. D'ye think 
I'm fuch a fimpleton as to tnift your. wordff 

" I know," replied Brid^etina^..'^ that 
promifes are immoral, and ought not .t^ 

be 



C 40 ] 

be confidered as binding; but in the pre- 
fent cafe " 

* No more palaver,' faid the honed 
watchman ; ' if you don't down with the 
ready, you mud go.' 

Bridgetina begged to be heard, but in 
vain. Each feizing an arm, they dragged 
her off; and had nearly reached the end 
of the ftrect, when, to the unfpeakable joy 
ef the flruggling, weeping Bridgetina, flie 
perceived Henry Sydney advancing to- 
wards them. 

Great was the furprife of Henry, on 
beholding the difmal plight of our hero- 
ine; of which, in a commanding voice, he 
inflantly demanded the caufe. He could 
not very eafily underdand either the dory 
of the watchmen, or the incoherent detail 
of Bridgetina, but found it no difficult 
matter to perfuade the guardians of the 
peace of their midake; who, receiving 
from his pocket fome very convincing ar- 
guments in favour of their prifoner's imio- 

cence, 



[ 41 1 

cence, did not hefitate to deliver up their 
charge. 

' I hope, (faid he) Mifs Botherim,' as 
he conducted her to Mrs. Benton's door, 
' this incident will convince you that Lon- 
don is a very improper place for you to 
remain in, while deftitute of the protection 
of any friend. You fee how your igno- 
rance of the manners of the metropolis 
expofes you to infult. I am happy in ha- 
ving refcued you at prefent from a fitua- 
tion fo terrible that I ftuidder to think of it ; 
but another time you may not be fo for- 
tunate to meet a friend. Let me, there- 
fore, intreat you to think of an immediate 

return to W , where your mother is 

made miferable by your abfence.' 

" Cruel Henry !" returned the weeping 
Bridgetina j " but I now know the motive 
of your conduct. Let me but reafon the 
the matter with you in one fmgle confe- 
rence, and 1 fliall be fatisfied." 

Henry 



[ 42 ] 

Henr3% in hopes of being able to con- 
quer her ftrange infatuation by argument, 
confented to drink tea with her the fol- 
lowing evening; and having feen her un- 
der the proteflion of Mrs. Benton's roof, 
took his leave, and purfued his way to his 
own lodgings. 



CHAP. 



[ 43 ] 



CHAP. II. 

** Bring me a father that fo lovM his child, 

** Whofe joy of her is overwhelm'd like mine, 

" And bid him fpeak of patience ! 

" No, no; 'tis all men's office to fpeak patience 

" To thofe that wring under the load of forrow ; 

•' But no man's virtue nor fufficiency 

" To be fo moral when he fball endure, 

« The like himfelf." Southe.y. 



T> EFORE we accompany Henry on his 
-*^ viflt to Bridgetina, it may not be 
amifs to take a retrofpeclive view of the 
manner in which he has been engaged 
from the time we left him reading the 
propofals of his enhghtened and liberal 
admirer. 

The ungrateful Henry, far from being 
elevated into rapture by the exalted fenti- 
ments and generous propofals of the phi- 
lofophic maiden, having given her letter a 

haflj 



L 44 ] 

hafly and peevifli perufal, threw it on the 
ground ; nor did he at that time vouchfafc 
to read the paper which had been inclofed 
in it, and which was no other than the 
circular letter addrelTcd by Mr. Myope to 
his brethren the philofophers. 

By the unfortunate fate of the amiable 
Julia, and the deep affliction of her 
wretched parents, the mind of Henry was 
fo completely engroffed, that he had not 
a fmgle thought to bellow on the tender 
woes of Bridgetina. Even the reflections 
upon his own fituation were fufpended; 
and felfifli cares and felfifli forrows were 
abforbed in the benevolent feelings of 
compaihon, or baniflied by difmterefted re- 
gret. He flew to the lodgings of his friend 
Churchill, whom he found juft arrived; 
his body worn out with fatigue, and hi§ 
mind lacerated by difappointment. After 
many vexatious delays and interruptions, 
he had traced the fugitives to London ; but 
(here, having (lepped from the poft-chaife 

into 



[ 45 ] 

into the lirft erppty hackney-coach tliat 
met them, they effc^^tually eluded all fur- 
ther purfuit. Henry fpent the remainder 
of the day with his friend, and devoted the 
greateft pan of the fucceeding ones to his 
afliftance. TheJr endeavours were fruit- 
kf^. The retreat of the lovers could not 
be difcovercd ;^' and poor Churchill, at 
length fubmitting to the judgment of 
Henry, was perfuaded to give over the 
hopelefs refearch. 

The day of the ekclion of the phyfician 
for the hofpital at length arrived 5 when 
the rival candidate having, in confequenc« 
of a private vifit from Mrs. Fielding'^ 
agent, relinquifhed his pretenfions, Henry 
was unanimoufly chofen to the vacant of- 
fice ; and thankfully rejoiced in his fuccef?, 
as a ftep towards that (late of independency 
on which his deareft hopes of happinefs 
feemed entirely to depend. Still were his 
profpe^ls diftant, far diftant from fuch an 
income as would, in the prefent ftate of 

fociety, 



[ 46 ] 

fociety, be deemed adequate to the fup- 
port of a family. Many men of the iirfl 
abilities in his profefTion had, he well 
knew, fpent their lives in hopelefs penury } 
and that he fliould be one of the fortunate 
few whom the caprice of fafliion (hould 
introduce to fortune's fajvours, was a per- 
ad venture too precarious- for hope to 
build on. 

The peculiar advantage he enjoyed of 
being introduced by Mrs^ Fielding into the 
houfes of feveral families of diftindlion, 
does not appear to have been eflimated by 
Henry at its full value. He was fo igno- 
rant as to imagine, that when people were 
lick, they would look more to the expe- 
rience and abilities of the phyfician in 
whofe hands they emrufted their lives, 
than to his rank in the fcale of fafliion. 
He did not think it poffible that the vanity 
of a dying man cpuld be flattered by having 
his prefcription written by the fame hand 
that had lately felt the pulle of a lord ; or 

that 



C '^r ] 

that his weeping wife and daughters could 
feci a fuperior gratification in telling their 
friends that the dear deceafed had been 
viiited by Dodtor — - — , at the very time 
he was attending my Lady Duchefs, 
than they fhonld have experienced from 
the happy effefls of any medical ikill. Of 
the omnipotence of faihion Henry had as 
yet formed no adequate idea ; and trufting 
to his own efforts, he refolved by exer- 
tion and unceafing ailiduity to deferve the 
fuccefs he fo ardently wifhed for. 

Several days elapfcd without bringing 

him another letter from W ; neither 

had Mr. Churchill received any intelli- 
gence from that quarter ; fo that the an- 
xiety of both was wound up to the ex- 
treme ; when Henry, on returning from 
his attendance on a new patient, a few 
hours previous to his chivalrous refcue of 
Bridgetina from the hands of the giant 
enchanters, found a letter from his fifler, 
which had been brought by that morn- 
ing's 



i 48 1 

ing's'poH:, He eagerly broke the feal, and 

read as follows : 
at)-- 

" BEFORE I enter upon fubjeas 
of a lels pleafmg though deeply- intereiliHg 
nature, let me tell my dear Harry how my 
heart thanks him for the kind hafte he 
made to rid me of my foolifli fears. No-; 
t did not, I could not, fufpe£l you of loving 
fuch a woman as Mifs Botherim'; bttt I 
could not help entertaining fdme fort of 
apprehenfion that you might have left her 
room to conftrue fome unmeaning fpeech 
hito art avowal of tendernefs. Even here 
I hax^'e been miflaken } and my heai-t exult- 
ingly repeats, that my beloved brother is 
now as ever free from the fhadow of. re- 
proach. But the more unequivocal your 
condu£i:, the more Ihameful, the more ab- 
fiird and prepofterous appears that of this 
weak, bewildered girl, whofe brain feems 
R> Iiuve been turned by the wild ambition 
of ftanding forth a practical champion for 

do6lrines 



C 49 ] 

do£^rInes which even in theory are fuffi- 
ciently ridiculous. 

" Would to God that flie had been the 
only facrifice to thefe extravagant opinions ! 
But, alas! poor Julia! She too, it feems, 
was a convert to this new fyftem, which 
teaches, that by cancelling the bonds of 
domeflic afFe^lion, and diflblving the tics 
of gratitude, the virtue and happinefs of 
the world is to be increafed. Fatal delu- 
fion ! how would it vaniili from her mind, 
could fhe have but a momentary glance at 
the altered countenance of her dying fa- 
ther! For thefe lad three days he has con- 
tinued to fulFer all that the mod: extreme 
agony of mind, added to the mod acute 
bodily torture, can infli£l. Dr. Orwell and 
my father have united their efforts tofoothe 
his forrows, and to alleviate the pangs of 
grief j but, alas! they cannot remove the 
dart which rankles in his bofom, or lead 
him to forget that it was planted there by 
the hand of his much-beloved child. 

VOL. III. E " The 



[ 50 ] 

" The affurance obtained from Mrs, 
Glib, that Vallaton was not a married man, 
as had been reported, feemed to convey a 
fliort-lived relief; but it was followed by 
fuch an account of his character, and of 
the meannefs of his flation, (which, it 
feems, is that of a hair-dreffer) as opened 
every wound of the father's heart. Un- 
able to fuppcrt the war of conflifling paf- 
fions, his feeble frame feems nearly ex- 
haufted by the contefl. In proportion as 
he becomes weaker, the more powerful 
emotions fubfide. Indignation gives place 
to pity, and the feelings of refentment are 
fwallowed up in thofe of paternal tender- 
nefs. He even drives to form excufes for 
his daughter's conduft, and feems eager 
to transfer the blame from her to fome 
other objeft. 

" Yefterday as my father fat by his bed- 
fide, after a filence of fome minutes. " Mr. 
Sydney," faid he, " you are very good to 
bear with me ; but you are yourfelf a fa- 
ther. 



[ 51 3 

•ther, though you cannot — oh, no; you 
cannot poffibly know the forrow that has 
pierced me. For the pride I took in this 
darling child, how feverely am I now pu- 
nifhed! In the foolifhnefs of my heart, I 
believed her to be fuperior to all her fex. 
I encouraged her to throw off the preju- 
dices of religion— to acl from nobler mo- 
tives than the hopes of an hereafter — to 
fubflitute the laws of honour for the laws 
of God ; and to confiilt the di£lates of her 
mind inflead of the morality of the gofpel. 
Oh if I have taught my child to err; if it 
is for want of more folid principles that flie 
has been made an eafy prey to the fnares of 
a feducer — but I cannot bear the thous^ht. 
Tell me, Mr. Sydney, O tell me that it is 
not to me flie owes her fall ! Say not that 
it was I who led my child to the precipice 
down which (lie has funk!" 

" You, Harry, who are fo well ac- 
quainted with the benignity of our dear 
father's nature, may imagine how much he 
E 2 was 



[ 62 ] 

was a&£led: nor need I fay, that heufed 
every endeavour to foothe and comfort the 
poor unhappy man, who feemed thus to 
cling to him for fupport. You know how 
much it is his deh^ht to heal the wounded 
fpirit, and to fpeak peace to the broken in 
heart. I pray God that his endeavours 
may in this inftance prove fuccefsful ! 

" Our amiable friend, Harriet Orwell, 
has done all in her power to fupply the 
place of a daughter to poor Mrs. Dclmond. 
While her attentions have been engroiTed 
by her, I have devoted mine to Mrs. Bo- 
therim ; who, ever fmce ftie heard of Bid- 
dy's departure, has been in a (late little 
ihort of diftraftion. Nothing, to be fure, 
can be more ludicrous than the ftile of her 
lamentations fometimes are ; but the voice 
of forrow ought to command refpe£l, how- 
ever mean or abfurd the language in which 
it is conveyed. I am far, you may believe, 
from juftifying a breach of filial duty; 
but furely the man does great injuftice to 

his 



[ 53 ] 

his children, who gives them a mother fo 
weak, or fo ignorant, as to render her 
defpicable in their eyes ; not that to a well- 
regulated mind the weaknefs of a parent 
will ever be made the objeft of contempt; 
but how ihould the children of a fool 
come by the information necelTary to point 
out the line of duty, or to fix the princi- 
ples of filial piety in the heart? 

*' Oh, my brother, if ever you marry, 
may your wife be one v;hofe memory your 
children's children Ihall delight to honour ; 
may fhe demand from her family, not 
merely the barren obedience of duty, but 
the grateful tribute of heart-felt venera- 
tion and efleem! 

'^ At the conclufion of the lad paragraph, 
I laid afide my writing, to enquire for 
Capt. Delmond; the anfwers fent by a fer- 
vant are fo little fatisfacStory, that I have 
generally contrived to go twice a-day my- 
felf, and from Harriet have learned the 
particulars for which I was fo anxious. 

« Very 



[ 54 ] 

" Very little alteration has taken place 
in his ftate of mind or health fmce yefter- 
day, except that he is apparently weaker 
and more tranquil. Dr. Orwell accom- 
panied me up flreet. As we approached 
the houfc of Mr. Glib the flationer, we 
perceived a croud about the door ; and 
on enquiring into the caufe, were informed 
that ivlr. Glib had fuddenly departed from 

W ^ and that the creditors were then 

taking poiTefiion of the few effe£ls he had 
left behind him. A perfon from the houfe 
requefted of Dr. Orwell to flep in for a 
few moments, as the prefence of a juftice 
of peace was neceflary, in order to take 
the affidavit of Mrs. Glib about fome 
matters^ but I do not know what. While 
waiting for the Do^lor, I was accoded in 
the rudefl: manner by two or three of the 
children, who were running about like fo 
many ragged colts. To fay they are In a 
ftate of nature would be doing little ho- 
nour to our fpecies, for never did I fee 

imps 



[ 55 ] 

imps (o mlfchievous and impudent. They 
were happily attracted by the arrival of 
another ftranger, an officer of dragoons, 
who was lately quartered in a neighbour- 
ing town, and whofe attentions to Mrs. 
Glib have not efcaped the notice of the 
fcandal-loving coterie. This gentleman 
ftepped up to Mrs. Glib's apartment with- 
out ceremony, and from the air of fatis- 
faclion that appeared in his manner, went, 
I hope, with the intention of affording re- 
lief to her misfortunes. In a few minutes 
Dr. Orwell returned to me, and brought 
with him a letter which Mrs. Glib had 
put into his hands. It was written by her 
hufband, and left behind him a> a juftifica- 
tion of his conducl. By this it appears, 
that in deferting his wife and children he 
acls upofi principle, " Convinced," he 
fays, " of the immoral tendency of matri- 
mony, and that it is an odious and uniuft 
inflituuon — a monopoly^ atid the luorst ofino' 
nopolies — wbichy by forbidding two human 

beings 



[ 56 ] 

beings to follow the dilates of their own 
mindsy makes prejudice alive and vigorous ;* 
he is refolved to difmifs the miftake he has 
fo happily detefled, and no longer feek, by 
artificial and defpotic means, to engrofs a 
pretty woman to himfelf, but to reftore to 
her that liberty, of which (by the defpotic 
fan£lion of a fooliili law) flie had been un- 
juflly deprived. As to the five children 
which flie calls his, it is a matter of no 
importance to him whether they are fo 
or no. He has neither the aristocracy^ 
self-love, or fa7nily pride^f that teaches 
prejudiced people to fet a value upon a 
matter in itfelf fo infignificant ; and as they 
may, very probably, be no v/orthier than 
the children of any other man, it is not 
confident with moral juftice that he fliould 
devote to them the fruits of his labour, 

" So far he fcems to make ufe of the 
words of fome author, who probably little 

* See Pol. Juf. vol. ii. p. 499. t See Pol. Juf. 

imagined 



[ 57 ] 

imagined that his theory would ever meet 
with fuch a practical advocate. In the 
conclufion, he makes ufe of his own pe- 
culiar jargon, which is often whimfical 
enough. Talks of Hottentots, who live 
according to the fublime fyftem that is to 
be univerfally adopted in the Age cf 
Reason^ and hints at a defign of emigra- 
ting to Africa ! 

*' It is probable Mifs Botherim may have 
been induced to become a party in this 
projected expedition. For the fake of her 
poor mother, I hope fhe will not carry her 
folly quite fo far; and intreat you may do 
all you can to perfuade her to an imme- 
diate return to W . 

'' Adieu, my dearefl: brother. We have 
another frank for this day week, which 
my father defires me to tell you he will 
fill J in the mean time he fends his blefTmg. 
In my opinion, the greateft we can have 
from Heaven, is a juft fenfe of the happi- 
nefs we enjoy in having fuch a parent. 

That 



[ ^s ]■ 

That he may be bleffed in the profperity and 
happinefs of ' his heart's dear Harry,* is 
the never-ceafmg prayer of 

" Your truly affe£lionate fifter, 

" MARIA SYDNEY." 

A fecond letter from IVIaria was enclo- 
fed in the fame cover. The contents were 
as follows : 

*' I HAVE opened the pacquet, to inform 
my dear Henry that the forrows of Captain 
Delmond are at an end. They have at 
length broken the attenuated thread of his 
exiftence, and accellerated his departure" to 
the filent grave. Oh, Julia, Julia, what 
mufl: be thy feelings, when informed of 
this event 1 The infatuation of paffion 
may for a while (liflc the voice of nature, 
but a time will come when the fv/ord with 
which fhe has pierced her father's heart, 
{hall deeply wound her own. 

'' The whole of yefterday the poor Cap- 
tain was fo much ealier as to give fome 

hopes 



C 59 ] 

hopes of his recovery. He fat up great 
part of the day, and appeared to receive 
fo much pleafure from the company of my 
father, that he fpent the greateft part of it 
in his apartment. He more than once re- 
gretted that he had fo long lived near two 
fuch men as my father and Do^lor Orwell, 
without having attempted to cultivate their 
friendfhip. ' I now,' faid he, ' perceive 
my error, in attributing to the fpirit of the 
chriilian religion itfelf that gloomy iliibe- 
rality which I have obferved in fome of 
its pretended votaries. I fee that its priefls 
are not neceflarily either mercenary knaves 
or zealous bigots; and begin to appre- 
hend, that while I piqued myfelf on being 
fuperior to prejudice, I have in reality 
been its dupe.' 

" The endeavours ufed by my father to 
foothe and tranquillize his mind appeared 
robe efre(flual; and he left him in fuch a 
compofcd and happy (late, as feemed to 
promifc a night of undiilurbed repofe. No 

fooner. 



[ 60 ] 

fooner, however, was he left to his own 
meditations, than his thoughts appear to 
have recurred to the fubject of his uneafi- 
nefs. He became reillefs, impatient, and 
not unfrequently delirious. Sometimes he 
uttered the wildeft threats againfl the vil- 
lain who had deprived him of his dauglv 
ter; and fometimes he called upon her 
name, and in the tendered and mod fup- 
plicating voice, adjured her not to leave 
him. Towards morning he called upon 
the nurfe to affift him in changing the 
poilure of his head ; and while fhe did fo, 
*Oh, Julia! Julia!' he murmured in a 
feeble voice, ' I looked to thy dear hand 
to fmooth my death-bed pillow — but I for- 
give thee!* His voice failed, he funk 
down upon the bed, and in a few moments 
expired. 

" Mrs. Delmond, being worn out w^Ith 
fatigue and grief, had, by the perfuafion 
of Harriet, (who has indeed a6led like an 
angel) lain down to take fome reft. She 

had 



C 61 3 

had fallen into a profound {lumber, from 
which fhe would have been haflily awa- 
kened by the nurfe ; but Harriet, fatisfying 
herfelf that all was over, would not permit 
the flumbers of the poor widow to be dif- 
turbed. By her wife precaution, Mrs. 
Delmond regained fonie ftrength of mind 
as well as of body ; and, fupported by her 
foothing tendernefs, has been enabled to 
bear her affli(5lions with more fortitude 
than could have been expelled. 

^' A meffage from General Villers has 
juft arrived, requeflmg Mrs. Delmond's 
permiffion to take upon himfelf the charge 
of the funeral ; which he wilhes to be per- 
formed in a manner fuitablc to the birth 
and merit of his deceafed friend. 

" Your letter is this moment put into 
my hand. Ah! in what juft colours doe* 
it paint the amiable Churchill! What no- 
ble generofity of fentiment ! What affeft- 
ing fenfibility! That Julia fliould have 
known him, fhould have feen (and how 

could 



[ 62 2 

could llie be blind to a partiality fo vifible) 
the imprelTion flie had made upon his 
heart, and yet give her preference to a 
wretch like Vallaton, is a myRery to me 
inexplicable. Adieu! dearell Henry, my 
fpirits are lb depreilcd I can fay no more, 
but that I am ever afte£lionately your's, 

" M. S." 
Henry had no fooner perufed his fill:er*s 
letter, than he haflened to his friend 
Churchill to inform him of the contents. 
As the quickefl method of doing fo, he gave 
it him to-read, a breach of delicacy which 
"xve can by no means excufe. If Henry 
had given a moment's confideration to what 
the feelings of Maria would have been^ 
could fhe have feen the eye of Churchill 
gazing on her letter, and devouring, with 
an appearance of more than common in- 
tereil, thofe pafTages concerning himfelfj 
which (he would leail of all have expofed 
to his perufal, Henry would not have given 
the letter out of his own hand. 

Churchill 



[ 62 3 

Churchill returned it to him with a figh. 
*' What a charming girl is your fifter," 
faid he. " Plow clear her underftanding! 
How jUit her fentimentsi Happy had it 
been for poor Julia Delmond had her 
mind been formed like hers. But the 
death of the poor father — how very (hock- 
ing it is! He deferved a better fate. 1 
foolifhly flattered myfelf that I ihould have 
had it ill my power to contribute to his hap- 
pinefs, and promifed myfelf much pleafarc 
in performing to him the duty of a fon. 
That is over. And I can now only fhew 
the refpeci: I bear his memory, by airifring 
at the lad offices of humanity, and follow- 
ing his body to the grave." 

Henry, finding it in vain to oppofe thi? 
fadden defign of his friend, left him to 
follow his inclination. To fay truth, had 
he had been at liberty to confult his own, 
he would much rather have encountered 
the fatigue of a midnight journey, to ac- 
company hiqa to W , than have gone 

to 



[ 64 ] 

to the fplendid party to which. he was 
engaged. 

It was on his return from this party, 
that he difcovered our heroine in the de- 
plorable fituation from which he had the 
good fortune to refcue her. He now re- 
proached himfelf for the Httle pains he had 
taken to perfuade her of the folly and im- 
propriety of her remaining in London, and 
refolved to lofe no time in urging the ne- 

ceflity of her immediate return to W . 

He next morning communicated his inten- 
tion to Mrs. Fielding, when, by her own 
appointment, he waited on her to report 
the fituation of fome poor patients flie had 
recommended to his attention. On receiv- 
ing from her an account of all that had 
palTed the preceding evening, his hopes of 
fuccefs became rather lefs fanguine j but 
the neceflity there appeared to him of ma- 
king fome effort to refcue the poor girl 
from a fituation expofed to fo many evils, 
made him refolve on making the experi- 
ment. 



[ 65 ] 

ment. While canvaffing the fubjc^t with 
Mrs. Fielding, her carriage drove up to 
the door, in which, accompanied by Henry, 
fhe fet oiF on a tour of vifits ; and flrange 
to tell, fet oft with a certain alTurance of 
receiving, wherever fhe appeared, a hearty 
welcome ! 



VOL. III. F CHAP 



[ 66 J 



CHAP. III. 

Come hither, out-caft one! and call her friend. 
And flie fball be thy friend more readily, 
Becaufe thou art unhappy. 

" Art thou aftonifh'd, maid, 
That one, though powerful, is benevolent ? 
In truth, thou well may 'ft wonder!" 

SOUTHET. 



^- A Welcome!" repeats fome lovely 
-^^^ fair one, as with a yawn fhe throws 
down the book at the conclufion of the 
lad chapter. "La! how vulgar! What 
a bore to find one's friends at home ! I am 
fatigued to death at the very thoughts of 
it. What odd notions thefe low authors 
have of the manners of the fafliionable 
world!" 

Stay, dear lady, and be convinced that 
we are not fo ignorant, or fo little accuf- 

tomed 



[ 67 ] 

tomed to the world of fafhion, as you feem 
to imagine. Well do we know, that in 
dropping your tickets at the fplendid dwell- 
ings of the dear friends^ whofe names ye 
in return expecl to fwell your porter's lift, 
ye have neither end nor obje£l in view, 
but the gratification of your own vanity; 
a vanity which might be fomewhat hum- 
bled, were ye obliged to witnefs the mor- 
tification that would be inflicted on your 
dear friends by your tirefome and infipid 
company. Wifely, therefore, do ye keep 
your infignificance concealed; and trufl 
the gratification of your pride and vanity 
not to your own intrinfic merits, but to 
thofe of the honed artifans, whofe united 
labours have clothed your equipage with 
fplendor. But never, when rolling in that 
fplendid equipage, did the loud thundering 
of your well-dreft footman at the door of a 
duchefs, not even when it has difturbed 
half a ftreet, touch your confcious heart 
with half the cxtacy that Mrs. Fielding 
F 2 experienced. 



C 6S ] 

experienced, when after walking down a 
a dirty lane, too narrow for her coach to 
enter, her gentle tap at the door of a 
decayed houfe was opened by a face beam- 
ing with gratitude, and her prefence hailed 
as that of a fuperior being, the difpenfer 
of happinefs and joy! 

It happened that this obfciire retreat of 
wretchednefs was not above a hundred 
yards remote from the refidence of a man 
of fafliion, at whofe houfe Mrs. Fielding 
was engaged to dine the day of her firft 
vifit to its flarving inhabitants. Her heart 
was dill full of the fcene (lie had witnelTed, 
The ghadly figure of the wretched father 
of the family, ftretched upon a pallet in 
one corner of the room in the agony of a 
rheumatic fever, was (till before her eyes; 
the appearance of his wife, not four and 
twenty hours delivered, fitting up in bed, 
and with her feeble hands flretching out 
fome pieces of muflin which a lady had in 
charity fent her to clear-ftarch, and in 

which 



[ «9 J 

which fhe was afliiled by the elded little 
girl, a half-naked and more than half- 
rtarved creature of nine years old, who 
worked with eagernefs in hopes of fliaring 
in the bread to be thus procured, and for 
which four other little mouths now vainly 
clamoured, ftill dwelt on Mrs. Fielding's 
imagination ; when ilie took her place at 
the loaded board of the voluptuous baro- 
net, who was equally remarkable for the 
irafcibihty of his temper, and theepicurea- 
nifm of his table. 

In vain had the ingenuity of the pur- 
veyor, and the art of the cook, been em- 
ployed to pleafe the fickly appetite of this 
fon of luxury. Every difh afforded him a 
fubje£l of inquietude and vexation. It 
was upon a fine turbot that he particularly 
vented the ebullition of his wrath. The 
fauce had not been made to pleafe him, 
and fauce and turbot were ordered from 
the table, with dire£lions that they might 
be thrown to the dunghill, as they were not 
fit even for the dogs. * 



C 70 1 

An involuntary exclamation, which at 
that moment efcaped the lips of Mrs. 
Fielding, reached the angry gentleman's 
ears. He immediately alked her pardon 
for his violence, but urged the impoffibi- 
lity of keeping his temper on an occafion 
fo provoking. 

"You need make no apology to me, 
fir," faid Mrs. Fielding; " for me your 
behaviour has not infulted." 

* I hope I have infulted no one;' re- 
turned the Baronet, attempting to refume 
his cheerfulnefs, while his fiery eye and 
contrafled forehead indicated the rage that 
flill poffeffed his breafl. 

" Pardon me, fir," faid Mrs. Fielding, 
*' if I differ from you." 

* I really do not undcrftand you, Madam,' 
rejoined the Baronet; * to whom has my 
fending away that execrable difli given 
offence?' 

" To the image of God in your fellow- 
creature, now ftarving at your very doorl" 

returned 



C 71 ] 

returned Mrs. Fielding. " To the famifhed 
wretches, who, while you are gorged to 
loathing, have not even bread for their 
mouths. Within a hundred yards from 
where you now fit, have I this morning 
feen a family of eight fouls, to whom the 
price of that very difh you have fpurned 
from your table would have afforded luxu- 
ries for a week. It is the pardon cf such 
as these you ftiould folicit, for to mifery 
fuch as theirs your condudl is an infult." 

Mrs. Fielding felt her energy in the caufe 
of humanity not a little flrengthened by 
the flriking contraftthis day afforded her, 
betwixt the fickly caprice of voluptuouf- 
nefs and the eagernefs of hungry poverty. 

It was to give his medical advice to the 
father of this little family of wretchednefs, 
that file carried Henry to their habita- 
tion, which now wore a very different af- 
pe6l from that which on her firfl vilit it 
had prefented. The children were now 
clothed 5 the furniture, which had been by 

piece- 



i 73 ] 

piece-meal Tent to pawn, was now replaced ; 
the wife with maternal tendernefs preffed 
the infant to her bofom, whofe birth fhe 
had deplored as an aggravation to her mif- 
fortunes ; and even the poor hufband, re- 
lieved from the torture of beholding his 
family perifhing before his eyes for the 
want of that food which ficknefs rendered 
him unable to procure, felt half the acute- 
nefs of his malady removed, and with tears 
of gratitude implored the bed bleffing of 
Heaven upon his worthy benefaflrefs. 

After a few vifits of a fimilar nature, 
Mrs, Fielding carried our young phyfician 
to a large houfe deftined for the reception 
and temporary abode of fuch of her ownfex 
as, from being deftitute of friends in Lon- 
don, were (when by ficknefs or misfortune 
thrown out of employment) in danger of 
being driven, through fear of want, into 
habits of infamy. The incident that gave 
rife to this plan of charity in Mrs. Fielding's 
mind, is fufficiently interefting to claim the 

attention 



L 73 ] 

attention of thofe of our readers who really 
believe people of an inferior (lation to 
be compofed of the fame materials with 
themfelvcs. 

It happened one cold evening in Decem- 
ber, that on returning from the theatre, 
through a narrow (Ireet, an accident which 
befel a preceding carriage occafioned a 
flop of many minutes to the line of carria- 
ges which followed. Mrs. Fielding let 
down the glafs to enquire the caufe; and 
having learnt it, was about to pull it up 
and patiently wait the event, when her 
attention was attra^led by an object of 
wretchednefs, who with looks of deep hu- 
mility implored alms at the door of the 
coach which was immediately before herV 
in the line. She heard the glafs violently 
drawn up, and faw at the fame moment tlie 
trembling emaciated wretch who had pre- 
fumed to fuppllcate, receive a blow for her' 
impertinence from the rattan of the laced 
footman who flood behind. Mrs. Fielding, 

who 



[ 74 ] 

who could not help feeUng indignant at 
an infult offered to mifery, even when cou- 
pled with vice, was about to offer the poor 
wretch a compenfation for what (he had 
endured, when flie faw her familiarly ac- 
coiled by a bold-looking fellow of the 
order vulgarly called shabby -genteeL The 
lamp now (lione full upon the objecl of 
her attention, and difplayed a countenance 
that had once been handfome, but appa;., 
rently wafted by ficknefs and famine. She 
feemed to ilirink from the perfon who ad- 
dreffed her, but yet wanted refolution to 
refift his importunity. She fuffered him 
to take one of her hands, while with tht 
back of the other (he wiped the tear^ 
which trickled down her pallid cheek. The 
coach moved a ftep or two nearer. Mrs. 
Fielding diftin^lly heard the ejaculation, 
' Oh, God, forgive me! if to fave myfelf 

from ftarving ' She could hear no 

more. The obftruclion to the proceeding 
of the further carriage being now rcmovcdg 

it 



[ 75 1 

It drove on with fury, and Mrs. Fielding's, 
with the reft that followed it, fuddenly 
darted forward in full fpeed. 

Mrs. Fielding's fenfibility was not of 
that nature which can content itfelf with 
dropping a graceful tear to the mifery 
which an aclive exertion of benevolence 
has power to relieve. She haflily pulled 
the check-ftring, and having called the 
footman, " Run, Thomas, run with fpeed, 
I befeech you, after that poor woman, 
whom yonder wretch is dragging away. 
Defire her to come hither; fly- — " 

Thomas hefitated. ' I prefume. Madam, 
you do not know that flie is ' 

'' No matter what fhe is — I muft fpeak 
to her." 

Thomas obeyed; and no fooner did the 
poor forlorn creature hear the welcome 
meffage, than ftruggling from the man 
who had hold of her, flie haftened as faft 
as her trembling limbs could carry her, 
to the coach-door over which Mrs. Field- 
ing leaned. ,, You 



[ 76 ] 

^^ You appear to be in great mifer}-, 
young woman;" faid Mrs. Fielding, in a 
voice of pity. 

*I am, indeed. Madam! in mifery that 
is inexpreifible.' 

" But is taking to a courfe o^ vice the 
proper way to procure relief? Would it 
not be better by honed induftry to feek a 
livelihood, than by continuing in the path 
of infamy, to '* 

* Ah, Madam ! I am not the wretch you 
take me for. I am, indeed, I as yet am 
virtuous; but I am ftarving. I have not 
one farthing to get either food or lodging. 
I wifli I had courao[e to die! I know It 
would be better ; and that I ought to die, 
rather than be wicked — but I am so 
hungry! ' 

Her weak and hollow voice here be- 
came quite inarticulate; it died away in 
fliort convulfive fobs, a (hivering came 
over her, and flie would have funk to the 
ground, had fhe not been fupported by 

Thomas ; 



[ 77 ] 

Thomas; who, having caught the conta- 
gion of pity from his miflrcfs, was now as 
zealous to reHeve thf poor unfortunate, as 
he was before unwilling to go after hen 
What was to be done? To leave her in 
her prefent fituation, was to leave her to 
perifh. A heavy fhower came on, which 
inilantly determined Mrs. Fielding. She 
ordered Thomas to open the coach-door, 
and to lift the poor exhaufted w^anderer 
into the carriage, where flie fupported her 
with her own arms all the way to Hanover- 
fquare. A few mouthfuls of bifcuit foaked 
in wine reftored the fmking powers of 
nature; and Mrs. Fielding, who adminif- 
tered the cordial with her own hands, had 
the pleafure of beholding the colour return 
to the faded cheek, and an exprefTion of 
fenfibility reanimate the funken eye. 

* Are you an angel?' cried the poor mi- 
ferable, grafping Mrs. Fielding's hand, as 
fhe held out to her a bit of bifcuit. * Yes, 
yes, you mud be an angel! no great lady 

could 



C rs ] 

could be fo condefcending, fo very, very 
good.' 

"Alas!'' faid Mrs. Fielding, "that the 
common duties of humanity, in a world 
where misfortune in one fhape or other is 
the lot of all, fliould be fo rare as to be 
thus over rated !" 

The falutary refrefhment flie had re- 
ceived, aided by a night's repofe, had fo 
far reftored the poor woman, that when 
fhe appeared before Mrs. Fielding on the 
following morning, flie could hardly be- 
lieve it was the fame perfon. 

In anfwer to Mrs. Fieldino's interro^^a- 
tories, flie informed her, that flie was the 
daughter of a Northumbrian peafant: 
that an elder brother, who had come up to 
London fome few years before, hadgot fo 
good a place as fliopman at a druggift's, 
that on her father's death flie was tempted 
to come up to town likewife — hoping, 
through her brother's intereft, to procure 
a place as maid of all work in fome credit- 
able 



[ 79 1 

able family. On arriving in London, flic 
found that her brother had died of the 
fmall-pox the week before, and his mafler 
(who was a batchelor) had been appointed 
furgeon in the army, and was then on the 
eve of embarking for the Weft-Indies. He 
however had the goodnefs, before his de- 
parture, to recommend her to a lady and 
gentleman from Devonihire, who had 
taken lodgings'^ in SufFolk-ftreet, where 
they had the ufe of a back-kitchen. From 
breathing the pure air of the Northumber- 
land mountains, flie was transferred to this 
unwholefome dungeon, where fhe had not 
been confined for many weeks when fhe 
was feifed with a fit of illnefs, forced to 
leave her place, and with the fmall pit- 
tance of wages flic had acquired in her 
fhort fervice, to pay for a lodging, food, 
and phyfic. On recovering from her fe- 
ver, which lafted many weeks, flie found 
herfelf deep in her landlady's debt, who 
had the goodness to accept of all the re- 
mains 



[ 80 ] 

mains of her little wardrobe in lieu of cafh; 
and having flripped her of every thing 
but the rags in which (he ufed to do her 
dirty work, humanely turned her out to 
the ftreet. A flranger in London, and 
without friends, to whom could flie apply 
for relief? Who would liften to the tale 
of her misfortunes? Who would accept 
her fervices, or open their doors to re- 
ceive a wretch that had none to help her? 
At the time fhe was feen by Mrs. Field- 
ing, {he had been eight and forty hours 
without food. Her virtuous principles 
revolted at the proffered wages of profli- 
tution, till hopelefs of fuccour, and over- 
powered by the repulfe fhe had met with 
from the fentimental Lady Mary Mildmay 
and her powdered footman, flie gave way 
to the impulfe of defpair, and would pro- 
bably, if the interpofmg hand of Mrs-. 
Fielding had not been held out to favc 
her, foon have added one other wretched 
female to the thoufands who yearly perifli 

by 



[ 81 ] 

by dlfeafe and want, in the flreets of the 
mod wealthy, the moil charitable, and the 
moft munificent city in the world. 

" Surely," faid Mrs. Fielding, " there 
is fomething wrong in this. There ought 
to be a reputable receptacle eftablifhcd for 
affording temporary (helter to thofe who 
are willing to eat the bread of honeft in- 
duflry. The government ought — but, 
alas! I cannot diftate to the government* 
I have not tlie. power to influence the ma- 
kers of our laWs; But cannot I do fome- 
thing towards the relief of a few of thefc 
unhappy individuals? Let me fee — " 

She then began to make calculations. 
Gradually, and with deep reflection formed 
her plan ; appropriated a fura to carry it 
into execution ; and at the time Ihe carried 
Henry to her afylum, ihe could exult in 
the refle<flion, that without injury to her 
fortune, without aflfiflance from the public, 
or aid from the purfe of any individual, 
flie had, in the five years that had elapfed 

VOL, HI. G fincc 



[ 82 ] 

fmce the commencement of her fcheme, 
afforded relief to above a thoufand defti- 
tute females, of whom many were fnaiched 
from the jaws of ruin, and faved from 
courfes that would have led to infamy 
or death. 

At firft the number admitted was very 
limited. She had now fourteen beds con- 
flantly occupied by as many women, whofe 
willing induflry was employed to fuch ad- 
vantage in needle-work of various de- 
fcriptions, that they entirely cleared the 
price of their maintenance. Thefe were 
chiefly compofed of fervants, who by fick- 
nefs, accident, or misfortune, had been 
thrown out of employment, r.nd who were 
willing by their diligence tc procure the 
recommendation of the houfe to creditable 
places. The unhappy female abandoned 
by the feducer, for whom flie had quitted 
the proteftion of her friends, here found 
that (heker (he dared not to implore from 
her offended family, and if inclined to ac- 

quire 



C 83 ] 

quire habits of induftry, was foon put in a 
way of earning a comfortable fubfidencej 
and of regaining the invigorating ftimulus 
of felf-approbation. Even the wretched 
outcafl of foclety, fuch as are every fef- 
lons difgorged frqm our prifons, and after 
having been acquitted by a jury of all 
crime, are charitably fent forth either to 
steal or perish^ was admitted here ; not in- 
deed to the fuperior apartment, but to one 
provided with every neceffary for their 
accommodation, where works of an infe- 
rior nature were carried on, the profits 
accruing from which were all appropriated 
to cloathing the poor wretches who here 
found ihelter. 

Three hundred a year was the fum firft 
defigned by Mrs. Fielding to be expended 
in this charity. It gradually increafed to 
five, and would have been much greater, 
had (he not found means to engage an 
American merchant in her interefl, who 
opened a (lore in Charleftown for the fale 

G 2 of 



t 84 ] 

of ready-made linen garments ; and would 
have taken off her hands, at a good price, 
more than Ihe was able to fupply. 

*' Five hundred a year!" cries Lady 
Racket ; " blefs me, what a fweet mafked 
ball one might give every winter with fuch 
a fum! It is true, Mrs. ****'s, and Lady 
******'s, cod twice the money ; but with 
five hundred pounds well managed, one 
-might give a very pretty, dafliy, ftileifh 
fort of an entertainment for a fmgle even- 
ing. Do'nt you think io ?" 



CHAP. 



[ 3+ ] 



CHAP. IV. 



" Thh forager on Others' wifdom, leaves 
♦♦ Her native farm, her reafon quite untili'd. 
" With mixt manure fhe furfeits the rank foil, 
*' Duug'd, but not drcfs'd; and rich to beggary, 
" A pomp untameable of weed prevails." 

You NO. 



M 



RS. Fielding and Henry were fo 
^^-^^ deeply engaged in converfation as 
the carriage went down Holborn, they 
perceived not Bridgetina paddling along 
the dirty (treet. They did nor, however, 
pafs unobferved by her. " Yesl" cried 
Ihe aloud, " there they are, fide by fide, 
tailing the balmy fweetnefs, drinking the 
delicious poifon, which unfophiflicated ef- 
fective love fheds through the humaa 
heart! Perhaps they are now going to be 
married. odious inftitution! nurfe of 

depravity ! 



C 8fl ] 

depravity! foe to energy and ufefulnefs! 
Never fhall I prevail upon the prejudices 
of Henry to break thy galling chain. But 
why fhould I defpair? Is not truth omni- 
potent? Muft not ray reiterated efforts in 
the end prevail? What though heihould 
be married ? May I not convince him of 
the immoral tendency of all engagements? 
May I not demonftrate from the divine 
principles of philofophy, that promifes are 
not, ought not, to be binding?*' 

Though the bufy croud of paffengers 
were too much occupied by their own 
concerns to take notice o her foliloquy, 
it met with numerous interruptions from 
the joinings of hawkers, porters, draymen, 
&c. &c. who, carelefs of all before them, 
puflied their way in a manner fo rude, as 
would frequently have provoked an expof- 
tulation from our heroine, had they not 
quickly got out of the reach of her voice. 
At the bottom of Holborn-hill the throng 
was fo great, that fhe was unable to refift 

its 



[ 87 ] 

its impetuofity ; but hurried along by the 
torrent, was forced to make a retrogade 
movement of fcveral fteps. On another 
occafion fhe was carried forward with a 
rapidity as much beyond her ftrength as 
contrary to her inclination: gafping for 
breath, ihe attained the iieps of a ihop- 
door, where (he flood for a few moments 
to recover herfelf. "Ah!'* faid fhe to 
herfelf, " how great mufl be his genius, 
who, in walking through aflreet like this, 
can enter into nice calculations^ can digest 
sagacious reasonings^ can declaim or de- 
scribe^ impressed with ihe deepest sympathy y 
or elevated to the loftiest rapture!* Oh, 
that I could energize in fuch a manner!'* 

* You feem at a lofs, Ma'am;* faid a 
tolerably well-drefTed man, who at that 
moment pafTed. ' Can I be of any fervicc 
to you, in fhewing you your way?' 

'* I fhould be forry to tafk your urba- 
nity, fir,' returned Bridgetina; "but if 

* Eoquirer, you 



[ 88 ] 

you are going to Mincing-lane, I (hall wil- 
lingly accept of your afTiflance/' 

The ftranger declaring he fhould have 
pleafurc in efcorting her, Bridgetina laid 
hold of his offered arm, and afcended 
Snow-hill, not a little fatisfied with her 
polite condudlor. They had proceeded to 
the middle of Newgate-ftreet, Bridgetina 
all the while loading with praifes the be- 
nevolence of the ftranger; when, to her 
utter aftonifhment, giving her a pufh into 
the middle of the flreet, he darted off, and 
was out of fight in a m,oment. 

' Look to your pockets;' cried a butch- 
er's boy. She did fo, and to her no fmall 
difmay perceived that they had been both 
turned infide-out. Happily, a pocket- 
handkerchief and an empty purfe was all 
fhe had to lofe ; but her fpirits were fo 
much fluttered by the accident, that (he 
was glad to get into a coach, in which fhe 
hoped to return loaded with too conflder- 
able a fum to trufl: to the mercy of another 
-benevolent ftranger. o- 



[ 89 ] 

Sir Anthony Aldgate was at home; and 
our heroine, by her own defire, was con- 
ducted into his office, (a little, difmal, dirty- 
looking hole, where every thing wore the 
appearance of wretchednefs and penury.) 
Here were feveral young men of no dcfpica-^ 
ble parentage, no vulgar educaticn,*and no 
mean abilities, defined to pafs the flower 
of their days in fumming up pounds, {hil- 
lings, and pence. But though every new 
combination increafed the owner's wealth, 
it increafed not the comforts of one of his 
dependants. Sir Anthony himfelf had no 
idea of any comfort but that of accumula- 
tion ; and this place, which had been the 
fcene of his fuccefsful negociations, was in 
his eyes beauteous as the gates of Paradife, 
and cheerful as the garden of Eden. 

Bridgetina,who had never feen the knight 
but in his drefs-fuit and tie-wig, was fur- 
prifed at the appearance he now made, in a 
fcarlet flannel night-cap, and night-gown of 
green ftuflT, lined throughout with crimfon 

flannel. 



C 90 ] 

flannel. A finall black filk handkerchief 
was tied tightly round his neck, but quite 
hid from obfervation by the enormous 
mafs of joller which overhung it. He was 
feated at the deik v/hen our heroine en- 
tered, from which having raifed his fmall 
black eyes, "My coufin Biddy Eotheriml" 
cried he, *' is it poflible? I am glad to fee 
you, my dear. But where is your mother? 
Up flairs, with my wife and daughter, I 
fuppofe. Well, better go up to them, and 
I ihall be with you prefently. Good-bye." 

* My bufmefs at prefent is only with 
you,' rejoined Bridgetina ; ' and I mufl 
requefl an immediate audience.' 

" Bufmefs with me, my dear ; and pray 
what about? I really did not think you 
knew any thing about bufmefs." 

^ My bufmefs is of fome importance,' 
rejoined Bridgetina ; * I am to inform you 
that I have immediate ufe for a thoufand 
pounds, and to requefl that you would let 
me have that fum as foon as pojEble.' 

"What! 



[ 91 1 

" What! are you then really going to 
be married I" cried Sir Anthony. " I de- 
clare I fhould not have thought of that ; 
but I hope your mother has taken care of 
the main chance: a good warm man— 
hey? '* 

' I neither wifli my mother, or any one 
elfe, to concern themfelves in my affairs/ 
faid Bridgetina; ' and defire you would 
put yourfelf to no farther trouble, than to 
make over to me the fum I mention.' 

" Fair and foftly, coufin," rejoined Sir 
Anthony; " don't you know that my 
confent in this bufmefs is abfolutely neceC. 
fary ? And do you think that I will give 
my confent to any perfon'that does not 
choofe to fettle your fortune upon you and 
your lawful iffue?" 

' I fhall have no lawful iffue,* cried 
Bridgetina angrily, ' I hate lawful iffue, 
and every thing that is lawful. Perfons 
of enlightened minds ought not, by giving 
their fanflion to an odious inflitution, to 

retard 



C 92 ] 

retard the progrefs of intelle(51:. I never 
fhall marry.' 

" No!" returned Sir Anthony, archly 
meafuring with his little optics the figure 
of our heroine, " I believe not, my dear, 
till you get an offer, he, he, he — what, 
four grapes, Mifs Biddy, hey ?" 

* Whether I have an offer or not, fir, 
is no concern of yours^ All you have to 
do is, to let me have a thoufand pounds of 
my own fortune, which I can now difpofe 
of in a way that will refle6^ lafting honour 
on ray name, and effeftually operate to- 
wards the grand end of life, general utility,' 

'' A thoufend pounds!" cried Sir An- 
thony, in amazement. " What d — ned 
fools thefe people in the country are ; they 
know no more of the price of flocks than 
what's doing in the moon. Time of war, 
time of peace, loan or no loan, all's the 
fame to them. I'd lay ten pounds to a 
fixpence, thou can'fl not tell what confols 
were done for any time thefe three months; 

and 



I 93 ] 

and yet ye would fell out, would yef A 
pretty ignoramus, truly ! You may thank 
your flars, my dear, that your father left 
ye in better management. A thoufand 
pounds, Indeed! And pray, how would 
your wife head fpeculate with a thoufand 
pounds?" 

* Your perceptions,' returned Bridge- 
tina, with a contemptuous fneer, ' your 
perceptions are too obtufe to penetrate 
the fcope of the grand defign in which I 
am about to engage. The virtues of the 
philofophers of Africa, wkh whom I in- 
tend fhortly to aifociate, are too fublime 
for the comprehenfion of a vulgar mind. 
The ' 

*' What! going to fpeculate in Sierra- 
Leona fliares, Mifs Wifehead, are ye? 
But what, indeed, poor thing, ihould you 
know of fuch matters ? Be thankful, again 
I tell you, be thankful that your father 
wifely put you into better hands. No 
man upon 'Change can tax me with having 

ever 



[ 94 ] 

ever loO: a farthing upon idle fpecalation. 
I remember in the year fixty-feven — no— --I 
believe it was in the year fixty-nine — aye, 
now I thiak of it, it was in fixty-nine, for 
it v»-is the very day after Mr. Alderman 
Pruen gave his grand feafl on being ele<f^ed 

to the ward of ; I remember it well; 

the turtle foup w^as the very bell I ever 
ate in my life. I fay it was in the year 
fixty-nine, juft as — ^" 

Here Bridgetina made an attempt to in- 
terrupt the knight, but in vain ; he thus 
proceeded : 

" You (hall hear — you (hall hear — I hate 
to be tedious. Juft, I fay, as I turned the 
comer of 'Change-alley, who fhould come 
up to me but Mr. Peter Purdy, brother 
to Purdy of Yarmouth, the great fpecula- 
tor in Avhale-blubber. He was a Scotch- 
man; fo was Peter. Aye, aye; they were 
both Scotfmen ; a flirewd fellow, I warrant 
ye. Thought to take me in! But you 
fliall hear. As I was faying, juft as I 

turned 



[ 95 ] 

turned the corner of 'Change-alley, up 
comes Peter. Now you muft know, (locks 
had been done for Sy^ for the January 
account. I was then a bull — I remember 
it well — Nib, of Bartholomew-lane, was a 
lame duck, and Tom " 

* I never concern myfelf with any body's 
ducks,' cried Bridgetina, impatiently, ^ I 
leave the care of the poultry entirely to 
my mother, and to her you may talk of fuch 
matters with propriety; but my energies 
are dire£led to nobler cbje<![ls. Unhappy 
ftate of civilization! Odious laws, that put 
it in a man's power to fecure his property 
to his children ! If it had not been for 
them my fortune Ihould have been, ere 
now, diifeminated in a dire£lion which — ' 

" Aye, aye, you may thank your fa- 
ther's will for having one Ihilling to rub 
upon another, I fee that. It would all 
have gone elfe to (harpers and fwindlers. 
Your father did well in confulting me; 
did he not? But, indeed, ray coufm Bo- 

thcrim 



[ 96 ] 

iherim was a man of fenfe; he never look 
any Hep without confulting me. Who, do 
you think, advifed his marriage with your 
mother? Ah! it was an excellent fpecula- 
tion! Six thoufand pounds for a young 
curate, whofe whole (lock lay in the Greek 
and Latin funds, was no bad job, let me tell 
ye. I knew how old Pafty would cut up. 
There was not a better frequented cook- 
fhop in London than his. No one made 
better vermicelli foup. I well remember 
going there once with old Drugget of 
Lombard-ilreet, father to Drugget of the 
Borough; he was partner to Bingley the 
broker, and did a monftrous deal of bufi-; 
nefs. As I was faying, we went one day 
to old Party's, your grandfather's—" 

' What is my grandfather to me?' cried 
Bridgetina; ' an illiterate drudge, whofe 
energies were all directed to the fordid 
purpofes of accumulation. I once for all 
deiire to have a categorical anfwer. Will 
you, or will you not, let me have a thou- 

fand 



[ sr ] 

fand pounds of my fortune to difpofe of 
at my own pleafure ?* 

*' A thoufand pounds ! no, nor a thou- 
fand pence neither ; no, nor a fingle (liil- 
ling while you remain a fpinfler, on any 
pretence whatever; fo there's your an* 
fwer, Mifs: will that pleafe your" 

* No, it does not pleafe me ; but what 
can be expelled in a ftate of fociety fo 
depraved? fo — ' 

" God help the foolifh girl, how (he 
talks. Prythee, my dear, where didil: 
thou pick up all this jargon? This is all 
along of them there foolifh books your 
mother fuffers you to read. If I ever 
caught my daughter fo much as opening a 
book, it fliould be the deareft day (he ever 
faw. But fhe is better taught, I promife 
ye; I don't believe (he has looked in one 
fmce (he came from fchool ; don't know 
how fhe Ihould, for not a book has ever 
been within thefe doors, but the Book of 
Common-Prayer, and old Robin's alma- 

VOL. III. H nack. 



C 98 ] 

jiack. Truft me for that. I kaow better 
what to do with my money.'* 

* If you perfiil in refufmg my requefl 
of the thoafand pounds, I hope at lead you 
will not deny me the trifling fum of twenty 
guineas for immediate neceflaries ?' 

" What! your lad dividend all gone al- 
ready? It is fliameful extravagance. I 
Ihall not encourage fuch profufion, fuch 
a fquandering of property ; at a time, too, 
when it might be laid out to fuch advan- 
tage! It is monftrous. I tell you I fliall 
not encourage it. Want money to buy 
books, I fuppofe — do ye? Is that the 
way you have fpent all that I paid you 
in Auguft?*' 

* Yes, man of narrow mind. That fum, 
which would have been fpent in ufclefs 
hixury by a weak, or vilely hoarded by an 
ignoble, fpirit, was by me beftowed to pro- 
mote the grand obje£l of general utility.' 

" General Fiddleftick!" exclaimed Sir 
Anthony. 

Bridgctlna 



[ 99 ] 

Bridgetina, without noticing the inter- 
ruption, went on. ^ It was given to the 
enlightened Citizen Glib to enable him to 
import from France feveral valuable trea- 
tifes on philofophy and atheifm/ 

" Philofophy and atheifml" repeated 
Sir Anthony in a fur}', " Hell and confu- 
flon, who ever heard the like of this? 
What has made the flocks fall forty per 
cent, but philofophy and atheifm? What 
has railed the price of infurance, and bur- 
thened the nation with fuch a load of new 
taxes, but philofophy and atheifm? Tell me 
that ? Why have we raifed fuch an army, 
aye and fuch a navy too, but to keep 
thefe vile French principles out of the 
kingdom? And yet this here idle girl, 
this fool, this little viper, fhall be the means 
of imponing in a box, four feet fquare, all 
the principles that it has cofl us fo many 
millions of money, and fo many hundred 
thoufand lives to keep out of the kingdom! 
Away, I fay, and never fee my face; I 

II 2 WO)jld 



[ 100 



would inform on you for a farthing. Was 
it not for my confm Bctherim^s memory, I 
fliould give you lodgings you little think 
of; but you fiiall have no harbour here, 
d'ye mind me! Never again darken my 
doors, I dcfire you. Never come here again 
on fuch an errand." 

' Wretched mortal 1' cried Bridgetina, 
• how deplorable is thy ignorance ! Yet/ 
continued fhe, in a tone that fufficiently 
indicated the violence (lie did in fuppreffing 
her refentment: * yet thou had energies., 
which, if properly directed, might produce 
glorious effedts. Think not, however, by 
thy intemperance to intimidate me. He 
that would adorn himfelf with the mofi: 
elevated qualities of a human being, ought 
to come prepared for encountering oblo- 
quy and mifreprefentation. When thou 
art willing to liilen to information, I fnall 
be happy to inftrudt thee, till then I take 
my leave.' So faying, fhe tottered in 
great agitation to the coach, while the 
;■ ':. knight 



L loj ] 

knight returned to his feat with an inten- 
tion of communicating to Mrs. Botherim 
a full account of the behaviour of her 
daughter, with afevere cenfure upon her- 
felf for permitting it. 

Bridgetina, having given the coachman 
orders to drive to Conduit-flreet, pulled 
up the glaffes, and throwing herfelf into 
a corner of the coach, gave way to a burft 
of paflion, which was the more violent for 
having been fo long fuppreffed. 

Anger and difappointment fo entirely 
occupied her mind, that the door was 
opened for her at Mrs. Benton's, before 
flic recollected that fhe had not any means 
of paying the coachman. Her embarralT- 
ment was foon removed by her good-na- 
tured landlady j to whom, though (he was 
already indebted more than Mrs. Benton's 
(lender finances could bear without incon- 
venience, flie did not fcruple to owe a dill 
farther obligation. 

The 



C 102 ] 

The idea of feeing Henry Sydney in the 
evening foon banifhed every difagreeable 
impreffion from her mind. Now, at length, 
(he was to have an opportunity of com- 
bating all his objc6^ions ; now flie fliould 
have the glory of arguing him into love. 
A fpeech which had long been conned, 
twice written over in a fair hand, and thir- 
teen times repeated in private, was now to 
prove its efficacy. It was taken from her 
pocket ; the heads again run over ; and 
for the help of memory, in cafe of inter- 
ruption, a fort of index taken of the con- 
tents, which fhe thus read aloud, while 
the maid cleared the table after dinner, 
McralVmnbiUty^ thinking sensibility^ impor- 
innate sensibility ; ynental sensation^ pernici" 
6US state of protracted and uncertain feeU 
ing; congenial sympathy^ congenial sentiment y 
congenial ardour; delidous emotions^ mela?!* 
choly e?7iotions^ frenzied emotions; tender 
feelings energetic feelings sublimised feeling; 
the o^ernK the bud, and the full-grown fruits 



[ 103 ] 

^f general utility^ ^c, G?r.* " Yes/^ cried 
fhe, in extacy, when (he had finifhed the 
contents, " this will do I Here is argu- 
ment irrefiflible; here is a feries of calcu- 
lations, enough to pour convidlion on the 
mofi: incredulous mind. Henry overcome 
fliall cry — Bridgetina, thou haft con- 
quered 1" 

' Let not him that girdeth on his armour, 
boast as he that throweth it offi* faid a wife 
king of Ifrael. The victory was not quite 
fo decifive on the fide of Bridgetina as flie 
expected. The prejudices of Henry were 



* Note, for the benefit of Novel-writers. — We here 
generoufly prefent the fair manufa^Tturers in this line 
with a fet of phrafes, which, if carefully mixed up with 
a handful of ftory, a pretty quantity of moonfhine, an 
old houfe of any kind, fo that it be in fufficient decay, 
and well tenanted with bats and owls, and two or three 
ghofls, will make a couple of very neat volumes. Or 
iliould the fentimental be preferred to the defcriptive, 
it is only leavmg out the ghofts, bats, owls, and moon- 
light, and the above phrafes will feafon any tender tale 
to taile. 

invinciblci 



[ 104 ] 

invincible. Inftead of acknowledging the 
force of her arguments, he laughed at their 
abfurdlty. What (he called the fublime 
dedu£llons of recondite and abftra^t truth, 
he termed the pernicious delufions of fo- 
phiftry ; and fo perverfely erroneous were 
his fentiments, that inftead of admiring the 
contempt of chaftity as an exalted proof 
of female heroifm and virtue, he perfifted 
in reprobating the principles that could 
lead to fuch an idea, as deftruftive of the 
peace, the happinefs, and the well-being 
of fociety. 

Bridgetina, having gone twice round the 
circle of her arguments, was at length 
compelled to give an unwilling hearing to 
thofe of Henry. He began by aiTuring 
her of his friendfliip, and as the beft proof 
he could give her of his good wifhes for 
her happinefs, pointed out to her in the 
ftrongeft terms the confequences of her 
prefect conduct ; and earneftly urged the 

aeceflity of her immediate return to W , 

as 



i: 105 ] 

as the only means of faving her from mor- 
tification and misfortune. He had at firft 
laughed very heartily at her flrange notion 
of his being in love with Mrs. Fielding; 
but apprehenfive left the old lady fhould 
be hurt by a hint of any thing fo ridicu- 
lous, he took fome pains to convince 
Bridgetina of her miftake as to the objecl 
of his paiTion ; at the fame time declaring, 
that though delicacy prevented him from 
mentioning the name of her who poiTefTed 
his affections, they were for ever fixed. 

"Who can promife for ever?" cried 
Bridgetina. " Are not the opinions of a 
perfectible being for ever changing ? You 
do not at prefent fee my preferablenefs, 
but you may not be always blind to a truth 
fo obvious. How can I believe it compa- 
tible with the nature of mind, that fo many 
ftrong and reiterated efforts {ball be pro- 
ductive of no effect? Know, therefore, 
Doflor Sydney, it is my fixed purpofe to 
perfevere. I fliall talk, I fliall write, I 

fliall 



r 106 ] 

fhall argue, I fhall purfue you; and if I 
have the glory of becoming a moral martyr, 
I fhall rejoice that it is in the caufe of gc« 
ueral utility." 

^ If you are refolved to be a martyr to 
your own folly, MifsBotherim,' faid Henry, 
rifmg, ' I am determined your friends fhall 
not have me to blame in the bufmefs. I 
folemnly aiTure you, this is the lafl time I 
fiiall ever fpeak to you, unlefs you fhcw, by 

your immediate return to W , that 

you have recovered a fenfe of what you 
owe to yourfelf and to your fex. Good 
fiight.* 

- Bridsfctina called after him in the foft 
tone of perfuafion, but in vain. The hard- 
hearted youth hurried down flairs, and 
•cpening the dreet-door for himfelf, was 
out of hearing in a moment. 

To paint the feelings of our heroine, on 
ih'' abrupt departure of her beloved Avain, 
h a lafk lefs fuited to the pen than the 
imagination. To the imagination of our 

readers 



[ 107 1 

readers we fliall therefore leave it; and 
•content ourfdves with obferving, that as 
it is one of the prime advantages of system 
to be able to twifl, and turn, and conilrue 
every thing to its own advantage, defeat 
produces as potent a flimulus to perfeve- 
rance as vidory. 

The three following days were employed 
byBridgetina in the compofition of a letter, 
which fhe determined ftiould be a mafler- 
piece of tine writing. It was, indeed, the 
very eflence of philofophy, and flower of 
eloquence. The flile was fublime and 
energetic, adorned in every fentence by 
ftrings of double and treble epithets, and 
all the new-coined noun-verbs .and verb- 
nouns that have of late fo much enriched 
the Englifli language. As to the argu^ 
ments, the reader rauft have formed a very 
inadequate idea of Bridgetina's powers, if 
he does not believe them to be unanfwer^ 
able. After having carefully taken a 
copy, which {he refolved fhould on fome 

future 



C 108 ] 

future day be generoufly prefented to the 
public, ihe configned the letter to the care 
of Jenny, with inftruclions to give it into 
Henry's own hand, and diligently to ob- 
ferve the expreflion of his countenance 
while he perufed it. 

The twenty minutes of Jenny's abfence 
appeared an age to Bridgetina. She took 
her flation at the window, and at length 
had the happinefs of feeing her mellenger 
of love appear, loaded to her wifh, with a 
packet ftill larger than her own, " He 
has written ! He has written !'* cried flie, 
in an extacy. '* He has ar length deigned 
to enter into a difcuiTion on the important 
truths it has been my glory to promulgate. 
My powers fliall be again called forth in 
an anfwer. Our correfpondence iliali be 
printed. It (liall be publiflied. It fliall be 
called Tbc Sweet Sensations of Sensibility ^ 
cr the Force of Argwuent, But here (he 
comes. Give me the letter. But before 
I open it, kt me know how he received 

mine ? 



[ 109 ] 

mine? I fee by this it muft have arrived 
in a moment of impreifion. Did he nor 
kifs the feal ? Did he not in trembling 
extacy prefs it to his throbbing bofom? 
Tell me, tell me all, I conjure you." 

* He did not kifs a bit of it, that I faw, 
Ma'am,' returned Jenny. ' He only took 
it out of my hand, and faid Pfhaw.' 

''Pfhaw! What does Pfhaw fignify? 
What is its etymology ? From whence its 
derivation ? I mud look to the dictionary. 
But did you mark his looks, as he perufed 
the important pages? Did you obferve 
where he changed colour, where he ap- 
peared ftruck with admiration, and where 
thrilled with delight?" 

' I could fee nothing of all which you 
fays, Ma'am ; for though I told him as how 
that you defired me to fee him prufe it, he 
only faid Phoh ! and walked into his clofet." 

" Charming delicacy! But here, here 
it is that I (hall view the portrait of his 
foul. Here the high-wrought frenzied 

emotions 



C 110 ] 

emotions of his bofom are doubtlefs pour* 
tniyed. Here " 

' Blefs me, Ma'am, how pale you look! 
Aye, that is the very letter I carried to the 
gentleman, fure enough. The feal not fo 
much as broken! Til be bound he never 
read a word on't. Well now, I wow I 
never faw a more ungenteeler thing done 
In all my life ; and if I was you, Ma'am, 
(thof to be fure, you mud know beft) but 
I fhould ha' my fingers burnt before I 
dould write another fuliebul to fuch a 
grumpifli fort of a gentleman.' 

^' My epiflle of fourteen pages, my pre 
clous effay on philofophy and love, re- 
turned without a perufal — returned in a 
blank cover 1 O hideous perverfion of in- 
tellefl! O prejudices, obftinate and in- 
vincible! Has he no fenfc of juflice, no 
fenfe of the duty he owes fociety, that he 
thus deprives of her ufefulnefs one of iti 
mofl: valuable members? O Jenny, Jenny, 
I can energize no longer. The freezing 

frod 



frofl of frigid apathy chills my powers. 
The morbid excefs of a diftempered ima- 
gination choaks the germ of general uti- 
lity! I fliall become a wanderer in the 
barren wildernefs of fociety, an ufelefs 
plant in the populous defart of human life! 
Leave me, leave me to myfelf, that I may in 
apt foliloquy give vent to the palpitating 
perturbation of my woe-ftruck fancy." 

' Good la ! what a power o' fine words 
you ha. Ma'am, juft at your fingers* ends 
too, as a body may fay. I never did hear 
fo fine a fpoken lady in all my life. But, 
well-a-day! the men care no more for a 
woman's words, if fo be as how that (he 
happens to be a little ordinary or fo, than 
for the fqueaking of a pig. But I would 
defpife the fellors, fo I would — and fo I 
does. I walors not e'er a man in the 
world the walor of a rufli!* 

Bridgetina again fignified her pleafurc 
to be left alone, and Jenny, not a little 
pleafed with having been fo far admitted 

to 



[ 112 ] 

to her confidence, haflened to difburthen 
herfelf of all llie knew of the late tranf- 
a6lion, to the very firll perfon that would 
give her the hearing. 

While Bridgetina was eloquently be- 
moaning the indignant treatment of" her let- 
ter in the drawing-room, and Jenny expatia- 
ting on the fame fnbjefl (though, perhaps, 
in terms not exaflly fimilar) in ihe kitchen; 
the whole foul of Henry was entirely oc- 
cupied, not with Bridgetina, nor with her 
love, nor with her letter, but with the 
contents of one he had jufl received from 
his father ; and in the perufal of which he 
had been interrupted by Mifs Botherim's 
melTenger. The old gentleman's epiflle 
was as follows: 

^' My dear Henry ^ 

" IT would be fuperfluous to 
dwell upon the pleafure your letters have 
afforded to thofe mofi: dearly interefted in 
your happinefs. Though far from con- 
, fidering 



C 113 ] 

fidering fortune as the '' one thing need- 
ful," the exclulivc obje£t of purfuit, 1 
cannot but with thankfulnefs contemplate 
your opening profpe£^s of honourable in- 
dependence. May the Giver of all good 
bellow upon you a heart to enjoy ^ a mind 
fuperior to the refllefsnefs of ambition, 
and flranger to the gnawings of difcontent. 
For the attainment of thefe happy difpo- 
fitions, without which increafe of fortune 
is but increafe of forrow, I know no better 
means (next to an habitual dependence on 
the Divine favour) than the purfuit of fci- 
ence, particularly thofe branches of it that 
are mod intimately connected with your 
profeffion. 

" I am delighted with the fuccefs of 
your chemical experiments, and flill more 
highly fatisfied with the ingenuous frank- 
nefs you difplay in fo candidly acknow- 
ledging your former errors. But fuch 
mud ever be the confequence of direfling 
our refearches, not into the wild and fruit- 

VOL. IIK 1 lefi» 



[ 114 ] 

Icfs regions of idle fpcculation, where the 
chimeras of fancy are miflaken for reali- 
ties, and bold conjeflure afllimes the au- 
thoritative tone of truth; but into thofc 
laws of nature that, by being obje£ls of 
fenfe, and fubjefl to the inveftigation of 
experiment, are within the grafp of our 
limited and feeble minds. 

" Such fpeculations have, indeed, a di- 
rect tendency to influence the moral cha- 
racter of man. It is this that ft amps them 
with their real value; for to whatever 
height we afcend in tracing the caufes 
which regulate the fyftem of the world, 
our views muft at laft terminate in an un- 
caufed Being, in whom all the beauty and 
and order, all the wifdom and powei^,' dif- 
played throughout the univerfe, are cen- 
tered. " When we look around us,** 
fays an amiable philofopher, in the.con- 
clufion of a volume that prefented a valu- 
able difcovery to the world, " When we 
look around us, we perceive that everjr 

part 



t "5 ] 

part of the material world is governed by 
general laws ; and when we reflect that in 
this vaft fyftem of things, a race of beings 
exifts, to whom the Deity has communi- 
cated a portion of his intelligence and ac- 
tivity, we cannot avoid concluding, that 
laws mufl have been ordained for the go- 
vernment of fuch beings, as well as for 
that of all other parts of the univerfe."* 

" Thus does the fludy of Nature lead us 
up to Nature's God. Thus does the mate- 
rial world itfelf give evidence to the pro- 
bability of a revelation, and to thofe whofe 
minds have been expanded by the contem- 
plation of the union of grandeur and fim- 
plicity in the works of creation, it muft be 
peculiarly delightful to obferve the fame 
union of grandeur and fimplicity charafle- 
rifing the gofpel of Jefus Chrid. 

" Yes, my fon, believe me, the more 
you ftudy the life and precepts of our 

* Trcatife on Animal Heat and Combuftion. By 
Adair Cra\vford, M. D» 

great 



[ 110- ] 

great Mailer, the more forcibly will you be 
ftruck with the congruity at which I have 
already hinted. But, alas! as in the in- 
fancy of natural philofophy, the ill-dire6led 
diligence of the chemifl was wafted upon 
trifles, while the grand laws of nature were 
unnoticed and unknown ; fo in the Chrif. 
tian world, has the zeal of believers been 
more ftrenuoully exerted in the fupport of 
non-important forms and dogmas, than in 
the promulgation of thofe grand and fmi- 
pie truths which are marked with the fignet 
of Nature's God. 

" I need not apologize to you, my dear 
Harry, for being led into a fubje<^ which, 
though the moft important, as well as the 
moft exalted, of which human beings can 
treat, it is, I know, deemed a breach of 
politenefs to hint at even to a friend ; but 
fliall confefs, that the imprefllon made upon 
my mind by the converfation I held with 
Captain Delmond on his death-bed, has 
given an unufual degree of folemnity to 

the 



[ 117 ] 

the train of my ideas. Indeed the misfor- 
tunes of that unhappy family, as well as 
the mifery that has overcaken fome others 
of this place, fo evidently originate in 
fialfe impreffions received of religion, as a 
gloomy and illiberal fyftem of fuperflition, 
that I cannot ceafe from deploring the ne- 
gle<5l of early information on this important 
point, as the foundation of thofe miflaken 
prejudices that are fraught with confe- 
qiietices fo fatal to the happinefs of fociety. 
" While Captain Delmond was taught 
to idolife the name of honour as the palla- 
dium of human virtue, religion was pre- 
fended to his mind as a mean and inferior 
principle, incapable of infpiring noble fen- 
tlments in the foul of a gentleman. Had 
not the avenues to invefligation been thus 
pre-occupied by prejudice, he would have 
difcovered that honour^ which is nothing 
more than a nice fufceptibility to the cen- 
fure or applaufe of mankind, is neither fo 
grand in its views, fo cxtenCve in its ope- 

ratioDy 



[ 118 ] 

ration, nor fo noble in its obje£l, as that 
principle which teaches the heart to appeal 
for its purity and integrity, not to the 
purblind judgment of our fellow-mortals, 
but to a Being of infinite purity and per- 
fe<^ion. While performing a part on the 
bufy ftage of life. Captain Delmond found 
honour competent to the purpofe of gain-, 
ing him the flattering approbation of the 
multitude, which was reverberated by felf- 
applaufe; but when he propofed it as the 
fole principle of ^£tion to his daughter, 
when he deprived her mind of the fup- 
porting aid. of religion, and defired her to 
confider the intrinfic excellence of virtue 
as its own fure and only reward, he was 
not aware how liable {he was to be taught 
by fophiftry a definition of virtue very op- 
pofite to his. Had a proper value for the 
morality of the Gofpel, enhanced by its gra- 
cious promifes and elevated views, been in- 
/l;illed into her tender mind, his child, his 
darling Julia, would not have, brought the 

grey 



[ 119 1 

grey hairs of her father with forrow to 
the grave. 

" The remains of this unhappy gentle- 
man were yeiterday configned to their pa- 
rent dud in military ftate, and with a degree 
of magnificence, an oftentatious parade of 
pomp and grandeur, that, in my opinion, 
was ill-fuited to the occafion. After the 
conclulion of the ceremony. Gen. Villers 
and a Major Minden, (a man of large for- 
tune, who, it fecms, had made propofals 
to Mifs Delmond) politely waited on the 
poor forlorn and difconfolate widow, and 
took their leave of her in terms of the 
moft courtly civility. I expelled that the 
General, who was no flranger to the po- 
verty to which fhe was reduced, would 
have come forward with fome generous 
offer of pecuniary affiftance. But no : the 
General's generofity was completely ex- 
pended in producing the parade of a half an 
hour's proceilion ; and I greatly queilion, 
whether he ever does Mrs. Delmond the 
honour of another vifit. „ After 



C 120 ] 

** After the departure of thefe great 
gentlemen, I was called out of the room 
by Quinten, the Captain's old domeflick, 
on whofe face was painted the fincerity of 
forrow; he beckoned me into the back- 
parlour, and having once or twice, with a 
llroke of his hard hand, driven away the 
tears that fell upon his furrowed cheek, 
*« I thought, fir," faid he, " wheor I faw 
the lid of the coiEn fcrewcd down upon 
my good mafter, that I had lived too 
long. When I heard the hammer knock 
upon the lafl: nail, my heart fo funk at 
every flroke, it made a coward of me ; and 
I fhould have been glad to have fkulked 
to the quiet garrifon of death. But then, 
when I thought on my poor miilrefs, and 
remembered how my poor dear mafler 
ioved her, I fcorned to be fo cowardly as 
to defert my pod, when, by fighting with 
life a little longer, I might fave her from 
being flormed by want. I know all I can 
do is but a triflle — a nothing, as a body 
may fay, to folks that are any way above 



[ 121 ] 

the world, but it may be of ufe to her for 
all that ; and fo, as I hear you are going 
to look into my mailer's papers, and to fee 
what can be made out for my poor mif- 
trefs, I thought it befl to tell you to take 
my penfion into the account.'* 

*^ Your penfion, Quinten! and what do 
you referve for yourfelf ?" 

' Nothing but what I can earn by my own 
labour. Thank God, 1 am not yet pad 
working. You fee how well I have dreffed 
the Captain's garden. It was I that made 
that pretty ferpentine walk for Mifs Julia, 
and planted all them flowers, of which flic 
ufed tq be fo fond, Alas ! that I fliould ever 
live to fee the day of her deferting them!' 
Oh, who would have thought it! fuch a 
pretty creature as flie was, and fo mild-fpo- 
ken, and fo good to every body, that flic 
ftiould after all go for to break her father's 
heart!* 

*' Well, but, honefl: Quinten, you do not 
confider that you are now in the decline of 

life, 



[ 122 ] 

life, and cannot long be able to labour a? 
you have done." 

* I know it, fir. I am growing old 
apace, but Sam Smith, the old gardener 
at Bensfield, is ten years older than I am, 
and he ftill keeps his place. - I am a floater 
man than he at any time. And fa,- dy'e 
fee, I am determined not to touch a far- 
thing of this here Ghelfea penfion while I 
am able to lift a fpade. Did not I get it 
by the good word of my mafler; and who, 
then, -has fo good a right to it as his 
widow? Here are twelve guineas befides, 
which, I humbly beg, you would fall on 
fome means to make her accept; for I 
know llie would not touch it, if flie thought 
it came from me. So pray don't let her 
know who fentit; for folks in affliflion 
.ought to be mighty tenderly dealt with, fo 
as not to hurt their pndc— fee lings y I be- 
lieve, my young miftrefs would have called 
it, but I am not karned enough to know 
the diiierence.' 

« Honed, 



[ 123 ] 

" Honefl, worthy Ouinten!" cried T, 
grafping his hand, " thou had a heart that 
doth honour to thy fpccies, and principles 
that are more eftimable than all the learning 
in the world. At a period when neither 
talents nor learning fliall avail, thy grati- 
tude and thy virtues fliall exalt thee to 
glory!" I was fo flruck by the noblenefs 
of this poor fellow's behaviour, that I 
could not avoid giving you the converfa- 
tion in detail. I fhall be more brief with 
regard to what followed, though for the 
honour of your friend I' ought there like- 
wife to be particular. 

" On examining the books and papers 
of the deceafed, it appeared, that all which 
remained to the widow was the houfe and 
furniture, and twenty-five pounds a year 
from an annuity-alTociation, of which her 
hufband had been a member. I had plan- 
ned an application to Mrs. Fielding for 
•doubling this fum, when Mr. Churchill 
generoufly flepped forward, and with a 

delicacy 



I 124 ] 

delicacy that enhanced the merit of his 
generofity declared, that though the tranf- 
a£Vion did not appear in any of the Cap- 
tain's papers, he was truflee for an annuity 
of an hundred pounds to Mrs. Delmond, 
which as long as flie remained a widow, 
fiiould be regularly paid at the terms of 
Lady^Day and Michaelmas. 

" I know how you will rejoice in the no- 
ble conduct of your friend, but 1 believe I 
ihould have left the defcription of it to 
your fifter, whofe lively fenfibility to all 
that is great and excellent would havb- 
done that juftlce to the fubje£l of which my 
tired pen is now incapable. From her dwn 
iips, however, you will ihortly have an 
opportunity of receiving it ; and I do not 
think (he will fuifer any circumftance that 
attended it to lofe in: the recital. 

*' Sadly fnall I feel the dear girl's ab- 
fence, whofe company is the folace of my 
heart. The fweetnefs of her temper, the 
harmonious cheerfulnefs of her difpofition, 

might 



[ l'^5 ] 

might foften the rugged breaft of a tyrant, 
and foothe the mofl boifterous pailions 
into peace ; to me they are enhanced by 
a mind of quick intelhgence, whofe culti- 
vation has been the fweeteft and the eafieft 
tafk of my whole life. I mud, however, 
carefully conceal from her the pain her 
abfence fhall occafion me; as otherwife, I 
know all the pleafure Mrs. Fielding has 
prepared for her would be deflroyed. She 
and her friend Mifs Orwell are now bufily 
employed in preparing for their purpofed 
expedition, to which they look forward 
with the happy ardour of juvenile expect- 
ation. The kind confideration of Mrs. 
Fielding, in inviting Mifs Orwell to par- 
take with Maria in the fcenes of novelty 
and amufement, where their reciprocal 
feelings of furprife and pleafure mud en- 
hance their mutual delight, is a new proof 
of the goodnefs of her heart. Harriet 
does not, however, exprefs her rclifh for 
the journey in the fame manner as IVIaria. 

The 



[ 126 ] 

The emotion with which Ihe now fpeaks of 
it, is lefs gay, and apparently more con- 
ftrained. When firft informed that her 
father had given his confent to her accept- 
ance of Mrs. Fielding's invitation, ihe, 
indeed, appeared agitated in a greater de- 
gree than I fhould have expefted from a 
girl of her underftanding ; but that I fup- 
pofe was from the mere love of novelty, 
a charm that never fails to operate flrongly 
on the youthful bread. This day fort- 
night is fixed on for the day of their de- 
parture. Dr. Orwell is himfelf to be their 
efcort, and Mr. Churchill likewife pro- 
pofes being of the party; Mrs. Botherim 
has delayed her journey, in order to have 
their company upon the road, fo that they 
will fill two chaifes, and, if no accident in- 
terpofes, have the promife of a pleafant 
journey. 

" Meantime I ftiall be left to the enjoy- 
ment of my own refle6i-ions; but, thank 
God, thefe are not difagreeable compa- 
nions. 



[ 127 ] 

nions. I can look upon the pad with com- 
fort, and to the future without difmay. 
In the happinefs of my children I am more 
than happy. O may this dearefl: of all 
felicities be my companion and my folacc 
through all the ftiort fpace that now re- 
mains for me to tread ! May they never 
caufe me a figh of forrow, as, thanks to 
Heaven, they have never tinged my cheeks 
with the blufli of anger or of fhame. God 
blefs thee, my dear Harry, prays your ten- 
derly aiFe£lionate father, 

" H. SYDNEY." 
P.S. I find I have committed a fad 
blunder, in telling you of the intended 
journey to London. It was to have been 
a fecret, it feems, and much pleafure did 
the girls promife thcmfelves in your fur- 
prife. It is in vain I preach to Maria 
about the fm it would be to deprive you 
of the pleafure of anticipation, which, 
alas! makes up fuch a mighty part of the 
fmall fura of human happinefs. They in- 
fill 



[ 128 ] 

£{l upon my writing the lail part of my 
letter over again, but my fingers are al- 
ready cramped, fo it mud go; and when 
you read it, you may go to your glafs, and 
tell them how you looked when you fee 
them; for it is their curiofity as to this im- 
portant point, that I now find to be their 
reafon for fecrecy. God help them! poor 
things! Adieu! 



CHAP, 



C 129 ] 



CHAP. V. 



He was a flirewd philofopher. 



" And had read every text and glofs over. 
" Whate'cr the crabbed' ft author hath, 
" He undcrftood b' implicit faith. 

*♦ All which he underflood by rote, 
" And as occafion ferv'd, wou'd quote." 

Butler. 



'TTARRIET Orwell coming up to 
•*• -*- town by invitation from Mrs. 
Fielding!" exclaimed Henry. " How ex- 
traordinary! Is it in order to gratify my 
wifhes, or to try my prudence, that (lie at 
this jun£lure brings her to London ? No 
matter which ; I (hall fee my Harriet ; I 
(hall hear her fweet voice; I fhall have the 
delight of being near her almofl: continu- 
ally. Dear Mrs. Fielding, how I bicfs thee!' 
VOL. III. K In 



[ 130 ] 

In the midft of this delirium of pleafure, 
Henry was interrupted by the arrival of 
Mifs fiotherim's letter. Of the manner 
of its reception it is unneceflary to repeat 
the particulars, as they have already been 
given fo minutely by Jenny, whofe faith- 
ful report of all that fell from Henry's hps 
upon the occafion, juflly entitles her to 
our applaufe. No fooner had he re-delir 
vered the important packet into the hands 
of Bridgetina's meffenger, than he flept to 
Mrs. Fielding's, on pretence of informing 
her of the contents of his father's letter, 
but in reality to endeavour to penetrate 
into her motives for inviting Mifs Orwell 
to accompany his fifter to London. In 
vain did he watch her countenance, while 
flie perufed that part of the cpiftle which 
had caufed him fuch extreme emotion; he 
only faw it lighted up with a benignant 
fmile. ** How much is Maria, how much 
are we all indebted to your goodnefs!" 
cried he; " how happy have you made 
me — I— mean, how — " ^ y 



[ 131 ] 

* You mean, I fuppofe, that it was good- 
natured of me to provide your fifler with 
a companion, that fhe might not be alto- 
gether confined to the fociety of an ofd 
woman, which you know from experience 
to be fufEciently tirefome. You fee how 
well I can explain for you.* 

" The fociety of Mrs. Fielding mufl: 

ever " 

' Be fuperior in your opinion to that of 
a young and pretty girl, I fuppofe ; but 
as Maria may be of a different way of 
thinking, I imagined a companion of her 
own age would be no difagreeable cir- 
cumflance to her; and as I wiflied to pay 
my old acquaintance. Dr. Orwell, a com- 
pliment, I thought I could not do it at an 
eafier rate than by inviting his daughter 
to fpend a few weeks in London. But, 
pray, who is this Mr. Churchill? He 
feems a character that is worth the know- 
ing, and I mufl defire you would introduce 
him to me whenever he comes to town.* 

*' I fhall 



[ 132 ] 

*' I {hall have a pride in prefcnting him to 
you as my earlieft and dearefl: friend; and 
one I can, with confidence, pronounce wor- 
thy of the honour of your acquaintance.*' 

' Does he refide at W ?' 

*' He was brought up by a rich uncle, 
whofe eftate farrounds the village, but who 
was fuch a mifer, that, though Churchill 
was his only near relation, and a ^ferved 
favourite, he could hardly be prevailed 
upon to afford him the education of a 
gentleman. My friend's genius was rather 
ftimulated than reprefTed by the obflacles 
which his uncle's avarice threw in the way 
of his improvement. His intimacy with 
me brought him frequently to our houfc, 
where his thirfl after knowledge was en- 
couraged and gratified by the Icfibns of my 
father. The expences attending an uni- 
verfity education would for ever have de- 
terred the old gentleman from permitting 
him to profecute his ftudies in a profef- 
fional manner, had it not fortunately oc- 
curred 



I us ] 

cuired no him, that by having a Iaw}Tr in 
his own family, he might gratify his love 
of litigation without the expence of a fee.'* 

*^ Admirably calculated ! He took care, 
L prefume, that the young gentleman's ftu- 
dies fhould not be inierrapted by thofe 
ingenious contrivances for getting rid of 
fuperfluous cafli, that occupy fo much of 
the time and talents of our young gentle- 
men of fafhion at the univerfity!' 

^^ Alas! poor Charles! His ingenuity 
was, indeed, very diiferently employed. 
His raoft rigid economy was neceflary to 
preferve the appearance of a gentleman; 
and the purchafe of books, and attending 
leQures on fuch fubjeftsi of literature or 
fcience as were not immediately connedle4 
with his. profeffion, was all ftolen-from his 
ilender allowance of pocket-money. Yet 
thefe circumftances, then confidered as fo 
mortifying, he now regards as fortunate. 
But for thefe he might have been drawn 
into the vortex of diflipation, and in the 

wild 



[ 134 ] 

wild career of pleafure have lofl: his taftc 
for fcience, and regard to virtue." 

* Too truly obferved/ faid Mrs. Field- 
ing; * and in my opinion, the abundance 
of pocket-money, with which every fchool- 
boy is now furnifhed, has done as much 
towards the rapid progrefs of depravity, 
as any circumftance whatever, I hope 
your friend's fuccefs at the bar has been 
equal to his merit.' 

" It has at lead: far exceeded his moft 
fanguine expe(ftations," returned Henry. 
*' But the honour that has accrued to him 
from undertaking the caufe of a helplefs 
family, who, but for his generous aid, 
might have perifhed in obfcurity and want, 
has defervedly raifed his reputation into 
celebrity. Indeed, his whole conduifl has 
given an ample proof that the profeffion 
of the law is not neccfTarily a narrower of 
the human heart.'^ 

' Narrow and illiberal mufl be his heart, 
that can fo pronounce of it/ returned 

Mrs^ 



[ 135 J 

Mrs. Fielding. * It is, like other profef- 
fions, open to men of unprincipled, as well 
as to virtuous, minds; and the felnfh paf- 
fions have there, perhaps, as wide a field 
for their operation as in any other. Bur, 
thank heaven, we need not go to the re- 
cords of former a'7es for illuflrious in- 
fiances of lawyers, whofe eminent talents 
have been more than equalled by their 
exalted virtues.' 

Henry again endeavoured to turn the 
converfation to the fubject that engroffed 
his thoughts, but in vain. He could not 
obtain from Mrs. Fielding the fmallefl: fa- 
tisfa£lion relative to Mifs Orwell's vifit: 
fhe fo feduloufly avoided coming to any 
explanation, that he left her without being 
able in the lead degree to penetrate her 
intentions. 

Leaving Henry to purfue 

" The idle phantafies of lore, 
" Whofe miferies delight," 

we return to Bridgetina. Her abflra£l 

reafoning 



C 136 1 

reafoning and mod profound reflei^ions 
on the unenlightened conduft of her 
lover, received a very unfeafonable inter- 
ruption from Mrs. Benton. That good 
woman, after a modefl preface of many 
apologies for the liberty (he was compelled 
to take, prefented her an account of the 
fum due for a fortnight's lodging ; which, 
together with what had been difburfed 
for other necefTaries, amounted to fevea 
guineas. 

"Seven guineas!" faid Bridgetina ; "it 
is an unnatural ftate of civilization, in 
which feven guineas can be fpent fo foon. 
But my mind cannot at prefent defcend to 
the vulgar concerns of common life. You 
may leave your bill, however, and when 
the prefent romantic, high-wrought, fren- 
zied emotions of my perturbed fpirit have 
have a little fubfided, I fliall enter into an 
examination of the contents.'* 

' I am extremely forry to difturb you, 
Madam,' returned Mrs. Benton, 'butlhaU 

be 



C 137 ] 

be really much obliged to you, if you can 
poffibly make it convenient to fettle it at 
prefent. I make a point of paying all our 
trades-people fo regularly, that I fliall be 
quite diftrelTed at not being able to dif- 
charge the butcher's bill, and he is to 
return for the money in the evening.* 

" Regularity," rejoined Bridgetina, *' Is 
a chara^eriftic of common honefty, that 
fum-conduclor to all the sympathies of the 
human heart ; that infallible proof of medi- 
ocrity ^ to which it is impossible that any thing 
great, magnanimous, or ardent, can be 
allied.'^* Pan£luality in the difcharge of 
one's debts is held in deferved contempt by 
the illuftrious and eccentric part of man- 
kind j in whofe eyes common honelty is a 
nuifance, reprobated and abhorred." 

' It is, indeed, as you fay. Ma'am, but 
common honefty to pay one's debts; and 
too often is it negle(^ed by thofe who 
ought to fet a better example. Oh, if my 

, . * Sec Enquirer. daughters 



[ 138 ]■ 

daughters and I were but regularly paid 
for our embroidery by the fine ladies for 
whom we work, we fhould then be but too 
happy, for we fhould then have nothing 
to care for. But great folks do not know 
the degree of mifery they often inflifl by 
their carelefTnefs; they are too highly ex- 
alted out of the fphere (as one may fay) 
of their fellow- creatures to cafl' a thought 
upon the diiEculties of thofe who are to 
earn their bread by labour. I myfelf 
know ladies who never refufe to open their 
purfes to charity, but v/ho, if they had paid 
their tradefmen with, punctuality, might 
have preferved fome honefl families frorn 
ruin.** 

'' Want of pun^imlify has for time imfiiemo- 
rial siippHed materials for invefiive against 
great and extraordinary chara6lers^ re- 
turned Bridgetina. It is, as I faid before, 
a breach of common honefly ; and greatly 
is it to be regretted, that common honefty 

See Enquirer. fllQuld 



C 139 ] 

fliould fo long have gained the applaufe of 
an injudicious world. But when mankind 
fhall have been fufEciently enlightened by 
philofophy, utterly to difcard the ignoble 
prejudices of religion, regard to common 
honefty will ceafe. BlefTed sera! when a 
fair character fhall be no longer deemed 
eflential! When promifes fhall be no 
longer binding! And when men who have 
frantically -proved themselves the pests and 
enemies of their species^ fliall be eilimatcd 
according to their energies ; and for a<fts, 
which would in theprefent didempered Hate 
of civilization, be deemed worthy of the 
gallows, receive the applaufe due to their 
eminent talents and uncommon generosity P^ 

* I cannot exprefs myfelf fo finely as you 
do. Ma'am, but 1 believe what you obferve 
is very juft; that though morals are badly 
enough attended to at prefent, God knows, 
yet if religion were banillied from the world, 
(which Heaven forbid!) it would be far 
worfe.' Again laying the bill before Brid- 

gctina 



[ i4ia 1 

getina on the table, (he begged her to pe- 
rufc it at her leifure, and aft^r making a 
fecond apology for her intrulion, left the 
room. 

" Unnatural ftate of civilization!" cried 
Brid getina, as foon as ihe was atone; 
^' Odious and depraved fociety, where 
every thing one eats, or drinks, or wears, 
mufl neceffarily be paid for! Oh, wife 
and enlightened Hottentots! ye alone of 
all mankind have attained to that ftate of 
perfe<5i:ion fo charmingly defcribed by the 
philofopher ! where the evils of co-opera- 
tion are avoided', where pecuniary rewards 
for labour are unknown, and ableffed ftate 
of equality gives vigour to the intelleft, 
and roufes the fublime energies of the fouL 
Oh, that I were in the midft of the Gono- 
quais horde! There no mercenary demand 
for the rent of my lodgings, no fares to 
hackney-coachmen, no bills from laun- 
drefles, nor butchers, nor bakers, nor gro- 
cers, nor {hoe-makers, nor chandlers, nor 

glovers, 



C 141 ] 

glovers, would interrupt the fublime fpecu- 
lations of my towering fancy ; but each 
congenial Hottentot, energizing in his felf- 
built fhed, would be too much engroffcd 
by forming projects for general utility to 
break in upon my repofe!" 

Some hours were thus fpent by our he- 
roine in deprecating the odious inflitutions 
of the fociety in which it was unhappily her 
lot to live, before fhe thought of any me- 
thod of extricating herfelf from her prefent 
embarraffment. It at length, however, 
very fortunately occurred to her recollec- 
tion, that fhe had, on the day of her fruit- 
lefs application to the city knight, obfer^xd 
the words Moriey Lent infcribed upon the 
door-pods of a {hop in Oxford-flreet. 

" Happy circuraflance !" cried (lie, as 
foon as the thought occurred; " How for- 
tunate was it, that by taking that road to 
the city, I Ihould become acquainted with 
the abode of this philanthropic. Thus it 
is that events generate each other ! Had 

Alexander 



[ 142 ] 

Alexander the Great never bathed in the 
Cydnus, Shakefpeare would never have 
written.* Had I gone by the Strand, I 
might not have known, that even in this 
depraved and unnatural ftate of civilization, 
men are to be found, who, convinced of 
the immoral tendency of accumulation, pro- 
mote the glorious cera of equahty by dif- 
tributing their fuperfluous wealth. Let 
me haften to the abode of this enlightened 
perfon, who will doubtlefs deem it a duty 
to fupply my wants." 

Delighted with this idea, (he haflily 
threw on her cloak, and proceeded without 
delay to the place where the advcrtifement 
had arreted her attention. The place was 
eafily found. She entered, and inftantly 
demanded an audience of the enlightened 
perfonage who had notified the generous 
intention of lending money. His wife was 
the perfon to whom fhe addreiTed herfelf; 
who told her, that Mr. Poppem was then 

* See Pol. Juf. engaged 



C 143 ] 

engaged with a cuflomer in the parlour, 
but that fhe could do her bufinefs equally 
well. 

" Mybufmefs," replied Bridgetina, 'Ms 
to converfe with the man you call your 
hufband ; for that he is your hufband I can 
fcarcely fuppofe, as it is little likely that a 
philofopher, who is convinced of the im- 
moral tendency of accumulation, fbould 
give encouragement to a monopoly fo per- 
nicious as marriage." 

* Dy'e m.ean to tell me, that I am not an 
honeft woman?' cried the (hopkeeper's 
in an enraged voice. 

" An honed woman is a very mean and 
vulgar appellation for a perfon who acls 
upon principles of abftrafl virtue," re- 
joined Bridgetina. " I make no doubt 
that your virtues are fublime; and it is the 
high idea I have conceived of Mr. Pop- 
pem*s, that now brings me here. Pray let 
him know, that a perfon of no mean ener- 
gies wiflies to converfe with liim." 

The 



[ Hi j 

The fight of Bridgetinu's large gold 
watch, which, in fpite of the change of 
faihioii, fhe dill wore fufpended from her 
apron-firing by its malTy chain of the fame 
precious metal, operated as a more power- 
ful pacifier of the good woman's refent- 
ment than all the arguments of philofophy. 
Without farther hefitation, Ihe conducted 
our heroine to the inner chamber of Mr. 
Poppem, a place peculiarly dedicated to the 
myfteries of his profeffion ; where, like a 
bronze ftatue that has been accidentally 
pufhed into fome ill-afforted wardrobe, he 
fat half-hid from view by piles of gowns, 
petticoats, great-coats, &c. A wretched- 
looking female flood before him, with a 
half-flarved infant in her arms. 

^' And will you really give no more?'* 
cried the fupplicant, in a feeble voice. 

* No more!' returned Poppem; 'no, 
not a {hilling more, if it was to fave you 
from the gallows. There's ne'er a pawn- 
broker in London would ha' gi'n you the 

half 



[ 145 ] 

half on't on that there trafli; fo you may 
take up your money, and be gone.' 

" I mud fo !" returned the woman, with 
a heavy figh ; and taking up a few {hillings 
that lay on a fmall table, (lie prefled her 
infant to her bread. " Yes, deared,'' faid 
(lie, " you fliall now have bread!" The 
child turned up its languid eyes to her 
pale face, which was bedewed with tears. 
She again prefled it to her bofom, and 
departed. 

* I beg your pardon, Mifs,* cried Mr. 
Poppem, on perceiving Bridgetina. ' I 
purted I have been fo bothered by that 
there woman, and her tales of a cock and 
bull, that I did not obfcrve you. Thefe 
fort of paupers are fuch troublefom.e peo- 
ple to have any dealings with, that for my 
fhare, I declare I never widi to fee one of 
them enter my {hop. But pray, what is 
your demand, Mifs?' 

" I come, enlightened citizen," replied 
Bridgetina, " I come to inform myfelf of 

VOL. III. L your 



C 146 ] 

your motives, to enquire into your princi- 
ples, and to convince you that I am enti- 
tled to a fliare in the property which, I 
make no doubt, it is your ftudy to diftri- 
bute according to the unerring rules of 
moral juftice." 

' Juftice!' returned the pawn-broker; 
^ What d'ye mean by juflice? I never was 
before any juflice, but Juflice Trap, in all 
my life; and then no one dared to fay that 
black was the white of my eye. I {lands 
upon my charadler. I deals upon the fair 
and the fquare. All open and above-board, 
I am no refetter of flolen goods — no abet- 
tor of robbery — no ' 

" I underftand you," faid Bridgetina, 
interrupting him. " The unequal diftri- 
bution of property may, undoubtedly, be 
termed a robbery; and all existing abuses 
are to be deprecated only as they serve to in^ 
crease and perpetuate the inequality of con* 
ditions.^ When mankind are fufEciently 



See Pol. Juf. vol. ii. illumi- 



[ U7 ] 

illuminated, every perfon, pofTelTed of pro- 
perty, will a<5i: as you,Mr.Poppem, nowdo. 
What I want particularly to know, is your 
mode of eflimating the worth of individu- 
als; or, in other words, the criterion by 
which you judge of capacity?" 

' Produce the pledge, Mifs,' faid Mr. 
Poppem ; « and if I don't eftimate it as 
fairly as e'er a pawn-broker in London, 
you fhall ha' the money for nothing.' 

^' What proof of powers or energies can 
the narrow limits of one ihort converfa- 
tion afford?" returned Bridgetina. "lam, 
however, prepared to difcufs, to invefti- 

gate, to argue, to energize, to " 

Here the voice of a perfon in the front- 
fhop attra<f^ed the attention of our heroine. 
She flopped to liflen, and inftantly recog- 
nifed the peculiar dialed of her townfman^ 
Mr. Glib. " How fortunate!" cried fhe, 
opening the flight door that feparated the 
place flie was in from the outer ihop. " See 
L 2 how 



> 



[ 148 ] 

how events generate each other!** holding 
out her hand to Mr. Glib. 

* Ha! Citizenefs Botherim!' cried Glib, 
'How do, chuck? Glad to fee you. 
Didn't think to meet ye here, though. 
Doft not come to Pop, furely?* 

Bridgetina immediately informed her 
brother illumine of the motives of her viCt 
to Mr. Poppem, at which he laughed fo 
immoderately as to incur no fmall degree 
of our heroine's refentment. 

^ Can't help it, for my foul,' cried Glib, 
breaking into another immoderate fit of 
laughter. ' Take a pawn-broker for a phi- 
lofopher! How comical! But never mind; 
better than us come for cafh. Can'ft help 
me to any? Curfedly out at elbows. Ci- 
tizen Vail no better than a fcoundrel. Sold 
my books to Lackington, and gone off 
with the cafh. Left me without a fixpence. 
Can lend me five pounds, I hope.' 

^' No, really," returned Bridgetina, " I 
have not at prefent fo much as five fhillings 

in 



[ 149 ] 

in my poffeflion, and came here in hopes 
of receiving a fiipply for myfelf." 

' So you can,' returned Glib. ' Get it 
on your watch. No watches among the 
Hottentots. No baubles, nor trinkets^ 
nor gewgaws, in a reafonable ftate of fo- 
ciety. Give it to me. Get you the money 
in a twinkling. How much dofl want?' 

*' Ten guineas will do for my immediate 
exigences," replied Bridgetina, putting 
the watch into his hands. 

' Say no more,' cried Glib. ' Shalt 
have it in a moment.' Then ikipping 
acrofs the (hop, he entered Mr. Poppem's 
apartment without ceremony, and in a few 
minutes returned with fifteen pounds and 
a duplicate. The latter he put into the 
hands of Bridgetina, with the ten-pound 
note. * Ten will ferve your turn,' faid he, 
and five is juft what I want myfelf. Shall 
pay it in a trice.' 

" But when ?" cried Bridgetina, per- 
ceiving him about to leave her. " When 

fliall 



[ I'^O ] 

fliall I fee you ? 1 fliall want tlie money In 
a few days, and you do*nt know where to 
find me." 

' Never make promifes,' cried Gllb» 
'^ Nothing fo immoral. Damps ray ener- 
gies to fee a creditor. Preferve your ener- 
gies, my dear. That's it ! Energies do 
alll' So faying, he ikipped out of the 
ftiop, and minghng with the croud, was 
quickly out of fight. 

Bridgetina, forgetting at that moment 
the immoral tendency of puncluality, was 
extremely difconcerted by the fudden de- 
parture of Glib without a promife of repay- 
ment. The illuminated citizen's contempt 
of common honefly flie knew to be as far fu- 
perior to her own:, as practice is to theory; 
but though flie ought, upon her own prin- 
ciples, to have made a point of conceding 
to him the larger fum, as being the more 
deferviug individual, yet either through 
the operation of fome latent prejudice, or 
of fome pre-difpofing caufes generated in 

tlie 



[ 151 ] 

the eternity that preceded her birth, fiie 
felt more inclined at that moment to relieve 
the preffing difficulties of her own fitua- 
tion, than to pay attention to the probably 
ftill more preffing difficulties by which he 
was embarraffed. Replete with chagrin 
and difappointment, (he flowly returned to 
her lodgings ; and having difcharged Mrs. 
Benton's bill, retired to her own apart- 
ment, to mufe in folitude and filence on the 
many miferies that overfpread the barren 
wildernefs of focietv. 



CHAP. 



L '52 J 



CHAP. VI. 

He little recks the woes which wait 
" To fcare his dreams of joy; 
Nor thinks to-morrow's alter'd fate 
" May all thofe dreams dcftroy." 

Mrs. Hannah Mors» 



SLOWLY, In the opinion of Henry, did 
the hours move on, till the day that 
brought his fifter and her fair companion 
to London. At length the fun arofe that 
was to light them on their journey, and 
never did aftronomer with more anxiety 
watch its progrefs on the day of the tranfit 
of a planet, than did Henry on this occa* 
fion. He had formed the defign of meet- 
ing them at Barnet, and having ordered 
his fervant to procure horfes, mounted 
about three o'clock, and fet off full fpeed, 

in 



[ 153 ] 

in hopes of fnrprifing them by his appear- 
ance at the Red-Lion, which he expe^^ed 
to reach before their arrival. 

The day had been unufually fine for the 
feafon, but by the time he had got to 
Highgate, the fky became obfcured, and 
a thick fog gradually fpread over the face 
of the country. Cheered by the profped 
in his " mind's eye/* he puftied forward, 
and having obtained the rifmg ground in 
the middle of Finchley-Common, obferved 
with palpitating delight the approach of 
two poft-chaifes, which he doubted not 
contained the friends he was in qued of. 
Riding briikly up to the firO: of the car- 
riages, the glaffes of which were all up, he 
called to the poftillion to ftop. The poft- 
boy obeyed. Immediately the front glafs 
was let down, and the kindly greetings of 
Henry anfwered by the firing of a piftol ! 
At the fame moment two perfons leaped 
from the carriage, and holding their piflols 
to the fuppofcd highwayman, laid hold of 

the 



[ 154 ] 

the bridle, which had dropped from his 
hand, 

*^ Have vou enough?*' cried one of the 
gentlemen. 

' Yes/ returned Henry; ' and when 
you have difcovered your millake, you 
will probably think I have had too much ' 

Henry's fervant being neither fo well 
mounted as his mailer, nor iufpired with 
an equal degree of impatience, had fallen 
confiderably behind. He darted forward 
at the report of the piflol, and feeing his 
mafter (as he imagined) in the hands of 
footpads, he called out for help. 

The gentleman who had fired the piftol, 
had, from the appearance of Henry, and 
flill more from his manner of fpeaking, 
begun to have fome apprehenfions of hk 
miftake. The appearance of the fervant 
gave additional (Irength to his furm^ifes. 

" Wherefore did you flop the carriage?" 
cried he, in a voice rather lefs violent than 
his former tone. 

* I expef^ed 



C 155 ] 

* I expe<^ed to meet with friends,' faid 
Henry, ' and confefs I owe the accident 
entirely to my own imprudence. What- 
ever may be its confequences, you, iir, are 
acquitted of all blame.' 

" Curfe on my rafhnefs!" cried the gen- 
tleman; " but I hope, fir, you are not 
much hurt?" 

' Not mortally, I truil,' returned Henry. 
^ From my feelings, I {hould fuppofe the 
ball to be lodged in myftioulder: the wound 
in my arm will fignify nothing.' 

" A brave fellow, by my flicul!" ex- 
claimed a perfon who at that moment came 
up from the fecond carriage. " I hope 
you will foon be after fettling the matter 
honourably, my dear, and be able to call 
him to account for taking a highwayman 
for a jontleman." 

• * I can only blame my own imprudence,* 
faid Henry. 

*' Toil may forgive me," faid the gen- 
tleman, grafping Henry-'s hand j " but I 

never 



C 156 ] 

liever fliall forgive myfelf. But let us not 
delay. My fervant ihall ride your horfe, 
while you take his place in the carriage 
with me. I fliall be miferable till the 
wound has been examined. Pray let us 
make hade/' 

^ The jontleman may do as he plafes/ 
faid the other traveller, ' but by my fhoul, 
my dear, when you travel through the 
county of Galway you had better take 
care how you pop at a jontleman, without 
giving him a chance of returning your firei' 

'^ I Ihall accept your offer with plea- 
fure, fir,^' faid Henry, without paying any 
attention to his obfervation, . " and hope I 
ihall havereafon to rejoice in the accident, 
as giving me the acquifition of a friend." 

Thelrifliman (hrugged up his fhoulders, 
and returned to his chaife; while Henry, 
with the affiflance of the flranger, dif- 
mounted from his horfe, and had placed 
his foot upon the flep of the chaife, when 
the rattling noife of carriages advancing 

quickly 



[ 157 ] 

quickly towards them attrafted his attention^ 
It was now fo dark, that they were quite 
near before they could be diftindly feen. 

' Has any accident happened ?' cried a 
voice, which Henry knew to be Do£lor 
Orweirs. 

*' None that is of any confequence," 
faid Henry, approaching the carriage. 

* It is Doctor Sydney!' cried Harriet. 

*' Do£l:or Sydney ! " repeated her father ; 
" I hope no difailer — " 

' A flight accident only,* faid Henry: 
' which I fliall inform you of at leifure, 
if you will have the goodnefs to make 
room for me.* 

" Yes, furely!*' faid they both at once. 
" Maria is behind," added the Doclor, 
" your appearance will alarm her, fo pray 
ftep in immediately." 

Henry affented ; and taking a hafly leave 
of the ftranger, placed himfelf by the fide 
of Harriet, whofe emotion was too appa- 
rent to efcape the penetrating eyes of 

love. 



[ 159 ] 

love. Ill a voice expreffive of the ten- 
derefl folicitude, flie enquired into the na- 
ture of the accident that had befallen him. 
Henry gave an evafive anfwer to her in- 
terrogatories, and turned the converfation ; 
which, in fpite of the pain he fufFered, he 
continued to fupport with all that fpirited 
animation the prefence of a beloved object 
naturally infpires. 

In the middle of a fprightly fally, he 
was flopped by a fcream from Harriet. 
* Ah! Sydney,' cried (he, * you arc 
wounded ! you are defperately wounded. 
My cloak is covered with blood.' 

Henry, finding it was in vain any longer 
to attempt deceiving her, gave a faithful 
account of all that had happened; and 
was amply repaid for the anguifh of his 
wound, by the intereft Harriet evidently 
took in his misfortune. 

On flopping at the door of Henry's 
lodgings, whither it had been agreed to 
drive, the flranger, whofe rafhnefs had 

occafioned 



[ 159 ] 

occafioned the unlucky accident, prefented 
himfelf, and with him an eminent furgeon, 
with whom Sydney was well acquainted ; 
and who was the very perfon he had 
Thought offending for on the occafion. 

Such generous ardour to repair an in- 
jury he had unintentionally committed, 
excited the admiration of Sydney, who, 
in fuitable terms, thanked him for his 
attention ; and then proceeded with him 
and Doflor Orwell to his own apartment, 
to fubmit the wound to the examination 
of the furgeon. 

Harriet's heart funk within her, at the 
idea of the pain he mud necefTarily un- 
dergo ; in vain did Ihe endeavour to exert 
her fortitude. When the carriage flopped 
in Hanover-fquare, (he was too much agi- 
tated to alight. The fecond chaife drove 
up, and Maria, Mr. Churchill, and Mrs. 
Botherim had defcended from it and come 
up to her, before fhe had fufficientiy re- 
collected 



C 160 ] 

colle^led her fcattered fpirits, to be able to 
form any excufe for her father's abfence. 

Alarmed at the appearance of her emo- 
tion, Maria earneftly entreated to know 
the caufe; but without taking any notice 
of her queftions, (he haftily followed Mrs. 
Botherim into the houfe, where Mrs. 
Fielding received them with that happy 
mixture of cordiality and politenefs which 
denotes the union of good-breeding and 
benevolence. 

Henry's fervant had communicated the 
news of Lis mafter's misfortune at Mrs. 
FieldinG['s a few minutes before the arrival 
of his friends, and had thereby excited a 
degree of alarm and anxiety, which was 
{till vifible in that good lady's countenance. 
The fimllar feelings of Harriet did not 
efcape her notice ; and by exciting a de- 
gree of intereft and compaffion, gave a 
(Ironger impreffion in her favour than all 
the graces of her perfon, or beauty of her 
countenance, could have produced. 

The 



C 161 ] 

The (hock which Maria received from 
the intelligence was fufficiently fevere, 
though mitigated by the confidence (he 
repofed in the veracity of her friends; 
which ihe knew to be of too genuine a 
nature to admit of their impofmg upon 
her by any of thofe kind lies^ which are 
often fo liberally difpenfed upon fimilar 
occafions. Do6lor Orwell's report was 
extremely favourable. The ball, he told 
them, had been extracted without diffi- 
culty, and the wound, in the opinion of 
the furgeon, fo little ferious, that it would 
only occafion a few days confinement. 

Maria's anxious defire to vifit her bro- 
ther was indulged by Mrs. Fielding, who 
kindly ordered her own chair to attend 
her. Mr. Churchill, as he handed her 
into it, whifpered a wifli that it had been 
a more fociable conveyance; Maria did 
not frown, nor was (he, pofTibly, much 
difpleafed at feeing him walk befide it to 
Henry's door. 

VOL. III. M While 



[ 162 ] 

While Maria and Churchill were on 
this charitable vifit, poor Mrs. Botherim 
\v?s employed in giving Mrs. Fielding a 
circumflantial derail of all fhe had fufFered 
from Bridgetina's abfence; interfperfed 
with many bitter reflections on the wicked 
people, and flill more wicked books, that 
had led her daughter aftray. " Yes," 
cried flie, " Ma'am, as I was telling you, 
I now knows for certain it is all along of 
them there people as comes to Mr. Glib's, 
v/ho I thought, all the time, (God help 
me) to be the mod learned and the mod 
wifefl people in the world. It is true, I 
did not underdand much of the meaning 
of what they faid ; for what ihould I know 
of perfebility, and cowfation, and all them 
there things? But had I known that they 
meant to make children unnatural, and un- 
dutiful to their parents, they ihould never 
liave been uttered in my houfe, I promife ye." 

' It is, indeed, to be regretted,' faid 
Mrs. Fielding, ' that Mifs Botherim (hould 

have 



[ 163 3 

have been (o unfortunate in the cholte of 
her books and friends. It could not be 
expcfted from Mifs Botherim, that with 
her limited opportunities of information 
fhe fhould be able to detedl the pernicious 
tendency of the opinions ftie fo unhap- 
pily embraced.' 

" Ah ! Madam," returned Mrs. Bo- 
therim, " you have no fort of notion how 
learned Ihe was, I do aiTure you, fhe has 
read as many books as e'er a parfon in the 
kingdom. The hiftories of lords and 
counts, and colonels and ladies of quality, 
was what fhe pored on from morning till 
night. And then fhe got them there 
Metam Phyfics in whole volumes, as big 
as the church bible ; all written, as fhe told 
me, by that General Utility^ as fhe called 
him. I'm fure I fhall hate the name of 
him as long as I live." 

Mrs. Fielding could not help fmiling at 

the fimplicity of this account. ' I am 

afraid, my good Madam,' faid fhe, ' that 

M 2 the 



[ 164 ] 

the fort of reading you firfl alluded to, 
was a very bad preparative for the latter. 
To an imagination enflamed by an incefTant 
perufal of the improbable fictions of ro- 
mance, a flight into the regions of meta- 
phyficks mud rather be a dangerous ex- 
curfion. • I am afraid Mifs Botherim has 
gone too far aflray in the fields of imagi- 
nation to be eafily brought back to the 
plain path of common fcnfe.' 

" I fhould hope," faid Do^or Orwell,, 
" that a little refleflion would make her 
fcnfible of the fallacy of opinions, which 
have invariably proved fatal to all who- 
have fo far adopted, as to make them a 
■principle of a(S^ion." 

' Yes, my dear Madam,' faid Mrs. 
Botherim, ' do pray tell her of the confe- 
quences. Bid her think of poor Mifs 
Delmond, who has been ruinated, and de- 
luded, andticed away by a fellow,, who, 
for all his fine talk, is no better than a 
fhabby hair-drefler. And — ' 

Here 



C l6o ] 

Here the entrance of Bridgetlna, who 
had been fent for by Mrs. Fielding, put an 
end to the good lady's harangue. Her af- 
feflion for her daughter fo far outweighed 
her refentment, that the former only ap- 
peared in her reception. Throwing her 
arms round her neck, fhe exclaimed in 
broken accents, while tears flowed from 
her eyes, ' My Biddy! my dear Biddy! 
you will not leave your poor mother again ? 
No, no, you cannot be fo cruel. You 
fhall do juft whatever you pleafe, and have 
the command of all I have in the world, 
if you will but flay with me to comfort 
my old age. I am fure,' added flie, fob- 
bing, ' I am fure I never contradicted you 
in my life — you cannot fay that I did.* 

" It would have been quite counter to 
the proper order of things, if you had,'* 
returned Bridgetina. " To a perfeflible 
being every fpecies of coercion is improper, 
and as contradidtion is a fpecies of coer- 
cion, it neceffarily follows that — " 

' There!* 



[ 166 ] 

* There!' cried Mrs. Botherim, holding 
up her clafped hands in agony, * there, 
now! (he is at it again! Jufltheoldftory! 
all them there fine words over again, as 
pat as the day ftie firfl: learned them. O, 
Biddy I Biddy! would ye but fpeak in a 
"way that a body could underfland!' 

^^ If I were to fpeak to your compre- 
henfion, mother," returned Bridgetina, 
*' I mufl defcend indeed I A mind that is 
illumined like mine " 

* Come, come, Mifs Botherim,' faid 
Doftor Orwell, ^ don't think you will add 
to your dignity by lefTening your parent. I, 
for my (hare, know no good of any illumi- 
nation that does not ihew itfelf in the con- 
du£i:. And in that, my dear, your mother 
has the advantage of you; as fhe has never 
been guilty of any glaring impropriety.* 

" The perfon, fir, who would energife 
in no vulgar manner mud prepare herfelf 
for encountering obloquy and cenfure,'* 
retorted Bridgeiina. 

<^And 



[ 167 ] 

* And pray, my dear, what entitles you 
to be fuperior to obloquy and cenfare? 
What right have you to think, that a line 
of condu£l, condemned by the general fuf- 
frage of mankind, and which, if it were uni- 
verfally to prevail, would prove deltruflive 
to the peace and happinefs of fociety, 
jfhould efcape rcprehenfion ?' 

^' The prejudices which fpring from 
the odious inflituiions of an ili-conitituted 
fociety,'' faid Bridgetina, '' ought to be 
defpifed by every perfon capable of foar- 
ing to a fublime morality, founded on ab- 
ftra6l reafoning/* 

' And it is this fublime morality, founded 
on abflra£t reafoning, which teaches you 
to neglefl, or to defpife, the performance 
of every duty belonging to your fituation ?* 
returned the Doflor. ' It is it which 
teaches you to forfake an indulgent pa- 
rent, who has made your happinefs the 
fludy of her whole life ; and in return for 
the tender care fhe has bellowed on your 

infancy 



[ 168 ] 

infancy and youth, to leave her old age to 
folitude and forrow. It is this fublime mo- 
rality, founded on ab(lra£l reafoning, which 
has likewife, I fuppofe, taught you to 
break through every law of delicacy and 
decorum,^ and {liamelefsly to offer yourfelf 
to proflitution? Such have been the fruits 
of this sublime morality^ which arrogantly 
pretends to excell that of the Gofpel!* 

" I have fomewhere heard reafoning 
termed the arithmetick of words ^'^ faid Mrs. 
Fielding. " Where the fum total is fo 
monftrous, 1 think we may confidently pro- 
nounce that there has been fome error in 
the calculation. Of this, I have no doubt, 
Mifs Bother im will become fully fenfible, 
when {he takes a wide and impartial view 
of the confequences." 

^ Aye!* cried Mrs. Botherim, ^ let her 
take a view of Mr. G lib's poor ragged 
children in the parifti workhoufe, whom 
their father has left to ftarve, becaufe, 
forfoorh, a man fliould have no regard for 

his 



[ 169 ] 

tls own flefh and blood ! And let her fee 
what is become of their mother — gone off, 
like a hufley, with a recruiting ofEcer! 
Pretty confequences, truly! To fay no- 
thing of the death of that worthy gentle- 
man, Captain Delmond, who died of a 
broken heart, if ever man did ; and I am 
fare I do not wonder at his doing fo, for 
what touches the heart of a parent equal 
to the undutifulnefs of a darling child? 
Woe is me that I fhould live to fpeak this 
from experience ! But, indeed, Biddy, I 
ihall never recover your unkindnefs.* 

Notwithftanding the philofophy of 
Bridgetina, fhe could not help being af- 
fefted by the tears of her mother. Mrs. 
Fielding, perceiving the impreffion that 
they made upon her, thought it bed to 
leave them fome time to themfelves. She 
arofe, and taking a hand of each, led them 
to the adjoining apartment, faying, " that 
after fo long a feparation they had pro- 
bably 



C m ] 

bably many things to communicate, that 
would be bed difcuiTed in a tete-a-tete,*^ 
. The endeavours of Mrs. Fielding to re- 
concile our heroine to return to her mo- 
ther were forcibly feconded by the mor- 
tifying circuraflances of her fituation. 
Without money, without friends, without 
any remaining hopes of fuccefs in the great 
objeft of her whiles, (lie began to think 
that {he had rather been too precipitate in 
her anticipation of the pra£lices of The 
Age of Reason; and that in, the prefent 
deplorable ftate of things, a young woman 
might be excufable in remaining under the 
protection of her relations, though flie 
efcaped the glory of moral martyrdom by 
doing fo. 

A thoufand times fmce (lie left W ^ 

had (he fenfibly felt the want of thofe little 
tender attentions, which her fond mother 
had ever been fo ready to beflow. Sl^e 
had been fick— and found no one in- 
tereftcd in her recovery. Mrs. Benton 

had. 



L 1/1 ] 

had, indeed, attended her as much as her 
bufmefs would allow; but her attentions 
fell far fiiort of the anxious folicitude of a 
parent, who, on the flighted indifpofition, 
had been alarmed for her fafety. Nor had 
flie been able to eradicate from her bread 
the feelings of filial affeflion j feelings, 
which the unexpected meeting with her 
mother had powerfully revived. And as 
flie had now little profpe£i: of foon feeing 
any of thofe who were fufficiently en- 
lightened, to condemn her for this return- 
ing weaknefs, fhe was eafily prevailed upon 
to oblige the old lady, by confenting to 

accompany her back to W . 

Overjoyed at this inflance of conde- 
fcenfion, Mrs. Botherim willingly under- 
took to difcharge all the debts contracted 
by her daughter; and having gratefully 
thanked Mrs. Fielding for her kind atten- 
tion, departed with Bridgetina to Mrs. 
Benton's. 

CHAP. 



[ 173 ] 



CHAP. vn. 

" Beware of Jcaloufy!'* 

SHAKESPEAar. 



IV yTRS. Fielding's intention of fending 
-*-'-■- to enquire for Henry on the follow- 
ing morning was anticipated by Doflor 
Orwell, whofe report was fo favourable as 
to in fufe cheerful nefs into the countenances 
of the circle, now affembled at breakfaft. 

In talking over the difafler of the pre- 
ceding evening, Dr. Orwell mentioned the 
gentleman who had been the unfortunate 
occafion of it, by the name of Carradine. 

" Has he ever been in India," aiked 
Mrs. Fielding, eagerly. 

* I believe he has,' returned the Do^or. 

« Then/' 



[ 173 J 

"Then,'' faid Mrs. Fielding, " I make 
no doubt he is the fon of one of my oldeft 
and moft intimate friends. Through the 
interefl of Lady Brierfton I procured this 
boy a cadet's appointment on the Bengal 
eftabUlhment, about fourteen years ago ; 
but of me, it is probable, he now retains 
not any remembrance." 

Mrs. Fielding was miftaken. While (he 
yet fpoke, Mr. Carradine was announced. 
He had, through Henry Sydney, heard of 
her living in London, and no fooner heard 
it, than with all that ardour which was the 
prominent feature of his character, he 
haftened to pay his refpe£is to his acknow- 
ledged benefa£lrefs. Mrs. Fielding recei- 
ved this leftimony of his gratitude with a 
fatisfaclion equal to the interefl fhe took 
in the welfare of the fon of her friend. 
She heard with pleafure of his fuccefs in 
India, which had far exceeded his moft 
fanguine expectations; and was (till more 
highly gratified by learning, that that fuc- 
cefs 



C 174 ] 

cefs had enabled him to make a handfomc 
provifion for two orphan fillers. He had 
corne over to pay a vifit to the cldefl of 
thefe, upon her marriage, and his leave of 
abfence being now nearly expired, was on 
the eve of again taking his departure for 
the Eaft. 

In fpeaking of the misfortune occalioned 
by his raflmefs the preceding evening, he 
cxpreiTed himfelf with fo much feeling on 
account of Henry, and fuch a generous 
condemnation of his own impetuofity, as 
not only reconciled Mrs. Fielding, but even 
divefled Maria of all inclination to impute 
to him the lead degree of blame. Harriet 
was, on this occafion, fomewhat behind 
her friends in point of generofity. As the 
perfon by whom the life of Henry had 
been expofed to danger, {he could not help 
viewing Mr. Carradine with a degree of 
dillike; nor was her diflike diminiflied by 
finding herfelf the object of his particular 
attention. That Ihe was fo, was evident 

almofl 



: 175 1 

almofl from the very moment of his en- 
trance; and the avidity with which he 
accepted Mrs, Fielding's invitation to din- 
ner, might, perhaps, be as juftly attributed 
to the power of attraction as to the impulfe 
of gratitude. 

This young man, whofe quick and lively 
feelings had, by early indulgence, been fof- 
tered into uncontrolable impetuofity, was 
the willing Have of impulfe ; but though 
frequently led aflray by his capricious 
guide, his errors were more than compen- 
fated by the virtues of his heart. Open, 
generous, and fmcere, he was flill more* 
fervent in his friendfhips than in his enmi- 
ties; and equally prompt to confer an ob- 
ligation, as to refent an injury. The im- 
prefTion made upon his mind by the firfl 
appearance of Mifs Orwell, was augmented 
into intoxication before the end of the 
evening; nor was this delirium of love in 
the lead checked by the apparent coldnefs 
of her manners. Little accuftomed to in- 

tercourfe 



[ 176 ] 

tercourfe with the fex, he was a ftranger to 
that delicacy of fcnriment which renders an 
union of minds effential to happinefs ; and 
having gathered from converfation in the 
courfe of the day, that Mifs Orwell's for- 
tune confided chiefly in her charms and vir- 
tues, he retired elate with hope, and fully 
confident of fuccefs. 

On the following morning he returned 
to efcort the ladies to an exhibition of 
paintings, to which Mrs. Fielding had 
mentioned an intention of carrying her 
young friends on the preceding evening. 
Harriet would willingly have been excufed, 
but fhe was fuch a novice in the modern 
fchool of female manners, that fhe did not 
confider herfelf at liberty to indulge every 
wayward humour, or to difconcert the 
pleafure of a party for the gratification of 
her own feelings. She therefore con- 
cealed her repugnance, and only begged 
Maria not to quit her fide. Maria promi- 
fed, and no doubt intended to comply with 

her 



[ 177 1 

her requeft ; but r. Churchill knew fd 
well the paintings that were particularly 
fuited to her tafle, and took fuch pains to 
point them out, that in the fervour of her 
admiration of the pieces to which he dt- 
re£^ed her attention, ihe was infenfibly 
drawn to another part of the room. Dr. 
Orwell and Mrs. Fielding were mean time 
engaged in converfation, fo that Harriet 
found herfelf left to the care of Mr. Car- 
radine; who, without confidering the cha- 
racier to whom he addrelTed himfelf, em- 
ployed the opportunity thus aiforded him 
to pour out that profuiion of exaggerated 
compliment, which he had been taught to 
confider as the mod acceptable offering to 
the ear of beauty. 

Tired by his afliduity, and provoked by 
his perfeverance, fhe haflened to where 
Mrs. Fielding and her father had procured 
feats. Jufl as fhe approached them, Dn 
Orwell refigned his to an elderly lady, 
whom he heard complain of fatigue. The 

VOL. Ill, N fame 



[ 178 ] 

fame complaint was heard by feveral young 
men of fafliion, who lounged upon the 
fame bench, but heard without producing 
on their part the fmalleri: effort for her 
accommodation. The eyes of the fame 
party were now turned on Harriet, who 
involuntarily (lirunk from their familiar 
flare, and gladly entered into a converfa- 
tion with Mrs. Fielding, in order to relieve 
her embarraffment. 

The converfation naturally turned on 
the paintings, on which Harriet gave her 
opinion with all that ingenuoufnefs and 
finnplicity which belonged to her chara6i:er. 
Accuilomed to think for herfelf, flie did 
not hefitate to " fpeak from her feelings ; 
and as fhe made no pretenfions to connoif- 
feurlhip, would not have been at all mor- 
tified at finding that flie had been pleafed 
wath a piece that was not flamped with 
the approbation of a connoiifeur. 

'*• You feem fatigued, my dear," faid 
Mrs. Fielding ; " I wifli we could make 

room 



C 179 1 - 

room for you," looking at the gentlemen, 
who (lill kept their feats. 

' I beg the young lady may take minej' 
faid the elderly lady whom Doctor Orwell 
had accommodated. Harriet declined the 
offer, and the fubjei^ of the paintings was 
renewed. 

*^ I confefs," faid Mrs. Fielding, " that 
I receive peculiar pleafure from fuch paint- 
ings as afford an exercife to the mind. I 
am not connoiffeur enough to be long en- 
raptured with all the charms of light and 
fliade; and though I admire the beauty of 
that St. Cecilia, I dwell with much more 
fatisfaclion on its companion, which gives 
fuch a lively reprefeniation of the manners 
of a former age and diflant country.'* 

* Taflelefs muft they be, who can turn 
their eyes to painted canvafs, while ani- 
mated beauty demands their admiration 1* 
whifpered Carradine. 

" You are right," faid Dr. Orwell to 

Mrs. Fielding J " and that view of the fa- 

N 2 vages, 



[ is-0 ] 

vages, which hangs oppofire to us, has ai* 
forded me particular pleafure, from the 
train of ideas it has excited. No one can 
view it, and look around, without being 
convinced how nearly the extremes of bar- 
barifm and civilization are united. Do 
but mark the expreifion of ftupidity and 
indolence in the countenance of that favage 
who fits at the door of the hut. Methinks 
he w^ants but a tooth-pick to make him 
quite a modern fine gentleman; he feems 
almoft as much infenfible to all the moral, 
natural, and focial feelings and enjoyments, 
as any beau in the room. See with what 
lifllefs indifference his companion views 
the females who are placed befide him. 
How vacant his flare! How rude and 
brutifli does itfpeak his manners!" 

While Dr. Orwell was fpeaking, Mrs. 
Fielding accidentally turned her eye from 
the picflure upon the gentlemen who fat 
befide her. ^ An't you tired of this horrid 
place?' faid one. 

"Tired!*' 



C 181 ] 

" Tired !" returned his companion ; " I 
have been fatigued to death this half- 
hour." So faying, they rofe with one 
confent, perhaps derci mined never more t j 
take their place at an exhibition befide a 
portrait of favages. 

On their return home, Mrs. Fieldinfj^ 
flopped the carriage at Henry's door. 
While Doctor Orwell and Maria were 
ftepping our to enquire for him., ^ Tell 
him,' faid Mrs. Fielding, ' that we fhali 
all pay him a vifit together, the firft evening 
he is well enough to receive us. Maria 
foon returned, with earneft intreaties from 
her brother that the kind proraife mic^ht 
be fulfilled that very evening. The requcit 
was feconded by Dr. Orwell, on whofe 
judgment Mrs. Fiek^ing fo much relied, 
that (lie was eafily prevailed upon to ac- 
quiefce in the propohl. 

In the evening rh-'v accordingly wen:, 
and were received by Hen> y with the mcfl: 
rapturous gratitude. To Mrs. Fielding he? 

wasf. 



[ 183 T 

Was profufe in his acknowledgments, for 
her goodnefs and condefcenfion. To Har- 
riet his eyes only fpoke, but they required 
not any interpreter. In anfwer to the in- 
terrogatories concerning his wound, he 
declared it to be a mere fcratch, not worth 
mentioning; and only that it obliged him 
to keep on his night-gown, would not con- 
fine him to his room another day. While 
Mrs. Fielding was congratulating him on 
the fortunate iflue of an event which had 
appeared fo big with danger, and Harriet 
fmiiing delight at the certainty of his re- 
covery, Mr. Carradine entered the room. 
He inftantly feized the vacant chair by the 
fide of Harriet, and to her fo exclufivePy 
devoted his attentions, that he did not feem 
to have either eyes or ears for any other 
objeift:. Unaccuftomed to difguife his feel- 
ings, he fought not to conceal them ; tho? 
the evident diftrefs of Harriet might have 
convinced him, that whatever gratification 
he enjoyed from this open avowal of his 

partiality. 



C 183 ] 

partiality, he enjoyed at her expence. la 
vain did ihe endeavour by monofyllable 
anfwers to weary out his patience, or by 
frequently addreiling Mrs. Fielding or 
Maria, to turn his attention to the conver- 
fation of her friends. He could fpeak but 
to her alone, and made fuch frequent allu- 
fions to what paffed either in the courfe of 
the morning, or during his vilit to Mrs. 
Fielding on the preceding day, as mufl: have 
impreiTed any liflener with an idea of their 
being on terms of long-eflabliflied intimacy. 
Trifling was the pain of the wound his 
hand had given, in comparifon of that 
which his conduct no^v inflicted on the 
heart of Henry. He now firft felt the 
torturing pang of jealoufy, nor did the be- 
haviour of Harriet quiet his apprehenfions. 
He knew her delicacy, he knew her pru- 
dence; and to prudence and delicacy did 
he folely attribute her feeming indifference 
to the too evident partiality of her new 
admirer. But would flie contmue indiffe- 
rent 



L 184 ] 

rent to a man, who, emboldened by profpc- 
rity, addreffed her in theflile of confident 
fuccefs ? Would fhe fcorn the allurements 
of ambition, and refufe the offer of afflu- 
ence from one whofe perfonal accomplifh- 
ments alone might make an impreflion on 
any female heart ? " She will," faid Hope. 
' No, no j' faid trembling Apprehenfion, 
* you have no right to expe£l it.' " Then 
fhe is loft to you for ever!** faid De- 
fpondency. 

The ^ale hue that fucceeded the feverifh 
flufti on the cheek of Henry, was not un- 
obferved by Mrs. Fielding. " Sydney,'* 
faid fhe, " I fear you have over-rated the 
progrefs of your recovery. Your wifh to 
fee your friends has led you to an exertion 
beyond your ftrength ; but we muft be no 
longer parties in your indifcretion." She 
then ordered her carriage, and while Henry 
endeavoured to affure her that her fears 
were without foundation, fhe was, by the 
changes of his colour, and the faltering 

of 



C 18-5 ] 

of his voice, fully perfuadcd of their 
reality. 

When Doftor Orwell went to enquire 
for his young friend on the following morn- 
ing, he met the furgeon coming out of his 
apartment, and from him (to his great dif- 
quietude) received intelligence of Henry's 
increafed indifpofition. A confiderable de- 
gree of fever had already taken place, 
which in the courfe of the day became fo 
alarming, that the furgeon on his next viiit 
in the afternoon propofed calling in the 
affiftance of an eminent phylician. Next 
day he w^as flill worfe, and Maria, in an- 
guifh of heart, difpatched a mxeifenger to 
her father with the melancholy tidings. 

All the bright vifions of expected hap- 
pinefs, with which Maria and her friend 
had indulged their imaginations while pre- 
paring for their jaunt to London, were 
now compleatly annihilated ; and in their 
place melancholy reflections on the pad, 
or gloomy forebodings of the future, took 

pofleflion 



L ^S^ 1 

poffeiHon of their minds. From thc-prcf- 
iure of thefe Maria was fomewliat relieved 
by active exertion; but Harriet had no 
Aich refonrce. She had not even the 
privilege of communicating the fufFerings 
of her anxious heart. They did not, how- 
ever, efcape the penetrating eye of Mrs* 
Fielding, who, by the moil foothing at^ 
tention, endeavoured to alleviate as much 
as poilibk the pain ihe well knew how 
to eftimate. 

A ftill feverer talk awaited her — it was 
the reception of Mr. Sydney; who in- 
flantly on the receipt of his daughter's 
letter had fet off for London, and arrived 
on the day that Henry was pronounced 
to be in the utmofl danger. 

Though a period of thirty years had 
elapfed fmce Mrs. Fielding had lafl feen 
Mr. Sydney, it is probable that time had 
not fo compleatly obliterated the remem- 
brance of their parting fcene, that ftie could 
now, without emotion, have gone through 

the 



[ 187 ] 

the ceremony of the firfl: interview, had 
not every feeling been abforbed by the ob- 
je£i: of their mutual anxiety. The fame 
caufe would have been productive of the 
fame effeds at any period of their acquain- 
tance ; for in fpite of the fupreme domi* 
nion afcribed by poets and novelifts to the 
God of Love, (who is reprefented as the 
prime mover of every human aftion, and 
the omnipotent governor of the bread of 
every perfon who has ever felt his power) 
he is, in fa6l, a mere funfliine vifitor, who 
fkulks away at the firfl appearance of ca- 
lamity, and is driven from the heart at the 
approach of real evil. 

Mrs. Fielding, who felt for Henry all 
the affedlion of a parent — feelingly parti- 
cipated in the parent's afflidlion. For 
fome days after the arrival of Mr. Sydney, 
feaVful fufpence continued to refl: on every 
brow, and to throb in every heart. Har- 
riet, to whom the prefence of Carradine 
had be«n fo difagreeable, now watched 

for 



[ 188 3 

for his knock at the door with fickening 
impatience; he, indeed, fpent the greateft 
part of his time in going betwixt Hanover- 
fquare and George-ftreet ; and by the Hvely 
intereft he took in Henry's recovery, raifed 
himfelf not a little in the opinion of his 
miftrefs. 

Above a week was thus fpenr. At the 
end of that period a change took place, 
which his medical friends pronounced to 
be a favourable crifis. Harriet was fitting 
with Mrs. Fielding in her drefhng-room, 
the door of which had been left open, 
to facilitate the communication of in- 
telligence. Twice had fhe gone to it on 
tip-toe, on hearing two feveral knocks at 
the hall-door, but was each time difap- 
pointedby the appearance of vifiting-tickets 
in the fervant's hands. 

While he was delivering the lad of thefe 
to Mrs. Fielding, Carradine ruflied in. — 
?* He is out of danger!'' cried he; " the 
phyficians declare he is out of danger! 

But 



[ m ] 

But Mlfs Orwell, why do you not fpeak? 
You are notforry, fure, to hear that Sydney 
is out of danger? why do you not rejoice?'* 

^ I — I do rejoice!' faid Harriet, and burft 
into a violent flood of tears. 

" Goodlaeavens!" exclaimed Carradine, 
" I thought it would have made you happy 
to hear the poor fellow was out of danger; 
but had I known how differently it was to 
affect you, I would fooner have been fliot 
from the mouth of a cannon than have 
told you a word of the matter." 

* Good as well as bad news may be 
declared too abruptly/ faid Mrs. Fielding. 
Then, in order to divert his attention from 
Harriet, Ihe proceeded to afk a number of 
queftions concerning the opinion of the 
phyficians, and the fymptoms on which 
that opinion was founded. Mr. Carradinc 
was but ill qualified to give her information 
concei-ning thefe particulars ; but the fimple 
faft that Henry was pronounced out of 
danger, was a folace to her friendly heart. 

CHAP, 



[ 190 ] 



CIIAP. VIII. 

« Reader, attend : Whether thy foul 
*• Soars Fancy's flights beyond the pole, 
** Or darkling grubs this earthly hole, 

" In low purfuit; 
" Know prudent, cautious, felf-control, 

" Is Wifdom's root." 



^ J ^HE recovery of Henry was not rapid, 
-^ but it was unattended by any relapfe. 
No fooner did returning health begin to 
re-brace the unftrung nerves, and re-invi- 
gorate the feeble frame, than the mind 
reverted to the objefts of its former in- 
terefl; and though (contrary to the ufual 
practice of lovers in fimilar circumdances) 
he had not during his delirium onc(" men- 
tioned the name of Harriet, her image now 
realTumed its wonted place in his breafl. 

'' Maria," 



[ 191 ] 

** Maria," faid he one day to his fifter, 
as die fet by his bedfide, which he was yet 
too feeble to leave for more than half an 
hour at a time, " you confine yourfelf too 
much to my apartment. Befides the rilk 
of injuring your health, you mufl: embitter 
the happinefs of Mifs Orwell by thus per- 
petually depriving her of your fociety. 
But, perhaps, fhe fees enough of company 
at Mrs. Fielding's to folace her for the 
abfenceofher old friends?" 

' No, indeed,' returned Maria, ' Mrs. 
Fielding has received no vifitors fmce you 
were taken ill ; I do not believe that any 
ftranger, except Mr. Carradine, has been 
within her door.' 

" And has Mr. Carradine been often 
there?*' 

* O yes, two or three times at leafl 
every day.' 

" He is, then, quite on a familiar foot- 
ting in Hanover-fquare?" faid Henry, in 
a tremulous voice. 

^ Entirely 



t 192 ] 

* Entirely fo/ returned Maria. * He 
goes in and out juft like one of the family. 
Indeed, I believe the interefl he took in 
your recovery, and thcfenfibility he evinced 
in the time you were thought to be in dan- 
ger, has more endeared him to Mrs. Field- 
ing than if he had been the fon of twenty 
friends. That deep iigh tells me, that I 
mud not yet indulge you in talking ; but if 
you pleafe I (liall now read to you a little — ' 

" I think I had rather fleep," faid 
Henry. Maria drew the curtain, and re- 
mained in filence. 

The convalefcence of Henry was no 
fooner afcertained, than Do6lor Orwell be- 
gan to think of returning home. And no 
fooner did Carradine hear of his intention, 
than he haflened to communicate to him 
fuch propofals concerning his daughter 
as he was well allured could not fail to 
meet his approbation. Having entered the 
Doftor's dreffin2[-room in a manner fuffi- 
ciemly abrupt to have created fome alarm 

in 



[ 193 ] 

in a perfon of weak nerves, he thus opened 
the conference. ' Do<fi:or Orwell, your 
daughter is a charming girl! By my foul, 
I do not believe there is fuch a lovely girl 
in England 1* 

" You do my daughter great honour, 
fir," faid the Do£lor, fmiling at his odd 
manner of expreffing a truth which he him- 
felf had, however, no difficulty in believing. 
" Harriet is furely much obliged to you 
for the compliment." 

' Not at all,' returned Carradine, * not 
obliged to me at all. I would not love 
her if I could help it, but I cannot help it ; 
and I do love her with all my heart. Ten 
thoufand pounds is what I mean to fettle 
on her. Tell me, if that will anfwer your 
expeflations?* 

" Really, fir, I do not well undcrftand 
you. Your propofal is made in a manner 
fo abrupt, and was fo truly unexpected, 
that you mud forgive me if I cannot give 
it an immediate anfwer." 

VOL. Ill, o * Nothing 



[ 19+ ] 

' Nothing can be plainer than my pro- 
pofal,' rejoined Carradine. ' I love your 
daughter, and will marry her without a 
ihilling, making her a fettlement of tea 
thoufand pounds, which lliall be entirely 
at her own difpofal.' 

" And is it with Harriet's knowledge 
that you now apply to me on this bufmefs ?" 
* No. Mifs Orwell, notwithflanding we 
have now been acquainted for almoft a 
fortnight, has never yet given me an op- 
portunity of talking to her on the fubje£i:.' 
*' And do you really think, that on a 
fortnight's acquaintance the chara<5ler of 
any perfon can be fufficiently developed, 
to warrant entering with them into a con- 
nection that is indiflbluble r" 

' A fortnight! Why I have known 
many very happy marriages take place in 
Bengal upon an acquaintance of lefs than 
half the time. I remember the time, wheu 
every freih cargo of imported beauties ufed 
to go off as faft as they were feen. Now, 

to 



[ 195 J 

to be fure, the market is rather over* 
ftocked; and many a iine girl remains on 
hands for the length of a whole feafon. 
But as to making up one's mind upon the 
bufinefs, that can be done in half an hour 
as well as in half a century/ 

" You aftoniihme!" cried Dr. Orwelh 
*' I have indeed heard of young women's 
going out to India with a view, no doubt, 
to get edabliihed in marriage. But that 
whole cargoes fhould go out in that man- 
ner, as to a regular market, I really fliould 
not, but from good authority, have cre- 
dited. Surely they can only be fome poor, 
unfortunate, and friendlefs girls, who have 
neither parents nor prote£lors at home, 
that are driven to fuch defperate methods 
of obtaining a provifion?" 

* Pardon me,' replied Carradine, * the 

greatefl number who now come out are 

fent by their parents and proteclors ; and, 

in general, the fpeculation is not a bad one.' 

02 " h 



[ ^96 ] 

'' h it poffible," cried Doaor OrweH, 
"'^ that any parent fliould be fo depraved, 
;is to expofe his child to a fituation fo hu- 
miliating! How loll to all that confcious 
dignity which enhances every female charm ; 
how loit to every fentiment of delicacy 
mud {he become, who is thus led to make 
a barter of herfelf ! My mind revolts at 
the idea!" 

' Does the didance of the market, then, 
make fuch a mighty difference?' faid Car- 
radine. ' Really, my dear fir, that is an 
objeftion merely imaginary. The voyage 
is a trifle; and as to the confcious dignity, 
and all that, I do affure you, that fo far 
from its being loft by going to India, I have 
there feen many a girl who, at an Engliili 
watering-place, would have been glad to 
flirt with an enfjgn, get fo proud and fancy 
in the fpace of a few weeks, that flie would 
not deign to fpeak to a fubahern! The 
reafon is plain — in India the number of 
European ladies is ftill fo fraall, in propor- 

tion 



[ 197 ] 

tion to the gentlemen, that they are there 
of fome confequence. But here they are 
hawked about in fuch quantities at every 
place of publick refort, that if the poor 
things did not lay themfelves out to court 
attention, they would have no chance of 
being taken notice of.' 

" Better remain unnoticed for ever, than 
be fo degraded !" faid Do£lor Orwell, with 
vehemence. " For my part,'' continued 
he, " though the increafnig prevalence of 
luxury and falfe pride, and falfe notions of 
true dignity, tend to render poverty an evil 
of mighty magnitude to a helplefs female, 
I had rather fee my daughters reduced to 
the neceflity of earning theii bread, than 
behold them raifed to the higheft pinnacle 
of fortune by fuch methods as you have 
defcribed." 

* Tour daughter! my dear fir. Oh, fhe 
is a being of a fuperior order. Tell me 
but that you confent Ihe fhall be mine, and 
by all that's facred fhe fhall be as happy a 

w^omaa 



[ 19S ] 

woman — aye, and truft me, as much rc- 
fpei^ed as the wife of any man in Europe.' 

" I muft repeat it again," replied the 
Doctor, '' that I am no friend to hafty 
connexions. We are frequently taught by 
experience, that where the general cha- 
racter is on both fides good, an unconfor- 
mity of temper, or diiTimilarity of taile, is 
fufficient to embitter the tenor of exiftence. 
And how on a (hort acquaintance can wc 
form that knowledge of the difpofirion 
which prudence requires, in order to give 
a chance for happinefs?" 

' As to temper, I do allure you no one 
ever found fault with mine. Let Mifs 
Orwell enquire of my friends, and they 
will tell her that I am the bed-ruatured fel- 
low in the world. A little hafty, or fo, 
perhaps, but then it is over in a moment; 
and I vow to God I never fuall be in a paf- 
fion with her. How could I, with fuch 
an angel ! Believe me, fir, we fhall be one 
of the happieft couples in the world.' 

Doftor 



[ m ] 

Doftor Onvell fmiled. " Well, but 
Mr. C'drradine, if you had my confcnt, 
pray have you any reafon to conclude that 
Harriet's is certain?'* 

' No, I really cannot fay that I am fure 
of that. But when fhe knows how good 
a'hufband I fhall make, and fees that you 
are very much inclined to the match, I do 
not defpair of prevailing on her to make 
me happy. She is fo fv^^eet, and fo com- 
panionate, that I do not think {he could 
have the cruelty to inflict mifery upon any 
mortal. I never faw any creature polTef- 
fed of a heart fo tender ! Why (he could 
not even hear mention made of what poor 
Sydney fuiFered, without always changing 
colour; and I have more than once ob- 
ferved the filent tear (leal foftly down her 
cheek, even while a fmile fat upon her 
countenance. And what is the anguifli of 
a thoufand fevers, in comparifon of what 
I fliould feel in lofuig her?' 

" I hope, 



[ 200 ] 

*' I hope, that if my daughter fliould be 
fo cruel," faid Do£lor Orwell, '' there is 
little reafon to apprehend any danger from 
the misfortune J and that in the fmiles of 
fome other beauty all your wounds will 
foon be healed." 

* I (liall never fpeak to another beauty in 
my life;' replied Carradine, warmly. *I 
Ihall embark for India in the firfl fhip; and 
do you think, that after having contempla- 
ted the unaffe£led lovelinefs of Mifs Orwell, 
endeared by fweetnefs, and exalted by the 
utmofl refinement of fentiment and grace- 
fulnefs of manners, I fliall have any tafte 
for the infipid morfels of foil and froth 
that I am there likely to meet with? No, 
no ; if I return to India without a wife, I 
fliall go back to poor MIrza ; tho' befides 
the burthen of fo many dingy brats, there is 
plaguy little comfort in a connexion that 
affords neither friendfhip nor fociety.' 

Here the converfation was interrupted 
by the fudden entrance of Mrs. Botherim, 

who. 



[ 201 ] 

who, with a heavy heart, came to complain 
to Doflor Orwell of the untoward difpofi- 
tion of her daughter. As many years had 
elapfed fmce the good lady had vifited Lon- 
don, (he had thought it proper to take the 
prefent opportunity of renewing her ac- 
quaintance with the few friends of her 
childhood who were (till in exiftence; and 
had accepted an invitation to take up her 
refidence, while fhe remained in town, at 
the houfe of a relation, for whofe family 
fhe anxioufly wifhed her daughter to culti- 
vate an affection. It was of her beha- 
viour to thefe friends that ilie now came 
to complain, which flie did with great bit- 
ternefs; and concluded with intreating 
Doftor Orwell to vifit them, and point out 
to Bridgetina the impropriety of her beha- 
viour towards people whofe character (he 
reprefented as extremely amiable, and 
whofe conduct had in fome refpe6ls been 
highly meritorious. The Doctor readily 
promifed compliance with her requeft, and 

as 



[ £02 ] 

as loon as flie departed, haflened to Hai- 
riet's apartment, to talk to her about the 
propodils of Carradine. 

The fubjefl did not bear much difcullion. 
It was decided by Harriet in a moment. 
Her objeflions were pointed out with fo 
much judgment, and fupported with fo 
much firmnefs, as left "Ro room to expe6l a 
change of fentimenr. 

" Well, my dear," faid the Doclor, " I 
cannot fay that I am forry for your refufal 
of this young man; particularly, as I do 
not believe your refufal of him proceeds 
from any romantic notions of getting a 
more advantageous propofal hereafter. If 
I confidered marriage as abfolutely necef- 
fary to your happinefs, I fliould regret your 
lofmg fuch an opportunity of eftablifhing 
yourfelf ; for with a fortune that will be 
no more than adequate to your fupport in 
a very retired fituation, fmall will be your 
chance of any other offer. But your mind 
has, I trud:, too much of the dignity of 

independence, 



[ 203 ] 

independence, to be abfolinely at the mercy 
of extrinfic clrcumftdnces for happinefs." 

While Doctor Orwell was thus conver- 
^ng with his daughter, her impatient lover 
who had left the room on Mrs. Botherim's 
entrance, in hopes of finding his adorable 
alone in the drawing-room, went immedi- 
ately thither in fearch of her. No one was 
there but Mrs. Fielding ; and Carradine, 
who had at that time little relifh for her 
fociety, very fpeedily put an end ;o his vifiu 

His impatience to know how Harriet 
would receive his propofals, was quite in- 
fupportable. Still hope predominated; 
and with fpirits highly exhilarated, notwith- 
ftanding their agitation, l.e fuddenly darted 
into Henry's apartment, who was fitting 
penfive and alone over the dying embers 
of his fire, the decline of which had en- 
tirely efcaped his obfervation. 

" What! moping all alone?*' cried Car- 
radine, on entering. " Have you had no 
vifit from you filler tr»-day :" 

*No, 



[ 204. ] 

' No, indeed,' returned Henry; ' flie, 
I believe, is aflifting Mifs Orwell in making 
fome preparations for this ball, to which 
they have been invited. You, I fuppofe, 
mean to accompany them?' 

" Me! oh, without doubt. I would ac- 
company Mifs Orwell to the end of the 
world! Is fhe not a charming creature? 
Tell me now, Sydney, did you ever fee a 
more lovely girl ? Don't you think a man 
might fancy himfelf in paradife with fuch 
an angel ? Oh, if (he be ever mine !" 

* Your's!' exclaimed Henry, in a voice 
•which his parched tongue could fcarcely 
render audible. 

" Yes, mine!" gaily anfwered his happy 
rival. Perhaps to-day — perhaps in an hour 
— in lefs than an hour, I may hear from her 
fweei lips, that I am the happiefl fellow in 
Chriflendom ! Zounds, Sydney, you have 
no notion what a happy fellow I (liall be!" 

The elder Mr. Sydney then coming in 
excufed Henry from making any reply. 

Carradine 



[ 205 ] 

Carradine afked him, whether he had been 
at Mrs. Fielding's? To which the old gen- 
tleman returned for anfwer, that he had 
called there to fpeak with Do£lor Orwell, 
but found him engaged in his daughter's 
apartment ; and as he thought they might 
be confuking about fome family bufmefs, 
he not interrupt their fete a tete, 

"Fine old fellow!" cried Carradine* 
*' I fee he did not lofe a moment. But the 
conference mud be over by this time. I 
fly to know my fate. Good morning.'* 
Grafping Henry's hand, which hefqueezed 
with great violence, " Dear Sydney, wifh 
me fuccefs!" and then, without making 
any obfervation on the altered countenance 
of Sydney, or imagining him in the lead 
interefted in the fubjedl, he precipitately 
left the room. 

No fooner was Sydney alone with his 
father, than the latter, obferving his un- 
ufaal gravity, and anxious to amufe him 
ia the beft manner poffible, began to enter 

into 



[ 206 ] 

into a minute defcription of a cabinet of 
natural hiftory, which he had that morning 
had the plealure of examining. In vain 
did he ^ive a detail of all the wonders it 
contained; in vain did he defer ibe, with the 
mod minute exaflnefs, the difcriminating 
marks that diftinguilhed the peculiar genus 
of every butterfly and every beetle. The 
delight he had received, he did not find it 
in his power to communicate; and he faw 
with regret, that the mind of Henry had 
not fufficiently recovered its tone to enter 
with avidity into this favourite fubjed. So 
fully was the old gentleman occupied in 
his defcription, that it was a confiderable 
time before he obferved the diflrafled and 
abfent air of his fon. 

At lengthj having for fome moments 
fixed his eyes on Henry's face, " Henry,'* 
faid he, in a voice full of paternal tender- 
nefs, " What is the matter with thee, my 
fon ? I plainly perceive that fomething has 
perturbed thy mind. But am I not wor- 
thy of thy confidence ?" * You 



L 207 ] 

^ You are, you are, fir,' replied Henry, 
' mod truly worthy of it ; but my mind is 
at prefent in fuch a di(lra£led (late that I 
can fcarcely make you comprehend my 
feelings — this fellow — this Carradine has 
undone me!' 

" Carradine! did you fay Carradine? 
And do you then apprehend any further 
bad confequences from the wound ? If fo, 
let me go inftantly for the furgeon. Not 
:3L moment AigII be loil. I " 

' Stop, my dear father,' cried Henry, 
^ Carradine has indeed inflicled a wound 
that is incurable ; but it is beyond the fur- 
geon's reach. He has torn my heart, and 
deprived my life of every hope that was 
dear to it. Oh! look not on me with 
contempt, accufe me not of folly, when 
I tell you, that in Harriet Onvell I had 
treafured up the happinefs of my exiflence!' 

" And has Mifs Orwell deceived you? 
Has (he fcorned your poverty, and forili- 
ken you for a wealthier lover? If fo — flis 

is 



[ 208 ] 

IS unworthy of my fon ; fhe never de* 
ferved to (hare a heart Hke thine." 

Though the feelings of Henry would 
have made his heart believe that Harriet 
did him iDJuflice, reafon told him {lie was 
blamelefs ; and love and honour equally 
impelled him to exculpate her from the 
charge. He, therefore, with great eager- 
nefs proceeded to vindicate the condu£l of 
Harriet, and to attribute to his own want 
of merit, and deficiency in addrefs, the dif- 
appointment that now overwhelmed him. 
To his father he freely opened his whole 
heart, and found from his foothing and 
tender fympathy all the confolatlon of 
which he was at prefent fufceptible. 

From the mutual confidence eflabliflied 
in the family of the Sydneys, it was ra- 
ther furprifmg that a fubjefl:, which had fo 
loneenp-rofTed his mind, fhouldnot fooner 
have been comm.unicated. His naturally 
open and generous temper was formed for 
confidential intercourfewith kindred minds. 

He 



[ £09 ] 

He was equally a flranger to the coldnefs 
of referve, and the pride of concealment. 
Whenever he could give pleafure, or even 
afford amufement by whac he communi- 
cated, he did it with a franknefs at once [o 
natural, and fo engaging, that it endeared 
him to every heart. It was of fclfifli cares 
and felfilh forrows that he was alone a 
churl. Thefe, which are by mod young 
gentlemen deemed the only fubje£l of fa- 
mily confidence, Henry often devoured in 
fecrer, or carefully concealed in the recelTes 
of his own bofom. The knowledge of his 
attachment to Harriet would, he knew, 
create anxiety in the affectionate hearts of 
his father and fifter, to whom his happinefs 
was too dear to render the completion of 
his wifhes an objeift of indifference. Now 
that anxiety was loft in defpair, he did no; 
fullenly refufe the confolations of fympathy, 
but happy in being now able to fpeak to 
bis beft friend without refervc on a fub- 

VOL. III. P jCift 



[ 210 ] 

jecV that occupied his whole foul, he wil- 
lingly conceded to his propofal of fending 
an apology to Mrs. Fielding's, that he 
might have his company for the reft of 
the evening. 



CHAP. 



[ 211 ] 



CHAP. IX, 



** Truth weeping tells the mournful tale, 

'• How paniper'd Lux'ry, Flatt'ry by her fide, 

" The parafite empoifoning her ear, 

" With all the fervile wretches in the rear, 
" Looks o'er proud property extended wide, 

" And eyes the fimple rultic mind; 
" W'hofe toil upholds the glittering (how — 

" A creature of another klnJ. 

" Some coarfer fubftance, unrtfin'd, 
** Placed for her lordly use, thus far , thus vile leloiv /" 

BURNS. 



T^EARFUL of meeting with Carradine, 
-*■ and anxious to avoid an interview 
that muft have been mutually embarraffing, 
Harriet Orwell propofed accompanying 
her father on an immediate vifit to Mifs 
Botherim; and underflanding that Mrs. 
Botherim intended calling at their late 
lodgings, flie haftened thither in hopes of 
p 2 finding 



[ 212 ] 

finding her, while her father wrote a few 
lines to Carradinc, intimating her deter- 
mined rejection of his fuit. Do£lor Orwell 
then ftepped into the carriage which 
waited for him, and taking up his daugh- 
ter and Mrs. Botherim at Mrs. Benton's, 
proceeded with them to the city. 

No fooner were they feated in the car- 
riage, than the old lady renewed her la- 
mentations concerning Bridgetlna's con- 
duft. " See," faid (he, prefenting Mrs. 
Benton's bill to Doftor Orwell, " fee what 
a fum I have juft now paid for her. But 
this is nothing! Oh, juft nothing at all, in 
comparifon to the difgrace of pawning her 
watch! Oh, think of that, Do£i:or Orwell! 
Think of that ! The very watch that had 
cofl me fo many tears to coax from my 
father on my marriage. Not that I fhould 
have cared a pin about it, but that the 
Mifs Pickles never let alone telling me of 
the fine things our neighbour, Mifs Dough, 
the bifcuit-maker's daughter, had got upon 

her 



[ 213 1 

her wedding. And my poor dear father^ 
who did not like :o fee me fret, refolved 
that I fhould be as fine as the bed of 'em! 
Little did he think that it was ever to 
come to a pawnbroker's fhop! — " 

Here the poor lady gave v/ay to a burfl 
of forrow and indignation, which her com- 
panions did all in their power to pacify. 
After it had fomewhat fubfided, (he thus 
proceeded: "Nothing could be kinder 
than our reception from our poor couCn 
Biggs's ; for though they have had a hard 
flruggle with the world, and gone down 
in fortune, their hearts are as warm and 
as good as ever. I hoped that Biddy would 
have taken to them, and that (he would 
ha' been the better of feeing what fome 
folks have to do to get through life; but, 
alas! they are not book-learned enough 
for her. And fhe looks fo down upon 
them that you can't think. But how (fays 
I) fhould they have found time for ftudy ? 
Coufin Peggy, who is the eldefl, was but 

eighteen 



[ 214 ] 

eighteen yf ars of age when her father died. 
In half a year after his death their houfe 
v/zs burnt to the ground, and in making 
their efcape from a two-pair of ftair win- 
dow, their mother's back was broke, fo 
that flie has been bed-ridden ever fmce; and 
tlieir brother, then a fine promifmg lad of 
fourteen, received a hurt upon his head 
which reduced him to the condition you 
now fee. The poor lad is quit^ an idiot, 
and the moO: melancholieft obje£^ in the 
world. Think, Biddy, (fays I) think 
what a charge this was to the poor girls ! 
And do but fee how they have fulfilled it. 
Finding what they had left of the wreck 
of their father's fortune infufficient for 
their maintenance, they.fet up a tea-fliop; 
and as they w^ere well beloved by all the 
neighbourhood, and every one pitied their 
misfortunes, they fuccceded wonderfully. 
But what betwixt their attendance on their 
mother, and on their bufinefs, their time- 
to be fure has been too fully occupied to 

have 



C 215 ] 

have any leifure for your abflra^l reafon- 
ing, as you call it. They cannot talk about 
duties^ I muft own, as fine as you do ; for 
how (hould they, when their whole lives 
have been employed in performing them ? 

*' Alas, fir, I might as well talk to the 
ftone wall. Biddy juft minded me no more 
than nothing; and when I would make 
any remark on the kindnefs with which 
they treated their poor brother, whom 
they even feem to love the better for the 
misfortune that deprived him of the no- 
tice of every one befides, or on their atten- 
tion to their poor miferable parent, who 
has been fo many years a burthen to them, 
{he flops my mouth by afking what all this 
has to do with General Utility? Poor thing ! 
I am fure it was a bad day for her that 
ever fhe heard his name; fo it was ! — " 

The carriage now drew up at Mrs. 
Biggs's door; and while Doflor and Mifs 
Orwell waited in the fhop, through which 
lay the only entrance to the apartments, 

Mrs. 



[ 216 ] 

Mrs. Botherim went up to prepare Brid- 
gf.iina for their reception. The mind of 
Harriet had been fo early and fo deeply 
cmbued with a refpe(ft for virtue, that ihe 
could not dived herfelf of a degree of re- 
verence in approaching Mifs Biggs, fuch 
as no external circumftance of rank or fplen- 
dour could have excited. She willingly 
accepted of a feat by her, and entered into 
converfation with a cheerfulnefs and unaf- 
fedled humility, very different from that 
fpecies of condefcenfion which certain peo- 
ple fo kindly affume, when addreffmg them- 
felves to thofe whofe fituation is in any 
refpedl: inferior to their own. Their con- 
verfatiop was foon interrupted by the en- 
trance of fome ladies, who ifTued from a 
fplendid carriage. Harriet retired to make 
way for them, while Mifs Biggs flood to 
receive their orders. To her, however, 
they were in no hafle to fpeak, but conti- 
nued their converfation to each other, 
without deigning to obferve her. 

At 



[ 217 ] 

At length, one of the ladies, feeming to 
recolle£l herfelf, exclaimed, "La! what a 
(hocking place ! I vow I cannot breathe 
in it a moment longer. I beg, young wo- 
man, you would make hafte." 

Mifs Biggs modeftly requefled to know 
with what article (he would be ferved? 

*' Did not I tell you it was Indian toys?*' 
returned the lady ; then addreffing herfclf 
to one of her companions, " I declare, 
thefe people in the city are fo flupid, it is 
quite a bore !'* 

The counter was by this time covered 
with various articles of japan, mother-of- 
pearl, &c. which the ladies examined and 
cheapened, making fuch remarks on the 
replies given to their queftions, as plainly 
charged the dealer with want of truth and 
common honefty. At length, after they 
had fufficiently amufed themfelves with 
looking over the things, and were about 
to depart, the lady firft-mentioned hap- 
pened to lift her veil, and difcovered to 

Dodtor 



[ 218 ] 

Do^or Orwell the face of Mrs. General 
Viiicrs. She either did not feej or pre- 
tended not to fee, the Doctor; and he on his 
partjAvac by thefcene that had juft occurred, 
infpircJ with fuch a fovereign contempt 
for the a^iors, that he felt no wifh to re- 
cognize any of them as an acquaintance. 
When they were gone, he aflied Mifs Bigots 
if they had really made no purchafe. 

" No, fn-,'' returned Mifs Biggs, " nor 
had they the lead intention to make any. 
It Is what we often meet with/' 

^ But I hope,' rejoined Do£lor Orweil, 
* you do not often meet with fuch unpro- 
voked rudenefs, fuch unfeeling infolencer' 

" Oh, yes, fir;' faid Mifs Biggs, fmi- 
ling, " people of fafliion referve al! their 
good-breeding for their equals; they never 
confider their inferiors as entitled to the 
fmallefl fliare." 

* Then,' faid Doaor Orwell, ' people 
of faihion know not what true good-breed- 
ihg is. A confideration for the feelings 

of 



C 219 ] 

of thofe with whom we converfe, and a 
qiikk perception of what thofe feelings 
are, is true politencfs ; and thofe who have 
it not, whatever be their rank, are vulgar J 

*' I am afraid, fir," faid Mifs Biggs, 
*' that your definition of politenefs is not 
taught at any modern fchool. At lead, if 
I am to judge from what has fallen under 
my own obfervation, I fhould imagine that 
a confideration for the feelings of inferiors 
in any fituation is thought not only unnc- 
ceffary, but abfurd." • 

' I am forry to hear you fay fo,' fali 
Harriet, ' as you have fuch an opportu- 
nity for making obfervations upon cha- 
racter, that I cannot doubt the judice of 
your remarks.' 

" Yes, Madam," replied Mifs Biggs, 
^* we have indeed an opportunity of ob- 
ferving an Infinite variety in the tempers 
and difpofitions of thofe who to their 
equals appear uniformly amiable. In the 
common intercourfe of civilities little 

of 



[ 2£0 ] 

of the real chara£ler appears; but If one 
would know the world, it is neceffary to 
be dependent." 

'Ah!' returned Harriet, 'would the 
gay and the giddy but bear in their recol- 
leflion, how often they may be looking 
down upon their fuperiors in all that is 
truly eflimable, in all that will one day 
appear fo even to themfelves, it would 
check the infolence of pride, and lower the 
arrogance of prefumption.' 

Mrs. Botherim, who had been all this 
time afliiling Bridgetina to drefs, now came 
to lead Do£lor and Mifs Orwell to the 
dining-room. Bridgetina received them 
coldly, and before they had time to enter 
into any converfation with her, the poor 
lad, of whofe unhappy fituation Mrs. Bo- 
therim had informed them, ran into the 
room. Harriet was fhocked at his appear- 
ance, but would not fuifer difguft to enter 
her bofom at the fight of misfortune inci- 
dent to humanity. He quickly approached 

her, 



[ 221 ] 

her, and feized the large fun-fan which 
(he held in her hand. Inftantly conquer- 
ing the involuntary flutter which his fudden 
motion had occafioned, flie fpoke to him 
with great gentlenefs, offering to teach him 
how to open and (hut it. He feemed fen- 
fible of her indulgence, and after playing 
with it for fome time, reflored it with an 
appearance of great fatisfaclion. His 
youngeft fifter then came in, and made 
many apologies for his intrufion. She de- 
fired him (not in the tone of authority, 
but with the voice of affeclion) to go with 
her to their mother's apartment, who was 
then getting her dinner ; and at length, by 
the promife of fome fwcetmeats which fhc 
fhewed him, prevailed on him to leave 
the room. 

" How amiable," faid Harriet, " how 
refpe£lable is the condufl of thefe young 
women! I (liall ever edeem myfelf obliged 
to Mrs. Botherim for introducing me to 
their acquaintance." 

' And 



[ 222 ] 

* And pra}',' cried Bridgctina, * Whzt 
is the worth about which you make fuch 
a mighty rout ? Is not k nowledge eiTential 
to virtue? And what knowledge have 
they to boaft of?* 

« That knowledge/' faid Dr. Orwell, 
" without which all other knowledge is an 
empty boafl: — tbe knowledge of their duty. 
The knowledge which leads not to this one 
point, is, to the individual who poffefles it, 
futile and nugatory." 

* And pray,* retorted Bridgetina, ' how 
is fociety benefited by the fort of know- 
ledge you talk of? What is the know- 
ledge good for, that only benefits the 
individual?' 

" Surely," replied Dr. Orwell, " you 
cannot aflv that queftion ferioufly ! The 
mere knovt^ledge of our duty is, I grant 
you, of little confequence, if it does not 
lead to the practice of it; but when, as in 
the prefent inflance, it eminently does (o^ 
who can fay hcv/ far the benefit may ex- 
tend? 



[ 223 ] 

tend? The a6live virtue of thefe young 
women, their filial piety, their fiilerly af- 
feclion, their kind and humane attention 
to their unfortunate brother, and the 
many felf-denials they mud: have under- 
gone in the performance of thefe duties, 
added to the confpicuous exertions they 
have made to enable them to perform them, 
is fuch an example of virtue as is not to be 
contemplated without bettering the heart. 
Believe me, Mifs Botherim, one fuch ex- 
ample fpeaks more home to the feelings, 
and is of greater confequence to fociety, 
than volumes of philofophy." 

* I truft,' faid Harriet, ' the impreflion 
it has made on my heart fhall never be 
obliterated.' 

" Nor do I make any doubt," continued 
Dr. Orwell, " that many have viewed it 
with feelings of a fimilar nature. Who 
knows how often the example of thefe 
young women may have filenced the 
murmurs of difcontcnt? how often it may 

have 



[ 224 1 

have produced reflection in the carelefs, 
and excited gratitude in the unthinking? 
We commit a great miftake, when we 
confine the influence of example to the 
higher ranks of fociety. It is an influence 
of which people in every rank and in 
every fituation are in fome degree pofTefTed. 
Happy they who make fuch a ufe of it as 
the family of whom we are now fpeaking." 

* You, fir/ faid Bridgetina, ' have fo 
many prejudices, that it is impofTible to 
argue with you. It may, to be fure, be 
very well for old Mrs. Biggs and her fon, 
that her daughters were not philofophers ; 
but you will never make me believe, that 
if they had been taught " to energize ac- 
cording to the flower and fummit of their 
nature,** they would not have done more 
for general utility.' 

'And who is this General Utility?' 
cried Mrs. Botherim, ' whofe name is for 
ever in Biddy's mouth? She is always in 
a pet when I aik her, as if I fliould know 

all 



[ 225 ] 

all about him as well as fhe; but I am fure 
flie may well know I never feed a General 
but General Villers, in all my life." 

* General Utility, my dear madam,' faid 
Dr. Orwell, fmiling, ' is an ideal perfon- 
age, a fort of Will o* the wifp, whom 
fome people go a great way out of the 
road to find, but ftill fee him fhining in 
fome diftant and unbeaten track; while, 
if they would keep at home, and look for 
him in the plain path of chriflian duty, 
they would never mifs their aim.' 

The entrance of Lady Aldgate and her 
daughter put an end to the converfation, 
and gave to Do£lor and Mifs Orwell 
an opportunity, of which they willingly 
availed themfelves, of taking leave. 



VOL, III. Q CHAP. 



C C26- 3 



CHAP. X. 

♦' Let rcafon teach what paCion fain would hide, 
" That Hymen's bands by prudence Ihouldbe tied; 
" Venus in vain the wedded pair would crown, 
" If angry fortune on their union frown." 

LYTTLETOy 



r> REATLY had the fanguine fpirli of 
^^ Carradine been mortified, by the un- 
favourable report that had been made to 
him of the fentiments of his miftrefs. That 
report had, however, been given by her 
father in terms fo obliging, as though it 
greatly damped, did not entirely extinguidi 
every hope. Perhaps her heart might be 
melted by a love-letter. He had heard of 
fuch things, and refolved to try the expe- 
riment. Writing, it is true, was not poor 
Carradine's fortj but talks moredifEcult 

would 



L 227 ] 

would at this time have appeared trifling 
to his ardent mind. After fpending the 
whole of the evening and great part of the 
night in writing and re-writing the import- 
ant fcroll, he at length produced an epiftle, 
which, if not a firft-rate piece of oratory, 
contained at lead as much good-fenfe as 
any love-letter we have ever had the plea* 
fure of perufmg. 

It was received by Harriet at fuch an 
early hour, as gave her fufficient time to 
anfwer it before breakfafl. By being de- 
livered in prefence of her friend, it laid her 
under the neceffity of breaking the filence 
ftie had hitherto obferved to Maria on the 
fubjedl of Carradine's addrefles. Superior 
to that mean vanity which leads little minds 
to exult in expofmg to the view of others 
the mortification of a reje6led lover, fhe 
confidered every principle of delicacy and 
honour as engaged in keeping his fecret. 
To have made the afFedlions of any human 
being the obje6l of her ridicule, fhe would 
Q^ 2 have 



[ 228 J 

have deemed in the lad degree cruel and 
unjuftifiable. The behaviour of many of 
her companions had, in this particular, 
appeared odious in her eyes; and fo far 
vs^as llie from following their example, that 
till the introduction of Carradine's letter, 
(when any longer concealment would have 
worn the appearance of myftery) (lie had 
not even given her bofom-friend a hint 
upon the fubje£l. 

In her anfwer to Carradine, flie united 
firmnefs to delicacy, and candour to poiite- 
nefs. She did not confider the circum- 
fiance of her being fmgled out from among 
her fex, as the perfon with whom he would 
wifh to fpend his days, as giving her any 
right to treat him with fcorn or indignity; 
but at the fiime time had too much regard 
for her own honour and his repofe, to gi\^ 
him a hope which flie did not mean to 
realize. 

Poor Carradine had no fooner difpatched 
his letter, than he repented him of his 

raflinefs. 



[ 229 ] 

rafhnefs. It then occurred to him, that 
through the medium of Mrs. Fielding he 
might more efFecl:ually have pleaded his 
caufe ; and the inftant the idea was ftarted 
he lefolved to purfue it, hoping that the 
interefl of Mrs. Fielding might flill be fo 
far exerted in his favour, as to prevent 
Mifs Orwell from extinguiihing his hopes 
by a pofitive refufal. He flew to Hanover- 
fquare on the inftant, or rather would have 
flown if wings could have been procured, 
but for thefe a hackney-coach is, alas! 
a forry fubditute. In vain did he fwear 
at the coachman, in vain did he anathe- 
matize the horfes; neither coachman nor 
horfes could be prevailed on to keep pace 
with his impatient fpirit. At length ar- 
rived, he fprung to the door, and told the 
fervant who opened it, that he muft fee 
Mrs. Fielding on a bufinefs of importance 
immediately. 

" My mifl:refs is not yet up," replied 
the footman; " but if you will flep into 

the 



[ 230 ] 

the breakfaft-parlour, I dare fay (he will 
be down in lefs than an hour." 

^ An hour!' 'sdeath, an age! For hea- 
ven's fake, at lead defire her maid to in- 
form her that I am here, and greatly wifli 
to fee her/ 

The man obeyed, and in lefs than half 
an hour Mrs. Fielding was with him. He 
abruptly informed her of the purport of 
his vifit, and vehemently befought her in- 
terefl in his favour; intreating her to go 
immediately to Mifs Orwell, to urge her to 
grant him the favour of an interview. 

While he yet fpoke, he heard the voice 
of Harriet on the flairs, and involuntarily 
opening the door, he faw the anfwer to 
his letter in the hands of the fervant, to 
whom Mifs Orwell had juH: delivered it. 
He impatiently fnatched it from him, and 
cafling his eye over the contents, gave 
way to an agony of defpair, 

Mrs. Fielding, having perufed the letter, 
told him, that after fuch a candid declara- 
tion 



[ 231 ] 

tion of her fentiments, it would be offering 
an infult to the delicacy of Mifs Orwell to 
perfevere in his fuit. The woman ((lie 
obferved) who after fuch a pofitive rejec- 
tion could be flattered into a chang^e of 
mind, mud be the imbecile child of vanity. 
Such, ihe was certain, was not Harriet 
Orwell. She therefore advifed him to 
bear with manly iirmnefs an evil that could 
not be remedied, and to endeavour by ab- 
fence to wear off the impreffion. 

Carradine liflened to her for a fliort 
time in filence, and then coldly thanking 
her for her advice, abruptly took his leave. 
There was a certain fermenting principle 
in his mind, which, laying hold of whatever 
happened to be the prefent obje6l of inte- 
reft, worked it up to fuch a (late of effer- 
vefcence, as rendered it abfolutely neceffary 
for him to have a confidant to receive 
the overflowings of his heart. 

Finding folitude intolerable, he bent 
his way to Henry Sydney, in order to 

vent 



vent to him thofe feelings of chagrin and 
difappointment which he no longer had 
patience to confine to his own bread. 
Henry was alone, ai. i not (as many of our 
fair readers doubtlefs will expe£l) confined 
to his bed by a relapfe of fever, or raving 
in a beautiful delirium of dcfpair ; but pen- 
fively fitting by the fire-fide with a book 
in his hand. We are fenfible that a dan- 
gerous fit of illnefs would in his circum- 
ilances have been vaftly more becoming, 
and much more natural, in the hero of a 
novel. We do not prefume to fay, that 
youth and a good conftitution ought to be 
admitted as any apology for his perfeve- 
ring in convalefcence at fuch a time, but 
fimply own the fa^^t. That he may not, 
however, entirely lofe the intereft we hope 
he has obtained in the hearts of our fair 
readers, we mult not omit adding that he 
looked as melancholy as poiTible. Soon, 
however, was his melancholy difiipated by 
Carradine; who, after a few incoherent 

fentences, 



[ ^33 ] 

fentences, and ?.s many exclamations, of 
which Henry could not guefs the meaning, 
put into his hands the letter of Harriet, 
which had been to him as the fentence of 
never-ending mifery. 

Henry perufed it with an emotion even 
fuperior to his own. " Charming, charm- 
ing Harriet!'* cried he, after having with 
his eye devoured the contents ; " How dif- 
interefted ! how noble ! how generous!" 

* Generous!' cried Carradine; ' on<! 
would think you were glad Ihe had re- 
fufed mel' 

" Forgive me, Carradine!*' faid Henry, 
offering him his hand ; '• but you areyour- 
felf fo generous and fo open, that I fhould 
hate myfelf if I deceived you. I love 
Harriet Orwell. I have long loved her. 
Even from infancy our hearts have been 
united in the bonds of the tendered friend- 
fliip. Want of fortune has alone prevented 
me from urging her to unite her fate with 
mine. Judge, then, if I can fay I am forry 

at 



[ 234 ] 

at a circumflance which revives my hopes, 
and raifes me from the very brink of 
defpair." 

Carradine darted back, and regarded 
him for a moment with a look of frenzy. 
Then haflily turning from him, he flrided 
four or five times up and dov/n the room, 
and at length retiring to the further win- 
dow, flood for fome minutes filent. Henry 
reproached himfelf for having inflicted an 
additional wound in the bread: of his rival. 
He was afraid to fpeak, lefl whatever he 
fhould fay might wear the appearance of 
triumphing in his difappointment. The 
lilence was at length broken by Carradine, 
who coming up to Henry, and taking the 
hand he had before reje£led, ^ Sydney,' 
faid he, ' you are a happy fellow! but 
don't think me the wretch to repine at your 
felicity. No. If 1 had known you had a 
prior claim to her aifd£lions, curfe me if 
I would have interfered with it. I would 
perifli fooner than do any thing fo bafel' 

Henry 



[ 235 ] 

Henry fpoke the effiifions of his heart, 
in giving him the praifc his generofity fo 
truly merited; and afTured him, that though 
her refufal of an offer fo advantageous, 
from a character fo unexceptionable, gave 
him fome caufe for hope, he was far from 
being certain of fuccefs. So well in the 
converfation that enfued did Henry manage 
the ardent temper of Carradine, that he left 
him in a great meafure reconciled to a dif- 
appointment, which, but an hour before, 
he had confidered in the light of an event 
that was to tin^e the colour of his future 
days w^ith mifery. 

The recovery of Henry was now fo ra- 
pid, that on the very following day he fur- 
prifed his friends by an unexpe<fi:ed viilt. 
Though dinner had been fome time over, 
the ladies had not yet retired to the draw- 
ing-room, when Henry made his appear- 
ance. Mrs. Fielding received him with joy, 
and welcomed his return with an embrace 
that fpoke the feelings of maternal affeflion. 

'' Thank 



[ 236 ] 

^^ Thank Heaven ! that m}^ brother, my 
dear brother is again reftored to us!" ex- 
chimed Maria, afFeflionately retaining one 
hand, while Dr. Orwell and Mr. Churchill 
alternately took the other. Harriet alone 
did not advance to meet him in the general 
joy; her voice only was unheard, but the 
congratulations which her faltering tongue 
could not pronounce, beamed from her 
eyes in a look of ineffable delight, while 
pleafure and furprife fuffufed her glowing 
cheek with crimfon. When he came up 
to where fhe flood, (he held out her hand 
with a complacency which feemed to afTurc 
Henry that his prefence did not difpleafe 
her ; and though the few words fhe ham- 
mered out were perfe£lly unintelligible to 
every one befides, it would appear that 
he fufficiently underflood their meaning. 

The remainder of the evening was exclu- 
fively devoted to friendfliip; Mrs. Fielding 
giving orders that no vifitor fliould be ad- 
mitted to intrude upon the focial circle. 

And 



[ £37 ] 

And though neither cards nor fcandal 
were introduced, we do not find that time 
appeared particularly tedious to any of 
the party. 

While Henry was again enjoying a hap- 
pinefs, rendered doubly dear to him from 
the fuiferings he had lately endured, his 
father, full of anxious folicitude for his fe- 
licity, was making every effort to render 
it compleat. He took the earliefl: oppor- 
tunity of informing Doctor Orwell of his 
Ton's attachment to his daughter, and found 
the Do£lor more pleafed than furprifed 
at the information. He had in truth long 
ago obferved the growing pafFion, and as 
it was the happinefs, not the affluence, of 
his child, that was the obje^l: of his wifties, 
nothing was more defirable in his eyes than 
to behold her united to a man of Henry's 
fenfe and virtue. 

Since the time that thefe old gentlemen 
had entered into the married ftate, they had 
lived fo fecluded from the world, that the 

rapid 



[ 238 ] 

rapid progrefs of luxury had almoft efcaped 
their obfervation. In an humble medio" 
crity of fortune, they had themfelves found 
happinefs; and it did not readily enter into 
their imaginations to conceive, why begin- 
ning the world with a fplendid eflablifli- 
ment was more necelTary to their children 
than it had been to themfelves. To the 
mind of Mr. Sydney a monopoly of wealth 
and power appeared an evil of mighty mag- 
nitude; and far from wifliing his children 
to become accelTaries, in continuing a fyf- 
tem to which, in his opinion, might be 
fairly attributed the greater part of the mi- 
feries that have fcourged the human race, 
he had laboured to imprefs their mJnds with 
a fenfe of its turpitude and injuftice. Po- 
litical fcience had long been his favourite 
fludy; and though a perfe<51: equality of 
conditions he confidered to be impracftica- 
ble and abfurd, the advantages that would 
refulc to fociety from fuch a diiTemination 
of the wealth of a country as (hould ren- 
der 



[ 239 ] 

der the extremes of wealth and poverty 
unknown, appeared to him fo obvious, 
that he wondered how it could efcape the 
obfervation of an enlightened mind. He 
had himfelf written a traft upon the fub- 
je£^, which he addreffed to the great landed 
proprietors of Great-Britain; clearly de- 
monftrating it to be their bounden duty, 
by making an equal divifion of their pro- 
perty among their children, to begin that 
gradual and rational reform, which would 
ultimately be produflive of an increafe of 
publick happinefs and virtue. 

Doctor Orwell, though lefs inclined to 
abftracl fpeculation than his friend, per- 
feftly coincided with him in principle. 
With refpeft to the happinefs of their chil- 
dren their fentiments were in unifon ; and 
to promote their union they readily agreed 
to give up, on both fides, fuch a part of 
their prefent income as they deemed fuffi- 
cient to eflablilh the young people in fome 
degree of comfort. 

The 



[ £40 ] 

The refult of their conful rations was im- 
mediately communicated to Henry by his 
father, who informed him, that he was now 
at full Hberty to difciofe his fentiments to 
Harriet, fmce the confent of her father had 
given a fancflion to his wifhes. 

With fome confufion Henry was obliged 
to confefs, that he had anticipated the per- 
milTion fo gracioufly bcflowed. Harriet 
was already miilrefs of every fecret of his 
heart. Attracted by the found of the harp- 
fichord to Mrs. Fielding's mufic-room, he 
had there found Harriet alone ; the oppor- 
tunity was irrefilltr>lc. The apprehenfion 
of her father's difpleafure, the threatened 
lofs of Mrs. Fieldino:'s friendihin, the im- 
prudence of marrying without a fortune, 
all were at that moment forgotten ; and 
the dread of fufFerinfdj-'from the horrid idea 
of another and perhaps more fortunaw 
rival, appeared to him a confideration pa- 
immount to every other. His father lif- 
tcned to his apology with a fmik, that told 

hira 



C 241 ] 

him he had no great difficuhy in pro" 
nouncing his pardon. He moreover pro- 
mifed to fpeak to Mrs. Fielding on the 
fubje^l, and hoped to be able to avert her 
difpleafure at fuch a very diredl breach of 
her injun(flions. 

Mr. Sydney was as good as his word; 
he told her of the plan agreed to by Dr. 
Orwell and himfelf for the union of their 
families, and begged to have her opinion 
concerning it. 

" I mufl: fpeak to Mifs Orwell on the 
fubje6l before lean reply to your queftion/* 
faid Mrs. Fielding; and flepping to the 
next room, where fhe knew Harriet was 
then employed in writing to her fifter, " I 
come, my dear," faid flie, " to fpeak to 
you on matters of fuch importance to your 
happinefs, that I fhall not apologize for 
interrupting you." Harriet, anticipating 
the fubje£l on which fhe intended to inter- 
rogate her, bowed in fome confufion. 
Mrs. Fielding proceeded — ^^ I am afraid 

VOL. Ill, R you 



[ S24£ ] 

you will fet me down for an Intermeddling 
old w^oman ; but I do afTure you, it is not 
from the defire of gratifying an old maidifli 
curiofity that I am prompted to aik you 
fome queflions, which I hope you will have 
the good-nature to forgive, and the inge- 
nuoufnefs to anfwer." 

Harriet again bowed affent. 

*' The reafons you gave me for refufmg 
the addrefles of Mr. Carradine were all 
calculated to do you honour. They were 
fuch as I could not but approve; but tell 
me, my dear, was there no other little 
lurking motive? — Ah! that blufli is a fuf- 
ficient reply, and I fliall require no other. 
Had Henry Sydney a fortune equal to 
Carradine's, 1 fhould not be furprifed at 
your preferring him; but my dear Mifs 
Orwell, do you confider what you are 
about to do? Have you duly weighed the 
confequences?" 

* I hope I have, Madam; but if you fee 
any objections — if you — pray go on, I 

fliall 



[ 243 ] 

fhall be much obliged to you for your opi- 
nion and advice/ 

Mrs. Fielding refumed : — " Though we 
arc all the poor dependents on futurity, 
and though it be our fanguine hope of fu- 
ture felicity that makes up the greater part 
of our prefent enjoyment, yet do we almofl 
always err by making the eftimate of that 
felicity from prefent feeling. While in- 
fpired by youthful paffion, we think that 
love alone will conftitute the happinefs of 
our future days; the evils of poverty are 
then defpifed, and when viewed at a dif- 
tance are perhaps converted by fancy into 
a charming addition to romantic tendernefs. 
If imagination have thus deceived you, let 
me beg of you, before it is too late, to 
difmifs the vain illufion, and take a real 
view of the cares and vexations that may 
await you." 

' I am fully fenfible of the truth of all 

you have faid,' returned Harriet, ' as well 

as of your goodnefs in reminding me of 

R 2 it. 



[ 244- ] 

ir. The fubjc(5l is not new to my reflec- 
tions; if I had been brought up in the lap 
of luxury and floth, or accuflomed to place 
my happinefs in the gratification of vanity, 
I am aware of the mifery that would await 
a change of circumftances. But all my 
habits have been thofe of a6live induftry, 
and all my hopes of happinefs been taught 
to reft in the bofom of domeflic peace. 
For myfelf I have therefore nothing to 
fear; but for Henry — ' 

*' You are a charming girl!" cried Mrs. 
Fielding, tenderly embracing her, " and 
truly deferving of the happinefs that I hope 
awaits you. But here comes Henry, and 
I muft now talk a little with him; fo pray 
ftep into the next room for a few minutes. 
Well, fir,^' continued Mrs. Fielding, ad- 
drefling herfelf to Henry as Harriet retired, 
" I fee the friendfhip of an old woman is 
not fo valuable in your eyes as the aifec- 
tions of a young one. Nay, nay, don't 
offer any apology, you muft hear me out. 

I told 



[ 245 ] 

I told you, I never (hould confcntto your 
marrying without a fortune adequate to 
your fupport; and I fhall keep my word. 
Here," continued fhe, taking a bundle of 
papers from her pocket, and prefenting 
them to Henry, " on perufmg thefe you 
will perceive, that I then addrelTed myfelf 
to a man who was his own mailer. For- 
give me for having prolonged the term of 
your probation, but I too well knew the 
danger of habits of luxury and diffipation, 
not to wifh to fave the child I had adopted 
from their dominion. It was on this ac- 
count I dire£led you to the choice of a pro- 
feiTion which, while it afforded an immedi- 
ate obje6l to your mind, and prevented the 
rufl of idlenefs from corroding your facul- 
ties, put it in your power to be ufeful to 
your fellow-creatures. The man without 
employment is a cypher in fociety ; de- 
pendent upon others for an adventitious 
value, he is in himfelf contemptible. May 
you, my fon, (for as fuch I {hall ever con- 

fider 



[ 246 ] 

fider you) fo employ your fortune and 
your talents, as to make them inftrumental 
to your eternal happinefs. And in the 
dear girl you have chofen for a wife, may 
you receive as great a reward as this world 
can beflow. So God blefs you !" 

Henry feized the hand that fhe held 
out to him, and involuntarily dropping 
on his knees, preffed it to his lips. His 
emotion was too great for utterance; and 
Mrs. Fielding, wifhing to efcape the efFu- 
fions of his gratitude, immediately left 
the room. 

It was fome time before Henry could 
fufficiently compofe himfelf to proceed to 
the examination of the papers (he had left 
with him ; when he did, he found a deed 
of gift for ten thoufand pounds, made on 
the day he had attained his fifth year. The 
fum had been at that period lodged in the 
hands of truflees, who received the interefl, 
which they laid out in the funds, and re- 
gularly accounted for the flock thus accu- 
mulated. 



[ 247 ] 

mulated. The principal was now, even 
after dedufling the two hundred a year al- 
lowed for his education, nearly doubled ; 
fo that he faw himfelf in poiTeirion of one 
thoufand pounds a year, independent of 
his profeffion. 

Harriet, who had in the adjoining apart- 
ment watched the departure of Mrs. Field- 
ing, and expefted Henry would inftantly 
join her, was not a little difappointed at 
his delay. She began to perfuade her- 
felf that the arguments urged by prudence 
had prevailed upon his mind, and that he, 
perhaps, at that moment was (truck with 
repentance for the raflinefs of his decla- 
ration. A fmall fpark of latent pride be- 
gan to operate upon her mind. She would 
no longer be the caufe of his uneafmefs j 
(he would free him from the fetters of aa 
engagement, of which it was plain he al- 
ready began to feel the weight. ImpreiTed 
with this idea, (he gently opened the door 

that 



[ 248 ] 

that feparated the two apartments, the 
firfl view flie took of Henry confirmed 
her fufpicions ; but the firfl: fentence he 
uttered banifhed them from her heart 
for ever! 



CHAP- 



[ 249 



CHAP. XL 



" Will you not now the pair of fages praife, ' 
" Who the fame end purfued by different ways? 
" One pity'd, one condemn'd, the woeful times; 
•' One laueh'd at follies, one lamented crimas." 

drtden's trans, of juv. sat. X. 28. 



A S lovers are of all people in the world 
■*• ^ thofe whofe company we have found 
mod infupportably infipid, we fhall not tire 
our readers by confining them to it for too 
great a length of time, but briefly inform 
them, that Mr. Churchill having found in 
the charms of Maria a confolation for his 
late difappointment, obtained her father's 
confent to lead her to the altar at the fame 
time that Henry and his bride were to ex- 
change 



[ 250 ] 

change their vows. While the prepara- 
tions were going on for the double nup- 
tials, Do£lor Orwell found it necefTary to 

return to W , but propofed coming 

up with his youngefl: daughter before the 
ceremony took place. Mr. Sydney, having 
procured a young clergyman to ofEciate in 
his abfence, readily confented to remain in 
London till he could be accompanied to 
the country by his children. While fixing 
on houfes for their future refidence, giving 
direflions about repairs, purchaling furni- 
ture, plate, &c. &c. occupied the morn- 
ings of the young people, Mr. Sydney era- 
ployed his at the Mufeums of Natural 
Hidory, which particularly attracted his 
attention. In thefe he found a never-fail- 
ing fource of amufement, and was only 
mortified on perceiving the little interefl: 
the young people feemed to take in his ela- 
borate defcriptions. Even Maria, who in 
the country had liftened to the fubje(51: 
with fo much complacency, had appa- 
rently 



[ 251 ] 

rently lofl: much of her relifh for piants and 
butterflies, fince her refidence in London. 
Hoping, however, that her talle was not 
as yet quite loft, he one day brought her 
home a fmall chryfldis of ' uncommon 
beauty, with which a friend had prefented 
him; while flie complacently expreffed her 
admiration Churchill entered the room, 
and perceiving how (he was engaged, 
peeped over her fhoulder at the obje£l of 
her contemplation. 

" Is it not very beautiful?" faid fhe, 
looking up to him with an enchanting fmile. 
' It is, indeed/ replied he, dafliing wkh 
his finger and thumb the little chryfalis 
into the fire, but dill keeping his eyes 
fixed upon the paper. 

"Blefsme!" exclaimed Maria, "what 
have you done? Where is the chryfalis ? 
Why did you throw it away ?" 

' Indeed, fir,' faid Mr. Sydney, gravely, 
* I {hall take care how I permit fuch a 
treafure, tg come into your way again.' 

" What 



[ 252 ] 

'^ Wim have I done?" cried Churchill, 
in amazement; " of what treafuredo you 
fpeak? I have not furely injured the poem 
Maria was looking at, which, if not a firft- 
rate performance, is certainly not deflitute 
of merit, if there be merit in truth." 

Maria, though vexed at the mortification 
it occafioncd her father, could fcarcely 
forbear laughing at her lover's miftake. 
The chryfalis was happily not irrecover- 
ably loft. After having carefully picked 
it from the aihes, and reftored it to him 
who bed knew its value, fhe examined the 
lines that had attracted the attention of 
Mr. Churchill, and at his requeft read 
them aloud.- 



TO 



C 253 1 



TO SELFISHNESS, 



N. 



O, Selfifhnefs, thou art not Nature's child! 
Of proud and pamper'd LuxVy thou wer't born 1 

Not in the rural vale, or defartu'ild, 
But 'mid thofe poiifh*d fcenes where Plenty pours her 
horn. 

Behold that youth, in whofe foul-beaming e^-e 
Sits S^Tnpathy, and each aitecHon kind ; 

His bofom fwells with Pity's tender figh, 
And at another's blifs warm glows hisgen'rous mind. 

No cold diftruft hath ever chill'd his heart. 
No blank refen-e his truth-taught lips hath feal'd ; 

Ardent he feeks his feelings to impart, 
And to the friend he loves his inmoll foul's reveal'd. 

Is there who cheer'd him in the hour of woe. 
Who from his eyes has wip'd Aiflic1:ion's tear ? 

Pure Gratitude's full flream doth ceafeleis Row, 
Enhancing, as it runs, each obligation dear. 

Doth rude NecefTity's imperious law 
In toilfonle bufmefs half his hours employ? 

From fleep, from paflime, flill he time can drav/, 
To aid the precious fund of deardomeflicjoy. 

hi 



[ 254 ] 



His foul a filler's fond afFedion charms, 
He joys to meet maternal love's mild beam ; 

The blifs of blefP.ng all his bofom warms, 
And dear doth his pure heart the focial circle deem. 

Such is the youth in Nature's bofom bred, 
While yet a llranger to the polifh'd world ; 

Behold him now in Fafliion's gay walks tread, 
And in the vortex vile of DiiTipation whirl'd. 

As Knarefborough's rills* arrell the filken zone, 
And drop by drop infidious works its change. 

Till the gay flutt'rer, llifF'ning into flone, 
In form alone efcapes the transfoi mation Itrange: 

So love of Pkafure by degrees devours 
JEach nobler, finer feeling of the heart ; 

So Pride and Vanity's transforming pow'rs 
Both callous Selfifimefs e'en to its core impart. 

See him, v/ho erft v/ith Sympathy's warm zeal 
Explor'd the rhet'rick of the afkirig eye; 

Who vnth the poor v/ould fhare his fcanty meal. 
And at foft Pity's call could his own wants deny; 

Now prefs'd by wants that Nature never knew, 
(Fantaftic wants ! imperious as vain) 

He for himfelf finds Fortune's gifts too few, 
Nor at foft Pity's call will one wild wilh refein. 

^ ■ ■ , -^"^ 

* Alluding to the petrefadion of ribbons fo quickly eifeded by 
the Dropping-Well of Knarefoorough. 



C 255 ] 

He, whofe warm heart with fympathetic glow 
Shar'd all the bofom-feelings of a friend, 

Now in gay crouds, or at the public (hew, 
In heartlefs, joylefs pomp prefers his hours to fpend. 

No more the focial fire-fide circle charms. 

No more a mother's fmiles he joys to meet; 
Fraternal love no more his bofom warms. 
Nor thoughts ofgiving joy imparts one rapture Iweeu 

No, Selfifhnefs, thou art not Nature's child; 
Of proud and pamper'd Lux'ry thou wer't born; 

Not in the rural vale, or defert wild. 
But in thofe polifh'd fcenes where Plenty pours her 
horn. 

Though the name of Carradine was 
never mentioned at Mrs. Fielding's, he was 
not forgotten by any of the party. The 
generous heart of Henry felt for the mor- 
tification of his rival, and finding that he 
did not come again to him, he took the 
earliefl: opportunity of calling at his lodg- 
ings. He there learned that Carradine 
had fet oflT for Bath the day after he had 
lad feen him, and from thence he foon after 
received from him the following letter : 



[ 255 ] 

" MY DEAR SYDNEY, 

" IMMEDIATELY on leaving 
you, I met with a party of friends who, 
like myfclf, were on the wing for India; 
but as the fleet will not be ready to fail 
for a few weeks, they refolved to take a 
daili to Bath in the interim. I liked the 
thought, and was glad to accompany them ; 
and here we are beating about like fo many 
fpaniels in a rabbit-warren. No cefTation 
from amufement. Morning, noon, and 
night, all here are on the fcent of pleafure; 
but for what is cdWcd pleasure I find I have 
loft fomewhat of my relifli, for I now find 
living in a croud to be abominably infipid. 
Poor Do£lor Orwell was fhocked at the 
idea of girls of character going to the 
Indian market; but had he come to Bath, 
he might have beheld a perpetual fair, 
where every ball-room may be confidered 
as a booth for the difplay of beauty to be 
difpofed of to thehigheft matrimonial bid- 
der. 



L 257 ] 

der. Having been introduced to ferae 
very pleafant fellows, all of them men of 
large fortune anc! high connexions, I have 
through them had an opportunity of ma- 
king what acquaintance I chofe. The 
mothers have all fmiled upon me, and I 
have had no rei»fon to complain of my re- 
ception from the daughters. I have ad- 
mired the beauty of fcveral, and do not 
know, had it been lefs prefTed upon my 
obfervation, what effeft it might have had 
upon my heart. But what one fees morn- 
ing, noon, and night, foon ceafes to inte- 
reil; and in a fociecy where intimacy takes 
place without acquaintance, the mind can 
never rivet the chain which is forged by 
the fenfes. 

" Harriet Orwell would not, I think, 
like Bath. No; Ihe likes conversation^ 
and here is only talk. But were Harriet 
Orwell here, die would, I make no doubt, 
foon difcover fome congenial fouls, who 
form a more rational fociety than that 

VOL. HI. s which 



C 258 ] 

which has come within the fphere of my 
obfervation. But why do I mention Harriet 
Orwell? Why, to (hew you that I can 
do it without pain; and to convince you 
that my heart has been made the better, 
and not the worfe, for its admiration of 
excellence. 

" From the tenor of my letter, you will 
perceive that this trip has been of ufe to 
my fpirits, and if you are the generous 
fellow I take you for, you will entirely 
rcftore them. To do this, you mull per- 
mit me to contribute to your happinefs. 
I am at prefent looking out for fome perfon 
in whofe hands I can depofit two thoufand 
pounds. It is the remainder of the fum I 
brought with me from India. I am per- 
fectly carelefs about the interefl, nor would 
the lofs of the principal aiferfl me; fo that 
it is no compliment to fay that the ufe of 
it is very much at your fervice. I hate 
the lawyers, and am an enemy to the 
ftamp-a<Si ; I (ball therefore have nothing 

to 



[ 259 ] 

to fay to bonds or parchments, but leave 
you to manage the Aim I have mentioned 
entirely as you pleafe, till my return to 
Europe; and am, ^'c. &c. 

Basil Carradine. 

The reader's heart, if he have one, will 
be at no lofs to fugged the reply which 
Henrymade to the friendly offer of his truly 
generous rival. Another letter of the fame 
date, received from Dr. Orwell, affigned 
to him a tafk of a more unpleafant nature. 
Tidings of Mr. Glib's having been ar- 
refted and thrown into prifon had reached 

W ; and the good Doctor, who never 

remembered the faults of the unfortunate, 
intreated his friends to intereft themfelves 
in his behalf, and if pofFible, to extricate 
him from the horrors of confinement. 

Following the dire^lions they had re- 
ceived, Mr. Sydney and his fon proceeded 
to Newgate; where, in a gloomy and defo- 
late apartment, they found the unhappy 
s 2 Glib, 



[ teo ] 

Glib, a prey to the mofi: abje^ deje^ion. 
The flippancy of his manner was now ex- 
changed for iin air of defpondency, which, 
however, a little brightened up on being 
informed of the purport of their vifit. In 
order to know how far there was a poflibi- 
lity of ferving him, it was neceffary to' 
have an accurate account of the (late of 
his affairs ; in giving which he was obli- 
ged f". confefs himfelf the dupe of Vallaton, 
againd whom he now poured forth all the 
bitternefs of inve<5tive. 

Mr. Sydney was at much pains to turn 
the current of his wrath from the man to 
the principles on which he had a£^ed ; thefc 
the old gentleman was at great pains to 
pourtray in their proper colours. What 
he learned from Glib of the conduct of 
Vallaton, imprcffed him with a deep for- 
row for the fate of poor Julia, and gave 
him a frefli anxiety concerning her fitua- 
fion; and finding that Glib, though he 
could not himfelf furnilh any information 

concerning 



[ 261 ] 

concerning them, fufpe^led Mr. Myope of 
being acquainted with the place of their 
concealment, he refolvcd immediately to 
apply to that gentleman on the fubjedl. 

While Henry remained to take in \Vri- 
ting the ftatement which Glib had given 
of his affairs, his father proceeded to 
Myope's lodgings, and had the good for- 
tune of finding him at home, and alone. 
Reintroduced himfelf without difficulty, 
but found the philofopher very little in- 
clined to gratify him on the fubje£l of his 
enquiries. After receiving fome evafive 
anfwers to his plain queftions, Mr. Sydney 
with fome indignation faid, " After the 
accounts 1 have jufl: received from a perfon 
whom the perfidious villainy of this man 
has involved in ruin, I cannot wonder that 
he (hould fkulk in concealment ; but from 
you, fir, I fliould expefl: better than to 
protefl a man who, as far as I can learn, 
has a^ed like a ficaundrel in every thmg." 

* Scoundrels, 



[ 262 ] 

* Scoundrels, fir,' faidMr. ]\Iyope, ' are 
frequently, indeed almofl always, men of 
talents, and great talents are great ener- 
gies ; and great energies cannot but flow 
from a powerful fenfe of iitnefs and'juftice. 
You allude, I fuppofe, to Mr. Vallaton's 
condu(ft as treafurer to the Hottentonian 
committee, from which condu<fl: Mr. Glib 
has been a fulferer. But, fir, Mr. Valla- 
ton no doubt perceived a degree of fitnefs 
in appropriating thofe fums to himfelf, 
which a man of more confined intelleft 
might not have difcovered.' 

" Is it poffible, fir," cried Mr. Sydney, 
'' that a man of your feeming gravity can 
be the apologifi of fuch crimes ?" 

' There is no fuch thing as crim.e,' re- 
plied Myope; 'and though Mr. Vallaron 
may, perhaps, in fome inftances have a^fled 
erroneoufly, yet it is inconteftibly proved^ 
that as a man of talents he cannot be def- 
titute of virtue/ 

« The 



[ a63 ] 

*^ The Devil himfelf is reprefented as 
poffeiTed of talents,'* returned Mr. Sydney, 
** and of him the do6lrines you have men- 
tioned are truly worthy." 

' The Devil!' rejoined Mr. Myop«; 
* why, my dear fir, the Devil is the firft of 
heroes ! I cannot conceive a greater com- 
pliment than to be compared to the Devil. 
You do not know in what high eftimation 
his chara6i:er is held by modern philofo- 
phers. It is polTible that his energies, Hke 
thofe of Mr, Vallaton, centered too much 
in perfonal regards; but take him all in 
all, his is the firft of imaginary charadlers 
that it ever entered into the heart of man 
to conceive. Oh, the virtues of the Devil 
are ineftimablel' 

" Mr. Vallaton has indeed proved a very 
clofe imitator of the arch apoftatc/' faid 
Mr. Sydney; " and I am afraid Mifs Del- 
mond, like our general mother, will find 
that file has liftencd to the voice of this 
black feducer to be 

« Defpoil'd of innocence, of faith, of blifs!" 



C 264 ] 

Can yoGj frr, inform me (for, from the 
infamous chara£ler of the man, 1 have 
my doubts) whether he and Mifs Delmond 
are really married?" 

* I cannot fpe<ak to a certainty/ replied 
Myope ; ' but all I can fay is, that I do not 
think Mr. Vallaton a man likely to fan£lion 
by his example an inditution fo immoral 
and injurious to the interefls of fociety.' 

Mr. Sydney looked aghafl. " Is it pof- 
fible," cried he, " that vice fliould thus 
audacioufly afTume the name of virtue?" 

' And pray, fir,' returned Myope, * what 
is virtue, but another name for happinefs? 
Is not happinefs the only true end of 
exigence?' f 

" That happinefs is the only true end of 
exiftence, I grant you," faid Mr. Sydney; 
" and if you can point out a fmgic inftancc 
where an encreafe of happinefs has been 
the refult of this new fyflem of morals, I 
(hall allow your argument to have fomc 
weight." 

'The 



[ 265 ] 

' The new morality is too fublime for 
the prefent depraved and diitempcred ftate 
of human fociety,' rejoined Mr. Myope. 
* The experiments thai have been made in 
it have been'rather premature, and there- 
fore cannot expect to have been followed 
T/ith advantageous confequences to the in- 
dividuals, who have nobly {leramed the 
torrent of prejudice to make them.* 

" A proof to me,'* replied Mr. Sydney, 
" of the fuperiority of thofe principles 
which are adapted to every flare of fociety, 
and to every circumftance in which a hu- 
man being can be placed; which, by go- 
verning the paffions and regulating the 
affeflions of the heart, bring peace to the 
foul, and are equally calculated for enhan- 
cing the enjoyment of profperity by pre- 
ferving from its temptations, and of allay- 
ing the bitternefs of adverfity by faving 
from defpair." 

A contemptuous fmile, which overfpread 
the countenance of Mr, Myope as Mr. 

Sydney 



I ^66 ] 

Sydney pronounced the lad fentence, in* 
dicatcd a fneering reply; but a letter, 
which was at that moment put into his 
hands by his fervant, gave a new exprelTion 
to every feature, and for the fupercilious 
fmileof fcorn, fubflituted the frown of fury 
and revenge. ' Vallaton is indeed a vil- 
lain!' exclaimed hcj (lamping his foot in a 
paroxyfm of rage. ' Infidious ferpent ! 
He fed uce my Emmeline 1 He entice her to 
leave me in this manner! Ungrateful 
wretch! To a£i thus by ??ief It is intole- 
rable !' In this incoherent manner did he 
run on for fome time, before Mr. Sydney 
could at all comprehend the caufe of his 
inquietude. At length, however, he dif- 
covered that Mr. Vallaton had that morn- 
ing fet off for France with the Goddess of 
Reaso?i, of whom it now appeared he had 
long been the favoured lover. 

It may perhaps be expelled, that Mr. 
Sydney (hould with avidity avail himfelf 
of fo favourable an opportunity of triumph- 
ing 



[ 267 ] 

ing in the difcomfiture of an opponent; 
fo far, however, was Mr. Sydney from do- 
ing fo, that the exprelTions which would fo 
naturally have Aid to the tongue of many 
good people in fimilar circumftances, never 
once found their way to his. Obferving 
the mind of Mr. Myope too much agitated 
for a difcuflion on principles, he only {laid 
with him until he obtained an addrefs to 
the lodgings Vallaton had lately occupied j 
and thither the old gentleman inflantly 
hurried, in hopes of gaining feme infor- 
mation concerning the injured and now 
forfaken Julia, His folicitude was fruit- 
lefs. Vallaton and Julia had left thefe 
lodgings a fortnight, nor could the peo- 
ple of the houfe furnifli him with any .!ue 
to their next place of abode. Opp-tiTed 
by fatigue, and overwhelmed with regret, 
he returned to Mrs. Fielding's, where hap- 
pinefs beamed on every countenance, and 
the fweet flutterings of youthful hope, or 
the more delicious feelings of internal 

fatisfa6lion. 



L 268 ] 

fatlsfaftlon, dwelt in every heart. In the 
contemplation of fuch a fcene every felfifli 
forrow would have been annihilated. The 
heart of Mr. Sydney fwelled with grati- 
tude to the Giver of all good, for making 
him a wirnefs of the happinefs of his chil- 
dren, but had been too deeply wounded in 
the courfe of the morning to admit of an 
immediate return of its wonted ferehity. 



CHAP. 



C 269 3 



CHAP. xn. 



" Then gently fcan your brother man, 

" Still gentler, fifter woman; 
" Though they may gang a kennin wrang, 

*' To ftep afide is human. 
•'< Who made the heart, 'tis he alone 

" Decidedly can try us; 
" He knows each chords its •carlou: tentf 

" Each fpring, its various bias: 
** Then at the balance let's be mute, 

** IVe fimep can adjust It ; 
" What's done we partly may compute, 

*' But never vtbat't reiisted^* 



T> Y the zeal of Mr. Sydney, the libera- 
-*^ lity of Mrs. Fielding, and the a£livc 
exertions of Henry, the aSairsof Mr.Glib 
^ere put into fuch a train, that in the courfc 
of a few days he was fet at liberty. Put- 
ting himfelf under the direction of his bc- 
ncfaftors, and abjuring all connection with 

his 



[ 270 ] 

his former afTociates, he kt out for W — 
to re-enter upon the polTellion of his houfe 
and fhop, to re-affemble his children round 
his own fire-fide, and to receive back his 
repentant wife, who now forfaken by her 
gallant, was left a prey to the miferies of 
poverty, or the flill greater miferies of 
vice. Having been mutually to blame, 
Mr. Sydney (Irongly recommended to them 
the duty of mutual forgivenefs ; and fuch 
weight had his advice, from the a6ls of 
beneficence with which it was prefaced, 
that they did not fcrupic to adopt it. New 
ideas of duty, and new perceptions of hap- 
pinefs, began to open on their minds ; at- 
tention to bufmcfs occupied the hours that 
had formerly been devoted to the ftudy of 
new theories in philofophy; and inftead of 
defcanting on general utility, they now 
ferioufly applied themfelves to the educa- 
tion of tfeeir own children. 

Glib, being now convinced that there is 
no immorality in gratitude, fcruples not to 

declare, 



L 271 1 

declare, that he owes to his benefactors 
not only the re-eflabhihment of his credit, 
but the exiftence of his happinefs. Nor 
let the proud reader murmur at our thus 
tranfgreffing the order of our hiftory, to 
gire this concluding Iketch of the adven- 
tures of a fimple tradefman. It is the af- 
fecled prerogative of felfifh profperity to 
conGder as mere auromacons all who move 
not in its own exalted fphere ; but it is the 
privilege of philofophy to view humaa 
nature from a flill more lofty eminence, 
from which the paltry diftinctions of fitua- 
tion are loll to the eye, and the interefls of 
humanity aflert an equal claim to the feel- 
ings of the heart. 

To return to our narrative. The pre- 
parations for the nuptials were now com- 
pleted ; the day fixed on for their celebra- 
tion was at hand. It was expected by the 
parties with that chaftened hope, which in 
well-regulated minds attends the often- 
clouded profpecl of earthly felicity. They 

fcic 



C 272 ] 

{eh the fulnefs of fatisfacftion, but were 
taught by reafon to fet bounds to the wild 
extravagance of joy. 

The friendihip of the two young ladies, 
which had been knit by a fympathy of 
tafte and fentiment, was flrengthened by a 
fimilarity of fituation; nor would the hap- 
pinefs of either have been compleat, if it 
had not been feared by the other. 

" Surely/' faid Harriet, one day that 
fee was fitting alone with her friend, 
*' furely, Maria, we are highly favoured 
of Heaven ; if our gratitude were propor- 
tioned to its gifts, I believe we feould do 
nothing but pray and fing pfalms from 
morning to night. Well, I wife to God 
that all the world was as happy as we are!" 

' And that wife, my dear girl,' faid Mrs. 
Fielding, who then entered the room, ' is 
of itfelf a fong of thankfgiving more ac- 
ceptable than a thoufand pfalms. But 
where is Henry? I have got fome bufmefs 
for him, and expefted to find him here.' 

"He 



C "^-(^ ] 

" He will be here foon, I will anfwer 
for him," faid Maria, " and here he is." 

' Here, however,' faid Mrs. Fielding, 
* I cannot at prefent permit him to remain,' 

She then put into his hands a billet (he 
had juft received from the matron of her 
afylum, informing her of the admiffion of 
an unfortunate young woman, who was fo 
very ill as to require immediate medical 
aififtance. Her appearance, (he added, 
was extremely interefling, and plainly indi- 
cated fomething very fuperior to her pre- 
fent fituation. 

' Come,' faid Mrs. Fielding, when 
Henry had read the note, ' let us haflen 
' to this poor unfortunate. The carriage 
is already at the door; and not to mortify 
you too much by taking you away, the 
girls fhall accompany us. What fay you, 
ladies, to my propofal?'* 

Their affent was readily accorded, and 

the coachman, obeying the orders of his 

miftrefs, drove full fpeed to the afylum. 

VOL. III. T On 



[ 274 ] 

On alighting, the young ladies went Into 
the work-room, where they were already 
kaown and beloved ; while Mrs. Fielding 
and Henry followed the matron to the 
chamber of the young flranger. There, 
reclining on the bed in a ftate of almoft 
torpid infenfibility, they beheld a young 
perfon, whofe face was concealed from 
view by a mafs of pale brown hair, which 
uncombed and un arranged flowed over it 
in wild diforder. The inimitable beauty 
of her hand and arm attracted their inflant 
obfervation: Henry gazed for a moment 
in filence, and then fuddenly advancing, 
" Is it poffible !" cried he, in a fmothered 
tone. " Is it Mifs Delmond, Julia Del- 
mond, that I fee thus?" 

At the found of that name flie haftlly 
ralfed her head; and with a wild and fud- 
den motion putting back her hair, fran- 
ticly gazed on Henry for a moment, then 
uttering a loud fcream, feinted away. 

When 



[ 275 3 

When (he recovered, fhe found herfelf 
fupported in the arms of Mrs.. Fielding, 
and her face bathed with the tears which fell 
fad from that good lady's eyes. ' Where 
am I?' cried fhe, in a quick and hurried 
voice. ' And who are you ? And why do 
you weep ? Did pu know my father l But 
be comforted; you did not kill him; you 
did not break his heart. Ah ! no, no, no !' 
then (Iriking her hand againfther forehead, 
flie hid her face in Mrs. Fielding's bofom. 

" Do not affli<ft yourfelf thus, my dear 
child,' faid Mrs. Fielding; " you are ill, 
and mufl: take care of yourfelf, and here is 
your old friend and phyfician, Do6lor 
Sydney, who begs leave to attend you, and 
I dare fay will join with me in entreating 
you to difmifs every uneafy thought from 
your mind. You are not among ftrangers, 
but furrounded by your befl and mod af- 
fectionate friends." 

' Yes,' faid DoClor Sydney, affeClion- 

ately taking her hand, * yes, dear Mifs 

T 2 Delmond, 



[ 276 ] 

Delmond, you do not know how much 
pleafure your recovery will give to many 
hearts.' 

•A deep figh burfl from her bofom, but 
as if afraid to look on Henry, (he clung to 
Mrs. Fielding to conceal her face from 
his obfervation. 

" Perhaps," faid Mrs. Fielding, " Mifs 
Delmond would better hke to fee her 
friend Harriet Orwell." 

* Harriet Orwell!' repeated Mifs Del- 
mond; ' ah! no, no, Harriet Orwell 
would now difdain to look on the poor 
forlorn Julia!' 

'' My Julia! my dear Julia! my fweet 
friend!" cried Harriet, who had only 
waited for a fignal to approach her, and 
clafping her in her arms, imprinted an af- 
fe£lionate kifs on her pale cheek; " Never, 
never will your friend Harriet forfake 
you !" Sighs and tears choaked her utter- 
ance; while Julia, with all the flrength (he 
had left, drained her to her bofom. She 

attempted 



[ 277 ] 

attempted to fpeak, but voice was denied 
her; the words died away upon her 
parched and pallid lips, and again (he was 
near fainting, when a timely fhower of 
tears feemed in fome mxafure to relieve 
her fwoln heart. 

It was the relief of nature, and her 
friends were too judicious to feek to ftop 
the falutary eifufion. Harriet, indeed, fhed 
tear for tear ; and Maria, who flood at a 
dillance, apprehenfive of overpowering 
the poor timid mourner, by the appearance 
of fo many people at once, had her full 
fhare of the affefling fcene. 

At length Mrs. Fielding obferved, that 
they mud not too far indulge their feelings. 
That ill as Mifs Delmond evidently was, 
flie thought fhe might now be removed to 
her houfe without danger. " And when 
there," faid (he, " I hope, under the care 
of fo many kind nurfes, (he will foon be 
well. Come, my love," fhe added, kindly 
preffing Julia's hand, " do not too much 

give 



[ 27« ] 

give way to this emotion, but let me prevail 
upon you to rally your exhaufted fpirits, 
and to take fome refrefhment to enable 
you to bear the fatigue of the ride." 

Again Julia attempted to fpeak, but her 
words were not yet audible. With diffi- 
culty file fwallowed the cordial Do6lor 
Sydney had ordered, which feeming to 
reftore fome degree of animation to her 
languid frame, Mrs. Fielding took the op- 
portunity of again urging their immediate 
departure. Henry begged leave to fup- 
port her to the carriage. ' And I too/ 
faid Harriet, putting her arm round her 
waift, ' I too will be the fupporter of my 
dear Julia.' 

She paffivcly permitted them to raife her 
from the chair, when, as if recollefling 
herfelf, ftie (hrunk fuddenly from their 
aiEfling arms, exclaiming, " Oh! never, 
never^ never (hall the houfe of Mrs. Field- 
ing be contaminated by the reception of a 
wretch like me. Here let me bide myfelf 

from 



[ 279 ] 

from a world that will defpife me, aad here 
let me die in peace/' The effort (he made 
in pronouncing thefe words (hook her 
whole frame ; her eyes rolled wildly round, 
and fhe feemed fpeedily relapfmg into the 
fame difordered Hate from which flie had 
fo lately recovered. 

In vain did Harriet fecond Mrs. Field- 
ing's kind intreaties with all the foothing 
eloquence of friendfhip. She made no 
other reply than by clinging to the bed- 
poil, and feveral times repeating, in a hol- 
low tone, " No, no, here, here," and 
fome other disjointed words, all, however, 
plainly indicative of her determined refo- 
lution of not being removed. 

Henry at length put an end to the con- 
tefl by declaring, that it would be Injurious 
in her prefent (late to perfift in it any further. 

* Here then, my love, you Ihall flay for 
to-day,' faid Mrs. Fielding, ^ provided 
you will fufFer yourfelf to be put immedi- 
ately to bed, and take whatever Doctor 
Sydney orders for you/ It 



[ 280 ] 

It was then agreed, that flie fliould be 
left to the care of Harriet, who would on 
no account leave her. Nor did Henry re- 
quire the motive of Harriet's prefence to 
determine him to devote as much of his 
time as was not engaged by other patients, 
to the relief of this unhappy girl; though 
as his hopes relied more upon the efficacy 
of confidential friendfhip than on the exer- 
tion of medical ikill, they depended on 
Harriet (till more than on himfelf. After 
the departure of Mrs. Fielding and Maria 
he withdrew, telling Harriet (he would 
find him in the parlour whenever (he 
thought his attendance neceflary. Harriet 
fmiled her approbation of his kind folici- 
tude, and as foon as he was gone, urged 
Julia to permit herfelf to be immediately 
vmdrefifed. Julia made no oppofition to 
her propofal, and as Harriet obferved her 
uneafinefs at the approach of ftrangers, (he 
herfelf performed the office of her maid. 
While fhe endeavoured to confine within 
the fraall cap, the matron had provided for 



C 281 ] 

her, thofe beautiful treffes wliich (he had 
fo often feen adorned with the niceft care, 
and remembered how proud Captain Del- 
mond ufed to be of their luxuriant growth, 
file was fo forcibly flruck with the contraft 
the prefent moment prefented, that fhe 
could not reftrain the falling tear. Julia 
perceived the tender emotion ; and feizing 
Harriet's hand, prefTed it to her lips. 

" My good, my gentle Harriet!" faid 
file, in a low and tremulous voice, *' you 
alone, of all the world, will have compaf- 
fion on me. It is your innate virtue only 
that will not fear contamination from a 
wretch like me. Oh that my father had 
had fuch a child 1'* Then leaning her head 
againft Harriet's fhoulder, (lie burft into a 
frefli agony of tears. It was a confider- 
able time before Harriet's utmoft efforts 
could reftore her to any degree of compo- 
fure; at length (he was conveyed to bed, 
and a foporific draught foon gave a tempo- 
rary oblivion to her forrows. 

Towards 



[ 282 ] 

Towards the clofe of evening, Henry, 
who fliared with his amiable miftrefs the 
talk of watching the flumbers of their un- 
happy friend, was called out of the room. 
He foon returned, followed by his father, 
who, to Mifs Orwell's great furprife, led in 
his hand the almoft-forgotten Bridgetina. 
She took no notice of Harriet, but with 
trembling fteps followed Mn Sydney to 
the bed-fide. On beholding the face of 
Julia, fhe flarted, and laying hold of Mr. 
Sydney's arm, ' Why,* faid flie, ' did you 
not tell me (he was dead I' 

" Nay, ihrink not from this fight," faid 
Mr. Sydney, without noticing her miflake, 
'' but in that pale face and altered form 
contemplate the fruits of your boafted fyf- 
tem of happinefs and virtue. Lovely, 
indeed, very lovely was this fallen flower! 
and long might it have bloomed the de- 
light of every heart, had it not been de- 
prived of thofe fa pports which God and 
Nature had affigned it. Sweet innocent! 
how cruel was the fpoilcr that laid thy 



[ 283 1 

glory in the duft ! how deteflable the arts 
that led to thy defl:ru£lion 1'* 

Bridgetina, though not remarkable for 
the quicknefs of her feelings, was aife£ted. 
She fobbed aloud. In pity to her diflrefs, 
and in apprehenfion that Julia might be 
diflurbed by her noify grief, Harriet took 
pains to comfort her. She told her they 
had every reafon to hope for Mifs Del- 
mond's fpeedy recovery. *' Even the 
wound which her peace of mind has re- 
ceived is not mortal," faid fhe; " flie will 
apply to the balm of confolation, and the 
principles of religion will aid the power of 
time, and reftore her to tranquillity.'' 

* She is not then dead!* cried Bridgetina, 
eagerly prefTmg forward. * She breathes! 
I fee flie breathes. Look how (lie fmiles! 
but ah! how ghaflly is that fmile! how 
unlike the playful fmile of Julia! What 
has wrought this change ?' 

" It has been wrought," faid Mr. Syd- 
ney, " by the fame delufive principles that 

have 



[ 284 1 

have reduced you from the path of filial 
duty. Had nature beftowed on you a form 
as beautiful, or a face as fair, you too 
would have been the prey of luft, and the 
vi6i:im of infamy. Be thankful that you 
have efcaped a fate fo dreadful. Repent 
of having ever dared it; and by your fu- 
ture behaviour to your fond mother, ftrivc 
to make amends for your pad conduct.*' 

Bridgetina wept bitterly, but did not 
refufe her hand to Mr. Sydney, who led 
her out of the room, without having given 
the leafl diflurbance by their prefence to 
the profound flumbers of Julia. 

In order to account for the appearance 
of our heroine at this jun^ure, it is necef- 
fary to mention the proceedings of Mr, 
Sydney fubfequent to the interview with 
Mr. Myope, which has been already re- 
lated. Mr. Sydney (though a clergyman) 
was neither diciatorial^ impatient ofcontra^ 
di6lion^ harsh in his censures^ nor illiberal 
in his judgments,* He faw the prejudices 

* See Enquirer, p. ^32. of 



[ 285 ] 

of Myope with compafTion; he felt for 
the fuuation in which his falfe principles 
had plunged him, with the acutefl: fenfibi- 
lity; and was impelled by his benevolence 
to exert every power of his foul for the 
reftoration of his peace. 

The mind of Mr. Myope was now in a 
(late peculiarly favourable to the reception 
of new impreffions. The ardour with 
which he had embraced the new theory 
of morals was fomewhat abated. Circum.- 
ftances had occurred, which even before 
the defertion of his friend and miilrefs, 
had confiderably cooled his zeal. This 
event had given a new turn to his reflec- 
tions, and he began to doubt whether the 
recent difcoveries in morality were likely to 
be attended with all the beneficial confe- 
quences to mankind, which, in the moment 
of cnthufiafm he had fo fondly predicted. 
The antipathy he had imbibed againft the 
clerical chara(fler, made him receive the 
firft advances of Mr. Sydney with reluc- 
tance; 



[ 286 ] 

tance ; but he foon found that zeal is not 
neceffarily accompanied with arrogance, 
and that a preacher of chriflianity is not 
alwa^^s of confequence dogjiiatical and in- 
tolerant. 

As Myope had been a zealous leader of 
feveral different fe£ls of religionifts, it may 
be fuppofed that Mr. Sydney could offer 
to him no new arguments in fupport of 
chriflianity J but however flrange it may 
appear, fo it was, that the light in which 
the truths of natural and revealed religion 
were placed by Mr. Sydney, were fuch as 
never before had been prefented to the 
mind of the philofopher. He fought not 
to perplex by logical definitions; he be- 
trayed no zeal for peculiar tenets; he 
treated the various explanations of parti- 
cular pafTages of fcripture as of very fmall 
importance; and feemed only anxious for 
the edablifhment of great and fundamental 
truths. The God of Mr. Sydney was a 
Cod of mercies — a God of confolation — 

" the 



[ 287 ] 

** the God of lights, with whom there Is ne 
variablenefs, neither fhadow of changing/* 
His gofpel, the perfeiStlon of benevolence, 
proclaiming " peace on earth, and good- 
will towards men." 

The enthufiafm of Mr. Myope kindled 
as he fpoke, but it was not the defign of 
Mr. Sydney to excite enthufiafm. He re- 
prefented It as the bufmefs of religion to 
regulate the emotions of the heart, to allay 
the efFervefcence of the fpirits, and to 
watch over the peculiar tendency of the 
temper. Its office to conduct the activity 
of an ardent mind into proper channels, 
where, inflead of being expended In vain 
fpeculations, it may be produdlive of real 
and fubftantial good. Far from loading 
with Indifcriminate abufe all the opinions 
which formed a part of Mr. Myope's fyf- 
tem, Mr. Sydney allowed all the merit that 
was due to thefplrit of philanthropy which 
breathed in his notions of benevolence, 
and gave to his doctrines of fincerity the 

warmeft 



[ 288 ] 

WHrmefl and mod decided applaufe. But 
while he applauded the abflracl notions 
entertained of each of thefe noble princi- 
ples, he plainly demonflrated their inuti- 
lity in the direction Mr. Myope had given 
them ; and proved that to thefe, as well 
as to every other virtue, the principles of 
chriflianity were the bed, the only fupport. 
*' I do indeed admire and applaud the zeal 
with which you efpoufe the caufe of the 
poor and oppreffed part of our fpecies," 
faid Mn Sydney; " it does honour to 
your heart. But what does your fyftem do 
for them? What does it propofe to do ?** 

' It propofes,' replied Mr. Myope, ' by 
enlightening the public mind, to render an 
equality of conditions, by the voluntary 
cefTion of property, univerfal.' 

** Suppofmg this to be pra(n:icable,*' 
returned Mr. Sydney, " (though how a 
perfon who is at all acquainted with the 
world or with human nature can make the 
fuppofition, I am at a lofs to imagine) 

ftill 



C 289 ] 

i\i\[ it does not appear that happinefs is 
the natural and neceflary refult. Does 
the experience of thofe who are mofi: ex- 
empt from the phyfical evils of life, lead 
us to form fuch a conclufion? lam fure 
it does not. And what is the prefent con- 
fequence of fuch do6lrines to the obje£ls 
of your benevolent regard ? To infufe 
additional gall into the bitter cup of po- 
verty, to add to the burden of human 
mlferies a load of difcontent I How differ- 
ent that fyftem of equality preached by 
Him who emphatically announced himfelf 
the friend of the poor and needy ! What 
are riches, or honours, or even the lefs 
equivocal bleffings of liberty and indepen- 
dence, compared with the glorious cer* 
tainty of the favour of God, and the en- 
joymcnt of immortal happinefs? By this 
hope have millions been fupported under 
the prefTure of calamities which your fyf- 
tem could never reach; for in it alone is 
found a cure for tlie forrows of the heart. 
voir. III. u The 



C 2C)0 ] 

The love of glory and the defire of fame 
have fometimes, it is true, animated their 
votaries into a contempt for the evils of 
pain, and even of death itfelf ; but from the 
influence of this principle the many mufl 
ever be excluded. The man who cheriihes 
it, and is by his fituation thrown into obfcu- 
rity, where his fufferings are unnoticed, or 
regjirded with contempt, mufl: be miferable ; 
but abfolute mifery can never in any fitua- 
tion be the lot of the chrlfl:ian." 

After feme little hefitation, the truth of 
Mr. Sydney's afTertion was acknowledged 
by Mr. Myope ; flill, however, the enor- 
mous evils attendant on the prefent fl:ate 
of fociety afforded him an ample field for 
Gxpatiation and cenfure. Thefe Mr. Syd- 
ney canvafTcd one by one, as they were 
pointed out by the philofopher. Some he 
traced to caufes very different from thofe 
from which Mr. Myope had deduced them; 
fome he proved to have confequences lefs 
miurious than thofe afTigued them; and 

others 



[ 291 ] 

Others he candidly gave up, as fubje^ls of 
regret and mortification to every thinking 
mind ; while he evidently fliewed, that not 
an evil complained of could have exiftence 
in a fociety, where the fpirit ofchriftianity 
was the ruling principle of every heart. 

The impreffion he made upon his learned 
adverfary was gradual, but it was flrong; 
and at every fuccelTive converfation he 
found him lefs tenacious of his former 
theory, and more inclined to admit the 
proofs of the truth of that doflrine v/hich 
alone, 

" Amid life's pains, abafements, emptinefs, 
" The foul can comfort, elevate, and fillj 
" Which only, and which amply this, performs; 
" Lifts us above life's pains, her joys above! 
** Their terrors thofe, and thefe their luftre lofe ; 
" Eternity depending covers all."* 

It was on his return from one of thefc 
conferences that Mr. Sydney learned the 
fituation of Julia. It immediately occurred 
to him, that an incident (o (Iriking was 



Young. 



more 



I 295 ] 

more likely to produce an cfFeft on the 
mind of Bridgetina than any argument 
that could poflibly be made ufe of. Mrs* 
Fielding readily entered into his views, and 
impatiently waited to know the rcfult of 
the interview they then proje£i:ed, and 
and from which they expelled the mod fa- 
lutary efFedls. How far their expe£lations 
were anfwered ifhall appear hereafter. 



CHAP. 



[ 293 ] 



CHAP. XIII. 



« Pfoftrate fcU 

" Before him reverent, and there confefs'd 
*• Humbly their faults, and pardon begg'd with tears, 
" Watering the ground; and with their fighs the air 
" Frequenting, fent from hearts contrite, in fign 
" Of forrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek." 

MILTON'. 



np^HE numbers of Julia were not re- 
-^ frefhing. She awoke languid and 
oppreffed, but perfe£lly reftored to her 
recolleclion. Harriet, for whom a bed 
had been provided in an adjoining room, 
bad retired to fnatch a ihort repofe ; and 
Henry had fome hours before been obliged 
to go to the other end of the town, fo that 
on awaking, the nurfe was the only perfon 
near her. To her (he addreiTcd herfelf in 

low 



[i ^94 J 

low aud irembllng accents, '^ Pray, pray, 
good woman, be To kind as to inform me 
where I am. J thought I came to the 
Afylum of the Deftitute. Yes, I remember 
the name. — the Asylum of the Destitute, Is 
it there I am?" 

* Yes,' replied the nurfe, * this is the 
Afylum. of the Defiitute.' 

" Thank God!" faid Julia, " I am then 
fafe. I am under the prote£lion oi the 
virtuous. I believe my head has been dif- 
turbed. It has been fadly confufed. I 
thought fome dear friends were with me; 
but it was all a dream. I now fee it was 
a dream." 

; ''Mifs Orwell fat up with you the greateft 
part of the night,^ faid the nurfe. 

" Mifs Orwell! Harriet Orwell! Dear 
amiable girl! And fhall I not fee her 
again?" ^a^tf7^1i 

' She is only lain down to take a little 
reft. Dr. Sydney infifled on it before he 
would go awayu' 

" Henry 



C ^95 ] 

*' Henry Sydney too here I Yes, I think 
I remember feein;^ him. But how extra- 
ordinary is all this! I beheve my head is 
Hill ftrangely bewildered, for I can account 
for nothing." 

* It is only the effe£^s of your fleeping 
draught, Madam. You had better keep 
quiet for a little time, and it will foon go 
off;' replied the judicious nurfe, drawing 
the curtains. 

Julia followed her advice, and remained 
filent till the light footfleps of Harriet at- 
tra(f^ed her attention. She then quickly 
withdrew the curtains, and railing herfelf 
up in the bed, held out both her hands to 
her fair friend, who, tenderly embracing 
her, made anxious enquiries after her 
health, " Ah, Harriet! how good, how 
very good you are! But your kindncfs 
overpowers me. When laft I faw you, 
how little did I think I ihould now be the 
bumbled wretch I ami" 

'Do 



[ 296 ] 

* Do not diftrefs yourfelf, my dear Julia, 
by too keen a recolieftion of pad events. 
Over thefe we have no control. Let us 
occupy our minds by the prefent and the 
future ; and if we do fo properly, be af- 
fured there is no evil of which good may 
not be the refult.' 

" Alas ! for me no good remains. No, 
RO j for me all i^ ;fi^,darknefs of defpair, 
the gloom of mifery ! My father ! — Oh, 
Hai-iiet, you know the circumilances of 
his death ; teil mc then, nay do not con- 
ceal it; tell mc, if with his lateft. breath he 
did not curfe his Julia?" -, ^^xfj ^s-. 

r * No, my dear, your father expired In 3 
better frame of mind ; his lad jvpTds .were 
to implore a bleilmg on you. He never 
fpoke of you with refentmem, but pitied 
your delufion, and I believe from his heart 
forgave it.' 

" Did he, indeed ! and did he blefs mc ! 
Oh, my dear, dear papa! howcoUldl — " 

Here 



[ ^297 ] 

Here fhe was interrupted by a flood of 
tears, which for fome time rendered her 
incapable of holding further converfe. 

* Do not, my dear Julia,' faid Harrier, 
* do not, I befeech you, dwell fo much upon 
the pail. Much as I wiili to know the 
particulars of ail the cruel circumftances 
that have led to our prefent meeting, I will 
not now permit you to enter upon the fad 
detail. We Ihall have fuiEcient time for 
this hereafter, as I hope you will find your- 
felf well enough this morning to accom-^ 
pany me to Mrs. Fielding's, in whom, I 
can afTure you, you will find a tender and 
afFeclionate friend ; (he will be as a mo- 
ther, to you, till the arrival of your own ; 
and I hope I may this morning have the 
pleafure of informing* Mrs. Delmond, that 
you are under fuch refpeflable proteclion.* 

" Alasr! alas! it is impoiTible. Never 
can I appear at Mrs. Fielding's ; never 
more can I enjoy the pleafures of fociety. 
No, Harriet; I have been a vain, guilty, 

infatuated 



[ 298 ] 

infatuated creature; but never will I add 
to my felf-condemnation by the meannefs 
of impofture. In retirement, deep retire- 
ment, will I bury myfelf from the notice of 
the w^orld. Even from you, my kind, my 
ellimable friend — even from you muft T 
hide myfelf; left your fair fame iliould fuf- 
fer by your deigning to pity fuch a wretch 
as I. Oh, I am indeed a wretch! 

" Have I not fteep'd a motlier's couch in tears, 
" And ting'd a father's dying cheek with fiiame?" 

Oh, for me there is no comfort." 

' And think you, Julia, that I am a flave 

to the letter^ and a ftranger to the spirit of 

virtue ! That you have erred, I regret ; 

but that you are fenfible of your error, 

gives you a claim not only to my efteem, 

but my admiration.. For how much lefs 

effort does it require to keep in the on- 

w^ard path of virtue, than to recover it 

when gone but a fmgle ilep aflray ? Amply, 

I am aflured, lliall your future life com- 

penfate the fault of inexperienced youth. 

Cheer 



Cheer up, then, my Julia ; and believe that 
you may yet be doubly dear to all who ever 
loved you.' 

" Ah, Harriet! your words are a cor- 
dial (what a cordial!) to my drooping 
heart." Here (he fervently preffed the 
hand of Harriet to her lips ; then dropping 
itj and looking timidly in her face, while a 
burning blufli {hot over her pallid cheek, 
*' But you — you know not all my fhame. 
You know not that it must be piibJic. I fee 
you arefhocked, greatly fhocked. Did I not 
fay, that even you would fcorn to own me?" 

' I am fhocked, my love, I confefs ; but 
it is with the idea that your fufferings are 
not yet to have an end. Let us not talk 
more of this circumflance at prefect ; per- 
mit me only to confide it to Mrs. Fielding, 
on whom you may rely for advice, and ia 
whofe tendernefs you will find confolation.' 

" To Mrs. Fielding ! Alas, yes, it mufl 
be fo— but yet — why, Harriet, after all 
that has befallen me, Ihould falfe ihame 

brin^ 



[ 300 ] 

bring this cold fweat upon my forehead? 
But i will conquer it. Do I not deferve 
the cenfure I fliall meet with? And why 
(hould I thrink from my deferts? Tell her, 
however — pray tell her, that 1 did not fall 
a prey to depraved inclination ; that my 
judgment was perverted by argument, not 
feduced by flattery ; and that when I yielded 
to the fpecious reafonings of my betrayer, 
I thought I was fetting an example of high- 
fouled X'inue, which foared above the vul- 
gar prejudices of the world. It is to vanity 
— yes, Harriet, I now fee it is to vanity 
(though not the vanity of beauty) that I 
owe my ruin!" 

Here fhe paufed for a little, but Harriet 
only anfwering her by a figh, fhe thus re- 
newed the converfation. " My mind is 
flill perplexed and bewildered. I have 
a£led upon the fublimeft principles of mo- 
rality ; I have been infpired by the mofl 
elevated fentiraents of virtue. But virtue 
is happinefs — and I am miferable! Is it 



[ 301 ] 

owing to the prejudices of fociety that I 
amfo? Ah! no. My father! — my un- 
happy father ! — Had my heart received no 
other wound, his death would have tranf- 
fixed a dagger in its inmoft core. But 
how has it been wounded by another hand! 
How cruelly torn! O Harriet! myfuifef- 
ings have been multiplied. I have paffed 
through fcenes which would freeze your 
foul with horror — but I dare not think of 
them. No, no, let me not think of them. 
I mufl avoid diftraclion — I — '* 

Harriet, perceiving the agitation of her 
mind, and fearful of its confequences, ten- 
derly interrupted her, and ufed every en- 
deavour to foothe her into compofure. 
Henry foon after came in, and while he 
m^e his enquiries after Julia's health, 
Harriet ftepped down to Mrs. Fielding, 
who was below in the parlour. She there 
informed her of all that had palled in the 
late converfation. They then confulted 
together on what was now to be done with 

the 



[ 302 ] 

the poor unfortunate, and as Harriet gave 
it as her opinion, that fhe would not be 
prevailed upon to remove to Mrs. Field- 
ing's houfe, it was agreed, that Ihe fhould 
remain v/here fhe was until the arrival of 
her mother, who was immediately to be 
fent for. Mrs. Fielding then begged leave 
to wait upon her ; Julia would have ex- 
cufed herfelf, on account of her being ilili 
in bed ; Ihe had attempted to rife but had 
fainted in the attempt, and w^as advifed by 
the Doftor not to get up till the evening, 
when he hoped ihe would find herfelf re- 
ftored to greater flrength. Mrs. Fielding 
waved the apology, and though her firft 
appearance threw Julia (who conjectured 
the fubjeCl of her conveiTation with Har- 
riet) into the deeped confufion, the fympa- 
thetic tendernefs of her addrefs was fo truly 
maternal, that it quickly re-aiTured her 
confidence, and reftored her ferenity. 

The natural opennefs and candour of 
Julia's mind fuggefted the propriety of 

giving 



[ 303 ] 

giving her friends a faithful relation of all 
that had befallen her ; but neither (Irength 
nor feelings were equal to the taflr. Mrs. 
Fielding and Harriet, perceiving that the 
bare recoilc£l:ion of fome of thefe events 
was attended with a degree of horror that 
fhook her tender frame, united their en* 
deavours to recall her from the fubje<St. 
They fpoke of her health, and of the means 
neceffary for its reftoration 5 of thefe Mrs. 
Fielding mentioned country air as the mod 
efficacious. She faid, fhe had upon her 
eftate in Hertfordlliire a charming cottage, 
where Mrs. Delmond and Julia might en- 
joy all the advantages of retirement, and 
remain as long as they pleafed unnoticed 
and unknown. When convenient for them 
to quit it, if they chofe to remove to Ire- 
land, fhe had there fome friends to whom 
flie could introduce them in fuch a manner 
as would procure their welcome reception 
ijito a very agreeable circle of fociety. 

" I underfland 



[ 504 ] 

" I underfland your kind hint, my dear 
Madam," faid Julia, " I perfe6lly undt^r- 
fland itj but you mufl not think me an 
ungrateful creature if I dedine your ge- 
nerous offer. I would live — yes, it is now 
my wifli to live, that by my future life I 
may make fome amends for my pad mif- 
condu61. But I greatly fear I have, in a 
moment of defpair, of heart-rending agony, 
fliortened the period of my exiftence. O 
that I could recall that moment ! O that I 
may not have been a double murderer! 
My father! and my child ! Nay, I pray you 
do not look upon me with fuch horror ! 
I cannot bear that look!" covering up her 
head with the bed-clothes. 

' Fear not the looks of us, thy frail M- 
l9W-mortals,' rejoined Mrs. Fielding ; ' to 
the Searcher of hearts thy humility and 
thy penitence will be acceptable. And (hall 
we, who know not how little of our 
boafted virtue we ca,n call our own — we, 
who arc ignorant of the tem.ptations that 

have 



[ 305 J 

have affailed thee, dare to pronounce thy 
condemnation? No, my dear Mifs Del- 
mond ; far other fentimentSj believe me, at 
this moment infpire our breads. But if 
you feel my prefence too much for you, I 
will retire and leave you with your friend 
Mifs Orwell, to whom you may fafely un* 
burthen every feeling of your heart/ 

Again Julia lifted up her head, and 
preffmg Mrs. Fielding's hand, which had 
kindly taken hold of her's, " Surely," 
faid file, " there is a God, a Providence, 
a reward hereafter for goodnefs fuch as' 
your's. But if there be a God, if there be 
an hereafter, what mud my firuation be ?" 

* That God, my dear, who in the things 
that are made hath not left himfelf without 
a witnefs, is, by the Gofpel of Jcfus Chrifl, 
revealed to us as a father and a friend. 
Surrounded as we are by the glorious 
proofs of a Supreme Intelligence, it is 
fcarcely poffible for a fane mind to doubt 
the exiftence of a God. But our peculiar 

VOL. III. ' X happineli 



[ 306 ] 

happinefs is to have our vague and imper- 
'tcd ideas upon this fubje£l cleared and ex- 
plained by Him who brought life and im- 
mortality to light; our great mafter came 
into the world " not to condemn the world, 
but that the world through him might have 
life." He addreffed not himfelf to the 
pcrfefl. He profeffcd not to call the 
" righteous (or thofe who proudly deemed 
thcmfelves fuch) but fmners to repentance," 
and revealed to them the Almighty as a 
God of hope and confolation. Do not 
then, my fweet girl, encourage the Ian- 
guage of defpair. Acquaint yourfelf with 
the promifes of the Gofpel, and when the 
world withdraws its confolations, thefe 
(hall fupport your foul. I hope, how- 
ever, that you have not — no, aflli redly 
you have not, done any thing with a wilful 
intention of fhortening your exidence?' 

" Oh ! yes, yes! If there be guilt in feek- 
ing to fly from a miferable exiftence, I am 
guilty ! In a moment of frenzy and defpe- 

racioQ 



[ 307 ] 

ration I fwallowed poifon, I hoped it would 
have rid me of a wretched being, and 
buried my woes in the dark abyfs of anni- 
hilation; but no fooner had I done the 
dreadful deed, than Nature recoiled, and 
death, which had long been the only ob- 
ject of my wiflies, appeared horrible to 
my view. Oh! how my foul then ftruggled 
within me ! What palpitations, what ter- 
rors laid hold of my di(lra£led mind ! 'Twas 
then, then I firfl fufpeded the poffibility 
of my having cheriftied falfe opinions j 
then that I firfl: began to fear, that there 
might be reality in thofe I had been taught 
to defpife. The converfations I had held 
with you, my Harriet, rufhed upon my re- 
coUe^ion; we had each of us afted upon 
the principles we had adopted; but, oh! 
how different was the refult! Thefe and 
a thoufand other agonizing reflections tore 
my throbbing heart, while momentarily I 
cxpc£fced its beating pulfe to be arrcfled by 
the cold hand of death. In this I was 
X 2 difappointcd J 



[ 308 1 

difappointed; cold fliivcrlngs, indeed, came 
upon me, and a numoncfs, which has not 
yet left me, feized my limbs, but death 
came not. I fear, however, the confe-' 
^quences will ftili be fatal — if not to ray- 
felf, to '' 

Here ihe Hopped, and Mrs. Fielding 
kindly renewed thofe foothing ailnrances 
of divine aid, and divine mercy, which, 
however lightly thought of in the gay hours 
of profperity, are found a cordial to the 
fmking heart, 

Mrs. Fielding's zeal was not difgraced 
by bigotry, nor was it enflamed by fuper- 
ilition; (lie did not feek to overwhelm the 
already broken fpirit by aggravating the 
colour of pad oifences, but rather made it 
her endeavour to re-aiTure her confidence 
in the pofTibility of future happinefs from 
future exertions of virtue. 

It was her opinion, that the fupport of 
reputation being found to be a flrong ad- 
ditional motive to virtue, it ought not to. 

be 



[ 309 ] 

be put out of the power of the unfortu- 
nate female, who, confcious of her error, 
is delirous to retrieve it by her after cou- 
du6t. On this account, in the next con- 
verfation flie held with Julia, (he was led 
again to propofe the plan (he had fuggefted 
for her going firfl: into the country, where 
fhe could enjoy all the privacy her circum- 
flances required; and then removing to a 
fituation, where the pad incidents of her life 
might remain forever buried in oblivion. 

Julia liftened to her propofal with re- 
fpeftful attention, and then, though in fal- 
tering accents, with a look and manner: 
that denoted the utmofl: firmnefs and com- • 
pofure, fhe thus replied: — " I am fully, I 
am gratefully fenfible of the goodnefs of 
your intention; your kind confideration 
for my reputation is the fuggeftion of pure 
benevolence, and believe me, I feel it as I 
ought. Do not, therefore, my dear 
Madam, attribute to perverfcnefs or pride 
my oppofitioa to your propofal; but it is 

a fubjc(ft 



[ 310 ] 

a fubjc(^ on which I have deeply thought ; 
on which I have fully made up my mind. 
If you will have the goodnefs to liften to 
my reafons you will, I flatter myfelf, ac- 
knowledge the force of the arguments that 
have determined me." 

Mrs. Fielding affectionately intreating 
her to fpcak without referve, (he thus 
proceeded : — ^' The peculiar difadvantages 
under which our fex is doomed to labour, 
early appeared to me fo enormous, that it 
made me liden with avidity to the reveries 
of the new theorifts, whofe doftrines pro- 
mifed emancipation from the tyranny of 
prejudice; and feemed to offer the rights 
of equality to the hitherto degraded part 
of the human race. Independence I con- 
fidered as effcmial lo virtue. But what 
was the independence to which I had re- 
fort? Alas! to throw off the gentle, the- 
cndcaring reilraints of parental authority 
for the yoke of a domineering pai2on, 
which bowed my foul in fubjedion to a 

man 



C 311 ] 

man who has fince proved the moft bar- 
barous and unworthy of the human race! 
In the height of my enthuiiafm for the new 
dodlrines I had embraced, I was intoxicated 
with the idea, that for me it was referved 
to point out to my fex a new and nobler 
path to glory than the quiet duties of do« 
meftic Hfe. To convince them, that equal 
to man in all the moll noble quaHties of 
the mind, we ought to fcorn the meannefs 
of confining our notions of virtue to one 
point; and that it was to our giving way to 
the prejudices of fociety in this particular, 
we owed the degradation and mifery of our 
fex. You, Madam, will wonder at my 
ftrange delufion, when I confefs that I con- 
fidered the lofs of my honour as a facrifice 
to principle, and that in this ideal flruggled 
to overcome the inflinftive repugnance of 
that delicacy which Nature had implanted, 
and education cheriftied, in my bread. I 
was taught to glory in having afferted the 
prerogative of human nature in a free and 

independent 



C 312 ] 

independent choice; but when I expelled 
the meed of fame, I was plunged into the 
depth of mifery, and goaded by the ftings 
of remorfe. Alas! what idea can words 
convey of what I have fuiFered ! — Robbed, 
betrayed, deferted, by the man on whom 
my foolifli heart refled as lover, counfellor, 
and friend! The cruel certainty of his un- 
worthinefs would have been fufficient to 
have made me miferable for ever. But 
this, even this, v/as light to what I fuiFered, 
when in the den of demons, to which I was 
betrayed, I faw in an old newfpaper, put as 
a wrapper about feme writing-paper, the 
account of my father's death. Then, in- 
deed,- the.excefs of horror feizedmyfoul. 
The wretches that furrounded me were to 
me no longer obje^ls of hate or terror. On 
mvfelf, on my ow;i, .guilty head all my exe- 
crations were poured^^ -T^? vilefl pf the 
vile, compared with me, I thought wasfin- 
nocent. la the freqzy of defpair I endear 
voured tg cfcape exiftencc; but no fooner 

bad 



[ 313 : 

had I fwallowed the deadly potion, than 
the death I fo ardently had wiflied for be- 
came dreadful to my imagination. Oh! 
the ftruggles of that moment! But they 
are not to be defcribed. Bleffed be God! 
that however dreadful, they were falutary. 
In the violence of the confli(^ the ilrength 
of contending paihons feemed to have been 
exhaufted. A fort of gloomy tranquillity 
fucceeded, which was not interrupted, favc 
by my renewed apprehenfions of the wicked 
defigns of the people of the vile houfc, 
where I knew myfelf to be a prifoner. 
Many were my plans for efcape which ac- 
cident had rendered abortive. At length, 
on the certainty that violence was intended 
me,; and that the wretched woman had ac- 
tually received the price of my perfon 
from a man of feeming gravity, who, while 
he kept what is called a fair chara^ler in 
fociety, and was himfelf the father of 
daughters, whofe honour he would have 
prote^led with his life, would not have 

fcniplcd 



[ 314 ] 

fcrupled to gratify his own brutal paflions 
at the expence of the temporal and eternal 
h^pinefs of a poor young creature defli- 
tute of all prote£tion. I colle£led all the 
vigour of my mind, and determined to run 
every rifk, in order to efFed my efcapc. 
Having taken my refolution, I afFe£led a 
degree of compofure, and even of cheer- 
fulnefs, that my defign might be the lefs 
fiifpe£led ; and the moment that I found 
myfelf unobferved, in purfuance of ray 
plan, I haftened up to the garret, got out 
of the window upon the leads, and as fafl 
as my benumbed limbs would permit, 
llowly crept upon my hands and knees 
along the different houfes, till I reached 
that at the end of the ftreet. There I 
likewife found the garret-window open; 
with fome difficulty I entered, and quickly 
(hutting after me, retired into a corner, 
where leaning againft the wall, I flood 
gafping for breath, and trembling in every 
limb. 

" A little 



[ 315 ] 

" A little kitten had, without my per- 
ceiving it, crept in at the half-open door. 
A boy of about four years old came in 
purfuit of it; but feeing me, fcreamed and 
fled. New terrors then feized upon me, 
as I made no doubt he would alarm the 
family, and that I (hould be treated as a 
thief, perhaps configned to the horrors of 
a prifon; but as noprifon was fo dreadful 
in my eyes as that I had juft quitted, I re- 
folved to bear my deftiny with patience. 
Part of my apprehenfions were foon ful- 
filled. The miftrefs of the houfe, followed 
by her maid-fervant and a lad of about 
fourteen, armed with a huge flick, came 
up to me, and almofl in one voice de- 
manded how I came there ? 

" I came hither for protection — for de- 
liverance! O fave me, dear Madam," 
faid I, dropping on my knees ; " fave me 
from death, and worfe than death!" 

* Where did you come from?' faid the 
mother of the little boy, who now ventured 
to approach me. -r j. 



[ 316 ] 

I told her. She at fird feemed to doubt 
my veracity, but did not hefitate (before 
her doubts on this head were removed) to 
afTure me of temporary prote£lion. 

' Whether what you fay be true 'or no/ 
faid ihe, ' you are young, and evidently 
unfortunate. I have children of my own, 
and who knows what may yet befal them I 
So, poor thing, I will not betray you. 
Here, however, thefe wretches may foon 
trace you ; and how can a poor widow de- 
fend you? I would therefore advife you 
to put yourfeif under the protecftion of a 
magiftrate, who will put you in a way of 
returning to your friends.' 

"Alas!" faid I, "I have no friends I 
Oh God ! what will become of me !" 

' Take courage, Mifs,' faid the fervant- 
maid, taking my hand with an appearance 
of fympathy for which my heart (liall never 
ceafe to be grateful, ' there is a refuge for 
you, a blelTed refuge — The Asylum of the 
Destitute, There I myfelf was faved from 

mifery 



[ 317 ] 

mikry and deflru£lion. There you will 
be received, and treated with kindnefs and 
humanity j and if you appear to be a pro- 
per-behaved perfon, will have every en- 
couragement to continue in a virtuous 
courfe." 

" Where," cried I, " oh, where is 
this bleffed retreat ? Let me iiy to it in- 
flantly. I will do any thing, I will fubmit 
to any thing — only to get permiflion to 
live among the good and virtuous. I care 
not how humble, how lowly — for I am 
truly humbled.'^ 

I would inftantly have fet out, but the 
good people, obferving how ill I was, pro- 
pofed my remaining there till the evening, 
and that in the mean time I ftiould take 
fome refrefhment and repofe ; and much, 
indeed, did I (land in need of both. They 
fupported me between them to a bed- 
chamber on the firft-floor ; and there, by 
their advice, I was about to lay me down, 
when a loud knocking at the door called 

away 



C 318 ] 

away both miflrefs and maid, and threw 
me into freOi trepidation. I Uftened, arid, 
heard a man's voice. It was loud and ter- 
rible. A thief, he faid, had efcaped from 
juftice, and mufl have contrived to hide 
herfelf in fome houfe on that fide of the 
flreet ; he therefore advifed them to fecurc 
their doors, as if they permitted her to get 
oiF, they would be confidcred as acceffaries 
in her crimes. I could not hear what re- 
ply was made by the miftrefs of the houfc, 
and dreadful was the fufpence I remained 
in till (lie returned to me. She came, but 
fufpicion was not in her looks. 

'Alas! poor thing,' faid (he, 'youmuft 
depart from hence immediately. I have 
fent Hannah for a coach, and in it (he ftiall 
conduct you to the Afylum ; for I believe, 
yes, I do believe you innocent.* 

I had no power to reply. She wrapped 
me in a long cloak, and put her own bon- 
net and veil upon my head, to conceal rac 
from the people who might be watching 

for 



C 319 ] 

for me in the ftreet. I happily got into 
the coach without obfervation, and fup- 
ported by the kind-hearted Hannah, 
reached this blcfled place in fafety. Ah! 
how Httle did I then imagine who 1 was 
here to meet with! The agitation I had 
undergone, together with the want of food 
and fleep, afFedled my brain; I was fenfible 
that it was aiFe£led. One image took pof- 
feffion of my mind — the image of my dying 
father. I conceived myfelf doomed to fuf- 
fcr as his murderer, and that all I had un- 
dergone, all I yet might have to undergo, 
was in expiation of this foul oifence. Alas! 
the return of reafon, though it enables me 
to methodize my thoughts, takes not from 
the bitternefs of this refle£^ion. But how 
have I wandered from the fubjeft on which 
I defigned to have explained myfelf! For- 
give me, dear Madam, for I now fear I 
(hall cj^haufl your patience.*' 

^ Not my patience, dear Mifs Delmond, 
but your own ftrengh, is in danger of being 

exhaufled 



[ 320 1 

exhauded by the continuance of the con- 
verfation. If, however, you do not feel 
yourfelf too much fatigued, I fliall be glad 
to hear the plan you intend to adopt, and 
the reafons you have for thinking it prefer- 
able to mine; which was intended to fave 
your character from obloquy, and to re- 
ilore to fociety one whofe many virtues 
may flill eminently adorn it»' 

" For your good intentions, I thank you 
— from my heart. I thank you," rcphed 
Julia; " but low as I am now funk in my 
own eftimation, fenfible as I am of the 
fauhinefs of my condufl, and humbled un- 
der the confcioufnefs, as my foul truly, 
is, I mud fhrink diU lower than I am, not 
to feel myfelf degraded by the pra^ice of 
any fpecies of impofture.. Whether the . 
unrelenting laws of fociety with regard to : 
our fex are founded in injullice or other- 
wife, is not for me to determine. .. Happy 
they who fubmit. without relu^iancc to 
their authority ! But firft to fet thenFi at 

defiance. 



[ 321 3 

defiance, and then ur^er falfe pretences to 
flirink from the penalty, what is this but to 
add hypocrify to prefamption — to add an 
unjuflifiable (becaufe deliberate) crime to 
an error, which perhaps may receive fome 
ifiitigation on the fcpre of human frailty? 
Forgive me, Madam, for fpeaking in this 
manner on a fubje£l you have evidently 
confidered in a different light ; but I know 
you are too generous to find fault with me 
for differing from you." 

* Find fault with you, my dear!' faid 
Mrs. Fielding; * no, I honour you in my 
heart for your noble fentiments, fo full of 
integrity and honour. I do not pretend 
to combat them, but in juftification of my- 
felf fhall only mention the motives that led 
to my propofal. On unfuUied chara£ler, 
not only our reception in fociety, but our 
ufefulnefs in life depends. The woman 
who is fufpe£led of having made a falfe 
ftcp, but who, by afTiduoufly concealing it, 
flicws fomc regard for reputation, will ever 

VOL. III. y meet 



[ 322 ] 

meet with more indulgence from the world 
than (he, who by openly avowing it, feems 
to brave its ceiifures. In the larter cafe 
ilie becomes a mark for public fcorn tQ; 
point the finger at ; ail the virtues fhe may 
poiTefs are of no avail, or rather they are 
confidered by the worlds what certain dogr 
matiils afiirm of the virtues of the unrege- 
neratc, as fo many shining sins. Her dif- 
honour attaches not merely to herfelf 
alone, but extends to all with whom {he is 
conne(2;ed. Should her future conduct be 
ever fo circumfped, nay (hould it be ever 
fo exemplary over thofe of her. own fex 
who arc moll inclined to applaud it, the 
fetters of public opinion^ will lliii exert a 
reftraining inuuence, and very fewwill dare 
to own her. Men alone will prefume to 
exprefs for her any frier^dfliip^ .and thus 
thrown upon the protection. pfniii^ni, while 
lier heart beats indignant at wh^t.^ftie con- 
f|?lers as injuftice, who can anfwer^for the 
confequences? From all thefe evils who 
<■ would 



[ 323 1 

would not Willi to preferve a chara6ler fo 
eftimable? Have not your errors been 
already fufficiently expiated by your fufFer- 
ings? Why then fhould you be loft to 
fociety at a period of life when you might 
enter it with every advantage? You are 
yet but in the very early morning of your 
life; by removing to another kingdom, you 
may in a manner recommence its courfe. 
Nor can the concealment of the paft be 
properly termed impofition; that belongs 
to falfe pretences only, and I am convinced 
the conduft of your future life will vindi- 
cate the reality of your claim to refpe6l and 
veneration.' 

Julia's languid eyes were fufFufed with 
tears of gratitude. " How generoully do 
you endeavour to reconcile me to myfelf,'^ 
fhe exclaimed; " but it cannot be. Hope 
of future happinefs can never reanimate 
my heart. On me the fun of joy is fet for 
ever. The only ray of peace or confola- 
tion that can ever fliine upon me, muft be 
Y 2 from 



[ 324 ] 

from the approbation of my own mind, re- 
verberated and confirmed by the approba- 
tion of thofe to whom it is fully known. 
Mortifying to me would be the applaufe, 
oh! very mortifying the expreflions of 
efleem I might receive from Grangers; 
who, if they knew the circumflances I mud 
then labour to conceal, would fpurn me 
from them with contempt. No, my dear 
Madam ; my place in fociety I have for- 
feited; nor will I endeavour to regain it 
by clandefline means. I will not add to 
my trangrefTion by relinquifning the duties 
I have diil to perform. If I am the means 
of bringing a helplcfs being into the world 
under circumflances the mod deplorable, I 
will not defert it. Oh, no! Cruelly, very 
cruelly has it already been deferred by one 
parent! and ihall its mother, for the fake 
of preferving a falfe appearance to the 
world, a<Sl a part equally inhun^an ? Never! 
pevcr ! The infamy I have brought upoa 
its innocent head I (hall freely (hare ; and 

devote 



[ 325 ] 

devote my future life to making it what 
recompence is in my power, for the inauf- 
picious circumflances under which it is for 
ever doomed to labour.** As fhe thus 
/poke, her fine eyes regained a momentary 
luftrc, heightened by the vivid blufli that 
gleamed on her pale cheek wet with 
tears. 

Mrs. Fielding gazing on her as (he fpoke, 
felt for her a degree of admiration mingled 
with piiy and regret, that caufed fenfations 
too big for utterance. She folded her ma- 
ternal arms round her, and preiTcd her to 
her heart. ' You are, indeed you are, an 
admirable creature!* fhe at length ex* 
claimed. ^ Your arguments make me 
afhamed of the comparative meannefs of 
my own fentiments upon this fubjecH:; and 
approbation is too poor a word to exprefs 
the fenfe I have of your magnanimity.' 

" Alas!'* replied Julia, " how little am 
I deferving of fuch praife! Were all my 
tears tears of penitence for pad mifcon- 

dua, 



C SQ6 ] 

duct, and did my heart poffefs fufficient 
firmnefs to throw from its affeclions the 
the man who has proved himfelf unworthy 
of its efleem, then indeed I might boaft 
fome Httle portion of magnanimity. But 
ih\ how feeble are the fentiments of virtue, 
when they prove fo ineffetoal in fubduing 
the ftrength of an unhappy pafTion'*' 

' Let not this confideration too much dif- 
courage you,' faid Mrs. Fielding. The 
iifFeftions of love are much more warm and 
vivid than thofe of friendfhip: and yet 
even in friendfliip, where it has been mif- 
placed, the heart is long, very long in 
receiving the convi^lion that is forced 
upon it by reafon. AfFe6lion (till lingers 
in the bofom, even after efleem has taken 
its everlafting flight; nor does it finally 
forfake it, till the mind has experienced the 
mod exquifite degree of anguifh in the 
conteft. Still, where the love of virtue 
reigns, the love of its oppofite will in 
the end be conquered. Take courage, 

then 



[ 327 ] 

then, my dear, and employ your mind, 
not fo much in ruminating on the pail, as 
informing plans for yoar future conduct*'; 
- The. entrance of Harriet and Maria j 
who jufl then, returned from an airing 
which Mrs. Fielding had prevailed on them 
to take, put an end to the converfation. 
A kind conteft then took place between 
the two friends about which diould re- 
main with Julia, who was at length called 
upon to determine ir. AiFe£i:ionatc]y pref- 
fmg the hand of each, " Between two 
fuch cordials," faid fhe, " it is difficult for 
mc' to choofe; but here is my phyfician, 
and to his decillon I iliall leave it." 

Henry had come with the fecret hope 
that Harriet would return to Hanover- 
fquarewith him and Mrs. Fielding. Since 
the arrival of Julia at the Afylum, he* had 
enjoyed little of Harriet's company, and 
his heart was deeply fenfible of the priva^ 
tion; but when he met the eyes of Julia, 
and read in them the wilh for Harriet's 

flay 



[ 328 ] 

flay ; when he reflefted on their greater in- 
timacy, which mud afford to JuHa the plea- 
fare of unreferved confidence, he checked 
the prompt wifh of felfi(hnefs, and declared 
that Harriet fhould remain. 

And here, left the reader fhould not be 
inclined to give to the condudl of Henry all 
the merit it deferves, we beg the favour of 
him to paufe for a moment, and give a can- 
did anfwer to the few following queftions. 

Pray, fir, have you ever been in love? 
If not, you may go on to the next chapter. 

" You have.'' Well then, be fo obli- 
ging as to fay how often you have facrificed 
the flightefl gratification of paffion to the 
calls of friendfhip or benevolence ? Pray, 
how often have you difobeyed the di£^ates 
of felfifhnefs, from the confideration of 
conferring pleafure on any individual of 
your acquaintance? What have you fa- 
crificed to the interefls even of the objcft 
of your paffion? One felfifh defire? 

** No. Paffion was too powerful.'* 

Ju%, 



[ 329 ] 

Juflly, then, may you appreciate the 
noblenefs of Henry Sydney's heart; which, 
filled with a pafllon as flrong and pure as 
ever warmed a human breaft, was yet fuf- 
ficiently capacious to have room for the 
feiuiments of friendfhip, and the feelings 
of benevolence. 



CHAP* 



[ 330 ] 



CHAP. XIV. 

" A wrench from all we love, from all we are\ 
"A fun extinguifh'd ! a juft-opcning grave ! 
V, And oh ! the laft, lafl; what? (.can words exprefs ? 
« Thought reach ?) thehft, laft Silence of a friend.** 



TT is high time to return to Bridgetina, 
-*- to whom, as the oftenfible heroine of 
thefe memoirs, it is our duty to attend. 
The inaufpicious career of her quondam 
friends, if it did not efFe6i: a fudden change 
in her opinions, confiderably damped the 
ardour of her zeal. Neither the reafon- 
ings of Mr. Sydney or Mrs. Fielding were 
calculated for making a convert of one, 
who to a very limited underftanding united 
an aclive imagination ; but they were fo 
unanfwerable 'that they abated the confi- 
dence of felf-conceit, and tempered her 
diilike to the do(ftrines of Chriflianity. 
';'/ Though 



I 331 ] 

Though this were all that was expecled 
by Mr. Sydney, it did not perfectly fatisfy 
Mrs. Fielding. " It is very extraordinary," 
faid fhe, in fpeaking to Mr. Sydney on this 
fubjef^, '' it is very extraordinary that Mifs 
Botherim fliould be (o obflinately blind, as 
not to perceive the fhocking confequences 
of the erroneous opinions flie has adopted. 
Does fhe not fee to what they have already 
led r How can (he refufe aifent to demon- 
ftration fo ftrong, fo full as that you have 
juft now been delivering? And to what is 
flie thus wedded? — to a fyflem that annihi- 
lates every future hope, and reduces us to 
a level with the beads that perifh! I can 
no way account for fuch obftinacy of un- 
belief.'' 

' My dear Madam,' replied Mr. Sydney, 
* you do. noif^fufficiently attend to the na- 
ture of the human mind. Not to mention 
the tenacioufnefs of pride, which naturally 
revolts at the acknowledgment of convic- 
tion, we mud, I fear, make greater allow- 
ances 



I 332 2 

anccs than you fcem inclined to do, for 
the flrength of early aflbciation. Among 
thofe who were eye-witnefTes of the mira- 
cles of our Saviour, we are told that many 
doubted — of what? Not of the miracles, 
for thefe they do not appear to have at- 
tempted to deny. The unbelief of the 
Jewilh fceptics were by their early preju* 
dices diref^ed to a different point; they 
acknowledged the miracle, but doubted 
whether it was of God, or proceeded from 
the power of fome demon. In embuing 
the minds of our children with notions of 
religion,' we too often reprefent to them 
not only the great and leading truths of 
revelation, but every minutia of our own 
peculiar tenets, as infeparable links of one 
p'reat chain, of which no one can be bro- 
ken without deflroying the Whole. The 
early alTociation which we thus create, is 
frequently productive of the mofl un- 
happy confequences. By it a long range 
of outworks of unequal flrength are ex- 

pc^ed 



[ 333 ] 

pofed to the attack of the ^nemy, where, 
if one be found untenable, the whwle muft 
of courfe furrender. In converfing with 
Mifs Botherira, I have more than once had 
occafion to remark the truth of the above 
obfervation. But let us not expe£l too 
much at once j time, her ripened judgment, 
reading, and obfervation, may efFe£fc a 
change in her mind of greater confequence 
than a fudden conviflion could poffibly 
produce. 

Mrs. Fielding acquiefced in this opinion, 
and leaving Bridgetina's converfion to Mr. 
Sydney, and the means by him prefcribed, 
flie entirely occupied herfelf in the con* 
cerns of the more amiable and more un- 
fortunate Julia. 

Doftor Orwell and his youngeft daugh- 
ter were on the eve of fetting out for Lon- 
don to attend Harriet's nuptials, when 
they received the account of Julia's re- 
appearance, which D oft or Orwell was 
begged to communicate to Mrs. Delraond. 

He 



[ 334 ] 

He did fo, but found the poor lady in no 
Ctuatioi;! for undertaking an immediate 
journey. Ever fmce her hufband's death 
a flow fever had preyed upon her conftitu- 
lion, which gradually increafmg, had at 
length brought her to the very brink of the 
grave. Till the elopement of Julia her 
mind had never experienced the dominion 
of aftrong emotion; Ihe was, therefore, 
unequal to its control. Inceffantly dwell- 
ing on the ingratitude of her daughter, 
who had been the objefl of her pride as 
much as of her aitections, her grief was 
embittered by refentment; which, from 
the taciturnity and referve of her temper, 
being denied a vent, preyed inwardly, and 
confumed the vital flame. And here it is 
^.worthy of remark, that while Captain 
Dclmond execrated the feducer, and his 
wife bitterly arraigned the conduct of the 
feduced, neithei- one or other ever once 
cad a retrofpe^ive glance upon what they 
ihemfelves had done. The amit of Mrs. 

Delmond 



[ 335 j 

Delmond had been little lefs hurt by her 
condu^, than (he was by that of her daugh- 
ter. But her refentment llie had deemed 
unreafonable and abfurd ; fo different i=? 
the allowance felf-Iove permits us to make 
for the feelings of others, and for our own! 
Till informed by Doctor Orwell, Mrs. 
Delmond had not the mod diftant idea of 
Julia's being dill unmarried. The intelli- 
gence aggravated the feelings of refcntmenL 
and defpair. And after a fiience, occa- 
fjoned by the excefs of agitation, fhe broke 
out into the bitterefl reproaches, nci only 
againfl: Julia, but againfl all who fiiould re- 
ceive or countenance her. In vain did 
Do6lor Orwell preach up to her the doc- 
trine of chriflian charity and forgivenefs. 
She told him, that if he gave fuch encou- 
ragement to wickednefs, flie thought his 
own children would do wxll to put his cha- 
rity to the proof; and concluded by de- 
claring, that were (he even able to under- 
take the journey, nothing fhould induce 

her 



[ 336 ] 

her to go to fee a wretch, whofe infamous 
conduct had brought difgrace on all con- 
ne(5led with her. 

After haying exhaufted her ftrength by 
venting the feelings of refentment, (he ap. 
parently funk into her ufual (late of torpid 
apathy. But it was only in appearance, 
for a variety of contending emotions con- 
tinued to druggie in her bread ; where, 
though grief, anger, and refentment were 
firft in place, they could not overcome 
the yearnings of the mother in her heart. 
The flruggle was too much for her weak 
frame to fupport, and an increafe of fever 
was the fatal confequence. Dr. Orwell 
was no fooner informed by Mr. Gubbles 
of her danger, than he difpatched a mef. 
fenger for the nearefl phyfician ; but ere he 
could arrive Mrs. Delmond was no more. 

Having given the neceffary directions 
for the interment, the Do£lor was urged 
by his daughter Marianne to fet out 
immediately on their intended journey, as 

they 



C ^v ] 

they would noTV have little enough time to 
reach London before the wedding. 

'' You are miitaken, my dear/' faid Dr. 
Orwell, " fo much mud the news of this 
event add to the m.ifery of the wretched 
Julia, and fo much will (lie now require 
the foothing fupport of friendfliip, that I 
know not Harriet's heart, if it have not the 
generofity to defer her ov/n happinefs, in 
^rder to alleviate the preffure of another's 
anguifli. There is no fear, therefore, of 
our not being in time to the wedding ; but 
to gratify you, we fhall fet out to-morrov\%" 

They accordingly did fet out, and ar- 
rived at Mrs. Fielding's the evening of the 
following day. There they found only 
fervants to receive them, and from them 
they learned, that Mrs. Fielding and her 
guefts had fpent the greater part of the 
day at the Afylum, from whence they were 
not yet returned. Thither Dr. Orwell, 
after committing Marianne to the care of 
Mrs. Fielding's houfekceper, diredly drove. 

VOL. III. z He 



[ 338 ] 

He was fliewn into a fmall parlour, 
where the firfl objeci: that flruck his eye 
was old Quinten, leaning againfh the win- 
dow, and with the hand that preiTed upon 
his forehead covering his eyes, fo that he 
did not perceive the Do£lor's approach. 

" Quinten!'' cried Do6lor Orwell, '* is 
it you? How came yon here? I did no: 
know you had kft W .'' 

* Ah! fir,' faid Quinten, * could I hear 
that my mafter's daughter was ill, and in 
diftrefs, and not come to offer her my poor 
fervices ? Sufan no fooner told me of the 
news you had brought my miflrefs, which, 
by reafon of her being in the next room, 
{he could not avoid hearing, than I begged 
her leave to march, and fet out that very 
Thurfday evening; though flie did not 
feem overpleafed at my coming, I know 
file will thank me afterwards, when — * 

" You do not then know that Mrs. 
Delmond is dead?" faid Do<5lor Orwell 
interrupting him. 

*My 



[ 339 ] 

^ My mlflrefs dead?' exclaimed Quintcn. 
* Oh ! that is heavy news indeed 1 But Mifs 
Julia will never hear it! Oh! no. She 
will never know that her mother died 
without forgiving her; but God will be 
more merciful. He will receive the peni- 
tent to his bofom, and the dear child fhall 
be an angel of light in heaven 1' 

" Is Mifs Delmond then fo very ill?" 
afked Doftor Orwell. 

* 111, indeed,' replied Quinten. ' But 
here is Mifs Orwell, and {he will tell 
you all.' 

Quinten then retired, while Harriet, 
rufhing into the room, threw her arms 
round her father's neck, and wxpt and 
fobbed aloud upon his bofom. 

" Be calm, my love," faid Dr. Orwell, 
*^ my darling child ! How fhould I bow in 
gratitude to that Providence whofe grace 
has been fo liberally beflowed upon you ; 
every a£lion of your life endears you flill 
further to my heart." Then fondly kiiling 
z 2 her. 



[ 340 ] 

her, he wiped away the tears that flill con- 
tinued to flow from her eyes, and again 
begged her to be cogjpofed. " I am 
afraid to afk for Julia,'^ faid he j " from 
your tears 1 fear it is all over.'' 

' No,' replied Harriet, ' (lie 3^et lives, 
but that is all that can now be faid. The 
night before laft {he was feized with fpafm^ 
and other fymptoms, which the Do6i:or 
immediately pronounced fatal. Since then 
Ihe has fuffered the extreme of pain ; but 
fuifered with a patience, a meeknefs, and 
refignation, that deferve a higher term than 
fortitude, for fortitude is fometimes the 
effort of defpair. Her's is the cRc£i of 
fmcere penitence, and lively hope in the 
mercies of God through that Saviour to 
whom Ihe has been brought, efFe<flualIy, I 
truft, brought through fufFerings. But 
you mud fee her. I can place you where 
you will be unperceived, for the fight of 
you would make her, perhaps, renew her 
enquiries concerning her mother, and Hie 

knows 



[ 34i ] 

knows nothing of her death. It would be 
cruel to diflurb her lad moments by the 
intelligence.' So faying, fhe took her 
father's hand, and filently led him into 
Julia's room. 

Accuflomed as Doclor Orwell was to 
the fight of a death-bed, he never without 
awe could approach the folemn fcene, 

" Where darknefs brooding o'er unfinifh'd fate, 
" With raven wing incumbent, waits the hour, 
" Dread hour! that interdids all future change." 

But never were his feelings more fenfibly 
impreffed than on the prefent occafion. 
The firfl: objefi: that prefented itfelf was 
old Mr. Sydney, fitting in an arm-chair by 
the bedfide, his hands clafped, and his eyes 
direfted towards Heaven in mental prayer, 
while a few unbidden tears ftole down his 
venerable cheeks. Mr. Churchill knelt 
by the bed, and preiled one of the cold 
hands of the dying Julia between both of 
his; while Maria, fitting behind her on the 
bed, fupported in her arms her feeble 

frame. 



[ 342 ] 

frame. She was ftill addreffing herfelf to 
Mr. Churchill, but in a voice too low and 
broken to be diftinftly heard. To what 
Ihe fciid Churchill was too much affefled to 
permit him to make any other reply than 
by kifllng her hand, and bathing it with 
his tears. After a Ihort paufe — " Heaven 
will, in this dear virtuoiis girl,'* faid {he, 
attempting to join Maria's hand to his, 
" amply reward you for your goodnefs. 
She too will acl: the part of a child to 
my poor mother — alas! a more deferving 
child than 1 have been towards her ! Oh, 
that I could recall the pad! But it cannot 
be. Penitence is all I now can offer — and 
that I hope God and fhe will accept of. 
Farewell, fir ! may God reward you for 
your goodnefs to my mother ! He only can." 
Again Churchill kilfed her hand with 
emphatic tendernefs, and covering his face 
with his handkerchief, hallily withdrew to 
give vent to the feelings he could not con- 
trol. Maria's eyes followed him to the 

door 



r 343 ] 

door with looks of tender fympathy, whicli 
feemed eager to exprefs how much his fen- 
fibihty endeared him to her heart. 

Julia obferved her looks, and tenderly 
taking her hand, " You will be happy, 
dear Maria," faid ilie, " and you defer ve 
to be fo. Harriet too, my dear Harriet, 
(he will be happy with her worthy Sydney ; 
doubly happy even here, for having kept 
conftantly in view the happinefs of here- 
after. Where is Mifs Botherim ? I think 
I have now flrength to fpeak to her, and 
it may not be fo long. I fhouJd like now 
to fee her.*' 

Harriet inftantly went out, and returned 
leading in Bridgetina, who feemed to enter 
with.fome relu(5lance. She appeared pale 
and frightened, and feemed to dread the 
folemnity of a dying fcenc — a fcene fhe had 
never yet witnefTed. ' You mud come 
near her,' faid Harriet, as Ihe drew Brid- 
getina on ; 'it would diftrefs her t©o much 
to fpeak to you at this diftance.' 

Julia 



[ 344 ] 

Julia attempted to hold out her feeble 
hand as flie approached her, which Brid- 
gctina took in her*s without fpeaking. 

"You tremble, my dear!" faid Julia. 
" Does it then fo greatly ftiock you to fee 
me thus ? Ah, Brjdgetina ! could I indeed 
imprefs you with a fenfe of what my mind 
how feels, I fliould not die in vain. You 
fee me now on the threfhold of eternity — 
that eternity, of which we have made a jeft, 
but which we mufl: acknowledge was never 
by any argument to a certainty difproved; 
improbable we were taught to believe it, 
but impossible by mere man it could never 
be pronounced. I am now convinced, oh! 
thoroughly convinced, of its awful truth. 
I believe that I fhall, ere the lapfe of many 
hours, appear before the throne of God 1 
that God whofe will I have defpifed, 
whofe providence I have arraigned, nay, 
~\^'hofe very being I have dared to deny! 
BleiTed b^his mercy, that did not leave me 
to perifn in my iniquity !" 

After 



[ 345 ] 

After a paufe, occafioned by want of 
breath, (he thus proceeded. *' You believe 
Jefus Chrift to have been a morahil and 
philofopher. Examine, I befeech you, the 
morality he preached, and you will acknow- 
ledge its teacher could not lay the founda- 
tion of fuch a fyfliem in impofture. Well 
did he fay of future teachers. By tbcir 
fruits ye shall knew ihemy What, my 
Bridget! na, are the fruits of the doflrines 
we have fo unhappily been led to embrace? 
In me you behold them ! In vain will you 
exclaim, in the jargon to which we have 
been accuftomed, againft the prejudices cf 
society^ as if to them were owing the load 
of mifery that fmks me to a premature 
grave. Ah! no. Thofe prejudices, againll 
which we have been accuftomed fo bitterly 
to rail, I now behold as a falutary fence, 
which, if I had never dared to overleap, 
would have fccured my peace. Were 
thofe barjiers broken down, and every 
woman encouraged by the fuffrage of uni- 

verfal 



•[ 346 ] 

verfal applaufe to acSl as I have af^ed, fatal, 
my dear Bridgetina, very fatal to fociety, 
would be the confequence! In my friends 
here, thefe dear friends whom Heaven has 
in mercy fent as miniftring angels to fmooth 
the path of death, fee the fruits of a firm 
adherence to the doctrines we have de- 
fpifed! If, like them, I had been taught 
to devote the a£lions of every day to my 
God ; and inflead of encouraging agloomy 
and querulous difcontent againft the pre- 
fent order of things, had employed myfelf 
in a vigilant performance of the duties of 
my fituation, and a fcrupulous govern- 
ment of my own heart and inclinations, 
how very different would my fituation 
now have been ! Think of thefe things, 
Bridgetina ; and if ever you fliould meet 

with but I will not difturb the fere- 

nity of my foul by mentioning his name. — 
Yet why? I carry not with me any re- 
fentments to the grave. Tell Vallaton, 
then, that as a chriilian I forgive him, and 

pray 



[ 317 1 

pray God to turn his heart. If mine 
had been fortified by principle, he never 
could have feduced it by his fophiftry. 
No. It was not he, it was my own pride, 
my own vanity, my own prefumption, that 
were the real feducers that undid me. My 
flrength fails. Farewell, my poor Biddy! 
Nay, do not weep fo much. I have now 
hopes of happinefs more fweet, more pre- 
cious, than aught the world can bellow! 
Go home to your mother, my Biddy; and 
in the fober duties of life forget the idle 
vagaries which our diftempered brains dig- 
nified with the name of philofophy." 

Bridgetina weeping withdrew. 

Julia, exhaufted by fpeaking, reclined 
her head on Maria's bofom, and remained 
for fome minutes filent. She then with a 
quick motion raifed her head, and looked 
around the room. " Who is now here ?" 
faid (he. " Methinks I do not fee dif- 
tin£lly. This I know is Harriet's hand. 
Dear Harriet, oh, when you draw near 

the 



[ ^-^8 ] 

the clofe of your life, may the rem^m. 
brance of the comfort you have beflowtJ 
on me be a fund of joy and confolation to 
your heart ! My fweet inftrudlor, my mo- 
nitrefs, my guide to the path of falvation, 
how (hall I thank you ? Your Sydney too 
I would thank. How much have I been 
indebted to his friendly attention ! Let 
me join your hands, that with my dying 
lips I may blefs you both." 

While Henry and Harriet knelt in filent 
forrow by the fide of the bed, endeavour- 
ing as much as poiTible to fupprefs their 
feelings, in order to catch every word that 
fell from Julia, a loud groan was heard 
from the oppofite fide of die room. Julia 
inftantly caught the found. '' It is honefl 
Quinten," faid ihe, " let him come near 
me. Do not, my good Quinten, do not 
grieve for me thus. God has for me 
ordered all things gracioufly — I rejoice in 
his decrees. Death has now for me no 



terrors." 



O that 



[ 349 J 

* O that I (hould have lived to fee this 
day!' fobbed the old foldier. * Would to 
God I could die for thee, ray dear young 
lady! But furely there is yet hope. So 
young as you are — fo very young!' 

" Death is-no refpe<^or of perfons, my 
good Quinten! you may yet fee many 
younger than me laid in their graves. Re- 
turn to my poor mother, and continue to 
be attentive to her. She has been ill ; do 
not wound her by the excefs of your for- 
row. I know my death will grieve her; 
but tell her, I beg (he would confider It as 
a bleffing." 

* This is too much!* cried Ouinten, ' I 
cannot, cannot (land it.' Then flriking 
his hand upon his furrowed brow, he 
turned away to conceal the anguifh of his 
heart. On a._ flight motion made by 
Mrs. Fielding he lifted up his eyes, and 
beheld the lifelefs head of Julia funk upon 
Maria's bofom, 

A filence 



[ ^50 ] 

A filence, more expreffive than the 
loudeft lamentations of clamorous forrow, 
clofed the folemn fcene. 

^laria continued Hill to clafp in her arms 
the inanimate form of her lovely friend, 
lovely even in death; and leaning over 
her, bedeviled the pale face with her fad- 
falling tears. Henry and Harriet dill knelt 
by the bedfide, and dill continued to prefs 
the hand whofe lad office had been uniting 
theirs. While the old domedic, the ve- 
nerable Quinten, wringing his hands in 
filent anguifli gazed upon the corpfe, and 
feemcd infenfible of the tears which courfed 
each other down his hard and weather- 
beaten face. Mrs. Fielding, who fat by 
the bedfide adiding and fupporting Maria, 
made an effort to fpeak, but could not. 
Doctor Orwell was the fird who broke 
the emphatick filence, " It is enough, 
my children," faid he, " all is now over. 
The folemn fcene is now clofed — happily 

clofed. 



[ 351 ] 

clofed, I truft in God, for the dead; and 
ufefully for us who are of the living, if we 
have grace to lay it to heart. 



CONCLUSION. 



[ 352 ] 



CONCLUSION, 



" Domeftic Happinefs, thou only blifs 

•' Of paradife that has furvived the fall! 

" Though few now tafle thee unimpaired and purej 

" Or tafting, long enjoy thee— too infirm, 

" Or too incautious, to preferve thy fweets 

** Unmixt with drops of bitter, which negled^, 

" Or temper, (beds into thy cryftal cup. 

*' T^oa art the nurse ofvirtut.^* 

CO\\TER. 



T^HE ferlous'part of our readers may, 
-^ perhaps, be of opinion, that wiih 
the lad chapter our hiftory ought pro- 
perly to have concluded; as whatever 
we now can add muft tend to deflroy the 
impreiTion it was calculated to produce. 
It may be fo. But how could we have the 
heart to difappoint the MiiTes, by clofmg 
our narrative without a wedding? A novel 

without 



[ 353 ] 

without a wedding is like a tragedy without 
murder, which no Britilh audience could 
ever be brought to reli(h. A wedding, a 
double wedding, we fhall with pleafure and 
alacrity announce; but from us our fair 
readers muft not expe(fl: too much. Wil- 
ling as we are to oblige them, we cannot 
poffibly contrive to marry every individual 
of our dramatis persona in the lafl fcene. 

*' And pray, why not ?*' exclaims a 
pretty critic. " All the young ones at leaft, 
you muft certainly provide for j is it net 
always done?" 

* Yes,^ cries another, * to be fure it is; 
and nothing fhould have tempted me to 
wade through the book, but to fee who 
Bridgetina was to have at the laft. Had I 
thought (he was to have remained unmar- 
ried after all, I give you my word I fhould 
never have read three pages.' 

" Nor I,'* repeats a third ; " and during 
the half of the lail: volume, I have been 
doing nothing but thinking whether Mr. 

VOL. III. A A Vallaton 



[ 354 ] 

VrJlaton or Mr. Myope was to be the happy 
man. Vallaton is a fad wretch, to be fure; 
but then he might have been made to r^- 
for?n ail at once y nothing is jo common; 
and who, except this flupid author, but 
would have made him out to be the fon of 
fome great Lord?" 

' If Bridgetina can't have him,' cries 
the other, ' fhe furely may have Myope 
at leafi:. His poverty is no obflacle; for 
what (o C2L{yy as to make him have fome 
rich uncle come home from the Eaft-Indies, 
or to give hira a prize in the lottery ; or — 
oh, there are a ihoufand ways of giving 
him a fortune in a moment ; and if Brid- 
getina be not m.arried either to him or Val- 
laton, I fliali be out of all patience.' 

" And I,'' rejoins another fair judge, 
" fiiall condemn the book without mercy, 
if Mrs. Fielding be not m.arried to her old 
lover Mr. Sydney. It mud be fo. to be 
fure. After being in love with each other 
for thirty years, it would be jo romantic 1 

and 



[ 355 ] 

and they mud of courfe be so happy ! As 
for Henry and Harriet, there is nothing 
interefling in their ilory. Such matches 
take place every day. Had they married 
t-o live in a cottage upon love, or had they 
been raifed to all the fplendour of the high 
ton, it might have been charming either 
way. But to give them competence in 
middle life is quite a bore, and fhews the 
author to be a mere quiz. Churchill and 
Maria, too, are tame creatures. What 
woman of fpirit would put up with being 
a man's second loveF When I marry — " 
Stay, dear young lady. Make no rafh 
promifes ; and till experience have convin- 
ced you that romantic paffion is the only 
true foundation for matrimonial felicity, do 
not condemn the condufi of Maria Sydney. 
To the obfervations of your filler critics 
we (hall reply in order, and obviate (as 
much as it is in our power to obviate) the 
force of their objedlions. 

A A 2 Firft, 



[ 356 ] 

FirH-, then, with regard ro the difpofal 
of our heroine. We are very forry to 
confefs that fue is ftiil unmarried. But 
this is far from being our fault; and if 
you will have the goodnefs to recolieft that 
ihe is neither r\'ch nor handsome^ it will 
ceafe to appear fo very extraordinary. Mr. 
Vallaton might, it is tnie, have been re- 
formed for her, as you propofe ; he might, 
likewife, for aught we know, have been 
recognized as the offspring of fome noble 
Lord, had it not unfortunately happened, 
that before either of thefe events could take 
place, a period was put to his exifteEce by 
the perfidious contrivance of the very wo- 
man for whofe fake he had robbed and 
abandoned the unfortunate Julia. This 
vvretchedwoman, whofe principles Vallaton 
had made it his boafl to form, had the art 
h far to infmuate herfelf into his affeflions, 
as to reign abfolute miftrefs of his heart. 
His pafTion for Julia gave but a fhort-livcd 

interruption 



[ 357 ] 

interruption to her authority. Though 
the beauty of Julia excited his admiration, 
his heart was too depraved to feel the full 
force of her charms. The delicacy of her 
pure and uncorrupted mind laid him under 
a reflraint fo difagreeable, that had not the 
power over her fortune been attached to 
the poffeillon of her perfon, he would foon 
have defined from the purfuit. Nor when 
fuccefs had crowned his arts, did the tender 
aiFe6tion of Julia touch his foul. The mind 
and manners of the profligate Emmeline 
were fo much more congenial to his own, 
that he found her convei-fation a relief 
from the infipid innocence of Julia's; and 
though in perfonal attractions there could 
be no comparifon made between them, he 
preferred to youth, modefly, and beauty, 
the fophifticated blandifhments of a time- 
worn wanton. So perverfc is the tafte 
of fenfual depravity ! which, in the well- 
known language of our immortal bard, 
" Though to a radiant angel link'd, 
" Will prey on garbage." With 



[ 353 ] 

With a degree of art beyond the concep- 
tion even of the artful Vallaton, did this 
infamous woman employ the influence fhe 
had obtviined to his deftrudtion. At her 
inftigation he took Julia to the houfe from, 
which llie fo fortunately efcaped to Mrs. 
Fielding's Afylum; and as the wickednefs 
of even the word of men feldom equals the 
wickednefs of woman, it was by her con- 
trivance that Julia was there robbed of the 
fam he had intended to leave her for the 
fiippiy of her immediate exigencies. The 
plan of their elopement to France was 
likewife her^s, and the execution of it fhe 
contrived to accellerate by the introdu6lion 
of a pretended friend from that kingdom, 
who appeared as a private agent for the 
fate of the confifcated eflates of the ex- 
nobles; and who fired the avarice of Valla- 
ton by the defcription of a feigniory which 
he offered him upon terms fo advantageous 
that it would have been folly to let flip the 
opportunity of fo highly advancing his 
fortune. ^ 



[ 359 ] 

On arriving at Paris, where the purchafe 
was to be compleated, fome obflacles oc- 
curred of which the London agent had not 
been fufficiently aware; hopes were how- 
ever given that thefe might be overcome, 
and the negociation was dill going forward, 
when Vallaton was arrefled as a fpy and 
agent of the royaiifts. It was not till after 
his trial and condemnation that he difco- 
vered the name of his accufer, or the na- 
ture of the evidence on which lie had been 
condemned. Sharper than the inftrument 
of death was the anguifh that pierced him, 
when made lenfible ihat he had been be- 
trayed by the wretched partner of his guilt. 
On his way to the fcaifold he gave vent to 
his rage by curfes and imprecations, which 
he continued to pour forth till the lafl mi- 
nute drew on. He then paufed, and by 
the expreffion of his countenance feemed to 
cad a retrofpedlive glance on the events of 
his pafl life. A convulfive groan of horror 
and defpair then burft from his agitated 

bofom ; 



[ 360 ] 

bofom ; he flarted from the grafp of the 
executioner, but after a ihort and ineffec- 
tual ftruggle, was forced to fubmij: to the 
fatal blow. 

To offer any comment upon the clrcum- 
ilances of this cataftrophe would be im- 
pertinent. As we do not prefume to ima- 
gine, far lefs to take it for granted, that 
our readers are lefs capable of reflexion 
than we are ourfelves, we fhall not trouble 
them with obvious dedu6iions from the 
circumftances we relate; but content our- 
felves with having fully explained the rea- 
fons that rendered it impoffible for us to 
gratify our fair readers by making up a 
match between Mr. Vallaton and our he- 
roine Bridgetina. 

Why Mr. Myope did not marry her 
is, perhaps, not quite fo eafily folved. He 
might, indeed, as has very properly been 
obferv^ed, have made an excellent hufband 
for her; but it unfortunately fo happened, 
tliat having 7w rich uncle coming home 

from 



[ 361 ] 

from abroad, and having got no prizq In 
the lottery, and having moreover become 
acquainted with a rich widow, (a difciple of 
Swedenburg's, by whom he was made a 
convert to the New Jerufalem faith) he 
fealed his converfion by by uniting himfelf 
to his inflruclrefs ; and is now employed 
in writing a quarto volume to prove the 
poflibility of an intercourfe with the world 
of fpirits. He has already had fome ad- 
mirable vifions; but Bridgetina, though 
much inclined to adopt his new opinions, 
has not yet been fo highly favoured. She 
continues to live with her mother, and 
notwithitanding the diffimilarity of their 
purfuits, begins to find that the confciouf- 
nefs of contributing to the happinefs of a 
parent is a pleasurable sensation. 

As for Mrs. Fielding, we fliall in her 
QWi\ words explain to you her reafons for 
declining an union wnth Mr. Sydney, when 
propofed to her by fome friends who knew 
the length and fmcerity of their mutual at- 
tachment, jj y 



[ 362 ] 

" It is obferved by Solomon," faid Mrs. 
Fielding, ' that there is a ime for all 
things \ among the refl ' a time to marry,* 
This time is furely not in the autumn of 
life, when the habits are formed, and the 
mind has loft that ductility which renders 
it capable of yielding to, and even of coa- 
lefcing wirh, the humours of its partner. 
Without folid and mutual efteem, no mar- 
riage can be happy. The love that has it 
not for its bafis, is, as Solomon obferves of 
the laughter of fools, ' like the crackling of 
thorns",'* ablaze that is foon extinguifhed. 
But cold efteem is not fufficient. Love 
too muft lend its aid ; and what can be 
more ridiculous than a Cupid in wrinkles! 
No, no, my friends j I fhall not fo expofe 
myfelf. I ftill feel for Mr. Sydney the 
mod lively affe61ion, but it is not the affec- 
tion that would now lead me to become his 
wife. From the day I heard of his mar- 
riage, I have devoted myfelf to a fmgle life. 
I have endeavoured to create to myfelf ob- 

je<^s 



i' 



[ S6S ] 

jefts of interefl that might occupy my at- 
tcntion, and engage my affecftions. Thefe 
I have found in the large family of the un- 
fortunate. My plan has been fuccefsful 
in bringing peace to my bofom ; and peace 
is the happinefs of age — it is all the happi- 
nefs of which on this fide the grave I fhall 
be folicitous/' 

Such was the decifion of Mrs. Fielding, 
"which no intreaty could prevail on her to 
alter. To our fair readers we fliall leave 
it to pronounce upon its propriety. 

In the aifedlionate and endearing atten- 
tion of her children (for fo fhe calls Henry 
Sydney and his wife) fhe receives as great 
fatisfa(^ion as ever parent experienced. 
She is a daily witnefs of their happinefs, 
and perhaps, in the confcioufnefs of having 
been inftrumental in promoting it, experi- 
ences a happinefs that is little inferior. 

Mr. and Mrs. Churchill, (who refidc 
great part of the year in the country) 

though 



I 364 ] 

though they could not prevail upon Mr, 

Sydney to relinquifh his houfe at W ^^ 

or give up the paternal care of his little 
fiock, enjoy a great deal of his company, 
and have the pleafure, by a thoufand tender 
attentions, of increafmg his comfort, and 
augmenting his felicity. In their journies 
to town, where Mr. Churchill is obliged 
to fpend a part of every winter, they have 
hitherto prevailed on Mr. Sydney to ac- 
company them; and that he may have an 
additional inducement for continuing to do 
fo, Mr. Churchill has fitted up a fmall mu- 
feum of natural hiftory, which it is the old 
gentleman's dclighcful bufinefs to fill with 
the choiced fpecimeiis. The mufeum has, 
however, of late occupied a lefs ihare of 
his attention than formerly. Since the 
little Maria Churchill has been able to lifp 
the name oi^ grand-papa, and Harry Sydney 
to climb upon his knee, the beetles and 
butterflies have been frequently negl8(^ed; 

nor 



[ 265 ] 

nor is it a flight gratification to the fmiling 
parents to perceive how much the endear- 
ing carelles of his httle favourites gain 
upon his heart. 

" Oh fpeak. the joy, ye whom the fudden tear 
" Surprifes often, while ye look around, 
** And nothing ftrikes your eye but fights of blifs, 
** All various nature prelTing on the hean ; 
" An elegant fufficiency, content, 
" Retirement, rural quiet, friendfhip, books, 
** Eafe, and alternate labour, ufeful life, 
" Progreffive virtue, and approving Heav'n! 
*' Thefe are the matchlefs joy<; of virtuous love, 
** And thus their moments fly. The feafons, thus 
** As ceafelefs round a jarring world they roll, 
" Still «ind them happy — " 

Happy even in " this corrupt wilderness 
of human society ^^ where any degree of 
happinefs is, in the dark and gloomy dog- 
mas of modern philofophy, reprefented 
as impoflible. Impoflible, however, it 
never will be found by thofe who feek for 
it in the right path of regulated defire?, fo- 
cial affections, active benevolence, humi- 

lity, 



[ 266 1 

lity, fincerlty, and a lively dependancc on 
the Divine favour and prote6lion. 

" What caufe for- triumph, where fuch ills abound? 
" What for dejeiflion, where prefides a Pow'r 
" Who caird us into being — io be blest!'* 




[CruttwcII, Printer, Baf.n. 



^ tV 












r/^' 



■^* .. 



A^^% 



