Mentoria; or, The Young Lady's Friend, Volume 2 (1794)
Author: Rowson, Susanna.
Publication info: Mentoria . 004-116. Philadelphia: 'Printed for Robert Campbell, by Samuel Harrison Smith', 1794.


Front matter Covers, Edges and Spine
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
Preliminaries
[Page ]
[Page ]
Title Page
MENTORIA;
OR THE
YOUNG LADY'S FRIEND.
IN TWO VOLUMES.
By Mrs. ROWSON,
of the NEW-THEATRE, philadelphia:
AUTHOR of THE INQUISITOR, FILLE DE CHAMBRE,
VICTORIA, CHARLOTTE, &c. &c.
Deteſted be the pen whoſe baneful influence
Could to the youthful docile mind convey
Pernicious precepts, tell looſe tales,
And paint illicit paſſion in ſuch colours,
As might miſlead the unſuſpecting heart,
And vitiate the young unſettled judgment.
I would not for the riches of the Eaſt,
Abuſe the nobleſt gifts of heaven thus,
ſink my Genius to ſuch proſtitution.
VOL. II.
PHILADELPHIA:
M,DCC,XCIV.
Preliminaries
[Page ]
Main text
[Page ]
MARIAN AND LYDIA
CONTINUED.
PART IV.
Marian liſtened attentively to the affecting
recital of her mother's ſorrow, but every
ſyllable ſunk deep into the heart of Lydia. I
will daily think of your diſtreſſes, my dear mother,
ſaid ſhe, and they will ſerve as a ſhield to
my heart, and render it invulnerable to the attacks
of vanity or the illuſion of paſſion.
And is my father living? ſaid Marian.
I know not, replied her mother, but if he
he can never be any thing to you, he has
us all.
It was inhuman, my dear mother, to deprive us
[Page 004]
of that rank in life, we were born to fill, and
which I ſlatter myſelf we ſhould not have disgraced.
Fooliſh Marian, ſaid the anxious mother, why
regret the loſs of ſuch a trifle; be virtuous, my
child, you will then elevate the moſt humiliating
ſtation, and riſe ſuperior to thoſe whoſe only boaſt
is wealth and titles, to render them the envy of the
blind miſguided multitude. Virtue alone is true
nobility; content is real happineſs.
Lydia's heart reſponſive echoed her mother's
ſentiments—Marian ſighed and was ſilent.
The moon in majeſtic ſplendor illumined the
ſky, and darted her ſilver beams through the ancient
elms that ſhaded Dorcas's cottage. The ſiſters
were ſeated by the door, and in obedience to
their mother's command, were pouring forth their
thankſgiving to the giver of all bleſſing in an
evening hymn. They had juſt finiſhed when
a ruſtling among the buſhes made them ſtart; a
beautiful pointer ran into the cottage, and in a
moment a ſervant in livery appeared, and enquired
the way to Gwinfred-Hall. Dorcas directed
him which way to go. He ſaid he was weary, requested
a drop of water, and leave to reſt. Lydia
went to fetch him ſome cyder, Dorcas moved
[Page 005]
towards the door, and ſilently admired the beauty
of the ſpangled .
The man ſeized the opportunity, and delivered
to the lovely unſuſpecting Marian a letter from
Sir George Lovemore.
Love and ambition had already taught her art,
ſhe haſtily took the offered letter, and hid it in her
boſom. Alas! ſimple maid, you there foſtered a
ſerpent, whoſe ſubtle poiſon tainted your very
heart. The ſervant having completed his errand
retired, and Marian found means to peruſe her
letter; — it abounded with profeſſions of love,
vows of everlaſting fidelity, and encomiums on
her beauty. She read it with rapture, and though
ſo recently warned of the duplicity of men, believed
every ſyllable it contained. In concluſion,
he ſolicited a private interview the next morning,
in the field adjoining her mother's cottage.
Marian pauſed at this requeſt, heſitated—read
the letter again and reſolved to comply.
During ſupper ſhe was thoughtful and abſent,
and when the uſual hour of reſt arrived, ſhe retired
with an anxious perturbed mind; ſleep was
to her eyes, and ſeveral times ſhe
reſolved to ſhew the letter to Lydia, and request
her to accompany her — But then Sir
[Page 006]
George had deſired her to come alone, he might
be offended and ſhe might never ſee him again.
Vanity alſo pleaded, he might marry her, raiſe
her to an exalted ſtation, and ſhould his views
be otherwiſe than honorable, ſhe certainly had resolution
to withſtand his ſolicitations.
In this manner did ſhe wear out the tedious
night, at five o'clock ſhe ſtole ſoftly from the ſide
of her innocent ſleeping ſiſter, and with as little
noiſe as poſſible opened the door that led into the
fields. Aurora had but faintly ſtreaked the eastern
ſkies with mingled gold and purple, when the
ill-fated Marian met her lover.
He thanked her for her , told her
his whole happineſs depended on her, and urged
her immediate ſlight with him to London.
Marian heſitated, her mother, her ſiſter, hung
heavy at her heart.
Sir George was an adept in the art of seduction,
he talked of gaiety, ſplendor and pleaſure, ſwore
ſhe was born to grace the firſt ſtation, declared it
was a crime to bury ſo much beauty and ſweetneſs
in a deſart.
[Page 007]
Marian's reaſon was not convinced, but her
vanity was awakened and her ſenſes dazzled,
what wonder then that her ſcruples were overcome
by Sir George's artful perſuaſions. She
left the manſion of peace and innocence, and in a
chaiſe which he had prepared for the purpoſe,
hurried as faſt as four horſes would carry her to
the feat of diſſipation and folly.
Marian dropped a tear as ſhe took a laſt look at
the cottage, but Sir George kiſſed it off, and the
reflection which had cauſed it to ſtart was inſtantly
baniſhed from her mind.
Lydia on awakening miſſed her ſiſter, and haſtily
riſing, ran into her mother's apartment, vexed
that Marian ſhould have been the firſt to bid her
good morning. I am not uſed to be ſuch a suaggard,
my dear mother, ſaid ſhe, but my ſiſter
has received your bleſſing before me this morning.
I have not ſeen your ſiſter, ſaid Dorcas, but as it
is a fine morning, ſhe has, no doubt, rambled out
to enjoy its ſweets; go, my beloved Lydia and
ſeek her.
Lydia left her mother, and ſought her ſiſter in
the fields and woods; echo a thouſand times repeated
the name as ſhe called her dear Marian; at
length fatigued and diſpirited, ſhe was returning
[Page 008]
home, when ſhe met a ſhepherd, who early attended
his ſheep, that way, and demanded of him
whether he had ſeen her ſiſter.
He had ſeen her, he ſaw her enter the chaiſe
with Sir George, he ſaw them drive off.
Lydia heard the heart-rending tidings, ſhe
would have wept, but tears refuſed their relief;
ſhe ſighed, raiſed her hands to heaven in an agony
of grief, and ſunk lifeleſs upon the ground.
The ſhepherd was frightened, nor did he uſe any
method to reſtore her, but ran backward and
forward, looking wildly round him, and calling
aloud for help. A young gentleman who had
been that morning out a ſhooting, heard the voice
of terror, and haſtened to the ſpot where the hapless
Lydia lay. Her charms were not of the dazzling
fort, but the more her features were examined
the more they intereſted the beholder. The
gentleman when he firſt raiſed her from the ground,
felt only for her as he would for any other woman
in diſtreſs; but when he looked attentively on her
face, and beheld her lovely though inanimate features,
he felt an irreſiſtible impulſe to defend her
not only from her preſent uneaſineſs, but to ſhield
her for ever from pain and affliction. He carried
her to a ſpring, and bathed her temples with water,
ſhe opened her expreſſive blue eyes, Oh! my unhappy
ſiſter, ſaid ſhe, and freeing herſelf from the
[Page 009]
arms of her deliverer, covered her face with her
hands, and gave free vent to her tears.
Have you loſt your ſiſter, my ſweet maid, ſaid
the ſtranger.
Alas! Sir, replied Lydia, I fear my poor Marian
is worſe than dead. A gentleman has found means
to enſnare her innocent unſuſpecting heart, and
ſhe has this morning left her only friends to truſt
the promiſes of one ſhe never ſaw till three days
ſince. I know not how to return to my poor mother
with theſe fatal tidings, I fear it will go near
to break an heart already oppreſſed with woes almost
too heavy to be borne. “But God tempereth
the wind to the ſhorn lamb,” continued ſhe,
raiſing her eyes to heaven, and no doubt will inspire
her with fortitude to bear, wihout repining,
this heavieſt of his trials.
The ſtranger reverenced her ſorrow, he took
her paſſive hand, drew it under his arm, and ſo
proceeded ſilently along towards Dorcas's cottage;
he attempted not to interrupt her grief, but now
and then a tear ſtole down his manly cheeks, and a
reſponſive ſigh anſwered hers.
When they arrived at the cottage Dorcas met
them at the door; Lydia flew towards her, folded
her arms round her neck, and dropping her
[Page 010]
head on her boſom, ſobbed aloud.
Oh! my beloved, ſaid Dorcas, tell me, has
any accident happened to your ſiſter?
She is gone, ſaid Lydia.
What, forever? cried the fond mother eagerly.
Oh! my dear mother, ſhe is loſt to us; that gentleman
whom we met—
Enough, ſaid Dorcas, I fully underſtand the
extent of my misfortune; my Marian is dishonored,
plunged in infamy; but I will not renounce
her, ſhe is my child. Oh! heavens, none but
a parent can judge of the anguiſh that now harrows
up my ſoul. But, my ſweet Lydia, will
you forſake your mother in her old age, will you
leave her grey hairs to ſink in ſorrow to the grave,
without a friend to chear her laſt moments, without
the gentle hand of filial love to cloſe her
dying eyes.
Oh! no, cried Lydia, dropping on her knees,
never, never; when I forſake my honor'd mother,
may heaven regardleſs hear me when I pray, may
I be caſt out to ſickneſs, pain and poverty, without
a friend to pity or relieve me.
[Page 011]
Dorcas embraced her, and the ſtranger endeavoured
to diſſipate the drops of humanity which
were gathering in her eyes. Lydia by degrees
became more compoſed, and informed her mother
of the obligations ſhe was under to the gentleman
who had accompanied her home.
Oh! Sir, ſaid Dorcas, you are my friend and
benefactor, had I loſt my Lydia I had loſt my all;
but ſay, by what name ſhall I remember you in
my prayers?
They call me Renfew, Earl of Landaff, ſaid
he.
Dorcas ſtarted and turned pale—the Earl
continued,
Your ſorrow has awakened in my breaſt every
feeling of humanity, and if it is in my power
to be of any ſervice to you, command me, and
I will exert it to the utmoſt.
Alas! my dear Marian! ſaid Dorcas.
I underſtand you, replied the Earl, and wiſh
I could reſtore her to you, but as that is not in my
power, teach me by ſome other means to promote
your happineſs.
[Page 012]
My Lord, ſaid Dorcas, there is but one way
to give the leaſt ſatisfaction to this afflicted heart;
leave the cottage immediately, nor ever attempt
again to ſee or converſe with Lydia.
And why this cruel reſtriction?
Time, my Lord, perhaps may inform you with
my reaſons for acting thus. At preſent I cannot
alledge the true cauſe, and will never ſtoop to a
mean equivocation to excuſe an action, which I
am ſenſible is perfectly right.
The Earl was piqued, he bowed and left the
cottage.
Lydia, ſaid Dorcas, if you love your mother,
you will avoid the Earl of Landaff.
He is generous and humane, ſaid Lydia,
Truſt not to appearances, replied her mother,
when you ſhall learn a tale which I could tell you,
you will then, like me, tremble at the name of
Renfew.
Peace, with the ſpeed of a courier, now fled
from the manſion of Dorcas, affliction uſurped
her place, and with ſolemn pace each night walled
with the ſolitary Lydia over thoſe fields an
[Page 013]
meadows where ſhe once had cheerfully tripped
with her beloved Marian.
In one of theſe melancholy excurſions ſhe was
accoſted by the Earl of Landaff; ſhe would have
fled, but he prevented her, and in the moſt eloquent
language true love could inſpire, told her
how dear ſhe was to him, and how cruel he
thought her mother, in refuſing him the pleaſure
of her converſation.
My mother, replied Lydia, can be actuated by
no motive but a wiſh to promote my happineſs.
I eſteem you, my Lord, I ſhall ever remember
you with gratitude, but my mother has forbid me
to hold any coverſation with you. Adieu, Sir,
I often think of you, but will never have any
intercourſe with you.
Stay, my ſweet Lydia, ſaid the Earl, only ſay
you do not hate me. I ſwear, dear maid, my designs
are honorable, and if you will put yourſelf
under my protection, a private marriage ſhall
convince you how ſincere my profeſſions are.
My Lord, replied Lydia, though I acknowledge
myſelf honored by this declaration, I muſt
decline accepting your offer; I know my rank
in life is far beneath what would be expected in
the bride of Landaff, but humble as I am, I will
[Page 014]
never become the wife of a man who would be
aſhamed publicly to own me as ſuch; nor will I
ever clandeſtinely converſe with a perſon whom
my mother has forbid me to ſee. My ſiſter, I
fear, by her diſobedience, has rendered herſelf
miſerable, nor will I, by a like conduct, increaſe
the affliction of my dear venerable parent.
Landaff expatiated on the many advantages
attending wealth and ſplendor; Lydia heard him
with ſilent contempt. He told her his only wiſh
was, to make her happy.
That is impoſſible, my Lord, ſaid ſhe, the heart of
Lydia never can know happineſs while her mother
is in affliction, and her ſiſter, perhaps, a
miſerable wanderer, expoſed to all the wretchedness,
want and infamy can entail on a fallen
woman.
All farther perſuaſion was of no effect, Lydia
continued firm in her reſolution of not leaving
her mother, and fearful of again meeting the
importunate Earl, avoided for ſome time her
favorite walk, confined herſelf to the narrow
limits of their garden, and devoted her time
entirely to comfort and chear her afflicted parent.
The Earl finding no hope of ſucceſs in drawing
Lydia from her duty, and having too much
[Page ]
[Page 016]
riches and finery, to which ſhe had hitherto been
unaccuſtomed, to enſnare and lead her an eaſy
victim to be ſacrificed at the ſhrine of vice. To
this end he forbore taking any liberty during their
journey which might alarm her, treated her with
reſpect and tender attention, and when they arrived
in London placed her in an elegant lodging,
with proper ſervants to wait on her, and left her
to ruminate at leiſure on the change in her situation.
The female attendant who was immediately about
the perſon of Marian, was a girl who had formerly
fallen a prey to the arts of Sir George, and
now only enjoyed his bounty for reducing other
hapleſs females to the horrid level with herſelf.
She was wretched in the loſs of her own virtue,
and like the ſpoiler of mankind, exulted in every
opportunity of robbing others of that bleſſing herself
could no longer enjoy. She treated the innocent
Marian with the moſt profound reſpect, led
her through a ſuit of ſuperb apartments and told
her; if ſhe could think of any thing that
would add to the elegance or beauty of the furniture,
ſhe need only mention her wiſhes to have them
complied with. She next diſplayed a variety of
elegant female apparel, toys, jewels, and other
things proper to catch the attention of inexperienced
youth, and kindle the glowing ſeeds of
vanity into a flame that might conſume her,
[Page 017]
at that time was without a favorite, and from the
prepoſſeſſion he felt in his boſom towards our poor
wanderer, he determined to raiſe her from the abject
ſtate to which ſhe was reduced, to the
honorable ſtation of his miſtreſs; he therefore
diſpatched his viſits as quick as poſſible, and
repaired to the place of appointment.
Marian met him at the door of the apartment,
he gave her his hand, ſhe raiſed it to her lips, and
attempted to ſpeak, but words were refuſed, a guſh
of ſilent tears more eloquently ſpoke her ſoul's
meaning--the Major was moved, he made her
ſit, down, and placing himſelf beſide her, began
to unfold the deſigns he had formed in her favour.
Alas! Sir, ſaid Marian mournfully, I had hoped
you would have taken me from this life of ſhame,
indeed I am ſick of what is termed pleaſure, I
long to ſink into peaceful obſcurity, and having
juſt ſufficient to ſupply the wants of nature, repent
my paſt miſdeeds, and wait with patience the
appointed hour of reſt. I know not why it is, but
I feel I never can return your generoſity in the
way you require, and therefore dare not hope for
farther favours.
Nay, my dear girl, ſaid the Major, this is
affectation; come ſhake off this gloom which your
[Page 018]
misfortunes have occaſioned to envelope your
mind---what, though I am an old man, I will
teach you to love me.
Oh! Sir, replied Marían, you have taught me
that already, there is nothing which I ſhould
think too hard to perform, to convince you of the
grateful affections of my heart. But I had hoped
this ſinking fragile frame never would have
known pollution more.
The Major endeavoured to calm the perturbation
of her ſpirits, and preſſed her to partake of
ſome excellent champaigne which he had ordered
with the ſupper. Marian was thoughtful, eat,
little, and frequently turned her head to hide the
ſtarting tears.
Supper removed he renewed his ſolicitations,
ſhe ſunk on her knees, and with uplifted hands
entreated him to grant her relief on other terms,
or ſuffer her to leave him, and again tempt the
miſeries of her hard deſtiny. He was deaf to her
prayers, he attributed them to art--he raiſed her
from the ground, and proceeded to unwarrantable
liberties--ſhe made a violent effort, and ſpringing
from his arms, cried, Oh! Dorcas, dear unhappy
mother, why did I leave you,--then ruſhing
out of the room, ran precipitately into the ſtreet.
[Page 019]
The exclamation which ſhe made had thrown
the Major into a ſtupor of aſtoniſhment, every
faculty was ſuſpended, nor could he recover
ſufficient recollection to endeavour to ſtop her--
a thouſand paſt occurrences ruſhed upon his mind,
and he remained immoveable, his eyes rivetted
to the door through which ſhe had paſſed.
At length recovering from his ſurpriſe, he observed
a ſmall ſhagreen caſe which lay on the floor,
and during her ſtruggles had dropped from Marian's
boſom. He took it up, with emotion opened
it, and the portrait of Dorcas met his eyes.
The caſe dropped from his unnerved hand, he
groaned and fell ſenſeleſs to the floor, the noiſe
of his fall brought up a ſervant of the houſe,
proper remedies were applied and ſoon reſtored
him to a keen ſenſe of his paſt guilt and treachery
to Dorcas, for Major Renfew was the perjured
huſband whom Dorcas had concealed under the
name of Melfont.
The firſt thought that ſtruck him was the horrid
crime he had ſo nearly perpetrated; the next
was what was become of his poor ruined child---
His continual ravings for his Marian, his dear
loſt daughter, and the evident incoherence of his
diſcourſe led the ſervants to believe he was fiezed
with a ſudden fit of inſanity, and in that belief
conveyed him home.
[Page 024]
The horror that dwelt upon his mind, and the
violent agitation brought on a fever, and before
morning he was inſenſible to all that paſſed
about him. Before reaſon entirely forſook him,
he was viſited by the Earl of Landaff, who was
his nephew, to him he unfolded the dreadful tale,
conjuring him to try every poſſible method to
diſcover the unhappy wanderer.
Oh! ſaid he in an agony, “ſhe knelt and prayed,
my child entreated me, with ſtreaming eyes, to
ſnatch her from infamy, and I would not hear
her,----ſeek her Landaff, find her, ſave her from
periſhing for want.” The remembrance was too
acute, and his ſenſes, which were before wavering,
took their flight--but ſtill his fancy was
haunted by the image of Dorcas and Marian, and
his agonies became dreadful, even to thoſe who
attended him.
Every enquiry after the hapleſs Marian was
fruitleſs, and the miſerable Renfew, when a turn
of his diſorder reſtored him to reaſon, found
that there was no hope of recovering the poor
wanderer—
The picture diſcovered to the Earl of Landaff
that Dorcas was the mother and Lydia the ſiſter
of the woman who had cauſed ſuch anxious emotions
in his uncle's boſom, but how Lydia and
[Page 025]
Marian ſhould be the daughters of Major Renfew
appeared to him an inexplicable riddle. His
uncle ſoon unravelled the myſtery, and received
ſome conſolation from hearing that Dorcas was
living, and that he might hope to embrace one
innocent child, in his Lydia.
He determined to ſeek Dorcas in her ſolitude,
and acknowledge her to the world as his firſt and
only true affianced wife; but fearing to alarm her
by too abrupt an appearance, he addreſſed her
firſt by letter.
Letter
By what title ſhall I addreſs you, dear injured
excellence, but by that which muſt
make me appear what I really am—the vileſt,
the baſeſt of mankind.—
Oh! Dorcas, cruel as my conduct was to
you, my puniſhment, I truſt, has been equal to my
fault—alas! the crimes of the father have been
viſited upon the child. Oh! my beloved, will
not your gentle heart break when I ſhall tell
you I have ſeen our dear Marian—I have
ſeen her a wretched nightly wanderer—I
heard her implore charity, I ſaw her
[Page 026]
overpowered with anguiſh of heart, and relieved her not,
but drove her from me, drove her again upon the
mercileſs world, expoſed to all the miſeries of
want!—But my old tough heart will not burſt,
though it ſwells and throbs at the remembrance
of that dreadful evening.
My Dorcas, I will do you juſtice, I will declare
to the world your injuries and my own
perſidy. Prepare my love, to meet your penitent
Renfew ſoon after the receipt of this, and bid
my ſweet, my innocent Lydia, prepare to receive
a father's bleſſing.
Adieu. Many days ſhall not paſs e'er I hope
to hear you pronounce my pardon, and claſp
you to the heart of your repentant huſband,
RENFEW.
Section From the day of Marian's elopement pleaſure
had been a ſtranger to the heart of Dorcas, nor
could all the duteous tenderneſs of Lydia dissipate
the anxiety ſhe felt for the fate of Marian
from her maternal breaſt. Nor did joy now
ſparkle in the eye of Lydia, the tear of ſorrow
had quenched their luſtre, and like a cankerworm
had fed upon her cheek, and ſtole from
[Page 027]
thence the bluſhing roſe. Full oft ſhe wept her
hapleſs ſiſter's fall, full oft ſhe ſighed and wiſhed
to hear again of Landaff, but her tears fell only
on her pillow, when the ſable curtain of night
hid them from the prying eye of maternal affection,
and her ſighs ſtole forth when no one was
nigh to hear them.
[Page 028]
MARIAN AND LYDIA,
PART VI.
Twas night, a chearful fire illumined their
little cottage, but ſorrow ſtill ſat heavy on
the heart of Dorcas—the wind blew, the cold
rain beat againſt the caſement; and where now
is my poor Marian? ſaid ſhe, ſighing deeply.
I will ſing you your favorite hymn, ſaid Lydia,
kiſſing off a tear as it fell on her mother's
cheek, and ſtruggling to ſuppreſs its ſympathiſing
ſiſter that trembled in her own eye.
She took up her guitar, ſhe wiſhed to divert her
mother's attention from the painful reflections which
then occupied her thoughts; ſhe paſſed her fingers
acroſs the ſtrings, the tones were diſcordant, it is
not in tune, ſaid ſhe. Alas! my dear Lydia,
replied her mother, it is our minds that are not
harmonized. She underſtood the meaning of her
mother's words, but, making no anſwer, began to
[Page 029]
ſing an evening hymn of thanks. The ſudden
trampling of a horſe interrupted her, a loud
rapping at the door alarmed them—Lydia
opened the door, a ſervant entered. Dorcas
looked earneſtly at him; he threw aſide his riding
coat, ſhe knew the livery, and inſtantly recognized
an old and favorite ſervant of Major
Renfew.
Simon, ſaid ſhe, turning pale and riſing as
ſhe ſpoke, why are you here?
My dear honored lady, I come from my master,
who repents his injurious treatment of you,
and comes to do you juſtice; but let this letter
ſpeak for him.
And where is Lady Laura, ſaid Dorcas, taking
the letter.
She left my maſter ſome years ſince, and now
leads a life of ſhame.
Poor miſguided Laura, ſaid Dorcas, as the
broke the ſeal.
When ſhe read the firſt lines joy lightened
her features, and a tranſient glow of pleaſure
acroſs her face; but as ſhe proceeded
trembled, her countenance aſſumed a
[Page 030]
ly hue, and large drops of unutterable anguiſh,
chaſed each other down her cheeks—the letter
fell to the ground, ſhe claſped her hands and
raiſed her eyes towards heaven.
Omnipotent power, ſaid ſhe, teach me to receive
theſe tidings as I ought, thy mercies and
thy judgments go hand in hand. Oh! make me
thankful for the one and ſubmiſſive to the other.
Thou haſt mingled thy judgments and thy bounties
in my cup of life; leſt while receiving only
benefits I ſhould forget the ſource from whence
thoſe mercies flow. Lydia, continued ſhe, you
will receive a father's bleſſing, but my poor Marian
is loſt for ever.
Two days after Major Renfew had diſpatched
the letter to Dorcas, he ſet forward for Wales,
accompanied by the Earl of Landaff; it was
nearly the cloſe of the third day, they had arrived
within a few miles of the cottage, and had slackened
their pace, that a ſervant might have time
to inform Dorcas of their near approach. The
Major's boſom was agitated by the moſt painful
ſenſations, the Earl was animated by hope. The
road was ſolitary, ſkirted on one ſide by a thick
wood, from whence they ſeveral times imagined
they heard a voice of complaint, the
his horſe and ſtood in the attitude of
ing.
[Page 031]
Ah! woe is me, ſaid the voice, I can get no
farther, I muſt e'en periſh here.
Landaff diſmounted inſtantly and ruſhed into
the wood, the Major would have followed but a
ſudden pang ſeized him, he reſpired with difficulty
and was forced to ſupport himſelf again a
tree. In a few moments Landaff returned, a female
reſted on his arm, her emaciated frame but
ſlenderly ſheltered from the inclemencies of the
weather, by a tattered gown; her hair looſe and
diſhevelled, her feet bare and bleeding from
wounds ſhe had received from ſharp ſtones, as
ſhe walked. Here is a ſight of miſery, ſaid the
Earl.
The Major looked at the unhappy girl, and
through the ſhade which extreme want, sickness,
and even diſordered reaſon had caſt over
her countenance, inſtantly diſcovered the seatures
of Marian.
Merciful heaven, he exclaimed, it is my
child.
Have you a child, ſaid Marian, catching at his
laſt words, then for pity's ſake don't forſake her.
I had a father once, I had a lover too; but you
ſee how it is with me now, I am poor, very
[Page 032]
wretched, and I ſometimes think not quite in my
right ſenſes. I have a mother who lives somewhere
here about, I have travelled a long way in
hopes to find her, but I know not how it is, I
have eat ſo little, and wept ſo much, I was
obliged to ſit down and reſt. Do but ſee how
my poor feet bleed.
Oh! my dear child, cried the Major, you
make my heart bleed drop for drop with them;
but I am going to your mother's, and will ſhew
you the way.
You are a man, ſaid ſhe, and I dare not truſt
you; they are all hard-hearted, cruel and treacherous.
I once, continued ſhe, looking earnestly
in the Major's face, I once met a man,
but 'tis a long time ſince, who looked and ſpoke
as you do, only not quite ſo ſorrowful—I was
miſerable then, and he promiſed to be my friend,
but he did not mean it; he uſed me very
cruelly, I hardly know how I got from him, and
have been wandering about ever ſince, ſometimes
one cold ſtone, ſometimes another has been my
pillow. I bear it as well as I can, we all muſt
ſuffer according to our offences.
Dear lunatic, ſaid the Major, what a leſſon
doſt thou teach thy father.
[Page 033]
That is true, ſaid ſhe, you have a child, if
it is a daughter, bring her to me, and I will teach
her ſuch a leſſon—I have it here (laying her hand
on her heart) it can never be eraſed but by the
hand of death. Oh! I would tell her ſuch tales
of men, would teach her to beware their flattery,
to ſhut herſelf in retirement, to pray for
humility. Oh! ſye upon it, ſye upon it, 'tis a
bad world, but I'll to my mother, for I am ſick,
heart-ſick of its ſollies.
She then darted precipitately into the wood,
but had not proceeded many ſteps, when overcome
with fatigue, long faſting, and the agitation
of her diſordered ſpirits, ſhe ſunk under the
complicated evils, and fell fainting to the ground.
Renfew was too much abſorbed in his own feelings
to be able to give any orders concerning his
unhappy daughter, and could only exclaim,
“Theſe are thy works, oh vice; look, old Renfew,
behold the ruin of thy child, and remember
'tis the reward of thy own ingratitude, perſidy
and cruelty.”
Landaff aſſiſted the ſervants in raiſing Marian,
and being then but a ſhort diſtance from the cottage,
perſuaded his uncle to ride forward, accompanied
by one ſervant, while he followed with
[Page 034]
the other two ſupporting Marian between them.
And is this the peace offering I ſhall carry to
my afflicted Dorcas, a daughter murdered by the
inhumanity of a father, ſaid the Major as he
proceeded.
Dorcas had been liſtening to every paſſing
breeze, and counting the minutes, chiding their
tardy progreſs. The ſound of horſes feet caught
her ear, ſhe met her repentant Renfew at the
door, threw herſelf into his arms, and fainted.
Lydia knelt and received a father's bleſſing.
Words are too languid to deſcribe the ensuing
ſcene, ſuffice it to ſay, for Marian was for
a moment forgot, for a moment they were all
happy; but they were awakened from this dream
of bliſs by the approach of Landaff.
Lydia ſtarted as ſhe drew near the door,
Renfew ſtruck his forehead with his hand, and
burſting from the embraces of Dorcas, ruſhed
out of the room.
Marian was beginning to recover her fenſes
as they entered the cottage. Lydia thought it
was a ſtranger, poor and ſickly, and as ſhe lent
her arm to aſſiſt in leading her in, a tear fell
in compaſſion to her weakneſs and appatent
[Page 035]
misery. Marian ſunk into a chair, folded her
arms round Lydia's waiſt, and gazing at her
for a moment, recollection and reaſon at once
returned, ſhe dropped her head on her boſom and
cried, it is indeed my ſiſter.
The voice was familiar to Dorcas. That voice
ſhould be the voice of Marian, ſaid ſhe, but alas!
the form retains no traces of my once lovely
innocent child.
Innocence and peace are fled together, ſaid
Marian, grant me but pardon and let medie at your
feet; ſhe ſunk upon her knees, Lydia knelt beſide
her; the afflicted mother wept over her, bleſſed
and forgave her.
Enough, ſaid Marian, this was the only prayer
I dared to offer at the throne of grace ſince I left
my home, and became acquainted with guilt and
miſery; how it has pleaſed heaven to direct me
to you I know not. I have ſome faint recollection
of an horrid dream, but all things ſeem
fading from my memory, an icy chillneſs hangs
about my heart, I feel the ſprings of life are
quite exhauſted.
Oh! ſpare her, ſpare my child, merciful
heaven, cried Dorcas, ſinking on her knees.
[Page 036]
It cannot be, ſaid the expiring ſufferer, I die,
but a mother's bleſſing ſoftens even the agonies
of death, Oh! had I but deſerved it.
She raiſed her hands and eyes in a fervent
though inarticulate ejaculation to heaven, and
uttering a piercing groan expired.
Renfew heard the groan, he heard the cries of
Dorcas and Lydia—“And is ſhe dead, ſaid he,
ruſhing in and catching the pale corſe in his arms,
Oh! Marian! Marian! why ſhouldeſt thou pay
the forfeit of thy father's crimes? But tell me,
continued he, who was her ſeducer; who
plunged my child into this abyſs of miſery;
teach me where to find him, that with his heart's
blood I may waſh out the ſtain he has entailed
upon the name of Renfew.”
Forbear, ſaid Dorcas, laying her hand upon
his arm, while a beam of mingled piety and
fortitude illumined her countenance, forbear,
the hand of heaven is in it, accept its juſt chastisements
with humility, and remembering only
thine own offences, blot from thy memory the
offences of others.
Renfew turned from her, folded his arms upon
his boſom, and was ſilent.
[Page 037]
A few days after the ill-fated Marian was committed
to her parent earth, when Renfew, Dorcas,
and Lydia removed to the ſeat of the Earl of
Landaff, where in a ſhort time ſhe reaped the full
reward of her filial duty and unremitting tenderness
to her mother, by becoming the bride of that
young nobleman. She was the bleſſing of her
parents, the pride and honor of her huſband, the
friend and preceptreſs of her children, who repaid
an hundred fold the pleaſure ſhe had conveyed
to Dorcas's boſom by ſhewing the ſame
duty and affection to her.
Major Renfew purchaſed the cottage where his
wife and children had lived ſo many years, and
kept it in conſtant repair; in the garden he had
two ſmall temples erected, one was almoſt hid
from the eye, by thick ſpreading cypreſs and
yew trees, round whoſe branches twined the
deadly night-ſhade, and baleful ivy; within was
a tomb of black marble, over which ſtood Humanity
weeping; on the front of the monument
was the following inſcription:
[Page 038]
Hither let the Daughter of Vanity repair,
Look on this ſilent Monitor,
AND REMEMBER
MARIAN!
She was fair and ſweet as the lily, innocent as the
young lamb, but folly miſled her, vice betrayed
her, and miſery cloſed the final awful ſcene,
in the Twenty-Third Year
of her Age .
Beware the voice of flattery, beware the allurements of
wealth, nor aſk of thy bountiful Creator aught but
HUMILITY, VIRTUE AND CONTENT.
The other temple was built of white marble,
ſurrounded by the moſt beautiful flowering ſhrubs
and evergreens; within was Peace and Proſperity,
thowering their favors on filial piety; above covered
an Angel with a crown of gold in her
hands, round which was this heavenly promiſe.
Honor thy , and thy Days ſhall be long in the Land.
May this promiſe ever be preſent to the remembrance
of the fair daughters of Britain!
[Page 039]
LETTER VI.
MENTORIA TO THE MISS WINWORTHS. Still am I to complain of the ſhortneſs of
your letters, and receive the trifling excuſe,
that you have no time. Fye, my dear girls, I am
aſhamed to read ſo very childiſh an apolegy,
your want of time muſt proceed from your own
bad management, for ſurely no rational being
will give more to the purſuit of amuſement than
what might juſt ſerve to give a zeſt to retirement;
and, believe me, you will find retirement alone
the ſource of true happineſs, and promoter of industry—
and on the contrary, an eager purſuit of
faſhionable folly, which ſeduces you under the
ſemblance of pleaſure, always tends to debilitate
the faculties of the mind, and lead you into habits
of idleneſs and indolence at once prejudicial to
your tranquillity and intereſt, not only your temporal,
but what is of far more conſequence, your
ſpiritual intereſt.
If, my beloved pupils, you cannot find time
once in ſeveral weeks to write a few lines to a
[Page 040]
friend, who regards you with a tenderneſs nearly
maternal; tell me, and tell me truly, I entreat,
how much time you can ſpare to devote each day
to the Creator and giver of all good? Ah! my
young friends, I fear but a little, very little portion
is allotted for that ſervice; yet truſt me it is
a ſervice which cannot be neglected but by the
ungrateful and unthinking. Is there one moment
of your lives that paſſes unmarked by his
bleſſings? Have you not health, chearfulneſs,
friends, and the moſt valuable of all bleſſings, the
power to dry the tear of affliction, to comfort the
widow, protect the orphan, releaſe the poor
debtor, and perform all the good works of peace
and mercy?
How ſhould your hearts overflow with gratitude
to that God, who thus bountifully ſpreads around
you the means of happineſs, do not then my dear
children, throw the bleſſing from you, and continue
ſquandering your time, and trifling with
your health 'till the firſt is nearly ſpent, and the
latter irretrievably ruined, and you will awaken
too late to a juſt ſenſe of your error, when your
mind, evervated by the weakneſs of your frame,
vainly ſhall endeavour in the few remaining years
to regain thoſe ſources of mental delight which
ever flow from a proper exertion of the reaſoning
faculties.
[Page 041]
When you were with me, was there ever a
day too long? I hear you readily anſwer no.
Every moment was fully and pleaſantly employed;
true, but had we not always time for
reading, writing, muſic, drawing, needle-work,
and every other amuſing or uſeful employment.
And did we ever, my dear girls, riſe from the
ſweets of repoſe, or retire to our chambers at
night, without remembering our duty to him
through whoſe mercy alone we enjoyed all thoſe
bleſſings? and certain I am, you were at that
time as happy as it was poſſible for young people
to be; you were blithe as the woodlark, blooming
as Hebe, and innocent as the dove, who tries
his new fledged wings in little circles round its
mother's neſt.
Think not, my young friends, that I wiſh to
deprive you of innocent amuſement, far from it.
In the ſphere where it has pleaſed providence to
place you, it is certainly right that you ſhould
partake in moderation of all the diverſions of the
metropolis; but if thoſe diverſions are too frequently
repeated, they loſe their effect, and
you return from them weary, diſguſted and dissatisfied.
But how different are the pleaſures ariſing from
the amuſement to be found within ourſelves.
The purſuit of either of the fine arts, the ſtudy
[Page 042]
of nature, in all her varieties and beauties, the excellencies
of chriſtianity, the delights ariſing from
benevolence—here are inexhauſtible ſources of
entertainment, rational ſublime pleaſure, that the
farther you purſue it, the more enchanting appears
the proſpect, new charms ariſe to your astonished
view; and though the joys of youth transiently
fleet away, you will ſtill have pleaſures
within your reach, that can render old age not
only eaſy to yourſelf, but delightful to others.
I am no ſtranger to the many enticements
youth and inexperience meet with in the gay
world to allure them from the paths of reaſon. I
myſelf ſpent my youth in London, but it was
my lot to be placed in a family, where nothing
was deemed pleaſure, however ſpecious its appearance,
that was not ſanctioned by reaſon.
Your grandmother, my dear girls, was a woman
remarkable for the elegance of her manners
and the chearfulneſs of her diſpoſition; yet believe
me ſhe was as truly pious as a primitive
chriſtian. Surrounded with affluence, ſhe was
humble, benevolent, tender hearted, and eaſy
of acceſs to the meaneſt petitioner. In affliction
reſigned, patient and uncomplaining.
When it was firſt my happy fate to be taken
under her protection, ſhe was ſcarcely twenty-ſix
[Page 043]
years old, extremely lovely in her perſon, endowed
with every accompliſhment, admired
wherever ſhe appeared, reſpected by her friends,
and adored by her huſband: yet ſhe was not
tainted by vanity, but made it her ſtudy to conciliate
eſteem, when love and admiration ſhould
be no more. She paid a ſtrict attention to her
domeſtic affairs, attended perſonally to the morals
and education of her children, never suffered
an hour to paſs unemployed, or a day without
paying her devotion to her maker.
This is an example I could wiſh you to follow,
as it cannot fail of making you as truly
happy, as it is poſſible for human nature to be.
MENTORIA.
[Page 044]
LETTER VII.
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.
And ſo you really feel yourſelves mightily
offended becauſe your father thinks of a second
marriage, when you ſhould rather rejoice
to find he has choſen ſo amiable a woman as Mrs.
Clairville.
You are to conſider that it is more than probable
in a few years you will all of you be ſettled
in a matrimonial way,and then how extremely uncomfortable
will your father find himſelf, after
being ſo long accuſtomed to the ſociety of an
amiable woman, to feel himſelf at once deprived
of it, how ſolitary would be his houſe, how pensive
his breakfaſt hours.
But you cry, you do not like a ſtep-mother.
Can you ſuppoſe that Mrs. Clairville will aſſume
any improper authority overyou, when ſhe becomes
Lady Winworth?—
[Page 045]
Believe me, my children, while you behave
with tenderneſs and propriety towards her, ſhe
will never appear otherwiſe than your friend
and companion. Beſides, you ſhould reflect that
your father having diſcharged his duty towards
you, by giving you a liberal education, and remaining
unmarried till you have attained to years
of maturity, has now an undoubted right to
pleaſe himſelf, and chuſe a companion ſuited to
his age and diſpoſition.—And ſhall you, the children
of his affection, whoſe happineſs he has ſo
much ſtudied, whoſe felicity is the firſt wiſh of his
heart, ſhall you ungratefully murmur at his choice,
and by your diſcontent embitter the life of him
it is your duty to love and reverence.
No, no.—I think my dear girls know too well
the many obligations they are under to this dear
father, to attempt any thing which would be prejudicial
to his happineſs. Conſider, my dear girls,
how much it will be your intereſt to endeavour
to conciliate the affection and eſteem of the woman
whom your father thinks proper to place in
ſo reſpectable a ſituation. You muſt regard her
as the repreſentative of your deceaſed parent,
and by tender aſſduity and attention, make her
your ſincere friend; ſuch a conduct will make
you dearer than ever to the heart of your father,
and a delightful tranquillity will diffuſe itſelf
through your own boſoms, conſcious that to the
[Page 046]
utmoſt of your power you have performed your
duty.
Perhaps you may tell me, there is no actual
duty due to a ſtep-mother. I confeſs it is not
ſo much a duty incumbent for you to obey the
commands or ſubmit implicitly to the will of
any but your natural parent, but remember my
fair friends, if you voluntarily perform an exalted
action, where perhaps it was not expected, and
could not be demanded, how much more will it
redound to your honor, than the ſimple discharge
of an obligation.
I am ſenſible that many young women have
been rendered extremely unhappy by their father's
chooſing ſecond wives, but then it has been
the error of judgment in his choice; where passion
has ſo blinded him that he could not diſcover
the faults of the perſon who had attracted his affection.
Perhaps ſhe has been ignorant, ill-natured,
illiberal, or fantaſtic; nay, it has been
the unhappy fate of ſome girls to have for a
ſtep-mother, a perſon in whom all thoſe disagreeable
circumſtances are combined. But what a
different choice has your father made, Mrs. Clairville
is elegant, accompliſhed, gentle and unassuming.
She will render your father's evening
of life like the parting rays of a mild autumn
day, where though we cannot but ſee the viſible
[Page 047]
approach of winter, there is ſuch a ſoſt ſerenity,
ſuch various beauties ſcattered over the proſpect,
that the reflecting mind cannot but prefer it to the
more gaudy tints that embelliſh the appearance
of ſpring.
Your own ſelicity too may be augmented by
this union, as I am certain, however vanity or
folly may for a moment miſlead your understanding,
you will all ſincerely rejoice in an event
that will ultimately tend to inſure the moſt refined
pleaſure to ſo good, ſo valuable a father, as
Lord Winworth, by uniting him to a woman,
whoſe highly cultivated underſtanding renders her
at once the chearful rational companion, and the
diſintereſted friend.
You may remember, my dear girls, how unkind
you thought me, when I poſitively refuſed
to accompany you to London; perhaps you may
now perceive the juſtice of that refuſal. Had
I complied with the polite invitation of your father,
and yielded my own better judgment to
your preſſing entreaties, I ſhould have undoubtedly
long ago forfeited, in your opinion, all
right to your affection.
Some years before Lord Winworth beheld your
truly amiable mother, he ſo far humbled himſelf
as to make me a tender of his hand and fortune. I
[Page 048]
will not dwell on the reaſon that urged me to refuse
an offer ſo very far above my deſerts, leaſt
my dear Miſs Winworths ſhould think I boaſted
of my great fortitude and reſolution; believe me,
it was only an exertion of reaſon, and I felt amply
compenſated for all I ſuffered in this ſelf-denial,
(for I will not deny that my heart pleaded strongly
in your father's favor) by the reflection that
I had acted with honour and propriety, and
evinced the ſincerity of my gratitude to my dear
benefactreſs.
Affections that have been deeply impreſſed on
our hearts in extreme youth, are often revived
again at the remote period of mature age, and I
feared to loſe the friendſhip of my young friends,
by awakening in the boſom of their father the tenderness
he once honored me with, by profeſſing—.
Before I drop this ſubject, I will give you two
inſtances that have fell under my own immediate
knowledge, to ſhew you how very poſſible it is
for an obſtinate misjudging child to trifle away
both her own and father's happineſs, by being wilfully
blind to the merits of his ſecond wife; and
alſo ſhew how truly amiable the daughter muſt
appear, who makes the tranquillity of her parent
her chief ſtudy; and if her own peace is in ſome
meaſure interrupted by the caprice of a ſtep mother,
ſhe will ſeek in reſignation, piety and humility,
a ſweet conſolation and comfort.
[Page 049]
Celia Markham had the misfortune to loſe her
mother at the early age of twelve. Mr. Markham
was doatingly fond of his daughter, he
placed his chief felicity in the hope of one day
ſeeing her the moſt amiable, accompliſhed and
happy girl in England.
He had placed her at an eminent boarding
ſchool, but he knew too much of the world to
ſuppoſe, a girl of her volatile diſpoſition, especially
when ſhe was lovely in her perſon, and
reputed heireſs to a large fortune, could be ſo
ſafe any where as under the immediate protection
of a father. He had no female relation
whom he could with propriety invite to his
houſe, and he thought he could not do his daughter
a more acceptable ſervice, than by chooſing
the amiable Miſs Nelſon to preſide in the place
of her departed mother.
Miſs Nelſon was at that time upwards of thirty,
ſhe had rendered herſelf univerſally beloved and
reſpected by all who knew her, for the innate
goodneſs of her heart was conſpicuous in every
action. She had received a moſt liberal education,
and her mental endowments were far ſuperior to
the generality of what is termed accompliſhed
women—yet ſo timid and unaſſuming in her
manners, that thoſe with whom ſhe converſed by
[Page 050]
degrees diſcovered her excellencies, and after
ſome years acquaintance would be daily finding
ſomething new to admire. She had by the moſt
exemplary conduct as a daughter, convinced the
world what might be expected from her as a
wife and mother. She was uniformly humane,
pious and gentle; in perſon attractive, and in
manners elegantly ſimple.
Such was the woman whom Mr. Markham
thought would help to form the manners, cultivate
the underſtanding, and direct the ſtudies of
his darling Celia.
Miſs Markham no ſooner was informed of her
father's intended union, than ſhe conceived the
moſt violent and ill founded diſlike toward the
innocent object of his affection.
As Celia was ſo young, Mr. Markham never
had an idea of conſulting her on his propoſed marriage,
having therefore obtained from Miſs Nelson
leave to name an early day for the ceremony,
he wrote to his daughter an affectionate letter,
informing her how much he had ſtudied her happiness
in providing her ſo amiable a friend and
preceptreſs, at the ſame time requeſting her governess
to prepare her to be preſent at the wedding.
[Page 051]
Celia was a girl of high ſpirits, her understanding
had remained entirely uncultivated, while
large ſums had been expended on the far leſs necessary
ſuperficial accompliſhments of muſic, dancing,
drawing, and fancy works. Religion ſhe
knew but by name; it is true, there were prayers
read twice a-day in the ſchool, and ſhe went with
the other ladies regularly to church twice every
Sunday, but there it reſted! There had been no pains
taken to inſtil into her mind a true knowledge
of what religion meant; ſhe had not been taught
that to keep her paſſions under the controul of
reaſon, to ſubmit, without repining, to the will
of thoſe whom heaven had placed over her; to be
meek, merciful, and juſt, and let every action of
her life be a continued work of gratitude to heaven,
and good will to her fellow creatures, was
to follow the precepts of true piety.
She had been early taught to value herſelf,
upon the trifling advantages of birth and fortune,
for ſhe ſaw the viſible difference between the attention
and reſpect paid by her governeſs and the
teachers to herſelf and thoſe young ladies who
had neither of thoſe advantages to recommend
them.
She was naturally vain, and that vanity was
augmented by the conſtant adulation which ſhe
daily received from thoſe girls, whoſe meanneſs
[Page 052]
of ſpirit induced them to cringe to her ſuperior
wealth.
From conſtantly contemplating thoſe fancied
endowments, ſhe began to imagine ſhe was born
for univerſal ſway, had ſettled it in her own mind,
that in a few years ſhe ſhould be called home to
preſide at her father's table, have the management
of the family, and partake of all the fashionable
pleaſures with which the metropolis
abounds.
How great then was her diſappointment when
ſhe found all theſe pleaſing expectations at once
fruſtrated—when ſhe found ſhe was to be ſtill considered
as a child, and under the controul of the
moſt dreaded of all characters, a ſtep-mother.—
She knew Miſs Nelſon, but far from admiring
her amiable qualities, ſhe had conſidered her as a
dull, preciſe, infipid old maid. She had no idea that
chearfulneſs and unaffected piety conſtantly inhabited
the ſame breaſt, nor could ſhe conceive
that rational converſation, ſtudy, uſeful employment,
and innocent amuſement, could amply diversify
the ſcene, and be a ſource of tranquil happiness
without the aid of public entertainments,
dreſs, parade and folly.
[Page 053]
It may be eaſily conceived, that two tempers
ſo diametrically oppoſite would never agree.
Mr. Markham had ſeen theſe erroneous traits
in his daughter's diſpoſition, but he flattered
himſelf, the amiable example and condescending
behaviour of Miſs Nelſon would ſo far operate
on her temper, as to make her love and endeavour
to imitate her virtues.
It is impoſſible to deſcribe the rage and grief
that diſplayed itſelf in the countenance of Celia,
on the receipt of her father's letters, regarding
only what ſhe fooliſhly imagined would be prejudicial
to her own happineſs. She gave vent to her
paſſion in the moſt unbecoming terms, called her
father cruel, unjuſt and unfeeling, and vowed ſhe
would die ſooner than call Miſs Nelſon mother.
“I will go to the wedding, ſaid ſhe, becauſe that
woman ſhall not have a moment's happineſs of
which it is in my power to deprive her.”
With this laudable reſolution ſhe ſat forward
for her father's houſe, where upon being tenderly
embraced by him, inſtead of returning a cordial
ſalute, and wiſhing him joy, ſhe turned her face
from him and burſting into tears, (which proceeded
more from paſſion than ſenſibility) ſaid ſhe
was ſorry to find her dear mother was ſo ſoon
forgot.
[Page 054]
Not forgot, my beloved; replied Mr. Markham,
for I have ſought a woman who is her counter-part
in every amiable quality.
They then proceeded to church, where, after
the ceremony was performed, tears and ſullen curtseys
were all the gratulations Celia offered to her
new mother.
Mrs. Markham was naturally a woman of great
ſenſibility, ſhe attributed Celia's melancholy to a
cauſe that did honour to her own heart, and instead
of taking offence, endeavoured to ſoothe
and entertain her during the whole day. But
alas! the gentle Mrs. Markham knew not
the difficulty of the taſk ſhe had undertaken.
She had known Celia ſome years before her
mother's death, and always thought her an amiable,
lively girl, and judging of her disposition
by that of her parents, imagined there
would be no difficulty in modelling her according
to her own wiſhes.
But theſe ſallacious hopes were ſoon no more.
Celia from the day of her father's marriage took
every opportunity in her power to thwart and vex
her mother-in-law.
Though Mrs. Markam was a woman of too
much ſenſe, to let the caprice of ſuch a girl ruffle
[Page 055]
the uncommon ſerenity of her temper, yet was
it totally impoſſible for a woman of her exquisite
ſenſibility, to enjoy any tolerable degree
of happineſs while ſhe ſaw the darling child of
the man ſhe loved and eſteemed of ſo ſroward and
perverſe a diſpoſition.
Celia was volatile, and thoughtleſs to exceſs,
fond of company, and ſo entirely unqualified to
amuſe or entertain herſelf, that the moſt improper
ſociety was preferred to being alone. Her mother-in-law
was of too grave and rational a turn
to afford her any pleaſure by her converſation,
and to read or work required ſo much attention,
that ſhe termed it fatigue.
It was with infinite regret that Mr. Markham
diſcovered the little felicity he was like to enjoy
in this ſecond union. He ſaw the child of his
tendereſt affection reſtleſs and diſcontented; he
ſaw with anguiſh the many fruitleſs endeavours of
Mrs. Markham to reclaim and make her purſue
the direct road to happineſs.
Whenever the tender attention of this amiable
woman lead her to remonſtrate with Celia on the
impropriety of her conduct, and the miſerable
waſte of her time, the petulant girl would burſt
into tears, and cry, “Oh! that my dear mother
was living, I ſhould not then be treated thus
[Page 056]
cruelly, and abridged of every innocent pleaſure,
by a woman, who having ſtolen from me my dear
father's affections, now uſurps an undue authority
over both him and me.”
Theſe continual diſputes greatly embittered
Mrs. Markham's life.—Mr. Markham was at a
loſs how to conduct himſelf ſo as to give pain
to neither wife or daughter. In ſhort, the whole
family was unhappy from the capricious behaviour
of her, whoſe chief ſtudy ſhould have been
to promote their felicity.
Celia had her friends, her parties, and her
ſecrets, in which Mrs. Markham was not allowed
to participate; the conſequence was, that ſhe at
a very early age had her lovers alſo.
Among the many candidates for her favor was
a Captain Parſlow, he was a man of no fortune,
ignorant, conceited, and a complete coxcomb.
He ſoon diſcovered the weakneſs of Celia, he
flattered her foibles, took her part againſt her mother-in-law,
and, in ſhort, ſo far won on the
fooliſh thoughtleſs girl, that ſhe conſented to elope
with him, and take a trip to Scotland.
By the dropping of a letter Mrs. Markham
diſcovered the plan; ſhe talked to Celia in the
accents of friendſhip and fond ſolicitude, but
[Page 057]
received in return, only impertinence and disrespect.
Mrs. Markham thought it her duty to acquaint
her huſband with the diſcovery ſhe had made.
Grieved to the ſoul, he ſent for his daughter, and
in the moſt pathetic terms entreated her to deſiſt
from ſo fatal a ſtep.
The artful Celia thought this was the time to
alienate her father's affections from his wife—ſhe
poſitively denied the whole charge, and declared
ſhe believed it muſt be a contrivance of Mrs.
Markham's; begged if her dear father thought
her capable of ſuch imprudence, he would ſend
her abroad, and ſhut her in a convent. “I
know, continued ſhe, with well diſſembled tears,
that you have been taught to conſider your poor
girl as an abandoned wretch, who conſulted only
her own happineſs, but indeed, indeed my beloved
father, you have been deceived. I am not
the guilty creature you think me. But, alas! I
have long ſeen my preſence is a bar to your happiness,
ſend me from you, then, dear Sir; ſince
it is impoſſible we can both enjoy content, let
me be the victim, and may your felicity be unbounded.”
This artful ſpeech had the deſired effect, and
Mr. Markham believing his daughter perfectly
[Page 058]
innocent, began to treat the woman with coolneſs
whom he imagined had attempted to create dissention
between him and his only child.
Celia ſaw ſhe had now completely made her
mother-in-law unhappy, and exulted in her cruelty,
adding inſult to the already poignant sufferings
of the patient and amiable Mrs. Markham.
But Celia had not ſufficient art to elude or
evade the ſolicitude of her admirer. Parſlow ſtill
continued his devoirs, and Miſs Markham liſtened
to his ſlattery and received his aſſiduities with too
much pleaſure to give any room for deſpair; in a
ſhort time ſhe eloped. Her father was amazed,
and how much was his aſtoniſhment increaſed
when the following letter was put into his hand.
Letter
DEAR AND HONORED SIR,
Though the ſtep I have taken will, I am
certain, by the generality of mankind, be
called an improper one, my own heart acquits
me of any motive but a wiſh to inſure your happiness.
I have long ſeen, with ſincere anguiſh of heart,
how much my preſence militated againſt your
[Page 059]
tranquillity. I am convinced, my dear father,
Mrs. Markham is now the only objeſct of your
affection; your once tenderly beloved child has
only a ſecondary place in your heart.
Pardon me, my revered parent, if I ſay, this
was too evident not to be diſcovered, and when
once diſcovered, too painful to be borne in ſilence.
The contempt which Mrs. Markham's unjuſt
ſuſpicions ſubject me to, not only from our acquaintance,
but even our ſervants, has urged
me to make choice of a protector for my ſame and
honor, nor do I ſcruple to add, a protector from
her undeſerved malice and continual ill-nature.
Adieu, my dear father, may you be as happy
as I wiſh you; forgive and think with compaſſion
on your child,
CELIA MARKHAM.
Letter The feelings of a father on the receipt of ſuch
a letter are more eaſily conceived than deſcribed.
He had long conſidered his innocent wife as a
perſon who had diſturbed the peace of his family,
and now that he imagined himſelf convinced of
her unjuſt conduct towards his daughter, his displeasure
knew no bounds; rage, invective, and
bitter reproach, were all the gentle, meek, uncomplaining
ſufferer, received from a huſband
[Page 060]
who once fondly eſteemed her. But though Mrs.
Markham complained not, the diſtreſs of her
mind preyed upon her delicate frame, ſhe ſunk
under this unexpected misfortune, and a rapid
decline in a few months put a period to her existence.
In the mean time Celia and her huſband had
been received and forgiven by Mr. Markham;
but, alas! that too indulgent father ſoon discovered,
that in the loſs of his wife, he had been
bereft of every earthly comfort; his daughter rather
triumphed in, than endeavoured to ſoothe
his melancholy—ſhe threw out the moſt illiberal
cenſures on the memory of the deceaſed Mrs.
Markham, and having no longer any particular
end to attain by pretending violent affection to
her father, ſhe at firſt began to ſlight and at length
totally neglected him.
He felt, acutely felt, her unkindneſs, but ſtill
his affection led him to laviſh immenſe ſums to
ſupport the extravagance of herſelf and huſband,
till unable any longer to keep them from ruin, he
gave up all but about one hundred pounds a year,
with which he retired into the country, and ended
his days in what he called peaceful obſcurity .
And to the laſt his prayers were offered at the
throne of grace for his ungrateful child—but alas!
[Page 061]
Celia, by her own conduct counteracted the effects
of thoſe pious prayers. Neglected, nay deſpiſed,
by her huſband, ſhe launched into every ſpecies of
diſſipation, and was in a few years reduced to a ſtate
of abſolute penury, where remorſe is not the leaſt
painful of her many heavy afflictions, all which ſhe
has brought on herſelf by an illiberal obſtinate
conduct; for had ſhe rightly conſidered the virtues
and amiable deportment of Mrs. Markham, ſhe
might have contributed to the ſelicity of her father,
and, in the end, ultimately inſured her
own.
How different was the behaviour of Screna—
But as my letter is already of a conſiderable length,
I ſhall reſerve her ſtory 'till the next poſt.
Adieu, my beloved pupils, once more believe
me, to be completely happy yourſelves, you muſt
ſtudy the happineſs of all with whom you are connected;
for there is more real pleaſure flows from
the reflection of having promoted the welfare and
tranquillity of a fellow creature, than can proceed
from the higheſt ſelf gratifications the world can
afford. The one is like a tranſient vapour that
for a moment illumines the ſky, paſſes and is forgotten;
but the other, like the glorious ſun, glads
the whole face of nature, by its enlivening beams
through the day, and even lends its rays to the
ſilver moon, to chear the horrors of approaching
[Page 062]
night. So does the remembrance of good actions
gild the day of life, and chear the heavy night of
approaching death.
God bleſs you, my dear girls, believe my
friendſhip ſincere and unchangeable, while life's
warm fluid animates the heart of
MENTORIA.
[Page 063]
LETTER VIII.
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.
I have taken up my pen, without farther
preface to proceed on my promiſed ſtory, and
ſhall leave my dear Miſs Winworths to apply the
moral themſelves; ſenſible that they do not want
ſenſe to diſcover right from wrong, and ſincerely
hoping they will not let folly, vanity, or illiberal
prejudices miſlead their judgment.
Mr. Oſborne was left a widower at a very
early age, with only one daughter, named Serena,
who, when ſhe had the misfortune to loſe her
mother, was ſcarcely three years old. She inherited
by the death of her mother, a genteel independence,
and was reputed heireſs to her father's
fortune, which was not inconſiderable.
Not long after this melancholy event Mr. Oſbore, being on a viſit to a friend in the country,
became acquainted with Miſs Withers.
[Page 064]
She was, it muſt be confeſſed, beautiful in the
extreme, but that acknowledged, and there was
not another favorable circumſtance to be mentioned
in her behalf. She was the daughter of
a man who enjoyed in a country town, a considerable
and lucrative poſt under government; his
wife had brought him four or five thouſand pounds,
which had been accumulated by her father, who
regarded not the cries of the fatherleſs, or the
tears of the widow.
This woman's education had been ſuch as might
be expected for the child of a poor petty-fogging
lawyer, who by dint of chicanery and dirty employment,
was ſcraping a little ſordid droſs together,
and thought by leaving her a fortune, he
left her every neceſſary recommendation to ſecure
her advancement in life; the conſequence was,
that to the moſt illiberal contracted ideas and consummate
ignorance, ſhe added the pride and ſelf
conceit of a firſt-rate woman of faſhion; ſhe was
extravagantly fond of dreſs, parade, and ſhow;
but had no idea of any difference being neceſſary
between the education of a gentlewoman, and that
of a tradeſman's or farmer's daughter.
Brought up under ſuch a mother, with ſuch
conſined notions, Miſs Withers had been taught
to believe that the good houſewife and
[Page 065]
accomplished woman, were one and the ſame thing.
She perfectly underſtood the art of cookery, pickling,
preſerving, and all the long &c's. neceſſary
to form a complete houſe-keeper.
She could work tent-ſtitch, tambour, and crossstitch,
make all her father's, and indeed, all the
family linen, knew the cheapeſt ways of going
to market, how to ſcold and keep her ſervants in
order; in ſhort, had been brought up as a complete
Mrs. Notable .
But to the fine arts ſhe was a perfect ſtranger.
Muſic, dancing, or drawing, had no charms for
her, nor had ſhe the leaſt idea of the pleaſures
reſulting from a well informed, elegantly cultivated
mind. Haughty, yet mean; ignorant, yet
obſtinate in her opinion, however abſurd, and
deaf to the voice of conviction.
She had been educated in the ſtricteſt principles
of methodiſm, yet was ſhe of no fixed religion,
having been wearied in her youth by being too
rigidly obliged to conform to her parents manners;
ſhe contracted a diſlike to her religious duties,
and at the time Mr. Oſborne firſt ſaw her,
was of no particular fect whatever.
She had, by the death of her mother, who had
[Page 066]
been extremely anxious to make her dear Jemima
a fortune, juſt come to the poſſeſſion of ten thousand
pounds, and was ſo inſinuatiug in her manner,
that ſhe was univerſally well received in all
companies, and called one of the beſt kind of
girls in the world.
Mr. Oſborne was captivated with her lovely
perſon and ſpecious manners, and having made
propoſals to her guardians, was accepted, and the
lady, in due time, became Mrs. Oſborne.
She had from the firſt of her acquaintance pretended
a violent attachment to the little Serena,
I ſay pretended, becauſe I have been ſince convinced
ſhe regarded her with an eye of envy and
ill-nature from the moment ſhe became her mother-in-law.
In about twelve months Mrs. Oſborne presented
her huſband with a little girl, and ſolemnly
declared, at the time of her birth, it was impossible
for her to love any child better than
ſhe did Serena; and that it ſhould be her chief
ſtudy to make no difference between the children.
This was a declaration I, who was preſent,
was by no means pleaſed with, as I knew it was
[Page 067]
not in nature for a woman to love another child
ſo well as her own offspring—and though a
ſtrong ſenſe of duty, and a naturally compassionate
heart, might lead a woman to treat with the
utmoſt tenderneſs, a girl, deprived of her natural
parent, and thrown, as it were, on her protection;
yet it was impoſſible but inclination
muſt lead her to give the preference to her own
child.
As Serena and Jemima (the name of her little
half-ſiſter) grew up, light and ſhade could not
be more oppoſite than their diſpoſitions. Serena
was ſenſible, volatile, and chearful, of a bright
genius, fond of the purſuit of knowledge, yet
meek, mild and innocent as it was poſſible for a
human being to be.
Jemima was ſullen, proud, obſtinate, and ſo
ſtupid, that it was not in the power of any maſters
whatever to cultivate a mind rendered impenctrable
by nature.
The excellencies which diſcovered themſelves
in the mind and diſpoſition of Serena were ſo
many faults in the eyes of Mrs. Oſborne, nor did
ſhe fail to aggravate every error to which her volatility,
or thoughtleſs innocence might betray her,
into crimes, ſo that by degrees her father's
[Page 068]
affection became alienated from her, and it was almoſt
impoſſible for the poor girl to ſpeak, move, or
look ſo as not to give offence. As ſhe advanced
towards womanhood, her troubles increaſed—her
high ſenſe of her religious duties was termed hypocrisy—
her ſtrong ſenſibility, art; and her fine
taſte, and brilliant genius, follies, which would
in the end lead her to ruin.
When ſhe had attained the age of ſixteen, the
bequeſt of a large fortune obliged her father to
viſit Jamaica; he reſolved to take his family with
him, and had not been there long before Mrs.
Oſborne was ſeized with one of thoſe fevers incident
to the climate.
Tenderly and with the utmoſt care did Serena
watch over her for many months when the disorder
had left her in a weak emaciated ſtate, did
ſhe never quit her bed-ſide, adminiſtering every
medicine, nor ever taking reſt except what ſhe
procured at intervals on a matraſs in the ſame apartment.
And what was the return ſhe received?
Pettiſhneſs, diſcontent, and repining. Frequently
did Mrs. Oſborne aſk, if ſhe was brought to that
ſtrange place to be murdered—if it was intended
ſhe ſhould be poiſoned—and whether Serena did
not know that the doctor deſigned to kill her;
and theſe expreſſions were not the effect of
[Page 069]
delirium, but ſpoken with a coolneſs and aſperity
that tore the heart of the mild affectionate girl to
whom they were addreſſed.
Mrs. Oſborne at length recovered, when it
pleaſed heaven to take her huſband from her, and
ſhe was left involved in a diſagreeable law ſuit,
which was finally terminated to her diſadvantage,
ſhe was caſt with coſts of ſuit, and returned to
England with little more than five hundred pounds
remaining.
Now it was that Serena ſhewed herſelf to be
the amiable girl I had ever thought her.
When ſhe received her fortune, ſhe ſettled an
handſome annuity on Mrs. Oſborne, and divided
the reſidue between Jemima and herſelf; though
at her father's death ſhe had been, by their arts,
deprived of any advantage from his fortune, the
whole being by will left to Mrs. Oſborne and her
daughter, but providence had ordained that they
were not to enjoy it.
To the laſt hour that ſhe remained with her
mother-in-law, ſhe ſtudied her happineſs only,
enough I have been informed it was ſeldom in
that ſhe received even the ſmalleſt token of
approbation. Her ſociety was circumſcribed, her
[Page 070]
amuſements abridged, her moſt innocent actions
cenſured, and the gaiety of her heart conſtrued
into levity, and reprimanded as vice; nay, after
the alteration in their circumſtances, ſhe was suffered
to perform the moſt menial offices: in ſhort,
my dear girls, her education had been confined,
her genius cramped, and had ſhe not been a girl
of an uncommon good heart, her diſpoſition muſt
have been totally perverted by the conſtant restraint
ſhe lived under, and the ſeverity with which
ſhe was treated; while Jemima was indulged in
idleneſs, her faults gloſſed over, and her perverſe
haughty diſpoſition called laudable pride. Yet
did I never hear that Serena ever uſed an unbecoming
expreſſion to her mother, or made any
complaint of unkindneſs.
She has been now for ſome years married to a
deſerving man, and ſtill continues to treat Mrs.
Oſborne with the higheſt reſpect, and her daughter
with affection, though the ingratitude of Jemima
often appears, by her unkind neglect of
a ſiſter who ſacrificed her own intereſt to the unterest
and happineſs of her mother.
Serena, though happy in her matrimonial
nection, is not in affluent circumſtances.
Jemima is lately married to a man of large
tune, and removed to a diſtant part of England,
[Page 071]
where ſhe can ſeldom find time to write to her
ſiſter, and when ſhe does ſo far condeſcend, it is
with ſuch apparent careleſſneſs, coldneſs, and
diſtance, that the warm heart of Serena is chilled
by the peruſal of her letters; yet will I venture
to affirm Serena the happier woman of the
two.
I happened to mention one day the unmerited
treatment ſhe had received, not only from them,
but from her other relations; and mark, my dear
girls, the anſwer I received.
“Were I to ſay their unkindneſs did not give
me pain, I ſhould be guilty of falſehood, becauſe
I have that warm affection in my heart, which
expands it with brotherly love towards all my fellow
creatures, and never yet breathed a wiſh to
the diſadvantage of a ſingle individual. I mourn
their afflictions, and rejoice in their proſperity.
I am therefore, conſcious of not deſerving their
unkindneſs, and wrapt in the integrity of my own
heart, from my ſoul pity the boſom that can harbour
malice or ill will towards any one.”
Thus, my dear Miſs Winworths, you ſee how
much our own happineſs depends on our strenuously
cultivating ſuch philanthropy of temper as
may lead us to regard ourſelves but as ſecondary
[Page 072]
objects; the felicity we promote for others will
return with double force to our own boſoms, and
conſcious of having always regarded our fellow
creatures as ourſelves, we can look up with confidence
to that good providence who will never
forſake the children of obedience.
Adieu!
Your friend in ſincerity,
MENTORIA.
N. B. Soon after this laſt letter Lord Winworth was married to
Mrs. Clairville, and the young ladies conducting themſelves according
to the advice of their amiable friend, Mentoria, found in the new-made
Lady Winworth, every engaging quality that could be deſired,
to form the polite agreeable companion, the affectionate parent, and
ſincere friend. The correſpondence between Mentoria and her pupils
was continued for many years, but as the publication of the
whole would render this work too extenſive, beſides occaſion unnecessary
repetitions, I have ſelected only two more letters, with which
I ſhall cloſe the preſent collection; one addreſſed to Miſs Gertrude,
on her marriage, and a ſecond to the ſame lady, on the birth of a
daughter, written by her venerable friend, when ſhe was in the laſt
ſtage of a decline, and haſtily verging towards her place of reſt, to
which ſhe humbly looked forward with that ſweet confidence and heavenly
hope which ever elevates the ſoul of a departing Chriſtian.
[Page 073]
LETTER IX.
MENTORIA TO MISS G. WINWORTH.
I address myſelf ſingly to you, my dear
Gertrude, becauſe the delicacy of your present
ſituation demands my ſerious attention, and
calls up all my tenderneſs.
I am inexpreſſibly pleaſed to find you have
made choice of ſo worthy a man as Sir Arthur
Fitzgerald, and that your father approves the object
of your ſelection.
I think you have acted like a woman of ſenſe
and prudence, and I make no doubt but you will
preſerve the ſame propriety of conduct when a
wife, as has evidently characteriſed you while
ſingle.
I admire that real delicacy which impelled you
to give an immediate diſmiſſion to all thoſe pretenders
who ſolicited your hand without being
able to influence your heart in their favor. There
[Page 074]
cannot be a more deſpicable paſſion than that insatiable
thirſt for admiration, which leads a woman
to encourage indiſcriminately the forward
advances of every coxcomb, who ſhall pay them
the incenſe of flattery, and be continually spreading
their lures to attract adulation, however in
their hearts they may deſpiſe the perſon who offers
it.
I am ſenſible, my dear Gertrude will pardon
me, if anxious for her future happineſs, I venture
to give her my advice and opinion for the preservation
of her felicity in the married ſtate; it has
often been remarked, that a heart is much eaſier
gained than kept, and, believe me, it is a very
judicious obſervation.
There requires more care, attention, and solicitude,
from the wife to the huſband, than from
the miſtreſs to her adoring lover. The lover being
but ſeldom with you, ſees you only in part,
it is natural to ſuppoſe you would neither appear
before him in a ſlatternly dreſs, or with a peeviſh
aſpect. Your clothes will be always put on with
neatneſs, and your face dreſſed in ſmiles. On
the contrary, the huſband being always in your
company, has an opportunity of diſcovering every
little defect or blemiſh in your perſon, manners,
or diſpoſition, and the chief ſtudy of a wife ſhould
[Page 075]
be to guard againſt every thing that might create
diſtaſte, or excite diſguſt.
And in the firſt place let me recommend a moſt
ſcrupulous regard to delicacy and neatneſs.
Many young women fooliſhly imagine, as ſoon
as they are married, they have a right to understand
and laugh at an indelicate alluſion, but from
this fault, the native purity of your mind will, I
am certain, preſerve you, ſince nothing but extreme
ignorance or levity could lead any woman
to liſten with apparent pleaſure, to an improper
tale, or ill timed jeſt.
There are too many men, nay, even among
thoſe who call themſelves gentlemen, who will
not ſcruple to ſhock a woman's ears with conversation
of this kind; but the look of marked disapprobation
and ſilent contempt, will never fail to
ſilence them, unleſs they are either brutes or
fools, and to ſuch there is no fear of your being
expoſed.
The next thing is neatneſs in your perſon and
dreſs and an equanimity of temper to be preserved
towards your huſband, and your ſervants;—
nothing degrades a gentlewoman more than her
ſuffering her temper to be ſo far ruffled as to uſe
improper language to her dependants, nor can
[Page 076]
any thing be more diſguſting to a man of ſenſe
than to ſee his wife give way to ſudden ſtarts of
paſſion.
To every relation and friend of your huſband,
ſhew a polite attention and marked preference;
ſhew him, that to be related to, or eſteemed by
him, is a ſufficient claim upon your regard—
whatever be his errors, confine the knowledge
of them to your own boſom, and endeavour, by
the mildeſt perſuaſions, to lead him to the path
of rectitude. Diſcretion muſt direct you as to
the proper ſeaſon to offer your advice and opinions,
ſince men in general are ſo tenacious of their prerogative,
that they ſtart from every thing that
has the leaſt appearance of controul or opposition.
Never attempt to reſtrain his pleaſures;
if he ſhould be ſond of company, diſſipation and
expenſive amuſements, be it your ſtudy to detach
his mind from thoſe purſuits, by endeavouring
to render his home delightful, let your face be
ever arrayed in ſmiles at his approach, form a society
of thoſe he loves and eſteems moſt, exert
your various abilities to charm and entertain him,
and believe me, he who conſtantly meets chearfulness
and ſmiles at home, will ſeldom wiſh to
ſeek abroad for pleaſure.
Above all things never ſuffer any perſon to
ſpeak diſreſpectfully of him in your preſence, and
[Page 077]
guard your heart from the leaſt approach of jealousy;
ſhould there even be occaſion for suspicion,
be careful not to let him ſee you have discovered
his diſhonorable conduct, and never suffer
any one, more eſpecially a man , to hear you
complain.
Avoid reproaches, they in general increaſe rather
than alleviate the diſtreſs; if patient suffering
and the mild remonſtrance of an afflicted uncomplaining
ſpirit, will not work a reformation,
reproach and diſcontent will have no effect.
You muſt not be above attending to his intereſt
ſo far as may lead you to inſpect the expences of
your family; have ſtated and regular times for
examining your houſe-keeper's accounts, and being
ſatisfied that your trades-people are regularly
paid; and do not let trifles put you aſide from this
very neceſſary point.
Let your own expences be regulated by prudence
void of parſimony, and ſuffer not a paſſion
for finery, and a wiſh to eclipſe your acquaintance,
prompt you to overſtep your income, or
deprive you of the inexpreſſible pleaſure of relieving
indigent merit.
Though I would not have you ſacrifice too
largely at the ſhrine of that idol, faſhion, I would
[Page 078]
have you follow her ſo far as may make your appearance
alway deſerve the appellation of elegantly
neat; nor muſt you confine this appearance
only to your going abroad or receiving company
at home; though you were to be in the
country for months, and ſee none but your husband
and ſervants, never neglect the real necessary
duties of the toilet, it is a reſpect due to
him, it ſhews a wiſh to appear agreeable in his
eyes, and that you prefer his approbation to that
of all the world beſide.
There is one more circumſtance I muſt mention,
although a thorough knowledge of your disposition
renders it almoſt unneceſſary; yet I have
ſeen ſo many couples made inexpreſſibly miserable
by it, that I cannot reſiſt my inclination to
warn you of ſo dangerous a conduct.
Never permit any man, however clothed with
the maſk of friendſhip, to treat you with familiarity.
There are many freedoms, which to a
girl may be perfectly innocent, and yet become
almoſt crimes when offered to, or received by a
married woman.
A married woman ſhould never ſuffer a man
to entertain her in a ſtrain of gallantry, a preſſure
of the hand is an affront, and an attempt at a salute
(except where the nearneſs of the relation
[Page 079]
authoriſes ſuch a liberty) is, and ſhould be reſented
as an inſult.
There is a decent gravity of manner that will
at once excite admiration and reſpect, and yet exclude
all improper familiarity, nor can any thing
be more ridiculous, than to ſee the miſtreſs of a family,
perhaps the mother of four or five children,
affecting a giddy flirting carriage, that would be
hardly excuſable in a girl of ſixteen—it may, in
ſome inſtances, proceed from an innocent gaiety
of heart, but it hardly ever fails of degenerating
into levity and imprudence, always lays a woman
open to inſult, of which ſhe cannot complain,
becauſe ſhe evidently invited it; and too often
ends in the total loſs of honor, happineſs, and reputation.
Be chearful, condeſcending, and polite to
all, but let there ever be that dignity in your
manner which may keep impertinent fools , or designing
villains at a proper diſtance.
Pardon the length of this epiſtle, and believe
it proceeds from a friend who loves you. Remember
me affectionately to your dear ſiſters.—
Adieu, may every bleſſing be your portion here
and hereafter.
MENTORIA.
[Page 080]
LETTER X.
MENTORIA TO LADY FITZGERALD.
The news that you were ſafe in bed, and mother
to a daughter, my dear Gertrude, will,
believe me, give as much ſatisfaction to my heart,
as any ſublunary pleaſure poſſibly can; and,
weak as I am, tottering as it were on the very
brink of a vaſt eternity, I cannot reſiſt the deſire
I feel, of once more writing to my beloved pupils,
for in addreſſing Lady Fitzgerald, I ſuppoſe myself
alſo writing to her ſiſters.
But firſt a few words to yourſelf, in regard to
this dear, this precious little charge, with which
it has pleaſed heaven to entruſt you. May it ever
be impreſſed on your mind that the future happiness
or miſery of this child depends greatly
on the treatment ſhe receives during her puerile
years.
Let not a too great fondneſs prompt you, by
extreme indulgence, to enervate the faculties of
[Page 081]
her ſoul, or pervert her diſpoſition, and by ſo
doing render her totally unfit to bear the many
inconveniences and croſſes ſhe muſt neceſſarily
meet with in her paſſage through life.
And on the contrary, do not, by an ill-judged
ſeverity, drive her to mean ſubterfuges, falſhoods
and deceit, through fear of your anger.—Many
an amiable girl has been totally ruined by ſuch
treatment; it leads them to fear but not love their
parents, it prompts them to make companions of
their ſervants, and often ends in the entire perversion
of their principles.
Teach her to fear to diſoblige you, but let it be
through fear of loſing your affection, not from
the apprehenſion of puniſhment. Do not be too
anxious to have your child praiſed for an early
progreſs in her education; a young mind ſhould
not be loaded, it ſpoils the memory, and often
occaſions a diſlike to ſtudy in more advanced life;
beſides, children accuſtomed to hear themſelves
commended are apt to think themſelves sufficiently
wiſe and accompliſhed before their education
is well begun.
Do not encourage her in a love of finery, or
ſuffer her to be told ſhe is handſome, they
both be very pernicious to her future tranquillity.
[Page 082]
There is one thing which parents are very apt,
not only to do themſelves, but to ſuffer their servants
to do the ſame; that is, when any little
maſter viſits at the houſe nearly of miſs's age, ſhe
is told that he is her little huſband, and that ſhe
muſt hold up her head and behave like a woman,
or ſhe will never be married.
Thus is the idea of love and lovers introduced
into ther little hearts, before they are capable of
underſtanding what the word means.
This is, to me, the moſt fooliſh conduct in the
world, and nothing would offend me ſo ſoon, as
having ſuch ridiculous things ſaid to any child
in whoſe education and future proſpects I was any
ways concerned. Teach them the difference between
right and wrong, and convince their reason,
by pointing out the real way to promote their
own happineſs, and merit the regard and eſteem
of their friends.
Do not introduce your girl too early into public,
it will give her a taſte for diſſipation: in
proper time let her partake in moderation of all
the amuſements of the metropolis, ſo as to prevent
the bad effects of curioſity ungratified; but
at the ſame time accuſtom her to find reſources
within herſelf, that may, at all times, enable her
to baniſh that monſter Ennui .
[Page 083]
Truſt not the cultivation of her mental faculties,
or the forming of her moral character, to
any one but yourſelf; and as ſhe advances towards
womanhood make her your friend and companion:
let the diſtance between mother and daughter
be forgot, and by treating her with a degree
of confidence that flatters her ſelf-conſequence,
encourage her to make your boſom the repoſitory
of all her ſecrets, and be ready to apply to your
better jugment to direct all her actions.
I am certain there would not be half the imprudencies
committed by girls in general, if they were
not kept at ſuch an awful diſtance by their mothers;
that fearing either ridicule or reproof, they
dare not entruſt them with their little plans and
diſappointments, and relying either on the advice
of ſome one as inexperienced as themſelves,
or to the ſuggeſtions of their own ſimple hearts,
they involve themſelves in troubles, which endanger
their peace of mind and ruin their reputation,
but ſo it will ever be while mothers forget
they have ever been girls themſelves, and make
no allowance for the volatility of youth, and the
innocent impulſes of a heart unburthened by the
cares of the world.
I have written much more than I intended, but
the ſubject intereſted me, and there is yet another
which dwells ſtill nearer my heart, that is, my
[Page 084]
beloved Gertrude, the neceſſity there is of giving
your child a proper ſenſe of the high advantages
of early piety, but this muſt not be done by teaching
her to ſay long prayers, of which ſhe cannot
comprehend the meaning, or by making her read
books of dull theology.
It is example, my dear friend, muſt teach her
the true principles of the Chriſtian Religion; let
her ſee you in the act of devotion, let her curiosity
be awakened, and then, as you anſwer her
queſtions lead her by degrees to love, worſhip and
adore the Almighty giver of all good; convince
her of her dependence on his bounty for food,
raiment, and all the bleſſings of life; teach her to
place her whole confidence in his mercy, to receive
even the ſmalleſt bleſſing with gratitude, and
to bow under the heavieſt affliction with patience
and humility.
But above all things, mind that your example
does not contradict you precept. What confidence
can a child place in the religion of its parent,
when the parent lives in direct oppoſition to the
principles of that religion.
Oh! my dear friend, this is the one thing
needful! this the heavenly comforter, that supports
us through life, and will cheer us in the
hour of death!
[Page 085]
Our duty is plainly marked and ſo eaſy, that
when we do not perform it, we take more pains
to court miſery, than would ſuffice to make us
truly happy. What can be more eaſily comprehended
even by the meaneſt underſtanding.
“Do juſtly, love mercy, and walk humbly.”
“Love thy Creator above all things, and thy neigh
“bour as thyſelf! forgive as you hope to be forgiv
“en.” And remember, “ That with the ſame measure
you mete, the like ſhall be given to you again .”
My dear young friends, think me not too serious.
I am old, and ſinking to the grave, I am
convinced of the neceſſity of living well, if we
hope to die in peace; and ſolicitous for the welfare
of all dear to the family of Winworth. I
have exerted myſelf to write this, which you
may conſider as my laſt farewell.
God preſerve and bleſs you all, may peace
reign in your hearts, and true piety direct your
actions; may you ſo paſs through this tranſitory
life, as not to dread the approach of the meſſenger
that ſhall convey you to eternal reſt.
And when, at laſt, Death ſhall your frame deſtroy,
Die by ſome ſudden ſudden of joy;
Peaceful ſleep out the ſabbath of the tomb,
And wake to raptures in a life to come.
MENTORIA.
[Page 086]
ESSAY ON FEMALE EDUCATION.
It is much to be lamented, that in the preſent
mode of educating females, the uſeful is entirely
neglected, for the more ornamental and superficial
accompliſhments.
There was a time, when, if the daughter of
a reputable tradeſman could read and write good
Engliſh, handle her needle with neatneſs and
celerity, and underſtand both the theory and
practice of good houſewiſery, ſhe was thought
perfectly accompliſhed, and ſo indeed ſhe was
as thoſe qalifications rendered her capable of undertaking
the management of a family.
But in the preſent refined age, if an induſtrious
tradeſman can afford to give his daughter, five
hundred pounds, it is immediately ſettled by
Mamma, that Miſs muſt be genteelly educated.
Accordingly ſhe is at an early age ſent to a boarding-school,
where ſhe learns to jabber bad
French, and worſe Engliſh; the old-faſhion sampler,
and uſeful plain-work are neglected, and
ſhe is inſtructed how to work fillagree, make
[Page 087]
wafer work, daub ſattin, and work ill proportioned
figures in cloth, which in due time are curiouſly
mounted, and hung round to ornament the parlour
of the fond but ill judging parents.
Add to theſe accompliſhments the very fashionable
one of jingling the keys of the harpſichord,
with great velocity, though perhaps out of time
and out of tune.
Imagine Miſs juſt returned, at the age of seventeen,
her mind puffed up with vanity, and her
head well ſtored with ſenſibility, and all the
delicate feelings to be gleaned from a circulating
library, the contents of which the has eagerly
and indiſcriminately peruſed, without any one
taking the pains to direct her judgment or correct
her taſte.
We will ſuppoſe her lovely in her perſon, and
attractive in her manners, ſhe comes home, and
is idolized by her too partial mother, and ſpoken
of by her father with pride and exultation; but
alas! ſhe is too fine a lady to pay any attention
to the domeſtic concerns of the family.
In this fooliſh idea ſhe is indulged by the mother,
who thinks her dear girl's beauty, sensibility,
and accompliſhments, will undoubtedly obtain
her a match far ſuperior to her preſent ſtation,
[Page 088]
and ſhe will have no occaſion to be a good housewife.
But theſe ſanguine wiſhes are ſeldom if ever
realized, and we will ſuppoſe her married to a
man who is juſt entered into a genteel and improving
line of buſineſs; her friends think it a good
match, her fortune is an acquiſition to her huſband
and they enter the career of life with all the hopes
of permanent happineſs which peace and plenty
can inſpire.
But what a wretched figure does this elegant
accompliſhed girl make, as miſtreſs of a family;
her ſervants cheat and laugh at her, her acquaintance
blame her, and perhaps ſhe may incur even
the cenſure of her huſband, for paying no more
attention to matters which ſo nearly concern
his intereſt.
Has ſhe children, ſhe knows not how to make
or mend their clothes, ſhe is always ſurrounded
with difficulties, from which ſhe knows not how
to extricate herſelf, and aſhamed to confeſs her
ignorance to any one who could inſtruct her in the
point ſhe requires, ſhe becomes peeviſh and dissatisfied,
neglects even thoſe accompliſhments
which ſhe formerly ſtrove ſo hard to attain; becomes
negligent in her dreſs, careleſs in her manners,
and ſinks into a very blank in the creation.
[Page 089]
Her huſband diſappointed in not ſeeing that
order and regularity at home which he had once
fondly hoped, no longer finds any charms in her
ſociety, and ſeeks to forget his diſappointment
either in the bottle, or at the gaming table, both
equally deſtructive; and ſhe ſees inevitable ruin
approaching, without the ſmalleſt power to ward
off the blow.
Nor can the whole univerſe preſent us with an
object more truly deſerving our pity, than ſuch
a woman in a ſtate of penury! She is at a loſs
how to perform even the neceſſary duties of life,
ſhe cannot exert herſelf to obtain even a ſingle
meal for herſelf or children; ſhe pines in obscurity,
regretting her uſeleſs education, and wishes
that the ſums ſo expended, had been laid by
to encreaſe her fortune, and ſhe herſelf had been
only inſtructed in thoſe things, which would have
tended ultimately to render her a uſeful and respectable
member of ſociety.
But how widely different is the lot of the
happy girl, whoſe parents have, not only by
precept but example, implanted in her mind the
great neceſſity of rendering herſelf uſeful, before
the can be eſteemed valuable--who perfectly understands
how to manage her family, and regulate
her ſervants -- who to affability and chearfulness,
adds induſtry oeconomy and piety.
[Page 090]
Such a woman when ſhe marries, however
ſmall her fortune, brings to her huſband an inexhaustible
fund of treaſure. She is not aſhamed to
inveſtigate even the minuteſt concerns of her family;
her expences are regulated by the ſtricteſt
rules of frugality void of parſimony, with one
hand ſhe ſecures her huſband's intereſt, and with
the other diſpenſes to the ſons and daughters of
poverty, the overplus of thoſe bleſſings which
her own prudence has helped to ſecure to herſelf.
She is always ſtrictly neat in her apparel, but
entirely free from ſhew or finery; her whole
family is regular, uniform and decent, her servants
reſpect her, her huſband idolizes her, and
her children look up to her as their friend and
benefactreſs, from whoſe bright example they
may learn the road to happineſs.
Should even misfortune overtake her, ſhe is ſtill
chearful, ſtill unembarraſſed, without a murmur
ſhe condeſcends to perform even the meaneſt offices
for herſelf, her huſband, and children; ſhe
exerts her utmoſt abilities to retrieve the proſperity
they had unfortunately loſt, ſhe ſhares her husband's
care, and alleviates his concern -- and
ſhould their honeſt efforts to regain their former
ſtate of affluence fail, ſhe ſets down perfectly happy
in the reflection that ſhe had diſcharged, to
[Page 091]
the utmoſt of her power, the duties of that ſtation,
in which it pleaſed Heaven to place her.
Yet, think not I mean entirely to ſet aſide
thoſe accompliſhments, which when kept under
proper regulations, certainly tend to make the
female character more irreſiſtibly charming.
There are a certain claſs of women to whom
theſe accompliſhments are abſolutely neceſſary,
to their filling their reſpective characters with propriety.
A woman of independent fortune may with
ſafety indulge her taſte for muſic, drawing, &c.
but, in the name of common ſenſe, what has a
girl to do with the fine arts, who, perhaps, after
ſhe leaves ſchool, has neither time or opportunity
to purſue thoſe ſtudies, unleſs by ſo doing, ſhe
neglects ſome more uſeful employment.
I acknowledge that it is not impoſſible for the
uſeful and ornamental branches of education to be
combined; nay, that it is even natural for a woman
of ſenſe and diſcretion to endeavour to blend
them in ſuch a manner, as to render them only as
foils to each other, and the woman who ſtudies
to unite in herſelf, the attentive houſewife, the
good mother, affectionate wife, well-informed
companion, and accompliſhed woman, is
[Page 092]
certainly a character deſerving eſteem and veneration,
we look upon her almoſt as a being of a ſuperior
order, and ſhe is at once beloved, admired and
reſpected by both ſexes.
As ſo much of the happineſs of mankind depends
on the females connected in their families,
I have expatiated on the neceſſity of young women
being brought up in the practice of every
domeſtic virtue, more largely than I at firſt intended,
ſince not only the riſing generation, but
ages yet unborn ſhall venerate or execrate our
memories, according to the advice and example
we give our children.
If the daughters of the preſent age are ſuffered
to remain totally ignorant of the domeſtic regulations
neceſſary to be obſerved in every family,
what are we to expect in the next generation,
but that the ruin which has already begun to ſhew
itſelf in our moſt capital cities, will ſpread itſelf
all over the kingdom, and ſink it at laſt in one
univerſal ſtate of bankruptcy.
More, much more than we ſhould at firſt be
led to imagine, depends on the education of the
female world. What ruin, what inevitable desolation
may not an idle diſſipated woman bring
on thoſe who may unfortunately be attached to
her perſon.
[Page 093]
And on the contrary, how does a ſenſible,
virtuous, well-informed female, exalt and ennoble
the thoughts of all who converſe with her.
Were every parent of my opinion they would
firſt, by example, plant the ſeeds of genuine
worth in the breaſt of their daughters, and by the
tendereſt care and mildeſt precept, cultivate each
budding virtue, 'till they bloſſomed in full perfection,
then ornamenting them with the elegant
accompliſhments neceſſary to complete the female
character, render them at once the pride and glory
of their country.
[Page 094]
URGANDA AND FATIMA,
AN EASTERN TALE.
In one of the moſt beautiful vallies that lies upon
the borders of the Eaſt lived Zegdad, an inoffensive
ſhepherd. He had but one child, and having
been early deprived of his wife, he laviſhed
his whole ſtock of tenderneſs on Fatima.
Though fortune had not been laviſh of her gifts
to the father ofFatima, yet he wanted not the necessaries
or comforts of life--his cottage was clean,
and furniſhed with every thing uſeful; his fields
ſupplied them with food; his flock with raiment.
Fatima was coarſe in her perſon, but ſhe was
chearfull and good-natured--ſhe roſe each morn
with the ſeathered ſongſters, and chearfully performed
the duties of her ſtation; her whole ſtudy
was to pleaſe her father, and a ſmile from Zegdad
was at any time, ample recompence for the
ſevereſt ſatigue, and like a cordial ſerved to revive
her drooping ſpirits. She would aſſiſt, unaſked,
in the moſt laborious employments, and when
the labour of the day was paſt, ſhe would lightly
[Page 095]
trip over the green turf, with her young companions,
while her father played on the flagelet. The
mind of Fatima was calm as the delights of Paradise.
One day her father ſent her to the grand Vizier's,
with fruit for his favorite--ſhe was conducted
by an eunuch into the garden, where the beautiful
Semira was repoſing on a bed of roſes, clad in
all the pomp of eaſtern magnificence, while two
ſlaves were fanning her to reſt.
Fatima had never before ſeen aught but simplicity--she
was filled with wonder and aſtoniſhment
at the ſurpriſing beauty and grandeur of Semira,
and as ſhe gazed, envy and diſcontent crept into
her hitherto guileleſs heart.
She returned home with a mind totally altered
to what it was. Her rural paſtimes no more deligted
her--labour was now a trouble -- ſhe had
been awitneſs to the caſe and indolence of Semira.
If at any time ſhe caught a glimpſe of her perſon in
the ſtream, ſhe turned from it with diſguſt. Her
days were joyleſs, and her nights ſpent in bewailing
her unhappy lot.
One evening, deaf to the ſolicitations of her
young companions, ſhe retired to a thick grove,
[Page 096]
and inattentive to the ſound of the flagelet, thus
gave vent to her ſorrow.
Oh! wretched Fatima, unhappy maid! Why
was I born to know ſo hard a fate--to eat the bread
of labour, to ſleep upon a ruſhy couch, while
Semira is ſurrounded with ſplendor, is ſerved by
kneeling ſlaves, and ſleeps on a bed of down!
Why has nature denied me thoſe raviſhing beauties,
it has ſo bountifully laviſhed on her, her
eyes are bright as the ſtars, her lips like half
blown roſes, her hand and arm like poliſhed ivory.
Oh! why was I not lovely as Semira, and favorite
to the grand Vizier--in this low abject ſtate my
being is intolerable, I will no longer endure it
but in yon limpid ſtream loſe the remembrance of
myſelf and Semira.
At this moment the Fairy Urganda ſtood before
her.
“Thy complaints are juſt, Oh! Fatima (ſaid
ſhe) and if thou wilt relinquiſh thy home, and
forſake thy father, thou ſhalt enjoy the utmoſt
extent of thy wiſhes.”
Fatima eagerly complied with the offered terms
and the Fairy immediately ſprinkled her with water
at the ſame time ſome myſtic words,
[Page 097]
when ſhe was transformed into a virgin of transcendent
beauty, and found herſelf in the garden
of a palace belonging to the grand Vizier.
The lovely Semira had the day before offended
her Lord, and was no longer a favorite. Fatima
attracted the notice of the Vizier--he ordered her
to be led into ſplendid apartments, clothed with
coſtly robes, adorned with jewels, and appointed
ſlaves to wait on her, and comply with all her
wiſhes--and Fatima ſupplied the place of the degraded
Semira.
She now thought herſelf the happieſt among
the happy; but the Vizier was paſſionate, capricious,
jealous, and extremely cruel, and it was
not long before the diſappointed Fatima diſcovered
that to be favorite to the grand Vizier, was to live
only in ſplendid ſlavery.
“But though (ſaid ſhe often to herſelf) though
the grand Vizier's favorite is miſerable, how
ſuperlatively happy muſt be the favorite Sultana
of my Lord the Emperor! Oh! could I but attain
that envied ſtation, how ſoon ſhould the imperious
Vizier ſuffer for his barbarity to me.”
Again did the boſom of Fatima ſuffer all the
miſeries of diſcontent--the vaulted roofs, spacious
gardens, and rich preſents of the Vizier, no
[Page 098]
longer charmed her. She fighed for the enſigns
of royalty, and her pillow was nightly bedewed
with her tears.
One evening ſhe retired to an arbour, at the extremity
of the garden, and throwing herſelf on
the banks where ſhe had firſt ſeen Semira, thus
poured ſorth her complaints.
“How wretched is the fate of Fatima—
condemned to drag a hated being with a man who
ſtudies only his own gratification, and expects
me to be the ſlave of his caprice and paſſion. Oh!
could I but get from this deteſted place, I would
fly to my Lord the Emperor, and bow my ſelf low
in the duſt before him. My charms might captivate
his royal heart, and I might reign the Empreſs of
the Eaſt.”
As ſhe ſpoke theſe words, a ſudden light entered
the arbour, and the Fairy Urganda again ſtood
before her.
“Beautiful Fatima, ſaid ſhe, forbear your complaints,
the prophet permits you to enjoy your
wiſh, then riſe and follow me.”
The Fairy led her to the Emperor's palace, and
placed her among a number of beautiful ſlaves,
[Page 099]
from among which the Emperor was next morning
to chuſe a favorite.
In the morning the Emperor paſſed through the
apartment, and his choice fell on Fatima. She
was cloathed in the enfigns of royalty, led in
ſtate to the moſque, and in a few hours heard herself
proclaimed Empreſs of the Eaſt.
But Fatima had, to the idea of royalty, annexed
the ideas of youth and beauty, how ſurpriſed
was ſhe then to find the Emperor, old, ugly, and
deformed in his perſon, moroſe in his diſpoſition,
and jealous in the extreme—ſhe ſhrunk from
his embraces with horror, and contracted ſo settled
an averſion to him, that not all the ſplendor
that awaited her could in the ſmalleſt degree compensate
for the many tedious hours ſhe was obliged
to devote to him.
Among the ſlaves that attended on Fatima, was
the artful Zynina, who had long, with envious
eyes, beheld the love of the Emperor beſtowed on
others, and only watched an opportunity to ingratiate
herſelf in his favor, by rendering him ſome
piece of ſervice. To this end ſhe cultivated the
friendſhip of the new Queen, and by degrees
drew from her the reaſon of her tears and dejection.
[Page 100]
This intelligence was inſtantly conveyed to the
Emperor, with the addition of Fatima's heart being
dedicated to another. Oſmin willing to be
convinced of the truth of Zynina's declaration,
deſired to be concealed in an apartment adjoining
the Queen's, where he might eaſily overhear any
thing that paſſed between her and the deceitful
ſlave, who immediately returned to her miſtreſs,
and artfully renewed the converſation.
Fatima, glad to unburthen her almoſt burſting
heart, confeſſed her ſettled averſion to her Lord,
and that death itſelf would be preferable to her
preſent ſituation. “Then death be thy portion,”
cried the enraged Emperor, ſuriouſly ruſhing into
the apartment, and lifting his glittering ſcimitar.
Fatima fell upon her knees, and, in an agony
of terror exclaimed, “O that I was an humble cottager,
and had never known the pangs that wait
on greatneſs.”
At that moment ſhe found herſelf clad in her
ſormer homely apparel, ſtanding at the door of
her father's cottage, when the Fairy appeared
and thus addreſſed her.
“Fatima, I have ſhewn you the vanity of human
wiſhes, learn from hence to be content with the
allotments of Providence, Whatever be your
[Page 101]
stiuation in life, ſubmit to it without repining, and
know that our holy Prophet, who ordereth all
things in this terreſtrial world knoweth what is
beſt for mortals: Fulfil therefore the reſpective
duties of thy ſtation, to the utmoſt of thy power:
envy not the ſuperior lot of another, but humbly
take the bleſſings within thy reach, enjoy them
and be happy.
THE
INCENDIARY. Among the many evils that eſcaped from Pandora's
box, to infeſt and plague mankind, I
know of none that has done more miſchief than
envy.
Good heavens! how depraved muſt be the heart
that is pained by the proſperity, merit, or beauty
of another, or rejoices in their debaſement.
Methinks, when I look round the world, I am
ready to hail each member of ſociety as my brother
or ſiſter, I rejoice in their ſucceſs, acknowledge
their merit, admire their beauty, lament their
misfortunes, and ſhed the tear of ſincere compassion
over their vices. I would not a heart
abſorbed in ſelfiſh views for the univerſe.
[Page 102]
The man who lives only for himſelf, is, in my
opinion, a monſter of ingratitude; his life is one
continued blank, except marked by ſome act of
inhumanity. If we muſt that day loſt in
which we perform no good action, what muſt we
think of a life paſſed in a continued ſeries of ſtupid
inattention to the diſtreſſes or injuries of our fellow
creatures.
Hail! heaven-born charity! bright resplendent
virtue; whoſe dazzling rays hide from the
accuſing angel multitudes of offences, bleſſed is
the heart thou doſt inhabit, happy is the man
whoſe actions are guided by thee.
By charity I do not mean the merely ſharing
with thoſe that need the ſuperabundant gifts of
fortune, though ' tis certainly our duty to alleviate
the misfortunes of others, yet by ſo doing we
do not fully diſcharge the duties of chriſtianity.
Charity is that benevolence of heart, that meekness
of ſpirit, which leads us to judge favorably
of the actions of others, never to propagate a ſtory
to the injury of a neighbour's character, but to
ſtand forward the champion of innocence, and to
defend thoſe, whom envy, malice, or revenge,
have aſperſed. Conſcious of its own rectitude,
ſuſpects not the integrity of another; ever ready
to the balm of conſolation into the heart
wounded by ſorrow; envies no perſon's ſuperior
[Page 103]
lot, but takes the portion aſſigned by providence,
with gratitude, uſes it with prudence, and gives
the overplus to the ſons and daughters of poverty,
looks round the world with a ſmile of complacency,
and wiſhes every boſom as tranquil as its own.
Yet there are people in the world whoſe chief
pleaſure conſiſts in villifying and aſperſing the
characters even of their beſt friends, and ſorry I
am to ſay, thoſe characters are too frequently
found among the fair ſex. Would they but consider,
that while depreſſing the merits of another,
they do not increaſe their own, but rather attract
notice, and lead their acquaintance narrowly to
the conduct of a woman, who is ſo severe
upon their errors, it would certainly,
meaſure, ſtop the unbounded licence they give
their tongues.
I do not know a more hateful character than Hecatissa,
ſhe has indulged this evil propenſity 'till it
has become a part of her nature, and ſhe could no
more entertain you for a few hours without a tale
of ſcandal than ſhe could walk over the surface
of the ocean. Many is the feeling heart
ſhe has wounded, many a breach of friendſhip
has taken its riſe from her malevolent tongue
ſhe cares not how dear the ties ſhe endeavours to
break, ſhe will ſow between father and
child, brother and ſiſter, huſband and wife, and
[Page 104]
exult in the miſery ſhe occaſions; under the fairest
ſemblance of friendſhip, ſhe will ſteal upon
the unſuſpecting heart, and after being treated
with unbounded confidence, like the ungrateful
ſerpent, ſting the breaſt that harbours her!
She was, when very young, by the treachery
of a near relation, thrown into a diſtreſſing situation,
from which the bounty and generoſity of a
widow lady relieved her; not ſatisfied with merely
adminiſtering to her preſent wants, ſhe took her
into her family, and made her companion to her
daughter.
The innocent Anna conceived a ſincere friendship
for her, and for many years they lived like
ſiſters; innumerable were the favours heaped on
Hecatiſſa, who remained with the family; till a
worthy man, attracted by her perſon and ſpecious
manner, made honorable propoſals and married
her.
Hecatiſſa might now have been the happieſt
woman breathing--her huſband was generous,
humane, friendly, and good-natured to exceſs.
He preſented her to his family, who received her
cordially, and the poor eaſy good man thought he
had inſured his own ſelicity, but Hecatiſſa ſoon
ſhone forth in her own proper character.
[Page 105]
She planted diſſention in her huſband's family,
aſſumed an unbecoming authority over all his
actions, and by her artful aſcendancy contracted
his heart, and made him treat with diſreſpect the
very family who had ſheltered her unprotected
youth! Her vile inſinuations were aimed at the
character of Anna, nor was ſhe the only object
of her malice; every woman who poſſeſſed superior
endowments of perſon or mind, was to
her a fit ſubject for ſlander. She wiſhed no perſon
to be more fortunate or happy than herſelf, ſhe listened
to every malicious tale with avidity, repeated
them with pleaſure, and aggravated every circumstance
which had the leaſt appearance of vice or folly.
She would ſtoop to ſuch meanneſs, that rather
than not compaſs a favorite point, ſhe would tamper
with ſervants, to obtain the ſecrets of a family.
She was once on a viſit at the houſe of Serena,
ſhe found her beloved by her ſervants, reſpected
by her friends, and tenderly eſteemed by her husband.
Vexed to ſee how ſuperior ſhe was in every
reſpect to herſelf, ſhe eagerly watched for ſome
opportunity to leſſen her merit. She wreſted the
moſt innocent and even laudable actions into guilt,
ſhe poiſoned the minds of her ſervants, and traduced
her reputation aſſuming the appearance of humility
and virtue, ſhe endeavoured to throw on
Serena the odium of every vice which deformed
her own character.
[Page 106]
But Serena was not long inveloped in the cloud
Hecatiſſa had ſpread over her; ſhe continued in
the regular diſcharge of the duties of her ſtation,
paid no regard to the malicious ſlanders ſhe daily
heard, but, pitying the woman who could ſo far
forget truth and juſtice as to blacken the character
of one ſhe proſeſſed a friendſhip for, treated her
with the ſilent contempt her conduct merited.
No ſenſible perſon will ſcruple to affirm that Hecatissa
is miſerable. Hated and deſpiſed by all her
acquaintance, her ſociety is ſhunned like the pestilence;
and though by her conſummate art ſhe ſtill
impoſes upon her huſband, and retains his affection,
her diſcontent and ill-nature prevent her reaping
any pleaſure in his company; ſhe is jealous,
peeviſh and uneaſy; in ſhort ſhe has ſuch a legion of
torments in her own boſom, that ſhe often applies
to a comforting cordial to raiſe her depreſſed ſpirits.
However deſpicable the character of Hecatiſſa
may appear that of Prudelia is equally ſo. Prudelia
is a woman who pays the niceſt regard to propriety
and decorum, ſhe is ever prying into her neighbour's
conduct, and if their actions do not exactly
agree with her ſcrupulous notions of rectitude, ſhe
heſitates not to conclude them abandoned and loſt
to every ſenſe of virtue.
[Page 107]
Albert and Julia had been married near four
years, during which time they had lived in mutual
love and confidence, when their ill-fortune took
them to live in the ſame ſtreet with Prudelia. Albert
followed the ſea, of conſequence Julia was often
left for months together the guardian of her honor,
the miſtreſs of her own actions. She was lively
in her diſpoſition, but her heart was the ſeat of pure
innocence.
Albert was gone his accuſtomed voyage, when
Prudelia undertook to ſcrutinize the conduct of
Julia.
Prudelia had viſited her, ſhe had been a witneſs to
the innocent gaiety of her temper, ſhe had even
pretended to admire her vivacity and good-humor,
but ſhe whiſpered among her friends, that ſhe
thought it was highly improper for a young woman
like her, whoſe huſband was from home, to
receive ſo much company, or be ſo frequent in her
viſits abroad. She watched every movement of Julia,
was informed of all her viſitors names, knew what
time they came and went and even what hours ſhe
retired to reſt and aroſe.
Julia was a woman of nice feelings, ſhe was tenacious
of honor; and the bare idea of that honor being
ſuſpected was extremely painful to her. She was
uneaſy at the watchful eye Prudelia kept upon her
[Page 108]
actions, not that ſhe feared to have them ſrcutinized,
but becauſe ſhe did not think herſelf obliged to be
accountable for her conduct to any perſon but her
huſband. She therefore grew diſtant and reſerved,
and whenever Prudelia called on her, gave little
or no anſwer to her many artful queſtions concerning
where ſhe had been, or how ſhe had ſpent her
time.
About this time a brother of Julia's failed in business,
he retired to a houſe in the environs of West-minster,
to avoid the importunity of his creditors.
Julia was tenderly attached to her brother, ſhe
exerted every power to ſerve his diſtreſſed family,
and even parted with her plate, and ſome other
valuables, to raiſe money to ſupply the preſent
exigence.
The attorney who had the care of ſettling her
brother's affairs, was frequently with her for an
hour or two together, and often ſhe went away with
him in a coach, and was abſent for ſeveral days, as
the buſineſs which employed ſo large a ſhare of her
time, required ſecreſy, ſhe never mentioned it to
Prudelia, nor did ſhe when going out ever tell the
ſervant where ſhe was to be found.
One morning the attorney had breakfaſted with
her and ſhe was gone with him to her brother,
[Page 109]
when Albert unexpectedly returned. The ſervant
could give no account where her miſtreſs was, and
Prudelia who had ſeen him return, came over to
invite him to dine with her family.
I am ſorry my Julia is from home, ſaid he, but
there was no poſſibility of her thinking to ſee me to
day, as I am returned at leaſt ſix weeks before the
time appointed.
Why yes, replied Prudelia, with a ſignificant
look, I fancy you will be a very unexpected gueſt.
It will be an agreeable ſurprize though, ſaid
Albert.
Perhaps ſo, ſaid, Prudelia ſmiling, contemptnously.
The ſmile, the ſignificant look, alarmed Albert,
have you any reaſon to think otherways, madam,
ſaid he? Surely Julia will be pleaſed with my
return.
Oh! moſt certainly ſhe will, replied ſhe, ſmiling
again; but, no doubt, ſhe would have liked a little
more warning of your arrival.
By heavens, madam, ſaid Albert, your words
diſtreſs me beyond meaſure, you cannot mean to
glance an aſperſion at the character of Julia, and
[Page 110]
yet what other motive can you have for thoſe contemptuous
ſmiles. Tell me, dear madam, the meaning
of theſe ambiguous looks; but hold, if it is
any thing to Julia's diſadvantage I ſhall not believe
it though uttered by an angel.
Indeed, Sir, (ſaid Prudelia, aſſuming a ſerious
countenance, in which was blended a mixture of
pity and anger) far be it from me to injure the
reputation of any woman, or ever interfere between
man and wife, you are united for life, and 'tis
therefore your duty to bear with each others foibles,
as well as you can.
My Julia has no foibles, replied Albert, or if
ſhe has I never diſcovered them.
I do not pretend to ſay ſhe has, my good friend,
but I wiſh ſhe would come home.
Albert joined the wiſh, and the day paſſed on
without much farther converſation.
As the evening advanced he grew uneaſy, and
when the clock ſtruck ten, he exclaimed impatiently,
where can ſhe be?
Patience, my good Sir, ſaid the artful Prudelia,
you may not perhaps ſee her theſe two or
three hours.
Julia was not uſed to keep ſuch late hours, ſaid
he penſively.
[Page 111]
Oh! that is nothing, new connections form
new manners; ſhe is never home much earlier, nay,
'tis very likely ſhe may not be at home to night.
You ſeem to be aiming at ſomething, madam,
ſaid Albert, for heaven's ſake ſpeak out, and deliver
me from this torture of ſuſpence.
This was the favourable moment for the vile incendiary--she
prefaced her ſcandalous tale, with
the ſorrow ſhe felt at being obliged to give his
worthy heart ſo much pain, ſaid, had Julia returned
in any tolerable time, ſhe would have kept
the affair to herſelf, but as ſhe found he already
began to ſuſpect ſomething was amiſs, ſhe thought
it was beſt he ſhould be informed of the whole, that
he might take his meaſures accordingly.
She then informed him, that during his abſcence
Julia's extravagance had known no bounds—
that ſhe had paid no regard to her reputation---received
the conſtant viſits of one particular gentleman,
and made frequent excurſions into the country
with him, where ſhe ſtaid for ſeveral days, that
to ſupply her extravagance and that of her paramour,
ſhe had parted with her watch, plate, and other
valuables; and concluded with ſaying, her
heart bled to think ſo worthy a man ſhould be united
to a woman who knew ſo little how to value
her good fortune.
[Page 112]
Albert liſtened with every mark of horror and
aſtoniſhment, at length(ſtarting from his ſeat and
ſtamping his foot with vehemence)he cried, `tis
every ſyllable as falſe as hell, my Julia can never
have betrayed the honor I truſted to her care, or
abuſed the confidence I repoſed in her.
'Tis well, Sir, replied Prudelia, with a look
of offended pride, you doubt my veracity, however
you will find the whole neighbourhood are
acquainted with her errors, as well as I am, nay
call your own ſervant, ſhe can aſſert the truth of
what I ſay.
The ſervant was called, ſhe confirmed the infamous
tale, and Albert vowed to be revenged on
his innocent wife.
Prudelia had judged rightly, Julia did not return
that night, and though Albert went home,
and retired to his apartment, he never attempted
to lye down, but traverſed the room in the utmoſt
agitation of ſpirits during the whole night.
In the mean time Julia was enjoying, with her
brother's family, the moſt exquiſite ſatisfaction.
His failure was occaſioned by remittances not arriving
in proper time for him to make good ſome
obligations he had entered into, the money Julia
had raiſed for him, had prevented immediate
[Page 113]
bankruptcy, and that day ſeveral ſhips had arrived
with remittances, which would again enable
him to appear among his friends with credit.
The whole family were together at his lodgings,
and a ſmile of tranquillity ſat on every countenance.—
How very happy I ſhould be, ſaid Julia,
looking round her, if my Albert was joined in
this loved company, I ſhould then, at one view,
behold all that is moſt dear to me on earth.
When ſupper was over, the evening was far
advanced, Julia propoſed ſtaying with them all
night, and walking home in the cool of the morning.
She retired to reſt with a heart lightened of its
cares, offered up a prayer for her Albert's safety,
and ſunk into an undiſturbed ſlumber, little
thinking the miſeries that awaited her in the morning.
At ſix o'clock ſhe aroſe, and kiſſing her little
ſleeping niece, who had been her bed-fellow,
ſtole ſoftly down ſtairs, and walked leiſurely towards
home, enjoying the freſhneſs of the morning,
as ſhe walked thro' the park, and contemplating
on the happy change in her brother's affairs.
[Page 114]
It was near eight o'clock when ſhe arrived at
her own door. My maſter is come home, madam,
ſaid the maid, as ſhe opened it.
Home, cried Julia, in an accent of joyful surprize,
and running eagerly up ſtairs, opened the
door of his apartment, and would have thrown
herſelf into his arms, but he puſhed her from him
with violence, and cried by heavens, this affected
joy ſhall not cover your guilt; then looking at
her ſternly, he added, how have you paſſed this
night, degenerate ungrateful Julia?
Julia had never been addreſſed by Albert before
but in a voice of the moſt ſoothing tenderneſs.
She ſtaggered to the neareſt chair, and faintly
exclaiming, what a horrid change is this, and
burſt into a violent flood of tears.
Albert had never ſeen his Julia weep before,
but his heart wept with her, but he now took her
ſurprize for a token of guilt, and imputed her
tears to the effects of art. He therefore regarded
them not, but walked about the room in ſullen
ſilence.
Oh! heavens, ſaid Julia, what have I done to
deſerve this; tell me, Albert, how have I forfeited
your affection?
[Page 115]
By betraying my honor, ſaid he fiercely, by
becoming an abandoned wanton.
Heaven is my witneſs, I have done neither,
ſaid ſhe, ſinking on her knees, Oh! Albert, kill
me inſtantly, but do not ſuſpect my fidelity. I
will bleſs you with my laſt breath, and dying, declare,
I never entertained even a thought to the
prejudice of your honor, or the purity of the affection
I bear to you.
Curſed diſſembler, ſaid the enraged Albert,
and he ſpurned her from him with his foot. She
ſhrieked and fell, her head ſtruck the bed-poſt,
and the blood guſhed in a torrent from her forehead.
Merciful heaven, cried he, I have murdered
her. He caught her from the ground, but found
neither ſenſe nor breath remained. Frantic, he
rang the bell for a ſervant, and ſent for immediate
aſſiſtance.
A ſurgeon examined her head, the ſkull was
fractured. After the wound was dreſſed ſhe opened
her eyes, and fixed them upon her huſband.
Albert, ſaid ſhe, I know not who has poisoned
your mind, or how you could ſuſpect the fidelity
of Julia. Believe me, I am innocent, in my
[Page 116]
cabinet you will find papers, that will unravel
any ſeeming myſtery in my late conduct. I die,
but dying bleſs you, for all your kindneſs to me.
Ah! my love, 'tis not the wound I received on
my head, but that which you inflicted on my heart,
that terminates my exiſtence! I loved you too
well, Albert, to feel the privation of your affetion
and live; my heart unprepared to meet your
unkindneſs ſunk under it, ſtruggled and broke.
She attempted to throw her arms round his
neck, but nature was exhauſted; ſhe could only
ſay, Oh! bleſs him heaven — and her ſpirit took
its flight to the regions of eternal day.
Albert's diſtreſs was too great for deſcription,
when he found he had by his blind paſſion, terminated
the exiſtence of an innocent, valuable woman,
whom he loved with the moſt ſervent affection.
A deep melancholy ſeized him, nor could
all the attentions of his friends rouſe him from the
torpid ſtupor he had ſunk into, he grew worſe
and worſe, and ended his days in a mad-houſe.
As there are too many Prudelia's in the world,
we cannot be too cautious how we believe a malevolent
aſſertion, or give way to ſuſpicion and jealousy.
N.B The Two laſt Tales have formerly appeared in a .
FINIS.
Back matter
[Page ]
BOOKS
PRINTED FOR, AND SOLD BY
ROBERT CAMPBELL, Bookſeller,
No. 54, South Second-street.
The Philoſophy of Natural Hiſtory, by William Smellie, Member
of the Antiquarian and Royal Societies of Edinburgh, 8vo.
The Conductor Generalis; or the Office, Duty and Authority of
Juſtices of the Peace, High-ſheriffs, Under-ſheriffs, Coroners,
Conſtables, Gaolers, Jurymen, and Overſeers of the Poor. As
alſo the Office of Clerks of Affize and of the Peace, &c. To which
are added, the Exciſe and Military Laws of the United States;
and the Act called the Ten Pound Act, of the States of Pennsylvania
and New-York, 8vo.
The New Art of Cookery, according to the preſent practice—
conſiſting of Thirty-eight Chapters; by Richard Briggs, many
years Cook at the Globe-tavern, Fleet-ſtreet, the White Heart,
Holborn, and now at the Temple Coffee-houſe, London, 12mo.
A Simple Story, by Mrs. Inchbald; .
The Life of Baron Frederick Trenck; containing his Adventures,
his cruel and exceſſive Sufferings, during Ten Years Imprisonment
at the Fortreſs of Magdeburg, by command of the late
King of ; alſo Anecdotes, Hiſtorical, Political, and Personal.
To which are now added, his late Adventures in
France, 12mo.
The Beauties of Hervey; or, Deſcriptive, Pictureſque, and Instructive
Paſſages, ſelected from the works of this deſervedly admired
author. To which are now added, Memoirs of the Author's
Life and Character; with an Elegiac Poem on his Death,
12mo,
[Page ]
The Riſe and Progreſs of Religion in the Soul: Illuſtrated in a
courſe of ſerious and practical addreſſes, ſuited to perſons of
every character and circumſtance. With a devout Meditation
and Prayer, added to each Chapter. To which are added, a
Funeral Sermon, on the One Thing Needful . By Philip Doddridge,
D. D. 12mo.
The Fool of Quality; or, the Hiſtory of Henry, Earl of Moreland,
3 vols. 12mo. By Henry Brooke.
Pike and Hayward's Caſes of Conſcience.
Sermons on important Subjects, by the Reverend Samuel Davies,
A. M. late Preſident of the College of New-Jerſey, 2 vols. 8vo.
Blair's Sermons, 3 vols. containing the ſame as the Britiſh Edition
in 4 vols. Three Dollars.
Same Book, Vol. 3d. being the 4th vol. of the Britiſh Edition,
One Dollar.
The Weſtminſter Aſſembly's Shorter chatechiſm, explained by way
of queſtion and anſwer, by and Fiſher, 80 cents.
Meditations and Contemplations containing Meditations among
the Tombs: Reflections on a Flower Garden: contemplations
on the Night: Contemplations on the Starry Heavezs; and a
Winter Piece. 80 cents.
R. CAMPBELL,
Has for Sale, a General Aſſortment of BOOKS, in all the different
Departments of Literature. Alſo a complete Aſſortment of
STATIONARY, which will be ſold, either by wholeſale or retail,
on the loweſt terms.
$$$
