Modern Chivalry: Containing the Adventures of Captain John Farrago, and Teague O'Regan, His Servant, Volume IV (1792)
Author: Brackenridge, Hugh Henry.
Publication info: Modern Chivalry: Containing the Adventures Of Captain John Farrago, and Teague O'regan, His Servant, Volume IV . 005-160. Philadelphia: John M'Culloch, 1792.

17921792 Front matter Covers, Edges and Spine
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
Preliminaries
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
Halftitle MODERN CHIVALRY:
VOL. IV .
[Page ]
[Page ]
Title Page
Modern Chivalry:
CONTAINING THE
ADVENTURES
OF
Captain John Farrago,
AND
TEAGUE O'REGAN,
HIS SERVANT.
VOLUME IV.
By H. H. BRACKENRIDGE.
Quicqud agunt homines, nostri, farrago libelli .
Juvenal .
PHILADELPHIA:
M,DCC,XCVII.
[ Entered according to Act of Congreſs .]
Section
[Page ]
[Page 005]
MODERN CHIVALRY.
A Chapter to be referred to the third Volume,
at the Concluſion. Not withſtanding the fairy ſcene of
imagination with reſpect to the advancement
of Teague, in which the Captain
had ſuffered himſelf to be engaged;
yet ſometimes he would begin to doubt
with regard to the reality of the proſpects,
and to queſtion whether, after all, it was
probable that the executive of the United
States would think him adequate to the
diſcharge of judicial or miniſterial functions,
and appoint him accordingly. Ruminating
one day on this ſubject, a ſervant
preſented a billet: It was from the President
of the United States, expreſſing a desire
to ſee the Captain, and to converſe
with him relative to the appointment of the
young man in his ſervice, of the name of
Teague O'Regan, to ſome office in the government.
Nothing could be more opportune:
for the Captain at that moment,
weary
[Page 006]
weary of his charge, and diſpairing of success,
was juſt about to re inquiſh all further
proſecution of his object, and to remand
Teague to his boot-cleaning and
horſe currying as formerly. It may eaſily
be ſuppoſed that he loſt no time in having
his coat and hat bruſhed, and ſetting out
to wait on his excellency. Preſenting
himſelf, he was aſked to fit down; and the
converſation opening on the ſubject of
Teague, and his qualifications for office.
The Captain not willing to be the means of
deception in the introduction of his valet,
thought proper to deal candidly with his
excellency, and to give him an exact account
of the education and hiſtory of the
bog-trotter; that if, on a full view of his
character, he ſhould think proper to appoint
him, the reſponſibility might lie with
himſelf. For to be candid, faid the Captain,
I ſhould doubt the expediency of appointing
him, in the firſt inſtance, to any of
the higher offices of government. Such as
Secretary of State, or even that of Secretary
at War; though, I preſume, requiring
leſs talents than the former: The buſineſs
of a ſoldier lying more in the heart than
the head. As to Secretary of the Treaſury,
ſhould bar that altogether; as it might be
unſafe
[Page 007]
unſafe all at once to truſt him with too
much money, until he had given greater
proofs of fidelity in this particular, than
thoſe of his nation and rank are uſually
found to poſſeſs. The diplomatic line
might ſuit him beſt, were it not that the
ſending him off the continent will put him
out of the way of that ſuperintendence
which for ſome time I myſelf am willing
to take of him, until he ſhall have acquired
habits of diligence, and principles of integrity
in buſineſs. The Preſident ſmiled,
doubtleſs at the idea of the Sans Cullotte
(for ſuch I figuratively call him, becauſe he
had now got on breeches,) being at all in
the way of appointment to ſuch truſts; for
a thought of the kind had never come into
his mind. He was thinking of an office of
much leſs dignity, and which came nearer
to the capacity and grade of ordinary education.
It was that of an exciſe officer.
Having mentioned this, the Captain approved
of it, and thanked his excellency, and
took his leave.
Teague having received his commiſſion,
was elated beyond meaſure, and impatient
to fet out to his diſtrict, in order to enter
on the functions of his office. The
Captain having purchaſed him a horſe, for
he
[Page 008]
refuſed to bog-trot any longer, the revenue
officer took leave of his old maſter,
who had previouſly given him much good
advice with regard to duty in office, and
promiſed to follow him, as ſoon as he could
provide himſelf with another ſervant, that
he might be on the ſpot to give him countenance,
and aſſiſt him occaſionally, with
ſuch farther leſſons of prudence and morality,
as his experience in life might enable
him to give, and which it could not be
unbecoming in one of his age, however
dignified by office, to receive.BOOK
Main text
[Page 009]
BOOK I. CHAP. I. TEAGUE having thus departed, it became
the Captain to look out for another
ſervant; and deliberating on this subject,
Mr. M`Donald the Scotch gentleman,
of whom we have before ſpoken, happening
to enter, the Captain explained to
him the circumſtance, and made enquiries
with regard to his knowledge of any one
that choſe to be employed in this way, and
might be fit for the ſervice. Said Mr.
M`Donald, I ken a lad right weel of the
name o' Duncan Ferguſon, frae about
Perth in Scotland, that is truſty and vera
fit to wait upon a gentleman, except it be
that he may gie ye o'er muckle trouble about
religion, having had a vera ſtrict education
i' the preſbytery; gin ye can put
up wie that, I fal warrant him honeſt, and
vera
[Page 010]
vera faithful to his maſter, and that he
take guid care of your horſe. He is about
thirty years of age, and has been a guid
deal in ſervice, and knows what it is to
wait on guid houſes, in his ain kintra; I
dina ken how he may ſuit all places in theſe
parts; but wie a man of your judgment,
I think he may do vera weel.
The Captain thanked him for the information;
and having conceived a good opinion
of Mr. M`Donald's integrity and
ſenſe, he was willing to take the young
man upon the recommendation he had given.
Accordingly he being ſent for by Mr.
M`Donald, the North Briton came, and
preſented himſelf to the Captain. The
wages of his ſervice being agreed upon, he
entered on his functions the ſame day; and
in a ſhort time the Captain having paid his
bills in the city, ſet out with Duncan on
the ſame rout with Teague.CHAP
[Page 011]
CHAP. II. DUNCAN in like manner with Teague
had to walk on foot, for the
Captain could not afford to purchaſe another
horſe, more eſpecially as he had considerably
exhauſted his finances, by the late
equipment of Teague. But even could he
have made it convenient to have increaſed
his cavalry, the expences of travelling
would have been increaſed, which he could
not alſo well afford; or which it would
not have been within the limits of a discreet
economy to have incurred. For travelling
ſlowly, the ſervant could without
wearineſs equal the pace of his maſter on
horſe-back. Beſides, it gave diverſity, and
had more the air of ancient cuſtom, than
being both mounted. It was in this manner,
the Gauls who fought with Cæſar equipped
their dragoons, as we learn from
the Commentaries; and alſo the Numidian
horſe under Jugurtha, as we learn from
saluſt
[Page 012]
Saluſt, had each a foot-man by his ſide,
who ſometimes aſſiſted himſelf by the mane
of the quardruped in running; but was at
all times conſidered as attached to the
rider, and ready to ſubſerve him in battle.
The Scotchman, moreover, had but a light
luggage to carry; being nothing more
than a couple of ſhirts, a pair of ſtockings,
a Kilmarnock cap, a Confeſſion of Faith,
Satan's inviſible kingdom diſcovered, and
Crookſhank's hiſtory of the Covenanters.
It was upon the topic of religion that the
converſation firſt turned, Duncan aſking
the Captain of what denomination he was.
I am denominated Captain, ſaid he; but
my name is John Farrago, though I have
had other epithets occaſionally given me by
the people amongſt whom I have happened
to ſojourn, eſpecially ſince my laſt ſetting
out on my travels, after the manner of the
antient chevaliers. I have been called the
modern Don Quixotte, on account of the
eccentricity of my rambles, or the singularity
which they conceive themſelves to
diſcover in my converſation and manner.
I have been called the Knight of the ſingle
Horſe, having but one myſelf, and none for
my attendant; in this particular unlike
my predeceſſors, whoſe ſquires were
mounted
[Page 013]
mounted as well as themſelves. In ſome
places I have taken my deſignation from
the Iriſh valet that I had, and of whom you
have heard me ſpeak, of the name of Teague,
and have been called the Owner of the
red-headed Bog-trotter; as it is probable I
may now be deſigned occaſionally by the
appellation of the Maſter of the raw Scotchman,
by thoſe who may be able by your
dialect to diſlinguiſh your origin. But all
theſe things I look upon as inconſiderable.
It is of little, or perhaps of no conſequence
to me, what my ſtile is amongſt men; provided
it contains nothing in it that may impeach
my moral character, and may ſeem
to have been drawn from ſome bad quality
or vicious habit of the intellect. They may
call me Don Quixotte, or Hudibras, or
the Knight of the Blue Beard, or the Long
Noſe, or what they pleaſe. It is all the
fame to me; and gives no affront, unleſs
containing a reflection on my underſtanding
or integrity.
Captain, ſaid Duncan, it canna be, but
ye ken right weel what I mean. It is na
the denomination o' your temporal capacity,
that I wad be at; but of your religion,
and to what perſwaſion ye belong;
er
[Page 014]
whether o' the Covenant, or of the Seceders, or
the high kirk o' Scotland.
Duncan, ſaid the Captain, I am not ſuch
an adept in faith, as to be acquainted with
theſe nice diſtinctions. I have ſome knowledge
of the Chriſtian religion in general,
but not of thoſe more minute ſubdiviſions of
which it is probable you ſpeak. For I have
underſtood that Chriſtianity is the national
religion in Scotland, and I preſume what
you call Covenanters, and Seceders, are
ſections from the general eſtabliſhment, and
ſubordinate to the worſhip of the kingdom.
It has not come in my way, nor have I
much ambition to be more particularly acquainted.
There is a degree of information
on moſt ſubjects which it becomes a
gentleman to have; but the going beyond
this may favour of pednatry, and argue the
having ſpent more time in trifles, than
beſpeaks ſtrength of mind and elevated talents.
Juſt as we reſpect the naturaliſt who
amuſes us with the philoſophy of great objects;
but ſmile at him whoſe life is occupied
in catching butterflies, or gathering
petrified ſhell-fiſh. Or to give a ſimile that
conveys my meaning better; ſkill in language,
either to write or ſpeak, is a noble
attainment; but this conſiſts more in
a
[Page 015]
a juſt taſte of the leading beauties, than
in the criticiſms of a mere grammarian,
which ſhew the mind to have been wholly
or chiefly taken up with theſe: To uſe the
words of the poet,
Word-catchers that live on ſyllables.
Commas and points they ſet exactly right,
And 'twere a fin, to rob them of their might.
The moſt liberal ſtudies may be purſued
to an illiberal exceſs; as for inſtance in
muſic, where it muſt be conſidered as an
elegant accompliſhment to have ſome talents;
yet not to have made ſuch proficiency
in the execution, as to induce a ſuſpicion
of attention to this art, to the neglect of
others. I have taken care to acquire a general
knowledge of the ſurface of this earth,
from the maps; yet have not made myſelf
maſter of the ſituation of every ſlough, or
bog that may be found in your country, or
exact bearing of hill or mountain there.
In the ſame manner, I may know that you
are Chriſtians in that iſland, but nothing
more.
What, man! ſaid Duncan, ha' ye never
heard o' the Solemn League and Covenanr.
I have heard, ſaid the Captain, of
many Leagues and Covenants. In the time
of
[Page 016]
of Henry IV. in France there was what
was called the League. The family of
Guiſe was at the head of this, and oppoſed
to the Proteſtants. It is probably a branch
of this that has come over into Scotland,
and kept up the name, after having been
broken by that heroic Prince, and afterwards
taken away altogether, by his conversion
to the mother church, and peaceable
poſſeſſion of the kingdom.
By that, ye wad make out the Covenanters
to be a relict of Popery, ſaid Duncan.
I ken ye right weel, Captain; ye canna
be ſae ignorant as not to know that the
Covenanters are the very reverſe o' Popery.
Did ye never read Crookſhanks? Did ye
never hear o' the perſecution.
I have heard of the ten perſecution under
the Roman Emperors, ſaid the Captain.
Under ten Deevils, faid Duncan. I
am ſpeaking o' the perſecutions in Scotland;
when the miniſters were hanged at
Ayr.
The Captain ſaw that his valet was beginning
to be warm on the ſcore of religion;
and that it would be difficult to continue
the converſation in any ſhape without
giving him offence. He was therefore disposed
to addreſs his pride, and pleaſe him
by
[Page 017]
by an acknowledgement of ignorance; at
the ſame time propoſing a readineſs to be
inſtructed in the peculiar tenets of the
faith of the Covenanters.
Duncan, ſaid he, you are under a mistake
as to the opportunities of education
in this country. It is not as in Scotland,
where the Chriſtian religion has been planted
above a thouſand years, and the reformed
church eſtabliſhed a century or two;
where clergymen are numerous, and religious
books plenty. Ay, ſaid Duncan,
where ye have preaching amaiſt every day
of the week, and twice on the Sabbath. Ye
canna ſet your face any way, but ye hae a
kirk before you. Catechizing o' the children
begins amaiſt as ſoon as they are
born; and examining the grown people,
in viſits at the houſe; wie a ſtrict diſcipline,
that calls to the ſeſſion for things that scandalize
the morals. Ye ſal find many guid
bukes there publiſhed by the Erſkines,
and the Gilliſes. Did ye e'er read Peden's
Propheſies? I have read nothing of this
kind, ſaid the Captain; for I was observing
to you, that in America we have not
theſe opportunities. For my own part, I
have lived a good deal in the rout of clerical
functionaries, where they have paſſed
and
[Page 018]
and repaſſed, and have heard their sermons,
and converſed with them; and
though they may have been diſtinguiſhed
amongſt themſelves as orthodox or heterodox;
or under ſeveral names, or by various
particulars of doctrine; yet the differences
appeared to me ſo minute, that I never
thought it worth while to trace them;
and they made themſelves acceptable to
me, leſs or more, by the greater harmony
of voice, or elegance of language, or
geſture; or by the juſtnſes of their observations
on the obligations of morality amongst
men, and the good conſequences
to ſociety and to the individual.—Have ye
read Williſon on the Catechiſm, or Halyburton,
or Boſton's Fourfo d State, or
Durham on the Revelation? ſaid Duncan.
Nothing of all theſe, ſaid the Captain. Said
Duncan, I ha' got the Confeſſion of Faith
in my wallet here; I wad lend it to you to
get a piece of it by heart, if ye wad promise
to take guid care o' the buke. My
memory is not good, ſaid the Captain, especially
in that artificial exerciſe of it, which
conſiſts in committing abſtract ideas. What
touches my affections, I remember without
trouble, and ſentiments which are obvious
and natural; and I ſhould think the early
mind
[Page 019]
mind would be better occupied in reading
ſome inſtructive fables, than in committing
theſe dogmas of divinity, that are untelligible
to any but theologiſts themſelves; nay
not even by them incontrovertibly; for
otherwiſe how ſhould they differ ſo much
in their illuſtrations of them. However, I
have no inclination to be led into a debate
with you, Duncan, on a ſubject where
you are ſo much my ſuperior. But you
will excuſe me in committing the Confession
of Faith to memory; at my age it
is painful to apply to a thing as to a taſk.
Duncan acknowledged the truth of this,
and was diſpoſed to excuſe him; but recommended
him to read the ſermons of
the reverend John Dick, and Saunders
M`Alpin.CHAP
[Page 020]
CHAP. III. Having travelled this day without
any remarkable occurence, and puting
up at an inn in the evening, Duncan
had taken care of the horſe, in having him
well rubbed down, and having ſeen his oats
given him, and the rack well filled with hay.
A gentlemen had alſo that evening put up
at the inn, and whoſe ſervant had been engaged
at the ſame time with Duncan, in
taking care of his reſpective maſter's horſe.
This valet, whether from reading Thomas
Paine's Age of Reaſon, which had been
publiſhed about this time, or to the sceptical
converſation of ſome one in his way,
was far from being orthodox in his notions
of religion; or rather was ſceptical with
regard to religion altogether; and had not
been accuſtomed to the ſtricteſt propriety
in the choice of his expreſſions; which became
apparent, in a ſhort time, from his
uſe of ſuppletives that are common with
pro-
[Page 021]
profane men, when they would enforce
what they have aſſerted; or when prompted
by paſſion, they are carried beyond the
bounds of decorum, in imprecations on
themſelves or the incidental cauſe of their
injury. Whether the horſe had not maintained
a proper poſition in currying him,
or that the valet thought he did not, is uncertain;
but ſo it was, that in the courſe
of his labour he broke out into occaſional
ſallies of ill humour; or perhaps, from mere
habit, and without any cauſe at all, he began
to damn the ſoul of the beaſt. Duncan
could not avoid taking notice of it, and
reprimanding him for his profanity. The
other gave him no other thanks than to
damn his ſoul alſo; which language began
to raiſe the blood of Duncan; but he repressed
his reſentment for the preſent, and
was ſilent until they both came to ſit down
to ſupper in the kitchen of the public
houſe, the gentlemen above having already
ſupped; when Roderick, for that was the
name of the valet, began to eat, not having
firſt ſaid grace. At this Duncan loſing
all patience, broke out upon him. Sirrah,
ſaid he, I could make an excuſe for your
damning the ſoul o' your beaſt; becauſe I
dinna believe he has a ſoul, and in that
cafe
[Page 022]
caſe ye were doing nothing mare than
making uſe o' a bad expreſſion; but ha' ye
na mare decency, than to fall to your meat
without aſking a bleſſing on what is ſet before
you; more than your horſe i' the stable,
when he falls to his oats? what could
ye expect frae a dumb beaſt? but with ane
o' the ſhape o' a Chriſtian creature, it favours
o' infidelity. Ha' ye na ſenſe o' religion?
Did ye never ſee the Confeſſion o'
Faith; or the Larger or Shorter Catechism?
Are ye na afraid, the devil will get
power o'er you, and make ye hang yourſel.
Hang the devil, ſaid Roderick. I am
not afraid of the devil; I could kick him,
and cuff him, and play hell with him.
Guid deliver us! what blaſphemy, ſaid
Duncan; I am afraid young man, ye may
get a trial o't, you'l ſee then wha o' ye
will be uppermoſt. I'll lay my lug for it,
ye dinna ſtand him twa ſhakes, for a ſae
ſtout as ye are. Ye had better ſeek the Lord,
and be out o' the reach o' Satan.
I never ſaw any greater devil than myself,
ſaid Roderick; nor do I believe there
is any, I wiſh I ſaw this Satan of yours; I
would take a knock with him; I would
bite, and gouge him, and,—
This he ſaid jumping to his feet,
[Page 023]
stretching out his hands towards Duncan, and
grinning at the ſame time.
Duncan could ſuſtain it no longer, but
making his eſcape from the kitchen, ran
to the chamber where the Captain was with
the gentlemen, taking a glaſs after ſupper:
Exclaiming with great vehemence, he gave
them to underſtand that the muckle deel
himſel was in the houſe below ſtairs. I did
na juſt ſee his horns, and his cloven foot,
ſaid he; but I ken him right weel by his
way o' talking, when he was i' the ſtable
wie the gentleman's horſe, rubbing him
down, he curſed, and ſwear'd like a devil;
and when he came to ſipper, he could
na bide the bleſſing, but when I ſpake o'
grace, he brake out into profane language;
and at laſt fairly acknowledged that he was
the deel himſel. Guid guide us, that we
ſhould hae the devil among us! I wad na
be aſtoniſhed if he has the kitchen aff in a
flame o' fire, before we gae to bed yet. I
hae Satan's inviſible kingdom diſcovered
wi' me, in my bags. It gies great account
o' theſethings. The like happened at Drumalawrig
ance before; and the guid folk
had a great deal o' wark to get the muckle
thief out o' their ſight again.
The Captain and gentleman were at a loſs
to
[Page 024]
to underſtand this rhapſody; and could
only in general collect from it, that he
conceived himſelf to have ſeen the devil.
Where is this devil? ſaid the Captain. Can
ye ſhew him to us, Duncan? I can ſoon
do that, ſaid Duncan. I left him i' the
kitchen at his meat; but I trow he does na
eat muckle. It is a' a pretence, to paſs for
one o' us. But gin ye ſing a pſalm, or
pronounce a verſe o' the Bible, or gae about
prayer, I ſall warrant ye ſall ſoon ſee
him in his proper figure, wi' his horns and
his cloven foot girnning at ye, juſt as he
had come out o' hell about an hour ago.
Let us ſee him, Duncan, ſaid the Captain,
and examine into theſe circumstances.
The Captain and the gentleman had
ſuppoſed that ſome wag, amongſt the servants
of the public houſe, had been attempting
to amuſe himſelf with the credulity
of Duncan, having diſcovered him to
be of a ſuperſtitious caſt of mind; and that
with ſome kind of vizor to the face, and
uncouth dreſs to the perſon, he had assumed
a frightful form, and impoſed upon him
the idea of a demon. Under this impression
they went forward, Duncan with fear
and trembling, lurking behind, and
ing
[Page 025]
eyeing carefully the ſcene as they approached.
Entering the kitchen, Duncan started,
and exclaimed, The Lord deliver
us! there he is, eating at his meat, as if
he was a creature above ground, though
ye may all ſee that he has the phyſiognomy
of Belzebub. Of whom do you ſpeak, ſaid
the Captain? of that muckle chiel there,
ſaid Duncan, i' the blue jacket, and the
lang breeks;—(it was a pair of overalls);—
that Satan-luking fallow, continued he,
wha puts the bread in his mouth, and ſits
wi' his backſide on a ſtool, as if he were
ane o' ourſels; and had na been i' the
bottomleſs pit theſe twelve months. But
gin ye ſpeak till him, I ſall warrant ye
ſal ſoon hear him talk the dialect of hell,
and curſe and ſwear like a fiend, and girn
like the deel himſel; and ſhew his cloven
foot very ſoon, tak my word for't.
Why that is my ſervant, ſaid the gentleman.
Ay, ay, ſaid Duncan, I dinna doubt
that; he may hae paſſed himſel for your
ſervant. But that does na hinder him to
be the de'el. Dinna ye hear what the apostle
ſays, “he can transform himſelf into
an angel o' light.” It canna be a great
trouble then to take the ſhape o' a waiting
man,
[Page 026]
man, and ſit before a pair o' ſaddle bags.
If ye read Satan's inviſible kingdom discovered,
which I hae in my portmantles,
ye ſal find that the devil can make himſelf
a miniſter, and gae into the pulpit, and
conduct himſelf very weel, aye'till it comes
to the prayer, and then off he gaes thro'
the window, or takes the gavel o' the houſe
wie him. It happened once at Linlithgo,
that he tuke the ſhape o' a guid auld
man, the reverend doctor Bunnetin, and
undertook to preach the action ſermon at
a ſacrament; but gaed awa in a flight o'
fire, juſt as he came to gie out the text.
Ah, ſirrah, ſaid he, addreſſing himſelf to
Roderick, are ye there yet? ye think because
the folk here in America dinna ken
ye, no ha'ing Satan's inviſible world discovered
among their printed bukes, that
for that reaſon, I wad na ken ye. I ken
ye weel enough, auld Reeky. Gae back,
to Scotland, and take the ſhape o' muckle
dogs there, whare there are guid foks
that dinna ſear ye; and no come o'er the
burn till America, where the goſpel is na
yet planted, and there is na need for ye.
What have you been doing to this man,
ſaid the gentleman to Roderick, that he
has conceived you to be the devil.No.
[Page 027]
Nothing more ſaid the valet, than that
when we ſat down to eat he inſiſted on
ſaying prayers firſt, and talked like a fool
about religion. I was hungry, and did
not like to wait for prayers. He talked
about the deel. I told him I was the devil
myſelf. He took me to be in earneſt,
I ſuppoſe; that is all.
Aye, and ye are the deel, ſaid Duncan.
Put out your foot here, and let us ſee if it
hae a cloven place i' the middle o't, or be
like a chriſtian's foot; or try if ye can ſtand
till I ſay the Lord's prayer; though I wad
na wiſh to ſay it, as I dinna ken but ye wad
take the man's houſe wi' ye, and leave the
Captain, and this gentleman without a
chamber to gae to bed in. PſhaDuncan, ſaid
the Captain; how can ſuch ideas come into
your brain? I ſee nothing, but the gentleman's
ſervant. It is the prejudice of your
education, to ſuppoſe that the devil can
take the ſhape of men, or tangible substance;
at leaſt that he can eat food, and
converſe with a human voice, You will
come by and bye to have a better ſenſe of
things. In the mean time we muſt excuſe
your revereis, as you are but a late emigrant.
This valet may be indiſcreet, or
as you would ſay, profane, in his
[Page 028]
expressions; a thing of which I will venture to
ſay this gentleman, whoſe waiting man
he is, does by no means approve. Nevertheless,
I cannot think he is Apolyon,
or Belzebub, or Satan, or the great
arch devil of the infernal regions I do
not even believe that he is one of your
inferior devils, that has aſſumed the ſhape
and function of a valet, and has ſat down
here to eat his ſupper in the kitchen.
I am not one one of thoſe, ſaid the gentleman,
that approve of profane language,
or the undervaluing the religious ceremonies
of a conſcientious, though weak
man; but it would appear to me that this
is but an affair of humour on the part of
my valet, who by the by is but hired with
me as a waiting man, and I have no controul
over him, farther than to diſmiſs him
for improper conduct. He is a merry fellow;
but I have always found him faithful,
and of good temper; ſo that I will venture
to ſay, that if Duncan, for that I underſtand
is the name of this North Briton, will take
ſupper, and go to bed with him, he will receive
no injury whatever.
I wad na take the whole town o' Perth,
to ſit down wie him, ſaid Duncan; nor a'
the kingdom of Scotland to ſleep wie him
ae
[Page 029]
ae night. I ſhould expect nothing elſe but
to be i' the lake o' brimſtane before the
morning.
I will be damn'd ſaid Roderick, if I do
you any damage. I am no devil more than
yourſelf. It was to get quit of your long
prayers before victuals, that led me to talk
as I have done.
Do you hear him, ſaid Duncan? would
any body but the deel, acknowledge himself
willing to be dam'd, or talk about it
in ſae light a manner. He confirms by ae
breath, what he denies by the other. He
is the deel, as ſure as ever Mitchel Scot
was in Scotland, or if he is na the deel;
he is as bad as the deel, and it gaes againſt
the grain wi' me to hae ony communication
wi' him. Let him gae to hell for me
by himself. He ſal not hae my company.
I wad na truſt but that he wad hae an
hundred witches here about the houſe, before
the morning, and put every one o' us
on a broomſtick to ride along wi' him, taking
the taps aff the trees, and dinging
floon houſes, as he gaes along; the auld
woman turning themſelves into cats, as
they like, or taking the ſhapes o' hares, or
ſoomin o'er rivers in their egg-ſhells.
The Captain finding that it was in vain
to
[Page 030]
to attempt by direct means to overcome the
force of prejudice, changed his language,
and affected to ſuppoſe that the valet might
be the devil, and propoſed to examine the
extremity of both limbs, to ſee whether he
had a cloven foot. The valet, ſummitting to
the jeſt, agreed to be examined. His
boots and ſtockings therefore being stripped
off, his feet were examined, and no sissure
appeared more than in a common
foot. Now, ſaid the Captain, if he can
ſtand the recital of a prayer, will you not
acknowledge that he may be a human person.
Ay, if 'twere a miniſter, ſaid Duncan;
but I dinna ken, if the prayer o' a layman,
can affect him much. But it does
na matter muckle, whether he is the devil
or not; he is amaiſt as bad as the devil,
as you may diſtinguiſh by his converſation,
and I dinna care to ha muckle more to do
wie him.
That is, devil or no devil, ſaid the
Captain, you will neither eat nor ſleep with
him.
Juſt the ſhort and the lang o' it, ſaid
Duncan. I will take a bit o' bread and
beef in my hand, and creep into ſome
nuke by myſel, if it ſhould be i' the ſtable
with the horſes, rather than wie this wicked
crea
[Page 031]
creature, that if he is not Satan, has a great
reſemblance o' him.
With this the Captain and the gentlemen,
left them to themſelves, and returned
to the chamber.
CHAP. IV. IN the morning it appeared that Duncan
had ſat up the greater part of the
night, with a candle burning by him in
the kitchen, until near day-light; when
overcome with ſleep he had reclined upon
a bench, until the gentleman and his valet
had departed, and the Captain had got
up, which was about an hour after sunrise.
Having breakfaſted, which was about
9 o'clock, they ſet out upon their travels,
converſing as they went along upon
ſubjects that occurred. The firſt topic was
a compariſon of Scotland with this country;
in what particulars each had the advantage
of the other. Duncan gave a decided
preference in all things to the trans-Atlantic
region; and found nothing on this
con
[Page 032]
continent that could encounter the smallest
competition. I ſhould preſume, ſaid
the Captain, we have more timber in this
country than in yours. You may have
more, but not half ſae guid, ſaid Duncan.
Our fir, is far better than the oak
that ye find here. I will allow you the
advantage in one particular, ſaid the Captain;
you are more cloſely ſettled, and the
ſoil of courſe muſt be under a more general
cultivation. Aye, but that is nathing,
ſaid Duncan; it is ſettled wi' a better
ſtock o' people; and we hae dukes and
lairds amang us; no as it is here, where
ye may gae a day's journey, and no hear
of a piper at a great houſe, or ſee a castle;
but a' the folks, and their habitations,
luking juſt for a' the warld like our
cotters in Scotland. But, ſaid the Captain,
what do you think of the works of
nature here, the ſun and moon for instance?
The ſun is a very guid ſun, ſaid
Duncan; but he has o'er muckle heat in
the middle of the day. I wad like him
better if he wad draw in a little of it at
this ſeaſon, and let it out i' the winter,
when we ſal hae more need o' it. But as
to the moon, Duncan, ſaid the Captain,
you have ſeen it ſince you came in; do
you
[Page 033]
you think it is as large as the moon in
Scotland? I dinna ken, quoth Duncan,
but it is amaiſt as large; but it changes
far aftener, and it is no ſae lang at the
full as it is in our kintry. But what think
you of the ſtars, Duncan; you have taken
notice of them, I preſume, in this hemisphere.
The ſtars dinna differ muckle
frae the ſtars at hame, quoth Duncan;
ſave that there are not ſae many o' them.
Wi' us, the firmament is a' clad wi' them,
like braſs buttons; they light it up juſt
like candles. But here they luke blaite,
and hae a watery appearance in the night,
as if they had got the fever and ague o'
the climate, and were ſickly, and had na
ſtrength to put forth their fire. I tell
you, captain, there is nothing here equal
to what it is in Scotland. How could
you expect it; this is but a young kintra.
It will be a lang time before it comes
to ſik perfection as wi' us; and I dinna
ken if it ever does.
How comes it to paſs, Duncan, ſaid the
Captain that the devil chuſes the women
of your country, in preference to any other,
to make witches of? For it would
ſeem to be the caſe; as I have heard more
of
[Page 034]
of Scotch witches, than of Engliſh or American.
I can gie ye a good reaſon for that, ſaid
Duncan. The deel kens weel enough
where to find out the beſt materials. The
Engliſh women are no worth making
witches of; they could do him little guid
when he had them. Ane Scotch witch is
worth a dozen Engliſh, or American.
They can loup farther, and ſink a ſhip in
half the time.
The Captain having made this experiment
of the national partiality of Duncan,
was ſatisfied; and turned the converſation
to another ſubject.CHAP
[Page 035]
CHAP. V. I Shall not ſtop to record the minute incidents
that took place in the courſe of
this day's travel; or that of the two following
days; or relate the particulars of the
converſation of the Captain with Duncan,
or of Duncan with any other perſon. What
I have related, was chiefly with a view to
give ſome idea of the new valet's character
and manners.
I think it was the fourth day after leaving
the city, that the Captain caſting up
his eyes at a place where there was a considerable
length of ſtraightroad before him,
ſaw a perſon trudging on foot, who by his
make and gait, appeared to him to resemthe
new revenue officer, the quondam bogtrotter.
Duncan, ſaid the Captain, if that
man was not on foot, that is before us, I
ſhould take him for Teague O'Regan, the
waiting man that was in my ſervice, and
who gave place to you; having obtained
a
[Page 036]
a commiſſion in the revenue, and become
an exciſe officer. But as I had equipped him
with a horſe, it is not probable that he
could be without one already, and have
taken to his trotters, after being advanced
to be a limb of the government. It would
be a degradation to the dignity of office.
I dinna think, quoth Duncan, there is
muckle dignity in the office. What is he
but a gauger? that is of na more eſtimation
in our kintra than a hangman. There is na
ane that can live in an honeſt way without
it, will take the commiſſion. Duncan, ſaid
the Captain, it is not ſo in this country,
where the government is a republic; and
all taxes being laid by people, the collection
of every ſpecies is a ſacred duty, and equally
honourable.
Honour! quoth Duncan. Do you talk
of honour in a gauger? If that be the way
of thinking in this kintra, I wiſh it were
back in Scotland. Every thing ſeems to
be orſa verſa here; the wrang ſide uppermost.
I am but a ſimple waiting man to a
gentlemen like yourſel, and I wad na
take the office o' gauger upon me, for a'
Philadelphia, which is amaiſt as big as
Perth.
By this time they were within a ſmall
dif
[Page 037]
diſtance of the traveller, whom the Captain
reconnoitering more perfectly, discovered
abſolutely to be Teague. The revenue
officer, turning round, he recognized
the Captain, and accoſted him: “By
my ſhoul, and there he is, his honour himself;
the Captain, and a new ſharvant that
he has trotting on foot, as I myſelf uſed to
do.” And as you ſeem to do yet, Teague, ſaid
the Captain. What is become of the horſe
I furniſhed you? Has he been ſtolen, or
has he ſtrayed away from ſome paſture in
the courſe of your progreſs? By my ſhoul,
ſaid the officer, neither the one nor the
oder of deſe happened; but I met wid a
good affer on de road, and I took it. I
ſwaped him for a watch dat I have in my
pocket here. Bleſs de ſweet little ſhoul of
it: It tells de hour of de day, and what
time of de clock it is, ſlapeing or waking;
and in de night time you have but juſt to
look at the face of it, and de ſweet pretty
figures dat are dare, and you will know how
long it is before the morning come. Not
like de dumb beaſt, that could not anſwer
you a word in the night nor in the day;
but hold his tongue like a ſhape, and ſay
nothing; while dis little watch, as de call
it, can ſpeak like a Chriſtian creature, and
keep
[Page 038]
keep company along de road like a living
perſon. It was for dat reaſon dat I took
it from a country man dat I met wid laſt
night at the tavern; and am now going on
by myſelf, and have no horſe to take care
of, and plague me on de road, and give
me falls over his tail, and over his mane,
up hill and down hill, ſo dat I almoſt broke
my neck, and thought it ſafeſt to ride upon
my foot. Dat is truth, maſter Captain.
But who is dis ſon of a whore dat you have
wid you trotting in my place? Does he take
good care of your creature at night, and
clean your boots. I would be after bidding
him ſmell dis cudgel here dat I walk wid,
if he neglect a good maſter, as your honour
is.
The blood of Duncan was up at the idea
of being cudgelled by an exciſe officer;
and ſtepping up to Teague he lifted a cudgel
on his part. “Ye cudgel me, ſirrah!
ſaid the Caledonian. If it was na for his
honour's preſence, I wad lay this rung on
your hurdies; or gie ye a rap upon the
crown; to talk ſik language to your betters.
I ſhould make ye ken what it is to
raiſe the blood of a Scotchman. You ca'
yourſelf a revenue officer. But what is
that but a guager? which is the next to a
hang
[Page 039]
hangman in our kintra. Captain, will ye
ſtand by and ſee fair play, till I gie him his
paikes for his impertinence. My lug for
it, I ſal make this rung rattle about the
bones o' his head to ſome tune.
With that Duncan was making his advance,
having raiſed his cudgel, and puting
himſelf in the attitude of a perſon accustomed
to the back ſword; which Teague
on the other hand obſerving, accoſted
him with ſofter words; not diſpoſed to
riſk an engagement with an unknown adversary.
Love your ſhoul, ſaid he, if I was
after affronting you more than his honour
my maſter; burn me, if I don't love you,
juſt becauſe you are my maſter's ſharvant,
and takes care of his baſte. I was only
jokeing. It is juſt the way I would ſpake
to my own dear couſin Dermot, if he were
here; for in Ireland we always ſpake backwards.
Put up your ſtick, dear honey, I
am ſure the Captain knows that I was always
good-natured, and not given to quarrels;
though I could fight a good ſtick too
upon a pinch; but it never came into my
head to wrangle with my maſter's ſharvant,
eſpecially ſuch a tight good looking fellow
as yourſhelf, dat has a good ſhelalah in your
hand
[Page 040]
hand, and is fitter to beat than to be beaten,
by ſhaint Patrick.
Duncan, ſaid the Captain, you have
heard the explanation of the haſty words
the revenue officer at firſt uſed; and it
would ſeem to me, that, conſiſtently with
the reputation of courage, and good
breeding both, you ought to be ſatisfied.
I dinna ken, quoth Duncan; it was a
vera great provocation to talk o' cudgeling;
and it may be the cuſtom o' a friendly
ſalutation in Ireland, but no in our kintra.
While I ha a drop o' the blood o' St.
Andrew in me, I wad na gae up to ſik civilities.
Said the Captain, as far as I can have
underſtood, St. Patrick and St. Andrew
were couſins, and you his deſcendants or
diſciples ought to be on terms of amity.
St. Andrew a couſin to St. Patrick!
ſaid Duncan. I canna acknowledge that,
Captain. St. Andrew was a guid Protestant,
and a Covenanter, but St. Patrick
was a Papiſt, o' the kirk o' Rome; and
did na keep the ſecond commandment, but
worſhipped graven images, and pictures o'
ſaints; and tuke the ſacrament wie a wafer.
I ſhall never gie up that, Captain,
that St. Patrick was o' kin to St. Andrew.
They
[Page 041]
They might be i' the miniſtry at the ſame
time; but there is a great difference in their
doctrine. Did ye e'er ready any o' the works
o' John Knox, Captain? Dinna ye ken,
that the church of Rome is the whore o'
Babylon? If ye had lived in the time o' the
perſecution, ye wad na hae compared a
Scotch ſaint wie a Iriſh prieſt.
Said the Captain, I have no particular
acquaintance with the diſtinguiſhing renets
of the two Evangeliſts; nor do I know any
thing of them, ſave juſt to have understood
that the one had planted Chriſtianity
in Scotland and the other in Ireland. But
this is not a point ſo material to us individually,
as that we cultivate peace, and
have no difference. I muſt therefore enjoin
it on you, Duncan, that you drop
your ſtick, and keep the peace towards the
revenue officer on the high way, that he
may not be delayed in going forward to enter
on the functions of his office. Said
Duncan, Since your honour ſays the word,
I ſhall lay down my ſtick; for I ken the
law better than to ſtand out againſt the civil
authority.
But Teague, ſaid the Captain, how can
you diſtinguiſh the figures of your watch,
ſo as to tell the hours of the day; you that
do
[Page 042]
do not underſtand figures? By my ſhoul,
ſaid Teague, and I never tought of dat.
Will not the figures ſpake for demſelves,
when I look at dem. I am ſure, I ſaw the
ſon of a whore dat I got her from, look
at her, and tell the hour o' de day, like a
pracher at his books; and I am ſure and
certain, dat ſuch an ill-luking teef as he
was, could neither read nor write. But by
my ſhoul, if dat is de way, dat I have to
read de marks myſelf, I will ſwap her back
for a horſe or a cow, on de road; or for
ſomething elſe, dat will plaſe your honour
better; ſo dere is no harm done, plaſe
your honour, while we are in a chriſtian
country, and can meet wad good paple to
ſpake to, and take a watch or a colt off
our hands, when we mane to part wid it,
plaſe your honour.
Such was the converſation at the firſt
interview of the Captain's family, to uſe
a military ſtile; and may be conſidered as
a ſample of that which took place in the
ſequel of this day's travel, as they proceeded
together until noon; when they
came to dine at a public houſe, and umbrage
was taken by Duncan, becauſe the
Captain had permitted Teague to ſit at table
with himſelf; which he did in reſpect
to
[Page 043]
to the office which he held, and in order
to ſupport its dignity. Captain, ſaid Duncan,
coming to the hall door, and looking
in, d'ye permit an exciſe officer to ſit
at the table wie your honour. For ſik
profanation I never heard o' in a' my
born days; if it were in Scotland, it
wad cauſe a ſight to the whole neighbourhood.
Does your honour ken that he is
an exciſe officer? Duncan, ſaid the Captain,
it is a principle of good citizenſhip,
eſpecially in a republican government, to
pay reſpect to the laws, and maintain the
honour of its officers. It is for this reaſon,
that I make it a point to honour one who
was lately my bog-trotter; not that I discern
in him any remarkable improvement
in talents or manners; but ſimply because
the government has diſcovered something;
and has ſeen fit to give him a commission
in the revenue. Who knows but
it may be your own fortune, at no diſtant
day to obtain an office, and will you not
think it reaſonable then, that it ſhould be
forgotten that you were once in the capacity
of a waiting man; and that you ſhould
receive the reſpect and the precedence due
to your new dignity? it is not with us as
in monarchies, where the advance is
dual
[Page 044]
gradual in moſt caſes; though even there, an
individual through the favour of the
prince, or of the queen, or of a lady or
gentleman of the court, may have a sudden
promotion: but in a free ſtate, what
hinders that the loweſt of the people ſhould
be taken up, and made magiſtrates, or put
into commiſſions in the revenue? I muſt
inſiſt, Duncan, that you retire to the kitchen,
and take your dinner, and make
no diſturbance in the houſe at this time;
you will come to underſtand better the
nature of offices in theſe commonwealths
in due time. Duncan retired; but in soliloquy
expreſſing his chagrin, at the ſtrange
reverſion of affairs in America, from what
they were in Scotland; and his mortification
at finding himſelf in the ſervice of a
maſter, that could degrade himſelf by dining
with an exciſe officer.
Teague, on the other hand, though he
was ſilent in the hearing of Duncan, broke
out as ſoon as he had ſhut the door; Captain,
ſaid he, plaſe your honour, where did
you pick up dat teef-luking ſon o'd a
whore, dat has no more manners, dan a
ſhape-ſtealer in Ireland; or a merchant
dat ſells yarn at a fair. By ſaint Patrick,
if your honour had given me leave in de
road
[Page 045]
road, I would have knocked his teet down
his troat; and if your honour will excuſe
de table, I will go out and take him by
de troat, and make him talk to himſelf
like a frog in de wet ſwamps; de ſon of
a whore, to ſpake to your honour wid a
brogue upon his tongue, in ſuch words
as defe.
By the brogue, Teague meant the Scottish
dialect, which Duncan uſed.
Teague, ſaid the Captain, the prejudices
of education muſt be tolerated, until
time and experience of the world, has
leſſened or removed them. He is an honest
fellow, and I have more confidence in
him, than I ever had in you, though his
talents have not appeared equal; at leaſt
if I am to judge from the eſtimate made
of you, by theſe who have a better right
to judge than I have. However, I am unwilling
to have any diſturbance between
you, and therefore, muſt inſiſt that you
leave him to the reprimands which I myself
have occaſionally given him, and ſhall
continue to give him, until he attains a
better knowledge of the nature of things
in this new hemiſphere, ſo different from
thoſe to which he has been accuſtomed.
This put an end to any altercation
tween
[Page 046]
between the two, the revenue officer and the
waiting man, for the remaining part of
that day, as they trudged together, until
they came to the inn at night, and having
ſupped, were about to go to bed. It was
what in ſome places is called an Ordinary;
that is, an indifferent tavern, of but
mean accommodations. The houſe was
ſmall, and there was but two beds for the
reception of ſtrangers; one of theſe ſo indifferent,
as to appear fit only for the servant
of a gentleman, who might happen to
travel the road, though large enough to
contain two, or three perſons. What it
wanted in quality of neatneſs, and perhaps
cleanlineſs, was made up in dimenſions.
This bed therefore ſeemed naturally to invite
the reception of two of the company.
Teague, ſaid the Captain, when about
to go to bed, I think Duncan and you, being
the younger men, may pig in together
in that large bed, and leave the other to
me who am an older man, and am apt to
tumble and toſs a little, from wearineſs in
my ride; and may perhaps diſturb you in
your ſleep.
Guid deliver me, ſaid Duncan, frae
ſik a profanation o' the name o' Ferguson,
as to ſleep wi' an exciſe officer. I
am
[Page 047]
am na o' a great family, but I am come o' a
guid family; and it ſhall never be ſaid that
I came to America to diſgrace my lineage,
by ſik contact as that. Gae to bed wi' an
exciſe officer! I wad ſooner gae to bed out
o' doors; or i' the ſtable amang the horſes.
The revenue officer was affronted at
this; and gave way to his indignation.
The devil burn me, ſaid he, if I will be
after ſlapeing wid you, you ſon of a whore,
you teef luking vagabon; wid de itch upon
your back; I am ſure all your country
has de itch; and keep ſcratching and
ſcratching, as if de ware in hell, and could
get brimſtone for noting; you ſon o'd a
whore.
The youke! ſaid Duncan. Do you impeach
me wi' the youke?
You impatche yourſelf, ſaid the revenue
officer. Did not I ſee you ſcratching
as you came along de road; and do you
tink, you teef, dat I with to get de leprosy,
or de ſcurvy, and have to ſleep in a
bag o' brimſtone two or tree weeks, before
I be fit to travel wid his honour the
Captain again?
The deel damn me, ſaid Duncan, if I
can bear that.
What, ſwear, Duncan? ſaid the
[Page 048]
Captain, or curſe rather; you that are a Covenanter,
and have religious books in your
wallet, the Confeſſion of Faith and the
Catechiſms!
How can I help it, man, ſaid Duncan.
The deel rive his ſaul, but I man be at
him.
Duncan had by this time ſeized his
walking ſtaff, and put himſelf in an attitude
to attack his adverſary, who on the
other hand had, inſtinctively, enſconced
himſelf behind the Captain, and oppoſed
him as a rampart to the fury of the Scot.
Duncan, ſaid the Captain, you are in the
wrong on this occaſion, you gave the asfront,
and ought to excuſe the revenue officer
for what he has ſaid, which, by the
bye, was not juſtifiable, on any other
ground but that of provocation. For national
reflections are at all times reprehensible.
But in order to compoſe this matter,
and that we may have no further disturbance,
I will take the large, though more
humble bed my ſelf, and ſleep with the
exciſe officer, for the reputation of the
government who has thought proper to
appoint him to this truſt.
The deel take me if ye ſhall do that,
Captain, ſaid Duncan; I wad rather take
the
[Page 049]
the ſtain upon myſel, than let my liege be
diſgraced; for it wad come a' to the ſame
thing in the end, that I had been the waiting
man o' ane that had been the bed fellow
o'a gauger. O! guid keep us, how that
would found in Scotland. What wad my
relation Willy Ferguſon, that is profeſſor
i' the high college o' E'nburgh, ſay to
that? But rather than your honour ſhou'd
take the ſtain upon you, I ſal put up wie
it for a night; though if the landlady
has a pickle ſtrae, and a blanket, I wad
rather lie by the fire ſide, than contaminate
myſel, beding wi' ſik a bog-trotting
loon as he is, that wad gae into ſik an
office for the ſake o' filthy lucre, and to
make a living; when there are many honest
means to get a ſupport other ways.
The landlady gave it to be underſtood
that ſhe could furniſh him with a bag of
ſtraw and a blanket.
This adjuſted the difficulty, and ſaved
the delicacy of the Scotchman, and embarrassment
of the Captain, in keeping peace
between the bog-trotters; as in reality they
both were, though the one had obtained
a commiſſion, and the other remained a
private perſon.CHAP
[Page 050]
CHAP. VI. IN the courſe of the three following days,
during which the Captain and the two
bog trotters, journeyed together, a great
deal of ill will ſhewed itſelf between the
underſtrappers. By the bye, I aſk pardon,
before I go farther, of the government,
for thus confounding the revenue
officer with the preſent waiting man; but
I aver, that it is not owing to any diſreſpect
of the government, though it may have
that appearance; but is to be reſolved simply
into the force of habit which I acquired
in deſignating O'Regan in the early part
of this narrative, before he was advanced to
office; and ſince that, to the impreſſion
made upon my mind, occaſionally by his
conduct, which has not intirely corresponded
with the dignity of the commiſſion.
When inſtances occur of this nature, I fall
involuntarily into the uſe of the former
epithet, which reflection, doubtleſs, would
teach
[Page 051]
teach me to diſcard. This is my apology;
and if it ſhould be attributed to any ſecret
grudge, or diſlike of public meaſures, or
perſons at the head of our affairs, it will
be a great injuſtice. But, as I was saying,
in the courſe of the following days,
much bickering took place between the
Hibernian and the Scotchman; or as I
might otherwiſe expreſs myſelf, between
the ſon of St. Andrew, and St. Patrick.
The Scot thought the Hibernian defective
in grace and manners; both becauſe
he did not aſk a bleſſing to his food, and
becauſe he took the liberty to eat with the
Captain, and to converſe with him as on
equal terms. Indeed it was the only fault
he found with the Captain himſelf, that
he did not ſay grace to meat, and that he
admitted the gauger to this enjoyment of
equality. He did not enter fully into the
neceſſary policy of obſerving the forms of
reſpect to officers of government, merely
for the ſake of the authority, and as a
compliment to the laws themſelves. Nor
was his knowledge of the human mind,
and the modes of acting, ſufficient to inform
him, that the ſaying grace at victuals
is a matter of form, more than of faith;
and that for this reaſon, ſome chriſtian
fects
[Page 052]
ſects, particularly the people called Quakers,
omit it altogether.
The Hibernian would ſometimes beat
off, to uſe a nautical phraſe, and diſarm his
adverſary by expreſſions of benevolence,
as “Love your ſhoul,” &c.; ſometimes he
would prepare for battle, and be diſpoſed
to defend himſelf; on which occaſions it
behoved the Captain to interfere, and
break off the conteſt.
The Captain, at length, weary of this
trouble, thought of the expedient of dismissing
the revenue officer a day or two a
head, in order that he might be apart from
the other bog trotter. This being done,
with exhortation that he would go lorward
ſpeedily, and open an office in the diſtrict,
the Captain propofed to remain a day at
the public houſe where he then was, in
order to give the revenue officer the advantage
of the ſtart I have mentioned. In
the mean time, hearing of a cave in the
neighbourhood, which was thought to be
a great curioſity, he took the opportunity
of viſiting it. The guide led them to it,
I mean the Captain and his waiting man,
in about an hour's walk from the public
houſe. It was on the bank of a ſmall river;
the mouth of the cave opening to the
bank
[Page 053]
bank. A ſmall ſtream iſſued from the
cave, and fell into the river, with a fall
of a few feet over a rock, rendered ſmooth
by the current of the water. Above this,
was a ſhade of ſpreading beech, with thick
foliage, and beneath, towards the ſtrand
of the river, was a gradual deſcent with
waſhed pebbles, and a clear filtrating ſand.
Hard by the fall of this water, and on the
ſtrand of the river, the attention of the
Captain was attached by certain rude
ſculptures, obſervable on a flat rock; and
alſo by others on a perpendicular one,
that compoſed a part of the bank. There
was the figure of the tarapin, the bear, the
turkey, &c. It was a ſubject of reflection
with the Captain, whether theſe impreſſions
had been made by the animals themſelves,
while the rock had been in a plaſtic ſtate,
and before it had hardened from clay into
ſtone; or whether it was the work of the
ſavages, before the Europeans had possession
of the country. He lamented that he
had not a philoſopher at hand, to determine
this. On the bank above, and toward
the mouth of the cave, were a number
of petrefactions to be found; the water
that ran here, appearing hence to have
a petrifying quality. The Captain
deri
[Page 054]
considering theſe, was thinking with himſelf
how good a ſchool this would have been
for Teague, had he been admitted a member
of the Philoſophical Society, as had
been propoſed at an early period.
The mouth of the cave, was of a height
and width to receive a man walking upright,
and without conſtraint on his entrance;
after a paſſage of a few yards, lined
with the ſolid rocks, it opened into an apartment
of about eighteen feet cube. The
oozing from above formed the ſtalactites,
and would probably in the courſe of a century
or two, fill up this chamber altogether,
unleſs by digging above, the courſe of
the water could be diverted from the roof,
and carried off by a conduit on a ſolid
part of the mountain. The floor of the
chamber had been raiſed by the pretrifaction
of the water; as appeared from the
inequality of ſurface, formed by the stalactites,
and from the teſtimony of the
guide, who remembered the time, not
more than fifteen years ago, when the descent
to this apartment, was a ſtep of at
leaſt a foot from the level of the entrance.
Paſſing on a few yards more, they descended
a ſtep, and came to a ſecond apratment,
of a greater extent, and of not less
[Page 055]
than an hundred feet to the level vault.
Here was a vaſt bed of human ſkeletons
petrified, but diſtinguiſhable by their
forms. No doubt it had been a repoſitory
of ſavage chiefs, whoſe bodies, converted
into ſtone by the virtue of this water,
were preſerved more durably than the
mummies of Egypt. The dimenſions of
ſome of the ſkeletons beſpoke them giants;
that of one meaſured eight feet, wanting
an inch. Duncan, ſaid the Captain, I
doubt much whether there have been larger
giants in Scotland. Aye have there, half
as large again, ſaid Duncan; from the
ſtones that are put up in ſome caſtles, there
muſt have been men at leaſt eighteen or
twenty feet in height. What can have become
of this breed? ſaid the Captain. They
have fought wi' ane another, 'til they are
a' dead, ſaid Duncan. This was the easiest
way of accounting for the loſs.
There was an aſcent of a ſtep or two to
the next apartment, which was of an oval
form, the conjugate diameter of which
was about thirty feet, and the tranſverſe
twenty five. There were the bows and arrows,
all petrified, that theſe warriors had
uſed in life. The water deſcended not in
drops, but through the fine pores of the
rock
[Page 056]
rock in a gentle dew, and with an impression
of extreme cold, ſo as to endanger
life, and probably convert the human body
into ſtone in a very ſhort ſpace of time.
The guide thought it not adviſable to remain
long, and Duncan was anxious to
return; the forms of the dead in the chamber
behind him leading him to apprehend,
that ſome of their ſhades might come after
them, to enquire the occaſion of their viſit.
Regaining the entrance of the cave, and
emerging into light, I mean the light of
day, for they had entered with torches,
they left the place, and returned to the
tavern.
The day following, they paid another visit
to the cave, and obſerved in the chamber
of bows and arrows, a pool of limpid
water, into which looking, they discovered
arrow heads, and hatchets of ſtone
innumerable. They took out, and brought
away ſome of them. Theſe had no doubt
been firſt formed in wood, and then put
in this water to petrify, and become fit
for uſe. Thus we eaſily account for the
formation of ſuch implements; whereas
the idea of being formed out of a ſtone,
in the firſt inſtance, by the dint of human
labour, and with no other inſtruments
than
[Page 057]
than ſtone itſelf, involves great difficulty.
This diſcovery, the Captain, I preſume,
loſt no time in communicating to the Philosophical
Society, as will in due time appear,
from a publication of their transactions.
Near the entrance, and on the right,
was the paſſage to what is called the petrified
grove. This, on their return they
entered, and in about thirty ſteps, found
themſelves in a ſpacious ſquare, which appeared
to have been once the ſurface of
the earth: For here was trees in their
natural poſition, with waſps neſts on
them, all petrified; and buffaloes standing
under, in their proper form, but as
hard as adament. A bleak wind, with a
petrifying dew, had arreſted them in life,
and fixed them to the ſpot; while the
mountain in a ſeries of ages, had grown
over them. That which ſtruck the Captain
moſt, was an Indian man reduced to
ſtone, with a bundle of peltry on his back.
If the virtuoſi of Italy, could have acceſs
to this vault, there would be danger of
them robbing it of ſome of theſe figures,
in order to compare with the ſtatues that
have been made by hands. When this
cave ſhall have gained due celebrity, there
is
[Page 058]
is no qeſtion, but that attempts of this
nature will be made. I ſubmit therefore,
whether it would not be adviſeable for the
connoiſſeurs of America, to apply to the
legiſlature of the ſtate, where the cave is,
to prevent ſuch exportation.
The Captain leaving this place, took nothing
with him but the ſkin of a wild cat,
which hung upon a ſtone peg in the ſide of
the grotto, and which he broke off, by
giving it a ſudden jerk as he turned
round. Duncan took a petrified turtle,
which he thought reſembled a highland
bonnet, and ſaid he would ſcrape it out,
and ſend it for a curioſity to Perth.CHAP
[Page 059]
CHAP. VII.
Containing Obſervations. It may be obſerved, that as I advance in
my book, I make fewer chapters, by
way of commentary, and occupy myſelf
chiefly with the narrative. It is the characteristic
of old age, and may be decorous
towards the concluſion of the work. Nevertheless,
I ſhall arreſt myſelf here a little,
to reflect on one particular of the discoveries
of the Captain; the ſculpture on the
rocks, which appeared to be the labour of
the aborigneſs of this country. I have
not ſeen theſe ſculptures, for I have not
had an opportunity of viſting this cave;
but I have ſeen ſimiliar ſculptures, in abundance,
on the weſt of the Allegany
mountains. I recollect at an early period
to have heard it ſaid, that Ferdinando Soto,
had been on the Ohio waters, and as high
as the mouth of the great Kenaway; and to
have
[Page 060]
have heard it given as a proof of this, that
in a particular place near the mouth of
that river, the imperial eagle was to be
ſeen engraven on a rock; the eagle which
was the enſign of the Spaniſh monarchy,
under Charles V, alſo emperor of Germany,
and the ſucceſſor of the Cæſars. It
was added, on the ſame ground, that the
veſtiges of fortifications diſcoverable in
this country, were the remains of Spaniſh
works, and encamping grounds, under
Soto. I had underſtood, that the great
Franklin had adopted this hypotheſis with
regard to theſe forts, from the ſculpture
of the eagle. In the winter of the year
1787, I had the happineſs to converſe
with that ſage, and amongſt a number of
queſtions, which I had the curioſity, and
perhaps impertinence, to aſk, I put this,
with regard to the Kenaway ſculpture, and
the theory of the veſtiges of forts in the
weſtern country. I found his ideas to be
as I had been informed, and have ſtated.
I was then in Philadelphia.
In the fall of this year, having returned
to the weſtern country, a ſurveyor who
had been engaged in ſurveying lands on
the Kenaway, being in my office on ſome
buſineſs, it occurred to me to interrogate
him
[Page 061]
him on the ſubject of the ſculpture. He
had ſeen the engraving, of what was
thought to be the eagle, but called it a
Turkey; which word no ſooner ſtrnck my
ear, than all the hypotheſis of the holy
Roman eagle, and Ferdinando Soto, fell
to the ground. It is a turkey, thought I,
which the fancy of the virtuoſo and antiquarian,
has converted into the king of
birds.
Converſing, with the ſurveyor, he gave
me an account more minutely of this, and
other figures cut upon the rock, viz. the
turkey with its wings ſpread, as if juſt alighting;
the deer with his branching
horns; and the ſavage himſelf, with a
large head and long limbs, rudely cut.
He added, that he had heard from a hunter
whom he well knew, that there was a
rock with ſimilar engravings on Cheat river,
a ſmall diſtance above where it falls
into the Monongahela; and promiſed to
bring this hunter to give me a deſcription.
About a month afterwards, the surveyor
brought the hunter to me, who appeared
to have been obſervant, and to be intelligent.
He had ſeen the rocks near the
mouth of Cheat river. The following is
the memorandum that I took from him:
The
[Page 062]
“The turkey appears to have alighted
at the lower part of the rock, and ran up
to the top. You ſee the track, which it
leaves; the ſtretched back, and the body
thrown forward, as between flying and
running. There is the figure of a man,
with a large head, and horns, and a thin
ſkeleton-like body. There are deer tracks
well cut. This rock ſtands on a bend of
the river; and the figures on the lower
end, which projects moſt, are defaced by
the water, which riſes to this height in the
time of floods. There is a horſe track.
This is the only thing that I think remarkable,
if it is a horſe track; for, as I do not
know that there were any horſes here, before
the European ſettlements, it would
argue that this engraving had been done
ſince, and by the natives who have come
from the Cheſapeek, and had ſeen horſes.
The ſettlement made by Captain Smith at
the mouth of James river, Virginia, was
I believe the earlieſt made, contiguous to
this country.”
This hunter gave me to underſtand, that
he had ſeen a rock, ſculptured in like
manner on the Kenaway, about eighty
miles from its mouth; that is nearly in a
line
[Page 063]
line directly weſt from the rocks on Cheat
river.
Having been led into the way of enquiring
on this ſubject, I have found that theſe
engravings are very common throughout
the whole weſtern country; that they are
diſcernible all along the Ohio, at low water
eſpecially, when the horizontal rocks
are left bare; that they are found on the
margins of the ſmaller ſtreams alſo.
I had heard of one of theſe on the Monongehela,
about forty miles above Pittsburgh,
and in the ſummer of 1793, crossing
the country near that place, I ſpent a
part of a day, in going out of my courſe
to obſerve it. The ſculptures were of the
ſame kind, and anſwer the deſcription before
given of thoſe elſewhere. The figures
on this are, a bear rudely or rather
clumſily cut; a hawk flying with a ſnake
in its beak; the moon and the ſeven ſtars;
a racoon; a human arm, and human feet,
well done; a buck with branching horns;
the turkey; and a number others. I want
no other proof that theſe ſculptures were
by the natives, than the form of the feet,
which are unqueſtionably Indian. The
narrowneſs, and ſmallneſs of the heel evinces
it. It might alſo be induced as a
pre
[Page 064]
preſumption, that there are the veſtiges of
a ſortification, ſuch as has been mentioned,
juſt above on the hill. For it is reasonable
to ſuppoſe, that theſe works of
leiſure and taſte, were moſt likely to be
purſued in the neighbourhood of ſuch
a work. But what has been at all times
concluſive to me, that theſe engravings
are the works of the natives, is, the circumstance
that no alphabetic mark of any
language, or Roman or Arabic numeral,
is found amongſt any of theſe. For it is
well known, that it is a thing which would
occur to any European, who ſhould amuſe
himſelf in this manner, to impreſs the initials
at leaſt of his name, and the digits of
the year. I had put this queſtion to the
ſurveyor and hunter, of whom I have
made mention, with regard to letters and
numeral marks, and found that none had
been obſerved by them, on the rocks which
they had ſeen. On that ground, independent
of all others, I made the deduction
I have ſtated.
I conſider theſe ſculptures, as the ſirſt
rude eſſeys of the fine art of engraving;
and to have been the work of ſavages of
taſte, diſtinguiſhed from the common maſs,
by a talent to imitate in wood or ſtone,
the
[Page 065]
the forms of things in nature, and a capacity
of receiving pleaſure from ſuch an
application of the mental powers. Whilſt
a chief of genius, was waiting for the assembling
of other chiefs, to hold a council;
or while the warrior was waiting at
a certain point for others, that were to meet
him, he may have amuſed himſelf in this
manner; or it may have been the means
to cheat wearineſs, and ſolace the intellectual
faculty, when there was no counselling
in the nation, or wars to carry
on.
Happy ſavage, that could thus amuſe
himſelf, and exerciſe his firſt preeminence
over animals we call Beaſts. They can
hunt, and devour living things for food;
but where do you find a wolf, or a fiſhing
hawk, that has any idea of theſe abſtract
pleaſures, that feed the imagination? Why
is it that I am proud, and value myſelf amongst
my own ſpecies? It is becauſe I
think I poſſeſs, in ſome degree, the distinguishing
characteriſtic of a man, a taſte
for the fine arts: a taſte and characteriſtic
too little valued in America, where a system
of finance, has introduced the love
of unequal wealth; deſtroyed the ſpirit
of common induſtry; and planted that of
lot
[Page 066]
lottery in the human heart; making the
maſs of the people gamblers; and under
the idea of ſpeculation, ſthrouded engrossing
and monopoly every where.
It would ſeem, that the ſculptures of
which I ſpeak, are the works of more ancient
ſavages, than theſe which have lately
occupied this country; theſe tribes not
being in the habit of making any ſuch
themſelves, and the figures evincing an
old date, being in moſt places, in ſome
degree eſſaced, by the water of the river,
or the rain waſhing the rocks, on which
they are engraven. They would ſeem to
have been a more improved race, who had
given way to barbarians of the north, who
had over run the country. It is generally
underſtood, by the tradition of the
preſent Indians, and the early French
writers, Charlevoix and others, that about
the beginning of the preſent century,
the Six Nations conquered this country,
and expelled the former owners; and the
word Ohio, is ſaid to mean Bloody, and
was the name given it from the blood ſhed
upon its waters at that time.
The ſortifications of which we ſpeak,
muſt have alſo been works of defence, of
that or an earlier period. From the trees
grow
[Page 067]
growing upon the mound, or parapet of
theſe, they muſt be ſome of them many
hundred years old.
It will ſtrike the reflection, how was it
poſſible for the human mind to remain ſo
long in ſo low a ſtage of improvement, as
was the caſfe with theſe, the aborigines of
this country. Perhaps the more puzzling
queſtion would be, whence the ſpring that
could have ſuſſicient energy to rouſe from
it. I ſhall leave this to philoſophy, thought,
and hiſtorical deduction. Enough has
been ſaid at preſent.CHAP
[Page 068]
CHAP. VIII. ON the third day renewing their journey,
the converſation between the
Captain and his ſervant turned on the
character, and hiſtory of the preſent revenue
officer, the late Teague O'Regan.
The Captain gave Duncan a relation of
what had happened; in the caſe of the attempt
to draw him off to the Philoſophical
Society, to induce him to preach, and even
to take a ſeat in the legiſlature of the United
States; that had it not been for a certain
Traddle, a weaver, whom they had been
fortunate enough to ſubſtitute for him,
the people would moſt undoubtedly have
elected Teague, and ſent him to Congreſs.
Guid deliver us! ſaid Duncan; do they
make Parliament men o' weavers i' this
kintra? In Scotland, it maun be a duke,
or a laird, that can hae a ſeat there.
This is a republic, Duncan, ſaid the
cap
[Page 069]
Captain; and the rights of man are understood,
and exerciſed by the people.
And if he could be i' the Congreſs, why
did ye let him be a gauger? ſaid Duncan.
This is all the prejudice of education,
Duncan, ſaid the Captain. An appointment
in the revenue, under the executive
of the United States, ought not to have
diſgrace attached to it in the popular opinion;
for it is a neceſſary, and ought to
be held a ſacred, duty.
I dinna ken how it is, ſaid Duncan;
but I ſee they hae every thing tail foremoſt
in this kintry, to what they hae in Scotland:
a gauger a gentleman; and weavers
in the legiſlature.
Juſt at this inſtant, was heard by the
way ſide, the jingling of a loom, in a
ſmall cabbin with a window towards the
road. It ſtruck Duncan to expoſtulate with
this weaver, and to know why it was that
he alſo did not attain a ſeat in ſome public
body. Advancing to the orifice,
as it might be called, he applied his
mouth, and beſpoke him, as he ſat upon
his loom, thus: Traddle, ſaid he, giving
him the ſame name that the Captain had
given the other; why is it that ye ſit here,
treading theſe twa ſtecks, and playing wi'
your
[Page 070]
your elbows, as ye throw the thread, when
there is one o' your occupation, not far
off, that is now a member of the houſe o'
lords, or commons, in America; and is
gane to the Congreſs o' the United States?
canna ye get yourſel elected; or it is because
ye dinna offer, that ye are left behind
in this manner. Ye ſhud be striving
man, while guid poſts are gaeing,
and no be ſitting there wi' your backſide
on a beam. Dinna your neibours gie ya
a vote. Ye ſhud get a chapin o' whiskey,
man, and drink 'till them, and gar
them vote, or, ye ſhoud gae out and talk
politics, and mak ſpeeches.
Such was the addreſs of Duncan, meaning
nothing more than to amuſe himſelf,
with the idea of a manufacturer obtaining
a ſeat in the legiſlature, and making
laws inſtead of warping webs. But in
the mean time, the wife of the mechanic,
who had overheard the converſation, and
was incenſed at an attempt to take her
huſband from his buſineſs, ſeizing a pot
ſtick and running out, and turning the
corner of the houſe, laid a blow upon the
poſteriors of the orator; accompanying
her force with reproachful words to this
effect:will
[Page 071]
Will you never let the man alone, ſaid
ſhe, to mind his buſineſs, but be putting
theſe notions in his head. He has been
once conſtable, and twice member of assembly;
and what has he got by it, but to
leave his cuſtomers at home, complaining
of their work not done? It is but little
good that has been got of him theſe three
years, but going to elections, and meetings,
and talking politics; and after all, what does
he know of theſe matters? juſt about as
much as my brown cow. A ſet of lounging
louts, coming here and taking up his time
with idle nonſenſe of what laws ſhould be
made, and urging him to be elected; and
William Rabb's wife waiting for her coverlet
this three months, and Andrew Nangle
for his ſhirt cloth. It is enough to put a
woman in a paſſion that has the temper
of a ſaint, to have her man's head turned
ſo from his own affairs, by idle vagabonds
that come the way in this manner.
At this, ſhe made another effort, and
ſpringing forward, was about to impreſs a
ſecond blow; when Duncan retreating, and
liſting up his ſtick in his turn accoſted her
in theſe words: “Gin ye were a man, as
ye are a muckle witch, I ſhoud be for
taking ye wi' this rung acroſs your hurdies.
it
[Page 072]
Is it any affront to have it evened to your
man Traddle, to gae to the ſenate, and to
get a poſt i' the government, and no be
knotting threads here, wi' his ſhuttle, like
a tradeſman o' Paiſly? Ye vile carlin, ye
maun be a witch, or a warſe body, to take
a ſtick in your hand, like a driver o' ſtots,
and come pelmel, upon a man ahint his
back, when he is na ſpeaking till ye.
Foul fa' me, but if it were na a ſhame to
battle wi' ane o' your ſex, I wad break
your back with a lunder, before ye knew
what ye were about. To keep this honest
man here, ſhut up like a priſoner under
ground, in a dungeon, drawing a reed
till him, inſtead o' throwing out his arms
like a Latin ſcholar, or a collegian, making
his oration to his hearers? Are ye chained
there, (turning his ſpeech to Traddle,)
that ye ſtay ſae contentedly yourſel, man,
and dinna break out, and eſcape ſrae the
fangs o' this witch.”
This witch! ſaid ſhe, (apprehending danger
from a ſecond addreſs to the weaver,)
this witch! I ſhall witch you to ſome
purpoſe, you vagabond. With this ſhe
made a haſty ſtep, and was nearly on the
back of the Caledonian, with her pot-ſtick,
having made a ſtroke at him, which be
eva
[Page 073]
evaded, by taking to his heels, and retreating
ſpeedily. The Captain in the
mean time had rode on, and left them to
compleat their dialogue.
CHAP. IX. Duncan had affected the wag on
the late occaſion with the manufacturer
and his wife, and had like to have
ſuffered ſome alloy of pain from the blows
which were inflictted, or were meditated.
But at the public houſe, in a village, a
little way ahead this day, where they halted
about noon, a circumſtance happened
which changed his view a little, and disposed
him to ſadneſs, rather than to play
the wag with his neighbours on the road.
While the Captain had reclined, and was
aſleep on a ſofa, a conſtable had apprehended
Duncan with a warrant; commanding
this officer to take the priſoner
before a juſtice of the peace, by whom it
had been iſſued. Duncan had taken for
granted, that it was the weaver's wife who
had made complaint, and ſent after him,
on account of the threats he had made to
chaſ-
[Page 074]
chaſtiſe her. The buſtle in apprehending
him, had made a noiſe in the porch, and
awakened the Captain. Duncan, ſaid he,
what is the matter? Lord deliver me, ſaid
he, if I ken. They ſay I am a priſoner.
The baiſiff here has ta'en me wi' a warrant.
It maun be that witch the weaver's wife,
that has made a complaint, juſt becauſe I
was jeſting a wee, about her huſband gaeing
to the legiſlature; and ſhe did na take it
weel, but amaiſt brake my back wi' her'
ſpurtle; and now ſhe has ga'en awa and
ſworn belike that I ſtrak her; for this
is the way o' theſe witches, that they turn
ſtates evidence, and ſwear for themſelves against
honeſt people.
Duncan, ſaid the Captain, this is what
comes of your meddling with politics. You
muſt undertake to ſay forſooth, who is
qualified to be a repreſentative of the United
States; you muſt inſiſt upon an industrious
mechanic to relinquiſh his occupation;
and this not from any opinion of
his fitneſs for ſuch appointment, or any
principle of love for the public good; but
merely for your paſtime, and in ridicule
of a republican government in this country.
For though there have been instances
of chuſing weavers for the legiſlature,
and
[Page 075]
and coblers, and coopers, why make a
burleſque of this? Have not the people a
right to make ſuch a choice? yet becauſe
theſe things are not common in Scotland,
it muſt be the ſubject of a laugh here.
Had you been ſerious, there could have
been no fault found; but the inſult lies in
your making a jeſt of it, which was evident
from your manner, in turning aſide from
the highway to addreſs a weaver through
the windos of a cellar; and in an abrupt
manner, to introduce an expoſtulation
with him on the ſubject of election. No
wonder that the termagant his wife, who
did not reliſh the propoſition, even in a
ſerious point of view, was offended, and
diſpoſed to inflict blows; and, on the resistance
made on your part, and threats
probably thrown out, has applied to a justice
of the peace, and obtained a warrant
to commit you to the cuſtody of the law.
What can they make o' it? ſaid Duncan.
I do not know, ſaid the Captain, what
offence it may be in law, but certainly it
was a great indecorum to amuſe yourſelf,
not at the expence of a mechanic, but indirectly
at the whole body politic of the
union; not that I think it unbecoming to
ſend ſuch as Traddle to deliberative
blies;
[Page 076]
assemblies; but that you ſeemed to think it ſo;
becauſe it is a thing not known in North-Britain,
where ariſtocratic principles prevail.
You might have meant this as pleasantry;
but it may be conſtrued a reflection
upon a republican government,
and to deſtroy the rights of man, in the
firſt germ and principles of their exiſtence.
They canna make high treaſon o't ſaid
Duncan.
I do not know, ſaid the Captain, what
a ſtrict judge might make it, I ſhould think
it could not be made a hanging matter.
However let us ſee the warrant, and enquire
what the juſtice of the peace has
made of it.
I ſhall not ſhew the warrant to any man,
ſaid the conſtable, but to his worſhip, justice
Underchin, to whom I muſt carry the
priſoner immediately. So come along;
come along; the juſtice will ſhew you the
warrant.
There being no help for it, Duncan
was obliged to go along, the Captain accompanying
him. Being brought before
the juſtice, Ah, have ye nabbed him? ſaid
his worſhip: I am glad ye have got him;
a great raſcal.
There is no queſtion, ſaid the Captain,
ſtep
[Page 077]
ſtepping forward, and addreſſing the justice,
but the young man has acted with
conſiderable imprudence; but ignorance of
the world, and eſpecially of the laws and
cuſtoms of America, has been the principal
cauſe of his intruſion. Though he has
not been long in my ſervice, yet I am disposed
to ſpeak with ſome confidence of
his civility in general. But, may it pleaſe
your worſhip, in what ſhape have you
brought the charge. Is it an aſſault and
battery, or what?
I make it baſtardy, ſaid the juſtice; what
elſe would I make it?
Baſtardy! ſaid the Captain. It might
be fornication, or adultery; but how can
it be baſtardy in ſo ſhort a time? It cannot
be a rape, that your worſhip means. There
was no rape, or fornication, or adultery in
the caſe, I will engage that. And how
can there be baſtardy? ſome very hot
words paſſed between him and the woman,
and ſtrokes might have been given; but
there was certainly no diſpoſition, as far
as I could ſee, to beget baſtards; nor was
there time for it. They were not in ſuch
a very loving humour, when I left them;
nor did he ſtay behind me above twenty
minutes on the road.The
[Page 078]
The juſtice was a little ſwarthy man, of
a corpulent habit, ſeated in an elbow
chair, with pen, ink, and paper on a ſtand
by him. He threw himſelf back, as he
ſpoke; leaned his head alternately on the
right and left ſhoulder, and bridled his
lips, as the phraſe is, diſcovering in the affectation
of his manner, great pride of office,
and apparent ſatisfaction in having
caught a criminal. Endeavouring to be
witty at the embarraſlsment of the preſent
culprit, and the expreſſions of the Captain,
why Mr. ſaid he, addreſſing himſelf, to
this laſt, though I do not know who you
are, that are ſo willing to aſſiſt me in the
examination of this vagrant, yet I will observe
to you, that I make no doubt that
ſome hot, or at leaſt warm words, have
paſſed between them; and ſtrokes as you
call it, might have been given; but as to
the time of twenty minutes, or a larger period,
it is of no conſideration in the law;
provided the woman ſwears, as this one
has done, that ſhe is with child by him.
Nor will his ignorance of the cuſtoms of America,
excuſe him; we muſt commit
him, or bind him over, if he can find security,
to appear at the ſeſſions, to take his
trial for the fornication.Wi'
[Page 079]
Wi' bairn! ſaid Duncan. She might
juſt as well have ta'en an oath, that I was
wi' bairn to her. Was na her man I raddle,
ſitting on his loom looking at us a'
the time. O the falſe jade! I get her wi'
bairn! I wad get a witch wi' bairn as
ſoon.
It is extraordinary, ſaid the Captain,
that ſhe could be certain of her pregnancy
in ſo ſhort a time?
So ſhort a time! ſaid the juſtice, do
you call ſix months a ſhort time?
It is not ſix hours, ſaid the Captain,
nor the half of it, ſince the fracas happened.
Guid guide us! ſaid Duncan, who was
ſtanding on the back ground, making his
ſoliloquy; Guid guide us, that I ſhould come
to America, to be tri'd for getting a woman
wi' bairn. What will Mr. Dougal,
our miniſter think o' this? after ha'ing the
Confeſſion of Faith wi' me, and ſae mony
guid bukes. Standing on the ſtool, is
bad enough; but nathing to the way they
hae i' this kintra, o' taking a man wi' a
bum, and bringing him before a magistrate;
juſt the ſame thing as he ware a
ſheep-ſtealer. O' the baſe jade, to ſwear
a bairn upon me; what will my ain folks
ſay
[Page 080]
ſay, when they hear o' it in Scotland? It
will be a ſtain upon a' my kin to the third
generation. It was the deel himſelf put it
in my head, to ſtand taking wi' a fool
weaver about his election. I wiſh I ware
in Perth again, and out o' a' this trouble.
Six hours! ſaid the juſtice, anſwering
to the Captain. Is it not ſix months, Sampson,
referring to the conſtable, ſince this
pedlar left this ſettlement? Pedlar! ſaid the
Captain; he never was a pedlar; nor is it
ſix months, ſince he left Scotland. He was
recommended to me by a gentleman whom
I knew very well, Mr. M`Donald, as a
lad juſt come over. So that it is impossible
he could have been here ſix months ago.
I am no ſax months frae Perth, ſaid
Duncan.
Is not your name, Ryburn, ſaid the
juſtice, and are you not that Scotch pedlar,
that was in this ſettlement two or three
months? Can there be any miſtake? referring
to the conſtable; is not this Niel Ryburn,
for whom the warrant calls? It is
the very man, ſaid the conſtable. I knew
him by his dialect the moment I ſaw him
in the porch at the public houſe, talking
with the hoſtler. He has the ſame brogue
upon his tongue, and ſays Guid guide us,
juſt
[Page 081]
juſt in the ſame manner: only at that time
he uſed to ſay alſo, By my fa'th, and by
my ſa'l, more than he does at preſent. He
has become religious ſince, or pretends
to be ſo, in order to deceive your worſship.
But at that time, he had not much religion
about him, and had no guid bukes as he
calls them in his pocket; but could damn
his ſa'l, and ſwear like a devil.
Niel Ryburn! ſaid the Captain, that is
not the name of my valet. It is that of
Duncan Ferguſon. But pray who is the
woman that he is ſaid to have got with child?
The weaver's wife is the only one that he
has had a converſation with to my knowledge;
and as I ſaid before, they were not
much in the way of making love when I
left them.
A weaver's wife! ſaid the juſtice; no,
Mr. M`Radin, or whatever elſe they may
call you; it is no weaver's wife; it is Kate
Maybone, that has made oath againſt him.
He had carnal knowledge of her about ſix
months ago, when he was in this settlement
pedling, and got her with child.
I perceive ſaid the Captain, we are all
at croſs purpoſes, and under a miſtake in
this buſineſs. This North Briton—
Stop, ſaid the juſtice, if you are to give
your
[Page ]
[Page 082]
your teſtimony, Mr. with the cocked hat,
ſpeaking to the Captain; we ſhall take
it by yourſelf; and not let the pedlar hear
it, to enable him to frame his ſtory to the
fame purpoſe.
Accordingly Duncan being withdrawn,
in the cuſtody of the conſtable, the Captain
was examined, and related the particulars
on oath of all that he knew respecting
the priſoner; and now being ordered
to withdraw, the priſoner was called in and
interrogated.
His ſtory was to the ſame effect with
that of the Captain, and would ſeem to
diſtinguiſh him from his countrymen named
in the warrant; but his Scottiſh dialect
founded the preſumption of identity ſo
ſtrongly, that it was difficult, if not impossible,
to get over it.
I ſee, ſaid the juſtice, that they have
framed their ſtories by colluſion. They are
a couple of ingenious raſcals; though the
one of them, the pedlar, affects great simplicity;
and the other vouches for him
that he is ignorant. I believe I muſt commit
them both; the one for baſtardy, and
the other for horſe-ſtealing. For the circumstance
of having but one horſe between
them, is extremely ſuſpicious, and renders
it
[Page 083]
it probable that they muſt have ſtolen that
one. The ſtory which they tell, of having
come in company with a revenue officer,
whom they have ſent a head on foot, is
abſurd, eſpecially when you add what the
one who is called Captain tells, of this officer
having been once his ſervant, or paſſed for
ſuch, under the name of Teague O'Regan,
and bog-trotting as he calls it, in the
manner that this Duncan, which he pretends
is the name, does now; and yet even
then being likely to be taken from
him to preach, to go to Congreſs, and the
Lord knows what: It is impoſſible; it muſt
be a falſehood; and the probability is, that
this fellow, this Captain, is the head of a
gang of horſe-thieves; and this Scotch pedlar,
and the Iriſh revenue officer, are understrappers,
with him, in the trade.
Ths being ſignified to the Captain who
was now called in, he addreſſed the justice
to the following effect: Mr. Juſtice,
ſaid he, what I have related to you upon
oath, however improbable it may appear,
is the fact; and as to your ſurmiſes of horſe
ſtealing, they are groundleſs; and you
may commit, if you think proper; but you
ſhall anſwer for the conſequences. It is
no ſmall matter to deprive a citizen of his
li-
[Page 084]
liberty, and I am not ſo much unknown
to the government, as not to obtain redress
againſt an ignoramus like you, who
diſgrace the commiſſion by your ſtupidity,
as many of the ſame office do. The utmost
of your power is to commit; but it
may come in my turn to impeach, for
your abuſe of power. What proof, or
preſumption have you, that I have ſtolen
horſes? Is it that of having a ſervant on
foot, rather than having one mounted? If
I had ſtolen one horſe, could I not as well
have ſtolen two? The preſumption is the
reverſe of what your worſhip ſtates. As
to the North Briton, who is charged with
baſtardy, by the name of Niel Ryburn,
with a certain Kate Maybone, where is
the woman? cannot ſhe be brought face to
face with the man, and confronted? Let
her then ſay if this is Niel Ryburn; and
that this ſimple lad is the perſon who begot
a child with her, ſix or eight months
ago. I am perſuaded he was on the eaſt
of the Atlantic at that time, and if ſhe could
become pregnant by him, ſhe muſt have
been on that ſide alſo. Let this matter be
examined.
From the ſedate and firm manner with
which the Captain had expreſſed himſelf,
the
[Page 085]
the juſtice began to be apprehenſive of
having been miſtaken, and was intimidated.
He was willing therefore to ſend for
the woman who had made the oath. Being
in the village, ſhe was in a ſhort time
brought before his worſhip, by the constable
who had been diſpatched for that purpose.
Kate, ſaid the magiſtrate, is not this
the Scotch pedler, the father of your child,
and againſt whom you have made oath?
The father of my child! ſaid Kate; does
your worſhip think, I would let ſuch a
ſervant looking ſon of a bitch as that, get
me with child? does your worſhip mean
to affront me, by having him taken up in
the place of the moving merchant, Mr.
Ryburn? no, no; he is not the father of
my child. I never ſaw the clumſy looking
dunce in my life before.
Duncan was well pleaſed to be relieved
from the charge of baſtardy; but at the
ſame time a little hurt, at the undervaluing
of the witneſs. Young lady, ſaid he, I wiſh
you muckle joy o' your big belly, but I
dinna envy the pedlar o' his guid luck o'
ha'eing you wi' bairn. If I was to ſtand
i' the ſtool, it ſhould be for anither ſort of
luking laſſie; and no ſik a brazen fac'd
ane as ye are.Kate
[Page 086]
Kate was about to make reply; but the
juſtice not thinking it comported with the
dignity of office, to ſuffer an altercation in
his preſence, and being chagrined at not
finding this to be the real culprit, releaſed
the arreſt, with ill humour, deſiring Captain,
priſoner, Kate, and conſtable, to
be gone about their buſineſs.CHAP.
[Page 087]
CHAP. X. THE ſecond day after this, in the afternoon
of the day, as the Captain
and his man Duncan were advancing on
their journey, they perceived a perſon a
head, coming towards them, with a long
ſlouching walk, as if in conſiderable haſte,
and a ſtick in his hand. If that man had
not his face the wrong way, ſaid the Captain,
I ſhould take him for the revenue officer,
Teague O'Regan; he has a good
deal of his appearance, both in his perſon
and his gait. But he cannot have mistaken
his direction ſo much as to be coming
this way, inſtead of going to his diſtrict.
I dinna ken, ſaid Duncan; theſe Iriſh
ay put the wrang end o' their ſpeech foremost;
and why not put the wrang end o'
their courſe now and then.
As they were debating, the perſon approached,
and it was diſcovered to be Teague.
He
[Page 088]
He had advanced to a paſs of the mountain,
where he was met and oppoſed by
two men, of an athletic perſonal appearance,
who forbade him, at his peril, to
proceed farther. They were armed with
clubs, and preſented a very choleric
countenance. The revenue officer had
thought it not adviſable to encounter them,
being two to one, and propoſed rather to
fall back, and join himſelf to the Captain
and the Scotchman, who might ſupport
him in his march.
Theſe two men were of the name of Valentine
and Orſon; ſo called either from
the fierceneſs of their nature, or from
their ſuperior ſtrength, reſembling the two
champions of that name, of whom we read
in books of romance. They had been
born and bred in theſe mountains.
Valentine had the advantage of ſome education
with a Welſh ſchool-maſter, who
paſſed his native language upon the young
man for Latin; ſo that conceiving himſelf
to have acquired the rudiments of this tongue,
and therefore qualified to enter on
the ſtudy of ſome one of the learned professions,
he had deliberated whether he
ſhould plead law, preach, or be a physician;
but happening one day to ſee a
ber
[Page 089]
member of Congreſs riding along, with a boy
behind him, carrying a portmanteau, he
had taken it into his head to be a member
himſelf, and had canvaſſed frequently for
that delegation; but had been disappointed;
one perſon and another coming forward,
and taking off the votes. He had
made up his mind for ſome time paſt to
make an experiment of perſonal force, to
intimidate competitors. For this purpoſe,
he had taken to his aſſiſtance another
young man of the name of Orſon, whom
he found in the neighbourhood, and with
whom ſallying out as a kind of ſquire, or
armour-bearer, he could knock down any
fellow that had the impudence to ſet up against
him in the diſtrict. Orſon had not
actually been ſuckled by a bear, like his
name ſake in romance; but he was a rough,
ſtout man, and well qualified to bear a part
in this mode of canvaſſing.
The rumour had prevailed by ſome
means, that Teague was coming forward
to ſtand a trial in that diſtrict; whether
propagated by ſome wag, who paſſed him
on the road, and was diſpoſed to amuſe
himſelf with the apprehenſions of the two
ruſtics; or to ſome miſtake on the parr of
tra-
[Page 090]
travellers, who had come through the village
in the neighbourhood.
The Captain, however, and the revenue
officer himſelf, had reſolved their menace
into a diſlike of the exciſe law, and a wiſh
to intimidate, or prevent by force, the opening
an inſpection office in that diſtrict.
Under theſe impreſſions, advancing to
the paſs, they were met by the young
men, who made a ſhew of battle; though
on their part, not a little diſconcerted at
ſeeing Teague return with a reinforcement,
and with the advantage of cavalry.
The Captain placed himſelf in the center,
on horſe-back, and a little in advance
of the two wings on foot, Duncan
and Teague. The North Briton, preserved
a compoſed manner, and ſhewed a
ſteady countenance. The Hibernian, on
the other hand, willing by an appearance
of great rage, and much valour, to supercede
the neceſſity of battle, or blood-ſhed,
ſtood with his right foot before the left,
flouriſhing his cudgel, and grinning like
an angry perſon, who was impatient for
the onſet.
As is the manner of heroic men, the
Captain thought proper, before the commencement
of hoſtilities, to accoſt the
adverse
[Page 091]
verſe combatants, to ſee whether it might
not be in his power to remove, or at leaſt
allay their prejudices againſt the obnoxious
law, and induce them to ſuffer the officer
to paſs. Accordingly he addreſſed them
in the following words:
Gentlemen, ſaid he, the law may be
exceptionable on general principles, or
locally unequal in its operation to you in
this diſtrict. Nevertheleſs, it is the law,
and has received the ſanction of the public
voice, made known through the constitutional
organ, the repreſentatives of the
people. It is the great principle of a republican
government, that the will of the
majority ſhall govern. The general will
has made this a law, and it behoves individual
minds to ſubmit.
I wad na fleech and prig wi' them, ſaid
Duncan, ſtepping forward, and flouriſhing
his cudgel. I wad na hae many words about
it. But juſt ſee at ance whether they
will dare to ſtap the high road. Gin they
perſiſt, I can tak ane o' them, and ye and
Teague, can tak the ither, and my lug for
it, I ſal gie the ane that fa's to my lot, a
weel payed ſkin, I warrant him. Sae dinna
ye tak up time fairlying about the matter;
but gae on, and try our rungs o'er
the
[Page 092]
the hurdies o' them. I ſal gar this ſtick
crack o'er the riggin o' the loons, in a
wie while.
Teague, in the mean time, was on the
back ground, endeavouring to look ſour,
making wry mouths, and grinning occasionally:
all this with a view to ſupport
the threats of the North Briton.
Duncan, ſaid the Captain, for he had
not attended to Teague, put up your
cudgel. Policy oftentimes avails more
than force. The law in queſtion may beodious,
and great allowance ought to be
made for the prejudices of the people. By
ſoſt meaſures, and mild words, prejudices
may be overcome. Theſe appear to
be but young men; and raſhneſs is a concomitant
of early life. By expostulation
we may probably have the good fortune
to be able to paſs on, without being
under the neceſſity to attempt battery, or
ſhed blood.
The two young men were not to be intimidated
by a ſhew of cudgels, or grinning,
and wry mouths; but ſtill conceiving
that the object of the Captain was to
force an election in favour of his precusor,
the Hibernian, and not understanding
the ſcope of his harrangue, but
supposing
[Page 093]
ſing him to ſpeak of the law of election
where the votes of the majority, that is,
the greater number of votes, conſtitutes
the repreſentative, they were as much disposed
to uſe force as at firſt; and, advancing,
appeared ready to ſuſtain the ſhock.
An affray muſt have enſued; for the
Captain having taken every poſſible measure
to avoid blows, was now reſolute to
force the paſs, even at the riſk of battle.
But juſt at this inſtant, a grave man coming
from the village, who had known the
character, and had been frequently a witness
of the conduct of the young men, addressed
them: “Young men, ſaid he,
will you be eternally running into errors
of this kind. Have you interrogated theſe
gentlemen, and underſtood from themselves
whether any of them are candidates,
and mean to diſturb you by ſetting up for
Congreſs in this diſtrict? It is poſſibly the
humour of ſome wag coming up the road,
and knowing your diſpoſition, that has
created the ſurmiſe.”
The fact was, that ſome wag who had
paſſed Teague on the road, and who had
known the apprehenſions of Valentine, had
given riſe to the report. For he thought to
amuſe himſelf by it, knowing the
gancies
[Page 094]
extravagancies into which it would of courſe throw
the two young men. For the whole country,
not long before that time, had heard
in what manner they had miſtaken individuals
for public candidates. On one occasion
they had fought with a maſon and
his barrow-man, and abuſed them considerably.
On another occaſion, they had
knocked down a potter with a bag of
earthen-ware, and broke ſeveral of his
veſſels. For this reaſon, the grave man, of
whom I ſpoke, who had got a hint by
ſome means of what they were about,
had traced the young men, and coming
up at the critical moment, addreſſed them
as I have before ſaid, exhorting them to
make enquiry firſt, whether their apprehensions
were well or ill founded; and not
to take it for granted that either of theſe
perſonages, were competitors for Congress,
before the fact had been ascertained,
and their pretenſions conſidered by an
amicable expoſtulation.
Candidates for Congreſs! ſaid the Captain;
what could have put that into the
young mens heads? is it true, this bogtrotter,
who is now an exciſe officer, was
on the point once of being a candidate,
or at leaſt of being elected, a
tive
[Page 095]
representative of the union; but having eſcaped
that, though with ſome difficulty, he is
now in the executive department; and
has received an appointment to the collection
of the revenue of a diſtrict beyond
this, to which he is now on his way; and
is far from having any thoughts of an election
of any kind whatever.
The two young men, at this, were relieved
from their fears, and their minds
ſeemed dilated with unuſual joy. Stepping
forward, they ſhook hands with Teague,
and invited him to drink with them; but
the Captain apologized, alledging the necessity
on the part of O'Regan, to preſs
forward as ſpeedily as poſſible, and to be
on the ſpot where the functions of his duty
called him. This apology ſeeming to suffice,
they all three made obeiſance to
the young men, and to the grave looking
man; and paſſed on.CHAP
[Page 096]
CHAP. XI.
Containing Reflections. It may be thought prepoſterous in theſe
young men to attempt force in the
matter of an election. That depends on
their poſſeſſing any other faculty by which
they could ſucceed. Have not all animals
recourſe to theſe means of providing for
themſelves, which nature has given them?
The ſquirrel climbs a tree, while the wolf
runs through the brake. The cat lies in
wait, and watches for her prey; while the
greyhound purſues with open mouth, and
ſeizes the hare or the fox.
Valentine would not ſeem to have possessed
the advantage of mental recommendations;
he could not have it in his power
to allure and perſuade. Why not therefore
act by compulſion, and uſe force?
But why not make application of this force
upon the voters themſelves, and knock
down either before or after an election,
all
[Page 097]
all thoſe who had been obſtinate, in withholding
their ſuffrages? It is probable that
experiment had been made of this, and
that it had been found ineffectual. What
then remained, but to repel the intruſion
of competitors. It was more convenient,
as there were fewer of theſe; at leaſt it
rarely happens, that there are as many candidates
as voters. It ſeems more natural,
as beginning at the ſource, and repreſſing
the pretenſions of the canvaſſing individuals,
who are uſually the firſt movers
in the buſineſs. It is of the nature of a
ſummary proceeding, and avoids delay,
to break the head of a competitor, and
induce him by fear, if not by modeſty, to
deſiſt.
It may be queried, what reſpectability
in the capacity of legiſlators can ſuch persons
have, after having been elected, without
the requiſite information on ſtate affairs,
or talent of eloquence, to make a figure
in a public body? That is no buſineſs
of mine. It belongs to theſe that ſet up for
ſuch appointment, to conſider this. It may
be ſaid, however, that it is not neceſſary that
all ſhould make a figure in the ſame way.
In the exhibition of a circus, you will be
as much diverted with the clown who
mounts
[Page 098]
mounts a horſe clumſily, or who attempting
to tumble, falls on his backſide, as with
the greateſt activity ſhewn by the maſter.
In muſic, baſs is uſeful; nay, may be
thought to be neceſſary, to mix with the
treble. An illetirate and ignorant member
of a deliberative aſſembly, forms an agreeable
contraſt with the intelligent; juſt as in
gardening, we are pleaſed with a wild
copſe after a parterre.
It may be thought a veſania, or ſpecies
of madneſs, to entertain ſuch an inordinate
paſſion for the legiſlature. Not at
all; it was not a madneſs properly ſo
called, by which I mean, a phyſical derangement
of the intellect. The cauſe
was merely moral; and the derangement
only ſuch as exiſts in all caſes, where the
mind is not well regulated by education,
and where the paſſions are ſtrong and intemperate.
This young man Valentine had
conceived, at an early period, the idea of
becoming a legiſlator; and as has been
ſaid, from ſeeing ſome member of Congress
paſs the road, with a ſervant and
portmanteau alſo; not at all comprehending
the neceſſity, or at leaſt uſefulneſs, of
a knowledge of the geography of the world
in commercial queſtions; or of hiſtory in
pol-
[Page 099]
political: he had been accuſtomed at home
to run a foot race with a wood-ranger; to
lift a piece of timber at a houſe building,
or log-rolling; or to wreſtle at Corniſh-hug
with the young men of the village; and had
imagined that the ſame degree of ſtrength
and dexterity, which had given him a superiority,
or at leaſt made him reſpectable
in theſe, would raiſe him to reputation in
the efforts of the human mind.
Why need we wonder at an uneducated
young man judging ſo prepoſterouſly on
great ſubjects. It is not to be preſumed that
he ever had an opportunity of reading Cudworth's
Intellectual Syſtem, or any other
writer on “ the eternal fitneſs of things .” This
belongs to the ſchools; I mean the higher
academies, where metaphyſics, and the
co-relate ſcience of logic, is taught.
I am aware that malevolent perſons, judging
from their feelings, will alledge that
in the caricature I have given of the mountain
candidate, I have had ſome prototype
in view, and hence intended a ſatire upon
individuals It will not be a fair deduction;
unleſs it is reſtrained ſimply to
this, that ſomething like it has occurred in
the courſe of my obſervation, which has
given riſe to my idea of the picture.Now
[Page 100]
Now that I am upon the ſubject of elections
for deliberative aſſemblies, I will
make a few general obſervations, without
meaning to give offence to any one.
There are but two characters that can
be reſpectable as repreſentatives of the
people. A plain man of good ſenſe, whether
farmer, mechanic, or merchant; or
a man of education and literary talents.
The intermediate characters, who have
neither juſt natural reflection, nor the advantage
of reading, are unnatural, and can
derive no happineſs to themſelves from the
appointment; nor can they be of uſe to
the commonwealth.
But men err, not only judging falſely of
their capacity for a public truſt, but in the
means of obtaining it. I have in view,
not only all indelicacy in the ſolicitation of
votes, but in the management that is too
often uſed on election days, in changing
tickets, obſtructing windows, voting more
than once; a thing tolerable perhaps, or
at leaſt excuſable, in the election of a
ſheriff, an office of profit; but which ought
to be conſidered indelicate in a competition
for honour. It is impoſſible for any law
to reach the cure of this evil; it can be remedied
only by attaching diſgrace in public
opinion,
[Page 101]
opinion, to them or the like arts. I do not
mean to repreſent as indelicate the candidates
offering to ſerve. For I would rather
be accuſed of forwardness to offer myſelf,
that of affectation to decline, when I was
willing to be elected. The one favours of
cowardice and falſehood; the other, at the
worſt, can be called but vanity.
The wife and virtuous exerciſe of the
right of ſuffrage, is the firſt ſpring of happiness
in a republic. If this is touched
corruptly, or unſkilfully, the movements of
the machine are throughout affected. Not
only judicious regulations by poſitive law
are neceſſary to ſecure this, but the ſyſtem
of family and ſcholaſtick education ought
to contemplate it. An advice which no father
ought to fail to give to his ſon ſhould
be to this effect. “Young man, you have
the good fortune to be born in a republic;
a felicity that has been enjoyed but by a
ſmall portion of the race of man, in any
age of the world. In ſome ages it has been
enjoyed by none at all. It is a principle
of this government, that every man, has
a right to elect, and a right to be elected .
In the exerciſe of the firſt, the right to
elect, be taught my ſon, to preſerve a
ſcrupulous and delicate honour: And as
at
[Page 102]
at ſchool, the ſenſe of ſhame amongſt your
equals, would reſtrain you from all fraud,
in obtaining a game at fives; ſo much more
now that your are a man, let it reſtrain you
from all unfairneſs in this the great game
of man. With regard to being elected,
your firſt conſideration will be your talent.
Quid valeant humeri, quid ferre recuſent.
At ſchool, you would deſpiſe the boy
who would ſet himſelf forward, as an expert
ſwimmer or wreſtler, who was deficient
in ſkill at theſe exerciſes. In order
to be reſpectable, put not yourſelf above
your ſtrength. If you covet the honour
of a public truſt, think of qualifying yourself
for it; and let the people think of chusing
you to diſcharge it; that is their business.
Lay in a ſtock of knowledge by
reading in early life. Your old age, by
theſe means will acquire dignity; and appointments
will readily follow. You will
be under no neceſſity of ſolliciting inordinately
the ſuffrage of men.”CHAP
[Page 103]
CHAP. XII. THE Captain and the two on foot,
journeyed from bence together,
without any material incident falling out,
or any thing to attract the attention; ſave
what aroſe from the ſparring of the bogtrotters.
This took place on the ground
of irreligion in Teague, and diſregard for
the covenants; but more eſpecially on a
difference of opinion with regard to the
deſert of their reſpective ſervices, in the
late rencounter with the highway-men,
as they were diſpoſed to call them; Teague
alledging that he had intimidated them
by grinning, and wry mouths; Duncan
claiming the credit by the diſplay of his
cudgel. The Captain had a good deal of
trouble, in parrying a deciſion of their respective
pretenſions; or adjuſting them in
ſuch a manner as to ſatisfy both. They
were likely ſometimes to come to blows.
He was relieved, however, by the approach
of
[Page 104]
of the revenue officer to his diſtrict, into
which they now began to enter.
After ſome days peregrination through
it, having made choice of a central situation,
it was thought proper to open an inspection
office, which was done by hiring
a houſe, and writing over the door, Inspection
office of Survey, No. &c.
Suſpicion had exiſted on the part of
the government, that oppoſition would be
made in this diſtrict to the opening an
office; or at leaſt to the collection of the
revenue. Theſe were founded not only in
reports of threats of that nature; but in
ſome inſtances of actual violence, clandestinely
committed on deputies. It was
for this reaſon, amongſt others, that
the Preſident had made choice of O'Regan,
a ſtout and reſolute man, as he
thought him, with a ſhelalah in his hand,
who could repel occaſional inſults. So far
theſe ſuſpicions appeared to be without
foundation; the officer having conspicuously
traverſed the diſtrict, and opened an
office without moleſtation.
The Captain was now about to return
home, having ſeen the eſtabliſhment of his
ward in an office under government. But
before he parted with him, he thought it
not
[Page 105]
not amiſs to give him leſſons with regard
to the diſcharge of his duty in his preſent
appointment. With this view, drawing
him into a walk the ſecond day, a ſmall
diſtance from the village, he began his lecture
in the following words:
Teague, ſaid he, for I am ſtill in the
habit of giving you that appellation, not
having yet aſcertained whether you are to
be ſtiled, your worſhip, your honour, or
your reverence; or at leaſt not having yet
been accuſtomed to add theſe epithets;
Teague, I ſay, you are now advanced
to great dignity; a limb of the executive
of the union. It is true, your department
is miniſterial. Nevertheleſs it requires
the wiſdom of the head to conduct it. But
the integrity of the heart is the great
object to be regarded. Keep your
hands from bribes; and by a delicate impartiality
towards all, even from the suspicion
of taking them. I ſhould regret
indeed after all the pains I have taken in
ſitting you for an office, and contributing
to your appointment, to hear of an impeachment
againſt you, for a misdemeanor
in that office. By conducting yourself
with a ſcrupulous honour and pure
morality in your preſent truſt, the way is
open
[Page 106]
open to a higher grade of advancement;
and there is no kind of doubt, but that in
due time it will be attainable. The President
of the United States, from whom
you have received your commiſſion, is ſaid
to have the virtue, or rather the exceſs of
one, never to abandon the perſon whom
he has once taken up; or at leaſt to carry
his attachment to an extreme of reluctance
in that particular; whether owing to great
ſlowneſs in conceiving unfavourably of
any one; or to pride of mind, in an unwillingness
to have it thought that his
judgment could be fallible. You will
have an advantage here; but at the ſame
time there is an ultimate point in this, as
in all things, beyond which it is impoſſible
to preſerve a man. Bear this in mind,
and be honeſt, attentive, and faithful in
your duty, and let it be ſaid of you, that
you have ſhewn yourſelf a good citizen.
Juſt at this inſtant a noiſe was heard,
and, looking up, a crowd of people were
diſcovered at a conſiderable diſtance, advancing
towards them, but with acclamations
that began to be heard. They were
dragging a piece of timber of conſiderable
length, which appeared to be juſt hewn
from the woods; and was the natural ſtem
of
[Page 107]
of a ſmall tree, cut down from the ſtump,
and the bark ſtripped off. At the ſame
time a couple of pack-horſes were driven
along, which appeared to be loaded with
beds, and pillow caſes.
The Captain was led to believe that
theſe were a number of the country people,
who having heard of the revenue officer
coming to his diſtrict, had come forward
to pay their reſpects to him, and
to receive him with that gratulation which
is common to honeſt but illiterate people,
in the firſt paroxyſms of their tranſport.
Having underſtood that country to be
chiefly peopled with the deſcendants of the
Iriſh, or with Iriſh emigrants themſelves,
he had ſuppoſed that hearing the new officer
was a countryman, they had been carried
forward, with ſuch zeal to receive
him, with huzzaing and tumult. On this
occaſion, he thought it not amiſs to turn
the converſation; and to prepare the mind
and the manners of the deputy for this
ſcene, which being unuſual, might disconcert
and embarraſs him.
Teague, ſaid he, it is not leſs difficult
to preſerve equanimity in a proſperous situation,
than to ſuſtain with fortitude a depression
of fortune. Theſe people, I perceive,
ceive,
[Page 108]
ceive, in a flow of mind are coming forward,
to expreſs, with warmth, the honest,
but irregular ſallies of their joy, on
your arrival amongſt them. It was uſual
in the provinces under the Roman republic,
when a Queſtor, of whom a favourable
impreſſion had preceded, was about to
come amongſt them. It is a pleaſing, but
a tranſient felicity, and a wiſe man will
not count too much upon it. For popular
favour is unſtable to a proverb. Theſe
very people in the courſe of a twelve-month,
if you diſpleaſe them, may ſhout
as loud at your degradation, and removal
from dignity. At the ſame time, this
ought not to lead you to be indifferent, or
at leaſt to ſeem ſo, to their well-meant expressions
of favour at preſent; much leſs to
affect a contempt, or even a neglect of
them. A medium of eaſe and gracefulneſs
in receiving their advance, and anſwering
their addreſs, whether it be a ruſtic orator
in an extempore harrangue, or ſome
ſcholar of the academy, or ſchool-maſter,
they may have have prevailed upon to draw
up a ſpeech, and read it to you. There is
no manner of doubt, but the Preſident of
the United States, may have been a thousand
times embarraſſed with the multitude
of
[Page 109]
of addreſſes delivered, or preſented, to
him; and it required no ſmall patience
and fortitude to ſuſtain them. Yet it has
been remarked, that he has received them
all with complacency; ſhewing himſelf
neither elevated with the praiſe, nor irritated
with the intruſion. And it is but
reaſonable, and what a benevolent man
would indulge; for it is a happineſs to
theſe creatures, to give themſelves the opportunity
of being diſtinguiſhed in this
manner.
Duncan who had heard a rumour in the
village of what was going forward, had in
the mean time come up, and understanding
from the laſt words of the Captain
what had been the drift of his converſation
with Teague, and diſcovering his miſtake,
interrupted him at this place. Captain,
ſaid he, ye need na be cowſhuning him against
applauſe, and popularity, and the
turning o' the head, wi' praiſe, and guid
uſage: for I doubt muckle if it comes to
that wi' him yet. I wad rather ſuſpect that
theſe folks have na guid will towards him.
I dinna ken what they mean to do wi'
him, but if a body might gueſs frae the
bed ye ſee there on the poney's back, they
mean to toſs him in a blanker. But if it
were
[Page 110]
were to be judged frae the tree they hae
trailing after them, I wad ſuppoſe they
mean to make a hanging matter o' it, and
take his life a' the gether. There is na
doubt but they are coming in a mob, to
make a ſeizure o' the gauger, and the
talk o' the town is o' a puniſhment I dinna
underſtand, o' tarring and feathering. I
have heard o' the ſtocks, and the gallows,
and drowning like a witch, but I never
heard o' the like o' that in Scotland. I have
heard o' tarring the ſheep, to keep them
frae the rot, but I never heard o' tarring
a human creature. May be they mean to
put it on his noſe, to hinder him frae smelling
their whiſkey. I ſee they got a keg o't
there in their rear, drawn upon a ſled; at
leaſt, I ſuppoſe it to be whiſky they hae in
that keg, to take a dram, as they gae on
wi the frolic; unleſs it be the tar that they
talk of to put upon the officer.
This laſt conjecture was the true one.
For it was tar; and the ſtem of a tree
which they drew, was what is called a liberty
pole, which they were about to erect,
in order to dance round it, with hallooing,
and the whoop of exultation.
The calvacade now approaching, they
began
[Page 111]
began to caſt their eyes towards the groupe
of the three as they ſtood together.
By de holy faders, ſaid Teague, I ſee
de have deir looks upon me. De look as
wild as de White Boys, or de Hearts of
Oak in Ireland. By de holy apoſtles, dere
is no fighting wid pitch forks; we ſhall be
kilt, and murdered into de bargain.
Teague, ſaid the Captain, recollect that
you are an officer of government, and it
becomes you to ſupport its dignity, not
betraying unmanly fear, but ſuſtaining
the violence even of a mob itſelf with fortitude.
Fait, and I had rader be no officer at
all, ſaid Teague, if dis is de way de paple
get out o' dair ſenſes in dis country.
Take de office yourſhelf; the devil burn
me, but I ſhall be after laying it down, as
faſt as I ever took it up, if dis is to come
of it; to be hooted at like a wild baſte,
and ſhot, and hanged upon a tree, like a
ſquirrel, or a Pady from Cork, when de
fooliſh boys hang him upon the 17th of
March, with potatoes about his neck, to
make ſun o' de Iriſh. I ſcorn to be choaked
before I am dead; de devil burn de
office for me, I'l have none of it. I can take
my Bible oath, and ſwear upon de holy
croſs
[Page 112]
croſs, dat I am no officer. By ſhaint Patrick,
and ifdere are any Iriſh boys, amongſt
dem I would rather join wid dem. What is
de government with offices to a ſon o'd a
whore dat is choaked, and cannot ſpake to
his acquaintance in dis world. By de holy,
apoſtles, I am no officer; I juſt took it for,
a frolic as I was coming up de road, and;
you may be officer yourſelf, and good
luck wid de commiſſion, Captain; I ſhall
have noting to do wid it.
At this inſtant the advancing croud;
raiſed a loud ſhout, crying, Liberty and
no exciſe, liberty and no exciſe; down with
all exciſe officers .
Teague began to tremble, and to ſculk
behind the Captain. By de holy vater o'
de confeſſion, ſaid he, dey are like de favages,
dey have deir eyes upon me, I ſhall
be ſcalped; I ſhall be kilt and have de hair
off my head, like a wolf or a ſhape. God
love you, Captain, ſpake a good word to
dem, and tell dem a good ſtory; or by de
Chriſtian church, I ſhall be eat up like a
toad, or a wild baſte in de foreſts.
The bog-trotter was right; for this moment,
they had got their eyes upon the
groupe; and began to diſtinguiſh him as
the officer of the revenue. An exact
description-
[Page 113]
ſcription had been given them, of his person
and appearance; for theſe people
had their correſpondents, even at the feat
of government; and travellers, moreover,
had recogniſed him, and given an account
of his phyſiognomy, and apparel.
There he is, there he is, was the language;
the reſcally exciſe officer; we
ſhall ſoon take care of him. He is of the
name of O'Regan, is he? We ſhall O'Regan
him in a ſhort time.
The devil burn me, if I am de exciſe
officer, ſaid Teague. It is all a miſtake
gentlemen. It is true I was offered the
commiſſion; but the Captain here knows
dat I would not take it. It is dis Scotchman
that is the officer. By my ſhoul, you
may tar and feather him, and welcome.
No, ſaid the Captain ſtepping forward,
no, gentlemen: for ſo I yet call you;
though the menaces which you expreſs,
and the appearance of force which your
preparations exhibit, depart from the desert
of that appelation. Nevertheleſs, as
there is ſtill a probability of arreſting violence,
and reclaiming you from the error
of your meditated acts, I addreſs you with
the epithet of gentlemen. You are not
miſtaken in your deſignation of the officer
of
[Page 114]
of the revenue, though he has not the
cundour, to avow himſelf; but would
meanly ſubject a fellow bog-trotter to the
odium and the riſk; an act of which, after
all the pains that have been taken of
his education, to impreſs him with sentiments
of truth and honour, I am greatly
aſhamed. No, Gentlemen, I am unwilling
to deceive you, or that the meditated injury
ſhould fall on him, who if he has
not the honour of the office, ought not to
bear the occaſional diſadvantage: I am
ready to acknowledge and avow, nor ſhall
theſe wry faces, and contorſions of body,
which you obſerve in the red-headed man,
prevent me; that he is the bona fide, actual
exciſe officer. Nevertheleſs, gentlemen,
let me expoſtulate with you on his behalf.
Let me endeavour to ſave him from your
odium, not by falſehood, but by reaſon.
Is it not a principle of that republican government
which you have eſtabliſhed, that
the will of the majority ſhall govern; and
has not the will of the majority of the United
States enacted this law? will—
By this time, they had ſunk the but end
of the ſapling in the hole dug for it, and
it ſtood erect with a flag diſplayed in the
air, and was called a Liberty Pole. The
beds
[Page 115]
beds, and pillow caſes had been cut open,
and were brought forward. A committee
had been appointed to conduct the operation.
It was while they were occupied in
doing this, that the Captain had without
interruption gone on in making his harangue.
But theſe things being now adjusted,
a principal perſon of the committee
came forward, juſt at the laſt words of the
Captain.
The will of the majority, ſaid he; yes,
faith; the will of the majority ſhall govern.
It is right that it ſhould be the
caſe. We know the exciſe officer very
well. Come lay hands upon him.
Guid folk, ſaid Duncan, I am no the
gauger, it is true; nor am I a friend to
the exciſe law, though I came in company
wi' the officer; nevertheleſs I dinna
approve o' this, o' your dinging down the
government. For what is it but dinging
down the government to act againſt the
laws. Did ye never read i' the Bible, that
rebellion is warſe than witchcraft? Did ye
never read o' how many lairds, and dukes,
were hanged in Scotland lang ago, for
rebellion? when the government comes to
take this up, ye ſal all be made out rebels,
and hanged. Ye had better think what
ye
[Page 116]
ye are about. Ye dinna gie fair play. If ye
want to fight, and ony o' ye will turn out
wi' me, I ſhall take a turn wi' him; and
no juſt jump upon a man a' in ae lump,
like a parcel o' tinklers at a fair.
The committee had paid no attention to
this harangue; but had in the mean time
ſeized Teague, and conveyed him to a
cart, in which the keg of tar had been
placed. The operation had commenced
amidſt the vociferation of the bog-trotter,
croſſing himſelf, and preparing for
purgatory. They had ſtripped him of his
veſtments, and pouring the tar upon his
naked body, emptied at the ſame time a
bed of feathers on his head, which adhering
to the viſcous fluid, gave him the appearance
of a wild fowl of the foreſt. The cart being
driven off with the priſoner in this
ſtate, a great part of the mob accompanied,
with the uſual exclamation of “Liberty,
and no exciſe law. Down with all
exciſe officers.”CHAP
[Page 117]
CHAP. XIII.
Containing Reflections. It is time now to make ſome reflections,
were it not only for the ſake of form;
juſt as the clergyman who divides his text
into ſeveral heads, and then adds, “we
ſhall conclude with an improvement of the
whole; or with a few practical observations,
or reflections.” In early life, when
long ſermons tired me, the young mind
not capable of a long attention, I uſed
to look out for this peroratory part of
the diſcourſe, with much anxiety; not
that I valued it more than any other, for
the intrinſic worth of it; but merely because
it was the laſt. It appeared to me
an unconſcionable thing in a man to ſpeak
too long, when it was left to himſelf
how long he ſhould ſpeak. Ah! if it
was known how many curſes I have given
tedious ſpeakers even in the pulpit itſelf,
in my time, I ſhould be thought a very
wick-
[Page 118]
wicked man. Perhaps ſome may think
that I am a tedious writer. Well; but
have not readers it in their power to lay
down the book when they think proper,
and begin again?
But as I was ſaying, it has become time
to make ſome reflections, of which it muſt
be acknowledged, I have been ſparing
in this the latter part of my performance.
But upon what ſhall I reflect? The
vanity of things, doubtleſs. But in what
mode ſhall I preſent this vanity? In moralizing
on the diſappointment of the Captain
and the revenue officer, with the waiting
man Duncan Ferguſon, coming forward
to eſtabliſh offices, and all at once
made priſoners, and treated as the meaneſt
culprits? or ſhall it be on the miſtaken
patriotiſm of even good, though uninformed
men, oppoſing an obnoxious, and unequal
law, not by remonſtrance, but by actual
force, and thereby ſapping all principle,
or rather overthrowing all ſtructure of a
republican government. No: theſe are
exhauſted topics. I ſhall rather content
myſelf at preſent, with a differtation, on
that mode of diſgrace, or puniſhment,
which was choſen in the caſe of the revenue
officer; tarring and feathering.I
[Page 119]
I find no trace of this mode of punishment
amongſt the ancients, I mean the
Greeks, Hebrews, and Romans. Having
had occaſion lately to look over the
whole book of Deuteronomy, I have paid
attention to this particular, and have discovered
no veſtige of it. Amongſt the
Greeks, ſo far as my memory ſerves me,
there is nothing like it. I recollect well
the ſanctions of criminal law amongſt the
Romans. And what appears to me to come
nearſt to this of tarring and feathering, is
the puniſhment of the ſewing up the culprit
in a ſack, with an ape, a ſerpent, and
a fox; and throwing him into a river, or
a balon of the ſea, to drown, if he had escaped
death by his companions in the
mean time.
As to the origin of tarring and feathering,
I am at a loſs to ſay. It would ſeem
to me, that it took its riſe in the town
of Bofton, juſt before the commencement
of the American revolution. Unless,
indeed, it ſhould be contended that
Nebuchadnezzar was tarred and feathered;
of which I am not perſuaded; becauſe tho'
it is ſaid that “his nails had grown to eagles
claws,” and in that caſe preſenting
the talons of a bird, which a tarred and
fea-
[Page 120]
feathered man reſembles, yet at the ſam
time it is added, he eat graſs like an ox.
Now a turkey buzzard, or a bald eagle,
does not eat graſs like an ox; nor do I
know that theſe ſowls eat graſs at all, at leaſt
ſo obviouſly as to make the eating graſs a
diſtinguiſhing characteriſtic of their nature.
I ſhall therefore give up the hypotheſis of
Nebuchadnezzar being tarred and feathered.
It would appear to me to be what may
be called a revolutionary puniſhment, beyound
what in a ſettled ſtate of the government
may be inflicted by the opprobrium of
opinion; and yet ſhort of the coercion of
the laws. It was in this middle ſtare, that
it took it's riſe with us; anſwering the
ſame end, but with a more mild operation,
than that of the lantern, at the commencement
of the revolution in France.
It took riſe in the ſea coaſt towns in America;
and I would ſuppoſe it to be owing
to ſome accidental conjunction of the seamen
and the citizens, deviſing a mode of
puniſhment for a perſon obnoxious. The
ſailors naturally thought of tar, and the
women, who uſed to be aſſiſting on theſe
occaſions, thought of bolſters and pillowcases.
Let
[Page 121]
Let it ſuffice that I have ſuggeſted the
queſtion, and leave it to be ſettled by
ſome other perſon, at ſome future period.
CHAP. XIV. WITH regard to Teague whom we
left in the hands of the unob, having
been carted about the village, until
the eyes of all were ſatiated with the spectacle,
he was diſmiſſed, but ordered to depart
from what was called the ſurvey, under
the penalty of being ſeized again, and
hanged on the liberty pole, to which they
pointed at the ſame time, and on which
there was a croſs bar, which appeared to
render it convenient for that purpoſe.
The unfortunate officer was not ſlow to
take the hint, but as ſoon as he was out
of their hands, made his way to the wilderness.
There we ſhall leave him for the
preſent, and return to the Captain, whom
we left in the village, and who had been
employed during the occaſion, reaſoning
with
[Page 122]
with the people, and endeavouring firſt
to divert them from the outrage, and afterwards
to convince them of the error
of it, and the danger of the consequences.
Inſtead of allaying their fervour,
and convincing their judgments, it
had begun to provoke, and irritate exceedingly;
and gave birth to ſurmiſes that
he was an accomplice of the exciſe officer,
which in a ſhort time grew into a rumour,
that he meant to continue the inſpection office,
and ſubſtitute the North Briton as a
deputy in the room of O'Regan, until his
return. Under this impreſſion, aſſembling
next day, they proceeded to pull down
the inſpection office altogether, and to enquire
for the Captain and his valet, that
they might tar and feather them alſo.
The Captain having had a hint of this,
and judging from the experiment he had
made, that it was in vain to oppoſe the violence
of the people, outrather to yield to it
for the preſent, thought proper to withdraw
from the village for a time, and take his
rout to wards the mountains, where he might
remain at ſome farm houſe, until a more
peaceable ſtate of things ſhould take place.
He had travelled the greater part of the
day, and towards evening when he began
to
[Page 123]
to think of taking quarters for the night,
he came to a narrow valley at the foot of
the mountain, with a ſmall, but a clear
and rapid ſtream running through the valley,
which had the appearance in ſome
parts of a natural meadow, there being intervals
of graſs plats of conſiderable extent,
with hazel copſes, and groupes of
young trees. The tall timber on the
height above, formed an agreeable ſhade,
and ledges of ſtone, worn ſmooth by the
water in ſome places, making ſmall but
perpendicular falls in the current of the
water. Diſmounting, and delaying a little
in this ſpot, to let the horſe take a mouthful
of the graſs, and deliberating whether
if no habitation appeared, it might not be
agreeable enough to take a bed there on
the natural ſward for the night; having a
ſmall quantity of proviſions in Duncan's
wallet, and a flaſk of whiſkey, which they
haltily put up at ſetting out.
At this inſtant, an aged and venerable
looking man deſcended from the mountain,
with a ſlender and delicately formed
young lad accompanying him, having on his
ſhoulder the carcaſe of a racoon, which he
held by the hinder feet, and which
ably
[Page 124]
probably had been cut out of a hollow tree, or
taken in a trap, that afternoon.
The Captain thought with himſelf, that
he would have no great objection to have
an invitation from the old man and his ſon,
as he ſuppoſed him to be, to go home with
them, and lodge for the night; taking it
for granted from the appearance of understanding
in the countenance, that they
were of a grade of education above the
bulk of the people of that country. It ſo
happened, after explanation had taken
place, that he did receive an invitation,
and went home with them.
The reſidence was romantic, ſituate on
a ſmall eminence on the north ſide of the
valley which running eaſt and weſt, the
ſun ſtruck it with his firſt beams, and the
zephyrs, playing in the direct line of their
courſe, fanned it in the ſummer heats. A
ſmall caſcade at a little diſtance, with a sandy
bottom, afforded a delightful bathing
place; and the murmur of the falling water,
in the ſilence of the night, was favourable
to ſleep.
It was a cabbin of an oblong figure,
perhaps twenty by twelve feet, conſiſting
of two apartments, the one ſmall, and serving
as a kitchen, the other anſwering the
pur-
[Page 125]
purpoſes of hall, parlour, and bed room.—
The family conſiſted of the old man, the
young lad his ſon, and an attendant who
acted as cook, butler, and valet de chambre.
Duncan having rubbed and combed
the Captain's horſe, and turned him looſe
to eat, was ſtowed away in the kitchen,
while the racoon was barbecued for supper,
and the Captain with the hoſt, and
his ſon, were purſuing the explanation of
what they reſpectively were; being yet in
a great degree unknown to each other.
It appeared that the old man was the
Marquis de Marneſſie, who had been an
emigrant from France, a ſhort time after
the commencement of the preſent revolution,
and had ſerved ſome time in a corps
of 10,000 men, which had been formed of
the nobility, under the combined princes,
againſt the republic. Having been under
the neceſſity of abandoning his ſeats with
precipitation, he had been able to carry
with him, but a few thouſand livres. Theſe
had been reduced in ſupporting himſelf
and friends in the ſervice, and he had
brought but a few hundred to America This
country he had been led to ſeek, diſguſted
with the combined powers, when the stipulations
of the convention of Pilnitz, began
to
[Page 126]
to tranſpire, and the object appeared to
be, not ſo much to ſupport the monarchy,
as to divide the country: chagrined alſo
with that neglect, and even contumely, experienced
from the German princes who
appeared to think with contempt of their
ſervices, and to repoſe their confidence alone,
in their own forces, and diſcipline.
Coming to America, he had retired
from the ſea coaſt, both to be out of the
way of the French democrats in the towns,
and in order to occupy a leſs expenſive
reſidence. He had found this valley unappropriated
by the ſtate, a warrant for an
hundred acres of which he obtained from
the land office, at the low rate of fifty
ſhillings; and having cleared a ſmall ſpot,
had made a garden, and cultivated what
is called a patch of Indian corn, ſubſiſting
and amuſing himſelf and his family, chiefly
by trapping and hunting in the neighbouring
mountain; wiſhing to forget his
former feelings, and to live upon the earth
as regardleſs of its troubles as if buried under
it. His cabbin was neat and clean,
with flooring of ſplit timber, and ſtools
made out of hewn logs. A few books,
and half a dozen ſmall paintings, a fuzee,
and
[Page 127]
and an old ſword, being the only ornament
of its walls.
Having ſupped on the barbecuedracoon,
they took bed upon the planks, each furnished
with a blanket, being the only matress,
or covering with which they were
provided.
A great deal of converſation had paſſed
in the courſe of the evening; and considerable
ſympathy of mind had taken place
on the part of the Marquis towards the
Captain, conſidering him in the light of
an emigrant with himſelf, having been obliged
to abſcond, from ſans cullotte rage,
and popular ſervor, which though not of
the ſame height with that in France, yet
was of the ſame nature, and different only
in degree.
The invitation was given by the Marquis,
and accepted on the part of the Captain,
and to remain in that retirement for ſome
weeks, until matters were compoſed, and
it might be ſafe for him to take his way again
through the country, and return to
his dwelling. Duncan took care of the
horſe, chopped wood, carried water, and
aſſiſed the French valet to barbecue racoons,
young bears, ſquirrels, pheaſants,
partridges, and other game, that the
traps
[Page 128]
traps, or fuzee and dog, of the Marquis
and his ſon, accompanied by the Captain,
could procure. Much converſation passed
in the mean time, on the affairs of
France; ſometimes ſitting on a rock on
the ſide of the mountain, or under the
ſhade of an elm tree in the graſſy valley; or
walking out to ſet a trap; at other times,
in an evening in the cabbin, when they had
returned from the labour or amuſements
of the day. Theſe converſations were
chiefly in the French language, which the
Captain ſpoke very well; but in relating
any particulars of that converſation, we
ſhall give it in Engliſh, to ſave the printer
the trouble of having it tranſlated. And
we ſhall confine ourſelves to a very few
particulars, meaning rather to haſten to
the action of the work, than to delay the
reader in an epiſode, longer than is absolutely
neceſſary to let ſome things be matured,
that are next to take place.CHAP
[Page 129]
CHAP. XV. IT was one of thoſe temperate and pleasant
evenings which in this climate succeed
the autumnal equinox, that the Marquis
and the Captain walking out together,
the ſubject of the converſation happened
to be the right of the people of France
to overthrow the monarchy, and eſtabliſh a
republic. The Captain had read the pamphlets
of Thomas Paine, entitled, “Rights
of Man,” and was a good deal diſpoſed to
ſabſcribe to the elementary principles of
that work; a leading doctrine of which is,
that at no time can the pact or cuſtoms of
anceſtors foreſtall or take away the right
of deſcendants to frame whatever kind of
government they think proper.
This muſt be underſtood, ſaid the Marquis,
like moſt other general propoſitions,
with ſome limitation, or exceptions; or at
leaſt ſome explanation, before the mind of
all, at leaſt of mine, can acquieſce in the
de-
[Page 130]
deductions. It may eaſily be ſuppoſed that
I am not a proper perſon to canvaſs this
ſubject, having been of that claſs of men,
who had all to loſe, and nothing to gain, by
a revolution in the government of the country
where I lived. Nevertheleſs, if my
feelings do not deceive me, I ought not to
be conſidered as a perſon under great prejudices.
For it ſeems to me, that I am detached
from the world, and never more expecting
to be reſtored to my country, ſo as to
live in it with reputation, or even with safety,
I am like a perſon with all his ſenſes awake,
and within a few ſeconds of death;
his vanity is aſleep, his pride is gone; he
looks back upon his purſuits, and his hopes
with true philoſophy, and makes a proper
eſtimate of all the acquiſitions, and all the
enjoyments of life. Or rather, I may be
thought to reſemble a diſembodied ſpirit,
who no longer capable of enjoying the falſe
glories of life, is not liable to be ſeduced
by the appearance of them. The ſhades
of departed men in the elyſian fields as imagined
by the ancients, and painted by the
poets, cannot be more abſtracted from
former impreſſions, than I feel myſelf to
be, in this kind of elyſian, and posthumous
valley. When I converſe with you
who
[Page 131]
who have come from the world, and may
return to it, I am in the ſituation of the
Grecian worthies defunct of life, when visited
by Ulyſſes. Achilles candidly acknowledged
to him, that he had rather
live as a hired labourer with a poor man,
who had little food, than to rule over all
the ghoſts. I will in like manner declare,
that ſuch is my predilection for my country,
and that raviſhing delight which I
would take, in breathing my native air,
and feeing my native ſoil, looking at the
buildings which were accuſtomed to ſtrike
my eyes in better days, that I would prefer
fiſhing along the ſtreams for my precarious
and daily food, or digging the ſoil, and
procuring my ſubſiſtence with a peaſant,
than to be the Preſident of the United
States, deprived of the countenance of my
countrymen, and the view of that other
heavens, and that other earth. The contempt
that I may have entertained, or at
leaſt the undervaluing inſperable from my
ſituation, which I may have felt, for the
undignifyed with nobility amongſt us, is
totally gone: I could lay myſelf down,
with the meaneſt plebian, and call him my
brother. Deſcent, title, and fortune,
have diſappeared from the eyes, and I
fee
[Page 132]
ſee nothing but man, in his rude and original
excellence, as a converſing and sociable
animal. Nevertheleſs, even in this
ſtate of mind, I cannot wholly ſubſcribe
to the analyſis of Paine. Let us examine
his poſition.
The new born infant has a right to a
ſupport from its anceſtor, until it ſhall be
of years to provide for itſelf; but has it a
right to his eſtate after it ſhall have been
of a mature age? ſurely not a natural
right; nor a right ſanctioned in all caſes even
by the municipal law; for the ancestor
may alien, or deviſe away from the
heir. But if he claims as heir, or takes by
deviſe, is it not under the artificial establishment
of ſociety, that he makes this
claim, or takes this gift? ſhall he not then
take this eſtate ſubject to that government
in the principle and form of it, under which
this eſtate was acquired, and by which it is
preſerved to him? The civil relations that
exiſt from the aggregate to him, are a law,
as well as the relations that exiſt from individuals.
Suppoſe all minors of age at
one hour, and all anceſtors juſt departed
at the ſame moment, there might be
ſome reaſon then in ſuppoſing that the
deſcendants were not bound by the
er
[Page 133]
former eſtabliſhments, but were at liberty to
introduce others; or the deſcendants
emigrating, and occupying a new ſoil,
are certainly at liberty to frame new structures:
But not while a ſingle anceſtor exists,
who has an intereſt in the old mansion
houſe, and is attached to the building,
however Gothic; becauſe the anceſtor had
this right before the minor was born, and
his birth could not take it away. I ſay,
then, contrary to the principle of Paine,
that our anceſtors having eſtabliſhed an hereditary
monarchy, it is not in the power
of the deſcendants to change it. They
may remove from under it, if they will,
but not pull the houſe down about our
heads.
The early feudaliſt, whoſe acquiſitions,
and poſſeſſion of them, depended on that
military ſubordination and tenure which
gave riſe to the ſyſtem, when he took his
place in it either as a cheſtain, or a vassal,
ſubmitted to it; he had his voice in this
ſocial compact; and ſhall his deſcendant be
allowed to unhinge the tenure, and change
the fabric which was not of his building?
ſhall he claim the advantages of that ſpecies
of government to which he has been introduced,
and not ſubmit to the
qual-
[Page 134]
inequalities of it? or ſhall it be changed but
by univerſal conſent? ſhall even a majority
change it? No: becauſe each individual
is, in the language of the law, a joint
tenant, and has a right, per my & per tant,
in the part, and in the whole. It can no
more take away the right an individual
has in the ſyſtem of government, than the
right he has in his eſtate, held by a prior
law. Upon inveſtigation, it will be found
a queſtion more of power than of right;
juſt as in theſe woods, I take the racoons
and rabbits, not that I conceive myſself to
have any right to have come from the
banks of the Loire to make theſe depredations,
but that having come, I have the
ſkill to do it.
The Captain was led to ſmile at theſe laſt
words of the Marquis, as favouring of misanthropy,
equalizing the caſe of brute
animals with men. I can eaſily excuſe,
ſaid the Captain, this ſally of your mind,
and muſt reſolve it into the wounds your
feelings have received from the reverſe of
your fortune, and the dreadful outrages
which have taken place, in the courſe of
the revolution, from the fury of the human
mind. Nor would I call in queſtion wholly
the juſtneſs of your poſition, with regard
to
[Page 135]
to the right of changing a mode of government.
Nevertheleſs, it may admit of ſome
diſcuſſion in the generality, and be ſo
bounded as to leave ſome great caſes out
of the rule. I grant you that the descendant,
on the principle of natural right, can
claim nothing more of the perſonal labour
of the anceſtor, or of his eſtate, than support,
until he ſhall be of an age which gives
ſtrength of mind and body to enable him
to provide for himſelf. But does he not
poſſeſs by his birth, a right to ſo much of
the ſoil as is neceſſary for his ſubſiſtence?
you will ſay he may emigrate. But suppose
all adjoining known lands already
peopled; he cannot emigrate without
committing injuſtice upon others. He
muſt therefore remain. How to preclude
him from all right to think, or act in affairs
of government, with a view to improve,
and to improve is to change, is restraining
the mind of man, in a particular
capable of the greateſt extent, and upon
which depends, more than on all things
elſe, the perfection of our ſpecies. I
would put it upon this point; is it conducive
to an amelioration of the ſtate of life,
and likely to produce a greater ſum of happiness,
to innovate upon eſtabliſhed forms,
or
[Page 136]
or to let them remain? It is true, indeed,
that when we conſider the throws and
convulſions with which a change in government
is uſually attended, it ought not
to be lightly attempted; and nothing
but an extreme neceſſity for a reform can
juſtify it. It is almoſt as impoſſible, comparing
a phyſical with a moral difficulty,
to change a government from deſpotiſm to
liberty, without violence, as to diſlodge a
promontory from its baſe, by any other
means, than mining and gunpowder.
Of that I am convinced, ſaid the Marquis;
for there never was a people more
generally diſpoſed to a degree of reform,
than the people of France, at the commencement
of the revolution. The writings
of philoſophers had prevaded the
minds of the higheſt orders, and it had become
the paſſion of the times to lean towards
a certain extent of liberty. It had
become the wiſh of the good, and the humour
of the weak, to advance the condition
of the peaſantry. As an inſtance of
this, I myſelf had written a book, entitled,
“ Sur le bonheur de Campagne, ” with the
expreſs view of depicting the depreſſed situation
of the common people in the
[Page 137]
country, and the means of raiſing them from
that condition.
But a reform once begun, it was found
impoſſible to arreſt it at a middle point.
It may be reſolved into a thouſand cauſes,
but the great cauſe was, the inſatiable nature
of the human mind, that will not be
contented with what is moderate. For
though there were doubtleſs a conſiderable
portion of the nobility who were oppoſed
to any diminution of their power and pageantry;
yet, on the other hand, as great
an evil exiſted in the wiſh of extreme equality
in others; or rather, a wiſh to bring all
things to a perfect level, that from thence
they might begin to aſcend themſelves.
There began to be inſincerity on the part
of the court, and licentiouſneſs on the part
of the people; and finally a conteſt, lurid
and dreadful, like the column of dark clouds
edged with blue, and fraught with lightning.
A conteſt ſo terrible, that I have
thought myſelf happy in eſcaping from it,
even though I have been obliged to call
upon the rocks and the mountains to cover
me in this valley.
The above is a ſample of thoſe conversations
which took place, between the
Marquis and the Captain, during the ſpace
of
[Page 138]
of ſome weeks which the Captain ſpent in
this rural and obſcure receſs. In the
mean time, the Count, the ſon of the Marquis,
had been diſpatched occaſionally
through the ſettlement, and to the village
where the late outrage had been perpetrated,
in order to learn what had become of
the revenue officer, as alſo to aſcertain
the ſlate of the public mind, and when it
might be ſafe for the Captain to ſhew himself
in public, and return by the main
road to his habitation.
Nothing had been heard of O'Regan,
but accounts the moſt unfavourable were
obtained of the diſpoſition of the people.
The flame of oppoſition had ſpread generally,
and the whole country appeared to
be involved in a common burning. They
had demoliſhed all inſpection houſes, far
and near; aſſembled in committees, and
framed reſolves of the utmoſt violence.
The obnoxious were baniſhed; and even
the lukewarm in the cauſe were threatened
with the deſtruction of their goods,
and injury to their perſons. They had
begun to frame guillotines, and to talk
of taking off the heads of traitors to the
cauſe.
The Captain was not a little alarmed at
these
[Page 139]
theſe proceedings; but the Marquis who
had ſeen the machine of the guillotine in
actual operation, was ſeized with a horrid
fear; and he almoſt imagined to himſelf
that he ſaw it moving of its own accord
towards him; and his reaſon told him, that
it was not all improbable but that it might
be brought to approach him very ſpeedily,
as the ſame ſans cullotte anarchy and violence
began to ſhew itſelf in theſe regions,
as had broke out in France.
CHAP.XVI. IT may now be time to make ſome enquiry
after the unfortunate exciſe officer,
who had been treated in the manner
we have mentioned.
The evening the outrage had been committed
on him, he had run ſeveral miles,
naked as he was; if a man may be ſaid to
be naked, that is inveſted with a layer of
viſcous fluid, and the adheſion of birds
feathers to cover him; through much
ger
[Page 140]
danger from the country people, who were ill
affected to his office: He had at length
gained the receſſes of a foreſt, where he
thought himſelf ſafe for the night; until
near morning, when the barking of wolves
at no great diſtance, as he thought, led
him to apprehend the being devoured by
theſe animals, who might take him for an
object of their prey. To eſcape this, he
had thought it adviſeable to climb a
ſpreading beech tree, and there remained
until after ſun riſe, when two hunters
coming along at that early hour, deſcried
him amongſt the branches; and not without
much ſurprize and aſtoniſhment. At
firſt they took him for a bear; but ſeeing
the feathers, it was decided that he muſt
be of the fowl kind. Nevertheleſs his face
and form, which appeared to be human,
made him a monſter in creation, or at
leaſt a new ſpecies of animal, never before
known in theſe woods.
They at firſt heſitated whether to take
him down by a ſhot, or to paſs on and
leave him unmoleſted. But at length it
was determined to paſs on for the preſent,
as if they had not ſeen him, and to rouſe
the ſettlement, to take him with dogs, and
the help of men. It would be a valuable
ti-
[Page 141]
tiquiſion to have ſuch a creature to carry
to the great towns for a ſhow. It might
be a fortune to a man. This being resolved
on, one of the hunters was diſpatched
to rouſe the ſettlement, while his comrade
in the mean time, had taken his ſtation on
an eminence at no great diſtance, to watch
the motions of the wild creature, and give
information of his change of ſituation.
The officer in much melancholy of mind
had deſcended from the beech, and was sitting
on the point of a rock, looking about
him like a bald eagle, when a couple of
ſtout fellows came ſuddenly behind him,
with the folds of ropes, and entrapped his
body, ſo that he could not move his arms,
which they took to be wings, but was as
tightly laced as a ſhip's yard arm, when
the ſails are furled to prepare for a tempest.
A cage having been made and put into
the bed of a waggon, he was conveyed
to the capital, when the proprietors, after
having publiſhed an advertiſement,
began to exhibit him as a curioſity, for the
ſum of a quarter dollar to each grown person,
and an eighth of a dollar to the children
of families whoſe parents brought
them with them.In
[Page 142]
In a ſhort time, this uncommon creature,
as it was thought to be, became the
ſubject of general converſation; and the
Philoſophical Society had heard of it.
Having called a ſpecial meeting, they dispatched
two members to aſcertain and report
the nature of the animal, in a memoir
to be inſerted in their tranſactions.
The two members accordingly requeſted
of the proprietors an opportunity of a leisurely
examination of the animal, and paid
them a quarter dollar each extraordinary,
for this indulgence. The proprietors were
diſpoſed, as was natural, to aſſiſt with ſome
particulars of fiction, the ſingular qualities
of the animal they had in charge. They
related, that when they firſt ſaw it, in its
flying from the mountain, it was juſt alighting
on the tree top; that having taken
it, they had at firſt offered it boiled
and roaſted fleſh, but this it refuſed; but
that at length it had come to eat fleſh both
roaſted and ſodden with conſiderable gout,
and ſometimes even with rapacity. This
was falſe, by the bye, for they had tried
the officer with raw fleſh at firſt, which he
had refuſed, and would eat only roaſted
or boiled.
The proprietors informed, that when
first
[Page 143]
firſt taken, its cries, or voice, was of a
mixed ſound, between that of a wild cat
and heron; but that it had come to have
ſome imitation of the human voice, and
even articulation, and might from that
circumſtance be probably a ſpecies of the
parrot.
The philoſophers noted all this, and
doubtleſs made a proper uſe of the particulars,
in determining the genus of the
animal. For the laſt thing that a virtuoſo
ought to queſtion, is the truth of facts. It
is by taking facts as granted, that an hypothesis
is moſt eaſily eſtabliſhed.
The tranſactions of the Society have not
been yet publiſhed. Nevertheleſs we have
been favoured with the report of the members
on this occaſion, with leave to publiſh
it, having ſo immediate a relation to this
work. It is as follows:
“The animal of which an account is
now to be given, was aſleep when we
made our viſit; and the keepers were unwilling
to diſturb him, having been kept
awake, they ſaid, too much for ſome time
paſt, by the frequency of people coming
to ſee him. However, this circumſtance
gave us an opportunity which we would
not otherwiſe have had, of obſerving him
while
[Page 144]
while aſleep. He lay with his head upon
his right ſhoulder, and his hinder legs,
drawn up to his belly, in the manner of
the dog, or bear. The drawing his breath,
and his ſnoring, is that of a man. He has
hair upon his head, with a mixture of feathers;
but upon his body there is nothing
but feathers, not in the manner of other
fowls, if fowl this may be called, ſmooth
and clean, but growing through a viſcous
ſubſtance reſembling tar, and intermixed
with it; in this particular differing from
the bird kind in general, who by means
of a ſpinal gland ſecrete an oily ſubſtance,
with which they beſmear and dreſs their
feathers; for here the oily or viſcous substance
is itſelf mixed with the feathers, and
oozing from the ſkin. Nor are the feathers
here, as in fowls in general, lying
all one way, but in various directions, as
if nature had given them to ſprout out at
random. But what is moſt extraordinary,
the ſtems are frequently protruded, and
the downy part inſerted in the ſkin.
Such were our obſervations while he lay
aſleep.
After half an hour the keepers having
awaked him, he got up from his ſtraw by
turning on his back, ſtretching out his
fore
[Page 145]
fore legs, or wings, if they may be ſo called,
raiſing himſelf on his rump, and then
by reſting on one paw, riſing with a ſlow
and eaſy motion, to his feet. It may ſeem
a catachreſis in language to talk of the
face of a beaſt; nevertheleſs we ſhall uſe
this phraſe, for though in great part covered
with feathers, and the ſame viſcous
matter with the body, yet in ſhape it has
the appearance of a human face, full as
much or more, than the baboon, or others
of the ape ſpecies. It cannot be ſaid
to laugh, but rather grin, though once or
twice in our preſence, you would have
thought that it exhibited a dilatation of the
oſcular muſcles, as if attempting to laugh.
The eye is of a grey colour, and the
look wild, but ſteady, like that of a person
under an impreſſion of amazement
and wonder. The neck, and whole form
of the body, and even the hinder legs,
have a ſtrong reſemblance of the human.
Were it not for the feathers, a perſon on a
ſuperficial view might miſtake the wings
for arms, being attached to the body by
a ſhoulder blade, and the claws reſembling
the fingers of a Negro.
If this animal is to be referred to the
quadruped, or beaſt kind, it would moſt
natur-
[Page 146]
naturally be claſſed with the Ouran Outang,
or Wild Man of Africa: If with the
bird kind, we ſhall be totally at a loſs to
aſſign the genus. For though it has a
head and face not unlike the ouzel, or
the grey owl, yet in the body it has no
reſemblance. Nevertheleſs we ſhould certainly
give it a place amongſt fowls, were
it not that it has ribs inſtead of the lamina,
or ſide plates, which are peculiar to the
winged race alone: as alſo, becauſe we
have reaſon to think it has an epiglottis,
from the articulation of its ſounds, by
which it has come to imitate our ſpeech,
with a pronunciation not unlike that
kind of brogue, which we remark in ſome
of the weſt country Iriſh. It appears to
want the ingluvies or craw; but has a gizzard,
and digeſts its food by the dissolving
power of the gaſtric juices.
All things conſidered, we incline to
think that it is an animal of a ſpecies wholly
new, and of a middle nature between
a bird and a beaſt; yet ſo widely differing
from a bat, as not to be claſſed with it.
This diſcovery leads to new and important
conſiderations. We do not undertake
to decide for the Society; but ſhall
venture to ſuggeſt ſome particulars.this
[Page 147]
This animal would ſeem to form the link
between the brutal and the human species;
being nearer to it in ſome particulars
than the Ouran Outang itſelf; and
eſpecially in the evident articulation of
certain ſounds. Articulation was with
the ancients, the diſtinguiſhing characteristic
of the human kind. The poet Homer
has the epither frequently, Meropon,
Antbropon: articulate, ſpeaking men. Yet
we find from this diſcovery, that articulation,
at leaſt to ſome extent, is not peculiar
to man alone. This is an incidental
characteriſtic, given by the poet; but
the diſtinguiſhing marks has been given
with more ſubtilty of obſervation, by his
ſcholar Ariſtotle, whoſe definition is that
of Animal bipes implumis . A two legged,
unfeathered animal: For though it might
be contended with ſome plauſibility, that
this animal has two legs; yet it is evidently
feathered; not indeed with the long
and ſtrong plumage of the oſtrich, but with
the down of a gooſe, or duck. This animal,
like man, has not a tail. Nevertheless
it has the os coccygis, or termination
of the ſpinal bone, longer than in man; as
was aſcertained by one of us, who in the
interval of his ſleeping, felt his rump. Not
that
[Page 148]
that we would draw from this any conclusion
in favour of the hypotheſis of Monboddo,
that men had once tails; but that
in the ſcate of animals, there is a gradual
nearing of diſtance, from having long tails,
to the having no tail at all.
The moſt important enquiry comes
now to be inveſtigated, namely, whether
this be an animal new to diſcovery, or
actually new to the world, and juſt lately
come into exiſtence in the natural kingdom.
No account of it having been heretofore
given by any traveller in America,
either from the information of the natives,
or perſonal obſervation of their own,
founds a ſtrong preſumption that it is of
a novel breed of creatures; but that it is
prepared to preſerve its ſpecies, with a female,
may be inferred, from the circumstance
of nature having furniſhed it with
teſticles.
The idea of original production, involves
in it the late hypotheſis of Macilhattan,
in his treatiſe, De Seminibus, that
nature has within herſe f an aboriginal productive
power; ſo that as ſome animals
diſappear from the earth, the Mammoth
for inſtance, others ſpring up, that were
never known before. Which hypotheſis,
by
[Page 149]
by the bye, ſo far as reſpects the extinction
of animals, receives conſiderable countenance
from the ancient relations of the gorgon,
the hydra, &c. and the leſs remote allusions
to winged gryphins, orchs, &c. If this
ſhould be found to be the fact, it may be
ſuggeſted whether it would be going too
far to ſay, that it might be in the compaſs
of human reſearch, to diſcover the ſubtil
combination of cauſes and effects, necessary
to the production of life, and the formation
of a living creature; and that the
time might not be far diſtant, when ingenious
chymiſts might undertake and accomplish
the analyſis of matter, and synthesis
of compoſition, ſo as to be able to
make animals, to thoſe who ſhould bespeak
them; as a workman would make
articles of furniture for a hall or aſſembly
room. This would ſave much expence,
in feeding, and providing them for food,
or for the purpoſes of labour, and burdens.
We have thought it ſufficient to ſuggeſt this,
and propoſe it to the induſtry and ingenuity
of the learned in philoſophic ſcience.”
So far the memoir.
The ſociety expreſſed their approbation
of it; and it was propoſed to make a purchase
of this animal, for the purpoſe of
ex-
[Page 150]
examining it more fully, in their own
hall, and poſſibly of ſending it to the societies
abroad, for their examination alſo.
This propoſition was adopted, and the ſame
members appointed to drive a bargain with
the proprietors, for the ſubject of their
ſhew.
When the deputation came forward,
and began to traffic with the keepers, proposing
a purchaſe of the curioſity in their
poſſeſſion, the revenue officer, in the
cage juſt by, raiſed what is called the Irish
howl, in a moſt pitiable manner; recollecting
what the Captain had told him,
on a former occaſion, with regard to the
uſe to which they would apply him, when
they ſhould have him in their power.
God love your ſhouls, my dear maſters,
ſaid he, that have taken me in the wild
woods. I care not ſat you make o'd me,
a wild baſte, or a turky buzzard; or a
fiſh o'd de varer, while I gat good mate
to ate, and clean ſtraw to ly down upon;
but for the ſake o'd de holy fathers, do
not ſell me to defe filoſophers, that will
cut me up as you would a dead cat, and
put my ſkin upon a pitchfork, juſt to plaſe
deir own fancies; rader let me ſtay where
I am, and ſhew me to de good paple, dat
gape
[Page 151]
gape and ſtare, but keep deir teeth in deir
mouths, and luke fooliſh, but dont affer
to bite.
The philoſophers aſſured him, that his
apprehenſions were without foundation;
having not the leaſt intention of diffecting,
at leaſt until he died a natural death.
Doubtleſs, it might be an object, to ascertain
from the internal ſtructure of his body,
to what genus or claſs of animals he
might belong: nevertheleſs, they were
perſuaded, the ſociety would content themselves,
with the obſervations drawn from
external ſtructure, at leaſt for ſome time.
On this turning round to the proprietors,
they reſumed the converſation relative to
a purchaſe; the ſuppoſed animal continuing
to vociferate and roar horribly.
In the mean time, the affair of this
wild man, beaſt, bird, fiſh, or whatever
it was, began to make a noiſe in the town;
the people who had come to ſee it, being
divided in opinion; ſome believing it to
be a monſter, or new animal in the creation;
others diſpoſed to be of opinion,
and others confidently aſſerting, that it
was a real man.
Coming to the ear of the chief juſtice of
the ſlate, it occured to him, that if a man,
the
[Page 152]
the confining him in that manner was a
reſtraint upon the liberty of the ſubject;
and ought not to be permitted in a country
where the laws govern. Accordingly,
he had iſſued his writ of Habeas Corpus
to the keepers, commanding them forthwith
to bring before him, the animal in
their poſſeſſion, and to aſſign the cauſe of
this detainer. The officer came forward
at the moment the keepers were about to
cloſe the bargain with the philoſophers,
and ſhewed his writ. They were obliged to
obey; and came forward with their charge
before the chief juſtice and aſſociate judges,
in open court then ſitting, alledging property
in themſelves by caption, and employing
counſel to ſupport this allegation.
The court having aſſigned counſel to
ſupport the Habeas Corpus, the argument
began: Counſellor Patch firſt.
May it pleaſe your honours,
I take this to be an animal in which
there can be no property abſolute or qualified,
being fera natara, or of an untamed
nature, ſuch as a panther, or a
buffalo; of which it is laid down no larceny
can be committed, as not being the
the ſubject of property. 4 Black. 235;
referring for authorities to 1 Hal. P. C. 511.
Foſt
[Page 153]
Foſt. 366. 1 Hawk. P. C. 94. Here counfeller
Patch read the authorities.
Councellor Catch in reply: But by the
ſame authorities, it is laid down, that animals
fera natura, or wild, when reclaimed,
or confined, and may ſerve for
food, may be the ſubject of property, as
deer incloſed in a park, fiſh in a trunk,
or pheaſants or partridges in a mew.
But is it conceded, that this animal can
ſerve for food? rejoined counſellor Patch.
The queſtion to be conſidered in the
firſt place, interrupted the chief juſtice, is
whether this creature is of the brutal or
the human kind. Speak to that point.
Counſellor Scratch, as amicus curia observed,
that this being a queſtion of fact,
was moſt properly determinable by a jury.
Counſellor Patch thought not, as the trial
by inſpection in the caſe of infancy, which
was within the province of the court, was
analogous to this. The court were of opinion
with counſellor Scratch, and proposed
to the counſel for the thing in custody,
to bring a writ de Homine Replegiando,
or Replevin, for the body of a man,
as the proper writ to bring the caſe before
a jury; or that an iſſue might be made
upon the return to the Habeas Corpus, by
con-
[Page 154]
conſent; and in that ſhape let it be tried.
It was agreed; property pleaded, the iſſue
made up, and the jury about to be impanelled.
Counſellor Patch under the principle of
an alien having a right to a jury de medietata
lingua, demanded, that the jury ſhould
conſiſt of one half beaſts.
Curia advifari vult, and in the mean
time deſired the counſel to ſearch for precedents.
No inſtance was found of the
jury de medietata lingua, being carried
ſo far as this, and the motion was overruled.
The jury being now ſworn, the counſel
for the keepers, offered the two members
of the Philoſophical Society, who had examined
him, to eſtabliſh his brutality;
this evidence was offered on the principle,
that it was peculiarly within the province
of their ſtudies to aſcertain a point of this
nature, and were therefore the proper witnesses;
as in a caſe within the cuſtom of
merchants, individuals of this occupation
are uſally called. According to the maxim
of the civil law, Unicuique, in arte ſua,
perito credendum eſt .
Exception to this evidence, that they
were intereſted, having had an eye to the
pur-
[Page 155]
purchaſe of this thing, and actually in negociation
for it.
The objection was overruled, as going
to the credibility, not the competency.
The witneſſes were clear that this thing
was not of the human race, though as to
what claſs of brute animals it was to be referred,
they were not yet prepared to decide.
To the weight of this evidence counsellor
Catch oppoſed the evidence of nature
herſelf; the thing had a human voice and
ſpeech, that of a weſt country Iriſhman;
no inſtance of which was to be found in any
natural hiſtorian that had ever written.
He would call upon the gentleman to produce
any authority to that effect.
Counſellor Patch, was not prepared with
an authority to prove, that beaſts had been
found that could ſpeak Iriſh; but that it
was no uncommon thing in early ages, and
in many countries, for beaſts to ſpeak
fome language; ſuch as Latin, Greek;
for which he might refer the gentleman to
the Æſopi Fabulæ, or thoſe of Phedrus;
nor was he without an authority at hand,
to prove that even in more modern times,
there were many beaſts who could ſpeak
Engliſ; this authority was that well known
book,
[Page 156]
book, The Hiſtory of Reynard the Fox;
which he now produced, and from which
he read paſſages.
The court thought the authority in
point, and the evidence not to be got over,
and directed the jury to find accordingly;
which they did, in favour of the
keepers, and the Habeas Corpus, was dismissed,
and the thing remanded to custody.
The members after this, ſtruck a bargain
the more eaſily with the keepers; as they
had been a good deal alarmed at the riſk
they had run of having this property taken
from them. The Society after having retained
the curioſity a year or ſo, and ascertained
its ſtructure and properties, proposed
ſending it to ſome of the foreign societies,
who had expreſſed a with to have a
an occural examination of it alſo. The preference
was given to the ſocieties of France;
and it was accordingly ſhipped in a brig
of Blair M`Clenachen, that was bound to
Nantz. At this place on coming aſhore,
the cage, by rolling and tubling in it,
having worn off the tar and feathers from
his back-ſide, he was miſtaken for a ſans
culotte; and the mob riſing, broke the
incloſure, and let him out. I have not
heard
[Page 157]
heard whether he joined the army of the
patriots, or is on his way home again to
this country.
CHAP. XVII. IN the mean time the oppoſition to the
exciſe law, and diſturbance in the survey,
had alarmed the government. The
militia had been called to ſuppreſs the insurrection.
They had marched, and were
within a ſhort diſtance of the ſurvey.
The Captain in the mean time having
heard of this, and believing the army now
to be within ſupporting diſtance, left the
Marquis, and came to the village where
the outrage had commenced. He was not
wanting in explaining to the people, the
illegality and great impolicy of their proceedings,
as ſubverſive of the government,
and deſtructive of the firſt principle of a
republican government.
His conduct, nevertheleſs, had been otherwise
underſtood by the
on,
[Page 158]
administration, and he was greatly obnoxious with
the army and judiciary. When the troops
had attained the point of deſtination, and
the judicial examinations had been ſet on
foot with regard to the conduct of individuals,
it was always a principal queſtion,
What do you know of Captain Farrago?
They had heard of his man Duncan, and
thinking that he muſt be acquainted with
the ſecrets of the Captain, orders were
given to apprehend him, under the idea of
a criminal.
The examinations were conducted with
great diſpatch, many hands making light
work, there being a vaſt number of assistant
interrogators, and depoſition-takers, in
the capacity of journeymen, and apprentices.
It was a good ſchool for ſtudents of
the law, and young clerks who came out
on the expedition. It is true, they were
not very capable of taking the true ſenſe of
what was ſtated in the teſtimony, nor very
careful to take down for and againſt;
but the giving them a habit of aſking
queſtions, and ſpelling words, was of
more conſequence to the public, than the
doing juſtice to people that had lived in a
remote corner of the commonwealth.
Duncan having been arreſted, was put
un-
[Page 159]
under guard with ſeveral others. When
he came to his examination, he was aſked
the following queſtion, and made the following
anſwers: Are you aquainted with
John Farrago? I hae a ſhort acquaintance
ſince I hae been in his ſervice, about a
month or twa. Has he ever converſed with
you on the ſubject of politics? He wad na
converſe wi' me, he kens I dinna understand
them. Do you not know him to be
an inſurgent? Indeed I dinna ken ony ſik
a thing. I believe he is no juſt vera right
in the head, but I dinna believe he tuk any
part in ſtirring up the inſurrection. He
has gane about the kintra for ſome time
paſt, in an odd way, wi' ane Teague O'Regan,
an Iriſhman, that got to be a gauger,
and came out to this kintra, to ſet up
in the buſineſs, and made a' this broil;
and ſince he parted wi' him, he has employed
me in the like capacity, no much to
my profit, if I am purſued, and put in fear
o' my life, and to hide three weeks in a
glen for fear o' the mob, and now to be
hanged for hanged ha'ing been in the kintra; and
what is mare, to be made a witneſs againſt
the Captain, when I hae nathing to ſay
o' him. The deel tak me, gin I ſwear
a word to wrang my conſcience. That is
the
[Page ]
[Page 160]
the ſhort and the lang o' it. Sae ye need
ſay na mare about it, but gae to the examination
o' ſome other body, for U hae
told ye a' that I hae to ſay about it.
Duncan was diſmiſſed, and the Captain
himſelf; and falling into the hands of an
aſſiſtant examiner of ſenſe, his account
and explanation was underſtood, and he
acquitted from the ſuſpicion of having
ſwerved from the duty of a good citizen.
Setting out after this with Duncan, he
returned to his home; having experienced
a number of incidents, and ſome danger
in his travels, ſufficient for one ramble.
FINIS
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
$$$
