Modern Chivalry: Containing the Adventures of Captain John Farrago, and Teague O'Regan, His Servant, Part I, Volumes 1-3 (1792)(1793)
Author: Brackenridge, Hugh Henry.
Publication info: Modern Chivalry: Containing the Adventures Of Captain John Farrago, and Teague O'regan, His Servant, Part I, Volumes 1-3 . 006-099. Philadelphia: John M'Culloch, 1793.

17931793 Front matter Covers, Edges and Spine
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
Preliminaries
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
Captain John Farrago,
AND
TEAGUE OREGAN,
HIS SERVANT.
VOLUME I.
By H. H. BRACKENRIDGE.
[Page ]
Preliminaries
[Page ]
Title Page
Modern Chivalry:
CONTAINING THE
ADVENTURES
OF
Captain John Farrago,
AND
TEAGUE OREGAN,
HIS SERVANT.
VOLUME I.
By H. H. BRACKENRIDGE.
Quicquid agunt homines, nostri, farrago libelli.
Juvenal.
PHILADELPHIA:
M.DCC.XCII.
[ Entered according to Act of Congreſs. ]
Preliminaries
[Page ]
[Page ]
INTRODUCTION.
IT has been a queſtion for ſome time paſt,
what would be the beſt means to fix the
Engliſh language. Some have thought of
Dictionaries, others of Inſtitutes, for that
purpoſe. Swift, I think it was, who proposed,
in his letters to the Earl of Oxford,
the forming an academy of learned men,
in order by their obſervations and rules,
to ſettle the true ſpelling, accentuation,
and pronunciation, as well as the proper
words, and the pureſt, moſt ſimple, and
perfect phraſeology of language. It has
always appeared to me, that if ſome great
maſter of ſtile ſhould ariſe, and without
regarding ſentiment, or ſubject, give an
[Page 006]
example of good language in his composition,
which might ſerve as a model to
future ſpeakers and writers, it would do
more to fix the orthography, choice of
words, idiom of phraſe, and ſtructure of
ſentence, than all the Dictionaries and Institutes
that have been ever made. For
certainly, it is much more conducive to
this end, to place before the eyes what is
good writing, than to ſuggeſt it to the
ear, which may forget in a ſhort time all
that has been ſaid.
It is for this reaſon, that I have undertaken
this work; and that it may attain
the end the more perfectly, I ſhall consider
language only, not in the leaſt regarding
the matter of the work; but as musicians,
when they are about to give the
moſt excellent melody, pay no attention
to the words that are ſet to muſic; but
take the moſt unmeaning phraſes, ſuch as
ſol, fa, la; ſo here, culing out the choiceſt
ſlowers of diction, I ſhall pay no regard
to the idea; for it is not in the power of
human ingenuity to attain two things perfectly
at once. Thus we ſee that they mistake
greatly, who think to have a clock
that can at once tell the hour of the day,
the age of the moon, and the day of the
[Page 007]
week, month, or year; becauſe the complexness
of the machine hinders that perfection
which the ſimplicity of the works
and movements can alone give. For it is
not in nature to have all things in one.
If you are about to chuſe a wife, and expect
beauty, you muſt give up family and fortune;
or if you attain theſe, you muſt at
leaſt want good temper, health, or ſome
other advantage: ſo to expect good language
and good ſenſe, at the ſame time, is
abſurd, and not in in the compaſs of common
nature to produce. Attempting only
one thing, therefore, we may entertain
the idea of hitting the point of perfection.
It has been owing to an inattention to this
principle, that ſo many fail in their attempts
at good writing. A Jack of all
Trades, is proverbial of a bungler; and we
ſcarcely ever find any one who excels in
two parts of the ſame art; much leſs in
two arts at the ſame time. The ſmooth
poet wants ſtrength; and the orator of a
good voice, is deſtitute of logical reaſon
and argument. How many have I heard
ſpeak, who, were they to attempt voice
only, might be reſpectable; but undertaking,
at the ſame time, to carry ſenſe along
with them, they utterly fail, and
[Page 008]
become contemptible. One thing at once,
is the beſt maxim that ever came into the
mind of man. This might be illuſtrated
by a thouſand examples; but I ſhall not
trouble myſelf with any; as it is not ſo
much my object to convince others as to
ſhew the motives by which I myſelf am
governed. Indeed, I could give authority
which is ſuperior to all examples;
viz. that of the poet Horace; who, speaking
on this very ſubject of excellence in
writing, ſays, Quidvis, that is, whatever
you compoſe, let it be, ſimplex duntaxit
& unum: that is, ſimple, and one thing
only.
It will be needleſs for me to ſay any
thing about the critics; for as this work
is intended as a model or rule of good
writing, it cannot be the ſubject of criticism.
It is true, Homer has been criticised
by a Zoilus and an Ariſtotle; but
the one contented himſelf with pointing
out defects; the other, beauties. But
Zoilus has been cenſured, Ariſtotle praised;
becauſe in a model there can be no
defect; error conſiſting in a deviation from
the truth, and faults, in an aberration from
the original of beauty; ſo that where there
are no faults there can be no food for
[Page 009]
criticiſm, taken in the unfavourable ſenſe
of finding fault with the productions of an
author. I have no objections, therefore,
to any praiſe that may be given to this
work; but to cenſure or blame muſt appear
abſurd; becauſe it cannot be doubted
but that it will perfectly anſwer the end
propoſed.
Being a book without thought, or the
ſmalleſt degree of ſenſe, it will be uſeful to
young minds, not fatiguing their understandings,
and eaſily introducing a love
of reading and ſtudy. Acquiring language
at firſt by this means, they will afterwards
gain knowledge. It will be uſeful especially
to young men of light minds intended
for the bar or pulpit. By heaping too much
upon them, ſtile and matter at once, you
ſurfeit the ſtomach, and turn away the
appetite from literary entertainment, to
horſe-racing and cock-fighting. I ſhall
conſider myſelf, therefore, as having performed
an acceptable ſervice to all weak
and viſionary people, if I can give them
ſomething to read without the trouble of
thinking. But theſe are collataral advantages
of my work, the great object of which
is, as I have ſaid before, to give a model of
perfect ſtile in writing. If hereafter any
[Page 010]
author of ſupereminent abilities, ſhould
chuſe to give this ſtile a body, and make
it the covering to ſome work of ſenſe, as
you would wrap fine ſilk round a beautiful
form, ſo that there may be, not only
veſtment, but life in the object, I have no
objections; but ſhall be rather ſatisfied with
having it put to ſo good a uſe.
Main text
[Page 011]
CHAP. I.
JOHN FARRAGO, was a man of about
fifty-three years of age, of good natural
ſenſe, and conſiderable reading; but in
ſome things whimſical, owing perhaps to
his greater knowledge of books than of the
world; but, in ſome degree, alſo, to his
having never married, being what they call
an old batchelor, a characteriſtic of which
is, uſually, ſingularity and whim. He had
the advantage of having had in early life,
an academic education; but having never
applied himſelf to any of the learned professions,
he had lived the greater part of his
life on a ſmall farm, which he cultivated
with ſervants or hired hands, as he could
conveniently ſupply himſelf with either.
The ſervant that he had at this time, was
an Iriſhman, whoſe name was Teague
Oregan. I ſhall ſay nothing of the character
of this man, becauſe the very name imports
what he was.
A ſtrange idea came into the head of
Captain Farrago about this time; for, by
[Page 012]
the bye, I had forgot to mention that having
being choſen captain of a company of
militia in the neighbourhood, he had gone
by the name of Captain ever ſince; for the
rule is, once a captain, and always a captain;
but, as I was obſerving, the idea
had come into his head, to ſaddle an old
horſe that he had, and ride about the world
a little, with his man Teague at his heels,
to ſee how things were going on here and
there, and to obſerve human nature. For
it is a miſtake to ſuppoſe, that a man cannot
learn man by reading him in a corner,
as well as on the wideſt ſpace of transaction.
At any rate, it may yield amusement.
It was about a ſcore of miles from his
own houſe, that he fell in with what we call
Races. The jockeys ſeeing him advance,
with Teague by his ſide, whom they took
for his groom, conceived him to be ſome
perſon who had brought his horſe to enter
for the purſe. Coming up and accoſting
him, ſaid they, You ſeem to be for the
races, Sir; and have a horſe to enter. Not
at all, ſaid the captain; this is but a common
palfrey, and by no means remarkable
for ſpeed or bottom; he is a common
plough horſe which I have uſed on my farm
[Page 013]
for ſeveral years, and can ſcarce go beyond
a trot; much leſs match himſelf with your
blooded horſes that are going to take the
field on this occaſion.
The jockeys were of opinion, from the
ſpeech, that the horſe was what they call a
bite, and that under the appearance of leanness
and ſtiffneſs, there was concealed
ſome hidden quality of ſwiftneſs uncommon.
For they had heard of inſtances,
where the moſt knowing had been taken
in by mean looking horſes; ſo that having
laid two, or more, to one, they were nevertheless
bit by the bet; and the mean
looking nags, proved to be horſes of a more
than common ſpeed and bottom. So that
there is no truſting appearances. Such
was the reaſoning of the jockeys. For they
could have no idea, that a man could come
there in ſo ſingular a manner, with a
groom at his foot, unleſs he had ſome
great object of making money by the adventure.
Under this idea, they began to
interrogate him with reſpect to the blood
and pedigree of his horſe: whether he
was of the dove, or the bay mare that
took the purſe; and was imported by
ſuch a one at ſuch a time? whether his
ſire was Tamerlane or Bajazet?
[Page 014]
The Captain was irritated at the questions,
and could not avoid anſwering.—
Gentlemen, ſaid he, it is a ſtrange thing
that you ſhould ſuppoſe that it is of any
conſequence what may be the pedigree of a
horſe. For even in men it is of no avail.
Do we not find that ſages have had blockheads
for their ſons; and that blockheads
have had ſages? It is remarkable, that as
eſtates have ſeldom laſted three generations,
ſo underſtanding and ability have
ſeldom been tranſmitted to the ſecond.
There never was a greater man, take him
as an orator and philoſopher, than Cicero:
and never was there a perſon who had
greater opportunities than his ſon Marcus;
and yet he proved of no account or reputation.
This is an old inſtance, but
there are a thouſand others. Cheſterfield
and his ſon are mentioned. It is true,
Philip and Alexander may be ſaid to be
exceptions: Philip of the ſtrongeſt possible
mind; capable of almoſt every thing
we can conceive; the deepeſt policy and
the moſt determined valour; his ſon Alexander
not deficient in the firſt, and before
him in the laſt; if it is poſſible to be before
a man than whom you can ſuppoſe
nothing greater. It is poſſible, in modern
[Page 015]
times, that Tippo Saib may be equal to
his father Hyder Ali. Some talk of the
two Pitts. I have no idea that the ſon is, in
any reſpect, equal to old Sir William. The
one is a laboured artificial miniſter: the
other ſpoke with the thunder, and acted
with the lightning of the gods. I will
venture to ſay, that when the preſent John
Adamſes, and Lees, and Jefferſons, and Jays,
and Henrys, and other great men, who figure
upon the ſtage at this time, have gone
to ſleep with their fathers, it is an hundred
to one if there is any of their deſcendents
who can fill their places. Was I to lay a bet
for a great man, I would ſooner pick up
the brat of a tinker, than go into the great
houſes to chuſe a piece of ſtuff for a man
of genius. Even with reſpect to perſonal
appearance, which is more in the power
of natural production, we do not ſee that
beauty always produces beauty; but on
the contrary, the homlieſt perſons have
oftentimes the beſt favoured offspring; ſo
that there is no rule or reaſon in theſe
things. With reſpect to this horſe, therefore,
it can be of no moment whether he is
blooded or ſtuded, or what he is. He is a
good old horſe, uſed to the plough, and carries
my weight very well; and I have never
[Page 016]
yet made enquiry with reſpect to his ancestors,
or affronted him ſo much as to
caſt up to him the defect of parentage.
I bought him ſome years ago from Niel
Thomas, who had him from a colt. As
far as I can underſtand, he was of a brown
mare that John M`Neis had; but of what
horſe I know no more than the horſe himself.
His gaits are good enough, as to
riding a ſhort journey of ſeven or eight
miles, or the like; but he is rather a pacer
than a troter; and though his bottom may
be good enough in carrying a bag to the
mill, or going in the plough, or the ſled,
or the harrow, &c. yet his wind is not ſo
good, nor his ſpeed, as to be fit for the
heats.
The jockeys thought the man a fool, and
gave themſelves no more trouble about
him.
The horſes were now entered, and about
to ſtart for the purſe. There was Black
and all Black, and Snip, John Duncan's
Barbary Slim, and ſeveral others. The
riders had been weighed, and when mounted,
the word was given. It is needleſs to
deſcribe a race; every body knows the
circumſtances of it. It is ſufficient to ſay,
that from the bets that were laid, there
was much anxiety, and ſome paſſion in
[Page 017]
the minds of thoſe concerned: So, that as
two of the horſes, Black and all Black,
and Slim, came out near together; there
was diſpute and confuſion. It came to
kicking and cuffing in ſome places. The
Captain was a good deal hurt with ſuch indecency
amongſt gentlemen, and advancing,
addreſſed them in the following manner:
Gentleman, this is an unequal and
unfair proceeding. It is unbecoming modern
manners, or even the ancient. For at
the Olympic games of Greece, where were
celebrated horſe and chariot races, there
was no ſuch hurry ſcurry as this; and in
times of chivalry itſelf, where men ate,
drank, and ſlept on horſe-back, though
there was a great deal of pell-meling, yet no
ſuch diſorderly work as this. If men had
a difference, they couched their lances,
and ran full tilt at one another; but no
ſuch indecent expreſſions, as villain, scoundrel,
liar, ever came out of their mouths.
There was the moſt perfect courteſy in
thoſe days of heroiſm and honour; and
this your horſe-racing, which is a germ of
the amuſement of thoſe times, ought to be
conducted on the ſame principles of decorum,
and good breeding.
As he was ſpeaking, he was joſtled by
[Page 018]
ſome one in the croud, and thrown from
his horſe; and had it not been for Teague,
who was at hand, and helped him on again,
he would have ſuffered damage. As
it was, he received a contuſion in his head,
of which he complained much; and having
left the race-ground, and coming to a
ſmall cottage, he ſtopped a little, to alight
and dreſs the wound. An old woman who
was there, thought they ought to take a little
of his water, and ſee how it was with
him; but the Captain having no faith in
telling diſorders by the urine, thought
proper to ſend for a ſurgeon who was hard
by, to examine the bruiſe, and apply bandages.
The ſurgeon attended, and examining
the part, pronounced it a contuſion
of the cerebrum. But as there appeared
but little laceration, and no fracture, simple
or compound, the pia mater could not
be injured; nor even could there be more
than a ſlight impreſſion on the dura mater.
So that trepaning did not at all appear necessary.
A moſt fortunate circumſtance;
for a wound in the head, is of all places
the moſt dangerous; becauſe there can be
no amputation to ſave life. There being but
one head to a man, and that being the residence
of the five ſenſes, it is impoſſible
[Page 019]
to live without it. Nevertheleſs, as the
preſent caſe was highly dangerous, as it
might lead to a ſubſultus tendinum, or
lock-jaw, it was neceſſary to apply cataplasms,
in order to reduce inflammation,
and bring about a ſanative diſpoſition of
the parts. Perhaps it might not be amiſs,
to take an anodyne as a refrigerant. Many
patients had been loſt by the ignorance
of empirics preſcribing bracers; whereas,
in the firſt ſtage of a contuſion, relaxing
and antifebrile medicines are proper. A
little phlebotomy was no doubt neceſſary,
to prevent the burſting of the blood veſſels.
The Captain hearing ſo many hard
words, and bad accounts of this caſe, was
much alarmed. Nevertheleſs he did not
think it could be abſolutely ſo dangerous.
For it ſeemed to him that he was not ſick
at heart, or under any mortal pain. The
ſurgeon obſerved, that in this caſe he could
not himſelf be a judge. For the very part
was affected by which he was to judge, viz.
the head; that it was no uncommon thing
for men in the extremeſt caſes to imagine
themſelves out of danger; whereas in reality,
they were in the greateſt poſſible:
that notwithſtanding the ſymptoms were
mild, yet from the contuſion, a
[Page 020]
mortification might enſue. Hypocrates, who might
be ſtiled an elementary phyſician, and has
a treatiſe on this very ſubject, is of opinion,
that the moſt dangerous ſymptom,
is a topical inſenſibility; but among the
moderns, Sydenham conſiders it in another
point of view, and thinks that where
there is no pain, there is as great reaſon
to ſuppoſe that there is no hurt, as that
there is a mortal one. Be this as it may,
antiſeptic medicines might be very proper.
The Captain hearing ſo much jargon,
and conſcious to himſelf that he was by
no means in ſo bad a ſtate as this ſon of
Eſcalapius would repreſent, broke out into
ſome paſſion. It is, ſaid he, the craft of
your profeſſion to make the caſe worſe than
it is, in order to increaſe the perquiſites.
But if there is any faith in you, make the
ſame demand, and let me know your real
judgment. The ſurgeon was irritated with
his diſtruſt, and took it into his head to
fix ſome apprehenſion in the mind of his
patient, if poſſible, that his caſe was not
without danger. Looking ſtedfaſtly at
him for ſome time, and feeling his pulſe,
there is, ſaid he, an evident delirium approaching.
This argues an affection of
the brain, but it will be neceſſary, after
[Page 021]
ſome ſoporiferous draughts, to put the
patient to ſleep. Said the Captain, If you
will give me about a pint of whiſkey and
water, I will try to go to ſleep myſelf. Adeleterious
mixture, in this caſe, ſaid the
ſurgeon, cannot be proper; eſpecially a
diſtillation of that quality. The Captain
would hear no more; but requeſting the
man of the cabin, to let him have the
ſpirits propoſed, drank a pint or two of
grog, and having bound up his head with
a handkerchief, went to bed.
[Page 022]
CHAP. II.
Containing ſome general Reflections.
THE firſt reflection that ariſes, is, the
good ſenſe of the Captain; who was
unwilling to impoſe his horſe for a racer;
not being qualified for the courſe. Because,
as an old lean beaſt, attempting a
trot he was reſpectable enough; but going
out of his nature, and affecting ſpeed,
he would have been contemptible. The
great ſecret of preſerving reſpect, is the
cultivating and ſhewing to the beſt advantage
the powers that we poſſeſs, and the not
going beyond them. Every thing in its element
is good, and in their proper ſphere all
natures and capacities are excellent. This
thought might be turned into a thouſand
different ſhapes, and cloathed with various
expreſſions; but after all, it comes to the
old proverb at laſt, Ne ſutor ultra crepidam,
Let the cobler ſtick to his laſt; a ſentiment
we are about more to illuſtrate in the
ſequel of this work.
[Page 023]
The ſecond reflection that ariſes, is, the
ſimplicity of the Captain; who was ſo unacquainted
with the world, as to imagine that
jockeys and men of the turf could be composed
by reaſon and good ſenſe; whereas
there are no people who are by education
of a leſs philoſophic turn of mind. The
company of horſes is by no means favourable
to good taſte and genius. The rubbing
and currying them, but little enlarges the
faculties, or improves the mind; and even
riding, by which a man is carried ſwiftly
through the air, though it contributes to
health, yet ſtores the mind with few or no
ideas; and as men naturally conſimilate
with their company, ſo it is obſervable
that your jockeys are a claſs of people not
greatly removed from the ſagacity of a
good horſe. Hence moſt probably the
fable of the centaur, among the ancients;
by which they held out the moral of the
jockey and the horſe being one beaſt.
A third reflection is, that which he
expreſt; viz. the profeſſional art of the surgeon
to make the moſt of the caſe, and the
technical terms uſed by him. I have to
declare, that it is with no attempt at wit,
that the terms are ſet down, or the art of
the ſurgeon hinted at; becauſe it is ſo
[Page 024]
common place a thing to ridicule the peculiarities
of a profeſſion, that it ſavours of
mean parts to indulge it. For a man of
real genius will never walk in the beaten
track, becauſe his object is what is new
and uncommon. This ſurgeon does not
appear to have been a man of very great
ability; but the Captain was certainly
wrong in declining his preſcriptions; for
the maxim is, Unicuique in arte, ſua perito,
credendum eſt; every one is to be truſted
in his profeſſion.
[Page 025]
CHAP. III.
THE Captain riſing early next morning,
and ſetting out on his way, had
now arrived at a place where a number of
people were convened, for the purpoſe of
electing perſons to repreſent them in the
legiſlature of the ſtate. There was a weaver
who was a candidate for this appointment,
and ſeemed to have a good deal of
intereſt among the people. But another,
who was a man of education, was his competitor.
Relying on ſome talent of speaking
which he thought he poſſeſſed, he addressed
the multitude.
Said he, Fellow citizens, I pretend not
to any great abilities; but am conſcious
to myſelf that I have the beſt good will to
ſerve you. But it is very aſtoniſhing to
me, that this weaver ſhould conceive himself
qualified for the truſt. For though my
acquirements are not great, yet his are ſtill
leſs. The mechanical buſineſs which he
purſues, muſt neceſſarily take up ſo much
of his time, that he cannot apply himſelf
[Page 026]
to political ſtudies. I ſhould therefore
think it would be more anſwerable to your
dignity, and conducive to your intereſt,
to be repreſented by a man at leaſt of
ſome letters, than by an illiterate handicraftsman
like this. It will be more honourable
for himſelf, to remain at his
loom and knot threads, than to come forward
in a legiſlative capacity: becauſe, in
the one caſe, he is in the ſphere where
God and nature has placed him; in the
other, he is like a fiſh out of water, and
muſt ſtruggle for breath in a new element.
Is it poſſible he can underſtand the affairs
of government, whoſe mind has been
concentered to the ſmall object of weaving
webs; to the price by the yard, the griſt
of the thread, and ſuch like matters as
concern a manufacturer of cloths? The
feet of him who weaves, are more occupied
than the head, or at leaſt as much;
and therefore the whole man muſt be, at
leaſt, but in half accuſtomed to exerciſe
his mental powers. For theſe reaſons, all
other things ſet aſide, the chance is in my
favour, with reſpect to information. However,
you will decide, and give your suffrages
to him or to me, as you ſhall judge
expedient.
[Page 027]
The Captain hearing theſe obſervations,
and looking at the weaver, could not help
advancing, and undertaking to ſubjoin
ſomething in ſupport of what had been juſt
ſaid. Said he, I have no prejudice againſt
a weaver more than another man. Nor do
I know any harm in the trade; ſave that
from the ſedentary life in a damp place,
there is uſually a paleneſs of the countenance:
but this is a phyſical, not a moral
evil. Such uſually occupy ſubterranean
apartments; not for the purpoſe, like
Demoſthenes, of ſhaving their heads, and
writing over eight times the hiſtory of
Thucydides, and perfecting a ſtile of oratory;
but rather to keep the thread moiſt;
or becauſe this is conſidered but as an inglorious
ſort of trade, and is frequently
thruſt away into cellars, and damp outhouses,
which are not occupied for a better
uſe.
But to riſe from the cellar to the ſenate
houſe, would be an unnatural hoiſt. To
come from counting threads, and adjusting
them to the ſplits of a reed, to regulate
the finances of a government, would
be prepoſterous; there being no congruity
in the caſe. There is no analogy between
knotting threads and framing laws.
[Page 028]
It would be a reverſion of the order of
things. Not that a manufacturer of linen
or woolen, or other ſtuff, is an inferior
character, but a different one, from that
which ought to be employed in affairs of
ſtate. It is unneceſſary to enlarge on this
ſubject; for you muſt all be convinced of
the truth and propriety of what I ſay. But
if you will give me leave to take the manufacturer
aſide a little, I think I can explain
to him my ideas on the ſubject; and
very probably prevail with him to withdraw
his pretenſions. The people ſeeming
to acquieſce, and beckoning to the weaver,
they drew aſide, and the Captain addressed
him in the following words:
Mr. Traddle, ſaid he, for that was the
name of the manufacturer, I have not the
ſmalleſt idea of wounding your ſenſibility;
but it would ſeem to me, it would be more
your intereſt to purſue your occupation,
than to launch out into that of which you
have no knowledge. When you go to
the ſenate houſe, the application to you
will not be to warp a web; but to make
laws for the commonwealth. Now, suppose
that the making theſe laws, requires
a knowledge of commerce, or of the interests
of agriculture, or thoſe principles
[Page 029]
upon which the different manufactures depend,
what ſervice could you render. It
is poſſible you might think juſtly enough;
but could you ſpeak? You are not in the
habit of public ſpeaking. You are not
furniſhed with thoſe common place ideas,
with which even very ignorant men can
paſs for knowing ſomething. There is
nothing makes a man ſo ridiculous as to
attempt what is above his ſphere. You
are no tumbler for inſtance; yet ſhould
you give out that you could vault upon a
man's back; or turn head over heels, like
the wheel of a cart; the ſtiffneſs of your
joints would encumber you; and you
would fall upon your backſide to the
ground. Such a ſquaſh as that would do
you damage. The getting up to ride on
the ſtate is an unſafe thing to thoſe who
are not accuſtomed to ſuch horſemanſhip.
It is a diſagreeable thing for a man to be
laughed at, and there is no way of keeping
ones ſelf from it but by avoiding all affectation.
While they were thus diſcourſing, a
buſtle had taken place among the croud.
Teague hearing ſo much about elections,
and ſerving the government, took it into
his head, that he could be a legiſlator
[Page 030]
himself. The thing was not diſpleaſing to the
people, who ſeemed to favour his pretensions;
owing, in ſome degree, to there
being ſeveral of his countrymen among
the croud; but more eſpecially to the fluctuation
of the popular mind, and a disposition
to what is new and ignoble. For
though the weaver was not the moſt elevated
object of choice, yet he was ſtill preferable
to this tatter-demalion, who was but
a menial ſervant, and had ſo much of what
is called the brogue on his tongue, as to
fall far ſhort of an elegant ſpeaker.
The Captain coming up, and finding
what was on the carpet, was greatly chagrined
at not having been able to give the
multitude a better idea of the importance
of a legiſlative truſt; alarmed alſo, from
an apprehenſion of the loſs of his ſervant.
Under theſe impreſſions he reſumed his
addreſs to the multitude. Said he, This is
making the matter ſtill worſe, gentlemen:
this ſervant of mine is but a bog-trotter;
who can ſcarcely ſpeak the dialect in which
your laws ought to be written; but certainly
has never read a ſingle treatiſe on
any political ſubject; for the truth is, he
cannot read at all. The young people of
the lower claſs, in Ireland, have ſeldom
[Page 031]
the advantage of a good education; especially
the deſcendants of the ancient Iriſh,
who have moſt of them a great aſſurance
of countenance, but little information, or
literature. This young man, whoſe family
name is Oregan, has been my servant
for ſeveral years. And, except a
too great fondneſs for women, which now
and then brings him into ſcrapes, he has
demeaned himſelf in a manner tolerable
enough. But he is totally ignorant of the
great principles of legiſlation; and more
eſpecially, the particular intereſts of the
government. A free government is a noble
poſſeſſion to a people: and this freedom
conſiſts in an equal right to make
laws, and to have the benefit of the laws
when made. Though doubtleſs, in ſuch
a government, the loweſt citizen may become
chief magiſtrate; yet it is ſufficient
to poſſeſs the right; not abſolutely necessary
to exerciſe it. Or even if you ſhould
think proper, now and then, to ſhew your
privilege, and exert, in a ſignal manner,
the democratic prerogative, yet is it not
deſcending too low to filch away from me
a hireling, which I cannot well ſpare, to
ſerve your purpoſes? You are ſurely carrying
the matter too far, in thinking to
[Page 032]
make a ſenator of this hoſtler; to take him
away from an employment to which he
has been bred, and put him to another, to
which he has ſerved no apprenticeſhip: to
ſet thoſe hands which have been lately
employed in currying my horſe, to the
draughting-bills, and preparing buſineſs
for the houſe.
The people were tenacious of their
choice, and inſiſted on giving Teague
their ſuffrages; and by the frown upon
their brows, ſeemed to indicate reſentment
at what had been ſaid; as indirectly charging
them with want of judgment; or calling
in queſtion their privilege to do what
they thought proper. It is a very ſtrange
thing, ſaid one of them, who was a speaker
for the reſt, that after having conquered
Burgoyne and Cornwallis, and got a
government of our own, we cannot put
in it whom we pleaſe. This young man
may be your ſervant, or another man's
ſervant; but if we chuſe to make him a
delegate, what is that to you. He may
not be yet ſkilled in the matter, but there
is a good day a-coming. We will impower
him; and it is better to truſt a
plain man like him, than one of your
[Page 033]
high flyers, that will make laws to ſuit
their own purpoſes.
Said the Captain, I had much rather you
would ſend the weaver, though I thought
that improper, than to invade my houſehold,
and thus detract from me the very perſon
that I have about me to bruſh my boots,
and clean my ſpurs. The prolocutor of
the people gave him to underſtand that
his ſurmiſes were uſeleſs, for the people
had determined on the choice, and Teague
they would have for a repreſentative.
Finding it anſwered no end to expostulate
with the multitude, he requeſted to
ſpeak a word with Teague by himſelf.
Stepping aſide, he ſaid to him, compoſing
his voice, and addreſſing him in a ſoft manner;
Teague, you are quite wrong in this
matter they have put into your head. Do
you know what it is to be a member of a
deliberative body? What qualifications are
neceſſary? Do you underſtand any thing
of geography? If a queſtion ſhould be, to
make a law to dig a canal in ſome part of
the ſtate, can you deſcribe the bearing of
the mountains, and the courſe of the rivers?
Or if commerce is to be puſhed to ſome new
quarter, by the force of regulations, are you
competent to decide in ſuch a caſe? There
[Page 034]
will be queſtions of law, and aſtronomy
on the carpet. How you muſt gape and
ſtare like a fool, when you come to be
aſked your opinion on theſe ſubjects? Are
you acquainted with the abſtract principles
of finance; with the funding public securities;
the ways and means of raiſing the
revenue; providing for the diſcharge of
the public debts, and all other things
which reſpect the economy of the government?
Even if you had knowledge, have
you a facility of ſpeaking. I would ſuppoſe
you would have too much pride to go to
the houſe juſt to ſay, Ay, or No. This is
not the fault of your nature, but of your
education; having been accuſtomed to dig
turf in your early years, rather than instructing
yourſelf in the claſſics, or common
ſchool books.
When a man becomes a member of a public
body, he is like a racoon, or other beaſt
that climbs up the fork of a tree; the boys
puſhing at him with pitch-forks, or throwing
ſtones, or ſhooting at him with an arrow,
the dogs barking in the mean time.
One will find fault with your not ſpeaking;
another with your ſpeaking, if you ſpeak
at all. They will have you in the news papers,
and ridicule you as a perfect beaſt.
[Page 035]
There is what they call the caricatura;
that is, repreſenting you with a dog's head,
or a cat's claw. As you have a red head,
they will very probably make a fox of you,
or a ſorrel horſe, or a brindled cow, or
the like. It is the devil in hell to be exposed
to the ſquibs and crackers of the gazette
wits and publications. You know
no more about theſe matters than a gooſe;
and yet you would undertake raſhly, without
advice, to enter on the office; nay,
contrary to advice. For I would not for
a thouſand guineas, though I have not the
half of it to ſpare, that the breed of the
Oregans ſhould come to this; bringing on
them a worſe ſtain than ſtealing ſheep; to
which they are addicted. You have nothing
but your character, Teague, in a
new country to depend upon. Let it never
be ſaid, that you quitted an honeſt livelihood,
the taking care of my horſe, to follow
the new fangled whims of the times,
and to be a ſtateſman.
Teague was moved chiefly with the laſt
part of the addreſs, and conſented to give
up the object.
The Captain, glad of this, took him
back to the people, and announced his
[Page 036]
diſpoſition to decline the honour which
they had intended him.
Teague acknowledged that he had changed
his mind, and was willing to remain
in a private ſtation.
The people did not ſeem well pleaſed
with the Captain; but as nothing more
could be ſaid about the matter, they turned
their attention to the weaver, and gave
him their ſuffrages.
[Page 037]
CHAP. IV.
CAPTAIN FARRAGO leaving this
place, proceeded on his way; and at
the diſtance of a mile or two, met a man
with a bridle in his hand; who had loſt
a horſe, and had been at a conjurer's to
make enquiry, and recover his property.
It ſtruck the mind of the Captain to go
to this conjuring perſon, and make a demand
of him, what was the cauſe that the
multitude were ſo diſpoſed to elevate the
low to the higheſt ſtation. He had rode
but about a mile, when the habitation of
the conjurer, by the direction and description
of the man who had loſt the horſe had
given, began to be in view. Coming up
to the door, and enquiring if that was not
where conjurer Kolt lived, they were answered
Yes. Accordingly alighting, and
entering the domicile, all thoſe things took
place which uſually happen, or are described
in caſes of this nature, viz. there
was the conjurer's aſſiſtant, who gave the
Captain to underſtand that maſter had
[Page 038]
withdrawn a little, but would be in shortly.
In the mean time, the aſſiſtant endeavoured
to draw from him ſome account of
the occaſion of his journey; which the
other readily communicated; and the conjurer,
who was liſtening through a crack
in the partition, overheard. Finding it
was not a horſe or a cow, or a piece of
linen that was loſt, but an abſtract queſtion
of political philoſophy which was to be put,
he came from his lurking place, and entered,
as if not knowing that any perſon
had been waiting for him.
After mutual ſalutations, the Captain
gave him to underſtand the object which
he had in view by calling on him.
Said the conjurer, This lies not at all in
my way. If it had been a dozen of ſpoons,
or a ſtolen watch, that you had to look
for, I could very readily, by the aſſiſtance
of my art, have aſſiſted you in the recovery;
but as to this matter of men's imaginations
and attachments in political affairs,
I have no more underſtanding than
another man.
It is very ſtrange, ſaid the Captain, that
you who can tell by what means a thing is
ſtolen, and the place where it is depoſited,
[Page 039]
though at a thouſand miles diſtance, ſhould
know ſo little of what is going on in the
breaſt of man, as not to be able to develope
his ſecret thoughts, and the motives
of his actions.
It is not of our buſineſs, ſaid the other;
but ſhould we undertake it, I do not ſee
that it would be very difficult to explain
all that puzzles you at preſent. There is
no need of a conjurer to tell why it is that
the common people are more diſpoſed to
truſt one of their own claſs, than thoſe
who may affect to be ſuperior. Beſides,
there is a certain pride in man, which leads
him to elevate the low, and pull down the
high. There is a kind of creating power
exerted in making a ſenator of an unqualified
perſon; which when the author has
done, he exults over the work, and, like
the Creator himſelf when he made the
world, ſees that “it is very good.” Moreover,
there is in every government a patrician
claſs, againſt whom the ſpirit of the
multitude naturally militates: And hence
a perpetual war; the ariſtocrats endeavouring
to detrude the people, and the
people contending to obtrude themſelves.
And it is right it ſhould be ſo; for by this
[Page 040]
fermentation, the ſpirit of democracy is
kept alive.
The Captain, thanking him for his information,
aſked him what was to pay;
at the ſame time pulling out half a crown
from a green ſilk purſe which he had in
his breeches pocket. The conjurer gave
him to underſtand, that as the ſolution of
theſe difficulties was not within his province,
he took nothing for it. The Captain
expreſſing his ſenſe of his diſintereſted
ſervice, bade him adieu.
[Page 041]
CHAP. V.
Containing Reflections.
A Democracy is beyond all queſtion the
freeſt government: becauſe under
this, every man is equally protected by
the laws, and has equally a voice in making
them. But I do not ſay an equal voice;
becauſe ſome men have ſtronger lungs than
others, and can expreſs more forcibly
their opinions of public affairs. Others,
though they may not ſpeak very loud, yet
have a faculty of ſaying more in a ſhort
time; and even in the caſe of others, who
ſpeak little or none at all, yet what they
do ſay containing good ſenſe, comes with
greater weight; ſo that all things considered,
every citizen, has not, in this ſenſe of
the word, an equal voice. But the right
being equal, what great harm if it is unequally
exerciſed? is it neceſſary that every
man ſhould become a ſtateſman? No more
than that every man ſhould become a poet
or a painter. The ſciences, are open to all;
[Page 042]
but let him only who has taſte and genius
purſue them. If any man covets the office
of a biſhop, ſays St. Paul, he covets a
good work. But again, he adds this caution,
Ordain not a novice, leſt being lifted
up with pride, he falls into the condemnation
of the devil. It is indeed making
a devil of a man to lift him up to a ſtate
to which he is not ſuited. A ditcher is a
reſpectable character, with his over-alls on,
and a ſpade in his hand; but put the ſame
man to thoſe offices which require the
head, whereas he has been accuſtomed to
impreſs with his foot, and there appears a
contraſt between the man and the occupation.
There are individuals in ſociety, who
prefer honour to wealth; or cultivate political
ſtudies as a branch of literary pursuits;
and offer themſelves to ſerve public
bodies, in order to have an opportunity of
diſcovering their knowledge, and exerciſing
their judgment. It muſt be chagrining to
theſe, and hurtful to the public, to ſee
thoſe who have no talent this way, and ought
to have no taſte, prepoſterouſly obtrude
themſelves upon the government. It is the
ſame as if a brick-layer ſhould uſurp the office
of a taylor, and come with his ſquare
[Page 043]
and perpendicular, to take the meaſure of
a pair of breeches.
It is proper that thoſe who cultivate oratory,
ſhould go to the houſe of orators. But
for an Ay and No man to be ambitious of
that place, is to ſacrifice his credit to his
vanity.
I would not mean to inſinuate that legislators
are to be ſelected from the more
wealthy of the citizens, yet a man's circumstances
ought to be ſuch as afford him
leiſure for ſtudy and reflection. There is
often wealth without taſte or talent. I have
no idea, that becauſe a man lives in a great
houſe, and has a cluſter of bricks or ſtones
about his backſide, that he is therefore fit
for a legiſlator. There is ſo much pride
and arrogance with thoſe who conſider
themſelves the firſt in a government, that
it deſerves to be checked by the populace,
and the evil moſt uſually commences on
this ſide. Men aſſociate with their own
perſons, the adventitious circumſtances of
birth and fortune: So that a fellow blowing
with fat and repletion, conceives himſelf
ſuperior to the poor lean man, that lodges
in an inferior manſion. But as in all caſes,
ſo in this, there is a medium. Genius and
virtue are independent of rank and
[Page 044]
fortune; and it is neither the opulent, nor the
indigent, but the man of ability and integrity
that ought to be called forth to ſerve
his country: and while, on the one hand,
the ariſtocratic part of the government,
arrogates a right to repreſent; on the other
hand, the democratic contends the point;
and from this conjunction and oppoſition
of forces, there is produced a compound
reſolution, which carries the object in an
intermediate direction. When we ſee
therefore, a Teague Oregan lifted up, the
philoſopher will reflect, that it is to balance
ſome purſe-proud fellow, equally as ignorant,
that comes down from the ſphere of
the ariſtocratic intereſt.
But every man ought to conſider for
himſelf, whether it is his uſe to be this
draw-back, on either ſide. For as when
good liquor is to be diſtilled, you throw
in ſome material uſeleſs in itſelf to correct
the efferveſcence of the ſpirit; ſo it may be
his part to act as a ſedative. For though
we commend the effect, yet ſtill the material
retains but its original value.
But as the nature of things is ſuch, let
no man, who means well to the commonwealth,
and offers to ſerve it, be hurt in
his mind when ſome one of meaner talents
[Page 045]
is preferred. The people are a ſovereign,
and greatly deſpotic; but, in the main,
juſt.
I have a great mind, in order to elevate
the compoſition, to make quotations
from the Greek and Roman hiſtory. And
I am conſcious to myſelf, that I have read
over the writers on the government of Italy
and Greece, in ancient, as well as
modern times. But I have drawn a great
deal more from reflection on the nature
of things, than from all the writings I
have ever read. Nay, the hiſtory of the
election, which I have juſt given, will afford
a better leſſon to the American mind,
than all that is to be found in other examples.
We have ſeen here, a weaver a
favoured candidate, and in the next instance,
a bog-trotter ſuperſeding him. Now
it may be ſaid, that this is fiction; but fiction,
or no fiction, the nature of the thing
will make it a reality. But I return to the
adventures of the Captain, whom I have
upon my hands; and who, as far as I can
yet diſcover, is a good honeſt man; and
means what is benevolent and uſeful;
though his ideas may not comport with
the ordinary manner of thinking, in every
particular.
[Page 046]
BOOK II.
CHAP. I. THERE was, in a certain great city,
a ſociety who called themſelves Philosophers.
They had publiſhed books,
they called Tranſactions. Theſe contained
diſſertations on the nature and cauſes
of things; from the ſtars of the heaven to
the fire-flies of the earth; and from the
ſea-crab to the woodland buffaloe. Such
diſquiſitions, are doubtleſs uſeful and entertaining
to an inquiſitive mind.
There is no queſtion, but there were in
this body ſome very great men; whoſe
inveſtigations of the arcana of nature, deserve
attention. But ſo it was, there had
been introduced, by ſome means, many
individuals, who were no philoſophers at
[Page 047]
all. This is no unuſual thing with institutions
of this nature; though, by the
bye, it is a very great fault. For it lessens
the incentives of honour, to have the
acceſs made ſo eaſy, that every one may
obtain admiſſion. It has been a reproach
to ſome colleges, that a diploma could be
purchaſed for half a crown. This ſociety
were ſtill more moderate; for the bare
ſcratching the backſide of a member has
been known to procure a fellowſhip. At
leaſt, there have been thoſe admitted who
appeared capable of nothing elſe.
Nevertheleſs, it was neceſſary, even in
theſe caſes, for the candidates to procure
ſome token of a philoſophical turn of mind;
ſuch as the ſkin of a dead cat, or ſome
odd kind of a mouſe-trap, or the like; or
have ſome phraſes in their mouths, about
minerals and petrifactions; ſo as juſt to
ſupport ſome idea of natural knowledge,
and paſs muſter. There was one who had
got in by finding, accidentally, the tail
of a rabbit, which had been taken off in
a boy's trap. Another by means of a
ſquirrel's ſcalp, which he had taken care
to ſtretch and dry on a bit of oſier, bended
in the form of a hoop. The beard of
an old fox, taken off and dried in the ſun,
[Page 048]
was the means of introducing one whom
I knew very well: Or rather, as I have
already hinted, it was beforehand intended
he ſhould be introduced; and theſe
exuviæ, or ſpoils of the animal kingdom,
were but the tokens and apologies for admission.
It happened, as the Captain was riding
this day, and Teague trotting after him, he
ſaw a large owl, that had been ſhot by ſome
body, and was placed in the crotch of a tree,
about the height of a man's head from the
ground, for thoſe that paſſed by to look
at. The Captain being ſtruck with it, as
ſomewhat larger than ſuch birds uſually
are, deſired Teague to reach it to him;
and tying it to the hinder part of his saddle,
rode along.
Paſſing by the houſe of one who belonged
to the ſociety, the bird was noticed at
the ſaddle-ſkirts, and the philoſopher coming
out, made enquiry of the genus and
nature of the fowl. Said the Captain, I
know nothing more about it, than that it
is nearly as long as a turkey buzzard. It
is doubtleſs, ſaid the other, the great Canada
owl, that comes from the Lakes; and
if your honour will give me leave, I will
take it and ſubmit it to the ſociety, and
[Page 049]
have yourſelf made a member. As to the
firſt, the Captain conſented; but as to the
laſt, the being a member, he choſe rather
to decline it; conceiving himſelf unqualified
for a place in ſuch a body. The other
aſſured him that he was under a very great
miſtake; for there were perſons there who
ſcarcely knew a B from a bull's foot. That
may be, ſaid the Captain; but if others
chuſe to degrade themſelves, by ſuffering
their names to be uſed in ſo prepoſterous
a way as that, it was no reaſon he ſhould.
The other gave him to underſtand, that
the ſociety would certainly wiſh to expreſs
their ſenſe of his merit, and ſhew themselves
not inattentive to a virtuoſo; that
as he declined the honour himſelf, he probably
might not be averſe to let his servant
take a ſeat among them.
Said the Captain, He is but a ſimple
Iriſhman, and of a low education; his
language being that ſpoken by the aborigines
of his country. And if he ſpeaks
a little Engliſh, it is with the brogue on
his tongue; which would be unbecoming
in a member of your body. It would ſeem
to me, that a philoſopher ought to know
how to write, or at leaſt to read. But
Teague can neither write nor read. He
[Page 050]
can ſing a ſong, or whiſtle an Iriſh tune;
but is totally illiterate in all things elſe.
I queſtion much if he could tell you how
many new moons there are in the year;
or any the moſt common thing that you
could aſk him. He is a long-legged fellow,
it is true; and might be of ſervice in
clambering over rocks, or going to the
ſhores of rivers, to gather curioſities. But
could you not get perſons to do this, without
making them members? I have more
reſpect for ſcience, than to ſuffer this bog-trotter
to be ſo advanced at its expence.
In theſe American ſtates, there is a wide
field for philoſophic ſearch; and theſe researches
may be of great uſe in agriculture,
mechanics, and aſtronomy. There
is but little immediate profit attending
theſe purſuits; but if there can be inducements
of honour, theſe may ſupply the
place. What more alluring to a young
man, than the proſpect of being, one day,
received into a ſociety of men truly learned;
the admiſſion being a teſt and a proof
of diſtinguiſhed knowledge. But the fountain
of honour, thus contaminated by a
ſediment foreign from its nature, who
would wiſh to drink of it?
Said the philoſopher, At the firſt
[Page 051]
institution of the ſociety by Dr. Franklin and
others, it was put upon a narrow baſis,
and only men of ſcience were conſidered
proper to compoſe it; and this might be a
neceſſary policy at that time, when the institution
was in its infancy, and could not
bear much draw-back of ignorance. But
it has not been judged ſo neceſſary of late
years. The matter ſtands now on a broad
and catholic bottom; and, like the goſpel
itſelf, it is our orders to go out into the
high-ways and hedges, and compel them
to come in. There are hundreds, whoſe
names you may ſee on our liſt, who are
not more inſtructed than this lad of yours.
They muſt be a ſad ſet indeed then, ſaid
the Captain. Sad or no ſad, ſaid the other,
it is the caſe; and if you will let Teague
go, I will engage him a memberſhip.
I take it very ill of you, Mr. Philosopher,
ſaid the Captain, to put this nonſenſe
in his head. If you knew what trouble I
have lately had with a parcel of people
that were for ſending him to Congreſs, you
would be unwilling to draw him from me
for the purpoſe of making him a philosopher.
It is not an eaſy matter to get hirelings
now-a-days; and when you do get
one, it is a mere chance, whether he is
[Page 052]
faithful, and will ſuit your purpoſe. It
would be a very great loſs to me, to have
him taken off at this time, when I have
equipped myſelf for a journey.
Teague was a good deal incenſed at this
refuſal of his maſter, and inſiſted that he
would be a philoſopher. You are an ignoramus,
ſaid the Captain. It is not the
being among philoſophers will make you
one.
Teague inſiſted that he had a right to
make the beſt of his fortune: and as there
was a door open to his advancement, he
did not ſee why he might not make uſe
of it.
The Captain finding that it anſwered no
end to diſpute the matter with him, by
words of ſenſe and reaſon, took a contrary
way to manage him.
Teague, ſaid he, I have a regard for
you, and would wiſh to ſee you do well.
But before you take this ſtep, I would
wiſh to ſpeak a word or two in private. If
you will go, I may perhaps ſuggeſt ſome
things that may be of ſervice to you, for
your future conduct in that body.
Teague conſenting, they ſtepped aſide;
and the Captain addreſſed him in the following
manner:
[Page 053]
Teague, ſaid he, do you know what you
are about? It is a fine thing, at firſt ſight,
to be a philoſopher, and get into this body.
And indeed, if you are a real philosopher,
it might be ſome honour, and alſo
ſafe, to take that leap. But do you think
it is to make a philoſopher of you that
they want you? Far from it. It is their
great ſtudy to find curioſities; and because
this man ſaw you coming after
me, with a red head, trotting like an Esquimaux
Indian, it has ſtruck his mind
to pick you up, and paſs you for one.
Nay, it is poſſible, they may intend worſe;
and when they have examined you awhile,
take the ſkin off you, and paſs you for an
over-grown otter, or a muſk-rat; or ſome
outlandiſh animal, for which they will,
themſelves, invent a name. If you were
at the muſeum of one of theſe ſocieties, to
obſerve the quantity of ſkins and ſkeletons
they have, you might be well aſſured they
did not come by them honeſtly. I know ſo
much of theſe people, that I am well persuaded
they would think no more of
throwing you into a kettle of boiling water,
than they would a tarapin; and having
ſcraped you out to a ſhell, preſent you
as the relics of an animal they had procured,
at an immenſe price, from ſome
[Page 054]
Guinea merchant. Or if they ſhould not
at once turn you to this uſe, how, in the
mean time, will they diſpoſe of you?
They will have you away through the
bogs and marſhes, catching flies and miresnipes;
or ſend you to the woods for a polecat;
or oblige you to deſcend into drawwells
for fog, and phlogiſtic air, and the
Lord knows what. You muſt go into
wolves dens, and catch bears by the tail;
run over mountains like an opoſſum, and
dig the earth like a ground hog. You
will have to climb upon trees, and get
yourſelf bit by flying ſquirrels. There will
be no end to the muſketoes you will have
to diſſect. What is all this to diving into
mill-dams and rivers, to get craw-fiſh. Or
if you go to the ocean, there are alligators
to devour you like a cat-fiſh. Who
knows but it may come your turn, in a
windy night, to go aloft to the heavens,
to rub down the ſtars, and give the goats
and rams, that are there, fodder. The
keeping the ſtars clean, is a laborious
work; a great deal worſe than ſcouring
andirons, or braſs kettles. There is a
bull there would think no more of toſſing
you on his horns than he would a puppy
dog. If the crab ſhould get you in his
[Page 055]
claws he would ſqueeze you like a lobſter.
But what is all that to your having no
place to ſtand on? How would you like
to be up at the moon, and to fall down
when you had miſſed your hold, like a
boy from the top-maſt of a ſhip, and have
your brains beat out upon the top of ſome
great mountain; where the devil might
take your ſkeleton and give it to the turkey-buzzards?
Or if they ſhould, in the mean time,
excuſe from ſuch out of door ſervices, they
will rack and torture you with hard questions.
You muſt tell them how long the
rays of light are coming from the ſun;
how many drops of rain fall in a thunder
guſt; what makes the graſshopper chirp
when the ſun is hot; how muſcle ſhells
get up to the top of the mountains; how
the Indians got over to America. You
will have to prove abſolutely that the negroes
were once white; and that their
flat noſes came by ſome cauſe in the compass
of human means to produce. Theſe
are puzzling queſtions; and yet you muſt
ſolve them all. Take my advice, and ſtay
where you are. Many men have ruined
themſelves by their ambition, and made
bad worſe. There is another kind of
[Page 056]
philoſophy, which lies more within your
ſphere; that is moral philoſophy. Every
hoſtler or hireling can ſtudy this, and
you have the moſt excellent opportunity
of acquiring this knowledge in our traverses
through the country; or communications
at the different taverns or villages,
where we may happen to ſojourn.
Teague had long ago given up all
thoughts of philoſophy, and would not
for the world have any more to do with
it; and therefore, without bidding the
philoſopher adieu, they purſued their route
as uſual.
[Page 057]
CHAP. II.
Containing Obſervations.
THE inſtitution of the American Philosophical
Society, does great honour
to the founders; and what has been published
by that body, comes not behind what
has appeared from ſocieties of the ſame
nature elſewhere. But of late years, it
has ceaſed to be preſumptive evidence,
at leaſt what the lawyers call violent presumption,
of philoſophical attainments, to
be a member; owing to the ſpurious brood
of illiterate perſons that have been admitted
indiſcriminately with the informed; this
again, owing to a political diſpute in the
government where this ſociety exiſts. For
when there are parties in a commonwealth,
they naturally ſubdivide themſelves, and
are found even in the retreats of the muſes.
It has become the queſtion with this society,
not whether a man is a philoſopher or
not, but what part he had taken in ſome
queſtion on the carpet. The body
[Page 058]
conceived itſelf to pay a compliment to the perſon
admitted, as if it could be any honour to
a man to be announced what he is not. The
contrary is the caſe here. For as honour
is the acknowledgement which the world
makes of a man's reſpectability, there can
be no honour here; for it has become a
mere matter of moon-ſhine to be a member.
To be or not be, that is the queſtion;
but ſo trifling, that it is ſcarcely ever made.
The way to remedy this, would be to have
an over hauling of the houſe, and derange
at leaſt three parts in four. As in the caſe
of Tarquin, and the three remaining books
of the Sybiles, you would receive as much
for the fourth part of that body, ſhould
you ſet them up at market, as for the
whole at preſent.
I have often reflected with myſelf, what
an honour it muſt be, to be one of the society
of the French academy; forty, of
twenty-four millions of people, are there
ſelected in conſequence of literary characters
already eſtabliſhed.
I recollect the time when I had high ideas
of philoſophical memberſhip in America.
But it does not appear to me now to
be the higheſt thing that a man could wiſh,
ſince even a common Teague Oregan,
[Page 059]
trotting on the high way, has been ſolicited
to take a ſeat. It may be ſaid, that this is
an exaggeration of the facts; and can be
conſidered only as burleſque. I profeſs it
is not intended as ſuch, but as a fair picture
of what has taken place. Should it
be conſidered in the light of burleſque, it
muſt be a very lame one; becauſe where
there is no exceſs there can be no caricatura.
But omitting all apologies and explanations,
let the matter reſt where it is.
[Page 060]
BOOK III.
CHAP. I. IT was ſomewhat late when the Captain
arrived at an inn this evening. There
was there before him, a young clergyman,
who had been preaching that day in
a neighbouring congregation; but had not
as uſual, gone home with an elder; but
had come thus far on his way towards another
place, where he was to preach the
next day.
The Captain entering into converſation
with the clergyman, ſat up pretty late.
The ſubject was what might be expected;
viz. the affairs of religion and the church.
The clergyman was a good young man;
but inclining to fanaticiſm, and being righteous
over much: The Captain on the
[Page 061]
other hand, ſomewhat ſceptical in his notions
of religion: Hence, a conſiderable
oppoſition of ſentiment between the two.
But at length, drowzineſs ſeizing both,
candles were called for, and they went to
bed.
It was about an hour or two after, when
an uproar was heard in a ſmall chamber to
the left of the ſtair-caſe which led to the
floor on which they ſlept. It was Teague,
who had got to bed to the girl of the
houſe. For as they would neither let him
go to Congreſs, nor be a philoſopher, he
muſt be doing ſomething. The girl not
being apprized, or not chuſing his embraces,
made a great outcry and lamentation.
The clergyman, who ſlept in an adjoining
chamber, and hearing this, out of
the zeal of his benevolence and humanity,
leaped out of bed in his ſhirt, and ran in
to ſee what was the cauſe of the disturbance.
The Captain alſo jumping up, followed
ſoon after, and was ſcarcely in the
chamber before the landlord coming up
with a candle, found them all together.
The maid gave this account of the matter,
viz. That between ſleeping and waking
ſhe felt a man's hand lifting up the
bed-clothes; upon which ſhe ſhouted out
[Page 062]
murder. But whether it was any body
there preſent, or ſome one elſe, ſhe could
not tell.
Teague, whoſe natural parts were not
bad, and preſence of mind conſiderable,
inſtantly took the reſolution to throw the
matter on the clergyman. By ſhaint Patrick,
ſaid he, I was aſlape in my own bed
as ſound as the ſhates that were about me,
when I heard the ſound of this young
crature's voice crying out like a ſhape in
a paſture; and when after I had heard,
aſlape as I was, and come here, I found
this praſte, who was ſo wholy, and praching
all night, upon the top of the bed,
with his arms round this young crature's
neck; and if I had not given him a twitch
by the noſe, and bid him ly over, dear
honey, he would have raviſhed her virginity,
and murdered her, ſave her ſoul,
and the paple of the houſe not the wiſer
for it.
The clergyman ſtared with his mouth
open; for the palpable nature of the falshood,
had ſhocked him beyond the power
of ſpeech.
But the landlady, who in the mean time
was come up, and had heard what Teague
had ſaid, was enraged, could ſupply ſpeech
[Page 063]
for them both. Hey, ſaid ſhe, this comes
of your preaching and praying, Mr. Minister.
I have lodged many a gentleman; but
have never had ſuch doings here before. It
is a pretty ſtory that a miniſter of the gospel
ſhould be the firſt to bring a ſcandal
upon the houſe.
The Captain interrupted her, and told
her there was no harm done. The maid
was not actually raviſhed; and if there
was no noiſe made about it, all matters
might be ſet right.
The clergyman had by this time recovered
himſelf ſo much as to have the uſe of
his tongue; and began by proteſting his innocence,
and that it was no more him that
made the attack upon the maid, than the
angel Gabriel.
The Captain, interrupting him, and
wiſhing to ſave his feelings, began by excusing
or extenuating the offence. It is
no great affair, ſaid he, after all that is
ſaid or done. The love of women is a
natural ſin, and the holieſt men in all ages
have been propenſe to this indulgence.
There was Abraham that got to bed to his
maid Hagar, and had a baſtard by her,
whom he named Iſhmael. Joſhua, who
took Jericho by the ſound of ram's horns,
[Page 064]
ſaved a likely ſlut of the name of Rahab,
under a pretence that ſhe had been civil to
the ſpies he had ſent out, but in reality because
he himſelf took a fancy for her. I
need ſay nothing about David, who wrote
the Pſalms, and ſet them to muſic; and
yet in his old days had a girl to ſleep with
him. Human nature is human nature ſtill;
and it is not all the preaching and praying
on earth can extinguiſh it.
The clergyman averred his innocence,
and that it was that red-headed gentleman
himſelf, meaning Teague, who was in the
room firſt, and had been guilty of the outrage.
Teague was beginning to make the
ſign of the croſs, and to put himſelf into
an attitude of ſwearing, when the Captain
thinking it of no conſequence who was the
perſon, put an end to the matter, by ordering
Teague to bed, and himſelf bidding
the company good night.
The clergyman finding no better could
be made of it, took the advice of the landlord,
and retired alſo. The landlady seemed
diſpoſed to huſh the matter up, and the
maid went to ſleep as uſual.
[Page 065]
CHAP. II.
IT is not the nature of the female tongue
to be ſilent. The landlady could not
avoid informing her goſſips, and even ſome
of her gueſts, of what had happened the
preceding evening in her houſe. The report,
ſo unfavourable to the clergyman,
had therefore got out; and coming to the
ears of the conſiſtory, was the occaſion of
calling him before them, to anſwer to the
accuſation. The clergyman much alarmed,
though conſcious of innocence, bethought
himſelf of applying to the Captain,
to extort from his waiting man a
confeſſion of the truth, and relieve his
character. Accordingly having ſet out on
a bay horſe that he had, he found the
Captain, and addreſſed him in the following
manner:
Captain, ſaid he, the affair of that night
at the tavern, is like to be of ſerious consequence
to me. For though I am innocent
as the child unborn, yet the presumption
is againſt me, and I am likely to fall
[Page 066]
under church cenſure. It may be ſport
to you, but it is a matter of moment to
me. Now, as ſure as God is in heaven,
I am innocent; and it muſt have been the
devil, or that red headed Iriſhman of
yours, that made the diſturbance.
The Captain gave him the comfort of
aſſuring him that he might make himſelf
eaſy; for be the matter as it might, he
would take care that Teague ſhould assume
it, and bear the blame. The clergyman
politely thanked him; declaring,
at the ſame time, that he would not forget
him in his prayers, Sunday or Saturday,
while he had an hour to live. The
Captain, not ſo much from any mercenary
motive of benefit, by his ſpiritual
ſolicitations, as from a real love of humanity
and juſtice, had determined to do him
eſſential ſervice in this affair. Accordingly,
when the clergyman had retired, calling
Teague before him, he began in this
manner: Teague, ſaid he, from what I
know of your diſpoſition, I have no more
doubt than I have of my exiſtence, that
it was yourſelf who made that uproar with
the girl at the tavern where we lodged;
though I could not but give you credit
for your preſence of mind in throwing it
[Page 067]
upon the clergyman. But whether the
matter lies with you or him, is of no
conſequence. You can take it upon you,
and lay up treaſure in heaven. It will be
doing a good work; and theſe people, you
may be aſſured, have a conſiderable influence
in the other world. This clergyman
can ſpeak a good word for you when you
come there, and let you into half the benefit
of all the prayers he has ſaid on earth.
It will be no harm to you, for your character
in this reſpect is as bad as it can well
be.
Teague ſaid he did not care much; but
thought the prieſt ought to pay a little
ſmart money; for it was a thankleſs matter
to do theſe things for nothing. Said
the Captain, theſe people are not the moſt
plenty of money; but I will advance half
a crown towards the accommodation.
Teague was ſatisfied, and ready to acknowledge
whatever was demanded of him.
Accordingly having come before the
preſbytery on the day appointed for the
trial. Teague made confeſſion of the truth;
viz. That being in the kitchen with the
girl, and obſerving her to be a good looking
huſſy —
But ſuppoſe we give the ſpeech in his
[Page 068]
own dialect. Maſter praſtes, ſaid he, I
perſave you are all praſtes of the goſple,
and can prach as aſily as I can take a chaw
of tobacco. Now the trut of de ſtory is
dis; I was ſlaping in my bed, and I tought
vid myſelf it was a ſhame amonſt chriſtian
paple that a young crature ſhould ſlape by
herſelf, and have no one to take care of
her. So I tought vid myſelf, to go and
ſlape vid her. But as ſhe was aſlape, ſhe
made exclamation, and dis praſte that is
here before you, came in to ſave her ſhoul
from the devil; and as the captain my master,
might take offence, and the devil, I
am ſhartain that it was no better perſon,
put it into my head, to lay it on the praſte
This is the trut maſter praſtes, as I hope
for ſhalvation in the kingdom of purgatory,
ſhentlemen.
On this confeſſion, the clergyman was
abſolved, to the great joy of the presbytery,
who conſidered it as a particular providence
that the truth was brought to light.
[Page 069]
CHAP. III.
Containing Reflections.
IT muſt appear from the incident at the
public houſe, with what caution presumptive
teſtimony is to be admitted. Our
criminal law admits it, but lays it down
as a rule, that it be admitted with caution.
There is what is called violent presumption;
that is, where ſuch circumſtances
exiſt, as uſually attend the fact. Presumptive
proof of this nature is held ſufficient
to convict. I doubt much, whether reason
or experience approve the doctrine.
Reaſon tells us, that there may be all the
circumſtances that uſually attend the fact,
and yet without the fact itſelf. Experience
evinces that it has been the caſe; for
we have heard of perſons convicted of a
capital offence; and yet with their laſt
breath aſſerting innocence. Nay, in the
caſe of ſome who have been convicted of
homicide, the perſons who have been
[Page 070]
supposed to have been murdered, have afterwards
been found alive.
But on abſtract principles, a concluſion
of certainty cannot be drawn from presumptive
proof. Becauſe in caſes of the
moſt violent preſumption, there is ſtill a
poſſibility of innocence; and where there
is a poſſibility, there muſt be a doubt; and
will you hang man, woman, or child, where
there is a doubt.
In all caſes there ought to be complete
proof; becauſe the convicted perſon is to
be completely puniſhed; and the jury, previous
to this, muſt make complete oath of
the guilt.
It is the ground of the doctrine of presumptive
proof, that where you cannot
help ſuſpecting, you ought to be poſitive;
whereas the juſt concluſion would be, that
where you cannot help ſuſpecting, there
you ought to ſuſpect ſtill, but no more.
It would be a curious queſtion in arithmetic
how many uncertainties make a certainty?
In mathematics, the three angles
of a triangle, are equal to a right angle.
But theſe are all angles, that are put
together; that is, they are things of the
ſame kind, but the greateſt angle, and the
longeſt ſide will never make a triangle,
[Page 071]
because there is no incluſion of ſpace. There
muſt be a number of things of the ſame
kind to make an aggregate whole; ſo that
ten thouſand poſſibilities, probabilities, and
violent preſumptions, can never conſtitute
a certainty.
Preſumptive proof is of the nature of
the ſemi plena probatio of the Roman law;
going but half-way towards proof, it can
never amount to proof at all. For, as the
ſaying is, a miſs is as good as a mile. I
would, therefore, recommend to all jurors,
to take care that unleſs the witneſſes ſwear
poſitively to the fact, they do not find a
verdict, guilty; becauſe, as the current
cannot riſe higher than the ſource, ſo the
verdict of the juror ought not to be more
abſolute than the oath of the witneſs. In
all caſes, therefore, ſhort of poſitive testimony,
acquit.
Theſe hints may alſo be of ſervice to
young attornies, and weak judges; ſo that
honeſt people may not loſe their lives, or
be rendered infamous, without full proof
of the offence. It is hard enough to suffer
when there is full proof; but to be in
the power of a juror's or a judge's imagination,
comparing and conſtruing circumstances,
and weighing poſſibilities,
[Page 072]
contingencies, and what might have been, or
what might not have been, as the humour,
caprice, wheel, or whim of the brain may
ſuggeſt, is inconſiſtent with that fair trial
which, in a free government, ought to be
enjoyed. Was I a judge or juror, no
one would I condemn without poſitive testimony
of the fact. For it would not be
in my power to reſtore that fame or life
which I took away from the innocent.
And if a guilty perſon ſhould eſcape, it
was none of my look out; but the business
of Providence to furniſh proof, if it
was intended that man ſhould puniſh; and if
proof is not furniſhed, let Providence take
the matter on himſelf, and puniſh the culprit
either in this life or in a future ſtate.
Inviſible things belong to the Omniſcient;
and it would ſeem great arrogance in man
to take upon him to decide in caſes of uncertainty.
I hope, therefore, yet to ſee the
doctrine of preſumptive proof, in criminal
caſes, wholly, in courts of juſtice, discountenanced.
I can declare, that in the
courſe of my experience at the bar, I have
bad one hung, and ſeveral others within
an ace of it, who were innocent; and
this on the doctrine of preſumption and
probability. The one that was hung was
[Page 073]
a tory caſe, where the popular clamour
was againſt the man; and light presumption
became violent, under ſuch a charge.
I ſhall ſay no more on this ſubject;
becauſe it ſeems to me that I have been affecting
to ſpeak ſenſe, whereas my business
is to ſpeak nonſenſe; this being the
only way to keep out of the reach of criticism;
becauſe critics can ſay no more
than you yourſelf allow; ſo that a charge
of nonſenſe cannot hurt. It is thus that
perſons who have a long noſe, or disproportion
of ſome other feature, take the
laugh upon themſelves firſt, and ſo eſcape
ridicule. The truth is, I will not give myself
the trouble to write ſenſe long. For
I would as ſoon pleaſe fools as wiſe men;
becauſe the fools are the moſt numerous,
and every prudent man will go with the
majority. I ſhall return to the adventures
of the Captain.
[Page 074]
CHAP. IV.
THE Preſbytery ſat a day or two at
this place, on church affairs, and the
Captain delaying with them, lodged at the
ſame houſe. Teague, in the mean time,
having an opportunity of ingratiating himself
with the clergymen, by rubing down
their horſes, and other menial ſervices.
For it is the national character of the aboriginal
Iriſh, to give fair words; and
Teague was not deficient in this addreſs.
What with maſter Praſting, and giving a
great deal of what is called Blarney, he
inſinuated himſelf into their good graces;
and by affecting, now and then, to be ſeen
at prayers by himſelf, and to have a sorrowful
countenance, he induced them to
believe that he was in the firſt ſtage of conviction,
and likely to become a pious man.
Having made this progreſs in their good
opinion, he ventured to ſuggeſt what was
the ultimate object of his ambition; viz.
the being a candidate for holy orders. The
Preſbytery, to whom the matter was
[Page 075]
represented by the individuals more particularly
acquainted with him, thought favourably
of the propoſition. For though his
common attainments might not be great,
yet if the grace of God had wrought upon
him, he might become a valuable man.
The Captain having got a hint of this,
took the firſt opportunity of addreſſing the
Preſbytery. Gentlemen, ſaid he, you are
deceived in this ragamuffin. For, notwithstanding
all the pretenſions he may lately
have to religion, you may be well aſſured
that it is all hypocriſy, and that he has no
more religion than my horſe.
The Preſbytery ſuſpecting the Captain
to be a carnal man, and regardleſs of the
miniſtry, gave little heed to what he ſaid,
and ſeemed diſpoſed to take Teague upon
trials.
The Captain finding the caſe to ſtand
thus, and that in ſpite of all he could do,
he was likely to loſe his ſervant, took his
uſual method of addreſſing the hopes and
fears of Teague himſelf.
Taking him aſide, he began, with all
poſſible art, to impreſs ſuch fears and apprehensions,
as the nature of the caſe suggested.
Teague, ſaid he, do you know
what you are about? You have got into
[Page 076]
your vagaries once more. You want to
preach, do you? Are you appriſed of the
difficulty of this work? The firſt thing you
will have to do, is to take a text; and
when that is done, you have to ſplit it into
parts. There are what are called heads;
and theſe you muſt divide into firſtlys,
and ſecondlys, and thirdlys, and fourthlys,
and ſo on, till you come to twentiethlys,
perhaps. Are you furniſhed with a concordance?
or do you know what a concordance
is? Can you find a text to ſuit
your purpoſe when you want it? Can you
explain the ſcriptures; the meaning of
Daniel's ram and the he-goat, or the ſeven
trumpets in the Revelations? You are
miſtaken if you think your Iriſh will paſs
for Hebrew.
You think it a great honour to preach
now-a days. It was an honour once; but
the thing is now become ſo common, that
it is of little conſequence to preach or not.
But do you know how it will behove
you to conduct yourſelf, if you take this office
upon you. You will have to compoſe
the muſcles of your face to greater seriousness
than your diſpoſition can afford. You
muſt quit whoring. How will you like
that, Teague. It would look very ill after
[Page 077]
ſermon to be catched in bed with a girl at
a tavern.
But do you know why theſe men are ſo
anxious to have you of their meſs? The
truth of the matter is, they carry on a war
with the devil, and they wiſh to recruit you
for the ſervice. Do they give you any
bounty-money. Take my word, there
will be but little of this going. Take my
advice then, and let them ſettle their own
quarrels. It is a ſilly thing to be drawn into
a party, when there is but little to be
got by it: Nay, worſe than little: For it
will be all on the other ſide. Think you
the devil will forget the miſchief you do
him in this world, and not reſent it when
he comes acroſs you in a future ſtate?
When you are preaching and praying, do
you think he will not hear all that you
throw out againſt him. You may rely
upon it, there will be enough to give him
information; and as a ſtory never loſes in
the telling, it is ten to one they will make
the matter worſe than it was. Take my
advice, therefore, and make no enemies
while you can help it. Steer through life
as ſmoothly as poſſible. Keep a good
tongue in your mouth, and let thoſe who
chuſe to diſpute with Belzebub, diſpute. I
[Page 078]
never knew any good come of broils and
quarrels, eſpecially with low characters.
And, to ſay the truth of it, this Satan,
as they call him, is very little of the gentleman.
Even where he is well diſpoſed,
he will do but little good to one; but a
moſt dangerous creature where he takes a
diſlike. When you go to hell, as, one
day, you muſt, you can expect but little
quarter, after abuſing him in this world.
He will make you ſqueel like a pig; take
you by the throat, and kick you like a
cat. His very ſcullions will piſs upon you,
and give you no better life than a dog among
their feet; while theſe very clergymen,
that put you forward to blackguard
for them, will ſtand by laughing in their
ſleeves that you could be ſuch a fool.
The repreſentation had the deſired effect
upon Teague, and he thought no
more of the matter.
[Page 079]
CHAP. V.
The Concluſion, with Obſervations.
THE overtures made by Teague, to be
admitted to the miniſtry, and the simplicity
of the eccleſiaſtics in liſtening to his
pretenſions, made a great noiſe through
the neighbourhood; in as much as the
young man laboured under a want of education,
and was not qualified by theological
reading. But I do not ſee, why it ſhould
be thought blamable; provided the matter
was not too much hurried and haſtily
brought forward. For give him a little
time, and he might have been inſtructed to
preach as well as ſome that I myſelf have
heard. Eſpecially if at firſt ſetting out,
he had confined himſelf to hiſtorical passages
of ſcripture; ſuch as the hiſtory of
Sampſon, and Gideon, and Barak, and the
like: Only he muſt have taken care that
in pronouncing Barak, with the brogue
upon his tongue, he did not make it Burke;
for that is a patronimic name of his
[Page 080]
country, and he might inadvertently have fallen
into this pronunciation.
I acknowledge, that in the regular
churches, ſuch as that of the Presbyterians,
there is ſtill kept up ſome opinion of
the neceſſity of literature. But do we not
ſee that with other denominations; ſuch
as the Quakers, the Methodiſts, and Anabaptists,
it is totally diſregarded and thrown
out? Becauſe when human gifts or acquirements
are abſent, that which is supernatural
more evidently appears.
Do not Quakers, and Methodiſts, and
Baptiſts, preach very well? At any rate,
they do a great deal of good, and that is the
firſt object of preaching. Whether ſuch
ſermoniſts, avail themſelves moſt of ſenſe or
ſound, I will not ſay; but ſo it is they do
good; and that without the aid of any human
learning whatever.
It is very true, that formerly in the infancy
of the church, a knowledge of languages
and ſciences, might be requiſite.
But the caſe is quite altered now. The
Scripture has been well explained, and
frequently preached over; every text and
context examined, and paſſages illuſtrated.
The Hebrew roots, ſo to ſpeak, have been
all dug up; and there is ſcarcely a new
[Page 081]
etymology to be made. Are there any new
doctrines to diſcover? I ſhould think it impossible.
At any rate, I ſhould conceive
it unneceſſary. There are enough in all
conſcience: The inventing more, would
be like bringing timber to a wood, or
coals to Newcaſtle.
This being the caſe, I feel myſelf disposed
to agree with thoſe who reject human
learning in religious matters altogether.
More eſpecially as ſcience is really
not the faſhion at the preſent time. For
as has been before ſeen, even in the very
province of ſcience itſelf, it is diſpenſed
with; that of natural philoſophy, for instance.
In ſtate affairs, ignorance does
very well, and why not in church? I am
for having all things of a piece; ignorant
ſtateſmen, ignorant philoſophers, and ignorant
eccleſiaſtics. On this principle,
Teague might have done very well as a
preacher. But the ſelfiſhneſs of the Captain
prevailed, and obſtructed his advancement.
[Page 082]
BOOK IV.
CHAP. I.
Containing preliminary Obſervations. I AM very happy in the compoſition of
this work; for though but of a trifling
nature as to ſentiment; yet, in what I do
write, no one can attribute to me the leaſt
tincture of ſatire, or ridicule of individuals
or public bodies. This is what I very much
diſlike in others, and would be far from
indulging in myſelf. I acknowledge, indeed,
that in my earlier years, and in the
courſe of my academical ſtudies, I had
contracted ſome taſte, and even habit, this
way; owing to my reading the dialogues
of Lucian, in the original Greek. Had I
read them in a tranſlation, they might have
[Page 083]
made leſs impreſſion. But by means of a
difficult language, ſtudying them ſlowly,
the turn of thought became more deeply
impreſſed upon my mind. Moreover, afterwards,
when I came to have ſome acquaintance
with the modern wits, ſuch as
Cervantes, Le Sage, and eſpecially Swift,
I found myſelf ſtill more inclined to an ironical,
ludicrous way of thinking and writing.
But finding the bad effects of this,
in many reſpects, leading me into broils
with individuals, and rendering me obnoxious
to public bodies, I ſaw the indiscretion,
and bad policy of ſuch indulgence;
and have for ſeveral years paſt, carefully
avoided every thing of this kind. It is indeed
acting but a poor part in life, to make
a buſineſs of laughing at the follies of others.
It is injurious to one's ſelf; for there
is a great deal more to be gained by soothing
and praiſing what men do, than by
finding fault with them. It may be ſaid
of ſatire, what was ſaid of anger by ſome
philoſopher, It never pays the ſervice it requires.
It is your ſcratching, rump-tickling
people, that get into place and power.
I never knew any good come of wit and
humour yet. They are talents which keep
the owner poor. For this reaſon, I have
[Page 084]
taken care to repreſs all propenſity to this
vice; and I believe I can ſay it with truth,
that ſince I have come to the years of a
man's underſtanding, I have carefully avoided
every thing of this nature. Had it
not been for this prudence, I ſhould not
have been in a fair way, as I now am, to
be a member of Congreſs, or a judge on
the bench, or governor of a commonwealth,
or ſecretary of ſtate, or any thing
that I may have in view. Had I remained
an admirer of Rabelais, or Sterne, or other
biting, jeering writers, that I at firſt
met with, I might at this day have been considered
as a wit only, without the leaſt advancement
in ſtate affairs. But I would
ſooner ſee your Juniuſes, and your Peter
Pindars, libelling kings and miniſters, at
hell, than ſacrifice my intereſt to my passion,
or my vanity, by ſtrokes of wit, which
is but another name for ill-nature.
In this treatiſe, which is ſimply a relation
of the adventures of an individual,
I have nothing to do with ſtrictures upon
particular perſons, or the affairs of men
in general, and ſo have no temptation to the
folly I have juſt mentioned. The reader,
if any body ever reads it, will find
[Page 085]
nothing here but philanthropic and benevolent
ideas.
Indeed, as it has been known that I
was engaged in writing ſomething, persons
who either took, or pretended to take,
ſome intereſt in my affairs, have urged
me very much to depart a little from my usual
way, and make uſe of a little irony, by
way of ſeaſoning to the compoſition; for,
in this caſe, it would be received better,
and procure more readers; mankind being
naturally delighted with ridicule. But
the truth was, I could ſee nothing to be
ironical about; owing, perhaps, to my
not being in the habit of looking for the
ridiculous, and ſo having loſt the talent
of diſcovering it. But my reſolution that
I had taken would have fully preſerved me
from ſuch a lapſe, however numerous the
objects of ridicule might be, that preſented
themſelves. This will ſerve as an apology
to thoſe who have ſolicited me on this
head, and relieve me from ſuch solicitations
for the future.
[Page 086]
CHAP. II.
DETAINING ſome time in a village,
there was a great deal ſaid about
a certain Miſs Fog, who was the
belle of the place. Her father had made
a fortune by the purchuſe of public securities
A garriſon having been at this
place, and troops quartered here, he had
been employed as an iſſuing commiſſary!
When the commiſſioners ſat to adjuſt unliquidated
claims, he had a good deal in
his power, by vouching for the accounts
of the butcher, and baker, and wood-cutter,
and water-drawer, and waggoner, and
all others of all occupations whatſoever,
whoſe claims were purchaſed by himſelf,
in the mean time, and when the certificates
iſſued in their names, they were to
his uſe. The butcher and baker, no doubt,
long before had been paid out of the fleſh
killed, or bread baked; becauſe it is a
good maxim, and a ſcriptural expreſſion,
“Muzzle not the ox that treadeth out
the corn.” But the public has a broad
[Page 087]
back, and a little vouching, by a perſon
intereſted, is not greatly felt. Theſe
certificates, though at firſt of little value,
and iſſued by the commiſſioners with
the liberality of thoſe who give what is of
little worth, yet by the funding acts of the
government, having become, in value, equal
to gold and ſilver, the commiſſary
had a great eſtate thrown upon him; ſo
that, from low beginnings, he had become
a man of fortune and conſequence. His
family, and eſpecially the eldeſt daughter,
ſhared the advantage; for ſhe had become
the object of almoſt all wooers. The Captain,
though an old bachelor, as we have
ſaid, had not wholly loſt the idea of matrimony.
Happening to be in a circle, one
evening, where Miſs Fog was, he took
a liking to her, in all reſpects ſave one,
which was, that ſhe ſeemed, on her part,
to have taken a liking to a certain Mr.
Jacko, who was there preſent; and to
whoſe attention ſhe diſcovered a facility
of acquieſcence. The Captain behaved,
for the preſent, as if he did not obſerve
the preference; but the following day,
waiting on the young lady at her father's
houſe, he drew her into converſation, and
[Page 088]
began to reaſon with her, in the following
manner:
Miſs Fog, ſaid he, you are a young lady
of great beauty, great ſenſe, and fortune
ſtill greater than either.—This was a ſad
blunder in a man of gallantry, but the
lady not being of the greateſt ſenſibility
of nerve, did not perceive it.—On my
part, ſaid he, I am a man of years, but a
man of ſome reflection; and it would be
much more adviſeable in you to truſt my
experience, and the mellowneſs of my
diſpoſition in a ſtate of matrimony, than
the vanity and petulence of this young fop
Jacko, for whom you ſhew a partiality.
The colour coming into the young lady's
face at this expreſſion, ſhe withdrew, and
left him by himſelf. The Captain ſtruck
with the rudeneſs, withdrew alſo, and,
calling Teague from the kitchen, mounted
his horſe and ſet off.
The next morning ſhortly after he had
got out of bed, and had juſt come down
ſtairs at his lodging, and was buttoning the
knees of his breeches, a light airy looking
young man, with much bowing and civility,
entered the hall of the public houſe,
and enquiring if this was not Captain Farrago
to whom he had the honour to
[Page 089]
address himſelf, delivered him a paper. On
the peruſal, it was found to be a challenge
from Mr. Jacko.
The fact was, that Miſs Fog, in order the
more to recommend herſelf to her ſuitor,
had informed him of the language of the
Captain. The young man, though he had
no great ſtomach for the matter, yet according
to the cuſtom of theſe times, could do
no leſs than challenge. The bearer was
was what is called his ſecond.
The Captain having read the paper, and
pauſing a while, ſaid, Mr. Second, for that
I take to be your ſtile and character, is it
conſiſtent with reaſon or common ſenſe,
to be the aider or abettor of another man's
folly; perhaps the prompter: for it is no
uncommon thing with perſons to inflame
the paſſions of their frends, rather than
allay them. This young woman, for I
ſhall not call her lady, from vanity, or
ill-nature, or both, has become a tale-bearer
to her lover, who, I will venture
to ſay, thanks her but little for it; as ſhe
has thereby rendered it neceſſary for him
to take this ſtep. You, in the mean time,
are not blameleſs, as it became you to have
declined the office, and thereby furniſhed
an excuſe to your friend for not
[Page 090]
complying with the cuſtom. For it would have
been a ſufficient apology with the lady to
have ſaid, although he was diſpoſed to
fight, yet he could get no one to be his armour-bearer
or aſſiſtant. It could have
been put upon the footing, that all had
ſuch regard for his life, that no one would
countenance him in riſking it. You would
have ſaved him by this means, all that uneasiness
which he feels at preſent, leaſt I
ſhould accept his challenge. I am not ſo
unacquainted with human nature, as not
to know how diſagreeable it muſt be to
think of having a piſtol ball lodged in the
groin or the left breaſt, or, to make the
beſt of it, the pan of the knee broke, or
the noſe cut off, or ſome wound leſs than
mortal given; diſagreeable, eſpecially to
to a man in the bloom of life, and on the
point of marriage with a woman to whoſe
perſon or fortune he has no exception. I
would venture to ſay, therefore, there will
be no great difficulty in appeaſing this Orlando
Furioſo, that has ſent me the challenge.
Did you know the ſtate of his
mind, you would find him at prayers this
moment, that I would eaſe his fears, and
make ſome apology. A very ſlight one
would ſuffice. I dare ſay, his
[Page 091]
resentment againſt Miſs Fog is not ſlight, and
that he would renounce her perſon and
fortune both, to get quit of the duel. But
the opinion of the world is againſt him,
and he muſt fight. Do you think he has
any great gratitude to you for your services
on this occaſion. He had much rather
you had, in the freedom of friendſhip,
given him a kick on the backſide, when
he made application to you; and told him,
that it did not become him to quarrel about
a woman, who had, probably, consulted
but her own vanity, in giving him
the information. In that caſe, he would
have been more pleaſed with you a month
hence, than he is at preſent. I do not
know that he has an overſtock of ſenſe;
nevertheleſs, he cannot be juſt ſuch a fool,
as not to conſider, that you, yourſelf,
may have pretenſions to this belle, and
be diſpoſed to have him out of the way
before you. He muſt be a fool, indeed,
if he does not reflect, that you had much
rather ſee us fight than not; from the very
ſame principle that we take delight in seeing
a cock-match, or a horſe-race. The
ſpectacle is new, and produces a briſk current
of thought through the mind; which
[Page 092]
is a conſtituent of pleaſure, the abſence
of all movement giving none at all.
What do you ſuppoſe I muſt think of
you, Mr. Second; I, who have read books,
and thought a little on the ſubject; have
made up my mind in theſe matters, and
account the ſquires that bring challenges
from knights, as people of but very ſmall
deſert. Thinking men have condemned
the duel, and laws have prohibited it;
but theſe miſcreants ſtill keep it up, by
being the conductors of the fluid. My
indignation, therefore, falls on ſuch, and
I have long ago fixed on the mode of
treating them. It is this: a ſtout athletic
man calls upon me, with a challenge in his
hand, I knock him down, if I can, without
ſaying a word. If the natural arm be not
ſufficient for this purpuſe, I avail myſelf
of any ſtone, wooden, or iron inſtrument
that I caſt my eye upon, not juſt to take
away his life, if I can help it; but to hit
the line as exactly as poſſible, between actual
homicide, and a very bad wound. For
in this caſe, I ſhould conceive, a battery
could be juſtifiable, or at leaſt excuſeable,
and the fine not very great; the bearing
a challenge being a breach of the peace,
in the firſt inſtance. This would be my
[Page 093]
conduct with a ſtout athletic man, whom
I might think it dangerous to encounter
with fair warning, and on equal terms.
But in the preſent caſe, where—(Here
the ſecond began to ſhew ſigns of fear,
raiſing himſelf, and inclining backwards,
opening his eyes wider, and caſting a look
towards the door)—where, continued the
Captain, I have to do with a perſon of
your ſlender make, I do not adopt that
ſurpriſe, or uſe an artificial weapon; but
with theſe fiſts, which have been uſed in
early life to agricultural employments, I
ſhall very deliberately impreſs a blow. The
ſecond riſing to his feet, began to recede
a little. Be under no apprehenſions, ſaid
the Captain; I ſhall uſe no unfair method
of biting, gouging, or wounding the private
parts. Nay, as you appear to be a
young man of a delicate conſtitution, I
ſhall only choak a little. You will give
me leave to take you by the throat in as
eaſy a manner as poſſible.
In the mean time, the ſecond had been
withdrawing towards the door, and the
Captain with outſtretched arms, in a sideway
direction, proceeding to intercept him.
In an inſtant, he was ſeized by the neck,
and the exclamation of murder which he
[Page 094]
made at the firſt graſp, began to die away
in hoarſe guttural murmurs of one nearly
ſtrangled, and labouring for breath. The
Captain meaning that he ſhould be more
alarmed than hurt, diſmiſſed him with a salutation
of his foot on the backſide, as a
claude oſtium, as he went out. You may
be, ſaid he, a gentleman in the opinion of
the world; but you are a low perſon in
mine; and ſo ſhall it be done to every one
who ſhall come upon ſuch an errand.
[Page 095]
CHAP. III.
HAVING thus diſmiſſed the secondary
man, he called in his ſervant
Teague, and accoſted him as follows:
Teague, ſaid he, you have heretofore discovered
an ambition to be employed in
ſome way that would advance your reputation.
There is now a caſe fallen out, to
which you are fully competent. It is not
a matter that requires the head to contrive,
but the hand to execute. The greateſt
fool is as fit for it as a wiſe man. It is indeed
your greateſt blockheads that chiefly
undertake it. The knowledge of law, physic,
or divinity is out of the queſtion. Literature,
and political underſtanding is
uſeleſs. Nothing more is neceſſary than a
little reſolution of the heart. Yet it is an
undertaking which is of much eſtimation
with the rabble, and has a great many on
its ſide to approve and praiſe it. The females
of the world, eſpecially admire the
act, and call it valour. I know you wiſh
to ſtand well with the ladies. Here is an
[Page 096]
opportunity of advancing your credit. I
have had what is called a challenge ſent me
this morning. It is from a certain Jacko,
who is a ſuitor to a Miſs Fog, and has taken
offence at an expreſſion of mine, respecting
him to this female. I wiſh you to
accept the challenge, and fight him for me.
At this propoſition, Teague looked wild,
and made apology that he was not much
uſed to boxing. Boxing, ſaid the Captain;
you are to fight what is called a duel.
You are to encounter him with piſtol, and
put a bullet through him if you can. It
is true, he will have the chance of putting
one through you; but in that conſiſts the
honour; for where there is no danger,
there is no glory. You will provide yourself
a ſecond. There is an hoſtler here at
the public houſe, that is a brave fellow,
and will anſwer the purpoſe. Being furnished
with a ſecond, you will provide
yourſelf with a pair of piſtols, powder and
ball of courſe. In the mean time, your
adverſary notified of your intentions, will
do the like. Thus apparalelled, you will
advance to the place agreed upon. The
ground will be meaſured out; ten, ſeven,
or five ſteps; back to back, and coming
round to your place, fire. Or taking your
[Page 097]
ground, ſtand ſtill and fire; or it may be,
advance and fire as you meet, at what distance
you think proper. The rules in this
reſpect are not fixed, but as the parties can
agree or the ſeconds point out. When you
come to fire, be ſure you keep a ſteady
hand, and take good aim. Remember
that the piſtol barrel being ſhort, the powder
is apt to throw the bullet up. Your
ſight therefore, ought to be about the
waiſt-band of his breeches, ſo that you
have the whole length of his body, and his
head into the bargain, to come and go upon.
It is true, he in the mean time, will
take the ſame advantages of you. He may
hit you about the groin, or the belly. I
have known ſome ſhot in the thigh, or the
leg, or the private parts. The throat alſo,
and the head are in themſelves vulnerable.
It is no uncommon thing to have an arm
broke, or a ſplinter ſtruck off the noſe, or
an eye ſhot out; but as in that caſe, the
ball moſtly paſſes through the brain, and
the man being dead at any rate, the loſs
of ſight is not greatly felt.
As the Captain ſpoke, Teague ſeemed
to feel in himſelf, every wound which was
deſcribed, the ball hitting him, now in
one part, and now in another. At the laſt
[Page 098]
words, it ſeemed to paſs through his head,
and he was half dead, in imagination.
Making a ſhift to expreſs himſelf, he gave
the Captain to underſtand, that he could
by no means undertake the office. What!
ſaid the Captain; you whom nothing would
ſerve, ſome time ago, but to be a legislator,
or philoſopher, or preacher, in order
to gain fame, will now detract a buſineſs
for which you are qualified. This requires
no knowledge of finances, no reading of
natural hiſtory, or any ſtudy of the fathers.
You have nothing more to do than to keep
a ſteady hand and a good eye.
In the early practice of this exerciſe; I
mean the combat of the duel, it was customary
to exact an oath of the combatants,
before they entered the liſts, that
they had no enchantments, or power of
witchcraft, about them. Whether you
ſhould think it neceſſary to put him to his
voir dire, on this point, I ſhall not ſay;
but I am perſuaded, that on your part,
you have too much honour, to make uſe of
ſpells, or undue means, to take away his
life, or ſave your own. You will leave all
to the chance of fair ſhooting. One thing
you will obſerve, and which is allowable
in this battle, you will take care not
[Page 099]
to preſent yourſelf to him with a full
breaſt, but angularly, and your head turned
round over the left ſhoulder, like a weather
cock. For thus a ſmaller ſurface being
preſented to an adverſary, he will be
leſs likely to hit you. You muſt throw
your legs into lines parallel, and keep them
one directly behind the other. Thus you
will ſtand like a ſail hauled cloſe to the
wind. Keep a good countenance, a ſharp
eye, and a ſour look; and if you feel any
thing like a cholic or a palpitation of the
heart, make no noiſe about it. If the ball
ſhould take you in the gills, or the gizzard,
fall down as decently as you can,
and die like a man of honour.
It was of no uſe to urge the matter; the
Iriſhman was but the more oppoſed to the
propoſition, and utterly refuſed to be after
fighting in any ſuch manner. The Captain
finding this to be the caſe, diſmiſſed
him to clean his boots and ſpurs, and rub
down his horſe in the ſtable.
[Page 100]
CHAP. IV.
ON reflection, it ſeemed adviſeable to
the Captain to write an anſwer to the
card which Colonel, or Major Jacko, or
whatever his title may have been, had ſent
him this morning. It was as follows:
Letter
Sir,
I have two objections to this duel
matter. The one is, leſt I ſhould hurt
you; and the other is, leſt you ſhould
hurt me. I do not ſee any good it would
do me to put a bullet through any part
of your body. I could make no uſe of
you when dead, for any culinary purpoſe,
as I would a rabbit or a turkey. I am
no cannibal to feed on the fleſh of men.
Why then ſhoot down a human creature,
of which I could make no uſe. A buffalo
would be better meat. For though your
fleſh might be delicate and tender; yet it
wants that firmneſs and conſiſtency which
takes and retains ſalt. At any rate it would
not be fit for long ſea voyages. You might
make a good barbecue, it is true, being of
the nature of a racoon or an opoſſum;
[Page 101]
but people are not in the habit of barbecuing
any thing human now. As to your
hide, it is not worth the taking off, being
little better than that of a year old colt.
It would ſeem to me a ſtrange thing to
ſhoot at a man that would ſtand ſtill to be
ſhot at; in as much as I have been heretofore
uſed to ſhoot at things flying, or
running, or jumping. Were you on a
tree now like a ſquirrel, endeavouring to
hide yourſelf in the branches, or like a
racoon, that after much eyeing and ſpying
I obſerve at length in the crotch of a tall
oak, with boughs and leaves intervening,
ſo that I could juſt get a ſight of his hinder
parts, I ſhould think it pleaſurable enough
to take a ſhot at you. But as it is, there
is no ſkill or judgment requiſite either to
diſcover or take you down.
As to myſelf, I do not much like to ſtand
in the way of any thing that is harmful. I
am under apprehenſions you might hit me.
That being the caſe, I think it moſt adviseable
to ſtay at a diſtance. If you want
to try your piſtols, take ſome object, a tree
or a barn door about my dimenſions. If
you hit that, ſend me word, and I ſhall acknowledge
that if I had been in the ſame
place, you might alſo have hit me.
J. Farrago.
[Page 102]
CHAP. V.
Containing Reflections.
CAPTAIN Farrago was a good man,
but unacquainted with the world.
His ideas were drawn chiefly from what
may be called the old ſchool; the Greek
and Roman notions of things. The combat
of the duel was to them unknown.
Though it ſeems ſtrange, that a people who
were famous for almoſt all arts and sciences,
ſhould have remained ignorant of its
uſe. I do not conceive how, as a people,
they could exiſt without it. But ſo it was,
they actually were without the knowledge
of it. For we do not find any trace of this
cuſtom in the poets or hiſtorians of all
antiquity.
I do not know at what period, preciſely,
the cuſtom was introduced; or to whom
it was owing; but omitting this disquisition,
we content ourſelves with obſerving,
that it has produced as great improvement
in manners, as the diſcovery of the
[Page 103]
load-stone, and mariner's compaſs, has at navigation.
Not that I mean to deſcant, at full
length, on the valuable effects of it; but
ſimply to obſerve, that it is a greater aid
to government than the alliance of church
and ſtate itſelf. If Dr. Warburton had
had leiſure, I could wiſh he had written a
treatiſe upon it. Some affect to ridicule
it, as carrying to a greater length ſmall
differences, than the aggravation may justify.
As for inſtance, a man is angry enough
with you to give you a ſlap in the
face; but the cuſtom ſays, he muſt ſhoot
you through the head. I think the ſmaller
the aggravation, the nicer the ſenſe of honour.
The heavieſt mind will reſent a
groſs affront; but to kill a man where
there is no affront at all, ſhews a great
ſenſibility. It is immaterial whether there
is or is not an injury, provided the world
thinks there is; for it is the opinion of
mankind we are to conſult. It is a duty
which we owe them to provide for their
amuſement. Non naſſcimur nobis ipſis; we
are not born for ourſelves, but for others.
Decorum pro patria mori; it is a becoming
thing to die for one's country; and ſhall
it not alſo be accounted honourable to
throw one's life away for the
[Page 104]
entertainment of a few particular neighbours and
acquaintances. It is true, the tears that
will be ſhed upon your grave, will not
make the graſs grow; but you will have
the conſolation, when you leave the world,
to have fallen in the bed of honour.
It is certainly a very noble inſtitution,
that of the duel; and it has been carried
to very great perfection, in ſome reſpects.
Nevertheleſs, I would ſubmit it to the public,
whether ſtill further improvement
might not be made in the laws and regutions
of it. For inſtance, could it not be
reduced nearer to an equality of chances,
by proportioning the caliber, or bore
or the piſtol; the length of the barrel,
alſo, to the ſize of the duelliſt who holds
it; or by fixing the ratio of diſtance in
proportion to the bulk of combatants.
To explain myſelf: When I am to fight
a man of a ſmall ſize, I ought to have a
longer piſtol than my adverſary, becauſe
my mark is ſmaller; or I ought to be permitted
to come nearer to him. For it is
altogether unfair that men of unequal bulk
ſhould fire at equal diſtances, and with
equal calibers. The ſmaller ſize multiplied
by the larger ſpace, or larger piſtol,
would equal the larger ſize multiplied by
[Page 105]
the ſmaller ſpace or ſmaller piſtol. If this
amendment of the duel laws ſhould be approved
by men of honour, let it be added
to the code.
[Page 106]
BOOK V.
CHAP. I. NOT long after this, being at a certain
place, the Captain was accoſted
by a ſtranger in the following manner:
Captain Farrago, ſaid he, I have heard
of a young man in your ſervice who talks
Iriſh. Now, Sir, my buſineſs is that of
an Indian treaty-maker; and am on my
way with a party of kings, and half kings
to the commiſſioners, to hold a treaty.
My king of the Kickapoos, who was a
Welch blackſmith, took ſick by the way,
and is dead. I have heard of this lad of
yours, and could wiſh to have him a while
to ſupply his place. The treaty will not
laſt longer than a couple of weeks; and
as the government will probably allow
three or four thouſand dollars for the
[Page 107]
treaty, it will be in our power to make it worth
your while, to ſpare him for that time.
Your king of the Kickapoos, ſaid the Captain;
what does that mean? Said the stranger,
it is juſt this: You have heard of the
Indian nations to the weſtward, that occasionally
make war upon the frontier settlements.
It has been a policy of government,
to treat with theſe, and diſtribute
goods. Commiſſioners are appointed for
that purpoſe. Now you are not to ſuppoſe
that it is always an eaſy matter to catch a
real chief, and bring him from the woods;
or if at ſome expence one was brought,
the goods would go to his uſe; whereas,
it is much more profitable to hire substitutes
and make chiefs of our own: And
as ſome unknown gibberiſh is neceſſary,
to paſs for an Indian language, we generally
make uſe of Welch, or Low Dutch,
or Iriſh; or pick up an ingenious fellow
here and there, who can imitate a language
by ſounds of his own, in his mouth,
and throat. But we prefer one who can
ſpeak a real tongue, and give more for
him. We cannot afford you a great deal
at this time for the uſe of your man; because
it is not a general treaty where
20,000, or 30,000, dollars are appropriated
[Page 108]
for the purpoſe of holding it; but an occasional,
or what we call a running treaty,
by way of brightening the chain, and holding
faſt friendſhip. The commiſſioners
will doubtleſs be glad to ſee us, and procure
from government an allowance for
the treaty. For the more treaties, the
more uſe for commiſſioners. The buſineſs
muſt be kept up, and treaties made if there
are none of themſelves. My Piankſha,
and Choctaw chiefs, are very good fellows;
the one of them a Scotch pedlar that talks
the Erſe; the other has been ſome time
in Canada, and has a little broken Indian,
God knows what language; but has been
of great ſervice in aſſiſting to teach the reſt
ſome Indian cuſtom and manners. I have
had the whole of them for a fortnight paſt
under my tuition, teaching them war
ſongs and dances, and to make reſponſes
at the treaty. If your man is tractable, I
can make him a Kickapoo in about nine
days. A breech-clout and leggins, that I
took off the blackſmith that died, I have
ready to put on him. He muſt have part
of his head ſhaved, and painted, with feathers
on his crown; but the paint will rub
off, and the hair grow in a ſhort time, ſo
that he can go about with you again.
[Page 109]
It is a very ſtrange affair, ſaid the Captain.
Is it poſſible that ſuch deception
can be practiſed in a new country. It astonishes
me, that the government does
not detect ſuch impoſition. The government,
ſaid the Indian treaty-man, is at
a great diſtance. It knows no more of
Indians than a cow does of Greek. The
legiſlature, hears of wars and rumours
of wars, and ſupports the executive in
forming treaties. How is it poſſible for
men who live remote from the ſcene of
action, to have adequate ideas of the nature
of Indians, or the tranſactions that
are carried on in their behalf. Do you
think the one half of thoſe ſavages that
come to treat, are real repreſentatives of
the nation. Many of them are not ſavages
at all; but weavers, and pedlars, as I
have told you, picked up to make kings
and chiefs. I ſpeak of thoſe particularly
that come trading down to inland towns,
or the metropolis. I would not communicate
theſe myſteries of our trade, were it
not that I confide in your good ſenſe,
and have occaſion for your ſervant.
It is a myſtery of iniquity, ſaid the
Captain. Do you ſuppoſe that I would
countenance ſuch a fraud upon the
[Page 110]
public? I do not know, ſaid the other; it is
a very common thing for men to ſpeculate,
now a-days. If you will not, another will.
An 100 dollars might as well be in your
pocket as another man's. I will give you that
for the uſe of your ſervant, for a week or
two, and ſay no more about it. It is an
idea new to me entirely, ſaid the Captain,
that Indian princes, whom I have ſeen
eſcorted down as ſuch, were no more
than trumpery, diſguiſed, as you mention;
that ſuch ſhould be introduced to
polite aſſemblies, and have the honour to
ſalute the fair ladies with a kiſs, the greatest
beauties thinking themſelves honoured
by having the ſalutation of a ſovereign?
It is ſo, ſaid the other; I had a red headed
bricklayer once, whom I paſſed for a
Chippawaw; and who has dined with
clubs, and ſat next the Preſident. He
was blind of an eye, and was called blind
Sam by the traders. I had given it out
that he was a great warrior, and had loſt
his eye by an arrow, in a conteſt with a
rival nation. Theſe things are now reduced
to a ſyſtem; and it is ſo well known
to thoſe who are engaged in the traffic,
that we think nothing of it.
How the devil, ſaid the Captain, do
[Page 111]
you get ſpeeches made, and interpret them
ſo as to paſs for truth. That is an eaſy
matter, ſaid the other; Indian ſpeeches are
nearly all alike. You have only to talk
of burying hatchets under large trees,
kindling fires, brightening chains; with a
demand, at the latter end, of blankets for
the backſide, and rum to get drunk with.
I much doubt, ſaid the Captain, whether
treaties that are carried on in earneſt,
are of any great uſe. Of none at all, ſaid
the other; eſpecially as the practice of
giving goods prevails; becauſe this is an
inducement to a freſh war. This being the
caſe, it can be no harm to make a farce
of the whole matter; or rather a profit
of it; by ſuch means as I propoſe to
you, and have purſued myſelf.
After all, ſaid the Captain, I cannot
but conſider it as a kind of contraband
and illicit traffic; and I muſt be excuſed
from having any hand in it. I ſhall not
betray your ſecret, but I ſhall not favour
it. It would ill become me, whoſe object
in riding about in this manner, is to give
juſt ideas on ſubjects, to take part in ſuch
ill-gotten gain.
The Indian-treaty man finding it in vain
to ſay more, withdrew.
[Page 112]
CHAP. II.
THE Captain apprehending that he
might not yet drop his deſigns upon
the Iriſhman, but be tampering with him
out of doors, ſhould he come acroſs him,
ſent for Teague. For he well knew, that
ſhould the Indian treaty man get the firſt
word of him, the idea of making him a
king, would turn his head, and it would be
impoſſible to prevent his going with him.
Teague coming in, ſaid the Captain to
him; Teague, I have diſcovered in you,
for ſome time paſt, a great ſpirit of ambition,
which is, doubtleſs, commendable
in a young perſon; and I have checked it
only in caſes where there was real danger,
or apparent miſchief. There is now an
opportunity of advancing yourſelf, not ſo
much in the way of honour as profit. But
profit brings honour, and is, indeed, the
moſt ſubſtantial ſupport of it. There has
been a man here with me, that carries on
a trade with the Indians, and tells me that
red-headed ſcalps are in great demand with
[Page 113]
them. If you could ſpare yours, he would
give a good price for it. I do not well
know what uſe they make of this article,
but ſo it is the traders find their account in
it. Probably they dreſs it with the hairy
fide out, and make tobacco pouches for
the chiefs, when they meet in council. It
faves dyeing, and beſides, the natural red
hair of a man, may, in their eſtimation,
be ſuperior to any colour they can give by
art. The taking off the ſcalp will not give
much pain, it is ſo dextrouſly done by them
with a crooked knife they have for that
purpoſe. The mode of taking off the ſcalp
is this; you lie down upon your back;
a warrior puts his feet upon your shoulders,
collects your hair in his left hand,
and drawing a circle with the knife in his
right, makes the inciſion, and, with a sudden
pull, ſeparates it from the head, giving,
in the mean time, what is called the
ſcalp yell. The thing is done in ſuch an
inſtant, that the pain is ſcarcely felt. He
offered me an 100 dollars, if I would have
it taken off for his uſe, giving me directions,
in the mean time, how to ſtretch it
and dry it on a hoop. I told him, No;
it was a perquiſite of your own, and you
might diſpoſe of it as you thought proper.
[Page 114]
If you choſe to diſpoſe of it, I had no objections;
but the bargain ſhould be of
your own making, and the price ſuch as
ſhould pleaſe yourſelf. I have ſent for you,
to give you a hint of this chapman, that
you may have a knowledge of his wiſh to
poſſeſs the property, and aſk accordingly.
It is probable you may bring him up to a
half Johannes more, by holding out a little.
But I do not think it would be adviseable
to loſe the bargain. An hundred
dollars for a little hairy fleſh, is a great
deal. You will trot a long time before
you make that with me. He will be with
you probably to propoſe the purchaſe. You
will know when you ſee him. He is a tall
looking man, with leggins on, and has several
Indians with him going to a treaty.
He talked to me ſomething of making you
a king of the Kickapoos, after the ſcalp is
off; but I would not count on that ſo
much; becauſe words are but wind, and
promiſes are eaſily broken. I would advise
you to make ſure of the money in
the firſt place, and take chance for the
reſt.
I have ſeen among the prints of Hogarth,
ſome ſuch expreſſion of countenance as
that of Teague at this inſtant; who, as
[Page 115]
ſoon as he could ſpeak, but with a double
brogue on his tongue, began to intimate
his diſinclination to the traffic. The hair
of his ſcalp itſelf, in the mean time had
riſen in oppoſition to it. Dear maſter, vid
you trow me into ridicule, and the bleſſed
ſhalvation of my life, and all dat I have in
the vorld, to be trown like a dog to de
ſavages, and have my fleſh tarn of my head
to give to deſe vild baſtes to make a napsack
to carry their parates and tings in, for
an 100 dollars or the like. It ſhall never
be ſaid that the hair of the Oregans made
mackeſeens for a vild Indian to trat upon.
I would ſooner trow my own head hair and
all in de fire, dan give it to deſe paple to
ſmoke wid, out of deir long pipes.
If this be your determination, ſaid the
Captain, it will behove you to keep yourself
ſomewhat cloſe; and while we remain
at this public houſe, avoid any conversation
with the chapman or his agents, ſhould
they come to tamper with you. For it is
not improbable, while they are keeping
you in talk, propoſing to make you a
Kickapoo chief, and the like, they may
ſnatch the ſcalp of your head, and you
not be the wiſer for it.
Teague thought the caution good, and
[Page 116]
reſolving to abide by it, retired to the kitchen.
The maid at this time, happening
to want a log of wood, requeſted Teague
to cut it for her. Taking the ax accordingly,
and going out, he was buſy chopping,
with his head down; while, in the
mean time, the Indian treaty-man had returned
with one in Indian dreſs, who was
the chief of the Killinoos, or at leaſt paſſed
for ſuch; and whom he brought as having
ſome recruiting talents, and might
prevail with Teague to elope, and join the
company. I preſume, ſaid the Indian
treaty-man, you are the waiter of the
Captain who lodges here at preſent. Teague
hearing a man ſpeak, and lifting up his
head, ſaw the leggins on the one, and the
Indian dreſs on the other; and with a
kind of involuntary effort, threw the ax
directly from him at the Killinoo. It
miſſed him but about an inch, and fell behind.
Teague, in the mean time, raiſing
a ſhout of deſperation, was fixed on the ſpot,
and his locomotive faculties ſuſpended; ſo
that he could neither retreat nor advance,
but ſtood ſtill, like one enchained or enchanted
for a moment; the king of the
Killinoos, in the mean time, drawing his
tomahawk, and preparing for battle.
[Page 117]
The Captain, who was reading at a
front window, hearing the ſhout, looked
about, and ſaw what going on at the woodpile.
Stop villain, ſaid he, to the king of
the Killinoos; you are not to take that
ſcalp yet, however much you may value
it. He will not take an 100 dollars for
it, nor 500, though you make him king of
the Kickapoos, or any thing elſe. It is no
trifling matter to have the ears ſlit in tatters,
and the noſe run through with a bodkin,
and a gooſe quill ſtuck a croſs; ſo
that you may go about your buſineſs; you
will get no king of the Kickapoos here.
Under cover of this addreſs of the Captain,
Teague had retired to the kitchen, and
enſconced himſelf behind the rampart of
the maid. The Indian treaty-man, and
the Killinoo chief, finding the meaſure
hopeleſs, withdrew, and turned their attention,
it is to be ſuppoſed, to ſome other
quarter, to find a king of the Kickapoos.
[Page 118]
CHAP. III.
Containing Obſervations.
THE Captain was certainly to be commended
in declining to countenance
the impoſition of making Teague a Kickapoo
chief. Had he been diſpoſed to adventure
in a contraband trade of this
kind, he might have undertaken it as a
principal, and not as furniſhing an assistant
only. He could have paſſed Teague
for a chief, and himſelf for an interpreter.
He might pretend to have conducted this
prince from a very diſtant nation, and that
he had been ſeveral moons in travelling,
and wanted, the Lord knows how much,
goods for his people, that otherwiſe would
come to war. By this means, the Captain
would have taken the whole emolument
of the treaty, and not have been put
off with a ſmall ſhare of the profit which
another made by it.
I ſhould like to have ſeen Teague in
an Indian dreſs, come to treat with the
[Page 119]
commiſſioners. It would be neceſſary for
him only to talk Iriſh, which he might paſs
for the Shawanee, or other language. The
Captain could have interpreted in the usual
words on theſe occaſions.
The policy of treating with the Indians
is very good; becauſe it takes off a great
deal of looſe merchandize, that might otherwise
lie upon our hands, and cuts
away ſuperfluities from the finances of
the government; at the ſame time, as every
freſh treaty lays the foundation of a
new war, it will ſerve to check the too rapid
growth of the ſettlements. The extremities
of a government, like the arm or
ancle of an individual, are the parts at
which blood is to be let.
Struck with the good effects of treating
with the ſavages, and that our wiſe men
who conduct affairs, purſue the policy, I
have been led to wonder, that the agricultural
ſocieties, have not propoſed treaties
with the wolves and bears, that they
might not clandeſtinely invade our ſheep
and pig folds. This might be done by
ſending meſſages to the ſeveral urſine and
vulpine nations, and calling them to a council
fire, to which four or five hundred waggon
load of beef ſhould be ſent, and
[Page 120]
distributed. If it ſhould be ſaid, that this would
reſtrain them no longer from their prey
than while they continued to be ſatiated,
the ſame might be ſaid of the Potawatamies,
or other Indian nations; and yet
we ſee that thoſe at the head of our affairs
think it prudent to negotiate with them.
A bear and wolf treaty might ſeem an
odd thing at firſt; but we ſhould ſoon come
to be accuſtomed to it. I ſhould be ſorry
abuſes ſhould prevail, by treaty-making
men paſſing rough water-dogs for bears,
or maſtiffs for wolves, upon our ſecretaries
at war, or ſubordinate commiſſioners;
which might be done as in the caſe of the
ſavages, where it is pretended that ſome
tribe that had not been at the general treaty,
now ſends a chief to repreſent them
and to get goods.
If our traders go amongſt the wolves in
conſequence of a treaty, I could wiſh they
could check themſelves in the introduction
of ſpirituous liquors. A drunk wolf, or
bear, would be a dangerous animal. It
may be thought, that a bear or wolf chief
would not get drunk, as it would be setting
a bad example to their people; but I
have ſeen Indian kings lying on the earth
drunk, and expoſing their nakedneſs, like
[Page 121]
Noah to Shem, Ham, and Japheth; and
if Indians that are a ſort of human creature,
act thus, what might we not expect
from a poor brute wolf or bear.
If treaties with the wolves and bears
ſhould be found to ſucceed, it might not be
amiſs to inſtitute them alſo with the foxes.
This is a ſagacious animal, and particularly
deſtructive to ducks and other fowls.
It would be a great matter to ſettle a treaty
with them, which might be done at the expence
of nine or ten thouſand dollars laid
out in goods.
[Page 122]
BOOK VI.
CHAP. I. MEANING to remain ſome time
in a certain town to which he came,
the Captain had his horſe put out to pasture,
and took private lodgings. The firſt
day at dinner, he was ſtruck with the appearance
of a young man who ſat at table,
but could not be ſaid to dine with them;
for except a little water, and a bit of bread,
he ate or drank nothing; and though sometimes
addreſſed, he made no anſwer.
There was a ſettled melancholy in his countenance,
and he often ſighed deeply. He
had been in this houſe ſix weeks, and had
behaved uniformly in the ſame manner.
In the evening he would walk by himſelf
till midnight. Whence he came, or what
[Page 123]
was his object, no one knew. He had
beſpoke a back room, and wiſhed to have
one where there was but little light; alſo,
that a little water, and a bit of bread might
be ſent when he ſhould require it. The
landlady not chuſing to have a perſon in
the houſe who was unwilling to be ſeen,
declined the circumſtance of ſending in
proviſions to his room; but thought it
proper he ſhould come to table. He did
ſo; but entered into no converſation, tho'
much pains was taken to engage him. He
had paid his boarding regularly, and did
not ſeem to be in want of money. This
was the account given by the family, when
the youug man retired from dinner.
The Captain's curioſity was much excited;
for being a philanthropic man, he
found himſelf intereſted in the hiſtory of
this perſon. Taking an opportunity that very
evening, when the young man was walking
in the back porch, he joined him, and
with the bluntneſs of a plain man, inſiſted
to converſe with him. Sir, ſaid he, it is
from no motive of vain curioſity, that I
thus ſolicit. It is from a diſpoſition to
know and alleviate your griefs. For it is
evident to me that ſomething hangs heavy
on your mind. I am a man, as you
[Page 124]
ſee, advanced in life, and have had ſome
experience. It is poſſible it might be in
my power to ſay or do ſomething that
might ſerve you; at leaſt, it is my disposition
to ſoothe your melancholy. If it
ſhould be an unfortunate murder, the
guilt of which lies upon your mind, you
will find no accuſer in me; I ſhall preserve
a ſecret obtained in this manner. Probably
it might have been a duel, and with
ſuch alleviating circumſtances, that though
the law would take hold of it, humanity
will excuſe.
The young man finding the charge of
murder, or ſuſpicion of it, ready to be
fixed upon him, ſpoke. Said he, I am no
murderer, but a murdered man myſelf. I
am in love with a young woman of the
moſt celeſtial beauty, but of a cruel heart.
The beauty may be more in your brain
than in her face, ſaid the Captain; for,
as the poet ſays, `There are three, the
`children of imagination, the madman,
`the lover, and the poet. The madman
`ſees more devils than vaſt hell can hold;
`the lover, all as frantic, ſees Helen's beau
`ty in a brow of Egypt.' I am not unacquainted
with the nature of this paſſion;
and have ſeen a gypſey myſelf, in my time,
[Page 125]
that have had dominion over me. Perhaps
I may have been carried to as much extravagance
as other people; and therefore
am a proper perſon to adviſe againſt it. A
principal ſource of my extravagance, was
an opinion that the jade who had hold of
my affections at the time, would pity me
when ſhe heard of the pain which her
beauty gave me; that ſhe would be afraid
I would hang myſelf for her ſake; that ſhe
would come to ſoothe and careſs me, in
order to prevent it. Far from it. My uneasiness
was the proof of her power to
wound; and the more diſtreſs I felt, the
greater credit to her beauty. She would
not have loſt a ſigh which ſhe cauſed me
for any conſideration. My lamentations
were as agreeable to her, as the groans of
the damned are to the devil. And ſo it
muſt be with every woman; becauſe ſelf
love induces it. Hanging is the laſt thing
they would be at. If they could get the
lover brought to this, they are then at the
height of fame. It falls but to the lot of
one here and there to have a man drown
himſelf for her; and when it does happen,
it makes ſuch a noiſe that all covet it.
I would venture to ſay, that this female
whom you faſt and pray about ſo much,
[Page 126]
would be very unwilling to breathe the ſoul
into you, were it once out. Inſtead of
faſting, ſhe is eating; and while you ſigh
in the night, ſhe ſnores.
You have an opinion, perhaps, that
you may bend her by your perſeverance.
That is a miſtake. A man that once comes
to this ſtate of ſighing, and dying, has
but little chance; becauſe he has surrendered
himſelf; and there is nothing more
to be won. Were there any poſſibility of
ſucceeding, it would be by firſt conquering
yourſelf; diſmiſſing all idea of her partiality
for you; for it is owing to this secret
vanity, and ſelf-flattery, that you ſtill
purſue. Abſolute deſpair is the firſt ſtep
towards the cure of love. It is either drowning
or curing, with you at preſent. As
you have not drowned yourſelf, you are
in a fair way to be cured.
I know very well how you miſſed the
matter with this huſſy. You appear to be
a young man of great ſenſibility of feeling;
and I preſume made your addreſſes with
great refinement of thought and manners.
You talked to her of flames and darts, and
flowers and roſes; read poetry in the mean
time, and thought a great deal of Phillis,
and Amaryllis; and entertained her with
[Page 127]
names and incidents in romances, and ſung
and recited ſoft love ſongs about Amanda,
and Phebe, and Colin; whereas your
way was to have talked careleſs nonſenſe,
and ſung ſuch ſongs as Pady Kelly, and
Triſtram Shandy-O; and told her ſtories
of girls that had run off with pedlars, or
gone a campaigning with the ſoldiers.
Theſe ideas are light and frolicſome, and
co-natural to ſpringing love. Hence it is
that men of but looſe and irregular education,
ſucceed better with the fair, than
ſcholars that are learned in the claſſics.
But to bring the matter to a point, the
true way is to get another miſtreſs; and profit
by your experience with the firſt. No
more of ſighing and dying in the caſe;
but ſinging, and laughing, and jumping
like a young fox. Hint a little with respect
to certain matters that are between
the ſexes; but let it be done in ſo delicate
a manner, that, though ſhe underſtands
you, ſhe is not obliged to do it. What
I mean, is to make her think you would
rather debauch her than marry her. Bring
her to this ſuſpicion, and I warrant you.
Her whole ſtudy will be to entrap you into
matrimony. For it is natural for the
human mind, when it obſerves a great
[Page 128]
ſecurity and confidence in another, to
imagine there muſt be ſome ground for
it. It will argue a conſciouſneſs, on your
part, of having as good or better in your
power. It will impreſs her with the ſame
idea; and imagination governs the world.
When the mind is bent upon any object,
it is relieved by the converſation of
thoſe who underſtand it; and, as it were,
diſſolve with them in the ſame ideas.
The young man was pleaſed with the conversation
of the Captain, and ſeemed
cheared; agreed to join the family, and
be a little ſociable. By degrees he became
ſo; and what by the converſation of the
Captain, ſometimes explaining and sometimes
ridiculing the paſſion of love; and
the young ladies of the family, in the
mean time, rallying him on his weakneſs,
he came a little to his ſenſes, (for love is
a phrenzy), and began to behave like a
common man. For it having come out
now, that love was the cauſe of his distress
and ſingularity of conduct, ſome
pitied him, and others rallied it with good
humour and philanthropy. It had, however,
become the general topic in the family,
and was carried down to the kitchen
among the ſervants.
[Page 129]
Teague hearing of it took it into his
head that he muſt be in love too; and
counterfeiting a demure look, and absence
of mind, and walking by himſelf,
and living on ſpare diet, as he had heard
the young man that was in love did, he
wiſhed to have it underſtood that his
mind was under the dominion of the ſame
paſſion. This being obſerved, was represented
to the Captain; who being at a loſs
to know what was the matter, called
Teague, and began to interrogate him.
The bog-trotter, with ſome ſeeming reluctance,
acknowledged that it was love.
Said the Captain, You in love, you great
bear; with whom are you in love? That
dear cratur, ſaid the Iriſhman, that has
the black hair, and the fair face, and her
name is Mrs. Sally, in the houſe there.
She is a fair as the wool or the ſnow, and
gives me the cholic, and the heart-burn,
every time I look at her fair eyes; God
ſave her ſoul from damnation, but I love
her as I do the very food that I ate, or
the cloathes that I ware upon my back.
It appeared to be Miſs Sally, a very
pretty girl, the eldeſt daughter of the landlady;
who, by the bye, I mean the ladlady,
was a widow, and had two daughters
[Page 130]
and a niece with her; the handſomeſt of
whom was this Miſs Sally, with whom
Teague had become enamoured. For simple
and ignorant nature will faſten on
beauty, as well as the moſt inſtructed
in the principles of taſte.
The Captain having been a good deal
troubled, heretofore, with the pretenſions
of this valet, in wiſhing to be a member
of the legiſlature, a philoſopher, a preacher,
and now a lover, thought he had now
a good opportunity of repreſſing his presumption
for the future. There was a
young man, a brother in the family, who
had been ſome time in the ſervice, as a
lieutenant, and had leave of abſence at
this time, on a viſit to his mother and
ſiſters. The Captain well knew, that being
in the pride and heat of youth, he
would conſider Teague's advances to his
ſiſter as an inſult on the family, and chastise
him accordingly. With this view,
counterfeiting every poſſible diſpoſition to
ſerve the bog-trotter, the Captain recommended
to him to make a confident of
the brother, and endeavour to gain his interest
with the ſiſter.
Accordingly, one morning when the
officer was in his chamber, Teague made
[Page 131]
his approach; and compoſing his woe begone
countenance as well as he could, and
explaining the cauſe of it, ſolicited his interest
with the lady.
There was a whip in a corner of the
room, with which the lieutenant had been
riding; ſeizing this haſtily, he made an
attack upon the perſon of the lover, in a
manner far beyond what was decent or
moderate. The valet retreating with considerable
outcries, made complaint to the
Captain; who gave him to underſtand,
that as this outrage was committed by his
intended brother in-law, it muſt be considered
in the nature of a family quarrel,
and he could not interfere.
The advances of Teague became the
ſubject of converſation in the family, and
of much mirth and laughter. The young
man who had been in the ſtate of melancholy
before deſcribed, and had been
cheered a little, was now in a great degree
cured by the imitation of the valet.
For ridicule is a better cure for love than
paſſion. It is better to make the patient
laugh than think.
Having now a diſpoſition to purſue his
travels, the Captain ſent for his horſe,
and ſet out.
[Page 132]
CHAP. III.
Containing Obſervations.
THE obſervations which we make when
the narration of the fact is ended, are
ſomething like the ſentiments delivered by
the chorus in the ancient plays; a kind of
moral on what was ſaid; or like the moral
as it is called to a fable. In this view therefore;
we ſhall endeavour to ſay ſomething.
The young man that we have ſeen ſo
deeply in love, was of a handſome personal
appearance, and of an eye and physiognomy
that indicated ſenſibility and understanding;
and yet it is probable the female
of whom he was ſo much enamoured, may
have been both homely, and deſtitute of
good mental qualities. Whence could a
repulſe in this caſe happen. From a thousand
cauſes. We will ſpecify ſome of
them. The very circumſtance of his being
beyond her firſt hopes, may have put him
beyond her laſt wiſhes. A female wooed
by a man her ſuperior, may be led to think
[Page 133]
ſhe has ſtill a chance for better; and that
there muſt be diamonds in her hair, or
ſome hidden advantages on her part, of
which ſhe was herſelf ignorant; otherwiſe
ſuch advances would not be made to her;
or ſhe may apprehend ſome defect on the
part of the lover, of which he is conſcious;
otherwiſe, he would not ſtoop beneath his
natural expectations.
It is poſſible the Amanda may not have
been of the ſame claſs and quality with
himſelf. This would of itſelf account for
the repulſe. Should the eagle come from
the firmament, and make his advances to
the pheaſant, he would find himſelf unsuccessful;
for the brown bird would prefer
a lover of her own ſpecies: or, ſhould
the rein deer, which is a moſt beautiful
creature, woo a frog, the croaking animal
would recede into the marſh, and solace
itſelf with a paramour of its own
chuſing. When, therefore, unexperienced
young perſons place their affections
on an object, and do not find a ſuitable
return, they ought to ſave their pride, and
make the inference, that they had descended
from their element, and faſtened on an
animal unworthy of their notice.
Theſe obſervations, in addition to thoſe
[Page 134]
made by the Captain to the young man,
may be of uſe to unfortunate lovers; and
if ſo, it will be a recompence for the trouble
we have given ourſelves in making
them.
[Page 135]
BOOK VII.
CHAP. I. IT was about an hour before ſunſet, that
the Captain fell in company with one
who had the Cincinnati eagle at his breaſt,
and riding on together, put up at the inn.
The landlady and the ſervants, having
never ſeen the badge before, were a good
deal ſtruck with the effigy of the eagle, and
the ribband at which it was pendant. Interrogating
Teague, who had come in
company, and whom they took to be a
common ſervant to both, or at leaſt acquainted
with the affairs of either, what
was the meaning of that bird, or what bird
it was, that the gentleman had at his breaſt?
Teague knew as little about it as they did;
but unwilling to be thought ignorant, took
[Page 136]
upon him to inform them. It is, ſaid he,
a gooſe; and the maining is, that the
ſhentleman would ate a gooſe, if your anours
would get one roaſted this avening,
for his anour to ate with the Captain, who
is my maſter; for we have ate nothing all
day long, and a roaſted gooſe with a shoulder
of mutton, a pace of poark, and bafe
and cabbage, and the like, would be a
very good ſlake for a faſting ſtomach. So,
God ſave your ſoul, dear honey, and make
haſte, and get a gooſe knocked down and
put to the fire, to keep their anours from
ſtarving, and to go to bed in a good humour,
when they have drank a cup of ale
or a mug of cyder after the gooſe; and,
bleſs your ſoul, dear honey, let it be a
good large fat gooſe, that there may be a
rib or a wing left, that a poor ſervant may
have ſometing to ate, at the ſame time.
The ſhentleman was very right to hold out
a token, like the ſign of a tavern-keeper,
with a gooſe, or a pigeon, or a turkey,
that paple may know what he wants, and
not be after the trouble of aſking whether
he would chuſe roaſt bafe and parates, or
pork and parſnips, may it plaſe your anour.
The landlady was a good deal diſtreſſed,
[Page 137]
having no gooſe about the houſe. But
ſending out to her neighbours, ſhe made
ſhift to collect a couple of ducks, which
Teague acknowledged would be a very
good ſubſtitute. Supper being ordered,
theſe were ſerved up, with an apology
from the landlady, that ſhe had not been
able to procure a gooſe; which ſhe hoped
the gentleman with the ribbon would excuse,
as ſhe was informed that a roaſted
gooſe was ſo much to his taſte. A roaſted
gooſe to my taſte! ſaid the officer; what
reaſon have you to think that a roaſted
gooſe is ſo much my choice? Surely madam
you cannot mean wit, or to inſinuate
that I myſelf am a gooſe? for one animal
preys not upon another; the maxim is,
dog will not eat dog. I cannot therefore
be a gooſe if I eat one.
Here the landlady explained her meaning,
giving the information ſhe had received
from the ſervant. The Captain was
greatly irritated, and would have called
him in and chaſtiſed him inſtantly, had not
the officer interfered; declaring that though
it was an eagle, not a gooſe that he wore
at his breaſt, yet he was not diſſatisfied
at the miſtake, in as much as it had brought
[Page 138]
a couple of good ducks to the table, a fowl
of which he was particularly fond.
This incident, in itſelf laughable, led
the officer to relate the trouble he had had
with a clergyman who had made a worſe
miſtake than this, taking the eagle for a
graven image, contrary to the injunction
of the decalogue, which prohibits the making
any ſuch repreſentation for the purpose
of worſhip, as he alledged this to be.
In anſwer to the clergyman, he had alledged
the improbability that he who had been
in the ſervice ſo many years, at a diſtance
from church, or church worſhip, except
when a deiſtical chaplain came the way,
ſhould think ſo much of religion, as to
have any worſhip at all; much leſs to have
become ſuperſtitious, and to wear an image
at his boſom. The truth was, that
he worſhipped any god, true or falſe, very
little; at leaſt, ſaid few or no prayers, on
ſuch occaſions; and was very far from being
an idolater, and paying adoration to
a gold or ſilver image; that this was nothing
more than a hieroglyphic, being the
effigies of a bald eagle, which is a native
of America, and deſignates the cauſe for
which her ſoldiery had fought; in the
ſame manner as the eagle was the ſtandard
[Page 139]
of the Roman legion; or the lion and the
unicorn are the arms of England, or the
thiſtle that of Scotland; that the emblem
of the American bald eagle had, on theſe
principles, been choſen by the Cincinnati
for their badge; of which ſociety he was
a member, and wore this device, not venerating
it as the image of any bird or
beaſt whatſoever.
The clergyman admitted, that, in strictness,
this ſymbol might not be a graven
image, as the term would intend engraving
on wood or metal, with the point of
an inſtrument; and under this mental reservation,
the wearer might ſave himſelf
in ſaying that it was not a graven image:
but it was at leaſt a molten one, which
comes within the meaning of the prohibition;
being the repreſentation of a fowl,
and doubtleſs for the purpoſe of idolatry.
For what elſe could be the uſe or meaning
of it. It was not a common broach, uſed
as a ligament to the ſhirt or coat; and it
was unworthy of a man to ſuppoſe it could
be worn merely for ornament; boys and
petit maitres delighting in theſe things,
but no one elſe. It could not be any ſort
of time-piece, worn for the purpoſe of ascertaining
diſtance. In fact, it was the
[Page 140]
portrait of a bird, the ſignal of ſome heathen
deity; as the cock was ſacred to Escalapius,
the owl to Minerva, the peacock
to Juno, and the dove to Venus. The eagle
was ſacred to Jupiter; and it was moſt
probable, that it was in honour of this
falſe god, that the image was worn.
It anſwered no end to reaſon with the
eccleſiaſtic; for he grew but the more enraged,
and inſiſted that it was an idol;
ſhewing from ſome texts of ſcripture, that
in the laſt times idolaters were to ſpring
up; and that this ſociety, which the Cincinnati
inſtituted, might be the Gog and
Magog ſpoken of in the Apocalypſe.
Said the Captain, It was natural enough
for the clergyman to make this deduction;
as in maintaining the cauſe of truth againſt
Pagans, he is led to dwell much on the
ſubject of idolatry. But for my part, the
principal objection that lies with me against
your inſtitution, is that which lies
againſt all partial inſtitutions whatſoever;
they cut men from the common maſs, and
alienate their affections from the whole,
concentring their attachments to a particular
point and intereſt. A circumſtance
of this kind is unfavourable to general
philanthropy, giving a temporary and
[Page 141]
artificial credit to thoſe who are of the body,
amongſt themſelves; ſo that while ſome
lend character, others borrow; and the
individuals do not ſtand on the natural basis
of their own merit. On this principle,
I do not much approve of clubs and societies,
unleſs in the caſe of ſome humane
or charitable inſtitution; or for the purpose
of carrying on ſome beneficial work
or improvement. I do not know that in
your conveening annually together, you
have any object in view of this nature. I
have not heard of any bridges you have
built, or any canals dug, or locks made for
the purpoſe of facilitating navigation. I
do not ſee of what uſe your inſtitution is;
unleſs it be, that your pronouncing an oration
now and then, may be favourable to eloquence.
But of this I much doubt, as
ſuch abſtract diſcourſes uſually degenerate
into common place. The great object of
an orator is, to perſuade the judgment, or
affect the paſſions. In this caſe, the judgment
is already perſuaded, the affections
already gained. Having therefore, no object,
what exertion can the mind make?
Be the cauſe what it may, certain it is that
ſuch compoſitions are ſeldom or ever found
to be models of eloquence; more
[Page 142]
especially where the ſubject is of an extenſive
nature, as the revolution of America, and
the ſtruggles of its heroes. For here ſo
wide a canvaſs is ſpread, that it is difficult
to fill it up; and to take a particular part
would ſeem to be a dereliction of the reſt;
for which dereliction no ſpecial reaſon
could be given. You could not embrace
all the characters who have figured or
have fallen, or catch at particular names
of the illuſtrious. Conſining yourſelf,
therefore, to general obſervations, you
make no particular impreſſion, and your
orations become frigid to the hearers.
I have felt the truth of all this, ſaid the
Cincinnati gentleman, and the difficulty of
compoſing an oration to ſatisfy my own
wiſhes. For being appointed by the society
to pronounce one at our next meeting,
to which I am now on my way, I
have been trying my hand at it, and find
it as you ſay, very difficult; but have attributed
this, not to the nature of the
compoſition; but to the inferiority of my
powers. Not ſo, ſaid the Captain; for in
the hands of the greateſt maſters, this kind
of compoſition labours. We do not find
that even the oration of Iſocrates, on the
Lacedemonian war, which he was ten
[Page 143]
years in compoſing, has obtained ſuch celebrity
among the ancients, as ſuch great
labour would beſpeak. I have read the
panegyric of Trajan, by Pliny; and find
it but a cold compoſition. Plato's oration
in honour of thoſe who had fallen in the
battles of Marathon and Platea, is the beſt
of this kind that antiquity can produce,
and doubtleſs has great excellence of simplicity
of painting. The touches are delicate
and fine, and I do not know but we may
place it among the moſt beautiful productions.
It amuſes with magic wildneſs of
fancy, at the ſame time, reſtrained and
guided by an exquiſite judgment. But it
is rather a poem than an harangue. For
though the compoſition is in proſe, yet it
breathes the ſoul of a bard, and is inchanting
by the flow of the words, and the elevation
of the images. In modern times,
the beſt thing we have of this nature, is
the panegyric of Cromwell, ſuppoſed to be
written by the great Milton, but not delivered.
The ingenuity diſcovered in the
mode of praiſing him, deſerves every possible
commendation. But the greater part
of addreſſes that I have ſeen to great men
now-a-days, or orations on public
[Page 144]
occasions, are turgid, or jejune, or little worth
our notice.
After this, ſaid the Cincinnati gentleman,
I ſhall heſitate to ſhow you the eſſay
I have made towards a compoſition of this
nature, as you appear to be ſo good a judge
in this reſpect, and to know the deficiencies
that may appear in any effort of this kind.
Nay, rather, ſaid the Captain, you ought
to be the more confident in ſo doing; for
knowing the difficulty of the work, I ſhall
be the more ready to excuſe what comes
ſhort of perfection.
I ſhall then take the liberty, ſaid the
Cincinnati gentleman, to read you a few
paragraphs. I ſhall be happy to hear it,
ſaid the Captain. The Cincinnati gentleman
read as follows:
Compatriots—I wiſh to ſay thoſe
things that never have been ſaid, and that
never will be ſaid again. Becauſe, in this
caſe, there will be the characteriſtics of
novelty and ſingularity; the two great
conſtituents of pleaſure, in all intellectual
entertainments. But what can I ſay new?
Has not the whole world reſounded with
the juſtneſs of the cauſe in which we have
been engaged; with the greatneſs of the
attempt to withſtand the power of Britain?
[Page 145]
And have not we, ourſelves, felt, ſeen,
and known the great variety and change
of good or bad fortune? What will it contribute
to our immediate enjoyment to go
over ſuch ſcenes, unleſs the particular achievements
of each officer can be enumerated,
which decency forbids, and which
indeed, cannot be done in the limits of
one harangue. Leaving, therefore, ourselves,
and theſe ſcenes, wholly out of
the queſtion, let us ſpeak a little of thoſe
whom we left behind. But why need we
ſpeak; for all time will ſpeak of them.
The bards that ſhall live, will draw hence
their choiceſt alluſions. Conſider them,
indeed, as more happy than you, becauſe
they aſcended from among the group of
their companions, who were at that time
inſtant witneſſes of their achievments. The
warriors who fall in battle, are the moſt
glorious ſubjects of panegyric. Hector and
Achilles, form the moſt ſplendid part of the
ſong of Homer, and in a great degree, because
their bodies were interred in the presence
of the two armies. Oh what a noble
object! an army mourning a brave officer,
and tears drawn even from the foe, ſtruck
with the ſublime of his perſonal proweſs,
and excellent knowledge of the military art.
[Page 146]
Much unlike, and far above thoſe who languish
with ſickneſs on a bed in calm life,
where relations ſtanding round, wiſh the
departure of the ſhade, and gape for the
poſſeſſion which he leaves behind. But
the fame of a ſoldier none but himſelf can
enjoy, there can be no heir or deviſee of
his property. It is his own, and it mounts
with him. His blood only remains to
bleſs the earth, from which flowers and
roſes ſpring, and clothe the woods and
groves with enchantment and delight. For
here the ſong of poeſy is awakened, and at
morn, and noon, and at ſtill eve, they are
heard who rehearſe where the brave fell,
and where they ſleep. Sublime ſpirits!
whether you inhabit the Pagan elyſium
or the Chriſtian heaven, you are happy;
and liſten to thoſe immortal lyres which
are ſtrung to the deeds of heroes.
So much for the exordium of the oration;
it was all he had yet written. The
evening paſſed away in hilarity; and the
converſation turned again on the Cincinnati
order; but particularly what may be called
the arms of the inſtitution, viz. Britannia
repreſented as a fine woman, with
her boſom bare, affrighted; and Cincinnatus,
an accoutred knight, attacking her
[Page 147]
thus unarmed, as St. George did the dragon;
the eagle, the bird of Jove, in the
mean time graſping the lightning in his
claws, an image that would ſeem unnatural:
Whereas the eagle might be represented
in the clouds near Jove, where the
lightning might be left to work its forked
courſe, without the handing of the eagle;
and in the other figure, Cincinnatus might
raiſe his lance againſt the lion that ſupports
the crown, not againſt the goddeſs of the
iſland.
From theſe ſtrictures which the Captain,
without pretending to be a connoiſſeur,
made, the tranſition was eaſy to a criticism
on the motto of the badge; viz.
Omnia reliquit, ſervare, rempublicam. The
infinitive is here uſed inſtead of the gerund,
with the prepoſition, ad ſervandam;
as if it was intended to expreſs his motion,
or change of place, and not the object.
But in fact, the motto does not at all express
that in which the merit of Cincinnatus
did conſiſt. It was not in his leaving
every thing to accept the commiſſion of
the Roman ſenate; but in reſigning his
commiſſion, and, the work done, going to
his plough again. His praiſe would have
been expreſſed better by the phraſe of,
[Page 148]
Victor ad aratrum redit. In fact, it cannot
apply well to our army; moſt of our
officers not having much to leave when
they accepted their commiſſions; but discovered
a Cincinnati-like diſpoſition, in returning
after war to the employments of
civil life. It is true, there would have
been leſs tinſel, and more bullion, in the
patriotiſm of retiring without a badge, as
Cincinnatus did: But it is a thing that can
do little harm, and it is pleaſing to indulge
a whim.
It may doubtleſs be ſaid, that there were
officers that left the plough, and fought,
and returned to it, as well as thoſe who
are within the limitations of the institution,
and entitled to a badge; that, troops
who had ſerved a ſhort enliſtment, and
militia perſons, at leaſt thoſe who fought
a little, were not wholly deſtitute of ſome
claim to the badge of merit. Even thoſe
who loſt property might be ſaid to ſuffer,
and advance pretenſions to the reward of
honour. Not that all of them ſhould claim
gold medals, or even ſilver; but ſome
braſs, ſome copper, pewter, a bit of tin,
or pot metal, juſt as the ſpecific value of
their ſervices might entitle them. Perhaps
while ſome wore it at the breaſt,
[Page 149]
others might be enjoined to war it at the
breeches pocket, and thus, as well by the
point from which appendant, as by the bob
itſelf, deſignate the proportion of their
honour.
After this, ſome things were ſaid on the
ſubject of introducing honourary members;
againſt which the Captain declared
himſelf: That every thing ought to be
preſerved ſui generis; as nature makes no
honourary animals; but all are of the species,
or take not the name: a bear is a
real bear, a ſheep is a ſheep; and there is
no commixture of name, where there is
a difference of nature. But it did not appear
to be of any great conſequence, one
way or the other. For the order would
never come to any great head, as there
was no oppoſition given. For this is necessary
to keep alive attachment to what is
arbitrary, and founded, not in utility, but
caprice. For as the fire dies without air,
ſo whim without contradiction.
The officer was a man of liberality and
good ſenſe, and acknowledged the truth
of this. But the evening being now far
ſpent, candles were called for, and they
went to bed.
[Page 150]
POSTSCRIPT.
THE preceding pages were written several
years ago; during which time
the Captain has continued his travels: and
having been favoured with his journal,
I have occaſionally made extracts, and put
them in the form of a continued hiſtory.
Whether I ſhall publiſh any more, will
depend on the reception of this.
I had firſt begun this work in verſe,
and have a volume by me, about two parts
in three as large as Butler's Hudibraſs;
from which compoſition, I have extracted
this; thinking it might be more acceptable
in proſe. When I viſit this city next, I may
produce that in verſe, and let the people
take their choice.
It is a happineſs to a man to be able
to amuſe himſelf with writing. For
it is not every one that can play upon
the violin, or the flute; and the
[Page 151]
fingers muſt be employed ſome way. I
may be blamed in not chuſing ſome subject
worthier of my ſtudies, and requiring
a profound reſearch. It might profit the
world more; but it would amuſe myſelf
leſs. Omnis labor improbus; all toil is
grievous. However, I have not been
wholly inattentive to ſeverer ſtudies. I
have ſeveral law tracts by me; for which
I mean, in due time, to ſolicit a subscription.
Nonum prematur in annum, in every
work of moment, ought to be obſerved.
There are ſome light things which I
may in the mean time throw out; a comparison
of Thucydides with Livy; thoughts
on the Egyptian hieroglyphics; on the
Carthaginian commerce; a compariſon
of the French and Engliſh eloquence; a
ſupplement to Buffon, containing a description
of ſeveral genera of animals, not
taken notice of by him; hints for the improvement
of the microſcope; on the uſe
of the Maſoretic points; on the recent
origin of the earth; on the criminal code
of the Siameſe, &c.
If the world will excuſe theſe, I will give
them my word for it, they ſhall be troubled
little more; for except the examining
my law tracts, I ſhall drop my pen,
[Page 152]
finding it, as I advance in life, more adviſeable
to apply myſelf to making money. What
things have been written, and are now
lying by me, may occaſionally ſee the
light.
It is a good deal owing to my ſolitary
reſidence in the weſtern country, at a distance
from books and literary conversation,
that I have been led to write at all.
It was neceſſary to fill up the interſtices
of buſineſs. If I ſhould remain in that
country, the ſame circumſtances may lead
me to write ſtill. If I ſhould remove to
this city, or the ſeat of the federal government,
I ſhall avoid the tedium by other
means.
I wiſh the preſent book, to ſell for at
leaſt as much as will defray the expence
of printing; for I have no inclination to
loſe by it. If I had a little time to ſtay
in town, I could give it ſome celebrity by
extracts, and remarks upon it; publiſhing
for and againſt. For it is of no conſequence
how a book is made famous, provided that
it is famous.
The truth is, as I have ſaid, I value this
book for little but the ſtile. This I have
formed on the model of Xenophen, and
Swift's Tale of a Tub, and Gulliver's
[Page 153]
Travels. It is ſimple, natural, various, and
forcible. I hope to ſee it made a ſchool
book; a kind of claſſic of the Engliſh
language.
In looking over it, I find in the whole
work, but one word I would alter; it
is near the beginning; where I ſay figure
on the ſtage, inſtead of appear, or
make a figure on the ſtage. I have carefully
avoided the word unfounded inſtead of
groundleſs, a word in vogue, among members
of Congreſs eſpecially. The word
commit, is good, but being lately introduced,
and too much hackneyed, I have
not uſed it.
Language being the veſtment of thought,
it comes within the rules of other dreſs;
ſo that as ſlovenlineſs, on the one hand,
or foppery, on the other, is to be avoided
in our attire; ſo alſo in our ſpeech, and
writing. Simplicity in the one and the
other, is the greateſt beauty.
We do not know at what time the Greek
language began to be written as it was by
Heſiod or Homer. But we find it to have
continued with little or no change, from
that time to the lateſt writers among the
Byzantine hiſtorians, a period of more
than 3000 years. The Roman language
[Page 154]
is conſidered as improving from the time
of Ennius to the Auguſtine age. The language
of the orators, poets, and hiſtorians
of that time is the ſtandard. It was not
ſo much in the uſe of particular words, as
an affectation in the thought, that Seneca
is cenſured as corrupting the language
of the Romans. But Tacitus, after
him, writes in a pure ſtile; and I have
found but one conceit in expreſſion, in his
whole hiſtory: meaning to give the geography
of a country of a certain tribe of
the Germans; they are, ſays he, separated
from the Sequani by mount Jura, from
the — by the lake —, from the —
by the river —, and from the Atabani
by mutual fear. I do not find ſo much
fault with the ſtile of Pliny, as the heaviness
of his thoughts and expreſſions. However,
the Latin ſtile of writing retained its
propriety and other excellencies tolerably
well, till the monks got poſſeſſion of it,
and brought it down to a jargon that is
now exploded; and we recur to the pure
originals of Horace, Virgil, Cicero, and
Salluſt.
The French language is corrupting faſt;
and not in the uſe of words, but in the
affectation of ſurpriſe, in the ſtructure of
[Page 155]
the ſentence, or the turn of the expression.
Mirabeau was free from this; but
not the Abbe Raynal. To give an example:
meaning to ſay, which he might have
done in a ſimple manner, that about this
time the Engliſh caſt their eyes upon Goa,
as a place where, &c. ſtating the advantages
of ſuch a port; he begins by telling
you, that the Engliſh had occaſion for ſuch
a port, which, &c. enumerating the advantages;
and after this, with ſurprize
comes upon you, and tells you, they wanted
Goa. Enfin, ſays he; that is, in fine
they wanted Goa.
The Engliſh language is undoubtedly
written better in America than in England,
eſpecially ſince the time of that literary
dunce, Samuel Johnſon, who was totally
deſtitute of taſte for the vrai naturalle, or
ſimplicity of nature.
The language of the Scots writers is
chaſte, but the ſtructure of the ſentence
of the academic Dr. Robertſon, especially
offends in this particular; his uniformity
of period ſtriking the ear with
the ſame pulſe, as the couplets of our
rhyme in Dryden and Pope. Hume is
before him in this reſpect, writing as naturally
as a man ſpeaks; his ſtile riſing
[Page 156]
and falling with the ſubject, as the movements
of the mind themſelves.
I am quite out of patience with this postscript.
I have written it, the Printer informing
me that he had a few pages of the laſt
ſheet to fill, which muſt be left blank unleſs
I had ſomething more; but as I am in a
hurry about ſome ſmall matters, and have no
diſpoſition to write, I believe I ſhall conclude,
and let him leave the remainder
blank, or put in a paragraph of his own,
if he chuſes it.
It juſt ſtrikes me to add, that I am this
moment come from being admitted a Counsellor
in the ſupreme court of the United
States; having written the preceding part
of this poſtſcript juſt before the court ſat.
In conſequence of my admiſſion in this
honourable court, I feel myſelf inſpired
with a conſciouſneſs of new dignity, and
am determined to relinquiſh the indulgence
of all theſe light amuſements, and
apply myſelf for the future to fathom the
profound depths of the legal oceans and
rivers.
Vale,
Valete,
Camenæ.
[Page ]
Section
MODERN CHIVALRY.
VOL. II.
[Page ]
[Page ]
Section
Modern Chivalry:
CONTAINING THE
ADVENTURES
OF
Captain John Farrago,
AND
TEAGUE O'REGAN,
HIS SERVANT.
VOLUME II.
By H. H. BRACKENRIDGE.
Quicquid agunt homines, nostri, farrago libelli.
Juvenal.
PHILADELPHIA:
Printed and ſold by John M`Culloch, No. 1,
North Third-ſtreet.
M.DCC.XII.
[ Entered according to Act of Congreſs. ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. RISING early next morning, the Captain
proceeded, with his man Teague,
on his journey, and having breakfaſted at
an inn, where nothing material happened,
we ſhall paſs it over, and come as far
down in the day as eleven o'clock; tho',
by the bye, it might have been more correct
to have ſaid up in the day, becauſe the
ſun riſes until twelve o'clock, and then
deſcends: But waving this nicety, we ſhall
go on to relate what actually took place.
A man was ſeen before them, driving,
leiſurely, a horſe with two kegs upon his
back. The Captain took him for what is
called a pack-horſe man, that was carrying
ſalt or ſugar to ſome place of market.
[Page 006]
A man of a philoſophic turn of mind never
heſitates to enter into converſation
with any character; becauſe human nature
is the field whence he gathers thoughts
and expreſſions. The Captain therefore
accoſting this man, ſaid, Is it ſalt or molasses
you have in your kegs, countryman?
You are going home from ſome ſtore, I
ſuppoſe, where you have purchaſed; or
going to ſet up a ſmall ſtore of your own,
and vend goods. No, ſaid the man,
with a Scotch-Iriſh pronunciation, there is
an election this day a little way before us,
and I am ſetting up for the legiſlature, and
have theſe two kegs of whiſky to give a
dram to the voters. The Captain was
thrown into a reverie of thought, and
began to reflect with himſelf on the nature
of a republican government, where
canvaſſing by ſuch means as this, can work
ſo great an evil as to elevate the moſt unqualified
perſons to the higheſt deliberative
aſſemblies. But, in the mean time,
rouſed a little from his thought, he had
preſence of mind to recollect the danger
in which he was about to be involved afresh
with his man Teague; whom, now
looking round, he ſaw to be about forty
yards behind him. It would have been
[Page 007]
adviſeable to have diverted from the road,
and taken a circuitous rout, to avoid the
election ground. But as the devil, or
ſome worſe being, would have it, it was
a lane in which they were, with a fence
on each ſide; ſo that he could not divert
without leaping like a fox hunter, or one
of your light-horſe men, to which the sober
nag on which he rode was not competent.
Beſides, if Teague did not leap after
him he would be left expoſed in the
lane to the populace, who might ſolicit
him to be their repreſentative. To turn
directly back would appear indecorous,
and unleſs he could drive Teague on before
him, which was not cuſtomary, and
to which he might not, all at once ſubmit,
his ſtation would of courſe be the rear,
where he might be picked up as a straggler,
and ſent to ſome public body.
In this quandary of thought, looking up,
he ſaw the breakers juſt a-head; that is,
the people met for the purpoſe of electing,
and that it was now impoſſible to avoid
them. Depending, therefore, on his
own addreſs, to make the beſt of circumstances,
he ſuffered himſelf to be carried
along towards them, keeping, in the mean
[Page 008]
time, an eye upon Teague, who was the
cauſe of his concern.
Meeting accidentally with a Scotch gentleman
on the ground, whom he knew, he
communicated to him the delicacy of his
ſituation, and the apprehenſions he had on
the part of Teague. Said the Scotch gentleman,
Ye need na gie your ſel any trouble
on that head, man; for I ſal warrant
the man wi the twa kegs will carry the
elaction: there is na reſiſting guid liquor;
it has an unco effec on the judgment in
the choice of a repreſentative. The man
that has a diſtillery or twa in our country,
canna want ſuffrages. He has his votaries
about him like ane o' the Heathen gods,
and becauſe the fluid exhilerates the brain,
they think he maun be a deity that makes
it; and they fa' down, eſpecially when
they have drank ower muckle, and worship
him, juſt as at the ſhrine of Apollo
or Bacchus, among the ancients.
The candidate that oppoſed the man of
the two kegs, was a perſon of gravity and
years, and ſaid to be of good ſenſe and experience
in facts. The judgment of the
people was in his favour, but their appetite
leaned againſt him.
There is a ſtory of one Manlius, a
[Page 009]
Roman, who had ſaved the capitol from the
Gauls, by putting his breaſt to the rampart,
and throwing them down as they ascended.
When this man afterwards, elated
with the honours paid him, forgot the
duties of a citizen, wiſhing to ſubvert the
republic, by uſurping the power of a tyrant,
the people, jealous of liberty, were
incenſed; and being convicted of the crime,
he was dragged to puniſhment. It was not
the way, at that time, to hang, as you
would a dog; or behead, as you would
a wild beaſt: but to throw from a high
rock, which they called the Tarpeian. The
capitol was juſt in view, and while they
were dragging him along to the place, he
would ſtretch his hand to this; as much
as to ſay, There, O Romans, I ſaved you:
The populace at this would ſtop a while,
irreſolute whether to deſiſt or drag him
on. While they recollected his offence,
they marched a ſtep; but when they caſt
their eye on the capitol, they ſtood ſtill;
and not until ſome principal men directed
the rout out of the view of the capitol,
could he be brought to juſtice.
So it was with the multitude convened
on this occaſion, between the man with
the two kegs and the grave looking perſon.
[Page 010]
When they looked on the one, they felt
an inclination to promote him. But when
again on the other hand, they ſaw two
kegs which they knew to be repleniſhed
with a very chearing liquor, they ſeemed
to be inclined in favour of the other.
But appetite prevailed, and they gave
their votes in favour of the man with the
two kegs.
Teague in the mean time thinking he
had another chance of being a great man,
had been buſy, but to no purpoſe; for the
people gave their votes to the man of the
two kegs. The Captain thought himſelf
fortunate to be thus relieved, and proceeded
on his journey.
[Page 011]
CHAP. II.
Containing Obſervations.
THE perplexity of the Captain, in the
late tranſaction on account of his man
ſervant, may ſerve to put thoſe in mind
who travel with a waiter, not to go much
about at the election ſeaſons, but avoid
them as you would the equinoxes. It
might not be amiſs, if, for this reaſon the
times of electing members for the ſeveral
bodies were put down in the almanac, that
a man might be ſafe in his excurſions, and
not have an underſtrapper picked up when
he could not well ſpare him.
I mean this as no burleſque on the present
generation; for mankind in all ages
have had the ſame propenſity to magnify
what was ſmall, and elevate the low. We
do not find that the Egyptians, though there
were lions in the kingdom of Lybia, not far
diſtant, ever made a god of one of them.
They rather choſe the cow kind, the ſtork,
and the crocodile, or the muſk-rat, or
[Page 012]
miresnipe, or other inferior animal to deify.
The Romans, and the Greeks alſo, often
worſhipped ſmall matters. Indeed we do
not find amongſt any nation, that the elephant,
or rhinoceros, or elk, or unicorn,
have been made tutelar divinities. As,
Cannons ſhoot the higher pitches,
The lower you put down their breeches.
The ſmaller the objects we take up, and
make them great, the act is the greater;
for it requires an equal art in the formation
of the glaſs to magnify, as to diminiſh,
and if the object is not of itſelf ſmall, there
is no magnifying. Caligula is celebrated
through all hiſtory for making his horſe a
ſenator. It would have been nothing to
have made a Roman knight one; but to
endow a mere quadruped with the qualities
of a legiſlator, beſpeaks great ſtrength
of parts and judgment.
[Page 013]
CHAP. III.
IT was about three o'clock in the afternoon
that the Captain came to an inn,
where unhorſeing and unſaddling, Teague
took the ſteed, and the maſter went to
ſleep on a ſopha in the paſſage. Unleſs it
is in a very deep ſleep, the mind is in ſome
degree awake, and has what are called
dreams. Theſe are frequently compoſed
of a recollection of late events. Sometimes
the mind recovers incidents long
ſince paſt, and makes comments, but
moſt uſually, out of mere indolence takes
up with what is next at hand. It happened
ſo on this occaſion; for the Captain
thought himſelf ſtill engaged with the
Scotchman on the ſubject of the late election.
It ſeemed to him that he ſaid, Mr.
M`Donald, for that was the name of the
Scotch gentleman, you do not ſeem to
have a high opinion of our republican form
of government, when the moſt indifferent
can obtain the people's ſuffrages.
The Scotchman ſeemed to anſwer in his
[Page 014]
own dialect, ſaying, Ye are much miſtaken
man, if ye draw that concluſion. I think
there is a worſe chance for merit to come
forth where appointments are in the hand
of one than when with many; for it is
much eaſier to ſcratch the rump of one,
than tickle the hurdies o' a thouſand. Ye
ſee our executives dinna do much better
in their appointments to judicial and ministerial
offices, than the rabble folk themselves
to the legiſlative. It all comes to
the ſame thing in every government; the
wind blaws, and the feathers and the fern
get uppermoſt.
At this inſtant he was awakened by a
buſtle out of doors. The fact was; a disagreement
had taken place between Teague
and the hoſtler at the inn, about their ſkill
reſpectively in rubbing down and currying
horſes. Teague had made uſe of a ſingle
grab of hay, which he held with both
hands, and impreſſed the horſe, rubbing
him from ſide to ſide, and up and down
with all his might. The other with a wiſp
in each hand, rubbed; the right hand
paſſing to the left, while the left hand passed
to the right, in a tranſverſe or diagonal
direction. The hoſtler valued himſelf on
having been groom, as he pretended, to
[Page 015]
ſome nobleman in England, and therefore
moſt be ſuppoſed to underſtand the true
art of currying. Teague maintained his
opinion, and way of working with a good
deal of obſtinacy, until at laſt it came to
blows. The firſt ſtroke was given by
Teague, who hit the hoſtler on the left
haunch with his foot, when he was stooping
down to ſhew Teague how to rub the
fetlock. The hoſtler recovering, and seizing
Teague by the breaſt, puſhed him
back with a retrograde motion, until he
was brought up by a cheek of the ſtable
door. Reſting againſt this, Teague made
a ſally, and impelled his antagoniſt ſeveral
yards back, who finding at length behind
him the ſupport of a ſtanding trough where
the waggoners uſed to feed, recovered his
poſition, and elanced Teague ſome distance
from the place of projection. But
Teague ſtill keeping hold of the collar of
his adverſary, had brought him along with
him, and both were now on the ground
ſtruggling for victory. But Teague turning
on his belly, and drawing up his knees,
was making an effort to raiſe himſelf to his
feet. The other in the mean time, partly
by the ſame means, and partly by retaining
hold of the Iriſhman, was in the
[Page 016]
attitude of riſing with him. They were now
both up, locked faſt in the graſp of each
other, their heads inclining in conjunction,
but their feet apart, like muſkets ſtacked
after a review, or like the arch of a bridge.
The head of each ſupported by the abutment
of the feet. Few blows were given,
and therefore not much damage done. But
the perſons preſent calling out fair play,
and making a buſtle in the porch of the
inn, had awakened the Captain, and bro't
him to the door, who ſeeing what was going
on, took upon him to command the
peace; and the people ſuppoſing him to
be a magiſtrate, aſſiſted to part the combatants;
when the Captain ordering both of
them before him, made enquiry into the
cauſe of the diſpute. Teague gave his account
of the matter; adding, if he had
had a ſhillelah, he would have been after
making him know that the paple in dis
country, could curry a horſe, or a cow,
or a ſhape, as well as any Engliſhman
in de world, though he have been haſtler
to a great lord, or de king himſelf, at his
own ſtable where he has his harſe.
Teague, ſaid the Captain, this may be
true; but it was unbecoming a philosopher
to attempt to eſtabliſh this by blows.
[Page 017]
Force proves nothing but the quantum of
the force. Reaſon is the only argument
that belongs to man. You have been the
aggreſſor, and therefore in the power of
the law. But as to you, Mr. Hoſtler, you
have given conſiderable provocation. I
have had this lad with me ſeveral years,
and I ſay that he curries and rubs down a
horſe very well. It is no uncommon thing
for men of your country, to undervalue
other nations, or thoſe retained by them.
You naturally aſſociate your own attainments
with the bulk and populouſneſs of
your cities: But can the looking at a large
building, or a tall ſpire, add an inch to
your ſtature? Becauſe Fox is eloquent, is
every one that hears him ſo too? Is not
human ingenuity, the ſame here as on the
other ſide of the water? Our generals have
fought as well, in the late war, as any
Clinton, or Cornwallis that you have. Our
politicians have wrote, and our patriots
have ſpoke as well as your Burkes, or your
Sheridans, or any other; and yet when
you come here, there is no bearing the
airs of ſuperiority you take upon yourselves.
I wonder if the waſps, that are in
your garrets in London, conſider themselves
better than the waſps that are in
[Page 028]
theſe woods? I ſhould ſuppoſe they muſt;
ſuch is the contemptible vanity of an island,
which, taking in its whole extent,
would be little more than a urinal to one
of our Patagonians in South America.
This the Captain ſaid to mortify the hoſtler;
though, by the bye, there is a good deal
of truth in the obſervation, that the people
of an old country undervalue the new;
and when they think of themſelves, conjoin
the adventitious circumſtances of all that
exiſts where they have lived. I have found
a prejudice of this nature even with the
wiſeſt men. What wonder, therefore, that
a poor illiterate hoſtler ſhould be ſubject
to it? But if he did undervalue an American
born, yet he ought to have considered
that Teague, though not born in Britain,
was born near it, and therefore
might conſiderably approach the ſame ſkill
in any handy-craft work.
In natural hiſtory, we do not value animals
on account of the place from whence
they are taken, but on account of what
they are themſelves; and in things that are
made by hands, not by the manufacturer,
but the quality. We prefer the trout of
the rivulet, to the mullet of the river;
and we judge of the pudding not by the
[Page 019]
maker, but the eating. There is a proverb
that eſtabliſhes this; for proverbs are
the deductions of experience, and to which
we aſſent as ſoon as expreſſed; containing
in them an obvious truth, which the simplest
underſtand.
[Page 020]
CHAP. IV.
IT is not for the ſake of any moral,
that I have related this ſcuffle that took
place between the Iriſhman and the hostler;
but for the ſake of ſhewing in what
manner incidents are to be related; that
is, with great ſimplicity of ſtile, and minuteness
of deſcription. That part of Livy
which contains the combat of the Horatii,
and Curatii, is frequently given to the students
at a college to tranſlate, that by this
means they may be taught to imitate the
like delicacy in the choice of words, and
particularity of the recital. The above
may anſwer the ſame purpoſe. It is true
there is not the like incidents in this combat,
as in that deſcribed by Livy; nevertheless,
the ſame art is therein diſcovered, as
the ſound critic will obſerve. I know it will
be thought by any one who reads it, that
he could uſe the very ſame words, and
give the ſame livelineſs of picture, were
[Page 021]
he to attempt it. Should he try it, he
will find himſelf diſappointed.—— Sudet
multum, fruſtraque laboret, auſus idem. —
It may be thought, that though ſtile is
my object, yet I might now and then bring
along a thought to entertain the reader,
and introduce ſome ſubject of moment,
rather than the fiſty-cuffs of two raggamuffins.
I would juſt aſk this queſtion;
Is not the talent of the artiſt ſhewn as much
in painting a fly, as a waggon-wheel. If
this were intended as a book of morals,
or phyſiology, and not as a mere belles
lettres compoſition, there might be something
ſaid;—as the caſe is, critics muſt be
ſilent.
[Page 022]
BOOK II.
CHAP. I. I SHALL paſs over the circumſtances
of the Captain's dining, and Teague,
reconciled with the hoſtler, taking his meſs
in the kitchen; and go on to what befel
afterwards, when having ſaddled the horſe,
they ſet out on their further perigrination.
Towards evening, when the ſhadows of
the trees began to be very long, the Captain
bidding Teague trot along ſide, addressed
him in the following words:—
Teague, ſaid he, it is true I am none of
your knight-errants, who uſed to ride about
the world relieving fair damſels, and killing
giants, and lying out in woods, and
foreſts, without a houſe, or even tentcloth
over their heads, to protect them
from the night air. Nevertheleſs, as in ſome
[Page 023]
reſpects my equipment, and ſallying forth
reſembles a knight-errant, and you a
ſquire, would it be amiſs, juſt for a frolick,
to ly out a night or two, that it might
be ſaid that we have done the like. There
is no great danger of wolves or bears, for
while there are ſheep, or pigs to be got
at, they will ſhun human fleſh. It will
make a good chapter in our journal, to
deſcribe you lying at the foot of an oak
tree, and me with my head upon my saddle,
under another; the horſe, in the mean
time, feeding at a ſmall diſtance. Teague
thought it would be an eaſier matter to
write down the chapter in the journal, than
ly under the trees to beget it. It is true,
ſaid the Captain, navigators and travellers,
make many a fiction; and thoſe who
have been in battle have killed many, that
were killed by others, or have not been
killed at all. But it would ill become a
limb of chivalry to deviate from the truth.
It will be but about twelve hours ſervice
lying on our backs and looking up to the
ſtars, hearing the howling of wolves, and
obſerving the great bear in the heavens,
the means by which the Chaldeans, the
firſt aſtronomers, laid the foundation of
the ſcience. Fait, and I tink, ſaid Teague,
[Page 024]
it would be better to be in a good houſe,
with a ſhoulder of mutton to ate before we
go to ſlape, than to have our own shoulders
tarn by the bears, or bruſed by lying
under great oaks. Of what uſe is this astranomy?
did any of theſe aſtranamers
ever ſhoot down a bear in the firmament,
to get a joint of mate for a ſick perſon;
and what good comes of lying in de woods,
to be ate up by the ſnakes; but ſevers, and
agues, and ſore troats, to get a long cough,
and die in a ditch like a dead horſe, and
be nothing thought of, but be trown into
ridicule like a black-head that has no ſenſe.
It is better to go to a houſe and get a bed
to ſlape in, and warm ſhates about us, than
be lying in the dew like a frag, crocking
the next day like one of daſe, and get no
good by it.
The Captain had made the propoſition
merely to divert himſelf with Teague, and
ſo did not inſiſt upon it.
Riding one or two miles, the ſun was
ſetting, and a houſe appeared in view a little
off the road. A lane led up to it with
a meadow on one ſide, and a paſture field
on the other. On this laſt, there were cattle
of cows, and ſheep grazing. The houſe
in front, was a frame building, reſpectable
[Page 025]
in appearance, from the height, and dimensions,
but ancient. There was a considerable
extent of clear ground around
it, and an orchard hard by, with at leaſt
five hundred apple-trees.
Having lodged chiefly at inns ſince his
firſt ſetting out, the Captain had the curiosity
to diverſify his travels, by lodging
at a private houſe this evening. Accordingly
riding up to the door, and calling
out Halloa, which is the note of interrogation
which is uſed when a man wiſhes the
maſter or miſtreſs of a family, or ſome one
of the ſervants, to come forth, to know
what he wants.
It happened that the miſtreſs herſelf
came to the door, and ſeeing a good looking
man, in a green old age, ſitting on
horſe-back, with his ſervant ready to take
care of his ſteed ſhould he think proper
to diſmount, ſhe made a low curtſey, as
much as to ſay, Sir, I ſhould be happy to
know, in what manner I can ſerve you.
Madam, ſaid the Captain, to tell you
the truth, the night is drawing on, and I
have been reflecting with myſelf, whether
to lodge in the woods, or take a houſe.
All things conſidered, I have thought it
moſt adviſeable to take a houſe, and the
[Page 026]
only queſtion that now remains is, whether
I can get one.
The lady ſmiling with much complacency,
and inclining her head forward, and
her middle back, replied, I ſhould be happy,
Sir, if this ſmall manſion could afford
you an accomodation worthy of your ſuite.
Madam, ſaid the Captain, I ſhall be happy
if the gueſt can be worthy of the accommodation.
Alight, Sir, ſaid the lady, we ſhall be
happy to receive you. Having alighted,
he was introduced to a very decent apartment,
where the lady ſeating herſelf in a
large cuſhioned chair, and pulling out her
box, took a pinch of ſnuff, and laid the
box upon the cuſhion. She was a good
looking woman, being about fifty-ſeven
years of age, with gray hairs, but a green
fillet on her left eye-brow, as it ſeems the
eye on that ſide was ſubject to a defluction
of rheum, which made it expedient tocover
it. It could not be ſaid that her
teeth were bad, becauſe ſhe had none. If
ſhe wanted the roſe on her cheek, ſhe had
it on her noſe, ſo that it all came to the
ſame thing. Nothing could be ſaid againſt
her chin, but it uſed her mouth ill in getting
above it. She was not very tall, but
[Page 027]
what ſhe wanted in height, ſhe made up in
breadth; ſo that multiplying one dimenſion
by the other, ſhe might be conſidered as a
very ſizeable woman. After converſing a
little while, the lady withdrew, to give directions
in the kitchen what to provide
for ſupper.
The Captain in the mean time taking
up a pipe, which he ſaw on the mantlepiece,
amuſed himſelf with a whiff.
The old lady in the mean time was in
the kitchen, and the firſt thing ſhe observed
was Teague, reclining in an angle of
the chimney faſt aſleep. Conſidering him
inattentive to his maſter's horſe which had
been ſent to the ſtable, ſhe deſired a servant
to give him a jog, and wake him.
Teague, awaking, ſaw the old lady, and
beſpoke her. Dear madam, what a great
happineſs it is for poor ſharvants to have
gentle folks about them? God bleſs your
anours ladyſhip; you are juſt for all the world
like my couſin Shala Shagney, the honsomest
woman in all Ireland, and was married
to Shan Croſſan, who had a great estate,
and a flock of ſhape into the bargain.
She uſed to ſay to me when I was aſlape,
Teague are you awake; and when I was
awake, Teague are you aſlape, dear honey.
[Page 028]
There is ſomething in an Iriſhman which
has an admirable effect upon the fair; whether
it is owing to that love creating lustiness
of perſon, and freſhneſs of complexion
which they uſually poſſeſs; or the delicacy
and quantum of the flattery of which they
are not niggardly; nor need they be ſo, no
perſons having a greater ſtock to come and
go upon. For ſo it was, that the language
of the bog trotter, had gained the good
will of this ſame Hecuba, and ſhe ordered
him a tankard of metheglim, to make himself
merry with the ſervants.
Returning to the parlour ſhe continued
her converſation with the Captain; but her
mind running upon Teague ſhe could not
avoid introducing his name, with a view
to learn ſome particulars of his hiſtory.
This is a civil young man, ſaid ſhe, that
came with you, and of a converſation above
ordinary perſons. The Captain being
an obſerver of the paſſions of the
mind, as they expreſs themſelves in the
eye and aſpect, ſaw that Teague had made
ſome impreſſion on the affections of this
goodly old maiden gentlewoman: Nor
was he diſpleaſed with it; for his firſt alarm
was, that ſhe would have faſtened
on himſelf; but her paſſion taking this
[Page 029]
courſe, would be leſs troubleſome. Framing
his anſwers therefore to her queſtions,
with a view to favour what had ſo fortunately
commenced, he gave her to understand,
that, though in the diſguiſe of
a ſervant, Teague was no inconſiderable
perſonage; that he had been a member
of Congreſs one or two years; though,
by the bye, this was ſtretching the matter
a little, as he had only had it in his power
to be one. But if it is allowable to ſtrain
a point at all, it is in the recommendation
of one who ſtands well enough already;
for not being taken on the recommendation,
there is no deception; and it
is but civility to make one more pleaſed
with their choice, than they already are.
The Captain ſaid nothing of his having
preached, or being about to preach; for
the idea of ſermons, and catechiſms, impressing
the mind with religious awe, is
unfavourable to love. As to his being a
member of the philoſophical ſociety, it
could be neither here nor there with a lady,
and therefore he was ſilent with reſpect
to this alſo.
Supper being brought in, they ſat down;
but little converſation paſſed; the mind
of the enamorata being more in the
[Page 030]
kitchen than in the parlour. After ſupper, the
Captain ſitting ſometime, and ſeeming
drowſy, was aſked by his hoſteſs, if he
choſe to go to bed: Anſwering in the
affirmative, a ſervant waited with a candle;
and bidding her good night, he was
lighted to his chamber.
No ſooner had he withdrawn, but the
old lady ſent her compliments to Teague,
to take a ſeat in the parlour; where ſitting
down to a roaſted duck, juſt brought in,
a few ſlices of gammon on a plate, a piece
of veal, and a couple of roaſted potatoes,
he was deſired to partake: the old lady
caſting amourous looks at him, in the
mean time. I ſay looks; for though
ſhe had but one eye to look with, yet
looking often, ſhe might be ſaid to caſt
looks. It was a new thing to the Irishman,
to be at a table with a ſervant at
his back; and he began now to think that
fortune meant to do him juſtice: and with
an eaſe, and ſelf-poſſeſſion, which ſome
would call affrontery, he did the honours
of the table; helping himſelf, and talking
as faſt as conſiſted with his diſpoſition
to ſatisfy his appetite. May it pleaſe your
ladyſhip, ſaid he, I am a poor ſharvant
now, but I have ſeen the time, when I
[Page 031]
have ate at as good a table as the Captain
my maſter, though he rides upon a horſe
and I trot on foot. My uncle, by the
mother's ſide, Shan O'Gan, had a deer
park, and kept race-horſes, to go to de
fair, and the city of Cork; and my father's
brother, Phelim O'Regan, was a
juſtice of the pace, and hung paple for
ſtaleing ſhape. I might have been a member
of parliament, if I had ſtaid at home
and went to ſchool; but ſending a challenge,
and fighting wid my own dear cousin
Denis O'Conelly, I had to fly de kingdom,
and brought noting wid me but my
brogs, and ten guineas in my purſe; and
am now noting but a poor ſharvant, unleſs
your ladyſhip would take pity upon me,
and marry me; for I am wary of this way
of tratting after a crazy Captain, that has
no ſenſe to curry his own harſe; and I
have to fight duels for him, and keep him
from being knocked down like a brute
baſte; for dis very day, when he had a
quarrel wid a haſtler, and was trown upon
his back, I lifted him up, and ſaid,
Dear honey, are you dead? took de haſtler
by de troat, and choaked him, and he
could not ſpake, but ſaid, Dear shentlemen,
ſpare my life; ſo dat if your
[Page 032]
ladyship will take me to yourſelf, I will ſtay
wid you, and take care of de harſes, and
cows, and de ſhape, and plant parates, and
ſlape wid you, and aſk not a farthing, but
your own ſweat ſelf into de bargain; for
you are de beauty of de world; and fasting
or ſlaping, I could take you to my
arms, dear crature, and be happy wid
you.
The lady was by this time entirely won,
and gave him to underſtand, that in the
morning, after conſulting a friend or two,
the marriage might be celebrated.
I give only a ſketch of the courtſhip that
took place, for a great deal was ſaid; and
it was near midnight before the lovers
could prevail upon themſelves to part;
when Teague was lighted to his bed, and
had as good as that in which the Captain
ſlept, which was a new thing to him; being
accuſtomed to pig in with hoſtlers and
ſervants, at the places where they lodged.
The Captain was up early in the morning,
and aſtoniſhed not to find Teague stiring,
but enquiring of the ſervants where
Teague ſlept, he was ſhewn up a pair of
ſtairs, which he aſcended, thinking he
had one or two more to aſcend before he
reached the garret. But what was his
[Page 033]
astonishment, when he was ſhewn into a
room on the ſecond floor, where he found
Teague ſnoring on a feather bed with
curtains. Waking him, Teague; ſaid he,
this goes beyond all your former impudence;
to crawl up out of the kitchen, and
get into a feather bed. Pleaſe your anour,
ſaid Teague, to ring a bell, and call up a
ſharvant, to bring boots, and ſlippers; for
I am to be married dis marning.
The Captain was thunder-ſtruck; and
comprehending the whole of what had taken
place, ſaw his faux pas in recommending
him to the hoſteſs; and now it only
remained, to cure the blunder he had
made, if it was at all curable.
We are ſhort ſighted mortals; and while
we ſtop one leak, the water ruſhes in at
another. The very means that we uſe to
ſave ourſelves from one evil, leads us to a
worſe. The Captain had need on this
occaſion of all his addreſs. Compoſing
himſelf, he diſſembled, and ſpoke as follows:
Teague, ſaid he, will you that are a
young man, and have great proſpects before
you, conſign yourſelf to the arms of an
old woman. Her breath will kill you in
the courſe of a fortnight. The fact is, ſhe
[Page 034]
is a witch, and inchantreſs; ſhe made the
ſame propoſition to me laſt night, of marrying
me; but I declined it. The world
is full of theſe ſort of cattle. There was
one Shagneſa Circe, in old times, that used
to gather all ſhe could into her net,
and transform them into hogs. Sir Teague
Ulyſſes was the only one that had the ſenſe
to keep clear of her muſic, and avoid her.
Did you ſee that drove of hogs before the
door, when we rode up laſt evening. They
are nothing more than ſtragglers which ſhe
has transformed into ſwine. I did not ſleep
a wink laſt night, thinking of the danger
to which you were expoſed, and indeed I
expected nothing leſs, than to find you
this morning a barrow, fattened up for a
feaſt, a day or two hence. Did you think
ſuch an old haridan as this can have any
natural concupiſcence for a man; or if ſhe
has, it is for a few days only, until ſhe can
make him fit for ſlaughter. Then by throwing
a little water on him, or by the bare
blowing of her breath, ſhe makes a beefcow,
or hog-meat of him, and he finds the
knife at his throat, and ſcalding water taking
off his briſtles, and his guts out, and
is into the pickling-tub before he knows
what he is about. Do you think, Teague,
[Page 035]
that I have read books for nothing? Have
you not ſeen me in my ſtudy, morning
and night, looking over Greek, and Hebrew
letters, like partridge tracks? All
this to find out what was going on up and
down the world. Many a hiſtory of witches,
and conjurers, I have read, and know
them when I ſee them, juſt as I would my
own ſheep, when I am at home. Better
indeed, for unleſs my ſheep are marked, I
could not know them; but marked or not
marked, I know witches; and if I am not
miſtaken, this is the greateſt witch that ever
run. She was all night in my room,
in the ſhape of a cat. It is God's mercy,
that ſhe had not changed herſelf into an
alligator, and eat you up before the morning.
When I came into the room I expected
to find nothing elſe but bones, and
particles of hair, the remnant of her repast;
but it ſeems ſhe has thought you not
fat enough, and has given you a day or
two to run, to improve your fleſh, and
take the ſalt better. The worſt thing, after
transformation, is the having you cut,
in order to make you fatter and better
pork, which is generally done the firſt
day; and caſtration is a painful operation,
beſides the loſs of the part. I have
[Page 036]
had ſeveral of my acquaintances ſerved in
this manner, falling in with old women
whom they took for fortunes; but were
in reality witches, and had dealings with
the devil.
Teague by this time was out of bed, and
had dreſſed himſelf in his overalls and ſhort
coat, and was ready for a march. Indeed
he wiſhed to eſcape as ſoon as poſſible;
and deſcending the ſtairs, going to the
ſtable, and ſaddling the horſe, they both
ſet out, without taking leave. It was in
this manner Eneas quitted Dido, and got
a ſhip-board, before ſhe was awake; and
the only difference was, that Teague had
left no little Iulus in the hall, to put her
in mind of the father.
[Page 037]
CHAP. II.
TRAVELLING along, the Captain
could not but obſerve to Teague, the
injudicious choice he was about to make,
even had the woman not been a necromancer.
For the man who ſurrenders
himſelf to the arms of a ſuperannuated female,
for the ſake of fortune, acts a part
not leſs unworthy and diſgraceful, than the
proſtitute who does the ſame for half a
crown. While a man has the uſe of his
limbs and arms, he ought to be above ſuch
mercenary motives; and true happineſs
can be found only in congruity, and what
is natural. Teague ſeemed ſtill to have
ſome hankering after the ſupper of ducks,
and the feather bed; but as they proceeded,
the recollection became more faint,
for diſtance and time, is the cure of all
paſſions.
[Page 038]
BOOK III.
CHAP. I. PROCEEDING four or five miles,
they breakfaſted; and afterwards, going
on a mile or two further, they came
to a church where a number of people
were convened, to hear the deciſion of an
eccleſiaſtical conſiſtory, met there on an
affair which came before them. It was
this: Two men appeared, the one of a
grave aſpect, with a black coat; the other
without the ſame clerical colour of garb;
but with papers in his pocket which announced
his authority to preach, and officiatate
as a clergyman. The man with
the black coat, averred, that coming over
together, in a veſſel from Ireland, they
had been meſſmates; and while he was
aſleep one night, being drowſy after
[Page 039]
prayers, the other had ſtolen his credentials
from his pocket. The man in poſſeſſion
of the papers, averred they were his own,
and that the other had taken his coat, and
by advantage of the cloth, thought to paſs
for what he was not.
The conſiſtory found it difficult, without
the aid of inſpiration, to decide; and that
faculty having now ceaſed, there were no
other means, that they could ſee, to bring
the truth to light.
The Captain being informed of this perplexity,
could not avoid ſtepping up, and
addreſſing them as follows: Gentlemen,
ſaid he, there is a text in your own Scripture,
which, I think, might enable you to
decide: It is this, “ by their fruits you ſhall
know them. ” Let the two men preach;
and the beſt ſermon take the purſe; or laying
aſide the figure, let him that expounds
the ſcripture beſt, be adjudged the clergyman.
The propoſition ſeemed reaſonable, and
was adopted; the competitors being desired
to withdraw a little, and conn over their
notes, that they might be ready to deliver
a diſcourſe reſpectively.
The Captain obſerving the countenance
of him in poſſeſſion of the papers, was
[Page 040]
sensible, from his paleneſs, and dejection of aspect,
that he was the impoſtor. Going out
therefore ſhortly after, and falling in with
him, as he walked in a melancholy mood,
at a little diſtance from the church, ſaid he
to him, I perceive how it is, that the other
is the preacher; nevertheleſs I would wiſh
to aſſiſt you, and as I have been the means
of bringing you into this predicament, I
ſhould be diſpoſed to bring you out.—Let
me know how the caſe really ſtands.
The other candidly acknowledged that
having been a yarn-merchant in Ireland,
his capital had failed, and he had thought
proper to embark for this country; and
coming over with this clergyman, he had
purloined his papers; and would have taken
his coat, had it not been too little for
him; a thing which never ſtruck the ecclesiastical
tribunal. But the matter being
now reduced to an actual experiment of talents,
he was at a loſs; for he had never
preached a ſermon in his life. It was true,
he had heard ſermons and lectures in abundance;
and had he been ſuffered to go
on and preach at his leiſure amongſt the
country people firſt, he might have done
well enough; but to make his firſt eſſay
in the preſence of a learned body of the
[Page 041]
clergy, would hazard a detection; but
now he ſaw his overſight in not having taken
the notes of the other, at the ſame
time he took the vouchers of his miſſion.
The Captain encouraged him, by observing,
that there were few bodies, ecclesiastical
or civil, in which there were more than
one or two men of ſenſe; that the majority
of this conſiſtory, might be as eaſily
humbugged, as the lay people; that a good
deal would depend on the text that he took;
ſome were eaſily preached upon; others
more difficult. An hiſtorical paſſage about
Nimrod, or Nebuchadnezzar, or Sihon,
king of the Amorites, or Og, king of
Baſhan; out of Geneſis, or Deuteronomy,
or the book of Judges, or Kings, would
do very well; but that he ſhould avoid
carefully the book of Job, and the Pſalms
of David, and the Proverbs of Solomon;
theſe requiring a conſiderable theological
knowledge; or, at leaſt, moral diſcuſſion
and reflection. Keep a good heart, ſaid
he, and attempt the matter. The iſſue
may be better than you apprehend.
With this, taking him a little further to
the one ſide, where his horſe was tied, he
took out a bottle from his ſaddle-bags, with
a little whiſky in it, which Teague had put
[Page 042]
there, and gave him a dram. This had a
good effect, and raiſed his ſpirits, and he
ſeemed now ready to enter the liſts with
his antagoniſt.
The other, in the mean time, had gone
in, and was ready, when called upon, to
hold forth. The man with the papers returning,
with the Captain not far behind,
took his ſeat. The board ſignified, that
one or other might aſcend the pulpit. The
credential man, wiſhing to gain time, to
think farther what he was about to ſay,
but affecting politeneſs, yielded precedence
to the other, and deſired him to
preach firſt. Accordingly ſtepping up, he
took his text and began.
[Page 043]
CHAP. III.
The Sermon.
Prov. viii. 33. Hear inſtruction and be wiſe,
and refuſe it not.
INSISTING on theſe words, I ſhall
enquire, 1. Whence it is that men are
averſe to inſtruction. 2. The misfortune
of this diſpoſition. Laſtly, Conclude
with inferences from the ſubject.
1. Whence it is that men are adverſe to
inſtruction. The firſt principle is indolence.
The mind loves eaſe, and does not wiſh to
be at the trouble of thinking. It is hard
to collect ideas, and ſtill harder to compoſe
them; it is like rowing a boat: whereas,
acting without thought, is like ſailing before
the wind, and the tide in our favour.
The ſecond principle is pride. It wounds
the ſelf love of men, to ſuppoſe that they
need inſtruction. We reſent more the
being called fools than knaves. No man
[Page 044]
will own himſelf weak and uninformed.
In fact, he has not humility to think he
is: or, if he ſhould be conſcious of a want
of knowledge, he is unwilling that others
ſhould have the ſame opinion: and he will
not ſubmit to be inſtructed, as that would
imply that he is not already ſo.
The third principle is paſſion. When
we are diſpoſed to ſatisfy the deſires of
the conſtitution, or the affections of the
mind, which are unlawful, we do not wiſh
to hear diſſuaſion from the indulgence.
The lecture comes to torment before the
time, when the conſequence muſt afflict.
Under the ſecond head, we ſhall ſhew
the misfortune of this diſpoſition. It is what,
in early life, begins to fix the difference of
perſons. The hearer of inſtruction, even
with more moderate parts, becomes the
more ſenſible boy. The hearer of instruction
has a better chance for life and mature
years. Into how many dangers do
young perſons run; leaping, climbing,
running, playing truant, and neglecting
books? Into what affrays too will paſſions
prompt them, when they begin to feel the
ſinew ſtrong, and the manly nerve braced?
They value corporeal ſtrength, which they
[Page 045]
have in common with the horſe, or the ox,
and neglect the cultivation of the mind,
which is the glory of our nature. What
is a man without information? In form
only above a beaſt. What is a man, negligent
of moral duty? Worſe than a
beaſt; becauſe, he is deſtitute of that by
which he might be governed, and of which
his nature is capable; and without which,
he is more dangerous, in proportion as he
is more ingenious.
I ſhall conclude with inferences from the
ſubject.
It may be ſeen hence, with what attention
we ought to hear, and with what observation,
ſee. The five ſenſes are the avenues
of knowledge; but the reflection of
the mind on ideas preſented, is the ſource
of wiſdom. Underſtanding is better than
riches; for underſtanding leads to compotcency,
and to know how to uſe it. Laying
aſide, therefore, all indolence, pride,
and paſſion, let us hear inſtruction, and
be wiſe, and refuſe it not.
This, reverend brethren, is a ſhort sermon.
It is one in miniature; like the model
of a mechanical invention, which is
complete in its parts, and from whence
[Page 046]
may be ſeen the powers of the inventor.
I did not intend to take up your time with
a long diſcourſe; becauſe, ex pede Herculem;
you may know what I can do by
this eſſay.
The fact is, I am regularly bred, and
licenſed; but this my competitor, is no
more than a yarn merchant; who, failing
in his trade, has adventured to this country:
And coming over in the veſſel with
me, took the opportunity one night, when
I was aſleep, and picked my fob of theſe
papers, which he now ſhews.
Thus having ſpoke, he deſcended.
The other, in the mean time, had been
at his wits end what to do. The technical
difficulty of taking a text, and dividing
it under ſeveral heads, and splitting
each head into branches, and purſuing
each with ſuch ſtrickneſs, that the thoughts
ſhould be ranged under each which belonged
to it, as exactly as you would
the coarſer yarn with the coarſer, and
the finer with the finer; or put balls with
balls, and hanks with hanks. At laſt he
had determined to take no text at all; as
it was much better to take none, than to
take one and not ſtick to it.
[Page 047]
Accordingly, he reſolved to preach up and down
the ſcripture, wherever he could get a
word of ſeaſonable doctrine. Mounting the
pulpit, therefore, he began as follows:
The firſt man that we read of was Adam,
and firſt woman Eve: ſhe was tempted
by the ſerpent, and eat the forbidden
fruit. After this ſhe conceived and bare
a ſon, and called his name Cain; and
Cain was a tiller of the ground, and Abel
a keeper of ſheep; for ſhe conceived and
bare a ſecond ſon, and called his name
Abel. And Cain ſlew Abel. There were
ſeveral generations unto the flood, when
Noah built an ark, and ſaved himſelf and
his family. After the flood, Abraham begat
Iſaac, and Iſaac begat Jacob, and Jacob
begat Joſeph and his brethren. Potiphar's
wife, in Egypt, took a fancy for
Joſeph, and caſt him in ward; and Potiphar
was a captain of Pharaoh's guards;
and Joſeph interpreted Pharaoh's dream
of the lean cattle; and there were twelve
years famine in the land; and Moſes passed
for the ſon of Pharaoh's daughter,
and married Jethro's daughter, in the land
of Midian, and brought the Iſraelites out
of the land of Egypt; and Joſhua the ſon
[Page 048]
of Nun, and Caleb the ſon Jephunneh;
and the walls of Jericho fell down at the
ſound of ram's horns; and Sampſon ſlew
a thouſand with the jaw-bone of an aſs;
and Delilah the harlot; and Gideon, and
Barak, and Jephthah, and Abinoam the
Giliaditiſh; and Samuel, and Saul, and
the prophets; and Jonathan, and David;
and Solomon built him an houſe; and silver
was plenty as the ſtreet ſtones in Jerusalem;
Rehoboam, and Jehoſophat, and
the kings of Iſrael and Juda; Daniel was
caſt into the lions' den; and Shadrach,
Meſhach, and Abed-nego; and Iſaiah and
Jeremiah; and Zachariah, and Zerobabel;
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, and the
apoſtles; Mary Magdalene, out of whom
were caſt ſeven devils; and the father of
Zebedee's children; and Pontius Pilate,
and the high prieſt, and Ananias and Sapphira,
and the ſeven trumpets, in the Revelations,
and the dragon, and the woman.
Amen. I add no more.
The lay people preſent were moſt pleaſed
with the laſt diſcourſe; and ſome of the
younger of the clergy: But the more aged,
gave the preference to the firſt. Thus it
ſeemed difficult to decide.
[Page 049]
The Captain riſing up, ſpoke: Gentlemen,
ſaid he, the men ſeem both to have
conſiderable gifts, and I ſee no harm in
letting them both preach. There is work
enough for them in this new country; the
firſt appears to me, to be more qualified
for the city, as a very methodical preacher;
but the laſt is the moſt practical; and
each may anſwer a valuable purpoſe in
their proper place.
The deciſion ſeemed judicious, and it
was agreed that they ſhould both preach.
The man who had been the yarn merchant,
thanked their reverences, and gave out
that he would preach there that day week,
God willing.
The clergy were ſo pleaſed with the Captain,
that they gave him an invitation to
go home with them to an elder's houſe,
juſt by; but recollecting the trouble he
had with Teague on another occaſion, and
the danger of being drawn into a like predicament,
ſhould he fall into converſation
with the clergymen, and take it into his
head to preach, he declined the invitation,
and haſtened to get his horſe, and having
Teague along ſide, proceeded on his journey.
[Page 050]
BOOK IV.
CHAP. I. THE inſuing day, the Captain arrived
in a certain city, and put up at the
ſign of the Indian Queen. Taking a day
or two to refreſh himſelf, and get a new
pair of breeches made, and his coat mended,
which was a little worn at the elbows,
he went to look about the city. The
fourth day, when he had propoſed to ſet
out to perambulate this modern Babylon,
and called for Teague to bring him his
boots, there was no Teague there. The
hoſtler being called, with whom he uſed
to ſleep, informed, that he had diſappeared
the day before. The Captain was alarmed;
and, from the recollection of former
incidents, began to enquire if there were any
elections going on at that time. As it
[Page 051]
ſo happened, there was one that very day.
Thinking it probable the bog-trotter, having
ſtill a hankering after an appointment
might offer himſelf on that occaſion, he ſet
out to the place where the people were
convened, to ſee if he could diſcover
Teague amongſt the candidates. He could
ſee nothing of him; and though he made
enquiry, he could hear no account. But
the circumſtance of the election drawing
his attention for ſome time, he forgot
Teague.
The candidates were all remarkably
pot-bellied; and waddled in their gait.
The Captain enquiring what were the pretensions
of theſe men to be elected; he was
told, that they had all ſtock in the funds,
and lived in large brick buildings; and
ſome of them entertained fifty people at a
time, and eat and drank abundantly; and,
living an eaſy life, and pampering their appetites,
they had ſwollen to this ſize.
It is a ſtrange thing, ſaid the Captain, that
in the country, in my route, they would elect
no one but a weaver, or a whiſky distiller;
and here none but fat ſwabs, that guzzle
wine, and ſmoke ſegars. It was not ſo in
Greece, where Phocion came with his plain
coat, from his humble dwelling, and
[Page 052]
directed the counſels of the people; or in Rome,
where Cincinnatus was made dictator from
the plough. Something muſt be wrong,
where the inflate, and pompous are the objects
of choice. Though there is one good arising
from it, that there is no danger of my
Teague here. He could not afford to give
a dinner; and as to funds, he has not a single
ſhilling in them. They will make him
neither mayor nor legiſlator in this city.
Na faith, ſaid Mr. M`Donald, the Scotch
gentleman who had been preſent at the embarrassment
of the Captain, on the occaſion
of the former election; and having, a few
days before, come to the city, and observing
the Captain in the crowd, had come
up to accoſt him, juſt as he was uttering
theſe laſt words to himſelf: Na faith, ſaid
he, there is na danger of Teague here,
unleſs he had his ſcores o' ſhares in the
bank; and was in league with the brokers,
and had a brick houſe at his hurdies, or
a ſhip or twa on the ſtocks. A great deal
uſed to be done, by employing advocates
with the tradeſmen, to liſten to the
news, and tell them fair ſtories; but all
is now loſt in ſubſtantial intereſt, and the
funds command every thing. Beſides, this
city is ſwarming with Teagues, and
[Page 053]
O'Regans, and O'Brians, and O'Murphys, and
O'Farrels; I ſee, that they cannot be at
a loſs without your bog trotter.
The Captain having his fears eaſed, in
this particular, returned home, greatly
troubled, nevertheleſs, that he could not
come up with the Iriſhman.
[Page 054]
CHAP. II.
REFLECTING with himſelf, that
Teague was inclined to women, and
that he might have gone to ſome of thoſe
houſes, which are not in the beſt repute
with the religious part of the community,
the Captain thought it might not be amiſs
to make enquiry. Being informed by the
waiter, that he had overheard gentlemen,
at the houſe, in their cups, ſpeak of a certain
Mrs. Robeſon, who kept a houſe of
that kind; and, as far as he could understand,
it was in ſuch a part of the city, a
few doors from ſuch a ſtreet.
The Captain having ſet out, coming
into the neighbourhood, and making inquiry,
was directed to the houſe. Knocking,
and, on a ſervant coming to the door,
enquiring for Mrs. Robeſon; he was ſhewn
into a parlour, and in a little time the old
lady entered. Being ſeated, he took the
liberty of addreſſing her: Madam, ſaid he,
I am not unacquainted with the ſtile and
[Page 055]
designation of your houſe. Why, as to that,
ſaid ſhe, we do the beſt we can; but the
times are hard, and it is a very difficult
thing to pick up a good looking healthy
girl, now a days. So many young women,
ſince the war is over, having taken
to virtuous ways, and got married, has
almoſt broke us up. But I have been fortunate
enough to light upon one, yesterday,
that is a rare piece, juſt from the
country; and I am ſure —
It is not in the way that you mean, madam,
ſaid the Captain, that I take the liberty
to call upon you. I have a ſervant
man, of the name of Teague O'Regan,
that is inclined to women, and has been
abſent ſome days; and it has occurred to
me, that he may have come to your houſe,
or ſome other of the like kind; and may
be ſkulking, to avoid my ſervice. As he
has little or no money, it is impoſſible he
can be much in your way; and I could
make it better worth your while to inform
on him, and ſurrender him up.
Teague O'Regan, ſaid the old lady!
ſnuffing; Teague O'Regan! I would have
you know, ſir, that no Teague O'Regans
come here; we keep a houſe for the firſt
gentlemen; not for waiters, or
[Page 056]
understrappers, or any of the common ſorts.
There is no half-crown, or five ſhilling
pieces here. Teague O'Regan indeed!
there is no Teague O'Regan at this houſe.
We have meat for his maſter. I was saying
there was a young woman juſt now
from the country, that looks more like a
woman of family, than a country girl;
but is ſo melancholy and mopiſh, that ſhe
ſcarcely ſpeaks; and ſtands in need of
ſome one to talk to her, and keep her in
ſpirits. She is fit for any gentleman.
Teague O'Regan! Humph! There is no
Teague O'Regan puts his foot into my
door.
The Captain aſſured her, that he by no
means meant to give offence. That tho'
the bog-trotter could not have acceſs to
her firſt rooms; yet he did not know but
he might have got in with ſome of her
under maids, and be about the kitchen.
The lady, being now appeaſed on the
ſcore of Teague, was in a good humour,
and renewed her hints to the Captain, with
reſpect to the young woman. She is, ſaid
ſhe, as good looking a girl as ever came
to my houſe; and has not ſeen a ſingle
perſon but yourſelf, whom ſhe has not yet
ſeen; but may ſee, if you chuſe; and
[Page 057]
a very pretty girl ſhe is; but keeps mopish
and melancholy, as if ſhe was crossed
in love, and had come to town for
fear of her relations, and wiſhes to keep
out of ſight of every body.
The Captain being no ſtranger to the art
theſe matrons uſe, in their addreſſes, to
enhance the value of their wares, was but
little moved with the recommendation ſhe
had given. But as there were ſome circumstances
in the account of the young
woman, that were a little ſtriking, his curiosity
was excited to let her be called in,
and preſent herſelf. Accordingly, the old
lady ſtepping out, a young woman made
her appearance, of conſiderable beauty;
but in her countenance expreſſions of woe.
Her blue eye ſeemed involved in miſt;
for ſhe ſhed no tears; her ſorrow was
beyond that.
Young woman, ſaid the Captain, it is
eaſy to perceive that you have not been
in this way of life long; and that you have
been brought to it, perhaps, by ſome uncommon
circumſtances. My humanity is
intereſted; and it occurs to me to aſk, by
what means it has come to paſs. The part
which he ſeemed to take in her diſtreſs,
inſpiring her with confidence; and being
[Page 058]
requeſted by him to relate her ſtory frankly,
ſhe began as follows:
My father, ſaid ſhe, lives at the diſtance
of about twenty miles from this city, and
is a man of good eſtate. I have two brothers,
but no ſiſters. My mother dying
when I was at the age of fourteen, I became
houſe-keeper for the family.
There was a young man that uſed to
come to the ſame church to which we went.
He was of the very loweſt claſs, mean in
his appearance, of homely features, and
a dimunitive perſon. Yet he had the assurance
to put himſelf in my way on every
occaſion; endeavouring to catch my eye;
for he did not dare to ſpeak to me. But
I hated him, and was almoſt reſolved to
ſtay at home on Sundays, to avoid him;
for he began to be very troubleſome. His
attentions to me were taken notice of by
my brothers. They were confident that I
muſt give him ſome encouragement, or he
would not make ſuch advances. My father
was of the ſame opinion. I aſſured
them I had never given him any encouragement,
and I never would; that I was
as much averſe to him as poſſible.
I ſhunned him and hated him. He persisted
a long time, almoſt two years, and
[Page 059]
ſeemed to become melancholy, and at laſt
went away from the neighbourhood; and,
as I heard afterwards, to ſea. I began
now to reflect upon his aſſiduity, and endeavours
to engage my affections. I recollected
every circumſtance of his conduct
towards me, ſince the firſt time I was obliged
to take notice of him. I reaſoned
with myſelf, that it was no fault of his, if
his family was low; and if he himſelf had
not all that comelineſs of perſon which I
wiſhed in a huſband; yet he was sufficiently
puniſhed in his preſumption in thinking
of me, by what he muſt have ſuffered,
and by his going to ſea, which he did to
get out of my ſight, finding his attempts
to gain my affections, hopeleſs. I dreamed
of him; and ſcarcely a moment of the
day paſſed, but my thoughts were running
on the danger to which he was expoſed.
It ſeemed to me that if he came back, I
ſhould be more kind to him. I might at
leaſt ſhew him, that I was not inſenſible
of his attachment.
In about a year he returned, and the
moment I ſaw him, I loved him. He did
not dare to come to my father's houſe. But
I could not help giving him encouragement,
by my countenance, when I met
[Page 060]
him in public. Emboldened by this, he
at laſt ventured to ſpeak to me; and I agreed
that he might come to a peach orchard,
at ſome diſtance from my father's
houſe, and that I would give him an interview.
There he came often; and with
a moſt lowly, and humble behaviour, fixed
my regard for him. Not doubting the
violence of his love for me, and my ascendency
over him, I at laſt put myſelf
in his power. Becoming pregnant, I hinted
marriage; but what was my astonishment
to find, that, on various pretences,
he evaded it; and as I became more fond,
he became more cold; which had no other
effect, than to make me more ardent than
before. It had been uſual, for many
months, to meet me every evening at this
place; but now I had gone often, and did
not find him there. At laſt he withdrew
altogether, and I heard he had left the settlement.
Worthleſs and baſe, as I now
knew him to be; and, though my reason
told me, that in perſon he was ſtill as
homely as I firſt thought him, yet I continued
to love him to diſtraction.
What was my diſtreſs, when my father,
and my brothers, found that I was with
child? They charged me, though
[Page 061]
unjustly, of having deceived them with reſpect
to my attachment to this low creature,
from the firſt: In fine, my father dismissed
me from the houſe: My brothers, no
leſs relenting than him, in their reſentment
againſt me, upbraided me with the offers
I had refuſed, and the treatment I had given
ſeveral gentlemen, in their advances to
me. For, indeed, during the abſence of
this worthleſs man, I had been addreſſed
by ſeveral; but my pity and compaſſion
for the wretch, had ſo wrought upon
me, that I could not think of any, or
ſcarcely bear them to ſpeak to me.
Diſmiſſed from my father's houſe, even
my younger brother, who was moſt ſoft and
yielding in his nature, ſeeming to approve
of it, I went to the habitation of a tenant
of my father; there remained ſome time,
and endeavoured to make compenſation,
by the labour of my hands, for the trouble
I was giving them. But theſe poor
people, thinking my father would relent,
had informed him where I was, and of
the care they had taken of me. The consequence
was, that, at the end of three
months, he ſent for the child, of which I
had been brought to bed ſome weeks before;
but ordered them inſtantly to
[Page 062]
dismiss me, that I might never more offend
his hearing with my name.
I wandered to this city, and the firſt
night lay in the market houſe, upon a
bench. The next morning mixed with
the women that came to market, and enquired
for work of any kind. I could find
none; but at laſt meeting with a young
woman who felt for my diſtreſs, ſhe told
me, that ſhe had a ſmall room in this city,
where ſhe had lived ſome time with an
aunt that was lately dead; and that now
ſhe ſupported herſelf by doing a little in
the millinery way; that if I would come
and take breakfaſt with her, and ſee where
ſhe lived, I was welcome. Going with
the poor girl, I found her lonely and distressed
enough. Nevertheleſs I continued
with her ſeveral months. But the work
was ſmall that we got to do, and times
becoming ſtill worſe, I was obliged to
ſell the cloths that I brought with me, to
the laſt petticoat and ſhort gown, to support
ourſelves and pay rent. To bring
me to the laſt ſtage of miſery, the poor
girl who was more expert than I was, in
making any little proviſion that could be
made, fell ſick and in ſhort time died. I
could bear to ſtay no longer in the room,
[Page 063]
and coming out to wander in the ſtreets,
like a forlorn wretch indeed, and ſobbing
ſorely by myſelf, when I thought no one
heard me, I was obſerved by this woman,
at whoſe houſe you now are, and preſſed
by her to go home. I ſoon found what
ſort of a houſe it was, and had I not been
watched, when I talked of going away,
and threatened to be ſent to jail, for what,
it is pretended I owe ſince I came to the
houſe, I ſhould not have been here longer
than the firſt day.
The Captain feeling with great sensibility
the circumſtances of her ſtory, made
reply: Said he, Young woman, I greatly
commiſerate your hiſtory and ſituation,
and feel myſelf impelled to revenge your
wrong. But the villain which has thus injured
you, is out of my reach, in two respects;
firſt, by diſtance; and ſecond, being
too contemptible and baſe to be pursued
by my reſentment even on your account.
But revenge is not your object, but support
and reſtoration to your friends, and
the good opinion of the world. As to
money, it is not in my power to advance
you any great ſum; but as far as words
can go, I could wiſh to ſerve you: not
words to yourſelf only; but to others, in
[Page 064]
your behalf. It is evident to me, that
you have ſuffered by your own too great
ſenſibility. It was humanity and generosity,
that engaged you in his favour.
It was your imagination, that gave thoſe
attractions to his vile and uncomely person,
by which you was ſeduced. You have
been a victim to your own goodneſs, and
not to his merit. The warmth of your
heart has overcome the ſtrength of your
judgment; and your prudence has been
ſubdued by your paſſion: or, rather, indeed,
confiding in a man whom you had
ſaved from all the pains, and heart-felt
miſeries of unſucceſsful love, you have become
a ſacrifice to your compaſſion and
tenderneſs. The beſt advice I can give
you, is, to compoſe yourſelf for this night.
Preſerve your virtue; for I do not consider
you as having loſt it: your mind has
not been in fault, or contaminated. I
will endeavour to find out ſome perſon,
who may be diſpoſed to aſſiſt you; and,
though it may be difficult for you yet to
eſtabliſh loſt fame, it is not impoſſible. So
ſaying, he left the room; but the young
woman, impreſſed with theſe laſt words
eſpecially, viz. the diffculty, if not impossibility,
of regaining reputation, ſunk
[Page 065]
down upon her chair, and could not pay
him the compliment of thanks, at his departure.
During the night, through the whole
of which he lay awake, at the public houſe,
he ruminated on the extraordinary nature
of this incident, and the means which he
would adopt to recover this woman from
her unfortunate ſituation.
Thought he, I am in a city where there
are a great body of the people called Quakers.
This ſociety, above all others, is remarkable
for humanity, and charitable actions.
There is a female preacher, of whom I
have heard; a Lydia Wilſon: I will inform
this good woman of the circumſtance;
and, if ge gives me leave, I will bring
this ſtray ſheep to her; ſhe may have it
in her power to introduce her to ſome
place, where, by needle work, and industry,
ſhe might live, until it may be in
my power, taking a journey to her father,
and ſtating the caſe, and giving my sentiments,
to reſtore her to her family.
Early next morning, as ſoon as it could
be preſumed, the Quaker lady had ſet her
houſe in order; that is, after the family
might be ſuppoſed to have breakfasted,
which was about nine o'clock, the
[Page 066]
Captain ſet out; and being admitted, stated
to Mrs. Wilſon, the exact circumſtances
as before related. The pious woman readily
undertook every office in her power.
Accordingly, taking leave, the Captain
ſet out for the houſe of Mrs. Robeſon.
At the door, he met a number of men
coming out, and, on inquiry, he found a coroner's
inqueſt had juſt ſat on the body of a
young woman of the houſe, who had the
preceding evening, ſuſpended herſelf from
the bed poſt with her garter. He was
ſtruck, ſuſpecting it muſt be the young
woman whom he had ſo much in his
thoughts. Going in, and enquiring, he
found it to be the caſe; and that they proposed
to bury as ſoon as the few boards of
a coffin could be got ready. As a man of
humanity, he could not but ſhed tears;
and blame himſelf that he had not given
her ſtronger aſſurance of his interpoſition
before he left her, that ſhe might not have
fallen into deſpair, and taken away her
life.
The coffin being now ready, the funeral
ſet out, not for the burying ground of
a church yard; but for a place without
the city, called the Potter's-field: For suicide
forfeits Chriſtian burial: Her
[Page 067]
obsequies attended, not by a clergyman in
front, nor by ſcarfed mourners, holding
up the pall; nor was ſhe borne on a bier,
but drawn on a cart; and the company
that followed her uncovered herſe, were
not decent matrons, nor venerable men,
but old bauds, and ſtrumpets, and cullies,
half drunk, making merry as they went along.
Being interred, they returned home; but
the Captain remaining ſome time, contemplating
the grave, thus ſpoke:
Earth, thou covereſt the body of a lovely
woman, and with a mind not leſs lovely;
yet doomed in her burial, to the ſame
ground with negroes, and malefactors;
not that I think the circumſtance makes any
difference; but it ſhews the opinion
of the world with reſpect to thy perſonal
demerit. Nor do I call in queſtion the
juſtneſs of this opinion; having ſuch circumstances
whereon to found it. But I
reflect with myſelf how much opinion, operating
like a general law, may do injuſtice.
It remains only with heaven's chancery to
reach the equity of the caſe, and abſolve
her from a crime; or at leaſt qualify that
which was the exceſs of virtue. If the fair
elements that compoſed her frame, ſhall
[Page 068]
ever again unite, and riſe to life, and as
the divines ſuppoſe, her form receive its
ſhape, and complexion from her mental
qualities, and conduct on earth, ſhe will
loſe nothing of her beauty; for her daring
diſdain of herſelf and fate, was a mark of
repentance,—ſtronger than all tears. Yet,
had ſhe acted the nobler part of holding
herſelf in life, preſerving her mind and
body chaſte until famine had taken her away,
or the hand of heaven moved for
her relief, ſhe had ſhone, at the laſt riſing,
with ſuperior brightneſs; been ranked amongst
the firſt beauties of heaven, and
walked diſtinguiſhed in the paradiſe of
God. Doubtleſs the Almighty muſt blame,
and chide her for this premature and raſh
ſtep. Fallen to the laſt point of depreſſion,
he was about to relieve her, and the sequel
of her days might have been happy
and ſerene. It was a diſtruſt of his providence.
She heard my words, though
ſhe did not know my heart. And ſurely
it was my intention to relieve her. But
ſhe erred againſt my thoughts; ſhe eluded
the graſp of my humanity. For this ſhe
will be reprimanded by the Moſt High;
and fail of that ſupereminent glory which
awaits heroic minds. Yet, O world, thou
[Page 069]
doſt her wrong, in ſentencing her to ſo low
a bed. Shall the wealthy, but diſhoneſt
men; matrons chaſte, but cold and cruel
in their feelings; ſhall theſe have a
ſtone built over them, and occupy a consecrated
ſpot; whilſt thou, unworthy, art
thrown amongſt the rubbiſh of carcaſes,
ſwept from jails; or of emigrants, unknown
as to their origin and place.
Farewel, lovely form, whom late I
knew; and let the graſs grow green upon
thy grave. Thy ſorrows are expunged;
but mine are awake; and will be ſo, until
I alſo come to the ſhades inviſible, and
have the ſame apathy of heart with thee.
[Page 070]
BOOK V.
CHAP. I. RETURNING to his lodging, he
could not help reflecting by the way,
that probably poor Teague, mortified by
repeated diſappointments, in going to
Congreſs, being ſuffered to preach, or be
a member of the Philoſophical Society;
and what might afflict him ſtill more, the
not marrying the rich hoſteſs, who had
made him overtures, might, in his deſpair
of ever coming forward in any reſpectable
capacity in life, have ſuſpended himſelf
from a beam, or plunged into the river,
and have put an end to his exiſtence;
which, ſhould it be the caſe, being in
ſome meaſure acceſſary to this cataſtrophe
of the bog-trotter, by diſſuading from theſe
ſeveral pretenſions, he could not acquit
[Page 071]
himſelf of guilt; at all events, he would
feel great pain and ſorrow.
Such were his reflections for a great
part of this day; and had thought of putting
an advertiſement in the paper, to
know if any dead body had been lately
diſcovered; or inquiſition held on a young
man, with red hair, and a long leg, who
had been miſſing ſome days, and was supposed
to have hung or drowned himſelf.
But in the evening, meditating thus, mention
being made by ſome of the lodgers,
of going to hear the annual oration, delivered
before the Philoſophical Society,
by a member; it ſtruck his mind, that
poſſibly Teague, falling in with ſome of
this body, had been induced by them to
take a ſeat, and might be preſent on that
occaſion. Not heſitating, therefore, he
ſeconded the propoſal of going; and offered
to be of the party.
Coming to the hall, the philoſophers
were ſeated; but a black member ſat with
a taper before him, who, it ſeems, was
to deliver the oration.
The fact was this; A gentleman of Maryland
of the name of Gorum, had ſent
to the ſociety, ſome time before, a curiosity
found by one of his negroes in the
[Page 072]
mud of Wye river, on the banks of which
his ſeat was. It appeared to be a ſtone,
with a cavity ſufficient to receive a man's
foot, and was adjudged by the ſociety to
be an Indian's petrified moccaſon. The
ſingularity of the diſcovery, well intitling
the gentleman to a ſeat, he was invited;
but ſending his compliments, he gave
them to underſtand, that Cuff, (for that
was the name of the negro) was more intitled
to that honour than he was, being
the perſon who had found the curioſity;
and as he made it a point to do his ſlaves
juſtice in any perquiſite of their own, he
could not think of robbing one, on this occasion
of any honour, to which he might
be introduced by this diſcovery.
The ſociety approved his honeſty, and
fair dealing; and by unanimous ballot,
admitted the negro; who, having been a
member ſome time, had been appointed,
to pronounce the annual oration. Cuff, a
good deal diſconcerted in hearing of the
taſk impoſed upon him, had applied to
his maſter to know what to ſay. Colonel
Gorum attending a good deal to literary
matters, had heard of an oration delivered
before the ſociety, the object of which was
to prove that the Africans had been once
[Page 073]
white, had ſharp noſes, and long hair;
but that by living in ſun-burnt climates,
the ſkin had changed colour, the hair become
frizzled, and in the courſe of generation,
the imagination of the mother, presenting
obtuſe objects, had produced an offspring
with flat noſes. He therefore gave
Cuff to underſtand, that it would be doing
no more than juſtice to his countrymen, for
he was a Guinea negro, if he ſhould avail
himſelf of this occaſion to prove that men
were all once black, and that by living in
ſnowy countries, and being bleached by
the weather, the ſkin had gradually become
white, and the hair moiſt and long, and
the imagination preſenting prominent objects
to the mothers, or the fathers differing
among themſelves, and pulling one another
by this part, had given the long and
pointed noſe.
Cuff, thus prepared, ſet out; having arrived,
and being on this occaſion to harangue,
began as follows:
The Oration.
Massa ſhentiman; I be caſh crab in de
Wye riva: found ting in de mud; tone,
big a man's foot: hols like to he; fetch
[Page 074]
Maſſa: Maſſa ſay, it be de Indian moccason.—
O! fat de call it; all tone. He ſay,
you be a filaſafa, Cuff: I ſay, O no, Massa;
you be de filaſafa. Wel; two tree
monts afta, Maſſa call me, and ſay, You
be a filaſafa, Cuff, fo' ſartan: Getta ready,
and go dis city, and make grate peech for
ſhentima filaſafa. I ſay, Fat ſay? Maſſa:
Maſſa ſay, ſomebody ſay, dat de firſt man
was de ſite man; but you ſay, dat de firſt
man was de black a-man. Vel, I ſet out
out: come along: Maſſa gi me paſs. Some
ſay, where you go, Cuff? I ſay, dis city, be
a filaſafa. O no, Cuff, you be no filasafa:
call me fool, gi me kick i'de backside;
fall down, get up again, and come
to dis city.
Now, ſhentima, I ſay, dat de firſt man
was de black a man, and de firſt woman
de black a woman; an get two tree children;
de rain vaſha deſe, an de ſnow
pleach, an de coula come brown, yella,
coppa coula, and, at de laſt, quite fite;
an de hair long; an da fal out vid van anoda;
and van caſh by de noſe, an pull;
ſo de noſe come lang, ſharp noſe.
Now I go home, Maſſa ſhentima; an
tel grate Maſſa, dat make peech, an ibedy
body vas da; an den Cuff fin a more
[Page 075]
tings—cabs, oyſta, cat-fiſh, bones, tones,
ibedy ting; ſen to you, ſhentima.
The oration being ended, the Society
could do no leſs than appoint a committee
to wait on Mr. Cuff, and requeſt a copy
of his oration, that it might be publiſhed.
But the Captain, in the mean time, had
examined, with great attention, the whole
audience; but could not diſcover Teague.
Departing, therefore, with the reſt, his
thoughts recurred to his firſt idea, viz.
that the unfortunate creature had committed
ſuicide. Drawing up, therefore, an
advertiſement, he ſent it to a daily paper;
but, though it appeared next morning,
and the day elapſed, there was no word of
Teague.
[Page 076]
CHAP. II.
THERE is no fact that has proved
more ſtubborn than the diverſity of
the human ſpecies; eſpecially that great
extreme of diverſity in the natives of Africa.
How the deſcendants of Adam and
Eve, both good looking people, ſhould
ever come to be a vile negro, or even a
mulatto man or woman, is puzzling.
Some have conjectured, that a black
complexion, frizzled hair, a flat noſe, and
bandy legs, were the mark ſet on Cain,
for the murder of his brother Abel. But,
as the deluge drowned the whole world,
and only one family was ſaved, the blacks
muſt have all periſhed; like the Mammoth,
whoſe bones are found on the
Ohio, and other places, which was too big
for Noah to get into the ark.
Some ſuppoſe, that it was the curſe pronounced
upon Canaan, the ſon of Noah,
for looking at his father's nakedneſs. They
got rid by this means of the difficulty of
[Page 077]
the flood; but by Moſes' own account,
the Canaanites were the deſcendents of
Canaan; and we do not hear of them being
negroes; which, had it been the caſe,
we cannot doubt would have been laid hold
of by the Iſraelites, as a circumſtance to
juſtify their extirpating, or making ſlaves
of them.
Lord Kames, in his Sketches of the History
of Man, ſolves the difficulty, by supposing,
that, at the building of Babel,
there was a confuſion of complexions, as
well as languages. But, beſides that it is
not to be ſuppoſed, that the hiſtorian would
paſs over ſo material a circumſtance, without
particularly mentioning it, it is introducing
a miracle, which we are not warranted
in doing, unleſs it had been expressly
laid down to have been wrought.
The laſt theory, has been that of accounting
for the change, from the climate,
and accident of wind and weather;
calling in aid, in the mean time, the imagination
of the mothers. This does not appear
altogether ſatisfactory. At leaſt, there
are thoſe who would not be averſe to hear
ſome other ſolution of the difficulty. I
have thought of one, which I would ſuggeſt
with great diffidence; the authors of thoſe
[Page 078]
before me being great men, and their hypothesis
not lightly overthrown.
I am of opinion that Adam was a tall,
ſtraight limbed, red haired man, with a fair
complexion, blue eyes, and an aquiline
noſe; and that Eve was a negro woman.
For what neceſſity to make them both
of the ſame colour, feature, and form,
when there is beauty in variety. Do not
you ſee in a tulip, one leaf blue, and another
white, and ſometimes the ſame leaf
white and red?
As God made Adam in his own likeness,
ſo it is to be ſuppoſed, that Adam
begat ſome in his; and theſe were red
haired, fair complexioned, blue eyed, proportionably
featured boys and girls; while,
on the other hand, ſome took after the
mother, and became negro men and women.
From a mixture of complexion, the
offspring, at other times, might be a ſhade
darker, in one caſe, than the father; and
a ſhade lighter, in another caſe, than the
mother; and hence, a diverſifyed progeny,
with a variety of features; from the
bottle-noſe to the mire-ſnipe; which is that
of the people in the weſt of Ireland; and
from the auburn of the Corſican hair, to
the golden locks of the Caledonian
[Page 079]
beauty; and from the black eye, to the hazle
and the grey.
It may be aſked, How at the flood?
when Noah, his wife, his three ſons, and
their wives, eight perſons, only were saved?
It is but giving ſome of the ſons negro
wenches for their wives, and you have the
matter all right.
[Page 080]
CHAP. III.
AS I have ſaid, the day paſſed over, and
there was no word of Teague. In
the evening, as it was uſual with the gentlemen
at the Indian Queen, to go to ſome
place for the amuſement of an hour or
two; mention being made of a celebrated
preacher, a Univerſaliſt, as he was called;
that is, one who preaches the doctrine of
univerſal ſalvation; it was propoſed to go
to hear him, as he was to hold forth that
evening. The Captain readily conſented;
and it ſtruck him, that, as this was a new
fangled doctrine, and the preacher had
made a great noiſe; and as it was a
doctrine that, conſcious of a good deal of
fornication, would naturally pleaſe Teague,
it was not impoſſible but the Iriſhman
might have become a diſciple of this reformist,
and be at his conventicle.
Coming in amongſt the crowd, and obtaining
ſeats, they ſaw the preacher aſcend
the pulpit, and, after the preliminary
[Page 081]
exercise of pſalms and prayer, take a text,
and begin his ſermon.
His text was taken from one of thoſe
paſſages of ſcripture, which ſpeaks of “the
lion lying down with the kid, and the tyger
with the lamb;” which have been interpreted
of the Millenium; but were applied
by him, to that period, when, as
the ſea ſhall give up her dead, ſo hell ſhall
give up her damned; and the devil himself
ſhall come to lick ſalt out of the hand
of an angel.
Enlarging on this doctrine, and supporting
it with a variety of proofs from
ſcripture, and arguments from reaſon, he
ſeemed to have brought the matter to a
point; anſwering all objections, and closing
in with the hearer. At this ſtage, uſing
that figure of oratory, which is uſual in
the pulpit, of aſking queſtions, and pressing
for an anſwer, but expecting none;
he would ſay, Is not this concluſive? Is it
not evident? Is there any here can advance
an argument againſt it? Will any of you
ſpeak—I pauſe for an anſwer?
Mr. M`Donald, in the mean time, (the
Scotch gentleman; who happened to be
there,) thinking him really ſerious, and
that he wanted an anſwer; or taking
[Page 082]
advantage of the pauſe, and the interrogation,
to ſpeak his mind, leaning over the
front of a back ſeat, made reply:
Why, ſaid he, I like the doctrine well
enough, and ha' na' diſpoſition to o'erthrow
it. I dinna muckle care if there
ware na' hell ava. If ye could make that
out, I wad rather hear it, than o' being
ſmoaked twa' or three thouſand years in
the devil's nuke, or ſinged wi' his burnt
brimſtone, even if we ſhould get out afterwards.
Ye need na' put yourſel in a
paſſion, or be flee'd that you'll no get proselytes;
for I ſhall warrant you, as many
every night as ye can weel ſtow awa i' the
conventicle.
The preacher giving thanks to God for
the ſucceſs in his miniſtry, in the remarkable
converſion of the man who ſpoke, the
Scotch gentleman ſaid again; Ye need
na ca' it a converſion; for I ha' been o'
the ſame opinion a' my life; that it was a
ſare thing to bide the kiln of hell, and
they wad deſerve muckle thanks wha could
eſtabliſh that we ſhould na' ſtay long in it,
or that there was na' ſuch place ava.
The preacher commenting upon this,
obſerved that ſome were orthodox from
their birth, like Jeremiah, who was
[Page 083]
sanctified in his mother's womb; but others
were hardly brought to the truth, with
much teaching and inſtruction. That the
preſent was a happy inſtance of one who
was in the right way from his very early
years.
The Captain in the mean time, had been
thinking of the doctrine; and thought it
reaſonable to ſuppoſe, that the Almighty
might relieve after ſome time, and let the
damned devils go. Juſt as with himſelf at
preſent in the caſe of Teague; if he had
got his hands on the bog-trotter, he could
not help being very angry, and would be
diſpoſed to puniſh him with great ſeverity;
but after ſome time he knew his paſſion
would ſubſide, and he would forget his
delinquencies.
Teague in this manner running in his
head, as the people, after ſome epilogue of
prayer and benediction, being diſmiſſed,
were retiring, he got up, and raiſing his
voice, begged the audience to detain a
little. — Good people, ſaid he, if any of
you ſhould come acroſs a young man, a
ſervant of mine, of the name of Teague
O'Regan, I ſhall thank you to ſend me notice
to the Indian Queen, where I lodge.
And, according to the advertiſement in
[Page 084]
this day's paper, I will give two dollars
reward.
Thinking him deranged in his brain,
they proceeded, and took no notice of the
proclamation.
[Page 085]
CHAP. IV.
Containing Obſervations.
IN the infancy of Chriſtianity it was
thought a hard matter to get to heaven;
and that when once in hell, there
was no geting out. A certain father of
the church, of the name of Origen, was
the firſt to be more liberal in his sentiments,
and thought, that after a certain
period, there would be a jail-delivery of
the damned. I do not know that he went
ſo far as to let the devils themſelves out
upon a furlough; but at the preſent time,
we all know very well, that the time will
come, when they will be out all together;
at leaſt the univerſaliſts tell us this, and
prove it.
The doctrine was received in ſome part
by the early councils; but in other parts
rejected. The matter was compounded
by eſtabliſhing a purgatory; for not consenting
to liberate from hell, in order to
[Page 086]
ſatisfy the advocates of a temporary punishment,
they fixed up a middle place,
where all the advantages of penal purgation
could be enjoyed, without the necessity
of contradicting the eternity of hell
torments.
Indeed under the catholic church, the
ſtrait gate, and the narrow way, and the
many called, and few choſen, was a good deal
laid aſide, and the road made pretty plain
by indulgencies and abſolutions. But at
the reformation, the matter was brought
back to its old bed again, and the cry of
their being but a remnant ſaved, was raised
in every pulpit. There has been ſome
relaxation of late years with almoſt every
ſect of Proteſtants; and there is not juſt
ſuch a fury of tumbling great crowds into
the tolbooth, as there was in the days of
John Knox, and the framers of the Westminster
confeſſion of faith, and catechiſms.
Dr. Bellamy, a New-England divine, ſome
years ago, ſtated in his pamphlet, that the
damned would be to the ſaved, as the malefactors
of a country to honeſt people that
came to an untimely end by jail or gibbet.
Some now preach boldly, not perhaps a
total exemption, from future puniſhment,
but a final reſtoration from it; ſo that the
[Page 087]
matter is now brought nearly to what it
was in the days of Origen. I do not know
that I would be of opinion with the
Scotch gentleman, and wiſh the matter
carried farther, eſtabliſhing that there is
no hell at all; becauſe if the thing ſhould
take a turn, it might go to the other extreme,
and be all hell; ſo that none ſhould
be ſaved; and inſtead of univerſal salvation,
we ſhould then have the doctrine of
the damnation of the whole, bodily.
[Page 088]
CHAP. V.
THE next day, revolving every thing
in his mind, it occurred to the Captain,
that the Iriſhman might have gone
out of town, hearing of an election at a
diſtrict, and have been elected to Congreſs.
As that body was then ſitting, he thought
it could be no great trouble to go to the
houſe, and caſt an eye from the gallery,
and ſee if the raggamuffin had got there.
There was one that had a little of the
brogue of Teague upon his tongue, but
nothing of his phyſiognomy; others had a
good deal of his manner; but there was
none that came abſolutely up to the physic
of his perſon.
However, being here, the Captain tho't
it not amiſs to liſten a while to the debates
upon the carpet. A certain bill was
depending, and made, it ſeems, the order
of the day. Mr. Cogan being on the floor,
ſpoke:—Sir, ſaid he, addreſſing himſelf to
the chair, the bill in contemplation, is, in
[Page 089]
my opinion, of a dangerous tendency. I
will venture to foretel, that, if it goes into
a law, the cows will have fewer calves,
and the ſheep leſs wool; hens will lay
fewer eggs, and cocks forget to crow day-light.
The horſes will be worſe ſhod, and
ſtumble more; our watches go too ſlow;
corns grow upon our toes; young women
have the ſtomach ach; old men the gout;
and middle aged perſons fainting fits. The
larks will fall dead in the field; the frogs
croak till they burſt their bags; and the
leaves of the trees fall before the autumn.
Snow will be found in the heat of harveſt,
and dog days in winter. The rivers will
revert; and the ſhadows fall to the eaſt in
the morning. The moon will be eclipſed;
and the equinoxes happen at a wrong season
of the year. Was it not ſuch a bill
as this, that changed the old ſtile; that
made the eclipſe in the time of Julius Cesar;
that produced an earthquake at Jamaica,
and ſunk Port Royal? All history,
both ancient and modern, is full of
the miſchiefs of ſuch a bill. I ſhall, therefore,
vote againſt it.
Mr. Bogan was now on the floor, and
advocated the good effects of the bill.
Sir, ſaid he, addreſſing himſelf to the
[Page 090]
chair, I appear in ſupport of the bill. I
ſay, it will have a good effect on the physical
world eſpecially. The ducks will be
fatter, the geeſe heavier, the ſwans whiter,
the red-birds ſing better, and partridges
come more eaſily into traps. It will kill
rats, muzzle calves, and cut colts; and
multiply the breed of oyſters, and pickle
cod-fiſh. It will moderate the ſun's heat, and
the winter's cold; prevent fogs, and cure
the ague. It will help the natural brain;
brace the nerves, cure ſore eyes, and the
cholic, and remove rheumatiſms. Conſult
experience, and it will be found, that
proviſions of the nature propoſed by this
bill, have an aſtoniſhing influence in this
reſpect, where they have been tried. I muſt
take the liberty to ſay, the gentleman's
allegations are totally unfounded; and he
has committed himſelf, in the matter of his
hiſtory; the earthquake in Jamaica, not
happening in the time of Julius Ceſar; and
therefore could have nothing to do with
the eclipſe of the ſun. I ſhall, therefore,
vote in favour of the bill.
Mr. Cogan roſe to explain; and ſaid,
that he did not ſay, that the earthquake at
Jamaica, was at the ſame time with the
[Page 091]
clipſe of the ſun, which happened at the
birth of Julius Ceſar.
Mr. Bogan roſe to correct the gentleman:
It was not at the birth of Julius
Ceſar, but at his death, that the earthquake
happened.
Mr. Hogan was on the floor: Said, he
thought he could reconcile the gentlemen
on that head. It was well known Julius
Ceſar lived about the time of the rebellion
in Scotland; a little after Nebuchadnezzar,
king of the Jews. As to the earthquake,
he did not remember what year it happened;
and therefore could ſay nothing about
it.
At this period, the queſtion being called,
it was put, and carried by a majority
of 25.
The Captain, ſatisfied with this ſample
of Congreſſional debates, retired, and came
to his lodging.
[Page 092]
CHAP. VI.
IT was about three or four o'clock in
the afternoon, that ſome one, who had
read the advertiſement reſpecting Teague,
came to the Captain, and informed him,
that a perſon, anſwering the deſcription,
had been lately employed to teach Greek
in the Univerſity. Struck with the idea,
that the bog-trotter might have paſſed himself
for a Greek ſcholar, whereas he understood
only Iriſh, he ſet out to the University,
to make enquiry. Knocking at
the door of the principal, he was admitted;
and, being ſeated, addreſſed him as
follows: Said he, ſir, a pedeſeque of mine,
(for talking to the rector of a college, he
did not chuſe to uſe the vulgar terms, waiter,
or bog-trotter,) a pedeſeque of mine,
whom I have found uſeful, ſave that he is
ſomewhat troubleſome in pretending to
places of appointment for which he is not
[Page 093]
qualified; a thing, by the bye, too common
in this country; where men, without
the aid of academic knowledge, thruſt
themſelves into places requiring great
learning and ability: (This he ſaid to
ſlatter the man of letters; as if a man could
know but little, that had not been forged
or furbiſhed at his ſchool): I ſay, this pedeseque
of mine, has abſconded for ſome
days; and I have been able to collect no
account of him until laſt evening, that a
perſon, having read an advertiſement of
mine in the gazette, came to me, and informed,
that one, anſwering the description
I had given, both as to appearance
and accompliſhments, had been lately employed,
as profeſſor of the Greek language,
in this Univerſity. Now, though I well
know this Pady, as I may call him, to understand
no Greek; yet, as he ſpeaks Irish,
and has much aſſurance, and little
honeſty in matters where his ambition is
concerned, I did not know, but he might
have impoſed himſelf upon you, for a
Greek ſcholar, and obtained a professorship.
The principal made anſwer, that it was
true that a perſon from Ireland had been
lately employed in that capacity; and that
[Page 094]
ſhould he be diſcovered to be an inpoſtor,
it would be uſing the univerſity very ill.
The Captain thought ſo too; and taking
it for granted that it was Teague, expressed
his ſurpriſe that they had not examined
him, before he was admitted; or at
leaſt had ſuch proof by letters as would
have had aſcertained his being qualified.
The principal obſerved, that as to examination
they had no one at hand to examine,
as there were none of the truſtees
or profeſſors of other branches in the university
underſtood Greek; as for himſelf
he did not, having not ſtudied it in early
life, and for a ſeries of years, having giving
himſelf to politics and mathematics;
ſo that unleſs they could ſend out for a
Roman Catholic prieſt, or a Scotch clergyman,
there was none to examine. The
improbability of any perſon paſſing himself,
above all things, for a maſter of the
Greek language on the ſcore of understanding
Iriſh, was ſuch, that it never came into
their heads to ſuſpect it, ſo as to demand
letters.
Had you known ſaid the Captain, this
bog-trotter of mine, (here he forgot the
word pedeſeque) as well as I do, you
would not be ſurpriſed at his attempting
[Page 095]
any thing; and that he ſhould be now in
your academy giving Greek lectures, understanding
nothing but the vernacular
tongue of his own country. Here he gave
an account of his ſetting up for Congress,
&c. as explained in the preceding
part of this narrative.
However, wiſhing to ſee the raggamuffin
that he might unkennel him, he was
accompanied by the principal to the chamber
of the pſeudo profeſſor, conſidering as
he went along, in what manner he ſhould
accoſt him; whether he ſhould break out
upon him with a direct invective, or with
ironical words; ſuch as, Mr. Profeſſor,
you muſt be a very learned man, not only
to underſtand Iriſh, but Greek: but perhaps
the Greek and Iriſh language are
much the ſame. It muſt be ſo; for I know
that a few days ago, you did not understand
a word of this, and to acquire a dead
language in ſuch a ſhort time would be impossible,
unleſs the living tongue was a
good deal a-kin to it. But I had never
underſtood that Iriſh had any more affinity
to the language of Athens and Sparta,
than the Erſe, or the German, or the
Welch; however, we muſt live and learn,
[Page 096]
as the ſaying is; you have ſhewn us what
we never knew before.
Conning a ſpeech of this ſort in his own
mind, with a view to divert the principal,
and amuſe himſelf with Teague, he entered
the chamber of the profeſſor; who ſat
in an elbow chair with Thucidydes before
him.
What was the ſurpriſe of the Captain
to find that it was not Teague.
In fact, it was a perſon not wholly unlike
him, eſpecially in a hinge of the
brogue which he betrayed in his diſcourſe;
for though the profeſſor was really a man
of education, having been early ſent to St.
Omer's, where he had ſtudied, being intended
for a prieſt, and underſtood not
only the Greek, and Latin, but ſpoke
French; yet in the pronunciation of the
Engliſh tongue, he had that prolongation
of the ſound of a word, and articulation
of the vowel O, which conſtitutes what
is vulgarly called the brogue, as being
the pronunciation of the native Iriſh; who
being a depreſſed people, are moſt of them
poor, and wear a kind of mean ſhoe, which
they call a brogue.
After an apology to the profeſſor for
miſtaking him for a certain Teague
[Page 097]
O'Regan, whom he had in his employment,
at the requeſt of the profeſſor, the principal
and the Captain took ſeats.
The profeſſor ſaid, His name was not
O'Regan, being O'Dougherty; but he
knew the O'Regans very well in Ireland.
There was a Pady O'Regan in the ſame
claſs with him at St. Omer's, when he read
Craike. That he was a good ſcholar, and
underſtood Craike very well; and he would
be glad if he was over in this country to
tach Craike here; it appeared to be a very
ſcarce language; but he had become a
praſte, and was now a miſſionary to Paraguay,
in Sout-America.
The Captain punning on his pronunciation
of the word Greek; and willing to
amuſe himſelf a little with the profeſſor,
could not help obſerving, that he was under
a miſtake, as to the ſcarceneſs of the
Craike language in theſe States. That
there were whole tribes who ſpoke the
Craike language; there was that of the
heron, and the raven, and ſeveral other
fowls. A German profeſſor, who was present,
apprehending the Captain to be under
a miſtake, and willing to correct him,
obſerved—It is, ſaid he, the Creek language,
that the profeſſor means. As to
[Page 098]
that, ſaid the Captain, it is alſo ſpoken
plentifully in America. There is a whole
nation of Indians, on the borders of South
Carolina and Georgia, that ſpeak the Creek
language; men, women, and children.
The profeſſor knowing more of the classics
than of the geography of theſe United
States, and of the heathen gods more
than of the aborigines of this country, expressed
aſtoniſhment. If what you tell me
be a trut, ſaid he, it is a crate diſcovery:
perhaps deſe may have de fragments o' de
books o' de philoſophers and poets that
are loſt, and de profeſſors cannot come
acraſs in deir own countries; but I have
tought dat de Craike language was ſpoke
only in de Morea, and a little in Ruſſia,
and Conſtantinople.
The Captain aſſured him, the principal
favouring the miſtake, by a grave face,
and bowing as the Captain ſpoke, that it
was abſolutely the vernacular language of
theſe people.
Why den, ſaid the other, do dey not
get profeſſors from amongſt deſe, to tache
Craike in deir Colleges?
Becauſe, ſaid the Captain, we have been
heretofore on hoſtile terms with theſe Indians;
and it is but of late that we have
[Page 099]
made a peace. But now, it is to be presumed,
we ſhall have it in our power to
procure from them able teachers.
The profeſſor was alarmed at this; as
ſuppoſing it would ſupercede the neceſſity
of his ſervices; or, at leaſt, much reduce
the price of his tuition. He could have
wiſhed he had not come to this quarter of
the world; and was almoſt ready, in his
own mind, to bind up what he had, and
go back to Clogher.
So ended their viſit to the Univerſity,
and the Captain withdrew.
[Page 100]
CHAP. VII.
Containing an Anecdote.
IT may be thought a prepoſterous idea,
that it could, for a moment, be supposed
poſſible, that the pedeſeque could
have had the aſſurance to paſs himſelf for
a Grecian. But I had it from the Marquis
de la Luzerne, that a friend of his, who
was in ſome public capacity at Moſcow;
and was entertained by a principal inhabitant
of the city, was aſked by him, to viſit
an academy, where the French language
was taught; and at which his ſon, a young
lad, then was. What was the ſurpriſe
of the gentleman, to find a Pady from
Cork, who underſtood not a ſingle word of
French, or Latin, teaching an unknown
gibberiſh, which moſt probably was Iriſh?
[Page 101]
CHAP. VIII.
OUR Chevalier was now at his wits
end; not being able to conceive of
any other place of amuſement, in which
Teague might be found; when all at
once it came into his head, (led to it,
perhaps, from the reference, in his late
converſation, to the Indian tribes,) that
probably he might have fallen in with the
Indian treaty-man, and have been prevailed
upon to perſonate a chief. It appeared
to him therefore adviſeable to go
directly to the ſecretary at war, to know
if any party of Indians had been lately
there to negociate a treaty.
Being introduced, and after ſome ceremony,
accoſting the ſecretary, he gave
him to underſtand why it was that he had
the honour to wait upon him, viz. that he
had a ſervant of the name of Teague O'Regan,
an Iriſhman, who had been abſent
ſome days, and that from a circumſtance
which happened in the way to the city, he
[Page 102]
had reaſon to ſuſpect, he might have been
picked up by a certain Indian treaty-man,
to ſupply the place of a Welch blackſmith,
who had died, and had paſſed for a chief
of the Kickapoos.
The ſecretary was a good deal chagrined,
believing the Captain to be ſome wag that
had come to make this enquiry by way of
burleſque on the Indian treaties; and
with ſome irritation of mind, gave him
to underſtand, that there had been no Indian
treaty-man, or Kickapoo chief there;
that no treaty had been held with the Indians
for above a month paſt, ſince the
king of the Togamogans had drawn goods;
but treaty or no treaty, it ill became him
in the appearance of a gentleman, to throw
a burleſque upon government, by insinuating
that his Iriſhman could be impoſed
upon them for a chief.
I mean no burleſque, ſaid the Captain,
a little irritated in his turn; I have had too
much trouble to keep him from the Indian
treaty-man that was coming here, to be
diſpoſed to jeſt with ſo ſerious an affair.
The hair-breadth eſcape of going to Congress,
or being licenced as a preacher, or
being choſen as a member of the philosophical
ſociety, was nothing to this, as it
[Page 103]
was ſo difficult to guard againſt it, the Indian
recruiters imitating ſavages, not only
in their dreſs and painting, but in the dexterity
to way-lay and ſurpriſe.
I wiſh youto know, ſir, ſaid the secretary,
that I comprehend your burleſque very
well. But though you and others may
miſrepreſent our policy in the Indian treaties,
it is baſe irony and ridicule to insinuate
that the Indians we treat with, are
not chiefs.
Chiefs, or no chiefs, ſaid the Capain, I
am not ſaying, nor care; but only wiſh to
know if you have been inſtituting any
treaty with my Teague, who has been absent
ſome days.
I will be much obliged to you to withdraw
from my office, ſaid the ſecretary.
I ſhall withdraw, ſaid the Captain; and
not with that reſpect for your understanding
and politeneſs, which I could have
wiſhed to entertain. I have addreſſed you
with civility; and I was entitled to a civil
anſwer; but I ſee the “inſolence of office,”
is well enumerated, by the poet, amongſt
the evils that make us ſick of life. Your
humble ſervant Monſieur Secretary; I ſhall
trouble you no further.
[Page 104]
CHAP. IX.
RETURNING to the Indian Queen,
a play bill, for the evening, had announced
the performance of the tragedy
of Macbeth, and a farce called the Poor
Solider. A party of the gentlemen, from
the public houſe, had taken a box; and
the Captain agreed to go with them to
the play. Having delivered their tickets,
and being admitted to the box, it ſtruck
the Captain to caſt his eye upon the pit
and galleries, and obſerve if he could any
way deſcry the phyſiognomy of Teague.
As before, when with the ſame view he
ſurveyed the members of Congreſs, he
could diſcover ſeveral that a good deal resembled
him; but yet not the identical
perſon. The curtain being now drawn
the play began. Nothing material occured
during the performance of the tragedy,
ſave that when the witches came in, there
was one in her cap and broomſtick whoſe
features a good deal reſembled the Irishman's,
and who, had ſhe not been an old
[Page 105]
woman and a witch, might have paſſed for
Teague. The Captain was ſtruck with the
reſemblance of feature, and long frame of
the bog-trotter, covered with a ſhort gown
and petticoat; and borrowing a glaſs from
one that ſat in the box with him, endeavoured
to reconnoitre more perfectly, and
could have ſworn that it was the mother,
or ſiſter of Teague, that had juſt came
from Ireland, and joined the company.
The tragedy being ended, the farce began
to be acted, and who ſhould come forward
in the character of Darby, but the
long ſought for Teague. The fact was,
he had before appeared in the tragedy, in
the character of an over-grown red-headed
witch. It was more natural for him to
appear in the character of Darby his own
countryman; for he ſpake with the brogue
naturally, and not by imitation. The managers
had had him all the while of his
abſence from the Captain, under tuition,
teaching him his part, which was not difficult
to do; the manner and pronunciation
being already his own.
It was this had induced the managers to
take him up, as a ſubſtitute; the perſon
who actually played the part of Darby, being,
at this time, out of the way. As the
[Page 106]
natural ſqual of a pig is ſuperior to an imitation
of it; ſo it was allowed by the audiance,
that Teague exceeded the pſeudo Irishman
that uſually performed this part.
All were pleaſed but the Captain, whoſe
ſenſe of propriety could ſcarcely reſtrain
him from throwing his cane at the begtrotter.
Thought he with himſelf, what
avails it that I prevented him from taking
a ſeat in a legiſlative body, or from preaching,
or being a philoſopher; if after all,
he has relinquiſhed my ſervice, and turned
player; a thing, no doubt, fitter for him,
than the being a ſenator, or clergyman,
or philoſopher; becauſe he can appear in
ſome low character in the farce or comedy,
and come off tolerably enough. For though
amongſt the dramatis perſonæ of learned
bodies, there are Tony Lumpkins, and
Darby M`Faddins in abundance, yet there
ought to be none; and Teague had better
be on the ſtage than in ſuch capacities,
ſince he muſt be ſome where. But to
leave me without notice, after all my civilities
to him, is ungrateful, and deſerves
all that I can ſay bad concerning him. I
ſhall give myſelf no farther trouble on this
head; but let him take his courſe. I muſt
endeavour to find another ſervant who can
ſupply his place.
[Page ]
BOOK VI.
CHAP. I. THE foregoing had been the reflections
of the Captain during the exhibition
of the farce. But the play being ended,
and having come home, the next day he
began to put his reſolution in practice;
and to think how he could ſupply himſelf
with another ſervant. It ſtruck him to
purchaſe a negro; and mentioning this to
the company, at breakfaſt, at the Indian
Queen, one of the people called Quakers,
who was preſent, and overheard the
converſation, made an apology for the
liberty he took in making ſome objections.
Friend, ſaid he, thee appears to
be a diſcreet man, from thy behaviour,
and converſation; and if thee will not be
offended, I would aſk if thee canſt
[Page 108]
reconcile it with thy principles, to keep a
ſlave. As to that, ſaid the Captain, I have
thought upon the ſubject, and do not ſee
any great harm in the matter. If we look
to inanimate nature, we ſhall find, that
the great law is Force. The Carteſians
call it preſſure and ſuction: The Newtonians
call it attraction and gravitation.
The ſun, the largeſt body in the univerſe,
endeavours to draw all towards it; while
the leſſer globes ſtruggle to fly off at a
tangent. The denſe air takes place of the
rare; and the heavier particles of water
cauſe the lighter to recede. The tall oak
overſhades the under wood. There is a
predominancy, and ſubordination in all
things. In the animal creation, the weaker
is always ſubject to the ſtrong; who even
devour them, when the fleſh ſuits their
appetite: and the very teeth and jaw-bone
of carnivorous animals, ſhew the intention
of nature, that they ſhould make a prey
of living creatures. Do you blame yourselves,
when you ſubjugate elephants, or
horſes, or oxen of the plough, to your
uſe? What right have you to invade the
liberty of a playful young colt, more than
of an African inhabitant? Or have you
not as good a right to take up a negro, and
[Page 109]
put him to your work, as you have to cut a
calf, and manufacture him for the draft?
In this caſe, there is a difference, ſaid
the Quaker; a negro is a human creature,
and poſſeſſes all the natural rights of man.
That may be, ſaid the Captain. But
what are the natural rights of men? Are
they not finally reſolvable, as in the inanimate
world, into power on the one hand,
and weakneſs on the other.
Who is it that abſtains from dominion,
when he has it in his power to aſſert it?
Power is the great law of nature; and nothing
but the pacts or conventions of society
can contravene it. I ſhould think myself
juſtifiable in making any man a ſlave to
anſwer my purpoſes, provided I treated him
well while he was ſuch. This I take to be
the only condition which the law of reaſon
annexes to the enjoyment of ſuch property.
I may be warranted in taking, and managing
an animal of the horſe kind; but it is
my indiſputable duty not to abuſe him by
cauſing him to ſuffer famine, or endure
too much toil. The ſame with any other
animal that I enſlave; there is a tacit condition
annexed to the grant which the law
of nature gives, viz. That the ſervice be
exacted with moderation; and proper
[Page 110]
nouriſhment be provided. I admit alſo,
that humanity would dictate that a ſlave
ought to be conſulted as much as is consistent
with my convenience. For inſtance;
if I had the Grand Turk in my power, as
he has been accuſtomed to a ſoft and effeminate
way of living, it would be hard to
put him all at once to maul rails, or clearing
out meadow ground, or the like; or if
it ſhould fall in my way to have Catherine
of Ruſſia in that capacity, as ſhe is a women
of an elevated mind, it would be inhumane
to put her to the loweſt drudgery,
ſuch as ſcrubing out rooms, and carrying
water from the pump; but rather indulge
her if I could afford it, with a more eaſy
employment, eſpecially as ſhe is an old woman,
of knitting ſtockings and carding
wool. There is no man would be more
diſpoſed to treat a ſlave with tenderneſs
than myſelf; but to deny me of my right
altogether of making one, or of trafficking
for one when made, is carrying the matter
too far.
So much for the right of enſlaving. But
if we put it on the principle of what will
conduce to the aggregate happineſs of
mankind, we ſhall find it to be, that there
ſhould be maſter and ſervant, or in other
[Page 111]
words, owner and ſlave. The economy
of nature illuſtrates this, in the ſubſerviency
of one thing to another: But, independent
of any illuſtration, it muſt be known
on reflection, and is felt in experience, that
all are not competent to all things; and
in the caſe of temporary ſervants, much
time is taken up in contracting with them
for their remanence; and it is a considerable
time before they get into the habit
of our ſervice; and having it in their power
to retire from us, when inclination may
direct, there is an inſecurity in the attachment.
But as the ſlave has the master
always to provide for him; ſo maſter
has the ſlave always to ſubſerve him: and
thus, by a conjoint intereſt, the felicity
of both is promoted, and the ſum of human
happineſs increaſed. Hence it is,
that moſt nations have made uſe of ſlaves.
The patriarch Abraham, had threeſcore
and ten ſervants born in his houſe. What
were theſe but ſlaves? The Jews, his descendants,
had bond-men, and bond-women:
Were not theſe ſlaves? The Roman
ſlaves were more in number than the citizens;
and amongſt the Greeks, the moſt
virtuous of them, viz. the Spartans, kept
in their ſervice the moſt depreſſed of all
[Page 112]
ſlaves, the Helotes; who, when we consider
the black broth, the food, and severe
life of the maſters, muſt have lived
on poor fare, and in a laborious ſervice
indeed.
But it may be ſaid, that example of
wrong never conſtitutes right. Grant it;
but if you examine the capacities, and even
inclinations of men, will you not find,
that ſome are qualified only to be ſlaves.
They have not underſtanding to act for
themſelves. Nor do all love freedom, even
when they have it. Do not many surrender
it; and prefer kiſſing a great man's
backſide, to being independent? It is not
always, even from the views of advantage,
that men are ſycophants; but from an
abſtract pleaſure in being drawn into the
vortex of others. There is a pleaſure in
ſlavery, more than unenſlaved men know.
Why is it, that, even after the convulſion
of a revolution in a government, in favour
of liberty, there is a natural tendency
to ſlavery; and it finally terminates in
this point. The fact is, a ſtate of liberty
is an unnatural ſtate. Like a bone out of
place, the mind, in an individual, or political
capacity, ſeeks the condition of a
maſter or ſervant; avoiding, as the
[Page 113]
particular propenſity may be, the one or the other.
There cannot be a greater proof that
this is founded in nature, than the common
moral obſervation, that the greateſt tyrants,
that is, the worſt maſters, make the moſt abject
ſlaves: And, vice verſa, that the moſt
ſubſervient of mankind, when you give
them power, make the worſt uſe of it: All
this becauſe, in theſe caſes, the perſons are
miſplaced, and not in their proper ſtations.
Julius Ceſar made a humane generous master;
but he would have made a very intriguing,
troubleſome valet de chambre. It
would have been impoſſible to have got any
good of him. On the other hand, Tiberius
would have made an excellent hoſtler, and
taken a beating, with as much reſignation,
as a houſe beagle, who is uſed to it. So
that it evidently is the proviſion of nature,
that there are materials of ſlavery; and
the fault of thoſe, whom ſhe intends for
maſters, if they do not make ſlaves. But
as it is difficult to determine, a priori, who
are intended for ſlavery or freedom, ſo
as to make a judicious diſtribution, things
muſt take their courſe; and the rule be,
catch, catch can; and every man have a
ſervant when he can get one. It is in
vain to be ſqueamiſh, and ſtick at colour.
[Page 114]
It is true, I would rather have a white
perſon, if ſuch could be got; as I prefer
white to black; eſpecially in the ſummer
ſeaſon, as being a more light and airy colour.
Thy reaſoning, ſaid the Quaker, is more
rhetorical than logical; and thy analogies
of nature, and hiſtorical proofs, cannot
ſo far oppreſs the light within, as to make
me think, that it is given to thee, or me,
to make ſlaves of our ſpecies.
As to that, ſaid the Captain, I am not
clear that a negro is of our ſpecies. You
may claim kindred with him, if you
pleaſe; but I ſhall not.
I ſhall not diſpute that with thee, ſaid
the Quaker: for I perceive thee does not
give credit to what the book ſays of the
firſt man, and his deſcendants: But will
thee not grant me, that the African,
though not of the ſame ſtock, is, at leaſt
a man; that is of the human genus,
though the ſpecies of the white and the
black may not be the ſame; if ſo, haſt
thou more right to enſlave him, than he
thee?
Grant it, ſaid the Captain; for my reasoning
tends to that, and reſolves the right
into the power.
[Page 115]
If ſo, ſaid the Quaker, thee may be the
ſlave in thy turn.
Doubtleſs, ſaid the Captain; and it is
not of ſo much conſequence who is ſlave,
as that there be one. It is better that the
foot be foot, and the head be head; but
if there is a converſion, nevertheleſs, let
there be head and foot. It is neceſſary
that there be domination and ſubjection,
in order to produce a compound improvement
and advantage.
You could ſee by the Quaker's countenance,
that he thought the reaſoning sophistical;
but as he did not know very well
what he could ſay more, he was ſilent.
[Page 116]
CHAP. II.
Containing Remarks.
IT is thought by ſome, the Captain was
not ſerious in thus advocating the cauſe
of ſlavery. Be that as it may, he omitted
ſome ſerious arguments, that naturally
preſent themſelves on that ſide on which
he reaſoned: For inſtance, it ſtrikes me
at firſt bluſh, that there can be no moral
wrong in catching a young African, and
bringing him away from his own happiness
to purſue ours. For if there were, is
it to be ſuppoſed, that humane and juſt
perſons, would promote and ſupport the evil,
by purchaſing ſuch negro, or retaining
him, and his offspring, when purchased.
For, on the principle that the receiver
is the thief, or, to ſpeak more strictly,
a thief, the purchaſer of the African
takes the guilt along with the poſſeſſion;
and, in the language of the law, every act
of retainer is a new treſpaſs. For the evil
[Page 117]
of the original act, if there be evil in it,
cannot be rendered pure by the filtration
of purchaſe, and retaining. So that the
holder of the negro, in the tenth transmission,
is an aider, or abettor, of the original
act of taking; if I may uſe the word
aider, or abettor, in a caſe of treſpaſs;
where, by the definition of the law, all
who any ways concur in the act, and further
it, are principals. The holder of a
negro muſt, therefore, look back to that
act which firſt made him, or an anceſtor,
a ſlave; and if he cannot juſtify this, he
cannot juſtify the retaining him in servitude:—
What a conſequence muſt this be!
There is no man that pretends to humanity,
much leſs to religion, would be ſafe
in being the poſſeſſor of a ſlave. The only
way therefore to get rid of the difficulty is
to juſtify, ab origine, traffic in all ſuch property.
That it is juſtifiable I have no doubt.
Is there any religious denomination, except
the fanatical people called Quakers,
that have made it a term of communion
not to hold a ſlave. In admitting to
church privileges, I have never heard,
of the queſtion aſked, Have you any negroes,
and do you keep ſlaves? If it was
[Page 118]
a matter of conſcience, would not conscientious
perſons themſelves make it.
The aſſemblies or ſynods of the Presbyterian
church, or conventions of the Episcopal,
in America, have ſaid nothing on
this ſubject. Is an omiſſion of this kind
reconcilable with the idea, that it is a
natural evil, or a moral wrong.
In the phrenzy of the day, ſome weak
minded powers, in Europe, begin to consider
what is called the African trade as a
moral wrong, and to provide for a gradual
abolition of it. If they will aboliſh
it, I approve of its being done gradually;
becauſe, numbers being embarked in this
trade, it muſt ruin them all at once, to
deſiſt from it. On this principle, I have
always thought it a defect in the criminal
codes of moſt nations, not giving licence
to the perpetrators of offences, to proceed,
for a limited time, in larcenies, burglaries,
&c. until they get their hands out of uſe
to theſe purſuits, and in uſe to others. For
it muſt be greatly inconvenient to thieves
and cut-throats, who have engaged in this
way of life, and ſpent time, and expended
money, and run great riſks in acquiring
ſkill in their employment, to be obliged
all at once to withdraw their hands, and lay
[Page 119]
aſide picking locks, and apply themselves
to induſtry in other ways, for a livelihood.
The law of Pennſylvania on this principle,
has provided for the gradual abolition
of the ſlavery of negroes. For thoſe who
have got them could not do without them,
no more than a robber could do without
the money that he takes, being preſſed by
ſome great neceſſity to make uſe of that
expedient to recruit his purſe. All thoſe
therefore who have been originally taken
from the coaſt of Africa, and deprived of
liberty, or deſcended from ſuch, and inheriting
ſlavery, when recorded agreeably
to the act in queſtion, continue ſlaves, and
for life, and their offspring to a certain
period. But were we to entramel the
caſe with political or moral doubts respecting
the original right of caption, and subjugation,
the difficulty would exiſt of reconciling
it with natural right to hold a
ſlave for a moment, even whether the law
ſanctioned it or not; in which caſe we ſhould
find it neceſſary to go as far as the fanatics in
religion, and ſet our ſlaves free altogether.
It is from not duly attending to this circumstance,
that abſtract reaſoners talk of
abolition; a doctrine which, however
[Page 120]
absurd, is becoming the whim of the day;
and the phrenſy ſeems to gain ſuch ground,
that I would not wonder if they would
next aſſert that it is unlawful to uſe the servitude
of horſes, or other beaſts of burden,
as having a natural right, to live in
the fields, and be as free as mankind. The
beſt way to avoid extremes, is to check
the principle; I hold the right of abſolute
ſubjugation, of whites, blacks, and browns
of all nations, againſt gradual abolition,
or any abolition whatſoever. This being
the only conſiſtent principle, ſhort of an
abſolute emancipation, made inſtantly; for
in no mean is there reaſon, or a reſt for
conſcience.
That it is of importance to ſettle the consciences
of ſober minded perſons in Pennsylvania,
clergymen, and members of the
Preſbyterian church eſpecially, who have
negroes, muſt be well known from that
tenderneſs of conſcience, for which ſuch
are remarkable. Some, indeed, carry their
ideas of the extent of duties ſo far, as not
to omit grace to meat, or the formal worship
of prayer, reading chapters, and singing
pſalms, on the ſet occaſions, on any
conſideration whatſoever; what is more,
will not ſhave a beard, on the Sabbath day,
[Page 121]
for a cow. Now, ſhould they, by any
means, come once to think of the wickedness
of enſlaving men, there would be no
getting them to keep a negro. For thoſe
of this denomination; and, indeed, moſt,
or all others of the Chriſtian, hold, that
the Africans, though of a ſable race, is
of their own ſpecies; being deſcended
from Adam. This being the caſe, a ſlight
matter, the bare directing their attention to
the ſubject, would alarm pious people, and
lead them to the favourite maxim of the
goſpel—“Do to others, as you would
have others to do to you.”
As oppoſed to the enfranchiſement of negroes,
generally, and in Pennſylvania in
particular, I have been under apprehensions,
that ſome of our young lawyers in
the courts, might plead the conſtitution of
the ſtate, by which it is eſtabliſhed that
“all men are born equally free and independent.”
Now admitting that a negro is
a man, how ſhall any maſter retain him as
a ſlave? On a habeus corpus, he muſt be
ſet at liberty. At leaſt I cannot conceive
how the judge could remand him to his
drudgery. The conſtitution is the law
paramount, and framed by a convention of
the people, recognizing the original right
[Page 122]
of freedom in a negro, allowing him to
be a man; and caries us above the act of
the legiſlature for the gradual abolition,
&c. which by implication ſeems to ſuppoſe
that negroes may be ſlaves:—
An implication inconſiſtent with the power
exerciſed by the law. For if negroes
were ſlaves, and ſo the property of thoſe
who claimed them, could the legiſlature
affect that property, without indemnification
to the maſters?
I ſhall ſay no more on this head, leſt I
ſhould furniſh hints to pettifoggers, who
may make an ill uſe of their information.
[Page 123]
CHAP. III.
JUST at this moment a waiter coming
in, told him there was a perſon without,
that is, in the bar room, who wiſhed
to ſpeak with him. Going out, who ſhould
ſtrike his optics, but Teague.
The fact was, being elated with the success
of his performance on the ſtage, attributing
that to art which was nature itself,
he had counted more upon his accomplishments
than he ought to have done,
and had made advances to the miſtreſs of
the manager, who was alſo an actreſs, and
not greatly coveting an amour with the
bog-trotter, made a merit of the circumstance,
to induce an opinion of fidelity, and
informed the manager of the preſumption
of the Iriſhman. The manager in the
moſt unbecoming manner, without either
citation, examination, trial, conviction,
or judgment, but laying aſide all forms of
law, had inſtituted an original proceſs of
[Page 124]
himſelf, and laying hold of a horſe-whip,
had applied this implement to the back and
ſhoulders of Teague, and as the Iriſhman
made an effort of reſiſtance at the firſt onset,
the manager had been under the necessity,
by turning the but end of the whip,
to knock him down, which he did by a
ſtroke above the left eye-brow, which not
only bereft him of ſenſes for the preſent,
but a diſcolouration of the eye for ſome
days, and a ſcar probably his whole life
after.
It was this incident had induced him
to leave the theatre, and brought him
back to the Captain, whom he now accosted
in the following manner: Dear maſter,
for the love of ſhalvation, forgive a poor
ſharvant that has been killed this marning
with a great cudgel, juſt for nothing at all,
but not plaſing a damned whore, that
wanted me to ſtale the manager's cloathing,
and go off wid her. This is all that
a poor ſharvant gets by being haneſt; but
by ſhant Patrick, and the holy craſs, it is
what I deſerve for leaving the ſarvice of
a good maſter, as your anour, and taking
up with bog-tratters, and ſtage players,
that would ſooner take a cup of wine than
the holy ſacrament, and get drunk every
[Page 125]
night in de wake, and go to de devil
head foremoſt; but if your honour, dear
maſter, will forgive the paſt, and my running
away, and laving you, I will come
back again, and ſarve you to the day of
judgment, or any langer time that your
honour plaſes, and clane your boots and
ſpurs, and rub down the bay harſe; the
poor old crature, how aften I have tought
of him when I was in my rambles and he
was a ſlape, laſte they ſhould chare him of
his oats, and give him nather hay nor
ſtraw to ate; for I always liked to take
care of a good harſe, and a good maſter;
and aften tought of your honour, when
I was among the bog-tratters of the ſtage,
and gave you a good name, and was always
talking of you and forgot my part,
and put the managers in a paſſion, who
fell upon me, and bate me like a dog.
The Captain ſaw the inconſiſtency in the
relation; one while alleging the tale bearing
of the miſtreſs, as the occaſion of it;
again, a deficiency in the recital of his
part; but expecting no truth from the Irishman,
cared very little how it came to
paſs. The principal thing that occupied
his thoughts, was whether to receive the
bog-trotter, or diſmiſs him. He reflected
[Page 126]
with himſelf on the trouble he had had
with him, on his various pretenſions to
advancement; his uneaſineſs of mind, and
fatigue of body, for ſeveral days paſt, in
examining ſtews, methodiſtical conventicles,
rumaging philoſophical ſocieties, attending
elections, and liſtening to the debates
of Congreſs, to ſee if he could any
where obſerve his phyſiognomy, or distinguish
his brogue. He could not think
of ſubjecting himſelf to ſuch uncertainty
in the attendance of any ſervant, with ſuch
prepoſterous ideas, as being a legiſlator,
philoſopher, &c. Again, he conſidered,
that probably this laſt chaſtiſement he had
received, might have a good effect, in curing
him of the freaks of his ambition;
and a mind broken and reduced by disappointment,
is in a mellow ſtate, and more
capable of receiving the ſeeds of good advice,
than a mind full of vanity or pride,
that has never yet received blows. Deliberating
on theſe grounds, his humanity
prevailed, and he determined to receive the
raggamuffin into favour.
This being ſettled, and learning from
the Iriſhman in what manner he had been
inveigled, and drawn away by the manager,
to go upon the ſtage; and that it was
[Page 127]
only becauſe Teague had made advances
to a woman that was a whore already,
that the manager had made ſuch an attack
upon his perſon, he wiſhed to puniſh him,
if it ſhould appear to be within the province
of the law to do it. Accordingly,
inquiring what principal lawyer there was
in that city, was informed of a certain counsellor
Grab. Taking Teague with him,
he ſet out to conſult this gentleman.
Counſellor Grab was in his office, amongſt
large ſhelves of books, or ſhelves of large
books; not, as the Latins ſay, Co-opertus,
aut obrutus, ſed comitatus libris; that is,
In the midſt of his books. He had on a
pair of ſpectacles, not ſo much on account
of age, as to make the client believe that
he laboured under a premature want of
ſight, from much reading; or, becauſe a
pair of lenſes, magnifying the organs of
viſion, gives the appearance of a larger eye,
which has a good effect on the perſon consulting,
impreſſing the idea of a broader
view of things that are before it.
Entering, the Captain addreſſed himſelf
to the counſellor, and gave him the outlines
of the injury done to Teague; The
counſellor, in the mean time, ſuſpending
his reading in a large book, which he had
[Page 128]
before him, printed in Saxon letter, and
raiſing his head, until the glaſſes of his
ſpectacles were brought to bear upon the
phyſiognomy of the Captain.
The Captain having finiſhed his account,
referred him to Teague, the ſubject
of the battery, for a a more particular
detail of the circumſtances. Teague was
glad of the opportunity of ſpeaking before
a learned lawyer, and was beginning to
give a relation of the whole affair; but
the Captain ſtopped him, bidding him wait
until the lawyer ſhould himſelf requeſt him
to begin. The lawyer was ſilent: after
having reconnoitered with his glaſſes, one
while the Captain, another while Teague,
he dropped his optics, and began to read
again. The Captain, thinking he had not
been ſufficiently underſtood, recommenced
the narration, and gave an account of
what he himſelf had ſuffered from the inveigling
and detaining his ſervant, and
the viſible injury which the ſervant himself
had ſuſtained. The lawyer was ſtill
ſilent; and, though he had eyed him while
ſpeaking, as a Tuſcan aſtronomer would
the moon, yet he applyed himſelf again to
the reading the black letter, that was before
him.
[Page 129]
The Captain thought it ſtrange treatment;
and was, for ſome time, at a loſs
to know what to think of the matter. But
recollecting, opportunely, that the circumstance
of a fee had been omitted, he took
out his purſe, and threw down two dollars.
The lawyer ſeemed a little moved,
but caſt his eye again upon the black letter.
Finding the two dollars not sufficient,
the Captain threw down two more.
The counſellor raiſed his head from the
book, and you might diſcern ſome dilitation
of the muſcles of the face, as bespeaking
an approaching opening of the
voice; but ſtill there was ſilence; and
might have been to this hour, had not the
Captain recollected, at this moment, what
he had all along forgot, that half a joe
was the fee of a lawyer. Doubling, therefore,
the four dollars that were already
down, the lawyer came to his voice, the
organs of his ſpeech were looſed, and taking
the glaſſes from his eyes, he gave his
counſel as follows:
Said he, You have a double remedy in
this caſe; againſt the manager who inveigled,
and againſt the ſervant himſelf:
Againſt the ſervant, on the act of Assembly,
if indented; at common law, on the
[Page 130]
contract to ſerve. For even a ſervant at
will, and not engaged for any ſpecial
time, is not at liberty to deſert the ſervice
of his maſter, without reaſonable notice
firſt given. So that you may have your
remedy againſt the ſervant, in the firſt
inſtance, by bringing the matter before
the court of quarter ſeſſions; and having
time put upon him, as the phraſe is, for
this dereliction of your ſervice; or, an
action on the contract, expreſs or implied,
as the caſe may be, wherein he ſhall repair,
in damages, the loſs ſuſtained.
The bog-trotter was alarmed at the idea
of an action againſt him; and looking
wiſtfully at his maſter, exclaimed; Dear
maſter, will you trow de law upon me,
dat am as innocent as a ſhild unborn; and
would go to death and damnation for you.
Dear maſter, I ſuffered enough by de cudgel
of dat player, for all de running away
I have done; and, God love your ſhoul,
keep de law in its own place, and not let
it come acraſs a poor ſharvant, that has
nathing but as he works and trats about;
but let deſe grate big books of his honour
de lawyer, ſpake to de manager, for his
deceiving a poor ſharvant, and putting it
in his head to run away, and lave a good
[Page 131]
maſter; and his beating him with a grate
cudgel into the bargain.
I have no deſire, ſaid the Captain, to
purſue the bog-trotter; as he has made
acknowledgments for his fault; but would
want the utmoſt rigour of the law to be
put in force againſt the player.
You have alſo in this caſe a double remedy,
ſaid the counſellor; by proſecution
on the part of the ſervant, and on your
part. Nay, the ſervant himſelf has a double
remedy; for he may proſecute by indictment,
or bring his action of aſſault
and battery; or both. I would recommend
the action only; becauſe, where no indictment
is proſecuted, and the civil action
only brought, exemplary damages may be
given, as well as reparatory. For in the
civil action, it will affect the minds of a
jury, that the party has already ſuffered all
that is in the nature of puniſhment by a
criminal proceeding; and nothing remains
with them, but to give reparatory damages.
On the part of the maſter, two kinds
of action may be brought; either an action
of treſpaſs, vi et armis, laying a perquod
ſervitium amiſit; or ſimply an action
on the caſe, for the conſequential damage
of inveigling the ſervant.
[Page 132]
As to the number of remedies ſaid the
Captain, or the kind of them, I care very
little how many there are, or what they
are; I want only a good remedy; give
me a good ſwingeing one againſt the raſcal,
and I care very little what it is called.
I ſhall then, ſaid the counſellor, adviſe
ſimply an action on the caſe; and count generally
on the inveigling, and detaining,
and rendering unfit for ſervice while in
his power. In this mode, the whole circumstances
of the injury may be brought
together, and ſummed up into one point
of view; and enhancing the quantum of damages,
can expatiate on the value of your
ſervant, and the ſpecial occaſion you had
for his ſervice, at this particular juncture;
for I make no doubt he is a valuable servant;
and that it has been an almoſt irreparable
injury to you, to have been defrauded
of his ſervice at this time.
As to his value, ſaid the Captain, there
can be no doubt, not only as a ſervant,
but in other reſpects. I have been offered,
or at leaſt I ſuppoſe I could have got, an
hundred pounds for him, to be a member
of Congreſs, or to preach, or to go to
the Philoſophical Society, or to be an Indian
treaty-man; but have refuſed every
[Page 133]
propoſal made him, or me, for theſe purposes;
and now to have him kidnapped,
and taken off, without fee or reward, and
employed as an actor, and beat, and rendered
uſeleſs, at leaſt for ſome time, into
the bargain, is too much for any man to
put up with. If there is law in the land, let
it be put in force; and this man made
an example.
The counſellor had no need of spectacles,
to give himſelf the appearance of a
glaring and broad look, on this occaſion;
for the words of the Captain made him
ſtare ſufficiently, without the aid of a magnifying
medium, to enlarge his optics.
He began to take him for a madman;
at leaſt, in ſome degree, deranged in his
brain; to talk of his ſervant being in request
for a member of Congreſs, and the
like.
Yes, continued the Captain, he not only
inveigled away a ſervant, that was
thought fit to be a member of Congreſs,
and a preacher, and an Indian treaty-maker,
and a philoſopher, and what not;
but has kept me, theſe three days, trotting
after him, and trying to find him, at election
places, and in Congreſs boarding-houses,
and the hall where they have their
[Page 134]
debates, and churches, and pulpits, and
chambers of philoſophical ſocieties, and
profeſſorſhips, and where not; to ſee if
I could find him; while this manager had
him, in the mean time, at rehearſals,
teaching him the art of mimickry, for the
ſtage.
The counſellor, in the mean time, had
reflected with himſelf, that, whether madman,
or no madman, the Captain had
money, and might be a good client, let
his cauſe be what it would; and ſo composing
the muſcles of his face, ſeemed to
agree with him; and obſerve, that doubtless
the quality and capacity of the ſervant
would be taken into view, in eſtimating
the damages: That, if it appeared he was
not only fit ſtuff for a ſervant; but to be
advanced to ſuch eminent offices as theſe,
not only the inveigling the embryo legislator,
preacher, and philoſopher; but the
aſſaulting and beating him, and, by that
means, diſabling him from immediate service,
muſt be viewed in the light of an
atrocious injury, and inſure a verdict accordingly.
Very well, ſaid the Captain; and I ſhall
wiſh to have the matter determined as
ſpeedily as poſſible, as I may be but a few
[Page 135]
days in town; and, beſides, as the marks
are yet apparent on the face, and, I suppose,
back, of the bog-trotter, it will appear
to the judges, and jury, without the
trouble of witneſſes, what damage he has
ſuſtained.
The proceſs of law, ſaid the counſellor,
is tedious, but certain; you cannot expect
a trial, in this caſe, until the 3d or 4th
term; that is, nine months, or a year.
How ſo, ſaid the Captain? Becauſe, ſaid
the counſellor, it is now two months, or
upwards, before the court to which the
writ will be returnable. Even if a declaration
is then filed, the defendant may
imparl until the ſucceeding term, which
is three months; when if there is no demurer
general or ſpecial, a rule to plead
will be taken, which may not be put in
until the ſucceeding term of three months
again: At this term, if there is no replication,
rejoinder, ſurrejoinder, rebutter,
or ſurrebutter, to draw up and file,
while the defendant may crave a term, issue
will be joined, and at the next term
trial. But even after a verdict, there may
be the delay of a term, on a motion for a
new trial depending; ſo that in the law
[Page 136]
there is delay; but this delay is the price
of juſtice.
It is a price, ſaid the Captain, that I
will not give for it. If you will bring it
about in a ſhort time to have this fellow
flogged, even with half the ſtripes he has
given my ſervant, I ſhall not think the
half joe thrown away; but to be a year or
half a year about the buſineſs, is putting
the matter ſo far off, that it may as well
be omitted altogether. If you could only
get him ſentenced to take a kick or two
from my foot, or Teague's, before we leave
the city, I ſhould be ſatisfied.
The lex talionis, ſaid the counſellor,
makes no part of our law. You can punish
only in eſtate, not in perſon, for a
ſimple aſſault and battery, as this is. Do
you not hang a man for murder, ſaid the
Captain; and why not puniſh perſonally for
an aſſault and battery? Becauſe it is our
law, ſaid the counſellor; and, in a civil
action, the object is damages.
A civil action, and damages, are ſtrange
phraſes, ſaid the Captain; how can civility
and damages, be reconciled.
Theſe are technical terms, ſaid the
counſellor, which perſons, not of the prosession,
are at loſs to underſtand; but
[Page 137]
have, in themſelves, a diſtinct and sensible
meaning.
Let the terms mean what they will, ſaid
the Captain, it all comes to this at laſt—
There is no getting at the manager, under
a year, or two year's race for it; before
which time, Teague will have forgot
the abuſe he has received, and I my trouble
in running after a ſtrayed Iriſhman,
through this city; and, therefore, it may
be as well to give the matter up, and ſit
down with the loſs.
That as you pleaſe, ſaid the counſellor;
and putting on his ſpectacles, caſt his eye
again upon the black letter.
The Captain, without bidding him kiſs
his backſide, beckoned to Teague to follow
him, and withdrew from the chamber.
Having retired; Teague, ſaid the Captain,
this thing of law has been well ſaid
to be a bottomleſs pit. The way to it is
like that to the ſhades;
                           —Facilis deſcenſus averni;
Sed reſerre gradus, hic labor, hoc opus eſt.
This pettifogger ſeemed to have a thousand
remedies at his command, and yet
none that would ſerve us; as the redreſs,
[Page 138]
if any, is to be poſtponed to ſuch a diſtant
day. I have heard a great deal of theſe
cattle, and I believe they are beſt off that
have leaſt to do with them. They have
ſo much jargon of technical terms, that
the devil himſelf cannot underſtand them.
Their whole object is to get money; and,
provided they can pick the pocket of half
a joe, they care little about the perſon
that conſults them. The firſt loſs is the
beſt; you had better put up with the currying
you have got, than have my pocket
picked, on pretence of redreſs a year or
two hence, which may, perhaps, prove a
century.
Teague was contented to put up with
the drubbing, and have no more ſaid about
it.
[Page 139]
CHAP. IV.
THE Captain had conſoled himſelf
with the idea that Teague was now
cured of his folly, and would no more be
diſpoſed to entertain notions of ambition,
and unreaſonable projects. He was disappointed
in his hope; for that very evening,
the Iriſhman waſhing down the recollection
of his woes with ſome exhilerating
drink, and though not intoxicated, but
enlivened only, he came to the Captain:
Said he, Dear maſter, what would your
anour think, if a poor ſharvant ſhould
turn lawyer; and get a half joe when a
cuſtomer comes to conſult him in the
morning? would it not be better than
currying a horſe, and tratting about like
a big dog; with no ſenſe to live like a
man of fartune, and have a big houſe over
his head, and books about him, and
take half joes from paple that come to him
about their quarrels and batings, through
[Page 140]
de town, and ſending dem aff as wiſe as
if dey never had come to him, and de
great ſpectacles, to look like a blind man,
dat was blind before he was born, and
could ſee more than two or three other
paple, for all dat; and was a canjurer,
and a wizzard, and could take money for
nating. Would it not be better, maſter,
than tratting like a fool, and diſputing wid
paple, and having nating to lay up; but
be as poor as a church mouſe, or a rat, all
the days of our life, and paple laugh after
us when we are gone.
The Captain was thrown into a reverie
of thought, by the ſpeech of the bog-trotter;
reflecting, that his preſumption
and folly was incurable; for, notwithstanding
all that had been ſaid to him, or
ſuffered by him, his natural propenſity remained
the ſame; according to the maxim—
Naturam expellas bufurca, uſque recurret;
You may toſs out nature with a
pitchfork, ſhe will ſtill come back upon
you. Not ſo much from any further view
of reclaiming him, as from indignation,
and reſentment, againſt his preſumption,
the Captain projected, in his mind, a farther
means of chaſtiſing him. He had
heard of a work-houſe, in this city, into
[Page 141]
which refractory ſervants are committed,
and put to hard labour; ſuch as pounding
hemp, grinding plaiſter of Paris, and picking
old ropes into oakum. He reſolved to
have the raggamuffin put into this a while.
Counterfeiting, therefore, an approbation
of his project of becoming lawyer, doubtless,
ſaid he, the profeſſion of the law is a
profitable buſineſs, where money is very
eaſily got, by the bare breath of the
mouth. Nevertheleſs, it requires time and
ſtudy to qualify for this profeſſion. Nay,
the introduction to the ſtudy, by being
put under an eminent lawyer, in full practice,
is itſelf very expenſive. An hundred
piſtoles is ſometimes the fee. This I could
not very well afford; but I have an acquaintance
in this town, who, I am persuaded,
would be willing to oblige me,
and will take leſs. I will call upon him
early to-morrow, and ſettle the contract.
Accordingly the next day, calling on
the keeper of the work-houſe, he gave him
an account of his refractory ſervant, and
with a gratuity of a couple of guineas, obtained
his conſent, to take the bog-trotter
under his direction, and give him a few
leſſons in picking oakum, and grinding
plaiſter of Paris, and pounding hemp, not
[Page 142]
withholding, in the mean time, a ſeaſonable
application of the cowſkin, in the intervals
of ſtudy of theſe ſeveral branches of the
law. For the idea was to be impoſed upon
Teague, that this was an office, or as
it were an inn of court, or chamber of
the Inner Temple; and that the ſeveral
flagellations, and grindings, and poundings,
were ſo many leſſons, and lectures,
to qualify him for the practice of the law.
It happened, fortunately, that the keeper
of the work-houſe was well qualified
for the taſk; for, in early years, he had
been put an apprentice to an attorney, and
had ſome opportunity of attending courts,
and hearing the names of books to which
the advocates referred in their pleadings;
but having a turn for extravagance, and
a diſſolute manner of life, he had come to
poverty, and, through various ſcenes, to
jail. There, by addreſs, he had gained
the good will of the jailor's daughter,
whom he married; and, by the intereſt of
his new father-in-law, having obtained his
liberation, he was, from acting as deputy
jailor, in a ſeries of time, at length promoted
to be the keeper of this work-houſe.
Indeed, from his employment, being acquainted
with the priſoners, and finding
[Page 143]
himſelf ſometimes intereſted in their fate,
and being led to attend their trials, he
had, even in his laſt capacity, been a good
deal about courts, and heard law phraſes
and books mentioned.
Accordingly, when Teague was introduced,
which was that very afternoon, he
had, at his command, the names of the
abridgers, and reporters, and commentators
of the law, and the technical terms in
the commencement and proceſs of a ſuit;
ſo that, when the key was turned, and,
after having ſtript him of the linen doublet
that was upon him, he began to give
him the firſt application of the cowſkin,
he told him this was reading Wood's Institutes;
and when, after this, he was sentenced
to an hour or two's hard labour,
at grinding plaiſter of Paris, this was called
Coke upon Littleton; and when the employment
was varied, pounding hemp, or
picking oakum, it was called Hawkin's
Pleas of the crown, or Foſter, or 4th
Blackſtone, &c. When the poor bog-trotter,
reduced to a ſkeleton, living on
bread and water, complained of the hard
uſage, and offered himſelf a ſervant for
life, to curry horſes and bruſh boots, to
any Chriſtian creature that would take him
[Page 144]
out of that place; he was told, that, as he
had begun the ſtudy of the law, he muſt
go through with it; that that was but the
commencement of the ſuit; that in a year's
time he would learn to file a declaration;
in another, to put in a plea; in a third,
to join iſſue; and in a fourth, to conduct
a trial; that unleſs a bill of exceptions
had been filed, or there was a motion, in
arreſt of judgment, or a writ of error
brought, he might be admitted the fifth,
and begin to practice the ſixth year: At
all events, provided he would ſubmit himself,
with due application, to faſting, and
cowſkinning, and grinding plaiſter of Paris,
pounding hemp, and picking oakum,
he might be a lawyer the ſeventh year,
and wear ſpectacles, like counſellor Grab,
and take half a joe when he thought proper.
I know not by what ſimile to repreſent
the howl of the Iriſhman, at this proſpect of
the duration of his woes. It was like that
of a wolf at the bottom of a well, or a
dog that had loſt his maſter, or a cow
her comrade, or ſome forlorn wanderer
that has miſſed the way, and given up all
hopes of being extricated from the wilderness.
At the various applications of the
[Page 145]
cowſkin, he had jumped, and curſed, and
ſwore, and prayed, and beſeeched, and
promiſed a thouſand ſervices, of currying
horſes, and bruſhing boots, and trotting
where ever he was ordered, provided they
would ſet him at liberty. When employed
at the hard labour, before mentioned,
he had groaned, and curſed the law, the
counſellor, and the half joe. Ah, thought
he, if my dear maſter, the Captain, knew
how hard a ting it was to ſtudy law, and
to faſt widout ating or drinking, and be
bate wid a cow-ſkin, he would not have
given the hundred piſtoles, nor the half
of it, to have had me kicked and cuffed
in dis manner: I would give body and
ſhoul into the bargain, if I could ſee him
once more at that iron gate there, to ſpake
to him, and beſache him to take me out
of this purgatory. He was a good maſter;
and when I was a fool, and wanted to be
a member of Congreſs, and prache, and
be a phaloſophar, he told me, Teague,
you are a fool; and what they would do
wid me there; how they would bate me,
and ate me, and take de ſkin aff my back,
and make a cow or a ſhape od me; and
now I am worſe than a cow or a ſhape,
or a horſe in de tame; for I am cut, and
[Page 146]
curried, black and blue; till my fleſh is
raw, and a cholic in my belly, wid faſting;
and all to ſtoody dis law. The devil take
counſellor Grab, and de half joe.
[Page 147]
CHAP. V.
THE Captain having been led to think
ſo much of law, of late, was ſtruck
with the idea of viſiting courts of juſtice,
and hearing ſome of thoſe caſes argued,
which come before them. Understanding
that a court was then ſitting, he resolved
to take the opportunity of the interval
of Teague's purgation, in the workhouse,
to amuſe himſelf with the pleading
of the advocates. Accordingly, repairing
to the court houſe, he took his place amongst
the crowd, and liſtened to what
was going forward.
What came before the court was a motion
in arreſt of judgment. A Jonathan
Mun had been indicted, and found guilty
of “felonoiuſly taking and carrying away
water out of the well of Andrew Mab.”
It was moved in arreſt of judgment, that
larceny could not be committed of water
in a well, it being real property; for it
[Page 148]
was a diſtinction of the common law, that
larceny could not be committed of things
real, or ſavouring of the realty, Black. 232.
2 Ray. 470. Hawkins, &c. So that taking
away the ſoil was merely a treſpaſs;
and taking away the water could be no
more.
It was anſwered, that water being fluitans,
et mobilis, could not be conſidered
as real property; that an ejectment would
not lie for water, but for ſo many acres of
land covered with water, Yelv. 143. 1
Burr. 142. Becauſe it was impoſſible to
give execution of a thing which is always
tranſient and running, Run. 36. quotes
Cro. Jas. 150. Lev. 114. Sid. 151.
Thence it is that in a grant of the ſoil it is
neceſſary, as we ſee from old forms, to add
the right of ways, woods, and water-courses,
Lilly. Con. 132. and 179. Bridg.
Con. 321. That whatever might be ſaid
of water in its natural bed on the ſoil,
as water in a running ſtream; yet a well
being dug by the labour of hands, the
water thus acquired, muſt be counted as
perſonal, not real property. Barbcray,
Titius, and Locke. That at a well, the
water being drawn up by the bucket, and
thus by one act ſeparated from the
[Page 149]
freehold, and by another taken from the bucket,
it becomes a ſubject of larceny; as in
the law of corn, trees, or graſs growing.
For if theſe be ſevered at one time, and
at another time taken away, it is larceny.
Hawk. Pl. Cr. 93.
It was replied, that an ejectment would
lie of water in a well; for here the water
is fixed in a certain place, within the
bounds and compaſs of the well; and is
conſidered as part of the ſoil. Run. 37.
That, ex vi termini, in the indictment,
“out of the well,” it muſt be conſidered
as water ex, out of, or from the well;
that is, water ſevered by the very act of
taking; for otherwiſe it would have been
expreſſed, by “water out of the bucket”
of Andrew Mab; not out of the well;
and ſo the taking could not be larceny,
but treſpaſs; as in the caſe of a tree
that is cut down at one time, and taken
away at another; or apples growing on a
tree, or ſhaken down and gathered from
the ſoil; the firſt being a treſpaſs, the second
larceny.
Curia adviſari vult.
The Captain whiſpering to lawyer Grab,
enquired what difference it made in the
[Page 150]
puniſhment, whether it was larceny or trespass?
He was anſwered, that in the one
caſe it was hanging by the common law,
and in the other to pay the value of the
property. A very material difference indeed,
ſaid the Captain, to depend on ſo
nice a diſtinction.
[Page 151]
BOOK VI.
CHAP. I. THE Captain had now leiſure to reflect
on the predicament in which
he left Teague; and thinking he might
have had what was ſufficient to cure him
of his folly, or at leaſt reſtrain it, thought
of making a viſit to the houſe of employment,
or ſending to liberate the valet.
This thought running in his head, he
naturally ſuggeſted it to a gentleman with
whom he was, at this time, in conversation,
on indifferent ſubjects; the gentleman
lodging at the ſame inn, or public
houſe, and ſeeming to be a perſon of considerable
ſhrewdneſs and diſcernment, not
only of the affairs of men in general, but
of the ſpecial ſpirit and character of theſe
times.
[Page 152]
Said the gentleman; The folly of your
man has certainly been very great, to suppose,
that he could be qualified to ſuſtain
the profeſſion of an advocate, and to practise
law: For, though in this, as in moſt
other profeſſions, “the race is not always
to the ſwift, nor the battle to the ſtrong;”
but the people that ſheweth favour; that is,
take up an opinion of abilities, where
there are none; yet your ſervant, having
ſo little, even of the ſemblance of qualification,
it would be counting too much on
the circumſtance, to promiſe great ſucceſs
in his caſe. His proſpect of advancement
would be much more certain in the political
career. You ſeem, by your account,
to have diſcouraged him in taking a feat in
the legiſlature; and would not wiſh now
to contradict yourſelf: yet why not indulge
him in taking a place in the executive
of ſome government. As far as I ſee,
with that ambition which is natural to him,
you will find him but of little uſe, as a
waiter; and you may as well let him do
ſomething for himſelf, as not. If appointed
in the department of finance, he can
uſe clerks; and, in a very ſhort time, he
may learn to write his name, ſo as to give
his ſignature to any paper; and this, with
[Page 153]
the help of clerks to do the accountant business,
would be ſufficient: At leaſt, there
have been thoſe in theſe departments, who
have been approved, and yet could do little
more. Should he even become a governor;
furniſhed with a ſecretary, he can
be at no loſs to compoſe his meſſages, or
other communications, to individuals, or
public bodies.
But what I would propoſe, and will
ſuit him beſt, will be to go into the general
government; and, under this, the
diplomatic line will be eligible. He might
be appointed conſul to the port of Cork
or Dublin; or the Barbary States; or other
places: Or he might go as ambassador
to the grand Mogul; or envoy extraordinary
to the king of England; or
other princes or potentates in Europe.
If you ſhould think of favouring him in
this career, it will be neceſſary for him to
appear at the levee of the preſident, that
he may be introduced with a certain gradual
etiquette of advancement.
What! ſaid the Captain; introduce a
ragged bog-trotter to the preſident of the
United States!
Not ragged, ſaid the gentleman; you
can have a pair of breeches made for him;
[Page 154]
and put ſhoes upon his feet: a ſword will
be neceſſary; and ſome other articles of
equipment. And when you bring this
into view with his making his fortune,
you will not conſider it as advancing much
for a perſon whom you wiſh to ſerve.
The Captain began to think there was
weight in the obſervations of this gentleman;
and that it might be proper to let
the bog-trotter have a chance of doing
what he could: Accordingly, he wrote a
note to the keeper of the houſe of employment,
to liberate him for the preſent.
The ſtate of politics at this time, and
the proſpect of Teague's advancement, we
ſhall leave to the Third Volume of this
work.
[Page ]
POSTSCRIPT.
IT is well for men in office, that my pen has
taken this turn; and that I employ myſelf in
writing harmleſs nonſenſe, rather than ſtrictures on
their conduct In the caſe of the famous Gordon,
who, with Trenchard, was an author of what were
ſtiled Cato's Letters, it is well known that the ſhrewd
miniſter of that day, Walpole, dreading the effects
of theſe writings, wiſely laid a plan to free his administration
from them; by affecting to admire the
ſtile; and ſaying, that it were a pity ſo noble a genius
were not employed in giving a ſample of good
language, where there would be no occaſion to invent,
but merely to clothe ideas. For this reaſon,
he would conſider it as a great happineſs, could he
be induced to tranſlate ſome work of merit; and
give it in the beautiful garb of his expreſſion. By
this addreſs, and the addition of a penſion, the author
was induced to undertake the tranſlation of
Tacitus.
Now, what government, with great art, got
Gordon to do, I have done of my own accord; that
is, to amuſe myſelf in abſtract compoſition; regarding
words only, and letting men of place alone.
Nevertheleſs, as the ſale of theſe is not certain; and
if I ſhould find it an expenſe, rather than a profit, to
proceed in the work, I may quit it, and fall foul of
the public meaſures, thoſe who diſcharge the public
truſt, at the preſent time, may not be altogether
ſafe. It were, therefore, wiſe policy in ſuch, to
aſſiſt the ſale as much as poſſible; and it might not
be amiſs, in the firſt inſtance, to buy up, each of
them, a number of copies I do not know that I
have any thing to ſay of the preſident of the United
[Page 156]
States; or that I would ſay it, if I had; nevertheless,
it might not be amiſs for him, on the principle
of preſervation, and, agreeably to that univerſal
prudence he has ever ſhewn, to take a few; perhaps
50 might ſuffice. The ſecretary of the treaſury,
and the ſecretary at war, might take, between
them, about 500. As to the ſecretary of ſtate, he
is ſuch a ſkin-dried philoſopher, that an author would
make as little out of him, as a fly would out of a
weather-beaten bone; and ſo, it is of little consequence
to him, whether he buys one at all; for I
believe I ſhall not trouble my head about him. As
to the Congreſs that have ſat ſince the adoption of
the federal conſtitution, they need not put themselves
to the expence, individually or collectively,
of purchaſing one pamphlet; as I am determined
not to be bought off by them; but in a work which I
ſhall by and by publiſh, will canvaſs, freely, the respective
demerit of their votes. I have not yet
written any of this work; but I have it all in my
mind; and if I had a ready amanuenſis, to take it
down, could give a volume in a ſhort time.
The whole gradation of officers and place-men,
under government, are a good deal in my power.
Not that I would deſcend to attack them; but I
might affect the ſyſtem by which they are supported.
A pretty liberal purchaſe, therefore, on their
part, might be money not ill laid out.
The men that are upon the government of Pennsylvania,
would find their account, in making it
worth my while to let my fingers run in this way,
a while longer. Peream ne ſcribam; I muſt write;
and if I ſhould break out upon them, I know not
where I might end.
The End of the Second Volume.
[Page ]
Section
MODERN CHIVALRY.
VOL. III.
[Page ]
[Page ]
Section
Modern Chivalry:
CONTAINING THE
ADVENTURES
OF
Captain John Farrago,
AND
TEAGUE O'REGAN,
HIS SERVANT.
Volume iii.
By H. H. BRACKENRIDGE.
Quicquid agunt homines, nostri, farrago libelli.
Juvenal.
PITTSBURGH.
Printed and Sold by John Scull.
M.DCC.XIII.
[ Entered according to Act of Congreſs. ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
INTRODUCTION.
Proceeding with my object; the
giving an example of a perfect ſtile in writing,
I come now to the third volume of
the work. I well know, that it will not
all at once, and by all perſons, be thought
to be the model of a perfect ſtile, for it is
only the perfectly inſtructed, and delicately
diſcerning that can diſcover its beauties:
and perhaps none will be more apt to paſs
them by than the learned of the academies,
and the moſt verſed in grammar rules of
writing, for there is a greeneſs in the judgment
of the ſchool critics with reſpect to
what is ſimple and natural in compoſition.
To illuſtrate this by anology. Let a
dancing maſter paſs his judgment on the
movements of the beſt bred man in life;
and not finding in his poſition and attitudes,
an evident conformity to the leſſons of the
ſalatory art, he will conclude that he has
not been taught to move with propriety.
He does not know that it is this very circumstance
that conſtitutes the excellence of
the movements of the eaſy and perfectly
[Page vi]
genteelman; to wit, that when you observe
him, it will never once come into
your mind that he thinks of his attitudes or
poſitions in the leaſt; but that every movement
is juſt as it happens, and without any
intention on his part. Ars eſt celare artem.
To wit; It is the ſecret of good taſte and
perfection in behavior to conceal that you
ever think of it at all. So it is the moſt
perfect proof of a good ſtile, that when you
read the compoſition, you think of nothing
but the ſenſe; and are never ſtruck with
the idea that it is any otherwiſe expreſſed
than every body would expreſs it.
That ſtile, is not good, where it appears
that you have not dared to uſe a word
without thinking a long time whether you
ought to uſe it; that, in the diſpoſition of
words, you have carefully ſtudied which
ought to go firſt and which laſt; and, that
your ſentence has a cadence which could
not come by chance; but is the effect of
deſign and art.
I acknowledge that no man will ever
write a good ſtile that has not well ſtudied,
and exerciſed himſelf in writing, ſelecting
with a moſt perfect delicacy, in all caſes;
the proper term; but he muſt go beyond
this, and be able to deceive the world, and
never let it come into their heads that he
[Page vii]
hath ſpent a thought on the ſubject. But
it is not one in five hundred that is born
with that ſenſibility of nerve as to be able to
attain with the help of great inſtruction and
practice, a perfect judgment in the uſe of
words. It is for this reaſon that I am ambitious
of the praiſe of writing well ſo far
as reſpects language. For it requires no
uncommon ſtructure of nerves, or organization
of the brain to produce good ſenſe;
the maſs of mankind is equal to this.
Language, as it is the peculiar gift, ſo
it is the higheſt glory of our ſpecies; and
the philologiſt is to be conſidered as cultivating
the moſt uſeful and ornamental of
all arts. Purſuing therefore ſolely the uſe
of words, I do not deſcend profeſſedly to
think of ſenſe; nevertheleſs, if at any time
there ſhould be found ideas that have ſome
conſiſtency and meaning, they may deſerve
attention, as much as if it was the primary
object of my work to expreſs them; for
it is not their fault if I ſet little ſtore by
them, and think more of the dreſs that I
put upon them than I do of themſelves.
I am happy to find that in the review of
this publication, given in Young's magazine,
my ideas of the merit of the ſtile, is
recognized, and fully juſtified. And as
my work may be well ſuppoſed, to have
[Page viii]
a much more extenſive circulation, and to
live longer than that miſcellaneous performance,
I have thought it not amiſs, for
the honor of the critics to extract ſome part
of the obſervations which have been made
by them, and which are as follows:
“The author of the work before us,
is H. H. Brackenridge, well known in
the literary world for his treatiſe on the
œconomy of Rats, a ſatirical compoſition,
in which under the veil of allegory, he designates
the meaſures of the federal government;
as alſo for his hiſtory of Weazles,
in which the ſame ſtrokes are given to thoſe
at the helm of our affairs, in a different fable,
and narration. In the preſent work
which he entitles Modern Chivalry, he disowns
the idea of any moral or ſentiment
whatſoever, and propoſes ſtile only as the
object of the compoſition. And to this
object, in our opinion, he ſcrupulouſly
adheres; for though on ſome occaſions,
there would ſeem to be a ſemblance of
idea, yet this we muſt attribute to the
imagination of the reader, juſt as in looking
upon a plaiſtered wall, attentively for
a long time, you will conceive the inequality
of the ſurface, or accidental ſcratchings,
to be the ſhape of birds and beaſts, or
the letters of the alphabet. Yet as reaſon
[Page ix]
in this caſe will correct the fancy, and
bring to mind that there is really no character
or image there, there being none
intended; ſo on a peruſal of the work in
queſtion, looking a long time for ſenſe,
you may at laſt conceive that you obſerve
ſome glimmerings of it, yet when you
recollect that you have it from the author
himſelf that he means none, you will be
ſenſible that it is nothing more than the accidental
combination of words which has
given this picture to the mind.
Stile, then, which is his object, muſt
alſo be ours, in our view of the publication.
For, to give a ſimile; if a manufacturer
of cloth, or a taylor that forms it into
veſtments, ſhould come forward, and produce
each his work, to be conſidered merely
as to the manufacture, or making up,
without regard to the materials of the
woof and warp in the one caſe, or the
wearing in the other, it would be abſurd
to enquire of theſe when nothing was proposed
to you reſpecting them, by the artists
themſelves.
Confining ourſelves therefore to the
ſtile of this performance, we obſerve, that
it has what is the firſt characteriſtic of excellence;
viz. Simplicity. This conſiſts
in the choice of the plaineſt and moſt
[Page x]
familiar words, and in the arrangement of
the words in their natural order. There
is a great difference between a vulgar term,
or phraſe, and that which is common,
and comes firſt upon the tongue, in eaſy
and familiar converſation. It is the mistake
of this diſtinction which leads ſome
writers to avoid the phraſe that any one
would uſe, and ſeek out what is uncommon.
Hence there appears a variation in
the words they put upon paper, from
thoſe which they themſelves would uſe in
converſation. And why this? Ought not
language to be preciſely the ſame whether
ſpoken or written.
Perſpicuity is the natural reſult of simplicity,
and needs not to be laid down as a
different characteriſtic. For can there be
obſcurity in that compoſition where the
moſt familiar word is uſed, and that word
put in its proper place. This brings to mind
the definition of ſtile by Swift; “proper
words in proper places.” There can
be nothing more eaſy than the compoſition
of our author, His writing ſavours of
the ſkill of an artificer who after many
years exercitation in his art, acquires a
power of accompliſhing his work by a habit
of the fingers, independent of any application
of the mind. So that while in
[Page xi]
the ſtile of others there is an appearance
of exertion, here there is what a superficial
obſerver would call careleſſneſs,
but which the ſound critic will diſcover to
be the reſult of a perfect maſtery of all that
relates to language.
It is pretty generally believed that our
ſtile has been conſtantly degenerating from
the time of queen Anne, in whoſe reign
flouriſhed thoſe immortal penmen, Swift,
Addiſon, Arbuthnot, Tillotſon, Bolinbroke.
&c. If the ſtile of Mr. Brackenridge
is examined, and compared with
thoſe models, it will be found to be in the
ſame pure, ſimple attic taſte. We ſhall
therefore not heſitate to recommend it as
a reſtorer of all that is correct and beautiful
in writing.” So far the reviewers.
I have ſaid that I was happy to find that
theſe have had the good taſte to find out
what I myſelf had thought of the composition.
But as I wiſh at all times to let
the reader, into a knowledge of my real
ſentiments, I will confeſs that theſe are
merely words of courſe with me, and that
I was not happy to find my work praiſed
in any reſpect; becauſe I wiſhed to have a
quarrel with the critics; and this not because
I love war, abſtractedly conſidered;
but becauſe in this caſe I ſhould have had
[Page xii]
an opportunity of ſhewing my polemic
talents. Nay, expecting an attack, I
had prepared a number of good thoughts
in my mind, to be uſed in my conteſt with
them. What is more I had actually written
a copy of verſes in the Hudibraſtic
rhyme and manner, for their uſe, in which
I conſidered them as Muſkitoes, or flies
of ſome kind, that were troubleſome to
men; and though the occaſion fails, yet
there can be no impropriety in giving to
the public thoſe ſtrokes of ſatire which lay
dormant in my mind. As theſe would
apply more particularly to an attack upon
me; yet the eſſay being in general
terms, it may appear without a particular
circumſtance to call it forth; merely as a
ſpecimen of what I could do had there been
occaſion for it. And the inſertion will
be excuſeable, when it is conſidered how
painful it is to be fruſtrated in what we
propoſe as our pleaſure. I have known a
good man wiſh to have bad news true,
merely becauſe he had related them: and
we may conceive a ſaint vexed at not finding
a man dead, when he had digeſted a
funeral ſermon in his mind, and was ready
to bury him. On this principle, therefore,
and in ſpite of the critics, I will have my
verſes publiſhed: they are as follows:
[Page xiii]
THE critic firſt poſſeſſ'd the earth,
                           And by his rules gave authors birth.
                           You may be ancient: critic, hark!
Were you with Noah in the ark?
In what compartment were you ſeen?
'Mongſt creatures clean or the unclean?
                           The critic, ſir's, the natural father
Of every ſnifling, ſnuffling author;
And when you nod or ſnore or ſleep,
We ſhly on poſteriors creep,
And rouſe you to a bright exertion,
Of all your faculties; you whoreſon.
                           How can there be idea of beauties,
Unleſs the critic genius ſhew't-us?
The angle of the ſight obtuſe,
Can ſee no more than doth a gooſe,
Whilſt we with microſcopic eye,
Examine as you would a fly,
See through the crevices of fancy,
As far as human eyeſight can ſee,
Tell where there is or is not Grammar;
What phraſeology wants hammer—
Or file to make the verſe run ſmoother,
Where ſound is harſh, or term uncouther.
                           I grant you ſee defects and errors,
Of thoſe in genius your ſuperiors:
The ſkin however ſmoothly curried,
To a flea's eye is deep and ſurrowed.
His optics may perceive a wart,
That grows upon the unſeen part,
But for the beauty of the frame,
It is above the ken of them—
Thus critics tell that bard divine
Has a rough word in ſuch a line,
Or that the ſacred poem ſcarce
Can bear the trot of ſuch a verſe,
That feeble author in ſuch ſentence
Has not the vis, the ſpirit intenſe,
That Pegaſus was lame when he rode,
[Page xiv]
Over this or that dull period:
They tell, but never felt the force,
Of genius in his rapid courſe.
                           What? did not Quintilian fully,
Develope all the praiſe of Tully?
And 'mongſt the Greeks, the great Longinus,
Who may be juſtly ſtil'd his highneſs,
With critic judgment join the fire,
Of Heaven itſelf? who can go higher?
From your vile accuſation whoſe's ſafe?
Not even the elder ſcaliger Joſeph,
Who had a mind as big's a mountain,
Could all defects and beauties contain,
And ſhew'd that Homer was inferior,
And Virgil hit perfection nearer.
Have you the aſſurance ſir to ſpeak,
Againſt the Roman worth and Greek?
                           So much we hear I believe that no man's,
Tongue is ſtill of Greeks and Romans;
For if diſpute ſhould riſe paſt curing,
Which way 'tis beſt to make our urine,
And each ſhould argue ſtiffly his way,
All muſt give up, the Greeks piſs'd this way.
                           But there in modern times is Bently,
Who ſung of Richard Blackmore daint'ly.
                           I grant it, critic, there's a thouſand;
The liſt beginning has nor knows end.
They ſwarm in millions from the flood—
The Hebrew critics firſt drew blood;
And this is what is meant by Babel
Where all were critics that were able.
The Rabbin and the Talmudiſt,
Fought hand to hand and fiſt to fiſt,
About the pentateuch of Moſes;
Their tales, the wildeſt ſtuff, God knows is.
                           If there has been ſome Grecian critic,
Above the offspring of a ſeed-tic;
Yet where is one in modern days
Who can deſerve that ſhare of praiſe?
[Page xv]
For metamorphos'd down to vermin,
Who can the various ſhapes determine.
And ſmall and great are prone to miſchief,
And every clan and ſect has his chief.
They ſwarm like Caledonian cluſter,
When the Mac Neils and Camrons muſter;
Or as when houſe wife ſpreads her ſugar,
With water mix'd, each inſect bugar,
Relinquiſhes pots, tubs and pails,
And for the booty ſpreads his ſails.
Thus all the race of critics gather,
Around the footſteps of an author,
Bite through his overalls and ſtocking,
And biting ſhins, you know's no joking.
Who now a days fits down to write
Uninterrupted by a bite?
Unleſs he takes good care and puts on,
A pair of leggins or has boots on.
                           They ſay of Reynard who loves geeſe,
That when oppreſs'd with ſwarm of fleas
He takes in's mouth a lock of wool,
And gradually retires to pool;
The fleas by ſecret inſtinct led,
Fly from the tail and trunk to head,
With ſpeed each mother's ſon of them goes
To ſeek the promontory of noſe,
And when no more remains abaft,
Fox ſhakes his head and leaves the raft.
                           Who could find out by book or ſermon,
An equal way t' allude the vermin,
Would merit a rich premium more,
Than vers'd in philoſophic lore,
The member who diſſects a glow-worm,
To ſee if 'tis a beaſt and no worm,
                           I wiſh ſome virtuoſo won'd,
Who natural hiſtory underſtood,
Diſſect a critic, ſhew his jaw teeth,
Whether they are quite ſmooth or ſaw-teeth,
Reſembling butterfly or aſp,
[Page xvi]
Or ſharp and pointed like a waſp;
And by the grinders edge determine,
Corn-eating or carnivrous vermin.
I'd give, myſelf, a golden medal,
To know if't has a brown or red tail,
And whether when it moves it goes on
An hundred feet or half a dozen;
But many glaſſes muſt be ground out,
Before theſe myſteries can be found out.
I leave it to ſome great Linæus,
Who may by this be fam'd as he was.
The reviewers in Young's Magazine,
may ſee from hence how well it was for
them, though unfortunate for me, that
they have dealt in approbation ſolely.
The prettieſt part of the hiſtory of any author,
is his war with the critics; and as
that prince's reign, ſeems unintereſting
where we are not amuſed with ſieges and
battles, ſo the life of an author is dull and
monotonous where we hear of no litigations
with a Bavius, or Mævius, a Dennis,
or a Colly Cibber.
It is true I have heard one obſervation
made, viz. that though my ſtile is excellent
of the kind; yet it is but of one kind,
and as Swift ſaid of himſelf that he could
never riſe to the ſtile of an oration or a
ſermon, ſo it would ſeem to be the caſe
with me, that I am competent only to
that humble ſpecies of diction which ſuits
the diſſertation, but riſes not to the ſwell
[Page xvii]
of lofty oratory. It is true this is the ſtile
I have uſed in the memoirs of the Captain;
becauſe it is the ſtile which ſuits ſimple narrative.
Nevertheleſs, it is not with me
as it was with Swift; and in this reſpect,
I am his ſuperior; for I can riſe to the
ſwell of the higheſt pipe of diction. And
to evince this, I will here produce an oration
delivered by me about two years ago,
when I officiated in the capacity of Chaplain
to the light infantry company of Pittsburgh.
I produce it only as a ſample of
ſtile; for as to other merit I will not answer
for it; and if the learned ſhould not
think it, in point of ſentiment, worthy
of my fame, let it be my apology that
the company at whoſe call I was, and
military diſcipline being ſtrict, I was obliged
to obey at a ſhort notice; the company
I ſay, having given me but about two
hours warning, the compoſition bears the
marks of haſte, not having that condensation
of ſentiment which deliberation gives
But of this let the public judge. I give it
as delivered.
The Oration.
“What is the object for which a ſoldier
juſtifiably draws his ſword? the protection
of perſonal and ſocial right. This is comprehended
under one word, LIBERTY.
[Page xviii]
By this we are to underſtand the natural
liberty of man, independent of government;
or liberty in a ſtate of ſociety,
and government. The firſt being but ideal,
it is the laſt to which our thoughts are directed
in the uſe of this word. What then
is liberty? It is the enjoying under ſome
form of government, an equality of rights:
an equal right to ſpeak, and an equal right
to act: where no one can or dare arrogate
a ſuperiority of power or privilege.
Who would not riſk a life for ſuch a blessing?
Who would not immolate a hecatomb
of foes who ſhould dare to invade it.
Cæsar; I admire thy talents, I praiſe thy
virtues; but in the face of nations, on the
height of the world, thou daredſt to uſurp
a ſuperiority over brave men. The ſoul of
Brutus, or of Caſius could not brook it;
the ſoul of Cato or of Caſta could not
brook it; every Roman felt the inſult, and
approved the act, that took away thy life.
When underſtood and felt, what are
the charms of Liberty? When poſſeſſed
and enjoyed, what are its effects: greatness
of thought, and greatneſs of conduct.
Can the vaſſal think nobly? Can the dependent
mind act boldly? No, “there is
a lion in the way,” and cowardice benumbs
the faculties.
[Page xix]
Are mankind ſenſible of this? There
have been thoſe who have borne honorable
teſtimony of it. Shall I give you proofs?
I recur not to the academies to bring thence
the ſentiments of philoſophic men. I depict
not thoſe who have fought for liberty.
I give you the ſenſe of a people who had
enjoyed it; who had loſt it, and who had
been reſtored to it. Stating the occaſion,
I ſhall give it in the words of Plutarch.
“Philip and the Macedonians had ſubdued
the Grecian ſtates. Theſe calling in the
Romans, ſubmitted to their authority, and
received garriſons in all their cities. Titus
Flaminius, who commanded the Roman
forces, beat the Macedonians, and
reduced them to their own territories.
The Grecian ſtates were ſtill enſlaved, but
had changed their maſters. The Ætolians
had thence taken occaſion to aſk them,
whether it were not matter of much consolation
that, though their chains weighed
heavier, yet they were now neater and
better poliſhed than formerly? Whether
Titus were not deſervedly admired by
them as their benefactor who had unshackled
the feet of Greece and tied her up by
her neck? Titus vexed hereat, made it his
requeſt to the ſenate, and at laſt prevailed
in it, that the garriſons in theſe cities ſhould
[Page xx]
be diſcharged, that ſo the Grecians might
be no longer debtors to him, for a partial
but entire favor. The Iſthmian games
were now renewed, and multitudes ſat
crowded in the theatre to ſee the exerciſes;
for Greece, who of late days not only
found reſpite from war, and was in full possession
of peace, but entertained farther
hopes of regaining her liberty, made holiday
for it. As theſe were celebrating,
ſilence was commanded by ſound of a trumpet,
and the cryer, ſtepping from amidſt
the ſpectators; made proclamation, that
Titus Quintus, the proconſular general,
having vanquiſhed king Philip and
the Macedonians, reſtored the Corinthians,
Locreans, Phoceans, Eubæans, Achæans,
Pthiotæans, Magnitians, Theſſalians, and
Perribæans, to their own country, laws
and liberty; took off all impoſitions upon
them, and withdrew their garriſons
thence.” At the firſt, many heard not at
all, and others did not diſtinctly hear what
was ſaid; but an odd kind of buſtle and ſtir
there was in the theatre, ſome wondering,
ſome aſking, ſome crying out to the cryer,
“Repeat that again, repeat that again.”
When therefore freſh ſilence was
made, the cryer raiſing his voice, his ſpeech
[Page xxi]
more eaſily reached the ears of the company.
The ſhout, which in that extacy of
joy they gave, was ſo incredibly great
that it was heard to ſea. The people all
jumped upon their legs; there was no farther
regard to the diverſions they came for,
but all fell a leaping and dancing, and
hugging one another; and all ſalute Titus
with the title of ſaviour and defender of
Greece. The ſtrength there is in voices,
and the many relations we have of the
wonderful effects of it, were ſeen verified
upon this occaſion: For the crows that
were then accidentally flying over the
ſtage, fell down dead upon the ſhout. For
the voices being numerous, and the acclamations
violent, and the parts of the air
ſeparated from each other, they could no
longer give ſupport to the birds, but let
them tumble; unleſs we ſhould rather
imagine theſe crows to fall and die, ſhot
through with the noiſe as with a dart.”
Are the preſent inhabitants of that country
ſenſible of the value of liberty? They
are not. They are enſlaved by the Ottoman
power. Could they be reſuſcitated
to a ſenſe of this magic word; this extatic
ſentiment, what would be their ſenſation?
What the acclamation? The Theban, the
Achean country would hear it, all Attica
[Page xxii]
and Sparta would reſound. The Ægean
and Corinthian ſeas would tremble.
Mount Olympus and Helicon would triumph.
The Gods on the one, and the
Muſes on the other, would celebrate the
feſtival. But O! Poetic and philoſophie
country, where my mind ranges every
day; whence I draw my beſt thoughts;
where I converſe with the ſchools of wiſe
men, and ſolace myſelf with the company
of heroes, thou art loſt in ſervitude, and
great muſt be the revolution that can extricate
thee thence.
Let me conſole myſelf with the proſpect
of a nation, who, after more than a
thouſand ages of barbarian conqueſt and
feudal tyranny, have emerged to liberty.
It is France I have in view. O glorious
people? Liberty deſcended not to you.
But it is your acquiſition. You have broke
the fetters that enſlave you, and tyranny
has been put under foot. The legiſlative
and judicial authority of your government
has been rendered independent of your
monarch, and the monarch reduced to a
ſimple executive power. Shall the sovereigns
of Europe conſpire to reinſtate him
in his abſolute dominion? Shall they hope
to ſubdue a nation of brave men contending
for liberty: Why do the heathen rage
[Page xxiii]
and the people imagine vain things.”
Sooner ſhall the clouds of the atmoſphere
reſtrain the electric fluid, or the object
ſtruck upon reſiſt the electric ſhock: Sooner
ſhall the height of hills and the weight
of mountains repreſs the caverned air, and
earthquakes ceaſe to burſt, than the generous
flame of liberty in this enlightened
nation, can be extinguiſhed and loſt.
Noble nation, you do us too much honor
in ſaying that you drew from us the
inſpiration of liberty. You drew it from
yourſelves. The Monteſquieus, the Rousseaus,
the Voltaires, the Abbe Raynalls
of your country. We felt the like ſpirit;
and reſiſted the Britiſh power, and were
aided by you in the conflict. May you
enjoy that liberty which you aſſiſted us to
poſſeſs; may your example give that liberty
to ſurrounding kingdoms which you
yourſelves enjoy. The mind contemplating
the ſubject is enlarged, and travels from
ſtate to ſtate, and from kingdom to kingdom
hailing the voice of liberty. It is not
in the nature of things that ſuch a renovation
ſhould take place at once. But the
day may not be far diſtant when Spain and
Sardinia, Sweden and Ruſſia, Germany
and Poland may hear the voice of liberty;
when Turky in Europe, and the iſlands of
[Page xxiv]
the Archipelago may hear the ſound, and
with an acclaim ſurpaſsing the Iſthmean
voice, convulſe the heavens with the impulſe.
Purſuing the thought, what would be
the effect of ſuch a reſurrection of the
dead? The expreſſion which I have incidently
uſed has given me a ſimile. It
would reſemble the reſuſcitation of the
dead at the laſt day, when the inhabitants
of the earth recovering limbs and new bodies,
ſhall raiſe their voice. Great will
be their exultation; great their acclaim.
They will ſhout, and with an emulation
not unpleaſing to the Almighty, ſtruggle
to ſurpaſs his yet reſounding trump itſelf.”
A copy of the preceding oration was
ſent by me to the Abbe Gochin, with
whom I have been in habits of intimacy
theſe forty five years, and was by him
tranſlated into elegant French. It was
the peruſal of this that brought me acquainted
with the Jacobin clubs of that
kingdom, and induced Mr. Claviers to
make honorable mention of me at the bar
of the aſſembly.
The fact is, as may be ſeen from the
oration, I poſſeſs great verſatility of ſtile,
and vaſt compaſs of ſentiment and imagination.
Nature intended me for a writer,
and it has always been my ambition. How
[Page xxv]
often have I ſighed for the garrets of London;
where I have read hiſtories, manners,
and anecdotes of Otway, Dryden,
and others, who have lived in the upper
ſtories of buildings, writing paragraphs,
or eſſays in proſe or verſe. I have lamented
my hard fate that I was not one of
theſe. Was I to go to London, of which
I have ſometimes thought, my firſt object
would be to viſit the aerial manſions of theſe
divine inhabitants. There is not a garret
where any of theſe have dwelt, or where
any of their deſcendents now dwells, that
I would not rummage to find papers, ſcraps
and remains, of what may be ſtill there. I
would at any rate viſit moſt of the preſent
men who live by their wits, and converſe
with them, indulging that pleaſure which
one takes in a conſimilarity of genius.
It was on this principle that the laſt
time I was in the city of Philadelphia, I
made enquiry of the bookſellers, if there
did not begin to be in that city ſome of
theſe garret people? I was told by Dobson
of a certain M`Comas, a Scotchman,
that had come over about two years ago,
and was in that way: that he had written
paragraphs for the gazettes, and occasionally
eſſays for the magazines; and that
he lived in ſuch an alley, I forget the
[Page xxvi]
name of it, but that he had not ſeen him
for ſeveral weeks; and ſuppoſed he was
engaged in preparing ſome work for publication.
With the advantage of this hint,
ſetting out, I found the alley, and by description,
the houſe; when knocking at
the door, an old woman opened it, to
whom addreſſing myſelf, I enquired if Mr.
M`Comas, the author, did not live there?
He did live here, ſaid the old lady, but
about two weeks ago he died, and left me
a quarter's rent unpaid, This is all a poor
woman gets by louſy authors and ſuch
truck that keep writing night and day,
and biting their nails, and mumbling to
themſelves, like witches or warlocks, that
I was frightened out of my wits many a
night, as he was tramping about in the
garret over my head and talking to himſelf.
I was ſtruck with the undervaluing manner
in which this old lady ſpoke of the author,
and being in ſome paſſion, you old
jade ſaid I, are you not ſenſible of the honor
done you in having a genius for your
tenant; a man that with a ſingle ſtroke of
his pen could make you immortal. Ay
mortal, ſaid ſhe, I am a poor enough
mortal to want my quarter's rent, with
his writings and fangles; I would rather
have a perſon that would ſit ſtill, and hold
[Page xxvii]
his tongue, and ſleep in my houſe, than a
raving crazy brained creature like him,
that made more noiſe than the rats, and
was behind with his rent when he died,
not leaving a pair of breeches or an old
coat that would ſell for the expence of
burying him. By this time I had a little
compoſed my mind, and ſuppreſſed my
reſentment, and told her I would pay her
the quarter's rent for the honor of the
cloth, if ſhe would give me leave to viſit
the celeſtial manſion where the bard had
reſided. Accordingly, depoſiting the
rent, which was two ſhillings and ſeven
pence, I was permitted to aſcend or rather
climb up a ladder with broad ſteps of
plank, to the habitation which was the
ſecond ſtory, for it was a low building,
with two apartments, the one on the
lower, and the other on the upper flooring.
The roof was low, and did not permit
a tail man as I am, to ſtand upright
on my entrance. Looking about, by the
help of an opening in the weather-boarding
of the gable end, I diſcovered a few
papers, which I took to be manuſcripts,
lying in a corner near a kind of ſtool, with
a board before it, nailed to the gable end,
on which he uſed to write, and making a
perquiſite of theſe in lieu of my two
[Page xxviii]
shillings and ſeven pence, I deſcended: nor
have I any reaſon to repent of my viſit,
or the ſum paid, for amongſt theſe I have
diſcovered ſome ſcraps of great merit, and
particularly a finiſhed poem, of considerable
length, with the title of Cincinnatus,
in Hudibraſtic verſe; a kind of rhyme
of which I am fond. I ſhall not, therefore,
ſcruple here to inſert the poem in
this introduction, as a ſpecimen of what
this man's manner was.
I know it will immediately be ſurmiſed
by ſome, that the whole is a fiction, and
that I myſelf have written this poem, and
that the ſtory of an author, &c. is an invention
to make it the more intereſting to
the reader, and to keep myſelf out of
ſight and behind the curtain; in the ſame
manner, as Cervantes, in his Don Quixotte,
pretends that his hiſtory is a translation
from a Mooriſh writer, Cid Hamed,
if I forget not; and the author of the Adventures
of a Guinea tells us of his tracing
the work to its repoſitory in manuſcript,
from a ſingle ſheet which he found, if I
remember right, wrapt round a pound of
pepper which he had bought at the ſhop of
a grocer. At any rate, though I may
not be accurate, as to the laſt circumſtance,
yet I mean to ſay in general, that, as
[Page xxix]
many writers of fictitious works, in order
to give them an air of truth and reality;
or to delight the reader by relating ſome
accidental manner of coming at what was
nearly loſt, invent tales of finding ſhreds
and ſcraps of compoſitions, and thence
tracing to the ſource; or that by taking
lodgings that had been before occupied by
ſome poet or philoſopher, they diſcover
in an old trunk, or elſewhere, the lucubrations
which they now offer to the public,
ſo I may be ſuſpected of adopting a
common mode of introducing what I myself
have written; but the fact is as I
have ſtated. Indeed, upon the leaſt reflection,
no one would ſuppoſe that I
could be the author of the poem; becauſe,
though it is but a playful ſatire, and thoſe
of the Cincinnati who are men of ſenſe,
would only ſmile at the performance, yet
there are weak brethren, who might be
offended; and I ſhould not wiſh to have
a ſword run through my body, for all the
pleaſure that a little mirth gives. But as
to the man that is dead, nothing can hurt
him; and therefore there can be no danger
in publiſhing what he wrote.
The ſcheme of the poem ſeems to be,
that of a member of the Cincinnati Society
with the badge at his breaſt coming into a
[Page xxx]
village, and the people of different descriptions
falling in with him occaſionally, and
altercating with him reſpecting the demerits
of the inſtitution, and the propriety of
the emblem which he wore. The introduction
is as follows.
CINCINNATUS. A Poem.
What time the States had ſettled peace
With adverſaries over ſeas,
And troops diſbanded, it ſeem'd good,
To inſtitute a brotherhood,
Among the chieftains of the war,
Of Cincinnati character,
Who now laid by their arms and came,
To ſeek an agricultural fame---
On territory they had ſav'd;
For as together they had brav'd,
The toils of ſervice, wiſh'd a tie,
At leaſt upon the memory,
Of that companionſhip; hence 'twas,
The inſtitution came to paſs,
Of a ſociety and badge.
At firſt it did provoke the rage,
Of ſeveral of the citizens,
[Page xxxi]
As being ſavouring of deſigns,
Of a nobility of title;
And chevaliering here a little;
And hence, when one of theſe in's gate,
Came to a village of the ſtate,
With badge dependant at his boſom,
It ſeem'd a ſingular roſy crozum,
And drew attention and ſurmiſe;
And every one that ſeem'd more wiſe,
Began diſcuſſion of th' affair.
                           A certain pedagogue was there,
Did firſt accoſt, and aſk'd the riſe,
And the intendment of device,
And why he wore a turkey there,
Effigies of a bird of the air,
And other ſuch interrogatories.
                           The Cincinnat who heard the queries,
Explain'd the hiſtory of the club,
And effigy upon the bob;
Vidilicet, that having fought,
And put the adverſar's to trot,
Retir'd from war, like Cincinnatus,
And were about to plant potatoes;
But firſt in memory of their warfare,
And individuals did moſt care for,
Had ſet up club and wore a badge.
                           And what bird have you in the cage,
Quoth pedagogue? is it a gooſe,
That you have choſen for your uſe?
Or a wild turkey or a ſwan?
[Page xxxii]
This hurt the Cincinnati man----
Quoth he, I will not ſay you mean,
T' affront, and throw out with deſign,
This ſarcaſm on the badge we wear;
For 'tis an eagle of the air,
And emblematical of power,
As having dominion of the lower,
The fowls of the ſtack-yard and the grove;
And hence become the bird of Jove,
And is device upon the badge,
Which you and other fools with rage,
Decry and vilify and abuſe,
As being without ſenſe or uſe;
Becauſe your ignorance is ſuch,
You cannot comprehend it much,
The meaning of the hieroglyphic,
Or motto that is ſcientific,
Devis'd by ſcholars that were good,
And authors of ſimilitude.
                           Quoth pedagogue, I own I ſaw
It had a bird's tail and a claw;
But never did ſo far encroach,
To look diſtinctly on the broach
Whether a grey gooſe or a drake,
That gives himſelf i' th' rooſt a ſhake,
But what reſemblance is there here,
To him of Roman character;
Who wore no brochet at his button;
Or a remarkable eſcutcheon;
But when he quit the war and battle;
[Page xxxiii]
Return'd t' his harrow and draft cattle,
Without a gooſe-reſembling bauble;
Or other bird or beaſt, could gabble,
A word of Latin or of Greek.
                           But what the phraſe it ſeems to ſpeak?
Relinquit omnia, ſervare
Rempublicam; by the lord Harry,
The Roman had not much to leave,
And would have laugh'd himſelf in's ſleeve,
T' have had theſe words applied to him.
And you that are of modern time,
Were in the ſame predicament,
Before were to the warfare ſent;
So that the point is not in this,
From whence eulogium takes its riſe,
The having left a ſteer or two,
Or an old horſe with which did plow;
But your returning to your place,
When armies had been ſent to graſs;
So that 'twere better you had made it,
Nunc victor ad aratrum redit:
Or ſome ſuch phraſeology,
Deſignating the eulogy,
Which really did belong to ſuch,
As not ambitious over much,
Return'd from victory and war,
To till their ground, and take the care,
Of ſtock upon their farms; but wore,
No other enſign than before,
With barbarous Latin ſuch as this,
[Page xxxiv]
Aſſum'd for their hypotheſis.
                           Quoth Cincinnat, a great Quintilian,
You are, and have read books a million;
Can give a Latin word to teach us,
Which way the Romans pull'd up breeches;
Or how tobacco quid in cheek,
Was turn'd by the enlighten'd Greek;
You cough and grunt by ſyntax rules
Drawn from the proſody of ſchools;
But though I know not Cincinnatus,
Or other Roman that begat us,
The club nam'd after him is good
And I could ſhew it if I would;
But eaſier to diſſolve the knot
By ſlitting noſe or cutting throat;
Than talking about book or claſſic,
And reading till it makes the eyes ach;
For that my buſineſs is; this, yours;
Which ſophiſtry, a hanger cures.
So ſay no more about the matter.
                           Meantime with ignorance and ill-nature,
There was a certain clergyman,
That took upon him to explain,
The meaning of the badge and uſe,
By reading hiſtory of the Jews;
Conceiv'd was an idolater,
That from the eaſtern climes came there
With native ſparrow at his breaſt;
Or what elſe bird it was expreſs'd;
Egyptian ibis or a ſtork,
[Page xxxv]
That did among the ſedges lurk,
In face of dictate that was given,
By decalogue that came from heaven,
Inhibiting the worſhiping,
Of graven bird or beaſt or thing;
Or otherwiſe a great magician,
He was, and dangerous on the occaſion;
For had a trinket of his own,
And abracadrabra writ thereon,
With ſome infernal ſpell or force,
Above a common Chriſtian's powers.
                           The Cincinnat enrag'd to hear
Attack upon his character,
Addreſſed himſelf to the populace,
Were then aſſembled at the place.
                           Quoth he, though no great orator
Experience being more in war,
Yet ſenſe of injury and wrong,
May looſen word-ſtrings of my tongue;
Enable me to tell my tale
In way, perhaps, acceptable;
Eſpecially as candour hears,
As is evinc'd by your drop'd ears.
For well aware that public lies,
Inſinuation and ſurmiſe,
Had got the ſtart of me, I fear'd,
I would not be with candour heard.
But to begin----'tis gone abroad,
That I have image of falſe god,
Hung at my breaſt; the effigy
[Page xxxvi]
Of bird, or beaſt, or fiſh or fly;
Which idol grav'd in bit of gold,
Like the idolaters of old,
I worſhip, and put up a prayer,
Tho' but a wild fowl of the air.
The clergyman has given riſe,
To this religious prejudice,
As natural to every mind,
To breed according to its kind;
But nothing more diſſimilar,
Than that a ſoldier in the war,
Should worſhip God at all, or beaſt,
In effigy or ſhape expreſs'd;
For ſeldom worſhip the true God,
Save when ſome danger comes the road;
Unleſs the ſwearing by the Lord,
Or zounds or zucks, or ſome ſuch word,
May be accounted reverence,
Expreſs'd to the Omnipotence;
And therefore much leſs probable
T' adore the viſual beak or bill
Of this ſmall eaglet that I wear.
As to idolatry am clear;
For though know nothing more about,
Religions that are ſet on foot
Than a grey gooſe; yet catholic,
Let all men worſhip till they're ſick;
Nor interfere with church or pſalm,
But be plain ſoldier as I am.
You that compoſe my audience,
[Page xxxvii]
Are perſons of ſuperior ſenſe,
And can with others ſet that right
Miſrepreſented by the wight,
And ſave my hard earn'd character,
And the good name I wiſh to bear.
                           There was a citizen juſt by,
Who liſtened to apology.
Quoth he it may not be the ſhape
Of bird or beaſt at which you gape,
For ſake of reverence or of prayer;
But to diſtinguiſh what you are;
The only ſaviours of the cauſe;
It being not the truth; whereas
Are many others that have fought,
And taken the Heſſians by the throat,
And may deſerve more ſolid praiſe,
Than wearing that ſmall thing of braſs,
Unworthy even of you that chuſe,
To have the enſign of the gooſe.
Is't not ridiculous that one,
Who in the ſervice has been known,
As champion of a ſober cauſe,
Which with it ſuch advantage draws
As to ſecure our liberty,
And place the thirteen ſtripes on high
In this ſevere and ruggid clime,
Should turn his thoughts to ſuch a whim
As ſavours of a ruder age,
When every light-head wore a badge;
And is no trophy or a ſpoil
[Page xxxviii]
The warrior earn'd, upon the ſoil,
But arbitrary honor made,
By ſome one of the brazier trade;
And is no ſpecial proof of worth;
There are ſo many to hold forth.
Pretenſion to the ſame device;
For the peculiar honor lies,
In being diſtinguiſh'd in deſert.
Are you the only that merit,
In revolution brought about?
Or are there not amongſt the croud,
Some others that have juſt pretence,
If not with ſword, at leaſt with brains,
To patriotiſm in the cauſe?
If not with arms they have withjaws
In councils of the ſeveral ſtates,
Or by their writings in Gazettes,
Rebuff'd the Britiſh power and force
And militated with diſcourſe;
And many who have ſpoke and wrote,
Have alſo on occaſion fought.
And there are victims of the cauſe,
By operation of the laws;
In favor of the general good.
What think you of the multitude,
Reduc'd by fluctuating paper,
Eſtates vaniſhing like vapour,
And brought to beggary and loſs:
For take the people in the groſs,
And all have ſuffer'd more or leſs;
[Page xxxix]
And ſo may claim by ſervices,
At leaſt a bit of lead or pewter,
As their deſervings are minuter,
And inſtitute a club or ſo,
For what they did againſt the foe,
In their particular grades and places;
So that the multitude increaſes,
To an infinity of badges;
The honorary rights and wages,
Of the whole bulk of citizens.
                           In this there was but little ſense,
To which the Cincinnat replied,
As having more reaſon on his ſide.
                           Quoth he, it is a ſmall affair,
If at the period of the war,
We inſtituted this our club,
To recreate us after rub,
And wear a badge which ſome arraign
As viſionary toy, and vain;
But is not fancy that ſupplies,
One half of things which are our choice;
And all beyond the dreſs and food,
Is but imaginary good?
The cut, the colour of the garb
Diſtinguiſhing the Jew from Ar'b;
And all kinds of appendages,
Of different tribes and nations dreſs
Have their foundation in caprice;
Not from neceſſity take riſe.
The ſavages that are untaught
[Page xl]
Do wear their honors at the ſnout;
And nature ſanctions the purſuit
By giving feathers to the brute.
The badge we wear is not a charm
Of Phyſical or moral harm;
But forcibly doth operate,
And in the human mind create
A love of fame and dignity,
By having this before the eye;
As, in the Britiſh iſle, a ſtar
And Garter, is reward of war;
And the St, Louis croſs in France,
In other places like advance:
It is a ſmall thing if from toil,
Of ſummers ſun and winters ſoil,
Deficient in the ſtipend due,
We wear a thing diſtinct from you,
A trifling ſignet of our own,
Shall ſcarcely coſt us half a crown,
Is there a law againſt the uſage,
Proſcribing it as a ſurpluſſage;
So that a writ of capias corpus
Can have the virtue to diſturb us,
If there is neither rule of nature,
Or juriſprudence that can deter,
Why not juſt let the things go on,
In the ſame channel 'tis begun?
For though not great the excellence,
Yet have there not been men of ſenſe
Among the Romans and the Greeks,
[Page xli]
That wore ſuch things about their necks?
A bull or button at the breaſt;
Or elſewhere, that has well expreſs'd,
The ſignal honor they had won,
By keeping adverſaries down;
Or ſaving citizen at leaſt;
And yet the thing not made a jeſt,
By perſons that have talk'd like you?
                           Quoth citizen, it may be true;
And alſo in the modern days,
There have been found out many ways,
To tickle fancies of the fools.
There ſcarcely is a king but gulls,
His courtiers with appendages,
(At leaſt when he is moneyleſs)
Of title, or ſome ſilly badge
With which they dance like birds in cage,
Proud of a feather that is red,
Or blue, becauſe they take't in head,
It does them honor with the prince;
But here we have a little ſenſe,
In theſe United States, and hate,
Such phantaſy of a wrong pate;
And wiſh t' have merit of our own,
And not a mark to make it known,
Hung up like ſign at tavern door,
Or barber's pole your noſe before,
Evincing what there is within,
You could not other ways divine.
Beſides why do you quote the Greeks,
[Page xlii]
Or Romans that had like dogs tricks?
There is a difference in the caſe;
For there, the people's ſuffrages,
Beſtow'd the honor that was worn;
But here it would not ſerve your turn,
But you yourſelves aſſum'd device.
                           Quoth Cincinnat, 'tis all damn'd lies;
We took it up, 'tis true, but yet,
It may be ſaid the gift of the ſtate,
Becauſe the honor was our right,
And by deſerving we came by 't.
Be that as't may the thing is ſafe,
And well befitting to the brave;
Quite innocent in name and nature;
Nor works a harm to ſingle creature,
Is neither error, nor a ſin,
T' offend a layman or divine.
                           At this the clergyman ſpoke out,
Who ſtill was ſtanding in the croud.
Quoth he, have ſaid, and ſay it again
The thing is heatheniſh and vain,
And wearer an idolater,
Of whom there is juſt cauſe to fear,
Being ſome falſe prophet come to light
As is laid down in ſacred writ,
That fell deceivers would ariſe,
In latter times to blind our eyes,
And draw us from the truth we hold;
For as to that ſame bit of gold,
What uſe? unleſs ſimbolical,
[Page xliii]
Of ſomething bad and magical,
With rhyme that is engrav'd thereon?
If the mythology was known,
It might be found it was that gog,---
And magog that has lain incog,
So long in the apocalypſe;
And now emerging from eclipſe,
Has riſen in ſuch ſhape to men.
                           The Cincinnat to him again:
Quoth he, it ill becomes a prieſt,
To travel from his ſphere, and jeſt,
About this trinket that I wear;
Againſt it roaring like a bear,
Who ſhould be reaſoning with the jew,
Wherever he can find a clue;
Or with the infidel, about,
The devil's horns and cloven foot.
Is this the knowledge that you gather,
From every old and half dead father,
As Chryſtoſtom or Poly-carp,
Who on a different ſtring did harp;
From you, about our inſtitutions,
Inſtead of prayers and abſolutions,
And teaching from the catechiſm,
The origin of faith and ſchiſm:
Which is unnatural and abſurd,
Deſerves to be chaſtis'd and cur'd?
For have you not an ample ſcope;
Or as we ſay, enough of rope,
To vent your rage and crudities,
[Page xliv]
Againſt the errors that ariſe,
Of fools that are propenſe to evil,
And lay the fault upon the devil,
As if he were a Jack o' lantern,
In every whole and corner ſauntering,
Who never yet was out of hell,
Or knew a ſingle ſyllable,
About the matter laid t' his charge,
In pulpit oratory at large?
I'ſt not enough to ſplit your text:
(Till every hearer's heart is vex'd)
In forks and branches multiple,
And firſtlies, and ſo-forths at ill,
With heads and horns of Daniel's ram,
That in the prophet's viſion came;
Or bring a ſermon out of what
Has ſcarce the ſemblance of a thought,
By twiſting, turning, proper phraſe;
Or cloathing priſtine nakedneſs,
With commentaries of the brain,
Which no man elſe could find therein?
And have you not interminable,
Career to run as faſt as able,
Through all the ſyſtems of the faith,
And variations that it hath,
Drawn from theology of ſchools,
Or ſelf-born of the preachers ſkulls,
And built upon the abſtract baſe;
Which was originally much leſs:
For ſo extenſive is the flood,
[Page xlv]
Of knowledge that is bad or good,
A man may ſouſe therein and toſs,
Juſt as in ocean would a gooſe,
And find no ſhore or bottom out
Of doctrines that are ſet on foot?
Why then neceſſity to ſtretch,
Your legs upon us at a fetch,
As if you had not room at home
To canter on your hypodrome,
But muſt inveigh againſt what is
But a mere ſymbol and device,
And has no moral turpitude;
Or meaning that is bad or good,
Save juſt to ſhew the club we're of?
                           Quoth preacher, it is well enough
To put that face upon the matter,
To keep the world from knowing better,
Leſt it ſhould do your club a damage.
But is it not an molten image
Which the commandment hath forbidden?
                           Quoth Cincinnat, are ſo prieſt-ridden
That common ſenſe has little place.
It may be molten, to uſe phraſe,
But what of that, if not the uſe
Is a new god to introduce,
And worſhip ſemblance of a beaſt,
Or bird that is upon the creſt?
It cannot give offence to Moſes,
Or hurt the decalogu's-proboſcis,
Or you that are conſervators,
[Page xlvi]
Of all that in religion ſtirs.
So that it is unneceſſary,
To make our club your adverſary
By thus miſconſtruing the badge,
By inuendoes that engage
The rabble to have prejudice.
                           Quoth clergyman the matter lies
Juſt here; the pagan deities,
False gods in Egypt or elſewhere
Did under ſome ſuch ſhape appear;
And even we read amongſt the Jews
They fell ſometimes to this abuſe;
But chiefly worſhip'd calves and ſtocks;
For which were given them ſore rebukes.
But paganiſm worſhip'd fowls,
Eagles and pigeons and vile owls,
Which you would imitate by this
A ſample of idolatries, ---
And whoredom people did commit,
And ſins of the fleſh in holy writ;
And hence were baniſh'd from the earth
Which gave the ſeveral nations birth.
Of Canaanites and after them,
The Philiſtines that err'd the ſame;
The Romans, Greeks, and other pagans,
That had their aſtharoths, and dagons
And worſhip'd bulls, and goats and heifers;
And were your oracle believers;
Whichbrought the curſe of God upon them:
And hence it is that there is no man,
[Page xlvii]
Who ſees affection that you have
For that which workmen did engrave,
But fears a judgment for the ſin,
And wickedneſs that is there in;
So that I preach and pray and faſt---
                           Quoth Cincinat, not much of the laſt;
At leaſt may ſpare it, and take food,
As prayers can do but little good;
And all your exhortation, is
A rhapſode of abſurdities,
To make the ſimple people ſtare,
About this wild fowl of the air.
But as you ſeem to be a fool,
The beſt way is to crack your ſkull
And let in light to give you ſenſe
And make your ſoul like other mens;
Removing this enthuſiaſm,
That turns your brain to Jewiſhiſm.
With that he drew as if to ſtrike;
But one among the people, quick,
Who was a great philoſoper,
Though yet had made but little ſtir,
Put by the blow, and thus beſpoke;
                           Quoth he, your hot-born rage revoke,
Nor draw your ſword upon the cloth,
Becauſe you are a little wroth;
And without reaſon or juſt cauſe,
what has been thrown out; whereas,
It is a general allegation,
And turns upon the whole profeſſion
[Page xlviii]
Of club, which has ſo broad a baſe
It eaſily bears it, in this caſe,
And is not perſonal alone,
To you on whom the thing is thrown;
And when a number are to bear
The ignominy of the affair,
It is as nothing to the whole.
                           Have you Don Quixotte in your ſkull,
And yet not recollect the ſpeech,
He made t' a town within his reach,
Which had conceiv'd offence, becauſe
His Sancho braying like an aſs;
At which he was not any ſlouch;
Did ſeem to ſay they were juſt ſuch?
He tells them that no words can ſtrike
Or hurt a body politic,
Becauſe the offence has no juſt baſe
Of individual in the caſe.
Are not the learn'd profeſſions known
To be juſt ſtring to harp upon?
We ſay that lawyers are all rogues,
And preacher, that he but humbugs;
And of phyſician, that he kills;
More than he cures, with his damn'd pills,
And yet we have not on our backs,
The whole of theſe like pedlars packs;
For the phyſician, lawyer, prieſt,
I aughs at the matter, as a jeſt.
Why, then enrag'd, at any one,
For obloquy, that he has thrown,
[Page xlix]
Juſt for a theme of his diſcourſe,
To raiſe a laugh among the boors'
Do they who write your worſt of ſatires,
And ironies and all ſuch matters,
Poſſeſs a temper worſe than others,
Drawn from the nature of their mothers;
Or juſt to ſhew their wit, at times,
They ſcratch out paragraphs and rhymes;
Attack the elergy, or the bar;
Or with hypocrates make war;
Or chuſe a country, or a town
To be the ſubject of lampoon;
Who laugh and read the ridicule;
And only but a natural fool,
Would take in head to fight or fence;
Or 'gainſt the ſlander break his ſhins.
But where there may be ſome juſt baſe,
Of obloquy, in any caſe,
It more behooves to bear, as here,
Where though the matter may be clear,
You have a right to wear what badge,
You chooſe; yet, there are who alledge,
It is a treſpaſs to break heads;
For though the man is pleas'd who reads,
The hiſtory of atchievment, yet,
Not him who feels the blow on's pate.
Unſeaſonable chivalry,
Does not with modern times agree;
Where law takes place of ancient prow'ſs,
puts a ſtop to the abuſe,
[Page l]
Nor troubles knights to knock down cows;
Or giants that have broke a houſe;
So that it is unneceſſary;
To eudgel any adverſary,
Eſpecially a clergyman,
Who has his priviledge: again,----
Inglorious to make war with ſuch,
Not having honor very much,
Of victory, when it is obtain'd.----
                           There was a corporal by, hot-brain'd;
Who had been in the war, and fought;
But no bald eagle, yet had got;
Or was a partner of the club,
Which military had ſet up;
And took it much amiſs that thoſe,
Who equally had fac'd the foes,
Unworthily, were left i' the lurch,
To ſtand the back ſide of the porch,
And though, were alſo at the muſtering;
Yet had not at the breaſt, or poſtern,
A thing, ſignificant of this----
For his part, he was wounded thrice,
While that ſame officer that ſpoke,
Had ſcarcely ever ſeen the ſmoke.
But ſince he was ſo hot to fight,
With clergyman, no man of might,
Had better turn to him a ſoldier,
Would make his blood a little colder;
And eaſe him of intemperate paſſion;
Becauſe the clergyman had reaſon,
[Page li]
And others, to find fault, and blame,
The Cincinnat that left no fame,
To th' common ſoldier, and the ſergeant,
But of their own accord, took charge on't;
And wore this honor as their own,
Appropriate to themſelves alone.
                           The Cincinnat, who heard this, ſpoke.
Quoth he, whether, in, or, out of ſmoke;
Or where, the bullets flew, or fell;
And men, and muſkets, fought like hell;
No matter, to an officer,
Who only has a right to wear,
The emblem of the victory;
Becauſe there muſt be low and high;
And what is better born and bread,
'Tis reaſonable ſhould be the head.
For what our nature makes the foot,
Doth, in the inferior ſtation trot.
As, in this very body of ours,
We do not go, upon all fours;
So, it is reaſonable, there ſhould,
Be a diſtinction of the brood;
And thoſe who have but little ſenſe
And lower quality of brains,
Should occupy a ſphere beneath.
Is not the officer the head?
When we gave orders you obey'd,
So that 'tis proper you poſſeſs
But the inferior grade and place;
And have no badge or inſtitution.
[Page lii]
                           The corporal felt his paſſion ruſhing.---
Quoth he, have juſt as good a right,
As you, though thus you did come by't
To take to ourſelves and wear a badge.
                           The Cincinnat felt greater rage.
Quoth he, forſooth, becauſe you fought,
Where battle was a little hot,
You claim the privilege with us,
To be o' th' inſide of the houſe,
To have inſignia at your breaſt!
As well might an irrational beaſt,
The horſe that draws artillery gun,
Or ſoldier had to ride upon,
Put in for heraldry, becauſe,
Has ſometimes been where dancer was.
What would you think to ſee a ribbon
Or badge, hung at his tail, or hipbone!
A burleſque on your appetite,
To have this matter made ſo light,
Which were a proper ridicule
When ſuch a Teague O'Regan fool
As you, would claim the eſtabliſhment.
                           The corporal's anger which was pent
Broke out.---It was not proof of ſenſe,
Or other quality of brains,
Quoth he, that fabricated one,
An officer, and let alone,
The other, that was juſt as good;
But Congreſs, that was in the mood;
For, had a comrade, in my hut,
[Page ]
That would have made a perfect butt,
Of many that were officers,
Who had as little ſenſe as bears---
And yet forſooth poor ſoldier dick,
May wiſh for honor, till he's ſick,
And get no knob, or bit of ribbon,
Hung at his boſom, or his hipbone,
As many of the codheads have,
Who did not ſhew themſelves ſo brave,
In any battle that was fought.
                           At this, the Cincinnat, red hot,
Drew out his hanger, to ſhed blood,
And hew down corporal, as he ſtood:
But thought it beſt, t' accoſt him firſt,
Before the matter came to th' worſt.
As Homer, when he wages battle,
Between two of heroic cattle,
He has a parly, and a ſpeech,
To know each other, which is which;
And, of what origin, they were;
And, how the devil, they came there:
Becauſe, whoknows, but they were couſins?
So ſhould not cut each others weazons;
But, turn to other combatants:
And even in the time of giants,
And champions, throughout chriſtendom,
Before they, hand to hand, did come,
And actual claſhing of the ſwords,
'Twas not unuſual to have words;
Though what was uſual to be ſaid,
[Page liv]
Have not at preſent in my head:
But do, remember, very well,---
What from our Cincinnatus fell,
                           “Quoth he, if, ſo prepoſterous,
T' have alſo what they call a gooſe,
Is your ambition, why not take,
God's name, and hang it at your neck;
Or at your breech, or back, or boſom;
Or like a turkey-cock, at noſe o' 'im?
Some wooden peg, or pewter noggin,
To wear it as you are a joging;
Or copper ball, or piece of metal
Inferior, for the common cattle;
With ſomething on it like a bird
Or ſign of poultry; whence infer'd,
That you have rob'd hen-rooſts, you rogue
Or ſtole a duck or drake incog;
When rations were a little ſcarce,
                           This ſeem'd to make the thing a farce;
And a militia man juſt by,
Who liſten'd t' him attentively,
Was angry, and began to frown,
To ſee the ſoldier ſo run down.
                           Quoth he, though but a common rat,
I am, and you a Cincinnat.
Great captain, that have ſpoke ſo loud,
In your haranguing to the croud;
And, though I know the ſoldier would
Much rather have a fowl for food,
And eat the wing or rib of a gooſe,
[Page lv]
Than ſmell its picture at his noſe;
Yet take a part in his defence,
Becauſe he ſpeaks the better ſenſe;
And undervaluing, you throughout
Hits me, and others in the croud,
Who being but militia perſons,
Who in the war have made exertions
Yet have no right to wear the badge,
As indirectly you alledge,
By title and the club aſſum'd---
                           By this time common fame had drum'd
The like ideas every where,
Amongſt the people that were there,
With ſuch exaggeration, as---
Is natural in the like caſe;
Videlicet, that the prognatus
Who then was there of Cincinnatus
Had ridicul'd all common people;
And blackguarded them like the devil,
Calling them all ſcrubs and bodkins,
And habberdaſhers, and ſuch odd things:
How, that they ran away at York,
And left the regulars at the work;
And fled at Germantown and broke,
Whilſt they were buſy in the ſmoke:
At other places turn'd about,
And ſcarcely ever ſhew'd their ſnout,
Where there was danger, or hot fire.
                           One of the people that was nigher,
Became the ſpokeſman of the reſt;
[Page lvi]
And rage now boiling in his breaſt;
Quoth he, no doubt, we are but goats
And ſcarce above the beaſt that trots,
Compar'd with you, in what was done,
And ſervices, you ſon of a gun;
Tag-rag and bob-tail, doubtleſs, are
Compar'd with vet'ran officer:
Becauſe we have not at our boſom
That thing of yours, a roſy crozum;
Are not embelliſh'd with a broach,
At head or neck, or breaſt, or crotch;
A Latin motto or an enſign,
Our toils, or ſervices evincing;
Being but a vulgar ſort of whigs,
That in the marches danc'd our jigs;
Nor help'd at Trenton to take Heſſians;
Or fought like you, on other occaſions;
Or at the Cowpens, made good battle;
And ſo are but a common cattle;
And you alone ſuſtain'd the cauſe,
While we like bears at home ſuck'd paws;
And cannot now advance a claim,
To hieroglyphic of your ſame.
                           Quoth Cincinnat, the charge is falſe,
And of the nature of all tales,
Which contradict, and ſhew by proof,
Intrinſical, what they are of.
What? an American, by birth,
Degrade the military worth,
And leſſen the applauſe,
[Page lvii]
Of my compatriots, in the cauſe,
Of thoſe who fought, in front, or flank,
In regular, or militia rank.
My ſentiments are the reverſe;
And never had in view t' aſperſe
The ſignal honor you have won,
In order to advance my own.
                           Theſe words had reaſon, but his voice
Was wholly buried in the noiſe;
And as the clamour was, to beat
And chaſtiſe, this our Cincinnat,
His words could not reſtrain the mob,
Or check the violence of hubbub.
For where a multitude convenes
To carry on ſome hot deſigns,
They muſt do ſomething, or ſeem ſlack,
Of ſkill and courage, for the attack.
So ruſhing diſcompos'd, the throng,
Brought violence, and blows along:
Here one uprais'd a ponderous ſtone;
Another got an old horſe bone;
Elſewhere, was ſeen, a block of wood,
Portending to the knight no good;
And all around, the face of war
Appear'd, juſt gathering, in the air.
Say, ſhall he wage an equal fight;
And wound whole ranks, and kill outright;
Like val'rous Hector, at the ſiege,
Of Troy, compoſe a perfect bridge,
Of bodies, upon which to tread,
[Page lviii]
And ſwell the rivers with the dead;
Or mow a whole battalion down,
Like Ajax, ſon of Telamon;
Conſtruct a rampart of the ſlain;
And ſtrew with carcaſes the plain?
Or ſhall I bid him jump among,
The individuals of the throng;
Like Alexander when half crazy
He leapt the walls of Oxcydracy?
Or ſhall I render him expert
The various wiles of war t' exert;
And now give way, and now advance,
And ſpit a parcel on his lance?
Shall I deſcribe a various fray,
And change the fortune of the day;
Now on the verge of a defeat;
And now, in turn, advantage get;
One while broke down, like very ſtubble;
Now riſe, and give the foe more trouble?
What wounds ſhall ſpecify; what heart,
Oppreſs with javelin or dart?
What names relate, and characters
Of thoſe who rag'd this day like bears?
                           I wave the arduous taſk of this;
Becauſe narration would be lies;
For, juſt the naked truth expreſs'd,
In hiſtory, is always beſt.
Hence ſhall relate what came to paſs;
And how the iſſue really was;
Videlicet---but here again,
[Page lix]
I feel the ruſhing epic vein,
To bring Minerva, from the clouds,
Down ſliding through aerial ſhrouds;
To make her vet'ran champion wiſe,
And teach him that no honor lies
In waging battle, where the chance,
Of war, between the combatants,
Is ſo unequal, as this was;
For, had no head piece, made of braſs;
Or iron, adamant, or wood;
And let him do the beſt he could;
Yet ſtill, the number, and the weight,
Of blows, that muſt aſſail the pate,
Would overpower his beſt defence,
And wound him, or knock out his brains.
'Twas no Minerva, or a God,
From dome celeſtial, or abode,
But, his own reaſon, play'd the part,
And put diſcretion in his heart.
For, ſeeing that the wild miſrule,
Of mob, as raging to the full,
As pedlars at an Ulſter fair,
With their ſhilelahs, ſwung in air,
Left him no hope of victory,
He thought the beſt way was to fly,
And without waiting for the blows,
He turn'd the corner of a houſe;
Eſcaping from the rioters:
As when a morning ſhadow ſtirs,
And hides itſelf behind a wood,
[Page lx]
Before the ſun that would ſuck blood,
Purſuing, with his riſing heat,
The thing that is not adequate,
To give him battle, and withſtand
The numerous beams he has at hand:
To overpower it on the plains,
And maul it, and knock out its brains.
Retir'd, and to a tavern got,
Where ſuch diſturbance there was not;
Fatigu'd with what had ſung and ſaid,
Now on a ſofa laid his head;
Becauſe he did not wiſh to trudge.
God Morpheus who does not begrudge
A dream, lent one to keep him quiet.
He ſaw a plain, and there eſpied,
The champions of the former period,
And airy courſers, on which they rode:
The cavalcade of ancient knight-hood?
A ſhew would do the very ſight good;
Such, as the monſters, had knock'd down;
And dwarfs, and giants, overthrown;
And fiery dragons of the air;
And pale-fac'd virgins that were there;
Whom they had reſcued from the graſp,
Of raviſhers that did enclaſp
Their ſnowy bodies, in their arms;
And drank the luſtre of their charms;
Or knights themſelves, who had been freed,
From oaken durance, where were tree'd;
Or bound in rocks, where by a ſpell,
[Page lxi]
They had remained inviſible,
                           The Cincinnat approach'd the throng,
Who beckon'd him to come along;
As recognizing his advance,
To be that of no common man's;
But one who came to join the ſquad,
By that ſame baublet that he had;
With enſign of the eagle's beak,
And motto in th' original Greek
Or Latin, knew not which it was:
For things had come to ſuch a paſs,
When theſe knights flouriſh'd, devil a one,
Had ſuch a thing as learning known;
But all depended on their ſlaſhing,
For fame, and for diurnal ration;
And cut and carv'd their ſuſtenance,
By force of vig'rous arm and lance.
                           The Cincinnat addreſs'd as ought,
With choſen words and ſelect thought.
Quoth he, my ſeniors, in the art,
Of chevalry's great maſter part;
You ſee me, of a junior breed;
A germ, ſprung from the ſelf ſame ſeed,
Of predeceſſors in romance,
And orders that did flouriſh once;
Profeſſion now degenerate,
Reduc'd to the very loweſt ſtate;
For even the Cincinnati club
Which imitative is ſet up,
Is much traduce'd, and badge do wear
[Page lxii]
Is greatly undervalu'd here;
Particularly a pedagogue,
And clergyman that is in vogue,
And other cavilers, juſt now
I met with in a town came through;
Do lead aſtray the populace,
Who have no judgment in the caſe.
                           A ſenior from the ſquad ſtep'd forth,
Of a ſuperior mein, and worth:
Quoth he, the more the degration,
Of chivalry, the more occaſion,
For an exertion of the brain,
To kindle up the thing again;
And doubtleſs this ſame club of yours,
Has, as't were added boots and ſpurs,
To bring it to a trot once more
And reſtorate the days of yore.
And, if diſcouragements ariſe,
In this the greater honor lies,
To overcome and perſevere.
'Tis true, no dragons of the air,
Or fiery vultures do occur,
T' encounter with, and make a ſtir;
Or damſels raviſh'd in a wood;
Or giant to let out his blood:
Or an inchanter with his ſpell;
But yet there is the devil in hell
To pay with other villainies,
That in your modern days take riſe
Such as falſe notions of the right,
[Page lxiii]
Which it behooves a valourous knight
T' arraign with free born thought and ſpeech
And tell the people which is which;
And no leſs courage is requir'd,
To ſpeak the truth with which are fir'd;
Than to knock down a cow at graſs,
Or monſter that did come to paſs.
                           Meantime a meſſage had been ſent
By Charlemagne to call from tent,
By trumpeter, the ſeveral orders,
That lay upon th' enchanted borders,
Our hero look'd to ſee where was,
Old Cincinnatus in the caſe.
In vain, for, in elyſium hous'd,
His mettle had not yet be rous'd;
But mixed, with the ignoble ſhades,
Did wander, idly in the glades;
And as in life, had been a plowman,
And wore no badge, or dreſs uncommon;
So now he troubles not his herd,
With theſe; but walks among the dead,
The Romans, or obſcurer Greeks;
That wore no pendle at their necks.
                           At this the Cincinnat below,
Awaking as ſome one came through,
Saw nothing but the ſtanding chairs,
And landlord coming down the ſtairs.
[Page lxiv]
It would ſeem a little ſtrange, what
could have induced this bard, to have made
choice of the preceding ſubject for his poem,
as not being an American; or at leaſt,
long in America; and could not be much
intereſted, one would think, in the institution
of the Cincinnati Society. But it is
to be obſerved, that poets, chuſe a ſubject,
and ridicule, or praiſe, not becauſe they
care any thing about the matter; but because
there may be ſome novelty or originality
in the ſubject; and, ſo, what they
write, not altogether beaten and common.
It may be alſo juſt to obſerve, that foreigners
were more alarmed at the institution
of the ſociety than Americans, and
for this reaſon, becauſe, they ſaw at home
the orders of nobility with ſtars, garters,
croſſes, &c. and felt the weight of superior
rank, of which theſe were ſometimes
the badges: and transferring the idea to
the Cincinnati, they conſidered them in
the ſame point of view. Hence, it was,
that Mirabeau, in France, was led to
compoſe a treatiſe againſt the inſtitution,
ſhewing it to be, as he conceived, unfavorable
to equality, and dangerous to the
liberty of theſe ſtates. Burke has been
the only American that has written, professedly,
on the tendency of this club:
[Page lxv]
but, as his name imports, I take it he
muſt have been, originally, an Iriſhman;
and had conceived, in that country, an
unfavorable idea of titled perſons, Sir
this, and Sir that one, &c. Probably
he has been of the Hearts of Oak, or
White Boys, who were of a levelling
principle, and oppoſed to all elevation
from the common maſs.
For my part, I could never ſee that it
was of any conſequence whether this institution
exiſted or not. For it muſt naturally
evaporate in a few years, the ſpirit
of the times being wholly changed, from
what it was in the days of chivalry, and
not capable of ſupporting an excreſcene
which has no natural root, or foundation
in the opinion of the people.
The public may think what it will of
this little work of the unfortunate Scotchman;
but it appears to me, to have the
vivida vis, animi, in a very great degree;
and the verſification, though careleſs, is
ſpirited. The brokenneſs and disjointings
of the verſes, one line running into, and
interlaced with another, carries it beyond
the monotous, though perhaps, more musical
imitators of Butler: amongſt whom,
Trumbull, of Connecticut, eaſily deſerves
the firſt place; yet though in his ſimilies,
[Page lxvi]
and other excellencies of his compoſition,
he may ſurpaſs the Cincinnatus of M`Comas;
nevertheleſs I muſt give the Scotch
bard the praiſe of greater variety in the
ſtructure of his verſes. I ſhould have been
glad to have ſeen him before his exit. I
have no doubt, that want of food, reducing
him to great weakneſs, together with pain of
mind from his deſolate ſituation, in a new
country, where there were but few in the
ſame line with himſelf, with whom he
could ſhare his joys, or communicate his
griefs, might haſten the diſſolution of his
frame, prematurely. For, from what I
have collected of the mode of life and private
hiſtory, in general, of bards, and
thoſe who live by their wits, in old countries,
I can eaſily conceive the pleaſure
which they have with each other, when,
after a fortunate paragraph with one, or
a copy of verſes with another, they collect
a few ſhillings, and after ſtarving several
days in the garrets while they had
been writing theſe, they now come together,
in an evening, to break their faſt,
with a few tripes, and a little ale, to exhilirate
their hearts.
Peace to the manes of M`Comas. He lies
buried in the Potter's-field; with a ſingle
ſtone at his head, which I myſelf, though
[Page lxvii]
I do not wiſh to boaſt of it, have put there,
with this inſcription on it, and nothing
more, Sanders M`Comas. I hope there
will be no miſtake, in future times, reading
it M`Comus, inſtead of M`Comas:
becauſe, it might be thought, to be a composition
of the name of the god of wit
among the Romans, which was Comus,
with the word Mac, put to it, which is a
Scoth adjective, which would puzzle antiquarians,
and be unintelligible: for the
fact is, he was a Scotchman, and his name
ſpelled, as I have written it.
[Page ]
BOOK I.
CHAPTER I. Having got through this long introduction
which may reſemble that ſpecies of
pompion they call a quaſhaw, whoſe neck
is longer than the whole body; I ſay resemble
it, for it will not be altogether like
it, as it will not be more at moſt, than a
third of the work. However it has been
long enough, in all conſcience. We hasten
to the ſequel of the adventures of the
Captain, and Teague his ſervant.
It will be recollected, that peſtered with
the prepoſterous ambition of the bog-trotter;
the Captain, by the advice of a
gentleman, had conſented to let him try
his luck of getting into ſome employment
under government.
[Page 002]
However; after reflecting with himſelf,
a long time on the ſubject, he could not
help expreſſing to the gentleman, with
whom he was ſtill in converſation, his
doubt of the ſucceſs of ſuch pretenſions.
Said he, after all, I do not ſee, how it
can be reaſonable to ſuppoſe that he can
come to any great height, in ſtate affairs:
He is totally illiterate and uncultivated.
As to that, ſaid the gentleman, it is no
reaſon at all. Do we not read in hiſtory
of perſons of the loweſt education who
have riſen to the greateſt heights both in
the civil, and military line. Butcher's
ſons, keepers of pigs, feeders of ſheep,
traffickers in ſmall wares, have come to
be Cardinals, Popes, and miniſters of
ſtate. That impuſe of mind which he discovers
to be ſomething, indicates a capacity
of being ſo. We ſeldom find in men,
a ſtrong deſire of obtaining any thing
which depends on human power, who have
not been able to obtain it. Hence it has
been ſaid, that let a man determine to be
Lord Mayor of London, and he may arrive
at that dignity.
The Captain yielding to the reaſons,
began to think, in what manner, it might
be proper, to give him an introduction,
and bring him forward; whether to
[Page 003]
endeavor to cultivate an acquaintance with
ſome members of Congreſs, or the heads
of departments, ſuch as the Secretary of
the Treaſury, of State, at War, &c. or
to begin with ſome of the ſubordinate
clerks, and riſe gradually to the knowledge
of the principals.
This, ſaid the gentleman, would be
beginning at the wrong end. Theſe people
muſt naturally be jealous, eſpecially of
ſuch as appear to have talents; not knowing
but that in time they may come to supercede
them. The moſt adviſeable way
is to attack the head at once: Preſent him
at the levee of the Preſident, and make
him known to the Chief Magiſtrate. This
is going to the fountain, and not depending
on the ſtreams, that divide among themselves;
and ſometimes ſink in the earth,
and diſappear.
Having been once ſeen at court, he will
acquire friends; and the Preſident himſelf,
can with more propriety take notice of
him.
But would it not be neceſſary, ſaid the
Captain, before we undertake to preſent
him at the levee of the Preſident, that I
ſhould have him rubbed down, and cloathed
a little better than he is at preſent.
[Page 004]
Not at all, ſaid the gentleman. It will
be beſt to preſent him, puris naturalibus,
juſt as he is, without brogues; in his over-alls,
with that long coat and ſlouched hat,
which you have given him to wear. The
Preſident ſeeing him as he is, will imagine
what he may be, when he comes to be
dreſſed off in a ſuitable manner; and imagination
always out-goes the reality. Besides;
unleſs he had been accuſtomed for
ſome time to good cloathing, he will appear
aukward in it, and move with pain
to himſelf, and to others. Take a country
girl that is neat enough in her ſhort
gown and petticoat, and put her in a fine
ſilk with ſtays, and ſhe will appear to
much leſs advantage. A clown in his
jacket and trowſers, is reſpectable; but
in a broadcloth coat, with ſuitable habiliments,
he would move ridicule.
Governed by theſe obſervations, the
Captain propoſed to take Teague to the
levee the next evening.
[Page 005]
CHAP. II.
Containing Obſervations.
The gentleman who thus adviſed the Captain,
though a grave man, I do not think was ſerious. He
has been what we call a wag, and wiſhed to amuſe himself
with the extravagance of introducing Teague as a
candidate for public offices, and taking him to the Levee.
For the Iriſhman was certainly in no very decent apparel
to appear at the court, even of a republic. The
jacket and trowſers, or overalls, as ſome call them,
that he had upon him, though of rough materials,
being a coarſe tow linen, that had not had but one
boiling before it was made up, were not even whole;
what is more, not clean, not that he had voluntarily
on ſome great occaſion, for a public or private calamity,
as was the manner of the Jews, rent his garments,
and put on ſackcloth, and ſtrewed aſhes on his head;
but what came to the ſame thing, by lying by the fire
ſide at night, and wreſtling in the day with the hoſtler,
and ſervants at the tavern, he was reduced to the ſame
raggedneſs and aſh-powdered ſtate.
Nevertheleſs, though there might not have been
time to have waſhed his duds; yet a patch or two might
have been put upon his veſtments; a conſiderable impression
having been made upon his flank, by a ſharp
point; and his rear being uncovered, a hand's-breadth
or more; unleſs indeed his breeches had been taken off
altogether, and he had come forward, a real ſans
culotte, without any thing on his backſide at all.
[Page 006]
CHAP. III.
The Levee.
Having waited with impatience
for the evening, the Captain, with the
candidate, ſet out for the levee. Arriving
at the door, the Captain, entering
firſt, and Teague juſt behind, he addressed
the Preſident: Said he, may it pleaſe
your Excellency, here is a young man,
whom I take the liberty to introduce, as
a candidate for ſtate employment. He
has been offered a ſeat in Congreſs. But
it appears to me that a place in the executive
department would ſuit him better;
his name is Teague O'Regan; and has
been for ſome time a ſervant of mine, a
bog-trotter; but I believe I could now
ſpare him if your Excellency has occaſion
to make uſe of him. The Attorney General,
and ſeveral others who were present,
were a good deal confounded at the
propoſition. A little lean Frenchman in
in the room, with a ſword by his ſide,
[Page 007]
was aſtoniſhed; and expreſſed above an
hundred foutres to himſelf in the compaſs
of a minute; I do not mean that he ſpoke
out, but thought them to himſelf in a
ſhort ſpace. A Britiſh conſul preſent,
who was a man of a philoſophic turn of
mind, could not but reflect on the nature
of a republican government, and the extraordinary
aſſurance of the loweſt claſs to
pretend to offices.
The Preſident, in the mean time, contemplating
the object, made a pauſe. But
after ſome time recollecting himſelf, bowed
to the Captain, and to Teague, and signified
that doubtleſs proper notice ſhould
be taken of the merits of the gentleman,
and proviſion made for him. This he
ſaid, bowing at the ſame time in a circular
manner, and turning round as if to converse
with another perſon, to whom attention
was in his turn, due. Teague in
the mean time advancing with his mouth
open, and both his arms ſtretched out, was
about to harrangue in his own dialect, as
plaſe your honor, &c. But an aid of the
Preſident, or ſome one concerned in the
ceremonial of the occaſion, touching the
Captain and Teague, and converſing with
them towards the door, gave them to understand,
that they might depart for the
[Page 008]
preſent; and that there was no manner
of queſtion, but that his Excellency had
taken a note of the matter, and when any
appointment was about to take place, the
gentleman would be remembered.
[Page 009]
CHAP. IV.
Containing Remarks & Obſervations.
I observe, from ſome ſcraps, in the public papers,
that the holding a levee by the Preſident of the United
States, has given offence, to men of ſevere, and extreme
republican ideas: For, as at the reformation from
the Roman Catholic ſuperſtition, the puritans, and
other thorough paced reformiſts, were offended with
the Church of England, for retaining ſome particulars
of the ancient ceremonies; ſuch as the ring in marriage;
the croſs in baptiſm; the ſurplice; kneeling at the
ſacrament; bowing at the name of Jeſus, &c. ſo here;
the more rigid revolutioniſts from monarchy, object to
any veſtige of its cuſtoms, and would lay aſide totally
all reſemblance of it.
On the other hand, it is ſuggeſted by thoſe who
would juſtify, or, apologize for the holding a levee,
that it is in itſelf, no ſubſtance or eſſential of monarchy;
it is, at the moſt, but a ſhadow of it, and can do little
harm; that the inſtitution was ſuggeſted by John
Adams, who having juſt returned from his embaſſy in
England, had no doubt good reaſon to ſuppoſe, that it
would be pleaſing to the Engliſh people who were accustomed
to ſuch things; and to the king eſpecially,
who, as far as we underſtand from Peter Pindar, is but a
thick-headed prince: It would be pleaſing to him, to
reflect that though he had loſt direct authority and jurisdiction
in theſe ſtates, yet we were ſtill diſpoſed to
touch, as it were, the hem of his garment, and adopt
ſome of the trappings of royalty. In this caſe he could
[Page 010]
with more propriety take notice of his brother George;
having a levee like another prince, than if he remained
but a bare republican, like a plucked fowl, without any
plumage to decorate his dignity. It is alſo ſaid, that it
was on this principle that Citizen Adams, propoſed introducing
titles of nobility, ſuch as, Duke and Dutcheſs,
Marquiſs and Marchioneſs, Count and Counteſs, Baronet
and Baroneſs, &c. For, that complying in theſe
ſmall matters with the ſtile of the Engliſh ranks, and
the genius of their government, it would produce and
preſerve a greater amity between the nations; and with
the court eſpecially, and enable us to obtain greater
advantages in our treaties of commerce. Whatever
may have been the principle, I do not think the proposition
bad. It could not be blameable; for Saint
Paul himſelf, in matters of religion, a thing much more
delicate in its nature, did not heſitate to ſhave the heads
of four young men, to pleaſe the Jews; and what was
worſe, circumciſed the poor boy Timothy. What
then, if to humour a weak king, and a prejudiced people,
we had received the appellations of nobility? Beſides;
the matter might have been ſo managed, as not to injure
the ſtamina of our conſtitution; that is, not to
confer the titles; but let the people take them. Carlisle,
for inſtance, the conſtable in Philadelphia, might
have called himſelf Lord Carliſle, and ſo on.
The advocates for a levee, ſay, that it is uſeful in order
to avoid the interruptions of perſons calling on the
Preſident at his private hours, who have no other buſineſs
than merely to be introduced and to ſee him; that setting
a couple of hours aſide, one day in the week, for the
purpoſe of ſatisfying the curioſity of the people, is good
œconomy; and is like throwing a barrel to a whale, in
order to preſerve the ſhip. For, that, if this was not
indulged, little elſe could be done through the week,
than attending to the formality of receiving viſitants.
To this it is anſwered that it muſt be impertient in any
one to call upon the Preſident who has no buſineſs with
[Page 011]
him, and if he has buſineſs, a levee is not the place to
ſettle it; that the Roman Pretors, and Grecian Archons
made out to diſcharge their offices, without this
expedient; that it is not conſiſtent with the honor of
wiſe and modeſt republicans to have it ſuppoſed, that
from idle, and light-headed curioſity, they would be
troubleſome to their chief magiſtrate; if any were ſo,
calling once, they could be diſmiſſed in ſuch a manner,
as to cure them of it; and the thing being once known
to be improper, the idea would pervade the maſs of the
citizens, and the moſt uninſtructed, would be taught
not to tranſgreſs by ſo obvious an intruſion.
Beſides; the curioſity of ſeeing a man eminent in
office, exiſts chiefly with weak minds; for the more
ſolid know, that it is not the figure of a great man that
has made him ſuch; but a ſeries of prudent and successful
conduct. They are ſenſible that when they ſee
the moſt diſtinguiſhed in arts, in letters, or in arms,
they will ſee a perſon that looks juſt like another man.
Is it worth while then, ſay the anti-lee-vites, to conſult
the curioſity of gaping haubucks, by obliging the chief
magiſtrate of a government, to ſhew himſelf to them
once a week, when he has ſo much real buſineſs on his
hands?
For my part, lying at the back of a mountain here;
the cool weſt wind blowing on me; I find myſelf little
heated with the difference of opinions on this queſtion.
All I ſhall ſay, is, that the ceremony of a levee would
not be agreeable to my mind; and if I ſhould be choſen
Preſident at any time, with which my friends flatter me,
I believe I ſhall not continue it, unleſs indeed, I ſhould
be allowed to diſcharge it by proxy. For I could not
myſelf, ſubmit to ſtand two hours, once a week, in a
circle, like a bear at a ſtake, to be ſaluted by all comers
and goers, and be obliged to ſay, ſome words of courſe,
to get clear of them. It is poſſible, this declaration
may affect my election, but ſuch is my habit of candour,
that being on the ſubject, I could not help making it.
[Page 012]
And I flatter myſelf, the moſt ſtreneous lee-vites, may
be reconciled to it, when I propoſe in its place to have
myſelf taken off the more abundantly in portraits, and
to have innumerable medals ſtruck repreſenting my
phyſiognomy and features; and to aſſiſt this, I ſhall not
be backward, to have diſcriptions given of my perſon,
manners, and apparel, to ſatisfy the curioſity of strangers.
This I hope will ſuffice.
[Page 013]
CHAP. V.
From the reception at the levee,
which the Captain thought favorable, he
began to entertain more confidence in the
advancement of Teague; and, under this
impreſſion, thought it now adviſeable to
begin to take ſome pains with his bodily
appearance, and by the next interview,
produce him to the beſt advantage.
To conduct this by ſyſtem, the firſt
thing was to heave him down, as it were,
and ſcrape off his barnacles. This was
done by ordering into an apartment of
the kitchen, at the Indian Queen, a tub
of warm water. His overalls being ſtript
off, and putting his feet and legs in this,
with hickory aſhes, and a pint of ſoft ſoap,
the hoſtler was occupied an hour or two,
in the neceſſary lotion and friction, until
the upper ſkin began to come off, and the
natural complexion of his fleſh appear.
After this being ſtript altogether, his
whole body underwent the ſame operation,
the Captain ſtanding by, and ordering
his joints to be ſtretched, in the manner
of the Turks in their baths. After this, a
clean ſhirt was put on him, and the uſual
attire of a common man.
[Page 014]
CHAP. VI.
The next thing to be done towards
forming the bog-trotter, to ſome degree
of decency, was the teaching him ſome
more eaſy movements of his perſon, ſo as
not to lift his feet ſo high, or make ſuch
long ſtrides; as not being neceſſary, where
there were now no ſloughs or ditches to
leap over, but carpets, or plain floors to
ſtep upon. This, with the inſtructing him,
in what manner, to turn his toes out, or
at leaſt to keep his feet parallel in walking;
and turning round, to throw one heel
into the hollow of the other foot; at the
ſame time, in what manner to bear his
arms and head; and to preſerve, or, incline
his body, in receiving or returning a
ſalutation: conſidering by what means
this was beſt attainable, the Captain
thought to himſelf it might be adviſeable,
in the firſt inſtance, to employ a dancing
maſter. For though the leſſons of ſuch a
teacher, might not give eaſe of behavior,
all at once, yet theſe might lay the foundation
of it. For, no man ever came
[Page 015]
from the hands of a dancing maſter with
a natural eaſe and flexibility of joint and
limb; yet being taught to move by rule at
firſt, in the courſe of mixing with good
company, the wire edge of art would
wear off, and an eaſe of demeanor be attained.
For this reaſon he thought proper,
the next morning, to ſend for Monsieur
Douperie, and to addreſs him as
follows:
Monſieur Douperie, ſaid he, here is a
young man of ſome talents, as the world
ſuppoſes, though I never could find them
in him; who, is in a fair way to be introduced
into the political, and probably the
gay world: and as he is but ruſtic and aukward
in his movements, I would wiſh to
have him poliſhed; not that I expect he
can attain to great perfection in the higheſt
ſpecies of the dance, ſuch as the minuet,
or the cotilion, or even the manœuvres
of a country dance; but ſimply in the position
of his feet, and to ſtep and move
with propriety. For I do not think it
neceſſary for a ſtateſman, that he be a
proficient in the ſaltatory art; but, simply,
that he be able to bear himſelf upright,
and to enter a room in an eaſy manner,
and not take too long ſtrides in
walking acroſs the floor.
[Page 016]
The Frenchman, eyeing Teague,
thought with himſelf, that he was but a
rough ſubject to work upon; nevertheleſs,
concealing his ſentiment, as the manner
of the nation is polite and compliant, he
replied. Monſieur Capitaine, ſaid he,
ver great ſenſible of de honneur, que vous
me faites, de attitude of dourſelf be ſo ver
natural, dat prove de high degree que vous
acquis in de art dat I taſhe; and trow un
grand luſtre, on de talents dat I poſſede.
Such was the compliment to the Captain
himſelf; though, by the bye, he was
but a plain man, and had never been taught
to dance.
Monſieur Douperie continuing, turned
his attention now to the bog-trotter.
Dis Monſieur, ſaid he, appear de beſt
calcule of de vorld for de danſe. Sa taille,
ver good, his limb promettent, ver much
en faveur of his talents futures. His muscle,
et ſon apparance nerveuſe, confirm
me of his ſtrenſe in de execution. His
eye, be ver good, pour fixet ſon viſavis,
his partner. Tout me promet un grand
expectation make Monſieur moſt egal
myſelf, in de art of de danſe.
As to that, ſaid the Captain, I would
not have you too ſanguine. You do not
take into view the low ſtate in which he
[Page 017]
is; and what pains will be neceſſary before
you can bring him to that point where you
begin with others. So low is my opinion
of his preſent grade in point of manners,
that I had thought of putting him a while
under the care of a perſon ſkilled in
breaking oxen, that he might be taught
to move by rule in ſome rough way at
firſt, before I would trouble you with
giving him the nicer precepts that reſpect
the locomotive art.
Tres plaiſant Capitaine, ver plaiſant,
ſaid the dancing maſter, mais, j'me promet
dat Monſieur make ver good proficiance,
in ver ſhort time.
The Captain now thinking proper to
withdraw, left Teague to his leſſons.
[Page 018]
CHAP. VII.
Monsieur Patrick, ſaid Monſieur
Douperie, for underſtanding that he was
an Iriſhman, and thinking that all Irishmen
were named Patrick, he gave him
this appellation: Monſieur Patrick, ſaid
he, il faut commencer, par les principes;
muſt begin by de principle.
La primiere principe, de firſt leſſong
eſt placer les pieds; place de foot. Voyez;
dis foot, cy; comme cela, (ſhewing
him how to place his foot) and ce luy, dat
foot, la; comme dis foot. (Shewing him
by his own foot how to place it) Tournez
les pieds; open de foot, quoi! vous
ouvrez la bouche; vous open de mout, and
not de foot. Vous keep vos foot in de
ſame poſition, et vous baillez: you open
de mout. La ſecon principe, is to keep
de body droit; trait. Muſt ſit firm ſur
ſes membres, on de limb. Tenez votre
body as dis (ſhewing him in what manner
to keep his body) aſſieyez vous, ſur vos
membres, comme ce la; dis way Monsieur
sieur Quoi! encore la bouche ouverte,
[Page 019]
you open de mout again Monſieur Patrick.
Fermez la bouche, ſhut de mout.
I ſtop here to obſerve, that the opening
the mouth when an exertion of the mind
or body is required, is a habit very common
with uninformed men, and not at all
peculiar to Teague: you will obſerve,
that men, who have not been long, or at
leaſt much in the habit of writing, when
they put pen to paper, open the
mouth, and protrude the tongue, moving
it, as the pen turns to the right hand
or to the left; or draws the ſtroke long
or ſhort; and, you will ſee a cordwainer
of good ſkill in his trade, from mere habit,
and not any defect of art, put out his
tongue, and move it, as if it could guide
his hand, when he is parcing nicely the margin
of the ſoal of a ſhoe or boot: Having
made this obſervation in juſtice to the bog-trotter,
I return to my narration.
The Captain coming in at this point of
the buſineſs, made enquiry of Monſieur
Douperie, what ſucceſs he appeared to
have with his pupil. Bien tolerable, Monsieur
Capitaine, ſaid Monſieur Douperie,
ver tolerable: Monſieur es d'une tres
bonne naturel; ver good diſpoſition. A
la commencement il ne faut pas nous
flatter, muſt not flatter, wid de plus haut
[Page 020]
degre, du ſucces; at de firſt of de lessong.
The Captain, not ſo much from the
words of the dancing maſter, as from his
countenance, and the tone of his voice,
ſaw, that he was not ſo ſanguine with
regard to the proficiency of the bog-trotter
as he had been at firſt: Nevertheleſs,
he was not diſcouraged in ſuffering
Monſieur Douperie to go on with his
leſſons; becauſe he expected little more,
as has been ſaid, than ſome improvement
of ſtep and gait. Nor did he draw any
concluſion unfavorable with reſpect to the
attainments of the bog-trotter in a political
career; becauſe he well that auk wardneſs
of manner is not at all inconſiſtent with
the higheſt literary and political abilities;
and that ſome of the greateſt geniuſeſs that
the world has produced have never been
able to attain the graces of behavior. The
poet Horace, ſays of Virgil; magnum
ingenium ſub inculto corpore latet: and
the anecdote of Harley, earl of Oxford,
is well known; who, when Queen Anne
made him Lord Treaſurer, his dancing
maſter expreſſed his aſtonishment, and
wondered what the Queen could ſee in
him; for he was the greateſt dunce he
ever had at his ſchool.
[Page 021]
With theſe reflections withdrawing he
left the Frenchman to go on with his lesson.
La troiſieme principe; de tird leſſong,
ſaid Monſieur Douperie, is to lift de foot;
you lift de foot, Monſieur Patrick, le pied
droit, de right foot furs; here Teague
raiſed the left, O! mon dieu, ſaid the
dancing maſter, le pied droit, et non pas
le guache; de right foot, and not de left.
Eſt il poſſible, you no diſting de right foot
from de left. Il faut lever le guache: a
la bonne heure, you lift de left foot.
Now, Monſieur Patrick; un pas avec
le pied guache; lift de left foot. Here
Teague lifted the right foot, thinking of
the former leſſon, and willing to pleaſe the
dancing maſter by giving him that foot
which had ſeemed to be ſo much in requeſt
with him. O! mon dieu, par blieu, ſaid
Monſieur Douperie, eſt il poſſible you no
diſting de right foot from de left?
It is obſervable of the French character
that while they preſerve their temper,
they are all complaiſance, and have the
ſofeſt words imaginable; but when they
break, it is all at once, and they paſs to
the oppoſite extreme of peeviſhneſs. It is
not altogether owing to an irritability of
nerve but to that ſyſtem of politeneſs which
[Page 022]
they cultivate; becauſe when the chord of
civility is immoderately ſtretched by a concealment
of the feelings, when it is let
go, it flies the farther, and with the
quicker vibration, beyond the medium of
its tenſion.
O! mon dieu, par blieu, ſaid the
Frenchman; and here he had almoſt ſaid
foutre, which is one of the worſt epithets
that is given, when great contempt is
about to be expreſſed.
However, compoſing his temper, and
reſuming his inſtructions; he continued;
now Monſieur Patrick, ſaid he, le pied
droit, lift de right foot. Here Teague,
as he had not pleaſed his inſtructor by what
he had done laſt, viz. lifting the right foot,
now lifted the left, being always at croſs
purpoſes, as it were, or ſtill too far forward,
or too far back in his motions, to
correſpond with the directions given.
O! diable, diable, ſaid the Frenchman,
raiſing his voice, and almoſt vociferating;
quoi ferai je? il eſt impoſſible d' inſtruire
cet garcon: no poſſible make you understand
fat I ſay, you do. Attendez vous,
Monſieur Patrick; you look at me, and
lift de foot dat I lift; now I lift de right
foot; lift de right foot.
[Page 023]
Teague ſtanding oppoſite the maſter,
and lifting that foot which was on the
ſame ſide with that of the inſtructor made
the ſame blunder as before, and lifted the
left foot.
Monſieur Douperie enraged beyond all
bearing, ran out of the room, and left
his ſcholar for the preſent.
The day after this, Monſieur Douperie,
having compoſed his temper and attending,
the Captain made enquiry, as uſual, of the
progreſs of his pupil. The Frenchman
endeavoring to put the beſt face on the
matter, ſaid ſome things of courſe and
complimentary; but could not help intimating
that it was une grand difficulty en
le commencement, in de beginning, to
make Monſieur diſting de difference of de
right foot, and de left.
As to that, ſaid the Captain, it is a national
incapacity; for which, as alſo for
their propenſity to make what they call
bulls, it is difficult to account. There are
not a people more brave than the aborigines
of Ireland, and are far from being
deſtitute of talents, and yet there is a
certain liability to blunders, both in their
words and actions, that is ſingular. Whether
it is that a mind ſtrong and vigorous,
and of extenſive range cannot attend to
[Page 024]
ſmall things; or that a great flow and hurry
of animal ſpirits, carries them too faſt
for reflection; or that there is a transposition
of the brain, ſo that things preſent
themſelves by contraries to the imagination;
I cannot tell: but the fact is ſo that
in their own country, as I have been told,
when they are taught to dance, which,
by the bye, is a hint which I forgot to
give you, they bind on the right and left
foot different badges, on the one, a twisted
wiſp of ſtraw, which they call a ſugan
and on the other a band of ozier twiſted
in like manner, which they call a gad: ſo
that when the word is given to raiſe the
one foot, and depreſs the other, it is
riſe upon ſugan, and sink upon gad;
ſo, that though the tiro may not all at
once, and on the word given, be able to
diſtinguiſh the right foot from the left, he
may eaſily tell gad from ſugan, as his eye
can aſſiſt his ear in this caſe; the object
being ſimple; whereas right and left
are relative terms, and that which is on
the right in one poſition, will be on the
left in the contrary.
Monſieur Douperie was willing to avail
himſelf of this hint, for underſtanding that
the bog-trotter was a candidate for ſtate
affairs, he was greatly anxious to have the
[Page 025]
honor of giving him ſome proficiency.
Accordingly, though he did not procure
a ſtraw ſugan, and an ozier gad, yet he
made uſe of what he thought might be
equivalent, viz. a red rag, and a blue;
ſo that inſtead of bidding him move the
right foot or the left, he could deſire him
to move the red rag or the blue.
Having tied theſe upon his ancles next
morning, he began his leſſon. Now,
Monſieur Patrick, ſaid he, lift de foot
dat hab de red ribbon: Teague obeyed
with exactneſs and promptitude, and
raiſed that foot. Now, ſaid Monſieur
Douperie, de foot dat hab de blue ribbon.
Teague hit the direction, and raiſed
the foot with the blue rag upon it.
A la bonne heure, vous y voila, ſaid
the dancing maſter; ver glad Monſieur
Patrick you make ſo good proficiance; en
peu de tems, je vous preſentera a l' assemble.
You danſe ver well, ſhort time.
La quatrieme principe, ſaid the dancing
maſter, de fort leſſong eſt former une pas,
to make de ſtep. Voyez Monſieur Patrick,
fat I do. You make ſtep, ne
pas long ſtep, mais van little ſtep. The
Iriſhman attempting to obey the directions
and to ſtep, made a ſtride about an ell in
length with his arms ſtretched out, and
[Page 026]
gaping at the ſame time. Foutre, ſaid
the dancing maſter; quoi! Vous baillez;
you ope de mout yet. Oh, diable! diable!
foutre! une bete! But compoſing
himſelf, he proceeded. Rangez vous a
quartier; ſtep to de van ſide, comme ce
la; ſhewing in what manner to ſtep out
with one foot at right angles to the other.
The Iriſhman, endeavoring to confine
his feet to rule, felt himſelf as much embarrassed
as if chained by the heels; and
attempting to make the ſtep as requeſted,
and making the uſual exertions, with his
eyes ſtaring, his arms ſtretched, and his
mouth open, loſt the command of himſelf
on the floor, and being thrown from the
line of gravity, was about to fall, when to
ſave himſelf, he made a catch at the dancing
maſter, and drew him down with him.
The dancing maſter ſuppoſing that he
hand underſtood him, though in French,
when he uſed the term foutre, and called
him a beaſt, and reſenting this, was about
to take vengeance, and having heard of
their mode of biting, gouging, &c. in
America, was much alarmed, and diſpoſed
to throw himſelf on the generoſity of the
Iriſhman, as not being able to contend
with him in ſtrength: He exclaimed, O!
my lord Patrick, excuſez moi, pardon,
[Page 027]
Monſieur Patrick, je demand pardon.
Pauvre diable que je ſuis. I be van poor
dible. Vous etes un honnete homme.
Ver good man. Un homme brave, courageux,
abſolument un homme brave,
gallant, tres brave, O! je ſuis un malheureux,
I be van poor dible. Je demand
pardon, my lord Patrick.
Theſe were the exclamations of the
Frenchman, though, at the ſame time,
he was uppermoſt, but entangled by the
bog-trotter, who having ſtill a hold of
him, was endeavoring to riſe; which the
other was diſpoſed to prevent, thinking
it adviſeable to retain the advantage he
poſſeſſed, and to keep him down until he
could appeaſe him by his entreaties, or
until help ſhould arrive ſo continuing his
expoſtulation, he exclaimed, O! my lord
Patrick, faites moi, grace. I give you
my money. J'ai beacoup d'argent. I
give you an order ſur mon intendant de
cent Louis; one, two, tree hundred
guinea. I forgive de compenſation of de
leſſong,
Teague, in the mean time, having understood
that chaſtiſement was uſually
given at ſchool, for inattention or flowneſs
in acquiring the elements, and not understanding
broken French, conceived, that
[Page 028]
the dancing maſter was expreſſing his resentment,
and about to inflict puniſhment;
and therefore endeavoured to excuſe himself
by a ſpeech on his part. God love
your ſhoul, ſaid he, dont be after bateing
me, becauſe I can't walk like a crippled
cooſe, juſt at once. By Shaint Patrick,
dis is like ſtoodying law in de workhouſe,
where de firſt ting is a good bateing;
God love your ſhoul, let me up, and i'l
ſtep as ſtrait as a lame ſhape, or a dog
wid dis leg broke into de bargain.
By this time ſtruggling, they were both
on their feet, the Frenchman, ſtill calling
out, voulez vous me tuer; O! ma femme,
mes enfans, ſpare my life my lord
Patrick, and the bog-trotter beginning
to curſe and ſwear, and to raiſe the Iriſh
howl.
Being diſengaged, the dancing maſter
made his eſcape, and waiting on the Captain,
not wiſhing to be under the neceſſity
of giving any more leſſons, gave him to
underſtand that Monſieur had made ver
good proficiance, en ver ſhort time; that
he was capable to preſent himſelf in public
wid all de ſucceſs poſſible; that it was not
neceſſary to give him any more leſſons.
The Captain did not ſuppoſe that the
Iriſhman could have made ſuch advances
[Page 029]
as the politeneſs of the Frenchman would
lead him to believe, but he concluded he
might have acquired what would be sufficient
as a foundation for his obtaining ſome
decency, though not elegance in his manner
and deportment. Paying, therefore,
Monſieur Douperie the ſum he demanded,
and thanking him for the pains he had
taken, the Frenchman withdrew.
[Page 030]
CHAP. VIII.
Having beſtowed ſome pains to
cultivate the perſonal movements of the
bog-trotter, it now remained to endeavor
to improve his manners. This the
Captain undertook, himſelf, and though
he had not read Cheſterfield, yet he had
ſome common ideas of decency, and delicacy
in habits, and behaviour. On this
point, addreſſing his pupil, he began.
Teague, ſaid he, you have now got,
in literal terms your rough coat off; that
is, you have ſome better dreſs, than what
you uſed to wear; you have alſo had ſome
leſſons, in what manner, to ſtand, or
move your feet, as there may be occaſion;
it now remains to inſtruct you with regard
to habits of delicacy, in ſome matters.
You muſt be careful to keep your hands
and face clean; pair your nails, and let
no black be under them. Waſh the inſide
of your mouth, and bruſh your teeth;
keep a handkerchief, and wipe your noſe
with this, not with your bare hand; when
[Page 031]
you cough, ſpit out, even ſhould there be
nothing to ſpit, leſt the imagination of
another, may ſuppoſe that there is; you
muſt not belch, or break wind from your
mouth, or from any other part. By the
bye Teague, I have my fears of you in
this laſt particular, for you know you
have not been always careful in trotting
with me to obſerve a delicacy in this respect;
and, it would be the devil in hell, if
in a company of ladies, an indiſcretion of
this kind ſhould eſcape you.
In the next place you will be careful to
avoid ſcratching your head, or your backside,
or putting your hand in the waistband
of your breeches, or turning your
back to the fire, and pulling up your coat
behind, which is the way of the vulgar.
Put but a ſmall quid of tobacco in your
mouth, not ſwell the cheeks as if you had
robbed a weaver of a ball of yarn, and put
it there. Do not ſpit on a floor, but in
the fire, or in your handkerchief if you
muſt ſpit. In eating, ſit cloſe to the table,
do not put your noſe too near the
plate; put but a little in your mouth at
once; do not ſpeak while your mouth is
full; or while you chew. If any one
ſpeaks to you in this predicament, bow;
as much as to ſay I will anſwer you
[Page 032]
presently: drink healths ſparingly, if at all.
Do not blow in your cup to cool your tea.
Keep your infirmities to yourſelf, and do
not complain of coſtiveneſs, or laxativeness;
of pains in the bowels, &c. A gentleman
ſhould have no complaints, unleſs
to his phyſician, of any thing, but the
gout, or a fever, or the like. Give no
information of a bad digeſtion; or food,
being heavy, or light to your ſtomach; of
your agreeing with this or that food, but
its not agreeing with you, as the vulgar
ſay; that is, as we ſhall underſtand you,
it gives you the belly-ach. Take care not
to value yourſelf, on your eating, as that
will ſhew a groſs mind; or on your drinking
much, as that is but a low ambition.
Sing no bawdy ſongs; eſpecially amongſt
ladies; ſuch as Brian O'Linn, and
Arthur O'Bradley; or that about
Triſtram Shandy O. For though theſe
were ſuitable enough to your former station,
and ſuch as you have been accustomed
to ſing among the girls at the taverns,
yet they will not paſs amongſt more refined
company. You muſt get ſome more
faſhionable airs, ſuch as the Bird, or
Guardian Angels, or the like.
Even at clubs, amongſt gentlemen, I
would recommend it to you to avoid lewd
[Page 033]
and indecent ſongs; eſpecially if they are
of the groſs and diſguſting kind. As you
are an Iriſhman, a verſe or two of Lango
Lee might be excuſeable, perhaps. It is
true, that in the higher ranks, among
both males and females, the double entendre
is ſometimes uſed; but unleſs it is with
great delicacy, and relieved by ſingular
wit, it is not admiſſible.
There are rules of good manners which
you are to obſerve. Such as when you
walk with any perſon, let them walk
next the wall; if you are about to enter
a room, with another, let him enter firſt.
or if about to ſit down, give way to another
who is alſo about to ſit down. Decline
the higher ſeat. You muſt not talk
too much; eſpecially about yourſelf;
boaſting, as I have heard you do sometimes,
of jumping and trotting, and how
you could wreſtler, and the like. I am
afraid. Teague, that after all the pains
I am taking with you, you will ſpoil the
broth, by ſome out-breakings, of your
old tricks, and habits in ſome way or
other. However, ſince I have ſuffered
myſelf to be perſuaded to try the matter,
let it go on, we ſhall ſee the iſſue of it.
Theſe are the outlines of ſome of the hints
upon manners, given by the Captain.
[Page 034]
BOOK II.
CHAP. I.
The Beer Houſe. Having thus far cultivated the bog-trotter
by waſhing, and currying his person,
forming his movements; refining
his manners, and give him ſome ideas of
delicacy of behavior, it now remained to
indoctrinate him in a knowledge of politics:
and for this purpoſe, as he could
not read the Gazettes, or other publications,
it became neceſſary, to give him the
opportunity of oral information, on political
queſtions: and as attending the debates
of Congreſs, and hearing only, in
the galleries, would not put it in his power
to join occaſionally in the debates, and
exerciſe himſelf in ſpeaking; the
[Page 035]
attending private clubs, or ſpending evenings,
occaſionally, at beer houſes, ſeemed the
more eligible means to be adopted. Accordingly
an evening, after this, the Captain
taking him to a beer houſe, and occupying
a bench, called for a mug of
ale, and bade Teague attend to the conversations
that were going forward.
The redemption of what are called certificates
was at that time the ſubject of debate.
It is well known to the readers of
the preſent day in America, but which
perhaps will not be ſo well underſtood
when this work comes to be read an hundred
years hence, that the United States,
having incurred debts during the war with
Great Britain, and being unable at that
time to diſcharge them, could only give,
certificates of the reſpective ſums due to
the ſeveral creditors; theſe they did give
to the ſoldiers of their army, to thoſe from
whom they had purchaſed articles, or
who had rendered any ſervice: The prospect
not being immediate of the public being
in a condition of taking up theſe, and
the neceſſity of many of the holders pressing,
they had transferred their right in
the certificates for a fourth, fifth, or ſixth
of their nominal value; in ſome caſes, at
a much lower rate. The queſtion was,
[Page 036]
whether under theſe circumſtances, the
original holder ſhould be bound by the contract,
and the transferree ought to take
the whole ſum from the public.
It was ſtated on one ſide, that it was
the folly of the holder to make the contract.
There was no fraud or impoſition
in the caſe; what he did was with his eyes
open. There was no undue advantage on
the part of the purchaſer, for he took no
more than the place of the holder; and
the bargain was fair and equal on both
ſides. The one had a preſent certainty
which he preferred: the other an uncertainty
of a greater ſum, of which he choſe
to run the riſk. The purchaſer who gave
credit to the bills of the ſtates, ſtood in a
better point of view than the holder, who
diſtruſting payment, had parted with
them.
On the other ſide it was contended,
that the certificates being only the evidence
of the debt, the receiving that was no
payment; that real ſervice was rendered,
and real payment ſhould be made;
that the purchaſer diſcovered a diſtruſt of
the credit of the government as well as
the holder, in not giving the full value,
and therefore ſtood on no better ground;
that from the prevailing ideas under which
[Page 037]
theſe contracts were made, the holder did
conceive himſelf parting with theſe securities
at an under value, and the purchaſer,
as obtaining them at that rate, but neither
had an idea that the loſs on the one
hand, or the advantage on the other,
could be ſo great as on the principle of the
proviſion made for the diſcharge of the
public debt it had come to be; that for
theſe and other reaſons meaſures ought to
have been adopted of a diſcrimination between
the original holders and the transferrees.
Teague had liſtened attentively, and,
contrary to the injunction of the Captain,
with his mouth open. He would willingly
have taken a part in the debates, but
the Captain, thinking the ſubject too abstruse
to begin with, did not ſeem to approve
of it, and ſhaking his head, repreſſed
the diſpoſition of the bog-trotter.
The next topic of argument, was that
of the aſſumption of the ſtate debts. In
order to underſtand this we muſt ſtate;
that, in carrying on the war againſt Great
Britain, contracts were made, and debts
incurred, on the faith of the confederated
ſtates, by their repreſentatives in Congreſs,
and this was called the continental debt.
At the ſame time, contracts were made
[Page 038]
and debts incurred, on the faith of individual
ſtates, by their repreſentatives in
the ſtate legiſlature, and this was called the
ſtate debt. This whole debt, continental
and ſtate, had been thrown into one maſs,
and the payment aſſumed by the Congreſs.
The policy of this meaſure was now canvassed.
On the one ſide, it was contended,
that as the whole debt, continental
or ſtate, was payable by the United States,
each ſtate paying the quota apportioned
by the reſolves of the former Congreſs,
and having credit for what ſtate debt
contracted on account of the war, was
over or beyond this quota, the queſtion
was no more than this, whether the ways
and means of raiſing money for the discharge
of its proportion of the ſtate debt,
ſhould remain with any ſtate, as was before
in the caſe of furniſhing its quota;
or whether the United States, aſſuming
the debt in the firſt inſtance, ſhould take
upon themſelves to diſcharge the whole;
that it came to the ſame thing, as the debt
was payable by the whole, and the only
queſtion, was with whom it ſhould lie to
deviſe ways and means, to diſcharge it;
that the ſyſtem of finance became more
ſimple, when the United States, aſſumed
the whole, and provided for the payment
[Page 039]
by ways and means of their own at once;
that it would contribute to the energy and
ſecure the establishment of the federal government,
to have that government the
immediate debtor of the whole amount.
To this it was anſwered, that each ſtate
was a better judge of the ways and means,
within itſelf, for the raiſing money to discharge
its debt; and while the United
States, now having command of the imposts
ſhould neceſſarily take upon them to
collect and provide for the diſcharge of
the continental debt, properly ſo called;
yet it might be left with each ſtate as before,
to collect and pay over what was
called the ſtate debt; receiving credit from
the United States, and having a right to
draw from thence, any overplus of that
proportion which by the reſolves of the
former Congreſs they ought to pay of
the whole debt.
The Captain thinking this ſubject alſo
above the comprehenſion of the Iriſhman,
was not willing that he ſhould ſpeak yet.
The next topic was that of the incorportion
of the bank of the United States,
ſome contending that no power was given
by the conſtitution to the general government
to incorporate banks; others asserting
that though not expreſſly, yet under
[Page 040]
the article of paying debts, &c. and making
laws neceſſary for that purpoſe, it
was by implication given.
The Captain thought this alſo above the
reach of Teague, and obliged him to be
ſilent.
The next ſubject of argument was the
policy of the war carrying on againſt the
Indians. By ſome it was contended that
an Indian was a good creature, ſimple and
inoffenſive, like a young child; that you
might put your finger in his mouth, and
he would not bite; that by ſpeaking softly
and kindly, and giving him victuals and
drink, and leggins, and breech-clouts, and
blankets, you might do what you pleaſe
with him; that when you gave him ammunition
and fire arms, he would go out
and kill turkies, and ſhoot down ſquirrels,
and bring you in a deer, now and then; that
there was no ſuch thing as an Indian stealing
a horſe, or burning a houſe, or taking
a ſcalp, unleſs you had firſt ſtolen his
horſe, or burnt his houſe, or made a
catch at his ſcalp; that when you made a
treaty with theſe people, they had ſuch a
love of juſtice, ſuch a ſenſe of honor, ſuch
a perfect command of themſelves, and
their young men, that, there was no danger
of their departing from the treaty.
[Page 041]
On the other hand it was advanced,
that, as a ſavage differed little from a beaſt
of prey; a wolf, or a panther of the
woods; was rude; his paſſions violent,
attached to no farm; cultivating no art;
his only amuſement, or ſenſe of honour,
war; or hunting, the image of war;
his ſenſe of juſtice, little; his ſenſe of honour,
none at all; no government in his
ſtate of ſociety; no ſecurity for individual
or national engagements; that fear
pervading the maſs, by reaching the feelings,
and apprehenſions of each individual
was the only principle by which they
could be governed; that inſtead of treaties
and giving goods, as heretofore, it
became us to retaliate by a heavy war
againſt them, and to make known, by
feeling, our ſuperior ſtrength.
Such were the arguments on each ſide
of this queſtion; when the Captain looking
at Teague, and obſerving that he was
anxious to advance his opinion, aſſenting
with a bow, or inclination of his head, he
ſeemed to ſignify that he might ſpeak.
But before we hear him, it will be necessary
to obſerve, that during the preceding
arguments, the company had taken
notice of him, as he ſat beſide the Captain
with a mug of beer before them; and
[Page 042]
had wondered in their own minds, who
he could be; for though he was a little
bruſhed up by this time, as may be supposed,
having been at the levee, and taught
to dance, and received leſſons of delicacy,
and what not; nevertheleſs, there was
ſtill an uncoothneſs in his appearance that
could not be all at once ſhaken off.
“His form had yet not loſt all her original
roughneſs: nor appeared leſs than a paddy
dreſſed; and the exceſs of ruſticity removed.”
He therefore the more eaſily
engaged attention, when raiſing his voice,
he addreſſed them as follows:
Plaſe your honours, ſaid he; I have
heard of deſe Indians, when I was trating
with the Captain my maſter. I came
acraſs one o' dem, who affer'd a hundred
dallars for my ſcoolp; he was going to a
traty here abouts. But my good maſter
the Captain took my part, and didn't let
him take it aff; de vile ſavages! O! I
have heard of deſe Indians; plaſe your
honours; they come out of de woods, and
ſtale ſhape, like de rabbers in Ireland, and
burn houſes, and take ſcoolps; trate wid
deſe! I would trate wid dem, wid a good
ſhelelah, or a tomahawk to break der
heads. Give dem goods! by Shaint Patrick,
I would give dem a good bullet
[Page 043]
hole in deir faces; or ſhoot dem trough
de backſide for deir pains. If I was in
Cangreſs, and God love your ſhouls, I
wiſh you would put me dere, I would
make a law to coot dem aff, every one o'
dem. O! if my uncle Phelim, and my
couſins Dennis and Dermot, and my brother
Murtock, and de oder boys was
here, we would chaſe dem, as you would
chaſe one of deir own ſhape; and keep
dem aff de country, and ſend dem home
to eat paratoes. God love your ſhouls,
raiſe a good party and go out upon dem,
and bring dem to de coort, and not let
dem be ſtaling ſhape, and taking ſcoolps
from de poor people.
You tink to plaſe dem, by ſpaking good
words to dem. Spake a good cudgel upon
der heads, and bid dem be aſy dear honies,
and keep at deir homes, and plant
paratoes, and be hang'd in deir own country;
plaſe your honours. Trate wid dem!
Trate wid de woolves or de bears, dat
roon troo de woods: I would trate wid a
good knock in deir troat, and be doon
wid dem.
From the manner in which he ſpoke,
of having been in danger of loſing his ſcalp,
and the Captain reſcuing him, it was understood
that he had been in a campaign
[Page 044]
againſt the Indians, and his fervour was
excuſed, and thought natural. Thoſe
particularly who were for uſing force
againſt the ſavages, thought the Iriſh gentleman
had ſpoken very well.
Encouraged with this ſucceſs, the bog-trotter
was confirmed in his opinion, that
he was fit for any political appointment;
and the Captain himſelf, began to entertain
better hopes of his advances than he
had yet done.
[Page 045]
CHAP. II.
Though I am not employed in political affairs; or,
meaning to make my book a treatiſe of finance; yet I
may be indulged in a few remarks on the preceding
ſubjects.
I am far from being greatly confident that I am right;
nevertheleſs I will acknowledge that in the caſe of the
certificates, I always found myſelf inclined to have made
a diſcrimination. It ſeems to me that even on the principles
of the municipal law, it would have been justifiable.
Let us apply the chancery deciſions to the caſe
of the contract between the original holders, and the
transferrees. In a court of equity, a contract will be
ſet aſide on the principle of,
1ſt. Fraud.
2d. The unconſcionableneſs of the bargain.
3d. The being againſt the public intereſt, and good
policy.
1ſt. Fraud: And in this caſe, it is not neceſſary to
prove expreſs fraud: preſumptive is ſufficient. “This
court, meaning the court of chancery, ſays lord chancellor
Hardwicke, will relieve againſt preſumptive fraud,
ſo that equity goes farther than the rule of law; for
there fraud muſt be proved, and not preſumed only.”
1ſt Atkins 352.
To apply this principle in our caſe. Is there not
preſumption of fraud, where the holder of a certificate
parts with it for a little more than the tenth of what is
really due upon it? But it is well known that actual
and expreſs fraud, did in general exiſt in the traffic in
theſe ſecurities, the purchaſers, individually, or in
combination with others, decrying the credit of the
[Page 046]
government, and depreciating as much as poſſible, the
value of the certificates.
But the ſame great chancellor, lays it down, that
“To take an advantage of another man's neceſſity is
equally bad as taking advantage of his weakneſs, and
in ſuch ſituation, as incapable of making a right uſe of
his reaſon, as in the other. Fraud has been conſtantly
preſumed, or inferred from circumſtances, and conditions
of parties; weakneſs and neceſſity on the one ſide,
and extortion and avarice, on the other; and merely
from the intrinſic unconſcionableneſs of the bargain. There
are hard unconſcionable bargains, which have been
conſtrued fraudulent, and there are inſtances, where
even the common law hath relieved for this reaſon expressly.”
1ſt Atkins 352.
2d. But the bare unconſcionableneſs of the bargain,
all idea of fraud out of the queſtion, would be ſufficient
to ſet aſide the contract in a court of equity.
Sir John Strange, the maſter of the rolls in the court
of chancery lays it down; that “there may be caſes
where this court will interpoſe to prevent improvident
perſons from ruining themſelves, before the expectancy
falls into poſſeſſion, though no expreſs fraud or impoſition
appears.” 1ſt Atkins 346.
But let it be ſuppoſed that the contract was equal,
and conſcionable at the time of making it; the one taking
a ſmall ſum certain, and the other receiving the uncertainty
of a large ſun.; yet has it not become unconscionable
by the event? Did any purchaſer ever expect
to be paid the whole nominal ſum, in gold or ſilver?
The ideas of the time muſt be yet freſh in every man's
mind; and we well know that no man was ſo ſanguine
as to expect this. It was ſuppoſed that ſomething might
be done towards paying the intereſt at a future day, or
lands in the weſtern country, might be obtained for
them. But whatever the purchaſer might think, no
ſeller did imagine that for one-third, or one-half of a
dollar, he was transferring twenty or twenty five shillings.
It was not in the contemplation of the parties
[Page 047]
to loſe ſo much on the one ſide, or gain ſo much on the
other. It is an unexpected event that has put it in the
power of the public to do more in making a proviſion
for the payment of the public debt, than could at that
time be foreſeen. What is more; it is an event brought
about by the joint efforts of the original holder and the
tranferree; I mean a new conſtitution of government,
under which the legiſlature of the ſtates having the
command of all reſources, was able to make a better
proviſion for theſe debts. It is unreaſonable, and unconscionable
that the transferree ſhould take all the advantage
of this event? Let any man putting a thouſand
dollars in his pocket from the bank of the United States,
look at the war-worn ſoldier, or the widow and fatherless
who has parted with them, and ſay if his conſcience
is not touched with a ſenſe of the unreaſonable gain.
If it is not, it ought to be. At any rate, on the principle
of unreaſonableneſs, a contract of ſuch undue advantage,
would not be ſanctioned by the law. The
3d. Ground is that of the public intereſt, and good
policy. Lord Hardwicke lays it down, “that political
arguments, in the fulleſt ſenſe of the word, as they
concern the government of a nation muſt, and have always
been of great weight in the conſideration of this
court (the court of chancery) and though there may be
no dolus malus in the contract, as to other perſons; yet,
if the reſt of mankind are concerned, as well as the parties,
it may properly be ſaid that it regards the public
utility.” 1ſt Atkins 352.
There can be nothing more hurtful to a people than
ſudden loſſes, and ſudden gains to individuals. Happiness
depends on a gradual acceſſion of attainment. Perhaps
a ſudden loſs inflicting with melancholy, is not
more hurtful, than ſudden great gains, hurrying into
a ſituation for which the mind is not gradually qualified.
But ſudden gains out of the way of common induſtry,
affect the ſenſations of others, who partake not; and
feel chagrin and diſſatisfaction with their ſtate in life.
[Page 048]
Such gains ſap the foundation of common induſtry.
For what man will be equally content to labour in his
vocation, and purſue the common means of a livelihood
when he ſees his neighbour all at once, by ſome fortunate
caſt, ſo far before him in his acquiſitions. It is
on this principle that our legiſlatures have prohibited
gaming, lotteries, &c. In the natural world there is
a gradation in all things. Animals grow to their ſize
in a courſe of years; trees and plants, have their progress;
Jonah's ground might ſpring up in a night by a
miracle; but in general all the productions of nature
have a regular period of increaſe.
The attainments of men are made to depend uſually
upon their induſtry. As ye ſow, ſo ſhall ye reap. In
well regulated ſocieties this œconomy is imitated, and
where one eſtate comes by accident, five hundred are
acquired by common means. Such an inſtitution of
things conſtitutes the health of any people.
On all or any of theſe grounds, therefore, fraud, unconscionableness,
or ſound policy, a contract of the nature
in queſtion, would have been ſet aſide on a bill in
the chancery of England, and in our courts, the contract
would not be eſtabliſhed againſt the original holder of a
certificate: or on payment to the transferree, an action
would lie to the original holder, counting for money
had and received to his uſe, and demanding all above
the ſum originally paid, and with legal intereſt from
the date.
But it will occur, that there were in moſt caſes a number
of transferrees between the original holder, and
the then poſſeſſor. The impracticability of making
theſe anſwerable to the original holder, for their respective
proportions of the undue gain, will put them out
of the queſtion. The caſe would then have ſtood between
the original holder and the laſt transferree. Shall
he be anſwerable to the original holder for all the intermediate
gains? No. But let him take no more than
the then ſelling price of the certificates. It became the
legiſlature in the firſt inſtance to have aſcertained the
[Page 049]
current value of the public ſecurities, and to have made
proviſion for the redemption of them in the hands of
the transferrees, at that value and no more; but in
the hands of the original holders, at the full ſpecie value;
and let the ſum ſaved from transferrees go to the
original holders who had transferred. Was it practicable
that theſe could be aſcertained? Let the proof lie
on the original holders; and where it could not be
made, let the public be the gainers.
As to the aſſumption of the ſtate debts, perhaps,
it would be adviſeable for me to be as ſilent as the
bog-trotter; as it is poſſible, I may not have a perfect
knowledge of the queſtion. But from the knowledge
I have on the ſubject, it has appeared to me I will not
ſay an unjuſt, but an impolitic meaſure. If more were
led to look to the general government, and to depend
upon it, as being the general debtor; yet with this it
took the odium of impoſing duties to diſcharge the
whole. It would have been as well perhaps, to have
left the ſtates themſelves, to enact exciſe laws, or to
deviſe whatever other ways and means, they thought
proper while the impoſts, which the United States
had now got in their collective capacity, would have
been ſufficient to have anſwered the continental debt
where they were the immediate contractors. There
is that advantage in a public debt, that the fortunes of
many are made to depend on the exiſtence of the government;
but as there, in the nature of things, can
be but few, in proportion to the whole, there will be
in that proportion, a greater number to be affected
with the payment, and to be careleſs of the exiſtence of
the government, or to wiſh a diſſolution of it. When
that debt, as in the preſent inſtance, by the neceſſiries
of the diſtreſſed, the diſtruſt of the credulous, and opportunities
of the knowing, has come to be in few hands;
after having paſſed from the moſt deſerving, at a ſmall value
it exiſts with an odium upon it in the public mind,
which naturally transfers itſelf to all ways and means that
can be deviſed for the diſcharge of it. At the ſame time
[Page 050]
that it is well to brace the government, and ſecure its
ſtrength, it is an object of equal moment to preſerve
it popular: affection, as well as power, are the bands
of authority.
As to the bank incorporation, I ſhall only ſay, that
the doctrine of inſering powers by implication, is extremely
dangerous, and may eaſily be carried to overthrow
all the boundaries of any conſtitution. I think
it much the moſt adviſeable, when the caſe is doubtful,
to wait until the ſame authority by which the constitution
is eſtabliſhed, ſhall have declared its ſenſe on the
ſubject. For otherwiſe, except as to the form of a government,
independent of its powers, a conſtitution will
be of no uſe.
A tranſgreſſion of the conſtitution is the breach at
which tyranny enters; and of all things it is the moſt
difficult thing to preſerve a conſtitution inviolate. The
Council of Cenſors in Pennſylvania, was a means, and
I think a good one. They did themſelves honour in
the report they made with reſpect to the violation of
the conſtitution, though the ſpirit of party prevented
them from going far enough. Under the United States
there is but one means, and that is the deciſion of the
judiciary. The judges have done themſelves honour in
a late caſe where they had the independence to declare
a law void which they conſidered as unconſtitutional.
In the caſe of the bank, would not a writ of quo warranto
lie. I can have no doubt of it; and, I may
be miſtaken, but I can have no doubt but that
the judges would find themſelves bound to declare the
act in queſtion not within the powers granted to the
United States, and therefore void.
As to Indian treaties, having occaſionally in this
work, inſinuated my ideas, it may ſeem a repetition
to ſay any thing more on the ſubject. Indeed the objection
may lie in general againſt the work, that certain
ſubjects, ſuch as the Philoſophical Society, Popular
Preaching, Indian Treaties, &c. have been too often
introduced. To this, I have to anſwer, that it has
[Page 051]
been the ſyſtem I propoſed, not to exhauſt a ſubject all
at once, but to touch it for the preſent, and introduce
it afterwards in a different point of view, where ſuch
things might be added, as would otherwiſe originally
have been brought in; juſt as, in order to preſerve a
reliſh for the ſame food, we do not dine upon it in continuance,
but having had veal to day, take pork to-morrow,
and the third day return to veal again.
Having certain ideas to inculcate, I bring them forward
at various times, and in different ſhapes, with
front, flank, rear, corps de reſerve, &c. As the human
mind, from defect of attention, or incapacity, cannot
be reached all at once, in the manner of the prophet,
imitating his zeal, and knowledge of the heart, I give
“line upon line; precept upon precept; here a little,
and there a little.” This will be my apology, for
touching the ſubject of Indian treaties again in this
volume.
On this ſubject I lay down theſe principles; that an
Indian is a man, and you may bind him by kind words
and good acts. But he is an ignorant, uninlightened
man, and when you loſe the affections of his heart,
you have little hold upon his reaſon to recover it:
Reſpect for you, in the firſt caſe, is the ground of his
attachment; fear of you in the laſt, muſt be your
means to reclaim him. Hence it depends upon circumstances
when a treaty is expedient, and when a war is necessary.
Apply this to our preſent ſituation with the Indians.
At the concluſion of the war with the Britiſh, we were
thought to be conquerors: though the ſavages were
kept in the dark with reſpect to the ſtipulated ſurrender
of the poſts on the lakes, and the ceſſion of the Indian
country by their allies, yet it had tranſpired among
them that we had been ſucceſsful againſt the great king;
hence a fear of us was impreſſed, and it was expedient
to treat.
We did treat, and after ſome interval, as will always
be the caſe, war, again took place. They have
[Page 052]
have had the advantage. This is not, therefore, the
criſis to treat.
Amongſt ourſelves, do we not find, that if you
yield to the impoſition of an ignorant man, he will attribute
it to your want of diſcernment to obſerve it;
whereas, on your part, it was to avoid all contention
with a low perſon. If you are inſulted by an ignorant
man, he will attribute it to your cowardice, that you do
not challenge him, whereas, it is an unwillingneſs to
have your name mentioned with his, as having had a
diſpute at all. If you attempt to negociate a contract
with an ignorant man, and aſk him juſt what you ought
to aſk, he propoſes leſs than he otherwiſe would have
done; and not until you convince him, that you are at
a world, in theſe matters, will you induce him to agree
to what is reaſonable.
A ſmall ſucceſs with an ignorant man, againſt an adversary,
will give him hopes, which the occaſion does
not juſtify; becauſe he does not comprehend the principles,
and ſee how much accident, or cauſes that may
not exiſt again, had to do in the buſineſs. It is therefore
like ſelling a fowl in a rainy day, to attempt negociating
with an ignorant man, when his imagination
is not corrected by an experience of facts againſt him.
It is on the principles of human nature, that I found
my ideas of managing the Indians.
I would deprecate a treaty at preſent, becauſe it
could not be permanent. We are in a fair way, to
bring things to a ſtate in which it might be adviſeable
to treat. Let the event be what it may, I am one of
thoſe who not only approve of the preſent war againſt
the Indians, but alſo of the princ i ple on which it is
carried on, viz. by a body of regular and well disciplined
troops. It is ſuggeſted by ſome, that the militia
would be adequate. What? Becauſe in the courſe of
the war againſt the Britiſh, when we had not disciplined
troops at all times, and in ſufficient numbers to oppose
to the enemy, the militia of neceſſity were obliged
to act, and ſometimes acted well, will it be ſaid that
[Page 053]
they were preferable to the diſciplined troops? we know
they were not, though occaſionally they diſcovered
bravery, and were obedient to orders. But ſuppoſing
them equal; what is more, ſuppoſing them preferable;
are the inhabitants of the weſtern country, to be perpetually
harraſſed with militia duty? To be ſubject to
the neceſſity of quiting their occupations, and to be occasionally
ſoldiers? Did not the militia during the war
with Britain, groan under the neceſſity of being obliged
to act? And ſhall this grievance exiſt to the weſtern
country, ten years after that war has been terminated;
and when it is in the power of the government, knowing
the ſeat of war with the ſavages, to have regular
troops to oppoſe them; not as in the caſe of the Britiſh,
where by means of their flects, the war was ſuddenly
transferable from place to place, and the militia were
obliged to act, in order to aſſiſt the parts of our army,
until a greater force ſhould arrive.
Militia! That is, let every man do his own fighting.
Why not every man his ſmithing, maſoning, weaving,
and tayloring, as well? Becauſe it will be better to
have perſons who will make a buſineſs of each particular
branch, and ſtick to it. It does not do to be a Jack
of all trades. Well, and why plow a ſpell, and then
fight? But the riflemen of the weſtern country, are
the beſt calculated to fight the Indians. Well: enliſt
ſuch, and give them rifles, and make an abiding body
of them, that the country may have a permanent force
to depend upon. But they will not enliſt. I engage
it, if you pay them well. When militia are called
upon they are not thoſe that are drafted that go; they
are ſubſtitutes. They coſt high to thoſe that employ
them; and being the refuſe of the country, they are
good for nothing when they are employed. But let
thoſe that are drafted go. Well; draft them from the
inland parts of the government, that have not families
to defend on the frontiers, and ſee what will then be
ſaid. Volunteers are the thing, making a ſudden incursion.
If they make a ſudden incurſion, they will make
[Page 054]
a ſudden recurſion, and leave the matter as they found
it. A large army cannot find the Indians. They will
run away. Well, ſtay till they come back. Occupy
the country; and occupying it, then prepare to treat.
Treating at their own towns you will not be impoſed
upon by raggamuffins paſſing for chiefs; or tribes treating
who are at peace already, and are ſo ſituated that
they dare not go to war. But the weſtern country is
not worth defending at the expence of a ſtanding army.
Give it up then; abſolve us from our allegiance, and
let us make terms with the Britiſh who have the command
of the Indians. For an army at leaſt equal to
the preſent eſtabliſhment muſt be kept up; otherwiſe
all the treaties that can be made, will be of no avail;
for a preſent viſible force is the only ſanction of engagements,
with the ſavages; more eſpecially in their
preſent ſituation, impelled, and ſupported by the traders
of Britain. I will not ſay how far the government
takes a part, as there are different opinions on this subject.
But it is not the weſtern country only that you
are defending. It is the very ſea coaſt ſettlements. For
if we give way, and return to the eaſt of the mountains,
will not the enemy come to the eaſt after us?
If he finds no horſes or blankets, on the one ſide, will
he not purſue his rout to the other? If he miſſes a ſcalp
ſhort of the Schuylkill, will it not do to take it there?
The fact is, that the command of lake Erie, by poſts
eſtabliſhed upon it, and from thence to the Wabaſh,
are the only means of repreſſing the Indians; not ſo
much from the actual force of theſe eſtabliſhments as
from the effect upon the imagination of the enemy; for
ſeeing the boldneſs of the ſtep, they will count more
upon our force than they ought; as at preſent they
count leſs; and it will refute the Britiſh traders, who
deny the ceſſion of the country made by that government.
But more eſpecially, by encouraging our traders
under the protection of our poſts, a commerce will
be eſtabliſhed with the ſavages, under the noſe of the
Britiſh, and we may equally have the direction of them.
[Page 055]
Surely any man of the ſmalleſt reflection muſt know,
that a treaty and giving goods, is but a tranſitory act,
and can have but a tranſitory effect; whereas the means
that will reduce, and the intereſts that will conciliate,
ought to be permanent to be of any uſe.
[Page 056]
BOOK III.
CHAP. I. The circumſtance of having been at the
levee, and having made a ſpeech in the
beer-houſe, which had been much approved,
and above all, it being announced
that he was a candidate for ſtate employment,
had made the bog-trotter a pretty
general theme of converſation. Sundry
perſons who were expectants upon government,
had procured themſelves to be
introduced to him, as ſuppoſing that when
in office, by and bye, he might have it in
his power to do them ſervice. Even by
thoſe that were in government, in the
legiſlative, executive, or diplomatic line,
he was not neglected. Several members
of Congreſs had left cards. Aſſiſtants,
and deputy aſſiſtants in offices, foreign
conſuls, two or three directors and caſhiers
of banks, had waited upon him and paid
him their compliments.
[Page 057]
His name became known in the gay
world, and by a gradual introduction, he
had become acquainted in ſome of the beſt
families of the city. The ladies, in general,
were much taken with him. They
thought him a plain, frank, blunt ſpoken
Iriſh gentleman; not harraſſing them with
deep obſervations, drawn from books, or
an oſtentation of learning; but always
ſaying ſomething gallant, and complimentary
of their perſons, or accompliſhments;
ſuch as God love your ſhoul, my dear
cratur, but you are de beauty of de
world. Sleeping or waking, I could
take you to my heart, and ate you wid
de very love o' d' my ſhoul dat I have
for you. De look o' d' dur face, like
de ſun or de moon, run trugh me, and
burn up like a coal o' d' de fire; dat I
am ſhick and fainting to take du to my
arms, my dear cratur.
Declarations of this nature, made without
any ambiguity, and warm and violent
in their nature, had rendered him, as I
have ſaid, pretty generally a favorite of
the ladies: far indeed beyond any thing
which the Captain, ſimple and ignorant
of the world, had ever imagined: his
aſtoniſhment therefore was not ſmall, a
day or two after this, when walking the
[Page 058]
ſtreet, he ſaw a carriage, paſs by, with
a gentleman and lady; and on aſking
whoſe carriage that was, and who the
gentleman that was in it; for he was
ſtruck with ſome reſemblance of the bog-trotter;
it was anſwered, that it was the
carriage of Mr. Haberdaſher, a merchant
of the city, whoſe lady was taking an
airing it would ſeem with Major O'Regan,
a member of Congreſs, or Ambaſſador,
or ſomething that was juſt come to town.
God Almighty! thought the Captain; is
it poſſible. I ſee that I have been a fool,
all my life, and though juſt going out of
the world, am but beginning to get experience
to live in it. I had been led by
his own confidence, and by the opinion of
others, though with great doubts, on my
part, to ſuppoſe it poſſible that he might
have come to be of ſome reſpect in government,
the diſcharge of an office, requiring
rather ſolid, than brilliant parts;
but that in ſo ſhort a time, or indeed, after
any period, he ſhould become a favorite
of females of taſte and faſhion,
never entered into my head at all: and
forſooth they have given him the appellation
of Major, though he is about as much
a Major as my horſe.
[Page 059]
Such were the ideas which the circumstance
of Teague in a carriage with a fine
lady, naturally produced in his mind.
Nor indeed ſhould we think them unreasonable,
were it not that we know there
was nothing extraordinary in the caſe.
For though abſtractedly conſidered, it
would ſeem improbable that the female
mind of great delicacy, and refinement,
ſhould be captivated by a rough and groſs
object; yet we know that the fact is in
nature, and we muſt leave it to the philosophers
to account for it. Nor will this
be any difficult taſk, when we conſider the
powers of imagination. Here was a new
object, unknown as to its origin, and
high as to its pretenſions; and what is novel,
and not fully comprehended, and lofty
in its nature, has a ſupereminent dominion
over the human mind. Hence the proverb,
“far fetched, and dear bought, is good
for ladies.” But on the preſent occaſion,
a particular principle operated in favour
of the bog-trotter: viz. the taſte and
faſhion of the day. For, as, in the age of
chivalry, a knight was the only object in
requeſt, and at the beginning of the revolution
in America, a Baron, or a Count
from France or Germany was the ton,
ſo now, ſince the adoption of the federal
[Page 060]
conſtitution, the appurtenant officers of
government are the only characters in
vogue. And as in the firſt inſtance, mere
ſquires had been taken for knights, and
paſſed very well, and in the ſecond caſe,
taylors and barbers, had ſlurred themſelves
for gentry or nobility, what could hinder
the bog-trotter from availing himſelf of
the whim of the day, and be taken for
a perſon qualified to fill any place in government,
from the bare pretending to
it? And being once taken for ſuch, what
prodigy was there in his being in requeſt
with the females, and all the firſt families
of the city, who might be ambitious, and
vie with each other, in having him married
to a niece or a daughter, that ſo being
raiſed above plebians by the connection,
they might be conſidered as of a pratrician
degree? Let the principle be what it
would, whether taſte, or ambition, the
fact was, that the bog-trotter was courted
and carreſſed by all the firſt people: there
could be no card party without Major
O'Regan. A young lady ſitting by a gentleman
in any houſe, and ſeeing him
paſs by, would ſtart up, and run to
the window and ſay, O, there is Major
O'Regan. When he was in company,
and would laugh, and put out his tongue,
[Page 061]
as if he was about to ſing, Lilibullero, the
young ladies would laugh too; not that
there was any jeſt, in what he or they
ſaid, but juſt becauſe the Major had laughed.
When he would put out his great
paw to touch the hand of any of them,
O, la! Major, one would ſay, O, now!
Major, another would ſay; don't now
Major, a third would exclaim, rather to
attract his attention, than to repreſs his
advances. The fact was, there ſeemed to
be a kind of Teagueomania, amongſt the
females, ſo that all idea of excellence,
perſonal, or mental was centered in him,
and all common lovers, were neglected,
or repulſed on his account. A melancholy
inſtance of this kind occured to the
Captain the following day, when walking
by the margin of the river on which the
city ſtood, and towards a grove of wood,
which ſkirted it on the ſouth, he obſerved
a man ſitting on a tuft of the bank, with
his head reclining forward, in a melancholy
poſition, and looking down upon the
wave beneath him, in the manner in which
Achilles is deſcribed by the poet Homer,
as looking on the purple ocean, and complaining
to the goddeſs Thetis of the injury
done to him, when the maid Briſfeis had
been taken from his arms by the order of
[Page 062]
Agamemnon. Senſibly touched with an
appearance of woe in any caſe, the Captain
could not avoid advancing, and accosting
him: Sir, ſaid he,----but what
need I take up the time of the reader with
ſtating particularly the words of the address:
it is ſufficient to ſay, that with all
the neceſſary delicacy, the captain gave
him to underſtand that he took a part in
his misfortune, if there was any upon his
mind, and would think himſelf extremely
fortunate if by language, or acts, he could
alleviate his griefs.
Sir, ſaid the other, it is impoſſible. I
am an unhappy man, who have been for
ſome months in love with a young lady of
this city, and whoſe affections I had conceived
myſelf to have engaged by the moſt
unremitting attention. I had counted
upon her, as my wife, and in all my industry
in buſineſs, which is that of a merchant,
I had my thoughts directed to the
proviſion, I hoped, to have it in my
power, to make, in order to ſupport her
with dignity and affluence. Yet within
theſe few days, her attention is engaged,
and her affections alienated by a certain
Major O'Regan, that is, or, is about to
be engaged in ſome public employment.
[Page 063]
Major O'Regan, ſaid the Captain,
laughing; is it poſſible!
Do you know him, ſaid the gentleman?
Know him, ſaid the Captain; he is my
bog-trotter; he has been my valet de
chambre this three years; and of late my
hoſtler and boot cleaner, in my travels to
this city. I believe I could prevail with
him for a pair of breeches, or ſo, to reſign
his pretenſions to the lady.
At this, the eye of the inamorato began
to reſume its luſtre; and the paleneſs of his
countenance to give way to ſome freshness
of complexion. Give me your name,
and the name of the lady, ſaid the Captain,
and call upon me to morrow, at
the Indian Queen, about nine o'clock, and
I will endeavor to make ſuch terms on
your behalf with this ſame Major O'Regan,
that he will give you no farther trouble,
on the ſcore of the lady.
The inamorato expreſſed his thankfulness
with great animation and fervour;
and accepted the invitation to wait upon
him at the time and place propoſed, informing
him, at the ſame time, that his
name was Williams, and that of the lady,
was M`Cracken, a daughter of an alderman
of the city of that name.
[Page 064]
The Captain coming home, addreſſed
the bog-trotter as follows: Major O'Regan,
ſaid he, for that I find is the title
which they have given you, there is a young
lady of this town of the name of M`Cracken,
whom you have by ſome means engaged
to think favorably of you, to the
neglect of a former admirer, a Mr. Williams,
a merchant, of this city. This
gentleman had a claim upon her from a
prior attention, and though there is no
municipal law that conſtitutes it a wrong
in you to interfere; yet humanity will
dictate that it is a wrong. Becauſe it is a
ſmall thing to a man whoſe affections are
not engaged; and who has yet waſted no
time upon an object, to decline attention
to it, or relinquiſh it. But to him who
has ſet his mind upon this or that lady, it
is death to be repulfed, and a man of honor
and delicacy of feeling, who ſees the
advances of another which are well received,
will not interfere, even though the
object might be agreeable to him. Much
leſs will he amuſe himſelf at the expence
of another, by paying attention when it
is his own vanity alone that he conſults, in
ſhewing in what point of view he could
ſtand if he ſhould think proper to perſiſt.
I hope better things of you Teague, and
[Page 065]
that you will conduct yourſelf on the principles
of honour and humanity; you will
reſign this flirt, for ſuch I deem her, who----
he was going to ſay, who could be
tickled with you; but having a point to
carry with Teague, he choſe to uſe ſoft
words; who, continued he, could ſo
readily change one lover for another.
What ſecurity have you of the affections
of one of ſo verſatile a mind, Mr. Williams
is a merchant, and has cloths in his
ſtore: he will give you the pattern of a
pair of breeches to decline your pretensions,
and reſign the jade to him who had
firſt caſt his eye upon her.
Teague, much more from this laſt part
of the argument, than from the fine sentiments
of delicacy, &c. which were laid
down in the firſt of it, conſented to relinquish
the dulcinea; and ſo when Mr. Williams
called at the hour propoſed, an order
for the making of a pair of breeches was
given and the bog-trotter pledged his
word, that he neither would laugh, talk,
walk, or ogle with her any more.
Shortly after this, while reading a newspaper,
the Captain heard two men conversing
at the oppoſite end of the ſaloon in
which they ſat, one of them expreſſing
his concern that having a cauſe to be tried
[Page 066]
before the court then ſitting, his lawyer
Mr. Hardicknute could not attend, being
indiſpoſed, and as it was alledged, from
a diſappointment in love, by a Miſs Thimbleton,
who was of late, as it appeared,
taken with a certain Major O'Regan, an
Iriſh gentleman of ſome note, who had
paid attention to her.
Enquiring the reſidence of the gentleman,
and being informed, the Captain
ever prompt to do offices of humanity,
immediately calling for Teague, who was
in the bar room with the waiter getting
him to write a love letter for him, ſet
out on a viſit to lawyer Hardicknute, and
being admitted to his chamber, where he
lay languiſhing in bed, accoſted him, giving
him to underſtand that he knew the
cauſe of his complaint, not by feeling his
pulſe as did the phyſician of Demetrius,
who was in love with Stratonice: nor by
any power of conjuring; but ſimply by
hearing it from a client who was intereſted
in his recovery; and that in conſequence
of this information he had come to relieve
him, and had brought the identical Major
O'Regan along with him, who for half a
johannes was ready to reſign all pretensions
to the lady. This the Captain presumed,
from his influence with the
[Page 067]
Irishman, and from his ſucceeding on the former
occaſion.
The ſick lawyer at this ſat up; and
having put on on his gown and ſlippers, expressed
great thanks to the Captain and
the Major, and very readily handed a half
johannes from his bureau, and calling for
pen, ink and paper, for he was not sufficiently
reſtored to go to his office, he signified
that it would be proper the Major
ſhould give him ſome inſtrument of writing
as evidence of the contract. It was
agreed on the part of the Captain and the
bog-trotter; and the lawyer wrote as follows:
Letter “Know all men by theſe preſents, that
I Teague O'Regan, Major, am held and
firmly bound unto John Hardicknute, in
the ſum of one hundred pounds, money
of the United States, well and truly to be
paid to him the ſaid John, his heirs, executors,
adminiſtators, or aſſigns. Given
under my hand and ſeal this ſecond day of
June, in the year of our Lord one thousand
ſeven hundred and ninety-one.
The condition of the above obligation is
ſuch, That if I the ſaid Teague O'Regan,
ſhall withdraw all attention, courtſhip,
or wooing on my behalf from a certain
Martha Thimbleton, lady, then the ſaid
[Page 068]
obligation to be void, otherwiſe to remain
in full force and virtue.
his
TEAGUE  O'REGAN
mark.
Signed, ſealed and delivered
in the preſence of
JOHN FARRAGO.
Section This matter being fully ſettled, the
Captain and the bog-trotter took their
leave and departed. On their way home,
a man was ſeen to run acroſs the ſtreet,
dreſſed in black, but without hat, coat,
or breeches on. The Captain conceived
it muſt be ſome mad ſans culotte, or unbreeched
perſon that had come over from
Paris, and was running through the ſtreets
here in order to bring about a revolution;
but on enquiry, he was informed, that it
was the Revd. Mr. M`Whorter, a young
clergyman, who had been deranged in his
underſtanding on account of a preference
given by Miſs Fiddle to a certain Major
O'Regan, who had ſeemed to have engaged
her affections; that it was firſt discovered
on the preceding Sunday, when in
his prayer, inſtead of ſaying “give
us this day our daily bread,” he repeated,
give us this day our daily Miſs Fiddle, and
[Page 069]
inſtead of ſaying, “deliver us from evil,”
as he ought to have done, he ſaid, deliver
us from Major O'Regan; that ever ſince
he had been getting worſe, and now had
thrown off a part of his garments, and
expoſing himſelf in public, appeared to be
mad altogether.
The Captain thinking on the ſubject,
was about to parody that line of the poet
and to ſay;
Ye Gods what havock does O'Regan make
Amongſt your works.
But repreſſing all poetical flights, he
wiſhed to loſe no time, but as ſpeedily as
poſſible to wait upon the unfortunate ecclesiastic,
and by ſatisfying his mind, remove
his derangement. Accordingly
purſuing the clergyman, and having had
him ſeized and conveyed to a chamber;
he endeavored to make him ſenſible that
Major O'Regan, the cauſe of his misfortune,
who was there preſent, was ready
to quit claim to Miſs Fiddle, and give him
no cauſe of uneaſineſs any farther. For
this, on their way, the bog-trotter, in consideration
of an intereſt in the clergyman's
prayers, had promiſed to do. But poor
Mr. M`Whorter was too far gone. He
could talk of nothing, but ſome incoherent
[Page 070]
jargon conſiſting of a mixture of ſcripture
and profane language, one while about
Miſs Fiddle and Major O'Regan; another
while of Daniel in the Lion's den, and
Jonas in the whale's belly, and the Devil
running into ſwine. He would imagine
ſometimes that the devil was in himſelf,
and would ſqueel like a pig.
The matter being thus hopeleſs, they
ſet off to come home. On their way they
fell in with a man who called himſelf a doctor,
and had a bliſtering plaiſter in his
hand, and a gallipot, and a clyſter pipe
tyed with a ſtring about his neck, and
hanging down his back, and had alarmed
two or three ladies juſt before, offering
his ſervices in the way of his profeſſion.
On enquiry, it was found, that it was
the celebrated doctor Cataplaſm that had
loſt his ſenſes, within three days paſt, on
account of a Major O'Regan, that was
likely to carry off Miſs Blaſm, to whom
the doctor had been a ſuitor for ſeveral
years, and with whom he had been juſt on
the point of marriage. Deſpairing from
the late experiment of doing any thing
with mad people, the Captain waved any
trouble with the doctor, but looking sternly
at Teague; this will never do, ſaid he:
I cannot reconcile it to myſelf to be in the
moſt diſtant way acceſſary to ſo much
[Page 071]
miſchief; and as, from a deference to the
judgment of others, and to your importunity,
I have ſuffered myſelf to be the
means of introducing you to this ſphere,
I muſt take care to repair the injury as
far as may be in my power, or at leaſt
prevent any increaſe of it as much as possible.
If there is ſome taliſmanic charm,
God knows what it is, in your perſon or
appearance, that makes you thus formidable
to the peace and happineſs of others
in giving this ſucceſs amongſt the females,
and if you have not generoſity, or moral
ſenſe of duty, to uſe your advantage consistent
with humanity, it is full time you
ſhould be checked and drawn from this
ſphere altogether, and ſent to your former
bog-trotting, or put into the ſtate
if you can get there, that honeſt men may
marry their wenches, whoſe affections
they had previouſly engaged.
The bog-trotter was ſomewhat obstreperous;
or as the vulgar ſay, obstrapalous,
on the occaſion; and ſeemed to
ſignify that he would not deſiſt; but would
pay attention to whom he thought proper.
The Captain ſaw that it was a difficult
matter to lay the devil he had raiſed; and
his hopes reſted in this, that he was but
the bubble of a day, and that though
[Page 072]
light-headed young women in the unfortunate
caſes mentioned, had given him a visible
preference, yet it was rather to torture
their former lovers with a view to
try the ſtrength of their paſſion than with
any intention ſeriouſly to make choice of
him, and finally accept him for a huſband.
For he could not think it poſſible that a
woman of faſhion, and education, would
ultimately be willing to give her hand to
ſuch a raggamuſſin. If indeed, he could
come to be a judge, or a governor, ſuch
a thing might take place; but as it was, it
ſeemed to outrage all credibility.
In this he was miſtaken; for but the
very next day, he was waited on by Mr.
Mutchkin, a merchant of the city, who
was in the wholeſale and retail way as a
grocer, and who had an only daughter,
Miſs Mutchkin, to whom the Iriſhman
had made his moſt ſerious propoſals. It
was to her, by the aſſiſtance of the waiter,
that he had been writing love letters:
Mr. Mutchkin, a cautious man, before
he would give his conſent to the match,
thought proper to call upon the Captain,
whom he underſtood to be the uncle, or
guardian of the young gentleman, with a
view of enquiring into his expectations.
[Page 073]
Expectations! ſaid the Captain, why
juſt this; that if he ſhould chance to get
into office, it is well, and if not he muſt
return to his bog-trotting. Bog-trotting!
ſaid the merchant. Aye; bog-trotting,
ſaid the Captain: what elſe would he do.
It is but ten days, or thereabouts, ſince
he quitted it; and ſince, by taking him to
levees, and beer-houſes, and rubbing and
ſcrubbing him, and teaching him to dance,
and giving him ſome leſſons of manners,
he has been made fit to appear in the gay
world. He has but that pair of breeches
that you ſee to his backſide, and a pattern
not made up yet, that merchant Williams
gave him; and for my part I have done
all for him that I can do: There is juſt
the truth Mr. Mutchkin; and if you chuſe
to take him for a ſon-in-law, you are
welcome; but as, thank God, I have
preſerved a principle of candour and honesty
all my life, I will not deceive on
this occaſion; and if the match ſhould
prove unfortunate, you will not have me
to blame,
Mr. Mutchkin, expreſſed by the staring
of his eye, his aſtoniſhment; and as
ſoon as he could ſpeak, thanked the Captain
for his candour, and declared his resolution
that if Major O'Regan as he had
[Page 074]
the aſſurance to call himſelf, ſhould again
come to his houſe, he would turn him out
of doors; and that if his daughter ſhould
give him the leaſt countenance for the future,
he would diſown her entirely: He
had taken the greateſt pains with her in
her education; ſhe had been taught all the
polite accompliſhments that could become
a lady; dancing, muſic, painting, reading
French, the Belles Lettres, geography,
&c. and if, after all this, ſhe would
throw herſelf away on a raggamuffin to
the diſcredit of the family, he would no
longer take notice of her.
Fair, and ſoftly, ſaid the Captain; I
have a word of advice to give on the subject.
It is true, I have not travelled
much through the world; ſo as to viſit
France, Italy, Spain, or Portugal; nevertheless,
I have ſome general knowledge
of the principles of human nature; not
only from books, but from my own observations,
of the ſmall circumſtances that
have fallen in my way, and reflection upon
them; and have found, that in the intellectual
province, as well as in material
works, art accompliſhes more than force;
nay, as in mechaniſm, the arch is strengthened
by the very weight you put upon it,
ſo, where the imagination is concerned, the
[Page 075]
attachment is fixed by an oppoſition to it.
Hence, it is, that the diſſuaſion of parents,
guardians, or friends is often ſo ineffectual,
with their daughters or wards, in matters
of love. It will behoove you, on this
occaſion, in order to accompliſh your object,
to conceal your knowledge of the
circumſtances communicated; to allow
the bog-trotter free ingreſs and egreſs as
uſual, and to affect to ſpeak of him with
reſpect. Leave it to me to ſay ſuch
things to the young lady, as under pretence
of recommending her lover, will be
effectual to diſguſt her, and remove her
attachment,
Mr. Mutchkin impreſſed with the sincerity
and good ſenſe of the Captain, consented
to be guided by him in this buſineſs,
and accordingly going home was ſilent to
the mother and daughter with reſpect to
the converſation he had with the old gentleman,
who was conſidered as the uncle
of Teague: and the following day when
the Captain waited upon the family, and
was introduced by Mr. Mutchkin, who
retiring under pretence of buſineſs, left
him alone with the daughter and mother
to make uſe of the means he had propoſed.
For Mr. Mutchkin well knew that O'Regan
was a great favorite with the mother;
[Page 076]
and that it would be as difficult to convince
her as the daughter, of the impoſition in his
character. Nay, as ſhe had promoted
the match, her pride, unleſs ſhe herſelf
was the firſt to detect the impoſture,
would hinder her from ſeeing it, or at leaſt
acknowledging it at all.
Being ſeated, converſation enſued,
and Mrs. Mutchkin, paid the Captain
many compliments on the fine figure and
addreſs of his nephew. Miſs Mutchkin,
hung down her head, and bluſhed, as being
in the preſence of the uncle of her lover
and hearing the name of Major O'Regan
mentioned. Why madam, ſaid the Captain,
I underſtand that the bog-trotter,
has been well received in your family.
It is true I am not his uncle, nor is he a
Major; nevertheleſs many uncles have
had worſe nephews; and there have been
Majors that did not perhaps ever ſee ſo
much ſervice: for I have underſtood from
himſelf that he was inliſted once when he
was drunk, and was a while in the barracks
in Dublin; but got off when the
matter came to be examined, and it was
found that advantage had been taken of
him. For the Lord Lieutenant had given
ſtrict orders, that in the enliſtments the
utmoſt fairneſs ſhould be uſed; nor,
[Page 077]
indeed was it neceſſary in time of peace, to
take advantage; becauſe there were men
enough to be got voluntarily, and deliberately
to enter the ſervice. Nor indeed
had Teague himſelf any objections to be a
ſoldier, but that his conſtitution had not
given him that courage which is neceſſary
to enable a man to face an enemy with fire
arms: He could cudgel at a fair, or the
like, where he was ſupported by others
that would take the weight of the battle
off his hands; but except to wreſtle at
carniſh hug, as he calls it, with a hoſtler,
now and then, I never knew him fond of
any contention whatſoever. I underſtand
that he has been fortunate enough to render
himſelf agreeable to the young lady
your daughter, and I congratulate myself
on the proſpect of having ſo accomplished
a young woman to be the wife of
my domeſtic. I have had him now theſe
three years. I bought him out a ſhip of
Iriſh ſervants. He has been always faithful
to me in the offices in which I employed
him, ſuch as bruſhing boots, and rubbing
down my horſe. It is true his manners
were a little rude at firſt, but I have taken
a good deal of pains to teach him ſome
of the outlines of a decent behaviour, ſuch
as to blow his noſe with a handkerchief,
[Page 078]
and keep from breaking wind in company,
a practice to which he was a good deal
addicted at his firſt ſetting out; and
though he takes long ſtrides as you may
ſee, from wearing brogues, and bog-trotting;
yet in the courſe of time, this
and other habits may be broke, by being
in good company. He has made considerable
improvement in the ſhort time, I
have taken pains with him. Though but
ten days ſince he was heaved down, and
curried and bruſhed up for a gentleman,
he has learned to chew food, without
greaſing his chin and cheeks. If he ſhould
fall into the hands of a lady of taſte, as
he is like to do, ſhe may improve him ſtill
more. It will be of particular advantage
to him to get a woman that can write and
read; as I underſtand Miſs Mutchkin can
do very well; for as he can neither read
nor write himſelf, it is neceſſary that there
ſhould be one of a family that can. He
has been fortunate at the taverns where
we lodged to get the waiters to write and
read billets to ladies; but ſuch cannot be
always at hand for theſe things; but a wife
may. It is true his hopes in government
are uncertain, as to being an ambaſſador
or conſul, but he may get to be a valet
de chambre to one of theſe: and though
[Page 079]
the ambition of Miſs Mutchkin may not be
ſo much flattered, as to be the lady of a
miniſter, yet true happineſs is to be found
in contentment; and the love ſhe has for
his perſon, may make amends for the
want of rank and honor; much more for
the want of fortune; for riches are but
droſs, and the maid of a kitchen may be as
happy as the miſtreſs in the parlour. His
fortune indeed is not much. He has nothing
of his own, but what dreſs he wears,
and a pattern of a pair of breeches, not
yet made up. My eſtate is but ſmall,
conſiſting in a farm, and implements of
huſbandry, with a couple of horſes, one
of which I have rode from home, while
he bog-trotted by my ſide. Nevertheleſs,
if he marries Miſs Mutchkin I will endeavor
to do ſomething for him, and for two
or three years to come will engage to
find him in breeches and waiſtcoats.
The young lady was confounded and
withdrew. The mother was ſilent, and
with all her heart wiſhed the Captain gone,
that ſhe might digeſt her mortification in
private. The Captain ſaw all this; but
without ſeeming to ſee it, preſerved a
grave countenance, and with ſome apology
of having an engagement ſo that he could
[Page 080]
not have the honor of a longer conversation,
he took his leave.
The dialogue that took place after this
between the mother and the daughter,
may be more eaſily imagined than expressed.
It was conluded that when
O'Regan came next to the houſe, the
porter ſhould be ready with a cowſkin to
give him a ſuitable reception.
Mr. Mutchkin coming in was made acquainted
with the diſcovery of Major
O'Regan's hiſtory. Affecting to be as
much aſtoniſhed as themſelves, he observed,
that it would be however proper
to diſmiſs him with civility, as he had been
received in the capacity of a ſuitor. Here
Miſs Mutchkin again bluſhed, not as at
firſt, with an affected bluſh of modeſty,
when Major O'Regan was at any time
mentioned, but with the bluſh of confuſion
and ſhame. The mother diſcovering in
her countenance all the emotions of
wounded pride, and ungovernable resentment,
avowed her determination to have
him received with a cowſkin by the porter.
Mr. Mutchkin, affecting to acquiesce,
as theſe were matters in which he
did not wiſh to concern, did but confirm
the reſolution.
Accordingly, that evening, when the
[Page 081]
bog-trotter being on the point of marriage
as he thought, came to take tea with Miſs
Mutchkin, ringing the bell, and being
admitted, a ſtout fellow, an Engliſhman,
who ſerved in the capacity of Porter,
being prepared with a very heavy cowskin,
made an attack upon him. The
Iriſhman exclaimed, and called out for
Miſs Mutchkin. O! God love your
dear ladyſhip, Miſs Mutchkin; by ſhaint
Patrick; by de holy apoſtles, I ſhall be
kilt and murdered into de bargain! O! I
ſhall be kilt and murdered. God love
your ſhoul ſtop wid your cowſkin, till I
ſay may prayers; and ſpare my life; O!
I ſhall be kilt and murdered, O! dis night,
in de houſe here. Miſs Mutchkin, where
is your dear ladyſhip, to look upon me
wid your eyes, and ſave me from dis
bateing? O! I am kilt and murdered.
Saying theſe words the porter had
kicked him out of the houſe, and ſhutting
the door, left him to his exclamations in
the ſtreet.
Coming home, to the Captain, he made
a woeful complaint of the diſaſter that had
befallen him; which the Captain took
care not to alleviate, but increaſe, alledging,
that it muſt have been ſome former
lover of the lady, who was exaſperated at
[Page 082]
the preference given, and took this method
of revenge; that he now ſaw how dangerous
it was to interfere with men of
ſpirit in their courtſhips, and he ought to
be more careful for the future.
[Page 083]
CHAP. II
Containing Obſervations.
HAVING given the preceding hiſtory, and put my
name to it, there is no man that knows me, will
doubt of the truth of it. For I have always conſidered
the firſt character of an hiſtorian to be veracity; and in
all my former compoſitions, have endeavored to preserve
that character. There being therefore no doubt
of the facts, it will remain only to account for them,
and indeed, though we have partly done it already, in
ſome obſervations we have made, yet this, and the
like circumſtances which occur every day in life, of
Teague O'Regans and bog-trotters, being the favorites
of ladies in preference to the moſt accompliſhed men,
is ſo contrary to what we would expect, that it may
deſerve a more minute developement of the cauſes and
principles. In early times, and even yet amongſt ſimple
and uninformed people, the effect has been attributed
to love potions, or witchcraft; that is, either to
ſome drug, or draught affecting the nerves, and deranging
the brain; or to ſome ſupernatural power
operating on the faculties. But exploding theſe, we
ſhall endeavor to explain the phenomenon upon the
common principles of the affections of the heart, and
the power of the imagination. But it muſt be presumed
that in general, advantage of perſon, good
ſenſe, and virtue prevail with the females, and where
the oppoſite is the caſe, it is to be conſidered as out of
the common courſe of choice. Why it ever ſhould be
ſo, may depend on this; that a Teague O'Regan having
little ſenſibility of nerve, has all that apathy from
nature which the man of addreſs has from habit, and
[Page 084]
more ſteadily, becauſe the one is nature, the other art:
and coolneſs in love, is a great ſecret of ſucceſs. Sensibility
is irritable, unperſevering, deſponding, extravagant;
and hence it is that no man who is deeply
enamoured of a lady before ſhe has conceived ſome
attachment on her part, has an equal chance to be
acceptable. The fond love of a refined mind, produces
ſillineſs, in proportion to the delicacy of the feelings;
and the contraſt being more obſervable, the wiſe man
becomes, or appears to be the greater fool. The
Teague O'Regan makes love without any heart at all;
he attends upon a lady as he would tread mortar:
flatters her as he would ſpeak to a parrot, or ſtroke a
cat, without a ſingle ſenſation to diſturb him. The
appearance of ſecurity on the part of the lover, gives
the lady to ſuppoſe that he is conſcious of advantages,
and of courſe that there muſt be ſuch which ſhe does
not yet diſcover: or conceiving that ſhe has not yet
abſolutely engaged him, ſhe makes it an object to inſpire
his attachment, and the very exerciſe of her own paſſions
kindles a flame; for hopes and fears are the aliments of
love. A Teague O'Regan has no ſentiment of his own,
and therefore he approves all the reaſon, and laughs at
all the wit of the lady; ſo that putting her in love with
herſelf, ſhe becomes in love with him. A man of
ſenſe, expreſſes it; but if contrary to the lady's ſenſe,
ſhe thinks it nonſenſe, and he becomes the Teague
O'Regan in her judgment.
Again, a Teague O'Regan is repreſſed by no ſenſe
of honour, or regard to a permanent happineſs, from
paſſing himſelf for what he is not, and practiſing imposition,
he impoſes; talking of his great relations when
he has none, and of an eſtate when the right owner, as
the Iriſh phraſe is, keeps him out of it, and provided
he can obtain the lady, he never thinks of the catastrophe
when the deception is diſcovered.
A Teague O'Regan is leſs oppoſed by his rivals;
becauſe no one ſuppoſes that he can prevail. He is
aſſiſted by the female acquaintance of the lady, becauſe
[Page 085]
they wiſh her mortified by making a bad choice. In
affairs of love there is no lady has a friend except a father,
an uncle, or a brother; not always a mother,
ſeldom a ſiſter, but never any one elſe. Becauſe the
pride of a mother may be hurt by the defect of attention
to herſelf; the jealouſy of a ſiſter is rouſed, even tho'
provided for, leſt it ſhould appear ſhe had not married
equally well; and therefore the greater the fool, the
more friends he has with all the world, in his advances.
But ſetting all theſe principles aſide, a particular circumstance,
as in the late caſe of the bog-trotter may
operate for the ſeaſon, and make it an object to be addressed
by him.
I ſhall conclude theſe ſtrictures, by laying down ſome
rules, for a prudent father, or guardian to correct the
imagination of a young lady, who appears to be facinated
with a bog-trotter; and in doing this, I conceive
I ſhall render eſſential ſervice to humanity. It is a
painful thing, having accumulated property, for the
ſake of a child; and having taken pains to improve and
poliſh, to have her thrown away upon a beaſt; for according
to the expreſſion of the poet, ſome men are
beaſts, compared with others.
Man differs more from man,
Than man from beaſt.
Wilmot. As love then is the offspring of the imagination,
reaſon has nothing to do with it. Ridicule is the only
remedy. Never let the Teague O'Regan be oppoſed,
or excluded from the houſe; but invited, and laughed
at; in the mean time giving the young lady no reaſon
to ſuppoſe that it is ſuſpected ſhe could poſſibly have
any fancy for ſuch a perſon. The father or guardian
may engage ſome perſons of both ſexes, in confidence,
to join in the ridicule, and relate or invent incidents of his
abſurdities; for as the bog-trotter is making an attack
upon the honour and happineſs of the family, it is self-defence,
and juſtifiable to counteract him by ſtratagem,
when open force will not avail. No object that is made
ridiculous can appear amiable; and as to what is
[Page 086]
respectable, we depend much more upon the opinion of
others, than our own. If a lover is oppoſed, the lady
attributes it to an old muſty taſte in the father, or to
envy and jealouſy in others, and out of pride ſhe will
ſupport him; whereas if he is ridiculed, ſhe becomes
aſhamed of him, and gives him up. I have thought it
worth while to give this hint; becauſe the greater part
of our romances and comedies in the Engliſh language
are calculated to depreciate the reſpect which a young
lady ought to have for the opinion of aged and grave
perſons; and to confirm her in taking the Teague
O'Regan of her own choice. For all ſuch are uſually
repreſented as old humdrum curmudgeons, or grany's
whoſe judgment is not worth regarding, and whoſe
taſte, in affairs of love, as in their dreſs, is antiquated,
unfaſhionable, and abſurd; but the adventurers, and
fortune hunters, are all poſſeſſed of taſte, and ſpirit,
and gallantry, and carry off the damſel and make her
happy. They ſtop juſt at the marriage, and give no
view of the diſguſt, repentance, and unhappineſs that
enſues.
[Page 087]
BOOK IV.
CHAP. I. Taking advantage of the humiliated
ſtate of mind in which the bog-trotter now
was, from the late cowſkining, he had
received, the Captain thought he could
be drawn off from an extreme attention
to the ladies, and engaged to apply to the
qualifying himſelf for ſtate affairs. Accordingly
continuing his addreſs to him,
he obſerved, that though gallantry and
waiting upon ladies, was very agreeable,
yet prudence ought to be obſerved not to
create enemies, by ſeeming to engroſs
their attachment, ſo as to put a man in
danger of duels, and cowſkinings: at the
ſame time it behooved a man not to ſuffer
his gallantry to interfere with buſineſs;
and more eſpecially in the early ſtages
when he was about qualifying himſelf for
any occupation, or appointment; that, as
he (Teague O'Regan) was a candidate
for ſtate affairs, he ought to check his
[Page 088]
career, and withdraw himſelf for ſome time
from the gay circles, in order to acquire
ſome ſmall things which were neceſſary to
the creditable and convenient diſcharge of
a public function; ſuch as learning to
write his name if poſſible. As to learning
to read, or write generally that would
be a thing of years, if at all acquirable at
his period of life; but he might be taught
to imitate the few characters that composed
his name, in ſuch a manner as to paſs
for it; ſo that when he had to ſign dispatches
or commiſſions, or the like, he need
not be under the neceſſity of making his
mark, like an Indian at a treaty; but
might do ſomething that would paſs for a
ſignature in letters of the alphabet. So
providing him with a room, and placing
a table before him with an inkſtand, and
ſtrewing ſome papers, and furniſhing him
with ſpectacles, as if he was already making
out diſpatches, he began to inſtruct
him in making the letters, T, E, A, G,
U, E, &c.
But he had ſcarcely begun, when the
waiter coming in, delivered a parcel of
cards, and billets for Major O'Regan.
The Captain inſtantly reflecting that this
correſpondence with the gay world would
undo all that he was doing, and draw off the
[Page 089]
bog-trotter from his leſſons, as ſoon as
the ſmart of the cowſkining had worn off,
ſaw it neceſſary to read the billets as from
different perſons, and containing language
different from what was in them.
The cards being chiefly from men in public
employment, he read as they really were.
Opening one of the largeſt of the billets,
aye, ſaid he, there is more of it. Do you
know this Johnſton that ſeems ſo much
enraged about Miſs Muſlin to whom you
have paid ſome attention? by the bye, it
was a billet from Miſs Muſlin, to whoſe
acquaintance it would ſeem he had been introduced;
but the Captain read Johnſton.
By de holy fathers, ſaid Teague, I know
no Johnſton. He ſends you a challenge,
ſaid the Captain, to meet him on the commons
this evening at ſix o'clock, with a
brace of piſtols and a ſecond to determine
whether you or he has the beſt right to
pay attention to this lady. We ſhall give
the billet as written by the lady, and as
read by the Captain.
As written by the Lady. Would wiſh to have the pleaſure of
Major O'Regan's company this evening at
tea. Lawyer Crabtree and Doctor Drug
will be here; and you know we ſhall ſplit
[Page 090]
our ſides laughing at the ninnies. You're
ſo full of your jokes that I want you here.
Dear Major, don't be engaged; but come.
Yours ſincerely,
Patty Muſlin.
Wedneſday Morning.
As read by the Captain.
SIR,
You will inſtantly do one of two things,
either relinquiſh your attention to Miſs
Muſlin, and be no more in her company;
or meet me this evening preciſely at ſix
o'clock, on the commons the back of the
Potter's-field, with a brace of piſtols, and
a ſecond, to take a ſhot. I ſhall have a
coffin ready, and a grave dug, for which
ever of us ſhall have occaſion to make uſe
of it.
Your humble ſervant,
Benjamin Johnſton.
Major Teague O'Regan.
Section In the ſame manner, he read the other
billets, converting them from love letters
into challenges to fight with mortal weapons,
or into declarations of cudgeling,
and cowſkining if he interfered any farther
in his attentions to ſuch and ſuch ladies.
The bog-trotter began to think the devil
was broke looſe upon him, and very
[Page 091]
readily gave the Captain leave to write
anſwers, declining all combats, and declaring
his compliance with all that was requested
of him.
The waiter was the only perſon who
by receiving the billets, and handing them
in the abſence of the Captain, and reading
them to Teague, might inflame his mind
with the thoughts of the fine ladies, and
gay circles, from which he ſeemed to be juſt
recovered: taking him aſide, therefore,
and accoſting him, Mathew, ſaid he, for
that was the name of the waiter, I do
not know that I ought to find any fault
with your giving your ſervice for ſome
time paſt, to my Teague, in reading the
billets directed to him, and in writing his
anſwers; but I deſire that there may be
nothing more of this. As he is about to
be cloſely engaged for ſome time to come,
in acquiring ſome ſcholarſhip, and preparing
to enter on ſome ſtate appointment,
I do not chuſe that his mind ſhould be taken
off by affairs of compliment or love.
All billets therefore directed to him, you
will for the future hand to me. The waiter
promiſed compliance, and ſaid it was
all the ſame thing to him, as all he had
done, was to oblige the bog-trotter, and
[Page 092]
if it was diſagreeable to him (the Captain)
he ſhould do no more of it.
However, Teague continuing ſtill to
have ſome hankering after the company of
the ladies, ſo as not to have his mind ſo
much upon learning to write the characters
of his name as the Captain could have
wiſhed, he found it neceſſary to engage
the bar-keeper to aſſiſt him in perſonating
now and then, ſome one who had come
to demand ſatisfaction for the interference
of the bog-trotter in affairs of love, that
by keeping up the alarm on his mind, he
might the better confine him to his ſtudies.
According to the plan agreed upon the
bar-keeper knocking at the door, and the
Captain opening it a little, and demanding
his buſineſs; is there not a Major O'Regan
here, he would ſay (with a counterfeited
voice) who has pretenſions to Miſs Nubbin?
(one of thoſe who had ſent billets) I
wiſh to ſee the gentleman, and try if I can
put this ſword in his body; (by the bye he
had a long ſword) God love your ſhoul,
would O'Regan ſay, dear Captain, don't
let him in. I ſhall die wid fear upon de
ſpot here; for I never fought a man in
cold blood in my life. Here the bar-keeper
as recognizing the voice of O'Regan;
yes, would he ſay, I find he is here, let
[Page 093]
me in, that I may put this through him;
I had paid my addreſſes to Miſs Nubbin,
and was juſt about to eſpouſe her, when,
unlike a gentleman, he has interferred,
and turned her head with his attention.
By the New Jeruſalem I ſhall be through
his wind pipe in a ſecond. Teague hearing
this and raiſing the Iriſh howl, would redouble
his entreaties to the Captain not to
let him in. The Captain would ſay, Sir,
if you mean to make a paſs at him, you
muſt make it through me; for I ſhall not
ſtand to ſee a domeſtic run through the
body, and his guts out, while mine are
in. You may therefore deſiſt, or I ſhall
have you taken into cuſtody, as a breaker
of the peace, With this he would ſhut
the door, and the bar-keeper would go
off curſing and ſwearing that he would
have revenge for the inſult that had been
offered him, by the Iriſhman.
By theſe artifices, certainly innocent
as the object was good; for it can be no
injury to deceive a man to his own advantage;
by theſe artifices, the Captain succeeded,
in preventing a correſpondence
with the gay world, and detaching the
mind of his pupil, from the gallantries of
love. But when any member of Congreſs
or officer of ſtate called upon him, he
[Page 094]
was admitted. Traddle called frequently,
and declared that he had no reſentment
on account of Teague's propoſing to be
his competitor, at the election in the country;
but wiſhed him ſucceſs in obtaining
ſome appointment where his talents might
be uſeful.
Back matter
[Page ]
APPENDIX.
Containing Thoughts on ſome preceding
Subjects.
In looking over this volume, it ſtrikes
me that by introducing Teague to the
levee, I may be thought to mean a burlesque
on the Preſident. It is not ſo; I
meant a burleſque on Teague. As to
levee-holding, I do not know whether it
is right or wrong; nor do I care. Because,
be it as it may, I believe it can do
little harm, and is one of thoſe inſipidities
in the affairs of men which are of no account.
Univerſal prudence is a characteristic
of the Preſident, with a capacity of
attending to ſubſtantial buſineſs, and being
able at the ſame time to accommodate
himſelf to forms and ceremonies.
As all mankind are not philoſophers, perhaps
it is well to poſſeſs this talent, in
order to pleaſe them:
[Page 096]
As to what I have ſaid on the ſubject of
certificates, it may be aſked what the induction
of ſhewing that by the municipal
law the transfer might be ſet aſide in
equity? Juſt this; that if a court of equity
could act with ſuch latitude, the people
themſelves, in a national capacity, might
with as much. I never had an idea that
after theſe ſecurities, became the ſubject
of traffic, and had acquired a fixed value,
for this was nearly the caſe through all the
ſtates, that any means would have been
adopted to diſturb them. If any means
had been adopted, I had expected that at
leaſt a ſcale would have been formed to ascertain
their value; as in the caſe of the
continental money; and I would have
wanted nothing more than the letter of
John Adams to the Count de Vergennes,
in the caſe of the continental money, to
juſtify the like ſtep in the caſe of the certificates.
At any rate the transferees
would have been contented, nay, thought
themſelves very happy with a French
crown in the pound, certain payment, or
with leſs; and if it ſhould be ſaid that the
original holders had no claim, having parted
with their right, let the maſs of the people
be the gainers, in which caſe the originalholders
would gain ſomething, not
[Page 097]
having ſo much of the very debt to diſcharge
which was originally due to themſelves.
But at the ſame time that I arraign the policy
of the ſyſtem, I do not call in queſtion
the integrity or patriotiſm of the authors of
it. I conſider it as an error in judgment,
and as I have already hinted, flowing from
the exceſs of integrity itſelf: doing too
much, from a fear of falling ſhort of doing
enough. But as the ſyſtem now exists,
it muſt be ſupported; all retreat is
impracticable, and we muſt advance.
As to peace with the Indians; in order
to effect it, my firſt ſtep would be, to establish
a poſt at Preſqu'iſle; build and equip
veſſels on the lake; tranſport troops, and
eſtabliſh a ſecond poſt at the rapids of the
Miami river: from this laſt poſt, make
an advance to the Miami towns. It will
doubtleſs be neceſſary to fight the Indians
once; but only once, if beaten; for
ſeeing themſelves thus cut off from the
Britiſh, their reſolution will as certainly
die, as a plant cut from the root, and left
to wither in the mid-day ſun.
A ſtep of this nature will convince the
Britiſh that we mean to hold the weſtern
country, and will hold it; and loſing the
hope which they entertain of poſſeſſing it
[Page 098]
themſelves, they will be checked in their
inſtigation of the ſavages againſt us.
It is a ſtrange thing that ideas of treating
under preſent circumſtances, cannot possibly
be eradicated from the minds of the
public. I have converſed abundantly with
men who know the Indians, and have been
much amongſt them ſince the concluſion
of the war with the Britiſh. I do not
draw my inferences as men in government
do, from perſons intereſted in having treaties
brought about: I have converſed
with traders that have been in the woods,
and not at the ſeat of government, that
have as much ſenſe, and more truth, than
Indian negociators who, unleſs treaties
are ſet on foot, are of no uſe. What
has been the reſult of my information?
I will give the very language of the Indians.
“You are learned, (ſpeaking of
us) you think yourſelves wiſe; and can
get our land by giving your goods. Our
chieſs are not learned, but are more wiſe;
for they can take your goods, and keep
our land too.” They are poſitively astonished
at our ſimplicity; for they have no
idea of faith and honour in the caſe. The
greater fraud, the more honour, if it can
be committed with impunity.
[Page 099]
They muſt be made to dread us: that
is the truth of it. Is this practicable?
Eaſily. Diſcard treaties; increaſe, or
at leaſt fill up, the eſtabliſhment of
troops, under the command of General
Wayne. Let him have an opportunity
of giving them at leaſt one blow.
This will do more good than a thouſand
fires kindled, and ten thouſand bales of
goods given. We are now in a fair way
to be able to beat them. Our troops,
not the beſt materials it is true, the beſt
men not always enliſting as ſoldiers, at the
low pay ſtipulated; but from the great
exertions of the Commander in Chief, in
the courſe of the laſt ſummer, and the present
winter, they are certainly in a good
ſtate of diſcipline. It would be a pity that
all this expence in raiſing troops, and exertions
in training them, ſhould evaporate
in the ſmoke of a treaty.
[Page ]
CONCLUSION
OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
Looking over the preceding ſheets, and observing
ſeveral errors of the preſs, I had thoughts of giving
a table of them. But I recollect that in other books,
a table of this kind has appeared to me unneceſſary.—
Becauſe the intelligent reader could in general himſelf
ſee what were errors, and as to the unintelligent, it
made no great odds, whether he did or not.
But in juſtice to the printer, it may be neceſſary to
advertiſe the reader, that I have been the corrector of
the preſs myſelf, and therefore with reſpect to theſe errors
he is not in fault. The truth is, though I am an
excellent writer, I mean as to authorſhip, yet I am,
perhaps the worſt corrector of a preſs in the world. I
have not patience in what is in the leaſt degree mechan
nical. It is impoſſible for me to examine literatim and
verbatim; not even indeed lineatim and paginatim. I
caſt a quick glance upon the ſheet, and unleſs ſomething
very glaring ſtrikes my eye, I let it paſs.
As to the fate of the bog-trotter, I muſt leave the
matter in ſuſpence until the fourth volume, when I ſhall
diſpoſe of him to as much advantage as poſſible.
I have only farther to ſay at preſent, that I wiſh I
could get this work to make a little more noiſe. Will
no body attack it, and prove that it is inſipid, libellous,
treaſonable, immoral, or irreligious? If they will not
do this, let them do ſomething elſe, praiſe it, call it excellent,
ſay it contains wit, erudition, genius, and the
Lord knows what? Will no body ſpeak? What? Ho!
are ye all aſleep in the hold there down at Philadelphia?
Will none of you abuſe, praiſe, reprobate, or commend
this performance? It is ill uſage; that is all I can ſay;
and I will take my revenge in a ſhort time unleſs the
matter mends, by dropping my pen altogether, as I now
do for the preſent.
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
$$$
