Modern Chivalry: Containing the Adventures of a Captain, &amp;c. Part II, Volume 2 (1804-5)
Author: Brackenridge, Hugh Henry.
Publication info: Modern Chivalry: Containing the Adventures of a Captain, & Part II . Volume(s): 2. Carlisle: Published for the author, 1804-5.

18045 Front matter Covers, Edges and Spine
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
Preliminaries
[Page ]
Title Page
MODERN CHIVALRY,
CONTAINING
THE
ADVENTURES
OF A
CAPTAIN, & c .
PART II.— Vol . II.
QUID VETAT RIDENTEM DICERE VERUM .
PUBLISHED FOR THE AUTHOR.
CARLISLE:
1805.
[Page ]
Acknowledgment
ENTERED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS .
Main text
[Page 003]
BOOK III.
CHAP. I. AS the Captain was lounging through the fair, he
saw a tall thin man, of a lean visage, and sallow complexion,
talking at a stall with a chapman. He had
under his arm a piece of new, or, as it is called,
green linen . In fact he was a weaver, and had linen
claith, as he called it, to sell. For he was what we
call a Scotch-Irishman, and of the name of Oconama,
which is not a Scotch-Irish name; but an aboriginal
Patronymic; nevertheless it came to be his name:
perhaps, by the mother's side.
He had on him what we call a spencer; that is a
coat with the tail docked; though some have this
kind of garb made so in the first instance; that is, a
juste au corps, or jacket to go over the coat, instead
of being under it; so that it seems to be but a half-coat .
Now Oconama is pronounced with the final vowel
soft; and hearing it so pronounced, the Captain took
[Page 004]
it to be oeconomy: especially as he saw that his dress
corresponded with the designation; and the small
scratch wig on his head, but half covered his brown
hair, which was seen underneath, supplying the defect
of covering by the caul, which was piss-burnt,
and had but a few stragling hairs on the top of it, which
was as bald otherwise, as the pate of a Capuchin.
Oeconomy, said the Captain; for such I see you
are; and I might have known you, even if I had not
heard your name; I am glad to have fallen in with
you; having often heard of you, and wishing to see
you, and to be acquainted. There was said to be
great want of you a few years ago, under the presidency
of John Adams, who, though a good man, yet
it has been understood, did not sufficiently consult
you. I am glad to hear that you are in request with
President Jefferson, though it may be as some say,
that he consults you too much, and that you carry
things too far.
Adams! Said Oconoma. I was not in the country
when Adams was President. The more the pity,
said the Captain. There was great want of you.
You were much called for. There is a want of oeconomy,
said one. There is no oeconomy, said another.
But I am happy that you are now here. Great things
were expected from you, and great things you have
done. But there are good men who think, to use their
own phrase, that we are oeconomizing over-much,
and that by the weight of your reputation, you have
[Page 005]
misled our councils, in some particulars. A judiciary
law was said to be repealed on the principle of oeconomy .
The constitutionality of the repeal has been
questioned, much more the expediency . The suitors
are obliged to come from the most remote parts of a
state, to some one place where the circuit court is
held, which under that law was brought, if not to their
own doors, yet at least nearer home. The Constitution
must be amended as to the jurisdiction of the Federal
Courts; or a like law must be re-established. The
army has been reduced on the principle of oeconomy;
the marine also. Our armed vessels have been sold
off, and turned into merchantmen. Hence a petit
guere with the Bashaw of Tripoli, for several years,
whom we could have put down, and burnt up like a
wasps' nest, if we had kept our ships, and men together.
But I will not say, that there was not good reason
at the time, to justify the retrenchment, I mean
that appearances were such as to justify it. It is easy
to judge after the event, and though I think the thing
was wrong, yet I do not arraign the motive. The
public mind leaned so strongly to retrenchments, and
called for it so loudly, that it was not easy to resist it.
But the spirit of oeconomy is said to have invaded
the legislative part of the administration, and to be
about to fall upon the executive itself in the reduction
of salaries . And not the administration only of the
general government, but of the states, confederate,
[Page 006]
and subordinate. For imitation is the faculty of man;
and we imitate those whom we respect. Hence it is,
that we every where hear of oeconomy. An old woman
cannot set a hen to hatch but on the principle of
oeconomy .
It is a check to all improvement in any system;
the judiciary, for instance, that it does not consist
with oeconomy . Now query, Mr. Oeconomy, whether
this may not be carrying things too far. I know well
that fault will be found with all measures. For all
systems have their draw-backs. This world that we
inhabit has its physical and moral evil though the
work of infinite wisdom. What perfection then can
we expect from man? But it is well to weigh, and
to know whether what is attempted, comes as near as
may be to the expedient. This is all I have in view.
You have been praised, and you are blamed. And
so it has been with all men in all ages who have endeavoured
to serve the public. Their integrity, and
their exertions have not been sufficient to secure them
against obloquy.
Romulus et liber Pater, et Cum Castore Pollux,
Post ingentia facta, Deorum in templa, recepti,
Dum Terras, hominumque colunt genus, aspera bella
Componunt, agros assignant, oppida condunt;
Ploravere suis non respondere favorem
Speratum meritis.—
Of this Smart's translation is as follows:
[Page 007]
“Romulus, and Father Bacchus, and Castor and
Pollux, after great atchievements, received into the
temple of the gods; while they were improving the
world and human nature; composing fierce dissensions,
setling property, building cities; lamented that
the esteem they might have expected, was not paid
in proportion to their merits.”
The weaver, at this rhapsody, especially the last
part, the Latin sentence, stood amazed, with his eyes
staring, and his mouth open. He took him for the
madman of whom he had heard, and who had been
said to have been tried that day; and, on the principle
of self-preservation, if not of oeconomy, began to
recede, and to ensconce himself behind the Pedlar,
who accosting the Captain took upon him to explain.
It must be a mistake of the person, said the chapman.
This is not the man you take him to be.
Who is he then! Said the Captain. It is not
Gallatin; [1] for Gallatin does not wear a wig, as I have
understood, but his own hair; and Maddison  is a
small man.
It is neither Gallatin; nor Maddison, said the
Pedlar; but an acquaintance of mine from the county
Wicklow in Ireland. He has been in the country
about two months, and has never seen Jefferson; or
given him advice to do good or harm.
[Page 008]
I ask his pardon, said the Captain. Calling him
Oeconomy, I took it to be him that is said to be at the
seat of government, helping on with retrenchments
and expenditures. His garb corresponded with his
designation, as he seemed to cut his coat according to
his cloth; and had curtailed the dimensions of his
periwig, substituting a little of his own hair; or rather
leting it grow, to make amends for the want of
caul, which bald as it is, come but half way down his
occiput, and leaves his neck bare .
REMARK. This pleasantry with which I have introduced the
name of Gallatin, and Madison, I hope will not offend.
I respect them both; Madison with peculiar amity
and good will. It is so extremely difficult to engage
attention to any thing serious, that one must enliven
with something singular, in order to be read. These
names seen in a page will induce the reading seven.
This is all I have in view by the use of them.
[Page 009]
OBSERVATIONS.
It would be a gratification to myself, and it might
be of use to others, to give some notes of political history
in this state . Those just grown up; or lately come
amongst us, from abroad, would better understand,
why it is, that democracy has been occasionally the order
of the day; and again put down. It has always
had numbers on its side, and yet has not always possessed
the administration. I use the term democracy,
as contradistinguished from the aristocracy; that is,
a union of men of wealth, and influence.
In the state constitution of 1776, the democracy
prevailed in carrying a single ligislature; but this laid
the foundation of their overthrow; because experience
proved that it was wrong. “ Wisdom is justified of all
her children .”
The constitution of 1776, gave way to that of 1790,
and the aristocracy obtained the ascendancy; or rather
having obtained it, they brought about a convention,
and carried the constitution of 1790; which is the present .
But connecting themselves with the errors of the
administration of the federal government, in 1797, 1798
they lost the state administration, and the democracy
prevailed.
[Page 010]
Five years has it retained the administration; and
will, an interminable time, provided that wise measures
are pursued, and justice done .
This, I am not addressing to the legislature, or executive
power of the government; but to the people .
It is for them my book is intended. Not for the representatives
of a year or four years, but for themselves .
It is Tom, Disk, and Harry, in the woods, that I want
to read my book. I do not care though the delegated
authorities never see it. I will not say, it is to their
masters that I write; for I reprobate the phrase. I
I have no idea of masters, or servants in a republic .
But it is to their constituents that I consider myself
as applying, in the observations I make. At the same
time professing, which, after what has happened in my
case, is perhaps necessary , that I have not the slightest
disrespect for the representatives that have been , or may
again be; I only wish them to support a character in
their deliberations, which the world must approve . Or
rather I wish the democracy supported which can be
done only, on the basis of wisdom , which contains in it
truth, and justice.
Error is always weakness. Integrity cannot save
error. It can only reduce it from misdemeanour to
frailty.
In what is the democracy likely to err? How do
men err when they run from one extreme to another?
There may be an extreme in oeconomy , as well as in
[Page 011]
expenditure. The oeconomists are a good description
of persons; but they may not always be the illuminati .
There is such a thing as oeconomy over much . A
man of spirit, and enterprise in his private affairs, will
be sensible that it is no oeconomy to stint his labourers
of wages; or to higgle in his bargains. More depends
upon judgment, and expansion of mind in his
plans, than in niggardliness in his contracts. Laying
out well, brings in, and improves his plantation.
The federal government, in the opinion of some,
taxed too much, or injudiciously. We will not
tax at all. Rather than tax, we will bend our minds,
to reduce offices and salaries; at a time too when the
purchase of commodities proves to us, that the value
of money is reduced, and the price of living advanced
one half. The jurisdiction of the justices of the peace
proves this; for it must have been a good deal, on
this ground, that it has been increased from fifty, or
thereabouts, to one hundred dollars . But it is not
merely the deduction of offices and salaries, that is the
evil, but the wounding a principle of the constitution;
or straining a principle, to get quit of these: for, it
cannot be dissembled, that it is broached in many
places, to overthrow the whole judiciary establishment,
and put men upon the bench that will take the
honour of it, for the compensation. This might look
well at the first glance; but it would ultimately destroy
the democracy by which it was accomplished.
[Page 012]
But suppose nothing of this, in contemplation, or
attempted; who are they that oppose an amelioration
of the judicial system, competent to an administration
of justice, by an increase of the districts, or the judges?
The oeconomists . Though, it can be demonstrated,
that a pound is lost to the community, where a penny
is saved. But it does not come by the way of direct
tax; but insensible filching, in the way of the expences
of attending courts .
But the justice of the thing is more; the dispatch of
trial, and decision. The delay of justice, is the denial
of justice. It would be for the credit of the democratic
administration, to have just ideas on this head. There
are amongst them who have; but it is not universal .
Well; the fact is, that it will not always be borne; and
their adversaries will triumph .
Were it not for the name of the thing, I do not
see that a judge in this state, need care much about
being broken; for it is but a pack-horse business at
present. It requires as much sitting as a weaver, and
as much riding as a carrier of dispatches. I often think
of the language of Job, in more senses, than one,
“my days are swifter than a post.”
In riding from one court to another, it is necessary
to be at a certain point by a certain hour, though rain
falls, flood swells, and roads are bad. Even in good
weather there are bad roads. Why not make good
roads? Here again the oeconomists present
[Page 013]
themselves. The roads are left to the townships; even the
great state roads; and no improvements of a public
nature are attempted, or thought of: oeconomy is the
order of the day. It would seem that democracy had
no soul; that it views things on a narrow scale. That
it has not the knowledge, or the ambition “to make a
great state out of a small.” I would wish it to stretch
a little in its views, as to the amendment of the roads,
and the improvement of the judicial system. But this
is not a building up, but a pulling down time .
I know what it will pull down eventually; the democracy .
People will be as much dissatisfied, by and
by, with oeconomy resisting all improvements, as they
were of late with provisional armies , and a house tax.
A false oeconomy , not resisting merely the accomplishment
of public objects, but sacrificing to itself the establishments
that do exist . It is the Moloch that is calling
for the constitution that it may devour it. It is to
this idol that the third branch of the government must
be offered up in one shape or another. For what is
it, whether a judge is broke upon the bench; or has
his neck broke upon the roads?
This is not intended against the representatives . I
am pleading their cause. Three dollars wages for an
Assembly man, in the great and wealthy State of
Pennsylvania: a state which has in it the great emporium
of the Union . It is a contemptible allowance.
Yet it would excite a clamour to raise the allowance,
[Page 014]
unless the public mind is prepared for it. This is my
object. “Ye are the salt of the earth,” say I to
the people. It is you that must season, and give
freshness to our councils, infuse a spirit into our republic.
What enlargeness of heart can there be in
men that are oeconomizing on three dollars a day, at
a time, when, by the institution of banks, and other
causes, the exchange of money, and commodities is
altered, in so great a proportion from what it was.
Four dollars is the least that ought to be mentioned.
It is time to raise it to that. Charity begins at home.
I should have some hope if I saw that done. Oeconomy
over-much, like Pharaoh's “ill-favoured, and
lean-fleshed kine,” “eats up” all that is generous,
and liberal in the commonwelth.
Oeconomy may save the representatives for the
time being until by feeling, the people come to have
a sense of the policy. But, it will affect the credit,
of the democracy; and in the end bring it down. It
is a paralytic that will terminate in a convulsion of the
public mind and change the administration. It is in
the nature of things that this will be the case; for
great is the force of truth, and it will prevail .
In what I have said on this head; I will acknowledge
that I have in view, chiefly that oeconomy which
resists an improvement of the judicial system. Though
probably before this is read, it will not be of consequence
to me but as a citizen, and perhaps not even in that
capacity, whether it is improved or not.
Footnotes
[1] The Secretary of the Treasury .
 Secretary of State .
[Page 015]
C H A P. II.
I FEEL a disposition in writing this bagatelle, to
introduce something solid, and therefore have contrived
to bring about a conversation on the part of the
captain, with the principal of the college. It was on
the subject of education: not education generally, but
particular points of academic institution.
I do not like said the Captain, the enjoining, or imposing,
to use a stronger term, tasks of original composition.
It is well to instruct in grammar, and the
elements of writing so far as respects arrangement,
perspicuity, and the choice of proper words: and in
this I have but one rule, which is to think first, and endeavour
to have a clear idea, and then to put it down in
such expression as to be best understood. The definition
of stile given by Swift, nothing can surpass;
“proper words in proper places.” And for this purpose
translation is the best exercise. It is absurd to
require of youth thoughts before they have any; or at
least, correct thoughts. Help me out with my description;
assist me with my theme, says one. What shall
I do for an oration, says another? Is it ever a complaint
in common life that men want tongues? Are
you obliged to urge them to write in news-papers?
The difficulty is to keep them from it. They will be
[Page 016]
talking and scribling before they know what to say, or
to write. The seven years silence of Pythagoras was
a noble institution. What an excellent improvement
it would be in our public bodies, that a man should
serve, say two years, before he should have leave to
open his mouth, save just to say aye or no.
But we begin our system of errors at the very
schools. The student must compose. It is true we
have improved upon the system of the last century in
this particular; and do not now insist upon it that it
shall be in verse. It is sufficient that it be in prose.
I mean that making Latin hexameters, or English
hendecasyllables, are not now a task. But it still remains
that the boys must write. And yet the poet which
you put into their hands says,
Recte scribendi, sapere principium est, et fos,
Good sense is the foundation of good writing.
I do not like much, your declaiming in colleges;
though doubtless the ancients had this practice;
—Ut inter discipulos plores, et declamatio fias,
says the poet in his apostrophe to Hannibal. But is
this arbitrary speaking calculated for any other purpose,
but to make a Pedant? You must stretch out
your hand, at this; you must draw up your leg at that.
Here you must say Ah! There, Oh! It is the feeling
of the heart only that gives attitudes; it is passion
only that can swell out the breast, or agitate the members.
I have seen an old woman angry, or moved with
grief, play the orator very naturally. The emotions
[Page 017]
of her spirit, distends the arm and stretches out the
muscles. She clenches her fist at the proper period,
and lays her emphasis upon the proper words. She
says Oh! or Ah! in its proper place, without being
taught it by rule, or pedagogue.
Passion blows a man up like a bladder. He grows
as big as himself. His hair rises on his head, and his
breast heaves. Will rules give a man passion? Will
a man that feels, stand in need of rules?
I preceive, Captain, said the Principal, that you are
no slouch at supporting a paradox. Polybius tells us,
that the Romans exercised themselves on shore, learning
to keep stroke, and to feather their oars, while their
gallies were building, to encounter the Carthagenians,
in the first punic war. Can it be of no use to stretch
the joints a little even without passion? Or cannot
passion be called up by the exertion of the speaker,
even in a feigned case? It is something to accustom
youth to stand up, and face an audience. At all events,
it is an amusement, and it can do no harm to the boys
to spout a little. At the same time it is no proof of
eminence in real speaking that the youth spouts well.
For that as you say, it must come from sentiment and
feeling. But there is something in a habit of declaiming,
at least to assist the voice and gesture. But I
have always thought it preposterous in our Young
Ladies Academies , to put little misses forward to
speak. I have thought it an indelicacy to suffer them
to declaim. It is unnatural; for what occasion can
they have to harangue?
[Page 018]
I am of the same opinion, said the Captain. I could
never approve in a family to see a little miss called
up by a silly mother, or weak father, to hold out her
hand, and speak a passage which the blockhead of a
teacher had instructed her to commit to memory. It
is indelicate, and out of nature.
To what assists the memory, I have no objection.
But for this purpose, there are sentences in Scriptures,
in the Proverbs of Solomon, especially; The
Gospels, and the writings of St. Paul. In Shakespear, are
fine thoughts drawn from human nature; moral observations
consolotary, or instructive. Let them be got
by memory, because recollected, they will guide, conduct,
or embellish conversation. These would be a
good substitute for catechisms, containing points of
faith, which the young mind cannot comprehend; and
which the divines dispute about themselves. Catechisms
might be laid up for grown persons. The
fact is the early catechumeni, were all grown persons.
It was not until the time of John Knox that they began
to teach children the dogmata of the scholastic theology.
The Jews had it in command from Moses, to teach
their children sentences; or precepts of the law. They
were taught to bind them on their arms, or about their
necks in slips of writing which they called phylacteries .
But do we hear of teaching them the Talmud of Jonathan,
or the Targum of Ben Onkelos? The commentaries
of Rabbi David; or Eben Ezra the Jew, never
superseded, amongst them, the preceps of the decalogue.
[Page 019]
I had no idea, Captain, said the principal, that you
had so much knowledge of the Pentateuch.
A little only, said the Captain. But I go on to observe
that in Turkey, they commit to memory only the
moral lessons of the Alkoran; or of the Misnud in
Persia. The Vedam of India is a book chiefly for the
Priests; and so with us ought to be the greater part of
the confessions . At least mature years, only can dijest
them.
But these dogmata planted in the memory, grow
up to fruit in the understanding afterwards, said the
Principal.
That is, said the Captain, commit to memory
now, what you will understand afterwards. I would
have memory and understanding go together. But
this leads me to say a word , on memory, as you divines
say when you preach. For you talk of saying but a
word, when before you are done, you make a sermon
out of it. Memory is a thing improveable, and ought
to be improved, I do not therefore approve of this
thing of taking notes . You read your lectures, and
the student must take notes. It spoils his hand; for
trying to keep up with you he writes fast, and runs
into scratches like short hand, or the Coptic alphabet.
Sometimes the student copies the lectures, to a
great waste of time, and unnecessarily; for learned
professors thought they had done a great great deal
in geting them out of manuscript into print; and now
[Page 020]
the labour is to get them out of print into manuscript
again. But the principal disadvantage, is the neglect
of the memory . And when a man gets a thing in his
book, he neglects to put it in his head. Let the thing
rest in the brain if possible.
Pedagogues that teach the first elements of arithmetic
will instruct the youth to work their sums, as
they call it, on the slates; and afterwards put down
the figures in their books. This is to take home to
shew to their parents, that they may seem to be doing
something, and the master get a good name. But
it is a loss of time and of paper.
The same pedantry is carried up into higher institutions;
and the classes copy lectures, to make
themselves, or others believe that they have been
doing something.
Just at this instant a gun went off, and thinking
somebody might have been shot, they broke off the
conversation.
[Page 021]
OBSERVATIONS. IT may be asked, of what use, a great part of
the preceding book? Some things may have a moral,
and carry instruction to the mind. But a great
part can have no meaning or effect; farther than to
raise a laugh, or to make a person smile for a moment.
That itself is something; and may conciliate
the reader to what is more solid. An ingredient, not
in itself savoury, may give a relish to substantial
good. Assafetida gives a flavour to a beef-steak.
Let me get a man to laugh, and I put him in good
humour. The whole book from beginning to end,
has a moral, which, if any one has not found out, let
him read again.
It may argue a light airy mind in the writer; and
yet, these things are sometimes the offspring, as in
the present case, of a mind, far from being at case;
on the contrary, it is to get case, and allay pain, that
it is written. Pain of mind is relieved by an abstraction
of solid thought. The early paroxism of deep
grief, may be incompatible with a playful fancy; but
gradually and insensibly, the heart-ache may be cheated
of its sensations. What else effect has
[Page 022]
conversation or music? Neither of these can assuage great
pain; or torture; but will be felt to alleviate, in a
lesser degree of pain, of body, or mind. The mind
is drawn off, and kept from reflecting. We use laudanum
to allay acute bodily pains; and it gives a
pleasing delirium, and insensibility for a time. But
in the case of a mental suffering, it is much safer to
attack the imagination by an intellectual paregoric.
There is less danger that the use will grow to excess,
and induce habit.
Scarron wrote his comical Romance under great
bodily pain. But ease to the mind has been more frequently
sought by the amusement of writing. It is
a fortunate thing for the writers, that it keeps off
hunger; for many of them in the garrets of cities,
if we may believe themselves, while they lived, or
their friends after they are dead, are reduced to short
commons. Certain it is, that the occupation of the
mind saves food. Literary men, are in general but
small eaters. The spirits are exhausted in the
thought of the brain, and are less active, in the juices
of the stomach. So that from a man's eating, I can
give a pretty good guess, whether he thinks, or speaks
most.
But it may be said, this book might have been
written, from the motive suggested; but why let it go
to the press? Because there is a pleasure in seeing
what you have written appear in a book; and the correcting
the proof sheets as you go along, pleases.
[Page 023]
It is on the same principle that the child is delighted
with its baby house; the grown person with the gratification
of his fancy in architecture or gardening.
All the objects of men, are in great part to please the
imagination. Utility is but one half. I admit at the
same time, that he who comprises both, hits the nail
on the head, and carries all votes. But it is even
something to attain one of these. This much it may
suffice to say, as an apology for the publication.
But it may be said, why not cast the salt of your
pleasantry upon some substantial food to the mind of
a young person, and not upon vapour, which constitutes
little nourishment. You would seem to be a moralist;
and to have some knowledge of practical philosophy.
Hence we should expect in your page, observations
conducive to regulate life, and to form manners.
If for instance you had taken a youth from his early
age, and conducted him to manhood, insinuating by example,
or precept, the best lessons, it might have been
a school book. I answer; there has been a great deal
in this way already; and my mind led me more to
give lessons to grown people. Was I to set myself
about such a work as is suggested; I do not know that
I could mend the matter. I believe, I would change
a little the system of education; in one particular;
but, it might not be for the better. As already hinted
by some things put into the mouth of the Captain, I
could make it a principal matter to form the heart to
[Page 024]
a republican government . And in order to this; keep
out of view all that nourishes ambition , the poison of
public virtue. “In honour prefering one another,” is
an apostolic, and christian injunction. But it is as wise
in philosophy, as it is true in religion. Honour is the
principle of monarchy, distinction of rank, titles, dignities.
In the American republics, we retain yet a
great deal of the spirit of monarchy. The people are
not aware of the phraesology itself, in some instances.
When an individual solicits a vote, his language is,
that he will serve the people. They take him at his
word, and when he is sent to a public body, he is
called, their servant . He goes farther himself, and
will talk of the majesty of the people.
No disgrace is supposed to attach itself to the soliciting
votes, any more than petitioning the monarch for
a place. This is not in the spirit of a republic. It
is contrary to the nature of it; it is subversive of it.
But I would begin at the foundation by inculcating, the
folly of coveting a public appointment. The private
interest of a man is better cultivated by staying at
home. The first lesson I would give to a son of mine,
would be to have nothing to do with public business,
but as a duty he owes to his country. To consider service
in civil life, no more to be desired than service in
the military . In this last, there is danger of rheumatism,
and ague; or of a wound, or of death in battle;
but in civil trusts, there is danger of obloquy and disrespect.
[Page 025]
But an individual that accepts a trust, is no servant .
He is an agent; a delegate, a commissioner. Nor are
a house of representatives the people . Nor can majesty
be predicated of them. It is a monarchial phrase, and
I would not apply it, even to the people themselves.
But take away the spring of ambition; that is
distinction, and preference; and you relax industry;
you increase indolence. I grant it. But it saves the
heart. There may be less eminence; but there will
be more goodness. It is on this principle that I condemn
the distribution of honours in academics. It is
beginning by corrupting the affections. It is planting
the poison weed of ambition ; the upas tree that taints
the breeze, and kills the visitant. I shall have accomplished
something by this book, if it shall keep some
honest man from lessening his respectability by pushing
himself into public trusts for which he is not qualified;
or when pushed forward into a public station, if
it shall contribute to keep him honest by teaching
him the folly of ambition, and farther advancement;
when in fact, the shade is more to be coveted, and
the mind, on reflection, will be better satisfied with
itself for having chosen it. This is in great part, the
moral of this book; if it should be at all necessary to
give a hint of it. Will not an honest man feel compunction,
when, after some experience, he comes to
look back, and see the mischief he has done in a public
station; sapped, perhaps the foundations of the
[Page 026]
constitution; misled by the ambitious; when at the
same time, he thought he was establishing the republic.
Understanding is therefore requistic; not common
sense merely; but knowledge of the subject.
But what is knowledge without integrity? And how
can there be integrity, where there is ambition? Is
there not the ambition of doing good? I do not call
that ambition. The praise of doing good? I do not
even like the word, praise. I would say the pleasure
of doing good. For it is the greatest possible pleasure
to a mind rightly informed; properly cultivated, to
have done good. A consciousness of this, consoles
under public obloquy, and ingratitude.
[Page 027]
CHAP. III.
A Fracas , in the mean time had taken place,
at the sign of the New Almanac. The cause of this
tumult at the public house, was the circumstance of a
disagreement which had taken place between the apothecary
and his tumbler, the Bog-trotter. The latter
having got upon the stage first, insisted that the himself
was the doctor, and the apothecary the tumbler;
and, indeed it seemed to be the most consistent;
for the apothecary had the appearance of being, by
far, the most alert man. Active and nimble he could
leap like a monkey. It was for this reason, the public
took the part of Teague, and insisted that he should
retain his station of doctor, and the apothecary should
play the part of the tumbler. Accordingly, he was
under the necessity, however reluctant, to take his
place upon the plat-form, and begin his pranks previously
to the opening of the sale of drugs.
The bog-trotter in the mean time, acting in the
capacity of Doctor Mountebank, had displayed his
boxes, papers and phials. But saying nothing of
these, he made it known to the multitude, that he
[Page 028]
had a good will for the people of that village; that
having been long absent, he had at length returned, with
the knowledge which he had acquired by his travels,
and with some wealth which he had encompassed by
means of that knowledge; that in consideration of
natural love and affection he was about to bestow a
dollar upon every man present.
At the sound of the word dollar every ear was
ereccted. No conventicle ever had hearers more attentive.
God love you, said he, my dear country paple and
name sakes, hold out your hands, and your purses at
the same time, and take dis dollar, dat I hold in my
hand before every one o'd you. For here is dat famous
powder tyed up so neatly here every paper by
itself, which I sell to all de world for two dollars;
you shall have, dear honies, and much good may it do
you; for nothing at all, but the half o'dat, one dollar
a pace, and the devil a worm will ever trouble you afterwards.
Here is two dollars going for one dollar;
just out of love and kindness to the paple o'de place.
The multitude, who had expected the bounty in
hard cash, were somewhat disappointed; but nevertheless
considering the bargain, the greater part that
could muster a dollar, took the gift, and gave it in
exchange.
The apothecary was so much pleased with the success
of the new partner, that though on his part
[Page 029]
degraded to the inferior station, he counted it no misfortune;
but began to tumble, with more good will, if
not with a better grace than before; submitting to
the Doctor Mountebank, who affected now and then
to chastise him with a cow-skin, to teach him manners,
and alacrity in his profession.
[Page 030]
CHAP. IV.
THIS being the day of the annual election, the
Captain apprehensive that Teague might be taken up
in the borough, as the people are ever fond of new
things, and the late gift of a dollar in the sale of the
drugs, had made him popular; though what he sold
for a dollar was not more in the apothecaries shops,
than a few cents; apprehensive of trouble, I say, as
on former occasions, when he had seen less of the
world, and was not so well qualified for a representative,
the Captain thought proper to withdraw the bog-trotter
for a day or two from the village, and take a
journey in the country, where his merits were less
known, and there was less danger of his being kidnaped
for such a purpose.
But whether owing to themselves, or to the times,
the office of a judge, happening to be peculiarly obnoxious;
there was danger of being taken for one of
them in their rambles; and therefore it became necessary
to be on their guard, more especially, on account
of the bog-trotter; so as not to go near an assembling
of people; whether for the sake of an election,
or for other purposes.
[Page 031]
With all his caution, and circumspection, keeping
the bog-trotter in the middle of the road; and warning
him against what might happen; nevertheless,
going too near a place where a poll was holden, the
unfortunate scavenger, as I may call him, was recognized
by some present, as having been upon the
bench. The rumour soon went out, that one of the
ci-devant judges, was making his escape, and the populace
were called to apprehend the fugitive. Teague,
denial being, in his way of thinking, a main point in
the law, even had it been the case, was ready to swear
by the holy poker, and the fathers, and every oath
that could be put to him, and with great truth, that
he had never been upon a bench in his life; or had
been in the capacity of judge, or justice, since the
day that he came into the country.
“Thy speech bewrayeth thee,” said one of the people
called Quakers; “I saw thee on the bench; and
heard thee give thy charge to the grand jury.”
By the bye, he was mistaken; for it was a Scotch
judge that had given the charge; but he mistook one
brogue for the other.
But the Quaker was believed, and the bog-trotter
stood convicted.
Yes, said the multitude; he has the very physiognomy
of a judge; you may see it in his face. Hang
him at once, and be done with his judge-ship.
[Page 032]
A rope-maker brought a new cord, with which
never man had been hung, and throwing it over the
limb of a tree, was about to attach the other end to the
neck, when the sudden squall of a pig, that some one
had hit with a stick, drew off the eyes of the multitude,
and the attention of the man that held the halter;
and the bog-trotter seeing an opening, made a
sudden spring, and escaped from the croud. He was
pursued but a little way; no one chusing to tire himself,
not understanding that any reward had been
proffered by the government for the taking up a judge.
The Captain seeing Teague clear, and running
now almost out of sight, began to expostulate with the
multitude, and upbraid them for this violence.
Do you call in question the right of the people,
said one of them, to hang their officers?
But are you the people? said the Captain. A few
mad caps get together, and call themselves the people;
and talk of the majesty of the people. You do
not appear to me to be a very discerning people; to
take my bog-trotter for a judge; nor can your majesty
be deemed very gracious, and merciful, that would
hang him up, not giving time to say his prayers, or
to have the conversation of a clergyman. Had he
been a spy come into your camp, in the war, on the
eve of an engagement, you could not have shewed
signs of greater dispatch in taking away life, than in
this instance.
[Page 033]
Captain, said a man who knew him; do not think
so hard of these young men; they had no intention
of hanging him outright.
But even half-hanging, said the Captain, is no
pleasant sport to him that is the subject of it.
With that turning round his horse, he left the
ground, and returned to the village; reflecting with
himself on the danger of wandering far from the place
of his abode; or at least venturing where he was not
known; lest he might be mistaken for a judge also,
and brought to a hasty end, by the limb of a tree, as
was near being the case, with his unfortunate bog-trotter,
a short time ago, in the place which he had
just quitted; and which he never wished to see again.
[Page 034]
CHAP. V.
HAVING composed himself at home some time,
the Captain took an opportunity, at a leisure hour to
pay a visit to the blind lawyer, and entering into conversation,
ventured to put the question, whence the
rage against the Judges? Had it always been the case,
or was it a late matter that had broken out? Did it
depend upon moral causes; or was it a matter of accident,
unacountable by man?
There is in the human mind, at all times, said the
blind lawyer, a disposition to throw off shackles and
revert to the natural simplicity of early ages; not that
we relish even in imagination, the oak, and the acorn;
but we pass over these which were the food, and the
covering of the primitive inhabitants; and we think
only of their liberty. How delightful it is to ly on
one's back, and whistle; having no care, and no laws
to trouble us. Down with the lawyers, has been the
language of the human heart ever since the first institution
of society. It breaks out into action, some times,
as the history of Jack Cade informs us.
A spirit of reform , is, unquestionably, a salutary
temper of the times; because there is at all times,
[Page 035]
need of reformation. This is the angel that descends
into the pool, and troubles the waters; so that
he who slipeth in afterwards, is made whole.
But troubling does not mean muddying the waters;
but giving them motion, and exciting a current. It is
by the spirit of the atmosphere, the wind, that the waters
of the ocean are preserved salutary. But from
the same cause springs the tempest, and hurricane.
The spirit of reform is terrible in its excess. It is a
matter of great judgement to stay it at a proper point.
Is not the right of universal suffrage, said the Captain,
a great cause of this excess in our councils:
Persons young in the world; young in the country;
or such as have but little property put upon the same
footing with those that have a greater stake in the preservation
of the laws, and in the stability of the government.
It is extremely difficult if not altogether impossible;
said the blind lawyer to adjust this matter to
general satisfaction, and at the same time, general safety.
with regard to age, it cannot well be carried, later
than the age which gives the ownership, and disposition
of real estate; and as to qualification of property,
it has been found impracticable to carry it into effect.
For how can the value of estate clear of all drawbacks,
which any man possesses, be ascertained?
It seems inhospitable to hold the emigrant to a
Quarantine; and postpone the exercise of suffrage, to
a distant day, and yet it is natural for an individual
[Page 036]
whom we admit to become a co-tenant of our habitation,
to think that he can serve us, and himself also,
by some alterations in the structure, or compartments
of the cabbin. The German inhabiting a cold country,
naturally thinks of accomodation to the winter; the
Briton also, anticipates the heat very little. Neither
of these are aware of the particular winds that blow,
or of the rains, at certain periods that usually descend;
or of the diseases of the climate. The older resident
ought to be consulted, and his notion of things not too
lightly undervalued.
The idea of reform delights the imagination.
Hence reformers are prone to reform too much.—
There is a blue and a better blue; but in making the
better blue, a small error in the proportion of the drug,
or alkali, will turn black. A great enemy to a judicious
reform is a distrust of those skilled in the subject of
the reform; and yet there is ground of distrust where
those skilled in the subject, have any possible interest
in the reform itself. One would suppose that an old
lawyer out of practice; one who had been a judge,
and no longer on the bench, might be trusted in all
questions of amendment of the judicial system. But
the legislative body is the organ of amendments; and
it is natural for one branch to endeavour to absorb the
independence of another; or to be suspected of it.
Hence jealousy, and distrust, which an enlightened policy
can alone dissipate.
But the present idea of reform seems to be to pull
[Page 037]
down altogether, said the Captain. I do not know
that you will see “down with the judges” just written
upon fence-rails; or scored on tavern windows; but
it is a very common language, among the more uninformed
of the community. The danger is that it may
be mistaken for the voice of the people , and under that
idea, influence the constituted authorities.
That would be an error, said the blind lawyer.
For it does not follow, that, because a thing seems to have
advocates, that it is the voice of the people. The noisy are
heard; but the dissentients are silent . Hence it is that
those who hold the administration for the time being,
are not always aware of the real inclination of the
public mind. It is at the moment they seem to have
the greatest way, that an under current begins to set.
The truth and justice of the case, therefore is the great
guide; not what may appear to be the popular opinion.
There would seem to be good sense in what you
say, said the Captain; and for a blind man, you appear
to have a tolerable insight into things. But how
shall the truth and justice of the case be known in a
government?
It is not an easy matter, said the blind Lawyer;
or, as in the present conversation, I ought rather to
call him, the blind politician . For there are fanatics,
and there are designing men. The fanatic is an honest
creature, that thinks he is doing God's service; when
at the same time he is undermining the pillars of the
[Page 038]
constitution . The designing man, sails with whatever
he finds to be the current: or, rather than let the
pool stagnate, he will excite a current. In order to
be something in a government, a man must do something.
There is little to be got by doing good; for all
feel the benefit; but no one enquires into the cause . It
is by disorganization, that reputation is most easily
acquired. The introducing a new law, or the pulling
down an old magistrate, says Machiavel, are the
means by which a young person may distinguish himself
in a commonwealth. Indeed, even an old person,
will find his account in shewing game. If he cannot
shew a panther, he must shew a hind, and raise the
talliho.
I do not know, whether you call a judge, a hind,
or a panther, said the Captain; but that seems to be
the game at present. Every one must have a whit at
a judge. No festival can be celebrated with suitable
patriotism, without a dash at the judiciary.
There is danger, said the politician, of running
down a branch of the government. It is a delicate
point to restrain and not to overthrow. Wrong or
excess terminates in the loss of liberty.
Individual injury may be done, said the Captain;
but the constitution is a barrier to usurpation.
Our constitutions are yet green, said the politician.
Inflexions are easy. It is construction makes
the constitution; and these vary with the men in
[Page 039]
power. A witch at a mast head is not more dangerous,
than the spirit of ambition. A branch of the government,
is no more than a bramble bush before it. A
philosopher is at a loss to know whether to laugh or
shed tears, when he hears invectives against the immediate
usurpers of a government, when the thing
had its foundation in the errors of the people a long
time before. It is like laying the death of a man upon
death itself, instead of the primary causes which
had sown the seeds of his disease. The ambition of
individuals out of doors, and afterwards within doors,
to carry particular points, without looking to the consequences,
or overlooking them for the sake of the
immediate object, is the invisible gass, or poison,
that with a slow, or rapid process, ultimately produces
fever, and brings on dissolution. Self-denial is
the great virtue of a republic. It is the opposite of
ambition. Self-denial looks only at justice. It looks
at the public good. Self-denial may not be accompanied
with information; but it is ready to receive information.
It is not always an apt; but it is at least a
willing scholar. But inordinate self-love, begets obstinacy
in the weak mind; and ambition in the strong;
both destructive of happiness, political, or personal.
I hear a sound, said the Captain, like that of many
tongues; and I see a man running, whose strides are
like those of my bog-trotter.
It was a tumult in the village occasioned by the
bog-trotter; though he could not be the cause of it.
[Page 040]
Talk much about a thing, and you will put it into the
people's heads. The fact was, that in a meeting of
the citizens, it had been proposed a second time, to
make Teague a judge.
Make him a devil, said a rash man, geting angry.
A devil, let it be then, said the populace; and
while one went to get horns, and another hair, to
make a tail, the bog-trotter was left standing in the
midst. But he did not stand long; for understanding
what was about to be done with him, he slipped cable,
and shot a-head half a square, before the people were
under way to retake him.
His object was, to reach the Captain, and the
blind lawyer, whom he saw conversing at a distance.
But was under the necessity of making some doubles,
to elude his pursuers. At length, however, reaching
the scean gate, more fortunate than Hector, he threw
himself under the protection of the Captain; who being
made acquainted with the cause of this uproar,
was beginning to expostulate with the rioters.
Captain, said they, Is it reasonable that the people
should be checked in every thing they do? Was
it not enough for you, to throw cold water upon
making him a judge, or the editor of a Telegraphe;
but you must also obstruct his advancement to the
office of a devil.
[Page 041]
Finding the people warm, the Captain thought it
prudent to lay the blame a little on the bog-trotter in
the first instance.
Teague, said he, This is the first promotion to
which I have ever known you to have the least objection.
Is it a false pride, or a false delicacy, that induces
you to decline the appointment? Were it not
more advisable for you to accept your credentials;
the tail and horns, than, through an affected modesty,
to decline the commission; or at least carry the matter
so far, as to be a fugitive from honour.
In a free government, said the blind lawyer, a man
cannot be said to have dominium directum, or an
absolute property in his own faculties. You owe yourself
to the commonwealth. If the people have discovered
in what capacity, you can best serve them, it
behooves you to submit, and accept the trust.
The bog-trotter, on the other hand, though he
could not yet speak from the fast running, was averse
from the proposition; not only on account of the unbecoming
appearance of the badge of the office, but
lest if made a devil, in appearance, he should be taken
for one in reality. He might be claimed by Lucifer,
perhaps, and ordered upon duty, not having a liking
to the service; whether it might be to tempt good
people, or afflict the bad.
The fact is, he was taken by surprise; and even
when he got his breath, he stood gaping and at a loss
[Page 042]
what to say. It appeared to him an unintelligible
matter, how he could be of any use to the community,
in the capacity of a devil; or how tails and horns,
should change the endowments of his mind, though
it did the appearance of his body. Hinting this, as
well as he could in broken sentences, he was answered
by the populace; “That he had made no objection
of that kind when he had been made a judge; or
acted in that capacity; or when it was proposed to
put him at the head of a paper; that in fact, it was a
new thing from any candidate unless, indeed under an
affectation, and semblance of modesty, to alledge
want of parts, or inadaptation to a place of profit or of
power.”
But perhaps it is the first time, said the Lawyer,
that it has been proposed to diabolize a man. Even
of offices that are known to the constitution, there are
some, which men of a liberal education, would wish
to decline; though, by the bye, it is not good policy
to decline an office because of the subordinate nature
of it; for submission to the will of the people, in this
respect, is a means of obtaining their suffrages at another
time, to a more important station; wherefore I
would recommend it to the young man to turn devil,
since it is the public voice.
It will require no great change of mind, said the
Captain, to qualify him. The metamorphose need
only be of his body. His parts otherwise may stand
as they are. But I would ask, is it not a superfluous
[Page 043]
alteration in the oeconomy of the world? Is not the
devil that is already made competent to all necessary
purposes. Why apply steam to propel a boat, unless
against the current?
It is true, said the Lawyer, we have it in all indictments
“moved by the instigation of the devil.” And
there is no complaint of the want of a devil, to instigate
indictments.
Were that the case, said the Captain, I should be
unwilling to withhold assistance even to do mischief
when the community required it. But all matters
appear to me to be going on pretty well towards confusion
in this village. And why increase the number
of devils, I do not well comprehend.
Cui bono, said the Lawyer, of what use? Why
carry coals to New-Castle, or timber to the wood?
It appeared to the more reasonable that there was
good reason in this; and it was agreed to postpone
the making a devil at that time.
But it will not be understood that even the bulk of
the people really conceived that it was in their power
to constitute a devil with the qualities of one. They
had no idea of turning devil-makers, to that extent of
the composition. They had sense enough to know,
that all they could do was to give the form, and appearance
of one. For however men of superior standing
in society, may be disposed to undervalue the common
people, and to reckon them fools, there are as
[Page 044]
many knaves amongst them as fools, and perhaps
more, upon a nice scrutiny. These rogues who were
at the bottom of the business, meant no more than
their amusement with the public, and a little mirth
at the expence of the Captain. Nevertheless, the
matter had been carried so far, that had not the Captain
and the blind Lawyer, assisted with their address,
and parried the proposition of devil-making by an indirect
argument, the inutility of it, the matter must have
gone on, and a devil, in some sense of the word, must
have been made. For it may easily be conceived,
what a flame it would have raised to have stood forward
boldly, and alledged that the idea of making a
devil was a wicked conception, and had its origin, in
a design to overthrow the government; that it was a
diabolical attempt, and they must be worse than devils,
into whose heads it had come. Nor would it have
mended the matter much, to have told them that they
were themselves devils, or at least, do the work of
devils in hostility to churches, and schools of learning.
For as by the application of mechanical powers we
gain a force above the direct strength of a man, so
by that mode of speech and reasoning, which flatters
self-love, and hides the application that is intended.
Men deserve great credit, who by skill in science, have
lessened labour; who by the invention of useful tools,
have rendered the life of man more comfortable upon
this globe. But they deserve not less praise, who by
study and reflection have rendered themselves
[Page 045]
capable of managing the minds of men. This is the art
of oratory, which consists not in length of speech, or
melody of voice, or beauty of diction; but in wise
thoughts: and here our orators from the schools fail.
Men of business learn to take things by the right
handle, and to speak with a single view to persuade.
You might as well expect good liquors without fermentation,
as a man of real sense without experience in
life. Doubtless all experience will not of itself suffice.
There must be a substratum, or layer of judgment to
begin with, in order to make a man of sense. Some
may ask me of what use it is to have recorded these
freaks of the town's people? It is not pretended that
it is of any use, farther than to keep my fingers going.
But is not that something to a man's self? There is
a pleasure in writing, which only the man who writes
knows . Yet I believe no man would write, unless he
expected somebody to read. His own reading would
be small if he did not expect to have it found out that
he had read. Thus self-love is, in a great degree, the
spring of all things. Is it nothing to be able to shew
how easily I can elevate small matters? That is the
very reason why I assume this biography. Any one
can write the campaign of a great prince, because
the subject sustains the narrative. But it is a greater
praise to give a value to the rambles of private persons,
or the dissentions of a borough town. One advantage
is, that these transactions being in a narrow
campass, the truth can be reached with more
[Page 046]
certainty, the want of which is a drawback upon histories
of a greater compass, most of them being little better
than the romance of the middle ages, or the modern
novel,
Having premised thus much, we go on to a fact
that took place the following Sunday.
[Page 047]
CHAP. VI.
THERE had been so much said of devil-making,
in the village, for the last two or three days, that it
had come to the ears of the clergyman, who became
alarmed; and thought he had as many devils on his
hands already as he well knew what do with; not alluding
to the devil in the Scripture; but to the diabolicism
of wicked men. He chose a text therefore
from which he could draw inferences on this subject;
a passage of the Scripture which might seem to have
an allusion to the devil they had been about to make
the preceding week, and at the same time, furnish a
clue to some illustrations of the text. The words fixed
upon, were those in the book of Job.
“And Satan came also among them.”
It so happened, that just at the giving out the text,
the bog-trotter with his walking pole, made his appearance
at the west end of the church, which the
people seeing, and mistaking him for that devil of
which the parson spoke, rose as one man, and called
out “the devil.” For it was seldom that Teague had
come to church; but the Captain had enjoined it upon
him that day, to see what reformation it might
[Page 048]
produce in his life, and conversation. It was unfortunate
that the clergyman, in pronouncing the word, had
happened to direct his eye toward that end of the
church at which Teague was; which drew the attention
of the people to the same quarter; and hence the
impression, as sudden as it was universal.
As from a theatre, where the scenery has taken
fire, there is an effort to escape, and the spectators
rush in every direction; so on the present occasion.
The greater part had got out, and were at some distance
from the church, in disorder, the deacons
endeavouring to rally them like officers, the flying
squadrons of a routed army; but in vain; the panic
had been so great, that every one was willing to make
the best of his way, from the scene of action.
The Clergyman himself, was not a little terrified,
thinking that, contrary to expectation, the devil had
come among them; and though he himself had seen
nothing of him with the naked eye, yet that he had
been visible to the congregation. Accordingly he
had made his escape at an early period of the flight,
and was on a hill, apart in the rear of the church, at
prayers; with his eyes open; not shut, as was his
custom, for on this occasion, he had thought it advisable
to have a look out, not knowing what might heave
in sight, before he had concluded.
The clerk being a lame man, had sat still in the
desk, and given out a Psalm, so that of the whole, he
[Page 049]
was the only one who could be said to remain at his
post.
The bog-trotter, was under a more unfortunate
mistake; for he took it for granted, from the words
of the clergyman which he had heard, and from the
alarm of the people, that he had in reality undergone
a change, and had become a devil. His endeavour,
therefore, was to fly from himself; like one whose
clothes are on fire. His howling and shouting, like
that of a beaten dog, increased the disturbance, and
his own peturbation. He was a mile from the village
before he ventured to look back; and even then, he
did not stop, but continued his rout to a greater distance
in the country; at the same time not convinced
fully of his metamorphose; for puting his hand to his
head, he could feel no horn, nor a tail behind his back,
though he endeavoured to catch at this also. Hence
it was, that he thought it proper to extricate himself,
and ascertain at his leisure, the real state of the case,
as to his being what he was, and the idiosincracy
of his existence.
Certain it is the bog-trotter had no great intrinsic
value in the qualities of his head, or heart; nevertheless,
from habit or some other principle, the
Captain had conceived some attachment to him; and
was uneasy at his disappearing, especially under the
late circumstances; not knowing what might befall
him from a mistake of characters. In the present
[Page 050]
state of the public mind, with regard to the judiciary,
it might happen to him to be viewed again under that
aspect, and be laid hold upon as before, and put in
fear of his life. Nor was it a thing morally certain
that he might not become a trespasser himself, if not
upon the persons, at least upon the property of men.
The want of food might tempt him to rob hen-roosts,
or break spring-houses, which are used as dairies, or
to keep meats fresh, in the summer season. On these
grounds, he thought it both for the public good, and
that of the individual, to endeavour to reclaim, and
bring him back. As to the idea of his turning hermit,
which some thought probable, it never came into
the head of the Captain. For though he knew that
disappointments in love or in ambition, have oftentimes
made hermits, yet this must have taken place
in the case of persons of greater sensibility than had
ever been discovered in the bog-trotter. Misanthropy
is sometimes the natural characteristic of the mind;
but more generally the offspring of extreme benevolence,
hurt by ingratitude. Hence it ought to be inculcated
to indulge even benevolence, with moderation;
and to be careful against sanguine expectations
of gratitude, from those served. “Be not weary in
well doing” to others, even though a correspondent
mind in those served, does not always shew itself.
But for the sake of self-preservation, it is unsafe to
count too much upon the fruit which good acts may
produce. The seed does not always fall upon good
[Page 051]
soil, and the seasons may blight the crop. But the
anchorite is not usually made out of such as Teague
O'Regan, who had rather be among men, geting flesh
and fowl to eat, than living on vegetables in the woods,
and drinking the element of water from the pure rock;
or to trace the matter somewhat farther back, as we
have already hinted, where the natural mind does not
find its enjoyments, in the association of the happiness of
others with its own.
The whole village appeared to take an interest in
the uneasiness of the Captain, from the loss of his servant.
The young man who had set up the pole-cat to
counteract the paper of Porcupine, had gone out in
quest of him, and from his knowledge of the woods,
looking for cats, could more readily than others, go to
such recesses, or point out such caverns, as might be
expected to receive him.
The blind Lawyer and Fidler had paid the Captain
a visit, to console him, the one with his violin;
the other with his conversation. The blind Lawyer
made light of the matter, and thought that taking to
his trotters, was the best thing that Teague O'Regan
could have done; and that the leaving the village,
for a time, though operating in the nature of exile,
yet carried nothing more with it, than had happened
in the case of Aristides among the Greeks, or Marcellus
among the Romans; and illustrious characters
of all countries, who avoiding envy or yielding to
[Page 052]
unjust prosecution, had been under the necessity of
abandoning their country for a period. Some indeed
had spent the remainder of their lives in foreign countries;
and were buried by people, who formed a juster
estimate of their merits, than their ungrateful countrymen,
whose happiness had been advanced by their
wise counsels, or heroic actions. But that in the case
of the bog-trotter, there was great reason to believe,
not only that he would be well received by the neighbouring
states; but that in due time he would be recalled
to the bosom of his country, with feelings of a contrary
nature; but in proportion to the ignominy of his
exit.
The Captain felt a degree of consolation from the
observations; but at the same time, could not avoid
expressing his regret that he had not favoured the ragamuffin,
throughout, in his pretensions to become an
editor of a gazette; and the proposition of the citizens,
to put him at the head of a paper; for though
it might have subjected him to a kick, or a cuff, now,
and then, for a blackguard paragraph, yet he would
have avoided the danger of being taken, as had been
the case, for a judge, or a devil.
But, said the blind Lawyer, as you intended it, for
the best, though it has turned out otherwise; yet there
is no reason, why you should blame yourself; or that
others should find fault. Time and chance happeneth
to all men. In the capacity of editor, he would
[Page 053]
have been subject to indictments for libels, to which
a want of an accurate knowledge of law in matters of
written slander, might have rendered him liable. He
had some legal knowledge, I presume; having studied,
not at the temple, but in this country, perhaps
with more advantage; for I believe it is pretty well understood,
that temple study is not of much account.
He understands about as much law, as my horse,
said the Captain; for which reason it was the greater
burlesque to talk of making him a judge. Unless indeed
all legal knowledge, should be put down, and men
should determine by their own arbitrary notions of
right and wrong, independent of rules, and principles.
As to the making him a judge, said the Lawyer, I
do not take it there ever was any thing serious in it;
and even as to the present obloquy against the law,
I am disposed to think, the current has in a great degree
spent itself. Accusation and condemnation are
not the same thing. It is no new thing to see accusation
and condemnation mean the same, under an arbitrary
government. Indeed in a government of laws,
we have seen the power of aristocracy, the influence
of wealth and office, exerting itself, and sometimes
succeeding in running down the accused; so that
while they enjoyed the name, they were deprived of
the substance of trial. Even in a democracy, not in
name only, but in fact, ambitious men have misled,
[Page 054]
and pretending the public good, have had in view,
their own purposes. But in the free and equal representation
of a larger borough, and before a deliberate
tribunal, it is contrary to moral probability that accusation
and condemnation, will come to be considered
as the same thing. Adversaries may pretend this;
and in order to bring a slur upon a republican administration,
may even wish it . But it is not in the common
course of things that it should be the case.
I do not know, said the Captain; I have not read
a great deal of history, antient or modern, to be able
to take a view of the judicial proceedings in the case
of public men in republican governments; but there
is a difference in this borough, from the antient republics,
in the matter of representation . In the Forum
of Rome, the people themselves assembled; and
heard the cause. They had not to look over the
shoulder to see how the constituent, who was not within
hearing, stood affected; or to reflect in their own
minds, how an acquittal would be taken by the voters,
who had prejudged the case, and had said, that the officer
must be brought down . Do you think Sylla, on his abdication,
would have offered to submit the necessity of his
proscriptions, to the people in a representative capacity ?
And yet, said the lawyer, the chances for justice,
would seem to be in favour of a body removed from
the multitude, and approaching more a Select Tribu
[Page 055]
nal . But the fact is, there is no perfection in any
human institution. It is “the Judge only of all the
earth,” that can at all times do right.
It is a great thing to have no private views, and to
have conscience; so that no enmity can warp, or dislike
mislead. Understanding also, is requisite to confine
the consideration to the charge, laying out of the
view collateral suggestions. For if Cinna has not
conspired, he ought not to be “ torn for his bad verses .”
But if justice cannot find a certain residence in a
democratic government; she must leave the earth . I
despair of finding it any where else. But I have felt
tyranny , or have thought that I have felt it, even in
the courts of justice. I had thought that I had felt it,
and left a certain bar prematurely on that account: so
that I am not one of those who lean against the investigation
of judicial conduct . It is my object only to assist
the democracy, with general observations; and by the
democracy, I mean not so much the tribunals that are
to judge, as the people that delegate the judgment .
It will be a great matter, that the judgment given,
be able to stand the examination of law and reason,
abroad and at home. High cases will come down to
posterity, and fix the character of the administration.
Liberty will be affected as posterity will approve or
reverse the judgment. That is a high and transcendant
court, with whom it lies to judge judges; and lessons
of high honour and discernment from that court,
[Page 056]
will have an effect upon the streams of justice
to the remotest fountains. If the understanding
of such paramount tribunals, appear not beyond suspicion ,
from the decision given, it will be a great hurt.
The really guilty may afterwards escape from an odium
brought upon the prosecution .
An accusation will be less readily sustained, when
accusation , and condemnation , should ever that happen,
comes to be considered as the same thing .
[Page 057]
CHAP. VII.
NOTHING had been yet heard from the pole-cat
man, who had gone in quest of the bog-trotter; nor
from any other quarter, could the Captain learn the
place of his banishment. Had he known where to
find him, he could have sent him some books to read,
suited to his present situation, and his state of mind.
Bolingbroke on exile; Boethius, his consolation of
Philosophy; these, though he could not read himself,
he could get others to read to him; unless indeed, he
should have happened to have fallen into a very illiterate
part of the country; or where the German only
was spoken; and so these books which are written in
English, could not be read; the last was written in
Latin; but translated into English. Not having books
to read, he would have to amuse himself with ninemen's-morrice,
or cross-the-crown, in the sand, or
upon chalked boards. Perhaps this might answer the
purpose as well to an uncultivated mind, as dissertations
of wisdom in manuscript, or print. Business is
perhaps the best assuager of melancholy; but the indolence
of the Owran-Outang, as he may be called,
speaking characteristically, would hinder him from
[Page 058]
using this means of cheating his imagination. Laziness
was his fort; and there was reason to believe,
that he knew it, and would stick to it.
The Captain, however, was not unattentive in his
enquiries in the mean time, and hearing of a conjurer
that had come to town; not having much faith in his
art, but in compliance with the wishes of some who
suggested it, he thought proper to consult this wise
man, and gain from him such discoveries as he might
think proper to communicate. Not that he imagined
Teague had got among the stars, and taken his station
with the Crab, or the Lyon. But this conjurer,
having more to do with bringing back stolen horses,
or lost goods, than casting nativities, it might fall in
his way, to ascertain the track of the bog-trotter.
The fact was, that O'Regan had been met with by
the conjurer, on his way to the village, and had been
taken into his service as one that seemed to answer
his purpose for an understrapper, having some knowledge
of the town, and capable of acting the part of
an under devil, whom he might occasionally raise,
and interrogate upon the state of affairs at home, or
abroad. The hair that had been intended for the devils
tail, sufficed now; for Teague pointed it out the
evening they came into the village; and the horns
were at hand, which had been provided for a former
service.
In the capacity of assistant conjurer, O'Regan played
his part in the commencement, well; and the
[Page 059]
ladies coming to consult, had some things told them
that had happened; a circumstance that gave them
full confidence in the information given with regard to
things to come. It was this that had raised the credit
of the conjurer, and made his art the subject of general
conversation. For the tongue of a woman is an
excellent promulgator in all that relates to secrets.
There was a widow lady of great fortune, that
wished to see her second husband. The visage of the
Captain, just coming in, was reflected from the mirror,
and she saw him.
My dear husband, said she, it must, it will be so.
If the stars have ordained it, there is no getting over
it. I shall be happy how soon it can be brought about.
Can you tell conjurer, how long it will be before the
knot is tyed. How valuable an art it is that can so
easily relieve doubts. By this time she had the Captain
round the neck, and was kissing him, without regard
to the company.
The Captain, from natural delicacy, or a good
education, was unwilling to repel the caresses of a lady;
at the same time, thought he could not in honour
take advantage of the mistake, under which she appeared
to labour; but on the contrary, explained to her on
principles of optics, the manner in which his physiognomy
had been reflected from the lense, and that
it would require another experiment to ascertain the
real husband, which the stars intended.
[Page 060]
The conjurer admitted, that his glass had not yet
been applyed to discover invisibles; that in fact, he
had been only bringing it to bear, when the face of the
Captain intercepting the vision.
The lady was satisfied, and disposed to reconcile
herself to the real designation of celestial powers,
conceiving it in vain to struggle with destiny; and
therefore desired the conjurer to lose no time; but to
manifest to her the real object of her hopes.
Applying her eye to the glass, she saw a face that
she did not greatly dislike; for it had the appearance
of freshness, and contentment; but she saw horns .
Horns! said she. What can this mean?
Mean, said the Captain; every one knows the
meaning of the emblem. Antlers is a common place
figure for cuckoldom; and that would seem to have
been the case with the poor man in his former wife's
time.
The lady was glad to find the allusion had passed
ascant from herself; as indeed it could not well be
made to her; not being yet married to the gentleman.
In fact it was the bog-trotter, who instead of raising
a picture in the Comera Obscura, had thrust his
own head into the box; and having just before affixed
his tail, and put on his horns, the last were visible
“in that quarter,” when he presented his physiognomy
through the magic lantern, of the conjurer. His
[Page 061]
curiosity to see the lady, had led him to do this; and
expecting that the conversation, before the scenes,
would have lasted longer, before she began to look,
he was surprized, and had not withdrawn his head.
The lady requested the conjurer to inform her,
what length of time her future spouse, would be in
coming down from the constellations.
It is not in our power to determine the orbits of
fortune, said the conjurer; but simply the phases of
the planetary changes.
I should like your faces better, said the lady, if
you would bring them down without horns.
This face that the stars have shewn, said the conjurer,
is in the crescent; but if you come a day or
two hence, he may be at the full, and without horns.
In the crescent, or at the full, said the lady, let
us have him soon, since it is what I am to have. So
saying, she withdrew.
The Captain stepped up to put his questions relative
to the bog-trotter; and explaining at full length,
the circumstance of his absconding, wished to know
the place of his seclusion, and the means of his recaption.
He is in my service, said the conjurer, acting the
part of the devil, and is the very figure with the
horns, which the lady that just now left us, has mistaken
for her future husband; at the same time
[Page 062]
explained to the Captain, the circumstances under which
he found the vagrant, and the manner in which he
had accoutred him for the part he had to act; and also
how it came to pass that he had got his head into
the box, and shewn his horns, which had given umbrage
to the lady. He gave him also to understand,
that he had found him a tolerably expert devil; that
he carried his horns, and his tail well; that he had
raised him frequently, in the capacity of devil, since
he came to town, and was to raise him that evening
to some young men who had appointed to consult
him on love matters; that if the Captain would wait,
he might see him play his part, and judge of his dexterity
in his new office.
As when in an epilepsy, the eye is fixed in the
head, and presents a motionless stare, so look'd the
Captains' at this crisis. He was astonished at the
deception of the fortune teller, and the vagaries of
his waiter; this last adventure had exceeded all the
rest. He could not avoid expressing his disapprobation
of the foul play which had been shewn the lady;
and the fraud which had been put upon her, shewing
his bog-trotter for a person designated by the heavenly
bodies, to be her partner in matrimony; and still
more, the iniquity of inveigling an ignorant creature,
to take upon him the character of devil; a masque
which he had been endeavouring to avoid, even at the
risk of leaving the village; but what especially gave
him pain, was the immorality of the occupation into
[Page 063]
which he had been led, picking peoples pockets under
a pretext of discovering things unknown, while
in reality, the whole was an imposition. It was of
lighter consideration that he had degraded himself, and
stooped beneath his former designation, and objects
of ambition.
However, as the conjurer had him in his service,
and some claim upon him, probably to fulfil his engagement,
for the season, what could he say, or do?
Contracts must be complied with; unless, indeed, the
unlawfulness of the service, might relieve, from the
condition. For this, it would be necessary to consult
the blind lawyer; and for which purpose, he took his
leave, and withdrew.
The blind Lawyer, was of opinion, no prior contract
with the subordinate, existing, having been but
a servant at will, no habeas corpus, or other legal
process could lie on the part of the Captain, to take
him out of the hands of the conjurer; and as to the
unlawfulness of the service, that must be a plea in the
bog-trotters own mouth, and not in that of another
for him. Doubtless it was a fraud upon the public: but
the people themselves became a party, by consulting
the wizard, and no action would lie to recover money
back so thrown away. For potior est conditio possidentis.
But in foro conscientiæ, it might be a question
whether it was a wrong to trick people that were
willing to be tricked. Si populus vult decipi, decipiatur.
[Page 064]
The Captain thought it an immorality, to take
such advantage of the credulity of the young, and the
ignorant; or even of old fools; for truth, sincerity,
and plain dealing, was the basis of morality.
A quid pro quo, in all contracts, said the Lawyer,
is doubtless, necessary. There must be a consideration.
But it is not necessary that this be a substantial
equivalent. One promise may be the consideration
of another. Amusement is a consideration of a great
part of our stipulations. Can any thing amuse more
than fair hopes?
The pleasure is as great,
Of being cheated, as to cheat.
I am not able to argue with a lawyer, said the
Captain, especially on principles of law; but this
much I know, that the conjurer engages to perform
what he cannot do, that is, to tell fortunes, and therefore
deceives. Hence he is what I call a rogue. Now
that my bog-trotter, low as he is, should be an apprentice
to a rogue, or worse, an assistant and partner
in iniquity, is a reflection upon me, who have brought
him here; and independent of this, there is the degradation
of turning devil. A printer's devil, we all
know, means, the lad that cleans the types, or puts
on the black-ball; but this is a different sort of personage;
and actually wears horns, and is in the semblance
of Belzebub; or at least in that representation
of him, which the painters give.
[Page 065]
As to degradation, said the blind Lawyer, that is
matter of opinion. If we recur to popular language,
and take our ideas of an honourable calling from common
parlance, we shall find nothing of higher estimation
in grade of profession, than that of the conjurer;
we say of a physician, he is no conjurer; of a lawyer,
he is no conjurer; and so on of other occupations,
meaning that however eminent, any one may be, still
he falls behind the conjurer. But in a republican
government, the trade or employment of a man, is
but little considered. The great matter is, the profits
of it. Does it make the pot boil? If the bog-trotter
finds his account in the service, and makes money,
the world will wink at the means.
To act the part of a devil may be sinful; as a divine
would say; but as to honour, I do not know it
to be any impeachment to be a devil. The greater
the devil, the better the fellow. It is a cause of challenge
to call a man a knave; but not to say he is a
devil.
The Captain discovered that the lawyer was disposed
to be playful, and not serious; and droped the
conversation; still hurt in his mind at the catastrophe,
his subordinate itinerant, who had been on the pinnacle
of fortune, in point of expectation, having fallen
so low; and gone so far astray, in his pursuits. But
a change was given to his meditations, when, in the
mean time, the bog-trotter appeared, without tail or
[Page 066]
horns; or a whole shirt upon his back. He had lost
all these in a scuffle with the conjurer, about the division
of the profits. A misunderstanding had also
taken place on the subject of alternating offices, the
deputy insisting that he should change places occasionally
with the master, who should act the devil in
his turn. This the principal refused to do, and hence
the disagreement, which had come to blows, was the
cause of a separation.
[Page 067]
CHAP. VIII.
POPULAR obloquy and reproach, had fallen upon
the Captain, in consequence of his waiter having
been with the conjurer, and acting in the capacity of
devil. Though, by the bye, it was the people themselves
that had brought the thing about by the
masqueing him with tail and horns. So inconsistent
is the multitude, that they blame to-day what they
themselves have caused yesterday. The Captain being
hurt at this, and willing to clear off reflections,
for the future, determined to deliver up the bog-trotter
to themselves, to make of him what they thought
proper. Accordingly having called a town meeting,
and bidding Teague follow him, and addressing,
more particularly, the officers of the incorporation, he
spoke as follows:
Fellow citizens, said he, here is that young man,
whom you have made a devil of in this town; for it
was you that made him a devil, and yet you blame
me, as accessary to the wickedness; or rather, the
principal in the act. Now here he is, strip'd of his
tail and horns; and, I will not say, like the sun,
“shorn of his beams,” for that would be too elevated
a simile; nor like Sampson, “shorn of his hair;”
[Page 068]
for that would be also pompous. But I will say, like
yourselves, without superfluous incumbrance. Take
him therefore into your custody, and under your protection;
and hew him into what ever shape you may
chuse; fashion him as you please. Make him the editor
of a newspaper; or transform him even to a judge
of your courts. I shall not stand in the way of his
promotion, or of your will any longer.
It was evident that the first impressions of the
people, were favourable to the proposition; and that
they took in good part, the condescension of the Captain
to the public voice. But a factious man, in a
leathern pair of breeches, who had never had an opportunity
before of making himself heard, rose to
speak. Captain, said he, Is it fair to attempt a burlesque
on the democracy, by intruding your servant
on the public mind, for a post of profit, or of honour.
It is true, the greater part of us, are but plain men,
and illiterate, if you chuse to have it so; but yet, it
is to be hoped, we are not just so hard run for persons
capable of civil employments among ourselves, as to
be under the necessity of recurring to your bog-trotter.
Heavens! said the Captain, roused a little in his
mind; for he was not apt to swear; has it not been
yourselves, that have proposed the matter, and
brought all the trouble on my head respecting it?
I did, it is true, in the first instance, suggest the idea
of puting him at the head of a paper; but it was
[Page 069]
without consideration; and I retracted it, both in my
own judgment, and in my words, to you, immediately
after. For though the press has been degraded, by
such as he is, in that capacity , yet I was not willing
to contribute to the like evil. The making him a
judge came from yourselves; it was an idea that
never started in my brains. It was your own burlesque,
not mine.
Why should I undervalue democracy; or be
thought to cast a slur upon it; I that am a democrat
myself. What proof have I given you of this; My
works shew my faith . It is true, I have not undervalued
learning, or exclaimed against lawyers; or joined
in the cry of down with the judges; but, take the
tenor of my life and conversation, since the foundation
of the village. I was at the first settlement of it. Did
I engross lots of ground? Has there been a necessity
for an agrarian law in my case? Have I speculated
on the wants of men, by forestalling, or regrating?
Have I made haste to be rich? That is, have I overstepped
the common means of industry? Do I value
myself on my fine clothing? Do I indulge in luxurious
living? Is my hat off to a rich man, sooner
than to the poor? Do I oppress the stranger; or
rather do I not assist him, and invite him to our habitations?
Who has heard me call out against foreigners;
or fixing a prejudice against emigrants?
[Page 070]
Captain, said an Irish gentleman, coming forward,
and beckoning with his hand; all dis, dat you tel us,
is very well. But is it a genteel ting, to trow a ridicule
upon de whole Irish nation, by carrying about
wid you, a bog-trotter, just as you would an allegator;
or some wild cratur dat you had catched upon the
mountains, to make your game of paple dat have de
same brogue upon deir speech; and de same dialect
upon deir tongues, as he has? By de holy faders, it
is too much in a free country, not to be suffered—
Phelim, said another of the same nation, interrupting
him, but a man of more sense, and liberality;
you are a fool, said he, Phelim; if you were my
own born broder, I would say so. You are a fool;
de Captain means to trow no ridicule upon de nation.
Gentlemen of all countries laugh at deir own fools,
and make jokes upon dem; not to shew de follies of
de nation; but of human nature. In Dublin, we have
our jokes upon our Dermots, and our Thadys, and de
devil a duel about it; nor in dis country neider; wid
men that have travelled and can give a joke, and take
one, just for de sake of peace and quietness, and good
fellowship, and ateing and drinking, which is much
better dan breaking heads, wid sticks, or skivering
one anoder wid bits of iron, de call cutlashes; or snapping
pistols, for notting at all, but de humour of de
ting; when I can see no humour in it but folly, and
nonsense: so hold your tongue Phelim, and let de
Captain spake; I like to hear him, very well. You
[Page 071]
might as well take exceptions to Don Quixotte, because
he had his Sancho, and would make him a governor;
if dere was any ridicule in it, it is upon dese
paple demselves, dat are so imposed upon, to make a
bog-trotter a justice of de peace, or a judge; and not
upon de nation of Ireland, dat have men of sense, and
fools like oder nations. Commend me to de fun o'
de ting. I like de joke very well. De burlesque
consits in comparing de high wid de low, and de low
wid de bigh: and de dialogues, and spaches mark de
charcters. It is de high dat is ridiculed, and not de
low; when you compare de low wid it. De books
and travels will tache you dat, Phelim. Let de Captain
spake widout interruptions; and tell his story.
I like to hear de Captain spake very well.
Far be it from me, continued the Captain, to undervalue
Ireland, or to mean disrespect to the nation.
On the contrary, it was from good will to the people,
that I have taken the notice of this young man, that
I have. Much less have I intended a reflection upon
a democratic government, in the countenance I have
given to the proposition of advancing him in grades,
and occupations. Nor is it democracy, that I have
meant to expose; or reprehend, in any thing that I
have said; but the errors of it: those excesses which
lead to its overthrow . These excesses have shewn
themselves in all democratic governments; whence
it is that a simple democracy has never been able to
exist long. An experiment is now made in a new
[Page 072]
world, and upon better principles; that of representation
and a more perfect separation, and near equipoise of the
legislative, judicial, and executive powers . But the balance
of the powers, is not easily preserved. The natural
tendency is to one scale . The demagogue is the
first great destroyer of the constitution by deceiving
the people. He is no democrat that deceives the people.
He is an aristocrat; and seeks after more power
than is just. He will never rest short of despotic rule.
Have I deceived the people? Why then am I suspected
of a want of patriotism, and good will to the
people. Why am I charged with ridicule at their expence,
who wish nothing more than to inform their
understanding, and regulate their conduct.
But is it not presumption in you, Captain, to undertake
this, in any shape? said a man, with a shrill
voice. Is it not an insult upon the people, to suppose
that they can err: or supposing it, that you can set
them right?
It is too much to bear, said a third person, with a
grey coat. I am for repressing all such presumption.
It leads to aristocracy.
The blind Lawyer got up to speak.
We will hear no lawyer, said a man with a long
chin,
and a pale visage.
It is the blind Lawyer, said a friend to the Captain.
[Page 073]
Blind, or pur blind, said the man with the pale visage,
we shall hear no lawyer here. The Captain has
bred a great deal of disturbance, since he returned to
the village. He has opposed us in every thing that
we proposed to do. No reform can be carried on, but
he must have his objections, and exceptions from the
nature of government. Just as, if the making, or
keeping up a government, was a thing of mixture, and
composition like a doctor's drug. As if a man must
learn it, as he would to make a watch; or to keep it
in repair like a clock. Can there be any thing more
simple than for the people just to govern themselves?
What needs all this talk of checks and balances?
Why keep up laws, and judges, at an expence, as if the
people were not competent to give laws, and to judge
for themselves?
Ye need na' mind the Captain, said Duncan, coming
forward, having a regard for him, and seeing him
in a delicate predicament, the anger of the people
kindling; ye need na' mind the Captain, said he, for
he's no right in his head . He has got some kink in his
intellect, that gars him conceit strange things. I was
his waiter twa'ree months; and I found him a wee
thing cracked; and ye canna weel but find it sae,
when ye tak a look at his vagaries, and imaginations.
Just let him go about his business, and mind your ain
affairs. It wad be a shame to fa' out wi' a man,
that's no right in his head .
[Page 074]
If that be the case, said a man with a brown wig,
great allowance ought to be made. None of ourselves
can tell how long, our natural reason may be
continued to us. To be sure, he talks like a man that
is not just himself. But we did not know but that it
might be a disguise to conceal his views; a masque
of simplicity the better to introduce monarchy.
Gentlemen, said the Captain, there is now nothing
more difficult for a man, than to prove that he is not
mad. For the very attempt to prove it, admits that
it may be doubted; or at least that it is doubted. Besides
I shall not contradict Duncan, who, I am persuaded,
believes what he says. But since my services
amongst you, at present, do not seem to have been well
received, though from my heart, well intended, I will
leave you for a while, and call off the bog-trotter to
another ramble. Considering it as a banishment in
fact, though not in name; and adopting the language
of some under like circumstances, I will wish, that the
village may never have occasion to remember me or my
observations .
[Page 075]
CHAP. IX.
THE Captain being obliged to leave the village,
was now about to renew his travels; not, as heretofore,
on a voluntary excursion, but in the capacity of
an exile. He was accompanied as usual, with the
bog-trotter; and with several others of the village;
who were willing to share his fortunes in some new
establishment. Amongst these were the blind lawyer
and fidler; Clonmel the ballad singer; the latin
schoolmaster; O'Fin, an Irishman; Tom the Tinker,
and others: the Captain mounted; the rest on foot.
A blind mare, with a pack-saddle, served to carry their
provisions. This was the whole caravan which was
about to set out for the new settlement.
After two days traveling, they came to a town,
where judges and lawyers continued yet to be tolerated.
Nevertheless a judge, just before, had been driven
from the bench, owing to a fracas that had happened
on the bench itself, with a brother judge, and
which took its rise from a difference relative to idiom,
and dialect of language. The one was a Scotch gentleman,
and spoke with the Saxon pronounciation;
which is still that of the north of England, and the
[Page 076]
south of Scotland, The other was a native of France,
and had acquired the English language after his arrival
in this country, some years before. The Scotch
judge found fault with the gallicisms of his French associate,
and said he did na' like the accent, and that it
was an error to bring it on the bench. That it did na'
behoove (the French judge) to open his mouth to give
a charge, especially to a grand jury, wi' sic' a dialec'
upon his gab. The French judge seemed to think
that his gallicisms were as good as the other's patois,
or scoticisms; and observed that the French language
had a footing in the courts, and was even the language
of the law itself, at a very early period. A great part
of the law of the tenure of real property, came from
the Normans, who were French; that England became
almost a French country under William the
conqueror; that the terms de la loi, or law phrases,
are vestiges of French to this day. Cestui que use: in
pleadings, ne unque accouple en loyal matremonie;
antre fouis acquit, tout tems prit, and many others. Are
there any vestiges of broad Scotch in the law books?
Aye, quo' the Scotch judge, the law was Saxon
before it was French; and it is time that it should
come back to the Saxon again. Ye sha' na' deliver a
charge on this bench, unless ye adap' your language
to the state of society and speak plain English, or Saxon;
for they are a' the same thing; and ha' the same
privilege in a' courts of justice.
[Page 077]
The French judge began to address the jury;
when the Scotch judge interrupted, and called a constable
to take him down frea the bench .
The French judge being a choleric man, laid hold
of him by the waist-band of the breeches, and the nape
of the neck, and whirled him with a contortion of the
body from the seat of justice, amongst the lawyers of
the bar. His body having a rotatory motion, and his
legs diverging like the spokes of a wheel, his heels
flew round, and one of them hit the clerk on the nose,
and a barrister above the brow; and caused great disturbance,
to the fear and terror of the suitors, and
other good citizens of the commonwealth. The result
was, that the Scotch judge had to leave the bench
altogether, and go to the bar. The French judge in
the mean time had been sent to Congress. Hence it
was, that a vacancy existed in the place of judge; or
rather two vacancies; but the main difficulty was to
get a chief justice; or president . The Captain made
mention of the blind lawyer, whom he had in company;
but they were unwilling to have a blind man.
They wished to have a perfect judge; or one at least
in possession of all his outward senses. He then proposed
the bog-trotter; stating that he had been in request
for that promotion, before they had set out from
the midland country.
The offer was accepted, and Teague was made a
judge, and took his seat upon the bench.
[Page 078]
The Captain had determined with himself, that he
would oppose the advancement of this Teague O'Regan
no more, having got so much ill-will by it. Nevertheless,
he thought it not amiss to put him under the
care of the blind lawyer, or for some time to give him
instructions for the office, which at least could do him
no harm, if it did no good. Accordingly the lawyer
took him in tow, and began as follows.
Teague, said he, you are arrived to honour and
emolument, which some of your betters have deserved,
and could not obtain. However, “time and chance
happeneth to all men.” You are now on the seat of
justice; and it remains for you, if possible, to qualify
yourself for it. For I take it, you are yet to begin
to obtain the requisites for the discharge of that trust.
Now I have no idea that you can acquire legal knowledge.
That is out of the question. Nor do I think
it possible that you can ever attain the first elements
of jurisprudence. But this is not absolutely necessary
upon the bench, more than at the bar. I have
known a judge upon a bench, whom I would not trust
with the value of a hob nail, in a cause of mine. It
would be a substitute for sense if you could cite cases.
But you have not even cases to cite, and call authorities .
You must therefore begin a peg lower, and
content yourself with the saving appearances, merely
personal . Your gate must be steady; your demeanour
slow, gravity is a great cover for stupidity; stupidity,
indeed supplies the place, and in most cases, gives
[Page 079]
gravity. But still it is to be cultivated. You must
wear spectacles, to make people think you can read.
If you do not take notes; yet seem to take them; for
it is the fashion of the time, to be a great note taker.
At least talk of your notes; that will pass for taking
them. The Areopagi took no notes; for they sat in
the night, and had no candle light. And justice herself
is said to be blind , and can take no notes. But
note taking is now the main part of the qualification
of a judge; so that if you do not take notes, you must
seem to take them. I myself, had I been appointed
a judge, would have had to scratch a little. My fidler
might have been a good assistant to me in note taking,
had he not been blind too; for having the use of his
elbow on the fiddle, he could scratch notes with great
rapidity, could he write; but that he could not do, nor
read either. So that I should have been as much at a
loss as you in this particular. But it would not be
impossible for you, as you have your eyesight, to
learn to write Abracadabra, Tantarara, and pass them
for notes. However, if you cannot acquire all excellencies,
you can avoid some defects. You can give
attention, and seem to understand what is said in argument,
though it be impossible that you should understand
a syllable. It is a great indelicacy in a gentleman
to refuse his ear, or to shew himselsf inattentive
in private conversation. But in a judge it is intolerable,
when you are to decide upon a point which
is argued with much earnestness at the bar, and where
[Page 080]
the council expect at least that you will hear them,
even if you should not decide in their favour. For
when they are heard, and are satisfied that they are
understood, they are disposed to be content. But it is
an error of which I hope you will not be capable, to
interrupt the argument by matters of your own concern.
As for instance, when an advocate is at the
pinching point of his reasoning, to call out for the
crier, to bring you something. You will see the advocate
in such a case, turn and writhe himself, and
shew, in his countenance, the irritation that he feels.
But he is obliged to resume his oratory, and go on,
saying your honour, and he would rather say, “cannot
you take advantage of a pause to call for what you
want.” It is mentioned of Lord Camden, that he
was in all respects, the most correct of men in his
treatment of the bar, save that he would sometimes,
in the middle of an argument, stoop down to garter up
his stockings .
It is dangerous in a judge to attempt wit, especially
if he has none. There are few that have the talent;
and it is not every one that knows that he has it
not. It will be your best way to attempt nothing of
the kind; but preserve gravity, and an imposing air
of austerity. For as far as I can learn from the Captain,
you are not happy at a bon mot.
But you must be careful of your mind itself, that it
be not rendered vain by being called your honour. If
[Page 081]
the bar discover that you are weak on this head, they
will plaister you with “your honour; your honour, and
your honour.” They will be careful also to say, the
“ learned judge ,” and this the more unlearned they think
you are. And especially when they mean to impose
upon you sophism for argument, and false construction
for solid deduction, and conclusion. The “learned
judge upon the bench;” when at the same time
they will be at a loss to say, whether they think you
or the bench you sit upon, the most destitute of sense
and understanding.
A man that has been behind the scene knows the
vanity of all this, and how much must pass for nothing
of all that apparent deference which is paid to the understanding
of a judge. For the council of delicacy,
and refined manners, will pay this respect to the office,
on a principle of good breeding, and what becomes
the profession; others will do the same thing,
and perhaps overdo it, from motives of prudence, and
to gain a point with the court. There is trick in all
trades, and there is craft, in the craft, if I may use a
pun on this occasion.
But you have never been behind the scene; and
have no experience of this play upon travellers; and
managing the weaknesses of men. You are but a young
judge, and likely to be lifted up with vanity, from
your sudden elevation. Because you sit a little higher
than the bar, and the suitors; for the bench is usually
[Page 082]
raised a little, you associate your situation with yourself;
thence comes arrogance, and insult.
“Man, vain man, drest in a little brief authority.”
But it will be necessary that you maintain order,
and support authority; because otherwise, the bar
will become a bear garden, and intolerable to the
practitioner. Rudeness must be repressed, and petulance
overawed. Interruption and bluster cannot be
endured. Rules of priority as to right of motion, and
order of speaking, must be enforced. In questioning,
or cross questioning a witness, the modest and observant
advocate must be permitted to proceed without
disturbance. All these things, your own good sense,
if you have any sense, good, or bad, must teach you
to consider, and apply.
By my showl, said the bog-trotter, but I will take
de poker to dem, and give dem over de nose wid a
shilelah, if de make any spaches out of deir turn, in
my hearing. It were better for dem dey were diging
turf in Laugh-Swilly. Dey shall interrupt no good
paple in my presence.
That will not do, said the blind Lawyer; you
must call a constable; and commit for misbehaviour.
It will be descending from your dignity to take a cow-skin,
or cudgel in your hand; nor does the law warrant
it. “All things must be done decently, and
in order.” You can lay your hands upon no man yourself.
It must be by your officers, that you execute the
[Page 083]
laws. The sheriff is at hand; the coroner with his
rod; or the constable with his staff. These are the
ministers of the law in your hands to keep the peace.
You can act only by warrant of authority, or what is
called a precept .
The bog-trotter thought it hard, that he could not
take a staff from the constable, and preserve the peace
himself. But he was disposed to submit to the restriction
since it seemed to be the practice of the court.
He enquired, however, whether it might not be allowable
to take a batabuoy to de officer, or sharvant of de
court, if he did his duty slowly, so as to break de
patience of de lawyers, and, and be waiting for him.
As to this, the Lawyer gave him the proper information,
and here “ endeth the first lesson .”
[Page 084]
OBSERVATIONS. IT may seem to shock all credibility, that Teague
should have a seat upon the bench.
Quicquid fingis
Sit simile veri.
This is a maxim of the critic, and founded in the
principles of human nature. For a just taste does not
relish what is incredible. But why should it be thought
incredible, that Teague should be a judge? Or why
distrust his capacity since he had a commission? On
the death of attorney Noy, the author of the maxims,
we have the following anecdote. Dining with the
Chancellor, it was lamented by some, that such a loss
had happened: what will the king do for an Attorney
General?
When the company were gone, said the valet to
the Chancellor; why need you be at a loss for an Attorney
General? I will be Attorney General.
You Attorney General! Said the Chancellor. Are
you fit for an Attorney General?
Let the king give me a commission, said the valet,
and I will see who will dare to say, that I am not fit
for it .
[Page 085]
There is certainly a great deal in a commission,
and the possession of power. I was early struck
with this, in seeing the respect paid to the opinion of
a man made a justice of the peace, when none had
been paid before; and yet the commission had but
very little increased his law knowledge; or, in fact,
had left it just where it was; some degrees below
zero.
It may be thought, that I mean to undervalue in a
judge, the faculty of taking notes. On this head I
will explain myself. Certain it is, that the taking
notes, detracts from the exercise of memory; but much
more from the exercise of understanding . The mind
is divided, and the act of puting upon paper, detracts
something from the operation of puting in the head.
The mechanical, and intellectual are at variance, and
in some degree, however imperceptible, destroy each
other. The revolution, and composition of forces,
produce a line in a diagonal direction. It is impossible
that the man who writes, can more than half
think. All those relations and combinations of ideas
that present themselves, and are managed by him at
his ease when he gives his whole mind, are lost in part,
or have not justice done them, when they are to be recovered,
and adjusted from the partial hints that can,
in the mean time, be thrown upon paper. A note
taker, and a thinker, on the bench might be of use.
The thinker to look over the notes, and assist himself
[Page 086]
afterwards. The note taker not to think at all; but
to mind his pen. At the bar, it was my way, to take
in a writer where I had the command of the cause;
but it was understood between us, that he was to confine
himself to his province for the time being, and
neither speak, nor think.
In the history of ancient oratory, tribunitial, or
judicial, do we meet with any thing on note taking?
In Cicero de Oratore, have we any thing? Has Quintilian
a chapter on the subject? No man can be an
orator, that dissipates his mind with taking notes. It
is a qualification at the bar, or on the bench, extremely
subordinate.
Nevertheless, I do not mean to exclude it altogether.
A skeleton of the cause must be preserved, for
the sake of a reserved point, a motion for a new trial;
or in arrest of judgment. It is that full body of the
evidence, to which I object. If it is in paper, it wastes
the time of the country to copy, and if oral, it turns
the judge into a mechanic to take down. It is not necessary
for the purposes of justice, to have all that
comes out in a cause put upon paper. There is seldom
more than a single particular in the testimony of
a witness that affects the cause. It is the height of
ability to select and take this down. The late Chief
Justice, the Governor, had this talent. I have heard
the present Chief Justice speak of it with admiration
The present Chief Justice himself (Shippen)
[Page 087]
possesses it in a high degree. Perhaps hits the medium perfectly.
It is in the case of jury trial, that my exception
chiefly lies to length of note taking, when the examination
of a witness is delayed until the judge, or the
council takes down; and the mind of the judge carried
off from the hearing of the evidence, is not so
well prepared to give his charge, which ought to consist
of the resulting points of the controversy , and not a
suming up of the evidence, for that is supposed to
have been done by the council, or by the jury in their
own minds. But a man that is writing all the time
the council are speaking, can but half think. But
these strictures must be taken “with a grain of salt;”
and it is not to be supposed that I would dispense
with note taking altogether in the case, especially of
the presiding judge. On a motion for new trial, some
detail of the case, is necessary for those who have not
tried the cause.
On an argument upon a law point, where the decision
is not immediately to be made, and the notes
are taken for the purpose of examination of the books,
it is immaterial of what length, because the council
are not stopped by the impediment of clerk-ship.
After all, as I am not in the habit of taking notes
much myself, and do not like it, and resting a great deal
upon felicity of memory, the result of trusting to it, I
thought it well enough to argue my own cause, and
[Page 088]
to see what could be said on behalf of my own way,
in this particular, whether it be a defect, or an excellence.
I had forgot to mention, in its proper place, that
though the people objected to the taking the blind
Lawyer for a judge, yet they agreed that he might be
a clerk, and associate the blind Fidler for his deputy.
This arrangement being made, the Captain was disembarrassed
of this part of the trumpery he had with
him, and which incumbered the caravan.
The settlement in which they now were, was called
the back settlement; not because it was farthest
back; but because it had been once the frontier. The
name back , still continued to be tacked to it; now
when it had become the midland country.
The inhabitants of this country had become wits,
and improved in manners, from society and intercourse.
The females dressed better because they
could afford it, than they had done years before.
Their buildings were of stone, or brick, or of sawed
timber, framed, instead of round, or squared logs, laid
upon each other, as was the mode at an early period.
Nevertheless there was still a defect of judgment in
the construction of their houses, for the summer, as
well as the winter seasons. They were placed, in
most cases, as they ought to be, fronting the south;
but without perforations, or a passage for the air, by
means of windows from the west to the east. On the
[Page 089]
contrary, many of them had what they called wings;
and these placed at the east and west end. The entries
were small, and the kitchen placed in a wing, or
at the east or west end of the house. Yet, a little
thinking on original principle, would say, that it
ought to be at the north east of the building, to oppose
the storm which comes from that quarter, in the
winter; and because in the summer, it obstructs no
breeze in that direction. But it is not lawyers or judges
only, that are enslaved by precedent .
They take care also, to build in a valley, because
it is near a spring head. But in the winter the court
yard is muddy; and in the summer they want air.
As they proceeded, the quo-he settlement lay upon
the left. This settlement takes its name from the
Quo-hees, a nation of Indians that inhabited the country
at the first discovery of this part of America. The
Munsees, and Shanees, have a like termination in
the sound of their names, and these are now the remains
of nations that inhabit the countries on Lake
Erie, and the Ohio river.
Some fanciful writers, nevertheless, attempt to
give a derivation from another source; and think, that
as this settlement is peopled, chiefly with what is called
the Scotch-Irish, so the name is derived from a
phrase amongst them very common in their familiar
discourse; quo' he, quo' she, and quo' they, &c.
Quo', they suppose to be an abreviation of quoth; that
is, said he, said she, &c.
[Page 090]
Butler, in his Hudibrass, uses the word quoth, in
this sense.
Quoth he, there is one Sydrophel,
Whom I have cudgel'd—
Of this they boast as a classical authority in their
favour. And, doubtless this etimology is strengthened
by the names of the rivers in this country, such as
the Sasquehannah, which is a compound of sauce quo'
Hannah; the name of a girl calling out for sauce to
her meat; and also from the Skuylkill, from scull and
kill. For what kills a man sooner than knocking on
the head? But there is great uncertainty in etimology,
in deducing the origin of nations. Abarbanel, in
his Jewish antiquities, fully evinces this. Also Spinazoli,
in his Asiatic researches; and others. But this
is just as plausible, and nothing more, with the hypothesis
of some who conjecture that the Alleghany
mountains took their name from an English woman,
of the name of Alley; as we say Alley Croker, in the
ballad. That the Chesapeak was so called from a
Welsh man, who made use of cheese instead of an
anchor; so that instead of saying the anchor is a peake,
said the cheese is a peake; and so fixed a nick name
on the bay. There are some local names of subordinate
rivers and smaller streams in this particular part
of the country that strengthens these conjectures.
Aughwic, is allied to Aughrim, which is a place in
Ireland. We have heard of the break of Aughrim; a
[Page 091]
place where the Protestants were defeated. Maeintanga;
Macanoy, is evidently Scotch, from the initial
Mac, which signifies son, in the Erse. Juniata is a
compound of English and Irish. Johnny is English;
but ata, or atoy is Hybernian. I knew one Dennis A'
Toy, that used to mow for my father, when I was a
lad.
Nevertheless, I incline to their reasonings, who
think that quo'he is an Indian word, and of aboriginal
derivation.
On the right hand of the rout of the Caravan,
moving back, lay the Fooley settlement. Etymologists
and antiquarians are here at war also.
African travellers tell us of the Foola country in
the neighbourhood of the Mitomba, or Sierra Leone
river. Winterbottom, and Walls, late travellers, give
a particular description of it. The natives distinguish
the year by moons . There is the sweep-brush moon;
from the wind that blows; shun-path moon, from the
heat; the shakoo, or harvest moon. The line of day
is distinguised by the “sun going down into the water,”
that is evening; “the sun in the bush,” that is night,
&c. Their epochas are a town burnt, or settlement
destroyed.
The Burree, or palaver house, is the seat of justice,
where all causes, civil or criminal, are decided. The
test of innocence is the drinking red water without
occasioning a qualm to the stomach. A hot iron
[Page 092]
applyed to the posteriors, is also a test. If the culprit
does not grunt, he is safe.
The Mandingo country lies north of this, and signifies
book-man, because here they read the Alcoran,
and have schools. In the Foola country, they have
no schools, and cannot read.
Now there are authors, who derive Fooley from
Foola; and think that this settlement must have been
peopled by a colony of Africans, and hence derive the
name. It is true they have seats of justice, and palaver
houses, where the lawyers plead. Jury trials are
in use; and in this mode of administering justice it is
not the accused that is tortured, but the judges; that
is the jury . This is not by drinking red water, which
is a composition of the bark of trees of an emetic quality;
but by drinking nothing at all, or eating either,
until twelve of them are all of one opinion; which, to
render more difficult, the palaverers, the lawyers, are
allowed to address them a whole day, or longer, previously
on different sides of the question or fact, so as
to “perplex and dash their councils.” There are
what are called judges also, who preside, and these
are allowed also to give different opinions on the case.
The jurors being puzzled are ordered off under the
care of a constable, with a staff like a weaver's beam,
and he is to keep them together without meat or drink,
unless with leave of the court, and without speaking
to any one until they are agreed .
[Page 093]
Notwithstanding this consimilarity in the manners,
and the resemblance in the sound, or speaking of the
word Fooley, with that of Foola, I cannot immediately
accede to the idea that the inhabitants came from
Africa. Because there is no tincture of the African
complexion. There are negroes and mulattoes
amongst them it is true; but the bulk of the inhabitants
are of a clear red and white. I take it that the word
Fooley, is derived from the word fool, which signifies
devoid of sense, and was applyed to them, being originally
a weak people; and still continuing to exhibit
marks of simplicity bordering upon folly. Their credulity
is amazing, and they are the constant bubble of
candidates for office. They do not sell themselves as
the Foolas; but they sell their votes; or rather give
them away at elections, for whiskey, or deceiving
speeches, replete with the words liberty and the rights
of man .
In the course of this day's journey, at the crossing
of the roads, the caravan fell in with a company of
electioneerers, who were coming from the Fooley settlement,
and had a number along, taking them to the
election ground, not far distant. They were slapping
them upon the shoulder; clapping them upon the
back; and saying come along my brave fellow; give
us your vote. How are the old people at home? How
came you to get that handsome girl for a wife? Is
your crop good this year? Come take a dram of this
whiskey. How is it that you do not set up for an office,
[Page 094]
and not be lying at home in the ashes, supping cyder,
while we are obliged to go to the legislature, and to fill
offices; and keep you at your ease doing nothing. You
must take your turn next year. This will never do.
Fair play is bonny play. It is too much to be always
on duty. But somebody must stand forward, or the
people will be run down by the lawyers, and the courts
of Justice. Come give us a vote.
The Foolies were all smiling, and in good humour.
Not so in the Foola country on the Sierra Leone river,
where the inhabitants are sold or bought. It is with
great reluctance that they go into service; and some
tender scenes take place at the parting of parents and
children. It is there called slavery. Here it is called
supporting liberty, though it is sometimes sapping it,
by puting folly into public trust.
The Foolas on the Sierra Leone, are spoken of by
some travellers, as Cannibals; but I do not find an
agreement upon this head; and the supposition arises,
I would presume, from the Purra, or state inquisition
which is amongst them, when the bandoo woman denounces
a culprit. The purra then, who are state officers,
take off the culprit, and he must drink red water,
or be subject to hot irons. If he shrinks in the experiment,
he is carried away, and never more heard of.
But this affords no conclusive evidence that they eat
him; any more than amongst the Foolas in this settlement,
who have been represented by some as Cannibals,
and devouring one another, because in their Kuriouks, or
[Page 095]
churches, they are frequently denounced by their priests
as back biters . This means slanderers, and not that
they feed upon the haunches of men like venison.
Such are the mistakes of superficial observers, and
credulous travellers; whose accounts writers copy,
and publish as facts, frequently without due examination.
It is an epocha in the life of a man when he puts on
breeches. The heart of the mother is glad when she
sees her son run about in pantaloons. A second era
is the going to school. She bids him be a good boy,
and learn his book. It is the father's business more
especially, or at least the father has then more to do
with him, when he puts him to the plough, or to a
trade, or a profession. He gives him lessons and instructions
of industry, and morals.
But when he comes to be his own man, at the age
of 21; and has a right to vote at an election, what a
change does his situation undergo! What a right devolves
upon him! I may say a trust for the under age,
and for posterity. What honour attaches to his right!
What delicacy ought to be used in the exercise of it.
In the age of antient chivalry, when the youth had
come to manhood, and was made a knight, it was with
matter of ceremony, and his equipment was by the
hand of a fair lady buckling on his armour; and inspiring
him by her charms and her sentiments, with heroic
sense of honour, and the scorn of all that is false
[Page 096]
or mean. The chevalier of that day was a conservator
of the peace. His prowess was instead of laws.
Now the vote of the citizen takes place of the sword
of the adventurer. This is at the bottom of all order
and subordination. Shall the knight of the Golden
Cross be free from stain in his atchievements; and
shall a republican prostitute his vote, or dishonour his
standing in society, by bestowing it on the unworthy?
Shall he give away his suffrage for a fair word, for a
dram of liquor, “for a mess of potage?” It is his
birthright . Shall he give his vote but on the principle
of conscience and of honour. Shall he decline his
duty to present himself at the election? How does he
know but that upon his vote may depend the duration
of the republic? Who can tell with what particle
of air a pestilence begins? And whether it is from a
quiescence of that particle that a stagnation of the atmosphere
ensues, or from its activity, by gass from
the earth, that a hurricane is produced. A vote given
wrong, or withheld, may occasion ultimately a convulsion
in the commonwealth.
But truth, artifice, fraud, meditated fraud in this
noblest of functions, the all of sovereignty, in a vote,
how disgracesul, how criminal! And yet it is not always,
or every where that disgrace begins to be attached
to this the most flagitious of all knavery. If these
strictures, shall have the effect to cultivate a sense of
honour in our candidates and in our voters, it will be
worth while to have written the book.
[Page 097]
CHAP. X.
THEY were now entering the Lack-learning settlement,
where a great uproar had been made on account
of their coming. It had been given out that the
company consisted of Scholars and Lawyers . This,
either from mistake, or the design of wags, who
liked to see misconception, even though it occasioned
mischief. A multitude had got together, with
sticks and stones, to obstruct the march into their
country.
It was at the opening of a defile they were met,
and could proceed no farther. The Captain himself,
advanced with a flag, and with great difficulty obtained
a parley, and a conference. Friends, and countrymen,
said he, what do you mean? There are no
scholars amongst us, save a Latin schoolmaster, who
has left off the business, and is going to become an
honest man, in a new country. We have no lawyers;
not a soul that has ever been in a court, unless indeed
as culprits, and to be tried for misdemeanours; and
that, I take it, is not likely to give them a strong prejudice
in favour of the administration of justice. Here
is Tom the Tinker; Will Watlin; Harum Scarum
[Page 098]
the duelist; O'Fin, the Irishman, and several others,
that have no predilection for scholarship. It will be
but little learning they will introduce among you.
There is Clonmel, the ballad singer; he can sing, and
make a ballad, that is, a song for a ballad; but that is
but a small matter.
After all, what harm could learning do you, provided
that you did not learn yourselves? The bears
and the foxes of these woods do not learn; but they
do not hinder men to read books. They have no objection
to schools, or colleges, or courts of justice;
because it does not prevent them running into holes,
or climbing upon trees. The racoons, and the squirrels
can crack nuts, maugre all our education, and refinement.
“Every man in his humour,” is the title
of one of Ben Johnstons' Comedies. If you do not
find your account, or your amusement in literary
studies, what matters it, if others do? Learning, is
not a thing that will grow upon you, all at once. It
is a generous enemy, like a rattle-snake, it gives warning.
The boy feels the birch on his back-side, to make
him learned. The man gets a head-ache, poring over
books. In fact, it requires some resolution, and much
perseverance, to become learned. I acknowledge that
men were at first, like the beasts of the wood, and the
fowls of the air, without grammars or dictionaries;
and it took a great deal to bring them out of that state,
and give them what is called education. At the revival
of letters in Europe, after the dark ages, it was
[Page 099]
thought a great matter to get to be a scholar. Peculiar
privileges were attached. Hence what is called
“the benefit of clergy.”
De Clergy, said an honest German. De Clergy
are de biggest rogues of de two. An honest Sherman
minister widout larning, ish better. But de lawyers
are de tyvil; wid deir pooks, and deir talks in de
courts; and sheats people for de money. I sticks to
de blantation, and makes my fence. Learning ish
goot for noting; but to make men rogues. It ish all
a contrivance to sheat people.
The Demagogue amongst the multitude, who had
excited this opposition, to learning and the learned,
was a shrewd fellow, and it was not that he was not
sensible of the advantages of learning; but because he
was a sciolist himself, and did not wish to loose his
influence by the competition of a lawyer, or a scholar,
that he had excited this prejudice. But discovering,
that amongst this company, as the Captain said, and
which he could guess from the manners, and the countenance,
there were really no literati; or what the
French call Savans, coming forward, to take a degree
of the meridian, or explore antiquities; much less a
corps of lawyers to establish codes of jurisprudence,
or introduce litigation, he explained the matter to
those around him, and reconciled them to the proposition
of suffering them to pass through the country.
[Page 100]
The Captain expressed his sense of his courtesy,
and opportune assistance, towards the object of their
progression; and making him a present of a box of
jews-harps for the young people, proceeded without
farther molestation.
[Page 101]
OBSERVATIONS. THE demagogue of all times, and countries, uses
the same arts. The laws are a standing butt of his
invective. He cannot be a sage, or a legislator; and
therefore must find fault with those that are. The
Athenian Cleon, in his harangues, as given by Thucydides,
is a perfect model of a demagogue. I have not
the book by me, or I would copy one to give a specimen
of his art. The oppression of the laws, and the
inequality of justice to the poor, are the usual themes
of his declamation. But where there are laws, there
will be science; and science is the support of laws.
Hence the hostility against these, at the same time.
But the passion of the time changes, like the fashions
of dress. It is just the same principle that introduces
the square toe in the place of the sharp, that
also, makes it the rage to be a scholar; or to be illiterate.
But the change in the one case is not so much
felt, as in the other. It is not attended with such extensive
consequences. “Of making many books, there
is no end, and much study is a weariness of the
flesh.” This is the language of a man that had been
a great scholar, and writer; because in his experience
it had not given perfect happiness, as nothing will,
[Page 102]
he speaks in these terms. It is not meant to be taken
precisely as spoken; and is no more than an expression
of the inanity of the noblest of all enjoyments;
the mental gratification, of making or reading a book .
I therefore think the lack-learning people had
been misled in their prejudice against a literary education.
At least, it is my simple way of thinking,
and I may be wrong. Admitting this, I shall go on
with my story.
Provisions had begun to fail; and though they
had a fire-arm, or two in company, with a little ammunition,
yet they were not the best marks-men, and
nothing had presented itself, in these woods, to take
down and barbacue. Harum Scarum, was the commissary;
but he could devise no ways and means of
supplying food, unless by sending a challenge to the
game, and calling them out to a duel, where they
might be shot at pleasure.
It was thought absurd to suppose that deer or buffaloe,
or even wild cat, or opposum, would stand upon
a point of honour , and come out of the woods, at a
card, in the manner of men, piqued upon their courage.
Why not? said Harum Scarum, do not men come
and stand up to be shot at, like a post without stiring?
Have not men more sense than beasts? At
[Page 103]
least they have more learning, and boast of their education.
I can bring a fellow out to me, almost at a
wink; and shall I be at a loss with a brute beast, who
hast not half the prudence, though it may have the
same self-love, and principle of preservation.
You may try it, said the Captain. I shall wonder
a little if the event “corresponds with the intention.”
Harum Scarum, having made out his challenge,
made choice of Will Watlin, for his second, to bear
the cards, and disperse them in the forest.
No answer came, and no bear, or panther appeared,
or came upon the ground.
The next thing was to post them; which he did,
and put up billets upon trees. They were to this effect.
“Take notice, that I Harum Scarum, gentleman,
do hereby post and publish the beasts of these woods, to
be scoundrels, liars, and cowards, of which let all men
take notice; that no man of honour may keep company
with them; but consider them as poltroons and
rascals.”
This was what is called the mad-cap settlement;
the inhabitants being of an irritable disposition, and
apt to take offence. Accordingly seeing those upon
trees, as they were looking for their cattle in the
woods, they were highly vexed, and put into great
passion. Sundry of them had fallen in with straglers
[Page 104]
of the company, gathering roots and berries; or looking
for a shot; and had come to high words, under
a mutual misunderstanding of the circumstance which
gave offence. Collecting a large party at a pass, the
mad-caps had come forward, and determined to give
battle. The Captain saw the necessity of some active
measures on his part, and collecting his men, began
to form. He had with him, the player on the
bag-pipes, and Tom the Tinker, who turned a piece
of tin that he had, into a kettle drum, and beat on it
the rogues march; which was the only point of war
that he could beat. Will Watlin had a saplin of
hickory; and O'Fin had his flail, which he brought
along with him, not knowing but he might get a job
of threshing by the way.
He had now got a job, it is true; but not of the
same kind that he meant, wheat at six-pence a bushel;
but people's brains to beat out, or their bones to
break; a thing as unprofitable as it is unlawful. The
Captain being a military man, was thinking of the
science, and manoeuvres put in practice by the antients,
by which they had gained battles. He was at
a loss whether to advance in single column, until within
a certain distance; and then halt with the head,
while the rear wheeled round, and struck like a serpent
with its tail, in the manner Epaminondas, gained
the battle of Leuctra. Or whether he should imitate
Hannibal at—I forget at what battle, with the Romans;
and oppose a semicircle, with the convex to the
[Page 105]
enemy; and which yielding in the centre changed to a
crescent, and received the adversary in its horns,
which encompassing the flanks, cut them to pieces.
He was debating with himself whether he should advance
to a certain height; or rely upon an ambuscade
among the bushes in the plain, when, in the mean
time Clonmel, the ballad singer, struck up a song in
the centre, and the mad-caps began to listen; and
though they had as many arms as a learned lawyer
puts in his declaration; “swords, staves, and knives,”
they dropped them all, and seemed to return to good
humour.
The song of Clonmel was as follows:
What use is in fighting, and gouging, and biting,
                           Far better to let it alone;
For kicking and cuffing, and boxing, and buffing,
                           It makes the flesh ache, and the bone.
But give me the whiskey, it makes one so friskey,
                           But beating, and brusing makes sore;
Come shake hands my cronies, come near, my dear
honies,
                           And think of your grudges no more.
We are a set of poor fellows just escap'd from the
gallows,
                           And hunting a wolf or a bear.
And what with a tail on, except the camelion,
                           Can live upon fog, or the air?
[Page 106]
Some venison haunches, to fill up our paunches,
                           Come see if you cannot produce,
A barbecued pig; a nice mutton leg,
                           Or turkey, or bit of a goose.
We have store of good liquor; so bring something
quicker;
                           And club your potatoes and yams.
We'l make a great feast, and turn all to jest;
                           So away with your frowns and your dams.
There is nothing like love, which comes from above,
                           And tickles the youngsters below.
It is vain man's own fault, that he so brews his malt,
                           As ever to cry out, heigh-ho!
Alexander and Cæsar, and Nebuchadnezar,
                           Found out to their cost this was true;
Now who will be fools, to drink at the pools,
                           Of ambition, and war, we or you?
The mad-caps were settled like a hive of bees, and
coming forward, began to gather in a cluster round
the ballad singer. Some took him by the hand, others
asked for the keg of whiskey, and in a short time amity
was established, and they were as well acquainted,
as if they had been together seven years. Several of
them knew Tom the Thinker, having served under
him, in the western insurrection, in the year 1794.
Store of provisions were in a short time brought in,
and forage for the Captain's horse and the blind mare.
[Page 107]
Having refreshed themselves with rest, a day or two,
maintaining still a good unnderstanding with the
mad-caps, and mixing occasionally with hunting parties
that shot squirrels, and racoons, who declined to
accept challenges, and fight upon equal terms, they
began to think of the object of their emigration. Orders
were given to put the troops in motion; and taking
up the line of march, the cavalry in front, they set
out and passing through the mad-cap country, no interruption
happened, until they began to enter that of
the democrats .
This is a settlement contiguous to the mad-caps.
The inhabitants are a very happy people, no demagogues
having yet arisen among them, to propel to
licentiousness, as for instance, to propose agrarian laws,
or an equality of goods and chattels; or to excite them
to contention amongst themselves, or to war with foreign
powers, in order that they may shew their oratory,
attain power, and become something in the state.
Such had not yet begun to call out against laws, and
the administration of justice; sciolists and young persons,
too indolent to acquire solid knowledge, declaiming
against rules, the policy of which they do not
comprehend; affecting to discuss points in their lucubrations,
of elementary jurisprudence, as to form or
substance of which, they are as incapable as half a
tradesman at any other profession, could be of pointing
out the excellencies or defects of an improvement
on the tools, or machines in use. It takes a great
[Page 108]
general to improve tactics; not a half year soldier just
taken from a dril-serjeant. Yet such are the most
presumptuous, and never are convinced of their incapacity,
until the experiment forms the rejection. But
in the mean time, the democratic character is leveled,
and incurs the imputation of being unfit for government.
The state of this democracy much resembled that
of the Achaean commonwealth; not so much in the
form of the constitution, as the principles of the government,
and the virtues of the people. I shall take the
description of it from Polybius. It is contained in the
eulogium which he makes, in the course of his history
upon this people.
“From whence then, has it happened,” says he,
“that, not the people of those countries only, but all the
rest of the inhabitants of Peloponesus, are so well
pleased to receive, not only their laws, and form of government,
but their very names also, from the Achaeans.
In my judgment, the cause is, nothing else, than
equality, and liberty , in a word, that democratical
species of government , which, is found more just and
perfect in its kind, among the Achaeans, than, in any
other state. This republic, was at first composed of
a small part only, of the inhabitants of Peloponesus;
who voluntarily associated themselves into one body;
but, a greater number soon joined themselves to them,
induced to it by persuasion, and the manifest advantage
[Page 109]
of such a union. And, some, as opportunities arose,
were forced into the confederacy. But they were satisfied
with the violence, by which they had been comcompelled
to embrace so excellent a form of government.
For the new citizens were suffered to enjoy all
the rights and privileges that were permitted to the old.
Every thing was equal among them all . Thus, employing
the means that were of all things, the most effectual
for their purpose, equity and gentleness , they soon
arrived at the point which they had in view.”
When the Thebans, after the great and unexampled
victory, which they obtained, against the Macedonians,
in the battle of Leuctra, began, with the surprize
of all, to lay claim to the sovereignty of Greece,
various troubles, and contentions arose among the
people of the country, and especially between the two
contending parties; for the one refused to submit as
conquered; while the other persisted to claim the
victory. In these circumstances, they at last agreed
to yield all the points that were in dispute between
them to the sole judgment and decision of the Achaeans.
Nor, was this preference obtained by any superiority
of thought, or power; for, they were at that
time, the last of all the states of Greece; but was confessedly
bestowed upon that integrity and love of virtue,
by which they became distinguished above all other
people .
This is the real character of democracy; and who,
in this view of the character, would be unwilling to
[Page 110]
be called a democrat . Yet there have been revolutions
in the public mind, with respect to the honorary, or
disreputable nature of this application. It will be
recollected, that after the adoption of what is called
the funding system, by the administration of the federal
government, societies were instituted about the
years, 1791—2—3, under the denomination of democratic
societies . It was the intemperance of some
of these bodies, and the insurrection of 1794, which
brought a cloud upon these societies, and caused them
to be discontinued. Prudent men, and patriots, were
willing to avoid a name which had incurred disreputation
from the excesses of those attached to it.
But the errors of the federal administration, or at
least measures thought to be errors, having overthrown
that administration, the name, before buried,
began to obtain resuscitation, and to be able to shew
its head in a new existence, and with fresh honours,
instead of insult and degradation. The term democrat ,
has ceased to be a stigma; and begins to be assumed
by our public writers, and claimed by our patriots, as
characteristic of a good citizen. That of republican ,
which alone had been ventured on for some time, is
now considered cold, and equivocal, and has given way,
pretty generally, to that of democratic republican.
In a short time, it will be simply, the democracy , and
a democrat .
But how long will this be so, in the United States,
or, in these states? Its duration will be in proportion
[Page 111]
to the wisdom of those who occasionally obtain the
ascendency in the government. It is him alone, “who
gathereth the winds in his fists,” that can calculate the
revolutions that depend upon the temper, and the passions
of men.
I call myself a democrat. I will be asked, what is
a democracy? I take my definition from a speech put
into the mouth of Pericles, by Thucydides. It is to the
Athenian people. “This our government is called a
democracy, because, in the administration, it hath respect,
not to a few, but to the multitude: a democracy;
wherein, though there be an equality amongst all men,
in point of law, for their private controversies; yet in
confering of dignities one man is prefered before another
to a public charge; and that, according to the
reputation, not of his power, but of his virtue; and is
not put back through the poverty, or the obscurity of
his person, as long as he can do service to the commonwealth.
And we live not only free in the administration
of the state; but also, one with another,
void of jealousy towards each other in our daily course
of life; not offended at any man for following his own
humour, nor casting on any man censure or sour looks,
which though they be no punishment, yet they grieve:
so that conversing one with another, for the private,
without offence, we stand chiefly in fear to transgress
against the public; and are able always to be
[Page 112]
obedient to those that govern, and to the laws; and principally
to such laws, as are written for punishment
against injury; and such unwritten as bring undeniable
shame to the transgressor.” Hob's translation of
Thucydides.
This definition or description, of a practical democracy,
is drawn from real life. It is in the mouth of
Pericles, a man of business; a sapient statesman;
who had been bred and born in a democracy; versed
in its affairs, and knew its errors, and its excellencies.
One thing is remarkable, that a particular excellence
which he notices, is the freedom of opinion. Where
a government is founded on opinion, it is of the essence
of its preservation, that opinion be free. It is not
enough that no inquisition exists; that no lettre de
cachet can issue; but that no man shall attempt to
frown another out of his exercise of private judgment.
Is it democracy to denounce a man in a paper, because
he thinks differently on a measure of government with
the editor? It is tyranny; and the man who can do
this without reason, or moderation, is a tyrant, and
would suppress the right of private judgment, if he
had the power. I distinguish between stricture, and
abuse. All depends upon the manner, and the toleration.
A man is not always a deserter from just polities,
because he cannot agree with me in opinion, on
a particular subject. Mutual toleration and forbearance,
in our sentiments, with regard to the legality, or
expedience of measures, is the soul of democracy. It
[Page 113]
is that which distinguishes it from despotism, as polite
manners the fine gentleman in polished life; in
civilized society. In a despotic country, it is the boot,
or the thumb screw, or the cord, that brings a man
to reason; at least the wheel and the pulley, are used
for this purpose. What better in a republic where a
man is this day a patriot, and the next day a traitor,
at the whim of him who bestows the appellation? In
the livid dens of despotism, state prisons are the seminaries
of submissive citizens. In a democracy, shall
terror issue from lamp-black, and patriotism be put
down, under the name of opposition. When a man
frowns upon me because I have dissented from him in
opinion, on a political matter, I discover clearly the
grade of his political standing, and democratic improvement.
He is no democrat, say I, as another
would say, he is no gentleman.
But it will be said, are not your democrats, all noisy,
vociferous, intolerant and of a persecuting spirit?
I say such are not democrats; they are spurious, and
usurp the name. In a government founded on opinion,
nothing ought to be a reproach, that is the exercise
of private judgment. It is subversive of the essence
of liberty. A frown is the shadow of force, and
he that uses the one, would have recourse to the other .
These observations allude to what is practical in
democracy, and cannot be established or prohibited
by the laws; but constitute the manners which a
[Page 114]
democratic government inculcates, and is calculated to
produce; and it will be observable, that there is a
great deal of this among the body of the people, who
have been accustomed to liberty. It is chiefly amongst
the young in the world , or young in the country , that
the contrary spirit shews itself. I am amongst those
who carry my ideas in favour of the naturalization of
foreigners, perhaps too far. I am for exercising the
rights of hospitality to them, to all extent at once;
making them citizens, and giving them the right
of suffrage, and even office, the moment they set
a foot upon the shore. For I cannot see on what
ground, we can justify a refusal. But I do not mean
to discuss this point at present. I introduce it to shew
that I am liberal in my notions, with regard to the
privileges of foreigners. But I admit, that it takes
some time to give them correct ideas of the limits of
liberty. It is, I believe, a faying of the Grand Pensionary,
De Wit of Holland, that “it takes a man half
an age to enjoy liberty, before he can know how to use
it.” Nevertheless, I cannot see the inexpediency of admitting
to a vote, the emigrant that comes amongst
us, the first day he presents himself. He will be instructed
by those that have been here before him.
He must take his ticket from some one.—Is the ocean
afraid of the rivers? Even when they come turbid
with the swell of the mountains? The sea clarifies,
or they are lost in it. Who complains, out a sea, of a
spring flood muddying the waters? This ought to
[Page 115]
be a lesson, at the same time, to emigrants, that they
“use their liberty, so as not abusing it.” It is a strange
thing to see a man come in the other day, undertake
to set all right; and to denounce men of age and high
standing, as guilty of defection. But what good is
there in the world without an allay of evil? What
exercise of right without abuse? If I am wrong it is
the excess of liberality.
But I find another principle in the oration of Pericles,
in the justness of which, I am more confident.
That is, the equal right of office to all the citizens . As
the greater contains the less, this involves the right of
vote. The only qualification of which I can have any
idea, as justifiable, is that of age; and I should have
no objection to see this restricted to a greater age than
that of 21,—say 45 years. At this time men cease
to be fit for the militia, or other ministerial services.
Let them then become legislators, and have the right
of vote in making laws, or chusing those that represent
in making them . This would take off a great deal of
wild-fire in our elections, and it would keep away vain
young men from our public councils.
What absurdity does the idea of a qualification of
property involve! It unhinges the ideas of the ancient
republicans; that it was honourable to have enriched
the republic, and to remain poor themselves. To be
wise, a man must be rich. No but to be honest, he
must have an estate. But in geting this estate, he
[Page 116]
may have been a rogue. In general, he must, in some
measure, have neglected the improvement of his mind.
At least, it does not follow, that in proportion as a
man is poor, he is not to be trusted. They are frequently
the most generous souls who have amassed
little wealth; on the contrary, the most ignoble, who
have acquired great property. The man that has set
his heart on riches, is lost to benevolence, and public
spirit. In the possession of office, he is thinking of
what can be made by it. “Nothing can be great,”
says the critic Longinus, or the stoic philosopher
Epictetes, I forget which, “ the contempt of which is
great. It is great to despise riches. These cannot
therefore be great .”
But how can we measure the value of property,
and fix the criterion? Shall it be real property, a free
hold? Is my acre worth more than yours? Shall I
have but an equal right? What are the drawbacks
upon my estate? My debts and credits? It is the
surplus that makes my property, even in the case of
the substantial fund of free-hold. But property is not
the only stake. Person and character, are stakes.
Every man that has a head has a stake. There is no
proportioning it. In what is impracticable we can
have no election. It is therefore an excellent principle,
of our excellent constitution, that all men have an
equal right of suffrage, and an equal right of office .
I should not like to live in a republic where a man
must be worth so much, to have equal rights; even
[Page 117]
could it be ascertained what I am worth; which, as
I have said, is impracticable. How many men have
I passed in life, less industrious than myself, and yet
richer. They have had better luck, as we express it;
or they have been more selfish, and kept what they
got. Can a man that is looking at the stars, mind
what is under his feet? We read of most of the great
statesmen of antiquity, and virtuous heroes, that they
were poor. It is no uncommon thing to find it added,
that they themselves were buried, or their children
educated at the public expence. The love of science;
and the love of the public, is at variance with attention
to private emolument. Shall it then be disreputable
in a republic to be poor? Shall it operate as a
crime and disqualify from the noblest function in society,
the enacting laws? But I enlarge upon this
only to shew that I am, in my way of thinking, a democrat .
But it is not so much, in the extension of the right
of suffrage, as in a delicate and just use of it, that the
democratic character consists. Will you see a democrat
practice unfairness in an election? Go upon the
ground to canvass for himself, unless in the case of a
ministerial office; and even in this, with great caution,
and forbearance. Will you see a democrat, substitute,
or change a ticket; much less introduce and
obtain a vote for an unqualified individual; no real
democrat was ever capable of this. It is with the aristocracy
that these arts are practised. They count it
[Page 118]
robbery to be stinted at an equal vote; and think it no
injustice to make themselves whole by taking a plurality
by whatever means in their power. This is all a
usurpation of the sovereign authority; and in some
republics has been punished with death. I own it
is a misdemeanour; at least a disgrace; and no real
democrat will be guilty of it.
In countries where the government is a fraud upon
the people , and the right of suffrage where it even
partially exists, is but a name; it may be thought
innocent to deceive, and to slur our votes. For it is
a buying and selling throughout. The candidate
buys the vote, and has in the mean time sold himself.
He is oftentimes purchased, and paid in advance, and
bribes with a part of the money that he gets. Not so
in this heaven of liberty, where other stars glitter,
where other suns and moons arise; this beautiful
world of liberty, in these states. Perdition on the man
that saps its foundation with intention; forgiveness,
but reformation of error, to him who destroys it by
mistake. And yet these last are more to be dreaded
than the former. At least as much; because the error
of opinion is equally fatal, though originating
from a different principle of the mind, and oftentimes
founded in virtue.
Who ever saw a democrat keep an open house at
an election for a place in the legislative body? They
are too poor, says an aristocrat. They are poor
[Page 119]
because they are honest, says a democrat. At least,
being poor, they are honest. I have seen open houses
kept in a republic; and private friendship, or personal
safety has sometimes stood in the way of my endeavors
to bring the persons to account. But disapprobation,
and a portion of contempt has invariably attached itself
to the transaction. What man can set the world
right? The greatest self-denial is obliged to yield
sometimes to personal considerations. Hence it is,
that I have often been silent when I saw fraud, and
unfairness before my eyes. Fraud in elections, is at
the root of all wickedness in the government of a republic.
A man of just pride, would scorn the meanness
of succeeding by a trick; a man of proper sense
would know, that in the nature of things, no good
can come of elevation obtained by such means. Success
by fraud, will never prosper. All men despise
cheating at cards, or other games. He is turned out
of company that is found guilty of it. And shall we
restrain our indignation; or can we withhold our contempt
when an individual is found cheating, not at a
game of chance or skill amongst idle men; but in
the serious business of real life, and the disposition
of our lives, characters and fortunes? I pledge myself
no democrat is guilty of this; at least those guilty
of it are not democrats . They are not true brothers;
real masons. They have been made at a false lodge;
and will not be acknowledged. Thus it must be seen,
I found democracy in virtue; that is in truth, honour,
[Page 120]
justice, integrity, reason, moderation; civility, but
firmness and fortitude in the support of right: Quarter
to error of opinion; and the aberrations of the
heart; but death to ambition, and the vain desire of
honour, without just pretension; and death to all
knavery, and meditated hostility to the rights of men .
Digressing a little, or rather returning to what I
have said on the first point, the right of naturalization,
I admit that emigrants, come when they will, are likely
to be in opposition to the existing government, or
rather, administration. This depends upon natural
principles. The governments of Europe, are most of
them oppressive, and it is oppression that drives, in
most instances, the inhabitant from amongst them.
The poor or the most enterprising, are those that emigrate.
They have been in the habit of thinking of a
reform, in the state of things in that country, from
which they come; it is natural for them to think that
a little touch of their hand may be still necessary here.
Did you ever know a new physician called in that would
not be disposed to alter the prescription, or to add to
it? What occasion for him, if there was not something
to be added, or retrenchment made? Or how can
he shew himself, but in changing the medicines, or the
regimen. Extremes beget extremes in opinions, as
well as in conduct, The extreme of government,
where he has been, leads to licentiouness in his ideas
of liberty, now where he is.
[Page 121]
Besides it is in this revolution of administration, if
he is an ambitious man, that he finds his best chance
of ascending. He is therefore a demagogue before
he becomes a patriot. I acquiesce, therefore, in the
policy of our constitution, and our laws, who prescribe
a kind of mental quarantine to the foreigner; though I
incline to the generosity of those who think it unnecessary,
and that such a great body of people have nothing
to fear from the annual influx of a few characters,
that may for some time, carry with them more
sail than ballast. We had half Eurpe with us, in our
revolution. We had all Ireland, the officers of government
excepted, and even some of these. I therefore,
do not like to see an Irishman obliged to perform a
quarantine of the intellect. I think it contributes to
sour his temper, and to fix a prejudice against the
administration, under which the limitation has been
introduced. However, this may be more splendid in
theory than safe in experience, and I sumbit to the policy
that has been adopted until the constituted authorities,
shall think proper to regulate it otherwise.
in the mean time, if this book should be read by any
foreigner of high parts, and spirit, I would recommend
it to him to suspend his judgment upon men
and things, until he has examined well, the ground
upon which he stands: to repress ambition and the
desire of office, until unsought, it comes to him, during
which time he may have become qualified to
[Page 122]
discharge it; and will have had an opportunity of finding
out what he will finally discover, that the best men
are the most moderate .
Intemperance of mind, or manner in a foreigner,
gives colour to the imputation, that all are incendiaries.
It becomes therefore, a matter of discretion,
and just prudence, on his part, to be cautious in coming
forward to take a lead in politics, until he has
well examined the field of controversy. But because
foreigners may abuse the privilege, I would not exclude
them by a law, did the matter rest on first principles.
I should think myself justifiable in excluding
from my society, and the government I had
formed, the inhabitants of another planet, could they
come from thence because I do not know the kind of
nature they are of; but men of this earth, of similar
forms, and of like passions with ourselves, what have
I to fear from them? What right have we to exclude
them? We are not born for ourselves; nor did we
atchieve the revolution for ourselves only. We fought
the cause of all mankind; and the good and great of
all mankind wished well to us in the contest. With
what anxiety did we look to Europe, for assistance.
We derived assistance even from the good will of nations.
It is an advantage to have a popular cause in
a war. Have we a right to shut ourselves up in our
shell, and call the society we have formed, our own exclusively?
Suppose we had a right to the government
exclusively, have we a right to the soil? That is
[Page 123]
ours, subject to the right of all mankind . Pre-occupancy
can give a right, but to a small portion of the soil to
any individual. To as much only as is reasonably necessary
for his subsistence. All the remainder is a
surplus, and liable to be claimed by the emigrant.
If he cannot get his right under the great charter of
nature, without coming within the sphere of our government,
and we hinder him to establish a society
for himself within ours, why abridge him even for a
moment, of the rights, immunities, and privileges of
that which we have instituted? But I had not meant
to take up this subject, though I have inadvertently
fallen into it. I shall drop it here, and go into the sequel
of this important history.
[Page 124]
CHAP. XI.
THEY now began to approach the new settlement.
This bordering on the Indian country, the inhabitants
were presumed to be half savages. It was thought
proper therefore, to approach them with a talk . Accordingly
Harum Scarum, was appointed for that purpose;
and taking a saddle girth for a belt of wampum
he set out for the frontier.
Passing through a wood, he heard the scream of
a panther, and advancing, saw it on a tree. Taking
this for a back-woods man, or half Indian, he accosted
him in the vernacular idiom of a savage, which he
had learned, from the Indian treaties published in the
news-papers. “Brother,” said he, “do you want
whiskey? We have a little in our keg at the camp.
We have come here to bury the hatchet. It is two
moons since we have been travelling. Our squaws
are all at home, or we have none. Have you got a
little killicaneeque, that we may smoke the calumet
of peace; brighten up the chain of friendship, and
sit round our council fires? Our young men are behind
with their tomhacks. But the great spirit has
taken off the cocks of their guns, and they come to
shake hands, and set their traps on these waters.”
[Page 125]
At that instant a settler, on the other side the
wood, shot the panther, which Harum Scarum observing,
ran in to help off with the hide, and became
acquainted with the marks-man. This was an introduction,
and no farther was necessary. He took the
skinning to be scalping; and that it was one savage
that had shot another, and, as is the way of the world,
he determined to take part with the conqueror. Assisting
to flay the panther, that was lately his brother,
he learned the news of the county town, of the new
settlement, and gave account of the Captain, and his
new-comers, and brought the hunts-man along, to
taste their whiskey, and conduct them to the village.
It may seem strange that we hear nothing of the
Latin schoolmaster all this time; but the fact is, that
coming through the lack-learning settlement, they had
gaged him, to keep him from speaking Greek; and his
mouth was sore for a long time after, so that he could
not even speak Latin; but as soon as he got into the
village, he began to ejaculate.
In nova fert animus, mutatas dicere formas—
Italiam, fato profugus, Lavinaque venit—
Nos patriam fugimus: Tu Tityre lentus in umbra—
There were several Indian traders in the town, who
understood Delaware, Shanee, Munsy, and Mingo, but
they took this for Chippewaw, or as they pronounce it,
Jibway, and did not understand it. They gave him,
[Page 126]
however, some boiled corn with bears oil in it, and threw
him a skin to ly down upon. Closing his mouth, with
“Odi profanum vulgus, et arceo,”
he fell asleep.
The first thing a settler does, when he goes to the
new country, is to look out for a spring. Hard by he
builds a cabbin, of the stocks of trees, laid at right angles,
and forming a square, or parallelogram. A
stone serves for a back-wall, and an aperture over it to
give vent to the smoke.
The settler brings with him few implements of
husbandry, because he is poor, and has them not to
bring; or the carriage is not in his power, from the
want of draught cattle. An axe, a mattock, a cornhoe
without a handle, perhaps plough-irons, an augre,
and a saw.
His household furniture is a pot, a frying-pan, a
kettle, and sometimes a grid-iron. A few blankets,
and a bed-tick to fill with oak leaves, is a luxury.
A cow to give milk, is almost indispensable; and
the rifle, with a little ammunition sparingly used, supplies
flesh for the family. He must occasionally take
a turn to the settlement to get a bag of flour, and a
quart or two of salt.
His horses, if he has any, range in the woods;
and a good deal of time is spent in looking them up,
when wanted for service.
A breeding sow is an admirable acquisition, big
[Page 127]
with pigs. If he can bring one with him, which is
most generally accomplished, he has soon a herd of
them, living on the pea vine, that supersedes the casual
supply of hunting, and covers the sides of the chimney
with hams, just at hand to cut off and broil.
It is of great advantage to the settler to be able
to handle a tool, and to lay a stone. It would
be advisable, therefore, in a father who means to send
out his son, when grown up, to the new country, to
put him some time to a carpenter, and to a stone mason.
His own smithery he cannot well do, as an anvil,
a pair of bellows, &c. are heavy to be carried; but the
greatest drawback is, that he cannot resist the solicitations
of his neighbours, to assist them occasionally,
and this takes him from the main branch of his improvement
and cultivation.
The settlement is usually begun in this manner,
and carried on by poor, honest, and industrious people.
The town on the other hand, at the commencement,
is usually a nest of adventurers, that have more
wit than money, and more experience than industry.
A tavern-keeper, or publican, that passes for a
republican , to get custom; a horse jockey, a store-keeper,
and a young lawyer, are the first that you find
domiciliated in this metropolis.
The young lawyer that had got to this place, was
half starved, either because there was no other to help
him to breed suits ; or rather, which is most probable,
[Page 128]
because the state of society had not yet so improved,
as to draw with it the inevitable consequent of valuable,
and individual property, litigation, and law suits.
The small controversies that had yet arisen, were determined
by arbitration . These related chiefly to occupancy,
and the rights of settlement; or contracts,
as simple as the subjects of them, and involving no intricacy .
But the inhabitants, either from the love of
novelty, or finding the system of arbitration inadequate
to the administration of justice, began to wish to have
fixed principles and permanent tribunals , to govern and
guard life, reputation, and property.
Not many months after the Captain had fixed himself
in this place, and began to have weight among the
people, there was a town-meeting on this subject, and
it was proposed to have a code of laws, a court, and advocates,
as in other settlements.
Is it possible? said the Captain, being in the habit
of speaking his mind freely. In the mid-land settlements,
they are going to burn the lawyers, as they did
the witches in New-England; and as to judges, it is
as much as a man's life is worth to resemble one;
either in the brogue of his tongue, or the cut of his
jib, I mean his hat; or coat that he wears; such is
the odium, under which that profession, or corps of
men labour. Arbitration is in every bodies mouth,
and down with the courts . A lawyer indeed! Raising the
devil was in vogue in the middle ages of the church;
but has been laid aside in Christendom, since black cats
[Page 129]
became scarce, as without them there is a difficulty in
laying him; but what can lay a lawyer, when he is
once up? The hurricane which carries away the haystack,
is nothing to the breath of his mouth, that bears
away people's property, by the fees which he exacts.
It was thus the Captain laboured to dissuade them
from the proposition, with as much earnestness, and
similar success, as Samuel dissuading the people of
Jewry, not from a jury trial, but from monarchy, in
the days, when they wished the kings to succeed judges .
And the fact is, that tyranny gets her best foot-hold on
the backs of courts of law, and judges. But those
judges had ceased to let the people “every man do
what was right in his own eyes,” and therefore they
wished for monarchs and despots. For if they were
not to have perfect liberty, it was as well to be hanged
for an old sheep as a lamb, and were unwilling “to
halt between two opinions.”
But the people of the settlement before us, had an
idea that courts of justice were the best preservatives
of a republic; and barriers against monarchy, and despotism.
They had got a maxim in their heads, pronounced
by the Latin schoolmaster when he rose out of
his sleep.
“Misera est servitus, ubi Jus Vagum, et incognitum.”
It is the worst slavery where the law is unknown, or
uncertain. And they had found arbitration to decide
like the oscillation of a pendulum, and all began to call
out for something more stable.
[Page 130]
OBSERVATIONS. WHENCE does the uncertainty of law arise? Let
us trace it. There is the letter of the law . Litera
scripta manet. “ What is written lasts .” But there
is the spirit, that is the construction of the laws. This
depends upon the mind of the construer; and two men
may not in some cases, construe alike.
There is again the application of the rule to the
case; And it is the mind that must apply. The history
of these constructions, and applications, are found
in what are called reports . But this history, like other
histories, is not always the truth. No two judges, or
two lawyers, will agree precisely in their statements
of the same decision. Some particulars, omitted, or
added, makes the variance. Yet these are helps to
establish the decision.
What is it that can correct the construction, or the
application as it was originally made, or as it appears
in the report? Reason. It was this at first made the
construction, or the application. Hence the maxim,
“that nothing which is against reason, can be law.
When the usage and custom which makes unwritten
law, like the laws of a game at school, are in the
memory of men, and the application of them to the
[Page 131]
case, depends upon two minds, it is morally, but not
physically certain, but the application will be the same.
But in all these cases, both of usage and custom, or of
written law, there is a higher degree of certainty than
where there are no positive institutions, or rules at
all. Which is most likely to establish certainty in the
transmission of usage and custom, or construction of
statutes, the occasional application of the law, by arbitrators,
who have little knowledge of positive institutions,
or tribunals in which records of legal proceedings
are preserved, and men are employed, who have
devoted their lives to the study, and to the perfect
knowledge of which, they do not find a life sufficient?
Visionary men, like Rousseau, and Godwin, have
seldom more in view than to support paradoxes. The
ability is shewn by the novelty or extravagance of the
proposition. Godwin, in his Political Justice, with great
brilliancy, supports the idea of deciding every case
on its own peculiar circumstances , according to the notions
of equity, which lie in the breast of the judge.
This is what is done in Constantinople. But it is to
avoid this that laws are enacted, and means used to
procure uniformity of construction, and application in
a free country. The object is to produce certainty .
The imperfection of human judgment produces
uncertainty. This must be greater in proportion as
there is no buoy to steer by; but a great difficulty
arises, in the administration of the laws, to guard the
[Page 132]
consciences of men . Which is most likely to secure
this? Tribunals open; and it is a principle of our
law, that the courts shall be open; and shall be held at
known times and places . Can arbitrations have this
requisite? It is a principle of jury trial, that the
jurors who are to try a particular cause, cannot be
known until they go upon it; and after hearing, they
are to be kept together without speaking to any one,
until they are agreed. There is not that opportunity
for labouring, a jury, that arbitration presents.
At the same time, I am not one of those who frown
upon arbitrations; or think those unworthy citizens
who meditate, or, inculcate the idea of what has been
called an adjustment bill . I profess myself a reformist;
and with regard to others who attempt reforms,
I am not ready to cry out, “they that have turned the
world upside down, have come hither also.” I have
been for leting the experiment be made. I know the
consequence that it will soon be laid aside. Perhaps
something might be retained of it that may be found
wise. But the difficulty of geting men together, that
act not immediately under a compulsory process, and
thus keeping them from being tampered with; independent
of arbitrary notions of right or wrong, and
unassisted reasonings, will be found to be such, that
men, who in the sincerity, and benevolence of patriotism,
have called for the system in the extent contemplated,
will be the first to recede, and
[Page 133]
acknowledge that there is a difference between what is rational
in theory, and practical amongst men .
No one can have a greater contempt of Pedantry,
and opposition to reform in principle, or practice , than
I have. A professional man thinks himself learned,
because he is technical, and knows the terms of his
art, as a workman his tools; but has become shackled
in forms, and a slave to precedents, and has no
horizon of original thought and comprehension. He
cannot recur to the correctress reason, or to experiment,
the scource of improvement amongst men.
At this particular time, there is a fermentation of
the public mind with regard to the administration of
justice. I have no fear for liberty, provided the form
of the government is left untouched; for a generous
constitution will soon give warning of the malady, and
on an error in reform, a fever will ensue, and demand
to be expelled . The wounding, or destroying a principle
of the constitution, affects liberty, as taking away
the trial by jury in the courts of law; or placing the
tenure of a judicial commission on other grounds than
on what the constitution has placed it; and the like vital
parts of the system.
To reform with safety requires a perfect knowledge
of the subject of the reform. To reform the law, either
in its principles, or administration, requires a lawyer;
a scientific, and philosophic lawyer, not a pedant,
even though on the bench of justice. Natural
[Page 134]
narrowness of mind, or technical contraction, unfits for this.
But an unreasonable jealousy of professional men is
to be avoided. There is such a thing as patriotism even
on the bench, and on the bench, what interest can
there be but to lessen service? Interest therefore here,
is not in the way of extending settlement by arbitration ,
so far as it may be practicable, and consistent
with the preservation of the democracy . For be
assured, that the recoil of a measure, hurts the authours
more than those against whom the ordnance may have
been directed .
But difference of opinion produces ill will. A man
and wife will separate on a disagreement which has
taken place about the fixing a hen-coop, or laying out
a bed of parsley. Christians have burnt each other because
the one would say off , and the other from , and what
man of sense doubts, but the burner, and the burn'd
were equally good men. The creeds, confessions and
commentaries of the one were just as orthodox as the
other, but not precisely the same; and the nearer they
came together the more wrath . This ought to teach in
polities, at least, concession, and forbearance .
If objects of sense, mock the senses, and deceive
vision, how much more, things in the political or
moral world, which we cannot comprehend, but by
reasoning . What a farce it was in the year 1779, in
America, to see committees formed from the one end of
the continent to the other, instituting regulations of the
[Page 135]
prices of commodities, at a standing value when the medium
of circulation continued to depreciate. The thing
was absurd; yet, I recollect Thomas Payne, an uncommon,
but uninformed man, was a secretary to a committee,
and an enthusiast in the project. The committee
regulated “that a measure of fine flour should
be sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley for
a shekel, in the gate of Samaria;” but neither barley
nor flour were brought to market, and as there
was “no reasoning with the belly,” the space of ten
days, undeceived the projectors.
The chymists tell us of substances that decompose ,
which is a process in order to the composition of other
bodies; but that it depends upon a knowledge of the
properties and quantity, whether the ingredients constitute
a poison , or a medicine . So may it be said of
the spirit of reform .
The practice of the courts in Pennsylvania, is rendered
simple to what it is in England; and could be
still improved, as it would seem to me; either by the
law of practice, which the courts themselves have the
power of making; or with the aid of the legislature.
But it is only a scientific man that understands the
system, as a farmer knows his grounds, who can easily
and with safety complete the reformation. The
law itself, is much improved in Pennsylvania, both
criminal and civil, and I am not sensible of much
wanting, but in the organization of the tribunals for its
[Page 136]
administration . Now it will not do, to make a law that
there shall be no litigation; or, that every man shall
know the law; for such a law cannot be carried into
effect. I doubt then, whether it will be found satisfactory
to provide “that every man shall be his own
lawyer,” and his neighbours' judge in the capacity of
arbitrator .
The excellence of jury trial is sanctioned by immemorial
usage; and is secured to a certain extent
by the constitution. What is that extent? “ Trial
by jury shall be as heretofore.” This mode of trial
has its laws. Does the constitution mean that the laws
of this trial shall be as heretofore? or, does it mean
any thing more? It may mean that it shall be the
mode of trial in the same tribunals as heretofore; that
is, the courts of justice . Does it mean to bar extending
the jurisdiction of the justice of the peace,
in point of action? This is a great question.
I admit that screwing up the construction of the
constitution too tight, the public mind will revolt
against it. Driven to a contention, much that is valuable
in the constitution might be lost in that torrent
which an overstrained construction had produced, like
waters in a dam without a flood-gate. The discretion
of the legislative body must not be too much disputed.
It produces the very effect in some way or other, which
the over cautious apprehend. While the great boundaries
of the constitution are unbroken, I do not fear
[Page 137]
much from those laws, which regulate the police of
justice, and may be enacted, and continued as the experiment
may seem to justify. But I wish to see the
democracy move in the groove of our noble constitution;
like one of the heavenly bodies preserving its
orbit, and biding fair for perpetuity. For this reason,
I am afraid of even experiment, in a case where there
is doubt, and which is of great moment and delicacy.
[Page ]
[Page ]
BOOK IV.
CHAPTER I. IT is full time we return a little, and see what became
of the bog-trotter, whom we left in the capacity
of judge. This will best appear from a report of a
case tried before him, and which has been kindly furnished
us by lawyer Tarapin who was council in the
cause.
Report . Slouch , vs. Crouch .
This was an action of assault and battery, with two
counts; the first for assault and battery; the second
for an assault. The case as it came out upon the evidence,
was as follows.
Upon some ill words given by Crouch, as villain,
Grouch, made a blow at him with a cudgel. Crouch
crouching, as the name imports, let the blow slip over
him, which lighting upon Slouch, broke his head. Upon
this Slouch had brought his suit against Crouch.
[Page 140]
Lawyer Tarapin moved for a non suit, on the
ground that the action ought to have been against
Grouch, whose stick, though intended against Crouch,
yet trespassed, and hit upon Slouch.
Lawyer Heberden for the plaintiff, thought the action
was properly brought, and that Crouch, who gave
the ill words that occasioned the outrage, was responsible
for all the consequences; that he had no right
to take his head out of the way; but that it ought to
have remained at its post, which had it been the case
no blow could have fallen upon Slouch.
What with the names with terminations, of a like
sound, and the intricacy of the case, the judge was puzzled,
and geting in a passion, snatched a staff from a
constable, and fell upon the suitors. “By my showl,
said he, I will be after bating de whole o'd you togeder.
A parcel of spalpeens and bog-trotters, to be
coming here and bodering me wid your quarrels, and
your explanations: better fight it out like men of
honour wid a shilelah, and not come here to trouble
de court about it.”
He had broke the heads of several, and was laying
about him with the constables staff, the clerks not being
able to interfere because they were blind, and the
citizens not being willing because they were afraid;
saying the culprits were in the hands of the judge,
and it did not behoove them to take the law into their
hands, and resist the execution.
[Page 141]
However, the result was that the proceeding broke
up the court, and the blind Lawyer, Fidler and bog-trotter
had to leave the country.
The bog-trotter followed the Captain, and the blind
Lawyer and Fidler followed him, to the new settlement.
It was just at this time they came in, when the
people were in commotion about the courts of justice.
It was opportune, and occasioned them all to be provided
for by the influence of the Captain. Things
were reversed in some measure, from what they had
been in the country below; for the blind Lawyer, was
made the judge; the Fidler the cryer of the court,
and the bog-trotter a constable. The piper of whom
we have spoken, and who was an emigrant with the
Captain, there being no bell, or drum in the town,
opened the first court at this place, with his bag-pipes.
There was nothing now wanting but a Lawyer, and
that was not a want long; for as one rat brings another,
so lawyer brings lawyer. The one here already
was soon paired, and these two like stool pigeons, attracted
others; so that, in a short time the whole settlement
was full of them.
There was now a talk of encouraging a printer.
Some thought there were typographical errors enough
in the world. However, the people were disposed to
[Page 142]
multiply them, and accordingly a printer was encouraged.
He set up a paper which he called the “Twilight.”
For, as there was a “dawn” in the east, it
seemed reasonable there should be a “Twilight” in
the west. The Evening Star, and the Western Star
have been names of Gazettes; but Twilight, for any
thing we have heard, would seem to be original.
The dawn.
—“That sweet hour of prime,”
In the language of Milton. One of his most
beautiful paintings is that in which he speaks of it as
introducing the Sun,
—Jocund to run
His longitude through heavens high road;
The grey dawn and the plieades before him danc'd
Sheding sweet influence.
The “Dawn” is a modest appellation for a paper,
bespeaking the beginning of light. The “Twilight”
not less so, meaning that small degree of it which remains
after the sun is set. The device was an owl, a
cat, and a bat; the owl an emblem of wisdom, the
cat of vigilance; the bat of impartiality being of equivocal
formation, and doubtful whether bird or beast.
At the same time these animals are all of the “Twilight,”
and therefore appropriate.
The motto by the Latin school master,
—Si quid superesset agendum.
[Page 143]
Clonmel the ballad singer furnished a few verses
to introduce the publication. The composition was
not the best; but, it was suited to the occasion.
The dawn and the twilight, have both but small
sky-light,
                           Yet pleasant are both in their prime,
For think of the moon, and the hot burning sun.
                           O' this is a far better time.
Hence name we the paper, and light up a taper
                           To lighten the clouds of the west.
If not the best skill, yet have the best will,
                           To make this our paper the best.
We want a little money to begin with, dear honey,
                           So bring it and take you the news.
Have a little heart, nor be sorry to part,
                           With a trifle like misers and jews.
We shall tell how the Spaniards, dress hides in their
tanyards,
                           Or curry their leather in France.
And when that we come to things nearer home,
                           You shall hear of these just at once.
Who's married? Who's broken? Who is shot, or
is choken,
                           By himself, or the hand of the law.
What dress is on foot, who has got a new clout,
                           To tickle the fancy and draw.
The lads that can write, now let them indite,
                           And here come speak their own praise;
[Page 144]
On politics or pride, or threshing the hide,
                           Of judges and lawyers now a days.
'Tis all one to us, what the blunderbuss,
                           So that it but makes a noise,
So down with your ink-pots; thinkers or think nots,
                           And help out our journal, brave boys.
Harum Scarum was a contributor to the paper,
and dealt in fabrications and intelligence. Will
Watlin gave dissertations on oeconomies, taming
wild geese, and brewing beer out of wasps nests.
Tom the Tinker hankering after insurrections struck
his hammer on the government. The Latin schoolmaster
was now employed as an Indian interpreter,
passing his Greek for the Chickasaw; nevertheless
found time to furnish a distic or hemistic, or Latin
epigram occasionally. O'Fin was a politician, and
brought down his flail upon Bonaparte, and said, had
it not been for his usurpation, there would have been
a republic in Ireland. The bag-piper was a merry
fellow, and brought his talents into hotch-pot in the
way of essays upon drones; shewing their use in a
commonwealth. Thus few papers were better supported
than the “Twilight” and it had subscribers.
The great variety of talents,
Quoniam sic positæ, suaves misscetis odores,
Said the Latinist—the great variety of talents
could not fail to furnish something to hit the taste of
every individual; and it is not so much excellency
[Page 145]
as variety that pleases. The most odiferous shrub,
or rose ceases to delight, and we turn to another bush,
or take up even a less fragrant flower.
The passions having their vent in a gazette, saves
battery and bloodshed. In this view of the subject it
is an aid-du-camp to the laws; and if it should be
thought eligible to extend the province of the press,
and to canvass all matters depending in a court of justice,
it will be an accessary to the practice, and a
great acquisition in a free government. But this I
leave to the discretion of the legislature.
The bog-trotter wrote little; in fact nothing. He
was busy tending process in the capacity of constable;
and in one of his excursions met with an accident. He
set his foot on the spur of a horse-jockey; which,
in this new country, from the prick of the rowler, he
took for a rattle snake. Not waiting to look behind
him, after it made the impression, and left a
puncture like the tooth of a serpent, he made his
tour to the town with great howling and lamentation.
A ligament was drawn tight about his ancle;
and the leg stroked down and the flesh pressed towards
the orifice. Cold water from the mouth of a
tea kettle, was poured upon the wound, with a steady
current from a considerable height. Finally, certain
roots, pointed out by the Indian traders, in a
cataplasm was applied to the foot, bandaged up, for
a fortnight, until all appearance, I need not say of
[Page 146]
poison, for there was none, but all apprehension of poison,
and mortification was removed.
It will not be understood that I record this incident
as an evidence of pusillanimity in the bog-trotter.
For a man of the firmest mind, might reasonably
conceive an alarm at the idea of being bitten by
a snake. Such is the horror in the human mind
at even the touch, much more the bite of such a
reptile.
Milton represents the tempter as seducing Eve under
the form of a serpent, and endeavours to render
that form amiable, by the art of description.
                           —Inclos'd
In serpent, inmate bad, and towards Eve
Address'd his way, not with indented wave
Prone on the ground, as since, but on his rear,
Circular base of rising folds, that tower'd
Fold above fold, a surging maze; his head
Crested aloft, and carbuncle his eyes;
With burnish'd neck of verdant gold, erect
Amidst his circling spires, that on the grass
Floated redundant: pleasing was his shape,
And lovely: never since of serpent kind
Lovelier.
It would seem to me to have been an oversight in
Milton to make the tempter assume the snake. For he
is not supported by the Scripture. The idea in Genesis
is not that the tempter was in the guise of a serpent;
[Page 147]
but of some creature which was, for that very act
condemned to be a serpent. “Upon thy belly shalt
thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy
life.” It is a metanomasia, or post-nomination.
“The serpent was more subtil;” that is the beast
which now we call a serpent, was then the wisest of
the field. It is impossible to imagine that creature,
which would seem to have been changed; for we
can no more imagine a new creature, than create one.
When the poets feign a griffin, it is but a winged
beast. The orc' of Aristo is made up of parts that are
taken from animals in nature.
But, it is to be presumed that the animal assumed
by the tempter, must have been next to the human,
the form the most beautiful in nature. The poet represents
the transformation as denounced in the garden.
                           —Without delay
To judgment he proceeded on th' accus'd
Serpent, tho' brute, unable to transfer
The guilt on him who made him instrument
Of mischief, and polluted from the end
Of his creation; justly then accurs'd.
As vitiated in nature—
Because thou hast first done this, thou art accurs'd
Above all cattle, each beast of the field;
Upon thy belly grovelling thou shalt go,
And dust shall eat all the days of thy life.
[Page 148]
I would have expected the metamorphose at this
time and place.
His visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare,
His arms clung to his ribs, his legs intwining
Each other, till supplanted down he fell
A monstrous serpent on his belly prone,
Reluctant; but in vain, a greater pow'r,
Now rul'd him, punish'd in the shape he sinn'd,
According to his doom.—
Since my first reading of the Poem, I have been
struck with the incongruity of representing the animal
which the tempter assumed, as being a serpent
in the first instance. yet there is classical authority
for supposing it possible, that a serpentine form could
be the subject, even of affection.
Lovelier: not those that in Illyria chang'd
Hermione and Cadmus, or the god
In Epidarus, nor to which transform'd
Ammonian Jove, or Capitoline was seen,
He with Olympias, this with her who bore,
Scipio the height of Rome.—
And Dryden in his Ode on St. Cecilia's day;
                           When he to fair Olympia prest,
Awhile he sought her snowy breast,
And then around her slender waist he curl'd
And stampt an image of himself, a sovereign
                           of the world.
[Page 149]
Yet strange as it seems to me, the antients in some
countries, appear not to have had this horror of serpents.
In the temple of Esculapius, the god himself
was said to visit his patients disguised under the form
of a great serpent, the caresses of which re-animated
them with new hope. Serpents in general were consecrated
to this god. “He appears to have had a particular
predilection for those found in the neighbourhood
of Epidarus, which are of a colour approaching
to a yellow, have no poison, are tame and gentle,
and love to live in familiarity with man. That which
the priests keep in the temple, will sometimes wind
round their bodies, or raise himself on his tail to take
the food which they present him on a plate. He is
rarely suffered to go out; but, when this liberty is
permitted him, he walks majestically through the
streets, and as his appearance is deemed a happy
omen, it excites universal joy.
These familiar serpents are found in the other temples
of Esculapius. They are very common at Pella,
the capital of Macedonia. The women there keep
them for their amusement. In the great heats of
summer, they wind them round their necks, like
necklaces. During my stay in Greece, it was said
“that Olympia, queen of Philip king of Macedon, had
one of them, which she frequently took to bed to her,
[Page 150]
and it was even added, that Jupiter had taken the form
of that animal, and that Alexander was his son.”—
Translation of Anacharsis .
Nevertheless, I still think that the more natural
allegory in Milton, and better supported by the Scripture,
would have been the idea of some creaturee the
most beautiful, as well as the wisest, tempting Eve,
and thence as a punishment, undergoing transformation.
So much for criticism.
[Page 151]
CHAP. II.
INACUS founded Argos; Cecrops Athens;
Cadmus Thebes in Boetia; Romulus Rome; and
Penn, Philadelphia. Now who formed the town of
which we are speaking, cannot be said; for it was
founded by a congluvies of mortals like the company
of David, in the cave of Adullam. “Every one that
was in distress; and every one that was discontented,
gathered themselves unto him.” Amongst these a
broken judge came in, who complained that he was
unjustly broken.
A word with you friend, said the Captain. Were
you not tried by a competent tribunal?
Yes, said the Judge; but the judgment was unjust.
Why not appeal? It was the tribunal in the
last resort.
What, said the Captain; can there be an error in
a dernier decision? What is it, according to yourselves
that makes the law, but decision? Precedent
is authority. What has reason to do in the case?
Once it gets into the books, and becomes a case, let
me see what judge can undo it; or question the reason
of it. It has become law. We must take the
[Page 152]
law as we find it . If Holt has once said it, the game
is up; or Buller; or Kenion. It is a knock 'im
down argument, that Paterson has ruled it so; or
Washington, or Marshal. It is the construction of
the judge makes the law. It is the application to facts
proved, or admitted, that makes the case; and the
application being by the constitutional tribunals, there
is no more to be said about it. Positive institutions
are arbitrary things, and there is no reason necessary
that they are as they are. You a judge, and talk of
an unjust judgment, where it has been given by those
who alone have had a right to judge. This shews
that you were not fit for your office; so turn in there,
we shall do the best we can for you; but no more caterwauling
about the injustice of your sentence; you
sent many a man from your decisions, I will undertake
to say, dissatisfied; but the law had determined
it; It had become a case; and there was an end of
the disquisition.
The Judge hung his lip, and turned into a cabbin.
A young Doctor had come here. What learning
he had before he came, is not of so much consequence,
as what practice he had afterwards. One
thing he had acquired, the cant of a physician, that
had he been called sooner, before the constitution had
lost its tone; or nature her diathesis to co-operate
with the medicine; a cure might have been effected;
[Page 153]
and even as it was, by preserving regimen, something
might be done. The quack taking care first to find
out what the patient liked best; and especially prohibiting
that, because, as he knew the indulgence
could not all at once be restrained absolutely, it was
morally certain, the patient would transgress a little,
and furnish the complaint with a pretence to stick by
him in spite of the faculty.
A young woman had been found in the woods,
naked, gag'd, and had been, as she said, tyed to a
tree. The account she gave, was that she had been
taken out of a nunnery in Canada, where she had been
educated: was on her way to her father in Kentucky,
a rich man; had been robbed of a thousand doubloons
by her conductor, stripped of her silks and muslins,
and left to perish in the wilderness. Imagination, or
philanthropy, saw truth in her history; and she was
fed and clothed, not as the law directed, but as humanity
dictated, and brought into good company.
At the first discovery of her, she was thought to be
a mortal; but in a short time she was conceived to
be an angel. There were an hundred that would have
married her, had it not been for this distrust of being
real flesh and blood. But by this time it began to be
found out, or at least suspected, that the nunnery had
been no farther off than a city of these states, and under
the care of brothers, rather than sisters; and
where the employment was something else than needle
[Page 154]
work. In the opinion of most persons she became a
mortal, that had put off her duds; and except in odes
or dithyrambics, we hear little farther of her as a divinity.
The preacher of the town was a Methodist that
had been a horse thief; and when he had taken his
text and was warning from the like offence, and telling
the danger of it, he would put back his wig, and
say you see, I have lost my ears by it.
Ecce signum, said the Latin schoolmaster;
Segnius irritant aminos demissa per aurem,
Quam quæ sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus.
At an early period, the ceremony of marriage had
been dispensed with, in this town, as is the case
where there are not magistrates or priests at hand
to officiate, and make the legal copula, or knot of
marriage. Diana, and her nymphs; the three
graces, and the nine muses, are represented as not
marrying at all. It is to be presumed, that it is owing
to the same cause, the absence of the justice of
the peace, or the parson. But it is always spoken of
as the first step towards civilization, the coupling
in marriage.
—Sancire leges.
Concubitu prohibere vago.—
The Captain being elected governor of the new
state, paid attention in the first instance, to this matter
of police, and directed the girdle of Hymen, to be
[Page 155]
added to the zone of Venus, in all cases where it
had been yet wanting. The settlement in a new
country, is in some respects delightful; the country
in its virgin state; before the underwood is browzed
upon, and the luxury of flowers, and shrubs is repressed
by the beasts of burden, or the labours of the husbandman.
It has seemed to me that the streams run
clearer in a new country than the old; they are certainly
more abundant. The cultivation of the soil uncovering
the vallies, lets in the rays of the sun which
drink up the moisture, and open fissures in the earth,
where the streamlets sink and disappear. Hence it
is that we read of brooks, and rivulets in the classic
and long cultivated countries, which bubble now, only
in the song of the muses.
“Sunk are their fountains, and their channels dry.”
The natural moss on the margin of the fountains
and the rivers in a new country, are greener, and furnish
a more romantic seat,
Saxo sedilia vivo,
shaded by the umbrage of the forest than the clover of the
meadow; or the artificial bank and bowers of the garden
itself. How delightful the small parties that are
made upon the water of the rivers in skiffs, or canoes,
or in the shades of the forest, and near a spring head,
at a fete champetre or barbecue, where the company
assemble, nor yet divided by the classifications of
wealth or pride. I do not wonder that the young people
of the Israelites were apt to be seduced to
[Page 156]
sacrifice “in high places, on hills, and under every green
tree,” even though prohibited, inasmuch as these
situations were so delightful, at least in the summer
seasons.
“The flowers of the forest are a' wed away,”
in the old school ballad, is a fine expression; for the
flowers of the “forest” are unquestionably of a more
lively bloom, and finer odour than those of a garden;
and that atmosphere of fragrance, which from a wilderness
of verdure, pours upon the senses, overwhelms
with delight. There is no ague, or fever here, for
the exhalation from the foliage, is aromatic to the
smell. The gale is not tainted with miasmata. The
air is a bed of perfume and the vapour tastes of nectar
and ambrosia.
Such scenes, and such air must be salutary.
Whatever the component parts or qualities, hydrogen,
or oxygen of which the chymists speak, certain
it is that the air breathed from plants and
flowers is favourable to health and longevity. Inhaled
by the lungs it is restorative to the tabesscent, and
as a vapour bath to the whole body is salubrious. A
ride from the sea coast to an ultramontane settlement
in the spring of the year is resuscitation to an almost
dead constitution.
But it would seem to be owing to other causes
than mere bodily vigour and health, that the inhabitants
of a new country, appear to have more
[Page 157]
intellectual vigour, and in fact more understanding in the
same grade of education, than the inhabitants of an
old settlement, and especially of towns and cities.
The mind enlarges with the horizon. Place a man
on the top of a mountain, or, on a large plain, his
ideas partake of the situation, and he thinks more
nobly than he would under the ceiling of a room, or
at a small country seat.
It may be that the change of situation gives a
spring to the mind, and that the intercourse with that
variety of characters which emigrate, increases the
stock of knowledge. Whether owing to these, or other
causes, it unquestionably appears to me, that the
ultramontaneer, is, in general the superior man,
in the same occupation, and pursuit in life. This
would seem to hold good out of the learned professions
which require a propinquity to the libraries of
Appollo, as well as the seats of the muses; but we have
in view chiefly that natural sagacity, and discernment
of spirit, and strength of mind which constitutes mental
superiority. Perhaps it may be that the most active
spirits are those that emigrate; or that people
put to their shifts which is the case in a new country,
acquire a vigour of mind, proportioned to the exercise.
There is one thing observable that in a new settlement,
society is coveted, because it is scarce; and
mutual wants produce reciprocal accommodation.
[Page 158]
The emigrants coming also, from different quarters,
and hitherto unknown to each other, do not bring
with them latent, or professed enmities; and the
mind, ira, amicitia, vacuus, is open wholly for new impressions.
Family feuds, of an old standing, or of recent
inception, do not exist. The absence of all chagrin
is a state of mind more easily coveted than explained,
either as to its sensations, or as to its consequences.
But it is a main spring of happiness in a
settlement, that the improver begins upon a new plan,
and upon his own scale; and he has his shades, and
his avenues at once, without waiting for the trees to
grow. There are neither ruins, nor vestiges of decay
before his eyes, but a young country receiving young
cultivation; just at the will of the possessor, without
the necessity of sacrificing taste to what had been
begun, and half finished. Suffice it to have said these
things to the encouragement of young people who
may not be well provided for by those before them,
and are disposed to seek their fortunes dependent only
on themselves.
[Page 159]
CHAP. III.
THE Captain in the capacity of governor, began to
turn his thoughts towards government; and considered
with himself what had been the means of governing men,
from time immemorial. This he found might be comprehended
under two general heads, fear and affection .
The priest is an adjunct of fear, because he holds out
the horror of what is to come, or is invisible.
What the origin of sacrifices? The true religion
ordain'd them being of mystical type and signification;
The false, in order to be like the true, and also, because
not having tithes, these became doubly necessary
for subsistence. For when a bullock was offered
up to the gods, the smell went to them, but the
taste to mortals. It was not that any thing could be
got out of visscera, that tripes were inspected; but
because this could not be done until the cow was killed;
and in that case, the Priest got a beef-stake .
What contempt would one entertain of the Haruspices,
pouring over the entrails of cattle, in order to ascertain
the events of futurity, if he had no idea, all this
time that it led to a barbecue .
Having discovered this, he would do the past ages
more justice, and would be disposed to acknowledge,
[Page 160]
that men were not just such fools, heretofore, as he
had thought them to be.
But what the origin of human sacrifices? That
has a deeper foundation. It was not that the Gentiles
devoured them; or were Cannibals. But, it was a
state engine, and under pretence that a human victim
was desired by the gods, some individual obnoxious to
the government, was pointed out by the Priest, in collusion
with the officer, and made the holocaust. We
have a proof of this from the poet Virgil, who puts a
tale into the mouth of Sinon, viz. that a victim being
necessary to procure a favourable wind to the Greeks
to return home, Ulysses having a grudge on an old
account, got Calchas to denounce Pil Garlick, as the
one the gods had pitched upon; and accordingly being
marked out for the altar, he had run off. In the Foola
country, according to Winterbottom, whom we have
already quoted, the Bondoo woman is made use of by
the Purra, to single out the culprit that is to go to pot,
and be knocked on the head. In the south sea islands,
it is the usual policy. A letter from a missionary at
Otaheit, tells us that the Emperor of that island, lately
dead, had offered up in his time, at least, two thousand
human persons. These were, doubtless, such as had
been in opposition to the administration.
Lettres de cachet, had answered this end in France;
the inquisition in Catholic countries, which was an ecclesiastical
tribunal, served the same purpose.
[Page 161]
The clergy in free states, are useful to government;
but not in the same way. It is by inculcating
obedience as a divine precept; and a moral duty. This
is the only “alliance of church and state,” that exists
in this country. Or if the clergy here do not touch
upon politics at all, yet by teaching such doctrines as
lead men to virtue, they make them good citizens.
Even the Calvinist, though he talks of nothing but
faith, and spiritual affections , yet produces the effect
of good works. So that in fact he comes to the same
point with the Arminian who talks chiefly of good
works.
In the antient republics, founded like ours, on reason,
and the laws , the power of speech was the great
means of keeping men together. Hence the orators
of the popular assemblies. With us the press is the
great pulley, by which the public mind is hoisted up,
or let down to any sentiment. It is a wonderful block
and tackle, so to speak, on board the state ship. It
can overthrow a good administration, and for a while
support the bad. But the press cannot exist but
by liberty. Nevertheless the freedom of it may
be lost by its own exertions. The intemperance, and
indiscretion of the journalist, propels to popular excesses,
which subdue the laws; and bring despotism.
See the French Revolution.
These were the reflections of the governor, who
thought it fortunate that a press had been established
[Page 162]
in his government as a vehicle of information, but was
a little afraid of some of the correspondents; Harum
Scarum, Tom the Tinker; Clonmel the ballad singer;
Will Watlin, and others. O'Fin the Irishman was an
excellent flail man; but threshing grain, and threshing
in a new paper, require, if not different powers of
mind, yet at least different cultivation. He was an
honest good hearted fellow; but as on a barn floor,
an unskilful, or careless person will bring the voluble
end of the jack-staff about his own head; and hurt;
so it is with a politician who enters the list with a
view to do good; but, from mistake of the true interest
of the body politic, does harm.
Under this idea of the effect of a journal to guide,
or mislead the public mind, the Governor solicited an
interview with the editor of the “Twilight.” After
such introductory compliments and observations as
may be presumed on the occasion, the governor
insensibly drew him (the editor) into a conversation
on the subject of the press, and his gazette in particular.
Editor, said he, your good sense I know, and
your patriotism; but I am afraid of your being a little
too much carried away with the spirit of the times,
oeconomies; dissolution of courts, disuse of codes of
law, and invectives against lawyers. There is a medium
in all things. This may be carried too far.
Would you not think it prudent to restrain this down-hill
speed a little. As to attacks upon the administration,
or the policy of measures merely executive, or
[Page 163]
even the constitutionality, or expediency of a law, I
should think the greatest freedom may be used; or
the public conduct of men in office may be canvassed;
though, by the bye, I should not think the public had
any interest in their amours, their costume, as for instance
the cut of their pantaloons, or the colour of
their breeches; or peccadilloes, even in the breaches
of decorum. Such restriction may perhaps be laying
an anchor to winward in my own behalf, as I am not
the most exact of all men in these particulars. But
I ask or wish for no indulgence, on the score of official
acts; let them be the subject of your examination,
and strictures. At the same time, taking the
rule of humanity for your guide, as expressed by the
Poet,
“Nothing extenuate, or set down ought in malice.”
But I advert chiefly to such sentiments, as poison
in respect of the elementary principles and constitutions
of government itself, and the prostration of those
establishments on which the security of property,
reputation and liberty depends .
You will assign us typographists a very narrow
sphere, indeed, said the editor; and you will strike
away from us the footstool of all our popularity .
What is it to the macaronie, whether you acquire
territory to the republic, or lose it; but what is the
fashion of your boot, or the cape of your coat? What
is it to a female, whether you wisely sanction a
[Page 164]
remedial act by your approbation, or negative it? But
whether you keep a mistress, or ever had one. The
taste of your subscribers is as various, as their faces,
and we must please our subscribers. Every body can
understand scurrility, but it requires one to knit the
brow to take up a report on the finances. As to the taste
of the time, we must fall in with it, if we mean to
keep on the popular side of the question. The rage
is now oeconomies, and down with the lawyers. We
cannot avoid harking in a little. You are not to take
it for granted that we speak our own minds in every
thing you see in our papers; no more than an advocate
who is employed on the wrong side to plead:
It happens to fall to his lot, and he finds his account
in it.
Cannot you fill up your journal, said the Captain,
or at least a great part of it, with essays on agriculture;
experiments in chymistry, mathematical problems,
or love adventures, years ago, or at a great
distance! Let the governors, and the laws alone,
since you cannot speak of them just according to
your own judgment.
That would never do, said the editor. The public
would not take half the interest in it. Finding
fault is a secret satisfaction, and the source of great
delight to the human mind. Hence slanders in society.
Why not much more in public life? When
a man builds a cabbin, it pleases us to object to the
[Page 165]
plan, or something done about it; much more when
the subject of our remark is of a high and noble nature,
such as a measure of the executive.
The fact is, a newspaper is a battery, and it must
have something to batter at. Where the editor is a
friend to the executive, or the legislative part of the
administration, he must make a butt of the judiciary .
It is against this he must bring his catapult, or battering
ram, to bear. Fortunate the man who is unentramelled
with any attachments, or restraints, of affection,
gratitude, or obligation: he has the whole before
him, and he is not under the necessity of slackening
his efforts, at one angle, lest he should affect another.
A clear field, and no favour. That is the province of
the printer. An advocate seldom finds it his interest
to be retained by a suitor altogether. And as to
building up systems, that is what we do not so well understand.
We leave that to the sages, and philosophers,
with whom we are naturally at war. It is not our
fort; every man has his faculty. One to spin a rope;
another to pick oakum.
Well; said the Captain, you must take your own
way. I had no idea of shackling the press, but only
of suggesting such hints, as might conduce to its credit,
and the good of the community.
I do not know, said the Governor to the Chief
Justice; the blind lawyer who was present; the
editor now withdrawn; I do not know, said he,
[Page 166]
whether, notwithstanding my observations to the printer,
something might not be done in setling suits, and
composing differences in matters of property without
such extensive codes of jurisprudence and court trials,
with advocates, and endless speeches. I should like
to hear your idea on this subject, Chief Justice,
Might we not do without such struggling to exist
in other respects, said the Chief Justice? The acre
must be grubbed; the maize planted; the sickle is
necessary. Why clothing? at least why taylors.
Skins, or a plaid might answer. Why houses? It
is probable that mankind had tried the acorn; the
bear skin; the cave, or the hut before these. Must
they return to this state, to see whether they cannot
now do without them?
The presumption is, that before laws, men had
tried what it was to dispense with them. Jury trial
would not seem to have been an invention, all at once
like the Cotton loom by Arkwright. It is probable
that it was considered an improvement upon arbitrations,
when it first came into use. But it would not
seem to have been adopted all at once, but to be the
result of successive amendments. In fact, it is nothing
but a mode of arbitration by the vicinage, uniting
with it the advantage of a court to inform as to what the
law is, and furnishing an executive authority to carry
awards into effect, and execution .
[Page 167]
This trial is of immemorial usage, and hid in
deep antiquity. If we had its history, it would be
seen that its laws, are the result of gradual accession;
and these added from an experience of defect. Just
as in our own time, and in these states, we find amendments,
or at least, changes in the summoning, return,
impaneling, or serving of juries.
The privilege of council in capital cases; as to
matters of fact, or witnesses on oath, is but a late
acquisition in England. And the presumption is, that
at least, as to the privilege of council, it did not originally
obtain in civil cases . But that the prerogative
of the crown had impeded this improvement in the
criminal laws, so that it did not keep equal pace with
that in the civil. Yet with us it begins now to be
thought a grievance to have council in any case. It
seems to be a wish of many to try a system of judicial
determination without it.
What would be the effect of the experiment of
simple arbitration? Said the Governor.
An injury to credit, said the Chief Justice; men
would not so readily give trust, knowing that the
screw of the law was relaxed, and they could not so
readily recover what was due to them; of course, it
would reduce contracts; and bring matters to the immediate
exchange of money, and commodities.—
In the third place, it would shake the security of property,
real and personal; on account of the
[Page 168]
uncertainty of holding it, the rules of evidence being rendered
uncertain before a tribunal having no rules;
and also on account of having no principles of contract
or use, but the notions of right and wrong, in
the breasts of the auditors; and these as changeable
as the different sets that sit upon a controversy.
In the last place, it would check, if not put a stop
to all improvement. A great object of the social compact,
is the security of private property; the ascertaining
and protecting the meum and tuum; the
mine, and thine of possessions. With sovereigns the
ultima ratio regum, is the means of redress in case
of an invasion. Of trespass with individuals in a state
of society, what else but the laws? and what are laws
without tribunals to lay down and enforce them? tribunals,
not casual and temporary, but fixed, and moving
with set times, and the regularity of clock work;
tribunals who have rules of property as well understood,
and as certain in their applications, as the laws
of gravitation, or magnetism. When the Barons met
at Runningmede, did they complain of any thing more
than the delay of justice. Nulli negabimus, nulli deferemus
justiam, is a provision of Magna Charta.
Could there be steady justice, otherwise than by a proper
organization of courts and juries? Not unless
we take the short way of despotism, and appoint subordinates
with a prompt power, and arbitrary discretion.
Trial by jury and the constituted courts, had
been in use, time out of mind, before Magna Charta,
[Page 169]
and more than eight hundred years since, it has been
tolerated; nay prized, and the constant subject of
eulogy; notwithstanding what I consider as that which
might be the subject of amendment, the principle of
unanimity . It ought not rashly to be changed, in the
essential law of its nature, that it shall be annexed to a
court where men sit, who are learned in the usages, and
customs, or written laws of the society . Human wisdom
never has devised an equal mode of uniting the
means of ascertaining fact, and applying law . It is
the life-giving principle in this regulation, that the
jury and the court are associated in the trial, and that
one cannot move without the other. As to the mode
of bringing forward juries, by return of the sheriff;
by a special jury, selected in the manner known, or
by election of the country, these are particulars of a lesser
nature, and may be the subject of modification from
time to time, and yet the vital principle preserved.
But the moment, the tribunals of fact and law are separated,
the talismanic charm is gone; that which was
never understood before, will then be felt.
But, said the Governor, did they not lay aside law
judges, and attempt the system of mere a-bitrament
in France, during the revolution?
It would have been matter of wonder if they had not,
said the Chief Justice. When the cord from its extreme
tension is let go, it vibrates nearly as far on the other
side of the circle to that from which it had been drawn.
[Page 170]
What could you expect in the return from despotism
but the opposite extreme? In the state of the public
mind, in France, what was there to arrest at a medium?
Was it natural for the preciptancy of the national
will, to stop short of the utmost latitude? You
might as well expect the stone of Sysiphus down hill,
of itself, to stop short, at a proper point.
Of what account was it, what the mode of settling
disputes, relative to property in France, at some periods
of the revolution? Proscriptions brought owners,
and possessors, so quickly to the guillotine; and
conscriptions took them so hastily to the cannons'
mouth, or the bayonet point, that it was of little consequence
what the tribunals of justice, or of litigation.
But had they the trial by the vicinage there to loose?
Or, have they continued to do even without judges?
Bonaparte, you may say, has given them courts. If
he had let them alone, they would have had them of
themselves, unless anarchy had continued, or some
other sovereignty of a like nature had taken place.
What was the law in France before the revolution?
From what sources drawn? The Roman civil law .
Not this only, but usages, customs, and written laws
of a general, or local nature, derived from their Gallic
ancestors; or from the Goths of Franconia; from the
law of nature; from the law of nations; from municipal
institutions, and a thousand sources as numerous,
as the springs that make the rivers of their country.
[Page 171]
Could not property be held and adjudged without
a knowledge of all these? Said the Governor. No
more than you could breathe without the atmosphere,
unless another atmosphere be given you. For what is
property, but that which is peculiarly my right? And
what constitutes it my right, but the laws under which
it was acquired, and to which it is subject?
Is this Roman civil law, that you speak of, a thing
of much extent? Said the Governor.
It is as extensive, said the Chief Justice, as the
common law with us, or as any law must be, that
arises out of the concerns of a great community, or is
provided for it. Romulus made regulations; Numa
institutions; the plebiscita, or resolutions of the tribunes,
and the commons; Senatus consulta; judicia
pretoris; responsa prudentum; these contained in the
twelve tables, institutes, pandects, and commentaries,
are grounds of that law, which on the decline and fall
of the empire, was incorporated by the barbarous nations
in their codes, as they became civilized, and an
agricultural, and commercial people. It is the experience
and wisdom of ages which can alone provide
for the cases of difference in matters of claim, or right
amongst a people. It will require the application of
years in those who administer these laws, to acquire a
knowledge of the rules established relative to them,
and which rules, by the change of property under
them, have become as much the right of the citizen
[Page 172]
as the property itself. For the laws of property go
with it; and is the right of the purchaser; and as
much a part of his estate, as the charters and documents
that constitutes the evidence of the acquisition.
A bit of a manual or collect of the rules of a legislative
body, will fill a duodecimo volume; and yet how
small a part is this of the “law of parliament,” which
embraces privileges, immunities, laws of election,
and expulsion, &c. &c. &c. And in the code of the
community, there are a thousand chapters of law,
more extensive than this, and equally important to be
known, and every day in use by the whole of the people.
So that the disuse of lawyers, judges, and courts,
or superceding the necessity of them by novel institutions,
is what will be found impracticable consistent
with government.
Nevertheless, said Harum Scarum, who had just
come in, and heard the concluding part of what the
chief justice had said, Harum Scarum, whom the governor
had just appointed secretary: Nevertheless,
said he, so it is, that nolens volens, the people will
have the lawyers and the judges down. They may
let the chief justice alone a while, because he is blind.
There is a generosity in men that leads them to spare
the miserable. But as to lawyers that have their hands,
and judges that can see, down they go: every day has
its rage; ca ira, it will go on. The Marseilles hymn
need not be sung to this. Marchez, Marchez; Marchon,
Marchon. It will march of itself, quick step.
[Page 173]
There needs no drum beat, or fife to play. So much
for the lawyers; they are under way, and down they go.
Every day has its trumpery of opinions, and pursuits;
obstinacies, and predilections. We had the age
of swindlers some time ago. Every man that had a
mountain, or no matter whether he had one or not, he
sold the top first, and then the bottom. For though
you lawyers say, chief justice, that Cujus est solum,
ejus est usque ad Coelum; yet we have no such maxim
as usque ad Tartarum, and so he might sell the bottom,
and by the bye, represent it as level, and well watered,
which he could not always say, with a good conscience,
as to the frustrum of the cone, whether the
parabola, or the hyperbola. It was not enough for
the swindler, to purchase or sell lands that were neither
in the moon, or “on the earth, nor in the waters under
the earth;” but he must go to the ring of Saturn,
and the planet Herchel. There was no end to deception
on the one hand, or credulity on the other.
But we have seen this age pass over, and now is
the age of oeconomies . A man wears spectacles, or a
clout on his eye, to save day-light; his shirt above his
coat in the day-time, and sleeps in his coat at night, to
save his shirt. It has got among the very Indians. A
sachem runs with his back-side bare, to save his breeches,
but wastes as much oil on his posteriors to keep
them from muskittoes, as would buy overalls, or pantaloons,
to hide his nakedness.
[Page 174]
Harum Scarum, said the governor, you are an extravagant
fellow in your painting; you exagerate. I
expect better things from the people, than such derangement
in their ideas of policy. But, in the mean
time, let us take dinner.
Note . There are two problems in politics, which
have some difficulty in the solution. The one is the
power of the judiciary, to adjudge a law void on the
ground of unconstitutionality . The other is that which
we have just touched upon a little, in the preceding
chapters; viz. the practibility of adjusting civil controversies
by arbitration .
On the first point, we find a precedent in the government
of the Athenian people. I shall quote from a
translation of the “travels of Anacharsis the younger.”
“Amidst that multitude of decrees, we see from
time to time enacted with the sanction of the Senate,
and the people, some there are in manifest contradiction
to the welfare of the state, and which it is important
not to suffer to subsist. But, as they were the
acts of the legislative power, it should seem that no
authority, no tribunal is competent to annual them.
The people themselves should not attempt it, lest the
orators who have already taken them by surprise ,
should again mislead them. What resource then shall
there be for the republic? A law singular indeed at
first sight, but admirable in its nature, and so essential
[Page 175]
as to reduce it impossible either to suppress or neglect
it, without destroying the democracy; I mean the
law that authorizes the very lowest citizen to appeal
from a judgment of the whole people , whenever he is
able to demonstrate, that the new decree is contrary
to the laws already established.
In these circumstances, it is the invisible sovereign ,
it is the laws which loudly protest against the national
judgement that has violated them; it is in the name of
the laws that the accusation is brought forward; it is
before the tribunal, which is the chief depositary and
avenger of the laws, that it is prosecuted; and the
judges by setting aside the decree, only pronounce that
the authority of the people has happened to clash unintentionally
with that of the laws; or rather they maintain
the ancient and permanent decisions of the people
against their present and transient inclinations .
On the second point, I meet with a precedent, in
the same state, the Athenian, and I quote from the
same book. “I cannot overlook an institution which
appears to me highly favourable to those, who, though
they appeal to the laws , wish not to be litigious. Every
year forty inferior judges go the circuit through
the different towns of Attica, hold their assizes there,
decide on certain acts of violencs, and terminate all
processes for small sums, refering more considerable
causes to arbitration .
These arbitrators are all persons of good reputation,
and about 60 years of age. At the end of every
[Page 176]
year, they are drawn by lot, out of each tribe, to the
number of 44.
Persons who do not choose to expose themselves to
the delays of ordinary justice, to deposit a sum of money
previous to the judgment, or to pay the fine (damages)
decreed against the plaintiff, failing in his
proofs, may confide their interest to one or more arbibitrators
nominated by themselves , or whom the Archon
draws by lot in their presence. When the arbitrators
are of their own choice, they take an oath to abide
by their decision, from which they cannot appeal;
but if they are chosen by lot, they are not deprived of
that resource; and the arbitrators, inclose the depositions
of the witnesses, and all the documents of
the process, into a box, which they carefully seal up,
and transmit them to the Archon, whose duty it is to
lay the cause before one of the higher tribunals .
If the Archon has referred the matter in dispute
to arbitrators drawn by lot, at the request only of one
party, the adverse party has the right, either to demur
against the competency of the tribunals, or to
alledge other exceptions.
Arbitrators called upon to decide in affairs where
one of the parties are their friends or relations might
be tempted to pronounce an iniquitous judgment: in
such cases, it is provided, that the cause may be removed
into one of the superior courts . They might also
permit themselves to be corrupted by presents, or be
[Page 177]
influenced by private prejudices: in which case the
injured party has a right at the expiration of the year
to prosecute them in a court of justice, and compel
them to defend, and shew the reasons of their award.
The fear of such a scrutiny might likewise induce
them to elude the exercise of these functions. But the
law has provided against that by fixing a stigma on
every arbitrator who when drawn by lot, refuses to perform
his duty .
The idea of an action against an arbitrator for a
wrong judgment , involves this, that the court above
must judge of his judgment. The jury trial had not
got quit of this under the shape of an attaint until the
granting new trials took place. It proves that arbitration
has been brought to perfection in the present state
of trial by jury, in the presence, and under the direction
of the court .
[Page 178]
CHAP. IV.
A noise was heard coming down the town, and a
cavalcade accompanying. It was Clonmel the ballad
singer followed by the Piper, and the blind Fidler;
the one with his bag-pipes; the other with his violin.
Will Watlin was along and had a bottle in his hand;
Tom the Tinker, O'Fin the Irishman, the Latin
schoolmaster, and a number others. The song sung
was as follows:
                           COME gather away to the new town,
There's nothing but lilting here,
                           And piping and singing and dancing,
Throughout every day of the year.
                           No maid that comes here but gets married,
Before she is here half an hour;
                           The brown, the black, or the hair red,
To live single is not in her power.
                           Come gather away, &c.
                           We get our provisions for nothing;
Just knock down a wolf or a bear,
                           The wear and the tear of our clothing,
A dress'd skin, or just in the hair.
[Page 179]
                           No trouble, no bubble, no sweating,
Like people that live in the smoke,
                           We catch the fresh fish with a neting,
And roast them just under the oak.
                           Come gather, &c.
                           Our governor is a fine fellow,
Chief justice as blind as a bat;
                           The governor sometimes gets mellow,
And blinks himself like a cat.
                           No lawyers are here but a couple,
Just enough to keep up the breed
                           The word of their mouth is a bubble,
And not worth a copper indeed.
                           Come gather, &c.
                           We have a fine printer a devil,
To whack at their fees and the court,
                           Because that the rascals can give ill
Opinions that do us much hurt.
                           Good fortune, we have little money,
To quarrel, and law suit about;
                           So turn up the bottle, dear honey,
But see that you dont drink it out.
                           Come gather, &c.
                           The air of this country is clearer,
The water is clearer by far,
                           The words of our wooing are dearer,
Such words as a body can spare;
                           When we smother the maids with our kisses,
And they smother us in their turn;
[Page 180]
                           I swear by St. Patrick that this is,
The best country that ever was born.
                           Come gather, &c.
                           The lads they go out a racooning,
Or take at a squirrel, a shot,
                           If they knock down a fowl, they are soon in,
To shew what a fowl they have got.
                           Great shame to the Paddies below stairs,
That live in the country below,
                           Ly snoring, and sleeping on bolsters;
And lounging one cannot tell how.
                           Come gather, &c.
                           Up to the mountains bog-trotters;
Our shamrocks are fresh, and are green.
                           Set traps for your beavers and otters,
And musk-rats the best ever seen.
                           Though I am too lazy to rough it,
And go to the waters with you.
                           Because I have had just enough 'f it;
Don't like to be rich as a Jew.
                           Come gather, &c.
                           O, what is life but a blister,
Put on we cannot tell where;
                           And sorrow herself is a sister,
To thinking, and much taking care.
                           So let us be jovial, and jolly,
And make out as well as we can;
                           Who knows whether wisdom or folly,
Makes the better or the happier man.
                           Come gather, &c.
[Page 181]
The drone of the piper; the screeching of the
violin, and the voices of the multitude, made such a
noise that one would have thought they were in Dublin;
and had it not been that Harum Scarum looking
out saw what it was, the Governor would have thought
of issuing his proclamation to keep the peace; but
the cause being understood, there was found to be no
necessity, and the secretary with the leave of the Governor
took a turn with them. The editor of the
journal seeing this came out. The two lawyers filed
in, a pedlar, and the bog-trotter. Being all together,
a new song was struck up, and the whole joined in
the chorus.
                           WHO says we're not of all trades,
And some they call professions;
                           Who wear their wigs or bald heads,
Scotch, English, Irish, Hessians?
                           The lawyer and the journal,
Though of a different calling,
                           And long, so like to turn all,
To tails with caterwalling.
                           Yet here they join in melody,
Walk hand in hand before us.
                           And they may go to hell the day,
They spoil the general chorus.
                           The bat has but its living,
No more than has the cat.
[Page 182]
                           The carter with his driving,
'Tis all he can get at.
                           The Tinker lives by blowing,
His bellows in the fire;
                           The Lawyer lives by throwing,
His snout a little higher.
                           The Pedlar goes the circuit,
And carries his small pack,
                           The Judge has harder work o't,
Impeachments on his back.
                           So let us all be liberal,
Let one another live
                           Dick, Harry, Tom, and Gabriel,
Which ever way they drive.
                           The Fidler and the Piper,
The flute and fife agree.
                           The boatman or the skipper,
'Tis all the same to me.
                           O'Fin come taste the jorum.
And Harum Scarum pledge,
                           And Horum Harum horum,
Will take it next I 'ngage.
                           Here's to the world of worthies,
That love a merry song;
                           Let all your topsy turvies,
Now drink and hold your tongue.
[Page 183]
OBSERVATIONS. I HAVE spoken of Thomas Payne as an uncommon,
but uninformed man . The felicity of his stile,
and the magic of his wit, is irresistible. But thinking
all and reading little, at least, before the writings he
has published, his ideas are unborrowed; but he
thinks them sole, whereas the human mind had produced
them all before. The same thoughts on religion
or government have never been expressed with
the like illusion; but they have existed in the doubts
of the unbeliever; and the theories of political reformers,
before his time. This philanthropist; for
his vote on the sentence of Louis XVI. proves him to
be such, had not sufficiently considered man's nature,
and the consequence of a deracination of establishments,
before he began to write his books. It is easier
to destroy than to substitute. The French revolution,
I presume, may have shewn him the difficulty
of arresting the human mind at a proper point . A book
of anecdotes, and remarks illustrative of this, with
the opportunities he has had, the discernment he possesses,
with the originality of his expression, would
have been a valuable work. I could wish him to have
done this, and left the priests to themselves, who
[Page 184]
have trouble enough on their heads with the devil unassisted
by Thomas Payne. He had no occasion to
tell philosophers, that the discoveries in astronomy were
not favourable to some of the dogmata of our theology;
for it was the source of melancholy reflection with
themselves; and as to the bulk of believers, that have
got over it, or never got into it, it is of no use; on the
contrary, a great injury. For even supposing the representations
of our theologists to be an illusion, why
dissipate the vision? Does it not constitute a great
portion of our happiness? Are those men supossed
to have done nothing for the world who have raised
fabricks of this kind to the imagination even upon
false grounds? Has it not contributed at least to
amuse in this life? It is an opiate under pain, and
cases the mind without affecting the nerves . But I
know what occurs upon this. It is, that it is not taking
away the opiate, but changing it. But is there no
difficulty in believing any thing, after you have begun
to doubt at all. It is as easy to believe that all things
always were, as that they began to be . So that if you
lay aside revelation , there is an end of the chapter.—
When Plato read his dialogue on the immortality of
the soul, all his school rose up, save Aristotle. I presume
the logical mind of the youth thought the reasoning
unsatisfactory.
On the subject of oeconomies , I have touched on
the administration of the general government, with
what might seem a fling at the executive in the case
[Page 185]
of the reduction of the navy, &c. It was currente calamo,
and more in a vein of jealousy than certain,
and correct stricture. For I am aware of the incapacity
and consequent presumption, of an individual not
master of reasons and circumstances, to undertake to
judge of public measures, on a great scale. It is not
from between decks in a vessel, that we expect to
hear directions to take in sail, to give more sail, or to
steer upon a wind; but from an officer on deck who
has an opportunity of judging of the way which the
vessel has, and what sail she carries. Carping at
public measures which we do not understand is not the
part of a good citizen; at the same time, unless there
is a perfect freedom of thought in a government
founded on opinion, those that direct the helm, will
be at a loss to know the impressions which public measures
give, and mistake silence for approbation.—
Hence oftentimes, a deceitful calm, which is succeeded
by a squall, as sudden as it is destructive. I
confess I was one of those who instead of diminishing
our navy, was for augmenting it. But this was but the
idea of an individual, far from the seat of government,
and still farther from an opportunity of forming a just
estimate of the policy of public measures.
It may be discovered from some things thrown
out in the course of this work, that I am apprehensive
of giving offence, and the reader may wonder why I
[Page 186]
should have such apprehensions. It is because I have
offended oftentimes, when I had no intention of offending;
and when I could not, even afterwards, conceive
how the offence could be taken. In early life, admiring
the beauty and manners of a young girl, I made
a few verses, and presented to her. After having read
them, she returned them to me, with visible anger and
emotion; and said she did not know what she could
have done to have deserved such treatment at my
hands.
Being unfortunate in poetry, my next billet doux,
some years after, to a young lady, was in prose. But
the consequence was the same. It produced resentment.
I could no more divine at the time, what it
was that displeased, than I could conjure up a spirit
from “the deep.” I disdained to enquire into the
cause; for in turn I was offended. But reflecting
since, on the nature of the human mind, I resolve it
into this, that I had attempted wit with my compliments,
which was mistaken for ridicule .
There have been occasions when I had in view to
try whether I had wit, but meant nothing more than a
little pleasantry, and to tickle with a feather, and yet
have hurt the feelings of the mind much. When at
the academy, I wrote an epigram upon a class-mate
whom I much respected, and had no conception that
it would have been more than the subject of a laugh
to himself as well as others, but he ran almost mad,
and I ran off. It was a fortnight, before the matter
[Page 187]
could be set right, and I could return again. A like
case happened to me some years since. The publisher
of a gazette, applied to me relative to the publication
of certain strictures on a public character, to
have my opinion as to their being libelous. I told
him they might not amount, in strictness to a libel;
but came rather under the idea of scurrility . But,
to satisfy his correspondents, who might think themselves
neglected, if no notice was taken of what they
had sent forward, I would throw the substance of them
into a light airy dress of playfulness, and fancy, so as
not to wound the man, who was my friend, but make
it difficult to say whether the laugh was most at his expence,
or that of others. But contrary to my expectation,
it hurt much, and occasioned an assault and battery
on a journalist who had copied it into his paper.
It cannot be the poignancy of any share of what
may be called wit that I possess, if any faculty that I
have may be to called; but it must be some peculiarity
in the expression, of the effect of which, I am not
myself sensible. I have not felt that I am apt to hurt
in conversation, or that my words are liable to be misconstrued,
and a meaning drawn from them, which
was not intended. Yet certainly the same shape of
thought, and turn of expression, must shew itself in
common parlance. I can account for the difference on
no other principle but this, that an appearance of good
humour may rebut the suspicion of malevolence,
which might otherwise attach itself to the allusion.
[Page 188]
When I had written, and even printed off the first
volume of this second part, which was in the course of
last summer, looking over it, at some distance of time,
I concluded to burn the impression. But not being
near a fire, it escaped; and in the mean time, I began
to consider, that it was paying but a bad compliment
to the understanding of a democratic people, who are
in the habit of freedom of speech, among themselves,
and allow great liberties, not to say licentiousness to
the press, to suspect them of being so intollerant, and
so ready to take offence, when it was not meant. Hence
it was that I have taken courage to write on, and
thought that if it did give offence, I might as well be
hanged for an old sheep as a lamb. The truth is, I
had not written myself out; but, many more ideas
springing up in my brain, and crouding together in a
narrow compass, wanted egress, and demanded to see
the light. But some of the more forward of them I have
actually knocked on the head, having reason to believe
that they might do more harm than good at the present
time. I thought a pity of several of them, for
they struggled hard to live. But, dearies, said I, you
must go. It is better you should die than your father.
So they went, poor things, to house themselves with
the infantile images that are heard only by their
plaints in the entrance of the house of night.
——Vagitus et ingens,
Infantrumque animæ flentes in limine primo—
[Page 189]
CHAP. V.
THE Lay Preacher having been pronounced by
the faculty, sui compos, and come to his reason, had
been dismissed from the hospital, and had come to
the new settlement. This was now a kind of Botany-Bay,
to the old country, with this difference, that here,
the outcasts came voluntarily, but there of force. The
Governor received the Lay Preacher with courtesy,
and made him his chaplain. The Sunday following
he preached to a numerous congregation, in a chapel
in the woods. His discourse was taken down in short
hand, by the editor of the “Twilight,” and has appeared
in his paper. As it would seem worth preserving,
we have copied it from them, and given it in
this work.
THE SERMON. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego: Dan. iii. 12.
These are the Hebrew names for Tom, Dick, and
Harry, and applicable to this settlement, which is a
colluvies of all nations: Mac's, O's, and Ap's; Erse,
Irish, and Welsh. But, as in a garden, a variety of
seeds, and plants, is desirable, so in a settlement,
where the human species is about to be cultivated, and
[Page 190]
this not only for the sake of what pleases the fancy,
but what is useful for the kitchen, or for medicine.
So let no uncharitableness prevail among you, and one
cast up to the other, their origin, former occupation,
or character. I presume there would be but little to
gain or lose on a fair balance, and set off, as the lawyers
say, among you. But it is best to consider all
accounts squared, and set out in a new partnership.
It falls to the lot of my function to see what good
advice I can give you, for it is by admonition only that
I can serve the commonwealth. I shall leave spiritual
things to my brother, the Methodist, who is as busy
as a bee in a tar barrel yonder, raising the affections,
and disturbing the imagination. I shall content
myself with some things merely temporal.
The sin that most easily besets a new settler, is
laziness, or to give it a more civil term, indolence .
He gets the means of life easily. He sets a trap over
night; or, he goes out with his gun in the morning,
and kills game. The flesh serves for food, and the
skin for covering. The soil is fertile, and yields, some
30, some 40, some 60, and some an 100 fold. This
just by a little stirring of the hoe. For you must know
that I myself have been brought up in a new settlement,
and know the history of such. Though that
settlement, in which I was brought up is now an hundred
miles below us, not by the sinking of the earth,
but by the frontier pushing back, and settling beyond
[Page 191]
it. Indolence, I know, is a vice of that situation. For
necessity is the mother of invention, and impels to
labour.
“Duris in rebus, urgens egestas.”
Said the Latin schoolmaster;
“Improbus labor omnia vincit.”
Drive out that fellow there, said the Sexton. He
disturbs the congregation.
The Preacher proceeded.
Now if a man can live without working, he will
not work. The cattle of a settler browzes in the woods;
and subsits even in the winter, without other shelter,
or food, than the under wood, and such shrubbery as
covers the head of a valley, where the soil is dry, and
the spring rises. The wilderness obstructs the course
of the winter winds, and the cabbin is warm on the
south side of the hill. Hence the temptation to indolence.
But there is a worse sin that easily besets the settler
in a new country; these especially that settle
in a town, where there is usually a tavern, a store, and
a race ground for the horse jockies. This sin, or vice
is, intemperance . Horse jockeying, shooting matches,
and all elections, are an inlet to this. Shew me a man
that frequents the county town, much, and I will shew
you one that is in the way to contract a habit of intoxication.
The little peltry he may have got to buy
himself a hunting shirt, or a little tea, and sugar, for
his family, goes into the whiskey bottle.
[Page 192]
Now to the application, said Harum Scarum, this
will do for the body of the sermon.
As to application, said the Preacher, I will leave
that to every man to make for himself. You can all
apply the doctrine as well as I can.
“Non omnia possumus omnes.”
Said the Latinist.
Will not that fellow be quiet yet? Said the Sexton,
drive him out.
By the bye he was out already, for the woods was
all the chapel that they had; and a rising ground
for the pulpit; but the Sexton meant to remove him
from the circle; and it was so understood; for they
pushed him back to some distance.
The Governor reprimanded Harum Scarum, for
his interruption also; for though this could be considered
but as a substitute for preaching, until a regular
clergyman came forward, yet, in the mean time,
the rules of propriety ought to be observed, and interruption
or desultory dialogue was improper.
Harum Scarum asked pardon, but wished the
preacher would stick a little more to his text, and illustrate
the words “Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.”
The Preacher said he had done that already, and
would not return to it; but, as the usual time had
clapsed, he would now finish his discourse.
[Page 193]
CONCLUSION.
COMPARING great things with small, we have
written this book in the manner of certain of the ancients;
that is, with a dramatic cast . The book of
Job, is amongst the earliest of all compositions, and
after an introduction containing the history of his misfortunes,
and malady, introduces the speakers in three
different characters, and names, each sustaining his
opinion; and giving the authour an opportunity to
canvass the subject he had in view, the ways of Providence,
and to give lessons of humility and resignation
to man.
The Socratic school, and amongst these, have distinguished
themselves chiefly, Plato in his dialogues,
and Zenophon, in his Symposium, or Banquet.
It has been followed by the Romans; of whom
Cicero in his book treating of the qualifications of an
orator, or, as we commonly stile it, de oratore, is the
happiest instance.
Sir Thomas More introduces his Utopia, in this
manner. But the most complete model of such
[Page 194]
structure of writing, is a posthumous work of David Hume,
his “Religion of Nature.”
The vehicle which I have chosen of supposed
travels, and conversations, affords great scope, and
much freedom, and furnishes an opportunity to enliven
with incident. Doubtless it is of the same nature,
with many things in the novel way, written by philosophic
men, who chose that form of writing, for the
purpose merely of conveying sentiments, which in a
didactic work, under the head of tract or dissertation,
could not so easily gain attention, or procure readers.
But the characters which we have introduced, are
many of them low. That gives the greater relief to
the mind.
The eye withdraws itself, to rest,
Upon the green of folly's breast.
Shakespeare has his Bardolph, Nymn, and
Pistol, and the dialogue of these is a relief to
the drama of the principal personages. It is so in
nature; and why should it not be so represented in
the images of her works. We have the sage and the
fool, interspersed in society, and the fool gives occasion
for the wise man to make his reflections. So in
our book.
In the beginning of the work, will be seen “ Entered
according to act of Congress .” How far this
might legaily exclude extracts from the work, it is
not necessary to consider, as the authour gives permission
to all Journalists to extract what they think
[Page 195]
proper; and even essayists who write a book, are at
liberty, to copy with all freedom, if they should find
themselves at their shifts, or, as we say, a dead lift,
for something to diversify their lucubrations. In this
case, if the book itself should leave home but little,
it will be known abroad by the quotations; and the
chances will be multiplied of coming down to posterity,
at least as to the title, and perhaps something of
the manner, and the execution.
Criticisms, if the bagatelle should seem to deserve
it, favourable, or otherwise, will be well taken, with
exception only to that stile and manner, which we
call scurrilous, not so much for our own sake, as for
the sake of those who have a propensity that way, and
whom we would not wish to encourage, by an express
invitation. If they indulge it, it is not amiss for them
to know that it is not to our taste, or acceptation . Such
as have no other talent, must be indulged; but it is
as we indulge the frailties of mortals in other cases.
It is a pleasure to have it known that one lives; yet
there is no man who would not rather be unknown
than much hurt. But though, what is undervaluing
must hurt, yet men of the quill, as erst those of the
sword, would rather bear a gentle prick than not
have the rare pleasure of playing with a master of
the noble science of defence. There is no knowing
how our guards may be beaten down; or how the adversary
may prick in an unguarded part; but it will
[Page 196]
be a hard case if our diversions should prove a serious
matter, and through the imperfection of language, or
our awkwardness, occasion misconception and ill will.
Deprecating this, we consign the volume to the public.
We do not say the world; for it has got a bad
name. We have heard since ever we recollect, the
terms, an ungenerous world; a wicked world; a persecuting
world. But the word public carries with it
a more favourable impression. Public spirit, is spoken
of as a virtue, and most men profess themselves disposed
to serve the public . Taking this distinction
therefore, we hope we are safe in giving this thing
publicity , and under this impression, to use a pun, we
commit the impression to the booksellers in the first
instance, and from them it may go into libraries, or
the hands of hawkers, as may happen. “Time and
chance happeneth to all men,” and so it must to
things.
Back matter
[Page ]
NOTES.
Note, Page 10.
“IT is to this idol (oeconomy) that the third
branch of the government is to be offered up in one
shape or another. For what is it whether a judge is
broke upon the bench, or has his neck broke upon
the roads.”
That is, whether he is broke of his commission on
trial, or has his neck broke through oeconomy, which resists
such an organization, as to admit of less riding .
It is not the idea that the breaking is for the sake of
oeconomy, for others being appointed in the room of
those removed, it could reduce no expence. This explanation
is made to prevent the captious from applying
it to the impeachment now depending.
The common law—note page —
I once heard a senator of the United States, in a
speech in the senate chamber, define this to be common
sense . This senator was said to have been bred
to the law; but this proved that he was no great lawyer.
Common sense , or reason, doubtless, is a ground
of the common law, and the great test of the application
of its principles, to the cases that occur in the
relations and transactions of men; but it is more than
common sense, otherwise, the knowledge of it would be
possessed by all men in proportion as they had common
sense. It is not an easy thing to explain to the
common mind, what the common law is; nor does it
seem to be understood, even by literary men who
have not made it a particular study. I observe that
[Page 198]
even journalists of great acuteness of mind hold it out as
a grievance in these commonwealths; whereas it is
considered by sages of other countries, as the best system
of jurisprudence the world ever saw. Our British
ancestors, and those of the present day in those
islands, consider it as the most valuable thing they
possess, and which they would not give up but with
their lives. If Ireland had acquired liberty, in the
life time of Tone, or Emmet, what would they have
thought of their countrymen, talking of throwing aside
the common law? That law for the perfect enjoyment
of which they had contended, and the abridgement of
which they considered as a deprivation of liberty.
For equality of representation is a principle of the common
law . This law is moral, judicial, and political.
Where is the common law to be found? You will
get a pretty good view of it in Blackstones Commentaries;
but could we not employ a few wise men,
such as perhaps we might find in the state of Pennsylvania,
to make a code entirely new, and by an act of the
legislature declare it law? Thus, laying aside the common
law, just as if no such system had ever existed.
The thing is impossible. For it is the experience of
man, that has begot it . It is human society exerting
itself in transactions; and human reason applying itself
to those, so that the rule of the case may be setled,
that constitutes a great part of this law. Shall
we lose the benefit of the wisdom of those before us,
in the most difficult of all concerns, the administration
of justice, while we consider it prudent to retain
the advantage of other labours, and attainments which
have been transmitted to us?
But why are the principles of this, or any other
law so extensive? Because the relations, and transactions
of men are extensive. The relation of parent
and child, master and servant, principal and agent,
buyer and seller, magistrate and citizen. Why should
I enumerate? The chapters would fill pages, and
each make a book.
[Page 199]
But have our constitutions carried with them this
law; or do they not supersede or render it unnecessary?
What are the constitutions of the individual
states more than an outline filled up by the common law?
That of the United States itself, which is but a confederation,
draws with the organization, such portions
of the common law, as belong to those parts of the
machine which have been taken from a government of
which the common law made a part .
The common law, is a system of reason and justice,
and a most valuable possession. The abridging
it or changing a principle, is dangerous. It requires
the hand of a workman who knows every pin in the
building, and can tell what to substitute, in the place
of that which is taken away.
Note, Page 203.
“My situation, and the motives of my conduct.”
This refers to my letter to the speaker of the house
of representatives, which has been before the public,
and is as follows:
Section
Sir ,
I have seen a report of the honorable the House of
Representatives, on the complaint of Thomas Passmore
against all the Judges of the Supreme Court of
this state, myself excepted, for a judgment on an attachment
against the said Passmore on an alledged
contempt of the administration of justice, and which
report your honorable hose has adopted and proceeded
to act upon. I was not upon the bench when the
motion was made for a rule to shew cause in this case
why an attachment should not issue, the motion having
been made on the last day of September term,
1802, when I had left the city on account of the yellow
fever which had begun to prevail, and the motion
having been heard before the Judges residing in the
[Page 200]
city or near it, and who met on that day for the purpose
of hearing motions only; nor was I on the bench
when the arguments on the facts of the case and the
law, took place, and the rule for the attachment was
made absolute, having returned from a special court
at the county of Northumberland by the way of Carlisle,
the place of my residence, and but a few days
intervening, so that I did not take my place on the
bench until some days after the beginning of the term,
but I was present on the third and last hearing of the
case when some additional evidence was given and
observations made; the presumption may have been
that I did not take a part, and doubtless I might have
excused myself; but I cannot say that I did not take
a part; I gave the case all the consideration I could
at the time, and three fourths of the court who had
heard all, declaring themselves fully satisfied, I saw
no reason to warrant a dissent, but concurred: I cannot
therefore distinguish my case in law from that of
the other Judges, and in honor I would not: I am
far from coveting or courting a prosecution, but am
unwilling to incur the imputation of screening myself
when in strictness equally liable, but I think it absolutely
necessary for the credit of the republican administration
that I should not be distinguished; as
there can be no stronger evidence than a man's own
acknowledgment, the house will find no difficulty in
a resolution to add my name to the list of the impeached
officers.
With the highest respect for the honorable house,
and you their speaker,
I am Sir,
Your most obedient
Humble servant,
H. H. BRACKENRIDGE.
[Page 201]
Section The judges of the Supreme court, sit, the chief
justice (Shippen) in the middle place; Yeats (second
judge) on the right; Smith (third judge) on his left;
and Brackenridge (fourth judge) on the left of Smith.
The case of Passmore was moved, and after some
argument, the court deliberated on the judgment.
Smith (judge) what say you?
Brackenridge. I am thinking whether the averment
in his answer, that he meant no contempt, can be
what is called purgation, as is contended.
Smith. That cannot be; it is the fact of the publication
of which he must purge himself .
Brackenridge. That is reason. There is no sense
in any thing else. But I am not so clear as to the
second point which seems to have been made, whether
the suit could be said to be depending, as a judgment
was entered, and an execution issued .
Smith. But that judgment was surreptitious, and
the judgment irregular.
Brackenridge. But it gave colour.
Smith. But that colour was of his own procuring;
his fraud, his own wrong.
Brackenridge. I cannot answer that. Have you
all considered it; are you all satisfied?
Smith. Yes.
Brackenridge. Well—
The case again moved, and the court deliberating
on the sentence. At this stage, Yeates (on the right)
said something to the chief justice, not heard by me.
Chief Justice. Has any thing been done in this
matter yet?
Brackenridge. What does the Chief Justice mean
by asking if any thing has been done in the case?
Smith. Judge Yeates wishes to know if concessions
have been made, or will be made .
Brackenridge. I do not like that. Can he shew
me that in a book? Can he shew me a case for that?
This is not a direct contempt.
Smith. He means concessions to the party.
[Page 202]
Brackenridge. I do not even like that. It savours
of the duel. We have no power to order that. This
is a court of law, not a court of honour.
Smith. He means a hint to satisfy the party.
Brackenridge. I do not think even that necessary
or proper, as he has council who can instruct him as
to that. A man of spirit will sometimes rather bear
the law, than humble himself to his adversary, if he
thinks himself wronged. In that case he would not
like to have the hint thrown out. I do not think it can,
with propriety, come from the court, as he has council.
Smith. I think so too. Chief Justice, Mr. Brackenridge
thinks it not necessary to give any hint as to
concessions, as his council can instruct him as to the
effect of this; and I agree with him.
Chief Justice. Well.
At this the two judges, one on each side the Chief
Justice, conversed with him. I did not lean over, and
did not hear.
Smith (to me) what say you, as to the sentence?
Brackenridge. What say you amongst yourselves?
You have heard all from the beginning; and considered
the circumstances more than I have done.
Smith. Judge Yeates thinks of a fine of 50 dollars,
and three months imprisonment. The Chief Justice,
as to the imprisonment, one month.
Brackenridge. Do any of you know any thing of
the man; his circumstances, or character?
Smith. We have no evidence as to either; and
there is none of us that know any thing of our own
knowledge. Judge Yeates, and myself, have never
heard of the man before. The Chief Justice says he
thinks he has seen him in his shop, and that he seemed
to be a decent man, and he liked his manners.
Brackenridge. Let it be one month .
Smith. Chief Justice, Mr. Brackenridge says one
month, and I agree.
[Page 203]
Chief Justice. Mr. Passmore, you have committed
a great offence, and you have been obstinate, and
in your answer to interrogatories, have persisted in the
libel, upon Andrew Bayard, and so far from retracting,
have justified the slander and abuse . It is the sentence
of the court, that you pay a fine of 50 dollars to
the commonwealth, and be imprisoned the space of
one callendar month, in the jail of the county, &c.
There was nothing said of concessions, or apologies,
that I recollect, for that had been over-ruled. It
was not until long afterwards, that I understood the
hint of apology, or concessions had been thrown out
by judge Yeates, as I am informed, before I came upon
the bench.
On Passmore bringing a charge against the three
judges, who had been upon the bench, at the ordering
the attachment, and the examination of his case,
(not knowing, it is to be presumed, that I had taken
any part) but thinking myself involved, in strictness of
law , I wrote to the Secretary of the commonwealth,
Mr. Thompson, stating my concurrence , and desiring
him to make it known to such of the members of the
legislature as he might happen to converse with upon
the subject. This, because Mr. Passmore had not mentioned
me in the charge.
A transcript of the evidence before the committee of
impeachment , was shewn to me, in which I found my
name not introduced. It had been forwarded to Philadelphia,
to judge Yeates. I saw recorder Levy, who had
been council for Passmore, on his return from his examination
at Lancaster, before the committee. He informed
me that he had been interrogated as to me, and in
like manner every witness; but that he had not been able
to say at what stage I had been present; and that the
evidence from the other witnesses had been contradictory,
and uncertain. I was just then on my way
to the stage office, where I fell in with two witnesses,
(Shoemaker and another,) who were taking seats in the
[Page 204]
stage for Lancaster, for a second examination. I stated
to them the part I had taken in the business of Passmore,
and desired them to state it to the committee
as my acknowledgment. I have not heard whether
they had been re-examined. If so, I presume, not interrogated
with respect to me.
The committee appear, from the journals of the
house, to have made their report on the 13th of March,
1804.
Having by that report, laid a ground for the house
to proceed upon, I had expected a re-examination of
the evidence, by the whole house, before the report would
have been adopted, and articles af impeachment prefered .
I had no conception that the house would impeach
upon the mere report of a committee . At least I had
expected that the evidence taken in writing by the
committee would be laid before the house, and become
the subject of examination. Perhaps it was the case.
But in fact I had not expected, from the information
I had, that the report would have been adopted, and so
did not come forward at that stage. It was adopted on
the 20th, and on the 21st, I had information. My letter
is dated the 22d. It was read on the 24th, and a committee
appointed on it. The 26th, the report of the
committee read and adopted. The 27th, the address
to the Governor for my removal.
My first information of the offence taken, and of the
address , was through the news-papers.
March 27th, the consideration of the address postponed.
March 30th, again postponed.
March 31st, taken up and carried. I had seen
these postponements announced by the papers from
day to day; but engaged in the business of the court,
I could not go to the seat of government, and conceived
the matter was put off until the next session, when
it might be made a question whether to proceed in the
address, or to add me to the articles of impeachment with
the other judges .
[Page 205]
THE ADDRESS IS AS FOLLOWS. To his Excellency THOMAS M'KEAN, Governor
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania .
The Senate and House of Representatives of the same
Commonwealth ,
RESPECTFULLY REPRESENT ,
THAT whereas, Hugh H. Brackenridge, Esquire,
one of the justices of the Supreme Court, of this Commonwealth,
after having perfect knowledge that the
House of Representatives had adopted a report, to impeach
Edward Shippen, Esquire, chief justice, Jasper
Yeates, and Thomas Smith, Esquires, assistant justices
of the said court, for a high misdemeanor in their official
capacities, did on the 22d of March, 1804, direct a
letter to the Speaker of the House of Representatives,
approving that conduct in the judges, for which the
House had agreed to impeach them: thus at once improperly
interfering while the question was pending before
the Senate, and pronouncing sentence, if not of
condemnation, at least of censure, upon the conduct of
the House of Representatives, by insinuating, in a
manner neither to be mistaken nor palliated, that the
House was actuated in their proceedings against the
other judges, by unworthy party motives; such unfounded
and unwarrantable insinuations, especially by
a citizen to whom the high trust of administering the
laws is confided, must unquestionably tend, to generate
suspicion among our constituents, that the laws are
the offspring of corruption, prejudice and caprice, and
not framed by the independent and unbiassed deliberations
of their Representatives, whereby the confidence
of the people in their government might be impaired,
and the peace and harmony of the good citizens
of this commonwealth destroyed: for, however
any officer in any department of government, or other
person, may chuse to hold in contempt the members of
[Page 206]
the legislature, as private citizens, we deem it a dereliction
of duty to permit the sovereignty of the people
to be insulted with impunity in the persons of their
representatives.
Fully impressed with persuasion, that a man capable
of such conduct, is an improper person to discharge
the important functions of a judge; therefore earnestly
recommend to you, to vindicate the majesty of
the people, by removing the said Hugh H. Brackenridge,
from the office of an assistant justice of the Supreme
Court, of this Commonwealth.
REMARKS. “Approving that conduct in the judges for which
the house had agreed to impeach them.”
That approbation can be but by implication infered
from my offering to be made a party to the prosecution.
“Thus at once improperly interfering while the
question was pending before the senate.”
I had a right to offer to be made a party: perhaps to
demand it . It is done every day in the courts of justice.
When the party has an interest, and the judgment will
affect him, though indirectly , he has a right to be made
a party in the first instance; at least it is no contempt
of the court to offer it .
“And pronouncing sentence, if not of condemnation,
at least of censure, upon the conduct of the house
of representatives.”
This could only be matter of inference from the
mere circumstance of offering to be made a party .
“And which letter also contains evidence of premediated
insult to the house of representatives, by
insinuating, in a manner neither to be mistaken or
palliated that the house was actuated in their proceedings,
against the other Judges, by unworthy party motives .”
[Page 207]
This is drawn from the expression, “That I
thought it absolutely necessary for the republican administration,
that I should not be distinguished .”
Did not my coming forward with a confession imply
that I knew there was not evidence against me, and
how could the house distinguish me through favour,
when they had not evidence? It was no more than
expressing the motive of my coming forward, which was
to give them evidence .
The credit of the democracy was doubtless a motive.
I had come in with it, under Governor M'Kean.
It would be said; it was said, but most unjustly, that
I was spared through favour. There was colour for
this, from my having been upon the bench at passing
sentence . It was in my power to dissipate the appearance,
at once, by being made a party to the prosecution.
Fidelity to the cause of democracy required
it.
But, it was justice to my associates . They had a
right to demand it of it. Did it become me to wait
until that was demanded of me which they had a right
to expect?
But it was self-preservation . After conviction, in
what situation was I placed? At the mercy of another
prosecution. For it would come out, that I had
concurred in the sentence. I had repeatedly acknowledged
it. Was it not prudence to come forward in
the first instance? Would not my defence be easier
on the first impression, than with a conviction on the
same point, though between other parties , against me.
But enough having been done to settle the principle,
I might be passed over. But as to public opinion.
Have I no pride; no repugnance at living by sufferance;
no sensibility at being told of it? The thinking
of it would be enough for me.
It is true, there were shades of difference in my case .
I went, in some measure, upon the representation
made to me of the case, as in bank, judgment is given
on the report of the Judge, or Judges who have tried the
[Page 208]
cause; and in this case there were three fourths of the
court who had decided on the main point, the pendency
of the suit . Also, if there was any thing exceptionable
in throwing out a hint of concessions being
made , I was not responsible; for I had objected; not
that I thought it illegal, but unnecessary, and exceptionable
on the ground of discretion . It was in my mind
at the time, though I did not express it, that it was
an insult to the prosecutor, to introduce so light a
word as concessions, or apology, in case of so weighty
an offence .
But in acceding to the sentence, I thought myself
responsible for that sentence , however improvidently ,
I might have acceded; and the being on the
bench, and not dissenting , would be evidence of this,
and involve me in the public opinion as one who if not
impeached, ought to be impeached.
The misconception of the house, and the consequent
address, has had the good effect to prove that
party considerations did not stand in the way of their
justice, and the harshness of the proceeding, has
evinced sufficient sensibility, at what they conceived
an implied reflection upon their honour. They ought
to respect in me what they felt in themselves. I
was piqued upon the point of honour, not a little,
by persons, some upbraiding, and others congratulating
me on being left out of the impeachment.—
How have you managed to get your brethren all
impeached, and escaped yourself? Were you not
upon the bench? If you are not impeached, you ought
to be impeached. But you are too good a democrat;
they will not impeach you . They had no evidence.
They did not want evidence. This was the address
of no common characters; but men of the first standing
in society. It might be want of fortitude to be
moved at such address; but there is nothing more
powerful than reproach; and even, if, on my own account,
I could have borne it, I could not on account
of the democracy; and was determined to rescue it
[Page 209]
from the imputation even at the risk of my commission.
It is possible that the self-denial, and uncommon
patriotism of the act, as I thought it, may have
prevented it being understood. When Timoleon assisted
in puting to death his brother, who had usurped
the government, no one would believe that it was
from a sense of duty to his country, but from private
malice. An unworthy motive is substituted when the
virtue transcends the common expectation .
But the coming forward in the manner I did, even
supposing it not to be strictly justifiable, on the ground
of right, or to be approved on the score of prudence,
has answered the good purpose of rebuting all presumption
arising from my situation, and repelling all
suggestion, that I could not be dissatisfied with the
impeachment, and consequent removal of the judges
higher on the bench, as I would thereby advance my
grade . The address of the house also proved that I
had no understanding with any of the members on the
subject, or had intrigued to bring about the impeachment,
as Judge Addison had alledged in his case.
For all of my most particular acquaintance, and those
who professed, and I believe had the greatest good
will for me, independent of the matter before them,
were the most enraged against me. This reconciled
me to the step they took; and I am this moment at a
loss to say, whether I was pleased or displeased with
it. The sensation was alternate of pleasure or of pain;
and depended on the successive impressions, of having
lost my commission, or saved my honour . Such was
my confidence in the good will of a great majority of
the members, that I had been sometimes led to think,
though I have no particular ground for it, having never
conversed with one of them since, on the subject,
nor indeed ever spoke to more than one or two of them
since, nor have I had any indirect communication with
any of them on the subject; yet I say, I had been
led to flatter myself, that they had not seen “those
strong marks of premeditated insult ” in my letter,
[Page 210]
which are made the ground of the address; that the
indignation expressed was with some of them beyond
the real measure of it, with a view to throw me upon
the governor, and give me a chance of an escape,
considering that from my shewing, I was but an accessary
to the judgment in the case of Passmore, and
that upon too nice a punctilio of honour I was rushing
upon certain danger , by offering myself to the impeachment.
It is thus we brush away the fly that approaches
the flame of the candle and is about to burn
its wings . It deserves the fillup it gets for its intrusion,
but we preserve its life. Independent of the
known good will of many of the members personally
towards me, I was led to flatter myself, with this surmise
on the ground, that several of the orators on the
occasion, treated me with a contumely that is sometimes
used to masque good will. “ He is not worth
impeaching .” I saved several in the western insurrection
from being shot, by the same means. “He is
too contemptible to deserve the notice of brave men.
Turn him over to the committees, they can ascertain
at leisure what he has done, and what ought to be
done with him.” This may be altogether the illusion
of self-love, which with reluctance admits the idea of
being insignificant , or even obnoxious. But it is on
these grounds only, that I can account for the otherwise
monstrous proceeding in the case of an alledged
contempt , without notice or hearing. No law ever
dispensed with this.
Nevertheless, I am aware that in all this I may be
mistaken, and that in my case there may have been
a sevenfold rage, and disposition to prosecute; and that
the object may have been to make short work of it,
and to get rid of me at all events, for the daring presumption
of interfering with the movements of a legislative
body.
It is natural for me to calculate upon the possibility
of this; and therefore I am thinking with myself,
whether in the case of a judgment against the other
[Page 211]
judges, the present house can recur to an impeachment
against me; which I do not see they can do,
having been refused the opportunity of a trial in the
first instance. For it would be unequal; and besides
inconsistent with the declaration of the house preceding,
that there was not ground for it: or, if there
was, might it not be thought that enough had been
done to fix the principle, in the case decided; so that
even had an unconstitutional, or illegal power been
exercised, under the circumstances of the case, and
being a junior judge, I might be left to take warning,
and be more guarded for the time to come. It is thus
even the svages dipense justice, with a mixture of
humanity. If an old and a young warrior are overtaken
in a fault; they knock the old on the head, and let
the young one run a while .
As to the Governor removing on the address, it is
not, and never was in his power. The constitution
requires two thirds of each branch . Two thirds of a
quorum of the house, is not two thirds of a branch .
But the constitution gives the governor the exercise
of a discretion in the case. He may remove. This
involves his right to judge of the regularity of the
proceeding, as well as the ground of it. The proceeding,
in the case of this address, was irregular. Natural
law , requires a hearing of the party accused; that
is, natural reason, says there ought to be a hearing.
The benignity of the common law sanctions this with peculiar
attention. A proceeding without notice and a hearing
is void . And in many cases there are essoign, or
excuse days for attendance after a summons, or citation.
The law parliamentary is a part of the common
law; and the constitution giving a power to the parliaments ,
it can be carried into effect only according to
the common law . In the case of the address there was
no summons, or citation; but, the contempt assumed,
and a proceeding to judgment in the first instance .
The governor could no more proceed upon it, than a
court could issue execution upon a judgment, without
process and entries to warrant it .
[Page 212]
But the Governor exercising his discretion, had a
right to judge upon the ground of the address, the
evidence of the contempt alledged. In my letter he
might not see the same proofs of premeditated insult,
and therefore not bound to draw the same conclusion .
Note—“I am a democrat.” Page 113.
You, a man of some reading, one will say, and yet
a democrat! Who put to death Socrates? The democracy
of Athens. What of that? Democracy has
slain her thousands; but aristocracy her ten thousands.
There is this difference; with democracy,
there is occasional tyranny, and horrid injustice. With
aristocracy, there is ever-during oppression. I grant
democracy is like the atmosphere, serene, or deforming
the face of heaven with a hurricane and a whirlwind.
Still it is salubrious, and necessary to respiration.
It is a democracy that more than any other
form of government, puts all the energies of the human
mind in action. Democracy is the nursery of
genius; the school of eloquence, and the great field
of heroic actions. But what think you of a democratic
administration? I acknowledge that even while
its integrity is not to be suspected; it is liable to errors,
the most dangerous; because they lead instantly
to despotism. The transition is as rapid as lightning.
Suppose in one of these states, a governor, unprincipled
and ambitious; with the two houses, infuriate in
reform , and bearing down existing establishments, the
third branch, the judiciary . He will fall in with them.
In a short time the greater numbers of the lower
house, will intimidate and bear down the upper; or
they will unite, and become in fact one band of conspirators.
He will fall in with this, until with the very
strength with which it has armed him, he thinks proper
to dismiss them, like Cromwell, or Bonaparte, and
not even thank them for their services; or the two
[Page 213]
houses may prevail against the governor, and the tyrant
may spring from themselves . Arming himself with their
own powers, he may extinguish them, and become
sole in a single hour. But the United States have
guaranteed a republican form of government.
Is it desirable that it should come to a struggle,
and that such a Hercules should be called upon for
help?
Happy the juncture, (popular phrenzy prevailing,
and the mad demon of innovation, instead of the angel
of reform taking the ascendency,) when shall be found
at the helm, AN UPRIGHT, AND WISE MAN,
WITH FLEXIBILITY, OR FIRMNESS, ACCORDING
TO THE EXIGENCY OF THE
CASE, YIELDING TO THE GALE, OR OPPOSING
THE BILLOWS WITH CONSUMMATE
SEAMANSHIP; WHO STEERS THE
VESSEL REGARDLESS OF THE CLAMOURS,
OR FALSE FEARS OF UNSKILFUL MARINERS,
AND HAS NO VIEW IN BEARING
OUT TO SEA, OR RUNNING INTO PORT;
BUT TO SAVE THE CARGO ENTRUSTED
TO HIM BY THE OWNERS. The name of such
a man will not be always inscribed on pillars of marble,
nor perhaps engraved in the memory of men;
for his exertions may be misunderstood, or misrepresented.
But the silence of co-temporaries, or oblivion
in time to come, cannot deprive him of his consciousness
of virtuous intentions, and this will carry with it, a very
great reward .
But the step of usurpation in a democracy may be
gradual, as well as rapid. It is not all at once that
the barriers of equal liberty may be borne down. Much
less is it, design, and actual conspiracy that may
accomplish this. The actors may look no farther
than the measure immediately before them, and may
not be able to see the consequences. As at the present
time in the attempt upon that noblest of
[Page 214]
possessions, the Common Law; which is at the foundation
of all our liberty, and the best security for life, reputation
and property; a law which is incompatible with
tyranny; and which maintains, at this moment, a
struggle against it in the islands of Great-Britain.
It was the spirit of this law, extorted magna charta;
the law of habeas corpus, the bill of rights; brought
about the revolution of 1788, and that of the United
States. It is this law, of human origin, but of celestial
vigour, that can alone preserve in health, the constitutions
which it has framed; what then shall we
think of those who defame it without understanding
it, and inveigh against it, enjoying its beneficence?
They are like children who spurn the parent; or respiring
men who repel the air in which they breathe.
[Page ]
Epilegomina.
THE arrival of the mail this day, (January 29th,
1805) at this place, (Carlisle) announces the acquittal
of the impeached judges . I am not one of those who
have found the least fault, or taken exception even in
my mind to the enquiry which the House of Representatives
thought proper to institute in the shape of an
impeachment. For though it sounds harsh to talk of
an impeachment where the heart is sound , and but mere
error of judgment , and what Judge is not fallible? yet
what can be done when a power is exercised which becomes
questionable on the ground of the constitution or
of law? It was under this view of the matter, and
with this impression, that I was willing to submit to
the examination of the question in the case of Passmore;
though my motives were misapprehended, and
instead of obtaining credit, for republican virtue, I was
stigmatized as coming forward to insult the majesty of
the people , in the persons of their representatives. But
I was always far from thinking there might not be
ground of an examination of the abstract principle; for
as to manner or motive with the court, I was sensible
that nothing did exist, and nothing could appear, partial,
tyrannical, or oppressive. Even the hint of Judge
Yeates, with regard to apologies, though I objected
to it, I well knew was the offspring of humanity . But
I thought it unnecessary as it respected the defendant
who was a person capable of deciding for himself, and
had council; but still more as it respected the prosecutor,
(Bayard) who might think it an insult to talk of
apologies, in a case where he had been charged with
perjury, bankruptcy, subterfuge, and fraud . But why
[Page 216]
not proceed by indictment, and bring the matter before
a Jury? Because the interference with a suit depending,
reflecting on the cause of action, or canvasing
the merits of the controversy, is not an indictable
offence. It cannot be brought before a jury. The attachment
of the court is the only remedy which the law
gives . Where it is coupled with a libel on the person,
I am not clear that it could be taken into view by
the court in assessing the fine on a conviction for the
libel. Because the offences are distinct; the one indictable
as a crime; the other reprehensible as a misdemeanour
of a high, but peculiar nature, and for which the
attachment is provided . The whole confusion has arisen,
from the not discriminating the libel on the cause, from
the libel on the person. The constitution provides in
the one case. In the other it is left to the common
law.
I have understood, that in the course of the late
trial, an allusion was made by a manager (Boileau) on the
part of the commonwealth, to a pamphlet which in the
pendency of the prosecution had been published at
Carlisle, my place of residence, containing strictures
on the impeachment of the Judges, and the proceedings
of the legislative branches in my case. The inference
naturally was, and the insinuation plainly made,
that the publication was by me. I had seen the pamphlet,
and cast my eye over some part of it, shortly
after it appeared, and was hurt much at the circumstance,
as I foresaw immediately the application; that
it would be adduced as an example of Judges themselves,
or others for them interfering in a case depending
before a Judicial Tribunal. All I can do is to aver
that it was without my privity or approbation: I had
no knowledge of the writing, nor do I know but by report,
who was the author. I have never called in question
the necessity, or the expediency of the impeachment;
or attributed to a blameable motive the proceedings
in my own case.
[Page 217]
This frankness, I hope will relieve me, from the
suspicion of having written this book, in a spirit of
malevolence towards the representative bodies; or that
I have them in view, in my allusions to the running
down Judges, or judicial establishments. It is the
wild fire out of doors; the inflammatory gass of popular
obloquy that has shewn itself in 4th of July toasts;
collected, and selected , published, and republished , in
country journals especially; all tending to the same
point, the bearing down the Judges on the approaching
trial; thus deprived of a protection which every
other citizen enjoys, the repression of every thing of this
kind during the pendency of the plaint; or matter undetermined
in a court of justice .
Let it be understood, therefore, that it is not a legal
enquiry in the cases of judges as well as every
other citizen, that I arraign; it is the unfairness of
edeavouring to prepossess the public mind against
them, during the investigation, or with a view to instigate
complaints. For should this out of door spirit
prevail, I can easily see where it will terminate. Every
4th of July orator will ressucitate liberty, and call
her shade around to hover over the demolition of the
common law, and the power of courts. Every man
that sets up for office must promise a victim to obtain
suffrages. Every candidate that goes upon the election
ground must edeavour to render himself popular
by talking of knocking down a Judge. Every young
member of assembly will make his first essay, at putting
on his arms, by the atchievement of moving an
impeachment. At home, every man that loses a cause,
or suffers penally for a crime, or misdemeanour, will
complain and bring forward accusations. Judge hunting
will become, to speak figuratively, a fashionable
country sport, and the ambitious to hark in, will pursue
it with as much avidity, as men do the wild boar in the
forests of Westphalia.
If it should be thought by the wise and judicious,
that this is an eligible state of things, let it go on.
[Page 218]
The principle I hope will be universal, and no man will
insits upon a court protecting his cause, when they are
not protected themselves. This principle of the common
law, taken away, or restrained, will make a change
in the administration of justice, and the peace of the
commonwealth; but if it should be thought adviseable
by the law-making power, to tolerate or sanction it,
who can hinder? It must take place, “and let all the
people say amen.”
It is easy to see the result of all this. Who will
be a judge under such circumstances? No one that
is fit for it. I do not flatter myself so much as to suppose
that a change of men on the bench to which I
belong, can materially affect the administration of justice;
but it is the change of situation? that prostration
of spirit; that abatement of mind, which I deprecate,
and which must put the office far below the acceptance
of any person qualified.
I have no idea as is suggested by some, that the noisy
and vociferous have in view to depreciate the office of a
judge, in order to bring it to a level with themselves, and
that they may occupy it. For they do not look even so far
before them. They have nothing more in view, than
to put down what is just before them, without thinking
what is to come after; and others have not even that
in view; but by an instinctive impulse, call out with
those that are around them.
These are the errors of democracy, and it is at such
a time as this, that it becomes all real democrats to
speak out, and endeavour to correct the public mind.
This is not effected under a government of laws, by
imposing silence on the individual; or checking the
exercise of private judgment; for liberty like nature,
permits every animal to exert its powers, and enjoy its
own voice. It is by respectful treatment, and the reasoning
of truth, that the uninformed are instructed,
and the misled set right. Democracy is a wild but
generous animal. It is never destroyed but by its own
strength.
[Page 219]
It is a great pity that the public prints are not always
in the hands of men whose information is equal to
their zeal for the republic. But it cannot be, in a
young country especially, where learning is yet but in
its infancy; and the helps that we get from abroad ,
though able, yet are fresh hands, and do not always
understand the work. They over do it. They have
got a new heaven, and a new earth here, and they
think there ought to be new every thing; or, in fact,
they will let nothing stand that has not been put up by
themselves. Well-meaning men; but like a spring
flood, they bring more water than serves the mills.
I have thought it due from intelligent and well educated
men, naturalized among us, and who have influence,
or are supposed to have influence over the mad-caps
of their countrymen, to give them lessons of
good sense, and tell them when they are upon a wrong
scent.
But they find the same difficulty that we do with
those that have been born in the country, but have not
had the best opportunities of information, or whose activity
and zeal of mind carries them beyond the bounds
of moderation. It is a subject of regret, as it brings reproach
upon the liberality of those who are for extending
the rights of citizenship to all from beyond the water
as soon as they arrive. It occasions a protraction of
the rights of citizenship under our naturalization laws.
With what good will would every man felicitate the arrival
of active spirits from the trans-atlantic countries to
these shores, were it not for the wild fire which they
bring among us; and which added to the fury of our
own hot spurs, carry us to an extreme. For we have
Harry Piercys among ourselves, enough in all conscience,
in this battle. Our democracy at the present time
in Pennsylvania, is going the way of all democracies, to
extremes. It is the subject of exultation to its opponents;
I cannot blame them. They have had their
mortifications, and it is natural to rejoice, at what they
must perceive is coming to pass, the humiliation of
[Page 220]
their adversaries. For what is a greater humiliation
to any individual, or body of people, than to see a
cause of shame in their own folly and extravagance;
or perhaps, injustice.
Before the election of the present Governor, from
the growing settlement of the state, the organization
of the courts had been found inadequate to the administration
of justice, which ought to be rendered
speedy, and brought as much as possible home to
every man's door. The knowledge which the Governor,
in the capacity of Chief Justice, could not but
have of the geography, as well as population, of the
state, put it in his power to have contributed to arrangements
of this nature; and his intimate knowledge of
the law qualified him abundantly to adapt changes to
the administration of it. Much was expected from
this; and though it appears to have been pressed in
strong terms every session, by the Governor; yet
nothing on a great scale has been done. The constituents,
in the mean time complain of the delay of law;
but seek for the cause of this, as the Indians do diseases,
in an evil spirit, that of the lawyers, or the law
itself. They wish the representatives to pow-wow, and
drive this devil out by some means, so that every man
may get his own, and cost him nothing. The representative
is willing to do his best; but no two can
agree upon the same means; and neither of these two
is willing to trust a third because he has also his opinion.
It is unfortunate, and will lose to the democratic
administration the opportunity, and the credit of establishing
a system that would put to silence the calumny
of those who say, that we are friends to neither law,
nor order.
The opposition to the election of Governor M'Kean,
was not to himself personally, but on account of the
political principles of a great portion of those by whom
he was taken up. These, on account of their attachment
to the French revolution, in the early stages of
it and also to the struggle of the Patriots of Ireland,
[Page 221]
were associated in epithet, and called Jacobins,
and United Irishmen. It was apprehended that these
would be disposed to run to extremes, as the revolutionists
in France had done; and that a Governor
elected by these, could not but go with them in all
their excesses and projects in administering the government.
Better things were expected by me of these
people themselves; for I had been an enthusiast in
the revolutionary cause of France; and strongly attached
to the cause of the Patriots in Ireland, and I
could not find in myself any thing of that spirit which
was deprecated as likely to take possession of this
state, on these people geting possession of the government.
I threw the small weight I had, into the scale
with them, and having succeeded, I have been anxious,
that unfavourable predictions might not be fulfilled.
The vanity of a man will sometimes assist his virtue.
I had considered myself a sort of leader on a small
scale, in a particular district; at least it would seem
to me, that I was so considered by others, if I may
infer it from the attacks upon me, from the opposite
quarter; and I felt a concern for the honour of the
people with whom I considered myself as having contended.
So much so, that it entered greatly into my
mind when I came forward, and offered myself to be impeached
with the other Judges . And now I feel it as
a matter that interests myself; it has become my own
ambition, what ought to be theirs, to prove that the
democratic part of the community are not incapable of
establishing, and preserving order, as well as effecting
a revolution .
I must acknowledge that I have not been able to
prove to my own satisfaction, that this has appeared
in every proceeding of the legislative body; I do not
speak so much of the bills which the Governor has
negatived, as of those which, but for the opposition
expected from him, would have been brought forward.
The governor's negative, it will be observed, renders
two thirds of each house necessary to pass a law, and
[Page 222]
this is a check to the bringing forward, such as give
reason to have it supposed, that the governor will not
sanction, and which two thirds cannot be obtained to
pass.
But it is to the constituent that my ideas are always
remounting; the people at home, amongst
whom disorganizing principles, as they are called, are
entertained, or about to be propagated. It is the object
of this book to reach them; and I have written
it in a playful way, to shew that I am in good humour,
and “hoping it will find them in the same
condition.”
There is an ultimate point of depression , as well as
exaltation , to use the language of Hume, from whence
things begin to return in a contrary direction. There
is reason to hope that this destructive gass, which for
some years, has infected our atmosphere, with more
pernicious consequences to the body politic, than a
yellow fever to a city, will begin to dissipate. But
however guardedly I may express myself, I know the
consequence of the freedom with which I write, that
it may draw upon me invective, and perhaps abuse,
not from men of high standing and authority; for I
have a confidence in great minds , and they are incapable
of even disapproving the freedom of open and manly
stricture; but from subordinates who may think
that the gods are pleased with burnt-offerings; and
for this reason may be disposed to scorch, and immolate,
to have the pretence of rendering service . And independent
of this, there is an enjoyment which is of
itself pleasing, the abusing such as differ in opinion,
whatever moderation they may use. The intollerance ,
in this respect, is always in proportion to the uneducated,
and uncivilized state of mind of the possessor.
For the savage who lifts his tomhack, or scalps the
infant, or little child that beseeches him to spare it,
is no worse a creature than Howard the philanthropist;
but the infernal fury of false notions of what is praise-worthy
or virtuous, makes the difference. The plea
[Page 223]
sure of announcing to his town when he returns, the
bloody success, by a scalp halloo, is the sole motive,
which the warrior has, in his trespass upon humanity.
Self-love is the great spring of human actions; and
upon how small a matter in the point of our existence,
does it depend whether a man shall place his happiness
in beneficence or murder; in truth, or defamation?
What but the accident of preceptorship, and just
sentiments of propriety? It is thus that a man is an
Hortensius, or a Curtius, [2] who might have been a
Cobbet, or what is worse, if possible, even a Callender
itself. I put this thing in the neuter gender, as an
entity whose species, much less his sex, did not deserve
to be determined; something beneath the human,
but above the beast; an Abhorson or Hippo-griff;
it was difficult to ascertain.
Who could help dissenting from the federal administration
in many particulars? Yet, at the same time,
entertaining more than respect, even affection, for the
patriots who meant well, but from which we dissented.
But, when a man feels the influenza of other errors in
other times, coming home to himself, perhaps more
immediately, if he happens to be a lawyer or a judge,
it is a stronger temptation to him at least, to
dissent. But it is with great reluctance, that
a mind of sensibility can draw off from the body of
those whose political sentiments he has approved, and
in the main still does approve. It is with great regret
that he can give up journalists and withdraw from
them, whose prints have merit. But if those journalists
attack the foundations of our jurisprudence, and
thus sap the very essence of our liberty, what can be
done but bear testimony against it? The common
law has been examined, principle by principle, and
tested by experience for more than 10 centuries
within the perfect knowledge of our books and records;
and has been caressed, and valued the more
it has been known. The only other regular system in
the world, that of the Roman republic, or what is
[Page 224]
called the Roman civil law, begun and formed chiefly
under the republic through a period of near 800 years,
has been postponed to it, in the opinion of sages who
understood them both; and yet the public mind is to
be poisoned by the declarations of sciolists who know
nothing of the matter. There are things suited to the
lowest vulgar; but in democracy where suffrage is
universal, it is of moment that even the lowest of the
community, in point of information, or the opportunity
of it, should not be lead astray. Who can approve
the use that is made of the medium of the press in this
way? At the same time it is of such moment to have
spirited journalists, that I am unwilling to repress
the efforts of such, severely reprehending even what
I conceive to be error.
What is it produces a third party, but the excesses
of that to which the individuals belonged? What gave
the democratic party the late preponderance, but great
bodies of moderate men breaking off from what was
called the federal interest, and throwing their weight
into the other scale? What will bring the democratic
scale once more to the beam, but the same weight
leaving it? It is not the mere weight of vote, that I
have in view. It is the weight of reason, which they
have with them, and which they will be able to assign.
Revolutions, in the public opinion, are slow in forming;
but in shewing themselves, they are like a shot.
It carried with it no recommendation, to hear of hostility
to courts of law, and professional men at the bar.
But to hear of an attack upon the most valuable part
of our jurisprudence itself, the common law, must be
considered as the ne plus ultra of barbarism. For
though a bill was actually brought into our legislature
some years ago, and now lies upon the files, to abolish
the common law; yet it received no countenance,
and it is but of late that the doctrine has been
revived; and this law is stigmatized as a nuisance
which ought to be abolished. The error has arisen
from the idea broached by some of the judges of the
[Page 225]
federal courts, that the constitution carried with it a
common law jurisdiction, in all laws whatsoever . That
was attracting at once the cognizance of all subjects
of legal controversy, and absorbing the whole judicial
authority of the Union; not professedly and in the
first instance, but usurping a great deal in the mean
time, and working naturally towards an usurpation of
the whole. But, it was not from an exception to the
common law that an opposition was made; but to the
power of the federal courts exercising common law
jurisdiction. I can resolve it into no other cause, that
journalists, and others of great acuteness of mind
have been led to express, and perhaps entertain, a
prejudice against the common law .
FINIS .
Footnotes
[2] Two Writers on the Sedition Law .
[Page ]
ERRATA.
Page 11, for deduction, read reduction.
Page 15, for fos, read fons.
Page 16, for it must, read must.
Page 29, for could, read would.
Page 35, for slipeth, read stepeth.
Page 50, for comera, read camera.
Page 91, for line, read time.
Page 109, for Macedonians, read Lacedemonians.
Page 143, for moon, read noon.
Page 145, for tending, read serving.
Page 154, for aminos, read animos.
Page 168, for runigmede, read runningmede.
Page 172, for constitutes, read constitue.
Page 185, for jealousy, read pleasantry.
Page 188, for infantrumque, read infantumque.
Page 142, for
— The grey dawn
And the pleiades.—
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
$$$
