Modern Chivalry: Containing the Adventures of a Captain and Teague O'Regan, His Servant, Volume 1 (1804)
Author: Brackenridge, Hugh Henry.
Publication info: Modern Chivalry: Containing the Adventures of a Captain, & Part II . iv-210. Carlisle: Published for the author, 1804.

Front matter Covers, Edges and Spine
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
Preliminaries
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
MODERN CHIVALRY.
[Page ]
[Page ]
Title Page
MODERN CHIVALRY:
CONTAINING THE
ADVENTURES OF A CAPTAIN,
AND
TEAGUE O'REGAN,
HIS SERVANT.
BY H. H. BRACKENRIDGE.
QUID VETAT RIDENTEM DICERE VERUM..........HOR.
VOLUME I .
1804.
[Page ]
COPY-RIGHT SECURED.
[Page ]
INTRODUCTION.
IT has been a question for some time past,
what would be the best means to fix the English language.
Some have thought of Dictionaries; others
of Institutes, for that purpose. Swift, I think it was,
who proposed, in his letters to the Earl of Oxford,
the forming an academy of learned men, in order
by their observations and rules, to settle the true
spelling, accentuation, and pronunciation, as well as
the proper words, and the purest, most simple, and
perfect phraseology of language. It has always appeared
to me, that if some great master of stile
should arise, and without regarding sentiment, or
subject, give an example of good language in his
composition, which might serve as a model to future
speakers and writers, it would do more to fix
the orthography, choice of word, idiom of phrase,
and structure of sentence, than all the Dictionaries
and Institutes that have been ever made. For certainly,
it is much more conducive to this end, to
place before the eyes what is good writing, than to
suggest it to the ear, which may forget in a short
time all that has been said.
It is for this reason, that I have undertaken this
work; and that it may attain the end the more perfectly,
I shall consider language only, not in the
least regarding the matter of the work; but, as
[Page iv]
musicians, when they are about to give the most excellent
melody, pay no attention to the words that are
set to music; but take the most unmeaning phrases,
such as sol, fa, la; so here, culling out the choicest
flowers of diction, I shall pay no regard to the idea;
for it is not in the power of human ingenuity to attain
two things perfectly at once. Thus we see,
that they mistake greatly, who think to have a clock
that can at once tell the hour of the day, the age of
the moon, and the day of the week, month, or year;
because the complexness of the machine hinders
that perfection which the simplicity of the works
and movements can alone give. For it is not in nature
to have all things in one. If you are about to
chuse a wife, and expect beauty, you must give up
family and fortune; or if you attain these, you must
at least want good temper, health, or some other advantage:
so to expect good language and good
sense, at the same time, is absurd, and not in the
compass of common nature to produce. Attempting
only one thing, therefore, we may entertain the
idea of hitting the point of perfection. It has been
owing to an inattention to this principle, that so many
fail in their attempts at good writing. A Jack of
all Trades, is proverbial of a bungler; and we
scarcely ever find any one who excels in two parts
of the same art; much less in two arts at the same
time. The smooth poet wants strength; and the
orator of a good voice, is destitute of logical reason
and argument. How many have I heard speak,
who, were they to attempt voice only, might be respectable;
but undertaking at the same time, to carry
sense along with them, they utterly fail, and become
contemptible. One thing at once is the best
maxim that ever came into the mind of man. This
might be illustrated by a thousand examples; but I
[Page v]
shall not trouble myself with any; as it is not so
much my object to convince others as to shew the
motives by which I myself am governed. Indeed
I could give authority which is superior to all examples;
viz . that of the poet Horace; who, speaking
on this very subject of excellence in writing, says,
Quidvis , that is, whatever you compose, let it be
simplex duntaxit & unum: that is, simple, and one
thing only.
It will be needless for me to say any thing about
the critics; for as this work is intended as a model
or rule of good writing, it cannot be the subject of
criticism. It is true, Homer has been criticised by
a Zoilus and an Aristotle; but the one contented
himself with pointing out defects; the other, beauties.
But Zoilus has been censured, Aristotle praised;
because in a model there can be no defect;
error consisting in a deviation from the truth, and
faults, in an aberration from the original of beauty;
so that where there are no faults there can be no
food for criticism, taken in the unfavourable sense
of finding fault with the productions of an author.
I have no objections, therefore, to any praise that
may be given to this work; but to censure or blame
must appear absurd; because it cannot be doubted
but that it will perfectly answer the end proposed.
Being a book without thought, or the smallest degree
of sense, it will be useful to young minds, not
fatiguing their understandings, and easily introducing
a love of reading and study. Acquiring language
at first by this means, they will afterwards
gain knowledge. It will be useful, especially to
young men of light minds, intended for the bar or
pulpit. By heaping too much upon them, stile and
matter at once, you surfeit the stomach, and turn
away the appetite from literary entertainment, to
[Page vi]
horse-racing and cock-fighting. I shall consider
myself, therefore, as having performed an acceptable
service to all weak and visionary people, if I
can give them something to read without the trouble
of thinking. But these are collateral advantages of
my work, the great object of which is, as I have
said before, to give a model of perfect stile in writing.
If hereafter any author of super-eminent abilities,
should chuse to give this stile a body, and
make it the covering to some work of sense, as you
would wrap fine silk round a beautiful form, so that
there may be, not only vestment, but life in the object,
I have no objections; but shall be rather satisfied
with having it put to so good a use.
Main text
[Page 001]
BOOK I
CHAPTER I. THE Captain was a man of about forty-five
years of age, of good natural sense, and considerable
reading; but in some things whimsical, owing
perhaps to his greater knowledge of books than of
the world; but, in some degree, also, to his having
never married, being what they call an old batchelor,
a characteristic of which is, usually, singularity
and whim. He had the advantage of having had in
early life, an academic education; but having never
applied himself to any of the learned professions, he
had lived the greater part of his life on a small farm,
which he cultivated with servants or hired hands, as
he could conveniently supply himself with either.
The servant that he had at this time, was an Irishman,
whose name was Teague Oregan. I shall say
nothing of the character of this man, because the
very name imports what he was.
A strange idea came into the head of the Captain
about this time; for, by the bye, I had forgot to mention
that having been chosen captain of a company
of militia in the neighbourhood, he had gone by the
name of Captain ever since; for the rule is, once a
captain, and always a captain; but, as I was observing,
the idea had come into his head, to saddle an
[Page 002]
old horse that he had, and ride about the world a
little, with his man Teague at his heels, to see how
things were going on here and there, and to observe
human nature. For it is a mistake to suppose, that
a man cannot learn man by reading him in a corner,
as well as on the widest space of transaction. At
any rate, it may yield amusement.
It was about a score of miles from his own house,
that he fell in with what we call Races. The jockeys
seeing him advance, with Teague by his side, whom
they took for his groom, conceived him to be some
person who had brought his horse to enter for the
purse. Coming up and accosting him, said they,
You seem to be for the races, Sir; and have a horse
to enter. Not at all, said the Captain; this is but a
common palfrey, and by no means remarkable for
speed or bottom; he is a common plough horse
which I have used on my farm for several years, and
can scarce go beyond a trot; much less match himself
with your blooded horses that are going to take
the field on this occasion.
The jockeys were of opinion, from the speech,
that the horse was what they call a bite , and that
under the appearance of leanness and stiffness, there
was concealed some hidden quality of swiftness uncommon.
For they had heard of instances, where
the most knowing had been taken in by mean looking
horses; so that having laid two, or more, to one,
they were nevertheless bit by the bet; and the mean
looking nags, proved to be horses of a more than
common speed and bottom. So that there is no
trusting appearances. Such was the reasoning of
the jockeys. For they could have no idea, that a
man could come there in so singular a manner, with
a groom at his foot, unless he had some great object
of making money by the adventure. Under this
[Page 003]
idea, they began to interrogate him with respect to
the blood and pedigree of his horse: whether he was
of the Dove, or the Bay mare that took the purse;
and was imported by such a one at such a time? whether
his sire was Tamerlane or Bajazet?
The Captain was irritated at the questions, and
could not avoid answering.....Gentlemen, said he, it
is a strange thing that you should suppose that it is
of any consequence what may be the pedigree of a
horse. For even in men it is of no avail. Do we
not find that sages have had blockheads for their
sons; and that blockheads have had sages? It is remarkable,
that as estates have seldom lasted three
generations, so understanding and ability have seldom
been transmitted to the second. There never
was a greater man, take him as an orator and philosopher,
than Cicero: and never was there a person
who had greater opportunities than his son Marcus;
and yet he proved of no account or reputation.....
This is an old instance, but there are a thousand
others. Chesterfield and his son are mentioned. It
is true, Philip and Alexander may be said to be exceptions:
Philip of the strongest possible mind; capable
of almost every thing we can conceive; the
deepest policy and the most determined valour; his
son Alexander not deficient in the first, and before
him in the last; if it is possible to be before a man than
whom you can suppose nothing greater. It is possible,
in modern times, that Tippo Saib may be equal to his
father Hyder Ali. Some talk of the two Pitts. I have
no idea that the son is, in any respect, equal to old Sir
William. The one is a laboured artificial minister: the
other spoke with the thunder, and acted with lightning
of the gods. I will venture to say, that when
the present John Adams, and Lee, and Jefferson, and
Jay, and Henry, and other great men, who appear
[Page 004]
upon the stage at this time, have gone to sleep with
their fathers, it is an hundred to one if there is any
of their descendants who can fill their places. Was
I to lay a bet for a great man, I would sooner pick
up the brat of a tinker, than go into the great houses
to chuse a piece of stuff for a man of genius. Even
with respect to personal appearance, which is more
in the power of natural production, we do not see
that beauty always produces beauty; but on the contrary,
the homliest persons have oftentimes the best
favoured offspring; so that there is no rule or reason
in these things. With respect to this horse, therefore,
it can be of no moment whether he is blooded or
studed, or what he is. He is a good old horse, used
to the plough, and carries my weight very well; and
I have never yet made enquiry with respect to his
ancestor, or affronted him so much as to cast up to
him the defect of parentage. I bought him some years
ago from Neil Thomas, who had him from a colt.
As far as I can understand, he was of a brown mare
that John M`Neis had; but of what horse I know no
more than the horse himself. His gaits are good
enough, as to riding a short journey of seven or eight
miles; but he is rather a pacer than a trotter; and
though his bottom may be good enough in carrying
a bag to the mill, or going in the plough, or the sled,
or the harrow, &c. yet his wind is not so good, nor
his speed, as to be fit for the heats.
The jockeys thought the man a fool, and gave
themselves no more trouble about him.
The horses were now entered, and about to start
for the purse. There was Black and All-Black, and
Snip, John Duncan's Barbary Slim, and several
others. The riders had been weighed, and when
mounted, the word was given. It is needless to
describe a race; every body knows the circumstances
[Page 005]
of it. It is sufficient to say, that from the bets that
were laid, there was much anxiety, and some passion
in the minds of those concerned: So, that as
two of the horses, Black and All-Black, and Slim,
came out near together; there was dispute and confusion.
It came to kicking and cuffing in some
places. The Captain was a good deal hurt with such
indecency amongst gentlemen, and advancing, addressed
them in the following manner: Gentlemen,
this is an unequal and unfair proceeding. It is unbecoming
modern manners, or even the ancient.
For at the Olympic games of Greece, where were
celebrated horse and chariot races there was no such
hurry scurry as this; and in times of chivalry itself,
where men ate drank, and slept on horseback though
there was a great deal of pell-melling, yet no such
disorderly work as this. If men had a difference,
they couched their lances, and ran full tilt at one
another; but no such indecent expressions, as villain
scoundrel liar, ever came out of their mouths.
There was the most perfect courtesy in those days
of heroism and honour; and this your horse-racing,
which is a germ of the amusement of those times,
ought to be conducted on the same principles of
decorum and good breeding.
As he was speaking, he was jostled by some one
in the croud, and thrown from his horse; and had
it not been for Teague, who was at hand, and helped
him on again he would have suffered damage.
As it was, he received a contusion in his head of
which he complained much; and having left the race-ground,
and coming to a small cottage, he stopped a
little, to alight and dress the wound. An old woman
who was there, thought they ought to take a little of
his water, and see how it was with him; but the
Captain having no faith in telling disorders by the
[Page 006]
urine, thought proper to send for a surgeon who was
hard by, to examine the bruise, and apply bandages.
The surgeon attended, and examining the part, pronounced
it a contusion of the cerebrum. But as
there appeared but little laceration, and no fracture,
simple or compound, the pia mater could not be injured;
nor even could there be more than a slight
impression on the dura mater. So that trepaning
did not at all appear necessary. A most fortunate
circumstance; for a wound in the head, is of all
places the most dangerous; because there can be
no amputation to save life. There being but one
head to a man, and that being the residence of
the five senses, it is impossible to live without it.....
Nevertheless, as the present case was highly dangerous,
as it might lead to a subsultus tendinum, or
lock-jaw, it was necessary to apply cataplasms, in
order to reduce inflammation, and bring about a sanative
disposition of the parts. Perhaps it might
not be amiss, to take an anodyne as a refrigerant....
Many patients had been lost by the ignorance of
empirics prescribing bracers; whereas, in the first
stage of a contusion relaxing and antifebrile medicines
are proper. A little phlebotomy was no doubt
necessary, to prevent the bursting of the blood vessels.
The Captain hearing so many hard words, and
bad accounts of this case, was much alarmed. Nevertheless
he did not think it could be absolutely so
dangerous. For it seemed to him that he was not
sick at heart, or under any mortal pain. The surgeon
observed, that in this case he could not himself
be a judge. For the very part was affected by
which he was to judge, viz. the head; that it was no
uncommon thing for men in the extremest cases to
imagine themselves out of danger; whereas in
[Page 007]
reality, they were in the greatest possible; that notwithstanding
the symptoms were mild, yet from the
contusion, a mortification might ensue. Hypocrates,
who might be stiled an elementary physician,
and has a treatise on this very subject, is of opinion,
that the most dangerous symptom is a topical insensibility;
but among the moderns, Sydenham considers
it in another point of view, and thinks that
where there is no pain, there is as great reason to
suppose that there is no hurt, as that there is a mortal
one. Be this as it may, antiseptic medicines
might be very proper.
The Captain hearing so much jargon, and conscious
to himself that he was by no means in so
bad a state as this son of Esculapius would represent,
broke out into some passion. It is, said he, the
craft of your profession to make the case worse than
it is, in order to increase the perquisites. But if
there is any faith in you, make the same demand,
and let me know your real judgment. The surgeon
was irritated with his distrust, and took it into his
head to fix some apprehension in the mind of his
patient, if possible, that his case was not without
danger. Looking stedfastly at him for some time,
and feeling his pulse, there is, said he, an evident
delirium approaching. This argues an affection of
the brain, but it will be necessary, after some soporiferous
draughts, to put the patient to sleep. Said
the Captain, If you will give me about a pint of
whiskey and water, I will try to go to sleep myself.
A deleterious mixture, in this case said the surgeon,
cannot be proper; especially a distillation of that
quality. The Captain would hear no more; but requesting
the man of the cabin, to let him have the
spirits proposed, drank a pint or two of grog, and
having bound up his head with a handkerchief, went
to bed.
[Page 008]
CHAPTER II.
CONTAINING SOME GENERAL REFLECTIONS.
THE first reflection that arises, is, the good
sense of the Captain; who was unwilling to impose
his horse for a racer; not being qualified for the
course. Because, as an old lean beast, attempting
a trot, he was respectable enough; but going out
of his nature, and affecting speed, he would have
been contemptible. The great secret of preserving
respect, is the cultivating and shewing to the best
advantage the powers that we possess, and the not
going beyond them. Every thing in its element is
good, and in their proper sphere all natures and capacities
are excellent. This thought might be turned
into a thousand different shapes, and cloathed
with various expressions; but after all, it comes to
the old proverb at last, Ne sutor ultra crepidam , Let
the cobler stick to his last; a sentiment we are
about more to illustrate in the sequel to this work.
The second reflection that arises, is, the simplicity
of the Captain, who was so unacquainted with
the world, as to imagine that jockeys and men of
the turf could be managed by reason and good sense;
whereas there are no people who are by education
[Page 009]
of a less philosophic turn of mind. The company
of horses is by no means favourable to good taste
and genius. The rubbing and currying them, but
little enlarges the faculties, or improves the mind;
and even riding, by which a man is carried swiftly
through the air, though it contributes to health, yet
stores the mind with few or no ideas; and as men
naturally consimilate with their company, so it is
observable that your jockeys are a class of people
not far removed from the sagacity of a good horse.
Hence most probably the fable of the centaur,
among the ancients; by which they held out the
moral of the jockey and the horse being one beast.
A third reflection is, that which he exprest, viz.
the professional art of the surgeon to make the most
of the case, and the technical terms used by him,
I have to declare, that it is with no attempt at wit,
that the terms are set down, or the art of the surgeon
hinted at; because it is so common a place
thing to ridicule the peculiarities of a profession, or
its phraseologies, that it favours of mean parts to
indulge it. For a man of real genius will never
walk in the beaten path, because his object is what
is new and uncommon. This surgoen does not appear
to have been a man of very great ability; but
the Captain was certainly wrong in declining his
prescriptions; for the maxim is, unicuique, in arte
sua, perito, credendum est; every one is to be trusted
in his profession.
[Page 010]
CHAPTER III.
THE Captain rising early next morning, and
setting out on his way, had now arrived at a place
where a number of people were convened, for the
purpose of electing persons to represent them in the
legislature of the state. There was a weaver who
was a candidate for this appointment, and seemed
to have a good deal of interest among the people.
But another, who was a man of education, was his
competitor. Relying on some talent of speaking
which he thought he possessed, he addressed the
multitude.
Fellow-citizens, said he, I pretend not to any
great abilities; but am conscious to myself that I
have the best good will to serve you. But it is very
astonishing to me, that this weaver should conceive
himself qualified for the trust For though my acquirements
are not great, yet his are still less. The
mechanical business which he pursues, must necessarily
take up so much of his time, that he cannot
apply himself to political studies. I should therefore
think it would be more answerable to your
dignity, and conducive to your interest, to be represented
by a man at least of some letters, than by an
illiterate handicraftsman like this. It will be more
honourable for himself, to remain at his loom and
[Page 011]
knot threads, than to come forward in a legislative
capacity: because, in the one case, he is in the
sphere suited to his education; in the other, he is
like a fish out of water, and must struggle for
breath in a new element.
Is it possible he can understand the affairs of government,
whose mind has been concentered to the
small object of weaving webs; to the price by the
yard, the grist of the thread, and such like matters
as concern the manufacturer of cloths? The feet of
him who weaves, are more occupied than the head,
or at least as much; and the whole must be, at
least, but in half, accustomed to exercise his mental
powers. For these reasons, all other things set
aside, the chance is in my favour, with respect to
information. However, you will decide, and give
your suffrages to him or to me, as you shall judge
expedient.
The Captain hearing these observations, and looking
at the weaver, could not help advancing, and undertaking
to subjoin something in support of what
had been just said. Said he, I have no prejudice
against a weaver more than another man. Nor do
I know any harm in the trade; save that from the
sedentary life in a damp place, there is usually a
paleness of the countenance: but this is a physical
not a moral evil. Such usually occupy subterranean
apartments; not for the purpose, like Demosthenes,
of shaving their heads, and writing over
eight times the history of Thucydides, and perfecting
a stile of oratory; but rather to keep the thread
moist; or because this is considered but as an
inglorious sort of trade, and is frequently thrust
away into cellars, and damp out-houses, which are
not occupied for a better use.
[Page 012]
But to rise from the cellar to the senate house,
would be an unnatural hoist. To come from counting
threads, and adjusting them to the splits of a
reed, to regulate the finances of a government,
would be preposterous; there being no congruity
in the case. There is no analogy between
knotting threads and framing laws. It would be
a reversion of the order of things. Not that a
manufacturer of linen or woolen, or other stuff, is
an inferior character, but a different one, from that
which ought to be employed in affairs of state. It
is unnecessary to enlarge on this subject; for you
must all be convinced of the truth and propriety of
what I say. But if you will give me leave to take
the manufacturer aside a little, I think I can explain
to him my ideas on the subject; and very
probably prevail with him to withdraw his pretensions.
The people seeming to acquiesce, and
beckoning to the weaver, they withdrew aside, and
the Captain addressed him in the following words:
Mr. Traddle, said he, for that was the name of
the manufacturer, I have not the smallest idea of
wounding your sensibility; but it would seem to
me, it would be more your interest to pursue your
occupation, than to launch out into that of which you
have no knowledge. When you go to the senate
house, the application to you will not be to warp a
web; but to make laws for the commonwealth.
Now, suppose that the making these laws, requires
a knowledge of commerce, or of the interests of
agriculture, or those principles upon which the different
manufactures depend, what service could you
render. It is possible you might think justly
enough; but could you speak? You are not in the
habit of public speaking. You are not furnished
with those common place ideas, with which even
[Page 013]
very ignorant men can pass for knowing something.
There is nothing makes a man so ridiculous as to
attempt what is above his sphere. You are no tumbler
for instance; yet should you give out that you
could vault upon a man's back; or turn head over
heels like the wheels of a cart; the stiffness of your
joints would encumber you; and you would fall
upon your backside to the ground. Such a squash
as that would do you damage. The getting up to
ride on the state is an unsafe thing to those who
are not accustomed to such horsemanship. It is a
disagreeable thing for a man to be laughed at, and
there is no way of keeping ones self from it but by
avoiding all affectation.
While they were thus discoursing, a bustle had
taken place among the croud. Teague hearing so
much about elections, and serving the government,
took it into his head, that he could be a legislator
himself. The thing was not displeasing to the people,
who seemed to favour his pretensions; owing,
in some degree, to there being several of his countrymen
among the croud; but more especially to
the fluctuation of the popular mind, and a disposition
to what is new and ignoble. For though the
weaver was not the most elevated object of choice,
yet he was still preferable to this tatter-demalion,
who was but a menial servant, and had so much of
what is called the brogue on his tongue, as to fall
far short of an elegant speaker.
The Captain coming up, and finding what was on
the carpet, was greatly chagrined at not having been
able to give the multitude a better idea of the importance
of a legislative trust; alarmed also, from
an apprehension of the loss of his servant. Under
these impressions he resumed his address to the
multitude. Said he, this is making the matter still
[Page 014]
worse, gentlemen: this servant of mine is but a
bog-trotter, who can scarcely speak the dialect in
which your laws ought to be written; but certainly
has never read a single treatise on any political
subject; for the truth is, he cannot read at all. The
young people of the lower class, in Ireland, have
seldom the advantage of a good education; especially
the descendants of the ancient Irish, who have
most of them a great assurance of countenance, but
little information, or literature. This young man,
whose family name is Oregan, has been my servant
for several years; and, except a too great fondness
for women, which now and then brings him into
scrapes, he has demeaned himself in a manner tolerable
enough. But he is totally ignorant of the
great principles of legislation; and more especially,
the particular interests of the government. A free
government is a noble acquisition to a people: and
this freedom consists in an equal right to make
laws, and to have the benefit of the laws when made.
Though doubtless, in such a government, the lowest
citizen may become chief magistrate; yet it is sufficient
to possess the right; not absolutely necessary
to exercise it. Or even if you should think proper,
now and then, to shew your privilege, and exert, in
a signal manner, the democratic prerogative, yet is
it not descending too low to filch away from me a
hireling, which I cannot well spare. You are surely
carrying the matter too far, in thinking to make a
senator of this ostler; to take him away from an
employment to which he has been bred, and put him
to another, to which he has served no apprenticeship:
to set those hands which have been lately employed
in currying my horse, to the draughting bills,
and preparing business for the house.
[Page 015]
The people were tenacious of their choice, and
insisted on giving Teague their suffrages; and by
the frown upon their brows, seemed to indicate
resentment at what had been said; as indirectly
charging them with want of judgment; or calling
in question their privilege to do what they thought
proper. It is a very strange thing, said one of them,
who was a speaker for the rest, that after having
conquered Burgoyne and Cornwallis, and got a government
of our own, we cannot put in it whom we
please. This young man may be your servant, or
another man's servant; but if we chuse to make
him a delegate, what is that to you. He may not
be yet skilled in the matter, but there is a good day
a-coming. We will empower him; and it is better
to trust a plain man like him, than one of your high
flyers, that will make laws to suit their own purposes.
I had much rather, said the Captain, you would
send the weaver, though I thought that improper,
than to invade my household, and thus detract from
me the very person that I have about me to brush
my boots, and clean my spurs. The prolocutor of
the people gave him to understand that his objections
were useless, for the people had determined
on the choice, and Teague they would have, for a
representative.
Finding it answered no end to expostulate with
the multitude, he requested to speak a word with
Teague by himself. Stepping aside, he said to him,
composing his voice, and addressing him in a soft
manner: Teague, you are quite wrong in this matter
they have put into your head. Do you know
what it is to be a member of a deliberative body?
What qualifications are necessary? Do you understand
any thing of geography? If a question should
[Page 016]
be put to make a law to dig a canal in some part of
the state, can you describe the bearing of the mountains,
and the course of the rivers? Or if commerce
is to be pushed to some new quarter, by the force of
regulations, are you competent to decide in such a
case? There will be questions of law, and astronomy
on the carpet. How you must gape and stare
like a fool, when you come to be asked your opinion
on these subjects? Are you acquainted with the
abstract principles of finance; with the funding public
securities; the ways and means of raising the
revenue; providing for the discharge of the public
debts, and all other things which respect the economy
of the government? Even if you had knowledge,
have you a facility of speaking. I would suppose
you would have too much pride to go to the house
just to say, ay, or no. This is not the fault of your
nature, but of your education; having been accustomed
to dig turf in your early years, rather than
instructing yourself in the classics, or common school
books.
When a man becomes a member of a public body,
he is like a racoon, or other beast that climbs up the
fork of a tree; the boys pushing at him with pitchforks,
or throwing stones, or shooting at him with
an arrow, the dogs barking in the mean time. One
will find fault with your not speaking; another with
your speaking, if you speak at all. They will put
you in the newspapers, and ridicule you as a perfect
beast. There is what they call the caricatura; that
is, representing you with a dog's head, or a cat's
claw. As you have a red head, they will very probably
make a fox of you, or a sorrel horse, or a brindled
cow. It is the devil in hell to be exposed to the
squibs and crackers of the gazette wits and publications.
You know no more about these matters
[Page 017]
than a goose; and yet you would undertake rashly,
without advice, to enter on the office; nay, contrary
to advice. For I would not for a thousand guineas,
though I have not the half it to spare, that the breed
of the Oregans should come to this; bringing on
them a worse stain than stealing sheep; to which
they are addicted. You have nothing but your character,
Teague, in a new country to depend upon.
Let it never be said, that you quitted an honest livelihood,
the taking care of my horse, to follow the new
fangled whims of the times, and be a statesman.
Teague was moved chiefly with the last part of
the address, and consented to relinquish his pretensions.
The Captain, glad of this, took him back to the
people, and announced his disposition to decline the
honour which they had intended him.
Teague acknowledged that he had changed his
mind, and was willing to remain in a private station.
The people did not seem well pleased with the
Captain; but as nothing more could be said about
the matter, they turned their attention to the weaver,
and gave him their suffrages.
[Page 018]
CHAPTER IV.
THE Captain leaving this place, proceeded
on his way; and at the distance of a mile or two,
met a man with a bridle in his hand; who had lost
a horse, and had been at a conjurer's to make enquiry,
and recover his property.
It struck the mind of the Captain to go to this
conjuring person, and make a demand of him, why
it was that the multitude were so disposed to elevate
the low to the highest station. He had rode but
about a mile, when the habitation of the conjurer, by
the direction and description of the man who had
lost the horse had given, began to be in view....,
Coming up to the door, and enquiring if that was
not where conjurer Kolt lived, they were answered
yes. Accordingly alighting, and entering the domicile,
all those things took place which usually
happen, or are described in cases of this nature, viz,
there was the conjurer's assistant, who gave the Captain
to understand that master had withdrawn a little,
but would be in shortly.
In the mean time, the assistant endeavoured to
draw from him some account of the occasion of his
journey; which the other readily communicated;
and the conjurer, who was listening through a crack
[Page 019]
in the partition, overheard. Finding it was not a
horse or a cow, or a piece of linen that was lost, but
an abstract question of political philosophy which
was to be put, he came from his lurking place, and
entered, as if not knowing that any person had been
waiting for him.
After mutual salutations, the Captain gave him to
understand the object which he had in view by calling
on him.
Said the conjurer, this lies not at all in my way.
If it had been a dozen of spoons, or a stolen watch,
that you had to look for, I could very readily, by the
assistance of my art, have assisted you in the recovery;
but as to this matter of men's imaginations
and attachments in political affairs, I have no more
understanding than another man.
It is very strange, said the Captain, that you who
can tell by what means a thing is stolen, and the
place where it is deposited, though at a thousand
miles distance, should know so little of what is going
on in the breast of man, as not to be able to develope
his secret thoughts, and the motives of his
actions.
It is not of our business, said the other; but should
we undertake it, I do not see that it would be very
difficult to explain all that puzzles you at present.
There is no need of a conjurer to tell why it is that
the common people are more disposed to trust one
of their own class, than those who may affect to be
superior. Besides, there is a certain pride in man,
which leads him to elevate the low, and pull down
the high. There is a kind of creating power exerted
in making a senator of an unqualified person; which
when the author has done, he exults over the work,
and, like the Creator himself when he made the
world, sees that “it is very good.” Moreover, there
[Page 020]
is in every government a patrician class, against
whom the spirit of the multitude naturally militates:
and hence a perpetual war: the aristocrats endeavouring
to detrude the people, and the people contending
to obtrude themselves. And it is right it
should be so; for by this fermentation, the spirit of
democracy is kept alive.
The Captain, thanking him for his information,
asked him what was to pay; at the same time pulling
out half a crown from a green silk purse which
he had in his breeches pocket. The conjurer gave
him to understand, that as the solution of these difficulties
was not within his province, he took nothing
for it. The Captain expressing his sense of his disinterested
service, bade him adieu.
[Page 021]
CHAPTER. V.
CONTAINING REFLECTIONS.
A DEMOCRACY is beyond all question the
freest government: because under this, every man
is equally protected by the laws, and has equally a
voice in making them. But I do not say an equal
voice; because some men have stronger lungs than
others, and can express more forcibly their opinions
of public affairs. Others, though they may not
speak very loud, yet have a faculty of saying more
in a short time; and even in the case of others, who
speak little or none at all, yet what they do say containing
good sense, comes with greater weight; so
that all things considered, every citizen has not, in
this sense of the word, an equal voice. But the right
being equal, what great harm if it is unequally exercised?
is it necessary that every man should become
a statesman? No more than that every man
should become a poet or a painter. The sciences
are open to all; but let him only who has taste and
genius pursue them. “If any man covets the office
of a bishop,” says St. Paul, “he covets a good
work.” But again, he adds this caution, “Ordain
not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he falls
[Page 022]
into the condemnation of the devil.” It is indeed
making a devil of a man to lift him up to a state to
which he is not suited. A ditcher is a respectable
character, with his over-alls on, and a spade in his
hand; but put the same man to those offices which
require the head whereas he has been accustomed
to impress with his foot, and there appears a contrast
between the individual and the occupation.
There are individuals in society, who prefer honour
to wealth; or cultivate political studies as a
branch of literary pursuits; and offer themselves to
serve public bodies in order to have an opportunity
of discovering their knowledge, and exercising their
judgment. It must be matter of chagrin to these,
and hurtful to the public, to see those who have no
talent this way, and ought to have no taste, preposterously
obtrude themselves upon the government.
It is the same as if a brick-layer should usurp the
office of a taylor and come with his square and perpendicular,
to take the measure of a pair of breeches.
It is proper that those who cultivate oratory,
should go to the house of orators. But for an Ay
and No man to be ambitious of that place, is to sacrifice
his credit to his vanity.
I would not mean to insinuate that legislators are
to be selected from the more wealthy of the citizens,
yet a man's circumstances ought to be such as afford
him leisure for study and reflection. There is
often wealth without taste or talent. I have no idea,
that because a man lives in a great house, and has a
cluster of bricks or stones about his backside, that
he is therefore fit for a legislator. There is so
much pride and arrogance with those who consider
themselves the first in a government, that it deserves
to be checked by the populace, and the evil most
usually commences on this side. Men associate
[Page 023]
with their own persons, the adventitious circumstances
of birth and fortune: So that a fellow blowing
with fat and repletion, conceives himself superior
to the poor lean man, that lodges in an inferior
mansion. But as in all cases, so in this, there is a
medium. Genius and virtue are independent of
rank and fortune; and it is neither the opulent, nor
the indigent, but the man of ability and integrity
that ought to be called forth to serve his country:
and while, on the one hand, the aristocratic part of
the government, arrogates a right to represent; on
the other hand, the democratic contends the point;
and from this conjunction and opposition of forces,
there is produced a compound resolution, which carries
the object in an intermediate direction. When
we see therefore, a Teague Oregan lifted up, the
philosopher will reflect that it is to balance some
purse-proud fellow, equally as ignorant, that comes
down from the sphere of aristocratic interest.
But every man ought to consider for himself,
whether it is his use to be this drawback, on either
side. For as when good liquor is to be distilled, you
throw in some material useless in itself to correct
the effervescence of the spirit; so it may be his part
to act as a sedative. For though we commend the
effect, yet still the material retains but its original
value.
But as the nature of things is such, let no man
who means well to the commonwealth, and offers to
serve it, be hurt in his mind when some one of
meaner talents is preferred. The people are a sovereign,
and greatly despotic; but, in the main, just.
It might be advisable, in order to elevate the composition,
to make quotations from the Greek and
Roman history. And I am conscious to myself,
that I have read the writers on the government of
[Page 024]
Italy and Greece, in ancient, as well as modern
times. But I have drawn a great deal more from
reflection on the nature of things, than from all the
writings I have ever read. Nay, the history of the
election, which I have just given, will afford a better
lesson to the American mind, than all that is to be
found in other examples. We seen here, a weaver
a favoured candidate, and in the next instance, a bog-trotter
superseding him. Now it may be said, that
this is fiction; but fiction or no fiction, the nature of
the thing will make it a reality. But I return to the
adventures of the Captain, whom I have upon my
hands; and who, as far as I can yet discover, is a
good honest man; and means what is benevolent and
useful; though his ideas may not comport with the
ordinary manner of thinking, in every particular.
[Page 025]
CHAPTER VI.
THERE was, in a certain great city, a society
who called themselves Philosophers. They
had published books, under the title of Transactions.
These contained dissertations on the nature and
causes of things, from the stars of heaven to the fire-flies
of the earth; and from the sea-crab to the woodland
buffaloe. Such disquisitions, are doubtless useful
and entertaining to an inquisitive mind.
There is no question, but there were in this body
some very great men; whose investigations of the
arcana of nature, deserve attention. But so it was,
there had been introduced, by some means, many
individuals, who were no philosophers at all. This
is no unusual thing with institutions of this nature;
though, by the bye, it is a very great fault. For it
lessens the incentives of honour, to have the access
made so easy, that every one may obtain admission.
It has been a reproach to some colleges, that a diploma
could be purchased for half a crown. This
society were still more moderate; for the bare
scratching the backside of a member has been
known to procure a membership. At least, there
have been those admitted who appeared capable of
nothing else.
[Page 026]
Nevertheless, it was necessary, even in these cases,
for the candidates to procure some token of a philosophic
turn of mind; such as the skin of a dead
cat, or some odd kind of a mouse-trap; or have
phrases in their mouths, about minerals and petrifactions;
so as just to support some idea of natural
knowledge, and pass muster. There was one who
got in by finding, accidentally, the tail of a rabbit,
which had been taken off in a boy's trap. Another
by means of a squirrel's scalp, which he had taken
care to stretch and dry on a bit of osier, bended in
the form of a hoop. The beard of an old fox, taken
off and dried in the sun, was the means of introducing
one whom I knew very well: Or rather, as I
have already hinted, it was beforehand intended he
should be introduced; and these exuviæ, or spoils of
the animal kingdom, were but the tokens and apologies
for admission.
It happened, as the Captain was riding this day,
and Teague trotting after him, he saw a large owl,
that had been shot by some body, and was placed in
the crotch of a tree, about the height of a man's
head from the ground, for those that passed by to
look at. The Captain being struck with it, as somewhat
larger than such birds usually are, desired
Teague to reach it to him; and tying it to the hinder
part of his saddle, rode along.
Passing by the house of one who belonged to the
society, the bird was noticed at the saddle-skirts, and
the philosopher coming out, made enquiry with regard
to the genus and nature of the fowl. Said the
Captain, I know nothing more about it, than that it
is nearly as large as a turkey buzzard. It is doubtless,
said the other, the great Canada owl, that comes
from the Lakes; and if your honour will give me
leave, I will take it and submit it to the society, and
[Page 027]
have yourself made a member. As to the first, the
Captain consented; but as to the last, the being a
member, he chose rather to decline it; conceiving
himself unqualified for a place in such a body. The
other assured him that he was under a very great
mistake; for there were persons there who scarcely
knew a B from a bull's foot. That may be, said the
Captain; but if others chuse to degrade themselves,
by suffering their names to be used in so preposterous
a way as that, it was no reason he should.
The other gave him to understand, that the society
would certainly wish to express their sense of
his merit, and shew themselves not inattentive to a
virtuoso; that as he declined the honour himself,
he probably might not be averse to let his servant
take a seat among them.
He is but a simple Irishman, said the Captain,
and of a low education; his language being that
spoken by the aborigines of his country. And if he
speaks a little English, it is with the brogue on his
tongue; which would be unbecoming in a member
of your body. It would seem to me that a philosopher
ought to know how to write, or at least to read.
But Teague can neither write nor read. He can
sing a song or whistle an Irish tune; but is totally
illiterate in all things else. I question much
if he could tell you how many new moons there are
in the year; or any the most common thing that
you could ask him. He is a long-legged fellow, it
is true; and might be of service in clambering over
rocks, or going to the shores of rivers, to gather curiosities.
But could you not get persons to do this,
without making them members? I have more respect
for science, than to suffer this bog-trotter to be
so advanced at its expence.
[Page 028]
In these American states, there is a wide field for
philosophic search; and these researches may be
of great use in agriculture, mechanics, and astronomy.
There is but little immediate profit attending
these pursuits; but if there can be inducements
of honour, these may supply the place. What more
alluring to a young man, than the prospect of being,
one day, received into a society of men truly learned;
the admission being a test and a proof of distinguished
knowledge. But the fountain of honour,
thus contaminated by a sediment foreign from its
nature, who would wish to drink of it?
Said the philosopher, at the first institution of the
society by Dr. Franklin and others, it was put upon a
narrow basis, and only men of science were considered
proper to compose it; and this might be a necessary
policy at that time, when the institution was in
its infancy, and could not bear much drawback of ignorance.
But it has not been judged so necessary of
late years. The matter stands now on a broad and
catholic bottom; and, like the gospel itself, it is our
orders, “to go out into the high-ways and hedges,
and compel them to come in.” There are hundreds,
whose names you may see on our list, who are not
more instructed than this lad of yours.
They must be a sad set indeed then, said the Captain.
Sad or no sad, said the other, it is the case;
and if you will let Teague go, I will engage him a
membership.
I take it very ill of you, Mr. Philosopher, said the
Captain, to put this nonsense in his head. If you
knew what trouble I have lately had with a parcel of
people that were for sending him to Congress, you
would be unwilling to draw him from me for the
purpose of making him a philosopher. It is not an
easy matter to get hirelings now-a-days; and
[Page 029]
when you do get one, it is a mere chance, whether
he is faithful, and will suit your purpose. It would
be a very great loss to me, to have him taken off at
this time, when I have equipped myself for a journey.
Teague was a good deal incensed at this refusal of
his master, and insisted that he would be a philosopher.
You are an ignoramus, said the Captain. It
is not the being among philosophers will make you
one.
Teague insisted that he had a right to make the
best of his fortune: and as there was a door open to
his advancement, he did not see why he might not
make use of it.
The Captain finding that it answered no end to
dispute the matter with him, by words of sense and
reason, took a contrary way to manage him.
Teague, said he, I have a regard for you, and
would wish to see you do well. But before you take
this step, I would wish to speak a word or two in
private. If you will go, I may perhaps suggest
some things that may be of service to you, for your
future conduct in that body.
Teague consenting, they stepped aside; and the
Captain addressed him in the following manner:
Teague, said he, do you know what you are about?
It is a fine thing at first sight, to be a philosopher,
and get into this body. And indeed, if you were a
real philosopher, it might be some honour, and also
safe, to take that leap. But do you think it is to
make a philosopher of you that they want you? Far
from it. It is their great study to find curiosities;
and because this man saw you coming after me,
with a red head, trotting like an Esquimaux Indian,
it has struck his mind to pick you up, and pass you
for one. Nay, it is possible, they may intend
[Page 030]
worse; and when they have examined you a-while,
take the skin off you, and pass you for an
overgrown otter, or a musk-rat; or some outlandish
animal, for which they will themselves, invent a
name. If you were at the museum of one of these
societies, to observe the quantity of skins and skeletons
they have, you might be well assured they did
not come by them honestly. I know so much of
these people, that I am well persuaded they would
think no more of throwing you into a kettle of boiling
water, than they would a tarapin; and having
scraped you out to a shell, present you as the relies
of an animal they had procured, at animmense price,
from some Guinea merchant. Or if they should not
at once turn you to this use, how, in the mean time,
will they dispose of you? They will have you away
through the bogs and marshes, catching flies and
mire-snipes; or send you to the woods to bring a polecat;
or oblige you to descend into draw-wells for fog,
and phlogistic air, and the Lord knows what. You
must go into wolves dens, and catch bears by the tail;
run over mountains like an oppossum, and dig the
earth like a ground-hog. You will have to climb
upon trees, and be bit by flying squirrels. There
will be no end to the musketoes you will have to dissect.
What is all this to diving into mill-dams and
rivers, to catch craw-fish. Or if you go to the
ocean, there are alligators to devour you like a
cat-fish Who knows but it may come your turn,
in a windy night, to go aloft to the heavens,
to rub down the stars, and give the goats and
rams that are there, fodder. The keeping the
stars clean, is a laborious work; a great deal worse
than scouring andirons, or brass kettles. There is a
bull there would think no more of tossing you on his
horns than he would a puppy dog. If the crab should
[Page 031]
get you in his claws he would squeeze you like a lobster.
But what is all that to your having no place
to stand on? How would you like to be up at the
moon, and to fall down when you had missed your
hold, like a boy from the topmast of a ship, and have
your brains beat out upon the top of some great
mountain; where the devil might take your skeleton
and give it to the turkey-buzzards?
Or if they should, in the mean time, excuse you from
such out of door services, they will rack and torture
you with hard questions. You must tell them how
long the rays of light are coming from the sun; how
many drops of rain fall in a thunder-gust; what
makes the grasshopper chirp when the sun is hot;
how muscle shells get up to the top of the mountains;
how the Indians got over to America. You will have
to prove that the negroes were once white; and that
their flat noses came by some cause in the compass
of human means to produce. These are puzzling
questions; and yet you must solve them all. Take
my advice, and stay where you are. Many men
have ruined themselves by their ambition, and made
bad worse. There is another kind of philosophy,
which lies more within your sphere; that is moral
philosophy. Every hostler or hireling can study
this, and you have the most excellent opportunity of
acquiring this knowledge in our traverses through the
country; or communications at the different taverns
or villages, where we may happen to sojourn.
Teague had long ago, in his own mind, given up
all thoughts of the society, and would not for the
world have any more to do with it; therefore, without
bidding the philosopher adieu, they pursued
their route as usual.
[Page 032]
CHAPTER VII.
CONTAINING OBSERVATIONS.
THE institution of the American Philosophical
Society, does great honour to the founders; and
what has been published by that body, comes not behind
what has appeared from societies of the same
nature elsewhere. But of late years, it has ceased to
be presumptive evidence, at least what the lawyers
call violent presumption, of philosophical attainments,
to be a member; owing to the spurious brood
of illiterate persons that have been admitted indiscriminately
with the informed; this again owing to
a political dispute in the government where this society
exists. For where there are parties in a commonwealth,
they naturally subdivide themselves,
and are found even in the retreats of the muses. It
has become the question with this society, not,
whether a man is a philospher or not, but what part
he has taken in some question on the carpet. The
body conceived itself to pay a compliment to the
person admitted, as if it could be any honour to a
man to be announced what he is not. The contrary
is the case here. For as honour is the acknowledgment
which the world makes of a man's
[Page 033]
respectability, there can be no honour here; for it has become
a mere matter of moon-shine to be a member.
To be, or not to be, that is the question; but so trifling,
that it is scarcely ever made. The way to remedy
this, would be, to have an overhauling of the
house, and derange at least three parts in four. As
in the case of Tarquin, and the three remaining
books of the Sybiles, you would receive as much for
the fourth part of that body, should you set them up
at market, as for the whole at present.
I have often reflected with myself, what an honour
it must be, to be one of the society of the French
academy; forty, of twenty-four millions of people,
are selected in consequence of literary characters already
established.
I recollect the time when I had high ideas of philosophical
membership in America. But it does
not appear to me now to be the highest thing that a
man could wish, since even a common Teague Oregan
trotting on the high-way, has been solicited to take
a seat. It may be said, that this is an exaggeration
of the facts; and can be considered only as burlesque.
I profess it is not intended as such, but as a
fair picture of what has taken place. Should it be
considered in the light of burlesque, it must be a
very lame one; because where there is no excess
there can be no caricatura. But omitting all apologies
and explanations, let the matter rest where it is.
[Page 034]
CHAPTER VIII.
IT was somewhat late when the Captain arrived
at an inn this evening. There was there, before
him, a young clergyman, who had been preaching
that day to a neighbouring congregation; but
had not as usual, gone home with an elder; but had
come thus far on his way towards another place,
where he was to preach the next day.
The Captain entering into conversation with the
clergyman, sat up pretty late. The subject was
what might be expected; viz. the affairs of religion
and the church. The clergyman was a good young
man; but with a leaning fanaticism, and being righteous
over much: The Captain on the other hand,
somewhat sceptical in his notions of religion:
Hence, a considerable opposition of sentiment between
the two. But at length, drowziness seizing
both, candles were called for, and they went to bed.
It was about an hour or two after, when an uproar
was heard in a small chamber to the left of the
stair case which led to the floor on which they slept.
It was Teague, who had got to bed to the girl of the
house. For as they would neither let him go to
Congress, nor be a philosopher, he must be doing
something. The girl not being apprized, or not
[Page 035]
chusing his embraces, made a great outcry and lamentation.
The clergyman, who slept in an adjoining
chamber, and hearing this, out of the zeal
of his benevolence and humanity, leaped out of bed
in his shirt, and ran in, to see what was the cause of
the disturbance. The Captain also jumping up, followed
soon after, and was scarcely in the chamber,
before the landlord coming up with a candle, found
them all together.
The maid gave this account of the matter, viz.
That between sleeping and waking she felt a man's
hand lifting up the bed clothes; upon which she
called out murder. But whether it was any body
there present, or some one else, she could not tell.
Teague, whose natural parts were not bad, and
presence of mind considerable, instantly adopted
the expedient to throw the matter on the clergyman.
By shaint Patrick, said he, I was aslape in my own
bed, as sound as the shates that were about me,
when I heard the sound of this young crature's
voice crying out like a shape in a pasture; and when
after I had heard, aslape as I was, and come here, I
found this praste, who was so holy, and praching all
night, upon the top of the bed, with his arms round
this young crature's neck; and if I had not given
him a twitch by the nose, and bid him ly over, dear
honey, he would have ravished her virginity, and
murdered her, save her soul, and the paple of the
house not the wiser for it.
The clergyman stared with his mouth open; for
the palpable nature of the falsehood, had shocked
him beyond the power of speech.
But the landlady, who in the mean time had come
up, and had heard what Teague had said, was enraged,
and could supply speech for them both. Hey,
said she, this comes of your preaching and praying,
[Page 036]
Mr. Minister. I have lodged many a gentleman;
but have never had such doings here before. It is a
pretty story that a minister of the gospel should be
the first to bring a scandal upon the house.
The Captain interrupted her, and told her there
was no harm done. The maid was not actually ravished;
and if there was no noise made about it, all
matters might be set right.
The clergyman had by this time recovered himself
so much as to have the use of his tongue; and
began by protesting his innocence, and that it was no
more him that made the attack upon the maid, than
the angel Gabriel.
The Captain, interrupting him, and wishing to
save his feelings, began by excusing or extenuating
the offence. It is no great affair, said he, after all
that is said or done. The love of woman is a natural
sin, and the holiest men in all ages have been
propense to this indulgence. There was Abraham
that got to bed to his maid Hagar, and had a bastard
by her, whom he named Ishmael. Joshua, who
took Jericho by the sound of ram's horns, saved a
likely slut of the name of Rahab, under a pretence
that she had been civil to the spies he had sent out,
but in reality because he himself took a fancy for her.
I need say nothing about David, who wrote the
psalms, and set them to music; and yet in his old
days had a girl to sleep with him. Human nature is
human nature still; and it is not all the preaching
and praying on earth can extinguish it.
The clergyman averred his innocence, and that
it was that red-headed gentleman himself, meaning
Teague, who was in the room first, and had been
guilty of the outrage. Teague was beginning to
make the sign of the cross, and to put himself into
an attitude of swearing, when the Captain thinking
[Page 037]
it of no consequence who was the person, put an
end to the matter, by ordering Teague to bed, and
himself bidding the company good night.
The clergyman finding no better could be made
of it, took the advice of the landlord, and retired
also. The landlady seemed disposed to hush the
matter up, and the maid went to sleep as usual.
It is not the nature of the female tongue to be silent.
The landlady, the next day, could not avoid
informing her gossips, and even some of her guests,
of what had happened the preceding evening in her
house. The report, so unfavourable to the clergyman,
had therefore got out; and coming to the ears
of the consistory, was the occasion of calling him before
them, to answer to the accusation. The clergyman
much alarmed, though conscious of innocence,
bethought himself of applying to the Captain,
to extort from his waiting-man a confession of
the truth, and relieve his character. Accordingly,
having set out on a bay horse that he had, he found
the Captain, and addressed him in the following
manner:
Captain, said he, the affair of that night at the
tavern, is like to be of serious consequence to me.
For though I am as innocent as the child unborn,
yet the presumption is against me, and I am likely
to fall under church censure. It may be sport to
you, but it is a matter of moment to me. Now, as
sure as God is in heaven, I am innocent; and it must
have been the devil, or that red headed Irishman of
yours, that made the disturbance.
The Captain gave him the comfort of assuring
him that he might make himself easy; for be the
matter as it might, he would take care that Teague
should assume it, and bear the blame. The clergyman
thanked him, declaring at the same time,
[Page 038]
that he would not forget him in his prayers, Sunday
or Saturday, while he had an hour to live. The
Captain, not so much from any mercenary motive
of benefit, by his spiritual solicitations, as from a real
love of humanity and justice, had determined to do
him essential service in this affair. Accordingly,
when the clergyman had retired, calling Teague before
him, he began in this manner: Teague, said
he, from what I know of your disposition, I have no
more doubt than I have of my existence, that it was
yourself who made that uproar with the girl at the
tavern where we lodged; though I could not but
give you credit for your presence of mind in throwing
it upon the clergyman. But whether the matter
lies with you or him, is of no consequence. You
can take it upon you, and lay up treasure in heaven.
It will be doing a good work; and these people, you
may be assured, have a considerable influence in the
other world. This clergyman can speak a good
word for you when you come there, and let you into
half the benefit of all the prayers he has said on
earth. It will be no harm to you, for your character
in this respect is as bad as it can well be.
Teague said he did not care much; but thought
the priest ought to pay a little smart money; for it
was a thankless matter to do these things for nothing.
Said the Captain, these people are not the
most plenty of money; but I will advance half a
crown towards the accommodation. Teague was
satisfied, and ready to acknowledge whatever was
demanded of him.
Accordingly, having come before the presbytery
on the day appointed for the trial, Teague made
confession of the truth, viz. That being in the kitchen
with the girl, and observing her to be a good
looking hussy........
[Page 039]
But suppose we give the speech in his own dialect:...
Master prastes, said he, I persave you are
all prastes of the gosple, and can prach as asily as
I can take a chaw of tobacco. Now de trut of de
story is dis; I was slaping in my bed, and I tought
vid myself it was a shame amongst christian paple
that a young crature should slape by herself, and
have no one to take care of her. So I tought vid myself,
to go and slape vid her. But as she was aslape,
she made exclamation, and dis praste that is here
before you, came in to save her shoul from the devil;
and as the Captain my master, might take offence,
and the devil, I am shartain that it was no
better person, put it into my head to lay it on the
praste. This is the trut master prastes, as I hope
for shalvation in the kingdom of purgatory, shentlemen.
On this confession, the clergyman was absolved,
to the great joy of the presbytery, who considered
it as a particular providence that the truth was
brought to light.
[Page 040]
CHAPTER IX.
CONTAINING REFLECTIONS.
IT must appear from the incident at the public
house, with what caution presumptive testimony
is to be admitted. Our criminal law admits it, but
lays it down as a rule, that it be admitted with caution.
There is what is called violent presumption;
that is, where such circumstances exist, as usually
attend the fact. Presumptive proof of this nature
is held sufficient to convict. I doubt much, whether
reason or experience approve the doctrine. Reason
tells us, that there may be all the circumstances that
usually attend the fact, and yet without the fact itself.
Experience evinces that it has been the case; for
we have heard of persons convicted of a capital offence;
and yet with their last breath asserting innocence.
Nay, in the case of some who have been
convicted of homicide, the persons who have been
supposed to have been murdered, have afterwards
been found alive.
But on abstract principles, a conclusion of certainty
cannot be drawn from presumptive proof. Because
in cases of the most violent presumption, there is
still a possibility of innocence; and where there is a
[Page 041]
possibility, there must be a doubt; and will you hang
man, woman, or child, where there is a doubt.
In all cases there ought to be complete proof; because
the convicted person is to be completely punished;
and the jury, previous to this, must make
complete oath of the guilt.
It is the ground of the doctrine of presumptive
proof, that where you cannot help suspecting, you
ought to be positive; whereas the just conclusion
would be, that where you cannot help suspecting,
there you ought to suspect still, but no more.
It would be a curious question in arithmetic how
many uncertainties make a certainty? In mathematics,
the three angles of a triangle, are equal to two
right angles. But these are all angles, that are put
together; that is, they are things of the same kind,
but the greatest angle, and the longest side will never
make a triangle, because there is no inclusion of
space. There must be a number of things of the
same kind to make an aggregate whole; so that ten
thousand possibilities, probabilities, and violent presumptions,
can never constitute a certainty.
Presumptive proof, like the semi plena probatio of
the Roman law, going but half-way towards proof,
can never amount to proof at all. For, as the saying
is, a miss is as good as a mile. I would, therefore,
recommend to all jurors, to take care that unless
the witnesses swear positively to the fact, they
do not find a verdict, guilty; because, as the current
cannot rise higher than the source, so the verdict of
the juror ought not to be more absolute than the oath
of the witness. In all cases, therefore, short of positive
testimony, acquit.
These hints may also be of service to young attornies,
and weak judges; so that honest people may
not lose their lives, or be rendered infamous, without
[Page 042]
full proof of the offence. It is hard enough to suffer
when there is full proof; but to be in the power of a
juror's or a judge's imagination, comparing and construing
circumstances, and weighing possibilities,
contingencies, and what might have been, or what
might not have been, as the humour, caprice, wheel,
or whim of the brain may suggest, is inconsistent
with that fair trial which, in a free government, ought
to be enjoyed. Was I a judge or juror, no one would
I condemn without positive testimony of the fact....
For it would not be in my power to restore that fame
or life which I took away from the innocent. And
if a guilty person should escape, it was none of my
look out; but the business of Providence to furnish
proof, if it was intended that man should punish; and
if proof is not furnished, let Providence take the matter
on himself, and punish the culprit either in this
life or in a future state. Invisible things belong to
the Omniscient and it would seem great arrogance
in man to take upon him to decide in cases of uncertainty.
I hope, therefore, yet to see the doctrine of
presumptive proof, in criminal cases, wholly, in
courts of justice, discountenanced. I can declare,
that in the course of my experience at the bar, I have
had one hung, and several others within an ace of it,
who were innocent; and this on the doctrine of presumption
and probability. The one that was hung
was a tory case, where the popular clamour was
against the man; and light presumption became violent,
under such a charge.
I shall say no more on this subject; because it
seems to me that I have been affecting to speak
sense, whereas my business is to speak nonsense;
this being the only way to keep out of the reach of
criticism; because critics can say no more than you
yourself allow; so that a charge of nonsense cannot
[Page 043]
hurt. It is thus that persons who have a long nose,
or disproportion of some other feature, take the
laugh upon themselves first, and so escape ridicule,
The truth is, I will not give myself the trouble to
write sense long. For I would as soon please fools as
wise men; because the fools are the most numerous,
and every prudent man will go with the majority. I
shall return to the adventures of the Captain.
[Page 044]
CHAPTER X.
THE Presbytery sat a day or two at this
place, on church affairs, and the Captain remaining
with them, lodged at the same house; Teague, in the
mean time, having an opportunity of ingratiating
himself with the clergymen, by rubing down their
horses, and other menial services. For it is the national
character of the aboriginal Irish, to give fair
words; and Teague was not deficient in this address.
What with master Prasting, and giving a great deal
of what is called blarney, he insinuated himself into
their good graces; and by affecting, now and then,
to be seen at prayers by himself, and to have a sorrowful
countenance, he induced them to believe that
he was in the first stage of conviction, and likely to
become a pious man. Having made this progress in
their good opinion, he ventured to suggest what was
the ultimate object of his ambition, viz . the being a
candidate for holy orders. The Presbytery, to whom
the matter was represented by the individuals more
particularly acquainted with him, thought favourably
of the proposition. For though his common attainments
might not be great, yet if the grace of God
had wrought upon him, he might become a valuable
man.
[Page 045]
The Captain having got a hint of this, took the
first opportunity of addressing the Presbytery. Gentlemen,
said he, you are deceived in this ragamuffin.
For, notwithstanding all the pretensions he may lately
have to religion, you may be well assured that it
is all hypocrisy, and that he has no more religion
than my horse.
The Presbytery suspecting the Captain to be a carnal
man, and regardless of the ministry, gave little
heed to what he said, and seemed disposed to take
Teague upon trials.
The Captain finding the case to stand thus, and
that in spite of all he could do, he was likely to lose
his servant, took his usual method of addressing the
hopes and fears of Teague himself.
Taking him aside, he began, with all possible art,
to impress such fears and apprehensions, as the nature
of the case suggested. Teague, said he, do you
know what you are about? You have got into your
vagaries once more. You want to preach, do you?
Are yon apprised of the difficulty of this work? The
first thing you will have to do, is to take a text; and
when that is done, you have to split it into parts....
There are what are called heads; and these you must
divide into firstlys, and secondlys, and thirdlys, and
fourthlys, and so on, till you come to twentiethlys,
perhaps. Are you furnished with a concordance? or
do you know what a concordance is? Can you find a
text to suit your purpose when you want it? Can you
explain the scriptures; the meaning of Daniel's ram
and the he-goat, or the seven trumpets in the Revelations?
You are mistaken if you think your Irish
will pass for Hebrew.
You think it a great honour to preach, do you? It
was an honour once; but the thing is now become
[Page 046]
so common, that it is of little consequence to preach
or not.
But do you know how it will behove you to conduct
yourself, if you take this office upon you. You
will have to compose the muscles of your face to
greater seriousness than your disposition can afford.
You must quit whoring. How will you like that,
Teague. It would look very ill after sermon to be
catched in bed with a girl at a tavern.
But do you know why these men are so anxious to
have you of their mess? The truth of the matter is,
they carry on a war with the devil, and they wish to
recruit you for the service. Do they give you any
bounty-money. I am afraid, there will be but little
of this going. Take my advice then, and let them
settle their own quarrels. It is a silly thing to be
drawn into a party, when there is but little to be got
by it: Nay worse than little: For it will be all on the
other side. Think you the devil will forget the mischief
you do him in this world, and not resent it
when he comes across you in a future state? When
you are preaching and praying do you think he will
not hear all that you throw out against him. You
may rely upon it, there will be enough to give him
information; and as a story never loses in the telling,
it is ten to one they will make the matter worse
than it was. Take my advice, therefore, and make
no enemies while you can help it. Steer through
life as smoothly as possible. Keep a good tongue
in your mouth, and let those who chuse to dispute
with Belzebub, dispute. I never knew any good
come of broils and quarrels, especially with low
characters. And, to say the truth of it, this Satan,
as they call him, is but a low fellow. Even where
he is well disposed, he will do but little good to one;
but a most dangerous creature where he takes a
[Page 047]
dislike. When you go to hell, as one day you must,
you can expect but little quarter, after abusing him
in this world. He will make you squeel like a pig;
take you by the throat, and kick you like a cat. His
very scullions will piss upon you, and give you no
better life than a dog among their feet; while these
very clergymen, that put you forward to blackguard
for them, will stand by laughing in their sleeves that
you could be such a fool.
The representation had the desired effect upon
Teague, and he thought no more of the matter.
[Page 048]
CHAPTER XI.
OBSERVATIONS.
THE application made by Teague, to be admitted
to the ministry, and the simplicity of the ecclesiastics
in listening to his overtures, made a great
noise through the neighbourhood; in as much as the
young man laboured under a want of education, and
was not qualified by theological reading. But I do
not see, why it should be thought blamable; provided
the matter was not too much hurried and hastily
brought forward. For give him a little time, and he
might have been instructed to preach as well as some
that I myself have heard. Especially if at first setting
out, he had confined himself to historical passages
of scripture; such as the history of Sampson,
and Gideon, and Barak, and the like: Only he must
have taken care that in pronouncing Barak with the
brogue upon his tongue, he did not make it Burke;
for that is a patronimic name of his country, and he
might inadvertently have fallen into this pronunciation.
I acknowledge, that in the regular churches such
as that of the Presbyterians, there is still kept up
some opinion of the necessity of literature. But do
we not see that with other denominations; such as
the Quakers, the Methodists, and Anabaptists, it is
[Page 049]
totally disregarded and thrown out? Because when
human gifts or acquirements are absent, that which
is supernatural more evidently appears.
Do not Quakers, and Methodists, and Baptists,
preach very well? At any rate, they do a great deal
of good, and that is the first object of preaching......
Whether such sermonists, avail themselves most of
sense or sound, I will not say; but so it is they do
good; and that without the aid of any human learning
whatever.
It is very true, that formerly in the infancy of the
church, a knowledge of languages and sciences, might
be requisite. But the case is quite altered now. The
Scripture has been well explained, and frequently
preached over; every text and context examined, and
passages illustrated. The Hebrew roots, so to speak,
have been all dug up; and there is scarcely a new
etymology to be made. Are there any new doctrines
to discover? I should think it impossible. At
any rate, I should conceive it unnecessary. There
are enough in all conscience: The inventing more,
would be like bringing timber to a wood, or coals to
Newcastle.
This being the case, I feel myself disposed to agree
with those who reject human learning in religious
matters altogether. More especially as science is
really not the fashion at the present time. For as
has been before seen, even in the very province of
science itself, it is dispensed with; that of natural
philosophy, for instance. In state affairs, ignorance
does very well, and why not in church? I am for
having all things of a piece; ignorant statesmen, ignorant
philosophers, and ignorant ecclesiastics. On
this principle, Teague might have done very well as
a preacher. But the selfishness of the Captain prevailed,
and obstructed his advancement.
[Page 050]
BOOK II.
CHAPTER I.
CONTAINING PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS. I AM very happy in the composition of this
work; for though but of a trifling nature as to sentiment;
yet, in what I do write, no one can attribute
to me the least tincture of satire, or ridicule of individuals
or public bodies. This is what I very much
dislike in others, and would be far from indulging in
myself. I acknowledge, that in my earlier years,
and in the course of my academical studies, I had
contracted some taste, and even habit, this way;
owing to my reading the dialogues of Lucian, in the
original Greek. Had I read them in a translation,
they might have made less impression. But by
means of a difficult language, studying them slowly,
the turn of thought became more deeply impressed
upon my mind. Moreover, afterwards, when I came
to have some acquaintance with the modern wits,
[Page 051]
such as Cervantes, Le Sage, and especially Swift, I
found myself still more inclined to an ironical, and
ludicrous way of thinking and writing. But finding
the bad effects of this in many respects, leading me
into broils with individuals, and rendering me obnoxious
to public bodies, I saw the indiscretion and bad
policy of such indulgence; and have for several years
past, carefully avoided every thing of this kind. It
is indeed acting but a poor part in life to make a
business of laughing at the follies of others. It is
injurious to one's self; for there is a great deal more
to be gained by soothing and praising what men do,
than by finding fault with them. It may be said of
satire, what was said of anger by some philosopher,
It never pays the service it requires. It is your
scratching, rump-tickling people that get into place
and power. I never knew any good come of wit and
humour yet. They are talents which keep the owner
down. For this reason, I have taken care to repress
all propensity to this vice; and I believe I can say it
with truth, that since I have come to the years of a
man's understanding, I have carefully avoided every
thing of this nature. Had it not been for this prudence,
I should not have been in a fair way, as I
now am, to be a member of congress, or a judge on
the bench, or governor of a commonwealth, or secretary
of state, or any thing that I may have in view.
Had I remained an admirer of Rabelais, or Sterne,
or other biting, jeering writers, that I at first met
with, I might at this day have been considered as a
wit only, without the least advancement in state affairs.
But I would sooner see your Juniuses, and
your Peter Pindars, libelling kings and ministers, at
hell, than sacrifice my interest to my passion, or my
vanity, by strokes of wit, which is but another name
for ill-nature.
[Page 052]
In this treatise, which is simply a relation of the
adventures of an individual, I have nothing to do with
strictures upon particular persons, or the affairs of
men in general, and so have no temptation to the
folly I have just mentioned. The reader, if any
body ever reads it, will find nothing here but philanthropic
and benevolent ideas.
Indeed, as it has been known that I was engaged
in writing something, persons who either took, or
pretended to take, some interest in my affairs, have
urged me very much to depart a little from my
usual way, and make use of a little irony, by way of
seasoning to the composition; for, in this case, it
would be received better, and procure more readers;
mankind being naturally delighted with ridicule....
But the truth was, I could see nothing to be ironical
about; owing, perhaps, to my not being in the habit
of looking for the ridiculous, and so having lost the
talent of discovering it. But my resolution that I
had taken would have fully preserved me from such
a lapse, however numerous the objects of ridicule
might be, that presented themselves. This will
serve as an apology to those who have solicited me
on this head, and relieve me from such solicitations
for the future.
[Page 053]
CHAPTER. II.
DELAYING some time in a village, there
was a great deal said about a certain Miss Vapour,
who was the belle of the place. Her father had
made a fortune by the purchase of public securities.
A garrison having been at this place, and troops
quartered here he had been employed as an issuing
commissary! When the commissioners sat to adjust
unliquidated claims, he had a good deal in his power
by vouching for the accounts of the butcher and
baker and wood-cutter and water-drawer and waggoner,
and others of all occupations whatsoever,
whose claims were purchased by himself in the
mean time and when the certificates issued in their
names, they were to his use. The butcher and baker,
no doubt, long before had been paid out of the flesh
killed, or bread baked; because it is a good maxim,
and a scriptural expression, “Muzzle not the ox
that treadeth out the corn.” But the public has a
broad back, and a little vouching, by a person interested,
is not greatly felt. These certificates, though
at first of little value, and issued by the commissioners
with the liberality of those who give what is of
little worth, yet by the funding acts of the government,
having become, in value, equal to gold and
[Page 054]
silver, the commissary had a great estate thrown
upon him; so that, from low beginnings, he had become
a man of fortune and consequence. His family,
and especially the eldest daughter, shared the
advantage; for she had become the object of almost
all wooers. The Captain, though an old batchelor,
as we have said, had not wholly lost the idea of matrimony.
Happening to be in a circle, one evening,
where Miss Vapour was, he took a liking to her, in
all respects save one, which was, that she seemed,
on her part, to have taken a liking to a certain Mr.
Jacko who was there present; and to whose attention
she discovered a facility of acquiescence. The Captain
behaved, for the present, as if he did not observe
the preference; but the following day, waiting on the
young lady at her father's house, he drew her into
conversation, and began to reason with her in the
following manner:
Miss Vapour, said he, you are a young lady of
great beauty, great sense, and fortune still greater
than either....This was a sad blunder in a man of
gallantry, but the lady not being of the greatest sensibility
of nerve, did not perceive it.....On my part,
said he, I am a man of years, but a man of some reflection;
and it would be much more adviseable in
you to trust my experience, and the mellowness of
my disposition in a state of matrimony, than the
vanity and petulence of this young fop Jacko, for
whom you shew a partiality. The colour coming
into the young lady's face at this expression, she
withdrew, and left him by himself. The Captain.
struck with the rudeness, withdrew also, and, calling
Teague from the kitchen, mounted his horse and set
off.
The next morning shortly after he had got out of
bed, and had just come down stairs at his lodging,
[Page 055]
and was buttoning the knees of his breeches, a light
airy looking young man, with much bowing and civility,
entered the hall of the public house, and enquiring
if this was not Captain Farrago to whom he
had the honour to address himself, and delivered him
a paper. On the perusal, it was found to be a challenge
from Mr. Jacko.
The fact was, that Miss Vapour, in order the more
to recommend herself to her suitor, had informed
him of the language of the Captain. The young
man, though he had no great stomach for the matter,
yet according to the custom of these times, could
do no less than challenge. The bearer was what is
called his second.
The Captain having read the paper, and pausing
a while, said, Mr. Second, for that I take to be your
stile and character, is it consistent with reason or
common sense, to be the aider or abettor of another
man's folly; perhaps the prompter: for it is no uncommon
thing with persons to inflame the passions
of their friends, rather than allay them. This young
woman, for I shall not call her lady, from vanity, or
ill-nature, or both, has become a tale-bearer to her
lover, who, I will venture to say, thanks her but little
for it; as she has thereby rendered it necessary
for him to take this step. You, in the mean time,
are not blameless, as it became you to have declined
the office, and thereby furnished an excuse to your
friend for not complying with the custom. For it
would have been a sufficient apology with the lady to
have said, although he was disposed to fight, yet he
could get no one to be his armour-bearer or assistant.
It could have been put upon the footing, that all had
such regard for his life, that no one would countenance
him in risking it. You would have saved him
by this means, all that uneasiness which he feels at
[Page 056]
present, least I should accept his challenge. I am
not so unacquainted with human nature, as not to
know how disagreeable it must be to think of having
a pistol ball lodged in the groin or the left breast, or,
to make the best of it, the pan of the knee broke, or
the nose cut off, or some wound less than mortal
given; disagreeable, especially to a man in the bloom
of life, and on the point of marriage with a woman
to whose person or fortune he has no exception. I
would venture to say. therefore, there will be no
great difficulty in appeasing this Orlando Furioso,
that has sent me the challenge. Did you know the
state of his mind, you would find it to be his wish at
this moment, that I would ease his fears, and make
some apology. A very slight one would suffice. I
dare say, his resentment against Miss Vapour is not
slight, and that he would renounce her person and
fortune both, to get quit of the duel. But the opinion
of the world is against him, and he must fight.
Do you think he has any great gratitude to you for
your services on this occasion. He had much rather
you had, in the freedom of friendship, given him a
kick on the backside, when he made application to
you; and told him, that it did not become him to
quarrel about a woman, who had probably, consulted
but her own vanity, in giving him the information.
In that case, he would have been more pleased with
you a month hence, than he is at present. I do not
know that he has an overstock of sense; nevertheless,
he cannot be just such a fool, as not to consider,
that you, yourself, may have pretensions to this belle,
and be disposed to have him out of the way before
you. He must be a fool, indeed if he does not reflect,
that you had much rather see us fight than not;
from the very same principle that we take delight in
seeing a cock-match, or a horse-race. The
[Page 057]
spectacle is new, and produces a brisk current of thought
through the mind; which is a constituent of pleasure,
the absence of all movement giving none at all.
What do you suppose I must think of you, Mr.
Second; I, who have read books, and thought a little
on the subject; have made up my mind in these
matters, and account the squires that bring challenges
from knights, as people of but very small
desert. Thinking men have condemned the duel,
and laws have prohibited it; but these miscreants
still keep it up, by being the conductors of the fluid.
My indignation, therefore, falls on such, and I have
long ago fixed on the mode of treating them. It is
this: a stout athletic man calls upon me, with a
challenge in his hand, I knock him down, if I can,
without saying a word. If the natural arm be not
sufficient for this purpose, I avail myself of any stone,
wooden, or iron instrument that I cast my eye upon,
not just to take away his life, if I can help it; but to
hit the line as exactly as possible, between actual
homicide, and a very bad wound. For in this case, I
should conceive, a battery would be justifiable, or at
least excuseable, and the fine not great; the bearing
a challenge being a breach of the peace, in the first
instance. This would be my conduct with a stout
athletic man, whom I might think it dangerous to
encounter with fair warning, and on equal terms.
But in the present case, where.......(Here the second
began to shew signs of fear, raising himself, and inclining
backwards, opening his eyes wider, and casting
a look towards the door)....where, continued the
Captain, I have to do with a person of your slender
make, I do not adopt that surprise, or use an artificial
weapon; but with these fists, which have been used
in early life to agricultural employments, I shall very
deliberately impress a blow. The second rising to
[Page 058]
his feet, began to recede a little. Be under no apprehensions,
said the Captain; I shall use no unfair
method of biting, gouging, or wounding the private
parts. Nay, as you appear to be a young man of
a deliicate constitution, I shall only choak a little.....
You will give me leave to take you by the throat in
as easy a manner as possible.
In the mean time, the second had been withdrawing
towards the door, and the Captain with outstretched
arms, in a sideway direction, proceeding to intercept
him. In an instant, he was seized by the neck,
and the exclamation of murder which he made at
the first grasp, began to die away in hoarse guttural
murmurs of one nearly strangled, and labouring for
breath. The Captain meaning that he should be more
alarmed than hurt, dismissed him with a salutation
of his foot on the backside, as a claude ostium , as he
went out. You may be, said he, a gentleman in the
opinion of the world; but you are a low person in
mine; and so shall it be done to every one who shall
come upon such an errand.
[Page 059]
CHAPTER III.
HAVING thus dismissed the secondary man,
he called in his servant Teague, and accosted him as
follows: Teague, said he, you have heretofore discovered
an ambition to be employed in some way
that would advance your reputation. There is now
a case fallen out, to which you are fully competent.
It is not a matter that requires the head to contrive,
but the hand to execute. The greatest fool is as fit
for it as a wise man. It is indeed your greatest
blockheads that chiefly undertake it. The knowledge
of law, physic, or divinity is out of the question.
Literature and political understanding is useless.
Nothing more is necessary than a little resolution
of the heart. Yet it is an undertaking which
is of much estimation with the rabble, and has a
great many on its side to approve and praise it.
The females of the world, especially, admire the act,
and call it valour. I know you wish to stand well
with the ladies. Here is an opportunity of advancing
your credit. I have had what is called a challenge
sent me this morning. It is from a certain
Jacko, who is a suitor to a Miss Vapour, and has taken
offence at an expression of mine, respecting him
to this female. I wish you to accept the challenge,
and fight him for me.
[Page 060]
At this proposition, Teague looked wild, and
made apology that he was not much used to boxing.
Boxing, said the Captain; you are to fight what is
called a duel. You are to encounter him with pistols
and put a bullet through him if you can. It is
true, he will have the chance of putting one through
you; but in that consists the honour; for where there
is no danger, there is no glory. You will provide
yourself a second. There is an hostler here at the
public house, that is a brave fellow, and will answer
the purpose. Being furnished with a second, you
will provide yourself with a pair of pistols, powder
and ball of course. In the mean time, your adversary
notified of your intentions, will do the like.
Thus equipped, you will advance to the place
agreed upon. The ground will be measured out;
ten, seven, or five steps; back to back, and coming
round to your place fire. Or taking your ground,
stand still and fire; or it may be, advance and fire as
you meet, at what distance you think proper. The
rules in this respect are not fixed, but as the parties
can agree or the seconds point out. When you
come to fire, be sure you keep a steady hand, and
take good aim. Remember that the pistol barrel
being short, the powder is apt to throw the bullet up.
Your sight therefore, ought to be about the waistband
of his breeches, so that you have the whole
length of his body, and his head in the bargain, to
come and go upon. It is true, he in the meantime,
will take the same advantages of you. He may hit
you about the groin, or the belly. I have known
some shot in the thigh, or the leg, or the private
parts. The throat also, and the head are in themselves
vulnerable. It is no uncommon thing to have
an arm broke, or a splinter struck off the nose, or
an eye shot out; but as in that case, the ball mostly
[Page 061]
passes through the brain, and the man being dead
at any rate, the loss of sight is not greatly felt.
As the Captain spoke, Teague seemed to feel in
himself, every wound which was described, the ball
hitting him, now in one part, and now in another.
At the last words, it seemed to pass through his
head, and he was half dead, in imagination. Making
a shift to express himself, he gave the Captain
to understand, that he could by no means undertake
the office. What! said the Captain; you whom nothing
would serve, some time ago, but to be a legislator,
or philosopher, or preacher, in order to gain
fame, will now detract a business for which you are
qualified. This requires no knowledge of finances,
no reading of natural history, or any study of the fathers.
You have nothing more to do than keep a
steady hand and a good eye.
In the early practice of this exercise; I mean the
combat of the duel, it was customary to exact an
oath of the combatants, before they entered the lists,
that they had no enchantments, or power of witchcraft,
about them. Whether you should think it
necessary to put him to his voir dire , on this point,
I shall not say; but I am persuaded, that on your
part, you have too much honour, to make use of
spells, or undue means, to take away his life, or save
your own. You will leave all to the chance of fair
shooting. One thing you will observe, and which is
allowable in this battle; you will take care not to
present yourself to him with a full breast, but angularly,
and your head turned round over the left
shoulder, like a weather-cock. For thus a smaller
surface being presented to an adversary, he will be
less likely to hit you. You must throw your legs
into lines parallel, and keep them one directly behind
the other. Thus you will stand like a sail
[Page 062]
hauled close to the wind. Keep a good countenance,
a sharp eye, and a sour look; and if you feel any thing
like a cholic, or a palpitation of the heart, make no
noise about it. If the ball should take you in the
gills, or the gizzard, fall down as decently as you
can, and die like a man of honour.
It was of no use to urge the matter; the Irishman
was but the more opposed to the proposition, and utterly
refused to be after fighting in any such manner.
The Captain finding this to be the case, dismissed
him to clean his boots and spurs, and rub down his
horse in the stable.
[Page 063]
CHAPTER IV.
ON reflection, it seemed adviseable to the Captain
to write an answer to the card which Colonel or
Major Jacko, or whatever his title may have been,
had sent him this morning. It was as follows:
Letter
Sir ,
I have two objections to this duel matter.
The one is, lest I should hurt you; and the other is,
lest you should hurt me. I do not see any good it
would do me to put a bullet through any part of your
body. I could make no use of you when dead, for
any culinary purpose, as I would a rabbit or a turkey.
I am no cannibal to feed on the flesh of men.
Why then shoot down a human creature, of which
I could make no use. A buffaloe would be better
meat. For though your flesh might be delicate and
tender; yet it wants that firmness and consistency
which takes and retains salt. At any rate it would
not be fit for long sea voyages. You might make a
good barbecue, it is true, being of the nature of a
racoon or an opossum; but people are not in the habit
of barbecuing any thing human now. As to your
hide, it is not worth the taking off, being little better
than that of a year old colt.
[Page 064]
It would seem to me a strange thing to shoot at a
man that would stand still to be shot at; in as much
as I have been heretofore used to shoot at things flying,
or running, or jumping. Were you on a tree
now, like a squirrel, endeavouring to hide yourself
in the branches, or like a racoon, that after much
eyeing and spying I observe at length in the crotch
of a tall oak, with boughs and leaves intervening, so
that I could just get a sight of his hinder parts, I
should think it pleasurable enough to take a shot at
you. But as it is, there is no skill or judgment requisite
either to discover or take you down.
As to myself, I do not much like to stand in the
way of any thing that is harmful. I am under apprehensions
you might hit me. That being the
case, I think it most advisable to stay at a distance.
If you want to try your pistols, take some object, a
tree or a barn door about my dimensions. If you
hit that, send me word, and I shall acknowledge that
if I had been in the same place, you might also have
hit me.
J. F.
[Page 065]
CHAPTER V.
CONTAINING REFLECTIONS.
THE Captain was a good man, but unacquainted
with the world. His ideas were drawn
chiefly from what may be called the old school; the
Greek and Roman notions of things. The combat
of the duel was to them unknown. Though it seems
strange, that a people who were famous for almost
all arts and sciences should have remained ignorant
of its use. I do not conceive how as a people, they
could exist without it. But so it was, they actually
were without the knowledge of it. For we do not
find any trace of this custom in the poets or historians
of all antiquity.
I do not know at what period, precisely, the custom
was introduced; or to whom it was owing; but
omitting this disquisition we content ourselves with
observing, that it has produced as great an improvement
in manners, as the discovery of the load-stone,
and mariner's compass, has in navigation. Not that
I mean to descant, at full length, on the valuable effects
of it; but simply to observe, that it is a greater
aid to government than the alliance of church and
state itself. If Dr. Warburton had had leisure, I
[Page 066]
could wish he had written a treatise upon it. Some
affect to ridicule it, as carrying to a greater length
small differences, than the aggravation may justify.
As for instance, a man is angry enough with you to
give you a slap in the face; but the custom says,
he must shoot you through the head. I think the
smaller the aggravation, the nicer the sense of honour.
The heaviest mind will resent a gross affront;
but to kill a man where there is no affront at all,
shews a great sensibility. It is immaterial whether
there is or is not an injury, provided the world thinks
there is; for it is the opinion of mankind we are to
consult. It is a duty which we owe them to provide
for their amusement. Non nasscimur nobis ipsis;
we are not born for ourselves, but for others. Decorum
pro patria mori; it is a becoming thing to die
for one's country; and shall it not also be accounted
honourable to throw one's life away for the entertainment
of a few particular neighbours and acquaintances.
It is true, the tears that will be shed
upon your grave will not make the grass grow; but
you will have the consolation, when you leave the
world, to have fallen in the bed of honour.
It is certainly a very noble institution, that of the
duel; and it has been carried to very great perfection,
in some respects. Nevertheless, I would submit
it to the public, whether still further improvement
might not be made in the laws and regulations
of it. For instance, could it not be reduced nearer
to an equality of chances, by proportioning the caliber,
or bore of the pistol; the length of the barrel,
also, to the size of the duellist who holds it; or by
fixing the ratio of distance in proportion to the bulk
of combatants. To explain myself: When I am to
fight a man of a small size, I ought to have a longer
pistol than my adversary, because my mark is
[Page 067]
smaller; or I ought to be permitted to come nearer to him.
For it is altogether unfair that men of unequal bulk
should fire at equal distances, and with equal calibers.
The smaller size multiplied by the larger
space, or larger pistol, would equal the larger size
multiplied by the smaller space or smaller pistol....
If this amendment of the duel laws should be approved
by men of honour, let it be added to the
code.
[Page 068]
CHAPTER VI.
NOT long after this, being at a certain place,
the Captain was accosted by a stranger in the following
manner: Captain, said he, I have heard of a
young man in your service who talks Irish. Now,
Sir, my business is that of an Indian treaty-maker;
and am on my way with a party of kings, and half-kings
to the commissioners, to hold a treaty. My king of
the Kickapoos, who was a Welch blacksmith, took
sick by the way, and is dead: I have heard of this
lad of yours, and could wish to have him a while to
supply his place. The treaty will not last longer
than a couple of weeks; and as the government will
probably allow three or four thousand dollars for the
treaty, it will be in our power to make it worth your
while, to spare him for that time. Your king of the
Kickapoos, said the Captain; what does that mean?
Said the stranger, It is just this: you have heard of
the Indian nations to the westward, that occasionally
make war upon the frontier settlements. It has been
a policy of government, to treat with these, and distribute
goods. Commissioners are appointed for
that purpose. Now you are not to suppose that it
is always an easy matter to catch a real chief, and
bring him from the woods; or if at some expence
[Page 069]
one was brought, the goods would go to his use;
whereas, it is much more profitable to hire substitutes
and make chiefs of our own: And as some unknown
gibberish is necessary, to pass for an Indian
language, we generally make use of Welch, or Low
Dutch, or Irish; or pick up an ingenious fellow here
and there, who can imitate a language by sounds of
his own, in his mouth, and throat. But we prefer
one who can speak a real tongue, and give more for
him. We cannot afford you a great deal at this
time for the use of your man; because it is not a
general treaty where 20,000, or 30,000 dollars are
appropriated for the purpose of holding it; but an
occasional, or what we call a running treaty, by way
of brightening the chain, and holding fast friendship.
The commissioners will doubtless be glad to see us,
and procure from government an allowance for the
treaty. For the more treaties, the more use for commissioners.
The business must be kept up, and treaties
made if there are none of themselves. My Pianksha,
and Choctaw chiefs, are very good fellows;
the one of them a Scotch pedlar that talks the Erse;
the other has been some time in Canada, and has a
little broken Indian, God knows what language; but
has been of great service in assisting to teach the
rest some Indian custom and manners. I have had
the whole of them for a fortnight past under my tuition,
teaching them war songs and dances, and to
make responses at the treaty. If your man is tractable,
I can make him a Kickapoo in about nine days.
A breech-clout and leggins, that I took off the blacksmith
that died, I have ready to put on him. He must
have part of his head shaved, and painted, with feathers
on his crown; but the paint will rub off, and the
hair grow in a short time, so that he can go about
with you again.
[Page 070]
It is a very strange affair, said the Captain. Is it
possible that such deception can be practised in a
new country. It astonishes me, that the government
does not detect such imposition. The government,
said the Indian treaty-man, is at a great distance. It
knows no more of Indians than a cow does of Greek.
The legislature, hears of wars and rumours of wars,
and supports the executive in forming treaties....
How is it possible for men who live remote from
the scene of action, to have adequate ideas of the nature
of Indians, or the transactions that are carried
on in their behalf? Do you think the one half of
those savages that come to treat, are real representatives
of the nation? Many of them are not savages
at all; but weavers, and pedlars, as I have told you,
picked up to make kings and chiefs. I speak of those
particularly that come trading down to inland towns,
or the metropolis. I would not communicate these
mysteries of our trade, were it not that I confide in
your good sense, and have occasion for your servant.
It is a mystery of iniquity, said the Captain. Do
you suppose that I would countenance such a fraud
upon the public? I do not know, said the other; it is
a very common thing for men to speculate, now adays.
If you will not, another will. A hundred dollars
might as well be in your pocket as another man's.
I will give you that for the use of your servant, for
a week or two, and say no more about it. It is an
idea new to me entirely, said the Captain, that Indian
princes, whom I have seen escorted down as
such, were no more than trumpery, disguised, as you
mention; that such should be introduced to polite
assemblies, and have the honour to salute the fair
ladies with a kiss, the greatest beauties thinking
themselves honoured by having the salution of a sovereign?
It is so, said the other; I had a red headed
[Page 071]
bricklayer once, whom I passed for a Chippawaw;
and who has dined with clubs, and sat next the President.
He was blind of an eye, and was called
blind Sam by the traders. I had given it out that
he was a great warrior, and had lost his eye by an
arrow, in a contest with a rival nation. These things
are now reduced to a system; and it is so well known
to those who are engaged in the traffic, that we think
nothing of it.
How the devil, said the Captain, do you get
speeches made, and interpret them so as to pass for
truth. That is an easy matter, said the other; Indian
speeches are nearly all alike. You have only to
talk of burying hatches under large trees, kindling
fires, brightening chains; with a demand, at the latter
end, of blankets for the backside, and rum to get
drunk with.
I much doubt, said the Captain, whether treaties
that are carried on in earnest, are of any great use.
Of none at all, said the other; especially as the practice
of giving goods prevails; because this is an inducement
to a fresh war. This being the case, it
can be no harm to make a farce of the whole matter;
or rather a profit of it; by such means as I propose
to you, and have pursued myself.
After all, said the Captain, I cannot but consider
it as a kind of contraband and illicit traffic; and I
must be excused from having any hand in it, I shall
not betray your secret, but I shall not favour it. It
would ill become me, whose object in riding about
in this manner, is to give just ideas on subjects, to
take part in such ill-gotten gain.
The Indian treaty-man finding it in vain to say
more, withdrew.
[Page 072]
CHAPTER VII.
THE Captain apprehending that he might
not yet drop his designs upon the Irishman, but be
tampering with him out of doors, should he come
across him, sent for Teague. For he well knew,
that should the Indian treaty-man get the first word
of him, the idea of making him a king, would turn
his head, and it would be impossible to prevent his
going with him.
Teague coming in, said the Captain to him;
Teague, I have discovered in you, for some time
past, a great spirit of ambition, which is, doubtless,
commendable in a young person; and I have checked
it only in cases where there was real danger, or
apparent mischief. There is now an opportunity of
advancing yourself, not so much in the way of honour
as profit. But profit brings honour, and is, indeed,
the most substantial support of it. There has been
a man here with me, that carries on a trade with the
Indians, and tells me that red-headed scalps are in
great demand with them. If you could spare yours,
he would give a good price for it. I do not well
know what use they make of this article, but so it is,
the traders find their account in it. Probably they
dress it with the hairy side out, and make
[Page 073]
tobaccopouches for the chiefs, when they meet in council.
It saves dyeing, and besides, the natural red hair of
a man, may, in their estimation, be superior to any
colour they can give by art. The taking off the
scalp will not give much pain, it is so dextrously
done by them with a crooked knife they have for
that purpose. The mode of taking off the scalp is
this; you lie down upon your back; a warrior puts
his feet upon your shoulders, collects your hair in
his left hand, and drawing a circle with the knife in
his right, makes the incision, and, with a sudden
pull, separates it from the head, giving, in the mean
time, what is called the scalp yell. The thing
is done in such an instant, that the pain is scarcely
felt. He offered me an hundred dollars, if I would
have it taken off for his use, giving me directions,
in the mean time, how to stretch it and dry it on a
hoop. I told him, No; it was a perquisite of your
own, and you might dispose of it as you thought
proper. If you choose to dispose of it, I had no objections;
but the bargain sbould be of your own
making, and the price such as should please yourself.
I have sent for you, to give you a hint of this
chapman, that you may have a knowledge of his wish
to possess the property, and ask accordingly. It is
probable you may bring him up to a half Johannes
more, by holding out a little. But I do not think it
would be adviseable to lose the bargain. An hundred
dollars for a little hairy flesh, is a great deal. You
will trot a long time before you make that with me.
He will be with you probably to propose the purchase.
You will know when you see him. He is a
tall looking man, with leggins on, and has several
Indians with him going to a treaty. He talked to
me something of making you a king of the Kickapoos,
after the scalp is off; but I would not count on
[Page 074]
that so much; because words are but wind, and promises
are easily broken. I would advise you to
make sure of the money in the first place, and take
chance for the rest.
I have seen among the prints of Hogarth, some
such expression of countenance as that of Teague at
this instant; who, as soon as he could speak, but with
a double brogue on his tongue, began to intimate his
disinclination to the traffic. The hair of his scalp
itself, in the mean time had risen in opposition to it.
Dear master, vid you trow me into ridicule, and the
blessed shalvation of my life, and all dat I have in
the vorld, to be trown like a dog to de savages, and
have my flesh tarn of my head to give to dese vild
bastes to make a napsack to carry their parates and
tings in, for an hundred dollars or the like. It shall
never be said that the hair of the Oregans made
mackeseens for a vild Indian to trat upon. I would
sooner trow my own head, hair, and all in de fire,
dan give it to dese paple to smoke wid, out of deir
long pipes.
It this be your determination, said the Captain, it
will behove you to keep yourself somewhat close;
and while we remain at this public house, avoid any
conversation with the chapman or his agents, should
they come to tamper with you. For it is not improbable,
while they are keeping you in talk, proposing
to make you a Kickapoo chief, and the like, they
may snatch the scalp off your head, and you not be
the wiser for it.
Teague thought the caution good, and resolving
to abide by it, retired to the kitchen. The maid at
this time, happening to want a log of wood, requested
Teague to cut it for her. Taking the ax accordingly,
and going out, he was busy chopping, with his
head down; while, in the mean time, the Indian
[Page 075]
treaty-man had returned with one in Indian dress,
who was the chief of the Killinoos, or at least passed
for such; and whom he brought as having some recruiting
talents, and might prevail with Teague to
elope, and join the company. I presume, said the
Indian treaty-man, you are the waiter of the Captain
who lodges here at present. Teague hearing a man
speak, and lifting up his head, saw the leggins on
the one, and the Indian dress on the other; and with
a kind of involuntary effort, threw the ax directly
from him at the Killinno. It missed him but about
an inch, and fell behind. Teague, in the mean time,
raising a shout of desperation, was fixed on the spot,
and his locomotive faculties suspended; so that he
could neither retreat nor advance, but stood still, like
one enchained or enchanted for a moment; the king
of the Killinoos, in the mean time, drawing his tomahawk,
and preparing for battle.
The Captain, who was reading at a front window,
hearing the shout, looked about, and saw what was
going on at the wood-pile. Stop villain, said he, to
the king of the Killinoos; you are not to take that
scalp yet, however much you may value it. He will
not take an hundred dollars for it, nor 500, though
you make him king of the Kickapoos, or any thing
else. It is no trifling matter to have the ears slit in
tatters, and the nose run through with a bodkin, and
a goose quill stuck across; so that you may go about
your business; you will get no king of the Kickapoos
here. Under cover of this address of the Captain,
Teague had retired to the kitchen, and ensconced
himself behind the rampart of the maid. The
Indian treaty-man, and the Killinoo chief, finding the
measure hopeless, withdrew, and turned their attention,
it is to be supposed, to some other quarter, to
find a king of the Kickapoos.
[Page 076]
CHAPTER VIII.
CONTAINING OBSERVATIONS.
THE Captain was certainly to be commended
in declining to countenance the imposition of making
Teague a Kickapoo chief. Had he been disposed
to adventure in a contraband trade of this kind,
he might have undertaken it as a principal, and not
as furnishing an assistant only. He could have passed
Teague for a chief, and himself for an interpreter.
He might pretend to have conducted this prince
from a very distant nation, and that he had been several
moons in travelling, and wanted, the Lord
knows how much, goods for his people, that otherwise
would come to war. By this means, the Captain
would have taken the whole emolument of the
treaty, and not have been put off with a small share
of the profit which another made by it.
I should like to have seen Teague in an Indian
dress, come to treat with the commissioners. It
would be necessary for him only to talk Irish, which
he might pass for the Shawanese, or other language.
The Captain could have interpreted in the usual
words on these occasions.
[Page 077]
The policy of treating with the Indians is very
good; because it takes off a great deal of loose merchandize,
that might otherwise lie upon our hands,
and cuts away superfluities from the finances of the
government; at the same time, as every fresh treaty
lays the foundation of a new war, it will serve to
check the too rapid growth of the settlements. The
extremities of a government, like the arm or ancle
of an individual, are the parts at which blood is to
be let.
Struck with the good effects of treating with the
savages, and that our wise men who conduct affairs,
pursue the policy, I have been led to wonder, that
the agricultural societies, have not proposed treaties
with the wolves and bears, that they might not clandestinely
invade our sheep and pig folds. This might
be done by sending messages to the several ursine
and vulpine nations, and calling them to a councilfire,
to which four or five hundred waggon load of
beef should be sent, and distributed. If it should be
said, that this would restrain them no longer from
their prey than while they continued to be satiated,
the same might be said of the Potawatamies, or other
Indian nations; and yet we see that those at the
head of our affairs think it prudent to negociate with
them.
A bear and wolf treaty might seem an odd thing
at first, but we should soon come to be accustomed
to it. I should be sorry abuses should prevail, by
treaty-making men passing rough water-dogs for
bears, or mastiffs for wolves, upon our secretaries at
war, or subordinate commissioners; which might be
done as in the case of the savages, where it is pretended
that some tribes had not been at the general
treaty, now sends a chief to represent them and to
get goods.
[Page 078]
If our traders go amongst the wolves in consequence
of a treaty, I could wish they could check
themselves in the introduction of spirituous liquors.
A drunk wolf, or bear, would be a dangerous animal.
It may be thought that a bear of wolf chief would not
get drunk, as it would be setting a bad example to
their people; but I have seen Indian kings lying on
the earth drunk, and exposing their nakedness, like
Noah to Shem, Ham, and Japheth; and if Indians,
that are a sort of human creatures, act thus, what
might we not expect from a poor brute wolf or bear?
If treaties with the wolves and bears should be
found to succeed, it might not be amiss to institute
them also with the foxes. This is a sagacious animal,
and destructive to ducks and other fowls. It
would be a great matter to settle a treaty with them,
which might be done at the expence of nine or ten
thousand dollars laid out in goods.
[Page 079]
CHAPTER IX.
MEANING to remain some time in a certain
town to which he came, the Captain had his horse
put out to pasture, and took private lodgings. The
first day at dinner, he was struck with the appearance
of a young man who sat at table, but could not
be said to dine with them; for except a little water
and a bit of bread, he ate or drank nothing; and
though sometimes addressed, he made no answer.
There was a settled melancholy in his countenance,
and he often sighed deeply. He had been in this
house six weeks, and had behaved uniformly in the
same manner. In the evening he would walk by
himself till midnight. Whence he came, or what
was his object, no one knew. He had bespoke a
back room, and wished to have one where there was
but little light; also, that a little water, and a bit of
bread might be sent when he should require it. The
landlady not chusing to have a person in the house
who was unwilling to be seen, declined the circumstance
of sending in provisions to his room; but
thought it proper he should come to table. He did
so; but entered into no conversation, though much
pains was taken to engage him. He had paid his
boarding regularly, and did not seem to be in want
[Page 080]
of money. This was the account given by the family,
when the young man retired from dinner.
The Captain's curiosity was much excited; for
being a philanthropic man, he found himself interested
in the history of this person. Taking an opportunity
that very evening, when the young man
was walking in the back porch, he joined him, and
with the bluntness of a plain man, accosted him....
Sir, said he, it is from no motive of vain curiosity,
that I thus address you. It is from a disposition to
know and alleviate your griefs. For it is evident to
me that something hangs heavy on your mind. I
am a man, as you see, advanced in life, and have
had some experience. It is possible it may be in
my power to say or do something that may serve
you; at least it is my disposition to soothe your melancholy.
If it should be an unfortunate murder,
the guilt of which lies upon your mind, you will find
no accuser in me; I shall preserve a secret obtained
in this manner. Probably it may have been a duel,
and with such alleviating circumstances, that though
the law would take hold of it, humanity will excuse.
The young man finding the charge of murder, or
suspicion of it, ready to be fixed upon him, spoke.
Said he, I am no murderer, but a murdered man
myself. I am in love with a young woman of the
most celestial beauty, but of a cruel heart.
The beauty may be more in your brain than in
her face, said the Captain; for, as the poet says,
                           “The Lunatic, the Lover, and the Poet,
“Are of imagination all compact;
“One sees more devils than vast hell can hold;
“That is the madman: The other, all as frantic,
“Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt.”
[Page 081]
I am not unacquainted with the nature of this passion;
and have seen a gypsey myself, in my time,
that has had dominion over me. Perhaps I may
have been carried to as much extravagance as other
people; and therefore am a proper person to advise
against it. A principal source of my extravagance,
was an opinion that the jade who had hold of my affections
at the time, would pity me when she heard
of the pain which her beauty gave me; that she
would be afraid I would hang myself for her sake;
that she would come to sooth and caress me, in order
to prevent it. Far from it. My uneasiness was
the proof of her power to wound; and the more distress
I felt, the greater credit to her beauty. She
would not have lost a sigh which she caused me for
any consideration. My lamentations were as agreeable
to her, as the groans of the damned are to the
devil. And so it must be with every woman; because
self love induces it. Hanging is the last thing
they would be at. If they could get the lover bro't
to this, they are then at the height of fame. It falls
but to the lot of one here and there to have a man
drown himself for her; and when it does happen, it
makes such a noise that all covet it.
I would venture to say, that this female whom
you fast and pray about so much, would be very
unwilling to breathe the soul into you, were it once
out. Instead of fasting, she is eating; and while
you sigh in the night, she snores.
You have an idea, perhaps, that you may bend
her by your perseverance. That is a mistake. A
man that once comes to this state of sighing, and
dying, has but little chance; because he has surrendered
himself; and there is nothing more to be won.
Were there any possibility of succeeding, it would
be by first conquering yourself; dismissing all idea
[Page 082]
of her partiality for you; for it is owing to this secret
vanity, and self flattery, that you still pursue.
Absolute despair is the first step towards the cure
of love. It is either drowning or curing, with you
at present. As you have not drowned yourself, you
are in a fair way to be cured.
I know very well how you missed the matter with
this hussy. You appear to be a young man of great
sensibility of feeling; and I presume made your addresses
with great refinement of thought and manners.
You talked to her of flames and darts, and
flowers and roses; read poetry in the mean time,
and thought a great deal of Phillis, and Amaryllis;
and entertained her with names and incidents in romances,
and sung and recited soft love songs of
Amanda, and Phebe, and Colin; whereas your way
was to have talked careless nonsense, and sung such
songs as Pady Kelly, and Tristram Shandy-O; and
told her stories of girls that had ran off with pedlars,
or gone a campaigning with the soldiers. These
ideas are light and frolicsome, and co-natural to
springing love. Hence it is that men of but loose
and irregular education, succeed better with the fair
than scholars that are learned in the classics.
But to bring the matter to a point, the true way
is to get another mistress; and profit by your experience
with the first. No more of sighing and dying
in the case; but singing, and laughing, and
jumping like a young fox. Hint a little with respect
to certain matters that are between the sexes; but
let it be done in so delicate a manner, that, though
she understands you, she is not obliged to do it.
What I mean, is to make her think you would rather
debauch her than marry her. Bring her to
this suspicion, and I warrant you. Her whole study
[Page 083]
will be to entrap you into matrimony. For it is natural
for the human mind, when it observes a great
security and confidence in another, to imagine there
must be some ground for it. It will argue a consciousness,
on your part, of having a good or better in
yourpower. It will impress her with the same idea;
and imagination governs the world.
When the mind is bent upon any object, it is relieved
by the conversation of these who understand
it; and, as it were, dissolve with them in the same
ideas. The young man was pleased with the conversation
of the Captain, and seemed cheered; agreed
to join the family, and be sociable. By degrees he
became so; and what by the conversation of the
Captain, sometimes explaining and sometimes ridiculing
the passion of love; and the young ladies of
the family, in the mean time, rallying him on his
weakness, he came a little to his senses, (for love is a
phrenzy), and began to behave like a common man.
For it having come out now, that love was the cause
of his distress and singularity of conduct, some pitied
him, and others rallied it with good humour and
philanthrophy. It had, however, become the general
topic in the family, and was carried down to the
kitchen among the servants.
Teague hearing of it, took it into his head that he
must be in love too; and counterfeiting a demure
look, and absence of mind, and walking by himself,
and living on spare diet, as he had heard the young
man that was in love did, he wished to have it understood
that his mind was under the dominion of the
same passion. This being observed, was represented
to the Captain; who being at a loss to know what
was the matter, called Teague, and began to interrogate
him. The bog-trotter, with some seeming reluctance,
acknowledged that it was love. You in
[Page 084]
love, said the Captain, you great bear; with whom
are you in love? That dear cratur, said the Irishman,
that has the black hair, and the fair face, and her
name is Mrs. Sally, in the house there. She is a
fair as the wool or the snow, and gives me the cholic,
and the heart-burn, every time I look at her fair
eyes; God save her soul from damnation, but I love
her as I do the very food that I ate, or the clothes
that I ware upon my back.
It appeared to be Miss Sally, a very pretty girl,
the eldest daughter of the landlady; who, by the bye,
I mean the ladlady, was a widow, and had two daughters
and a niece with her; the handsomest of whom
was this Miss Sally, with whom Teague had become
enamoured. For simple and ignorant nature
will fasten on beauty, as well as the most instructed
in the principles of taste.
The Captain having been a good deal troubled,
heretofore, with the pretensions of this valet, in
wishing to be a member of the legislature, a philosopher,
a preacher, and now a lover, thought he had
now a good opportunity of repressing his presumption
for the future. There was a young man, a brother
in the family, who had been some time in the service,
as a lieutenant, and had leave of absence at
this time, on a visit to his mother and sisters. The
Captain well knew, that being in the pride and heat
of youth, he would consider Teague's advances to
his sister as an insult on the family, and chastise him
accordingly, With this view, counterfeiting every
possible disposition to serve the bog-trotter, the Captain
recommended to him to make a confident of the
brother, and endeavour to gain his interest with the
sister.
Accordingly, one morning when the officer was
in his chamber, Teague made his approach; and
[Page 085]
composing his woe-begone countenance as well as
he could, and explaining the cause of it, solicited his
interest with the lady.
There was a whip in a corner of the room, with
which the lieutenant had been riding; seizing this
hastily, he made an attack upon the person of the
lover, in a manner far beyond what was decent or
moderate. The valet retreating with considerable
outcries, made complaint to the Captain; who gave
him to understand, that as this outrage was committed
by his intended brother-in-law, it must be considered
in the nature of a family quarrel, and he
could not interfere.
The advances of Teague became the subject of
conversation in the family, and of much mirth and
laughter. The young man who had been in the
state of melancholy before described, and had been
cheered a little, was now in a great degree cured by
the imitation of the valet. For ridicule is more a
cure for love than reason. It is better to make the
patient laugh than think.
Having now a disposition to pursue his travels,
the Captain sent for his horse, and set out.
[Page 086]
CHAPTER X.
CONTAINING OBSERVATIONS.
THE observations which we make when the
narration of the fact is ended, are something like the
sentiments delivered in the chorus in the ancient plays,
a kind of moral on what was said; or like the moral
as it is called to a fable. In this view therefore, we
shall endeavour to say something.
The young man that we have seen so deeply in
love, was of a handsome personal appearance, and
of an eye and physiognomy that indicated sensibility
and understanding; and yet it is probable the female
of whom he was so much enamoured, may have been
both homely, and destitute of good mental qualities.
Whence could a repulse in this case happen. From
a thousand causes. We will specify some of them.
The very circumstance of his being beyond her first
hopes, may have put him beyond her last wishes....
A female wooed by a man her superior, may be led
to think she has still a chance for better; and that
there must be diamonds in her hair, or some hidden
advantage on her part, of which she was herself ignorant;
otherwise such advances would not be made
to her; or she may apprehend some defect on the
[Page 087]
part of the lover, of which he is conscious; otherwise,
he would not stoop beneath his natural expectations.
It is possible the Amanda may not have been of
the same class and quality with himself. This would
of itself account for the repulse. Should the eagle
come from the firmament, and make his advances to
the pheasant, he would find himself unsuccessful;
for the brown bird would prefer a lover of her own
species; or, should the rein-deer, which is a most
beautiful creature, woo a frog, the croaking animal
would recede into the marsh, and solace itself with
a paramour of its own chusing. When, therefore,
unexperienced young persons place their affections
on an object and do not find a suitable return, they
ought to save their pride, and make the inference,
that they had descended from their element, and
fastened on an animal unworthy of their notice.
These observations, in addition to those made by
the Captain to the young man, may be of use to unfortunate
lovers; and if so, it will be a recompence for
the trouble we have given ourselves in making them.
[Page 088]
CHAPTER XI.
IT was about an hour before sunset, that the
Captain fell in company with one who had the Cincinnati
eagle at his breast, and riding on together,
put up at an inn.
The landlady and the servants, having never seen
the badge before, were a good deal struck with the
effigy of the eagle, and the ribbon at which it was
pendant. Interrogating Teague, who had come in
company, and whom they took to be a common servant
to both, or at least acquainted with the affairs of
either, what was the meaning of that bird, or what
bird it was, that the gentleman had at his breast?....
Teague knew as little about it as they did; but unwilling
to be thought ignorant, took upon him to inform
them. It is, said he, a goose; and the maining
is, that the shentleman would ate a goose, if your
anouers would get one roasted this avening, for his
anour to ate with the Captain, who is my master; for
we have ate nothing all day long, and a roasted goose,
with a shoulder of mutton, a pace of poark, and bafe
and cabbage, and the like, would be a very good slake
for a fasting stomach. So, God save your soul, dear
honey, and make haste, and get a goose knocked
down and put to the fire, to keep their anours from
[Page 089]
starving, and to go to bed in a good humour, when
they have drank a cup of ale or a mug of cyder after
the goose; and, bless your soul, dear honey, let it be
a good large fat goose, that there may be a rib or a
wing left, that a poor sarvant may have something
to ate, at the same time. The shentleman was very
right to hold out a token, like the sign of a tavernkeeper,
with a goose, or a pigeon, or a turkey, that
paple may know what he wants, and not be after the
trouble of asking whether he would chuse roast bafe
and parates, or pork and parsnips, may it plase your
anour.
The landlady was a good deal distressed, having
no goose about the house. But sending out to her
neighbours, she made shift to collect a couple of
ducks, which Teague acknowledged would be a very
good substitute. Supper being ordered, these were
served up, with an apology from the landlady, that
she had not been able to procure a goose; which she
hoped the gentleman with the ribbon would excuse,
as she was informed that a roasted goose was so
much to his taste. A roasted goose to my taste!
said the officer; what reason have you to think that a
roasted goose is so much my choice? Surely madam
you cannot mean wit, or to insinuate that I myself
am a goose? for one animal preys not upon another;
the maxim is, dog will not eat dog. I cannot therefore
be a goose if I eat one.
Here the landlady explained her meaning, giving
the information she had received from the servant....
The Captain was greatly irritated, and would have
called him in and chastised him instantly, had not
the officer interfered; declaring that though it was
an eagle, not a goose that he wore at his breast, yet
he was not dissatisfied at the mistake, in as much as
[Page 090]
it had brought a couple of good ducks to the table,
a fowl of which he was particularly fond.
This incident, in itself laughable, led the officer to
relate the trouble he had had with a clergyman who
had made a worse mistake than this, taking the eagle
for a graven image, contrary to the injunction of the
decalogue, which prohibits the making any such representation
for the purpose of worship, as he alledged
this to be. In answer to the clergyman, he
had alledged the improbability that he who had been
in the service so many years, at a distance from
church, or church worship, except when a deistical
chaplain came in the way, should think so much of
religion, as to have any worship at all; much less to
have become superstitious, and to wear an image at
his bosom. The truth was, that he worshipped any
god, true or false, very little; at least, said few or no
prayers on such occasions; and was very far from
being an idolater, and paying adoration to a gold or
silver image; that this was nothing more than a
hieroglyphic, being the effigies of a bald eagle which
is a native of America, and designates the cause for
which her soldiery had fought; in the same manner
as the eagle was the standard of the Roman legion;
or the lion and the unicorn are the arms of England,
or the thistle that of Scotland; that the emblem of
the American bald eagle had on these principles,
been chosen by the Cincinnati for their badge; of
which society he was a member, and wore this device,
not venerating it as the image of any bird or
beast whatsoever.
The clergyman admitted that, in strictness, this
symbol might not be a graven image, as the term
would intend engraving on wood or metal, with the
point of an instrument; and under this mental reservation,
the wearer might save himself in saying that
[Page 091]
it was not a graven image: but it was at least a molten
one, which comes within the meaning of the prohibition;
being the representation of a fowl, and
doubtless for the purpose of idolatry. For what else
could be the use or meaning of it. It was not a
common broach, used as a ligament to the shirt or
coat; and it was unworthy of a man to suppose it
could be worn merely for ornament; boys and petit
maitres delighting in these things, but no one else.
It could not be any sort of time-piece, worn for the
purpose of ascertaining distance. In fact, it was the
portrait of a bird, the signal of some heathen deity;
as the cock was sacred to Esculapius, the owl to
Minerva, the peacock to Juno, and the dove to Venus.
The eagle was sacred to Jupiter; and it was most
probable, that it was in honour of this false god, that
the image was worn.
It answered no end to reason with the ecclesiastic;
for he grew but the more enraged, and insisted that
it was an idol; shewing from some texts of scripture,
that in the last times idolaters were to spring
up; and that this society, which the Cincinnati instituted,
might be the Gog and Magog spoken of in
the Apocalypse.
Said the Captain, It was natural enough for the
clergyman to make this deduction; as in maintaining
the cause of truth against Pagans, he is led to
dwell much on the subject of idolatry. But for my
part, the principal objection that lies with me, against
your institution, is that which lies against all partial
institutions, whatsoever; they cut men from the common
mass, and alienate their affections from the
whole, concentring their attachments to a particular
point and interest. A circumstance of this kind is
unfavourable to general philanthropy, giving a temporary
and artificial credit to those who are of the
[Page 092]
body, amongst themselves; so that while some lend
character, others borrow; and the individuals do not
stand on the natural basis of their own merit. On
this principle, I do not much approve of clubs and
societies, unless in the case of some humane or charitable
institution; or for the purpose of carrying on
some beneficial work or improvement. I do not
know that in your convening annually together, you
have any object in view of this nature. I have not
heard of any bridges you have built, or canals dug,
or locks made for the purpose of facilitating naviga-tion.
I dot see of what use your institution is; unless
it be, that your pronouncing an oration now and
then, may be favourable to eloquence. But of this
I much doubt, as such abstract discourses usually
degenerate into common-place. The great object
of an orator is, to persuade the judgment, or affect
the passions. In this case, the judgment is already
persuaded, affections already gained. Having therefore,
no object, what exertion can the mind make?...
Be the cause what it may, certain it is that such
compositions are seldom or ever found to be models
of eloquence; more especially where the subject is
of an extensive nature, as the revolution of America,
and the struggles of its heroes. For here so wide a
canvass is spread, that it is diffcult to fill it up; and
to take a particular part would seem to be a dereliction
of the rest; for which dereliction no special reason
could be given. You could not embrace all the
characters who have risen or have fallen, or catch at
particular names of the illustrious. Confining yourself,
therefore, to general observations, you make no
particular impression, and your orations become frigid
to the hearers.
I have felt the truth of all this, said the Cincinnati
gentleman, and the difficulty of composing an
[Page 093]
oration to satisfy my own wishes. For being appointed
by the society to pronounce one at our next meeting,
to which I am now on my way, I have been trying
my hand at it, and find it as you say, very difficult;
but have attributed this, not to the nature of the composition;
but to the inferiority of my powers. Not
so, said the Captain; for in the hands of the greatest
masters, this kind of composition labours. We do
not find that even the oration of Isocrates, on the
Lacedemonian war, which he was ten years in composing,
has obtained such celebrity among the ancients,
as such great labour would bespeak. I have
read the panegyric of Trajan by Pliny; and find it
but a cold composition. Plato's oration in honour of
those who had fallen in the battles of Marathon and
Platea, is the best of this kind that antiquity can produce,
and doubtless has great excellence in the simplicity
of the expression. The touches are delicate
and fine, and I do not know but we may place it
among the most beautiful productions. It amuses
with magic wildness of fancy, at the same time, restrained
and guided by an exquisite judgment. But
it is rather a poem than an harangue. For though
the composition is in prose, yet it breathes the soul
of a bard, and is inchanting by the flow of the words,
and the elevation of the images. In modern times,
the best thing we have of this nature, is the panegyric
of Cromwell, supposed to be written by the
great Milton, but not delivered. The ingenuity discovered
in the mode of praising him, deserves every
possible commendation. But the greater part of
addresses that I have seen to great men now-a-days,
or orations on public occasions, are turgid, or jejune,
and little worth our notice.
After this, said the Cincinnati gentleman, I shall
hesitate to show you the essay I have made towards
[Page 094]
a composition of this nature, as you appear to be so
good a judge in this respect, and to know the deficiencies
that may appear in any effort of this kind.
Nay, rather, said the Captain, you ought to be the
more confident in so doing; for knowing the difficulty
of the work, I shall be the more ready to excuse
what comes short of perfection.
I shall then take the liberty, said the Cincinnati
gentleman to read you a few paragraphs. I shall be
happy to hear it, said the Captain. The Cincinnati
gentleman read as follows:
Compatriots........I wish to say those things that
never have been said, and that never will be said
again. Because, in this case, there will be the characteristics
of novelty and singularity; the two great
constituents of pleasure, in all intellectual entertainments.
But what can I say new? Has not the whole
world resounded with the justness of the cause in
which we have been engaged; with the greatness of
the attempt to withstand the power of Britain? And
have not we, ourselves, felt, seen, and known the
great variety and changes of good or bad fortune?...
What will it contribute to our immediate enjoyment
to go over such scenes, unless the particular achievements
of each officer can be enumerated, which decency
forbids, and which indeed, cannot be done in
the limits of one harangue. Leaving, therefore,
ourselves and these scenes, wholly out of the question,
let us speak a little of those whom we left behind.
But why need we speak; for all time will
speak of them. The bards that shall live, will draw
hence their choicest allusions. Consider them, indeed,
as more happy than you because they ascended
from among the group of their companions, who were
at that time instant witnesses of their achievements.
The warriors who fall in battle, are the most
[Page 095]
glorious subjects of panegyric. Hector and Achilles, form
the most splendid part of the song of Homer, and
especially, because their bodies were interred in the
presence of the two armies. Oh what a noble object!
an army mourning a brave officer, and tears
drawn even from the foe, struck with the sublime of
his personal prowess, and excellent knowledge of the
military art. Much unlike, and far above thsoe who
languish with sickness on a bed in calm life, where
relations standing round, wish the departure of the
shade, and grasp at the property which he leaves
behind. But the fame of a soldier none but himself
can enjoy, there can be no heir or devisee of his property.
It is his own, and it mounts with him. His
blood only remains to bless the earth, from which
flowers and roses spring, and clothe the woods and
groves with enchantment and delight. For here the
song of poesy is awakened, and at morn, and noon,
and at still eve, their voices are heard who rehearse
where the brave fell, and where they sleep. Sublime
spirits! whether you inhabit the Pagan elysium
or the Christian heaven, you are happy; and listen
to those immortal lyres which are strung to the deeds
of heroes.
So much for the exordium of the oration; it was
all he had yet written. The evening passed away
in hilarity; and the conversation turned again on the
Cincinnati order; but particularly what may be called
the arms of the institution, viz. Britannia represented
as a fine woman, with her bosom bare, affrighted;
and Cincinnatus, an accoutred knight, attacking
her thus unarmed, as St. George did the
dragon; the eagle, the bird of Jove, in the mean
time grasping the lightning in his claws, an image
that would seem unnatural: Whereas the eagle might
be represented in the clouds near Jove, where the
[Page 096]
lightning might be left to work its forked course,
without the handing of the eagle; and in the other
figure, Cincinnatus might raise his lance against the
lion that supports the crown, not against the goddess
of the island.
From these strictures which the Captain, without
pretending to be a connoisseur, made, the transition
was easy to a criticism on the motto of the badge;
viz. Omnia reliquit, servare, rempublicam . The infinitive
is here used instead of the gerund, with the
preposition, ad servandam; as if it was intended to
express his motion, or change of place, and not the
object. But in fact, the motto does not at all express
that in which the merit of Cincinnatus consisted. It
was not in his leaving every thing to accept the
commission of the Roman senate; but in resigning
his commission, and, the work done, going to his
plough again. His praise would have been expressed
better by the phrase of, Victor ad aratrum redit ....
In fact, it cannot apply well to our army; most of
our officers not having much to leave when they accepted
their commissions; but discovered a Cincinnati-like
disposition in returning after war to the
employments of civil life. It is true, there would
have been less tinsel, and more bullion in the patriotism
of retiring without a badge, as Cincinnatus
did? But it is a thing that can do little harm, and it
is pleasing to indulge a whim.
It may doubtless be said, that there were officers
that left the plough, and fought, and returned to it,
as well as those who are within the limitations of the
institution, and entitled to a badge that, troops who
had served a short inlistment, and militia persons,
at least those who fought a little, were not wholly
destitute of some claim to the badge of merit. Even
those who lost property might be said to suffer, and
[Page 097]
advance pretensions to the reward of honour. Not
that all of them should claim gold medals, or even
silver; but some brass, some copper, pewter, a bit
of tin, or pot metal, just as the specific value of their
services might entitle them. Perhaps while some
wore it at the breast, others might be enjoined to
wear it at the breeches pocket, and thus, as well by
the point from which appendant, as by the bob itself,
designate the proportion of their honour.
After this, some things were said on the subject
of introducing honourary members; against which
the Captain declared himself: That every thing
ought to be preserved sui generis; as nature makes
no honourary animals; but all are of the species, or
take not the name: a bear is a real bear, a sheep is
a sheep; and there is no commixture of name, where
there is a difference of nature. But it did not appear
to be of any great consequence, one way or the other.
For the order would never come to any great head,
as there was no opposition given. For this is necessary
to keep alive attachment to what is arbitrary,
and founded, not in utility, but caprice. For as the
fire dies without air, so whim without contradiction.
The officer was a man of liberality and good sense,
and acknowledged the truth of this. But the evening
being now far spent, candles were called for, and
they went to bed.
[Page 098]
POSTSCRIPT.
THE preceding pages were written several
years ago; during which time the Captain has continued
his travels; and having been favoured with
his journal, I have occasionally made extracts, and
put them in the form of a continued history. Whether
I shall publish any more, will depend on the reception
of this.
I had first begun this work in verse, and have a
volume by me, about two parts in three as large as
Butler's Hudibrass; from which composition, I have
extracted this; thinking it might be more acceptable
in prose. When I visit this city next, I may
produce that in verse, and let the people take their
choice.
It is a happiness to a man to be able to amuse
himself with writing. For it is not every one that
can play upon the violin, or the flute; and the fingers
must be employed some way. I may be blamed in
not chusing some subject worthier of my studies,
and requiring a profound research. It might profit
the world more; but it would amuse myself less.
Omnis labor improbus; all toil is grievious. However
I have not been wholly inattentive to severer studies.
I have several law tracts by me; for which I mean,
in due time, to solicit a subscription. Nonum prematur
annum , in every work of moment, ought to be
observed.
[Page 099]
There are some light things which I may in the
mean time throw out; a comparison of Thucydides
with Livy; thoughts on the Egyptian hieroglyphics;
on the Carthagenian commerce; a comparison of the
French and English eloquence; a supplement to
Buffon, containing a description of several genera of
animals, not taken notice of by him; hints for the
improvement of the microscope; on the use of the
Masoretic points; on the recent origin of the earth;
on the criminal code of the Siamese, &c.
If the world will excuse these, I will give them
my word for it, they shall be troubled little more;
for except the examining my law tracts, I shall drop
my pen, finding it, as I advance in life, more advisable
to apply myself to making money. What
things have been written, and are now lying by me,
may occasionally see the light.
It is a good deal owing to my solitary residence in
the western country, at a distance from books and
literary conversation, that I have been led to write at
all. It was necessary to fill up the interstices of business.
If I should remain in that country, the same
circumstances may lead me to write still. If I
should remove to this city, or the seat of the federal
government, I shall avoid the tedium by other means.
I wish the present book to sell for at least as
much as will defray the expence of printing; for I
have no inclination to lose by it. If I had a little
time to stay in town, I could give it some celebrity
by extracts, and remarks upon it; publishing for
and against. For it is of no consequence how a
book is made famous, provided that it is famous.
The truth is, as I have said, I value this book for
little but the stile. This I have formed on the model
of Xenophen, and Swift's Tale of a Tub, and Gulliver's
Travels. It is simple, natural, various, and
[Page 100]
forcible. I hope to see it made a school book; a
kind of classic of the English language.
In looking over it, I find in the whole work, but
one word I would alter; it is near the beginning;
where I say figure on the stage, * instead of appear,
or make a figure on the stage. I have carefully
avoided the word unfounded instead of groundless,
a word in vogue, among members of Congress
especially. The word commit , is good, but being
lately introduced, and too much hackneyed, I have
not used it.
Language being the vestment of thought, it comes
within the rules of other dress; so that as slovenliness,
on the one hand, or foppery, on the other, is to
be avoided in our attire; so also in our speech, and
writing. Simplicity in the one and the other, is the
greatest beauty.
We do not know at what time the Greek language
began to be written as it was by Hesiod or Homer.
But we find it to have continued with little or no
change, from that time to the latest writers among
the Byzantine historians, a period of more than 3000
years. The Roman language is considered as improving
from the time of Ennius to the Augustine
age. The language of the orators, poets, and historians
of that time is the standard. It was not so
much in the use of particular words, as an affectation
in the thought, that Senaca is censured as corrupting
the language of the Romans. But Tacitus,
after him, writes in a pure stile; and I have found
but one conceit in expression, in his whole history:
meaning to give the geography of a country of a certain
tribe of the Germans; they are, says he, separated
from the Sequani by mount Jura, from the —
by the lake —, from the — by the river —,
[Page 101]
and from the Atabani by mutual fear . I do not find
so much fault with the stile of Pliny, as the heaviness
of his thoughts and expressions. However, the
Latin stile of writing retained its propriety and other
excellencies tolerably well, till the monks got possession
of it, and brought it down to a jargon that is
now exploded; and we recur to the pure originals of
Horace, Virgil, Cicero, and Sallust.
The French language is corrupting fast; and not
in the use of words, but in the affectation of surprise,
in the structure of the sentence, or the turn of
the expression. Mirabeau was free from this; but
not the Abbe Raynal. To give an example: meaning
to say, which he might have done in a simple
manner, that about this time the English cast their
eyes upon Goa, as a place where, &c. stating the
advantages of such a port; he begins by telling you,
that the English had occasion for such a port, which
&c. enumerating the advantages; and after this, with
surprize comes upon you, and tells you, they wanted
Goa. Enfin, says he; that is, in fine they wanted
Goa.
The English language is undoubtedly written better
in America than in England, especially since the
time of that literary dunce, Samuel Johnson, who
was totally destitute of taste for the vrai naturelle ,
or simplicity of nature.
The language of the Scots writers is chaste, but
the structure of the sentence of the academic Dr.
Robertson, offends in this particular; his uniformity
of period striking the ear with the same pulse, as
the couplets of our rhyme in Dryden and Pope.
Hume is superior to him in this respect, writing as
naturally as a man speaks; his stile rising and falling
with the subject, as the movements of the mind
themselves.
[Page 102]
I am quite out of patience with this Postscript. I
have written it hastily, the Printer informing me
that he had a few pages of the last sheet to fill, which
must be left a blank unless I had something more;
but as I am in a hurry about some small matters,
and have no disposition to write, I believe I shall
conclude, and let him leave the remainder blank, or
put in a paragraph of his own, if he chuses it.
It just me strikes to add, that I am this moment
come from being admitted a Counsellor in the supreme
court of the United States; having written
the preceding part of this postscript just before the
court sat.
In consequence of my admission in this honourable
court, I feel myself inspired with a consciousness
of new dignity, and am determined to relinquish the
indulgence of all these light amusements, and apply
myself for the future to fathom the profound depths
of the legal oceans and rivers.
Vale ,
Valete ,
Camenæ.
Footnotes * It is altered in this edition .
[Page 103]
BOOK III.
CHAPTER I. RISING early next morning, the Captain proceeded,
with his man Teague, on his journey, and
having breakfasted at an inn, where nothing material
happened, we shall pass it over, and come as far
down in the day as eleven o'clock; though, by the
bye, it might have been more correct to have said
up in the day, because the sun rises until twelve
o'clock, and then descends: But waving this nicety,
we shall go on to relate what actually took place. A
man was seen before them, driving, leisurely, a horse
with two kegs upon his back. The Captain took
him for what is called a pack-horse man, that was
carrying salt or sugar to some place of market. A
man of a philosophic turn of mind never hesitates
to enter into conversation with any character; because
human nature is the field whence he gathers
thoughts and expressions. The Captain therefore
accosting this man, said, Is it salt or molasses you
[Page 104]
have in your kegs, countryman? You are going home
from some warehouse, I suppose, where you have
been dealing; or going to set up a small shop of your
own, and vend goods. No, said the man, with a
Scotch-Irish pronunciation, there is an election this
day a little way before us, and I am setting up for
the legislature, and have these two kegs of whisky
to give a dram to the voters. The Captain was
thrown into a reverie of thought, and began to reflect
with himself on the nature of a republican government,
where canvassing by such means as this, can
work so great an evil as to elevate the most unqualified
persons to the highest stations. But, in the
mean time, roused a little from his thought, he had
presence of mind to recollect the danger in which he
was about to be involved afresh with his man Teague;
whom, now looking round, he saw to be about forty
yards behind him. It would have been adviseable to
have diverted him from the road, and taken a circuitous
rout, to avoid the election ground. But as the
devil, or some worse being, would have it, it was a
lane in which they were, with a fence on each side;
so that he could not divert without leaping like a
fox-hunter, or one of your light-horse men, to which
the sober nag on which he rode was not competent.
Besides, if Teague did not leap after him he would
be left exposed in the lane to the populace, who might
solicit him to be their representative. To turn directly
back would appear indecorous, and unless he
could urge Teague on before him, which was not
customary, and to which he might not, all at once
submit, his station would of course be in the rear,
where he might be picked up as a straggler, and
sent to some public body.
In this quandary of thought, looking up, he saw
the breakers just a-head; that is, the people met for
[Page 105]
the purpose of electing, and that it was now impossible
to avoid them. Depending, therefore, on his
own address, to make the best of circumstances, he
suffered himself to be carried along towards them,
keeping, in the mean time, an eye upon Teague,
who was the cause of his concern.
Meeting accidentally with a Scotch gentleman on
the ground, whom he knew, he communicated to
him the delicacy of his situation, and the apprehensions
he had on the part of Teague. Said the Scotch
gentleman, Ye need na gie yoursel any trouble on
that head, man; for I sal warrant the man wi the
twa kegs will carry the elaction: there is na resisting
guid liquor; it has an unco effec on the judgment
in the choice of a representative. The man
that has a distillery or twa in our country, canna
want suffrages. He has his votaries about him like
ane o' the Heathen gods, and because the fluid exhilerates
the brain, they might think he maun be a
deity that makes it; and they fa' down, especially
when they have drank ower muckle, and worship
him, just as at the shrine of Apollo or Bacchus,
among the ancients.
The candidate that opposed the man of the two
kegs, was a person of gravity and years, and said to
be of good sense and experience. The judgment
of the people was in his favour, but their appetite
leaned against him.
There is a story of one Manlius, a Roman, who
had saved the capitol from the Gauls, by putting his
breast to the ramparts, and throwing them down as
they ascended. When this man afterwards, elated
with the honours paid him, forgot the duties of a
citizen, wishing to subvert the republic, by usurping
power; the people, jealous of liberty, were incensed;
and being convicted of the crime, he was
[Page 106]
dragged to punishment. It was not the way, at that
time, to hang, as you would a dog; or beheaded, as
you would a wild beast: but to throw from a high
rock, which they called the Tarpeian. The capitol
was just in view, and while they were dragging him
along to the place he would stretch his hand towards
it; as much as to say, There O Romans, I saved
you: The populace at this would stop a while, irresolute
whether to desist or drag him on. While they
recollected his offence, they marched a step; but
when they cast their eye on the capitol, they stood
still; and not until some principal men directed the
rout out of the view of the capitol, could he be
brought to justice.
So it was with the multitude convened on this
occasion, between the man with the two kegs and the
grave-looking person. When they looked on the
one, they felt an inclination to promote him. But
when again on the other hand, they saw two kegs
which they knew to be replenished with a very cheering
liquor, they seemed to be inclined in favour of
the other.
But appetite prevailed, and they gave their votes
in favour of the man with the two kegs.
Teague in the mean time thinking he had another
chance of being a great man, had been busy, but to
no purpose; for the people gave their votes to the
man of the two kegs. The Captain thought himself
fortunate to be thus relieved, and proceeded on his
journey.
[Page 107]
CHAPTER II.
CONTAINING OBSERVATIONS.
THE perplexity of the Captain, in the late
transaction on account of his servant, may serve to
put those in mind who travel with a waiter, not to
go much about at the election seasons, but avoid
them as you would the equinoxes. It might not be
amiss, if, for this reason the times of electing members
for the several bodies were put down in the almanac,
that a man might be safe in his excursions,
and not have an understrapper picked up when he
could not well spare him.
I mean this as no burlesque on the present generation;
for mankind in all ages have had the same
propensity to magnify what was small, and elevate
the low. We do not find that the Egyptians, though
there were lions in the kingdom of Lybia, not far
distant, ever made a god of one of them. They rather
chose the cow kind, the stork, and the crocodile,
or the musk-rat, or mire-snipe, or other inferior
animal, for an object of deification. The Romans,
and the Greeks also, often worshipped small matters.
Indeed we do not find amongst any nation, that the
elephant, or rhinoceros, or elk, or unicorn, have been
made tutelar divinities. As,
[Page 108]
Cannons shoot the higher pitches,
The lower you put down their breeches.
The smaller the objects we take up, and make them
great, the act is greater; for it requires an equal art
in the formation of the glass to magnify, as to diminish,
and if the object is not of itself small, there
is no magnifying. Caligula is celebrated for making
his horse a senator. It would have been nothing to
have made a Roman knight one; but to endow a
mere quadruped with the qualities of a legislator,
bespeaks great strength of parts and judgment.
[Page 109]
CHAPTER III.
IT was about three o'clock in the afternoon that
the Captain came to an inn, where unhorseing and
unsaddling, Teague took the steed, and the master
went to sleep on a sopha in the passage. Unless it
is in a very deep sleep, the mind is in some degree
awake, and has what are called dreams. These are
frequently composed of a recollection of late events.
Sometimes the mind recovers incidents long since
past, and makes comments, but most usually, out of
mere indolence, takes up with what is next at hand.
It happened so on this occasion; for the Captain
thought himself still in conversation with the Scotchman
on the subject of the late election. It seemed
to him that he said, Mr. M`Donald, for that was the
name of the Scotch gentleman, you do not seem to
have a high opinion of our republican form of government,
when the most contemptible can obtain
the people's suffrages.
The Scotchman seemed to answer in his own dialect,
saying, Ye are much mistaken man, if ye draw
that conclusion. I think there is a worse chance
for merit to come forth where appointments are in
the hand of one, than when with many; for it is
much easier to scratch the rump of one, than to tickle
[Page 110]
the hurdies o' a thousand. Ye see our executive
dinna do much better in their appointments to judicial
and ministerial offices, than the rabble folk themselves
to the legislative. It all comes to the same
thing in every government; the wind blaws, and the
feathers and the fern get uppermost.
At this instant he was awakened by a bustle out
of doors. The fact was; a disagreement had taken
place between Teague and the hostler at the inn,
about their skill respectively in rubbing down and
currying horses. Teague had made use of a single
grab of hay, which he held with both hands, and impressed
the horse, rubbing him from side to side, and
up and down with all his might. The other with a
wisp in each hand, rubbed; the right hand passing
to the left, while the left hand passed to the right, in
a traverse or diagonal direction. The hostler valued
himself on having been groom, as he pretended,
to a nobleman in England, and therefore must be
supposed to understand the true art of currying.
Teague maintained his opinion, and way of working
with a good deal of obstinacy, until at last it came
to blows. The first stroke was given by Teague,
who hit the hostler on the left haunch with his foot,
when he was stooping down to shew Teague how to
rub the fetlock. The hostler recovering, and seizing
Teague by the breast, pushed him back with a
retrograde motion, until he was brought up by a
cheek of the stable door. Resting against this,
Teague made a sally, and impelled his antagonist
several yards back, who finding at length behind
him the support of a standing through, which the carriers
used for a manger to feed their horses, recovered
his position, and elanced Teague some distance
from the place of projection. But Teague still
keeping hold of the collar of his adversary, had
[Page 111]
brought him along with him, and both were now on
the ground struggling for victory. But Teague
turning on his belly, and drawing up his knees was
making an effort to raise himself to his feet. The
other in the mean time, partly by the same means,
and partly by retaining hold of the Irishman, was in
the attitude of rising with him. They were now
both up locked fast in the grasp of each other, their
heads inclining in conjunction, but their feet apart,
like muskets stacked after a review, or like the arch
of a bridge. The head of each supported by the
abutment of the feet. Few blows were given, and
therefore not much damage done. But the persons
present calling out fair play, and making a bustle in
the porch of the inn, had awakened the Captain,
and brought him to the door, who seeing what was
going on, took upon him to command the peace;
and the people supposing him to be a magistrate,
assisted to part the combatants; when the Captain
ordering both of them before him made enquiry into
the cause of the dispute. Teague gave his account
of the matter; adding, that, if he had had a
shallelah, he would have been after making him
know that the paple in dis country, could curry a
horse, or a cow, or a shape as well as any Englishman
in de world, though he have been hastler to a
great lord, or de king himself, at his own stable
where he has his harse.
Teague, said the Captain, this may be true; but
it was unbecoming a philosopher to attempt to
establish this by blows. Force proves nothing but
the quantum of the force. Reason is the only argument
that belongs to man. You have been the aggressor,
and therefore in the power of the law. But
as to you, Mr. Hostler, you have given provocation.
[Page 112]
I have had this lad with me several years, and I say
that he curries and rubs down a horse well. It is no
uncommon thing for men of your country, to undervalue
other nations. You naturally associate your
own attainments with the bulk and populousness of
large cities: But can the looking at a large building
or a tall spire, add an inch to your stature? Because
Fox is eloquent, is every one that hears him so too?
Is not human ingenuity the same here as on the
other side the water? Our generals have fought as
well, in the late war, as any Clinton, or Cornwallis
that you have. Our politicians have wrote, and our
patriots have spoke as well as your Burkes, or your
Sheridans, or any other; and yet when you come
here, there is no bearing the airs of superiority
you take upon yourselves. I wonder if the wasps
that are in your London garrets consider themselves
better than the wasps that are in these woods? I
should suppose it must be so; such is the contemptible
vanity of an island, which, taken in its whole
extent, would be little more than a urinal to one of
our Patagonians in South America. This the Captain
said to mortify the hostler; though, by the bye,
there is a good deal of truth in the observation, that
the people of an old country undervalue the new;
and when they think of themselves, conjoin the adventitious
circumstances of all that exists where
they have lived. I have found a prejudice of this nature
even with the wisest men. What wonder,
therefore, that a poor illiterate hostler should be subject
to it? But if he did undervalue an American
born, yet he ought to have considered that Teague,
though not born in Britain, was born near it, and
therefore might considerably approach the same
skill in any handy-craft work.
[Page 113]
In natural history, we do not value animals on account
of the place from whence they are taken, but
on account of what they are themselves; and in
things that are made by hands, not by the manufacturer,
but by the quality. We prefer the trout of
the rivulet, to the mullet of the river; and we judge
of the pudding not by the maker, but the eating.
There is a proverb that establishes this; for proverbs
are the deductions of experience, and to which we
assent as soon as expressed; containing in them an
obvious truth, which the simplest understand.
IT is not for the sake of any moral, that I have
related this scuffle that took place between the
Irishman and the hostler; but for the sake of shewing
in what manner incidents are to be related; that
is, with great simplicity of stile, and minuteness of
description. That part of Livy which contains the
combat of the Horatii, and Curatii, is frequently given
to the students at a college to translate, that by
this means they may be taught to imitate the like
delicacy in the choice of words, and particularity of
the recital. The above may answer the same purpose.
It is true there is not the like incidents in
this combat as in that described by Livy; never theless,
the same art is therein discovered, as the sound
critic will observe. I know it will be thought by
any one who reads it, that he could use the very
same words and give the same liveliness of picture,
were he to attempt it. Should he try it, he will find
himself disappointed......... Suder multum, frustraque
laboret, ausus idem....
It may be thought, that though stile is my object,
yet I might now and then bring in a thought to
[Page 114]
entertain the reader, and introduce some subject of
moment, rather than the fisty-cuffs of two raggamuffins.
I would just ask this question: Is not the talent
of the artist shewn as much in painting a fly, as
a waggon-wheel. If this were intended as a book
of morals, or physiology, and not as a mere belle
lettre composition, there might be something said;
as the case is, critics must be silent.
[Page 115]
CHAPTER IV.
I SHALL pass over the circumstances of the
Captain's dining, and Teague, reconciled with the
hostler, taking his mess in the kitchen; and go on to
what befel afterwards, when having saddled the
horse, they set out on their further perigrination....
Towards evening, when the shadows of the trees
began to be long, the Captain bidding Teague trot
along side addressed him in the following words:...
Teague, said he, it is true I am none of your knight-errants,
who used to ride about the world relieving
fair damsels, and killing giants, and lying out in
woods, and forests, without a house, or even tentcloth
over their heads, to protect them from the
night air. Nevertheless, as in some respects my
equipment, and sallying forth resembles a knight-errant,
and you a squire, would it be amiss, just for
a frolick, to lie out a night or two, that it might be
said that we have done the like. There is no great
danger of wolves or bears for while there are sheep,
or pigs to be got at, they will shun human flesh. It
will make a good chapter in our journal, to describe
you lying at the foot of an oak, and me, with my
head upon my saddle, under another; the horse, in
the mean time, feeding at a small distance. Teague
[Page 116]
thought it would be an easier matter to write down
the chapter in the journal, than lie under the trees
to beget it. It is true, said the Captain, navigators
and travellers, make many a fiction; and those who
have been in battle have killed many, that were
killed by others, or have not been killed at all....
But it would ill become a limb of chivalry to deviate
from the truth. It will be but about twelve hours
service lying on our backs and looking up to the
stars, hearing the howling of wolves, and observing
the great Bear in the heavens, the means by which
the Chaldeans, the first astronomers, laid the foundation
of the science. Fait, and I tink, said Teague,
it would be better to be in a good house, with a
shoulder of mutton to ate, before we go to slape,
than to have our own shoulders tarn by the bears, or
bruised by lying under great oaks. Of what use is this
astranomy? did any of these astranamers ever shoot
down a bear in the firmament, to get a joint of mate
for a sick person; and what good comes of lying in
de woods, to be ate up by the snakes; but fevers, and
agues, and sore troats, to get a long cough, and die
in a ditch like a dead horse, and be nothing thought
of, but be trown into ridicule like a black-head that
has no sense. It is better to go to a house and get
a bed to slape in, and warm shates about us, than be
lying in the dew like a frag, croaking the next day
like one of dase, and get no good by it.
The Captain had made the proposition merely to
amuse himself with Teague, and so did not insist
upon it.
Riding one or two miles, the sun was setting, and
a house appeared in view a little off the road. A lane
led up to it with a meadow on one side, and a pasture-field
on the other. On this last, there were
cattle of cows, and sheep grazing. The house in
[Page 117]
front, was a frame building, respectable in appearance,
from the height, and dimensions, but ancient.
There was a considerable extent of clear ground
around it, and an orchard hard by, with at least five
hundred apple-trees.
Having lodged chiefly at inns since his first setting
out, the Captain had the curiosity to diversify his
travels, by lodging at a private house this evening.
Accordingly riding up to the door, and calling out,
Halloa, which is the note of interrogation which is
used when a man wishes the master or mistress of
a family, or some one of the servants to come forth,
to know what he wants.
It happened that the mistress herself came to the
door, and seeing a good-looking man, in a green old
age, sitting on horse-back, with his servant ready to
take care of his steed should he think proper to dismount,
she made a low curtsey, as much as to say,
Sir, I should be happy to know, in what manner I
can serve you.
Madam, said the Captain, to tell you the truth, the
night is drawing on, and I have been reflecting with
myself, whether it were better to lodge in the woods,
or take a house. All things considered, I have
thought it most adviseable to take a house, and the
only question that now remains is, whether I can
get one.
The lady smiling with much complacency, and
inclining her head forward, and her middle back, replied,
I should be happy, Sir, if this small mansion
could afford you an accommodation worthy of your
suite. Madam, said the Captain, I shall be happy if
the guest can be worthy of the accommodation.
Alight, Sir, said the lady, we shall be happy to
receive you. Having alighted, he was introduced to
a very decent apartment, where the lady seating
[Page 118]
herself in a large cushioned chair, and pulling out her
box, took a pinch of snuff, and laid the box upon the
cushion. She was a good-looking woman, being
about fifty-seven years of age, with grey hairs, but a
green fillet on her left eye-brow, as it seems the eye
on that side was subject to a defluxion of rheum,
which made it expedient to cover it. It could not be
said that her teeth were bad, because she had none.
If she wanted the rose on her cheek, she had it on
her nose, so that it all came to the same thing. Nothing
could be said against her chin, but it used her
mouth ill in getting above it. She could not be said
to be very tall, but what she wanted in height, she
made up in breadth; so that multiplying one dimension
by the other, she might be considered as a sizeable
woman. After conversing a little while, the
lady withdrew, to give directions in the kitchen what
to provide for supper.
The Captain in the mean time taking up a pipe,
which he saw on the mantle-piece, amused himself
with a whiff.
The old lady in the mean time was in the kitchen,
and the first thing she observed was Teague, reclining
in an angle of the chimney fast asleep. Presuming
that he had been inattentive to his master's horse
which had been sent to the stable, she desired a servant
to give him a jog, and wake him. Teague,
awaking, saw the old lady, and addressed her. Dear
madam, what a great happiness it is for poor sharvants
to have gentle folks about them? God bless
your anour's ladyship; you are just for all the world
like my cousin Shala Shagney, the handsomest woman
in all Ireland, and was married to Shan Crossan,
who had a great estate, and a flock of shape into the
bargain. She used to say to me when I was aslape,
[Page 119]
Teague are you awake; and when I was awake,
Teague are you aslape, dear honey.
There is something in an Irishman which has an
admirable effect upon the fair; whether it is owing
to that love-creating lustiness of person and freshness
of complexion which they usually possess; or
the delicacy and quantum of the flattery of which
they are not niggardly; nor need they be so, no persons
having a greater stock to come and go upon.
For so it was, that the language of the bog-trotter
had gained the good will of this same Hecuba, and
she ordered him a tankard of metheglim, to make
himself merry with the servants.
Returning to the parlour she continued her conversation
with the Captain; but her mind running
upon Teague she could not avoid introducing his
name, with a view to learn some particulars of his
history. This is a civil young man, said she, that
came with you, and of a conversation above ordinary
persons. The captain being an observer of the passions
of the mind, as they express themselves in the
eye and aspect, saw that Teague had made some
impression on the affections of this goodly old maiden
gentlewoman: Nor was he displeased with it; for
his first alarm was, that she would have fastened on
himself; but her passion taking this course, would
be less troublesome. Framing his answers therefore
to her questions, with a view to favour what had so
fortunately commenced, he gave her to understand,
that, though in the disguise of a servant, Teague was
no inconsiderable personage; that he had been a
member of Congress one or two years; though, by
the bye, this was stretching the matter a little, as he
had only had it in his power to be one. But if it is
allowable to strain a point at all, it is in the recommendation
of one who stands well enough already;
[Page 120]
for not being taken on the recommendation, there is
no deception; and it is but civility to make one more
pleased with their choice, than they already are.
The Captain said nothing of his having preached,
or being about to preach; for the idea of sermons,
and catechisms, impressing the mind with religious
awe, is unfavourable to love. As to his being a member
of the philosophical society, it could be neither
here nor there with a lady, and therefore he was silent
with respect to this also.
Supper being brought in, they sat down; but little
conversation passed; the mind of the enamorata being
more in the kitchen than in the parlour. After supper,
the Captain sitting sometime, and seeming
drowsy, was asked by his hostess, if he chose to go
to bed: Answering in the affirmative, a servant waited
with a candle; and bidding her good night, he was
lighted to his chamber.
No sooner had he withdrawn, but the old lady
sent her compliments to Teague, to take a seat in
the parlour; where sitting down to a roasted duck,
just brought in, a few slices of gammon on a plate,
a piece of veal, and a couple of roasted potatoes, he
was desired to partake: the old lady casting amourous
looks at him, in the mean time. I say looks;
for though she had but one eye to look with, yet
looking often, she might be said to cast looks. It was
a new thing to the Irishman to be at a table with
a servant at his back; and he began now to think
that fortune meant to do him justice: and with an
ease, and self-possession, which some would call effrontery,
he did the honours of the table; helping
himself, and talking as fast as consisted with his
disposition to satisfy his appetite. May it please
your ladyship, said he, I am a poor sharvant now,
but I have seen the time, when I have ate at as good
[Page 121]
a table as the Captain my master, though he rides
upon a horse and I trot on foot. My uncle, by the
mother's side, Shan O'Gan, had a deer-park, and
kept race-horses, to go to de fair, and the city of
Cork: and my father's brother, Phelim O'Regan,
was a justice of pace, and hung paple for staleing
shape. I might have been a member of parliament,
if I had staid at home and went to school; but sending
a challenge, and fighting wid my own dear cousin
Denis O'Conelly, I had to fly de kingdom, and
brought noting wid me but my brogs, and ten guineas
in my purse; and am now noting but a poor
sharvant, unless your ladyship would take pity upon
me, and marry me; for I am wary of this way of
tratting after a crazy Captain, that has no sense to
curry his own harse; and I have to fight duels for
him, and keep him from being knocked down
like a brute baste; for dis very day, when he had
a quarrel wid a hastler, and was trown upon his
back, I lifted him up, and said, Dear honey, are
you dead? took de hastler by de troat, and choaked
him, and he could not spake, but said, Dear shentlemen,
spare my life! so dat if your ladyship will take
me to yourself, I will stay wid you, and take care of
de harses, and cows, and de shape, and plant parates,
and slape wid you, and ask not a farthing, but your
own sweat self into de bargain! for you are de beauty
of de world! and fastin or slaping, I could take you
to my arms, dear crature, and be happy wid you.
The lady was by this time entirely won, and gave
him to understand, that in the morning, after consulting
a friend or two, the marriage might be celebrated.
I give only a sketch of the courtship that took
place, for a great deal was said: and it was near
midnight before the lovers could prevail upon
[Page 122]
themselves to part: when Teague was lighted to his bed,
and had as good as that in which the Captain slept,
which was a new thing to him, being accustomed to
pig in with hostlers and servants, at the places
where they lodged.
The Captain was up early in the morning, and
astonished not to find Teague stirring, but enquiring
of the servants where Teague slept, he was shewn
up a pair of stairs, which he ascended, thinking he
had one or two more to ascend before he reached the
garret. But what was his astonishment, when he
was shewn into a room on the second floor, where
he found Teague snoring on a feather bed with curtains.
Waking him, Teague, said he, this goes beyond
all your former impudence: to crawl up out of
the kitchen, and get into a feather bed. Please your
anour, said Teague, to ring a bell, and call up a
sharvant, to bring boots and slippers; for I am to be
married dis marning.
The Captain was thunder-struck; and comprehending
the whole of what had taken place, saw his
faux fias in recommending him to the hostess; and
now it only remained, to cure the blunder he had
made, if it was at all curable.
We are short sighted mortals; and while we stop
one leak, the water rushes in at another. The very
means that we use to save ourselves from one evil,
leads us to a worse. The Captain had need on this
occasion of all his address. Composing himself, he
dissembled, and spoke as follows:
Teague, said he, will you that are a young man,
and have great prospects before you, consign yourself
to the arms of an old woman. Her breath will
kill you in the course of a fortnight. The fact is,
she is a witch, and inchantress; she made the same
proposition to me last night, of marrying me; but I
[Page 123]
declined it. The world is full of these sort of cattle.
There was one Shagnesa Circe, in old times, that
used to gather all she could in her net, and transform
them into hogs. Sir Teague Ulysses was the
only one that had the sense to keep clear of her music
and avoid her. Did you see that drove of hogs
before the door, when we rode up last evening....
They are nothing more than stragglers which she
has transformed into swine. I did not sleep a wink
last night, thinking of the danger to which you were
exposed, and indeed I expected nothing less, than
to find you this morning a barrow, fattened up for a
feast, a day or two hence. Did you think such an
old haridan as this can have any natural concupiscence
for a man; or if she has, it is for a few days
only, until she can make him fit for slaughter.....
Then by throwing a little water on him, or by the
bare blowing of her breath, she makes a beef-cow,
or hog-meat of him, and he finds the knife at his
throat, and scalding water taking off his bristles, and
his guts out, and is into the pickling-tub before he
knows what he is about. Do you think, Teague,
that I have read books for nothing? Have you not
seen me in my study, morning and night, looking
over Greek, and Hebrew letters, like partridge-tracks?
All this to find out what was going on up and down
the world. Many a history of witches and conjurers,
I have read, and know them when I see them, just
as I would my own sheep, when I am at home. Better
indeed, for unless my sheep are marked, I could
not know them; but marked or not marked, I know
witches; and if I am not mistaken, this is the greatest
witch that ever run. She was all night in my
room, in the shape of a cat. It is God's mercy, that
she had not changed herself into an alligator, and eat
you up before the morning. When I came into the
[Page 124]
room I expected to find nothing else but bones, and
particles of hair, the remnant of her repast; but it
seems she has thought you not fat enough, and has
given you a day or two to run, to improve your flesh,
and take the salt better. The worst thing, after
transformation, is the having you cut, in order to
make you fatter and better pork, which is generally
done the first day; and castration is a painful operation,
besides the loss of the part. I have had several
of my acquaintances treated in this manner, falling
in with old women whom they took for fortunes; but
were in reality witches, and had dealings with the
devil.
Teague by this time was out of bed, and had
dressed himself in his overalls and short coat, and
was ready for a march. Indeed he wished to escape
as soon as possible; and descending the stairs, going
to the stable, and sad dling the horse, they both set
out, without taking leave. It was in this manner
Eneas quitted Dido, and got a ship-board, before she
was awake; and the only difference was, that Teague
had left no little Iulus in the hall, to put her in mind
of the father.
TRAVELLING along, the Captain could not
but observe to Teague, the injudicious choice he was
about to make, even had the woman not been a necromancer.
For the man who surrenders himself
to the arms of a superannuated female, for the sake
of fortune, acts a part not less unworthy and disgraceful,
than the prostitute who does the same for
[Page 125]
half-a-crown. While a man has the use of his limbs
and arms, he ought to be above such mercenary motives;
and true happiness can be found only in congruity,
and what is natural. Teague seemed still to
have some hankering after the ducks, and the feather
bed, but as they proceeded, they recollection
became more faint, for distance and time, is the
cure of all passions.
[Page 126]
CHAPTER V.
PROCEEDING four or five miles, they breakfasted;
and afterwards, going on a mile or two further,
they came to a church where a number of people
were convened, to hear the decision of an ecclesiastical
consistory, met there on an affair which
came before them. It was this: Two men appeared,
the one of a grave aspect, with a black coat; the
other without the same clerical colour of garb; but
with papers in his pocket which announced his authority
to preach, and officiate as a clergyman. The
man with the black coat, averred, that coming over
together, in a vessel from Ireland, they had been
messmates; and while he was asleep one night, being
drowsy after prayers, the other had stolen his
credentials from his pocket. The man in possession
of the papers, averred they were his own, and
that the other had taken his coat, and by advantage
of the cloth thought to pass for what he was not.
The consistory found it difficult, without the aid
of inspiration, to decide; and that faculty having
now ceased, there were no other means, that they
could discover, to bring the truth to light.
The Captain being informed of this perplexity,
could not avoid stepping up, and addressing them as
[Page 127]
follows: Gentlemen, said he, there is a text in your
own scripture, which I think might enable you to
decide: It is this, “ by their fruits ye shall know them .”
Let the two men preach; and the best sermon take
the purse; or laying aside the figure, let him that
expounds the scripture best, be adjudged the clergyman.
The proposition seemed reasonable, and was
adopted; the competitors being desired to withdraw
a little, and conn over their notes, that they might
be ready to deliver a discourse respectively.
The Captain observing the countenance of him
in possession of the papers, was sensible, from his
paleness, and dejection of aspect, that he was the impostor.
Going out therefore shortly after, and falling
in with him, as he walked in a melancholy mood,
at a little distance from the church, said he to him,
I perceive how it is, that the other is the preacher;
nevertheless I would wish to assist you, and as I
have been the means of bringing you into this predicament,
I should be disposed to bring you out....
Let me know how the case really stands.
The other candidly acknowledged, that having
been a yarn merchant in Ireland, his capital had
failed, and he had thought proper to embark for this
country; and coming over with this clergyman, he
had purloined his papers; and would have taken his
coat, had it not been too little for him; a thing which
never struck the ecclesiastical tribunal. But the
matter being now reduced to an actual experiment
of talents, he was at a loss; for he had never preached
a sermon in his life. It was true, he had heard
sermons and lectures in abundance; and had he been
suffered to go on and preach at his leisure amongst
the country people first, he might have done well
enough; but to make his first essay in the presence
[Page 128]
of a learned body of the clergy, would hazard a detection;
but now he saw his oversight in not having
taken the notes of the other, at the same time he
took the vouchers of his mission.
The Captain encouraged him, by observing, that
there were few bodies, ecclesiastical or civil, in which
there were more than one or two men of sense; that
the majority of this consistory, might be as easily
imposed upon, as the lay people; that a good deal
would depend on the text that he took; some were
easily preached upon; others more difficult. An
historical passage about Nimrod, or Nebuchadnezzar,
or Sihon, king of the Amorites, or Og, king of Bashan;
out of Genesis, or Deuteronomy, or the book
of Judges, or Kings, would do very well; but that
he should avoid carefully the book of Job, and the
Psalms of David, and the Proverbs of Solomon;
these requiring a considerable theological knowledge;
or, at least, moral discussion and reflection.
Keep a good heart, said he, and attempt the matter.
The issue may be better than you apprehend.
With this, taking him a little further to the one
side, where his horse was tied, he took out a bottle
from his saddle-bags, with a little whisky in it, which
Teague had put there, and gave him a dram. This
had a good effect, and raised his spirits, and he
seemed now ready to enter the lists with his antagonist.
The other, in the mean time, had gone in, and
was ready, when called upon, to hold forth. The
man with the papers returning, with the Captain
not far behind took his seat. The board signified,
that one or other might ascend the pulpit. The credential
man, wishing to gain time, to think farther
what he was about to say, but affecting politeness,
yielded precedence to the other, and desired him to
preach first. Accordingly stepping up, he took his
text and began.
[Page 129]
THE SERMON. Prov. VIII. 33. Hear instruction and be wise, and
refuse it not .
INSISTING on these words, I shall enquire,
1. Whence it is that men are averse to instruction.
2. The misfortune of this disposition. Lastly , Conclude
with inferences from the subject.
1. Whence it is that men are adverse to instruction .
The first principle is indolence . The mind loves
ease, and does not wish to be at the trouble of thinking.
It is hard to collect ideas, and still harder to
compose them; it is like rowing a boat: whereas,
acting without thought, it is like sailing before the
wind, and the tide in our favour.
The second principle is pride . It wounds the
self-love of men, to suppose that they need instruction.
We resent more the being called fools than
knaves. No man will own himself weak and uninformed.
In fact, he has not humility to think he is;
or, if he should be conscious of a want of knowledge
he is unwilling that others should have the same
opinion; and he will not submit to be instructed, as
that would imply that he is not already so.
The third principle is passion . When we are
disposed to satisfy the desires of the constitution, or
the affections of the mind, which are unlawful, we do
not wish to hear dissuation from the indulgence.
The lecture comes to torment before the time, when
the consequence must afflict.
[Page 130]
Under the second head, we shall shew the misfortune
of this disposition . It is what, in early life, begins
to fix the difference of persons. The hearer of
instruction, even with more moderate parts, becomes
the more sensible boy. The hearer of instruction
has a better chance for life and mature years. Into
how many dangers do young persons run; leaping,
climbing, running, playing truant, and neglecting
books? Into what affrays too will passions prompt
them, when they begin to feel the sinew strong, and
the manly nerve braced? They value corporeal
strength, which they have in common with the
horse, or the ox, and neglect the cultivation of the
mind, which is the glory of our nature. What is a
a man without information? In form only above a
beast. What is a man negligent of moral duty?
Worse than a beast; because he is destitute of that
by which he might be governed, and of which his
nature is capable; and without which, he is more
dangerous, in proportion as he is more ingenious.
I shall conclude with inferences from the subject.
It may be seen hence, with what attention we
ought to hear and with what observation, see. The
five senses are the avenues of knowledge; but the
reflection of the mind on ideas presented, is the
source of wisdom. Understanding is better than
riches; for understanding leads to competency and
to know how to use it. Laying aside, therefore, all
indolence, pride, and passion, let us hear instruction,
and be wise and refuse it not.
This, reverend brethren, is a short sermon. It is
one in minature; like the model of a mechanical invention,
which is complete in its parts, and from
whence may be seen the powers of the inventor. I
did not intend to take up your time with a long
[Page 131]
dis-course; because, ex pede Herculem ; you may know
what I can do by this essay.
The fact is, I am regularly educated, and licensed;
but this my competitor, is no more than a yarn
merchant; who, failing in his trade, has adventured
to this country: And coming over in the vessel with
me, took the opportunity one night, when I was
asleep, and picked my fob of these papers, which he
now shews.
Thus having spoke, he descended.
The other, in the mean time, had been at his wits
end what to do. The technical difficulty of taking a
text, and dividing it under several heads, and spliting
each head into branches, and pursuing each with
such strictness, that the thoughts should be ranged
under each which belonged to it, as exactly as you
would the coarser yarn with the coarser, and the
finer with the finer; or put balls with balls, and hanks
with hanks. At last he had determined to take no
text at all; as it was much better to take none, than
to take one and not stick to it. Accordingly, he resolved
to preach up and down the scripture, wherever
he could get a word of seasonable doctrine.
Mounting the pulpit, therefore, he began as follows:
[Page 132]
SERMON.
THE first man that we read of was Adam, and first
woman Eve; she was tempted by the serpent, and
eat the forbidden fruit. After this she conceived
and bare a son, and called his name Cain; and Cain
was a tiller of the ground, and Abel a keeper of
sheep; for she conceived and bare a second son, and
called his name Abel. And Cain slew Abel. There
were several generations unto the flood, when Noah
built an ark, and saved himself and his family. After
the flood, Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat
Jacob, and Jacob begat Joseph and his brethren.
Potiphar's wife, in Egypt, took a fancy for Joseph,
and cast him in a ward; and Potiphar was a captain
of Pharaoh's guards; and Joseph interpreted Pharaoh's
dream of the lean cattle; and there were
twelve years famine in the land; and Moses passed
for the son of Pharaoh's daughter, and married Jethro's
daughter, in the land of Midian, and brought
the Israelites out of the land of Egypt; and Joshua
the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh;
and the walls of Jericho fell down at the sound of
ram's horns; and Sampson slew a thousand with
the jaw-bone of an ass; and Delilah the harlot; and
Gideon, and Barak, and Jephthah, and Abinoam
the Giliaditish; and Samuel, and Saul, and the prophets;
and Jonathan and David; and Solomon built
him an house; and silver was as plenty as the street
stones in Jerusalem; Rehoboam, and Jehosophat,
and the kings of Israel and Juda; Daniel was cast
into the lions' den; and Shadrach, Meshach, and
[Page 133]
Abed-nego; and Isaiah and Jeremiah; and Zachariah,
and Zerobabel; Matthew, Mark, Luke and John,
and the apostles; Mary Magdalene, out of whom
were cast seven devils; and the father of Zebedee's
children; and Pontius Pilate, and the high priest;
and Ananias and Saphira, and the seven trumpets in
the Revelations, and the dragon, and the woman.
Amen. I add no more.
The lay people present were most pleased with
the last discourse; and some of the younger of the
clergy: But the more aged, gave the preference to
the first. Thus it seemed difficult to decide.
The Captain rising up, spoke: Gentlemen, said
he, the men seem both to have considerable gifts,
and I see no harm in letting them both preach.
There is work enough for them in this new country;
the first appears to me, to be more qualified for
the city, as a very methodical preacher; but the last
is the most practical; and each may answer a valuable
purpose in their proper place.
The decision seemed judicious, and it was agreed
that they should both preach. The man who had
been the yarn merchant, thanked their reverences,
and gave out that he would preach there that day
week, God willing.
The clergy were so much pleased with the Captain,
that they gave him an invitation to go home
with them to an elder's house, just by; but recollecting
the trouble he had with Teague on another occasion,
and the danger of being drawn into a like
predicament, should he fall into conversation with
the clergyman, and take it into his head to preach,
he declined the invitation, and hastened to get his
horse, and having Teague alongside, proceeded on
his journey.
[Page 134]
CHAPTER VI.
THE ensuing day, the Captain arrived in a certain
city, and put up at the sign of the Indian Queen.
Taking a day or two to refresh himself, and get a new
pair of breeches made, and his coat mended, which
was a little worn at the elbows, he went to look about
the city. The fourth day, when he had proposed to
set out to perambulate this modern Babylon, and
called for Teague to bring him his boots, there was
no Teague there. The hostler being called, with
whom he used to sleep, informed, that he had disappeared
the day before. The Captain was alarmed:
and, from the recollection of former incidents, began
to enquire if there were any elections going on at
that time. As it so happened, there was one that
very day. Thinking it probable the bog-trotter, having
still a hankering after an appointment, might offer
himself on that occasion, he set out to the place
where the people were convened, to see if he could
discover Teague amongst the candidates. He could
see nothing of him; and though he made enquiry,
he could hear no account. But the circumstance of
the election drawing his attention for some time,
he forgot Teague.
[Page 135]
The candidates were all remarkably pot-bellied;
and waddled in their gait. The Captain enquiring
what were the pretensions of these men to be elected;
he was told, that they had all stock in the funds,
and lived in brick buildings; and some of them entertained
fifty people at a time, and eat and drank
abundantly; and, living an easy life, and pampering
their appetites, they had swollen to this size.
It is a strange thing, said the Captain, that in the
country, in my route, they would elect no one but a
weaver, or a whisky-distiller; and here none but fat
swabs, that guzzle wine, and smoke segars. It was
not so in Greece, where Phocion came with his plain
coat, from his humble dwelling, and directed the
counsels of the people; or in Rome, where Cincinnatus
was made dictator from the plough. Something
must be wrong, where the inflate, and pompous
are the objects of choice. Though there is one
good arising from it, that there is no danger of my
Teague here. He could not afford to give a dinner;
and as to funds, he has not a single shilling in them.
They will make him neither mayor nor legislator in
this city.
Na faith said Mr. M`Donald, the Scotch gentleman
who had been present at the embarrassment of
the Captain, on the occasion of the former election,
and having, a few days before, come to the city, and
observing the Captain in the crowd, had come up to
accost him, just as he was uttering these last words
to himself: Na faith, said he, there is na danger of
Teague here, unless he had his scores o' shares in
the bank; and was in league with the brokers, and
had a brick house at his hurdies, or a ship or twa on
the stocks. A great deal used to be done, by employing
advocates with the tradesmen, to listen to the
news, and tell them fair stories; but all is now lost
[Page 136]
in substantial interest, and the funds command
every thing. Besides, this city is swarming with
Teagues, and O'Regans, and O'Brians, and O'Murphys,
and O'Farrels; I see, that they cannot be at
a loss without your bog-trotter.
The Captain having his fears eased, in this particular,
returned home, greatly troubled, nevertheless,
that he could not come up with the Irishman.
[Page 137]
CHAPTER VII.
REFLECTING with himself, that Teague was
addicted to women, and that he might have gone to
some of those houses, which are not in the best repute
with the religious part of the community, the
Captain thought it might not be amiss to make enquiry.
Being informed by the waiter, that he had
overheard gentlemen at the house, in their cups,
speak of a certain Mrs. Robeson, who kept a house
of that kind; and, as far as he could understand, it
was in such a part of the city, a few doors from
such a street.
The Captain having set out, coming into the
neighbourhood, and making enquiry, was directed to
the house. Knocking, and on a servant coming to
the door, enquiring for Mrs. Robeson, he was shewn
into a parlour, and in a little time the old lady entered.
Being seated, he took the liberty of addressing
her: Madam, said he, I am not unacquainted
with the stile and designation of your house. Why
as to that, said she, we do the best we can; but the
times are hard, and it is a very difficult thing to pick
up a good looking healthy girl, now a days. So many
young women, since the war is over, having taken
to virtuous ways, and got married, has almost
[Page 138]
broke us up. But I have been fortunate enough to
light upon one, yesterday, that is a rare piece, just
from the country, and I am sure.......
It is not in the way that you mean, madam, said
the Captain, that I take the liberty to call upon you
I have a servant man, of the name of Teague O'Regan,
that is fond of women, and has been absent
some days; and it has occurred to me, that he may
have come to your house, or some other of the like
kind; and may be skulking, to avoid my service.
As he has little or no money, it is impossible he can
be much in your way, and I could make it better
worth your while to inform on him, and surrender
him up.
Teague O'Regan, said the old lady! snuffing;
Teague O'Regan! I would have you know, sir,
that no Teague O'Regans come here; we keep a
house for the first gentlemen, not for waiters or understrappers,
or any of the common sorts. There is
no half-crown or five shilling pieces here. Teague
O'Regan indeed! there is no Teague O'Regan at
this house. We have meat for his master. I was
saying there was a young woman just now from the
country, that looks more like a woman of family,
than a country girl; but is so melancholy and mopish,
that she scarcely speaks, and stands in need of
some one to talk to her, and keep her in spirits. She
is fit for any gentleman. Teague O'Regan! Humph
There is no Teague O'Regan puts his foot into my
door.
The Captain assured her, that he by no means
meant to give offence. That though the bog-trotter
could not have access to her first rooms; yet he did
not know but he might have got in with some of her
under maids, and be about the kitchen.
[Page 139]
The lady, being now appeased on the score of
Teague, was in a good humour, and renewed her
hints to the Captain, with respect to the young woman.
She is, said she, as good a looking girl as
ever came to my house; and has not seen a single
person but yourself, whom she has not yet seen; but
may see, if you chuse; and a very pretty girl she is;
but keeps mopish and melancholy, as if she was
crossed in love, and had come to town for fear of her
relations, and wishes to keep out of sight of every
body.
The Captain being no stranger to the art these
matrons use in their addresses, to enhance the value
of their wares, was but little moved with the recommendation
she had given. But as there were some
circumstances in the account of the young woman,
that were a little striking, his curiosity was excited
to let her be called in, and present herself. Accordingly,
the old lady stepping out, a young woman
made her appearance, of considerable beauty; but
in her countenance, expressions of woe. Her blue
eye seemed involved in mist; for she shed no tears;
her sorrow was beyond that.
Young woman, said the Captain, it is easy to perceive
that you have not been in this way of life long;
and that you have been brought to it, perhaps, by
some uncommon circumstances. My humanity is
interested; and it occurs to me to ask, by what
means it has come to pass. The part which he
seemed to take in her distress; inspiring her with
confidence; and being requested by him to relate
her story frankly, she began as follows:
My father, said she, lives at the distance of about
twenty miles from this city, and is a man of good
estate. I have two brothers, but no sisters. My
[Page 140]
mother dying when I was at the age of fourteen, I
became house-keeper for the family.
There was a young man that used to come to the
same church to which we went. He was of the very
lowest class, mean in his appearance, of homely
features, and a diminutive person. Yet he had the
assurance to put himself in my way on every occasion;
endeavouring to catch my eye; for he did not
dare to speak to me. But I hated him, and was almost
resolved to stay at home on Sundays, to avoid
him; for he began to be very troublesome. His attentions
to me were taken notice of by my brothers.
They were confident that I must give him some encouragement,
or he would not make such advances.
My father was of the same opinion. I assured
them I had never given him any encouragement,
and I never would; that I was as much averse to
him as possible.
I shunned him and hated him. He persisted a
long time, almost two years, and seemed to become
melancholy, and at last went away from the neighbourhood;
and, as I heard afterwards, to sea. I began
now to reflect upon his assiduity, and endeavors
to engage my affections. I recollected every circumstance
of his conduct towards me, since the first
time I was obliged to take notice of him. I reasoned
with myself, that it was no fault of his, if his family
was low; and if he himself had not all that
comeliness of person which I wished in a husband;
yet he was sufficiently punished in his presumption
in thinking of me, by what he must have suffered,
and by his going to sea, which he did to get out of
my sight, finding his attempts to gain my affectons
hopeless. I dreamed of him, and scarcely a moment
of the day passed, but my thoughts were running
on the danger to which he was exposed. It
[Page 141]
seemed to me that if he came back, I should be
more kind to him. I might at least shew him, that
I was not insensible of his attachment.
In about a year he returned, and the moment I saw
him, I loved him. He did not dare to come to my
father's house. But I could not help giving him
encouragement, by my countenance, when I met
him in public. Emboldened by this, he at last ventured
to speak to me, and I agreed that he might
come to a peach orchard, at some distance from my
father's house, and that I would give him an interview.
There he came often, and with a most lowly
and humble behaviour, fixed my regard for him.
Not doubting the violence of his love for me, and
my ascendency over him, I at last put myself in his
power. Becoming pregnant, I hinted marriage,
but what was my astonishment to find, that, on various
pretences, he evaded it, and as I became more
fond, he became more cold, which had no other effect,
than to make me more ardent than before. It
had been usual for many months, to meet me every
evening at this place, but now I had gone often,
and did not find him there. At last he withdrew altogether,
and I heard he had left the settlement.
Worthless and base, as I now knew him to be; and,
though my reason told me, that in person he was
still as homely as I first thought him, yet I continued
to love him to distraction.
What was my distress, when my father, and my
brothers, found that I was with child? They charged
me, though unjustly, of having deceived them
with respect to my attachment to this low creature,
from the first: In fine, my father dismissed me
from the house: My brothers, no less relenting than
him, in their resentment against me, upbraided me
with the offers I had refused, and the treatment I
[Page 142]
had given several gentlemen, in their advances to
me. For, indeed, during the absence of this worthless
man, I had been addressed by several, but my
pity and compassion for the wretch, had so wrought
upon me, that I could not think of any, or scarcely
bear them to speak to me.
Dismissed from my father's house, even my younger
brother, who was most soft and yielding in his
nature, seeming to approve of it, I went to the habitation
of a tenant of my father; there remained some
time, and endeavoured to make compensation, by
the labour of my hands, for the trouble I was giving
them. But these poor people, thinking my father
would relent, had informed him where I was, and
of the care they had taken of me. The consequence
was, that, at the end of three months, he sent for
the child, of which I had been brought to bed some
weeks before, but ordered them instantly to dismiss
me, that I might never more offend his hearing
with my name.
I wandered to this city, and the first night lay in
the market-house, upon a bench. The next morning
mixed with the women that came to market,
and enquired for work of any kind. I could find
none; but at last meeting with a young woman who
felt for my distress, she told me, that she had a small
room in this city, where she had lived some time
with an aunt that was lately dead, and that now she
supported herself by doing a little in the millinery
way; that if I would come and take breakfast with
her, and see where she lived, I was welcome. Going
with the poor girl, I found her lonely and distressed
enough. Nevertheless I continued with her
several months. But the work was small that we
got to do, and times becoming still worse, I was
obliged to sell the clothes that I brought with me, to
[Page 143]
the last petticoat and short gown, to support ourselves
and pay rent. To bring me to the last stage
of misery, the poor girl, who was more expert than I
was, in making any little provision that could be
made, fell sick, and in a short time died. I could
bear to stay no longer in the room, and coming out
to wander in the streets, like a forlorn wretch indeed,
and sobbing sorely by myself, when I thought no
one heard me, I was observed by this woman, at
whose house you now are, and pressed by her to go
home. I soon found what sort of a house it was,
and had I not been watched, when I talked of going
away, and threatened to be sent to jail, for what it is
pretended I owe since I came to the house, I should
not have been here longer than the first day.
The Captain feeling with great sensibility the circumstances
of her story, made reply: Said he,
young woman, I greatly commiserate your history
and situation, and feel myself impelled to revenge
your wrong. But the villain which has thus injured
you, is out of my reach, in two respects; first,
by distance; and second, being too contemptible and
base to be pursued by my resentment, even on your
account. But revenge is not your object, but support
and restoration to your friends, and the good
opinion of the world. As to money, it is not in my
power to advance you any great sum; but as far as
words can go, I could wish to serve you: not words
to yourself only, but to others, in your behalf. It is
evident to me, that you have suffered by your own
too great sensibility. It was humanity and generosity,
that engaged you in his favour. It was your
imagination, that gave those attractions to his vile
and uncomely person, by which you was seduced.
You have been a victim to your own goodness, and
not to his merit. The warmth of your heart has
[Page 144]
overcome the strength of your judgment; and your
prudence has been subdued by your passion: or, rather,
indeed, confiding in a man whom you had saved
from all the pains and heart-felt miseries of unsuccessful
love, you have become a sacrifice to your
compassion and tenderness. The best advice I can
give you, is, to compose yourself for this night.
Preserve your virtue; for I do not consider you as
having lost it: your mind has not been in fault, or
contaminated. I will endeavour to find out some
person who may be disposed to assist you; and,
though it may be difficult for you yet to establish
lost fame, it is not impossible. So saying, he left
the room; but the young woman, impressed with
these last words especially, viz. the difficulty, if not
impossibility of regaining reputation, sunk down upon
her chair, and could not pay him the compliment
of thanks, at his departure.
During the night, through the whole of which he
lay awake, at the public house, he ruminated on the
extraordinary nature of this incident, and the means
which he would adopt to recover this woman from
her unfortunate situation.
Thought he, I am in a city where there are a
great body of the people called Quakers. This society,
above all others, is remarkable for humanity,
and charitable actions. There is a female preacher
of whom I have heard, a Lydia Wilson: I will inform
this good woman of the circumstance; and, if
she gives me leave, I will bring this stray sheep to
her; she may have it in her power to introduce her
to some place, where, by needle-work, and industry,
she might live, until it may be in my power, taking
a journey to her father, and stating the case, and giving
my sentiments, to restore her to her family.
[Page 145]
Early next morning, as soon as it could be presumed,
the Quaker lady had set her house in order;
that is, after the family might be supposed to have
breakfasted, which was about nine o'clock, the Captain
set out; and being admitted, stated to Mrs. Wilson
the exact circumstances as before related. The
pious woman readily undertook every office in her
power. Accordingly, taking leave, the Captain set
out for the house of Mrs. Robeson.
At the door he met a number of men coming out,
and, on enquiry, he found a coroner's inquest had
just sat on the body of a young woman of the house,
who had, the preceding evening, suspended herself
from the bed-post with her garter. He was struck,
suspecting it must be the young woman whom he
had so much in his thoughts. Going in, and enquiring,
he found it to be the case; and that they proposed
to bury as soon as the few boards of a coffin
could be got ready. As a man of humanity, he
could not but shed tears, and blame himself that he
had not given her stronger assurance of his interposition
before he left her, that she might not have
fallen into despair, and taken away her life.
The coffin being now ready, the funeral set out,
not for the burying-ground of a church-yard, but for
a place without the city, called the Potter's-field:
For suicides forfeit christian burial: Her obsequies
attended, not by a clergyman in front, nor by scarfed
mourners, holding up the pall; nor was she borne
on a bier, but drawn on a cart; and the company
that followed her uncovered herse, were not decent
matrons, nor venerable men, but old bauds, and
strumpets, and cullies, half drunk, making merry as
they went along.
[Page 146]
Being interred, they returned home; but the Captain
remaining some time, contemplating the grave,
thus spoke:
Earth, thou coverest the body of a lovely woman,
and with a mind not less lovely; yet doomed in her
burial, to the same ground with unknown persons
and malefactors; not that I think the circumstance
makes any difference, but it shews the opinion of
the world with respect to thy personal demerit. Nor
do I call in question the justness of this opinion,
having such circumstances whereon to found it.
But I reflect with myself how much opinion, operating
like a general law, may do injustice. It remains
only with heaven's chancery to reach the equity of
the case, and, in its decision, absolve her from a
crime; or at least qualify that which was the excess
of virtue. If the fair elements that compose her
frame, shall ever again unite, and rise to life, and as
the divines suppose, her form receive its shape and
complexion from her mental qualities and conduct
on earth, she will lose nothing of her beauty; for
her daring disdain of herself and fate, was a mark
of repentance,....stronger than all tears. Yet, had
she acted the nobler part, of holding herself in life,
preserving her mind and body chaste until famine
had taken her away, or the hand of heaven moved
for her relief, she had shone, at the last rising, with
superior brightness; been ranked amongst the first
beauties of heaven, and walked distinguished in the
paradise of God. Doubtless the Almighty must
blame, and chide her for this premature and rash
step. Fallen to the last point of depression, he was
about to relieve her, and the sequel of her days
might have been happy and serene. It was a distrust
of his providence. She heard my words, tho'
she did not know my heart. And surely it was my
[Page 147]
intention to relieve her. But she erred against my
thoughts; she eluded the grasp of my humanity.
For this she will be reprimanded by the Most High,
and fail of that super-eminent glory which awaits
heroic minds. Yet, O world, thou dost her wrong,
in sentencing her to so low a bed. Shall the wealthy,
but dishonest men; matrons chaste, but cold
and cruel in their feelings; shall these have a stone
built over them, and occupy a consecrated spot,
whilst thou, unworthy, art thrown amongst the rubbish
of carcases, swept from jails; or of emigrants,
unknown as to their origin and place.
Farewell, lovely form, whom late I knew: and
let the grass grow green upon thy grave. Thy sorrows
are expunged; but mine are awake; and will
be so, until I also come to the shades invisible, and
have the same apathy of heart with thee.
[Page 148]
BOOK IV.
CHAPTER I. RETURNING to his lodgings, he could not
help reflecting by the way, that probably poor
Teague, mortified by repeated disappointments, in
going to Congress, being suffered to preach, or be a
member of the Philosophical society; and what might
afflict him still more, the not marrying the rich hostess,
who had made him overtures, might, in his
despair of ever coming forward in any respectable
capacity in life, have suspended himself from a
beam, or plunged into the river, and have put an end
to his existence, which, should it be the case, being
in some measure accessary to this catastrophe of the
bog-trotter, by dissuading from these several pretensions,
he could not acquit himself of guilt; at all
events, he would feel great pain and sorrow.
Such were his reflections for a great part of this
day, and he had thought of putting an advertisement
in the paper, to know if any dead body had been
[Page 149]
lately discovered, or inquisition held on a young
man with red hair, and a long leg, who had been
missing some days, and was supposed to have hung
or drowned himself. But in the evening, meditating
thus, mention being made by some of the lodgers,
of going to hear the annual oration, delivered
before the Philosophical Society, by a member, it
struck his mind, that possibly Teague, falling in
with some of this body, had been induced by them
to take a seat, and might be present on that occasion.
Not hesitating, therefore, he seconded the proposal
of going, and offered to be of the party.
Coming to the hall, the philosophers were seated,
but a black member sat with a taper before him,
who, it seems, was to deliver the oration.
The fact was this: A gentleman of Maryland, of
the name of Gorum, had sent to the society, some
time before, a curiosity, found by one of his negroes
in the mud of Wye river, on the banks of which his
seat was. It appeared to be a stone, with a cavity
sufficient to receive a man's foot, and was adjudged
by the society to be an Indian's petrified moccasin.
The singularity of the discovery, well intitling the
gentleman to a seat, he was invited; but sending his
compliments, he gave them to understand, that Cuff,
(for that was the name of the negro) was more intitled
to that honour than he was, being the person
who had found the curiosity; and as he made it a
point to do his slaves justice in any perquisite of their
own, he could not think of robbing one, on this occasion
of any honour, to which he might be introduced
by this discovery.
The society approved his honesty and fair dealing,
and by unanimous ballot, admitted the negro, who,
having been a member some time, had been appointed
to pronounce the annual oration. Cuff, a good
[Page 150]
deal disconcerted in hearing of the task imposed upon
him, had applied to his master to know what to
say. Colonel Gorum attending a good deal to literary
matters, had heard of an oration delivered before
the society, the object of which was, to prove
that the Africans had been once white, had sharp
noses, and long hair; but that by living in sun-burnt
climates, the skin had changed colour, the hair become
frizzled, and in the course of generation, the
imagination of the mother, presenting obtruse objects,
had produced an offspring with flat noses. He
therefore gave Cuff to understand, that it would be
doing no more than justice to his countrymen, for he
was a Guinea negro if he should avail himself of this
occasion, to prove that men were all once black, and
that by living in snowy countries, and being bleached
by the weather, the skin had gradually become
white, and the hair moist and long, and the imagination
presenting prominent objects to the mothers,
or the fathers differing among themselves, and pulling
one another by this part, had given the long and
pointed nose.
Cuff, thus prepared, set out: having arrived, and
being on this occasion to harangue, began as follows:....
THE ORATION. Massa shentiman; I be cash crab in de Wye
river: found ting in de mud; tone, big a man's foot:
holes like to he; fetch Massa: Massa say, it be de
Indian moccason.....O! fat de call it; all tone. He
say, you be a filasafa, Cuff: I say, O no, Massa,
you be de filasafa. Wel; two tree monts afta, Massa
call me, and say, You be a filasafa, Cuff, fo'
[Page 151]
sartan: Getta ready, and go dis city, and make grate
peech for shentima filasafa. I say, fat say, Massa?
Massa say, sombody say, dat de first man was de
fite man; but you say, dat de first man was de black
a-man. Vel, I set out: came along: Massa gi
me pass. Some say, where you go Cuff? I say, dis
city, be a filasafa. O no Cuff, you be no filasafa:
call me fool, gi me kick i'de backside; fall down,
get up again, and come to dis city.
Now, shentima, I say, dat de first man was de
black a-man, and de first woman was de black a-woman;
an get two tree children; de rain vasha dese,
an de snow pleach, an de coula come brown, yella,
coppa coula, and, at de last, quite fite; an de hair
long; an da fal out vid van anoda; and van cash by
de nose, an pull; so de nose come lang, sharp nose.
Now I go home, Massa shentima; an tel grate
Massa, dat make peech, an ibedy body vas da; an
den Cuff fin a more tings.....cabs, oysta, cat-fish,
bones, tones, ibedy ting....sen to you, shentima.
The oration being ended, the society could do no
less than appoint a committee to wait on Mr. Cuff,
and request a copy of his oration, that it might be
published.
But the Captain, in the mean time, had examined,
with great attention, the whole audience, but could
not discover Teague. Departing, therefore, with
the rest, his thoughts recurred to his first idea, viz.
that the unfortunate creature had committed suicide.
Drawing up, therefore, an advertisement, he sent it
to a daily paper: but, though it appeared next morning,
and the day elapsed, there was no word of
Teague.
[Page 152]
CHAPTER II.
THERE is no fact that has proved more stubborn
than the diversity of the human species; especially
that great extreme of diversity in the natives
of Africa. How the descendants of Adam and Eve,
both good looking people, should ever come to be a
vile negro, or even a mulatto man or woman, is puzzling.
Some have conjectured, that a black complexion,
frizzled hair, a flat nose, and bandy legs, were the
mark set on Cain, for the murder of his brother
Abel. But, as the deluge drowned the whole world
and only one family was saved, the blacks must
have all perished; like the Mammoth, whose bones
are found on the Ohio, and other places, which was
too big for Noah to get into the ark.
Some suppose, that it was the curse pronounced
upon Canaan, the son of Noah, for looking at his father's
nakedness. They got rid by this means of
the difficulty of the flood; but by Moses' own account
the Canaanites were the descendants of Canaan;
and we do not hear of them being negroes, which,
had it been the case, we cannot doubt would have
been laid hold of by the Israelites, as a circumstance
[Page 153]
to justify their extirpating, or making slaves of
them.
Lord Kaimes, in his Sketches of the History of
Man, solves the difficulty, by supposing, that, at the
building of Babel, there was a confusion of complexions,
as well as languages. But, besides that
it is not to be supposed that the historians would
pass over so material a circumstance, without particularly
mentioning it, it is introducing a miracle,
which we are not warranted in doing, unless it had
been expressly laid down to have been wrought.
The last theory, has been that of accounting for
the change, from the climate, and accident of wind
and weather; calling in aid, in the mean time, the
imagination of the mothers. This does not appear
altogether satisfactory. At least, there are those
who would not be averse to hear some other solution
of the difficulty. I have thought of one, which I
would suggest with great diffidence; the authors of
those before me being great men, and their hypothesis
not to be lightly overthrown.
I am of opinion that Adam was a tall, straight
limbed, red haired man, with a fair complexion,
blue eyes, and an aquiline nose, and that Eve was a
negro woman.
For what necessity to make them both of the
same colour, feature, and form, when there is beauty
in variety. Do not you see in a tulip, one leaf
blue, and another white, and sometimes the same
leaf white and red?
As God made Adam in his own likeness, so it is
to be supposed, that Adam begat some in his, and
these were red haired, fair complexioned, blue eyed,
proportionably featured boys and girls, while, on the
other hand, some took after the mother, and became
negro men and women. From a mixture of
[Page 154]
complexion, the offspring, at other times, might be a
shade darker, in one case, than the father; and a
shade lighter, in another case, than the mother, and
hence a diversifyed progeny, with a variety of features,
from the bottle-nose to the mire-snipe, which
is that of the people in the west of Ireland; and from
the auburn of the Corsican hair, to the golden locks
of the Caledonian beauty; and from the black eye to
the hazle and the grey.
It may be asked, how at the flood, when Noah,
his wife, his three sons, and their wives, eight persons,
only were saved? It is but giving some of the
sons negro wenches for their wives, and you have
the matter all right.
[Page 155]
CHAPTER III.
AS I have said, the day passed over, and there
was no word of Teague. In the evening, as it was
usual with the gentlemen at the Indian Queen, to go
to some place for the amusement of an hour or two,
mention being made of a celebrated preacher, a
Universalist, as he was called; that is, one who
preaches the doctrine of universal salvation; it was
proposed to go to hear him, as he was to hold forth
that evening. The Captain readily consented, and
it struck him, that, as this was a new fangled doctrine,
and the preacher had made a great noise, and
as it was a doctrine that, conscious of a good deal of
fornication, would naturally please Teague, it was
not impossible but the Irishman might have become
a disciple of this reformist, and be at his conventicle.
Coming in amongst the crowd, and obtaining
seats, they saw the preacher ascend the pulpit, and,
after the preliminary exercise of psalms and prayer,
take a text, and begin his sermon.
His text was taken from one of those passages of
scripture, which speaks of “the lion lying down with
the kid, and the tyger with the lamb,” which have
been interpreted of the Millenium, but were applied
by him, to that period, when, as the sea shall give up
[Page 156]
her dead, so hell shall give up her damned, and the
devil himself shall come to lick salt out of the hand
of an angel.
Enlarging on this doctrine, and supporting it with
a variety of proofs from scripture, and arguments
from reason, he seemed to have brought the matter
to a point, answering all objections, and closing in
with the hearer. At this stage, using that figure of
oratory, which is usual in the pulpit, of asking questions,
and pressing for an answer, but expecting
none; he would say, is not this conclusive? Is it not
evident? Is there any here can advance an argument
against it? Will any of you speak.....I pause for an
answer?
Mr. M`Donald, in the mean time, (the Scotch gentleman,
who happened to be there,) thinking him
really serious, and that he wanted an answer, or taking
advantage of the pause and the interrogation,
to speak his mind, leaning over the front of a back
seat, made reply:
Why, said he, I like the doctrine well enough,
and ha' na' disposition to o'er throw it. I dinna
muckle care if there ware na' hell ava. If ye could
make that out, I wad rather hear it, than o' being
smoaked twa' or three thousand years in the devil's
nuke, or singed wi' his burnt brimstone, even if
we should get out afterwards. Ye need na' put
yourself in a passion, or be flee'd that you'll no get
proselytes, for I shall warrant you, as many every
night as ye can weel stow awa i' the conventicle.
The preacher giving thanks to God for the success
in his ministry, in the remarkable conversion of the
man who spoke, the Scotch gentleman said again,
ye need na ca' it a conversion, for I ha' been o' the
same opinion a' my life, that it was a sare thing to
bide the kiln of hell, and they wad deserve muckle
[Page 157]
thanks wha could establish that we should na' stay
long in it, or that there was na' such place ava.
The preacher commenting upon this, observed
that some were orthodox from their birth, like Jeremiah,
who was sanctified in his mother's womb,
but others were hardly brought to the truth with
much teaching and instruction. That the present
was a happy instance of one who was in the right
way from his very early years.
The Captain in the mean time, had been thinking
of the doctrine, and thought it reasonable to suppose,
that the Almighty might relieve after some
time, and let the devils go. Just as with himself at
present in the case of Teague: if he had got his
hands on the bog-trotter, he could not help being
very angry, and would be disposed to punish him
with great severity, but after some time he knew
his passion would subside, and he would forget his
delinquencies.
Teague in this manner running in his head, as the
people, after some epilogue of prayer and benediction,
being dismissed, were retiring, he got up, and
raising his voice, begged the audience to detain a
little........Good people, said he, if any of you should
come across a young man, a servant of mine, of the
name of Teague O'Regan, I shall thank you to send
me notice to the Indian Queen, where I lodge.
And, according to the advertisement in this day's
paper, I will give two dollars reward.
Thinking him deranged in his brain, they proceeded,
and took no notice of the proclamation.
[Page 158]
CHAPTER IV.
CONTAINING OBSERVATIONS.
IN the infancy of christianity it was thought a
hard matter to get to heaven, and that when once in
hell, there was no getting out. A certain father of
the church, of the name of Origen, was the first to
be more liberal in his sentiments, and thought, that
after a certain period, there would be a jail-delivery
of the damned. I do not know that he went so far
as to let the devils themselves out upon a furlough,
but at the present time, we all know very well, that
the time will come when they will be out all together:
at least the universalists tell us this, and
prove it.
The doctrine was received in some part by the
early councils, but in other parts rejected. The
matter was compounded by establishing a purgatory,
for not consenting to liberate from hell, in order to
satisfy the advocates of a temporary punishment,
they fixed up a middle place, where all the advantages
of penal purgation could be enjoyed, without the
necessity of contradicting the eternity of hell torments.
[Page 159]
Indeed under the catholic church, the straight
gate and the narrow way , and the many called and
few chosen , was a good deal laid aside, and the road
made pretty plain by indulgencies and absolutions.
But at the reformation, the matter was brought
back to its old bed again, and the cry of there being
but a remnant saved, was raised in every pulpit.
There has been some relaxation of late years with
almost every sect of protestants; and there is not
just such a fury of tumbling great crowds into the
tolbooth, as there was in the days of John Knox,
and the framers of the Westminster confession of
faith, and the catechisms. Dr. Bellamy, a New-England
divine, some years ago, stated in his pamphlet,
that the damned would be to the saved, as the
malefactors of a country to honest people, that came
to an untimely end by jail or jibbet. Some now
preach boldly, not perhaps a total exemption from
future punishment, but a final restoration from it;
so that the matter is now brought nearly to what it
was in the days of Origen. I do not know that I
would be of opinion with the Scotch gentleman, and
wish the matter carried farther, establishing that
there is no hell at all; because if the thing should
take a turn, it might go to the other extreme, and be
all hell, so that none should be saved; and instead
of universal salvation, we should then have the doctrine
of the damnation of the whole, bodily.
[Page 160]
CHAPTER V.
THE next day, revolving every thing in his
mind, it occurred to the Captain, that the Irishman
might have gone out of town, hearing of an election
at a district, and have been elected to Congress.
As that body was then sitting, he thought it could
be no great trouble to go to the house, and cast an
eye from the gallery, and see if the raggamuffin had
got there. There was one that had a little of the
brogue of Teague upon his tongue, but nothing of
his physiognomy; others had a good deal of his
manner, but there was none that came absolutely up
to the physic of his person.
However, being here, the Captain thought it not
amiss to listen a while to the debates upon the carpet.
A certain bill was depending, and made, it
seems, the order of the day. Mr. Cogan being on
the floor, spoke:....Sir, said he, addressing himself
to the chair, the bill in contemplation, is, in my
opinion, of a dangerous tendency. I will venture to
fortel, that, if it goes into a law, the cows will have
fewer calves, and the sheep less wool; hens will lay
fewer eggs, and cocks forget to crow day-light. The
horses will be worse shod, and stumble more; our
watches go too slow; corns grow upon our toes;
[Page 161]
young women have the stomach ach; old men the
gout; and middle aged persons fainting fits. The
larks will fall dead in the field; the frogs croak till
they burst their bags; and the leaves of the trees fall
before the autumn. Snow will be found in the heat
of harvest, and the dog-days in winter. The rivers
will revert; and the shadows fall to the east in the
morning. The moon will be eclipsed; and the
equinoxes happen at a wrong season of the year.
Was it not such a bill as this, that changed the old
stile; that made the eclipse in the time of Julius Cesar;
that produced an earthquake at Jamaica, and
sunk Port Royal? All history, both ancient and modern,
is full of the mischiefs of such a bill. I shall
therefore vote against it.
Mr. Bogan was now on the floor, and advocated
the good effects of the bill.
Sir, said he, addressing himself to the chair, I appear
in support of the bill. I say, it will have a
good effect on the physical world especially. The
ducks will be fatter, the geese heavier, the swans
whiter, the red-birds sing better, and patridges
come more easily into traps. It will kill rats, muzzle
calves, and cut colts; and multiply the breed of
oysters, and pickle cod-fish. It will moderate the
sun's heat, and the winter's cold; prevent fogs, and
cure the ague. It will help the natural brain, brace
the nerves, cure sore eyes, and the cholic, and remove
rheumatisms. Consult experience, and it will
be found, that provisions of the nature proposed by
this bill, have an astonishing influence in this respect,
where they have been tried. I must take the
liberty to say, the gentleman's allegations are totally
unfounded; and he has committed himself, in the
matter of his history; the earthquake in Jamaica not
happening in the time of Julius Cesar; and
[Page 162]
therefore could have nothing to do with the eclipse of the
sun. I shall, therefore, vote in favour of the bill.
Mr. Cogan rose to explain, and said, that he did
not say, that the earthquake at Jamaica was at the
same time with the eclipse of the sun, which happened
at the birth of Julius Cesar.
Mr. Bogan rose to correct the gentleman: It was
not at the birth of Julius Cesar, but at his death, that
the earthquake happened.
Mr. Hogan was on the floor: Said, he thought he
could reconcile the gentlemen on that head. It was
well known Julius Cesar lived about the time of the
rebellion in Scotland, a little after Nebuchadnezzar,
king of the Jews. As to the earthquake, he did not
remember what year it happened, and therefore
could say nothing about it.
At this period, the question being called, it was
put, and carried by a majority of 25.
The Captain, satisfied with this sample of Congressional
debates, retired, and came to his lodgings.
[Page 163]
CHAPTER VI.
IT was about three or four o'clock in the afternoon,
that some one, who read the advertisement
respecting Teague, came to the Captain, and informed
him, that a person answering the description,
had been lately employed to teach Greek in the
University. Struck with the idea, that the bog-trotter
might have passed himself for a Greek scholar,
whereas he understood only Irish, he set out to the
University, to make enquiry. Knocking at the door
of the principal, he was admitted; and being seated,
addressed him as follows: Said he, sir, a pedeseque
of mine, (for talking to the rector of a college, he did
not chuse to use the vulgar terms, waiter, or bog-trotter,)
a pedeseque of mine, whom I have found
useful, save that he is somewhat troublesome in
pretending to places of appointment for which he is
not qualified; a thing, by the bye, too common in this
country; where men without the aid of academic
knowledge, thrust themselves into places requiring
great learning and ability: (This he said to flatter
the man of letters; as if a man could know but little
that had not been forged or furbished at his school.)
I say, this pedeseque of mine, has absconded for
some days, and I have been able to collect no
[Page 164]
account of him until last evening, that a person, having
read an advertisement of mine in the gazette,
came to me, and informed, that one answering the
description I had given, both as to appearance and
accomplishments, had been lately employed, as professor
of the Greek language, in this University.
Now, though I well know this Pady, as I may call
him, to understand no Greek, yet, as he speaks
Irish, and has much assurance, and little honesty in
matters where his ambition is concerned, I did not
know but he might have imposed himself upon you
for a Greek scholar, and obtained a professorship.
The principal made answer, that it was true that
a person from Ireland had been lately employed in
that capacity, and that should he be discovered to
be an impostor, it would be using the University
very ill. The Captain thought so too, and taking it
for granted that it was Teague, expressed his surprise
that they had not examined him, before he
was admitted; or at least had such proof by letters
as would have had ascertained his being qualified.
The principal observed, that as to examination, they
had no one at hand to examine, as there were none
of the trustees or professors of other branches in
the University understood Greek; as for himself he
did not, having not studied it in early life, and for a
series of years having given himself to politics and
mathematics; so that unless they could send out
for a Roman Catholic priest, or a Scotch clergyman,
there was none to examine. The improbability of
any person passing himself, above all things, for a
master of the Greek language on the score of understanding
Irish, was such, that it never came into
their heads to suspect it, so as to demand letters.
Had you known, said the Captain, this bog-trotter
of mine, (here he forgot the word pedeseque,) as
[Page 165]
well as I do, you would not be surprised at his attempting
any thing; and that he should be now in
your academy giving Greek lectures, understanding
nothing but the vernacular tongue of his own country.
Here he gave an account of his setting up for
Congress, &c. as explained in the preceding part of
this narrative.
However, wishing to see the raggamuffin, that he
might unkennel him, he was accompanied by the
principal to the chamber of the pseudo professor,
considering as he went along, in what manner he
should accost him; whether he should break out upon
him with a direct invective, or with ironical
words; such as, Mr. Professor, you must be a very
learned man, not only to understand Irish, but
Greek: but perhaps the Greek and Irish language
are much the same. It must be so, for I know that
a few days ago, you did not understand a word of
this, and to acquire a dead language in such a short
time would be impossible, unless the living tongue
was a good deal a-kin to it. But I had never understood
that Irish had any more affinity to the language
of Athens and Sparta, than the Erse, or the German,
or the Welch; however, we must live and learn, as
the saying is; you have shewn us what we never
knew before.
Conning a speech of this sort in his own mind,
with a view to divert the principal, and amuse himself
with Teague, he entered the chamber of the
professor, who sat in an elbow chair, with Thucidydes
before him.
What was the surprise of the Captain, to find that
it was not Teague.
In fact it was a person not wholly unlike him, especially
in a tinge of the brogue which he betrayed
in his discourse; for though the professor was really
[Page 166]
a man of education, having been early sent to St.
Omer's, where he had studied, being intended for a
priest, and understood not only the Greek and Latin,
but spoke French; yet in the pronunciation of
the English tongue, he had that prolongation of the
sound of a word, and articulation of the vowel O,
which constitutes what is vulgarly called the brogue,
as being the pronunciation of the native Irish, who
being a depressed people, are most of them poor, and
wear a kind of mean shoe which they call a brogue.
After an apology to the professor for mistaking
him for a certain Teague O'Regan, whom he had in
his employment; at the request of the professor,
the principal and the Captain took seats.
The professor said, his name was not O'Regan,
being O'Dougherty, but he knew the O'Regans very
well in Ireland. There was a Pady O'Regan in the
same class with him at St. Omer's, when he read
Craike. That he was a good scholar, and understood
Craike very well; and he would be glad if he
was over in this country to teach Craike here; it appeared
to be a very scarce language, but he had become
a praste, and was now a missionary to Paraguay,
in South-America.
The Captain punning on his pronunciation of the
word Greek, and willing to amuse himself a little
with the professor, could not help observing, that he
was under a mistake as to the scarceness of the
Craike language in these States. That there were
whole tribes who spoke the Craike language; there
was that of the heron, and the raven, and several
other fowls. A German professor who was present,
apprehending the Captain to be under a mistake,
and willing to correct him, observed....It is, said he,
the Creek language, that the professor means. As
to that, said the Captain, it is also spoken plentifully
[Page 167]
in America. There is a whole nation of Indians, on
the borders of South-Carolina and Georgia, that
speak the Creek language, men, women, and children.
The professors knowing more of the classics than
of the geography of these United States, and of the
heathen gods more than of the aborigines of this
country, expressed astonishment. If what you tell
me be a trut, said he, it is a crate discovery; perhaps
dese may have de fragments o' de books de
philosophers and poets that are lost, and de professors
cannot come acrass in deir own countries; but I
have tought dat de Craike language was spoke only
in de Morea, and a little in Russia and Constantinople.
The Captain assured him, the principal favouring
the mistake, by a grave face, and bowing as the Captain
spoke, that it was absolutely the vernacular
language of these people.
Why den, said the other, do dey not get professors
from amongst dese to tache Craike in deir
colleges?
Because, said the Captain, we have been heretofore
on hostile terms with these Indians, and it is
but of late that we have made a peace. But now, it
is to be presumed, we shall have it in our power to
procure from them able teachers.
The professor was alarmed at this, as supposing
it would supercede the necessity of his services; or,
at least, much reduce the price of his tuition. He
could have wished he had not come to this quarter
of the world; and was almost ready in his own mind,
to bind up what he had, and go back to Clogher.
So ended their visit to the University, and the
Captain withdrew.
[Page 168]
IT may be thought a preposterous idea, that it
could, for a moment, be supposed possible, that the
pedeseque could have had the assurance to pass
himself for a Grecian. But I had it from the Marquis
de la Luzerne, that a friend of his, who was in
some public capacity at Moscow, and was entertained
by a principal inhabitant of the city, was asked by
him to visit an academy where the French language
was taught, and at which his son, a young lad, then
was. What was the surprise of the gentleman, to
find a Pady from Cork, who understood not a single
word of French, or Latin, teaching an unknown
gibberish, which most probably was Irish?
[Page 169]
CHAPTER VII.
OUR chevalier was now at his wits end, not being
able to conceive of any other place of amusement
in which Teague might be found; when all at once
it came into his head, (led to it, perhaps, from the
reference, in his late conversation, to the Indian
tribes,) that probably he might have fallen in with
the Indian treaty-man, and have been prevailed upon
to personate a chief. It appeared to him, therefore,
adviseable to go directly to the secretary at war, to
know if any party of Indians had been lately there
to negociate a treaty.
Being introduced, and after some ceremony, accosting
the secretary, he gave him to understand
why it was that he had the honour to wait upon him,
viz. that he had a servant of the name of Teague
O'Regan, an Irishman, who had been absent some
days, and that from a circumstance which happened
in the way to the city, he had reason to suspect, he
might have been picked up by a certain Indian treaty-man,
to supply the place of a Welch blacksmith,
who had died, and had passed for a chief of the
Kickapoos.
The secretary was a good deal chagrined, believing
the Captain to be some wag, that had come to
[Page 170]
make this enquiry by way of burlesque on the Indian
treaties; and with some irritation of mind, gave him
to understand, that there had been no Indian treaty-man,
or Kickapoo chief there; that no treaty had
been held with the Indians for above a month past,
since the king of the Togamogans had drawn goods;
but treaty or no treaty, it ill became him, in the appearance
of a gentleman, to throw a burlesque upon
government, by insinuating that his Irishman could
be imposed upon them for a chief.
I mean no burlesque, said the Captain, a little irritated
in his turn; I have had too much trouble to
keep him from the Indian treaty-man that was coming
here, to be disposed to jest with so serious an
affair. The hair-breadth escape of going to Congress,
or being licensed as a preacher, or being chosen
as a member of the philosophical society, was
nothing to this, as it was so difficult to guard against
it, the Indian recruiters imitating savages, not only
in their dress and painting, but in the dexterity to
way-lay and surprise.
I wish you to know, sir, said the secretary, that I
comprehend your burlesque very well. But though
you and others may misrepresent our policy in the
Indian treaties, it is base irony and ridicule, to insinuate
that the Indians we treat with are not chiefs.
Chiefs, or no chiefs, said the Captain, I am not
saying, nor care; but only wish to know if you have
been instituting any treaty with my Teague, who has
been absent some days.
I will be much obliged to you to withdraw from
my office, said the secretary.
I shall withdraw, said the Captain, and not with
that respect for your understanding and politeness
which I could have wished to entertain. I have
[Page 171]
addressed you with civility, and I was entitled to a civil
answer; but I see the “insolence of office,” is
well enumerated by the poet, amongst the evils that
make us sick of life. Your humble servant, Monsieur
Secretary, I shall trouble you no further.
[Page 172]
CHAPTER VIII.
RETURNING to the Indian Queen, a playbill
for the evening had announced the performance
of the tragedy of Macbeth, and a farce called the
Poor Soldier. A party of the gentlemen from the
public house, had taken a box, and the Captain
agreed to go with them to the play. Having delivered
their tickets, and being admitted to the box, it
struck the Captain to cast his eye upon the pit and
galleries, and observe if he could any where descry
the physiognomy of Teague. As before, when with
the same view he surveyed the members of Congress,
he could discover several that a good deal resembled
him; but yet not the identical person. The
curtain being now drawn, the play began. Nothing
material occurred during the performance of the
tragedy, save that when the witches came in, there
was one in her cap and broomstick whose features a
good deal resembled the Irishman's, and who, had
she not been an old woman, and a witch, might have
passed for Teague. The Captain was struck with
the resemblance of features, and long frame of the
bog-trotter, covered with a short gown and petticoat;
and borrowing a glass from one that sat in the box
with him, endeavoured to reconnoitre more
[Page 173]
perfectly, and could have sworn that it was the mother or
sister of Teague, that had just came from Ireland,
and joined the company.
The tragedy being ended, the farce began to be
acted, and who should come forward in the character
of Darby, but the long sought for Teague. The
fact was, he had before appeared in the tragedy, in
the character of an over-grown red-headed witch.
It was more natural for him to appear in the character
of Darby, his own countryman; for he spake
with the brogue naturally, and not by imitation.
The managers had had him all the while of his absence
from the Captain, under tuition, teaching him
his part, which was not difficult to do; the manner
and pronunciation being already his own.
It was this had induced the managers to take him
up, as a substitute; the person who actually played
the part of Darby, being at this time out of the way.
As the natural squeal of a pig is superior to an imitation
of it; so it was allowed by the audience, that
Teague exceeded the pseudo Irishman that usually
performed this part. All were pleased but the Captain,
whose sense of propriety could scarcely restrain
him from throwing his cane at the bog-trotter.
Thought he with himself, what avails it that I prevented
him from taking a seat in a legislative body,
or from preaching, or being a philosopher; if, after
all, he has relinquished my service, and turned
player; a thing, no doubt, fitter for him, than the being
a senator, or clergyman, or philosopher; because
he can appear in some low character in the farce or
comedy, and come off tolerably enough. For though
amongst the dramatis personæ of learned bodies,
there are Tony Lumpkins, and Darby M`Faddins in
abundance, yet there ought to be none; and Teague
[Page 174]
had better be on the stage than in such capacities,
since he must be somewhere. But to leave me
without notice, after all my civilities to him, is ungrateful,
and deserves all that I can say bad concerning
him. I shall give myself no farther trouble
on this head; but let him take his course. I must
endeavour to find another servant who can supply
his place.
[Page 175]
CHAPTER IX.
THE foregoing had been the reflections of the
Captain during the exhibition of the farce. But the
play being ended, and having come home, the next
day he began to put his resolution in practice; and
to think how he could supply himself with another
servant. It struck him to purchase a negro; and
mentioning this to the company, at breakfast, at the
Indian Queen, one of the people call Quakers, who
was present, and overheard the conversation, made
an apology for the liberty he took in making some
objections. Friend, said he, thee appears to be a
discreet man, from thy behaviour, and conversation;
and if thee will not be offended, I would ask if thee
canst reconcile it with thy principles, to keep a slave.
As to that, said the Captain, I have thought upon
the subject, and do not see any great harm in the
matter. If we look to inanimate nature, we shall
find, that the great law is Force. The Cartesians
call it pressure and suction: The Newtonians call it
attraction and gravitation. The sun, the largest body
in the universe, endeavours to draw all towards
it; while the lesser globes struggle to fly off at a tangent.
The denser, that is, denser air, takes place
of the rare; and the heavier particles of water cause
[Page 176]
the lighter to recede. The tall oak overshades the
under wood. There is a predominancy, and subordination
in all things. In the animal creation, the
weaker is always subject to the strong; who even
devour them, when the flesh suits their appetite:
and the very teeth and jaw-bone of carnivorous animals,
shew the intention of nature, that they should
make a prey of living creatures. Do you blame
yourselves, when you subjugate elephants, or horses,
or oxen of the plough, to your use? What right have
you to invade the liberty of a playful young colt,
more than of an African inhabitant? Or have you
not as good a right to take up a negro, and put him
to your work, as you have to cut a calf, and manufacture
him for the draft?
In this case, there is a difference, said the Quaker;
a negro is a human creature, and posseses all
the natural rights of man.
That may be, said the Captain. But what are the
natural rights of men? Are they not finally resolvable,
as in the inanimate world, into power on the one
hand, and weakness on the other.
Who is it that abstains from dominion, when he
has it in his power to assert it? Power is the great
law of nature; and nothing but the pacts or conventions
of society can contravene it. I should think
myself justifiable in making any man a slave to answer
my purposes, provided I treated him well while
he was such. This I take to be the only condition
which the law of reason annexes to the enjoyment
of such property. I may be warranted in taking,
and managing an animal of the horse kind; but it is
my indisputable duty not to abuse him by causing
him to suffer famine, or endure too much toil. The
same with any other animal that I enslave; there is
a tacit condition annexed to the grant which the law
[Page 177]
of nature gives, viz. That the service be exacted
with moderation; and proper nourishment be provided.
I admit also, that humanity would dictate
that the happiness of a slave ought to be consulted
as much as is consistent with my own convenience.
For instance: if I had the Grand Turk in my power,
as he has been accustomed to a soft and effeminate
way of living, it would be hard to put him all
at once to maul rails, or clearing out meadow ground;
or if it should fall in my way to have Catharine of
Russia in that capacity, as she is a woman of an elevated
mind, it would be inhuman to put her to the
lowest drudgery, such as scrubing out rooms, and
carrying water from the pump; but rather indulge
her if I could afford it, with a more easy employment,
especially as she is an old woman, of knitting
stockings and carding wool. There is no man would
be more disposed to treat a slave with tenderness
than myself; but to deny me of my right altogether,
of making one, or of trafficking for one when made,
is carrying the matter too far.
So much for the right of enslaving. But if we
put it on the principle of what will conduce to the
aggregate happiness of mankind, we shall find it to
be, that there should be master and servant, or in
other words owner and slave. The economy of nature
illustrates this, in the subserviency of one thing
to another: But, independent of any illustration, it
must be known on reflection, and is felt in experience,
that all are not competent to all things; and
in the case of temporary servants, much time is taken
up in contracting with them for their remanence;
and it is a considerable time before they get
into the habit of our service; and having it in their
power to retire from us, when inclination may direct,
there is an insecurity in the attachment. But
[Page 178]
as the slave has the master always to provide for
him; so master has the slave always to subserve
him: and thus, by a conjoint interest, the felicity of
both is promoted, and the sum of human happiness
increased. Hence it is, that most nations have made
use of slaves. The patriarch Abraham, had three-score
and ten servants born in his house. What
were these but slaves? The Jews, his descendants,
had bond-men, and bond-women: Were not these
slaves? The Roman slaves were more in number
than the citizens; and amongst the Greeks, the
most virtuous of them, viz. the Spartans, kept in
their service the most depressed of all slaves, the
Helotes; who, when we consider the black broth,
the food, and severe life of the masters, must have
lived on poor fare, and in a laborious service indeed.
But it may be said, that example of wrong never
constitutes right. Grant it: But if you examine
the capacities, and even inclinations of men, will you
not find, that some are qualified only to be slaves.
They have not understanding to act for themselves.
Nor do all love freedom, even when they have it....
Do not many surrender it; and prefer kissing a
great man's backside, to being independent? It is
not always, even from the views of advantage, that
men are sycophants; but from an abstract pleasure
in being drawn into the vortex of others. There is
a pleasure in slavery, more than unenslaved men
know. Why is it, that, even after the convulsion of
a revolution in a government, in favour of liberty,
there is a natural tendency to slavery; and it finally
terminates in this point. The fact is, a state of liberty
is an unnatural state. Like a bone out of
place, the mind, in an individual, or political capacity,
seeks the condition of a master or servant;
avoiding, as the particular propensity may be, the
[Page 179]
one or the other. There cannot be a greater proof
that this is founded in nature, than the common moral
observation, that the greatest tyrants, that is, the
worst masters, make the most abject slaves: And,
vice versa , that the most subservient of mankind,
when you give them power, make the worst use of
it: All this because, in these cases, the persons are
misplaced, and not in their proper stations. Julius
Cesar made a humane generous master; but he
would have made a very intriguing, troublesome valet
de chambre. It would have been impossible to
have got any good of him. On the other hand, Tiberius
would have made an excellent hostler, and
taken a beating, with as much resignation as a house
beagle, who is used to it. So that it evidently is the
provision of nature, that there are materials of slavery;
and the fault of those, whom she intends for
masters, if they do not make slaves. But as it is
difficult to determine, a priori , who are intended for
slavery or freedom, so as to make a judicious distribution,
things must take their course; and the
rule be, catch, catch can; and every man have a servant
when he can get one. It is in vain to be squeamish,
and stick at colour. It is true, I would rather
have a white person, if such could be got; as I prefer
white to black, especially in the summer season,
as being a more light and airy colour.
Thy reasoning, said the Quaker, is more rhetorical
than logical; and thy analogies of nature, and
historical proofs, cannot so far oppress the light
within, as to make me think, that it is given to thee,
or me, to make slaves of our species.
As to that, said the Captain, I am not clear that a
negro is of our species. You may claim kindred with
him, if you please; but I shall not.
[Page 180]
I shall not dispute that with thee, said the Quaker:
for I perceive thee does not give credit to what
the book says of the first man, and his descendants:
But will thee not grant me, that the African, though
not of the same stock, is, at least a man; that is of the
human genus, though the species of the white and
the black may not be the same; if so, hast thou more
right to enslave him, than he thee?
Grant it, said the Captain; for my reasoning tends
to that, and resolves the right into the power.
If so, said the Quaker, thee may be the slave in
thy turn.
Doubtless, said the Captain; and it is not of so
much consequence who is slave, as that there be
one. It is better that the foot be foot, and the head
be head; but if there is a conversion, nevertheless,
let there be head and foot. It is necessary that there
be domination and subjection, in order to produce a
compound improvement and advantage.
You could see by the Quaker's countenance, that
he thought the reasoning sophistical; but as he did
not know very well what he could say more, he was
silent.
[Page 181]
CHAPTER X.
CONTAINING REMARKS.
IT is thought by some, the Captain was not serious
in thus advocating the cause of slavery. Be
that as it may, he omitted some serious arguments,
that naturally present themselves on that side on
which he reasoned: For instance, it strikes me at
first blush, that there can be no moral wrong in
catching a young African, and bringing him away
from his own happiness to pursue ours. For if there
were, is it to be supposed, that humane and just
persons, would promote and support the evil, by
purchasing such negro, or retaining him, and his
offspring, when purchased. For, on the principle
that the receiver is the thief, or, to speak more stricly,
a thief, the purchaser of the African takes the
guilt along with the possession; and, in the language
of the law, every act of retainer is a new trespass.
For the evil of the original act, if there be evil in it,
cannot be rendered pure by the filtration of purchase,
and retaining. So that the holder of the negro, in
the tenth transmission, is an aider, or abettor, of the
original act of taking; if I may use the word aider,
or abettor, in a case of trespass; where, by the
[Page 182]
definition of the law, all who any way concur in the act,
and further it, are principals . The holder of a negro
must, therefore, look back to that act which first
made him, or an ancestor, a slave; and if he cannot
justify this, he cannot justify the retaining him in servitude:...
What a consequence must this be! There is
no man that pretends to humanity, much less to religion,
would be safe in being the possessor of a slave.
The only way therefore to get rid of the difficulty is
to justify, ab origine , traffic in all such property.
That it is justifiable I have no doubt. Is there any
religious denomination, except the fanatical people
called Quakers, that have made it a term of communion
not to hold a slave. In admitting to church
privileges, I have never heard of the question asked,
Have you any negroes, and do you keep slaves? If
it was a matter of conscience, would not conscientious
persons themselves make it.
The assemblies or synods of the Presbyterian
church, or conventions of the Episcopal, in America,
have said nothing on this subject. Is an omission of
this kind reconcileable with the idea, that it is a natural
evil, or a moral wrong.
In the phrensy of the day, some weak minded
powers, in Europe, begin to consider what is called
the African trade as a moral wrong, and to provide
for a gradual abolition of it. If they will abolish it,
I approve of its being done gradually; because, numbers
being embarked in this trade, it must ruin them
all at once, to desist from it. On this principle, I
have always thought a defect in the criminal codes
of most nations, not giving licence to the perpetrators
of offences, to proceed, for a limited time, in larcenies,
burglaries, &c. until they get their hands out
of use to these pursuits, and in use to others. For
it must be greatly inconvenient to thieves and
[Page 183]
cutthroats, who have engaged in this way of life, and
run great risks in acquiring skill in their employment,
to be obliged all at once to withdraw their
hands, and lay aside picking locks, and apply themselves
to industry in other ways, for a livelihood.
The law of Pennsylvania on this principle, has
provided for the gradual abolition of the slavery of
negroes. For those who have got them could not
do without them, no more than a robber could do
without the money that he takes, being pressed by
some great necessity to make use of that expedient
to recruit his purse. All those therefore who have
been originally taken from the coast of Africa, and
deprived of liberty, or descended from such, and inheriting
slavery, when recorded agreeably to the act
in question, continue slaves, and for life, and their
offspring to a certain period. But were we to entramel
the case with political or moral doubts respecting
the original right of caption, and subjugation,
the difficulty would exist of reconciling it with natural
right to hold a slave for a moment, even whether
the law sanctioned it or not; in which case we should
find it necessary to go as far as the fanatics in religion,
and set our slaves free altogether .
It is from not duly attending to this circumstance,
that abstract reasoners talk of abolition; a doctrine
which, however absurd, is becoming the whim of the
day; and the phrensy seems to gain such ground,
that I would not wonder if they would next assert
that it is unlawful to use the servitude of horses, or
other beasts of burden, as having a natural right to
live in the fields, and be as free as mankind. The
best way to avoid extremes, is to check the principle;
I hold the right of absolute subjugation, of
whites, blacks, and browns of all nations, against
gradual abolition, or any abolition whatsoever. This
[Page 184]
being the only consistent principle, short of an absolute
emancipation, made instantly; for in no mean is
there reason, or a rest for conscience.
That it is of importance to settle the consciences
of sober minded persons in Pennsylvania, clergymen,
and members of the Presbyterian church especially,
who have negroes, must be well known from that
tenderness of conscience, for which such are remarkable.
Some, indeed, carry their ideas of the extent
of duties so far, as not to admit grace to meats, or
the formal worship of prayer, reading chapters, and
singing psalms, on the set occasions, on any consideration
whatsoever; what is more, would not shave
a beard, on the Sabbath day, for a cow. Now, should
they, by any means, come once to think of the wickedness
of enslaving men, there would be no getting
them to keep a negro. For those of this denomination;
and, indeed, most, or all others of the Christian,
hold, that the Africans, though of a sable race, is of
their own species; being descended from Adam.....
This being the case, a slight matter, the bare directing
their attention to the subject, would alarm pious
people, and lead them to the favourite maxim of the
gospel—“Do to others, as you would have others to
do to you.”
As opposed to the enfranchisement of negroes, generally,
and in Pennsylvania in particular, I have
been under apprehensions, that some of our young
lawyers in the courts, might plead the constitution
of the state, by which it is established that “all men
are born equally free and independent.” Now admitting
that a negro is a man, how shall any master
retain him as a slave? On a habeus corpus, he must
be set at liberty. At least I cannot conceive how the
judge could remand him to his drudgery. The constitution
is the law paramount, and framed by a
[Page 185]
convention of the people, recognizing the original right
of freedom in a negro, allowing him to be a man;
and carries us above the act of the legislature for the
gradual abolition, &c. which by implication seems to
suppose that negroes may be slaves:—
An implication inconsistent with the power exercised
by the law. For if negroes were slaves, and so
the property of those who claimed them, could the
legislature affect that property, without indemnification
to the masters?
I shall say no more on this head, lest I should furnish
hints to pettifoggers, who may make an ill use
of their information.
The fact is that this chapter, or something else
gave rise to a habeas corpus in the case of a negro;
and which came to trial in the supreme court of the
state. The argument occupied a whole week; but
it was determined that slavery by law did exist in
Pennsylvania; maugre the constitution; which did
not respect those in a state of slavery at the time of
forming the constitution; and who were not parties
to the compact; that it is a claim of property founded
in wrong; but tolerated until it can be consentient
with general safety, and the happiness of slave and
master to abolish it altogether.
[Page 186]
CHAPTER XI.
JUST at this moment a waiter coming in, told
him there was a person without, that is, in the bar-room,
who wished to speak with him. Going out,
he saw Teague.
The fact was, being elated with the success of his
performance on the stage, attributing that to art
which was nature itself, he had counted more upon
his accomplishments than he ought to have done,
and had made advances to the mistress of the manager,
who was also an actress, and not greatly coveting
an amour with the bog-trotter, made a merit
of the circumstance, to induce an opinion of fidelity,
and informed the manager of the presumption of
the Irishman. The manager in the most unbecoming
manner, without either citation, examination,
trial, conviction, or judgment, but laying aside all
forms of law, had instituted an original process of
himself, and laying hold of a horse-whip, had applied
this implement to the back and shoulders of
Teague, and as the Irishman made an effort of resistance
at the first onset, the manager had been under
the necessity, by turning the butt-end of the
[Page 187]
whip, to knock him down, which he did by a stroke
above the left eye-brow, which not only bereft him
of senses for the present, but a discolouration of the
eye for some days, and a scar probably his whole
life after.
It was this incident had induced him to leave the
theatre, and brought him back to the Captain, whom
he now accosted in the following manner:....Dear
master, for the love of shalvation, forgive a poor
sharvant that has been killed this marning with a
great cudgel, just for nothing at all, but not pleasing
a damned whore, that wanted me to stale the manager's
cloathing, and go off wid her. This is all that
a poor sharvant gets by being hanest; but by shaint
Patrick, and the holy crass, it is what I deserve for
laving the sarvice of a good master, as your anour,
and taking up with bog-tratters, and stage players,
that would sooner take a cup of wine than the holy
sacrament, and get drunk every night in de wake,
and go to de devil head foremost; but if your honour,
dear master, will forgive the past, and my running
away, and laving you, I will come back again, and
sarve you to the day of judgment, or any langer
time that your honour plases, and clane your boots
and spurs, and rub down the bay harse; the poor old
crature, how aften I have tought of him when I was
in my rambles and he was a slape, laste they should
chate him of his oats, and give him nather hay nor
straw to ate; for I always liked to take care of a
good harse, and a good master; and aften tought of
your honour, when I was among the bog-tratters of
the stage, aud gave you a good name, and was always
talking of you and forgot my part, and put the
managers in a passion, who fell upon me, and bate
me like a dog.
[Page 188]
The Captain saw the inconsistency in the relation;
one while alleging the tale-bearing of the mistress,
as the occasion of it; again, a deficiency in the recital
of his part; but expecting no truth from the Irishman,
cared very little how it came to pass. The
principal thing that occupied his thoughts, was whether
to receive the bog-trotter, or dismiss him. He
reflected with himself on the trouble he had had
with him, on his various pretensions to advancement;
his uneasiness of mind, and fatigue of body, for several
days past, in examining stews, methodistical
conventicles, rumaging philosophical societies, attending
elections, and listening to the debates of
Congress, to see if he could any where observe his
physiognomy, or distinguish his brogue. He could
not think of subjecting himself to such uncertainty
in the attendance of any servant, with such preposterous
ideas, as being a legislator, philosopher, &c.
Again, he considered, that probably this last chastisement
he had received, might have a good effect,
in curing him of the freaks of his ambition; and a
mind broken and reduced by disappointment, is in
a mellow state, and more capable of receiving the
seeds of good advice, than a mind full of vanity or
pride, that has never yet received blows. Deliberating
on these grounds, his humanity prevailed, and
he determined to receive the raggamuffin into favour.
This being settled, and learning from the Irishman
in what manner he had been inveigled, and
drawn away by the manager, to go upon the stage;
and that it was only because Teague had made advances
to a woman that was a whore already, that
the manager had made such an attack upon his person,
he wished to punish him, if it should appear to
be within the province of the law to do it. Accordingly,
inquiring what principal lawyer there was in
[Page 189]
that city, was informed of a certain counsellor Grab
Taking Teague with him, he set out to consult this
gentleman. Counsellor Grab was in his office,
amongst large shelves of books, or shelves of large
books; not, as the Latins say, co-operatus, aut abrutus,
sed comitatus libris; that is, In the midst of
his books. He had on a pair of spectacles, not so
much on account of age, as to make the client believe
that he laboured under a premature want of
sight, from much reading; or, because a pair of lenses,
magnifying the organs of vision, gives the appearance
of a larger eye, which has a good effect on
the person consulting, impressing the idea of a
broader view of things that are before it.
Entering, the Captain addressed himself to the
counsellor, and gave him the outlines of the injury
done to Teague; the counsellor, in the meantime,
suspending his reading in a large book, which he
had before him, printed in Saxon letter, and raising
his head, until the glasses of his spectacles were
brought to bear upon the physiognomy of the Captain.
The Captain having finished his account, referred
him to Teague, the subject of the battery, for a more
particular detail of the circumstances. Teague was
glad of the opportunity of speaking before a learned
lawyer, and was beginning to give a relation of the
whole affair; but the Captain stopped him, bidding
him wait until the lawyer should himself request
him to begin. The lawyer was silent: after having
reconnoitered with his glasses one while the Captain,
another while Teague, he dropped his optics,
and began to read again. The Captain, thinking he
had not been sufficiently understood, recommenced
the narration, and gave an account of what he himself
had suffered from the inveigling and detaining
[Page 190]
his servant, and the visible injury which the servant
himself had sustained. The lawyer was still silent;
and, though he had eyed him while speaking, as a
Tuscan astronomer would the moon, yet he applied
himself again to the reading the black letter that
was before him.
The Captain thought it strange treatment; and
was, for some time, at a loss to know what to think
of the matter. But recollecting, opportunely, that
the circumstance of a fee had been omitted, he took
out his purse, and threw down two dollars. The
lawyer seemed a little moved, but cast his eye again
upon the black letter. Finding the two dollars not
sufficient, the Captain threw down two more. The
counsellor raised his head from the book, and you
might discern some dilitation of the muscles of the
face, as bespeaking an approaching opening of the
voice; but still there was silence; and might have
been to this hour, had not the Captain recollected,
at this moment, what he had all along forgot, that
half a joe was the fee of a lawyer. Doubling, therefore,
the four dollars that were already down, the
lawyer came to his voice, the organs of his speech
were loosed, and taking the glasses from his eyes,
he gave his counsel as follows:
Said he, you have a double remedy in this case;
against the manager who inveigled, and against the
servant himself: Against the servant, on the act of
assembly, if indented; at common law, on the contract
to serve. For even a servant at will, and not
engaged for any special time, is not at liberty to desert
the service of his master, without reasonable notice
first given. So that you may have your remedy
against the servant, in the first instance, by bringing
the matter before the court of quarter sessions; and
having time put upon him, as the phrase is, for this
[Page 191]
dereliction of your service; or, an action on the contract,
express or implied, as the case may be, wherein
he shall repair, in damages, the loss sustained.
The bog-trotter was alarmed at the idea of an action
against him; and looking wistfully at his master,
exclaimed, dear master, will you trow de law
upon me, dat am as innocent as a shild unborn;
and would go to death and damnation for you.
Dear master, I suffered enough by deacudgel of dat
player, for all de running away I have done; and,
God love your shoul, keep de law in its own place,
and not let it come acrass a poor sharvant, that has
nathing but as he works and trats about; but let dese
grate big books of his honour de lawyer, spake to de
manager, for his deceiving a poor sharvant, and putting
it in his head to run away, and lave a good
master; and his beating him with a grate cudgel into
the bargain.
I have no desire, said the Captain, to pursue the
bog-trotter, as he has made acknowledgments for
his faults; but would want the utmost rigour of the
law to be put in force against the player.
You have also in this case a double remedy, said
the counsellor, by prosecution on the part of the
servant, and on your part. Nay, the servant himself
has a double remedy; for he may prosecute by
indictment, or bring his action of assault and battery,
or both. I would recommend the action only, because,
where no indictment is prosecuted, and the
civil action only brought, exemplary damages may
be given, as well as reparatory. For in the civil action,
it will affect the minds of a jury, that the party
has already suffered all that is in the nature of punishment
by a criminal proceeding; and nothing remains
with them, but to give reparatory damages.
On the part of the master, two kinds of action may
[Page 192]
be brought; either an action of trespass, vi et armis ,
laying a perquod servitium amisit , or simply an action
on the case, for the consequential damage of inveigling
the servant.
As to the number of remedies, said the Captain,
or the kind of them, I care very little how many
there are, or what they are; I want only a good remedy;
give me a good swingeing one against the
rascal, and I care very little what it is called.
I shall then, said the counsellor, advise simply an
action on the case, and count generally on the inveigling
and detaining, and rendering unfit for service
while in his power. In this mode, the whole
circumstances of the injury may be brought together,
and summed up into one point of view, and
enhancing the quantum of damages, can expatiate
on the value of your servant, and the special occasion
you had for his service at this particular juncture;
for I make no doubt he is a valuable servant,
and that it has been an irreparable injury to you, to
have been defrauded of his service at this time.
As to his value, said the Captain, there can be no
doubt, not only as a servant, but in other respects.
I have been offered, or at least I suppose I could
have got, an hundred pounds for him, to be a member
of Congress, or to preach, or to go to the philosophical
society, or to be an Indian treaty-man, but
have refused every proposal made him, or me, for
these purposes; and now to have him kidnapped
and taken off, without fee or reward, and employed
as an actor, and beat, and rendered useless, at least
for some time, into the bargain, is too much for
any man to put up with. If there is law in the land,
let it be put in force, and this man made an example.
[Page 193]
The counsellor had no need of spectacles to give
himself the appearance of a glaring and broad look,
on this occasion; for the words of the Captain made
him stare sufficiently, without the aid of a magnifying
medium, to enlarge his optics. He began to
take him for a madman; at least in some degree
deranged in his brain, to talk of his servant being in
request for a member of Congress, and the like.
Yes, continued the Captain, he not only inveigled
away a servant that was thought fit to be a member
of Congress, and a preacher, and an Indian treaty-maker,
and a philosopher, and what not; but has
kept me, these three days, trotting after him, and
trying to find him at election places, and in Congress
boarding-houses, and the hall where they have their
debates, and churches, and pulpits, and chambers of
philosophical societies, and professorships, and
where not, to see if I could find him; while this manager
had him, in the meantime, at rehearsals,
teaching him the art of mimickry, for the stage.
The counsellor, in the meantime, had reflected
with himself, that, whether madman, or no madman,
the Captain had money, and might be a good
client, let his cause be what it would; and so composing
the muscles of his face, seemed to agree
with him; and observe, that doubtless the quality
and capacity of the servant would be taken into
view, in estimating the damages: That, if it appeared
he was not only fit stuff for a servant, but to be
advanced to such eminent offices as these, not only
the inveigling the embryo legislator, preacher, and
philosopher; but the assaulting and beating him,
and, by that means disabling him from immediate
service, must be viewed in the light of an atrocious
injury, and insure a verdict accordingly.
[Page 194]
Very well, said the Captain, and I shall wish to
have the matter determined as speedily as possible,
as I may be but a few days in town; and, besides, as
the marks are yet apparent on the face, and I suppose,
back, of the bog-trotter, it will appear to the
judges and jury, without the trouble of witnesses,
what damage he has sustained.
The process of law, said the counsellor, is tedious
but certain; you cannot expect a trial in this case,
until the 3d or 4th term; that is nine months or a
year.
How so, said the Captain? Because, said the
counsellor, it is now two months, or upwards, before
the court to which the writ will be returnable. Even
if a declaration is then filed, the defendant may imparl
until the succeeding term, which is three
months; when, if there is no demurer, general or
special, a rule to plead will be taken, which may
not be put in until the succeeding term of three
months again: At this term, if there is no replication,
rejoinder, surrejoinder, rebutter, or surrebutter
to draw up and file, while the defendant may crave a
term, issue will be joined, and at the next term trial.
But even after a verdict, there may be the delay of a
term, on a motion for a new trial depending; so
that in the law there is delay, but this delay is the
price of justice.
It is a price, said the Captain, that I will not give
for it. If you will bring it about in a short time to
have this fellow flogged, even with half the stripes he
has given my servant, I shall not think the half-joe
thrown away; but to be a year or half a year about
the business, is putting the matter so far off, that it
may as well be omitted altogether. If you could
only get him sentenced to take a kick or two from
[Page 195]
my foot, or Teague's, before we leave the city, I
should be satisfied.
The lex talionis , said the counsellor, makes no
part of our law. You can punish only in estate, not
in person, for a simple assault and battery, as this is.
Do you not hang a man for murder, said the Captain;
and why not punish personally for an assault
and battery? Because it is our law, said the coun
sellor; and in a civil action, the object is damages.
A civil action and damages, are strange phrases,
said the Captain; how can civility and damages be
reconciled.
These are technical terms, said the counsellor,
which persons, not of the profession, are at a loss to
understand; but have, in themselves, a dinstinct and
sensible meaning.
Let the terms mean what they will, said the Captain,
it all comes to this at last:....There is no getting
at the manager under a year, or two year's race
for it; before which time Teague will have forgot
the abuse he has received, and I my trouble in running
after a strayed Irishman, through this city; and
therefore it may be as well to give the matter up,
and sit down with the loss.
That as you please, said the connsellor; and putting
on his spectacles, cast his eyes again upon the
black letter.
The Captain, without bidding him kiss his backside,
beckoned to Teague to follow him, and withdrew
from the chamber.
Having retired; Teague, said the Captain, this
thing of law has been well said to be a bottomless
pit. The way to it is like that to the shades;.............
Facilis descensus averni;
Sed referre gradus, hic labor, hoc opus est.
[Page 196]
This pettifogger seemed to have a thousand remedies
at his command, and yet none that would serve
us; as the redress, if any, is to be postponed to such
a distant day. I have heard a great deal of these
cattle, and I believe they are best off that have the
least to do with them. They have so much jargon
of technical terms, that the devil himself cannot understand
them. Their whole object is to get money;
and, provided they can pick the pocket of half a joe,
they care little about the person that consults them.
The first loss is the best; you had better put up
with the currying you have got, than have my pocket
picked, on pretence of redress a year or two
hence, which may, perhaps, prove a century.
Teague was contented to put up with the drubbing,
and have no more said about it.
[Page 197]
CHAPTER XII.
THE Captain had consoled himself with the idea
that Teague was now cured of his folly, and would
no more be disposed to entertain notions of ambition,
and unreasonable projects. He was disappointed in
his hope; for that very evening, the Irishman washing
down the recollection of his woes with some exhilirating
drink, and though not intoxicated, but enlivened
only, he came to the Captain: Said he, Dear
master, what would your anour think, if a poor sharvant
should turn lawyer; and get a half joe when a
customer comes to consult him in the morning?
would it not be better than currying a horse, and
tratting about like a big dog; with no sense to live
like a man of fartune, and have a big house over his
head, and books about him, and take half joes from
paple that come to him about their quarrels and
batings, through de town, and sending dem aff as
wise as if dey had never come to him, and de great
spectacles, to look like a blind man, dat was blind
before he was born, and could see more than two or
three other paple, for all dat; and was a canjurer,
and a wizzard, and could take money for nating....
Would it not be better, master, than tratting like a
fool, and disputing wid paple, and having nating to
[Page 198]
lay up; but be as poor as a church mouse, or a rat,
all the days of our life, and paple laugh after us
when we are gone.
The Captain was thrown into a reverie of thought,
by the speech of the bog-trotter; reflecting, that his
presumption and folly was incurable; for, notwithstanding
all that had been said to him, or suffered
by him, his natural propensity remained the same;
according to the maxim— Naturam expellas bufurea,
usque recurret; you may toss out nature with a pitchfork,
she will still come back upon you. Not so
much from any further view of reclaiming him, as
from indignation, and resentment, against his presumption,
the Captain projected, in his mind, a farther
means of chastising him. He had heard of a
work-house, in this city, into which refractory servants
are committed, and put to hard labour; such
as pounding hemp, grinding plaister of Paris, and
picking old ropes into oakum. He resolved to have
the raggamuffin put into this a while. Counterfeiting,
therefore, an approbation of his project of becoming
lawyer, doubtless, said he, the profession of
the law is a profitable business, where money is very
easily get, by the bare breath of the mouth. Nevertheless,
it requires time and study to qualify for this
profession. Nay, the introduction to the study, by
being put under an eminent lawyer, in full practice,
is itself very expensive. An hundred pistoles is
sometimes the fee. This I could not very well afford;
but I have an acquaintance in this town, who,
I am persuaded, would he willing to oblige me, and
will take less. I will call upon him early to-morrow,
and settle the contract.
Accordingly the next day, calling on the keeper
of the work-house, he gave him an account of his refractory
servant, and with a gratuity of a couple of
[Page 199]
guineas, obtained his consent, to take the bog-trotter
under his direction, and give him a few lessons in
picking oakum, and grinding plaister of Paris, and
pounding hemp, not withholding, in the mean time,
a seasonable application of the cowskin, in the intervals
of study of these several branches of the law.
For the idea was to be imposed upon Teague, that
this was an office, or as it were an inn of court, or
chamber of the Inner Temple; and that the several
flagellations, and grindings, and poundings, were so
many lessons, and lectures, to qualify him for the
practice of the law.
It happened, fortunately, that the keeper of the
work-house was well qualified for the task; for, in
early years, he had been put an apprentice to an attorney,
and had some opportunity of attending courts,
and hearing the names of books to which the advocates
referred in their pleadings; but having a turn
for extravagance, and a dissolute manner life, he had
come to poverty, and, through various scenes, to jail.
There, by address, he had gained the good will of
the jailor's daughter, whom he married: and, by the
interest of his new father-in-law, having obtained his
liberation, he was, from acting as deputy jailor, in a
series of time, at length promoted to be the keeper
of this work-house. Indeed, from his employment,
being acquainted with the prisoners, and finding
himself sometimes interested in their fate, and being
led to attend their trials, he had, even in his last capacity,
been a good deal about courts, and heard law
phrases and books mentioned.
Accordingly, when Teague was introduced, which
was that very afternoon, he had, at his command, the
names of the abridgers, and reporters, and commentators
of the law, and the technical terms in the commencement
and process of a suit; so that, when the
[Page 200]
key was turned, and, after having stript him of the
linen doublet that was upon him, he began to give
him the first application of the cowskin, he told him
this was reading Wood's Institutes; and when, after
this, he was sentenced to an hour or two's hard labour,
at grinding plaister of Paris, this was called
Coke upon Littleton; and when the employment
was varied, pounding hemp, or picking oakum, it
was called Hawkin's Pleas of the crown, or Foster,
or 4th Blackstone, &c. When the poor bog-trotter,
reduced to a skeleton, living on bread and water,
complained of the hard usage, and offered himself a
servant for life, to curry horses and brush boots, to
any Christian creature would take him out of that
place; he was told, that, as he had begun the study
of the law, he must go through with it; that that was
but the commencement of the suit; that in a year's
time he would learn to file a declaration; in another,
to put in a plea; in a third, to join issue; and in a
fourth, to conduct a trial; that unless a bill of exceptions
had been filed, or there was a motion, in
arrest of judgment, or a writ of error brought, he
might be admitted the fifth, and begin to practice
the sixth year: At all events, provided he would
submit himself, with due application, to fasting, and
cowskinning, and grinding plaister of Paris, pounding
hemp, and picking oakum, he might be a lawyer
the seventh year, and wear spectacles, like counsellor
Grab, and take half a joe when he thought proper.
I know not by what simile to represent the howl
of the Irishman, at this prospect of the duration of
his woes. It was like that of a wolf at the bottom of
a well, or a dog that had lost his master, or a cow
her comrade, or some forlorn wanderer that has missed
the way, and given up all hopes of being
[Page 201]
extricated from the wilderness. At the various applications
of the cowskin, he had jumped, and cursed, and
swore, and prayed, and beseeched, and promised a
thousand services, of currying horses, and brushing
boots, and trotting wherever he was ordered, provided
they would set him at liberty. When employed
at the hard labour, before mentioned, he had groaned,
and cursed the law, the counsellor, and the half joe.
Ah, thought he, if my dear master, the Captain,
knew how hard a ting it was to study law, and to
fast widout ating or drinking, and be bate wid a cowskin,
he would not have given the hundred pistoles,
nor the half of it, to have had me kicked and cuffed
in dis manner: I would give body and shoul into
the bargain, if I could see him once more at that iron
gate there, to spake to him, and besache him to take
me out of this purgotary. He was a good master;
and when I was a fool, and wanted to be a member
of Congress, and prache, and be a phalosophar, he
told me, Teague, your are a fool; and what they
would do wid me there; how they would bate me,
and ate me, and take de skin aff my back, and make
a cow or a shape od me; and now I am worse than
a cow or a shape, or a horse in de tame; for I am
cut, and curried black and blue; till my flesh is raw,
and a cholic in my belly, wid fasting; and all to stoody
dis law. The devil take counsellor Grab, and de
half joe.
[Page 202]
CHAPTER XIII.
THE Captain having been led to think so much
of law, of late, was struck with the idea of visiting
courts of justice, and hearing some of those cases
argued, which come before them. Understanding
that a court was then sitting, he resolved to take the
opportunity of the interval of Teague's purgation, in
the work-house, to amuse himself with the pleading
of the advocates. Accordingly, repairing to the courthouse,
he took his place amongst the crowd, and listened
to what was going forward.
What came before the court was a motion in arrest
of judgment. A Jonathan Mun had been indicted,
and found guilty of “feloniously taking and carrying
away water out of the well of Andrew Mab.”
It was moved in arrest of judgment, that larceny
could not be committed of water in a well, it being
real property; for it was a distinction of the common
law, that larceny could not be committed of things
real, or savouring of the reality, Black. 232. 2 Ray.
470. Hawkins, &c. So that taking away the soil was
merely a trespass; and taking away the water could
be no more.
It was answered, that water being fluitans, et mobi
is , could not be considered as real property; that an
[Page 203]
ejectment would not lie for water, but for so many
acres of land covered with water, Yelv. 143. 1 Burr.
142. Because it was impossible to give execution
of a thing which is always transient and running,
Run. 36, quotes Cro. Jas. 150. Lev. 114. Sid. 151.
Thence it is that in a grant of the soil it is necessary,
as we see from old forms, to add the right of ways,
woods, and water-courses, Lilly. Con. 132. and 179.
Bridg. Con. 321. That whatever might be said of
water in its natural bed on the soil, as water in a running
stream; yet a well being dug by the labour of
hands, the water thus acquired, must be counted as
personal, not real property. Barbcray, Titius, and
Locke. That at a well, the water being drawn up by
the bucket, and thus by one act separated from the
freehold, and by another taken from the bucket, it
becomes a subject of larceny; as in the law of corn,
trees, or grass growing. For if these be severed at
one time, and at another time taken away, it is larceny.
Hawk. Pl. Cr. 93.
It was replied, that an ejectment would lie of water
in a well; for here the water is fixed in a certain
place, within the bounds and compass of the well;
and is considered as part of the soil. Run. 37. That,
ex vi termini , in the indictment, “out of the well,”
it must be considered as water ex , out of, or from
the well; that is, water severed by the very act of
taking; for otherwise it would have been expressed,
by “water out of the bucket” of Andrew Mab; not
out of the well; and so the taking could not be larceny,
but trespass; as in the case of a tree that is cut
down at one time, and taken away at another; or apples
growing on a tree, or shaken down and gathered
from the soil; the first being a trespass, the second
larceny.
Curia advisare vult ,
[Page 204]
The Captain whispering to lawyer Grab, enquired
what difference it made in the punishment, whether
it was larceny or trespass? He was answered, that in
the one case it was hanging by the common law, and
in the other to pay the value of the property. A very
material difference indeed, said the Captain, to depend
on so nice a distinction.
[Page 205]
CHAPTER XIV.
THE Captain had now leisure to reflect on the
predicament in which he left Teague; and thinking
he might have had what was sufficient to cure him
of his folly, or at least restrain it, thought of making
a visit to the house of employment, or sending to liberate
the valet.
This thought running in his head, he naturally
suggested it to a gentleman with whom he was, at
this time, in conversation, on indifferent subjects;
the gentleman lodging at the same inn, or public
house, and seeming to be a person of considerable
shrewdness and discernment, not only of the affairs
of men in general, but of the special spirit and character
of these times.
Said the gentleman; The folly of your man has
certainly been very great, to suppose, that he could
be qualified to sustain the profession of an advocate,
and to practise law: For, though in this, as in most
other professions, “the race is not always to the swift,
nor the battle to the strong;” but the people that sheweth
favour; that is, take up an opinion of abilities,
where there are none; yet your servant, having so
little, even of the semblance of qualification, it would
be counting too much on the circumstance, to
[Page 206]
promise great success in his case. His prospect of advancement
would be much more certain in the political
career. You seem, by your account, to have discouraged
him in taking a seat in the legislature; and
would not wish now to contradict yourself: yet why
not indulge him in taking a place in the executive of
some government. As far as I see, with that ambition
which is natural to him, you will find him but
of little use, as a waiter: and you may as well let
him do something for himself, as not. If appointed
in the department of finance, he can use clerks; and,
in a very short time, he may learn to write his name,
so as to give his signature to any paper; and this,
with the help of clerks to do the accountant business,
would be sufficient: At least, there have been
those in these departments, who have been approved,
and yet could do little more. Should he even become
a governor; furnished with a secretary, he can be at
no loss to compose his messages, or other communications,
to individuals, or public bodies.
But what I would propose, and will suit him best,
will be to go into the general government; and, under
this, the diplomatic line will be eligible. He
might be appointed consul to the port of Cork or
Dublin; or the Barbary States; or other places: Or
he might go as ambassador to the grand Mogul; or
envoy extraordinary to the king of England; or other
princes or potentates in Europe.
If you should think of favouring him in this career,
it will be necessary for him to appear at the
levee of the president, that he may be introduced with
a certain gradual etiquette of advancement.
What! said the Captain, introduce a ragged bog-trotter
to the president of the United States!
Not ragged, said the gentleman; you can have a
pair of breeches made for him; and put shoes upon
[Page 207]
his feet: a sword will be necessary; and some other
articles of equipment. And when you bring this into
view with his making his fortune, you will not
consider it as advancing much for a person whom
you wish to serve.
The Captain began to think there was weight in
the observations of this gentleman; and that it might
be proper to let the bog-trotter have a chance of doing
what he could: Accordingly, he wrote a note to
the keeper of the house of employment, to liberate
him for the present.
The state of politics at this time, and the prospect
of Teague's advancement, we shall leave to the Second
Volume of this work.
[Page 208]
POSTSCRIPT.
IT is well for men in office, that my pen has
taken this turn; and that I employ myself in writing
harmless nonsense, rather than strictures on their
conduct. In the case of the famous Gordon, who,
with Trenchard, was an author of what were stiled
Cato's Letters, it is well known that the shrewd minister
of that day, Walpole, dreading the effects of
these writings, wisely laid a plan to free his administration
from them; by affecting to admire the stile;
and saying, that it were a pity so noble a genius were
not employed in giving a sample of good language,
where there would be no occasion to invent, but merely
to clothe ideas. For this reason, he would consider
it as a great happiness, could he be induced to
translate some work of merit; and give it in the
beautiful garb of his expression. By this address,
and the addition of a pension, the author was induced
to undertake the translation of Tacitus.
Now, what government, with great art, got Gordon
to do, I have done of my own accord; that is, to
amuse myself in abstract composition; regarding
words only, and letting men of place alone. Nevertheless,
as the sale of these is not certain; and if I
should find it an expense, rather than a profit, to
[Page 209]
proceed in the work, I may quit it, and fall foul of the
public measures, those who discharge the public
trust, at the present time, may not be altogether
safe. It were, therefore, wise policy in such, to assist
the sale as much as possible; and it might not be
amiss, in the first instance, to buy up, each of them,
a number of copies. I do not know that I have any
thing to say of the president of the United States;
or that I would say it, if I had; nevertheless, it might
not be amiss for him, on the principle of preservation,
and, agreeably to that universal prudence he
has ever shewn, to take a few; perhaps fifty might
suffice. The secretary of the treasury, and the secretary
at war, might take between them, about five
hundred. As to the secretary of state, he is such a
skin-dried philosopher, that an author would make
as little out of him, as a fly would out of a weatherbeaten
bone; and so, it is of little consequence to him,
whether he buys one at all; for I believe I shall not
trouble my head about him. As to the Congress
that have sat since the adoption of the federal constitution,
they need not put themselves to the expence,
individually or collectively of purchasing one pamphlet;
as I am determined not to be bought off by
them; but in a work which I shall by and by publish,
will canvas, freely, the respective demerit of their
votes. I have not yet written any part of this work;
but I have it all in my mind; and if I had a ready
amanuensis, to take it down, could give a volume in
a short time.
The whole gradation of officers and place-men,
under government, are a good deal in my power.
Not that I would descend to attack them; but I might
affect the system by which they are supported. A
pretty liberal purchase, therefore, on their part, might
be money not ill laid out.
[Page 210]
The men that are upon the government of Pennsylvania,
would find their account, in making it worth
my while to let my fingers run in this way, a while
longer. Peream ne scribam; I must write; and if I
should break out upon them, I know not where I
might end.
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
S. H. M'FETRICH, PRINTER.
Back matter
[Page ]
$$$
