Art. II. ... Moore ... Byron
Author: Hazlitt, William.
Publication info: The Edinburgh Review or Critical Journal ; Edinburgh (1823): iv, 534 p.

Art. II. 1. Loves of the Angels. A Poem. By Thomas Moore. 8 vo. pp. 148. London, 1823. 2 Heaven and Earth. A Mystery. By Lord Byron. 1823. [in, The Edinburgh Review, or Critical Journal: for Feb. 1823 ... May 1823 ... Vol. XXXVIII]
[Page 27]
Art . II. 1. Loves of the Angels. A Poem . By Thomas Moore . 8vo. pp. 148. London, 1823. 2. Heaven and Earth. A Mystery . By Lord Byron . 1823. IT is curious to see two writers, so very able, and so very different, both treating the same singular, and (as one might be tempted to suppose) almost intractable subject. All things, however, are possible to genius, and come within the range of poetry. We may set the reader's mind at once easy by stating, that there is nothing (or next to nothing) of that speculative daring in Lord Byron's present production that gave such just offence in his Mystery of Cain ; and that Mr Moore, in his new Poem, has kept his amatory vein within the strict bounds of decorum. There is nothing equivocal in it but the title; and that may occasion some idle flutter and some trifling disappointment. The first of these very extraordinary performances may be read without incurring a frown from the brow of piety, and the last without calling up a blush in the cheek of modesty. Considering the nature of the subject, and the temper of the authors, this is a great and a rare merit. Perhaps they found themselves so near the edge of a precipice, that they were afraid, if they made one false step, of being hurled down ‘ten thousand fathom deep.’ To whatever cause we may attribute this cautious reserve and self-denial, we have to thank them for saving us a world of moralizing —a tone in criticism we do not much affect, unless when it is forced upon us, and which we would gladly leave to the Pulpit, or to the Chairs of Moral Philosophy.
Mr Moore, in his Preface , informs us, that he had somewhat hastened his publication, to obviate the disadvantage of coming after his friend Lord Byron; or, as he ingeniously expresses it, ‘By an earlier appearance in the literary horizon, to give himself the chance of what astronomers call an Heliacal rising , before the luminary, in whose light he was to be lost, should appear.’ This is an amiable, but by no means a reasonable modesty. The light that plays round Mr Moore's verses, tender, glancing, and brilliant, is in no danger of being extinguished even in the sullen glare of Lord Byron's genius. An aurora borealis might as well think of being put out by an eruption of Mount Vesuvius. They are both bright stars in the firmament of modern poetry, but as distant and unlike as Saturn and Mercury. Their rising may be at the same time, but they can never move
[Page 28]
in the same orb, nor meet or jostle in ‘the wide pathless way’ of fancy and invention. Let Mr Moore then shine on, and fear no envious eclipse, unless it be from an excess of his own light!
We conceive, though these two celebrated writers in some measure divide the Poetical Public between them, that it is not the same Public whose favour they severally enjoy in the highest degree. They are both read and admired, no doubt, in the same extended circle of taste and fashion; but each is the favourite of a totally different set of readers. Thus a lover may pay the same outward attention to two different women; but he only means to flirt with the one, while the other is the mistress of his heart. The gay, the fair, the witty, the happy, idolize Mr Moore's delightful Muse, on her pedestal of airy smiles or transient tears. Lord Byron's severer verse is enshrined in the breasts of those whose gaiety has been turned to gall, whose fair exterior has a canker within, whose mirth has received a rebuke as if it were folly, from whom happiness has fled like a dream! If we compute the odds upon the known chances of human life, his Lordship will bid fair to have as numerous a class of votaries as his more agreeable rival! We are not going to give a preference, but we beg leave to make a distinction on the present occasion. The poetry of Moore is essentially that of Fancy; the poetry of Byron that of Passion . If there is passion in the effusions of the one, the fancy by which it is expressed predominates over it: if fancy is called to the aid of the other, it is still subservient to the passion. Lord Byron's jests are downright earnest; Mr Moore, when he is most serious, seems half in jest. The latter plays and trifles with his subject, caresses and grows enamoured of it: the former grasps it eagerly to his bosom, breathes death upon it, and turns from it with loathing or dismay! The fine aroma, that is exhaled from the flowers of poesy, every where lends its perfume to the verse of the Bard of Erin. The noble bard (less fortunate in his Muse) tries to extract poison from them. If Lord Byron flings his own views or feelings upon outward objects (jaundicing the sun), Mr Moore seems to exist in the delights, the virgin fancies of nature. He is free of the Rosicrucian society; and enjoys an etherial existence among troops of sylphs and spirits, and in a perpetual vision of wings, flowers, rainbows, smiles, blushes, tears and kisses. Every page of his works is a vignette, every line that he writes glows or sparkles; and it would seem (so some one said who knew him well and loved him much) ‘as if his airy spirit, drawn from the sun, continually fluttered with fond aspirations, to regain that
[Page 29]
native source of light and heat.’ The worst is, our author's mind is too vivid, too active, to suffer a moment's repose. We are cloyed with sweetness and dazzled with splendour. Every image must ‘blush celestial rosy red, love's proper hue,’—every syllable must breathe a sigh. A sentiment is lost in a simile— the simile is overloaded with an epithet. It is ‘like morn risen on mid-noon.’ No eventful story, no powerful contrast, no moral , none of the sordid details of human life (all is etherial), none of its sharp calamities, or, if they inevitably occur, his Muse throws a soft, glittering veil over them,
‘Like moonlight on a troubled sea,
Brightening the storm it cannot calm.’
We do not believe Mr Moore ever writes a line, that in itself would not pass for poetry, that is not at least a vivid or harmonious commonplace. Lord Byron writes whole pages of sullen, crabbed prose, like a long dreary road that, however, leads to doleful shades or palaces of the blest. In short, Mr Moore's Parnassus is a blooming Eden; Lord Byron's is a rugged wilderness of shame and sorrow. On the tree of knowledge of the first, you can see nothing but perpetual flowers and verdure; in the last, you see the naked stem and rough bark; but it heaves at intervals with inarticulate throes, and you hear the shrieks of a human voice within.
Critically speaking, Mr Moore's poetry is chargeable with two peculiarities. First, the pleasure or interest he conveys to us is almost always derived from the first impressions or physical properties of objects, not from their connexion with passion or circumstances. His lights dazzle the eye, his perfumes soothe the smell, his sounds ravish the ear: but then they do so for and from themselves, and at all times and places equally—for the heart has nothing to do with it. Hence we observe a kind of fastidious extravagance in Mr Moore's serious poetry. Each thing must be fine, soft, exquisite in itself, for it is never set off by reflection or contrast. It glitters to the sense through an atmosphere of indifference. Our indolent, luxurious bard does not whet the appetite by setting us to hunt after the game of human passion, and is therefore obliged to pamper us with dainties, seasoned with rich fancy and the sauce piquante of poetic diction. Poetry, in his hands, becomes a kind of cosmetic art —it is the poetry of the toilette. His Muse must be as fine as the Lady of Loretto. The naked Venus to some eyes would seem a dowdy to her! Now, this principle of composition leads not only to a defect of dramatic interest, but also of imagination. For every thing in this world, the meanest incident or object, may receive a light and an importance from its association
[Page 30]
with other objects and with the heart of man; and the variety thus created is endless as it is striking and profound. But if we begin and end in those objects that are beautiful or dazzling in themselves and at first blush, we shall soon be confined to a narrow round of self-pleasing topics, and be both superficial and wearisome. It is the fault of Mr Wordsworth's poetry that he has perversely relied too much (or wholly) on this reaction of the imagination on subjects that are petty and repulsive in themselves, and of Mr Moore's, that he appeals too exclusively to the flattering support of sense and fancy. Secondly, We have remarked that Mr Moore hardly ever describes entire objects, but abstract qualities of objects. It is not a picture that he gives us, but an inventory of beauty. He takes a blush, or a smile, and runs on whole stanzas in extatic praise of it, and then diverges to the sound of a voice, and ‘discourses eloquent music’ on the subject; but it might as well be the light of Heaven that he is describing, or the voice of Echo—we have no human figure before us, no palpable reality, answering to any substantive form in nature. Hence we think it may be explained why it is that this author has so little picturesque effect—with such vividness of conception, such insatiable ambition after ornament, and such an inexhaustible and delightful play of fancy. Mr Moore is a colourist in poetry, a musician also, and has a heart full of tenderness and susceptibility for all that is delightful and amiable in itself, and that does not require the ordeal of suffering, of crime, or of deep thought to stamp it with a bold character. In this, we conceive, consists the charm of his poetry, which all the world feel, but which it is so difficult for critics to explain scientifically, and in conformity to transcendental rules . It has the charm of the softest and most brilliant execution. There is no wrinkle, no deformity on its smooth and shining surface. It has the charm which arises from the continual desire to please, and from the spontaneous sense of pleasure in the author's mind. Without being gross in the smallest degree, it is voluptuous in the highest. It is a sort of sylph-like, spiritualized sensuality. So far from being licentious in the present instance, Mr Moore has become moral and sentimental (indeed he was always the last) —and tantalizes his young and fair readers with the glittering shadows and mystic adumbrations of evanescent delights. He (in fine) in his courtship of the Muses, resembles those lovers who always say the softest things on all occasions; who smile with irresistible good humour at their own success; who banish pain and truth from their thoughts, and who impart the delight they feel in themselves unconsciously to others! Mr Moore's
[Page 31]
poetry is the thornless rose—its touch is velvet, its hue vermilion, and its graceful form is cast in beauty's mould. Lord Byron's is a prickly bramble, or sometimes a deadly Upas, of form uncouth and uninviting, that has its root in the clefts of the rock, and its head mocking the skies, round which the loud cataracts roar, and that wars with the thunder cloud and tempest.
Having said so much in the way of criticism, we shall now proceed to enable our readers to judge for themselves. Lord Byron's ‘Heaven and Earth’ has a dramatic form; Mr Moore's ‘Loves of the Angels’ is thrown into a narrative. Both have attempted a diversity of character in the angels, and in the women whose lovers they are. Lord Byron has contrasted his pairs of lovers, giving the mildest angel to the most masculine woman; Mr Moore has assimilated his, giving a high-spirited and aspiring woman as a mistress to the most heroic and dignified angel, a Semele to his Jupiter. Each has yielded to the bent of his genius in the path he has chosen: the one method giving softness, the other strength. The ‘Loves of the Angels’ opens with the following beautiful stanzas, which will give an idea of the plan of the whole. We have delayed thus long to quote any passages from this Siren-like poet, because we knew from that instant our occupation would be gone; the seductive power of his style being such as to render us as little inclined to make, as our readers to listen, to fastidious objections. ‘The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of Apollo.’ It was necessary for us, therefore, to have our say first: and having now discharged our consciences, we have nothing to do but to please ourselves as well as others.
Without further preface, then, Mr Moore thus announces his design.
‘'Twas when the world was in its prime,
    When the fresh stars had just begun
Their race of glory, and young Time
    Told his first birth-days by the sun;
When, in the light of Nature's dawn
    Rejoicing, Men and Angels met
On the high hill and sunny lawn,—
Ere sorrow came, or Sin had drawn
    'Twixt man and heaven her curtain yet!
When earth lay nearer to the skies
    Than in these days of crime and wo,
And mortals saw, without surprise,
In the mid-air, angelic eyes
    Gazing upon this world below.
[Page 32]
Alas, that Passion should profane,
    Ev'n then, that morning of the earth!
That, sadder still, the fatal stain
    Should fall on hearts of heavenly birth—
And oh, that stain so dark should fall
From Woman's love, most sad of all!
One evening, in that time of bloom,
    On a hill's side, where hung the ray
Of sunset, sleeping in perfume,
    Three noble youths conversing lay;
And, as they look'd, from time to time,
    To the far sky, where Day-light furl'd
His radiant wing, their brows sublime
    Bespoke them of that distant world—
Creatures of light, such as still play,
    Like motes in sunshine, round the Lord,
And through their infinite array
Transmit each moment, night and day,
    The echo of His luminous word!
Of Heaven they spoke, and still more oft,
    Of the bright eyes that charm'd them thence;
Till, yielding gradual to the soft
    And balmy evening's influence—
The silent breathing of the flowers—
    The melting light that beam'd above,
As on their first, fond, erring hours,
    Each told the story of his love,
The history of that hour unblest,
When like a bird, from its high nest
Won down by fascinating eyes,
For Woman's smile he lost the skies.
The First who spoke, was one, with look
    The least celestial of the three—
A Spirit of light mould, that took
    The prints of earth most yieldingly;
Who, ev'n in heaven, was not of those
    Nearest the Throne, but held a place
Far off, among those shining rows
    That circle out through endless space,
And o'er whose wings the light from Him
In the great centre falls most dim.
Still fair and glorious, he but shone
Among those youths th' unheavenliest one—
[Page 33]
A creature to whom light remain'd
From Eden still, but alter'd, stain'd,
And o'er whose brow not Love alone
    A blight had, in his transit, sent,
But other earthlier joys had gone,
    And left their foot-prints as they went.
Sighing, as through the shadowy Past
    Like a tomb-searcher, Memory ran,
Lifting each shroud that Time had cast
    O'er buried hopes, he thus began.’ p. 5.
We shall attempt to give the outline, and some of the most refulgent passages of the First Angel's Story .
‘'Twas in a land, that far away
    Into the golden orient lies,
Where Nature knows not night's delay,
But springs to meet her bridegroom, Day,
    Upon the threshold of the skies.
One morn, on earthly mission sent,
And mid-way, choosing where to light,
I saw, from the blue element—
    Oh beautiful, but fatal sight!—
One of earth's fairest womankind,
Half veil'd from view, or rather shrin'd
In the clear crystal of a brook;
    Which, while it hid no single gleam
Of her young beauties, made them look
    More spirit-like, as they might seem
    Through the dim shadowing of a dream.
Pausing in wonder, I look'd on,
    While, playfully around her breaking
The waters, that like diamonds shone,
    She mov'd in light of her own making .
    At length, as slowly I descended
    To view more near a sight so splendid,
The tremble of my wings all o'er
    (For through each plume I felt the thrill)
Startl'd her, as she reach'd the shore
    Of that small lake—her mirror still—
Above whose brink she stood, like snow
When rosy with a sun-set glow .
Never shall I forget those eyes!—
The shame, the innocent surprise
Of that bright face, when in the air
Uplooking, she beheld me there.
It seem'd as if each thought, and look,
[Page 34]
    And motion were that minute chain'd
Fast to the spot, such root she took,
And—like a sunflower by a brook,
    With face upturn'd—so still remain'd.
In pity to the wondering maid,
    Though loth from such a vision turning,
Downward I bent, beneath the shade
    Of my spread wings, to hide the burning
Of glances, which—I well could feel—
    For me, for her, too warmly shone;
But, ere I could again unseal
My restless eyes, or even steal
    One side-long look, the maid was gone—
Hid from me in the forest leaves,
    Sudden as when, in all her charms
Of full-blown light , some cloud receives
    The Moon into his dusky arms. .’ p. 9.
We have marked some lines of the foregoing extract in italics, which we either think exquisitely beautiful, or doubtfully so. Thus, we conceive that the expression,
‘She moved in light of her own making,’
is wounderfully natural and happy: but we object to the figure employed just after, where it is said,
‘---She stood, like snow
When rosy with a sunset glow.’
This we pronounce to be tinsel. It may look very fine to the eye, but it chills the sense. No one ever in his feelings connected the appearance of a beautiful woman with a figure of snow, however decked with roses by the sun. Again, we suspect there is something a little false and meretricious in talking of the ‘charms,’ and the ‘full-blown-light’ of the moon. That lady of Heaven is cold and distant; nor will she endure to have her beauties compared to spreading flowers, or to the ripe and swelling bosoms that burst and expand like them. The moon is a flat, shining, well-defined surface. ‘Full-blownlight’ is, we apprehend, a conceit , as Dryden and the wits of that day (for critics were then thought wits) would have termed it.
The glowing warmth of the cherub's love, and the lady's platonic return to it, are well described (allowing for one or two epigrammatic points) in the following stanzas.
‘Nor was it long, ere by her side
    I'found myself, whole happy days,
Listening to words, whose music vied
    With our own Eden's seraph lays,
[Page 35]
When seraph lays are warm'd by love;
But, wanting that , far, far above!
And looking into eyes where, blue
And beautiful, like skies seen through
The sleeping wave, for me there shone
A heaven, more worshipp'd than my own,
Oh what, while I could hear and see
Such words and looks, was heaven to me?
Though gross the air on earth I drew,
'Twas blessed, while she breath'd it too;
Though dark the flowers, though dim the sky,
Love lent them light, while she was nigh.
Throughout creation I but knew
Two separate worlds---the one , that small,
    Belov'd, and consecrated spot
Where Lea was —the other, all
    The dull, wide waste where she was not!
But vain my suit, my madness vain;
Though gladly from her eyes to gain
    One earthly look, one stray desire,
I would have torn the wings, that hung
    Furl'd at my back, and o'er that Fire
Unnam'd in heaven their fragments flung;—
'Twas hopeless all—pure and unmov'd
    She stood, as lilies in the light
    Of the hot noon but look more white; —
And though she lov'd me, deeply lov'd,
'Twas not as man, as mortal—no,
Nothing of earth was in that glow—
She lov'd me but as one, of race
Angelic, from that radiant place
She saw so oft in dreams—that Heaven,
    To which her prayers at morn were sent,
And on whose light she gaz'd at even,
Wishing for wings that she might go
Out of this shadowy world below,
    To that free, glorious element!’
The angel then describes, in terms of pure and eloquent pathos, the sorrow of Lea at learning his wild passion for her. On the night of this discovery, a feast is held, in which her lover inflames his imagination by the aid of wine.
‘Then, too, that juice of earth, the bane
And blessing of man's heart and brain—
That draught of sorcery, which brings
Phantoms of fair, forbidden things—
Whose drops, like those of rainbows, smile
    Upon the mists that circle man,
[Page 36]
Bright'ning not only Earth, the while,
    But grasping Heaven, too, in their span!—
Then first the fatal wine-cup rain'd
    Its dews of darkness through my lips,
Casting whate'er of light remain'd
    To my lost soul into eclipse.’
He has a meeting with his enchanting, inexorable maid, ‘at the silent moonlight hour,’ who, however, instead of listening to his vows, turns her eyes to her favourite star. In the depth of his despair of gaining her mortal love, he agrees to leave Earth for Heaven, and pronounces, for that purpose, ‘the spell-word’ that is to waft him to the skies, which she no sooner hears, than she eagerly catches it up, and mounts on the wings of faith to the starry firmament, while it loses its power over the Cherub, who repeats the magic sound in vain, and in vain seeks to follow her.
‘While thus I spoke, the fearful maid,
Of me and of herself afraid,
Had shrinking stood, like flowers beneath
The scorching of the south-wind's breath;
But when I nam'd—alas, too well,
    I now recall, though wilder'd then,—
Instantly, when I nam'd the spell,
    Her brow, her eyes uprose again,
And, with an eagerness, that spoke
The sudden light that o'er her broke,
The spell, the spell!—oh, speak it now,
    “And I will bless thee!” she exclaim'd—
    Unknowing what I did, inflam'd,
And lost already, on her brow
    I stamp'd one burning kiss, and nam'd
The mystic word, till then ne'er told
To living creature of earth's mould!
Scarce was it said, when, quick as thought,
Her lips from mine, like echo, caught
The holy sound—her hands and eyes
Were instant lifted to the skies,
And thrice to heaven she spoke it out,
    With that triumphant look Faith wears,
When not a cloud of fear or doubt,
    A vapour from this vale of tears,
    Between her and her God appears!
That very moment her whole frame
All bright and glorified became,
And at her back I saw unclose
Two wings, magnificent as those
    That sparkle round th' Eternal Throne,
[Page 37]
Whose plumes, as buoyantly she rose
    Above me, in the moon-beam shone
With a pure light, which—from its hue,
Unknown upon this earth—I knew
Was light from Eden, glistening through!
Most holy vision! ne'er before
    Did aught so radiant—since the day
When Lucifer, in falling, bore
    The third of the bright stars away—
Rise in earth's beauty to repair
That loss of light and glory there!
But did I tamely view her flight?
Did not I , too, proclaim out thrice
The powerful words that were, that night—
Oh, ev'n for heaven too much delight!
Again to bring us, eyes to eyes,
And soul to soul, in Paradise?
I did—I spoke it o'er and o'er—
    I pray'd, I wept, but all in vain;
For me the spell had power no more,
    There seem'd around me some dark chain
Which still, as I essay'd to soar,
    Baffled, alas, each wild endeavour:
Dead lay my wings, as they have lain
Since that sad hour, and will remain—
    So wills the offended God—forever!’
We must refer our reader's for the Second Angel's Story to the poem itself; and, after the specimens we have already given, they will, we apprehend, find this no very irksome task. Suffice it to say, that Rubi is a Spirit of Knowledge, and that the desire of knowledge is the fatal passion of his human bride, who perishes like another Semele in the fiery revelation of his celestial charms. We must be contented to enrich our pages with the description of his person.
‘'Twas Rubi , in whose mournful eye
Slept the dim light of days gone by;
Whose voice, though sweet, fell on the ear
    Like echoes, in some silent place,
When first awak'd for many a year;
    And when he smil'd—if o'er his face
    Smile ever shone—'twas like the grace
Of moonlight rainbows, fair, but wan,
The sunny life, the glory gone.
Ev'n o'er his pride, though still the same,
A softening shade from sorrow came;
And though at times his spirit knew
    The kindlings of disdain and ire,
[Page 38]
Short was the fitful glare they threw—
Like the last flashes, fierce, but few,
    Seen though some noble pile on fire!
Such was the Angel, who now broke
    The silence that had come o'er all,
When he, the Spirit that last spoke,
    Clos'd the sad history of his fall:
And while a sacred lustre, flown
    For many a day, relum'd his cheek,
And not those sky-tun'd lips alone,
But his eyes, brow, and tresses , roll'd
    Like sun-set waves , all seem'd to speak—
Thus his eventful story told.’
We are sure we need not point out the beauty of the comparison marked in italics; and though it would be endless to specify all the splendid images that have struck us in perusing a poem, where almost every line is, if not ‘a flash of golden fire,’ ‘a streak of silvery light,’ we cannot resist the temptation of culling a few that flash on our eyes, as they run over its pages.
Some certainly savour a little of quaintness—as this, of mutual love—
‘As free from any fear or doubt
    As is that light from chill or stain,
The sun into the stars sheds out,
    To be by them shed back again!’
Or this pretty simile—
‘He saw, upon the golden sand
Of the seashore a maiden stand,
Before whose feet the expiring waves
    Flung their last tribute with a sigh—
As, in the East, exhausted slaves
    Lay down the far-brought gift, and die.’
The following, however, has as much truth and pathos in the sentiment, as beauty and delicacy in the expression.
‘Alas, that it should e'er have been
    The same in heaven as it is here,
Where nothing fond or bright is seen,
    But it hath pain and peril near—
Where right and wrong so close resemble,
    That what we take for virtue's thrill
Is often the first downward tremble
    Of the heart's balance into ill.’
And the following, on sweet music at sunset, though perhaps a little obscure, seems to us to have great grandeur as well as beauty.
[Page 39]
‘Whose echoes still went on and on,
Till lost among the light that shone
Far off, beyond the ocean's brim—
    There, where the rich cascade of Day
Hath, o'er the' horizon's golden rim,
    Into Elysium roll'd away!’
This, upon Hope, is more questionable.
‘As if, ev'n yet, through pain and ill,
Hope had not left him—as if still
Her precious pearl, in sorrow's cup,
    Unmelted at the bottom lay,
To shine again, when, all drunk up,
    The bitterness should pass away.’
The following is perhaps too ingenious to be passionate, but it shows the activity and fertility of the author's fancy.
‘Those cheeks, a glory but to see—
    Those lips, whose touch was what the first
Fresh cup of Immortality
    Is to a new-made angel's thirst!
That hair, from under whose dark veil,
The snowy neck, like a white sail
At moonlight seen 'twixt wave and wave,
Gleams out by fits.---’
The two last which we shall venture to extract, are eminently characteristic of the author.
‘Light, winged hopes, that come when bid,
    And rainbow joys that end in weeping,
And passions, among pure thoughts hid,
    Like serpents under flow'rets sleeping.’
‘There, at her altar while she knelt,
And all that ever woman felt,
    When God and man both claim'd her sighs—
Every warm thought, that ever dwelt,
    Like summer clouds 'twixt earth and skies,
    Too pure to fall, too gross to rise,
    Spoke in her gestures, tones and eyes.’
But we must desist from this flower-gathering, and return to our business. The Third Story is of the Loves of Nama and Zaraph. It is not told in the first person, like the other two; but rehearsed by the poet, as it is found (he tell us) in records of ‘the unblest,’ which were saved by Cham from the Flood. Zaraph is a Spirit of Love (of higher rank in Heaven than even the Spirits of Knowledge); and his fall, which does not arise from the admiration of external beauty, or the desire of forbidden knowledge, but from the indulgence of a faithful and mutual passion, is accompanied with a less severe punishment,
[Page 40]
namely, a condemnation to ‘the milder shades of purgatory’ here below. He and his Nama, it seems, still wander inseparable upon earth; and wherever we see an instance of pure and perfect love (so rare are the examples) we may fancy we have met the fallen seraph and his immortal bride—
‘And as we bless them on their way
Through the world's wilderness, may say
There Zaraph and his Nama go.’
Lord Byron's Mystery, with whatever crudeness or defects it is chargeable, certainly has more poetry and music in it than any of his dramatic writings since Manfred—and has also the peculiar merit of throwing us back, in a great degree, to the strange and preternatural time of which it professes to treat. It is truly, and in every sense of the word, a meeting of ‘Heaven and Earth:’ angels are seen ascending and descending, and the windows of the sky are opened to deluge the face of nature. We have an impassioned picture of the strong and devoted attachment inspired into the daughters of men by angel forms, and have placed before us the emphatic picture of ‘woman wailing for her demon-lover.’ There is a like conflict of the passions as of the elements—all wild, chaotic, uncontrollable, fatal—but there is a discordant harmony in all this—a keeping in the colouring and the time. In handling the unpolished page, we touch upon the world before the Flood, and gaze upon a doubtful blank, with only a few straggling figures, part human and part divine; while, in the expression of the former, we read the fancies, etherial and lawless, that lifted the eye of beauty to the skies; and, in the latter, the human passions that drew angels down to earth. The despair of the mortal lovers for the loss of their mortal mistresses, is also well and pathetically expressed. In his description of the Deluge, which is a varied and recurring masterpiece, (we hear it foretold, we see it coming, and we see it come), Lord Byron appears to us to have had an eye to Poussin's celebrated picture, with the sky hanging like a weight of lead upon the waters, the sun quenched and lurid, the rocks and trees upon them gloomily waiting their fate, and a few figures struggling vainly with the overwhelming waves. We are aware that it is hazardous and idle to accuse Lord Byron of plagiarism. He will swear that he never saw the picture, or that it is so long ago that he has quite forgot it. It is no matter. We proceed to give a few striking extracts.
The opening scene will give a good idea of the tone and manner of the whole—though we must leave out one of the invocations.
[Page 41]
‘ A woody and mountainous district near Mount Ararat.— Time, midnight.—Enter Anah and Aholibamah .
Anah.
Our father sleeps: it is the hour when they
Who love us are accustomed to descend
Through the deep clouds o'er rocky Ararat:—
How my heart beats!
Aho.
                                         Let us proceed upon
Our invocation.
Anah.
                     But the stars are hidden.
I tremble.
Aho.
                     So do I, but not with fear
Of aught save their delay.
Anah.
                                         My sister, though
I love Azaziel more than---oh, too much!
What was I going to say? my heart grows impious.
Aho.
And where is the impiety of loving
Celestial natures?
Anah.
                                         But, Aholibamah,
I love our God less since his angel loved me:
This cannot be of good; and though I know not
That I do wrong, I feel a thousand fears
Which are not ominous of right.
Aho.
                                         Then wed thee
Unto some son of clay, and toil and spin!
There's Japhet loves thee well, hath loved thee long;
Marry, and bring forth dust!
Anah.
                                         I should have loved
Azaziel not less were he mortal; yet
I am glad he is not. I can not outlive him.
And when I think that his immortal wings
Will one day hover o'er the sepulchre
Of the poor child of clay which so adored him,
As he adores the Highest, death becomes
Less terrible; but yet I pity him;
His grief will be of ages, or at least
Mine would be such for him, were I the Seraph,
And he the perishable.
Aho.
                                         Rather say,
That he will single forth some other daughter
Of Earth, and love her as he once loved Anah.
Anah.
And if it should be so, and she so loved him,
Better thus than that he should weep for me.
Aho.
If I thought thus of Samiasa's love,
All Seraph as he is, I'd spurn him from me.
But to our invocation! 'Tis the hour.
                     Samiasa!
                     Whereso'er
[Page 42]
    Thou rulest in the upper air—
Or warring with the spirits who may dare
                     Dispute with him
Who made all empires, empire; or recalling
Some wandering star, which shoots through the abyss,
    Whose tenants dying, while their world is falling,
    Share the dim destiny of clay in this;
    Or joining with the inferior cherubim,
    Thou deignest to partake their hymn—
                     Samiasa!
I call thee, I await thee, and I love thee.
    Many may worship thee, that will I not:
If that thy spirit down to mine may move thee,
    Descend and share my lot!
       Though I be formed of clay,
                     And thou of beams
       More bright than those of day
                     On Eden's streams,
Thine immortality can not repay
    With love more warm than mine
My love. There is a ray
    In me, which, though forbidden yet to shine,
    I feel was lighted at thy God's and thine.
It may be hidden long: death and decay
    Our mother Eve bequeath'd us—but my heart
Defies it: though this life must pass away,
    Is that a cause for thee and me to part?
Thou art immortal—so am I: I feel—
    I feel my immortality o'ersweep
All pains, all tears, all time, all fears, and peal,
    Like the eternal thunders of the deep,
Into my ears this truth—“thou liv'st for ever!”
                     But if it be in joy
    I know not, nor would know;
That secret rests with the Almightly giver
    Who folds in clouds the fonts of bliss and wo.
                     But thee and me he never can destroy;
Change us he may, but not o'erwhelm; we are
Of as eternal essence, and must war
With him if he will war with us. With thee
    I can share all things, even immortal sorrow;
For thou hast ventured to share life with me ,
And shall I shrink from thine eternity?
    No! though the serpent's sting should pierce me thorough,
    And thou thyself wert like the serpent, coil
    Around me still! and I will smile
                     And curse thee not; but hold
                     Thee in as warm a fold
[Page 43]
                     As---but descend; and prove
                     A mortal's love
For an immortal. If the skies contain
More joy than thou canst give and take, remain!
Anah.
Sister! sister! I view them winging
Their bright way through the parted night.
Aho.
The clouds from off their pinions flinging
As though they bore to-morrow's light.
Anah.
But if our father see the sight!
Aho.
He would but deem it was the moon
Rising unto some sorcerer's tune
An hour too soon.
Anah.
They come! he comes!—Azaziel!
Aho.
                                         Haste
To meet them! Oh! for wings to bear
My spirit, while they hover there,
To Samiasa's breast!
Anah.
Lo! they have kindled all the west,
Like a returning sunset;—lo!
    On Ararat's late secret crest,
A mild and many-colour'd bow,
The remnant of their flashing path,
Now shines! and now, behold! it hath
Returned to night, as rippling foam,
    Which the leviathan hath lash'd
From his unfathomable home,
When sporting on the face of the calm deep,
    Subsides soon after he again hath dash'd
Down, down, to where the ocean's fountains sleep.’
pp. 165–171.
Lord Byron here takes a wide career, and is sometimes obscure and confused; but the flashes of fire continually break through, and illumine the clouds of smoke and vapour. The extravagance is dictated by passion. His Muse, even in her riddles and digressions, has a sybil-like prophetic fury.
In the Second Scene, Irad and Japhet enter, and discourse of their hapless unrequited passion for the two daughters of the race of Cain. Irad is represented as returning scorn for scorn, while Japhet mingles pity and regret with his complaints. Irad says,
                     ‘I have some cause to think
She loves another.
Jap.
What other?
Irad.
                                         That I know not; but her air,
If not her words, tells me she loves another.
Jap.
Ay, but not Anah; she but loves her God.
Irad.
Whate'er she loveth, so she loves thee not,
What can it profit thee?’
[Page 44]
This is one of those bitter, taunting sarcasms that escape from Lord Byron's pen, in spite of himself. Japhet is afterwards introduced alone in a mountainous cave, and his soliloquy, bemoaning his own fate and the approaching destruction of mankind, is interrupted by a terrific laugh of demons rejoicing over the event. We shall give a few of the most striking parts of this terrific scene. Japhet says,
‘Ye wilds, that look eternal; and thou cave,
Which seem'st unfathomable; and ye mountains,
So varied and so terrible in beauty;
Here, in your rugged majesty of rocks
And toppling trees that twine their roots with stone
In perpendicular places, where the foot
Of man would tremble, could he reach them—yes,
Ye look eternal! Yet, in a few days,
Perhaps even hours, ye will be changed, rent, hurled
Before the mass of waters; and yon cave,
Which seems to lead into a lower world,
Shall have its depths search'd by the sweeping wave,
And dolphins gambol in the lion's den!
And man---Oh, men! my fellow-beings! Who
Shall weep above your universal grave,
Save I? Who shall be left to weep? My kinsmen,
Alas! what am I better than ye are,
That I must live beyond ye? Where shall be
The pleasant places where I thought of Anah
While I had hope? or the more savage haunts,
Scarce less beloved, where I despair'd for her?
And can it be!—Shall yon exulting peak,
Whose glittering top is like a distant star,
Lie low beneath the boiling of the deep?
No more to have the morning sun break forth,
And scatter back the mists in floating folds
From its tremendous brow? no more to have
Day's broad orb drop behind its head at even,
Leaving it with a crown of many hues?
No more to be the beacon of the world,
For angels to alight on, as the spot
Nearest the stars?’
The spirits then say or sing,
                     ‘Rejoice!
    The abhorred race
Which could not keep in Eden their high place,
    But listen'd to the voice
Of knowledge without power,
    Are nigh the hour
                     Of death!
[Page 45]
Not slow, not single, not by sword, nor sorrow,
    Nor years, nor heart-break, nor time's sapping motion,
Shall they drop off. Behold their last to-morrow!
    Earth shall be ocean!
                     And no breath,
Save of the winds, be on the unbounded wave!
Angels shall tire their wings, but find no spot:
Not even a rock from out the liquid grave
    Shall lift its point to save,
Or show the place where strong Despair hath died!
                     While a brief truce
       Is made with Death, who shall forbear
    The little remnant of the past creation,
To generate new nations for his use;
    This remnant, floating o'er the undulation
       Of the subsiding deluge, from its slime,
    When the hot sun hath baked the reeking soil
       Into a world, shall give again to Time
New beings—years—diseases—sorrow—crime
With all companionship of hate and toil.
Meantime still struggle in the mortal chain,
                     Till earth wax hoary;
War with yourselves, and hell, and heaven, in vain,
                     Until the clouds look gory
With the blood reeking from each battle plain;
New times, new climes, new arts, new men; but still
The same old tears, old crimes, and oldest ill,
Shall be amongst your race in different forms;
                     But the same moral storms
    Shall oversweep the future, as the waves
    In a few hours the glorious Giant's graves.
Hark! hark! already we can hear the voice
    Of growing ocean's gloomy swell;
       The winds, too, plume their piercing wings!
       The clouds have nearly filled their springs;
The fountains of the great deep shall be broken,
    And heaven set wide her windows; while mankind
View, unacknowledged, each tremendous token—
    Still, as they were from the beginning, blind.
       We hear the sound they cannot hear,
       The mustering thunders of the threatening sphere;
                     Yet a few hours their coming is delayed;
                     Their flashing banners, folded still on high,
                     Yet undisplay'd,
Save to the Spirits' all-pervading eye.
                     Howl! howl! oh Earth!
[Page 46]
Thy death is nearer than thy recent birth:
Tremble, ye mountains, soon to shrink below
                     The ocean's overflow!
The wave shall break upon your cliffs; and shells,
    The little shells, of ocean's least things be
Deposed where now the eagle's offspring dwells—
    How shall he shriek o'er the remorseless sea!
And call his nestlings up with fruitless yell,
Unanswered, save by the encroaching swell;—
While man shall long in vain for his broad wings,
    The wings which could not save.’
pp. 178–183.
Japhet remains, after this startling vision, to have his eyes and his heart blasted by a more dreadful one, the seeing the two sisters (one of them, his heart's mistress) advance with the enamoured angels, Azaziel and Samiasa.
                                         ---‘Anah! Anah! my
In vain, and long, and still to be beloved!
Why walk'st thou with this Spirit, in those hours
When no good spirit longer lights below?
Anah.
Japhet, I cannot answer thee; yet, yet
Forgive me---
Japh.
May the Heaven, which soon no more
Will pardon, do so! for thou are greatly tempted.’
Aholibamah then exclaims,
‘Back to thy tents, insulting son of Noah!
We know thee not.’
and a dialogue ensues, in which the characters of the two sisters are displayed in powerful dramatic contrast. The Archangel Raphael afterwards appears, to warn the misguided angels to return to Heaven before their term of pardon is expired; but they refuse, although the more heroic daughter of earth thus adjures them to fly.
‘Fly, Seraphs! to your own eternal shore,
Where winds nor howl nor waters roar.
                     Our portion is to die,
    And yours to live for ever:
       But which is best, a dead eternity,
Or living, is but known to the great Giver:
    Obey him, as we shall obey;
       I would not keep this life of mine in clay
                     An hour beyond his will;
Nor see you lose a portion of his grace,
For all the mercy which Seth's race
                     Find still.
                     Fly!
    And as your pinions bear ye back to heaven,
[Page 47]
    Think that my love still mounts with thee on high,
                     Samiasa!
And if I look up with a tearless eye,
       'Tis that an angel's bride disdains to weep—
       Farewell! Now rise, inexorable Deep!’
The enamoured angels, however, refuse to desert them; and as the storm and rain come on, they fly off, and take Anah and Aholibamah with them into some far region of the upper or the nether sky. At seeing this, Japhet exclaims—
‘They are gone! They have disappear'd amidst the roar
Of the forsaken world; and never more,
Whether they live, or die with all earth's life,
Now near its last, can aught restore
Anah unto these eyes.’
We shall close these extracts with a part of the Chorus of Mortals , which concludes the poem.
‘Oh son of Noah! mercy on thy kind!
What, wilt thou leave as all—all— all behind?
While safe amidst the elemental strife,
Thou sit'st within thy guarded ark?
A Mother ( offering her infant to Japhet .)
Oh let this child embark!
I brought him forth in wo,
                                         But thought it joy
To see him to my bosom clinging so.
                     Why was he born?
                     What hath he done—
                     My unwean'd son—
To move Jehovah's wrath or scorn?
What is there in this milk of mine, that Death
Should stir all heaven and earth up to destory
                     My boy,
And roll the waters o'er his placid breath?—
    The loathsome waters in their rage!
And with their roar make wholesome Nature dumb!
    The forest's trees (coeval with the hour
When Paradise upsprung,
    Ere Eve gave Adam knowledge for her dower,
Or Adam his first hymn of slavery sung),
    So massy, vast, yet green in their old age,
Are overtopt,
Their summer blossoms by the surges lopt,
Which rise, and rise, and rise.
Vainly we look up to the lowering skies—
    They meet the seas,
And shut out God from our beseeching eyes.
Woman .
Oh, save me, save!
[Page 48]
Our valley is no more:
My father and my father's tent,
My brethren and my brethren's herds,
The pleasant trees that o'er our noonday bent
And sent forth evening songs from sweetest birds,
The little rivulet which freshen'd all
                     Our pastures green,
                     No more are to be seen.
When to the mountain cliff I climb'd this morn,
    I turn'd to bless the spot,
And not a leaf appear'd about to fall;—
    And now they are not!—
Why was I born?
Japh.
                                         To die! in youth to die;
And happier in that doom,
Than to behold the universal tomb
Which I
Am thus condemn'd to weep above in vain.’ 203—206.
A second Part of this Dramatic Mystery is intended shortly to appear.
$$$
