Mr. Hazlitt and the Utilitarians
Author: Hunt, Leigh.
Publication info: The Tatler : A Daily Journal of Literature and the Stage; London (1830): 408, ii p.

Mr. Hazlitt and the Utilitarians [in, The Tatler. A Daily Journal of Literature and the Stage. From September to December 1830. Volume The First. No. 21. Tuesday, September 28, 1830]
[Page ]
MR. HAZLITT AND THE UTILITARIANS. Passing the other night through Wardour street, by the church of St Anne, Soho, in the burial-ground of which the mortal remains of this admirable writer had been deposited, we thought how different the edifice and the whole scene looked to us in consequence. Wardour street is not an unpleasant thoroughfare: it divides the west-end from the lively neighbourhood of Covent garden, and abounds in the humanities of book stalls and old picture shops. But the church is the ungainliest in London; and till now, we never passed the dead wall of the burial ground, without thinking of that, and nothing else. On the night in question we found a different scene. We then observed, for the first time, that however uncouth the church, it stood midway at the base of a sort of square, the street forming one side of it, and the backs of other streets the two others. This area was in good proportion; the night time, though starry, veiled the worst part of the steeple; its height only was seen, piercing the air; there was not a cloud in the sky; and as we looked at the lines of houses on the three sides, and thought of all the living humanity that was going on in this enclosure of the dead, we thought that Mr Hazlitt would have been as content to lie in that place as any. Love, hate, business, pleasure, books or no books, laughter and tears,—nothing was indifferent to him that affected mankind. He recoiled only from the brutality of the lowest, and the heartlessness of the most privileged; and he would have fancied he should lie as warm here as anywhere, in the arms of his fellow-creatures. A foolish writer, who says that he confessed himself “at feud with the world,” makes it a consequence of this quarrel that he treated the world “with ill-will, if not malice”; “which,” says he, “the world requited with something of resentment and scorn.” This man would take everybody who called himself a misanthrope, for a misanthrope at heart. Mr Hazlitt was “at feud with the world” out of his infinite sympathy with them, and because he was angry that they were not in as great haste as himself to see justice done them. The world did not requite his sympathy “with resentment;” it was only those who fancied they had an interest in keeping the world foolish. Knaves affected to scorn him, and fools thought they really did.
Mr Hazlitt's death (what strange words do these seem to us to write!) was no surprise to the friends who were about him; but it was a great one to others, who were but at little distance. The first time we heard of his illness was but a fortnight before, and the news was accompanied with the intelligence that he was getting well. We had often seen him in fits of illness, such as at last carried him off, and had been used to his getting over them. We therefore went on, toiling, among other hopes, in the daily one of resuming our old evenings with him, of filling them cram full of the late glorious events and all that were to come, and of enjoying his company at the entertainment he loved best in the world—the theatre. It is all gone,—a series of delightful hours cut short, unexpectedly, and in a moment,—the interchange of hopes and fears,—the talk of books,—the more than Johnsonian cups of tea,—the little quarrels, so on appeased (the quarrels of the lovers of truth are like those of other lovers)—the pleasure of welcoming and regretting on his side, and of forgiving and being instructed on ours. If Mr Hazlitt sometimes vented his temper in a book apparently for temper's sake, and could seldom forbear repeating a shrewd observation or a bit of truth, though it told against you, no man was readier to do justice to what he thought a merit; and though we differed with him as to the necessity of making public the errors, fancied or real, of those who fought on the same side with him, we felt certain that a wish for their advantage was involved in it. At all events, it was not for friends who had suffered in the same cause, and were content to suffer and to share any good or evil, to be angry at heart, even with each other's anger. If an erroneous nurture had left in Mr Hazlitt some things which his friends had reason to wish stronger in him on the side of temperament, in point of understanding he was essentially a great man,—a master mind; and he had this characteristic of the greatest,—that his regard for human nature, and his power to love truth and loveliness in their humblest shapes, survived his subtlest detections of human pride and folly.
“One of the warps of Mr Hazlitt,” says a writer in the Examiner , “was against the persons styled Utilitarians, whose doctrines and characters he entirely mistook. The Utilitarians are charged with a Puritanic hostility to the arts and pleasures; they are described as ascetics railing against enjoyments they are incapable of tasting. Nothing can be more unjust than this representation. The Utilitarians can only be reproached with rating things according to their importance to society, and accounting the correction of mischievous errors, and the improvement of institutions, objects to which the most strenuous application should be given. They are, for the most part, men of very considerable literary accomplishments, and as capable of relishing the pleasures as others, but they certainly do not treat the toys of life as the great machinery for human happiness. The amount of incapacity for enjoyment, or positive misery, referable to misgovernment and the force of erroueous opinions, is not to be relieved by poetry and painting. We never need fear a neglect of the pleasures of literature, or the arts, where there is the condition of ease that invites to them; and notwithstanding the prejudices of Mr Hazlitt, we can take upon us to assure him that the Utilitarians—even the Utilitarians—have as much delight in wit, imagination, and the elegances, as those who make these things, and these alone, the object of pursuit, and enervate and surfeit on the dainties. But in truth the whole quarrel with the Utilitarians resolves itself into this, that they profess a morality, strictly observe truth, and prefer objects according to their tendencies to disabuse and benefit society. Of this we are confident, that if Mr Hazlitt had informed himself more respecting the doctrines of those persons, he would have inveighed against them less.”
Mr Hazlitt knew the doctrines of the Utilitarians well, (who is likely to have known them better?) and he also knew several of their leaders personally. He, assuredly, whose whole life was a warfare in behalf of the good of his fellow-creatures, was not likely to quarrel with “the correction of error,” and the desire “to disabuse and benefit society.” He only doubted, whether the Utilitarians were the fittest men to promote real utility; whether they understood as well as they professed to do, either the end or the means of it; and he thought he had reason to object to some of them, that they acted rather out of a propensity to objection, than a sympathy with the common good; that they had no notion of poetry, whatever they pretended, because they loved none but upon authority, and could not discover that the modern world contained hearts and imaginations as well as the ancient; that they knew nothing about painting, in some instances openly avowed their contempt for it (which was betraying at least one incapacity for delight); and finally, that they grudged every species of reputation out of the pale of their own pretensions; affected to see (perhaps did see) no wit, elegance, or scholarship, but in themselves; and whenever a personal pique stood in the way of their philanthrophy, were at little slow to indulge it, as the most intolerant of their opponents.
We know not in how many instances Mr Hazlitt thought himself justified in coming to these conclusions; but we are certain, that instances were not wanting: and if we were as disposed, as some Utilitarians have been, to sacrifice public feelings to private, we could make out a case or two not a little startling to the majority of the school themselves. Those who know to what we allude, will give us credit for waving no common opportunity of revenge; but we shall neither take it, (unless further provoked, as the cause existed before the setting up of this paper) nor shall we hesitate to confess ourselves, as far as independent men can do, and unworthy lovers of the agreeable can be allowed to be, fellow-advocates with the holders of the greatest-happiness principle. We had the honour of asserting the cause for many years, after our vaguer fashion, before the school assumed its title, and in the very paper which we are now answering; and we shall never cease to pride ourselves upon having sat at the table of the venerable Bentham (at his feet in spirit), and hearing him pleasantly conclude a sally against poetry with half a dozen lines out of Virgil.
We confess, we think, that Mr Hazlitt, in the warmth of his zeal for the spirit against the letter, went too far in his objections
[Page 82]
to the Utilitarians, supposing them even to have been the mechanical persons he pronounced them, and destitute of all sympathy, but with the dry bones and skeleton of the social frame. We do not think that he was right in attributing to them that destitution; but supposing for the sake of argument that he was, we think it was erroneous in him to object to the working of their machinery, even upon his own shewing. It seems to us, that supposing a steam-engine could lay claim to a character for what it is not, he might as well have objected to what it could do, and to the obvious utility of steam-engines. We can even conceive, that such of the Utilitarians as are really what he took the whole body for (and doubtless there are such) are of use to the system in the very absence of the qualities he required; and that in this, as in all other cases that are to work out any great good for mankind, a certain absorption of purpose, and exclusion of everything calculated to divert it, may be necessary to produce its greatest amount of good. What then? We must not quarrel with a steam-engine, because it is not a sun-beam; nor fail to take advantage of its working, in order to further one's opportunities of enjoying the beam itself. When the steam-plough shall cultivate the fields for our children, they will have more leisure for their books and flowers.
On the other hand, it must not be denied, especially to reasoners like Mr Hazlitt, whom we are bound to suppose far-sighted in their reasoning, that even the gravest looking benefits may be over-done, and turn to ill; that a system may lean too much one way, as it did with the Puritans, and crush what it meant to cherish. The greatest understanding of this age has said, in contradiction to those who think mankind proner to the enjoyment of mere pleasure than action, that it is in the nature of things for men to study what they think most useful to them; the common necessities of the hour demand it; whereas delight is in danger of being forgotten, and requires perpetual advocates. And we confess, that in a high and refined sense, we agree with him. Nothing would sooner convince us of it, than the readiness of all men to listen to schemes of what they call profit and convenience, and the difficulty you have in making them turn the simplest beauties of nature to account. Earth is a garden, which men at present may be said hardly to know that they live in; they so crowd in streets and houses, occupied with the merest first impulse of their being, like ants up and down an oak.
It was thus Mr Hazlitt probably felt, though he did not exactly say it: and, indeed, we are sure that he felt so, from other things that he did say, and from the zest with which he delighted to fetch out the utilities of poetry and painting, professedly as such, and as rescuing the other utilities from grossness. A time of ease, undoubtedly, brings a desire for enjoyment; but it may not bring the right enjoyment itself, unless we cultivate the true sense of delight and utility together. The driest understandings are those which fall into the grossest sensualities for refreshment, out of an ignorance of the refinements they have disdained to learn. They hasten to the mire and the trough, because they have not been taught to know the sweet fountain and the blossom.
But whatever we may feel ourselves compelled to think of some of the Utilitarians, we are persuaded that the school at large contains many men, as zealous for the true ends of utility as for the means; and we are sure, that the greater the friendliness of the two schools with each other, or the identification of them (if the Examiner so pleases) the better for both parties and for mankind. We cannot conceal from ourselves, nor do we desire it, that we belong to the school of the pleasurable,—whether the upper or lower school, compared with the other, it does not matter, provided each is zealous for a community of good objects, and the interests of the many are preferred to those of the few: let us rather say, become the same thing. So zealous are we for delight, that we are among the very warmest advocates of utility; and so grateful are we accordingly to such men as Mr Bentham, that in reverence to him alone, if for nothing else, we would fain compose all jars with such as reverence him in common with us,—and touch his white hairs, if we could, with a lustre surpassing the roses of Anacreon.
$$$
