Narrative.
Author: Stodart, Mary Ann.
Publication info: Female Writers: Thoughts On Their Proper Sphere, and On Their Powers Of Usefulness . 203 p. London: Published by R.B. Seeley and W. Burnside, 1842.

Narrative. [in, Female Writers: Thoughts on Their Proper Sphere, and on Their Powers of Usefulness. By M. A. Stodart]
[Page 124]
VIII.
NARRATIVE. Narrative may be considered, as dividing itself into three branches, history, biography, and fictitious narrative, and we will consider it under these separate heads.
Although history is one of the most useful studies which a woman can pursue, her powers of mind are hardly fitted to enter this field for the sake of instructing others. To her own mind, it is most improving and important to follow the course of events, to trace the under-current of cause and effect, to observe as from a gallery the real nature of actions, to estimate the real worth of characters, and to have her judgment strengthened by being exercised on subjects in which her feelings are not so strongly called forth as to warp her
[Page 125]
decisions. And this point we would strenuously maintain, that it is not that woman is, in ordinary cases, deficient in judgment; it is that her feelings usurp the seat of judgment, and she is carried away by their power. She feels keenly, and then decides promptly, instead of calmly weighing facts and deciding upon evidence. The very reasons which make the study of history beneficial to her, are reasons dissuasive from her ever attempting to be an historian.
We have had one female historian in England, Mrs. Catharine Macaulay. Not being professional reviewers, we cannot give an opinion of a work that we have not read; for we do not profess to step beyond ordinary human power.
We do know that Catharine Macaulay began her literary career as an historian; that the first volume of her work, ‘The History of England from James I. to the Brunswick Line,’ was published in 1763; the eighth in 1783. She seems to have trod the same ground twice over, for we find in the list of her works, another book bearing the title of ‘History of England from the Revolution to the present time, in a series of Letters to a Friend,’ (the Rev. Dr. Wilson, Prebendary of Westminster,)
[Page 126]
1778. Mrs. Hannah More in one of her letters, speaks of Mrs. Macaulay as having nothing of the woman about her, but as being only ‘a tolerably clever man,’ and this description seems to suit very well with all that we hear of this lady. She came booted and spurred to her public career; a free-thinker, or what in modern phraseology is styled a liberal; and her works are said to be strongly imbued with democratical and infidel principles. Alas, for woman when she forgets that Christianity has raised her to the place which she occupies in society; and that if she attempts to take one stone from its glorious temple, she is undermining the foundation of her own peace, respectability and usefulness! A statue of Mrs. Macaulay in the character of the Goddess of Liberty, was erected by Dr. Wilson, during her life-time, in the chancel of his church at Walbrook; it was afterwards taken down, but it is difficult to say whether the erection of it was more disgraceful to the clergyman or to the lady. We may appear to write with severity. A degree of courteous regard is due and is paid to ladies in literature, and is extended to their memory; but Mrs. Macaulay, in laying aside the amiable weaknesses of her sex, forfeited her
[Page 127]
claim to its privileges. She and her friend Mary Wolstonecraft seem to have been a pair of true Amazons; happily their deportment was not sufficiently winning to lead any to desire to follow their example. Female warriors are never very interesting beings, and all the art of Tasso and Ariosto cannot make us fall in love with them. And the he-shes of literature, (let the colloquial familiarity of the expression for once pass muster,) are quite as little likely to gain our affections. Whatever may be the talents and the energies of a woman, (and let those talents and energies be faithfully improved and employed,) they must be shaded by sweetness, veiled by modesty, or else much of what the eye looks for, and the heart expects in woman will be wanting. Learning in females is not surely always like salt to cherries, 1 but assumption and arrogance most assuredly are. We leave Mrs. Macaulay to her unenvied niche
[Page 128]
in the temple of Fame; better, far better to be the humblest cottager, nay, the starving inmate of a work-house, than to have the awful responsibility of misapplied talents, and abused powers.
The humbler walk of Biography is less unfitted to feminine power, though some of the remarks made with respect to the difficulty of writing history, will apply to this department also. When the biographer is contemporary with the person whose life is written, the facts recorded, (if the writer be truthful and honest,) are likely to be authentic, but the difficulty lies in selecting them, so as to give a full portrait of the individual. Phrenologists tell us, that the character is to be estimated, not by particular organs, but by a general view of the whole of the head, taking into account the relative effect of the different organs, how one either neutralizes another, or tends to increase its power. How this may be in phrenology we know not, but
[Page 129]
we are sure that it is so in the estimate of human character. This comprehensive estimate is very difficult for woman to make, but yet, if it be not made, very erroneous impressions may be given of a character. In the biographies compiled and sent forth to the public, erroneous views are undoubtedly often given; not intentionally, (for we would speak of those who write honestly and uprightly, and there are honesty and uprightness in literature as in everything else,) but from defectiveness in survey, and from want of comprehensiveness. The apparent inconsistencies in the characters of Shakespeare, which have, by superficial observers, sometimes been objected against that dramatist, are among the strongest proofs of his consummate knowledge of the human heart. It is a rule as old as Aristotle, that any character which is either perfectly good or perfectly wicked, is not dramatic, as our sympathies are not engaged for such beings. It would be well if our biographers would remember, that in veiling the defects of their heroes and heroines, they not only give us a partial and distorted portraiture, but they actually lower the interest of their work, sometimes, to say the truth, below zero. Besides this, our confidence is shaken,
[Page 130]
and we do not give credit for the possession of such unbalanced excellence by any frail heir of humanity. The evil of giving an over-estimate of excellence, and a partial view of character, is one to which contemporary female biographers, in the plenitude of admiration, are particularly exposed, and instances of the truth of the assertion are unfortunately so numerous, as not to render it necessary to adduce any.
When the subject of the biography has not been a contemporary, but is removed by the distance of years or of centuries, the difficulty that offers itself is of another kind. The patient investigation of records; the examination of concurring and differing testimonies with a view to the eliciting of truth; a correct estimate of the value of testimony; a careful weighing of evidence; a cool, calm, patient, ab extra consideration of the parts and of the whole of the character; a laying aside of previous prejudices, whether those prejudices be national, literary, educational or feminine; a real love of truth, and determination to follow her, even though she lead to the precise point to which we do not wish to go; a deep knowledge of the human heart so as to test the probability of facts; a fair acquaintance with
[Page 131]
contemporary history for the same purpose; all these, and more than these, are necessary for the female biographer, who leaves contemporary events, and dives into the character and incidents of past times. This sketch of the requisites is rapid, but it is not exaggerated. An Englishwoman may be permitted for one moment to express her exultation at the well-earned tribute of praise bestowed on the biographer of the Queens of England, Miss Agnes Strickland. The graceful eulogium of M. Guizot, is one that could not fail most highly to gratify the accomplished authoress, and a reflective honour comes to her age, her sex, and her country.
Fictitious narrative is the field in which women have most delighted to employ themselves, and their powers of delicate observation, joined to their instinctive penetration into the movements of the human heart, give them, for some species of novels, peculiar advantages. This was Sir Walter Scott's opinion, and no one, it is presumed, will question the accuracy of judgment of the Prince of Novelists. In Miss Austen's novels he particularly delighted, and so did Coleridge. When a transition is to be made from private, domestic
[Page 132]
life, to its bolder scenes and more public walks, women will be found necessarily at fault; for what is written from hear-say, even admitting it to be accurate, cannot of course have the force and vividness of personal impressions. Our belief is, that when a man writes a novel, the hero of the novel should be the principal character, the nucleus of the story; but when a woman is the author, it will be safer to rivet the attention on the adventures of the heroine. We are not sufficiently well read in this class of literature, to know if this rule prevails, but the reason for its adoption are so obvious, that it is highly probable that it does.
The question sometimes arises, is it that the ancients were unacquainted with the art of novel writing and novel-reading? or is it that their novels have perished? The probability is, that the fictions of their poets, and the changes rung upon their fanciful mythology, occupied that portion of thought, which with us is devoted to novels. Certainly in our literature, there is no lack of this commodity. They are to be enumerated, not by scores, not by hundreds, but by thousands. 2 There
[Page 133]
are new ones every month, and we might feel surprised at this constant reproduction, did we not know that many are old friends with new names, having undergone merely a little change and revision to be accommodated to the changes of times and manners. The supply does not appear to exceed the demand, and it is a well-known fact in ‘the trade,’ that when a novel really succeeds, nothing pays so well. The novel-writers of the day are chiefly women, and a very large proportion of the women who write for the public, are thus engaged.
Now though we do plead guilty to rather a strong feeling, (prejudice some would call it,) against novels and romances, we do not mean to deny that a really well-written novel may occasionally be useful, as a species of relaxation to the mind after severe and long-continued labour. It is sometimes necessary to have our attention directed without labour to something quite out of ourselves, and if, in such circumstances, we can read a novel, as we look at a panorama, without suffering it afterwards to interfere with the direction of our thoughts, the influence
[Page 134]
may be not injurious. It may even be in a degree useful; it may be merely like having looked on a vivid picture of life and manners. Of this kind are the sketches of the Irish peasantry in some of the novels of Miss Edgeworth, without any dispute, one of the most accomplished female writers of the day. The danger is however on the opposite side; the tide of the day sets in far too decidedly in favour of novels and novel-reading, and some from whom better things might have expected, are carried away by the torrent.
It has been already said that many of the female writers of the day, are to be found among the novelists. This is exceedingly to be regretted. If the evils to women from novel-reading are not small, those which arise from novel-writing, are alarming great. A very slight survey will convince of the truth of this assertion.
We have already pointed out that one stronghold of woman, in fictitious narrative, is her knowledge of the human heart. Her sphere of observation is limited, and it is from herself that she learns to know others. Now in this laying bare of the workings of the inward heart, there is a peculiar inconvenience for delicate and sensitive woman.
[Page 135]
It is like proclaiming to the public that which passes within her own breast. It is more—it is placing a glass window in her bosom, that every passer-by may look in and see the workings of her heart. It is needless to point out the obvious inconveniences; every woman of ordinary delicacy of feelings instinctively perceives them, and, like the mimosa plant, shrinks away from the danger.
Another danger for female novel-writers is, that their attention is too exclusively directed to the tender passions, and this exclusive attention has a tendency to increase the force of those feelings, which in the gentler sex, are generally sufficiently strong. By close attention to any subject, the importance of that subject is magnified. A prominence greater than its relative value authorizes, is thus given to one part of the character, and indedently of destroying the moral balance of power, the feelings to which we allude, are precisely those which are most to be guarded against. They are the weak part of woman; the breach in the wall by which the enemy often enters into the city.
We can imagine that the two evils of novel-writing which have just been pointed out, may, in some kinds of novel-writing, be avoided. The field
[Page 136]
of fiction is a very wide one, and the paths to be trodden, are very varied. But a third evil appears to be inseparable from fictitious narrative when pursued by woman. The habit of working every thing up for effect, will be carried into ordinary life. Nothing will be seen precisely in its right dimensions and true colouring; at least nothing will be so represented to others. There will necessarily and inevitably be a want of accuracy, as it regards the common details of every-day existence. The sagacious surmise of the Athenian legislator, when he first witnessed the representations of Thespis, and asked him if he was not ashamed to tell so many lies before so many people, is verified in the characters to which we allude. The habit is formed of telling fictions for amusement; and that habit is continued even when there is an imperative demand for simple, plain, and unadorned truth.
These remarks are made with an eye to those novels which amuse and employ what is styled ‘the world.’ We are almost afraid of meddling with religious novels; those nondescript productions that carry an anomaly in their very name. Their introduction is probably due to Mrs. More.
[Page 137]
Who has not read Cœlebs? Who does not know that stiff, cold, lifeless heroine yclept Lucilla Stanley, the perfection, we may suppose, of a young lady in the imagination of an elderly maiden one. The character is very well parodied in the Lucille of ‘Corinne;’ correctness of sentiment, propriety of deportment, with about as much life and energy as a marble statue. Was it accident or design that led Madame de Stäel to the same name? We confess that as the first of a class of literature to which we feel a peculiar repugnance, we have a dislike to the name of Cœlebs, but we do not think that our feelings, in this case, influence our judgment.
There are strong objections against religious novels at the very outset; it is the professed union of the most important truths with light fiction, the dreamy fancies of a human brain. It is the joining together of the eternal words of God, with the lightest workings of the imagination of man. In some cases indeed, fiction may be a vehicle for the conveyance of truth to quarters, which, without such vehicle it might not reach, but does truth suffer no loss of dignity in availing herself of such a conveyance? A queen, our Queen Victoria might
[Page 138]
ride in a waggon, and be to all intents and purposes a queen still—‘aye, every inch a queen;’ but it is necessary and proper for various good reasons, that she should not voluntarily lay aside the ordinary appurtenances of her Royal rank. A hackneyed quotation from Tasso, 3 is often urged on this subject, but every body knows, that there is a way of taking the sweets and leaving the bitters. Besides, to say the honest truth, the fault in these days is not so much ignorance of what is right, as the not feeling and acting up to the knowledge that we possess. The treating of grave theological truths in conjunction with light fiction, has a decided tendency to strengthen this evil.
Mrs. Barbauld once objected to that wild and beautiful poem, ‘The Ancient Mariner,’ that there was a want of moral to it. The poet answered, and his reply was just, that there was too much
[Page 139]
moral in it for a work of pure imagination. Reasoning from the less to the greater, how powerful an argument may be drawn from this remark against religious novels!
There is another consideration. Is there not, in this species of literature, a peculiar tendency to that which we before touched upon, a regard to effect? Vanity is woman's besetting sin; it rules in the unrenewed heart, and it struggles for undue ascendancy in the renewed one. It is most dangerous when it entwines itself with the very principles of Christian action; and manifests itself in the works which ought to spring from the pure love of Christ constraining us. Who can deny that scenes are drawn in novels, and characters are described, so as to appear lovely to the eye of man? And may not this tend to foster the natural desire of the female heart to appear, even as it regards her religion, amiable and interesting in the eyes of her fellow-creatures? Every Christian woman who knows any thing of her own heart, knows that this is a source of constant sin and sorrow, a fountain casting up continually mire and mud, tainting every thing in its neighbourhood.
We have hazarded these few remarks on a class
[Page 140]
of literature which has been much cultivated by women, and much encouraged by them. To some persons, they may appear too strong. It is true that some good may occasionally have been produced by works in this class of literature; but though the calculation is difficult to be made, it is not certain that the good has, by any means, been a fair counterbalance to the evil. Neither can any human being say, that if this very questionable auxiliary had never been employed, the very same amount of good, and a larger one too, might not have been effected by the faithful use of other means. We may appear sceptical and even cavilling, but we are more disposed to examine the nature of the impressions produced by works of this class, than to rejoice in their having been made. The exquisite susceptibility of the nature of woman, connected as it is with her delicate organization, renders her peculiarly liable to impressions. She does not analyze very accurately, and it is not to be wondered at, if the mere excitement of animal feeling may sometimes pass for the workings of grace on the heart.
These remarks are general, and in treating of a class of literature, in which several of the female
[Page 141]
religious writers of the day have been engaged, we have avoided naming any living name, nor has there been, in any thing that has been here said, the slightest intention of making any personal allusion.
NOTES
1 See, ‘The Salted Cherry,’ by Professor Carlyle, a poem intended to be written in the fly leaf of the ‘Rights of Woman.’ Bertha, the learned lady, after defending learning, by this maxim, ‘Whate'er is excellent per se can never be misplaced,’ is invited to a feast by Oberon, king of the fairies. Just as she is going to regale on some cherries which had been recently brought into Europe by Lucullus, she is startled by a shower of salt on her plate. She remonstrates—Oberon smiling, parodies her own words. “Know that the sages all agree Whate'er is excellent per se,    Can never be misplaced.” The lady took the hint; “Her books forsook, the shuttle threw,    And in a month was married.”
2 In a small street, in the neighbourhood of the Regent's Park, is an announcement on a bookseller's shop, that ‘Te thousand novels and romances are lent to read.’ It is an ominous announcement, for such a collection is enough to poison the minds of a whole city.
3 Cosi all' egro fanciul porgiam aspersi Di soavi licor gli orli del vaso; Succhi amari ingannato intantobeve, E dall' inganno suo, vita riceve. Thus to the sick child, we offer the edges of the vase sprinkled with sweet liquor; being deceived, he drinks in the mean while bitter juices, and from his mistake, receives life. Gerusalemme Liberata.—Canto i. 3.
$$$
