New Poets
Author: Patmore, Coventry Kersey Dighton.
Publication info: The Edinburgh Review or Critical Journal ; Edinburgh (1856): ii, ii, 613 p.

New Poets [in, The Edinburgh Review, or Critical Journal ...]
[Page 338]
New Poets Poetry is an infinite subject, and an infinite number of clever things, true and false, have been said about it. ‘It is the pleasure of a truth,’ says Aristotle; ‘It is the pleasure of a lie,’ says Bacon. We of course side with Aristotle, who gave the Muse the worthiest praise she has ever received, when he wrote, ‘Poetry is more philosophical and more deserving of attention than history, for poetry speaks more of universals, but history of particulars.’ Sir Philip Sydney, in his ‘Defence of Poesy,’ proves further that poetry is more philosophical than philosophy itself, and he does the Muse excellent service in relieving her and Plato from the current supposition that she was excluded from the ‘Republic’ on any abstract and general grounds of bad citizenship. The scope of poetry is, in fact, ‘as broad and general as the casing air:’ wherever there is interest properly human, there, too, may be poetry. There are, indeed, many things which seem, not only to be most at home, but absolutely to require to be expressed in prose; though, by the way, prose itself has, or should have, only a lower degree of rhythm. Thus, mere physical interests are best discoursed of in prose. But no sooner are the facts of science regarded in their widest reference to the universe and its source, than they may abandon the swaddling clothes of prose, and assume the singing robes of verse. Whatsoever stands immediately and obviously in relation to universal truth and permanent humanity,—be it action or suffering, thought or emotion, a psychological fact or a phenomenon of nature,—is perceived, by those who are able to appreciate that relation, to have within it a capability of being sung—a tendency, in short. to ‘move harmonious numbers.’ Thus Milton, concerning the poetic faculties, declares: ‘These, wheresoever they be found, are the inspired gift of God, rarely bestowed; and are of power, besides the office of a pulpit, to allay the perturbations of mind, and set the affections to right tune; to celebrate in glorious and lofty hymns, the throne and equipage of God's almightiness; to sing victorious agonies of saints and martyrs. Whatsoever in religion is holy and sublime, in virtue amiable or grave, whatsoever hath passion or admiration, in all the changes of fortune from without, or the wily subtleties and reflexes of man's thought from within, —all these things, with a
[Page 339]
solid and treatable smoothness, to point out and describe, teaching over the whole book of sanctity and virtue with such delight, that, whereas the paths of honesty appear now rugged, they will then appear to all men both easy and pleasant.’ All the well-established and permanently significant results of intellectual and moral investigation are the poet's domain; though the paths to these results lie within the realms of prose.
Poetry, so far as it relates to moral and intellectual truth, has the somewhat paradoxical recommendation of having to do mainly with truisms. The central thought about which the characters in each of Shakspeare's plays group themselves, is some merest truism of morality; and all the greatest poets seem to have been equally partial to commonplace themes, as well in incident as in moral; for these reasons, among others, that moral truth is usually important in proportion to its triteness; that the poet is doing his noblest work in resuscitating moral truths from the inert condition of truisms and conferring upon them a perennial bloom and power; and that a poem, unlike a novel, ought to contain no element of effect calculated to diminish or fail in its operation after repeated perusals. The poet more than justifies his adoption of truisms and stale legends by his mode of dealing with them: he shows that, in such things, acknowledged and spoken of by all men, there are more and deeper meanings than may be fully expressed or comprehended by any man; ‘somewhat,’ as Hooker says, ‘which exceedeth the reach of sense; yea, somewhat above capacity of reason, somewhat divine and heavenly, which, with hidden exultation, reason rather surmiseth than conceiveth.’ The same great writer affirms that ‘goodness doth not move by being, but by being apparent;’ and all the highest poets have faithfully followed this high ministerial vocation of moving the hearts of men to love goodness by making it apparent.
It is difficult to take a lofty view of poetry, or any other art, without considering its relation to Christianity. With the Christian poet religion maintains her right position as the sole, but unobtrusive, source of all excellence and real loveliness, and does not show her unveiled countenance without reason. Art, though of universal appeal, is especially the gospel of the sceptical and ignorant, who, although unable to receive religious truth in its direct statement, may not be unaffected by the same truth shown livingly forth in clouds of glory and darkness, in mysteries of music, and in the various forms of symbolical nature.
Be the theme of the poet magnificent of humble, be it his purpose to justify the ways of God to man, or to publish the
[Page 340]
praises of the ‘small celandine,’ it is certain that, in order to sing, he must first feel. Poetry is truth or fact of properly human import and general intelligibility verbally expressed so as to affect the feelings. This rough definition includes much writing which is not in verse, but none that is not, in some degree, metrical and musical. To this it must be added, that what is poetry to one person or period is not necessarily so to another. In art, people can feel, in any particular direction, only so far as the power and activity of simple perception exceed, for the time being, the power and activity of the conscious understanding in the same direction. Beauty of various kinds, appreciable by totally uneducated persons, may be quite inappreciable, or unfelt , by persons accustomed, as whole classes in these days are, to the unceasing exercise of the analytic faculty. But, by a more mature and substantial culture, this faculty, though fully developed, is rendered capable of scasonable repose; and, where this is the case, the beauty, perceived or felt by children and ignorant persons, blossoms anew.
Of the interest which people feel, or profess to feel, in poetry, or any other art, it is melancholy to find how little is artistic and sincere, how much attributable to a vulgar vanity of connoisseurship. To this vanity, infecting classes which a few years ago were comparatively unsophisticated, we must attribute the strange phenomenon of poetic reputation, and even popularity, attaching to a set of writers whose chief characteristics, violence and incongruity, have fixed upon them the appropriate designation of the ‘spasmodic school,’ and whose verses do little else than incessantly contradict the right definition of poetry, and, indeed, every other definition which asserts any relation of poetry to the realities of nature and of sane humanity. To certain merits, which it would be unjust to deny to the leaders of this school, Mr. Bailey, Mr. Alexander Smith, and the gentleman calling himself by the singular inversion of Sydney Yendys, but whose name now appears to be Sydney Dobell, we shall presently do justice; in the mean time, we will take a hasty glance at the most prominent general features of the school which, in spite of certain rough blows already dealt against it, still appears to number disciples and admires.
In the opinion of these writers, a poet is nothing if not striking. Accordingly every line they put forth is, or at least is intended to be, a fine thing, though some of the dramas of this school are twenty thousand lines long. The consequence is, that the ‘poems’ of these writers are, to what we and the world hitherto have regarded as true poems, pretty much what christmas trees' are to forest trees. Sugar-plums, quick-silvered
[Page 341]
globes, oranges, gimcracks, and lighted candles are not more incongruous ornaments to the stunted fir tree which they decorate for the nonce at a Christmas party than the tinsel thoughts and images which illustrate the subjects chosen by these poets. Probably nothing will convince these writers of their mistake; but for the sake of their readers, who may not be beyond the reach of remonstrance, we submit that there is an indefinable congruity and propriety in the most far-fetched imagery of true poetic feeling which nothing but true feeling can produce. The imagery in true poetry is always felt to be simply illustrative, and never attracts attention on its own account. If we call an image or a thought in a genuine poem ‘striking,’ the chances are that we have discovered it to be so only after having voluntarily regarded it in isolation from its context. In the whole of Shakspeare's plays we shall scarcely find one ‘striking thing’ in the sense in which almost all our living verse-writers aspire to be sayers of such things. The contrary notion, which widely prevails, is mainly owing to the evil influence of a remarkable school of critics who, in the early years of this century, made it their chief delight to dwell with altogether disproportionate emphasis of praise upon the mere niceties of verbal expression in our ancient poets. The unearthing of that great sayer of ‘fine things,’ Fletcher, and the immoderate praise bestowed upon him and other members of the early ‘spasmodic school’ of English dramatists, we are disposed to regard as having been great misfortunes for modern English poetry. The ultimate result is now seen, on the one hand, in such criticisms as those of Mr. George Gilfillan, and, on the other, in such poems as ‘Festus,’ and ‘A Life-Drama.’ In all such writings we find literally nothing but an aimless and incoherent succession of ‘striking things,’ many bad, some good, but all elaborately and by malice prepense ‘striking.’ Hence, to a reader of old-fashioned mental habits, one who has been accustomed to expect and require purpose, unity, and vital sequence in all kinds of intellectual products, and, in return, to give habitually that attention which such qualities demand for their appreciation, the writings in question are absolutely unreadable. The current of meaning or emotion, if meaning and emotion can be predicated of such productions, is never the same for ten lines or three sentences together; and the conscientious endeavour to follow the general action or idea, and at the same time to attend to all the collateral incoherences, is, without exaggeration, the most distressing operation to which we have ever been under the necessity of submitting our understanding.
[Page 342]
We do not deny that the writers, of whom these complaints are made, have the faculty of occasionally expressing an image or a thought in what might be regarded as a picturesque manner, were such expressions found in the verses of a different order of poets; but as a wise sentence is despised in the mouth of a fool, so a beautiful phrase has little force when its intellectual origin is discredited by the context of tawdriness, bombast, and imbecility. Such accompaniments impair the tone of mind which is the condition of the reception of pleasing impressions; we naturally conclude that the poetic phrase has been either stolen or struck off by chance; and thus we miss that sense of relation to a source of living reality and humanity which is at the foundation of all feeling of beauty, poetic or otherwise, and we are rather shocked than delighted with the additional incongruity of a sentence here and there which, to quote a good line of Mr. Alexander Smith's, shines ‘like a great diamond on a threadbare robe.’ Our surprise at the occurrence of such passages becomes almost as small as our admiration when we reflect that to make an occasional hit of this kind is commonly the great end and occupation of the author's life. A better poet than these gentlemen can ever hope to become might no doubt, if he chose to sacrifice all higher considerations to superficial glare, make every line or stanza separately a work of independently ‘striking’ beauty or power. Indeed, in some of Mr. Tennyson's early poems, this experiment has been made. The ‘Palace of Art,’ for instance, is one string of ‘fine things,’ each of which may stand alone without loss, or rather with very much advantage; for their unflagging succession constitutes one of the least readable of Mr. Tennyson's poems. How refreshing in comparison is the other extreme of puritanical simplicity in the same poet's idyl called ‘Dora,’ in which we have a really fine poem with scarcely a quotable ‘fine thing’ in it! Mr. Matthew Arnold's Preface affords a passage so much to our purpose on this subject that we must extract it.
‘We can hardly at the present day understand what Menander meant when he told a man who inquired as to the progress of his comedy that he had finished it, not having yet written a single line, because he had constructed the action of it in his mind. A modern critic would have assured him that the merit of his piece depended on the brilliant things which arose under his pen as he went along. We have poems which seem to exist merely for the sake of single lines and passages, not for the sake of producing any total impression. We have critics who seem to direct their attention merely to detached expressions, to the language about the action, not to the action itself. I verily think that the majority of them do not in their hearts believe that there is such a thing as a total impression to be derived from a
[Page 343]
poem at all, or to be demanded from a poet; they think the term a commonplace of metaphysical criticism. They will permit the poet to select any action he pleases, and to suffer that action to go as it will, provided he gratifies them with occasional bursts of fine writing, and with a shower of isolated thoughts and images.’
Another characteristic, common to the writers we are describing, is an eager and feverish craving for poetic reputation, far different from the calm confidence, often boldly expressed by great poets, in ultimate fame. We ask particular attention to this quality, because it seems to us to constitute the very spring, the pseudo-Pierian, from which these writers draw whatever force they appear to have.
‘O, fame, fame, fame, next grandest word to God!’
Foolishly and impiously exclaims one of the school; and for this he and his order prefer to pluck bright honour from the moon by the publication of verses seemingly written under her culminating influence. In accordance with this view of the false inspiration of the writers in question, we find that the works produced under the first fury for fame are commonly their best. They mistake the deluding and transitory popularity which rewards unusual extravagance and self-assertion for the first instalment of true fame; their motive for doing their best is at an end; and in no subsequent attempt can they equal themselves.
But the most remarkable quality common to these writers is their surprising lack of acquaintance with all that is the true poet's chief material, namely, the ordinary realities of human nature. We have the latest geological, astronomical, chemical, and botanical discoveries; the newest applications of steam and electricity; the very last imported curiosities of social and religious heresy, put under contributions for the development and illustration of—nothing! We seek in vain among these elaborate and pretentious glosses and commentaries for the simple text of humanity. It is all ‘words, words, words!’ The men and women are the meagre and ghastly offspring of a debilitating egotism. What Mr. Ruskin, in his last publication, says of the false ‘high art’ painters, is exactly true of such poets. ‘They mistake their vanity for inspiration, their ambition for greatness of soul, and take pleasure in what they call “the ideal” merely because they have neither humility nor capacity enough to comprehend the real.’ Fine poems, like fine manners, so far from contradicting common sense, as the vulgar often think, carry out its dictates with extraordinary minuteness and perfection; and, at the very least, we expect that persons pretending to the august rank of poets should write things which
[Page 344]
persons of average good sense and feeling might acknowledge without discredit. ‘A palace,’ Coleridge said, ‘should at least be a house;’ and a poet should at least be a sensible man. But how strangely is this primary necessity overlooked in our days, as well by poets as their readers. They give us the paper-hangings of fancy, the chandeliers of imagination, and the ‘stucco’ of poetic diction; but where are the bricks of commonsense, the rafters of reflection, and the corner and key-stones of morality, that should constitute the solid structure of which all this magnificence is properly nothing but the appendage?
As we might expect, the vastness of the aim professed in each of the works of such writers is commonly in direct proportion to the incapacity of the author, who generally sets out with the intention of writing, not only a great poem, but the great poem of this age, and of all ages past and to come. The ‘place’ of their dramas—for they all write dramas—is usually space; the ‘time,’ eternity; the ‘dramatis personæ,’ the hierarchies of heaven and hell, a certain number of ‘walking gentlemen’ of the intermediate mortal rank, and ‘the coming poet,’ who combines the characteristics and prerogatives of all three, and for the original of whom we have seldom far to seek. From these elements the ‘problem of life,’ whatever that may mean with these persons, all of whom seem to be deeply concerned in its elucidation, is to be evolved. Their heroes have a supreme disregard for every kind of moral or social ‘conventionality’ and a manifest contempt for all action or purpose in life, but that of making poems and long speeches about themselves and the sublime and beautiful. They have always the misfortune —the worst that can happen to men or poets—of having no profession but that of contemplating stars and primroses, despising their fellow creatures or patronising them with a still more contemptuous philanthropy, and making love in a condescending style to young ladies of the ‘sumptuous’ type. These writers invariably take occasion, in the course of their ‘Life,’ ‘Death,’ or other ‘Drama,’ to print their arrears of unpublished lyrics without the slightest pretence of congruity. The chief of these lyrics is usually one in ‘Lockesley Hall’ metre, the prevailing thought—to express it in the characteristic language of one of the school—being,—
‘Lo, this gorgeous day goes queenlike with the treasures of all time,
And her men and women dangle on the verge of the sublime.’
How explain the fact that, in some instances, the sale of the works of these writers rivals that of the publications of the Poet Laureate, and that, for the most part, they have been
[Page 345]
welcomed by the minor critics with respect, and sometimes with enthusiasm? We admit our inability to account for this singular caprice of the public taste, for it seems that, although very little good poetry is written in these days, a great deal of indifferent poetry is bought; we feel bound, however, for our own justification, to note such approximate reasons as occur to us. The temporary popularity of these poems among persons of some culture and understanding, seems partly explicable when we discover that these writings contain innumerable good things from the great and comparatively unread poets, diluted, disjointed, and vulgarised so as to enable them to strike a common order of apprehension. In all but one or two exceptions these works are tissues of gross, though perhaps unconscious plagiarism. For one person who is capable of appreciating a well-sustained poetic flight there are a hundred who can derive a certain amount of pleasure from a good image or a well-turned line, when its effect is emphasized by isolation. Hence separate bright thoughts and images, which, in a great writer, make less popular effect, because they are the appropriate and subordinate parts of a whole, are received with enthusiastic admiration when they glitter one by one among the decorations of Mr. Smith's or Mr. Bailey's christmas tree. Writers like Mr. Henry Taylor and Mr. Aubrey De Vere, who exceed in the opposite, but far nobler and more truly poetic extreme of depending somewhat too exclusively upon the higher qualities of our nature, are scarcely regarded as poets by the partisans of the new school; nor can we feel surprise at this when we consider the almost savage repugnance to, and incapacity for, attention , which appear to be increasingly characteristic of the popular mind in our day. It not only requires no attention to enable a reader to receive whatever poetic delectation there may be in most of our modern poets; but a dormant condition of that faculty is one of the prime conditions of receiving pleasure from their writings. Fortunately for the popularity of many modern writers, in prose as well as verse, the intellects of most modern readers move, as it were, in ‘snow-shoes,’ which enable them to traverse an unsubstantial surface without sinking into the depths of mud which obstruct at every step the advance of a thoughtful reader. Wherever, as is sometimes the case even with Mr. Tennyson and Mr. Browning, the meaning is hidden by the hardness of the expression, the reader is carried along by the play of verse, and he may console himself for having missed what will hardly repay the effort of extracting it from such a knot of words.
But, after all, the vanity of connoisseurship, as we have
[Page 346]
already said, is the chief clue to the solution of the present riddle. There is a tradition,—extremely well-founded,—that when, from time to time, great poets have appeared, it has commonly been their fate to be for a long while overlooked and neglected by all but the finest intellects of their day; the latest instance, and one of the most notorious, being John Keats. A quarter of a century has sufficed, not to make Keats a popular poet, but to make his name and style well known to that large and ever increasing class of persons who pique themselves on the possession of literary taste. Now the appearance of any writer whose verses very closely resemble those of Keats seems, we suppose, to these persons to be a good opportunity of proving themselves to be among the select minds of the time, who know a poet when they see him. In this conclusion, however, there lurks a fallacy: the fact of the verses of such a writer being very much like the verses of Keats constitutes the greatest possible difference between that writer and Keats, who wrote verses quite unlike any one who ever lived before him,— the ability to do so having constituted at once his claims to be regarded as a true poet, and the cause of his neglect.
The parade, invariably made by these poets, of a lofty metaphysical purpose, and their abundant employment, at third or fourth hand, of a German religio-philosophic slang, are also strong recommendations to a large number of readers, who (perhaps justly) despise whatever they can understand.
In entering now upon particulars, we must premise that the foregoing censures, though characterising the class of writers in question with general truth, would, if taken without qualification, express a condemnation more absolute than is merited by any one of the more conspicuous members of that class.
The author of ‘The Roman’ and ‘Balder’ has unmistakeable claims to whatever respect may be due to genuine poetic power wasted in the wielding of it. In ‘The Roman,’ his first work, there are many hundreds of lines of true eloquence bordering very nearly upon true poetry, and reminding us strongly of the best of the French dramatists of the classical era. The following passages are selected from many others not inferior to them; and although they are somewhat laboured and obscure, with here and there a puerile conceit, they are not without the force of true poetic diction.
The Colisseum in Ruins.
                                         ‘When conquering suns
Triumph'd in jubilant earth, it stood out dark
With thoughts of ages; like some haughty captive
[Page 347]
Upon his death-bed in a Christian land,
And lying, through the chant of psalm and creed,
Unshriven and stern, with peace upon his brow,
And on his lips strange gods.’
The Plains of Italy.
‘Rude heaps, that had been cities, clad the ground
With history; and far and near, where grass
Was greenest, and the unconscious goat browsed free,
The teeming soil was sown with desolations,
As though Time, striding o'er the field he reap'd,
Warm'd with the spoil, rich droppings for the gleaners
Threw round his harvest-way. Frieze, pedestal,
Pillars that bore through years the weight of glory
And take their rest. Tombs, arches, monuments,
Vainly set up to save a name, as though
The eternal served the perishable; urns
Which winds had emptied of their dust, but left
Full of their immortality.’
Truth.
‘Truth, partial to her sex, made woman free
Even of her inmost cell; but man walks round
The outer courts, and by the auspices
And divinations of the augur Reason,
Knows her chaste will, her voice and habit better,
With a sure science, more abstract and pure,
Than she who runs by instinct to her knee.’
Some of the lyrics in ‘The Roman,’ though entirely out of place, are poems of true merit, expressing as they do, lively feeling in what almost always accompanies lively feeling,—when the mechanical practice of verse has been acquired,—rhythm of sweet and novel movement. This drama, indeed, though full of constructive faults and greatly wanting in human verisimilitude, is not worse in these respects than nearly all dramas of a very modern date, and the sustained eloquence of much of the writing takes it out of the category of the ‘spasmodic school.’ It is in ‘Balder’ that Mr. Sydney Dobell puts forth his claim to rank with the first in that unhappy clique; and, strange to say, it is also in ‘Balder’ that he proves himself to be, not only a rhetorician in verse, but by nature a poet; witness the following short passages, which might do credit to any poet living:— The Past.
‘I have linger'd by the Past,
As by a death-bed, with unwonted love,
And such forgiveness as we bring to those
Who can offend no more.’
[Page 348]
His Mistress.
‘My first love and my last, so far, so near,
So strong, so weak, so comprehensible
In these encircling arms, so undescribed
In any thought that shapes thee; so divine,
So softly human, that to either stretch
Extreme and farthest tether of desire,
It finds thee still.’
Ghosts.
       ‘Doubtless there are no ghosts;
Yet somehow it is better not to move,
Lest cold hands seize upon us from behind.’
Charity.
‘The secret that doth make a flower a flower,
So frames it that to bloom is to be sweet,
And to receive to give.
No soil so sterile, and no living lot
So poor but it hath somewhat still to spare
In bounteous odours. Charitable they
Who, be their having more or less, so have
That less is more than need, and more is less
Than the great heart's goodwill.’
Dante.
                     ‘Who wove his web
And thrust it into hell, and drew it forth
Immortal, having burned all that could burn,
And leaving only what shall still be found
Untouch'd, ner with the smell of fire upon it,
Under the final ashes of the world.’
Our readers will thank us for having culled these specimen flowers from the interminable prairie in which we have discovered them—not without difficulty; for although they grow thickly, it is scarcely until they are relieved from their untruthful and intolerably wearisome context, that they affect us with their unquestionable poetic force. We must further credit this writer for a high and just appreciation of feminine loveliness. In this he stands quite alone in the class of which he is a member; and it is with sincere delight that we turn from the degrading materialism of most modern descriptions of poetic heroines to anything so much like the antique chastity and honour as the following fragments of a picture much too elaborate to be given in full:—
                                         ‘Thus she who came unknown
Into the stranger crowd with modest step
[Page 349]
And eyes that rather would be ruled than rule,
Having no need of praise, nor hope of fame,
Nor conscious of dominion, did subdue
Its chaos to her nature, being divine;
And, merely present, could no less than stir
The dull and grosser essence to revolve
About her, as by instinct, and hid force
Of that well-ordered universe whereof
Its matter was a part. Herself informed
The jarring elements, till, as her sway
No outer sign enforced, no shows of power,
Nor but a golden sweet necessity
Sovereign, unseen, the subject heart gave like
Confession. Not as they confess a queen
With sudden shout, but as two friends regard
A rising star, and speak not of it while
It fills their gaze. The loud debate grew low,
What was unseemly chasten'd, and the fear
Of beauty waking her moralities
Sent through the adjusted limbs the long-forgot
Ambition to be fair. Nor sex, nor rank,
Nor age, nor chang'd condition, did absolve
Her rule, which whatsoever was remote
From sin the more saluted. ...
... She was much like the moon
Seen in the daytime, that by day receives
Like joy with us, but when our night is dark,
Lit by the changeless sun we cannot see,
Shineth no less. And she was like the moon,
Because the beams that brighten'd her passed o'er
Our dark heads, and we knew them not for light
Till they came back from her's; and she was like
The moon, that whatsoe'er appeared her wane
Or crescent was no loss or gain to her,
But in the changed beholder.’
That the man who is capable of writing verses so good as these, should also be capable of anything upon the whole so bad as ‘Balder,’ and ‘England in Time of War,’ is to us a mystery.
Mr. Alexander Smith's ‘Life Drama,’ though it abounds with remarkable verbal beauties, surpasses everything we have met with in its display of ignorance of that kind of reality which it is a poet's first duty to seize. Its views of human nature and society are literally such as Gaspar Hauser—the man who had been shut up in a hole in the earth from his first infancy—might have been expected to depict, had aspirations for fame induced him to set about the execution of a ‘Life Drama’ before his eyes were become well used to the light of day. The hero, Walter, a great poet of course, though
[Page 350]
as yet only in intention, is discovered at midnight in an antique room. He reads aloud certain crack lines of Mr. Smith's poetry, but, a better judge than their real author, tears them into fragments as unworthy of publication. He invokes fame in that remarkable apostrophe which we will not give our readers the pain of perusing a second time; and immediately after spares our breath by dubbing himself ‘poor fool.’ Soon after, the would-be famous minstrel falls asleep in a forest. In singular keeping with what is obviously intended to be the thoroughly modern costume of the poem, a young lady, rushing by with a fawn, sees him ‘thick in the light of his own beauty,’ ‘like young Apollo in his golden curls.’ She declares in soliloquy her admiration of his ‘dainty cheeks and ringlets like a girl,’ and innocently confesses that ‘his slumber-parted lips twere sweet to kiss.’ The young fellow wakes up, and entering forthwith into confidential talk, expatiates to the strange lady on the all-absorbing plan of a great poem; the lady declares that the scheme ‘is wide and daring as a comet's spoom;’ and, after appointing another solitary meeting, rushes on her way with her fawn, which comes in for the sake of the picturesque, like St. Peter for that of the metre. The second meeting arrives, and the pair wander by the side of a river. Walter veils his declaration of passion in a tale, not apprehending, we suppose, in the charming modesty of youth, that the young lady's conduct has been of a nature to render all disguise of his feelings superfluous. The tale shows how a certain damsel, whose blood had coursed through the veins of a hundred earls, —the family honours dating, therefore, from about the time of King Cambyses,—cast herself back on her couch in an extremely ‘sumptuous’ manner, and, having summoned her blackamoor page to her side, talks to him of love; telling him, among other things, how her cousin had taken the orthodox poetical mode of declaring his affections by reciting a long tale, which she repeats, and which had nothing in common with the said cousin's condition except that its hero was in love; how she had refused him; how her heart was as yet untouched, but ready to dote on him that should ‘leap into it’ with sufficient audacity; the story says further how the lady on the couch asks the page if he thinks her fair; how the little blackamoor, or ‘cub o’ the ‘sun,’ as Mr. Smith calls him, owned that he loved the daughter of the hundred earls as she lay ‘carelessly displayed’ before him; how he was turned out of the room in consequence; how he was no sooner gone than she expressed her real willingness to grant his utmost wishes, and ‘pasture him on her lips until his beard was grown.’ Whether she ultimately did so is only
[Page 351]
to be presumed, for Walter break off his story, and pays the lady of the fawn the compliment of identifying her with the heroine and himself with the ‘cub o' the sun,’ although, as in the case of the tale within the tale, we are unable to comprehend the slightest parallelism between the illustration and the position illustrated. After a little more equally pertinent discourse, listened to without reproof by the lady, the poet somewhat abruptly, but certainly not without ample encouragement, declares it to be his intention forthwith to ‘taste the bliss’ of his companion's lips; but the lady draws back, and informs him for the first time that in a few days she will be the bride of another. The plighted bride, who seems to represent tempted, and suffering, but triumphant virtue, tears herself away, exclaiming, ‘Walter, I am thine!’ and promising to die shortly and to pass into daisies, which should wave recognition at his approach. Walter is much soured at this unlooked-for slip between the cup and the lip, and passes some time in despair and yearnings for a great poetic reputation. We then find our poet making one of a party at ‘a manor.’ The party consists of a Mr. Wilmott, his daughter Violet, and several young men. Miss Wilmott, who is represented as a person of good position and great personal charms, and who, it seems, is accustomed to make one at roystering bachelors' parties, is impatient at a pause in the conversation, and proposes a song. The young men sing a number of songs in praise of ‘wine and women,’ but these lyrics are too Anacreontic for extract in our pages. Walter, who is struck with the young lady's charms, repeats the stock artifice of telling an entirely mal-à-propos story of a poet who was in love, and Miss Wilmott, at its conclusion, inquires with charming naïveté ,
‘How look'd this youth?
Did he in voice or mien resemble you?
Was he about your age, wore he such curls?
Such eyes of dark sea-blue?’
Upon this hint, we suppose, he spake, for soon after we find the young lady reposing by the side of the poet, on her father's lawn, and bestowing, unsolicited, the favour of a kiss. All this, and what follows, as forcibly indicated by the simple exclamation ‘Walter!’ which closes the scene, may be very natural, for aught we know, under certain social conditions; but we altogether deny that the poet's desperate and enduring remorse consequent upon this little accident, has a shadow of meaning or verisimilitude. It seems, however, that this ‘experience’ has at last rendered him capable of a great poem. It is accordingly written and published, and, to use the expressive phrase of his friend
[Page 352]
Edward, ‘that was a hit!’ Walter's poem, by the way, with such experience and culture as his seem to have been, and ‘each word sincere as blood drops from the heart,’ must have remarkably resembled the ‘Life Drama.’ At the end of the play, it appears to have occurred to the poet that his remorseful feelings, which have now endured for some years, and have answered their literary purpose, might as well be allayed by a legitimate union with the debauched and deserted Violet, and the curtain falls with the hero's intimation that more ‘great songs’ are to be expected from him, now that he has completed his moral and intellectual education.
We assure our readers that this analysis of Mr. Smith's poem is a great effort of our indulgence, and that nothing but the unabridged work could convey a competent notion of its absolute lack of truth, actual or imaginative. Here and there, nevertheless, amidst this surprising display of ignorance of humanity,— an ignorance much too profound to be attributed to anything but a natural defect of feeling, and the power of observation which feeling gives,—we are startled by a true thought, as
‘He had no heart to grasp the fleeting hour,
Which, like a thief, steals by with silent foot,
In his closed hand the jewel of a life.’
Or by a piquant touch of description, as—
                                         ‘I saw a misery perch'd
I' the melancholy corners of his mouth,
Like griffins on each side my father's gates!’
Or by a brilliant phrase, as—
‘My drooping sails
Flap idly 'gainst the mast of mine intent,
I rot upon the waters when my prow
Should grate the golden isles.’
Perhaps the best passage of the same extent in this poem, is the following,—
‘The lark is singing in the blinding sky,
Hedges are white with May. The bridegroom sea
Is toying with the shore, his wedded bride,
And, in the fulness of his marriage joy,
He decorates her tawny brow with shells,
Retires a space, to see how fair she looks,
Then, proud, runs up to kiss her. All is fair!
All glad from grass to sun! Yet more I love
Than this, the shrinking day that sometimes comes
In winter's front, so fair 'mong its dark peers,
It seems a straggler from the files of June,
[Page 353]
Which in its wanderings had lost its wits
And half its beauty; and, when it returned,
Finding its old companions gone away,
It join'd November's troop, then marching past;
And so the frail thing comes and greets the world
With a thin crazy smile, then bursts in tears,
And all the while it holds within its hands
A few half-wither'd flowers.’
There is in this and other passages a certain largeness of handling, and a command of words, which distinguish Mr. Smith from the older and more hopelessly ‘spasmodic’ poets; but these qualifications are impaired by the extraordinary incapacity he displays for regarding steadily, and recording sincerely, any scene, thought, or emotion which requires more than two or three lines for its expression. In this extract, for example, which is of much more than Mr. Smith's average precision, we find several glaring inaccuracies,—in a matter, too, of merely external nature, where accuracy is comparatively easy. The lark and the hedges white with May are in the worst possible keeping with the sea-shore, where the verses are supposed to be said; and the pretty lines about the sea do not in any way assist the description of a peculiarly fine summer's day, to which the remaining portion of the passage is intended to be an antithesis. The second half of the passage, like many other morsels in this poem, has a musical movement which would be remarkable had we not heard every inflexion of it in Shakspeare; and although the humour of the poet is expressed with great ingenuity and delicacy of language, the fanciful reaches the fantastic, and the impression left upon the mind is neither natural nor pleasing.
The worst feature about ‘Balder’ and the ‘Life Drama’ is, that what power they have is mature. These poems, the only works of the school which are not quite destitute of promise, are yet not at all like anything we remember of the early failures of true poets. Coleridge, Byron, Keats, and others of their order, began, it is true, by writing a good deal of trash, but the difference between the trash of such poets and that of those under our notice is, that the one kind is a mere falling short, whereas the other takes its rise in extravagant perversity. If, however, contrary to our expectation, the authors of ‘Balder’ and the ‘Life Drama’ ever take rank as poets, they will be among the readiest to acknowledge with us that there is no excuse for the man who publishes bad poetry, because there is none for the folly and conceit which cause him to mistake his vocation and capacity. Most certainly want of education will
[Page 354]
not supply him with an excuse, for the plough and the sheephook have been the youthful occupation of many a true poet; and there never was a period in the history of literature and society at which an acquaintance with the best writers might be more easily obtained. That which is wanting to these aspirants is neither a knowledge of past excellence nor encouragement to their own deserts; but rather the sacred gift of invention and the faculty divine which intuitively reflects the face of nature and the life of man.
Mr. Bailey's ‘Festus’ is a dramatic poem more than twice as long as ‘Paradise Lost.’ It contains enough poetry to have set-up a dozen minor poets, yet is Mr. Bailey no more than such a poet himself, and his work is just such a production as might have been looked for from a minor poet attempting to write the greatest poem of the world.
Really, Mr. Bailey should have had some respect for the angels, archangels, and all the company of heaven. He rushes in where Milton stumbled, and Dante feared to tread, and makes the cherubim and Dante feared to tread, and makes the cherubim and seraphim, not to mention higher names, vent volumes of such religion and philosophy as would be appropriate only in the mouth of the prophet of the Agapemone. Our readers have only to imagine (if they can) the effect of twenty thousand consecutive lines like the following, in order to obtain a tolerably just estimate of ‘Festus.’
‘ God.
The earth shall not be when her Sabbath ends,
In the high close of order.
Lucifer.
                                         Heaven, farewell!
Hell is more bearable than nothingness.
Thrones.
Thou, God, art Lord of Mercy; and Thy thoughts
Are high above the star-dust of the world!
The spheres themselves are but as shining noughts
Upon the mantle of the night impearled.
From rank to rank in Thearchy ( sic ) divine,
We angel raylets gladden in Thy sight;
Whose thousand thrones are holy in the heavens,
And hidden in Thy universal light.
Dominations.
Between Creation and Destruction now
The lull of creatural action intervenes.
God rests; and the world is working out its week;
His hand is in his bosom, and at rest, &c.
Powers.
Thy might is self-creative, and Thy works
Immortal, temporal, destructible,
Are ever in Thy sight and blessed there.
The heavens are in thy bosom, and thine eye
Is high o'er all existence; yea, the worlds
Are but Thy shining foot-prints upon space.
Princedoms.
Eternal Lord! Thy strength compels the worlds
[Page 355]
And bows the heads of ages; at Thy voice
Their unsubstantial essence wears away.
Virtues.
All-favouring God! we glory but in Thee.
Ye heavens exalt, expand yourselves; they come,
The infinite generations, all divine,
Of Deity, our brethren and our friends, &c. &c.’
Colloquies of this kind, sometimes thousands of lines long, are relieved by jaunty conversations on love, literature, theology, Shakspeare, and musical glasses, between Frank, Edward, Harry, Caroline, Helen, Marian, and other mortals, whose talk, for the most part, is very much what one may imagine would take place at a soirée of such persons as Mr. Dickens loves to describe. Yet strange to say, here, as in ‘Balder’ and the ‘Life Drama,’ we not unfrequently come upon a poetic passage which, for a moment, refreshes our weariness and checks our general feeling of unqualified dislike; as, for example, these lines about ‘Another and a better world.’
‘This is a world where every loveliest thing
Lasts longest; where decay lifts never head
Above the grossest forms, and matter here
Is all transparent substance; the flower fades not,
But every eve puts forth a fragrant light,
Till by degrees the spirit of each flower,
Essentially consuming the fair frame,
Refines itself to air.
The beautiful die never here: Death lies
A dreaming; he has nought to do: the babe
Plays with his darts.’
Or, again, this touchingly expressed dismissal of an unworthy lover:—
‘Go; I cannot choose
But love thee, and thy love refuse;
And if my brow grow lined while young,
And youth fly cheated from my cheek,
'Tis that there lies below my tongue
A word I will not speak:
For I would rather die than deem
Thou'rt not the glory thou didst seem.’
The writers to whom these remarks apply, although they have attracted far more than their proper share of attention, have by no means filled the whole poetical horizon during the last few seasons. Not to speak of Mr. and Mrs. Browning, and two or three others, who are scarcely ‘new poets,’ and therefore not within our present scope; we have Matthew Arnold, William Allingham, Owen Meredith, George Meredith, and ‘V,’ all of whom are writers, not only of ‘some promise’—a very dubious
[Page 356]
commendation for those who have ventured into print—but also of some performance. Mr. Matthew Arnold, in ‘Sohrab and Rustum,’ and ‘The Death of Balder’; and Mr. Allingham, in ‘The Music Master,’ have written poems which, although they are not faultness, are as much better than any equal amount of the poetry of the spasmodic school, as a diamond which weighs an ounce is better than an ounce of diamond-dust; in the ‘Earl's Return,’ and ‘Queen Guenevre,’ Owen Meredith has given us two admirably descriptive pieces; and in the verses called ‘Love in the Valley,’ George Meredith has produced a little poem of singular sweetness, truth, and originality.
The ‘Music-Master,’ the only poem in Mr. Allingham's volume of more than a few stanzas in length, is a work which, in some important respects, is superior to anything emanating from the ‘new poets’ whose names are at the head of this article. Without equalling Mr. Arnold's principal poems in metrical finish, or the force and beauty of detached passages and single lines in Mr. Dobell's or Mr. Smith's poetry, the ‘Music-Master’ surpasses as a poem all that these writers have done, if a simple and sustained obedience to the muse's injunction, ‘Look in thy heart and write’ be, as we believe, the first of all poetic requirements. In this idyl Mr. Allingham, who is an Irishman, has produced a love-story in which singular tenderness, simplicity, and purity of feeling are combined with a peculiar national colouring. The art of construction is considerable, but perfectly well concealed; and, without being at all like any other poem we have read, it has none of the conscious pretension to originality which infects so much of our recent verse. Its appeal is not to our admiration, but to our feelings; yet those who have a right understanding of poetic art will not fail, after the subsidence of the deep emotion which this idyl is calculated to call forth, to be much impressed with the skill of the poet in his management of a story which turns upon a course of conduct created by the most subtle and shadowy, though perfectly real and essential, refinement of natural feeling in the two lovers. There is no piece, in any of the volumes before us, to which extract could do so little justice. The following lyric, selected from another part of the volume, will give our readers a good idea of the sweetness, simplicity, and unpretending vigour of Mr. Allingham's ordinary style.
‘Bud and leaflet, opening slowly,
    Woo'd with tears by winds of spring,
Now, of June persuaded wholly,
    Perfumes, flow'rs, and shadows bring.
[Page 357]
‘Evey, in the linden alley,
    All alone I met to-day,
Tripping to the sunny valley,
    Spread across with new-mown hay.
‘Brown her soft curls, sunbeam-sainted,
    Golden in the wavering flush;
Darker brown her eyes are, painted
    Eye and fringe with one soft brush.
‘Through the leaves a careless comer,
    Never nymph of fount or tree
Could have press'd the floor of summer
    With a lighter foot than she.
‘Few her words; yet like a sister,
    Trustfully she look'd and smiled;
'Twas but in my soul I kiss'd her,
    As I used to kiss the child.
‘Shadows, which are not of sadness,
    Touch her eyes, and brow above;
As pale wild roses dream of redness,
    Dreams her innocent heart of love.’
The greater portion of Mr. Allingham's volume consists of short lyrics, few of them without merit, some well maintaining the reputation of Irish minstrelsy. It is with justifiable pride that the author, in his preface, tells us that some of his songs ‘have already an Irish circulation as “ha'penny ballads.”’
We scarcely know what to say of ‘Clytemnestra,’ ‘The Earl's Return,’ ‘The Artist,’ and other poems, by Owen Meredith. That this volume indicates remarkable ability in so young a writer as we understand its author to be, is unquestionable; but whether that ability includes the exceedingly rare conjunction and balance of intellectual forces which constitute the nature of an original poet is more than we can undertake to determine from the evidence before us. It is certain that the best pieces in this volume are those in which the writer consents to look upon nature through the eyes of others; and so singular is his power of doing this, that his imitations sometimes surpass, in their own way, the originals. ‘The Earl's Return,’ by much the most remarkable piece in the collection, sustains to the extent of eight hundred lines, the peculiar sharpness and intensity which distinguish the best of Mr. Browning's descriptive passages. The opening lines of this poem are no more than an average specimen of its quality.
‘Ragged and tall stood the castle wall,
And the squires, at their sport, in the great South Court,
[Page 358]
Lounged all day long from stable to hall,
Laughingly, lazily, one and all.
The land about was barren and blue,
And swept by the wing of the wet sea-mew,
Seven fishermen's huts on a shelly shore;
Sand-heaps behind, and sand-banks before;
And a black champaigne streak'd white all through
To a great salt pool which the ocean drew,
Suck'd into itself, and disgorged it again,
To stagnate and steam on the mineral pain;
Not a tree or a bush in the circle of sight,
But a bare black thorn which the sea winds had wither'd
With drifting scum of the surf and blight,
And some patches of gray grass-land to the right,
Where the lean, red-hided cattle were tether'd;
A reef of rock wedged the water in twain,
And a stout stone tower stood square to the main;
And the flakes of the spray that were jerk'd away
From the froth on the lip of the bleak blue sea,
Were sometimes flung by the wind, as it swung
Over turret and terrace and balcony,
To the garden below, where, in desolate corners,
Under the mossy green parapet there,
The lilies crouch'd, rocking their white heads like mourners,
And burn'd off the heads of the flowers that were
Pining and pale in their comfortless bowers,
Dry-bush'd with the sharp stubborn lavender,
And paven with discs of the torn sun-flowers,
Which, day by day, were strangled and stripp'd
Of their ravelling fringes and brazen bosses,
And the hardy mary-buds nipp'd and ripp'd
Into shreds for the beetles that lurk'd in the mosses.’
‘Queen Guenevre,’ and one or two other pieces, reproduce the manner of the Poet Laureate quite as strikingly as the ‘Earl's Return’ does that of Mr. Browning. If ‘Owen Meredith’ ‘is himself anywhere, he is so in the two poems called Good-night in the Porch,’ and ‘The Wife's Tragedy.’ In these pieces there is an expression of passion apparently unborrowed; but the flow and force of it is sadly marred by the crying sin of almost all recent writers, the introduction of minute observation, and description of natural objects which would certainly not attract the notice of persons under the circumstances and with the feelings of the supposed speakers. We hope to hear of ‘Owen Meredith’ again, not under a nom de guerre , but by a name which has an hereditary claim to distinction in English literature.
Mr. Matthew Arnold's poems are very refreshing and instructive contrasts to the works of the writers who engaged our
[Page 359]
attention in the first part of this article. Mr. Arnold seems to have been driven, by the consideration of the faults of those writers, into almost an affectation of indifference to minute verbal beauties. He has altogether failed to establish or illustrate the chief doctrine propounded in his preface; but he has done much to deserve our thanks in more substantial ways. For combined culture and fine natural feeling in the matter of versification Mr. Arnold has no living superior. Though sometimes slovenly in the versification of his smaller poems, when he is put upon his mettle by a particular affection for his subject, he manages the most ‘irregular’ and difficult metres with admirable skill and feeling.
As a specimen of an order of poetical ability to which his critics have not, we think, hitherto done justice, we extract from ‘The Buried Life’ a passage which, although it does occasionally echo an immortal strain of Wordsworth's, deserves to be remembered for its own merit.
‘Often, in the din of strife,
There rises an unspeakable desire
After the knowledge of our buried life;
A thirst to spend our fire and restless force
In tracking out our true, original course;
A longing to inquire
Into the mystery of this heart that beats
So wild, so deep in us, to know
Whence our thoughts come and where they go.
And many a man in his own breast then delves,
But deep enough, alas, none ever mines:
And we have been on many thousand lines,
And we have shown on each talent and power,
But hardly have we, for one little hour,
Been on our own line, have we been ourselves;
Hardly had skill to utter one of all
The nameless feelings that course through our breast,
But they course on for ever unexpress'd.
And long we try in vain to speak and act
Our hidden self, and what we say and do
Is eloquent, is well—but 'tis not true:
And then we will no more be rack'd
With inward striving, and demand
Of all the thousand nothings of the hour
Their stupifying power;
Ah, yes, and they benumb us at our call:
Yet still, from time to time, vague and forlorn,
From the soul's subterranean depth upborne
As from an infinitely distant land,
Come airs, and floating echoes, and convey
A melancholy into all our day.
[Page 360]
    ‘Only—but this is rare—
When a beloved hand is laid in our's,
When jaded with the rush and glare
Of the interminable hours,
Our eyes can in another's eyes read clear,
When our world-deafen'd ear
Is by the tones of a loved voice caress'd,—
A bolt is shot back somewhere in the breast
And a lost pulse of feeling stirs again,
The eye sinks inward, and the heart lies plain,
And what we mean we say, and what we would we know.’
Here, and in many other poems, we recognise with delight the coolness of head and warmth of heart, which pass for insensibility with the multitude, who commonly mistake a fevered brain, with its invariable accompaniment, an unfeeling breast, for poetic passion.
Although Mr. Arnold's passionate partiality for ancient models is not without damage to his poetical aims and practice, it is impossible not to respect the sincerity and enthusiasm with which he holds up the example of the Greek tragedians as a protest against much of our modern practice. And here let us remark that the best poets of recent times have flatly contradicted the vulgar notion that the poetical and critical faculties are incompatible with each other. Mr. Arnold, like Wordsworth, is a very good, though not an infallible critic; and Göthe and Coleridge, two of the greatest poets of recent times, are by far the greatest critics of recent, and we might almost say of any times. We rejoice in every additional testimony to the too often denied truth that, although the true poet's song is never trammelled with a present consciousness of the laws which it obeys, science, not ignorance, supplies the conditions of such absence of consciousness. The free spirit of art, in its noblest developments, has ever been obtained, not by neglect, but by perfection of discipline.
Not unlike the poems of Matthew Arnold, for quality and style, are the poems by ‘V,’ of which we have before us a new edition with several additions. ‘V’ is the accomplished authoress of ‘Paul Ferroll,’ a tale which, in spite of the horrid subject on which it is founded, and the false interest it attaches to a great criminal, is unquestionably a very powerful work of fiction. The same literary talents have been more agreeably displayed by Mrs. Clive in her poetical writings. In description, with which her poetry abounds, she displays that coexistence of the synthetic and analytic modes of looking at things, the general want of which is the great defect of most modern poetry, even of a high
[Page 361]
class. ‘The Valley of the Morlas’ is perhaps the best piece in the volume, but its merit is of a kind to which comment and extract must fail to do justice, residing as it mainly does in the sustained loftiness and individuality of moral tone, which more or less distinguish all the verses of ‘V’ from the ordinary poetry of the day.
Mr. Gerald Massey's lyrics have already gone through several editions, and some of them deserve their popularity. The most fastidious tastes will be the most charmed with such verses as those called ‘That merry, merry May,’ and the following stanzas, entitled ‘Unbeloved’:—
‘Like a tree beside the river
    Of her life that runs from me,
Do I lean me, murmuring ever
    In my love's idolatry.
And I reach out hands of blessing,
    And I stretch out hands of prayer,
And, with passionate caressing,
    Waste my life upon the air.
In my ears the syren river
    Sings and smiles up in my face;
But for ever and for ever,
    Runs from my embrace.
‘Spring by spring the branches duly
    Clothe themselves in tender flower;
And for her sweet sake as truly
    All their fruit and fragrance shower;
But the stream with careless laughter,
    Runs in merry beauty by,
And it leaves me, yearning after,
    Lorn to weep and lone to die.
In my ears the syren river
    Sings, and smiles up in my face;
But for ever and for ever
    Runs from my embrace.’
There is a real glow about all that Mr. Massey writes, though this glow, especially in the love poems, is often somewhat hectic. The political and ‘patriotic’ pieces in this volume are of little value, as indeed their author in his preface allows. His excuse for retaining them, now that he knows better, appears to us unsatisfactory. They express, he assures us, a state of feeling and opinion out of which he has himself grown, but in which thousands among the poorer classes still remain. Merely to represent this state, which he admits to have been a false one, without representing its falsehood, is to inflame and propagate,
[Page 362]
instead of curing or alleviating, it in others. We would recommend Mr. Massey, in printing a future edition, to omit most of these poems, and to tone down some of the amatory pieces.
Upon the whole, we cannot conclude this rapid survey of the latest poetical growth of English literature without arriving at a low estimate of its character and its tendencies. The harvest is great, but the labourers are weak, though not few. We utterly dissent, indeed, from the hasty and superficial opinion that there is anything in the spirit of these times which renders men insensible to the charms of the highest poetry, or disqualifies them from producing works more worthy of the language and the country in which they are born. The liberal patronage, the intelligent curiosity, the lenient and even enthusiastic criticism, which the humblest of these writers has met with, suffice to show that the English public were never more eager to hail the productions of literary genius. But the prevailing taste of the latest school of poetry in England is neither a healthy nor a vigorous one. It is infected with something of that mannerism which has produced the Pre-Raphaelite school of painters. In the absence of the higher qualities of art, such as enlarged creative powers of fiction, the charm of narrative, and the broad light and shade of character and thought, these poets linger with tedious predilection over the mosses on a wall or chace the shadows of the plain. There is not enough of human interest in their hearts. Their work is fanciful and unreal: their meaning too frequently obscure, and their diction elaborate without being harmonious or correct.
We have no doubt that these are passing imperfections, and the increased attention given to such poetry as we have leads us to hope that we shall emerge ere long from the regions of silence and obscurity into those of light and song. In spite of the fashion of the day, which may serve to raise this or that writer into a semblance of popularity, we must venture to record our opinion that the high places of English poetry are at this time unfilled, and that the man whose genius shall next enable him to embody in some living and original form the spirit and the feeling of our times has not yet revealed himself to us by his works.
$$$
