Notes on Gilfillan's Literary Portraits
Author: De Quincey, Thomas.
Publication info: The Collected Writings Of Thomas De Quincey . vi, 474 p. Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black, 1890.

Notes on Gilfillan's Literary Portraits [in, The Collected Writings of Thomas De Quincey ... By David Masson ... Vol. XI. Literary Theory And Criticism]
[Page ]
NOTES ON GILFILLAN'S LITERARY PORTRAITS 1 William Godwin [1756–1836] It is no duty of a notice so cursory to discuss Mr. Godwin as a philosopher. Mr. Gilfillan admits that in this character he did not earn much popularity by any absolute originality;
[Page 327]
and, of such popularity as he may have snatched surreptitiously without it, clearly all must have long since exhaled before it could be possible for “a respectable person” (p. 15) to demand of Mr. Gilfillan “ Who's Godwin ?”—a question which Mr. Gilfillan justly thinks it possible that “some readers” of the present day (November 1845) may repeat. That is, we must presume, not Who is Godwin the novelist? but Who is Godwin the political philosopher? In that character he is now forgotten. And yet in that he carried one single shock into the bosom of English society, fearful but momentary, like that from the electric blow of the gymnotus; or, perhaps, the intensity of the brief panic which, fifty years ago, he impressed on the public mind may be more adequately expressed by the case of a ship in the middle ocean suddenly scraping with her keel a ragged rock, hanging for one moment as if impaled upon the teeth of the dreadful sierra ,—then, by the mere impetus of her mighty sails, grinding audibly to powder the fangs of this accursed
[Page 328]
submarine harrow, leaping into deep water again, and causing the panic of ruin to be simultaneous with the deep sense of deliverance. In the quarto (that is, the original) edition of his Political Justice , Mr. Godwin advanced against thrones and dominations, powers and principalities, with the air of some Titan slinger or monomachist from Thebes and Troy, saying—“Come hither, ye wretches, that I may give your flesh to the fowls of the air.” But in the second or octavo edition—and under what motive has never been explained— he recoiled absolutely from the sound himself had made: everybody else was appalled by the fury of the challenge, and, through the strangest of accidents, Mr. Godwin also was appalled. The second edition, as regards principles, is not a re-cast, but absolutely a travesty of the first; nay, it is all but a palinode. 2 In this collapse of a tense excitement I myself find the true reason for the utter extinction of the Political Justice , and of its author considered as a philosopher. Subsequently he came forward as a philosophical speculator in the Enquirer and elsewhere; but here it was always some minor question which he raised, or some mixed question, rather allied to philosophy than philosophical. As regarded the main creative nisus of his philosophy, it remained undeniable that, in relation to the hostility of the world, he was like one who, in some piratical ship, should drop his anchor before Portsmouth—should defy the navies of England to come out and fight, and then, whilst a thousand vessels were contending for the preference in blowing him out of the seas, should suddenly slip his cables and run.
But it is as a novelist, not as a political theorist, that Mr. Gilfillan values Godwin; and specially for his novel of Caleb Williams. 3 Now, if this were the eccentric judgment of one unsupported man, however able, and had received no countenance at all from others, it might be injudicious to detain the reader upon it. It happens, however, that other men of
[Page 329]
talent have raised Caleb Williams to a station in the first rank of novels; whilst many more, amongst whom I am compelled to class myself, can see in it no merit of any kind. A schism, which is really perplexing, exists in this particular case; and, that the reader may judge for himself, I will state the outline of the plot: out of which it is that the whole interest must be supposed to grow; for the characters are nothing, being mere generalities, and very slightly developed. Thirty-five years it is since I read the book; but the nakedness of the incidents makes them easily rememberable:— Falkland, who passes for a man of high-minded and delicate honour, but is, in fact, distinguished only by acute sensibility to the opinion of the world, receives a dreadful insult in a most public situation. It is, indeed, more than an insult, being the most brutal of outrages. In a ball-room, where the local gentry and his neighbours are assembled, he is knocked down, kicked, dragged along the floor, by a ruffian squire named Tyrrel. It is vain to resist; he himself is slightly built, and his antagonist is a powerful man. In these circumstances, and under the eyes of all the ladies in the county witnessing every step of his humiliation, no man could severely have blamed him, nor would our English law have severely punished him, if, in the frenzy of his agitation, he had seized a poker and laid his assailant dead upon the spot. Such allowance does the natural feeling of men,— such allowance does the sternness of the judgment-seat,— make for human infirmity when tried to extremity by devilish provocation. But Falkland does not avenge himself thus: he goes out, makes his little arrangements, and, at a later hour of the night, he comes by surprise upon Tyrrel, and murders him in the darkness. Here is the first vice in the story. With any gleam of generosity in his nature, no man in pursuit of vengeance would have found it in such a catastrophe. That an enemy should die by apoplexy, or by lightning, would be no gratification of wrath to an impassioned pursuer: to make it a retribution for him , he must himself be associated to the catastrophe in the consciousness of his victim. Falkland for some time evades or tramples on detection. But his evil genius at last appears in the shape of Caleb Williams; and the agency through which Mr. Caleb
[Page 330]
accomplishes his mission is not that of any grand passion, but of vile eavesdropping inquisitiveness. Mr. Falkland had hired him as an amanuensis; and in that character Caleb had occasion to observe that some painful remembrance weighed upon his master's mind, and that something or other—documents or personal memorials connected with this remembrance —were deposited in a trunk visited at intervals by Falkland. But of what nature could these memorials be? Surely Mr. Falkland would not keep in brandy the gory head of Tyrrel; and anything short of that could not proclaim any murder at all, much less the particular murder. Strictly speaking, nothing could be in the trunk of a nature to connect Falkland with the murder more closely than the circumstances had already connected him; and those circumstances, as we know, had been insufficient. It puzzles one, therefore, to imagine any evidence which the trunk could yield, unless there were secreted within it some known personal property of Tyrrel's; in which case the aspiring Falkland had committed a larceny as well as a murder. Caleb, meantime, wastes no labour in hypothetic reasonings, but resolves to have ocular satisfaction in the matter. An opportunity offers: an alarm of fire is given in the day-time; and, whilst Mr. Falkland, with his people, is employed on the lawn manning the buckets, Caleb skulks off to the trunk,— feeling, probably, that his first duty was to himself, by extinguishing the burning fire of curiosity in his own heart, after which there might be time enough for his second duty, of assisting to extinguish the fire in his master's mansion. Falkland, however, misses the absentee. To pursue him, to collar him, and, we may hope, to kick him, are the work of a moment. Had Caleb found time for accomplishing his inquest? I really forget; but no matter. Either now, or at some luckier hour, he does so: he becomes master of Falkland's secret; consequently, as both fancy, of Falkland's life. At this point commences a flight of Caleb, and a chasing of Falkland in order to watch his motions, which forms the most spirited part of the story. Mr. Godwin tells us that he derived this situation, the continual flight and continual pursuit, from a South American tradition of some Spanish vengeance. Always the Spaniard was riding in to any given
[Page 331]
town on the road when his destined victim was riding out at the other end; so that the relations of “whereabouts” were never for a moment lost: the trail was perfect. Now, this might be possible in certain countries; but in England!— heavens! could not Caleb double upon his master, or dodge round a gate (like Falkland when he murdered Mr. Tyrrel), or take a headlong plunge into London, where the scent might have lain cold for forty years? 4 Other accidents by thousands would interrupt the chase. On the hundredth day, for instance, after the flying parties had become well known on the road, Mr. Falkland would drive furiously up to some King's Head or White Lion, putting his one question to the waiter, “Where's Caleb?” And the waiter would reply, “Where's Mr. Caleb, did you say, sir? Why, he went off at five by the Highflyer, booked inside the whole way to Doncaster; and Mr. Caleb is now, sir, precisely forty-five miles ahead.” Then would Falkland furiously demand “four horses on”; and then would the waiter plead a contested election in excuse for having no horses at all. Really, for dramatic effect, it is a pity that the tale were not translated forward to the days of railroads. Sublime would look the fiery pursuit, and the panic-stricken flight, when racing from Fleetwood to Liverpool, to Birmingham, to London; then smoking along the Great Western, where Mr. Caleb's forty-five miles ahead would avail him little, to Bristol, to Exeter; thence doubling back upon London, like the steam leg in Mr. H. G. Bell's admirable story. 5
But, after all, what was the object, and what the result, of all this racing? Once I saw two young men facing each other upon a high road, but at a furlong's distance, and playing upon the foolish terrors of a young woman, by continually heading her back from one to the other as alternately she approached towards either. Signals of some dreadful danger in the north being made by the northern man, back the poor girl flew towards the southern; who, in his turn,
[Page 332]
threw out pantomimic warnings of an equal danger to the south. And thus, like a tennis-ball, the simple creature kept rebounding from one to the other, until she could move no farther, through sheer fatigue; and then first the question occurred to her—What was it that she had been running from? The same question seems to have struck at last upon the obtuse mind of Mr. Caleb: it was quite as easy to play the part of hunter as that of hunted game, and likely to be cheaper. He turns therefore sharp round upon his master, who in his turn is disposed to fly, when suddenly the sport is brought to a dead lock by a constable, who tells the murdering squire that he is “wanted.” Caleb has lodged informations; all parties meet for a final “reunion” before the magistrate; Mr. Falkland, oddly enough, regards himself in the light of an ill-used man,—which theory of the case, even more oddly, seems to be adopted by Mr. Gilfillan; but, for all that he can say, Mr. Falkland is fully committed, and, as laws were made for every degree, it is plain that Mr. Falkland (however much of a pattern man) is in some danger of swinging. But this catastrophe is intercepted. A novelist may raise his hero to the peerage; he may even confer the Garter upon him; but it shocks against usage and courtesy that he should hang him. The circulating libraries would rise in mutiny if he did. And therefore it is satisfactory to believe (for all along I speak from memory) that Mr. Falkland reprieves himself from the gallows by dying of exhaustion from his travels.
Such is the fable of Caleb Williams ; upon which, by the way, is built, I think, Colman's drama of The Iron Chest. 6 I have thought it worth the trouble (whether for the reader or for myself) of a flying abstract; and chiefly with a view to the strange collision of opinions as to the merit of the work, —some, as I have said, exalting it to the highest class of novels, others depressing it below the lowest of those which achieve any notoriety. They who vote against it are in a large majority. The Germans, whose literature offers a free port to all the eccentricities of the earth, have never welcomed Caleb Williams . Chenier, the ruling littérateur of Paris in
[Page 333]
the days of Napoleon, when reviewing the literature of his own day, dismisses Caleb contemptuously as coarse and vulgar. It is not therefore to the German taste; it is not to the French. And, as to our own country, Mr. Gilfillan is undoubtedly wrong in supposing that it “is in every circulating library, and needs more frequently than almost any novel to be replaced.” If this were so, in presence of the immortal novels which for one hundred and fifty years have been gathering into the garners of our English literature, I should look next to see the race of men returning from venison and wheat to their primitive diet of acorns. But I believe that the number of editions yet published would at once discredit this account of the book's popularity. Neither is it likely, a priori , that such a popularity could arise even for a moment. The interest from secret and vindictive murder, though coarse, is undoubtedly deep. What would make us thrill in real life,—the case, for instance, of a neighbour lying under the suspicion of such a murder,— would make us thrill in a novel. But then it must be managed with art, and covered with mystery. For a long time it must continue doubtful both as to the fact, and the circumstances, and the motive. Whereas, in the case of Mr. Falkland, there is little mystery of any kind: not much, and only for a short time, to Caleb; and none at all to the reader, who could have relieved the curiosity of Mr. Caleb from the first, if he were placed in communication with him.
Differing so much from Mr. Gilfillan as to the effectiveness of the novel, I am only the more impressed with the eloquent images and expressions by which he has conveyed his own sense of its power. Power there must be, though many of us cannot discern it, to react upon us through impressions so powerful in other minds. Some of Mr. Gilfillan's impressions, as they are clothed in striking images by himself, I will here quote:—“His [Godwin's] heat is never that of the sun with all his beams around him; but of the round rayless orb seen shining from the summit of Mont Blanc, still and stripped in the black ether. He has more passion than imagination. And even his passion he has learned more by sympathy than by personal feeling. And amid his most tempestuous scenes you see the calm
[Page 334]
and stern eye of philosophic analysis looking on. His imagery is not copious, nor always original; but its sparseness is its strength: the flash comes sudden as the lightning. No preparatory flourish or preliminary sound; no sheets of useless splendour: each figure is a fork of fire, which strikes, and needs no second blow. Nay, often his images are singularly commonplace, and you wonder how they move you so, till you resolve this into the power of the hand which jaculates its own energy in them .” And again, “His novels resemble the paintings of John Martin, being a gallery—nay, a world—in themselves. In both monotony and mannerism are incessant; but the monotony is that of the sounding deep, the mannerism that of the thunderbolts of heaven. Martin might append to his one continual flash of lightning,—which is present in all his pictures, now to reveal a deluge, now to garland the brow of a fiend, now to rend the veil of a temple, and now to guide the invaders through the breach of a city,—the words, John Martin his mark . Godwin's novels are not less terribly distinguished to those who understand their cipher,—the deep scar of misery branded upon the brow of the ‘victim of society.’” And as to the earliest of these novels, the Caleb Williams , he says, “There is about it a stronger suction and swell of interest than in any novel we know, with the exception of one or two of Sir Walter's. You are in it ere you are aware. You put your hand playfully into a child's, and are surprised to find it held in the grasp of a giant. It becomes a fascination. Struggle you may, and kick, but he holds you by his glittering eye.” In reference, again, to St. Leon , the next most popular of Godwin's novels, there is a splendid passage upon the glory and pretensions of the ancient alchemist in the infancy of scientific chemistry. It rescues the character from vulgarity, and displays it idealised, as sometimes, perhaps, it must have been. I am sorry that it is too long for extracting; but, in compensation to the reader, I quote two very picturesque sentences, describing what, to Mr. Gilfillan, appears the quality of Godwin's style:—“It is a smooth succession of short and simple sentences, each clear as crystal, and none ever distracting the attention from the subject to its own construction. It
[Page 335]
is a style in which you cannot explain how the total effect rises out of the individual parts, and which is forgotten as entirely during perusal as is the pane of glass through which you gaze at a comet or a star.” Elsewhere, and limiting his remark to the style of the Caleb Williams , he says finely:—“The writing, though far from elegant or finished, has in parts the rude power of those sentences which criminals, martyrs, and maniacs scrawl upon their walls or windows in the eloquence of desperation.” 7
These things perplex me. The possibility that any individual in the minority can have regarded Godwin with such an eye seems to argue that we of the majority must be wrong. Deep impressions seem to justify themselves. We may have failed to perceive things which are in the object; but it is not so easy for others to perceive things which are not ,—or, at least, hardly in a case like this, where (though a minority) these “others” still exist in number sufficient to check and to confirm each other. On the other hand, Godwin's name seems sinking out of remembrance; and he is remembered less by the novels that succeeded, or by the philosophy that he abjured, than as the man that had Mary Wollstonecraft for his wife, Mrs. Shelley for his daughter, and the immortal Shelley as his son-in-law.
John Foster [1770–1843] Mr. Gilfillan perhaps overrates the power of this essayist, and the hold which he has upon the public mind. 8 It is
[Page 336]
singular, meantime, that, whatever might be its degree, much or little, originally his influence was due to an accident of position which in some countries would have tended to destroy it. He was a Dissenter. Now, in England, that sometimes operates as an advantage. To dissent from the established form of religion, which could not affect the value of a writer's speculations, may easily become the means of diffusing their reputation, as well as of facilitating their introduction. And in the following way:—The great mass of the reading population are absolutely indifferent to such deflexions from the national standard. The man, suppose, is a Baptist: but to be a Baptist is still to be a Protestant, and a Protestant agreeing with his countrymen in everything essential to purity of life and faith. So far there is the most entire neutrality in the public mind, and readiness to receive any impression which the man's powers enable him to make. There is, indeed, so absolute a carelessness for all inoperative shades of religious difference lurking in the background that even the ostentatiously liberal hardly feel it a case for parading their liberality. But, on the other hand, his own sectarian party are as energetic to push him forward as all others are passive. They favour him as a brother, and also as one whose credit will react upon their common sect. And this favour, pressing like a wedge upon the unresisting neutrality of the public, soon succeeds in gaining for any able writer among sectarians an exaggerated reputation. Nobody is against him; and a small section acts for him in a spirit of resolute partisanship.
To this accident of social position, and to his connexion with the Eclectic Review , Mr. Foster owed his first advantageous presentation before the public. 9 The misfortune of many an able writer is, not that he is rejected by the world, but that virtually he is never brought conspicuously before them: he is not dismissed unfavourably, but he is never effectually
[Page 337]
introduced. From this calamity at the outset Foster was saved by his party. I happened myself to be in Bristol at the moment when his four essays were first issuing from the press 10 ; and everywhere I heard so pointed an account of the expectations connected with Foster by his religious party that I made it a duty to read his book without delay. It is a distant incident to look back upon,—gone by for more than thirty years; but I remember my first impressions; which were these:—1 st , That the novelty or weight of the thinking was hardly sufficient to account for the sudden popularity without some extra influence at work; and, 2 dly , That the contrast was remarkable between the uncoloured style of his general diction and the brilliant felicity of occasional images embroidered upon the sober ground of his text. The splendour did not seem spontaneous, or growing up as part of the texture within the loom; it was intermitting, and seemed as extraneous to the substance as the flowers which are chalked for an evening upon the floors of ballrooms.
Subsequently I remarked two other features of difference in his manner, neither of which has been overlooked by Mr. Gilfillan: viz., 1 st , The unsocial gloom of his eye, travelling over all things with dissatisfaction; 2 d (which in our days seemed unaccountable), the remarkable limitation of his knowledge. You might suppose the man, equally by his ignorance of passing things and by his ungenial moroseness, to be a specimen newly turned out from the silent cloisters of La Trappe. A monk he seemed by the repulsion of his cloistral feelings, and a monk by the superannuation of his knowledge. Both peculiarities he drew in part from that same sectarian position, operating for evil, to which, in another direction as a conspicuous advantage, he had been indebted for his favourable public introduction. It is not that Foster was generally misanthropic; neither was he, as a sectarian, “a good hater” at any special angle: that is, he was not a zealous hater; but, by temperament, and in some measure by situation, as one pledged to a polemic attitude by his sect, he was a general disliker and a general suspecter. His confidence in human nature was small; for he saw the
[Page 338]
clay of the composite statue, but not its gold; and apparently his satisfaction with himself was not much greater. Inexhaustible was his jealousy; and for that reason his philanthropy was everywhere checked by frost and wintry chills. This blight of asceticism in his nature is not of a kind to be briefly illustrated, for it lies diffused through the texture of his writings. But of his other monkish characteristic,—his abstraction from the movement and life of his own age,—I may give this instance, which I observed by accident about a year since in some late edition of his Essays. He was speaking of the term Radical as used to designate a large political party; but so slightly was he acquainted with the history of that party, so little had he watched the growth of this important interest in our political system, that he supposes the term “Radical” to express a mere scoff or movement of irony from the antagonists of that party. It stands, as he fancies, upon the same footing as “Puritan,” “Round-head,” &c., amongst our fathers, or “Swaddler,” applied to the Evangelicals amongst ourselves. This may seem a trifle; nor do I mention the mistake for any evil which it can lead to, but for the dreamy inattention which it argues to what was most important in the agitations around him. It may cause nothing; but how much does it presume? Could a man interested in the motion of human principles or the revolutions of his own country have failed to notice the rise of a new party which loudly proclaimed its own mission and purposes in the very name which it assumed! The term “Radical” was used elliptically. Mr. Hunt, 11 and all about him, constantly gave out that they were reformers who went to the root—radical reformers; whilst all previous political parties they held to be merely masquerading as reformers, or, at least, wanting in the determination to go deep enough. The party-name “Radical” was no insult of enemies: it was a cognisance self-adopted by the party which it designates, and worn with pride; and, whatever might be the degree of personal weight belonging to Mr. Hunt, no man who saw into the composition of society amongst ourselves could doubt that his principles were destined to a most extensive diffusion,—were sure of a permanent settlement
[Page 339]
amongst the great party interests, and therefore sure of disturbing thenceforwards for ever the previous equilibrium of forces in our English social system. To mistake the origin or history of a word is nothing; but to mistake it when that history of a word ran along with the history of a thing destined to change all the aspects of our English present and future implies a sleep of Epimenides amongst the shocks which are unsettling the realities of earth.
The four original essays by which Foster was first known to the public are those by which he is still best known. It cannot be said of them that they have any practical character calculated to serve the uses of life. They terminate in speculations that apply themselves little enough to any business of the world. Whether a man should write memoirs of himself cannot have any personal interest for one reader in a myriad. And two of the essays have even a misleading tendency. That upon “Decision of Character” places a very exaggerated valuation upon one quality of human temperament, which is neither rare nor at all necessarily allied with the most elevated features of moral grandeur. Coleridge, because he had no business talents himself, admired them preposterously in others, or fancied them vast when they existed only in a slight degree. And, upon the same principle, I suspect that Mr. Foster rated so highly the quality of decision in matters of action chiefly because he wanted it himself. Obstinacy is a gift more extensively sown than Foster was willing to admit. And his scale of appreciation, if it were practically applied to the men of History, would lead to judgments immoderately perverse. Milton would rank far below Luther. In reality, as Mr. Gilfillan justly remarks, “decision of character is not strictly a moral power; and it is extremely dangerous to pay that homage to any intellectual quality which is sacred to virtue alone.” But even this estimate must often tend to exaggeration; for the most inexorable decision is much more closely connected with bodily differences of temperament than with any superiority of mind. It rests too much upon a physical basis; and of all qualities whatever it is the most liable to vicious varieties of degeneration. The worst result from this essay is not merely speculative: it trains the
[Page 340]
feelings to false admirations, and upon a path which is the more dangerous as the besetting temptation of our English life lies already towards an estimate much too high of all qualities bearing upon the active and the practical. We need no spur in that direction.
The essay upon the use of technically religious language seems even worse by its tendency, although the necessities of the subject will for ever neutralise Foster's advice. Mr. Gilfillan is, in this instance, disposed to defend him: “Foster does not ridicule the use, but the abuse, of technical language, as applied to divine things, and purposes merely as an experiment to translate it in accommodation to fastidious tastes.” Safely, however, it may be assumed that in all such cases the fastidious taste is but another aspect of hatred to religious themes,—a hatred which there is neither justice nor use in attempting to propitiate. Cant words ought certainly to be proscribed, as degrading to the majesty of religion: the word “prayerful,” for instance, so commonly used of late years, seems objectionable; and such words as “savoury,” which is one of those cited by Foster himself, are absolutely abominable, when applied to spiritual or intellectual objects. It is not fastidiousness, but manliness and good feeling, which are outraged by such vulgarities. On the other hand, the word “grace” expresses an idea so exclusively belonging to Christianity, and so indispensable to the wholeness of its philosophy, that any attempt to seek for equivalent terms of mere human growth, or amongst the vocabularies of mere worldly usage, must terminate in conscious failure, or else in utter self-delusion. Christianity, having introduced many ideas that are absolutely new, such as faith, charity, holiness , the nature of God , of human frailty , &c., is as much entitled (nay, as much obliged and pledged) to peculiar language and terminology as Chemistry. Let a man try if he can find a word in the market-place fitted to be the substitute for the word gas or alkali . The danger, in fact, lies exactly in the opposite direction to that indicated by Foster. No fear that men of elegant taste should be revolted by the use of what, after all, is Scriptural language; for it is plain that he who could be so revolted wants nothing seriously with religion. But there is great fear that any
[Page 341]
general disposition to angle for readers of extra refinement, or to court the effeminately fastidious, by sacrificing the majestic simplicities of Scriptural diction, would and must end in a ruinous dilution of religious truths. Along with the characteristic language of Christian philosophy would exhale its characteristic doctrines.
William Hazlitt [1778–1830] This man, who would have drawn in the scales against a select vestry of Fosters, is for the present deeper in the world's oblivion than the man with whom I here connect his name. That seems puzzling. For, if Hazlitt were misanthropic, so was Foster; both as writers were splenetic and more than peevish; but Hazlitt requited his reader for the pain of travelling through so gloomy an atmosphere by the rich vegetation which his teeming intellect threw up as it moved along. The soil in his brain was of a volcanic fertility; whereas in Foster, as in some tenacious clay, if the life were deep, it was slow and sullen in its throes. The reason for at all speaking of them in connexion is that both were Essayists,—neither in fact writing anything of note except essays, moral or critical,—and both were bred at the feet of Dissenters. But how different were the results from that connexion! Foster turned it to a blessing, winning the jewel that is most of all to be coveted,—peace and the fallentis semita vitœ . Hazlitt, on the other hand, sailed wilfully away from this sheltering harbour of his father's profession,—for sheltering it might have proved to him , and did prove to his youth,— only to toss ever afterwards as a drifting wreck at the mercy of storms. Hazlitt was not one of those who could have illustrated the benefits of a connexion with a sect,— i.e. with a small confederation hostile by position to a larger; for the hostility from without, in order to react, presumes a concord from within. Nor does his case impeach the correctness of what I have said on that subject in speaking of Foster. He owed no introduction to the Dissenters; but it was because he would owe none. The Ishmaelite, whose hand is against
[Page 342]
every man, yet smiles at the approach of a brother, and gives the salutation of “Peace be with you!” to the tribe of his father. But Hazlitt smiled upon no man, nor exchanged tokens of peace with the nearest of fraternities. Wieland, in his Oberon , says of a benign patriarch—
“ His eye a smile on all creation beamed.”
Travestied as to one word, the line would have described Hazlitt—
His eye a scowl on all creation beamed.
This inveterate misanthropy was constitutional. Exasperated it certainly had been by accidents of life, by disappointments, by mortifications, by insults, and still more by having wilfully placed himself in collision from the first with all the interests that were in the sunshine of this world, and with all the persons that were then powerful in England; but my impression was, if I had a right to have any impression with regard to one whom I knew so slightly, that no change of position or of fortunes could have brought Hazlitt into reconciliation with the fashion of this world, or of this England, or “this now.” It seemed to me that he hated those whom hollow custom obliged him to call his “friends” considerably more than those whom notorious differences of opinion entitled him to rank as his enemies. At least within the ring of politics this was so. Between those particular Whigs whom Literature had connected him with and the whole gang of us Conservatives he showed the same difference in his mode of fencing and parrying, and even in his style of civilities, as between the domestic traitor, hiding a stiletto among his robes of peace, and the bold enemy who sends a trumpet before him, and rides up sword-in-hand against your gates. Whatever is —so much I conceive to have been a fundamental lemma for Hazlitt— is wrong . So much he thought it safe to postulate. How it was wrong might require an impracticable investigation: you might fail for a century to discover; but that it was wrong he nailed down as a point of faith that could stand out against all counter-presumptions from argument or counter-evidences from experience. A friend of his it was,—a friend wishing to love him, and admiring him
[Page 343]
almost to extravagance, 12 —who told me, in illustration of the dark sinister gloom which sate for ever upon Hazlitt's countenance and gestures, that involuntarily, when Hazlitt put his hand within his waistcoat (as a mere unconscious trick of habit), he himself felt a sudden recoil of fear, as from one who was searching for a hidden dagger. Like “a Moor of Malabar,” as described in the Faery Queen , at intervals Hazlitt threw up his angry eyes and dark locks, as if wishing to affront the sun, or to search the air for hostility. And the same friend, on another occasion, described the sort of feudal fidelity to his belligerent duties which in company seemed to animate Hazlitt, as though he were mounting guard on all the citadels of malignity, under some sacramentum militare , by the following trait,—that, if it happened to Hazlitt to be called out of the room, or to be withdrawn for a moment from the current of the general conversation by a fit of abstraction, or by a private whisper to himself from some person sitting at his elbow, always, on resuming his place as a party to what might be called the public business of the company, he looked round him with a mixed air of suspicion and defiance, such as seemed to challenge everybody by some stern adjuration into revealing whether, during his own absence or inattention, anything had been said demanding condign punishment at his hands. “Has any man uttered or presumed to insinuate,” he seemed to insist upon knowing, “during this interregnum , things that I ought to proceed against as treasonable to the interests which I defend?” He had the unresting irritability of Rousseau, but in a nobler shape; for Rousseau transfigured every possible act or design of his acquaintances into some personal relation to himself. The vile act was obviously meant, as a child could understand, to injure the person of Rousseau, or his interests, or his reputation. It was meant to wound his feelings, or to misrepresent his acts calumniously, or secretly to supplant his footing. But, on the contrary, Hazlitt viewed all personal affronts or casual slights towards himself as tending to something more general, and masquing, under a pretended horror of Hazlitt the author, a real hatred, deeper
[Page 344]
than it was always safe to avow, for those social interests which he was reputed to defend. It was not Hazlitt whom the wretches struck at; no, no; it was democracy, or it was freedom, or it was Napoleon, whose shadow they saw in the rear of Hazlitt,—and Napoleon not for anything in him that might be really bad, but in revenge of that consuming wrath against the thrones of Christendom for which, said Hazlitt, let us glorify his name eternally.
Yet Hazlitt, like other men, and perhaps with more bitterness than other men, sought for love and for intervals of rest, in which all anger might sleep, and enmity might be laid aside like a travelling dress after tumultuous journeys:—
“Though the sea-horse on the ocean
   Own no dear domestic cave,
Yet he slumbers without motion
   On the still and halcyon wave.
If, on windy days, the raven
   Gambol like a dancing skiff,
Not the less he loves his haven
   On the bosom of a cliff.
If almost with eagle pinion
   O'er the Alps the chamois roam,
Yet he has some small dominion,
   Which, no doubt, he calls his home.”
But Hazlitt, restless as the sea-horse, as the raven, as the chamois, found not their respites from storm; he sought, but sought in vain. And for him the closing stanza of that little poem remained true to his dying hour. In the person of the “Wandering Jew,” he might complain,—
“Day and night my toils redouble:
   Never nearer to the goal,
Night and day I feel the trouble
   Of the wanderer in my soul.”
Domicile he had not round whose hearth his affections might gather; rest he had not for the sole of his burning foot. One chance of regaining some peace,—or a chance, as he trusted, for a time,—was torn from him at the moment of gathering its blossoms. He had been divorced from his wife, —not by the law of England, which would have argued
[Page 345]
criminality in her , but by Scottish law, satisfied with some proof of frailty in himself. Subsequently he became deeply fascinated by a young woman in no very elevated rank,— for she held some domestic office of superintendence in a boarding-house kept by her father,—but of interesting person, and endowed with strong intellectual sensibilities. She had encouraged Hazlitt; had gratified him by reading his works with intelligent sympathy; and, under what form of duplicity it is hard to say, had partly engaged her faith to Hazlitt as his future wife, whilst secretly she was holding a correspondence, too tender to be misinterpreted, with a gentleman resident in the same establishment. Suspicions were put aside for a time; but they returned, and gathered too thickly for Hazlitt's penetration to cheat itself any longer. Once and for ever he resolved to satisfy himself. On a Sunday, fatal to him and his farewell hopes of domestic happiness, he had reason to believe that she, whom he now loved to excess, had made some appointment out-of-doors with his rival. It was in London; and through the crowds of London Hazlitt followed her steps to the rendezvous. Fancying herself lost in the multitude that streamed through Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, the treacherous young woman met her more favoured lover without alarm, and betrayed, too clearly for any further deception, the state of her affections by the tenderness of her manner. There went out the last light that threw a guiding ray over the storm-vexed course of Hazlitt. He was too much in earnest, and he had witnessed too much to be deceived or appeased. “I whistled her down the wind,” was his own account of the catastrophe; but, in doing so, he had torn his own heart-strings, entangled with her “jesses.” Neither did he, as others would have done, seek to disguise his misfortune. On the contrary, he cared not for the ridicule attached to such a situation amongst the unfeeling: the wrench within had been too profound to leave room for sensibility to the sneers outside. A fast friend of his at that time, and one who never ceased to be his apologist, described him to me as having become absolutely maniacal during the first pressure of this affliction. He went about proclaiming the case, and insisting on its details, to every stranger that would listen. He even published
[Page 346]
the whole story to the world in his Modern Pygmalion. 13 And people generally, who could not be aware of his feelings, or the way in which this treachery acted upon his mind as a ratification of all other treacheries and wrongs that he had suffered through life, laughed at him, or expressed disgust for him as too coarsely indelicate in making such disclosures. But there was no indelicacy in such an act of confidence,—growing, as it did, out of his lacerated heart. It was an explosion of frenzy. He threw out his clamorous anguish to the clouds, and to the winds, and to the air, caring not who might listen, who might sympathise, or who might sneer. Pity was no demand of his; laughter was no wrong: the sole necessity for him was to empty his overburdened spirit.
After this desolating experience, the exasperation of Hazlitt's political temper grew fiercer, darker, steadier. His Life of Napoleon was prosecuted subsequently to this, 14 and perhaps under this remembrance, as a reservoir that might receive all the vast overflows of his wrath, much of which was not merely political, or in a spirit of bacchanalian partisanship, but was even morbidly anti-social. He hated, with all his heart, every institution of man, and all his pretensions. He loathed his own relation to the human race.
It was but on a few occasions that I ever met Mr. Hazlitt myself; and those occasions, or all but one, were some time subsequent to the case of female treachery which I have here described. 15 Twice, I think, or it might be three times, we walked for a few miles together: it was in London, late at night, and after leaving a party. Though depressed by the
[Page 347]
spectacle of a mind always in agitation from the gloomier passions, I was yet amused by the pertinacity with which he clung, through bad reasons or no reasons, to any public slander floating against men in power or in the highest rank. No feather, or dowl of a feather, but was heavy enough for him . Amongst other instances of this willingness to be deluded by rumours, if they took a direction favourable to his own bias, Hazlitt had adopted the whole strength of popular hatred which for many years ran violently against the King of Hanover, at that time Duke of Cumberland. A dark calumny had arisen against this prince amongst the populace of London, as though he had been accessory to the death of his valet. This valet (Sellis) had in fact attempted to murder the prince; and all that can be said in palliation of his act is that he believed himself to have sustained, in the person of his beautiful wife, the heaviest dishonour incident to man. How that matter stood I pretend not to know; the attempt at murder was baffled, and the valet then destroyed himself with a razor. All this had been regularly sifted by a coroner's inquest; and I remarked to Hazlitt that the witnesses seemed to have been called indifferently from all quarters likely to have known the facts,—so that, if this inquest had failed to elicit the truth, we might with equal reason presume as much of all other inquests. From the verdict of a jury, except in very peculiar cases, no candid and temperate man will allow himself to believe any appeal sustainable; for, having the witnesses before them face to face, and hearing the whole of the evidence, a jury have always some means of forming a judgment which cannot be open to him who depends upon an abridged report. But on this subject Hazlitt would hear no reason. He said—“No; all the princely houses of Europe have the instinct of murder running in their blood;—they cherish it through their privilege of making war, which being wholesale murder, once having reconciled themselves to that , they think of retail murder, committed on you or me, as of no crime at all.” Under this obstinate prejudice against the Duke, Hazlitt read everything that he did, or did not do, in a perverse spirit. And in one of these nightly walks he mentioned to me, as something quite worthy of a murderer,
[Page 348]
the following little trait of casuistry in the royal duke's distribution of courtesies. “I saw it myself,” said Hazlitt; “so no coroner's jury can put me down.” His Royal Highness had rooms in St. James's; and one day, as he was issuing from the palace into Pall-Mall, Hazlitt happened to be immediately behind him: he could therefore watch his motions along the whole line of his progress. It is the custom in England, wheresoever the persons of the royal family are familiar to the public eye, as at Windsor, &c., that all passengers in the streets, on seeing them, walk bareheaded, or make some signal of dutiful respect. On this occasion all the men who met the prince took off their hats, the prince acknowledging every such obeisance by a separate bow. Pall-Mall being finished, and its whole harvest of royal salutations gathered in, next the Duke came to Cockspur Street. But here, and taking a station close to the crossing, which daily he beautified and polished with his broom, stood a negro sweep. If human at all,—which some people doubted,—he was pretty nearly as abject a representative of our human family divine as can ever have existed. Still he was held to be a man by the law of the land; which would have hanged any person, gentle or simple, for cutting his throat. Law (it is certain) conceived him to be a man, however poor a one, though medicine, in an under-tone, muttered sometimes a demur to that opinion. But here the sweep was , whether man or beast, standing humbly in the path of royalty: vanish he would not; he was (as the Times says of the Corn League) “a great fact,” if rather a muddy one; and, though, by his own confession (repeated one thousand times a-day), both “a nigger” and a sweep, (“Remember poor nigger, your honour! remember poor sweep!”), yet the creature could take off his rag of a hat and earn the bow of a prince as well as any white native of St. James's. What was to be done? A great case of conscience was on the point of being raised in the person of a paralytic nigger; nay, possibly a state question,—Ought a son of England, 16 could a son of England, descend from his
[Page 349]
majestic pedestal to gild with the rays of his condescension such a grub, such a very doubtful grub, as this? Total Pall-Mall was sagacious of the coming crisis; judgment was going to be delivered; a precedent to be raised; and Pall-Mall stood still, with Hazlitt at its head, to learn the issue. How if the black should be a Jacobin, and (in the event of the duke's bowing) should have a bas-relief sculptured on his tomb exhibiting an English prince and a German king as two separate personages in the act of worshipping his broom? Luckily it was not the black's province to settle the case. The Duke of Cumberland, seeing no counsel at hand to argue either the pro or the contra , found himself obliged to settle the question de plano ; so, drawing out his purse, he kept his hat as rigidly settled on his head as William Penn and Mead did before the Recorder of London. 17 All Pall-Mall applauded: contradicente Gulielmo Hazlitt, and Hazlitt only. The black swore that the prince gave him half-a-crown; but whether he regarded this in the light of a godsend to his avarice or a shipwreck to his ambition—whether he was more thankful for the money gained, or angry for the honour lost—did not transpire. “No matter,” said Hazlitt; “the black might be a fool; but I insist upon it that he was entitled to the bow, since all Pall-Mall had it before him, and that it was unprincely to refuse it.” Either as a black or as a scavenger, Hazlitt held him “qualified” for sustaining a royal bow. As a black, was he not a specimen (if rather a damaged one) of the homo sapiens described by Linnæus? As a sweep, in possession (by whatever title) of a lucrative crossing, had he not a kind of estate in London?
[Page 350]
Was he not, said Hazlitt, a fellow-subject, capable of committing treason, and paying taxes into the treasury? Not perhaps in any direct shape, but indirect taxes most certainly on his tobacco, and even on his broom!
These things could not be denied. But still, when my turn came for speaking, I confessed frankly that (politics apart) my feeling in the case went along with the Duke's. The bow would not be so useful to the black as the half-crown: he could not possibly have both; for how could any man make a bow to a beggar when in the act of giving him half-a-crown? Then, on the other hand, this bow, so useless to the sweep, and (to speak by a vulgar adage) as superfluous as a side-pocket to a cow, would react upon the other bows distributed along the line of Pall-Mall, so as to neutralise them one and all. No honour could continue such in which a paralytic negro sweep was associated. This distinction, however, occurred to me,—that, if, instead of a prince and a subject, the royal dispenser of bows had been a king, he ought not to have excluded the black from participation; because, as the common father of his people, he ought not to know of any difference amongst those who are equally his children. And, in illustration of that opinion, I sketched a little scene which I had myself witnessed, and with great pleasure, upon occasion of a visit made to Drury Lane by George IV when Regent. At another time I may tell it to the reader. Hazlitt, however, listened fretfully to me when praising the deportment and gracious gestures of one conservative leader, though he had compelled me to hear the most disadvantageous comments on another.
As a lecturer, I do not know what Hazlitt was, having never had an opportunity of hearing him. Some qualities in his style of composition were calculated to assist the purposes of a lecturer, who must produce an effect oftentimes by independent sentences and paragraphs; who must glitter and surprise; who must turn round within the narrowest compass, and cannot rely upon any sort of attention that would cost an effort. 18 Mr. Gilfillan says that “he proved more popular than was expected by those who knew his
[Page 351]
uncompromising scorn of all those tricks and petty artifices which are frequently employed to pump up applause. His manner was somewhat abrupt and monotonous, but earnest and energetic.” At the same time Mr. Gilfillan takes an occasion to express some opinions, which appear very just, upon the unfitness (generally speaking) of men whom he describes as “fiercely inspired” for this mode of display. The truth is that all genius implies originality, and sometimes uncontrollable singularity, in the habits of thinking, and in the modes of viewing as well as of estimating objects, whereas a miscellaneous audience is best conciliated by that sort of talent which reflects the average mind, which is not overweighted in any one direction, is not tempted into any extreme, and is able to preserve a steady, rope-dancer's equilibrium of posture upon themes where a man of genius is most apt to lose it.
It would be interesting to have a full and accurate list of Hazlitt's works, including, of course, his contributions to journals and encyclopædias. 19 These last, as shorter and oftener springing from an impromptu effort, are more likely than his regular books to have been written with a pleasurable enthusiasm; and the writer's proportion of pleasure in such cases very often becomes the regulating law for his reader's. Amongst the philosophical works of Hazlitt, I do not observe that Mr. Gilfillan is aware of two that are likely to be specially interesting. One is an examination of David Hartley, at least as to his law of association. Thirty years ago I looked into it slightly; but my reverence for Hartley offended me with its tone; and afterwards, hearing that Coleridge challenged for his own most of what was important in the thoughts, I lost all interest in the essay. Hazlitt
[Page 352]
unavoidably, having heard Coleridge talk on this theme, must have approached it with a mind largely preoccupied as regarded the weak points in Hartley, and the particular tactics for assailing them. But still the great talents for speculative research which Hazlitt had from nature, without having given to them the benefit of much culture or much exercise, would justify our attentive examination of the work. It forms part of the volume which contains the Essay on Human Action ; which volume, by the way, Mr. Gilfillan supposes to have won the special applause of Sir James Mackintosh, then in Bengal. This, if accurately stated, is creditable to Sir James's generosity; for in this particular volume it is that Hazlitt makes a pointed assault, in sneering terms, and very unnecessarily, upon Sir James as a lecturer at Lincoln's Inn. 20
The other little work unnoticed by Mr. Gilfillan is an examination (but under what title I cannot say) of Lindley Murray's English Grammar. 21 This may seem, by its subject, a trifle; yet Hazlitt could hardly have had a motive for such an effort but in some philosophic perception of the ignorance betrayed by many grammars of our language, and continually by that of Lindley Murray,—which Lindley, by the way, though resident in England, was an American. There is great room for a useful display of philosophic subtlety in an English grammar, even though meant for schools. Hazlitt could not but have furnished something of value towards
[Page 353]
such a display. And, if (as I was once told) his book was suppressed, I imagine that this suppression must have been purchased by some powerful publisher interested in keeping up the current reputation of Murray.
“Strange stories,” says Mr. Gilfillan, “are told about his [Hazlitt's] latter days, and his deathbed.” I know not whether I properly understand Mr. Gilfillan. The stories which I myself have happened to hear were not so much “strange,” since they arose naturally enough out of pecuniary embarrassments, as they were afflicting in the turn they took. Dramatically viewed, if a man were speaking of things so far removed from our own times and interests as to excuse that sort of language, the circumstances of Hazlitt's last hours might rivet the gaze of a critic as fitted harmoniously, with almost scenic art, to the whole tenor of his life,—fitted equally to rouse his wrath, to deepen his dejection, and in the hour of death to justify his misanthropy. But I have no wish to utter a word on things which I know only at second-hand, and cannot speak upon without risk of misstating facts or doing injustice to persons. I prefer closing this section with the words of Mr. Gilfillan:—
“Well says Bulwer that, of all the mental wrecks which have occurred in our era, this was the most melancholy. Others may have been as unhappy in their domestic circumstances, and gone down steeper places of dissipation than he; but they had meanwhile the breath of popularity, if not of wealth and station, to give them a certain solace.” What had Hazlitt of this nature? Mr. Gilfillan answers,— “Absolutely nothing to support and cheer him. With no hope, no fortune, no status in society, no certain popularity as a writer, no domestic peace, little sympathy from kindred spirits, little support from his political party, no moral management, no definite belief,—with great powers and great passions within, and with a host of powerful enemies without,—it was his to enact one of the saddest tragedies on which the sun ever shone. Such is a faithful portraiture of an extraordinary man, whose restless intellect and stormy passions have now, for fifteen years, found that repose in the grave which was denied them above it.” Mr. Gilfillan concludes with expressing his conviction, in which
[Page 354]
I desire to concur, that both enemies and friends will now join in admiration for the man. “Both will readily concede now that a subtle thinker, an eloquent writer, a lover of beauty and poetry, and man and truth, one of the best of critics, and not the worst of men, expired in William Hazlitt.” Requiescat in pace !
Percy Bysshe Shelley [1792–1822] There is no writer named amongst men of whom so much as of Percy Bysshe Shelley it is difficult for a conscientious critic to speak with the profound respect, on the one hand, due to his exalted powers, and yet without offence, on the other, to feelings the most sacred which too memorably he outraged. The indignation which this powerful young writer provoked had its root in no personal feelings,—those might have been conciliated; in no worldly feelings,—those would have proved transitory; but in feelings the holiest which brood over human interests and which guard the sanctuary of religious truth. Consequently,—which is a melancholy thought for any friend of Shelley's,—the indignation is likely to be co-extensive and co-enduring with the writings that provoked it. That bitterness of scorn and defiance which still burns against his name in the most extensively meditative section of English society—viz. the religious section—is not of a nature to be propitiated. Selfish interests, being wounded, might be compensated; merely human interests might be soothed; but interests that transcend all human valuation, being so insulted, must upon principle reject all human ransom or conditions of human compromise. Less than penitential recantation could not be accepted; and that is now impossible. “Will ye transact 22 with God?”
[Page 355]
is the indignant language of Milton in a case of that nature. And in this case the language of many pious men said aloud—“It is for God to forgive; but we, His servants, are bound to recollect that this young man offered to Christ and to Christianity the deepest insult which ear has heard or which it has entered into the heart of man to conceive.” Others, as in Germany, had charged Christ with committing suicide, on the principle that he who tempts or solicits death by doctrines fitted to provoke that result is virtually the causer of his own destruction. But in this sense every man commits suicide who will not betray an interest confided to his keeping under menaces of death: the martyr, who perishes for truth, when by deserting it he might live; the patriot, who perishes for his country, when by betraying it he might win riches and honour. And, were this even otherwise, the objection would be nothing to Christians, who, recognising the Deity in Christ, recognise his unlimited right over life. Some, again, had pointed their insults at a part more vital in Christianity if it had happened to be as vulnerable as they fancied. The new doctrine, introduced by Christ, of forgiveness to those who injure or who hate us —on what footing was it placed? Once, at least in appearance, on the idea that by assisting or forgiving an enemy we should be eventually “heaping coals of fire upon his head.” Mr. Howdon, in a very clever book (“Rational Investigation of the Principles of Natural Philosophy”), calls this “a fiendish idea”: and I acknowledge that to myself, in one
[Page 356]
part of my boyhood, it did seem a refinement of malice. My subtilising habits, however, even in those days, soon suggested to me that this aggravation of guilt in the object of our forgiveness was not held out as the motive to the forgiveness, but simply as the result of it—an undesigned result; secondly, that perhaps no aggravation of his guilt was the point contemplated, but the salutary stinging into life of his remorse, hitherto sleeping; thirdly, that every doubtful or perplexing expression must be overruled and determined by the prevailing spirit of the system in which it stands. If Mr. Howdon's sense were the true one, then this passage would be in pointed hostility to every other part of the Christian ethics. 23
These were affronts to the Founder of Christianity, offered too much in the temper of malignity. But Shelley's was worse,—more bitter, and with less of countenance, even in show or shadow, from any fact, or insinuation of a fact, that Scripture suggests. In his “Queen Mab” he gives a dreadful portrait of God; and, that no question may arise of what God, he names him: it is Jehovah. He asserts his existence; he affirms him to be “an almighty God, and vengeful as
[Page 357]
almighty.” He goes on to describe him as the “omnipotent fiend,” who found “none but slaves” (Israel in Egypt, no doubt) to be “his tools,” and none but “a murderer” (Moses, I presume) “to be his accomplice in crime.” He introduces this dreadful Almighty as speaking, and as speaking thus—
“From an eternity of idleness
I, God, awoke; in seven days' toil made Earth
From nothing; rested; and created Man.”
But Man he hates, and he goes on to curse him; till, at the intercession of “the murderer,” who is electrified into pity for the human race by the very horror of the divine curses, God promises to send his Son,—only, however, for the benefit of a few. The Son appears: the poet tells us that
   “The Incarnate came; humbly he came,
Veiling his horrible Godhead in the shape
Of man, scorned by the world, his name unheard
Save by the rabble of his native town.”
The poet pursues this incarnate God as the teacher of men, —teaching “in semblance” justice, truth, and peace,—but underneath all this kindling “quenchless flames,” which eventually were destined
                                         “To satiate, with the blood
Of truth and freedom, his malignant soul.”
He follows him to his crucifixion, and describes him, whilst hanging on the cross, as shedding malice upon a reviler,— malice on the cross !
“A smile of godlike malice re-illumined
His fading lineaments”;
and his parting breath is uttered in a memorable curse.
This atrocious picture of the Deity in his dealings with man, both pre-Christian and post-Christian, is certainly placed in the mouth of the Wandering Jew; but the internal evidence, as well as collateral evidence from without, makes it clear that the Jew (whose version of scriptural records nobody in the poem disputes) here represents the person of the poet. Shelley had opened his career as an atheist, and as a proselytising atheist. But in those days he was a boy. At the date of “Queen Mab” he was a young man. And we
[Page 358]
now find him advanced from the station of an atheist to the more intellectual one of a believer in God and in the mission of Christ, but of one who fancies himself called upon to defy and to hate both, in so far as they have revealed their relations to man.
Mr. Gilfillan thinks that “ Shelley was far too harshly treated in his speculative boyhood ”; and it strikes him “ that, had pity and kind-hearted expostulations been tried instead of reproach and abrupt expulsion, they might have weaned him from the dry dugs of Atheism to the milky breast of the faith and ‘worship of sorrow,’ and the touching spectacle had been renewed of the demoniac sitting ‘clothed and in his right mind’ at the feet of Jesus .” I am not of that opinion; and it is an opinion which seems to question the sincerity of Shelley,—that quality which in him was deepest, so as to form the basis of his nature,—if we allow ourselves to think that by personal irritation he had been piqued into infidelity, or that by flattering conciliation he could have been bribed back into a profession of Christianity. Like a wild horse of the Pampas, he would have thrown up his heels, and whinnied his disdain of any man coming to catch him with a bribe of oats. Once having scented the gales of what he thought perfect freedom, he had a constant vision of a manger and a halter in the rear of all such caressing tempters from the lawless desert. His feud with Christianity was a craze derived from some early wrench of his understanding, and made obstinate to the degree in which we find it from having rooted itself in certain combinations of ideas that, once coalescing, could not be shaken loose,—such as that Christianity underpropped the corruptions of the earth in the shape of wicked governments that might else have been overthrown, or of wicked priesthoods that, but for the shelter of shadowy and spiritual terrors, must have trembled before those whom they overawed. Kings that were clothed in bloody robes; dark hierarchies that scowled upon the poor children of the soil: these objects took up a permanent station in the background of Shelley's imagination, not to be dispossessed more than the phantom of Banquo from the festival of Macbeth, and composed a towering Babylon of mystery that, to his belief, could not have flourished under
[Page 359]
any umbrage less vast than that of Christianity. Such was the inextricable association of images that domineered over Shelley's mind; such was the hatred which he built upon that association—an association casual and capricious, yet fixed and petrified as if by frost. Can we imagine the case of an angel touched by lunacy? Have we ever seen the spectacle of a human intellect, exquisite by its functions of creation, yet in one chamber of its shadowy house already ruined before the light of manhood had cleansed its darkness? Such an angel, such a man—if ever such there were—such a lunatic angel, such a ruined man, was Shelley whilst yet standing on the earliest threshold of life.
Mr. Gilfillan, whose eye is quick to seize the lurking and the stealthy aspect of things, does not overlook the absolute midsummer madness which possessed Shelley upon the subject of Christianity. Shelley's total nature was altered and darkened when that theme arose: transfiguration fell upon him. He, that was so gentle, became savage; he, that breathed by the very lungs of Christianity—that was so merciful, so full of tenderness and pity, of humility, of love, and forgiveness—then raved and screamed like an idiot whom once I personally knew when offended by a strain of heavenly music at the full of the moon. In both cases it was the sense of perfect beauty revealed under the sense of morbid estrangement. This it is, as I presume, which Mr. Gilfillan alludes to in the following passage:—“On all other subjects the wisest of the wise, the gentlest of the gentle, the bravest of the brave, yet, when one topic was introduced, he became straightway insane; his eyes glared, his voice screamed, his hand vibrated frenzy.” But Mr. Gilfillan is probably in the wrong when he countenances the notion that harsh treatment had any concern in riveting the fanaticism of Shelley. On the contrary, he met with an indulgence to the first manifestation of his Antichristian madness better suited to the goodness of the lunatic than to the pestilence of his lunacy. It was at Oxford that this earliest explosion of Shelleyism occurred; and, though, with respect to secrets of prison-houses, and to discussions that proceed “with closed doors,” there is always a danger of being misinformed, I believe, from the uniformity of such
[Page 360]
accounts as have reached myself, that the following brief of the matter may be relied on:—Shelley, being a venerable sage of sixteen or rather less, came to a resolution that he would convert, and that it was his solemn duty to convert, the universal Christian Church to Atheism or to Pantheism, no great matter which . But, as such large undertakings require time, twenty months, suppose, or even two years— for you know, reader, that a railway requires on an average little less—Shelley was determined to obey no impulse of youthful rashness. Oh no! Down with presumption, down with levity, down with boyish precipitation! Changes of religion are awful things: people must have time to think. He would move slowly and discreetly. So first he wrote a pamphlet, clearly and satisfactorily explaining the necessity of being an atheist; and, with his usual exemplary courage (for, seriously, he was the least false of human creatures), Shelley put his name to the pamphlet, and the name of his college. His ultimate object was to accomplish a general apostasy in the Christian Church of whatever name. But, for one six months, it was quite enough if he caused a revolt in the Church of England. And, as, before a great naval action, when the enemy is approaching, you throw a long shot or two by way of trying his range—on that principle Shelley had thrown out his tract in Oxford. Oxford formed the advanced squadron of the English Church; and, by way of a coup d'essai , though in itself a bagatelle, what if he should begin with converting Oxford? To make any beginning at all is one-half the battle. To speak seriously, there is something even thus far in the boyish presumption of Shelley not altogether without nobility. He affronted the armies of Christendom. Had it been possible for him to be jesting, it would not have been noble. But here, even in the most monstrous of his undertakings,—here, as always,— he was perfectly sincere and single-minded. Satisfied that Atheism was the sheet-anchor of the world, he was not the person to speak by halves. Being a boy, he attacked those (upon a point the most sure to irritate) who were grey; having no station in society, he flew at the throats of none but those who had ; weaker than an infant for the purpose before him, he planted his fist in the face of a giant, saying
[Page 361]
“Take that , you devil, and that , and that .” The pamphlet had been published; and, though an undergraduate of Oxford is not (technically speaking) a member of the university as a responsible corporation, still he bears a near relation to it. And the heads of colleges felt a disagreeable summons to an extra meeting. There are in Oxford somewhere about five-and-twenty colleges and halls. Frequent and full the heads assembled in Golgotha, a well-known Oxonian chamber, which, being interpreted (as scripturally we know) is “the place of a skull,” and must, therefore, naturally be the place of a head. There the heads met to deliberate. What was to be done? Most of them were inclined to mercy: to proceed at all was to proceed to extremities; and (generally speaking) to expel a man from Oxford is to ruin his prospects in any of the liberal professions. Not, therefore, from consideration of Shelley's position in society, but on the kindest motives of forbearance towards one so young, the heads decided for declining all notice of the pamphlet. Levelled at them, it was not specially addressed to them; and, amongst the infinite children born every morning from that mightiest of mothers, the Press, why should Golgotha be supposed to have known anything, officially, of this little brat? That evasion might suit some people, but not Percy Bysshe Shelley. There was a flaw (was there?) in his process; his pleading could not, regularly, come up before the court. Very well—he would heal that defect immediately. So he sent his pamphlet, with five-and-twenty separate letters, addressed to the five-and-twenty heads of colleges in Golgotha assembled, courteously “inviting” all and every of them to notify, at his earliest convenience, his adhesion to the enclosed unanswerable arguments for Atheism. Upon this, it is undeniable that Golgotha looked black, and, after certain formalities, “invited” P. B. Shelley to consider himself expelled from the University of Oxford. But, if this were harsh, how would Mr. Gilfillan have had them to proceed? Already they had done, perhaps, too much in the way of forbearance. There were many men in Oxford who knew the standing of Shelley's family. Already it was whispered that any man of obscure connexions would have been visited
[Page 362]
for his Atheism, whether writing to Golgotha or not. And this whisper would have strengthened, had any further neglect been shown to formal letters which requested a formal answer. The authorities of Oxford, deeply responsible to the nation in a matter of so much peril, could not have acted otherwise than they did. They were not severe. The severity was extorted and imposed by Shelley. But, on the other hand, in some palliation of Shelley's conduct, it ought to be noticed that he is unfairly placed, by the undistinguishing, on the manly station of an ordinary Oxford student. The undergraduates of Oxford and Cambridge are not “boys,” as a considerable proportion must be, for good reasons, in other universities—the Scottish universities, for instance, of Glasgow and St. Andrews, and many of those on the Continent. Few of the English students even begin their residence before eighteen, and the larger proportion are at least twenty. Whereas Shelley was really a boy at this era, and no man. He had entered on his 19th year, and he was still in the earliest part of his academic career, when his obstinate and reiterated attempt to inoculate the university with a disease that he fancied indispensable to their mental health caused his expulsion.
I imagine that Mr. Gilfillan will find himself compelled, hereafter, not less by his own second thoughts than by the murmurs of some amongst his readers, to revise that selection of memorial traits, whether acts or habits, by which he seeks to bring Shelley, as a familiar presence, within the field of ocular apprehension. The acts selected, unless characteristic —the habits selected, unless representative—must be absolutely impertinent to the true identification of the man; and most of those rehearsed by Mr. Gilfillan, unless where they happen to be merely accidents of bodily constitution, are such as all of us would be sorry to suppose naturally belonging to Shelley. To “rush out of the room in terror as his wild imagination painted to him a pair of eyes in a lady's breast” is not so much a movement of poetic frenzy as of typhus fever; to “terrify an old lady out of her wits” by assuming, in a stage-coach, the situation of a regal sufferer from Shakspere, is not eccentricity so much as painful discourtesy 24 ; and
[Page 363]
to request of Rowland Hill, a man most pious and sincere, “the use of Surrey Chapel” as a theatre for publishing infidelity, would have been so thoroughly the act of a heartless coxcomb that I, for one, cannot bring myself to believe it an authentic anecdote. Not that I doubt of Shelley's violating at times his own better nature, as every man is capable of doing under youth too fervid, wine too potent, and companions too misleading; but it strikes me that, during Shelley's very earliest youth, the mere accident of Rowland Hill's being a man well born and aristocratically connected, yet sacrificing these advantages to what he thought the highest of services—spiritual service on behalf of poor labouring men—would have laid a pathetic arrest upon any impulse of fun in one who, with the very same advantages of birth and position, had the same deep reverence for the rights of the poor. Willing, at all times, to forget his own pretensions in the presence of those who seemed powerless, —willing in a degree that was almost sublime,—Shelley could not but have honoured the same nobility of feeling in another. And Rowland Hill, by his guileless simplicity, had a separate hold upon a nature so childlike as Shelley's. He was full of love to man; so was Shelley. He was full of humility; so was Shelley. Difference of creed, however vast the interval which it created between the men, could not have hid from Shelley's eye the close approximation of their natures. Infidel by his intellect, Shelley was a Christian in the tendencies of his heart. As to his “lying asleep on the hearth-rug, with his small round head thrust almost into the very fire”—this, like his “basking in the hottest beams of an Italian sun,” illustrates nothing but his physical temperament. That he should be seen “devouring large pieces of bread amid his profound abstractions” simply recalls to my eye some hundred thousands of children in the streets of
[Page 364]
great cities,—Edinburgh, Glasgow, London,—whom I am daily detecting in the same unaccountable practice, and yet probably with very little abstraction to excuse it; whilst his “endless cups of tea,” in so tea-drinking a land as ours, have really ceased to offer the attractions of novelty which, eighty years ago, in the reign of Dr. Johnson, and under a higher price of tea, they might have secured. Such habits, however, are inoffensive, if not particularly mysterious, nor particularly significant. But that, in default of a paper boat, Shelley should launch upon the Serpentine a fifty-pound bank-note seems to my view an act of childishness, or else (which is worse) an act of empty ostentation, not likely to proceed from one who generally exhibited in his outward deportment a sense of true dignity. He who, through his family, 25 stood related to that “spirit without spot” (as Shelley calls him in the “Adonais”), Sir Philip Sidney (a man how like in gentleness, and in faculties of mind, to himself),—he that, by consequence, connected himself with the later descendent of Penshurst, the noble martyr of freedom, Algernon Sidney, —could not have degraded himself by a pride so mean as any which roots itself in wealth. On the other hand, in the anecdote of his repeating Dr. Johnson's benign act by “lifting a poor houseless outcast upon his back and carrying her to a place of refuge,” I read so strong a character of internal probability that it would be gratifying to know upon what external testimony it rests.
The life of Shelley, according to the remark of Mr. Gilfillan, was “among the most romantic in literary story.” Everything was romantic in his short career; everything wore a tragic interest. From his childhood he moved through a succession of afflictions. Always craving for love, loving and seeking to be loved, always he was destined to reap hatred from those with whom life had connected him.
[Page 365]
If in the darkness he raised up images of his departed hours, he would behold his family disowning him, and the home of his infancy knowing him no more; he would behold his magnificent university, that under happier circumstances would have gloried in his genius, rejecting him for ever; he would behold his first wife, whom once he had loved passionately, through calamities arising from himself called away to an early and a tragic death. The peace after which his heart panted for ever, in what dreadful contrast it stood to the eternal contention upon which his restless intellect or accidents of position threw him like a passive victim! It seemed as if not my any choice of his, but some sad doom of opposition from without, forced out as by a magnet struggles of frantic resistance from him , which as gladly he would have evaded as ever victim of epilepsy yearned to evade his convulsions! Gladly he would have slept in eternal seclusion, whilst eternally the trumpet summoned him to battle. In storms unwillingly created by himself he lived; in a storm cited by the finger of God he died.
It is affecting,—at least it is so for any one who believes in the profound sincerity of Shelley, a man (however erring) whom neither fear, nor hope, nor vanity, nor hatred, ever seduced into falsehood, or even into dissimulation,—to read the account which he gives of a revolution occurring in his own mind at school: so early did his struggles begin! It is in verse, and forms part of those beautiful stanzas addressed to his second wife which he prefixed to “The Revolt of Islam.” Five or six of these stanzas may be quoted with a certainty of pleasing many readers, whilst they throw light on the early condition of Shelley's feelings, and of his early anticipations with regard to the promises and the menaces of life:—
   “Thoughts of great deeds were mine, dear friend, when first
   The clouds which wrap this world from youth did pass.
   I do remember well the hour which burst
   My spirit's sleep: a fresh May-dawn it was,
   When I walked forth upon the glittering grass,
   And wept—I knew not why, until there rose,
   From the near schoolroom, voices that, alas!
   Were but one echo from a world of woes—
The harsh and grating strife of tyrants and of foes.
[Page 366]
   And then I clasped my hands, and looked around
   (But none was near to mock my streaming eyes,
   Which poured their warm drops on the sunny ground):
   So without shame I spake—I will be wise,
   And just, and free, and mild, if in me lies
   Such power; for I grow weary to behold
   The selfish and the strong still tyrannise
   Without reproach or check. I then controlled
My tears; my heart grew calm; and I was meek and bold.
   And from that hour did I with earnest thought
   Heap knowledge from fobidden mines of lore:
   Yet nothing that my tyrants knew or taught
   I cared to learn; but from that secret store
   Wrought linkëd armour for my soul, before
   It might walk forth to war among mankind.
   Thus power and hope were strengthened more and more
   Within me, till there came upon my mind
A sense of loneliness, a thirst with which I pined.
   Alas, that love should be a blight and snare
   To those who seek all sympathies in one!—
   Such once I sought in vain; them black despair,
   The shadow of a starless night, was thrown
   Over the world in which I moved alone:—
   Yet never found I one not false to me,—
   Hard hearts and cold, like weights of icy stone
   Which crushed and withered mine, that could not be
Aught but a lifeless clog, until revived by thee.
   Thou, friend, whose presence on my wintry heart
   Fell like bright spring upon some herbless plain,
   How beautiful, and calm, and free thou wert
   In thy young wisdom, when the mortal chain
   Of Custom 26 thou didst burst and rend in twain,
   And walked as free as light the clouds among
   Which many an envious slave then breathed in vain
   From his dim dungeon, and my spirit sprung
To meet thee from the woes which had begirt it long.
   No more alone through the world's wilderness,
   Although I trod the paths of high intent,
   I journeyed now: no more companionless
   Where solitude is like despair, I went.
[Page 367]
   Now has descended a serener hour;
   And, with inconstant fortune, friends return:
   Though suffering leaves the knowledge and the power
   Which says—Let scorn be not repaid with scorn.
   And from thy side two gentle babes are born,
   To fill our home with smiles; and thus are we
   Most fortunate beneath life's beaming morn;
   And these delights and thou have been to me
The parents of the song I consecrate to thee.”
My own attention was first drawn to Shelley by the report of his Oxford labours as a missionary in the service of Atheism. Abstracted from the absolute sincerity and simplicity which governed that boyish movement,—qualities which could not be known to a stranger, or even suspected in the midst of so much extravagance,—there was nothing in the Oxford reports of him to create any interest beyond that of wonder at his folly and presumption in pushing to such extremity what naturally all people viewed as an elaborate jest. Some curiosity, however, even at that time, must have gathered about his name; for I remember seeing in London a little Indian-ink sketch of him in the academic costume of Oxford. The sketch tallied pretty well with a verbal description which I had heard of him in some company: viz. that he was rather tall, slender, and presenting the air of an elegant flower whose head drooped from being surcharged with rain. This gave to the chance observer an impression that he was tainted, even in his external deportment, by some excess of sickly sentimentalism,—from which, however, in all stages of his life, he was remarkably free. Between two and three years after this period, which was that of his expulsion from Oxford, he married a beautiful girl named Westbrook. She was respectably connected, but had not moved in a rank corresponding to Shelley's; and that accident brought him into my own neighbourhood; for his family, already estranged from him, were now thoroughly
[Page 368]
irritated by what they regarded as a mésalliance , and withdrew, or greatly reduced, his pecuniary allowances. Such, at least, was the story current. In this embarrassment, his wife's father made over to him an annual income of £200; and, as economy had become important, the youthful pair— both, in fact, still children—came down to the Lakes, supposing this region of Cumberland and Westmoreland to be a sequestered place,—which it was for eight months in the year,—and also to be a cheap place,—which it was not . Another motive to this choice arose with the then Duke of Norfolk. He was an old friend of Shelley's family, and generously refused to hear a word of the young man's errors, except where he could do anything to relieve him from their consequences. His grace possessed the beautiful estate of Gobarrow Park on Ullswater, and other estates of greater extent in the same two counties 27 ; his own agents he had directed to furnish any accommodations that might meet Shelley's views; and he had written to some gentlemen amongst his agricultural friends in Cumberland, requesting them to pay such neighbourly attentions to the solitary young people as circumstances might place in their power. This bias, being impressed upon Shelley's wanderings, naturally brought him to Keswick, as the most central and the largest of the little towns dispersed amongst the Lakes. Southey, made aware of the interest taken in Shelley by the Duke of Norfolk, with his usual kindness, immediately called upon him; and the ladies of Southey's family subsequently made an early call upon Mrs. Shelley. One of them mentioned to me, as occurring in this first visit, an amusing expression of the youthful matron, which, four years later, when I heard of her gloomy end, recalled, with the force of a pathetic contrast, that icy arrest then chaining up her youthful feet for ever. The Shelleys had been induced by one of their new friends to take part of a house standing about half-a-mile out of Keswick on the Penrith road,—more, I believe, according to that friend's intention, for the sake of bringing them within his own hospitalities than for any
[Page 369]
beauty in the place. There was, however, a pretty garden attached to it; and, whilst walking in this, one of the Southey party asked Mrs. Shelley if the garden had been let with their part of the house. “Oh no,” she replied, “the garden is not ours; but then, you know, the people let us run about in it whenever Percy and I are tired of sitting in the house.” The naïveté of this expression, “run about,” contrasting so picturesquely with the intermitting efforts of the girlish wife at supporting a matron-like gravity, now that she was doing the honours of her house to married ladies, caused all the party to smile. And me it caused profoundly to sigh, four years later, when the gloomy death of this young creature, now frozen in a distant grave, threw back my remembrance upon her fawn-like playfulness, which, unconsciously to herself, the girlish phrase of run about so naturally betrayed.
At that time, I had a cottage myself in Grasmere, just thirteen miles distant from Shelley's new abode. As he had then written nothing of any interest, I had no motive for calling upon him, except by way of showing any little attentions in my power to a brother Oxonian, and to a man of letters. These attentions, indeed, he might have claimed simply in the character of a neighbour; for, as men living on the coast of Mayo or Galway are apt to consider the dwellers on the seabord of North America in the light of next-door neighbours, divided only by a party-wall of crystal —and what if accidentally three thousand miles thick?—on the same principle we, amongst the slender population of this lake region, and wherever no ascent intervened between two parties higher than Dunmail Raise and the spurs of Helvellyn, were apt to take with each other the privileged tone of neighbours. Some neighbourly advantages I might certainly have placed at Shelley's disposal: Grasmere, for instance, itself, which tempted at that time 28 by a beauty
[Page 370]
that had not then been sullied; Wordsworth, who then lived in Grasmere; Elleray and Professor Wilson, nine miles further; finally, my own library, which, being rich in the wickedest of German speculations, would naturally have been more to Shelley's taste than the Spanish library of Southey.
But all these temptations were negatived for Shelley by his sudden departure. Off he went in a hurry: but why he went, or whither he went, I did not inquire; not guessing the interest which he would create in my mind, six years later, by his “Revolt of Islam.” A life of Shelley in a continental edition of his works says that he went to Edinburgh
[Page 371]
and to Ireland. Some time after, we at the Lakes heard that he was living in Wales. Apparently he had the instinct within him of his own Wandering Jew for eternal restlessness. But events were now hurrying upon his heart of hearts. Within less than ten years, the whole arrear of his life was destined to revolve. Within that space he had the whole burden of life and death to exhaust: he had the worst of his suffering to suffer, and all his work to work.
In about four years his first marriage was dissolved by the death of his wife. She had brought to Shelley two children. But feuds arose between them, owing to incompatible habits of mind. They parted. And it is one chief misery of a beautiful young woman, separated from her natural protector, that her desolate situation attracts and stimulates the calumnies of the malicious. Stung by these calumnies, and oppressed (as I have understood) by the loneliness of her abode—perhaps, also, by the delirium of fever, —she threw herself into a pond, and was drowned. The name under which she first enchanted all eyes, and sported as the most playful of nymph-like girls, is now forgotten amongst men; and that other name, for a brief period her ambition and her glory, is inscribed on her gravestone as the name under which she wept and she despaired, suffered and was buried, turned away even from the faces of her children, and sought a hiding-place in darkness.
After this dreadful event an anonymous life of Shelley asserts that he was for some time deranged. Pretending to no private and no circumstantial acquaintance with the case, I cannot say how that really was. There is a great difficulty besetting all sketches of lives so steeped in trouble as was Shelley's. If you have a confidential knowledge of the case, as a dear friend privileged to stand by the bedside of raving grief, how base to use such advantages of position for the gratification of a fugitive curiosity in strangers! If you have no such knowledge, how little qualified you must be for tracing the life with the truth of sympathy, or for judging it with the truth of charity! To me it appears, from the peace of mind which Shelley is reported afterwards to have recovered for a time, that he could not have had to reproach himself with any harshness or neglect as contributing
[Page 372]
to the shocking catastrophe. Neither ought any reproach to rest upon the memory of this first wife, as respects her relation to Shelley. Nonconformity of tastes might easily arise between two parties, without much blame to either, when one of the two had received from nature an intellect and a temperament so dangerously eccentric, and constitutionally carried, by delicacy so exquisite of organisation, to eternal restlessness and irritability of nerves, if not absolutely at times to lunacy.
About three years after this tragical event Shelley, in company with his second wife, the daughter of Godwin and Mary Wollstonecraft, passed over for a third time to the Continent; from which he never came back. They lived up and down in Northern Italy, and, I believe, happily. On Monday, July 8, 1822, being then in his twenty-ninth year, Shelley was returning from Leghorn to his home at Lerici, in a schooner-rigged boat of his own, twenty-four feet long, eight in the beam, and drawing four feet water. His companions were only two, Mr. Williams, formerly of the Eighth Dragoons, and Charles Vivian, an English seaman in Shelley's service. The run homewards would not have occupied more than six or eight hours. But the Gulf of Spezzia is peculiarly dangerous for small craft in bad weather; and, unfortunately, a squall of about one hour's duration came on, the wind at the same time shifting so as to blow exactly in the teeth of the course to Lerici. From the interesting narrative drawn up by Mr. Trelawny, well known at that time for his connexion with the Greek Revolution, it seems that for eight days the fate of the boat was unknown; and during that time couriers had been despatched along the whole line of coast between Leghorn and Nice, under anxious hopes that the voyagers might have run into some creek for shelter. But at the end of the eight days all suspense ceased. Some articles belonging to Shelley's boat had previously been washed ashore: these might have been thrown overboard; but finally the two bodies of Shelley and Mr. Williams came on shore near Via Reggio, about four miles apart. Both were in a state of advanced decomposition, but were fully identified. Vivian's body was not recovered for three weeks. From the state of the two corpses, it had
[Page 373]
become difficult to remove them; and they were therefore burned by the seaside, on funeral pyres, with the classic rites of paganism, four English gentlemen being present: Capt. Shenly of the navy, Mr. Leigh Hunt, Lord Byron, and Mr. Trelawny. A circumstance is added by Mr. Gilfillan which previous accounts do not mention—viz. that Shelley's heart remained unconsumed by the fire; but this is a phenomenon that has repeatedly occurred at judicial deaths by fire. The remains of Mr. Williams, when collected from the fire, were conveyed to England; but Shelley's were buried in the Protestant burying-ground at Rome, not far from a child of his own, and Keats the poet. It is remarkable that Shelley, in the preface to his “Adonais,” dedicated to the memory of that young poet, had spoken with delight of this cemetery, “an open space among the ruins [of ancient Rome], covered in winter with violets and daisies”; adding, “it might make one in love with death to think that one should be buried in so sweet a place.”
I have allowed myself to abridge the circumstances as reported by Mr. Trelawny and Mr. Hunt: partly on the consideration that three-and-twenty years (now in 1857 five-and-thirty) have passed since the event, so that a new generation has had time to grow up, not feeling the interest of contemporaries in Shelley, and generally, therefore, unacquainted with the case; but partly for the purpose of introducing the following comment of Mr. Gilfillan on the striking points of a catastrophe “which robbed the world of this strange and great spirit,” and which secretly tempts men to superstitious feelings even whilst they are denying them: —“Everybody knows that, on the arrival of Leigh Hunt in Italy, Shelley hastened to meet him. During all the time he spent in Leghorn, he was in brilliant spirits—to him ever a sure prognostic of coming evil. [That is, in the Scottish phrase, he was fey .] On his return to his home and family, his skiff was overtaken by a fearful hurricane, and all on board perished. To a gentleman who, at the time, was with a glass surveying the sea, the scene of his drowning assumed a very striking appearance. A great many vessels were visible, and among them one small skiff, which attracted his particular attention. Suddenly a
[Page 374]
dreadful storm, attended by thunder and columns of lightning, swept over the sea, and eclipsed the prospect. When it had passed, he looked again. The larger vessels were all safe, riding upon the swell; the skiff only had gone down for ever. And in that skiff was Alastor! 29 Here he had met his fate. Wert thou, O religious sea, only avenging on his head the cause of thy denied and insulted Deity? Were ye, ye elements, in your courses, commissioned to destroy him? Ah! there is no reply. The surge is silent; the elements have no voice. In the eternal counsels the secret is hid of the reason of the man's death. And there, too, rests the still more tremendous secret of the character of his destiny.” 30
These words are Mr. Gilfillan's, and possibly pursue the scrutiny too far. Conscious, indeed, that it tends beyond the limits of charity, Mr. Gilfillan recalls himself from this attempt to fathom the unfathomable. But undoubtedly the temptation is great, in minds not superstitious, to read a significance and a silent personality in such a fate applied to such a defier of the Christian heavens. As a shepherd by his dog fetches out one of his flock from amongst five hundred, so did the holy hurricane seem to fetch out from the multitude of sails that one which carried him that hated the hopes of the world; and the sea, which swelled and ran down within an hour, was present at the audit. We are reminded
[Page 375]
forcibly of the sublime storm in the wilderness (as given in the fourth book of “Paradise Regained”), and the remark upon it made by the mysterious tempter—
“This tempest at this desert most was bent,
Of men at thee.”
Undoubtedly, I do not understand Mr. Gilfillan, more than myself, to read a “judgment” in this catastrophe. But there is a solemn appeal to the thoughtful in a death of so much terrific grandeur following upon defiances of such unparalleled audacity. Æschylus acknowledged the same sense of mysterious awe, and all antiquity acknowledged it, in the story of Amphiaraus. 31
Shelley, it must be remembered, carried his irreligion to a point beyond all others. Of the darkest beings we are told that they “believe and tremble”; but Shelley believed and hated , and his defiances were meant to show that he did not tremble. Yet, has he not the excuse of something like monomania upon this subject? I firmly believe it. But a superstition, old as the world, clings to the notion that words of deep meaning, uttered even by lunatics or by idiots, execute themselves, and that also, when uttered in presumption, they bring round their own retributive chastisements.
On the other hand, however shocked at Shelley's obstinate revolt from all religious sympathies with his fellow-men, no man is entitled to deny the admirable qualities of his moral nature, which were as striking as his genius. Many people remarked something seraphic in the expression of his features; and something seraphic there was in his nature. No man was better qualified to have loved Christianity; and to no man, resting under the shadow of that one darkness, would Christianity have said more gladly— talis cum sis, utinam noster esses ! 32 Shelley would, from his earliest manhood, have sacrificed all that he possessed to any comprehensive purpose of good for the race of man. He dismissed all injuries and insults from his memory. He was the sincerest and the most truthful of human creatures. He was also the purest. If he denounced marriage as a vicious institution,
[Page 376]
that was but another phasis of the partial lunacy which affected him; for to no man were purity and fidelity more essential elements in his idea of real love. I agree, therefore, heartily with Mr. Gilfillan, in protesting against the thoughtless assertion of some writer in the “Edinburgh Review” that Shelley at all selected the story of his “Cenci” on account of its horrors, or that he has found pleasure in dwelling on those horrors. Far from it! Indeed, he has retreated so entirely from the most shocking feature of the story—viz. the incestuous violence of Cenci the father—as actually to leave it doubtful whether the murder were in punishment of the last outrage committed or in repulsion of a menace continually repeated. The true motive of the selection of such a story was—not its darkness, but (as Mr. Gilfillan, with so much penetration, perceives) the light which fights with the darkness: Shelley found the whole attraction of this dreadful tale in the angelic nature of Beatrice, as revealed in local traditions and in the portrait of her by Guido. Everybody who has read with understanding the “Wallenstein” of Schiller is a ware of the repose and the divine relief arising upon a background of so much darkness, such a tumult of ruffians, bloody intriguers, and assassins, from the situation of the two lovers, Max. Piccolomini and the Princess Thelka, both yearning so profoundly after peace, both so noble, both so young, and both destined to be so unhappy. The same fine relief, the same light shining in darkness, arises here from the touching beauty of Beatrice, from her noble aspirations after deliverance, from the remorse which reaches her in the midst of real innocence, from her meekness, and from the depth of her inexpressible affliction. Even the murder, even the parricide, though proceeding from herself, do but deepen that background of darkness which throws into fuller revelation the glory of that suffering face immortalised by Guido.
Something of a similar effect arises to myself when reviewing the general abstract of Shelley's life—so brief, so full of agitation, so full of strife. When one thinks of the early misery which he suffered, and of the insolent infidelity which, being yet so young, he wooed with a lover's passion, then the darkness of midnight begins to form a deep, impenetrable
[Page 377]
background, upon which the phantasmagoria of all that is to come may arrange itself in troubled phosphoric streams, and in sweeping processions of woe. Yet, again, when one recurs to his gracious nature, his fearlessness, his truth, his purity from all fleshliness of appetite, his freedom from vanity, his diffusive love and tenderness, suddenly out of the darkness reveals itself a morning of May, forests and thickets of roses advance to the foreground, and from the midst of them looks out “the eternal child,” 33 cleansed from his sorrow, radiant with joy, having power given him to forget the misery which he suffered, power given him to forget the misery which he caused, and leaning with his heart upon that dove-like faith against which his erring intellect had rebelled.
John Keats [1795-1821] Mr. Gilfillan, in his “Gallery of Literary Portraits,” introduces this section with a discussion upon the constitutional peculiarities ascribed to men of genius: such as nervousness of temperament, idleness, vanity, irritability, and other disagreeable tendencies ending in ty or ness —one of the ties being “poverty”; which disease is at least not among those morbidly cherished by the patients. All that can be asked from the most penitent man of genius is that he should humbly confess his own besetting infirmities, and endeavour to hate them; and, as respects this one infirmity at least, I never heard of any man (however eccentric in genius) who did otherwise. But what special relation has such a preface to Keats? His whole article occupies twelve pages; and six of these are allotted to this preliminary discussion,—which perhaps equally concerns every other man in the household of literature. Mr. Gilfillan seems to have been acting here on
[Page 378]
celebrated precedents. The “ Omnes homines qui sese student præstare cæteris animalibus ” has long been “smoked” by a wicked posterity as an old hack of Sallust's, fitted on with paste and scissors to the Catilinarian conspiracy. Cicero candidly admits that he kept in his writing-desk an assortment of movable prefaces, beautifully fitted (by means of avoiding all questions but “the general question”) for parading en grand costume before any conceivable book. And Coleridge, in his early days, used the image of a man's “sleeping under a manchineel tree” alternately with the case of Alexander's killing his friend Clitus as resources for illustration which Providence had bountifully made inexhaustible in their applications. No emergency could by possibility arise to puzzle the poet or the orator, but one of these similes (please Heaven!) should be made to meet it. So long as the manchineel continued to blister with poisonous dews those who confided in its shelter, so long as Niebuhr should kindly forbear to prove that Alexander of Macedon was a hoax and his friend Clitus a myth, so long was Samuel Taylor Coleridge fixed and obdurate in his determination that one or other of these images should come upon duty whenever, as a youthful rhetorician, he found himself on the brink of insolvency.
But it is less the generality of this preface, or even its disproportion, which fixes the eye, than the questionableness of its particular statements. In that part which reviews the idleness of authors, Horace is given up as too notoriously indolent,—the thing, it seems, is past denying,—but “not so Lucretius.” Indeed! and how shall this be brought to proof? Perhaps the reader has heard of that barbarian prince who sent to Europe for a large map of the world, accompanied by the best of English razors; and the clever use which he made of his importation was that, first cutting out with exquisite accuracy the whole ring-fence of his own dominions, and then doing the same office with the same equity (barbarous or barber-ous), for the dominions of a hostile neighbour, next he proceeded to weigh off the rival segments against each other in a pair of gold scales; after which, of course, he arrived at a satisfactory algebraic equation between himself and his enemy. Now, upon this principle of comparison, if we should take any common
[Page 379]
edition (as the Delphin or the Variorum ) of Horace and Lucretius, strictly shaving away all notes, prefaces, editorial absurdities, &c.,—all “flotsam” and “jetsam” that may have gathered like barnacles about the two weather-beaten hulks, —in that case we should have the two old files undressed and in puris naturalibus ; they would be prepared for being weighed; and, going to the nearest grocer's, we might then settle the point at once as to which of the two had been the idler man. I back Horace for my part; and it is my private opinion that, in the case of a quarto edition, the grocer would have to throw at least half-a-pound of sugar into the scale of Lucretius before he could be made to draw against the other. Yet, after all, this would only be a collation of quantity against quantity; whilst, upon a second collation of quality against quality (quality as regards the difficulties in the process of composition), the difference in amount of labour would appear to be as between the weaving of a blanket and the weaving of an exquisite cambric. The curiosa felicitas of Horace in his lyric compositions, the elaborate delicacy of workmanship in his thoughts and in his style, argue a scale of labour that, as against any equal number of lines in Lucretius, would measure itself by months against days. There are single odes in Horace that must have cost him a six weeks' seclusion from the wickedness of Rome. Do I then question the extraordinary power of Lucretius? On the contrary, I admire him as the first of demoniacs. The frenzy of an earth-born or a hell-born inspiration; divinity of stormy music sweeping round us in eddies, in order to prove that for us there could be nothing divine; the grandeur of a prophet's voice rising in angry gusts, by way of convincing us that all prophets were swindlers; oracular scorn of oracles; frantic efforts, such as might seem reasonable in one who was scaling the heavens, for the purpose of degrading all things, making man to be the most object of necessities as regarded his origin, to be the blindest of accidents as regarded his expectations: these fierce antinomies expose a mode of insanity, but of an insanity affecting a sublime intellect. 34 And most people
[Page 380]
who read Lucretius at all are aware of the traditional story current in Rome that he did actually write in a delirious state,—not under any figurative disturbance of brain, but under a real physical disturbance from philtres administered to him by some enamoured woman. But this kind of morbid afflatus did not deliver itself into words and metre by lingering oscillations and through processes of stealthy growth: it threw itself forward, and precipitated its own utterance, with the headlong movement of a cataract. It was an æstrus , a rapture, the bounding of a mænad, by which the muse of Lucretius lived and moved. So much is known by the impression about him current among his contemporaries; so much is evident in the characteristic manner of his poem if all anecdotes had perished. And, upon the whole, let the proportions of power between Horace and Lucretius be what they may, the proportions of labour are absolutely incommensurable. In Horace the labour was directly as the power, in Lucretius inversely as the power. Whatsoever in Horace was best had been obtained by most labour; whatsoever in Lucretius was best by least . In Horace, the exquisite skill co-operated with the exquisite nature; in Lucretius, the powerful nature disdained the skill, —which, indeed, would not have been applicable to his theme, or to his treatment of it,—and triumphed through mere precipitation of volume and headlong fury.
Another paradox of Mr. Gilfillan's under this head is that he classes Dr. Johnson as indolent; and it is the more startling
[Page 381]
because he does not utter it as a careless opinion upon which he might have been thrown by inconsideration, but as a concession extorted from him reluctantly: he had sought to evade it, but could not. Now, that Dr. Johnson had a morbid predisposition to decline labour from his scrofulous habit of body 35 is probable. The question for us, however, is not what nature prompted him to do, but what he did. If he had an extra difficulty to fight with in attempting to labour, the more was his merit in the known result,—that he did fight with that difficulty, and that he conquered it. This is undeniable. And the attempt to deny it presents itself in a comic shape when one imagines some ancient shelf in a library, that has groaned for nearly
[Page 382]
a century under the weight of the doctor's works, demanding “How say you? Is this Sam Johnson, whose Dictionary alone is a load for a camel, one of those authors whom you call idle? Then Heaven preserve us poor oppressed book-shelves from such as you will consider active.” George III, in a compliment as happily turned as any one of those ascribed to Louis XIV, expressed his opinion upon this question of the Doctor's industry by saying that he also should join in thinking Johnson too voluminous a contributor to literature were it not for the extraordinary merit of the contributions. Now, it would be an odd way of turning the royal praise into a reproach if we should say: “Sam, had you been a pretty good writer, we, your countrymen, should have held you to be also an industrious writer; but, because you are a very good writer, therefore we pronounce you a lazy vagabond.”
Upon other points in this discussion there is some room to differ from Mr. Gilfillan. For instance, with respect to the question of the comparative happiness enjoyed by men of genius, it is not necessary to argue, nor does it seem possible to prove, even in the case of any one individual poet, that, on the whole, he was either more happy or less happy than the average mass of his fellow-men: far less could this be argued as to the whole class of poets. What seems really open to proof is that men of genius have a larger capacity of happiness,—which capacity, both from within and from without, may be defeated in ten thousand ways. This seems involved in the very word genius . For, after all the pretended and hollow attempts to distinguish genius from talent, I shall continue to think (what heretofore I have advanced) that no distinction in the case is tenable for a moment but this: viz. that genius is that mode of intellectual power which moves in alliance with the genial nature— i.e. with the capacities of pleasure and pain,—whereas talent has no vestige of such an alliance, and is perfectly independent of all human sensibilities. Consequently, genius is a voice of breathing that represents the total nature of man, and therefore his enjoying and suffering nature, as well as his knowing and distinguishing nature; whilst, on the contrary, talent represents only a
[Page 383]
single function of that nature. Genius is the language which interprets the synthesis of the human spirit with the human intellect, each acting through the other; whilst talent speaks only from the insulated intellect. And hence also it is that, besides its relation to suffering and enjoyment, genius always implies a deeper relation to virtue and vice; whereas talent has no shadow of a relation to moral qualities any more than it has to vital sensibilities. A man of the highest talent is often obtuse and below the ordinary standard of men in his feelings; but no man of genius can unyoke himself from the society of moral perceptions that are brighter, and sensibilities that are more tremulous, than those of men in general.
As to the examples 36 by which Mr. Gilfillan supports his prevailing views, they will be construed by any ten thousand men in ten thousand separate modes. The objections are so endless that it would be abusing the reader's time to urger them; especially as every man of the ten thousand will be wrong, and will also be right, in all varieties of proportion. Two only it may be useful to notice as examples, because involving some degree of error—viz. Addison and Homer. As to the first, the error, if an error, is one of fact only. Lord Byron had said of Addison that he “died drunk.” This seems to Mr. Gilfillan a “horrible statement”; for which he supposes that no authority can exist but “a rumour
[Page 384]
circulated by an inveterate gossip,”—meaning Horace Walpole. But gossips usually go upon some foundation, broad or narrow; and, until the rumour had been authentically put down, Mr. Gilfillan should not have pronounced it a “malignant calumny.” Me this story caused to laugh exceedingly: not at Addison, whose fine genius extorts pity and tenderness towards his infirmities; but at the characteristic misanthropy of Lord Byron, who chuckles, as he would do over a glass of nectar, on this opportunity for confronting the old solemn legend about Addison's sending for his stepson, Lord Warwick, to witness the peaceful death of a Christian with so rich a story as this,—that he, the said Christian, which is really not improbable, “died drunk. Supposing that he did , the mere physical fact of inebriation, in a stage of debility where so small an excess of stimulating liquor (though given medicinally) sometimes causes such an appearance, would not infer the moral blame of drunkenness; and, if such a thing were ever said by any person present at the bedside, I should feel next to certain that it was said in that spirit of exaggeration to which most men are tempted by circumstances unusually fitted to impress a startling picturesqueness upon the statement. But, without insisting on Lord Byron's way of putting the case, there is no doubt that latterly Addison gave way to habits of intemperance. He had married a woman of rank, the Countess of Warwick,— a woman by general report not amiable, but at any rate of trying and uneasy temper. 37 From this cause he suffered considerably, but also (and probably much more) from dyspepsy and tædium vitæ . He did not walk one mile a-day, and he ought to have walked ten. To remedy these evils, I have always understood that every day (and especially towards night) he drank too much of that French liquor which, calling itself water of life , nine times in ten proves the water of death. He lived latterly at Kensington—viz. in Holland House, the well-known residence of the Fox family, consequently
[Page 385]
for generations the hospitable rendezvous of the Whigs; and there it was,—in this famous mansion (where, as Jack Cade observes, the very stones survive to this day as witnesses of the fact),—that his intemperance was finished. The tradition attached to the gallery in that house is that, duly as the sun drew near to setting, on two tables, one at each end of the long ambulacrum , the Right Honourable Joseph placed, or caused to be placed, two tumblers, not of water slightly coloured with brandy, but of brandy slightly diluted with water, and those, the said tumblers, then and there did alternately to the lips of him, the aforesaid Joseph, diligently apply, walking to and fro during the process of exhaustion, and dividing his attentions between the two poles, arctic and antarctic, of his evening diaulos , with the impartiality to be expected from a member of the Privy Council. How often the two “blessed bears” northern and southern, were replenished, entered into no affidavit that ever reached my unworthy self. But so much I have always understood, —that in the gallery of Holland House the ex-Secretary of State caught a decided hiccup, which right honourable hiccup never afterwards subsided. In all this there would have been little to shock people, had it not been for the sycophancy which ascribed to Addison a religious reputation such as he neither merited nor wished to claim. But one penal reaction of mendacious adulation, for him who is weak enough to accept it, must ever be to impose restraints upon his own conduct which otherwise he would have been free to decline. How lightly would Sir Roger de Coverley have thought of a little sotting in any honest gentleman of right politics! And Addison would not, in that age, and as to that point, have carried his scrupulosity higher than his own Sir Roger. But such knaves as he who had complimented Addison with the praise of having furnished a model to Christians of extra piety, whereas in fact Addison started in life by publishing a translation of Petronius Arbiter, had painfully coerced his free agency. This knave, I very much fear, was Tickell the first; and the result of his knavery was to win for Addison a disagreeable sanctimonius reputation that was, first, founded in lies; secondly, that painfully limited Addison's free agency; and, thirdly, that provoked insults to his
[Page 386]
memory, since it pointed a censorious eye upon those things viewed as the acts of a demure pretender to extra devotion which would else have passed without notice as the most venial of frailties in an unsanctimonious layman.
Something I had to say also upon Homer, who mingles amongst the examples cited by Mr. Gilfillan of apparent happiness connected with genius. But, for want of room, 38 I forbear to go further than to lodge my protest against imputing to Homer, as any personal merit, what belongs altogether to the stage of society in which he lived. “They,” says Mr. Gilfillan, speaking of the Iliad and the Odyssey, “are the healthiest of works. There are in them no sullenness, no querulous complaint, not one personal allusion.” But I ask, how could there have been? Subjective poetry had not an existence in those days. Not only the powers for introverting the eye upon the spectator , as himself the spectaculum , were then undeveloped and inconceivable, but the sympathies did not exist to which such an appeal could have addressed itself. Besides, and partly from the same cause, even as objects, the human feelings and affections were too grossly and imperfectly distinguished; had not reached even the infancy of that stage in which the passions begin their processes of intermodification; nor could have reached
[Page 387]
it, from the simplicity of social life, as well as from the barbarism of the Greek religion. The author of the Iliad, or even of the Odyssey (though, doubtless, belonging to a later period), could not have been “unhealthy” or “sullen,” or “querulous,” from any cause except psora or elephantiasis , or scarcity of beef, or similar afflictions, with which it is quite impossible to inoculate poetry. The metrical romances of the Middle Ages have the same shivering character of starvation as to the inner life of man; and, if that constitutes a meritorious distinction, no man ought to be excused for wanting what it is so easy to obtain by simple neglect of culture. On the same principle, a cannibal, if truculently indiscriminate in his horrid diet, might win sentimental praises for his temperance: others (it might be alleged) were picking and choosing, miserable epicures! but he, the saint upon earth, cared not what he ate; any joint satisfied his moderate desires,—shoulder of man, leg of child, anything, in fact, that was nearest at hand, so long as it was good, wholesome human flesh; and the more plainly dressed the better.
But these topics, so various and so fruitful, I touch only because I find them introduced, amongst many others, by Mr. Gilfillan. Separately viewed, some of these would be more attractive than any merely personal interest connected with Keats. His biography, stripped of its false colouring, offers little to win attention; for he was not the victim of any systematic malignity, as has been represented. He met, as I have the best reason to believe, with unusual kindness from his liberal publishers, Messrs. Taylor & Hessey. 39 He met with unusual severity from a cynical reviewer,—the late Mr. Gifford, then editor of the “Quarterly Review,” 40 The story ran that this article of Mr. Gifford's had killed Keats; upon which, with natural astonishment, Lord Byron thus commented, in the eleventh canto of “Don Juan”:—
[Page 388]
“John Keats, who was killed off by one critique
   Just as he really promised something great,
If not intelligible, without Greek
   Contrived to talk about the gods of late
Much as they might have been supposed to speak.
   Poor fellow! His was an untoward fate:
'Tis strange the mind, that very fiery particle, 41
Should let itself be snuffed out by an article.”
Strange, indeed! and the friends who honour Keats's memory should not lend themselves to a story so degrading. He died, I believe, of pulmonary consumption, and would have died of it, probably, under any circumstances of prosperity as a poet. Doubtless, in a condition of languishing decay, slight causes of irritation act powerfully. But it is hardly conceivable that one ebullition of splenetic bad feeling, in a case so proverbially open to endless revision as the pretensions of a poet, could have overthrown any masculine life, unless where that life had already been irrecoverably undermined by sickness. As a man, and viewed in relation to social objects, Keats was nothing. It was as mere an affectation when he talked with apparent zeal of liberty, or human rights, or human prospects, as is the hollow enthusiasm which innumerable people profess for music, or most poets for external nature. For these things Keats fancied that he cared, but in reality, from all I can learn, he cared next to nothing. Upon them, or any of their aspects, he had thought too little, and too indeterminately, to feel for them as personal concerns. Whereas Shelley, from his earliest days, was mastered and shaken by the great moving realities of life, as a prophet is by the burden of wrath or of promise which he has been commissioned to reveal. Had there been no such thing as literature, Keats would have dwindled into a cipher. Shelley, in the same event, would hardly have lost one plume from his crest. It is in relation to literature, and to the boundless questions as to the true and the false arising out of literature and poetry, that Keats challenges a fluctuating interest,—sometimes an interest of strong disgust, sometimes of deep admiration. There is not, I believe, a case on record throughout European Literature where feelings so
[Page 389]
repulsive of each other have centred in the same individual. The very midsummer madness of affectation, of false vapoury sentiment, and of fantastic effeminacy, seemed to me combined in Keats's “Endymion,” when I first saw it, near the close of 1821. The Italian poet Marino had been reputed the greatest master of gossamery affectation in Europe. But his conceits showed the palest of rosy blushes by the side of Keats's bloody crimson. Naturally I was discouraged at the moment from looking further. But about a week later, by pure accident, my eye fell upon his “Hyperion.” The first feeling was that of incredulity that the two poems could, under change of circumstances or lapse of time, have emanated from the same mind. The “Endymion” trespasses so strongly against good sense and just feeling that, in order to secure its pardon, we need the whole weight of the imperishable “Hyperion”; which, as Mr. Gilfillan truly says, “is the greatest of poetical torsos.” The first belongs essentially to the vilest collections of waxwork filigree or gilt gingerbread. The other presents the majesty, the austere beauty, and the simplicity of a Grecian temple enriched with Grecian sculpture. 42
We have in this country a word—viz. the word folly — which has a technical appropriation to the case of fantastic buildings. Any building is called a “folly” 43 which mimics purposes incapable of being realised, and makes a promise to the eye which it cannot keep to the experience. The most impressive illustration of that idea which modern times have seen was, undoubtedly, the ice-palace of the Empress Elizabeth— 44
[Page 390]
“That most magnificent and mighty freak”
which, about eighty years ago, was called up from the depths of winter by
“The imperial mistress of the fur-clad Russ.”
Winter and the Czarina were in this architecture fellow-labourers. She, by her servants, furnished the blocks of ice, hewed them, dressed them, laid them; winter furnished the cement, by freezing them together. The palace has long since thawed back into water; and the poet who described it best—viz. Cowper—is perhaps but little read in this age, except by the religious. It will, therefore, be a sort of resurrection for both the palace and the poet if I cite his description of this gorgeous folly. It is a passage in which Cowper assumes so much of a Miltonic tone that, of the two, it is better to have read his lasting description than to have seen with bodily eyes the fleeting reality. The poet is apostrophising the Empress Elizabeth:—
                                         “No forest fell
When thou wouldst build; no quarry sent its stores
To enrich thy walls; but thou didst hew the floods,
And make thy marble of the glassy wave. ...
Silently as a dream the fabric rose;
No sound of hammer or of saw was there;
Ice upon ice, the well-adjusted parts
Were soon conjoined, nor other cement asked
Than water interfused to make them one.
[Page 391]
Lamps gracefully disposed, and of all hues,
Illumined every side; a watery light
Gleamed through the clear transparency, that seemed
Another moon new-risen: ...
                                         Nor wanted aught within
That royal residence might well befit
For grandeur or for use. Long wavy wreaths
Of flowers, that feared no enemy but warmth,
Blushed on the panels. Mirror needed none
Where all was vitreous; but in order due
Convivial table and commodious seat
(What seemed at least commodious seat) were there,—
Sofa, and couch, and high-built throne august.
The same lubricity was found in all,
And all was moist to the warm touch,—a scene
Of evanescent glory, once a stream,
And soon to slide into a stream again.”
The poet concludes by viewing the whole as an unintentional stroke of satire by the Czarina
                                         “On her own estate,
On human grandeur and the courts of kings.
'Twas transient in its nature, as in show
'Twas durable; as worthless as it seemed
Intrinsically precious: to the foot
Treacherous and false,—it smiled, and it was cold.”
Looking at this imperial plaything of ice in the month of March, and recollecting that in May all its crystal arcades would be weeping away into vernal brooks, one would have been disposed to mourn over a beauty so frail, and to marvel at the solemn creation of a frailty so elaborate. Yet still there was some proportion observed: the saloons were limited in number, though not limited in splendour. It was a petit Trianon . But what if, like Versailles, this glittering bauble, to which all the science of Europe could not have secured a passport into June, had contained six thousand separate rooms? A “folly” on so gigantic a scale would have moved every man to indignation. For all that could be had, the beauty to the eye and the gratification to the fancy in seeing water tortured into every form of solidity, resulted from two or three suites of rooms as fully as from a thousand.
Now, such a folly as would have been the Czarina's, if
[Page 392]
executed upon the scale of Versailles or of the new palace at St. Petersburg, was the “Endymion”: a gigantic edifice (for its tortuous enigmas of thought multiplied every line of the four thousand into fifty) reared upon a basis slighter and less apprehensible than moonshine. As reasonably, and as hopefully in regard to human sympathies, might a man undertake an epic poem upon the loves of two butterflies. The modes of existence in the two parties to the love-fable of the “Endymion,” their relations to each other and to us, their prospects finally, and the obstacles to the instant realisation of these prospects,—all these things are more vague and in comprehensible than the reveries of an oyster. Still, the unhappy subject, and its unhappy expansion, must be laid to the account of childish years and childish inexperience. But there is another fault in Keats, of the first magnitude, which youth does not palliate, which youth even aggravates. This lies in the most shocking abuse of his mother-tongue. If there is one thing in this world which, next after the flag of his country and its spotless honour, should be holy in the eyes of a young poet, it is the language of his country. He should spend the third part of his life in studying this language and cultivating its total resources. He should be willing to pluck out his right eye, or to circumnavigate the globe, if by such a sacrifice, if by such an exertion, he could attain to greater purity, precision, compass, or idiomatic energy of diction. This if he were even a Kalmuck Tartar, —who, by the way, has the good feeling and patriotism to pride himself upon his beastly language. 45 But Keats was an
[Page 393]
Englishman, Keats had the honour to speak the language of Chaucer, Shakspere, Bacon, Milton, Newton. The more awful was the obligation of his allegiance. And yet upon this mother-tongue, upon this English language, has Keats trampled as with the hoofs of a buffalo. With its syntax, with its prosody, with its idiom, he has played such fantastic tricks as could enter only into the heart of a barbarian, and for which only the anarchy of Chaos could furnish a forgiving audience. Verily it required the “Hyperion” to weigh against the deep treason of these unparalleled offences. 46
NOTES
1 [1] From Tait's Magazine for November and December 1845 and January and April 1846: reprinted by De Quincey in a distributed fashion in his Collective Edition,—the portions relating to Godwin, Foster, and Hazlitt not appearing till vol. xii of that edition (published in 1859), while those relating to Shelley and Keats had appeared as separate articles in vol. vi (published in 1857).—The Rev. George Gilfillan of Dundee (1813–1878), a man of much literary enthusiasm, author of not a few very popular books, and an indefatigable writer for periodicals, knew De Quincey personally, by visits to him in Edinburgh, and latterly by association with him in contributorship to the same Edinburgh periodicals,—first to Tait's Magazine, and afterwards to Hogg's Instructor and Titan. He may be remembered, in fact, as one of De Quincey's junior collaborateurs in the magazine industry of Edinburgh during the last twenty years of De Quincey's life. Among his earliest and best-known publications were three volumes of his collected magazine papers, consisting of sketches and criticisms of contemporary or recent literary celebrities,—the first in 1845 under the title of A Gallery of Literary Portraits, the second in 1850 under the title Second Gallery of Literary Portraits, and the third in 1854 under the title Third Gallery of Literary Portraits. It was the first of these that occasioned the present series of “Notes” from De Quincey's pen in the columns of Tait. He probably wanted to oblige Mr. Tait, who was the publisher of Mr. Gilfillan's volume, and at the same time to do a kindness to Mr. Gilfillan as the author. One observes now, at all events, that among the sketches of celebrities in Mr. Gilfillan's volume was one of De Quincey himself. The opening sentence of this sketch was as follows:—“Conceive a little, pale-faced, woe-begone, and attenuated man, with short indescribables, no coat, check shirt, and neckcloth twisted with a wisp of straw, opening the door of his room in---Street, advancing towards you with a hurried movement and half-recognising glance, saluting you in low and hesitating tones, asking you to be seated, and, after he has taken a seat opposite you, but without looking you in the face, beginning to pour into your willing ear a stream of learning and wisdom as long as you are content to listen or to lend him the slightest cue.” De Quincey was probably too well accustomed to this style of familiarity in the description of his personal appearance to mind it much; and the rest of Mr. Gilfillan's sketch, though with some interspersed criticisms, made ample amends. It was an eloquent and affectionate expression of Mr. Gilfillan's immense admiration of the singular genius of De Quincey. It was not for De Quincey, of course, to notice this particular sketch while reviewing Mr. Gilfillan's book; nor, in fact, did he review the book, in any sense, as a whole. It was sufficient for his kindly purpose to select a few of the many portraits of celebrities included in Mr. Gilfillan's “Gallery,”—about thirty altogether,—and review these. The portraits selected for comment were those of Godwin, Foster, Hazlitt, Shelley, and Keats, respecting each of which De Quincey had something to say in addition to what Mr. Gilfillan had said, or in difference from him.—Although, as we have said, De Quincey dispersed the five sketches when he reprinted them in his Collective Edition, it is best now to keep them together, as originally. They are suggested “Notes” rather than substantive articles; and the reference in each is avowedly to Mr. Gilfillan's book.—M.
2 [1] The first edition of Godwin's Enquiry concerning Political Justice was in 1793, in two quarto volumes; the second in 1795, in two volumes octavo. There was a third edition in 1797, and a fourth in 1798.—M.
3 [2] Things as they Are; or, The Adventures of Caleb Williams: first published in 1794.—M.
4 [1] “Forty years”:—So long, according to my recollection of Boswell, did Dr. Johnson walk about London before he met an old Derbyshire friend, who also had been walking about London with the same punctual regularity for every day of the same forty years. The nodes of intersection did not come round sooner.
5 [2] Henry Glassford Bell, 1803–1874.
6 [1] This play, by George Colman the younger, was produced in 1796.—M.
7 [1] “Desperation”:—Yet, as martyrs are concerned in the picture, it ought to have been said, “of desperation and of farewell to earth,” or something equivalent.
8 [2] The best-known of Foster's writings was, and still is, his Essays, in a Series of Letters, published originally in 1805, when he was minister to a Baptist congregation at Frome in Somersetshire. The Essays were four in number, with these titles: “On a Man's Writing Memoirs of Himself”; “On Decision of Character”; “On the Application of the Epithet Romantic”; “On some of the Causes by which Evangelical Religion has been rendered less acceptable to persons of Cultivated Taste.” These thoughtful Essays, and other later writings from the same pen, were in higher reputation about fifty years ago than they are perhaps at present.—M.
9 [1] The Eclectic Review, started in 1805, was for about sixty years thenceforward an important literary organ of English Evangelical Dissent. Robert Hall and James Montgomery were among its chief contributors; but the most active of all from 1805 to 1843 seems to have been Foster. A selection of his papers in the Eclectic was published in the year after his death.—M.
10 [1] For the titles of the four Essays see ante, p. 335, footnote.—M.
11 [1] Henry Hunt, 1773–1835.—M.
12 [1] Probably Charles Lamb. See ante, Vol. III, pp. 79–83, and Vol. V, p. 232.—M.
13 [1] The book, the proper title of which is Liber Amoris, or The New Pygmalion, was published in 1823. See ante, Vol. III, pp. 79–83, where this story of Hazlitt's frenzied passion has already been told by De Quincey in the course of his “Recollections of Charles Lamb.”—M.
14 [2] Hazlitt's Life of Napoleon was published in four volumes in 1828–30.—M.
15 [3] The time was between 1821, when De Quincey's connexion with the London Magazine had begun by the publication there of his Opium-Eating Confessions, and 1825, when that connexion had ceased. It was during those years that people were anxious to meet “the Opium-Eater” in any of his occasional visits to London.—M.
16 [1] “Son of England”:—i.e. prince of the blood in the direct, and not in the collateral, line. I mention this for the sake of some readers who may not be aware that this beautiful formula, so well known in France, is often transferred by the French writers of memoirs to our English princes, though little used amongst ourselves. Gaston, Duke of Orleans, brother of Louis XIV, was “a son of France,” as being a child of Louis XIII. But the son of Gaston, viz. the Regent Duke of Orleans, was a grandson of France. The first wife of Gaston, our Princess Henrietta, was called “Fille d'Angleterre,” as being a daughter of Charles I. The Princess Charlotte, again, was a daughter of England; her present Majesty, a granddaughter of England. But all these ladies collectively would be called, on the French principle, the Children of England.
17 [1] The obstinacy of the early Quakers in keeping on their hats even in Courts of Law was a constant cause of squabble between them and the Judges.—M.
18 [1] For a more elaborate criticism of Hazlitt's literary style see ante, Vol. V, pp. 230–238.—M.
19 [1] The most complete Bibliography of Hazlitt, I believe, is that privately printed in 1868 by Mr. Alexander Ireland in a volume entitled List of the Writings of William Hazlitt and Leigh Hunt, chronologically arranged; with notes, descriptive, critical, and explanatory.” No one has done so much as much as Mr. Ireland to maintain, or indeed to resuscitate, the memory of Hazlitt; and probably the best and fullest information of all kinds now easily accessible about Hazlitt is that which will be found in Mr. Ireland's recent publication (1889) entitled “William Hazlitt, Essayist and Critic: Selections from his Writings; with a Memoir, Biographical and Critical.”—M.
20 [1] The book of Hazlitt's here referred to was his first publication, having appeared in 1805 with the title “An Essay on the Principles of Human Action: being an argument in favour of the Natural Disinterestedness of the Human Mind.” Mr. Ireland, in his Bibliography of Hazlitt mentioned in last footnote, quotes Sir James Mackintosh's opinion of the book, as summed up in the phrase “A work of great ability,” and quotes also the following words from Hazlitt himself,—“The only thing I ever piqued myself upon was the writing the Essay on the Principles of Human Action.” The Essay, Mr. Ireland also tells us, was reprinted in 1836, six years after Hazlitt's death, with corrections which the author had left in MS., and with the addition of another essay “On Abstract Ideas.”—M.
21 [2] A New and Improved Grammar of the English Tongue: for the Use of Schools. 1810.—This is the abbreviated title. The full title, with notices of the book, is given by Mr. Ireland in his Hazlitt Bibliography.”—M.
22 [1] Transact”:—This word, used in this Roman sense, illustrates the particular mode of Milton's liberties with the English language— liberties which have never yet been properly examined, collated, numbered, or appreciated. In the Roman law transigere expressed the case (as the French word transiger still does) where each of two conflicting parties conceded something of what originally he had claimed as the rigour of his right, and transactio was the technical name for a legal compromise. Milton has here introduced no new word into the English language, but has given a new and more learned sense to an old one. Sometimes, it is true, as in the word sensuous, he introduces a pure coinage of his own, and a most useful coinage; but generally to re-endow an old foundation is the extent of his innovations. M. De Tocqueville is therefore likely to be found wrong in saying that “Milton alone introduced more than six hundred words into the English language, almost all derived from the Latin, the Greek, or the Hebrew.” The passage occurs in the 16th chapter of his “Democracy in America,” Part ii; where M. De Tocqueville is discussing the separate agencies through which democratic life on the one hand, or aristocratic life on the other, affects the changes of language. His English translator, Mr. H. Reeve, an able and philosophic annotator, justly views this bold assertion as “starling, and probably erroneous.
23 [1] Since the boyish period in which these redressing corrections occurred to me, I have seen some reason (upon considering the oriental practice of placing live coals in a pan upon the head, and its meaning as still in use amongst the Turks) to alter the whole interpretation of the passage. It would too much interrupt the tenor of the subject to explain this at length; but, if right, it would equally harmonise with the spirit of Christian morals. [The New Testament passage referred to is Romans xii. 19–20, “Avenge not yourselves, beloved, but give place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance belongeth unto me; I will recompense, saith the Lord. But if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him to drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head.” The general meaning of the passage,—which is an almost exact quotation of the Old Testament passage, Proverbs xxvi. 21–22,—clearly is “For that is the best mode of revenge”; but what is the meaning within this meaning? The interpretation which finds “a fiendish idea” in the words must be “For in so doing, in refraining from vengeance yourself, you ensure a more terrific vengeance from Him to whom vengeance belongs.” Very properly, however, De Quincey thinks this interpretation strained, and seeks another. He does not precisely explain that other; but it seems to have been some form of the interpretation, now pretty generally accepted, which makes “thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head” a metaphor for “thou shalt burn him with remorse, and so melt him down.”—M.]
24 [1] The story is that once, when Shelley and a friend of his were travelling in a stage-coach where the only other inside passenger was a timid-looking old lady, Shelley, after a good deal of preliminary wild talk of a kind likely to alarm the old lady, suddenly completed her horror by squatting down between the seats and addressing his friend with the words of Richard II in Shakespeare's play:— “For God's sake, let us sit upon the ground And tell sad stories of the death of kings.”—M.
25 [1] “Family”:—i.e. the gens in the Roman sense, or collective house. Shelley's own immediate branch of the house did not, in a legal sense, represent the family of Penshurst, because the rights of the lineal descent had settled upon another branch. But his branch had a collateral participation in the glory of the Sidney name, and might, by accidents possible enough, have come to be its sole representative.
26 [1] “Of Custom”:—This alludes to a theory of Shelley's on the subject of marriage as a vicious institution, and an attempt to realise his theory by way of public example; which attempt there is no use in noticing more particularly, as it was subsequently abandoned. Originally he had derived his theory from the writings of Mary Wollstonecraft, the mother of his second wife, whose birth in fact had cost that mother her life. But by the year 1812 (the year following his first marriage) he had so fortified, from other quarters, his previous opinions upon the wickedness of all nuptial ties consecrated by law or by the church that he apologised to his friends for having submitted to the marriage ceremony, as for an offence; but an offence, he pleaded, rendered necessary, by the vicious constitution of society, for the comfort of his female partner.
27 [1] “Two counties”:—The frontier line between Westmoreland and Cumberland traverses obliquely the lake of Ullswater, so that the banks on each side lie partly in both counties.
28 [1] “At that time!”—the reader will say who happens to be aware of the mighty barriers which engirdle Grasmere: viz. Fairfield, Arthur's Chair, Seat Sandal, Steil Fell, &c. (the lowest above the thousand, the higher above three thousand feet high)—“What them? Do the mountains change, and the mountain tarns?” Perhaps not; but, if they do not change in substance or in form, they “change countenance” when they are disfigured from below. One cotton-mill, planted by the side of a torrent, disenchants the scene, and banishes the ideal beauty, even in the case where it leaves the physical beauty untouched: a truth which, many years ago, I saw illustrated in the little hamlet of Church Coniston. But is there any cotton-mill in Grasmere? Not that I have heard; but, if no water has been filched away from Grasmere, there is one water too much which has crept lately into that loveliest of mountain chambers; and that is the “water-cure,”—which has built unto itself a sort of residence in that vale: whether a rustic nest, or a lordly palace, I do not know. Meantime in honesty it must be owned that many years ago the vale was half ruined by an insane substruction carried along the eastern margin of the lake as a basis for a mail-coach road. This infernal mass of solid masonry swept away the loveliest of sylvan recesses, and the most absolutely charmed against intrusive foot or angry echoes. It did worse: it swept away the stateliest of Flora's daughters, and swept away at the same time the birth-place of a well-known verse describing that stately plant, which is perhaps (as a separate line) the most exquisite that the poetry of earth can show. The plant was the Osmunda regalis— “Plant lovelier in its own recess Than Grecian Naiad seen at earliest dawn Tending her fount, or lady of the lake Sole-sitting by the shores of old romance.” It is this last line and a-half which some have held to ascend in beauty as much beyond any single line known to literature as the Osmunda ascends in luxury of splendour above all other ferns. I have restored the original word lake, which the poet himself, under an erroneous impression, had dismissed for mere. But the line rests no longer on an earthly reality: the recess which suggested it is gone; the Osmunda has fled; and, a vile causeway, such as Sin and Death build in Milton over Chaos, fastening it with “asphaltic slime” and “pins of adamant,” having long displaced the loveliest chapel (as I may call it) in the whole natural cathedral of Grasmere, I have since considered Grasmere itself a ruin of its former self.
29 [1] “Alastor”:—i.e. Shelley. Mr. Gilfillan names him thus from the designation self-assumed by Shelley in one of the least intelligible amongst his poems.
30 [2] The immediate cause of the catastrophe was supposed to be this: —Shelley's boat had reached a distance of four miles from the shore, when the storm suddenly arose, and the wind suddenly shifted: “From excessive smoothness,” says Mr. Trelawny, all at once the sea was “foaming, breaking, and getting up into a very heavy swell.” After one hour the swell went down, and towards evening it was almost a calm. The circumstances were all adverse: the gale, the current setting into the gulf, the instantaneous change of wind, acting upon an undecked boat, having all the sheets fast, overladen, and no expert hands on board but one, made the foundering as sudden as it was inevitable. The boat is supposed to have filled to leeward, and (carrying two tons of ballast) to have gone down like a shot. A book found in the pocket of Shelley, and the unaltered state of the dress on all the corpses when washed on shore, sufficiently indicated that not a moment's preparation for meeting the danger had been possible.
31 [1] See “The Seven against Thebes” of Æschylus.
32 [2] Such when thou art, would to God thou wert ours.
33 [1] “The eternal child”:—This beautiful expression, so true in its application to Shelley, I borrow from Mr. Gilfillan; and I am tempted to add the rest of his eloquent parallel between Shelley and Lord Byron, so far as it relates to their external appearance:—“In the forehead and head of Byron there is more massive power and breadth: Shelley's has a smooth, arched, spiritual expression; wrinkle there seems none on his brow; it is as if perpetual youth had there dropped its freshness.”
34 [1] There is one peculiarity about Lucretius which, even in the absence of all anecdotes to that effect, would have led an observing reader to suspect some unsoundness in his brain. It is this, and it lies in his manner:—In all poetic enthusiasm, however grand and sweeping may be its compass, so long as it is healthy and natural, there is a principle of self-restoration in the opposite direction; there is a counter-state of repose, a compensatory state, as in the tides of the sea, which tends continually to re-establish the equipoise. The lull is no less intense than the fury of commotion. But in Lucretius there is no lull. Nor would there seem to be any, were it not for two accidents: first, the occasional pause in his raving tone enforced by the interruption of an episode; secondly, the restraints (or at least the suspensions) imposed upon him by the difficulties of argument conducted in verse. To dispute metrically is as embarrassing as to run or dance when knee-deep in sand. Else, and apart from these counteractions, the motion of the style is not only stormy, but self-kindling and continually accelerated.
35 [1] “Habit of body”: but much more from mismanagement of his body. Dr. Johnson tampered with medical studies, and fancied himself learned enough in such studies to prescribe for his female correspondents. The affectionateness with which he sometimes did this is interesting; but his ignorance of the subject is not the less apparent. In his own case he had the merit of one heroic self-conquest: he weaned himself from wine, once having become convinced that it was injurious. But he never brought himself to take regular exercise. He ate too much at all times of his life. And in another point he betrayed a thoughtlessness which (though really common as laughter) is yet extravagantly childish. Everybody knows that Dr. Johnson was all his life reproaching himself with lying too long in bed. Always he was sinning (for he thought it a sin); always he was repenting; always he was vainly endeavouring to reform. But why vainly? Cannot a resolute man in six weeks bring himself to rise at any hour of the twenty-four? Certainly he can; but not without appropriate means. Now, the doctor rose about eleven A.M. This, he fancied, was shocking; he was determined to rise at eight, or at seven. Very well; why not? But will it be credited that the one sole change occurring to the doctor's mind was to take a flying leap backwards from eleven to eight, without any corresponding leap at the other terminus of his sleep? To rise at eight instead of eleven presupposes that a man goes off to bed at twelve instead of three. Yet this recondite truth never to his dying day dawned on Dr. Johnson's mind. The conscientious man continued to offend; continued to repent; continued to pave a disagreeable place with good intentions, and daily resolutions of amendment; but at length died full of years, without having once seen the sun rise, except in some Homeric description, written (as Mr. Fynes Clinton makes it probable) thirty centuries before. The fact of the sun's rising at all the doctor adopted as a point of faith, and by no means of personal knowledge, from an insinuation to that effect in the most ancient of Greek books.
36 [1] One of these examples is equivocal, in a way that Mr. Gilfillan is apparently not aware of. He cites Tickell, “whose very name,” (he says) “savours of laughter,” as being “in fact a very happy fellow.” In the first place, Tickell would have been likely to “square” at Mr. Gilfillan for that liberty taken with his name, or might even, in Falstaff's language, have tried to “tickle his catastrophe.” It is a ticklish thing to lark with honest men's names. But, secondly, which Tickell? For there are two at the least in the field of English Literature. The first Tickell, who may be described as Addison's Tickell, never tickled anything, that I know of, except Addison's vanity. But Tickell the second, who came into working order about fifty years later, was really a very pleasant fellow. In the time of Burke he diverted the whole nation by his poem of “Anticipation,” in which he anticipated and dramatically rehearsed the course of a whole parliamentary debate (on a forged king's speech) which did not take place till a week or two afterwards. Such a mimicry was easy enough; but that did not prevent its fidelity and characteristic truth from delighting the political world.
37 [1] There is a well-known old Irish ballad, repeatedly cited by Maria Edgeworth, which opens thus:— “There was a young man in Ballinacrasy That took him a wife to make him unasy.” Such to the letter was the life-catastrophe of Addison.
38 [1] For the same reason I refrain from discussing the pretensions of Savage. Mr. Gilfillan gives us to understand that not from want of materials, but of time, he does not (which else he could) prove him to be the man he pretended to be. For my own part, I believe Savage to have been the vilest of swindlers; and in these days, under the surveillance of a searching police, he would have lost the chance which he earned of being hanged,Savage had actually received sentence of death for murder perpetrated in a tavern brawl. The royal elemency interposed most critically to save him from the scaffold, but under an impression utterly without foundation as to his maternal persecutions. Not he by his mother, but his pretended mother by him, was systematically persecuted for years, as a means of extorting money. Suppose his pretensions true, would a person of any manliness have sought to win his daily bread from the terrors of her whom he claimed as his mother? by being long previously transported to the Plantations. how can Mr. Gilfillan allow himself, in a case of this nature, to speak of “universal impression” (if it had even existed) as any separate ground of credibility for Savage's tale? When the public have no access at all to sound means of judging, what matters it in which direction their “impression” lies, or how many thousands swell the belief for which not one in all these thousands has anything like a reason to offer?
39 [1] Keats's first publication was in March 1817, when a volume of poems was brought out for him by Messrs. Ollier; his Endymion, a Poetic Romance, appeared in 1818: his Lamia, Isabella, The Eve of St. Agnes, and other Poems (the fragment of Hyperion included) in 1820.—M.
40 [2] Gifford's famous, or infamous, article on Endymion (a mere scrag of four pages) appeared in the Quarterly Review in April 1818.—M.
41 [1] “Fiery particle”:—Lord Byron is loosely translating the expression of Horace—divinæ particula auræ.
42 [1] “Seems actually inspired by the Titans: it is as sublime as Æschylus” was Byron's estimate of the Hyperion.—M.
43 [2] “A folly”:—We English limit the application of this term to buildings; but the idea might as fitly be illustrated in other objects. For instance, the famous galley presented to one of the Ptolemies, which offered the luxurious accommodations of capital cities, but required a little army of four thousand men to row it, whilst its draught of water was too great to allow of its often approaching the shore,—this was a “folly” in our English sense. So again was the Macedonian phalanx. The Roman legion could form upon any ground: it was a true working tool. But the phalanx was too fine and showy for use. It required for its manœuvring a sort of opera stage, or a select bowling-green, such as few fields of battle offered.
44 [3] I had written the “Empress Catherine”; but, on second thoughts, it occurred to me that the “mighty freak” was, in fact, due to the Empress Elizabeth. There is, however, a freak connected with ice, not quite so “mighty,” but quite as autocratic, and even more feminine in its caprice, which belongs exclusively to the Empress Catherine. A lady had engaged the affections of some young nobleman who was already regarded favourably by the imperial eye. No pretext offered itself for interdicting the marriage; but, by way of freezing it a little at the outset, the Czarina coupled with her permission this condition—that the wedding night should be passed by the young couple on a mattress of her gift. The mattress turned out to be a block of ice, elegantly cut by the court upholsterer into the likeness of a well-stuffed Parisian mattress. One pities the poor bride, whilst it is difficult to avoid laughing in the midst of one's sympathy. But it is to be hoped that no ukase was issued against spreading seven Turkey carpets, by way of under-blankets, over this amiable nuptial present. Amongst others to whom I may refer as having noticed the story is Captain Colville Frankland of the navy.
45 [1] Bergmann, the German traveller, in his account of his long rambles and residence amongst the Kalmucks [see ante, Vol. VII, pp. 8–10—M], makes us acquainted with the delirious vanity which possesses these demi-savages. Their notion is that excellence of every kind, perfection in the least things as in the greatest, is briefly expressed by calling it Kalmuckish. Accordingly, their hideous language, and their vast national poem (doubtless equally hideous), they hold to be the immediate gifts of inspiration; and for this I honour them, as each generation learns both from the lips of their mothers. This great poem, by the way, measures (if I remember) seventeen English miles in length; but the most learned man amongst them, in fact a monster of erudition, never read farther than the eighth milestone. What he could repeat by heart was little more than a mile and a half; and, indeed, that was found too much for the choleric part of his audience. Even the Kalmuck face, which to us foolish Europeans looks so unnecessarily flat and ogre-like, these honest Kalmuckish Tartars have ascertained to be the pure classical model of human beauty; which, in fact, it is, upon the principle of those people who hold that the chief use of a face is not at all to please one's wife, but to frighten one's enemy.
46 [1] The following apologetic sentences for this most inadequate appreciation of Keats occur in De Quincey's Preface in 1857 to the volume of his Collected Writings containing the article (see ante, p. 323):—“In the case of Keats there is something which (after a lapse of several years) I could wish unsaid, or said more gently. It is the denunciation, much too harsh, and disproportioned to the offence, of Keats's licentiousness in the treatment of his mother-tongue: to which venerable mother-tongue Keats certainly did approach with too little reverence, and with a false notion of his rights over it as a material servile to his caprices. But the tone of complaint on my part was too vehement and unmeasured,—though still (as I request the reader to observe) not uttered until Keats had been dead for many years, and had notoriously left no representatives interested in his literary pretensions,—which, besides, are able to protect themselves.”—M.
$$$
