-^'-?^ 



L^l 



c. 



University of 'California. 

aiFT OF 

HENRY DOUGLASS BACON. 

1877, 



Accessions No. ...^.^.(^^.Z.ST Shelf No.-s^...j^::i.... | j 







NOW AND THEN 



NOW AND THEN 



THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY 



BY SAMUEL WARREN, F.R.S. 



AUTHOR OF 



'ten thousand a-year," and the "diary of a late physician' 



THIRD EDITION 




WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS 

EDINBURGH AND LONDON 

MDCCCXLIX 



PRINTEU L'Y WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AX D SONS, EDIVBUHGH. 



TO 

EDWARD WALPOLE WARREN, 

THIS WORK IS INSCRIBED, 
AS A TOKEN OF LOVE, 

BY 

HIS FATHER. 

London, 18th Decemher 1847. 



PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION, 



I AM at a loss for terms in which to express mj 
sense of the favour with which this work has been 
received bj the public, both at home and abroad. 
Two very large editions, thrice as large as I could have 
contemplated, before yielding to the confidence of my 
publishers, were exhausted almost immediately, and 
the second has been now out of print for several 
months. I greatly regret the delay which has occurred 
in bringing out this Third Edition, and the disap- 
pointment which may have been felt by numerous 
applicants for copies of the work. That delay has 
been occasioned by the pressure of numerous engage- 
ments, which prevented my bestowing upon the pre- 
sent Edition the careful revision which it has now 
received. The necessity of that revision may be 
accounted for, by the rapidity and suddenness with 
which " Now and Then" was written, and passed 
through the press. Not a line of the manuscript was 



viii PKEFACK. 

ill existence previously to near midnight on the 20th 
November 1847 ; j^et it was in the hands of the prin- 
ter at a very early hour in the morning of the 9tli of 
December, and was actually published on Saturday the 
1 8th of December; on which day, and the ensuing 
Monday, the entire Edition was disposed of, and the 
second in preparation. During the brief interval above 
mentioned, I wrote principally in the night-time, my 
days being necessarily otherwise occupied. While 
making these statements, however, I anxiously depre- 
cate the imputation of having rushed before an indul- 
gent public without due and respectful consideration ; 
for this story, the elements of which had been long 
floating in my mind, had been thoroughly thought out, 
in all its parts, during the two months immediately 
preceding the day on which I began to write ; and I 
venture to doubt whether many modern books of this 
description have occasioned their Authors more deli- 
berate and anxious consideration, than I had bestowed 
on this one, before sitting down to write. Whatever 
faults of execution and detail may even still be found, 
this at least 1 can truly affirm, that every character, 
conversation, and incident introduced, is the result of 
much reflection, and is in strict subordination to a 
determined purpose, steadily kept in view from begin- 
ning to end. The plan may be faulty, and the con- 



PREFACE. 



ception unsatisfactory ; but such as it is, it has been 
completely carried out. 

I had, as I conceived, very important objects in 
view, in writing this work ; but it would be almost an 
impertinence here to indicate them, for they are suffi- 
ciently obvious to a thinking reader. I have, however, 
two observations to offer on this subject. First, — that I 
most advisedly abstained, for grave reasons, from so con- 
triving tlie plot of the story, as to make it in accordance 
with what is understood by the words " poetical justice'' 
Had I been so minded, few experienced readers can 
avoid perceiving, from the ensuing pages, how abun- 
dantly easy it would have been to effectuate such an 
intention. In the second place, I solemnly disclaim 
an object which a great organ of public opinion, the 
Times newspaper, suggested as likely to have been con- 
templated by the writer of this work, viz. to con- 
tribute towards the abolition of capital punishments, 
even in cases of murder. I am, on the contrary, 
quite agreed in opinion, on that subject, with my 
able reviewer in the Times. I had, in truth, given 
the subject great consideration, long before writing 
this work ; and fear that the legislature has, in 
recent times, gone unwisely, though with praiseworthy 
intentions, too far in abolishing capital punishments. 
Entertaining these views, I feel it rather hard that 



X PREFACE. 

the Author of this work should bo represented — 
as has been the case, not only in this country, but 
on the Continent, and in America — as favouring and 
endeavouring to advance doctrines which he utterly re- 
pudiates. I acknowledge that, as a subsidiary object, 
I have endeavoured to illustrate the awful liability 
to error, to which even the highest and best human 
intellects and institutions are liable, in judging of, and 
dealing with, especially judicially, the events which hap- 
pen around us, in the mysterious scene of action in which 
God has placed mankind — where He has ordained that 
we should hioiu in part only, and see through a glass 
darkly. These are topics suggesting many solem- 
nising and salutary reflections. — On the particular 
subject under consideration, which has been repeatedly 
mentioned to me, as the Author of this work, I express 
my entire concurrence with the critic in question ; who 
says that " if we are to suspend a punishment essential 
to public example, and justified by the laws of God, as 
well as by the oldest sanctions of man, until human 
institutions are rendered absolutely perfect and un- 
erring, we must, on the same grounds, stop short also 
of inflicting smaller penalties for secondary crimes, and 
finally resolve to inflict upon our fellow-creatures no 
punishment whatever." 

I feel constrained to say, that the almost unanimous 



PREFACE. XI 

approbation of this work, expressed bj the public press, 
— overlooking, in a noble spirit, defects of detail, while 
recognising good intentions, — has deeply, indelibly, im- 
pressed my heart. I have also received a surprising 
number of private communications, of a similar kind, 
from persons in all ranks of society, and even in far 
distant lands. I humbly hope that the feelings and 
intentions with which " Now and Then" was written 
will, as some of those communications have suggested, 
bear that terrible test — deathbed reflection. I regarded 
the publishing of this work, as a very bold experiment ; 
and it is impossible to express the anxiety with which 
I awaited the issue, which was destined greatly to 
surpass my most sanguine expectations. 

The title '^ of the work has been variously remarked 
on. It was deemed by myself to be peculiarly signi- 
ficant and suggestive; but I intended that, while it 
should awaken curiosity, the propriety of the words 
should become fully apparent, only on finishing the 
perusal of the work : when " Now and Then'' might 
present themselves under several aspects, to one who 
might have taken the trouble to reflect on the course 
of the narrative. 

The scheme of the story is purposely simple and 

* " For NOW we see through a glass, darkly ; but then face to face : now 
I know in part ; but then shall T know even as also I am known." — 1 Cor. 
xiii. 12. 



Xli PREFACE. 

slight ; but it appeared to afford opportunities for exhi- 
biting human nature under circumstances of exquisite 
interest, difficulty, and perplexity, such as are calcu- 
lated to call into action its strongest passions and high- 
est faculties. The aim of the writer was to deduce, 
from such a display, lessons of sterling value. And 
finally, this work was, with all its imperfections, com- 
posed under a strong sense of the serious moral respon- 
sibility attaching to him who ventures to write for the 
public ; especially if he believes that what he writes has 
the faintest chance of being read by many, or influen- 
cing the feelings, opinions, or conduct of one. 



NOW AND THEN, 



V o'^ THE >e^ 
UiTIT^E^RrSITy: 

CHAPTER I. 

SOMEWHEEE about a hundred years ago (but in which 
of our good kings' reigns, or in which of our sea-coast 
counties, is needless to be known) there stood alone, at a 
little distance from the secluded village of Milverstoke, a 
cottage of the better sort, which no one could have seen, 
without its suggesting to him that he was looking at a cot- 
tage of the true old English kind. It was most snug in 
winter, and in summer very beautiful ; glistening, as then it 
did, in all its fragrant loveliness of jessamine, honeysuckle, 
and sweet-briar. There, also, stood a bee-hive, in the 
centre of the garden, which, stretching down to the road- 
side, was so filled with flowers, especially roses, that nothing 
could be seen of the ground in which they grew ; wherefore 
it might well be, that the busy little personages who occu- 
pied the tiny mansion so situated, conceived that the lines 



2 NOW AND THEN. 

Lad fallen to them in veiy pleasant places indeed. The 
cottage was built substantially, though originally somewhat 
rudely, and principally of sea-shore stones. It had a thick 
thatched overhanging roof, and the walls were low. In 
front there were two latticed windows, one above the other. 
The lower one belonged to tlie room of the building ; the 
higher, which was much smaller, belonged to what might 
be called the chief bed-room ; for there were tln-ee little 
dormitories — two being small, and at the back of the cot- 
tage. Not far behind, and somewhat to the left, stood an 
elm-tree, its trunk covered with ivy ; and it so effectually 
sheltered from the sea breezes the modest little fabric 
beneath, and otherwise so materially contributed to its snug, 
picturesque appearance, that there could be little doubt of 
the tree's having reached its maturity, before there was 
any such structure for it to grace and protect. Beside this 
tree was a wicket, by which was entered a small slip of 
ground, half garden and half orchard. All the foregoing 
formed the remnant of a little freehold property, which had 
belonged to its present owner, and to his family before him, 
for several generations. The mitial letter (^) of then- 
name, x^yliffe, was rudely cut, in old English character, in 
a piece of stone forming a sort of centre facing over the 
doorway ; and no one then living there, knew when that 
letter had been cut. The present owner of the cottage 
was Adam Ayliffe, once a substantial, but now a reduced 
yeoman, well stricken in years, being at the time now 
spoken of not far from his sixty-eighth year, the crown of 
his head was bald, and finely formed ; and the little hair 



NOW AND THEN. ^ 

that lie liad left was of a silvery colour, verging on white. 
His countenance and figure were striking, to an observant 
beholder ; who would have said at once, " That man is of a 
firm and upright character, and has seen trouble," — all 
which was indeed distinctly written in his open Saxon 
features. His eye was of a clear blue, and steadfast in its 
gaze ; and when he spoke, it was with a certain quaintness, 
which seemed in keeping with his simple and stern cha- 
racter. All who had ever known AyliiFe entertained for 
him a deep respect. He was of an independent spirit, 
somewhat taciturn, and of a retiring, contemplative humour. 
His life was utterly blameless, regulated throughout by 
the purifying and elevating influence of Christianity. The 
excellent vicar of the parish in which he lived, reverenced 
him : holding him up as a pattern, and pointing him out 
as one of whom it might be humbly said. Behold an 
Israelite indeed^ in ivJiom is no guile. Yet the last few 
years of his life had been passed in great trouble. 
Ten years before had occurred, in the loss of his wife, who 
had been every way worthy of him, the first great sorrow of 
his life. After twenty years spent together in happiness 
greater than tongue could tell, it had pleased God, who had 
given her to him, to take her away — suddenly, indeed, but 
very gently. He woke one morning, when she woke not, 
but lay sweetly sleeping the sleep of death. His Sarah was 
gone, and thenceforth his great hope was to follow her, and 
be with her again. His spirit was stunned for a while, but 
murmured not ; saymg, with resignation, '' The Lord hath 
given, and the Lord hath taken away : blessed be the name 



4 NOW AND THEN. 

of the Lord." A year or two afterwards occurred to him 
a second trouble, great, but of a different kind. He was 
suddenly reduced almost to beggary. To enable the son of 
an old deceased friend to become a collector of public rates 
in an adjoining county, Ayllffe had unsuspiciously become 
his sm-ety. The man, however, for whom he had done this 
service, fell soon afterwards into intemperate and dissolute 
habits ; dishonesty, as usual, soon followed *, and poor Ay- 
liffe was horrified one evening by being called upon, his 
principal having absconded, a great defaulter, to contribute 
to repair the deficiency, to the full extent of his bond. At 
the time of this sad event, Aylifie was the freehold owner of 
some forty or fifty acres of gromid adjoining his cottage, 
besides having some small sum of money advanced upon 
mortgage to a neighbour, the interest of which he was set- 
ting apart for a purpose which will be presently mentioned. 
But all was suddenly sacrificed:. — not only the little accu- 
mulation of Interest, but the principal from which It had 
grown, — and not only that, but more than half of his land, 
to make good the loss for which he had so mihapplly become 
responsible. This stroke seemed to prostrate poor Aylifie, 
not only on account of his severe pecuniary loss, but his 
cruelly betrayed confidence. Nor was this all. His favourite 
pui-pose had been suddenly defeated : that pui-pose having 
been, to make a provision for the marriage of his only child, 
a son, called after himself, Adam, — bemg the fifth Adam 
Aylifie, father and son, during as many generations. That 
fondly desired object was now unattainable ; and father and 
^ eon shortly afterwards experienced a bitter proof of the too 



NOW AND THEN. 



frequent fickleness of earthly friendships. The girl whose 
hand had been pledged to young Adam, readily broke off 
the match at her parents' desire ; and she being very pretty, 
and they so well to do in the world as would have enabled 
them with ease to set Adam Ayliffe and their daughter com- 
fortably going in life, little difficulty was found in obtam- 
ing a successor to poor Adam, in a thriving young farmer, 
whom, however, if the truth must be told, she had origi- 
nally jilted in his favour. And possibly some paUiative of 
her misconduct in the matter might have been derived from 
the fact, that Adam was not only of an old family, and would 
have succeeded to no inconsiderable hereditary property, but 
was also one of the finest young fellows in the county ; 
with a handsome countenance, of a most engaging frank- 
ness ; a figure tall and well formed; possessed of surpassing 
activity and strength, and of a daring and reckless courage. 
In all manly exercises he excelled every competitor ; and as 
to his feats at singlestick, they were famous in several adjoin- 
ing counties. Every one, in short, liked Adam AyUffe : he 
had a laugh and a good word for all whom he met ; would 
do any thing to obhge any body ; and seemed not to know 
that there was such a thing in the world to be looked after 
as — self. 

It was every where said that a handsomer couple than 
Adam and Phoebe would make, was not to be found. But, 
poor soul ! all his prospects were, as has been seen, in one 
moment blighted ; and Phoebe's heartless desertion hurt 
him far more than the poverty, with its humiliating inci- 
dents, into which he and his father had so unexpectedly 



NOW AND THEN. 



been plimged. His buoyancy of spirits had fled for ever ; 
but the manly simpUcity of character which he had 
inherited from his father, remamed. Much, however, of 
that father's pious teaching it took, to soothe the ruffled 
sph'it of his son. Long was it before any one could 
exchange a smile with Adam Ayliffe the younger. Alas ! 
what a contrast now, between father and son going here- 
tofore together arm in arm to church, the one with his 
great walking-stick, broad hat, and long rough blue coat, and 
face of grave, but not austere composure ; the other gaily 
clad, and his hat somewhat jauntily set upon his curly 
nut-brown hair ; nodding to this one, smiling to the other, 
and taking off his hat to the elder folk ! As the two would 
stand suddenly uncovered while the parson passed or met 
them, on his way into the church, his heart yearned towards 
them both. He thoroughly loved and respected them, and 
was proud of two such specimens of the EngKsh yeoman : 
and, above all, he was charmed with the good example 
which they uniformly set to all his other parishioners. He 
had from Adam's boyhood entertamed a liking for him, 
and had personally bestowed no inconsiderable pains upon 
his education, which, though plain, as suited his position, 
was yet sound and substantial. Greatly concerned had 
been the Vicar, at the disasters befalling the Ayliffes ; nay, 
he went so far as secretly to make an effort to reclami the 
fickle Phoebe : but in vain : it was plainly not to be ; and 
then he sought to satisfy the sorely discomfited suitor, that 
he might depend upon it all would tm^n out for the best. 
The Eev. Henry Hylton, M.A., at the time now spoken 



NOW AND THEN. / 

of, had been Yicar of Milverstoke for nearly twenty years. 
It was a Cambridge College living, of about £300 a-year ; 
the &st that had fallen in for his acceptance, after he had 
obtained his Fellowship, to which, in consequence of his 
distinguished degree, he had been elected almost immedi- 
ately. He was a man of good family ; of powerful intellect 
and accurate scholarship ; deeply read in divinity ; of signal 
decision of character, lofty independence of spirit, and fer- 
vent piety. He, too, was naturally of a cheerful disposition, 
but had been saddened by domestic affliction ; for marrymg, 
shortly after coming to the living, a woman every way fitted 
for her post, of sweet and most amiable temper, they had 
had five childi^en, all of whom had died, except the youngest ; 
a little girl, for whom it may easily be believed that they 
entertained an anxious love passing expression. 

After young Adam's troubles had come upon him, by 
way of occupying or diverting his attention, Mr Hylton 
would have him often to the parsonage, on some kind pre- 
text or other ; one being to copy out some old sermons, the 
manuscript of which had become too small to be read in the 
pulpit conveniently ; the good Vicar's eyesight not being as 
clear and strong as it had been originally. Thus it was 
that Adam came to be constantly thrown into the way of a 
certain maid of Mr Hylton's— Sarah, whose history was 
short, but not uninteresting. She had been left an orphan, 
when young, by a poor widow, a parishioner of Milverstoke, 
who had died some years before ; and Mrs Hylton, having 
taken a liking to the girl, had had her carried, about her 
fourteenth year, to the parsonage, and brought up under 



8 NOAV AND THEN. 

her own eye. Sarah proved a good and grateful girl, and 
became useful, being a good needle- woman, and discreet 
and intelligent ; in short, she was a favom-ite with both Mr 
and ]\Ii's Hylton. Though her countenance was pleasing, 
it could not be called pretty; its expression was pensive 
and thoughtful ; her voice was soft, and pleasant to hear ; 
and her figure slight, but well-proportioned. Now Adam 
and she were often thrown together ; for he used to sit in 
the housekeeper's room, in the evenings, copying out Mr 
Hylton's sermons, none other being present than the house- 
keeper and Sarah: and no one can wonder that Adam 
should often talk of his troubles, particularly touching 
Phoebe. The good housekeeper pronounced her a hussy, 
who would live to repent her shameful conduct ; and assured 
Adam that there were quite as good fish in the sea, as had 
ever come out ; he all the while listenmg in silence, or with 
a sigh, and shaking his head. The last observation, how- 
ever, imperceptibly grew more grateful to his feelings when- 
ever it was repeated. At length it occurred to him that 
Sarah, who was never very voluble, always preserved silence 
when such topic, or any thing akin to it, was mtroduced, and 
looked very steadily at her needlework. One's own heart 
indicates the natural result of all this. On one such occa- 
sion as that just referred to, Sarah ventured to lift up her 
eyes, for an instant, from her work, and glanced timidly at 
Adam, whom she imagined to be busy writing ; but behold! 
he was looking in silence, and rather earnestly, at her. 
Thus was kindled the first spark of love between Adam and 
Sarah ; and, after several years' quiet courtship, long dis- 



NOW AND THEN. » 

couraged, but never absolutely forbidden, by both Mr and 
Mrs Hylton, Adam married Sarah from the parsonage, 
with the full consent of all persons concerned : and then 
took her home to the cottage ; where old Adam Ayliffe, as 
he kissed the pale cheek of the meek and trembling new- 
comer, welcomed them both with a solemn and affecting 
benediction that was quite patriarchal. 

" Daughter-in-law," said he, " I am poor : so is this thy hus- 
band ; and we may become poorer : but here is that which 
will make those rich, who rely on it. Give me thy hand, 
Sarah, and thine, Adam," said he, and placed them, with his 
own, upon the cover of the old family Bible : ^' Promise, 
with the blessing of Him who gave us this Book, never to 
look beyond it, in time of trouble, nor then to forget it. 
Thus promised my Sarah when God gave her to me, who 
hath since taken her away again !" 

The old man's voice here trembled, but failed him not. 
Then he tenderly embraced both his son and daughter- 
in-law, the latter weeping much ; and they sat down to their 
frugal repast, with such cheerfulness as they might. 

Adam and his son had for some time betaken themselves 
to labour, for their subsistence ; and on this marriage taking 
place, both found it necessary to redouble their exertions, 
in order to meet their augmented expenditure; for small 
though it might be at first, prudence warned them to pre- 
pare against any probable increase of it. Bitter, bitter in- 
deed was it to young Ayliffe, when first he saw his vener- 
able father enter into the capacity of a hireling ; but not so 
with that father, who heartily thanked God for the strength 



10 NOW AND THEN. 

whicli he still had, and the opportunity of profitably exert- 
ing that strength. 'Twas somewhat late in the day, to be 
sure : but the necessity had not arisen from his fault. 
Labour was the lot of man : this he knew ; and was rever- 
ently content w^ith that lot. 

These three were the sole occupants of the cottage : and 
Mrs Ayliffe, being as one might say neatness personified, 
felt a pride in keeping her pretty residence in fitting order. 
Often, however, when her husband and father-in-law were 
absent at their labour, to which they would go early, and 
from which they would often retmni late, she thought with 
trembling solicitude about the future ; for in due time she 
had the prospect of becoming a mother. The sight of her 
venerable father-in-law thus daily going to, and returning 
from, his labour, at a time when he ought to have been 
enjoying the repose suited to his years, greatly distressed 
her*, and sometimes she would secretly reproach herself 
for having added even a straw's weight to his burthens, by 
becoming the wife of his son. That son, however, loved 
her tenderly ; and with, perhaps, a more lasting affection 
than ever he might have entertained for her whose place 
she had so unexpectedly occupied. Both he and his father 
engaged themselves in their labours with sustained alacrity. 
But a year and a half's severe and constant exertion, told 
more heavily on old Adam's impaired physical powders, than 
he had calculated upon ; and to his grievous mortification, 
the doctor at length positively forbade his resuming work 
of any kind, for several months to come. So the old man 
was not only obliged to lay up, but to incur considerable 



NOW AND THEN. 11 

expense by medical attendance, rendered necessary by a 
serious injiuy, which strong exertion, at his time of life, 
was but too sure to occasion. 

About a year after her marriage, poor Mrs AyUfFe 
brought her husband, at the peril of her own life, a son. 
She had, indeed, a terrible time of it, and did not quit her 
bed for three months, nor the cottage, for two months 
after that; during the whole of that period being quite 
unable to manage her household affairs, — small, it was true 
— but requiring, nevertheless, constant attention. Alas ! 
how were all these sadly increased exigencies, and that of 
medical attendance, to be encountered and provided for? 
There was but the labour of young Ayliffe, itself producing 
no great results, but still sufficient, with good management 
and frugality, to supply their daily necessities. They had 
also no house-rent to pay : but how long might that be the 
case ? For abeady had arisen the sad necessity of parting 
with another portion of the land which still constituted the 
family property. It had cost old Ayliffe a bitter pang to 
sacrifice an acre of that land ; yet had he been obliged to 
do so, and was now again driven to repeat the sacrifice. 
All hitherto sold, had been purchased on account of the 
Earl of Milverstoke — a nobleman of ancient lineage and 
vast possessions, whose principal country residence, Milver- 
stoke Castle, a magnificent structure, stood at nearly two 
miles' distance from Ayliffe's cottage. Much must presently 
be said of this distinguished personage ; for such, indeed, 
he was, even were it only in respect of his lofty personal 
character, his great talents, and the high political position 



12 NOW AND THEN. 

which he had occupied. Suffice it at present to say, that 
the Earl did not give himself much personal concern about 
the management of his estates, but devolved it upon others 
— upon local agents, all under the control of one principal, 
who lived in London. The Earl's agent at Milverstoke 
was ^Ir Oxley, formerly a land-valuer in the adjoining 
county, a shrewd and energetic man, devoted to the Earl's 
interests, but occasionally acting in a way not likely to 
secure to his noble employer the good-will of those who 
were connected with him as tenants or neighbours ; for little 
cared Mr Oxley about hui'ting the feelings of any one who 
stood between him and any of his purposes. He it was 
who had negotiated the purchase of the land which old 
Ayliffe had been forced to sell, in consequence of the vil- 
lany of the person for whom he had become bound ; and 
the object of Mr Oxley, in making that pmxhase, was the 
furtherance of a favom-ite scheme which he had for some 
time had in view, and which had met with the Earl's own 
approbation, of making a new approach to the Castle, 
through the woods at the back of it, instead of the present 
road, which was somewhat inconvenient with reference to 
the highway, and very circuitous. 

This object could not, however, be attained, unless all the 
remaining property of Ayliffe could be acquired by the 
Earl ; whose agent had teased and harassed xlyliffe on the 
subject, to an extent which only one of so well-regulated 
a temper as his, could have tolerated with any thing like 
calmness. The new road to the Castle, it was intended, 
should pass exactly over the present site of the cottage ; 



NOW AND THEN. 13 

which therefore had long been a grievous eyesore to Mr 
Oxlej, as a monument at once of his own abortive negotia- 
tion, and, as lie chose to consider it, AyKfFe's dogged obsti- 
nacy. In vain the old man earnestly told him that it would 
break his heart to be separated for ever from the property 
of his fathers — to see their residence pulled down, and all 
trace of it destroyed ; in vaui did the selfish matter-of-fact 
man of business hear that Ayliffe hadv solemnly promised 
his father, on his death-bed, not to part with the cottage so 
long as he had a crust of bread to eat in it, and a son to 
succeed to it. Mr Oxley largely increased, and finally 
doubled, his original offer, on hearing these cunning pre- 
texts, for such to him they appeared, urged so pertinaciously ; 
but the old yeoman was not to be tempted : and his resolu- 
tion irritated Mr Oxley the more, because the latter, never 
dreaming of having to encounter such an obstacle, had 
somewhat precipitately pledged himself to the Earl, that 
his Lordship might depend upon the new road to the Castle 
being laid down, by a day which had — long passed by. A 
last and desperate effort was made by Mr Oxley, on behalf 
of his noble principal, who little dreamed of the real state 
of the case : or, high-minded as he was, he would have 
sacrificed a thousand acres of his richest land, rather than 
have sanctioned the ungracious and unwarrantable proceed- 
ings attempted on his behalf. But his Lordship had only 
recently made Milverstoke his constant residence, on his 
somewhat sudden retirement from public life, and probably 
knew httle or nothing of what went on in his name, and 
professedly on his behalf; while of Ayliffe and his property, 



] 4 NOW AND THEN. 

the Earl knew little more than that there was a small free- 
holder of that name, livmg at a short distance from the 
Castle, whose slight interest in the soil it would be necessary 
to purchase, before the contemplated approach could be 
made from the high road to the Castle. On the occasion 
just alluded to, as witnessing the last eager effort of Mr 
Oxley to effect liis purpose, Ayliffe and his son were to- 
gether in the cottage ; and the former, unprovoked by much 
intemperate and coarse language, which, however, greatly 
incensed the latter, finally, but quietly, told Mr Oxley that 
he would talk no more with him on the subject : " And as 
for my Lord," he added, with a calm, though somewhat 
stern smile, " let him be satisfied with what he hath ; the 
Castle for him, the cottage for me ! " 

"Be not a fool, Adam Ayliffe — know your interest 
and duty better," replied Mr Oxley; '^depend upon it, 
I will not throw all this my trouble away, nor shall my 
Lord be disappointed. Listen, therefore, once for all, to 
reason, and take what is offered, which is princely, and be 
thankful!" 

" Well, well," said Ayliffe ; " it seems that I cannot say 
that which will suit thee, good Mr Oxley. Yet once more 
will I try, and with words that perhaps may reach the ear 
which mine cannot. Wilt thou hear me ?" 

" Ay, I will hear, sure enough, friend Adam," said Mr 
Oxley, cm-iously ; on which Ayliffe took do^Am from the top 
of the clock, which stood in the corner, a large old brass- 
bound Bible, and, opening it on his lap, read with deliberate 
emphasis, as follows : — 



NOW AND THEN. 15 

" Nabotli, tlie Jezreelite, liacl a vineyard which was in 
Jezreel, hard by the palace of Ahab, King of Samaria. 

^' And Ahab spake unto Naboth, saying, ' Give me thy 
vineyard, that I may have it for a garden of herbs, because 
it is near unto my house : and I will give thee for it 
a better vineyard than it ; or if it seem good to thee, I will 
give thee the worth of it in money.' 

^' And Naboth said unto Ahab, ' The Lord forbid it me, 
that I should give the inheritance of my fathers imto thee.' " 

When he had read these last words, which he did very 
solemnly, Ayliffe closed the Bible, and gazed at Mr Oxley 
in silence. For a moment the latter seemed somewhat 
staggered by what he saw, and what he had heard ; but at 
length — " Oh, ho, Adam ! do you make your Bible speak 
for you, in business ?" said he, in a tone of rude jocularity. 
" Well, I shall wish you good day for some little while, it 
may be, and good luck to you here. It is somewhat of a 
bit of a place," he continued, as he drew on his gloves, 
glancing, at the same time, contemptuously round the little 
room, "to set such store by; but be patient — be patient, 
Adam ; there is one somewhat larger that will be ready for 
you by-and-bye." 

This insulting allusion to the workliouse, or the county 
gaol, old Ayliffe received in dignified silence. !N^ot so, 
however, his son ; who, rising with ominous calmness from 
the chair on which he had for some time been sitting, as it 
were on thorns, and silent only out of habitual deference to 
his father, approached Mr Oxley m two strides, seized him 
by the collar with the hand of a giant, and before his 



16 NOW AND THEN. 

astonished father could interpose, had dragged Mr Oxley 
to the doorway, and, with a single jerk, flung him out into 
the open air with a violence which sent him staggering 
several yards, till he fell down at full length on the ground. 

" Adam, Adam, what hast thou done?" commenced his 
father, approaching his son with an astounded air. 

^' Nay, never mind we, father," muttered his son, vehe- 
mently, standing with arms a-kimbo, and watching Mr 
Oxley, with eyes flashing fury. ^' There, Master Oxley ; 
show never here agam that wizened face of yours, or worse 
may happen. Away! Back to the Castle, and tell him 
that sent you here what you have received ! Off" ! out into 
the road," he added, raising his voice, and stnding towards 
Mr Oxley, wdio precipitately quitted the garden, " or I'll 
teach you to speak of the workhouse again ! See that the 
dogs lick not''"' — 

"Adam! I charge thee — hold thy peace!" said the old 
man, loudly and authoritatively, and advancing towards Mr 
Oxley *, who, however, after muttering a few words, heard 
by the old man, and glancing furiously at young Ayliffe, 
hastily mounted his horse, which had been standing fastened 
at the gate, and was soon out of hearing. About that time 
in the ensuing day, he had contrived, during an interview 
on business with the Earl, to intimate, as if casually only, 
that the Aylifles, who owned the road-side cottage, had 
received the liberal overtures made by Mr Oxley on his 
Lordship's behalf, with expressions of coarse disrespect, and 
even malignant hostility. Not a word, however, said 'My 
Oxley of the violent treatment which he had received at the 



NOW AND THEN, 



hands of young AylilFe ; nor did he deem it expedient, for 
reasons of his own, to summon his assailant to answer before 
the magistrates for what he had done. Would that the Earl 
of Milverstoke had received the slightest inkling of the 
occurrence of the day before, — of the spirit and temper in 
which Mr Oxley's negotiations, if such they could be called, 
had been carried on with the venerable yeoman. Such 
information, however, was of course not to be expected from 
Mr Oxley. Would-, then, that it had occurred to Ayliife or 
his son to go resolutely up to the Castle, insist on seeing its 
stern secluded lord, and apprise him of the insulting and 
oppressive line of conduct which had been pursued on his 
behalf. Mr Oxley, unless his denial had been believed, 
would have fled blighted from the presence of his lord, who 
would have told him in a voice of thunder to give an account 
of his stewardship, for that he might be no longer steward. 
But it fell not out so. Such a step was never dreamed of 
by either of the Ayliffes ; who, on the contrary, rather 
anxiously awaited some vindictive movement on the part 
of Mr Oxley. He seemed, however, disposed to take 
no notice of what had happened ; and the untoward 
occurrence appeared not likely to be followed by its 
apprehended consequences. 

Ayliffe received no more molestation from Mr Oxley, or 
any one else, with the view of compelling him to surrender 
the poor remnant of his little patrimonial estate. That 
gentleman probably thought it his wisest course, hoping that 
distress might effect what negotiation had failed in, to bide 
his time, as far as concerned the Earl's interests, with refer- 



18 NOW AND THEN. 

ence to gahilng possession of AylifFe's cottage and the slip 
of ground still remaining attached to it, and on which stood 
the small orchard and garden which have been already men- 
tioned. All the rest poor old AylifFe had been compelled to 
dispose of with reluctance and agony, during the troubled 
two years and a half, or thi-ee years, ensuing on his son's 
marriage. Like any slave in the plantations worked that 
son, from morning to night, with fond willingness, to sup- 
port those who were so dear to him ; and being also stunu- 
lated by an honourable ambition to preserve in his family 
the cherished spot where the parents from whom he sprung 
had been born, which, moreover, seemed infinitely enhanced 
to him in value, now that he had become himself a father — 
the father of yet another Adam AylifFe, for so the child had 
been christened. But, alas ! the poor thmg gave no pro- 
mise of its father's comeliness or strength, being, on the 
contrary, small and feeble from its birth, and likely to be 
reared, if at all, with difficulty. This little heir to misfor- 
tune and misery, however, had yet a further claim on the 
pity of every beholder ; for, in the momentary absence of 
the woman intrusted with the care of it, on the occasion of 
her being suddenly summoned to the bedside of its apparently 
dying mother, the child fell from the chair on which it had 
been hastily and imprudently left, occasioning mjuries, the 
effects of which would remain through life. This last 
occurrence grievously disturbed the equanmiity of even old 
Ayliffe, and drove the more excitable temperament of his 
son almost to frenzy. When the poor mother, too, heard 
of what had happened — for how could it be concealed 



NOW AND THEN. 19 

effectually ? — it caused a relapse which nearly proved fatal. 
Here was wretchedness indeed ! and wretchedness of which 
the sufferers saw no end ! Had it not been for the teaching 
and example afforded by the father, young Ayliffe would 
have fallen into a gloomy irreHgious humour, sullenly ques- 
tioning the goodness and wisdom of Him without whose 
knowledge and permission this sad blow had not descended 
upon either parent or child. For a time, that which was 
unaccountable in this visitation of Providence, seemed also 
unreasonable and unjust ! To both his father and to Mr 
Hylton, young Ayliffe once morosely declared, that the 
spirit of a m^an could not bear flat injustice, come from ivJiom. it 
might! and asked — ^What had this poor child done ? — what 
had its mother ? — what had its father done to deserve such 
an infliction ? " Questions, these, Adam," said Mr Hylton, 
kmdly, but very gravely, " which millions upon millions of 
mankind have asked, in their own various troubles, v/ho 
soon afterwards saw causes showuig the wisdom and good- 
ness which had permitted those troubles to happen, and 
vindicating the justice by which they had been ordained. 
Are you, Adam, the only one chastened by adverse visita- 
tions from God?" mquired Mr Hylton earnestly, his eyes 
filling with tears. '' Look at him who now addi'esses you : 
why have my four children, whom I as dearly loved as ever 
you loved this poor babe, been taken from me, and after 
years of suffering, pain, and misery ? why do they now lie 
mouldering into dust in yonder churchyard ?" 

Adam's lip quivered; his heart was softened; and his 
wife, in whose weak arms lay the injured infant, gently 



20 NOW AND THEN. 

leaned down, and kissed its pale unconscious cheek, with 
emotions which none but a mother could feel. To her, and 
to her husband, their poor child became infinitely dearer 
from this its misfortune, — it was enshrined, as it were, in 
their very heart of hearts. Possibly, had it not suffered so 
severely, it might never have been loved so dearly. 



NOW AND THEN. 21 



CHAPTER II. 

The straits to which the AyHfFes were driven could not 
escape the notice of the kind-hearted inhabitants of the 
village, notwithstanding the stem reserve of the old man, 
and the somewhat angry and proud impatience of the son ; 
who had rejected several friendly offers of assistance, with a 
morbid sensitiveness for which all considerate persons could 
make ample allowance. He would not, he said, live on 
charity, while he had health to work, and they could manage 
to keep their own freehold house over their heads. It was, 
however, very hard to sustain these proud feelings when he 
looked at his father, and his emaciated wife, and thought of 
her privations, borne with apparently a cheerful indiffer- 
ence, which quite vanished the instant that his back was 
turned. Many marks of substantial kindness were, with 
delicate consideration, forced upon them from the parsonage ; 
and whatever came, indeed, from that hallowed quarter, 
young Ayliffe received with a kind of reverential gratitude. 
Mr Hylton had no income except that derived from his 
vicarage ; and being very easy in the matter of his tithes, 
was sometimes not inconsiderably inconvenienced by the 
dilatoriness with which they were paid. Yet his charities. 



22 



NOW AND THEN. 



substantial and unostentatious, failed not : good Mrs Hylton, 
with her faithful housekeeper, made their cowslip, ginger, 
and elderberry wine, ever in due season ; and many a bottle 
of it had been carried by Mr Hylton hunself, on his visits 
to those who needed it. He kept but one cow, which went 
by the name of Every-one's-Cow ; because, as soon as suffi- 
cient for the parsonage had been taken from what the good 
cow yielded at milking-time, the remamder was at the ser- 
vice of the poorer inhabitants of the village, who might 
always be seen trudging for this purpose, pitcher ui hand, 
towards the parsonage, morning and evening. 

Ayliffe had told Mr Hylton, but only in general tenns, 
of the coarse and offensive treatment which he had expe- 
rienced from Mr Oxley ; and Mr Hylton was also thoroughly 
aware of the fond tenacity with which old Adam climg to 
the last link connectmg him with the soil, which Mr Oxley 
would sever with such heartless and mde indifference. Mr 
Hylton's best sympathies, indeed, were with the old yeoman, 
whom he had from time to thne, with cordial alacrity, 
assisted by loans of small sums of money, to enable him, as 
the phrase runs, "to keep his head above water " as long 
as possible. Mr Oxley was seen through and despised 
by Mr Hylton. The former perfectly well knew the esti- 
mation in which he was held by the latter; who, however, 
for the sake of parish peace, exhibited a constramed but 
perfectly dismterested civility, towards one who was invested 
with so much authority as enabled him, when so disposed, 
to turn tyrant over those whom Mr Hylton loved — his 
poorer parishioners— with almost absolute impunity. He 



NOW AND THEN. 23 

was not on such terms with Mr Oxley as would have war- 
ranted interference between him and the AyHfFes, even had 
there been any practical mode of doing so successfully. For, 
indeed, what was Mr Hylton to do ? what could he prevent 
Mr Oxley from doing ? The latter had planned an improve- 
ment in the Earl's property, to which the acquisition of 
Ayliffe's would be very conducive; and Mr Oxley had 
used every exertion which had occurred to him, to eifect 
his purpose, in vain. He professed no intention, as he 
certainly had no power, to force Ayliffe to comply with 
his wishes ; and, as the latter was fixedly resolved not to 
part with his last sad shred of interest in his native soil, 
till absolutely compelled to do so, Mr Hylton saw that, 
whatever might be his wish, and his opinion of Mr Oxley's 
diaracter, he could not interfere between them for any 
practical purpose. He saw, alas ! but too clearly, that 
the old man's grasp, however desperate, was very, very 
feeble, and could not be long maintained, unless some deci- 
sive and permanent change in his circumstances were to take 
place. The sad inhabitants of the cottage were aware of 
some efforts which Mr Hylton was making on behalf of the 
younger Ayliffe ; for whom he was endeavouring to procure 
a permanent situation, as a resident schoolmaster, in a school 
conducted on a new plan, which Mr Hylton had been for 
some time anxious to establish at Milverstoke. With what 
tenacity did they cling to this solitary plank in the sea of 
sorrow in which they were buffeting ! Yet were their hopes, 
here, doomed to be disappointed; since Mr Oxley, deter- 
mined to defeat young Ayliffe, brought forward a person as 



24 NOW AND THEN. 

candidate for the office, whom, therefore, there was no possi- 
bility of rejecting ; for the Earl of Milverstoke had given the 
site for the school, and, through Mr Oxley, provided funds 
for the building of it, and promised to contnbute largely to 
its support. 

Baffled here, Mr Hylton bethought himself of a similar 
opening which was about to occur in an adjoining coimty ; 
where, in the parish of a friend of his, a school was being 
erected on a much larger scale than that in Milverstoke, 
with a commensurate superiority of advantages to the per- 
son who might be so fortunate as to obtain the appointment 
of master. His move in this quarter, however, he did not 
communicate to the Ayliffes, lest he should excite hopes 
which might never be realised. His strenuously expressed 
opinion in favour of AylifFe, his account of the family to 
which he belonged, and of the exemplary father by whom 
he had been brought up, and personal testimony to his qua- 
lifications for the office, — were likely to have great weight 
with the persons with whom Mr Hylton was thus good- 
naturedly negotiating. He observed with pain the effects 
which long-continued anxiety were producing in young Ay- 
liffe ; on whose manly but harassed features he had not seen 
a smile, nor any thing approaching to one, for many a long 
day. He had become silent and reserved ; and Mr Hylton 
feared lest a tendency to moroseness should be established, 
such as it might be difficult to overcome ; for he learnt from 
old Ayliffe that his son no longer seemed desu'ous of con- 
versing with him, as formerly, on their circumstances ; and 
when the old man read aloud the usual morning and even- 



NOW AND THEN. 25 

ing chapter in the Bible, he could not but observe that his 
son lacked much of that serious and earnest attentiveness 
with which he had, from his youth up, joined in the family 
devotions. And an effort it appeared also to poor Mrs 
Ayliffe to do so ; who, while holding her crippled child in 
her lap, would fix her eyes on the moody face of her hus- 
band, too well knowing, the while, how and whither his 
thoughts were wandering. 

One night, as she told Mr Hylton with sobs and tears, 
her husband started up in bed, and, after sitting in silence 
for some time beside her, said, 

" And all this, Sarah, has come upon us from the chari- 
table deed my good father did do towards another, in 
giving security ! Who can make me believe that that is 
just? Sarah, Sarah, this is very strange ! " 

This she mentioned also to old Ayliffe, who received it 
with stem expressions of sorrow. 

" With me," said he, " my son will not now hold talk, 
nor scarcely listen to me, with the duty which he oweth to 
an old father, who hath ever striven to teach him aright ! 
But, Sarah, be not thou guided by him herein. It is a 
spirit undevout and rebeUious, and may be grievously chas- 
tised by God. I never said before, Sarah, be not guided by 
thy husband — but now I do ; for when he thus speaks, it is 
not he, but Satan through him : and God deliver my son 
and thy husband Adam, from this peril to his soul ! " 

On the same day on which the old man thus rebuked the 
distrustfulness of his son, his own fortitude was not a little 
tried by an incident sadly indicative of his rapidly-failing 



26 NOW AND THEN. 

circumstances. One bj one head been parted with the 
chief articles of furniture which had for so many years 
made their little sitting-room a model of neatness and com- 
fort, — articles which had gone, with as much privacy as might 
be, by the carrier's cart, to be disposed of in the ncigh- 
bouiing market-town. With aching hearts the owners 
saw them removed, and with heavy misgivings received 
the petty produce of them. Still was there, however, in 
the corner, the clock which has akeady been mentioned ; 
old-fashioned, and in a dark oaken case, curiously cai-ved, 
and w^hich had stood on the same spot, going tich^ tick^ with 
exemplary regularity, for more than half a centuiy, but was 
that evening to cease performing its monitory functions in 
the cottage : having been sold by old Ayliffe, during the day, 
for three pomids, to a chandler living in the village, thi'iving, 
and just married ; and who was presently coming to fetch 
away his purchase in liis cart. The top of the clock had, 
during all the years which have been mentioned, formed the 
resting-place of the family Bible before spoken of; a large 
old-fashioned volume, with heavy brass clasps and corners, 
kept, by frequent handling, in constant brightness. Quaint 
and mysterious were the pictures illustrating the text of the 
Holy Volume ; and by how many of the xVyliffe family, now 
dead and gone, had that volume been read, and hung over, 
with solemn and enchaining interest ! Yet so carefully had 
it ever been preserved, that not a leaf w^as missing, or bore 
noticeable marks of injury. The spare leaves at the 
beginning and the end, w^ere covered with entries of a 
century's births, deaths, and marriages among the AyHifes. 



NOW xVND THEN. 2? 

There seemed scarcely room for above three or four more ; 
yet one would soon be required, of another bh'th ! — and, as 
old Ayliffe glanced at the abridged space remaming, he 
sadly wondered whether room would be found for a certain 
brief entry by-and-by, concerning himself ! 

It is impossible to deny that, as old Ayliffe sat by the dull 
red fire on the hearth, gazing at the old familiar face of the 
clock, knowing that he did so for the last time in his life, 
and that on the ensuing day that old clock would be standing, 
with its grave methodical tich^ iick^ amidst a new circle of 
faces at the chandler's, its new proprietor, he felt an inex- 
pressible melancholy. Never would three pounds have been 
so precious as at that moment, presenting themselves to 
avert the coming spoliation! But it was not to be; the 
clock must go ; and those whom it had so long served, so 
long guided and warned, must do without it. On that 
evening Ayliffe had read to his daughter-in-law the last 
chapter of Job; the preceding ones having been read 
regularly every evening, from the first chapter. Old Ayliffe, 
as had ever been his wont, read aloud the Bible : and 
methinks it was a subject for a keen-observing painter, to 
see the old man, and his son and daughter, in that their 
partially stripped cottage, awaiting its entire dismanthng, 
nay, its transfer to strangers, — the first reading with grave 
energy, and the others earnestly listening, to the sublime 
book of Job. Ayliffe's voice now and then trembled some- 
what while reading passages exactly applicable to his own 
situation and cii'cumstances ; but, generally speaking, he 
discharged his duty with dignified composure and firmness, 



28 NOW AND THEN. 

albeit with a certain rough and quaint simplicity. As he 
finished the last verse of the last chapter, and closed the 
book, — 

" Ah, good father !" said Mrs AylifFe, with a sigh, " how 
happy and grand Job must have been at the last ! I wish 
that such things would happen to those who soiTowfiilly read 
his griefs and trials !" 

Old Ayliffe remained silent for some time ; and then said, 
looking at her with a grave reproving air, 

" Sarah, didst thou notice that naught is said in this last 
chapter concerning Job's wife ?" 

" No, good father — ^but now I do," she replied — " And 
why is it?" 

" There is a reason for it, Sarah ; that thou may est rely 
on. She perhaps was not let into her husband's prospeiity 
and rejoicing," — he looked at her keenly, — " because she 
had said to him in his trouble, when God's hand was heavy 
on him. Curse God^ and die. And these thuags, Sarah, He 
forgetteth not." 

His daughter-in-law raised her hand to her eyes, and 
submitted to the old man's kind and calm reproof in tearful 
silence ; for she remembered a hasty expression of her own, 
in his presence, some day or two before, which, in spmt, had 
fallen not far short of the impious language of Job's wife. 
While they were thus talkmg, was heard the nimbling of 
approaching cart-wheels, on which AylifFe rose and went to 
the door ; and shading his eyes with liis hand, as he looked up 
the road, saw that it was the chandler's cart coming for the 
clock. On this he returned rather suddenly, to await the 



NOW AND THEN. 29 

moment of his friend's departure; gazing with a sort of 
fondness at the poor old clock's face : " Good-bye, good-bye/' 
said he, within himself, " I do not willingly bid thee go ; but 
go thou must : and how soon we must follow thee, and quit 
this, our little home, who can tell ? " Now approached 
to the door the two men who had come for the clock, 
which they removed very carefully ; AylifFe scarcely open- 
ing his lips the while, but looking on in troubled silence. 
At length the business being ended, the men bade him 
respectfully "Good evening;" the cart rattled heavily 
away ; and Ayliffe gazed at the corner then standing- 
vacant for the first time during half a century, with moist 
eyes and unutterable feelings. 

How gloomily did all this herald in the approaching 
Christmas ! 

All hail, thou season of rightful, but solemn and elevating- 
joy! Oh, what EVENT, gracious, stupendous, and awful, 
dost thou not commemorate ? What but the mysterious, yet 
foretold, advent of the Almighty Eedeemer of mankind, the 
joy and glory of heaven and earth ! In the wrapt con- 
templation, behold the very dust of earth become instinct 
with heavenly intelligence : even as the stars sang together 
for joy ! Let a universal HOSANNAH fill the hearts and 
voices of mankind. For He came ! and was God with 
Us ; dwelling in the flesh ! With us ! Here ! on this 
dim speck, amidst the bewildering and inconceivable vast- 
ness of the universe, singled out for such purpose in the 
unsearchable wisdom of the Most High ! Angels unseen ! 
bow with us, your present dust-clad brethren, your heads in 



30 NOW AND THEN. 

awe profound ! Together let us celebrate this ^Mystery, 
saying, " Glory to God in the highest ; and on earth, peace, 
GOOD-AVILL TOWARDS MEN ! " Thus, heaven-kindled, is 
the joy ousness of Christmas: soul-elevating: heart-opening. 
Therefore do all Christian people welcome this solemnly 
cheerful season; their hearts being first prostrate before 
God, and then expanding towards man, in deeds of charity 
and virtue. 

But the coming of this hallowed season cannot, alas ! 
banish gloom, poverty, and wretchedness, — no, not even for 
one day — from among mankind. The great and the hmnble, 
the distmguished and the obscure, the rich and the poor, 
the gifted and the simple, may alike have their happy or 
their miserable Christmas! Be the season, therefore, 
approached with mingled fear and hope ; and, when past, 
regarded with pious reflection, with cheerful submission, 
and reverential gratitude. 

How bleak and bhghting was to the Ayliffes the aspect 
of the coming Christmas ! How different the feelings with 
which father and son regarded it ! It is not to be denied 
that there was becommg evident a great difference between 
their views and feelings ; those of the one tending towards 
a sullen intolerance of that adversity, which the other bore 
with faithful humility and resignation. During the week 
preceding, there had occurred between old Ayliffe and his 
son, their first serious dispute and misunderstanding ; and 
it arose as follows. Anxiety and privation were doing 
their work conspicuously upon the health and appearance of 
Mrs Ayliffe, who was shortly expecting to become again a 



NOW AND THEN. 31 

mother ; and, judging from a former occasion, with what a 
prospect before her ! The sight of her sweet but careworn 
face was to her husband agony insupportable ; and it sent 
her good father-m-law often to liis knees in private. The 
doctor who had attended her before, was again engaged ; 
and never left her without speaking of the necessity of 
nourishing food, which alone, he said, would go far to help 
her through her coming trouble. The son would listen to 
this with a quivering lip and a full heart ; inwardly ex- 
claiming, as the doctor spoke, '^ Nourishing food ! Heaven 
help thee, dear Sarah, where is it to be got?'' With 
these thoughts in his mind, burthening and depressing it, he 
went one day to his work at a farmer's, at some distance 
from Milverstoke, having only one companion the whole 
day long : but that companion appearing goodnatured and 
communicative, the frank young Ayliife could not refrain 
from talking about that which was upperaiost in his thoughts 
— the feeble condition of his wife, and her doctor's constant 
recommendation of nourishing food. " And why do not you 
get it, if you care for her?" inquired his companion, with 
a surprised aii', resting, a moment from his work. 

" Surely," quoth poor Ayliffe, " you should ask me why 
I do not get one of the stars out of the sky. Is meat to be 
picked up in the high-road ? " 

" No ; not in the high-road," said the other, drily, " but 
there's dainty eating for the sick and the gentle to be had — 
elsewhere !" 

In plain English, AyHffe's new friend pointed at game ; 
speaking most temptingly of hare, above all other sorts of 



32 NOW AND THEN. 

game, as a dainty dish, wlictlier roast or stewed, for those 
that were sick and delicate ; and assured AylifFe that his 
(the speaker's) wife had Uved secretly on hare all through 
her time of trouble, and had never in her life thriven so 
well ; for naught was so nourishing as hare's flesh. Poor 
AylifFe listened to this, and much more, with but too willing 
an ear, though clean contrary to all his own notions, and 
those which he knew to be entertained by his father. He 
resisted but very faintly the arguments of his new friend ; 
who, indeed, fairly staggered Ayliffe by asking him whether 
he thought that he did wrong, if he caught a hedgehog, a 
weasel, or a snake in the field or hedge of another ; and if 
not, why was it different with a hare ? Much conversation 
had they of this sort ; in the course of which poor Ayhffe, in 
the frank simplicity of his natm-e, gave such a movmg pic- 
ture of his wife's necessities, as seemed greatly to mterest his 
companion ; who said that in truth, and as luck would have 
it, he happened to have by him a very fine hare, which was 
greatly at Ayliffe's service. After much hesitation he, with 
many thanks, accepted the gift ; and, accompanying his new 
friend to his cottage, at the close of their day's work received 
into his possession the promised hare, (a finer one certainly 
was hardly to have been seen,) and made his way homeward 
with his perilous present, under cover of the thickening 
shades of night. What dismal misgivings he had as he went 
along ! How often he resolved either to return the hare to 
the giver, or fling it over the hedge as he passed ! For he 
was aware of his danger : there being no part of England 
where game was more strictly preserved, more closely 



NOW AND THEN. 33 

looked after, or poachers more severely punished than at 
Milverstoke. He thought, however, of his wife, and of the 
relish with which she must partake of this hare ; and by the 
inspiriting aid of considerations such as these, he nerved 
himself to encounter her suspicions, and his father's rebuke. 
And to be sure, a sad scene ensued on his reaching home ; 
where he foimd his father and wife anxiously awaiting his 
protracted arrival. 

'' Sarah," said he, as he entered, with a flustered air, 
" here is a present that I have for thee," and he placed 
before her what he had brought, scarcely daring to glance at 
his father ; who, however, instantly took the alarm, demand- 
ing to know how, and when, and from whom he had gotten 
the hare that he had brought home. His son said that it 
was a gift, but refused to say who had given it to him. This 
startled his father still more ; and more pressing he became 
to know how his son had obtained the hare. 

" Adam ! Adam !" said the old man sternly, " thou hast 
gone very wrong in this matter, and thy face shows the 
trouble which it hath cost thee to do it ! I will have none of 
this hare in my house. Strange doings are on foot truly ; 
and of a sudden," he added, sighing, ^' is clean forgotten all 
that ever I have tried to teach ! " 

" Well, since it must be so," replied his son, somewhat 
doggedly, " let no more noise be made about this hare ; 
but let it only be quietly eaten by Sarah there — and, it may 
be, I shall not bring another." 

Mrs Ayliffe kissed her husband, and grasped her father- 
in-law's hand, earnestly, but in vain, trying to pacify them. 

D 



'64 NOW AND THEN. 

Old AylifFe, however, was inexorable, and spoke far more 
sternly than either of them had ever heard him speak be- 
fore ; till, indeed, he had spurred his son's temper into 
unwonted heat and violence. 

" I am tired, and so should we all be, of being beggars, 
and living on charity," said he with a kind of fierceness. 

^' Better be beggar, Adam, than robber," replied his 
father, gravely. 

" I am no robber !" said his son, with flushed cheek and 
flashing eye. 

All this while the hare lay on the floor, in the midst of 
them, there being no light in the cottage except the low 
niddy one proceeding from the peat fire. After gazing for 
some time with gloomy steadfastness at his son, old Aylifle 
rose from his stool, took up the hare, and walked with it 
towards the door. 

" Why, what art thou going to do, father, with that 
hare ? " inquired his son, amazedly. 

" To bury it," replied the old man, sternly. 

His son made no answer ; and, without speaking even to 
his wife, strode out of the cottage, got into the high-road, 
and paced up and down it, walking to a considerable dis- 
tance, in a state of unprecedented agitation and anger. 
At length, however, he returned somewhat calmed; and 
finding his father and his wife sitting up, awaiting his 
return, and cowering chillily over the nearly extinct fire, 
his heart suddenly softened at the sight of them, and he 
could not return their fond greeting, for emotion. 

" Come, Adam, my dear son !" quoth the old man, grasp- 



NOW AND THEN. -^^ 

ing him aiFectionatelj by the hand, " mischief thou didst 
not intend, I verily believe ; but mischief and wrong hast 
thou done nevertheless. But now are we friends : and get 
thee to bed, and vex me thus no more, dear Adam ! Meddle 
not again with game, which in these times is verily like 
hell-fire, the least touch of which burns terribly. That hare 
haunts me, though I have put it away, Adam. Nay — it 
much misgives me that we have not heard the last of yon 
poor hare, buried though she be !" 

^' Listen, dear Adam, to this," said his wife, throwing her 
arms round her husband's neck; ''never, though I die of 
hunger, will I touch game which I know not how thou didst 
come by — nay, I will not, Adam, lest we get into trouble, 
and do anger God 1" 

These last words made her husband glance suddenly to- 
wards her as if he would have spoken ; but he restrained 
himself, and they retired to their little room. 

Poor old Ayliffe's words overnight, were prophetic. 
Scarcely had they sat down to their scanty breakfast, the 
next morning, when two constables entered the cottage, with 
a warrant against young Ayliffe for poaching, as they said. 
The truth was, that he had been miserably entrapped into 
accepting the hare as a gift, by one who, having sent a 
companion to watch him home with it, went immediately to 
inform against him, in order to get half the penalty, if any 
were awarded, as prescribed by the statute ; and who should 
be at the justice's, on some matter of business, when the 
waiTant was applied for, but Mr Oxley, who quickly saw 
what a lever this occurrence afforded him, wherewith to 



36 NOW AND THEN. 

force the AylifFes into sniTcndering their cottage, and so 
allowing the long -sought improvements in the Earl's estate 
to be at once effectuated. The prisoner at first was about 
to resist, infuriated by a faint shriek of his wife, who fell 
senseless into the arms of the agitated old Ayliffe ; and had 
the young man resisted, his prodigious strength would, in 
spite of the staves of the constables, have made him their 
match : and who could have answered for the result ? But 
a miserable groan from his father, accompanying the words, 
" Go, dear lad 1 go: and I'll follow thee presently! " brought 
him to his senses ; and he peaceably, but despairingly, accom- 
panied the officers. The only words which he uttered to 
them, were a request not to go through the village, and 
they complied. 

The matter would soon have been settled at the justice's, 
before whom the case was proved in a trice : Ayliffe con- 
fessing that he had had the hare in his possession, (such 
being the offence with which he stood charged,) and honestly 
telling what had passed between him and his old father, on 
the subject. The punishment was a penalty of five pounds, 
or three months' imprisonment in the house of correction. 

" Nay, but I have not five farthings," said Ayliffe, des- 
perately; "and if I be sent to prison, it will go hard with 
my poor wife — that's all! " 

The magistrate, Sir Henry Harrington, looked at him 
kindly ; and after a pause, read him a serious lecture on the 
consequences of listening to bad advice, and the heinous 
nature of an offence against the game laws, which, his Wor- 
ship said, were the only things that prevented the country 



NOW AND THEN. 3? 

from becoming barbarous ; on which accomit the law was 
properly very strict — but, alas ! not haLT strict enough to put 
down the enormous vice of poaching. 

Wliile this and much more was being said, some one, at 
the instance of Mr Oxley, who dared not be seen in the 
matter by the prisoner, offered to pay the penalty of five 
pounds, if his father would promise to sell his cottage to the 
Earl of Milverstoke. 

"No! I'll rot in jail first ! " said young Ayliffe, fiercely. 
"Mayhap I now see how I got here ! " This he said with a 
strange expression of countenance. 

At this moment arrived Mr Hylton, accompanied by old 
Ayliffe ; who, on his son's being taken from the cottage, had 
gone to the vicarage, and told every thing that had hap- 
pened : and, by his artlessness and misery, so moved Mr 
Hylton's feelings, that he took five pounds with him, and 
borrowing a gig from the sm'veyor in the village, drove off 
in it, accompanied by old Ayliffe, and arrived at the magis- 
trate's just in time to save poor young Ayliffe from being 
committed to prison for three months, as a rogue and vaga- 
bond! according to the statute. 

" I have reason to believe," said Mr Hylton to his brother 
magistrate, " that this poor soul hath fallen into a trap set 
for him, and hath done it ignorantly, and from mere love of 
a sick wife ; wherefore I will pay the penalty for him." 

At this young Ayliffe could not restrain himself, but 
turned his head away, and wept bitterly. 

" I wish," said Sir Henry, with some emotion, " that it 
were fitting for me to join in paying this fine, or that I 



38 NOW AND THEN. 

could remit it : but my duty, as Mr Hylton can testify, is, 
under the statute, imperative." 

So this sad affair ended. Mr Hylton sternly desired 
young- Ayliffe to be in attendance at the parsonage, at nine 
O'clock on the next morning ; and then drove home the 
elder Ayliffe, who could scarce speak for sorrow. 

" These five pounds, Adam," said Mr Hylton, " are not 
a light matter to me, for I cannot get in my tithes without 
great trouble, and neither of you will be able, I fear, ever 
to repay it me ; that, however, I ask not, but freely for- 
give your son, whom I will, with God's blessing, read a 
lesson in the morning that he shall not forget." 

With this they ahghted at the parsonage, where old 
Ayliffe was obliged to swallow a little refreshment ; and 
then he made his way to his desolate cottage, where he was 
some two hours afterwards joined by his son, wearied with 
a fourteen miles' walk, (for the Justice's was seven miles 
off,) and the agitation and mortification of the day. No re- 
proaches had he to encounter from his father, Avhom he 
found on his knees, in his bed-room, with his hands clasped 
over his heart ! 

By nine o'clock on the ensuing morning, poor young 
Ayliffe was standing in the little library of Mr Hylton, who 
was greatly moved when he saw the woe-struck but manly 
face of the culprit. 

" Come, come, I am not going to make a mighty business 
of this, xidam," said Mr Hylton, after compelling him to sit 
down, " because I see that you feel deeply the A\Tong that 
you have done. You knew better, Adam, and terribly for- 



NOW AND THEN. 39 

got yourself ; — and see the consequences ! Your father 
never had to bow his good head with shame before yester- 
day ; and then, through no fault of his ; and your wife, I 
dare say, has suffered not a little on this account." 

Ayliffe's lip quivered, and presently his tears could not 
be any longer forced back. 

"How is she, Adam, this morning?" said Mr Hylton, 
gently, observing his emotion. 

After a few moments' pause, Ayliffe faltered, " Terribly 
ill, sir!" 

" I was afraid that it might be so ; but we must look 
after her : and indeed Mrs Hylton is, 1 hope, by this time 
there, with some small matters suitable for your poor wife's 
situation." 

" Sir — sir !" said Ayliffe, with sudden vehemence, after 
long struggling against emotions which seemed likely to 
choke him, " you are killing me : I cannot bear it ! You are 
too good, and I must go away ! I cannot look you in the 
face, sir ! — I'm quite heart-broken, sir ! " 

" Give me your hand, Adam," said Mr Hylton, heartily, 
rising and approaching him. ''You are restored to my 
good opinion : great allowances were to be made for you ; 
and I believe that you acted from naught but love to a suf- 
fering wife. And now," he continued, opening a drawer, 
and taking out a letter, " see how nearly you have seriously 
injured yourself — and yet what a prospect there is of better 
days for you ! Here have I been doing all that I could to 
get you made the master of a school in the next county, 
and this letter tells me that I was on the point of succeed- 



40 NOW AND THEN. 

ing ; when, behold ! you arc suddenly a convicted poacher ! 
I have miserable fears that you have undone all ; but hope 
that what passed yesterday has not yet been carried into the 
next county. I am gomg to the rector, w4io is an old friend 
of mine, to tell him the true state of the case, and w^hat 
great allowances ought to be made for you. He is a very 
feeling gentleman, and I may prevail on him to give you 
the place, that I have so long striven to get for you ; but it 
must be only by-and-by, when this matter may be some- 
what blown over. I have to prepare for my Sunday duty, 
and it is inconvenient for me to leave home : yet this thing- 
is so urgent, and so much for your good, that I am going to 
ride over this very day — nay, my horse and saddlebags are 
even now being got in readiness." 

It is in vain to attempt describing the feelings of mingled 
gratitude, fear, hope, and vexation w^tli Avhich all this w^as 
listened to by young AylifFe. 

" You know that I am dealing kindly by you," continued 
Mr Hylton ; " and now make me, and keep when you make 
it, a promise — that you will never, knowingly, speak again 
to a poacher, or receive game from him, or by means of 
him ; nor let any unlaw^fully come into your hands or your 
house." 

" As I am a true man, sir, for all that's just happened, 
I never w^ill, sir ; even though we be all starving !" replied 
Ayliffe, with energy. 

" God will not permit you to starve, Adam, depend upon 
it : you shall not, at least, while we live at the parsonage : 
so now^, my poor friend, go l^ack home, and comfort your 



NOW AND THEN. 41 

wife and father as well as you may. I have a long day's 
ride before me." 

So they parted. About ten minutes afterwards, Ayliffe, 
trudging homeward, was overtaken by Mr Hylton on horse- 
back, in travelling trim, having thus made good his word, 
and bemg already on his errand of goodness. 

" God bless thee, Adam !" said he, as he passed smartly 
along. 

^' God Almighty bless you, sir ! — and thank you ! " 
faltered Ayliife, almost inaudibly, taking off his hat, and 
gazing bare-headed after his benefactor till he was hid 
from his sight. 

How little either of those two thought, at that mo- 
ment, of what was ordained to happen before they met 
again ! 

When Ayliffe reached the cottage, he found that Mrs 
Hylton had not long before quitted it, having spent half an 
hour by his wife's bed-side, and left with her two bottles of 
cowslip, and one of port wine, together with some rice, tea, 
sugar, two rabbits, and nearly a quarter of a cheese, all of 
which had been eagerly carried by the housekeeper who 
accompanied her, and who had known poor Mrs Ayliffe, as 
has been seen, in her happier days at the parsonage. When 
Ayliffe had been made aware of the visit of his gentle bene- 
factress, he stood gazing in tearful silence at the prints of 
her slender feet, in the snow, homeward ; and his heart was 
so full that he could have fallen down and kissed them, as 
traces of an angel's visit. 

The next morning he presented himself, as usual, to his 



42 NOW AND THEN. 

employers ; who, however, rejected his services, having 
heard of the atrocity of which he had just been convicted, 
and being moreover dii'ectly mider the influence of Mr 
Oxley, from whose noble master had been purloined the 
hare Avhich lay buried behind the cottage : having attained 
thereby a distinction possibly never conferred upon hare 
before. 

Three days clasped before Mr Hylton returned; and 
when he did, it was with a sad and averted countenance 
that he passed the cottage, at a quick pace : for his friend 
had, not unreasonably, deemed the conviction for poaching 
to be an insuperable obstacle in the way of receiving Ayliife 
as the master of the newly established school. Still the 
resolute kindness of Mr Hylton led him to persevere, though 
with faint hopes ; and he determined to get up, if possible, 
a testimonial to poor young Ayliffe's irreproachable character 
from the leading people in the village. On the Sunday Mr 
Hylton observed that he was absent from church, and sent 
the clerk, at the close of the service, to old AylifFe, who was 
in his usual place, but with a very dejected look, desirmg 
him to attend for a moment in the vestry. AYlien he ap- 
peared, Mr Hylton shook him warmly by the hand, told 
him of the disappointment which he had experienced, and 
seemed much affected when the old man explained to him 
that it was pure shame only that had kept his son from 
church, seeing that "all present would have had their eyes 
on him. Mr Hylton also heard with anxiety that the young 
man had continued in a very moody humour, and had let 
fall, — as he had supposed, unnoticed by his father, — certain 



NOW AND THEN. 43 

expressions which had somewhat disquieted him ; for they 
were of an miforgiving tendency. 

" Talk you to him, Ayliffe, faithfully," said Mr Hylton, 
" and in a day or two's time I will come and speak to him. 
But I wish first to see whether I may yet be able to bring 
you cheering news about the school." 

And Ayliffe did talk to his son, often and seriously ; and 
so were they engaged, on the evening but one before 
Christmas, when a low rumbling sound, coming from the 
direction of the high-road, which, as has been already ex- 
plained, ran at only a little distance from the front of the 
cottage, caused both of them to walk towards the door ; 
where they stood, just as a coroneted traveUing carriage and 
four, followed by two others, turned the corner, being those 
of Lord Alkmond, the only son and heir of the Earl of Mil- 
verstoke, and some friends coming down to the Castle for 
the Christmas holidays. 

" Stay, Adam, and pay respect to the young lord," quoth 
the old man to his son, preparing to uncover. " Honour to 
whom honour is due ! " 

u -^Q — I ^{\\ not, if even thou, mine own father, went on 
thy knees," said his son sternly, walking inward ; while 
old AyUffe, standing rigidly erect in the doorway, respect- 
fully took off his broad hat, exhibiting as fine a bald head, 
fringed with silvery hair, as ever had been uncovered to the 
young lord ; who, catching sight of him, returned the 
courtesy in a hasty military fashion (for he was an officer 
in the Guards) as they dashed past. He knew no more than 
the beautiful boy w^iom he was at the moment fondling, or 



44 NOW AND THEN. 

the lovely lady who sate beside him, of the injurious and 
oiFensive proceedings of Mr Oxley towards the owner of that 
cottage. 

"There will be rare doings, by-and-by, at the Castle, 
I warrant me," said the old man, retiring into the cottage. 
" They be like to make a merry Christmas on't !" — and he 
sighed. 



NOW AND THEN. 45 



CHAPTER III. 

MiLVERSTOKE Castle was a magnificent structure, wor- 
thy of its superb situation, which was on the slope of a 
forest, stretching down to the sea-shore. Seen from the 
sea, especially by moonlight, it had an imposing and pic- 
turesque aspect ; but from no part of the surrounding land 
was it visible at all, owing to the great extent of wood- 
land in which it was embosomed. The Earl of Milverstoke, 
then lord of that stately residence, had a personal appear- 
ance and bearing which might be imagined somewhat in 
unison with its leading characteristics. He was tall and 
thin, and of erect figure; his countenance was refined 
and mtellectual, though of a stern expression; and his 
features were comely : his hair had been for some years 
changed from jet-black into iron-gray. His bearing was 
lofty, sometimes even to repulsiveness; his manner was 
frigid; his temper and spirit were haughty and self-reliant. 
Opposition to his will, equally in great or small things, 
rendered that arbitrary will inflexible, whatever might be 
the consequence or sacrifice ; for he gave himself credit for 
never acting from impulse, but always from discretion and 
deliberation. He was a man of powerful intellect, extensive 



46 NOW AND THEN. 

knoAvledge, and high principle — and, so far, admirably fitted 
for public affairs ; in which, indeed, he had borne a conspi- 
cuous part, till his imperious and exacting temper rendered 
him intolerable to his colleagues, and objectionable even to 
his sovereign : from whose service he had retired^ (to use a 
courteous word,) in disdainful disgust, some five years 
before being presented to the reader. He possessed a vast 
fortune, and two or three princely residences in various 
parts of the kingdom. Of these, Milverstoke was the prin- 
cipal ; and its stern solitude suiting his gloomy humour, 
he had betaken himself to it on quitting public life. He 
had been a widower for many years, and, since becoming- 
such, had been alienated from the distinguished family of 
his late Countess, whose ardent and sensitive disposition 
they believed to have been utterly crushed by the iron des- 
potism of an unfeeling and domineering husband. What- 
ever foundation there might have been for this supposition, 
its effects contributed to embitter the feelings of the Earl, 
and strengthen a tendency to misanthropy. Still his cha- 
racter had fine features. He was most munificent ; the 
very soul of honour ; a perfect gentleman ; and of irre- 
proachable morals. He professed a firm belief in Chris- 
tianity, and was exemplary in the discharge of what he 
conceived to be the duties which it imposed upon him. He 
would listen to the inculcation of the Christian virtues of 
humility, gentleness, and forgiveness of injury, with a kind 
of stern complacency ; unaware, all the while, that they 
no more existed within himself than fire within the sculp- 
tured marble. Most of his day-time he spent in his library, 



NOW AND THEN. 47 

or iu solitary drives, or walks along the sea-shore, or in the 
woods. Unfortunately, he took no personal part, nor felt 
any particular interest, in the management of his large 
revenues and extensive private affairs ; trusting them, as 
has been already intimated, implicitly to others. When he 
rode through the village, which lay sheltered near the con- 
fines of the woodland in which his castle was situated, he 
appeared to have no interest in it or its inhabitants, though 
nearly all of them were his own tenantry. His agent, Mr 
Oxley, was their real master. 

Mr Hylton was one of his lordship's occasional chap- 
lains, but by no means on intimate terms with him ; for 
that, the vicar's firm independent character unfitting him. 
While he acknowledged the commanding talents of the 
Earl, his lordship was, on his part, fully aware of Mr 
Hylton's strong intellect, and the pure and lofty spirit in 
which he devoted himself to his spiritual duties. The good 
vicar of Milverstoke knew not what was meant by the fear 
of man, as his stately parishioner had had many opportuni- 
ties of observing; and, in short, Mr Hylton was a much less 
frequent visitor at the castle than might have been sup- 
posed, and was warranted by his position and proximity. 

Some of the Earl's frigid reserve towards him was possi- 
bly occasioned by the cordial terms of intimacy which had 
existed between him and the late Countess ; — a lovely and 
exemplary personage, who, living in comparative retirement 
at Milverstoke, while her lord was immersed m political 
life, had consulted Mr Hylton constantly on the early edu- 
cation of her two children. The Earl had married late in 



48 NOW AND THEN. 

life, being nearly twenty years older than his Countess, who 
had brought him one son and one daughter. The former 
partook largely of his father's character, but in a somewhat 
mitigated form ; he was quicker in taking offence than the 
Earl, but had not his implacability. If he should succeed 
to the paternal titles and estates, he would be the first in- 
stance of such direct succession for nine generations: the 
Earl himself having been the third son of a second son. 
The family was of high antiquity, and its Saxon and 
Norman blood had several times intermingled with that of 
royalty. 

His daughter. Lady Emily Amaranthe, was, when pre- 
sented to the reader, nearly entering on her eighteenth 
year, and promised to be, as had been her mother, one of 
the most beautiful women in England. In her were the 
lofty spirit of her father, and the gentle virtues of her 
mother, blended in such a manner as to be gradually investing 
her with considerable influence over her stem surviving 
parent : for that occasional firmness secretly pleased him in 
a beautiful girl, which, in one of his own sex, would have 
served only to call into action an over-mastenng manifesta- 
tion of the same quality. 

On his son, the Lord Viscount Alkmond, all the EarFs 
hopes and anxieties were centred: he had been watched 
with exquisite solicitude from his birth. He was, as has 
been already said, an officer in the army ; and had been for 
but a short time married to a very lovely person j the heiress 
and representative of a family of the highest distinction ; 
and, to the EarFs unutterable delight, she had brought 



NOW AND THEN. 49 

her lord a son and heir, within a year after their 
marriage. 

Lord Alkmond's spirits had never been buoyant ; but he 
had returned from his continental tour with a perceptible 
gloom of manner, for which he assigned no reason : even his 
marriage had only temporarily relieved his depression of 
spirits ; and the return of it occasioned both his wife and 
father considerable anxiety. Fond as was the Earl of his 
son, it is strangely true that he had never quite made a 
friend of that son ; the cause lying in a peculiar tempera- 
ment of both, unfavourable to the growth of affectionate 
confidence. They had had but one serious misunderstand- 
ing, however, in their lives, and that had occurred about a 
year before their being presented to the reader — when Lord 
Alkmond astounded even his wealthy and munificent father, 
by asking for a very large sum of money, at the same time 
refusing even to answer any question concerning the desti- 
nation of it. His manner somewhat alarmed, but more 
irritated and offended the Earl, who peremptorily refused to 
comply with what he deemed a monstrously unreasonable 
request on the part of his son ; — and there had ever since 
existed a certain uneasy feeling between them, which did 
not, however, perceptibly affect their demeanour before 
strangers. The Earl was haunted by the suspicion of a 
post ohit bond ; but, from a variety of considerations, never 
deigned to ask his son a question on the subject. 

There were. Indeed, as old Ayliffe had supposed, grand 
rejoicings at the Castle that Christmas, to celebrate the first 
anniversary of the birth-day of the future heir to the Castle ; 



50 NOW AND THEN. 

and many distinguished visitors had been invited, whose 
equipages had thundered at intervals past old AylifFe's 
cottage, for a day or two before that on which Lord Alk- 
mond had passed it ; he having been detained in town by 
mihtary business, rendered necessary by his having obtained 
a somewhat extended leave of absence. 

The rejoicings were not to be confined to the brilliant 
circle assembled at the Castle. An order had gone forth 
for corresponding festivities and holiday making among the 
villagers and the surromiding tenantry; for all of which 
Lord Milverstoke had most bountifully provided, after the 
usual fashion of old English hospitality, on a grand scale. 
His frigid courtesy w^as, on that occasion, melted mto cheer- 
ful cordiality. Except during a brief tenure of high office, 
and of great political power, his ambitious and craving soul 
had never appeared so nearly satisfied. The domestics of the 
Castle reaped a rich harvest ; the pecuniary remembrances 
of the season being doubled, from the highest to the lowest, 
by the Earl's express direction. Alas ! even the sum paid 
to the humblest helper in the stables, would have provided 
a repast on Christmas day for all the melancholy occupants 
of the cottage ; but no one in that magnificent stmcture 
ever thought of them. Had it not been, indeed, for the 
kmdness of Mr Hylton, who had forwarded to them some 
little contribution towards a Christmas dinner, scarcely more 
than a nominal one would have been theirs ! Cheerless and 
disconsolate though Christmas threatened thus to be with 
old Ayliffe, as far as this world's hopes and happiness w^ere 
concerned, he rose very early in the morning of that 



NOW AND THEN. 51 

Christmas day ; while even yet the stars were glittering 
brightly in the cold clear sky, and all was solemn silence. 
As he gazed upwards into the heavens, he bethought him 
of the sublime and mystic STAR of Bethlehem. What pure 
and elevating thoughts were his, whose spirit dropped for a 
while the fetters of earth, while mounting into heavenly 
contemplation ! He was the only one from the cottage who 
made his appearance at church that day ; and the vigilant 
eye of Mr Hylton could scarcely detect his distant figure, 
lost as it was in the novel crowd of gentle and simple, from 
the Castle, that occupied the church. When the old man 
returned home, he found his son and daughter far more 
despondent even than he had left them. The former seemed 
scarcely capable of speaking in answer to either his wife or 
father ; who attributed the main cause of his depression and 
taciturnity to grief at losing the situation which Mr Hylton 
had been striving to obtain for him. All three of them now 
gave it up in despair ; but none of them knew of another 
effort on the behalf of young Ayliffe, which had been made 
by the indefatigable Mr Hylton, on his visit to his friend, 
and which effort was likely to be successful ; viz., to obtain 
for him the situation, then vacant, of bailiff to a wealthy 
squire, related to the clergyman who had so reasonably 
demurred to appointing young Ayliffe to the mastership of 
the school. Here Mr Hylton was very sanguine ; and he 
had good grounds for expecting, within a few days' time, to 
be able to announce to that unhappy little family, an event 
which would be really, to them all, Hke life from the dead. 
Only one visitor had the Ayliffes on that dreary Christmas 



52 NOW AND THEN. 

day, and it was good Mr Hylton, who went to them after 
the mommg service. The snow lay nearly a foot deep, and 
continued to flutter down thickly, threatening to do so for 
hours. He carried with him a bottle of port wine, which he 
gave to them with a solemn and hearty benediction ; at the 
same time placing a five-shilling piece in the trembling hand 
of Mrs AylifFe, as a Christmas-box for the little Adam. 
There was not much fire on the hearth ; and they were just 
concluding the meal for wdiicli they had been indebted to 
Mr Hylton, as he entered. They all looked so sad — even 
old Ayliffe — that Mr Hylton longed to announce the strong 
hopes which he entertained that better days were in store 
for them ; but, after balancing the matter for some little time 
In his mind, a humane pnidence prevailed, and he left them to 
return to his own Chnstmas fireside ; partaking of the homely 
comforts there awaiting him, with a sense of quiet enjoyment, 
which was somewhat dashed, however, by a recollection of 
the cheerless scene which he had so shortly before quitted. 
The first glass of wine which he took after dinner, accom- 
panied the following expression of his benevolent feelings ; 
" May God Almighty bless all mankind, and confer upon 
the virtuous poor his choicest blessings. Let us drink to the 
health of all my parishioners, peer and peasant, in castle and 
cottage : all this day duly remembering, who it was that 
lay in the manger, and WHY. And may God bless thee, my 
Mary," said he, embracing his wife ; " and thee, thou last 
lamb of our flock," he added, tenderly folding his little child 
in his arms, and kissing her, as did the mother, in silence. 
Their hearts were full ; and their eyes unconsciously glanced 



NOW AND THEN. 53 

at several chairs ranged at tlie further end of the room, 
which had no longer any stated occupants. — Presently, 
however, they got into a more cheerful vein, which was 
interrupted, though for a moment only, when, in talking 
over their neighbours and parishioners, and the events of 
the past year, they spoke of the unfortunate Ayliffes. 

" How full the church was, to-day, dear Henry ! " ex- 
claimed Mrs Hylton. 

" Ay, it was," he repUed, somewhat complacently. ^' It 
seemed to me as if there were a sea of strange faces, and 
most of them, too, with a sort of town look about them. 
There were one or two of the great ones of the earth there, 
Mary, I can tell you ! Who would have thought of the 
King's prime minister being one of Parson Hylton's Christ- 
mas congregation ! And I can tell you, too, that he listened 
to my sermon very attentively : and, by the way, I must 
say, there were in it one or two things which it might do his 
Grace no harm to remember." 

" He has a fine commanding face, Henry, has he not? " 

" Polly, Polly," said Mr Hylton, chucking her under the 
chin, and smiling good-naturedly, '' I fancy you would say 
as much of any prime minister : you would say it — ay, of 
me, were I he." 

" Well, and, dear love, I might say as much, and yet tell 
no fib," said she, affectionately. 

"Pho! " he replied, laughingly, and kissed the dear cheek 
which he still thought pretty : and which, in expression, was 
lovely indeed. 

Good Mrs Hylton was not far wrong. Her husband's 



54 NOW AND THEN. 

features were still handsome, plainly stamped with the im- 
press of thought, and, as it were, radiant with benignity. 
You would have said also, on looking at them, that their 
owner had seen his share of troubles. 

^' The most striking figure in the Earl's pew," said Mr 
Hylton, "crowded though it was with those whose names are 
so often heard of, was in my opinion, my Lord Milverstoke 
himself" 

" Yes, he truly had a stately appearance — that I myself 
noticed : but he is so stern and distant in his bearing — one 
feels, dearest, no interest in him." 

" Ay, that is so, doubtless; 'tis a pity he is of so imperious 
a temper. He has a heart, which is in its proper place, but, 
as it were, imbedded in ice, which you have to cut tlu-ough 
before you can get at it. He is one of the most powerful 
intellects that we have ; and yet — " 

" How like him young Lord Alkmond is — only hand- 
somer ! " 

" Not handsomer than his father was, when he was his 
son's age, I can tell you, ]\Iary. But did you notice how 
charming looked dear Lady Emily ? Mark my words, Mary ; 
she will in a year or two shine at court a star of the first 
magnitude ! " 

'' I hope they won't spoil the dear girl : she is one of a 
disposition simple, and noble, and quite perfect." 

" Perfect^ my dear, is a huge word ; but 'tis Christmas, 
and we won't quarrel about luords. Lady Emily is a fine 
creature ; but, when she chooses, she can be as stately as 
her lofty papa." 



NOW AND THEN. 55 

" She is growing very like the Coiintess, Henry, is she 
not?" said Mrs Hylton with a sigh. 

" So I thought to-day—" 

" By the way, I wonder whether we shall be asked to 
dinner at the Castle this week ! — If she have her way, we 
go — that I am sure of," said Mrs Hylton, resolutely. 

And she proved not mistaken ; for the next day Lady 
Emily called at the parsonage, as she drove by, and deliv- 
ered a very cordial uivitation from the Earl for dinner on 
the day after, and the Earl's coach was to come down for 
them, as it did whenever both Mr and Mrs Hylton dmed at 
the Castle. Their high expectations were exceeded by the 
splendid scene which they encountered on that occasion. 
The Castle had never, in fact, during twenty years, wit- 
nessed such festivity as during those Christmas holidays. 
In returning home, both remarked the buoyant spirits of 
the Earl of Milverstoke, and the exquisite courtesy of his 
manners. Wliile good Mrs Hylton had occupied herself 
chiefly with Lady Emily, and Lady Alkmond and her beau- 
tiful boy, Mr Hylton had been watching with anxious 
interest the Earl and Lord Alkmond; observing in the 
latter manifestly forced spirits, especially when he was 
brought into contact with his father, whose full piercmg 
eye Mr Hylton occasionally observed directed towards 
his son, with what appeared an expression of rapid but 
uneasy scrutiny. 

On one of the more advanced days of the Christmas 
week, there was to be a kind of military banquet at the 
Castle, in compHment to the officers of a dragoon regiment. 



56 NOW AND THEN. 

one of whose out-quarters was at the barracks, at some 
two miles' distance, their headquarters being in an adjoin- 
ing comity. Every officer, either m that regiment or any 
other, was invited, if within reach ; for an affair of that 
kind was not an everyday occurrence. Every evening had 
the band from the barracks been' placed at the disposal of 
the Earl, for the entertainment of his guests ; and charm- 
ing indeed was the effect produced, when, the weather 
admitting, the mellow music echoed through the woods. 

On the occasion last mentioned, Mr Hylton happened to 
be returning home, from paying a visit to a sick parishioner. 
His walk lay for upwards of a mile along the outskirts of 
the wood. It was about ten o'clock, and the night calm, 
but gloomy. With what ravishing sweetness came fitfully 
towards him the sounds of bugles and French horns ! He 
often stood still to listen ; and, while thus engaged, heard 
the report of a musket, evidently fired m the wood. The 
soimd was quickly repeated. " Oh ho ! " thought he, as he 
resumed his walk homeward, " the rogues thmk that they 
have found an opportunity ! " He was somewhat surprised, 
a few moments afterwards, at the music abruptly ceasing, 
in the midst of a well-kno^vn national air ; and, unless his 
ear deceived him, he heard the faint sound of human voices, 
but evidently at a considerable distance. His expenence 
as a magistrate suggested to him a probable solution of 
what he had heard, viz., a collision between poachers and 
the keepers. Just as he had reached the parsonage-gate, a 
horseman came galloping up the road which he had just 
quitted, and which led on to the park-gates of the Castle. 



NOW AND THEN. 57 

A moment afterwards, a dragoon, in undress milform, 
thundered past him at top speed. " What's the matter? " 
hastily called out Mr Hylton, but received no answer. The 
soldier had either heeded or heard not, and was quickly 
out of sight. Scarcely five minutes had elapsed before 
other similar sounds from the same quarter brought Mr 
Ilylton suddenly out of the parsonage, down to the gate, 
when he saw a groom coming along at full gallop. 

" Stay, stay a moment ! What has happened ? " called 
out Mr Hylton, loudly. 

The man did not slacken his pace, but, as he passed, 
shouted hoarsely, and evidently in desperate agitation, 
'' Oh ! murder ! murder ! " 

And, indeed, an astounding and horrifying event had just 
occurred. How shall it be written ? Lord Alkmond had 
been murdered in the wood ! And at the moment of Mr 
Hylton's asking the question, the bleeding body of the young 
peer was being earned into the Castle, by two dragoons, 
who almost trembled under their lifeless burthen. By the 
time that Mr Hylton, greatly agitated, had got into the 
village, all its startled Inhabitants were at their doors, or 
standing in groups in the street, conversing so Intently 
together that they scarcely observed a troop of dragoons, 
fully armed, galloping past them towards the park-gate of 
the Castle. Within a few minutes afterwards, a portion of 
them returned faster than they had gone, following a per- 
son in plain clothes, who appeared to be leading the way 
for them. Woeful to relate, their errand was to Ayllife's 
cottage, which they reached a few moments after young 



58 NOW AND THEN. 

AyliiFe had sprung into it, nearly striking down the door 
as he entered, reeking with perspiration, with hoiTor in 
his face, breathing hke a hard-run horse, and with glaring 
blood-stains on one of his arms ! His father, who was sit- 
tmg beside a small candle, reading the Bible, shrunk from 
him, aghast and speechless ; and young Ayliffe was utter- 
ing some incoherent sounds in answer to his astounded 
father's inquiries, when the clattering of horses' hoofs was 
heard; and the next moment four dragoons, carbine in 
hand, entered the cottage, while others remained outside, 
around the door, with swords drawn. 

'' What do ye want with me ?" at length gasped young 
Ayliffe, staring with haggard countenance at the soldiers. 

" Dost thou surrender to us, who demand it in the King's 
name?" said one of them, — the sergeant. 

Young Ayliffe started up from the bench on which he 
had thrown himself, and, with a desperate effort, said, 
" Where is your authority to take me ? Tliis is my father's 
house !" 

" Raise thou but a finger to resist us, and we fire ! " said 
the sergeant, and the three dragoons who were with him 
lowered their carbines. 

" What do ye arrest me for?" inquired Ayliffe, hoarsely. 

" When we have got thee in safe keeping, according to 
orders, thou shalt know," quoth the sergeant. 

At this moment Ayliffe's eye lit upon the blood on his 
sleeve, and he gave a frightful start. '' I know nought of 
it! I am innocent — God be my witness!" he gasped, 
looking imploringly at the soldiers. 



NOW AND THEN. 59 

At that moment was heard the sound of rapidly approach- 
mg horse-feet ; and presently a constable entered with his 
staff, and approaching, said,—" Adam AylifFe, I arrest thee 
for the murder of Lord Alkmond in the wood just now !" 
on which a loud groan issued from poor old Ayliffe, who 
had been listening in speecliless consternation, and then he 
fell senseless on the groimd. In the sudden agitation and 
horror of the scene, had not been noticed a female head 
tlu'ust hastily through the half-opened door, shortly after 
young AyHffe had rushed into the house, as has been 
described ; nor had any one observed, or heard, a moment 
or two afterwards, a dull sound, as of one falling ; but the 
miserable Mrs Ayliffe, for m truth she it was, had sunk on 
the floor of her room in a swoon, m which she continued up 
to the entrance of the constable. " Sally ! — Sarah ! Where 
art thou?" shouted young Ayliffe wildly, making a motion 
towards the door ; but the constable proceeded to put hand- 
cuffs on him. 

" If thou stir a foot till these be on," said the sergeant, 
coolly, " thou wilt have lead in thee : " on which Ayliffe, with 
a bewildered stare, yielded himself, apparently palsied, to 
his captors, and shortly afterwards suffered himself to be 
led from the room, and assisted on the horse of one of the 
dismounted dragoons, who first withdrew the pistols from 
the holster. The others instantly momited, leaving him 
whose horse was ridden by Ayliffe in the cottage, to attend 
on old Ayliffe, who seemed in a fit j and within half an hour 
afterwards, the horror-stricken and half-stunned Ayliffe was 
safely lodged in the cage near the village : the troop which 



60 NOW AND THEN. 

had escorted him remaining on guard aromid it, till relieved 
by orders from the baiTacks. An excited crowd of villagers 
soon gathered around the cage, but was kept at a distance 
by the dragoons, who w^ould not allow even ]Mr Hylton to 
approach it, though he came up to them, greatly agitated, 
demanding admission as a magistrate. His right, however, 
was not recognised by the soldiers, who also listened with 
frigid indifference to the loud murmurs of the crowd aromid, 
expressing indignation at Mr Hylton's repulse. " Where 
did you take Adam Ayliffe — your prisoner?" he inquired, 
but received no answer. One of the officers who had been 
dining at the Castle in company with the late Lord Alk- 
mond, rode up immediately afterwards. 

"Is your prisoner secured ?" said he. 

"Yes, sir; handcuffed." 

"Did he resist?" 

" No, sir." 

"Who is he?" 

" Don't know, sir." 

The officer cast a glance of hasty but effectual scrutiny 
at the cage. He saw that it looked old, and was not over- 
strongly constructed. " No one," he whispered, " is to 
approach this place nearer than you ; and I will send down 
some irons from the barracks immediately. Let him remain 
till further orders ;" and Avith this the officer was galloping 
off, when a loud howl w^as heard from within the cage, 
curdling the very blood of the bystanders. " Open the 
door," said the officer, turning round his horse, and dis- 
mounting. 



NOW AND THEN. CI 

Two soldiers thereupon alighted, and stood, sword in 
hand, by their officer. ''Stand back!" said he, calmly. 
The door was opened, and the sergeant, holding up the 
lantern in the doorway, disclosed the figure of apparently a 
maniac, striking his forehead violently with the handcuffs. 

" Be quiet, sir, or you will be placed in irons," said the 
officer, sternly. 

Ayliffe gnashed his teeth, and his bloodshot eyes glared 
fearfully at the officer ; who, having whispered a word or 
two in the ear of one of the men, on which the door was 
closed and locked, rode off at full gallop. Within half an 
hour's time the unfortunate prisoner was in irons, which 
had been sent down from the barracks. Mr Hylton's bene- 
volent heart dictated another errand to him: on being 
repulsed from the cage, he had returned to the parsonage, 
ordered out his horse, and ridden off to the cottage. Oh, 
what a scene he encountered ! The soldier who had been 
left there was, with a kind air, giving some water to the 
old man, who sat on the floor, propped up against the wall, 
apparently in a stupor. Beside him lay huddled up, near 
the fireplace, the poor child of the prisoner, still sobbing, 
but having cried itself to sleep. A woman, whom the sol- 
dier had fetched from a neighbouring cottage, was in Mr 
Ayhffe's room ; and on Mr Hylton entering, came out in 
weeping agitation, saying, " Poor soul ! I believe, sir, she 
is dead, and yet in labour !" 

« Oh, poor Mrs Ayliffe ! Oh, poor Mrs Ayliff'e ! What 
is to be done ?" quoth Mr Hylton •, " I will go for the 
doctor ;" and, as fast as his horse could carry him, he went. 



C2 NOAV AND THEN. 

Who shall describe the scene going on at the Castle in 
consequence of this awful event ? It seemed as though a 
thunderbolt had fallen upon them from heaven. All was 
petrifying consternation and bewilderment. At the moment 
when the bleeding corpse of the young Lord was being 
earned towards the Castle, Lady Alkmond was gracefully 
dancing a minuet. The ball-room presented a gay and 
splendid aspect. Many officers were there ; the costume of 
the ladies was exceedingly beautifid ; and the loveliest of 
the figm-es that wore it, was the young Lady Emily, who 
that evening was makmg her first appearance in public. 
The Earl of Milverstoke had never appeared before to such 
great advantage ; having dropped almost all his stem state- 
Imess, he was a model of courtly ease and affability. Even 
the Duke of Bradenham, formerly one of his colleagues in 
the Cabinet, was eyeing hun with great interest, wondering 
how mollifying an effect had been produced, by retirement 
and reflection, m the temper of the haughty, impracticable 
peer, whom none of them had been able to tolerate In office. 
The ghastly countenance of the groom of the chambers, 
who suddenly appeared at one of the large doors of the 
ball-room, w^here he whispered to the nobleman standing 
nearest, and who instantly followed him out, sufficed to give 
token of something awful having happened. In a moment 
the dancing ceased ; the music was hushed ; hurried whis- 
pering was heard ; agitated faces were seen ; hasty gestures 
were observed; and when Lord Milverstoke quitted the 
apartment, w^ith a face suddenly blanched and overspread 
with hoiTor, amazement and terror reached their climax. 



NOW AND THEN. C3 

Faint shrieks, and presently loud cries, and universal 
agitation ensued throughout the Castle; and, in a few 
moments more, all was known, and Lord Milverstoke verging 
on madness. 

The banquet of that day had partaken, as has been 
already stated, of a military character, in compliment to 
Lord Alkmond ; and the Earl of Milverstoke and several of 
the guests had quitted the room, some time before the hap- 
pening of the catastrophe, leaving Lord Alkmond and most 
of his brother officers at the dinner-table for awhile to 
themselves. The conversation was for some time gay and 
animated, till accidentally a topic was introduced, which 
only one or two of those present perceived to be, for some 
reason or other, distasteful to Lord Alkmond ; for he 
changed colour, and immediately addressed the person next 
to him on another subject. The general conversation, how- 
ever, continued on the topic alluded to ; and Lord Alkmond 
was at length observed, by one next to him, to be seriously 
disquieted ; becoming silent, and uttering suppressed sighs. 
At length all of them quitted the table, to repair to the 
ball-room. Lord Alkmond was seen by some servants, 
directly afterwards, leaving the Castle, with his hat on ; but 
this attracted no special notice, since his lordship was fre- 
quently in the habit of taking solitary rambles in the woods. 
He walked, as it afterwards appeared, for a time to and fro 
on the grand terrace ; then descended from it by a by-path 
into the wood ; and was not seen again till his body was 
brought into the hall, carried by the two dragoons (several 
of whom were guests in the servants' hall,) followed by 



G 1 NOW AND THEN. 

several other persons, all greatly agitated. The head keeper, 
with two under keepers, had, while going his rounds in the 
woods, heard suddenly a dull, heavy sound ; then that as of 
a person falling, accompanied by, apparently, a faint groan 
or sigh; then, steps, as of one iimning. Continuing to 
move onward in the direction whence the sounds seemed to 
come, they encountered a body stretched on the ground ; 
and, to their inconceivable horror, presently recognised Lord 
All^mond, wrapped in a great coat, bleeding profusely from 
a frightful blow on the side of the head, and speechless ; 
motionless ; senseless ; dead. 

" Follow ! follow ! follow those steps ! I hear some one 
running ! " exclaimed the head keeper, remaining by the 
body, while his companions started off in obedience to his 
orders. 

"Hollo! — There! there's the murderer!" presently 
they shouted violently ; for they had caught sight of the 
figure of a man running with great rapidity, and who at 
one bound cleared a wall, and got into the high road, where 
he resumed running; on which one of the two pursuers 
fired, but missed the fugitive. 

" Ila ! — I know him !" exclaimed one of the two fol- 
lowers ; " It's Adam Ayliffe !" and while the one who had 
not fired contmued the pursuit, the other ran to the baiTacks, 
which were at but a short distance from that part of the 
road; and the result was, the capture of Ayliffe, as the 
monster who had done this deed of cruelty and horror. 

The next morning at an early hour the formidable pri- 
soner was delivered up to the civil power ; but owmg to the 



NOW AND THEN. 65 

public excitement, which was every moment increasing, the 
military were requested to escort the prisoner to the justice- 
hall of the neighbouring magistrate, Sir Henry Harrington, 
bemg the same who had adjudicated on the prisoner so short 
a time before, for the trifling delinquency of which the 
reader has heard. The moment that the miserable man was 
seen, heavily ironed, staggering from the cage into the 
post-chaise which was to convey him to the magistrate's, a 
groan issued from the appalled bystanders ; one of mingled 
pity, terror, and wonder. Those who caught the nearest 
glance at the prisoner, from behind the horses of the 
dragoons, saw the blood on his left sleeve, and shuddered. 
His eyes were blood-shot *, his forehead was severely bruised, 
and much swollen, with the blows which he had given 
himself over night ; his lips were tightly compressed ; and he 
uttered not a syllable to the officer who accompanied him. 
In another chaise were the clerk of the peace and Mr 
Hylton, the latter intending to be present in his magis- 
terial capacity. They set off at a rapid pace, preceded and 
followed by the dragoons. Their road lay past Ayliife's 
cottage, and, as they approached it, the unhappy prisoner 
became terribly excited. He sat upright, and stared with 
a half-frenzied eye as they passed. A woman had just 
quitted the cottage with a child covered up under her red 
cloak : it was the infant son of the prisoner, whom she was 
carrying to her own home for a while, at Mr Hylton's 
request, the mother lying desperately ill, and about to be 
taken to the infirmary the moment that it could be done 
with safety — if indeed her doom were not already sealed, 

F 



66 NOW AND THEN. 

and she could be moved elsewhere than to the churchyard. 
The prisoner moaned heavily as they drove past, and sunk 
back witli a deep groan in the chaise. There was already 
a considerable concourse around the gates of the magistrate's 
house, and it was deemed prudent for the military to remain 
till the proceedings were over. ^ 

There were three justices present, including Mr Hylton, 
who looked harassed and most unhappy. He had been up 
several hours during the night, in attendance at the cottage, 
where indeed at that moment was Mrs Hylton herself, in 
compassionate attendance on her poor suifering sister. 
When Ayliffe, heavily ironed, entered the justice-room, 
with a constable on each side, he seemed not to obser\'e any 
one before him ; but presently his eye lit on Mr Hylton, 
who sat at the table, his head leaning on his hand, which 
concealed his face from Ayliffe. 

" Sir ! — Mr Hylton !" shouted the prisoner with frantic 
energy, " oh, say for me ! could I do this thing that I am 
charged with ? No, no, no ! you know I could not !" 

Mr Hylton unconsciously shook his head without removing 
the hand that supported it. Again the prisoner addressed 
him, with wild gestures and a loud hoarse voice : 

" How's Sarah, sir ? how's my wife ?" 

Mr Hylton shook his head and remained silent ; and then 
the prisoner sunk doTvm on the bench that was placed for 
him, his heavy irons clanking dismally. The hearing was 
not long, nor was much more disclosed than has been 
already told. The doctor who had been summoned to the 
castle on the horrid occasion declared that death must have 



NOW AND THEN. 67 

been instantaneous, for that the wound was most frightful, 
and had been inflicted with a bludgeon, or some other heavy 
instrument. The blood on the prisoner's sleeve was pointed 
out, at which he seemed suddenly roused from a sort of 
stupor ; and Mr Hjlton, observing it, instantly arose, and 
with an air of great agitation quitted the room, nor did he 
return again. 

^' Have you any other evidence to adduce '?" said the 
magistrate. 

'' None, ain't please your Worship." 

" Is any one else suspected ?" 

'^ Nobody at present, an't please your Worship ; but a 
strict inquiry is on foot." 

The justices' clerk then read over to the witnesses what 
had been taken down from their lips, — the prisoner's hag- 
gard countenance, and eyes fixed intently on the floor, 
showing that he was not attending to what was going on. 
When the depositions had all been read over, and signed by 
the witnesses, 

" Adam Ayliflb," said the magistrate, " hearken to me — 
thou standest committed for the wilful murder of the late 
Lord Viscount Alkmond." 

" It is false ! I never murdered him ! I know naught 
about it : and ye are all driving me mad !" cried the 
prisoner in a loud hoarse voice, starting up and looking 
wildly at the principal magistrate, who calmly signed the 
warrant of committal as soon as it had been made out ; and 
within an hour's time Aylifl'e was safely lodged in the 
county gaol, having been escorted thither by the dragoons, 



G8 NOW AND THEN. 

for fear of any sudden and desperate resistance being offered 
by one of such formidable courage and strength as the 
prisoner. When the proceedings were closed, the two 
committing magistrates withdrew into another room, where 
was Mr Hylton, walking about in much perturbation ; and 
the three had a long conversation on the mysterious and 
frightful transaction which had called them together that 
day. Mr Hylton was asked with much interest by his 
brother magistrates concerning the passionate appeal which 
had been made to him by the prisoner, but said only, that 
to him what had happened appeared an awful mystery ; that 
the prisoner was by nature one of the frankest, best natured, 
and best behaved men in the world, and had been brought 
up by a father who was himself a pattern of virtue and 
piety. 

" Ah !" said one, " there is something very fine in the 
character of old Ayliife ; I know a little of him ; and grieved 
indeed I am for him ! " 

" What conceivable motive^^^ commenced Mr Hylton — 

" Stay," said Sir Henry Harrington, di'opping his voice 
almost to a whisper — " you do not forget a former occur- 
rence in this justice-room some few days ago, good friend, 
when you acted so liberally ?" 

" Alas ! of what avail was it ?" said Mr Hylton. 

" That is not what I mean," quoth Sir Henry ; " I heard 
a word or two muttered by the prisoner on that occasion, 
which perhaps no one else did : " and he repeated what had 
caught his ear, unless, indeed, as he said, he had been 
greatly mistaken, and about which he declared that he 



NOW AND THEN. 



69 



would make some private inquiry. He mentioned the 
words, and after a pause Mr Hylton sighed, changed colour 
a little, and shook his head. " Well, still," said he, " I 
cannot believe he did this murder !" 

On the ensuing evening sat the coroner's inquest, at the 
Blind Hound, an inn in the village ; and the jury having 
been taken to the Castle, and seen the body of the murdered 
nobleman, which lay just as it had been brought in from the 
woods, and was a sight which none of them could ever for- 
get, they heard substantially the same evidence which had 
been given before the magistrates, and at once returned a 
verdict of wilful murder against Adam AylifFe ; all of them, 
on retiring to their various homes in the village and neigh- 
bourhood, expressing amazement and horror; and deep 
sympathy for poor old Ayliffe, and the prisoner's wife. 
Eigorous inquiries elicited no circumstances which could 
throw any light on an event which soon occasioned con- 
siderable excitement throughout the whole kingdom. The 
woods had been scoured all night long by soldiers from the 
barracks, constables, gamekeepers, villagers, and others, but 
in vain. There was nothing to aiford a trace of the deed 
which had so recently been done, but the dismal crimsoned 
spot that had witnessed the mysterious and horrible occm^- 
rence which had extinguished the mortal life of the next 
heir to the domains and dignities of Milverstoke, in the very 
flower of his youthful manhood. Poor Lord Alkmond was, 
when thus hastily smitten from the land of the living, 
apparently possessed of almost every imaginable worldly 
advantage and guarantee for happiness. He was one of the 



70 NOW AND THEN. 

handsomest men of his day ; his features were symmetry 
itself, at once refined and manly ; he was tall and well- 
proportioned as his father, but his manner was infinitely 
more gracious and winning — at all events till latterly, when 
some strange spell seemed to have overshadowed his spirits, 
such as even the lovely wife of his bosom, now, alas ! his 
prostrate and broken-hearted widow, could neither account 
for, nor was permitted by him to inquire into : a gloom 
which only deepened before the stern solicitude of his father. 
How awful the obscm-ity which skrouded his sudden depar- 
ture ! impenetrable perhaps for ever, to all but the eye of 
Him from whom nothing is hid ; of whose ordering are all 
things, in perfect wisdom, not to be vainly or presumptu- 
ously questioned; and whose will it might be that this 
mystery should not be unravelled on earth. — Beat yom- fair 
bosoms and bewail the departed, ye lovely kindred of the 
dead, and of him, the living, — deep in whose dark spirit is 
quivering an arrow from on high ! Let the light of heaven 
be shut out from yon gloomy and silent residence of the 
great ones of the earth, till their dead be buried out of their 
sight, and their stricken hearts enlightened, humbled, and 
consoled from on high ! 

On Saturday was the burial. Lengthened was the funeral 
cavalcade, and many were the noble mourners composing It, 
which wound slowly its way from the Castle to the church 
of Milverstoke, w^iere a silent assemblage of awe-stnick 
beholders awaited it. The chief mourner was the Earl of 
Milverstoke, treading with firm step, his face of dreadful 
whiteness, — a world of woe in his dark eyes ! From his 



NOW AND THEN. 71 

rigid lips had fallen no sound, since he had ordered away 
the attendants from the chamber of the dead, that he might 
himself pace, the livelong night, alone, before the bier of his 
murdered son. He now followed into the church, and to 
the black entrance of the vault, the remains of that — his 
only son, in grievous silence ; in all the majesty of sorrow 
and suffering ; seen by every beholder to be too great and 
awful to be approached, or intermeddled with. Oh, with 
what solemnity was read the Service for the Dead, stirring 
the very soul alike of every great one, and humble one, who 
heard, that day, the voice of the minister of God ! Fain 
would Mr Hylton have devolved that sad office upon another; 
but his duty was plain ; and, though reading with a voice 
sometimes tremulous, he gave grand significance, because 
simple utterance, to the sublime Burial Service of the 
Church. 

At a late hour in the evening there was delivered into the 
hands of the desolate and bereaved Earl, by a special mes- 
senger from London, an autograph letter from the King, 
expressing deep concern for his misfortune ; and, so far as 
he could thence derive any consolation, the Earl had also 
abundant proof of the sympathy felt for him throughout the 
kingdom. 

On the evening after the capture of young Ayliffe, occurred 
a circumstance worthy of perpetual remembrance. Mr 
Hylton, notwithstanding the inclemency of the weather, 
paid a visit to the late residence of the imprisoned malefac- 
tor, whose miserable father now tenanted it alone. There, 
by the dim light issuing from the low fire, Mr Hylton 



72 NOW AND THEN. 

beheld the old man kneeUng, and so absorbed in devotion 
that he scarcely noticed the entrance of his reverend and 
sympathising visitor. The old man slowly rose, however, 
on feeling his hand gently squeezed by that of ^Ir Hylton, 
and hearing his friendly voice. The food which had been 
laid beside him early in the morning lay untouched, and 
the old man tottered, from evident faintness, while Mr 
Hylton assisted him from his knees to the stool on which he 
had been sitting. After a while he pointed, with a shaking- 
finger, to a distant part of the room. Mr Hylton asked 
him what he meant. " A light, a light, sir ! " said he. 
Mr Hylton lit a small candle which stood on a shelf over 
the fireplace, and, on going with it to the spot to which old 
Ayliffe had pointed, beheld an object sufficiently startling : 
a thick oaken walking-stick, which had been brought in by 
his son on the evening of his capture ; and, alas, there were 
upon it evident marks of blood ! 

'' This is dreadful, Ayliffe — dreadful indeed !" said Mr 
Hylton, laying it down with a silent shudder ; and neither 
he nor the old man spoke for some time, each actuated by 
conflicting emotions. 

" It is strange : hath not the cottage been searched?" said 
Mr Hylton. 

The old man shook his head : " Xo, sir," said he in a 
feeble tone, '' that stick hath lain there ever since he came 
in ; and " — he paused, and added, with a long-drawn sigh, 
^' but for that book," pointing to the Bible, which lay on the 
table beside him, " that bloody witness had not been here 
now." 



NOW AND THEN. IS 

Mr Hyltoii was silent. He was a magistrate^ and his duty- 
was painful, but plain. " AylifFe," said he, gloomily, " I 
am a magistrate !" 

" I know thou art ; and that book, with thy good teach- 
ing from it, hath taught me my duty. There must lie that 
sad stick till it be sent for, if sent for it must be !" 

" Thou faithful servant of God," said Mr Hylton, his eyes 
almost blinded with tears, rising and grasping in his hands 
those of the old man, who spoke not — " put thy trust in 
God, who hath, for His own wise purposes, sent thee this 
terrible trial, and He will bear thee through it !" 

" Ay, ay ! ' though he slay me' " — began the old man ; 
but his voice suddenly failed him. 

" Whether thy son be innocent or guilty, this stick must 
appear against him," said Mr Hylton, firmly but mournfully ; 
" and even were it by any accident not to be produced, yet 
have I seen it, and must, by force of conscience, tell that I 
have seen it." 

" No one shall touch it, sir, while I have strength to pre- 
vent it," said the old man, laying his hand on the open 
Bible : " and if, as concerning my son, I have done him 
wrong, God forgive me : and if I do right, I pray thee, sir, 
give me thy prayers to help my trust, and strengthen me to 
do this bitter duty !" 

Mr Hylton rose, aiid pronounced upon him a solemn bene- 
diction, and then sat opposite to him for some time in silence, 
lost in admiration of the old man's virtue, and troubled 
sorely at the duty which that virtue had just cast upon him- 
self. " I would have given much, Adam, that it had 



i-i NOW AND THEN. 

been any other than myself who had come hither and seen 
and heard this," said he, at length ; " but if thine unhappy 
son be innocent, God may make it appear so ; yet, whether 
He do or not. His will be done. And He cannot will that 
we should pervert or conceal truth !" 

" He doth support me now," repHed the old man, gravely 
and loftily. Mr Hylton gazed in silence, as though on some 
old patriarch or martyr risen from the dead to exemplify trust 
in the Almighty. 

The next day, alas ! the dumb but dreadful witness was 
taken possession of by a constable, under a search-warrant, 
and delivered over to the proper authority. Mr Hylton 's 
painful share in the transaction was known to none but the 
committing magistrate, who passed a high eulogium on what 
he termed the Spartan spirit of the prisoner's father. 

On the Sunday succeeding the day of the funeral, the 
church wore a very impressive aspect. The pulpit and 
reading-desk were hung in black ; so was the great family- 
pew belonging to the Castle, and mitenanted, but one side 
of the gallery was nearly filled with a long array of the Earl's 
domestics, in deep moummg. The church was unusually 
crowded by the saddened occupants of the village and neigh- 
bourhood, and others who had come from far and wide 
thinking that the Vicar might, as was his custom on those 
which he deemed fitting occasions, make some allusion to 
the awful occurrence of the past week. Nor were they mis- 
taken or disappomted. Methinks one may now see that 
exemplary person in his pulpit, upon that memorable, melan- 
choly, and excitmg occasion, resolved to turn it to the profit 



NOW AND THEN. 75 

of those who were before hmi. He was not quite as old as 
the Earl of Milverstoke ; of middle stature ; his hair grey ; 
his face intellectual and somewhat care-worn, but of a most 
benevolent expression. He was a man of firm purpose, of 
stern integrity, of profound piety, and devoted to the duties 
of a parish priest. It was only his independence of character, 
indeed, which had stood in the way, some years before, of 
his obtaining great clerical advancement. Here, however, 
lay his parish, the parishioners of Avhich he loved — whose 
children's dust was intermingled with the dust of his own 
dear children, in the adjoining churchyard ! 

When he had entered the pulpit, and looked round upon 
his grave and silent congregation, his soul rose to the height 
of the occasion, and felt itself in unison with theirs. The 
few words which formed his text fell, as he pronounced them, 
into the hearts of all present with fearful weight : — " Boast 
not thyself of to-morrow : for thou hnoicest not ivhat a day 
may bring fortli^ His own feelings forced him to pause 
for some moments after he had uttered that divine injunction ; 
and there ensued, till his voice broke it, the silence of the 
grave. His sermon was brief, but weighty, and the chastened 
severity of his judgment prevented any approach to inde- 
corous directness of allusion. It was only towards the close 
of his affecting and solemn address, that his voice faltered as 
his eye lit upon an unexpected figure in the furthermost 
corner of the gallery — that of old Adam Ayliffe, who had 
gone thither with a stern consciousness of rectitude of con- 
duct, as far as concerned his fellow-creatures, and a lofty 
sense of what was at once his right, and his duty towards 



"6 NOW AND THEN. 

God— to enter the house of God, with a lieart which He had 
smitten, to pay his vows there. Alone had he come, and 
unsupported, though with hmbs weakened by abstinence and 
the agitation of the week, to His Father's house. As he 
returned home, several oflfered him their arms, and kindly 
saluted him, but he spoke not a word to any ; and his silence 
deepened their sympathy for his sufferings, their reverence 
for his character. On arriving at the cottage to which his 
little grandchild had been taken, on its mother's removal in 
almost a dying state to the infirmary, he entered it, and 
seated himself beside the kind woman in whose lap it lay, 
a sad little figure. The child, recognising him, stretched 
forth its hand, and smiled, on which the old man's pent-up 
feelings gave way: " Xay, nay, lad," he faltered, '' don't 
do that !— thou'lt break my heart !" And the child seemed 
surprised, and then somewhat alarmed, at the weepmg of 
both his grandfather and his nurse. 

" It doth not trouble thee much, I tnist?" at length said 
Ayliffe, gently. 

" Nay, never at all— never was there a quieter child ; 'tis 
content with whatever is given to it." 

" This was a terrible fall," said the old man, sadly, pointing 
to the child's shoulder. 

" Ay, it was, good Adam, and"— she pointed, sighing, to 
to the little creature's left leg—" much it misgives me he 
will walk lame." 

" Well, God's will be done !" said the old man, and he 
leaned down and kissed its forehead tenderly, while his tears 
fell upon it. 



NOW AND THEN. 77 

There was another grandfather looking, about the same 
time, at an infant grandson, with feelings which language 
cannot express or describe. And there were also two 
mothers, stricken and prostrate, whom it appeared to be the 
will of heaven to remove for ever from the sight of their 
children ! 

On the third Smiday after the fmieral, two figures in deep 
mourning passed slowly along the aisle to the central pew 
in the parish church : they were the Earl of Milverstoke and 
his youthful daughter Lady Emily, whose beautiful but pale 
countenance was almost entirely hidden beneath a long black 
veil, and, on taking her seat, she was evidently suffering 
under strong emotion. No eye that saw the Earl, as he fol- 
lowed after her, had ever looked before on so affecting an 
object, — a black monument of grief unutterable. Lady 
Emily had placed herself at a distance from her father, wish- 
ing to avoid the sight of his pallid, wasted, and gloomy 
features, which bore deep and perhaps indelible traces of the 
sufferings which he had undergone. His was a morbid and 
haughty spu-it, which would rather perish under the crushing 
pressure of misery than seek for any alleviation of it by com- 
munion with others. An expression of sympathy was, m- 
deed, intolerable to him ; and by a certain strange perversity 
of his nature, he appeared loth to lose sight, even for an 
instant, of the full extent of his wretchedness. The bulk of 
the congregation were simple souls, who could not forbear 
regarding him with a sort of subdued awe, which seemed to 
exclude all tendency to pity. He had rarely ever spoken to 
any of them, which they had attributed to his naturally cold 



iS NOW AND THEN. 

stern habits, his occupation with high and important matters, 
and sorrow for the death of his Countess. A few there were 
who, not unnaturally, had attributed much of his apparent 
moodiness to sheer vexation about high political matters, and 
anger and mortification at not having been appointed, some 
two years before, Lord-Lieutenant of the county. But there 
was not one present, even down to the very humblest, who 
had ever had just occasion to complain of the Earl as a land- 
lord, or as having turned a deaf ear to the cry of distress ; 
and some were there whose eyes were constantly in tears, 
while fixed upon the haggard and emaciated features and 
figure of their own munificent but secret benefactor. There, 
also, was one whom the noble mourner saw not, but whose eye 
was often occasionally settled upon him, under an undefinable 
impulse — old Ayliflfe. Possibly neither of the two might 
have that day entered the church had he known that the 
other had been there. The Earl was perfectly' calm, and 
deeply attentive to the service. Mrs Hylton's pew adjoined 
that of the Earl ; and she was often in tears, for she several 
times heard stifled sobs from Lady Emily, but not one, after 
the Earl had whispered in a low and kind, but peremptory 
tone, — 

" Kestrain your feelings, Emily, or we must retire." 
When the service was concluded, the Earl and Lady Emily 
rose, and slowly walked down the aisle, before those in the 
body of the church had risen from their seats. This had not 
been observed, however, by old AylifFe in the gallery, who, 
desirous of quitting before the Earl should have left his pew, 
had gone as quickly as his enfeebled limbs would allow him 



NOAV AND THEN. 79 

down the stairs : yet it actually so chanced, that the two 
encountered each other immediately outside the little porch. 
The Earl involuntarily stepped back for a moment, and 
heaved a mighty but inaudible sigh. Then he passed on to 
his carriage, and threw himself back in it with much agita- 
tion. Old AylifFe, though it was snowing thickly, had taken 
off his hat and bowed as the Earl passed him ; trembling in 
every limb, he yet stood as erect as the Earl ; but, when 
the carriage had di'iven off, he sat down for a moment on 
the nearest snow-covered gravestone, as if staggering under 
the weight of his agitated feelings. Two farmers who were 
near kindly gave their arms to the troubled old man, and 
set him far on his way home. 

One of them had, early in the week, driven him to the 
county gaol in his market-cart, and thereby afforded the 
unhappy father, who had obtained the requisite order for 
that purpose, his first opportunity of seeing his imprisoned 
son, who was just recovering from a violent brain fever ; 
and, during his illness, the doctor had peremptorily for- 
bidden any interview between his patient and his father. 
Old Ayliife was very minutely searched by the turnkey 
before he was allowed to enter. He shook his head and 
sighed during the operation. " These be the orders of this 
place," said the turnkey gruffly : " poison and razors have 
been found before now on folks going in to see murder- 
prisoners." 

Ayliffe trembled at the words. " No one, friend, that 
feared God would do so," said he, mildly and sadly. 

^' I dcn't know that," replied the turnkey, '' but 



80 NOW AND THEN. 

now^ you are a safe man and may go in :" and the next 
moment the heart-broken old man stood before his unhappy 
son. 

They were allowed to be alone for a short time, the 
doctor and nurse of the prison being within call, if need 
might be. The prisoner gently raised his father's cold hand 
to his lips and kissed it, and neither spoke for a few minutes ; 
at length — 

" Adam ! iidam ! " said the old man in a low tremulous 
whisper, " art thou innocent or guilty T and his anguished 
eyes seemed starmg into the very soul of his son, who calmly 
replied, — 

" Father, before God Almighty, I am as innocent as thou 
art, nor do I know who did this terrible deed." 

" Dost thou say it ? Dost thou say it ? I never knew thee 
to lie to me, Adam !" said his father eagerly, half nsingfrom 
the stool on which he sate ; " Dost thou say this before God, 
whom thou art only too likely," he shuddered, " to see, after 
next Assizes, face to face?" 

" Ay, I do, father," replied his son, fixing his eyes 
solemnly and steadfastly on those of his father, who slowly 
rose and placed his trembling arms around his son, and em- 
braced him in silence : " How is Sarah ?" faltered the pri- 
soner, looking suddenly very faint. 

" Ask me not, Adam," said the old man ; who quickly 
added, perceiving the agitation of his son, '' but she is not 
dead, my son : she hath been kindly cared for." 

" And the lad ?" inquired the prisoner, still more faintly. 

" He is well," said the old man, and the prisoner shook his 



NOW AND THEN. 81 

head In silence, the tears running do^vn his cheeks, through 
closed eyelids. 

At this point the doctor re-entered, apprehensive for the 
safety of his patient, and ordered the visitor at once to with- 
draw, as he did, having tenderly kissed the fevered forehead 
of his son. As the old man passed the governor's room, he 
was called in, and oiFered a glass of wine, which had been 
kindly placed in readiness for him. 

" No, no, I thank thee, sir," said he, somewhat excitedly; 
" I need it not ; I have just gotten a great cordial, that 
hath warmed my heart ! " 

"Ay, ay! who gave it thee?" quickly inquired the governor. 

" My son, thy poor prisoner ! for he hath told me that he 
is innocent," said the old man confidently. 

"Oh! hath he?" quoth the governor gravely, with 
melancholy significance ; and not choosing to say more, the 
venerable and grief-wom visitor was presently ushered out 
of the gloomy gates of the gaol. "When next he saw Mr 
Hylton, he spoke of his son in the like confident tone in 
which he had spoken to the governor. 

"Adam, it is not his mere saying that he is innocent, 
that will satisfy the judge and the jury at the coming As- 
sizes," said Mr Hylton, seriously ; " be not, my poor friend, 
over sanguine, for the case has very, very black features in 
It, Adam ! Has your son explained to you how he came 
into the wood just when he did ? why he fled as for his life ? 
how he got the blood upon his coat and his stick ? Alas, 
Adam, these are terrible things to deal with ; and " — he 

a 



82 NOW AND THEN. 

paused and seemed troubled — " there may be, for auglit 
you or I know, other matters proved, still blacker !" 

Old AylifFe listened to all this in silence, but his face had 
whitened visibly as Mr Hylton proceeded. 

" He's innocent, sir, for all that," at length said he; "he 
never lied to me since he was born, sir ; and I trust in God 
that He will not let the innocent suffer for the guilty ! " 

" So indeed do I," replied Mr Hylton, solemnly ; " but 
go you to the attorney whom we have engaged to take up 
the case on your son's behalf, and see what he says : I, you 
must always remember, am a magistrate, and therefore 
desire not to hear what conscience might possibly hereafter 
force me to disclose." 

" Ay, ay, sir," said the old man sadly, sighing deeply : 
" I see it, I know it ; appearances be against my son 
terribly ; but my lord judge mil be a just man, and may 
find out my son's innocence, though others may be unable 
to see it till then." 

That which greatly disturbed Mr Hylton, was the com- 
munication which had been made to him by the county 
magistrate, of the remark of young Ayliffe in the matter 
of the hare, and which undoubtedly gave a dismal com- 
plexion to the already overwhelming case against him. 



NOW AND THEN. 83 



CHAPTEE lY. 

Some short time after their first appearance at church, 
Lady Emily called upon Mrs Hylton, whom she had always 
tenderly loved from her childhood, being tenderly beloved 
in return. It was a painful interview, and both of them 
wept much. The poor girl's feelings had long been strung 
to the highest pitch of intensity, scarce ever reheved by 
commmiion with her father, though he really loved her 
fondly. Partly owing to his nature, however, and partly 
from a belief that conversation would but make deep wounds 
bleed afresh, he rarely spoke to her on the subject of the 
event which had enveloped the Castle in a desolate gloom, 
which, to him, formed indeed a darkness that might be 
felt. Besides all this, she was almost constantly an atten- 
dant on her miserable and heart-broken sister-in-law. Lady 
Alkmond, whose recovery from the shock which she had 
sustained seemed to the last degree uncertain ; and that 
uncertainty and fear occasioned the Earl an intolerable 
agony of apprehension, lest his infant grandson, now an 
object precious in his eyes beyond all comparison or expres- 
sion, should be deprived of his surviving parent. What 
delight thrilled through the heart of Mrs Hylton, when she 
found the lovely creature before her, reverentially recog- 



84 NOW AND THEN. 

nising, without a murmur, without a question, in the 
disaster which had befallen her family, the ordination of the 
all-wise Disposer of events ! 

" Thus," said she, " you spoke to me, Mrs Hylton, when 
my poor mamma was taken from us : thus she herself 
spoke to us, only a short time before she died ! I wish 
my dear papa saw these things so ; but he is always so 
stem and gloomy ! " 

" Depend upon it, my dear, dear Lady Emily," said Mrs 
Hylton, " that all which has happened may one day plainly 
appear to us to have been for the best : or it may please the 
Almighty never to reveal his purposes to us ! And if he do 
not, can we help ourselves ? What can we say or do, but 
submit to Omnipotence?" 

While they were thus talking, Mr Hylton rode up to the 
door, and seeing the Earl's carriage there, looked at the 
window, and recognised Lady Emily. Hastily uncovering, 
he dismounted, and led his horse round to the stable. 

" Why do you change colour, dear Mrs Hylton," said 
Lady Emily with sm-prise, preparing to go. 

" Shall I tell you where Mr Hylton has been ?" said Mrs 
Hylton, after a moment's pause. 

" Yes, if you please, unless there is any objection." 

" He has just been to the infirmary" — 

"What! are you afraid of fever? Don't fear for me," 
said Lady Emily, with a faint smile ; but added hastily, 
a stay— remember poor Lady Alkmond, whom I am with 
all day—fand the dear child : If any thing were to happen to 
it, I do believe my papa would die^outright ! for he almost 



NOW AND THEN. 85 

trembles with fearful love, wlien he takes it into his arms 
for only a moment ! " 

" Oh no ! dear lady Emily ,tliere is no fever there at all, 
I believe. Mr Hylton has been to visit, there, one of the 
most mifortimate beings on the earth !" 

" Dear Mrs Hylton, your looks alarm me. What do you 
mean ? — who is it ? " 

" Alas ! alas ! it is the poor innocent wife of" — Lady Emily 
changed colom^ ; '' of that wretched man who" — Lady Emily 
turned deadly pale, and trembled violently. Vain were her 
efforts to recover from the shock, and she at length swooned, 
to the great consternation of Mrs Hylton. With the aid of 
the usual restoratives, however, she soon recovered; on 
which she gazed on Mrs Hylton with a look of agonising 
affection and apprehension. 

She lay in Mrs Hylton's arms, with her raven tresses 
slightly disturbed, and straying over her pale but exqui- 
sitely beautiful features, Mrs Hylton gently rearrangmg her 
truant locks, and fondly kissing her forehead, as Mr Hylton 
entered; and Mrs Hylton motioned liim to withdraw. — " No, 
no, no I" said Lady Emily, extending her hand to him : " I 
am better now!" 

" Why, what is all this?" inquired Mr Hylton, sufficiently 
surprised. 

" I rather suddenly told dear Lady Emily where you had 
been," replied Mrs Hylton, anxiously. 

" I am soiTy for that, Mary," said he rather displeasedly ; 
and he tenderly took Lady Emily by the hand, and seated 
himself beside her. 



86 NOAV AND THEN. 

" How is the poor creature ? " she inqmred faintly. 

" We will talk about this on some other occasion," said 
he. But Lady Emily would not have the question thus 
parried, and repeated it. 

" She is certainly in a sad state," said Mr Ilylton, sighing, 
and looking very grave. 

" Is there any danger?" she inquired, slightly trembling. 

" My dear Lady Emily, you have suffering enough at the 
Castle ; I cannot add to what so oppresses you ! " 

" But how is this poor Avoman ?" she repeated firmly ; 
and Mr Hylton's acute eye detected in her tone and look 
a momentary resemblance to her father's peremptory spirit. 

" She is, alas ! at death's door ! " 

Lady Emily remained for several moments silent, and 
visibly agitated. 

" What sort of a character has she borne?" 

"Oh, poor soul!" interposed Mrs Hylton with sudden 
energy, " she was one of the best, meekest, most self-denying 
Clnistian creatures that I ever saw. I have, as you know, 
brought her up from her early youth." 

Again Lady Emily was silent. " She must not want for 
any thing, dear Mr Hylton," said she suddenly. 

" She is well cared for at our excellent infirmary ; and as 
for her unfortunate child" — 

"What! child!— has she a child?" said Lady Emily, 
tremulously. 

" Yes ! but such a poor little lame, injured creature ! " 

Lady Emily burst into tears. " May God protect it ! " 
said he at length : " Where is it?" 



NOW AND THEN. 87 

" It is taken care of by a woman, at one of the cottages." 

''How old is it?" 

" Not mucli more than a year." 

"Nearly the same age!" exclaimed Lady Emily, half 
unconsciously; sighing, and apparently falling into a mo- 
mentary reverie. " You said that it was lame and injured ; 
how came it to be so, dear Mrs Hylton ?" 

" It was always a feeble child, and when not much more 
than eight months old had a sad fall, which nearly killed 
it, and has left it lame for life, and a little deformed in the 
back," said Mrs Hylton. 

" How dreadful ! " exclaimed Lady Emily, with a shud- 
der : " Are you sure that the poor little thing is with a 
careful woman ? " 

" Yes." 

" But who pays her to attend to it?" 

"My dear husband," quickly replied Mrs Hylton, her 
eyes filling with tears ; not caring for his displeasure, and 
only too proud of his conduct. 

" I have ten guineas here," said Lady Emily, opening 
her purse eagerly, and emptying its contents into Jjlrs 
I Hylton's lap : " I don't want them ; I have more money 
than I can use ; and I will bring you fifteen more to-morrow ; 
and pray let both the mother and the child have proper 
attention paid to them." 

" My dear Lady Emily," commenced Mr and Mrs Hylton 
in a breath, " the half of what you have now given us will 
suffice for nearly a year." 

" Never mind, keep it all, and to-morrow I will give you 



88 NOW AND THEN. 

the remainder ! It is really nothing to me, I assure you ; 
my dear papa is very, very liberal to me : I cannot spend 
a tenth part of what he gives me." 

" Well, then, dear Lady Emily," said Mr Hylton, with 
energy, '' I will be the almoner of your bounty willingly 
and carefully." 

" But don't let it be known where this trifle comes from, 
dear Mr Hylton, lest my papa should happen to hear of it 
and be displeased ; for he might think it undutiful in me. 
Will you, now, promise me this?" continued Lady Emily, 
winningly, but earnestly. 

" I will— we both will," replied Mr Hylton ; ^' and you 
have in part anticipated something of what I intended to 
ask you, Lady Emily." 

" What is that ?" she inquired, anxiously. 

" iVfter what you have said, it seems hardly necessary j 
but I was about to have entreated you on no account to 
mention either of these poor bemgs to your harassed father, 
the Earl." 

" Oh mercy ! mention them to him?" exclaimed Lady 
Emily, with a great start ; ^' oh no ! not for the whole world! 
The very thought makes me tremble. Not that he might 
— but — consider 1''^ — she paused, and looked anxiously at 
Mr and Mrs Hylton, who assured her that they perfectly 
understood her meanmg, and profoundly sympathised with 
the afflicted Earl. With this she rose to depart ; and, kissing 
Mrs Hylton, promised to call the next day with the fifteen 
guineas. Mr Hylton then led her to the carriage, m which 
sat one of her maids, wondering at her Ladyship's prolonged 



NOW AND THEN. 89 

Stay at the parsonage. As they drove rapidly away, 
" There goes an angel in human form !" said Mr and Mrs 
Hylton to each other. Ah ! what a contrast did the youth- 
ful Lady Emily present before the eye of Mr Hylton, to her 
inaccessible and implacable parent ! — for such, alas ! he but 
too plainly appeared to Mr Hylton, on the very first occa- 
sion on which the Earl and he had said any thing to each 
other at all bearing on the recent calamity. Three times 
had the Earl's carriage appeared before the parsonage, 
since the funeral, to convey Mr and ]\Irs Hylton, on a 
friendly invitation, to the Castle, to dine with its taciturn 
and gloomy lord and Lady Emily ; and when she and Mrs 
Hylton had withdrawn to Lady Alkmond's chamber, Mr 
Hylton felt oppressed by witnessing in liis companion a 
misery incapable of rehef. He had long before thoroughly 
mastered the Earl's idiosyncracy, and perceived and 
lamented his utterly insufficient notions of rehgion. A thou- 
sand times had he striven with all the delicacy and tact of 
which he was m^aster, and of much indeed he was master, to 
turn the Earl's attention mward upon himself, but in vain : 
feeling himself ever courteously, though sometimes rather 
sternly, repulsed. About a fortnight after Lady Emily's 
visit to the parsonage, Mr Hylton made his appearance at 
the Castle, on one of those cheerless occasions which have 
just been spoken of; and on being left alone, as usual, after 
dinner, the Earl produced a sheet of paper, containing a 
Latin inscription, which he had been framing during the 
day, for a tablet or monument which he meditated erecting 
in memory of his son. The language was quite unexcep- 



90 NOAV AND THEN. 



tionable ; tlie Earl being noted for his elegant scliolarsliip. 
Mr Hylton read it attentively twice or thrice, and then laid 
it down before tho Earl in silence. 

" Has it your approbation, Mr Hylton?" said his Lord- 
ship, with a melancholy air. 

" The Latinity, my Lord, is, as I expected, faultless," 
replied Mr Hylton, with a certain significance of manner 
which arrested the attention of his noble companion ; who 
remained silent for a few moments, while he cast his eye 
over the paper ; and then said, 

" I presume the matter, Mr Hylton, is unobjectionable as 
the manner? — I composed it in a sad spirit, I assure you." 
Mr Hylton remained silent, apparently absorbed in thought. 
*' Pray, teU me frankly, Mr Hylton," said the Earl, with 
slight displeasure in his tone, " are you now thinking ^j>am- 
fully^ or disapprovingly, about what you have just read?" 

" My Lord," repHed Mr Hylton solemnly, '^ I have been 
thinking how this inscription at this moment appears before 
the eyes of Him, whose minister and servant I am !" 

'' Lideed, sir !" said the Earl haughtily; '-'■ and are you 
intimating that it w^ould not bear the scrutiny?" 

" I fear not, my Lord, if I have read the New Testament 
aright. But pardon me, my Lord ; if you will favour me 
for a day with that paper, I will give your Lordship my 
written sentiments on the subject ; and I need hardly say, 
with all respect and faithfulness." 

" I will consider of it, sir," said the Earl gloomily, en- 
deavouring to repress a sigh, as he returned the paper to 
his pocket-book. 



NOW AND THEN. 91 

" There is no living being, my Lord, I verily believe," 
said Mr Hylton, earnestly, " who wishes better to your 
Lordship than I do, and few who think of your Lordship 
more frequently and anxiously. Even should your Lordship 
not feel disposed to honour me with that paper, may I ask 
permission to send your Lordship my written impressions 
concernmg it ; chiefly upon one expression ?" 

" I think, sir, I know now to what you allude ;" said the 
Earl, wdth a lowering brow, and a stately courtesy of man- 
ner ; " but I have considered the subject, and deem the 
expression unobjectionable : if I should feel disposed to 
consult you upon the matter again, I will receive your 
opinion in writing." 

"My dear Lord, forgive me if, when appealed to, a 
solemn sense of duty forces me" — 

" I thank you, Mr Hylton ; but we need at present dis- 
cuss this matter no further," said the Earl coldly. 

" Be it so, my Lord," replied Mr Hylton sadly ; and 
after a brief interval of chilling silence, they separated ; the 
Earl with feelings of suppressed indignation and gloomy 
excitement, Mr Hylton with concern and apprehension. 
Had he been a mere man of the world, he would have felt 
the supercilious demeanour and treatment of the Earl to be 
intolerable ; but he knew himself to be invested with a 
holier character, to be engaged on a great and arduous 
mission, of which as yet scarcely any thing had been accom- 
plished. With w^hat different feelmgs he quitted the Uttle 
cottage of old Ayliffe, where he was a very frequent visitor ; 
on every occasion conceivmg a more and more exalted 



92 NOW AND THEN. 

opinion of him, standing upon earth welhiigh alone in his 
misery, but not forgotten by his God ! He was kept from 
the work-house, a destination of which he had all a true 
Englishman's horror, solely by the kindness of a few neigh- 
bouring farmers and Mr Hylton; all of whom, understanding 
his feelings, contrived to find him such sort of employment 
for a portion of each day as supplied his slight wants, and 
left him tune for frequent inquiries after each of the scattered 
members of his family — his infant grandson, his dying 
daughter-in-law, liis death-doomed son. On one or other of 
these sad errands he was to be seen engaged almost every 
day, in all weathers, an object of universal respect and 
sympathy. Little, however, spoke he to any one but Mr 
Hylton ; for his heart was sorely oppressed with fear on 
accomit of the peril of his son, suddenly charged as that son 
was with so tremendous a crime, and looked on with horror 
by the whole kingdom, as too truly was reported to the old 
man : a son who had passed all his life, till that moment, 
peacefully and virtuously. Late of nights might a curious 
passer-by have observed a faint light within old AylifFe's 
solitary cottage ; and on looking closely, seen him at one 
time poring over his Bible, at another on his knees. And 
early in the cheerless mornings, and later in the more 
cheerless evenmgs than others were found stirring, might he 
have been seen standing silently in the churchyard, beside 
the grave of his wife, with thoughts solemn and unutterable. 
" Here," would he say within himself, '' the wicked cease 
from troiibling^ and the loeary are at rest ! And in God's 
good time I may lay my bones beside thee, Sarah, that we 



NOW AND THEN. 93 

may moulder away together, till the day when we rise 
again, and see the meaning of every thing that hath befallen 
us here !" 

In the mean time thicker and thicker darkness gathered 
around poor young Ayliffe, as the dreaded Assize-time drew 
near. The active kindness of Mr Hylton, and a few of the 
chief inhabitants of the village, had provided the prisoner 
with professional assistance, in preparing for his defence ; 
but as time wore on, it somehow or other got abroad, that 
that the skilful and experienced attorney who had been 
retained looked disheartened about the busmess, though 
knowing his duty better than to speak despondingly to any 
one but the prisoner : whom he told, and sickened in telling, 
that though he verily believed him to be innocent, he could 
not see how the judge and jury were to be brought to look 
at the affair in the same light, without witnesses to guide 
them. Many and anxious were the conversations between 
Mr Hylton and old Ayliffe, on the dismal subject of the 
approaching trial ; and more and more frequent their 
interviews became, as the time of that trial drew nearer. 
The miserable old man was wasted, so to speak, to a 
shadow ; and but for the patient indulgence of his agonised 
inquiries by Mr Hylton, an overstrained and overburthened 
mind might have given way. Little, indeed, could be 
conscientiously said to him to sustain hopes of a favourable 
issue ; Mr Hylton dweUing, on the contrary, strongly upon 
the dreadful directness of the evidence which it was under- 
stood was ready to be brought forward. The old man, 
however, gave implicit credit to his son's protestations, not 



9-i NOW AND THEN. 

only of innocence, but of total ignorance who the murderers 
were, or why the murder had been committed. 

"But why went Adam that night to the wood? Wliy 
were his clothes stained with blood ? Why did he run from 
the wood with that bloody staff, as for his life?" asked 
Mr Ilylton : " these, as I have often told you, my poor 
friend, arc questions which it is very terrible to hear asked, 
and not satisfactorily answered !" 

" Sir, I do verily believe," rephed Ayliffe, " that he can 
show why he did all these thmgs, and is yet innocent." 

"Can he? Can he? How?" inquired Mr Hylton 
anxiously. " What witnesses has he ?" 

His companion pressed his hand against his forehead : 
" May the Lord have mercy on him, poor soul !" said he ; 
" I misgive me that he hath not any witnesses to speak for 
him ; but he may surely, when he is on trial, say what is 
the truth of the matter, and God may put it into the hearts 
of those whom he pleads before to believe him ; for I will 
swear for him, that he never did speak an untrue word that 
I know of in his life : and as for cruelty — why, he hath the 
heart of a veiy woman, for all his strength and spirit ! Oh, 
sir, why should poor Adam do this bloody wickedness? 
What hate had he against the young Lord ?" 

"Adam," said Mr Hylton, looking steadfastly at Ayliffe, 
" that is likely to be an awful question, from what I have 
heard. 'Tis whispered that they can show malice, on your 
son's part, towards the late Lord Alkmond ; that he hath 
been heard to mutter" — 

While Mr Hylton spoke, a sickening change came 



NOW AND THEN. 95 

over the features of the old man, and he ahnost groaned 
aloud. 

"What! do you fear," said Mr Hylton khidly, "that 
any may be commg to swear falsely against him?" 

Ayliffe remained silent, and looked the picture of despair ; 
for while Mr Hylton was dwelling, in his own mind, on the 
expressions wliicli he knew that young Ayliffe would be 
shown to have let fall, when he was convicted for unlawfully 
having possession of the hare, the old man suddenly 
recollected, for the first time since his son's arrest, his sullen 
refusal to stay and salute the young Lord, as he passed the 
cottage on coming down from London, and the strong 
expressions accompanying that refusal. And with those 
expressions were quickly associated certain others, which also 
old Ayliffe had till then forgotten, and which, thus combined, 
and coupled with the suggestion thrown out by Mr Hylton, 
suddenly acquired a significance that was appalling. The 
old man staggered under the shock ; and the doubts and 
fears which had vanished before his son's solemn asseveration 
of innocence, when first his father saw him in gaol, now 
reappeared with tenfold force. Mr Hylton perceived that 
the unhappy father's misery had reached its climax ; for his 
long and fondly cherished confidence in his son's truth and 
innocence seemed suddenly shattered. Mr Hylton spoke 
with infinite kindness to him, but in a very guarded way. 

"Tell me, Adam," said he, "if you choose, what is the 
explanation which your son is going to give, of the strange 
and horrid circumstances in which he was found : you may 
do so with perfect safety, for, on consideration, I can see no 



96 NOW AND THEN. 

impropriety in my hearing, though I am a magistrate, what 
his defence is hkcly to be." 

On this AyhfFc told Mr Ilylton what his son's statement 
was; and Mr Ilylton listened to it with deep attention. 

" That is the whole matter, sir," said the old man as he 
concluded ; adding with a grave eagerness, " and dost not 
thou beheve it, sir ? Ay, ay, thou wouldst, knowing but 
my son as well as 1 do, sir!" 

" Let me consider a Httle, Adam — let me consider," said 
Mr Hylton seriously. 

Old Ayliffe gazed at him with intense anxiety for some 
minutes, during which ^Mr Hylton was evidently deep in 
thought. 

''Of course, all this has been told to your attorney?" at 
length he inquired. 

"Every word on't, sir — every word!" answered Ayliffe 
eagerly. 

" And what says he of it ?" 

" Why, sir, I cannot rightly make out ; only that it is a 
serious business, such as a counsellor must decide on ; and 
that it will clear my son, if it be believed; but, sir, I would 
rather know what thou dost think on't?" 

Mr Hylton shook his head. " Why, Adam, the account 
he gives is strange, very strange ; it may be quite true, but 
much discretion, methinks, will be required on the part of 
your son's counsel. I am glad, my friend, that he has so 
shrewd and experienced an attorney as has been engaged 
for him ; and for the rest, may God detect the guilty, and 
vindicate the innocent." 



NOW AND THEN. 97 

"Amen, sir," said the old man ; and, Mr Hylton having 
bade him adieu, with earnest cordiality he betook himself 
homeward, but with such direful misgivings as kept him 
awake the live-long night ; and Mr Hylton himself spent 
some hours in revolving what he had heard, but without 
being able to come to any satisfactory conclusion. His first 
impression, however, when he woke in the morning, was that 
poor young Ayliife's doom was sealed. 

A few evenings before the commencement of the Assizes, 
Mr Hylton was at the Castle, whither he had been summoned 
to read the service for the Visitation of the Sick, in the 
chamber of Lady Alkmond. The Earl and Lady Emily were 
present, as had been the case on several previous occasions ; 
and on that now referred to, the Earl, who had been 
during the day grievously depressed by the precarious 
condition of Lady Alkmond, requested Mr Hylton, on 
quitting the chamber, to accompany him for a few moments 
to the library. On bemg seated, " Mr Hylton," said his 
Lordship, whose manner was so subdued as to give infinite 
satisfaction to the pious mind of Mr Hylton, " it has been 
this morning intimated to me that you are about to give 
evidence, at the approaching trial, in favour of the prisoner," 
—pausing as he uttered the word, — '' as far as his previous 
character is concerned." 

" I am, my Lord," replied Mr Hylton with energy — " most 
warm and willing testimony, most decisive testimony: 
would to God, indeed, that I could speak in the like terms, 
and with the same justice, of many others of my parishioners, 

H 



98 NOW AND THEN. 

as I shall speak on the dark day, that draws near, on behalf 
of these AylifFes, father and son. A more exemplary little 
family I never knew nor heard of; and I consider the old 
man, my Lord, to be a very fine character. He trained up 
his son as a Christian, and showed hmi the life of one. It is 
he, old Adam AylifFe" — 

" I wish merely to assure you, Mr Hylton," replied the 
Earl, with much of his usual haughtiness of manner, " that I 
can have no objection to your giving favourable testimony 
on behalf of the prisoner, as far as you conscientiously can 
do such a thing." 

" Forgive me, my dear Lord," said Mr Hylton, with 
dignity, " if I feel impelled to say, that I need to ask no 
consent or permission, from any one living, to do that which 
is a duty incumbent upon me !" 

This was said with a calm firmness, very perceptible to the 
Earl, who appeared for some moments as if about to say 
somethmg in reply ; but rather abruptly, and with a stern 
com-tesy, he wished Mr Hylton good evening, and they 
parted. As the latter was passing, in deep meditation, through 
a long and dusky corridor which led to that part of the 
Castle by which he usually quitted, he thought he heard the 
faint sound of steps hastenmg towards him, and the rustling 
of a lady's di'css. Nor was he mistaken : for Lady Emily, 
with her finger on her lips, and a furtive glance round, 
hastily approached him, and whispered hurriedly, but softly, 
^' How is that poor woman at the infirmary ?" 

" She remains barely alive, dear Lady Emily." 



NOW AND THEN. 99 

" Is she resigned, poor creature?" 

" I think so ; but she is often miserable, and her mind, 
latterly, wanders much." 

" Could she be better cared for if she were removed to 
a private house?" 

" Certainly not, my dear Lady Emily ; she cannot 
possibly have better nursing and medical attendance than 
she has now. I have myself given special instructions on 
the subject." 

" And," her voice faltered, " that wi'etched little being, 
her poor child, is it — " 

At that moment were heard distant footsteps, which both 
Lady Emily and Mr Hylton recognised as those of the Earl 5 
and Lady Emily vanished as though she had been a spirit. 



100 NOW AND THEN. 



CHAPTER V. 

At length arrived the day of the great murder trial, which 
the judges of Assize had fixed for Friday — a day always, 
in those times, when practicable, named for cases of murder, 
with the humane view of giving, in the event of conviction, 
as long an interval as possible for carrying into effect the 
dreadful sentence of the law ; which then recjuired execution 
for murder to be done on the day next but one after convic- 
tion, unless that day should be Sunday ; and then, on the 
Monday following. There were two other capital cases 
coming on early in the Assizes, but of no public interest ; 
being only those of a farmer's man, for stealing a pair of 
shoes from a booth in a fair, and another for taking a cheese, 
in the night-time, out of a dairy — both the offenders being 
found with the stolen property upon them ! These were, 
therefore, simple cases, and could be quickly disposed of. 
But the great murder trial appeared to have attracted nearly 
half the county into the Assize town, besides many persons 
of quahty from distant parts of the country. The case was 
to be tried before the Lord Chief Justice, who was a humane 
man, and a great law}-er; and the Solicitor-General had 
come do^\Ti, on the part of the Crown, to conduct a case of 



NOW AND THEN. 10"^ 

such public Interest and importance. The town was astir 
from four o'clock in the morning ; since which hour a great 
number of country-folk, who had walked five, ten, and even 
fifteen miles, had been standing outside the gaol, till the 
doors should be opened. There were upwards of a thousand 
people thus collected, being very many more than by any 
means could be got into the gallery ; and as for the body 
of the court, and the bench, all that part had been allotted 
to persons of distinction, long beforehand, by orders from the 
Sheriff. At a few minutes before nine o'clock, the Judge 
was to be seen, sitting in his imposing scarlet and ermine 
robes in the Sheriff's coach, preceded by a troop of javelin- 
men and trumpeters ; and so excited was the crowd, through 
which they slowly passed, that many of them thought there 
was something very startling and dismal in the sounds of 
the trumpets on that morning. The Judge, who was noted 
for pmictuality, took his seat while the clock was striking 
nine. On sitting down, he seemed for a moment to be 
adjusting his robes ; but he was also secretly disposmg Ms 
hlach cap^ so as to have it in readiness against a sad event 
which, having read what had been deposed to before the 
Coroner's jury, and the magistrates who had committed the 
prisoner, his Lordship foresaw was but too likely to happen. 
This done, he leaned back for a moment, and, while the stir 
raised by his entrance was subsiding, looked around him 
with grave composure, not at all surprised at the prodigious 
number of people who were present. On the bench near him , 
were noblemen and gentlemen of high rank, (but no ladies, 
as now-a-days happens,) whom he knew w^ell, but then took 



102 NOW AND THEN. 

no notice of whatever. The seats round and beneath him 
were crowded by counsel : among whom, facing the jury- 
box, was Mr Sc^icitor-General, who had a grave, care-worn 
face ; and a Kttlc to his right was the comisel engaged on 
behalf of the prisoner, but only to cross-examine the wit- 
nesses, or (if he could) detect an objection to the proceed- 
ings, in point of law — the law not allowing him to say one 
word for his client to the jury. Next to him sat his attor- 
ney, and both of them looked very anxious. Beside the 
attorney who conducted the case for the Crown, sate the 
Earl's sohcitor and Mr Oxley. In the magistrates' box 
might have been seen Mr Hylton, looking pale and har- 
assed. Just before taking his seat, he had quitted poor old 
AylifFe, whom, with infinite effort, he had at length pre- 
vailed upon to remam out of court, in a room close by, with 
every comfort kindly provided for him by the High Sheriff. 
From the moment that Mr Hylton sat do^vn, he seemed 
buried m his own thoughts — his head leaning on his hands, 
which quite covered his agitated face. ''Put the prisoner 
to the bar," said the officer of the court, to the gaoler, and 
there was instantly a solemn silence, broken presently by 
the clanking sound of irons; and amidst beating hearts, 
hurried breathing, and eyes intently fixed on the dock, there 
slowly approached it, accompanied by two gaolers, and 
walldng, not without difficulty, in his heavy irons, a tall 
marvellously well-proportioned man, apparently about thirty 
years old, with a countenance that, especially irradiated, as 
it happened just then to be, by a transient gleam of sunshine, 
said instantly to all present that it could never be that of 



NOW AND THEN. 103 

a MURDERER. All were struck by it. ' Twas a frank manly 
face, of a dauntless English cast, yet looked somewhat ema- 
ciated from illness and confinement. But for this, there was 
not among the gentle or simple who beheld him a finer 
specimen of the Saxon countenance, including even the 
colour and disposition of his hair, somewhat disordered 
though it seemed. He stood straight upright at the bar, 
with an air of manly and somewhat indignant confidence ; 
having bowed decorously to the Judge, who was eyeing him 
very earnestly. His pale face had reddened a little, as he 
first encountered so exciting a scene, on an occasion to him 
so unspeakably awful and momentous. His light blue eyes 
spoke most eloquently in his favour, being full of intelligence 
and spirit, and indicative of goodness ; but there was much 
in them that told of sufiering. While the Judge gazed at 
him the favourable impression created by his countenance 
and demeanour was deepening, but was presently efiaced, 
by habitual caution, and a recollection of what he had read 
concerning the case in the depositions. 

"Adam Ayliffe," said the Clerk of Assize, "hold up thy 
hand!" The prisoner obeyed, holding up his right hand, 
which was observed to quiver a little. Had that liand^ 
thought every body, done the deed of blood that was now 
to be inquired into ? Then the Clerk of Assize proceeded, 
— "Thou standest indicted by the name of Adam Ayliffe, 
late of the Parish of Milverstoke, in this County, labourer, 
for that thou, not having the fear of God before thine eyes, 
but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the devil, 
on the 31st day of December last, in the Parish of Milver- 



104 NOW AND THEN. 

stoke, in this County, in and upon one FitzStephen GeofFiy 
Lionel Bcvyllc, Esquire, commonly called Viscount Alk- 
mond, in the peace of God and of our Lord the King- then 
and there being, feloniously, wilfully, and of thy mahce 
aforethought, didst make an assault, and then and there 
with a certain bludgeon, in thy right hand then and there 
held, in and upon the head of him, then and there feloniously, 
wilfully, and with malice aforethought, with the bludgeon 
aforesaid, didst give him a mortal wound, whereof he then 
and there mstantly died ; and so him, the said FitzStephen 
Geoffry Lionel Bevylle, in manner and form aforesaid, thou 
feloniously, wilfully, and of thy malice aforethought, didst 
thereby, then, and there kill and murder, against the peace of 
our said Lord the King, his crowTi and dignity. How sayest 
thou, Adam AyliiFe? art thou guilty of the murder and felony 
with which thou standest indicted, or not guilty ?" 

"Not guilty! not guilty!" said the prisoner quickly, 
with great energy, and his chest visibly heaved. 

"How wilt thou be tried ?" 

" By God and my country," replied the prisoner, prompted 
by one of the turnkeys near him. 

"God send thee a good deliverance ! " quoth the Clerk of 
Assize. 

"Let the prisoner's irons be removed," said the Judge, 
after having spoken privately to the Sheriff; who had told 
him of the prisoner's recent severe illness, that no rescue 
had ever been attempted, and that no violence was to be 
apprehended. 

On this the irons were knocked off, during which process 



NOW AND THEN, 



105 



the Clerk of Assize thus addi'essed him :— "Prisoner at the 
bar 1 Those good men whose names thou wilt now hear 
called over, are the Jury, who are to pass between our 
Sovereign Lord the King and thee, upon thy trial. If, 
therefore, thou wouldst challenge them, or any of them, 
thou must do so when each comes to the book to be sworn, 
and before he is sworn, and thou shalt be heard. " 

The prisoner listened to this brief but significant address 
so intently as to be apparently unaware of the act by which 
he was being liberated from his irons. 

Every juryman was then thus publicly and separately 
sworn by the crier : — " Thou shalt well and truly try, and 
true dehverance make, between our Sovereign Lord the 
King and the prisoner at the bar, whom thou shalt have in 
charge ; and a true verdict give, accordmg to the evidence. 
So help thee God 1" 

When the twelve had been counted aloud, one by one, 
and their names called over, the crier thus made proclama- 
tion : — "If any one can inform my Lords the King's Justices, 
the King's Serjeant, or Attorney-General, on this Inquest to 
be now taken between our Sovereign Lord the King and 
the prisoner at the bar, of any treasons, murders, felonies, or 
misdemeanours done or committed by the prisoner at the 
bar, let him come forth, and he shall be heard, for the 
prisoner now stands upon his deliverance ; and . let all 
persons bound, by their recognisance, to prosecute or give 
evidence against the prisoner at the bar, come forth and give 
evidence, or they will forfeit their recognisances." After a 
moment's pause, the Clerk of Assize said to the prisoner. 



106 NOW AND THEN. 

"Adam AylifFe, hold up thy hand !" and, on his doing so, thus 
addressed the jury — '^ Gentlemen of the jury, look upon the 
prisoner, and hearken to his charge." Then he read the 
substance of the indictment, and proceeded, — " Upon this 
indictment the prisoner hath been arraigned : upon his 
arraignment he hath pleaded Not guilty. Your charge, 
therefore, is to inquire whether he be guilty or not guilty, 
and to hearken to the evidence." 

The Solicitor-General, on rising to state the case to the 
jury, tm-ned for a moment to the Judge, and whispered ; on 
which, " Prisoner," said the Judge, with a kind and dig- 
nified air, "I hear that you have been ill, and may be 
unable, with comfort, to stand ; you may therefore be seated, 
if you choose." 

" I would rather stand, my Lord, till I cannot — with 
thanks to your Lordship," replied AylifFe, with an air of 
respectful firmness which pleased every body ; and the next 
moment Mr Solicitor-General had commenced his speech to 
the jury — speaking with a directness and cogency utterly 
sickening to all who felt any interest in him whose 
life depended on the proof, or disproof, of what was being 
stated in that brief speech. Mr Solicitor made, indeed, a 
very plain case of it. 

" That a foul and bloody murder (it signified nought that 
it had been done upon a young nobleman, more than upon 
any other person, high or low, man, woman, or child, in the 
land) had been committed, was beyond all reasonable doubt 
whatever ; and the only question that day to be tried was, 
whether the prisoner had done that murder. He is seen," 



NOW AND THEN. 107 

continued Mr Solicitor, " as yon will be told by the witnesses 
within a few yards of the place where lay the newly 
murdered body ; his clothes have a great stain of blood on 
them ; he has a club with him, which, marked with blood, is 
found in his house ; he flies, as for his life, from the spot 
where the body lay ; and, being hotly pursued, reaches home 
with this blood on him, and this club with him ; and, while 
panting and affrighted, is arrested. This of itself surely 
is the very case put by my Lord Coke, as that of a most 
violent presumption of guilt ; and his words are these : '• It is, 
if one be mn through the body with a sword, in a house, 
whereof he mstantly dieth, and a man is seen to come out 
of that house with a bloody sword, and no other man was 
at that time in the house.' If the prisoner answer not ; nor 
explain away what will be proved against him ; nor show 
how he came to be in my Lord Milverstoke's wood that 
evening, at that very time, and to be running away bloody, 
and with a bloody weapon capable of domg the deed, and 
yet quite imconcemed in, and ignorant of, this most bar- 
barous and horrid murder — why, gentlemen, what shall be 
said ? Whatever must, in such case, be said, it is for you 
alone to say. But the Crown will, as I am instructed, carry 
this matter much further than even all this ; and will show 
an evil will and malice aforethought of the man at the bar, 
towards my Lord Milverstoke and his late son, the murdered 
person, arising, so I am told, out of some angry feeling at 
the desire of my Lord Milverstoke to become the purchaser 
of some cottage property of the prisoner's father; but 
more especially because of a poaching affair, which had 



108 NOW AND THEN. 

occiUTcd only some week or so previously to the murder — 
and on that occasion the prisoner was convicted of poaching 
on my Lord Milverstoke's land,"— here the prisoner made 
some eager gesture of dissent, but was anxiously motioned 
to silence by his advisers — " and then let fall some expres- 
sions which I shall leave to a witness to tell you, and 
which will, I fear, be thought by you to have a serious 
bearmg on this case. These, gentlemen, are the facts 
which, I am told, we shall prove most clearly before you : 
so that, you see, however dreadful the consequences of this 
crime, and exalted the position in society of the victim and 
his bereaved relatives, with whom there is, as there surely 
ought to be, a universal sympathy, the case is short and 
simple on the part of the Crown, who have no wish (God 
forbid that they should have) to press on the prisoner. 
He may not make his defence before you by counsel — such 
is the law of the land, be it good, be it bad — but this I 
know, it secures him a counsel in the judge who tries him, 
and who will take all fitting care of his interests, as well 
as those of the public." 

With this Mr Solicitor-General sat down ; and the case 
was not long in bemg proved, much as the reader has it 
already. The head-keeper and two under-keepers were 
called as witnesses, and explained that, as they were going 
their customary rounds, they heard, some twenty or thirty 
yards off from a particular spot where they were, a dull 
heavy sound, followed by a fall, then something like a 
faint groan or sigh, and footsteps. " Hallo !" cried the 
head-keeper, "what is that?" Then all three pushed on. 



NOW AND THEN. 109 

spreading a few yards from each other, when, just as they 
had got into a pathway, one of them stumbled over the 
body of Lord Alkmond, and cried '' Murder;" while the two 
others, hearmg running footsteps, followed in their direction 
till they caught sight of the prisoner ; and, after he had 
cleared the wall and got into the high road, fired after him in- 
effectually ; and finally he was arrested, in the manner which 
has been described. His Lordship was in dinner dress, but 
had put on a dark great-coat before quitting the Castle ; and 
nothing about his person had been taken away,or disturbed. 
The doctor who had been called in described the blow 
which Lord Alkmond had been struck, to have been most 
tremendous, such as that death must have followed almost 
instantly ; and that the blow had been given by some heavy 
blmit mstrument, and fi'om behind. Then was produced 
the thick oaken stick which was proved to have been taken 
from the prisoner's house, a day or two after the murder, 
and which still bore blood-stains on it. (At all this the 
prisoner was much agitated, using vehement gestures, which 
were with difficulty restrained by his advisers beneath, and 
the turnkeys behind him.) The doctor said, upon being 
asked the question, that such an instrument was quite 
sufficient to occasion the blow which Lord Alkmond had 
received, and from which he had died. 

" Nay ! God help me, but it is not true ! — it cannot be ! — 
it is not so !" exclaimed the prisoner, with agitation ; but 
he was temperately checked by the Judge. 

Then were produced, by the constable, the clothes which 
the prisoner had worn, when arrested. The left sleeve of 



110 NOW AND THEN. 

tlic coat must, on that night, have been almost soaked in 
blood ; and other parts of his dress had also marks of blood 
on them. The prisoner turned ghastly white as these dumb 
witnesses were arrayed before him and the jury ; there was 
agony in his averted eye ; and he shuddered — so indeed 
did most of those in court : and his agitation at that moment 
did him mischief, perhaps irreparable, m the minds of the 

Then was called Mr Oxley — and the prisoner changed 
colour on hearing the name. This proved to be, indeed, a 
terrible witness : for, speaking in a mild and somewhat pre- 
possessing way, and with a show of reluctance, he yet 
mentioned expressions used by the prisoner, which, in the 
judgment of every body present, established great ill-will 
towards the noble owner of Milverstoke. He said that he 
feared the beginning of the son's grudge was the Earl's 
having bought, on several occasions, parts of a little property 
owned by the prisoner's father, and showing a desire, through 
the witness, to pm'chase the remamder, but at a price vastly 
beyond its value. That on one occasion the prisoner had 
said to the witness, in a sullen way, " Those that live in the 
cottage, may outlive those that live in the Castle !" 

The prisoner, on hearing this, gave a prodigious start, 
and a glance of wrathful astonishment at the witness, which 
were observed by the watchful Judge. 

" Was any one present, sir, besides you two, when this 
was said?" inquired his Lordship, with a tincture of stern- 
ness in his manner. 

" No, my Lord ; we were alone," said the witness. 



NOW AND THEN. HI 

" I never, never said such words — no, nor any like tliem 
— nor ever thought them, good my Lord!" exclaimed the 
prisoner, vehemently. 

Mr Oxley looked sadly towards the jury, and shook his 
head. Then he spoke of the conviction for poaching, of 
which he made a far blacker business than the other. He 
said that the prisoner, knowing the hare to have come from 
Lord Milverstoke's land, muttered, thinking himself unheard 
by any, and no one did hear him but the witness, " They 
shall rue it that own that hareP 

With this answer sat down, very gravely, the counsel for 
the Crown ; but the prisoner became deadly pale, and said 
aloud, in a kind of agony, to the counsellor beneath him — 
" I said not so ! I never had a thought to say so ! O that 
my poor life should thus be sworn away !" 

On this his attorney got up, and whispered to him 
earnestly, so did he to the attorney, and the latter to the 
counsel, who thereupon rose, and was going to ask the 
witness a question, when a piece of paper was handed to 
him from the magistrate's box, written by Mr Hylton in 
great agitation : it was this — " Ask Mr Oxley whether the 
words did not apply to another, who had got him into 
trouble by giving him the hare ; and whether they were 
not — ' he shall rue it, that hrought me here ! ' Tell him 
that this is written by one who was at the Justice's on that 
day." 

This question was closely pressed on Mr Oxley ; but he 
said, with great firmness — '-'- No ; the words were as I have 
sworn to them, and closely noted at the time, not liking 



112 NOW AND THEN. 

the prisoner's looks. I thought of them often afterwards, 
before tliis murder was committed ; but never dreamed of 
any thing so bloody as this coming of it, or would have had 
him bound in sureties of the peace, I waiTant you !" 

" And will you say this, when those are present who 
were then there?" 

" Yes, I w^ill; whether they heard it or not, I cannot 
tell; but I did. If they heard differently, let them say so." 

Mr Oxley happened to know that Sir Henry Harring- 
ton, the magistrate who had convicted poor Ayhffe, w^as 
ill at home, of the gout. 

" Did the magistrate's clerk hear it ? " inquired the 
counsel for the prisoner, after much hesitation. 

'•'' I cannot say : being busy, he might, or might not. I 
have not spoken to him on the matter." 

Several other questions the counsel was disposed to have 
put, but refrained — perceiving, and having, indeed, been 
assured, what sort of person the witness was, and how dis- 
posed towards the prisoner; so he sat down, and Mr 
Solicitor-General asked no further questions. 

" But," said the Judge, in a calm and scrutinising way, 
" Mr Oxley, you will be pleased to repeat the very self-same 
words which you allege the prisoner to have used, on each 
of the two occasions which you have spoken of." 

Mr Oxley immediately did so, with the variation of only 
an immaterial word or two. 

" Do you positively sw^ear, sir, that his words before the 
magistrate were not — ' He shall rue it, that brought me 
here?'" 



NOW AND THEN. 113 

" I do, my Lord. His words were — ' tliey that own tliat 
hare.' " 

" Is not the sound of the one somewhat hke that of the 
other?" 

" Not, my Lord — not as the prisoner pronounced it." 

" Of course the man was present who had informed against 
him?" 

'' Yes, my lord ; he got half the penalty." 

"• Did any thing pass between him and the prisoner?" 

" Not that I saw or heard, my Lord." 

" Are they neighbours?" 

''They live at some six miles' distance from each 
other." 

" What was the man's name ?" 

" Jonas Hundle." 

" Who or what is he ?" 

" For aught I know, my Lord, a decent farming-man." 

" Do you know how he came by the hare that he gave 
or sold to the prisoner?" 

" No, my Lord." 

" Is Jonas Hundle still in that part of the country ?" 

"Yes, my Lord; I saw him last week, hedging and 
ditching." 

" How came you to be at the magistrate's on that day, 
sir?" 

" I chanced to be there on other business with the justice's 
clerk, and through one present offered the prisoner to pay the 
fine for him, if he and his father would agree with the Earl 
of Milverstoke about seUing theb cottage." 



114 NOW AND THEN. 

" Did lie accept the ofFer?" 

" Noj my Lord ; but used same horrid words concerning 
the Earl, which I recollect not exactly." 

^' Have you and the prisoner ever had any dispute or 
difference of any sort?' 

" No, my lord," replied the witness resolutely ; " except 
that he has sometimes made me angry by what he said 
concerning the Earl and his family : otherwise we have 
never fallen out." 

" What sort of a character bears he ?" 

Mr Oxley considered for a moment ; and then said, in 
a very candid manner — " I never knew of any thing to 
his disparagement, before this matter, and that of the hare, 
were laid to his charge." 

After a considerable pause, during which the Judge was 
evidently engaged in deep thought — " Pray, Mr Oxley," 
said he, " do you happen to know how Lord Alkmond came 
to be in the woods at so late an hour, and alone ?" 

"No, my Lord ; only I have heard — " 

" That you cannot tell us, sir." 

" But I know, my Lord, that when at Milverstoke, some 
time before, his Lordship would take such walks, and go 
alone." 

His Lordship made a few notes, very deliberately ; and 
then, laying down his pen, leaned back, and looked gloomily 
thoughtful. " Call back Mr Oxley," said he, just as Mr 
Sohcitor-General was nsing to say something. " Which 
was the taller and larger man. Lord Alkmond, or Jonas 
Hundle?" 



NOW AND THEN. 115 

'' Ob, my Lord, Ms Lordship was tall and slight, and of 
a beautiful figure ; and Jonas Hundle is stout and short." 

" Call back the head-keeper," said the judge ; and on 
that witness reappearing — '' Have you ever," inquired his 
Lordship, " seen this man Hundle in the woods at Milver- 
stoke?" 

" I cannot recollect, my Lord ; I know but little of 
him." 

" You told us that, before you came up with the body 
of Lord xllkmond, you heard sounds of something falling 
heavily, — of a faint sigh, or groan, and of footsteps^ — 
now, did you notice in what direction those footsteps seemed 
to be going ?" 

" No, my Lord, I did not : I heard the sounds of foot- 
steps, as I believed, and that was all ; and those, I do 
remember, were faint, but quick." 

" Can you give those gentlemen," pointing to the jury, 
" no notion on the subject ? — whether the footsteps were to 
your right or your left — towards, or away from you?" 

" No, my Lord ; speaking in all truth, upon my oath I 
cannot." 

" Were the sounds which led your companions to follow 
till they caught sight of the prisoner the only sounds of 
footsteps which had reached your ear between the time of 
your coming up with the body and your companions 
starting off in pursuit?" 

'' They were, in truth, my Lord. I heard none other 
whatsoever." 

His lordship paused for some moments, evidently tm-ning 



110 NOW AND THEN. 

over anxiously in his mind the last few answers of the 
witness, who spoke in an earnest and simple manner. 

" Were you not so greatly disturbed at seeing Lord 
Alkmond's body," presently inquired the Judge, " that you 
might have heard, but without noting, footsteps in another 
direction?" 

" My Lord, I am quite assured that I did not ; I have 
often since thought of that matter." 

The other two keepers were then recalled by the Judge, 
and asked similar questions, to which they gave similar 
answers ; and then Mr Solicitor declared that the case for 
the Crown was closed. 

The Judge thereupon glanced ominously at the prisoner's 
counsel and attorney, who were instantly in anxious con- 
sultation, amidst the breathless silence of the court ; being, 
up even to that critical moment, in direful perplexity 
whether or not they should hand in to the officer of the 
Court the account which the attorney had drawn up in 
^vl'iting, from the prisoner's lips, of the affair, as he pro- 
tested, without ever varying, that it had happened. Just 
as they had determined in the negative, but with a dreadful 
sense of responsibility, behold ! their client, as if unable to 
resist a sudden impulse, turned to the jury, and spoke in 
substance thus, with a voice at first somewhat smothered, 
but presently becoming clear : — 

" Gentlemen, — With my Lord's permission to speak, I 
own that I have done wrong, and meant to do wrong, but 
no murder ; and I do not wonder why I am now here, for 
truly appearances be against me terribly. Yet of this 



NOW AND THEN. 117 

murder wliicli has been done, I am every whit as innocent 
as any of you, or his Lordship there ; nor do I know who 
did it, nor why. But I was in the wood at the time when 
that most cruel deed was done, and was (may God forgive 
me !) lying in wait to punish one who had hurt and deceived 
me grievously ; and that was the man whom I took yonder 
stick to cudgel soundly, and teach him thereby how to lay 
a cruel snare for one whose wife (as I told him mine was) 
lay nearly at death's door for lack of nourishment. He 
spoke kindly to me as we were hedging, and so afterwards 
did the man that came as witness against me before the 
magistrate — those two agreeing, doubtless, to have between 
them what I might have to pay. I cannot but say I knew 
I had gone against the law therein, but had never done 
aught like it before, though many a time I might. And 
truly, had I on that terrible night caught them, or either of 
them — as I had heard they might chance to be there — God 
knoweth how much greater mischief I might have done than 
I had intended. But to say I killed Lord Alkmond, is quite 
contrary to God's truth. I, hearing footsteps at some dis- 
tance, and thinking only ofHundle, crept onward; and some 
time after, they getting fainter, I w^ent on faster, and" — a 
visible tremor came over him — " right across my path lay 
a body, and I thought the arm moved a little. The fright 
I then felt may none of you ever know — God grant you 
may not ! I saw who it was — the poor young Lord, 
\ wrapped in a great-coat. I tried to lift him, and just then 
heard steps coming another way. ' Ho,' quoth I, within 
myself, ' they will say that I did this — having come out 



118 NOW AND THEN. 

after hares again,' as I misgave me it would be supposed ; 
and though at first I was minded to shout for help, I feared, 
for appearance's sake ; and, knowing that I had not done 
the cruel deed, and hearing steps coming nearer, and then 
voices speaking, as hath been truly told you to-day, I ran 
quicker, and was followed, and fired at, ay, as though I 
had been a wild beast : and here am I this day to answer 
before you for a murder which I never committed, nor 
dreamt of. There never passed a word, good or ill, 
between the poor young Lord and me, in our lives ; nor, 
as God doth know, had I malice, or cause for mahce, 
against him. Now, gentlemen, I hope you believe all this — 
aud may God put it into your hearts to do so, for it is 
nothing but the truth ; and there is one, I think, that could 
say" — he paused, his eyes filled with tears, and he seemed 
choked. After a while he resumed — " I mean, my old 
father ; were he here, (but tmly glad I am that he is not,) 
he would testify that he hath never known falsehood come 
from my lips. And this is all that I can plead for my poor 
life, now in danger." 

Here his counsel got up, and whispered hastily to him. 
"Ay, ay, my Lord," continued the prisoner," that ^Ir 
Oxley hath put a wrong colour on my words ; and much I 
fear he hath done it knowingly, for he doth not love me, nor 
mine. The words that I said, when I was before the justice 
for the hare, were not what have here, this day, been told 
you by Mr Oxley ; but I will own I did say then to myself, 
as indeed I had intended, that it should go hard with them 
that had brought me where I was, by the cruel means of 



NOW AND THEX. 119 

trapping me with that hare ; and those other words that he 
hath spoken of I never said at all, nor any like them, that 
I can remember, at any time." 

At this moment the prisoner suddenly fell heavily on the 
floor, overcome with exhaustion both of mind and body, 
(which was much weakened by ilhiess,) rendering him for 
a short time insensible. This greatly startled and moved 
all present. After a while, he was assisted from court, and 
given some refreshment ; and on a message from the Judge 
being sent, to know if he were able and ready to come back, 
he returned, shortly afterwards, looking very ill, leaning 
between two gaolers, and sat down on a stool, which had 
been placed for him in the dock, by order of the Judge. 
Then were called witnesses to speak to his good character, 
begimiing with Mr Hylton, whose words, and hearty em- 
phatic manner of uttering them, and his amiable look and 
reverend appearance, aided by the high character he bore, 
evidently produced a great impression in the prisoner's 
favour. For no mortal man could more have been said than 
Mr Hylton said, as clergyman and magistrate, for Ayliffe, 
who sobbed violently while his affectionate and zealous 
witness was speaking. 

Then the Chief Justice turned towards the Jury, and all 
they, with anxious faces, towards him. In a twinkling no 
earthly sound was audible, but his clear, distinct voice, which 
thus began : — 

"Gentlemen of the Jury, there be many cases in 
which we are forced to some judgment or other, on the 
question oitrue^ or false : though lamenting, with just cause, 
that we have but scanty means for forming such judgment. 



1 20 NOW AND THEN. 

But in this world it ever will be so, judging, as we must, 
with imperfect faculties, and concerning matters tlic know- 
ledge whereof, as (observe you!) constantly happens in 
crimes, is studiously impeded, or sought to be impeded, by 
those who have done such crimes. Seeing, then, that our 
judgment may be wrong, and, as m this case, may be 
followed by consequences which cannot be remedied by 
man — and yet that we must form a judgment one way or 
another, or fail of doing our duty to both God and man — 
it behoves us solemnly and carefully to do our utteimost, 
as though our own lives were at stake ; and, devoutly 
asking God's assistance in doing so, to leave the result with 
His mercy, wisdom, and justice. Now, gentlemen, in this 
case, forget, for a very little while, that life depends on the 
judgment which you are to pronoimce ; but only, by-and- 
by, to remember it the more distinctly and reHgiously. 
Did this man at the bar slay the late Lord Alkmond ? is 
yom- first question ; and the only other is — Did he do it 
with malice aforethought ? for if he did, then has he done 
murder, and your verdict must needs be Guilty, He says 
before you to-day, that he did not kill the Lord Alkmond 
at all. If you verily believe that he did not, nor was by, 
counselling and assisting those w^ho did, why, there ends 
the matter, and he is Not guilty. But did he do the act 
with which he is charged? No one but Almighty God 
above, and the prisoner himself, can, as far as we seem able 
this day to see, absolutely hnow whether the prisoner did, 
as though you had yourself seen him do it ; for even if he 
had never so solemnly told you that he did, yet that telling 
would not be such absolute knowledge^ but, as I may say, 



NOW AND THEN. 121 

next door to it. And so is it, in reason, observe you well, 
if facts be proved before you, which, be they few or many, 
point only one way ; unless, indeed, all sense and reason 
are to be disregarded and outraged. Look, then, to what 
are proved, to your satisfaction, to be FACTS ; and also 
forget not that which the prisoner himself has this day 
voluntarily told you. That some one did this foul mm'der 
is past dispute — the wound proved not being of such a 
nature that it could possibly have been inflicted by the Lord 
Alkmond himself. The prisoner owns himself to have been 
with the body at a time closely after that when the deed must, 
by all accounts, have been done, nay, while the deceased yet 
lived — for the prisoner tells you that he thought he saw 
the arm of Lord Alkmond move — and yet says that he 
knows nothing whatever of the matter, though he ran 
away — and bloody — and with a bloody stick, such as, it is 
sworn before you, might have done the murder. If these 
be really /acfe, are they not such as point one way only, 
according to the expression of my Lord Coke, which w^as 
read rightly to you by Mr SoUcitor ? There is, as you see, 
no suggestion this day concernmg any other who might have 
done the deed. But the prisoner himself does admit that he 
w^ent whither he had no right to go ; and, in doing that, 
trespassed secretly by night on the land of another, for a 
malicious and revengeful purpose, armed with that danger- 
ous weapon which you have seen, and is now here — which 
purpose was, privily to lay wait for one who, he says, had 
wronged him ; and he says himself that he might, in his 
anger, possibly have gone further with this unlawful and 



122 NOW AND THEN. 

felonious assault tlian lie had intended when he began it. 
Now, gentlemen, do jou think, according to the best of 
your judgment upon these facts, that the pnsoner may have 
unliappily lit suddenly upon Lord Alkmond, and in the 
darkness, and the haste of his angered temper, mistaken him 
for the man for whom he was lying in wait, and under that 
mistake slain him ; and, hearing voices and footsteps, fled 
for it?" The Chief Justice paused, and the jury were 
evidently uneasy, gazing on him very intently. 

" If that were so," continued the Judge, " then is the 
prisoner at the bar before you as guilty of the murder of 
Lord Alkmond as if he had intended to kill Lord Alkmond 
— that is the law, beyond all possible doubt ; and your verdict 
must in such case be guilty, founded on facts proved, and 
the prisoner's own admissions. That, I tell you again, is 
the clear law of England, which you must, on your oaths, 
abide by." 

The prisoner here made violent efforts to rise and speak, 
but was prevailed on by those beside him, and beneath him, 
to remain silent, while this frightful possibility against him 
was being put to the jury. The man most agitated at this 
time, next to the prisoner, was Mr Hylton. 

"Your first question, gentlemen, as I have told you," 
proceeded the Chief Justice, "is. Did the prisoner kill Lord 
Alkmond ? And methinks it may not be ill for you to ask 
yourselves. If it were not the prisoner, who could it have 
been ? Do you, in your sound discretion, verily, on your 
oaths, believe that it was not the prisoner ? You may so 
believe, if you credit what he has said here to-day, having. 



NOW AND THEN. 123 

look you, due regard to what is otherwise proved against 
him, and the probabiHtes of the case. But have you, 
gentlemen, in your souls, and on your consciences, so much 
uncertainty on the matter that you cannot bring yourselves 
to say the prisoner struck the blow, or (which is the same 
thing in law) was present counselling or assisting those who 
did? Then has the Crown failed to bring before you 
evidence sufficient to prove the case which they undertook 
to prove. But beware, gentlemen, (as 'tis my duty to warn 
you,) of being led away from proved facts, by speculation 
and conjecture, which are mere Will-o'-the-wisps, as I may 
say, if far-fetched and fanciful ; and also take care not to be 
drawn from your duty by thoughts of the cruelty or 
meanness which the prisoner charges (for aught we know, 
truly) on him whom he owns that he went to injure. And 
as for what has been sworn by Mr Oxley, my Lord 
Milverstoke's local agent, and seemingly a reputable person, 
going to show malice of the prisoner beforehand against 
Lord Alkmond, why, consider whether you believe that this 
gentleman really heard the very words which he swears he 
heard the prisoner use. If such words were spoken, as are 
told us to-day, they go some little way to show deliberate 
malice towards the Lord Milverstoke and his family 
generally, — but Mr Oxley may be mistaken after all, or 
(which God forbid) may have had such horrid wickedness 
as to colour, invent, or pervert, advisedly against the prisoner. 
You will also, though I trust it may be needless to mention 
such a thing, think nothing whatever of the interest with 
which this trial may have been looked forward to outside. 



124 NOW AND THEN. 

or be listened to in this place to-day ; but think you only 
of your being on your solemn oaths before Almighty God, 
and judging as fearlessly and justly as though the prisoner 
and the late Lord Alkmond had changed places — as though 
the prisoner had been murdered, and Lord Alkmond were 
here to answer for it. Consider the case, then, gentlemen, 
under the pressm^e and sanction of your oaths, according to 
proved facts, and plain probabilities, such as Avould guide 
you in important affairs of your own. Say — Did the Lord 
Alkmond kill himself? Or are you, after all that you have 
heard, totally In the dark ? Can you form no reasonable 
opmion on the matter ? If that be so, why you must needs 
say — Not guilty. Or did Lord Alkmond and the prisoner 
contend together, so as to make the killing him man- 
slaughter ? But of this there is no pretence or suggestion 
whatever. Then did the prisoner strike the fatal blow, 
whether knowing the person to be Lord Alkmond, or mis- 
taking him for some one else whom he intended to kill or 
maim ? Li either of these last two cases you must say — 
Guilty. But if you think that the prisoner neither struck 
the blow, nor counselled nor assisted those who did — know- 
ing nothing, indeed, (as he hath alleged,) about the matter — 
and if you believe that what he has said before you this day 
is the pure truth, then you must say that he is Not Guilt y. 
And now, gentlemen, consider the verdict Avhich you shall 
pronounce ; and may God enlighten and guide your minds 
in discharging the solemn duty which is this day cast upon 
you." 

On this a bailiff was thus sworn publicly, — 



NOW AND THEN. 125 

" You do swear, that you will keep this jury without 
meat, drink, fire, or candle, in some quiet and convenient 
place ; that you will suffer none to speak to them, nor any 
of them ; neither speak to them, nor any of them, yourself, 
without leave of the Court, except to ask them whether they 
have agreed on their verdict. — So help you God !" 

Slowly then arose the twelve from their seats ; and, fol- 
lowing the bailiff to their private room, passed on to it, 
scarcely one of them looking at the prisoner, within a few 
yards of whom they walked on their gloomy errand ; nor 
did he look at them, but seemed faint and exhausted — which 
the Judge observing, gave him leave to retire, till the jury 
should have returned with their verdict. 

Then Mr Hylton withdrew for a moment to the room, the 
key of which he had with him, where he had left old Ayliffe, 
and whom, on entering, he found staring towards the door 
with mute terror. 

'' I brmg no news, Adam — the case is not over yet," said 
Mr Hylton quickly, but with a heavy sigh and a face of 
fearful gloom. 

After in vain attempting to make the old man take any 
nourishment, Mr Hylton returned to Court, almost trem- 
bling at the bare thought of a sudden knock at the door 
announcmg the return of the jury, while he was absent with 
the prisoner's father, on whom a sudden shock might have 
fatal effects. On re-entering the Court, he found the Judge 
sitting with a solemn countenance, having spoken to no one 
since the jury had retired, but appearing absorbed in his own 
thoughts. Wliat a position, indeed, was his ! If the jury 



126 NOW AND THEN. 

should find the prisoner guilty, that judge would have to 
assume the dismal emblem of the death-doom, and from his 
lips must fall upon the prisoner's ears the blighting accents 
which would extinguish life and all earthly hope ! 

Mr Hylton permitted another to occupy his seat, he 
standing near the door In a state of sickening anxiety, In 
order that, whatever should be the verdict, he might be able 
to enter, Avith a little preparation and calmness, the room 
where the old man was, at the door of which j\Ir Hylton had 
a servant stationed, to prevent any sudden noise or knocking. 
At length the low general whispering which had been going 
on m Court, for upwards of an hour and a half, was arrested 
by the sound of knocking at the jury-room door ; and, while 
all voices were hushed, few faces were there which did not 
then change colour, few hearts which did not throb thickly 
and fast. 

" Put the prisoner to the bar," said the officer of the 
Court; and, before the fii'st juryman had re-entered the 
jury-box, the unhappy prisoner came slowly forward from 
beneath the prison, to the bar, and stood there with much 
firmness, but his face manifestly flushed. 

Oh ! who could tell the appalling agony which he had to 
endure while the twelve jurymen's names were being slowly 
called over, they answering one by one, all looking either on 
the floor, or away from the prisoner ! 

The last name having been called over, — 
" Adam Ayliffe," said the officer, " hold up thy hand !" 
The prisoner did so, and a very awful silence ensued, 
while the officer proceeded to say to the jury. 



NOW AND THEN. 127 

*' Gentlemen of the jury, have ye agreed upon your 
verdict ? Who shall say for you ? Ye shall speak by your 
foreman. Do ye say that the prisoner at the bar is guilty 
of the felony and murder with which he stands charged, or 
not guilty ? " 

'' Guilty," said the foreman in a low tone — and those 
who were watching the prisoner observed the colour fly 
rapidly from his face, like breath from a glass, leaving his 
countenance of a corpse-like hue. But he stood firmly. His 
lips appeared to move, and he spoke : no one, however, 
hearing him but the two gaolers next to him, who said after- 
wards that his words were, 

" Now am I murdered, who never did murder any 
one!" 

*' Hearken to your verdict, as the Court records it," said 
the clerk of assize, (as soon as the verdict had been pro- 
nounced,) writing the fatal " Guilty" on the indictment. 
" Ye say that the prisoner at the bar, Adam Ayliffe, is guilty 
of the felony and murder whereof he stands indicted: that is 
your verdict, and so ye say all." 

There was a moment's thrilling silence. 

" Call upon him!" said the Judge, gazing solemnly at 
the prisoner, while the officer thus called on him to hear 
judgment, or show why it ought not to be passed. 

" Adam Ayliffe, hold up thy hand. Thou hast been 
indicted of felony and murder ; thou wast thereupon arraign- 
ed, and didst plead thereto Not guilty, and for thy trial 
didst put thyself upon God and thy country, which country 
hath found thee Guilty. What hast thou now to say why 



128 ^^OW AND THEN. 

the Court slioiild not give thee judgment upon that convic- 
tion, to die according to law?" 

A momentary pause ensued — this being the time for the 
prisoner's counsel to take any objection in law to the suf- 
ficiency of the indictment, so as to arrest the judgment — 
but the prisoner's counsel spoke not, nor moved, looking 
down in silence. Then the Judge drew from beneath his 
desk a black velvet cap, and placed it deliberately upon 
his head, a sigh or sob being audible throughout the 
Court while he did so. 

Then rose the crier, and said in a loud voice, — 

" O yez ! yez ! yez ! My Lords the King's Jus- 
tices do strictly charge and command all manner of persons 
to keep silence, while sentence of death is passing against 
the prisoner at the bar, upon pain of imprisonment ! " 

The prisoner stood staring with ashy cheek and glazed 
eye, at the Judge, while the following words were being 
uttered, the import of which w^as, perhaps, at that fearful 
moment, only imperfectly apprehended by him to whom 
they were addressed, with a calmness and deliberation 
that were appalling. 

" Adam Ayliffe, the word has just been spoken which 
has severed you from this world, and from life. You 
stand there convicted of a most foul and cruel murder, 
upon a young nobleman, in the very heyday of happiness, 
prosperity, and grandeur, and, on your own showing, 
utterly unoffending against you. Whether there be any 
truth whatever in that which you have this day said in 
your defence, I know not: a jury of twelve honest men here, 



NOW AND THEN. 159 

whose present manifest agitation shows the pain with which 
they have discharged a sacred duty, have rejected your 
story, and found that you did actually commit this awful 
crime; and have said so, without venturing to speak of 
recommending you to mercy. I am bound to tell you that 
I agree with their verdict entirely; and all intelligent 
persons who hear me, are now probably regarding you as a 
justly convicted murderer. Indeed, what enormous offences 
must go unpunished, if evidence so clear as that given this 
day in your case were held not sufficient to bring you to 
conviction ! An earthly tribunal has endeavoured to do its 
duty, and is consoled, in its anxiety, by reflecting on the 
overpowering strength of the evidence which has been 
brought before it. Get you, unhappy, misguided man, 
victim of your own guilty and headlong passions ! to your 
knees, without one moment's delay, to prepare, after quit- 
ting this earthly, for your speedy appearance before a 
heavenly, tribmial. I will not waste the few precious, most 
Inestimably precious, hours which yet remain to you, by 
doing more than conjuring you to address yourself devoutly 
to Him who, and who alone, is able to save you from the 
bitter pains of eternal death. Through your blessed Ee- 
deemer, who died the just for the unjust, and ever livetli 
to make intercession for you, and in reliance on his merits, 
beseech and implore the pardon and mercy of your offended 
God ! Alas ! all that now remains for me to do, as your 
earthly judge, is to declare and pronounce upon you the sen- 
tence of the law : which sentence is, that you, Adam AyliiFe, 
be taken back to the place whence you came ; and thence, on 

K 



130 NOW AND THEN. 

Monday now next, to the place of public execution, and 
there be hanged by the neck until you be dead : and that 
afterwards your body be dissected and anatomised. — And 
the Lord have mercy on your soul." 

"Amen!" solemnly cried the Chaplain, who, on the 
jury's pronouncing theu' verdict, had silently entered the 
Court, in his full canonicals, and stood a little behind the 
Judge's seat, only long enough to pronounce that word, and 
then withdrew. 

The wi'etched prisoner moved not, nor spoke, when the 
Judge had concluded ; and, apparently mechanically, turned 
round and accompanied the two gaolers who stood beside 
him, and who, putting his arms within theirs, gently led 
him away from amidst the sea of solemn faces around him, 
to the cell, which, within a few short hours, he would have 
to quit, only to appear before a far greater assemblage, 
on a still more a^vful occasion, with what decorum and 
firmness he might. 



NOW AND THEN. 131 



CHAPTER VI. 

As soon as Mr Hylton had heard the death-dooming 
word uttered by the foreman of the jmy, he instantly with- 
drew ; and breathing a hurried inward prayer on behalf of 
the prisoner, and his afflicted father, gently opened the 
door of the room where he was awaiting the dreadful issue ; 
and, with as much composure as he could command, sat 
down beside the old man, who moved not as Mr Hylton 
entered, but remained with his face buried in his hands, 
which were supported by his knees. For some moments 
Mr Hylton spoke not, scarce laiowmg how to break the 
blighting intelligence. 

'' Adam, my friend, it is over !" said he, gently taking 
one of the old man's hands, and grasping it within his 
own. Ayliffe looked slowly and fearfully in Mr Hylton's 
face, and read his son's doom written in every troubled 
feature. He tried, but in vain, to speak : his lips moved 
without uttering any sound, and he sunk from his chair on 
his knees, his hands clasped before him, and his haggard 
face inclined towards the ground. 

"God, in whom you have trusted, my dear troubled 
friend, support you in this horn- of darkness ! " said Mr 
Hylton. 



132 NOW AND THEN. 

" Pray ! — help — help mc to pray ! " gasped the old 
man famtly; on which Mr Hylton knelt beside him 
saying— 

" God be merciful unto thee, and bless thee, and lift up 
the light of his countenance upon thee ! Be Thou a very 
present help in time of trouble, unto this thy servant, who 
trusteth In thee ! " 

While they were thus engaged, the Lord Chief Justice 
suddenly stood for a few seconds before them, having, in 
haste, mistaken the room for his own, which adjoined that 
assigned to old Ayliffe. After a moment's pause, he silently 
retired, having recognised the benevolent features of Mr 
Hylton, with whose face he had been much struck, as he 
spoke on behalf of the prisoner. The Chief Justice had 
been aware of the prisoner's father having been in atten- 
dance all day in some adjoining apartment, and saw at a 
glance how the matter w^as. On entering his own room, the 
Judge was so much affected with what he had thus acci- 
dentally witnessed, that he sate in silence, and without 
unrobing, for a considerable time. 

When Mr Hylton had uttered a few more sentences of 
Scripture, with great fervency, the old man's tears began to 
fall, and he heaved a long, deep-drawn sigh. 

At length, " I scarce know where I am," said he faintly ; 
" yet — I have had help, but for which surely I must have 
died ! I thank thee, sir, for all thy goodness to a poor 
heart-blighted old man !" he whispered, slowly rising from 
his knees, with Mr Hylton's assistance, and sitting down, 
trembling from head to foot ; " I — dare — not — ask " — he 



NOW AND THEN. 133 

stammered ; " thy terrible face tells me — all is over witli 
him!" 

^' I cannot say that it is not so ! " said Mr Hylton. 

" Oh ! Adam, Adam, my son ! would thou hadst never 
been born !" exclaimed the old man, lamentably. " Would 
I were dust, as is thy poor mother ! Oh, my Sarah ! my 
Sarah ! " He placed his hands before his eyes, and the tears 
trickled down beneath them. 

"He hath not to Hve beyond Monday morning ? " said 
he, after a long pause, with a sudden affrighted look at Mr 
Hylton, who shook his head in silence. 

The old man groaned, and pressed his hand over his 
heart, as though it were bursting. 

" Wliat shall I — what can I say to comfort you, Adam ? " 
said Mr Hylton — " except, that there is one never-failing 
source of succour, as you know well, both for you, and for 
your son, and for all mankind ! " 

" Oh, my son ! my son ! — let me go to my poor son 
while yet he lives!" said Ayliffe mournfully, and, takmg 
his stick and hat, essayed tremulously to move towards the 
door. 

" Stay here, Ayliffe, while I go and see whether, by the 
niles of this place, you may be admitted to see him — that 
is, so soon after what has happened. Consider, too, what 
he has had to go through this day, and that his health has 
besides been somewhat shattered of late — as well, poor 
soul ! it might be." 

Having received a promise from Ayliffe to remain in the 
room till his return, Mr Hylton withdrew, and found no 



134 NOW AND THEN. 

difficulty in obtaining written leave from the under sheriff 
for immediate access to the wretched convict, who, being 
thenceforth allowed only bread and water, had been removed 
from the bar of the Court to the condemned cell ; tlu'ough 
the open door of which Mr Ilylton saw, as he approached, 
three turnkeys fastening upon him heavy irons, the chaplain 
standing in his robes beside him, and holding in his hand a 
cup of water, which he had in vain brought several times 
to the closed lips of the condemned man. 

This dreadful scene greatly agitated Mr Hylton; who 
stood, for a moment, at a little distance, to regain some 
measure of self-possession. 

" Come, my man, take the cup of water the parson offers 
thee!" said the head turnkey, kindly, clapping his hand 
roughly on the prisoner's shoulder. 

Ayliffe started, looked with glazed eye at the turnkey, 
breathing heavily through his nostrils, his lips remaining 
spasmodically closed. Mr Hylton hereupon entered, very 
pale. 

" Adam, my poor friend, God be with you! " said he, with 
a faltering voice, takmg the prisoner's hand. 

Ayliffe suddenly rose from his seat, but sunk down, his 
irons being connected to a strong staple m the floor. " I 
am stifled ! " he gasped, his^breast heaving fearfully. '' This 
is a grave!" he added, looking, his features distorted with 
horror, round the narrow cell in which he foimd hunself. 
" Open the door — I cannot breathe ! " 

" Adam, if you have not forgotten one who ever loved 
you," said Mr Hylton, taking the cup of water from the 



NOW AND THEN. 135 

Chaplain, and bringing it to Ayliife's lips, " drink tins water 
from my hand ! " 

But the prisoner turned aside, convulsively gasping, '' I 
choke! I choke!" 

At length, however, on the persevermg entreaty of Mr 
Hylton, he greedily swallowed some of the water ; and then, 
.as if for the first time noticing the robed figure of the 
Chaplain, stammered, with a ghastly stare, " Who— who 
are you?" 

On the suggestion of Mr Hylton, the Chaplain withdrew, 
as also did the turnkeys, closing the door behind them; and 
then Mr Hylton was alone with the condemned. For some 
time his solemn admonitions were lost upon Ayliffe ; whose 
first connected words were — 

" The curse of God be on them that have condemned the 
innocent for the guilty — ay, a curse!'" he added, almost 
gnashing his teeth. 

"Adam!" said Mr Hylton, "you are too near the 
immediate presence of the judgment-seat of the Eternal, to 
be indulging in these unholy thoughts ! " 

The condemned man glared at him wildly, evidently 
making a mighty effort to keep silent. 

" Your father is waiting to see you — heart-broken, yet 
bowing in reverent submission before God ; but, so long as 
you cherish such resentful feelings, I cannot bring him to 
this cell." 

Mr Hylton saw a change coming over his miserable 
companion, who seemed terribly agitated, and about to 
weep. 



136 NOW AND THEN. 

" Does not your heart yeam after the sight of that saintly 
father of yours ? " continued Mr Hylton, gently. 

The son raised his hand to his eyes, sighed heavily, and 
shook his head bitterly. 

" God is softening your heart, Adam," said Mr Hylton, his 
voice faltering with his own strong emotions ; " yield to His 
holy influences ! From Him hath come all this that has 
happened to you ! Oh ! let not Satan now steel your heart, 
and close your ears, that he may have you presently his for 
ever ! Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right ? Kneel 
down with me, my fellow-sinner, and let us humble our- 
selves before God, and beseech his forgiveness and support! " 

The prisoner's tears flowed fast; and, sobbing convul- 
sively, he permitted himself to be inclined gently on his 
knees. Mr Hylton uttered a short, solemn, and fervent 
prayer, in which AylifFe audibly joined; and presently 
rising, assisted by Mr Hylton, began to exhibit an approach 
towards composure, Mr Hylton speaking to him gently and 
soothingly. 

^' You have much work to do, Adam, and little time to do 
it m ! Will you listen to me for a moment ? " 

The convict sadly bowed his head, and grasped the hand 
of Mr Hylton in silence. 

" Do you from your heart forgive all those who you 
believe may have injm-ed you, as you would be yourself 
forgiven by God?" 

Ayliffe paused. " No — not yet ! I cannot truly say I 
do !— but, with God's help, I will try." 

'' He is at this moment helping you, in saying these last 



NOW AND THEN. 137 

pious words of yours ! Within a few hours, Adam, how 
plainly may you see the justice, ay, and even the mercy 
and wisdom of all that now appears so greatly to the con- 
trary ! Prepare! — prepare, Adam, to meet your God! 
Confess your sins, if you would have them forgiven ! Oh, how 
many have they been ! How many things have you done 
dm*ing your life, that will not now bear examination ! yet 
all MUST be examined, and judged hereafter ! How much 
have you omitted to do, that ought to have been done ! — 
and all these things are noted against you, by an Eye that 
sleepeth not ! And in this very matter — why, Adam ! rouse 
yourself — stir up your soul within you ! — reflect ! —consider ! 
— what have you not confessed this day in open Court, before 
yoiu- earthly judge — before all mankind ? What, but the 
deadly malignity and revenge that you had long cherished 
in your heart against your enemy ! — whom the Gospel had 
told you to forgive ! — but whom you — oh, Adam ! — went, 
under a hellish impulse, secretly to be revenged on ! If God 
should enter into judgment against you, what have you to 
say? Look at the very root of this matter : concerning the 
hare which (small cause of so much evil !) led to all this. 
Did you not then stifle your conscience, which condemned 
you, when first you were tempted to do wrong ? Oh ! 
where was then your Bible? Where were your father's 
warnings ? where were my humble teachings ? Had you but 
resisted at the first — at the very first — would you now have 
been here, Adam ? And was not Providence opening for 
you, through my imworthy exertions, a way for you out of 
your troubles ? Think, Adam, of the steps by which you 



138 NOW AND THEN. 

have gone wrong, and done deliberate wickedness, and 
hrought yourself directly hither ! I say not this, Adam, 
believe me, to chide and trouble you in so awful a moment 
as this ; but am only striving to set you right with your 
conscience, that when I am gone, and before we meet again 
on earth, and while your precious moments ebb fast away," 
— ^liere Mr Hylton Avas greatly moved, and paused for some 
moments, — '' you may think of your sins, and humble 
yourself under the mighty hand of God, and give ear to no 
temptings of the fiend who would seduce and delude you ! " 

AylifFe clasped his hands together, and gazing upwards, 
said tremulously, " I do confess my many and grievous sins, 
O God ! and more now they seem than they ever seemed 
before!" 

"The world in which you still, for a little, live," con- 
tinued Mr Hylton, " is fading fast from before your 
eyes, Adam ! It passeth away ! It pensheth ! From you, 
within a few hours, does it disappear, and is only some- 
what more slowly vanishing from me, and from all living ! 
Hither were we sent for trial only, and but for a brief space ! 
— Then return we to Him who sent us, who is Eternal, 
Omnipotent, Omniscient, Just, and Merciful ; and who will 
assuredly, as he hath distinctly told us, render to every man 
according to his deeds! " 

Mr Hylton uttered all this with thiillmg solemnity ; and, 
as he ceased, the condemned man sunk again on his knees, 
in an attitude of profound devotion. Thus he remained for 
some minutes, neither he nor Mr Hylton speaking. At length 
Ayliffc rose slowly, and resumed his seat. 



NOW AND THEN. 139 

"Adam," said Mr Hylton, "let me ask you a great 
question — one that I will not ask a second time, be your 
answer what it may. Tell me, who am a minister of that 
God before whom you are so soon to appear, and now that 
all earthly hope is over — are you innocent or guilty of the 
crime for which you are to die ? " 

The condemned man calmly elevated his hands and his 
eyes towards heaven, and with solemn firmness replied, " God 
knoweth that I am as innocent as the child that hath not 
been born ; and may He reconcile me to die for that which 
I never did, nor know who did, nor why it was done. May 
I, before I depart, cease to think it hard that the innocent 
should die for the guilty ! " 

Mr Hylton gazed at him in troubled silence. 

" Do you believe, sir, that 1 am innocent of this murder?" 
Ayliffe suddenly inquired, turning to Mr Hylton a face that 
wore an awful expression — havmg no anger or sternness in 
it, but being, in a manner, radiant with truth from heaven, 
which seemed to lighten into the mind of Mr Hylton ; who 
replied — 

" As I live, Adam Ayliffe, I do ! " 

" I am ! I am ! and, now that you believe me, I feel a 
great change here," he continued, raising his manacled hands 
to his breast, — " I feel free and light ; and that I may die 
in full piety, truth, and hope, and be forgiven all my many 
sins, for His sake, who died the just for the unjust ! " 

" See, Adam, what peace may come suddenly from Hea- 
ven, into so dismal a cell as this ! " 

"It may! — it hath! Yet" — he paused — "God grant 



140 NOW AND THEN. 

that, when I am left alone, all mj evil thoughts and impiety 
do not retmTi ! " 

^' No, they will not, if you be continual in your supplica- 
tions, and strenuous in faith ! But remember, Adam, remem- 
ber ! — remember ! time is short ! Thrice only will the smi 
rise upon you ! " 

^' I know it, sir ! I know it ! and very terrible is it to feel 
and to know it! But" — he became suddenly agitated — 
^' there is yet a question I would ask — yet I dare not." 

" I know, Adam, what you mean," said Mr Hylton very 
piteously. "Alas! I fear me — but, — what think you, 
Adam ? Do you wish her to stay m so sad a world after 
you?" 

" The will of God be done ! Is she — is my poor Sarah 
— is she gone ? " He shook m every limb. 

" No, Adam, she is not ; but I must own, it may be that 
you will both meet sooner than you now think for. She 
lies trembling on the very verge of the grave. A breath 
might — " 

" Oh, poor soul ! — oh, dear Sarah ! — oh, my own wife ! " 
cried Ayliffe, dismally. " Mother of my child ! must we 
never meet again on earth ? And my child ! — oh that thy 
mother had never borne thee to me ! " 

Mr Hylton bowed his head in silence, at this bitter out- 
break, and his eyes overflowed with tears. 

" Let her not know of my death, if she live afterwards, 
till she may, with God's blessing, bear it ! And the old man 
— my poor father! — where is he?" suddenly inquii-ed 
Ayliffe. 



NOW AND THEN, 



141 



" He is in the prison, and hath been there all the day long, 
and now, doubtless, is wondering why I return not to per- 
form my promise, and bring him to see you. Can you bear 
to meet him, Adam, if I get leave to bring him ? " The 
prisoner groaned; and, after a long pause, said, sorrowfully — 
" It cannot hurt me — but may it not kill him ? " 
" I hope and do trust not, Adam. He, like his son, has 
sought for succour from above 1 He knows, poor soul ! 
the worst of what has happened, and I doubt not his coming 
may at first grieve, but directly afterwards it will greatly 
comfort you ! " 

With this, ]\Ir Hylton quitted the cell, and, having 
obtained the requisite permission, returned, supporting 
on his arm the grief-worn father of the convict, even the 
gruff turnkey pitying him, as he passed silently along. He 
almost dropped to the earth at sight of the two turnkeys, 
standing with blunderbusses at the door of the cell in which 
lay his miserable son. They were about to search the old 
man before he entered ; but the governor, having been 
appealed to, gave peraiission for him to be admitted into 
the cell after only a nominal search, provided Mr Hylton as 
a magistrate would stay in the cell during the whole of the 
interview — an undertakhig which Mr Hylton gave with 
great reluctance, hopmg to have been spared so sad a scene ; 
for sad indeed, and heart-rending, it proved to be. 

It lasted not long, however ; for the limits of indulgence 
allowed by the prison rules to the condemned had already 
been nearly exceeded when Mr Hylton re-entered with the 
old man. 



142 NOW AND THEN. 

Oil ! liow great was the consolation afforded to father and 
son, by Mr Hylton's declaring his conviction that that son 
was really innocent of the barbarous and horrible crime for 
which he was nevertheless to die ! Never had the father 
doubted of his son's innocence, from the moment of liis 
solemn assertion of it, when first his father had seen him in 
the gaol. On Mr Hylton's mind this solemn asseveration 
of the prisoner had produced a profound impression — one 
painful and intolerable ; for he himself, of course, as im- 
plicity and absolutely believed that assertion as he had 
professed to the prisoner that he did. Fixed in such a 
belief, how awful appeared to him the insufficiency of all 
earthly modes of investigation, and administering justice, 
deliberate, impartial, unimpeachable even as had been that 
of the memorable day which was then closmg. " Oh," 
thought Mr Hylton, '^ how, in this dim scene of action, we 
grope in the dark after truth, and may miss it, and do miss 
it, after all our best directed efforts. And how fearful often, 
as in this case, the consequence of error ! " 

Mr Hylton had himself heard the whole of Ayliffe's 
trial ; and felt that, had he been either judge or juryman, 
he could not possibly have come to any other conclusion, 
according to the evidence, than that the prisoner's guilt 
had been fully established that day in Court, and corro- 
borated too, most powerfully, by his own voluntary acknow- 
ledgment ! " But what," thought Mr Hylton, as he slowdy 
conducted his aged heart-broken companion, from the 
gaol, to a small house where he had kindly engaged a 
room for him for a day or two, that he might be near his 



NOW AND THEN. 1 43 

son diu'Ing the few sad hours left hmi of life, — " what is to 
be done ? What time is there for doing that which may 
be done ? Here is Friday night — and on Monday he 
dies!" 

Sitting down with old Ayliffe, as soon as they were 
alone, Mr Hylton, endeavouring to speak in such a guarded 
and desponding manner as should kindle no hopes which 
might be disappointed, engaged him in imrestrained con- 
versation concerning what had been stated in Court by Mr 
Oxley, touching the alleged origin of both the Ayliifes' 
ill-will to the Earl and his family. With lively indignation 
did Mr Hylton hear of the insulting and oppressive 
conduct of Mr Oxley ; and on being told, above all, of his 
outrageous allusion to the workhouse, as the destined 
resort of old Ayliffe, and of the scornful fury with which 
the condemned man had cast the offensive speaker out of 
the cottage, Mr Hylton was indeed confounded, on remem- 
bering Mr Oxley's statement to the Judge, that there 
never had been any ill-feeling or cause of dispute between 
him (Oxley) and the Ayliffes ! This Mr Hylton men- 
tioned to Ayliffe, who thereupon told him, that on Mr 
Oxley's coming to his legs again, after being jerked down 
by young Ayliffe, as has been described, old Ayliffe heard 
him say, with a venomous look towards young Ayliffe — 
'' Ay, ay. Master Ayliffe ! I owe thee a turn for this ! " 

As time was precious, and the evening was far advanced, 
Mr Hylton hurriedly took leave of his companion, promising, 
rather vaguely, to see him again as soon as possible. On 
his way to the inn where his horse was put up, a travelling- 



144 NOW AND THEN. 

carnage and foiu' rolled rapidly by him ; and, on inquiry, 
he found that it was that of the Lord Chief Justice, who, 
having finished the Assize, was thus already on his way to 
London. Mr Hylton rode round by Sir Henry Harring- 
ton's, on whom he called, and found him ill in bed ; but, 
stating the urgency of his errand, Mr Hylton was admitted 
instantly to his room, and took down verbatim Sir Henry's 
account, (signed by himself,) of the expression which the 
condemned man had used on the occasion of his conviction 
for having had the hare in his possession ; and that expres- 
sion was precisely the one which Mr Hylton had written 
down in Court, and handed to the prisoner's counsel ; but 
which had been, nevertheless, peremptorily denied by Mr 
Oxley. 

" Here, then," thought Mr Hylton, as he urged on his 
horse rapidly homeward, " are two things — malice estab- 
lished in Oxley against the prisoner ; and a false, or at least 
an erroneous, account given by the former of the words 
which had been used by the latter, as showing settled malice 
against Lord Milverstoke and his family. But, alas!" 
thought Mr Hylton, as he revolved the matter in his mind, 
'' to what do these two things really amount ? Does the 
fatally conclusive proof on which AylifFe has been con- 
demned, depend on Mr Oxley? Suppose even all that 
he has said at the trial were stnick out from the evidence, 
would not the glaring facts proved by the crown, and admitted 
by the prisoner, remain?" — and Mr Hylton reflected on the 
fearful summing-up of the Judge, knowing not how to 
impugn any part of it. If this were indeed so, then must 



KOW AND THEN. 



145 



poor AylifFe be left to liis fate, and tlie innocent (as Mr 
Hylton believed him) die the shameful and horrible death 
of the murderer. 

Thoughts like these greatly depressed Mr Hylton — ex- 
hausted, moreover, as he was with the agitation and 
excitement of that dismal day, during which he had scarcely 
tasted any refreshment. 



146 NOW AND THEN. 



CHAPTER VII. 

When within a mile of Milverstoke, he slackened his pace 
to give his horse a little breathing-time ; and had hardly 
done so before he heard the sound of some one approaching 
on horseback, a little to his right, evidently from the quarter 
where the barracks lay. As he passed the entrance of the 
by-road which led to them, he saw, on glancing aside, an 
orderly come trotting up at a brisk pace, and who was 
going to pass him, (it being about nine o'clock, and dark.) 
Suddenly, however, the soldier stopped his horse, saluted 
Mr Hylton, and said — " I ask your pardon, sir ; are not 
you Parson Hylton, sir?" 

" I am," said ]\Ir Hylton, sufficiently surprised, reining 
up. 

" Well, sir, I am the third man that has been ordered 
from the barracks within this two hours to your parsonage, 
sir — with a letter to you, sir, from Captain Lutteridge. I 
have it now, sir. Here it is," giving it to Mr Hylton ; 
"but you cannot read it in the dark." 

" I suppose, my man, you don't know what it is about?" 
inquired Mr Plylton amazedly. 

"No, sii' ; I know nothing of the matter ; my orders were 



NOW AND THEN. 147 

only to take this letter, and bring an immediate answer, 
sir, if you were at home ; and my two comrades that went 
before carried each this letter, and brought it back, as you 
were not at the parsonage, sir." 

The barracks were at little more than a quarter of a mile's 
distance, so — " Go back, if you please," said Mr Hylton, 
" as quickly as you choose, and say that I follow you." 

"Yes, sir," replied the man; and galloped back as fast 
as Mr Hylton could have desired: he following pretty 
briskly, wondering much what urgent matter might be astir. 
Arrived at the barracks, he was forthwith shown into a 
private room, where two officers (one of them considerably 
older than the other, of a stern, matter-of-fact, soldierly 
appearance) joined him before he had had time to do more 
than open the letter which had been given him by the 
orderly. After a hasty but handsome apology for troubling 
him, and especially for the liberty which had been taken, 
without orders, by the orderly, in stopping him on his return 
home — 

" It is known to us," said Captain Lutterldge, the elder of 
the two officers, " that you have great concern In the case 
which has been this day tried at the Assizes, concerning the 
murder of the late Lord Alkmond : and my friend here, 
Lieutenant Wylsden, who was present at the trial, has come 
back, telling us that the Judge said he thought it strange 
that Lord Alkmond should have gone out, as he truly did, 
into the woods on that night ; and asked whether any one 
knew the cause." 

"Sir," replied Mr Hylton, with sudden interest, "the 



148 NOW AND THEN. 

Judge did say so, and In so saying expressed that which 
I, and others, have often felt and talked about." 

"Well, sir, I know little about it; but, for aught I 
know, tliat little may have some bearing on the case of the 
man this day condemned for the murder. This, then, is all I 
have to say : I, do you see, sir, was at my Lord Milverstoke's 
on the night of the murder, dining there, and afterwards 
was at the ball, till it was suddenly broke up by the news 
of my Lord Alkmond's murder. Kow, when we were all 
at dinner, naught happened ; but some time afterwards, 
when my Lord Milverstoke and others had gone to the ball- 
room. Lord Alkmond and some few of us, principally 
officers, remained behind ; and a certain one present chanced 
to speak of a subject which several immediately talked upon 
— but not Lord Alkmond, who seemed to become suddenly 
sad, and even troubled. I sat next to him, and I saw that 
he grew very much disturbed indeed as the talk went on : 
but why, I could neither know nor guess. He spoke to me 
of some matter altogether different, but I saw that he was 
listening, as though in spite of himself, to what the others 
were saying — especially when one of them, a nobleman, not 
now, I believe, in England, told us of a thing which had 
happened to him (or that he had heard of, I forget which.) 
Then Lord Alkmond did, as I thought, grow suddenly far 
more troubled ; and I, for politeness' sake, moved to go : 
so did the others, except two, who talked very earnestly 
together, still on the same subject. My Lord Alkmond 
bade us, with forced gaiety, go to the dancing, saying that 
he would before long rejoin us. I sportingly said 'No, 



NOW AND THEN. 149 

come with us, my Lord.' ^ By-and-by,' said his Lordship, 
'I have a small matter to do;' and so we parted, never 
again (as it proved) to meet alive. Now this is all I know, 
reverend sir, and it may signify little, and yet may mean 
much. I, being a soldier, know not what bearing all this 
may have on law matters : but as the Judge, it seems, asked 
a question which, had I been there, I could have so far 
answered ; and as the Judge said, so Lieutenant Wylsden 
tells me, that it was strange that on such an occasion my 
Lord Alkmond should go into the wood — why, I too say it 
was a little strange. The man that has been tried to-day is 
convicted, and will, I suppose most justly, die on Monday ; 
therefore, sir, I have sent to tell you what you have now 
heard, but what you can make of it I know not." 

These last pregnant words startled Mr Hylton out of a 
reverie into which he had fallen, while listening in silent 
amazement to Captain Lutterldge. "May I trouble you, so 
far, reverend sir," said the Captain, "as to ask whether 
you have seen the prisoner since his sentence ?" 

"I have," replied Mr Hylton, as if his mind were bent 
on something else. 

" Does he stand firm ? The Lieutenant here tells me he 
is a marvellous tall, well-built, and strong man, and would 
have made a fine trooper. Methlnks I must have seen him 
about, some time or other, in these parts." 

"What was that matter, sir, on which you gentlemen wei'e 
speaking, at which the Lord Alkmond grew so troubled?" 
inquired Mr Hylton suddenly and anxiously. 

" Why, " quoth Captain Lutterldge, evidently taken quite 



150 NOW AND THEN. 

aback by the question, ^' look you. sir — is it necessary or 
proper that I should say what passed, in confidential talk, 
at the table of my Lord Milverstoke ? For I was the guest 
of his Lordship; and we cannot, I reckon, talk elsewhere 
about any thing there spoken of. How knew I what mis- 
chief I might do, or how grievously I might thereby hurt 
my hospitable host ?" 

^' But I implore you, sir, consider that within little 
more than forty-eight hours an innocent man may be 
swinging on a gibbet ; and what you have now told me 
may—" 

Captain Lutteridge appeared quite nonplussed at this turn 
of the matter, it never having occurred to the frank and 
high-minded soldier that such a question was likely to be 
asked. Now it seemed to him to be directly contrary to 
good manners, and the rules of hospitality, that he should 
disclose any thing which had taken place on an occasion of 
unrestrained private intercourse at his host's table : and 
that, too, relating to the son of that host, and under most 
afflicting and awful circumstances. 

''I entreat — I earnestly implore of you to tell me, sir," 
said Mr Hylton, eagerly. 

'' Sir, you see, I never thought of this, nor did any of us, 
as we talked the matter over in our room there ; so I am at 
a loss suddenly to answer you. Let me tell you, sir, that 
it seems certain to me that the thing can have no real bear- 
ing on the case of this murder. What could my Lord 
Alkmond, sir, have had to do with the man who has been 
this day tried for murdering him ? Did he dine with us, 



NOW AND THEN. " 151 

sir, and hear what we said ? And if he did, still it plainly 
could have signified nothing in such a case." 

" Oh, forgive me. Captain — forgive me !" answered Mr 
Hylton, earnestly. '' It may have every bearing — the 
most vital bearing, for aught you and I, at present, can 
know. You said, but a moment ago, most truly, gallant 
sir, that you, being an officer, knew not the bearing which 
the thmg might have on law matters. 

" Ay, I did then say so, but I never thought of the 
question which you would presently ask, sir" — Captain 
Lutteridge said this somewhat stiffly, looking rather angry. 
<' And even though it had a bearing, sir, do you wish me, 
a gentleman and officer, to tell out of my host's doors what 
took place within, whether it be a matter great or little ? 
Sir, you should not, being yourself a gentleman, stand 
upon your question." 

'' But I must. Captain ; life is at stake : this poor man, I 
declare in the presence of Heaven, I beheve to be quite 
innocent." 

'' Phew !" exclaimed the Captain, with an air of complete 
astonishment, and a touch of disdain too — '' and that, 
reverend sir, after my Lord Chief-Justice and a jury have 
found him guilty ? Excuse me, sir, but who shall know 
better than they? Besides, the Lieutenant here tells us 
that your very innocent man confessed the deed in open 
Court. Did he not?" continued the Captain, sarcastically, 
tm^ning to his brother officer. 

" Yes ; I say so. Captain — he did." 

Mr Hylton eagerly interposed — " No ! no ! no !" 

^' I say he did, sir !" quoth the Lieutenant sternly ; "or 



152 NOW AND THEN. 

at least he did as good, or I had no cars or understanding 
— and so said also the Judge ; I marked it well" — 

" I assure you, Lieutenant " — commenced Mr Ilylton, 
with a gesture of strenuous dissent. 

" Why, look you, reverend sir," interrupted the Lieu- 
tenant, " did not the prisoner say plainly and loudly, that 
true it was he got the blood on his coat from my Lord 
Alkmond's body, and ran away from it, with a bloody 
bludgeon, for his life?" 

" Yes ; but he said also that he did not do the deed, and 
only feared he might be thought to have done it." 

" And there, sir, I reckon, he lied, " quoth the Lieutenant 
warmly. 

" Interfere between us. Captain, for the love of God, and 
for pity to man !" said Mr Hylton, appealing to Captain 
Lutteridge, who was a much older man than the Lieutenant, 
and during the latter's brief contention with Mr Hylton 
had stood looking at the fire, in a very thoughtful manner. 
On being appealed to — 

'' Be quiet, Mr Wylsden," said he quickly, and somewhat 
authoritatively, to the fiery subaltern ; then turning to ^Ir 
Hylton, he continued, — " Sir, I have been thinking of 
this, and it seems to me at present a somewhat graver matter 
than it appeared to me just now ; for, as you say, sir, this 
man will hang in forty-eight hours ; and if he ought not to 
hang, that would (as I think) be unjust, though all the 
judges in the world said otherwise. I will speak to you in 
a few minutes, sir, wishing on this point to consult those 
who are within there." 

With this the two officers hastily withdrew, leaving IMr 



NOW AND THEN. 1''53 

Hylton in a state of no little excitement, impatience, and 
amazement. What extraordinary aspect was tliis miserable 
case about now to assume ? What could this conversation 
have been about, that such a mystery was made of it? 
Troubled as he was, and serious as was the case, he saw 
clearly and respected the motives which influenced the 
simple-minded and honourable soldier, in demurring to give 
him the answer which he had besought. Presently he 
heard loud and earnest talking in the mess-room adjoining. 
" I say, nay !"— " 'Tis monstrous !"— " 'Tis unofficer- 
lilj-el" — "Pity 'tis you named it. Captain!" were expressions 
which he could not avoid hearing. Anon all the voices 
dropped to a lower key, and he heard nothing for some 
minutes but hurried whispering ; and at length his impa- 
tience, which was becoming quite intolerable, was relieved 
by Captain Lutteridge, who came in alone, shutting the 
door after him, and his flushed face showed that he had 
borne an active part in a somewhat keen discussion. 

"■ Mr Hylton," said he courteously, ^' I have taken advice 
of several of my brother officers, and we all do think this a 
case of much difficulty, and some danger, and that may 
perhaps, for all I meant well, bring some discredit on me 
as being guilty of tattling or eaves-dropping, and that too 
on so sad and bloody a business as this in hand. AYhat I 
have resolved to do is this, sir : I will first see my Lord 
Milverstoke and take his orders — that is, his pleasure on 
the matter — and if he object not" — 

" Then is poor Adam Ayliffe sacrificed !" said Mr 
Hylton despairingly. 



154 NOW AND TIIEX. 

" How SO, sir ?" quickly asked the astonished officer. 
" Of course, sir, though my Lord Milverstoke should be 
greatly hurt " — 

" No, no — I mean, sir, there is NO time for all this ! It 
is now near ten o'clock, and if any thing be done to get a 
respite even, I must go off to London by the coach passing 
through Milverstoke at midnight ; and consider, dear 
Captain, how long it will be before I reach London — how 
much I have to do there, and must yet be back before 
Monday morning ! " 

" Sir, all that is doubtless so," said Captain Lutteridge, 
looking the picture of blank perplexity : he was rapid and 
decisive enough in military matters, but here he seemed for 
a while at fault. " Ho ! without there !" he suddenly 
exclaimed ; " saddle my horse and another instantly, and 
let Hickson, or some other of the men, be ready to accom- 
pany me without one moment's delay." 

" Why this ? why this. Captain ?" inquired Mr Hylton. 

'' Sir, I am going to my Lord Milverstoke's, and if he 
grant me leave to tell you what you wish to know, I will 
follow you on to London, if I gallop all the way on 
horseback." 

" Once more, sir, let me tell you how I honour you for 
your highmindedness ; but will you not act in this awful 
dilemma on your own judgment, and let me quit for London 
immediately with a somewhat lighter heart?" 

" No, sir, not if I die for it, till I have seen my Lord 
Milverstoke." 

Mr Hylton sighed heavily. " Do you know his Lordship ?" 



NOW AND THEN. 155 

" Not Ultimately ; only as an hospitable nobleman, who 
entertained us all at a most princely banquet." 

" But I know his temper and character well, Captain — 
haughty, stern, inflexible ; and in this matter, above all 
others" — 

^' I care not," said Captain Lutteridge proudly, " for his 
haughtiness, if he were fifty Lords Milverstoke ! I will see 
him and take his wishes on the subject, and, if need be, 
struggle for his consent. No man shall hang unjustly, if I 
can help it. But look you, Mr Hylton, upon my word and 
honour I think nothing will come of all this ; and I fear, 
when I may have disturbed and grieved, and it may be 
angered Lord Milverstoke, the matter that I may be 
permitted to tell, will signify Httle or nothing : I cannot see 
how it does, I assure you." Here the servant announced the 
horses ; and, hastily bidding adieu to Mr Hylton, on whom 
he promised to call in returning from the Castle, and, if 
Mr Hylton had gone to London, follow after him post-haste, 
if need might be — but if Lord Milverstoke proved inexor- 
able, of course Captain Lutteridge would take no further 
steps — off galloped the Captain, and his man, at top speed, 
followed at a more moderate, but still a quick pace, by Mr 
Hylton. If what had just taken place at the barracks 
appeared strange, however unsatisfactory and tantalising, 
there awaited him at home, presently, intelligence still more 
so, and calculated to invest the case in which he had 
interested himself with real mystery. When he was about 
to dismount at the parsonage door, behold, Mrs Hylton, 
unable to restrain her impatience, rushed forward to meet 



156 NOW AND THEN. 

him ; and before he could give his horse into the hands of 
the old gardener, who also had been for the last two hours 
anxiously looking out for him, and even before Mrs Hylton 
could speak to him about the dismal result of the trial, she 
put an open letter into his hand, saying — 

"There, dearest! read it, read it!" Shortly after his 
quitting the parsonage in the morning, Mrs Hylton had also 
gone, pursuant to a previous arrangement with him, to the 
infirmary, which was at about five miles' distance, to be pre- 
sent with the unfortmiate wife of the man who was to be 
that day tried for his life. Some three hours after the par- 
sonage had thus been deserted for the day, the post came in, 
bringing a letter addressed to Mr Hylton, and marked 
outside '* post-haste." The gardener had accompanied ]\Irs 
Hylton, and only the old housekeeper and a servant girl 
were left in the house. On Mrs Hylton's return, about six 
o'clock in the evening, this letter caught her eye, and 
having opened it in consequence of the words " post-haste," 
guess the feelings with which she read as follows : — 

" Rectoiy, Midgecombe, 28tli March. 

"Dear Mr Hylton, 

" In my husband's absence, on an expedition in which I 
am sure you would take an interest, seeing it is to preach a 
charity sermon on behalf of a lying-in society about to be 
founded, and of which our bishop highly approves, and has 
invited my husband to ofiiciate on this occasion, I have 
opened several letters which came for him yesterday and 
to-day, and one of them appears to have come from some 



NOW AND THEN. 137 

place on the French coast, and relates to that horrid murder 
of poor Lord Alkmond, which is to be tried (I think my 
husband said) at the close of the Assizes for your comity. 
I do not Iviiow the particulars of the case, but this letter 
seems written by some one who has lived in this parish, and 
knows my husband — and says, in effect, that the man that 
wrote it is a mate in a small coasting vessel ; and having 
seen a country paper, telling about the murder of Lord 
Alkmond, recollects one of their men being in a boat on the 
very night it happened, his vessel being at a couple of miles' 
distance, waiting for this man to return from some errand 
to the shore. He says it was nearly opposite Milverstoke 
Castle, and he recollects hearing guns fired in the wood, 
and, immediately before or afterwards, he saw one, or it 
might be two persons, running very quickly along the shore. 
He says the sailor recollects it, because he supposed 'twas 
some poaching business. The writer says he looks forward 
to being in England very soon, after they leave Dunkirk, 
from which place the letter seems written. As the man 
who is accused is unfortunately a parishioner of yours, and 
doubtless you take an interest in the case, I thought it light 
to tell you of this curious letter, which I would have sent, 
but that I expect my husband home hourly, and thought it 
better to keep the letter till he comes. — With best remem- 
brances to Mrs Hylton, (how is she in this bitter cold 
weather?) I am, dear Mr Hylton, yours sincerely, 

'^ Fanny Merton." 
'' P. S. — The man's name is ^ Jevons,' or some such 
name (but horridly written,) and my maid says she recol- 



158 NOW AXD THEN. 

lects that there was a young fellow of that name near us 
some years ago, and thinks he went to sea. By the way, 
he says something about a note m the log-book." 

The letter almost fell from Mr Hylton's hands by the 
time that he had breathlessly read it over ; and he looked 
so harassed and confounded that his good wife, who had a 
world of questions to ask him, slipped out of the room into 
an adjoining one, where preparations for supper had been 
going on, and brought him a glass of wine, which he drank 
from her hands almost mechanically. 

"Ifwe had had this letter at the trial to-day ! " he exclaimed. 

" Sure, my dear, I have not done wrong ? I never saw 
it till I came back this evening." 

^'ISTo, my dear Mary, how can you suppose that I think 
so ? This is a most extraordinary accident — if, indeed, there 
he such a thing as accident." 

"But poor Ayliffe" — she interposed, anxiously. 

He shook his head. " The worst has happened. He is 
condemned to death, and is left for execution on Monday 
morning ; the Judge made it an awfully clear case of guilt ! 
but I have been with poor Ayliffe smce, and verily believe 
him as innocent of it as you or I. How is his poor wife ? 
Did she know what was going on ?" 

" No ; the doctor had taken care, for fear of accidents, to 
give her some sleeping medicine, and she has dozed all day 
long." 

" Mary ! " said Mr Hylton, suddenly, " I start for London 
by the coach to-night. I will go to the Secretary of State's 
about this miserable victim of mistake ! " 



NOW AND THEN. 1 59 

" Why, the coach will be here m three-quarters of an 
hour's time ! " 

" Put me up, dearest, a change of linen at once, to be 
ready " — 

" But get your supper, first, surely, Henry ! You will 
be fainting for mere want of food ! " 

Having hastily swallowed a little refreshment, he went 
out to borrow ten pounds from his church-warden, who lived 
at a neighbouring farm-house (not, himself, having sufficient 
money by him.) Having obtained the necessary supplies, 
and made what hasty arrangements the time admitted of, 
especially in respect of his Sunday duty, which gave him 
great anxiety, lest there should be no one to do it, owing to 
this hurried movement of his ; he carefully placed in his 
pocket-book the all-important letter above mentioned, also 
the memorandum signed by Sir Henry Harrington ; and 
kissed his wife, who bade her good husband, with tears and 
fond embraces, God-speed. 

'^ But, my dear," said she, suddenly, " suppose there 
should be no room in the coach, outside or in? " 

" Oh dear, dear ! that never occurred to me ; really, 
Mary, you are always supposing such mischances " — 

"Yes; but, dearest, you know we must consider these 
things!" 

Here they heard the distant horn of the approaching 
vehicle, which had only a few months before made its ap- 
pearance in these parts; and, followed by the gardener, 
bearing a small portmanteau, Mr Hylton made his way 
quickly to the inn where the coach changed horses — so tor- 



160 NOW AND THEN. 

mented by the possibility (overlooked by himself) of there 
being no place for him, that he nearly forgot Captain 
Lutteridge's expedition to the Castle. When that, however, 
occurred to him, he became very anxious, straining his ears 
in the direction of the wood, but heard no sounds. Fortun- 
ately, there proved to be a vacant place on the coach — had 
there not, it might have gone hard with poor AylifFe, for 
posting up to London was a very serious matter, and quite 
beyond Mr Hylton's means. This was a Httle auspicious 
circumstance, which dwelt long and often upon his mind as 
they rattled onward to London on his momentous errand. 
In about five minutes' time the coach rolled smoothly and 
rapidly past a small solitary cottage, near the road-side, 
for which Mr Hylton's eye had been on the look-out, while 
a pang shot through his aifectionate heart ; for he thought 
of the poor child lying there, all imconscious that its mother 
was on a bed of death — even if then alive ; and its father 
heavily ironed in the horrible condemned cell, doomed to 
die the ignominious death of a murderer within a few short 
hours, unless Providence should vouchsafe success to the 
efforts at that moment being made on his behalf by Mr 
Hylton. Unuttered by his lips, from the depths of his pious 
and trustful heart, proceeded an humble prayer to God, 
from this. His minister, that He woidd be pleased to give 
His blessing to the undertaking in which that minister was 
then engaged. The night was bitterly cold, and Mr Hylton 
much exhausted from long-continued anxiety, and want of 
rest and food. Once or twice he would have fallen into the 
road, but for the interposition of his friendly and more 



NOW AND THEN. 161 

wakeful neighbour, who told him, with a smile, on the oc- 
casion of his being thoroughly roused from fitful sleep, about 
three o'clock, by the echoing sound of the guard's horn, and 
the thundering clatter of hoofs and wheels through one of 
the silent towns on their way, where they changed horses 
— that any one who had heard him might have supposed 
that he was some capital convict escaping from Jack 
Ketch ! 

" What, friend !" said Mr Hylton, slightly confused, " do 
you say that I have been talking in my sleep ?" 

" Ay, sir, I reckon you have, indeed," quoth the coach- 
man, with a respectful laugh — for he of course saw that Mr 
Hylton was a clergyman ; and was, besides, himself at that 
place surrendering the reins to his successor, and had gratui- 
ties in view. 

No more on the road slept Mr Hylton , nor spoke he more 
than a word of casual and constrained civility to his fellow- 
travellers, being intently concerned with his own weighty 
and troubled thoughts. He was going to introduce himself 
forthwith to a great Minister — the Secretary of State — 
without knowing how to obtain access to so exalted a 
functionary, being totally ignorant of all matters of official 
etiquette and procedure, and unacquainted with any one in 
London who could give him assistance in his desperate 
emergency. He trusted, however, to the purity of his 
motives, the consciousness of a courage which no fear of 
man had ever damited, and the support and blessing of 
God. But still he could not blink the difficulties of the case. 
He was bent on interrupting the due course of the law, on a 

M 



162 NOW AND THEX. 

memorable and unliappily notorious occasion; he was 
tiying to get interposed the royal prerogative of mercy 
towards the convicted mm'derer of Lord Alkmond, after 
an miexceptionable trial, before the eminent Cliief Justice of 
England, who had publicly and solemnly declared his entire 
approval of the verdict which consigned the prisoner to the 
gallows. And with what weapons had Mr Hylton entered 
upon this warfare? His heart sunk within him as he 
surveyed their inadequacy. Suppose Mr Oxley and 
his evidence were discarded altogether from the case, w^as it 
not impregnable, as built on unquestionable facts and the 
piisoner's own acknowledgments ? What could Mr Hylton 
say, as a matter of conscience and honom', of the singular 
communication which had been made to him by Captain 
Lutteridge, utterly ignorant as Mr Hylton was of the 
nature of the conversation which appeared to have agitated 
Lord Alkmond shortly pre\^ous to his murder ; and above 
all, restrained as Mr Hylton was from making any use of 
that communication, till authorised by Captain Lutteridge ? 
And as for the letter received from Mrs Merton, he had not 
that original letter with him : in short, Mr Hylton, as he 
drew nearer the mighty Babylon, which he had not seen for 
upwards of a quarter of a century, became more and more 
dejected and desponding. 



NOW AND THEN. 163 



CHAPTER VIII. 

That simple-minded and gallant officer. Captain Lutte- 
ridge, performed his promise to Mr Hylton to the very 
letter, but felt exceedingly disconcerted as he rode rapidly 
along to the Castle. For, at what a moment, and on what 
a subject, was he approaching the Earl of Milverstoke ? 
On the very day on which his son's publicly-proved mur- 
derer had been capitally convicted ; the Captain having 
little or no personal acquaintance with his Lordship, beyond 
having experienced his splendid hospitalities ; intent upon 
tearing open cruel wounds, just as they might be imagined 
beginning to heal — by suggesting all sorts of painful and 
agitating surmises to the Earl concerning his deceased son, 
if his Lordship were indeed unacquainted with the facts 
concerning which Captain Lutteridge was coming to speak. 
" Egad," thought he, '•'- 1 shall be thought a paltry, gossip- 
ing, meddling mischief-maker and eaves-dropper ! What 
business had / to have said one syllable about a private 
conversation at the Castle ? Why must I mention it at 
all ? Bah !" The Captain bit his lips ; his gallop subsided 
into a canter, then into a trot, and the trot into a walk, as 
he thought of all these things ; and by the time that he had 



1C4 NOW AND THEN. 

reached the park gates, which his attendant had gone for- 
ward to get opened, greatly to the astonishment of the 
sleepy gate-keeper, the Captain walked his horse very 
slowly indeed — slower and slower, and at length fairly 
stood still for some minutes, as did also his mechanical 
follower ; who indeed would have stood so for a fortnight, 
or any longer given period, as a matter of course, without 
inward questioning or surprise, if so had done, or ordered 
him to do, his commanding officer. But Captain Lutte- 
ridge recollected that his promise had been given, and that, 
too, on a matter of life and death ; and suddenly urging 
his horse into a rapid pace, soon made his way along the 
winding gloomy road leading to the Castle, and reined up 
his reeking horse, and dismounted, just as a couple of tall 
seiwants, startled by his attendant's appeal to the bell, 
slowly drew open half the great central door, and came out 
to inquire who it was that had arrived at so unusual an 
hour. A great wood fire, that had blazed in the hall dur- 
mg the day, was now burnt down to red embers ; and only 
a dull flickering light fell from the antique lamp suspended 
from the lofty roof. 

The Captain strode into the hall with a stout heart, and 
said, in his usual peremptory way — " Is my Lord Milver- 
stoke in the Castle?" 

" He is, sir." 

" Send some one hither immediately, who may take a 
message to his Lordship : I am Captain Lutteridge." 

For a moment or two he was left alone, and inwardly 
protested that he would give a hundred pounds to see him- 



NOW AND THEN. 165 

self decently at the end of this strange and bootless 
expedition ; for he felt now certain, that he should appear 
before the harassed peer in no other light than that of a 
very impertinent and unfeeling intruder. Presently came 
the personage for whom he had sent, who with an air of 
great politeness assured the Captain that on no account 
could his Lordship be disturbed at that hour, being just 
about to retire to his chamber, and being, moreover, some- 
what indisposed. 

'' Take his Lordship, nevertheless, my name, sir, imme- 
diately ; assuring him that were my errand not most 
pressing, I would not trespass on his Lordship's privacy in 
this manner." 

On this the gentleman bowed and withdrew, leaving the 
Captain with all the comfortable composure of one con- 
sciously standmg on a mine certain to explode within a 
minute or two. He was presently invited into an adjoining 
chamber, where he saw a gentleman in black, who begged 
to be favoured with the nature of his business at that hour 
with the Earl of Milverstoke. 

" Is it not enough, sir, for me to say who I am, and that 
I must see his Lordship, if it be only for a few minutes, on 
business that admits of no delay ? In short, life and death 
being, possibly, concerned ! " 

The gentleman gave him a strange look, and then with- 
drew, promising to return very shortly, with the Earl's 
pleasm^e on the matter. 

" My Lord was about retiring, and is indisposed to see 
any one, sir," said he, reappearing after the lapse of a few 



166 NOW AND THEN. 



minutes ; ^' but I am to say, that after what you have 
mentioned, sir, his Lordship camiot but receive you for a 
short tune. Will you follow me, sir?" 

So the Captam did, with a certain quaint, cheerless 
determination, mixed of courage and shame; and presently 
was ushered into a magnificent apartment, where sat the 
Earl, alone, in evening dress, in deep mourning, with a 
melancholy countenance, and a restrained demeanour. 

" I have the honour to receive you. Captain Lutteridge," 
said his Lordship, with a courtesy manifestly tinged with 
stem surprise, '' at a very unusual hom^, at your pressing 
instance. I am told that you represent it as concerning 
matters of life and death. What can you possibly mean, 
sir?" 

" Though I feel, my Lord," replied Captain Lutteridge, 
fii-mly, ^' that I appear intrusive, and a great effort it has 
cost me to come, I don't relish, I must own, the tone in 
which your Lordship is pleased to address one who has the 
honour to bear His Majesty's commission, and has had also 
the honour to be a guest of your Lordship's." 

'' Captain Lutteridge, I beg your pardon," said the Earl, 
oftily, " if any thing in my demeanour has offended you. 
I am not well, sir, as I thuik ; and you may possibly be 
able to guess that this has been a day not calculated to 
compose my spirits." 

This last was said with real dignity and sorrow, and his 
frank visitor's pique vanished as the words were uttered. 

^' Being a soldier, my Lord," said he, with a frank, cour- 
teous air, ''I will come instantly to the point. Your 



NOW AND THEN. 167 

Lordship has of course heard all that took place at the trial 
of — of the man — to-day ? " 

" Sir, I have," replied his Lordship, gloomily. 

'^ 'Tis about something which happened during the trial 
that I have felt compelled to come to your Lordship, in 
this untimely manner : the man dies on Monday morning, 
my Lord, if the law take its com^se." 

The Earl gazed at him in silence for some moments, 
with a very peculiar expression of countenance, and the 
Captain gazed at the Earl ; and both were silent. 

" Well, sir, and what then?" inquired the Earl, slowly. 

^' Oh, my Lord, do not mistake me ; I am not come to 
plead for a murderer ! " 

" I earnestly entreat you, sir, to be so good as to inform 
me immediately of the object of this your most extraor- 
dinary errand to me ; I protest that I am quite confounded, 
sir, at present." 

" Your Lordship's known firmness of character will, I 
am sure, tolerate my alluding for a moment to the — noble 
victim of the convicted " 

'' In the name of Heaven, sir, what are you talking 
about?" inquired the Earl, with startling vehemence of 
manner. 

" Do not, my Lord, be distressed ; I will come at once to 
the matter which has brought me hither. On the fatal 
evening which made your Lordship sonless, I had the dis- 
tinction of being one of your Lordship's guests : I remained 
with the late lamented Lord Alkmond" — the Earl visibly 
shuddered from head to foot — " and one or two others. 



168 NOW AND THEN. 

after your Lordship and others had withdrawn ; and to-day, 
in Court, the Judge, it seems, inquired — " 

" I have heard, sir," said the Earl, m a subdued tone, 
but still with great sternness, and making evidently a 
strong effort to overcome his emotion, " that the Chief 
Justice asked a question, which was not answered. — Have 
you heard, sir, what that question was?" 

" Yes, my Lord ; it was concerning the strangeness of 
the Lord Alkmond's quitting the Castle at such an hour." 
The Earl Involuntarily closed his eyes for a few seconds, in 
manifest mental agony. '' I cannot tell, my Lord, what 
was the cause of his Lordship's leaving on that occasion." 

" Captain Lutteridge, I may see you," said the Earl, 
with an agonised look, " another day — " 

" I pledge to your Lordship the honour of an officer and 
a gentleman, that the few words which I have to utter 
must be said now, or never ! " 

'' Do you w4sh, sir, to see me fall prostrate at your 
feet?" inquired the Earl, with an air of extreme misery. 

" No, my Lord ; and I will conclude in a moment. My 
Lord, I recollect, on the occasion to which I allude, a con- 
versation arising after your Lordship had withdrawn. I 
took no part in it. I saw that, for some reason, the subject 
talked of grew more and more distressing to my Lord Alk- 
mond : I tried to change the topic, but it seemed fated to 
be persevered with; and at length his Lordship was so 
disturbed that I, with whom he was talldng, arose, much 
concerned, to quit the room : whether others observed it 
I know not, but we parted — I going to the ball-room, his 



NOW AND THEN. 169 

Lordship towards the corridor leading to the terrace. That 
is all, my Lord, that I know ; this has brought me hither ; 
and I am to ask your Lordship for leave to tell all this, 
signifying much, or signifying little, to those who may say 
it is likely — in short, my Lord, 'tis said by some — that there 
is a mystery hanging over this case, and that efforts will be 
forthwith made in the proper quarter to get the man's life 
spared long enough for further inquiry, if so be there re- 
main time ; that is, the man at present having to die, by his 
sentence, on Monday morning : therefore, my Lord, I, 
thinking it only just to stir in this, when unfortunately 
having chanced this day to let fall to others that which, till 
now, had never passed my lips, am here, as I said to your 
Lordship, on matters of life and death" — here the Castle 
clock struck eleven; and the Captain added suddenly, "if 
it be not, my Lord, already too late, the coach passing- 
through Milverstoke in an hour hence. " 

Captain Lutteridge was so completely absorbed with his 
own earnest feelings, and the not very complicated move- 
ments of his own mind — at best, moreover, no particularly 
acute observer of the manner of others — that he did not see 
I the tremendous agitation which his noble companion was 
domg his utmost to suppress. Had the light, too, been 
somewhat brighter, the Captain might have observed evi- 
dences in Lord Milverstoke's striking countenance, of the 
shock which his straightforward and unthinking visitor had 
occasioned him, by the strange account which he had given 
concerning the mysterious conversation at the banquet, 
immediately preceding Lord Alkmond's exit from the Castle 



1 70 NOW AND THEN. 

into the woods, from which he was destined never to return 
aUve. At length the restrained breathing of Lord Milvcr- 
stoke, becommg every moment more and more violent, 
attracted the attention of Captain Lutteridge 

^' WI17, my Lord, I fear much that I have disquieted your 
Lordship — that you are ill. God forbid, my Lord, that I 
should have occasioned you this distress ; but I never thought 
it would have come to this point, or I would not have stirred 
in the matter. I hope I have your Lordship's pardon for 
an imtimely visit ; one which, I begin to fear, is somewhat 
unmannerly even. But did your Lordship never hear of all 
this before ? seeing three or four others knew it besides me, 
and now I wish I had not. My Lord ! my Lord ! you seem 
ill J shall I call for assistance?" 

Lord ]\Iilverstoke heaved a vast sigh, and stretched forth 
his hand violently, deprecating the threatened movement of 
the Captain, who was quite bewildered by the sight of such 
fearful mental agony, which he could not account for satis- 
factorily, merely by referring to his present visit and the 
communication which he had made. 

"Shall I retire, my Lord?" said he. 

Lord Milverstoke rose hastily, shaking his head, and 
walked to and fro rapidly, with even increasing agitation, 
having, mdeed, a far deeper cause for it than was dreamed of 
by the Captain, though he had unknowingly called it into 
action. The Earl walked with heavy step to the door, and 
secured it ; then returned to his seat, and in a low smothered 
voice said, "What was the subject that you talked of?" 

The Captain told him, in a single word, which caused 



NOW AND THEN. 171 

Lord Mllverstoke suddenly to sink back in his chair, as 
though he had been seized with a fit. Captain Lutteridge 
instantly rose and went towards the door, saying to himself, 
aloud, " Now will I have help ; " which words, added to the 
loud sound of his footfalls hastening to the door, roused Lord 
Milverstoke, and with a great effort he exclaimed, ^' Sir — 
Captain Lutteridge — pray sir, let us remain alone : this is 
my house ; surely, sir, I am master here ! " 

Both remained silent for some minutes, during which the 
flustered faculties of Captain Lutteridge were occupied with 
only one thought — " Could any man living have supposed 
all this would have come out of the business? " 

Language, indeed, could not adequately describe the 
feelings which were at that moment convulsing the very 
soul of Lord Milverstoke Avithin him ; for a new and fearful 
light had been suddenly reflected on some scenes between 
him and his late son, which had always occasioned the Earl, 
even in his son's Hfetime, anxiety ; and, after his death, 
serious disquietude. The former, however, had been in no 
small degree tinged with displeasure ; the latter, with grief 
and misgiving. The unbidden visitor before him, on whose 
face the Earl's eye was fixed, half unconsciously, had, as it 
were, ruthlessly opened the grave of Lord Alkmond, that 
his miserable figure might glide reproachfully and in terror 
before a father who had ever, by his own austerity and pride, 
checked and disheartened that son, when he might have 
meditated reposing hearty confidence in his father, as between 
man and man. " What may not my poor Alkmond have 
been bm'thened with when he — when he implored me — in 



172 NOW AND THEX. 

vain," — thought the Earl, pressing both his hands to his 
forehead, and then rising and pacing the chamber to and 
fro, with an expression of countenance which led Captain 
Lutteridge to fear the possibility of his being alone with one 
who was about to burst out into madness. The Captain 
resolved, therefore, simply to be on his guard, making his 
observations in silence, upon the perturbed spirit before 
him. The Earl appeared to start from one reverie 
only to sink into some other, more agitating ; but gra- 
dually the violence of his feelings seemed to be somewhat 
abating. 

At length, '' My Lord, it is long since the clock struck 
eleven," abruptly exclaimed the Captain, rising. 

" Is it, sir ? " inquii-ed the Earl, languidly, and as though 
he did not comprehend why the Captain had made the 
observation. 

" Yes, my Lord, nearly half an horn' : the coach goes by 
at twelve, and Mr Hylton starts " — 

" What, su'? what, sir? " inteimpted the Earl, sternly. 
'' Oh, I had forgotten ; private circumstances. Captain Lut- 
teridge, which you know not of, nor ever can, have caused 
yom' words this night to stab me as with a knife ! And 
besides, su*, sorrow has of late not a little shaken my 
nerves." 

" My Lord, I cannot adequately express my regret : but 
time presses — what is to be done? " 

The Earl looked as though evidently making a strong 
effort to address his mind to what the Captain was saying 
to him. 



NOW AND THEN. 173 

" The man hangs, my Lord, past praying for, on Monday 
mormng" — 

''And why should he not, sh'?" thundered the Earl, 
in a voice which echoed through the lofty and spacious 
apartment, and for a moment all trace of his Lordship's 
previous agony had disappeared. 

" Why, my Lord, perhaps," said Captain Lutteridge, 
stoutly and calmly, " he may not be rightly con- 
demned." 

"Are you in your senses, sir?" mquired the Earl, 
vehemently. 

" Yes, my Lord," replied Captain Lutteridge quietly. 

"I think you are not, sir! Nor are you, sir ! Do you, 
in your sober senses, come hither to the father of one so 
savagely murdered" — his voice shook — " as my son was, 
and speak of the accursed miscreant convicted of it, as 
possibly innocent, against proof as clear as that Cain 
murdered Abel ? And did I hear, sir, aright, that you and 
Mr Hylton — Mr Hylton — are laying your heads together to 
defeat justice — to call my son in anger and horror out of his 
grave ?" He paused. 

" My Lord, a plain-spoken soldier am I, and must needs 
come to the point. The time, my Lord, the time !" he 
continued, in a loud and peremptory tone. 

'' What is your object here, sir?" inquired the Earl with 
gloomy fierceness. 

" Can I have your Lordship's leave to tell Mr Hylton 
that which I have just mentioned to your Lordship ?" 

" No, sir !" answered the Earl, again in a voice of 



1 74 NOW AND THEN. 

thunder; and his eye seemed to glance lightning at his 
companion ; who bowed and said, rather sternly. 

" That, my Lord, suffices. God forbid that I should so 
far forget the character of an officer, of a gentleman, as to 
utter a syllable more to any one living upon the subject, 
without your Lordship's permission, in whose house I heard 
it. Time, therefore NOW no longer presses my Lord," said 
the Captam, with sad emphasis ; ^' and I can but, in 
quitting your Lordship, ask your forgiveness for thus having 
troubled you so unwarrantably." 

''What can this, that you have told me, sir," said the 
Earl, with returning agitation, " by any possibility have to 
do with the bloodthirsty miscreant who is to die on Monday ? 
Should you not, sir, have considered that., before you came, 
this night, hither?" 

" My Lord, I did consider, and that to the best of my 
power : and I myself said, that even should your Lordship 
give me the permission which I sought for, I saw not its 
bearuig on the case of him that is to die on Monday." 

" Nor has it, sir ! nor can it, sir ! — not one iota .''" 

The Earl seemed suddenly moved by some inward feel- 
ings of a less stormy nature than those by which he had 
hitherto been agitated. 

" Captain Lutteridge," he continued, "I am a man nearly 
broken down by misery and misfortune, heavier than man 
can bear : therefore I ask your pardon, very heartily, sir, 
for any discourtesy of which I may have been guilty ; but 
you have taken me frightfully by surprise." 

The utter wretchedness of the Earl's voice and manner. 



NOW AND THEN. 175 

as he spoke these words, penetrated the heart of Captain 
Lutteridge. 

'' My Lord, I trust you will say nothing of it. I owe your 
Lordship unspeakable amends for what I have done ; and 
now see what methinks I might liave seen before, had I 
considered the matter fully," replied the Captain heartily; 
"but it was the thought of Hfe and death that led me 
astray." 

" Do you not think, sir, that If I believed there were any 
reasonable doubt of the guilt which has been openly proved 
to-day, according to law, against the prisoner, I would not, 
from mere justice, wish him to escape ? " 

" God forbid that you should not, my Lord." 

"But this man, sir, has long had a deadly malice against 
me and my family, sir — so has his father : you know not a 
tithe of the matter. Captain, I verily assure you." 

"My Lord, I know nothing whatever of it, but from 
public talli." 

" Did you say, sir, that this night persons are travelling 
to London to attempt to procure the pardon of a clearly 
convicted murderer?" 

" My Lord, Mr Hylton has by this time, I reckon, taken 
his seat in the coach, and such Is certainly his object 5 so I 
understood him." 

The Earl said nothing, but sighed with mingled anger 
and astonishment. After a pause, " Captain Lutteridge," 
said he, " may I ask so great a favour of you, as that you 
will speak to me again on Tuesday upon the subject which 
you have this evening communicated to me ? I never till 



176 NOW AND THEN. 

now heard of it ; and can it be doubted, sir, that any thing 
rebating to my late son, my unhappy Alkmond, must be of 
painful, nay, frightful interest to me? " 

" Most wiUingly shall I attend your Lordship." 
^' And in the mean time. Captain Lutteridge, I implore 
you to spare the feelings of a bereaved father, and talk not 
of these matters to others, when your so doing may sei-ve 
only to spread idle and distressing rmnours. Remember, 
sir," — his voice quivered — "his youthful widow! — she at 
present survives — is at this unhappy moment under the 
same roof with you, but may soon follow her murdered 
husband to the grave." 

" That grave shall not be more silent than I, my Lord ! " 
The Captain, as he uttered these words, rose, and bowing 
low to the afflicted peer, who courteously and sadly bade 
him adieu, quitted the apartment, and immediately after- 
wards the Castle ; riding rapidly home to the barracks, his 
mind in a strange tumult. He had seen no little service in 
his day, but never before had meddled with such matters as 
had just occurred between himself and the Earl of Milver- 
stoke. AVhen he had reached the imi where the coach 
stopped, he found that Mr Hylton had gone by it to London 
some quarter of an hour before; and without knowing 
precisely why, the Captain took it for granted that, after 
what had just taken place at the Castle, Mr Hylton's errand 
was in vain, and that before his return to Milverstoke the 
convict Ayliffe's body would be in the hands of the surgeon. 



NOW AND THEN. 177 



CHAPTER IX. 

Rather late in the afternoon of Saturday Mr Hylton 
arrived in London, and put up, for the few hours during 
which he intended staying there, at the inn where the coach 
stopped. He took not long to dress, and still less to partake 
of refreshment, anxious to lose not a moment of his precious 
time. Forth, therefore, he sallied towards Westmmster, 
with the situation and localities of which he had, in earlier 
days, been not unacquainted. As he was hurrying along 
the crowded streets, the incessant and strange hubbub of 
which seemed stunning to a comparative recluse like him- 
self, desperately fatigued also, and absorbed with a most 
portentous mission, it suddenly recurred to him, as he got in 
sight of the Government offices and ministerial residences, 
that he was a total stranger in London, having come off 
without credentials or introductions of any kind. How then 
was he to expect reception and attention from the Secre- 
tary of State, on a matter, moreover, of such magnitude as 
attempting to stay the execution of a criminal whose con- 
viction for so enormous an atrocity as the murder of Lord 
Alkmond had become a subject of national attention? As 
all this flashed across his mind, he stopped, struck his stick 

N 



J 78 NOW AND THEN. 

despairingly on the pavement, and for some fnoments 
arrested the attention of the passers by, as the very image 
of one, indeed, in a horrid quandary. For, looked at from 
this point of view, the grounds or materials on which he had 
been relying for the success of his application seemed sud- 
denly shrunk and shrivelled into nothing, or at least gross 
inadequacy to their object. But the miserable image of 
AylifFe, lying heavily ironed in the condemned cell, brought 
withm a few hours of eternity — the sands of life running out 
fast — and he too a perfectly innocent man, as Mr Hylton in 
his conscience believed him, quickened his movements and 
re-strung his relaxed energies. Silently invokmg God's 
blessing on his humane enterprise, he luuTied onward and 
presented himself at the door of the Secretary of State's 
office, before which was slowly pacing a sentry, who paid 
no attention whatever to his inquiry whether the Secretary 
of State wxre within. Makmg up his mind to encounter 
and disregard all kmds of discourtesy, so as he but gained 
his object, and trusting some little to his sacred character 
and appearance, and his consciousness of having a gentle- 
man's address, he entered the outer office, from which were 
at the moment passing several gentlemen drawing on their 
gloves, and some holding riding-whips in their hands, as if 
intending forthwith to momit their horses, which were stand- 
ing at the door. One of these, a gay young gentleman, 
evidently of quality, Mr Hylton, m a courteous manner, 
spoke to, as he was passing, heartily laughing at some joke 
of the person nearest to him, and who seemed very obse- 
quious. 



NOW AND THEN. 179 

"Sir, I ask your forgiveness for the intrusion," quotli Mr 
Hylton in an earnest manner, taking off his hat ; '' but is 
the Secretary of State within ? " 

"What though he be?" jocularly interposed the com- 
panion of the gentleman who had been addressed. The 
latter, however, took off his hat with a bland and high-bred 
air, nobly contrasting with that of the rude intiiider, and 
said, "Lord Farnborough, sir, is within, but cannot be seen, 
bemg here beyond his usual hour of attendance, engaged on 
business of great importance : but, reverend sir, can I do 
aught for you in the meanwhile ?" 

"I greatly thank you, sir," — 

"My Lord, if you please" — internipted the one already 
spoken of, with an air of vulgar sycophancy, which was 
fittingly rewarded by his noble companion desiring him, 
with transparent contempt of manner, to see whether his 
lordship's horse was in readiness. 

"Will you follow me, sir, for a moment ?" said the young 
Lord, and immediately turned back, requesting Mr Hylton 
to accompany him ; and the two walked through several 
long, lofty, dusky passages, till they arrived at the room 
which Mr Hylton's companion had only just quitted. 
Having ordered out the servants, who were busily engaged 
arranging the chairs and tables, "What may be your 
eiTand, sir?" said he, in a very gracious manner. 

"My Lord — for 'tis plain I, through unacquaintance with 
town, mistook your Lordship's rank and station" — 

"Oh, think nothing of it, sir, I beg," said his Lordship, 
rather hastily. 



180 



NOW AND THEN, 



"I have just come up, my Lord, concerning a case of life 
and death " — 

"Oh! some prisoner left for execution at one of the 
Assizes ? I miderstand : proceed, sir, if you please. But 
may I ask who you are, reverend sir?" 

" I am the Keverend Henry Hylton, Vicar of Milver- 
stoke, my Lord." 

" Ho ! Milverstoke ! Milverstoke ! That is the place," 
said his Lordship, very gravely, "where the man was 
yesterday convicted for the murder of my Lord Alkmond, 
Lord Milverstoke's son?" 

" Yes, my Lord, he is to suffer his sentence on Monday, 
imless he be respited, and on that subject I have come up, 
and have but just quitted the coach." 

" Oh! you are seeking a respite? but that, you know, 
especially in such a case as this— however, of course you 
are prepared with grounds f " 

" I am, my Lord." 

" Sir, you shall see my Lord Famborough immediately ; 
he will, I am sure, receive you, however otherwise occu- 
pied he may haj^pen just now to be." On this his Lordship 
withdi-ew, leaving Mr Hylton alone for a few moments ; 
on which he took out his pocket-book, saw that his few 
manuscripts were there in readiness, and hastily arranged 
his thoughts so as to express himself with the utmost 
possible brevity, point, and force. After scarcely three 
minutes' absence, his Lordship returned, followed by a 
gentleman, whom he desu^ed to show ]\Ir Hylton into the 
private room of Lord Farnborough : a minute more, and 



NOW AND THEN. 181 

the all-important Interview between Mr Hylton and tlie 
Minister had commenced. The nobleman who then filled 
that office of splendid responsibility was an eminent states- 
man — a great man — the whole of whose energies and 
resources were just then taxed to the uttermost by the 
distracted state of the country, and the necessity of 
promptly and effectually providing for its safety, and at the 
same time justifying his measures against a most malignant 
Opposition in parliament. Mr Hylton, himself a man of 
intellect, was instantly charmed by the Minister's appear- 
ance ; for, with a noble cast of features, decisively eviden- 
cing practised mental power, he looked calmness itself: 
though evidently harassed, by no means oj>pressed., by his 
multifarious and distracting duties. He quietly and cour- 
teously pointed to a vacant chair nearly opposite to him, 
and on which Mr Hylton immediately sat down. 

'•'• Will you be so obliging as to state, shortly, your 
business, sir?" said Lord Famborough, 

" I presume, my Lord, you have heard of the murder of 
the late Lord Alkmond?" 

" Yes, sir ; and I find that a person named Ayliffe 
was yesterday tried before the Lord Chief Justice at the 
Assizes, convicted for the murder, and is left for execution 
on Monday." 

" That is so, my Lord. I am the Yicar of Milverstoke, 
and the convict is an old parishioner of mine, of hitherto 
spotless and exemplary character. I am perfectly satisfied 
that he is really innocent of this charge." 

" How came he to be convicted, then? Have you any 



182 NOW AND THEN. 

evidence which was not laid before the judge and jiuy ? 
And if it was not, why ? Or do you imagine that there 
has been any miscarriage?" 

" If you will permit me, my Lord, to state briefly the 
nature of the case as laid before the jury" — 

*' Pardon me, sir, a moment," said his Lordship, gently 
ringing a small hand-bell ; on which a gentleman entered, 
to whom he whispered in a low tone. The gentleman 
withdrew, and Mr Hylton proceeded to give a brief and 
lucid sketch of the case as proved, to which he perceived 
the Minister listening with perfect attention. While Mr 
Hylton was proceeding, the gentleman above spoken of 
reappeared, but immediately withdrew, after having silently 
placed a sheet of paper before the Minister, who glanced at 
it for an instant only, and resumed his attitude of close 
attention to ^Ir Hylton. 

" I perceive, sir," said his Lordship, when Mr Hylton 
had concluded, " from your succinct and candid statement, 
that any difficulties which might be supposed to have 
existed, were conclusively disposed of by the prisoner's own 
acknowledgment to the jury. I must say that it appears to 
me an unusually strong case for a conviction. You ask 
me, sir, to advise the interposition of the Royal prerogative 
to stay the execution of the law — a matter always of infinite 
delicacy, and, in this case, responsibility — and I, at present, 
see no sufficient grounds for doing so. Since you have 
been here, however, I have ascertained that the Lord 
Chief Justice has amved in town, and is now at his 
house. I expect his report this evening ; and in the mean 



NOW AND THEN. 183 

time he Is the person to whom you should address your- 
self." 

" My Lord — forgive me, but did I succeed in making 
myself understood, as asking not for a reprieve, but for a 
short respite only, to afford time for inquiry?" 

" Perfectly, sir — but you had better go at once to the 
Lord Chief Justice, who has power to order — with whom, 
indeed, it in the first instance properly rests — the respite for 
which you ask. I recommend you, sir, however, not to be 
sanguine." 

'' But will his Lordship receive me at once ?" 

" Unquestionably, sir ; in serious matters of this sort 
every body is always accessible : God forbid that it should 
be otherwise ! " 

The Minister's significant glance, while uttering the last 
words, at evidently a newly-opened despatch, apprised Mr 
Hylton that his audience was over. Bowing profoundly, 
he therefore withdrew ; the Minister courteously returning 
his salutation, while his Lordship drew before him the 
important and pressing document, of which Mr Hylton' s 
arrival had delayed his perusal. Mr Hylton soon found his 
way to the room where he had left the young Lord, who 
had remained there waiting for him. Mr Hylton was 
anxious to have spoken on the subject of his interview with 
the Minister ; but, from his Lordship's manner, concluded 
that such a procedure was contrary to etiquette. He, 
therefore, contented himself with asking the address of the 
Lord Chief Justice, which was immediately procured for 
him ; and shortly afterwards got into a coach, and drove 



184 



NOW AND THEN. 



Straight to the Lord Chief Justice's house, greatly dis- 
heartened by the reception which he had just met with from 
the courteous but frigid Lord Famborough. On inquiring 
whether the Lord Chief Justice was within, a footman 
somewhat superciHouslj answered in the affii-mative, but 
added that his Lordship, having only a few hours before 
returned from Circuit, was about sitting down to dinner, 
and could on no accoimt whatever be disturbed. Mr 
Hylton pretty sharply said that his business admitted of no 
delay. The butler, a corpulent, bald-headed, gentlemanly 
person, happening at that moment to pass along the hall, and 
hearing the peremptory tone in which Mr Hylton was speak- 
ing, came forward, and in an affable manner said that he 
had no objection to hear shortly the nature of the gentleman's 
busmess, and by-and-by tell it to my Lord ; but that his 
Lordship certainly could not be distm'bed till after dinner. 
The grave nature of Mr Hylton's errand, and the earnest 
humour of his mind, prevented his being amused, as he 
otherwise woidd have been, by these menial airs. 

^' Tell his Lordship, if you please," said he quietly, " that 
I am the Eeverend Mr Hyhon, the Yicar of Milverstoke." 

"Oh! is it about the Milverstoke murder, sii'?" quoth 
the butler, with a good-natured air : " 'tis a very awful 
murder, folks say." 

" Take in my name, sir, instantly to his Lordship !" said 
Mr Hylton sternly. 

" Bless us !" said the butler, half whistling, but went to 
the library ; and, after a few minutes' absence retimied, quite 
an altered man, bowing obsequiously ; and Mr Hylton was 



NOW AND THEN. 185 

Immecliately ushered into the presence of the Lord Chief 
Justice : a man considerably advanced in years ; of benevo- 
lent countenance ; care-worn, grave, and of dignified bear- 
ing; a great lawyer; of simple and pure character, and 
unassuming manners. He sate beside a large fire, in 
dinner-dress, but had been busily engaged reading, when 
Mr Hylton's name was announced ; in short, his Lordship 
was carefully looking over his notes of several capital cases, 
and, amongst others, of that which had brought Mr Hylton 
up to town. The instant that his name was mentioned, his 
Lordship recollected the striking scene which he had 
accidentally witnessed, immediately after sentencing the 
Milverstoke murderer ; and nothing could be more respect- 
ful or cordial than his reception of Mr Hylton. 

" I fear I can only too surely conjecture, reverend sir," 
said his Lordship gravely, as soon as Mr Hylton was 
seated, '' the object of your visit to London ; it must be 
connected with that terrible case of the murder of Lord 
Alkmond, tried before me yesterday." 

" It is so, my Lord, indeed," repHed Mr Hylton, sighing. 
The Lord Chief Justice shook his head, and shrugged his 
shoulders with dismal significance, but said nothing. '' I 
trust that I shall be able, my Lord, notwithstanding those 
ominous gestures of your Lordship's, to satisfy you that a 
case is made out for, at all events, some little postponement 
of the execution of the sentence, in order to afford time for 
inquiry — I say — for inquiry — for inqui — " 

Mr Hylton suddenly seemed unconscious of what he was 
saying : having become very faint, and sinking back in his 



1^<5 XOW AND THEN. 

chair — for a moment overcome with exhaustion, want of 
food, and long-continued agitation and excitement. Tlie 
Lord Chief Justice paid him the kindest attentions ; and 
after a short time lie recovered himself, offering apologies, 
but attributing the weakness frankly to the true cause. 

'' Ah ! sir," said his Lordship, kindly, " these are very 
agitating affairs, even to us Judges, however long we may 
have been accustomed to this melancholy portion of our 
duties; but let us go in to dinner, Mr Hylton— nay, I 
positively insist upon it ! I am quite alone, with the excep- 
tion of my wife, whom I have scarcely seen since my return 
from Circuit a few hours ago, or you and I would dine 
together alone. You cannot do justice to your case, what- 
ever it may be — trust me— till you have a little recruited 
your physical energies. We have, indeed, both travelled 
far and fast since we met; and I, too, am somewhat 
exhausted." 

Mr Hylton intimated that dining would be, in his own 
case, just then, an idle ceremony : — 

" Sir," interiTipted the Lord Chief Justice, with an air of 
good-natured peremptoriness, ^' I will not speak a syllable 
to you on business, however pressing, till we have both 
enabled ourselves, by a meal as brief and temperate as you 
please, to attend to it with revived, and only befitting 
energy." This proved Irresistible, and Mr Hylton pre- 
sently found himself sitting at the plain and unostentatious 
dinner-table of the Lord Chief Justice, and his lady. Not 
a syllable was spoken by either his Lordship or Mr Hylton, 
during dinner, concerning the subject, nor on any thing 



NOW AND THEN. 187 

akin to it, which was to be so solemnly discussed by them 
presently ; and within an hour from their sitting down, they 
both withdrew to the library. 

^' Now, Mr Hylton," commenced his Lordship, with a 
suddenly-resumed judicial air, turning over the leaves of a 
manuscript volume, " I have before me my notes of the 
trial of Adam Ayliffe, yesterday. What have you to say 
on the subject ? Has any thing .important come to light 
since the trial ? For if not, I must tell you, at the outset, 
not to be sanguine as to the issue of your benevolent enter- 
prise : for a clearer case, I think I have seldom, if indeed 
ever, tried. I trust that you have no fault to find with the 
way in which I put the case to the jury ? Pray, speak 
freely, reverend sir, and without ceremony ; we are all 
only too liable to error." 

" My Lord, I frankly assure you that I can take no 
exception whatever to your Lordship's summing up : it was 
fearfully simple and cogent, but perfectly and absolutely 
fair." 

" Why, you see," said the Chief Justice, thoughtfully, 
" the man's own hands fastened the rope round his neck : 
he voluntarily took up a position, from which the wit of 
man could not extricate him. Had he been acquitted, on 
such a state of facts as went to the jury, trial would be a 
farce. He bnngs himself to the body of the murdered 
man instantly after the murder, and runs away bloody, and 
with a bloody weapon capable of committing the murder, 
as was sworn by the surgeon. Even if he thought he had 
struck another man whom, according to his own story, he 



188 NOW AXD THEN. 

had meant to strike, what signifies it In point of law ? The 
person whom he so killed by mistake, he murdered : God 
forbid, reverend sir, that there should be any doubt about 
that!'' 

" Oh no, my Lord ! — I do not presume to question the 
law which your Lordship laid down : I own it seems to be 
perfectly reasonable and just. But I venture to come now, 
my Lord, at once to what I humbly but confidently submit 
will satisfy your Lordship that this case cannot possibly rest 
where it does at present." 

" Well, let me hear," said the Lord Chief Justice, dis- 
posing himself in an attitude of great attention ; but the 
tone of his voice seemed, to Mr Hylton, to argue something 
like a foregone conclusion as to the futility of what was to 
be brought before him. 

" Permit me to ask your Lordship, that I may not be 
over-estimating the value of what I am gomg to adduce 
before you, whether you did not deem of great importance 
the absence of any soimd of footsteps in the wood, on the 
night of the murder, in any other direction than that in 
which the prisoner ran ?" 

" Certainly, certainly ; surely I myself pressed the wit- 
nesses on that part of the case?" 

" You did, my Lord." 

" And indeed the point is most important. If you recol- 
lect, Mr Solicitor-General read a passage from Lord Coke, 
in which that very condition is relied on as an integral part 
of what he calls his violent presumption of guilt." 

" Well, my Lord, and so it occurred to me," said Mr 



NOW AND THEN. 1S9 

Hylton, taking out from his pocket-book, evidently with no 
Uttle excitement and expectation, the letter of Mrs Merton ; 
which, after explaming who the writer was, and how it was 
that her communication had not reached him till after the 
trial, he put into the Chief Justice's hands, and eyed 
him, as he perused it, with extreme anxiety, scrutinising 
every feature. The Chief Justice read it attentively — very 
attentively, even twice — lookmg at the outside, the post- 
mark, and superscription ; and all the while in perfect silence, 
and with a countenance from which it was impossible to 
collect what impression had been produced on his mind. 
Then he quietly laid down the letter, towards Mr Hylton ; 
Avhose face fell as he said, " Well, my Lord, what think 
you? Have I overrated the importance of this letter?" 

" You have not had the experience that I have had, Mr 
Hylton," said he, with a serious air; '' nor have you any 
idea of the cmming devices to which prisoners and their 
friends will have recourse, to mislead inquiry, and divert 
suspicion. I have known of one or two, and heard of 
several, instances not unlike the present." 

" Why, surely, surely, my Lord, you cannot have borne 
in mind who the writer is — a lady, a friend of mine, wife of 
a clergyman, and she of a most exemplary character? The 
idea, my Lord, of Aer" — 

" Oh, Mr Hylton, you quite misapprehend me. Inde- 
pendently of even your own testimony, I think I know a 
little myself of this lady : she belongs to a family with 
whom I have some acquaintance, and her husband is, I 
understand, a distmguished divine. This good lady believes, 



100 NOW AND THEN. 

cloubtless,an tlie genuineness and authenticity of the letter 
she speaks of; but" — he shook his head — " that carries us 
a very httle way on our journey indeed ! I told you not to 
be sanguine, Mr Hylton, as you must remember. Besides, 
where is the original V How could any Judge safely act, 
in even the most trivial case, on the document now before 
us, which is not even, nor professes to be, a copy ? And 
observe you, the original itself would, in my opinion, carry 
us no further. Come, my dear sir," said he kindly, observ- 
ing Mr Hylton's blank and crestfallen look, " can you 
yourself supply me with reasons against the vahdity of 
those with which I am forced to encounter yoiu* letter?" 

" Yes, my Lord. Remember, I pray you, that I am not 
asking for a pardon, nor calling on you to assume the 
functions of a jury ; but only to interpose a little time for 
inquiry, before this poor wretch goes hence and is no more 
seen ! Suppose he be executed on Monday morning, and 
the same afternoon the writer of the letter in question 
should arrive, and uncontestably establish the truth of what 
is contained in it?" 

" Wiy, suppose he did, Mr Hylton ! Apply an unbiassed 
mind to the case, as if you had yourself to administer justice. 
Are you, by the way, a magistrate?" Mr Hylton bowed 
acquiescence. ^' I am glad of it. Suppose the writer did 
actually see one, or two, or any number of men, running 
along the shore, as represented : how are they to be con- 
nected with the bloody transaction in the wood ? — Is it not, 
to begin with, by the way, separated from the shore by 
cliffs?" 



NOW AND THEN. 191 

" Yes, my Lord, but by no means by lofty cliffs ; persons 
have been known to drop over without injury : there are 
no rocks beneath. And who can say but that the persons 
mentioned in this letter may have done the deed?" 

The Lord Chief Justice shook his head ; but took up the 
letter and read it again, with, as Mr Ilylton sanguinely 
supposed, more thoughtfulness than his Lordship wished to 
be visible to an observer. 

'' Pardon me, my Lord," said he, ^' but there occurs to 
me another way of putting the case. And while we thus 
discuss it, how fast fly away this man's precious moments ! " 

"I am perfectly and painfully aware of that^ reverend 
sir," replied his Lordship, looking pointedly at Mr Hylton, 
who felt the delicate rebuke, and bowed. 

" I was going to say, my Lord: Suppose I had received 
this letter, or the one to which it refers, before the Court 
opened yesterday morning, and the prisoner's counsel had 
applied to your Lordship to postpone the trial till the next 
Assizes?" 

" Sir, that is well worth considering, undoubtedly. You 
put your points ably, Mr Hylton." 

Again the Chief Justice took up the letter. " Is this in 
Mrs Merton's own handwriting?" he inquired, apparently 
carelessly. 

'' I will swear to it, my Lord. And, by the way, for 
aught I know, Mr Merton may by this time have brought, 
or forwarded, the original letter to my house, and it may be 
there awaiting me at this moment." 

" Certainly, certainly ; that may be so," said the Chief 



192 NOW AND THEN. 

Justice, musingly, but still discouraginglj. " Is this, how- 
ever, the only matter which you are desirous of bringing- 
before me?" he inquired. 

" Oh no, my Lord : I have three others." 

" I shall be very happy to hear them, sir. Pray proceed." 

" What I now am about to mention, my Lord, is of a 
confidential, and at present, I own, an unsatisfactory nature ; 
but, if time be given, I am not hopeless of discovering 
something highly important. Your Lordship recollects 
observing at the trial, on the singularity of Lord Alkmond's 
having gone out into the woods at such an hour of the night, 
and when such festivities were going on at the Castle." 

^' Undoubtedly: it is indeed a curious circumstance, which 
I should like to have had, if possible, explained. Did I 
not ask some of the witnesses about it? " 

" Yes, my Lord : Mr Oxley, Lord Milverstoke's agent. 
Since the trial — but I repeat, my Lord, that I am at present 
placed in circumstances of exquisite embarrassment, with 
reference to this subject." The Lord Chief Justice looked 
with great curiosity at Mr Hylton, on his saying this. " I 
have some reason to believe, and that, too, from persons of 
station, that Lord Alkmond's going into the wood was not 
so wholly unaccountable as at present it appears, but was 
connected with a circumstance or circumstances which may 
possibly — I say possibly, my Lord — come to be, in due time, 
fully disclosed ; and the person to whom I allude was in 
communication, on the subject, with another person of 
exalted station, at the moment of my quitting Milverstoke. 
The issue I shall not know till I return ; but I have heard 



NOW AND THEN. 



193 



sufficient to excite lively anxiety and curiosity ; and pos- 
sibly — but, my Lord, I repeat, only possibly — the result 
may be suddenly to invest this dreadful transaction with 
great mystery. My word, however, is pledged to take no 
further steps at present, nor to indicate even the nature of 
what I have heard, without the express permission of the 
person to whom I have been alluding. I may, neverthe- 
less, tell your Lordship that I am acting on information sent 
to me with great anxiety, in consequence of a gentleman 
being present at the trial, who, on his return home, com- 
municated to a friend that which had fallen from your 
Lordship, and led him to use his utmost exertions to bring 
this matter to my notice immediately. Thi-ice had a 
mounted messenger from him been sent to my house be- 
tween the close of the trial and my return to Milverstoke ; 
and I met the last messenger, and followed him back, while 
yet on my way home. It is a scruple of extreme delicacy 
alone that suddenly prevented this gentleman's at once 
communicating to me what he knew." 

To all this the Chief Justice listened with profomid atten- 
tion. " I am sure, Mr Hylton," said he, gravely, *^ that a 
gentleman of your superior capacity, to say nothing of 
your position as a clergyman and magistrate, is aware of 
the responsibility attaching to any thing said by you to me 
on such an occasion as this, and that you cannot be uncon- 
sciously yielding eagerly to first impressions, and misty 
conjectures?" 

"My Lord, I speak most advisedly, in my conscience 
believing it possible — and at present I put it no higher — . 





194 NOW AND THEN. 

that there may be something in the background fully war- 
ranting the step which I am taking. I do not feel myself 
at liberty, speaking for a moment as a man of even mere 
worldly honour, to mention who is the person of whom I am 
speaking, or what his station in society. Nay, my Lord, I 
now recollect what I feel bound to mention, that he 
expressed his OAvn belief that the matter would prove not 
to be connected with that in question ; but he had previously 
said enough to make me take a very, very different view of 
the affair. 

" And you assure me that the matter is at this moment 
in a train of inquiry ?" 

" Undoubtedly, undoubtedly, my Lord." 

^' Very well, Mr Hylton : all this is curious at least. 
What next?" 

" Why, my Lord, I have, I think, discovered facts tend- 
ing to impeach the perfect trustworthiness of Mr Oxley as 
a witness." 

" I doubt whether that gentleman's evidence really touches 
the merits of the question, one way or the other." 

" But the Solicitor-General, my Lord, on the part of the 
Crown, pointedly mentioned that evidence to the jury ; and 
aftenvards proved it, as giving a peculiarly malignant com- 
plexion to the case." 

" He did, sir, certainly. Well, Mr Hylton, and what of 
that matter ? " 

" Why, the way that it strikes me, my Lord, is that Mr 
Solicitor-General may be supposed to have himself felt the 
importance of establishing a motive on the part of the 



NOW AND THEN. 195 

prisoner for perpetrcating so enormous and seemingly unac- 
countable a crime, as slaying the eldest son and heir of a 
very eminent peer of the realm. However this may be, 
my Lord, what prejudice may it not have worked against 
the unfortunate prisoner, turning the minds of his jury away 
from a dispassionate examination of the case?" 

" Mr Hylton, do not lay too much stress on such topics. 
Look at the undisputed facts — the bloody reality, if I may so 
speak, of this dreadful case, standing even solely on the 
prisoner's own voluntary statement : the bloody sleeve — 
the bloody club — and the affrighted flight from the corpse 
of the murdered man ! Let us bring our common sense to 
bear on these few, but terrible, facts of the case ; and then 
how unimportant become the topics which you seem about 
to urge, Mr Hylton ! Pray, however, proceed." 

^' Shortly, then, my Lord, do you remember how 
indignantly the prisoner repudiated the words put into his 
mouth before the magistrate who convicted him for having 
possession of the hare ?" 

'^ I do perfectly, and was struck with it, sir." 

" And your Lordship may recollect his counsel proposing 
another form of expression, which was in consequence of a 
written suggestion sent him in Court ? I, my Lord, sent 
that paper ; I proposed that question ; for the magistrate 
(who also committed him on the charge for murder) had on 
the day of that committal told me the words which he had 
heard the prisoner utter ; and I have with me Sir Henry 
Harrington's own signed statement (here Mr Hylton 
produced it) made yesterday evenmg after the trial, 



196 NQ^ j^^jy THEN. 

attesting the words to have been most dlsthictly heard by 
him, and to be — ' He shall smart for it, that brought me 
here ;' and Sir Henry observed the prisoner glance fimously 
at the man who had so cruelly and perfidiously used him." 

Mr Hylton paused ; so did the Chief Justice, presently 
observing — " Well, Mr Hylton, does all this carry your case 
really one hair's-breadth further ? Suppose the prisoner went 
into the wood to kill or feloniously assault his enemy, and 
by mistake killed the other ? Have you not admitted that 
to be murder?" 

" Forgive me, my Lord, if I press these points too far," 
said Mr Hylton, with sudden emotion, " but the interests of 
humanity impel me — I have a poor manacled and fettered 
figure perpetually before my eye" — 

" God forbid, Mr Hylton," said the Chief Justice, solemnly 
and kindly, laying his hand on that of Mr Hylton, " that 
you should suppose it necessary to apologise for any thing 
that you have said here. I wish you knew how greatly I 
am touched by your noble and disinterested exertions, which 
my heart is all the while most zealously seconding; but 
God hath given me the scales of Justice to hold, and my 
reason must not be disturbed by my feelings. Proceed, dear 
sir, and say all that occurs to you, even though you stay till 
midnight." 

How mildly and kindly was this said ! Yet the words 
rapidly froze the Chief Justice into a pillar of ice, as it were, 
before Mr Hylton's eyes ; and for a Httle while he paused 
to overcome his emotions. 

^' I feel, my Lord, getting weak and exhausted in this 



NOW AND THEN. 197 

mortal wrestle wltli your Lordship, on so awful an occasion. 
It is what I am not used to ; and I must soon cease." He 
seemed, for a moment, at a loss. 

" You were speaking," said the Chief Justice, very kindly, 
" of j\Ir Oxley's perverted or mistaken representation of 
what had fallen from the prisoner." 

'' I thank your Lordship, and have only to say that Sir 
Henry is ill in bed of the gout, or might have been at the 
trial and contradicted Mr Oxley." 

^' Is this gentleman Mr Oxley supposed to bear any ill 
feeling towards the prisoner ?" 

^' That, my Lord, is the last topic which I was going to 
urge. The prisoner and his father (of whom, with your 
Lordship's permission, I shall say a word presently) have 
been persecuted beyond all bearing — so they both tell me, 
and I believe them implicitly — by Mr Oxley, who wants, 
as they say, to get them out of a small freehold cottage of 
the father's, in order that a new and more direct approach 
may be made from the high road to Milverstoke Castle. 
Mr Oxley has, doubtless, exceeded his instructions, and 
what he has done is probably all unknown to Lord Milver- 
stoke ; but Mr Oxley's conduct has been unfeeling and 
insulting in the extreme, to these poor people, who are in 
great distress ; and not long before last Christmas, with a 
bitter sneer, Mr Oxley predicted that the father would pro- 
bably soon find himself in a much larger house — the work- 
house." 

"The brutal fellow!" exclaimed the Chief Justice, in- 
dignantly. 



198 NOW AND TIIEX. 

'' On this, my Lord, the son, who was present — the 
prisoner, and who is a man of giant strength, rose from his 
stool, grasped Mr Oxley by the collar, and flmig him several 
yards through the door, like a rotten faggot." The Chief 
Justice listened with an earnest air, but in silence. " On 
that occasion, my Lord, the father heard Mr Oxley mutter 
some sinister expressions to this effect — ' I owe thee a turn 
for this.'" 

" I think it very possible that he did say so ; but, was it 
Mr Oxley who brought the prisoner to the bleeding body 
of Lord Alkmond, made him iim away as for life, with a 
bloody club, and then own it all, in open Court ? Oh, Mr 
Ilylton!" 

" A word more, my Lord," said he, in a desponding tone, 
after both of them had been silent for some moments, during 
which the Chief Justice's eyes were fixed on the fire, his 
face indicatmg that he was in deep thought — " only one 
word more, and my melancholy mission is closed. I have 
known the prisoner and his father for upwards of twenty 
years ; and do assure your Lordship that the old man I 
have ever regarded as a perfect pattern of Christian virtue 
— as an Israelite in whom there is no guile — as one of the 
patriarchs of old — I have seen him fearfully tried — in deep 
affliction — rumed at last by his generosity to another : in 
short, indeed, a second Job, my Lord!" Here Mr Hylton 
suddenly stopped, for his voice failed him. The Chief 
Justice rose from his seat, and, as if to avoid seeing Mr 
Hylton's emotion, slowly walked away ; really, however, 
to conceal his own feelings ; but soon he returned. 



NOW AND THEN. 109 

" Tliou excellent person ! Thou servant of God ! Thou 
true Samaritan !" said he, greatly moved, and taking Mr 
Hylton by the hand, " to my dying day I cannot forget 
thee. I saw thee kneeling beside that old man ! When I 
am at my last end, would that so thou, or one as holy, 
might kneel beside me /" 

''May God bless your Lordship, living and dying!" 
faltered Mr Hylton ; and it was not for several moments 
that either recovered his self-possession. 

" Let us now return to this sad business," said, at length, 
the Chief Justice, mildly, and very gravely. " Have you 
any thing further to urge ?" 

" Only that this poor soul, the prisoner, so far from being 
of the barbarous nature which could suffer him to do this 
cowardly deed of blood, is, and has been ever, beloved by 
young and old, who know him as one of generous heart ; 
has more than once perilled his life for others; and has 
never done otherwise than as became a son trained by such a 
father as his, until sharp misery, and despairing love for his 
sick wife, led him to listen to the voice of the tempter in 
that matter of the hare ! And finally, my Lord, yesterday, 
immediately after he had his irons put on, and was placed 
in the condemned cell, I was with him ; and, by all his 
hopes of Heaven, he solemnly asseverated his total inno- 
cence, and his absolute ignorance of the person who did, 
or the manner in which was done, this horrible murder ; 
and that, too, when I had, to the best of my power, taught 
him that he had looked his last on life— that hereafter 
was close upon him. And, my Lord, by my own hopes. 



200 NOW AND THEN. 

and in the presence of Him whom I serve, I verily believe, 
notwithstanding all appearances, that this man is innocent, 
or I should not have been this day with your Lordship, in 
whose just hands," said Mr Hylton, with a sigh, " I now 
leave the matter." 

^' It is one, Mr Hylton, of some difficulty, and requires a 
consideration," said the Chief Justice ; "which must be, as 
far as possible, perfectly dispassionate, and as deliberate as 
the urgency of the case will admit of. I shall read over 
my notes of the evidence with care, and give my best atten- 
tion to all that you have so discreetly, and so eloquently, 
urged upon me this evenmg. You must, if you please, 
leave with me that letter which you received from Mrs 
Morton ; and, if you feel disposed to retmii hither in two 
hom-s' time, you shall know my decision." 

Seeing by his countenance and manner, that the Chief 
Justice desired to be immediately left alone, Mr Hylton 
withdi'ew, his Lordship bidding him good evening, cordially, 
but so very gravely, that he thereby unconsciously shot 
dismay into the soul of Mr Hylton. As the latter quitted 
the library, the butler approached, bringing him his hat and 
stick, with great respect, and in silence; and the next 
moment he was alone in the open air — determming to pace 
the gloomy square in which the Chief Justice's house was 
situated, or the immediate neighbourhood, till the two hours 
should have expired. How anxiously, as he walked about, did 
he revolve in his mmd all that had taken place ! whether he 
had omitted any thing, or urged anything ineffectually ! Also 
he pondered the whole demeanour of the grave and discreet 



NOW AND THEN. 201 

Chief Justice ; his significant speech, his significant silence ; 
how his practised judicial mind would be likely to view the 
case ; and then good Mr Hylton thought within himself 
how he would decide the case, were it in his hands. At 
length, after having pulled out his watch more than twenty 
times, and waited for at least three minutes beyond the 
appomted two hours, Mr Hylton presented himself again at 
the Chief Justice's door; another person mounting the 
steps at the same time, and whose face Mr Hylton imagined 
that he had seen somewhere before. This was, in fact, the 
Chief Justice's" head clerk, who had been shortly before 
summoned to attend his Lordship immediately. When the 
door was opened, this gentleman went at once to the library, 
and, having knocked, was admitted ; while Mr Hylton was 
shown into a large empty dining-room adjoining. Presently 
he heard the library-door opened ; steps across the hall ; 
then the street-door opened and closed ; and then he, too, 
was shown into the Hbrary, where sat the Chief Justice, 
looking somewhat fatigued, and in the act of returning his 
watch into its place. 

" Well, Mr Hylton," said his Lordship, calmly, " after 
much consideration of all the facts of the case, in all their 
bearings, as far as I could, I have felt myself at liberty to 
order a temporary — a brief — respite for the prisoner" — 

''God bless your Lordship! God be thanked!" com- 
menced Mr Hylton excitedly ; but was promptly checked, 
for the Chief Justice elevated his finger, and slowly shook 
his head in a serious and admonitory manner. 

" I have thought it right, after your strenuous and advised 



202 NOW AXD THEX. 

representations, to afford a little time for further inquiry ; 
but am bound to tell you, that I feel the reverse of being 
sanguine as to the ultimate issue. The more I consider it, 
the blacker seems the case against the prisoner, as it was 
proved at the trial before me and the pubhc ; but God for- 
bid that, when human life is at stake, the faintest chance 
of saving it, and preventing the dismal spectacle of an 
innocent man's life being taken from him through a mistake 
of the law, should be thrown away. All your energies 
must from this moment be exerted to establish facts tending 
to raise a very strong presumption, against fearfully strong 
appearances. For this pm-pose I have granted a delay of 
a fortnight, that all necessary inquiries may be set on foot, 
especially with regard to the letter spoken of in that which 
you left with me : and you will have the goodness, by the 
way, at the earliest moment that is practicable, to forward 
to me that other letter. It is right to intimate to you that, 
should you be so fortunate in your exertions, as, on a proper 
representation to the Earl of Milverstoke, to prevail on his 
Lordship to concur in recommending the prisoner to the 
merciful consideration of the Crown, expressing a doubt as 
to the guilt of the prisoner, it might be attended with an 
important and beneficial effect, as coming from so dis- 
tinguished and deeply injm-ed a prosecutor." To this 
suggestion Mr Hylton listened in silent despair. " What 
use is to be made by the prisoner of this brief extension of 
his earthly career, none knows better, reverend sir, than 
yourself, and I presume not to say a word on that subject. 
Humanity plainly dictates one thing — the steadfast depres- 



NOW AND THEN. 203 

sion of tlie prisoner's hopes to tlie lowest point possible, 
lest the result of your charitable interference should have 
been only to inflict twice on him the pangs of death. 
Good-by, Mr Hylton, good-by ; God speed your efforts, 
and if the prisoner be mnocent, may your exertions to 
prove it succeed." 

" But the respite, my Lord — I beg your Lordship's par- 
don — but Monday morning is awfully near us ; when will 
your Lordship order" — 

" Your anxiety, sir, is only natural, but you may safely 
leave that matter in my hands," said the Chief Justice. '' It 
has been already seen to : the respite you may regard as 
already on its way : it will be forwarded, for your consola- 
tion I may tell you, by two separate Government mes- 
sengers, and reach the gaol, at the latest, to-morrow 
afternoon." 

Mr Hylton saw plainly that the matter might not be 
pressed further ; but what would he not have given to be 
permitted, if practicable, to accompany one of the bearers 
of the precious little documents, which some ten minutes 
before had been signed in duplicate by the Chief Justice, 
directing execution upon Adam Ayliffe not to be done until 
the Monday fortnight from the date of that order of the 
Chief Justice ! So, with a heart beating gratitude to that 
merciful and considerate judge, Mr Hylton respectfully took 
leave, and walked with buoyant spirits and quick steps to 
his inn, thinking to return by that night's coach, but which 
he found, to his concern, had left upwards of two hours 
before : Mr Hylton having supposed that it would quit 



204 



NOW AND THEN. 



London at tlic same hour as it passed through Milverstoke ; 
a mistake which he would soon have found out, but for 
his being so completely absorbed in the pressing and all- 
important affaii' which had brought him up to London. 
Unless he had taken a post-chaise all the way, which no 
adequate necessity justified him under the circumstances in 
doing, and for which, indeed, he had not by him the 
requisite funds, nor knew where to obtain them at a 
moment's notice in London, he could not reach the county 
tomi in which at that moment lay the miserable object of 
his solicitude, before seven o'clock in the evening, by an 
early morning coach, which did not start from the inn at 
which he was staying, but from another, m a different part 
of the town. On reaching his inn, he went straight to bed, 
quite overpowered with long want of rest, travelhng, and 
mental exhaustion; but directed himself to be called at 
half-past three o'clock without fail, that he might be in time 
for the early coach which left at half-past four o'clock. 
The moment, however, that he got into bed, he sunk Into 
the black abyss of forgetfulness, — into sleep unbroken and 
profound : and when he awoke, scarcely knew where he 
w^as ; the place around him was quite strange ; the sun 
shone brightly : and for several minutes he seemed strug- 
gling out of some wild and gloomy dream. A guard's hora 
peaHng in the coach-yard beneath him, however, effectually 
recalled his scattered faculties : and forth he spinmg from 
his bed in consternation. It was nearly nine o'clock, and 
the coach by which he had hoped to start, was then some 
forty miles on its way towards Milverstoke ! He rang his 



NOW AND THEN. 



205 



bell hurriedly ; and all he could learn from the Boots was, 
that he had knocked till he was tired, and had even come 
mto the room and spoken to Mr Hylton, who ansAvered him, 
but must have fallen asleep again. There was no help for it. 
He was not a man to curse, in a dilemma such as this, himself 
and every body and every thing about him. A misfortune 
had occurred, which appeared to have been inevitable: 
and in reahty no one soever was to blame. He had 
nothing for it now, but to secure a place by a coach startmg 
at seven o'clock that evening: and having done so, he 
betook himself to the nearest church, and attended the 
service there ; and again at Westminster Abbey in the 
afternoon : feeling, during the day, no little misgiving 
concerning the duty at his own church, and whether, alas, 
there should have been no one found, at such short notice, 
to do it all. As he went to the Abbey, and also as he came 
away after the service, he called at the Secretary of State's 
office ; but all there was silent, and apparently deserted ; 
the sentry gravely telling him that no one attended there 
on Sundays. But it occurred to Mr Hylton nevertheless to 
knock and inquire ; and it was very fortunate that he did 
so ; for he found that no less a personage than an Under 
Secretary, and several clerks, were there, engaged on 
important business connected with apprehended disturbances 
in the North. With no little difficulty Mr Hylton obtained 
access to one of the chief clerks ; and from him learnt that 
a communication had been received overnight from the 
Chief Justice, of his having ordered a fortnight's respite to 
Adam Ayhffe, under sentence of death for the murder of 



206 NOW AND THEN. 

Lord Alkmond ; that two duplicate orders to that effect had 
been forthwith despatched by special messengers, wdio 
"would deliver them, during the ensuing afternooUj into the 
hand of the proper authorities. 

" But forgive my anxiety in a matter m which I have 
taken a deep interest," said Mr Hylton : " Suppose the 
messengers should happen to miscany ?" 

"It may, of course, be the worse for the prisoner," replied 
the clerk somewhat impatiently : " but suppose the sky 
w^ere to fall — you know the saying, sir. A special 
messenger miscarry, sir ! Was ever such a thing heard of ? " 

With such consolation as could be derived from this 
somewhat irritable official, who was not overpleased at his 
extra day's work at the Office, Mr Hylton departed, without 
having asked several other questions which had occurred to 
him, concerning the aid of goverament in the inquiries w^hich 
w^ere to be set on foot, as suggested by the Lord Chief 
Justice. 



NOW AND THEN. 20*; 



CHAPTER X. 

At seven o'clock, precisely, Mr Hylton took his place 
on the coach, which in due course would bring him to the 
county town where AylifFe lay awaiting a fate only, by 
extraordinary exertions on the part of Mr Hylton, postponed 
for a few fleeting days ; and he purposed sending on his 
portmanteau to the inn at Milverstoke, himself staying 
behind to have an interview at the gaol with poor Ayliffe, 
and possibly his father. As he travelled along, he 
calmly reviewed the occurrences of the last few days, and 
agitating and alarming as they were, thought that streaks of 
light were really beginning faintly to glisten in the murky 
horizon, and felt devout thankfulness at the prospect of his 
being permitted to be an humble instrument in the hands of 
Providence, of rescuing an innocent man from an ignomi- 
nious death. What, he began to inquire, would be the effect 
of this respite on the mind and heart of Ayliffe ? As they 
drew near the county town, about ten o'clock in the 
morning, he pictured to himself the dismal scene which might, 
but for his exertions, have met their eyes that morning 
in passing the gaol . As they rolled rapidly onward, he was 
struck with the numerous foot-passangers whom they met 



208 NOW AND THEN. 

and in increasing numbers ; and at length — how shall it be 
written ? — he almost fell from his seat ; for he heard the 
voice of a person who held a long printed paper in his hand 
shouting — 

" Why, sir — Parson Hylton — sir " — said the coachman, 
drawing up hurriedly for a moment, "sir, how's this? — 
They're crying Adam Ayliffe's last dying speech, and full 
confession of the murder of Lord Alkmond ! " 

And sure enough, the man near them announced '' the 
last dying speech and confession of Adam Ayliife, who was 
hanged this morning for the murder of — " 

" Let me get down," said Mr Hylton, faintly, turning 
deadly pale : " Am I dreaming ? What inscimtable dispen- 
sation of Providence is this? Have, then, both the special 
messengers miscamed, after all ? or has Lord Famborough 
thought fit to overrule the Chief Justice ? Oh, horror ! " 
thought he — and all this with lightning rapidity. He stag- 
gered towards the man who had the papers, eagerly snatched 
one of them out of his hand, and found that there was no 
name of Adam Ayliffe whatever in them. Nor had the 
crier deliberately falsified the contents of his gloomy docu- 
ments; but having obtained a number of them to dispose of, 
and not having heard of the respite which had amved for 
the great criminal, whose expected execution was the talk 
of the county, had taken it for granted that he had suffered 
in due course ; the fact being, that there really had been an 
execution that morning at the gaol, but only of the two men 
convicted at the beginning of the A ssizes, for stealing the 
pair of shoes at the fair, and the cheese from the dairy. Poor 



NOW AND THEN. 209 

souls, they liad died, it seemed, with great penitence, acknow- 
ledging, if not the lenity of the laws, the justice of the 
sentence under which they suffered ; for, indeed, how could 
they do otherwise, when the cheese and the shoes had been 
found in their actual possession ? Their last moments had 
been, however, a little disturbed at the sudden, and, as it 
seemed to them, unjust escape of their expected fellow-suf- 
ferer, the murderer ; a complaint, as Mr Hylton afterwards 
learnt from the chaplain, which w^as one of the very latest 
among the words spoken by them on earth. The gallows, 
having performed its deadly office, was being taken down, 
as Mr Hylton, with averted eyes and a sickened heart, made 
his way to the gaol through the remains of a far greater 
crowd than would have been drawn together to witness the 
exit of the two poor thieves. In answ^er to his hurried 
inquiry, how Ayliffe had borne the temporary postponement 
of his sentence, the turnkey to whom he spoke, infomied 
him that the man was pretty well considering, but that there 
had been a great stir w^hen the news came. Mr Hylton was 
immediately introduced to the chaplain in the governor's 
room, and found, to his consolation, that the considerate 
Chief Justice had caused the respite to be accompanied by 
an injunction to the authorities to warn the prisoner, that 
the only use which he ought to make of the few days longer 
allowed to him on earth, should be to prepare the better for 
hereafter. No intimation had reached the prison of the 
grounds on which the respite had been obtained ; and Mr 
Hylton abstained from satisfying the curiosity or anxiety 
of even the chaplain and governor. With equal discretion, 

P 



210 NOW AND THEN. 

he left the prison without having had any interview with 
AyUffe, in order to be spared useless pam, and avoid questions 
causing an agonising embarrassment. The chaplain had 
been intrusted with the critical task of communicating to 
AylifFe the unexpected result of Mr Hylton's unknown 
exertions on his behalf ; the intelligence arriving only a few 
hours after Ayliffe, and the two other capital convicts, had 
partaken of the sacrament. He bore the agitating com- 
munication in total silence, but shortly afterwards became 
wildly excited ; in spite of all the earnest cautions of the 
chaplain, expressing his conviction that, by some providen- 
tial means, his innocence had been discovered and his life 
spared ; and it was not till after he had become calmer, that 
the official document was shown him, by which his wretched 
life was extended for one fortnight longer, and onefortniglit 
only. Shortly afterwards he became very desponding : and 
when his father was admitted to him, wept bitterly, and 
lamented that his troubles^were prolonged, and that his peace 
of mind was endangered. The old man himself had been 
tenderly and discreetly dealt with, on being told of the respite, 
by the chaplain ; who had already conceived a great respect 
for him, infinitely heightened by the firmness and composure 
with which he received the intelligence, and conducted him- 
self towards his son. With what tempered sternness and 
affection did he enforce the teaching of the chaplain, and 
depress the wild and unwarrantable hopes of him who still 
hung suspended over the grave, as it were, by only one 
single hair of his head ! 

Serious and anxious was the frame of mind with which 



NOW AND THEN. 211 

Mr Hylton now rode on to Milverstoke. He felt the fear- 
ful responsibility which his energetic humanity had entailed 
upon him, lest he should have really, in the pregnant 
language of the Chief Justice, done no more than twice 
inflict the pangs of death on the convict, and awfully perilled 
his religious condition. He also thought with momentary 
trepidation of the Earl of Milverstoke, and the effect upon 
him which the intelligence of the respite might have had ; 
especially when he should have heard through whose agency 
it had been brought about ; and, moreover, the result of 
Captain Lutteridge's interview with the Earl, Mr Hylton 
had yet to learn. On that score, however, his uncertainty, 
at all events, might soon be relieved, for his way lay witliin 
half a mile of the barracks ; to which, accordingly, on ar- 
riving at the road leading up to them, he directed his horse's 
head, and rode at a quickened pace. On entering the room 
in which his interview with the Captain had taken place, that 
officer quickly made his appearance, in full uniform, his men 
being drawn up, ready for drill, on the ground opposite to 
the window ; and his manner seemed to Mr Hylton cold 
and constrained. 

''Look you, reverend sir," said Captain Lutteridge, 
closing the mess-room door after him, "I was as good as 
my word; went straight to my Lord Milverstoke; and sorry 
I am that I thought of going. It has done you no service, 
sir, and I have greatly angered (about which I care not) 
and grieved my Lord Milverstoke, for which I do care, 
greatly." 

"I deeply regret to hear it," replied Mr Hylton ; "but 



212 XO^Y AND THEN. 

peraiit me to ask what was the result of your mtervlew ? 
Ai'e you at liberty to tell me w^hat you went to inquire 
about?" 

"Noj sir," answered Captain Lutteridge, peremptorily. 

^'jSTo!" echoed Mr Hylton, with a dismayed air, 

^'Xot one w^ord, sir !" 

Mr Hylton felt distressed and confoimded. Here had 
broken down, suddenly and altogether, one of the props on 
which rested the precious but precarious fabric of his hopes 
for AyliiFe. A miserable beginnmg was this of his fort- 
night's exertions ! 

"Perhaps, Captain Lutteridge, you have heard of the re- 
spite for a few days, which I have succeeded in obtaming ?" 

"Yes, sir, last night." 

" I trust that you heard with some satisfaction the news 
that a fellow-creature may be spared from suffering unjustly 
an ignominious death?" 

" Su-, I say I heard it, and I wish nobody to die 
unjustly; but how he can die unjustly, whom the law hath 
ordered to die, I know not. If this man be hanged when 
his respite is over, doubtless it tn^II be all right, bemg 
according to law. Had I been he, I would rather have 
had it all over at once, being so near it ; now he will die 
every day till it is over." His words smote the heart 
of his listener. " For this reason, sir, when a court- 
martial orders sentence of death, we carry it into effect 
quickly — the thing is over, forgotten, and the men return 
to duty." 

" But suppose the man shot were not really guilty?" 



NOW AND THEN. 213 

" That," said the Captahi, drily, "never occuiTed in my 
time." 

Mr Hylton sighed : he saw that it was useless to reason 
with the impracticable soldier, who, moreover, glanced 
once or twice at his men through the window, as though 
he wished to mount his horse immediately. 

" Pardon me. Captain, as I fear I detain you ; but this 
wretched person's life seems now, in a manner, dependent 
on my exertions ! " 

" Yes, sir, as doubtless you must have well considered 
beforehand. But, by the way," added the Captain, sud- 
denly, " on what grounds did you get the respite, sir ? Of 
course you said nothing of the matter on which we spoke 
here, sir?" 

'' Captain Lutteridge," said Mr Hylton, with dignity, 
" I am a gentlemen, as are you ; and though a Christian 
minister, struggling on behalf of one condemned unjustly, as 
I verily believe, to death, I could not break my promise, 
though, I own, with a conscience grievously disquieting me 
at the time, as it has also done ever since." 

" I hope quite unnecessarily," said the Captain, with a 
quaintly-confident air. 

" But imderstand me, sir, when I say this : I must tell 
you, in candour, but in perfect truth and honour, that, to 
some extent, I made use of the fact that — " 

" Hollo! How, sir? — how's that, sir?" uiterrupted the 
Captain, his whole face becoming suddenly flushed. 

^' Hear me. Captain Lutteiidge," said Mr Hylton, calmly: 
" hear what passed between the Lord Cliief Justice and 



214 NOW AND THEN. 

myself. I placed my application to him on fom' distinct 
grounds ; and one of them certainly related to what had 
passed between us — " 

" The d it did ! — I beg your pardon, sir, but, by 

! I can't help it, sir, though you're a parson ; but — " 

burst out the Captain, who seemed as if he were going into 
a frenzy. 

"I say, sir," continued Mr Hylton, eyeing him with stern 
steadfastness, — " that one of those four things related to what 
had passed between us : only glancing however, at it. " 

^'Go on, sir ! Go on, sir ! — If you please, that is," said 
the Captain, with ill-suppressed vehemence. 

^'I will, sir, if you interrupt me not;" said Mr Hylton, 
thoroughly roused, and speaking with a deliberate determi- 
nation which instantly arrested the Captain's impetuosity ; 
but he walked to and fro hastily, his boots clattering, per- 
haps, a very trifle more than they needed to have done. 
^' I told the Judge that some one in court had heard him 
inquire whether any one could say why Lord Alkmond had 
quitted the Castle at so late an hour of the night ; had 
afterwards communicated with a person, who thought it 
possible, and only possible, that he might be able to throw 
some light on the matter, but must first obtain the permis- 
sion of some one else : was attempting to do so when I 
quitted Milverstoke ; and that, till I received express per- 
mission, I could say no more on the business. I also said 
that the person who had spoken to me had expressed his 
opinion that the conversation would prove to have no 
bearing on the case." 



NOW AND THEN. 215 

''Yes, yes, I did say that — I did, I recollect ; but, excuse 
me, reverend sir," he added, with a somewhat puzzled air ; 
"I did not quite understand all that went before ; 'twas too 
long : I ask the favour of you to repeat it, sir." 

Mr Ilylton deliberately repeated what he had said, 
adding, "but I never made the slightest mention of Lord 
Milverstoke, nor you, sir, nor of any one about you ; nor 
spoke of any officer being concerned ; nor of this place ; 
nor of Milverstoke Castle." 

•'Well, sir," said the Captain, apparently relieved, yet 
evidently not perfectly satisfied, "I suppose that ^Aa^ would 
not give the Lord Chief Justice any inkling, eh ? These 
great lawyers can find out so much more in every thing 
than we can. — Eh ? how is it, really, sir ?" 

"You know, Captain Lutteridge, now, as much as I do ; 
and let me add that, in my opinion, this did not form one 
of the grounds upon which the Lord Chief Justice proceeded 
in granting the respite ; but he went principally on another 
very remarkable circumstance, freshly" — 

" Egad ! so one of our men outside there told Lieu- 
tenant Wylsden, this morning, that something strange had 
tm-ned up. What is it, if it please you, reverend sir?" 
inquired the Captain eagerly. 

" Forgive me. Captain Lutteridge ; but at present it would 
be premature," replied Mr Hylton, guessing that good Mrs 
Hylton must have been talking a little on the subject, since 
his departure. "I have yet to ask, did Lord Milverstoke 
distinctly refuse to allow you to tell me that which you 
went to ask his leave to do ? " 



216 NOW AND THEN. 

" Sir, I have given jou an answer, and cannot go 
further. I am not at liberty to do what you ask, and will 
not." 

*'Did his Lordship know of the matter, or did you first 
tell him?" 

" Sir, I shall — that is, sir, I can say nothing more than 
that you get not one syllable on this matter from me : and 
— harke'e, sir," he added very significantly, " I wish you 
well out of asking my Lord Milverstoke yourself; but 
my men, reverend sir, are waiting, and I bid you good 
morning." 

So ended this disheartening interview ; Mr Hylton re- 
mounting his horse and quitting the barrack-yard, much more 
depressed than he had entered it. He was about to turn 
back, to inquire of Captain Lutteridge whether he had told 
the Earl who had gone to London on the business of the 
respite ; but hearing the Captain's loud voice giving the 
word of command, he abstained, and continued his cheerless 
exit. 

As he neared the village, he overtook an Increasing 
nmnber of persons, who appeared as if they had Avalked from 
some distance. The faces of many of them he knew : they 
saluted him as he quickly passed, with a dash of awe and 
expectation in then- respectful obeisances. He quickened his 
pace to escape from the gaze of eager scrutiny, and at length 
increased his speed ; but that only added to the excitement 
of those who beheld and were overtaken by him ; and by 
the time that he had reached his own gateway, he was 
almost hemmed in by a little crowd, which in a quarter of 



NOW AND THEN. 217 

an hour's time had nearly doubled their numbers ; so that 
he was forced to quit the room again, leaving Mrs Hylton 
no little excited with what was going on ; and approaching 
his gateway, he assured the crowd, who instantly uncovered 
and became silent, that AylifFe had got a fortnight's, and 
only a fortnight's respite, because of some little doubts 
about his guilt ; and then Mr Hylton earnestly besought 
them to go away immediately and peaceably; and was 
obeyed within as short a time as could have been reason- 
ably expected. 

But what had been the first thing which occurred to him 
on entering the parsonage ? — A letter lay on the table, 
unopened, even by anxiously curious Mrs Hylton : it hav- 
ing arrived only some half an hour before her husband's 
return ; bearing a great black coroneted seal, and being 
addressed to him in Lord Milverstoke's handwriting, with 
that formidable name at full length, in the corner of the 
letter. Mr Hylton, with forced calmness, opened it and 
read as follows : — 

" Castle, Monday, 8 o'clock, a. m. 

" The Earl of Milverstoke requests" (the word originally 
written was visibly '•''desires^'') "the attendance of Mr 
Hylton at the Castle, as soon after his arrival from London 
as possible." 

Mr and Mrs Hylton looked at one another in silence for 
a few moments, as soon as they had read this ominously 
laconic summons, the significance of which they had been 



218 NOW AND THEN. 

liumedlj discussing, at the moment of Mr Hylton's quitting 
her, to dismiss the little crowd assembled before his door. 

^'I do not perfectly like the peremptory authoritative tone 
of this note," said he to Mrs Hylton ; " but let us not be 
quick at taking offence, when none may be intended. As 
one of his Lordship's occasional chaplains, he has a right 
to command my services ; but if he consider that, being his 
chaplain, I have no right to endeavour to rescue one whom 
I believe an innocent man from an infamous death, I will, 
with God's blessing, prove my right, and disprove that which 
he assumes." 

"My dear Henry, you will have a terrible scene to 
encounter, I see too plainly," said his wife, apprehensively. 

" Painful, Mary — very, very painful it may be ; but 
what is to terrify a man supported by a sense of duty, 
exercising an unquestionable right, and that, too, in so 
sacred a cause? My parishioner, Ayliffe, shall not die 
wrongfully, if I can lift up a finger to prevent it, did I live 
surrounded by forty Lords Milverstoke ? If he be one of the 
great nobles of the earth, think, my Mary, of Him whose 
servant I am ! — whose bidding I do — ay, and will do, 
though hell itself should rise against me ! And in my 
Master's name, the Loed of Lords and King of Kings, 
will I encounter this proud Earl, and, it may be, humble 
him into submission to the will of God, and make him yield 
to the dictates of our better nature ! " Mrs Hylton flung 
her arms round her husband with fond enthusiasm, and 
sobbed. 

" But, I must say, there are great allowances to be made 



NOW AND THEN. 219 

for him," said slie presently. " What would be oin- feelings, 
dearest Henry, if this loved one of ours — our only one — 
were — " She suddenly stopped. 

" Sweet soul !" exclaimed her father, looking tenderly 
at the Httle girl, who was listening absorbedly to this 
colloquy between her parents ; '' dear soul ! I should wish 
to accompany thee to Heaven, however black and horrible 
might be thy path thither ! And I Avould pray for grace to 
forgive thy murderers ; and if I could not get that grace, then 
wouldst thou, beloved one ! be an angel in Heaven, and I, 
thy unhappy father, be for ever excluded. This my Master 
hath taught me— this He hath most expressly told me ! 
Come hither, my little Mary, and let me feel thy arms 
about me, strengthening me in my religion ; for of such as 
thou art, is the kingdom of Heaven !" 

The child sprang into his open arms, and sobbed aloud ; 
he folded her fondly to his breast, in silence; and Mrs 
Hylton's tears fell fast. She gazed at her husband with 
almost reverent love and admiration ; for, as he spoke, there 
beamed upon his harassed features an expression that was 
heavenly. For him she entertained no fears whatever; 
she knew his utter devotion to his calling ; his lofty sense 
of the greatness of his office ; his unwavering faith ; his 
indomitable courage. She knew well, also, his discretion ; 
his complete command of temper ; in short, the simplicity 
and elevation of his whole character. That minister of God 
was indeed a burning and a shining hght, which, placed on 
an eminence, would have scattered far a blessed radiance ; 
but a Wisdom unquestionable, and by him unquestioned, 



220 KOW AND THEN. 

had placed him not on the mountain, but in the valley ; had 
assigned him a remote and obscure station in the great 
vineyard. But how noble the opportunity of doing good 
that seemed now afforded him ! Already had he felt 
stirring within him energies, the existence of which he had 
not known, till they were thus miexpectedly called into 
action ; and at the moment of his thus conversing with Mrs 
Hylton, he experienced but one serious anxiety — lest the 
Earl, fatally for his own final peace and happiness, should 
be permitted to harden himself into hopeless inhumanity, 
and, in the inscrutable wisdom of the great Orderer of all 
events, succeed in intercepting the flow of mercy — nay, of 
JUSTICE : and gloat over the sacrifice of one, as guilty, 
whose innocence he himself would, however unconsciously, 
have prevented from being vindicated. !Mr Hylton knew 
the substantial nobleness of the Earl's character, with all 
the faults which cast baleful shadows around it ; and those 
faults were exactly such as might now be expected in full 
operation and activity, — hideous serpents writhing around 
a black pillar of pride. Alas ! blind and deadly anunosity 
and revenge would now disguise themselves as retribution 
and justice ! How were they to be unmasked ? 

To Lord Milverstoke's significant summons, Mr Hylton 
returned a courteous reply, which was carried back by one 
of the Earl's servants, who had been sent a second time to 
know whether Mr Hylton had returned from London. His 
note simply excused its writer till the evening, at a named 
hour, on the reasonable and tiiie plea of extreme fatigue 
from having travelled all night, and also having some 



NOW AND THEN. 221 

matters of importance to transact during the day, in con- 
sequence of his sudden absence from home. Lord Milver- 
stoke's, however, was not the only letter which had awaited 
the arrival of Mr Hylton. It seemed that, during the 
Saturday, Mr Merton, the husband of Mr Hylton's corre- 
spondent, who, unknown to herself, had rendered him such 
service with the Lord Chief Justice, having returned home 
late on the Friday evening, and perceiving the possible 
importance of the communication mentioned in Mrs Mer- 
ton's note, resolved to set off with the letter itself, at an 
early hour on the Saturday morning, to the parsonage at 
Milverstoke. He had left the letter with Mrs Hylton, 
finding the errand on which Mr Hylton had gone to Lon- 
don, whom he heartily wished God-speed ; and, moreover, 
relieved the good lady's anxieties concerning her husband's 
duty on the morrow, by pledging himself either personally 
to occupy the pulpit and reading-desk at Milverstoke church, 
or provide some one who would ; which done, he returned 
home ; and, it may be as well to say, that he proved able to 
perform his promise. A crowded and very attentive con- 
gregation heard both the morning and afternoon service ; 
their prayers being desired " for one appointed to die, and 
for others dangerously ill and greatly distressed in mind." 
Most, if not all of those present, thought only of the con- 
demned criminal, his sick wife, and troubled father ; but 
others bethought themselves also of the Lady Alkmond, 
lying dangerously ill, and piously included her in their 
prayers. 

Neither the Earl nor Lady Emily made their appearance 



222 KOW AND THEN. 

at the cliurcli. — There had been a kmd of gloomy excite- 
ment throughout the village and neighbourhood, during the 
Saturday and Sunday ; rising high on its being discovered 
that Mr Hylton had suddenly gone up to London on behalf 
of AylifFe — being supposed to have had very sufficient 
reasons for so doing. When, however, good Mrs Hylton, 
in the fulness of her feeling heart, let out to Mrs Wigley, 
the churchwarden's wife (who told it to her husband, and 
he to the doctor and surveyor, and they to many others) 
the purport of the mysterious letter from Mrs Merton, the 
public feeling quickly rose to a pitch of painful intensity. 
But when, above all, news came down from London on the 
Sunday night, by the coach which had passed through the 
county town, that a respite, or a reprieve, had actually 
arrived, the feelings which it excited cannot be described. 
In spite of black appearances, Ayliife's high character had 
proved, for a long time, like a buckler agamst reproach and 
suspicion, till the trial ; when the reported stern concurrence 
of the Lord Chief Justice with the verdict of the jury, 
staggered the strongest friend of the convicted. Now, 
however, that a reprieve had arrived — which was believed 
to have emanated directly from His Majesty, as a personal 
act — the tide was entirely turned in Ayliife's favour, and 
good Mr Hylton given credit for a very potent influence 
over the will and pleasure of his sovereign. Hence the 
excitement which had attended his return — an excitement 
which would have manifested itself in a less subdued 
manner, but for a consideration of the peculiar and painful 
position of the Earl of Milverstoke. The following is an 



NOW AND THEN. 223 

exact copy of the letter, tlie alleged existence of which had, 
almost alone, wrung the respite from the hesitating Chief 
Justice of England :— 

Dunkirk, 15th March. 

" Reverend Mr Merton, 

" Being at this present here, sir, at which place a man of 
which I had been shipmate in another coaster, of which I 
am no longer on hoard, but in another vessel that I am mate 
of, and the reason of this trouble to you, sir (which have 
doubtless forgot Jack Jevons, whose mother you knew in 
Midgecombe,) is my seeing the County Paper which he 
show'd me on Sunday last, where is described the horrid 
murder of Lord Alkmond by somebody caught, but, reve- 
rend sir, perhaps others liad hands in it, as this may show 
and my log-book too which I writ it in at the time, that is 
that as our boat was romng back from the shore to the ship, 
this last was about two miles off, in a line with Milverstoke 
Castle (S.S.E.) on the exact same night of that murder, 
and the man (his name is Jno. Harrup) heard gun-fire in 
the wood once or twice near the Castle, and just then saw 
one or (may be) two men running like for life along the 
shore to the east, thinking them running away only from 
sport, because catch'd in the woods, and poaching, Jno. 
Harrup was only 4 or 5 hundred yards from the shore, 
which I entered in my log all on that day and Harrup is 
still here, only we are going up further than this before w^e 
return, which will be very soon, and God send us good 
trading in these quarters, and best respects (and hope of 



224 NOW AND THEN. 

forgiving this trouble) from Rev. Sir, yrs' mo. dutifully ; and 
to command ; (the name of this vessel is the Morning Star.) 
J. Jevons. (Putting up in London at Wapping, at the 
Commodore Anson.y 

Addressed — '' The Eev. MrMerton, Rector of the Parish, 
Midgecombe." 

After perusing and re-perusing this quaint but, in Mr 
Hylton's estimation, all-important document, the suspicion 
hinted at by the Chief Justice, that it might be only some 
cunning device to mislead justice, flickered with cruel fre- 
quency around Mr Hylton's mmd. Yet there seemed an 
authentic air about the letter ; and Mr Merton had assured 
]\rrs Hylton, that he distinctly recollected a young man 
called Jack Jevons living at Midgecombe, about seven or 
eight years before, but of whom he knew little except that 
he was the son of a worthy widow (a parishioner of Mr 
Merton's) since dead, and had run off to sea, to her great 
displeasure ; but Mr Merton had never heard of any thing 
to the disadvantage of Jevons ; and, since receiving the 
letter, had, through inquiries made by one of his sen^ants, 
heard that Jevons was really the mate of some coasting 
vessel. However this might be, Mr Hylton's first business 
was to make an exact transcript of this letter ; and then, in 
performance of his promise, he enclosed the original to the 
Lord Chief Justice, putting his packet with his own hand, 
and m the presence of a witness, into the post-office. He 
also sent by a special messenger a note addressed to Mr 
Melcombe, an able and experienced attorney, in a neighbour- 



NOW AND THEN. 225 

ing town, requesting his attendance at tlie parsonage, at an 
early hour in the ensuing morning, on a matter of importance ; 
which consisted, in fact, of the energetic prosecution of 
inquiries concerning the writer of the above letter, and 
whether or not he had returned to England, or if not, where 
the ship might now be, and whether, and how, it could be 
discovered. If Ayliffe's earthly salvation depended on the 
issue of these inquiries, and within the time already limited, 
how awfully precarious his fate ! 

Having had some trifling repose during the afternoon, 
and partaken of a spare dinner, Mr Hylton ordered his horse 
to the door ; and having made another copy of the letter on 
which so much depended, he carefully placed it in his pocket- 
book, and set off, in a pious, firm, and solemn spirit, for 
Milverstoke Castle, which he reached about seven o'clock. 
As usual, when he went unattended, he turned oif into a 
by-path which led, at a few hundi'ed yards' distance from 
the Castle, towards the stables; and there dismounting, 
gave his horse into the care of a groom, who, hastily trans- 
ferring his charge to another, ran off at top speed in an 
opposite direction, while Mr Hylton slowly made his way 
back into the main path which led to the front of the Castle. 
He walked thoughtfully along ; and on reaching the door 
by which he usually entered, was spared the trouble of 
announcing his arrival, by a servant who was stationed there 
holding the door half open. He raised his finger towards 
his lips, and then said in a low tone, " The Lady Emily, sir, 
has given orders that when you arrived you should be con- 
ducted into a chamber, for a short time, near her Ladyship's 

Q 



226 NOW AND THEN. 

apartments, where her Ladyship will speedily come to 
you." 

^' Tell her Ladyship," said Mr Hylton, with some sm^prise, 
" that I will await her arrival In any room she pleases, but 
that I earnestly request her Ladyship to come quickly, for 
I am here on business, doubtless of importance, with his 
Lordship, and by appointment." 

He had not sat down more than three or four minutes, 

and was looking at his watch with fast increasing anxiety, 

when the door was opened quickly but silently, and the 

slight, but tall and graceful, figure of Lady Emily entered 

and advanced to him, extending both her hands, which were 

very cold as he clasped them, and her face was deadly pale. 

" Dear Mr Hylton, I hear that my papa has sent for you. 

"What Is it about? " she inquired with eager apprehension. 

" I really hnow not, though I have a suspicion, dearest 

Lady Emily ; his Lordship did not say, in his brief note, 

why he wished to see me. Pray, did he expect me sooner ? " 

She looked down for a moment, and after a hesitating 

pause said, " I beheve he did, and was di'cadfuUy angry, I 

hear, at your not coming earlier." 

" Have you seen his Lordship to-day?" 
" Only for a moment, early in the morning, — but he did 
not see me; and 1 never recollect him looking so much 
agitated. Do you know a Captain Plumrldge, or some such 
name, a dragoon officer at the barracks ? He came here on 
Friday night, very late, I am told. Dear Mr Hylton, what 
did he come about?" said Lady Emily anxiously. 

'' I cannot say that I do not know ; but he came of his 



NOW AND THEN. 227 

own free will to ask his Lordship a question^ and I certainly 
was aware that he was commg." 

" Was it " — she trembled visibly — " was it to beg the life 
of — you know — Mr Hylton — whom I mean?" continued 
the agitated girl. 

''No, it was not, Lady Emily," replied Mr Hylton. 

A sudden piercing glance of her lustrous eyes fell upon 
him, with an expression which he could not at the moment 
fully understand ; and she sighed for some moments in silence. 

'' Dear Mr Hylton, you know how I love you, and would 
believe you against all the world," said she, at length, seiz- 
ing his hand with convulsive earnestness. ' " Do you think 
this man ought not to die ? Do you think he is innocent?" 

" Li the most solemn manner I assure you that, whether 
I be right or wrong, I feel as certain of his innocence as 
that the sun rose this morning ! " 

Her bright eyes were fixed upon him with a mournful 
intensity as he spoke, and her bosom heaved fast. 

" Then," she said, in a tremulous whisper, " you will 
NEVER get my papa to believe it ! No, not if you were an 
angel out of heaven, coming down before his very eyes from 
the clouds to tell him so !" 

"Why, my dearest Lady Emily, why say you so?" 
inquired Mr Hylton with great earnestness. 

'' Oh, I hnow it ! " she replied, shaking her head : '' and I 
am very, very unhappy after what you have just said ; and 
so will somebody else be, when I tell her" — 

'' Dear Lady Emily," said Mr Hylton, much moved, " I 
know whom you mean ! And does she forgive" — 



228 NOW AND THEN. 

^' Yes, she does ! though she knows not whether he be 
guilty or not of this horrid crime. She has prayed to God, 
so have I ; and though he be guilty, we both forgive him, 
and do not wish him to die. And if he be innocent ! Oh, 
Mr Hylton ! Then to die ! And my jpapa to wish it ! " 

The low thrilling voice in which she uttered these em- 
phatic words produced an indescribable eflfect on Mr Hylton. 

^' You know what a dreadfid day we must have looked 
forward to in this" — she shuddered — '' and when we heard 
last night that it was not to occur" — 

" My dear Lady Emily," whispered Mr Hylton, ^' I 
have no time to explain details ; but I must tell you that, 
since the trial, a fact has come to light tending strongly to 
show some other hand engaged in this awful business than 
that of poor AylifFe ! The finger of Providence seems to 
have pointed out some traces, which with His blessing may 
lead to" — 

" Who is that ? who is that ?" inquired the terrified girl, 
hastily nsing from her chair, and opening the door. 

It was her maid, who hmTiedly whispered that she had 
just heard that his Lordship had ordered horses to be got 
ready to go instantly to the parsonage. 

" I must leave you ; you must go to my papa directly ! " 
said she, with a face full of alarm. 

^' I will, dear Lady Emily"— 

^' And oh, consider his feelings!" — her eyes filled sud- 
denly with tears. 

" I do ! I will ! my heart bleeds for him ! I fear he will 
be exceedingly angry with me for what I have done." 



NOW AND THEN. 229 

" I fear he will ! " sighed Lady Emily; " but — think of 
us when you are with him ! and do not, for worlds — no, not 
for worlds — let him know that I have been with you!" 
Then she hastily took from her bosom a small black-edged 
packet, and put it into Mr Hylton's hands : "You will know 
what to do with this," said she earnestly : (it contained a 
£10 bank-note.) Another moment and she was hastening 
along, followed by her maid, to Lady Alkmond's chamber ; 
and Mr Hylton proceeded round to the front door, and 
ringing the bell, was quickly admitted, and walked with 
firm step and yet firmer heart, following one of the atten- 
dants who had ushered Captain Lutteridge into the Earl's 
presence, and who, now opening the library-door, announced 
Mr Hylton, and, on his entry, instantly withdrew. 

" So, sir," said Lord Milverstoke in a low hoarse voice, 
rising from his chair, his eyes flashing the moment that he 
saw Mr Hylton, '' you have robbed the gibbet of its due, to- 
day!" Mr Hylton slowly approached, with a respectful 
inclination^ towards a chair which seemed to have been 
placed for him, but remained standing beside it, and spoke 
not, observing the fearful excitement under which the Earl 
was labouring : '' I say, sir, you have robbed the gallows 
this day ! you have made groans rise from the gi-ave of the 
murdered!" said the Earl, with a vehemence of manner to 
which Mr Hylton had never seen, or even imagined, an 
approach. 

" I hope not, my Lord," he commenced gravely. 
"I say you have, sir! The dead in their graves are 
crying out against you ! " 



230 NOW AND THEN. 

" God forbid, my Lord ! Nay, God forbid ! " repeated 
Mr Hylton. 

*' Blood crieth out from the ground ! — And you have dared 
to interfere to defeat the vengeance of Heaven ! — Presump- 
tuous ! " 

^' You are labouring, my Lord, under great excitement ; 
let me implore of you to endeavour to calm yourself, and I 
will respectfully and readily answer any thing which your 
Lordship may demand of me. Recollect, my Lord, that I 
have come willingly to attend your Lordship " — 

" ^Vliat have you been doing, sir ? You, having a sacred 
duty to me and my family, being at present one of my 
chaplains, sir, have bestirred yourself — have busied your- 
self — have gone about — to save the forfeited life of the 
guilty — of him who did his endeavours to blast me and my 
house — him whose accursed body was forbidden to pollute 
the grave ! Yes, sir, such was the voice of the laws of 
your country ! such the voice of justice ! and you — you 
forsooth ! — have dared to step forward and disobey and 
defeat that law, and pervert that justice ! What, sir ! " the 
Earl started forward a step or two nearer to Mr Hylton, 
who moved not, " would you, then, have that blood-stained 
monster let loose upon me? — Am I — are I and mme — 
henceforth to skulk in terror from the light of day, for 
fear of the assassin ? Oh ! hideous ! — You ingrate ! you 
meddling priest ! — There stand you, calm before my mad- 
ness ! madness which you are brmging upon me ! — which I 
feel coming upon me — and all at the bidding of one who 
was bound religiously to me and mine ! " The Earl stepped 



NOW AND THEN. 231 

back and threw himself down on the couch ; the vehis of 
his forehead were swollen; he shook perceptibly, and 
uttered a groan that seemed rending open his breast, while 
his eyes were fixed upon those of Mr Hylton, who stood in 
an attitude of respectful firmness. "Why speak you not, 
sir ? Have you then no defence ? — no excuse ? Do you 
really stand there, sir, and defy me?" 

" Oh no, my Lord ! no ! I take God to witness how my 
soul is torn at beholding you ; fearful as is your language 
to be heard by a Christian, and a Christian minister" — 

" Bah ! talk not, sir, to me of your Christian character ! " 
thundered the Earl. " Where was" — 

" Your Lordship means not to insult me, or outrage my 
sacred office," said Mr Hylton, with solemn composure; 
" too well I know your Lordship's lofty character. When 
you are calmer, you possess a soul loving justice ; to that 
soul I appeal— for that calmness I wait ; I will then render 
full account of every thing, even the smallest matter that I 
have done" — 

" Now, sir ! now ! the present moment ! You shall have 
no pretence, sir, for contriving evasive answers, or cunning 
subterfuges ! Sir, there is a seat beside you ! Mr Hylton — 
I request you — I beg — I desire — you to be seated. Begin ! 
begin, sir ! — I am calmer — I am calmer than I was — calm 
I never shall be again — my soul is shaken by your miscon- 
duct — your cruelty — your perfidy !" 

" If, my Lord, you desire me, as distinctly as I may, to 
give an account of my doings, in this unhappy business, I 
will at once" — 



232 NOW AND THEN. 

'' Well, sir ! — at last, then ! — but remember, sir, two 
tilings I demand ! — explain the past ! forbear /o?' the fixture ! 
— to those two, sir, address your words ! " 

" Have I, then, my Lord, really free speech ? Hear me 
first, my Lord, and afterwards, if you choose, dismiss me 
hence as you will, with whatever indignity, with whatever 
reproach!" 

" Oh ! I am all ear, sir ! all attention !" exclaimed Lord 
Milverstoke, with an exhausted look, his eyes fixed heavily 
on those of Mr Hylton, who, with a dignified bearing and 
a presence of mind which had never for a moment deserted 
him, inclmed towards Lord Milverstoke with a countenance 
full of respect and sympathy, believing now that the fearful 
storm had spent its chief violence. 

" Having leave, my Lord," he began with quiet delibera- 
tion, " from one who never once broke his word, that I know 
of, and who, I verily believe, from his high nature, cannot, 
I will speak as becomes one man to another, in the presence 
of Him who made us both, and orders every event that 
ever happened or can happen, however mysterious and 
aw^ul. His nature being such. I will speak as though I 
might never again speak here, nor enter this Castle. I 
acknowledge the duty I owe your Lordship, one that, 
humble and imperfect as may be my mode of doing it, I 
would earnestly desire to do, to the end of my days, — or to 
the end of your Lordship's will and pleasure. It was I 
that buried yom- dead out of your sight, my Lord, and in 
that awful moment w^as so moved by yom' majestic sorrow, 
that I scarce could perform my sacred functions." Lord 



NOW AND THEN. 233 

Mllverstoke's eyes fell to the ground for a moment, and his 
lips quivered, but manifestly with no intention to speak, and 
Mr Hylton's voice sHghtly trembled : '•'- When you quitted 
that burial-place, these eyes followed you, and I breathed an 
humble prayer to Almighty God, that He who had broken, 
would heal your heart — a prayer that has seldom since been 
absent from me, or forgotten when I offered up my own 
supplications. My Lord, this most cruel, this barbarous 
and most bloody murder, is hideous at this moment in my 
eyes, as in your Lordship's : the vengeance of Heaven, of 
Him to whom vengeance belongs, will assuredly light upon 
the head of him who did this deed, be it sooner, be it later, 
than man may look for ; and I pray God that such ven- 
geance, if it be His will, may be swift. Now crave I your 
Lordship's most absolute word and promise to be performed, 
while I say but little more. I know not that I ever 
knowingly broke my own word, or spoke that which I knew 
to be false ; and so I now tell your Lordship firmly, even 
though a thousand torturing racks were stretched in readi- 
ness before me, I believe in my soul, in my soul of souls, 
that this wretched man, Adam Ayliffe, is innocent of this 
deed, for which he is nevertheless doomed to die ! " Lord 
Milverstoke started from his chair, his breast heaving sud- 
denly and violently, and he walked to and fro for a few 
moments in silence, while Mr Hylton proceeded : — '' I 
believe that had he been able, and had had the opportmiity, 
his giant strength would have slain a thousand who had 
raised a hand against the precious life of your son : ay, or 
of any one else." 



234 NOW AND THEN. 

^' Oh ! Insupportable ! — intolerable ! " vehemently mut- 
tered the Earl through his closed teeth, as he paced to and 
fro before Mr Hylton — looking, however, away from him, as 
if resolved not to interrupt him. 

" I deliberately acknowledge that, as the case was proved 
at the trial on Friday last, no other verdict than Guilty 
would have been just" — 

'' Oh ! what candour !" muttered the Earl to himself, with 
a kind of bitter fury. 

" So said, as doubtless your Lordship has heard, the 
Chief Justice of England ; so said the jury ; so said all 
who heard : there, had it stood, I would, had I been so 
required, have done mine office towards the dying guilty, 
nor dared to meddle with his righteous doom. My Lord, 
these eyes saw, these ears heard, that wretched convict, 
when first he was thrust, manacled and fettered, and blighted 
by the cm^se of his sentence, into the cell where he awaited, 
and, I fear, still awaits, an ignominious and imrighteous 
death. In that terrible horn-, believing himself thenceforth 
beyond the help of man, did he solemnly avow himself 
innocent. I believed him then, and have ever since ; and 
I believe him now.'''' 

" How long — how much longer all this drivel?" quoth 
the Earl to himself, as if nearly bm'sting through all self- 
control. 

^' But not on my mere belief, nor any man's mere belief, 
could the verdict which has been given be shaken. Yet 
have I gained, with efforts which nothing could have 
induced me to make, but a conviction that I obeyed the 



NOW AND THEN. 235 

will of God, a brief and precious respite for this wretch. I 
have stnven — I have been in long and mortal struggle with 
the excellent and just Chief Justice, and laid such cause 
before him as forced his righteous mind to delay this death. 
And for the grounds — the reasons — these am I ready to 
lay before your Lordship, if so your Lordship pleases." 
Mr Hylton paused, and bowed. 

" Ho, then at length my lips are loosed ! — is it — even — 
so ?" said the Earl. "And I may speak ? and am able to 
speak, not being choked with all the nonsense that I have 
been hearing, and I hope, for your sake, sir, that even you 
yourself have forgotten ! So, the idiot chatter of the con- 
vict-cell — but" — the Earl with a great eifort restrained 
himself — "but state, sir, such reasons, such grounds, as you 
have urged — state, I say, your pretences — false I know 
them ! — sir, sir, I ask your forgiveness ! Language unjusti- 
fiable and unbecoming has passed from these lips — I crave 
forgiveness, sir ! Scarce know I sometimes what I say or 
think. But, sir, in mercy to me, tell me briefly why — why 
the law falters about this death, and so stultifies its most 
solemn doings in so few days, before all mankind?" 

"My Lord, such reasons as I alleged satisfied a reluctant 
Judge ; but only so far as to grant delay. No glimpse of 
mercy — of pardon — was there in his gloomy face ; but this 
brief delay he granted for inqviiry." 

Here Mr Hylton produced the copy he had made of the 
letter which he had forwarded that day to London, and 
explained briefly how and when he himself had received 
it. Then he read it to the Earl with deliberate emphasis. 



236 NOW AND THEN. 

observing his Lordship give a slight start when the running 
of the two men along the shore was mentioned ; but he 
seemed instantly to recover himself, and heard Mr Hylton 
read, without interrupting him, to the end. Then ^Ir Hylton 
observed, on quickly glancing at the Earl, an expression 
of withering scorn flit instantaneously over his agitated 
features. 

"And that wretched scrawl has delayed this day's justice, 
and satisfied the powerful mind of the Chief Justice. Sir, 
I tell you he must be a dotard ! He should be removed ! 
He deserves impeachment ! I Avill in my place in Parlia- 
ment impeach him ! " 

" Sees then, really, your Lordship nothing in all this ? — 
no reason even for pausmg — for considering whether it may 
not be possible to trace out the guilty and save the innocent ? 
Oh, my Lord, not one single fortnight, before the tree be 
felled, which, once felled, must lie for ever as it falls !" 

'^ Who sees not, sir, that this your letter is a transparent 
device — a forgery — an imposture — a practice upon your 
credulity ? And are keys such as these henceforth to open 
our pnson-doors ? Oh, horrible, horrible mockery ! " 

"The writer, my Lord, is known — known to one whom 
your Lordship knows — the Eector of Midgecombe — a 
gentleman, surely, and of honour and veracity." 

"Oh, how can I patiently hear you, Mr Hylton," said 
the Earl reproachfully, and with infinitely greater calmness 
than he had till then manifested, " seriously m'ging on me 
such despicable drivelling — for is it not such? Will that 
paper of yours bear an instant's scmtiny ? And is it to be 



NOW AND THEN. 237 

the potent instrument of letting loose again on society — oli, 
I shudder ! I sicken ! Why, sir, how long is justice to be 
thus befooled ? How long must we wait till these persons 
— sir, the mere stating of it shows the monstrous absurdity 
of your proceedings. Your feelings pervert your judgment 
and disturb your understanding, sir. A false pity makes 
you credulous and cruel : credulous are you to the guilty : 
cruel are you to the innocent : cruel to the living : cruel to 
the memory of the dead ! " 

" JSTo, my Lord ! The dead may be in spirit present with 
us at this moment — hearing and seeing, or hnowing how 
the truth is — oh, my Lord, my Lord ! " — Mr Hylton said 
all this very solemnly, and saw that the Earl was for a 
moment startled by the thought which had been suggested 
to him. '' And beware, my Lord, lest you yourself be cre- 
dulous of guilt where guilt is not. Is it not worse than 
being credulous of innocence where innocence is not, but 
guilt ? This last is an error reparable ; the other irreparable ; 
and an account thereof must be given hereafter. I speak 
with the liberty and authority of my office. I come not 
unbidden before you ; I intrude not on the retirement of 
grief. But you call me hither ; and, as a messenger from 
my Heavenly Master, I stand before you, and plead against 
this your precipitate judgment of your fellow-man. ' If thou. 
Lord, shouldst mark iniquity, O Lord, who should stand ? ' 
To Him all things are known, even our most secret sins ; 
quite forgotten, it may be, by ourselves ; unknown to any 
living ; but marked and remembered by Him ! all seen by 
the unsleeping Eye ! " 



238 NOW AND THEN. 

The Earl remained silent ; his face suddenly went of a 
ghastly whiteness. 

Mr Hylton proceeded : — ^' Awful is this visitation of his 
Providence — like a thunderbolt hath it fallen upon you. 
Humble yourself under the mighty hand of God ! Think 
not of vengeance, which is His, and He will repay it ! How 
know you His object in all this? or the cause of it? That 
there is some deep mystery hanging over this fearfid 
occurrence, I in my conscience do believe. It may be one 
never to be solved on this side of the grave," proceeded Mr 
Hylton, who/eZ^ that his words were sinking into the heart 
of the agitated listener. " I have myself reason to suspect 
— perhaps to fear — that something strange and solemn may 
yet come forth from all this ; yet to me all is now darkness. 
]\Iy Lord, I ask your pardon, I did not hear what your Lord- 
ship said," continued Mr Hylton, observing that the Earl 
asked him some question. 

" I know not, sir," said he in a low subdued tone of voice, 
and with a strange apprehensive expression of countenance, 
^' what you wish to convey to me. What do you mean, 
sir ? What are you alluding to ? " 

He paused, and Mr Hylton remained silent, from several 
considerations. 

" Did you, sir," said, presently, the Earl, " send Captain 
Lutteridge to me as an emissary to torment me, and" — he 
stopped, evidently suifering under strong emotion. 

" My Lord, I did not send Captain Lutteridge hither ; he 
proposed it himself: he refused, from a scruple of honour, to 
disclose some matter which yet he said had happened, or, if 



NOW AND THEN. 239 

I understood aright, something that had been said at your 
Lordship's banqueting-table before " — 

" Have you seen him, sir, since your return?" said the 
Earl faintly. 

'' I have, my Lord." 

^' And what said he?" 

" That he had seen your Lordship ; and he simply refused 
to give me any information whatever, or to give me any 
cause for his withholding it." 

The Earl sighed heavily. " And tell me, sir, did you 
found on any thing that had fallen from him, any plea urged 
before the Chief Justice ? " 

" My Lord, I was forced to quit Milverstoke " — 

^' I know, I know that, sir. But give me an answer ! 
Give me, sir, an answer to my question ! — candid and true, 
I know from your character, that such answer will be." 

" I repeat, my Lord, that time pressed upon me, I may 
say, mortally. I saw the Captain but for a short time ; he 
refused to tell me aught that had passed at your Lordship's 
table, without your Lordship's express permission, which 
he said he would get refused, or granted, before I quitted 
for London ; but, to my infinite concern, the coach came 
before he did, and I quitted by it, or my mission had been 
useless. Under these difficulties, my Lord" — the Earl 
listened with agonising earnestness — " I did most undoubt- 
edly say to my Lord Chief Justice solely this, that I might 
possibly be able, hereafter, to show him some reasons for 
the Lord Alkmond's having quitted the banqueting-table, to 
go into the wood as he did ; but I mentioned not names nor 



240 KOW AND THEN. 

places, least of all those of your Lordship ; neither did I in 
any way suggest or insinuate them." 

The Earl eyed him all the while that he was saying this 
gloomily. " Do you, Mr Hylton," said he, " believe Lord 
Milverstoke, when he asserts or denies^any thing ? " 

" Most absolutely, as I would that your Lordship would 
so beheve me." 

" Then, sir, I tell you that I verily believe it to be 
beyond all question, that the biief conversation which Cap- 
tain Lutteridge represents as having taken place at my 
table, had no connexion whatsoever with the frightful occur- 
rence which has reduced me to — that which you see before 
you. Yet, sir, would I not have such matters talked of, 
giving occasion, as possibly they might, to vulgar scandal 
and gossip, and offensive and hurtful speculation and won- 
dering. But, sir, is it possible that the Chief Justice laid 
stress on such matter ; and founded upon it, in any degree, 
his respite?" 

" I know not, my Lord, for he said not ; he told me 
with a face which, ever since, I have seen frowning before 
me, that he was all against me ! and that, in a manner, I 
took the proffered respite at my peril — on peril, that is, of 
making the prisoner twice die." 

" Think not, sir, from what I have said in this matter," 
said the Earl, with an exhausted air, " that I consent to this 
foolish respite ; I think it a foul perversion of justice, and 
of most horrid example ! " 

" I was hoping, my Lord, that milder and better thoughts 
were rising up hi your mind !" 



NOW AND THEN. 241 

" Draw not false consequences, sir, from appearances. 
Methinks I seem calmer than when we met ; but, believe me, 
sir, my heart seems dead within me, and my mind may 
perish at any instant. I feel my soul failing me. Things 
that you know not, revived by what you have been saying, 
are well-nigh maddening me : I can now no longer think or 
talk. Leave me, Mr Hylton; but be assured, my will is 
inflexible, my judgment unconvinced — utterly untouched by 
any thing that you have urged," 

" Still would I ask your Lordship to listen to the other 
ground on which I pressed my precarious suit with the Chief 
Justice. My Lord, I have reason to believe that — without 
desiring to impute any thing of wilful misconduct to one of 
the principal witnesses, he was seriously mistaken, at least, 
in attributing to the prisoner that which he has ever strenu- 
ously disclaimed — ill blood to your Lordship, or any mem- 
ber of your family. That witness stated that this unhappy 
man, and even his father, had long entertained malignant 
feelings towards yom^ Lordship." 

" So they have, sir! I know it!" interrupted the Earl, 
fiercely ; " but why am I to be dragged into these matters? 
Am I to sit in judgment on every paltry perversion of 
proved facts, subsequently thought of by the condemned and 
his friends ? No more of it, sir ! No more of it, sir ! I will 
hear nothing ; blood glares before my eyes ! the cry of it is 
in my ears ! Leave me ! leave me, sir ! and pursue, if you will, 
your insane efforts to cheat the gallows finally of its prey ! 
— to bring again to Milverstoke your injured, your pious 
parishioner ! Oh ! it is maddening ! Sir, I would be alone ! " 

E 



242 NOW AND THEN. 

^' I take my leave then, my Lord, thus Laden with your 
bitter, but I feel unjust, reproaches ; my conscience being- 
clear and void of offence to God and man, and dictating my 
duty. That duty I must and will do, my Lord, caring for 
consequences nothing whatever." 

" Good even, sir, good even !" interrupted the Earl, 
impetuously, and with a miserable countenance ; and bowing 
in silence, Mr Hylton withdrew, greatly oppressed; 
inwardly bewailing the Earl's sufferings, but more his 
unchristian temper ; desponding for the issue of his own 
enterprise of mercy and justice, but with no trace of 
exasperation or irritation for the many harsh expressions 
and imputations which had been levelled at him by the 
proud, infm-iate peer. 

That night slept good Mr Hylton in deep, sweet sleep, 
forgetful of all things — alike of bodily fatigue, of mental 
anxiety, and the bitter, impassioned reproaches to which he 
had listened, with manly and Christian forbearance, just 
before retiring to rest. Him they disturbed not sleeping, 
whom, when awake, they had not provoked to forgetfulness 
of whose Minister and servant he was ; whose work he had 
to do ; whom he had hereafter to appear before, and show 
how that work had been done ! 

It cannot be exactly told how it came to pass, but there 
seemed a sort of tacit miderstanding, that evening, among the 
leading inhabitants of Milverstoke, that they should confer 
together on the matter of the respite ; and one by one they 
di'opped into the parlour (a large, yet snug and simple- 
fashioned one it was) of the Blind Hound — for so had the 



NOW AND THEN. 243 

inn at Milverstoke been immemorially called, owing to an 
ancient tradition in the Milverstoke family. While Mr 
Hylton was engaged in his exciting interview with the 
gloomy lord of the Castle, the parlour of the Blind Hound 
was well-nigh filled. The doctor had felt it his duty to call 
upon the churchwarden, Mr Wigley, a man whom he had 
most thoroughly cured at least a fortnight before, and who 
being somewhat, it might possibly be, imprudently, at the 
Blind Hound, thither vigilantly followed him the doctor ; 
and they two were incontinently joined by at least six or 
eight others. 

" There's no getting over the blood on coat and stick — 
there oughtn't to be, and therefore there can't, and so there's 
the end of all that^ Mr Wigley," said, in a peremptory 
and authoritative tone, Mr Glynders, the farrier, whose 
professional services were often required at the Castle. 

"Well, nay now, say I; nay, saving your better 
knowledge, Mr Glynders," quoth Mr Wigley — a most 
devoted admirer of the parson's — " why may it not be true, 
as the poor man said at the trial, that he did stumble in fright 
over a body that had been murdered by another?" 

" Pho ! so would get off every murderer," replied Mr 
Glynders haughtily. '• I stand with my Lord Chief Justice, 
and he said 'twas all gammon, and quite impossible to be 
true; and he was right !" 

" Why," said Mr Muddle, a small farmer, very modestly, 
" saving your presence, Mr Glynders, I do remember some- 
thing that, if you please, I will mention. Do you, gentle- 
men, any of you recollect Nick Gould having me up at 



244 NOW AND THEN. 

Sessions, two years ago, for an assault? He showed the 
Justices a sliirt of his, with blood on the neck and ^mst, and 
swore I did it with my fist, when nobody else was by : he was 
believed, and I fined. I, knowing all the while it was a cruel 
and false lie, and perjury — for I fetched no blood, striking 
him only on the shoulder, and kicking him elsewhere (as I 
would again, were he to do again what he then did,) — 
hows'cver, I paid the money, and be hanged to him ; and, 
three months afterwards, over his cups one night, he owned 
the blood was that of a pig he'd killed just before ! " 

" Now why can't it be so here, Mr Gljaiders? " said Mr 
Wigley, replenishmg his pipe, — " answer that." 

'' Because it canH — that's flat," replied Glynders dogma- 
tically. 

" Alas ! Mr Wigley," said the doctor, " though I'm a bit 
shaken about this case, I don't see how that matter of Mr 
^luddle squares with this — seeing that there it was merely 
pig's blood, and none of man, at all ; whereas here, ' tis 
owned by Ayliffe to be the blood of poor Lord Alkmond 
past all dispute; so there's no likeness between the two 
cases." 

" Yes, to be sure, that is so ; and what I was going to say, 
doctor," said Mr Glynders. " So now you've had your 
say. Muddle ; and a pretty one 'tis ! " 

Mr Muddle modestly went on smoking in silence, inwardly- 
owning that he was quite vanquished, but not distinctly 
seeing how that had been effected by Mr Glynders. Here 
there was a pause. 

" I wonder," said the doctor, " what any one of us would 



NOW AND THEN. 245 

have done had he been In AylifFe's place — gone to do as he 
said he did— and, stick in hand, lit on the bloody body ? " 

" I should have tried to revive him, or see if he were 
really dead," said one. 

" I should have hollo'd out. Murder ! " quoth another. 

" So should I," said a third. 

" I should have shouted, and run for help " — 

''I should have hstened for steps," said several in a 
breath. 

" And suppose," said Mr Wigley, " you'd heard some 
one coming after you while you were running, and had 
suddenly thought how ugly and black it might seem against 
you— adad, if I'd thought of all that, I'm thinking I should 
have done as Ayliffe did, and been glad enough to get clean 
out on't." 

" And a stick, with blood on it, in your hand, too, would 
be a nice companion to get home and be caught with," 
quoth Glynders. 

" Nay, nay, you're too hard on poor Ayliffe," said one. 

" Suppose he'd thrown the stick away, and it had been 
found bloody ; wouldn't that have been worse ?" 

No one answered this, for it seemed so convincing ; till 
Mr Muddle somewhat timidly said, '' No ; why, it might be 
said some one else had done it, with Ayliffe's stick !" 

Here was another pause : whereupon, " You see, gentle- 
men," said Mr Glynders, dignifiedly, ^' how wrong you all 
get, when once you go beyond my Lord Chief Justice and 
the jury. Depend on't they're always right, or it's no use 
having judge and jury." 



240* NOW AND THEN. 

" That which troubles me most in the businesSj" said the 
doctor, " is what all this has brought on poor old AylifFe 
and young Mrs AylifFe : better people never lived in this 
coimtry, that ever I heard of; and as for the old man, he's 
brought up his family better than most of us." 

'' Well, no one says he^s done any thing wrong, and 
much is he to be pitied," said Mr Glynders ; " yet 'tis 
proved he had a terrible grudge against my Lord and hisy 

^^What!" said Mr Wigley, ''old Adam AylifFe !— my 
life on't, 'tis false !" And all present but Glynders eagerly 
echoed his words. '' Never did AylifFe do hurt to any man, 
woman, child, beast, bird, or any livuig thing." 

" By the way, sir," interposed Mr Wigley, addressing 
the doctor, " how comes on poor Mrs AylifFe — is she likely 
to get over it?" 

" No, I fear not ; the illness that she was in, from the 
sudden fright, brought her direct to the grave's edge, and 
there she has been ever since : a single puff may blow her 
in, as it were !" 

" So is it with the Lady Alkmond, at the Castle, as I 
surely hear," said Mr Glynders, somewhat sternly ; " and 
what can signify Adam Ayliffe's wife, to that poor Lady?" 

'' Make not comparisons, Mr Glynders, I beseech you !" 
said the doctor — who had been himself occasionally in 
attendance on Lady Alkmond, in addition to two physicians, 
one of them of great eminence from London, and another 
from the neighbouring town, and the resident family phy- 
sician. " Surely God hath afflicted both, and the one is as 
innocent, and as much to be pitied, as the other." 



NOW AND THEN. 247 

" What ! where the one's husband — bless the poor Lady — 
died unjustly, and the other's will die justly ?" 

Here was a pause. 

" I wonder what my Lord Milverstoke says to all this ! " 
exclaimed one ; and added, addressing Mr Glynders, " What 
say you, Mr Glynders ? we should like to hear ! " 

" I never mention what happens at the Castle," he re- 
plied impressively. '' But thus much I may say — his 
Lordship desires only the thing that is right to be done ; 
which is, that this man, AylifFe, should suffer !" 

'^ 'Tis a dreadful thing to hear one's self told, with one's 
own ears, that one's body's to be dissected and anatomised ! " 
said one ; and there was a perceptible shudder throughout 
the room. 

'•'• I hope it won't come to that," said the doctor mildly ; 
" but if the thing is to be, why, I must say," — he paused 
suddenly, and added, in a different voice — " it surely does 
not signify much — does it ? — what is to become of the shell, 
if the kernel's safe : and I think I know," he continued, 
dropping his voice to a lower tone, " those who will have 
the anatomising of poor Ayliffe ! for what must be must 
be, and there's no use mincing things, is there ?" he asked, 
looking round with a melancholy shake of the head. But 
every face looked blank — no one answered ; for before the 
disturbed mind's eye of each, arose the dismal object of a 
skeleton — the skeleton of one whom all of them had fami- 
liarly known for years as a man frank, good-natured, high- 
spirited, ready to oblige every body, of spotless character 
till this questionable charge, and who, while they were 



248 NOW AND THEN. 

talking, lay, as It were, alive in death — liis manly limbs 
heavily ironed, his heart broken. 

" There's a deal of work to be done this next few days 
by those who have got this respite, isn't there?" said one. 

" It will all come to nothing, you'll find, this that was 
heard of, about a man seen running away," said another. 
" I suppose it's that which gained the respite ; but those 
must be sharp who have the catching of that same man 
during the fortnight. I should like to know what said the 
King on the subject, when Mr Hylton saw his Majesty ?" 

" He never saw the King — not he," said Mr Glynders, 
somewhat sneeringly. 

" Didn't he!'''' echoed Mr Wigley confidently, and some- 
what peremptorily ; for he being churchwarden, and in 
frequent communication with Mr Hylton on parish business, 
and indeed on many other matters, felt that he had a right 
to appear better informed than others, of his movements ; 
and the grander they appeared, the more elevating, of 
course, to Mr Wigley. His significant "Didn't he!" 
seemed conclusive ; and after some other conversation of a 
general nature, the party was about to break up, when the 
landlord announced that Mr Hylton had just called, on 
horseback, as he passed, to inquire whether Mr Wigley 
were there ; and on learning that he was, had ridden on, 
leaving word for him to come at once to the parsonage, as 
Mr Hylton had something to say to him. Mr Wigley, on 
hearing this, looked important, yet changed colour a little ; 
and all present silently gave him credit for being as high 
in the counsels of the Vicar as he had been intimating. 



NOW AND THEN. 249 

And to be sure, shortly afterwards, Mr Hylton, all fatigued 
and depressed in body and mind as he was, gave ]\Ir 
Wigley half an hour's audience ; and then put him upon 
making many inquiries, early in the ensuing day, concer- 
ning a point connected with the great murder case, which Mr 
Wigley inwardly wondered had never before happened to 
occur to any of the very astute party at the Blind Hound. 
His ears also tingled a little at a chance-word falling from 
Mr Hylton, which dissipated into thin air the notion of his 
having seen the King on the matter : but that good Mr 
Wigley perhaps justly deemed unnecessary to be again 
alluded to elsewhere — and besides, seeing the King's minis- 
ter personally, was, after all, in a general way, exceedingly 
like seeing the King himself. 



2-^0 KOW AND THEN. 



CHAPTER XI. 

The first thing that Mr Hjlton did, in the morning, was 
to attempt to follow up the inquiries suggested by the 
mysterious letter from the mate of the Mornmg Star : 
taking such means as occurred to him, to ascertain whether 
any one living near the sea-shore had noticed any thing- 
unusual on the eventful night in question ; or any thing 
which, when originally observed, might have appeared un- 
important, yet, on being now minutely inquired into, might 
become of pregnant significance. Then his thoughts directed 
themselves, in his dire dilemma and perplexity, towards a 
question which he dared hardly even propose to himself : — 
Could any one have had any imaginable MOTIVE for killing 
Lord Alkmond? Scarcely venturing to follow up the 
shadowy possibility, yet led on irresistibly by the vague 
and mysterious character of what might have taken place 
at, or immediately after, the banquet on that fatal evening — 
he thought within himself, as he stood in his Httle library, 
" Had the unfortunate young nobleman, in an unguarded 
and guilty hour, yielded to headlong passions, and lit up in 
the hearts of others the fires of intense and unappeasable 



NOW AND THEN. 251 

malignity and revenge? But, indeed, how could that 
degrading suspicion be entertained in the case of a young 
nobleman, situated as he was — more es23ecially at that par- 
ticular period — coming down at a season of exulting family 
festivity, accompanied by his beautiful Viscountess, and his 
cherished little son and heir ? Had, nevertheless," for Mr 
Hylton felt such an awful sense of responsibihty upon him 
as compelled him to do with his might what his hand had 
undertaken to do — and to let no false delicacy, no improba- 
bility even, however glaring at first sight — prevent him from 
exhausting every possible supposition — "had Lord Alkmond 
so far forgotten himself, in a moment of hcentiousness, in a 
temporary God-forgetting recklessness, as to incur the blast- 
ing guilt of ruining female virtue, and turning into fiends 
those interested in protecting or avenging it ? If not at, or 
near, Milverstoke, had such miserable occurrence happened 
elsewhere : and had the bloodthirsty avenger tracked his 
unsuspecting steps, and lain in wait for him ? Why was 
Lord Alkmond at all in the woods at such an hour on such 
an occasion ?" Mr Hylton almost started in trepidation- at 
the possibilities which he was conjuring up around him— 
the fearful figures with which he was peopling his disturbed 
and morbidly active fancy. For that something had occurred, 
and of a very peculiar nature, was evident from what little 
had dropped from Captain Lutteridge and the Earl himself ; 
the latter being — and, indeed having owned himself — greatly 
distressed and agitated about the matter, and having per- 
emptorily forbidden both Captain Lutteridge and Mr Hylton 
to utter a syllable about it to any one. 



252 NOW AND THEN. 

'^ But let me not," said Mr Hylton, almost aloud, ^' let me 
not wrong the noble and innocent dead, in order to protect 
even the wronged, and innocent, and mortally-endangered 
living ! To the winds with such injurious and cruel suspi- 
cions !'' Yet, struggle as he might, he could not quit the 
dismal train of thought into which he had seemed forced ; 
and his speculations received a fresh impetus, on its sud- 
denly occurring to him, that he had heard of the young 
Lord's having been, for some time shortly previous to the 
fatal occurrence, in low and troubled spirits ; and Captain 
Lutteridge had distinctly told him that, whatever was the 
subject which had been introduced into the conversation, it 
had distm-bed Lord Alkmond to a pitch that was absolutely 
intolerable, and he had been, apparently, incapacitated from 
presenting himself, at least till after some interval, intended 
for recovering his spirits, in the ball-room. Into the woods 
he had gone, and to a considerable distance from the 
Castle ; and he could not have been long absent, before 
being murdered by the hand of frightfully ferocious violence. 
Had the fatal blow been stiaick by the persons who were 
represented as having been seen imnning alone the shore ? 
and had they intended to slay Lord Alkmond? or had 
they mistaken him for some other person ? If so, /or icliom ? 
Had his Lordship unexpectedly encountered poachers, and, 
owing to his dress, in the gloom of the night, been con- 
founded with some obnoxious keeper ? Or had he, Avith the 
spirit of a soldier, endeavoured to resist and capture any 
person, and been suddenly felled to the earth by some one 
behind? Or — honid thought, haunting Mr Hylton in spite 



NOW AND THEN. 253 

of all that had occurred m the condemned cell — had, as 
suggested by the Lord Chief Justice, the blow been really 
struck by Ayliffe, under the belief that he was inflicting it 
on Hundle, the perfidious informer against him ? Or was it 
possible that Lord Alkmond had gone out into the wood hy 
ap2^ointment — a supposition that seemed to the last degree 
improbable. With whom ? For what ? And at such an 
hour, and on such an occasion ? If Ayliffe had gone into 
the wood in the way which he had represented, how knew 
he that Hundle would be there ? And had Hundle been 
there that night ? After being long tormented by these and 
many other perplexing conjectures, Mr Hylton anxiously 
asked himself the question — whether, if, at the fortnight's 
end, the case should stand as it did at that moment, he could 
then offer any valid reason whatever, why the sentence of 
the law should not be carried into effect ? For what would 
there, in such case, be, to extricate Ayliffe from the rational 
presumption arising out of his appalling proximity to the 
deed, in point of both time and place, as had been estab- 
lished to demonstration — but his own unsupported asser- 
tions ? Would there be really doubt enough to warrant a 
further suspension of the sentence? Mr Hylton sighed, and in- 
wardly answered in the negative. Had he, then, been guilty 
of precipitation ? For surely very guilty would be such pre- 
cipitation : and of that guilt all would convict him, however 
unjustly, by the adverse issue of his exertions. Alas ! if he 
had nourished hopes but to be blighted ! How heavy and 
thankless his responsibility ! Accused on every side : by the 



254 NOW AND THEN. 

prisoner, and all who pitied and wished him well ; by Lord 
]^.lilverstoke, and those interested in the prosecution ; by 
tlie public, roused on behalf of justice ! 

Greatly disturbed was he by these doubts and fears ; yet 
he felt consoled by the conscious purity of his motives, his 
perfect disinterestedness. Xay, was he not acting directly 
against his ow^n worldly interests, in thus making a mortal 
enemy of the Earl of Milverstoke ? This last, however, was 
a consideration which gave him not an instant's concern. 
And for the rest, he had from the first besought, and con- 
tinued faithfully to seek, the aid of heaven, and its guidance 
in all his doings ; w^herefore he felt a supporting conscious- 
ness of being engaged upon his duty, resolved to shrink 
from no suiFenng or sacrifice, whether foreseen or not ; to 
leave no effort untried: to tuork luJuIe it teas day; for the 
night came in which no man might ivorh. 

He felt an almost insuperable repugnance to visiting poor 
Ayliffe, during the pendency of these critical proceedings. 
What questions might he not ask? — questions, the not 
answering of which might prove as fatally delusive as the 
answering disingenuously ; and as to equivocation of any 
sort, under any circumstances, it was a thing impossible to 
Mr Hylton — least of all, as a minister of religion, and 
towards a death-doomed fellow-creature. And with refer- 
ence to Mr Hylton's present object, w^hat useful information 
had he to expect from Aylifi"e ? There seemed but one sub- 
ject on w^hich Mr Hylton could w^ith any advantage ques- 
tion him : and yet, when considered, how ineffectually. 



NOW AND THEN. 255 

whatever might be the answer ! — and that was, concerning 
the reason which AylifFe had had for expecting to meet 
with Hundle in the wood, on the particular night when he 
went thither. But, as the case stood, what signified that 
reason, however satisfactory and conclusive ? except, indeed, 
as tending to negative the notion that he had gone thither 
with any feelings of hostility towards Lord Alkmond, whom, 
nevertheless, he might have mistaken for the object of his 
own particular vengeance. But Mr Hylton received one 
brief message from the unhappy occupant of the condemned 
cell, which no man, least of all such an one as Mr Hylton, 
could disregard ! — " I go back into darkness while you are 
away!" 

On this, ^' Poor soul ! " said Mr Hylton, ordering his 
horse, '' I will quickly be with thee ! " 

As he rode along, his mind lost sight almost entirely of 
the temporal in the spiritual, the present in the future 
interests of the condemned ; and by the time that he had 
reached the gaol, his mind was in an elevated frame, befit- 
ting the solemn and sublime considerations with which it 
had been engaged. 

A turnkey, with loaded blunderbuss on his arm, leaned 
against the cell door, which he opened for Mr Hylton in 
silence, as he approached — disclosing poor Ayliife sitting on 
his bench, double-ironed, his head buried in his hands, his 
elbows supported by his knees. He did not move on the 
entrance of Mr Hylton, as his name had not been mentioned 
by the turnkey. 

"Adam! Adam! — the Lord be with thee! Amen!" 



256 NOW AND THEN. 

exclaimed Mr Hylton, gently taking in his hand one of the 
prisoner's. 

AylifFe suddenly started up, a gaunt figure, rattling dis- 
mally in his irons ; and grasping, in both his hands, that of 
Mr Hylton, carried it to his heart, to which he pressed it 
for some moments in silence, and then, bursting into tears, 
sunk again on his bench. 

" God bless thee, Adam ! and lift up tlie light of His 
countenance upon thee ! Put thy tinist in him : but remem- 
ber that He is the All-Seeing, the Omniscient, Omnipotent 
God, who is of purer eyes than to hehold iniquity!^'' 

AylifFe wept in silence, and, with reverent affection of 
manner, pressed to his lips the still-retained hand of Mr 
Hylton. 

" Come, Adam ! speak ! Speak to your pastor — your 
friend — your minister ! " 

" You seem an angel, sir!" said Ayliffe, looking at him 
with a dull, oppressed eye, that was heartbreaking. 

" Why an angel, Adam ? I bring you," said Mr Hylton, 
shaking his head, and sighing, '' no earthly good news 
whatever ; nothing but my unworthy offices to prepare you 
for hereafter ! Prepare!" continued Mr Hylton, with an 
awful solemnity, '' prepare to meet thy God, for He draweth 
near ! And who may abide the day of His coming ! " 

" I was readier for my change when last I saw you, sir, 
than now," said Ayliffe, with a suppressed groan, covering 
his face with his manacled hands. 

" How is that, poor Adam?" 

'' Ah ! good sir ! I was, so it seemed, half over Jordan, 



NOW AND THEN. 257 

and have been dragged back. I see not, now, that other 
bright shore, which made me forget earth ! All now is 
dark!" 

His words smote Mr Hylton to the heart. ^' Why is 
this? Why should it be? Adam!" said he, earnestly, 
''have you ever been, can you possibly ever be, out of 
God's hands? What happens but from God? And if 
He hath prolonged this your bitter, bitter trial, what should 
you, what can you do, but submit to His infinite power and 
goodness? He doth not afflict unlUngly^ nor grieve the 
cMldren of men^ to crush under his feet all the jprisoners of 
the earth! He will not cast off for ever; hut though he 
cause grief yet will He have compassion according to the 
multitude of his mercies .^ " 

"Oh, sir ! oft do I think his mercy is clean gone for 
ever ! Why — why am I here ?" he continued, with sudden 
vehemence. " He knoweth my innocence — yet will make 
me die the death of the gniilty? That cannot, cannot be 
just!" 

" Adam ! " said Mr Hylton, earnestly, " Satan is indeed 
besieging you ! Even if, in the inscrutable decrees of Pro- 
vidence, you be ordained to die for what you did not, have 
you forgotten that sublime and awful truth and fact, on 
which depend all your hopes — the death of Him who died, 
the just^ for the unjust f " 

Ayliffe's head sunk down on his knees. 

"Ah, sir!" said he, tremulously, after a pause, during 
which Mr Hylton had not interfered with his meditations, 



258 NOW AND THEN. 

" those words do drive me into the dust, and then raise me 
again higher than I was before ! " 

" And so, verily, they ought, Adam ! Is there a God? 
Has He really revealed himself to us? Are the Scriptures 
true ? Am I the true servant of a true master ? If to all 
this you say yea^ speak not again distrustfully. If you do, 
if you so think, then are you too like to be beyond the pale of 
mercy. I am free, Adam, — you are bound,— yet are both 
our lives every instant at the command and absolute disposal 
of Him who gave them, that we might be on trial here for 
a little while. For aught I know, I may even yet die 
before you, and with greater pain and grief; but both of us 
must surely die, and much of my life is gone for ever. As 
your frail fellow-mortal, then, I beseech you to hsten to me ! 
Our mode of leaving life is ordered by God, even as our 
mode of entering into, and living in it. To some He hath 
ordained riches, others poverty ; to some pleasure, others 
misery, in this life ; but all for reasons, and with objects 
best known, nay, known only to Himself ! Adam, you have 
now been four days here beyond that which had been ap- 
pointed you : now that we are alone, have you aught to 
confide to me, as the muiister for whom you have sent? 
What saith my Master? If you confess your sins. He is 
faithful and just to forgive you ; but if you say that you 
have no sin, you deceive yourself, and the truth is not in 
you. And if that last be so, Adam, what shall be said of 
you, what can be hoped for you ? " 

" If you be thinking, sir, of that deed for which I am 



NOW AND THEN. 2r)9 

condemned," said Ayliffe, with a suddenly radiant coun- 
tenance, " then am I easy and happy. God, my maker, 
and who will be my judge, knoweth whether I speak the 
truth. Ay ! ay ! I am as innocent of this deed as you 



are: 



! " 



" It is right, Adam, that I should tell you, that all man- 
kind who know of your case, from the highest down even to 
the lowest, do believe you guilty." 

"Ah, sir, is not that hard to bear ? " said Ayliffe, with a 
grievous sigh, and a countenance that looked anguish un- 
speakable, and insupportable. 

" It is, Adam — it is hard ; yet, were it harder, it must be 
borne. Here is Lord Milverstoke, who hath lost his son, 
his only son, the heir to his title and his vast possessions — 
lost him in this mysterious and horrid way : is not that hard 
to be borne ? And now, Adam, — I ask you by your precious 
hopes of hereafter, — do you bear animosity towards him 
who believes you to be his son's murderer? " 

There was an awful silence for nearly a minute, at the 
close of which Ayliffe, with an anguished face, said, 

" Oh, sir ! give me time to answer you ! Pray for me ! 
I know whose example I ought to imitate; but " — he sud- 
denly seemed to have sunk into a reverie, which lasted for 
some time ; at the end of which, — " sir — Mr Hylton," said 
he, desperately, " am I truly to die on Monday week ? Oh, 
tell me ! tell me, sir ! Life is sweet, I own ! " 

He spmng towards Mr Hylton, and convulsively grasped 
his hands, looking into his face with frenzied earnestness. 

'' I cannot — I will not deceive you, Adam," repHed Mr 



260 NOW AND THEN. 

Hylton, looking aside, and with a profound sigh. " My 
duty is to prepare you for death ; but '• — 

^' Ah ! " said he witli a desperate air, '^ I am to be hanged 
like a vile dog ! — and every one cursing me, who am all 
the wliile innocent ! — and no burial service to be said over 
my poor body! — never — iiever to be buried!" With a 
dismal groan he sunk back, and would have fallen from the 
bench, but for Mr Hylton's stepping forward. " Sir — sir," 
said AylifFe presently, glaring with sudden wildness, " did 
you see the man at the door, with the blunderbuss ? There 
he stands ! all day ! all night ! but never comes in !— 
never speaks! Would that he would put it to my head 
and finish me in a moment !" 

" Adam ! Adam ! what awful language is this that I 
hear?" said Mr Hylton sternly. "Is this the way that 
you have spoken to your pious and venerable father?" 

"No! no! no! sir!" — he pressed his hand to his fore- 
head — " but my poor head wanders ! I — I am better now ! 
I seem just to have come out of a horrible dream. But I 
should never di-eam thus, if you would stay with me — till — 
all is over!" 

Feeling it quite impossible then to ask the miserable convict 
such questions as he had wished, Mr Hylton resolved not to 
make the attempt, but to do it as prudently and as early as 
might be, through old AylifFe, or the chaplain or governor 
of the gaol. He was just about to leave, and was con- 
sidering in what terms he could most effectually address 
himself to Ayliffe, when, without any summons having 
issued from within, the door was unlocked, and the turnkey, 



NOW AND THEN. 261 

thrusting in his head, said, " I say, my man, here's the 
woman come with thy child, that thou'st been asking for. 
They'll be let in when the gentleman goes." 

Ayliffe started up from his seat with an eager motion 
towards the door, but was suddenly jerked down again, 
having forgotten, in his momentary ecstasy, that his irons 
were attached to a staple in the floor. 

" Come, come, my man," said the turnkey sternly, '^ thou 
must be a bit quieter, I can tell thee, if this child is to come 
to thee." 

" Give me the lad ! give me the lad ! give me the lad ! " 
said Ayliffe, in a hoarse whisper, his eyes straining towards 
the approaching figure of the good woman, who, with a 
sorrowful and apprehensive look, now came in sight of the 
condemned man. 

"Lord bless thee, Adam Ayliffe!" she began, bursting 
into tears : " Lord love thee and protect thee, Adam 1" 

" Give me the lad! — show me the lad!" he continued 
staling at her, while she trembHngly pushed aside her red 
cloak ; and, behold, there lay in her arms, simply and de- 
cently clad, his little boy, awake, and gazmg, apparently 
apprehensively, at the strange wild figure whose arms 
were extended to receive it. 

" Adam, father of this thy dear child," said Mr Hylton, 
in a soothing manner, interposing for a moment between 
Ayliffe and the child, not without some alarm, " wilt thou 
handle it tenderly, remembering how feeble and small it is ? " 
On this poor Ayliffe turned to Mr Hylton with a face of 
unutterable agony, weeping lamentably ; and still extend- 



262 NOW AND THEN. 

ing his arms, the passive child, eyeing him in timid silence, 
was placed within them. He sat down gently, gazing at 
his child for some moments, with a face never to be forgot- 
ten by those who saw it. Then he brought it near to his 
face, and kissed incessantly, but with imspeakable tender- 
ness, its tiny features, which were quickly bedewed with a 
father's tears. 

"His mother! — Oh, his mother! — his mother!" he ex- 
claimed, in heart-rending tones, still gazing intently at the 
child's face, which was directed towards his own with evi- 
dent apprehension. Its little hand for a moment clasped 
one of the cold irons that bound its father, but removed it 
immediately. The father, seeing this, seemed grievously 
agitated for some moments ; and Mr Hylton, who also had 
observed the circumstance, was greatly affected, and turned 
aside his head. After a while, 

" How easily, my little lad, could I dash out thy brains 
against these irons," said Ayliffe, in a low desperate tone 
of voice, staring wildly into the child's face, " and save thee 
from ever coming to this unjust fate that thy father hath !" 

Mr Hylton was excessively alarmed, but concealed his 
feelings, preparing, nevertheless, for some perilous and 
insane action of the prisoner's, endangering the safety of the 
child. The gathering cloud, however, passed away, and 
the manacled father kissed his imconscious child, with all 
his former tenderness. 

" They'll tell thee, poor lad, that I was a murderer ! 
though it be false as hell!" muttered Ayliffe, fiercely — 
" They'll shout after thee, ^ There goes the murderer's 



NOW AND THEN. 263 

son ! '" He paused — and tlien with a sudden start, said in 
a hollow tone—" There will be no grave for thee or thy 
mother to come and cry over ! " 

" Adam," said Mr Hylton, very anxiously, " weary not 
thyself thus— alarm not this poor child, by thus yielding to 
fear and despair; but rather, if it can remember what 
passeth here this day, may its thoughts be of thy love, and 
of thy gentleness and piety ! If it be the will of God that 
thou must die, and that unjustly, as far as men are con- 
cerned. He will watch over and provide for this little soul, 
whom He, foreseeing its fate, sent into the world." 

Ayliffe lifted up the child with trembling arms, and 
pressed its cheeks to his lips. The little creature did not 
cry, nor appear likely to do so, but appeared the image of 
mute apprehension. The whole scene was so painful, that 
Mr Hylton was not sorry when the governor of the gaol 
approached, to intimate that the interview must cease. The 
prisoner, exhausted with violent excitement, quietly sur- 
rendered his child to his attendant, and then silently grasped 
the hand of Mr Hylton, who thereupon quitted the cell, 
the door of which was immediately locked upon its miserable 
occupant — who was once again alone ! 

The inquiries which Mr Hylton had caused to be set on 
foot, with reference to Hundle, proved to be unproductive. 
What, indeed, had been the precise object which Mr Hyl- 
ton had proposed to himself in making them, beyond 
partially corroborating the statements made by Ayliffe 
himself at the trial, and whenever he had been interrogated 
on the subject, that he really had had reason to believe 



264 NOW AND THEN. 

that Hundle was to be in the woods, on tlie evening when 
AjlifFe had gone to He in wait for him ? When questioned 
on the subject, the prisoner said that he had ascertained the 
intended visit of Hundle, by happening to overhear a con- 
versation between him and another, both of whom had 
agreed to be in the wood in quest of game, as Ayhffe under- 
stood, on the memorable evening in question ; and it had 
unhappily occurred to AylifFe, that this would afford him a 
fitting opportunity, not only of severely chastising Himdle, 
but of subjecting him to the severe penalties of the law 
against poaching, by detecting and capturing him in the 
very act. Mr Hylton secretly hoped that Hundle might 
have absconded in consequence of Ayliife's statements at 
the tnal ; but when Mr Wigley rode over to the village 
where the man resided, for the purpose of making the 
desired inquiries concernmg him, he was found engaged in 
his ordinary employment of a farmer's day labourer, one 
which it seemed that he had never suspended since the 
disastrous occuiTence which had led to the inquiry. He 
totally denied, and with an astonished ah' which impressed 
his interrogator, that he had ever made any such arrange- 
ment for going to the wood as had been alleged by Ayliffe, 
or that he had ever dreamed of doing so ; and declared 
that he was at liis own cottage during the whole of the 
evening in question, as his mother also emphatically affii'med. 
He admitted that he had acted a shabby and cruel part 
towards Ayliffe about the hare, but pleaded the distress of 
himself and his mother ; and, when asked how he could 
have supposed that one in such circumstances as those of 



NOW AND THEN. 2G5 

AylifFe, could possibly pay any portion of the expected 
fine, said that he had heard of Ayliffe's having high friends, 
who would not see him in trouble for a pound or two ; and 
mentioned the Vicar of Milverstoke as the chief of such 
friends, having heard AylifFe himself speak of that reverend 
gentleman in terms of impassioned gratitude and respect. 
Hundle offered to be confronted with Ayliffe, at any 
moment, on the subject in question, and voluntarily accom- 
panied Mr Wigley in quest of the person whom Ayliffe 
alleged to have concurred with him in his projected expe- 
dition ; but the man had, some ten days before, it seemed, 
gone to another part of the country. The only practical 
result, then, of these inquiries was, so far from being in 
any degree corroborative of Ayliffe's statement, to give it 
a flat contradiction ; which unspeakably disheartened and 
distressed Mr Hylton, tending to paralyse his humane exer- 
tions — nay, even somewhat to shake his confidence in 
Ayliffe's truthfulness and innocence. 

The day after that on which Mr Hylton had received 
this dispiriting information, he resolved to see Ayliffe, and 
probe his conscience on the subject. Two little incidents 
occurred to him, on his melancholy ride from Milverstoke to 
the gaol, which, though insignificant in themselves, yet 
made a lasting impression upon him. On reaching the cot- 
tage in which poor Ayliffe's child was living, he dismounted, 
in order to make his usual weekly payment out of Lady 
Emily's boimty ; and on entering, found there his good 
wife, Mrs Hylton, with his little daughter, who was in the 
act of putting, with childish excitement of manner, a small 



266 NOW AND THEN. 

silver token Into the hand of the child ; who, though inca- 
pable of appreciating the gift, yet smiled upon the little 
giver with what appeared to Mr Hjlton to be an expres- 
sion of ineffable sweetness. "And this is the child of the 
reputed murderer of Lord Alkmond ! " thought he ; and a 
tear came into his eyes, and he sighed deeply. As he rode 
along, that poor child's comitenance accompanied him, 
pleading hard in favour of its miserable parent ! 

When he had gone about two-thirds on his way, he saw 
at a distance the figure of a man, sitting on a mile-stone, 
just under a tree — and who should this prove to be but old 
Ayliffe ! He was not for some time aware of Mr Hylton's 
approach : the wind, which was very bitter, coming from 
an opposite direction, and the old man slttmg in a sad and 
thoughtful attitude, with his eyes bent upon the ground. 
Mr Hylton stopped for some moments to look at him, 
much moved, and even startled by the coincidence which 
had happened — that he, going to see the death-doomed son, 
in whom his confidence, till then so firm, was beginning to 
be shaken, should have encountered both the son and father 
of the condemned, each under circumstances so touching 
and unlooked-for. 

]\Ir Hylton had come up \\4th Ayliffe before the latter 
seemed aware of his approach ; and to his arrested eye, the 
old man's comitenance appeared invested with an aspect of 
grandeur. There might be seen in it gloom and grief ; a 
certain stem composure and dignity, speaking of nature's 
own nobility. And he had, withal, an appearance so utterly 
poverty-stricken ! And his features were so pallid and 



NOW AND THEN. 267 

wasted! — He had walked upwards of five miles from his 
cottage to the gaol ; and his wearied limbs required the rest 
which he was taking — the book which then lay upon his 
knees being also somewhat weighty for an old man's carry- 
ing so far. 

He was bringing, he said, in answer to Mr Hylton's 
inquiries, his own old Bible, to read out of it to his son, at 
his earnest request ; and intended to leave it with him 
during the few remaining days of his life. " There is no 
difference in Bibles, sir," said the old man with sorrowful 
deliberation of manner, "so each be the pure word of God 
— that I do well know ; but this one will my poor son weep 
precious tears to see ; and I shall weep grievously over it, 
after he is gone !" 

"My excellent, my pious friend," said Mr Hylton, "I go 
this day again to see your son ; but with heavy heart. 
How fast is wearing away his time ! and yet I make no 
advance towards his rescue, or pardon ! No, not one step ! 
And assuredly I do beUeve that he will die on the day now 
appointed by the law !" 

"The will of God be done, sir!" exclaimed Ayliffe, 
taking off his hat as he spoke, and looking reverently 
and awfully upwards. 

" I grieve to tell you, Adam, that I can do nothing with 
my Lord Milverstoke, in the way of getting him to say that 
he doubts, be it never so little ; or of prevailing on him to 
recommend to mercy !" 

The old man covered his eyes with his hand, and shook 
his head sadly. After a long pause— "Sir," said he. 



2C8 NOW AND THEN. 

speaking in a low broken tone of voice, ^^ he was a father, 
as yet I am. Some short while ago, he thought as little to 
lose his only son, as did I to have mine taken horribly from 
me, as he Avill be, a few days hence. Yet who hath ordered 
both these things but Almighty God, whose creatures we all 
be ? And if his Lordship doth verily believe that my son 
slew his, who shall wonder if he think it right that my poor 
son should die, according to the law of God and man ! But 
as for me, my days are now few and bitter, and this is hke to 
close them somewhat sooner than they would have been. 
Yet have I not read this Book, which I have here, in vain ; 
and I bear malice to no man. Alas ! my poor son's own sin 
first led him into the way that brought him down into this 
horrible pit ; and God is just, His doings are never to be 
questioned ; and if the punishment seem to us beyond the sin, 
that matter leave I humbly to God, who will one day make 
plain. what He hath done, and why. And often think I 
what may be said for God's reasons in pemiitting this 
young noble to be slain, whom verily I believe my poor son 
slew not ! Soon sir, to all appearance, must they meet face 
to face, and in the presence of God ; and for such meeting 
do I daily strive to prepare my son !" 

All this was said, with some few intervals of silence 
uninternipted by Mr Hylton, who Kstened to the speaker, 
and gazed at him with thrilling and awe-subduing thoughts. 
" This man," said he to himself, " has not read that blessed 
Book in vain ! And oh ! that I, with all mankind, might 
so read it ! " 



KOW AND THEN. ' 2G9 



CHAPTER XII. 

On his return to the parsonage that evening, after a brief 
but affecting interview with the prisoner, who with unvarying 
and calm consistency reasserted the truth of his statement 
concerning Hundle, and evinced a sensible improvement in 
the tone of his feelings, — as his hopes diminished, his 
resignation increasing, — Mr Hylton found Mr Melcombe 
impatiently awaiting his arrival, with intelligence of a suf- 
ficiently exciting character, which had come from London 
by that afternoon's coach, in a letter from Mr Melcombe's 
agent. The latter gentleman was a skilful and experienced 
man ; and instantly on receiving Mr Melcombe's instructions, 
in a case so calculated to excite his interest and stimulate 
his energies, had taken the best practicable means of becom- 
ing acquainted with the arrival at London, or any other 
port, of the Morning Star. But, above all, he had stationed 
a clerk, of tact and vigilance, near the Commodore Anson 
tavern, at Wapping, with instructions to discover and 
announce the arrival there of John Jevons, or any other 
person belonging to the Morning Star. The merchant to 
whom that vessel belonged, had been discovered by Mr 
Melcombe without difficulty, through information afforded 



270 NOW AND THEN. 

by Mr Merton ; and from such owner had been ascertamed 
beyond a doubt the following highly satisfactory, and ap- 
parently important information : — That the Morning Star 
must, on the day in question, have been passing that part 
of the coast where Milverstoke Castle was situated ; having 
quitted the port to which she belonged on that morning, 
and with a fair though intermitting wind ; that John Jevons 
was the mate ; that there was on board a sailor named 
HaiTup ; that the place usually frequented by the sailors, in 
London, was the Commodore Anson ; and that the destina- 
tion of the vessel had been that which the letter specified. 
Why, however, the vessel had lain-to when opposite Milver- 
stoke Castle, except it had been becalmed — and why, more- 
over, the boat, with Harrup in it, had gone ashore, or 
whether, indeed, such a fact had happened at all, the owner 
knew not ; but aware of the cause of the inquiries which 
were being made on the subject, had promised to afford 
every information in his power, and at the earliest moment. 
Now the letter which ]\Ir Melcombe had brought from Lon- 
don, was from his agent, announcing the arrival, on the 
preceding evening, of the Morning Star; the discovery, 
late on the same night, at the Commodore Anson, of Jevons, 
the mate ; and that the writer had obtained an appointment 
from the Secretary of State, at his office, for the ensuing 
morning — when he would be in attendance with Jevons and 
Harrup ! 

Mr Hylton was so overjoyed and excited by this bright 
gleam of sunshine (for such he esteemed it) that Mr Mel- 
combe was forced to remind him of the slight importance 



NOW AND THEN. 271 

which, after all, might be attached to these circumstances, 
by the high authorities in whose hands lay. the fate of the 
prisoner. Mr Melcombe was not so sanguine a man as Mr 
Hylton, and of course better acquainted with the practical 
administration of justice; and when, by means of what he 
said, there appeared before Mr Hylton's mind's eye, as it 
were, a pair of scales, in one of which were the proved and 
admitted facts of the case — and in the other this mere 
possibility and ground for conjecture — the latter scale seemed, 
alas ! instantly to kick the beam. Had there been time, 
Mr Hylton would have started for London to be present at 
the all-important interview. That, however, being imprac- 
ticable, he was obliged to wait for information by due course 
of post ; and, to be sure, on the morning but one after the 
receipt of the above intelligence, Mr Hylton rode over to 
Mr Melcombe's office, and read with him the following 
deeply Interesting letter from his London agent, Mr Burn- 
ley :— 

^' Li the matter of Adam Ayllffe, Junior. 

"Pomegranate Court, Temple, 7tli April. 

^' Dear Sir, 

" I have just come from the Secretary of State's, 
where we have had an Interview of considerable length, but 
not (I regret to say) of so satisfactory a character, as far, 
that Is, as concerns the prisoner's Interests, as could have 
been desired. His Lordship Is a man of few words, but 
those prodigiously to the point, and he showed himself per- 
fectly acquainted with the whole facts and bearings of the 



272 XOW AND THEN. 

case. Considering the present tronbled state of public affairs, 
and the anxiety they occasion, this is greatly to be praised. 
Mr Under Secretary was present, and also paid close atten- 
tion, and asked several keen questions. The two men, 
Jevons and Harrup, (who were had in separately) behaved 
very properly, though they were somewhat flustered at 
first ; but Jevons, on seeing the 1-etter, said at once it was 
his, and explained why he wrote it ; and Hamip said just 
what it was to have been expected, from the letter, that he 
would say — namely, that he saw two men rmming along 
the shore, near the water's edge ; one of whom, he thought, 
ran faster than the other : he could not tell what sort of 
clothes they wore, nor whether they carried any thing with 
them : and on seeing them, and hearing shots above in the 
wood, and thinking them poachers, he lay on his oars for a 
moment, and sung out ' Hallo, my hearties ! ' AVhen he 
had said the substance of all this, my Lord asked him the 
following pertinent questions : ' Do you know Adam Ayliffe, 
or any of his family or friends ? ' The man said that he had 
never even heard of the name — nor ever been at Milver- 
stoke. ^ How soon after your return to the vessel did you 
mention to the mate, or to any one else, the things which you 
have just told us ?' — He answered, directly that he had got 
on deck, when he said, ' There's been sport going on in yon 
woods. ' ' Why had you been ashore ? ' — He said, to try to 
get some carpenter's tools ; having left several of their own 
behind them, at the port. 'How long had you left the 
shore, when you saw the men runnmg ? ' — ' About a quarter 
of an hour.' 'In what direction were they nmnuig?' — 



NOW AND THEN. 2 / 3 

^ Easterly — towards the east.' ' Would that be as if they were 
going away from J or towards, the wood?' — 'Going away 
from it. ' ' Does the wood come close down to the shore, or 
are there cliffs?' — The man could not say ; but Mr Under 
Secretary said he knew the place himself well, and whispered 
something to his Lordship which I could not hear. 'Did 
the man who ran appear to be tall or short ? ' — He had not 
taken sufficient notice, and it was also too dark to do so. ' Did 
you think any thing more about this matter after mention- 
ing it to the mate?' — No ; not till he afterwards heard it 
talked of. ' When was that ? ' — When they were at Dun- 
kirk. ' Who mentioned it, and why ? ' — The captain brought 
a newspaper on board, and spoke to the mate, and they 
both looked at the log-book, and called him (Harrup) down, 
and reminded him of it. 'Who first told you of the 
matter Avhen you came back to London?' — Then he 
mentioned my clerk, as I explained to his Lordship. ' Was 
it before or after the firing of the gun that you saw the man 
running ?' — He thought it was within a very few minutes 
after. ' How many minutes, do you believe ?' — Perhaps 
four or five ; or it might be less. ' Did you hear a gun 
fired more than once?' — He thought twice, but it might 
have been even three times. ' What hour of the night 
might this have been, as nearly as you can recollect ? ' — 
' About ten o'clock.' Then Harrup was ordered to withdraw. 
' Has there been any reward offered by Lord Milverstoke, 
or the magistrates, for the discovery of any one connected 
with the transaction?' asked his Lordship of me; and I 
answered ' No,' Before Jevons was brought in, his Lordship 

T 



274 NOW AND THEN. 

asked me, very particularly, what inquiries we had made at 
Milverstoke, to ascertain whether any one near the seashore 
had observed persons running on the occasion in question. 
I told him what we had done, reading him your last letter 
to me, announcing that you could learn nothing on the subject. 
AYlien Jevons was called in, he gave, as I have already said, 
a clear and plain account of how he came to write the letter, 
disclaimed all knowledge of the AylifFes, and knew but little 
of Milverstoke. Neither he nor any one on board had heard 
the soimd of gun-shot from shore. His Lordship asked, 
very quietly, two or three acute questions, designed to detect 
any material difference between the accounts of those parts 
of the transaction which both must have observed ; but I never 
heard any person answer more satisfactorily than Jevons did ; 
it could have left no doubt in any one's mind, that whatever 
might be the value or effect of the evidence, it was given 
truly and honafide. Then Jevons was ordered to withdraw ; 
and, after a few moments' silence, his Lordship said, 
addressing Mr Under Secretary and me — ' All that we have 
just heard might, had it been known at the time of the trial, 
possibly have been fit to lay before the jury ; but they might 
have deemed it immaterial or irrelevant, or as showing only 
that possibly others were concerned, icitli the 'prisoner^ in the 
murder — they escaping, and he happening to be detected : 
his guilt being, of course, in either case the same. But 
the persons represented as running along the shore may 
have had nothing whatever to do with the murder, nor known 
any thing about it : what a slight foundation,' these were his 
Lordship's words, ' for so large a superstructure ! The 



NOW AND THEN. 275 

Lord Chief Justice, however,' continued his Lordship, ' will 
be seen, and shown the notes of what has taken place this 
morning (a clerk had set down every thing as it went on ;) 
and, in the mean time, those two persons who have been here 
to-day should be forthcoming, if required. I think it right 
to intimate to you,' said his Lordship to me, ' for communi- 
cation to the prisoner's friends, that, as I am at present 
advised, I see no grounds for delaying, beyond the period 
now fixed, the carrying into effect the sentence of the law. 
I regard the evidence adduced at the tiial as of rare cogency 
and, in truth, irresistible. There is, however, one matter 
not mentioned to-day, on which it is desirable to communicate 
with the Lord Chief Justice ; and in the mean tune you will 
be pleased to leave here the address of the clergyman who 
has taken so much interest in this case, and who called on 
me and on the Lord Chief Justice upon this subject.' From 
his Lordship's manner, I should not be surprised if the 
reverend gentleman were to have a communication made 
to him respecting some matter which he may have mentioned 
to the Lord Chief Justice. The moment that I have any 
thing new, you may rely on hearing from me: and 
meanwhile I am, 

" Your very faithful servant, 

" Jonathan Burnley." 
" P. S. — As you intend to take no costs in this case, nor 
shall I — regarding it as a matter of humanity. At the same 
time, if funds be provided by those well able to afford it, I 
think it would be not unreasonable for both you and me to 
be reimbursed the money which we may actually expend on 



276 iVOW AND THEN. 

the occasion, but, equally with yourself, I will not hear of 
any thing further." 

The " matter not mentioned to-day," to which the Secre- 
tary of State had referred, Mr Hylton perfectly understood ; 
and the allusion to it threw him into a brief but extremely 
anxious reverie. He had not felt himself at liberty to com- 
mmiicate the point to which Lord Farnborough must have 
alluded, to ^Ir Melcombe, whose inquiries concerning the 
matter on the present occasion he easily parried. Both 
he and Mr Melcombe were somewhat dashed in spirit by the 
foregoing letter. Neither of them could deny the weight 
which there was in the Secretary of State's observations. 
As for the prospect of being able to extort from Lord Mil- 
verstoke an explanation of the mysterious conversation at 
the banqueting-table, and, above all, permission to com- 
municate it to the Secretary of State, Mr Hylton had re- 
garded it as being quite as much out of the question as pro- 
curing his Lordship to join in a recommendation to mercy. 
Ought he, indeed, under all the dreadful circumstances of 
the case, to be pressed upon such a subject ? It required no 
small amount of firmness even to contemplate making the 
effort. Momentous as were the interests which a strong 
sense of duty had impelled Mr Hylton to take into his keep- 
ing — the saving an innocent man from the blighting death 
of the guilty — he nevertheless could not regard the unfor- 
tunate Earl of Milver stoke otherwise than as an object of 
profound sympathy ; as one whose grieved and harassed 
heart should not be assailed with rude intrusiveness, but 



NOW AND THEN. 277 

approached with the delicacy and deference due to the ter- 
rible sufferings with which it had pleased the wisdom of 
God to visit him. If Mr Hylton verily believed in Ayliffe's 
innocence, he remembered that it was still in a somewhat 
daring disregard of all those appearances and facts which 
abundantly justified, not only the Earl of Milverstoke, but 
every dispassionate impartial person, in believing Ayllffe to 
be really guilty of that cowardly and savage murder, of 
which he had been openly, and fairly, convicted by a court 
of justice. What father might not be expected to act 
similarly, if similarly situated? To the Earl, Mr Hylton had 
himself most expressly admitted, that if he had felt satisfied 
of Ayliffe's guilt, he would not interpose to shield a mur- 
derer from that punishment with which the law of both 
God and man visited his crime. Mr Hylton had brought 
himself to disbeHeve in Ayliffe's guilt ; but how was he to 
bring to that conviction the cruelly bereaved father, the 
Earl of Milverstoke ? To attempt to coerce an understand- 
ing so clear and powerful as his ? For, indeed, of this Mr 
Hylton sometimes feared that his efforts were falling but 
little short. Yet he inwardly disclaimed, as equally absurd, 
insulting, cruel, and hopeless, all design to influence the 
feelings of Lord Milverstoke, independently of his judg- 
ment. Mr Hylton was justly entitled to place much 
reliance on his own understanding, which was really of a 
superior order ; yet he often apprehensively asked himself 
what degree of confidence was he NOW— at this late stage 
of the affair— warranted in reposing in his own judgment, 
running counter as it did to that of the Lord Chief Justice 



278 KOW AND THEN. 

and the Secretcaiy of State, neither of them, surely, incap- 
able of forming that judgment, or biassed by partiality or 
any assignable improper motive whatever ; both of them, 
moreover, being men of high intellectual power, of great 
experience, and most humanely disposed. Fortified by their 
unshaken conclusions, did not the Earl of Milverstoke stand 
as it were upon a rock ; and might he not well be excused 
for repulsing Mr Hylton's pertinacious efforts, with a kind 
of impatient scorn and indignation ? These were reflections 
occasioning him increasing anxiety and misgiving, especially 
Avith reference to what he feared to have been the unau- 
thorised use which he had made, with the Lord Chief 
Justice, of Captain Lutteridge's intimation concerning an 
alleged occurrence at the Earl of Milverstoke's own table, 
and which it was sought by Mr Hylton to connect, in spite 
of representations to the contrary, with the death of Lord 
Alkmond. How injurious and unwarrantable must not 
this appear to the Earl ! and this too, as he saw by Mr 
Burnley's letter, the Lord Chief Justice had communicated 
to the Secretary of State ; who seemed, in consequence of 
it, evidently about to take some step or other which might 
place Mr Hylton in a position of greatly aggravated and 
alarming embarrassment and responsibility. And his fears 
were abundantly justified by the event ; for, on the morning 
after Mr Melcombe's visit, Mr Hylton received by post a 
letter, wearing an ofiicial aspect, addressed " To the Rev. 
Henry Hylton, at the Vicarage, Milverstoke ; " with the 
name of the Secretary of State, " Farnborough," in the 
corner, sealed with his seal of office, and bearing the 



NOW AND THEN. 279 

authoritative words ^' On his Majesty's Service. Imme- 
diatey A little fluttered bj the sight of this formidable 
missive, Mr Hylton withdrew with it into his library, Avhere 
he opened it and read as follows : — 

"London, 15th April. 

^' Reverend Sir, 

" I am directed by Lord Farnborough to communicate 
with you upon a matter of considerable difficulty, and also 
of pressing urgency ; as it relates to the case of a prisoner, 
Adam AylifFe, capitally convicted at the last Assizes for 
your county, of the murder of the late Lord Viscount 
Alkmond, and now awaiting execution on the 18th mstant, 
having been respited till that day by the Lord Chief Justice, 
in consequence of representations made by you to his Lord- 
ship, on the day ensuing that of the sentence. Lord 
Farnborough has bestowed the greater attention on this 
case, in consequence of the illness and absence from London 
of the Lord Chief Justice, with whom, however, his Lord- 
ship some days ago fully conferred on the subject. And I 
am now to recall to your recollection one particular ground 
proposed by you to the Lord Chief Justice for delaying 
execution on the prisoner. You represented, in a very con- 
fident manner, that if time were afforded, you might be able 
to discover the existence of facts at present enveloped in 
mystery, the tendency of which was (unless you have been 
misunderstood) to connect the death of the deceased Lord 
Alkmond with matters which were not brought to notice at 



280 NOW AND THEN. 

the trial. You are further reported to have intimated, that 
the persons able to afford such information are of rank and 
station, indisposed to speak of the matter, at present, from 
scruples of delicacy, fearing the imputation of a breach of 
confidence. You also further stated, that the person to 
whom jou had ah'eady spoken, and promised again to 
apply, had expressed an opinion (in which you yourself, as 
you stated, had heard sufficient to prevent your concurrence) 
that the information, when obtained, would prove to have 
no bearmg on the case, relating, though it did, to the late 
Lord Alkmond's quittmg Milverstoke Castle at a very 
unusual hour, and under very unusual circumstances, for 
the wood in which he was so shortly afterwards found 
murdered. I am directed to draw your most serious atten- 
tion to the responsibility attaching both to persons making 
these communications, and to those who have it in their 
power to prove, at once, that these suggestions and repre- 
sentations are either well founded, or totally groundless. 
A peculiarly painful responsibility is, moreover, thus cast on 
those whose duty it is to direct the administration of justice, 
and advise His Majesty in a matter of life and death. As 
a clergyman and magistrate, you need not be reminded of 
what Lord Farnborough is entitled to expect from you 
under these critical circumstances : and you are requested, 
without a moment's delay, to furnish his Lordship with such 
infomiation as may be acted upon, one way or the other. 
And Lord Farnborough directs me to inform you finally, 
that in the absence of any further communication from yon. 



NOW AND THEN. 281 

or of intelligence, relating to this subject, of a nature 
decisively favourable to the prisoner, the present respite 
will not be extended. 

" I have the honour to remain, 

" Reverend Sir, 

'' Your very faithful, and most obedient servant, 

'' J. C. L. Wylmington. 

" The Reverend Henry Hylton, /'^ ^ 

.-Vicar of Milve^toke." |^^,.^^^gj^^ 

'''-''TJie present respite will not he extended T — 0\\^_^^ 
words of portentous significance!" exclaimed Mr Hylton 
aloud, in a despairing way, as, having finished reading the 
letter, he leaned back in his chair, in dire dismay and 
perplexity. What had sprung up out of his own unjusti- 
fiable precipitation ! for by no gentler name could he then 
characterise what he had done in making to the Lord 
Chief Justice the communication of which that eminent 
and conscientious functionary had felt it his duty to apprise 
the Minister intrusted with the executive authority of the 
State ; and whom the above letter of the Under Secretary 
showed to have been plunged into deep anxiety by such 
communication. One of the first things that recurred to 
Mr Hylton's recollection, was the Earl of Milverstoke's 
peremptory and emphatic assurance to him, that the matter 
spoken of by Captain Lutteridge could have no bearing 
whatever upon the question of the prisoner's guilt or hmo- 
cence : and so had, in the very first instance, said Captain 
Lutteridge himself! Had it thus become Mr Hylton's 



282 NOW AND THEN. 

duty, without harassing- the Earl any more, to act upon his 
dehberate assurance, and write off to the Secretary of State, 
frankly abandoning as untenable the plea for delay which 
had called forth his Lordship's letter? But suppose he 
should do so, AylifFe be executed, and it were to be after- 
wards discovered that the matter in question had a bearmg, 
and a vital bearing, upon the question of his guilt or inno- 
cence — showed that, whoever else might have committed 
this mysterious murder, Ayliffe had not ; and that he had 
been hanged in spite of his vehement and unwavering 
denial of guilt and assertion of innocence, and without a 
stain on his previous character to lend colour to so frightful 
a charge as that in respect of which he had unjustly 
suffered ? Was not that a possibility sufficient to make the 
most stout-hearted man shudder ? Was, then, Mr Hylton 
again to importune the Earl upon the subject ? to show him 
the letter from the Secretary of State ? and leave with his 
Lordship the painful responsibility of withholding the 
desired information ? Suppose he should demand from Mr 
Hylton, why he had not at once conveyed to the authorities, 
with whom he had been so busily commimicating, the EarFs 
own deliberate and emphatic declaration on the subject? 

Mr Hylton was a courageous man, and of inflexible 
firmness of purpose ; yet he contemplated another interview 
with the Earl with grave, very grave, anxiety. Fear he 
knew not; but what was not due to the feelings of the 
father of a murdered son ? And had not Lord Milverstoke 
movingly acknowledged to him that, though the conversa- 
tion of which he was in quest had no bearing on the dread- 



NOW AND THEN. 283 

fill murder of his son, yet was it so connected with other 
associations and recollections as to occasion his Lordship 
exquisite pain in adverting to it? Agam; had not the 
Secretary of State addressed to him weighty matter ; and 
was he not entitled to the prompt and decisive answer which 
he had demanded ; and the refusal or neglect to afford which, 
would plainly absolve him from all kind of responsibility, 
and a thousand-fold augment that which already rested upon 
others ? Again ; Mr Hylton was beginning to regard with 
intense disfavour and repugnance this attempt to extort and 
divulge private conversation, that which had passed in the 
unrestrained freedom of fancied security, the confidential 
intercourse of private life. It required the conviction of 
some positive and overwhelming necessity to overcome such 
feelings in the breast of a gentleman — and a gentleman, 
indeed, and of pure and high feelings, was Mr Hylton. But 
all this while poor Adam AyHffe was lying in irons, broken- 
hearted, and drawing nearer HOURLY to the ignominious 
agonies and horrors of the scaffold ! What was to he done ? 
indeed. Mr Hylton, conscious of the purity of his motives, 
and yet perceivmg the thick darkness which seemed to lie 
upon the path of duty, humbly commended himself and his 
proceedings to God, and besought His assistance, that he 
might not, from mistaken motives, be blindly and rashly 
attempting to thwart the will of Providence ; and instead of 
furthering the ends of justice, frustrate and pervert its efforts 
to attain them. For suppose, after all, that Ayliffe were 
falsely protesting his innocence, had really slain Lord Alk- 
mond in mistake for another, or — horrid thought ! — had. 



284 NOW AND THEN. 

through Mr Oxley's proceedings, fallen into a mortal frenzy 
of hatred against the Earl of Milverstoke and his son, and 
resolved to wreak his vengeance on both or either as 
opportunity offered ? How many had gone to the scaffold 
as loudly protesting their innocence as at present did Ayliffe, 
and concerning whose guilt there yet never was even a 
shadow of doubt ! Distracted by these considerations, he 
folded up the letter, placed it in his pocket-book, ordered his 
horse, and resolved to go straightway and take counsel with 
quiet and judicious Mr Melcombe. After having gone a 
little way past the road which led to the barracks, " Why," 
said Mr Hylton to himself, suddenly stopping his horse — 
" Why should I not try my fate again with Captain Lut- 
teridge?" He remained stationary for several minutes, 
and then, turning his horse's head, rode up to the barracks; 
resolved to read to the Captain the letter of the Secretary 
of State, and see what new view of the case it might present 
to that straightforward and well-meaning officer. The 
Captain received him with a sort of bluff caution ; that of a 
plain unsuspecting man, who, feeling that he had, somehow 
or other, got himself into difficulties on former occasions, 
was now at all events resolved to present no salient points 
of attack. Mr Hylton, with whom time was becoming 
momentarily more precious, came to the subject of his ap- 
plication at once ; assuring the Captain that he, Mr Hylton, 
had taken no steps of any kind since they had met on the 
last occasion ; but that the affair on which he had honoured 
himself by then speaking to the Captain, had suddenly 
assumed a more serious aspect than ever. 



NOW AND THEN. 285 

" This, sir, in short, is a quandary ; one you have got 
into, and must get out of," said the Captain, in a matter-of- 
fact manner ; '' and how do you intend doing it ? I can't 
help you. We military people generally, you see, look a 
hair's-breadth or so beyond our noses, if one may so 
speak, in the moves we make — considering not only how 
to advance, but how to retreat ; not only, do you see, how 
to get to a place, but, by Jupiter — forgive me, sir ! — what 
to do when there — and then, how to get back again ! " 

" I cannot deny. Captain Lutteridge," said Mr Hylton, 
with a very harassed air, " that I feel myself in a terrible 
perplexity " — 

"Then give me, so please you, your hand," said the 
Captain, advancing to him cordially, with his right arm 
extended. " You know what my opinion was, t'other day, 
when you gave me the honour of a visit ; and I thought, 

by ! hem! I ask your pardon, sir — but — eh, sir? Has 

any thing new come of it ? " 

"I have received, within this hour," said Mr Hylton, 
seriously, while he opened his pocket-book and took out the 
Secretary of State's letter, '' a communication of such weight 
and consequence, that I shall leave it to speak for itself, 
Captain Lutteridge." 

" All about that abominable vagabond, I suppose, who " — 

"Captain Lutteridge," said Mr Hylton, with touching 

dignity of manner, " you pain me indeed. Why should 

you, an officer, a man of birth, a gentleman, use language 

such as this towards a poor wretch at this moment shivering 

. in irons, and expecting hourly to die an unjust death, as I 



286 KOW AND THEN. 

believe it will be, since, as I have told you, I think him 
innocent?" 

" I ask jour pardon, reverend sir," said the Captain, 
courteously ; '' but do not forget that we think differently 
about this affair — at least, you and Lord Milverstoke do. 
As for me," he added, Avith a look of sudden vexation, 
^' little care I, truly, whether this gentleman live or die ! " 

^' This is the document I spoke of, Captain. AVill you 
read it ?" said Mr Hylton with a sigh : and his companion 
immediately took the letter, reading every Ime of it as scru- 
pulously as though it had been some death-warrant addressed 
to, and requiring execution by, himself. "Phew! Phew! 
sir ! " he exclaimed, or rather whistled, when he had finished 
reading the letter, down even to the signature; "by this 
time you must be somewhat sick of this busmess ! Well, I 
do say, not intending disrespect to civilians, least of all to 
your cloth — but — give me^ reverend sir, a military trial, and 
a quick death according to order, without questions asked 
after the court hath broke up ! It saves a world of trouble 
— all such as this you are giving yourself, and occasioning 
others too !" 

" But — forgive me. Captain — what say you to the sub- 
stance of this letter ? Is my tongue to be tied, and is yours, 
and this man to die, therefore, possibly unjustly?" 

"Why, sir, as to the letter, what is the Secretary of 
State to my Lord Milverstoke or me ? Can he force open 
our lips ? No ; nor fifty Lords Farnborough, sir ! " 

" But I trust you see now how careful I was, with both 
my Lord Farnborough and the Chief Justice, to say no- 



NOW AND THEN. 287 

thiug, till authorised, about persons or places, as well as 
tilings?" 

^'Tliat, sir, of course, you would be," interposed the 
Captain, somewhat sarcastically. 

"But let me ask," continued Mr Hylton, "supposing this 
letter had been addressed to you^ Captain, and you were in 
my place — what answer would you give ?" 

"Why, sir, I would not have put myself in your place, 
do you see ; for I should have deemed myself to be (which 
doubtless you, reverend sir, by reason of your holy cloth, 
are not) meddling somewhat." 

"But, Captain Lutteridge, I implore an answer — time 
presses frightfully !" 

" Why, you see, sir, I am a soldier, and you a parson, 
reverend sir: therefore" — the Captain paused; the conse- 
quence, of which he had indicated the approach, not appear- 
ing, or presenting itself, exactly when he wished it. 

" I must, in virtue of the sacred office which I hold, and 
of which you have reminded me. Implore you to let no 
imaginary notions of honour" — 

"Honour! — honour imaginary! I give you my word, 
reverend sir, that I never heard any thing so monstrous fall 
from man before ! " said the Captain, with an amazed air. 

" Oh, sir, I neither thought, nor said, aught that you could 
except to," replied Mr Hylton. " No man values honour more 
than I ; nor do I think any man living can have a truer, keener 
sense of it than you. Captain Lutteridge : all I dread is, lest, 
while you strain honour too far, a fellow-creature be sacrificed. ' ' 

"What would you then, reverend sir," inquired the 



288 NOW AND THEN. 

Captain, somewhat appeased, "mth me, now, after what has 
before passed between us ? For I do protest that I know 
not ! Say plainly, sii' !" 

''This being an imminent matter of life and death," said 
Mr Hylton, after a pause, " do you feel yom-self at liberty 
to authorise me, if I should deem it proper, to communicate 
to the Secretary of State what you told me before I went 
up to London?" 

"Xo, sir," replied the Captain, quietly. 
"Is that really your final determination, dear Captain?" 
inquired Mr Hylton, with such a kind of intensity in his 
manner, as quite touched the soldier's heart. 

"Upon my w^ord of honour, sir," he replied, earnestly, 
" I really fear it is. You see, sir, I have often talked over 
this matter with my brother officers ; and we all, being bred 
alike, think alike. Where one's own honour, and another 
man's life, are in conflict, what the deuce to do we know 
not. AVe made not honour : it is made for us ; it governs 
us all, or ought ; and it shall govern me, and be obeyed, so 
help^hem ! I beg your pardon, sir, for what I was going 
to say, but did not, you being a clergyman." 

"I am distracted!" said Mr Hylton, pressing liis hand 
to his forehead. 

" So methinks, with much respect, " quoth the impene- 
trable soldier, "you have good reason to be, reverend sir. 
Look you at the way in which you have fixed eveiy body : 
my Lord Milverstoke, my Lord Famborough, me — but 
most especially yourself! Surely, good sir, it was not I 
that did all this ! " 



NOW AND THEN. 289 

^'True, true, Captain," replied Mr Hylton, with a melan- 
choly air, and sighing deeply; ^'and yet, had you not 
yourself, with all a soldier's honourable frankness, first 
volunteered to tell me all this" — 

^' Piff ! Paff ! — Phew ! " exclaimed the Captain, suddenly 
starting up as if he had just received a pistol-shot. " Why, 
sir — egad — you are right ! What you say is quite true ! " 
Captain Lutteridge stood rubbing his chin, and gazing 
earnestly, in perturbed silence, at Mr Hylton. " Why, 
hang me, sir, if it is not I that have put you, and every 
body else, into a false position!" He paused, gazing at 
Mr Hylton with the look of a man astounded by some 
sudden discovery. " Sir, in his Majesty's service there is not, 
I do believe, a greater fool at this moment than am I, 
Captain Lutteridge. The devil hath this day suddenly 
paid me off, handsomely, a somewhat long score. I beseech 
you, reverend sir, in this horrible state that I am in, tell me 
what should I do ? I own all this never occurred to me, 
nor those that I have talked with on the subject ! I wonder 
my brother-officers yonder never thought of it ; for as for 
myself, I am a fool — an arrant fool ! Sir — I — I beg your 
pardon, for putting you into all this difficulty !" 

"My dear Captain," said Mr Hylton, mildly, having 
waited till the Captain's excitement had a little abated, " I 
really meant not to suggest any thing of this kind : it did 
not occur to me " — 

'' Oh yes, it did, sir ; but you were too civil to say it. I stand 
an ass, sir — a very ass before you ! And what the deuce 

u 



290 NOW AND THEN. 

to do I know not ; yet, on my honour, I never meant to do 
any thing but what was proper and humane." 

" Still, Captain, let us not overlook the real difficulty of 
the case, nor forget what is due to yourself, and also to me, 
as men of honour, as well as of humanity and religion. It 
is I that have entailed all this perplexity, by my unauthor- 
ised communication of what you had so frankly told me, in 
your love of justice and fair play. I may have erred in 
what I did — but what else could I have done? I was 
forced to leave by that night's coach, or all would have been 
in vain; and had I not made some use of what you had 
told me, I might as well have stayed here. And when I 
came back, and poor Ayliffe's body was swinging m the air, 
you might have reproached me for my false honour and 
punctilio, and (for aught I could then have known) might 
have said that, in a matter like this, your delicacy would 
have given way." 

" Sir, there's no gainsaying it. What a puzzle you must 
have been m. Sometimes, it seems, things will so turn out, 
that no man can possibly know how to act ; and then the 
only thing is, to do nothing, which can never be wrong." 

" Oh, Captain, Captain ! cannot it ! Look at this case — 
this very case ! " 

" I don't know, for the life of me, what to do ! " said 
Captain Lutteridge, walking hastily up and down the room. 
'' Let me, sir, read the letter again. It is a somewhat long- 
winded roundabout despatch. Methinks I could have said 
as much in twenty words." He read it over pretty rapidly. 



NOW AND THEN. 291 

" One tiling, sir, it shows, that you certainly acted hand- 
somely at headquarters, in not committing one whom you 
had no right to commit." 

" Indeed, Captain, I so deeply appreciated your disinte- 
rested and noble anxiety to assist the cause of justice and 
humanity, that I was doubly — trebly — on my guard." 
'' Quite correct, sir, to be so — quite." 
" Now, suppose, dear Captain, that you had happened to 
be in London at the time, and had thoughts of going at 
once to headquarters to prevent injustice — fatal, irreparable 
injustice — in this matter, being unwittingly done, don't 
you think you might have said just as much to my Lord 
Chief Justice as you did to me? — and felt that Lord 
Milverstoke could have no right to interfere in such a case 
of life and death as ought to be left to every man's own 
conscience, alone, to deal with?" 

'' There's no knowing what a man might do when sud- 
denly pushed, and off his guard. But, for the matter of 
this letter,"— he tm-ned to it again,—" it seems that you 
handsomely told the Judge what I said, that I thought the 
matter in question had no bearing on the case." 

" I did, most distinctly, most emphatically." 

" But, forgive me, reverend sir, — how came you to say, 
thereupon, that you differed with me?" 

" Pardon me, dear Captain ; I thought I was right in 
doing so. It appeared to me that, at a point of time so 
all-important as that of Lord Alkmond's quitting the Castle 
for the wood" — 

" That, sir, is what I so marvel— have always marvelled— 



292 NOW AND THEN. 

at. What possible bearing — pshaw ! — what could duelling 
have to do with this vagabond and Lord" — 

'' Duelling I " echoed Mr Hylton, with a great start : while 
Captain Lutteridge sprang clean out of the chair in which 
he had the moment before sat down, and slapped his hand 
desperately on his mouth, as though he would have forced 
back the words which had leaped forth, never to return. 

" Did I say duelling f " commenced the Captain, in a low 
tone, after a long gasp, and staring amazedly at his com- 
panion, who looked equally astounded. 

'•'■ Yes, you did, Captain Lutteridge ! " said Mr Hylton, 
in an absent manner — having fallen into a deep reverie. 

The Captain stood still, his eyes fixed on the floor, in 
silence. 

" Bah ! " at length he exclaimed, with such a violent 
stamp of his foot that the floor quivered under it. " I — 
I — look on this as a stroke of fate, sir !" said he, approach- 
ing Mr Hylton with a desperate air, his face quite flushed. 
" We don't part, reverend sir, till we have agreed on 
what is to be done with the word that hath thus accursedly 
jumped out from me," continued the Captain, hastily going 
to the door, which he locked, and took out of it the key. 
Then he strode to the fire-place, and gave Mr Hylton, in 
passing, a furious glance. " Look you, sir, we soldiers are 
plain people ; and if you, being one cunning in speech, 
came hither to lay a trap for me" — 

" Captain Lutteridge," replied Mr Hylton, calmly, " your 
language shows that you labour under sudden excitement. 
Do you, now that I remind you of your expressions, really 



NOW AND THEN. 293 

mean, sii', to insinuate that I, a Christian minister, and, I 
trust, a gentleman also, could, under any conceivable cir- 
cumstances whatever, stoop to the baseness of inveigling 
you into a breach of confidence? I forgive you, Cap- 
tain Luttendge, and also the gross and, saving your 
presence, vulgar indignity," continued Mr Hylton, point- 
ing sternly to the door, " which you have just perpetrated 
upon me." 

" Mr Hylton — reverend sir — I — ^beg your pardon ; I — 
ask forgiveness, having quite forgotten myself, and you 
too," said Captain Lutteridge, bowing profoundly, while 
the colour a little deserted his cheek ; and hastily stepping 
to the door, he unlocked and threw it open. Then, return- 
ing to Mr Hylton, he resumed — " You are as free as air, sir : 
free to go whither you please ; to say, to do, Avhat you 
please, sir — any where — to any body. You are a gentle- 
man, sir ; and I, an officer, have not, I fear, acted just now 
as became an officer and a gentleman." 

Nothing could exceed the soldier-like simplicity, gravity, 
and fine spirit, with which all this was said by Captain 
Lutteridge. 

"'Tis all forgiven — forgotten: it is as though it had 
never happened, my dear Captain," replied Mr Hylton ; 
^' and I shall deem myself honoured if you will suffer me 
to shake you by the hand, for whose character I have 
already learned to feel great admiration. I never saw one 
whom I believed to be actuated by nobler motives — of that 
be assured ; and as for this strange word that has escaped 
you, it is buried Aere"— he placed his right hand on his 



294 NOW AND THEN. 

heart — " it Is considered by me, already, as utterly un- 
spoken." 

^' Most excellent and reverend sir, give me your hand ! " 
said Captain Lutteridge, almost with tears m his eyes, grasp- 
ing the proffered hand of Mr Hylton. " I never came in 
my life near one that behaved with such handsomeness, by 
— I beg pardon, su' ! But I never did ! And I am begin- 
ning, I know not how, to take quite a different view of the 
entire matter. By Jove, sir, your whole conduct on behalf 
of this poor wretch is disinterested and great, beyond utter- 
ance. The trouble you have taken — what you have put up 
with while doing all that you have done, no one thinks so 
highly of as your humble, unworthy servant. Captain Lut- 
teridge ; and God himself only can reward you, for He put 
it all in your heart to do ! Sir — I — I almost begin to think 
this man — Heaven forgive me for calling him a vagabond, 
poor wretch ! — must be, as you say, imiocent — though his case 
has, it must be owned, a desperate ugly look, or you would 
not have been led to do all you have done ; but if he he inno- 
cent" — the Captain paused for a moment — " I have been 
all this while doing my best to tie the rope round his neck! " 
While Captain Lutteridge was saying all this, Mr Hylton 
appeared to be attentively listening to him in silence ; but 
his mind was closely engaged with the subject which had 
been suggested to it, by the pregnant word which had fallen 
from Captain Lutteridge — Duelling ! — Duelling ? Had tliat^ 
then, been the topic which Lord Alkmond could not bear to 
hear talked of, and by which he had been so much agitated, 
as Captain Lutteridge had represented ? Why go out into 



NOW AND THEN. 295 

the wood — and directly from the banquetlng-table ? The 
more Mr Hylton thought of it — and his ideas sprung up and 
followed one another with lightning rapidity — the greater 
were his amazement and anxiety ; for he recollected Lord 
Milver stoke 's agitation on the subject being mentioned ; his 
Lordship's acknowledgment that it occasioned him great 
agony, from reasons of which, as he had said, Mr Hylton 
could have no notion ; and his Lordship's solemn declaration 
that it had no connexion with, or bearing upon, the awful 
bereavement which he had suffered. And, again, what 
reason could there be for his stem refusal to allow the mat- 
ter to be communicated to the official authorities, even in 
so grave a case as that affecting the life of a fellow-crea- 
ture ? And he had said, moreover, that it might, if talked 
about, afford matter for injurious and harassing gossip and 
speculation ! He was thus getting deeper and deeper into 
gloomy speculation, when Captain Lutteridge's last words, 
alluding to the rope round Ayliffe's neck, startled Mr Hyl- 
ton out of his reverie. 

" True — certainly. Captain Lutteridge," said he, as if 
still somewhat confounded by the course of his own bewil- 
dering reflections ; " but that single word which you have 
so naturally let fall, at a moment when you were off your 
guard, has plunged me headlong into a sea of conjecture and 
perplexity. I own myself utterly at a loss how to connect 
this conversation with the death of poor Lord Alkmond ; 
and consider you warranted (for all that at present occurs to 
me) in your frequent assertion that there really was no such 



296 NOW AND THEN. 

" That may all be, sir, and perhaps is really so ; but 
now the point is, what must be done herein ? Any thing 
nothing?" 

" Were I disposed to make any use, and you to permit 
me, of the information which I now possess" — 

^' Get Lord Milverstoke's leave, and the thing is done ! 
If his Lordship care not, I am sure 1 don't." 

" But what if his Lordship should hear that which has 
happened here to-day. Captain Lutteridge ?" 

'' What if he do ? It will make him angry, very angry, 
mth me ; but that I cannot help. He may curse my folly, 
but cannot question my honour: and what say you, by 
Jove, sir, to my going myself to my Lord Milver stoke, and 
plainly telling him what has happened? If it will serve 
your purpose in this strait that you are in, why, I will go at 
once, and within an hour's time his Lordship shall know all 
that has happened, and do as he pleases." 

" Kesolution such as yours cannot be daunted, I see, my 
dear Captain ; and I entreat you, then, to do as you pro- 
pose ; and in justice to me, explain how it fell out, without 
effort of mine, and that I will, of course, neither say a 
word, nor take a step, till I have his Lordship's consent to 
do so." 

'' I will do all this, and the sooner the better : and why 
may I not tell him of Lord Farnborough's letter? I'm sure 
there's nothing can come of it, though. Men don't fight 
duels with bludgeons, and at night-time, eh? And strike 
from behind, too ? You don't suppose any thing so wild as 
all that ? Had my Lord Alkmond been stabbed or shot, the 



NOW AND THEN. 297 

case might have looked somewhat different. But duelling 
was doubtless the thing talked of that night, and a bloody 
duel was spoken of, too, that had no long time before taken 
place. All this, however, let us see what my Lord Milver- 
stoke will say to. He, for aught I know^, may let you go 
up to London with your news, and make what you can of 
it. 'Tis a hopeful case, truly ; but here is my horse, and 
within an hour shall I learn what his Lordship hath to say 
concerning this my folly." 

The Captain and Mr Hylton then mounted their horses ; 
the former galloping off towards ^lilverstoke Castle, the 
latter to the town where Mr Melcombe resided, with whom 
he was more anxious than ever to confer on the subject of 
the Secretary of State's letter. 



298 KOW AND THEN. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

As Mr Hylton rode along, he felt a miserable suspicion 
strengthening in his mind, that the mystery on which he 
had been placing so fond but gratuitous a reliance was van- 
ishing into thin air, as far as concerned any probable con- 
nexion between it and the tragical end of Lord Alkmond. 
The last words of bluff Captain Lutteridge — the bludgeon, 
the pistol, the rapier, the dagger — quite haunted Mr Hylton, 
forcing upon him an inference destinictive of his hopes on 
behalf of Ayliffe. He, of course, made no mention to Mr 
Melcombe of the accidental disclosure of Captain Lutteridge; 
but both of them were greatly perplexed as to the course 
proper to be taken with reference to the Secretary of State's 
letter, which nevertheless loudly demanded that sometMng 
should be done, and that something quickly. 

Little thought Captain Lutteridge, as, inwardly cursing 
his own stupidity at every step he took, he hastened on to 
the Castle, of the scene which his announced arrival would 
termmate. 'Twas one between young Lady Emily and her 
father, with whom she was angel-like pleading the desperate 
cause of Ayliffe ! Any one who had been present, hearing 
the conversation which had taken place that morning in the 



NOW AND THEN. 299 

sick chamber of Lady Alkmond, between her Ladyship and 
Lady Emily, on the subject of AylifFe, might have believed 
himself listening to the converse of two angels : so gentle, 
so pitiful, so pious Avas it, as no words can tell. Lady Alk- 
mond lay in bed, in extreme weakness, in a state most pre- 
carious ; so frightful had been the shock sustained by a 
delicate system, at a period when that delicacy was infi- 
nitely enhanced by the distant prospect — now, alas! at an 
end — of another addition to the ancient house of her mur- 
dered Lord. The Earl, on entering her chamber at his 
usual horn', on the morning of the day on which Mr Hylton 
and the Captain's last interview had taken place, on sitting 
down beside the bed, leaned down and kissed the lily-hued 
cheek, and pressed the slight attenuated fingers of the gentle 
sufferer, with an air of inconceivable tenderness. Had his 
attention not been entirely absorbed by her whom he had 
come to visit, he might have observed Lady Emily, who sat 
on the opposite side of the bed, looking pale and apprehen- 
sive: for she knew that Lady Alkmond intended to utter 
one word — only one word — into the Earl's ear on his retir- 
ing, which word Lady Emily had undertaken afterwards, 
on that same morning, to enforce upon her father, with all 
her powers of dutiful and loving persuasion and intercession. 
She trembled like an aspen leaf, therefore, when the Earl, 
after sitting rather longer than usual, rose to take his 
departure, and Lady Alkmond, gazing at him sweetly, as 
he kissed her forehead, and clasped her hand, softly whis- 
pered " Forgive ! " Lady Emily observed her father slightly 
start, but only very slightly : he looked for a moment ear- 



300 NOW AND THEN. 

nestly at Lady Alkmond, and, after pressing his lips to her 
pale cheek, withdrew in silence. When he had quitted 
the chamber. Lady Emily glided round to the side of her 
sister, and both of them remained for some moments silent, 
and with beating hearts. 

" Don't fear, love !" whispered Lady Alkmond. 

^' I tremble, Agnes ; I feel I do, but 'tis not from fear. 
I will do what I have promised !" 

Lady Emily's fingers gently clasped those of her sister-in- 
law, whose beautiful cheek was of an ashy whiteness, and 
her bosom heaved ; for Lady Alkmond knew the firmness 
of the resolution which Lady Emily had formed, to follow 
her stern father to his library, soon after he had quitted the 
chamber where they were sitting, and brave the peril of 
angering him, upon a subject on which he had never 
hitherto interchanged a syllable with her. And she well 
knew his fierce inflexibility of character, and that, on the 
trying topic which she was going to urge, that inflexibility 
would be exhibited with tenfold force. But she had received 
several letters from Mrs Hylton, so feelingly advocating the 
cause of Ayliff'e, his dying wife, and unfortunate little son ; 
and so strenuously protesting the writer's and her husband's 
conviction of Ayliffe's innocence, that Lady Emily resolved, 
cost what effort it might, to make an attempt to wring from her 
father that expression of a desire for mercy to be extended to 
the prisoner, which Mrs Hylton assured her would probably 
be attended with success, and save an innocent man from the 
horrible and ignominious death of a murderer. That morning 
she had been early in his library, and placed on the table at 



NOW AND THEN. 301 

which he usually sat a little copy of the New Testament, with 
a slip of paper in it, on which she had written in pencil the 
words " Matthew xviii. 35." On his return from Lady Alk- 
mond's room, Lord Mllverstoke repaired to his library, in 
he which walked to and fro for some time, meditating with no 
light displacency on the word which had fallen from Lady 
Alkmond. He suspected its true import and object ; and on 
taking his seat, and opening with some surprise the 
Testament which lay before him, guided by the reference 
written by the trembling fingers of his daughter, he read as 
follows : — " So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also 
unto you^ if y^t from your hearts^ forgive not^ every one his 
brother^ their tresspasses y This verse the Earl read hastily ; 
then laid down the book, folded his arms, and leaned back in 
his seat, not with subdued feelings, but very highly indignant. 
He now saw clearly what had been intended by the faint 
but impressive whisper of Lady Alkmond, even could he 
have before entertained -a doubt upon the subject. Oh, why 
did not thoughts of the heavenly temper of these two 
loving and trembling spirits melt his stern heart ? 'Twas 
not so, however : and even anger swelled within that 
father's breast of untamed fierceness — anger, almost 
struggling and shaping itself into the utterance of ^' Inter- 
ference ! intrusion ! presumption !" After a long interval, 
in which his thoughts were thus angrily occupied, he 
reopened the Testament, and again read the sublime and 
awful declaration of the Eedeemer of mankind ; yet smote 
it not his heart. And after a while, removing the paper, 
he calmly replaced the sacred volume on the spot from 



302 NOW AND THEX. 

which it had been taken by Lady Emily. Xot long after 
he had done so, he heard a faint tappbig at the distant door, 
but without taking any notice of it ; although he had a 
somewhat disturbing suspicion as to the cause of that meek 
application, and the person by whom it was made. The 
sound was presently repeated, somewhat louder ; on which 
" Who is there ? — enter ! " called out the Earl loudly, and in 
his usual stern tone, looking apprehensively towards the door 
— which was opened, as he had thought, and perhaps 
feared, it might be, by Lady Emily, 

" It is I, dear papa," said she, closing the door after her, 
and advancing rather rapidly towards him, who moved not 
from his seat ; though the appearance of — NOW — ^his only 
child, and that a daughter most beautiful in budding woman- 
hood, and approachmg a father with timid, downcast 
looks, might well have elicited some word or gesture of 
welcoming affection and tenderness. 

" What brings you hither, Emily?" he inquired coldly, 
as his daughter, in her loveliness and terror, stood within a 
few feet of him, her fine features wearing an expression of 
blended modesty and resolution. 

''Do you not know, my dearest papa ?" said she gently ; 
''do you not suspect? Do not be angry! — do not, dear 
papa, look so sternly at me ! I come to speak with you, 
who are my father, in all love and duty." 

"I am not stem — I am not angry, Emily. Have I not 
ever been kind to you ? Why, then, this unusual mode of 
approaching and addressing me ? Were I a mere tyrant, 
you could not show better than your present manner does 
that I am such ! " 



NOW AND THEN. 803 

His words were kind, but his eye and Lis manner blight- 
ing. His daughter's knees trembled under her. She 
glanced hastily at the table in quest of the little book which 
her hands had that morning placed there ; and, not seeing 
it, her heart sunk. 

"Be seated, Emily," said Lord Milverstoke, moving 
towards her a chair, and gently placing her in it, imme- 
diately opposite to him, at only a very little distance. She 
thought that she had never till that moment seen her father's 
face ; or, at least, had never before noticed its true character. 
How cold and severe was the look of the penetrating eyes 
now fixed on her ; how rigid were the features ; how com- 
manding was the expression which they wore ; how visibly 
clouded with sorrow, and marked with the traces of suffering ! 
"And what, Emily, would you say ?" he inquired calmly. 
"Dearest papa, I would say, if I dared, what my sister 
said to you so short a time ago — Forgive .^" 

"Whom?" inquired the Earl, striving to repress all 
appearance of emotion. 

"Him who is to die on Monday next — Adam Ayliffe. 
Oh, my dearest papa, do not — oh, do not look so fearfully at 
me!" 

"You mean, Emily, the murderer of your hrother .-'" He 
paused for a moment. "Am I right? Do I understand 
you?" inquired her father, gloomily. 

"But I think that he is not — I do beheve that he is not. " 
" How can it concern you^ Emily, to think or beheve on 
the subject ? Good child, meddle not with what you under- 
stand not. Who has put you upon this, Emily ? " 



304 NOAV AND THEN. 

*'My o"svn heart, dear papa !" 

" Bah, gh'l !" cried the Earl, unable to restrain his angry 
impulse, ''do not patter nonsense with your father, on a 
subject like this. You have been trained and tutored to 
torment me on this matter !" 

'' Papa ! — my papa ! — I trained ! I tutored ! By whom ? 
Am I of your blood ?" said his daughter, proudly and indig- 
nantly. 

" You had better return, my child, to your occupations" — 

''My occupation, dearest papa, is here, and, so long as 
you may suffer me to be with you, to say few, but few 
words to you. It is hard if I cannot, I who never know- 
ingly grieved you in my life. Remember that I am now 
your only child. Yet I fear you love me not as you ought 
to love an only child, or you could not speak to me as you 
have just spoken ! " She paused for a moment, and added, 
as if with a sudden desperate impulse — "My poor sister and 
I do implore you to give this wretch a chance of life, for we 
both believe that he is innocent ! " 

For a second or two the Earl seemed really astounded ; 
and well he might, for his youthful daughter had suddenly 
spoken to him with a precision and distinctness of language, 
an energy of manner, and an expression of eye, such as the 
Earl had not dreamed of her being able to exhibit, and told 
of the strength of purpose with which she had come to him. 

" And you both believe that he is innocent!" said he, 
echoing her words, too much amazed to utter another word, 

" Yes, we do ! we do ! in our hearts. My sister and I 
have prayed to God many times for his mercy ; and she 



NOW AND THEN. 305 

desires me to tell you that she has forgiven this man 
AylifFe, even though he did this dreadful deed, and so have 
I. Wife and sister of the dear one dead, we both forgive, 
even though the poor wretch be guilty; but we believe 
him innocent, and if he be, oh, Heaven forbid that on Mon- 
day he should die ! " 

" Emily," said the Earl, who had waited with forced 
composure till his daughter had ceased, " do you not think 
that your proper place is in your own apartment, or with 
your suffering sister-in-law?" 

^' Why should you thus treat me as a child, papa ? " in- 
quired Lady Emily, scarcely able to restrain her tears. 

" Why should I not ? " asked her father calmly. 

Lady Emily looked on the ground for some moments in 
silence. 

^^ Does it not occur to you as possible that you are med- 
dling ? meddling with matters beyond your province ? Is it 
fitting, ^<VZ," he continued, unable to resist an instantaneous 
but most bitter emphasis on the word, " that you should be 
HERE talking to me at all — for one moment even, on a matter 
which I have never thought of naming to you — a child?" 

" I am a child, papa ; but I am your child, and your only 
one ; and love you more than all the whole world," replied 
his daughter with ineffable sweetness. 

" Obey me then, as a proof of that love : retire to your 
chamber, and there wonder at what you have ventured— 
presumed, this morning to do." 

Lady Emily felt the glance of his eye upon her, as though 
it had lightened ; but she quailed not. 



306 NOW AND THEN. 

" My dear, my only parent, I Implore you send me not 
away ; let me" — 

" Emily, I cannot be disobeyed ; I am not in the habit of 
being disobeyed by any one ; it is very sad that I should see 
the attempt first made by my child." 

" Oh, papa ! forgive me ! forgive me ! " She arose, and 
approaching him hastily, as she observed him about to 
advance, sunk on one knee before him, clasping her hands 
together. " Oh, hear me for but a moment. I never knelt 
before but to God, yet kneel I now to my father. Oh, have 
mercy ! nay, be JUST ! " 

" Why, Emily, verily I fear that long confinement, and 
want of exercise and of changed scenes, are preying upon 
your mind ; you are not speaking rationally. Eise, child, 
and do not pursue this folly — or I may think you mad !" 
He disengaged her hands gently from his knee, which they 
had the moment before clasped, and raised her from her 
kneeling posture, she weeping bitterly. 

" I am not mad, papa, nor is my sister ; but Ave fear lest 
God's anger should fall upon you, nay, upon us all, if you 
will not listen to the voice of compassion ! " 

" Be seated, Emily," said the Earl. " Excited as you 
are at present," he continued, with rapidly increasing stern- 
ness of manner, " no words of mme will be able to satisfy 
you of the grievous impropriety, nay, the cruel absurdity 
of all this proceeding. You talk to me like a parrot 
about mercy, and compassion, and God's anger, and so forth, 
as though you understood what you were saying, and I 
understood not what I am doing, what I ought to do, and 



NOW AND THEN. 307 

what I have done. Child, you forget yourself, me, and your 
duty to me. How dared you to profane yonder Testament, 
and msult your father, by placmg it before him as you 
did this morning ? Did you do so ?" 

" I did ! " she answered, sobbing. 

" You presumptuous girl ! forgetful of the fifth command- 
ment!" 

"Oh, say not so ! say not so ! I love, I reverence you — 
and I FEAR you now ! " said Lady Emily, with passionate 
energy, gazing at him with tears running doAvn her cheeks, 
her dark hair partially deranged, her hands clasped together 
in a supplicatory manner. I prayed to God, before I 
came to you, that I might not be doing wrong ; that you 
might not be angry with me ; that if angry, you might for- 
give me !" 

" Angry with you ! Have I not cause ? Never dared 
daughter do such thing to father before ! You presume to 
rebuke and threaten me — me — with the vengeance of Hea- 
ven, if I yield not to your sickly, dreaming, drivelling sen- 
timentality. Silence!" he exclaimed, perceiving. her about 
to speak. '' I have not had my eyes closed, I tell you now, 
for days past ! I have observed your changed manner ! you 
have been deliberating, long beforehand, how to perpetrate 
this undutifulness ! As though my heart had not been already 
struck as with a thunderbolt from Heaven, you, forsooth — 
you idle, unthinking child ! must strive to stab it — to wound 
me ! to insult me ! This is not your own doing ; you dared 
not have thought of it ! You are the silly tool of others. 
Silence ! hear me, undutiful girl ! " 



308 NOW AND THEN. 

" Papa, I cannot listen to you saying all this, in which 
you arc so wrong. I am no tool of anybody ! Twice have 
you said this thing !" Her figure the Earl perceived invo- 
luntarily becoming erect as she spoke, and her eye fixed with 
steadfast brightness upon his. Had he been sufficiently calm 
and observant, he might have seen in his daughter, at that 
moment, a faint reflection of his own lofty spirit — intolerant 
of injustice. " And even you, papa, have no right whatever 
thus to talk to me. If I have done wrong, chide me becom- 
ingly ; but all that you have said to me only hurts me, and 
stings me, and I cannot submit to it " — 

" Lady Emily, to your chamber ! " said the Earl, with a 
stately air, rising ; so did his daughter. 

^' My Lord ! " she exclaimed magnificently, her tall 
figm-e drawn up to its full height, and her lustrous eyes fixed 
unwavering upon his own. Neither spoke for a moment ; 
and the Earl began, he knew not why, to feel great inward 
agitation, as he gazed at the erect figm-e of his silent and 
indignant daughter. 

" My child !" said he at length, faintly, with a quivering 
lip, and, extending his arms, he moved a step towards her ; 
on which she sprung forward into his arms, throwing her own 
about his neck, and kissing his cheek passionately. His 
strong will for once had failed him ; his full eyes ovei'flowed, 
and a tear fell on his daughter's forehead. She wept bitterly. 
For a while he spoke not, but gently led her to a couch, and 
sat down beside her. 

" Oh, papa, papa ! " she murmured, " how I love you ! ' 

For a while he was silent, struggling, and with partial 



NOW AND THEN. 309 

success, to overcome the violence of his emotions. Then he 
spoke in a low deep tone, and with a strange expression of 
countenance. 

" The voices of the dead are sounding in my ears, Emily ! 
the tranquil dead! 'Tis said, my Emily,"— he paused for 
some moments, and his agitation was prodigious, — " that I 
was stern to your sweet mother " — 

" Oh, dear, dearest, best beloved by daughters, never ! " she 
cried vehemently, struggling to escape from his grasp — for 
he held her rigidly while gazing at her with agonised eyes 
— that she might again throw her arms around his neck. 

" And I now fearfully feel— I fear— that I WAS stern, as 
I have this day been stem to you. Forgive me, ye meek and 
blessed dead ! " — his quivering lips were closed for a moment, 
as were also his eyes. " Alas, Emily ! she is looking at me 
through your eyes. Oh, how like ! " he remarked, as if speak- 
ing to himself. His daughter covered her eyes, and buried 
her head in his bosom. " Do you, my Emily, forgive me ?" 

*'0h, papa! no, no; what have I to forgive? Every 
thing have I to love ! my own, sweet papa ! Much I fear 
that I may have done what a daughter ought not to have 
done ! I have grieved and wounded a father that tenderly 
loved me " — 

" Ay, my child, I do," he whispered tremulously, gently 
drawing her slender form nearer to his heart. '' Emily," 
said he, after a while, " go, get me that Testament which 
you placed before me ; oh go, dear child ! " She still hung 
her head, and made no motion of going. " Go, get it me ; 
bring it to me ! " 



310 NOW AND THEN. 

She rose without a word, and brought it to him ; and 
while he silently read the verse to which she had directed 
his attention, she sat beside him, trembling and in silence, 
her eyes timidly fixed on the ground. 

" It was in love, and not presumption, my Emily, that 
you laid these awful words before me !" 

" Indeed, my papa, it was," said she, bursting into tears. 

He appeared about to speak to her, when words evidently 
failed him suddenly. At length — " And when that sweet 
soul " — he paused, " this morning whispered in my ear, did 
she know of this that you had done ?" Lady Emily could 
not speak. She bowed her head in acquiescence, and sobbed. 
Her father was fearfully agitated. " Wretch that I am ! — 
I am not worthy of either of you!" Lady Emily again 
flung her arms round him fondly, and kissed him. " I am 
yielding to great weakness, my love," said he, after a while, 
with somewhat more of composure. " Yet, never shall I — 
never can I — forget this morning ! I have long felt, and 
feared, that I was not made to be loved : I have seen it 
written in people's faces. Yet can I love ! " 

" I know you can ! I know you do, my own dear papa ! 
Do you not beHeve that I love you ? that Agnes loves you ? " 

" I do, my Emily — I do ! Yet till this moment have I 
felt alone in life. In this vast pile, to me now how gloomy 
and desolate ! with these woods, now so horrible, around me, 
I have been alone — utterly alone ! And yet were you with 
me — you, my only daughter — who, I suppose, dared not tell 
me how much you loved me ! " 

" Oh, do not say so, papa ! I knew your grief and suffer- 



NOW AND THEN. 311 

ing. They were too sacred to be touched — I wept for you, 
but m my own chamber!" 

'' You stand beside me as an angel, Emily ! " said the Earl 
fondly ! " as you have ever been : yet I now feel as though 
my eyes had not really seen and known you !" 

They wallved slowly to and fro, the Earl affectionately 
supporting her tall slim figure ; and as he gazed at her, 
though her eyes were heavy with weeping, and her features 
partly concealed beneath her dark dishevelled tresses, he 
beheld in them a beauty which he had never fully seen be- 
fore, and which no one knew him familiarly enough ever 
to have remarked to him ! 

"Papa," said she, at length, evidently with timorous 
reluctance in her manner ; " Shall I offend you if" — She 
paused and glanced at him apprehensively. 

" No, Emily, sweet love ! you will not — you cannot now 
offend me," said he, sighing deeply, and speaking very 
gravely, but affectionately. " I know what is in your gentle 
heart — your earliest words this morning are still ringing in 
my ears. Can you believe and trust in me, now, my dear 
Emily?" 

" Indeed, indeed, papa, I can !" 

" As you love me, then, sweet girl ! do not, at present, 
speak to me on this dreadful affair. I know all that you 
would say : but — you do not, you cannot, you ought not, 
to know as much of this matter as I do. Eemembering 
the solemn and fearful passage of Holy Writ which you 
have showed me, Emily, I yet declare to you I believe in 
my conscience that there is no shadow of doubt about tlie 



312 NOAV AND THEN. 

guilt of Ayliffe ! So said his judge, an able and merciful 
judge ; so said the jury ; so say the whole world ! I could 
tell you of expressions of dreadful malice on his part, 
against me and my family : but why ? why, my love, 
should I distress you, or harass myself?" 

Lady Emily was going to speak — but he added, 

" Suppose before he suffer the sentence of the law, he 
were to acknowledge that he did this awful deed — what 
then, Emily?" 

" What mean you, dear papa?" she inquired faintly. 

'' Should his life be even then spared ? — or should he 
die?" said the Earl in a very solemn manner. 

" Oh papa ! " she murmured, after a pause, sighing 
heavily. " But," she added, " suppose he should not con- 
fess it, but die, saying that he is innocent, and it should be 
so found afterwards? Would not that be awful, dearest 
papa?" 

" My dear Emily, unfortunately few criminals suffer 
their just sentence without falsely protesting iimocence : 
were we to believe them, against all proof positive of guilt, 
how could law or justice be administered?" 

" But, forgive a word more, papa! — Suppose he should 
really die innocent?" 

" My dear child, that is, I own, a shocking supposition ; 
but — you may speak of this again to me — I hear the sound 
of steps coming along the corridor." 

The Earl was right ; in a few moments a servant gently 
opened the door, and announced that Captain Lutteridge 
had just arrived from the barracks, m great haste, and 



NOW AND THEN. 313 

begged to be allowed immediately to see his Lordship 
on an important matter. The Earl started : and, after a few 
seconds' angrj pause, said, "Let him be shown hither." 

When the servant had withdrawn — " Emily," said he, 
" this is a well-meaning, thick-headed soldier, who has 
occasioned me great distress by his folly and meddling ; 
but after the message which he has sent, I am bound to see 
him. Away, my love — I hear him coming — God bless thee ! 
God bless thee!" he continued, kissing her fondly. " Go 
through yonder door;" and Lady Emily ran to the private 
door, and in a moment more Captain Lutteridge entered, 
and found the Earl alone. 

'' I fear your Lordship is ill," said the Captain, approach- 
ing him, and bowing courteously. 

" No, sir ; but I am harassed," replied the Earl, who had 
resumed all his habitual haughtiness of manner : " and 
may I request the favour of being at once informed what 
may be your urgent business with me?" 

The Captain was, as usual, excessively irritated by the 
Earl's mode of address, but was then conscious of being in 
no position to quarrel with, or resent it. 

"I will to the point at once, my Lord," said he, with 
forced composure. " I am come to own myself to have 
been just playing the part of an utter fool." 

There was something in his quaint embarrassed manner 
which instantly arrested the Earl's attention, and he listened 
with stern curiosity. 

" Your Lordship may beHeve that as a gentleman, and 
having the honour of bearing his Majesty's commission, I 



314 NOW AND THEN. 

would rather suffer death than willingly or knowingly break 
my word" — 

" For Heaven's sake, sir, proceed ; go on : " said the 
Earl impatiently, observing Captain Lutteridge hesitate 
for a moment. 

" Well, my Lord, yet so the matter is ; — in a conversa- 
tion had, scarce an hour ago, with Mr Hylton, about this 
caitiff that is to die on Monday — I could submit to be shot 
for having to acknowledge to your Lordship, that unad- 
visedly, and in the heat of the very speech in which I was 
protesting to the contrary, out sHpped the accursed word — 
duelling.^'' 

"What, sir!" exclaimed the Earl, starting out of his 
chair, and standing erect, gazing at Captain Lutteridge in 
a kind of stupefied silence. 

" Yes, my Lord, I am a man of few words, and those 
few, how foolish sometimes ! My Lord — I say — out sprung 
this thrice accursed word — duelling" — 

" Mercifid heavens ! — these people will assuredly kill me, 
between them all," exclaimed the Earl, striking his fore- 
head with his clenched hand. "And what then, sir?" he 
presently inquii'ed, desperately, but with the manner of one 
quite exhausted. 

" ]N"othing, my Lord," replied the Captain. 

" How say you, sir ? Are you trifling— bandying words 
with me ? What mean you, su', by — nothing ? " 

" My Lord, what I mean I say ; what I say that I 
mean," replied Captain Lutteridge, doggedly. 

The Earl glanced at him for a moment, with an exprcs- 



NOW AND THEN. 315 

sion which prevented a somewhat fierce speech that the 
Captain was about making ; and then — 

" Have you any other business with me, sir?" inquired 
the Earl, with evidently suppressed fury. 

" JSTone, my Lord — none, I thank my stars ;" replied the 
Captain, coolly, and even sarcastically. 

" Sir, I seem the sport of destiny this day ! — Never felt 
I so humiliated ! I wish you good day, sir," said the Earl. 
" You see, my Lord," said the Captain resolutely — " I am 
cool, your Lordship is not ; wherefore I overlook" — 

The Earl rang his bell violently ; and stood in silence, 
till a servant appeared ; on which his Lordship motioned 
the Captain to the door, with an air which was to that 
gallant person quite intolerable. 

" This is your house, my Lord," said he, haughtily, '^ and 
I have no right in it ; nay, I had no business here what- 
ever, seeing I ought to have better understood the nature 
of the person living in it. For the present, my Lord, 
good day. But I pray you, by no means to forget the 
words which you have this day used to me, nor the manner 
in which, before your menial, you have presumed to dismiss 
a gentleman and an officer. Be assured that if your Lord- 
ship be disposed to obliviousness hereof, I am not." 

With this the Captain made a low and formal bow, and 
with slow dignified steps withdrew. 

If he imagined that his last words had had the least effect 
on Lord Milverstoke, he was mistaken : for his Lordship 
was sunk deep in a reverie with which the name and threats 
of Captain Lutteridge had no connexion whatever. And, 



816 NOW AND THEN. 

indeed, as for the Captain himself, something occuiTed a 
few moments after his exit from the Earl's library, Avhicli 
made him for awhile forget the only as yet unavenged insult 
which he was aware of having ever experienced in his life ; 
for he happened to encounter the Lady Emily, who, unex- 
pectedly to herself, crossed his path on her way to Lady 
Alkmond's apartment, and disappeared in a moment. 

" By my sword !" said the Captain to himself, as he hur- 
ned on, " what a beauty is that girl already ! And in tw^o 
years' time — heigho — naught will be heard at Court but of 
her. But, if she hath a temper like her father's — why. 
Heaven pity hhii that is captivated by her !" 

When the Captain was fairly on his way back to the bar- 
racks, his first stinging recollection of the treatment which 
he had experienced from the Earl made him scratch his ear 
violently, and then dig his spurs into his startled but obe- 
dient horse, who thereupon pelted onward with him, till sud- 
denly reined up, on its rider's meeting another horseman, and 
that was Mr Hylton, on his way home from Mr Melcombe's. 

" Sir, good day," quoth the Captain. '' Are you going 
to the Castle ? Ecod, if you be, look out ! You will be 
clean eaten up in one minute ! Look out, therefore, is all 
I shall say, that am just escaped to tell you." 

" Why, Captain, what is the matter, eh ?" 

''Matter? Egad, go and see, if you be so minded; for 
I'll be ■ hem ! I ask your pardon, sir, you being a par- 
son — good day, sir." 

" But stay — stay. Captain ! Am I to go to the Castle to 
see Lord Milverstoke ? " 



NOW AND THEN. 317 

'' Oh, certainly ! " said the Captain, smiling grimly. " Go 
and pnt your head into the lion's mouth for a moment ! 
You may come out again ! And if you do, blessed be the 
stars that will shine on Mr Hylton — good day, good day, 
sir ! "—and away rode the Captain, leaving Mr Hylton in a 
perplexed, whom he had found in a very melancholy, mood : 
for Islv Hylton had quitted Mr Melcombe witliout having 
scarcely a ray of hope left on behalf of the unhappy convict, 
for whom he had so powerfully but (as he now feared) un- 
availingly exerted himself. While he and Mr Melcombe had 
been in the midst of their anxious consultation on the course 
to be pursued, Mr Hylton's attention was called by his com- 
panion to a person just then passing along the street, into 
which the window of Mr Melcombe's office looked, and who 
was no other than old Ayliife, in his broad hat, long thread- 
bare blue coat, and high walking-stick, on his way from the 
gaol. Oh, what a face was his ! wasted, and full of sorrow 
and resignation ! And his step seemed feebler than Mr 
Hylton had before observed it to be. He heaved a deep 
sigh while gazing after the venerable figure of one whom 
he did not venture to summon into the apartment in which 
his son's welfare was the sole subject of discourse and con- 
sultation. Mr Hylton told Mr Melcombe, with a depressed 
air, that he had accidentally discovered what had been the 
topic of conversation at the Earl of Milverstoke's table, at 
the moment of Lord Alkmond's quitting it ; but that it 
had become known to him in a manner which at present 
prevented his making any use of what he had heard ; yet 
that he was able to assure Mr Melcombe, that the conver- 



•'^18 NOW AND THEN. 

sation seemed to throw no light whatever on the gloomy- 
affair, and, indeed, appeared quite incapable of being, in 
any intelligible or probable way, brought to bear upon it. 
Mr Melcombe looked blank enough on hearing this. 

" Then I fear the game is up^ Mr Hylton — if you will 
forgive the expression," said Mr Melcombe, shrugging his 
shoulders, and sighing. Mr Hylton only shook his head. 
" Can't you give me — I mean, are not you at liberty to give 
one the least inkling, — ^just a hint — a mere breath — eh ? I 
would receive it in sacred confidence." 

" On no earthly consideration," replied Mr Hylton, sadly. 
" My lips are sealed till I see one from whom I accidentally 
learnt what I know. But this I can tell you — certain I 
am that there is something or other strange and mysterious 
about Lord Alkmond's fate, unconnected though what I 
have heard may be with the facts proved against the 
prisoner." 

^' Does the intelligence which you have thus become pos- 
sessed of in any way vary your view of the facts proved at 
the trial?" inquired Mr Melcombe. After a pause, during 
which Mr Hylton rapidly ran over them, he answered in 
the negative. 

" Does it bear at all on the new facts laid before the 
Secretary of State, as mentioned in my agent's letter?" 
Again Mr Hylton paused, and longer than before. 

" I cannot say that it does ; nor yet will I say that it 
does not." 

" The way to try the question fairly is, to put yourself in 
my Lord Farnborough's place, and ask yourself whether 



NOW AND THEN. 319 

that which you now know warrants you in further suspend 
ing the execution of this sentence." 

^' Of course, acting only on the knowledge which he 
would then have of the case, I mean, independently of my 
own unshaken conviction of the prisoner's innocence?" 

" Of course ; most certainly. You see, Mr Hylton, my 
Lord Farnborough has a tremendous responsibility upon 
him, and must rest the exercise of his discretion on sure 
grounds. What conclusion, then, on these principles, ought 
Lord Farnborough to arrive at, as the case now stands, 
and supposing him informed of that which you say that you 
now are ?" 

"Oh, do not ask me !" replied Mr Hylton gloomily. 
"Is it information likely to bring you at all into com- 
munication with the Earl of Milverstoke ? What effect will 
it have on him if he know it ? Have we any chance of 
getting from his Lordship an expression of doubt of the 
prisoner's guilt, or a recommendation to mercy ? " Again 
Mr Hylton paused, turning over in his mind the possible 
result of Captain Lutteridge's interview that day with Lord 
Milverstoke ; and having done so, shook his head and sighed. 
" Well, mystery ! mystery all ! all is mystery ! " exclaimed 
Mr Melcombe, shrugging his shoulders : " my duties seem 
a farce at present. We are walking in a fog, a blinding 
fog ; " but, thought he, I see through that fog the dim, 
ghastly outline of a gallows ! " My real opinion," he con- 
tinued, " is that you have done all that can be done ; and 
this unhappy fellow must be left to his fate. But, by the 
way, Mr Hylton, you must needs answer the Under Secre- 



320 NOW AND THEN. 

tary's letter, and without delay. I never read one at once 
so courteous, so solemn, so exacting of an answer. As a 
gentleman, but, above all, as a Christian minister, you are 
bound to be promptly candid in this matter, and relieve his 
Lordship from the harassing doubts which it is you only 
who have raised in his mind." 

" 'Tis true, Mr Melcombe ; I feel the pressure of your 
words," said Mr Hylton, " and if possible I will send an 
answer by this night's coach ; but I must first see or hear 
from Lord ]\Iilverstoke ; and so have not" — looking at his 
watch — " a moment's time to lose. Pray come over to the 
parsonage to-morrow morning. " And with this Mr Hylton 
took his leave of Mr Melcombe, grievously depressed, and, 
indeed, reduced well-nigh to downright despair. He feared 
within himself to contemplate the scattered fragments of the 
structure of hope which he had raised with such well-meant 
precipitation. He felt, indeed, sick at heart. Not all the 
endearments of good Mrs Hylton could cheer his drooping 
spirits for a moment. He began now to afflict himself on 
account of having only protracted the mortal anguish of 
Ayliffe, and — in language terrible to be recollected — made 
him suffer twice the pangs of death. Little thought he of 
the angel who, in the form of Lady Emily, had that day 
joined her passionate advocacy with his ! That her gentle 
hand had struck a blow which reached a long ice-bound 
heart, whence gushed upon her streams of pent-up love and 
tenderness, as from a source never, perchance, to be dried 
up agam : but had that dear, noble creature succeeded in 
overmling her father's judgment? In his sudden con- 



NOW AND THEN. 321 

descension towards one whom he lightly regarded as, in such 
a matter, but a child, had he not shown a glimpse of reason- 
ing, adverse to her wishes, which was not to be answered ? 
Of all this Mr Hylton knew nothing; and, in forming the 
resolution to go that evening to the Castle, ascertain the 
state of his Lordship's feelings on the subject, and make one 
last earnest effort to shake his confidence in the prisoner's 
guilt, and persuade him to join in a recommendation to 
mercy, Mr Hylton felt himself at once discharging a duty 
and exercising a right. 



322 NOW AND THEN. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

Shortly after arriving at the parsonage, Mr Hylton 
partook of a slight and hasty dinner ; and then, taking with 
him the letter of Mr Melcombe's London agent, and that of 
the' Under Secretary of State to himself, set off for the 
Castle, with heavy forebodings, when he adverted to the 
ominous intimations with which Captain Lutteridge had 
that day left him. Mr Hylton 's corn-age was not at fault ; 
and in a cause which he believed to be righteous and just, 
he would have faced the bloodiest tyrant whom ever earth 
had seen and shuddered at. He would not else have been 
a true sei^ant of his Master, whose awful words should be 
ever sounding in our ears, subduing vain fears, and 
strengthening feeble pui-poses (and so they ever were with 
Mr Hylton :) — I say unto you^ my friends^ Be not afraid of 
them that kill the hody^ and after that^ have no more that they 
can do. But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear : Fear 
Him who^ after he hath hilled^ hath ^ower to cast into hell ; 
YEA, I SAY UNTO YOU, FEAR HIM. '' So," said Mr Hylton 
within himself, as he went to pay probably his last visit, in 
AylifFe's lifetime, to the Lord of Milverstoke, '^ let me ask 
myself — do I verily in my conscience believe (as said the 



NOW AND THEN. '323 

Judge to the jury in this poor man's case) that Adam AyUffe 
is, in spite of all appearances against him, innocent of the 
crime for which he is adjudged to die? " And after a brief 
and serious revolving of the matter, he answered, " Yes, I 
do : then will I make this last effort, and, if it fail, console 
myself by reflecting that what I thought my duty I have 
done, careless of consequences." 

Having come to this conclusion, he felt a wonderful com- 
posure of feeling, and serenity of spirit, which deserted him 
not for a moment, even when he entered the room in which 
Lord Milverstoke awaited him, and which had been the 
scene of their former agitating interview. He expected to 
see the Earl with a fierce and scowling countenance, and to 
hear him speak in a voice of bitter contemptuousness, if indeed 
he were not even roused into fury ungovernable. But Lord 
Milverstoke received him with marvellous calmness of 
manner, albeit with visible gloom. 

"Pray, Mr Hylton, be seated," said his Lordship, with a 
sort of solemn courtesy which sensibly affected his visitor. 
" I am far from well, in either mind or body, but doubtless 
you have that to say which I ought to hear, and at once, 
therefore, sir, speak freely. I am all attention." 

"Your Lordship has to-day seen Captain Lutteridge," 
said Mr Hylton, resolved to take advantage of this unex- 
pectedly calm humour of the Earl, and touch first the most 
dangerous topic which he had to deal with. 

"I have, sir. He told me what had passed between you 
and him this day. Captain Lutteridge is a plain-spoken 
gentleman, and somewhat abruptly broke to me a matter 



324 NOW AND THEN. 

very painful ; and I fear I dismissed him roughly, for which 
I am sorry, and ask his pardon ; and I request you, if you 
should see him, to tell him this from me." 

^' I trust your Lordship is satisfied that I had taken no 
means whatever to betray the Captain into the inadvertence 
which he must have explained to your Lordship." 

" He did not say that you did, Mr Hylton, nor suggest 
it ; and I believe that you could not possibly do so base and 
paltry a thing. And now that you know what formed the 
subject of conversation at my table, on that — that — hideous 
night — let me ask you, sir, whether you agree with what I 
told you some time ago, that what was said on that occasion 
could have no bearing on the case which you have thought 
proper so vehemently, so tenaciously, to advocate and 
uphold?" 

"My Lord, I feel it my duty to acknowledge that I have 
been unable, since hearing what was the subject of conver- 
sation on that dismal night, to see any means of connecting 
that conversation with the event which we all so deeply 
deplore ; which still seems to me enshrouded in mystery 
and terror. But I am unshaken in my belief of the inno- 
cence of Ayliife" — 

"I feel it, sir, very difficult to listen to you with calmness ; 
but I restrain my feelings ; and I request to be informed 
of your object in coming hither to-night." 

"My Lord, I deem it right to show your Lordship how at 
present stands the case, which now probably can have only 
one ending, and that on Monday morning next." Here he 
took out of his pocket-book two letters, and handing them 



NOW AND THEN. •'525 

to liis Lordship, said, '' The first, my Lord, of these letters, 
is one which gives an account of what took place before 
the Secretary of State, with reference to the communica- 
tion forwarded from Dunkirk ; and the second is the Under 
Secretary's letter to me, on the subject concerning which 
I have just spoken to your Lordship." 

The Earl took the two proffered documents, and opened 
first the latter with visibly checked eagerness, reading it 
over in silence. "I will not," said his Lordship, when he 
had come to the end, " ask you, sir, whether now you feel 
justified in having made the representations which have 
called forth this very marvellous and creditable despatch ; 
for such, I suppose, I must call it. But if you have no ob- 
jection to be so communicative, sir, I wish to know what 
course you may now be intending to pursue. I mean, 
speaking with precision, how you will endeavour to make 
it appear that you have not grievously disturbed the admi- 
nistration of justice. " 

"Oh, my Lord, while I acknowledge the courtesy of your 
Lordship's language, I feel the searing severity of your 
rebuke, and must submit to it. But while I do so, suffer 
me to say, that my conscience acquits me of having done, 
intentionally, wrong. I acted in a great, a terrible diffi- 
culty." 

" I think, sir, you evade — no, sir, I beg your pardon — I 
mean, I think that you did not hear, or have forgotten, my 
question. I ask you again, what course you intend to 
pursue with reference to this letter ? You pause, Mr Hyl- 
ton. K it be any relief to your feehngs, I have to inform 



r326 NOW AND THEN. 

you that I shall myself immediately write to my Lord 
Farnborough, telling him how I am forced, by circmnstances, 
to disclose a conversation which took place in the fancied 
privacy of my own house. I shall also mention the subject 
of that conversation ;" — he paused, and involuntarily closed 
his eyes for a moment — "and that — my — unfortunate mur- 
dered son was present, and probably heard what was said ; 
and shortly afterwards left the Castle. This I intend to do, 
sir, immediately : and then, sir, I presume your end will 
have been so far answered," said the Earl, momentarily 
resuming his usual sternness of tone and manner. Mr Hyl- 
ton bowed in silent acquiescence. "And what inference do 
I'OU think proper, sir, to draw from this circumstance, touch- 
ing my unhappy son's murder?" the Earl proceeded to 
inquire, with ill-subdued vehemence, and a voice in which 
a faint tremor was perceptible. 

"My Lord," replied Mr Hylton calmly, ''I do not pro- 
fess to draw any inferences. I know not that I am entitled 
to draw any, nor that I am able to do so." 

" This babbling Captain told you, sir, I believe, that the 
late Lord Alkmond seemed disturbed — distressed — at the 
conversation?" 

" Certainly he did, my Lord." 

" And of course, sir, you placed implicit reliance on what 
he said ? and were ready to act on what a man in his cups 
fancied that he observed in another ? But I cannot pursue 
this further, sir," said the Earl, having slightly changed 
colour. " And now, concerning this other letter." 

That also his Lordship read entirely through. When he 



NOW AND THEN. 327 

had done, he said, with a contemptuous air, " It did not 
require Lord Farnborough's talents to dispose of this flimsy 
farce ! But are you satisfied on this point also, sir?" 

" My Lord, I cannot carry the matter further, and look 
upon it, after the two letters which your Lordship has before 
you, as concluded ; or at least placed beyond my judgment 
or responsibility." 

" And what then^ sir?" inquired Lord Milverstoke, eyeing 
Mr Hylton steadfastly. 

"What then, my Lord, indeed?" echoed Mr Hylton, 
with a deep sigh. 

" I will tell you, sir. Justice will be satisfied, and a 
lesson taught to those who have striven to defeat it." 

" My Lord, pardon me, I cannot sit silent while" — 

" I tell you, sir," continued the Earl excitedly, " that 
you must and shall sit silent before him whom you have so 
deeply injured, whose feelings you have outraged, whose 
heart you have wrung, whose soul you have tortured almost 
to madness. I tell you, sir, that you have acted in vain 
and presumptuous defiance of common sense, the law of 
the land, and the principles of justice ; and most delibe- 
rately stabbed hearts into which it was your province 
rather to have poured sympathy and consolation. How, 
sir, shall you ever make me amends for the days and nights 
of misery which your intrusive meddling and false humanity 
have occasioned me ? Was your object, sir, to hold me up 
as a mark for the arrows of calumny ? To earn for your- 
self the reputation of the good and merciful, at my expense, 
coarsely careless of the peace of my family ? To make me 



328 NOW AND THEN. 

appear, I say, vindictive and relentless, that you might 
appear the reverse? But, doubtless, you have been par- 
tially successful ; and I beg of you to spend an early day 
next week, a very early day, sir, in humiliation and fasting, 
that you may acquire a smarting sense of your inhumanity, 
and possibly even learn a little humility, and to place less 
confidence in your own somewhat overweening and pre- 
sumptuous judgment ! Oh, let me hear, sir, what you have 
to say ! By all means, Mr Hylton ; plausibility will not 
even now desert you!" said the Earl, with a most bitter 
smile, it being the first approach — but such an one ! — to a 
smile of any kind that had been seen in his features since 
his son's death. 

" My Lord, I see before me, in your Lordship, only a 
cruelly injured and bereaved father ; your Lordship sees in 
me only an humble clergyman, miable, and indisposed, 
even were he able, to resent insult, or render railing for 
railing, I dare not, I cannot, take or feel offence at any 
thing which has just fallen from your Lordship ; and I 
believe that, though your words are sharp and cutting, your 
Lordship meant not offence against one who never uttered 
a disrespectful or hasty word to your Lordship ; who at this 
moment, God be my witness, loves and pities your Lord- 
ship"— 

'-'- I thank you, sir," interposed the Earl loftily. 

— " And sympathises with your sufferings," continued 
Mr Hylton, calmly. " But, my Lord, I choose to appeal 
for a moment, confidently, to your own high feelings. I 
call upon you to remember my sacred character and office. 



NOW AND THEN. 329 

and to bear with me while I solemnly denounce, in the 
name of Him whom I serve, your present fierce, unchristian, 
implacable spirit ! " 

" Mr Hylton," said the Earl, his eyes ghstening with 
fury, " I would be tranquil and temperate with you, in spite 
of your provoking me to forget what is due to myself, as 
well as you. Pray, sir, exercise, in your amazing meek- 
ness ! — a little discretion ; and consider whether you are 
not guilty of inordinate assumption in thus addressing him 
whom you have injured, and towards whom you express no 
single word of regret or apology !" 

" For what, my Lord, am I to apologise?" inquired Mr 
Hylton mildly. 

" If your own heart do not tell you, sir, words of mine 
are unavailing. And now that you have, perhaps, no fresh 
indignity to offer me under the guise of saintly counsel and 
rebuke" — Mr Hylton gazed earnestly at the Earl, but 
evidently with no intention to interrupt him, and with a 
look which made the Earl falter for a second or two — " let 
me, in my turn, presume to offer you some advice ; to give 
you, sir, a recommendation, and methinks a very solemn 
one. To the prison, sir — to the cell of the justly doomed 
betake yourself, and make efforts which, I would fain hope, 
may not even yet be unavailing, to repair the almost mortal 
mischief that you have done ! Try, sir, to turn the guilty 
eye which is there again to hereafter — that eye which you 
have diverted fatally to earth ! Calm that spirit ! Collect 
those wandering and distracted thoughts! Clear away 
the confusion which you have there created ! Be this^ 



330 NOW AND THEN. 

reverend sir, for some few days to come, yom' terrible 
task!" 

" I have not, my Lord," said Mr Hylton calmly, when 
the Earl had ceased, " your Lordship's known eloquence, 
your powers of blighting sarcasm — gifts from God, for wise 
purposes, towards yourself and others, and not weapons to 
be thus used agahist an unoffending, though most miworthy, 
servant of that Great Giver ! who is Lord of Lords, and 
King of Kings ! Oh, my Lord ! my Lord ! to the con- 
demned cell my steps shall, indeed, soon be bent ! Its poor 
occupant shall have my fervent prayers, my most affectionate 
offices ! I will prostrate by his side my own unworthy soul 
before the awful throne of God, now, I humbly trust, 
brightening before his eye, from which are falling fast away 
the films of earth. I will try, unscathed by your causeless 
curse, to lift up those trembling hands, and support those 
feeble knees : and oh ! my God ! for His sake, who ever 
liveth to make intercession for us, assist my efforts on that 
occasion ; and before he, this poor victim of error, go hence, 
may he declare his forgiveness of those who express no 
forgiveness towards him ! " 

No man living could have then seen and heard Mr 
Hylton, immoved: what dignity and solemn tenderness 
were in his every look, his every word! The Earl of 
Milverstoke gazed at him in silence, as he spoke ; and when 
he paused, said, with some effort to retain his former stern- 
ness of tone, " Sir, this is very eloquent and moving, and 
quite in the style of your profession ! — but endeavour 
to be reasonable and just. Have I said, sir, that I 



NOW AND THEN. 331 

would extend no forgiveness towards tliis unhappy 
wretch?" 

'•''Do you feel that you can^ my Lord?" inqmred Mr 
Hylton, and his eyes seemed to search the soul of Lord 
Milverstoke, whose wasted and agitated features were 
suddenly flushed, but he spoke not : '^ one word — one such 
word, my Lord, from those truthful lips of yours would be 
indeed" — 

" Are you my confessor, sir ?" inquired Lord Milverstoke 
sternly. 

" No, my Lord, I am not ; but still one who, till I may 
be dismissed, am intrusted with sacred functions towards 
your Lordship and your household. I charge you, my 
Lord, by your hopes of eternal life and happiness, passing 
through the forgiveness of injury — I charge you, my Lord, 
to give me authority, on your behalf, to tell this" — 

'^ Let not my name be mentioned in that place of guilt 
and pollution ! " said the Earl with great excitement. " By 
what authority, sir, do you presume thus to talk to me ? to 
tell me that you are entitled to ask me such a question ? If, 
between my God and myself I endeavour to do my duty 
towards Him and towards man — who shall interfere ? Sir, 
you still are^ at present, one of my chaplains, and I forbear ; 
but you will find it prudent to pursue these topics no 
fm-ther." 

Mr Hylton bowed with sad respectfulness. " I ask your 
Lordship to bear with me — possibly for the last time that I 
may be seen, or my voice be heard, within your Lordship's 
residence — in your Lordship's presence. Change, for a 



332 NOW AND THEN. 

luoment, the case that is now, my Lord ; and suppose that 
Adam AylifFe had been the murdered man, and your Lord- 
ship unjustly accused as the murderer, and doomed to die, 
though innocent — to be ignominiously hanged, my Lord — 
your big, proud heart bursting indignantly amidst universal 
yet undeserved execration" — 

" Why, sir, will you exercise your rhetorical powers upon 
me? I have acknowledged your eloquence; I add to it, if 
it gratify you, that you are a master of your art ; you dis- 
play powers, sir, that I never dreamed of your possessing ; 
and, to show you the gross injustice of your accusation 
against me, if ever it be in my power to contribute towards 
placing yom' talents in a more conspicuous position — of use- 
fulness, I mean, sir, — I will pledge myself to do it. Yes, 
sir, heartily, zealously — from motives unimpeachable by 
God or man. Is not that a forgiveness of injury ? For, 
sir, I tell you that I bear an almost intolerable sense of the 
injury which you have done me — which you continue to do 
me — injury with which you are now mingling insult I — 
insult, sir — bitter insult! I feel that you are absurdly 
striving to practise upon my feelings, and to trifle with my 
understanding ! Yes I do, sir," added the Earl, darting 
towards Mr Hylton a glance of mingled fury and scorn. 

<■'- Forgive me, my Lord Milverstoke ; you cannot have 
arrived deliberately at that conclusion ; and you are wrong- 
ing yourself, and not me ! Oh, my Lord, my Lord, my 
question remains unanswered ! Your expressions of intended 
good towards me, I am constrained to receive with implicit 
credence: but I ask no forgiveness for myself; it is for" — 



NOW AND THEN. 383 

" Pshaw, sir ! Now, let me remind you of a passage 
tliat you know well — Why see you the mote that is in my 
eye, and not the beam that is in your own ? 'Tis almost 
descending to the ridiculous, sir ; but it is you who force 
that descent — you, preacher of humility to others ! see with 
what tenacious conceit and pride you refuse to own your 
faults, and proudly disclaim a proffered forgiveness ! " 

" God must judge between us, my Lord," said Mr 
Hylton, with a sigh. " I am not conscious of feeling that 
which you impute to me." 

" That, sir, I believe," interposed the Earl bitterly ; 
" and now we understand each other ! " 

" But if aught in me — my speech, my manner, any thing 
that I have said or done — have given oiFence, I disclaim 
all intention of doing so, and ask your Lordship's forgive- 
ness most sincerely, and thankfully will receive it." 

" You have it, sir." 

" And now, my Lord " — 

"Pursue the subject no further, sir," interrupted the 
Earl, " lest you should clean provoke me out of all patience. 
I know what you would repeat and reiterate. Would you 
not be well pleased to see me accompany you, and present 
myself with you in the cell of— of" — the Earl stopped, 
shuddering, and recoiling from the presence which he had 
conjured up. 

" If you even did, my Lord, it might stand you in stead, 
hereafter, before the awful bar of God, when you and I, and 
this your abhorred and despised fellow-man, are standing 
to receive our final and irrevocable judgment!" As Mr 



334 NOW AND THEN. 

.Hylton said this, lie dropped his hccad invokmtarily, and 
spoke in a very thrilling tone as he continued — " There, 
also, will stand one who, could he now speak from amidst 
the silence of the grave, would say only — Forgive ! in his 
name, my Lord, I"- — 

" Oh, you presumptuous, horrible, and most barbarous 
person !" exclaimed Lord Milverstoke, starting up from his 
seat, his features flushed, his eyes glaring with fearful 
expression at Mr Hylton ; " is the grave not sacred from 
your vile profaning touch, your polluting presence ? " — he 
walked to and fro, apparently almost gasping for breath. 
"Leave the room, sir ! — leave me ! — never let my eyes hght 
on you again ! — you, whose miscreant hand would pluck 
out my heart, and trample upon it and the mangled body 
of my son together ! — Out upon you !" 

" May God forgive me, my Lord, if" — 

" Silence ! A word, sir, and you drive me to madness ! " 
The Earl stood still for a few moments, pressing both his 
hands upon his head. '' And all this— all this— to save"— 
he gasped — " from the gallows — a wretch — a bloodstained 
wretch. — Look you, sir, look ! So let him perish!" and 
rushing forward towards the table, on which stood a large 
and costly lamp, he struck it down with frenzied violence, 
and they were instantly in darkness. " Begone, sir ! " 

" I go, my Lord ; and so may not YOU go, hereafter, 
into OUTER DAEKNESS ! Amen ! Oh God ! Amen ! " ex- 
claimed Mr Hylton, at the same time slowly groping his 
way towards the door, and along the wall near which he 
had been standing. 



NOW AND THEN. 335 

" Begone ! messenger of Satan, sent to buifet me !" cried 
the Earl, with hoarse vehemence, stamping his foot furiously on 
the floor; and when Mr Hyltonhad nearly reached the door, 
and was considering whether he should make one more effort, 
before quitting the Castle for ever, he heard a loud groan issue 
from the Earl, and then a sound as of one falUng heavily. 

Mr Hylton hastily opened the door, and with great 
presence of mind, avoided calling out for assistance, lest he 
should fatally alarm Lady Alkmond, whose apartments 
were, though at some distance, in that quarter of the Castle. 
With as little disturbance as was possible under the circum- 
stances, assistance was soon procured for the Earl, the library 
within a few minutes' time being crowded with servants 
and others ; who, it may easily be imagined, were fearfully 
shocked on entering, with lights, the darkened room, where 
they foimd on one side of the library table the Earl stretched 
insensible on the floor, and on the other the scattered frag- 
ments of the lamp which he had, in his sudden frenzy, 
destroyed. Happily medical aid was instantly at hand. 
The physician resident in the Castle, in attendance upon 
Lady Alkmond, expressed no surprise at the illness of the 
Earl, whom he had known to be for some time in a state of 
considerable excitement, and who had during that very day 
complained to him of indisposition. It could not be for 
some little time pronounced whether Lord Milverstoke was 
suff'ering from an attack of apoplexy; but the remedies 
applied had reference to such an alarming visitation, and 
he was profusely bled on the spot, and then carried to bed — 
a messenger being immediately despatched to the county 



33G NOW AND THEN. 

town for tlie attendance of the consulting physician, a per- 
son of great skill and eminence. IMr Hylton stayed for 
some time, in such a state of anxiety and distress as seemed 
likely, combined with his own long-continued excitement 
and fatigue, to precipitate him also into serious illness. To 
the amazed and troubled inquiries of those whom he had 
summoned into the room, Mr Hylton answered merely that 
the Earl had been engaged up to almost the last moment 
in anxious conversation on the subject of recent events, and 
especially upon one which would probably occur within a 
few days. Fortunately, he was not asked how they came 
to be in darkness, and the lamp broken upon the ground ; 
and it was naturally supposed that the lamp might have 
been overthrown accidentally in the hurried movements of 
Mr Hylton in obtainmg assistance. As calmly as he could, 
under circumstances of such an agitating kmd as those which 
had happened just previously to his quitting the Castle, he 
considered, on his ride homeward, what course was now 
proper to be adopted with reference to answering the 
inquiries which the Secretary of State had directed to be 
addressed to him. As he conceived it requisite that no time 
should be lost, he hastened on to the parsonage ; and in 
time for despatch by that night's coach, which passed at 
midnight through the village, he addressed the following 
letter to the Under Secretary of State : — 

" Parsonage, Milverstoke. 

^'Sn, 

'' I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt 
of your letter of the 15th instant, and to express the deep 



NOW AND THEN. 337 

and grateful sense ^Yllich I entertain of Lord Farnborough's 
anxiety to see justice done in a case which I humbly con- 
ceive (however erroneously) to be one of peculiar difficulty 
and responsibility. I made the representations to the Lord 
Chief Justice, which were substantially of the nature men- 
tioned in your letter, under a strong conviction of the respon- 
sibility which attached to me in making them. I have now 
to inform my Lord Famborough that, after great efforts, 
and partly through an accident, I have discovered the nature 
of the occurrence which immediately preceded Lord Alk- 
mond's departure from the Castle to the wood. It consisted 
of a conversation, merely, among some of the guests left at 
the table, after Lord Milverstoke and others had quitted it, 
Lord Alkmond remaining behind. A topic was casually 
introduced, which led to rather animated conversation, and 
which was observed to be extremely disagi'eeable, and even 
painful, to Lord Alkmond, who took no part in it ; and, 
finding it persevered in, quitted the room, and was not seen 
afterwards alive by any of the guests at the Castle. The 
gentleman who first told me of this circumstance was one 
of those who had dined at the Castle on that occasion ; and 
hearing, after the trial of this case, of a remark which had 
fallen from the Lord Chief Justice, sent for me, and told me 
of the fact of this conversation, but declined mentioning what 
was the subject of it, until he should have received my Lord 
Milverstoke's permission. I have just quitted the Castle ; 
where, I lament to say, that while I was with his Lordship, 
he was seized with sudden — and possibly, I fear, serious — 
illness ; such as will probably render it impossible for his 

z 



338 NOW AND THEN. 

Lordship to do what he explicitly declared to me that it 
was his intention to do to-morrow — namely, to write and 
inform my Lord Farnborough, that the conversation in 
question was on the subject of duelling. I conceive, under 
the special circumstances of the case, that I am justified in 
making this disclosure ; to which, however, I trust Lord 
Farnborough will give no publicity, miless it be deemed 
absolutely necessary for the ends of justice. I feel bound 
in candour to state, that after anxious reflection during 
this day, I am at a loss to suggest any probable connexion 
between the happening of this conversation and the perpe- 
tration of the murder ; nor have I, at present, any reason 
to believe that more Ught can be thrown on the subject, 
notwithstandmg the possibility of the fact proving to be 
otherwise, were time allowed for further inquiry. And I 
must add, that the Earl of Milverstoke has repeatedly and 
most explicitly stated to me, that he knew no reason what- 
ever for Lord Alkmond's being agitated by such a conver- 
sation as that above mentioned ; and could not conjecture 
what bearing it could have upon the horrible murder of the 
late lamented Lord Alkmond. 

'' I have been made aware of what passed before Lord 
Farnborough and yourself, relating to this matter. I have 
no new facts or suggestions to offer on this subject, w^hichl 
must now finally leave in the hands of his Lordship, under 
the direction of a superintending Providence. I cannot, 
however, abstain from adding, that my own conviction of 
the prisoner's innocence remains unshaken ; but, at the same 
time, I cannot deny the strength of the case against him, if 



NOW AND THEN. 339 

regarded solely with reference to the facts established at the 
trial. 

" I have the honour to be, Sir, 

" Your obedient servant, 

" Henry Hylton. 

" The Hon. H. J. C. Wylmington." 

" Alas, Adam ! my poor friend ! I fear all is over ! I 
have done my best — but in vain," were the words with 
which, on the ensuing morning, Mr Hylton led into his 
library old AylifFe, who had come down to learn the final 
result of Mr Hylton's benevolent exertions : having walked 
for that purpose all the way from the county town where 
his son lay awaiting death. Ayliife clasped his hands 
together in silence, and looked unutterable things at Mr 
Hylton, who seemed unable to bear the misery that 
gleamed upon him from those penetrating blue eyes, 
the expression of which he had, in happier days, so often 
admired. 

" Then he must die ! " faintly exclaimed the old man, 
after awhile, his eyes never having wandered for even an 
instant from those of Mr Hylton, who only shook his head, 
in sad affirmance of Ayliife's words. " Oh ! let me return 
to my son !" said the old man, slowly rising. " Adam ! my 
son ! my son ! would God I might die with thee ! How we 
could uphold one another in passing through the deep 
waters ! Wilt thou not pray for us, sir, that God would be 
with us in this bitter hour?" 

" Ay, my poor brother, let us kneel before Him who will 



340 NOW AND THEN. 

see, and hear, and answer us, though it may not be as we 
would at this moment desire !" 

Mr Hylton gently assisted Ayliffe to his knees, (for he 
appeared bewildered, though he had spoken calmly,) and 
sinking on his own, with faltering voice addressed a short 
and fervent prayer to the Almighty, that He would vouch- 
safe support to those who reverently strove, whether living 
or dying, to yield themselves to His sovereign will in all 

things. 

" The blessing of an old man, fatherless, be upon thee 
and thine, thou minister of God !" said Ayliffe, when they 
had risen from their knees ; and his countenance, voice, and 
gesture seemed, as he spoke, scarcely to be of this world. 

'' Amen, Adam ! Amen ! " said Mr Hylton, grasping his 
hands affectionately. 

"Is it fixed that my son die on Monday?" inquired 
Ayliffe, with dreadful calmness. 

u i^ ig — alas ! it is ! " rephed Mr Hylton : " I see now no 
earthly means whatever of delaying the day, or preventing 
the execution of the law." 

" Friday ! — Saturday ! — Sunday !" said Ayliffe, gazing 
intently at Mr Hylton. 

" Yes, Adam ; three days ! only three ! How important 
are they for hereafter ! " 

" And then my son is no more on earth ! Let me go to 
my son ! T stay too long from him !" The old man rose 
from his seat, and, walking slowly to the door, taking his 
hat in one hand, and his staff in the other, exclaimed, as if 
to himself, " Adam ! Adam ! I am coming to thee ! " 



NOW AND THEN. 341 

'' How go you, Adam, my dear friend ? have you any 
conveyance thither?" inquired Mr Hylton, earnestly. His 
words seemed for a moment to rouse his unhappy companion. 

" God will guide me ! If he do not give me strength, I 
die by the way ; for truly, truly, sir, my heart is faint within 
me, and my knees tremble ! " 

" Kemain a moment till my return," said Mr Hylton, 
hurriedly — and presently came back, accompanied by Mrs 
Hylton, who, in tearful silence, assisted her husband in 
pouring out a glass of wine, which the old man took with 
thankfulness, his hand trembling the while ; and observing 
Mrs Hylton in tears, he shook his head mournfully, attempt- 
ing to speak to her, but his lips uttered no audible sound. 
At that moment their little daughter timidly approached 
the door, and, entering the room, stole beside her mother, 
looking at those around her apprehensively and in silence. 
Then the old man's feelings gave way, as he gazed at her ; 
the tears forced themselves down his cheeks ; he shook his 
head for some time, evidently struggling for speech ; and at 
length said in a faint voice, " The Lord bless thee, little 
one!" 

" Lay thy hands upon her, Adam, and give her thy bless- 
ing, thou suffering saint ! " said Mr Hylton : and gently 
placing his daughter before the old man, he put his hands 
upon her head, and solemnly and tremulously repeated his 
words, " The Lord bless thee ! Amen ! " 

Shortly afterwards he quitted the parsonage, and would 
not hear of any assistance being provided to enable him to 
return to the gaol. Mr Hylton pledged himself to visit the 



342 NOW AND THEN. 

unhappy convict, if possible, on that very day ; " Though I 
tell you, Adam, it will be a far sorer trial to me, than I can 
well bear. I trust, however," he continued, with great 
emotion, " that your poor son is satisfied that I have not 
lightly lengthened his sufferings." 

"Oh, sir ! reverend sir ! if it were lawful for man to bow 
to man, my poor Adam would fall on his knees before thee, 
and even kiss the dust off thy feet ! " 

" Let him receive me calmly, Adam, I entreat thee ; or 
I may not be able to discharge the solemn office which I 
shall have gone to perform — to administer such counsel and 
comfort as God may enable me. Farewell now, Adam, for 
a while ; and tell your son, if I be not with him before you 
are, that I am coming ; that I will not — I cannot — desert 
him." 

Within a few hours afterwards Mr Hylton, after a melan- 
choly ride thither, entered the gaol, and took an opportunity, 
before going to the condemned cell, of seeing the chaplain — 
an excellent person, exemplary in the discharge of his duties 
at the prison, and who had been unremitting in his attentions 
to Ayliffe. The first word uttered by the chaplain concern- 
ing him not a little agitated Mr Hylton. 

" Poor soul ! " said the chaplain, " he is about to ask you 
to use your influence, as a magistrate, with the authorities 
(I told him that I knew it would be in vain,) that when he 
has suffered, his body may not be given over to be anatom- 
ised, but be buried in your churchyard, in the same grave 
with his mother, and that you will bury him." 

" I — I — cannot, then, see the unhappy man to-day ! My 



NOW AND THEN. 343 

feelings are already overpowered. I am quite unfit to dis- 
charge the duty which I came to endeavour to do," said Mr 
Hylton 5 and his disturbed countenance and gestures con- 
firmed what he said. " Is his father with him?" 

" No ; he has not yet returned from Milverstoke. He 
was to have seen you, and asked you, in his son's name, to 
do what I have just mentioned." 

" He has been with me," said Mr Hylton, almost in tears; 
" but his heart must have failed him : he said not a word to 
me on the dismal subject." 

" That old man is piety personified ! His reverent sub- 
mission to the will of God, in this awful dispensation of his 
Providence, has made all my own past teachings, my dear 
friend, seem poor and ineffectual — every act of my life, a 
short-coming. His image is ever before my eyes — his 
voice, solemn and calm, ever sounding in my ears. I sit, in 
spirit, at his feet ! " 

" I, my friend, have long done so ! — And his son : does 
he waver in asserting his innocence?" 

"No, not for a moment : he is firm as at the first — declar- 
ing his belief that, when too late, it will be shown that the 
deed was done by others, and that he knew nothing of it 
whatever. Once he showed unusual emotion on the subject, 
and, drawing himself up with an air of true dignity, if ever 
I saw dignity in man, exclaimed, ' No murder could I do at 
all ; but least of all could I strike, coward-hke, from behind. 
When I think of tliat^ and that people can believe that Adam 
Ayliffe, an Englishman, did so, I feel as though my heart 
would clean burst, for shame and anger !' " 



''544 NOAV AND THEN. 

Mr Hylton listened to this in agitated silence ; for he 
could not speak. 

" And, in truth," continued the chaplain, " there is some- 
thing noble in the poor fellow's features, and their expression 
is of a pure frankness, such as never, I am sure, masked the 
heart of a murderer. I have come to your conclusion ; and 
I terribly fear that this man is going to suffer wrongfully. 
But what can be done ? Who is to be blamed ? Consider 
that the gloomy position which exposed him to the gallows 
was sought out by himself; and, as we cannot see with 
God's eyes, human justice must do the best it can. I have, 
I think, satisfied Ayliffe that a fairer trial than he had could 
not have been. I have said to him, ' Had you been a sworn 
juryman, as your father has several times been, and on such 
a trial as yours, your verdict, on your oath, must have been 
Guilty ; ' — and he was silent." 

" In what state of feeling is he, now that he believes his 
doom to be unchangeably fixed?" 

'^ Then it really is fixed ? " inquired the chaplain suddenly, 
and very gravely. 

" I doubt no more that he will suffer on Monday, than 
that the sun will rise on that morning. Alas ! I am too 
well able to express that conviction. I have left no stone 
unturned — have moved in high, nay, the highest places — in 
vain. Only last night there was a truly awful scene between 
Lord Milverstoke and me, the consequence of which I cannot 
foresee ; for he was seized with a fit while I was with him, 
endeavouring, to the best of my ability, to induce upon him 
a Christian temper of forgiveness and mercy." 



NOW AND THEN. 345 

" Is his Lordship, then, stem and implacable as ever?" 

" Indeed, I fear he is ; but God grant that, in my zeal, I 
may not have gone further than my duty warranted. My 
heart bleeds for his sufferings ; so did it all the while I was 
with him. But, alas! his will is as iron, seemingly not 
softened by affliction." 

" Oh, what a contrast — what a contrast to this old man 
Ayliffe ! Before I leave you," said the chaplain, suddenly 
placing his hand on Mr Hylton's arm, and speaking with 
an air of peculiar solemnity, " let me say, that you must, 
with me, attend the prisoner in his last moments ! He will 
expect it — nay, I believe he will this day ask you to do so ! " 

'' Oh, my dear friend," replied Mr Hylton rather faintly, 
" forgive me ! — I pray you, cease ! Surely sufficient for 
the day is the evil thereof!" 

^' True, my friend ; but prepare, you, for the painful 
question : and therefore only do I mention it. And now 
you must lose no time, if you would be of service to the 
prisoner. You will find two Prayer-books in the cell : and 
will probably see the prisoner reading in the great old 
Bible of his father." 

" Adam ! God be with you ! " exclaimed Mr Hylton as 
soon as the turnkey had unlocked, unbarred, and thrown 
open the door of the cell. 

Poor Ayliffe rose eagerly, the clanking of his heavy 
fetters sickening the soul of his sorrowful visitor, whose 
hand he grasped convulsively, and then carried to his lips, 
but spoke not a word. 

" Alas, Adam ! I have only gloomy tidings for you, if you 



34() NOW AND THEN. 

need to be told them : all earthly hope is now utterly 
extinguished ! The day of your departure is near at hand. 
I feel it a sacred duty to assure you that, on Monday 
morning — on Monday morning^ Adam — the will of God will 
be accomplished on you. Then He who gave you life, will 
take it from you : He who placed you on earth, will remove 
you from it. May you, Adam, be ready for that tremendous 
change !" 

Finding that Ayliffe was firmly grasping his hand, and 
sighing deeply, but apparently not suffering violent emotion, 
Mr Hylton, in a low earnest tone continued to address him. 

"Regard this transitory life, henceforth, as over — fled like 
a dream — gone as a shadow — yet leaving its traces in most 
awful responsibility, on account of what has been done in 
that brief space, in that fleeting dream and passing shadow ? 
Look upward ! For that is your spirit formed — of that, 
made capable. Be not disheartened, — be not presumptuous ! 
It is fearful to look back on the long array of sins which you 
have committed, known only to God and yourself, to whom 
He may now have had many visible, which had before been 
forgotten ! What sins wilfully committed ! what stifling 
of the voice of conscience ! — what myriad holy warnings 
disregarded ! Let not the foul tempter and enemy of man- 
kind, in these your last hours, deceive you : be prepared 
against him. He will strive, as I know he has striven, to 
tell you of great sins, and little sins, and that none which 
you have committed do deserve this punishment which is 
inflicted upon you — nay, he will impiously tell you that this 
death, which is coming on you, is unjust !" — Here Ayliffe 



NOW AND THEN. 347 

heaved a profound sigli, but made no attempt to speak. 
" Whether you die innocent of the crime for which the law 
of man has declared jour life forfeit, God perfectly knoweth, 
as you cannot doubt ; and if your conscience be herein void 
of offence towards God and man, God forbid that such a 
consciousness should nevertheless lead you down to destruc- 
tion, by inciting profane and rebellious thoughts ! Adam, as 
a servant of the living God, I earnestly warn you against 
this deadly snare and danger, and remind you that, as you 
cannot escape in anywise from the power of God Almighty, 
you must needs resign yourself mto His hands, whose wis- 
dom is imsearchable, infinitely past finding out, but also 
whose goodness and justice are perfect and absolute : and 
in this dispensation, which appears to you strange and 
unreasonable, yet in a moment — in the twinkhng of an eye 
— He could reveal abundantly sufficient gromids and reasons 
for this His ordering. He may not be pleased to do so with 
you in this life, though possibly, when you are gone. He may 
vouchsafe to make plain all that now seems mysterious and 
confounding. And He may not choose now to show you a 
reason for what He doth with you, because He will have 
you thoroughly exercise your faith and obedience, as the 
condition of your immortal soul entering into happiness with 
Him, that can have no end. And, though you die innocent 
of this particular act charged against you, and so, in the 
language of men, die unjustly — (yet forget never that this 
evil overtook you when seeking revenge, and indulging 
malignity most utterly abhorrent to God, and contrary to 
all religion)— yet, Adam ! think of One who, ignominiously 



348 NOW AND THEN. 

dying, asked that, if it were possible^ the cup of agony and 
death might pass from Him^ yet submitted to the will of His 
Father, and, knowing no sin, died yet the just for the unjust ! 
Adam ! let this thought kindle youi' spirit into faith and 
love ! " 

^'Oh, SU-, there — there are all my hopes: all is darkness, 
but there ! And when I am, though only for a moment, 
put oif that thought and hope, I sink ! and am quite un- 
done ! " 

This Ayliffe said very earnestly, and in a way that great- 
ly consoled and encouraged Mr Hylton, who then spoke 
long and movingly to him of the glorious but awful Pre- 
sence in which they were ; and brought distinctly before 
him the gracious promises, but also the strict conditions, of 
the Gospel. Poor Ayliffe's answers told Mr Hylton of the 
constant presence and teaching of old Ayliffe, whom Mr 
Hylton likened to the guardian angel of his son. 

"And now, Adam, one question I must ask you, and the 
answer must be a true one, and it will tell at once whether 
your peace and hopes for hereafter be well or ill founded. 
Do you, from your heart and soul, forgive all mankind — even 
those whom you think to have most grievously wronged 
you?" 

"Ay, sir, I do; God be thanked, I do!" repHed Ayliffe, 
quickly and heartily, and with such a heavenly smile on his 
features that ^Ir Hylton felt an indescribable awe in look- 
ing at him and listening to him. 

"Do you forgive Lord Milverstoke ?" 

"Oh, sir, why should I be angered with him? His son 



NOW AND THEN. S49 

has been murdered, and he thinks that I did that murder ! 
But he has done nothing of malice against me, who die — not 
through Ms will or moving — according to the law of the 
land. Never in this case have I felt malice towards my 
Lord, so God be my witness !" 

"There is another, Adam," said Mr Hylton, pointedly. 
"I know, sir, whom you mean — one that has truly been 
my enemy, and the foe of my father and me." 
"I mean Mr Oxley, Adam." 

"I do clearly and perfectly forgive him, as I do hope 
myself to be forgiven ; but I must say the truth, sir — it has 
been a long and a hard business to do this. But God has 
heard prayer for me, and helped me to feel the forgiveness 
that I now profess ; and I hope Mr Oxley will, when I am 
gone, bethink him of his unkindness towards those who 
never injured him, and were striving hard to live honestly, 
though near upon starving." 

"And yet, Adam, is there one other" — 
"Oh, sir, you speak of Hundle, that first led me into all 
this. Whatever he has done against me, I have forgiven 
— I do forgive ! He was a cruel and deceitful man to me 
— but he must answer to God for it ! " 

"And have you, Adam — it is my duty to remind you — 
nothing to answer for against that man ? With God, in- 
tended guilt is guilt — for He seeth into the heart ! " 

"I know it, sir ! I know it ! " replied AylifFe, with a con- 
trite air. "I went out to lie in wait for Jonas Hundle, 
with foul ill-will : and Satan might have urged me much 
further than I had meant ; for I will own, sir, that as I 



350 NOW AXD THEN. 

walked in that wood, waiting to see him, when I thought of 
him, these fingers tightened like a vice round my stick. 
Oh, sir ! a terrible business it might have been !" 

" And all this, Adam, fully seen and known by Almighty 
God at the time ! The forgiveness which you pray for, 
must first be shown by you — there must not be one spark 
of animosity lurking in your heart, or it will pollute the 
whole beyond cleansing ! And have you thus thoroughly 
forgiven?" 

"Ay, ay, I have, God being my witness ! and from the 
time I first felt that I had done so, I was a changed man ; 
and, even in these irons, felt for a while free and light- 
hearted ! I have forgiven ! I do — so may God forgive 
me !" said AylifFe, with a look of such meek sincerity that 
Mr Hylton implicitly believed him, and said very cheer- 
fully- 

"Why, Adam ! God hath been with you ! and He is 
with you, and will be with you ! " 

" So T do humbly believe and hope, sir ; yet I feel often- 
times sharp and bitter pains and pangs, and fall into dark- 
ness. There's one — nay, there be more, that I leave behind 
me — would that they went with me, if such were the will 
of God, and so were quit of a miserable world !" 

'^ Beware of such thoughts, Adam ! for they lead to 
unholy repinmgs and doubts. God may have good, or 
evil, in store for them ; but only when He pleases will they 
go after you. In the course of nature, yom' good, your 
virtuous father must follow you, and it may not be long ; 
but while he lives, surely you will be thankful that he 



NOW AND THEN. 351 

is left here to watch, for a while, over those whom you 
love?" 

" But, sir, there is a thing that does cruelly trouble my 
poor soul : where is their bread to come from ? Who is to 
work for them when I am gone ? Oh, sir ! almost my last 
thoughts will be of that ! My child is a poor, little, weak 
creature, and likely never to be able to stir for himself! 
Now would I cry, and could ever, when I think of him and 
Sarah : but I cannot cry ! Tears will not come, though they 
might ease my heart, which feels hot and choked !" 

" My poor friend !" said Mr Hylton, whose tears had 
fallen fast, " believe me when I assure you that God has 
already raised up a friend for those whom you will leave 
behind you. Cast your care on Him who careth for you : 
those whom you love will not, shall not, perish ; they shall 
not come to want !" 

Here Ayliffe put his hand into his bosom, and took out a 
small packet, neatly fastened with thread, and opened it. 
There were two small papers, and each contained a lock of 
hair. 

'' This is Sarah's, sir : and this is Adam's," said he ; and 
he gave such a sad, heart-broken look, first at them, and 
then at Mr Hylton, that the latter turned aside his head to 
conceal his emotion. 

" Ah, sir ! " said Ayliffe calmly, and sighing, " I wish my 
tears could come ; but I am past it !" Then he folded up 
the little precious remembrances, and replaced them in his 
bosom. " Are these to be buried with me, sir?" said he, 
with an ominous, a fearfully significant look at Mr Hylton ; 



352 NOW AND THEN. 

who, remembering what the chaplam had prepared him for, 
felt suddenly sick at heart. 

"What answer can I give you, my poor friend?" 
inquired Mr Hylton, in a low tone, looking down ; and there 
was a dismal silence. 

"Oh, sir, cannot you, being a magistrate, beg off my 
poor body, for burial? Some pangs it might save me, to 
think that I lay in the blessed earth of our churchyard at 
Milverstoke, in my mother's grave — ah ! you buried her, 
sir." 

" I did, Adam — I did ; may you soon meet her sainted 
spirit ! And why care about the darkened dust that you 
leave behind you? K your spirit live for ever, in 
happiness" — 

" Sir — good, kind sir — I cannot help it ! It is the nature 
that I am made of ! My flesh creeps to think that — that 
this body " — he shuddered visibly from head to foot. 

" Poor friend ! your feelings I respect — I would have 
your wishes attended to ; but, alas ! I have no power 
whatever. It pains me to remind you, Adam, of the 
sentence" — 

" Oh, I heard it, sir ! " said he, and seemed for a moment 
absorbed in a sickening recollection. " I know that so as my 
soul be right, it signifies little about my poor body ; but I 
should not tell truth if I said that this thing did not grieve — 
nay, fright me. How I do think of it, su' ! Do, sir, i^romise 
to do what you can ! " 

" I promise to do my utmost endeavour." 

" Thank you, sir ! " he replied with a deep sigh. 



NOW AND THEN. 3.53 

'-'• And now I must leave you, Adam" — 

" He rose up suddenly, his irons rattling so as to startle 
Mr Hylton. ^' Not — not for ever, sir ! " said AylifFe, with 
wild alarm in his face, stretching his arms forwards. 

'' What do you mean? " inquired Mr Hylton faintly. 

" Oh, sir ! good, dear, merciful sir ! do come to me again ! 
I cannot die happy if I see you not again ! " 

"I will be with you again," faltered Mr Hylton ; and, 
fearful of a more explicit promise being exacted from him, 
knocked at the cell-door, which was immediately opened. 
Then cordially grasping both the poor convict's hands, he 
fervently blessed him, and withdrew, with feelings much 
disturbed by the recollection of what had passed, and the 
prospect of the dismal scene which, after his promise, awaited 
him. 



2 a 



354 NOW AND THEN. 



CHAPTER XV. 

Feeling assured that he would be too much agitated by 
thoughts of the ensuing Monday morning, to admit of his 
doing duty at his church on the approaching Sunday, Mr 
Hylton succeeded in procuring the assistance of a friend ; 
and when the hour of divine sei-vice had arrived, was thank- 
ful that he had been relieved from a duty which he then felt 
that he certainly could not have gone through — at least 
with the requisite degree of calmness and self-possession. 

When the congregation, which was crowded, and very 
sad, saw Mr Hylton walk, unrobed, into his own pew, w^hile 
a stranger entered the reading-desk, they too surely sur- 
mised the cause ; and many eyed the harassed, benevolent 
countenance of their pastor, with beating hearts. He was 
once obliged to change his position ; for, as he stood, his 
eye fell on the seats, now vacant, which had usually been 
occupied by old Ayliffe and his son. Oh, where were those 
two then ? Where would one of them be at that time on 
the morrow ? There were portions of the sublime service 
of the Church which fell on all ears, and sunk into all 
hearts, that day, like sounds from the unseen world! — 
When arrived at the appropriate part of the service, the 



NOW AND THEN. o55 

minister paused for a moment, and amidst deathlike silence 
said — " The prayers of this congregation are desired for seve- 
ral persons dangerously ill, and for one appointed to die!^^ 

The responses to the Litany were but faintly audible ; 
yet they came from the depths of hearts smitten with sym- 
pathy and fear. 

All that day Milverstoke, though a secluded and rural 
district, afforded significant evidence of the excitement 
which pervaded the minds of those who lived in it and the 
neighbourhood. Many strangers came to the church, both 
morning and afternoon ; and were afterwards to be seen 
talking in the churchyard, and at the doors of the houses. 
As Mr Hylton, with Mrs Hylton and their Httle Mary, 
walked on to the parsonage, the obeisances of those whom 
he passed were silent and almost reverential — bearing 
eloquent homage to his untiring, albeit ineffectual zeal in 
the cause of humanity. 

All were filled with concern at the final failure of his 
exertions to avert the fearful catastrophe which was to take 
place on the ensuing morning. The opinion of the neigh- 
bourhood upon the subject had undergone a great change, 
influenced by the profound respect which every one enter- 
tained for the Vicar, his character, and talents. " If such a 
man," it was said, and not without good reason, '' were so 
satisfied of the innocence of Ayliffe, as to have persevered 
with his strenuous exertions on his behalf even up to the 
last moment, and had caused such doubts to be felt in the 
highest quarters as had led to the fortnight's respite, which, 
alas ! was so awfully to end on the morrow — there must 



356 NOW AND THEN. 

be cogent grounds for the belief on which he had acted. " 
Rumour had got hold of some of the circumstances on which 
Mr Hylton had foimded his futile hopes — and those circum- 
stances had been, as is usually the case, exaggerated and 
misrepresented, but all in favour of Ayliffe. Vague whispers 
were heard of something having occurred at the Castle, on 
the night of the murder, of a mysterious character, connected 
with the officers. Captaua Lutteridge's visits to the Castle 
had been noticed, and also those of Mr Hylton. The sudden 
illness of the Earl of Milverstoke, occurring just when it did, 
and especially while he was in consultation with ]\[r Hylton, 
gave a strange, dark complexion to the whole affaii'. But 
the most substantial of all these matters, was that founded 
on the facts which were alleged to have been witnessed from 
the sea, on the night of the murder, — two men, no one 
could conjecture who, seen running along the shore, as for 
their lives, in a direction from the wood, not many minutes 
after the murder had been committed! What was the 
inference ? No one thought of the possibility that these two 
might have been accomplices of Ayhffe ; but they were 
given credit for having been the sole perpetrators of the ap- 
palling murder, for which he was alone to die ! Then, upon 
all this doubt and mystery, was brought to bear the excellent 
character which he had ever borne — one perfectly irreproach- 
able till thus accused; one of a generous, affectionate, 
obhging nature: oh— said all — 'twas Impossible that he 
could be a murderer ! Then thought they of the father ! 
the wife ! the child ! Oh ! how this last was hugged and 
kissed, — all unconscious of the cause of such accumulated 



NOW AND TllKN. 357 

endearments — that Sunday afternoon, by the good, pitiful, 
weeping womanfolk of the village ! With what awe was 
regarded the shut-up cottage of the Ayliffes, on which were 
written, in their eyes, desolation ! and terror ! and injustice ! 
And, indeed, this dismal and mysterious affair had obtained 
notoriety, not only throughout the county, and those ad- 
joining it, but the whole kingdom. The murder of the son 
and heir of a peer of the realm, and that one so powerful 
and eminent as the Earl of Milverstoke, might well, indeed, 
be regarded as an incident of national interest and impor- 
tance. 

The fortnight's respite had awakened, indeed, universal 
curiosity and apprehension, lest from any cause there should 
be an vmhappy miscarriage of justice, by the escape of the 
guilty, or the sacrifice of the innocent. The authorities of 
the county were prepared for the attendance of a prodigious 
concourse, on the ensuing morning, to witness the execution 
of one who was either most terribly and irreparably wronged, 
or the most cowardly and bloody of murderers. Prudent 
precautions were taken, under these circumstances, to pre- 
serve the public peace. Many special constables were sworn 
in ; every turnkey in the prison was armed, and their 
numbers were doubled. A strong party of soldiers, both 
horse and foot, was ordered to be in attendance, the former 
under the command of Captain Lutteridge (who heartily 
wished that he had been in another part of the country ;) 
and they were to march into the open space in the centre of 
the prison, at a very early hour in the morning. All this 
had been deemed necessary by the High Sheriff, as a 



358 NOW AND THEN. 

matter of precaution, in consequence of certain intimations 
which had been conveyed to him, of its not being impro- 
bable that a rescue might be attempted — as had been the 
case, under less exciting circumstances, only half a year 
before, in another part of the kingdom, where a man had 
been executed who, being at the time believed, was after- 
wards proved, to have been innocent of the crime for which 
he died. 

At seven o'clock on Monday morning Mr Hylton, pale 
and harassed, made his appearance at the chief gate of the 
prison on horseback ; having, not without some difficulty, 
got through the throng of persons pouring down to the 
gaol ; in front of which stood — sickenmg spectacle ! the 
expectant scaffold, already surrounded by a great and con- 
tinually increasing crowd — though the brief work of death 
was not appointed to take place before nine o'clock. When 
Mr Hylton had ridden within the gates, and before he had 
dismounted, his eye fell on Captain Lutteridge, who, the 
reins of his horse being held by one of his men, was walk- 
ing slowly to and fro with folded arms before the troopers. 
His features were stem and gloomy, and he returned Mr 
Hylton's hasty and somewhat agitated salutation in silence. 
It was a calm, bright, spring morning ; and the hedges and 
trees which Mr Hylton had passed, Avere all beginning to 
put on their glistening verdure ; and the birds were hopping 
and fluttering about, free as the air, and chirping and sing- 
ing merrily ! ]Mr Hylton had sighed only the more heavily 
for observing them. He found the chaplain robed and 
waiting for him, as they had appointed, and, without liaving 



NOW AND THEN. 359 

spoken more than a word or two, followed him towards 
the condemned cell, where, shortly after their arrival, the 
Sacrament was to be administered. The door stood open — 
three turnkeys being near it, on the outside, each with his 
blunderbuss ; and Mr Hylton's knees trembled beneath him, 
and he felt deadly faint, at the first glance he got of the 
occupants of the cell — father and son silently locked in each 
other's arms. Not a word had they been heard to speak 
for nearly half an hour. 

"Do not — do not disturb them ; I cannot go in," whis- 
pered Mr Hylton ; and they both withdrew, returning to the 
room which they had quitted. The chaplain spoke not to 
him, nor he to the chaplain, for some time. 

" But that my word is given to this poor soul, I could 
almost pray to be disabled from witnessing this appalling 
scene," at length said Mr Hylton. 

"Courage — courage, my dear brother!" replied the 
chaplain firmly ; " the voice of duty calls you hither ; and 
you shall now see such piety and virtue in trouble, and in 
death, too, as shall for ever hallow this morning's scene in 
your memory. I have myself been on my knees, and in 
tears, beseeching God that the lesson which I am this morn- 
ing learning, may be written on my heart till it cease to 
beat! and that He would give me fortitude fittingly to 
discharge my sacred duties on this awful morning ! Be not 
apprehensive ; our charge is subdued into a sublime calm- 
ness, and has inquired after you with serenity almost 
approaching to cheerfulness. There is with him at this 
moment, as you indeed saw, a visible angel ! But now let 



360 NOW AND THEN. 

US return," said the chaplain, observing that Mr Hylton had 
recovered his composure. " All is in readiness for the last 
sacred nte of our religion!" Again they set out on their 
solemn errand. 

" Adam, my friend," said the chaplain gently, on enter- 
ing the cell, " here comes he whom you have asked for — 
Mr Hylton!" 

The old man and his son were still locked in one another's 
arms, which, however, on the chaplain speaking, were slowly 
unloosed ; and two such countenances presently looked on 
Mr Hylton, silently taking his seat beside them, as filled 
him with fear and reverence. Tearless were the eyes of 
both, but there was immortality in their expression, a 
heavenly radiance on their solemn and wasted features. 
Neither father nor son spoke, while gazing calmly at Mr 
Hylton, who, as he grasped a hand of each, felt them to be 
cold as death ; but there was no tremor in them. After a 
few moments they again slowly folded their arms round 
each other. 

" Speak, Adam, tell these good gentlemen what God hath 
done for thee ! Speak, my son, for thy God ! Hath he 
not taken all fear of death from thee?" said at length the 
old man in a low tone, but with great firmness. 

"He hath! and I know it is He that hath done it, 
of his unspeakable mercy!" replied his son, who, leaning 
forward, kissed his father's white hair with gentle fondness 
and reverence. 

" Here," said the old man, " is my only son ; God gave 
him to me, and hath allowed us many years of love together. 



NOW AND THEN. 8(il 

He is now taking him back again ! I shall stay a Httle 
time after thee, Adam — only a little; and assuredly we 
meet again ! " 

" The blessing of the ever-merciful God be upon you, 
Adam ; upon you both !" said Mr Hylton tremulously. 

The prisoner slowly raised to his lips Mr Hylton's hand, 
and kissed it. 

" I thank you, sir, for coming as you promised ! But — 
I cannot speak much," said he; adding, with an air of 
infinite sweetness, " Oh ! what love and pity you have ever 
shown me ! " Here the chaplain made a sign to Mr Hylton 
that all was in readiness for the Sacrament, which was 
thereupon administered with an awful solemnity. 

When it was over, " How much longer hath he to live?" 
inquired the father, with a faltering voice, as soon as he 
had risen from his knees, and kissed the forehead of his son. 
He spoke to the Under Sheriff, who had joined with them 
in the sublime ceremony which was just over. 

'' One hour and a half — or only a very few minutes more 
than that," replied that functionary, looking sadly at his 
watch. 

" May my son and I pass that hour alone ?" inquired the 
old man : and added, turning to his son, " Adam, wouldst 
thou not rather that we spend this our last hour together, 
with no eye on us but that of Grod?" 

" Yes, I would," replied the prisoner, calmly ; " but oh, 
sir! rememher!'" said he, turning towards Mr Hylton, and 
fixing on him an eye of mysterious expression. 

'' I do ! I will ! " replied Mr Hylton. " At the hour's 



3G2 NOW AND THEN. 

close, I will, with God's permission, again be with you, and 
remain ! " On this the prisoner grasped his hand with silent 
energy. 

" We will now leave you," said the Under Sheriff, " for 
exactly one hour ; and then it will be necessary for you to 
quit this room for another ;" by which he meant the press- 
room, where the prisoner's irons were to be knocked off. 
All then withdrew, and the cell-door was closed and locked. 
Word Avas from time to time brought to Mr Hylton and 
the chaplain, during the ensuing hour, that the occupants of 
the cell were engaged in almost constant prayer. The 
chaplain's room, in which, together with the Under Sheriff, 
they were sitting, overlooked the yard where the military 
stood : and shortly after they had entered this room, the 
window being open, Mr Hylton overheard the stern per- 
emptory voice of Captain Lutteridge uttering a word or two 
to the dismounted dragoons, which Avere followed by the 
sounds of re-mounting. When the noise thus occasioned 
was over, both Mr Hylton and the chaplain distinctly heard 
the confused hum as of a great multitude, apparently close 
to them ; and such was indeed the fact — the governor 
taking occasion, as time wore on, to come into their room 
and inform them that the concourse without was beyond all 
measure the greatest that he, or any one else in the prison, 
had ever seen collected together ; but, he added, that the 
road through which they should have to pass to the fatal 
spot, was very short, railed off, and guarded by a strong 
body of constables. 

" And though we think it right to be prepared," he added. 



NOAV AND THEN. 363 

glancing down through the windoAV significantly, '' at pre- 
sent there has been not the slightest ground for apprehend- 
ing any sort of disturbance." Mr Hylton took the oppor- 
tunity of the Governor leaving the room to speak alone 
with the Under Sheriif, on a subject which sickened the 
speaker as he mentioned it. 

"Must every portion — every portion of the sentence be 
carried into literal effect, Mr Under Sheriff?" 

'^ Certainly, sir," he rephed with a surprised air ; but 
added quietly, '' Oh ! you mean, I dare say, whether the 
body must be given up to be dissected?" Mr Hylton 
nodded in silence. 

" Assuredly," was the answer, " quite a matter of course, 
reverend sir, however painful to the friends or survivors 
of the criminal. It is a part of the sentence ; and can on 
no account be dispensed with. Not," he whispered, with 
a significant look, " if I may say it between us, that suppos- 
ing great interest were to be made, more than a nominar^ — 
Here the prison bell began to toll — oh! dismal, dismal 
sound ! — and the Under Sheriff suddenly started, ceased, 
took out his watch, and, observhig the hour, withdrew in 
silence. In a few minutes' time, Mr Hylton heard a clank- 
ing sound, as of one passing their door in fetters ; and, im- 
mediately afterwards, the chaplain informed him that the 
prisoner was going to the press-room, where his irons were 
to be removed, and then the final preparations would be 
made. 

" Poor soul ! he will now soon be out of his misery ! " said 
the chaplain : and, as he spoke, a turnkey came silently, 



364 NOW AND THEN. 

motioning them to follow him. Mr Hylton, with a beating 
heart, accompanied the chaplain into the chamber, where, 
as he entered, he saw a turnkey in the act of knocking off the 
prisoner's irons. Ayliffe stood erect, with calm and solemn 
countenance, his eyes fixed upwards, and his lips firmly 
compressed together ; while his father, with both his hands 
grasping one of the prisoner's, had buried his head so that 
his face could not be seen. The tolling of the bell at inter- 
vals had an almost palsying effect upon the shaken nerves 
of Mr Hylton. There was a petrifying silence for a few 
moments, as soon as the irons had been removed from the 
prisoner ; when Mr Hylton, with suddenly averted eyes, 
then observed approaching one whose ghastly ofiice was only 
too manifest. But at that moment a hasty step was heard 
enteiTng the room ; and Mr Hylton, turning round, observed 
the Governor of the gaol, with a face blanched by strong 
emotion of some sort or other, rapidly beckon to the Under 
Sheriff, who instantly quitted the room. 

" I devoutly hope," whispered the chaplain to Mr Hylton, 
with evident agitation, " that this is no liot or attempted 



rescue i 



f" 



They both turned towards the door, which still stood 
open, and Mr Hylton followed the Under Sheriff out of the 
room. In a few seconds afterwards he lost all sense of what 
was going on, and staggered unconsciously into the arms of 
the Governor, as the latter uttered the words — '-'• A reprieve ! 
Positively ! A reprieve !" 

The Under Sheriff, with cool self-possession and thought- 
ful humanity, stepped instantly back to the press-room, and, 



NOW AND THEN. 365 

without entering, locked the door ; and then went to ascer- 
tain, beyond all doubt, how the fact really was. That some- 
thing extraordinary had happened was evident. Outside 
was a prodigious commotion ; inside were Captain Lutte- 
ridge and his dragoons, sword in hand, ready to charge at an 
instant's notice : but, thank God ! there was no necessity for 
their services. A confused cry had, some few minutes before, 
been heard from the extremity of the crowd, which stretched 
round a large building, so as to be unable to catch any view 
of what was going on at the gaol ; but turning the opposite 
way, on hearing sounds from that direction, they beheld a 
startUng sight — a post-chaise and four, with a horseman 
riding beside it, all at full gallop ; and inside the chaise 
was a man waving something white. 

" Stop ! stop ! — stop the execution ! A reprieve ! a re- 
prieve !" was shouted by both the person inside the chaise 
and the horseman without. The cry was instantly caught, 
and presently an unusual thundering sound was heard from 
the vast concourse, echoing the word " Eeprieve! reprieve! 
reprieve !" 

Eound the outskirts of the crowd was in a twinkling seen 
dashing along towards the back of the gaol, where stood the 
chief entrance, the post-chaise, with its occupant, and the 
accompanying horseman, each of whom bore a precious 
document, even under the royal sign-manual, both having 
been separately despatched from London, to prevent all 
possibility of accident ; and just eighteen minutes before the 
prison clock struck nine, the two authoritative acts of mercy 
were in the hands of those to whom they were addressed, 



366 NOW AND THEN. 

the representative of the High Sheriff, and the Governor of 
the gaol. 

Ay, there had been no miscarrying — there was no mis- 
take ! The swords, carbines, and muskets of the expectant 
soldiery were not, thank God ! to be turned upon the vast 
honest-hearted English crowd which stood outside, shouting, 
till their voices were well-nigh cracked, " Hurrah, hurrah ! 
God save the King ! ' ' 

On hearing all this, Captain Lutteridge hastily dismounted, 
and got sight of one of the documents which had proved of 
such prodigious potency. He quietly read it all over, and 
then somewhat quickly returned to the yard, and mounted 
his horse. 

" My lads," said he, addressing the soldiers, '' hearken to 
me, do you see. His Majesty the King, whose servants we 
are, hath been pleased to reprieve the prisoner, of his own 
good will and royal pleasure ; whereupon, my lads, we may 
by-and-by return to our quarters, and in your hearts you 
may say, ^Long live King George ;' — though that, doubtless 
you do always ; for you serve the best and greatest king on 
earth, that is certain." 

The Captain was even meditating for a moment an 
extravagance, viz. to give his men leave to shout " God save 
the King !" but discipline and a sense of dignity repressed 
any such exuberant manifestation of enthusiasm. He 
looked, however, at their pleased faces with great inward 
satisfaction ; and a smile nearly stole over his grave rigid 
features, as he said to himself ,— " Those lads of mine 
are good lads; and methinks T know one that will 



NOW AND THEN. 367 

make another of them, if this man that was to have 
suffered be he whom I have seen about Milverstoke. 
Piff ! paff! If I can only catch hold of this Ayliffe, I'll 
have him pretty quickly clapped on horseback, and in the 
ranks — and a better trooper than he will make, is not to be 
seen. I'll warrant me he'll do a trifle of good service for 
his most merciful Majesty !" 

But tlie Captain was here reckoning without his host. It 
was true that a pardon had arrived for poor Ayliffe, but 
only a conditional one, and that condition was — trans- 
portation to the colonies for life ! When the astounding 
news of his deliverance was communicated to him whom 
they suddenly snatched out of the gaping jaws of death, the 
hangman had just completed pinioning the prisoner's hands. 

" Loose those cords," said the Under Sheriff, as calmly 
as he could ; and, holding in his hand the document on 
which he was acting, he approached Ayliffe, and said, 
" Adam Ayliffe, his Majesty the King hath sent thee a 
pardon under his own sign-manual, on condition that thou 
be transported for life. — God save the King : so thou well 
may est say ! " 

The prisoner staggered back for some paces before the 
cords could be loosed, as ordered by the Sheriff. 

''Come, lad! come, come!" quoth the executioner, 
following him, " take it steadily — take it quietly, lad ! 
Thou'st plenty of time to think on't now, I assure thee, 
both here and elsewhere !" 

But Ayliffe still staggered back, with the appearance of one 
stunned by some sudden blow. Then he sunk, with a half 



368 NOW AND THEN. 

stupefied air, on his knees, with his hands clasped together. 
From this position the executioner raised him, and seated 
him on a form which was near. In a few moments' time 
his face was covered with a clammy sweat — one, indeed, 
which h^d suddenly bm'st through every pore of his body. 
His grim attendant took out his pocket-handkerchief, and 
wiped Ayliffe's face gently. 

^' Fetch him some water, Gregory," said the executioner to 
his man, who in truth had not yet quite recovered his own 
wits, which had been scattered by the suddenness of the 
affair. 

He soon obeyed his master, and in a few moments' time 
returaed with a cup of water. Ayliffe, however, seemed to 
recoil from the sight of it, and, as though with a choking 
sensation, hastily motioned off the hand that held it to his 
lips ; and there was horror in his eye. At length he opened 
his mouth with a sudden gasp, and heaved a mighty sigh — 
and another — and another. 

^' This is right," quoth the executioner, pattmg him on the 
back ; " he'll soon come to himself. Nay, lad, don't be 
frighted — I've done with thee ! Why — how thou starest ! 
Well," he added hastily, whispering, as he heard the 
Governor's well-known heavy step approaching the room, 
" Good-by, good-by, my man. I do thmk thou wouldst 
have done well, and stood it bravely outside !" 

Ayliffe gazed vacantly at him, as the hideous functionary 
slunk away — all present seeming to breathe more freely 
when he was gone. 

Old Ayliffe had fallen senseless on the floor the moment 



NOW AND THEN. Sdi) 

that he had heard the Sheriff's announcement, and hiy there 
for some minutes quite unobserved; those present being 
sufficiently occupied with the person principally concerned 
in that day's tragic and agitating proceedings. The rescued 
prisoner, however, by-and-by recovered himself sufficiently 
to think of his venerable parent : but by the time that he 
was fully conscious of what had taken place, alas ! he foimd 
himself the solitary tenant of a cell in the prison, whither he 
had been conveyed, almost unconsciously, by the Governor's 
order, for security's sake. In answer to his loud and 
agonising cries, he was presently informed by the Governor 
that his father was not well, having been somewhat over- 
come by the suddenness of that which had just taken place. 
The truth was, that the poor old man had lain insensible so 
long, in spite of all that could be done for him, as to alarm 
the gaol doctor for his safety. He was treated with all 
imaginable kindness, and taken to a chamber in the 
prisoner's part of the gaol — lying on the very bed which 
had been occupied, some few months before, by his unhappy 
son. 



2 B 



370 NOW AND THEN. 



CHAPTEE XVI. 

There was yet another person then withm those gloomy 
walls on whom the marvellous occurrence of that morning 
had produced an overwhelming eiFect, and that was Mr Hyl- 
ton; to whom alone was attributable, under Providence, 
the deliverance of Adam Ayliffe from the ignominious and 
horrible death which, to all human appearance, had been 
inevitable. 

Impelled by an irresistible impulse, and fortified by an 
imwavering conviction of the prisoner's innocence, Mr Hyl- 
ton on the Friday evening, as a last resource, had, relying 
on the King's well-known sternly independent character, 
written a letter to his Majesty, under cover to a nobleman, 
then in London attending Parliament ; and with whom Mr 
Hylton had been acquainted at College. He earnestly en- 
treated his Lordship to lose not a moment in securing a 
personal interview with the Kmg ; or, at all events, the 
delivery into his Majesty's hands of the letter in question, 
touching, as it did, life and death ; its object being to save 
from execution, on the Monday morning, a man who was, 
in the writer's opinion, as innocent of the death of which he 
had nevertheless been found guilty, as the Secretary of State 



NOW AND THEN. '371 

himself, to whom application on behalf of the convict had 
been unhappily made in vain. Mr Hylton's letter to the 
King was expressed in terms of grave eloquence. It set 
out with calling his Majesty's attention to the execution, six 
months before, of a man, for a crime of which three days 
afterwards he was demonstrated to have been innocent. 
Then the letter gave a moving picture of the exemplary life 
and character of the prisoner, and of his father ; pointed to 
testimonials given in his favour at the trial, and added the 
winter's own ; together with the most emphatic and strong 
conviction which could be expressed in language, that who- 
ever might have been the perpetrator of this atrocious murder, 
it was not the prisoner doomed to die on Monday. It then 
conjured his Majesty, by every consideration which could 
properly have weight with a sovereign intrusted with 
authority by Almighty God to govern according to justice 
and mercy, to give his personal attention to the case then 
laid before him, and act thereon, according to his Majesty's 
own royal and clement judgment. This letter Mr Hylton's 
noble acquaintance, happening to be absent from town for a 
few days, travelled thirty miles, at great inconvenience, to 
lay before the King ; who did not receive it till past mid- 
night, at St James's, and after he had been in bed for up- 
wards of an hour. On hearing, however, from the nobleman 
who brought the letter, that it was one of a very urgent 
nature, concerning life and death, those who were intrusted 
with guarding the royal repose caused it to be broken by 
the delivery of the packet. His Majesty instantly got out 
of bed, and, after hastily glancing over the letter, ordered 



372 NOW AND THEN. 

Lord Faraboroiigh to be sent for immediately, with direc- 
tions to bring along with him all the papers which he had, 
or could lay his hand on, relating to Adam Ayliffe, then 
lying under sentence of death for the murder of Lord Alk- 
mond. His Majesty had paced his chamber many times, 
somewhat impatiently, before his astonished minister arrived : 
for the latter, being in bed when he received the royal sum- 
mons, had had to go from his private residence to his office, 
in order to get the documents required by the King, and 
had experienced great difficulty in finding them ; all clerks 
and others being, as might well be supposed, out of the way. 
Immediately on his entering the King's antechamber. Lord 
Farnborough encountered his Majesty, who with bluff 
earnestness begged him to be seated at a table, duly furnished 
with lights and writing materials, and then the King request- 
ed to be informed of the whole facts of the case ; to which he 
paid great attention. When Lord Farnborough had, in his 
usual terse and emphatic fashion, given his own view of the 
matter, assm'ing his Majesty, with expressions of profound 
respect, that a clearer case for hanging there never had been, 
if justice were to be any longer administered in the coimtry ; 
his Lordship appeared confomided when the King said, 
very thoughtfully, that he was by no means so clear on the 
subject as his Lordship seemed ; and in fact felt so uneasy 
on the matter, being one of life and death, that he could not 
return to bed without deciding one way or the other. Lord 
Farnborough assured the King that he need feel no anxiety 
whatever on a matter which was exclusively within the 
province of his ministers. 



NOW AND THEN. 373 

" But look you, my Lord Famborough," quoth the King, 
somewhat hastily and sternly, " suppose you and I differ on 
this matter?" 

"Please your Majesty, we are your Majesty's sworn 
responsible servants" — 

" So, so, because you are my servants, my Lord Farn- 
borough, I am to be your puppet, eh ? — to register your 
decrees, nolens volens I By those that begot me, and those 
before me, but I will show you otherwise ! Look you, my 
Lord, and all of you that serve me, I am set over my people 
to protect them, and am answerable for them to Him who 
set me over them : and if it cost me my crown, look you, 
as I must answer for it hereafter, I won't see the humblest 
creature calling me King deprived of his life, even though 
according to law, {which can't give back life taken wrong- 
ly,) if I in my conscience do verily doubt whether he 
ought to die." 

Lord Farnborough said something rather faintly about 
a constitutional monarchy — 

" Ay, ay," said the King, catching the word, "but I am 
also a conscientious King, my Lord. My advisers may be 
impeached in Parliament if they give me evil advice ; but 
I have to answer to the King of Kings ; and none but a 
King can tell a King's feelings in these matters. God only 
knows what I suffered some half a year ago, in a matter of 
this sort— eh, my Lord? What say you to that ? Have 
you forgotten it?" 

" Not at all, please your Majesty : but I take leave 
humbly to represent. Sire, in the matter now before your 



o74 NOW AND THEN. 

Majesty, that your Majesty, as the guardian of the laws, has no 
discretion herein, but must allow the law to take its course." 

'' I w^on't, I won't, my Lord. There are features about 
this case that I don't like ; and, in short, I shall not have 
this man die. Transport him for life, if you please ; then, 
if we be wrong, he may retm-n: but — there are paper, 
pens, and ink j pray, my Lord, let it be done instantly, for 
time is precious ; I will put my hand to it now — and then 
methinks I shall sleep soundly till morning." 

" Pardon me, Sire," began his Lordship, with an air of 
vast deference — 

" No, no ! not you — I have nought to pardon you ; 'tis 
another I mean to pardon" — 

" Sire, this really is one of the plainest cases of guilt" — 

" Did you not say the very same thing to me, my Lord, 
on the occasion I have just spoken of?" inquired the King 
with stern solemnity : '' did I not then say I had doubts ? 
but I yielded to your certainty^ my Lord! And what 
followed?" 

" Please your Majesty, we are all frail ; all human insti- 
tutions are liable to error" — 

"Therefore," said the King quickly, "ought we the 
longer to doubt in matters of life and death, my Lord." 

" I do assure your Majesty that this interference of your 
Majesty will give great dissatisfaction" — 

" To whom ? Where ? AVhy ? ' ' inquired the King with 
great dignity. " What is that to me, when my conscience 
is concerned, who have SAvorn an oath, when God Almighty 
placed my crown on my head, to cause law and justice, in 



NOAV AND THEN. 375 

MERCY, to be executed in all my judgments? Who swore 
that oath, my people or I ? I did, and, with God's assis- 
tance, will keep my oath. And as for my people, they are 
a brave and virtuous people, and won't obey me the less 
because I will not again let any one die on a gibbet hastily." 

Lord Farnborough remained with his eyes earnestly fixed 
on the King, and his pen in his hand, which hung down by 
his side. 

''Let it be done, my Lord," said the King peremptorily : 
and his Minister obeyed. 

Within a couple of hours' time, down went the messen- 
gers of mercy, whose arrival has been already duly told. 
The King went to bed very comfortably ; the Minister re- 
turned to his, most exceedingly uncomfortable — with, as it 
were, a bee buzzing in each ear, and tickling, even to sting- 
ing, his consequence both personal and official ; expecting 
to be questioned pretty sharply in Parliament on what had 
taken place. He resolved, however, that then he would 
loyally uphold his royal master's act at all hazards, and 
give him full credit for the noble spirit in which he had 
acted ; and he would ask, what if it should afterwards turn 
out that, but for the King, this man would have been hanged 
innocent ? And who should gainsay the propriety of the 
King's reference to the painful occasion of a former, fatal, 
and irreparable miscarriage of justice? 

When Mr Hylton entered the cell where Ayliffe sat, now 
not fettered, the latter sprung from his seat, and then drop- 
ping on his knees, embraced those of Mr Hylton, crying 
like a child. Yet he knew nothing of that last interference 



376 NOW AND THEN. 

of his exemplary benefactor, which had saved him, at the 
eleventh hour, from swinging a dishonoured corpse from 
the gallows which was at that moment being taken down. 

''God has been very, very merciful towards you, Adam," 
said Mr Hylton, " and your spared life will be a monument 
of that mercy ! Adam, now that no power on earth can 
again place you in jeopardy on this charge, I ask you, as 
in the immediate presence of your merciful God, are you 
innocent?" 

"Oh, Mr Hylton ! oh, kind and most beloved sir! how 
can you ask? Do you, then, doubt? Have I not just 
been standing half-way in eternity, and almost face to face 
with Him that was to judge me ; and could I stand there 
with a lie on my lips ? Ay, I am innocent as my own poor 
crippled child." Here he burst into an agony of weeping. 

" Well, well, Adam, you must forgive me. I ought not, 
perhaps, to have asked you such a question — I feel that I 
ought not ; but you know not yet the immense responsibility 
which I have incurred on your behalf, and in reliance on 
your word. Adam, once for all, I tell you that I am as 
thoroughly persuaded of your innocence of this awful crime, 
as I am of mine own ; and may God himself, if it please 
His infinite wisdom, one day make it plain to us, even here, 
in this life." 

Ayliffe answered, with a look and a manner eloquent with 
injured innocence, "Amen! yea, Amen! Amen! sir!" And 
then, burying his face in his hands, uttered aloud a few 
words of fervent prayer and praise, to which Mr Hylton 
reverently responded. " And now for Sarah, sir. Oh, 



NOW AND THEN. 377 

Sally ! Sally ! Sally ! shall we, then, meet again!" exclamied 
the poor prisoner in a passionate and frantic manner. 

" Adam, try to be calmer ; it is very natural that you 
should be excited " — 

" Why, sir. Is she deadV said Ayliffe, in a whisper that 
echoed through the soul of Mr Hylton, who was also startled 
by the wild despairing eye which was staring at him. 

" She is not dead, Adam," rephed Mr Hylton ; " and I 
go hence to see her." 

Ayliffe burst into bitter weeping, and sobbed, '' Oh ! that 
I might go with you, sir, to see her dear, precious face, 
though but for one moment ! " 

" Adam, be thankful to God that it is with you as it is — 
that I have now to prepare her, not for your death, but for 
your preserved life." 

" Oh ! yes, sir ! thanks be to God for His infinite mercy ! 
I leave it all to Him ! for what have I deserved at His 
hand!" 

"What, indeed, Adam !" echoed Mr Hylton. 

With infinite tenderness and judgment did he discharge 
the critical duty which he had undertaken. His cautious 
words fell upon the ear, and sunk into the fainting soul, of 
poor Mrs Ayliffe, like drops, as it Avere, of living water. 
What tears oozed from her closed eyes, and flowed down 
her wan and wasted cheeks ! She knew not, so vigilant 
had been her faithful attendants, at the repeated instance of 
Mr Hylton and the doctor resident at the Infirmary, the 
awful aspect with which had dawned upon her doomed hus- 
band that memorable Monday morning ; and all that Mr 



378 NOW AND THEN. 

Hylton dared to tell her was, that her husband's life was no 
longer in danger. It was not till Mr Hylton was ridmg at 
a brisk canter into the village, passing many old familiar 
faces wearing an expression of tearful congratulation at the 
issue of his humane exertions (the last of which, however, 
had not then become known ;) nor till he felt ]Mrs Hylton 
sobbing in his arms, and saw his little Mary crying she 
scarce knew why, but not with an unhappy cry, — that that 
pious pastor of his flock felt the full luxury of having done 
good, and beheld upon his humble handiwork the radiant 
seal of God's blessing. Oh, happy moment ! in which he 
forgot all his past agonies and long-unrequited toil, and said, 
with profound devoutness and self-abasement, ^' Not unto us, 
O God ! not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for 
thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake." 

About the middle of the next day he went out on foot, 
some mile or two upon the road, to meet one whom he ex- 
pected, and into whose wellnigh broken heart also, he had 
been the honoured instrument of pouring the balm of con- 
solation. 'Twas old Adam Ayliffe, who, as he approached, 
was sitting between a farmer and his wife, who had gone in 
their market-cart purposely to bring him home. The good 
woman's arm was kindly placed round the spare and feeble 
figure of the venerable sufferer, as her husband, on Mr 
Hylton's coming up, stopped the cart. The old man then 
tried to rise, but in vain, his knees evidently tottering under 
him ; and with trembhng hands he raised his broad hat 
from his head, and looked unutterable gratitude towards 
Mr Hylton, who himself could hardly speak, as he grasped 



NOW AND THEN. 379 

one of AylifFe's extended hands. His eyes were fixed 
tearlessly on Mr Hylton for a long time, during whicli they 
spoke volumes of thrilling feeling. 

'^ God bless thy dear bald head, Adam !" said the 
farmer's wife, gently pressing upon it his hat ; " do not thou 
catch cold; the parson, belike, may come and see thee when 
we get home." 

" Yes, yes, I will," said Mr Hylton, and followed them 
on to the cottage ; which, during the preceding day, and 
that morning, had been got to rights and made very tidy, 
against the old man's return, by some dozen eager and 
affectionate pairs of hands ; who had trimmed the little 
garden, cut the hedge, and cleaned the small windows till 
they looked clear as crystal. Ah, dear little services, how 
eloquent you are I — When the cart had arrived at the cot- 
tage, old Ayliffe was carefully helped down, gazing at his 
cottage looking so trim and tidy, with feelings not difficult 
to be understood, but hard to express. Within was Mrs 
Hylton, who had intended to come out and welcome home 
the poor old man *, but on seeing him her heart failed her, 
and she continued to busy herself with the little table, on 
which her own hands had, shortly before, placed some small 
matters of refreshment. When Adam entered, leaning on 
Mr Hylton's arm, all who were present, and there were 
several, rose and received him silently, being unable, when 
they saw his face, to speak a word; nor could he, but shook 
his head in silence. And when one of them, on his sitting 
down, brought him his little grandson, he folded in his arms 
its pale and silent figure, and presently his tears fell fast. 



380 NOW AND THEN. 

They relieved him ; and by-and-by he was able to say, 
though in a very faint way, " God bless you all, good 
friends!" and he drank, without uttering a word, the wine 
which Mr Hylton had placed in his trembling hand ; and, 
perhaps recollecting on what occasion it was that wine 
had last touched his lips, he looked upward with an awful 
expression. 

In the course of the next week, poor Adam Ayliffe was 
removed, handcuffed, from the county gaol, together with 
several other prisoners, and conveyed to a vessel in a neigh- 
bouring port ; and thence was duly brought to London, and 
placed on board a ship, to be conveyed abroad, in pursuance 
of the grievous conditions of his pardon. He had spoken 
scarcely a syllable between the time of his quitting the gaol 
and being lodged on shipboard, a handcuffed convict, shunned 
even by his guilty brethren as one stained with blood, and 
unjustly saved from the scaffold. He resented no petty 
mdignity which was offered him, and there were many, 
inflicted by those who loathed the vile Cheat-the-gallows ! 
His patient endurance they attributed to consciousness that 
he had no right to cumber the ground, to pollute, by his 
accursed presence, the land of the living. All this he bore 
in silence. His big, indignant heart seemed constantly on 
the point of breaking. Xo kind word to him ever fell upon 
his ear. He felt desolate and blighted ; bearing the brand 
of Cain upon the brow of innocence. 

For he WAS innocent ! 

The unfortunate Earl of Milverstoke lay, for a long while. 



NOW AND THEN. 381 

in a most precarious state. The first words which he spoke, 
on regaining full consciousness, after having remained with- 
out it for nearly a fortnight, were to his daughter, who sat, 
pale and worn, beside him. 

"Emily," said he feebly, "let me, during the day, see 
Mr Hylton ; " and he was obeyed. 

When that reverend person seated himself, some hours 
afterwards, in a chair placed for him beside the prostrate 
peer, it was with mingled hope and apprehension ; for with 
what feelings his Lordship might recollect the closing scene 
of their last memorable interview, Mr Hylton knew not. 
He gazed at the sunken features of the Earl with deep 
emotion. 

"Mr Hylton," said his Lordship, faintly, "have you 
forgiven me?" 

"My dear Lord," he replied, gently, " I have nothing to 
forgive. Were you fit to bear it, I should ask you to for- 
give we" — 

"Do you think that God will forgive me ?" inquired the 
Earl, closing his eyes. 

"To be sure He will, my dear Lord !" replied Mr Hyl- 
ton with energy ; " He will ! if He be but rightly asked for 
forgiveness!" The Earl shook his head sadly; and his 
wasted fingers, white as snow, grasped Mr Hylton's hand. 

" May I — still — reckon on your pious services — towards 
me and my family ? " 

"Oh, my dear Lord," replied Mr Hylton, with subdued 
fervour, "yes ! as long as I live, and it may please God to 
enable me to serve you 1" 



382 NOW AND THEN. 

''There are those here," said the Earl, speaking, from his 
weakness, with difficulty, "who love, who reverence you: 
and I am one of them, but the unworthiest !" Again his 
fingers gently compressed those of Mr Hylton, who was 
much affected. "When I have a little more strength, Mr 
Hylton, we will speak of that — of which we have formerly 
spoken ; but it will be, on my part, in a different spirit. " 

Mr Hylton bowed silently, with feelings of earnest respect 
and sympathy, and also with others of a profound and agi- 
tating character. For alas ! to him had been intrusted the 
trying and terrible duty, undertaken only in deference to 
the agonising importunities of Lady Emily, of communi- 
cating to her noble parent intelligence, which had reached 
her accidentally, and while utterly unprepared for it ; and 
by which not only she, but shortly afterwards Lady Alk- 
mond, had been fearfully agitated, and for a while pros- 
trated. 

Among several letters which had come to the Castle, 
shortly after the Earl's sudden illness, was one marked 
" Immediate " and " Private and Confidential," and bearing 
outside the name of the Secretary of State. From this letter 
poor Lady Emily leamt the lamentable intelligence, that her 
brother, the late Lord Alkmond, had, when on the Conti- 
nent, and shortly before his marriage, slain, in a duel, a 
Hungarian officer ; whom, having challenged for some 
affront which had passed at dinner, he had run through the 
heart, and killed on the spot : the unfortunate officer leaving 
behind him, alas ! a widow and several orphans, all thereby 
reduced to beggary. The dispute which had led to these 



NOW AND THEN. - 383 

disastrous results had been one of really a trivial nature, 
but magnified into importance by the young Lord's quick 
and imperious temper, which had also led him to dictate 
terms of apology so humiliating and offensive that no one 
could submit to them. Wherefore the two met ; and pre- 
sently the Hungarian fell dead, his adversary's rapier having 
passed clean through the heart. It was, however, an affair 
which had been managed with perfect propriety ; with an 
exact observance of the rules of duelling ! All had been 
done legitimately ! Yet was it mueder ; an honourable, 
a right honourable, murder : but murder as clear and glar- 
ing, before the Judge of all the earth, as that by which 
Lord Alkmond had himself fallen. When, therefore, thus 
fearfully summoned away to his account, the young noble's 
own hand was crimsoned with the blood which he had shed: 
and so went he into the awful presence of the Most High, 
whose voice had ever upon earth been sounding tremen- 
dous in his ears, — TFi^ere is tliy brother f JVhat hast thou 
done ? The voice of thy brother'' s blood crieth unto me from 
the ground. Unhappy man ! well might his heart have been 
heavy, when men expected it to be lightest ! Well might 
his countenance darken, and his soul shudder within him, 
under the mortal throes of a guilty conscience ! From his 
father's splendid banqueting-table he had been driven by 
remorse and horror ; for his companions, unconscious that 
they were stabbing to the heart one who was present, WOULD 
TALK of duelling, and of one sanguinary duel in particular, 
which bore a ghastly resemblance to his own. Such poor 
amends as might be in his power to make, he had striven to 



384 NOW AND T1IP:X. 



offer to the miserable family whom he had bereaved, beg- 
gared, and desolated, to vindicate an honour which had 
never been for one instant really questioned or compromised 
by his slain opponent ; and, if it had been tarnished, could 
BLOOD cleanse and brighten it ? 

All the money which he could ordinarily obtain from the 
Earl, had from time to time been furnished by Lord Alk- 
mond to the wretched family of his victim. For them it 
was that he had importuned his father for a sum of money 
sufficient to make for them an ample and permanent pro- 
vision. Only the day before that on which he had quitted 
London, to partake of the Christmas festivities atMilverstoke, 
he had written an earnest letter to the person abroad, with 
whom he had long communicated on the subject, assuring 
him that within a few weeks a satisfactory final arrangement 
should be effected. And he had resolved to make a last 
strenuous effort with the Earl ; but whom, nevertheless, he 
dared not, except as a matter of dire necessity, tell the 
nature of his exigency. And why dared not the son tell 
that to his father? And why had that father shrmik, 
blighted, from the mention, by Captain Lutteridge and Mr 
Hylton, of the conversation which had driven his son out 
into the solitude where he was slain ? Alas ! it opened to 
Lord Milverstoke himself a very frightful retrospect : through 
the vista of years his anguished, terror-stricken eye settled 
upon a crimsoned gloom — 

—Oh, Lord Milverstoke !— and then would echo ui thy 
ears, also, those appalling sounds,— lyAai hast THOU done ? 

For THY— Honour ! also, had been dyed in blood ! 



NOW AND THEN. 385 



CHAPTER XVII. 

Though no oue liked to own it, or much less speak of 
it, the coming struggle for Senior Wrangler was pretty 
generally felt in the University to be one, as it were, 
between patrician and plebeian; since it had been for a 
length of time perceived that the contest lay between a 
noble member of a leading college, and an obscure sizar of 
an obscure college, which had never before signalised itself 
by producing even a creditable candidate for the laurel. 
The aristocrat was deservedly popular ; a favourite with 
every body. Handsome and graceful, engaging, affable, 
dignified, and unaffected, there were also a certam charming 
modesty and pensiveness in his demeanour, which some 
attributed to the early and severe rehgious discipline which 
he was said to have received — a notion borne out by his 
exemplary conduct at college ; and others referred to pro- 
found love of study. These appeared somewhat unusual 
characteristics of the immediate heir to one of the most 
ancient peerages in the realm, and its vast unencumbered 
estates, — to wealth which made dizzy the heads of those 
weak enough to contemplate the possession of it with 

2 c 



386 NOW AND THEN. 

envious longings. To its destined lord, however, it appeared 
unattended with these effects. He was as assiduous and sys- 
tematic in his studies, as though his daily bread had depended 
altogether on his obtaining academical distinction. His 
private tutor, himself a picked man, who had gained almost 
the highest honours, gave out, from time to time, confident 
assm-auces of his noble pupil's capabilities, and inspired 
high hopes of honour for his college ; which, though a dis- 
tinguished one, had not for the precedhig fom- years 
produced a senior wrangler. But my Lord and his nume- 
rous well-wishers were not, it seemed, to have it all their 
own way : for it had slowly grown into a rumour, dm'ing 
the year preceding the day of contest, that a person, of 
w^hom scarcely any one knew or had heard any thmg, — m 
fact, the aforesaid sizar, — was coming out to do battle on 
behalf of his long unhonoured and humble college, against 
the whole miiversity. The more that the matter was 
inquhed into, the more exciting and interesting became the 
anticipated contest ; shadowing out in the mmds of the 
solemn and quiet men looking on, a certain battle between 
Goliath of Gath, and one David. The tutor of the 
favourite made it his business to become acquainted, as far 
as practicable, with the real probabilities of the case ; and 
the result was a very complete conviction that his pupil 
would have to encounter, in this champion of obscm'ity, a 
most formidable opponent, one apparently bom with a 
genius for mathematics, and the hidden mysteries of physi- 
cal science. A fellow, in the confidence of my Lord's tutor, 
desirous of probing the proficiency of this imknown disciple 



NOW AND THEN. 387 

of Newton, threw himself in his way ; and was pleased to 
declare himself puzzled with a certain question in high 
mathematics, which had occurred to him : {. e. he had 
picked it out of a recently published foreign scientific 
treatise. His teeth, however, presently chattered ; for his 
difficulty was disposed of with a masterly ease, and also 
with a certain scientific elegance, which, under the circum- 
stances, were most unsatisfactory and alarming to him ; 
whose genuine doubts had been solved. Who was this 
person ? No one knew any thing of him except his name, 
" Southern," and that of his college ; that he led a secluded 
life ; appeared very poor ; was studious, yet by no means 
devoted exclusively to mathematics, having such superior 
classical acquirements as were unusual in the case of can- 
didates for mathematical honours. In short, whoever 
he might be, he seemed lilcely to prove himself a first-rate 
man, and his college began to regard him with great 
interest ; and its members, as the moment of contest 
approached, went about talking with a mighty easy air 
about the result. This led to increased energy and activity 
of operation among a certain large class of ardent univer- 
sity men, well versed in the pecuniary calculation of chances, 
and resolute in maintaining, even at considerable risk, any 
opinion which they might have espoused on a given subject ; 
which in the present case was, which of these two will come 
out senior wrangler? The higher class of men pretty 
generally backed the plebeian; the lower, the patrician: 
that is to say, the plebeians professed, and probably sincerely 
felt, a deep interest in my Lord's success; while the 



388 NOW AND THEN. 

patricians, and those of plebeian rank who were of natural 
nobility, felt a generous interest on behalf of his Lordship's 
obscure and unbefriended competitor. And it must be 
recorded to his honour, that no man in the university could 
surpass, in genuine and exalted feehng, that which animated 
the young aristocrat towards his untitled and, so far there- 
fore, ignoble rival. As the day of battle drew nigh, these 
two met, not quite undesignedly on my Lord's part ; who 
very shortly established himself deservedly in the high 
estimation of his opponent. Each talked freely on his 
respective prospects, each admired the other's modesty, and 
entertained qualms, or sharp twinges of apprehension, as to 
the result of the contest. Several times in the dusk of the 
evening they were seen walking together ; and a striking 
contrast was there in the outward appearance of those on 
whose movements and prospects were now concentrated the 
curiosity and interest of the whole university. One was 
tall, slender, erect, graceful ; the other short, lame, and a 
little distorted in figure. In a word, though no person in 
the university knew it, one was son to the man who, nearly 
twenty years before, had been condemned to the gallows, 
on the false charge of having mm*dered the father of the 
other! — for who else should these two be, but the Lord 
Viscount Alkmond and Adam Ayliffe ! Strange, very 
strange was it, yet true ; and while the two combatants, 
Lord Alkmond and Mr Southern, are in honourable and 
exceedingly eager strife together, for the mastery, — which 
of them shall be declared THE FIEST MAN OF THE UNIVER- 
SITY, — let us take a rapid retrospect of the interval of nearly 



NOW AND THEN. 389 

twenty years wliicli has elapsed since those two young 
men, — now walking together arm-in-arm, in amicable col- 
legiate equality, each respecting, and fearing, the talents 
and acquirements of the other, — were lying respectively in 
castle and cottage at Milverstoke — oh, und^*what di^fe^^^^v 
rent circumstances ! / ^ "" '^>T T TT 

— Twenty years ! Prodigious interval '\ the life of man \ ^ . > 
How blessed is he who can turn round t^^^^^e^japfe^'glj*^^^ 
with reverent composm^e and thankfulness ; enjtr ^^ing'^ ^e^ 
humble and well-founded hope that he has become a wiser, 
a better, and a happier, albeit a somewhat sadder, man, 
than when those twenty years began ! Though he has not 
been cut dotvn^ has he, during all that momentous period, 
been merely cumhering the ground^ remaining now barren 
and blighted ? or diligently self-cultivated and nourished, 
so as to thrive, and bloom, in immortality '? 

Mr Hylton, the Earl of Milverstoke, and old Adam Ay- 
liffe, still were living ; as also were some others who have 
appeared in the former part of this history ; and how have 
they fared ? what have they done ? what have they become 
during those twenty years ? 

Mr Hylton's hair is white as snow, but his eye is bright, 
his face beams with a benignity which is endearing and 
elevating to the heart of the beholder. Still he hves at 
Milverstoke parsonage ; and his good wife, also stricken in 
years, is still by his side, his cheerful, pious, and affectionate 
helpmate ; his daughter, sole surviving child, has been 
spared to them, and has become a woman, a charming 
woman. But how many of his parishioners has Mr Hylton 



390 NOW AND THEN. 

during these twenty years consigned to the tomb, reading 
over tlieir remains, in solemn hopefulness, that sublime 
sei-vice which he tmsts that some pious soul will by-and-by 
read over Ms remains, when he also shall have become a 
tenant of the chmxhyard, sleeping beside those whom he 
has buried, his children — and tlieir mother ! 

Upwards of a month elapsed from the time of Mr Hyl- 
ton's first visit to the Earl of Milverstoke after his illness, 
before Mr Ilylton deemed it prudent to communicate to 
him the afflicting intelligence concerning his late son which 
has been lately laid before the reader. There had been 
reasons rendering it highly expedient that no time should 
be needlessly lost in making the revelation m question, in 
order to protect the Earl from harassing importunities on 
behalf of the widow and orphans of the officer who had 
been killed by Lord Alkmond, and whose case had been 
repeatedly and urgently pressed on the Secretary of State, 
through the intervention of the British and foreign ambas- 
sadors. In spite of all the discretion and skill exercised by 
Mr Hylton in making the agitating communication, it 
almost prostrated the Earl, both in mind and body. For 
upwards of half a year he lay at death's door; and for 
several weeks was bereft of reason. During those benighted 
intervals he not only raved wildly about his son, and the 
fearful transaction in which he had been engaged, but let 
fall expressions of dismal import, explicable only by a refer- 
ence to some event of a similar nature in his own early life ! 
He^ grievously reproached himself for not having instilled 
into his son, from earliest youth, an abhorrence of duelling; 



NOW AND THEN. 391 

for not having affectionately and vigilantly trained and 
disciplined his hasty and imperious temper ; and, above all, 
uttered lamentable accusations against himself for his hard- 
lieartedness in not having yielded to his son's entreaties to 
be supplied with money, (he had asked a sum of five thou- 
sand poimds,) and encouraged him to disclose that which so 
evidently oppressed his mind. And even after the Earl 
had recovered the use of his reason, he would talk in the 
same strain to Mr Hylton ; and began to express a suspicion 
lest the death of Lord Alkmond should, in some mysterious 
and horrid way unknown, have had a connexion with his 
fatal duel. That idea had presented itself, indeed, to Mr 
Hylton's mind. He thought it by no means impossible, 
that some friend or member of the family of Lord Alkmond's 
victim, had come over to this country, impelled by a deadly 
spirit of revenge, tracked out Lord Alkmond's path, patient- 
ly waited on his movements, and seized the first fitting 
opportunity to destroy him. Might not the assassin or 
assassins be the persons who had been seen by the sailor 
Harrup, from the sea, running along the shore, in a direc- 
tion from the woods ? 

But the Earl of Milverstoke soon abandoned such ideas 
as chimerical, and recurred to his original opinion that the 
murderer had been none other than Ayliffe ; whose rescue 
from the gallows was a subject on which the Earl never 
touched with Mr Hylton ; retaining his stern and sincere 
conviction and belief, that by Ayliffe's escape, justice had 
been defeated. But what a vast change in his opinions, 
and in the whole temper of his soul, had been effected by 



392 NOW AND THEN. 

the dreadful discovery of his son's sangumarj duel ! Lord 
Milverstoke"s angry rebellious feelings were quelled, and 
awed into a submissive recognition of God's moral govern- 
ment of the world ; and he was terrified by the glimpses 
which he had obtained of His retributive justice. Declar- 
ations of Scripture, which had never before attracted his 
attention, now gleamed before his eyes with a new aspect, 
and appeared invested with a tremendous significance. 
Verily He is a God that judgeth in the earth ! Vengeance 
helongeth unto me^ I will recompense^ saith the Lord I It is 
a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God! How 
amazing — how appalling — appeared now the indifference 
with which he had ever, till then, read and heard language 
such as this ! Now^ it smote and shook his very soul with- 
in him. He dared hardly think of the startHng assurance 
that the sins of the father might he visited uj^on the children 
— yea^ even to the third and fourth generation ! What 
ghastly light was thus reflected upon the death of his son ! 
How impious seemed now the father's persevering accu- 
sation against the Most High, of hard and unreasonable deal- 
ing with His creatures ! AVhen his thoughts wore this 
terrifying complexion, he would abandon — but, alas ! only 
for a moment — his vindictive and implacable feelings to- 
wards Ayliffe, and cease to mmTnur at the dispensation of 
Providence, by which his life had been saved. "Even 
were he guilty," — an awful voice, within, sometimes asked 
the Earl of Milverstoke, "is it for thee to complain that 
the vengeance of Heaven tarneth?" and for a while he 
would be speechless. 



NOW AND THEN. 393 

Milverstoke became intolerable to the Earl: whose 
gloomy, unquiet, and still but half-subdued spirit, dreaded 
solitude equally with society. How could he walk, as 
theretofore, in woods, which now seemed ever shrouded 
beneath an ensanguined haze ! How appalling the silence 
ever reigning within the magnificent apartments of his 
Castle — of that stately structure where had lain so recently 
the bleeding remains of his son — for which it had served 
but as a vast and dismal mausoleum ! As soon, therefore, 
as his shattered condition would admit of his doing so, he 
removed, with his family, to another of his residences in a 
distant part of England, not haunted with such maddening 
associations as that which he had quitted, and, as he purposed, 
for ever. There was one person whom he was deeply 
affected in taking leave of, and that was Mr Hylton, whose 
character, having always respected, he now regarded with 
reverence. In him the Earl saw lofty purpose, in him 
inflexible rectitude; purity unsuUied ; a meekness which 
could never be ruffled or disturbed ; a simplicity, strength, 
and dignity of character, the foundations of which were 
laid in profound Christian humility and faith. A thousand 
softening and self-reproaching recoflections cherished the 
Earl, of this good man's patient gentleness under galling 
insult, such as his Lordship now felt would have infuriated 
most, if not all others whom he had ever known in life. Mr 
Hylton had, however, borne it in silence, yet without, on the 
one hand, surrendering an iota of his self-respect or inde- 
pendence ; or, on the other, exhibiting the faintest approach 
to resentment. With what affectionate and persevering 



394 NOW AND THEN. 

faithfubiess, vritli what umvavering firmness, with what im- 
Ijafflccl sldlfulncss, had this, his spu'itual physician, probed the 
unsoimdness of his spirit, and then appUed to it the cleansing 
and heaUng influences of religion ! Ai\d even yet how 
much remained to be done, before the Earl could dare to look 
back without blighting terror, or contemplate the future 
with any degree of calmness and hope ! — Alas, not once 
from those rigid lips had fallen a word of forgiveness towards 
the supposed slayer of his peace ! The language of those 
lips was, and ever had been, truth and sincerity. Such, also, 
were the regulating principles of his conduct ; yet without 
the one missing element^ all w^as the very blackness of 
darkness, and hopeless, eternal exclusion from heaven. 
This Mr Hylton felt, and fearfully felt; and the more, 
because to such absolute and intimate certainty had not yet 
attained he whom it so awfully concerned. All these 
anxieties crowded into his mind, and many of them into that 
of the Earl, as his white attenuated hand finally grasped 
that of Mr Hylton, before the equipage rolled away which 
contained Lord Milverstoke, his beautiful but saddened 
daughter, and the lovely widowed mother of the little 
unconscious heir to all his earthly wealtli, greatness, honour, 
and ancient lineage. The little lips of the living Lord 
Alhnond! ]\[r Hylton solemnly pressed with his own. In 
the Earl's presence ; and, with a voice and look pregnant 
with mysterious significance and w^arning, said to liim, 
" Remember !" His Lordship leaned back in silence in his 
carriage, and a few moments afterwards had commenced 
his long journey. Both his lovely companions wept much : 



NOW AND THEN. 395 

and as for Lady Emily, she had thrown her arms round Mr 
and Mrs Hylton, and kissed them again and again Avith all 
a daughter's fondness ; and into J\Ir Hylton's ear she softly 
whispered the word which he afterwards uttered to her noble 
father, ^^ Eemember !" By that word he had signified, 
" Forget not our many discoursings together, nor that 
glorious and awful Volume which is now beginning to shine 
before your hitherto unseeing eyes, in letters of living light. 
Abhor yourself ! Look withm, and see in your heart a nest 
of serpents ! Pray that they die, and disappear ! — that 
pride and revenge may perish ! Forgive, or ask not to be 
forgiven, lest you offend the awful majesty of Heaven, and 
draw down perdition upon your soul ! Adore the Unsearch- 
able, the Just, the Merciful ; but only through Him whom 
He hath sent ! Tremble as you look on that little one, 
upon whom all your earthly hopes are fixed — whom you 
have chosen to make the pride and mainstay of your house ! 
Let him be to you, not a vain idol, but a precious memento 
of your duty and your allegiance to Heaven, in whose anger 
this desire of your eyes may mstantly wither and vanish. 
Look upon him, and tremblingly remember the doings of 
his progenitors!" The Lady Emily's "Eemember" said 
gentler things ! "On me rest the succour of those who are 
objects, alas! of my father's seemingly implacable animosity. 
But remember the reverence which is due to him from me, 
as a most loving daughter !" 

So departed the lordly occupants of Milverstoke Castle. 
Lady Emily's injimctions related to the father, wife, and son 
of the banished Ayliffe, of whose innocence she entertained, 



396 NOW AND THEN. 

in confident and not unjustifiable reliance on Mr Hylton, 
a firm conviction. Her father's unbounded liberality gave 
her ample opportunity for carrying her generous purposes 
into effect, unknown to him, through the agency of Mr 
Hylton. She settled on old Ayliife a small weekly allow- 
ance, sufficient for his modest wants, without the necessity 
of exertions, for which his years and his sufferings had 
incapacitated him. She contrived also, through Mr Hylton, 
to find n'leans of sending Mrs Aylifi'e, on her passionate 
entreaty, to follow her husband to the plantations, about a 
year after liis ignominious banishment ; that being the ear- 
liest moment that her shattered health would permit. And 
as for the wretched little Adam, Lady Emily had declared 
that he should become her child — that she would be wholly 
answerable for his support. 'Twas agony to the mother to 
part with her child — but the representations of Mr Hylton 
prevailed : even had there not existed difficulties almost 
insurmountable in the way of her child's accompanying her 
abroad, instead of remaining at home to receive the kind 
support and superintendence of Mr Hylton. Shortly before 
Mrs Ayliffe's departure to rejoin her unfortunate husband, 
Mr Hylton arranged that the woman to whom the care of 
her infant had been committed on the arrest of his father, 
should take up her abode with her little charge at the cot- 
tage of old Aylifi'e ; and a touching and pleasant sight it 
was to behold the venerable sorrow-stricken grandfather 
betimes familiarising the child with the Book to which 
alone, throughout life, he had himself clung for consolation 
and succour. 'Twas he who taught the child his letters. 



NOW AND THEN. 397 

being as patient a teacher as the learner was apt and docile. 
It seemed, indeed, as if Providence had compensated that 
poor little being's physical deficiencies by intellect];<al endow- 
ments of a superior order. From a very early age, his pale 
placid features evinced decided thoughtfulness. It was not 
timidity that characterised his demeanour and deportment, 
but a contemplative temperament, conjoined with possibly 
a painful sense, increasing with his years, of physical infe- 
riority — a combination of conditions which soon attracted 
the notice of an observer so acute and affectionately watch- 
ful as Mr Hylton. He thought that the child exhibited 
precocity ; but judiciously acted as though it had not. The 
death of his attentive nurse, when he was about four years 
old, enabled Mr Hylton, with the consent of old Ayliffe, 
wrimg from him, however, with infinite reluctance, to carry 
into effect a scheme which had occurred to him, namely, 
the removal of the child to a distance from Milverstoke, 
and under another name, in order to avoid the fatal preju-^ 
dice attached to the blighted name which he bore — that of 
a convicted murderer — who, as such, was generally believed 
to have unjustly escaped the gallows through the caprice or 
timidity of the King. Mr Hylton's indefatigable zeal over- 
came several difficulties in his way, apparently trivial, but 
practically not a little embarrassing ; and he ultimately suc- 
ceeded, with the assistance of a clerical relative living in a 
village on the furthest outskirts of an adjoining county, in 
placing the child, under the name of Southern, in the house, 
and under the care, of a village schoolmaster — a person of 
much higher qualifications than were requisite for the 



398 NOW AND THEN. 

humble sphere which he then occupied, and to which he had 
been reduced by misfortune. In a much shorter time than 
Mr Ilylton coukl have anticipated, he was gratified by 
receiving more and more decisive, and indeed sm-prising, 
reports of the chikl's capacity and progress ; who presently 
evinced, over and above his general talents, such a mathe- 
matical faculty, as quickly placed him beyond the reach of 
his master, and commended him to the special notice of the 
clergyman whom Mr Hylton had interested m his behalf, 
and who, like Mr Hylton, had taken high honours at Cam- 
bridge. Mr Hylton went over to see his charge regidarly 
once a month, and personally ascertained how well fomided 
were the reports which he had received of the child's 
advancement. The two parsons often laid their good heads 
together on the subject ; and at length Mr Hylton, relying 
on the secret and most efficient patronage of Lady Emily, 
resolved to give the child a splendid start, as he called it, 
and put him into a position which would enable him to make 
the best of his rare talents. In short, Mr Hylton resolved, 
but with a sort of inward spasm when he reflected on the 
boldness of the enterprise, to give him the advantage of a 
university education. With Lady Emily's full concurrence, 
young Southern, as soon as he was deemed by Mr Hylton 
duly quahfied, was estabUshed as a sizar at a quiet and 
obscure college at Cambridge, with a few affectionate 
cautions from Mr Hylton as to the course of conduct to be 
pursued there. Without distinctly intimating why, he told 
Southern to regard himself as an orphan, whose continuance 
at the university depended solely on the successful use which 



NOW AND THEN. 399 

lie might make of such rare advantages as had been provi- 
dentially conferred upon him. Good Mr Ilylton's heart 
yearned towards the modest youth m saying all this, which 
he felt to be indeed needless ; and, when looking at his pale 
countenance, the lineaments of which betokened humility 
and goodness, while his dark eyes beamed with unerring- 
indications of intellect and genius, Mr Hylton's thoughts 
reverted to a memorable scene of that youth's infancy, when 
he lay uneasy, and yet unconscious of his position, in the 
lap of an innocent, manacled, fettered, and nearly maddened 
father, about to swing from the gibbet as a foul and cowardly 
mm^derer ! 

" Well, my good lad," said Mr Hylton, his voice a little 
tremulous, on first leavmg him in his tmy room, '' give me 
thy hand : God's good Providence hath brought thee hither, 
and may His smile be upon thee ! Ay, lad," Mr Hylton 
added, more firmly grasping his hand, '' the smile of Him 
from loliom cometh every good and j^erfect gift I God bless 
thee, my lad ! One day thou wilt perhaps see a very angel 
upon this earth, whose finger hath pointed thy way hither : 
but of this inquire and speak never a word to any one, as 
thou lovest me, and wouldst remain here ! " 

Southern listened to all this with a beating heart, full of 
tenderness, gratitude, fear, hope, and wonder, — but withal, 
a sustaining sense of capacity and power : alone, as he was 
amongst so many — the great, the wealthy, the proud, — all 
of whom, whatever their disposition, would, had they known 
who he was, have spm-ned him, or shrunk from him, as one 
in whose veins ran the black and corrupted blood of heredi- 



400 NOW AND THEN. 

tary crime ! Poor youth ! Happy, happy, was thy ignor- 
ance ; and humane were the object and pui-pose of those who 
placed thee in it ! 

Another there was, however, of nearly the same age as 
Southern — but how differently circumstanced ! — with what 
different feelings regarded by those who surrounded him ! — 
whose hearts he gladdened by displaying true nobility of 
disposition, as he grew up, and unequivocally superior intel- 
lectual endowments. This was the grandson of the Earl of 
Milverstoke, the youthful Viscount Alkmond. Living, as 
he had, in the presence of those who regarded him, so to 
speak, as the very a^i^le of their eye, watching his every 
movement with lynx-like vigilance and unutterable love, yet 
had he breathed the pure and invigorating air of moral and 
religious discipline. He was regarded by those who sur- 
rounded him as indeed a precious trust from Heaven, an 
earnest and pledge of forgiveness and happiness here and 
hereafter ! His ripening intellect was trained and cultivated 
by the most consummate skill which could be pressed into 
the responsible service. His temper was calm, mild, self- 
denying ; and so unaffected and humble, that he seemed 
really scarcely aware of the resplendent position which he 
occupied, and was apparently destined to grace and dignify. 
Oh, with what thrilling emotions of solicitous fondness, of 
well-warranted exultation, would his widowed mother gaze 
on his noble features, and the winning but pensive smile 
which played over them ! Who but she could tell the feel- 
ings with which she often detected in them the highest ex- 
pression that she had ever seen in those of his unhappy 



NOW AND THEN. 401 

departed father ! Who could sound the awful depth of those 
reflections into which the Earl of Milverstoke would sink, 
when he regarded that son of a murdered father — and he 
the son of a father — that grandson of one who — the Earl 
would tremble when thoughts like these presented themselves 
— thoughts which flung him prostrate before the awfid foot- 
stool of Mercy — and even there would he lie quaking with 
terror, yet — God be thanked ! — not in despair. 

Every year were Mr and Mrs Hylton visitors at the 
picturesque and splendid residence to which the Earl had 
betaken himself on quitting Milverstoke. The presence of 
that minister of God served at once to humble and exalt 
those to whom he came, radiant with the pure influences of 
piety and virtue, which, in his meek presence, shone, as it 
were, before their very eyes. And, when absent, still year 
after year came from him many missives of earnest and 
faithful teaching : soul-subduing, soul-elevating ; entering 
into his inner man, and seeking to expel all that could de- 
file the temple of the living God. And he had, indeed, at 
length sapped the foundations of PEIDE : the pillar which 
had stood upon it, in black and hideous strength and height, 
had fallen, and lay crushed in visible fragments around. 
Yet was there another, apparently adamantine and inaces- 
sible : alas ! still continued the Earl utterly unforgiving ! 
And the subtle fiend, who ever hovered around so coveted 
a victim, to him invisible, but visible to the eyes of the 
minister of Christ, supplied reasons which seemed mianswer- 
able, for perseverance in blind and deadly infatuation. In 
vain presented Mr Hylton to the shuddering averted eye of 

2 D 



402 NOW AND THEN. 

the Earl, moving pictures of the deserted and desolate 
father of the heart-broken exile ; of blameless life, of exalted 
piety, of miswerving faith, of liearty forgiveness of injury : 
the more vivid the colouruig, the nearer came the awe- 
inspiring figure — the hastier and a;agrier was the retreat of 
the inexorable Earl. And that poor exile himself — him also 
fearlessly presented Mr Hylton to the Earl, as an image of 
resignation and Christian forgiveness : but all in vain — the 
Earl recoiled from the approach, with mingled disgust and 
horror. And Mr Hylton's last weapon, which with daunt- 
less aim he drove home — What if all this time he he innocent 
as your Lordship'' s self I — even that, too, failed of its pur- 
pose. His steadfast perseverance, year after year, did not, 
however, exasperate the Earl, who loved and reverenced 
one whom he might well style — incomparable. The finest 
living in his gift (and he had several) he earnestly and 
affectionately pressed upon Mr Hylton — but in vain. 

'^ No, my dear Lord," said he, '-'• give it to a younger, a 
stronger, a better man. Here pitched I my tent long ago ; 
and here will I remain and take my rest, with those whom 
I love, whom one by one I have followed lovingly to the 
dust — my people ! — my flock ! — my children ! Here are 
they all ! Here sweetly sleep they ; and by-and-by, in 
God's good time, I hope to slumber beside them, till we all 
rise together again from the dust ! " 

When the Earl got the letter which contained these 
moving expressions, he took it out with him, and read it 
often, as he walked in solitude for many hours. " This man's 
foot," said he, "I could see placed upon my paltry coronet 



NOW AND THEN. 40o 

of dust ; for on His brow wears he one that gleams with 
heavenly brightness ! " 

Hopeless indeed appeared Mr Hylton's efforts : but the 
stake which he played for was one of tremendous magnitude; 
and he dared not cease his exertions, he dared not despair. 
IfVas a contest that was sublime ; one upon which angels 
looked down, ay, into which they entered unseen ; one in 
which victory would be celebrated in eternity. 

Many brilliant suitors sought the hand of Lady Alkmond, 
but in vain : her heart could feel no second love, but was 
either buried in the untimely grave of her husband, or 
absorbed in the treasure which survived him. She was still 
lovely — pensive in her loveliness — and meet companion to 
the sorrow-stricken father of him whose loss she mourned ; 
and she was in time his only companion : for Lady Emily, 
peerless in beauty, ay, and in purity and goodness, on com- 
ing forth from her stately privacy into the world, found 
herself surrounded by those who paid an eager and enthusi- 
astic homage to her charms ; and it was not long before the 
contest ended ; the fortress surrendered at discretion ; and 
fair Lady Emily became the Duchess of Waverdale — her 
lord, her slave : she, his vowed servant, his sweet and absolute 
mistress ! — and the link which bomid them together passed 
through the hallowing hands of Mr Hylton. 

Little difficulty felt the beautiful Duchess in obtaining the 
Duke's sanction to her secret arrangement with Mr Hylton, 
for the support of young Southern, both at school and at 
college ; but the alarmed perplexity into which both her Grace 
and Mr Hylton fell, on hearing of the destination of the 



404 NOW AND THEN. 

yoiing Lord Alkmond to Cambridge, instead of Oxford, 
where the Earl of Milverstoke had been educated, may be 
easily imagined. Mr Hylton, good soul, took the earliest 
opportunity which he could find, of soundmg to the Earl the 
praises of Oxford; which he did with such remarkable 
energy and pertinacity, as not a Uttle surprised his Lordship ; 
and once or twice even drew from him what was rarely seen 
on his features, a smile, as he good-naturedly reproached 
Mr Hylton with ingratitude and undutifulness towards his 
Alma Mater. 

The Earl heartily, and very justly, loved Oxford, where 
he himself had contended successfully for honours ; but the 
last and greatest resident tutor of Lord Alkmond happened 
to be a Cambridge man ; and had made such stimulating 
representations concerning his Lordship's mathematical tal- 
ents and acquirements, and the probability which there was 
of their conducting him to the highest point of academical 
distinction, that the Earl resolved on having his grandson 
entered at Cambridge. And to Cambridge, therefore, he 
went ; little di^eaming, the while, of the tremulous anxiety 
which his going thither occasioned. 

Mr Hylton and the Duchess had some anxious correspon- 
dence on the question of intrusting at once, in confidence 
to Lord Alkmond, the secret by which they were themselves 
so disquieted. They finally determined, however, not to do 
so ; and perhaps wisely. And on another cognate matter 
were they also agreed — to keep Mr Southern in the dark as 
to the position which he occupied with reference to the 
young Lord Alkmond ; with whom, indeed, a nobleman, 



NOW AND THEN. 405 

and member of the leading college in the University, pos- 
sibly he, an obscure sizar of an obscure college, might 
never happen to come into personal contact. 

Sixteen years after the cruel death of Lord Alkmond, the 
persevering efforts of Mr Hylton to overcome the unrelent- 
ing and bitterly unchristian feelings of the Earl of Milver- 
stoke towards the supposed murderer of his son, were at 
length crowned with success, to Mr Hylton's unspeakable 
joy and satisfaction. But it was only because his pious 
efforts had been aided by the afflicting hand which it had 
pleased God to lay upon the Earl, who was brought very 
nearly to the door of death, and then saw around him the 
uncompromising minister of religion, his own daughter, and 
his widowed daughter-in-law — all of whom, with gentle, 
and at length irresistible persuasion and prayer, urged him 
to utter (which uttering, they knew he would feel) the word 
which would open to him that door of mercy, which other- 
wise must remain for ever — yes, FOR ever closed. 

" Come forth from that wretched hard-heartedness of 
thine," said Mr Hylton, with solemn energy, " and thank- 
fully and reverently echo the awful language of the Saviour 
of mankind, in his agony on the cross, ' Father, forgive 
THEM ! ' Oh, how art thou hereafter to stand before Him, 
asking for mercy, whose example thou didst on earth disre- 
gard, and disregarding, despise ? Awake ! awake from thy 
horrible and deadly trance ! Awake^ thou that sleepest^ and 
arise from the dead^ and Christ shall give thee light f"^ 

'•'- Oh, my brother! my teacher!" said the Earl, devoutly, 
and with a holy transport, " the scales are falling from mine 



406 NOW AND THEN. 

eyes ! Pray for me ! — pray for me ! I abhor myself, and 
repent in dust and ashes ! " 

And they did pray for him, and ^Yith him, and the 
offended majesty of God was appeased, through an ever- 
living Intercessor ! From liis foot there fell the last of the 
fetters which had bound him in the dungeon of the Prince 
of Darkness. 

"I humbly and feaifally FORGIVE !" he said— and the 
light of Heaven fell that moment upon his benighted soul, 
scaring away for ever the fiends of darkness ! A sudden 
peace pervaded his long-troubled breast. 

" O ever-merciful God ! it is sufficient ! Keep Thou thy 
servant in this spirit, and in this faith ! " solemnly faltered 
Mr Hylton, kneeling at his bedside, where also knelt the 
weepmg figures of the Duchess and Lady Alkmond. 

Yes, the grace had been given, — the long, fervent, 
effectual prayer of a nghteous man had availed much : — 
and oh, stupendous, inconceivable change! due only to 
heavenly potency ! a whole natm-e had been transfonned — 
a great spirit, long downward sinking, sprung like lightning 
out of the awful abyss of condemnation and despair — and 
stood, trembling, but firm, upon the Eock of Ages, with 
humble uplifted eye, on which streamed light and glory 
from the Sun of Eighteousness. 

" Oh, why," thought afterwards the Earl, " hath this been 

so long delayed ? AAHiy have I passed thus far through 

this earth, a blasted wilderness, which might have bloomed 

and blossomed as the rose, — a very paradise around me ! " 

That sickness was not unto death, but had been otherwise 



NOW AND THEN. 40? 

ordered by the supreme disposer of events ; and not long 
after this blessed change had come over the Earl of Milver- 
stoke, whose very countenance betokened it, there happened 
an event so utterly unlooked for and signal, as to demand a 
faithful record of it. 

For the benefit of the sea air, Lord Milverstoke, after 
seventeen years' absence from the scene, to his Lordship 
dismal enough, of those events which have formed the sub- 
ject of this history, returned to Milverstoke Castle — oh, 
what an altered man ! It might almost be said to have 
been in a stern spirit of martyrdom that he came back to a 
spot so surrounded Avith associations of grief and horror. 
But he resolved to dare all, to bear all, and in a spirit of 
voluntary self-denying humiliation. And, indeed, his soul 
shuddered within him as he passed through the village and 
drove along the road lying in that horriUe icood — to his 
long-deserted Castle, soon standing before him with an 
aspect of gloomy, nay, terrible magnificence. 

''Courage!" said Mr Hylton, who, at his request, was 
waiting to receive him as he alighted— the Earl grasping 
his proffered hand with an almost convulsive energy, and 
involuntarily closing his eyes. ''You are entering this 
great and ancient house," whispered his venerable chaplain, 
" possibly more blessed by Heaven than ever entered any 
of your ancestors ! " 

" Oh, Mr Hylton !" faltered the Earl, "it may be, it may 
be!" — and he took ofi" his hat with an air of profound 
reverence, and for a moment stood still in the hall through 
which he was passing. 



408 NOW AND THEN. 

His hair had become white as snow ; his noble features 
wore an expression of sorrowful dignity ; but their once 
haughty frownmg sternness was gone for ever, having 
vanished with the temper and feelings in which it had origi- 
nated. His tall commanding figure, once erect as an arrow, 
now was bent beneath the burden of age and grief, and his 
gait and step were feeble. But what gentleness in his eyes, 
what gentleness in the tones of his voice, appeared to those 
now around him, who remembered the proud Earl of Mil- 
verstoke of a fonner day ! And there was his daughter, 
still blooming with beauty, and the Duke, her husband, and 
her children — all there to welcome him ! — and his daughter- 
in-law and his grandson — all of whom he embraced, but 
especially the last, with a tenderness which could find no 
utterance. 

That evening, before the assembled family and house- 
hold, Mr Hylton resumed his functions as the Earl's chaplain, 
in the presence of a grave auditory, collected in that 
chamber, the library, which had foiTuerly witnessed scenes 
so stoiTuy and so different. ]\Ir Hylton read the ninetieth 
Psalm, and the prayers, with soul-subduing solemnity ; for 
his spirit was indeed moved within him, by the mighty 
contrast which he beheld between now, and then ; by the 
humble but hvely hope which he felt, that old things had 
passed away, and all things had become new ! 



NOW AND THEN. 409 



CHAPTEK XVIII. 

"Why, what can this be, Mary ? " said Mr Hylton, as 
Mrs Hylton placed in his hands, on his return one day from 
a walk in the village, after paying a visit to old Ayliffe — 
who still occupied his own cottage, a grateful pensioner on 
the bounty, conveyed through Mr Hylton, of the Lady 
Emily of a former day, the brilliant and celebrated Duchess 
of the present ; who, with beauty in nowise faded, but only 
perfectly matured, retained all her characteristic simplicity 
and loveliness of character. " What can his Majesty have 
thought it worth his while to send, in his royal pleasure, to 
the Vicar of Milverstoke ? " He alluded to the words " On 
His Majesty's service," standing on a packet of much 
greater than the usual dimensions ; while in the corner was 
the signature "Mordaunt," — that of the Secretary of State, 
Lord Mordaunt, the third successor to Lord Farnborough, 
in whose time he had communicated, in the character of 
Mr Under Secretary Wylmington, with Mr Hylton. The 
letter contained a large enclosure, to which a note from the 
Under Secretary called Mr Hylton's attention ; such en- 
closure being a copy of a communication which had just 
been received from the gentleman whose name it bore. 



410 now and then. 

" My Lord, 

" I lose no time in informing your Lordship of a some- 
what remarkable fact which has just been communicated to 
me, officially, by the chaplain of the prison here. This 
morning, a person named Isaac Hart, otherwise Jonas 
Hundle, was executed, pursuant to the statute 18 Geo. IL, 
c. 27, for stealing a piece of cotton goods, value ten shilhngs, 
from a bleaching-field in this county. There was every 
reason to believe that this was a second offence. Yester- 
day evening the prisoner, being much troubled in his mind, 
desired to see the chaplain, to whom, I rejoice to say, he 
heartily acknowledged the justice of the sentence under 
which he was going to suffer. And he then went on to 
speak to the following effect, (the words I copy from those 
which the reverend chaplain took down from the prisoner's 
lips, and which afterwards he signed himself, by affixing 
thereto his mark, in the presence of the chaplain aforesaid, 
and the Governor of the gaol,) that is to say, — 

" ' I, who am to die in the morning, most justly for my 
many sins, am not Isaac Hart, but Jonas Hundle, formerly 
living far away from this. And it was 1 that did kill and 
murder my Lord Milverstoke's son, for which one Ayliffe 
was taken, and condemned to die, but is now transported, 
and possibly dead. I did it with Giles Armstrong, my 
brother-in-law, never thinkmg to kill the Lord's son, whom 
we knew not, nor knowing, would have harmed, having no 
cause, that I knew of, for so doing ; nor knowing to this 
day how he came ever into the wood that night, so as to be 
killed. I and Armstrong (who hath died five years ago) 



NOW AND THEN. 411 

did determine to kill Master Godbolt, the head-keeper, for 
divers ills that he had done us, having shot Giles's brother, 
and transported another; wherefore we purposed to kill 
him, and I did with mine own hand strike him, as I thought, 
having heard that he was to be that night in the wood alone. 
I and Armstrong were together, but the young Lord cam6 
up to me before him, and I, thinking him, in the dark, to 
be Godbolt, and he walking quick, did strike him (for which 
God forgive me) with the coulter of a plough which Giles 
did take that evening from Farmer Hopkins's plough ; and 
I did, for fear's sake, when I had struck Godbolt, (as I 
thought it was,) and lest I should be found out, thrust the 
coulter into a hole in a hollow tree hard by, where now, 
please God, it may be found, if yon tree do yet stand in 
that wood. And we both did get off as best we might, 
hearing steps, and Giles did drop over the cliff where loAvest, 
but I ran round, and we two did go along by the sea till 
we got to Gaffer Strong's house, and so home by the road, 
no one seeing us that we knew of. And this is the very 
truth thereof, and I did hear Adam Ayliffe hereof tried, 
being present in Court during that time, but fearing to speak 
lest I should have to die ; but I heard him not sentenced, 
for my heart did fail me ; and hoping he may be now aKve, 
may God have mercy on my sinful soul, which is justly 
to leave this Avorld to-morrow morning, having done 
many other wicked things, but none so great as this that I 
now tell, and that for which I am to die to-morrow, which 
did to me seem hard, till I bethought me of the great 
wickedness of robbing people that were forced to have their 



412 NOW AND THEN. 

goods put out in open air for to bleach, and this murder 
which I did on the young Lord, that another was to suffer 
for, but mercifully did not ; all which is true, as I die to- 
morrow, and hope to be saved hereafter, knowing nothing 
can save me here from the consequence of my evil and most 
horrid life. God bless all Christian people, and forgive me, 
dying penitent. Amen. 

" 'Jonas [x] Bundle, his mark, 
" * Witnesses. Gregory Durden, Chaplain, 
Abraham Higson, Governor.' 

^' Just before the prisoner had his ii'ous struck off, he was 
asked by the aforesaid Governor and Chaplain, whether all 
that he had over-night said was true, having first had read 
over to him the above, word for word ; when he said it was 
true as the gospel : and again Mr Durden did ask him just 
before he suffered, and he did most solemnly declare to the 
truth thereof; and so he died. And, respectfully begging 
forgiveness for thus troubling your Lordship, yet knowing 
your Lordship's desire to help the cause of justice, I have 
thought fit, on great consideration, to send off" this forthwith 
to your Lordship, being, my Lord, 

"Your Lordship's most obedient, humble servant, 
"Humphrey Harris, Glerh of the i^eace.'' 

"My Lord Mordaunt," said Mr Hylton's correspondent, 
"was sure that :Mr Hylton would give his best attention to 
the enclosed document ; not merely as a magistrate for the 
county, and a gentleman anxious for the due administration 



NOW AND THEN. 413 

of justice, but also as one who formerly had taken great 
personal interest in the case of Adam AylifFe above men- 
tioned, as Lord Mordaunt well remembered ; who rehed on 
Mr Hylton's taking steps, without delay, to confirm or con- 
tradict, as far as might be practicable, the extraordinary 
statements of the deceased convict Hart alias Hundle, in 
in order that, if Adam AylifFe were yet living, justice should 
without delay be done in the matter, as far as yet might 
be." 

^'Oh, Mary, Mary !" said Mr Hylton, after he had some- 
what recovered from the astonishment into which this letter 
had thrown him, "that hath now happened which I ever 
felt and knew within myself would happen, before I died !" 

" Yes, my dear, 'tis indeed strange and most wonderful, 
if it be true ; but stir not herein before you have found the 
coulter in the tree spoken of; and also, as Hopkins is alive, 
learnt from that good soul whether he did lose any coulter 
at that time, that he now can remember." 

"That is all reasonable enough, and true ; but the matter 
is already absolutely determined. I have that within me, 
Mary, which tells me that so it is, as I have ever felt that 
so it would prove to be ; but what you say shall be done. " 

Good Mr Hylton could no longer mount his horse, and 
ride about, as twenty years before he used to do, but w^as 
somewhat feeble, and had gotten a gig to carry him easily 
and quietly about, as he might require. And in this gig he 
had soon placed himself, with his old gardener ; and drove 
off to his nearest brother magistrate, and then to the clerk 
to the justices, a most shrewd and practised attorney. To 



414 NOW AND THEN. 

all of them he read the marvellous letter which had brought 
him to them ; and then they agreed to accompany him, at 
a given hour tliat afternoon, to Milverstoke wood, and 
search for the instrument of murder alleged to be there 
lying hid. But Mr Hylton also determined, for the sake 
of more absolute security of evidence, to have with them still 
other witnesses of what might be discovered. Wherefore 
it happened, that about three o'clock that afternoon a party 
of at least eight people met together in Milverstoke wood, 
several of whom were well acquainted with the old hollow 
tree spoken of in the confession of Hart alias Hundle ; and 
to be sure, when they had come up to the tree, there was a 
hole in the trunk some four feet above the ground, and 
quite capable of receiving what was alleged to have been 
thrust into it. The head-bailiff, one of the party, put his 
hand into the hole amidst excited silence, but felt nothing. 
"The hole," said he, ''seems deep — the tree cannot stand 
many more high winds, so hollow as it is ; but I will soon mend 
this matter of the depth. " With this he sent off his man, 
who was present, to the woodman's house, not far off; and 
before long the two returned, with an axe, which they plied 
heartily, and soon slit down nearly three feet of the half- 
rotten trunk, when out sprung a large snake (which had 
doubtless crept in through a hole at the foot of the trunk,) 
startling every body away, and getting out of sight before it 
could be killed. Before those who had been thus stirred 
had quite recovered themselves, Mr Hylton, too much 
absorbed with the object of his errand to take much notice 
of what had just happened, put his own hand into the hole, 



NOW AND THEN. 415 

(careless at the moment of the possibility that other snakes 
were there,) and, sure enough ! amidst expressions of 
wonder, and even awe, from all present, drew forth the 
coulter of a plough ! Mr Hylton, holding in his hands the 
dismal memorial of the black transaction which has been 
commemorated in this history, stood greatly moved before his 
companions. At length, " My friends, " said he, solemnly, 
"this seems to be the doing of Almighty God ; let us ac- 
knowledge it with awe and thankfulness ! " As he said this, 
he uncovered his venerable head, his example being followed 
by all present : and for some moments a dead silence pre- 
vailed, during which thoughts passed through the mind of 
each, not to be forgotten, nor easily to be expressed. They 
then closely examined the rusty iron, but could discover no- 
thing upon it that would warrant the belief, after so great a 
lapse of time, that the instrument bore any marks of the 
bloody use to which it had been apphed. Mr Hylton him- 
self took possession of it, covering it up in a cloth, which he 
had provided against the occasion; and his next object was 
to see old Hopkins, whose farm, now managed by his son- 
in-law, was not far off, and lay in Mr Hylton's way home. 
He and his brother magistrate went into the farm-house, 
where sat the old man smoking in the chimney corner, 
cheerful and intelligent, and able to hear every thing that 
was said to him. Mr Hylton, having quietly led the con- 
versation to the time of the great murder, which, with all 
its incidents, seemed quite fresh in the old man's mind, asked 
him whether he had ever, about that time, chanced to miss 
a coulter from a plough of his. 



416 NOW AND THEN. 

" Ay, ay," said he, rubbing his forehead for a few mo- 
ments, " I do bethink me I did, and somewhere, too, about 
that time ; nay, now I do remember that I did truly lose 
one, and thought that one of those Armstrongs must have 
taken it : a sad family they were, but I never did see or 
hear more of the matter." 

" Should you know that coulter, were you to see it now, 
as matter of curiosity?" said Mr Hylton. 

" What ! now ? That coulter ?— No, no ; not after all 
these years, hardly," replied the old man, smiling. " I got 
another coulter when t'other was wantmg, and thought no 
more on't ; but I've often thought that Giles did me that 
trick ; he were a bad one, I always did believe ! " 

'' Did you ever know one Hundle ?" 

" What — Jonas Hundle ? the lad that choused poor Adam 
AylifFe about the hare ? Ay ! — A sorry knave was he, I 
ever did think — he and Giles were always, as I may say, 
together, and never doing good. Glad was I to get rid of 
'em — and T don't know what came of 'em, nor ever cared, 
not I!" 

" Well, I can tell thee ; Jonas was hanged, some two 
hundred miles off, last week." 

"Hanged! And only last week? He hath had a long 
hide-and-seek with Satan (saving your reverence) — but 
what might he go for, at the last ?" 

" He robbed a bleachmg-ground." 

"Why, what's that?" said the farmer, scratching his 
head. " We've no such things in these parts, I'm think- 
ing." 



NOW AND THEN. 417 

" And what would you say, my friend, if I told you that, 
just before he died, he confessed to a great murder?" 

Hopkins suddenly took his pipe out of his mouth, and 
stared silently at Mr Hylton, who proceeded— 

" Ay, and that he did it with that same coulter of yours 
that I have just spoken of." 

^' Lord have mercy upon us ! " exclaimed Hopkins faintly, 
dropping his pipe on the hearth — '^ why — it — was not — the 
young Lord! the Lord Alkmond ? surely! surely!" 

" Ay, but Jonas, dying, did declare it was, and that he 
did it with his own hand, and with that same coulter which 
is here !" 

Hopkins got up from his seat, heaved a long-drawn sigh, 
and walked, feebly and slowly, a step or two about the 
room, with an amazed air. 

" This is it," said Mr Hylton, beginnmg to uncover it. 

" Phew !" cried Hopkins earnestly—" I wish it were not 
in my house, here : it takes my breath off— it does, gentle- 
men ! But— if it be my coulter, look ye, gentlemen, at 
one end— for, now that I do bethmk me of it, I do well 
remember it was broken, and so would not hold on, and 
was to have been taken to the smith's. Is it so ?" 

It was, verily ! And Hopkins saw, and most positively 
identified it— but would not touch the horrid instrument of 
murder, which Mr Hylton himself, with shuddering reluc- 
tance, took home with him. Further minute inquiry afforded 
complete corroboration to every part of the wretch Hundle's 
confession. 

Godbolt, the head-keeper, was dead : but he was, beyond 

2 E 



418 NOW AND THEN. 

all doubt, as indeed had been proved at the trial of Ayllffe, 
in the wood, on the night of the murder, going his rounds ; 
and he it was who had stumbled over the body of Lord 
Alkmond ; who, it now appeared, had been mistaken for 
him, owing to the obscurity of the night, and the san- 
guinary impetuosity of the assassins. And though true it 
was that Hundle had remained in the neighbourhood till 
some time subsequently to the trial, apparently occupied 
only as an occasional farming-servant, yet a few months 
afterwards he left, and was never seen or heard of any 
more in that quarter of the country. It appeared, also, 
that Giles Armstrong, his brother-in-law, ceased, about the 
same time, to be known in those parts ; and there was every 
reason to believe that he was, as stated by Hundle, dead. 

So then, poor Adam Ayliffe was innocent ! innocent as 
the unborn child ! The discovery, together with the reflec- 
tions which it occasioned, was to Mr Hylton perfectly 
overwhelming. It was, indeed, an awful mystery; an 
inscrutable dispensation of Providence— one which baffled 
the impious daring of human conjecture ; but was assuredly 
reconcilable, though our limited and disturbed faculties 
should be unable to perceive how^ with the ineffable wisdom 
and justice of the Almighty ]\Iaker and Governor of the 
world. When, on the ensuing morning, Mr Hylton went 
to old Ayliffe, to communicate to him this extraordinary 
and most affecting intelligence, he greatly feared the effect 
which it might produce upon the venerable sufferer of 
nearly a twenty years' martyrdom. 

He found the old man alone in his cottage, intently read- 



NOW AND THEN. 419 

ing that Book which had been long the only solace of his 
life ; one which either gave him a clue to the course of 
God's providence in human affairs, or conferred upon him 
the blessing of a composed resignation, an implicit faith 
and confidence that one day would make it known that He 
had done all things loell. Deep in that old man's heart 
were engraved the solemnising and consolatory words of 
the Apostle, — For now, ii^e see through a glass ^ darkly ; 
hut THEN, /ace to face : NOW, I know in fart ; hut THEN, 
shall I know^ even as also I am knoimi, God and His 
doings, are at present surrounded with darkness, often 
impenetrable : but otherwise shall it be hereafter, when 
He shall be seen to have here been, where He was not 
known, or thought, to be ! Therefore the old man received 
this amazing intelligence, the first shock over, with calmness 
and dignity. '' God is good," said he, "who hath given me 
to see this day — to hear these tidings, as a ray of sunshine 
on the short path which leads me to my home yonder," — 
and he pointed, through his little window, to the churchyard. 
" It will not shorten, nor could the want of it have length- 
ened, my sleep in the dust ! This old body of mine hath 
increasing attraction to the dust ; I feel the hour coming 
when it must drop, when the earthly house of this tabernacle 
shall he dissolved : and I leave it cheerfully here, to enter a 
huilding of God^ an house not made loith hands^ eternal in 
the heavens. For in this tdbernaclei^^ continued he solemnly, 
'-'• I do groan.^ heing hurthened: not for that I icould he un- 
clothed^ hut clothed upo7i^ that mortality may he sioallowed 
up in life ! Links have I which yet bind me to this earth, 



420 NOW AND THEN. 

but they will presently melt and dissolve away, and I 
escape. My son, mine only son, whom I loved, hath been 
offered up, this twenty years, upon my heart, an offering 
unto God : when He unlooseth him, I will receive him back 
thankfully, be it but for a moment. Ay, let me see my 
son, my son Adam, and I depart in peace, knowing that 
God hath heard my prayer ! His mother hath long been 
dust ; so mil be soon his father : so ere long will he be! " 

Here he paused long, and seemed to have fallen into a 
reverie, which Mr Hylton's feelings permitted him not to 
disturb. " I reckon his hair will be long gone gray — turn- 
ing white — and his face sad and worn ; and so will it be 
with — Sarah : but — I shall know them ! " said the old man, 
his sad low voice such as would have softened a heart of 
stone. "Doth my Lord know of this?" he presently in- 
quired, gazing with momentary stateliness at ^Ir Hylton, 
who answered in the negative. " I felt, then, Satan for a 
moment ; but he is gone, God be thanked !" said the old 
man, with his former solemn and affecting tranquillity of 
tone and manner. 

That day Mr Hylton wrote a letter to the Secretary of 
State, explaining the complete verification which he had 
obtained, of the confession that had been made by the 
deceased miscreant, Hundle. 

From Ayliffe Mr Hylton went direct to the Earl of 
Milverstoke ; deeming it of great importance to obtain, 
before answering the Secretary of State's letter, the hearty 
and decisive acquiescence of the Earl in the truth of the 
disclosure, which had thus signally vindicated the innocence 



NOW AND THEN. 421 

of one whom he was going down to the grave believing to 
be the murderer of his son. The Earl's coach was standing 
at the Castle door when Mr Hylton arrived, his Lordship 
being about to take his usual mid-day drive. The former 
was, however, shown immediately into the library, where 
the feeble Earl's valet, and another, were assisting in draw- 
ing on his Lordship's gloves, and preparing him to en- 
counter the out-door air, which was keen and biting. Mr 
Hylton's countenance showed that he came the bearer of 
some kind of serious intelligence : and on the Earl's inquir- 
ing, somewhat apprehensively, whether such were the case, 
and being answered in the affirmative, he ordered his 
attendants instantly to withdraw — and then he and Mr 
Hylton were alone. 

"My grandson— is Alkmond well? Speak! "said the 
Earl, who had gone suddenly pale— "if any thing has 
happened, let me, in pity, know at once." 

"No, no, my Lord; nought that I know of, nor have 
reason to fear. When last I heard, he was well — quite 
well — and going on to great distinction." 

"Then what hath happened? Speak, whatever it be. 
I am old and feeble now, and suspense doth make me shake 
inwardly, as though my soul were palsied. Speak, good 
Mr Hylton," continued the Earl earnestly, drawing near 
to Mr Hylton, who, while the Earl was addressing him, 
had been hastily considering which was the best mode of 
breaking the matter, to one whose nerves were, indeed, as 
he had said, shattered. 

"My dear Lord Milverstoke," said he with a frank air. 



422 NOW AND THEN. 

" we are both now very far on in years, and have seen no 
little of God's dealing with mankind, to discipline and sub- 
due our unruly and wicked hearts and wills. For wise and 
awful purposes of His own. His government of man is one 
of deep mystery ; His doings are only partially revealed — 
sometimes never — in this dim scene of our trial. But He 
doth, now and then, condescend unto our weakness and 
blindness ; and now shall I show you one marvellous and 
most signal doing of His. I pray your Lordship to be 
calm while I speak," he continued, observing the Earl's 
gathering excitement — '' calm as was that aged samt whom 
I have just quitted, when I told him of what I shall tell 
your Lordship noAV. Oh, my dear Lord ! Adam Ayliffe — 
poor banished Adam Ayliffe." 

" Is he dead, then ? " asked the Earl gravely, appealing 
suddenly calm, as if relieved from apprehension — "And if 
he be — how was his end ? What said he before quitting to 
give his great account?" 

"How feels your Lordship towards him?" said Mr Hyl- 
ton, glancing searchingly at the Earl, and removing from 
his pocket-book, and opening the Secretary of State's letter. 

"I have, God be my witness, no ill-will towards him, my 
wretched brother sinner. Malice hath long since died with- 
in me, as you do know, dear friend Mr Hylton ; and I feel, 
alas ! — who am I that should bear malice to another !" said 
Lord Milverstoke with a perceptible shudder. 

" Ah, my good Lord, I must now, then, tell you all ! Adam 
Ayliffe is innocent — innocent as I am — of poor Lord Alk- 
inond's murder." The Earl's face went suddenly of a ghastly 



NOW AND THEN. 423 

whiteness, and in his eye, fixed intently on Mr Hylton, 
apprehension was evidently mingled with some of the stern- 
ness, and even fierceness, of a former day. But he seemed 
resolved, as Mr Hylton judged from his rigid and compressed 
lips, to listen in silence ; so Mr Hylton proceeded, firmly and 
with his peculiar and impressive emphasis : " The providence 
of God, my dear Lord, hath at length cleared up this dread- 
ful mystery, and all is revealed." The Earl sunk back in 
his seat, faintly asking for water, which Mr Hylton caused 
to be immediately procured. When his Lordship had drunk 
a little, which Mr Hylton gave him, he desired those to be 
ordered out again who had come in to answer his summons. 
Within a few moments they were again alone. 

'' That— letter : is it from abroad ? "—gasped Lord Milver- 
stoke with tremulous eagerness. 

" No, my Lord — no : you have no need to fear any thing 
from the quarter you think of, where your munificence hath 
long, long ago extinguished all claim on your Lordship. 
But this letter is from the Secretary of State, and encloseth 
the confession of a guilty wretch, hanged within these last 
few days only, and who, to the chaplain attending him, did 
in his last moments most solemnly and explicitly confess 
that he had done this foul murder ; and proof that he spake 
truly the providence of God hath placed within oui' reach, 
and I have got that proof: with mine own eyes have I seen, 
with mine own hands have I felt, with mine own ears have 
I heard it ! Oh, the wonderful" — 

"My friend— my friend— your voice fails; I have not 
heard much of what you have been saying ! Let me hear 



424 NOW AND THEN. 

again, and somewhat louder," said the Earl, leaning forward, 
and speaking in a very feeble tone, his eyes also gazmg 
languidly at Mr Hylton ; who had, in truth, been speaking 
most deliberately, and mth rather more distinctness and 
loudness than usual. He repeated what he had said — and as 
he went on the Earl closed his eyes, and shook his head 
gently and mournfully, his snowy attenuated hands resting 
on his knees, which were trembling visibly. 

" My Lord — I perceive that you are not able now to hear 
me — that you are indisposed " — 

" Now ! now ! or it may be — never ! ■' said the Earl, open- 
ing his eyes, and looking with a steadfastness and energy at 
Mr Hylton, which he had not seen for years, and betokened 
the great effort of the Earl's will, which produced it. Mr 
Hylton then read the letter which he had received from 
London — Lord Milverstoke's eye being all the while fixed 
upon him with unwavering intensity ; and also while he 
explained, as briefly but pointedly as possible, the steps which 
he had taken to obtain, and by which he had obtained, com- 
plete corroboration of the matters which had been spoken of 
by the murderer. When he had concluded, the Earl heaved 
a succession of deep-drawn sighs; and then tremulously 
said, " Is all this in judgment, or in mercy ?" 

"Li mercy, my dear Lord! in mercy !" answered Mr 
Hylton, with a brightening countenance and a cheerful 
voice, — " in you, spared to advanced age, I see before me a 
monument only of mercy and goodness ! Had you con- 
tinued till now deaf to the teaching of His Holy Spirit, dead 
to His gracious influences — hateful, relentless, and vindictive 



NOW AND THEN. 42.5 

— this which has now occurred would, to my poor thinking, 
have appeared to speak only in judgment, uttering con- 
demnation in your ears, and sealing your eyes in judicial 
blindness ! But you have been enabled to hear a still small 
voice, whose melting accents have pierced through your 
deaf ear, and broken a heart once obdurate in pride, and 
hopelessly unforgiving. Plainly I speak, my dear Lord, for 
my mission I feel to be now no longer one of terror, but of 
consolation. What hath happened is awful, but awful in 
mercy only, and condescension ! " 

" All this — all this— to a worm of the earth, guilty — 
utterly worthless !" faltered the Earl. 

" Nay, call not that worthless which God himself hath 
deigned to redeem ! which he hath endowed with immorta- 
lity ! and placed here to become fitted for eternal happiness ! " 

The Earl spoke not for some minutes. 

" Twenty years ! — nearly twenty years ! — twenty years' 
exile and misery ! — and injustice ! " he presently exclaimed, 
clasping his hands over his forehead. " Oh, what an eternity 
of anguish, upon earth ! " 

" Afflict not yourself unnecessarily, my dear Lord, nor in 
vain. Attribute not to your agency that which has been 
caused only by the unavoidably unperfect administration of 
justice — and for which you are not responsible, before either 
God or man. It was not you who placed this unfortunate 
man in the circumstances which led him into the mortal 
peril from which the providence of God only rescued him. 
It was, as he has all along reverentially owned, his own mis- 
conduct ! Nor was it you who judged or condemned hlui : 



426 NOW AND THEN. 

yet only your own heart can tell you, how you have stood 
before God towards this your brother, in spirit and in 
intention ! " 

" Oh, my heart condemns ! hath terribly condemned me ! 
Oh, fiend that I have been ! And I" — he shuddered — " to 
be of all men thus exacting and vindictive!" 

" These, my Lord, are painful but wholesome thoughts, 
and I dare not interrupt them." 

" Alas ! alas ! Mr Hylton, were I to dwell upon them I 
should despair : my eyes turn ever back upon the past, and 
they-e still gleams upon me vengeance unappeased ! " He 
paused. ^'Dare I ask — what says poor old Ayliffe — 
Adam Ayliffe, the father?" 

" He seems but half with us, my Lord, on earth ! As 
though he had lingered only to hear these glad tidings, 
before descending into the dust !" 

" Twenty years ! twenty years hath he, too, spent in 
misery and wrong ! " 

" Twenty years have they been, my Lord, of resignation, 
of faith, which have raised and purified his noble soul — for 
noble, my Lord, even in the language of men, it is — from 
almost all di'oss of earth ! Never one w^ord has there fallen 
from him, as I do verily believe, during those long twenty 
years, which angels might not joyfully carry up to Heaven, 
as tokens of his fitness to join them ! " 

" Oh, venerable man ! Think you that he w^ould receive 
one whose head, aged as his own, is bowed with shame, 
while his is erect in virtue and nobleness?" 

Mr Hylton was moved almost to tears at the spectacle 



NOW AND THEN. 427 

which arose before his mind's eye, of these two old men 
meeting for the first, and it might be for the only time upon 
earth : and his offer to accompany his Lordship at once to 
the cottage the Earl eagerly accepted, and they both took 
their departure. As the carriage approached, the Earl 
showed no little agitation at the prospect of the coming 
interview. 

" Yonder," said Mr Hylton exultingly — " yonder is the 
humble place where dwells still, and for but a little longer, 
one whom angels there have mmistered to ; with whom God 
deigneth to have communion ; — and it is a hallowed spot ! " 



428 NOW AND THEN. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

The Earl spoke not ; and in a few minutes' time he was 
to be seen slowly approaching the cottage door, leaning on 
the arms of Mr Hylton and a servant — another preceding 
him to announce his arrival, and standing uncovered outside 
the door as the Earl entered it : his lordly master himself 
uncovering, and bowing low as he stepped within, accom- 
panied by Mr Hylton ; who led him up to old Ayliffe, say- 
ing, " Adam, here comes one to speak with you, my Lord 
Milverstoke, who saith that he hath long, in heart, done to 
you and yours injustice — and hath come hither to tell you 
so." The Earl trembled on Mr Hylton's arm while he said 
this, and stood uncovered, gazing with an air of reverence 
at the old man ; who, when they entered, was sitting near 
the fire, leaning on his staff beside a table^ on which stood 
his old Bible, open, with his spectacles lying upon it, as 
though he had but just laid them there. He rose slowly as 
Mr Hylton finished speaking. 

" My Lord," said he solemnly, and standing more erectly 
than he had stood for years, "we be now both very old men, 
and God hath not spared us thus long for nothing ! " 

" Ay, Adam Aylifi'e, indeed it is so ! Will you forgive 



NOW AND THEN. 429 

me, and take my hand?" said the Earl faintly, advancing 
his right hand. 

^' Ay, my Lord — ay, in the name of God ! I will, I do ! 
— feeling, too, that I have had somewhat to forgive ! For a 
father am I, and a father wast thou, my Lord ! Here, since 
it hath been asked for, is my hand, that never was withheld 
from man that kindly asked for it ; and my heart goes out 
to thee with it ! God bless thee, my Lord, in these thine 
old and feeble days ! Old and feeble are we both, and the 
grasshopj)er is a burthen to us P'' 

" Let me sit down, my friend," said the Earl gently, " I 
am feebler than thou; and be thou seated also!" They 
both sat down opposite to each other, Mr Hylton looking 
on in silence. '' God may forgive me, (and may He of his 
infinite mercy !) — thou, my fellow-creature, mayst forgive 
me ; but I cannot forgive myself, when I am here looking at 
thee. Good Adam ! what hast thou not gone through these 
twenty years !" faltered the Earl. 

" Ay, twenty years it is ! " echoed Ayliffe solemnly, sigh- 
ing deeply, and looking with sorrowful dignity at the Earl. 
" Life hath, during those twenty years, been a long journey 
through a country dark and lonesome ; but yet, here is the 
lamp that hath shone ever blessedly beside me, or I must 
have stumbled and missed my way for ever, and perished 
in the valley of the shadow of death!" As he spoke, 
his eyes were fixed steadfastly on the Earl, and he 
placed his hand reverently upon the sacred volume beside 
him. 

" Adam, God hath greatly humbled me, and mightily 



430 NOW AND THEN. 

afflicted me ! " said the Earl in a moving tone ; " I am not 
what I was ! " 

" The scourge thou doubtless didst need, my Lord, and 
it hath been heavily laid upon thee ; yet it is in mercy to 
thee that thou art here, my good Lord !" said AyhfFe, with 
an eye and in a tone of voice belonging only to one who 
spoke Avith conscious authority. " It is in mercy, too," he 
continued, " to me that I am here to receive and listen to 
thee ! I, too, have been perverse and rebellious, yet have 
I been spared ! And art thou, then, my Lord, in thy heart 
satisfied that my poor son hath indeed suffered wrongfully?" 

^' Good Adam," said the Earl, sorrowfully, and yet with 
dignity, " I believe 7ioio that thy son is innocent, and ought 
not to have suffered ; yet God hath chosen that we should 
not here see all things as He seeth them, Adam. The law, 
with which I had naught to do, went right as the law of 
men goeth ; but, alas ! as for me, what a spirit hath been 
shown by me towards thee and thine ! Forgive me, Adam ! 
There is one here that knoweth more against me " — the Earl 
turned towards ^Ir Hylton with a look of gloomy signifi- 
cance — " than I dare tell thee, of mine own awful guiltiness 
before God." 

'' He is merciful ! He is merciful ! " said Ayliffe. 

" Wilt thou give me a token of thy forgiveness of a spirit 
most bitter and inhuman^ such as mine hath been?" said 
the Earl presently. '^ If thy poor son Adam cometh home 
while I live, wilt thou speak with him, that he forgive me 
my cruel heart towards him ? — that he accept amends at my 
hands?" 



NOW AND THEN. 431 

^' For amends, my Lord," said AylifFe, " doubtless he 
will have none but those which God may provide for him ; 
and my son hath no claim upon thee for human amends. 
His forgiveness I know that thou wilt have for aught in 
which, my Lord, thou mayst have wronged him by unchari- 
tableness ; or he is not son of mine, and God hath afflicted 
him in vain." 

Here Mr Hylton interposed, observing the Earl grow 
very faint, and rose to assist him to the door. 

" Good day, friend Adam, good day," said Lord Milver- 
stoke feebly, but cordially grasping the hand which AylifFe 
tendered to him. " I will come hither again to see thee ; 
but if I may not, wilt thou come yonder to me ? Say yes, 
good Adam! for my days are fewer, I feel, than thine !" 

" When thou canst not come to me, my good Lord, 
I will come to thee!" said Ayliife sadly, following the 
Earl to the door, and gazing after him till he had driven 
away. 

That evening Mr Hylton wrote off to the Secretary of 
State, fully detailing the corroboration which he had ob- 
tained of every part of Bundle's confession ; and also com- 
municating the fact of Lord Milverstoke's complete convic- 
tion of its truth, and expressing his Lordship's extreme 
anxiety that not an hour should be lost in providing means 
for Ayliffe's immediate return home; Lord Milverstoke 
declaring his readiness to equip a vessel at his own expense, 
to proceed at the earliest moment abroad for that purpose. 
To this Mr Hylton added the firm conviction which he had 
from the first entertained of Ayliffe's innocence, and which 



432 NOW AND THEN. 

had been strengthened by constant correspondence with him 
ever since his quitting England. 

Mr Hylton was summoned, by the Earl's desire, that even- 
ing to the Castle, which he had quitted scarcely two hours 
before, it being believed that his Lordship was dying ; and 
Mr Hylton was greatly affected when he saw the Earl, 
whom he verily believed to be indeed near his end, and who 
exhibited a solemn tranquillity, and expressed a mournful 
sympathy on behalf of old Ayliffe and his son, such as no 
one could have observed or heard without being moved. 
When Mr Hylton retmiied, leaving the Earl a little revived, 
it was in company with his Lordship's solicitor, for whom a 
special messenger had been despatched by his Lordship, 
immediately on his return to the Castle fromvisitmg Ayliffe's 
cottage. The solicitor was an affable person, but on matters 
of business his lips were, so to speak, hermetically sealed. 
Not a word, therefore, passed between him and Mr Hylton 
respecting any thing which might have taken place between 
the former and the Earl that evening. His Lordship, how- 
ever, afterwards rallied from the prostration which had been 
occasioned by the agitation of that day ; and on the ensuing 
Sunday, Mr Hylton had the unspeakable satisfaction of see- 
ing both the Earl of Milverstoke and old Adam Ayliffe at 
church, and of administering to them, kneeling side by side, 
amongst other reverent communicants, the Holy Sacrament. 
It was a sight that was long afterwards spoken of by those 
who beheld the two old men taking leave of each other at 
the church door with solemn courtesy, each, forgetful of 
mere earthly relations, which between them were so soon 



NOW AND THEN. 433 

to cease, uncovering to the other in silence his venerable 
head, shaking each other by the hand ; and then the one 
assisted into his stately coach, the other into the small cart, 
in which a friendly neighbour had conveyed him to the 
church. Then went they severally home from the house of 
their common Father — the Father of the spirits of all flesh; 
who was no respecter of persons! The spectacle of that day 
produced a deep and lasting impression on the beholders of 
it, but especially upon those who had lived long enough to 
remember, or had been told by those who did, what had 
taken place m Milverstoke some twenty years before. 

Shortly after the happening of the events which have last 
been mentioned, there came on at Cambridge the exciting 
struggle for pre-eminence, to which the whole University 
had for some time been looking forward with an unusual 
degree of interest and curiosity, concentrated on the two 
individuals who have been already mentioned — Viscount 
Alkmond and Mr Southern. Their respective partisans 
lacked much of the calmness and good-nature of the two 
principals, who had had just that degree of intercourse with 
each other, before the hour of contest, which was calculated 
to excite reciprocal respect and apprehension. Each, it need 
hardly perhaps be said, continued ignorant of the strange 
and critical position which he and his family occupied with 
respect to the other. 

Lord Alkmond was stimulated to his uttermost exertion ; 
for to him, the future head and representative of a very 
ancient and noble family, and knowing with what intense 

2 F 



434 NOW AND THEN. 

anxiety his noble grandfather awaited the issue — what 
could be more precious than intellectual distinction — the 
highest honours of a great University, won in fair fight with 
an antagonist so formidable, so worthy of being arduously 
conquered, as Mr Southern ? But if the pressure of such 
incentives were great upon Lord Alkmond, what would 
have been the effect of his knowing, besides, who that for- 
midable competitor really was ? The son, not of his father's 
murderer, but of the heart-broken man who, having been 
falsely accused of that murder, had nearly perished for it 
on the gibbet, and afterwards passed, as the penalty of a 
crime never committed by him, twenty years of his life in 
ignominious exile from his country — from his child — from 
his father ! Would Lord Alkmond have retired from the 
contest, overpowered by his feelings, under an impulse of 
chivalrous generosity, leaving his innocent and unfortunate 
opponent to occupy the splendid post of distinction to which 
his great and admitted talents and acquirements entitled 
him ?— Who can tell ? 

But suppose that Mr Southern had discovered who he 
himself really was, and the position in which he and his 
family at that moment stood with respect to his distinguished 
opponent — what would he have done? Or, suppose him 
aware that amongst those who regarded him as an object of 
interest — as one of the two observed of all observers, in 
that great academical struggle — was one who watched him 
with a straining eye and a wellnigh bursting heart — that 
very same long-dishonoured exile, that falsely adjudged 
murderer, Ms father ? Yet so it was ! Him, rebelHous 



NOW AND THEN. 435 

Nature nearly overpowered into forgettiilness of the solemnly 
pledged word of a Christian man, that he would not disclose 
himself to his son, till that son should have passed through 
the fiery ordeal into which he had entered, and on the issue 
of which depended all his earthly prospects. Yes, poor 
Ayliffe and his wife had indeed returned to their native 
country — to dreadful, but still dear England ! 

Unable to resist the poor father's importunities, Mr Hyl- 
ton had accompanied him to Cambridge the day before that 
on which the contest commenced ; and in going thither had 
exacted the promise which has been mentioned above. 
Besides this, Mr Hylton had earnestly impressed upon him 
lessons of piety and gratitude, towards Him who out of seem- 
ing evil brought so often good. " Great and terrible are 
the sufferings both of mind and body which you have under- 
gone : but they have been inflicted upon you by an All- 
wise, Just, and Incomprehensible God. — Your duty is 
humble and joyful submission to all His dispensations : He 
owes you nothing ; you owe him every thing. As He is 
your Maker, so is He your Judge ! It is for Him alone to 
deal with you, both here and hereafter, as seemeth best to 
His infinite wisdom. Had you perished on the scaftbld : 
had you died in ignominious exile, after leading a long life 
of bodily agony — insect of the dust ! what could you have 
said against it to your Omnipotent Creator ? But in judg- 
ment He has remembered mercy : He has given you the 
consolations of rehgion, resignation, peace of mind, even 
in your very sorrow. Awfully incomprehensible in His 
nature, He has yet permitted you to see in Him a Father ; 



V 



436 NOW AND THEN. 

who chasteneth those whom he loveth, and even vouch- 
safes to them some few glimpses of his wondrous govern- 
ment of the world. Long-suffering, He stoops even to 
reason with his creatures ! And is it no mark of His favour 
and blessing that you are now here, alive, with your 
loving wife beside you — and your venerable father alive 
to welcome you — and your character and innocence vindi- 
cated before all mankind? Nay, good Adam, look even 
further ! Here is your son, likely to become the foremost 
man of Cambridge University, and have all the honom's and 
advantages attending such high distinction. He is now 
contending, as an equal, with the future Earl of Milverstoke, 
whom he may vanquish by the force of his talents and 
learning. Could this have been, in all human probability, 
if what has happened to you had not taken place ? And 
had he been strong and well-formed like you, might he not 
have gone to the plough — or at all events been never what 
he now is?" 

Ayliffe, now a gray-headed, care-worn, sad-hearted man, 
was reverently silent. — Oh, with what feelings did he first, 
at a distance, catch sight of his son ! That son was in 
academical costume, walking alone with an air of deep 
thought for a while, till he was joined by — Lord Alkmond ! 
Poor Ayliffe, who gazed at his son from the window of an 
inn, with Mr Hylton beside him, was violently affected on 
seeing him, and wept like a child. 

"How like his mother!" he exclaimed: and indeed so 
the poor youth was ! 

"And is not Lord Alkmond like his unhappy father?" 
inquired Mr Hylton. 



NOAV AND THEN. 437 

"He is !" replied Ayliffe, with a cold shudder. ^ 

The contest lay entirely that year, as all had foreseen, 
between Lord Alkmond and Mr Southern, both of whom 
far outstripped all other competitors ; and between those 
two the issue was long doubtful, to all but one or two of 
the most experienced and able members of the University, 
who privately expressed a decided opinion as to which of 
the two would be the senior wrangler. And at length 
their confident prediction was verified ; for Mr Southern 
was declared the victor, after a most severe struggle with 
his noble antagonist, noble in every sense of the word, — 
noble before, infinitely nobler after, this great contest, in 
which success had been to his Lordship an object, on many 
accounts, so dearly prized. From him Mr Southern received 
the first, heartiest, and sincerest of the congratulations which 
were soon from all quarters showered upon him. If ever a 
pure and high spirit were shown by man, it was that which 
then actuated the young Lord Alkmond ; and his modest, 
retiring, confused victor profoundly felt the generosity of his 
defeated but gifted antagonist. 

Great curiosity was excited in the University about their 
new senior wrangler; and "Who is he? — Where does he 
come from? — Who knows anything about him?" were 
questions asked eagerly on every hand. Who, however, 
could answer them ? Lord Alkmond was repeatedly asked ; 
but, in spite of his apparent acquaintanceship with his 
victorious opponent, could give no information about him. 
Curiosity was raised to a high pitch, on the day after this 
great contest, when Mr Southern was seen walking along 



438 NOW AiND THEN. 

the streets of Cambridge, his face exhibiting traces of strong 
and recent excitement and agitation, and he arm-in-arm 
with a tall, elderly, gray-haired man, with a frank but mel- 
ancholy countenance, calculated to prepossess in his favour 
every beholder, and a very homely appearance. The latter, 
also, looked as if he had not yet recovered from agitation : 
there was in his features a mingled expression of grief and 
exultation ; and the two were observed frequently to gaze 
with sudden, strange, and loving earnestness at each other. 
During the course of that day Lord Alkmond, walking 
arm-m-arra with Mr Hylton, appeared also somewhat pale, 
and as if he too had been lately the subject of strong 
emotion, or had not recovered from the effects of some 
agitating intelligence. He shook hands with Mr Southern 
in a marked manner, evidently with cordiality, yet with a 
certain gravity which he had never before exhibited ; and 
took off his hat with a courteous air, yet a concerned coun- 
tenance, to the person with whom Mr Southera was walking. 
With a sudden impulse, however, his Lordship shook him 
cordially by the hand, and said, " Sir, allow me most warmly 
to congratulate you on Mr Southern's — I mean — Mr AylifFe's 
— I mean, your son's, success — and long may you live to 
see the fruits of his great distmction ! " The person ad- 
dressed bowed low, and in his turn looked greatly embar- 
rassed. Nor was this all the food which events seemed to 
have provided for the lovers of mystery at the University, 
or in its neighbourhood. A grand entertainment was given, 
two days after the contest for the senior wranglership, by 
the Duke and Duchess of Waverdale, who had come to a 



NOW AND THEN. 439 

residence of theirs near the University, chiefly on account 
of the interest which they took in their relative Lord Alk- 
mond. Several of the august Heads of Houses were there, 
and the conversation naturally turned upon the University 
struggle, which had just closed. 

" Our new senior wrangler is a man that hath dropped 
down among us from the moon, brimful of mathematics," 
said the grave and learned Vice-Chancellor. 

" He is a particular friend of mine," replied the brilliant 
Duchess of Waverdale, with sudden and visible emotion, 
her eyes filHng with tears — " and he was invited to dinner 
here to-day, but has an engagement which all who know 
him must respect him for keeping. Do they not, dear Mr 
Hylton?" 

" Indeed, my dear Duchess, they do ! " replied Mr Hylton, 
with correspondent emotion, " I shall never forget yesterday 
— or rather, the day before ! I am, however, thinking 
anxiously about — you know whom ! — What will he say of 
it?" 

" Let us drink health and prosperity to the new senior 
wrangler," said the Duke, somewhat abruptly, glancing 
significantly at the Duchess and Mr Hylton ; "for he is an 
honour to your University, Mr Vice-Chancellor and gentle- 
men ! Come, my dear Alkmond " — 

"Indeed I will — with my entire heart," he repHed, 
eagerly; "I shall ever feel an inexpressible interest in Mr — 
Southern." 

The Heads all looked at one another with a well-bred 
air of mystery, as though they had hit upon a problem that 



440 NOW AND THEN. 

would bear discussing by-and-by ! On the next evening 
it got noised about, that Lord Alkmond, Mr Southern, and 
the strange-looking person with whom he walked about so 
much, had all dined together, that afternoon, at the Inn : 
and it somehow or other got known, that conversation was 
particularly restrained and formal, so long as dinner was on 
the table, but seemed afterwards more earnest. And the 
next day the whole party quitted Cambridge in a carriage 
and four ! Such, indeed, was the fact ; and their destina- 
tion was Milverstoke— whither Lord Alkmond anxiously 
hastened to give an account of the defeat which he had sus- 
tained, to his grandfather, and prepare him to hear by whom, 
in the mysterious and wonderful course of events, that defeat 
had been occasioned, Mr Hylton promising his assistance in the 
enterprise : for he knew, better even than the high-minded 
and frank-hearted young Viscount, the bitter mortification 
which was in store for the Earl; who appeared long to 
have set his heart upon his grandson's obtaining the dis- 
tinction which his tutors had so confidently anticipated for 
him. The Earl had had, up to that moment, no knowledge 
whatever of young Ayliffe's being at the UHiversity ; and 
how this fact, and that of his defeating Lord Alkmond, 
would be received by the Earl, was a problem which Mr 
Hylton was about to solve with some trepidation ; and that 
trepidation he had communicated to Lord Alkmond. ^' But," 
said his Lordship, "I will answer for my grandfather. 
When he first hears it all, he may be a little angry about 
the concealment, but that can be most amiably accounted 
for : and then, if I know the nature of the blood tliat runs 



NOW AND THEN. 441 

in our family, he may be somewhat dissatisfied with me for 
my faikire, but towards my distinguished opponent will feel 
as becomes a gentleman." How differently turned out 
events from those for which these excellent persons were 
preparing! — The Earl of Milverstoke was dead. 

For some time before Mr Hylton's departure for Cam- 
bridge, the Earl's health and spirits had been greatly 
depressed; which Mr Hylton and his Lordship's medical 
attendant attributed to the excitement and agitation occa- 
sioned by the Ayliffes' return to Milverstoke, and anxiety 
about Lord Alkmond's success at the University. As to 
the former, immediately on the Earl's hearing of their re- 
turn, he sent a message to Mr Hylton, requesting him to 
take a chaise and bring with him Ayliffe and his wife to 
the Castle. This Mr Hylton did ; and the Earl's manner, 
in receiving and addressing them, was signally characterised 
by dignity and kindness. 

" Eemember always, Adam," said his Lordship, " it was 
not I who caused your arrest on the charge upon which 
you were tried, nor placed you in the situation which led to 
your being an^ested. You were fairly and openly tried by 
your equals, as every Englishman must be, who is charged, 
whether rightly or wrongfully, with an offence. I, who 
had no part in your trial, verily believed you guilty : I do 
declare it upon my honour — I do assure you of it solemnly 
before God : and I continued to beheve it, till the extraor- 
dinary confession of the crime, by the man whose shameful 
cruelty first led you heedlessly astray. No man could force 
my understanding, Adam, to believe that you were innocent, 



442 NOW AND THEN. 

when I conscientiously believed that you were guilty, or 
guilty, if I had really believed that you were innocent ; but 
I freely own, humbly and penitently, before God, that I 
have, ever since you were charged with my unhappy son's 
death, felt, until lately, a most unjustifiable and unchristian 
animosity and vindictiveness towards both you and your 
exemplary father. Through the teaching of Mr Hylton, 
and the blessing of God, I have, I trust, been greatly 
altered, and regard my past conduct herein with downright 
shame and grief. But Christ my Saviour hath looked upon 
me in mercy, and (I trust) softened a heart which was a 
heart of stone. I hope that the consolations of religion are 
yours, and that they have been during your banishment ; 
and now that you are returned, I hope that peace will 
attend you both, nay, all of you, for the rest of your days. 
I am myself a great sinner," — here the Earl became greatly 
affected, turned pale, and paused for a while : then he pro- 
ceeded in a broken voice — " I am, alas ! a much greater 
sinner than you think of, or than probably any one knows 
of, but my kind, pitying friend, Mr Hylton. But I have 
repented — yes, in dust and ashes ; and may God accept of 
my repentance ! I am not much longer for this world. 
Would I had led a better life, and set a better example to 
those around me. And now, do you, both of you, heartily 
forgive me, my friends — my long-oppressed, my excellent 
and greatly pitied friends?" continued the Earl, in a 
very moving manner. 

Both Ayliffe and his wife, whom the Earl had made to 
sit down near him when they entered, were in tears all the 



NOW AND THEN. 44^ 

while that the Earl was speaking ; for there was something 
indescribably touching and solemn in the tones of his voice, 
and the expression of his countenance. They fervently 
assured his Lordship that all was forgotten in the joy of 
their returning, and with the bloody stain of guilt for ever 
blotted out. 

" Then may God Almighty bless you both, my poor per- 
secuted friends ! bless you here and hereafter, and prepare 
you for that day which I feel is drawing awfully near to me ! 
Pray for me while I am with you ; and when I am dead, 
continue in a kind and forgiving spirit, and be gentle to my 
memory. He that will succeed me will behave more 
worthily in his station than I have. I am not deserving of 
such a grandson ! But I am faint and must bid you fare- 
well. Give me your hands, my friends ; and when you 
return home, you will find here a little token a-piece for 
you, of my good-will, and an earnest only of what I will do 
for you ! " Then he gave to each a small sealed packet, 
and they withdrew, leaving him much exhausted. They 
found in each packet bank-notes to the amount of £500. 

When Mr Hylton had set off for Cambridge with Adam 
Ayliffe, (whose accompanying him was not known to the 
Earl,) Lady Alkmond, who was, from the first, acquainted 
with the secret concerning him who had become unexpec- 
tedly so formidable a competitor with her son, resolved, 
being left alone with the Earl, and seeing his subdued and 
gentle temper, herself to break the whole matter to him ; 
and this she did so judiciously, and with such winning 
tenderness, that the Earl expressed only great, very great 



444 NOW AND THEN. 

surprise, but no anger whatever. He was, on the contrary, 
much affected by the silent unostentatious generosity of his 
daughter, the Duchess of Waverdale. When the news 
came that Lord Alkmond had been defeated, and by young 
Ayliffe, Lady Alkmond shed a flood of tears ; and with a 
mother's fondness lamented the grievous disappointment of 
their proud and ambitious hopes. When she had sufficiently 
recovered her self-possession, she went to the Earl, and 
broke the tidings to him as gently as possible. He was 
then lying in the bed from which he was destined never to 
rise, and received the intelligence with perfect calmness, 
though a faint flush at first overspread his fine yet wasted 
features. The first words which he uttered, after tenderly 
foldmg his arms round Lady Alkmond, and kissing her, 
were these : — " This God hath done, and as a scourge for 
my pride ! As such I humbly receive it. God bless the 
youth Aylifl'e ! may God bless them both ! Oh send for my 
grandson ! my daughter ! my friend Hylton ! " 

The next day the doctor told Lady Alkmond that he 
had noticed a striking alteration in the Earl's countenance, 
and advised her to prepare for a great change. Other 
medical assistance was sent for, and an express despatched 
for Lord Alkmond, the Duchess of Waverdale, and Mr Hyl- 
ton. The Earl's solicitor was also summoned, and remained 
alone for some little time with his Lordship, who caused 
some additions to be made to his will. Getting rapidly 
fainter and worse, his Lordship directed his confidential 
servant to go in the coach to the cottage of old Adam Ay- 
liff'e, with an entreaty to him to come, in remembrance of 



NOW AND THEN. 445 

a promise which he had made to the Earl of Milverstoke 
some time before. 

On hearing this the old man trembled, and covered his 
face with his hands for some moments. Then, with a solemn 
countenance, getting his hat and stick, and putting his 
Bible under his arm, he said to the servant, ^' Ay, I will go 
with thee to my Lord !" 

When the Earl saw him, it was about evening, and the 
sun was setting. Its declining rays shone softly into the 
magnificent chamber in which lay the dying noble- 
man. 

" Adam, see — it is going down ! " said Lord Milverstoke 
in a low tone, looking mournfully at Adam, and pointing to 
the sadly splendid spectacle of the sinking sun. 

"How is thy soul with God?" said the old man with 
great solemnity. 

The Earl placed his hands together, and remained silent 
for some moments. Then he said, " I would it were, good 
Adam, as I believe thine is ! " 

" Nay, my good Lord, think only of thine own, not mine ; 
I am sinful, and often of weak faith. But hast thou faith 
and hope?" 

" I thank God, Adam, that I have some little ! Before I 
was afflicted I went astray ! But I have sinned deeper 
than ever thou thinkest, good soul!" 

" But His mercy, to whom thou art going, is deeper than 
all thy sins!" 

" Oh, Adam ! I have this day often thought, that I could 
die more peacefully in thy little cottage than in this place! " 



446 NOW AND THEN. 

" So thy heart and soul be right, what signifies where 
thou diest?" 

" Adam," said the Earl gently, " thou speakest somewhat 
sternly to one with a broken spirit — but God bless thee ! 
Thy honest voice searcheth me ! Wilt thou make me a 
promise, Adam?" said the Earl, softly placing his hand 
upon that of AylifFe. 

'' Ay, my Lord, if I can perform it." 

" Wilt thou follow my unworthy dust to the grave ? I 
would have followed thee, hadst thou gone first ! " 

" I will !" replied Adam, looking solemnly at the Earl. 

" And now give me thy prayers, dear Adam ! Pray for 
him that — is to come after me — for I go — and " — He paused 
long, and his eyes remained closed. After a while, he faintly 
mm-mured — " peace ! — peace ! " — 

Lady Alkmond, who was at the other side of the bed, 
observed a great change come suddenly over the Earl's 
face. While Adam was opening the Bible, and adjusting 
his glasses to read a Psalm, she hastened round, leaned 
over the bed, and kissed the Earl's forehead and cheek, 
grasped his thin fingers, and burst into weeping. But the 
Earl saw her not, nor heard her : he was no longer among 
the living. 



The Earl of Milverstoke left to the AyliiFes the mimifi- 
cent bequest of ten thousand pounds, which he styled in his 
will /'an humble peace-offering." He also directed, that 
all the land which had been purchased, on his account. 



NOW AND THEN. 447 

from old AyllfFe should be reconveyed to him free of every 
charge : and bequeathed twenty pounds for a tablet to be 
erected in the church to the memory of old Adam Ayliffe, 
the inscription on which was to be written by Mr Hylton. 
Concerning him, his Lordship said that he left the Rev. 
Henry Hylton his affectionate and his most unworthy bless- 
ing ; grieving that he had made the Earl most solemnly 
promise to leave him no legacy whatever, on hearing from 
his Lordship that such was his intention. But his Lord- 
ship left Mary Hylton, the daughter of his dear friend, the 
Rev. Henry Hylton, five thousand pounds. 

It cost that venerable man a great effort to comply with 
the wishes of the young Earl of Milverstoke and his sorrow- 
ful relatives, that he should bury his late friend. But he did; 
and old Adam Ayliffe went as one of the mourners, and 
stood, with a majestic countenance, only a few yards from 
the spot where, within three months' time, he was himself laid 
that he might take his rest beside her whom he had loved, 
till both — till all mankind — shall rise at the sound of the 
trumpet of the Resurrection. He died with noble calmness. 
His very dead countenance diffused a living peace around 
the room ; for its expression was that of a heavenly serenity. 
Him, also, Mr Hylton buried; the Earl of Milverstoke 
joining with Adam Ayliffe and his son, in following the 
honoured remains of the old patriarch through a little con- 
course in the churchyard, who wept silently as they passed. 

All those here mentioned are long since mouldered into 
dust, their kindred dust. They are dead, but have not 
perished, being only asleep. Perhaps already, they see no 



448 NOW AND THEN. 

longer through a glass, darkly, but face to face : knowmg 
no longer in part, but even as they are known. We, who 
have come after them, see also, at present, as they saw, 
only through a glass, darkly : wherefore we look for full 
clearness hereafter only ; and till our sleeping time come, 
walk trembling, but hopefully. 



THE END. 



PRINTED BV- WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS, EDINBURGH. 



UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY 
BERKELEY 



Return to desk from which borrowed. 
This book is DUE on the last date stamped below. 



FEB 4 i9/;>^ 



IN STACKS 

OCT 11957 
REC'D CD 

8 1952. 



