Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 



ji^^Bsst^mmmmoM^ 



600069279$ 




OA.KFIELD, 



OR 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST, 



VOL. n. 



OAKFIELD, 



OB 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST 



BY PUNJABEE. 



IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOL. IL 



LONDON : 
LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS. 

BUOBY : CBOSSLEY AND BILLINOTON. 
M.DCCC.LIII. 



^ 4^ ^ . ^^. ^ 



/■ 



'/• 



"... He within, 

" Took measure of his soul, and knew its strength, 
" And by that silent knowledge, day by day 
" Was calmed, ennobled, comforted, sustained." 

Mycerinus. 



OAKFIELD, 



OB 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 



CHAPTER L 

" Then be my restless heart content. 
Dull years are not all idly spent : 
Give me one feeling true and deep, 
One hour of self-forsaking ; 
And I will bear with years of sleep 
Foj that one glimpse of waking." 

Anonymous. 



We left Oakfieldat Ferozepore^ waiting in that 
hot July weather for the sentence of the court 
martial; which sentence (it may be as well to say) 
is agreed upon in a cleared courts by the members^ 
under an oath of secrecy^ both as to their own and 
their neighbours' votes ; as also the finding of guilty 
or not guilty is first voted upon individually^ going 
upwards from the junior member; and afterwards 
the sentence is decided upon in a similar manner ; 
the proceedings are then closed^ and sent up to head 

VOL. IL B 



2 OAKFlELDy OR 

quarters for the approval, confirmation, or revision 
of the Commander-in-chief, and finally appear in 
printed general orders ; so that the sentence of a 
court martial assembled at a station some thousand 
miles firom the head quarters, especially if the pro- 
ceedings are sent back once or twice for reconsidera- 
tion or alteration, is sometimes not known for two 
or even three months firom the time of the trial. 
Oakfield, however, had not much more than three 
weeks to wait About the end of August it was 
known in Ferozepore that general orders had 
come, by the morning post, containing the two 
courts martiaL Stafibrd was found guilty of send- 
ing a challenge to fight a duel, and sentenced to be 
degraded three steps in the list of Lieutenants of 
his regiment Then followed,— ^* At the same 
court, on the 2nd August, 1847, Ensign E. Oak- 
field, of the 90th regiment of Native Light In- 
fantrjy was arraigned on the following charges : 

L ^^ For conduct highly unbecoming an officer 
and a gentleman, in suffering himself, on the 20lh 
of June, 1847, to be grossly and publicly insulted 
at the mess-table of his regiment, and neither re- 
porting to his commanding officer, nor in any way 
noticing the affront" 

2. " For highly unofficer-like conduct, in hav- 
ing, on the morning of the 21st of June, 1847, 
assaulted Lieutenant U. Straddles, of the 90th 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 3 

regiment, N. L, and struck him repeatedly with a 
riding whip." 

Finding—" The court having carefully weighed 
and considered the evidence that has been brought 
before them, as well as what the prisoner has said 
in his defence, are of opinion that he. Ensign R 
Oakfield, of the 90th regiment of Native Light 
Infantry, is, 

" On the first charge. Not guilty ; and they do 
acquit him thereof. 

" On the second charge Guilty." 

Sentence : " The court having found the 
prisoner guilty to the extent above specified, do 
now sentence him to be severely reprimanded, in 
such a place and manner as his Excellency the 
Commander be now pleased to direct" 

Recommendation by the court : " The court 
beg most respectfully to urge, in mitigation of the 
punishment dde to the offence of which the 
prisoner has been most clearly convicted, and for 
which he has been sentenced by them according 
to the Article of war, the very great provocation 
under which it was committed." 

** Approved and confirmed." 

Remarks by his Excellency the Commander- 
in-chief: — " The Commander-in-chief, taking into 
consideration the recommendation of the court, and 

the extreme and gross provocation by which Ensign 

B 2 



4 OAKFIELD^ OR 

Oakfield was tempted to commit the unmilitary 
action of which he has been very properly con*** 
▼icted^ merely desires that Ensign Oakfield will 
recollect for the future that personal violence is a 
mode of redress which neither civil or military law 
can for a moment tolerate. On the first charge 
the court has acquitted the prisoner, and therefore 
the Commander-in-chief abstains from commenting 
upon his conduct ; but he cannot refrain firom ex- 
pressing his strong disapprobation of the behaviour 
of Captain Colt; and indeed, were it not for that 
officer's previous services in the field, the Com- 
mander-in-chief would have felt himself compelled 
to order him to be tried by court martial for egre- 
gious neglect of duty. Ensign Oakfield will be 
released from arrest, and return to his duty." 

So ended the Ferozepore court martial ; and the 
90th were indignant Stafibrd put down three steps, 
(by which proceeding both Straddles and Brooks 
were gainers, by the bye, so that they felt bound to 
express an extra amount of indignation to prove 
their disinterestedness,) while Oakfield got off with 
a reprimand ! Colonel Pringle talked seriously of 
leaving the army, if such things were to be done 
and tolerated in it ; but he did not retire, and stops 
promotion even to this day. Even those most 
kindly inclined to Oakfield, such as Perkins, now 
that he had got off so lightly, and was as it 



FELLOWSHIP IN THB EAST. 5 

were up i^in, felt less indisposed to condemn him ; 
whatever sneaking sympathy there might have been 
for him at the time of the trial, was quite gone, or 
boldly transferred to Stafford, who for his part, was 
comicallv divided between an affectation of re- 
garding himself as a martyr to the cause of honor, 
and a great heartiness of damning Straddles for 
having got him into such a scrape, by which Strad- 
dles himself (the unkindest cut of all) came out a 
gainer. His friends, however, were staunch, — 
Mr. Middleton, Stanton, and Wykham, that is to 
say ; for from his friends at home he resolved, now 
that the matter had so ended, to conceal the event 

altogether. Mrs. Oakfield suspected something, 

■ 

from a certain forced air and unusual vacancy in 
his letters, the sure consequence of a man's sup- 
pressing what his mind is full of and writing upon 
other points which, for the time at least, he cannot 
feel much real interest in ; but she would not ask 
what he apparently wished to conceal, and never 
knew what had happened till she heard it from 
Wykham, more than a year afterwards. She now, 
however, began to hear from Oakfield himself what 
distressed her more than the account of his court 
martial troubles would have done, — that his health 
was failing; that his old delicacy of the lungd 
seemed to be allying itself with new symptoms of 
liver ailment,— -a combination so often fatal to the 



6 OAKFIELD, OB 

Anglo-Indian. Not that Oakfield either talked^ or 
the least thought, of fatal symptoms; he was ill in- 
deed, but not seriously; only the depression, which 
so often accompanies any affection of the liver, 
made him more sensible than he otherwise would 
have been to the unkindness of those about him. 
He never for an instant thought of retracting or 
qualifying his principles ; he was only half-ashamed 
of himself for so much regarding what he knew to 
be of so little importance. ^^ But I fear," he said 
one day to Mr. Middleton, ^^ that I am not cut out 
for a combatant; old Stanton now, were he in my 
position, with double my firmness, would evince a 
complete and unruffled composure, which would 
make even his opponents half laugh at their ina- 
bility to disturb him." 

^^I don't think you have much to reproach 
yourself with on either head," said Mr. Middleton, 
knowing that Oakfield's language was that of sin- 
cere self-reproach, and that his answer was not, 
therefore, flattery, but a just consolation. '^I am 
sure you show no signs of being over-troubled by 
anything, except by sickness, which you must get 
rid of; and I am equally sure that neither Stanton 
nor any of us could have fought the battle with 
more firmness and temper than you did." 

" And yet," he said, " you will not suspect me 
of hunting for praise, when I say that I sometimes 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 7 

doubt whether I did not rather evade the true point 
at issue in raising that defence about Colt. I have 
no compassionate regrets for having lugged him into 
a scrape which he well deserved ; but I am not 
sure that it would not have been a fairer answer, a 
more honest unflinching testimony, to have taken 
my stand simply on an unqualified denial of the 
unholy command, ^ Thou shalt resent evil.' Really, 
the almost literal opposition of the Articles of 
war to the New Testament on this point is quite 
startling." 

** The literal opposition, Oakfield ; but you ought 
to be the last man in the world to allow yourself 
to be imposed upon by a mere literal coincidence* 
No — I am sure that you took the right ground. 
That 'an officer shall resent an afiront,' is not 
reaUy inconsistent with the high moral precept, 
^ when a man smites thee on the one cheek, turn 
to him the other also ; '-—depend upon it, it was a 
true instinctive consciousness of this that induced 
you to appeal to Colt, and afterwards to rest your 
defence upon that appeal" 

''You mean," rejoined Oakfield, "that society 
is obliged to take, and therefore is justified in 
taking, a lower standard of morality than an in- 
dividual" 

" Even that I think is true, though you put it 
harshly. Society may rightly hang a man for 




8 OAKPIELD, OS 

murder, and that not for example, but ibr retri- 
budoD. Why, then, may not one man slaj a 
murderer in the same righteous apirit? I will not, 
indeed, say that he may not ; I do not think it 
impoBBible that a good man, eeeing one commit . a 
hideous crime, may not even kill him in the boli- 
neee of his wrath, and stand excused to bis own 
conscience and to God himseIC But I am sure 
that it would be madness for society to allow such 
a possibility; because, for one case where such 
homicide would be as just and dispassionate a 
retribution as a legal execution, there would be a 
million and more where it would be only an evil 
and malignant murder. Society cannot tell, cannot 
judge, and therefore cannot allow for motives. It 
can only prevent and punish consequences. In 
this way you must think of the unlimited evil con- 
sequences of allowing swa^ering bullies to hector 
away unchecked. Far more, certainly, than in the 
cose I supplied, a good man may hear it, endure 
it, and in the strong consciousness of rectitude be 
meekly silent; and yet society, military society 
especially, is not wrong, I think, in enjoining the 
resenting of afih>ntB as a law; because, while it 
cannot detect the exceptional cases where sub- 
is the result of strong self-^vemment and 
high reli^ous principle, it does know the strong 
torrent of bravado, tyranny, and insolence on the 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 9 

one hond^ cringing baseness and cowardice on the 
other^ which would poor down were the safeguard 
of this (frail I grant, and in principle defective^ 
yet necessary) law, withdrawn. 

^'I never heard you hold forth so vehemently 
before/ said Oakfield, half admiringly, <' except 
once." 

Mr. Middleton laughed* 

*^ Ah I you have not forgotten my Ganges 
sermon, but I have not done yet : it is true I am 
silent till I speak, and when I speak I fear I some- 
times preach, and when I preach it may be that I 
prose, but that you must endure ; however, to 
continue, — what is true, I think, of society alto- 
gether, that it is forced (not to take a lower stan- 
dard of right and wrong but) to guard right and 
wrong, by laws lower in principle, and springing 
from a lower and less worthy ground than those 
which originate in the high and only entirely true 
legislative court of conscience, is true also of mili- 
tary, as compared with common, society. If the 
fountain of ordinary social law be necessarily low, 
that of military law is still lower. For armies 
themselves being anomalies, the necessary but still 
anomalous consequences of the world's haying 
once degenerated from the high moral ground 
where alone the motive can be decided upon as 
coloring the act, it must needs follow that its laws 



10 OAKFIELD^ OR 

should also be anomalous. As a mere arrange- 
ment for preserving the peace, nay, as a needful 
help to keeping up the artificial character which 
is considered, (rightly or wrongly,— OUver Crom- 
well, you know, thought wrongly, and created a 
regiment of ironsides, on strange revolutionary 
principles, by discarding the artificial in favor o f 
the real sincere character), but which I say is still 
considered, best for keeping up the fighting quali- 
ties in soldiers, military law has, I think, a right to 
prescribe a certain code of manners, even as they, 
and as colleges, and other peculiar institutions do 
a certain code of dress and habits, and even diet." 

** But," suggested Oakfield, " surely a compul- 
sory code of manners is a far greater infi-ingement 
upon personal liberty than a code of dress or 
habits." 

" Granted ; but the excess of interference is 
not greater than the greater peculiarity of the 
military institution warrants." 

^^You cannot mean that a man is bound to 
submit to a code of manners which his own code 
of morals rejects." 

" Of course not; but he should consider well 
whether he need reject it. Of course all this 
would be the vilest casuistry if I were attempting 
to set up any authority above a man's own con- 
science, which is, after all, the one final court of 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. II 

appeal, by whose sentence every decision of all 
minor jurisdictions must be confirmed, or utterly 
quashed ; I only mean that there are things which, 
for social convenience sake, we may lawfully sub^ 
mit to a lower tribunal ; even as you did when 
you brought Stafford's conduct to the notice of a 
superior officer, as we all do whenever we go to 
law ; for this is the only answer I can find, and I 
think it is a conclusive answer, to the quaker doc- 
trine of entire non-resistance ; but when that lower 
tribunal requires of you some act, such as fighting 
a duel, or any much more trifling action, which 
represents itself to you as malignant, and therefore 
wrong, then, of course, you must go no further ; 
you must say no, — the case is no longer before 
you; to the utmost of your jurisdiction I have 
obeyed, but now I am engaged with laws which 
you do not administer. In the same way, that in 
the case I just supposed, of a man's literally going 
to law, there may arise, at any time, circumstances 
which transfer his case firom the sessions to the 
assizes, so it may at any time be his duty to trans- 
fer it himself fix)m any human court to the higher 
jurisdiction of God and conscience ; and if he still 
continues to prosecute his cause notwithstanding, 
in a court of human law, he is guilty of sin just as 
much as a man who, in obedience to the lower law 
of honor, fights a duel in opposition to the double 



12 OAKFIELD, OR 

command of two higher authorities — social and 
moral law. 

'* I follow you ;" said Oakfield, ** it is very good 
of you to find a theory to suit my practice, though 
it is rather putting the cart before the horse." 

** No, I do not think it is, I am rather fond of 
theorising myself, and reducing things to laws and 
principles, but I do not at all admit that a cut and 
dried theory is the horse which must, in every 
case, precede the cart of action. Our actions 
would be few, and poor, and hesitating, did we al- 
ways wait to find a theory to fit them to." 

** How should a man act then if not on prin- 
ciple? What security have you then for the 
actions ? " 

** On principle he must act ; that is, he must 
have broad principles of right and wrong clearly 
established in his own mind ; a theoriser, in the 
bad sense of the word, is one who is always fidget- 
ing to find out how his principle applies, and to 
what principle his act is to be referred, and so on, 
while a more healthy-minded man feels that he 
acts most truly when he acts on impulse ; a good 
man may feel sure that his impulsive act, besides 
having a fireshness and a vigour which no careful 
laborious squaring to a given principle beforehand 
can ever give, will also be far more correct ; he 
may examine afterwards, and then find, with plea- 



FELLOUVSHIP IN THE EAST. 13 

sure, that be ean refer it, with great precision, to a 
theory. You will never fail to find a good theory 
to support a good practice, but reverse this order 
and you will seldom be able to deduce a good 
practice from however good a theory." 

This conversation took place during a morning 
ride ; Oakfield had met Mr. Middleton, who had 
been out alone inspecting the new gaol which he was 
building ; they had by this time reached the house, 
and found Miss Middleton, according to custom, 
seated in the verandah, with the tea-pot and the 
mangoes on the little table, waiting for her brother. 
They both dismounted. ^^ Give me a cup of tea, 
directly. Fan; I have been preaching." 

Miss Middleton looked at Oakfield as for con* 
firmation of this remark : she knew how rare her 
brother's outpourings were. 

** Yes, I assure you," Oakfield said, in answer to 
her look, *^ he has been talking more fireely than I 
have heard him do for a year past" 

^' I consider myself defirauded, Henry ; you had 
tu> business to be loquacious without roe. Now the 
fit is over, and I suppose you will give me the 
benefit of your silence for another twelve months." 

Oakfield remained to spend the day, as he now 
did many days; for he had little inducement to 
stay in cantonments, and his still failing health 
prevented those habits of regular employment and 



14 OAKFIELD, OR 

active thought which could alone have made com- 
plete solitude endurable. Towards the end of 
August^ however, he was so unwell that the doctor 
would not permit him to stand the trying month of 
September in the plains, and sent him to the hills, 
on medical certificate, till the 1st of January* He 
was, for some reasons, glad ; for others, unwilling 
to go. He was glad to be relieved firom his present 
unpleasant position, and yet would have dreaded 
any appearance of timidly retreating from it He 
would be glad to see Wykham at Simla ; but he 
had to part with the Middletons. He believed 
that his health required the change, and yet it was 
very trying to be going away on leave of absence, 
especially to one in his peculiar circumstances, just 
as there seemed a prospect of the regiment's being 
ordered on service. The disturbances which in 
April had seemed a mere local agitation at Mool- 
tan, but had become serious there by the murder 
of two British officers ; had, by procrastination and 
feeble tossing to and fro of responsibility, been 
fomented into something very like a general insur- 
rection in the Punjab. Already a lai^e force was 
in pn^ess to Mooltan; already there was a ru- 
mour afloat, that an army was to be formed on the 
frontier, under the Commander-in-chief, and that 
there would be another Sikh campaign. However, 
Oakfield knew that he could at any time rejoin his 



FELLOWSHIP IN THB EAST. 15 

corps^ should it actually go on service, and that in 
the meantime two months or even one month in 
the hills would probably be of great use to him, 
setting him up for the whole cold season. Ac- 
cordingly, on the 3rd of September, he started for 
Simla. He had a troublesome journey, for the 
floods were out, and there are few things in this 
world more entirely irksome and disagreeable than 
travelling in a palanquin through a flooded country. 
The patient (such he surely is whether invalid or 
not) is jolted along dismally ; the perpetual com- 
plaints of the bearers mingling with the sound of 
the dripping rain and the moaning wind ; the torch 
is blown out every three minutes, and so often 
has he to stop while it is re-lighted; his palki is not 
altogether water-tight; first he feels a suspicious 
drop on his up-looking &ce, wipes it away, but lo, 
another and another, and the gloomy truth is too 
manifest that there is a leak overhead, and ere long 
he finds his only comfort in resignation, and after 
vainly trying to protect first one part, then another, 
firom the encroaching moisture, at last fairly gives 
in, and is soon lying in a cold trickling river; even 
this becomes bearable, by use, and as he is getting 
accustomed to it, perhaps even thinks of sleeping, 
notwithstanding the discordant sounds without and 
the watery couch within, he hears an extra yelling, 
feels a strange uplifting, has a painful conscious- 



16 OAKFIELD, OR 

nes8 that he is about to be let down, when he finds 
himself, palki and all, deposited upon the bearers' 
heads, and so pasung through a broad rapid nullah, 
up to a man's chest in depth. In the middle of the 
stream, as he looks out upon the thick yellow rush- 
ing water, just where it gleams sullenly in the light 
of the torch, a man slips ; the rest yell ; the palki 
lurches ; and his heart is in his mouth ; for immer- 
sion in that boxed up conveyance is certain drown- 
ing. The bearers, however, recover themselves, and 
presently the same screeching which had attended 
his being hoisted up proclaims that he is being let 
down, and again he jogs on, on his moist, monoto- 
nous, melancholy march. The long night passes 
away in occasional nullah passages and alternating 
gUmpses of rest; the day breaks, and is gladly 
welcomed ; but too soon the sun arises, shining with 
a pale sickly heat over the flooded plains, which 
begin visibly to exhale their feverish steam; the 
wet palki and its wet inmate are soon dried up, and 
then the sun begins to beat down with a sickening 
power. Seven o'clock I The bearers quicken their 
pace into a fast measured shufBie ; their noisy talk 
degenerates into a methodical sing song that keeps 
time with their step ; and by these signs the un- 
happy traveller knows that his rest is near. A 
group of trees is seen, and amoi^st them the small 
white bungalow. Happy that one moment of 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 17 

leaping satisfaction^ after the long hours of discom- 
fort The palki is set down, its pale dishevelled 
inmate hoists himself out with his sun-baked 
shrivelled garments hanging to him in uncomfort- 
able wrinkles, and finds that he has with thus much 
pain and grief, accomplished thirty miles of the 
two hundred and fifty which constitute his journey i. 
However, hope gilds the future, and the elastic youth, 
forgetfiil of the immediate past, sets himself to find 
what comfort he can in the busy present ; scanty, it 
must be owned ; rest and shelter he may find, but 
assuredly not comfort. D^ bungalows have been 
described by some Oriental travellers as ^* the Inns 
of India." Playful satirists I Who does not asso- 
ciate the word inn with his most cheerful hours, 
with evenings of intensest comfort, with meals of 
rarest conviviality? What English imagination 
does not, at the word inn, see visions of blazing 
fires, bright red curtains, dark mahogany tables, 
panelled wainscots, hospitable landladies, obliging 
winters, amiable chambermaids, virtuous soles, 
tender beef-steaks, refireshing malt, deep-curtained 
beds, snow white sheets, downy pillows, comfort 
on every side, cleanliness in every department, a 
pleasant evening over the paper, a good night's 
rest in a good four-poster, a cheerful waking the 
next morning at the friendly voice of Boots, to 

proceed by the mail, which is even now putting 
VOL. n, c 



18 OAKFIELD, OR 

to in the yard^ or to go down by the omnibus to 
the station for the early train I And these things 
are to be transferred to a dUc bungalow in India I ! 
Passing over those differences which a different 
country and climate necessitate, such as the absence 
of fires and the substitution of native for European 
attendants, we still find little to justify the com- 
parison. What did Oakfield see as he emerged 
from his palki ? A cold white bungalow, with all 
doors open, disclosing the two rooms which com- 
pose the house — he may occupy either of these 
rooms he Ukes ; nor need the privilege perplex him, 
for they are each the fac-simile of the other — he 
enters either, and finds four white walls, a very 
ricketty, dirty, roughly-made table, two chairs to 
match, and in one comer a small square bedstead, 
dirty to a degree that makes even the table and 
chairs look clean, the pillows and bedding in his 
palki are soaked through with the last night's rain, 
so he must resign his body, taking the precaution 
to keep his clothes on, to the dingy pallet, and rest 
his aching head upon his coat. The obsequious 
waiter (shade of 'Charles!') comes in, the one 
long-robed, long-bearded, dark-visaged, beturbaned 
attendant, and asks if breakfast shall be brought 

Of course it shall. These eighteen hours the 
man is fasting from all but muddy water. But no 
vain dialogue succeeds about what shall be pro- 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 19 

vided; too well the unhappy traveller knows the 
nakedness of the land, and with a sigh of resigna- 
tion, and one pitying glance towards the brood 
which he sees and hears frolicking in the com- 
pound% orders the grilled fowl. The native atten- 
dant, as though agreeably surprised at receiving 
such an order, and proud of his ability to obey 
it, rushes out, and in a moment is seen enticing 
one out of that destined tribe. A shout, a cackle, 
a struggle, a triumphant exclamation, and the 
traveller has the satisfaction of knowing that his 
breakfast is secured. In the course of an hour 
it appears : — ^the intermediate time has been pro- 
fitably employed in doing battle with the count- 
less flies, which descend upon this &vored spot in 
myriads that forcibly recall the days of Pharaoh 
and afflicted Egypt But the breakfast is come : 
two square feet of the unhappy table are covered 
with a dirty brown towel, which is *^ the govern- 
ment regulation table cloth ; " and on this is the 
appetizing meal There lies, in all its leathery 
indigestible integrity, the deluded cock, that fsither 
of whole generations of d&k bungalow supplies, who 
only this morning, with unfearing crow, heralded 
in the day of his doom ; a browner, more leathery 
substance, called a chapattie, supplies the place of 

* Uompound — the small paddock-like enclosure in which a 
house is situated. 

c 2 



20 OAKFXELD, OR 

bread, and in that vessel of undefinable metal floats a 
hot preparation of some unpronounceable leaf, which 
the caterer, in the same incorri^ble spirit of stem 
humour, presents as tea. The breakfast is taken 
away, and now for ^' a day at an inn." The healthy 
man, with organs underanged, may sleep ; the con* 
templative man may speculate upon the march of 
civilization in India as indicated by d&k bungalows, 
which, from the day of their institution, twelve 
years ago, untU now, have remained with no fear 
of innovating reform, with little or no change save 
that the furniture (the table, two chairs, and dirty 
bedstead aforesaid) were then only old, but now 
are crumbling to their last decay ; the morbid man 
may marvel under what foolish star he was born> 
that he worried his friends out of their lives to 
procure him an appointment to the gorgeous East ; 
the inquisitive man may read over, in the bungalow 
book, the names of all the victims that have been 
there ; the poet may add his mite to the stores of 
facetious and sentimental literature with which the 
Snooks and the Browns of this world have garnished 
this said book ; but the sick man— -what shall he 
do, except vidnly wish it was evening, that he might 
be in his palki, and again struggling with the 
waters, and again wishing it were morning ! 

Such was Oakfield's journey in the pleasant 
month of September : it will hardly be wondered at. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 21 

that when he reached Simla, and found himself at 
last landed in Wjkham's rooms at the Pavilion, he 
was seriously unwelL He had, however, not been so 
ill but that he had been impressed with his first view 
of the Himmalajas ; striking it always must be ; 
the thought that those great ranges which we see 
with our eyes are the very Himmalaya mountains 
of which we were taught in our geography lessons 
as children ; which have ever existed for us as a 
vague standard of immeasurable size. But as the 
traveller approaches for the first time that won- 
derful nucleus of the earth's anatomy, he requires 
no such strange reminiscences to stir his wonder: 
that first glance is one 

" That hath no need of a remoter charm. 
By thought supplied, or any interest 
Unborrowed from the eye :" 

the dark huge mass giving to the mind an almost 
new idea of the meaning of size, those endless 
ranges that rise up one behind another, growing 
dimmer and more dim in the vague distance, till 
suddenly up spring, hindmost of all, far the most 
distant of all, yet looking so near and distinct as to 
startle the eye that has been with difficulty tracing 
up the intermediate steps, those white and glisten- 
ing peaks, which, with that tremendous outline 
traced in dazzling and perennial snow, seem indeed 



22 OAKFIELD^ OR 

fit emblems of eternity, and defy the wondering 
mind to picture to itself a time when ought was 
and they were not All day long, Oakfield looked 
and marvelled as he approached the foot of the 
hills. It was one of those bright days after violent 
rain, when September feels almost as cold as 
January, and the sun^^^m^at least to be powerless. 
All day long he travelled — so cool was it, and all 
day long he gazed, and was not weary ; and when 
he got to his resting-place that night, immediately 
at the foot of the hills, he was glad to go to bed 
and rest, for he felt, as it were, overwhelmed, as a 
man who had stood all the day in a most awM 
presence. At day-break he started on a hired 
pony to ride up the hill. And now it must be 
confessed that his disappointment began. He 
looked for the characteristics of mountain scenery, 
and he found few or none. This is a disappoint- 
ment which is felt by every one entering the 
Uimmalayas who has ever seen the Alps, or the 
Highlands, or the Welsh or English Lakes. The 
mountains partook too much of the nature of the 
plains of India ; the gigantic scale of everything did 
not at all compensate for that exquisite beauty of de- 
tail which Oakfield remembered in Cumberland. 
The crumbling muddy rock was a poor substitute 
for the hard slate or granite ; the wood lost much 
of its attraction by its appearance of jungley im- 



FELLOWSHIP IN TUB EAST. 23 

penetrability ; the monotonous outline defied any 
attempt at that individualising personification which 
gave such a vitality to his recollection of every 
point and crag of his own mountains ; and the one 
crowning defect of all, a defect so great that no 
beauty could have quite atoned for it, was the 
entire absence of water. Even in September, when 
the quantity of water was nearly at its maximum, 
it could be heard only, and not seen. There was 
an indistinct murmur in the ravine, and this was 
well, and he was less disappointed than he would 
have been by the dead dry silence which reigns for 
so great a part of the year; but even now, as his 
eye followed the endless water-courses, it was rarely 
that he could detect the faintest twinkle of a stream, 
and this gave an unmeaning look, a listlessness to 
the whole landscape, which was almost painful. 
Let those who have been in a mountain country in 
Europe try to recall some of the scenes which they 
most admired, and try to conceive what those val- 
leys would be if the streams, upon which their 
existence seems to depend, were wanting. The 
stream appears to make the valley, and with this 
natural consequence we are unconsciously pleased ; 
but a valley without a stream is a wax figured- 
dancing, without music — Hamlet, without the 
Prince of Denmark. 

But Oakfield felt little disposed to quarrel with 



24 OAKFIELD^ OB 

this or anything else as he gradually moonted into 
the re^on of pure and cool atmosphere ; he had 
left the foot of the hills at five o'clock in the morn- 
ing; at that time the heat was still most oppressive ; 
the night had been one of those hot, close, heavy 
burdens, so common in September; when he woke 
the very dawn had no freshness in it; the thick 
brooding air seemed as though it never could be 
lightened again. By six o'clock he had ascended 
two thousand feet ; and was, by no other magic than 
the four legs of a stout hill-pony, transported into 
a region as different to that he had quitted as 
Damascus from Bagdad The pale blue sky was 
clear and cloudless above him ; below lay the plains, 
stretching as far as the horizon, one dank hot fog- 
bank ; the heavy boiling wind was exchanged for 
light fresh breezes, exhilarating almost to intoxica- 
tion ; the rays of the rising sun were welcomed {or 
their now pleasing warmth ; the hills were one mass 
of fresh moist verdure. The pony trudged on with 
the sedate indifference of an animal who was used 
to the kind of thing ; but Oakfield felt as if he were 
inhaling laughing gas. 'He got that night to Hur- 
reepore ; and by the help of a horse which Wyk- 
ham sent down to Sairee to meet him, arrived at 
Simla in time for breakfast the next morning. Wyk- 
ham was delighted to see him, and they passed all 
that day in the pleasing, exciting, yet most transient 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 25 

and unsubstantial conversation which is common 
to friends who meet after a certain length of ab- 
sence. In the evening they rode round Jacko» and 
went to bed soon after dinner^ as tired as if the 
whole day had been passed in violent exertion. 
Oakfield rose the next morning, feeling better in 
health and happier in mind than he had done for 
some weeks past The first fact is easily accounted 
for, and may have had some share in producing the 
second, and yet it was not alL Attached as Oakfield 
was to the Middletons, he yet felt more at home, 
more entirely at his ease, more able to bear and to 
do whatever might be before him, in Wykham's 
society than theirs. And yet this was strange, for 
with these he fireely discussed all that had hap- 
pened, while to Wykham he would never perhaps 
have uttered a syllable had it not been for a cir- 
cumstance which, after he had been at Simla about 
a fortnight, drew him into a communication on the 
subject He was riding behind Jacko*, in company 
with Wykham, according to evening custom, when 
they met a man riding alone, whom Oakfield in- 
stantly recognised as an officer belonging to one of 
the regiments at Ferozepore, who had been up at 
Simla ever since the middle of April. Wykham 
knew him, and spoke to him. Oakfield, as a matter 
of course also addressed him, but the other afiected 

* i/incAo— the name of a celebrated hill at Simla. 



26 OAKFIELD, OR 

not to hefir, and passed on. The case was clear : 
he had heard of what had occurred at Ferozepore, 
had heard and believed the popular story, and come 
to the popular conclusion. Oakfield saw all this in 
an instant, colored violently, and rode on. Wykham 
had also seen what had passed, but was not so ready 
to account for it 

<'I say, Oakfield, didn't you speak to that 
man?" 

" Oh, yes," said Oakfield, who had quite re- 
covered his composure. 

"Well?" 

"Well, — and he cut me Fred, that's all. No- 
thing when you are used to it, I assure you." 

Wykham now understood also, and regret and 
indignation kept him silent 

"Oakfield," he said, abruptly, "how do you 
expect all this to end ?" 

"All what?" 

" Oh you know what I mean ; do you intend to 
be black-balled all your life ?" 

** Possibly." 

" My dear fellow, don't be so confoundedly cool ; 
you can't like it, you know ?" 

"Not at all, I never said I did; I only say 
possibly it may be so, whether I like it or not" 

" And shall you take no measures to stop it? 
My dear Ned, patience and endurance may be 
carried too fiur." 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 27 

" No, they cannot, Wjkham, not a jot too far, 
not half far enough. You speak impatiently when 
you say so ; if I was like old Stanton I should tell 
you that you didn't really think sa'' 

Wykham laughed. '* Yes, that is just one of 
the old bear's cool self-complacent assertions ; but 
Oakfield, I really don't know what to think about 
your principle of endurance. It's all very well in 
theory, I dare say, but just look at the conse- 
quences." 

^' Well, Fred, even looking at the consequences, 
though I do not admit that it is at all necessary to 
do so, I see nothing very terrible in them." 

" Not in being cut?" 

**No; you do not cut me, nor Stanton, nor 
Middleton, nor some five or six more I could name ; 
you don't suppose I am afflicted by that fellow who 
just passed cutting me?" 

" Well, I thought you did care when I looked at 
your fiwse." 

^'I was foolish to shew it, and you are hard 
upon me to notice my infirmity. Of course human 
nature is liable to be irritated by rudeness when it 
is both intentional and sudden ; but if we meet 
that man to-morrow night you shall see me endure 
it with a wonderful serenity. ^Nonsense, Fred I you 
don't consider it a hardship really. I should like 
to see you putting yourself out of the way, or doing 



28 OAKFIELD, OR 

what you thought wrong, because all the fools of 
your acquamtance chose to cut you." 

Wykham smiled^ and there was a force and de- 
termination in his smile^ as he mentally examined 
the picture Oakfield exhibited to him, which was 
strongly in confirmation of the latter's assertion. 

^' And yet," he said, ^'I should be inclined, I 
think, to do something to set myself right." 

^^ Of course, so am I : I have an extra motive, 
not a very strong one I hope, but still a motive, to 
live well, and shame the devil. Ah I my dear 
Fred I it does shame me when I think how little 
we have to bear, and how ill we bear it For just 
think," he continued, " how very little we do have 
to bear, we, in our rank of life ; how seldom it is 
that we are called upon to suffer for conscience 
sake. It is in this, I think, more even than in 
physical comforts, that we foiget too much the fel- 
lowship of the poor with ourselves; expect too 
much of them, and claim far too great an exemp- 
tion for ourselves. They are daily tempted by 
their own agonies, and those of their dearest rela- 
tions, to the commission of crime, and we wonder 
that a sense of duty does not restrain them from 
offences so shocking as theft; but when we are 
tempted to commit % crime of equal guilt, though 
the cost of denying ourselves be no more than a 
displeasure against us, felt by those who have no 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 29 

power at all over us, then we think it a venial 
weakness if we fall, a miracle of virtue if we stand. 
I wonder what would become of us if we, with 
our softened natures, were suddenly exposed to 
the torrent of temptation that besets the poor. l£ 
all that God demands of me is that I shall resist 
the foolish dictates of a feeble foolish society, I 
shall not think myself hardly tasked. We live in 
a soft age, Fred, when everything is made so plain 
for us, when it is so easy to go through Ufe, assent- 
ing, with a shrug and a smile, to a thousand lies in 
a day ; it is well when we get something to harden 
us, when we wake for a little while to live for our- 
selves ; relinquishing our lazy, faithless dependence 
upon others." 

Wykham looked surprised; he and Oakfield 
seldom got beyond a playfiil tone in their convei^ 
sation ; and yet this always left upon them a sense 
of agreement and sympathy which made this 
deeper note, now that it was touched, sound — 
'^not harsh, nor grating," though perhaps at first 
startling. 

" Of course, Oakfield, I don't really expect you 
to give in to those fellows who differ with you, if 
you think it necessary to hold out; but do you? " 

" Of course I do, and so do you, only you feel 
a friendly annoyance at seeing me subjected to im- 
pertinence, and so half advise me to do, what you 



30 OAKFI£LD» OR 

would justly despise me for if I did reaOy^ what you 
would scorn to do yourself. What do you mean by 
holding out? or rather, what would it be if I did 
not hold out ? I must go, I suppose, and be guilty 
of some braggadocia, to prove I am not a coward, 
or apologize to man for having feared God; — 
let us hear no more of holding out or giving in." 

^^You speak pluckily, Ned, and have done 
pluckily too, and I have a secret satisfaction in 
your holding out ; but do not you think on your 
own ground, as regards your duty to God and so 
on, (this language was new to Wykham, and he 
used it rather awkwardly), that holding out may 
be little better than pride ; is it not right to respect, 
to a certain extent, the opinion of the world ? It is 
all very well to talk of men being fools, but is it 
not a good deal for a man to assume that he is 
right and all the world wrong? " 

^' I didn't expect to hear such a common-place 
from you, Fred ; it is false though, as every com- 
mon-place more or less is. That is a favorite ruse 
of the devil's, to adopt the parson's language, and 
call self-reliance pride, and the fear of man humility. 
There are, of course, cases where a man requires to 
be cautioned not to set himself up against or above 
the world ; when singularity, especially in indif- 
ferent matters, may be pride or vanity ; but in 
morals, for one case where this caution is necessary. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 31 

there are a thousand where it is worse than super- 
fluous. I know that I do not require it, that my 
natural tendency is to swim with the stream, and 
I believe too that you require it a great deal more, 
that you have naturally far more firmness than I 
have, and therefore more need to be warned 
against obstinancy; it's no good grinning, Fred, 
you know it's true; but besides this, I protest 
against that clap-trap insinuation, that it is a good 
deal for a man to assume, and so on ; I can't help 
it if it is ; a man who is worth his salt must assume 
a good deal, or the world will drag him down to its 
own wretched level, while he is playing at mock- 
modesty. The world is enmity with God; that is 
my ground, as you call it, though your ground too, 
just as much ; why should I make such a fuss al>out 
dissenting from that which is enmity with God. 
I wish a priori to dissent from it" 

*' You can hardly identify the society in which 
you and I move with the toorld^ which the bible 
speaks of in that way." 

^^ Can't 1 1 why not? the identical world; what 
world do you suppose i$ meant ? " 

" The world of wicked men ? " 

'* And is our's the world of good men ? Ah ! 
my dear Wykham, so we go oh, passing on the ap- 
plication of the bible from hand to hand, and all 
repudiating it, and saying that it is our neighbour's 



32 OAKFIBLD, OR 

not our'sy till we reduce the bible to a formal 
stupid common-place, and then are satisfied. I say 
the world does mean my society to me, and the 
poor man's society to the poor man. If I wait till 
the world of murderers and burglars molests me 
or tempts me I shall wait for ever, and what is said 
about the world in the bible, if it means only that, 
is great humbug,^because perfectly useless to me ; 
but if I regard the world of worldly men, the 
world of those who love mammon better than 
God, the world of drunkards, gamblers, spend- 
thrifts, misers, gossipers, fools, as the world I have 
to steer clear of, then I see the application, and 
the extreme need of the bible warnings very 
plainly.** 

'* But have you a right, according to your own 
view of things, to condemn others so largely ? " 

^^ Not till they are thrust upon me as patterns 
to follow, or as an authority to dread ; then I do 
not condemn them ; but I will not lie by saying 
that they are good and wise whom I know to be 
bad and foolish; nor for the sake of a seeming 
wortMess charity resign my independence. But, 
Wykham," he added, after a short interval, " why 
do you talk of my views, and my ground, as if 
they were not yours every bit as much ? " 

"I wish they were, old fellow; but I fancy 
they'd be astonished in the regiment if you told 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 33 

them that Fred Wykham had set up for a re- 
ligious man, and I won't play the hypocrite at 
any rate." 

"I should like very much Fred, if you will 
allow me, to know what your idea of a religious 
man is?" 

" Oh I you know well enough ; a man who goes 
to church, and reads the bible, and doesn't swear, 
and that sort of thing." 

<^ Rather a queer jumble isn't it Fred?" asked 
Oakfield, good humouredly, " but taking your de- 
finition, I should say you were a religious man ; for 
I never hear you swear; I believe you go to church, 
and I dare say you read the bible — eh ? " 

** Yes, I do occasionally ; but still I can't say I 
feel a religious man." 

" Very likely not ; for I don't the least accept 
your definition; it's all very well not to swear, 
of course, but no more than may be said of some 
of the wickedest scoundrels on earth; going to 
church hasn't much to do with the matter, I sus- 
pect, one way or the other; reading the bible 
indeed is another thing, but it will no more make 
a man religious than reading a couple of pages of 
Bacon per diem will make him wise. A wise man 
will read Bacon and become wiser, and a good 
man will read the bible and become better. A 
religious man, even though not a Christian (for 

VOL. n. D 



34 OAKFIELD, OR 

recollect that your definitioQ excluded all the non- 
Christian religious world), will probably be a bible- 
reader, but it does not the least follow that a bible- 
reader will be a religious man ; indeed, we see that 
practically, in nine cases out of ten, it does not 
follow. All read the bible, — hardly any are re- 
ligious." 

" What do you call a religious man then ? " 

** In two words, one who fears God, and loves 
God and man." 

" That is rather vague, is it not ? " 

" No, not vague ; comprehensive." 

" But how is one to know whether a man fears 
God or not ? There are so many ways in which 
men may live, all saying that they fear God." 

" Assuredly, and who shall know, and who need 
know except the man himself? What is it to you 
to establish to my satisfaction that you fear God ? 
know it yourself, and you will find that enough. I 
and my neighbours shall find it out by and bye if 
it is necessary for you or us that we should do so." 

" I wish I did know it," said Wykham, sadly. 

" Ah, yes, my dear Fred I that is quite a dif- 
ferent matter; but let me tell you this— *do you 
think I am coming the parson over you Fred ? " he 
said, abruptly. 

" No, no, — go on." 

" Well then — I am not such a treacherous fool 



FELLOWSHIP IN THB EAST. 39 

as to tell you that you are very likely serving God, 
when you think yourself you are not Not only 
do you know best, but yon are the only one who 
knows anything at all about the matter; — but don't 
think yourself worse than you are ; I was vexed 
and displeased with myself once because I thought 
1 didn't come up to people's notions of a religious 
man» but I wish now not to come up to their idea, 
but my own ; this is not lower than theirs I hope ; 
I am sure it is not easier, but it makes me freer, 
and so happier, and so, I think, more able to 
serve God. I was distressed that I could not like 
going to church, that I always found it dull, that I 
still hated sermons, that in many ways I could not 
bring myself to feel as I found so many good men 
saying they felt" 

<< Well, well," said Wykham, rather eagerly, that 
is just my case, I know it's very wrong*" 

« Why ? " said Oakfield, " why admit it to be 
wrong ? Why condemn yourself so hastily ? " 

Wykham looked surprised. " Of course," he 
said, '* it must be wrong not to like being good and 
religious, and all that." 

'^ Very wrong indeed, but let us be sure that 

we understand what good and religious are. Be 

free, Fred. It is a perilous thing for a man to 

emancipate himself, but he may dare to do it if he 

lays on a thousand-fold extra precautions against 

D 2 



\ 



36 OAKFIELDy OR 

licence and self-indulgence. Bat I feel for you 
Fred, for I have felt the same thing myself, and so, 
I am certain, do a great many of us ; and I believe 
many of us go to the bad, in despair at not being 
able to accommodate ourselves to a given limited 
standard of the good, held up, not by our own 
conscience and experience, but those of others. 
Let us give ourselves a fair chance. While you 
do your duty, and do it not to man, but to God, 
do not distress yourself because a certain religious 
method which other men have adopted, and been 
right to adopt, because it suited them, does not 
suit, and therefore cannot and need not, nay, should 
not, be adopted by you. Do not spend your ener- 
gies in trying to like going to church and to enjoy 
sermons, but in trying to fear God ; to think, to 
govern and restrain yourself." 

They had reached their house, and went up to 
sit in the verandah till dinner time. Wykham 
looked very serious: he was not accustomed to 
deliberate thought (though often harassed by ruf- 
flings of mental activity which he had not felt the 
duty of encouraging), and the process was of course 
hard and painful to him. He was fair and honest 
too as the day; this was one of those qualities 
which gave that hearty sunshine to his countenance, 
and made all love him, and he felt Oakfield's words 
pleasant, and distrusted them for that very reason. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 37 

<<I am suspicious, Oakfield," he said, after a 
long silence, '* of anything that o£Pers to make good 
easy," 

** God forbid that I should so lie as to make any 
such offer, I am glad indeed that you said that. I 
should have made mischief indeed, and babbled 
villanously, had you gone away with an impression 
that your friend advised a relaxation of self-govern- 
menL All I ask is this, what are the temptations 
in life that most assail you? Tou are silent, but 
you know them, or can know them. It is fairer to 
speak for oneself than to force a confidence. I will 
tell you my experience; see if your own at all 
answers to it. I know that the things which make 
good so very hard to me are the lusts of the flesh, 
and a love of things seen and apparent, and a great 
carelessness about things unseen and real ; that is, 
especially, God. I might name many more ; but 
these will do. Now I believe that so far all 
young men are tempted alike, especially by those 
passions which destroy so many of us. Now I say 
that religion to me consists, firstly, in subduing 
these passions, and learning to look upward as a 
man, not to follow my natural tendency and grow 
downward as a beast ; this is not easy, Fred, believe 
me : the only ease I take, the only ease I recommend 
to you, is to reject whatever pokes itself between 
me and these great objects, either professing to be 



38 OAKFIELD, OB 

objects themselvesy in which case they lie, or to be 
means by which I may attain my object ; I will 
try the means ; if they are good and helpful, well ; 
I will use them, and thank God ; if not, I will pass 
them by : if they still clamour that they are essen- 
tial means, I will still say they lie, and disregard 
them ; and further, I will claim for myself the sole 
right of saying whether or not they are a means 
and a help to me or not ; and if they are not, I will 
not be persuaded to say they are, though they 
prove themselves to be so to every other single man 
in the world. In that extreme and impossible case, 
I should prefer owning myself to be a monster in 
nature, to telling a lie, and pretending to trust to a 
lie ; as matters really are, there are very many, an 
increasing number every day, who are in the same 
boat ; who begin to acknowledge that we must dis- 
cern with our own eyes, and not our neighbours' ; 
that such self-reliance is not presumptuous because 
it is necessary ; that listless dependence on others 
is presumptuous in the literal sense of the word, 
because it takes up unexamined, unearned, and 
claims as its own, what belongs only to those who 
thought it out in the first instance. A man may 
go over the same train of thought, and arrive at the 
same result; and in this way so many orthodox 
churchmen are also good and honest men ; but he 
may just as fairly and more naturally arrive at much 
' -^ same result by a different line of thought" 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 39 

" Why more naturally ? The natural thing is 
to follow the stream." 

'* The natural thing for the unthinking, listless, 
essentially irreligious men, I grant you, but not for 
the thougbtfiiL Consider, if you and I have a 
problem to work out, we sit down, and if we both 
hit upon exactly the same line of reasoning it 
would be thought a strange coincidence." 

^^ I see, I see,*-well9 but now, Oakfield, the drift 
of all this?" 

^* That I advise you, my dear Fred, to do what 
I wish to do, to put honestly to yourself your ob- 
ject, viz: to overcome yourself^ and to think of 
God and the unseen, more than the world and the 
seen, and to work to this object with all your 
enet^es, to use such means as you know help you, 
not to distract youiself by pretending to find assist- 
ance in those which really do not Above all, to 
think for yourself, and act upon your own thoughts." 

" And defy your cutters," said Wykham, getting 
up, laughing and stretching himself, ^^ and so we 
return with true logical method to our starting 
point, and bring our rambling conversation back to 
the man who cut you behind Jacka But Oakfield ! 
one question more before dinner. After all this do 
you intend to go to church to-morrow?" 

<< Well," said Oakfield, laughing, but hesitating, 
yes, but I won't say why, now, we've had enough." 



<( 



40 OAKFIELD, OR 

So saying, he took his friend's ann, and they 
descended to the dining room. 

Wykham was unusually silent, for he was ex- 
cited by hearing, for the first time, the language of 
emancipation disconnected from the licentiousness 
which his honest heart revolted from. A great 
fact, indeed, if it shall restore to their proper place 
those honorable impulses, that frank instinctive 
virtue, which had hitherto felt half guilty for want 
of a rule to walk by. All these, then, it seems, are 
of God; gentlemanliness, honor, whatever good 
things commend themselves to me, these actually 
are, and I need not be afraid of Religion's ignoring 
them. My self-restraint, it appears, has been re- 
ligious, though I did not venture to call it so : I am 
better than I knew; this is encouraging, — but to 
conquer myself — ^to live in and for the infinite 
rather than the finite : — Ah ! that is hard : the en- 
couragement is not more than I need for such a 
task as that Yet again I may strive to do this 
task in silence, in consoling incc^ito : the strife 
will be between God and myself ; and though the 
world think me not religious, though my nearest 
friends know not what I am about, think perhaps 
that I am about idle things, yet my strife will go 
on none the less ; and the fruits will be as genuine, 
though to all others invisible: God will know 
them, and I too. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 41 

Such was the sting that the conversation behind 
Jacko left in Wykham's breast ; we shall not say it 
was a crisis in his life — that he had been thought- 
less and now became thoughtful ; but we say this, 
that that night he thought, that night he prayed, 
not as a form-bound slave, but as a hopeful child, 
and that '^ a freer and a wiser man he rose upon 
the morn." 



42 OAKFIELDy OR 



CHAPTER 11. 

" But who, if he be called upon to face 

Some awful moment, to which Heaven has joined 

Great issues, good or bad for human kind, 

Is happy as a lover ; and attired 

With sudden brightness, like a man inspired ; 

And, through the heat of conflict, keeps the law 

In calmness made, and sees what he foresaw." 

WORDSWOETH. 

" I call him a brave man who fears God thoroughly, 
and fears neither man nor devil besides." — ^De. Aenold. 

While Oakfield was recruiting his health, still 
indifferent, at Simla, — while Herby was going 
through his work well and creditably at Winches- 
ter, enjoying, in something like their full extent, 
the great advantages of that ancient and glo- 
rious institution, — while the rest of the Oakfield 
family pursued their peaceful course, blessing and 
blessed, at Leatheburn, — while England, to take a 
wider range, was recovering her self-complacency 
after the Trafalgar Square out-break of the tenth 
of April, 1848, so that the low moan of her suffering 
millions was for a time overpowered by the general 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 43 

rejoicing over the stability of her glorious institu- 
tioDy — while Europe was being deluged by the revo- 
lutionary, and let us hope, fertilizing lava stream 
that flowed from the unrestful Parisian crater, An- 
glo-India was becoming involved in her own trou- 
bles. It is a matter of history how the Punjab was 
settled after the Sutlej campaign; how, by the 
counsel of the then ruling influences in India, the 
native dynasty was permitted to survive under 
British control; how, in the absence of those who 
had set this machinery in motion, the machinery 
itself was first involved in the working, then 
checked, then violently overturned; how local 
circumstances connected with Mooltan demanded 
the substitution of a new man for the popular 
Dewan Moolraj ; how the two officers who were 
sent to superintend this petty revolution were foully 
and treacherously murdered ; how the paltry retri- 
bution that was sought to be enacted for this vil- 
lany, was dribbled out into a more and more 
absorbing agitation ; till, by a judicious tampering 
with an assassin, the Punjab was fomented into a 
revolt, and in the beginning of autumn it was 
found necessary again to assemble an army at the 
frontier ; when at last the vigour, so long dormant, 
began to bestir itself, and a force better equipped, 
perhaps, than any that had yet taken the field in 
India, began from all quarters its march of concen- 



44 OAKFIELD, OR 

tration upon the north-west frontier, under the 
imposing title of the "Army of the Pmijab.'* 
Early in October, Oakfield heard what he had 
long expected, that the 90th Light Infantry were 
ordered to form a part of the 3rd Infantry Brigade. 
The army was to assemble however at Feroze- 
pore, so that there was no immediate necessity for 
his going down. With Wykham it was different 
His regiment (the 12th Cavalry it will be remem- 
bered) formed a part of the Mooltan force which 
was already on its march: it was with deep regret 
that the two friends parted. 

" Good bye, Oakfield," said Wykham, "this has 
been a memorable time to me, this last two months; 
however, I shan't make a speech," then in his old 
tone, " we shall meet again soon probably. There 
will be a regular row youll see, and when we have 
knocked Moolraj on the head, we shall come up 
and join you. Stanton's troop is certain to be 
ordered up, so please heaven and the Sikh Artil- 
lery we shall all three meet again ere long." 

" Good bye, Fred, God bless you," was all that 
Oakfield could say. It was a great trial to him to 
lose his friend. At war with society, it may be 
imagined how he clung to those who loved him, 
and he found more help and satisfaction from 
Wykham's society than any body's else in the 
world. There was a strength in the latter which 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 45 

always made itself felt Oakfield's more cultivated 
mind and (although rather the younger of the two) 
his far greater experience, had, of course, much 
more to communicate, but his naturally softer, 
perhaps too speculative nature, had much to learn 
from the instinctive rectitude and ready vigour of 
his friend; ^'If Wykham has right and wrong 
clearly before him," Oakfield once wrote to Mid- 
dleton, '^he will go straight to the one and from 
the other without let or hesitation ; apparently, 
though of course not really, without di£Sculty. If 
Wykham ever becomes, as he will become after 
his first sorrow, a thoughtftd man, he will be one 
of the toughest enemies the devil will have had 
for a long time." 

Meanwhile, he remained in the hills till the 
20th of October, and then, after about a month 
and a halTs sojourn in the wonderfrd climate of 
the Himmalayas, a sojourn which, though so 
short, had yet greatly improved his health, com- 
menced his journey back to Ferozepore, very 
different from his troublesome trip in Septem- 
ber. It was now the latter part of October, 
the rain had ceased for some weeks, the streams 
had. run themselves out, the earth still retained, 
though too soon to lose, the fresh verdure which 
the rains had created, and all nature seemed 
in sympathy with the European population, who 



46 OAKFIELD, OR 

sprang up, as it were, with the delight of re- 
leased prisoners to hail the first fresh breezes of 
the incipient cold season. But fresh and beaudfiil 
as that October month was, it was the herald of a 
cold season, different enough from the ordinary 
times of Christmas enjoyment Already the whole 
North- West was stirred by the approach of war, not 
war as it once was in India ; all testimony agrees as 
to the changed and far sterner character of Indian 
warfare since the Mahratta enemies were ez« 
changed for Sikhs. The stru^les of the Sutlej, 
the fearful night at Ferozeshah, when, if ever, the 
Indian empire was indeed in jeopardy, were still 
remembered ; and although it were a base libel to 
say that these or any recollections dimmed the ex- 
pectation, or lowered the sanguine courage of those 
who were now again called upon to complete the 
discomfiture of the same obstinate enemies, yet 
it is true that to thoughtful minds war in India is 
a far more serious thing than it used to be; a 
game which, ever since that great turning point in 
Indian history, that ^beginning of the end,' the 
war in Affghanistan, has been at once more expen- 
sive and more hazardous. 

Oakfield found things not much changed in 
his regiment, but what change there was, for 
the better. The bustle of public affairs gave 
that excitement, the desire for which is the cause 



FELLOWSHIP IN THB EAST. 47 

of half the private quarrels, jealousies, and per- 
secutions that go on. There was still a dislike 
felt towards him, and he was generally avoided, 
but the dislike was now passive, and his prin- 
ciples of toleration were not tried by marked 
insolence. Perkins was thie only officer that spoke 
to him, and he but seldom and unwillingly, for 
Perkins was not disposed to espouse Oakfield's 
cause against the regiment; Stafford, Brooks, and 
Straddles industriously fomented the ill-feeling; 
the rest listlessly acquiesced in iL One or two 
officers of Horse Artillery, who had known Oak- 
field from the day he joined, and who (although 
they expressed surprise and regret at his method 
of treating Staffi[)rd, whom they detested) bad, 
nevertheless, throughout, felt a consistent and 
reasonable belief^ that however much Oakfield 
miglit differ from them, it was impossible that 
a courteous, gentlemanly, strong-minded, man as 
they knew him to be, should be a coward; and 
in this belief had throughout evinced an honor- 
able superiority to the contemptible fear of public 
opinion, being aggrieved at the coldness with which 
Oakfield was everywhere regarded, and touched by 
the patience and dignity with which he bore it, 
advised him to apply for an exchange : but when 
Oakfield firmly declined, in a way that showed it 
would be useless to repeat the su^estion, and 



48 OAKFTELDy OR 

pointed out how inconsistent any appearance of 
retreat from the ground he had taken would be 
with that profession of rightful confidence which 
he had all along maintained, they were silent, 
and by their silence assented to the justice of 
what was said. But, .indeed, Oakfield had not 
much cause to regret an exclusion which he hardly 
felt; had a triumphal procession been prepared 
for him in cantonments he would not have bene- 
fited, for there was a double attraction for him 
now at the civil line& Stanton's troop, as Wyk- 
ham had anticipated, was ordered to the frontier, 
and Stanton himself, in anticipation of its ar- 
rival, had come on to stay with the Middletons 
at Ferozepore. The troop had arrived, and been 
detained at Ferozepore some short time, when 
Oakfield returned, and the latter, though slow to 
observe such things, could not but think that his 
friend was differently impressed with Miss Mid- 
dleton fix)m what he himself had been. Nor was 
he surprised at this ; his only cause of surprise was 
that he himself had been so comparatively unim- 
pressed; yet, as he observed and questioned him- 
self with that merciless candour which had now 
become habitual to him, he seemed to perceive how 
far more congenial to Miss Middleton's impetuous 
though affectionate temper, to her flashing wit and 
ambitious, though perfectly feminine nature, must 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 49 

be the cftim force^ the unru£9ed caustic strength of 
Stanton, than his own painful anxious darkling 
search after truth. But however this might be, 
Oakfield saw with sincere joy the genial influence 
which Miss Middleton's society exercised over 
Stanton's heart, so strong and wmm for all his short 
and somewhat crabbed manner; and could have 
smiled at the unconscious acknowledgment which 
Miss Middleton made, by her subdued inquiring 
tone, to the magnetic force of his friend's character. 
It was a sad day when that party at Ferozepore 
was broken up. Mr. Middleton, of course, re- 
mained at his post ; alone, for he was glad to take 
this opportunity of sending down his sister to pay 
a long promised visit to a friend at Allahabad ; she 
was loth to go, but perceiving in her brother's 
playful assurance that women were an encum- 
brance when bustling work was in prospect, an 
indication of his real wish, not only for her safety 
but to be himself unfettered, consented. We will 
pass over a busy week of preparation, the gradual 
assembly of the advanced portion of the army, and 
the unopposed passage of the Sutlej, that great 
river, which had been the extreme point of the 
previous campaign operations, forming the base 
on which, on the present occasion, they were 
commenced, and take up our story at the time 
when, on the evening of the 22nd November, 

VOL. u. £ 



IMf^f the BrioAh army was encsnped s£ VLaat- 
nrn^ir^ dil regretting the inanspiciooB opening dt 
rhe <tamp^5^ which they had witocsBed Aat xaonk- 
\rv^ when, in ^ frnitless esevalrj jdrmish, the Ores 
fA m^ny brave men, and more than ooe d£$txi»> 
^wh^A r^er^ had been aarrificed, with afasoIiitelT 
rw> r^^'HiItr The army, after this on&rtnnate a&ir, 
hsilte^l at Rarnnn;;^^, on the Idt bonk of the 
ChenaF>y fronting the enentj, who were strongtr 
errtrenehed upon the opposite sde of the liTer, 
waiting for the bea;ry guns which were in the rear. 
Tbe»e joined the army on the 29th. On the 30th 
it wa» known in camp that a force was to be de- 
tached under Sir 3. Thackwell to torn the left flank 
of the enemy* Oakfield was spending the day as 
timial in Stanton^s tent when the intelligence that his 
regiment was ordered to march reached him. He 
hastened home^ home being the ground occupied 
by his own corps, and by his own tent, par excel- 
lenc0f and at midnight the detached force began its 
march. It was a calm but very cold night ; Oakfield 
rode along silently, wrapped in his cloak, amply 
engaged in looking at the stars, and with his own 
reflections. lie had been greatly struck, during the 
few weeks of his experience, by the difference 
between an army in cantonments and an army in 
the fleld, and the vast superiority of the latter; 
at\d he came to the conclusion that the cause of 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 51 

this superiority consisted principally in the fkct, 
that an army in the field was at work, that work 
involved seriousness, that seriousness to a certain 
extent induced reflection, and that reflection in 
some degree dissolved the wretched tie of a 
wretched public opinion, and called forth some- 
thing of individual character and independent 
action : that although the individual character so 
brought to light might be, and most probably in 
most instances was, weak and bad, yet the cha- 
racter of few or none was individually so bad as 
that most wretched and contemptible aggregate 
of weakness and evil which at other times asserted 
its coarse domination. He was struck, and half 
amused at the manner in which this nascent inde- 
pendence evinced itself in his own case, how greatly 
the bitterness subsided, now that men ventured to 
think and act a little for themselves ; the majority, 
hitherto passive imitators, followed their own bent 
and returned, not indeed to anything like intimacy 
or cordiality, for that had never existed, but to 
commonly civil intercourse ; while those only who, 
like Stafibrd and Straddles, entertained a real feel- 
ing of active animosity, kept up a sullen silence. 
Ought Oakfield to have allowed this arbitrary 
return to intercourse after so many weeks of equally 
arbitrary excommunication? Ought he to have 

required some apology, some explanation of the 

E 2 



52 OAKFIELD, OR 

treatment he bad met with? He thought not. He 
perfectly understood the cause of the excommuni* 
cation, he i^preciated and allowed for the weakness, 
the timid following of others, which had made it 
general; he understood, also, and felt willing to 
help forward rather than thwart the good influences 
which now led to a change. ** Besides," he thought, 
^' if I professed to think so lightly of the baa of 
exclunon, nay, let me do myself justice^ if I did 
think lightly of it, why should I pretend to make a 
fiiss about its removal? I have not conceded an 
inch of the cause I took up ; that is enough for me. 
I need not busy myself about my personal dignity ; 
that will take care of itself, I dare say. * What we 
owe to ourselves ;' oh, much-abused phrase I I fency 
we owe a good deal less than we pay in that quarter; 
a very large credit balance there, I imagine, with 
most of us." 

So Oakfield evinced no surprise when first one 
officer, then another, asked him to drink beer* 
at mess, as a kind oi tacit sui^ension of hostili- 
ties ; and although Stafford and Co. were loud in 
their condemnation of such meanness, such want 
of self-respect, &c., yet the majority felt, and some 
acknowledged that this was of a piece with the rest 
of Oakfield's conduct, and they accepted his being 

* Equivalent to the English custom of drinking wine with a 
person. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THB EAST. 53 

SO open to conciliation now, when it would have 
been so easy to hold out and turn sulky, as a part 
proof of his having been consistent and sincere 
throughout Li &ct, the impression which had 
obtained for a time during his trial, but which had 
given way to standing prejudices^ began to revive ; 
viz : that Oakfield was a queer sort of fellow, who 
took his own view of things, and did not care what 
other people thought of him. ''And yet," said 
Perkins, who had distinguished himself in the 
Sutlej campaign on one occasion, '' I shall be glad 
to see how he carries himself in action." Perhaps 
this thought had occurred to Oakfield too. 

It was long and weary that night march : the col* 
umn moved slowly up the left bank of the river, aod 
it was not till sunset the next evening (1st Decem- 
ber) that Sir J. Thackwell, being then at Wuzzeera- 
bad, thought proper to cross the river. That night 
also was long and anxious. The column had marched 
more than twenty miles that day ; all were cold, 
hungry, weary ; the night, too, was dark as pitchj 
but it was necessary to cross at once, aod the pas- 
sage was immediately begun. The hours passed 
on that night, and still in long succession the Ar- 
tillery, with their guns and horses, were being 
transported across. The morning broke without 
any interruption from the enemy during this 
anxious operation, and at about noon on the 2nd 



54 OAKFIELD. OR 

December^ the column recommenced its march, 
DOW down the right bank of the Chenab, upon 
the left flank of the enemy, being separated by the 
river from the main body and the Commander-in- 
chie£ They marched all day, and halted at sunset. 
That night Oakfield had his first experience of 
campaigning hardships; the column marching light, 
had left all equipage and creature comforts behind 
them, and that cold night was passed upon the hard 
ground. The contemplative man was pleased at 
this, the first fruits of privation, and at the uni- 
versal cheerfiilness with which it was bom. At 
dawn on the 3rd, the column pursued its march 
with the prospect of being engaged shortly with 
the enemy. The Commander-in-chiefs guns were 
heard all the morning, as he attracted the attention 
of the Sikhs in front At one o'clock there was a 
halt to rest and water the horses ; this had scarcely 
been accomplished, when the galloping in of the 
advanced pickets, and the opening of the enemy's 
artillery, gave intimation of his advance. The 
engagement of Sadoolapoor was of that unsatis- 
factory nature, a victory useless because not used. 

That night the British column, wearied and 
disappointed with the result of the combat, lay 
down at their arms to guess at the events of the 
coming day. 

Not so the enemy. All night he was engaged 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 55 

in removing his shattered guns, and effecting a 
swift and silent retreat. 

The Commander-in-chief being apprised of the 
retreat of the whole Sikh force, immediately sent 
two regiments of European cavalry in pursuit, 
under that great pursuing officer, Sir W. Gilbert ; 
and the whole British army crossed the Chenab. 

Then followed an anxious and a vacant month ; 
while the enemy remained secure in his jungle 
retreat about Mooney and Russool, daily adding to 
the difficulties and defensive properties of the 
ground he had selected, the British army remained 
in comparative inactivity, with the exception of 
almost daily reconnoisances and counter projects to 
defeat the cunning and activity of the enemy in 
escheating their camels. 

So the two enemies lay, looking at each other, 
the Sikhs awaiting the arrival of Chutter Singh, 
when he should have reduced Attok ; the British 
looking out for the army which was to reinforce 
them upon the downfall of Mooltan — ^but though 
there was thus little stirring in the way of actual 
warfare, yet an army on the qtd vive in presence of 
the enemy is seldom dull Constant rumours cre- 
ated an unfading interest for those who live upon 
such things ; the stroll about camp in the morning, 
the repetition of it in the evening, hearing upon 
each occasion new anecdotes, new reports, new 



56 OAKFIBLD, OR 

prophecies, new croakipgs; the social parties at 
mess in the evening, when each regiment was 
drawn together by a bond of fellowship di£Perent 
enough from the slack one that had held them in 
cantonments; all this, together with such booka 
as could be mustered, to be passed from band to 
hand; above all, the consciousness that whatever 
might have been said in the Sadoolapoor despatch, 
the real work of the campaign was still to come, 
helped out those short December and January days 
quickly, and not unpleasantly. 

To Oakfield the life was all agreeable, for it was 
new, and besides this, to a contemplative admirer 
of Carlyle, the self-possessed energy, the silent 
intentbn to attain its point and do its work, in 
short the genuineness of an army in the field, was 
an engaging spectacle. He passed much €ii his 
time with Stanton and amongst the Artillery offi^ 
cers, and made other acquaintance also in camp, 
one especially, an old chum of Stanton, Jenkyns, 
now on the Commander-in-chiefs stafi; a great 
authority in the midst of the thousand and one 
rumours that day by day were bom, flovuriahed, 
subsided, and died. His old friends, too, the Slst, 
were in camp, and he found them quite ready to 
forget old differences; all except Cade, who was 
an intimate friend of Stafford's, and fraternized 
with him most determinedly. But the others re- 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 57 

membered Oakfield principally in connection with 
Vernon, and his kindness and friendship to their 
brother officer had left an impression on them all, 
while other things were forgotten. 

In fact, Oakfield found himself after his long 
solitude, being strangely forced into social habits, 
and although he still sought in vain, cmd still re- 
gretted the absence of that moral earnestness which 
should give its character to war as to every thing 
else, yet he was willing to accept, as a far better 
substitute for this than any he had yet found, the 
physical earnestness (if the expression may be al- 
lowed) which did certainly animate and elevate, far 
above their ordinary level, those around him. He 
dined generally at his own mess, always indeed, 
except when he was with Stanton, at whose tent 
on the 11th of January, he had been spending 
most of the day. They were walking up and 
down the long street in the evening, talking as 
usual about the campaign, when they saw Jenkyns. 

" Well, Jenkyns, any news?" 

** Nothing pmka * that I know of, — you have 
heard the report I suppose ? " 

" No ; what report ? " 

^* Why, that Attok has fallen ; but I fancy it's 
only a native rumour ; at least, I know the Chief 

* Pucka, literally ripe, mature ; hence used in a great variety 
of metaphorical senses in the Anglo- Hindustanee dialect. 






58 OAKFIELD^ OR 

hasn't heard anything of it. I must be off^ though^ 
I'm going to dine with the Adjatant-general." 

« Humph," said Stanton, « if that's a true bill 
we shan't be here long." 
Why not?" 

Why not, — because, oh sagest Bachelor of 
Arts, with 40,000 men in our front, it were inexpe- 
dient to await the arrival of Lord knows how many 
thousand more, — we shall have an action, you'll 
see within a week if this is anything more than a 
banauJ** 

^^How many times have you been in action, 
Stanton ? " 

"Let me see — Moodkee, Ferozeshah, Aliwal, 
Sobraon, that's four, and Ramnugger, and Sadoo- 
lapoor the other day, six, — and I never once got hit 
yet" 

" Beware of Nemesis," said Oakfield, laughing. 

"Well, what are you looking so solemn about?" 
asked Stanton after a pause. 

"Why," said Oakfield hesitatingly, "I feel 
' rather anxious as to the truth of this rumour," 
Stanton stared; "because," he added, "though I 
know that in my aflFair at Ferozepore I asserted the 
truth, yet I know also that it was only half the 
truth ; it is not necessary, I am aware, that I should 
have an opportunity of asserting the other half, 

* BanaUf a make-up, a falsehood. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 59 

but if it should occur, you must perceive how great 
a relief it will be." 

*^ Explain/' said Stanton. 

^'You understand me, I am certain, but you 
always take a pleasure in making one express in 
terms what one would rather imply, you often re- 
mind me of Middleton in that." 

'^ Oakfield," interrupted Stanton. 

"WeU?" 

^* Don't shirk, but explain." 

" You are a bully, Stanton, as Wykham always 
says, and we are very weak to submit to you ; but 
what I mean is this, and you know it: having 
asserted the superior claim of moral courage, it is 
a great boon to be able to assert the inferior but 
still essential importance of physical courage. 
Now do you see ? " 

" I begin to have a glimmering." 

**01d mole! well, you see it will be a satis- 
faction to be able to show those fellows in action, 
that I am physically as little afraid of cannon and 
musket as they are." 

" Very true, Oakfield ; and I have often thought 
and wished the same on your account Do you 
feel confident in yourself, however, in this latter 
respect?" 

Oakfield colored violently ; *^ I hardly thought 
that you suspected me, Stanton." 



60 OAKFIBLD, OR 

^^My dear boy, pardon me; I wouldn^t have 
hurt you for the world; you have had enough, 
heaven knows, without your friends, as you say, 
suspecting you, I don't suspect you, my dear fel- 
low, one half as much as I do myself; that is, as to 
the existence of every true and noble intention ; 
but what I mean is this, asserting a principle is a 
very different thing, I don't say easier, I dare say 
it is far harder, but still it is very different from 
feeling at home under a hot fire. Brave men have 
often half winced under their first experiment, 
and our next engagement will be all but your first; 
for you know you Infantry people had nothing to 
do the other day at Sadoolapoor." 

^* I understand," said Oakfield, in a kind tone, 
'^ and I beg your pardon for having for an instant 
misunderstood you. It w a very different thing, I 
grant you, and quite new and untried to me, and 
so, as he that putteth his armour on may not boast 
as he that putteth it off, I will not vaimt myself a 
hero. Nor do I think myself a hero ; that is one 
of those people who are very sanguinely indifferent 
to, apparently almost unconscious of, danger; I 
dare say I shall half wince, as you say, in my in- 
most heart when I first find myself under fire ; the 
only thing I venture to assert confidently is that 
this wincing shall not overpower me, I say I shall 
not be afraid, as confidently as I say I shall not lie 
or steal" 






FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 61 

^ There is a great difference, Oakfield ; one is 
often purely constitationaL Many men, who not 
only do not lie or steal, but are really good men, 
are positively unable to subdue personal fear/ 

" ITiat I deny in totoJ" 
My dear fellow, you have never tried." 
That arffumentum ad Aominem is never a par^ 
ticularly oourteooa, and very seldom a sound one. 
If we only affirm ot deny within the bounds of our 
own erperienoe, we are somewhat limited, I think. 
I still deny m toto the proposition 'that good men 
are unable to subdue physical fear,' as treason to 
God and the soul." 

^ You speak warmly, Oakfield." 

«* I do Stanton." 

** But, to drop the appeal to experience, since 
that offends you" — 

<' Only when it would set itself up against 
eternal principles, in comparison with which its 
testimony is not worth a rush." 

^' Well, weD, I say dropping that, you are carried 
away rather when you say that a good man is ne-* 
cessarily free from physical fear." 

** I do not say so ; I merely say he may over- 
come it as surely as any other temptation ; of course 
there are different degrees of courage and fear im- 
planted in men constitutionally, as there are of 
beauty, of strength, of intellect ; and he who has 



62 OAKFIELD^ OR 

much courage constitutionally is &r happier than he 
who has little, yet he must not boast of that which 
he has only received ; and the man of great constitu- 
tional timidity is not one whit worse, though far 
less fortunate, not one whit more contemptible, 
though &r more to be pitied, than the man of great 
constitutional courage." 

'^A timid man no worse than a brave man, 
Qakfield ? A little paradoxical, my dear boy." 

^'No; not worse in any other sense than an 
ugly is worse than a handsome, a stupid than a 
clever man : that is to say no worse morally, but 
more unfortunate." 

^^ A man who takes a gun," said Stanton, pur- 
suing his reductio ad absurdtan, ^^ no better than he 
who runs away I Well, I dissent to that theory ; at 
least I shall take the liberty of preferring one to 
the other next week." 

'^ You are less fair than usual, Stanton." 

^^ Because you are more than ever paradoxical 
I tell you it is the fault of your mind; you always 
seem to delight in dissenting from those things 
which are most universally acknowledged." 

*^ Because in morals the things most universally 
acknowledged are seldom without a great alloy of 
falsehood ; and in no one more than this of courage ; 
at any rate, Stanton, hear this : you say a man who 
runs away is worse than a man who takes a gun ; 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 63 

ipfinitely worse ; as much worse as the roan who 
speaks the truth is than one who tells a lie. Yet 
it would be hard to say that a man of a reserved 
cautious temperament, who yet always spoke the 
truth, was worse than a naturally frank and out- 
spoken man. Again, I grant you that the latter is 
far more happily constituted, inasmuch as he is far 
less than the former tempted to the sin of lying ; 
but I will not be so grossly unjust as to condemn the 
man who, under far greater disadvantages, speaks 
the truth ; I will rather esteem him the better of 
the two, as having done the hardest thing ; in the 
same way a clever man is far more fortunate than 
a very dull one, but I will respect the dull but in- 
dustrious worker, who, by cultivation, attains to his 
ultimate possible of intelligence, more than that 
other who is content with admiring the gifts which 
he has received from nature, and has done nothing 
for himsel£'' 

"Where are you getting to, Oakfield?" 
"To the point; — so a constitutionally timid 
man, who lets his timidity conquer him, is guilty 
of sin, as every man is who gives way to his beset- 
ting temptation, whatever it is ; but the timid man 
who does his duty, that is in our case who fights 
well, is not worse, but rather better than the care- 
less fire-eater who, at little or no sacrifice, does 
likewise. Cowardice consists not in being na- 



64 OARl'IELD^ OR 

turally afraid, btit in not overcoming the natural 
fear ; natural fear is a defect which a man cannot 
help; for which therefore he may not, without 
injustice, be blamed ; but it is the work of all our 
lives to overcome our defects, and he who does not, 
but is overcome by them, is the sinner, coward, 
liar, or whatever the natural defect may be to which 
he has yielded Fancy if people were to talk of 
* a man who cannot get over his murderous pro- 
pensities ! ' ** 

^ You admit, then, that cowardice is a thing for 
which a man may be blamed, despised, and pun- 
ished." 

*' Do I admit that a liar may be blamed, and 
despised, and punished? You might as weU ask 
me that. Falsehood is cowardice,— cowardice is 
falsehood ; though I think the world is often cruelly 
unjust in its punishment of it." 

«I thought so," said Stanton, smiling. 

^' For," continued Oakfield, without noticing the 
interruption, ^* it punishes cowardice not because it 
is sin, but because it is inconvenient If it pun- 
ished it on high grounds the coward would not be 
more severely punished than the adulterer; the 
man conquered by his fear than the man conquered 
by his lust ; this is one injustice. Another is that 
men do not (though this is more pardonable, for in 
a great degree they cannot) allow for the different 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 65 

force of temptation in different cases ; but cer- 
tainly society is unjust and wicked in punishing 
cowardice as if it were, I may almost say, the only 
sin." 

** There are few, or none, so bad." 

'^Granted; but there are some: and many, but 
a few degrees better, which are not punished 
at alL" 

'^ But how is it, Oakficld, that you are always 
putting yourself in the position of advocate for the 
defendant ? you talk now as if you were pleading 
in mitigation of cowardice; and so always you 
seem uneasy till you have found some ground of 
dissent from public opinion ; and yet I believe, in 
ordinary matters of right and wrong, such as false- 
hood and truth, cowardice and courage, (where you 
must excuse my saying refinement is rather super- 
fluous, and the instinct of the honorable mind is 
the most conclusive argument), public opinion is 
oftener correct than not" 

^^ Perhaps," said Oakfield, with a gentle con- 
cession that touched Stanton acutely, *^you are so 
far right that I may have an unhealthy desire for 
singularity, and yet, Stanton, I do believe, indeed, 
that God's truth and man's opinion are, as a gene- 
ral rule, so diverse, that he who would seek to live 
by the former, must needs dissent for the most part 
from the latter. But good night, old fellow, we 

VOL. u. F 



66 OAKFIELDy OR 

m 

have been both rubbing our rough edges against 
the other a little more than usual, a good deal more 
than I like ; but if we are engaged soon, I trust 
you will find that, theorist as you think me, my 
practical conclusion is much the same as yours." 

** I know it, I know it," said Stanton, and he 
shook his friend's hand fitr more warmly than was 
the wont of his undemonstrative nature, for he was 
conscious that his tone in the preceding conver- 
sation had been scarcely altc^ether kind. 

'< That man's temper," he said to himself as he 
walked towards the mess tent, "gets better and 
sweeter every day, and 1 am a rough cantankerous 
Turk to try him so; and yet his eternal dissent does 
provoke me ; I believe if I asserted as au uni-* 
versally admitted &ct that good was better than 
evil, he would fidget about till he could find out 
some ground of opposition or qualification to take 
up. I hope to God his theories will not unman 
him in action, that he will not be musing and re* 
fining when he should be leading the Jacks;* but," 
he concluded abruptly, "I don't fear that." 

Meanwhile Oakfield wended his way back to 
his part of the camp. 

"Stanton will not see," such was his half-uttered 
soliloquy, "how far I agree with him; but surely 
God's bidding is a nobler motive to bravery than 

* A popular aame in the army for Sepoys. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THB EAST. 67 

man% — I doubt whether a sense of honor ever 
kept men up to the mark better than the fear of 
God and the greatest mdifference to man did 
David^ and Deborah, and Zwingle, and Oliver 
CroniiweU and his Ironsides. God knows I feel 
no rash self-confidence just at this moment, and 
yet," looking op at the stars, ^'he knows that I do 
feel it very impossible that the fear of a muidcet 
ball should turn me from what I do heartily ac- 
knowledge to be my duty to him." 

*^ Halloa I Oakfield," cried Perkins, as he entered 
the mess tent, where they were already seated for 
dinner; *' don't k>ok down in the mouth man; 
Attok taken. Chatter Sing daurmg* down like the 
deyil,-^^mavch to-morrow, knock the Sikhs into the 
middle of next week the day after ; ah I diat's it 
old fellow ; by Jove we shall all be C B*s. in a 
fortnight" 

It was reported the next morning that an ex*- 
press had come in from Mackesoo, the political 
agesit with the Governor-general, and soon after it 
was known that the rumour of the preceding day 
was true, that Attok had surrendered, and that 
Chutter Singh was in full march to reinforce his 
son. It required no great military science ot ex- 
perience to see the necessity of attacking the 
enemy at once, before his numbers, already exoe»- 

* To daw, to ruflh or hurry. 

F 2 



68 OAKFIELD, OR 

sive, were so formidably increased ; and nobody was 
surprised when the orders appeared in the after- 
noon, for the whole force to move at daybreak on 
the following morning. Oakfield met Stanton in 
the course of the evening; both felt that their 
last interview had been a little less friendly than 
usual, and were glad to meet again before sepa- 
rated by the active duties of the next day. 

" Well, Oakfield I you see I was right ; you'll 
smell powder enough before the next few days are 
over; this time the day after to-morrow, Ned, and 
I dare say you will have seen your first, and I my 
sixth general action ; perhaps one or both of us 
will have solved all problems ; eh, old boy I " 

They talked for some time in their old fiiendly 
style, carefully avoiding all subjects on which they 
were likely to disagree. They recalled their over- 
land voyage, spoke each of his own antecedents 
in England, of Hajeepoor, and Arthur Vernon, of 
Wykham, and the Middletons, on which last sub- 
ject Stanton, under the influence of the moment, 
approached as near to tenderness as his reserve 
would allow him to do to a third party ; and with 
a few remarks as to the next day's march, parted. 
Oakfield dined at the mess as usual ; the camp re- 
sounded with the bustle of preparation till about 
ten o'clock at night, from which time till daybreak 
the profoundest silence prevailed. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 69 

At daybreak on the 12tha the whole army ac- 
cordingly moved to Dhingee, within a few miles 
of the enemy's position. The orders of the night 
detailed the position of regiments, &c.9 for the bat- 
tle of the next day. Perhaps from the well-known 
strength of the enemy's position, and the num- 
bers and courage of Shere Singh's troops, a scarcely 
less bloody*combat than that which actually ensued, 
was anticipated by all former opponents of the 
Sikhs; many hands were shaken that night, and 
many an honest fervent wish for the safety of 
friends on the coming day, fell from lips which, 
before another sun had set, were cold and fixed 
in death. 

Although Oakfield's health was greatly im- 
proved, he still retained that painful invalid 
symptom, restlessness at nights. On this night, 
the eve of the battle, wearied by the long march 
of the morning, and the exciting rumours and 
looking forwarc^ of the evening, he soon fell &st 
asleep, but paid for this rare luxury by waking 
up at one in the morning. Finding himself un- 
able to go to sleep again immediately, he got up, 
partly dressed himself, and stood for some time in 
the door of his tent That was the time to test 
himself; to see whether his resolutions, his inten- 
tions, his faith, would stand the depressing influence 
of the night watches; who does not know the un- 



70 OAKFIELD, OR 

Strang, unnerved, even desponding feeling, which 
80 often attends upon a midnight waking ? The 
heavj weight of sleep seems to deaden the will^ 
and the drowsy m^an will sometimes shrink in 
dismay at the thought of some task of the morrow^ 
which the night beft^e he had iiesolved to do. 
There is mimy a man who, at such a time, will 
feel incapable of the very effort which in a few 
honrs he will certainly accomplish ; but that will 
IS well trained to dominion, which even at this 
hour can assert its wonted mastery ; that resolution 
is strong which the powers of darkness cannot 
shake. Oakfield looked round ; it was a dark cold 
night: the moon was near the full, but almost 
continually obscured by black threatening clouds ; 
there was a patrol passing, and the challenge of 
the sentinels seemed to mark rather than to disturb 
the silence ; he could not see &r, and where he 
could see, nothing but the dim outline of endless 
tents ; the army of the Punjab was sleeping, many 
perhaps dreaming of scenes very different from that 
stem one which they should behold at waking. 
Oakfield stood and looked and thought, for about 
half^nn-hour, glad and thankful to find how com-> 
pletely he was master of himself, how collectedly 
he could look forward to the call of duty which 
awaited him, and then groping his way back to his 
bed, slept till he heard the harsh notes of the bugles 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 71 

sounding the reveille. What anxious, what hope- 
fuly what various thoughts did those unsparing, 
unthinking bugles waken into life I 

The whole army was in motion shortly after 
daybreak, marching towards the enemy's position, 
which was but a few mifes off in a straight line ; 
but the march was lengthened to about ten miles 
by a considerable detour to the right, which the 
British general bought it advisable to make, partly 
to distract the enemy's attention, but principally to 
get as clear as possible of the thick jungle on 
which the Sikhs appeared so much to rely. The 
90th, as has been mentioned, belonged to the 3rd 
Infantiy division, and were one of the two native 
regiments brigaded with the Queen's 101st The 
divisions marched separately in column, with de-* 
ploying distance between them. The baggage 
was two or three miles in the rear, guarded prin- 
cipally by Irregular Cavalry. Oakfield rode close 
to his own company, dismounting and fiilling 
in with it whenever a halt occurred, that is to 
say, every ten minutes ; for an army advancing 
upon a hostile position, and also moving across a 
country full of obstacles, seldom proceeds for a 
longer time without a halt The tedium of this 
snail's progress was, however, relieved by the ex- 
citement of catching from time to time glimpses of 
bodies of the enemy, and an occasional interchange 



72 OAKFIELD, OR 

of shots between the reconnoitering parties of the 
two armies. In this way they moved on till nearly 
noon, when a pretty general halt seemed to have 
occurred^ whereupon a general dismounting took 
place among the infantry officers, accompanied by 
an equally general requisition for the contents of 
knapsacks, and a corresponding demand for * nips ' 
from sundry queer shaped bottles. *^ Hallo, Jen* 
kyns!" shouted Oakfield, as his friend the aide- 
de-camp galloped up, *^ where are you off at that 
rate?" 

'^Ah, Oakfield, is that you? I can't stop a 
moment, my good fellow," Jenkyns replied, pulling 
up his horse, however, with a jerk which almost 
threw him on his haunches, ^' I am just going to 
order the Horse Artillery to the front" 

** But I say just wait a minute," said Oakfield,' 
springing from the ground where most of the offi- 
cers of the 90th were lounging in various attitudes 
with cheroots in their mouths ; these surely are our 
Irregular Cavalry, and not the enemy's, so close to 
us, just under the tree there ? " 

"Those? those are just the fellows we are 
going to make scarce I you see that high mound 
about half-a-mile a head, with a tent or two at the 
top of it ? Well, that's their advanced post ; our 
heavy guns are just going to open upon it," and as 
he spoke, a wreath of white smoke suddenly rose 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 73 

three or four hundred yards ahead, and the deep- 
toned report of a heavy gun gave confirmation to 
his words. 

^' One moment more, that's a good fellow," cried 
Oakfield, laying his hand upon his horse's neck, 
and becoming rather excited, for the report of the 
first gun fired in earnest has the peculiarity of 
making the heart beat a second or two quicker; 
^'you don't mean to say that we shall have to 
storm those heights out there?" pointing as he 
spoke to a low range of hills on the right fix)nt, 
with all the appearance of a large camp on the 
highest ridge. 

Several of the 90th gathered round to listen to 
their conversation, for an aide-de-camp is a great 
authority in the day of battle. 

*^ No, no,'^ said Jenkyns, " that is their camp, 
but their whole army is drawn up in the jungle, 
just in front of us, a few hundred yards, say half-a- 
mile, on the other side of that village and mound, 
— Chillian walla I believe they call it; and pretty 
tough work we shall have to turn them out llieir 
left rests on those heights, and I suppose we shall 
have to follow them up there, for of course they 
will retreat in that direction. Well, good bye, old 
fellow, good luck to you; I can't stop a minute 
longer, — stayed five too many already^" — and, with 
vicious dig of the spurs, away he went like a shot. 



74 OAKFIELD, OR 

Oakfield fi)llowed him with his eyes, and shortly, 
issuing f]x>in a cloud of dust in the rear, he observed 
a body of British Cavalry trotting up sharply, in 
column of squadrons, and making a d6tour to the 
left; while diaving the regiments in their way, and 
scattering right and left any stragglers on the road, 
some troops of Horse Artillery came thundering up 
at a canter. 

^ How are you, Stanton 7* exclaimed one of the 
officers of the 90th, as, from some check in front, 
the troop to which Oakfield's friend belonged pulled 
up alongndde of that corps. As usual you lucky 
d(^ are always in for it first; leave a little for us, 
that's good fellows.^ 

'* Humph I" said Stanton, ''no fear of our not 
doing that, my dear Sir; you'll have lots of it be- 
fore the day is over, I can see. I've not forgotten 
Ferozeshah yet, and to-day will be no bad imitation 
of it, I expect Oh ! what a lovely shell ! good, 
good, by Jove I right in the middle of them," he 
continued, watching the practice of the heavy guns 
with all the gusto of a artilleryman. ''Well, 
Oakfield, my dear old boy," turning to him, "I 
only hope we shall both of us find our legs safe 
and sound under the mes&-table to-morrow ; same 
of us cannot, that's very certain. Do you feel 
your theory up to its work," he added, laughing, 
now that it is going to be tested with practice?" 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 75 

Oakfield replied to this with a smile, a nod, and 
a grasp of the hand, which was expressive enough, 

although perhaps rather in the Lord Burleigh style ; 
'' You're not the kind of man, any more than I 
am, I fancy, Stanton, to think much of presenti- 
ments and that style of thing.^ 

" No,** said the other, « I think not," 

^*You never have a feeling, an indescribable 
sensation (that^ the expression) that you are likely 
to be killed or severely womided?^ 

** No," rejouied Stanton, slowly, with more hesi- 
tation than Oakfield expected, ** no, I really don't 
think I do feel, or ever have felt, anything of the 
kind. I certainly feel, every action I go into, that 
having escaped so often without a hurt, (this will 
be, as I told you« my sixth general action) my 
chance, on tlie Babbage calculation principles, is 
lessening ; but I always do hope, and more than 
half expect, to get off; indeed I almost fency I 
should feel more surprised than anything else if I 
was hit; absurd, of course; but I find the best 
plan (the pleasantest I mean, as well as the right 
one) is never to think of there being any danger in 
anything during an action; go a«>head, thinking 
only of your duty, and watching the shot as little 
as possible ; it will be all right depend upon it" 

*^ All falls in pat with my theory," said Oakfield. 

*^ Well, then your theory is worth more than I 



76 OAKFIELD^ OR 

was inclined to allow the other day. Well, here 
we are going on again; — What's that order?" (as 
the word of command, ^^The column will deploy 
into line," was repeated by successive shouts from 
regiment to regiment till it reached the 90th) ^^ You 
had better be off, Oakfield. Good bye, my dear 
Ned ; good luck." 

"Good bye, dear Stanton. God bless you," 
responded Oakfield, shaking hands with his friend, 
while the guns slowly moved forward. 

In a few moments they had broken again into a 
canter, and Oakfield drew his sword and fell in 
with his company, for the regiment was now be- 
ginning to move into line. On the mound already 
mentioned was posted a strong picket of the enemy. 
This was soon dispersed, and the mound taken pos- 
session of by the British troops. From this point 
the whole Sikh army could be descried, drawn up 
in order of battle. It was now three o'clock in the 
afternoon, and Lord Gough hesitated about making 
an attack that day. Considering, however, the 
proximity of the enemy to the ground which the 
Quarter-master General's department were already 
beginning to mark out for an encampment, and 
that the Sikhs never had before and never might 
again, venture so fair a front in the field with their 
whole force, he was probably justified, with the 
splendid force under his command, in seizing the 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 77 

opportunity offered by the presumption of the 
enemy. The Sikhs, as usual, opened their guns 
from a long range; this was replied to by the 
British heavy artiUery halted in the line. After a 
cannonade on both sides for about an hour, the 
Cavalry and Horse Artillery were ordered to the 
front like hounds darting from the leash they 
dashed forward, and soon the rolling of wheels 
and the clanking of sabres and harness were lost 
in one continued roar from above a hundred pieces 
of artillery. On every side the shot crashed 
through the jungle ; branches of trees were shat- 
tered and torn from their stems, rolling horses and 
fiilling men gave an early character to this fearful 
evening. During this cannonade the Infantry 
divisions had been lying down. The order to ad- 
vance was now given to the 3rd division, which 
formed the left of the army, supported on the 
left by its Horse Artillery, (amongst them that 
troop to which Stanton belonged,) while to the 
left of the artillery again were the 3rd dra- 
goons. That division accordingly advanced, with 
what fatal result to the gallant 24th is weU known. 
This regiment together with the 25th N. I. formed 
the right brigade of the left division ; either by an 
injudicious order, or as stated in the official des- 
patch by mistaking a chance movement of their 
commandant's for a signal, the 24 th broke into the 



78 OAKFIELD, OB 

double at a distance from the guns far too great to 
be accomplished at the charge; outstripping the 
native corp% thej arrived breathless and exhausted 
at the gunsy where a terrific and hitherto concealed 
fire of musketry awaited them. The native corps 
came up and well sustained their European brethren, 
but both were repulsed; not until twenty-one Eu- 
ropean ofiicers, twelve sergeants;, and four hundred 
and fifty rank and file of the 24th had been killed 
and wounded. The Horse Artillery moved to their 
support, and drove away the enemy in the act of 
cutting up the wounded. Meanwhile the left 
brigade of this division> including the 90th regi- 
ment, moved forward, formed line to their right, 
and overthrew that portion of the enemy which 
had obtained a temporary advantage over the ri^t 
brigade. In this last movement Oakfield found 
and seized sax opportunity of obtaining that indi- 
vidual distinction which he had so much desired. 
As the 90th regiment, formed in line, arrived 
amongst the enemy's guns, the old native officer, 
who carried the royal color of the regiment, was 
cut down by the blow of a Sikh tulwar.* As he 
fell, his slayer stretched forward to secure the priase, 
when Oak&eld, who commanded the left centre 
company, seizing the color from the falling man 
with his left hand, with his right warded off the 

* Ikdioarf broadsword. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE BAST. 79 

descending blow which his adversary instantly 
aimed at him, then with a soccessftd delivery of 
the point of his own regulation sword, (the one 
successful answer which that feeUe weapon can 
make to the terri6c slashing cuts of the Sikh broad- 
sword) eased himself of his enemy, and retained 
the color, which he carried till the conclusion of 
the action. The venerable Commander^in chief 
was watching these proceedings with eager anxiety. 
1£ he was disappointed by the result of the infantry 
advance oq the left, that of the ri^t division was 
eminently successful, spiking the whole of the 
enemy's guns in their front, and dispersing the 
Sikhs themselves wherever they became visible. 
Such was the conduct of the right infantry divi- 
^on ; on their right, again, was a Imgade of Euro* 
pean and Native Cavalry, supported by troops of 
Horse Artillery. The cavalry were required to 
follow up the success of the infimtry by an effective 

charge. 

* * * « 

The ground thus lost upon the right by the 
'false movements' of the cavalry, and upon the 
left by the honorable failure of the gallant 24th9 
was subsequently recovered, but the sun had set 
some time, and it was necessary to collect the 
army together for the night; the enemy drew off 
the ground in good order, — not vanquished,— *hav- 



80 OARFIELD, OR 

ing recovered and taking with them nearly all the 
guns which had been captured. The Commander- 
in-chief rode along the whole line, giving directions 
to each division; as he passed the 90th regiment, 
Oakfield, grasping the color he had saved, joined 
with all his might in the enthusiastic cheering with 
which, notwithstanding the depression on every 
heart, at having fought without victory, the brave 
old general was received by all. Sir Colin Camp- 
bell's division, reinforced by another brigade from 
the right, was formed up at the end of the ac- 
tion, just where the 24th had suffered so severely. 
Oakfield's regiment was on the very spot He 
counted the bodies of nine officers lying dead in 
as many square yards ; there lay the dead bodies 
of the two Pennycuicks side by side ; those of the 
men almost touched each other. It was originally 
intended that this division should remain to keep 
the ground; had this intention been adhered to, 
it is probable that most of the enemy's captured 
guns would have been brought in. When, how- 
ever, the &ilure of the cavalry on the right became 
known, when it was ascertained that however great 
the loss of the enemy might have been, they were 
still repulsed certainly, but not defeated, it was 
determined that the whole army should fall back 
for the night upon the village of Chillianwalla. 
So this division began its retreat to join the rest of 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 81 

the force. This march in the dark was, as Oak- 
field and Stanton (who, it will be remembered, 
both belonged to this division) afterwards agreed, 
the longest and most trying part of all the day's 
proceedings. It was pitch dark, and the jungle 
was high and strong. None knew exactly what 
direction to take. The enemy's bugles seemed 
to be sounding on all sides of them. They moved 
at a snail's pace, repeatedly sounding a bugle, and 
waiting for a reply. They saw lights, but were 
even doubtful whether these denoted their own 
or the Sikh camp. At last, by a carefiil feeUng of 
the way and sending men- on before, to reconnoitre 
as best they could under the circumstances, they 
found that they were in the right direction, and 
so reached the rest of the army without hindrance. 
The regiments halted where they came up, blended 
promiscuously amongst each other. Oakfield re** 
ported to his commanding officer the fact of his 
being in possession of the regimental color. He 
was received by Colonel Pringle, who had wit- 
nessed the transaction and was acutely sensible 
that his corps had been saved so painful a blow 
as the loss of the color, graciously— almost cor- 
dially ; was told that his conduct would certainly 
be fiivorably reported, and desired to make over 
his trust to the native officer next in seniority to 
the one who had fallen, whose duty it now be- 

VOL. n. G 



82 OAKFIELD, OR 

cune to cairy it As Oakfield, after obeying this 
order, joined a gioap of officera of his own regi- 
menty who were discussing soirowfully the condition 
of four of their oomradesy of i^om one was killed 
and three more or less serioody wounded, there 
was heard ibe sullen report of a heavy gun. All 
started. Could it be that the enemy meditated a 
night attack; and if they did, was the British 
army in a state to resist efficiently ? But another 
and another followed at marked and regular inter* 
vals. '^Wby, confound their impudence I" said 
Perkins, '' if the blackguards are not firing a royal 
salute I" They counted the guns ;- — twenty-one 
were dischaiged, in regular saluting time, by the 
Sikhs, in celebration of theur victory of Chillian- 
walla! 

Qakfield now went to look for Stanton, whom 
he found, with some difficulty ; and the two hav- 
ing shdcen hands cordially, sallied out to wander 
about and gather particulars of the day, and also 
to pick up, if possible, something to eat and drink. 
They walked towards the mound, whereon the 
lights of the field -hospital, at a distance, looked 
cheerfiil, shining through the dark threatening 
night But there was little cheerfiilness there* 
The dragoons had galloped right through the hos- 
pital, and there were signs everywhere of the havock 
they had committed. The surgeons were working 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE BAST. 83 

without a moment's cessation ; operations were 
being performed by the uncertain glare of candles 
in the open air; doolies^ with wounded men in 
them, were being continually brought in ; already 
those who had died were being thrown carelessly 
out of the doolie to make room for fresh occupants, 
soon perhaps, to follow them. In many doolies 
two wounded men were lying together* As Stan- 
ton and Oakfield arrived, they observed a Euro- 
pean soldier with his head bandaged up and his 
&ce covered with bloody shouting in a Irish tone, 
which, amid that scene of horror, strangely and al- 
most ludicrously recalled the land of blarney: 
'' Oh, God I I wish you would take this fellow out ; 
he has been dead these three hours, and I can't 
stretch my legs for him." The horror of this place, 
even for those accustomed to surgical operations 
and who were kept up by a sense of duty, was al- 
most overpowering ; to Stanton and Oakfield it was 
quite sa They were passing out when a faint yet 
deep voice caught their ear: *' Oakfield I" Oak- 
field started ; he knew that voice, though he had 
never yet heard it addressing him in other than 
angry tones. Turning to the doolie from which 
the sound proceeded, he saw by the yellow light of 
a candle that was flaring wildly directly overhead, 
the countenance, now ghastly white and pinched 

by the approaching hand of death, of his late 

G 2 



84 OAKFIELD^ OR 

adversary^ Stafford. He started^ and^ as he looked 
at him, shuddered, but his course was clear: 
'^Stanton," he said, disengaging his arm, *^jou 
must excuse me a little while ; look here." 

^^ I shall stay with you," replied Stanton ; and 
they both sat down on the ground by the side of 
the dying man. 

"Has any doctor been to you yet?" asked 
Stanton. 

" Oh, yes I " he said, in that same death-stricken, 
yet calm unagitated voice, "one came for a 
minute or so, which was quite enough. They can 
do nothing for me, I know that" 

A violent fit of coughing interrupted him, and 
the florid bright blood that foamed at his Ups 
showed plainly that the doctors could, indeed, do 
nothing for him, that he was shot through the 
lungs. "Water," he gasped faintly. Oakfield 
went to get him some. 

" He musn't speak again," Stanton said to Oak- 
field; "another attack like that would kill him." 

"Don't talk Stafford," said Oakfield, bending 
over him ; " we will stay here and do anything we 
can for you." 

The smile of the dying man, as he expressed 
his thanks with a nod, played with an unwonted 
softness over features fixed by too long habit into 
an expression of harsh severity. They sat by him 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 85 

for an hour or so, giving him water from time to 
time. One of the field sm*geon8 came up once, 
looked at him, then turning to Stanton, shook his 
head and passed on to a case where his services 
might be of more avail. Stafford saw what passed, 
for his eyes were still open though the lids drooped 
heavily over them. ** Ay, ay," he said, "I know 
it's all up." 

« Hush ;" said Oakfield, gently ; « don't talk." 
** Oh, yes I talking can only make a few minutes 
difference;" he stopped exhausted already; then 
resumed, — and neither Oakfield nor Stanton in- 
terrupted him, for he had said the truth ; it could 
make but a few minutes difference, — ^^ Oakfield, 
forgive me." 

Yes ; even at that hour it cost a struggle to that 
proud man to use the unwonted language of peni- 
tence. Merciful struggle I that even at this eleventh 
hour an opportunity of self^^onquest was given; 
merciful inspiration of the Spirit of God that it was 
also taken ! Oakfield's eyes were fulL There is 
always something touching in the melting mood of 
a proud stem man ; most awful when it is in the 
very presence of death ; when the infinite evil of 
pride, and good of meekness are, not indeed more 
real than in the noonday of life, but so &r more 
evident. He took Stafford's cold hand in both his 
own : ^* God bless you my dear Stafford, and for- 
give and comfort you I " 



A 



Uti OAK FIELD, 'M 

'I'lu) \irayKr (ur comfim *ra> beanL .Agam ^ 
Hints wtft Dinile ihoiie orer tlut oaw almam '^:SAm 
t«iiiiit«iiaii(i« I he tried to retum tbe ymt wi ml 
ill* httiid, lie tried to speak, wheo tbe '■'Mp*'^ 
rutiiriiei), the red florid blood nubed id a tammt 
(i ttia hi* month, and when the fit wee orer, fife ■» 
KIIII4I will) it. Stafford waa dead. The doeBHt 
Itml ahowii more bravery id his death than ever he 
hiul thine in his lifetime. Stanton and Ohkfield 
itlill Nut and hwked, and were rilent As the latter 
witliilrew hia hand from what was now the gnep of 
ft rorjMe, one of the hospital attendants came np, 
hxikfld at the body, and taid, " By jonr leave, geo- 
ilemen, we want this doolie." The dead body 
was liAoil up with as much delicacy as haste coold 
perriif t, wid placed opon the ground ; as they mored 
it llw shirt Ml open npoo the breast; "LocA 
thvre," Sttid Stanton, and be pointed to a small Uoe 
limfk (JVffr which the skin had almost entirely 
ti|(MWl> 

** WImll you don't mean that that is a mnsket 
tUnt t* " tnht Oakfteld, with the natural snipriae of 
I'll* wUu liwl iifiv^r Men a gunshot wound. 

" Ait, yuni' rvplied the other, "death can enter 
Mr Uf K ¥Hry imrriiw (mtrance." 

'tlmt miiiiWMl t\m disturbed gannent with re- 
tf.MM t*i4lUiriU'aii, liJoke<l once more at the placid 
^tHiHiB, ti»il ffMs and walked homeward. It waa 



I 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 87 

a dark cold blowing night ; the rain fell heavily at 
intervals. ** That is rather different," observed Oak- 
fieldy when they had walked some time in silence, 
'^ from the last death-bed I witnessed." 

" Whose was that ? " asked Stanton. 

" Arthur Vernon's." 

They parted; Stanton betook himself to his 
troop, Oakfield to his regiment, and slept soundly, 
wrapped in their cloaks upon the cold wet ground. 



88 OAKFIELD, OB 



CHAPTER ni 

" Why with such earnest pains dost thou provoke 
The years to bring the ineyitable yoke, 
Thus blindly with thy blessedness at strife ? 
Full soon thy soul shall have her earthly freight. 
And custom lie upon thee with a weight. 
Heavy as frost, and deep almost as life I " 

WOEDSWORTH. 

The next day, and indeed for three days after 
the battle, it rained heavily* Fortunately the bag- 
gage came up, and as there seemed no prospect of 
an immediate renewal of hostilities, orders were 
given to mark out an encampment The 90th 
marched down to their ground, and there, just as 
the parade was being dismissed, while the officers 
were congregated together just after the comman- 
dant had left the ground, Perkins stepped forward 
and said to Oakfield ; — *^ Oakfield I I am desired 
by my brother officers to express the sincere regret 
we all feel for the injurious suspicions entertained 
about you, and to beg your pardon ; and," he added 
in a less formal tone, ^' I apologize most sincerely 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 89 

for any coldness you may have observed in me 
since your unlucky trial." 

Several officers stept up and shook hands cor- 
dially with Oakfield ; even Brooks and Straddles 
were overcome by the regimental feeling, and 
yielded to it when it veered in this direction as 
completely as they had done when it set in that 
diametrically opposite. Oakfield was deeply grati- 
fied ; he said a few matter of course words about 
his being obliged, glad to have done his duty, and 
so on ; but having no turn for speechifying, and 
feeling moreover that it would be out of place, he 
took Perkins's arm and walked with him to his tent, 
where he spent most of the day, discussing the 
events of the previous afternoon. That evening a 
mournful scene took place. All the bodies of the 
officers who had fallen were interred on the mound. 
It was a drizzly evening; the sky black with roll- 
ing clouds; the bodies sown up in sheets were 
arranged by the side of several broad deep grave 
pits. On all sides officers were assembled to look 
their last upon what may have been once some 
dear fiiend. Old Lord Gough was there, the 
tears rolling down his cheeks, insensible to the 
storm which beat about his silvery locks. 

To this exciting action succeeded another period 
of inaction* The Sikhs, reinforced by Chutter 
Singh, suddenly left their position at Russool, and 



90 OAKFIELD, OR 

took up their final one at Guzrat, after an abortive 
attempt to cross the Chenab at Wuzzeerabad, with 
the intention, as they arrogandj said, and as was 
commonlj rumoured, of marching direct upon La- 
hore. 

The army under Lord Gough moved to the 
attack, being reinforced by the whole of the Mool- 
tan force during the 18th, 19th, and 20th of 
February. The disappointment of Stanton and 
Oakfield may be imagined, when, on the arrival of 
the last column from Mooltan, they still did not 
find WykhauL He had been left behind, suffer- 
ing firom a severe, but happily not dangerous 
wound, received in the trenches before Mooltan. 
The morning of the 2l8t was a glorious one, dif- 
ferent indeed from the lowering sky which heralded 
in Chillianwalla. Oakfield understood, as he rode 
along with his regiment and watehed the bright 
sunshine resting on the fields, richly green, and 
noisy with birds, while as fiur as the eye could reach, 
wended along amid this peaceful beauty masses of 
sparkling steel, variegated with flags, the darker 
bodies of cavalry, the still gloomier colnmns of 
artillery with their ominous rumble, in what con- 
sisted the delightfiil excitement of that pomp and 
circumstance of glorious war, which on former 
occasions he had looked for, but certainly failed 
) find. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 91 

Almost all felt confident as to the result of 
the day, and no precaution of steadiness and 
patience were omitted on this occasion to justify 
the wholesome feeling. No sooner did the enemy 
open his guns upon the advancing army than the 
line was halted. The Infantry lay down; the 
Horse Artillery and field-batteries were ordered to 
the firont, and together with the eighteen monster 
siege guns brought up from Mooltan, and dragged 
by elephants, whose huge bodies gave a strange 
tinge of antiquity and orientalism to the modern 
and busines»-like appearance of the magnificently 
equipped British army, opened a cannonade which 
the veteran Commander justly described, with the 
concurrent testimony of ail who were present, as 
the most magnificent and most terrible in its effects 
he had ever witnessed. The Sikhs answered it 
with their usual courage, rapidity, and precision. 
They were the same race of men, animated by 
despair, who, at Ferozeshah, at Sobraon, at Chil- 
lianwallah, had been cut down at their guns; nor 
were they unworthy of their previous heroism now. 
But this cannonade was ' beyond the rules.' As 
they afterwards said themselves, ^it rained fire.' 
A diminution in their fire was perceptible: in- 
stantly the Horse Artillery moved forward, and 
took up a new and a nearer point of attack. On 
and on they moved with a cruel cogency, and still 



92 OAKFIELD, OR 

the storm of shot waxed more and more furious. 
The enemy, by a last effort, clung to the most 
defensible parts of their position ; but the Infantry 
brigades now coming up to take their share in the 
conflict, drove them out of these at the point of the 
bayonet The huge line wavers, breaks, retires, 
flies ; and the Sikh army is in fact dissolved, the 
Punjab as good as conquered. The whirlwind 
charge of the Scinde Horse upon the left, the 
vigorous pursuit of the Regular and Irregular 
Cavalry complete the discomfiture. The great 
pursuer. Sir Walter Gilbert, is despatched with a 
powerful force in pursuit : Turpin's ride to York 
is outdone by the march to Peshawur. Such a 
defeat, followed up by such a pursuit, was more 
than the broken spirit of the Sikh army could rally 
against ; and the Sikh chiefs, together with an im- 
mense number of their followers and guns, were 
surrendered unconditionally beyond the banks of 
the Jhelum. 

Once more that huge army was assembled ; 
not the whole of it indeed, for the Bombay 
column, who had so signalized themselves both 
at Mooltan and Goojerat, returned with their 
alien laurels to their ovm place; but it was 
a powerful and victorious army that was as- 
sembled in March, 1849, in that ancient Sikh 
capital, Lahore. Here Oakfield found poor Wyk- 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 93 

ham, whose wound had healed slowly, and who 
was looking pale and shattered, very different from 
when Oakfield had last seen him the morning he 
left Simla. He was chagrined, too, beyond ex- 
pression, at having lost his share in the glories of 
Goojerat '^ I suppose though," he said, we shall 
get a medal for Mooltan." Ah, wonderful power 
of medals I Ah, magic silver mites that can inspire 
men to do and endure so much, and to think them- 
selves more than rewarded if at last they obtain 
but thee ; power that retains with great tenacity its 
charm, although those in high places have done 
their best in these last years to break the spell, and 
by thankless indiscriminate distribution of what 
should be the peculiar and unerring indication of 
personal, or at least regimental merit, to reduce it 
to the contemptible level of Cross of the Legion of 
Honor as it now is. 

But while Oakfield sympathized with his fiiend, 
others again thought Oakfield himself a fitter 
subject of anxiety. Wykham had a healthy con- 
stitution that nine years and a half of Indian 
climate had ^ot affected ; his wound was already 
heaUng ; directly he would leave off fretting 
about Goojerat, he would go to the hills, and 
get quite well; but Oakfield's firame was not one 
to stand with impunity the hardships of a cam- 
paign, and the night exposure involved by picquet 



M OAKFIKLD, OtL 

doty. He had eacaqped the swoid of the Skh 
to find, as it seemed, a more insidioos enemy in 
the wet gcDiind of Chillianwalla. That bri|^t 
complexion seems flushed with a more delicate 
shade than ever, there is a yellow hue sometimes 
mixing with the red, which doctors do not like, 
and old Stanton is painfully starded when he 
hears that occamonal harsh suUen sounding cough* 

Oakfield knew that he was ill, but the conscious- 
ness could not just now depress him. The campaign 
left him happier than he had been since he landed 
in India. He had found lus theory stand fire; he 
had been enabled to carry out in acdon the plan 
made in calm reflection; had, in the hour of 
trial been master of himself and 'seen what he 
foresaw ; ' had found fidth in God as veritable a 
support against the Sikhs upon the banks of the 
Jhelum, as it had been to his people of old against 
the host of the Philistines. He had, in fact, proved 
to his own satisfaction, and of any who chose to 
consider of it, that a man was none the woise 
soldier for being a Christian. 

''Well, Oakfield," said Stanton, entering the 
former's tent one morning in the middle of March, 
where Wykham also was lying on a bed, "they 
have counter-marched you and me." 

" How do you mean ? " 

" Why the reliefs out, and our troop goes to 
Ferozepore, and your regiment to Meerut." 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 95 

*^ Do we move ? " asked Wjkham. 

^'No: all the Cavalry corps stands fast; or 
rather go back to their old quarters." 

*^ Hah ! well ; it doesn't matter to me much. I 
mean to take my furlough in the cold weather." 

** Do you really ? " exclaimed Oakfield ; " why 
how long is it dace you come to that intention ? " 

^Not long; but the doctor was asking this 
morning when my furlough would be due; and 
when I told him next July, he advised me to go 
home by all means in the cold weather; and so I 
shall if I can manage it" 

^Are you going up to Simla in the mean- 
while?" 

^' Yes ; six months on medical certificate. After 
all," he said, with his old smile, which his friend 
had not seen for a long time, " it's rather lucky 
this," touching his wounded leg as he spoke, <* tor 
I don't suppose I could have got another season 
out of them on private affairs, and it would never 
do, you know, to spend the hot winds in the plains. 
It's all very well for you fellows, but I haven't been 
a hot weather in the plains, Stanton, for three 
years. 

^^ Young shirk shirk I " growled Stanton ; and 
Wykham laughed heartily. 

'^ Oakfield are you going to Simla ? " he asked. 

" I, — no : why should I go ? " 



96 OAKFIELD, OR 

« Why, you look very seedy. I shall speak to 
your doctor about you," 

'^ Thank you," said Oakfield; ^'but I advise 
you, as a Mend, not to." 

"Why not?" 

" Because you might as well try to coax a bear 
with a sore head, as to get to windward of old 
McGrowdy about one of his patients ; he'd pro- 
bably call you an impertinent boy, and turn on 
his heel, and walk off whistling, to tell somebody 
how he had snubbed you." 

" Confound him," said Wykham, who didn't at 
all like this description, especially as he saw how 
Stanton enjoyed it ; "I should call him out" 

" No good that even ; for he wouldn't come." 

" Wouldn't he ? " began Wykham ; then recol- 
lecting himself, — " Oakfield, my boy, I was going 
to commit myself" 

'' I thought," said Oakfield, '' that I had made 
a convert of you, at Simla." 

" Well, upon my honor, I half thought so my- 
self; but you see, when the screw was taken off" — 

"I being the screw?" interrupted Oakfield, 
" well, if I do go to Simla, I shaU come and live 
with you, and then we'll apply it again." 

" Well, you shall live with me, Oakfield ; be- 
cause, you see, I shall want somebody to share the 
house ; in consideration of which, I will even risk 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 97 

another such sermon as that I got once behind 
Jacko." 

^' Ahf master Fred, there's not much the matter 
with you I see ; when you're as impudent as that 
you are in a good way to be off the sick list" 

'^ Not till my sick certificate is signed, you may 
take your oath," said Wykham. 

« Well, Oakfield," said Stanton, « if you and 
Wykham have done chaffing, I vote we go over 
and see Jenkyns ; I've hardly spoken to him once 
since Guzrat : — Wykham seems getting all right," 
he continued, as they left the tent ; '^ but I declare, 
Oakfield, I think he was right about you." 
« What about me ? " 
" That you ought to go to the hills." 
" Well," said Oakfield, " I dare say he was. I 
am not well, I know ; old Mc Growdy was asking 
me a day or two ago, if I didn't dread the heat, 
which was a great advance for him to make. I 
think he'd give me a certificate." 

'^ Take it then, my good fellow, by all means ; 
and then come down from Simla in the cold wea- 
ther, and join your appointment" 
« What appointment ? " 

" Oh, they are certain to give you something, 
now that you have passed in both languages ; and 
after saving the color the other day." 

VOL. n. H 



98 OAKFIELD, OR 

^^I don't feel confidenty I must say, of their 
offering; nor if they do, of my" — he stopped. 

"Well?" said Stanton. 

" Why, I know you'll be in a rage when I say 
it — of my accepting." 

*^ Nay, said Stanton, *^ 1 don't see what there 
is in that to put me in a rage." 

'^ I thought you'd call it paradoxical ; an affec- 
tation of singularity, and all that; and yet, on 
second thoughts, you ought not to, for you have 
done the same thing yourself; you never applied 
for an appointment, I fancy, and that alone is rather 
singular." 

*^I never applied, because I knew I should 
never get one, and I am not so fond of the mere 
process of asking a favor, as to go through it for 
the sake of getting a civil refusal, in a public let- 
ter; but still I allow I do share your heresy upon 
this, more than most other points. For a man who is 
not pecuniarily straightened and has plenty of work 
made for himself, a mere drudgery appointment is 
not to be snatched at merely because Smith, 
Jones, and Robinson, think it is a tremendous 
piece of luck, and so on : yet, I should be sorry, 
Oakfield, if you were to make up your mind to 
lead the life which I have led, and now shall always 
lead." 

« Why ? " 



P^' - "JJL^"'^g^^^lWg^WgBBgi|WB^^^ggpq M^Blijj 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 99 

'' Why I am not sure it is at all the best thing 
for a man; there are few people, I think, so 
capable of standing it as I am, (you know I'm not 
a conceited fool, so I shall not take up five minutes 
in every sentence in would-be-modest circumven- 
tions), and for one who cannot stand it, it is 
wretchedly injurious. Depend upon it there is a 
difficulty in sticking perseveringly to work made 
for yourself, which you ought to scruple before en- 
countering as your position for life ; there is an 
assistance to the whole character in compulsory 
work, even the commonest routine drudgery, 
which you should consider well before you venture 
to abandon." 

** WeU," said Oakfield, «I allow that; but if I 
weigh myself and come to the conclusion that I 
can both sustain the difficulties and dispense with 
the help, what then ? " 

^* Why then, I grant you, you have a right to 
make a free choice, only still I would ask you 
whether you are quite certain that your choice 
would be rightly made, in preferring your own 
work to that which some appointments might hold 
out to you. I fully agree with you that an ap- 
pointment which involves a great deal of occupa- 
tion and but little work, which would, in fact, 
oblige you to spend the greater part of your time 

in accounts, or copying, or other such like clerk- 

H 2 



100 OARFIELDy OR 

work^ leaves little or no question ; every man is 
justified in deciding for himself whether or not 
so much extra money a month will compensate 
him for what he will consider waste of time ; and 
if he decides in the negative, I for one shall think 
him not foolish but wise ; but there are other ap- 
pointments, Oakfield, where the work is really 
such as a man may well devote himself to; I 
never can think civil employ, for instance, to be 
sneered at." 

" Of course not sneered at ; why sneer at any- 
thing which men think fit to do ? It is that sneer- 
ing at occupations and callings which we ourselves 
do not affect, that causes so much mischief. People 
do not choose a path in life for themselves, but fol- 
low that which their neighbours declare to be the 
best. I do believe there is more real intolerance 
on this matter of a profession than on any other 
subject in the world; I do not sneer at the calling 
of a billiard-marker ; why should I at civil employ ? 
But I think one is bound to examine the latter as 
rigidly as the former ; not to take the excellence of 
one for granted any more than that of the other." 

" Well, but what do you mean by examining ? 
Examine what ?" 

^* Examine what there is in any line of life 
which seems to open itself, that may assist or re- 
tard the great object of life." 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 101 

« Which is''— 

** One's own spiritual life." 

"Yes," said Stanton, after a pause, "I allow 
that ; our own, because such selfishness involves, 
in fact, the highest self-abandonment Go on." 

" How shall I go on ? I say this civil employ 
you were talking of is good or bad to me, desirable 
or the reverse, according as it could help to develop 
that in me which requires developing, and repress 
that which wants repressing. I believe in several 
ways I should find it helpful ; that the regular hard 
work would be good for my indolence, and its prac- 
tical activity a healthy counterpoise to those theo- 
rizing tendencies you often speak of; then on the 
other hand, I should have, you see, to give up that 
literary mode of life which you have pursued with 
such success, which you feel has been a better 
'appointment' for you than any the government 
could have given you, and which, as I believe I 
should like it best, so I have been always willing to 
hope would suit me best ; though I am doubtful, I 
own, doubtful of my own power of overcoming 
indolence, without some external force to assist 
me." 

" You are right, I am sure ; It is an awfiil tug, 
I know, to me, going on month after month and 
day after day working as regularly as if the terrors 
of wigging overhung indolence, instead of con- 



102 OAKFIELD, OR 

science reproof merely ; the law is as bindings I 
know, a good deal more so, but infinitely harder to 
obey." 

^' But if obeyed," continued Oakfield, ^^ nothing 
strengthens the character so much ; it is the yery 
perfection of obedience in a good sense, the 
most complete opponent of Jacobinism and law- 
lessness; so that it is the best thing, you see, for 
those who are equal to it ; and it cannot be with- 
out reluctance that we judge ourselves unequal ; 
turn away from the best and follow the second 
best ; besides, there is another danger in external 
laws ; it is easier to obey them, but it is also easy 
to depend upon them, which is emasculating and 
wrong; they may make work easier, but they also 
tempt us to devote ourselves to it." 

** Do you speak of that as a temptation ? A 
man worth his salt would wish, I should think, to 
devote himself to any calling he enters upon ; a 
clei^man devotes himself to his preaching and 
visiting, and you praise him ; you call him a good 
officer in this country who^ like Middleton, gives 
himself up entirely to his magisterial duties." 

'^ And yet, Stanton, I think one of the things 
which you and I both so like and admire in Mid- 
dleton is that he does not * give himself up' to his 
work. I do not praise that man, clergyman or 
what else, who Ogives himself up' to his work; I 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 103 

should desire to enter myself upon civil employ, or 
any other employ, with the deliberate intention of 
not * devoting' myself to it ; an intention, I fancy, 
hard to keep." 

"Oh! now you get to paradox, again!" said 
Stanton, impatiently. 

" If you mean by paradox finding fallacies in 
common phrases and notions, I hope I am para- 
doxical; though I know I am not so much so as 
you, who have long lived in practical rejection of 
common notions, acting paradox for the last twelve 
years. What I said, I believe, — and so do you, I 
dare say, if you think of it ; and don't start off and 
toss your old mane directly you fancy you catch 
me tripping." 

" My dear Oakfield, I will not be preached out 
of common sense." 

" Yes, but you ought to be, by that which is 
higher than common sense ; the common sense is 
insufficient where nice discrimination is required." 

^^ Do you really mean to contend that an honest 
man, voluntarily entering upon any profession or 
business, is not bound to do his best in it ?" 

" I contend for nothing of the sort, and your 
common sense ought to have saved you from utter- 
ing such a common-place ; what you have said now 
is just as true, and just as original as if you had 
said ^an honest man ought not to steal.'" 



104 OAKFIELD^ OR 

" I ought to be angry at your cool impertinence, 
young man^" said Stanton^ smiling^ however, amic- 
ably. 

" Not you ; but what I said was a very different 
thing ; that a man should not devote himself to 
his work. To do his work to the best of his 
ability, to put all his energy into it, is, of course, 
an obvious duty : to ^ devote himself to it is a sin." 

*^ I see what you mean : but you are at your old 
game : the distinction is too fine, of no practical 
value.'* 

"Of as much value,*^ rejoined Oakfield, "as 
any of the nice distinctions between the border 
shades of right and vnrong, which go to make up 
the diagnosis of morals: nay, of greater importance : 
for a man who devotes or gives himself up to any 
work, to anything, to any name save One, in earth 
or heaven, is an idolater. His work, be it what 
it may, is still but an appendage, a circumstance, 
not of the first importance to him, but at highest 
the second: he may not give it the first place, 
lliat belongs, not to his work any more than to 
his coat, but to him; not to the appurtenances 
of the man, even the highest and noblest of them, 
but to the man. He may devote himself to God, 
devote himself to spiritual life : it is not profane 
nor selfish, but in the correct meaning of the words 
true, to say he may devote himself to himself, but 
not to his circumstances." 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 105 

^* A needless caution to nine men out of ten." 

" I rather think not ; but, even so» needful for 
the tenth : and if I think myself the tenth for whom 
it is needful, what difference does it make to me 
that nine others want another, an opposite truth ? 
Let them take it in God's name ; but not presume 
to quarrel witli me (nor I with them) for choosing 
mine. But it is a more common evil, I suspect, 
especially among very busy men, than you seem to 
think." 

^' It is at any rate a nobler vice than mere ani- 
mal idleness, and a rarer." 

^' Yes, a nobler kind of selfish idolatry ; but at 
best never noble, nor anything but base. The 
animal-indulging, idle man, worships, 'devotes 
himself to his belly, his dinner, his horse-racing, 
and neglects himself— his soul, which decays. The 
busy man devotes himself to his office, his ' cases', 
his appeals, — a nobler vice you say : be it so : at 
any rate it sounds better; the language of one 
man's idolatry is revolting to us, the other com- 
mands our respect; but the result is much the 
same in both : the accidents of the man lives, the 
essence dies ; the soul can be smothered in a law- 
suit as effectually as in a beer tankard ; and fifly 
years hence the former, as well as the latter, will 
be gone, and the two men left; equally bare, equally 
dead, equally unprofitable." 



lOG OAXFIELD, OB 

" You should have been a padre, Ned. Wykham 
might well talk of your preaching." 

" I may allow Wykbani to talk of it, but not 
you," answered Oakfield, laughing. "I dare say 
I do preach to Wykham, or did once : I converse 
with you ; that is I would, if yoa were not crus^. 
If it is a padre's buaness only to exalt the soul, 
then I allow I ought to have been a padre, and so 
ought you; and indeed all but padres must be in a 
bad way. I will, by your leave, call myself a padre 
henceforth. Ah I my dear Stanton, what padr£ 
shall deliver my soul, or make agreement unto 
God for it? Have I not a life, a being, ever 
struggling for the birth, ever driven back by sin, by 
form, by conventionalities of ray own or others 
making ; and shall I ignore all this because I wear 
a red coat instead of a black one ? No," he added, 
seeing that Stanton was about to interrupt, " I 
know that you were only in joke, and didn't mean 
that; but"— 

" But what ? " 

" But God deliver us from all forms ! I could 
say oow, I will never listen to or act a part in a lie 
again. I will never go to a church where God is not 
worshipped, never mix in a society where only the 
anima! life is acknowledged, never even speak with 
respect of what does not approve itself to me as 
good, be it priest, or altar, or sacrament, or what- 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 107 

ever man calls most sacred; but I will worship 
God under the stars^ and call good good, and evil 
evil, the liberal liberal, and the churl churl, the 
wise man wise, and the fool foolish." 

The fit will pass," said Stanton, '^and you will 
find that till you can ignore time and space, and 
mortality, you must even accommodate yourself to 
their imposed necessities and imperfections." 

'^ I know it," he said, sadly, ^' the fit will pass ; 
it is even now passing. God knows there is no 
fear of our intuitions lasting too long : it has passed, 
and I am the less happy; the more prudent, and 
perhaps the less wise. I see that dust-storm com- 
ing up, which will make us uncomfortable, and 
then cool us ; and I acknowledge that we are in a 
composite world. I remember that I have once or 
twice this morning spoken harahly or violently, 
and I acknowledge the same thing; and come 
down to the old conclusion, fix)m which the soul, 
in what you call its fits, will now and then try to 
escape, but is forced back again by matter of fact 
merciless nature, that we must take the evil with 
the good, that we can no more affirm perfect truth 
than we can do it. All true. Sir. The fit is 
over, and I shall go to mess to-night, and to church 
to-morrow, and jog on in an orthodox fashion again 
till the next fit, trying to patch up irreconcileable 
differences as best I can ; Oh I doubtless I shaU be 
very wise." 



108 OARFIELD^ OR 

He spoke ironically^ almost bitterly. Stanton 
knew what he felt, what he suffered ; he too had 
felt the same. What young man does not feel the 
same at some time or other of his career; when he 
is tempted (Oh I shall we say by his good or evil 
genius ?) to effect for himself an entire revolution, 
to stand on his own ground, and not another's ; to 
go wherever his belief leads him in full trust ? and 
then there is the painful self-reproaching sinking 
back again into the strong grasp of form and 
fashion ; there are the last clinging glances to the 
Eastern sun, as the man now yielding to the force 
of the actual, beholds the last glimses of the real — 

" to die away, 
And fade into the light of common day " — 

and so, as Stanton said himself, with a half uncon- 
scious bitterness, ^^ the fit passes," and the sobriety 
of respectability and orthodoxy succeeds. *^ And 
80," resumed Stanton, ^* what is the upshot of all 
this? Do you intend to take your appointment? " 
'^ 1 must admire the delicious gravity with which 
we have first assumed our castle, and then disputed 
as to whether or no we will tak6 possession ; why 
as to my appointment which is in the clouds, I will 
postpone the decision till it comes down to earth, 
and then I say I shall have plenty of time to con- 
sider of it I think I probably should; for I be- 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 109 

lieve indolence would be a greater snare to me 
than idolatry." 

" To descend to sublunary matters," said Stan- 
ton, *^ the pay is a consideration." 

'^ Well, I can't allow that even ; I manage to 
live well enough." 

" But you will marry some day, and then you 
won't be able to manage on * Ensign's pay?'" 

'^ I don't expect to be an Ensign all my life ; 
but at any rate I can't understand to provide for a 
future, and very vague contingency." 

" Do you say you live well enough at present, 
Oakfield ? Are you out of debt ? " 

" I am *no more in debt than the batta,* if we 
get it, will amply clear. I never was before the 
campaign." 

" You don't assent to the common cry just now 
that Ensigns cannot live upon their pay ? " 

" Why you know, Stanton, by your own account, 
the fact of its being a common cry is sufficient to 
make me mistrust it ; but really there seems to me 
to be something in it almost shocking," 

" Well, I agree with you entirely. I do despise 
that cant most heartily ; — the very idea of asking 
whether an Ensign can live on his pay, when there 
are some scores who do. Why if one did, it would 
be proof positive that it could be done." 

* Batta, the donation generally given, of late years, to the 
Indian armies after a campaign. 



110 OAKFIELD, OR 

''Ezacdy," said Oakfield, ''that is the folly of it; 
and besides the foUj, I really do think that there 
is something fearful in asking whether a man (a 
soldier too) can live on £200 a year; it always 
sounds like itisolence to the thousands of good 
honest men who live on twenty ; like cruelty to the 
tens of thousands who live on less than ten." 

" Very true," said Stanton, "the Ensign would 
tell you, however, that he had his position as a 
gentleman to keep up." 

" Yes, I suppose he would." 

" Well, and what should you say to him ? " 

" Why, I think if I condescended to say any- 
thing in answer to such melancholy folly, I should 
ask him how much gentlemanliness cost, how 
cheap one could do it, what was the price of the 
very best article, and so on." 

'' Good," said Stanton, ** I am glad that we have 
found one subject on which we can declaim con- 
jointly and in peace. How far do you carry your 
socialism, Oakfield ? " 

Oakfield started. ''SociaUsmI oh yes— how far 
do I carry it? Why 1 suppose as far as one has 
occasion for it. It is like every truth, I suppose, 
infinite." 

'' Surely you think the Parisian socialists carry 
it too far ? " 

'' I am scandalously ignorant, I am sorry to say. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. Ill 

about Paris and Parisians^ but as the Parisians, 
socialists or other, are, I presume, only mortal men, 
I will undertake to say most confidently that they 
have carried no truth too far; they cannot go 
further than finity, and as aforesaid, all truth is 
infinite." 

^^ Well, but what have murder and rapine to do 
with truth?" 

Just nothing; and so it is, people call that 
which has nothing to do with a truth a too great 
extension of it No, depend upon it, your Paris 
fiiends are not too true in their socialism, though 
possibly terribly unbalanced." 

" What do you mean ? " 

^' I mean that you may walk along the truth of 
socialism, and the further you walk the truer it is ; 
but it has an antipodes, a polar truth on the other 
side, and if you quite neglect that side, and put all 
your weight on this, the see-saw is spoiled, and 
down you go." 

^^ Is all truth, then, a see-saw ? " 

'^ Not in itself I dare say, not as it is, not as 
God sees it; but practically it so accommodates 
itself to our view ; — but Stanton, I am tired to death 
of talking^ and here we have been sitting in your 
tent for the last hour, when we ought to have been 
going to call on Jenkyns." 

" By Jove," rejoined Stanton, " so we ought, I 
forgot all about it." 




CHAPTER IV. 

" It U not to taste sweet things, but to do noble and 
true things, and vindicate himself under God's heaven as 
a God-made man, that the poorest son of Adam dimly 
longB. Show him the way of doing that, the dullest day- 
druilge kindles into a hero. They wrong him greatly who 
say he is to be seduced by ease. Difficulty, abnegation, 
martyrdom, death, are the allurementt that aet on the 
heart of man. Kindle the inner genial life of him, yon 
have a flame that bums up all lower considerations ; not 
happiness but something higher. One sees this even in 
the frivolous cksses, with their 'point of honour' and 
the like." 

Carlttle. 

The army at Lahore broke up a few days after 
the above conversadoD, and the regiments returned 
to their different cantonments. Stanton's troop, it 
will be remembered, was to be quartered at Feroze- 
pore, and the 90th regiment at Meerut ; Oakfield, 
however, applied for and obtained a month's leave 
to stay with the Middletons ; indeed his health was 
becoming so much worse, as the heat increased, 
that he would have been unable to stand the pro- 
longed march. Miss Middleton was still at Allaha- 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 113 

bad^ but expected to return soon ; they were both 
received by her brother with hearty hospitality. 

" Welcome to the two warriors ! " he exclaimed 
as Oakfield and Stanton rode up from where their 
camp was pitched; — ^and he shook each of them 
by the hand with a heartiness that testified to the 
depth of the emotion which was concealed under a 
playful manner. Coming off their march^ not hav- 
ing been in a house for some four or five months^ the 
two campaigners were able fully to appreciate the 
comfort of the cool, large, matted, dust-tight rooms, 
the purifying, refreshing bath, the luxury of iced 
water, and light yet substantial breakfast, to which 
they presently sat down. They talked of the cam- 
paign of course ; — men who had served were seldom 
allowed to talk of anything else for the next six 
months ; — Mr. Middleton was severe, as almost all 
sensible men were, upon Chillianwalla. 

^'It is provoking^** he said, ''that big people 
should still be allowed to go on telling lies to each 
other when everybody knows that they are lies. 
I am certain that it never can be wise policy to tell 
a lie which is sure to be found out What can be 
the good of caUing Chillianwalla a glorious victory, 
when everybody in the country knows it was al- 
most a defeat ? " 

" No, no," said Stanton, "it was no defeat, no- 
thing like it ; we had rather the best of it of the 
VOL. n. I 



114 OAKFIELD^ OR 

two. I grant you it would have been called a vic- 
tory just the same if it had been a defeat; as 
Ferozeshah was^ where I grant you we were 
thoroughly and entirely beaten. But it was quite 
different at the Jhelum^ we should have beaten 
them thoroughly had we had an hour's more day- 
light" 

''Whose fault was it that there was not an 
hour's more daylight?" 

'^Ahl there I grant you; fighting at three 
o'clock in the afternoon was a sad mistake." 

"But," said Oakfield, "could it be helped? 
They were firing, recollect, right into the ground 
where we were going to encamp." 

"Well, but where was the necessity for en- 
camping just within range of the enemy's bat- 
teries? that was the blunder; and then the notion 
of a British general talking of his Irish blood." 

"What, is that really a true story?" said Mr. 
Middleton : "is it possible ? Just fancy the Duke 
of Wellington, whom the Irish are always claiming 
as a countryman, though I suppose he is in every 
respect the very most un-Irish, and even anti-Irish 
man, in his constitution and temper, that ever lived, 
just fancy his telling his soldiers in the Peninsula 
that he fought a battle because his Irish blood 
couldn't stand the insult of a stray shot" 

"Well," interposed Oakfield, who had a vivid 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 115 

recollection of Lord Goiigh as he rode up to the 
90th on the evening of the action, and as he ap- 
peared at the funeral the day after ; ^' he is a grand 
old fellow, notwithstanding." 

^^ So he is," said Stanton, heartily; ''and if he 
was a little hasty at Chillianwalla he couldn't have 
made a better business than he did of Guzrat" 

'' True ; and even at Chillianwalla, I shall al- 
ways think he had not a £sdr chance ; he couldn't 
calculate upon the 24th being taken up to the 
charge from an unheard of distance, and, as some 
people say, unloaded." 

" Is it possible?" said Mr. Middleton ; " neither " 
he added, ''could he have calculated upon the 
false movements of the Cavalry on the right" 

" Humph I " ejaculated Stanton, " the less said 
about that the better." 

" I don't see that," exclaimed Oakfield ; " I de- 
clare I think there has been a great deal of mis- 
placed generosity in this matter. Depend upon it 
it is not returned. The wretched natives don't get 
off so easily. 

" I must say I agree with Oakfield," said Mr. 
Middleton ; " not that I think the native soldiers 
have much reason to complain of the way in which 
their services are acknowledged." 

" No," said Oakfield, " perhaps not." 

"I should rather think not," said Stanton, in 

I 2 



116 OAKFIELD^ OR 

his turn warming ; ** on the contrary^ I think the 
way in which the Sepoys are belauded and bebut- 
tered^ and bebattaed after a campaign^ as if their 
fighting — in other words doing what they are paid 
for — was the most wonderful thing in the worlds is 
the grossest as well as the most impolitic thing in 
the world.** 

They all agreed that this was true. 

*'But the fact is," added Stanton^ ''we are 
all of us a great deal too fond of buttering each 
other on these occasions. It is the tendency of the 
age to try and make things easy^ to get honor 
and glory cheap, without suffering for them, hence 
that wretched system of squandering medals and 
C. B.-ships after a campaign, with such absurd 
indiscriminating provision, that they are hardly 
worth the having." 

'' But how can you discriminate ? " asked Mr. 
Middleton, ''you must give them to all who were 
present" 

Present where ? " cried Stanton, " present under 
fire, and I agree with you, but men get them now- 
a-days who are in as great security all the time as 
if they were a thousand miles off. Surely they 
might limit the distribution to those who were 
actually engaged. I believe the army would thank 
them to do so. No officer likes to wear a medal 
which he feels he has not earned. I know in my 



WKwmmm^a^^KBmfmf^^'^^v^^mmtm'^^'^mr^^^^^im^ i umj-t^vo^^^ 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 117 

own case, I would as soon think of wearing the 
Waterloo medal, as that for Maharajpore ? " 

" Were you present at Maharajpore ?" 

^^ I was with the army, but saw no more of the 
action than you did. I was on duty at the time in 
camp. I had no right to the medal, whereas that 
for the Sutlej, and for this last business, if we get 
it, I am and shall be as proud of as you could 
wish." 

** That distinction would be rather hard, would 
it not," suggested Mr. Middleton, ^^ on those who, 
by no fault of theirs &re absent, yet belong to the 
army?" 

^^ I don't see that it is hard. It is very unlucky 
of course for the man whose roster for any de- 
tached duty comes round on the day of a general 
action ; and anybody of military spirit will deeply 
regret the bad fortune which keeps him out of the 
field ; will accept his inglorious duty as a hard and 
unpleasant one, but still a duty; and the man who 
regrets being unable to enter the field will be the 
first to refuse to be decorated as though he had 
been there. It is no fault of the regiments down 
at Barrackpore that they were not at Chillianwalla, 
but we should think it rather odd if they claimed 
the medal. In the same way it was no fault, but 
a great misfortune, for which I pity them sincerely, 
of the men who were in the rear guarding the bag- 



118 OAKFIELD^ OR 

gage ; but it would be, or rather it will be, unjust 
to decorate them with the same badge of honor 
for walking alongside a camel, as they do Oakfield 
for saving a color." 

''What was that? what was that," said Mr. 
Middleton, "why did you never mention it? I 
never heard a word about it ? " 

"Did you not," said Stanton, "of course not, 
though, for Oakfield was, I believe, your only 
correspondent, and I know you were not likely to 
hear it from him." 

He looked kindly at his friend as he spoke, and 
with an honorable pleasure told the story. Mr. 
Middleton looked much pleased. "This is delight- 
ful," he said, "the very most desirable epilogue 
to your court martial, my dear boy." 

"Just what I told him," said Stanton, "but his 
court martial had another epilogue besides that;"— - 
and he related the account of Stafford's death, 
which made them all silent for some time. 

" What were we talking about ? " Stanton pre- 
sently resumed, " Oh ! medals ! — well, I was going 
to say that people abuse the old Duke now-a-days, 
for being, as they say, stingy, and ungracious about 
medals ; for my part I think it is just Uke the man, 
that is to say, wise and admirable. He knows 
exactly what an action is, few men better; and 
knows therefore, that to give medals promiscuously 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 119 

to all who were present, is to give them very un- 
deservedly in some cases, and very much diminished 
in value in others ; and knowing this, I do love the 
profound indifference with which the grand old 
man listens to the foolish ravings of thousands of 
people, who, as he is perfectly well aware, know 
just exactly nothing about the matter.^ 

^*I like to hear you speak like that of the 
Duke," said Mr. Middleton, ^^ an Englishman, and 
especially an officer, presuming as so many do 
now-a-days, to affect to speak deprecatingly and 
disrespectfully of him, is to me one of the most 
offensive things I know." 

'^ I think so too," said Oakfield, '^ he is a very 
obelisk of a man in these latter days, a giant among 
pigmies, one of the few eminent signs left to show 
what an unconquerable will, an entire-hearted man 
can do." 

'^ I am half inclined to agree with you, Stanton," 
said Mr. Middleton, ** about medals, but I confess 
I have thought more about that which is now-a- 
days the usual concomitant of medals: I mean 
batta ; — and I consider the principle on which that 
is granted most thoroughly detestable." 

** Well, but what do you suppose is the prin- 
ciple ? " 

" I know," answered Mr. Middleton, " that it 
professes not to be a remuneration for fighting, but 



120 OAKFIBLD^ OR 

a compensation for camp expenses; in wise adapta- 
tion to which theory a very large sum is given to 
those who can best afford to defray those expenses^ 
and vice versa. But I appeal to your considerable 
experience, whether you have ever found your cam- 
paigns so expensive, that without batta they would 
have greatly involved you ? " 

"No, certainly not; oh! I quite agree with 
you, and even if they had, I should think batta 
false in principle. The notion of the State paying 
the expenses of individuals as well as its own is 
monstrous. I believe Cabul was an exceptional 
case; and as government, in a foolish war, brought 
an army for no purpose into a country where all 
things were at starvation prices, it was perhaps just 
that they should pay for their folly. But I admit 
that batta, on its present, and now it seems habitual 
footing, is low, unchivalrous, and worthy of a people 
of shopkeepers. To degrade war to such a very 
mercenary level is also, I fear, as Oakfield would 
say, symptomatic of the age." 

" I think so, certainly," said Oakfield ; fancy 
England or France or any of the great powers in 
the last war, taking upon them in addition to their 
other burdens, to give six months batta to their 
armies 1 " 

Breakfast over, Mr. Middleton went to his court, 
where he was occupied till five in the evening. To 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 121 

Stanton and Oakfield it was a great lounge^ after a 
long camp life, to lie on a sofa again, with the range 
of (for India) a very good library. At five o'clock 
Mr. Middleton came in, and found both his firiends 
asleep on their respective couches. They formed 
a strange contrast Stanton's rough brown hair 
and moustache and heard^ upon which, according to 
a prevailing fashion of the army, he had suffered no 
razor to come since the commencement of the cam- 
paign, partly concealed, but could not altogether 
disguise the strong lines of his quiescent face. In 
that calm square forehead, those features which, 
though so rough, look as if cut in stone, so un- 
moved are they, especially the firm Unes of his 
mouth, one of those mouths for which nature has, 
in the first place, done enough, and then as it were 
left it to the man himself whether it shall be good or 
bad, whether those thick lips shall droop into sensual 
hideousness, or be gathered up into the solidity of 
strength ; his face altogether indicates much self- 
conquest ; it is the countenance of a man who, 
though young in years, has passed the crisis of life 
and settled down into the comparative serenity of 
self-knowledge, self-reliance, self-subjugation; — ^but 
Mr. Middleton found his gaze fixed more and 
longer on Oakfield. If in the other physiognomy 
there was more matter for congratulation, perhaps — 
in its placid strength — for admiration, yet this more 



122 OAKFIELD^ OR 

called for sympathy. Not only for the appearance 
of ill health, though that is sadly visible ; the sunk 
face, so grave, yet so clear ; the hollow eye ; the 
shrunk form ; the painful l)reathing ; these symp- 
toms startled and shocked Mr. Middleton, v^rho had 
*not observed them when the features were lighted 
up with animation, as they had been in the morning. 
But there was more than the signs of ill health to 
sympathize with. If in Stanton's face the traces 
of conflict past were visible, here might be seen 
those of conflict present The delicacy of skin 
seemed to indicate a corresponding deUcacy within 
that shrank continually from the battle which 
duty still rendered necessary. There is a look 
of anxiety, of restlessness, that seems to speak of 
a perpetual jarring within of discordant elements, 
of a painful struggle between strength and weak- 
ness, which seems to say that poor Oakfield has not 
found peace yet, any more than when he talked to 
Margaret on Dunmail Raise. 

Mr. Middleton stood still at the entrance of the 
room, making these observations. He would not 
disturb them, so proceeded to take a book, intend- 
ing to read till one of them chose to wake. He 
was not so quiet, however, in moving across the 
room, but that Stanton, with the quick ear of an 
old soldier recently exercised, heard him, and 
started up. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 123 

« Hallo Middleton, is that you ? By Jove 1 I 
think I have been asleep." 

" I think you have." 

" How long have you been here ? Why didn't 
you wake me ?" 

'* I have only just come in ; but I didn't intend 
to wake you. I thought very likely you might 
have arrears of sleep to work off; but don't let us 
talk loud^ for poor Oakfield there doesn't seem in- 
clined to wake. Don't you thinks Stanton/ he 
added, dropping his voice, " he looks very ill ?" 

^* I do really ; I was quite uneasy about him at 
Lahore the other day ; he ought to go to the hills 
directly." 

'* Hell have to go to England, I suspect, before 
he has done. The sea is the only thing that ever 
thoroughly drives that colour out of a man's cheeks. 
Well, which of you gentlemen am I to drive to- 
night? We can't all three go in the buggy." 

Oh I drive Oakfield, then : I shan't go out ; or 
you can lend me a horse." 

" I can very easily do that." 

So it was arranged. In about an hour's time, a 
little before sunset, Oakfield woke up, with much 
the same shrewd observation which Stanton had 
made ; and which, indeed, most people make who 
go to sleep in the day time, as a kind of apology 
to themselves for having been guilty of such an 



124 OAKFIELD^ OR 

impropriety ; just in time to bathe^ dress, and go 
out on the course with Mr. Middleton. It was 
curious to Oakfield being back on the Ferozepore 
course, after a six months interval, which seemed 
like years. How much had happened in those six 
months I His journey to Simla and back, and all 
the excitement of the campaign, which had of it- 
self been such a completely strange and new chap- 
ter in his life ; his court martial seemed to belong 
to a past age. As he was thus musing, Stanton 
rode up alongside : '^ I say, Oakfield, wasn't it on 
this road you had your adventure with the great 
Straddles?" 

*^ Yes, just by the tree there, about a hundred 
yards a-head. Poor Straddles ! Idon'tlike to think 
of that business; he was a great fool, to be sure." 

'^ Preserve me from my commiserators," said 
Mr. Middleton, laughing. 

*' No, no ; I didn't mean to say that, either ; upon 
my word, I am very sorry when I think of poor 
Straddles, and poor Sta£Pord too I" 

His countenance felL Ferozepore and his en- 
counter on the very spot which they were now 
driving over, recalled associations that ill agreed 
with his last impressions of Stafford. 

^' Don't talk any more about that business," he 
said, lying back in the buggy, ^^ it was a bad one at 
best, and 1 would rather forget it" 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST.. 125 

" Well^ I quite understand your feeling on the 
subject," said Mr. Middleton, "don't you, Stanton." 

«* Humph," replied that gruff gentleman, with 
his favorite prefatory ejaculation, "well, perhaps 
IdofandgaUopedoff. 

"Stanton hates any allusion to feelings," ob- 
served Oakfield ; " well it is a wise antipathy." 

*' He will respect yours, though, you may de- 
pend upon it," said Mr. Middleton. 

" Oh, I know that ; I know he will never open 
his lips on the subject again. Good old fellow! 
Now if I was in his place I should make ten reso- 
lutions to his one, and — not through unkindness, but 
infirmity, — keep them about a tenth part as well. 
He is one of the few men 1 know whose resolution 
is as good as his performance ; one is so perfectly 
certain to follow the other." 

"Very true, but he has reached that state 
through a severe discipline, you may be sure. I 
like to watch him now ; his seat on his horse has a 
characteristic force in it. I am convinced the ani- 
mal must feel a magnetic consciousness that Stanton 
intends to be master, and will certainly be so, under 
all circumstances. Hah ! is not that Perkins, of your 
regiment, on the grey horse ?" 

" Yes, to be sure. Well Perkins, good evening ; 
do you march to-morrow ?" 

" Oh no ; halt here a couple of days more. 



128 OAKFIELD, OR 

store of anecdotes connected with it, complained 
bitterly of the 90th not having been sent with the 
pursuing force, and indeed any soldier might well 
regret having missed that glorious and exciting 
expedition. 

In three days the regiment marched. Oak- 
field remained behind; not to remain long how- 
ever, for the very day before his corps left he 
appeared before a medical committee, upon the 
recommendation of his crusty but skilful friend 
McGrowdy, and received a sick certificate to 
Simla till 1st November, 1849. The sun w^as 
getting hotter every day, and he felt it becoming 
more and more injurious to him, so he left Feroze- 
pore without delay, on the 20th April, to travel by 
dawk to Simla. He had no such unpleasant rainy 
adventures as had marked his last journey in Sep- 
tember; the only event, if it may be so called, 
was his passmg, near Loodiana, the train of wag- 
gons with the wounded men, European and Na- 
tive, of the late batdes, journeying slowly, march 
by march, towards the invalid depot at Landour. 
It was a ghastly sight, those squalid faces and 
thin bodies ; some were evidently sufiering excru- 
ciating pain from the jolting of these rough vehi- 
cles; the effects of war, with the excitement off 
and the chill on, are an awful spectacle ;— " Poor 
fellows," thought Oakfield, as he looked at them. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 129 

" I doubt very much whether you individually get 
your fair share of the honor and glory in these 
affairs, at all equivalent to your share of the pains 
and perils;" with which radical cogitation he 
passed sadly on, musing upon the Peace Sopiety 
then just beginning to agitate in England, but not 
even the carts he had just seen could reconcile 
him to their doctrines. ^' So long," thought he ^^ as 
there are worse evils in the world than gunshot 
and bayonet wounds, universal peace is a doctrine 
not to be preached without qualification. 1 have 
just seen some of the physical evils of war, but I 
must not forget its moral good effects, which I as 
certainly witnessed in the case of the officers of 
the 90th." 

He reached Simla better than he had expected, 
though exhausted by the journey. He found 
Wykham in his old house, and went and took 
up his quarters with him as before. Wykham 
was quite recovered, but still adhering to his reso- 
lution of taking his furlough in the cold weather. 
It may be fancied what a theme of conversation 
this was to them, though rather a sad one to poor 
Oakfield, who, however, still found a fascination 
in it, and almost tired Wykham by constantly 
recurring to it Wykham lived in London; his 
friends, he said, were living in the same street, 
in the same house, that they had done ever since 

VOL. II. K 



130 OAKFIELD, OR 

he could remember. Except that two sisters had 
been bom dming his absence, whose acquaintance 
he had yet to make, his family circle remained ex- 
actly as it had been when he left, so that his pros- 
pects in returning to England were really happy ; 
so happy that Oakfield with his nervous distrust of 
Nemesis, wondered he could contemplate, or at 
least speak of them, without trembling. He was 
much struck by the increased gravity of Wykham's 
manner. There was the same joyous cheerfulness 
which sat on him even more gracefully that it 
seemed now to play lightly over a ground of more 
becoming and restful gravity. His wound and ill- 
ness, perhaps too his previous intercourse with 
Oakfield, had made him think ; with all his light- 
someness undiminished, he appeared to have a 
more distinct consciousness of the solemnity of life ; 
Oakfield saw, or at least felt, this change, and found 
bimself more closely drawn than ever to his friend. 
He remarked upon it in his letters to Stanton, but 
got, what he half expected, a quasi reproof in that 
quarter. '^If you make Wykham as grave as 
yourself," wrote this uncourteous correspondent, 
"you will spoil a very good fellow ; — sweets to the 
sweet, gravity to the grave, frolic to the frolicsome." 
Oakfield wrote back a protest, in which he expressed 
himself better : " Wykham is not spoilt, but much 
improved : he is graver than he was ; still frolic- 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 131 

some, but serious : and I will not think any human 
being the worse, but much the better, for having a 
broad foundation of seriousness, which the lightest 
spirits may gracefully illuminate. Playfulness on 
the top of the seriousness, is not only a charm to 
others, but it is the wise secret of life ; without this 
it is mere folly and grimacing: graceful in a boy as 
in a kitten : but intolerable in a man. Wykham 
has been a playfully graceful boy: he is now a 
wisely sportive man." 

To this Stanton assented. 

<<Do you look forward much to going home 
yourself, Oakfield ?" Wykham asked, one evening, 
in the course of the ride. 

^^ Does a cat like milk ? you must be mocking 
my misfortune ; fancy not looking forward to it!" 

" Well, I never did, till quite lately ; till in fact 
I was advised to go. I used to say to myself I 
should probably go home some day, but never dwelt 
upon it, or built castles, as many men do ; it always 
seemed so distant" 

"I should be very sorry," said Oakfield, "not 
to dwell upon it, and build castles ; sorry to lose 
the softening influence of a prospect so made up 
of pleasure and pain. 1 often observe that the 
best men in this country are those who like it least" 

" I shouldn't have thought it did any man much 

good to hate the country he has to live in." 

K 2 



132 OAKFIELD, OB 

'^Why not? there is a strict analogy in the 
highest sense of goodness. The good man is he 
who loves earth the least, and has the greatest de- 
sire to leave it" 

"Why, after all," said Wykham, **it doesn't much 
matter to you and me, because we have nothing to 
do, and so it is of no importance whether we like it 
or not ; but a man who has hard work to do, surely 
does it better for liking the country he has to do 
it m. 

"That sounds true, Wykham, but really I be- 
lieve you will find that practically it is not the case. 
Besides, my analogy is against you still, and I think 
it is a fair one. Few men worked more vigorously 
in their day than Paul ; yet who so much longed 
to depart and be with Christ, which was far better? 
So in a very much lower but strictly analogous 
sense, men out here may even be desirous to de- 
part and be with those they love best on earth, and 
yet work none the less vigorously, but the more so, 
so long as it is profitable for them to remain : their 
vigor is not lessened by this home longing, at least 
it certainly need not be ; and on the other hand, in 
this country, where the afiections are too apt to 
grow cold, nothing is so softening, so calculated to 
keep them alive. Besides, why waste time in find- 
ing reasons lo justify our natural affections ? their 
existence is their justification: look too at indi- 
vidual cases,— at Middleton.'' 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 133 

^* Middleton I you don't mean to say he is 
troubled with home longings? I should have 
thought he cared for nothing but cutcherry." 

'^Then you never formed a more erroneous 
opinion of a man in your life. Since his raster has 
come out, he has said less, and I dare say felt less 
on the subject, but I know he still looks forward to 
going home as the great event of his Ufe." 

" Going home for good ? " 

'< No : Middleton would not do that as long as 
his health lasts. There again he would feel bound 
to give his service to the country so long as he could 
usefully and profitably do so." 

^^ I don't see how he is bound to stay after serv- 
ing his time." 

^* Not bound, of course, legally ; but Middleton 
is too good a man to view his duty by the light of 
human compulsions. Having deliberately adopted 
this country as a working field for his Ufetime, he 
feels (he has told me all this) that he is bound to 
stay at his post, working as long as he can. He 
does not recognise the theory of a man earning 
idleness. Of course there is a time when faculties 
begin to fiiil ; and when the close of life draws upon 
a man he may perhaps lawfully rest awhile before 
the end ; but to abandon his work in the prime of 
Ufe and health and fiiculty, requires, he thinks, a 
better reason to justify it before God, than having 
a certain number of pounds a year." 



134 OAKFIELD, OR 

^^ It would rather astonish the senior officers of 
the service to tell them that their having enough 
to live upon was no reason for going. Fancy 
our old Major being told that he had no right to 
take 30,000 rupees from us for his step, and go 
homer 

** I fancy, Wykham, the senior officers might 
be as you say,, very considerably astonished in 
many ways, could they be persuaded for a moment 
to realise the fact that an income did not fix the 
limits of man's duties and movements; but your 
reductio ad absurdum, for such I suppose you meant 
that speech to be, fails you ; of course, to apply true 
principles to a conclusion whose premises have 
been grounded on false ones, gives an absurd 
result." 

" Steady, old fellow, steady I don't come the 
Oxford man quite so severely !" 

Oakfield laughed. 

'* Well, but look here : you apply what I said, 
or rather what Middleton said, about retiring, and 
so on, to the case of a man who has been serving 
all his time in the mere spirit of worldliness, and 
of course the combination of a worldly twenty-five 
years, with a spiritual idea tacked on at the end, is 
merely ludicrous. It is a common fallacy, and one 
which is apt, I think, to puzzle us all, till we detect 
it I have heard men try to make what they call re- 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 135 

ligion, ridiculous, by attributing some so-called reli- 
gious act or speech to a notoriously worldly careless 
man; of course the result is absurd, as real inconsist- 
ency always is ; and therefore people are too apt 
carelessly to attach the absurdity to the isolated re- 
ligious act, whereas it consists only in its apparent 
connexion with yeaifs of iniquity. The incon- 
gruity is as ludicrous as the motley of a fool ; red 
need not be an absurd color for a dress, nor blue ; 
but blue and red in contiguity are so. That is the 
reason why men find it so difficult to get from 
wrong to right They are conscious that the 
change involves an inconsistency, an absurdity; 
and wrongly attribute this to the right which they 
wish to do.'' 

'^ Give an instance, and I shall understand you 
better." 

" Why, I will take one of the strongest possible 
instances ; a man gets into a passion, insults — ^say 
strikes — another, and is challenged by the man he 
has aggrieved. In a cooler temper he regrets his 
passion, and thinks it wrong to fight But to 
allege this conviction now exposes him to the 
reasonable charge of hypocrisy and cowardice. 
The inconsistency here is not only absurd but 
odious. In nine cases out of ten he will shrink 
firom the absurdity and the odium, and fight; 
thereby avoiding the inconsistency by a wicked 



13G OAKFIELD^ OR 

integrity; but if he had been wise, he would have 
seen that the inconsistency was the painful conse- 
quence of his first sin ; that there was nothing 
odious or hypocritical in his refusal to fight ; that 
that was still right, still his duty; duty is not 
foolish, cannot be so ; only looks so when set in 
striking juxtaposition with neglect or breach of 
duty. This is only in the collocation. No man 
can turn from wrong to right* without paying the 
tax of inconsistency, and risking the charge .of hy- 
pocrisy ; the more flagrant the former wrong, the 
heavier the tax, the greater the charge; to the 
habitually conscientious man every lapse firom duty 
involves this struggle and this charge, self-made if 
by no other." 

*^ That is a hard case, you suppose ? " said Wyk- 
ham, musingly. 

" Very, but possible." 

*^ Do you think that, under these circumstances, 
a man would really be wrong in fighting? " 

'^ As wrong as Herod was in killing John the 
Baptist, to save his consistency." 

'^But consider the fearful weight with which 
the charge of hypocrisy would fall in such a case." 

*' Fearful, certainly ; a martyrdom if you like, 
but one which a man should prefer to sin, even as 
he should the actual martyrdom unto death." 

" You have the best of it in theory, certainly." 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 137 

'^ And the only thing which makes you lay the 
stress on theory ^ Wykham, is the difficulty of prac- 
tice ; but a thing is not the less right or wrong for 
being difficult Well, but that was an instance 
of what I meant, when 1 spoke of the fiedlacy of 
applying a true conclusion to false premises. Now, 
in Middleton's case, the premises have been emi- 
nently true. He has lived all his life in the fear 
of God, doing his duty, not to man, but to God : 
you can fancy no absurdity in the end of such 
a man's service being calculated on other than 
worldly principles. He has felt a consciousness 
of right and wrong, duty and sin, every day 
through twenty years of service ; it is not wonder- 
ful that he should retain this consciousness in one 
particular act, is it ? So I think he looks forward 
as much as you or I do to visiting home, as an 
oasis in what can never be a happy life." 

" Never— do you think ? Well, I don't think 
so: I think we get on very well." 

" Very well; but not happily. I do not think 
exile can ever be happy. And there are other 
drawbacks not acutely painful, but of a chronic 
nature, that makes our life out here a wholesomely 
sad one, in my opinion." 

^* You mean the climate ? " 

'^ That for one thing : the ugliness of the country 
is another." 



'>o - »A^7'iiii.iV. . 



u 



^mu. ji lORC^mu" 



;sr >. 



;>it i»^ Ir, ic€ ^-re 3C 2i3iiA: acii 1 :nnjK 



ii^%»^ Autfi^wni»i 'A 'ZJt zii^zA s T"^'^ 






.'V^y^AiM: a* r^uisjc aft tr^ 

^ .VxttetL^ i^ tLat : weZtLcndxxe are the 



^We^Idodete^thenadres; tfaer «e a men, 
I^>i^ hmu\x^ lordid lace; and after ten years 
^^fi^tier^ce^ I iajr that to call a natire 'a man anda 
f/f//ij^^kaHe. Heknotaman; and I repodiate 
t>i« fratmriitj r/f a fconndrel idio lies at ereiy other 

'^Mj experience is much leas than yours, and I 
({nifft yon tfadr lying is most awfhl; bat then this 
M jijst one of the evils which I say weigh upon us 
in this eountiy* It is grievous to live among meo, 
HfMl feel the idea of fraternity thwarted by facts; 
and yet the idea must not be abandoned as false or 
}iopeleM» We must not resign ourselves, without a 
fiirugglei to calling them brutes." 

'^ I think we may call them what they are." 
" Yoi| but be sure of what they are first ; you 
know yourself that there are many good points in 
the natives." 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 139 

But what do you say in defence of their lying ? 
you shirk that?" 

'^ It is hard to know what to say ; nothing to 
defend it, certainly ; but then, I believe they lie a 
great deal less than we suppose." 

'^ We must suppose they Ue infinitely then, for 
no supposition within finite bounds can exceed the 
trutL" 

^^ Do you like your servants ? " Oakfield asked 
by way of answer. 

" Well, I certainly like them better than any 
other natives, but then I flatter myself they are a 
good set ; they have been with me too for a long 
time." 

'^And yet you will find that I think mine a 
good set; and almost every man thinks his a good 
set, and likes his own servants much better than 
any other natives." 

"Well, what then?" 

" Why this, at least, that they improve upon ac- 
quaintance, and that we abuse those least whom we 
are best qualified to pronounce upon." 

Wykham laughed. " You have me in a trap ; 
but as Galileo remarked,. ' they lie still ! ' " 

*^ Rather unfair to represent poor Galileo as 
the pertinacious holder of a prejudice; he intro- 
duced the new system recollect: 'they still are 
better than you think, still men, still souls : ' this is 



140 OAKFIELD, OR 

^hat he would shout, this new doctrine, yet as old 
as the fact of the earth going round the sun in 
itsel£ The &ct is not new, but only our know- 
ledge of it." 

^^ You merely assert this ; Galileo could prove 
his new fact" 

<^It would have existed even if he had not 
proved it. I consider the fact we agreed to just 
now is part proof. We esteem them the better, the 
more we know them. Why ? because we learn to 
look at things from their view, instead of arro- 
gantly assuming our own as the true one, and con- 
demning them for not coming up to it. So if we 
knew them well (which, remember, neither you nor 
I do,) we should find them men even as we are, look- 
ing at truth from a different point of view, and a 
much worse one, which is their misfortune ; but still 
their view is as honest as ours, and in some things as 
sufficient" 

** I trust there is no point of view from which 
you can so discern truth as to consider it venial 
to lie." 

'' I am sure you exaggerate the lying of the 

natives, Wykham. You and I could not get on 

with our servants in every-day life, if truth was not 

%r more habitual to them than falsehood. For all 

^ou say of their lying, you believe much the greater 

)art of what they say ; but allowing that lying is 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 141 

a national vice, and a detestable one, they might 
retaliate. It is quite conceivable that a good 
Brahmin, if yon can find such an one, shall be 
as disgusted at our national drunkenness (for judg- 
ing from our soldiers they will call it a national 
vice) as we are at their national falsehood. But 
after aU, I grant freely that they are a deplorably 
inferior race, but 1 do not see why they should be 
considered hopelessly so. I know they have souls ; 
and I believe their souls to be as glorious and ma- 
jestic as yours or mine, though perhaps more ter- 
ribly hampered. But I grant fireely, Wykham, 
that it is much easier to say all this than to believe 
and act upon it ; indeed this latter is so hard as to 
constitute, as I said, one of the drawbacks to hap- 
piness in India. To overlook the merely artificial 
distinctions of rank and money, is difficult, as we 
see by every day's experience in Europe; how 
much more the real distinctions of color and lan- 
guage." 

** And do you think that we are bound to over- 
look these distinctions, which you yourself allow to 
be real?'* 

<<I do; depend upon it, he approaches the 
nearest to wisdom who advances frirthest in self- 
restrained liberty; and every barrier that is re- 
moved, every distinction that is merged in a grow- 
ing sense of unity, is an approach to a higher 



142 OARFIELDy OR 

liberty. There is only one real permanent dis- 
tinction, that is, between good and evil; within 
this there are a million others, some absolutely 
wrong, some venial, some even desirable as expe* 
dients, but all defective, all temporary ; we should 
be ever trying to get rid of them all one by one. 
We shall have never finished this work on earth, 
but the approach to it is the course of truth." 

Such conversations became frequent between 
Oakfield and Wykham. Those who had long 
known the latter were struck by the change in 
him ; and yet, although he rather withdrew fi*om 
society^ and became fonder and fonder of Oak- 
field every day, preferred his company to all other, 
yet all would have confirmed the truth of Oak- 
field's saying, that his lightsomeness was not gone, 
not diminished really, though you could not but 
be conscious that it traversed a more serious back- 
ground than formerly. They were both much 
occupied in reading. They read Shakspeare to- 
gether; Oakfield had commenced his long purposed 
course of French and German study. One morn- 
ing in August, he was thus engaged in his own 
room; Wykham was out; he always went out 
before breakfast, and was generally the bearer of 
letters firom the post on his return. While Oak- 
field was engaged in trying to set straight a more 
than ordinarily complicated sentence of his com- 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 143 

plicated but now much loved Deutsche he heard 
the sound of his friend's horse as he galloped up 
at a pace that indicated eagerness^ and in an in- 
stant Wjkham himself rushed into the room with 
two or three letters in his hand^ but holding also 
one already opened^ and exclaimed — 

" News ! Oakfield, news ! no, I shan't give you 
your letter, or youll see in a moment Guess I" 

" Anybody I know ? " 

"Yes." 

«^ Ah, I know." 

" What, what ? I don't believe you do ? " 

" Ferozepore ? " asked Oakfield. 

A nod. 

** Stanton ? " 

Another nod. 

** Going to be married ? " 

** By Jove, yes ! how came you to guess that " 

" I have been half expecting it for some months 
past Miss Middleton, of course ? " 

« Of course." 

"Well, it is one of the most entirely happy 
things I have heard for a long time." 

" Yes ; but just fancy that surly old ruffian pro- 
posing I Well, he'll be in decent order henceforth, 
that's one comfort ; I should think Miss Middle- 
ton would soon break him in. She's not a girl to 
stand his * humph ' long, I'm pretty certain." 



144 OAKFIELD, OR 

• 

^^Come^ come^ Fred," said Oakfield, ''keep a 
civil tongue in your head and give me my letters." 

It's rather a bore," said Wykham, without no- 
ticing this last request, ''your having guessed iU 
I meant to have some fun out of you; what a 
sharp look out you keep under that demure specu*- 
lative look of yours, Master Oakfield. How long 
is it since you noticed anything?" 

" Fred, I see you want a good bit of gossip ; 
and I can just tell you that you won't get it ; you 
have called me demure too ; a word I hate ; I shall 
resent it by telling you nothing ; come, — ^letters." 

What do you want ? " said Wykham, as Oakfield 
stretched out his hand, — " oh, I foi^ot your letters. 
Well, here's one from Stanton, ditto to mine I 
fancy, and here's one I can't make out, for it has 
the Simla post-mark and is ' Private Service.' " 

" Do give me my letters you regular old Mrs. 
Mulsetter. Look here, Wykham," he added laugh- 
ing, afler reading Stanton's letter, "he agrees with 
toe you see." 

Stanton's epistle was characteristic. 

"Dbae Oakfield, 

" I am engaged to be married. Fred will 
be astonished; you, I fancy, less so. You are deeper 
than you would care to be thought, I suspect. I detected 
a look of yours once or twice, at Ferozepore, which would 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 145 

have done credit to any old lady gossip of the station. 
Fan sends her kind regards to you. Of course you un- 
derstand it is Miss Middleton I am going to marry. 

" Most affectionately yours, 

"H. Stanton." 

" P. S. Dont let that griff Wykham go and chatter 
about this all over Simla.'' 



" Griff indeed ! " said Wykham^ in high dudgeon. 

"Oh, murder," said Oakfield, "I forgot the 
postscript ; bear up, Fred : you must own it was a 
needful caution." 

" A caution wanted most for the old lady gossip 
sort of observers," retaliated Wykham ; then added, 
with a comical seriousness, " I must never trust a 
serious man again : I find them impostors." 

Oakfield did not hear this last speech ; he was 
engaged in reading his second letter. It seemed 
short, but engrossing all his attention notwith- 
standing. 

" Just read this," he said, handing the note to 
Wykham. 

It was an important document; a demi-o£Scial 
note firom the Governor General's Private Secre- 
tary, stating that the fact of his having saved one 
of the colors of his regiment firom falling into the 
hands of the enemy at Chillianwalla, had been 

VOL. n. L 



146 OAKFIBLD^ OR 

brought to the favc^-able notice of the goTernment, 
and informitig bia>, finally, that he had been ap- 
pointed an Assistant Commissioner in the newly 
annexed territoiy of the Punjab. 

^^Hurtah!" exclaimed Wykham, as he heard 
this; *^I congratulate you most heartily, my boy; 
I knew they must do something for you ; do you 
like the notion of civil employ?" 

^^ Yes," said Oakfield, who still sat back in his 
chair in a musimig fit ; yes, I think I da" 

** Think you do I that's a cool way for an En- 
sign to talk when he gets a civil appointment flnog 
at his head." 

Oakfield smiled. ^^ Very good of die flingers, 
oertainly, Fred ; but it's a queer tUi^ isn^ it ? " 

'< What'a qoeer ? What a fellow you ate. Oak- 
field ; I know if I bad an appointment offered iike» 
I «hottldti\ stop to consider what there was queer 
ink." 

*^ No, bot don^ yon thmk it w an odd ching, to 
reward a military service, to call mine su<c:h, with a 
civU appointment? I wonder if diey ever give a 
good magistrate a commission in the army I" 

*^ Oidcfidd, you are an nngratefiil dog, and I 
-Aeil wfite a civQ refiisal for you." 

''It is too bad apon my word, but the oddity of 
it would occur to me fotr the moment Refiisal ? 
No, Feed, I shall instantly write a most grateful 
acceptance." 



FELLOWIfiXP f» T«[B EAST. 147 

He did accQEdmgly, and showed k to Wykham. 

'' Well, jou are gracious enough on paper, cer- 
taaiily ; let me add 4 postscript to saj you weare 
laugbiog at aod ikbusiog them for o^feriag it just 
be^Nre you wrote. Do you know Oakfield, I begin 
to think you eve an extremely «rtful dodger." 

'^ Come, Fred^ g^tly, who dodged up io the 
hiUs for four seasons rmmioig? Four years in the 
hills and the fifth in Engiand ! Oh, Fred, Fred I 
blu^ if you have any bowels of compassion £fx 
poor John Company, whom you have so eeandal* 
0UfiIy defrauded of servioe." 

^ Defrauded I I seom the imputation. Have i 
not Uved in India for them, worn their uniform, 
eommaudod their bkek troopers, devoted a fraction 
of one of my valuable 'legs to them ? flod if I had 
ddirauded them, I !&ncy John Ima bowels enou^ 
of his own without indenting on me* Bat, I say, 
Oakfield, let us have a look at you; well, now do 
you know yoa Aotw rather t^e air of a Cvfi 
Officer." 

Oakfield laughed, butiie had much to thiotk of; 

Stanton's engif ement, his own so suddesjy altered 

prospects had to be consideiied quietly, and as 

Wykbam was evidently not -in a quiet vein, he 

withdrew to his own room, whece in the course of 

the morning he wrote two long letters ; one to his 

mother and another to Stanton. 

L 2 



148 OAKFIELD, OR 

The next month and a half were spent in great 
peace and enjoyment at Simla, but October was to 
all the three friends a most eventful month. Oak- 
field received official intimation of his appoint- 
ment to Lahore ; he had entertained some hopes of 
being sent to Ferozepore, but of course could not 
expect it On the 15th of October, however, 
both he and Wykham were present at Mr. Mid- 
dleton's house at Ferozepore, at Stanton's weddings 
and the same evening Wykham started for Cal- 
cutta, en route to England. 

" Don't forget to go to Leathebum within six 
weeks of your arrival," were nearly the last words 
Oakfield said to him. 

" I think not," said Wykham, ** nor to write you 
a full account of my arrival there: — good bye my 
dear Oakfield," he said in an altered tone ; ^* thank 
you, and God bless you." 

While Oakfield was still meditating on that 
word ''thank you," the palki was lifted up, and the 
homeward-bound journey was begun. 

''So it is," soliloquized Oakfield, "Stanton 
married, and half separated from me: Wykham 
gone to England, and I must go to my strange un- 
tried work alone. But what a fool and worse I am 
to talk like this : am I a child that I must have my 
fiiends to bold me up through life ? Besides, thank 
Heaven, there is Middletoo still left" 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 149 

** Thank you for that kind word, dear Edward," 
said Mr. Middleton, who came up behind him, and 
was an unintentional listener to this sentence; 
'^come, I know your thoughts, it happens to us all 
in India. My hearth seems rather desolate to-day, 
but I can thank God for it notwithstanding. 

They shook hands cordially and entered the 
house. 



OAKFIELII, OR 



CHAPTEE V. 

" Here on our native scnl we breathe once more ; 
The eock that crows, the Bmoke that curia, that sound 
Of bells, those boys who in yon meadow-gTonnd 
In white-sleered shirts are pkying, and the roar 
Of the wares breaking on the chalky shore, — 
AU— all are English." 

Wordsworth. 

We tniBt the reader will not be unwilling to re- 
turn to Leatheburn. It is the beginning of Febru- 
ary, in 1850. Four years have passed since we 
.last accompanied the Oakfields to LodorS) and 
marked changes have come over some of the party ; 
no rude revolutionary changes however, none 
but what bare been wrought by the gentle pro- 
cess of growth and gradual development. Mrs. 
Oakfield is the one on whom the lapse of time 
seems to have impressed its mark the least; her 
dark hiur atiil shines as brightly as thea : her soft 
face is still as loveablc as ever: her eyes beam 
as 'tenderly when she smiles upon ber children. 
Neither is Margaret much changed: she is in tbe 
very bloom of youthful womanhood, just two and 



FELLOWSHIP IN TH6 EAST. 151 

twenty : the whole p«rty seem to lean towards and 
depend upon her, much as they used to do : nor is 
there any diminution perceptible in her willing joy 
at serving and pleasing others. Rose and Mary 
are now nine and ten years old; both as pretty as 
they promised to be : Rose^ as of old, takes the 
lead ; her unflagging spirits, more than her years 
of seniority, giving her thecommnd over the more 
sedate little Mary. But it is a kind rule. Majt^ 
garet is their teacher* their playmate: beginning 
even thus early to be their friend and companion. 
Ilerby is the most changed: he is now sixteen, 
in tatU, a prefect at Winchester* his holidays just 
drawing to a close ; but he stands this time* so 
trying to body and mind, well. Of course he is 
not free from alP its physical disagreeables : the 
queer changes in his voice from squeak to growl, 
make Rose and Mary and even Maxgaret laugh at 
times: they lihfi the squeak* for it seems the last relic 
(no pleasing one* it must be owned, in fact* however 
delightful to the imagination) of childhood; of 
course Herbert himself prefers the more manly growL 
There is too about him some of the awkwardness 
which invariably attends the transition from boy- 
hood to incipient manhood: an assumed dignity* 
with the least possible tinge of swagger in it* is 
sometimes perceptible to those who watch him 
closely ; but he is full of boyish fun still ; very 



152 OAKFIELD, OR 

kind to his sisters ; and as fond of his mother as 
when he was a little child. He walks about by 
himself a good deal now, spends afternoons on the 
side of Helvelljn, with his fishing-rod ; he is for- 
tunate to have hills and streams and rocks to bestow 
his idleness upon. He is as romantic as Edward 
was before him ; writes verses, which he shews to 
Margaret : he is sixteen, so probably in love. He 
certainly does find the time hang a little heavy 
now and then, especially just at the end of the 
holidays, when, like the juvenile so admirably de- 
picted in Punchy — ^'he has read all the books 
in the house." One great resource for him is to 
walk down, about eleven o'clock, to the Inn, and 
see the mail change. He is a great fiiend of both 
the coachmen and guards, and knows exactly their 
respective days for working up and down. It is on 
the 3rd of February, 1850, that we introduce Herby 
again, sauntering down by the lake side towards the 
King's Head. 

He found the four horses waiting in a shed, in 
readiness for the change, but the mail had not yet 
appeared in sight, although the first point fi-om 
which it became visible was nearly a mile oflT. 
Presently, however, Herby descried the dark object 
just coming in sight over the brow of the hill, and 
communicated the fact to his friend the ostler, 
yrho thereupon brought out his team into the road. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 153 

Both the ostler and Herby watched the mail with 
great interest as it from time to time disappeared 
and again emerged from among the trees and wind- 
ings of the road. 

" A poor load to-day," said the former, ** I only 
see one upon the roof." 

Suddenly the loud blast of the horn was heard : 
the mail dashed round the last obscuring corner, 
came at a tast trot down the gentle declivity, and 
pulled up in most scientific style at the door of 
the King's Head. Herby was too much occupied 
in gazing at the mail itself, his darling object, 
watching the change of horses, and talking to his 
friend, the coachman, to pay much attention to 
the solitary passenger on the box. The passen- 
ger, however, got down: this was nothing; he 
probably got down for a change ; but Herby was 
surprised when he heard him ask the guard to 
get his portmanteau out of the boot: it was almost 
the first time that he had ever seen any passenger, 
except himself or one of his own &mily, get down 
at the King's Head. He began to observe the new 
arrival more attentively, as he dived into the boot 
to instruct the guard which portmanteau belonged 
to him, and which to the old gentleman inside. 

The stranger was a young man, apparently less 
than thirty, with dark, rather curly, hair, very bright 
brown eyesf, and a pleasant, rather laughing ooun- 



154 OAKFIELD, OR 

tenance. He was dressed in a black paletot ; but 
as he got down Herby observed, acrosa his arm, in- 
stead of the dark brown great coat, which is as usual 
a concomitant of the English gentleman on hia tra- 
veb as a Mackintosh was once, and as a portman- 
teau and carpet-bag are now, a huge blue cloak, 
lined with red, with brass buttons. This appendage, 
together with his black curly moustache, might 
have suggested to Herbert that he was a soldier, 
even had he not heard the coachman, when ac- 
knowledging an apparently liberal donation, say— ^ 
" Thank you. Captain : good morning. Sir." 

While Herby was still wondering what on earth 
this person — Captain, or whatever he was-^^ould 
be wanting at Leathebum, looking out in vain for 
some gun*case or fishing-rod, whose connection 
with the grouse of Helvellyn, or the trout of the 
Red Tarn, might solve the mystery, he heard him 
ask the coachman, ^' Can you tell me whereabouts 
Mrs. Oakfield Uvea?" 

^* Here's a young gentleman as 1 dare say can 
tell you," replied the coachman, pointing to Herby, 
who said (a little awkwardly, but with polite inten- 
tion) — 

^^ I shall be happy to show you the way up to 
Leathebum." 

The stranger started as he turned and looked at 
liis offered guide, but accepted his offer readily, and 



FELLOWSHIP IN THB EAST. 155 

after one last look from Herby at the mail, they 
started off on the little path through the wood* 

"I am lucky in having so good a guide/' said 
the unknown, after they had gone about a mile 
through the twistings of a beautiful but very intri- 
cate wood, '^ I should never have found the path by 
myself.'' 

" Why no," said Herby, rather proudly, ** this is 
the short cut| which I fancy you could not have 
found : the regular path is easy enough, lower down 
by the lake there." 

" You seem to know it well." 

" I ought to, I have lived here all my life." 

'^ I beg your pardon if I am wrong," said the 
other ; '^ but surely, I think you must be Herbert." 

Herby started. 

'^ How on earth did you know that," he said ; 
" I never saw you,— did I? " 
** Probably not : I certainly never saw you." 

Herby looked quite puzzled; but there was 
something so good natured in his companion's 
laughing eyes, as he enjoyed his amazement, that 
he felt encouraged to join in the joke, though 
generally rather reserved and shy of strangers. 

** Do you always guess people's names before 
you see them?" 

" I didn't guess yours ; I knew it" 

" And yet you never saw me, nor any of us," 



156 OAKFIELD^ OB 

pointing, as he spoke, to the house, which jast be- 
came visible on the opposite side of a deep bay of 
the lake, at one horn of which lliey now emerged 
from their wooded patL 

'^ No, none of you up there, certainly, though I 
hope soon to have the pleasure of doing so ; but I 
was never in thb part of the world before, and a 
most lovely part it is." 

** Is it not?" said Herby, foigetting his wonder 
in h'ls readily stirred enthusiasm about his beloved 
Cumberland ; ^' well, but about this ; I give it up." 

Hb companion laughed heartily. '^ I will tell 
you more," he said; "you are at Winchester." 

" Yes ;" said Herby, now quite resigned ; " go 
on." 

"You have three sisters?" 

"Yes." 

"One older and two younger?" 

" This is getting awful," said Herby, in a tone 
of affected terror. 

" You have an elder brother ?" 

"Yes." 

" Called Edward ?" 

" Yes." 

" In the Indian Army ?" 

" Yes." 

"Very like you in face, and about the best 
fellow that ever lived." 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 157 

** Ah I" exclaimed Herby, " you know Ned ?" 

"I am proud to say I rather do know Ned; 
and I hope Ned has told you that he knows Fred 
Wykham?" 

" Oh P said Herby, " how stupid of me not to 
guess; why he told us we might expect to see you 
some time in February ; how very odd my meeting 
you in this way." Then assuming, to a slight ex- 
tent, the acting head of the family, he added — 
<* Allow me to welcome you to Leathebum, Captain 
Wykham." 

^' Thank you," said the other, shaking heartily 
his extended hand, *^ but don't introduce me to your 
mother as ' Captain' Wykham, please." 

" Why not? what are you?" 

** Only * Mr.' I fear ; unless the junior Captain 
and five senior Lieutenants have disappeared since 
the date of my last accounts from the regiment." 

'^ Well, but I heard the coachman call you 
' Captain.' " 

" Ah I that you see was a brevet he kindly gave 
me ; he found out as we came along that I was in the 
army, and seemed to take such pleasure in be- 
Captaining me, that it would have been cruel to 
undeceive him; — Oh how very beautiful I" he sud- 
denly exclaimed, as a bend brought immediately 
to view the whole length of the fairy-like lake, 
with its magnificent boundaries — Helvellyn, Raven 



158 OAKFIELDy OB 

Crag — ^in the remoter distanoey Blencathm and 
Skiddaw — and in the immediate foregromid the 
Oakfielda' house, not more than a hmidred yards 
from them. 

''Ill just run on/' said Herby, ''and tell my 
mother you're coming; unless," he added, archly, 
*'yoa wish to make experiments upon them as you 
did on me ? " 

''No, no; quite right; better run on; Til wait 
here till I see you coming back to meet me." 

So Herby ran off to the house, burst into the 
drawing room, and with a somewhat startling ab- 
ruptness announced : — " Mother, a Tisitor." This 
message seemed hardly worthy of the excitement 
with which it was announced; — "A friend of Ed- 
ward's frx>m India." This time a sensation was 
]^oduced ; and when Herby doled out the climax 
of his intelligence — ^^fais friend, Fred Wykhun, 
whom he wrote about, you know; he's waiting 
while I tell you," the quiet party was broken up. 
Mrs. Oakfidd, told Herby to go and call him 
directly, and sank back on her seat on due sofa* 
It seemed like being brought nearer to her son 
than she had been for four long years. Margaret 
shared this feeling; and Rose and Mary, who 
scented a holiday from a&r, were busily and con 
amare engaged in puUing away the lesson books. 

Bcesendy the noise of steps was heard in the 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 159 

faaU^ and Herby^ tlirowing open Uie door, an- 
nouDoed with more fixrmality ihan ¥ras strictly 
necessary*-^^ lAr. Wykham ! " and in walked Ered, 
limpingalittle9(for he had not entirely recovered from 
the effects of his Mooltan wound,) his handsome 
good-humoured countenance, crossed by an un- 
wonted shade of embarrassment; for these meetings 
with people whom you have heanl miueh a( and 
who have heard much of you, — ^yet, who are, not- 
withstanding, perfect strangers,— -however pleasant 
in anticipation, however delightful when previous 
report has been confirmed by a few days or even 
hoctfs intercourse, are, in their actual commence- 
ment, undoubtedly embanassiiig. 

Wykham was the first to recover himself; and 
his frank yet perfectly polite «:id respectful manner 
soon set all the party at tlieir -ease. He told them, 
in a whimsical way, of the trick he had played 
upon Herby; taUced of his voyage, and cCfferent 
things, but neither side felt quite prepared yet to 
touch upon the subject which was uppermost in 
the thoughts of each. 

** Have you been long in England, Mr. 
Wykham ? " asked Margaret. 

Nearly seven weeks, I am ashamed to say." 

Why ashamed?" 

Because I promised your brother to present 
myself here as his ambassador, in six weeks.at 
least from the day of my landing." 



u 



160 OAKFIELD^ OR 

" We have no reason to quarrel with you, I am 
sure, but rather to be much obliged to you for 
being so punctual when you must have had a 
great deal to detain you at your own home. Were 
you ever at the lakes before you went to India ?^' 

" No, never.'* 

** Have you been in any mountain country ? ** 

" None but the Himalayas." 

*' Ah, I forgot ; you will think nothing of our 
little mole-hills after those giants." 

'^I beg your pardon. Miss Oakfield; from 
what I have already seen, I assure you I give the 
preference to these lovely mole-hills of yours, very 
decidedly. Ned always told me, — by the bye, 
does it sound odd to you to hear a perfect stranger 
talking of your brother as Ned ? " 

^* Rather, perhaps," said Mrs. Oakfield, smiling, 
'* but very pleasant, certainly." 

"Well, you know, I have been calling him 
nothing else for the last three years." 

" Where did you last see him, Mr. Wykham ? " 
asked Margaret 

" At Middleton's house, — did you ever hear of 
Mr. iSJiddleton, by the bye ? " 

" Of Ferozepore ? oh, yes I — ^all the names of 
Edward's friends are household words with us;" 
then recollecting that Wykham was one of those 
friends, she stopped rather abruptly, and blushed ; 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 161 

Wykham undenitood, and was too polite to add to 
her embarrassment by a spooney compliment. 

'* Well, it was at Middleton's house, at Feroze- 
pore, on the 15th of October, just as I got into my 
palki to start for Calcutta, the very day that Stan- 
ton, — another friend of ours. Miss Oakfield,— was 
married." 

<*And how was he looking?" was Mrs. Oak- 
field's natural and thoroughly maternal question. 

" Why, pretty well; I cannot honestly give you 
as good an account as I should wish ; but then he 
was depressed, I think, at losing Stanton ; and, if 
I may say so, my unworthy self; but certainly very 
much better, indeed, than he had looked some 
months previously, before he went to Simla. But 
you must have heard from him long afler I saw 
him last?" 

" We got letters only yesterday," said Mrs. Oak- 
field, ^Mated the 20th of December, but he said no- 
thing about his health ; he never does." 

"Where was he? at Lahore, I suppose?— how 
did he like his work ? " 

" At Lahore ; and he seemed to be beginning 
to like his work a little better than he did at first ; 
he says it is very hard." 

"So it must be, I fancy; and he will find it 
harder in the hot weather." 

*' You are consoling ;" said Margaret, laughing. 

VOL. n. M 



162 OAKFIELD, OR 

» 

<^ Ah, 1 forgot; I must not be a Job's comforter; 
but no wish to please can make cutgherry in the hot 
weather pleasant, I fancy." 

" Cutcherry !— what's that ? " 

**Has he not explained that word yet? — cut- 
cherry means properly — the court; or in plain 
words, the great ugly white-washed room, wherein 
he sits all day and does his work." 

*^ And what is his work ?" said Mrs. Oakfield ; 
" can you try to give us some idea of it? " 

" Why, I have not often been in a cutcherry, 
but 1 think I know its principal characteristics. 
At this moment I suppose, — ^let me see, what time 
is it?" 

« About one." 

*^ Well, that you know is seven with him ; ah I 
I don't suppose he is at work yet. This is quite a 
cool month, and the offices do not open, I believe, 
till ten or eleven, except in the hot weather, when 
they begin very early in the morning. But at 
about eleven o'clock to-day, just as it is beginning 
to get dark here, I suppose if you could transport 
yourself to Lahore, you would see him occupying 
the only chair in a large bare white room, the doors 
all thrown wide open, the whole space thronged 
with natives, standing, sitting, squatting, chattering. 
In the midst of all this hubbub, you would see 
poor Ned, seated at a table covered with papers. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 163 

written in strange characters ; on the ground, by 
his side, a man jabbering Hindustanee, at about 
the same pace that a Frenchman talks. He is 
reading part of a case; either a petition^ or an 
evidence, or an order connected with it ; for the 
whole proceedings in all cases in those courts are 
committed to writing, and then read aloud to the 
magistrate." 

^^And," said Herbj, ''does Edward put people 
in prison, and so on?" 

'^ Yes, I believe he has the power of imprison- 
ment" 

'' But he is very young for that, is he not ? " said 
Herbert, with a natural wonder, all his experience 
of magistrates being derived from the venerable 
gentlemen who assembled weekly at the court 
house at Winchester. 

" Well, I suppose he is ; but you know men get 
to their work early in India." 

" Were you a magistrate ?" asked Herby. 

"II no; I never was anything except a Lieu- 
tenant in my regiment; it is only lucky fellows, 
like your brother Ned, who get appointments. Not 
that it was luck in his case ; you heard of his saving 
the color at Chillian walla?" 

« Yes," said Herby ; " but tell us all about it" 

"Well, I wasn't there myself, you know, any 
more than you were, but I'll tell you what I heard 

M 2 



1C4 OAKFIELD, OB 

of it as well as I can;" and he told die stoiy whh 
considerable animation, to Heibert's unutterable 
delight ; who fc^wed it up with innumerable ques- 
dons about batdes, si^es, maidie8» &c., &c. ; all of 
which Wjkham very good-humouredly answered ; 
indeed, he was pleased and amused by the ardent 
temper and eager inquiries of the boy. 

At last Mrs. Oakfield, who had been listenii:^ 
with an equal but rather more shuddering interest, 
interposed. ** You see how you must expect to be 
worried by us all, Mr. Wykham ?" 

Of course Fred protested that nothing could be 
so delightful as such wc^iying. 

<' Well, but at any rate you must not be worried 
out of your dinner. Uerby, show Mr. Wykham 
to his room, — the one next your own." 

Wykham returned, having made himself pre- 
sentable, and found them all present except Mrs. 
Oakfield. Meanwhile, Rose and Mary, who had 
been all the while prowling round the new comer, 
taking observations, now made their advances more 
boldly, and at last came to close quarters ; so that 
Mrs. Oakfield, on entering the room, found Rose 
thoroughly established on a flirtation footing. 

Dinner was now announced ; and after dinner 
they all went out for a walk round the lake. Of 
course the conversation turned, without ending, 
upon Edward ; Wykham relating numberless little 



FELLOWSHIP IN THB EAST. 165 

anecdotes that no one would ever mention in a 
letter^ which seemed to give such reality to that 
distant strange life; while be on his part had a 
thousand spots pointed out to him as associated 
with Edward ; was delighted and affected to find 
how his friend lived amongst his family; stored 
up a thousand particulars for that tremendous jour- 
nal-letter which he despatched by the next South- 
ampton mail^ to reach poor Edward in the midst of 
his cutcherry toils^ to drive him nearly mad with 
pain and pleasure. 

By the end of that first day Fred Wykham was 
established with all, firom Mrs. Oakfield to Mary, 
as a firiend of the Jbmily; and even the old 
gardener, who was generally rather shy of new 
comers, who had been a soldier himself in early 
days, and had contrived in the course of the day to 
get a talk with Wykham about Mooltan, expressed 
his opinion to Herby next day, that **the Captain 
from India was a fine young man." 

When Wykham had been at Leathebum about 
a week, the time came for Herbert to return to 
Winchester : he evinced a most unwonted reluct- 
ance to leave home, and spoke of the approach- 
ing half-year with impatience, almost with dis- 
gust As the day approached matters grew worse. 
On the very morning of his departure be bad a 
long walk with his mother, who, after he was 



166 OAKFIELDy OK 

gone, fleemed depiessed and agitatffJ in a d^ree 
gteatar than the mere usual separation would ac- 
esmntfoT. Maigaiet saw that there was something 
the matter, and when he was gone, the fidlowing 
oonTenation took place between her and Mis. Qak- 
field 

^Tou have seen, Maigaret,'' sud the hitter, 
^ how uneasy and restless poor Heiby has been 
about returning to school this time?" 
''Tes, I have — and was surprised at it." 
** I wish, Maigaret, that Mr. Wykham had not 



come." 



Maigaret looked surprised; it was about the 
first time she had ever seemed to hear her mother 
make an inhospitable speech ; and of Mr. Wykham 
too, who had told them all about Edward, and 
whom on that account, as well as his own, they 
were all disposed to like so much. 

'' At least," added Mrs. Oakfield, ^' I wish he had 
come a week later." 

*^ What, so that Herby would have missed him ? " 
said Margaret, still more surprised; ^'why Herby, 
I thought, seemed so fond of him." 

*' Indeed he was, and I do not wonder at it; he 
is just the person to attract such a boy as Herby ; 
and yet I wish it had been otherwise, for he has, 
most unconsciously, had a very disturbing unsettling 
influence upon the dear boy. What do you think 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 167 

was the subject of our conveicsation this morning? " 

Margaret had no idea. 

^' Fancy his wanting to go to India ! " 

Margaret understood it all, and almost won- 
dered that she had not thought of it before. Why 
it was the old story : a young handsome dashing 
cavalry soldier, coming home with honor, and talk- 
ing about battles and sieges, and so on, had of 
course made the young high-spirited boy of sixteen 
mad to throw away his stupid books, and mount 
the red or blue jacket, and be off to do likewise. 
Margaret understood it all, and looked very grave. 

*^I could not refuse him if he set his heart 
upon it," his mother added ; « and yet, Margaret, I 
think it would kill me.** 

** But, mother, we have no reason to think he 
will set his heart upon it : he has been excited by 
Mr. Wykham's conversation, and manner, and cir- 
cumstances : it is a pity, certainly. I wish, as you 
say, that Mr. Wykham had waited a week longer, 
though it seems almost ungracious to say so— does 
it not?" 

"1 am sure, Margaret, be need have no sus- 
picion of not being welcome; the most welcome 
guest that has come into our house since your 
brother left it — and that not only for Edward's 
sake ; I admire his kind, gentle, soldier-like bear- 
ing very greatly : he often reminds me of some I 



168 OAKFIELD^ OR 

used to see in my youthful days, when sc^dieis and 
sailors were more plentiful than they are now-*- 
days, and more thought of; but that has all nothing 
to do with Herby — God bless him." 

''No; but, mother, I was going to say, that I 
do not really think there is much danger of his 
seriously setting his heart upon India* He would^ 
when he began to think seriously of it, shrink from 
the idea of leaving home, as acutely as Edward 
did, and he would not have Edward's all-constrain- 
ing motive to carry him through. He has just 
been excited, as I suppose boys of his age easily 
are, and now it is a very gpood thing that he is 
gone, darling fellow, and at Winchester he will 
soon forget Mr. Wykham and India, depend upon 
it : but still it is very unfortunate ; how I wish 
Edward could speak to him." 

« He might write to him," said her mother. 

*« Not till the Winchester half was almost over, 
and the mischief perhaps done. No ; I think the 
best plan would be to get Mr. Wykham to write 
to him." 

It was agreed that this was the best plan. " After 
all," said Margaret, "I have no great dread of 
Herby's actually going to India. He would never 
make up his mind to leave this beloved lake." 

They had reached, as she spoke, the foot of the 
lawn of velvet-like turf, which sloped down to the 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 169 

lake bank. A little stone pier ran out into the 
water ; the old green and white family boat rocked 
gracefully at a short distance from the shore, chuned 
to its brown water-stained post ; the air was mild 
and silky, as it is in a moist mild Februaiy day ; 
the lake looked gray and warm; the mountains 
seemed to share in the universal gentleness that 
pervaded all nature, as they lay in their soft out* 
line, — ^now crossed by fleecy clouds, now haunted 
by the play of the passing sun-gleam ; the sanguine 
spring flowers, the crocusses and snow-drops in the 
garden were bursting into life, able and willing to 
forget that one gentle day does not make a spring, 
that March winds and frosts will too surely come 
to nip that precious life ; in the back-ground, the 
old house of rough country stone, overgrown with 
roses and other creepers, in its neutral color, its 
picturesque shape, its kindly hospitable comfort — 
in rare harmony with the beauty that enshrined it 
— ^nestled under the woody crags of Leathebum 
Fells, as though it were itself a true part and parcel 
of the friendly hills. Well might Maigazet think 
that Herbert would be unwilling to leave such a 
home. 

All that day Margaret was puzzling herself as 
to how she should introduce the subject with 
Wykham, when the latter unconsciously helped 
her, by saying, — 



170 OAKFIELD, OR 

^' Your brother did not seem at all to like going 
back to school this morning. Miss Oakfield, which 
is not to be wondered at. What a fine young 
fellow he is I — ^very like Ned ; only I should say 
more fiery." 

^' He is not generally so reluctant to go back to 
Winchester; " said Margaret, making a side-move- 
ment towards the point ; " I hope you appreciate 
the compliment which he paid you by his unusual 
indisposition to leave home ? " 

Wykham laughed incredulously. 

"Poor Herbyl I don't feel guilty of having 
much to do with his distress, I must say." 

"You had really, though," said Margaret, gravely. 

Wykham looked puzzled, and thought Maigaret 
seemed a great deal more serious than there was 
any occasion for. 

" What do you mean? " he asked. 

" I am avenging poor Herby for the trick you 
played him," said Margaret, laughing; ^'you do 
look so delightfully puzzled, Mr. Wykham : what 
will you say then, when I tell you that you have 
sent poor Herby away in distress, and made mamma 
very unhappy and uneasy about him ? " 

"I should say," replied Wykham, in his turn 
becoming grave, " that I had most unconsciously 
done a mischief which it would be quite impossible 
for me to laugh at" He did not mean this for a 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 171 

rebuke ; but Margaret felt it as such^ and colored 
as she said, — 

" You are right, Mr. Wykham ; this is not so 
fair a joke as you made upon dear Uerby. No ; 
the matter is simply this: you have perplexed us 
all a little, though, as you say, most nncon- 
sciously and most innocently. The fact is, Uerby 
told mamma, before he went away this morning, 
that he wanted to go to India." 

Wykham's surprise overpowered his good 
manners, and evaporated into a long semi-whistle. 

** And although," added Mai^aret, *^ mamma does 
not think that he will really settle down into a 
serious purpose about it, yet she fears, and I thiiik 
she is right, its unsettling him just now, and giving 
him a distaste for his Winchester work." 

** I see — I see ; it was that Mooltan business, I 
suppose, did the mischief; what a griff I was to 
go bragging about my campaigns, as if any good 
could possibly come of it 1 " 

Margaret could not bear to see anybody suffer- 
ing unjustly, even by his own reproaches. 

'* I am sure, Mr. Wykham, you have no cause 
to reproach yourself for your kindness to Herby." 

^'Wykham felt more pleased than he had 
perhaps any business to be at such a simple re- 
mark: he tried, as is the treacherous manner of 
men, to elicit a repetition of the consoktion by a 



172 OAKFIELD, OR 

reiteration of what had drawn it forth, but was 
disappointed: Margaret was silent, and he soon 
grew tired of abusing himself uncontradicted. 

**What is to be done?" he continued; "I 
wouldn't for any consideration be the guilty cause 
of any man's going to that wretched country ; I 
wish Herby was lying as I was this time last year, 
in all the agonies of a painful wound, in a state of 
helpless incapacity, while my regiment was in the 
field, and overwhelmed by perpetual dust storms ! " 

*^ Herby is very much obliged to you, I am 
sure," said Margaret, laughing, *^ but we m^an to 
ask you to apply a less severe remedy." 

" How — what?" exclaimed Wykham; "of course 
I shall be only too glad to do anything." 

" We thought, that is mamma and I, that you 
would perhaps write him a letter : " (Wykham 
looked all abroad) "just, to tell him that Indian 
life was not altogether made up of glorious battles 
and sieges." 

" I see, I see," cried Wykham, "give him a hair 
of the dog that bit him ; I and India dividing the 
character of dog between us ; depend upon it. Miss 
Oakfield, I will write him a letter by to-day's post." 

" You cannot," interrupted Margaret, laughing 
at his energy, "unfortunately it went out three 
hours ago." 

" Well, well, to-morrow ; and if there is virtue 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 173 

in words, he shall, after reading it, hate India with 
as profound a hatred and abhorence as I do, though 
that is a bold word.'' 

"Poor Herby, he will be puzzled by your *look 
on this picture and on this ; ' your glorious siege 
of Mooltan, and your threatened letter. However, 
Mr. Wykham, if you will try to drive this Indian 
scheme out of his head, I believe you will be 
doing him, and all of us too, a very great service." 

Wykham was prompt to redeem his promise ; 
he wrote that night a letter to Uerby, certainly not 
holding out any very inviting picture of Indian 
life ; told him that battles and sieges were all very 
well, but were dearly earned by long years of un- 
comfortable inactivity; told him that of every 
hundred who went every year to India in haste, 
ninety-nine repented at leisure ; quoted his own 
experience ; how he had gone to India principally 
to get rid of his school work, and how he had ever 
since wished himself back again ; told him how 
his own brother hated India, and concluded with 
a glowing eulogy of home life in general, and such 
a home life as Leatheburn in particular. 

It was all to no purpose ; and if Mrs. Oakfield 
and Margaret had had more experience, they 
never would have expected much from such a plan. 
When a fire is lighted in a boy's fancy, no amount 
of preaching or practical experience will put it out 



174 OAKFIELD, OR 

It is either to be met by counter irritation, that is 
kindling another flame in another and counter- 
acting direction, to do which requires great art and 
patient kindness, or be suffered to bum itself out 
Herby wrote back just such an answer as a boy of 
sixteen, with head well up, making a push at his 
first hobby, was Ukely to write. There was an 
importance in having a scheme for his whole life 
to discuss, in tossing carelessly off such words as 
India, ten years service, furlough, the army, active 
service, &c., &c., which flattered his dignity; he 
wrote very good humouredly, with a comical .air of 
boyish experience, said that he was very much 
obliged to Wykham for his letter, but that he felt 
an active life would be more suited to him than a 
studious one ; (ah ! how many boys have ere now 
used that phrase, and will use it again as a respect- 
able way of saying they prefer being idle, and 
wearing a red coat, and becoming spurious men all 
at once, to going on steadily at their present work 
and earning genuine manhood by steadily serving 
out the period of boyhood; boys are sometimes too. 
much encouraged in the use of this language which 
is seldom better than cant,) said politely enough 
that Wykham's own honorable experience contra- 
dicted the evidence of his letter, and wound up 
with that argumendum ad hondnem so thoroughly 
characteristic of boy logic, closely associated as it 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 175 

is with all the tu-quoque region of dialecticks^-^that 
if Wykham disliked India so very much, why was 
he himself intending to return to it at the expira- 
tion of his furlough? In fact, it was quite clear 
that Herby was precisely as obstinate as people 
with hobby horses usually are; and the unfortunate 
results soon appeared in the unfavourable reports 
which now for the first time began to be received 
fix)m the Winchester authorities, of his idleness and 
indisposition to submit to ordinary school dis- 
cipline. 

This made Mrs. Oakfield very uneasy, and poor 
Wykham was really quite distressed at the mischief 
he had occasioned. He talked the matter over and 
over again with Margaret, but he could hit upon no 
remedy. It is not quite certain that Wykham ex- 
pected much to result from these conferences, but 
he liked the intimate footing and feeling of con- 
fidence which they seemed to imply. At last, one 
evening about three weeks after Herbert's depar- 
ture, Wykham said suddenly, as they sat at dinner, 
(there had been received in the course of the day 
one of the unsatisfactory school reports alluded to 
above), ** I shall be obliged to wish you good bye 
to-morrow, Mrs. Oakfield." 

Mrs. Oakfield and Margaret both started. 
There was nothing strange in the announcement;, 
he had been staying for four weeks, and that is a 



176 OAKFIELD^ OR 

very &ir duration for any visit, but still it startled 
them. They had never supposed that he was to be 
a permanent inmate of Leathebum, and yet they 
had not thought of his going. His intimacy vrith 
Edward, and his sympathy with them about Herby, 
had made him appear more in the light of a mem- 
ber of the &mily than an ordinary guest Every- 
body urged him to stay ; Rose and Mary not the 
least; Mrs. Oakfield was equally sincere, though 
less vehement in her assurances : " I had no idea 
you were going so soon, Mr. Wykham ; we have no 
right to complain ; it has been very good of you 
to give us so much of your time just after your 
arrival in England ; but I trust you will recollect 
your promise to Rose and Maiy, and give us the 
pleasure of another visit before long." 

Wykham began with an animated and sincere 
declaration, that so &r from there having been any 
self-denying virtue in the case, he had never been 
so happy in his' life, when, thinking perhaps that 
he was speaking with rather excessive vehemence, 
he stopped abruptly and awkwardly, and said, '^ I 
really intended to ask you to let me return almost 
immediately to complete my visit, which, though 
it has been already so long, I should be sorry to 
think of as over ; in short, it is some business 
which calls me away, and if you will allow me, I 
shall be back here in a fortnight" Hereupon, 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 177 

Rose and Mary roared as heartily for joy as 
they had done, but a short time before, for grief. 
There could be little doubt as to the sincerity of 
their welcome ; nor, indeed, of the more quiet but 
equally genuine assurance, which he received from 
Mrs. Oakfield, that they would Jitl be glad to see 
him back again. ** You will find a friend of ours 
here," she added, " upon your retiun." 

Wykham looked at Margaret with the sus- 
picious quickness of one already interested in 
knowing who were the friends of the house. 
« Oh I" he said, "indeed." 

" A Mrs. Vernon," she continued, "whose name 
you may possibly have heard, as you seem to have 
heard everything about us from Edward*" 

" VemcHi, Vernon, — ^yes, I must have heard the 
name. Oh, yes; wasn't it the poor young fellow 
who died at Hajeepoor when Ned was there ? " 

" The same ; and it is his mother and two sisters 
whom I am expecting next week. You are going 
to London I suppose ? " 

" Yes, to London, perhaps further." 

" It seems a pity to go so far for so short a time. 
Your business could not be transacted by letter, 
could it?" 

"No, Mrs. Oakfield, indeed it could not; I 
have tried that once." 

The speech and the laugh were rather a mys- 

VOL. n. N 



178 OAKFIBLD, OR 

tery to them, but they did not feel at liberty to 
ask more qoestionB. 

The next day (it was early in March) Wykham 
took his departure by the mdl ; as he entered the 
intricate wooded path by which Herbj had con- 
ducted him on hi& first arriral, bnt which was now 
familiar to him, and looked across the bay at that 
peaceful happy house, he a^n wondered how 
Edward Oakfield could ever have lefi it, and this 
thought seemed somehow to suggest the purpose 
of his journey, for he turned and walked on a few 
steps; then stopped, turned and looked again at 
the house ; looked so long and earnestly that his 
reverie was only disturbed by the sound of the 
guard's horn, at which signal he started, sighed, 
turned round once more, and ran off as iast as be 
could to the little inn where the mail had just 
pulled up, and where his lu^age in a wheelbarrow 
had already arrived. 

From all which stoppings and turnings and 
lookinga and sighings, the reader may conjecture 
if he pleases, without fear of contradiction, that 
Wykham was in love. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 179 



<c 



CHAPTER VI. 

Then in that time and place I spoke to her, 
Bequiring, — ^though T knew it was mine own, 
Tet for the pleasure that I took to hear, — 
Bequiring at her hand the greatest gift, 
A woman's heart, the heart of her I loyed : 
And in that time and place she answered me, 
And in the compass of three little words 
More musical than ever came in one. 
The silver fragments of a broken voice 
Made me most happy, lisping ' I am thine.' " 

Tennyson. 



Wjkham travelled all night, and reached Lon- 
don in the morning. After a bath and hasty 
ante-breakfast (which is called in India 'a little 
breakfast ') at the Euston Hotel, he proceeded to 
the private residence of a man of law in Montague 
Place, who recognised, but seemed surprised at 
seeing him. ''I thought, Mr. Wjkham, you said 
you would not return from the north till the middle 
of April." 

Why, yes ; I did say so, Wilson, but here I am 
you see : I am going to leave town again this 

N 2 



180 OAILFOILD^ <m 

evening, and wanted just to have a talk vnth yoa 
about these affairs," taking some notes out of his 
pocket as he spoke. 

** There is not much to talk about ; Lady Pres- 
cot's vnll is proved ; there never was any difficulty 
about it; and your firet quarterly instalment of 
£1000 per annum, funded property, has been drawn 
by me, and lies to your credit at Drummond's.'' 

" That*s all right," said Wykham ; well, what I 
wanted to ask you was to send to Radley's^ — ^the 
East Indian agents, you know." 

" I know, I know." 

** And to tell them to draw my pay quarterly, 
at the India House, and pay it into Drummond's." 

'^ Certainly, but you don't mean to say you 
came up all the way from Westmoreland or Cum- 
berland to tell me what might have been put into 
half a page of note piq>er." 

''No, not exactly ; I had other business; don't 
look frightened, Wilson ; nothing in the £. s. d. 
line ; but besides, I have really business to do here 
also^ for if this legacy is all right, I must make 
arrangements for retiring from the service." 

« You don't mean to do that ! " 

^ Not mean it :— -don't I ? Why on earth should 
I go back to that purgatory if I can live here ? 
Why it would be an insult to my good aunt's 
memory." 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 181 

*' At any rate»" said the prudent attorney ^^ there's 
no hurry : you have three years furlough, haven't 
you?" 

^' Yes; that is, I should have to leave England 
in about two years and a half.'' 

'^ Well then ; there is no good in retiring till 
that period is expired. You may just as well draw 
your pay during that time as not" 

" No," said Wykham, " I won't do poor John 
Company any more ; if I don't mean to do any 
more work for him, I won't draw his pay either. 
However, it will take some time, I fancy ; I wish, 
by the bye, you would see about my blood money." 

^^Your what?" said the man of peace with a 
slight shudder, 

"Oh," said Wykham, laughing, "merely the 
compensation money for my wound. There is 
such a delay about these things, that I could not 
get it before I left India, though I had, and have 
still, my medical papers. I don't see why I should 
let John off that My valuable blood is worth 
paying for." 

"You had better do that through Badley, 
they understand those things best I will speak to 
them ; but take my advice and think better about 
retiring. Depend upon it, £1000 a year is not so 
much as you think." 

" It will do," said Wykham, laughing. 



182 OAKFIELD, OR 

<< Well, bat then your professicm, it is a great 
thing for a young man to have a prafeflsion.'' 

*'My dear Wilson, you waste your eloquence; 
nothing on earth would induce me to return to 
India.'' 

"Ah," said the other, drily, «I see." 

« See what ?** 

** Oh ! why I see that young men do not fly 
out at India all of a sudden, and go down and 
bury themselves in a northern wilderness fiv 
months together without meaning something by 
it" 

** I tell you," replied Wykham, ** I always 
flew out at India, as you call it, fiom the day 
I landed there ; and as to what you irreverently 
call a wilderness, I went down to that lovely coun- 
try, which even you, if you could see it, would 
admire with all the fervency that parchment and 
process may have left in you, to visit, according 
to promise, the family of one of my fiiends in 
India.'' 

** Yes, yes, of course ; your friend had sisters 
too, I presume. Ah, well; nevermind: come and 
have some breakfast" 

They walked into a room, the snug and even re- 
fined air of which bore witness that parchment and 
process had done less to ossify Mr. Wilson than 
Wykham had chosen to suppose. There were 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 183 

some good prints on the walls, and a large collec- 
tion of books on the shelves, amongst which Wjk- 
ham observed a considerable sprinkling of the * 
poets, contained mainly in those large single 
volumes which have of late years been such a 
blessing to the poor reading community, who can- 
not afford comfortable many-tomed editions. Nei- 
ther the furniture of the room nor the plentiful and 
appetizing array of the breakfast table corresponded 
with Wykham's crude rough notions of the crabbed 
discomfort of a bachelor attorney. Mr. Wilson had 
been for many years solicitor to one Lady Prescot, 
and had for a yet longer period enjoyed a lucrative 
and honorable practice in his profession. T^ady 
Prescot was Wykham's aunt; she had sold a large 
West India property, left to her as a young widow, 
by her husband, at a time when such property was 
saleable ; and had invested the proceeds in secu- 
rities nearer home, and, as it turned out, more pro- 
fitable; she had never married again, though of 
course it was rumoured, and was indeed likely 
enough, that she had refused innumerable offers; 
but had sunk into a queer, eccentric, solitary way 
of living, which grew upon her till she liked to be 
as much unmolested as possible by all except her 
lady companion ; she remained on good terms with 
Wykham's father, and had largely assisted him in 
his son's outfit, when Fred went to India, and at 



184 OAKFIELD, OR 

different times, though always in a strange round- 
about way of her own ; she approved very greatly 
' of his going out ; said it was very well that the 
boy should learn to do something for himself, and 
see the world ; and the very day Fred was shipped, 
she, without saying anything to anybody, made her 
will, leaving him half her property, that is to say, 
£1000 a-year ; and the other half to her companion. 
Neither Fred nor his parents had the slightest 
suspicion of the existence of any such arrangement 
till the day of her death, which occurred suddenly, 
just after Fred's return on furlough. She lived 
to hear of this event, and said something to the 
effect that she was ^' glad the boy was come back 
to comfort his parents, who were good folk who 
had never disturbed her, and had provided for 
their own children without seeming to depend on 
others ; and that he must not go back again to the 
Indies." The next thing the Wykhams heard of 
her was that she was dead, and Fred her joint heir. 
Fred had borne his change of circumstances 
with more philosophy than might have been ex- 
pected from him : his first impulse was to laugh, 
and say it was very odd ; he then laughed more 
heartily, as (with more trouble than the joke was 
worth) he turned a large map of India which 
adorned the room with its face to the wall, in token 
of his renouncing all connexion with that part of 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 185 

the globe ; and lastly, sent for a cab and drove down 
to Gray's Inn, to ascertain from Mr. Wilson, the 
executor of the will, and an old friend of his 
&ther's, a friend too of bis own boyish days, how 
matters really stood. Mr. Wilson received him with 
kindness and congratulations; told him that his 
money was in the 3^ per cents., talked a good deal 
of probates, administrations, and soon; and finally 
engaged that all should be concluded and settled, 
he, Mr. Wilson, being constituted agent, attorney, 
^ctotum, and what not, within the space of six 
weeks. Wykham was quite satisfied : he knew he 
was in good hands, but still he left the lawyer's 
chambers with a different feeling from that with 
which he had entered them. He did not feel quite 
so confident of being really a monied man. He 
had left England a mere boy, and had never been 
troubled in India with any other money transactions 
than drawing his monthly pay. The consequence 
was that he knew a good deal more about cavalry 
movements than probates, and all lawyer terms and 
dealings seemed to him to invest things with a halo 
not only of distance but uncertainty. He there- 
fore asked his fetther to say nothing to anybody 
about the change in his fortunes, which the old 
man, though he laughed at the reasons assigned for 
making the request, readily agreed to ; and himself 
set off for Leatheburq, where he observed the same 



186 OAKFIELD^ OR 

silence^ first from a religious belief that it was quite 
a chance whether or not the lawyers allowed him 
to have his money ; and afterwards, when he heard 
that it was all arranged, because he saw no good in 
talking about it : he was the last man in the world 
to boast, or indeed to feel proud of being rich. This 
will explain the footing on which Wykham found 
himself in the breakfast room, with Mr. Wilson, in 
Montague place. The latter tried once or twice to 
get at '^ the business" which had brought him up 
to town, but Fred only laughed, and declared that 
it was "a merely private personal matter," which 
it was quite clear he did not intend to say anything 
more about He went after breakfast to Radle/s 
reading rooms, looked over the Indian papers, felt 
with wonder how long he had been mixed up with 
that strange distant land, from which he now seemed 
separated for ever. The thought was impressive, 
but did not cost him much pain. Having studied 
the Delhi Gazette koA, Lahore Chranick to his satis- 
Action, he went back to his hotel, had luncheon, 
and then drove down to the South Western Station, 
and booked his place, for the reader will have 
perhaps guessed his destination before this, — ^Win- 
chester. 

The fact was that Wykham was quite determined 
to do all he could to allay the excitement which 
^e found he had raised in Herby's mind ; and hav- 



FELLOWSHIP m THE EAST. 187 

ing, as he told Mrs. Oakfield, ^'fidled signaUy in 
correspondence," was now about to try the effect 
of a personal interview. He had concealed his in- 
tention, wishing not to raise hopes that would very 
probably be disappointed ; he knew also that Mrs. 
Oakfield would have felt bound to protest against 
his making so long a journey for such a purpose, 
and thought it as well to avoid the friendly conffict. 
He reached Winchester at six in the evening ; it 
was almost dark, so he took up his quarters for the 
night at the George ; and about twelve the next 
morning walked up to St Mary's. He asked the 
first boy he met wandering about in the college 
precincts where Herbert Oakfield could be found. 

''Oakfield!" said the youngster, dropping the 
christian name with great contempt, '' Oh I know ; 
you must go over to Commoners." 

" Oh, yes," said Wykham, unwilling to acknow- 
ledge his ignorance, for that boy evidently felt his 
superiority ; '' thank you ; and where does Com- 
moners live ?" 

** This was almost too much for the boy, but he 
was polite, as public school boys generally are ; so 
swallowing down his intense enjoyment of the 
stranger's tremendous ignorance, he said civilly — 

" K you will come with me I will find him out 
for you." 

Wykham gladly assented, thinking himself only 



188 OAKFIELD, OR 

too lacky to get a guide in this terra ineofniiu; be 
clang to him as his guardian angel, as they walked 
on amongst the wondering &ces : a man never feels 
so shy as he does amongst boys. 

<' Here's Oakfield T exclaimed the guide, sudr 
denly. '' Here, Oakfield P he shouted 

Herby turned round, and, directly he saw Wyk- 
ham, came running up. 

" Halloa I" he exclaimed, " how do you do ? how 
very glad I am to see you ; when- did you leave 
Leathebum ? where are you staying ? when do you 
go ? By Jove how very glad I am to see you !" 

Wykham shook hands with a warmth corres- 
ponding to such a greeting; it was as real a plea- 
sure to him to see Herby as to Herby to see him ; 
not only because he liked the boy himself so much, 
but also because his &ce, amongst those strange 
groups, looked so fiiendly, so homelike, reminded 
him of Leathebum and Margaret 

'^ I'll answer all your questions presently," he 
said, laughing ; " there were about half-a-dozen, 1 
think, in one sentence ; but first you must go and 
get leave to come and spend the day with me ; and 
also have the goodness to introduce me to my 
guide, without whom I don't think I should ever 
have found you." 

" Ruskin, senior," said Herby, " Mr. Wykham, 
— Mr. Wykham, Mr. Ruskin." 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 189 

Riaskin was a good-looking young fellow, in 
Middle Part, some two years junior to Herby. 

** Will you give me the pleasure of your com- 
pany at dinner, at six o'clock to-night, at the 
George, together with Oakfield ?" 

Of course Buskin would be too happy : would 
go home and get leave. So the two went off, and 
obtained the required permission. 

" Well, then," said Wykham, « 111 just take an 
hour or so of your lions first, and then well go up 
to the Geoige to luncheon." 

So they all three went over the schools, the cha- 
pel, and cathedral, together. Herby's enjoyment 
of Wykham's mistake about Commoners was as in- 
tense as Ruskin could have wished. But they had 
plenty more of such mistakes to laugh at Two 
Winchester fellows talking to a stranger in their 
own dialect are sure to have sufficient occasion to 
admire his utter discomfiture. Every minute 
Wykham had to stop and request to know the 
English of some such words as * Remedy,' ^ Tugs,' 
^ Semper Socius,' ^ Hills,' &c. &c. 

^^ Well," he said at last, in despair, Hindustanee 
is bad enough, but I'll be shot if Winchester doesn't 
beat it ; come along, Herby, let^ go to luncheon, 
and for Heaven's sake talk EnglisL Good morning," 
he added, bowing to Ruskin, ^^ we shall see you at 
six o'clock." 



190 OAKFIELD, OR 

As they walked ami in arm up the street towards 
the inn, they talked of Leathebum. Wykham gave 
a minute account of the morning of his departure ; 
of his stay there since Herbert left; of the walks, 
and of the flourishing condition of each individual 
member of the family when he had last seen them. 

^^I am going down there again very soon," 
Wykham said. 

"Are you?" said poor Herby, moumfiilly, "I 
wish I was." 

It would have been hard to say which of the 
two most enjoyed talking on this subject 

" Well now, Herby," Wykham began, as they 
sat opposite each other at the well-spread table in 
the cofiee room of the George, ^^(you mustn't mind 
my calling you by your christian name, it comes 
most natural, you know I'm used to do it with 
your brother : you may call me Fred, if you like), 
I'll tell you candidly what I came down to Win- 
chester for. In the first place it was to see you." 

" I'm sure I am very much obliged to you." 

" No, I don't know that you will be, when I tell 
you why I particularly wanted to see you, though 
I dare say you more than half guess. You re- 
member what I wrote to you about?" 

Herby nodded. 

"Well; 1 can't bear to think that my having 
made a fool of myself should lead you to do the 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 191 

same; I beg your pardon, Herby, but upon my 
honor, I couldn't call a fellow anything else, who 
in your position was to go to India." 

^^It wouldn't follow that he should be one 
though," rejoined Herby, rather drily. 

" Well, that's true too, and yet, my good fellow, 
what is there to tempt you? I talked like an ass 
about Mooltan, and no good came of it, as no good, 
I believe, ever does come of bragging. I don't 
wonder at a fellow of your age getting excited at 
hearing of campaigns and so on, they do excite all 
of us ; but remember it is not certain that you see 
service because you go to India. Pass me the beer, 
Uerby. Lots of men," he resumed, after an inter- 
view with the tankard, " have been thirty years in 
India, and never seen a shot fired, and now the 
knowing ones say there is to be no more fighting 
for I don't know how many years. Besides, if you 
do get one campaign in your first ten years service, 
and are not knocked over, still there are nine dreary 
years of cantonment, dull, hot, uncomfortable vege- 
tation. I dare say you would like the fighting part 
of the business well enough, but I am perfectly 
certain you would hate all the rest. I think I see 
you on a hot dusty day, after having been four or 
five years in the country, confined to the house, 
too sick to read, thinking of home, and wondering 
what on earth induced you to leave it" 



192 OAKFIELD, OB 

" People leave home every day," urged Herby, 
rather staggered. 

" They do ; and how much they like it I you 
see, a man ten thousand miles off can't come back 
the first fine morning he wants to ; he very soon 
finds he has got a bad bargain, but also one which 
he must stick to ; and so, because he stays where 
he is, and is too much of a man to howl and com- 
plain, ashamed too to seem to regret his own act, 
people think, or pretend to think, that he is very 
happy, and so on. I tell you, Herby, you would 
hate India; everybody does. The best men, such 
as your own brother, who work hard, and, as 
it is said, get an, hate it ; idle good-for-nothing 
dogs like myself hate it: perhaps the worst like 
it best; they can get drunk there, and that is 
about all they want : but even they hate a country 
where beer and wine are expensive." 

^' But," said Herby, changing his ground, ^^what 
am I to do in England ? " 

" Why, Herby, the first answer to that, I should 
think, is that you should do well at Winchester 
and the University." 

^' Ugh ! " said Herby, with a look of great dis- 
gust This was, of all others, the very most un- 
palatable proposition to him. 

Wykham was puzzled ; he had not been used 
to this style of argument ; he did the wisest thing 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 193 

he could under the circumstancesy followed his 
own instinct, guided by a sincere desire to say the 
right thing : he knew it was no good to assure a 
person that he did like that which he himself said 
he did not 

** Well, old fellow, I have no doubt your work 
is irksome to you, and the prospect of it still more . 
so ; and I believe I ought to sympathize with you 
as much as anybody, for I remember how I hated 
that Latin and Greek work myself; only, Herby, 
I never got so far as you have, so that it was 
less interesting to me than it must be to you. 
However, observe what was the consequence in 
my case ? I threw it all up, and went to India, 
thinking I should have nothing to do ; that lies at 
the bottom of all our fine talk about change of 
duties, active employment, and so on: eh, Herby?" 

Herby blushed, but said nothing. 

*^ Well, I went to India, and, before a year was 
out, I would have been glad to be at Homer and 
Virgil again for twelve hours out of the twenty-four, 
if only I could have got back. Oh, Herby, what a 
fool I did think myself! A whole school day here 
may be a nuisance, but depend upon it, my boy, 
it is a very seventh heaven of enjoyment compared 
to a long succession of whole days of hot vacant 
idleness in India." 

The boy looked unpersuaded still; he had not 

VOL. IL o 



194 OAKFIELD, OR 

much to say ; he felt the cogent force of Wykham's 
candour, but the hope of relief jfrom the tedium of 
work by a revolution of scene and occupation, had 
taken too strong a hold upon him to be relinquished 
without a struggle. 

"You would advise me, then," he said, **to 
make up my mind to go plodding on for some six 
or seven more dreary dreary years, at work which 
I detest" 

His face looked the very picture of dismay as 
he said this, in a most dismal tone : but Wykham 
was glad to find that he thus tacitly consented to 
the matter being put on its real merits. 

" Well, Herby, it is very horrid ; and, as I said, 
I have no right to preach. But really you will 
find something horrid in your work everywhere. 
That is what Ned would tell you. He has found 
his duty harder in India than he did at Oxford ; 
and then remember that he went through his Win- 
chester and Oxford work first. That is the great 
point. If you really feel that an active life (if you 
will continue so to call one of the most inactive 
careers which a young man can possibly enter 
upon) is best suited for you, then you know best, 
and have a right to act for yourself just as much 
as anybody else : but what are you to do for the 
next four years? Edward was twenty-one, you 
know, when he went out." 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 195 

« I need not go out as old as that'' 

'^ Heaven forbid^ my dear fellow, you should 
go much earlier^ Come Herby, make a compro- 
mise; make up your mind to go through your 
school and university career first, on the under- 
standing that you reserve a perfect right to do all 
you can, and that your friends shall help you, after 
that I will undertake that my father shall get you 
an appointment after you have taken your degree ; 
though I tell you candidly I am perfectly certain 
that then you will not care much to make me keep 
my promise." 

*^ Six years drudgery," said Herby, shaking his 
head slowly. 

"No I not six years; depend upon it, that 

before a year is over this fit will pas& The great 

difficulty is to believe that I hate talking like this, 

Herby," he said, getting up ; •* it is so easy to talk, 

and I know, well enough, so confoundedly hard to 

act I feel for you, my dear boy ; I do upon my 

word. I know that when one has taken it into 

one's head to come to a halt and rest, it is awiid pain 

to make the effort, and resolve to pass by the 

tempting place and go on. But I do believe, 

indeed, that your life's happiness depends upon it 

I declare it makes me wretched to think of your 

going out to India and hating me all your life, as 

you must and would, as having been the first per- 

o 2 



ktH$ wt^// \mi it mU) y^HK bead Just think of joor 
t^/fi^i IMfy/^ eoniioued Wjkham, with an un- 
iUfumtUnm Mkill, opening his heaviest battery hist. 
'^ Wnit nix year» ; not dreary ones, beUere me ; 
ouv4$ irittke ibe effort^ horrid I know, but make it, 
mnl iho dreariness^ will all be over, and your 
inoUier would no more oppose you, or rather no 
iiioro try to dissuade you (you know as well as I 
do timt nhe would never think of opposing you now) 
\\m\ nhe did Ned. You owe her a good deal, 
\\\y buy I you do really : you would hate yourself 
weiH) you to break up and throw unhappiness into 
that huine of yours ; the best and the happiest, 
aud by heaven the most beautiful, that I ever saw, 
tu' heaixL or dreamt o£ Ah I * he added, mode- 
r«^lu\^ the tone of extraordinary energy into whidi 
he hail warmed* ^I see you give in! come to 
t^mi^ ^1 feUow, eh? Treaty agreed to, signed 
mhI ««Nide<l at thb blessed Geoige Inn, lOdi of 
Maix^ la^n himah! And Wjkham sank back 
Ukt^> hW chawr% thai SBwMJBlarffced dngooni as pleased 
at^ n^ vhUvU aud vinnr iieaitr doin^ vfaaa he co— 
y^aUAivHit wat» doio^xtiocit wa$ the twinkle in Hczbys 
^\^ th«M bwftd ujt«)iie bint cbim tbe vktorc The 
Is^x >N«Ib^i ^^ tihf vHJbsidr end of thie room binm^ 
btiun^Ht' >iiiia dfat pc^^citnto^ gf looking ouc &r pen^ 
uikg. ^ukX ^i^Knr> « ^i«^ wrlcn^ ;aaie. WjsiuHn. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 197 

"What," he said, "you mean to put the treaty 
on paper, eh? write a letter to Leathebum, — is 
that it? A very good idea too, Herby; I only 
wish I might be there to see them get the letter." 

Herby had not had any such thought or inten- 
tion ; but he would not say so, and sat down to 
write. 

" G-EORGE Inn, Winchester. 

"My Dearest Mother, 

" I am spending the day at the Inn here, 
with Mr. Wykham, who came this morning. He has been 
advising me very strongly to give up the idea of India, at 
all events for the present ; so I will say no more about it 
till I leave Winchester, at any rate, and that will be two 
years ; though I do not at all think that he is right in 
saying that by that time I shall have got reconciled to this 
abominable, stupid, useless Latin and Greek ; to which, 
however, I shall now go back as before, and work as weU 
as I can. I postpone the Indian plan, but I tell you 
candidly, that you will find me less fickle about it than 
you may expect. However, I will say nothing about that, 
and for two years, at any rate, will victimize myself. 

" I am, &c." 

He went and showed this to Wykham, who was 
delighted. He knew that Herbert would keep his 
word, and the assurances of an unchangeable pur- 



198 OAKFIBLD, OR 

poee he inwardly estimated at no more tlian they 
were worth. 

" Aiid now, Herby," he said, " tell me one thing 
more : you are not ofiended with me ? you don't 
think I have been meddling with what is no busi- 
ness of mine?" 

Herby smiled, shook his own head Emd bis 
friend's band, by way of answer. 

" But," be asked, " I want also to know one 
thing: if you hate India so much, how do you like 
the thought of going back yoiuself ?" 

How glad Wykbam was to have the wherewithal 
to allay the not unnatural suspicion implied in this 
question. 

" Going back ? I'm never going back, my dear 
fellow." 

" What never J" 

"Never no more; I'm a gendeman at laige, 
Herby, and mean to live at home at ease ; and bo 
you see, I, an idle dog, with nothing to do, am 
preaching work and duty and I don't know what all 
to you. Cool, isn't it ? But I want you to grant 
me one favor, Herby, and that is not to post that 
letter of yours." 

" What, not send the treaty ?" 

" ^o, no, I didn't say that ; — send it ? I should 
tliink so ; but do let me have the very great pleasure 
of being the bearer of it" 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 199 

" Why, are you going back again ?" 

'^ I hope to start to-morrow, and if I am the 
bearer of an express, shall, of course, travel day and 
night in the correct express style." 

^* But did you come all the way from Leathebum 
to see me about this ?" asked Herby, in a tone of 
surprise, as the truth dawned upon him. 

" Of course I did ; why not? I like knocking 
about ; that is in England, not in India, Herby." 

Herbert felt touched, and perhaps flattered, at 
the thought of Wykham's having made such an 
exertion on his account It gave, too a dignity to 
his scheme, an enhancement to the value of his 
present sacrifice, which pleased him. 

** Of course," he said, I shall be very glad if 
you will take the letter ; I only wish I could come 
myself." 

** I wish you could, too : well, what o'clock is 
it ? Four ; — ^how we have been talking I" 

Herby went oflP to dress for dinner, promising 
to return, with Ruskin, at six. Wykham went to 
stroll by the banks of the Itchen, and feast upon 
the thoughts of the pleasure he should convey to 
the party at Leathebum. 

** He is a fine fellow," he thought to himself; ** I 
wish I could resign my fancies to my duty as 
bravely as he does. How pleased Ned will be when 
he hears it all. I have taken a leaf out of his ser- 



200 OAKFIELD, OR 

mon book, I think ; I had no idea I could preach 
so ; after all the man who said he didn't know whe- 
ther he could play the fiddle or not because he had 
never tried, was right : we do not know what we 
can do till we try, I declare," 

The next day Wykham left Winchester, travelled 
all night from London, and reached Leathebum 
soon aft:er the dawn of a chill Sunday morning, 
the fifth day aft;er he had quitted it. His history 
was soon told, and afforded all the pleasure he 
could have expected, earned for him more grati- 
tude than he thought he deserved. 

A letter was received fi:om Herby himself the 
next morning, in which he confirmed all that Wyk- 
ham had said, but solaced himself by clinging to 
the prospect of reviving the scheme, which he now 
consented to lay aside, in two years time. 

" But that's all humbug, you know," Wykham 
said, ** by the time two years, or two months, are 
gone, he'll think no more of India than he did six 
months ago." 

And so it proved. It cost the poor boy a hard 
struggle to wrench himself back to his work, but 
having done so forcibly in spite of his inclination, his 
inclination gave in and meekly followed his will; he 
had arrived at that period when a classical education 
assumes a different aspect ; when drudgery gives 
place to science ; the painful acquiring of the rudi- 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 201 

ments of a dead language, to the animated study 
of an immortal literature. No more complaints 
were made of idleness ; and with this, the restless 
distaste for disciplme disappeared also; so that by 
the end of the half-year, the second master even 
ventured to hint at, as already looming in the dis- 
tance, that most perfect consummation of a Tutor's 
hope, a first class at Oxford. 

" All very well," muttered Fred, when he heard 
this, — " a capital thing, I've no doubt, but I've a 
notion that Herby did something harder than a 
first class that afternoon when he came to the 
George." 

But we are anticipating ; this was not till July ; 
and how came Wykham to be at Leathebum again 
then ? It may serve to explain this, if we go back 
to the end of March, and follow the course of one 
of the customary afternoon walks. The party, 
consisting originally of Mrs. Vernon and her two 
daughters, Wykham, Margaret, Rose, and Mary, 
went skirting the hill above the house for two 
or three miles, till they emerged near the top 
of that Dunmail Raise, which has been so often 
alluded to. But here a misfortune befell poor 
little Edith Vernon, productive of more im- 
portant consequences than often follow upon 
a child's becoming lame from walking with a 



202 OAKFIELD, OR 

Stone ia her shoe ; the stone was taken out, 
but the tramping along the hard highway was 
too much for Edith, who had thought nothing 
of the pain so long as she could run about in 
the woods with Rose and Mary and her sister; 
she sat down and begged pitcously to be taken 
home. Margaret was for returning at once, but 
Mrs. Vernon declared it would be a great pity 
to lose so beautiful an afternoon, (there was the 
first light flush of pale green visible everywhere in 
the larch wood), that she would take Edith home 
while the others continued their walk ; this sug- 
gestion was clamourously supported by the other 
children ; and the scamp, Fred, said with a com- 
passionate gravity, that it would be hard upon the 
poor little girls to lose their walk, and so Mrs. 
Vernon and Edith went one way, and the rest of 
the party another. Thus Wykham and Margaret 
were left, as it were, alone; and their situation 
bad something of embarrassment in it, partly firom 
its novelty, partly from the fact that the feelings 
of both with regard to each other had, during the 
last few weeks, undergone a change unperceived 
in its process, only perceived now in its maturity ; 
like the growth of a child, or the coming out of 
the stars ; that stealthy development so beautifully 
described by Keble : — 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 203 

*' Who ever saw the earliest rose 
First open her sweet breast ? 
Or when the summer sun goes down, 
The first soft star in evening's crown. 
Light up her gleaming crest ? 

" Fondly we seek the dawning bloom 
On features wan and fair, — 
The gazing eye no change can trace ; 
But look away a little space — 
Then turn, and lo ! 'tis there." * 

Under such circumstances it is a convenience to 
have a subject of conversation ready made, that 
shall turn up as naturally as the weather, and yet 
be more interesting. Edward was this convenient 
subject and was certainly used most unsparingly, 
being lu^ed in unceremoniously at all times and 
in all seasons, yet with an ever fresh interest. 

** I wonder what your brother is doing just now. 
Miss Oakfield ; perhaps just going to his work, at 
Lahore, poor fellow I " 

" Poor fellow, indeed," said Margaret ; " I do 
dread the next hot season for him : has the very 
hot weather commenced yet ? * 

" Why, let me see : the 30th of March ; no, not 

in the Punjab ; it is bearable still, but will continue 

to get worse till about the 1st of May, when, if it 

was to get hotter still, the universe must crack 
bodily." 

* Christian Year, Fourth Sunday in Lent. 



204 OAKFIBLD, OR 

** There is no place in the world," said Margaret, 
looking round, ** which I associate with Edward as 
much as this." 

They had reached the top of the hill, and were 
come to the short stretch of level ground that con- 
nects the two sides of the pass : they sat down 
among the rocks to look down upon the valley be- 
low. The children soon left them to play in the 
stream, and so Wykham and Margaret were left 
alone. 

" Indeed," said Wykham ; " may I ask why ?" 

** These stones," she answered, smiling, " were 
fateful to him." 

« How so ? " 

" It was here, Mr. Wykham, just where we are 
now sitting, that he determined to go to India." 

^* Indeed," said Wykham, with marked attention, 
as though wishing to hear more ; *^ and were you 
with him?" 

" Oh no ; he told me of it afterwards, (on this 
same road, though), but on this occasion he was 
alone. It was nearly six years ago, on the 25th 
September, that he was sitting here alone for 
nearly two hours, revolving his destiny, as he said. 
He told me quite casuaUy, but it struck me greatly 
at the time, and I have often and often thought 
of it since." 

^I do not wonder," rejoined Wykham; <^it is 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 205 

SO seldom than a man can trace any important 
change in his life to one particular act of deliberate 
reflection; and when he can^ it is indeed very 
striking ; it has the same sort of interest, and in a 
far higher degree, as watching the source of a large 
river. Well," he added, looking round him, " he 
had a glorious temple wherein to think ; a resolu- 
tion made among these hills and rocks, and by 
that pure stream, ought to have been noble and 
pure and lofty." 

'^ So I often think," said Margaret, *^ and so I 
am sure it was. I believe I half tried to dissuade 
him at the time, but I have been glad since that 
he did not listen to me ; poor dear Edward !" 

^^ You think, then, that his going to India was 
no mistake ; that he has been successful there ? " 

" You ought to answer that question, Mr. Wyk- 
ham, instead of asking it." 

" Well, I was thinking what he would say him- 
self. It is difficult to tell, now that he has entered 
upon so different a course of life out there, but 
formerly I doubt whether he did not often wish 
himself back again; I used often to think. Miss 
Oakfield, and that before I was much in the habit 
of thinking about anything, that your brother had 
to contend against a continual sense of disappoint- 
ment: I do not mean that he did not like the 
country; he used to own that, as a thing to be 



206 OAKFIEI.D, OR 

laughed at, and of no great consequence ; bat I 
had alwajs a vagoe notion that he had a much 
deeper sorrow than this." 

Margaret bad been listening with eagerness ; 
seeing that she made no answer, Wykbam con- 
tinued, — 

" I don't mean that there was an; morbid melan- 
choly about bim : a tendency tlus way be bad, I 
know; he has told me so himself more lately ; but 
one which he always resisted, and has, I think, 
completely overcome: it seems more as though be 
were oppre^d by the seriousness of life, and 
harassed by an anxious desire to-do right, which 
leaves its mark upon his countenance when he 
does not know it." 

"Yea, yes, I can conceive all you say, very 
well ; pray go on." 

" Well, I remember this impressed me when 1 
first knew bim ; I met him at Meerut, four years 
ago, dining with Stanton, a mutual and very dear 
fnend of ours." 
" I know," 

" Wel\, I knew he was a griff (you know what 
that is, Tresh in the country) and was prepared to 
look down upon him accordingly, — though he was 
very nearly my own age, — ^by virtue of my ax years 
eeniority ia the service ; but I found out before 
dinner was over, that the looking down must be 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 207 

the Other way, if at all. I did not see moch of 
him then, but I liked him, and I think he liked me ; 
in fact I know he did, for we corresponded, from 
the very beginning, like old friends. I was a good 
deal more light-headed then than I am now, 
though I dare say you will find it hard to believe 
that, Miss Oakfield ; and I have wondered since 
what it was that made us such friends. Stanton 
used to growl and make uncivil observations about 
it, for I think it puzzled him too; however, friends 
we were. Well, then followed his court martial 
troubles, which I was telling you about the other 
day, and then at last we came fairly in contact I 
could not agree with him then as I do now, but 1 
still admired him, and had a sneaking consciousness 
that he was right. I heard him abused, for the 
thing was a good deal talked about, and sometimes 
I had horrid misgivings about him, which I hate 
myself now when I think of. On the whole, though, 
I am glad to remember that I believed and main- 
tained before others that he was not afraid, or 
anything of that sort, but I believe I made con- 
cessions of principle on the other side, which he 
would have thought worse than my letting him be 
called a coward. I declare to you. Miss Oakfield, 
I could be a child when I think of his letters to 
me at that time in answer to mine, which were, I 
dare say, suspicious, half unkind, half insolent. 



210 OAKFIELD, OR 

if not odious : my whole being awoke, I think, at 
that time ; people talk of conversions, and so on ; 
it is often great folly, I dare say ; but there are 
undoubtedly points in the lives of some of us, which 
can be at once fixed upon as vitally criticaL The 
change from boyishness to manliness comes sooner 
or later, at very different times, and in very different 
ways ; to some so gradually that its progress is not 
perceptible : to others again suddenly, as visible as if 
accompanied by a tongue of fire or a rushing mighty 
wind. I think that this conversation which I have 
been speaking of was such a crisis to me ; I was 
older than your brother, but then for the first time 
seemed to put away childish things. We parted 
soon afterwards, and during the campaign were 
separated; but the sting of our intercourse re- 
mained with me, and often during the march and 
on the picket, and afterwards on a bed of wakeful 
pain and sickness, his image was with me, and 
another image more startling, more impressive, 
more welcome,— that of myself, of my own long 
latent being. It is wonderful to wake firom the 
sleep that bounds us in, to an hour or a minute of 

self-consciousness. Well, we met again at Lahore, 
and again lived together at Simla, and took up our 

intercourse, so to speak, at the point where we had 

left it I went back to school, a dear schoolmaster. 

Miss Oakfield, you can easily believe," (Margaret 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 211 

looked quite as if she could), '^and I think we helped 
in those few months to educate each other. But I 
owe him an obligation which I can never repay ; it 
was not that he was the first who ever spoke to me 
of these things ; a clergyman, or an uncle, or any 
one in authority over me, might have preached to 
me for weeks, and it would, I doubt not, have gone 
in at one ear and out at the other. I should have 
thought it very right and proper, and natural for 
them to speak so, and should have received their 
good advice in so many set lectures, as I should 
take a prescription from a doctor, and think about 
one as much as the other an hour afterwards. But 
you may imagine how different a thing it was when 
I found my teacher in a friend, a companion, a 
brother officer, my junior in years, whom I was first 
attracted to by a natural liking; when we only came 
to talk of these things, because they had a deep 
interest for us both, which interest he had perhaps 
communicated to me without my knowing it, or 
rather not communicated it, but roused what was al- 
ready dormant in my own nature ; — when we learnt 
to talk of religion, and to begin to think of it as a 
matter of Monday and Tuesday, and the ride and 
the parade, as much as Sunday and the church and 
the sermon ; when, in short, I began to feel that God 
was not an unpleasant terrible shadow, only re- 
straining me by a vague terror from doing many 

p 2 



212 OAKFIELD, OR 

pleasant things, but a God who, as he made, so 
alone gives meaning to existence, to the natural 
world, to friendship, to love, to man." 

He stopped, and thej both sat silent for a few 
moments, encouraging the idea so suggested. 
An idea of wonderful power I To dissolve and to 
unite ; to dissolve all seeming differences and bar- 
riers, and to unite in very closest intimacy of 
being. When two souls, though it be for a mo- 
ment, look out together upon God's works and 
feel that they are his, for that instant at any 
rate the mysterious earthbom divbions melt 
away, and a complete, primitive, yet more mys- 
terious unity once again exists ; those two souls, 
while such a vision lasts, are, in very deed, one. 
A ringing laugh from one of the little girls, play- 
ing in the brook close by, broke the reverie, 
and Wykham descended to earth again, but still 
a fairy-like half visionary earth: the afternoon, 
sun shone above them with more than the 
warmth of spring: the pale blue sky with the 
white clouds sailing under it seemed to beckon 
them on into infinite visions, the babbling stream 
danced by them with a mirth worthy of the gods, 
the sleepy motions of the happy sheep as they 
grazed upon the mountain turf were the only dull 
signs of animal life that served to give a quiet 
reality to what else had been almost too ideal; 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 213 

except when, from time to time, the laughing shouts 
of the tiny masons, so busily employed in obstruct- 
ing the passage of the dashing sparkling waters, 
peopled this lover's paradise with images of human 
affection and domestic joy. With a long sigh to 
relieve his almost oppressive sense of happiness, 
Wykham continued his history, all old to the 
reader, but, if not new, most deeply interesting to 
Margaret 

" We parted, as I told you, on the 16th of Oc- 
tober, at Ferozepore ; it was not without more emo- 
tion than perhaps he thought me capable of, that 
I saw him left alone, while Stanton went off to his 
new domestic life, — I to my home in that England 
which was so seldom out of his thoughts. Poor 
Ned I as I said before. Miss Oakfield, his life the 
last five years has been more brave than happy. I 
thought of all our intercoiu^e ; I had a strong con- 
sciousness of what he had been to me, but I hated 
a scene, and so did he ; I only said * Thank you ;' 
a sufficiently compressed epitome of all and more 
than all that I have now been saying to you, — I 
don't know whether he understood it, — and I came 
away. There ; — I meant to give you your brother's 
history, Miss Oakfield, and with the cunning of 
egotism I have run off into my own." 

" Thank you," said Margaret ; and as she looked 
up, there was a diamond sparkle in her soft brown 
eye that set Wykham's soul on fire. 



214 OA&FIELD, OR 

*' And do you think," he began again, in a tone 
in which sadness had given place to vehement 
energy, ^* that my obligations ended there ? Oh, 
Miss Oakfield, who knows as well as you that they 
had but hardly begun ? Poor Ned I he little thought 
that when he next saw me, I should no longer be 
able to give him the first and highest love of my 
heart, as indeed I did before. Oh, indeed, if ever 
he taught me anything, — if my soul has awaked 
from her long slumber, — if I have gone through 
the discipline of pain, of suffering, of discomfort, — 
it was for this hour; that through such teaching I 
might bring to you a love, pure, earnest — oh, Mar- 
garet, 80 deep and true, that I dare not use even 
the language of flattery to call it unworthy of you. 
My love is worthy, Margaret : it has seen God and 
lived. I never knew till a few minutes ago, when 
I looked round upon this lovely scene, and felt how 
present God is, how infinite,— how eternally rooted 
my love for you is ; — Margaret T — 

He stopped, for poor Margaret's diamond 
sparkles had swollen into a flood ; and the tears, as 
she held her hands before her eyes, were escaping 
through her small white fingers. Surely she is 
not weeping for grief: so thought her lover : he 
took one of those small hands in his own, and drew 
it gently and unopposed away from that beautiful 
countenance, which its fellow now only half con- 
cealed. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 215 

"Margaret," he almost whispered, "you will 
finish Edward's lesson; you will be my teacher, 
my rich blessing, my own, my beloved companion, 
support, and comforter." 

The other hand was withdrawn, and in that up- 
turned face, smiUng through tears, he read that 
answer which prompted him to draw her gently to 
himself, and imprint the first long, loving, earnest 
kiss of deep and pure affection upon the lips of his 
affianced wife. 

• • • « • 

The smi had set when they entered the garden, 
but the quick eyes of Mrs. Oakfield, who met them, 
detected the traces of excitement in her daughter's 
appearance. 

" Margaret, love, you look pale, you have been 
walking too far." 

" No mother," she said, " I think not ; oh, my 
mother," she added, " let me come to you." 

She put her arms round her mother's neck, and 
hung there like a little child. Wykham, like a 
sensible man, walked on and entered the house. 



216 OAKFIELD, OR 



CHAPTER VII. 

" A feeling of sadness comes o'er me 
That my soul cannot resist. 

A feeling of sadness and longing. 
That is not akin to pain. 
And resembles sorrow only 
As the mist resembles rain." 

Longfellow. 

» 

'^ This is delightful T exclaimed Edward Oak- 

fieldy as he sat down to his solitary dinner, in his 
small quarters at Lahore, with an unopened Eng- 
lish letter before him. ^^ He was a wise man who 
said ^ Sweet is pleasure after pain,' though the pain 
is severe, it must be owned." 

It was the beginning of the burning nK)nth ot 
May, and he had spent most of the day in the still 
more burning atmosphere of cutcherry, engaged in 
the arduous work of laboring to administer justice 
in a language with which his ear and tongue were 
not yet familiar. The overland letters had come 
in about twelve o'clock; he could not resist the 
temptation to read that from Leatheburn ; he tore 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 217 

it open, and it is to be feared that for the next 
quarter of an hour the interesting civil action of 
Dhina versus Rhowany Doss, (in which the plaintiff 
sued the defendant for an old debt of five rupees 
four annas, each party bringing an army of wit- 
nesses, who swore stoutly, on their respective sides, 
to facts diametrically opposite ; not content with a 
single peijury, but, after the custom of Hindoos, 
calling heaven and earth and all manner of redun- 
dant witnesses to attest their unblushing lie) did 
not meet with the attention which it deserved* 
He laid down the letter, when read, with a sigh. 
*^ When will the next mail be in ?" was his first 
thought; ''now, shall I read Wykham's letter, or 
keep it till the evening?" The question seemed a 
hard one; he handled the letter, looked at the 
post-mark, and seemed on the point of opening it, 
when, with a sudden effort, he put it in his pocket, 
and turned with a perfect rush of attention to the 
perjured liar who was giving his evidence. But in 
the evening virtue was rewarded, when the busy 
work of the day was over, rid of the crowd that had 
beset him for so many hours, almost fidnt firom long 
fasting, he sat down in his own quiet room to his 
comfortable dinner, with Wykham's long unread 
letter on one side, and, by way of reserve, a volume 
of Carlyle on the other. But when he had read the 
letter, containing a long account of Herby's Indian 



218 OAKFIELD, OR 

freak, and Wykham's successful journey to Win« 
Chester, he did not take up the book, but sat think- 
ing for a long time, then ordered the things to be 
taken away, got' his paper-case, and wrote the fol- 
lowing letter to Wykham in answer : — 

"Lahobe, May 5th, 1850. 

" My deae Feed, 

" I received, by to day's mail, your long letter, 
written from Leathebum, telling me about poor Herby's 
wish to come out here. One never answers a letter so 
fully and graphically as when we sit down within five 
minutes of reading it, so I mean to try this plan now, for 
indeed you deserve to be well answered. Dinner is just 
over; you may easily fancy me in one of these small 
Annerkullee houses, sitting at my old camp table which 
has gone all over India with me, with a book at each cor- 
ner of my paper, to prevent its being blown away by the 
punkah, and your letter, with that dear Leathebum post- 
mark, before me. 

In the first place let me thank you, my dear Fred, 
most heartily, for your very kind and wise treatment of 
poor Herby. Indeed it would be a sad disappointment 
to me if he were to come out here ; one of a family is 
enough for this place of torment : speaking seriously, you 
know how often we have agreed that for one man 
whose character is refined and strengthened by the fiery 
furnace of Indian temptation, thet^ are ten who are 
carried away, withered up, and destroyed by it. It is a 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 219 

risk to which I never wish to see kith or kin of mine 
exposed. You hint mysteriously at some change in your 
own fortunes, which may prevent your coming out again. 
Is this a real probability, or only one of the thoughts 
which the wish of all men on their first return home so 
plentifully generates? If the former, India is likely to 
become a howling wilderness to me ; for Middleton talks 
of going home for good. He has only been sixteen years 
in the country, but has lived carefully, and has also, since 
his father's death, had some money of his own. I think 
he has some idea of trying to get into Parliament. In 
that case Stanton alone will be left : a host in himself you 
say, and you are right, though neither he nor Middleton 
can make up to me, dear Ered, for losing you. You will 
be curious to know how I and my Assistant Commissioner- 
ship get on, now that we have had a little more experience 
of each other than when you and I parted on the 15th 
October. I hardly know what to say. I like it better 
than I expected, or rather dislike it less. The actual 
routine, which I thought would be so very difficult, has 
become easy, as you assured me it would, as all routines 
do, though it is hard to believe they will when contem- 
plated irom the distance of utter ignorance. The language 
was my great difficulty, is still, and I think always will 
be. I don't mean to say that I am worse off than my 
neighbours in this respect, but I think they are worse off 
than they often allow. I am sure that there are very few 
men to whom a foreign language, however famiHar from 
study and experience, becomes as complete a servant as 
their own, as for judicial purposes is so desirable. There 



220 OAKFIELD, OR 

are shades of meaning which we often lose, not so much 
in hearing as in speaking, by that cowardly instinct 
which makes us substitute a feeble but fieuniliar, for a 
more vigorous and obscure word. I do not wish to 
exaggerate the importance of this. Eloquence is by no 
means an essential attribute to a judge, but it is always 
a most effective adjunct, especially with Asiaticks ; and 
there are very few Europeans, even amongst those who are 
justly called excellent linguists, who can be really eloquent 
in Ordoo or Persian ; they must think too much of their 
instrument for the effect to be very great. But, on the 
whole, I dislike the work less than I expected ; and the 
actual labor I feel, as I knew I should, most beneficial ; 
not for my health perhaps, which is never good, and 
sometimes very bad, (you need not mention this at 
Leathebum), but to my intellect certainly, which seems to 
work better and more freely at all points for having so 
much heavier a strain upon it. And the method and 
regularity which business necessitates are always a 
wholesome check to my indolent nature. Then on the 
other hand, there is the Oharybdis which we are apt to 
run upon while steering clear of ScyUa ; the danger of 
becoming a mere machine; of becoming a 'first-rate 
officer,' as it is called, and ceasing to be a man. I am 
sometimes startled to find how full my whole mind and 
imagination become of my business, and then the spirit 
of the world is ever at hand to infect all with his blighting 
curse. In this difficulty you may understand how I 
have learnt to value the Sunday, a day when I try com- 
pletely to give myself up to the ideal, that is, the only 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 221 

real ; and shun, as profane, every thought of the material 
and the actual. I onoe used to talk very unwisely about 
the Sunday; I am now, no more than then, a fourth 
commandment man, but I do most heartily admire and 
acknowledge the wisdom of a day of rest. Even now 
Sunday draughts of ether can scarcely counteract weekly 
contact with a grosser atmosphere ; one day of Words- 
worth, or Shakespeare, or that other greater book than 
all, — of quiet thought upon the wonders that are 
above, beneath, and on every side,— of life and death, — 
of Gt)d and the soul,^-can hardly give that firm faith 
which shall resist six days of sapping intercourse with 
the world, — shall impart the liberty of infinite truth to 
those most finite details which are else so apt to degene- 
rate into bondage. You will not think that I mean we 
should take in enough religion on Sundays to last through 
the week, like a steam-engine getting supplies of water to 
carry it on to the next station, but I am sure that in life, 
where so much of our time is necessarily given up to 
dealings with the most common-place present, to hearing 
merely worldly interests insisted upon with all the im- 
portance of ofEidality, it is very necessary (at least to those 
who do not feel their faith far stronger than is the position 
of most of us) to have set and frequent periods wherein 
to shake ourselves, to open our eyes, and see how things 
really do stand ; that the justice, which we do well to be 
so busily engaged with all the week, is still in itself but a 
poor and gross emblem of that eternal truth and justice 
with which it is too often our monstrous error to confound 
it. I am certain that all this is of great practical import- 



222 OAKFIELD, OR 

anoe, though it may perhaps sound vague and mystical. 
The effect of mistaking a lower for a higher good is very 
sadly visible in all our Indian government. The lower good 
is so much higher thaa the highest of many other govern- 
ments, that we may be thankful even for this ; I do believe 
that there are few, if any, governments in the world so 
vigorous, and yet (in the common sense of the term) so 
just and so liberal as that of the East India Company ; and 
yet few or none in so bad a way. Stanton would abuse 
me for being paradoxical ; but I may indulge myself with 
you who are at a safe distance, and more courteous withal 
than our beloved bear. What I am going to say may be 
a humbug, but it has the merit of being, at any rate, a 
well-digested, deliberately-believed humbug. The Indian 
government seems to me to be in a less hopeful and pro- 
mising condition than any other, because, while its prac- 
tice is perhaps better, its principles are worse. In most 
civilized countries there is, generally at least, a partially 
recognised idea of the higher and spiritual ends in go- 
vernment, in "human life, whether social or individual. 
And this is what I call the higher truth, as distinguished 
from that lower one which our government in this country 
seems alone to recognise. In practice most states fall be- 
low even the lower good ; but, for the most part, the pro- 
fession of belief in something higher than protection to 
life and property and revenue collection, is acknowledged 
amongst them ; and even this is something. But we in 
India have not this. Those beaver tendencies which Car- 
lyle speaks of as characterising Englishmen of the present 
day, are not only followed too far in our practice, but, as 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 223 

it would seem, their perfection is our highest idea. Our 
govenunent is purely secular ; and thus, while there can 
be no doubt of the very great relief which British rule 
has given to this country, though it is certain that there 
is a growing desire to treat the natives well, to improve 
the country physically, to improve the courts of justice, 
and so on ; and though I fully admit that these are great 
blessings, (a great deal more than can be said for most 
governments), yet I maintain that to a government that has 
no higher idea than all this, the words * great' or ' noble* 
are misapplied. There is an utter want of nobleness in 
the government of India ; it still retains the mark of its 
commercial origin ; we see every year, in England, the evils 
of a merely commercial spirit, developing themselves in 
selfishness, in coarseness, in cowardly shrinking from brave 
endurance ; in England this is partly counteracted by other 
influences ; but here it is counteracted by nothing but the 
good which undoubtedly is contained, together with the 
evil, in itself. The good, as has been said a thousand 
times, is* great ; it consists in vigour, force, energy, a ter- 
restrial justice, infinitely better than lawless rapine and a 
politic benevolence ; but the evil, though less talked about, 
is great also, and no less certainly exists. The evil is a 
money-getting earthly mind, that dares to view a large 
portion of God's world, and many millions of Grod's crea- 
tures, as a more or less profitable investment, as a good 
return for money laid out upon them, as a providential 
asylum for younger sons. It is curious to observe how 
this commercial spirit, so predominant in Anglo-India in 
the aggregate, manifests itself in the component indivi- 



224 OAKFIELD, OR 

duals. Here of course there are exceptions; but the 
tendency sets all this way. Take the majority of officials 
in this countiy : their vigoiir, their strong sense, their 
prompt and bnsiness-like dexterity, have earned for them 
as a class, a justly honorable distinction. These are 
what may be caUed the commercial virtues. But except 
good men of business what are they P Many of the most 
famous men in India, now and in former days, have had 
none but an official life ; good and honest and intelligent 
men of business ; but alas ! when I add to this, devout, 
godly, reverent servants of Heaven, are you not almost 
inclined to smile ? The Indian government is perhaps the 
best, the most perfect, nay, perhaps the only specimen of 
pure professing secularism that the civilized world has 
ever seen since the christian era ; and sometimes, when our 
eyes are open to see things as they are, such a secularism 
does appear a most monstrous phenomenon to be stalking 
through God's world, not the less so that it happened to 
have four legs to go upon. It is not missionaries that we 
want to remedy this state of things. Secularism is ever 
ready to pay missionaries to any amount, and then com- 
placently to button up its breeches pocket, and go on 
its way rejoicing. But you may land fleet^bads of mis- 
sionaries at Calcutta, and they will pass innocently 
through the length and breadth of the land, having 
about as much influence with the Europeans as the na* 
tives, than which a more utter negation of all quantity 
can hardly be conceived. No amount of orthodox Sun- 
day services will break the force of the spirit of com- 
merce; indeed, this apparatus dares not attack that 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 225 

which is the real enemy; but goes off to a hundred 
other merely fancied ones, enemies of straw, which it 
may set up, and have the fun of knocking down again, 
to all eternity, and take nothing by the motion; the 
truth must come to us by other channels ; our great hope, 
I do beUeve, is the spirit which seems quite lately to 
have gone abroad in Europe, and especially in England, 
where poetry and philosophy do seem to be once more be- 
ginning to assert themselves in opposition to mere selfish 
covetousness, and where good men appear to be learning 
to venture to call things by their real names, and to look 
what Grod makes in the face, and receive it as it is, instead 
of trying to square it away to some orthodox pre-con- 
ceived pattern of their own. When this spirit of phi- 
losophy, and poetry, and godliness shall move across the 
world, and begin to dawn even upon the Englishmen in 
the East, — when the philosophical reformer shall come out 
here as Grovemor-General, — then the spirit of Mammon 
may tremble for its empire, but not till then. We have 
seen in France the evil of a professed regard for abstract 
ideas magnified into idolatry, an idolatry, false of course, 
and ruinous in its effects ; but its opposite, which is the 
sin of this country, cannot be considered much better ; 
nay, even more degraded, if one species of idolatry can 
be a more degraded lie than another. You have no 
notion how seducing this influence, on every side, is. It 
becomes necessary to force myself to repeat continually 
the commonest facts, that Grod made and makes the world, 
— Asia as well as Europe, — that I and all men, black as 
well as white, have immortal souls, and also bodies, that 

VOL. IL Q 



226 OARFIELD, OR 

will die in some thirty or forty years ; or else the cat- 
cheny work would soon degenerate into a gross and de- 
grading mechanism. 

** My Deputy Commissioner is a very pleasant agreeable 
man, and few could be better able, I fancy> to teach me 
the necessary rudiments ; but of course I wish sometimes 
that I could have been at Eerozepore, under Middleton, 
the only man I think I have seen in the country to whom 
I could really look up. Does this sound like conceit ? 
I am so certain that it is not, that I have no scruple in 
saying it. I have met with many men in this country, 
far better and more self-denying in their practice than I 
am, and I have met with very many whom I know per- 
fectly well are far cleverer men than I am, more able to do 
things, quicker, more ready, more ingenious, more ener- 
getic. But I really cannot call to mind any man except 
Middleton who has, combined with an intellect to which 
my own has completely bowed itself, an earnest, serious 
insight into life ; and I cannot look up to the ablest man 
in the world, not to one who shall combine in himself the 
intellectual faculties of Plato, Shakespeare, and Sir Isaac 
Newton, if I feel that in spite of all this I can at any 
time look upon the green earth or upon the starry sky, 
and see in them more than be does, — ^that in fifty years 
at latest I shall have cut him out. But I will end my 
letter with more restful thoughts. This is my resting 
time in the twenty-four hours, and how thoroughly I do 
enjoy it ! Let me compose and soften myself before I go 
to bed, with the thoughts of you and Leatheburn ; though, 
by the bye, I do not suppose you can be there now. But 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 227 

you have seen it, Fred, and you have seen those whom I 
feel I am destined always to love best upon earth, and 
you can conceive what my longing to return has some- 
times been. You may imagine how, in times of storm, 
' and difficulty, and pain, I have longed for that haven of 
peace and love ; how I have left the society of Brooks or 
Straddles, to think of my beloved mother and family ; 
have closed my eyes upon the dusty hideousness of 
Ferozepore to try and conjure up the image of Helvellyn 
and Thirlwater. It is an allowable joy, dear Fred, so to 
muse, but it must not weaken us for work. Were all life 
one peaceful sojourn at Leathebum, it would no longer 
be a hard and sorrowful battle-field. God bless you, 
dear Fred, and strengthen us to work while it is day, 
and for our rest, to look forward, not to furlough, which 
death or poverty may rob us of, but to the peaceful night, 
which, if we may wait for it, will surely come. Good 
night. I have just shouted for my bearer, and am going 
to bed. 

"Ever yours, 

"Edwabd Oakpield." 

If the reader is inclined to object that the asser- 
tions in the above letter are too sweeping and 
general, let him remember that this is the natural 
failing of a young man on first entering into life ; 
that he looks round, and not observing the intricate 
maze in which good and evil lie so closely inter- 
twined, sees only, as he thinks, two main divisions, 

Q 2 



228 OAKFIELD, OR 

and in the freshness of his zeal lauds the one and 
condemns the other ^ith a dogmatical heartiness 
which he is only too certain to learn after a very 
little experience to qualify. It is well, if while 
in after years he learns to be more discreet, he 
does not also become more lukewarm. Oakfield 
worked very hard, and there was no danger of his 
not being interested in his work. And yet it was 
a painful interest; it required a continual effort of 
faith to counteract the degrading spectacle which 
he witnessed every day in his court. It was hard 
to believe that there could be any foundation of 
human sympathy between himself and those men 
who, for the sake of a rupee, would, without the 
smallest scruple, without the faintest sign of shame 
or compunction when detected, lie on with an 
unblushing, unwearying, effrontery. He asked 
Mr. Middleton about this ; his answer was, " That 
the lying of natives in the courts of justice was 
not to be denied, nor certainly to be excused; 
and yet," Mr Middleton wrote, ** there is this to be 
said; that they themselves regard lying to an 
European magistrate, much in the same light as 
some school -boys regard lying to a master; a low 
and wretched and false principle certainly; and 
yet we should probably think worse of a boy who 
told a gross lie to his companions and equals, in 
spite of every injunction of boy morality and honor. 






FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 229 

than of him who lied to his master with little or no 
sense of violating either. So it is with natives ; 
follow them into their villages, it has been often 
said, and you will find that when collected under 
the village trees, in the presence of tlie village 
elders, they will tell the truth even against their 
interests; and shame and reproof from those 
around him will light upon the detected liar. It 
is certain that boys may be taught a higher prin- 
ciple of truthfulness, nay, that they have been : — I 
hear that in the great public schools in England 
the gross notion of its being fair to deceive a 
master, (which certainly prevailed in my time at 
the school I was at,) is quite exploded. I see no 
reason why it should be otherwise in time with 
those older, but still feebler, children, with whom 
we have to deaL After all, 1 believe that even now 
truth is so much stronger than falsehood that in 
most cases it manages, somehow or other, to assert 
itself; and for the rest you must be patient, and 
live in hope. Above all do not be disgusted, but 
stick, at all hazards, to your newly learnt doctrine, 
that men are better than they seem." 

And so Oakfield tried to do. He worked very 
hard at the unwelcome irksome details of his busi- 
ness, and at the same time endeavoured to keep in 
mind that the crowds who thronged his court daily 
were not merely suitors, plaintiffs, defendants. 



230 OAKFIELD, OR 

witnesses, but also men ; that the cases he disposed 
of were not merely official transactions, to be re- 
corded, decided, and appealed upon, but were each 
the plot of so many dramas, exciting interests, hopes, 
fears, in so many homes and villages, which he never 
witnessed, but which existed none the less. This 
gave a human interest to his proceedings that was 
as a salt of vitality, preventing them from becoming 
dry, dead, and unprofitable ; from degenerating (to 
use an expressive modem phrase) into red tapeism. 
It gave too a fresh unwonted vigour to his new offi- 
cial routine, and he soon earned the reputation of 
being a very promising civil officer, even among 
those who were little enough able to guess what 
was the root from which this promise was develop- 
ing itself. In fact Oakfield found that for civil 
employ as well as military, for cutchery as well as 
the field of battle, the fear of Uod was still, as 
much as it ever bad been in the old times, a power 
which nothing could withstand, beating the worldly 
men on their own ground, and expatiating besides, 
on higher grounds, the very existence of which, in 
their philosophy, was never dreamt of. Ue admired 
and wished to learn from the wisdom of the chil- 
dren of the Indian world: he admired, and 
heartily sought to use and imitate the vigour which 
marked almost all the departments of the public 
service : he found the God of prudence and un- 



1 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 231 

derstanding worshipped, and he wished to join such 
worship to that of the God of reason and faith : 
he found everywhere a wise tendency to recognise 
and allow for material facts ; he wished to do the 
same, but not with foolish inconsistency to ignore 
invisible spiritual facts; to behave as if they had no 
existence. He corresponded with Mr. Middleton, 
who often talked of retiring, and sometimes ex- 
pressed a wish that he could be in Parliament when 
the next discussion on the charter came on : ^' Not," 
he wrote, ^^ that I expect there will be much of im- 
portance done at this next renewal ; and indeed I 
hope not ; for the ignorance about India is so enor- 
mous that they would too probably only meddle 
with those things which should be let alone, and 
vice versa. From what I hear, too, I should be 
afraid that people in England would be too apt to 
transfer the reforms and remedies required for their 
own country to us out here; whereas our com- 
plaints are essentially different, and so must be 
their treatment Pauperism, for instance, is, I 
suppose, the one absorbing difficulty to an English 
statesman, including in the term pauperism all the 
manifold evils which lead to and spring out of it ; 
and so an intelligent friend of mine who is en- 
gaged night and day in his Lancashire manufac- 
turing home, with this fearful mesh of problems, 
wrote to me not long ago to know 'what Poor 



232 OAKFIELD^ OB 

Law provbionB we had out here ?' It was a very 
natural question ; yet you, and I, and anybody who 
has been a year in India, with his eyes open, feel 
inclined to smile at it. And why ? Because we 
happen to know that pauperism does not exist ; or 
rather, if you like, that it exbts so universally as 
to cease to be regarded as an evil. In ordinary 
years nobody starves, and the whole population 
lives at the rate of eight shillings per man per 
month. In extraordinary years, — such as the great 
famine year, 1837, shortly after I came out, — the 
whole country starved together, and then, by way 
of special Poor Law for the nonce, the Govern- 
ment remitted the whole revenue for the year. It 
is an acute evil in this country, sent by a special 
dispensation of God, which no poor-laws in the 
world could remedy. In England it is a chronic 
evil, which I suppose the political economists would 
say God had nothing at all to do with ; which I 
should call a dispensation of God no less than the 
other, but different in this, that it results in great 
measure from ordinary foreseeable causes which 
human interference can prevent or modify. The 
difficulty returns to us in another form ; miUions 
live at the rate of eight shillings per man per 
month, and are quite contented; but what a 
thing it is that they should be contented! If 
we wished to state the difference in the most 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 233 

striking way, we might say, discontent is the mis- 
chief in England, content in India. In England 
how is the demand to be supplied ? In India how 
is the demand (the first step in civilization) to be 
created? On the whole, then, I hope that they 
will let us very much alone : it would be useful if 
some influential sensible witness from India could 
be there to point out the immediate reforms ur- 
gently wanted : such as a very large increase of 
officers, that there might be an end to such absurd 
anomalies as one man being appointed, and profess- 
ing, to do the whole revenue, judicial, and executive 
work of a district of some hundreds of miles in ex- 
tent ; not only cruelly wasting the life and powers of 
the European officials, but driving the natives away 
from tribunals so over-crowded that they know it is 
physically impossible for them to obtain a sufficient 
hearing : this only requires thorough exposure to 
be altered ; but, beyond some such points as this, 
the less the House of Commons meddle the better. 
There is more vigour and as much honesty in our 
government as in Downing Street, I believe.* The 
one reform above all others which we want, is bet- 
ter men : a better class to be sent out : older, better 
educated, carefully selected. The Indian officer's 
progress (civil and military) has now too often but 

* It must be remembered that Mr. Middleton was writing 
under the reign of the Russell Ministry. 



234 OAKFIELDy OR 

two or three stages,— child, foolish, profligate, re- 
spectable man of the world. We get shiploads of 
physical courage, and more or less sufficient intel- 
ligence every year : what we want in addition to 
these is a few bushels of thoughtfulness ; of pure, 
unselfish, nay, if you will, even visionary enthu- 
siasm ?" 

Meanwhile the secret which Oakfield had com- 
municated to Wykham in his letter, viz., the 
threatened return of his own illness, could no longer 
be kept a secret He still struggled on, being un- 
willing to throw up his work so soon after coming 
to it, in order to go to the hills on leave. But he 
made that common mistake which has killed and 
does kill so many in India; he clung on in the 
hope of the cold weather coming, and making it 
unnecessary for him to go away ; the consequence 
was, that in August he became so ill (so danger- 
ously ill at one time that Mr. Middleton came over 
from Ferozepore to see him) that he had to go 
away, — ^not to Simla, but to England. His heart 
leaped up within him when he first heard the sen- 
tence ; and then he thought of his work, and begged 
to go to the hills instead. But the doctor was im- 
moveable ; a sea voyage and a long respite firom 
Indian climate, was the only thing that could re- 
store him ; go he must, and for three years. And 
now poor Oakfield allowed himself to give way to 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 235 

the home prospect : his fate once decided he turned 
away resolutely from his opening career of credit 
and distinction in India, and prepared for his jour- 
ney. He set out in the very beginning of October ; 
stopped a few days at Mr. Middleton's, and there 
too he met Stanton (whose troop was still at Fero- 
zepore) and his wife. It was a touching thing 
to them when they parted ; they remembered 
their previous meetings in the same house and sta- 
tion, which last had been the theatre of such im- 
portant events to all of them : the bustle of Oak- 
field's court martial, their re-union after the 
campaign, and Stanton's marriage; and their 
former common associations with the place con- 
trasted strangely with their present state of settled 
calm retrospection. 

<^Do you remember, Mrs. Stanton," Oakfield 
asked, " when I used to come and drink tea every 
morning in the verandah, long before you knew 
that fellow ? " pointing to her husband. 

*'0h yes! I remember it; but it seems ages 
ago." 

" I fancy," said Stanton (when the hour of part- 
ing came), more sentimentally than was his wont, 
'^that our Indian set is pretty well broken up." 

" What the Ferozepore school," rejoined Oak- 
field, laughing, ^^ or young India — which will you 
have? Yes, old fellow; and now I must be off, 



OAKFIBI.D, OB 



and when I get out of this place, my ties with thb 
countTj will be pretty well severed, and I shall only 
have to make the best of my way home. Good 
bye, good bye, God bless you all," and be hurried 
off as Wykham had done almost exactly a year 
before, from the same house, bound in the same 
direction. 

" Poor Mr. Oakfield T said Mrs. Stanton, as they 
stood looking after his retreating palki, "he is an 
old friend, Heorv, for India, is he not P I wonder 
when we shall see him again." 

"An old friend," assented her brother, in a tone 
of still but most deep emotion, " God bless him ! 
we shall see him in heaven." 

She started and looked round, and read plainly 
in the countenances of both her husband and 
brother that they had in their hearts wished Ed- 
ward Oakfield good bye for ever. 

Oakfield left Ferozepore on the 10th of Octo- 
ber ; he travelled by d&k the whole way to Calcutta, 
which place he reached in a fortnight He took 
up his abode at Spence's Hotel, for bis friend at 
Garden Reach had left the country some time 
before. It seemed but a few months since he had 
gone to Spence's with Stanton the first evening he 
landed, and now, after five evonttul years, he was 
on the point of disembarking to return to England 
with a shattered conBtitution. He had acquired 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 237 

much experience, certainly, in that long interval; 
and looking back, felt to have grown very much 
older; and yet to be as far as ever from having solved 
the difficulty which had then beset him. He had 
indeed earned a position in society of credit and 
respectability, but he knew that it did not require 
very much to attain to this. He had more than 
once put himself in contact with the world, but 
these had been but isolated efforts, hardly worth, 
60 it seemed, the agitation and discomposure which 
they had cost. He had served both in a military 
and civil calling with zeal and diligence, and had 
gilded the service with such words as duty, state of 
life in which heaven had placed him, and so on; but 
were these indeed heaven's work ; was God indeed 
glorified in them ; or were they but part of that 
restless meaningless agitation with which earth's 
children are ever with a pompous assumed import- 
ance disquieting themselves; and was there, after all, 
no wisdom in the world, but in a retired philoso- 
phical contemplation, varied only by labors of the 
most direct and obvious charitv ? Poor Oakfield I 
Wykham must have said truly that life had been no 
merry game for him, if these doubts had still haunted 
him, and were not answered yet It is to be be- 
lieved that there are many in these days like him ; 
many of the best and the ablest, who, year by year, 
shrink back from taking any share in the world's 



238 OARFIELD, OR 

government, because they feel that such labour has 
long been hopelessly committed to the spirit of 
worldlinessy to anarchy, to atheism. They iall 
back into an inner spiritual circle, whose contracted 
limits they themselves are the readiest to acknow- 
ledge, the most earnest to lament, leaving more 
active and what are called more important pursuits 
to those whose keener faith and insight enables 
them to discern the real and the divine, though 
covered over with never so many disguises ; or to 
those — far more numerous — who, with duller con- 
sciences, worship the disguises themselves, bestow 
all their energy, all their faith, all their love, upon 
these. 

Oakfield had to appear before the Medical 
Board to get his certificate confirmed. Having 
passed through this ordeal, he sallied forth straight- 
way, and drove in his hired buggy to the office 
of the ^' Peninsular and Oriental Company," and 
took a berth in the overland steamer, ^Had- 
dington,' to sail on the 8th, that very day week. 
The seven intervening days were occupied in 
making arrangements with outfitters, the military 
fund people, &c. &c,, and perhaps chiefly in castle- 
building. He had written firom Ferozepore to tell 
his fiiends that he should probably be at home in 
December, and now he wrote another short letter to 
go by the same steamer as himself as far as Malta, 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 239 

and then to strike ofF via Marseilles, and reach 
England only four days before its writer. Again 
reminiscences crowded almost overpoweringly upon 
Oakfield as he closed this, his last Indian letter, 
and then thought of his first ; which he well re- 
membered writing the very day after his landing, 
full of his first impressions of the new life which 
had now become so familiar to him. 

He had met at Spence's the person who was to 
share his cabin in the steamer, and was glad to 
find him a quiet gentlemanly man. Capt Rob- 
bins, who, like himself and so many others, was 
returning to England on sick leave, broken down 
by fifteen consecutive years of Indian sun. 

The eventful 8th arrived; Oakfield and Capt 
Robbins drove down together about seven in the 
morning to the ghat where the steamer was 
lying. It was a fine day, of course, but still 
hot even in November, mid-winter being the 
only time when Calcutta is for a few weeks re- 
sonably cool Oakfield had seen no shipping 
since the day he landed, and, as he set foot on 
deck, looked up at the smoking funnel, heard the 
buzzing gui^le of the nascent steam, listened to 
the strange homelike shouts, ^ Malta,' ^ Gibralter/ 
^ Southampton,' * Southampton,' as the mail-boxes 
were brought on board, looked at the directions of 
the various packages which lay about the ship, 



240 OAKFIELDy OR 

containing the names of remote English country 
villages, English towns and counties, he felt the 
spell of his exile dissolve itself within him, and 
perceptibly entered upon another phase of exist- 
ence. 

The bell rings, the pale-faced men and wo- 
men who have accompanied their home-bound 
friends to the ship now move off, a dolorous troop, 
to return listlessly to their desks and counting houses 
in that hot painful city, which it is to be feared will 
appear distasteful enough to them to-day, after 
thus standing as it were for an hour to two upon 
the threshold of home* Again the bell rings, the 
Pilot and the Captain have taken their stand upon 
the paddle-box : the former slowly raises his hand, 
a small sharp-looking boy posted at the hatch- 
way leading down into the engine-rooms sees the 
signal, and with a quick indifferent shout commu- 
nicates its import to the inmates of the glowing den 
beneath. Those swarthy inmates hear and obey ; 
the shrill scream of the escaping steam ceases, 
Oakfield rushes to the side and sees the huge 
wheel slowly revolve ; then, as the great ship glides 
away, he watches the scarcely receding shore; the 
wheels turn more quickly, stirring up the bubbling 
yeasty waters, and raising in the ship's wake that 
trail of rolling waves that is to follow them home ; 
small boats toiling up the river seem to fly past 



FELLOWSHIP IN THB EAST. 241 

them^ animated with their own speed; Garden 
Reach and its deadly verdure is passed ; the pas- 
sengers turn to look once more at the City of 
Palaces^ but it is gone ; and they are gliding down 
between the quiet banks of the sacred Hooghley, 
aheady three miles on their way to England. 
They had started at ten o'clock ; about noon, just 
as with that readiness which never fails an English 
society, they were settling naturally into the feel- 
ings and habits of voyagers, the steamer from 
England came in sight: the speed was slackened, 
the crews of both ships manned the rigging and 
exchanged hearty cheers as they passed each other. 
Oakfield tried to join in those friendly huzzas, but 
his heart and his voice &iled him ; he went behind 
the wheel and looked after the other ship, more dis- 
posed to weep than to cheer. What hopes and fears 
were being borne on to their near fulfilment ; what 
histories of most thrilling interest were being 
acted there, in anxious expectation of the new 
chapter so soon to open ! There were the sailors 
returning to Calcutta for the hundredth time, 
looking at every object with the careless eye of 
custom, and only glad to have their voyage done : 
there was the old Indian returning with pleasure 
to the land of curries, marring his own enjoyment 
by feverish speculations as to what appointment 
he would get, and whether so and so would have 

VOL. IL R 



242 OAKFIELDy OR 

superseded him in his absence ; there was the wife 
returning to her husband to share with him the 
pain of separation from the beloved children she 
has left behind her; there are the young ladies 
coming out to their parents^ or brothers^ or uncles, 
viewing every thing, some with intelligence, 
some, it is to be feared, with an inquisitive in- 
sipid^ feebleness ; and there, too, God help them I 
are the grifis; — Oh, how Oakfield's heart was 
filled with sympathy for them I Some indeed 
were probably in Uttle want of sympathy ; coarse, 
thoughtless, foolish, as ready to take the road 
to perdition in India as they would have been 
in England; others sanguine, bold, ambitious, 
crowding to the vessel's bows with eager intereist 
to catch the first glance of what has so long been 
the land of their dreams and fancies; others again 
trying to veil an aching heart (poor boys, it seems to 
them well nigh a broken one I) under a garb of 
manliness, of indifierence^ of recklessness; and 
some few looking upon all things with a piteous 
vacancy that proclaims them to belong to that ijlass 
of characterless victims who are the devil's first, and 
favorite, and easiest prey ; but all, probably, more 
or less hopefiil, more or less anxious. What a 
depth of fathomless interest was centred in each 
individual case I and regarded more generally here 
was another instalment of English power; a fresh 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 243 

supply of that material from which the soldiers and 
statesmen of India were to be formed ; what gene- 
rals, what council members, what governors may 
that ship contain; but then once more Oakfield 
turned in thought to the higher interest, and 
added, as indeed the most wonderful climax, what 
men! 

The Haddington continued her voyage, and 
anchored that evening at the Sandheads: the 
next morning the pilot went off, taking with him 
Oakfield's last official communication to the go- 
vernment of India, the report of his departure on 
8th November by the P. O. S. N. Co.'s ship Had- 
dington, for Europe, on medical certificate. Once 
more he determined that he would set foot on 
Indian ground. They reached Madras on the 
third day, and he went ashore in one of the masul- 
lah boats, through the tossing surC The steamer 
was to start again at sun-set Shortly before that 
time he came on board, and while the anchor was 
being weighed, stood watching that wonderful 
coipitry, of which he had now taken his last fare- 
well. Parting will make us kindly disposed even to 
those persons and places which we have loved the 
least His Indian life passed slowly in review 
before him, and he owned he was not a little in- 
debted to that country whose purple shores were 

fast fading from his view in the increasing dark- 

R 2 



244 OAKFIELDy OR 

ness. There lay the Indian empire^ the great* 
est wonder of the world; there reposed those 
hostile races whose struggles had been ended in 
common submission to the stronger foreign stranger ; 
there that English community was eating and 
drinking, and sleeping and laughing, heedless or 
unconscious of their own miraculous position, and 
the enormous resp(»isibility that burdened it ; there 
too within those shores were his own Mends, Stan-» 
ton and Middleton ; and there slept the young boy 
whom he had left on the banks of the Ganges; 
there lay India, teeming, like every other part of 
the world, with its million of individual human 
interests, passions, and sufferings; the history of 
which, as a nation, had had its beginning in 
marvel, and of which all ask, and none can tell 
what the end shall be. 

So mused Oakfield ; and with a long deep sigh 
of thankfulness, of penitence, of hope, of joy, of 
sorrow, of all emotion, he took his last look over 
the dark calm sea, and at the intermittent flashes 
of the Madras light, now the only object visible 
from the shore, and went below; but before he 
slept, uttered a fervent prayer for that country 
which he should never see again. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 245 



CHAPTER VIII. 

" Oh ! dream of joy ! is this indeed 
The lighthouse top I see ? 
Is this the hiU P Is this the kirk ? 
Is this miae own countrie ? " 

Coleridge. 

** Hame, hame, hame ; hame fain wad I be, 
Oh hame, hame, hame, to my ain countrie ! 
When the flower is i' the bud, and the leaf is on 

the tree, 
The larks shaD sing me hame in my ain countrie ; 
Hame, hame, hame, hame fain wad I be, 
Oh hame, hame, hame, to my ain countrie ! '' 

Alan Cunningham. 

The Haddington continued her voyage in great 
prosperity over a mirror-like sea. The weather 
was delightful, the days sunny, cloudless, warm 
but not oppressive, the nights just cold enough to 
make a blanket welcome. On the 15 th of Novem- 
ber, the seventh day of their voyage, they came in 
sight, about six o'clock in the morning, of the 
fairy-like island of Ceylon. 

As they approached and saw those bright eme- 
rald woods in the foreground, with the red roofs of 



246 OAKFIELD, OR 

the tiny houses peeping out of them, more like a 
highly-colored and vamished card-board picture, 
than a part of the actual every day world, the har- 
bour lying with its unruffled surface like an inland 
lake fringed with the grey green of the cocoa trees, 
whUe in the distant back-ground rose up ranges of 
blue wavy mountains; it was not hard to people 
this scene with the fimcy forms of Hindoo mytho- 
logy ; an army of monkeys might easily be imagined 
advancing to the attack, and finding a rich spoil in 
the cocoa forest 

They left Ceylon on the same evening, and 
began the longest stage of their overland voyage, 
standing right across the Arabian gulf for the 
Straits of Babelmandeb. That same night, as 
Oakfield stood by the bowsprit watching the strange 
stars, which in those latitudes cluster round the 
Southern Cross, his meditations were suddenly 
broken in upon by a loud voice exclaiming, in a 
well-known tone, " Well, Mr. Oakfield ; here you 
are at last." Oakfield turned to look at the 
speaker ; he supposed that all the passengers had 
been in bed ; these midnight musings of his had 
always been undisturbed by any human presence^ 
save that of the silent watching sailors. 

He himself used, at this time, to leave a bed 
where he could not sleep, and wrapping himself in 
the Scotch plaid, which had done like duty on his 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 247 

first voyage to India, in which he had slept before 
now, and hoped perhaps to sleep again, upon the 
side of Helvellyn, would walk, or sit, or he down 
in different parts of the ship, building his castles 
and exercising his thoughts beneath the kindly 
teaching of the silent sky, and the "wide glim- 
mering sea.** He turned to look at the person who 
had addressed him ; the moon, within three days 
of the full, shed a bright pure light upon a coun-- 
tenance and figure that spoke little of brightness or 
of purity. He recognised the man instantly ; the 
seedy black clothes looked seedier, the red dissi* 
pated face more dissipated, the coarse sandy hair 
involved in wilder tangles by the accumulated 
matting of four years of uncultivated vegetation, 
the gray twinkling eye seemed to have had much 
of its moist humour clouded by the mists of a grow-" 
ing sensuality, but that face and that Irish voice 
could belong to no other than his steamer acquaint- 
ance, the friend of his poor dear papa, Malone. 

« Where did you spring from ? I had no notion 
you were on board.'' 

" I dare say not Sir, for I am where I believe no 
one would think of looking for a Malone ; I am a 
second class passenger. Sir ; there — ^you know it all. 
" I am sorry that circumstances should oblige 
you to travel uncomfortably, Mr. Malone," replied 
Oakfield, who could not bring himself, however, to 



248 OAKFIELD, OR 

regard it as any very tremendous calamity, ^^ but I 
still wonder that I have not met you, for I have 
been in this part of the ship almost every night," 

*^ Ah I you see I have been in my bed for these 
seven days, for the real &ct is I have been cruel 
bad with the sea-sickness, Mr. Oakfield," 

'' Tou must be a bad sailor ; for we have had the 
sea like a mill pond the whole way ; well, but did 
you know I was on board ? You spoke just now 
as if you did." 

*^ Ah, bless you, yes ; I know the name of every 
ereature on board." 

Oakfield could not help smiling as he recog* 
nised this old trait, indulged even in spite of sea- 
sickness and cabin imprisonment 

" Well, but Mr. Malone, why didn't you send 
for me if you were ill, and if you knew I was on 
board?" 

^' Why, you know, young gentlemen are proud 
sometimes, and I thought you might not like your 
friends to know you carae to see a second class 
passenger." 

** I am very much obliged to you for thinking 
me a very contemptible puppy," replied Oakfield. 

" No no," said the other, hastily, "I knew you 
wouldn't feel so really, but then I wasn't sure ; for 
after all, the Oakfields of licathebum have a right 
to be proud if any hc^ve." 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 249 

- <« Do you still maintain^ Mr. Malone, that I am 
the fortunate possessor of £2000 a year ? " 

The other laughed in an awkward half-^ibashed 
way ; it was evident that he had fallen terribly in 
the world, and consequently in his own estimation, 
since he had patronised Oakfield and tried to hold 
him up as his friend, the landed proprietor, on 
board the river steamer. 

^^No, no; but I suppose you are really going 
home to live at Leathebiun ? " 

^^ To live upon nothipg for the rest of my life ? 
No, I am going home on sick certificate." 

''Ah I you look ill; awfiil country! I was 
nearly a dead man myself after I saw you ; I tra- 
velled all over the three presidencies on a tattoo, at 
the rate of fifty miles a day, sleeping under trees or 
in the serais; I killed about three tattoos, but 
couldn't kill myself, though God knows I should 
not much have minded changing places with the 
poor dead beasts at times." 

There was something in the despair with which 
this was said, and the broken-down forlorn appear- 
ance of one whom he remembered so flaunting and 
self-confident, which touched Oakfield. He hardly 
knew, however, what to say, for he knew nothing 
of his companion's business, or circumstances, or 
prospects ; and on all these points Mr. Malone was 
as reserved as ever; he confessed indeed that he 



250 OAKFIELD, OR 

was hard up^ and hinted that he had lost his en- 
gagement with some newspaper establishment : and 
probably Oakfield was not far wrong in setting him 
down as a poor literary adventurer, who had wan- 
dered about the world all his life ministering to 
men's excitements, and now was about to reap, in 
a premature old age, the fruits of so ignominious a 
service. A man who had been used to writing 
flashy articles, firet in English, then in Indian news- 
papers, for his bread ; using the terms duty, princi- 
ple, and conscience, with the free indiiSerence of a 
paid hack, till the great names, so often on his lips 
and at his finger ends, were dead in his heart; 
and while he seemed to take an interest in, — nay, 
believed himself interested in the ^ cause of the 
church,' ^ the cause of missionary labor,' ^ the cause 
of the aristocracy,' ^ the cause of the press,' cared 
in truth for nothing ; and tried to supply the utter 
vacuum of such an existence by the temporary ex- 
citements of debauchery. 

Oakfield was moved with compassion, and said, 
on the impulse of the moment, ^^ Can I do anything 
for you in England?" An instant afterwards he 
was sorry he had asked the question : he knew he 
could do nothing, and had probably taken on his 
own shoulders a burden that would stick like the 
Old Man of the Sea. He was relieved, therefore, 
when Mr. Malone answered, ^^ No Sir ; no thank 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 251 

you ; if ever I do come to England again I shall 
remember your offer, but I leave you at Aden." 

^^ At Aden !" exclaimed Oakfield ; then thought, 
** what a place in all the world for a ruined man to 
go to for the purpose of retrieving his fortunes 1" 

Mr. Malone saw his surprise, and muttered 
something about having an interest in the hotel 
there; which left Oakfield under the impression 
that he was going to turn inn-keeper; perhaps the 
thousandth speculation which this Protean man had 
tried in the course of his multifarious life. Oakfield 
had several conversations with him before they 
reached Aden, and was much impressed with the 
pathetic sight of the wreck of a fellow man. Ma- 
lone himself gave up more and more entirely the 
old slang, and free and easy manner ; talked no 
more of Oakfield's poor dear papa, though he 
seemed to take a humanizing pleasure in recurring 
to the period of his own intercourse with him in 
the days of his respectability ; and when the ship 
anchored at Aden he said to Oakfield — 

" The fact is. Sir, the proprietor of the hotel 
here is a sort of cousin of mine, and when I was a 
ruined man, so help me God, Mr. Oakfield, nearer 
actual starvation than perhaps any Cambridge 
graduate ever yet was, I wrote to him, (by token I 
hadn't money to pay the letter inland and walked 
to Madras to post it there) and he behaved like an 



252 OAKFIELD^ OR 

Irishman and told me to come to him, and here I 
am, and I suppose the descendant of all the Malones 
must turn waiter or boots ; and now Mr, Oakfield, 
m make free before I leave the only respectable 
friend I have in the world to ask the loan of a 
sovereign," 

Oakfield could have smiled at the feeling which 
prompted the use of the word loan : he was able, 
however, and most willing to give the poor man 
five pounds; and with an earnest wish, but little 
hope, of his well doing, shook hands with him and 
watched him as he went over the side, and (being 
already almost himself again in the possession of 
five pounds) ordered about the boatmen in his old 
style of happy Irish insolence ; his very brogue 
seeming to spring up, phoenix-like, under the golden 
shower, Malone vanished from Oakfield^s sight, 
and in a few lines he must vanish from ours also. 

About eight months afler, as Mr. Middleton was 
Sitting at breakfast, at Ferozepore, he was told that 
a ^ Sahib ' wanted to speak to him. Going out, he 
found the person, twice described, of Mr. Malone ; 
it was evident that he had fallen upon his legs once 
more: the misfortune, the starvation, the pathos, 
which, when Oakfield parted with him at Aden, 
had seemed to give some hope for the man, were 
all gone, and he was again the loud, sanguine, 
hypocritical, insolent Irishman. He wanted Mr. 



n 



FELLOIVSHIP IN THE EAST. 253 

MiddletOQ to support a new paper, which he pro* 
posed editing under the imposing tide of the Cm* 
Sutig Gazette* 

**I knew, by the bye," Mr. Malone said, "a 
friend of yours ; a young man called Oakfield*" 

^^Hahl" said Mr. Middleton, with a sudden 
interest, which the eulogy upon the Cis^Sudg 
Oazette had failed to awaken ; when did you know 
him?'' 

^* Sure, Mr. Middleton, didn't I meet him five 
years ago, on the Ganges, in the same steamer as 
yourself; and then I was on the overland with 
him going to Aden. A good family he belongs to, 
but I fear hell never be worthy of it ; he was but 
a tame poor-spirited young chap." 

*' Sir," interrupted Mr. Middleton, sternly, ^'you 
are foolishly mistaken." 

Mr. Malone wished to retract, directly he saw 
how the land lay, but perceiving he made no pro- 
gress, took a speedy departure. Mr. Middleton 
went back to his breakfast ; Mr. Malone went 
— ^reader, we know not where ; but take our word 
for it that he still wanders up and down the 
earth with the curse of sensuality and servility 
upon him ; and that the first number of the C&- 
Sutlef Gazette has not yet made its appearance. 

To return to our narrative. The Haddington 
had a good passage down the Red Sea ; the weather 



254 OAKFIELD> OR 

was still calm, and clear, and beautiful. Oakfield 
continued his forecastle vigils without any fear of 
interruption. On the night of the first of Decem- 
ber they crossed the spot to which tradition assigns 
the passage of the Israelites; Oakfield, of course, 
took the tradition for no more than it was worth, 
yet it was an awful thing to look over the sea at the 
dark horizon, and think that there lay Mount Sinai, 
where God had in very truth appeared and spoken 
with the sound of the thunder and the voice of 
words unto his people : that there was the shore 
where the Heaven-preserved host had landed, and 
Miriam and her fellows had played upon the tim- 
brels, saying, ^^Sing unto the Lord, for he hath 
triumphed gloriously ; the horse and his rider hath 
he thrown into the sea:" that near here, at any 
rate, was the place where the waters had rolled 
back and been a wall upon this side and a wall 
upon that, while the chosen race—- a wandering 
band of emigrants, let the scoffing antiquarian tell 
us, but let us rather say, with a truer wisdom, a 
more prudent faith, — the chosen seed, the royal 
Priesthood, the peculiar People; — carrying with 
them the destinies of an unconscious world, passed 
through on dry land, which the Egyptians assaying 
to do, perished, and were drowned in the depths of 
the sea. 

With break of day our sleepless traveller was 



FELLOY^SHIP IN THE EAST. 255 

again on deck ; the contracting shores and the red 
clifis, marked strikingly both the shape of the 
Red Sea, and the obvious geological peculiarity 
from which it derives its name. The ship went 
on, and by eleven o'clock on the morning of the 
2nd of December anchored in Suez roads. The 
Indian half of the voyage was over ! The whole 
party of voyagers, about ninety in number, were 
landed, after about three quarters of an hour un- 
comfortably spent in boats, upon that yellow arid 
shore, to which the great white staring hotel 
of Suez seemed to give an appearance of even 
greater heat and discomfort The vans were got 
ready, and in an hour's time Oakfield was going 
over that wild sandy wilderness as fast as four Arab, 
almost unbroken, horses, could draw him. On he 
jogged, in a state of half-sleepy, half-painfully jolted 
consciousness ; no event broke that eighteen hours, 
except the occasional, noiseless, stealthy tread of 
the spongy-footed camels, as, in long strings, they 
glided by in the ghostly darkness, laden with the 
passengers' luggage and the mail boxes. 

At three o'clock, on the morning of the third, 
they reached Grand Cairo : wonderful city 1 rest- 
ing under the shadow of the Pyramids, and all the 
ages since the Arabian Nights : but alas I for the 
ignominious truth, Oakfield was fast asleep from the 
time he reached the Oriental Hotel till be was 



256 OA&FIELD, OR 

roused to go down to the steamer upon the Nile, 
He embarked; and havmg» with the wisdom of an 
experienced traveller, committed his lu^;age at 
Suez, with unquestioning confidence, to the ser- 
vants of his Highness the Pasha, found it safely 
placed on board the steamer ; while poor Robbins, 
who had tried to go upon the orthodox principle of 
never allowing his belongings to go out of his sight, 
after breaking the hearts of all the infidel porters 
at Suez, and disquieting himself and his companions 
in the van with the clamorous expression of his 
fears, now found those fears realized ; for the red 
green striped carpet-bag was nowhere to be found ! 
The steam was up, and the little vessel paddled 
quickly down the fertilizing river. The name of 
a Liverpool firm, engraved conspicuously over the 
engine room, seemed strangely associated with the 
richly flourishing banks, with the mosques and 
minarets, the bright costumes and the solid uncouth 
buildings, which all spoke of the days of Mussul- 
man conquest, of Herodotus's kings, of Isis and 
Anubis, and of that small family which came down 
fi-om the land of Canaan, because they heard * that 
there was com in Egypt' 

They steamed quickly down the Nile and reached 
Atfeh and the Mahmoudie canal in the middle of 
the night, and had to change into the smaller 
boats there ready. The shouts and cruelty of the 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 257 

janissaries, as they beat and abused the unhappy 
work-people who labored from fear only, made 
Oakfield glad that this was the last time he would 
have to witness despotic government At eleven 
o'clock, on the morning of the fifth, they reached 
Alexandria, and were there greeted with the joy- 
ful tidings that the ^Ripon' steamer, had come in 
three days previously, and was now lying in the 
roadstead waiting for the passengers. It was, 
indeed, a step homewards to be in the Medi- 
terranean; to set foot on the very vessel which 
was to take them to England. The Captain 
and the sailors were all equally anxious to be off; 
the passengers had certainly no wish to linger; 
where all are of one mind work goes on briskly ; 
and that very evening at six o'clock the Ripon 
sailed out of the harbour on her way to Southamp- 
ton. The change of hemisphere was now very 
perceptible; and although in that southern lati- 
tude, (strange to say, nearly the same parallel as 
Lahore,) even December breezes blew gently, yet 
at midnight they would draw their blankets over 
them with a shiver, that gave a foretaste of that 
acquaintance with an English winter which they 
soon hoped to renew. 

At Malta they anchored, but were prevented by 
the quarantine regulations &om going on shore. 
Oakfield could only stand and look at the white 

VOL. n. 8 



258 OAKFIELD, OR 

houses that clustered up the precipitous side of Va- 
letta, overhanging the harbour, and think how he 
had rambled there five years before with Stanton. 
A strange coincidence occurred here to divert the 
monotony of a ship-imprisonment in sight of land. 
As the passengers were, with the tenacity of true 
Indians, taking their usual ante-dinner promenade 
upon their limited * course' — ^the flush deck of the 
Ripon, — they saw a large man-of-war fiigate stand- 
ing slowly out towards the mouth of the harbour, 
with the homeward bound pennant streaming al- 
most down to the deck. ^' What is she ? what is 
she?" was the universal admiring question. It was 
with a pleasant shock of surprise that Oakfield 
heard the answer, — "H. M. S. * Amazon,'" and 
recollected that she was the ship to which young 
Walter Vernon belonged, of whose first impres- 
sions of sea life he had read, in his letter to Arthur, 
when on his sick bed at Hajeepoor. They were 
a happy set in that ship; going home to spend 
Christmas season in England, after three years ser- 
vice on the Mediterranean station. 

The Ripon got to Gibralter on the fourteenth 
of December, and there, for the last time in foreign 
waters, dropped anchor. The same quarantine 
regulations were in operation at Gibraltar as at 
Malta, which perhaps only added to the general im- 
patience to get the coaling finished and be off. This 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 259 

business was completed in about six hours, and by 
sun-set they were under weigh again, passing 
through the straits into the ** still vexed " waters of 
the Bay of Biscay, where the same wind seemed 
to be raging which Oakfield had left there in 1845. 
Happily, however, it was now in their favor, as then 
it had been against them ; and although it sent a 
considerable portion of the passengers — who, in the 
fair-weather voyaging, which it had been their 
good fortune to enjoy since they left Calcutta, had 
begun to consider themselves tried mariners — 
weeping to their beds, those who like Oakfield were 
not troubled in this way, wickedly rejoiced in the 
stormy breezes, which, if they emptied the interiors 
of their shipmates, served no less to fill the sails of 
the ship. So they steamed swiftly on ; the ship 
moving, as the sailors fondly but irreverently re- 
marked, ^^ like a jackass with its head turned to- 
wards home." 

On the night of the twentieth of December, 
about eight o'clock, when the wind, now thoroughly 
imbued with English cold, had driven everybody 
below, as Oakfield sat writing a letter ; while old 
gentlemen played their rubber and young ones 
mixed their negus, all discussing, however, the ap- 
proaching termination of their voyage and the dif- 
ferent things which they would respectively order 

for their first dinner in England, — a subject that had 

s 2 



260 OAKFIELD, OR 

been dwelt upon with an unwearying enthusiasm 
from the day they left Calcutta, — a slight sensation 
became perceptible at the end of the saloon nearest 
the hatchway. « What is it? what is it?" "En- 
gland in sight !" exclaimed a man who had just 
come down, looking cold and blue, but evidently 
happy with the importance of his intelligence; 
" they have just seen the Lizard lights." In two 
minutes the saloon was empty; old gentlemen 
dropped their cards, the young ones their tumblers; 
all rushed up to see with their own eyes what they 
had been told o£ There it was — the object that 
had such attraction for them all, — that small red 
glimmering light, now hidden beneath the waves, 
then suddenly, as the ship rose, flashing out again 
its all-exciting ray. Each time it appeared there 
was a little shout, — for that was England ! The 
manifestation of a pure genuine sensation is always 
imposing, even when we do not share it ; but when 
we ourselves sympathize with it, one of the most 
softening, exhilarating influences our nature is ca- 
pable of receiving. 

Oh, you grand and soaring and deep-searching 
philosophers, who sit at home and sneer at the 
populfu: cant about patriotism, and pique yourselves 
upon being citizens of the world, for God's sake 
go and live ten years in India, that you may return 
and know the power of that vulgar, common-place 



FELLOY^SHIP IN THE EAST. 261 

love of country, which every schoolboy has de- 
claimed about, and which you think it below your 
philosophical dignity to acknowledge. Leave for 
a day your speculations on the relations of the 
will and the passions, and the effect of this and 
that upon the human mind, and go out with a pilot 
to meet an East Indian home-bound ship, and 
make your observations there. See that old, grey- 
headed man, who for forty years there, has been 
adding house to house, and worshipping mammon, 
and dying daily to everything ideal and spiritual ; 
and watch the hard lines about his worldly mouth 
melt into a gracious weakness, as he turns away to 
hide the strange emotion which, against his will, 
obtains for the time the mastery over him, as that 
small candle-beam recalls the forgotten years when 
he loved man more than money, when he himself 
was loved by a mother or a sister, with an affection 
different from that of those who have since loved 
his rupees, and his appointment, and his dinners. 
See that youth of five and twenty, whose folly, 
sickness and the shadow of death have not over- 
come ; yet now, though it be but for an instant, 
sobered into the wisdom of love and tenderness; 
watch that other, who seeks a secret place that be 
may weep away the overwhelming pressure of his 
devout and godly joy; and then cease to deny 
with your theories and your sneers that which 



262 OAKFIELDy OR 

really is ; cease to speculate upon or question the 
existence or the wisdom of that which so plainly 
declares itself by signs, which all the wisdom of 
the world cannot gainsay nor resist; cease, while 
talking of divine truth, to blaspheme God, by 
denying the holiness — nay, the very being — of 
those feelings of love and unselfish reverence, 
which are of all things the most certainly His 
work. ' 

Oakfield was not ashamed to sympathize, to the 
fullest extent, with the excited throng around him ; 
even upon the youthful Ensign, who had babbled 
all the voyage about the Arab horses he had left in 
India, and the sensation he would produce upon 
the turf in England, he could, when he broke out 
into— -"Breathes there the man with soul so dead?" 
&c., look with a friendly countenance. He did not 
try to analyse his own sensations, to know why or 
how he was affected ; he was content to gaze, with 
a tearful eye, and feel the tumult of his rushing 
blood, as his whole soul seemed to be moved within 
him. 

After some half-hour's light-house gazing 
the cold cutting wind drove the majority below 
again. Oakfield went to bed, and woke the next 
morning, the 21st, with the hope that his rarely 
sound slumber might be accepted as an earnest 
of what an English climate was to do for him. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 263 

He was up at seven o'clock, and dressed, and on 
deck by day-break. 

It was the dawn of an English winter, than 
which nothing could look more lovely to the eyes 
of that home-stricken crew. The coast of Dorset 
was plainly visible through the clear frosty air, — 
there was England in its very actuality. Men 
were engaged in getting up the luggage out of the 
hold^ for the Captain said that he hoped to pass 
the Needles at eight, and (the tide favoring them, 
as the winds and waves had done throughout the 
voyage) to come to his moorings at Southampton, 
by noon. They breakfasted at eight, and during 
that last hasty meal, according to the Captain's 
foretelling, passed the Needles, and felt, in the 
abated motion of the vessel, the welcome shelter of 
the Isle of Wight 

Breakfast was soon over ; the speechifying had 
been disposed of at dinner the night before ; and 
everybody was on deck, — ^a motley crowd, dressed 
in every imaginable shade of costume, from the 
orthodox broad cloth and black hat, to the full 
paraphernalia of an Indian white paper helmet and 
brown-hoUand shooting coat The excitement of 
the previous night had subsided; few men's senti- 
mentalism will stand broad daylight ; and as the 
prospect of landing and the custom house became 
more and more immediate, there appeared on most 



264 OAKFIELDj OR 

countenances the shade of that gloom which ever 
pursues an Englishman in connexion with his lug- 
gage. And now men have done rushing down 
into their cabins, to make positively the last pre- 
parationsy and all walk about the deck somewhat 
pale with anxiety. 

Twelve o'clock I — the sun stands directly over 
them, and the Ripon's bells strike eight as they 
enter the Southampton water; there lies their goal, 
visible before them; the huge steamer rushes on 
amongst the still increasing multitude of smaller 
fry, all of whom look with interest upon the " Indian 
Mail ;" now the houses can be seen, and now the 
people on the pier, and the word is given, — " Ease 
her !" a few short splashing revolutions of the mon- 
ster wheels and they sweep up the harbour; — "Stop 
her I" — the voyage is over — the great ship floats 
alongside of the quay ; then all motion entirely 
ceases and Oakfield has got back to England I 

Then the eighty or ninety passengers, who for 
the last seven weeks had been living in such inti- 
mate relations, melted away with a careless nod, or 
shake of the hand, into the mutual indifference 
and ignorance of each other which was to last for 
the rest of their lives. Oakfield waited patiently 
till the custom house officer shouted for the letter 
"O," and then his patience was not tried much 
longer; his trunks were unlocked, the contents 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 265 

hastily tossed over, and he was a free man to go 
wheresoever he would. He first of all posted 
his letter; and then hurried off to the railway 
station, where the three o'clock train to London 
was on the point of starting. With a wonder- 
ing consciousness of the gradual ease with which 
he was relapsing into the old habits of five years 
ago, he got into a first-class carriage, instinctively 
took a corner seat with his back to the engine, 
and put his head out of the window to look for 
a news-vender. A little boy with a great tray 
of newspapers and cheap books slung before him, 
sees and understands the look. 

" JHmes, Sir, — Times — Mominff Chronicle — 
Morning Post^ 

<<The Times^ please," said Oakfield, and, as 
he took in the oblong-folded paper, saw that ' 
morning's date upon it, and took a sixpence out 
of his waistcoat pocket to pay for it, he could 
almost have sworn that he had never been out of 
England for a day. The bell rings, — with infinitely 
less noise than accompanies the up-lifUng of a sin- 
gle palanquin, — the train, with its cargo of two 
hundred people, glides slowly off; emerges from 
the station, and in two minutes is darting through 
the fields of Hampshire at the rate of five and 
thirty miles an hour. 

" Wonderful ;" ejaculated Oakfield, as he leant 



266 OAKFIELD, OR 

back and turned to the leading article. There 
were two middle-aged men in the same carriage, 
whose conversation unmistakeably pronounced 
them to be inhabitants of '* the city." 

** The heavy portion of the Indian Mail came 
in this morning," observed one of them* 

" Yes ; so I heard," replied the other, — " by the 
Ripon ; very little in it ; Indian securities just the 
same ; Lord Dalhousie going to Peshawur it ap- 
pears." 

"Peshawur; where is that?" 

** One of the great towns recently taken in the 
Punjab; one of the largest military stations, my 
young nephew tells me, in India." 

« Ah 1" said the other, « I dare say. What a 
pity it is, that they always will post their troops in 
those big towns : exposing the poor young lads to 
all its temptations and luxuries. If I had my way 
I'd send them all to out-of-the-way placeai, where 
they wouldn't have the opportunity to get into 
debt I hear people talk about the banks ; I say I 
know better; I know what it is runs away with 
youngsters' money. It isn't the banks, bless you ! 
it's your theatre-going every night of the week, and 
your tavern supper-parties afterwards, and your 
sky-larking, and what not !" 

"But you don't mean," interrupted his com- 
panion, " that they have theatres and taverns, and 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 267 

all that sort of thing, in those outlandish parts?" 

" Don't I," rejoined the other, with a knowing 
shake of the head, — " I do \hough. What I say 
is, that wherever Englishmen go, they take these 
things with them. Look at the number of Queen's 
regiments out there ; — ^you don't suppose that they 
will be content to go without their little amuse- 
ments ? Why, there's Calcutta, I'm told, just like 
a second London I" 

" Indeed !" said the other, with credulous sur- 
prise ; " well, — I shouldn't have thought it ; ray 
young nephew must be a quiet youngster, for he 
never seems to see any of this gaiety." 

" Trust him for seeing it," rejoined the know- 
ing one ; ^^ doesn't like to tell ' old nunks in the 
city ' of it ; keeps it all snug; — ah I I know what 
young men are ; find it all out some day when he 
sends his bills home, — eh? Where is he? — Ben- 
gal Presidency ?" 

^^ Yes, — Bengal I believe it is ; he was stationed 
at Poonah, I think, or some such place, when last 
I heard of him." 

Oakfield could not trust himself to listen any 
longer ; he held up the paper, as it was, to conceal 
his laughter. ^' And these are the kind of people," 
he thought, ^^who take, we are assured, such a 
glowing interest in India and the Indian Army ? — 
well; we oughtn't to wonder, when the Times 



268 OAKFIELD, OR 

takes the lead, by talking of ' the seductions of the 
luxurious towns of India,* — heaven save the mark ! 
I should like to see t&e man who wrote that, sitting 
in a tent at Peshawur in the month of May, with a 
dust storm blowing, and half a dozen Khyberees 
prowling about in the distance with an eye to his 
horse." 

With which charitable reflection he turned to 
let down the window, and put his head out to look 
at Winchester, to which station the train was now 
slowly approaching. There were the old towers 
of the Cathedral, and there ^Hhe Hills," looking, as 
he so often remembered to have seen them, — ^bloak 
and chill — in the cold grey dimness of a Decem- 
ber afternoon. "The holidays, I suppose," — ^he 
thought to himself, "or I would certainly stop 
and take a look at the old place." 

The train moved on, and Oakfield fell asleep. 
When he awoke it was quite dark ; he had been 
dreaming of Ferozepore, and started up, hearing 
nothing but the dull rumble of the train, seeing 
nothing but the yellow gleam of the carriage lamp 
overhead, wondering where he was ; then the joy- 
ful remembrance of his position came pleasantly 
over him. Finding that he had the carriage now 
to himself he put the window down and looked 
out What home association there was in the 
blast of cold fiercely rushing air that met him, as 
he gazed out into the darkness. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 269 

Still the train dashed on; the blood-red cinders 
from time to time flying past the carriage from the 
engine, the piercing scream of which now and 
then breaks the stillness of the winter night with 
some salutary signal Presently Oakfield looked 
out again, and saw lights on the horizon ; momen- 
tarily they brighten and increase, and he looks down 
from the embankment, which they are crossing, 
upon the suburbs of London. Still they rush on, 
and the huge London itself is before them. The 
Nine Elms station, which had been the terminus 
when Oakfield left England, is passed, and the 
train is winding quickly on among the very streets 
of the metropolis. The speed slackens; the un- 
earthly creaking of the breaks is heard ; suddenly 
the darkness is forsaken for light fiercer than the 
noon-day sun, — as with a clash and a swing and a 
rattle, the train draws its snaky length through the 
gas-lighted iron-roofed station, and then — stops. 

The doors are all flung open, almost simultane- 
ously ; porters walk briskly along from carriage to 
carriage ; and in an instant the passengers are all 
disgorged upon the platform. Oakfield, half-smil- 
ing, as he feels the anxious frown of a luggage 
seeker knitting itself upon his forehead, walks up 
to the van behind the engine. He sees, claims, 
and appropriates his well-travelled trunks, and 
desires a porter to call a cab. His luggage is 



270 OAKFIELD, OR 

hoisted up; he steps inside; recognises, almost 
with pleasure, the well-known damp-strawey odour 
so peculiar to a London cab, and inimitable taut 
ensemble of a London cabman, as he shows his red 
face at the window to ask, — "Where to, Sir!"— 
" Euston Hotel ;" and they rattled off over the loud 
pavement; sink into silence upon the macadamized 
road across Waterloo bridge, — ^from which Oakfield 
looks down upon the broad steaming river ; are 
lost for a time in the tangled wilderness of the 
Strand; improve their pace up Regent street, — 
where Oakfield looks, with a child's marvel, at the 
shop windows, and thinks of "the luxurious towns" 
of India ; and finally, after sundry twists and turns, 
pull up before the well remembered door of the 
Euston.* 

Oakfield was determined not to commence his 
English life by a struggle with a cabman, so having 
dismissed that functionary, with a remuneration 
which even he had not the conscience to murmur 
at, he entered the large and magnificent coffee 
room. He sees the blazing fires in the spacious 
grates ; the bright mahogany tables, whereat peo- 
ple, either singly or in parties of two and three, are 

* The author hopes that the detail of this descriptioii may be 
excused, as, however tedious or frivolous it may appear to the 
English reader, he trusts it may not be without interest to some 
exiles in India, for whom such details have an attraction as only 
exiles can comprehend. 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 271 

indulging in the luxurious privacy of a quiet din- 
ner; sees the tables in the centre of the room 
piled with papers and periodicals ; casts a glance at 
the magnificent proportions of the room, — and then 
remembered that a " dak bungalow " is an Indian 

'' hotel r 

There was a party of four very young men 
dining at the next table. By the ludicrous profusion 
which covered their table, and the rapid succession 
and intermixture of wines of every climate and 
country, Oakfield would have known them for 
Oxford undergraduates, even if they had not pro- 
claimed themselves so to be, by their unwearying 
flow of 'shop,' and incessant repetition of the 
word 'men.' Looking at them he could with diffi- 
culty believe that only five years ago he himself 
had been, by position at least, such an one. 

His dinner soon made its appearance, and he 
seemed to dispose of it rather with the appetite 
of a traveller than that of an invalid. Indeed, he 
was throughout borne up by an excitement which 
might easily be mistaken for health. 

He was up and at breakfast by nine o'clock the 
next morning, and then walked over to the station, 
where the ten o'clock train to the North was on the 
point of starting. It would be painting the lily to 
describe the scene at the station, after the inimitable 
sketches given by Sir Francis Head, in ' Stokers and 



272 OAKFIELD, OB 

Pokers.' Oakfield did not feel up to doing the whole 
distance in one day, bo booked his place only to 
Lancaster. Ab the train rushed on through the 
hours of the day, and the counties of England, the 
morning lightly gleamed over the cheerful woodlands 
of Hertfordshire ; the noon-day sun glared down, 
with its short frosty heat upon the sloping pastures 
of Warwickshire and Leicestershire ; the sober tints 
of a winter afternoon were shed with soothing har- 
inony upon the warm brown moors of Staffordshire ; 
and night was felling as the train crossed the glim- 
mering Mersey at Warrington, and hastened on 
among the unceasing fires of the manufacturing 
north. 

He started again by the railway at half-paat six 
the next day. It was the 23rd December, a clear 
cloudless frosty morning ; and it would not have re- 
quired the home interest to ^ve delight to that morn- 
ing's drive through the tinkhng woods — white with 
hoar frost, green and red with the Christmas holly — 
that every now and then disclosed through theiropen- 
ing the joyous waters of Windermere, as, blue and 
life-hke, they rippled to the shore. They passed 
OD to Grasmere, where, imder the shadow of that 
white church tower, beneath the yew trees which 
his own hands had planted, Wordsworth lay asleep ; 
—Wordsworth — the greatest Englishman of his 
age ; known to the world as a master of En^ish 



^ 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 273 

poetry, but known also in these valleys as the good 
sympathizing neighbour, the true simple-minded 
friend, the noble venerable man : — " There he lies," 
thought Oakfield ; " and surely it would be treason 
to humanity to associate one thought of sadness, 
or anything but quiet joy, with his death." 

And now they are ascending Dunmail Raise ; 
the heap of stones — the silent witnesses of the crisis 
of Oakfield 's destiny — is passed ; he is in Cumber- 
land — his own county ; he sees with his eyes that 
lake and those woods and hills, which he has seen 
so often in fancy, or in the visions of the night, 
during the last five years; the descent is com- 
menced, and in less than half-an-hour his journey 
will be over. And now let us leave him there, on 
Dunmail Raise, while we see with what feelings 
his coining was waited for at home. 



VOL. n. 



OAKFIELD, OB 



CHAPTER IX. 



" Sleep aweetly, tender heart, in peace : 

Sleep holy Spirit, blessed soul ; 

While the stars burn, the moons increase. 

And the great ages onward roll. 

" Sleep till the end, true soul and sweet : 
Nothing cornea to thee new or strange ; 
Sleep full of rest from head to feet ; 
Lie still, dry dust, secure of change." 

Tennyson. 

The Oakiield family were still unaware, when 
Wykham and Margaret became engaged, of the 
change which had taken place in the former's for- 
tunea. It was with happy hearts therefore that 
they heard Margaret was not to be entirely lost to 
them ; that she was at least to remain in England. 
Of coarse Wjkham postponed his departure for 
some time longer than he bad intended; but in 
the beginning of May he returned to London. 
Befui-e leaving Cumberland, he wished to have 
a day lixed for the wedding: it was ultimately 
agreed, however, to wait till they could hear from 
I 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 275 

Edward, and think of him as being cognizant of 
what was passing. 

In July, Fred returned to Leatheburn, in time 
to receive a most affectionate greeting, as a brother, 
from Edward : but now there was another reason 
for puttii^ off the marriage, and this was the very 
unsatisfactory account of the latter's health. Mail 
after mail was eagerly looked for, and at last, after 
much anxiety, as successive fortnights brought a 
worse and yet a worse report, they heard with in- 
expressible satisfaction that he was coming home. 
Fred himself could not but assent to the propriety of 
now waiting for the presence of the head of the 
family, and won the admiration of all by the cheer- 
fulness with which he bore these repeated disap- 
pointments. 

Autumn came and went; and even Wykham 
could hardly regret this prolongation of his days of 
courtship. Golden days they were, in those glori- 
ous autumn months, when the valley blazed with 
the crimson splendour of the decaying cherry trees, 
and the burnished brown of the oaks, wonderfully 
commingled with the deep blue-green of the fern 
forests. Autumn passed away, and winter came ; 
the rich colors faded from the trees, giving place to 
the beauty of the glistening birch twigs and the 
glowing evergreens. The snow came and covered 

the earth, as it had done five years before, when 

T 2 



276 OAKFIELD, OR 

Edward Oakfield had left home for India, and was 
lying thick when the post arrived on the 19th of 
December, bringing the Marseilles letter announc- 
ing his own immediate arrival. 

The 23rd of December arrived, and with it the 
. meeting so long and anxiously expected. What 
that meeting was we will not attempt to describe : 
how the weary wanderer, so long distressed both in 
body and mind, found himself at last in the haven 
where he would be. It was one of those days not 
to be foi^otten in a lifetime ; nor was the happiness 
disturbed, so much as might have been expected, 
by the thought of Oakfield's illness, for the flush 
of animation was easily mistaken by sanguine ob- 
servers for the sign of returning health. But in a 
few days the excitement on which he had been 
living for some days began to fade, and the re-action 
did not fail to impress its mark upon the sunken 
eye and the wasted cheek. His mother saw these 
symptoms with uneasiness; and as they continued 
and grew worse, with alarm. A touching incident 
first brought home to her the fact that Edward him- 
self regarded his illness as being very serious. 

On Christmas eve, while all were gathered round 
the cheerful fire, listening (' who but listened ?') to 
the serenade which, according to old kindly north- 
ern custom, greets every family on this night, Ed- 
ward began to repeat Wordsworth's beautiful dedi- 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 277 

catory lines to the Sonnets on the river Duddon, 
describing this identical custom. All listened with 
a subdued pleasure to the soft musical stanzas, so 
well suited to the sober cheerfulness of a winter's 
night; but when he came to the lines — 



" The mutual nod, the grave disguise 
Of hearts with gladness brimming o'er, 
And some unbidden tears that rise 
For names once heard, but heard no more, 



i» 



his voice faltered, and the emotion of his hearers 
was exchanged for one of a different nature. 

Indeed ere long it became obvious to all that 
poor Edward had been sent home, not before his 
constitution had been shattered, and that he had 
now little or no strength to resist the influence of 
an English winter, nor yet to flee from it. A cloud, 
not of gloom, but of seriousness, brooded over the 
whole family. The marriage of Wykham and 
Margaret seemed again indefinitely postponed by 
mutual consent. Edward himself never spoke of 
his illness as dangerous ; perhaps indeed he him- 
self knew less than others how ill he was, though 
occasional intimations of how seriously his case was 
regarded could not fail to reach him from time 
to time. One afternoon, early in January, one of 
those mild sunny interloping days which sometimes 
come to remind us of spring and summer in the 



278 OAKFIELD, OR 

depth of winter, Oakfield was driving Margaret in 
a pony carriage — now his onlj means of getting 
about — along the road so often referred to in these 
pages, towards Dunmail Raise. At the foot of the 
pass the pony, unwilling to go beyond this his usual 
turning place, came to a halt. 

" The pony thinks you will be tired if you go 
further," said Margaret ; " he is right, is he not?" 
^' No, not to-day : I feel better than I have done 
for a long time ; and I cannot afford to lose those 
sun-gleams just yet : so. Come up I" and with this 
exhortation he broke the force of the pony's asso- 
ciations with the whip, and on they went slowly up 
the hill. 

^' Margaret, what is the day of the month ?" 
« The 7th of January. Why do you ask ?" 
'^How very strange!" said Oakfield, leaning 
back in the carriage and looking about him with a 
musing eye ; *^ how very strange, Margaret ! it is 
just six years to-day, then, singe I had that long 
conversation with you about gouig to India, in this 
very place, going up this hill. I was thinking how 
exactly the same everything looks now as it did 
then : how you, dearest, are looking so unchanged ; 
and so, for that matter, do I, perhaps ; but I feel 
changed enough, Margaret Do you recollect the 
day?" 

« Perfectly." 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 279 

They drove on without speaking for some time. 
Margaret's heart was full of the memory of that 
day, and all which it suggested. At length she 
said, — 

** It has been a happy change, Edward, which 
these six years have worked for you." 

" Has it ?" he replied mournfully. " God knows. 
When I said I felt different, I thought, I believe, of 
outward rather than inward changes. I seem to 
myself more experienced; older by a hundred 
years; and yet — and yet; — Margaret! Do you 
recollect asking me why I went to India?" 

His sister nodded. 

^^ Well, that question has recurred to me a thou- 
sand times: it recurs still, for 'all my mind is 
clouded with a doubt ;' it is a sad thing to have 
battled for six years, Margaret, and seem at the end 
to be no nearer to a clear perception." 

Margaret laid her hand upon her brother's arm ; 
" Edward, dearest, you must not torment yourself 
needlessly ; you know that none of us would pre- 
sume to flatter you, but we know that during these 
six years you have been earnestly trying to do your 
duty ; and I am sure that God acknowledges such 
as seekers of truth, and will, in his own time, send 
them such light as they need." 

'' You speak comfortably, my sister, and I hope 
and believe, truly. Do not misunderstand me. I 



imttm^jfrntrnmrntam Wfc»w gB^— — WgaBi 



280 OARFIELD, OR 

do not despair, nor at all feel that God has forsaken 
me : in my illness I find him continually near me; 
and should my illness end, as I sometimes think it 
\<rilly I believe I could still find him very near. 
But, Margaret, he is a God of the living; and 
when I look forward and ask ' How am I to serve 
him in active life ?' 1 again feel all at sea ; for I 
feel no confidence that my work in India was snch 
a service. The fact is, life seems to me to be get- 
ting more and more perplexed and wonderful every 
day, and I do not at all find in myself the strength 
that shall take hold of any one of its clues and fol- 
low it out to the end of the mystery. The combi- 
nation of worldly activity and godliness seems be- 
coming more and more impossible ; the worldly to 
be living more entirely to and for the world ; the 
godly to be more and more going out of it I often 
think that the latter would be a wise and no unself- 
ish course for me ; that in these days, when so many 
are ready to push forward and supply all vacancies 
that may occur in the busy conspicuous posts, his 
is a true wisdom who keeps apart, and listens, and 
observes, and thinks, and, when be finds a season, 
speaks a rare word or two. That, in short, the 
literary man, not meaning thereby anything at all 
connected with the penny-a-liner, is about the best 
off of all others. * Serve God by action,' it is said, 
but then I find all courses of action so clogged and 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 281 

blocked up with meanness, and worldliness, and 
Mammon, that the service of God is well nigh 
choked out of them. Well, then patience is re- 
commended: 'Wait,' it is said, 'and cast bread 
upon the waters ; and sow, not desiring yourself to 
reap ; and believe that these active courses shall be, 
by degrees, purified, and God will be continually 
drawing more and more good out of the evil which 
now offends you ; do not expect to see perfection, 
but be content to take the good with the bad' 
Well, this is a hard saying, though I suppose there 
is much truth in it ; the only thing I complain of 
in it is, that this said contentment is so tempting ; 
it is so easy to be content to take the good with the 
bad ; and then it is so easy to go a step further, and 
be content with the bad. Why should I expose 
myself to this temptation ? Why should I not seek 
for the good where I can get it without the bad, in 
the ideal world? Why should not I strive to dwell 
there where there are so many thousands willing 
and more able, to fill my place in the actual world? 
Why should I be battling and painfully discrimi- 
nating between good and evil ; finding, with much 
disgust, a grain of truth for a bushel of falsehood, 
if by giving myself up to the pure words of great 
men 1 may be growing continually to a higher 
standard of unmixed truth ?" 

" Because," said Margaret, " God does not will 



282 OAKFIELDy OR 

that you should have peace in the world; how 
would the world go on, how would God's service 
be advanced in it, if all good men were to retire 
from it in disgust ?" 

** You are always to the point, Margaret, which 
is one of the very many reasons that I so like talk- 
ing with you. God does not will, you say, that we 
should have peace in the world. I doubt that, — 
only I think that we, with our slavish fears, shrink 
from peace as from every other good thing : none 
of us take as freely as God gives. We fidget and 
bustle, and plunge into painful turmoil, and then 
babble about peace not being our lot on earth, when 
in truth we have never looked for it If all the good 
men, you say, were to leave the world, what would 
become of it? But what do you mean by leaving 
the world ? Nothing but leaving the evil of the 
world, so that there should be a marked division 
between the good and evil — a consummation 
greatly to be desired, only in the present state of 
things, impossible. All the good men never tmll 
leave the world, so your hypothesis cannot be 
allowed: or if they did, so much the better, in 
which case it tells against your objection. Besides, 
Margaret, I cannot undertake to say what other 
men might, or could, or should do ; I must con- 
sider, in the first place, what I may and ought to 
do ; the question for me is, < may I give myself up 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 283 

to peace,' that is, practically, to thinking and read- 
ing and writing as the main employment of my 
life? or shall I again seek a more busy life, and 
going on patiently, sowing and not hoping to reap, 
taking a bushel of falsehood for a grain of truth, 
casting my bread upon the waters, resume my work 
in India ? Oh ! " he exclaimed suddenly, ^' I cannot 
do it" 

Margaret looked at him tenderly ; in his pale 
haggard face^ from which, in his excitement, the 
false bloom had quite faded away, she seemed to 
read an anxious longing for the peace of which he 
spoke, which it would be Tain and cruel to contro- 
vert, llie tears stood in her eyes, as taking her 
brother's hand, and following more her own thoughts 
than what he had been saying, she exclaimed, — 

" Dear, dear Edward ! " 

He started. 

" Margaret," he asked in a low tone, very differ- 
ent from that which he had formerly used, *^ what 
do you mean ? " 

" What should I mean ? " she answered, smiling; 
'* you are not surprised, I hope, at my calling you 
dear Edward; — for if you are, you will have to be 
shocked again : Dear, dear Edward, can you bear 
it?" 

" You meant more than that, Margaret : come, 
tell me darling: you must not treat me like a 



284 OAKFIELD, OR 

child: did you not think I looked very ill when 
you said that ? ** 

She bowed her head and pressed his hand by 
way of answer. 

" And you were thinking that I need not dis- 
quiet myself about returning to India, when I am 
Ukely, ere long, to be lying in the churchyard? 
Speak Margaret; believe me, there is nothing 
shocking to me in this; it is not that which I 
shrink from ; I have sometimes suspected that my- 
self—often indeed ; but do others think I shall die^ 
Margaret ? " 

He looked anxiously in her face with the awful 
curiosity which all, the best or the more despairing, 
must ever feel, while they wait the answer to this 
fearful question. Margaret had neither the power 
nor the will to deceive him. 

*' We know little, dearest, but we sometimes are 
very sad about you; not /or you, my own brother, 
for it would bring you peace." 

It was long before Oakfield could reply. 

" How wonderfully my mother bears it," were 
his first words ; '^ I fancied she had no idea how ill 
I was: it is strange," he added, '^to be talking of 
one's own death. Here we are at the top; on 
those stones, Margaret, I revolved the early acts of 
the drama of my life, and now at this place we are 
contemplating the last ; and you my faithful con- 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 285 

fidante in alL A solemn studio this place has been , 
to me, and now I think this is the last time that I 
shall ever see it ; it must be your inheritance, my 
sister." 

Poor Margaret could not answer, for the tears 
would no longer be repressed, and she rested her 
head upon her brother's shoulder and sobbed for 
grief, like a child. He tenderly kissed her, and 
turning, they drove slowly homewards. That 
evening the Christmas games were played as usual, 
but Edward could not but think from time to time 
of his conversation with Margaret, as he looked up 
and wondered painfully whether any change could 
weaken or destroy that communion which so held 
them all together. "If it could," he thought, 
" death would be horrible ; but if death be horrible, 
God's promises have &iled. Therefore, I believe 
in the Communion of Saints." 

The days passed on uneventfully enough. The 
Indian mail brought Oakfield a long letter from 
Mr. Middleton full of Indian intelligence, and ex- 
patiating on it with that energy, strong sense, and 
single-eyed honesty, which distinguished the writer. 
Strangely, indeed, did the vigour and the decision 
of Mr. Middleton contrast with the doubts and 
perplexities in which Oakfield had confessed him- 
self to Margaret to be still involved. By years of 
energetic labor, Mr. Middleton had clearly opened 



286 GARFIELD, OR 

for himself that path of useful activity along which 
he was now pursuing his clear and prosperous 
course. It was as one who had overcome the diffi- 
culties of life, speaking to one who was even now 
dying in the struggle. Undoubtedly Oakfield was 
in the way himself to overcome likewise, and had 
there been more time before him he might not 
have despaired of doing so ; but as it was, he felt 
that it was too late. He read the letter with a 
mournful sense of regret, perhaps of self-reproach ; 
then, with a smile full of sorrowful meaning, handed 
it to Margaret It was evident that he had de- 
liberately turned away from the world. 

The days passed away, and with them the mild 
weather, and the iron frost again bound the earth. 
One sunny morning, Edward had gone with the 
rest of the party to the lake, which was completely 
frozen over. A sudden storm of sleet came on, with 
an icy driving wind ; they all went home as fast as 
they could, but before they reached the house, 
Oakfield's tearing cough and difficult breathing 
indicated too surely that the mischief was done. 
He was put to bed, and there he remained for some 
days. At the end of the month the weather again 
grew milder, and he was able once more to come 
into the drawing room. But it was fearful to ob- 
serve the ravages which the last attack had made 
in his face and frame. He was brought down 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 287 

Stairs into the drawing room on the afternoon of 
the 31st of January, and laid upon a sofa. Mar- 
garet read aloud to him ; he spoke from time to 
time^ but in a voice hardlj above a whisper. Pre- 
sently the door was thrown open, and Rose ran in, 
calling out, '^ Mamma, mamma ! I've found a snow- 
drop." 

It was the first of the year, and she held her 
prize in her hand. When she saw her brother 
however, she dropped it, and ran up to kiss him. 

'* Thank you, Rose," said Edward, in a voice so 
low as almost to frighten the little girl ; " thank 
you for bringing the snowdrop; will you give it 
me?" 

Rose brought it and gave it to him, crying, she 
did not know why. 

^^ I did not think I should see any snowdrops 
this year. Rose, but you see you have brought me 
one. Herby, old fellow, 1 wish you would wheel 
the sofa to the window." 

Herby did so, with Wykham's assistance,— -in 
silence, for all kept looking at Edward as if there 
was something unusual in his countenance. Mrs. 
Oakfield had observed a change, as she thought, 
and had gone out of the room to send for the 
doctor. Edward, not perceiving her absence said, 
when the sofa arrangement by the window was 
completed, — 



288 OAKFIELD, OR 

« Mother." 

** She is gone out of the room/ said Mai^ret ; 
"she will be back directly." 

« Call her please." 

At a sign Mary ran off to do so. Mrs. Oakfield 
came back in trembling haste, but grew composed 
as she approached her son : he lay with his face 
towards the window, pale and peaceful, with his 
eyes hardly open. 

" Mother ! " he exclaimed, faintly. 

Nobody spoke. Mrs. Oakfield bent over his 
face, and bathed it with her tears. 

" Mother I I am going to my Father, whom I 
have loved since you first taught me of him." 

Presently turning to Rose, he said, " Rose, my 
pet, where is the snowdrop ? " 

It was in his unconscious hand ; the little girl 
took it, and with a wail of grief and terror, held it 
before him. 

" Gently, Rose, gently ; where is Mary ? Bless 
you both, darlings. Herby, my own brother ; you 
brought me here to take my last look at God's 
earth. Stay at home, Herby — they must not lose 
us both." 

Another pause. What awe is equal to that of 
those silent pauses round a death-bed? Pre- 
sently he resumed in a voice fainter than before, 
and with longer interruptions from his painful 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 289 

breathing, *' Fred, give my love to Stanton, and to 
Middleton: Margaret!" he then said, in a tone 
so loud as to almost startle all who heard him, " my 
friend, my sister, Margaret I He is very near ; He 
is here now, a Father to us alL" 

His mother, who had hitherto sat clasping his 
hands in speechless sorrow, again knelt by his side^ 
and again embraced him in an agony of love. 

" Mother !" he gently murmured, and his eyes 
closed, and the gasps came at long intervals ; then 
succeeded but one word, the last word of that 
young warrior, a word which his countenance, as it 
settled into the sleep of death, confirmed; that 
word was * Peace :' — saying which he passed away. 



VOL. n. u 



290 OARFIELD, OR 



CHAPTER X. 

" The ring is on ; 
The * wilt thou ' answered, and again 
The * wilt thou ' asked, till out of twain 
Her sweet * I will ' has made ye one." 

Tbnnyson. 

Although Oakfield had been ill so long, yet his 
death came upon his family as a sudden calamity. 
Indeed the end had been sudden, and throughout 
they had regarded him more as a confirmed invalid 
than as one likely soon to die. Uis friends in 
India, more accustomed to such a result of a long 
illness, the seeds of which had been sown in that 
climate, were less startled, perhaps, but hardly less 
grieved. With the following letter fix)m Stanton^ 
containing an expression of their grief, we shall 
close the Indian part of our story. 

"Benares, March 20th, 1851. 
"My Dear Wykham, 

" I have just seen the Overland Mail of 
the 7th February with the intelligence of Oakfield's death. 
As you are now so closely connected with his family, I 
wiU venture to ask you to assure them how deeply he is 
mourned by his friends out here. I had been thinking 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 291 

very much of him in. the last few days. Three days ago, 
in my passage up the river, I stopped at Htgeepoor for a 
few hours ; I went to the house in which he used to live, 
and visited the grave of the poor young boy, Vernon, 
whom he nursed and watdied so faithfully. You ean 
imagine how these places and associations recalled him to 
my mind. I thought of him as he was then, and as I had 
known him since, little thinking that he who so occupied 
my thoughts was even then in his grave. Not that it has 
surprised me to hear of his death. When I parted with 
him at Ferozepore, last year, I never expected to see him 
again. I shall not weaiy you with all the thoughts that 
crowd upon me as I recall the days of my acquaintance 
with him. Though a good deal younger than myself, and 
though I believe I exercised considerable influence over 
him, yet I can truly say that I always looked up to him ; 
not only for his good self-denying life, but also because 
I always felt impressed by the sadness which never, I 
think, quite deserted him. Had he lived longer, I believe 
he would have outgrown the doubts and suspicions of 
himself, which so clouded his mind : his anxious and too 
speculative nature would have derived strength and health 
from the invigorating influence of active employment, he 
would have held with fruitful strength the truth which he 
spent his life in dimly striving after. As it is, he has 
died in the struggle, and found by a shorter road a more 
perfect deliverance. He was, I have long felt, the great 
tie that held me to this oountiy, and now I begin to think 
seriously of emigrating with my wife and child. They 
are now just gone to England with Middleton ; my wife 



292 OAKFIELD, OR 

liad been ill for some time, so I took this opportmuty of 
sending her home. I only wish that I conld have gone 
too. I went down with them to Calcutta, and am now 
returning to Ferozepore, feeling more solitary than I have 
ever done since the days of my griffinage. You know I 
never liked India, but one always takes a sort of stoical 
pleasure in doing a veiy unpleasant duty. You may 
imagine what zest stable duty may acquire by being re- 
garded as a chronic martyrdom 1 

Middleton will be deeply disappointed at losing that 
meeting with Oakfield to which he had so long looked 
forward. I do not think he will return to India; he 
has money enough to stay at home, and will, probably, 
by publishing or otherwise, try to carry on his Indian 
labours there. If he does leave the service, it will be 
an additional inducement to me to quit India, so do 
not be surprised if you next hear of me and my wife as 
denizens of the bush. The fates of us three have diverged 
considerably since that night when you first met Oakfield 
at our mess at Meerut. The world, my dear Fred, would 
say that you had been the fortunate man of the trio. I 
do not exactly know about that ; but I am sure that your 
marriage is a matter for the most sincere congratulation ; I 
am not so certain about the thousand a year. I trust it will 
not induce you to give up all work and hang about the 
world as an idle rascal for the rest of your days. I believe 
you are just the man to like such a life ; but you have no 
more right to be idle on a thousand than on a hundred, 
or on ten pounds a year. I do hope you will enter some 
profession; you are not yet quite too old, though you 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 293 

very soon will be. Give my compliments to your wife if 
yon are married when this reaches you. I love her for her 
name's sake, and also, my dear Fred, for yours. I am 
writing this on board the steamer, and shall send it up to 
the station post-office by a cooHe. We shall be off again 
in less than an hour for Allahabad. So now I set my 
face towards Ferozepore, in which amiable place I suppose 
I shall be when this letter reaches you, just becoming 
used to hot weather and dust storms. Good bye, dear 
Fred ; my heart is very fuU, a reason perhaps for being 
silent rather than for expatiating at greater length. 

" Believe me, ever yours, 

" H. Stanton." 

And now once more, and for the last time, we 
return to Leatbeburn. It is the middle of June, 
the anniversary of Edward Oakficld's birth, which 
has been fixed for the marriage of Wykham and 
Margaret The beauty is that of a summer's day 
among the mountains* Upon the side of Helvellyn, 
^^ the solemn wastes of heathy hill " lie sleeping in 
the sunshine ; the whole outline of the range that 
bounds the valley is reflected in the glassy waters 
of the lake, the sun glares down with a power 
rarely felt in English latitudes, with a power that 
might be oppressive, were it not for the shade of 
the birch and sycamore trees which stud the valley, 
and the cooling ripple of the streams ; tourists on 
foot, tourists on horseback, tourists on gigs, are 
panting along the high road, enjoying, to the ut- 



294 OAKFlELDy OR 

most, that consammation of tourist bliss so seldom 
granted — a fine day ; all living nature speaks aloud 
of bapinness^ but nowhere is there greater joj» 
placid and silent though it be^ than in that grej 
house, almost hidden in the luxuriant creepers, 
where they are preparing to celebrate the birthday 
of the dead and the marriage of the living. 

The celebration is to be gravely cheerful as befits 
his memory to whom the day is sacred. Only two 
carriages are at the door, which are shortly filled, 
the first by Mrs. Oakfield, Margaret, and her two 
bridesmaids, Rose and Mary ; the second, by Wyk- 
ham, his father, Herby, and Mr. Middleton, who 
alone had been asked to come down firom London 
and attend the wedding. 

Herby had tried hard, but in vain, to induce 
Wykham to astonish the rustics of the valley> by 
appearing in all the magnificence of Bengal Light 
Cavalry full dress uniform, and himself made up 
for any deficiencies with the gorgeous costume of 
an Oxford Freshman. They drove along the well- 
remembered grass-grown road, by the lake side, 
sheltered by the deep woods firom the rays of the 
mid-day sun, and entered the little church, which, 
cool, ancient, and kindly-looking, with its little 
stone arches and pillars, was now full of people, 
not listless gossipers, nor gaping starers, but kind 
sympathizing fiiendly neighbours, who had known 
the family before either Wykham or Margaret were 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 295 

born^ and who, only fi^ months before, had fol- 
lowed Edward Oakfield's body to the grave. The 
yoftng clergyman who officiated was orthodox, and 
read the whole service right through in a strictly 
orthodox manner; but orthodoxy itself could not 
make dull that solemn ceremony, when those two, 
in the presence of God and their friends and 
neighbours, plighted to each other their faith in the 
name of God, and promised to be one in flesh and 
in spirit till death did them part At last the ser- 
vice is over down to the veiy last word ^ amaze- 
ment,' and they pass out into the church-yard 
When they reached the little white gate leading 
into the road, Wykham stood still, and pressing his 
wife's arm pointed to two graves that were close 
beside them, under the boughs of the old yew tree, 
which flung its shade over one-half of that little 
burying ground. They were the grass-grown 
graves of the two Edward Oakfields, father and 
son, with the name, age, and date of death, in- 
scribed on a stone at the head of each. Mar- 
garet perceived and accepted her husband's mean- 
ing, and as they had already made their vows 
publicly in the presence of God and the living, so 
now they silently renewed them in the no less 
real and awful presence of God and the dead. 
Breakfast was waiting for them at the house, to 
which they sat down, a family party, with the single 
addition of Mr. Middleton. 



296 OAKFIELDy OR 

It was a day of shower and sunshine, of tears 
and laughter, of most intense feeling both of regret 
and hope, the two springs that move human hearts. 
When Fred went up to Rose with a grave face, and 
said he was going to kiss her, and Rose with equal 
gravity refused to be kissed, then the laughter car- 
ried it ; but when Fred and Maigaret had fairly 
started on their road to Scotland, then for a few 
minutes the tears had it all their own way; and 
poor Rose and Mary cried as if their hearts would 
break, nor could their mother find it in her heart 
to stop them : " And yet, Herby, my boy," she said, 
as she took her son to her arms, '* I believe it is in 
every way a most happy day for her and for us," 

Reader, we believe so too ; and with this pleas- 
ing confidence we must conclude. Wykham has 
followed Mr. Middleton's advice, and matricyilated 
as a gentleman commoner at a small college at Ox* 
ford, and is now residing as a married man at that 
University, looking forward to going to the bar. 
We hear that at a recent debate on Indian affairs 
at the ^ Union,' he astonished ' the house ' with a 
few personal recollections of Mooltan. Herby is 
also residing at Christ Church, and as he never has 
anything to say to the highest authorities of that 
place, nor they to him, is probably doing well there. 
The Vemons still pay periodical visits to Leathe- 
bum. Walter Vernon was of the party on the last 
occasion, a fine young midshipman. If he and 



FELLOWSHIP IN THE EAST. 297 

Rose are as fond of each other a few years hence as 
they seem to be now, there is likely to be another 
wedding in the Oakfield family. Mr. Middleton has 
not returned to India, nor is it likely that he will, but 
his sister has rejoined her husband, and is perhaps 
by this time on her way with him to the Canterbury 
Settlement. So * Young India,' or the * Ferozepore 
School' is quite broken up, without, it must be 
confessed, leaving the slightest trace of existence 
behind. Yet some say that no brave man fights 
and dies in vain ; that the fact that there was one 
who, in the days of his youth, desired and earnestly 
endeavoured to be a devout, thoughtful, sensible 
soldier, cannot become as though it had never been ; 
in short, that there was or will be a fruit, not only 
for himself but for others, from that anxious life- 
conflict which was borne by him, who the while is 
peacefully sleeping under the old yew tree in 
Leathebum churchyard. 



THE END. 



Crossley and Billington, Printers, Rugby. 



»»^ 



ilLl 



