Observations upon 'Observations' ...
Author: Byron, George Gordon.
Publication info: The Works Of Lord Byron . 14 vols. London: John Murray, 1832.

Observations upon “Observations” [in, The Works of Lord Byron: with his Letters and Journals, and his Life, by Thomas Moore, Esq.]
[Page 382]
OBSERVATIONS UPON “OBSERVATIONS.”
A SECOND LETTER TO JOHN MURRAY, ESQ.
ON
THE REV. W. L. BOWLES'S STRICTURES
ON THE
LIFE AND WRITINGS OF POPE. Now first published. Ravenna, March 25. 1821.
Dear Sir,
In the further “Observations” of Mr. Bowles, in rejoinder to the charges brought against his edition of Pope, it is to be regretted that he has lost his temper. Whatever the language of his antagonists may have been, I fear that his replies have afforded more pleasure to them than to the public. That Mr. Bowles should not be pleased is natural, whether right or wrong; but a temperate defence would have answered his purpose in the former case—and, in the latter, no defence, however violent, can tend to any thing but his discomfiture. I have read over this third pamphlet, which you have been so obliging as to send me, and shall venture a few observations, in addition to those upon the previous controversy.
Mr. Bowles sets out with repeating his “ confirmed conviction ,” that “what he said of the moral part of Pope's character was, generally speaking, true; and
[Page 383]
that the principles of poetical criticism which he has laid down are invariable and invulnerable ,” &c.; and that he is the more persuaded of this by the “ exaggerations of his opponents.” This is all very well, and highly natural and sincere. Nobody ever expected that either Mr. Bowles, or any other author, would be convinced of human fallibility in their own persons. But it is nothing to the purpose—for it is not what Mr. Bowles thinks, but what is to be thought of Pope, that is the question. It is what he has asserted or insinuated against a name which is the patrimony of posterity, that is to be tried; and Mr. Bowles, as a party, can be no judge. The more he is persuaded, the better for himself, if it give him any pleasure; but he can only persuade others by the proofs brought out in his defence.
After these prefatory remarks of “conviction,” &c. Mr. Bowles proceeds to Mr. Gilchrist; whom he charges with “slang” and “slander,” besides a small subsidiary indictment of “abuse, ignorance, malice,” and so forth. Mr. Gilchrist has, indeed, shown some anger; but it is an honest indignation, which rises up in defence of the illustrious dead. It is a generous rage which interposes between our ashes and their disturbers. There appears also to have been some slight personal provocation. Mr. Gilchrist, with a chivalrous disdain of the fury of an incensed poet, put his name to a letter avowing the production of a former essay in defence of Pope, and consequently of an attack upon Mr. Bowles. Mr. Bowles appears to be angry with Mr. Gilchrist for four reasons:—firstly, because he wrote an article in “The London Magazine;” secondly, because he afterwards avowed it; thirdly, because he was the author of a still more extended article in “The Quarterly Review;” and, fourthly, because he was not the author of the said Quarterly article, and had the audacity to disown it—for no earthly reason but because he had not written it.
Mr. Bowles declares, that “he will not enter into a
[Page 384]
particular examination of the pamphlet,” which by a misnomer is called “Gilchrist's Answer to Bowles,” when it should have been called “Gilchrist's Abuse of Bowles.” On this error in the baptism of Mr. Gilchrist's pamphlet, it may be observed, that an answer may be abusive and yet no less an answer, though indisputably a temperate one might be the better of the two: but if abuse is to cancel all pretensions to reply, what becomes of Mr. Bowles's answers to Mr. Gilchrist?
Mr. Bowles continues:—“But as Mr. Gilchrist derides my peculiar sensitiveness to criticism , before I show how destitute of truth is this representation , I will here explicitly declare the only grounds,” &c. &c. &c.— Mr. Bowles's sensibility in denying his “sensitiveness to criticism” proves, perhaps, too much. But if he has been so charged, and truly—what then? There is no moral turpitude in such acuteness of feeling: it has been, and may be, combined with many good and great qualities. Is Mr. Bowles a poet, or is he not? If he be, he must, from his very essence, be sensitive to criticism; and even if he be not, he need not be ashamed of the common repugnance to being attacked. All that is to be wished is, that he had considered how disagreeable a thing it is, before he assailed the greatest moral poet of any age, or in any language.
Pope himself “sleeps well,”—nothing can touch him further; but those who love the honour of their country, the perfection of her literature, the glory of her language—are not to be expected to permit an atom of his dust to be stirred in his tomb, or a leaf to be stripped from the laurel which grows over it.
Mr. Bowles assigns several reasons why and when “an author is justified in appealing to every upright and honourable mind in the kingdom.” If Mr. Bowles limits the perusal of his defence to the “upright and honourable” only, I greatly fear that it will not be extensively circulated. I should rather hope that some
[Page 385]
of the downright and dishonest will read and be converted, or convicted. But the whole of his reasoning is here superfluous—“ an author is justified in appealing ,” &c. when and why he pleases. Let him make out a tolerable case, and few of his readers will quarrel with his motives.
Mr. Bowles “will now plainly set before the literary public all the circumstances which have led to his name and Mr. Gilchrist's being brought together,” &c. Courtesy requires, in speaking of others and ourselves, that we should place the name of the former first—and not “ Ego et Rex meus.” Mr. Bowles should have written “Mr. Gilchrist's name and his.”
This point he wishes “particularly to address to those most respectable characters , who have the direction and management of the periodical critical press.” That the press may be, in some instances, conducted by respectable characters is probable enough; but if they are so, there is no occasion to tell them of it; and if they are not, it is a base adulation. In either case, it looks like a kind of flattery, by which those gentry are not very likely to be softened; since it would be difficult to find two passages in fifteen pages more at variance, than Mr. Bowles's prose at the beginning of this pamphlet, and his verse at the end of it. In page 4. he speaks of “those most respectable characters who have the direction, &c. of the periodical press,” and in page 10. we find—
“Ye dark inquisitors , a monk-like band,
Who o'er some shrinking victim-author stand,
A solemn, secret, and vindictive brood ,
Only terrific in your cowl and hood.”
And so on—to “bloody law” and “red scourges,” with other similar phrases, which may not be altogether agreeable to the above-mentioned “most respectable characters.” Mr. Bowles goes on, “I concluded my observations in the last Pamphleteer with feelings not unkind towards Mr. Gilchrist, or” [it should be nor ]
[Page 386]
“to the author of the review of Spence, be he whom he might.”—“I was in hopes, as I have always been ready to admit any errors I might have been led into, or prejudice I might have entertained, that even Mr. Gilchrist might be disposed to a more amicable mode of discussing what I had advanced in regard to Pope's moral character.” As Major Sturgeon observes, “There never was a set of more amicable officers—with the exception of a boxing-bout between Captain Shears and the Colonel.”
A page and a half—nay only a page before—Mr. Bowles re-affirms his conviction, that “what he has said of Pope's moral character is ( generally speaking ) true , and that his “poetical principles are invariable and invulnerable .” He has also published three pamphlets, —ay, four of the same tenour,—and yet, with this declaration and these declamations staring him and his adversaries in the face, he speaks of his “readiness to admit errors or to abandon prejudices!!!” His use of the word “amicable” reminds me of the Irish Institution (which I have somewhere heard or read of) called the “ Friendly Society,” where the president always carried pistols in his pocket, so that when one amicable gentleman knocked down another, the difference might be adjusted on the spot, at the harmonious distance of twelve paces.
But Mr. Bowles “has since read a publication by him (Mr. Gilchrist) containing such vulgar slander, affecting private life and character,” &c. &c.; and Mr. Gilchrist has also had the advantage of reading a publication by Mr. Bowles sufficiently imbued with personality; for one of the first and principal topics of reproach is that he is a grocer , that he has a “pipe in his mouth, ledger-book, green canisters, dingy shop-boy, half a hogshead of brown treacle,” &c. Nay, the same delicate raillery is upon the very title-page. When controversy has once commenced upon this footing, as Dr. Johnson said to Dr. Percy, “Sir, there is an end of politeness—we are to be as rude as we please—Sir,
[Page 387]
you said that I was short-sighted .” As a man's profession is generally no more in his own power than his person—both having been made out for him—it is hard that he should be reproached with either, and still more that an honest calling should be made a reproach. If there is any thing more honourable to Mr. Gilchrist than another it is, that being engaged in commerce he has had the taste, and found the leisure, to become so able a proficient in the higher literature of his own and other countries. Mr. Bowles, who will be proud to own Glover, Chatterton, Burns, and Bloomfield for his peers, should hardly have quarrelled with Mr. Gilchrist for his critic. Mr. Gilchrist's station, however, which might conduct him to the highest civic honours, and to boundless wealth, has nothing to require apology; but even if it had, such a reproach was not very gracious on the part of a clergyman, nor graceful on that of a gentleman. The allusion to “ Christian criticism” is not particularly happy, especially where Mr. Gilchrist is accused of having “ set the first example of this mode in Europe .” What Pagan criticism may have been we know but little; the names of Zoilus and Aristarchus survive, and the works of Aristotle, Longinus, and Quintilian: but of “Christian criticism” we have already had some specimens in the works of Philelphus, Poggius, Scaliger, Milton, Salmasius, the Cruscanti (versus Tasso), the French Academy (against the Cid), and the antagonists of Voltaire and of Pope—to say nothing of some articles in most of the reviews, since their earliest institution in the person of their respectable and still prolific parent, “The Monthly.” Why, then, is Mr. Gilchrist to be singled out “as having set the first example?” A sole page of Milton or Salmasius contains more abuse—rank, rancorous, unleavened abuse—than all that can be raked forth from the whole works of many recent critics. There are some, indeed, who still keep up the good old custom; but fewer English than foreign. It is a pity that
[Page 388]
Mr. Bowles cannot witness some of the Italian controversies, or become the subject of one. He would then look upon Mr. Gilchrist as a panegyrist.
In the long sentence quoted from the article in “The London Magazine,” there is one coarse image, the justice of whose application I shall not pretend to determine:— “The pruriency with which his nose is laid to the ground” is an expression which, whether founded or not, might have been omitted. But the “anatomical minuteness” appears to me justified even by Mr. Bowles's own subsequent quotation. To the point:—“ Many facts tend to prove the peculiar susceptibility of his passions; nor can we implicitly believe that the connexion between him and Martha Blount was of a nature so pure and innocent as his panegyrist Ruffhead would have us believe,” &c. —“At no time could she have regarded Pope personally with attachment,” &c.—“But the most extraordinary circumstance in regard to his connexion with female society, was the strange mixture of indecent and even profane levity which his conduct and language often exhibited. The cause of this particularity may be sought, perhaps, in his consciousness of physical defect, which made him affect a character uncongenial, and a language opposite to the truth.”—If this is not “minute moral anatomy,” I should be glad no know what is! It is dissection in all its branches. I shall, however, hazard a remark or two upon this quotation.
To me it appears of no very great consequence whether Martha Blount was or was not Pope's mistress, though I could have wished him a better. She appears to have been a cold-hearted, interested, ignorant, disagreeable woman, upon whom the tenderness of Pope's heart in the desolation of his latter days was cast away, not knowing whither to turn, as he drew towards his premature old age, childless and lonely,—like the needle which, approaching within a certain distance of the pole, becomes helpless and useless, and, ceasing to tremble, rusts. She seems to have been so totally unworthy of
[Page 389]
tenderness, that it is an additional proof of the kindness of Pope's heart to have been able to love such a being. But we must love something. I agree with Mr. B. that she “could at no time have regarded Pope personally with attachment,” because she was incapable of attachment; but I deny that Pope could not be regarded with personal attachment by a worthier woman. It is not probable, indeed, that a woman would have fallen in love with him as he walked along the Mall, or in a box at the opera, nor from a balcony, nor in a ball-room; but in society he seems to have been as amiable as unassuming, and, with the greatest disadvantages of figure, his head and face were remarkably handsome, especially his eyes. He was adored by his friends—friends of the most opposite dispositions, ages, and talents—by the old and wayward Wycherley, by the cynical Swift, the rough Atterbury, the gentle Spence, the stern attorney-bishop Warburton, the virtuous Berkeley, and the “cankered Bolingbroke.” Bolingbroke wept over him like a child; and Spence's description of his last moments is at least as edifying as the more ostentatious account of the deathbed of Addison. The soldier Peterborough and the poet Gay, the witty Congreve and the laughing Rowe, the eccentric Cromwell and the steady Bathurst, were all his intimates. The man who could conciliate so many men of the most opposite description, not one of whom but was a remarkable or a celebrated character, might well have pretended to all the attachment which a reasonable man would desire of an amiable woman.
Pope, in fact, wherever he got it, appears to have understood the sex well. Bolingbroke, “a judge of the subject,” says Warton, thought his “Epistle on the Characters of Women” his “masterpiece.” And even with respect to the grosser passion, which takes occasionally the name of “ romantic ,” accordingly as the degree of sentiment elevates it above the definition of love by Buffon, it may be remarked, that it does not always
[Page 390]
depend upon personal appearance, even in a woman. Madame Cottin was a plain woman, and might have been virtuous, it may be presumed, without much interruption. Virtuous she was, and the consequences of this inveterate virtue were that two different admirers (one an elderly gentleman) killed themselves in despair (see Lady Morgan's “France”). I would not, however, recommend this rigour to plain women in general, in the hope of securing the glory of two suicides apiece. I believe that there are few men who, in the course of their observations on life, may not have perceived that it is not the greatest female beauty who forms the longest and the strongest passions.
But, apropos of Pope.—Voltaire tells us that the Marechal Luxembourg (who had precisely Pope's figure) was not only somewhat too amatory for a great man, but fortunate in his attachments. La Valière, the passion of Louis XIV., had an unsightly defect. The Princess of Eboli, the mistress of Philip II. of Spain, and Maugiron, the minion of Henry III. of France, had each of them lost an eye; and the famous Latin epigram was written upon them, which has, I believe, been either translated or imitated by Goldsmith:—
“Lumine Acon dextro, capta est Leonilla sinistro,
    Et potis est forma vincere uterque Deos;
Blande puer, lumen quod habes concede sorrori,
    Sic tu cæcus Amor, sic erit illa Venus.”
Wilkes, with his ugliness, used to say that “he was but a quarter of an hour behind the handsomest man in England;” and this vaunt of his is said not to have been disproved by circumstances. Swift, when neither young, not handsome, nor rich, nor even amiable, inspired the two most extraordinary passions upon record, Vanessa's and Stella's.
“Vanessa, aged scarce a score,
Sighs for a gown of forty-four .”
He requited them bitterly; for he seems to have broken the heart of the one, and worn out that of the
[Page 391]
other; and he had his reward, for he died a solitary idiot in the hands of servants.
For my own part, I am of the opinion of Pausanias, that success in love depends upon Fortune. “They particularly renounce Celestial Venus, into whose temple, &c. &c. &c. I remember, too, to have seen a building in Ægina in which there is a statue of Fortune, holding a horn of Amalthea; and near her there is a winged Love. The meaning of this is, that the success of men in love affairs depends more on the assistance of Fortune than the charms of beauty. I am persuaded, too, with Pindar (to whose opinion I submit in other particulars), that Fortune is one of the Fates, and that in a certain respect she is more powerful than her sisters.”—See Pausanias, Achaics, book vii. chap. 26. p. 246. Taylor's “Translation.”
Grimm has a remark of the same kind on the different destinies of the younger Crebillon and Rousseau. The former writes a licentious novel, and a young English girl of some fortune and family (a Miss Strafford) runs away, and crosses the sea to marry him; while Rousseau, the most tender and passionate of lovers, is obliged to espouse his chambermaid. If I recollect rightly, this remark was also repeated in the Edinburgh Review of Grimm's correspondence, seven or eight years ago.
In regard “to the strange mixture of indecent, and sometimes profane levity, which his conduct and language often exhibited,” and which so much shocks Mr. Bowles, I object to the indefinite word “ often ;” and in extenuation of the occasional occurrence of such language it is to be recollected, that it was less the tone of Pope , than the tone of the time . With the exception of the correspondence of Pope and his friends, not many private letters of the period have come down to us; but those, such as they are—a few scattered scraps from Farquhar and others—are more indecent and coarse than any thing in Pope's letters. The comedies of Congreve, Vanbrugh, Farquhar, Cibber, &c., which
[Page 392]
naturally attempted to represent the manners and conversation of private life, are decisive upon this point; as are also some of Steele's papers, and even Addison's. We all know what the conversation of Sir R. Walpole, for seventeen years the prime minister of the country, was at his own table, and his excuse for his licentious language, viz. “that every body understood that , but few could talk rationally upon less common topics.” The refinement of latter days,—which is perhaps the consequence of vice, which wishes to mask and soften itself, as much as of virtuous civilisation,—had not yet made sufficient progress. Even Johnson, in his “London,” has two or three passages which cannot be read aloud, and Addison's “Drummer” some indelicate allusions.
The expression of Mr. Bowles, “his consciousness of physical defect,” is not very clear. It may mean deformity or debility. If it alludes to Pope's deformity, it has been attempted to be shown that this was no insuperable objection to his being beloved. If it alludes to debility, as a consequence of Pope's peculiar conformation, I believe that it is a physical and known fact that hump-backed persons are of strong and vigorous passions. Several years ago, at Mr. Angelo's fencing rooms, when I was a pupil of him and of Mr. Jackson, who had the use of his rooms in Albany on the alternate days, I recollect a gentleman named B-II-gh-t, remarkable for his strength, and the fineness of his figure. His skill was not inferior, for he could stand up to the great Captain Barclay himself, with the muffles on; — a task neither easy nor agreeable to a pugilistic aspirant. As the by-standers were one day admiring his athletic proportions, he remarked to us, that he had five brothers as tall and strong as himself, and that their father and mother were both crooked, and of very small stature ;—I think he said, neither of them five feet high. It would not be difficult to adduce similar instances; but I abstain, because the subject is
[Page 393]
hardly refined enough for this immaculate period, this moral millenium of expurgated editions in books, manners, and royal trials of divorce.
This laudable delicacy—this crying-out elegance of the day—reminds me of a little circumstance which occurred when I was about eighteen years of age. There was then (and there may be still) a famous French “entremetteuse,” who assisted young gentlemen in their youthful pastimes. We had been acquainted for some time, when something occurred in her line of business more than ordinary, and the refusal was offered to me (and doubtless to many others), probably because I was in cash at the moment, having taken up a decent sum from the Jews, and not having spent much above half of it. The adventure on the tapis, it seems, required some caution and circumspection. Whether my venerable friend doubted my politeness I cannot tell; but she sent me a letter couched in such English as a short residence of sixteen years in England had enabled her to acquire. After several precepts and instructions, the letter closed. But there was a postscript. It contained these words:— “Remember, Milor, that delicaci ensure everi succés.” The delicacy of the day is exactly, in all its circumstances, like that of this respectable foreigner. “It ensures every succès ,” and is not a whit more moral than, and not half so honourable as, the coarser candour of our less polished ancestors.
To return to Mr. Bowles. “If what is here extracted can excite in the mind (I will not say of any ‘layman’, of any ‘Christian’, but) of any human being ,” &c. &c. Is not Mr. Gilchrist a “human being?” Mr. Bowles asks “whether in attributing an article,” &c. &c. “to the critic, he had any reason for distinguishing him with that courtesy,” &c. &c. But Mr. Bowles was wrong in “attributing the article” to Mr. Gilchrist at all; and would not have been right in calling him a dunce and a grocer, if he had written it.
Mr. Bowles is here “peremptorily called upon to
[Page 394]
speak of a circumstance which gives him the greatest pain,—the mention of a letter he received from the editor of ‘The London Magazine.’” Mr. Bowles seems to have embroiled himself on all sides; whether by editing, or replying, or attributing, or quoting,—it has been an awkward affair for him.
Poor Scott is now no more. In the exercise of his vocation, he contrived at last to make himself the subject of a coroner's inquest. But he died like a brave man, and he lived an able one. I knew him personally, though slightly. Although several years my senior, we had been schoolfellows together at the “grammar-schule” (or, as the Aberdonians pronounce it, “ squeel ”) of New Aberdeen. He did not behave to me quite handsomely in his capacity of editor a few years ago, but he was under no obligation to behave otherwise. The moment was too tempting for many friends and for all enemies. At a time when all my relations (save one) fell from me like leaves from the tree in autumn winds, and my few friends became still fewer,—when the whole periodical press (I mean the daily and weekly, not the literary press) was let loose against me in every shape of reproach, with the two strange exceptions (from their usual opposition) of “The Courier” and “The Examiner,” —the paper of which Scott had the direction was neither the last nor the least vituperative. Two years ago I met him at Venice, when he was bowed in griefs by the loss of his son, and had known, by experience, the bitterness of domestic privation. He was then earnest with me to return to England; and on my telling him, with a smile, that he was once of a different opinion, he replied to me, ‘that he and others had been greatly misled; and that some pains, and rather extraordinary means, had been taken to excite them.’ Scott is no more, but there are more than one living who were present at this dialogue. He was a man of very considerable talents, and of great acquirements. He had made his way, as a literary character, with high success, and
[Page 395]
in a few years. Poor fellow! I recollect his joy at some appointment which he had obtained, or was to obtain, through Sir James Mackintosh, and which prevented the further extension (unless by a rapid run to Rome) of his travels in Italy. I little thought to what it would conduct him. Peace be with him!—and may all such other faults as are inevitable to humanity be as readily forgiven him, as the little injury which he had done to one who respected his talents, and regrets his loss.
I pass over Mr. Bowles's page of explanation, upon the correspondence between him and Mr. S-. It is of little importance in regard to Pope, and contains merely a re-contradiction of a contradiction of Mr. Gilchrist's. We now come to a point where Mr. Gilchrist has, certainly, rather exaggerated matters; and, of course, Mr. Bowles makes the most of it. Capital letters, like Kean's name, “large upon the bills,” are made use of six or seven times to express his sense of the outrage. The charge is, indeed, very boldly made; but, like “Ranold of the Mist's” practical joke of putting the bread and cheese into a dead man's mouth, is, as Dugald Dalgetty says, “somewhat too wild and salvage, besides wasting the good victuals.”
Mr. Gilchrist charges Mr. Bowles with “suggesting” that Pope “attempted” to commit “a rape” upon Lady M. Wortley Montague. There are two reasons why this could not be true. The first is, that like the chaste Letitia's prevention of the intended ravishment by Fireblood (in Jonathan Wild), it might have been impeded by a timely compliance. The second is, that however this might be, Pope was probably the less robust of the two; and (if the Lines on Sappho were really intended for this lady) the asserted consequences of her acquiescence in his wishes would have been a sufficient punishment. The passage which Mr. Bowles quotes, however, insinuates nothing of the kind: it merely charges her with encouragement, and him with wishing
[Page 396]
to profit by it,—a slight attempt at seduction, and no more. The phrase is, “a step beyond decorum.” Any physical violence is so abhorrent to human nature, that it recoils in cold blood from the very idea. But, the seduction of a woman's mind as well as person is not, perhaps, the least heinous sin of the two in morality. Dr. Johnson commends a gentleman who having seduced a girl who said, “I am afraid we have done wrong,” replied, “Yes, we have done wrong,”— “for I would not pervert her mind also.” Othello would not “kill Desdemona's soul .” Mr. Bowles exculpates himself from Mr. Gilchrist's charge; but it is by substituting another charge against Pope. “A step beyond decorum,” has a soft sound, but what does it express? In all these cases, “ce n'est que le premier pas qui coute.” Has not the Scripture something upon “the lusting after a woman” being no less criminal than the crime? “A step beyond decorum,” in short, any step beyond the instep, is a step from a precipice to the lady who permits it. For the gentleman who makes it it is also rather hazardous if he does not succeed, and still more so if he does.
Mr. Bowles appeals to the “Christian reader!” upon this “ Gilchristian criticism.” Is not this play upon such words “a step beyond decorum” in a clergyman? But I admit the temptation of a pun to be irresistible.
But “a hasty pamphlet was published, in which some personalities respecting Mr. Gilchrist were suffered to appear.” If Mr. Bowles will write “hasty pamphlets,” why is he so surprised on receiving short answers? The grand grievance to which he perpetually returns is a charge of “ hypochondriacism ,” asserted or insinuated in the Quarterly. I cannot conceive a man in perfect health being much affected by such a charge, because his complexion and conduct must amply refute it. But were it true, to what does it amount?—to an impeachment of a liver complaint. “I will tell it to the world,” exclaimed the learned Smelfungus.—“You had better,” said I, “tell it to your physician.” There is nothing
[Page 397]
dishonourable in such a disorder, which is more peculiarly the malady of students. It has been the complaint of the good, and the wise, and the witty, and even of the gay. Regnard, the author of the last French comedy after Molière, was atrabilious; and Molière himself, saturnine. Dr. Johnson, Gray, and Burns, were all more or less affected by it occasionally. It was the prelude to the more awful malady of Collins, Cowper, Swift, and Smart; but it by no means follows that a partial affliction of this disorder is to terminate like theirs. But even were it so,—
“Nor best, nor wisest, are exempt from thee;
Folly—Folly's only free.” Penrose .
If this be the criterion of exemption, Mr. Bowles's last two pamphlets form a better certificate of sanity than a physician's. Mendehlson and Bayle were at times so overcome with this depression, as to be obliged to recur to seeing “puppet-shows, and counting tiles upon the opposite houses,” to divert themselves. Dr. Johnson at times “would have given a limb to recover his spirits.” Mr. Bowles, who is (strange to say) fond of quoting Pope, may perhaps answer,—
“Go on, obliging creatures, let me see
All which disgrac'd my betters met in me.”
But the charge, such as it is, neither disgraces them nor him. It is easily disproved if false; and even if proved true, has nothing in it to make a man so very indignant. Mr. Bowles himself appears to be a little ashamed of his “hasty pamphlet;” for he attempts to excuse it by the “great provocation;” that is to say, by Mr. Bowles's supposing that Mr. Gilchrist was the writer of the article in the Quarterly, which he was not .
“But, in extenuation, not only the great provocation should be remembered, but it ought to be said, that orders were sent to the London booksellers, that the most direct personal passages should be omitted entirely ,”
[Page 398]
&c. This is what the proverb calls “breaking a head and giving a plaster;” but, in this instance, the plaster was not spread in time, and Mr. Gilchrist does not seem at present disposed to regard Mr. Bowles's courtesies like the rust of the spear of Achilles, which had such “skill in surgery.”
But “Mr. Gilchrist has no right to object, as the reader will see.” I am a reader, a “gentle reader,” and I see nothing of the kind. Were I in Mr. Gilchrist's place, I should object exceedingly to being abused; firstly, for what I did write, and, secondly, for what I did not write; merely because it is Mr. Bowles's will and pleasure to be as angry with me for having written in the London Magazine, as for not having written in the Quarterly Review.
“Mr. Gilchrist has had ample revenge; for he has, in his answer, said so and so,” &c. &c. There is no great revenge in all this; and I presume that nobody either seeks or wishes it. What revenge? Mr. Bowles calls names, and he is answered. But Mr. Gilchrist and the Quarterly Reviewer are not poets, nor pretenders to poetry; therefore they can have no envy nor malice against Mr. Bowles: they have no acquaintance with Mr. Bowles, and can have no personal pique; they do not cross his path of life, nor he theirs. There is no political feud between them. What, then, can be the motive of their discussion of his deserts as an editor?— veneration for the genius of Pope, love for his memory, and regard for the classic glory of their country. Why would Mr. Bowles edite? Had he limited his honest endeavours to poetry, very little would have been said upon the subject, and nothing at all by his present antagonists.
Mr. Bowles calls the pamphlet a “mud-cart,” and the writer a “scavenger.” Afterward he asks, “Shall he fling dirt and receive rose-water ?” This metaphor, by the way, is taken from Marmontel's Memoirs; who, lamenting to Chamfort the shedding of blood during the
[Page 399]
French revolution, was answered, “Do you think that revolutions are to be made with rose-water ?”
For my own part, I presume that “rose-water” would be infinitely more graceful in the hands of Mr. Bowles than the substance which he has substituted for that delicate liquid. It would also more confound his adversary, supposing him a “scavenger.” I remember, (and do you remember, reader, that it was in my earliest youth, “Consule Planco,”)—on the morning of the great battle, (the second)—between Gulley and Gregson,— Cribb , who was matched against Horton for the second fight, on the same memorable day, awaking me (a lodger at the inn in the next room) by a loud remonstrance to the waiter against the abomination of his towels, which had been laid in lavender . Cribb was a coal-heaver—and was much more discomfited by this odoriferous effeminacy of fine linen, than by his adversary Horton, whom he “finished in style,” though with some reluctance; for I recollect that he said, “he disliked hurting him, he looked so pretty,”—Horton being a very fine fresh-coloured young man.
To return to “rose-water”—that is, to gentle means of rebuke. Does Mr. Bowles know how to revenge himself upon a hackney-coachman, when he has overcharged his fare? In case he should not, I will tell him. It is of little use to call him “a rascal, a scoundrel, a thief, an impostor, a blackguard, a villain, a raggamuffin, a—what you please;” all that he is used to—it is his mother-tongue, and probably his mother's. But look him steadily and quietly in the face, and say — “Upon my word, I think you are the ugliest fellow I ever saw in my life,” and he will instantly roll forth the brazen thunders of the charioteer Salmoneus as follows: —“ Hugly ! what the h-ll are you ? You a gentleman ! Why---!” So much easier it is to provoke — and therefore to vindicate — (for passion punishes him who feels it more than those whom the passionate would excruciate)
[Page 400]
—by a few quiet words the aggressor, than by retorting violently. The “coals of fire” of the Scripture are benefits ; — but they are not the less “coals of fire .”
I pass over a page of quotation and reprobation— “Sin up to my song”—“Oh let my little bark”— “Arcades ambo”—“Writer in the Quarterly Review and himself” — “In-door avocations, indeed” — “Kings of Brentford”—“One nosegay”—“Perennial nosegay”—“Oh Juvenes,”—and the like.
Page 12. produces “more reasons,”—(the task ought not to have been difficult, for as yet there were none) — “to show why Mr. Bowles attributed the critique in the Quarterly to Octavius Gilchrist.” All these “reasons” consist of surmises of Mr. Bowles, upon the presumed character of his opponent. “He did not suppose there could exist a man in the kingdom so impudent , &c. &c. except Octavius Gilchrist.”—“He did not think there was a man in the kingdom who would pretend ignorance , &c. &c. except Octavius Gilchrist.”—“He did not conceive that one man in the kingdom would utter such stupid flippancy, &c. &c. except Octavius Gilchrist.”— “He did not think there was one man in the kingdom who, &c. &c. could so utterly show his ignorance, combined with conceit , &c. as Octavius Gilchrist.”— “He did not believe there was a man in the kingdom so perfect in Mr. Gilchrist's ‘old lunes,’” &c. &c.—“He did not think the mean mind of any one in the kingdom,” &c. and so on; always beginning with “any one in the kingdom,” and ending with “Octavius Gilchrist,” like the word in a catch. I am not “in the kingdom,” and have not been much in the kingdom since I was one and twenty, (about five years in the whole, since I was of age,) and have no desire to be in the kingdom again, whilst I breathe, nor to sleep there afterwards; and I regret nothing more than having ever been “in the kingdom” at all. But though no longer a man “in the kingdom,” let me hope that when I have ceased to
[Page 401]
exist, it may be said, as was answered by the master of Clanronald's henchman, his day after the battle of Sheriff-Muir, when he was found watching his chief's body. He was asked, “who that was?” he replied—“it was a man yesterday.” And in this capacity, “in or out of the kingdom,” I must own that I participate in many of the objections urged by Mr. Gilchrist. I participate in his love of Pope, and in his not understanding, and occasionally finding fault with, the last editor of our last truly great poet.
One of the reproaches against Mr. Gilchrist is, that he is (it is sneeringly said) an F. S. A . If it will give Mr. Bowles any pleasure, I am not an F. S. A. but a Fellow of the Royal Society at his service, in case there should be any thing in that association also which may point a paragraph.
“There are some other reasons,” but “the author is now not unknown.” Mr. Bowles has so totally exhausted himself upon Octavius Gilchrist, that he has not a word left for the real quarterer of his edition, although now “deterré.”
The following page refers to a mysterious charge of “duplicity, in regard to the publication of Pope's letters.” Till this charge is made in proper form, we have nothing to do with it: Mr. Gilchrist hints it—Mr. Bowles denies it; there it rests for the present. Mr. Bowles professes his dislike to “Pope's duplicity, not to Pope”—a distinction apparently without a difference. However, I believe that I understand him. We have a great dislike to Mr. Bowles's edition of Pope, but not to Mr. Bowles; nevertheless, he takes up the subject as warmly as if it was personal. With regard to the fact of “Pope's duplicity,” it remains to be proved—like Mr. Bowles's benevolence towards his memory.
In page 14. we have a large assertion, that “the ‘Eloisa’ alone is sufficient to convict him of gross licentiousness .” Thus, out it comes at last. Mr. Bowles does accuse Pope of “ gross licentiousness,” and grounds
[Page 402]
the charge upon a poem. The licentiousness is a “grand peut-être,” according to the turn of the times being. The grossness I deny. On the contrary, I do believe that such a subject never was, nor ever could be, treated by any poet with so much delicacy, mingled with, at the same time, such true and intense passion. Is the “Atys” of Catullus licentious ? No, nor even gross; and yet Catullus is often a coarse writer. The subject is nearly the same, except that Atys was the suicide of his manhood, and Abelard the victim.
The “licentiousness” of the story was not Pope's,— it was a fact. All that it had of gross, he has softened; —all that it had of indelicate, he has purified;—all that it had of passionate, he has beautified;—all that it had of holy, he has hallowed. Mr. Campbell has admirably marked this in a few words (I quote from memory), in drawing the distinction between Pope and Dryden, and pointing out where Dryden was wanting. “I fear,” says he, “that had the subject of ‘Eloisa’ fallen into his (Dryden's) hands, that he would have given us but a coarse draft of her passion.” Never was the delicacy of Pope so much shown as in this poem. With the facts and the letters of “Eloisa” he has done what no other mind but that of the best and purest of poets could have accomplished with such materials. Ovid, Sappho (in the Ode called hers)—all that we have of ancient, all that we have of modern poetry, sinks into nothing compared with him in this production.
Let us hear no more of this trash about “licentiousness.” Is not “Anacreon” taught in our schools?— translated, praised, and edited? Are not his Odes the amatory praises of a boy? Is not Sappho's Ode on a girl? Is not this sublime and (according to Longinus) fierce love for one of her own sex? And is not Phillips's translation of it in the mouths of all your women? And are the English schools or the English women the more corrupt for all this? When you have thrown the ancients into the fire, it will be time to denounce the
[Page 403]
moderns. “Licentiousness!”—there is more real mischief and sapping licentiousness in a single French prose novel, in a Moravian hymn, or a German comedy, than in all the actual poetry that ever was penned, or poured forth, since the rhapsodies of Orpheus. The sentimental anatomy of Rousseau and Mad. de'S. are far more formidable than any quantity of verse. They are so, because they sap the principles, by reasoning upon the passions ; whereas poetry is in itself passion, and does not systematise. It assails, but does not argue; it may be wrong, but it does not assume pretensions to Optimism.
Mr. Bowles now has the goodness “to point out the difference between a traducer and him who sincerely states what he sincerely believes.” He might have spared himself the trouble. The one is a liar, who lies knowingly; the other (I speak of a scandal-monger of course) lies, charitably believing that he speaks truth, and very sorry to find himself in falsehood;—because he
“Would rather that the dean should die,
Than his prediction prove a lie.”
After a definition of a “traducer,” which was quite superfluous (though it is agreeable to learn that Mr. Bowles so well understands the character), we are assured, that “he feels equally indifferent, Mr. Gilchrist, for what your malice can invent, or your impudence utter.” This is indubitable; for it rests not only on Mr. Bowles's assurance, but on that of Sir Fretful Plagiary, and nearly in the same words,—“and I shall treat it with exactly the same calm indifference and philosophical contempt, and so your servant.”
“One thing has given Mr. Bowles concern.” It is “a passage which might seem to reflect on the patronage a young man has received.” Might seem!! The passage alluded to expresses, that if Mr. Gilchrist be the reviewer of “a certain poet of nature,” his praise
[Page 404]
and blame are equally contemptible.”—Mr. Bowles, who has a peculiarly ambiguous style, where it suits him, comes off with a “ not to the poet , but the critic,” &c. In my humble opinion, the passage referred to both. Had Mr. Bowles really meant fairly, he would have said so from the first—he would have been eagerly transparent. —“A certain poet of nature” is not the style of commendation. It is the very prologue to the most scandalous paragraphs of the newspapers, when
“Willing to wound, and yet afraid to strike.”
“A certain high personage,”—“a certain peeress,”—a “certain illustrious foreigner,”—what do these words ever precede, but defamation? Had he felt a spark of kindling kindness for John Clare, he would have named him. There is a sneer in the sentence as it stands. How a favourable review of a deserving poet can “rather injure than promote his cause” is difficult to comprehend. The article denounced is able and amiable, and it has “served” the poet, as far as poetry can be served by judicious and honest criticism.
With the two next paragraphs of Mr. Bowles's pamphlet it is pleasing to concur. His mention of “Pennie,” and his former patronage of “Shoel,” do him honour. I am not of those who may deny Mr. Bowles to be a benevolent man. I merely assert, that he is not a candid editor.
Mr. Bowles has been “a writer occasionally upwards of thirty years,” and never wrote one word in reply in his life “to criticisms, merely as criticisms.” This is Mr. Lofty in Goldsmith's Good-natured Man; “and I vow by all that's honourable, my resentment has never done the men, as mere men , any manner of harm,—that is, as mere men .”
“The letter to the editor of the newspaper” is owned; but “it was not on account of the criticism. It was because the criticism came down in a frank directed to Mrs. Bowles!!!”—(the italics and three
[Page 405]
notes of admiration appended to Mrs. Bowles are copied verbatim from the quotation), and Mr. Bowles was not displeased with the criticism, but with the frank and the address. I agree with Mr. Bowles that the intention was to annoy him; but I fear that this was answered by his notice of the reception of the criticism. An anonymous letter-writer has but one means of knowing the effect of his attack. In this he has the superiority over the viper; he knows that his poison has taken effect, when he hears the victim cry;—the adder is deaf . The best reply to an anonymous intimation is to take no notice directly nor indirectly. I wish Mr. Bowles could see only one or two of the thousand which I have received in the course of a literary life, which, though begun early, has not yet extended to a third part of his existence as an author. I speak of literary life only. Were I to add personal , I might double the amount of anonymous letters. If he could but see the violence, the threats, the absurdity of the whole thing, he would laugh, and so should I, and thus be both gainers.
To keep up the farce,—within the last month of this present writing (1821), I have had my life threatened in the same way which menaced Mr. Bowles's fame, —excepting that the anonymous denunciation was addressed to the Cardinal Legate of Romagna, instead of to Mrs. Bowles. The Cardinal is, I believe, the elder lady of the two. I append the menace in all its barbaric but literal Italian, that Mr. Bowles may be convinced; and as this is the only “promise to pay,” which the Italians ever keep, so my person has been at least as much exposed to a “shot in the gloaming,” from “John Heatherblutter” (see Waverley), as ever Mr. Bowles's glory was from an editor. I am, nevertheless, on horseback and lonely for some hours ( one of them twilight) in the forest daily; and this, because it was my “custom in the afternoon,” and that I believe if the tyrant cannot escape amidst his guards (should it be
[Page 406]
so written?), so the humbler individual would find precautions useless.
Mr. Bowles has here the humility to say, that “he must succumb; for with Lord Byron turned against him, he has no chance,”—a declaration of self-denial not much in unison with his “promise,” five lines afterwards, that “for every twenty-four lines quoted by Mr. Gilchrist, or his friend, to greet him with as many from the ‘Gilchrisiad’;” but so much the better. Mr. Bowles has no reason to “succumb” but to Mr. Bowles. As a poet, the author of “The Missionary” may compete with the foremost of his cotemporaries . Let it be recollected, that all my previous opinions of Mr. Bowles's poetry were written long before the publication of his last and best poem; and that a poet's last poem should be his best, is his highest praise. But, however, he may duly and honourably rank with his living rivals. There never was so complete a proof of the superiority of Pope, as in the lines with which Mr. Bowles closes his “ to be concluded in our next .”
Mr. Bowles is avowedly the champion and the poet of nature. Art and the arts are dragged, some before, and others behind his chariot. Pope, where he deals with passion, and with the nature of the naturals of the day, is allowed even by themselves to be sublime; but they complain that too soon—
“He stoop'd to truth and moralised his song.”
and there even they allow him to be unrivalled. He has succeeded, and even surpassed them, when he chose, in their own pretended province. Let us see what their Coryphœus effects in Pope's. But it is too pitiable, it is too melancholy, to see Mr. Bowles “ sinning ” not “ up ” but “ down ” as a poet to his lowest depth as an editor. By the way, Mr. Bowles is always quoting Pope. I grant that there is no poet—not Shakspeare himself—who can be so often quoted, with reference to life;—but his editor is so like the devil quoting Scripture,
[Page 407]
that I could wish Mr. Bowles in his proper place, quoting in the pulpit.
And now for his lines. But it is painful—painful —to see such a suicide, though at the shrine of Pope. I can't copy them all:—
“Shall the rank, loathsome miscreant of the age
Sit, like a night-mare, grinning o'er a page.”
“Whose pye-bald character so aptly suit
The two extremes of Bantam and of Brute,
Compound grotesque of sullenness and show,
The chattering magpie, and the croaking crow.”
“Whose heart contends with thy Saturnian head,
A root of hemlock, and a lump of lead.
Gilchrist proceed,” &c. &c.
“And thus stand forth, spite of thy venom'd foam,
To give thee bite for bite , or lash thee limping home.”
With regard to the last line, the only one upon which I shall venture for fear of infection, I would advise Mr. Gilchrist to keep out of the way of such reciprocal morsure —unless he has more faith in the “Ormskirk medicine” than most people, or may wish to anticipate the pension of the recent German professor, (I forget his name, but it is advertised and full of consonants,) who presented his memoir of an infallible remedy for the hydrophobia to the German diet last month, coupled with the philanthropic condition of a large annuity, provided that his cure cured. Let him begin with the editor of Pope, and double his demand.
Yours ever,
Byron .
To John Murray, Esq.
P. S. Amongst the above-mentioned lines there occurs the following, applied to Pope—
“The assassin's vengeance, and the coward's lie.”
And Mr. Bowles persists that he is a well-wisher to Pope!!! He has, then, edited an “assassin” and a
[Page 408]
“coward” wittingly, as well as lovingly. In my former letter I have remarked upon the editor's forgetfulness of Pope's benevolence. But where he mentions his faults it is “with sorrow”—his tears drop, but they do not blot them out. The “recording angel” differs from the recording clergyman. A fulsome editor is pardonable though tiresome, like a panegyrical son whose pious sincerity would demi-deify his father. But a detracting editor is a paricide. He sins against the nature of his office, and connection—he murders the life to come of his victim. If his author is not worthy to be mentioned, do not edit at all: if he be, edit honestly, and even flatteringly. The reader will forgive the weakness in favour of mortality, and correct your adulation with a smile. But to sit down “mingere in patrios cineres,” as Mr. Bowles has done, merits a reprobation so strong, that I am as incapable of expressing as of ceasing to feel it.
Further Addenda . It is worthy of remark that, after all this outery about “ in-door nature” and “artificial images,” Pope was the principal inventor of that boast of the English, Modern Gardening . He divides this honour with Milton. Hear Warton:—“It hence appears, that this enchanting art of modern gardening, in which this kingdom claims a preference over every nation in Europe, chiefly owes its origin and its improvements to two great poets, Milton and Pope .”
Walpole (no friend to Pope) asserts that Pope formed Kent's taste, and that Kent was the artist to whom the English are chiefly indebted for diffusing “a taste in laying out grounds.” The design of the Prince of Wales's garden was copied from Pope's at Twickenham. Warton applauds “his singular effort of art and taste, in impressing so much variety and scenery on a spot of five acres.” Pope was the first who ridiculed the “formal, French, Dutch, false and unnatural taste in gardening,”
[Page 409]
both in prose and verse. (See, for the former, “The Guardian.”)
“Pope has given not only some of our first but best rules and observations on Architecture and Gardening .” (See Warton's Essay, vol. ii. p. 237, &c. &c.)
Now, is it not a shame, after this, to hear our Lakers in “Kendal Green,” and our Bucolical Cockneys, crying out (the latter in a wilderness of bricks and mortar) about “Nature,” and Pope's “artificial in-door habits?” Pope had seen all of nature that England alone can supply. He was bred in Windsor Forest, and amidst the beautiful scenery of Eton; he lived familiarly and frequently at the country seats of Bathurst, Cobham, Burlington, Peterborough, Digby, and Bolingbroke; amongst whose seats was to be numbered Stowe . He made his own little “five acres” a model to princes, and to the first of our artists who imitated nature. Warton thinks “that the most engaging of Kent's works was also planned on the model of Pope's, —at least in the opening and retiring shades of Venus's Vale.”
It is true that Pope was infirm and deformed; but he could walk, and he could ride (he rode to Oxford from London at a stretch), and he was famous for an exquisite eye. On a tree at Lord Bathurst's is carved “Here Pope sang,”—he composed beneath it. Bolingbroke, in one of his letters, represents them both writing in the hay-field. No poet ever admired Nature more, or used her better, than Pope has done, as I will undertake to prove from his works, prose and verse , if not anticipated in so easy and agreeable a labour. I remember a passage in Walpole, somewhere, of a gentleman who wished to give directions about some willows to a man who had long served Pope in his grounds: “I understand, sir,” he replied: “you would have them hang down, sir, somewhat poetical .” Now, if nothing existed but this little anecdote, it would suffice to prove Pope's taste for Nature , and the impression which he had made on a common-minded man. But I have already quoted Warton and Walpole ( both his enemies),
[Page 410]
and, were it necessary, I could amply quote Pope himself for such tributes to Nature as no poet of the present day has even approached.
His various excellence is really wonderful: architecture, painting, gardening , all are alike subject to his genius. Be it remembered, that English gardening is the purposed perfectioning of niggard Nature , and that without it England is but a hedge-and-ditch, double-post-and-rail, Hounslow Heath and Clapham Common sort of country, since the principal forests have been felled. It is, in general, far from a picturesque country. The case is different with Scotland, Wales, and Ireland; and I except also the lake counties and Derbyshire, together with Eton, Windsor, and my own dear Harrow on the Hill, and some spots near the coast. In the present rank fertility of “great poets of the age,” and “schools of poetry”—a word which, like “schools of eloquence” and of “philosophy,” is never introduced till the decay of the art has increased with the number of its professors — in the present day, then, there have sprung up two sorts of Naturals;—the Lakers, who whine about Nature because they live in Cumberland; and their under-sect (which some one has maliciously called the “Cockney School”), who are enthusiastical for the country because they live in London. It is to be observed, that the rustical founders are rather anxious to disclaim any connexion with their metropolitan followers, whom they ungraciously review, and call cockneys, atheists, foolish fellows, bad writers, and other hard names not less ungrateful than unjust. I can understand the pretensions of the aquatic gentlemen of Windermere to what Mr. Braham terms “ entusumusy ,” for lakes, and mountains, and daffodils, and buttercups; but I should be glad to be apprised of the foundation of the London propensities of their imitative brethren to the same “high argument.” Southey, Wordsworth, and Coleridge have rambled over half Europe, and seen Nature in most of her varieties (although I think that they have occasionally not used her very well); but what on
[Page 411]
earth—of earth, and sea, and Nature—have the others seen? Not a half, nor a tenth part so much as Pope. While they sneer at his Windsor Forest, have they ever seen any thing of Windsor except its brick ?
The most rural of these gentlemen is my friend Leigh Hunt, who lives at Hampstead. I believe that I need not disclaim any personal or poetical hostility against that gentleman. A more amiable man in society I know not; nor (when he will allow his sense to prevail over his sectarian principles) a better writer. When he was writing his “Rimini,” I was not the last to discover its beauties, long before it was published. Even then I remonstrated against its vulgarisms; which are the more extraordinary, because the author is any thing but a vulgar man. Mr. Hunt's answer was, that he wrote them upon principle; they made part of his “ system !!” I then said no more. When a man talks of his system, it is like a woman's talking of her virtue . I let them talk on. Whether there are writers who could have written “Rimini,” as it might have been written, I know not; but Mr. Hunt is, probably, the only poet who could have had the heart to spoil his own Capo d'Opera.
With the rest of his young people I have no acquaintance, except through some things of theirs (which have been sent out without my desire), and I confess that till I had read them I was not aware of the full extent of human absurdity. Like Garrick's “Ode to Shakspeare,” they “ defy criticism .” These are of the personages who decry Pope. One of them, a Mr. John Ketch, has written some lines against him, of which it were better to be the subject than the author. Mr. Hunt redeems himself by occasional beauties; but the rest of these poor creatures seem so far gone that I would not “march through Coventry with them, that's flat!” were I in Mr. Hunt's place. To be sure, he has “led his ragamuffins where they will be well peppered;” but a system-maker must receive all sorts of
[Page 412]
proselytes. When they have really seen life—when they have felt it—when they have travelled beyond the far distant boundaries of the wilds of Middlesex — when they have overpassed the Alps of Highgate, and traced to its sources the Nile of the New River—then, and not till then, can it properly be permitted to them to despise Pope; who had, if not in Wales , been near it, when he described so beautifully the “ artificial ” works of the Benefactor of Nature and mankind, the “Man of Ross,” whose picture, still suspended in the parlour of the inn, I have so often contemplated with reverence for his memory, and admiration of the poet, without whom even his own still existing good works could hardly have preserved his honest renown.
I would also observe to my friend Hunt, that I shall be very glad to see him at Ravenna, not only for my sincere pleasure in his company, and the advantage which a thousand miles or so of travel might produce to a “natural” poet, but also to point out one or two little things in “Rimini,” which he probably would not have placed in his opening to that poem, if he had ever seen Ravenna;—unless, indeed, it made “part of his system!!” I must also crave his indulgence for having spoken of his disciples—by no means an agreeable or self-sought subject. If they had said nothing of Pope , they might have remained “alone with their glory” for aught I should have said or thought about them or their nonsense. But if they interfere with the “little Nightingale” of Twickenham, they may find others who will bear it — I won't. Neither time, nor distance, nor grief, nor age, can ever diminish my veneration for him, who is the great moral poet of all times, of all climes, of all feelings, and of all stages of existence. The delight of my boyhood, the study of my manhood, perhaps (if allowed to me to attain it) he may be the consolation of my age. His poetry is the Book of Life. Without canting, and yet without neglecting religion, he has assembled all that a
[Page 413]
good and great man can gather together of moral wisdom clothed in consummate beauty. Sir William Temple observes, “that of all the members of mankind that live within the compass of a thousand years, for one man that is born capable of making a great poet , there may be a thousand born capable of making as great generals and ministers of state as any in story.” Here is a statesman's opinion of poetry: it is honourable to him and to the art. Such a “poet of a thousand years” was Pope . A thousand years will roll away before such another can be hoped for in our literature. But it can want them — he himself is a literature.
One word upon his so brutally abused translation of Homer. “Dr. Clarke, whose critical exactness is well known, has not been able to point out above three or four mistakes in the sense through the whole Iliad. The real faults of the translation are of a different kind.” So says Warton, himself a scholar. It appears by this, then, that he avoided the chief fault of a translator. As to its other faults, they consist in his having made a beautiful English poem of a sublime Greek one. It will always hold. Cowper and all the rest of the blank pretenders may do their best and their worst: they will never wrench Pope from the hands of a single reader of sense and feeling.
The grand distinction of the under forms of the new school of poets is their vulgarity . By this I do not mean that they are coarse , but “shabby-genteel,” as it is termed. A man may be coarse and yet not vulgar , and the reverse. Burns is often coarse, but never vulgar . Chatterton is never vulgar, nor Wordsworth, nor the higher of the Lake school, though they treat of low life in all its branches. It is in their finery that the new under school are most vulgar, and they may be known by this at once; as what we called at Harrow “a Sunday blood” might be easily distinguished from a gentleman, although his clothes might be the better cut, and his boots the best blackened, of the two;—probably because
[Page 414]
he made the one, or cleaned the other, with his own hands.
In the present case, I speak of writing, not of persons. Of the latter, I know nothing; of the former, I judge as it is found. Of my friend Hunt, I have already said, that he is any thing but vulgar in his manners; and of his disciples, therefore, I will not judge of their manners from their verses. They may be honourable and gentlemanly men, for what I know; but the latter quality is studiously excluded from their publications. They remind me of Mr. Smith and the Miss Broughtons at the Hampstead Assembly, in “Evelina.” In these things (in private life, at least,) I pretend to some small experience; because, in the course of my youth, I have seen a little of all sorts of society, from the Christian prince and the Mussulman sultan and pacha, and the higher ranks of their countries, down to the London boxer, the “ flash and the swell ,” the Spanish muleteer, the wandering Turkish dervise, the Scotch highlander, and the Albanian robber;—to say nothing of the curious varieties of Italian social life. Far be it from me to presume that there ever was, or can be, such a thing as an aristocracy of poets ; but there is a nobility of thought and of style, open to all stations, and derived partly from talent, and partly from education,—which is to be found in Shakspeare, and Pope, and Burns, no less than in Dante and Alfieri, but which is nowhere to be perceived in the mock birds and bards of Mr. Hunt's little chorus. If I were asked to define what this gentlemanliness is, I should say that it is only to be defined by examples —of those who have it, and those who have it not. In life , I should say that most military men have it, and few naval ;—that several men of rank have it, and few lawyers;—that it is more frequent among authors than divines (when they are not pedants); that fencing -masters have more of it than dancing-masters, and singers than players; and that (if it be not an Irishism to say so) it is far
[Page 415]
more generally diffused among women than among men. In poetry, as well as writing in general, it will never make entirely a poet or a poem; but neither poet nor poem will ever be good for any thing without it. It is the salt of society, and the seasoning of composition. Vulgarity is far worse than downright blackguardism ; for the latter comprehends wit, humour, and strong sense at times; while the former is a sad abortive attempt at all things, “signifying nothing.” It does not depend upon low themes, or even low language, for Fielding revels in both;—but is he ever vulgar ? No. You see the man of education, the gentleman, and the scholar, sporting with his subject,—its master, not its slave. Your vulgar writer is always most vulgar, the higher, his subject; as the man who showed the menagerie at Pidcock's was wont to say,—“This, gentlemen, is the eagle of the sun , from Archangel, in Russia; the otterer it is, the igherer he flies.” But to the proofs. It is a thing to be felt more than explained. Let any man take up a volume of Mr. Hunt's subordinate writers, read (if possible) a couple of pages, and pronounce for himself, if they contain not the kind of writing which may be likened to “shabby-genteel” in actual life. When he has done this, let him take up Pope;—and when he has laid him down, take up the cockney again—if he can.
Note to the passage in page 396. relative to Pope's lines upon Lady Mary W. Montague. ] I think that I could show, if necessary, that Lady Mary W. Montague was also greatly to blame in that quarrel, not for having rejected, but for having encouraged him: but I would rather decline the task—though she should have remembered her own line, “ He comes too near, that comes to be denied .” I admire her so much—her beauty, her talents—that I should do this reluctantly. I, besides, am so attached to the very name of Mary , that as Johnson once said, “If you called a dog Harvey , I should love him;” so, if you were to call a female of the same species “Mary,” I should love it better than others
[Page 416]
(biped or quadruped) of the same sex with a different appellation. She was an extraordinary woman: she could translate Epictetus , and yet write a song worthy of Aristippus. The lines,
“And when the long hours of the public are past,
And we meet, with champaigne and a chicken, at last,
May every fond pleasure that moment endear!
Be banish'd afar both discretion and fear!
Forgetting or scorning the airs of the crowd,
He may cease to be formal, and I to be proud,
Till,” &c. &c.
There, Mr. Bowles!—what say you to such a supper with such a woman? and her own description too? Is not her “ champaigne and chicken ” worth a forest or two? Is it not poetry? It appears to me that this stanza contains the “purée” of the whole philosophy of Epicurus:—I mean the practical philosophy of his school, not the precepts of the master; for I have been too long at the university not to know that the philosopher was himself a moderate man. But, after all, would not some of us have been as great fools as Pope? For my part, I wonder that, with his quick feelings, her coquetry, and his disappointment, he did not more,—instead of writing some lines, which are to be condemned if false, and regretted if true.
END OF THE SIXTH VOLUME.
$$$
