Oliver Goldsmith
Author: De Quincey, Thomas.
Publication info: The Collected Writings Of Thomas De Quincey . 439 p. Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black, 1890.

Oliver Goldsmith [in, The Collected Writings of Thomas De Quincey; New and Enlarged Edition; by David Masson ...]
[Page 288]
OLIVER GOLDSMITH 1 This book accomplishes a retribution which the world has waited for through more than seventy years. Welcome at any rate by its purpose, it is trebly welcome by its execution, to all hearts that linger indulgently over the frailties of a national favourite, long systematically exaggerated,—to all hearts that brood indignantly over the genial powers of that favourite, too often maliciously undervalued.
A man of original genius, shown to us as revolving through the leisurely stages of a biographical memoir, lays open, to readers prepared for such revelations, two separate theatres of interest: one in his personal career; the other in his works and his intellectual development. Both unfold concurrently: and each borrows a secondary interest from the other: the life from the recollection of the works—the works from the joy and sorrow of the life. There have, indeed, been authors whose great creations, severely preconceived in a region of thought transcendent to all impulses of earth, would have been pretty nearly what they are under any possible changes in the dramatic arrangement of their lives. Happy or not happy,—gay or sad,—these authors would equally have fulfilled a mission too solemn
[Page 289]
and too stern in its obligations to suffer any warping from chance, or to bend before the accidents of life, whether dressed in sunshine or in wintry gloom. But generally this is otherwise. Children of Paradise, like the Miltons of our planet, have the privilege of stars to “dwell apart.” But the children of flesh, whose pulses beat too sympathetically with the agitations of mother-earth, cannot sequester themselves in that way. They walk in no such altitudes, but at elevations easily reached by ground-winds of humble calamity. And from that cup of sorrow which upon all lips is pressed in some proportion they must submit, by the very tenure on which they hold their gifts, to drink, if not more profoundly than others, yet more perilously as regards the fulfilment of their intellectual mission.
Amongst this household of children, too sympathetically linked to the trembling impulses of earth, stands forward conspicuously Oliver Goldsmith. And there is a belief current that he was conspicuous, not only in the sense of being constitutionally more flexible than others to the impressions of calamity, in case they had happened to occur, but also that he really met with more than his share of those afflictions. I am disposed to think that this was not so. My trust is that Goldsmith lived upon the whole a life which, though troubled, was one of average enjoyment. Unquestionably, when reading at midnight, in the middle watch of a century which he never reached by one whole generation, this record of one so guileless, so upright, or seeming to be otherwise only in the eyes of those who did not know his difficulties, nor could have understood them,—when recurring also to his admirable genius, to the sweet natural gaiety of his oftentimes pathetic humour, and to the varied accomplishments, from talent or erudition, by which he gave effect to endowments so fascinating,—one cannot but sorrow over the strife which he sustained, and over the wrong by which he suffered. A few natural tears fall from every eye at the rehearsal of so much contumely from fools, which he faced unresistingly as one bareheaded under a hailstorm 2 ; and
[Page 290]
worse to bear than the scorn of fools was the imperfect sympathy and jealous self-distrusting esteem which he received to the last from friends. Doubtless he suffered much wrong; but so, in one way or other, do most men: he suffered also this special wrong, that in his lifetime he never was fully appreciated by any one friend: something of a counter-movement ever mingled with praise for him; he never saw himself enthroned in the heart of any young and fervent admirer; and he was always overshadowed by men less deeply genial, though more showy than himself: but these things happen, and will happen for ever, to myriads amongst the benefactors of earth. Their names ascend in songs of thankful commemoration, yet seldom until the ears are deaf that would have thrilled to the music. And these were the heaviest of Goldsmith's afflictions: what are likely to be thought such—viz. the battles which he fought for his daily bread—I do not number amongst them. To struggle is not to suffer. Heaven grants to few of us a life of untroubled prosperity, and grants it least of all to its favourites. Charles I. carried, as it was thought by a keen Italian judge of physiognomy, a predestination to misery written in his features. And it is probable that, if any Cornelius Agrippa had then been living, to show him in early life the strife, the bloodshed, the triumphs of enemies, the treacheries of friends, the separation for ever from the familiar faces of his hearth, which darkened the years from 1642 to 1649, Charles would have said, “Prophet of woe! if I bear to live through this vista of seven years, it is because at the further end of it thou showest me the consolation of a scaffold.” And yet my own belief is that, in the midst of its deadly agitations and its torments of suspense, probably enough by the energies of hope, or even of anxiety which exalted it, that period of bitter conflict was found by the king a more ennobling life than he would have found in the torpor of a prosperity too profound. To be cloyed perpetually
[Page 291]
is a worse fate than sometimes to stand within the vestibule of starvation; and we need go no further than the confidential letters of the court ladies in this and other countries to satisfy ourselves how much worse in its effects upon happiness than any condition of alarm and peril is the lethargic repose of luxury too monotonous, and of security too absolute. If, therefore, Goldsmith's life had been one of continual struggle, it would not follow that it had therefore sunk below the standard of ordinary happiness. But the life-struggle of Goldsmith, though severe enough (after all allowances) to challenge a feeling of tender compassion, was not in such a degree severe as has been represented. 3 He enjoyed two great immunities from suffering that have been much overlooked; and such immunities that, in our opinion, four in five of all the people ever connected with Goldsmith's works, as publishers, printers, compositors (that is, men taken at random), have very probably suffered more, upon the whole, than he. The immunities were these:—1st, from any bodily taint of low spirits. He had a constitutional gaiety of heart, an elastic hilarity, and, as he himself expresses it, “a knack of hoping”—which knack could not be bought with Ormus and with Ind, nor hired for a day with the peacock-throne of Delhi. How easy was it to bear the brutal affront of being to his face described as “ Doctor minor ,” when one hour or less would dismiss the Doctor major , so invidiously contradistinguished from himself, to a struggle with scrofulous melancholy; whilst he , if returning to solitude and a garret, was returning also to habitual cheerfulness. There lay one immunity, beyond all price, from a mode of strife to which others, by a large majority, are doomed,—strife with bodily wretchedness. Another immunity he had of almost equal value, and yet almost equally forgotten by its biographers—viz. from the responsibilities of a family. Wife and children he had not. They it is that, being a man's chief blessings, create also for him
[Page 292]
the deadliest of his anxieties, that stuff his pillow with thorns, that surround his daily path with snares. Suppose the case of a man who has helpless dependents of this class upon himself summoned to face some sudden failure of his resources: how shattering to the power of exertion, and, above all, of exertion by an organ so delicate as the creative intellect, dealing with subjects so coy as those of imaginative sensibility, to know that instant ruin attends his failure. Success in such paths of literature might at the best be doubtful; but success is impossible, with any powers whatever, unless in a genial state of those powers; and this geniality is to be sustained, in the case supposed, whilst the eyes are fixed upon the most frightful of abysses yawning beneath his feet. He is to win his inspiration for poetry or romance from the prelusive cries of infants clamouring for daily bread. Now, on the other hand, in the case of an extremity equally sudden alighting on the head of a man in Goldsmith's position, having no burden to support but the trivial one of his own personal needs, the resources are endless for gaining time enough to look around. Suppose him ejected from his lodgings: let him walk into the country, with a pencil and a sheet of paper; there, sitting under a hay-stack for one morning, he may produce what will pay his expenses for a week: a day's labour will carry the sustenance of ten days. Poor may be the trade of authorship, but it is as good as that of a slave in Brazil, whose one hour's work will defray the twenty-four hours' living. As a reader, or corrector of proofs, any decent Latin and French scholar (like Goldsmith) would always have enjoyed a preference, I presume, at any eminent printing-office. This again, would have given him time for looking round or he might perhaps have obtained the same advantage for deliberation from some confidential friend's hospitality. In short Goldsmith enjoyed the two privileges—the one subjective, the other objective—which, when uniting in the same man, would prove more than a match for all difficulties that could arise in a literary career to him who was at once a man of genius so popular, of talents so versatile, of reading so various, and of opportunities so large for still more extended reading. The subjective privilege lay in his buoyancy of animal
[Page 293]
spirits; the objective in his freedom from responsibilities. Goldsmith wanted very little more than Diogenes: now, Diogenes could only have been robbed of his tub 4 : which, perhaps, was about as big as most of poor Goldsmith's sitting-rooms, and far better ventilated. So that the liability of these two men, cynic and non-cynic, to the kicks of fortune was pretty much on a par; whilst Goldsmith had the advantage of a better temper for bearing them, though certainly Diogenes had the better climate for soothing his temper.
But it may be imagined that, if Goldsmith were thus fortunately equipped for authorship, on the other hand, the position of literature, as a money-making resource, was in Goldsmith's days less advantageous than ours. We are not of that opinion; and the representation by which Mr. Forster endeavours to sustain it seems to us a showy but untenable refinement. The outline of his argument is that the aristocratic patron had, in Goldsmith's day, by the progress of society, disappeared—he belonged to the past; that the “mercenary” publisher had taken his place—he represented the ugly present; but that the great reading public (that true and equitable patron, as some fancy) had not yet matured its means of effectual action upon literature: this “reading public” virtually, perhaps, belonged to the future. All this I steadfastly deny. No doubt the old full-blown patron, en grand costume , with his heraldic bearings emblazoned at the head of the Dedication, was dying
[Page 294]
out, like the golden pippin. But he still lingered in sheltered situations. And part of the machinery by which patronage had ever moved—viz. the use of influence for obtaining subscriptions—was still in capital working order; a fact which we know from Goldsmith himself (see the “Inquiry” 5 ), for he tells us that a popular mode of publication amongst bad authors, and certainly it needed no publisher's countersign, was by means of subscription papers: upon which, as I believe, a considerable instalment was usually paid down when as yet the book existed only by way of title-page, supposing that the whole sum was not even paid up . Then, as to the publisher, he could not have been a weed first springing up in Goldsmith's time, but must always have been an indispensable broker or middleman between the author and the world. In the days even of Horace and Martial, the book- seller (bibliopola) clearly acted as book- publisher . Amongst other passages proving this, and showing undeniably that Martial at least had sold the copyright of his work to his publisher, is one arguing pretty certainly that the price of a gay drawing-room copy must have been hard upon £1:11:6. Did ever any man hear the like? A New York newspaper would have been too happy to pirate the whole of Martial, had he been three times as big, at the small cost of threepence, i.e. six cents. Now, it cannot be supposed that Martial, a gay, light-hearted fellow, willing to let the public have his book for a shilling, or perhaps for love, had been the person to put that ridiculous price upon it. We may conclude that it was the publisher. As to the public, that respectable character must always have constituted the true and final court of appeal, silently defying alike the prestige of patronage and the intriguing mysteries of publishing. Lordly patronage might fill the sails of one edition, and masterly publishing of three. But the books that ran contagiously through the educated circles, or that lingered amongst them for a generation, must have owed their success to the unbiassed feelings of the reader—not overawed by authority, not mystified by artifice. Varying, however, in whatever proportion as to power, the three
[Page 295]
possible parties to an act of publication will always be seen intermittingly at work: the voluptuous, self-indulging public, and the insidious publisher, of course; but even the browbeating patron still exists in a new avatar . Formerly he made his descent upon earth in the shape of Dedicatee; and it is true that this august being, to whom dedications burned incense upon an altar, withdrew into sunset and twilight during Goldsmith's period; but he still revisits the glimpses of the moon in the shape of author. When the auctoritas of a peer could no longer sell a book by standing at the head of a dedication, it lost none of its power when standing on the title-page as the author. Vast catalogues might be composed of books and pamphlets that have owed a transient success to no other cause on earth than the sonorous title, or the distinguished position, of those who wrote them. Ceasing to patronise other people's books, the grandee has still power to patronise his own. All celebrities have this form of patronage. And, for instance, had the boy Jones 6 (otherwise called Inigo Jones) possessed enough of book-making skill to forge a plausible curtain-lecture, as overheard by himself when concealed in Her Majesty's bedroom, ten steam-presses working day and night would not have supplied the public demand; and even Her Majesty must herself have sent for a large-paper copy, were it only to keep herself au courant of English literature. In short, first, the extrinsic patronage of books, secondly, the self-patronage of books in right of their merits, and, thirdly, the artificial machineries for diffusing the knowledge of their existence, are three forces in current literature that ever have existed, and must exist, in some imperfect degree. Horace recognises them in his
“Non Dî, non homines, non concessere columnæ.”
[Page 296]
The Dî are the paramount public, arbitrating finally on the fates of books, and generally on some just ground of judgment, though it may be fearfully exaggerated on the scale of importance. The homines are the publishers; and a sad homo the publisher sometimes is, particularly when he commits insolvency. But the columnæ are those pillars of state, the grandees of our own age, or any other patrons, that support the golden canopy of our transitory pomps, and thus shed an alien glory of coloured light from above upon the books falling within that privileged area.
I am not, therefore, of Mr. Forster's opinion, that Goldsmith fell upon an age less favourable to the expansion of literary powers, or to the attainment of literary distinction, than any other. The patron might be a tradition, but the public was not therefore a bare prophecy. My lord's trumpets had ceased to sound, but the vox populi was not therefore muffled. The means, indeed, of diffusive advertisement and of rapid circulation, the combinations of readers into reading societies, and of roads into iron networks, were as yet imperfectly developed. These gave a potent stimulus to periodic literature. And a still more operative difference between ourselves and them is that a new class of people has since then entered our reading public—viz. the class of artisans and of all below the gentry, which working class was in Goldsmith's day a cipher as regarded any real encouragement to literature. In our days, if the “Vicar of Wakefield” had been published as a Christmas tale, it would have produced a fortune to the writer. In Goldsmith's time few below the gentry were readers on any large scale. So far there really was a disadvantage; but it was a disadvantage which applied chiefly to novels. The new influx of readers in our times, the collateral affluents into the main river from the mechanic and provincial sections of our population, which have centupled the volume of the original current, cannot be held as telling favourably upon literature, or telling at all, except in the departments of popularised science, of religion, of fictitious tales, and of journalism. To be a reader is no longer, as once it was, to be of a meditative turn. To be a very popular author is no longer that honorary distinction which once it might have been amongst
[Page 297]
a more elevated, because more select, body of readers. I do not say this invidiously, or with any special reference. But it is evident that writers and readers must often act and react for reciprocal degradation. A writer of this day, either in France or England, to be very popular, must be a storyteller —which is a function of literature neither very noble in itself, nor, secondly, tending to permanence. All novels whatever, the best equally with the worst, have faded almost with the generation that produced them. This is a curse written as a superscription above the whole class. The modes of combining characters, the particular objects selected for sympathy, the diction, and often the manners, 7 hold up an imperfect mirror to any generation other than their own. And the reader of novels that belong to any obsolete era, whilst acknowledging the skill of the groupings, or the beauty of the situations, misses the echo to that particular revelation of human nature which has met him in the social aspects of his own day; or too often he is perplexed by an expression which, having dropped into a lower use, disturbs the unity of the impression; or he is revolted by a coarse sentiment, which increasing refinement has made unsuitable to the sex or to the rank of the character. How bestial and degrading at this day seem many of the scenes in Smollett! How coarse are the ideals of Fielding!—his odious Squire Western, his odious Tom Jones! What a gallery of faded histrionic masqueraders is thrown open in the novels of Richardson, powerful as they were once found by the two
[Page 298]
leading nations of the earth. 8 A popular writer, therefore, who, in order to be popular, must speak through novels, speaks to what is least permanent in human sensibilities. That is already to be self-degraded. Secondly , because the novel-reading class is by far the most comprehensive one, and, being such, must count as a large majority amongst its members those who are poor in capacities of thinking, and are passively resigned to the instinct of immediate pleasure —to these the writer must chiefly humble himself: he must study their sympathies, must assume them, must give them back. In our days he must give them back even their own street slang—so servile is the modern novelist's dependence on his canaille of an audience. In France, amongst the Sues, &c., it has been found necessary to give back even the closest portraits of obscene atrocities that shun the light, and burrow only in the charnel-houses of vast manufacturing towns. Finally, the very principle of commanding attention only by the interest of a tale, which means the interest of a momentary curiosity, destined to vanish for ever in a sense of satiation, and the interest of a momentary suspense, that, having once collapsed, can never be rekindled, is in itself a confession of reliance upon the meaner functions of the mind. The result from all which is that, to be popular in the most extensive walk of popularity—that is, as a novelist—a writer must generally be in a very considerable degree self-degraded by sycophancy to the lowest order of minds, and cannot (except for mercenary purposes) think himself advantageously placed.
To have missed, therefore, this enormous expansion of the reading public, however unfortunate for Goldsmith's purse, was a great escape for his intellectual purity. Every man has two-edged tendencies lurking within himself, pointing in one direction to what will expand the elevating principles of his nature, pointing in another to what will tempt him to its degradation. A mob is a dreadful audience for chafing and irritating the latent vulgarisms of the human heart. Exaggeration
[Page 299]
and caricature, before such a tribunal, become inevitable, and sometimes almost a duty. The genial but not very delicate humour of Goldsmith would in such circumstances have slipped, by the most natural of transitions, into buffoonery; the unaffected pathos of Goldsmith would, by a monster audience, have been debauched into theatrical sentimentality. All the motions of Goldsmith's nature moved in the direction of the true, the natural, the sweet, the gentle. In the quiet times, politically speaking, through which his course of life travelled, he found a musical echo to the tenor of his own original sensibilities. In the architecture of European history, as it unfolded its proportions along the line of his own particular experience, there was a symmetry with the proportions of his own unpretending mind. Our revolutionary age would have unsettled his brain. The colossal movements of nations, from within and from without; the sorrow of the times, which searches so deeply; the grandeur of the times, which aspires so loftily: these forces, acting for the last fifty years by secret sympathy upon our fountains of thinking and impassioned speculation, have raised them from depths never visited by our fathers, into altitudes too dizzy for their contemplating. This generation and the last, with their dreadful records, would have untuned Goldsmith for writing in the key that suited him; and us they would have untuned for understanding his music, had we not learned to understand it in childhood, before the muttering hurricanes in the upper air had begun to reach our young ears, and forced them away to the thundering overhead from the carolling of birds amongst earthly bowers.
Goldsmith, therefore, as regards the political aspects of his own times, was fortunately placed: a thrush or a nightingale is hushed by the thunderings which are awakening to Jove's eagle. But an author stands in relation to other influences than political; and some of these are described by Mr. Forster as peculiarly unfavourable to comfort and respectability at the era of Goldsmith's novitiate in literature. Will Mr. Forster excuse me for quarrelling with his whole doctrine upon this subject—a subject and a doctrine continually forced upon attention in these days by the extending lines of our own literary order, and continually refreshed
[Page 300]
in warmth of colouring by the contrast, as regards social consideration, between our own literary body and the corresponding order in France. The questions arising have really a general interest, as well as a special one in connexion with Goldsmith; and therefore I will stir them a little, not with any view of exhausting the philosophy that is applicable to the case, but simply of amusing some readers (since Pliny's remark on history is much more true of any literary anecdotage —viz. that “ quoquo modo scripta delectat”), and with the more ambitious purpose of recalling some other readers from precipitate conclusions upon a subject where nearly all that is most plausible happens to be most untrue.
Mr. Forster, in his views upon the social rights of literature, is rowing pretty nearly in the same boat as Mr. Carlyle in his views upon the rights of labour. Each denounces, or by implication denounces, as an oppression and a nuisance, what I believe to be a necessity inalienable from the economy and structure of our society. Some years ago Mr. Carlyle offended us all (or all of us that were interested in social philosophy) by enlarging on a social affliction which few indeed needed to see exposed, but most men would have rejoiced to see remedied, if it were but on paper, and by way of tentative suggestion. 9 Precisely at that point, however, where his aid was invoked, Mr. Carlyle halted. So does Mr. Forster with regard to his grievance; he states it, and we partly understand him—as ancient Pistol says, “we hear him with ears”; and, when we wait for him to go on, saying, “Well, here's a sort of evil in life, how would you redress it? You've shown, or you've made, another hole in the tin-kettle of society; how do you propose to tinker it?” —behold, he is suddenly almost silent! But this cannot be allowed. The right to insist upon a well-known grievance cannot be granted to that man (Mr. Carlyle, for instance, or Mr. Forster) who uses it as matter of blame and denunciation, unless at the same time he points out the methods by which it could have been prevented. He that simply bemoans an evil has a right to his moan, though he should make no pretensions to a remedy; but he that criminates,
[Page 301]
that imputes the evil as a fault, that charges the evil upon selfishness or neglect lurking in some alterable arrangements of society, has no right to do so unless he can instantly suggest the remedy; for the very first step by which he could have learned that the evil involved a blame, the first step that could have entitled him to denounce it as a wrong, must have been that step which brought him within the knowledge (wanting to everybody else) that it admitted of a cure. A wrong it could not have been, even in his eyes, so long as it was a necessity, nor a ground of complaint, until the cure appeared to him a possibility. And the overriding motto for these parallel speculations of Messrs. Carlyle and Forster, in relation to the frailties of our social system, ought to have been—“ Sanabilibus ægrotamus malis .” ( We are sick—but by maladies that are curable .) Unless with this watchword, they had no right to commence their crusading march. Curable evils justify complaints; the incurable justify only prayers.
Why it was that Mr. Carlyle, in particular, halted so steadily at the point where his work of love was first beginning, it is not difficult to guess. As the “statutes at large” have not one word against the liberty of unlicensed hypothesis, it is conceivable that Mr. Carlyle might have indulged a little in that agreeable pastime; but this, he was well aware, would have brought him in one moment under the fire of Political Economy, from the whole vast line of its modern batteries. These gentlemen, the economists, would have torn to ribands, within fifteen minutes, any positive speculation for amending the evil. It was better, therefore, to keep within the trenches of the blank negative, pointing to everything as wrong , horribly wrong, but never hinting at the mysterious correction of the wrong; which, to this day, we grieve to say, remains as mysterious as ever. 10
[Page 302]
Passing to Mr. Forster, who (being capable of a splendour so original) disappoints us most when he reminds us of Mr. Carlyle, by the most disagreeable of that gentleman's phraseological forms, and, in this instance, by a speculation twinsister to the economic one just noticed, I beg to premise that, in anything here said, it is far from my wish to express disaffection to the cause of my literary brothers. I grudge them nothing that they are ever likely to get. I wish even that the House of Commons would see cause for creating state benefices in behalf of us all. But what is the use of benevolently bequeathing larks for dinner to all literary men, in all time coming, if the sky must fall before they can bag our bequest? Suffer me to discuss Mr. Forster's views, not perhaps according to any arrangement of his, but according to the order in which they come back to my own remembrance.
Goldsmith's period, Mr. Forster thinks, was bad—not merely by the transitional misfortune (before noticed) of coming too late for the patron, and too soon for the public (which is the compound ill luck of being a day after one fair and a month too soon for the next), but also by some co-operation in this evil destiny through misconduct on the part of authors themselves. Not “the circumstances” only of authors were damaged, but the “literary character” itself. I am sorry to hear that . But, as long as they did not commit murder, I have a great indulgence for the frailties of authors. If ever the “benefit of clergy” could be fairly pleaded, it might have been by Grub Street for petty larceny. The “clergy” they surely could have pleaded; and the call
[Page 303]
for larceny was so audible in their condition that in them it might often be called an instinct of self-preservation, which surely was not implanted in man to be disobeyed. One word allow me to say on these three topics:—1, the condition of the literary body in its hard-working section at the time when Goldsmith belonged to it; 2, upon the condition of that same body in England as compared with the corresponding body in France; 3, upon the condition of the body in relation to patronage purely political.
1. The pauperised (or Grub Street) section of the literary body, at the date of Goldsmith's taking service amongst it, was (in Mr. Forster's estimate) at its very lowest point of depression. And one comic presumption in favour of that notion I myself remember—viz. that Smart, the prose translator of Horace, and a well-built scholar, actually let himself out to a monthly journal on a regular lease of ninetynine years. 11 What could move the rapacious publisher to draw the lease for this monstrous term of years I cannot conjecture. Surely the villain might have been content with threescore years and ten. But think, reader, of poor Smart two years after, upon another publisher's applying to him vainly for contributions, and angrily demanding what possible objection could be made to offers so liberal, being reduced to answer—“No objection, sir, whatever, except an unexpired term of ninety-seven years yet to run.” The publisher saw that he must not apply again in that century; and, in fact, Smart could no longer let himself, but must be sublet (if let at all) by the original lessee. Query now—was Smart entitled to vote as a freeholder; and Smart's children (if any were born during the currency of the lease), would they be serfs, and ascripti prelo? Goldsmith's own terms of self-conveyance to Griffiths 12 —the terms we mean on which he “conveyed”
[Page 304]
his person and free-agency to the uses of the said Griffiths (or his assigns?)—do not appear to have been much more dignified than Smart's in the quality of the conditions , though considerably so in the duration of the term; Goldsmith's lease being only for one year, and not for ninety-nine, so that he had (as the reader perceives) a clear ninety-eight years at his own disposal. I suspect that poor Oliver, in his guileless heart, never congratulated himself on having made a more felicitous bargain. Indeed, it was not so bad, if everything be considered: Goldsmith's situation at the time was bad; and for that very reason the lease (otherwise monstrous) was less bad. He was to have lodging, board, and “a small salary,” very small, I suspect; and in return for all these blessings he had nothing to do but to sit still at a table, to work hard from an early hour in the morning until two P.M. (at which elegant hour we presume that the parenthesis of dinner occurred), but also—which, not being an article in the lease, might have been set aside, on a motion before the King's Bench—to endure without mutiny the correction and revisal of all his MSS. by Mrs. Griffiths, wife to Dr. Griffiths, the lessee. This affliction of Mrs. Dr. Griffiths surmounting his shoulders, and controlling his pen, seems to us not al all less dreadful than that of Sinbad when indorsed with the old man of the sea; and we, in Goldsmith's place, should certainly have tried how far Sinbad's method of abating the nuisance had lost its efficacy by time—viz. the tempting our oppressor to get drunk once or twice a-day, and then suddenly throwing Mrs. Dr. Griffith off her perch. From that “bad eminence” which she had audaciously usurped what harm could there be in thus dismounting this “old woman of the sea”? And, as to an occasional thump or so on the head, which Mrs. Dr. Griffiths might have caught in tumbling, that was her look-out, and might besides have improved her style. For really now, if the candid reader will believe us, we know a case, odd certainly but very true, where a young man, an author by trade, who wrote pretty well, happening to tumble out of a first-floor in London, was afterwards observed to grow very perplexed and almost unintelligible in his style; until, some years later, having the good fortune (like Wallenstein at Vienna)
[Page 305]
to tumble out of a two-pair-of-stairs window, he slightly fractured his skull, but, on the other hand, recovered the brilliancy of his long-fractured style. Some people there are of our acquaintance who would need to tumble out of the garrets before they could seriously improve their style.
Certainly these conditions—the hard work, the being chained by the leg to the writing-table, and above all the having one's pen chained to that of Mrs. Dr. Griffiths— do seem to countenance Mr. Forster's idea that Goldsmith's period was the purgatory of authors. And we freely confess that, excepting Smart's ninety-nine years' lease, or the contract between the Devil and Dr. Faustus, we never heard of a harder bargain driven with any literary man. Smart, Faustus, and Goldsmith, were clearly overreached. Yet, after all, was this treatment in any important point (excepting as regards Dr. Faustus) worse than that given to the whole college of Grub Street in the days of Pope? The first edition of the “Dunciad” dates from 1727: Goldsmith's matriculation in Grub Street dates from 1757—just thirty years later; which is one generation. And it is important to remember that Goldsmith, at this time in his twenty-ninth year, was simply an usher at an obscure boarding-school; had never practised writing for the press; and had not even himself any faith at all in his own capacity for writing. It is a singular fact, which we have on Goldsmith's own authority, that until his thirtieth year (that is, the year he spent with Dr. and Mrs. Griffiths) it never entered into his head that literature was his natural vocation. That vanity which has been so uncandidly, and sometimes so falsely, attributed to Goldsmith, was compatible, we see, if at all it existed, with the humblest estimate of himself. Still, however much this deepens our regard for a man of so much genius united with so much simplicity and unassumingness, humility would not be likely to raise his salary; and we must not forget that his own want of self-esteem would reasonably operate on the terms offered by Griffiths. A man who regarded himself as little more than an amanuensis could not expect much better wages than an under-gardener; which perhaps he had. And, weighing all this, we see little
[Page 306]
to have altered in the lease,—that was fair enough; only, as regarded the execution of the lease, we really must have protested, under any circumstances, against Mrs. Dr. Griffiths. That woman would have broken the back of a camel, which must be supposed tougher than the heart of an usher. There we should have made a ferocious stand; and should have struck for much higher wages, before we could have brought our mind to think of capitulation. It is remarkable, however, that this year of humble servitude was not only (or as if by accident) the epoch of Goldsmith's intellectual development, but also the occasion of it. Nay, if all were known, perhaps it may have been to Mrs. Dr. Griffiths in particular that we owe that revolution in his self-estimation which made Goldsmith an author by deliberate choice. Hag-ridden every day, he must have plunged and kicked violently to break loose from this harness; but, not impossibly, the very effort of contending with the hag, when brought into collision with his natural desire to soothe the hag, and the inevitable counter-impulse in any continued practice of composition towards the satisfaction at the same time of his own reason and taste, must have furnished a most salutary palæstra for the education of his literary powers. When one lives at Rome, one must do as they do at Rome: when one lives with a hag, one must accommodate one's-self to haggish caprices; besides that once in a month the hag might be right; or, if not, and supposing her always in the wrong, which perhaps is too much to assume even of Mrs. Dr. Griffiths, that would but multiply the difficulties of reconciling her demands with the demands of the general reader and of Goldsmith's own judgment. And in the pressure of these difficulties would lie the very value of this rough Spartan education. Rope-dancing cannot be very agreeable in its elementary lessons; but it must be a capital process for calling out the agilities that slumber in a man's legs.
Still, though these hardships turned out so beneficially to Goldsmith's intellectual interests, and, consequently, so much to the advantage of all who have since delighted in his works, not the less on that account they were hardships, and hardships that imposed heavy degradation. So far, therefore, they would seem to justify Mr. Forster's characterisation of
[Page 307]
Goldsmith's period by comparison with Addison's period 13 on the one side, and our own on the other. But, on better examination, it will be found that this theory is sustained only by an unfair selection of the antithetic objects in the comparison. Compare Addison's age generally with Goldsmith's—authors, prosperous or unprosperous, in each age taken indiscriminately—and the two ages will be found to offer “much of a muchness.” But, if you take the paupers of one generation to contrast with the grandees of another, how is there any justice in the result? Goldsmith at starting was a penniless man. Except by random accidents, he had not money enough to buy a rope, in case he had fancied himself in want of such a thing. Addison, on the contrary, was the son of a tolerably rich man; lived gaily at a most aristocratic college (Magdalen), in a most aristocratic university; formed early and brilliant connexions with the political party that were magnificently preponderant until the last four years of Queen Anne; travelled on the Continent, not (like Goldsmith) as a mendicant, housing with owls, and thankful for the bounties of a village fair, but with appointments and introductions equal to those of a young nobleman; and became a secretary of state, not by means of his “delicate humour,” as Mr. Forster chooses to suppose, but through splendid patronage, and (speaking Hibernicé ) through a “strong back.” He was backed by the Whig party. His bad verses, his Blenheim, his Cato in later days, and other rubbish, had been the only part of his works that aided his rise; and even these would have availed him little, had he not originally possessed a locus standi , from which he could serve his artilleries of personal flatteries with commanding effect, and could profit by his successes. As to the really exquisite part of his writings, that did him no yeoman's service at all, nor could have done; for he was a made man, and had almost received notice to quit this world of prosperous whiggery, before he had finished those exquisite prose
[Page 308]
miscellanies. Pope, Swift, Gay, Prior, &c., all owed their social positions to early accidents of good connexions, and sometimes of luck, which would not indeed have supplied the place of personal merit, but which gave lustre and effect to merit where it existed in strength. There were authors quite as poor as Goldsmith in the Addisonian age; there were authors quite as rich as Pope, Steele, &c., in Goldsmith's age, and having the same social standing. Goldsmith struggled with so much distress, not because his period was more inauspicious, but because his connexions and starting advantages were incomparably less important. His profits were so trivial because he started with a capital next to none.
So far as regards the comparison between Goldsmith's age and the one immediately before it. But now, as regards the comparison with our own, removed by two generations, can it be said truly that the literary profession has risen in estimation, or, is rising? There is a difficulty in making such an appraisement; and from different minds there would proceed very different appraisements; and even from the same mind, surveying the case at different stations. For, on the one hand, if a greater breadth of social respectability catches the eye on looking carelessly over the body of our modern literati,—which may be owing chiefly to the large increase of gentlemen that in our day have entered the field of literature,—on the other hand, the hacks and handicraftsmen , whom the shallow education of newspaper journalism has introduced to the press, and whom poverty compels to labours not meriting the name of literature, are correspondingly expanding their files. There is, however, one reason from analogy, which may incline us to suppose that a higher consideration is now generally conceded to the purposes of literature, and, consequently, a juster estimate made of the persons who minister to those purposes. Literature, provided we use that word not for the mere literature of knowledge, but for the literature of power—using it for literature as it speaks to what is genial in man, viz. to the human spirit , and not for literature (falsely so called) as it speaks to the meagre understanding—is a fine art: and not only so; it is the supreme of the fine arts; nobler, for instance, potentially, than painting, or sculpture, or architecture. Now, all
[Page 309]
the fine arts, that popularly are called such , have risen in esteem within the last generation. The most aristocratic of men will now ask into his own society an artist whom fifty years ago he would have transferred to the house-steward's table. And why? Not simply because, more attention having been directed to the arts, more notoriety has gathered about the artist—for that sort of éclat would not work any durable change; but it is because, the interest in the arts having gradually become much more of an enlightened interest, the public has been slowly trained to fix its attention upon the intellect which is presupposed in the arts, rather than upon the offices of pleasure to which they minister. The fine arts have now come to be regarded rather as powers that are to mould than as luxuries that are to embellish. And it has followed that artists are valued more by the elaborate agencies which they guide than by the fugitive sensations of wonder or sympathy which they evoke.
Now, this is a change honourable to both sides. The public has altered its estimate of certain men; and yet has not been able to do so without previously enlarging its idea of the means through which those men operate. It could not elevate the men without previously elevating itself. But, if so, then, in correcting their appreciation of the fine arts, the public must simultaneously have corrected their appreciation of literature; because, whether men have or have not been in the habit of regarding literature as a fine art, this they must have felt—viz. that literature, in its more genial functions, works by the very same organs as the liberal arts, speaks to the same heart, operates through the same compound nature, and educates the same deep sympathies with mysterious ideals of beauty. There lies the province of the arts usually acknowledged as fine or liberal: there lies the province of fine or liberal literature. And with justifiable pride a litterateur may say that his fine art wields a sceptre more potent than any other. Literature is more potent than other fine arts, because deeper in its impressions according to the usual tenor of human sensibilities; because more extensive , in the degree that books are more diffused than pictures or statues; because more durable , in the degree that language is durable beyond marble or canvas, and in the degree that
[Page 310]
vicarious powers are opened to books for renewing their phœnix immortality through unlimited translation: powers denied to painting except through copies that are feeble, and denied to sculpture except to casts that are costly.
I infer that, as the fine arts have been rising, literature (on the secret feeling that essentially it moves by the same powers) must also have been rising; that, as the arts will continue to rise, literature will continue to rise; and that, in both cases, the men, the ministers, must ascend in social consideration as the things, the ministrations, ascend. But there is another form in which the same result offers itself to my notice; and this should naturally be the last paragraph in this section 1; but, as I have little room to spare, it may do equally well as the first paragraph in section 2: viz. on the condition of our own literary body by comparison with the same body in France.
2. Who were the people amongst ourselves that, throughout the eighteenth century, chiefly came forward as undervaluers of literature? They belonged to two very different classes—the aristocracy and the commercial body, who agreed in the thing, but on very different impulses. To the mercantile man the author was an object of ridicule, from natural poverty; natural , because there was no regular connexion between literature and any mode of money-making. By accident the author might not be poor, but professionally, or according to any obvious opening for an income, he was . Poverty was the badge of all his tribe. Amongst the aristocracy the instinct of contempt, or at least of slight regard, towards literature was supported by the irrelation of literature to the state . Aristocracy itself was the flower and fruitage of the state; a nobility was possible only in the ratio of the grandeur and magnificence developed for social results; so that a poor and unpopulous nation cannot create a great aristocracy: the flower and foliation must be in relation to the stem and the radix out of which they germinate. Inevitably, therefore, a nobility so great as the English—that, not in pride, but in the mere logic of its political relations, felt its order to be a sort of heraldic shield, charged with the trophies and ancestral glories of the nation—could not but in its public scale of appreciation estimate every profession and
[Page 311]
rank of men by the mode of their natural connexion with the state. Law and arms, for instance, were honoured, not because any capricious precedent had been established of a title to public honour in favour of those professions, but because, through their essential functions, they opened for themselves a permanent necessity of introsusception into the organism of the state. A great law officer, a great military leader, a popular admiral, is already, by virtue of his functions, a noble in men's account, whether you gave or refused him a title; and in such cases it has always been the policy of an aristocratic state to confer, or even impose, the title, lest the disjunction of the virtual nobility from the titular should gradually disturb the estimate of the latter. But literature, by its very grandeur, is degraded socially; for its relations are essentially cosmopolitan, or, speaking more strictly, not cosmopolitan,—which might mean to all other peoples considered as national states, whereas literature has no relations to any sections or social schisms amongst men: its relations are to the race. In proportion as any literary work rises in its pretensions—for instance, if it works by the highest forms of passion—its nisus , its natural effort, is to address the race, and not any individual nation. That it found a bar to this nisus in a limited language was but an accident: the essential relations of every great intellectual work are to those capacities in man by which he tends to brotherhood, and not to those by which he tends to alienation. Man is ever coming nearer to agreement, ever narrowing his differences, notwithstanding that the interspace may cost an eternity to traverse. Where the agreement is, not where the difference is,—in the centre of man's affinities, not of his repulsions,— there lies the magnetic centre towards which all poetry that is potent, and all philosophy that is faithful, are eternally travelling by natural tendency. Consequently, if indirectly literature may hold a patriotic value as a gay plumage in the cap of a nation, directly, and by a far deeper tendency, literature is essentially alien. A poet, a book, a system of religion, belongs to that nation best qualified for appreciating their powers, and not to the nation which, perhaps by accident, gave them birth. How, then, is it wonderful that an intense organ of the social principle in
[Page 312]
a nation—viz. a nobility—should fail, in their professional character, to rate highly, or even to recognise as having any proper existence, a fine art which is by tendency anti-social (anti-social in this sense, that what it seeks it seeks by transcending all social barriers and separations)? Yet it is remarkable that in England, where the aristocracy for three centuries (sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth) paid so little honour, in their public or corporate capacity, to literature, privately they honoured it with a rare courtesy. That same grandee who would have looked upon Camden, Ben Jonson, Selden, or Hobbes, as an audacious intruder, if occupying any prominent station at a state festival, would have received him with a kind of filial reverence in his own mansion; for in this place, as having no national reference, as sacred to hospitality, which regards the human tie, and not the civic tie, this grandee would be at liberty to regard the man of letters in his cosmopolitan character. And, on the same instinct, a prince in the very meanest state would, in a state-pageant commemorating the national honours, assign a distinguished place to the national high admiral, though he were the most stupid of men, and would utterly neglect the stranger Columbus. But in his own palace, and at his own table, he would perhaps invert this order of precedency, and would place Columbus at his own right hand.
Some such principle as is here explained did certainly prevail in the practice (whether consciously perceived or not in the philosophy) of that England which extended through the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. First in the eighteenth century all honour to literature, under any relation, began to give way. And why? Because expanding politics, expanding partisanship, and expanding journalism, then first called into the field of literature an inferior class of labourers. Then first it was that, from the noblest of professions, literature became a trade. Literature it was that gave the first wound to literature; the hack scribbler it was that first degraded the lofty literary artist. For a century and a-half we have lived under the shade of this fatal revolution. But, however painful such a state of things may be to the keen sensibilities of men pursuing the finest of vocations —carrying forward as inheritors from past generations
[Page 313]
the eternal chase after truth, and power, and beauty—still we must hold that the dishonour to literature has issued from internal sources proper to herself, and not from without. The nobility of England have, for three and a-half centuries, personally practised literature as an elevated accomplishment; our royal and noble authors are numerous, and they would have continued the same cordial attentions to the literary body, had that body maintained the same honourable composition. But a litterateur , simply as such, it is no longer safe to distinguish with favour. Once, but not now, he was liable to no misjudgment. Once he was pretty sure either to be a man of some genius, or, at the least, of unusual scholarship. Now, on the contrary, a mob of traitors have mingled with the true men; and the loyal perish with the disloyal, because it is impossible, in a mob so vast and fluctuating, for the artillery of avenging scorn to select its victims.
All this, bitter in itself, has become more bitter from the contrast furnished by France. We know that literature has long been misappreciated amongst ourselves. In France it has long been otherwise appreciated—more advantageously appreciated. And we infer that therefore it is in France more wisely appreciated. But this does not follow. I have ever been of opinion that the valuation of literature in France, or at least of current literature, and as it shows itself in the treatment of literary men, is unsound, extravagant, and that it rests upon a basis originally false. Simply to have been the translator from the English of some prose book, a history or a memoir, neither requiring nor admitting any display of mastery over the resources of the language, conferred, throughout the eighteenth century, so advantageous a position in Parisian society upon one whom we English should view as a mere mechanic drudge, that we really had a right to expect the laws of France and the court ceremonies to reflect this feature of public manners. Naturally, for instance, any man honoured so preposterously ought in law to have enjoyed the jus trium liberorum , and perpetual immunity from taxes. Or again, as regards ceremonial honours, on any fair scale of proportions, it was reasonable to expect that to any man who had gone into a fourth edition
[Page 314]
the royal sentinels should present arms; that to the author of a successful tragedy the guard should everywhere turn out; and that an epic poet, if ever such a difficult birth should make its epiphany in Paris, must look to have his approach towards a soirée announced by a salvo of a hundred- and-one guns.
My space will not allow me to go into the illustrative details of this monstrous anomaly in French society. I confine myself to its cause, as sufficiently explaining why it is that no imitation of such absurdities can or ought to prosper in England. The same state of things, under a different modification, takes place in Germany; and from the very same cause. Is it not monstrous, or was it not until within recent days, to find every German city drawing the pedantic materials, and the pedantic interest of its staple conversation, from the systems and the conflicts of a few rival academic professors? Generally these paramount lords of German conversation, that swayed its movements this way or that, as a lively breeze sways a corn-field, were metaphysicians: Fichte, for instance, and Hegel. There were the arid sands that bibulously absorbed all the perennial gushings of German enthusiasm. France of the last century and the modern Germany were, as to this point, on the same level of foolishness. But France had greatly the advantage in point of liberality. For general literature furnishes topics a thousand times more graceful and fitted to blend with social pleasure than the sapless problems of ontological systems meant only for scholastic use.
But what, then, was the cause of this social deformity? Why was literature allowed eventually to disfigure itself by disturbing the natural currents of conversation, to make itself odious by usurpation, and thus virtually to operate as a mode of pedantry? It was because in neither land had the people any power of political discussion. It was because every question growing out of religion, or connecting itself with laws, with government, with governors, with political interests or political machineries, or with judicial courts, was an interdicted theme. The mind sought in despair for some free area wide enough to allow of boundless openings for individualities of sentiment—human enough to sustain the
[Page 315]
interests of social discussion. That free area was found only in books. In Paris to talk of politics was to talk of the king; l'état c'est moi; to talk of the king in any spirit of discussion, to talk of that Jupiter optimus maximus , from whom all fountains flowed of good and evil things, before whom stood the two golden urns, one filled with lettres de cachet , the other with crosses, pensions, offices—what was it but to dance on the margin of a volcano, or to swim cotillons in the suction of a maelstrom? Hence it was that literature became the only safe colloquial subject of a general nature in old France; hence it was that literature furnished the only “open questions”; and hence it is that the mode and the expression of honour to literature in France has continued to this hour tainted with false and histrionic feeling, because originally it grew up from spurious roots, prospered unnaturally upon deep abuses in the social system, and at this day (so far as it still lingers) memorialises the political bondage of the nation. Cleanse, therefore—should be our general prayer—cleanse, O unknown Hercules, this Augean stable of our English current literature, rich in dunghills, rich therefore in precipitate mushroom and fraudulent fungus, yet rich also (if we may utter our real thoughts)—rich pre-eminently at this hour in seed-plots of immortal growths, and in secret vegetations of volcanic strength;—cleanse it (O coming man!), but not by turning through it any river of political Lethe, such as for two centuries swept over the literature of France. Purifying waters were these in one sense: they banished the accumulated depositions of barbarism; they banished Gothic tastes; but they did all this by laying asleep the nobler activities of a great people, and reconciling them to forgetfulness of whatsoever commanded them as duties, or whispered to them as rights.
If, therefore, the false homage of France towards literature still survives, it is no object for imitation amongst us; since it arose upon a vicious element in the social composition of that people. Partially it does survive, as we all know by the experience of the last thirty years, during which authors, and as authors (not, like Mirabeau or Talleyrand, in spite of authorship), have been transferred from libraries to senates and privy councils. This has done no service to literature,
[Page 316]
but, on the contrary, has degraded it, by seducing the children of literature from their proper ambition. It is the glory of literature to rise, as if on wings, into an atmosphere nobler than that of political intrigue. And the whole result to French literature has been that some ten or twelve of the leading literati have been tempted away by bribes from their appropriate functions, while some five thousand have been made envious and discontented.
At this point, when warned suddenly that the hour-glass is running out which measures my residuum of flying minutes, I first perceive, on looking round, that I have actually been skirmishing with Mr. Forster from the beginning of my paper to this very line, and have thus left to myself but a corner for the main purpose of expressing emphatically public thanks to him for this successful labour of love in restoring a half-subverted statue to its upright position. I am satisfied that many thousands of readers will utter the same thanks to him, with the same sincerity. Admiration for the versatile ability with which he has pursued his object is swallowed up for the moment in gratitude for his perfect success. It might have been imagined that Goldsmith's exquisite truth of household pathos and of humour, with happy graces of style, plastic as the air or the surface of a lake to the pure impulses of nature sweeping them by the motions of her eternal breath, were qualities authorised to justify themselves before the hearts of men, in defiance of all which affected scorn or the condescension of masquerading envy could effect for their disturbance. And so they are: and, left to plead for themselves at such a bar as unbiassed human hearts, they could not have their natural influences intercepted. But, in the case of Goldsmith, literary traditions have not left these qualities to their natural influence. It is a fact that up to this hour the contemporary falsehoods at Goldsmith's expense, and (worse perhaps than those falsehoods) the malicious interpretations of incidents partly true, having wings lent to them by the buoyant and amusing gossip of Boswell, continue to obstruct the full ratification of Goldsmith's pretensions. To this hour, the scorn from many of his own age runs side by side with a misgiving sense of his real native power. A feeling
[Page 317]
still survives, originally derived from his own age, that the “inspired idiot,” wherever he succeeded, ought not to have succeeded—having owed his success to accident, or even to some inexplicable perverseness in running counter to his own nature. It was by shooting awry that he had hit the mark; and, when most he came near to the bull's-eye, most of all “by rights” he ought to have missed it. He had blundered into The Traveller , into “Mr. Croaker,” into “Tony Lumpkin”; and, not satisfied with such dreadful blunders as these, he had consummated his guilt by blundering into the Vicar of Wakefield and the Deserted Village; atrocities over which, in effect, we are requested to drop the veil of human charity; since, the more gem-like we may choose to think these works, the more unnatural, audacious, and indeed treasonable, it was in an idiot (as Dr. Johnson styled him) to produce them. 14
In this condition of Goldsmith's traditionary character, so injuriously disturbing to the natural effect of his inimitable works (for in its own class each of his best works is inimitable), Mr. Forster steps forward with a threefold exposure of the falsehood inherent in the anecdotes upon which this traditional character has arisen. Some of these anecdotes he challenges as literally false; others as virtually so; they are true, perhaps, but under such a version of their circumstances as would altogether take out the sting of their offensive interpretation. For others again,—and this is a profounder service, —he furnishes a most just and philosophic explanation, that brings them at once within the reader's toleration, nay, sometimes within a deep reaction of pity. As a case, for instance, of downright falsehood, we may cite the well-known story told by Boswell—that, when Goldsmith travelled in
[Page 318]
France with some beautiful young Englishwomen (meaning the Miss Hornecks) he was seriously uneasy at the attentions which they received from the gallantry of Frenchmen, as intruding upon his own claims. Now this story, in logical phrase, proves too much. For the man who could have expressed such feelings, in such a situation, must have been ripe for Bedlam. Coleridge mentions a man who entertained so exalted an opinion of himself, and of his own right to apotheosis, that he never uttered that great pronoun “ I ” without solemnly taking off his hat. Even to the oblique case “ me ,” which no compositor ever honours with a capital M , and to the possessive pronoun my and mine , he held it a duty to bend reverentially. Yet even this bedlamite would not have been a competitor with a lady for the attentions paid to her in right of her sex. In Goldsmith's case the whole allegation was dissipated in the most decisive way. Some years after Goldsmith's death, one of the sisters personally concerned in the case was unaffectedly shocked at the printed story when coming to her knowledge, as a gross calumny; her sorrow made it evident that the whole had been a malicious distortion of some light-hearted gaiety uttered by Goldsmith. There is little doubt that the story of the bloom-coloured coat, and of the puppet-show, rose on a similar basis—the calumnious perversion of a jest.
But in other cases, where there really may have been some fretful expression of self-esteem, Mr. Forster's explanation transfers the foible to a truer and a more pathetic station. Goldsmith's own precipitancy, his overmastering defect in proper reserve, in self-control, and in presence of mind, falling in with the habitual undervaluation of many amongst his associates, placed him at a great disadvantage in animated conversation. His very truthfulness, his simplicity, his frankness, his hurry of feeling, all told against him. They betrayed him into inconsiderate expressions that lent a colour of plausibility to the malicious ridicule of those who disliked him the more from being compelled, after all, to respect him. His own understanding oftentimes sided with his disparagers. He saw that he had been in the wrong; whilst secretly he felt that his meaning—if properly explained— had been right. Defrauded in this way, and by his own cooperation,
[Page 319]
of distinctions that naturally belonged to him, he was driven unconsciously to attempt some restoration of the balance by claiming for a moment distinctions to which he had no real pretensions. The whole was a trick of sorrow, and of sorrowing perplexity; he felt that no justice had been done to him, and that he himself had made an opening for the wrong; the result he saw, but the process he could not disentangle; and, in the confusion of his distress, natural irritation threw him upon blind efforts to recover his ground by unfounded claims, when claims so well founded had been maliciously disallowed.
But a day of accounting comes at last—a day of rehearing for the cause, and of revision for the judgment. The longer this review has been delayed, the more impressive it becomes in the changes which it works. Welcome is the spectacle when, after three-fourths of a century have passed away, a writer like Mr. Forster—qualified for such a task by ample knowledge of things and persons, by great powers for a comprehensive estimate of the case and for a splendid exposition of its results, with deep sensibility to the merits of the man chiefly concerned in the issue, enthusiastic, but without partisanship—comes forward to unsettle false verdicts, to recombine misarranged circumstances, and to explain anew misinterpreted facts. Such a man wields the authority of heraldic marshals. Like the Otho of the Roman theatre, he has power to raise or to degrade—to give or to take away precedency; but, like this Otho, he has so much power because he exercises it on known principles, and without caprice. To the man of true genius, like Goldsmith, when seating himself in humility on the lowest bench, he says, “Go thou up to a higher place. Seat thyself above those proud men, that once trampled thee in the dust. Be thy memorial upon earth, not (as of some who scorned thee) ‘the whistling of a name’:—be thou remembered amongst men by tears of tenderness, by happy laughter untainted with malice, and by the benedictions of those that, reverencing man's nature, see gladly its frailties brought within the gracious smile of human charity, and its nobilities levelled to the apprehension of simplicity and innocence.”
Over every grave, even though tenanted by guilt and
[Page 320]
shame, the human heart, when circumstantially made acquainted with its silent records of suffering or temptation, yearns in love or in forgiveness to breathe a solemn Requiescat! How much more, then, over the grave of a benefactor to the human race! But it is a natural feeling, with respect to such a prayer, that, however fervent and sincere, it has no perfect faith in its own validity, so long as any unsettled feud from ancient calumny hangs over the buried person. The unredressed wrong seems to haunt the sepulchre in the shape of a perpetual disturbance to its rest. First of all, when this wrong has been adjudicated and expiated, is the Requiescat uttered with a perfect faith in itself. By a natural confusion we then transfer our own feelings to the occupant of the grave. The tranquillization to our own wounded sense of justice seems like an atonement to his : the peace for us transforms itself under a fiction of tenderness into a peace for him : the reconciliation between the world that did the wrong and the grave that seemed to suffer it is accomplished; the reconciler, in such a case, whoever he may be, seems a double benefactor—to him that endured the injury—to us that resented it; and in the particular case now before the public we shall all be ready to agree that this reconciling friend, who might have entitled his work Vindiciæ Oliverianæ , has, by the piety of his service to a man of exquisite genius, so long and so foully misrepresented, earned a right to interweave forever his own cipher and cognisance in filial union with those of Oliver Goldsmith.
NOTES
1 [1] First published in the North British Review for May 1848, and revised by De Quincey in 1857 for the collective edition of his works, with some verbal changes (e.g. “we” into “I,” “our” into “my”). The book reviewed was “The Life and Adventures of Goldsmith: a Biography. In four books. By John Forster. London, 1848.”
2 [1] I do not allude chiefly to his experience in childhood, when he is reported to have been a general butt of ridicule for his ugliness and his supposed stupidity; since, as regarded the latter reproach, he could not have suffered very long, having already at a childish age vindicated his intellectual place by the verses which opened to him an academic destination. I allude to his mature life, and the supercilious condescension with which even his reputed friends doled out their praises to him.
3 [1] I point this remark not at Mr. Forster; who, upon the whole, shares my opinion as to the tolerable comfort of Goldsmith's life. He speaks, indeed, elsewhere of Goldsmith's depressions; but the question still remains—were they of frequent recurrence, and had they any constitutional root or lodgment? I am inclined to say no in both cases.
4 [1] Which tub the reader may fancy to have been only an old tar barrel; but, if so, he is wrong. Isaac Casaubon, after severe researches into the nature of that tub, ascertained to the general satisfaction of Christendom that it was not of wood, or within the restorative powers of a cooper, but of earthenware, and, therefore, once shattered by a horse's kick, quite past repair. In fact, the home of Diogenes was a large oil jar, such as the remnant of the forty thieves lurked in, when waiting for their captain's signal from Ali Baba's house; and, in Attica, it must have cost fifteen shillings, supposing that the philosopher did not steal it. Consequently a week's loss of house-room and credit to Oliver Goldsmith, at the rate of living then prevalent in Grub Street, was pretty much the same thing in money value as the loss to Diogenes of his crockery house by burglary, or in any nocturnal lark of young Attic winebibbers. The underwriters would have done an insurance upon either man at pretty much the same premium.
5 [1] i.e. Goldsmith's Inquiry into Present State of Polite Learning in Europe, published in 1759.—M.
6 [1] It may be necessary to explain, for the sake of the many persons who have come amongst the reading public since the period of the incident referred to, that this was a boy called Jones, who was continually entering Buckingham Palace clandestinely, was as regularly ejected by the police, but with respectable pertinacity constantly returned, and on one occasion effected a lodgment in the royal bed-chamber. Some happy wit, in just admiration of such perseverance and impudence, christened him by the name of the great architect as In-I-go Jones.
7 [1] Often, but not so uniformly (the reader will think) as the diction, because the manners are sometimes not those of the writer's own age, being ingenious adaptations to meet the modern writer's conjectural ideas of ancient manners. These, however, even in Sir Walter Scott, are precisely the most mouldering parts in the entire architecture, being always (as, for instance in “Ivanhoe”) fantastic, caricatured, and betraying the true modern ground gleaming through the artificial tarnish of antiquity. All novels, in every language, are hurrying to decay; and hurrying by internal changes, were those all; but in the meantime the everlasting life and fertility of the human mind is for ever accelerating this hurry by superseding them—i.e. by an external change. Old forms, fading from the interest, or even from the comprehension, have no chance at all as against new forms embodying the same passions. It is only in the grander passions of poetry, allying themselves with forms more abstract and permanent, that such a conflict of the old with the new is possible.
8 [1] “By the two leading nations of the earth”:—viz. our own and the French. It was little known at any time, and is now forgotten, that Rousseau, Diderot, and all the leading minds in France, made an idol of Richardson, even more consecrated than amongst ourselves.
9 [1] The reference, at the date when this was written, must have been to Carlyle's Chartism (1839) or his Past and Present (1843).—M.
10 [1] It ought by this time to be known equally amongst governments and philosophers that for the state to promise with sincerity the absorption of surplus labour, as fast as it accumulates, cannot be postulated as a duty, until it can first be demonstrated as a possibility. This was forgotten, however, by Mr. Carlyle, whose vehement complaints that the arable field without a ploughman should be in one county, whilst in another county was the stout ploughman without a field—and sometimes (which was worse still) that the surplus ploughmen should far outnumber the surplus fields—certainly proceeded on the secret assumption that all this was within the remedial powers of the state. The same doctrine was more openly avowed by various sections of our Radicals, who (in their occasionally insolent petitions to Parliament) many times asserted that one main use and function of a government was to find work for everybody. At length (February and March, 1848) we see this doctrine solemnly adopted by a French body of rulers—self-appointed, indeed, or perhaps appointed by their wives, and so far sure, in a few weeks, to be answerable for nothing; but, on the other hand, adopting it as a practical undertaking, in the lawyer's sense, and by no means as a mere gaiety of rhetoric. Meantime, they themselves will be “broken” before they will have had time for being reproached with broken promises, though neither fracture is likely to require much above the length of a quarantine.
11 [1] When writing this passage, I was not aware that Mr. Forster had himself noticed the case.
12 [2] Griffiths, a bookseller in Paternoster Row, had started in 1749 a periodical called the Monthly Review; and in 1757 he engaged Goldsmith, then in very wretched circumstances, to be his chief hackwriter for the Review, his remuneration to be board in Griffiths's house (which was over his shop in Paternoster Row), with some small pay besides. The engagement was for a year, but lasted only from April to September.—M.
13 [1] If Addison died (as I think he did) in 1717, then, because Goldsmith commenced authorship in 1757, there would be forty years between the two periods. But, as it would be fairer to measure from the centre of Addison's literary career—i.e. from 1707—the difference between their eras would be just half-a-century.
14 [1] De Quincey is decidedly unfair here to Dr. Johnson and the other chief London contemporaries of Goldsmith. While they were amused with his oddities and laughed at them, they never failed to love him and do justice to his genius. Burke burst into tears on hearing of his death; Sir Joshua Reynolds left his painting-room and would do no more work that day; and Johnson, talking of him three months afterwards, wound up with the words, “Let not his frailties be remembered; he was a very great man.” De Quincey himself would never have used so high a phrase as this respecting Goldsmith; and, indeed, the tenor of this paper and of the postscript to it proves that his estimate of Goldsmith did not come nearly up to Johnson's mark.—M.
$$$
