On Art in Fiction
Author: Lytton, Edward Bulwer.
Publication info: The Monthly Chronicle ; London (1838): viii, 384 p.

On Art in Fiction [in, The Monthly Chronicle; A National Journal of Politics, Literature, Science, and Art. Vol. I. March – June, 1838] THE CRITIC. — No. I. ON ART IN FICTION. Art is, that process by which we give to natural materials the highest excellence they are capable of receiving.
We estimate the artist, not only in proportion to the success of his labours, but in proportion to the intellectual faculties which are necessary to that success. Thus, a watch by Breguét is a beautiful work of art, and so is a tragedy by Sophocles: — The first is even more perfect of its kind than the last, but the tragedy requires higher intellectual faculties than the watch; and the esteem the tragedian above the watchmaker.
The excellence of art consists in the fitness of the object proposed with the means adopted. Art carried to its perfection would be the union of the most admirable object with the most admirable means; in other words, it would require a greatness in the conception correspondent to the genius in the execution. But as mechanical art is subjected to more definite and rigorous laws than intellectual art, so, in the latter, a comprehensive critic regards the symmetry of the whole with large indulgence towards blemishes in detail. We contemplate mechanical art with reference to its utility — intellectual art with reference to its beauty. A single defect in a watch may suffice to destroy all the value of its construction; — a single blemish in a tragedy may scarcely detract from its effect.
In regarding any work of art, we must first thoroughly acquaint ourselves with the object that the artist had in view. Were an antiquarian to set before us drawing, illustrative of the costume of the Jews in the time of Tiberius, we should do right to blame him if he presented to our eye goblets in the fashion of the fifteenth century; but when Leonardo da Vinci undertook
[Page 43]
the sublime and moving representation of the Last Supper, we feel that his object is not that of an antiquary; and we do not regard it as a blemish that the apostles are seated upright instead of being recumbent, and that the loaves of bread are those of an Italian baker. Perhaps, indeed, the picture affected the spectators the more sensibly from their familiarity with the details; and the effect of art on the whole was only heightened by a departure from correctness in minutiæ. So, in an anatomical drawing that professed to give the exact proportions of man, we might censure the designer if the length of the limbs were disproportioned to the size of the trunk; but, when the sculptor of the Apollo Belvidere desired to convey to the human eye the ideal of the God of Youth, the length of the limbs contributed to give an additional and super-human lightness and elasticity to the form; and the excellence of the art was evinced and promoted by the sacrifice of mechanical accuracy in detail. It follows, therefore, that intellectual Art and technical Correctness are far from identical; — that one is sometimes proved by the disdain of the other. And, as this makes the distinction between mechanical and intellectual art, so is the distinction remarkable in proportion as that intellectual art is exercised in the highest degree, — in proportion as it realises the Ideal. For the Ideal consists not in the imitation, but the exaltation, of Nature; and we must accordingly inquire, not how far it resembles what we have seen so much as how far it embodies what we can imagine.
It is not till we have had great pictures, that we can lay down the rules of painting; — it is not till we have had great writers in a particular department of intellect, that we can sketch forth a code of laws for those who succeed them: For the theory of art resembles that of science; we must have data to proceed upon, and our inductions must be drawn from a vast store of experiments.
Prose fictions have been cultivated by modern writers of such eminence, and now form so wide and essential a part of the popular literature of Europe, that it may not be an uninteresting or an useless task to examine the laws by which the past may be tested, and the labours of future students simplified and abridged.
PROSE FICTIONS. The Novelist has three departments for his art: Manners, Passions,Character.
MANNERS. The delineation of manners embraces both past and present; the Modern and the Historical Romance.
The Historical . We have a right to demand from the writer who professes to illustrate a former age, a perfect acquaintance with its characteristics and spirit. At the same time, as he intends rather to interest than instruct us, his art will be evinced in the illustrations he selects, and the skill with which they are managed. He will avoid all antiquarian dissertations not essentially necessary to the conduct of his tale. If, for instance, his story should have no connection with the mysteries of the middle ages, he will take care how he weary us with an episodical description that changes his character from that of a narrator into that of a lecturer. In the tale of Notre Dame de Paris, by Victor Hugo, the description of the cathedral of Notre Dame is not only apposite, but of the deepest interest; for the cathedral is, by a high effort of art, made an absolute portion of the machinery of the tale. But the long
[Page 44]
superfluous description of the spectacle with which the story opens is merely a parade of antiquarian learning, because the Scholars and the Mysteries have no proportionate bearing whatever in the future development of the tale.
The usual fault of the historical novelist is over minuteness in descriptions of dress and feasts, of pageants and processions. Minuteness is not accuracy. On the contrary, the more the novelist is minute, the more likely he is to mar the accurate effect of the whole, either by wearisome tameness or some individual error.
An over-antiquated phraseology is a common and a most inartistical defect: whatever diction the delineator of a distant age employs, can never be faithful to the language of the time, for if so, it would be unintelligible. So, in the German novels that attempt a classical subject, there is the prevalent vice of a cold imitation of a classic epistolary style. It is the very attempt at resemblance that destroys the illusion, as it is by the servility of a copy that we are most powerfully reminded of the difference between the copy and the original. The language of a former time should be presented to us in the freest and most familiar paraphrase we can invent. Thus the mind is relieved at once from the task of forming perpetual comparisons, and surrenders itself to the delusion the more easily, from the very candour with which the author makes demand on its credulity. In selecting a particular epoch for illustration, an artistical author will consider well what is the principal obstacle in the mind of his audience to the reception of his story. For instance, if he select a story of ancient Greece, the public will be predisposed to anticipate a frigid pedantry of style, and delineations of manners utterly different from those which are familiar to us now. The author will, therefore, agreeably surprise the reader, if he adopt a style as familiar and easy as that which a Greek would have used in common conversation; and show the classical spirit that pervades his diction, by the grace of the poetry, or the lightness of the wit, with which he can adorn his allusions and his dialogue. Thus, the very learning he must evince will only be but incidental and easy ornament. On the other hand, instead of selecting such specimens and modifications of human nature as are most different from, and unfamiliar to, the sympathies of modern times, he will rather prefer to appeal to the eternal sentiments of the heart, by showing how closely the men of one age resemble those of another. His hero, his lover, his epicure, his buffoon, his miser, his boaster, will be as close to the life as if they were drawn from the streets of London. The reader will be interested to see society different, yet men the same; and the Manners will be relieved from the disadvantage of unfamiliarity by an entire sympathy with the humours they mask, or the passions on which they play.
Again, if the author propose to carry his reader to the times of Richard the First or of Elizabeth, he will have to encounter an universal repugnance from the thought of an imitation of Ivanhoe or Kenilworth. An author who was, nevertheless, resolved to select such a period for his narrative would, accordingly, if an artist of sufficient excellence, avoid with care touching upon any of the points which may suggest the recollection of Scott. He would deeply consider all the features of the time, and select those neglected by his predecessor; — would carefully note all the deficiencies of the author of Kenilworth, and seize at once upon the ground which that versatile genius omitted to consecrate to himself.
To take the same epoch, the same characters, even the same narrative, as
[Page 45]
a distinguished predecessor, is perfectly allowable; and, if successful, a proof at once of originality and skill. But if you find the shadow of the previous work flinging itself over your own — if you have not thoroughly escaped the influence of the first occupant of the soil, — you will only invest your genius to unnecessary disadvantage, and build edifices, however graceful and laboured, upon the freehold of another.
In novels devoted to the delineation of existing manners, the young author will be surprised to find, that exsact and unexaggerated fidelity has never been the characteristic of the greatest novelists of their own time. There would be, indeed, something inane and trifling, or mean and vulgar, in Dutch copies of the modern still life. We do not observe any frivolity in Walter Scott, when he describes with elaborate care the set of the ruffle, the fashion of the cloak of Sir Walter Raleigh, nor when he catalogues all the minutiæ of the chamber of Rowena. But to introduce your hero of May Fair with an exact portraiture of the colour of his coat, and the length of his pantaloons, to item all the commodes and fauteuils of the boudoir of a lady Caroline or Frances, revolts our taste as an effeminate attention to trifles.
In humbler life, the same rule applies with equal strength. We are willing to know how Gurth was dressed, or Esmeralda lodged; but we do not require the same minuteness in describing the smock-frock of a labourer, or the garret of the girl who is now walking upon stilts for a penny. The greatest masters of the novel of modern life have usually availed themselves of HUMOUR as the illustration of manners; and have, with a deep and true, but, perhaps, unconscious, knowledge of art, pushed the humour almost to the verge of caricature. For as the Serious Ideal requires a certain exaggeration in the proportions of the Natural, so also does the Ludicrous. Thus, Aristophanes, in painting the humours of his time, resorts to the most poetical extravagance of machinery, and calls the Clouds in aid of his ridicule of philosophy, or summons Frogs and Gods to unite in his satire on Euripides. The Don Quixote of Cervantes never lived, nor, despite the vulgar belief, ever could have lived, in Spain; but the art of the portrait is in the admirable exaltation of the Humorous by means of the Exaggerated. With more qualification, the same may be said of Parson Adams, of Sir Roger de Coverley, and even of the Vicar of Wakefield.
Where the author has not adopted the Humorous as the best vehicle for the delineation of manners, he has sometimes artfully removed the scene from the country that he seeks to delineate, so that he might place his portraitures at a certain, and the most advantageous, distance from the eye. Thus, Le Sage obtains his object, of a consummate and masterly picture of the manners of his own land, though he has taken Spain for the theatre of the adventures of Gil Blas; and Swift has transferred all that his experience or his malice could narrate of the intrigues of courts, the chimeras of philosophy, the follies and vices of his nation and his time, to the regions of Lilliput and Laputa.
It may be observed, that the delineation of Manners is usually the secondary object of a novelist of high power. To a penetrating mind, manners are subservient to the illustration of views of life, or the consummation of original character. In a few years the mere portraiture of manners is obsolete. It is the knowledge of what is durable in human nature that alone preserves the work from decay. Lilly and Shakspeare alike painted the prevailing and courtly mannerism of their age. The Euphues rests upon our shelves; — Don Armado will delight us as long as pedantry exists.
[Page 46]
CHARACTER. An author once said, “Give me a character, and I will find the play;” and, if we look to the most popular novels, we shall usually find, that where one reader speaks of the conduct of the story, a hundred readers will speak of the excellence of some particular character. An author, before resolving on the characters he designs to portray, will do well to consider maturely, first, what part they are destined to play in his performance; and secondly, what is the precise degree of interest which he desires them to create. Having thus considered, and duly determined, he will take care that no other character in the work shall interfere with the effect each is intended to produce. Thus, if his heroine is to be drawn gentle and mild, no second heroine, with the same attributes, should distract the attention of the reader, a rule that may seem obvious, but which is usually overlooked. When the author feels that he has thoroughly succeeded in a principal and predominant character, he will even sacrifice others, nominally more important, to increase the interst of the figure in the foreground. Thus, in the tale of Ivanhoe, Rowena, professedly the heroine, is very properly sacrificed to Rebecca. The more interesting the character of Rowena, the more pathetic the position she had assumed, the more we should have lost our compassion and admiration of the Jewess; and the highest merit of the tale, its pathos, would have been diminished. The same remark will apply to the Clementina and Harriet Byron of Richardson.
The author will take care not to crowd his canvass. He will select as few characters as are compatible with the full agency of his design. Too many plants in a narrow compass destroy each other. He will be careful to individualise each; but, if aspiring to the highest order of art, he will yet tone down their colours by an infinite variety of shades. The most original characters are those most delicately drawn, where the individual peculiarity does not obtrude itself naked and unrelieved. It was a very cheap purchase of laughter in Sir Walter Scott, and a mere trick of farce, which Shakspeare and Cervantes would have disdained, to invest a favourite humorist with some cant phrase, which he cannot open his mouth without disgorging. This was so special a device (because so easy and popular a mode of producing a ludicrous effect) with Sir Walter Scott, that it was almost his invariable resource. The “Prodigious” of Dominie Sampson — the “My Father, the Baillie” of Nichol Jarvie — the “Provant” of Major Dalgettie — the “ Dejeuner at Tillietudlem” of Lady Margaret Bellenden, &c., all belong to one source of humour, and that the shallowest and most hacknied. If your tale spread over a considerable space of time, you will take care that your readers may note the change of character which time has necessarily produced. You will quietly show the difference between the boy of eighteen and the man of forty; — you will connect the change in the character with the influence of the events you have narrated. In the novel of Anastasius, this art of composition is skilfully and delicately mastered; more so than in Gil Blas.
If you bend all your faculties to the development of some single character, and you make us sensible that such is your object, the conduct of your story become but a minor consideration. Shakspeare, probably, cared but little whether the fencing scene in Hamlet was the best catastrophe he could invent: he took the incidents of the story as he found them; and lavished his genius on the workings of the mind, to which all external incidents on this side the grave had become trivial and uninfluential, — weary, unprofitable, stale.
[Page 47]
It must rest entirely on the nature of the interest you desire it to effect, whether you seek clearly to place before us, or dimly to shadow out, each particular character. If you connect your hero with supernatural agency, if you introduce incidents not accounted for by purely human means, if you resort to the Legendary and Mysterious, for the interest that you identify with any individual character, it may be most artistical to leave such a character vague, shadowy, and half incompleted. Thus, very skilfully is the Master of Ravenswood, over whose head hang ominous and weird predictions, left a less distinct and palpable creation than the broad-shouldered and much-eating heroes, whom Scott usually conducts through a Labyrinth of adventures to marriage with a wealthy Ariadne.
The formation of characters improbable and grotesque is not very compatible with a high conception of art, unless the work be one that so avowedly deals with beings different from those we mix with, that our imagination is prepared as to the extent of the demand upon its faith. Thus, when Shakspeare introduces us at once to the Enchanted Island, and we see the wand of the magician, and hear the song of Ariel, we are fully prepared to consider Caliban a proper inhabitant of such a soil; or when the Faust opens with the Chorus of the Angels, and the black dog appears in the chamber of the solitary student, the imagination finds little difficulty in yielding assent to the vagaries of the witches, and the grotesque diablerie of the Hartz Mountains; but we are wholly unprepared to find a human Caliban in the bell-ringer of a Parisian cathedral; and we see no reason why Quasimodo should not have been as well shaped as other people. The use of the Grotesque in The Abbot, where Sir Percy Shafto is killed and revived, is an absurdity as gross and gratuitous as can well be conceived.
In the portraiture of evil and criminal characters lies the widest scope for an author profoundly versed in the philosophy of the human heart. In all countries, in all times, the delineation of crime has been consecrated to the highest order of poetry. For as the emotions of terror and of pity are those which it falls to the province of the sublimest genius to arouse, so it is chiefly, though not solely, in the machinations of guilt that may be found the source of the one, and in the misfortunes, sometimes of the victim of the guilt, nay, sometimes of the guilty agent himself, that we arrive at the fountain of the softer passion. Thus, the murder of Duncan rouses our compassion, through our admission to all the guilty doubts and aspirations of Macbeth; and our terror is of a far higher and more enthralling order, because it is reflected back upon us from the bared and struggling heart of the murderer, than it would have been if we had seen the physical death of the victim. It may be observed, indeed, that, in a fine tragedy, it is the preparation to the death that is to constitute the catastrophe that usually most sensibly excites the interest of terror, and that the blow of the murderer, and the fall of the victim, is but a release to the suspense of fear, and changes the whole current of our emotions. But the grandest combination is when the artist unites in one person the opposite passions of terror and pity — when we feel at once horror of the crime, yet compassion for the criminal. Thus, in the most stirring of all the ancient dramas, the moment that we discover that Œdipus has committed the crimes from which we most revolt, homicide and incest, is the very moment in which, to the deepest terror of the crimes is united the most intense compassion for the criminal. So, again, before the final catastrophe of the mystic fate of Macbeth, when evil predictions are working to their close, and we feel that his hour is come, Shakspeare has paused, to draw from the dark bosom or the fated murderer those moving reflections, “My way of life,” &c. which
[Page 48]
steal from us insensibly our hatred of his guilt, and awaken a new and softer interest in the approaching consummation of the usurper's doom. Again, in the modern play of Virginius, when the scene opens, and discovers the avenging father upon the body of the murdered Appius, it is in Virginius, at once criminal and childless, that are concentrated our pity and our terror.
In the portraiture of crime, however dark, the artist will take care to throw some redeeming light. The veriest criminal has some touch and remnant of human goodness; and it is according as this sympathy between the outcast and ourselves is indicated or insinuated, that the author profanes or masters the noblest mysteries of his art. Where the criminal be one, so resolute and hardened, so inexorable and preter-human, in his guilt, that he passes the bounds of flesh-and-blood inconsistencies and sympathies, a great artist will bring forth intellectual qualities to balance our disgust at the moral. Thus, in Richard III., it is with a masterly skill that Shakspeare relieves us from the revolting contemplation of unmingled crime by enlisting our involuntary and unconscious admiration on the side of the address, the subtle penetration into character, the affluent wit, the daring energy, the royal will, with which the ruthless usurper moves through the bloody scenes of his treachery. And, at the last, it is, if not by a relic of human virtue, at least by a relic of human weakness, by the working conscience, and the haunted pillow, that we are taught to remember that it is a man who sins and suffers, not a beast that ravages and is slain. Still, despite all the subtle shadings in the character of Richard, we feel that the guilt is overdrawn — that the dark spirit wants a moral as well as intellectual relief. To penetrating critics, it has always, therefore, been the most coarse of all the creations of Shakspeare; and will never bear a comparison, as a dissection of human nature, with the goaded and writhing wickedness of Macbeth.
In the delineation of a criminal, the author will take care to show us the motives of the crimes — the influences beneath which the character has been formed. He will suit the nature of the criminal to the state of society in which he is cast. Thus, he will have occasions for the noblest morality By concentrating in one focus the vicious influences of any peculiar error in the social system, he will hold up a mirror to nations themselves.
As the bad man will not be painted as thoroughly and unredeemedly had, so he, whom you represent as good, will have his foibles or infirmities. You will show where even the mainspring of his virtues sometimes calls into play a counter vice. Your just man will be sometimes severe — your generous man will be sometimes careless of the consequences of generosity. It is true that, in both these applications of art, you will be censured by shallow critics and pernicious moralists. It will be said of you in the one case, “He seeks to interest us in a murderer or a robber, an adulterer or a parricide;” — it will be said of you in the other, “And this man whom he holds up to us as an example, whom he calls wise and good, is a rascal, who indulges such an error, or commits such an excess.” But no man can be an artist who does not prefer experience and human nature to all criticism; and, for the rest, he must be contented to stand on the same ground, or to have filled his urn from the same fountains, as Shakspeare and Boccaccio, as Goethe and Schiller, Fielding and Le Sage. If it be, however, necessary to your design to paint some character as almost faultless, as exempt from our common infirmities and errors, you will act skilfully if you invest it with the attributes of old age. When all the experience of error has been dearly bought, when the passions are laid at rest, and the mind burns clear as the night deepens, virtue does, in fact, become less and less wavering
[Page 49]
and imperfect. But youth without a fault would be youth without a passion; and such a portrait would make us despair of emulation, and arm against reverence and esteem all the jealousies of self-love.
THE PASSIONS. Delineation of passions is inseparable from the delineation of character. A novel, admirable in character, may, indeed, be drawn, in which the passions are but coldly and feebly shadowed forth: Gil Blas is an example. But either such novels are intended as representations of external life, not of the metaphysical operations of the inner man, or they deal with the humours and follies, not the grave and deep emotions, of our kind, and belong to the Comedy of Romance.
But if a novel of character can be excellent without passion, it would be impossible to create a novel of passion without character. The elementary passions themselves, like the elements, are few: it is the modifications they take in passing through different bodies that give us so inexhaustible a variety of lights and shadows, of loveliness and glory.
The passion of Love is not represented by a series of eloquent rhapsodies, or even of graceful sentiments. It is represented, in fiction, by its effects on some particular character: the same with Jealousy, Avarice, Revenge, &c. Therefore, in a certain sense of the word, all representations of passion in fiction may be considered typical . In Juliet, it is not the picture of love solely and abstractedly — it is the picture of love in its fullest effect on youth . In Anthony, it is love as wild, and as frantic, and as self-sacrificing; but it is love, not emanating from the enthusiasm of youth, but already touched with something of the blindness and infirmity of dotage.
In Macbeth, it is not the mere passion of ambition that is portrayed, — it is ambition operating on a man physically daring, and morally irresolute; a man whom the darkest agencies alone can compel, and whom the fullest triumphs of success cannot reconcile, to crime. So, if we review all the passionate characters of Shakspeare, we shall find that the passion is individualised and made original by the mould in which the fiery liquid is cast. Nor is the language of that passion declamation upon the passion itself, but the revelation of the effect it produces on a single subject. It is, accordingly, in the perfect harmony that exists between the character and the passion that the abstract and bodiless idea finds human force and corporeal interest. If you would place the passion before us in a new light, the character that represents it must be original. An artistical author, taking advantage of the multiform inconsistencies of human nature, will often give to the most hacknied passion a thoroughly new form, by placing it in a character where it could least be looked for. For instance, should you desire to portray avarice, you will go but on worn-out ground, if you resort to Plautus and to Moliere for your model. But if you find in history the record of a brilliant courtier, a successful general, marked and signalised by the vice of Harpagon, the vice itself takes a new hue, and your portraiture will be a new addition to our knowledge of the mysteries of our kind. Such a representation, startling, untouched, and truthful, might be taken from the character of the Duke of Marlborough, the hero of Blenheim. In portraying the effect of a passion, the rarest art of the novelist is to give it its due weight and no more. Thus, in love novels, we usually find nothing but love; as if, in the busy and complicated life of man, there were no other spring to desire and action but
“Love, love — eternal love.”
[Page 50]
Again, if an author portrays a miser, he never draws him otherwise than as a miser. He makes him, not the avaricious miser, but abstract avarice itself. Not so Shakspeare, when he created Shylock. Other things, other motives, occupy the spirit of the Jew besides his gold and his argosies: he is a grasping and relentless miser, yet he can give up avarice to revenge. He has sublime passions, that elevate his mean ones.
If your novel be devoted to love and its effects, you will act more consistently with the truths of life, if you throw the main interest of the passion in the heroine. In the hero, you will increase our sense of the power of the passion, if you show us all the conflicting passions with which in men it usually contends — ambition, or honour, or duty: the more the effect of the love is shown by the obstacles it silently subdues, the more triumphant will be your success. You will recollect that in the novel, as in the drama, it is in the struggle of emotions that the science of the heart is best displayed; and, in the delineation of such struggles, there is ground little occupied hitherto by the great masters of English fiction. It was not in the province of Fielding or Smollett; and Scott but rarely indulges, and still more rarely succeeds, in the metaphysical operations of stormy and conflicting feelings. He rather seems to have made it a point of art to imitate the ancient painter, and throw a veil over passions he felt inadequate to express. Thus, after the death and burial of Lucy, it is only by the heavy and unequal tread of Ravenswood, in his solitary chamber, that his agonies are to be conjectured. But this avoidance of the internal man, if constant and systematic, is but a clever trick to hide the want of power.
THE SENTIMENT. The Sentiment that pervades a book is often its most effective moral, and its most universal charm. It is a pervading and indescribable harmony, in which the heart of the author himself seems silently to address our own. Through creations of crime and vice, there may be one pervading sentiment of virtue; through the humblest scenes, a sentiment of power and glory. It is the sentiment of Wordsworth of which his disciples speak, when they enlarge upon attributes of holiness and beauty, which detached passages, however exquisite, do not suffice to justify; for the sentiment of a work is felt, not in its parts, but as a whole: it is undefinable and indefinite — it escapes while you seek to analyse it. Of all the qualities of fiction, the sentiment is that which we can least subject to the inquiries or codes of criticism. It emanates from the moral and predominant quality of the author, — the perfume from his genius; and by it he unconsciously reveals himself. The sentiment of Shakspeare is in the strong sympathies with all that is human. In the sentiment of Swift, we see the reflection of a spirit discontented and malignant. Mackenzie, Goldsmith, Voltaire, Rousseau, betray their several characters as much in the prevalent sentiment of their writings as if they had made themselves the heroes. Of all writers of great genius, Shakspeare has the most sentiment, and, perhaps, Smollett and Defoe the least. The student will distinguish between a work of sentiment and a sentimental work. As the charm of sentiment in a fiction is that it is latent and indefinite, so the charm vanishes the instant it becomes obtruding and importunate. The mistake of Kotzebue and many of the Germans, of Metastasio, and a feeble and ephemeral school of the Italians, was in the confounding sentiment with passion.
Sentiment is capable of many classifications and subdivisions. The first and finest is that touched upon — the sentiment of the whole work: a sentiment of beauty or of grandeur — of patriotism or of benevolence — of
[Page 51]
veneration, of justice, or of piety. This may be perfectly distinct from the characters or scenes portrayed: it evinces itself insensibly and invisibly; and we do not find its effect till we sum up all the effects that the work has bequeathed. The sentiment is, therefore, often incorporated and identified with the moral tendency of the fiction.
There is also a sentiment that belongs to style, and gives depth and colouring to peculiar passages. For instance, in painting a pastoral life in the heart of lonely forests, or by the side of unpolluted streams, the language and thoughts of the author glide into harmony with the images he creates; and we feel that he has, we scarcely know by what art, penetrated himself and us with the Sentiment of Repose.
A sentiment of this nature will be felt at once by the lovers of Spenser, and of Ariosto and Tasso. In the entrance to the Domains of Death, Milton breathes over the whole description the Sentiment of Awe.
The Sentiments are distinct from the Passions: sometimes they are most eloquent in the utter absence of passion itself; as the sentiment that pervades the poem of The Castle of Indolence; — at other times they are the neighbours, the intervening shades, between one passion and another; as the Sentiment of a Pleasing Melancholy. Regret and Awe are sentiments: Grief and Terror, passions.
As there is a sentiment that belongs to description, so there are characters in which sentiment supplies the place of passion. The character of Jacques, in As You like It, is purely one of sentiment. Usually, sentiment is, in character, most effective when united with humour, as in Uncle Toby and Don Quixote, and, to quote a living writer, some of the masterly creations of Paul de Kock. For the very delicacy of the sentiment will be most apparent by the contrast of what seems to us at first the opposite quality; as the violet we neglect in a flower-bed enchants us in the hollow of a rock.
In a succeeding paper it is proposed to enter upon the construction of the fiction itself — the distinctions between the Drama and the Novel — and the mechanism, conduct, and catastrophe of the different species of Invented Narrative.
THE CRITIC. — No. II. ON ART IN FICTION. [Concluded from page 51.] THE CONCEPTION. A story may be well constructed, yet devoid of interest; on the other hand, the construction may be faulty and the interest vivid. This is the case even with the drama. Hamlet is not so well constructed a story as the Don Carlos of Alfieri; but there is no comparison in the degree of interest excited in either tragedy. Still, though we ought not to consider that excellence in the technical arrangement of incidents as a certain proof of the highest order of art, it is a merit capable of the most brilliant effects, when possessed by a master. An exquisite mechanism in the construction of the mere story, not only gives pleasure in itself, but it displays other and loftier beauties to the best advantage. It is the setting of the jewels.
It is common to many novelists to commence a work without any distinct chart of the country which they intend to traverse — to suffer one chapter to grow out of another, and invention to warm as the creation grows. Scott has confessed to this mode of novel-writing 1 but Scott, with all his genius, was rather a great mechanist than a great artist. His execution was infinitely superior to his conception. It may be observed, indeed, that his conceptions are often singularly poor and barren, compared with the vigour with which they are worked out. He conceives a story with the design of telling it as well as he can, but is wholly insensible to the high and true aim of art, which is rather to consider for what objects the story should be told. Scott never appears to say to himself, “Such a tale will throw a new
[Page 139]
light upon human passions, or add fresh stores to human wisdom: for that reason I select it.” He seems rather to consider what picturesque effects it will produce, what striking scenes, what illustrations of mere manners. He regards the story with the eye of the property man , though he tells it with the fervour of the poet. It is not thus that the greatest authorities in fiction have composed. It is clear to us that Shakspeare, when he selected the tale which he proposed to render Χτη̂μά ἐς ἀΕὶ, — the everlasting possession of mankind, made it his first and paramount object to work out certain passions, or affections of the mind, in the most complete and profound form. He did not so much consider how the incidents might be made most striking, as how the truths of the human heart might be made most clear. And it is a remarkable proof of his consummate art, that though in his best plays we may find instances in which the mere incidents might be made more probable, and the theatrical effects more vivid, we can never see one instance in such plays where the passion he desired to represent, could have been placed in a broader light, or the character he designed to investigate, could have been submitted to a minuter analysis. We are quite sure that Othello and Macbeth were not written without the clear and deep and premeditated CONCEPTION of the story to be told us. For with Shakspeare the conception itself is visible and gigantic from the first line to the last. So in the greatest works of Fielding a very obtuse critic may perceive that the author sat down to write in order to embody a design previously formed. The perception of moral truths urged him to the composition of his fictions. In Jonathan Wild, the finest prose satire in the English language, Fielding, before he set pen to paper, had resolved to tear the mask from False Greatness. In his conception of the characters and histories of Blifil and Jones, he was bent on dethroning that popular idol — False Virtue. The scorn of hypocrisy in all grades, all places, was the intellectual passion of Fielding; and his masterpieces are the results of intense convictions. That many incidents never contemplated would suggest themselves as he proceeded — that the technical plan of events might deviate and vary, according as he saw new modes of enforcing his aims, is unquestionable. But still Fielding always commenced with a plan — with a conception — with a moral end, to be achieved by definite agencies, and through the medium of certain characters pre-formed in his mind. If Scott had no preconcerted story when he commenced Chapter the First of one of his delightful tales, it was because he was deficient in the highest attributes of art, viz., its philosophy and its ethics. He never seems to have imagined that the loftiest merit of a tale rests upon the effect it produces, not on the fancy, but on the intellect and the passions. He had no grandeur of conception, for he had no strong desire to render palpable and immortal some definite and abstract truth.
It is a sign of the low state of criticism in this country that Scott has been compared to Shakspeare. No two writers can be more entirely opposed to each other in the qualities of their genius, or the sources to which they applied. Shakspeare ever aiming at the development of the secret man, and half disdaining the mechanism of external incidents; Scott painting the ruffles and the dress, and the features and the gestures — avoiding the movements of the heart, elaborate in the progress of the incident. Scott never caught the mantle of Shakspeare, but he improved on the dresses of his wardrobe, and threw artificial effects into the scenes of his theatres.
Let us take an example: we will select one of the finest passages in Sir
[Page 140]
Walter Scott: a passage unsurpassed for its mastery over the Picturesque. It is that chapter in “Kenilworth,” where Elizabeth has discovered Amy, and formed her first suspicions of Leicester.
“Leicester was at this moment the centre of a splendid group of lords and ladies, assembled together under an arcade or portico, which closed the alley. The company had drawn together in that place, to attend the commands of her majesty when the hunting party should go forward, and their astonishment may be imagined, when instead of seeing Elizabeth advance towards them with her usual measured dignity of motion, they beheld her walking so rapidly, that she was in the midst of them are they were aware; and then observed with fear and surprise, that her features were flushed betwixt anger and agitation, that her hair was loosened by her haste of motion, and that her eyes sparkled as they were wont when the spirit of Henry VIII. mounted highest in his daughter. Nor were they less astonished at the appearance of the pale, extenuated, half-dead, yet still lovely female, whom the queen upheld by main strength with one hand, while with the other she waved aside the ladies and nobles, who pressed towards her, under the idea that she was taken suddenly ill. ‘Where is my Lord of Leicester?’ she said, in a tone that thrilled with astonishment all the courtiers who stood around — ‘Stand forth, my Lord of Leicester!’
“If, in the midst of the most serene day of summer, when all is light and laughing around, a thunderbolt were to fall from the clear blue vault of heaven, and rend the earth at the very feet of some careless traveller, he could not gaze upon the smouldering chasm which so unexpectedly yawned before him, with half the astonishment and fear which Leicester felt at the sight that so suddenly presented itself. He had that instant been receiving, with a political affectation of disavowing and misunderstanding their meaning, the half-uttered, half-intimated congratulations of the courtiers upon the favour of the queen, carried apparently to its highest pitch during the interview of that morning; from which most of them seemed to augur, that he might soon arise from their equal in rank to become their master. And now, while the subdued yet proud smile with which he disclaimed those inferences was yet curling his cheek, the queen shot into the circle, her passions excited to the uttermost; and, supporting with one hand, and apparently without an effort, the pale and sinking form of his almost expiring wife, and pointing with the finger of the other to her half-dead features, demanded in a voice that sounded to the ears of the astounded statesman like the last dread trumpet-call, that is to summon body and spirit to the judgment seat, ‘Knowest thou this woman?’”
The reader will observe that the whole of this splendid passage is devoted to external effects: the loosened hair and sparkling eyes of Elizabeth — the grouping of the courtiers — the proud smile yet on the cheek of Leicester — the pale and sinking form of the wife. Only by external effects do we guess at the emotions of the agents. Scott is thinking of the costume and postures of the actors, not the passions they represent. Let us take a parallel passage in Shakspeare; parallel, for, in each, a mind disturbed with jealousy is the real object placed before the reader. It is thus that Iago describes Othello, after the latter has conceived his first suspicions:
“Look where he comes! Not poppy, nor mandragora,
Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,
Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
Which thou ow'dst yesterday.
Othello.
                                         Ha! ha! false to me?”
Here the reader will observe that there is no attempt at the Picturesque — no sketch of the outward man. It is only by a reference to the woe that kills sleep that we can form any notion of the haggard aspect of the Moor. So, if we compare the ensuing dialogue in the romance with that in the
[Page 141]
tragedy, we shall remark that Elizabeth utters only bursts of shallow passion, which convey none of the deep effects of the philosophy of jealousy; none of the sentiments that “inform us what we are.” But every sentence uttered by Othello penetrates to the very root of the passion described: the farewell to fame and pomp, which comes from a heart that, finding falsehood in the prop it leaned on, sees the world itself, and all its quality and circumstance, crumbled away; the burst of vehement incredulity; the sudden return to doubt; the intense revenge proportioned to the intense love; the human weakness that must seek faith somewhere, and, with the loss of Desdemona, casts itself upon her denouncer; the mighty knowledge of the heart exhibited in those simple words to Iago, “I greet thy love;” — compare all this with the mere words of Elizabeth, which have no force in themselves, but are made effective by the picturesque grouping of the scene, and you will detect at once the astonishing distinction between Shakspeare and Scott. Shakspeare could have composed the most wonderful plays from the stories in Scott; Scott could have written the most excellent stage directions to the plays of Shakspeare.
If the novelist be contented with the secondary order of Art in Fiction, and satisfied if his incidents be varied, animating, and striking, he may write from chapter to chapter, and grope his way to a catastrophe in the dark; but if he aim at loftier and more permanent effects, he will remember that to execute grandly we must conceive nobly. He will suffer the subject he selects to lie long in his mind, to be revolved, meditated, brooded over, until from the chaos breaks the light, and he sees distinctly the highest end for which his materials can be used, and the best process by which they can be reduced to harmony and order.
If, for instance, he found his tale upon some legend, the author, inspired with a great ambition, will consider what will be, not the most vivid interest, but the loftiest and most durable order of interest he can extract from the incidents. Sometimes it will be in a great truth elicited by the catastrophe; sometimes by the delineation of one or more characters; sometimes by the mastery over, and development of, some complicated passion. Having decided what it is that he designs to work out, he will mould his story accordingly; but before he begin to execute, he will have clearly informed his mind of the conception that induces the work itself.
INTEREST. No fiction can be first-rate if it fail to create Interest . But the merit of the fiction is not, by any means, proportioned to the degree of excitement it produces, but to the quality of the excitement. It is certainly some merit to make us weep; but the great artist will consider from what sources our tears are to be drawn. We may weep as much at the sufferings of a beggar as at the agonies of Lear; but from what sublime sympathies arise our tears for the last! what commonplace pity will produce the first! We may have our interest much more acutely excited by the “Castle of Udolpho” than by “Anastasius;” but in the one, it is a melo-dramatic arrangement of hair-breadth escapes and a technical skill in the arrangement of vulgar mysteries — in the other, it is the consummate knowledge of actual life, that fascinates the eye to the page. It is necessary, then, that every novel should excite interest; but one novel may produce a much more gradual, gentle, and subdued interest than another, and yet have infinitely more merit in the quality of the interest it excites.
TERROR AND HORROR. True art never disgusts. If, in descriptions intended to harrow us, we feel sickened and revolted by the very power with which the description is drawn,
[Page 142]
the author has passed the boundary of his province; he does not appal — he shocks. Thus, nothing is more easy than to produce a feeling of intense pain by a portrait of great bodily suffering. The vulgarest mind can do this, and the mistaken populace of readers will cry, “See the power of this author!” But all sympathy with bodily torture is drawn from our basest infirmities; all sympathy with mental torture from our deepest passions and our most spiritual nature. Horror is generally produced by the one, Terror by the other. If you describe a man hanging by a breaking bough over a precipice — if you paint his starting eyeballs, his erect hair, the death-sweat on his brow, the cracking of the bough, the depth of the abyss, the sharpness of the rock, the roar of the cataract below, you may make us dizzy and sick with sympathy; but you operate on the physical nerves, and our sensation is that of coarse and revolting pain. But take a moral abyss: Œdipus, for instance, on the brink of learning the awful secret which proclaims him an incestuous parricide. Show the splendour of his power, the depth of his wisdom, the loftiness of his pride, and then gradually, step by step, reveal the precipice on which he stands — and you work not on the body but the mind; you produce the true tragic emotion, terror . Even in this, you must stop short of all that could make terror revolt while it thrills us. This, Sophocles has done by one of those fine perceptions of nature which open the sublimest mysteries of art; we are not allowed time to suffer our thoughts to dwell upon the incest and self-assault of OElig;dipus, or upon the suicide of Jocasta, before, by the introduction of the Children, terror melts into pity, and the parricide son assumes the new aspect of the broken-hearted father. A modern French writer, if he had taken this subject, would have disgusted us by details of the incest itself, or forced us from the riven heart to gaze on the bloody and eyeless sockets of the blind king; and the more he disgusted us the more he would have thought that he excelled the tragedian of Colonos. Such of the Germans, on the contrary, as follow the School of Schiller, will often stop as far short of the true boundaries of Terror as the French romanticists would go beyond it. Schiller held it a principle of art never to leave the complete and entire effects of a work of art one of pain. According to him, the pleasure of the art should exceed the sympathy with the suffering. He sought to vindicate this priciple by a reference to the Greek drama, but in this he confounded the sentiments with which we, moderns, read the works of AElig;schylus and Sophocles, with the sentiments with which a Greek would have read them. No doubt, to a Greek religiously impressed with the truth and reality of the woes or the terror depicted, the “Agamemnon” of AElig;schylus, the “OElig;dipus Tyrannus” of Sophocles, and the “Medea” of Euripides, would have left a far more unqualified and overpowering sentiment of awe and painful sympathy than we now can entertain for victims, whom we believe to be shadows, to deities and destinies that we know to be chimeras. Were Schiller's rule universally adopted, we should condemn Othello and Lear.
Terror may then be carried up to its full extent, provided that it work upon us through the mind, not the body, and stop short of the reaction of recoil and disgust.
DESCRIPTION. One of the greatest and most peculiar arts of the Novelist is Description . It is in this that he has a manifest advantage over the dramatic poet. The latter will rarely describe scenery, costume, personals , for they ought to be placed before the eyes of the audience by the theatre and the actors. When
[Page 143]
he does do so, it is generally understood by an intelligent critic, to be an episode introduced for the sake of some poetical beauty, which, without absolutely carrying on the plot, increases the agreeable and artistical effect of the whole performance. This is the case with the description of Dover cliff, in “Lear,” or with that of the chasm which adorns, by so splendid a passage, the monstrous tragedy of “The Cenci.” In the classical French theatre, as in the Greek, Description, it is true, becomes an essential part of the play itself, since the catastrophe is thrown into description. Hence the celebrated picture of the death of Hippolyte, in the “Phedre” of Racine — of the suicide of Hæmon in the “Antigone” of Sophocles. But it may be doubted whether both Sophocles and his French imitator did not, in this transfer of action to words, strike at the very core of dramatic art, whether ancient or modern; for it may be remarked — and we are surprised that it has not been remarked before, that AElig;schylus preferred placing the catastrophe before the eyes of the reader; and he who remembers the sublime close of the Prometheus, the storm, the lightning, the bolt, the shivered rock, and the mingled groans and threats of the Titan himself, must acknowledge that the effect is infinitely more purely tragical than it would have been if we had been told how it all happened by the Aggelos or Messenger. So in the “Agamemnon” of the same sublime poet, though we do not see the blow given, the scene itself, opening, places before us the murderess and the corpse. No messenger intervenes — no description is required for the action. “I stand where I struck him,” says Clytæmnestra. “The deed is done!” 2
But without recurring farther to the Drama of other nations, we may admit at once that in our own it is the received and approved rule that Action, as much as possible, should dispense with Description. With Narrative Fiction it is otherwise: the novel writer is his own scene painter; description is as essential to him as canvass is to the actor — description of the most various character.
In this art, none ever equalled Scott. In the comparison we made between him and Shakspeare, we meant not to censure the former for indulging in what the latter shunned; each did that which his art required. We only lament that Scott did not combine with external description an equal, or, at least, not very inferior, skill in metaphysical analysis. Had he done so, he would have achieved all of which the novelist is capable.
In the description of natural scenery, the author will devote the greatest care to such landscapes as are meant for the localities of his principal events. There is nothing, for instance, very attractive in the general features of a common; but if the author lead us through a common, on which, in a later portion of his work, a deed of murder is to be done, he will strive to fix deeply in our remembrance the character of the landscape, the stunted tree, or the mantling pool, which he means to associate in our minds with an act of terror.
If the duration of time in a fiction be limited to a year, the author may be enabled artfully to show us the progress of time by minute descriptions of the gradual change in the seasons. This is attempted to be done in the tale of “Eugene Aram:” instead of telling us when it is July, and when it is October, the author of that fiction describes the signs and characteristics of the month, and seeks to identify our interest in the natural phenomena, with the approaching fate of the hero, himself an observer and an artist of the “clouds that pass to and fro,” and the “herbs that wither and are renewed.” Again, in description, if there be any natural objects that will bear
[Page 144]
upon the catastrophe, if, for instance, the earthquake or the inundation be intended as an agent in the fate of those whose history the narrative relates, incidental descriptions of the state of the soil, frequent references to the river or the sea, will serve to make the elements themselves minister to the interest of the plot; and the final catastrophe will be made at once more familiar, yet more sublime, if we have been prepared and led to believe that you have from the first designed to invoke to your aid the awful agencies of Nature herself. Thus, in the OElig;dipus at Colonos, the Poet, at the very opening of the tragedy, indulges in the celebrated description of the seats of the Dread Goddesses, because the place, and the deities themselves, though invisible, belong yet more essentially to the crowning doom of the wanderer than any of the characters introduced.
The description of feelings is also the property of the novelist. The dramatist throws the feelings into dialogue, — the novelist goes at once to the human heart, and calmly scrutinises, assorts, and dissects them. Few, indeed, are the writers who have hitherto attempted this — the master mystery of the hierophant! Godwin has done so the most elaborately; Goëthe the most skilfully. The first writer is, indeed, so minute, that he is often frivolous — so lengthened, that he is generally tedious; but the cultivator of the art, and not the art itself, is to be blamed for such defects. A few words will often paint the precise state of emotion as faithfully as the most voluminous essay; and in this department condensation and brevity are to be carefully studied. Conduct us to the cavern, light the torch, and startle and awe us by what you reveal; but if you keep us all day in the cavern, the effect is lost, and our only feeling is that of impatience and desire to get away.
ARRANGEMENT OF INCIDENTS. Distinctions between the Novel and the Drama . In the arrangement of incidents, the reader will carefuly study the distinctions between the novel and the drama — distinctions the more important, because they are not, at the first glance, very perceptible.
In the first place, the incidents of a play must grow, progressively, out of each other. Each scene should appear the necessary consequence of the one that precedes it. This is far from being the case with the novel; in the last, it is often desirable to go back instead of forward — to wind, to vary, to shift the interest from person to person — to keep even your principal hero, your principal actor, in the background. In the novel, you see more of Frank Osbaldistone than you do of Rob Roy; but bring Rob Roy on the stage, and Frank Osbaldistone must recede at once into a fifth-rate personage.
In our closets we should be fatigued with the incessant rush of events that we desire when we make one of a multitude. Oratory and the drama in this resemble each other — that the things best to hear are not always the best to read. In the novel, we address ourselves to the one person — on the stage we address ourselves to a crowd: more rapid effects, broader and more popular sentiments, more condensed grasp of the universal passions are required for the last. The calm advice which persuades our friend would only tire out the patience of the crowd. The man who writes a play for Covent Garden ought to remember that the Theatre is but a few paces distant from the Hustings: success at either place, the Hustings or the Theatre, will depend upon a mastery over feelings, not perhaps the most commonplace, but the most commonly felt. If with his strong effects on the stage, the dramatic poet can, like Shakspeare, unite the
[Page 145]
most delicate and subtle refinement, like Shakspeare he will be a consummate artist. But the refinement will not do without the effects. In the novel it is different: the most enchanting and permanent kind of interest, in the latter, is often gentle, tranquillising, and subdued. The novelist can appeal to those delicate and subtle emotions, which are easily awakened when we are alone, but which are torpid and unfelt in the electric contagion of popular sympathies. The most refining amongst us will cease to refine when placed in the midst of a multitude.
There is a great distinction between the plot of a novel and that of a play; a distinction which has been indicated by Goëthe in the “Wilhelm Meister.” The novel allows accident , the drama never. In the former, your principal character may be thrown from his horse, and break his neck; in the latter, this would be a gross burlesque on the first laws of the drama; for in the drama the incidents must bring about the catastrophe; in the novel, there is no such necessity. Don Quixote at the last falls ill and dies in his bed; but in order that he should fall ill and die in his bed, there was no necessity that he should fight windmills, or mistake an inn for a castle. If a novelist had taken for his theme the conspiracy of Fiesco, he might have adhered to history with the most perfect consistency to his art. In the history, as Fiesco, after realising his ambitious projects, is about to step into the ship, he slips from the plank, and the weight of his armour drowns him. This is accident, and this catastrophe would not only have been admissible in the novel, but would have conveyed, perhaps, a sublimer moral than any that fiction could invent. But when Schiller adapted Fiesco for the stage, he felt that accident was not admissible 3 , and his Fiesco falls by the hand of the patriot Verrina. The whole dialogue preceding the fatal blow is one of the most masterly adaptations of moral truth to the necessity of historical infidelity, in European literature.
In the “Bride of Lammermoor,” Ravenswood is swallowed up by a quicksand. This catastrophe is singularly grand in romance; it could not be allowable on the stage; for this again is accident , and not result .
The distinctions, then, between the novel and the drama, so far as the management of incidents is concerned, are principally these: that in the one the interest must always progress — that in the other, it must often go back and often halt; that dealing with human nature in a much larger scale in the novel, you will often introduce events and incidents, not necessarily growing one out of the other, though all conducing to the completeness of the whole; that in the drama you have more impatience to guard against — you are addressing men in numbers, not the individual man; your effects must be more rapid and more startling; that in the novel you may artistically have recourse to accident for the working out of your design — in the drama, never.
The ordinary faults of a play by the novelist 4 , and of a novel by the play-writer,
[Page 146]
will serve as an illustration of the principles which have insensibly regulated each. The novelist will be too diffuse, too narrative, and too refined in his effects for the stage; the play-writer will be too condensed, abrupt, and, above all, too exaggerated, for our notions of the Natural when we are in the closet. Stage effect is a vice in the novel; but, how can we expect a man trained to write for the stage to avoid what on the stage is a merit? A certain exaggeration of sentiment is natural, and necessary, for sublime and truthful effects when we address numbers; it would be ludicrous uttered to our friend in his easy chair. If Demosthenes, urging a young Athenian to conduct himself properly, had thundered out 5 that sublime appeal to the shades of Marathon, Platea, and Salamis, which thrilled the popular assembly, the young Athenian would have laughed in his face. If the dialogue of “Macbeth” were the dialogue of a romance on the same subject, it would be equally good in itself, but it would seem detestable bombast. If the dialogue in “Ivanhoe,” which is matchless of its kind for spirit and fire, were shaped into blank verse, and cut up into a five-act play, it would be bald and pointless. As the difference between the effective oration and the eloquent essay — between Pitt so great to hear, and Burke so great to read, so is the difference between the writing for the eye of one man, and the writing for the ears of three thousand.
MECHANISM AND CONDUCT. The Mechanism and Conduct of The Story ought to depend upon the nature of the preconceived design. Do you desire to work out some definite end, through the passions or through the characters you employ? Do you desire to carry on the interest less through character and passion than through incident? Or, do you rather desire to entertain and instruct by a general and wide knowledge of living manners or human nature? or, lastly, would you seek to incorporate all these objects? As you are faithful to your conception, will you be attentive to, and precise in, the machinery you use. In other words, your progress must depend upon the order of interest you mean to be predominant. It is by not considering this rule that critics have often called that episodical or extraneous, which is in fact a part of the design. Thus, in “Gil Blas,” the object is to convey to the reader a complete picture of the surface of society; the manners, foibles, and peculiarities of the time; elevated by a general, though not very profound, knowledge of the more durable and universal elements of human nature in the abstract. Hence, the numerous tales and nouvelletes scattered throughout the work, though episodical to the adventures of Gil Blas, are not episodical to the design of Le Sage. They all serve to complete and furnish out the conception, and the whole would be less rich and consummate in its effect without them. They are not passages which lead to nothing, but conduce
[Page 147]
to many purposes we can never comprehend, unless we consider well for what end the building was planned. So if you wish to bring out all the peculiarities of a certain character, you will often seem to digress into adventures which have no palpable bearing on the external plot of incident and catastrophe. This is constantly the case with Cervantes and Fielding; and the critic who blames you for it, is committing the gross blunder of judging the novel by the laws of the drama.
But as an ordinary rule, it may be observed that, since, both in the novel and the play, human life is represented by an epitome, so in both it is desirable that all your characters should more or less be brought to bear on the conclusions you have in view. It is not necessary in the novel that they should bear on the physical events; they may sometimes bear on the mental and interior changes in the minds and characters of the persons you introduce. For instance, if you design in the life of your hero to illustrate the Passion of Jealousy upon a peculiar conformation of mind, you may introduce several characters and several incidents, which will serve to ripen his tendencies, but not have the least bearing on the actual catastrophe in which those tendencies are confirmed into deeds. This is but fidelity to real life, in which it seldom happens that they who foster the passion are the witnesses or sufferers of the effects. This distinction between interior and external agencies will be made apparent by a close study of the admirable novel of Zeluco.
In the mechanism of external incidents, Scott is the greatest model that fiction possesses; and if we select from his works that in which this mechanism is most artistical, we instance not one of his most brilliant and popular, but one in which he combined all the advantages of his multiform and matured experience in the craft: we mean the “Fair Maid of Perth.” By noting well the manner in which, in this tale, the scene is ever varied at the right moment, and the exact medium preserved between abruptness and longueur ; how all the incidents are complicated, so as to appear inextricable, yet the solution obtained by the simplest and shortest process, the reader will learn more of the art of mechanical construction, than by all the rules that Aristotle himself, were he living, could lay down.
DIVISIONS OF THE WORK. In the Drama, the Divisions of the plot into Acts are of infinite service in condensing and simplifying the design of the author. The novelist will find it convenient to himself to establish analogous divisions in the conduct of his story. The division into volumes is but the affair of the printer, and affords little help to the intellectual purposes of the author. Hence, most of our greatest novelists have had recourse to the more definite sub-partition of the work into Books ; and if the student use this mode of division, not from capricious or arbitrary pleasure, but with the same purposes of art, for which, in the drama, recourse is had to the division into Acts, he will find it of the greatest service. Properly speaking, each Book should be complete in itself, working out the exact and whole purpose that the author meditates in that portion of his work. It is clear, therefore, that the number of his Books will vary according to the nature of his design. Where you have shaped your story after a dramatic fashion, you will often be surprised to find how greatly you serve to keep your construction faithful to your design by the mere arrangement of the work into the same number of subdivisions as are adopted in the drama, viz., five books instead of five acts. Where, on the other hand, you avoid the dramatic construction, and lead the reader through great varieties of life and action, meaning, in each
[Page 148]
portion of the history of your hero, to illustrate separate views of society or human nature, you will probably find a much greater number of subdivisions requisite. This must depend upon your design. Another advantage in these divisions consists in the rules that your own common sense will suggest to you with respect to the introduction of Characters. It is seldom advisable to admit any new character of importance, after the interest has arrived at a certain point of maturity. As you would not introduce a new character of consequence to the catastrophe, in the fifth act of a play, so, though with more qualification and reserve, it will be inartistical to make a similar introduction in the corresponding portion of a novel. The most illustrious exception to this general rule is in “Clarissa,” in which the Avenger, the brother of the heroine, and the executioner of Lovelace, only appears at the close of the story, and for the single purpose of revenge; and here the effect is heightened by the lateness and suddenness of the introduction of the very person to whom the catastrophe is confided.
THE CATASTROPHE. The distinction between the novel and the drama is usually very visible in the Catastrophe. The stage effect of bringing all the characters together in the closing chapter, to be married or stabbed as the thing may require, is, to a fine taste, eminently displeasing in a novel. It introduces into the very place where we most desire verisimilitude, a clap-trap and theatrical effect. For it must be always remembered, that in prose fiction we require more of the Real than we do in the drama (which belongs, of right, to the regions of pure poetry), and if the very last effect bequeathed to us be that of palpable delusion and trick, the charm of the whole work is greatly impaired. Some of Scott's romances may be justly charged with this defect.
Usually, the author is so far aware of the inartist-like effect of a final grouping of all the characters before the fall of the curtain, that he brings but few of the agents he has employed to be present at the catastrophe, and follows what may be called the wind-up of the main interest, by one or more epilogical chapters, in which we are told how Sir Thomas married and settled at his country seat, how Miss Lucy died an old maid, and how the miser Grub was found dead on his money chest; disposing in a few sentences of the lives and deaths of all to whom we have been presented — a custom that we think might now give place to less hacknied inventions.
The drama will bear but one catastrophe; the novel will admit of more. Thus, in “Ivanhoe,” the more vehement and apparent catastrophe is the death of Bois Guilbert; but the marriage of Ivanhoe, the visit of Rebecca to Rowena, and the solemn and touching farewell of the Jewess, constitute, properly speaking, a catastrophe no less capital in itself, and no less essential to the completion of the incidents. So also there is often a moral catastrophe, as well as a physical one, sometimes identified each with the other, sometimes distinct. If you have been desirous to work out some conception of a principle or a truth, the design may not be completed till after the more violent effects which form the physical catastrophe. In the recent novel of “Alice, or the Mysteries,” the external catastrophe is in the vengeance of Cæsarini and the death of Vargrave, but the complete denouement and completion of the more typical meanings and ethical results of the fiction are reserved to the moment when Maltravers recognises the Natural to be the true Ideal, and is brought, by the faith and beauty of simple goodness, to affection and respect for mankind itself. In the drama, it would be necessary to incorporate in one scene all the crowning results of
[Page 149]
the preceding events. We could not bear a new interest after the death of Bois Guilbert; and a new act of mere dialogue between Alice and Maltravers, after the death of Vargrave, would be insufferably tame and frigid. The perfection of a catastrophe is not so much in the power with which it is told, as in the feeling of completeness which it should leave on the mind. On closing the work, we ought to feel that we have read a whole — that there is an harmonious unity in all its parts — that its close, whether it be pleasing or painful, is that which is essentially appropriate to all that has gone before; and not only the mere isolated thoughts in the work, but the unity of the work itself, ought to leave its single and deep impression on the mind. The book itself should be a thought.
There is another distinction between the catastrophe of a novel and that of a play. In the last, it ought to be the most permanent and striking events that lead to the catastrophe; in the former, it will often be highly artistical to revive for the consummating effect, many slight details — incidents the author had but dimly shadowed out — mysteries, that you had judged, till then, he had forgotten to clear up; and to bring a thousand rivulets, that had seemed merely introduced to relieve or adorn the way, into the rapid gulf which closes over all. The effect of this has a charm not derived from mere trick, but from its fidelity to the natural and lifelike order of events. What more common in the actual world than that the great crises of our fate are influenced and coloured, not so much by the incidents and persons we have deemed most important, but by many things of remote date, or of seeming insignificance. The feather the eagle carelessly sheds by the way-side plumes the shaft that transfixes him. In this management and combination of incidents towards the grand end, knowledge of Human Nature can alone lead the student to the knowledge of Ideal Art.
These remarks form the summary of the hints and suggestions that, after a careful study of books, we submit to the consideration of the student in a class of literature now so widely cultivated, and hitherto almost wholly unexamined by the critic. We presume not to say that they form an entire code of laws for the art. Even Aristotle's immortal treatise on Poetry, were it bequeathed to us complete, would still be but a skeleton; and though no poet could read that treatise without advantage, the most glorious poetry might be, and has been, written in defiance of nearly all its laws. Genius will arrive at fame by the light of its own star; but Criticism can often serve as a sign-post to save many an unnecessary winding, and indicate many a short way. He who aspires to excel in that fiction which is the glass of truth, may learn much from books and rules, from the lecturer and the critic; but he must be also the Imaginer, the Observer. He will be ever examining human life in its most catholic and comprehensive aspects. Nor is it enough to observe, — it is necessary to feel. We must let the heart be a student as well as the head. No man who is a passionless and cold spectator, will ever be an accurate analyst, of all the motives and springs of action. Perhaps, if we were to search for the true secret of Creative Genius , we should find that secret in the intenseness of its Sympathies .
NOTES
1 See Mr. Lockhart's Life of Scott, vol. vi. p. 232. “In writing I never could lay down a plan,” &c. Scott, however, has the candour to add, “I would not have young writers imitate my carelessness.”
2 Even Sophocles, in one of his finest tragedies, has not scrupled to suffer the audience to witness the last moments of Ajax.
3 “The nature of the Drama,” observes Schiller, in his preface to Fiesco, and in excuse for his corruption of history, “does not admit the hand of Chance.”
4 “Why is it that a successful novelist never has been a successful play-writer?” This is a question that has been so often put, that we have been frightened out of considering whether the premises involved in the question are true or not. It is something like the schoolboy question, “Why is a pound of feathers heavier than a pound of lead?” It is long before Tom or Jack ask, “Is it heavier?” Is it true that a successful novelist never has been a successful play-writer? We will not insist on Goldsmith, whose comedy of “She Stoops to Conquer,” and whose novel of the “Vicar of Wakefield,” are alike among the greatest ornaments of our language. But was not Goëthe a great play-writer and a great novelist? Who will decide whether the palm in genius should be given to the “Tasso” or the “Wilhelm Meister” of that all-sided genius? Is not the “Ghost-seer” a successful novel? Does it not afford the highest and most certain testimony of what Schiller could have done as a writer of narrative fiction, and are not “Wallenstein,” and “Fiesco,” and “Don Carlos,” great plays by the same author? Are not “Candide” and “Zadig” imperishable masterpieces in the art of the novelist? And are not “Zaire” and “Mahomet” equally immortal? The three greatest geniuses that, in modern times, the Continent has produced, were both novelists and dramatists — equally great in each department. In France, at this day, Victor Hugo, who, with all his faults, is immeasurably the first writer in the school he has sought to found, is both the best novelist and the most powerful dramatist. That it has not happened oftener that the same man has achieved equal honour in the novel and the play is another question. But we might just as well ask why it has not happened oftener that the same man has been equally successful in tragedy and epic — in the ode and the didactic — why he who is sublime as a poet is often tame as a prose writer, and vice versâ — why the same artist who painted the “Transfiguration” did not paint the “Last Day.” Nature, circumstance, and education have not fitted many men to be great, except in one line. And least of all are they commonly great in two lines which, though seemingly close to each other, run in parallel directions. The more subtle the distinctions between the novel and the play, the more likely are they to be overlooked by him who attempts both. It is the same with all departments of art; the closer the approximation of the boundaries, the more difficult the blending.
5 Dem. de Cor.
$$$
