On Fable And Romance
Author: Beattie, James.
Publication info: Dissertations Moral and Critical ... By James Beattie ... . x, [6], 655 p. Edinburgh: ... W. Creech ...--Printed for W. Strahan; and T. Cadell .., 1783.

On Fable and Romance [in, Dissertations Moral And Critical ... By James Beattie, LL. D.]
[Page 505]
On Fable and Romance. The love of Truth is natural to man; and adherence to it, his indispensable duty. But to frame a fabulous narrative, for the purpose of instruction or of harmless amusement, is no breach of veracity, unless one were to obtrude it on the world for truth. The fabulist and the novel-writer deceive nobody; because, though they study to make their inventions probable, they do not even pretend that they are true: at least, what they may pretend in this way is considered only as words of course, to which nobody pays any regard. Fabulous narrative has accordingly been common in all ages of the world, and practised by teachers of the most respectable character.
It is owing, no doubt, to the weakness of human nature, that fable should ever have been found a necessary, or a convenient, vehicle for truth. But we must take human nature as it is: and, if a rude multitude cannot readily comprehend a moral or political doctrine, which they need to be instructed in, it may be as allowable, to illustrate that doctrine by a fable, in order to make them attend, and understand it, as it is for a physician to strengthen a weak stomach with cordials, in order to prepare it for the business of digestion. Such was the design of Jotham's parable of the trees chusing a king, in the ninth chapter of the book of Judges: and such that famous apologue, of a contention between the parts of the human body, by which Menenius Agrippa satisfied the people of Rome, that the welfare of the state depended on the union and good agreement of the several members of it. In fact, the common people are not well qualified for argument. A short and pithy proverb, which is easily remembered; or little tales, that
[Page 506]
appeal as it were to their senses, weigh more with them than demonstration.
We need not wonder, then, to find, that, in antient times, moral precepts were often delivered in the way of proverb or aphorism, and enforced and exemplified by fictitious narrative. Of those fables that are ascribed to Esop, some are no doubt modern, but others bear the stamp of antiquity. And nothing can be better contrived, than many of them are, for the purpose of impressing moral truth upon the memory, as well as the understanding. The disappointment, that frequently attends an excessive desire of accumulation, is finely exemplified in the fable of the dog and his shadow; and the ruinous and ridiculous nature of ambition is with equal energy illustrated in that of the frog and the ox. These little allegories we are apt to undervalue, because we learned them at school; but they are not for that reason the less valuable. We ought to prize them as monuments of antient wisdom, which have long contributed to the amusement and instruction of mankind, and are entitled to applause, on account of the propriety of the invention.
The Greek apologues ascribed to Esop, and the Latin ones of Phedrus, are masterpieces in this way of writing; and have hardly been equalled by the best of our modern fabulists. They are (at least many of them are, for some are trifling) remarkable for the simplicity of the style; and for the attention, which their authors have generally given, to the nature of the animals, and other things, that are introduced as agents and speakers. For in most of the modern fables, invented by Gay, La Fontaine, L'Estrange, Poggio, and others, the contrivance is less natural; and the language, though simple, is quaint, and full of witticism. That a dog should snap at the shadow of a dog, and by so doing lose the piece of flesh that was in his own mouth, is suitable to the character of the animal, and is indeed a very probable story: but that an
[Page 507]
elephant should converse with a bookseller about Greek authors, or a hare intreat a calf to carry her off on his back, and save her from the hounds, is a fiction wherein no regard is had to the nature of things. In this, as in the higher, sorts of fable, it is right to adhere, as much as may be, to probability. Brute animals, and vegetables too, may be allowed to speak and think: this indulgence is granted, from the necessity of the case; for, without it, their adventures could neither improve nor entertain us: but, with this exception, nature should not be violated; nor the properties of one animal or vegetable ascribed to a different one. Frogs have been seen inflated with air, at least, if not with pride; dogs may swim rivers; a man might take a frozen viper into his bosom, and be bit to death for his imprudence; a fox might play with a tragedian's headpiece; a lamb and a wolf might drink of the same brook, and the former lose his life on the occasion: but who ever heard of an elephant reading Greek, or a hare riding on the back of a calf?
The wisdom of antiquity was not satisfied with conveying short lessons of morality in these apologues, or little tales. The poets entered upon a more extensive field of fable; in order to convey a more refined species of instruction, and to please by a more exquisite invention, and a higher probability. But I confine myself at present to prose fable.
One of the first specimens of Fabulous History, that appeared in these western parts of the world, is the Cyropedia of Xenophon. This work, however, we are not to consider as of the nature of Romance; for the outlines of the story are true. But the author takes the liberty to feign many incidents; that he may set in a variety of lights the character of Cyrus, whom he meant to exhibit as the model of a great and good prince. The work is very elegant and entertaining, and abounds in moral, political, and military knowlege. It is, nevertheless, to be regretted, that we have no certain rule for distinguishing what is historical in it, from what
[Page 508]
is fabulous. The history of Cyrus the Great, the founder of the Persian empire, who has the honour to be mentioned by name in the Old Testament, is surely worth knowing. Yet we are much in the dark in regard to it. The account given of him by Herodotus differs greatly from Xenophon's; and in many instances we know not which to prefer. It is observable however, that Xenophon's description of the manner in which Cyrus took Babylon, by turning aside the course of the Euphrates, and entering, through the empty channel, under the walls of the city, agrees very well with several intimations of that event, which we find in the prophecies of Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Daniel.
Allegorical Fables were not unknown in the days of Xenophon. The Table, or Picture, of Cebes the Theban was written about this time; as well as the Story of Hercules conversing with Virtue and Vice, and preferring the honours promised by the former to the pleasures offered by the latter. Cebes's Picture of human life excels in accuracy of description, justness of allegory, and a sweet simplicity of style. The fable of Hercules, as originally written by Prodicus, is lost, and seems not to have been extant in the time of Cicero 1 ; but Xenophon gives a full and elegant abstract of it, in the beginning of his second book of Memorabilia.
Excepting some Allegorical fables scattered up and down in Plato, I do not recollect, among the Classick productions of Greece and Rome, any other remarkable specimen of prose fable: for the heathen mythology, though full of allegories, I am not to touch upon in this place, on account of its connection with poetry; and because my chief purpose is, to inquire into the origin and nature of the Modern Romance.
But, first, it may be proper to observe, that the Oriental nations have long been famous for fabulous narrative. The indolence peculiar to the genial climates of Asia, and the luxurious life which
[Page 509]
the kings and other great men, of those countries, lead in their seraglios, have made them seek for this sort of amusement, and set a high value upon it. When an Eastern prince happens to be idle, as he commonly is, and at a loss for expedients to kill the time, he commands his Grand Visir, or his favourite, to tell him stories. Being ignorant, and consequently credulous; having no passion for moral improvement, and little knowlege of nature; he does not desire, that they should be probable, or of an instructive tendency: it is enough if they be astonishing. And hence it is, no doubt, that those oriental tales are so extravagant. Every thing is carried on by inchantment and prodigy; by fairies, genii, and demons, and wooden horses, which, on turning a peg, fly through the air with inconceivable swiftness.
Another thing remarkable in these eastern tales, is, that their authors expatiate, with peculiar delight, in the description of magnificence; rich robes, gaudy furniture, sumptuous entertainments, and palaces shining in gold, or sparkling with diamonds. This too is conformable to the character and circumstances of the people. Their great men, whose taste has never been improved by studying the simplicity of nature and art, pique themselves chiefly on the splendour of their equipage, and the vast quantities of gold, jewels, and curious things, which they can heap together in their repositories.
The greatest, indeed the only, collection, that I am acquainted with, of Oriental fables, is the Thousand and one tales , commonly called The Arabian Nights Entertainment . This book, as we have it, is the work of Mons. Galland of the French Academy, who is said to have translated it from the Arabick original. But whether the tales be really Arabick, or invented by Mons. Galland, I have never been able to learn with certainty. If they be Oriental, they are translated with unwarrantable latitude; for the whole tenor of the style is in the French mode: and the Caliph of Bagdat, and
[Page 510]
the Emperor of China, are addressed in the same terms of ceremony, which are usual at the court of France. But this, though in my opinion it takes away from the value of the book, because I wish to see Eastern manners in an Eastern tale, is no proof, that the whole work is by M. Galland: for the French are so devoted to their own ceremonies, that they cannot endure any other; and seldom fail to season their translations, even of the gravest and most antient authors, with the fashionable forms of Parisian civility.
As the Arabian Nights Entertainment is a book which most young people in this country are acquainted with, I need not draw any character of it, or remark that it exactly answers the account already given of Oriental fable. There is in it great luxury of description, without any elegance; and great variety of invention, but nothing that elevates the mind, or touches the heart. All is wonderful and incredible; and the astonishment of the reader is more aimed at, than his improvement either in morality, or in the knowlege of nature. Two things, however, there are, which deserve commendation, and may entitle it to one perusal. It conveys a pretty just idea of the government, and of some of the customs, of those eastern nations; and there is somewhere in it a story of a barber and his six brothers, that contains many good strokes of satire and comick description. I may add, that the character of the Caliph Haroun Alraschid is well drawn; and that the story of forty thieves destroyed by a slave is interesting, and artfully conducted. The voyages of Sindbad claim attention: they were certainly attended to, by the author of Gulliver's Travels.
Tales in imitation of the Oriental have oft been attempted by English, and other European, authors: who, together with the figurative style, and wild invention of the Asiaticks, (which, being extravagant, are easily imitated) endeavour also to paint the customs and manners of that people. They give us good store of gold and jewels; and eunuchs, slaves, and necromancers in abundance: their
[Page 511]
personages are all Mahometan, or Pagan, and subject to the despotick government of Caliphs, Visirs, Bashaws, and Emperors; they drink sherbet, rest on sophas, and ride on dromedaries. We have Chinese Tales, Tartarian Tales, Persian Tales, and Mogul Tales; not to mention the Tales of the Fairies and Genii; some of which I read in my younger days: but, as they have left no trace in the memory, I cannot now give any account of them.
In the Spectator, Rambler , and Adventurer , there are many fables in the eastern manner; most of them very pleasing, and of a moral tendency. Rasselas , by Johnson, and Almoran and Hamet , by Hawkesworth, are celebrated performances in this way. The former is admirable in description, and in that exquisite strain of sublime morality by which the writings of this great and good man are so eminently distinguished:—of the latter, the style is rhetorical and solemn, and the sentiments are in general good, but the plan is obscure, and so contrived as to infuse perplexing notions of the Divine Providence; a subject, which the elegant writer seems to have considered very superficially, and very confusedly 2 .—Addison excels in this sort of fable. His vision of Mirzah, in the second volume of the Spectator, is the finest piece of the kind I have ever seen; uniting the utmost propriety of invention with a simplicity and melody of language, that melts the heart, while it charms and soothes the imagination.
Modern Prose Fable (if we omit those sorts of it that have been already hinted at) may be divided into two kinds; which, for the sake of distinction, I shall call the Allegorical and the Poetical . The Allegorical part of modern prose fable may be subdivided into two species, the Historical , and the Moral ; and the Poetical part I shall also subdivide into two sorts, the Serious , and the Comick. Thus the Prose Fable of the moderns may be distributed into four species; whereof I shall speak in their order:
[Page 512]
I. The Historical Allegory; 2. The Moral Allegory: 3. The Poetical and Serious Fable; 4. The Poetical and Comick Fable. These two last I comprehend under the general term Romance.
I. The Fabulous Historical Allegory exhibits real history disguised by feigned names, and embellished with fictitious adventures. This sort of fable may also be subdivided into the Serious and the Comick.
I. Of the former, the best specimen I know is the Argenis ; written in Latin, about the beginning of the last century, by John Barclay a Scotchman: and supposed to contain an allegorical account of the Civil wars of France during the reign of Henry the third. I have read only part of the work: and what I read I never took the trouble to decypher, by means of the key which in some editions is subjoined to it, or to compare the fictitious adventures of Meleander and Lycogenes with the real adventures that are alluded to. I therefore am not qualified to criticize the performance: but can freely recommend it, as in some places very entertaining, as abounding in lively description, and remarkable for the most part, though not uniformly, for the elegance of the language.
2. We have a Comick specimen of the Historical Allegory, in the History of John Bull ; a pamphlet written by the learned and witty Dr. Arbuthnot, and commonly printed among the works of Swift. It was published in Queen Anne's time; and intended as a satire on the Duke of Marlborough, and the rest of the whig ministry, who were averse to the treaty of peace that was soon after concluded at Utrecht. The war, which the Queen carried on against the French and Spaniards, is described under the form of a law-suit, that John Bull, or England, is said to have been engaged in with some litigious neighbours. A candid account of facts is not to be expected in an allegorical tale, written with the express design to make a party ridiculous. The work, however, has been much read,
[Page 513]
and frequently imitated. It is full of low humour, which in this piece the author affected; but which he could have avoided if he had thought proper; as he undoubtedly possessed more wit and learning, as well as virtue, than any other writer of his time, Addison excepted. In John Bull, great things are represented as mean; the style is consequently burlesque, and the phraseology, and most of the allusions, are taken from low life. There is a key printed, in the late editions, at the foot of each page, to mark the coincidence of the fable with the history of that period.
II. The second species of modern fabulous prose I distinguished by the name of the Moral Allegory. Moral and Religious Allegories were frequent in Europe about two hundred and fifty years ago. Almost all the Dramatick exhibitions of that time were of this character. In them, not only human virtues and vices personified, but also angels both good and evil, and beings more exalted than angels, were introduced, acting and speaking, as persons of the drama. Those plays, however, notwithstanding their incongruity, were written for the most part with the laudable design of exemplifying religious or moral truth; and hence were called Moralities. The publick exhibition of them in England ceased about the time of Shakspeare, or in the end of the sixteenth century: but several of the English Moralities are extant, and may be seen in some late collections of Old Plays. In Spain and Italy they continued longer in fashion. When Milton was on his travels, he happened to witness a representation of this kind, written by one Andrieno, and called Original Sin ; from which, rude as it was, he is said to have formed the first draught of the plan of Paradise Lost.
Those were poetical allegories: but I confine myself to such as are in prose, and assume something of the historical form.—John Bunyan, an unlettered, but ingenious man, of the last century, was much given to this way of writing. His chief work is the
[Page 514]
Pilgrim's Progress ; wherein the commencement, procedure, and completion of the Christian life, are represented allegorically, under the similitude of a journey. Few books have gone through so many editions, in so short a time, as the Pilgrim's Progress. It has been read by people of all ranks and capacities. The learned have not thought it below their notice: and among the vulgar it is an universal favourite. I grant, the style is rude, and even indelicate sometimes; that the invention is frequently extravagant; and that in more than one place it tends to convey erroneous notions in theology. But the tale is amusing, though the dialogue be often low: and some of the allegories are well contrived, and prove the author to have possessed powers of invention, which, if they had been refined by learning, might have produced something very noble. This work has been imitated, but with little success. The learned Bishop Patrick wrote the Parable of the Pilgrim : but I am not satisfied, that he borrowed the hint, as it is generally thought he did, from John Bunyan. There is no resemblance in the plan; nor does the Bishop speak a word of the Pilgrim's Progress, which I think he would have done, if he had seen it. Besides, Bunyan's fable is full of incident: Patrick's is dry, didactick, verbose, and exceedingly barren in the invention 3 .
Gulliver's Travels are a sort of allegory; but rather Satirical and Political, than Moral. The work is in every body's hands; and has been criticised by many eminent writers. As far as the satire is levelled at human pride and folly; at the abuses of human learning; at the absurdity of speculative projectors; at those criminal or blundering expedients in policy, which we are apt to overlook, or even to applaud, because custom has made them familiar; so far the author deserves our warmest approbation, and his satire will
[Page 515]
be allowed to be perfectly just, as well as exquisitely severe. His fable is well conducted, and, for the most part, consistent with itself, and connected with probable circumstances. He personates a sea-faring man; and with wonderful propriety supports the plainness and simplicity of the character. And this gives to the whole narrative an air of truth; which forms an entertaining contraste, when we compare it with the wildness of the fiction. The style too deserves particular notice. It is not free from inaccuracy: but, as a model of easy and graceful simplicity, it has not been exceeded by any thing in our language; and well deserves to be studied by every person, who wishes to write pure English.—These, I think, are the chief merits of this celebrated work; which has been more read, than any other publication of the present century. Gulliver has something in him to hit every taste. The statesman, the philosopher, and the critick, will admire his keenness of satire, energy of description, and vivacity of language: the vulgar, and even children, who cannot enter into these refinements, will find their account in the story, and be highly amused with it.
But I must not be understood to praise the whole indiscriminately. The last of the four voyages, though the author has exerted himself in it to the utmost, is an absurd, and an abominable fiction. It is absurd: because, in presenting us with rational beasts, and irrational men, it proceeds upon a direct contradiction to the most obvious laws of nature, without deriving any support from either the dreams of the credulous, or the prejudices of the ignorant. And it is abominable: because it abounds in filthy and indecent images; because the general tenor of the satire is exaggerated into absolute falsehood; and because there must be something of an irreligious tendency in a work, which, like this, ascribes the perfection of reason, and of happiness, to a race of beings, who are said to be destitute of every religious idea.—But, what is yet worse, if any thing can be worse, this tale represents human nature itself
[Page 516]
as the object of contempt and abhorrence. Let the ridicule of wit be pointed at the follies, and let the scourge of satire be brandished at the crimes, of mankind: all this is both pardonable, and praiseworthy; because it may be done with a good intention, and produce good effects. But when a writer endeavours to make us dislike and despise, every one his neighbour, and be dissatisfied with that Providence, who has made us what we are, and whose dispensations towards the human race are so peculiarly, and so divinely beneficent; such a writer, in so doing, proves himself the enemy, not of man only, but of goodness itself; and his work can never be allowed to be innocent, till impiety, malevolence, and misery, cease to be evils.
The Tale of a Tub, at least the narrative part of it, is another Allegorical fable, by the same masterly hand; and, like the former, supplies no little matter, both of admiration, and of blame. As a piece of humourous writing, it is unequalled. It was the author's first performance, and is, in the opinion of many, his best. The style may be less correct, than that of some of his latter works; but in no other part of his writings has he displayed so rich a fund of wit, humour, and ironical satire, as in the Tale of a Tub. The subject is Religion: but the allegory, under which he typifies the Reformation, is too mean for an argument of so great dignity; and tends to produce, in the mind of the reader, some very disagreeable associations, of the most solemn truths with ludicrous ideas. Professed wits may say what they please; and the fashion, as well as the laugh, may be for a time on their side: but it is a dangerous thing, and the sign of an intemperate mind, to acquire a habit of making every thing matter of merriment and sarcasm. We dare not take such liberty with our neighbour, as to represent whatever he does or says in a ridiculous light; and yet some men (I wish I could not say, clergymen) think themselves privileged to take liberties of this sort with the most awful, and most benign dispensations
[Page 517]
of Providence. That this author has repeatedly done so, in the work before us, and elsewhere, is too plain to require proof 4 . The compliments he pays the Church of England I allow to be very well founded, as well as part of the satire, which he levels at the Church of Rome; though I wish he had expressed both the one and the other with a little more decency of language. But, as to his abuse of the Presbyterians, whom he represents as more absurd and frantick, than perhaps any rational beings ever were since the world began, every person of sense and candour, whether Presbyterian or not, will acknowlege it, if he know any thing of their history, to be founded in gross misrepresentation. There are other faults in this work, besides those already specified; many vile images,
[Page 518]
and obscene allusions; such as no well-bred man could read, or endure to hear read, in polite company.
III. I come now to the second species of modern prose fable, to which I gave the appellation of Poetical , to distinguish it from the former Allegorical species. In reading the Allegorical Prose Fable , we attend not only to the fictitious events that occur in the narrative, but also to those real events that are typefied by the allegory: whereas in the poetical prose fable we attend only to the events that are before us. Thus, in the Tale of a Tub, I not only mind what is related of three brothers, Peter, Martin, and Jack, but also keep it constantly in view, that those three brothers are by the author meant to be the representatives of the Romish, English, and Presbyterian churches: whereas when I read Robinson Crusoe, or Tom Jones, I attend singly to the narrative; and no key is necessary to make me comprehend the author's meaning.
Considering this as the chief part of my subject, I dispatched the former parts as briefly as I could, that I might have the more time to employ upon it. The rise and progress of the Modern Romance , or Poetical prose fable , is connected with many topicks of importance, which would throw (if fully illustrated) great light upon the history and politicks, the manners, and the literature, of these latter ages.—Observe, that I call this sort of fable poetical , from the nature of the invention; and prose , because it is not in verse. Prose and Verse are opposite, but Prose and Poetry may be consistent. Tom Jones , and Telemachus , are epick, or narrative poems, though written in prose; the one Comick, the other Serious and Heroick.
The subversion of the Roman Empire, by the Goths, Huns, Vandals, and other northern nations, was followed, or rather accompanied, with an universal neglect of learning, which continued for some centuries. During this long night of intellectual darkness, the classick writers of Greece and Rome were quite forgotten in
[Page 519]
these western parts of Europe; and many antient authors perished irrecoverably. To read and write was then a rare accomplishment. Even the clergy, who performed the service in Latin, according to the usage of the Church of Rome, seldom understood the words they pronounced. Nay, it was no uncommon thing for persons of rank, when they had occasion to sign papers of business, to employ a notary to subscribe for them, because they themselves had not learned to write. The very phrase of signing a paper came from the practice of putting a mark to it, instead of a name; and this mark was commonly the sign of the Cross. Alfred the Great, king of England, a prince of excellent parts, and who afterwards made considerable attainments in learning, was twelve years old, before a master could be found to teach him the alphabet.—The very implements of writing were so rare in those days, that the monks would often obliterate valuable manuscripts, by erasing the letters, that they might have the parchment to write upon. Of this a remarkable evidence appeared a few years ago. A scrap of parchment was found, on which part of the book of Tobit had been written, but which, on being narrowly inspected, seemed to have been originally inscribed with something else; and this was at length discovered to be a fragment of Livy. The fragment is now published.
Men are generally credulous, in proportion as they are ignorant. But want of books, and of the knowledge of letters, was not the sole cause of the ignorance that prevailed in the period of which I now speak. There was little, or no commerce in Europe; navigation and industry were neglected; and, except on pilgrimage to the shrines of saints, people seldom travelled beyond the bounds of their native country, or native province. The consequence may easily be guessed at. Not having the means of knowing what had happened in other ages, and being equally uninformed of what was now happening in other countries, they would without scruple give
[Page 520]
credit to any fabulous reports that might be told them, concerning what was to be seen in foreign parts. Hence arose a thousand wild ideas, of giants, and dwarfs, dragons, and enchantments, of fairies, ghosts, witches, and hobgoblins. And when once people were satisfied, that such things were common in other lands, it was natural for them to believe, that they were not uncommon in their own. And the same extravagance of fancy, and love of superstition, may always be expected in times of ignorance; especially in countries, where traditions remain concerning antient history and fable; and where the priests, deluded themselves with visionary legends, not wholly destitute of knowledge, and living retired in gloomy and lonely habitations, find it their interest to deceive, amuse, and terrify the vulgar.
The credulity of mankind in those dark ages is now matter of astonishment. As late as the thirteenth century, when modern literature had made some progress, Dante, a famous Italian poet, published a work in verse, which he called Inferno; wherein he gave a description of the infernal regions, which he says, in the poem, that he had passed through, in company with Virgil: and this poem the common people of that time took for a real history, and seriously believed that Dante went down to hell from time to time. Sir John Mandeville, an Englishman of learning, set out on his travels in the year one thousand three hundred and twenty; employed thirty years in visiting foreign countries; and, at his return to Europe, published the history of his adventures in three languages, Latin, English, and Italian. His book, before publication, was presented to the Pope, who, after comparing it with the Mappa Mundi , was pleased to give it the sanction of his authority: a proof, that it not only was believed by the author, and by His Holiness, but was also thought credible enough according to the notions of those times. Yet this book, though Mandeville seems to have been an honest, and by no means an ignorant man,
[Page 521]
contains the most absurd fables. The author gravely tells us, that he saw the rock to which Andromeda was chained, when they delivered her to the sea-monster, and adds, that Andromeda lived before the flood. With equal gravity he speaks of a Lady, who had been transformed into a serpent, or dragon, by a goddess called Diana, and was then confined in a dungeon, in the island of Cyprus, if I mistake not 5 . He does not say, that he saw this lady; but he mentions it as a fact, which he had heard; and he seems not to disbelieve it. He speaks too of a nation of men fifty feet high, who inhabited an island in the East Indies, and of another race of mortals, who had their eyes in their shoulders: and all this, and much more, of the same kind, he appears to have credited, merely because he had been so informed.—There is reason to think, that Caxton, one of the first English printers, mistook a French translation of Virgil's Eneid for a true history;—if he did not use the word history in a sense different from what it now bears. Nay, a Swedish navigator, who lived not two hundred years ago, has affirmed, that, in the islands of Nicobar, in the gulph of Bengal, he discovered a race of men, with long tails, like those of cats. The islands of Nicobar, and their inhabitants, are now well known to Europeans; but the cats tails are no where to be found.
While the ignorance and credulity of this western world were so great, we may well suppose, that, in their histories (if they had any) little regard would be paid to truth; and none at all to probability, or even to possibility, in their fables. In fact, the first productions in the way of romance, that appeared in Europe, were in the highest degree extravagant.
But other causes, besides the credulity and ignorance of the times, conspired to give a peculiar cast of wildness to those performances, and make them totally unlike every thing of the kind, which had
[Page 522]
hitherto occurred to human fancy.—To explain these causes, it will be proper to give a brief account of that form of policy, which was introduced by the northern nations, who over-ran the Roman empire; and which is commonly called the Feudal Government. It has been described at large by many eminent writers. I shall enter into the subject no further, than is necessary to connect and illustrate my reasoning. This government it was, that, among many other strange institutions, gave rise to Chivalry: and it was Chivalry, which gave birth and form to that sort of fabulous writing, which we term Romance.
The word is Spanish, and signifies the Spanish Tongue: and the name is suitable enough to the nature of a language, whereof the greater part is derived from the antient Latin or Roman. It seems, the first Spanish books were fabulous: and, being called Romance, on account of the tongue in which they were written, the same name was afterwards given, by the other nations of Europe, not to Spanish books, which is the proper application of the term, but to a certain class of fabulous writings.
Some have thought, that the nations, who destroyed the Roman empire, were obliged to leave their own country, and establish themselves by force elsewhere; because at home their numbers were so great, that the soil was insufficient to support them. But this, I presume, is a mistake. Those northern regions, where the climate is inhospitable, may produce a hardy race of men, but cannot be supposed to produce them in very great numbers. In fact, the population in such countries has generally been found rather deficient, than excessive. I therefore think, that they left their native land, because it was uncomfortable; and because they had heard, that the conveniencies of life were more easily obtained in the southern parts of the world. Accordingly, there is no evidence, that they sent out colonies, or that one part of the nation went in quest of settlements, while the other remained at home: it rather
[Page 523]
appears, that a whole people emigrated at once, men, women, and children; without any purpose to return.
One of their first expeditions, that we read of, happened about the six hundred and fiftieth year of Rome; when the Cimbri and Teutones (who are supposed to have come from Denmark, and the northern parts of Germany) invaded the Roman Province with an army of three hundred thousand men, besides women and children, and were overthrown by Caius Marius, with prodigious slaughter. Their countrymen were more successful in the decline of the empire: and at length they wrested a great part of Europe out of the hands of the Romans; establishing themselves in the conquered provinces; the Franks and Normans in Gaul, the Goths and Vandals in Spain, and the Lombards in Italy.
There are, in the character of this extraordinary people, several particulars that deserve attention. We may call them one people, because a great similarity in manners, opinions, and government, prevailed among them; though they occupied many wide regions in the northern part of the continent of Europe.
First: They were a strong, hardy, and active race of men. This character they must have derived, in a great measure, from their climate and needy circumstances. Want is the parent of industry. To obtain even the necessaries of life, where the climate is cold, and the soil untractable, requires continual exertion; which at once inures the mind to vigilance, and the body to labour. The Germans, in Cesar's time, made it their boast, that they had not been under a roof for fourteen years 6 : which conveyed such an idea of their ferocity and strength to the neighbouring Gauls, that they thought them invincible; and even Cesar found it difficult to persuade his Romans to march against them. Warm and fruitful countries generally produce (unless where a spirit of commerce and manufacture prevails) effeminacy and indolence: for there, neither
[Page 524]
art nor labour is necessary to procure what is requisite to life; and there, of course, both the mind and the body are apt to grow languid for want of exercise.
Secondly: They were fierce and courageous. This was owing, not only to their activity and necessitous life, but also, in part, to their religion; which taught them to undervalue life, and to wish rather to die in battle, or by violence, than in the common course of nature. For they believed, that the souls of those who fell in war, or were put to death, had a better right than others to happiness in a future life; and passed immediately into the hall of Odin (so in latter times they called heaven), where they were to be regaled with feasting and festivity through innumerable ages. Agreeably to which opinion, in some of the nations adjoining to Hudson's bay, who are thought to be of the same race, it is still customary, for the old men, when they become unfit for labour, to desire to be strangled; a service, which they demand as an act of duty from their children; or, if they have no children, request, as a favour, of their friends. 7
[Page 525]
A third peculiarity in the character of these people is, their attention to their women. With us, the two sexes associate together,
[Page 526]
and mutually improve and polish one another: but in Rome and Greece they lived separate; and the condition of the female
[Page 527]
was little better than slavery; as it still is, and has been from very early times, in many parts of Asia, and in European and African Turkey. But the Gothick warriors were in all their expeditions attended by their wives; whom they regarded as friends and faithful counsellors, and frequently as sacred persons, by whom the gods were pleased to communicate their will to mankind. This in part accounts for the reverence wherewith the female sex were always treated by those conquerors: and, as Europe still retains many of their customs, and much of their policy, this may be given as one reason of that polite gallantry, which distinguishes our manners, and has extended itself through every part of the world that is subject to European government. 8
Another thing remarkable in the Gothick nations, was an invincible spirit of liberty. Warm and fruitful countries, by promoting indolence and luxury, are favourable to the views of tyrannical princes; and commonly were in antient, as many of them are in modern times, the abode of despotism. But the natives of the north, more active and valiant, are for the most part more jealous of their privileges. Exceptions may be found to all general theories concerning the influence of climate in forming the human character: but this will be allowed to have been true of the antient Germans, and those other nations, whereof I now speak. All the Gothick institutions were, in their purest form, favourable to liberty. The kings, or generals, were at first chosen by those who were to obey them: and though they acknowleged, and indeed introduced, the distinction of superiour and vassal, they were careful to secure the independence, and respective rights of both, as far as the common safety would permit. To them there is reason to believe that we are indebted for those two great establishments, which form the basis of British freedom, a parliament for making laws, and juries for trying criminals, and deciding differences.
[Page 528]
These four peculiarities, in the character of the northern conquerors, it will be proper to keep in mind; that we may the better understand some things that are to follow. They were bold and hardy: they despised death, or rather, they thought it honourable and advantageous to fall in battle: they were indulgent and respectful to their women: and they were animated with a spirit of liberty and independence.
When they left their own country to go in quest of a better, it is probable they made choice of the general and other officers who were to command them. They were volunteers in the service; and they served without pay, or at least without any pecuniary acknowlegement. All the recompence they looked for, was to have a share in the lands of such countries as they might conquer. No other indeed could have been them, as their commander had no money to bestow; nor can we conceive, how he could have forced them into the service, if they had been unwilling.
Suppose them now to have conquered a country. To exterminate the natives, seems not to have been their intention 9 : they
[Page 529]
only wished to settle among them, to introduce their own customs and form of government, and to have the territory, or as much of it as they might have occasion for, at their disposal. The land they considered as their property; and presented, as a voluntary gift, to their sovereign or commander, on condition of his dividing it
[Page 530]
among them, on certain terms, and according to a plan, which, though perhaps not well defined in the beginning, came at last to be what I am going to describe.
He first appropriated a part of the conquered territory to his own use; for the maintenance of his household, and the support of his dignity. This was afterwards called the Crown-lands, and the Royal Demesnes. The rest he divided among his great officers, alloting to each a part. The officer held this property, on condition of professing loyal attachment to his sovereign, and serving him in war, at his own charges. He who conferred the property was called the Superiour; and, he who received it, the Vassal: who, on being invested, swore fealty or allegiance to his superiour, and on his bended knees did him homage, by declaring himself his man, homo ; whence came the barbarous Latin word homagium , and the English term homage. If afterwards he proved unfaithful, or abandoned his lord in battle, or refused to serve him in war when regularly summoned, he forfeited his land, and the superiour might either retain it, or give it to another. The land thus granted was called a fief , in Latin beneficium ; and this sort of tenure was
[Page 531]
termed a feud , or feod , from two Norse words, fee signifying reward , and odh property 10 : an appellation, which implied, that the land was indeed the property of the vassal, but that he derived it from the superiour, and held it, on condition of rendering personal service, by way of reward or recompence. And hence, the form of government introduced by these northern nations is called the Feudal government, and the laws peculiar to that form are called the Feudal laws.
Be careful not to confound this with another English term of the same sound and letters, Feud , which denotes contention, or quarrel: the one is a simple term of Saxon original; the other is compounded, and derived, as above, from another language.
As the vassal's property was feudal , that of the Sovereign, who held of no superiour, was called Allodial , from all, totum , and odh, property ; to intimate, that it was wholly his own, and that he owed no reward nor acknowlegement to any person for it. A sovereign might indeed be feudatory to another sovereign for certain lands or provinces; but, in regard to these, the feudatory was a vassal, and obliged to do homage to his superiour: as we find that the kings of Scotland often did, for some of their southern territories, to the kings of England; and the kings of England to the kings of France for some of their foreign dominions.
In conformity to the feudal institutions and language, our law still supposes every tenure in land, pertaining to a subject, to be derived either from another subject, or from the sovereign. But in this last case, the tenure is really allodial; for those lands are said to hold of the Crown, which do not hold of any subject.
They, who derived their tenures immediately from the sovereign, came, in process of time, to be the barons, thanes, lords, or nobility, of a feudal kingdom. They had, all of them, castles, and
[Page 532]
kept a court, and a retinue, resembling that of the monarch: and each of them, within his own territory, had great power, and possessed many of the privileges of royalty; as the right of conferring certain dignities, of coining money, and of pardoning criminals.
The state of a feudal lord resembled that of his sovereign in other respects. He retained part of his territory in his own hands, for the support of his dignity and household; and the rest, with consent of the king, he divided among his own vassals, according to the same feudal tenure, by which he himself held his lands of the sovereign. The secondary vassals were afterwards known, in some countries, by the name of Armigeri, or Esquires; which in the original signification denoted Armour-bearers, or Bearers of shields. On being invested with their respective fiefs, they did homage to their immediate superiour, swore allegiance to him, and promised at their own charges to attend him in war, when summoned for that purpose. They, like their superiours the Great Barons, had jurisdiction within their own territories; and, in the economy of their household, would no doubt imitate them, as far as they were able.
The Secondary Barons, like the Primary, had their vassals, to whom they gave lands on the same feudal conditions; and by whom they were served and attended in war, even as they themselves served and attended the nobility, and the nobility the king. In times of peace, and when military attendance was not required, the lowest order of vassals would sometimes make a payment of corn, cattle, or money, in return for their lands; and this in time became general, and was the origin of rents.
A feudal kingdom, thus established, resembled, as an elegant author observes 11 , the encampment of a great army: and no form of policy could be better contrived, for securing a conquest. Military
[Page 533]
service being the chief part of the duty which the vassal owed his lord, and being equally the business of men of all ranks, we may conclude, that the whole nation must have been trained to arms: which would thus come to be considered as the most honourable, and, for a man of any rank, the only honourable profession. If to this we add the natural ferocity of the people, and their high spirit of independance, we shall be at no loss to account for that passionate love of warlike enterprise, which diffused itself through all the members of the feudal system. A people, thus arranged, prepared, and animated, was at all times ready to appear in arms, when summoned by the sovereign; who would instantly be attended by the Greater Barons his vassals, and they by their vassals, and so downward.
I hinted, that the whole nation was trained to the use of arms. In the beginning it would probably be so: but, when the Gothick system had been for some time established, this was not the case. All the free men, indeed, were warriors; but the lowest sort of people, who supplied their betters with food, cloaths, armour, and other necessaries, had not that honour, and were in fact no better than slaves, though all were not equally servile.
For a nation, when once conquered, and subjected to this form of policy, it was scarce possible to throw off the yoke, or even attempt to regain their freedom. The truth is, that the vanquished soon came to incorporate with the victors; who seemed, when they made their first appearance in the southern parts of Europe, to found their political ideas on the natural equality of mankind.
What passes for the history of those dark ages is in many particulars little better than conjecture. It is however certain, that the Feudal plan of subordination became at length almost universal in Europe. Those islands and provinces, that had not been conquered, or invaded, by the northern warriors, found their account in adopting it: partly, no doubt, from a desire to imitate the rest
[Page 534]
of the world; and partly too, that they might, by establishing the same military arrangements, acquire the same military vigour, and be able to maintain independency in the midst of their warlike neighbours. The feudal system, in its full extent, was not brought into England, till the Conquest by William Duke of Normandy; who imported it from his own country, where it had been long established; and introduced it into the southern part of this island, with the consent of the Great Council of the nation. At what time it came into Scotland, is not yet, so far as I know, determined among antiquaries. But that it was adopted by the Scots, and maintained its influence longer in North, than in South, Britain, is well known. 12
Every human institution is liable to change. And no form of government has hitherto been devised, that is not obnoxious to alteration from a thousand causes, which human laws cannot prevent, because human wisdom cannot foresee. The Feudal system soon became different from what it had originally been. While people are in needy circumstances, they have not the same views of things, which they afterwards come to have, when settled in the secure enjoyment of riches and honour. The feudal king or commander was at first elective; and the fiefs granted by the superiour to his vassal were but for life, or during pleasure. But both the sovereign power, and the right of the feudatory, were in time made perpetual in the same family, and descended from the father to the son, or to the nearest relation. The nobles grew proud and ambitious, in proportion as they became independent. In some cases, their fiefs were still further secured by Entails; which put it in the power of their posterity to enlarge, but not diminish the inheritance. Nay, at last, the son, whether worthy or unworthy, was allowed to possess those titles of honour, which the merit of his father had obtained from the sovereign: and thus the dignities, as well as lands,
[Page 535]
of the feudal baron, became hereditary. And, what is still more singular, though great abilities are requisite to qualify one for the great offices of state, and though nothing can be more absurd, than to bestow an office of difficulty upon a person who is unfit for it; yet many of the feudal nobles, by force of importunity, or as a reward for particular services, obtained the high privilege of having certain great and lucrative posts annexed to their respective families.
These corruptions of the old feudal system were gradually introduced, in consequence of the aspiring genius of the nobles, and want of power in the kings. The lands of the former were honoured with privileges, that allowed an extensive, and something even of royal, authority, to the proprietor. Before him, or judges appointed by him, all causes, civil or criminal, were tried, which concerned any of his vassals: and if the vassal of a baron was summoned before any of the king's courts, the lord of that vassal might refuse to give him up, reserving to himself the right of trying him; and might even punish his vassal, if he submitted to any other jurisdiction, than that of his immediate superiour. Thus, it is easy to see, that the influence of the crown would be very weak, except within the king's own territory: and that contests would take place between him and his nobles, wherein the latter might have the advantage. And hence, a wealthy baron, who had a great number of dependants, might vie, in the splendour of his economy, even with the sovereign himself, and learn to set him, and his power, at defiance: whence would arise insolent demands from the nobles, and mean-spirited concessions on the part of the king. In fact, the history of modern Europe contains, for several ages, little more, than a detail of dissentions between the kings and their nobility. For, in process of time, the power of the feudal barons, increased by legacies, lucrative marriages, and imprudent concessions from the crown, became offensive, and even intolerable, to
[Page 536]
their sovereigns: who were thus obliged, in self-defence, to devise expedients for checking that ambition, which gave them so much uneasiness. Some think, that the Crusades took their rise from this principle.
The Crusades were military expeditions into Palestine, undertaken by the Christian princes of Europe, with a view to exterminate, as they pretended, from the Holy Land, those Turks and Saracens, who were then in possession of it. For they gave out, that it was a reproach to Christendom, to permit infidels to live and reign in a country, which in antient times belonged to the posterity of Abraham, and had been honoured with the presence of our Saviour, while he sojourned among men. These warlike enterprises, warranted and encouraged by the Pope, were well suited to the enthusiastick valour of the feudal times, as well as to the religious opinions that prevailed while popery and ignorance were universal in the western world. The nobility and people, therefore, engaged in them with eagerness. They believed, that they should perform an acceptable service to God, by destroying, or at least by conquering, the enemies of the Christian faith; and that the reward of their labour would be military renown in this life, and a crown of glory in the next. The pope claimed, and was allowed to have, power to remit the sins of the whole world: and a general remission of sin, together with many advantages of a secular nature 13 , was offered to all who would enlist in those armaments.
But whatever the opinions might be of those who were to serve in the holy wars, as they were called, we may, without breach of charity, conclude, that the princes, who planned them, were actuated no less by political, than by religious motives. They found their nobility turbulent at home; and were happy to engage them in foreign expeditions, from which it was probable, that the greater part would never return.—The expedition was called a crusade, or
[Page 537]
croisade, from a Latin, or from a French, word signifying a cross ; which has in every age been an emblem of Christianity, and which these adventurers, as the champions of the faith, bore in their standard, and impressed upon their armour.
The honours acquired by the heroes of the Crusade were not inconsiderable; though attended with great expence, both of treasure, and of blood. They conquered Palestine, and drove the Saracens out of it: and Godfrey of Bologne, or Bouillon, was actually crowned king of Jerusalem, about the year eleven hundred. Those, who had distinguished themselves in these wars, expressed their atchievements by some emblematical device, engraven, or painted, on their shield: and this is said to have been the origin of Armorial Ensigns; which, though they may now be purchased with money, were antiently attainable by valour only. For the defensive armour then in use was of a particular kind, and quite different from that of the Greeks and Romans. The Feudal baron cased his whole body in steel or brass: and the helmet was so contrived, as to cover upon occasion every part of his face, except the eyes; so that in the field he could not be known, but by the figures on his target, or by the make or colour of his arms. And by these the warriors of that time were often distinguished. Edward the Black Prince, a name famous in the English history, was so called from the colour of his armour, which is still preserved in the Tower of London.
I said, that the figures, which the Crusader displayed on his shield, were the origin of ensigns armorial. And this is the opinion of many authors: but it can be true of such figures only, as were according to the system of modern heraldry. For devices on shields are more antient: witness the shield of Hercules by Hesiod; that of Achilles by Homer; and those of the seven chiefs at Thebes particularly described by Eschylus. Some fancy, that they are of still higher antiquity, and were known to Noah, Abraham, and Jacob;
[Page 538]
and that the twelve tribes of Israel were distinguished by their respective ensigns. But this is foreign from the present purpose.
That spirit of valour and religion, and that passion for travelling and strange adventures, to which the crusades were so favourable, gave rise to Chivalry; which now began to appear in the world, and in time produced very important consequences, in politicks, in manners, and in literature. I am not ignorant, that some authors assign it an earlier date; and are rather inclined to derive the crusades from chivalry, than chivalry from the crusades. The dispute is not very material. Certain it is, that Chivalry was first known about the time of the crusades; and that the romantick enthusiasm, wild fancy, and desperate valour, which characterised the knights who professed it, were much inflamed, and partly produced, by the reports then circulating through a credulous world, concerning the adventures that were believed to have befallen the heroes of the holy war.
The word chivalry is derived from the French chevalier ; which, like the Latin eques , properly signifies a man who serves in war on horseback. As the poorer sort served on foot, Eques in Latin, and Chevalier in French, became titles of honour, corresponding nearly, but not perfectly, with the English term knight.
Chivalry was a military profession. The man, who wished to be distinguished in this way, dressed himself in a suit of the armour of that time; and, girding on a sword, and grasping a spear, mounted his horse, and set out on some warlike enterprise. He could not, however, be considered as a complete cavalier, till he had received the honour of knighthood. This none can now confer, but a sovereign prince; but any man, who was himself a knight, could then confer it; and a sovereign would condescend to accept of it from the hands of a subject. The person, who was invested with this honour, received it on his knees; and many ceremonies, both warlike and religious, were performed on the
[Page 539]
occasion.—There are several things remarkable in the character of the knights of chivalry; which may be partly accounted for, from the preceding observations.
1. The first is, their Religious character. The authority of the church of Rome was then unbounded and universal in Europe; and the wars undertaken to rescue the holy land infused a religious enthusiasm into all who took part in those expeditions, that is, into every European, who aspired to military same. Hence piety, as well as valour, was considered as indispensably requisite to form a gallant soldier. Some parts, too, of Europe, particularly Spain, had suffered from the invasion of Saracens and other infidel nations, who by their cruelty had rendered themselves, and their religion, objects of horror to all Christendom. When a knight, made captive by those unbelievers, was prevailed on, by threats, punishment, or exhortation, to abandon the true faith, he was branded among Christians with the name of a Recreant, that is, of an Apostate Knight: a term of the bitterest reproach. For every knight, at his installation, swore to maintain the Catholick faith, in opposition to every danger. And therefore this term implied, in the language of Chivalry, nothing less, than an impious, perjured, and profligate coward. 14
2. The second thing remarkable in the sons of chivalry, is their valour; and, I may add, their love of fighting. This they might have derived, as we have seen, from their Gothick progenitors; and this every feudal institution tended to encourage. This, by their expeditions against the infidels, was raised to a pitch of extravagance bordering on phrensy; and was further cherished by those private broils, wherein the feudal nobility were, from the nature of the government, and the ineffectual authority of the law, almost continually engaged. The very sports of those warlike barons were attended with bloodshed: for then, on solemn festivals, and when
[Page 540]
people met together to be merry, tilts and tournaments, and other forms of single combat, were exhibited, for the entertainment of kings, and lords, and even of ladies. 15 And these encounters were by no means mock battles. The knights, fixing their lances, with the points advanced, made their horses run violently together; and both knight and horse were often overturned by the shock, and sometimes killed. If they survived the first assault, which was generally the case, they attacked each other with their swords, till one of them fell, or owned himself vanquished, or till they were parted by the officer, who presided at the ceremony. Audemar de Valentia, earl of Pembroke, was killed in one of those encounters, on the very day of his marriage. The mode of fighting at that time, as well as in antient Greece and Italy, had, no doubt, some influence upon the valour of the combatants, or made them at least more eager to display it. With us, by means of fire-arms, the weakest man is a match for the strongest: and all that our soldiers have to do, is to show their contempt of danger, presence of mind, and regard to discipline. But, before the invention of gunpowder, a warrior, who slew his enemy, gave proof, not of valour only, but also of strength, and of address in the use of his weapons.
3. Their passion for strange adventures is another trait in the character of the knights of chivalry. The world was then little
[Page 541]
known, and men (as I observed before) were ignorant and credulous. Strange fights were expected in strange countries; dragons to be destroyed, giants to be humbled, and enchanted castles to be overthrown. The caverns of the mountain were believed to be inhabited by magicians; and the depth of the forest gave shelter to the holy hermit, who, as the reward of his piety, was supposed to have the gift of working miracles. The demon yelled in the storm, the spectre walked in darkness, and even the rushing of water in the night was mistaken for the voice of a goblin. The castles of the greater barons, reared in a rude but grand style of architecture; full of dark and winding passages, of secret apartments, of long uninhabited galleries, and of chambers supposed to be haunted with spirits; and undermined by subterraneous labyrinths as places of retreat in extreme danger; the howling of winds through the crevices of old walls, and other dreary vacuities; the grating of heavy doors on rusty hinges of iron; the shrieking of bats, and the screaming of owls, and other creatures, that resort to desolate or half-inhabited buildings:—these, and the like circumstances, in the domestick life of the people I speak of, would multiply their superstitions, and increase their credulity; and, among warriors, who set all danger at defiance, would encourage a passion for wild adventure, and difficult enterprise.
Consider, too, the political circumstances of the feudal barons. They lived apart, in their respective territories, where their power was like that of petty kings; and in their own fortified castles, where they kept a train of valiant friends and followers: and, in the economy and splendor of their household, they imitated royal magnificence. An offender, who had made his escape, either from the publick justice of his country, or from the vengeance of some angry chief, was sure of a place of refuge, if he could find admittance into the castle of any other lord. Hence publick justice was eluded, and the authority of the law despised: and a wicked
[Page 542]
and powerful baron, secure within his own castle, would even defy the power of the sovereign himself, or perhaps with hostile intention meet him in the field, at the head of an army of determined followers. William earl of Douglas was generally attended, on solemn occasions, by a body of two thousand horse. Such a man it might be unsafe, even for a king, to provoke. As late as the reign of Mary queen of Scots, we read of a court of law held near the border of England; and are told, that the inhabitants of eleven counties were summoned by royal proclamation, to defend the persons of the judges, and enforce their decrees. 16
Hence a conjecture may be formed of the distracted state of those feudal governments, in which the nobility had acquired great power, and high privileges. The most daring enormities were daily committed, to gratify the resentment, or the rapacity, of those chieftains: castles were invaded, and plundered, and burned: depredations by the vassals of one lord were made upon the grounds and cattle of another; and horrid murders and other cruelties perpetrated. Rich heiresses, and women of distinguished beauty, were often seized upon, and compelled to marry the ravisher. Royalty itself was not secure from these outrages. When Eleanor queen of France was divorced from her husband Louis VII, she was, in her journey to her own hereditary dominions, waylaid by three princes, at three different places, each of whom intended to force her to marry him: but she escaped them all; and afterwards gave her hand to Henry the Second, king of England 17 . Nay, in those days, there were outlaws and robbers, who, possessing themselves of mountains and forests, got together a little army of followers, and lived by rapine; while the power of the kingdom was employed in vain to dislodge, and bring them to justice. Such, in England, were the famous Adam Bell, and Robin Hood, and others who are still celebrated in ballads: and, even in the memory of persons now alive,
[Page 543]
there were some of the same prosession remaining in the highlands of Scotland; but the race at last is happily extinct.—In a word, the western world was in those feudal times full of extraordinary events, and strange vicissitudes of fortune. And therefore we need not wonder, that a passion for adventures and warlike enterprize should have been universal among the knights of chivalry.
4. They were also distinguished by a zeal for justice: and, as the laws were so ineffectual, professed to take up arms in vindication of the rights of mankind; to punish the oppressor; to set at liberty the captive; to succour the distressed damsel; and to rid the world of those false knights, who wandered about in armour, to accomplish wicked purposes. These were noble designs; and, while society was so insecure, and the law so openly violated, must have been attended with good effects.—If you ask, how this heroick part of their character is to be accounted for; I answer, that they seem to have derived it, partly from their northern ancestors, who were lovers of liberty, and generous in their behaviour to the weaker sex; and partly from their attachment to the Christian religion, whereof they were the declared champions, and which, disfigured as it then was by superstition, would still be a restraint upon the passions of those who were willing to attend to its dictates.
Besides, the disorders of the time were so great, that sober-minded men, who were at all enlightened by knowledge, or capable of reflexion, would see, that such an institution might be beneficial, and was become almost necessary to the existence of society. At first, perhaps, their views might reach no further, than to defend the persons, and redress the grievances of their friends 18 . But the habit of doing this, and the honour acquired by it, would determine them to enlarge their plan, and form the generous resolution of patronising mankind, by going through the world, to signalize their valour, in protecting the weak, and punishing the haughty.
[Page 544]
Their courage, their passion for adventures, their desire of seeing what was wonderful in foreign parts, and those hopes of future happiness which religion taught them to entertain, conspired with their military genius, and with their sense of the evils to which they saw their fellow-creatures exposed, to produce that extraordinary personage, a Knight Errant, or wandering knight: a character, which they who have read Don Quixote are apt to smile when they hear mentioned; but which, in its origin, was honourable to the warriors who bore it, and of no small advantage to the publick.
5. The fifth and last characteristick of chivalry, is the Courtesy of the knights who professed it. I remarked, that the founders of the feudal system were distinguished, among all the nations then known in Europe or Asia, by the peculiarity of their behaviour to their women; whom they regarded and loved, as their friends, and faithful counsellors, and as invested with something of a sacred character. Accordingly we are told by some authors, that in all their conquests they were never guilty of violence, where the female sex was concerned. This delicacy they transmitted to their descendants; among the greater part of whom, whatever outrages might now and then be committed by individuals, it seems to have been a point of honour, to be generous and respectful in their attentions to women. This was at least an indispensable part of the duty of a knight errant. By the statutes of Chivalry, the love of God was the first virtue, and devotion to the ladies the second 19 . But that devotion had nothing licentious in it; being delicate to a degree that bordered on extravagance, if not on impiety. For the true knight did not expect condescension on the part of his mistress, till he had proved himself worthy of her, by deeds of arms, and performed many acts of heroism as her champion and admirer. And, when he was going to attack his enemy, we are told it was customary
[Page 545]
for him, first, to implore the help of God, and then to invoke, or at least to mention, the name of his mistress.
The gallant behaviour of these knights may further be accounted for, from that religious ardour, which prompted them to signalize themselves as the champions of the faith, and to fulfil those duties of benevolence and kindness, which are no where so earnestly recommended as in the Gospel, and which form the most substantial, and indeed the only substantial, part of true politeness.
The domestick life of the feudal baron must also have had considerable influence, in refining the manners of men and women in the higher ranks. He lived, as already observed, in his castle, with a numerous train of friends and vassals, who formed a court, similar in its economy to that of the sovereign. Luxury was little known at that time, even in palaces. The kings of England had their chambers littered with rushes; and their beds were laid on straw or hay. Every person of fashion in a great family has now a separate apartment; but then it was not so. The hall of the castle was a place of constant and universal resort 20 . There appeared the Baron himself, with his lady and children, and those noble guests who might occasionally reside with him; there too were often seen his vassals, ranked according to their dignity; and there, in a lower situation, the chief servants of the family would sometimes assemble. Were so many persons of mean and of equal rank to meet together, every man would indulge his own humour, and politeness would not be much minded. But the very great diversity of ranks in a feudal castle would introduce courteous behaviour;
[Page 546]
while the great found it their interest, to be affable; and those of the lower sort, to be respectful. Think with what reverence the inferiour vassals would look up to the Baron, who had so many men, and so much wealth, at his command; and who, within his own jurisdiction, could pardon, or put to death, and enjoyed many other privileges of royalty. The ladies of the family, conscious of their high rank, restrained by native modesty, and intimidated by the presence of their relations, would, in the midst of this great domestick assembly, maintain a reserve, sufficient to discourage all familiarity on the part of the other sex. Ladies of lower rank would imitate them: and thus it is reasonable to think, that there must have prevailed, and we have positive evidence, that there actually did prevail, among the women of fashion in those days, a dignity, and even a stateliness, of manner, tending to inspire the enamoured beholder with a passion compounded of love and veneration. Hence the origin of Romantick Love: which, regarding its object as something more than human, forms extravagant ideas of perfection and happiness; a passion almost peculiar to latter times; and which, in antient Greece and Rome, as well as in Asia, where the sexes lived separate, and where the condition of the female was little better than servitude, could have no place. For, if it be true, that a prudent reserve commands some degree of reverence; and that the best of humankind have blemishes, which at a distance are not seen, and which when near cannot be concealed; we need not wonder at the effects, said to have been produced, in courteous knights, by the sublime prudery of accomplished ladies; nor at the opposite tendency of those modes of life, by which men are emboldened to consider women as a sort of property, and as rather under the standard of human excellence, than above it.
Politeness and courtesy take their rise among those who stand in awe of one another. For this reason, Monarchy, where different
[Page 547]
ranks of men are established, has always been thought more favourable to elegant manners, than any of the republican forms of government, in which all the citizens are supposed to be equal, or nearly so. In his own court, that is, in his castle, the feudal baron was a monarch in miniature; and polite manners, like those that take place where kings have their residence, would naturally be diffused through his whole household. You easily know by one's behaviour, whether one has been much in the company of one's superiours. A man of spirit contracts no servility from that circumstance: but he acquires the habit of attending to the wants and wishes of those with whom he converses, of complying with their innocent humours, of adapting himself to their views of things, and their peculiar ways of thinking; and he also acquires the habits of unassuming speech, elegant phraseology, and easy motion.—It has been remarked by several writers, that the true Scotch highlander is distinguished by a gentility of behaviour, which does not generally display itself in the lower ranks of mankind. The fact, I believe, is true; and may be accounted for, if not from the feudal, at least from the patriarchal, policy of the people; from the relation of clanship subsisting between the lord and his vassal, which entitles the latter to the company of the former, and occasions a more familiar intercourse, than is elsewhere met with, between the gentry and the commonalty.—And therefore it is not surprising, that there should have been, notwithstanding the rudeness of the times, so much courtesy in the castle of a feudal baron; especially among those who appeared there in a military character, and still more especially among the knights of chivalry.
Besides, the character of a true knight was very delicate: and single combat was a thing so familiar to him, and withal accounted so honourable, that he never failed to resent in a hostile manner any reproachful word that might be thrown out against his virtue, particularly against his faith, or his courage. Hence reproachful
[Page 548]
words would in general be avoided; which would promote courtesy, by refining conversation. And hence the origin of Duelling: a practice, unknown to Greece and Rome; which took its rise in the feudal times, and probably among the sons of chivalry; and which, though in many respects absurd and wicked, is allowed to have promoted politeness, by making men cautious of offending one another.
The knight errant was the declared enemy of the oppressor, the punisher of the injurious, and the patron of the weak. And as women were more exposed to injury, than men; and as ladies of rank and merit were, for reasons already given, the objects of veneration to all men of breeding; the true knight was ambitious, above all things, to appear the champion of the fair sex. To qualify himself for this honour, he was careful to acquire every accomplishment that could entitle him to their confidence: he was courteous, gentle, temperate, and chaste. He bound himself, by solemn vows, to the performance of those virtues: so that, while he acted with honour in his profession, a lady might commit herself to his care, without detriment to her character; he being in regard to those virtues as far above suspicion, as a clergyman is now. And, that women of fashion might confide in him with the more security, he commonly attached himself to some one lady, whom he declared to be the sole mistress of his affections, and to whom he swore inviolable constancy. Nothing is more ridiculous than Don Quixote's passion for Dulcinea del Toboso, as Cervantes has described it: and yet, it was in some sort necessary for every knight errant to have a nominal mistress: because, if he had not acknowledged any particular attachment, nor made any vows in consequence of it, his conduct, where women were concerned, might have been suspected; which would alone have disqualified him for what he justly thought the most honourable duty annexed to his profession. In a word, the chastity of a knight errant was to be no
[Page 549]
less unimpeachable, than the credit of a merchant now is, or the courage of a soldier.
I have endeavoured to trace out the distinguishing features of that extraordinary character, a Knight Errant; and to account for each of them, from the nature of the institution, and the manners of the times. The true Knight was religious, valiant, passionately fond of strange adventures, a lover of justice, a protector of the weak, a punisher of the injurious; temperate, courteous, and chaste; and zealous, and respectful, in his attentions to the fair sex. And this is the character assigned him in all those old romances and poems, that describe the adventures of chivalry.
Knight-errantry, however respectable in its first institution, soon became dangerous. The Gothick armour was a complete covering to the whole person: and under that disguise many warriours went through the world as knights errant, who were really nothing better than robbers; and who, instead of being patrons of mankind, were pests of society. The true knight, therefore, thought himself bound in honour to inquire into the character of those who might appear in the same garb; so that two knights, who were strangers to each other, could hardly meet without fighting. And we may warrantably suppose, that even the better sort of these wanderers would sometimes attack an innocent man, without necessity, in order to signalize their valour, and do honour to the lady of their affections. Nay in time it came to be a sufficient cause for combat, if the strange knight refused to acknowlege the beauty of his adversary's mistress superiour to that of his own. The law, therefore, would find it necessary to interpose; first, in subjecting chivalry to certain restraints, to which a knight would not willingly submit; and, at last, in declaring the profession itself unlawful. Before the publication of Don Quixote, knight-errantry had been prohibited in several countries; and was indeed become unnecessary, from the alterations, that (as will appear in the next paragraph)
[Page 550]
had been gradually introduced into the feudal system; as well as inconvenient, from the absurd conduct of the knights themselves.
Of all those, who repined at the encroachments of the feudal barons, the kings of Europe were the most impatient, and indeed the greatest, sufferers. They could summon their subjects in arms to the field; but, having little to give them, could not easily keep them together for more than a few weeks. And, in time of peace, the royal power being almost confined to the royal territory, the greater barons were continually opposing the views of the sovereign, despising his authority, extorting from him new privileges, and counteracting the influence of the law. This was more or less the state of every feudal kingdom. The fashion of crusading was now over. And a feudal prince, unable to devise employment in foreign parts, for his turbulent nobility, was obliged, in self-defence, to exert all his power and policy, in controuling them at home; with a view to resume, if possible, some of those privileges that had been wrested from him. Many years were passed in struggles of this kind, between the kings and the nobles; to which nothing could put a period, but a change in the form of government. That happened, in some countries sooner, and in others later: but the kings at length prevailed, and the feudal system was broken in pieces. Its laws, however, and its manners, are still observable, in every European kingdom.
As the power of the nobles was contracted, that of the kings became more extensive. This might be unfavourable to the independence, or rather to the licentiousness, of the grandees: but it promoted peace, and re-established the authority of law. Society became more regular, and more secure. The knight-errant was no longer of any use. He was even found troublesome; and the law considered him as a vagrant.
But the old spirit of chivalry was not extinguished: and what remained of it was inflamed by the books called Romances, which
[Page 551]
were now common in Europe; and, being written in the vulgar tongues, and filled with marvellous adventures, could not fail to be eagerly sought after and read, at a time when books were rare, and men credulous.
To investigate all the causes that brought about the revival of letters, is now impossible. The ages immediately preceding this great event were profoundly ignorant; and few memorials of them remain. The crusades, bloody and unnatural as they were, seem to have given a new, and a favourable, impulse to the human soul. For the heroes of those wars, who lived to return home, brought along with them marvellous accounts of Asia, and of the misfortunes, triumphs, and other adventures that had there befallen them. Thus, it may be supposed, that the imagination of Europeans would be elevated, their memory stored with new ideas, and their curiosity awakened. The human mind, thus prepared, naturally betakes itself to invention. Or if we believe the dawn of modern literature to have been previous to, or coeval with, the first crusade, it is not absurd to imagine, that the same spirit of activity, however raised, which made men think of signalizing themselves in feats of arms at home, or in quest of adventures abroad, might also stimulate the mental powers, and cause genius to exert itself in new ways of thinking, as well as of acting. The wars of Thebes and of Troy are undoubtedly to be reckoned among the causes that gave rise to the literature of Greece. 21
Be this however as it will, certain it is, that, about the beginning of the twelfth century, or perhaps a little earlier, there appeared,
[Page 552]
in the country of Provence, a set of men, called Troubadours , who are to be considered as the fathers of modern learning. That country, known of old by the name of the Roman province , is situated in a genial climate: and, from its vicinity to Marseilles, which was a Greek colony, and from having so long enjoyed the benefit of Roman arts and manners, we need not wonder, that, when all the rest of Europe was in a rude state, it should retain some traces of antient discipline. An obvious advantage it must have had, in this respect, over Rome; owing to its distance from the seat of Papal despotism: which in those days was friendly to ignorance; though in a later period, under Leo, it favoured the cultivation of arts and sciences.
The word Troubadour , in its etymological sense, differs not much from the Greek word poet ; the one denoting an inventor , and the other a maker. In Italian, trovare signifies to find , or to invent ; trovatore is a finder, inventor , or composer of poetry : and trovatore and troubadour are plainly of the same origin. The troubadours made verses in the Provençal tongue; which (as might be conjectured from the situation of the country) resembled partly the Italian, and partly the French, and is said to have had in it many Greek words and idioms, which it owed, no doubt, to the neighbouring city of Marseilles. It seems to have been the first modern tongue that was put in writing, or employed in composition. And the rank of some of those who composed in it (for many of the Troubadours were princes 22 ) and the wandering life which others of them led, made it quickly circulate through the western world.
The first poets of Greece sung their own verses: but the first Provensal bards only composed poems; leaving it to an inferiour
[Page 553]
order of men, called Jongleurs , to sing them. This at least was the general practice: though occasionally, no doubt, the former might sing, and the latter compose. Both were inclined to a wandering life; but the singer more professedly than the poet; though they sometimes went in company. The Jongleur studied to recommend himself by various arts; by playing on musical instruments, by imitating the song of birds, by jumping through hoops, and by all sorts of legerdemain. Hence, probably, our word Juggler.
No poets were ever held in higher esteem, than the Troubadours. Raimond the fifth, count of Provence, exempted them from taxes. They went through many nations; and, wherever they went, they found patrons and patronesses. The Ladies were particularly ambitious of being celebrated by them; and would rather submit to be teized with the importunities of their love, than venture by rejecting them to incur their hatred: for as the troubadour was extravagant in panegyrick, he could be equally so in satire, when he thought himself affronted or despised.—This passion for that sort of renown, which poets pretend to give, may be accounted for, perhaps, from the ignorance of letters, which then prevailed in all ranks, and especially among the fair sex. Bernard de Ventadour mentions it as one of the accomplishments of Queen Eleanor, who was married first to Louis the Seventh of France, and afterwards to Henry the Second of England, that she could read. 23
Considering the gallantry of the times, and the attention paid to these poets by the ladies, it is natural to suppose, that love would be a chief theme in their compositions. And so in fact it was. But this love, though in some instances it might be genuine, had so much formality in it, that I can hardly believe it to have been any thing else, for the most part, than a verbal parade of admiration and attachment, in which the heart had little concern, and which aimed at nothing further, than to secure the protection of the fair,
[Page 554]
and the noble. The Provensal poet went to the court of some prince or lord; where he was no sooner established, than he began to compose sonnets in praise of his patron's wife, and to feign, or to fancy, himself in love with her. This happened, not to one only, or to a few, but almost to the whole species of these adventurers; so that it would seem to have been the mode, and a thing of course. To unmarried ladies it does not appear, that much devotion was paid: I suppose, because they had little to bestow, in the way either of pecuniary, or of honorary, favour.
Petrarch's passion for Laura, though disinterested, seems to have been in some degree fictitious, or at least, not quite so serious a matter as many people imagine. “He was wretched to show he had wit,” as the song says: he loved after the Provensal fashion: he wanted to make passionate verses; and Laura, being a beautiful lady, and a married one too, with a pretty romantick name, suited his poetical purposes as well, as Dulcinea del Toboso did the heroick views of Don Quixote. Had his heart been really engaged, he could not have gone on, from day to day, in the same strain of elegant and elaborate whining: a sincere passion would have allowed him neither time nor tranquillity for such amusement.—What is observed, in the old aphorism, of violent grief, that it is silent, and of slight sorrow, that it vents itself in words, will be found to hold true of many of our affections. Hammond was not in love, when he wrote his elegies; as I have been informed on good authority: and Young, while composing the most pathetick parts of the Night-thoughts, was as chearful as at other times. These are not the only instances that might be mentioned 24 .
[Page 555]
The Cicisbeism , as it is called, of modern Italy, (a sort of romantick attention paid to married women by those who should not pay it) I do not pretend to understand: though I believe it to be a disgrace to the country, not only as it tends to the utter corruption
[Page 556]
of manners; but also because it supplies a pretence for idleness, effeminacy, sauntering, gossiping, and insignificant prattle. But if this fashion arose from the bewitching influence of Petrarch's poetry, which has been affirmed by some writers, and is not improbable, there may be reason to think, that at first it was rather a foolish, or at most a selfish, than a criminal, connection.—Adelaide, viscountess of Baux, was extremely indulgent to the Troubadour Peter Vidal, as long as his passion was merely poetical: but when he had the presumption to kiss her one day in her sleep, she drove him from her presence, and would never after, even at the request of her husband, be reconciled to him. Peter, finding her inexorable, went and fell in love with another lady, whose name happened to be Wolf ; and, dressing himself in a skin of the animal so called, submitted to the danger of being hunted for her sake. In this garb he was discovered by the dogs; who, entering with great alacrity into the srolick, gave chace, pursued him to the mountains, and were actually worrying him, when he was with difficulty rescued by the shepherds.
Vidal, however, though fantastick in love, was not in every thing ridiculous. His advice to a Jongleur is curious; and shows,
[Page 557]
that, though in those days there might be little learning in Europe, the principles of good breeding, and of elegant behaviour, were in some parts of it very well understood. 25
Love was not the only theme of the Provensal poets. They occasionally joined their voices to those of the pope, and the monks, and the kings of Europe, to rouse the spirit of crusading. Satire, religious and political, as well as personal, and little tales or novels, with portions of real history, and even theological controversy, were also interwoven in their compositions. But in every form their poetry pleased; and, by the industry of those who composed, and of those who sung it, obtained a very extensive circulation.
[Page 558]
A book, or a poem, in a living language, was at this period an extraordinary appearance. All Europe attended to it. The Provensal tongue, and mode of writing, became fashionable: and the neighbouring nations wished to know, whether their languages could not also be applied to the same, or to similar purposes.
This was first attempted with success in Italy; where several men of great genius happened about this time to arise, whose practice and authority fixed the Italian tongue in a state not very different from its present. Among these were Dante, Petrarch, and Boccacio; who all flourished in the end of the thirteenth century, or in the beginning of the fourteenth.—Dante distinguished himself in poetry: and wrote his Inferno, Paradiso , and Purgatorio , in a bold, but extravagant style of fable: intermixing satire with his poetical descriptions and allegories; whereof many are highly finished, and in particular passages enforced with singular energy and simplicity of expression.—Petrarch composed many poems, letters, essays, and dialogues in Latin, which he thought the only durable tongue: for as to his Italian verses, he did not believe they could last, or be intelligible for a century. But in this he was mistaken greatly: his Latin works being now almost forgotten; while his Italian sonnets are still the admiration of Europe, for delicacy of sentiment, and elegance of style. Their merit was indeed thought to be so transcendent, that he alone was attended to, and his masters the Troubadours were neglected and forgotten.—Boccacio's chief performance is called the Decameron . It is a series of novels; whereof some are grave, others comical, and many indecent. He supposes a number of men and women met together, at the time when a pestilence was ravaging Florence, and telling those stories for their mutual amusement. His imagination must have been unbounded: and so highly is his prose esteemed in Italy to this day, that a late author of that country 26 declares it
[Page 559]
to be impossible, for the man who has not read Boccacio, to form an idea of the extent or energy of the Italian tongue.
The fourteenth century produced also the illustrious Geoffry Chaucer; who, though not the first who wrote in English, is the first of our great authors, and may be truly called the father of our language and literature. His writings are chiefly translations, or imitations, of the Provensal and Italian writers then known. But he has imitated and translated with the greatest latitude, and added many fine strokes of character, humour, and description: so that we ought to consider him as an original; since he does in fact exhibit, especially in his Canterbury Tales, a more natural picture of the English manners of that age, than is to be met with in any other writer. He did not, however, fix the English tongue, as his contemporaries Petrarch and Boccacio had fixed the Italian. Many of his words soon fell into disuse: and his language at present is not well understood, except by those who have taken some pains to study it. He died in the year fourteen hundred. Some of his poems, particularly his Knight's Tale , which is well modernized by Dryden, are written in the taste of Chivalry; but not in that extravagant mode of invention, which now began to display itself in the Spanish and French romances; and which was afterwards adopted, and adorned with every grace of language and of harmony, by Ariosto in Italy, and by Spenser in England.
The origin of the Old Romance, which, after this long historical deduction, we are now arrived at, has been already accounted for. It was one of the consequences of chivalry. The first writers in this way exhibited a species of fable, different from all that had hitherto appeared. They undertook to describe the adventures of those heroes who professed knight-errantry. The world was then ignorant and credulous, and passionately fond of wonderful adventures, and deeds of valour. They believed in giants, dwarfs, dragons, enchanted castles, and every imaginable species of necromancy.
[Page 560]
These form the materials of the Old Romance. The knight errant was described as courteous, religious, valiant, adventurous, and temperate. Some enchanters befriended, and others opposed him. To do his mistress honour, and prove himself worthy of her, he was made encounter the warrior, hew down the giant, cut the dragon in pieces, break the spell of the necromancer, demolish the enchanted castle, fly through the air on wooden or winged horses; or, with some magician for his guide, to descend unhurt through the opening earth, and traverse the caves in the bottom of the ocean. He detected and punished the false knight, overthrew or converted the infidel, restored the exiled monarch to his dominions, and the captive damsel to her parents: he fought at the tournament, feasted in the hall, and bore a part in the warlike procession: or, when the enchanter who befriended his enemy prevailed, he did penance in the desart, or groaned in the dungeon; or, perhaps, in the shape of a horse or hart, grazed in the valley, till some other valiant knight broke the spell, and restored to him his form, his arms, and his freedom. At last, after innumerable toils, disasters, and victories, he married his mistress, and became a great lord, a prince, or perhaps an emperor.
It will appear, from this account, that nature, probability, and even possibility, were not much attended to, in those compositions. Yet with them all Europe was intoxicated: and in every nation, that had pretensions to a literary character, multitudes of them were written, some in verse, and others in prose. To give a list is unnecessary, and would be tedious. Amadis de Gaul was one of the first; and is, in the opinion of Cervantes, one of the best. Several others are mentioned, and characterised, by that excellent author, in his account of the purgation of Don Quixote's library.
While the taste continued for every thing that was incredible and monstrous, we may suppose, that true learning, and the natural simplicity of the Classicks, would not be held in general estimation.
[Page 561]
Accordingly, though the knowlege of Greek and Latin was now advancing apace in the western world, Homer, Virgil, Cicero, and all the most elegant authors, were much neglected. The first accounts, that circulated among us concerning the siege of Troy, seem to have been taken, not from Homer, but from Dares Phrygius and Dictys Cretensis, two writers in prose, who have given a fabulous and marvellous history of it: and, as late as the age of George Buchanan, our modern Latin poets, Vida excepted, were, if I mistake not, more ambitious to imitate Claudian, than Virgil in their hexameters. Ovid, too, was a favourite author; partly on account of the astonishing fables of the Metamorphosis , and partly, no doubt, for the sake of his love-verses, so well adapted to the gallantry of this period. 27
The passion for romance was attended with other bad consequences. Men of warlike genius and warm fancy, charmed to infatuation with the supposed atchievements of knights errant, were tempted to appear in that character; though the profession was now considered as a nuisance, and proscribed by law in some parts of Europe. This folly seems to have been most prevalent in Spain: which may be thus accounted for. The first Romances were written in the language of that kingdom. The Spaniards were then, as they are now, a valiant and enterprising people. And they had long been enslaved by the Moors from Africa, whom, after a seven hundred years war (according to the historians), and after fighting three thousand and seven hundred battles, they at last drove out of Spain. This produced many wonderful adventures; made them fierce, romantick, and haughty; and confirmed their attachment to their own religion, and their abhorrence of that of their enemies.
[Page 562]
But the final extirpation of chivalry and all its chimeras was now approaching. What laws and force could not accomplish, was brought about by the humour and satire of one writer. This was the illustrious Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra. He was born at Madrid in the year one thousand five hundred and forty-nine. He seems to have had every advantage of education, and to have been a master in polite learning. But in other respects fortune was not very indulgent. He served many years in the armies of Spain, in no higher station, than that of a private soldier. In that capacity he fought at the battle of Lepanto, under Don John of Austria, and had the misfortune, or, as he rather thought, the honour, to lose his left hand. Being now disqualified for military service, he commenced author; and wrote many Dramatick pieces, which were acted with applause on the Spanish theatre, and acquired him both money and reputation. But want of economy and unbounded generosity dissipated the former: and he was actually confined in prison for debt, when he composed the first part of The History of Don Quixote ; a work, which every body admires for its humour; but which ought also to be considered as a most useful performance, that brought about a great revolution in the manners and literature of Europe, by banishing the wild dreams of chivalry, and reviving a taste for the simplicity of nature. In this view, the publication of Don Quixote forms an important era in the history of mankind.
Don Quixote is represented as a man, whom it is impossible not to esteem for his cultivated understanding, and the goodness of his heart: but who, by poring night and day upon the old romances, had impaired his reason to such a degree, as to mistake them for history, and form the design of going through the world, in the character, and with the accoutrements, of a knight errant. His distempered fancy takes the most common occurrences for adventures similar to those he had read in his books of chivalry. And thus, the extravagance of those books being placed, as it were, in
[Page 563]
the same groupe with the appearances of nature and the real business of life, the hideous disproportion of the former becomes so glaring by the contrast, that the most inattentive observer cannot fail to be struck with it. The person, the pretensions, and the exploits, of the errant knight, are held up to view in a thousand ridiculous attitudes. In a word, the humour and satire are irresistable; and their effects were instantaneous.
This work no sooner appeared, than chivalry vanished, as snow melts before the sun. Mankind awoke as from a dream. They laughed at themselves for having been so long imposed on by absurdity; and wondered they had not made the discovery sooner. It astonished them to find, that nature and good sense could yield a more exquisite entertainment, than they had ever derived from the most sublime phrenzies of chivalry. For, that this was indeed the case: that Don Quixote was more read, and more relished, than any other romance had ever been, we may infer, from the sudden and powerful effects it produced on the sentiments of mankind; as well as from the declaration of the author himself; who tells us, that upwards of twelve thousand copies of the first part were sold, before the second could be got ready for the press:—an amazing rapidity of sale, at a time when the readers and purchasers of books were but an inconsiderable number compared to what they are in our days. “The very children, (says he) handle it, boys read it, men understand, and old people applaud, the performance. It is no sooner laid down by one, than another takes it up; some struggling, and some entreating, for a fight of it. In fine, (continues he) this history is the most delightful, and the least prejudicial, entertainment, that ever was seen; for, in the whole book, there is not the least shadow of a dishonourable word, nor one thought unworthy of a good catholick.” 28
[Page 564]
Don Quixote occasioned the death of the Old Romance, and gave birth to the New. Fiction henceforth divested herself of her gigantick size, tremendous aspect, and frantick demeanour; and, descending to the level of common life, conversed with man as his equal, and as a polite and chearful companion. Not that every subsequent Romance-writer adopted the plan, or the manner, of Cervantes: but it was from him they learned to avoid extravagance, and to imitate nature. And now probability was as much studied, as it had been formerly neglected.
But before I proceed to the New Romance, on which I shall be very brief, it is proper just to mention a species of Romantick narrative, which cannot be called either Old or New, but is a strange mixture of both. Of this kind are the Grand Cyrus, Clelia , and Cleopatra ; each consisting of ten or a dozen large volumes, and pretending to have a foundation in antient history. In them, all facts and characters, real and fabulous; and all systems of policy and manners, the Greek, the Roman, the Feudal, and the modern, are jumbled together and confounded: as if a painter should represent Julius Cesar drinking tea with Queen Elizabeth, Jupiter, and Dulcinea del Toboso, and having on his head the laurel wreathe of antient Rome, a suit of Gothick armour on his shoulders, laced ruffles at his wrist, a pipe of tobacco in his mouth, and a pistol and tomahawk stuck in his belt. But I should go beyond my depth, if I were to criticize any of those enormous compositions. For, to confess the truth, I never had patience to read one half of one of the volumes; nor met with a person, who could give me any other account of them, than that they are intolerably tedicus, and unspeakably absurd.
The New Romance may be divided into the Serious and the Comick : and each of these kinds may be variously subdivided.
I. I. Of Serious Romances, some follow the historical arrangement ; and, instead of beginning, like Homer and Virgil, in the
[Page 565]
middle of the subject 29 , give a continued narrative of the life of some one person, from his birth to his establishment in the world, or till his adventures may be supposed to have come to an end. Of this sort is Robinson Crusoe . The account commonly given of that well-known work is as follows.
Alexander Selkirk, a Scotch mariner, happened, by some accident which forget to be left in the uninhabited island of Juan Fernandes in the South Seas. Here he continued four years alone, without any other means of supporting life, than by running down goats, and killing such other animals as he could come at. To defend himself from danger during the night, he built a house of stones rudely put together, which a gentleman, who had been in it, (for it was extant when Anson arrived there) described to me as so very small, that one person could with difficulty crawl in, and stretch himself at length. Selkirk was delivered by an English vessel, and returned home. A late French writer says, he had become so fond of the savage state, that he was unwilling to quit it. But that is not true. The French writer either confounds the real story of Selkirk with a fabulous account of one Philip Quarl, written after Robinson Crusoe, of which it is a paltry imitation; or wilfully misrepresents the fact, in order to justify, as far as he is able, an idle conceit, which, since the time of Rousseau, has been in fashion amongst infidel and affected theorists on the continent, that savage life is most natural to us, and that the more a man resembles a brute in his mind, body, and behaviour, the happier he becomes, and the more perfect.—Selkirk was advised to get his story put in writing, and published. Being illiterate himself, he told every thing he could remember to Daniel Defoe, a professed author of considerable note; who, instead of doing justice to the poor man, is said to have applied these materials to his own use, by making them the groundwork of Robinson Crusoe; which he
[Page 566]
soon after published, and which, being very popular, brought him a good deal of money.
Some have thought, that a lovetale is necessary to make a romance interesting. But Robinson Crusoe, though there is nothing of love in it, is one of the most interesting narratives that ever was written; at least in all that part which relates to the desert island: being founded on a passion still more prevalent than love, the desire of self-preservation; and therefore likely to engage the curiosity of every class of readers, both old and young, both learned and unlearned.
I am willing to believe, that Defoe shared the profits of this publication with the poor seaman: for there is an air of humanity in it, which one would not expect from an author who is an arrant cheat. In the preface to his second volume, he speaks feelingly enough of the harm done him by those who had abridged the first in order to reduce the price. “The injury, says he, which these men do to the proprietors of works, is a practice all honest men abhor: and they believe they may challenge them to show the difference between that, and robbing on the highway, or breaking open a house. If they cannot show any difference in the crime, they will find it hard to show, why there should be any difference in the punishment.” Is it to be imagined, that any man of common prudence would talk in this way, if he were conscious, that he himself might be proved guilty of that very dishonesty which he so severely condemns?
Be this however as it may, for I have no authority to affirm any thing on either side, Robinson Crusoe must be allowed, by the most rigid moralist, to be one of those novels, which one may read, not only with pleasure, but also with profit. It breathes throughout a spirit of piety and benevolence: it sets in a very striking light, as I have elsewhere observed, the importance of the mechanick arts, which they, who know not what it is to be without
[Page 567]
them, are so apt to undervalue: it fixes in the mind a lively idea of the horrors of solitude, and, consequently, of the sweets of social life, and of the blessings we derive from conversation, and mutual aid: and it shows, how, by labouring with one's own hands, one may secure independence, and open for one's self many sources of health and amusement. I agree, therefore, with Rousseau, that this is one of the best books that can be put in the hands of children.—The style is plain, but not elegant, nor perfectly grammatical: and the second part of the story is tiresome.
2. A second species of the Modern Serious Romance is that, which follows the poetical arrangement ; and, in order to shorten the time of the action, begins in the middle of the story. Such, partly, are Sir Charles Grandison , and Clarissa Harlowe , by Mr. Richardson. That author has adopted a plan of narrative of a peculiar kind: the persons, who bear a part in the action, are themselves the relaters of it. This is done by means of letters, or epistles; wherein the story is continued from time to time, and the passions freely expressed, as they arise from every change of fortune, and while the persons concerned are supposed to be ignorant of the events that are to follow. And thus, the several agents are introduced in their turns, speaking, or, which is the same thing in this case, writing, suitably to their respective feelings, and characters: so that the fable is partly Epick, and partly Dramatick. There are some advantages in this form of narrative. It prevents all anticipation of the catastrophe; and keeps the reader in the same suspense, in which the persons themselves are supposed to be: and it pleases further, by the varieties of style, suited to the different tempers and sentiments of those who write the letters. But it has also its inconveniencies. For, unless the fable be short and simple, this mode of narration can hardly fail to run out into an extravagant length, and to be encumbered with repetitions. And indeed, Richardson himself, with all his powers of invention, is apt to be
[Page 568]
tedious, and to fall into a minuteness of detail, which is often unnecessary. His pathetick scenes, too, are overcharged, and so long continued, as to wear out the spirits of the reader. Nor can it be denied, that he has given too much prudery to his favourite women, and something of pedantry or finicalness to his favourite men.—Clementina was, no doubt, intended as a pattern of female excellence: but, though she may claim veneration as a saint, it is impossible to love her as a woman. And Grandison, though both a good and a great character, is in every thing so perfect, as in many things to discourage imitation; and so distant, and so formal, as to forbid all familiarity, and, of course, all cordial attachment. Alworthy is as good a man as he: but his virtue is purely human; and, having a little of our own weakness in it, and assuming no airs of superiority, invites our acquaintance, and engages our love.
For all this, however, Richardson is an author of uncommon merit. His characters are well drawn, and distinctly marked; and he delineates the operation of the passions with a picturesque accuracy, which discovers great knowlege of human nature. His moral sentiments are profound and judicious; in wit and humour he is not wanting; his dialogue is sometimes formal; but many of his conversation-pieces are executed with elegance and vivacity. For the good tendency of his writings he deserves still higher praise; for he was a man of unaffected piety, and had the improvement of his fellow-creatures very much at heart.
Yet, like most other novel-writers, he represents some of his wicked characters as more agreeable than was necessary to his plan; which may make the example dangerous. I do not think, that an author of fable, in either prose or verse, should make his bad characters completely bad: for, in the first place, that would not be natural, as the worst of men have generally some good in them: and, secondly, that would hurt his design, by making the tale less captivating; as the history of a person, so very worthless as to have
[Page 569]
not one good quality, would give disgust or horror, instead of pleasure. But, on the other hand, when a character, like Richardson's Lovelace , whom the reader ought to abominate for his crimes, is adorned with youth, beauty, eloquence, wit, and every other intellectual and bodily accomplishment, it is to be feared, that thoughtless young men may be tempted to imitate, even while they disapprove, him. Nor is it a sufficient apology to say, that he is punished in the end. The reader knows, that the story is a fiction: but he knows too, that such talents and qualities, if they were to appear in real life, would be irresistably engaging; and he may even fancy, that a character so highly ornamented must have been a favourite of the author. Is there not, then, reason to apprehend, that some readers will be more inclined to admire the gay profligate, than to fear his punishment?—Achilles in Homer, and Macbeth in Shakespeare, are not without great and good qualities, to raise our admiration, and make us take concern in what befals them. But no person is in any danger of being perverted by their example: their criminal conduct being described and directed in such a manner, by the art of the poet, as to show, that it is hateful in itself, and necessarily productive of misery, both to themselves, and to mankind.
I may add, that the punishment of Lovelace is a death, not of infamy, according to our notions, but rather of honour; which surely he did not deserve: and that the immediate cause of it is, not his wickedness, but some inferiority to his antagonist in the use of the small sword. With a little more skill in that exercise, he might, for any thing that appears in the story, have triumphed over Clarissa's avenger, as he had done over herself, and over the censure of the world. Had his crime been represented as the necessary cause of a series of mortifications, leading him gradually down to infamy, ruin, and despair, or producing by probable means an exemplary repentance, the fable would have been more useful in a moral view, and perhaps more interesting. And for the execution
[Page 570]
of such a plan the genius of Richardson seems to me to have been extremely well formed.—These remarks are offered, with a view rather to explain my own ideas of fable, than to detract from an author, who was an honour to his country, and of whose talents and virtues I am a sincere admirer.
His Epistolary manner has been imitated by many novel-writers; particularly by Rousseau in his New Eloisa ; a work, not more remarkable for its eloquence, which is truly great, than for its glaring and manifold inconsistencies. For it is full of nature and extravagance, of sound philosophy and wild theory, of useful instruction and dangerous doctrine.
II. I. The second kind of the New Romance is the Comick ; which, like the first, may, with respect to the arrangement of events, be subdivided into the Historical and the Poetical.
Of the Historical form are the novels of Marivaux, and Gil Blas by M. le Sage. These authors abound in wit and humour; and give natural descriptions of present manners, in a simple, and very agreeable, style. And their works may be read without danger; being for the most part of a moral tendency. Only Le Sage appears to have had a partiality for cheats and sharpers: for these are people whom he introduces often; nor does he always paint them in the odious colours, that properly belong to all such pests of society. Even his hero Gil Blas he has made too much a rogue: which, as he is the relater of his own story, has this disagreeable effect, that it conveys to us, all the while we read him, an idea that we are in bad company, and deriving entertainment from the conversation of a man whom we cannot esteem.
Smollet follows the same historical arrangement in Roderick Random and Peregrine Pickle : two performances, of which I am sorry to say, that I can hardly allow them any other praise, than that they are humourous and entertaining. He excels, however, in drawing the characters of seamen; with whom in his younger days
[Page 571]
he had the best opportunities of being acquainted. he seems to have collected a vast number of merry stories; and he tells them with much vivacity and energy of expression. But his style often approaches to bombast; and many of his humourous pictures are exaggerated beyond all bounds of probability. And it does not appear that he knew how to contrive a regular fable, by making his events mutually dependent, and all co-operating to one and the same final purpose.—On the morality of these novels I cannot compliment him at all. He is often inexcusably licentious. Profligates, bullies, and misanthropes, are among his favourite characters. A duel he seems to have thought one of the highest efforts of human virtue; and playing dextrously at billiards a very genteel accomplishment. Two of his pieces, however, deserve to be mentioned with more respect. Count Fathom, though an improbable tale, is pleasing, and upon the whole not immoral, though in some passages very indelicate. And Sir Launcelot Greaves, though still more improbable, has great merit; and is truly original in the execution, notwithstanding that the hint is borrowed from Don Quixote.
2. The second species of the New Comick Romance is that which, in the arrangement of events, follows the poetical order; and which may properly enough be called the Epick Comedy, or rather the Comick Epick poem: Epick , because it is narrative; and Comick , because it is employed on the business of common life, and takes its persons from the middle and lower ranks of mankind.
This form of the Comick Romance has been brought to perfection in England by Henry Fielding; who seems to have possessed more wit and humour 30 , and more knowlege of mankind, than any
[Page 572]
other person of modern times, Shakespeare excepted; and whose great natural abilities were refined by a classical taste, which he had acquired by studying the best authors of antiquity: though it cannot be denied, that he appears on some occasions to have been rather too ostentatious, both of his learning, and of his wit.
Some have said, that Joseph Andrews is the best performance of Fielding. But its chief merit is parson Adams; who is indeed a character of masterly invention, and, next to Don Quixote, the most ludicrous personage that ever appeared in romance. This work, though full of exquisite humour, is blameable in many respects. Several passages offend by their indelicacy. And it is not easy to imagine, what could induce the author to add to the other faults of his hero's father Wilson the infamy of lying and cowardice; and then to dismiss him, by very improbable means, to a life of virtuous tranquillity, and endeavour to render him upon the whole a respectable character. Some youthful irregularities, rather hinted at than described, owing more to imprudence and unlucky accident than to confirmed habits of sensuality, and followed by inconvenience, perplexity, and remorse, their natural consequences, may, in a comick tale, be assigned even to a favourite personage, and, by proper management, form a very instructive part of the narration: but crimes, that bring dishonour, or that betray a hard heart, or an injurious disposition, should never be fixed on a character whom the poet or novel-writer means to recommend to our esteem. On this principle, Fielding might be vindicated in regard to all the censurable conduct of Tom Jones, provided he had been less particular in describing it: and, by the same rule, Smollet's system of youthful profligacy, as exemplified in some of his libertines, is altogether without excuse.
Tom Jones and Amelia are Fielding's best performances; and the most perfect, perhaps, of their kind in the world. The fable of the latter is entirely poetical, and of the true epick species; beginning
[Page 573]
in the middle of the action, or rather as near the end as possible, and introducing the previous occurrences, in the form of a narrative episode. Of the former, the introductory part follows the historical arrangement; but the fable becomes strictly poetical, as soon as the great action of the piece commences, that is, if I mistake not, immediately after the sickness of Alworthy: for, from that period, the incidents proceed in an uninterrupted series to the final event, which happens about two months after.
Since the days of Homer, the world has not seen a more artful Epick fable. The characters and adventures are wonderfully diversified: yet the circumstances are all so natural, and rise so easily from one another, and co-operate with so much regularity in bringing on, even while they seem to retard, the catastrophe, that the curiosity of the reader is kept always awake, and, instead of flagging, grows more and more impatient as the story advances, till at last it becomes downright anxiety. And when we get to the end, and look back on the whole contrivance, we are amazed to find, that of so many incidents there should be so few superfluous; that in such variety of fiction there should be so great probability; and that so complex a tale should be so perspicuously conducted, and with perfect unity of design.—These remarks may be applied either to Tom Jones or to Amelia : but they are made with a view to the former chiefly; which might give scope to a great deal of criticism, if I were not in haste to conclude the subject. Since the time of Fielding, who died in the year one thousand seven hundred and fifty-four, the Comick Romance, as far as I am acquainted with it, seems to have been declining apace, from simplicity and nature, into improbability and affectation.
Let not the usefulness of Romance-writing be estimated by the length of my discourse upon it. Romances are a dangerous recreation. A few, no doubt, of the best may be friendly to good taste and good morals; but far the greater part are unskilfully written,
[Page 574]
and tend to corrupt the heart, and stimulate the passions. A habit of reading them breeds a dislike to history, and all the substantial parts of knowledge; withdraws the attention from nature, and truth; and fills the mind with extravagant thoughts, and too often with criminal propensities. I would therefore caution my young reader against them: or, if he must, for the sake of amusement, and that he may have something to say on the subject, indulge himself in this way now and then, let it be sparingly, and seldom.
NOTES
1 Cicero de Officiis. Lib. i. cap. 32.
2 See the Preface to his Voyages.
3 The Imprimatur prefixed to Patrick's Pilgrim is dated April 11, 1665. Bunyan's Progress was written, while he was in Bedford prison, where he lay twelve years, from 1660 to 1672; but I cannot find in what year it was first printed.
4 I know not whether this author is not the only human being, who ever presumed to speak in ludicrous terms of the Last Judgment. His profane verses on that tremendous subject were not published, so far as I know, till after his death: for Chesterfield's Letter to Voltaire, in which they are inserted, and spoken of with approbation (which is no more than one would expect from such a critick), and said to be copied from the original in Swift's hand-writing, is dated in the year one thousand seven hundred and fifty-two. But this is no excuse for the Author. We may guess at what was in his mind, when he wrote them; and at what remained in his mind, while he could have destroyed them, and would not. Nor is it any excuse to say, that he makes Jupiter the agent: a Christian, granting the utmost possible favour to Poetick licence, cannot conceive a heathen idol to do that, of which the only information we have is from the word of God, and in regard to which we certainly know, that it will be done by the Deity himself. That humourous and instructive allegory of Addison, (Spectator, 558, 559) in which Jupiter is supposed to put it in every person's power to choose his own condition, is not only conformable to antient philosophy, but is actually founded on a passage of Horace. I mean not to insinuate, that Swift was favourable to infidelity. There is good reason to believe he was not; and that, though too many of his levities are inexcusable, he could occasionally be both serious and pious. In fact, an infidel clergyman would be such a compound of execrable impiety and contemptible meanness, that I am unwilling to suppose there can be such a monster. The profaneness of this author I impute to his passion for ridicule, and rage of witticism; which, when they settle into a habit, and venture on liberties with what is sacred, never fail to pervert the mind, and harden the heart
5 I write from memory; not having the book at hand, nor knowing at present where to find it.
6 Cesar. Bell. Gall. i. 36.
7 “Are there not places,” (says Mr. Locke, in the first book of his Essay on Human Understanding) “where at a certain age men kill, or expose, their parents, without remorse?” Taking for granted, that there are; his intention is, from this, and other supposed facts of a like nature, to draw these inferences. First, that there is no instinctive affection towards parents in the human constitution; that, independently on habits contracted by education, we should be as indifferent to the person whom we knew to be our father, or mother, as we are to any other man or woman; and that, if our teachers were to adopt a contrary plan of education, it would be not more difficult to make us hate our parents, because they are our parents, than it is to make us love them on that account. Secondly, and in general, that the same thing is true of every first principle, both moral and speculative, even of the κοιναι Εννοιαι, that is, of the axioms of geometry, for so Euclid calls them: in other words, that all our ideas of duty, and of truth, would be just the reverse of what they are, if we were from the first told, that compassion (for example) and justice are criminal, and cruelty and treachery meritorious; that bodies are not as our senses represent them; and that things equal to one and the same thing are not equal to one another.—If this is not the intention of Locke's first book, his words and arguments are without meaning. It is true, he is there very full of words; and so inaccurate in the use of them, as well as superficial in examining the facts brought to confirm his theory, that we can readily believe, what he himself infinuates, that he sat down to write his book, before he had any distinct idea of what was to be in it. But, passing this; let us consider, how far the fact hinted at in the quotation tends to prove, or to disprove, his general doctrine. The fact is thus stated by a judicious Traveller, Mr. Ellis, in his Voyage for the discovery of a North-west passage. In some of the countries adjoining to Hudson's Bay, “they have one custom, which is very extraordinary: that when their parents grow so old, as to be incapable to support themselves by their labour, they require their children to strangle them; and this is esteemed an act of obedience in the children to perform. The manner of discharging this last duty is thus. The grave of the old person being dug, he goes into it; and, after having conversed, and smoaked a pipe, or perhaps drank a dram or two with his children, the old person signifies he is ready: upon which, two of the children put a thong about his neck, one standing on the one side, and the other opposite, and pull violently, till he is strangled; then cover him with earth, and over that erect a kind of rough monument of stones. As for such old persons as have no children, they request this office from their friends; though in this last case it is not always complied with.—These Indians” (we are told by the same author) “believe in a Supreme Being infinitely good, and the author of all their blessings; they believe also in an evil being, of whom they are much afraid.” From this account we learn several things. I. The parents are strangled by their own command, because they choose, it seems, to die in this manner: for old persons, when childless, solicit from others, as a favour, what they would have exacted from their children, as a duty. 2. Children would be thought undutiful to their parent, if they did not comply with his command in this particular. 3. This last duty is not performed without reluctance; for they, who do not think themselves bound by the ties of blood, are unwilling, and sometimes refuse, to perform it. 4. The old person dies with composure, and even with festivity, as well as of choice: which is a proof, that by such a death he hopes to escape some great evil, or secure some important good. To which I may add, that such a practice could not become general, and continue from age to age, unless with the consent of the persons who suffer. Young people there, as in other countries, have the view of becoming parents, and of growing old, in their turn; and would never set the example, if they were under any apprehension in regard to its consequences. Does this fact, then, prove, that those poor barbarians are destitute of filial affection? It proves just the contrary. The children comply with the parent's command, because they love him, and think it their duty to obey him: and they do nothing to him, but what, if in his circumstances, they would wish to be done to themselves. If a teacher were to say, “Ye children, afflict and torment your parents, and, when they are old, put them to death; for to them ye owe your life, and many of its most important blessings:”—he would hardly obtain a second hearing: the absurdity of the speech would be evident to every rational creature. But if his address were in these terms; “Children owe gratitude and obedience to their parents: let them, therefore, when a parent grows old, wishes to be at rest, and requires them to put an end to his sufferings, do as they are commanded; for thus shall they recommend him to the favour of the good Deity, and satiate all the malevolence of the evil one:”—such an address to credulous and pagan barbarians might not perhaps appear absurd. And yet their acquiescence in it would not prove them destitute of natural affection, or of moral sentiment; nay it would prove that they were possessed of both: for otherwise, how could they receive the one doctrine, and reject the other! This note is already too long: and yet I think I shall not be blamed for subjoining, in honour of human nature, another extract from Mr. Ellis's book: that ingenious work being now (I know not for what reason) very rare. “The Indians adjoining to Hudson's Bay, except when intoxicated with brandy, are very courteous and compassionate, even to those who are absolute strangers, as well as to their own family: and their affection for their children is singularly great. An extraordinary instance of this happened lately at York-Fort. Two small canoes, passing Hayes's river, when they had got to the middle of it, one of them, which was made of the bark of a birch tree, sunk, in which was an Indian, his wife, and child. The other canoe, being small, and incapable of receiving more than one of the parents and the child, produced an extraordinary contest between the man and his wife: not but that both of them were willing to devote themselves to save the other; but the difficulty lay in determining which would be the greatest loss to the child. The man used arguments to prove it more reasonable that he should be drowned, than the woman. But she alledged, that it was more for the child's advantage, that she should perish; because he, as a man, was better able to hunt, and consequently to provide for it. The little time there was still remaining was spent in mutual expressions of tenderness; the woman strongly recommending, as for the last time, to her husband, the care of her child. This being done, they took leave in the water; the woman, quitting the canoe, was drowned; and the man with the child got safe ashore; and is now taken much notice of by the people thereabouts. It appears upon the whole, that the single object in view was the preservation of the child.”—Parental love and filial regard are not always proportioned to each other; yet, where the former is so strong, it cannot be supposed that the latter will be preternaturally weak.
8 See Essay on Laughter and Ludicrous Composition. Chap. iv.
9 That no instance of extermination took place, during the period of Gothick Conquest, cannot be affirmed, if we admit the testimony of contemporary historians. Several instances might have happened; and other horrid deeds, whereof there is no record, must have been perpetrated, while so many violent and extensive revolutions were going on. In regard to the character of the northern invaders, authors are not agreed: some look upon them as barbarians of the worst kind; many judge more favourably, both of their policy, and of their manners. It was natural enough for the writers of that time to think and speak of them with the utmost abhorrence, and rather to magnify the calamities that were before their eyes, than to describe things impartially. Several circumstances incline me to believe, that the sufferings of the vanquished, though they must have been great, were not so dreadful, as some learned writers imagine. I confine myself to one particular, which is connected with a subject that I have elsewhere touched upon. If we were to be exterminated by a race of men, whose language was totally different from ours, would not our language be exterminated too? Can it be supposed, that the speech of our conquerors would undergo any material alteration from the English, which, without understanding it, they might have heard during the war, or which might still be muttered in obscure corners by a few of our surviving countrymen, who had escaped from the general massacre, and were suffered to remain in their own land, because too inconsiderable to provoke expulsion? In such a case, it seems probable, that the language of the country would be altogether changed, and that in this, as in every thing else, the conquerors would give the law. But if Britain were now to be subdued by a people of a strange tongue; and if, after the lapse of a thousand years, the British language should bear such a resemblance to the English now spoken, as the Italian and Spanish bear to the Latin; would it not be reasonable for our successors of that remote period to conclude, that the invaders of the eighteenth century must have been but few, in proportion to the number of those among whom they established themselves; and that, therefore, though they became masters of the country, they did not extirpate the people? In Gaul, in Spain, and in Italy, the Roman tongue was generally spoken at the time of the Gothick invasions; not pure, we may well imagine, in the remoter parts especially, but with such debasements, as it is natural for provinces, at a considerable distance from the seat of empire, to adopt in the course of two or three hundred years. And yet, notwithstanding these debasements, and those additional barbarisms introduced by the Franks, Vandals, Lombards, &c. the languages now spoken in France, Spain, and Italy, are so like the antient Latin, and one another, that any person who understands one of them may guess at the meaning of hundreds and thousands of words in each of the rest. In fact, though many changes have been made with regard to syntax, inflection, articles, and other things of less moment, these languages may all be said to be composed of the same materials. Of the Italian, in particular, an author, who must be allowed to be a competent judge, declares, that, though very many barbarous and northern words have been brought into it, one might form, not a discourse only, but an entire and large volume of good Italian, wherein not a single word or phrase should be admitted, that did not derive its origin from the Latin writers. Tutto che non si possa negare, che sianvisi aggiunte moltissime voci barbare, ed oltramontani, io sono certissimo altresì, che si potrebbe formare, non dico un discorso, ma un intero e grosso volume in buon Italiano, senza che vi entrasse pure una sola parola, o frase, di cui non si trovasse l' origine negli scrittori Latini. Le vicende della Letteratura. Cap. 4. Next to the Italian, the Spanish and Portuguese bear the greatest resemblance to the Latin; although they suffered alteration, not only from the northern invaders, but also from the Moors, who conquered Spain in the eighth century, and were not finally driven out of it, till the fifteenth. If these languages, after all, lost so little of their primitive form, how inconsiderable must have been the number of the victorious Goths and Vandals, when compared to that of the people whom they subdued, and among whom they settled! The Saxons, who established themselves in England, seem to have been more intent upon extermination, than any others of those adventurers. The British language they extirpated from all the provinces that fell into their hands, and planted their own in its stead; which they could hardly have done, if they had not destroyed the greater part of the people. And to this day, the English and lowland Scotch dialects are called Sassonich or Saxon, by the highlanders of North Britain, and do indeed partake more of that tongue, than of any other. By the Norman Conquest many French words were brought in, but the foundation and fabrick of the language were not materially affected.
10 Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws of England. Book ii. c. 4.
11 Robertson's History of Scotland. Book i.
12 See Robertson's History of Scotland. Book i.
13 See Robertson's History of Charles V. vol. i. page 240.
14 Hurd's Letters on Chivalry and Romance.
15 Tilts and tournaments, however, ought not to be looked upon, as unnatural expedients of a barbarous and bloody policy. In their first institution, they were not only rational, but wife: “because of singular use to instruct the nobility and gentry, who formed the cavalry of those days, in the dextrous management of their horses and arms.” So says the great historian, upon the authority of writers who lived in the age of tournaments. And he subjoins the following pertinent remark. “Indeed, all nations, desirous to excel in war, have endeavoured to render their publick diversions conducive to that purpose,” (that is, to military discipline); “a policy, which seems to be too much forgotten at this time, in this kingdom.” Lord Lyttelton's Notes on the fifth book of his History of the age of Henry the Second. That single combat was an amusement of heroes in the days of Homer, we learn from the funeral games in honour of Patroclus.
16 Robertson's History of Scotland.
17 Lord Lyttelton's Age of Henry II.
18 Hurd's Letters on Chivalry and Romance.
19 Hurd's Letters.
20 “After having attended your Lady in the morning,” says the Troubadour Amanieu des Escas in his advice to a Gentlewoman, “you may walk in the great hall, and salute with civility those who pass there; answering them in a courteous manner, but without exceeding in talk. Be grave in your step, and modest in your look.” Mrs. Dobson's History of the Troubadours, pag. 444. —In those days, the upper servants in great houses were generally persons of family. By the common people in Scotland they are still called, the gentlewoman, and the gentleman.
21 The Crusades were in many other respects beneficial to Europe. They enlarged mens ideas of commerce, improved their taste, and refined their manners; and occasioned new distributions of property; whereby the sovereigns acquired greater power, the laws became more effectual, the aristocracy grew less formidable, and the people by degrees emerged into liberty. These causes, by a slow and almost imperceptible energy continued through several ages, brought on at last a total reformation of the Feudal System.
22 Richard the First, king of England, and count of Poitou, was a generous patron of the Troubadours, and at length came to imitate them with no bad success. Two of his poems, with some other Provensal pieces, are very well versified in a volume intitled Rimes, printed for Mr. Dilly 1781; in which volume there is great store of poetical ideas, expressed with strength, elegance, and harmony.
23 Literary History of the Troubadours, page 12.
24 That Petrarch's passion was sincere, or such at least as gave him uneasiness for a considerable time, appears from a passage in an account of his life and character, written by himself in Latin prose, and prefixed to an edition of his works printed Basil, apud Hen. Petri 1554. But that it was of that permanent and overwhelming nature, which is generally supposed, may justly be doubted, upon the same authority. He was, he says, once violently in love, when a young man; but it was amor honestus, an honourable, or a virtuous passion. Granting, that Laura (or Lauretta) the wife of Hugues de Sade was the object of it; and that the lover called it honourable, because it detached him from criminal connections; yet what evidence have we, that it continued with him (as some authors are pleased to affirm) to the end of his life? There is presumptive, nay there is positive, evidence of the contrary: and that he was less subject perhaps, than most men can pretend to be, to the tyranny of the winged boy. The presumptive evidence is founded on the laborious life which he must have led in the pursuits of literature. His youth was employed in study, at a time when study was very difficult, from the want of books and of masters. He became the most learned man of his time. To him we are indebted for the preservation of some antient authors, whom he is said to have transcribed with his own hand. His works, in my edition of them, fill one thousand four hundred and fifty folio pages closely printed; whereof the Italian Sonnets are not much more than a twentieth part; the rest being in Latin; and one of his Latin pieces an Epick poem called Africa, almost as long as the Eneid. Is it credible, that a man of extreme sensibility, pining in hopeless love for thirty, forty, or fifty years, could be so zealous a student, and so voluminous a composer? His retirement at Valcluse was by no means devoted to love and Laura. There, says he, almost all the works I have published were completed, or begun, or planned: and so many they were, that even at these years they employ and fatigue me. Diverticulum aliquod quasi portum quærens, repperi vallem perexiguam, sed solitariam atque amænam, quæ Clausa dicitur, quindecim millibus ab Avinione distantem, ubi fontium rex omnium Sorga oritur. Captus loci dulcedine, libellos meos, et meipsum illuc transtuli. Longa erit historia, si pergam exequi quid ibi multos ac multos egerim per annos. Hæc est summa, quod quicquid fere opusculorum mihi excidit ibi vel actum, vel cæptum, vel conceptum est: quæ tam multa fuerunt, ut usque ad hanc ætatem me exerceant ac satigent. Fr. Petrarcha; de origine sua, vita, et conversatione. The positive evidence we have in the following quotation from the same Treatise; in the third sentence of which quotation, for a reason that will occur to the learned reader, I take the liberty to expunge two words, and put one in their place.—Amore acerrimo, sed unico, et honesto, in adolescentia laboravi; et diutius laborassem, nisi jam tepescentem ignem mors acerba, sed utilis, extinxisset. Libidinum me prorsus expertem dicere posse optarem quidem, sed si dicam mentiar; hoc secure dixerim, me, quanquam fervore ætatis et complexionis ad id raptum, vilitatem illam tamen semper animo execratum. Mox vero ad quadragesimum annum adpropinquans, dum adhuc et caloris satis esset, et virium, non solum AMOREM, sed ejus memoriam omnem sic abjeci, quasi nunquam fœminam aspexissem. Quod inter primas felicitates memoror, Deo gratias agens, qui me adhuc integrum et vigentem, tam vili et mihi semper odioso servitio liberavit. Sed ad alia procedo. Hieronymo Squarzafichi, in a life of Petrarch prefixed to the same collection of his writings, informs us, that the Lady's real name was Lauretta, and that the poet made it Laura. Thus altered, it supplies him with numberless allusions to the Laurel, and to the story of Apollo and Daphne. Might he not, in many of his Sonnets, have had allegorical references to the Poetical Laurel; which was offered him at one and the same time by deputies from France and Italy, and with which he was actually crowned at Rome? In this view, his love of fame and of poetry would happily coincide with his tenderness for Laura, and give peculiar warmth and elevation to such of his thoughts as might relate to any one of the three passions
25 I beg leave to subjoin the concluding paragraph, as a specimen of this excellent piece.—“Never condemn other jongleurs: those, who are severe on persons of their own profession, show a base and envious mind, and expose their own jealousy much more than the faults of their brethren.—If you are asked to relate what you have seen and heard in the world, be not too diffusive, but proceed by degrees; sound the disposition of your hearers, till you observe they relish your discourse: then speak of the brave lords you have met with, and of the ladies in the highest esteem; and endeavour to inspire those, who listen to you, with the love of virtue. If the company are persons of high rank, and of elevated minds, display, both in your countenance and voice, the eloquence which your subject inspires. Be distinct and grave in your manners; let your carriage be firm and graceful; and abstain from all mean and low expressions. Some jongleurs find fault with every thing, but take care to extol themselves highly: and such is their vanity and ignorance, that were they in the presence of the king himself, they would affect the free and familiar tone of men of importance. Do not imitate those; the more they are known, the less they are esteemed. For your part, whatever is your genius, your knowledge, or your wit, do not make a boast of it: be modest, and you will find persons enough who will set forth your merit and abilities. Avoid all excess: flee all bad company; but do not appear to despise any one; for the meanest and the worst person is most able to become your enemy; and they sometimes pursue those they hate, with such inveterate malice, as to injure them in the opinion of the worthy and the judicious.—While you are young and vigorous, recommend in your writings, and impress by your behaviour, the respect due to old age: And maintain continually this truth, that those, who frequent the company of persons, whose lives have been spent in virtue, will derive to themselves a lasting blessing and reward.”—See Mrs. Dobson's Literary History of the Troubadours, pag. 338–349.
26 Vicende della Litteratura, del C. Denina.
27 “To avoid the raillery of those who mock my useless constancy, a thought occurs: I may seign, that I am favourably received. I shall be believed: for women are easily softened. So says Ovid, and all the gallant poets.” This passage is found in Arnaud Daniel, a Troubadour of the twelfth century. Hist. of Troub. p. 215.
28 Third volume of Don Quixote, near the beginning.
29 Essay on Poetry and Musick Part i. chap. 5.
30 The great Lord Lyttelton, after mentioning several particulars of Pope, Swift, and other wits of that time, when I asked some question relating to the Author of Tom Jones, began his answer with these words, “Henry Fielding, I assure you, had more wit and more humour than all the persons we have been speaking of put together.” This testimony of his Lordship, who was intimately acquainted with Fielding, ought not to be forgotten.
$$$
