On Modern Female Cultivation. No. I
Author: Jewsbury, Maria Jane.
Publication info: The Athenæum ; London (1832): viii, 848 p.

On Modern Female Cultivation.—No. I. [in, The Athenæum; Journal of English and Foreign Literature, Science, and the Fine Arts. No. 223. London, Saturday, February 4, 1832]
[Page 79]
ON MODERN FEMALE CULTIVATION.—No. I. Women , like kings, are rarely spoken of impartially; adored or stigmatized, flattered or libelled, despots or puppets, we have not yet settled—they have not yet settled for themselves—what is the precise quantity of understanding they possess, and of power they should exercise. Controversy on these points ran high towards the close of the last century. Some of the disputants brought the subject to be considered a dangerous one, and, as if by general consent, it has since lain in abeyance. A casual essay in a periodical has sometimes broken the silence, but nothing more; there has been a long truce between claim and dispute; it has been the fashion for women to write books, the fashion for men to praise them, and the old question of equal or not equal, has been amicably waived. Latterly, there have been a few notable signs, significant of a change, and about the year ---, expect, as Francis Moore says, “rain more or less heavy”— otherwise, articles, chapters, dissertations, and perhaps satires, on the subject of female mind, its capacity, its limits, and its proper line of exertion. Strange to say, the relative merits of the understanding of the sexes, was a favourite controversy soon after the revival of letters; and the fifteenth and sixteenth century saw, on behalf of women, the gallantry of chivalry carried into literature. Boccacio was the first who set the example, by writing a Latin work in honour of illustrious women; after him, more than twenty writers published eulogies on the sex, and many of these writers were monks. Brantome, a Frenchman, was the author of a volume, ‘Des Vies des Dames Illustres,’ but, like a courtier, he mentioned none except queens and princesses; after Brantome, one Hilarion, of Coste, a monk, published two quarto volumes of eight hundred pages each, devoted merely to the women of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and he, like a good priest, praised none but women of the Roman Catholic church. One would have thought these writings alone must have exhausted the quarry, but Peter Paul Ribéra, an Italian, published, in that language, a work entiled ‘The Immortal Triumphs and Heroic Enterprises of eight hundred and forty-five women!’—and independent of these large volumes, many writers addressed short panegyrics to particular ladies; men of genius attached themselves to celebrated women, (whether for their intellect or their influence, the reader's bias must determine); and, at a later period, Descartes, admired by two princesses, boasted of the philosophic character of women. Amongst these panegyrics, one of the most singular was published at Venice in 1555, styled ‘The Temple of the Divine Signora Jeanne d'Arragon, constructed to her honour by all the greatest wits, and in all the principal languages, of the world.’ The Academy voting this homage, once entertained the notion of associating the Signora's sister in the honour; but, after grave deliberation, it was decided that the ladies might prefer separate shrines, and the “Temple” was erected to Jeanne d'Arragon alone. The most correct name for this literary monument would have been the tower of Babel; for the Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Chaldean, Italian, French, Spanish, Slavonic, Polonese, and Hungarian tongues, were employed in its construction. It might have seemed that literary gallantry “could no further go;” but, grave and reverend signors (there were beards and black caps then,) having claimed for women equality with men, others came forward to claim for them superiority! The leading knight in this new tourney, was the celebrated Cornelius Agrippa, theologian, soldier, physician, astrologer, alchemist, courtier, and vagabond. In 1509, he published a treatise “on the superior excellence of women over men,” and supported his arguments by proofs, theological, physical, historical, cabalistical, and moral. Ruscelli, a Venetian, followed on the same side, and out-Agrippa'd Agrippa; he mixed up Platonism and theology, put Moses by the side of Petrarch, and cited in the same breath Homer and St. John: his book was a fantastic mixture of love, religion, philosophy, and paganism. Notwithstanding all these tomes, there yet remained some incredulous people; bachelors and husbands, who demurred to such large draughts on their humility— sixteenth-century-men, whom even folios could not vanquish; and new books on the old theme continued to be produced for their conversion, in Italian, Spanish, and French. John Bull seems to have been John Bull even then, for we meet with no English work on the subject. The women too, not satisfied with having been so lauded by men, began to laud themselves, and one published a volume at Paris, with a title, which we copy for its singular modesty:— ‘The Generous Woman; who shows that her sex is more noble, more politic, more learned, more valiant, more virtuous, and more economical than the male sex!’
Venerable cobwebs these, and spun by venerable spiders, yet not to be despised, as illustrating the fact, that female cultivation will always accord with the masculine taste predominant for the time being. When the men were chivalric savages, spending their time according to Mr. Chainmail's fancy, in “feasting, fighting, and praying,” the women were Amazonian in their pursuits, embroidering scarfs to be worn in battle—in the amusements of peace stimulating the love of war, and not unfrequently acting as warriors themselves. When letters revived, and learning came into fashion amongst men, learning was cultivated by women. When political party spirit has split men into factions, women have scarcely been behind-hand, presenting petitions and patching their faces in behalf of a favourite cause—witness the times of Charles I. and of Queen Anne.
Re-asserting that female cultivation will always accord with the predominant masculine taste, the existing era cannot be passed without remark. What are the intellectual possessions now most in vogue, most marketable, and soonest recognized? General knowledge —versatility—and, both in writing and conversation, “the gift of utterance.” What most strikingly characterizes our literature? Universal inquiry, and universal readiness at meeting inquiry; or, to venture description by an epithet, and that a coined one, our literature is encyclopædic—a brief description of all things—a colloquial commentary on whatsoever is, has been, or is to come. To this, female cultivation affords a precise parallel, for never were our women so—accomplished. We do not limit this term to music, dancing, and drawing: by accomplished, we mean that peculiar mental elegance which is the real or supposed result of much tuition, some travel, and great intercourse with society. Accomplishment is the intellectual shadow of an intellectual substance; it is not attainments, not science, not even knowledge in its simple form, but the combined phantasm of all; it is less a cultivation of understanding than a preparation for society, a fashioner of deportment, and a teacher of conversation. Accomplishments are the manners of the mind; and were a census taken of all the educated women under thirty, the result would justify our calling the present THE ERA OF ACCOMPLISHED WOMEN, as
[Page 80]
distinguished from all other eras, and all the women of other eras. Beyond this we are not prepared to admit. Yet a cry is heard in some quarters that females are now over-educated, and over-education, as it is termed, bears the blame of all feminine delinquencies: over-education answers to the French Revolution, inasmuch as it can be made a grand mot d'énigme . Now, so far from joining in this cry, we must take the liberty of saying, that women are not educated half enough. But more on this subject next week.
$$$
