On Modern Female Cultivation. No. III
Author: Jewsbury, Maria Jane.
Publication info: The Athenæum ; London (1832): viii, 848 p.

On Modern Female Cultivation.—No. III [in, The Athenæum; Journal of English and Foreign Literature, Science, and the Fine Arts. No. 226. London, Saturday, February 25, 1832]
[Page 129]
ON MODERN FEMALE CULTIVATION.—No. III. The next on the list of those who havef troubled the waters of education generally, but of woman in particular, are the systematizers —teachers and writers who think that nothing is to be learned except out of “a prent buik”—who take the universe of knowledge and cut it “into little stars”—stitch the elements into catechisms—teach nothing old but on new principles (as if principles were ever new)—intellectual Pucks, who will put a girdle round any science “in forty minutes” —or pages;—systematizers, who make love to unsuspecting fathers and mothers, causing them to believe, that mind, like mahogany, may be carved into anything, and that mahogany, like mind, will very soon inlay itself with brass inventors of teaching-schemes,
Cold as their hearts, and barren as their brains;—
marrers of the health of the early, and therefore most sacred happiness of girlhood, removing it from the hands of those teachers of God's own appointing, for the first years of existence—fresh air—natural play— buoyant spirits and affections—fields— flowers—Bible stories, and “the mother's knee.”
To give amusements a learned air, to besiege with information the senses of mere babes, and stiffen with premature accomplishments minds and bodies yet “in the gristle” —well may there be a superabounding of crooked spines, pale faces, and precocious performances, almost rivalling dancing dogs and piping bullfinches. With regard to the boasted result of this immense machinery of tuition, we shall say a word by-and-bye— meanwhile, those ruthless children of Anak who dwell in the cities of system, great and strong, and walled up to Heaven, so that the light of the sun never penetrates, will be so good as shoot no arrows at us; for, in the love of Goody Two Shoes we mean to live and die.
There remains yet a third party in this question, on whom blame must fall—the race of ambitious parents; who, not sordid, but infatuated worshippers of talent, would, at every risk, have their children clever, or at least reputed to be so; who expend cheerfully on a daughter's schooling what would formerly have sufficed for her dower. The commencement of a simpler, and yet far deeper style of instruction lies with them; it is their money, their anxiety, their expectations, that call forth promises and professors of wonders; they are the real authors of the systems, theories, and treatises, that “darken counsel by words without knowledge;” they really keep those splendid establishments where mind and manner are forced as in a hot bed; they require, they remunerate, and with them it lies to regenerate. We have said that the present is par excellence the era of accomplished women; herein, ambitious parents have their reward, but it is one that might not perhaps satisfy them, did they recognize the fact, that, with all the modern means of facilitating study, with the triple aid of books, time, and fashion, we have no females so remarkable for their attainments as some who graced an earlier and a darker period! To name but a few proofs. The young creature who was queen only to mount a scaffold, solaced some of her last hours with Plato in Greek: the three Seymours, nieces to a queen and daughters to a regent, were all celebrated for their science and for Latin verses, which were translated all over Europe; the daughter of Lord Chancellor More translated from the Greek the ecclesiastical history of Eusebius; the three daughters of Sir Anthony Cooke (one of whom was governess to Edward VI.) were all celebrated for their learning; the beautiful Mary Stuart wrote and spoke six languages; Aloysia Sigéa, of Toledo, besides Latin and Greek, understood Hebrew, Arabic, and Syriac, and wrote in each of these languages a letter to Pope Paul the Third; Isabella de Cordaud was mistress of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, Cassandra Fidele wrote well in the three languages of Homer, Virgil, and Dante, and frequently gave public lessons in Padua. Madame Seturman seems to have been a female Crichton, since, independent of other acquirements, she spoke nine different languages. But it is neither interesting nor needful to accumulate all the names of those females who in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries assisted in controversies, harangued in Latin, wrote Greek, studied Hebrew, gave lectures in philosophy and even theology. The question is not one of taste, but of facts: we may prefer, if we choose, the female mind in a state of greater feminineness, but such preference has nothing to do with the quantity of real and unusual attainment possessed by women less preferred. In adverting to these facts, we wish not to see the revival of lady doctors—if we did, it would not be possible. That which we now call society, was then much less known; habits of life were more simple; fashion had not established her multitudinous claims on time; literature was not an adjunct to luxury, it was a luxury in itself. We should regret to see a pedantic system supersede even the accomplishing one; but when a girl manifests real intellect, why should the intervention of prejudice prevent her studies, conducted privately as they may, being in some degree sound, masculine, invigorating, and comprehensive? Why, as in a famine, is she to pay dearly for inferior food? why is she to give her “fourscore pieces of silver for an ass's head”? An early intercourse with those works which prove their authors to have been “only a little lower than the angels”—with those grave and lofty thinkers who flood the understanding with light without heating the sensibility, who love the beautiful, the holy, and the true—the great writers of and for all ages, “to whom as to the mountains and the stars the soul feels passive and submiss”— this, more than anything besides, would render mind, what to woman it too often is not, a source of tranquil enjoyment. On this subject, we could, time and space permitting, enlarge much more; we prefer, however, on closing, to refer the reader to a very admirable paper by the late Mrs. Barbauld, on the Education of Circumstances. Ostensibly relating to the care of a son, the principle is transferrable to that of a daughter; and we commend the whole essay to the earnest attention of all over-anxious parents.
$$$
