On Modern Female Cultivation. No. II
Author: Jewsbury, Maria Jane.
Publication info: The Athenæum ; London (1832): viii, 848 p.

On Modern Female Cultivation.—No. II [in, The Athenæum; Journal of English and Foreign Literature, Science, and the Fine Arts. No. 224. London, Saturday, February 11]
[Page 95]
ON MODERN FEMALE CULTIVATION.—No. II. We concluded last week with declaring our opinion, that women are so far from being over-educated, that they are not educated half enough. Over-accomplished they may be; but the boasted education they now receive, is meagre and contemptible, if the intent of education be a perfect development of mind and character, in accordance with the native bias of both—if every human being ought to consider the Spirit within him in the light of a kingdom he is to rule over, a domain he is to cultivate, a trust of which he is to give account—if the educator and the educated ought to consider themselves fellow-workers in the great business of becoming wise in order to be useful. Where there is mind, no such thing is possible as over-education, in the high meaning of the term. What we really labour under in practice, is the prevalence of inappropriate education—one that has no reference to difference of intellect or station. What we labour under in theory, is the prevalence of mean or inflated notions relative to the nature of education, its power, effects, and instruments; and, as subordination is the complexion of female life, women suffer most, alike from the practice and the theory. The worth of all instruction which can be bought and sold, which books and professors can impart, is exaggerated; that instruction which would nurture the faculties and encourage them to act vigorously for them-selves, is feared and disliked. There is Mahomedanism in our system; memory answers to the Koran, manner to the Prophet, and society to Mecca: these are sanctioned, cultivated, and worshipped; but of anything beyond these there is intolerance. Of what is styled over -education, how much has reference to aught beyond making the pupil pleasing and prosperous? In what is called our excessive cultivation, of what is the portion of mind really cultivated? Amongst the highly-finished young women who have spent eight or nine years as the recipients of tuition, how many shall we find who have thought out for themselves a single thought, or have any notion of the value of knowledge beyond the mere credit of possessing it? how many are acquainted with the responsibility involved by the possession of an understanding—be it great or be it small? There is Mahomedanism in our system, and faithful answers to these queries would prove it: a faithful answer would prove, that we cultivate our women to the highest pitch that can make them fascinating, with a careful abstinence from that which would make them wise. We overlay the idol with gold, but should grieve if a Prometheus gave it life. We deprive the nightingale of sight, in order that it may sing us sweeter songs; we render the captive weak, and demand him to be strong as the free; we stimulate his feelings to madness, and expect from him the exercise of reason; we spread our treasures before him, and mock if he ask to share them; we deprive him of liberty, and bid him rejoice in his prison. This may be a metaphorical way of putting the case, but is it very far from the truth? Is the painted, gilded, varnished thing which we call education, and which some call over-education, worth presenting to the minds and hearts of a race of beings as influential as women?— and, remembering the conventional morality in which, for the most part, a female is reared—the veil that is kept between herself and the knowledge of her true position in society —the little truth that she hears whilst hearing it might avail her—the enervating treatment she habitually receives even from the nursery, till at least half way towards the grave,—remembering this, and much more, are we justified in attributing her faults and follies primarily to herself?—There are many to divide the blame amongst; we will begin with the poets and novelists, who, like the enchanters of old times, can effect more mischief in a few minutes than may be undone with long and weary toil. Women, and the influence of women, have been to them such fertile themes, that, if all their descriptions were fairly copied out, we might cover the world with them; the globe would be an
[Page 96]
entire sheet of foolscap—the real “Ladies' Magazine.” But amidst all the bevies of angels they have drawn, how passing few of them have been rational creatures; their heroines have mainly become such personifications of tears, love, death, poetry, and helplessness, that an honest man, linked to such in real life, would surely be at his wits' ends before the end of the honey-moon. They have mainly erected the standard of feminine excellence, and their motto has been, “ La vertu—c'est le dévoûment ,”—as false and fatal a one as may well be found. Yet in various applications of this sentiment consist the ethics of imagination. Therein, the two great duties of womanhood are, being beautiful, and being devoted; the two great occupations, loving and dying; and the exceeding great reward consists in every self-willed exhibition of impassioned feeling being made a decoy for sympathy and admiration. Examine the whole range of imaginative literature, and, considering its matchless sway over human sensibility, and the matchless power and beauty of mind employed in its construction, has it done, or has it failed in, its duty?—has it thrown its influence into the scale of sacred right, or of pleasing wrong?—has it seduced or strengthened —has it done justice to, has it benefited Women ? We trow not. They have received from poetry and fiction lip homage and knee reverence, adulation, incense, every concomitant of idol-worship, with only the absence of fervent rational respect. The process of degradation has taken the semblance of adoration; compliments to their love have veiled contempt of their understanding—for one female portrait that society would be benefited by its having life, how many hundreds have we who would only be less intensely, ethereally useless than the ghost of a rose or the phantasm of a lily? Earth is too gross for these essences of womanhood. This is only one point in which poetry and fiction may be arraigned on behalf of the female character: over against the land of sentiment lies the kingdom of heartlessness, and the topographers of this kingdom, otherwise fashionable novelists, have assuredly done their best to erect a low standard of womanly excellence. The bowl-and-dagger-and-wrapping-gown ladies were bad enough, but all good angels keep us from the nether mill-stones of quality!—Enough on this subject until next week.
$$$
