Essay III. On Poetry
Author: Allingham, William.
Publication info: Varieties In Prose By William Allingham . [1], 380 p. London: Longmans, Green and Co, 1893.

Essay III. On Poetry [in, Varieties in Prose; By William Allingham; Volume III; Irish Sketches Essays Etc.]
[Page 253]
ESSAY III. ON POETRY. [ These remarks were orally delivered, which partly accounts for the form they have taken. ] The spirit of Poetry in man is that force which everywhere and through various means is urging him to the production of something beautiful—to the production of Beauty. Through Metrical Speech it finds one channel to express itself. Through this, it expresses itself on the whole more completely than in any other way. And, therefore, Metrical Speech, in its best examples, is called ‘Poetry:’ this manifestation of the Poetic Spirit is called ‘Poetry’— par excellence.
But the word ‘Poetry’ is used sometimes in this sense, sometimes in the wider and more general sense; and thus is produced a haziness in our minds. The words Poetry, Poet, Poetical, are applied in a loose, indefinite manner. A beautiful place or prospect is sometimes called poetical; a starry night; a romantic incident; a noble action; a fair face or form. A picture, a piece of music, is said to be poetical, or ‘full of poetry.’ Dancing has been called ‘the Poetry of Motion;’ Sculpture, ‘silent Poetry;’ Beethoven is sometimes styled a ‘tone-poet;’ Turner, a ‘poet in colours.’
[Page 254]
In these cases, perhaps we mean, ‘Here is a manifestation of the Spirit of Poetry;’ or, perhaps, ‘Here is something that impresses us like Metrical Poetry—puts us into a similar mood.’ We may, consciously or unconsciously, refer either to the ideal source of all kinds of Poetry, or else to the flower and finest embodiment of the Spirit of Poetry which exists in metrical language; we may be using the words Poet and Poetry in a direct sense, or an indirect, or partly in the one and partly the other. Hence, some indistinctness and confusion of thought; greatest, when we come to compare one form of words with another form of words, and call Prose ‘poetical,’ or even call Prose ‘Poetry,’ as is done every day. What more common than to praise some rich and sonorous bit of prose-writing, or some flight of oratory, as ‘highly poetical’? and now and again we go farther and declare it to be ‘true poetry.’
Let us examine this a little. Richly coloured and melodious sentences there are in the writings of several of our high prose-writers. Many parts of our English Bible have a powerful poetic impressiveness. If you call these ‘poetry,’ do I dissent? No. Substantially we agree. The question that remains is one of words, of definition of words.
Here is a passage, you say, which embodies the spirit of poetry in a powerfully impressive form. As to this, we are of one mind. Also it has a very discernible rhythm and modulation of sound—a greater degree of this than ordinary prose. Thus it has not only the high spiritual qualities of Metrical Poetry, but a noticeable degree also of the peculiar quality of metre . This does not amount to a regular metre, or the composition would be Metrical Poetry. It approaches, but is not, Metrical Poetry: it is something else. Might we not call it Rhythmic Prose? Then ‘Rhythmic Prose’ (you remark) may be, and is as high, perhaps a higher thing than regular Poetry. Not so either.
In certain grand and rare examples of Rhythmic Prose,
[Page 255]
the matter, the substance, is transcendently impressive, and the total effect upon the mind more powerfully poetic than the effect of most of the matter to be found in a regular metrical form. Nevertheless, other qualities being equal, and the matter expressed being suitable for rhythmic treatment, a composition in regular metrical form is more impressive than one which is not in regular metrical form. Nay, must not the Psalms be finer still in their original form than in any translation? and that original form is metrical, after the Hebrew manner. Isaiah and Ezekiel, too, and the author of ‘Job,’ recognised Metrical Poetry as a thing different from Prose, and rose into it when they felt need of their highest means of expression.
‘Poetry’— Poiesis —Making—in the widest sense (as applied to man) I take to mean the mental Creative Energy, and its products—the whole group of the inventing, systematising, and ordering faculties; that energy which is the earthly well-head (but drawn from a higher invisible source) of morals, laws, arts, society.
Long usage has applied the world more distinctively to the Fine Arts—those arts which spring from, and appeal to, our sense of Beauty: and, in its strictest application, we confine the word Poetry to one particular Fine Art—that which expresses beauty through metrical speech. It is an Art arising out of the musical quality of words, and thus, as we shall find, influences the manner and the matter. When any one speaks simply and without qualification of Poetry, he is understood to mean Metrical Poetry, and nothing else. And it is in this sense that I desire to use the word.
Poetry thus defined, is a different thing from Prose. Prose is sometimes very like Poetry, yet Prose and Poetry are two distinct things, and ought to have two distinct names. You might ask me to call the latter Verse; but I don't see that we need give up the old and honoured name, by which metrical Poetry is marked as Poetry par excellence.
[Page 256]
Poetry includes every highest quality of Prose, and includes them in a definitely metrical and musical form, peculiar to itself: but observe, this form is not a mere grace and decoration; it is found by experience to give to words their greatest attainable force and beauty, and, in most cases, to convey the highest thoughts incomparably better than Prose. Poetry is metrical, Prose is non-metrical: they are thus at first definable by their forms: but the distinction is found to permeate their substance and spirit.
No doubt (though each has its proper realm, its own authority and laws) there is a kind of borderland where they sometimes mix. Prose is never without some share of rhythm and modulation, because these are inherent qualities in human speech; and in the best rhythmical prose this rises into a near approximation to the effect of metre. There are many gradations of rhythm from the merest Prose—say of an Act of Parliament, rising through that of a statement in the Nisi Prius Court, of a familiar letter, of a conversational narrative, of a newspaper leading- article, of an eloquent novel, of an impassioned oration, up to the rich, emphatic and almost lyrical modulation of our intensest prose-writers.
So, in the Pictorial Art, you may pass from a design in simple outline, to one in outline shaded, to a woodcut, an etching, an engraving, a tinted sketch, a sketch in colours; and upwards, by gradations, till you arrive at the finished water-colour or oil picture.
Now an etching, or even a design in outline, may exhibit the highest qualities of the Pictorial Art in larger measure than many a painting. You might properly prefer one of Rembrandt's etchings, or one of Dürer's woodcuts, to a large and careful picture by Benjamin West, although President of the Royal Academy, and admired by George the Third. Yet, in the finished picture only, the Pictorial Power uses all its means. And it is in organised metrical
[Page 257]
Poetry that human speech attains its most perfect and impressive form.
But let us rather consider Prose in its usual and average condition, when it is most in its own character, and less emulous of those qualities which are the especial property of Poetry. Taking the simple and usual point of view, Prose is obviously one thing, and Poetry another.
It is in the very nature of Prose to be non-metrical ; and it is artificially put together with that very intention. Prose is a later, less natural, more conventionalised and artificial form of composition than Poetry. The metrical qualities of language are by effort and practice subdued, reduced to a minimum, kept out of observation. Prose is the expression of the scientific and analytical intellect, striving to take things separately, to examine them narrowly, little by little, continually guarding and limiting itself in its progress. Prose is careful, cautious, judicial; its business-like eyes fixed upon some attainable object, towards which it moves step by step, whether slowly or swiftly, lifting right foot after left in due succession. Vehement, high-coloured and notably rhythmic Prose, even when successful, is felt to be on the confines, if not over the boundary, of its proper dominion; it is only allowable in exceptional cases; if much used, it becomes disagreeable. In good Prose, usually, metrical forms are avoided. Metrical forms are felt to belong to a mood different from that to which Prose, as Prose, addresses itself; they belong to the poetic mood , in short, wherein imagination rather than intellect is paramount; a mood of delight, not of investigation, when the soul is lifted from the ground and moves on pulsing wings in a new and freer element.
Prose Composition, then (we say) is a form of language growing out of scientific limitations and the spirit of analysis, and is only perfectly attained through the culture of ages. In early times, everything was chanted. The
[Page 258]
chief works in Sanskrit upon grammar, law, history, medicine, mathematics, geography, metaphysics, are in verse; verse being more natural, and more memorable. Science in those days was far from being so strict, scholastic, pedantic, as in ours (but there are changes gathering in the atmosphere of Science), for imagination came largely into all processes of thought; the feeling of the unity of the world, and of the general mystery of things, showed itself in every department of study; the universal was felt in the particular. Mean associations of ideas and words (always caused by separation from the universal) were fewer than they now are. With the progress of culture came necessarily division of studies, definitions, exclusions, application to particulars, and the growth of Prose as a distinct vehicle of thought.
Poetry, by this (you may say), would appear to belong to a barbarous condition of humanity. Say, rather, to a simple and primeval condition. After science and analysis have done their best, there is still need for us nineteenth-century people to make a synthesis, and a larger synthesis than ever: to rise from anatomic studies to the contemplation and enjoyment of Life—from particulars to the universal. The Man of Science, the Man of Business, break up the whole into little bits, for analysis, for calculation, for sale; the Poet reconstructs the shattered world, and shows it still complete and beautiful.
Poetry proper (the Poetry of which I speak) is metrical, by the nature of it. Metre is sine quâ non ; and though you may compare this given specimen of Prose with that given specimen of Poetry, and prefer the former, and even rightly prefer it, and prove that it possesses a larger share of poetic qualities than the latter, yet the one remains a different quality of thing from the other. And however high the degree of poetic expression that has, in exceptional instances (fewer, perhaps, than we vaguely fancy), been attained in Prose, Metrical Poetry remains the best medium of poetic
[Page 259]
expression. The works of the Poets—of the high men who wrote in metre, are, as a matter of fact, the real treasury of poetic language. The Sense of Beauty, seeking expression in words, finds in Metrical Poetry its most fitting embodiment.
Metre, I repeat once again (for there is much misconception as to this), is the natural form of Poetry; and it brings about certain important results, for thereby is Poetry constituted as one of the Arts—an Art which is perhaps the earliest, as it is the most famous of them all.
Art comes to man before Science; also, it comes after Science, and includes it.
‘But what is your boasted Art, after all, but a toy—a knack of rhymes and metres?’
Yes!—and what, in fact, too, are bits of cobalt and vermilion, when you come to consider them dispassionately? What is Raffael's brush? a tag of bristles (you may count them, if you like). What is Mozart's harpsichord?—a frame of chips and wire. And what are you yourself, my friend?—what am I?—but a bundle of rods, and strings, and pipes? Only, somehow, there is a something slipt in, which we call Life —nay, Soul —and which makes a difference. We don't know what it is: we see it in its effects.
Poetry has a good deal of life in it. What is old Homer himself, this very long time, but a name, a dream, a question? But the Homeric Poems are alive at this day over the face of the earth, springing up fresh and fresh like grass, new to every new generation. They have outlived dynasties, and nations, and creeds. Two hundred and fifty years ago, William Shakespeare's body (eyes and hands, tongue and brain) was hidden in the ground beside a little river in Warwickshire; but his Book is not buried yet—it is running about in this world, lively enough.
Why do we love and reverence Art? Because it gives a
[Page 260]
natural scope, and lasting expression, to Genius . Artists are men of a communicate genius.
Why is ‘Painting’ a grand word? Because the Art of Painting has embodied for us the genius of such men as Van Eyck and John Bellini, Raffael and Titian, Holbein and Hogarth and Turner.
What is glorious in music? That it keeps for us, safer than wine in its flask, the fine inspirations that come (we know not how, they knew not how) to a Bach, a Glück, a Handel, a Mozart, a Purcell, a Beethoven, a Rossini: and to those nameless men who made the delicious old melodies of Ireland, Scotland, and Wales.
And even so, by the Art of Poetry has embodied itself the power and beauty and wisdom and versatility of the minds of the Greek, Latin, Oriental, Italian, Spanish, German, English, Poets—a noble crowd. Its Poetry is the glory and the crown of every Literature. The work of these men cannot be held as toyish and trifling. Their place in human history is honourable, and most honourable. The Art through which they reach us, through which they belong to us, certainly is wonderful, and to be reverenced.
I had intended to submit in this place some thoughts on Painting, Sculpture and Musical Composition, distinguishing these, along with Poetry, as Creative Arts ,—of course using the word ‘creative’ in no absolute sense; and also on Acting, on Musical Performance, and on Oratory, describing these as Arts of Personal Communication ; as well as the semi-fine- arts (is there no good phrase for them?) which ally beauty with usefulness. Architecture I reckon one of these: also Prose-Writing, which is perhaps to Poetry what Architecture is to Sculpture and Painting; mere Prose being mere building, like Baker Street, or Pimlico, or a brick wall: good Prose rising and rising, till it meets, competes, almost blends with Poetry. But it seems better to refrain for the present
[Page 261]
than to deal with these matters too cursorily; and I leave untouched the question as to Landscape Gardening's place among the arts.
Metre is the bodily form of Poetry: and now on metre let us say a few words. Metre, a stimulant and a delight, acts through the ear. A man deaf from his birth, could not taste the true enjoyment of Poetry: though he might have some pleasure, through the eye, from those verses arranged in the visible forms of eggs, altars, turbots, lozenges, which you see in old-fashioned books.
Metrical movement in words,—swing, emphasis and cadence, melodious and varied tones, rhythm and rhyme, have (as matter of fact) certain peculiar effects upon us. Some people are more moved than others, more vibrant, but all (unless notably defective) are thus moved in some degree.
We do not examine or estimate the Art of Painting or the Art of Music, according to the impressions of those who have least natural sensibility to those arts; nor need we stop to consider degrees of sensibility to Poetry, or to argue with those who care little or nothing for Poetry, or complain of them, or lament over them. Innumerable people know from experience, that metrical movement tends to draw the mind into, and keep it in a particular mood—a mood peculiarly favourable to certain impressions. Partly the mind is drawn, partly it yields. Its own feeling coincides with the known intention of the writer, or speaker. It receives, and it prepares itself for delight. It is at once soothed and stimulated. It desires and expects warmth of feeling, beauty of imagery, subtlety and rapidity of thought, refined, rich, and expressive forms of words, in the best possible order.
And all these are given to it by good Poetry. In its melodious movement it raises a succession of pleasurable expectations, and in due succession fulfils them; shows at
[Page 262]
once a constant obedience to law, and a joyful boldness and mastery; its movements and transitions are birdlike, with free yet symmetrical swing and cadence, with regulated exuberance (like that of nature in all her best forms) a beautiful proportionality develops itself as by spontaneous movement, giving to each part its utmost effect, while each remains in due subordination to the whole.
Thus far, the effect closely resembles that of Music; but during the working of Poetry's enchantment, the intellectual powers also are in a peculiar condition of pleasurable excitement and clairvoyance. Beautiful Proportionality permeates the thought and the spirit of the thought which the well-proportioned words convey. Plan, ideas, images, style, words, are all modulated to one harmonious result. All, together, moves and floats, and orbs itself. A rapid- glancing and airy logic (but strong and genuine) makes itself felt throughout; the highest and sweetest gifts of memory, of fancy, of imagination, are now fittest to the soul's mood; the synthetic, comparing, harmonising, unifying power is in the ascendant. The soul rises above trivial cares and hindrances, moving rapidly, breathing in all its body, rejoicing in every cadence of its beating wings; all its powers at command, all of them acting in due subordination; it is become more refined, clairvoyant, harmonious; organised form and regulated movement are joined with a mystical and supersensuous beauty. Beautiful Proportionality, manifest yet mysterious, that all-pervading quality of Nature's work,—here it is also, developed in the world of man's mind, in the microcosm of human thought.
This is the work of man's joyful sense of beauty (of the beauty which is in all things, rightly seen) expressing itself in choicest rhythmic words; and this is the most complete manner of human expression. Every man, when he speaks his best, would utter Poetry if he could.
[Page 263]
Shall we then call any composition of metrical words a poem?—and leave no distinction at all between Poetry and Verse? This would not do. Without metre, no Poetry; but, given a metrical form of words, have we necessarily Poetry? Not so. What is thus expressed, must be something naturally fit to be so expressed.
For expression by the Pictorial, or by the Musical Art, certain things are fit, others unfit, and the limits of these Arts are well marked. The Art of Poetry is of wider scope, less definite boundary; hence the innumerable mistakes of critics, and of poets too. But on the whole it is recognised that Poetry is doing its right and peculiar office when it expresses imaginative truth, in forms of beauty, or of sublimity, imbued with tenderness, awe, aspiration, exultation, every mood of noble emotion; and the general result is harmonious thought and feeling in harmonious words.
The Poet does not think in prose, and turn his thought into poetry, by measurement and arrangement and decoration. His thought is poetic. The beauties of a true Poem are not excrescences—they are part of the life and nature of the work. When a true poetic impulse, seeking verbal expression, clothes itself successfully in rhythmic speech, the rhythm will have a natural suitableness to the thought; its words will be the fittest and choicest words; its arrangement of them, the best possible arrangement. In good Poetry, the Metre is not a limitation, but a power; it gives not shackles, but wings.
Good Poetry is in every way the choicest arrangement of words: it demands, therefore, and rewards, the nicest elocution . And here let us glance at the benefits which Poetry confers on Language. Poetry preserves, upholds, and improves Language. It chooses the most clear, vivid, and exact forms of speech; and supports the purest methods of pronunciation. Poetry is the chief storehouse of authority
[Page 264]
on these matters. Changes must gradually come into every Language: but Poetry opposes itself to carelessness, conventionality, vulgarism, corruption of whatever kind,—all those deteriorations to which ordinary speaking and writing are subject. And remember that when language decays, not merely good taste, but thought and reason also decay. One cannot rate highly the just et norma loquendi of our own day, but doubtless it would be many degrees worse but for the Poets. The diction of social life is at present for the most part vague, unpoetic and corrupt; so also is the general run of our public writing and public oratory,—both of which indeed being addressed to the hour, use naturally the phraseology of the hour; but it is proper for men of literature, and it is their duty, to uphold our noble tongue out of these debasements. This, though a subordinate, is an important function of literature, and especially of the flower of literature, Poetry,—namely, to preserve and if possible enhance Language (which is Thought's body) in health and beauty. Many words and phrases now in common use are less than half alive; blood from the intelligent vital source hardly enters their cold lumpish substance. Human speech of this kind resembles the Horny Woman whose skin was hard warts all over,— smiles, blushes, every sympathetic change, being hopelessly and hideously encrusted. The Poets by their genius, their sensibility and culture, are led to use those forms of their native tongue which are essentially best. And the general character of their forms, where differing from those in ordinary use, is by no means additional pomp, elaboration, inflation, but on the contrary, greater simplicity, naïvety, directness, nature, truth; and thus they are at once more picturesque and more exact. Which do you suppose—is the Great Newspaper or the Great Poet the more simple and more exact in the use of words? Good poetic language fits as close as possible to its thoughts; while ordinary language too often hangs loosely sagging and bagging, here gathered
[Page 265]
into a shapeless lump, there trailing on the ground, disguising and disgracing the thought of which it is the slovenly garment.
The Spirit of Poetry itself it was, which, at an earlier stage of language, fitted words to things, and ever it requires the word and phrase not merely to approach but to get as near as possible to the thought. Many or most of the finest forms of language we owe, as we shall find if we trace them up, to the Poets. The chief wealth of Prose is borrowed or adapted from the treasury-house of Poetry. Poetry has not only originated the best words and applications of words, but has taught Prose the general power of language, and given it the hint of invention. They who, loving high Prose, disparage Poetry, are, if they knew it, a little ungrateful. I know a very great Prose-writer of our time, 1 who is not always respectful to Poetry in the abstract, yet whose pages are bejewelled with costly phrases and sentences from the Poets.
The youth enjoying his beloved poem, perusing and reperusing till every line becomes familiar as his own name, is unawares storing his memory with better forms of language than he could elsewhere find. Considered merely as a literary composition, a good Poem is incomparably the most perfect of such things,—although Prose has a wider and more varied service.
Dealing oftener with high and abstruse matters, good Poetry is always as clear as the nature of the subject and the nature of human speech will allow. If not, it so far falls short of what it might be, and of what Poetry is, at its best. At the same time let me remark, that good Poetry is not to be read lazily and loungingly, but with both eyes open, and all one's wits about one.
Now think of the diffusion of the English language over
[Page 266]
the face of the globe, and of the still mightier future that lies before it among the unborn millions of Australia and of the American Continent, and it will appear no light thing to uphold the purity and strength of the great English Tongue and to confirm it by examples and models. When a language becomes corrupt, so also do thought and reason; the form of civilisation which it contains and expresses must deteriorate along with it.
Even in this lively literary weather, so to speak, of our own day, when it snows novels, and hails essays, and blows newspaper-articles from all points of the compass at once, a good Poem still finds its readers, is oftener read, and better remembered than the other things.
Repeat to me a sentence or two of that ‘leader’ which you were so much pleased with, eighteen months ago, or say the day before yesterday. It was not meant, you will say, to be remembered verbatim—it did its part, gave its message, had its influence. But, allowing this its value, do you think it would be well that all writing should be of this hasty and ephemeral character?—nothing written with care, and with the highest care? nothing that will be worth reading next month, or next year?
Can we not guess some of the probable effects on taste, and on judgment, too?
To its Poets, the world (give it time) is on the whole not unappreciating or ungrateful. The greatest names in Literature, among the greatest in all History, are the names of Poets. Over millions and generations of men they have an influence, not confined to one people or tongue. The higher the Poet's genius, the more it belongs to all mankind; and its effect is to unite them all in the feeling of a common humanity. The ideal Poet is the highest of men, the masterwork of known being, the crown of life.
Poetry, in its actual examples, is differently conditioned
[Page 267]
and modified in different languages. The Poet is limited by his instrument, and some languages give more freedom and power in poetic expression than others. Yet when the true Poet appears, he is able to use whatever language lies next to his hand, and certain times and countries blaze into poetry, who can tell why?
Poetry, as we believe, preserves and purifies language, cultivates good taste, helps memory, fills the mind with fair images and high unselfish thoughts, wondrously increases our perception and enjoyment of natural beauty, relieves the pain of our usual lack or poverty of expression, shaping and bringing within compass multifarious thoughts and feelings, otherwise inexpressible. But the boon of boons, including all the rest, is the general enlargement, elevation, emancipation of the soul. Poetry universalises. In its last result it is never despondent, but inspired with the loftiest joy and courage. It begins in the glad sense of Universal Beauty, and when it bestows the same glad sense upon its hearers, its result is accomplished. Here and there you find a short poem, exceptional, expressing a despondent mood. Diseased genius, or unlucky circumstances, may surprise the passing age with hectic and short-lived births. But the best Poetry in its total effect is cheerful and encouraging. Even when it treats of sorrow, of pain, of death, it is sympathetic but not despondent and gloomy. The very production of the exceptional sad poem (if it have permanent qualities) indicates a victory over the sadness. The Iliad, treating much of war, wounds, and violent death, is animated and exhilarating throughout: of Dante's great poem the first part is most read, for its fierce picturesqueness and dreadful fascination, but the second is an ascending symphony of hope and faith, and the third part a hymn of heavenly rapture. Chaucer is cheerful as the green landscape after a spring shower; Spenser full of rich vivacity and bold adventure; Shakespeare's book a multifarious
[Page 268]
world of movement and interest; nothing did Goethe so much abhor, in life and in literature, as despondency, discouragement.
The Poet, when he is most himself, rises to a high and serene view. He will not exhibit grief, misery, horror, in isolated sharpness and for the mere sensational effect; these must lose their harsh and painful prominence, and fall into place in a large and noble circle of ideas. The merely painful always marks as inferior the work in which it is found. Didactic poetry, and doctrinal poetry, are also inferior, so far as they are narrowed not merely by human but by particular limitations, concerned too much with certain people, opinions, circumstances, with the temporary and accidental. In the pure mountain air which blows over the realm of true Poetry no mental epidemic can exist, or if it rises thither it melts away; fever of partisanship, itch of personality, ophthalmia of dogmatism, lie below with fog upon the marsh-lands.
Yet the Poet escapes not the influence of his time, usually it affects him far too much. He is sensitive, sympathetic, enters easily into the feelings and opinions of others, but does not so easily escape again. He is apt to fall into sudden timidity in the midst of his boldest enterprises, apt to yield to the pressure of the hour. The World, his inevitable and dangerous antagonist, strives by force and by cajolement to put him off his right road. His delicate senses persuade him to luxury and sloth. His experience of the stupidity and the selfishness which have possession of so many human beings goads him sometimes into one or another form of cynicism. He may sometimes write below his own dignity, and that of his Art. But, remember, if he puts any evil (here is not meant by evil, what this person or that person may object to, but contradiction of his own better self, treason to humanity)—if he puts any wickedness
[Page 269]
into his poetry, it is so much the less Poetry. So far it suffers loss of value and of rank. It is always demanded of him that he dignify, not degrade, that with which he deals. The external facts, too, and incidents connected with composition and publication, are often ugly, nauseous and warping.
The ideal, the typical Poet has all but superhuman power of vision and of speech. But in the actual, every Poet is very limited and imperfect. Even the greatest poets are faulty, full of faults and shortcomings. They pour themselves often into strange enough moulds. Each, limited already in his genius, is also limited from without, and does not do even as well as he might. On every side a dull and perverse world of persons and circumstances presses in upon his work. We have entered, we hope, a zone of freedom, but our poets are still timid, and mostly sing in old forms.
The fair Poem, a gift to many,—to the Poet himself is often but a poor shadow, a faint reminiscence of some glorious message.
‘Could I revive within me
Her symphony and song,
To such a deep delight 'twould win me,
That, with music loud and long,
I would build that dome in air,
That sunny dome! those caves of ice!
And all who heard, should see them there;
And all would cry “Beware! Beware!
His flashing eyes, his floating hair!
Weave a circle round him thrice,
And close your eyes with holy dread;
For he on honey-dew hath fed,
And drunk the milk of Paradise.”’
Never yet has a Great Poem been really written—only hints and fragments. No one as yet has delivered his message even as well as he might have done. The masterpieces of all Poetry are only such by comparison.
I think—hope—might almost say believe, that the best
[Page 270]
poets are yet to come. Do we not hope for a better earth than has yet been? And we all hope for a better life elsewhere. Shall not that have its Poetry, think you, inexpressibly greater and finer than anything we can now conceive or dream of?—and when Man is more in unison with Heaven (be it here or elsewhere) a fairer, fuller Poetry will surely arise: yet, with all its imperfections, that which we already possess is a great gift.
Of Poetry as written, Poetry as we have it, there are many degrees and varieties.
Every poem need not be great, but it must be genuine in its own class, true and fine.
Every poem is the result of two co-operating forces: one, impulse, emotion, inspiration; the other, will, intention, conscious effort. Of true Poems, some have more of the one, and some of the other: and so also of different parts of a Poem, one part is done chiefly from will, another part from impulse. The Poets, exceedingly various as they are, seem to me to be divisible mainly into two great classes, those whose work springs chiefly from the pure poetic impulse, and those whose work is chiefly produced by will and intention. All are to be called Poets who succeed in expressing themselves in verse, and the lesser Poets are as real as the greatest, and have thus seats in the temple.
Those whom I would place in the second and lower class of the singers from poetic will are able men who have been turned, by circumstances and choice, in proportions varying in the various instances, to express themselves through the medium of verse, and who on the whole successfully accomplish their aim. Other men, of equal or greater total capacity, are quite ungifted for singing their thoughts; but these of whom we speak have more or less a share of the necessary gift; some true musical impulse moves in the midst of their general intellectual power; each, along with
[Page 271]
his other qualities, has enough of the metrical, the musical, the poetic, if not to urge, at least to enable him to write in verse, and this gives him his claim to be called a Poet. Even within the limits of this class, one will prove much more of a Poet than another. Some Poets there are who, in the economy of things, appear to be made for the unpoetic listener,—since metrical language works more or less upon all men. These move on the confines of prose, yet move in poetry. Swift, unexpectedly, has a true sense of metre hidden somewhere in his mind.
In the Poets whom I would reckon in the other class, the purely poetic impulse is the master quality, irrepressible and all-pervading; even as the born Painter has a constant delight in colour for its own sake.
One might, I think, arrange the names of all Poets known to him (though in certain cases there might be question and difficulty) broadly into these two large classes. Suppose this done, it probably strikes us, that such a one standing in the Will class is on the whole greater than such another in that of Impulse : but we also find that all the greatest Poets in the total list stand in the class marked ‘Poetic Impulse’; and that the precious qualities peculiar to Metrical Poetry come to us most abundantly from natures wherein also dwell the highest sensibility to beauty, the swiftest movement of thought, the most penetrative intellect. The imagery of these men is usually that of the true Imagination, intuitive, dealing with essential relations of things. The imagery of those who would come into our other class (of Will ) is collected chiefly by the Fancy, in her sport or for parade; and its product may degenerate into the clever or the factious.
If we divide and classify further, we arrange Poets into certain schools,—but at last we shall find, if we go on, that every considerable Poet is to be taken singly; and the greater the Poet, the more distinctly individual he is. He
[Page 272]
views the world in his own way, and reports his experience in his own way; his sincerity is his power. If he ‘carries a mirror’ it is not a common mirror, but a magic mirror, made out of his individual quality. Yet, a high Poet is also a chief representative of the human race; his work, while peculiar, is at the same time thoroughly sympathetic. The particulars, which he conveys so strikingly are not merely particulars, they are also typical, and have a general application. The singularity of each Poet may be counted as one more indication of the importance, the kingship of every single Human Being. Each has a whole world of his own, besides the world that is his in common with mankind. The Poet is peculiar, because largely receptive of life and nature at first hand, and bold and skilful enough to sing his own proper experiences; he is universal by virtue of that unity which underlies all appearance, and which is everywhere reached by the penetrative mind. He, more clearly than another, recognises and delights in the magical appearances of things, and at the same time it is peculiarly his instinct and his gift to perceive the essential under the apparent. The individuality will be modified by circumstance and accident; the insight, the veracity, is the gift given to all true Poets, and the secret of their strength. As to the work of judging and ranking the poets of an Age, this must needs be left to another Age, perhaps to several.
Let us glance back at the ground we have passed over. Poetry is the Art of Verbal Metrical Expression. It is the most comprehensive of the Arts. It furnishes the most adequate means of expressing certain thoughts and moods. The thought, the mood, must itself be emotional and creative—must be such as moves all the powers of expression to harmonious result. It is first the movement of the Poet's mind that is musical: not saying ‘musical’ in any technical sense, but that his mind is moved and modulated into a
[Page 273]
beautiful orderliness: his emotions, his conceptions, when they seek and find the most fitting expression, flow into harmonious speech. There is always some resistance in the medium; his song is not so free and perfect as he desires. He must often compromise, supply missing links, as best he can, by more conscious exertion; he stumbles, makes mistakes, falls short in many ways; but if his work on the whole is a genuine Poem, a boon to mankind, an addition to the world, the music of it first vibrated spiritually through the Poet's being, and there lives in it a mystical quality, inherent in all true Art, inexplicable even to the Artist himself.
Where lies the source of this influence? It lies deep. In approaching this part of my subject, I would avoid anything like a rhetorical or rhapsodical tone. The idea to be conveyed is, I believe, not fanciful or fantastic, but of the deepest truth;—so deep is it, and draws us into such awful precincts, that Poetry itself could alone furnish words in the least degree adequate, words at once clear and subtle; and even these at their best would fail and fall short.
To those varied and wonderful manifestations of the Divinity, in the midst whereof we find ourselves placed, and of which we form a part, and a most important part, we give collectively, in default of a better term, the name of ‘Nature.’ And all Nature is poetic—a countless multitude of poems, which Man translates as best he may into his own language. It is too great for any of us; we can but report a line here and a verse there. The Man of Science is the critic and grammarian of Nature's Poems; the Poet the translator and interpreter. Neither is let into the secret. The absolute essence remains inconceivable. Yet most astounding it is that little Man should possess the faculties of intellectual investigation and the powers of spiritual vision which are his; powers correlative to all that is external to him—other forms of One Eternal Truth.
[Page 274]
Nature is poetic: Nature (as we have ventured to express it) is a Poem, and every part of Nature. Art is not the same as Nature, has something less and something more, is an externised beauty imbued with human elements, and is not the result of mere imitation of Nature: but that life, that Spirit, which shows itself through Nature, and which shows itself through Art, is one and the same. The soul of our pictures, our music, our verse-poetry,—there it is also in Nature. Beauty is every where; unnecessary, useless beauty; throughout earth, water, air, and the infinite of space; and everywhere developed in metre, in balance, in rhythm, in symmetry; the grand original Poiesis . Consider merely the growth of a plant: what the Indian conjuror pretends to do in five minutes is no less wonderful in the slower natural movement continued throughout weeks and months. The little seed sends up its stem like a slender fountain, shaking out the delicate foliage on every side, unfolding bud and flower, leaf for leaf, petal for petal, in due order and proportion, with symmetry and freedom gracefully reconciled; beauty is not alone of lily, rose, and palm-tree; every wayside weed is a green poem. More wonderful still the multiform animal creation; Lion and Horse, Bird, Serpent, Fish, Butterfly, Earthworm, Animalcule, each of these, and every living thing, harmoniously organised, and fitted to its place; and above these again our own orderly and rhythmic frame, with its powers and energies.
Then consider in this light the steps and incidents and progression of a human life, from appearance to evanishment. Every chief incident, every group of incidents, seen in the true connection and from the proper point of view, with right insight and right feeling, is poetic. I do not speak of the life of a hero, but of an average common-place human being. Birth, Childhood, Youth, Maturity, Old Age, Death; —a day, a month, a year, a life from cradle to grave,— all together rounds itself, when seen from a little way off,
[Page 275]
into a consistent and symmetric form, which as a whole is permeated with beauty,—rounds itself into a Poem.
Again, looking off from ourselves, we see every day, not unrelated to us, the landscape with all its variety combined and rounded and poetised within its horizon-circle. This we see with the natural eyes. And with the larger and no less truthful eyes of the imagination, we can see (standing upon the vantage ground won by Science, and looking beyond and above Science) this Earth-Globe of ours, clad with the seasons, painted with day and night and many- coloured clouds, softly spinning round its regulated course. Who doubts of this, more than of the apple which he holds in his hand? What man has ever seen this? It is a Poem, seen only by the eyes of the imagination, but known also to be a scientific fact. Is there any External Universe (the old question)? We answer, Yes. How can we know anything of it? In the last step, only by the Poetic Imagination.
Looking higher still and farther, aided thereby, what find we? On every side,—boundless, inconceivable, yet true and sure, as mere matter of fact as our own five fingers when we hold out our hand,—a Universe crowded with Earths and Suns. They move and mingle unceasingly, in a mighty dance, ‘Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb.’ Our utmost imagination, though entirely believing, throws hitherward a most faint and ineffectual glance.
And higher still we may rise at privileged moments above this sphere, into the awful perception of Absolute Truth, when, Religion and Poetry becoming one, we recognise Conscience and its laws as a beautiful reality and wonder excelling the Starry Heaven itself.
This great Universe is the Poem of Poems. The Maker of it is the Primal Poet.
The Plant, the Animal, the World—poems, miracles, are these; Man the greatest. He only, of all known Created Beings, has the gift of articulate speech, and of conscious
[Page 276]
communion with the Divine Source,—this faculty, this communion, cognate powers. So does he share in little the Creative Energy. He orbs his intelligent life into economic, into moral, into social, into religious order. His delight in the universal Beauty he projects into ordonnance of forms and colours and sounds; and for all the faculties of his mind, in due subordination and perfect proportionality, he finds an expression, and the best expression, in the wider, freer, and more various element of Language, and so orbs that also into Poetry—what we agree to call ‘Poetry’ par excellence . Divine is the impulse, nor are the means unworthy, since Language also (however we may analyse its grosser elements and trace its growth) originates from a spiritual, and celestial source. In Language, the Poetic Spirit seeks, finds and uses its own, that which it gave long before, and ever it strives after what is truest and most essential in Language. Rightly is Poetry esteemed miraculous, a gift from above. The impulse comes to all men, but only a few are so open and sensitive by genius, so unspoilt by circumstance, so unclogged with trifles, unshackled by daily needs, as to vibrate with free and full responsive tone, and convey to others any hint of the heavenly message. Here and there by the bounty of Heaven, some true messenger, among many pretended messengers and many self-deceiving, speaks a word not inadequately. In those good and happy moments of enlargement and power, when memory, hope, experience, faith, imagination, all the faculties, rise together into an emotional mood of love and joy, new, delicious, and creative,—a gifted Human Soul, recognising the presence of eternal beauty, and impelled to communicate its delight, projects itself into the world of language, and there creates beautiful things.
Happy I call him, whatsoever his visible fortune, to whom above the petty and distracted din of the passing day, it is given to hear the far-off movement of an Eternal Harmony.
[Page 277]
For one Poem that he writes, ten thousand unwritten poems are his. And if he have the gift and courage to report well some snatch or fragment, happy also are they whose ear and soul are open to his message, whereby human life thereafter is enriched.
In youth, when the senses are fresh and the spirit is open, it is well to drink of this ambrosia. As people grow older, they are apt to grow more shrewd and decorous, not always more reverent, not in every way wiser. I can imagine that an Old Man may gladly find floating on winged words into his memory some early dream, some ideal hope or joy, some high thought, a Poet's gift, and find it truer after all, more deep founded, than much that he counted reality in life, but which was only fleeting appearance. Perhaps, though long latent, it has not been without its influence.
But whether this or that individual, young or old, reads or never reads, remembers or does not remember any Poetry in a given form of words, the Poets have not the less influenced and modified the world of men into which he and we have been born, the language that we speak, the society in which we live.
If this man or that cares nothing, has never cared anything for Poetry, 'tis his loss and his defect—the greater, the less he is conscious of it; let him at least carefully avoid to brag of his apathy. He might as reasonably be proud of deafness or blindness.
Poetry, like Humanity itself, appears poor and absurd, or rich and profound, partly according to the mood in which we regard it, but mainly according to the wisdom we bring to its estimation.
The Spirit of Poetry is assuredly a divine presence and power. This particular manifestation of it, this Art of Metrical Language, is a fact and a force in the world; its effects delightful, elevating, and enduring; its source hiding beyond investigation,—in the Infinite Deep of Things.
NOTES
1 Carlyle.
$$$
