On the Moral Effect of Writers
Author: Lytton, Edward Bulwer.
Publication info: Caxtoniana: a Series Of Essays On Life, Literature, and Manners . 2 v. London: William Blackwood and Sons, 1863.

On the Moral Effect of Writers [in, Caxtoniana: A Series of Essays on Life, Literature, and Manners. By Sir E. Bulwer Lytton ... In two volumes. Vol. I]
[Page 179]
ON THE MORAL EFFECT OF WRITERS. Godwin has somewhere remarked on the essential distinction between the moral object and the moral tendency of a work. A writer may present to you, at the end of his book, some unexceptionable dogma which parents would cordially admit into the copybook ethics of their children, yet, in the process of arriving at his harmless aphorism, he may have led the mind as much astray into mischief as it is in his power to do. On the other hand, a writer may seek to work out a proposition, from the moral truth of which there would be a very general dissent, and yet be either harmless, or often instructive and elevating, from the reasonings which he employs, or even from the mere art which embellishes his composition, and supersedes, in the mind of the reader, the purpose to which the art was applied. For Art itself is essentially ethical; because every true work of Art must have a beauty or grandeur of some kind, and beauty and grandeur cannot be comprehended by the beholder except through
[Page 180]
the moral sentiment. The eye is only a witness; it is not a judge. The mind judges what the eye reports to it; therefore, whatever elevates the moral sentiment to the contemplation of beauty and grandeur is in itself ethical. Though no Christian can approve the idolatrous worship to which the Parthenon was devoted, or which the Apollo Belvidere represented, few Christians nowadays would deny that the human intellect has been refined and exalted by the study of those masterpieces of Art. The object for which they were created by their artists is annulled, but their effect is existent and imperishable. It may indeed be said that the refinement or even the elevation of the intellect is not necessarily an improvement to the moral being; and unquestionably it must be owned that an individual, nay sometimes a generation, may combine exquisite refinement of taste with profound corruption of manners just as it is possible that an individual or a generation may unite a sincere devotion to the mild Christian faith with the savage fanaticism of a follower of Omar; but the salutary effect of Art, as that of Christianity, must be sought not in an individual nor in a generation, but in the concrete masses of society, and in the progressive history of the human race. In Art the salutary effect may not be directly and immediately derived from the original standards, models, and types of Beauty; more often it is to be indirectly and remotely traced, in countless succession, through an intricate variety of minds, to which the originals have suggested new forms of Art, new presentations
[Page 181]
of Beauty. In the heathen temples of the East originated the outlines of the Gothic architecture now so essentially Christian.
Art, in fact, is the effort of man to express the ideas which Nature suggests to him of a power above Nature, whether that power be within the recesses of his own being, or in the Great First Cause of which Nature, like himself, is but the effect.
Art employs itself in the study of Nature, for the purpose of implying, though but by a hint or a symbol, the supernatural. By the word supernatural I mean, not that which is against Nature but, that which is above Nature. Man himself, in this sense of the word (the only sense in which Philosophy can employ it), is supernatural. And hence Jacobi, justly termed by Sir William Hamilton “the pious and profound,” says with felicitous boldness, “that it is the supernatural in man which reveals to him the God whom Nature conceals.” Mere Nature does not reveal a Deity to such of her children as cannot conceive the supernatural. She does not reveal Him to the cedar and the rose, to the elephant and the moth. Man alone, from his own supernatural—that is, his own spiritual—attribute, conceives at once, even in his most savage state, even in his earliest infancy, the idea of the Supernatural which Nature, without such attribute in man himself, could not reveal to him; and out of that conception is born Art, which we not only degrade, but altogether mistake and falsify, if we call it the imitation of Nature.
[Page 182]
The acanthus leaf may suggest the form of a capital to a column; a vista through the forest stems may suggest a peristyle or an aisle. But a temple, whether in Assyria, in Greece, in China, in England, is no imitation of Nature—it is a selection from Nature of certain details arranged into a whole, to which no whole in Nature has resemblance, and intended to convey ideas of a something which man conjectures or divines to be supernatural by reason of the supernatural within himself.
It is thus with art in sculpture, in masonry, in colour; it is so with the nobler art which finds sculpture, masonry, and colour in man's most primitive expression of thought—Language.
There is no work of true Art in language existent, nor can there ever be one, in which there is not expressed the idea of a power beyond external Nature; in which there is not some creation which external Nature never produced; in which there are not appeals to sympathies, affections, aspirations—which would be the same in the innermost shrine of man's being, if external Nature were annihilated, and man left a spirit in a world of spirit.
As, in the art of masonry, sculpture, or colour, the effect of true art is ethical, whatever the original intention or object of the artist—so it is in the art of language. All Genius comprehends Art as its necessity: where there is no art, there can be no genius in a book, any more than without art there can be genius in a picture or a statue. Every book of first-rate
[Page 183]
genius is and must be a work of first-rate art; though it may be a kind of art so opposed to the fashion of the day that the common criticism of the day, nay even the finest taste of the day, may not detect and appreciate it. Neither Ben Jonson nor even Milton comprehended the sovereign Mastership of Art in Shakespeare. But Shakespeare himself could not have been conscious of his own art. And no writer, whatever his moral object, can foresee what in the course of ages may be the moral effect of his performance.
The satirical design in ‘Gulliver's Travels’ is certainly not that which philanthropists would commend to the approval of youth. It seeks to mock away all by which man's original nature is refined, softened, exalted, and adorned; it directs the edge of its ridicule at the very roots of those interests and motives by which society has called cities from the quarry, and gardens from the wild; and closes all its assaults upon the framework of civilised communities with the most ruthless libel upon man himself that ever gave the venom of Hate to the stingings of wit. Yet the book itself, in spite of its design, has no immoral, no misanthropical influence: we place it without scruple in the hands of our children: the lampoon upon humanity is the favourite fairy tale of the nursery. And I doubt if any man can say that he was ever the worse for all that was meant to make him scorn and detest his species in The Voyage to Laputa or the description of the Yahoos; while the art of the book is so wonderful in rendering lifelike the creations of a fancy only
[Page 184]
second to Shakespeare's in its power of “imagining new worlds,” that, age after age, it will contribute to the adornment and improvement of the human race, by perpetual suggestions to the inventive genius by which, from age to age, the human race is adorned or improved. None of us can foresee what great discoveries, even in practical science, may have their first germ in the stimulus given to a child's imaginative ideas by the perusal of a work in which genius has made fiction truthlike, and the marvellous natural. “Wonder,” says Aristotle, “is the first cause of philosophy.” This is quite as true in the progress of the individual as in that of the concrete mind; and the constant aim of philosophy is to destroy its parent. In vain. Where wonder is ejected from one form it reappears in another— transmutable always—destructible never.
But, to return to the distinction between the object and the tendency of an author's work. No one would think it necessary to vindicate the morality of Johnson's ‘Rasselas,’ few would extol the morality in Voltaire's ‘Candide,’ yet there is so much similarity in the moral object of the two stories, that Voltaire congratulated himself on having published ‘Candide’ before ‘Rasselas’ appeared, “Otherwise,” he said, “I should have been accused of plagiarising the philosophical conception of the distinguished Englishman.”
In fact, as two travellers may arrive at the same inn by different roads and in different company, so two writers can arrive at the same moral conclusion through very different paths; and the impression of the journey
[Page 185]
left on the mind depends on the features of the country traversed, and the companions one has had by the way. It is not rendered alike in both the travellers because they meet at last under the same sign, and conclude their adventures with a chop off the same mutton.
It is the property of true genius, in proportion as time acts upon its works, to lose its deleterious particles, and retain only those which are innocuous or salutary. The interests of mankind never concede lasting popularity to works that would seriously injure them. Some works, it is true, of an order inferior to that which is assigned to the masterpieces of genius, may be decidedly wicked in their effect if indiscriminately read; but look for them a few generations after their first appearance, and you will never find them among the current literature of a people—they will have shrunk out of sight in the obscure corners of learned libraries, referred to only by scholars or historians as illustrations of manners in a bygone age, and read by them with the same cold scientific eye that a physician casts upon specimens of morbid anatomy. The works that remain incorporated in the world's literature all serve to contribute to the world's improvement. Passages, indeed, here and there, as in the classic poets, are extremely censurable; but they sink into insignificance compared with the general excellence of the pervading wholes—as, in mortal life, human imperfections and blemishes little affect the good derivable from the large example of a saint's or a hero's character. From Nature herself we may select
[Page 186]
partial evil. If we choose, out of all her products, to take the nightshade for our nutriment, though, beside the hedge in which it lurks, the prodigal corn glitters ripe in the sun, we may certainly harm ourselves, and lay the fault upon Nature; but Nature is not to blame if we devour the nightshade and eschew the corn.
The great poem of Lucretius expounds the creed of an atheist; no modern collegian was ever made an atheist by reading the poem of Lucretius. Has any modern collegian been made the better, the wiser, the nobler, by reading it? In all probability, yes! Because the poem abounds with ideas that enrich his intellect and exalt his thoughts. Its sublimity, as Dugald Stewart justly observes, “will be found to depend chiefly, even in those passages where he (Lucretius) denies the interference of the gods in the government of the world, in the lively images which he indirectly presents to his readers of the attributes against which he reasons. ... The sublimest descriptions of Almighty Power sometimes forming a part of his argument against the Divine Omnipotence.” 1 In fact, the poem, to a very ordinary reason, is in itself a refutation of its philosophical purpose. It would resolve the artistic design of creation to a fortuitous concurrence of atoms. But could any one, reading the poem, conceive that those harmonious lines could be strung together by fortuitous concurrence? And follows it not, as a corollary of common sense, that, if a poem cannot be written without a a poet, the universe cannot be created without a Creator?
[Page 187]
Hence, I think, it will be found that the best and subtlest effects of writers are those of which they were themselves unconscious while writing. Critics, in later times, gain repute by discovering what the author did not mean. I have said that Shakespeare could not be conscious of his own art. How many recondite designs are imputed to him, of which he was wholly unaware? I have read an elaborate argument to prove that the character of Shylock was conceived as a plea in favour of religious toleration. But it is clearly the man to whom the idea of religious toleration is familiar, in a subsequent age, who discovers that Shylock may be applied as an illustration of an argument in favour of the emancipation of the Jews. Goethe, in examining the depths of meaning in ‘Hamlet,’ introduces the line, “He's fat and scant of breath,” in order to give a physical clue to the intricate moral character of the Danish prince. 2 “The fencing tires him,” says Wilhelm Meister; “and the Queen remarks, ‘He's fat and scant of breath.’ Can you conceive him to be otherwise than plump and fair-haired? Brown-complexioned people, in their youth, are seldom plump; and does not his wavering melancholy, his soft lamenting, his irresolute activity, accord with such a figure? From a dark-haired young man you would look for more decision and impetuosity.”
The dogmas conveyed in this criticism are neither historically nor physiologically correct. If, as Wilhelm
[Page 188]
Meister had just before asserted, “Hamlet must be fair-haired and blue-eyed—as a Dane, as a Northman,”— certainly, of all the populations on the earth, the Dane, the Northman, has ever been the least characterised by “wavering melancholy” or “soft lamenting.” The old Scandinavian Vikings did not yield to any dark-haired warriors “in decision and impetuosity.” To this day, those districts in England wherein the old Danish race left their descendants— where the blue eye and light sandy hair are most frequently seen—as in the Scottish Lowlands, the Northern Border counties, in Lincolnshire, or in Norfolk (those provinces in which Palgrave proves the wholesale settlement of the Danes), the superior activity, the practical long-headedness, the ready adaptation of shrewd wit to immediate circumstance—in short, all the attributes most opposed to the character of Hamlet, are proverbially evidenced. Nor is it true that the fair-haired children of the North are more inclined in youth to be plump than the dark-haired inhabitants of the same climate. The Yorkshireman and the Lowlander are generally high cheek-boned and lean. But is it clear that the Queen's remark is intended to signify that Hamlet is literally fat? Does the expression convey any other sense than that in which a prize-fighter, far from corpulent, would, half-sportively, use it, in order to imply that he is out of training? If, however, the word really did convey to the audience an idea in harmony with the personal appearance of the person who uttered it, Shakespeare, as
[Page 189]
a practical stage-manager, would have meant it to apply, not to the ideal Dane, but to the flesh-and-blood actor who was performing the part;—as in ‘The Midsummer Night's Dream,’ the two heroines exchange satirical taunts upon their respective proportions of stature, because of the two youths who performed the parts of Hermia and Helena one was taller, the other shorter, than usual. The jest there would have been unsuccessful, indeed unsafe, if the audience were not prepared for its fitness by the contrast between the two figures bodily before their eyes. But a world of refining criticism might be written to show what subtle distinctions of character—between the tall and the short—Shakespeare designed to intimate in the verbal duel between Hermia and Helena.
Though Goethe wastes so much exquisite ingenuity on the pinguous temperament of Hamlet, no one would have acknowledged more readily than Goethe the general proposition that an author himself is unaware of the best and deepest moral deductions which a reader may draw from his works.
No poem of our age has more perplexed the critics as to its moral design than Goethe's ‘Faust.’ And what says the poet himself of that design? “They ask me what idea I wished to incorporate in my ‘Faust.’ Can I know it? Or, if I know, can I put it into words?” And indeed it is upon this fact—viz., that genius in Art cannot, like mastership in Science, trace step by step the process which leads to its results— that Kant bases the theory by which he distinguishes
[Page 190]
art from science, and restricts to art the application of the word Genius (the innate quality of the mind— ingenium ). “Genius,” he says, “cannot of itself describe, nor scientifically demonstrate, how it accomplishes its productions, but it gives the rule by an inspiration of nature, and so the author of a production, for which he is indebted to his genius, knows not himself how the ideas form themselves in his mind. It is not in his power to form the like at his own pleasure and methodically, and to communicate to others, precepts which can enable them to accomplish the like works.”
But, on the other hand, Genius has many conceptions, many subtle beauties of thought, many arcana in occult wisdom, of which it is fully cognisant, and which no critic ever detects.
Certain I am that every author who has written a book with earnest forethought and fondly-cherished designs, will bear testimony to the fact, that much which he meant to convey has never been guessed at in any review of his work; and many a delicate beauty of thought, on which he principally valued himself, remains, like the statue of Isis, an image of truth from which no hand lifts the veil.
The moral effects of writers upon the spirit of a nation must, no doubt, be considerable; yet it is difficult in this to discriminate between the effect which the writers produce on the nation, and the effect which the nation produces on the writers. A people sound at the core will not be corrupted by any meretricious or enervating literature which may be in fashion for
[Page 191]
the time. We may certainly presume that the profligate wits, whose plays and lyrics amused Charles II. and his Court, did not form, but were formed by, the manners of a reign which did in reality substitute one revolution for another. The first reaction from revolution is revolution. A dominant desire to contrast the austerity of the Puritans could not result in a decorous generation. But the generation passed—with it, the fashionable literature that represented it; and England was ultimately none the worse for the ribaldry of Rochester: let us hope she is to this day the better for the sublimity of Milton.
Where a people is degenerate, it receives from its literature only excuses for its own degeneracy. The softness of Lydian manners, no doubt, served to engender the soft Lydian music. But the music, as it extended its fame among manlier communities, would have seemed to the Lydians to dignify the voluptuous effeminacy of which it was the persuasive expression.
Yet, when the Spartans, in one brief holiday of their martial existence, nationalised Alcman, the most famous of Lydian poets, 3 all the innovations he introduced into the Doric music—all the licence which he gave to his genius, orientally sensual—did not corrupt the Spartans. Their proudest achievements in history date long after Alcman had joined Linus and Orpheus in the Fields of Asphodel. In their private entertainments
[Page 192]
the stern lords of the Helot continued to enjoy the gay strains of the Lydian in praise of love and good cheer; but when the State was in danger, they gathered round the tent of their king to find fitting voice for patriotism and valour in the war-song of Tyrtæus.
The moral effect of writers is unquestionably sometimes the mere echo of the time in which they write. And such writers may, for their season, be exceedingly popular; but the probability is that their fame will not endure. Whether their effect be for good or for evil, it is on the surface of an ever-fleeting society, and not in the deeps of our ineffaceable human nature. The writers whose effect on their nation, and, beyond their nation, on the family of mankind, is permanent, are no echoes of their time, nor do they so much influence their own generation as they do the generations that succeed. Helvetius indeed has, with great force and an eloquence often noble, insisted upon the fact that the literature and the spirit of an age move in concert together. “There is an age,” he observes truly, “when the word virtus in Italy meant both morality and valour; there has been another age when the word virtu meant a taste for antiquities and knicknacks.”
But Helvetius, like all enthusiasts of a system, rejects the facts which would militate against his system. He commences his 19th chapter, ‘De l'Esprit,’ with the dogma, that “the esteem for different kinds of genius is, in every age, proportioned to the interest the people have in esteeming them;” and proceeds thus: “To
[Page 193]
show the perfect justice of this proposition, let us first take romance for an example. From the publication of ‘Amadis’ to the present age, that kind of writing has successively experienced a thousand vicissitudes. Would we know the cause? ... The principal merit of most of these works depends on the exactness with which they paint the virtues, vices, passions, customs, follies, of a nation. But the manners of a nation change every age. This change must, then, occasion a revolution in taste, and consequently in romance. A nation is, therefore, constantly forced, by the very desire of amusement, to despise in one age what it admired in that which preceded it. What I have said of romance may be applied to almost all other works.” The assertion here made is notably untrue; it applies only to indifferent and mediocre works, which perish because they are indifferent or mediocre. And a work that paints the manners of an age essentially different from our own, will be as much admired in our age as in that which gave birth to it, if it deserve such admiration from enduring qualities. The romance of Cervantes describes no manners harmonious to our own, and is more esteemed than any romance which does. Nay, the principal merit of Walter Scott consists in his portraiture of times utterly distinct from the time in which he lived.
In a very corrupt age, a vitiated moral taste may possibly accept a vicious morality as a sound one. But even in societies the most licentious, if a work by a true genius appear, presenting some innocent childlike picture of life and manners, the probability is that it
[Page 194]
will seize the public attention more firmly than it would have done in simple communities, to whose social characteristics it offered no contrast and implied no rebuke. ‘Paul and Virginia’ was published in a time perhaps the most cynical and profligate that France herself ever knew, yet its chaste pathetic idyll went straight and irresistibly to the public heart. I doubt if it would have made so great a sensation in a virtuous age. But this is one instance, among many, in refutation of the axioms of Helvetius, who maintains that genius is so far dependent on manners, that it cannot win popular favour for a work to which the manners of the age are not congenial. And, indeed, in the latter part of the same chapter from which I have quoted, Helvetius, unconsciously to himself, contradicts his own doctrine, because he allows that there are works of which our esteem survives the manners they depicted, by their fidelity to human nature in general. And if this be so, such works would command the esteem of their own age, even if they represented a state of society utterly foreign to that of the age itself.
Yet there are periods when a tendency and spirit in literary compositions, which would be either inoperative or even mischievous in other periods, may become eminently effective and beneficent. For instance, suppose a time when a nation is predisposed to aggressive wars, a literature systematically stimulating the passion for military glory would either be inoperative, because not needed, or mischievous, because adding fuel to a flame already perniciously destructive. But
[Page 195]
next, suppose a time when a nation, long enervated by peace, has fallen into a drowsy neglect of self-defence —suppose that dangers are gathering round it, with which nothing can cope but the revival of a hardy martial spirit, animating the community to consent to every sacrifice for the security of their native land— then a literature, warlike and fiery, may be that which best evokes the one public virtue, without which all others would be in vain for the conservation of the body politic, and the most martial poet would, for the moment, be the noblest moralist.
For this reason we must, if we would judge fairly of the moral intention of works of genius, take a comprehensive view of the times in which they were composed, and the purposes to which they served. Yet the moral effect of all works of a pre-eminent genius will be felt in times beyond his farthest vision, and conduce to purposes unconceived by his profoundest thought. “Mizraim cures wounds, and Pharaoh is sold for balsams.” 4
It may justify the indulgence which, on the whole, we are compelled, whether we will or no, to concede to all varieties of genius in their ethical objects, when we notice the fact that, where genius is pre-eminent, becomes enduring, establishes its products as a part of the ‘everlasting possession’ which civilisation transmits from age to age,—the good remains and the evil perishes.
Take even the author who, in the judgment of most sober Englishmen, did in his own day the most mischief,
[Page 196]
and in the most wanton spirit, by writings of which no one can dispute the genius,—I mean Voltaire. Well, not a century has passed since he closed his long career, and, strange to say, the great bulk of the works which most moved his time, is already obsolete and unread. Wit the most lavish has not preserved ‘La Pucelle’ from disdain; irony the keenest has not sapped one foundation in Christian faith. What of Voltaire remains popular and current? Writings either harmless or morally benignant; school histories, like those of Charles XII. and Peter the Great; the first suggestive sketch of social history itself in ‘L'Esprit des Mœurs;’ decorous tragedies constructed with an art which critics commend to the study of genius, and abounding with ethical maxims which preceptors impress on the memories of youth; and a general authority against fanaticism and persecuting bigotry, against oppression and arbitrary law.
Nay, even in his philosophy, while its siege-works against Christian Revelation have so crumbled away that they supply no corner-stone to any system which speculators have since constructed, France still owes to Voltaire's patient labour the knowledge of Newton's ‘Principia,’ from which she has deduced so many great discoveries of her own. Without Voltaire France might not have known La Place. And even in that special field of controversy, wherein he fought with the infidel against the Cross, while no opponent to Christianity now picks up from the dust those light shafts in which, if the feather remain, the arrow-head is broken, divines
[Page 197]
themselves yet employ the heavy mace of argument with which he demolished the atheism of Diderot, and defended those two truths which are the columns of every temple—the existence of the Deity and the immortality of the soul.
Again, it is noticeable how much even the fallacies of a great writer serve, not the less effectually, because indirectly, to the advancement of truth, by stimulating the energies of the writers who oppose the fallacies, and, in so doing, strike out new ideas and suggest fresh discoveries. How much his researches into alchemy may have warmed and emboldened the imagination of Newton, in whom imagination seems to have been only less powerful than reason! It is said with no exaggeration, by Sir William Hamilton, “that the man who gave the whole philosophy of Europe a new impulse and direction, and to whom, mediately or immediately, must be referred every subsequent advance in philosophical speculation, was David Hume.” And this less from the partisans he enlisted than from the opponents he aroused. “Accepting his principles from the dominant philosophies of Locke and Leibnitz, and deducing with irresistible evidence these principles to their legitimate result, Hume showed, by the extreme absurdity of these results themselves, either that philosophy altogether was a delusion, or that the individual systems which afforded the premises were erroneous or incomplete. He thus constrained philosophers to the alternative, either of surrendering philosophy as such, or of ascending to higher principles, in
[Page 198]
order to re-establish it against the sceptical reduction.” To Hume we owe the philosophy of Kant, and therefore all that Kant himself has originated in the succeeding philosophies of Germany. To Hume again we owe the philosophy of Reid, and consequently, what is now distinctively known in Europe as the philosophy of the Scottish School,—that school which, in France, originated the intellectual movement that raised up, in Royer-Collard, Victor Cousin, and Maine de Biran, the counterpoise to the disguised materialism which had previously been accepted, with scarcely a question, in the system by which Condillac analysed every faculty into sense. These considerations tend to confirm the wisdom of complete toleration to the freedom of all opinion. Had some mistaken benevolence of intention suppressed the publication of Hume's sceptical theories, because of the temporary harm they might effect, it would have suppressed also all those great arguments for an immaterial soul in man, which have enlarged and ennobled the whole world of thought. Kant would have continued in “his dogmatic slumber;” Reid would have remained in quiet adhesion to Locke; the materialism of Condillac would still be reigning over the schools of France.
Our obligations to genius, even where it may not mean to be our special benefactor, are so great, that our gratitude is as involuntary as the service it acknowledges. Every genius, it is true, however eminent, may find its hostile critics; but, in spite of the critics, who are frequently right in detail, we continue our homage
[Page 199]
to every eminent genius on the whole. What should we know to-day, if genius had not been free to guess, right or wrong, through the long yesterday? It was said of Plato, “If he had not erred he would have done less.” The saying does not exaggerate, it falls short of, the truth. For it may rather be said of every great man, “If he had not erred, he would have done nothing.” And our obligations to genius are the greater, because we are seldom able to trace them. We cannot mount up to the sources from which we derive the ideas that make us what we are. Few of my readers may have ever read Chaucer; fewer still the ‘Principia’ of Newton. Yet how much poorer the minds of all my readers would be if Chaucer and Newton had never written! All the genius of the past is in the atmosphere we breathe at present. But who shall resolve to each individual star the rays of the heat and the light, whose effects are felt by all, whose nature is defined by none? This much, at least, we know; that in heat the tendency to equilibrium is constant; that in light the rays cross each other in all directions, yet never interfere the one with the other.
NOTES
1 Dugald Stewart ‘On the Sublime,’ Essay II., chap. ii.
2 ‘Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship.’ Carlyle's Translation. Book v. c. 6.
3 See Clinton's ‘Fasti Hellenici,’ and Colonel Mure's ‘Critical History,’ for the authorities and testimonies in support of the opinion that assigns to Lydia the honour of Alcman's origin and birth-place.
4 Sir Thomas Browne, ‘Hydriotaphia.’
$$$
