On the Science of Criticism
Author: Lewes, George Henry.
Publication info: The Fortnightly Review ; London (1866): iv, 896 p.

“On the Science of Criticism,” [in, The Fortnightly Review. Edited by George Henry Lewes. Vol. VI. August 15 to December 1, 1866]
[Page 759]
On the Science of Criticism From Science to Criticism is a long step, yet in many quarters the question is being raised, Why have we no science of Criticism? Nothing can be more patent than the fact that such a science is absent, but I am very far from thinking that such a science is desirable. A writer in the Pall Mall Gazette , pointing out the diametrically opposite dicta of two critical journals on the same work, asks, Are there no canons of criticism? apparently wishing that such canons were in force as would prevent contradictory judgments being delivered. A writer in the last Revue des Deux Mondes also urges the necessity of a doctrine in Literature.
My first objection to anything like a doctrine in Literature is, that it must necessarily be so incomplete as to be tyrannically oppressive; because at the best it could only exhibit the laws which great artists had followed, it could not embrace the laws which great artists to come would follow. Thus, supposing
[Page 760]
the science perfect in its construction (a large supposition!), it could only explain the works and processes of an art that had developed itself up to a certain point; it could not explain, it could not even divine what would be the new evolutions of the art under the new conditions of advancing civilisation. Let us take the case of Music, and suppose that an Aristotle had constructed a perfect science of musical criticism, out of the musical productions then known in Greece. Had there been a musical doctrine, with canons which all critics would enforce, the consequence would have been that progress would have become impossible. It is now known, and has been demonstrated, that the Greek music, from the very nature of its gamut, could have no Harmony. All the magnificent developments of modern music which spring from its enlarged gamut would, therefore, not only have been unsuspected by the critics, but would have been arrested in the early stages because “contrary to rule.” The innovator would have been repressed. In like manner the Greek Drama is constructed on principles so narrow compared with those of the modern drama, that an application of the canons of the one to the productions of the other can only be an oppressive mistake.
I have been arguing on the supposition that the Science would be a true exposition of the laws of art. If even on that supposition the effect of canons would be disastrous, what would be the effect of canons that were false? We have had one striking lesson. Europe once had a literary doctrine, which it accepted from France; and the effect of that doctrine in repressing all originality and all progress is familiarly known to the most superficial student of literary history. A somewhat similar oppression is exercised in Germany by the so-called philosophic criticism, which views a work of art in relation to certain philosophic ideas, not in relation to the effect on the emotions of the audience.
Because the Laws of Nature are more or less discoverable and reducible to a system, it is supposed that the Laws of Art must be equally discoverable. There is, however, this difference: Art is in a state of perpetual evolution, new forms arise under new conditions, and new inventions introduce new laws. Now it is certain that if men of science had the power, they would suppress all the facts they were unable to explain; whatever disturbed the symmetry of their doctrine would be set aside as chaotic and unworthy of a place in orderly creation. They have not this power, and so are forced reluctantly to accommodate their doctrine to the facts, to enlarge their doctrine with enlarging knowledge. But critics would have the power of suppressing originality; and would brand as “chaotic,” “unworthy a place in orderly Art,” whatever disturbed the symmetry of their system, whatever was not amenable to their canons.
Hence I maintain that the present state of anarchy in Criticism is preferable to a state of dogmatic authority. Criticism may suffer; but Art is freer. This is by no means asserting that one critic's judgment is as good as another's, or that every man may set up his individual judgment as a standard. One judgment is not so good as another, because it will not be founded on equal insight, equal knowledge; nor can every man make his judgment a standard for others, but only for himself and for those who think and feel like him. In every work there are certain general principles involved, and certain technical principles; the best critic is he who best understands both principles, and whose sagacity enables him to appreciate their application. The technical principles which are
[Page 761]
involved in the drama are not the same as those involved in the novel, and therefore an effect in the one may be a defect in the other. But there are certain general principles common to both, and these the public at large can judge as well as the best critic.
Inasmuch as every Art has its rules, general and technical, there might be a codification of the various rules which would be of service, and might stand for a Science of Criticism; but were this codification effected, we should still have to remember that Criticism is itself an art and not a science, and that nothing could be more disastrous than the establishment of a Doctrine of Criticism, with its rigorous canons, which would suppress originality merely because originality was a violation of some canon.
$$$
