Originality of Milton's harmonious use of Proper Names
Author: Hunt, Leigh.
Publication info: The New Monthly Magazine and Literary Journal ; London (Jan. 1821-Dec. 1836): 604 p.

Originality of Milton's harmonious use of Proper Names [in, The New Monthly Magazine and Literary Journal 1825. Part II. Original Papers]
[Page 387]
Originality of Milton's harmonious use of Proper Names. Dr. Black , who has obliged the lovers of poetry with a life of Tasso in two volumes quarto (would that we had a life of Ariosto in four, and of Shakspeare in eight!) gives an account of the uses to which Milton has turned his intimacy with the works of that poet. Among others, he traces to him his fondness for heaping together those sonorous proper names, which, if they had no other beauty, are so managed as to charm and exalt the ear with an organ-like music.
“Nothing in the style of Milton,” says Dr. Black, “is more peculiar and characteristic, than the aggregation of a number of beautifully sounding names of places, winds, &c. as in the following example:—
                                         —‘Not that fair field
Of Enna, where Prosèrpine gathering flowers,
Herself a fairer flower, by gloomy Dis
Was gather'd,’ &c. &c. &c.
“This aggregation of melodious names, is so characteristic of Milton, that Philips in his ‘Splendid Shilling,’ written as a burlesque of the style of ‘Paradise Lost,’ has availed himself of it more than once; and indeed, those passages in the ‘Splendid Shilling’ are the features which principally, and perhaps alone, stamp the resemblance of the caricature with the original.” The Doctor then quotes “Not blacker tube,” &c. &c.
“This collection of a number of names,” continues the Doctor, occurs very often in the Sette Giornate of Tasso, and I have little doubt, that from that work, its use was adopted by Milton. The following is an example from Tasso's poem.
‘Ma quel canuto pescatore, e lasso
Ch' appo le rive del Tirreno invecchi,
O del mar d' Adria, o dell' Egeo sonoro,
O lungo 'l Caspio, o lungo 'l ponto Eussino,
O 'n su' lidi vermigli, o dove inonda
Il gran padre Ocean Germani e Franchi,
Scoti e Britanni, od Etiopi ed Indi.’
“I shall only solicit the attention of my reader to two other instances. In the first, the poet is describing the phœnix preparing materials for its conflagration.
‘Quinci raccoglie dell' antica selva
I dolci succhi, e più soavi odori,
Che scelga 'l Tiro, o l' Arabo felice,
O pigmeo favoloso, od Indo adusto;
O che produca pur nel molle grembo
De' Sabei fortunati aprica terra. ...
Ne Cassia manca, o l'odorato acanto,
Ne dell' incenso lagrimose stille
E di tenero nardo i nuovi germi.’
“The first five of these verses seem to me to have a wonderful resemblance to the manner of Milton. The latter three are also much in his style, as he often uses the verb wanted in the way here employed by Tasso.
‘His stature reached the sky, and on his crest
Sat horror plumed; nor wanted in his grasp,
What seem'd both spear and shield.
[Page 388]
Nor gentle purpose, nor endearing smiles
Wanted , nor youthful dalliance.’
“The following is the other example, to which I request the reader's attention, as I think it can hardly be doubted that Milton had the passage of Tasso in his mind while composing it.
—‘Tralascio di Sfingi e di Centauri
Di Polifemo e di Ciclopi appresso,
Di Satiri, di Fauni, e di Silvani,
Di Pani, e d' Egipani, e d' altri erranti
Ch' empier le solitarie inculte selve
D'antiche maraviglie; e quell' accolto
Esercito di Bacco in Oriente,
Ond' egli vinse e trionfo' degl' Indi
Tornando glorioso a' Greci lidi,
Siccom' è favoloso antico grido.
E lascio gli Aramaspi, e quei ch' al sole
Si fan col piè giacendo, e scherno, ed ombra,
E i Pigmei favolosi in lunga guerra
Colle grà rimarransi, e quanto unquanco
Dipinse 'n carta l' Affrica bugiarda.
—‘For never since created man
Met such embodied force as, nam'd with these,
Could merit more than that small infantry
Warr'd on by cranes: though all the giant brood
Of Phlegra with the heroic race were join'd
That fought at Thebes and Ilium, on each side,
Mix'd with the auxiliar gods, and what resounds
In fable or romance of Uther's son,
Begirt with British and Armoric knights,
And all who since, baptized or infidel,
Jousted in Aspramont or Montalban,
Damasco, or Marocco, or Trebisond,
Or whom Biserta sent from Afric shore
When Charlemain, with all his peerage, fell
By Fontarabia.’
“In some papers of the Rambler, on the subject of Milton's versification, Dr. Johnson remarks that poet's custom of heaping up a number of softly sounding proper names, for which he assigns what he considers to be the reason. ‘Milton,’ says he, ‘whose ear had been accustomed, not only to the music of the ancient tongues, which, however vitiated by our pronunciation, excel all that are now in use, but to the softness of the Italian, the most mellifluous of all modern poetry, seems fully convinced of the unfitness of our language for smooth versification, and is therefore pleased with an opportunity of calling in a softer word to his assistance: for this reason, and I believe, for this only, he sometimes indulges himself in a long series of proper names, and introduces them, where they add little but music to his poem.
—‘The richer seat
Of Atabalipa, or yet unspoil'd
Guiana, whose great city Gerion's sons
Call El Dorado.
—the moon, whose orb
Through optic glass the Tuscan artist views
At evening from the top of Fesolè,
Or in Valdarno, to descry new lands.’
[Page 389]
“The critic then proceeds, not very consistently, to blame Milton, on account of his roughening his style by his uncommonly frequent use of elisions. ‘The great peculiarity of Milton's versification (says he) compared with that of later poets, is the elision of one vowel before another, or the suppression of the last syllable of a word ending with a vowel, when a vowel begins the following word. As,
                                         ‘Knowledge—
Oppresses else with surfeit, and soon turns
Wisdom to folly, as nourishment to wind.’
“‘Milton (adds Dr. Johnson) therefore seems to have mistaken the nature of our language, of which the chief defect is ruggedness and asperity, and has left our harsh cadences still harsher.’ The same objection was made by the critics to Tasso, and with full as little sensibility to true poetical harmony.”
So far Dr. Black. His concluding observation is very true. But Dr. Black himself, whom this finer perception of the beautiful might have enabled to discern it, has missed the real beauty of these nomenclatures in Milton. It is not that the names are merely beautiful or sounding in themselves, but that they are so grand and full of variety in their collocation. And for this the poet is certainly not indebted to the author of the Sette Giornate, nor, I believe, to any author ancient or modern. It is a discovery of his own elaborate and harmonious spirit, ever prepared to better what he finds, and make his “assurance doubly sure.”
Dryden had secrets of versification which he professed himself unwilling to divulge. He was afraid they would be turned to bad account by the unskilful. Surely he need not have been alarmed. A poor hand may play the finest piece of music after another, and yet still remain and be recognized as a poor hand. To hide his secret effectually, Dryden should not have written his verses. I am much mistaken if it has not been discovered in our own times; and yet nobody can write the heroic measure as he did.
The great secrets of a noble and harmonious versification appear to consist in varying and contrasting the vowels, distributing the emphasis, diversifying and nicely measuring the pauses, and bringing together as many emphatic syllables as possible without heaviness. The last requisite corresponds with nerve and muscle; the next with spirit and grace of action: the second with fervour of intention; the first with harmony of utterance. Dryden excelled in them all, as far as the shackle of rhyme allowed him. Indeed he gathers his golden chains about him, like a vassal superior to his destiny. But Milton is as much greater, as an invincible spirit roaming at large.
There can be no doubt that Milton made use of Tasso in various instances, or that while composing his first book he had in his mind the striking passage pointed out by Dr. Black. But in no instance is Milton indebted to him for the variety and loftiness of his modulation; and in these consists the charm of his proper names. The Italian language, which is so adapted for music in all other respects, is haunted with monotonous vowels. These, one would think, it would be the first business of a great versifier to endeavour to avoid; yet Tasso has not done it in the present instance; he has even commenced his Jerusalem
[Page 390]
with a set of o's, which startled Voltaire; nor throughout either that poem, or the one which Dr. Black has quoted, is there any evidence, I fear, which would go to prove that this eminent poet had any very conscious idea of his versification at all. He seems to have taken his beautiful language on trust, and left it to make out its own case. Observe the repetition of the same sound on the third and fourth lines:
                                         —di Silvàni,
Di Pàni, e d'Egipàni, e d'àltri errànti.
and again the o's in the two next:
Ch' empier lè solitariè incultè selvè
D'antichè maravigliè.
and then the o's:
                                         —e quell' accòltò
Esercitò di Baccò in òriente,
Ond' egli vinse, e trionfò degl' Indi
Tornandò glòriòsò ai Greci lidi
Siccom' e favòlòsò anticò gridò, &c.
to say nothing of càrta and bugiàrda in the last line, and of that villanous quanto unquanco in the last but one. Whenever Milton repeats a vowel, we recognize, in him , a variety in the very sameness, owing to the singular diversity with which he treats us in general. To mark the diversity in the passage quoted by Dr. Black, would be to mark almost every syllable. Not a line but what contains a sprinkle of different sounds, and the whole passage is replete with grandeur of intonation:
                                         —“For never , since created man ,
Met such embodied force , as named with these
Could merit more than that small infantry
Warr'd on by cranes ; though all the giant brood
Of Phlegra with the heroic race were joined
That fought at Thebes and Ilium , on each side
Mix'd with auxiliar gods .”
What strenuous language! and then he goes on, heightening at every step, till he ends with that flower of a word, which seems to droop with all the beauty of the East upon it:—
                                         “---and what resounds
In fable or romance , of Uther's son
Begirt with British and Armoric knights ;
And all who since, baptiz'd or infidel,
Jousted in Aspramont , or Montalbàn,
Damàsco , or Marocco , or Trebisond ,
Or whom Biserta sent from Afric shore,
When Charlemain with all his peerage fell
By Fontarabia .”
Now take another passage from the Sette Giornate, book the second.
Còrròn dall' òriente Idàspe ed Indo
E degli àltri màggiòr tràscòrre il Gànge
Ed il Càspio e l'Aràsse, e Cirro e Bàttro, &c.
and again:
                                         —E là Sàettà àccesà
Di cinque stelle, e l'Aquilà superbà;
[Page 391]
E 'l guizzànte Delfin, e 'l gràn Pegàso,
Che già portò Bellerofonte a vòlò:
E la figlia di Cefeo, e 'l Dèlta apprèsso,
E quèllà immàgo, che figurà e segnà
L'Isolà, che tre monti innalzà in màre;
E del nudò Mòntòn l'òscura testa
Del suo splendore 'nfiamma; e 'n quella parte
Alle vie degli erranti e piu vicina.
Dall' altre versò 'l Pòlò òppòstò all' òrse
Press' al tòrtò viaggiò e il fierò Mòstrò, &c.
Ohe jam satis!—After these read such lines as the following:
Nor was his name unheard , or unadored ,
In ancient Greece ; and in Ausonian land
Men call'd him Mulciber ; and how he fell
From heaven they fabled, thrown by angry Jove
Sheer o'er the chrystal battlements . From morn
To noon he fell ;—from noon to dewy eve ,—
A summer's day ; and with the setting sun
Dropt from the zenith like a falling star ,
On Lemnos th' Ægean isle : thus they relate
Erring.
Or these:—
As when the Tartar from his Russian foe
By Astracan , over the snowy plains
Retires ; or Bactrian Sophi , from the horns
Of Turkish crescent, leaves all waste beyond
The realm of Aladule , in his retreat
To Tauris or Casbeen.
See also the famous passage on Vallombrosa in book the first; the long one in book the eleventh beginning with
                                         —“The walls
Of Cambalù, seat of Cathaian Can;”
the account in the first book of the gods and their places of abode
                                         Beyond
The flowery dale of Sibma, clad with vines,
And Eleälè to the Asphaltick pool;
in short, all the passages where names are brought in, not omitting the feast in Paradise Regained, the description of which seems a part of the luxury. I am not aware of a finer piece of modulation in the whole circle of English poetry, than the account of Satan's journey of discovery in book the ninth. The pauses are wonderfully and beautifully varied, the modulations of the syllables masterly; and at the close the ear remains perfectly satisfied.
In with the river sunk, | and with it rose
Satan, | involv'd in rising mist; | then sought
Where to lie hid: | sea he had search'd, | and land,
From Eden over Pontus, | and the pool
Mæotis, | up beyond the river Ob; |
Downward as far antarctick; | and in length,
West from Orontes to the ocean barr'd
At Darien; | thence to the land where flows
Ganges, and Indus. | Thus the orb he roam'd
With narrow search; | and with inspection deep
Consider'd every ereature, | which of all
Most opportune might serve his wiles; | and found
The serpent, | subtlest beast of all the field.
[Page 392]
Our poets before the time of Milton, sometimes wrote with a fine instinctive melody, Shakspeare in particular: and in lyrical poetry, they could not help thinking of modulation. The lyrics of Beaumont and Fletcher almost set themselves to music. But no one, except Milton, appears to have had this beauty perpetually before him; to have been conscious of the high service he was performing at the altar of the Muses, dressed (as he describes the poet) in his “garland and singing robes.” Chaucer, though he had a finer ear than some of his imitators have been willing to acknowledge, does not think it necessary to have recourse to it, when he comes to a set of names. He takes no more heed of a list in poetry, than he would have taken of an abbey roll. Spenser, from a luxurious indolence, heeds it as little. Yet now and then he seems on the verge of discovering the secret. There is a dreary piece of British history in his poem, of which I recollect a magnificent passage:—
Let Scaldis tell, and let tell Hania,
And let the marsh of Estambruges tell,
What colour were their waters that same day,
And all the moor 'twixt Elversham and Dell.
To avoid a multitude of quotations for the sole purpose of illustrating sound, and those quotations of necessity none of the best, I must content myself with asserting, that in the discovery of these new islands of poetical beauty,
Full of sweet sounds that give delight and hurt not,
Milton has had no precursor, Greek, Latin, or Italian. The curious reader may consult the list of the ships in Homer (book 2,) of the forces in Virgil (book 7,) of dogs in Ovid (book 3); the proper names in the Persæ of Æschylus; in Petrarch's Trionfi; in Ariosto's enumeration of the Este family; and in the Divina Commedia of Dante, who thinks with Mr. Crabbe that a name's a name, and a christian and surname as good as a name and an epithet.
L' altro ch' appresso me la vena trita,
E Tegghiaio Aldobrandin—
Ed io che posto son con loro in croce,
lacopo Rusticucci fui, &c.
Dante, as well as Mr. Crabbe, may have had good reasons for giving his cog and ag-nomens; but it is clear, that harmony is not thought of.
The first quatrain of Petrarch's 115th sonnet is taken up with a list of rivers, remarkable for its indifference to the musical. Yet Petrarch was renowned for his fine ear, and used to try his verses on the lute. Till the time of Milton, names appear to have had a privilege of exemption from harmony. The following water-piece would not have been unworthy of Guthrie's Geography.
Non Tesin, Pò, Varo, Arno, Adige, e Tebro,
Eufrate, Tigre, Nilo, Ermo, Indo, e Gange,
Tana, Istro, Alfeo, Garonna, e'l mar che frange,
Rodano, Ibero, Ren, Senna, Albia, Era, Ebro.
The couplet in the Rejected Addresses is full of crumb and relish, compared with this:
John Richard William Alexander Dwyer,
Was footman to Justinian Stubbs, Esquire.
$$$
