Peter Bell, a Lyrical Ballad ..
Author: Hunt, Leigh.
Publication info: The Examiner, A Sunday Paper, on Politics, Domestic Economy, and Theatricals ; London [London]. 01 Jan 1819: 816 p.

Peter Bell, a Lyrical Ballad, by Wm. Wordsworth [in, The Examiner. No. 592. Sunday, May 2, 1819]
[Page 282]
Peter Bell, a Lyrical Ballad, by Wm. Wordsworth. This is another didactic little horror of Mr. Wordsworth's, founded on the bewitching principles of fear, bigotry, and diseased impulse. Peter Bell is a potter, who has rambled about the country, and been as wilful, after his fashion, as any Lake poet. His tastes indeed are different. He sees no beauty in mere solitariness, and is not alive to the abstract sentiment of a ditch; neither does he dance with daffodils. He is, in fact, a little over social, chusing rather to dance with gypsies, and having had no less than a dozen wives. He is like the Friar in Chaucer ; he
— Will drinke the liquor of the vine,
And have a ioly wenche in everie towne.
One day, however, losing himself in a wood, he meets with a stray jack-ass, who lies upon the ground by a river's side, and looks mysterious, Peter has a royal contempt for inferior animals (not that the Poet so words it, but such is the fact), and belabours the poor jack-ass in a dreadful manner, till it groans and then looks into the water, and then at Peter . He looks in his turn, and in the water what does he see? This is a question which the Poet himself asks his Readers, putting a number of samples of horrid sights, by way of help to their memorie. Of course they cannot answer him; but it turns out, that one thing at least which Peter did see, was the corpse of a man newly drowned, the owner of the jack-ass. The animal's attachment makes the first impression on Peter's imagination; he sees him inclined to shew him the way to the deceased's house, and accordingly rides him thither, where he finds the widow and children bitterly lamenting. For the final impression resulting from this scene he is also prepared, as he rode along, by the sound of a Damnation Sermon, which a Methodist is vociferating from a chapel. The consequence is, that after a melancholy of eleven months, he is thoroughly reformed, and has a proper united sense of hare-bells and hell-fire.
Now all this, we conceive, is as weak and vulgar in philosophy as can be. It is the philosophy of violence and hopelessness. It is not teaching ignorance, but scourging it. If Mr. Wordsworth means to say that feat may occasionally do good, we grant it; but we say that nine times out of ten, it does harm, and is likely to make a man's after-thoughts desperate and resentful, and still oftener selfish and servile. The very hope of such things as Methodism is founded in hopelessness, and that too of the very worst sort,—namely, hopelessness of others, and salvation for itself. Peter Bell is an ill-taught blackguard. There is his whole history. The growth of such persons must be prevented by good and kind teaching. If they are suffered to grow up without it, and are then to be dosed with horrors proportioned to the strength of the disease inflicted on them, they have as much right to complain as any that suffer from them. It is no more incumbent on them to think themselves objects of God's anger (thus giving them a bad idea of God, as well as man) than it is on the most didactic of the Lake Poets to think himself wise and virtuous. The good old fable of the son who bit off his mother's ear at the gallows, is, and will ever remain, worth a thousand such stories.
We are really and most unaffectedly sorry to see an excellent poet like Mr. Wordsworth returning, in vulgar despair, to such half-witted prejudices; especially when we meet with such masterly descriptions as the following. It is a portrait as true in the colouring as any of Mr. Crabbe's, and deeper thoughted.
A savage wildness round him hung
As of a dweller out of doors;
In his whole figure and his mien
A savage character was seen,
Of mountains and of dreary moors.
To all the unshap'd half human thoughts
Which solitary Nature feeds
'Mid summer storms or winter's ice,
Had Peter join'd whatever vice
The cruel city breeds.
His face was keen as is the wind
That cuts along the hawthorn fence;
Of courage you saw little there,
But, in its stead, a medley air
Of cunning and of impudence.
He had a dark and sidelong walk,
And long and slouching was his gait;
Beneath his looks so bare and bold,
You might perceive, his spirit cold
Was playing with some inward bait.
His forehead wrinkled was and furr'd;
A work one half of which was done
By thinking of his whens and hows;
And half by knitting of his brows
Beneath the glaring sun.
There was a hardness in his cheek,
There was a hardness in his eye,
As if the man had fix'd his face,
In many a solitary place,
Against the wind and open sky.
[Page 283]
But what is to be said to the following Methodistical nightmare? It is part of the questions of which we spoke, when Peter sees the spectacle in the water.
Is it a fiend that to a stake
Of fire his desperate self is tethering?
Or stubborn spirit doom'd to yell
In solitary ward or cell,
Ten thousand miles from all his brethren?
Is it a party in a parlour?
Cramm'd just as they on earth were cramm'd—
Some sipping punch, some sipping tea,
But, as you by their faces see,
All silent and all damn'd!
What pretty little hopeful imaginations for a reforming philosopher! Is Mr. Wordsworth in earnest or is he not, in thinking that his fellow-creatures are to be damned? If he is, who is to be made really better or more comfortable in this world, by having such notions of another? If not, how wretched is this hypocrisy?
Mr. Wordsworth, in the course of his mystic musings on Peter , has the following passage on a jackass's grin:—
Let them whose voice can stop the clouds—
Whose cunning eye can see the wind—
Tell to a curious world the cause
Why, making here a sudden pause,
The Ass turn'd round his head—and grinn'd.
Appalling process!—I have mark'd
The like on heath—in lonely wood,
And, verily, have seldom met
A spectacle more hideous—yet
It suited Peter's present mood.
Pray admire the way in which the poet first begs the question about a meaning in the ass's grin, and then calls upon those who “can see the wind” to disprove it. Surely the burden of the proof lies upon the ass's worthy spectator. We refer him however, if he still makes his call, to the Learned Pig.
Yet it is in this morbid spirit that Mr. Wordsworth writes, for the benefit of the world!
The poem is dedicated in an odd shy way, that has any thing but the look of sincerity, to “Robert Southey, Esq. P. L.”, that is to say, (for Mr. Wordsworth has left it unexplained) not Precious Looby , but Poet Laureat . It has a Proem also, which the author thinks it necessary to inform us was written some years back,—about an aerial living Boat which he can ride if he chuses about the upper regions, but declines so doing for the benefit of the lower. There are fine passages in it, but Mr. Wordsworth should should never affect vivacity. It leads him to expose himself in such unwieldy levities as these—
There's something in a flying horse,
And something in a huge balloon;
But through the clouds I'll never float
Until I have a little boat,
Whose shape is like the crescent-moon.
And now I have a little boat,
In shape a very crescent-moon, &c.
The pamphlet concludes with three sonnets on some of Mr. Westall's landscapes. The first is a fine one, though running off into the old vein. The conclusion of one of the others is very melancholy, and would let us into the secret of Mr. Wordsworth's philosophy, if nothing else did. He forsakes the real cause of the world, and then abuses what he has injured. And yet this is he who would make us in love with the visible creation!
Vain earth!—false world! Foundations must be laid
In Heav'n; for, mid the wreek of is and WAS,
Things incomplete and purposes betrayed
Make sadder transits o'er truth's mystic glass
Than noblest objects utterly decayed.
Alas! Alas for the ci-devant patriots, and soi-disant philosophers!—We happen to write this article on the First of May; and thanks to greater poets than Mr. Wordsworth, and to the nature whom be so strangely recommends, can enjoy the beautiful season on earth, without thinking the less hopefully of heaven.
$$$
