Art V.-Poems by Alfred Tennyson
Author: Hunt, Leigh.
Publication info: The Church of England Quarterly Review ; London  : iv, iv, 564 p. London (1842)

Art. V. — Poems by Alfred Tennyson [in, The Church of England Quarterly Review. Vol. XII]
[Page 361]
Art. V.— Poems by Alfred Tennyson. 2 vols., 12mo. London: Moxon. 1842. Only one of these volumes is entirely new. The first, as the author intimates in two successive dates at the beginning and middle of it, and a little more copious bit of information in four lines at the conclusion, is for the most part a collection of former volumes, and some of the poems in it have been “considerably altered.” Others, he might have added, have been left out; and, retaining what he has, we do not see good reason for the omission: so that the present publication is neither an entire collection, nor a thoroughly satisfactory selection, which is a pity.
We state our objections first, that we may get rid of the unpleasant part of our task, and enjoy the subsequent approbation with more comfort; for, though reviewers are supposed to take a special delight in censure, and we ourselves must in candour confess that we know what it is to be tempted to go the way of all critical flesh, and how strong the desire in the young reviewer is to make the importance of the judgment-seat felt; but a little more Christian reflection made us discern the danger which our love of truth was undergoing, especially towards persons who differed with us in opinion; and, though we must never cease to find fault where truth demands it, and where the book is of importance enough to render fault-finding necessary (for wretched books may surely be left to their own natural death, without exciting a shabby desire to kill them), yet, so far from giving either into this once reigning bad habit of reviews, or into the other pick-thank extreme of indiscriminate praise, or following the still more common and servile practice of giving the greatest praise to none but authors in fashion, and being afraid of doing justice to others perhaps far superior, we shall make it our business to give as cheerful and even reverential eulogy to genius, in whatever quarter we find it, as we shall jealously guard that right and sincerity of objection which alone can render it thoroughly valuable. We would not give wholesale, indiscriminate laudation to Shakspeare himself, as long as human nature is what it is, and no man perfect. Neither, on the other hand, shall any reigning fashion induce us to take common-place for invention, or the soothing of the languors of soft ears for a masculine versification.
We are compelled to say, then, in justice to the very respect which we entertain, and the more which we desire to entertain, for the genius of Mr. Tennyson, that the above “lettings out of the bag” of his dates and alterations, are a little too characteristic
[Page 362]
of a certain mixture of timidity and misgiving with his otherwise somewhat defying demands upon our assent to his figments and his hyphens , and that we have greater objections to a certain air of literary dandyism, or fine-gentlemanism, or fastidiousness, or whatever he may not be pleased to call it, which leads him to usher in his compositions with such exordiums as those to Morte d' Arthur , and Godiva ; in the former of which he gives us to understand that he should have burnt his poem but for the “request of friends;” and, in the latter, that he “shaped” it while he was waiting “for the train at Coventry,” and hanging on the bridge “with grooms and porters.” Really this is little better than the rhyming fine-ladyism of Miss Seward, who said that she used to translate an ode of Horace “while her hair was curling.” And, if the “grooms and porters.” have any meaning beyond a superfluous bit of the graphic, not in keeping with his subject, it is a little worse, for why should not Mr. Tennyson, in the universality of his poetry, be as content to be waiting on a bridge, among “grooms and porters,” as with any other assortment of his fellow-men? Doubtless he would disclaim any such want of philosophy; but this kind of mixed tone of contempt and nonchalance, or, at best, of fine-life phrases with better fellowship, looks a little instructive, and is, at all events, a little perilous. There is a drawl of Bond-street in it. We suspect that these poems of Morte d' Arthur and Godiva are among those which Mr. Tennyson thinks his best, and is most anxious that others should regard as he does; and therefore it is that he would affect to make trifles of them. The reader's opinion is at once to be of great importance to him, and yet none at all. There is a boyishness in this, which we shall be happy to see Mr. Tennyson, who is no longer a boy, outgrow.
So of his hyphens and his dots, his sëers, low-lieths , and Eleanoras , and the intensifications of his prefix a—aweary, amany, anear ; it is “affectations, 'oman,” as Sir Hugh says; and a very unnecessary bad compliment both to his readers and himself, as if they did not know how to read, or could never enough see the merit of his quantities and qualities without the help of his lackadaisical particle. Upon a like principle we object to his excessive fondness for repeating a lyrical “burthen.” His “aweary, aweary,” in the Moated Grange , may indeed help us to sympathise with the fatigue of the inhabitant; but four “Orianas” to every stanza, in the ballad of that name, amounting to forty-four in all, burlesque all music and feeling, and become a parrot-cry instead of a melody. This, too, in a poem full of beauty!
[Page 363]
We trust that in his next publication Mr. Tennyson will show that he has acquired energy enough to get rid of these mixtures of weakness with his strength. We do not wish him, merely because critics object to them, to leave out some of his second or third-best productions, as he seems to have done, and this, too, while retaining his most objectionable; we desire to see him once for all at ease both with his critics and himself, acknowledge what is juvenile or faulty, or rather perceive it without saying anything about the matter; and, whether he discountenances anything or nothing of what he has done, cease to combine misgiving with rashness, and airs of the drawing-room with the enlargement he really possesses, and give us a good, wholesome, satisfactory, and enduring quintessence of the best part of him. He has fancy, imagination, expression, thought, knowledge, and music, too—in short, all the materials of an admirable contemplative poet, and in some instances his success has been already great, and his name, we trust, will be lasting. But at present he still shows a little too much of the spoiled child. He is indolent, over-refining, is in danger of neutralizing his earnestness altogether by the scepticism of thought not too strong, but not strong enough to lead or combine, and he runs, or rather reposes, altogether upon feelings (not to speak it offensively) too sensual. His mind lives in an atmosphere heavy with perfumes. He grows lazy by the side of his Lincolnshire water-lilies; and, with a genius of his own sufficient for original and enduring purposes (at least we hope so), subjects himself to the charge of helping it too much with the poets gone before him, from Homer to Wordsworth, and to Shelley and Keats. But we will touch upon most of the poems in their order, and thus best show what we mean. The beautiful passages that we shall have to quote in eulogy will luckily far more than repay the reader and ourselves for any unpleasant necessity of finding fault.
Claribel , who “low-lieth” where the “beetle boometh ”(not a good word), and the “wild bee hummeth,” and the “lint-white smelleth,” and the “mavis dwelleth,” et cetera, et cetera , is rather a series of descriptive items in obsolete language than a dirge in earnest.
Lilian is as light and pretty as its subject; but
“Till the lightning laughter's dimple
The baby roses in her cheeks,”
is an instance of that injudicious crowding of images which sometimes results from Mr. Tennyson's desire to impress upon us the abundance of his thoughts.
[Page 364]
The style of Isabel reminds us both of Wordsworth's solemnity and Shelley's Grecisms and penultimate accents. It is a panegyric of chastity in that ultra-super-exalting spirit of Beaumont and Fletcher, which renders the sincerity of it suspicious; and the conclusion unluckily corroborates the impression by informing us that “the world hath not such another,” for a “finished, chastened purity,” as this lady! This is awkward for the sex in general, and for their gratitude to the poet. The expression “ blanched tablets of the heart,” will not do at all after its beautiful original in the old poet, “the red-leaved tablets of the heart.” There is a charming verisimilitude and warmth of feeling in the latter image, full of grace and cordiality.
Mariana , in the Moated Grange , brings us at once into the thick of the real beauties of the author; and, as we have not noticed him in this publication before, and wish our article to give as thorough an idea of his genius as it can, we will quote the whole of it, though at the hazard of the reader's having seen it years ago. The loose, rusty nails on the garden wall, the “glooming flats,” the low of the oxen coming from the dark fens, the blue fly singing in the pane, and the mouse shrieking behind the mouldering wainscot, are part of heap of images all painted from nature, and true to the feeling of the subject.
MARIANA.
“Mariana in the Moated Grange.”— Measure for Measure.
“With blackest moss the flower-plots
    Were thickly crusted, one and all;
The rusted nails fell from the knots
    That held the peach to the garden-wall.
The broken sheds look'd sad and strange;
    Unlifted was the clinking latch;
    Weeded and worn the ancient thatch
Upon the lonely moated grange.
       She only said, ‘My life is dreary;
          He cometh not,’ she said:
       She said, ‘I am aweary, aweary;
          I would that I were dead!’
“Her tears fell with the dew at even;
    Her tears fell ere the dews were dried:
She could not look on the sweet heaven,
    Either at morn or even-tide.
After the flitting of the bats,
    When thickest dark did trance the sky,
    She drew her casement-curtain by,
And glanced athwart the glooming flats.
[Page 365]
       She only said, ‘the night is dreary;
          He cometh not,’ she said:
       She said, ‘I am aweary, aweary;
          I would that I were dead!’
“Upon the middle of the night
    Waking, she heard the night-fowl crow;
The cock sung out an hour ere light;
    From the dark fen the oxen's low
Came to her: without hope of change,
    In sleep she seem'd to wake forlorn,
    Till cold winds woke the gray-eyed morn,
About the lonely moated grange.
       She only said,‘The day is dreary;
          He cometh not,’ she said:
       She said, ‘I am aweary, aweary;
          I would that I were dead!’
“About a stone-cast from the wall,
    A sluice with blacken'd waters slept,
And o'er it many, round and small,
    The cluster'd marish-mosses crept.
Hard by a poplar shook alway,
    All silver-green with gnarled bark,
    For leagues no other tree did dark
The level waste, the rounding gray.
       She only said, ‘My life is dreary,
          He cometh not,’ she said:
       She said, ‘I am aweary, aweary;
          I would that I were dead!’
“And even when the moon was low,
    And the shrill winds were up and away;
In the white curtain, to and fro,
    She saw the gusty shadow sway.
But when the moon was very low,
    And wild winds bound within their cell,
    The shadow of the poplar fell
Upon her bed, across her brow.
       She only said, ‘The night is dreary,
          He cometh not,’ she said:
       She said, ‘I am aweary, aweary;
          I would that I were dead!’
“All day within the dreamy house,
    The doors upon their hinges creak'd;
The blue fly sang i' the pane; the mouse
    Behind the mouldering wainscot shriek'd,
Or from the crevice peer'd about.
    Old faces glimmer'd through the doors,
    Old footsteps trod the upper floors,
Old voices call'd her from without.
[Page 366]
       She only said, ‘My life is dreary,
          He cometh not,’ she said:
       She said, ‘I am aweary, aweary;
          I wish that I were dead!’
“The sparrow's chirrup on the roof,
    The slow clock ticking, and the sound
Which to the wooing wind aloof
    The poplar made, did all confound
Her sense; but most she loath'd the hour
    When the thick-moted sunbeam lay
    Athwart the chambers, and the day
Was sloping toward his western bower.
       Then said she, ‘I am very dreary,
          He will not come,’ she said:
       She wept, ‘I am aweary, aweary;
          Oh God! that I were dead!”’
Mr. Tennyson seems to have felt, that these descriptions, beautiful as they were, were rather native than foreign; and he has accordingly given us a Mariana in the South ; which, though more Catholic in one sense is less so in another; and though not without its truth too, and beauty, must undergo the fate of all sequels, in being considered very inferior to its prototype.
Madeline is held forth to us a lady, who “smiling frowning evermore,” is considered “perfect in love.” “Delicious spites and darling angers” are here; things such as Tasso took delight in praising; and as long as they only amused him, they were very well; but when he came to take a deeper interest, adieu to the lovingness of the lady and to his own happiness. So with this ever frowning and smiling coquette of Mr. Tennyson's, who fixes a smile at him if he offers to go, and then “blushes angerly” if he offers to kiss the tips of her fingers. We confess we have no faith in the lady's knowledge of love at all, nor any vast deal in the loveability of Mr. Tennyson's ladies in general. They remind us too much of the fine young ladies in souvenirs and beauty-books, with rapturous eyes, dark locks and tresses, and all that—ready made to conquer between the meretricious and the moral—between a boarding-school education, and prudential, and in truth cold contradictions to it. He has a whole seraglio of them. The list would make a song of itself. There is Mariana, Eleonora, Oriana, Fatima, Dora, Margaret, Olivia, Rose, Emilia, Claribel, Isabel, Adeline, Madeline, Lady Clara, and Lady Flora. Poets are bound to be admirers of the fair sex; but Mr. Tennyson talks as if he really loved most of these ladies, while it is pretty clear that his admiration
[Page 367]
is of a very ordinary sort, and that he makes the poor creatures pegs to hang characters upon; for which we are not surprised that they seldom appear to return his passion. We think him more ingenious than happy in these portraitures. There is sometimes a good deal of observation in them, and metaphysical acuteness; but it is too ostentatiously shown, often in numbers affectedly musical; and he makes them so very conscious, or fastidious, or stately, or in some way or other almost always puts some such unpleasant contradiction to their loveability in the midst of their exuberant airs and graces, that they end in impressing us as a sort of poetical milliners, or artificial idealisms full dressed. And how can he condescend to write such fantastic nothings, pretending to be intense somethings, as the following:—
“Lovest thou the doleful wind
When thou gazest at the skies?
Doth the low-tongued Orient
Wander from the side o'the morn.
Dripping with Sabæan spice,
On thy pillow lowly bent,
With melodious airs lovelorn,
Breathing light against thy face,
While his locks a-dropping turned,
Round thy neck in subtle ring,
Make a carcanet of rays.
(The meaning?)
And ye talk together still,
In the language wherewith spring
Letters cowslips on the hill?
Hence that look and smile of thine,
Spiritual Adeline!”
We have read of lettered hyacinths in Theocritus (alluding to the story in the Mythology), and of “shuttles of the morn,” in a very different poet, one Mr. Merry, hight Della Crusca, who described them as “weaving an airy lay upon a cobwebbed thorn;” and we must say that in such verses as these, Mr. Tennyson reminds us far more of the gossamer fancies of that gentleman, than of his worthier and more kindred associate. Could any one suppose that the writer who would allow himself to put forth such lines as these was the same who painted the following masterly portrait? It is very different from those of his young ladies, and evidently taken entirely from the life. We have heard of its original being disowned in a late admirable poet and metaphysician. If so, it is after all but a one-sided, and in great measure even superficial portrait, for the whole
[Page 368]
humanity at the bottom of his heart is left out, together with his lovely imagination. But still it is a masterly show-up of the worldly side of a man who is understood by most people to have had an esoterical and an exoterical creed; and it is very like his manner and his book.
“A CHARACTER.
“With a half glance upon the sky,
At night he said, ‘The wanderings
Of this most intricate universe
Teach us the nothingness of things.’
Yet could not all creation pierce
Beyond the bottom of his eye.
“He spake of beauty: that the dull
Saw no divinity in grass,
Life in dead stones, or spirit in air;
Then looking as 'twere in a glass,
He smooth'd his chin and sleek'd his hair,
And said the earth was beautiful.
“He spake of virtue: not the gods
More purely, when they wish to charm
Pallas and Juno sitting by;
And with a sweeping of the arm,
And a lack-lustre dead-blue eye,
Devolved his rounded periods.
“Most delicately hour by hour
He canvass'd human mysteries,
And trod on silk, as if the winds
Blew his own praises in his eyes;
And stood aloof from other minds
In impotence of fancied power,
“With lips depressed as he were meek,
Himself unto himself he sold;
Upon himself himself did feed;
Quiet, dispassionate, and cold,
And other than his form of creed,
With chisell'd features clear and sleek.”
We look upon the above, after its kind, as a faultless composition; and its kind is no mean one. Considered as poetical satire, it brings an atmosphere of imagination round the coldest matter of fact; and the delicate blank effect of the disposition of the rhymes completes the seemingly passionless exposure of its passionless object.
The Poet reminds us of Shelley; and we are not sure whether,
[Page 369]
though it has in some respects a look of generality, it was not intended for his portrait. If so, whatever objections this publication would have to make to the original, we should have admired Mr. Tennyson's boldness more had he spoken out.
The Merman and Mermaid are true bits of half-human, half-fishy sympathy. But even under the water there is too much vanity and consciousness mixed up with the author's actions of love. The Lady of Shalott , we confess, we do not very well understand, except as a series of long-drawn musical reiterations; and as such, it is very successful. Oenone lamenting the infidelity of Paris is as beautiful and graceful as if it had been painted by one of the Italian masters. It reminds us of a lovely comparison by a brother critic, the other day, of Raphael, cut off in the flower of his years, to a broken orange-tree (something more than an imitation of Homer's simile of the fallen warrior with the young olive-tree.) Select beauty is in it; not the less true for being select; and a golden warmth pervades the grace, like Titian shining upon the Caracci, or the hue of the orange upon the beauty of its orb. The Recollections of the Arabian Nights , compared with this elegant bit of paganism, is not a true oriental contrast. It runs too much into mere luxury and exuberance. We are oppressed as with a nook of Lincolnshire weeds. The better part of the stateliness and drapery of the East is not in it, much less the human variety of that wonderful set of stories. When Mr. Tennyson's subject is spiritual, he is apt to become sensuous enough; and very beautiful he then is in his sensuousness. When his subject is sensual , it is to his detriment; for his luxury tends to rankness.
Of the Goose we shall only say that humour and jest are not Mr. Tennyson's forte, and that the less he meddles with them the better. These, like his vaticinations on the future glory of one of the Kemble family—the only one without a ray of talent or genius, presumptuous, overbearing, a self-conceited coxcomb and liberal—Mr. T. should relinquish. We can assure him he has not the prophetic portion of the ancient Vates, as this unlucky mistake of a goose for a god, a block for a brain, a braggart for a brave, indicates—proving him to possess less than vulpine astuteness into the real character of objects.
We now come to the principal poems in the second or new volume; and of these we may observe in general that, although we do not recognize any advancement upon the best of the former ones, we can testify to a very considerable negative improvement in the articles of fantasticism and whimsicality. We have no longer such passages as the one quoted from Adeline , nor the same propensity to hyphens, quaint lyrics, and other
[Page 370]
juvenilities. The only difference for the worse is, that Mr. Tennyson has become more misgiving, not in what he omits, but in what he has at the same time a special inclination to do, and that not liking the misgiving, and fearing it will commit his dignity, he takes to a kind of unpoetical nonchalance or indifferent superiority to himself over his own performances. We have already noticed this involuntary exhibition of uneasiness in speaking of two of the new poems, the Morte d' Arthur and Godiva . We confess that, with all our admiration of particular passages, we do not like either of these poems so well as the author, by his studious airs of indifference about them, seems to wish we should. The Morte d' Arthur , as he truly designates it, is an “Homeric echo.” It treats the modes and feelings of one generation in the style of another, always a thing fatal, unless it be reconciled with something of self-banter in the course of the poem itself, or the mixture of light with grave, as in Pulci and others. The impossibility of a thorough earnestness must, somehow or other, be self-acknowledged. The peculiar exoterical delicacy, or, as prophane critic would say, the ticklishness of the position of Lady Godiva, is exceedingly well characterized. The very “stones” of the city streets and walls “prate of her whereabouts,” or, at least, hold their tongues, and open their eyes with an eloquent intensity of dumbness. But the true spirit of the master, we conceive, is not hit in this treatment of the subject. The feelings of the heroine's heart ought to have been more spoken of, and those of the good people inside the houses, who did not think of “peeping,” like the rascally tailor, but wept, and prayed, and loved the unseen angel that was going along. This would have been the way to do honour to the glorious Coventry heroine; and this is what few could have done better than Mr. Tennyson, had he been less in the habit or writing about a hundred Adelines and Madelines, and done more justice to the spiritual part of his fine genius. The best passage in this poem is the characteristic sketch of Godiva's husband and his dialogue, ending with a truly Homeric bit of human animal painting.
                                         “She told him of their tears,
And pray'd him, ‘If they pay this tax, they starve.’
Whereat he stared, replying, half amazed,
‘You would not let your little finger ache
For such as these ?’—‘But I would die,’ said she.
He laugh'd and swore by Peter and by Paul;
He fillipped at the diamond in her ear:
‘O ay, ay, ay, you talk!’—‘Alas!’ she said,
‘But prove me what it is I would not do.’
[Page 371]
And, from a heart as rough as Esau's hand,
He answer'd, ‘Ride you naked through the town,
And I repeal it;’ and, nodding as in scorn,
He parted with great strides among his dogs .”
The poem entitled St. Simeon Stylites is a powerfully graphic, and in some respects appalling satire on the pseudo-aspirations of egotistical ascetism and superstition. Poetry had need mix up the beautiful with the horrible, or, sometimes, in the enjoyment of its power to detect and punish, it would appear cruel. We do not recollect to have met with a more startling picture of the sordid and the aspiring—the selfish and the self-sacrificing— the wretched, weak body and mind and resolute soul—the abject, the dominant, the stupid, the imaginative—and, alas, the misgiving (don't let Mr. Tennyson suppose that we are applying any other of these bad epithets to him)—all mixed up in the poor phantom-like person of the almost incredible Saint of the Pillar—the almost solitary Christian counterpart of the Yogees of the Hindoos, who let birds build in their hair, and the nails of their fingers grow through the palms of their hands. We say Christian, out of Christian charity; for though real Christianity is a quintessence of good sense, both in its human and angelical aspirations, as the flower of it in due time will make manifest, yet these and other dark absurdities have, no doubt, lurked about its roots, and for a time, with equal absurdity, been confounded with the flower.
But our favourite poem in the new volume is The Two Voices . The humour of the Head Waiter we cannot relish, though we like its good fellowship; and Amphion is but a fancy of Monk Lewis's run to seed. We prefer the original ballad, in which—
    “An arm of the sea,
    Introduc'd by a tree,
To a fair young whale advances,
    And, making a leg,
    Says, “Miss, may I beg
Your fin for the next two dances.”
The Two Voices is a summary of the argument, pro and con , about suicide, capitally well put on both sides, and ending, as they ought to do, in the victory of a cheerful wisdom befitting the beauty of the universe and the goodness of its Creator. We admire it so much, that we would fain extract the whole of it, did it not amount to upwards of thirty pages—a good bit of the volume; so that we must content ourselves with recommending the reader to buy the work, if it were only for this single poem, though his money would be well laid out were it not among the contents. Unluckily, the more we admire it, the more we are
[Page 372]
compelled to do so at the expense of the volume that contains it, for, on looking at the last stanza, we suddenly discover a date which informs us that it was written in the year 1833; so that we must qualify in some respects what we have intimated about the progress of Mr. Tennyson's genius, the new volume assuredly containing nothing either in feeling or thought which is superior to the old one, if, indeed, it can be said to equal it. We will quote the beginning and the conclusion of The Two Voices , that we may have the pleasure of shewing the reader of what sort of stuff it is made, and then say a word or two more on this point, in bringing our remarks to an end.
“A still small voice spake unto me,
‘Thou art so full of misery,
Were it not better not to be?’
“Then to the still small voice I said,
‘Let me not cast in endless shade,
What is so wonderfully made.’
“To which the voice did urge reply,
‘To-day I saw the dragon-fly
Come from the wells where he did lie.
“‘An inner impulse rent the veil
Of his old husk: from head to tail
Came out clear plates of sapphire mail.
“‘He dried his wings—like gauze they grew:
Through crofts and pastures wet with dew,
A living flash of light he flew.’
“I said, ‘When first the world began,
Young Nature through five cycles ran,
And in the sixth she moulded man.
“‘She gave him mind, the lordliest
Proportion, and, above the rest,
Dominion in the head and breast.’
“Thereto the silent voice replied,
‘Self-blinded are you by your pride;
Look up through night: the world is wide.
“‘This truth within thy mind rehearse—
That, in a boundless universe,
Is boundless better, boundless worse.
“‘Think you this mould of hopes and fears
Could find no statelier than his peers
In yonder hundred million spheres?”
“It spake moreover in my mind,
‘Though thou wert scatter'd to the wind,
Yet is there plenty of the kind.’
[Page 373]
“Then did my response clearer fall:
‘No compound of this earthly ball
Is like another, all in all.’
“To which he answer'd scoffingly,
‘Good soul, suppose I grant it thee,
Who'll weep for thy deficiency?’
“‘Or will one beam be less intense,
When thy peculiar difference
Is cancell'd in the world of sense?’
“I would have said, ‘Thou can'st not know;’
But my full heart that work'd below ,
Rain'd through my sight its overflow.
That is very beautiful. But we must hasten to the conclusion, always begging the reader to become acquainted with the rest for himself.
“The still voice laugh'd. ‘I talk,’ said he,
‘Not with they dreams. Suffice it thee
Thy pain is a reality.’
“But thou,' said I, ‘hast miss'd thy mark,
Who soughtst to wreck my mortal ark,
By making all the horizon dark.
“Why not set forth, if I should do
This rashness, that which might ensue
With this old soul in organs new?
“Whatever crazy sorrow saith,
No life that breathes with human breath
Has ever truly long'd for death.
“' Tis life, whereof our heroes are scant ,
Oh, life, not death, for which we pant ;
More life, and fuller, that I want.
“I ceas'd, and sat as one forlorn.
Then said the voice, in quiet scorn,
‘Behold, it is the Sabbath morn.’
“And I arose, and I releas'd
The casement, and the light encreas'd
With freshness in the dawning east.
“Like soften'd airs that blowing steal,
When meres begin to uncongeal,
The sweet church bells began to peal.
“On to God's house the people press'd,
Passing the place where each must rest,
Each enter'd like a welcome guest.
[Page 374]
“One walk'd between his wife and child,
With measure'd footfall firm and mild,
And now and then he gravely smil'd.
“The prudent partner of his blood
Lean'd on him, faithful, gentle, good,
Wearing the rose of womanhood.
“And in their double love secure,
The little maiden walk'd demure,
Pacing with downward eyelids pure.
“These three made unity so sweet,
My frozen heart began to beat,
Remembering its ancient heat.
“I blessed them, and they wander'd on;
I spoke, but answer came there none,
The dull and bitter voice was gone.
“A second voice was at mine ear,
A little whisper silver-clear,
A murmur, ‘Be of better cheer.’
∗   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
“What is it thou knowest, sweet voice? I cried,
‘A hidden hope,’ the voice replied.
“So heavenly-toned, that in that hour
From out my sullen heart a power
Broke, like the rainbow from the shower.
∗   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
“And forth into the fields I went,
And Nature's living motion lent
The pulse of hope to discontent.
“I wonder'd at the bounteous hours,
The slow result of winter showers,
You scarce could see the grass for flowers.
“I wonder'd while I paced along,
The woods were fill'd so full with song,
There seem'd no room for sense of wrong.
“So variously secur'd all things wrought,
I marvell'd how the mind was brought
To anchor by one gloomy thought.
“And wherefore rather I made choice
To commune with the barren voice,
Than him that said, ‘rejoice, rejoice!”’
This is genuine, Christian, manly, and poetical philosophy, far better than a hundred elaborate luxuries, whether of voluptuousness
[Page 375]
or woe, and in a style more advanced than that which heaps up compound epithets and an ostentation of thoughts. There has been a reaction of late years in favour both of thought and feeling, and a very salutary reaction it is, against the unthinking common-place that prevailed at the beginning of the century; but, with the usual tendency of revolutions, it has gone to an extreme, and young poets are in danger of exchanging one set of impertinences, that is to say, irrelevancies, for another. They think they must think at any rate, and be in an incessant state of exuberant remark and imagery, in order to shew what is in them. But real abundance is not under the necessity of taking those violent measures to prove itself. Everything even said well is not said fitly. The real feeling is apt to become smothered in the false; thought takes its place, and that alone is perilous; genuine powers prematurely exhibit themselves, taking pains to shew they have come to their full growth, with airs of universality, and profundity, and final judgments; till at last they are in danger of meeting with a very awkward “extreme, and, instead of hitting the real points of their subject, whirl their giddy heads round towards the gentle outer-pole of the heroes of the Dunciad,
“Who wrote about it, goddess, and about it.”
Now, one thing said with thorough truth, and to the purpose, is worth millions of half-apposite fancies, and similes, and collateralities, which do but end, as Ovid calls it, in a poverty-stricken abundance— inops copia , and leave every poem of necessity unfinished: for where so many things are said about things, why not say more? or where is to be the end of them? Writers of this kind are apt to look with scorn on such poets as Gray and Collins, much more on Pope and the other poets of the French school. We ourselves are adherents to poetry in all its grades, and love the miniatures of Pope, notwithstanding our far greater love and delight in Spenser and Shakspeare, and our admiration of all the genuine intermediate good stuff, whether of thought or feeling, or both, in Beaumont and Fletcher, and Webster, and Marlowe, and Donne, and Daniel, and Drayton; but we cannot blind ourselves to the fact, that completeness is completeness—judgment, a thing select—and passion, a thing with “no nonsense”—and imagination, not to be confounded with thoughts and fancies, any more than quantity is quality, or profession performance. And the danger to these gentlemen is, that the Grays and Collinses, and even that of the simply natural in Goldsmith, will survive them, and see most of them
[Page 376]
even speedily perish, unless they “change their hand and check their pride,” simply because those writers are consistent with the truth that is in them, and are not always provoking and disappointing the degree of expectation which they have undertaken to raise.
Mr. Tennyson is at present a kind of philosophical Keats, without the later judgment of that extraordinary genius, and of a turn of mind less naturally and thoroughly given to poetry, in its essence. But there can be no doubt that he is a genuine poet too in his degree (a sacred name—pray let him know how to value it, and be at his ease with it): and there is a class of poetry in which we think he may obtain for himself a name, perhaps as great in its way as that of the other, and one of an independent sort, and that is in a mixture of thought and feeling, more abundant in the former respect than Keats, and more pleasurable and luxuriant in the latter than Wordsworth. We have already characterized, at the beginning of our article, his poetical merits as well as defects, and surely out of all these he might produce another volume which, if less in bulk than the two before us, would have a far greater real abundance. His poems of Mariana , and A Character , and the Merman and Mermaid , and Oriana (in spite of its burden), and the Miller's Daughter , and Simeon Stylites , and the Two Voices , are almost all written in a style as clear and compact as the fancy and imagination are poetical, and the thinking profound; and we hope to see the day when Mr. Moxon will oblige us with a volume including these, and containing new ones nothing inferior to the old.
Such is the position, in the opinion of poets and lovers of genuine poetry (the opinion of critics, and of the public, may not as yet be quite in accordance with the former), which Mr. Tennyson has attained after having been before the world during ten or twelve years. With the first class his genius was at once recognized—with the critics and the public it has, as usual, been matter of slow progress and much contest; but we think that, on the whole, he has little reason to be dissatisfied, and no reason at all, when we consider the ill treatment and tardy admission of the claims of Shelley, of Keats, and of Wordsworth.
$$$
