Preface, Including Cursory Observations On Poetry and Cheerfulness
Author: Hunt, Leigh.
Publication info: Foliage . 39, cxxxv, iii p. London: C. And J. Ollier, 1818.

Preface, Including Cursory Observations On Poetry And Cheerfulness [in, Foliage; or Poems Original And Translated, by Leigh Hunt]
[Page ]
DEDICATION. TO Sir JOHN EDWD. SWINBURNE, Bart. MY DEAR SIR JOHN,
This book belongs to you, if you will accept it. You are not one of those who pay the strange compliment to heaven of depreciating this world, because you believe in another: you admire it's beauties both in nature and art; you think that a knowledge of the finest voices it has uttered, ancient well as modern, ought, even in gratitude, to be shared by the sex that has inspired so many of them;—a rational piety and a manly patriotism
[Page 8]
does not hinder you from putting the Phidian Jupiter over your organ, or flowers at the end of your room;—in short, you who visit the sick and the prisoner, for the sake of helping them without frightening, cannot look more tenderly after others, than you are regarded by your own family; nor can any one of the manly and amiable friends that I have the happiness of possessing, more fitly receive a book, the object of which is to cultivate a love of nature out of doors, and of sociality within. Pray pardon me this public compliment, for my own sake, and for sincerity's. That you may long continue to be the centre of kind happy looks, and an example to the once cheerful gentry of this war and money-injured land, is the constant wish of
Your obliged and affectionate servant, LEIGH HUNT.
[Page 9]
PREFACE, INCLUDING CURSORY OBSERVATIONS ON POETRY AND CHEERFULNESS. The downfall of the French school of poetry has of late been encreasing in apidity; it's cold and artificial compositions have given way, like so many fantastic figures of snow; and imagination breathes again in a more green and genial time. An attachment to the school undoubtedly survives in some quarters; but those who defend it as a superior one of poetry , merely shew that they have no real perception of that art; and the other critics,
[Page 10]
who are either loth to give it up from a natural self-love, or not magnanimous enough to own the conviction they feel, are in danger of being left behind by the public whom they would lead.
This has undoubtedly been owing, in the first instance, to the political convulsions of the world, which shook up the minds of men, and rendered them too active and speculative to be satisfied with their common-places. A second cause was the revived inclination for our older and great school of poetry, chiefly produced, I have no doubt, by the commentators on Shakspeare, though they were certainly not aware what fine countries they were laying open. The third, and not the least, was the accession of a new school of poetry itself, of which Wordsworth has justly the reputation of being the most prominent ornament, but whose inner priest of the temple perhaps was Coleridge,—a man who has been the real oracle of the time in more than one respect, and
[Page 11]
who ought to have been the greatest visible person in it, instead of a hopeless and dreary sophist. Between these two for natural powers, and superior to both in what renders wisdom amiable and useful, which is social sentiment, I should place Charles Lamb, a single one of whose speculations upon humanity, unostentatiously scattered about in comments and magazines, is worth all the half-way-house gabbling of critics on the establishment.
The consequence of this re-awakening of the poetical faculty is not, as some imagine, a contempt for Pope and the other chief writers of the French school. It justly appreciates their wit, terseness, and acuteness; but it can neither confound their monotony with a fine music, nor recognize the real spirit of poetry in their town habits, their narrow sphere of imagination, their knowledge of manners rather than natures, and their gross mistake about what they called classical, which was Horace and the Latin breeding, instead of the
[Page 12]
elementary inspiration of Greece. 1 The notions about poetry can no longer be controuled, like the fashions, by a coterie of town gentlemen. People have ceased to believe
[Page 13]
that wit and verse are the great essentials of the art; much less cant phrases, and lines cut in two; or that any given John Tomkins, Esq. upon the strength of his stock of Johnson's Poets, can sit down, and draw upon our admiration in the usual formulas, as he would upon his banker for money.
A sensativeness to the beauty of the external world, to the unsophisticated impulses of our nature, and above all, imagination, or the power to see, with verisimilitude, what others do not,—these are the properties of poetry; and in proportion as the enjoyer applies them according to his experience, to his sense of good, and especially his natural disposition, he turns what he possesses of them to account. This is a secret which I saw very early; and I attribute to the knowledge of it whatever popularity I may have obtained, whether in verse or prose. The three living poets, who may chiefly be said to have characters of their own, have found their advantage in it, especially
[Page 14]
Byron and Moore, experience being the principal ground on which the former goes, and natural disposition the latter. The remaining one, Wordsworth, whose ground is morals, has not succeeded so well as either in one sense of the word; but taking every thing into consideration, the novelty of his poetical system, and the very unattractive and in my opinion mistaken nature of his moral one, he has succeeded still more; and is generally felt among his own profession to be at the head of it. Among the poets who were bred up in the French school, Moore, who is a real musician also, has lately given a valuable proof of his approbation of a different system of verse in the new-modelled heroic numbers of his Lalla Rookh; and my noble friend, Lord Byron, who waits as little for his own genius to be admired, before he admires that of others, does justice, I know, to the new school, though his charity inclines him to say what he can for a falling one.
[Page 15]
An unattractive, creed, however the hypocritical or envious may affect to confound the chearful tendencies of our nature with vicious ones, or the melancholy may be led really to do so, is an argument against itself. Shall we never have done with begging the question against enjoyment, and denying or doubting the earthly possibility of the only end of virtue itself, with a dreary wilfulness that prevents our obtaining it? The fatality goes even farther; for let them say what they please to the contrary, they who are most doubtful of earth, are far from being the most satisfied with regard to heaven. Even when they think they have got at their security in the latter respect, it is through the medium of opinions which make humanity shudder; and this, except with the most brutal selfishness, comes round to the same thing. The depreciators of this world,—the involuntary blasphemers of Nature's goodness,—have tried melancholy and partial systems enough, and talked enough of
[Page 16]
their own humility. It is high time for them, and for all of us, to look after health and sociality; and to believe, that although we cannot alter the world with an ipse dixit, we need not become desponding, or mistake a disappointed egotism for humility. We should consider ourselves as what we really are,—creatures made to enjoy more than to know, to know infinitely nevertheless in proportion as we enjoy kindly, and finally, to put our own shoulders to the wheel and get out of the mud upon the green sward again, like the waggoner whom Jupiter admonishes in the fable. But we persist in being unhealthy, body and mind, and taking our jaundice for wisdom; and then because we persist, we say we must persist on. We admire the happiness, and sometimes the better wisdom of children; and yet we imitate the worst of their nonsense—“I can't—because I can't.”
For my part, though the world as I found it, and the circumstances that connected me
[Page 17]
with it's habits, have formerly given me my portion of sorrow, some of it of no ordinary kind, my creed, I confess, is not only hopeful, but cheerful; and I would pick the best parts out of others creeds too, sure that I was right in what I believed or chose to fancy, in proportion as I did honour to the beauty of nature, and spread cheerfulness and a sense of justice among my fellow-creatures. It was in this spirit, though with a more serious aspect, that I wrote the Story of Rimini, the moral of which is not as some would wish it to be,— unjust, and bigoted, and unhappy, sacrificing virtue under pretence of supporting it;—but tolerant and reconciling, recommending men's minds to the consideration of first causes in misfortune, and to see the danger of confounding forms with justice, of setting authorized selfishness above the most natural impulses, and making guilt by mistaking innocence.
It is in the same spirit, though more obviously,
[Page 18]
that I put forth the present work. I do not write, I confess, for the sake of a moral only, nor even for that purpose principally:— I write to enjoy myself; but I have learnt in the course of it to write for others also; and my poetical tendencies luckily fall in with my moral theories. The main features of the book are a love of sociality, of the country, and of the fine imagination of the Greeks. I need not inform any reader acquainted with real poetry, that a delight in rural luxury has ever been a constituent part of the very business of poets as well as one of the very best things which they have recommended, as counteractions to the more sordid tendencies of cities. But I may as well insinuate, that the luxuries which poets recommend, and which are thought so beautiful on paper, are much more within the reach of every one, and much more beautiful in reality, than people's fondness for considering all poetry as fiction would imply. The poets only do with their imaginations what all
[Page 19]
might do with their practice,—live at as cheap, natural, easy, and truly pleasurable a rate as possible; for it is not industry, but a defeat of the ends of it, and a mere want of ideas, to work and trouble themselves so much as most of our countrymen do; neither is it taste, but an ostentatious want of it, that is expensive; and the French in some of these matters are better practical poets than we are; for they refuse to get more than is reasonable, or than leaves fair play for enjoyment; and they spend their afternoons in dancing under the trees or in-doors, or attending the theatres, where they see imitations of the Golden Age in dances more poetical. The fashionable world among us see a great deal farther into these things, from the mere absence of this yellow atmosphere of money-getting; and it is curious to observe, how they come round, through all their refinements, to place their best entertainment in music and dancing, which are two of the most natural and pastoral of pleasures.
[Page 20]
As little need be said in order to deprecate the notion of effeminacy in pleasures of this kind. The French, whatever may be their defects in some matters, are at any rate not deficient in courage; and the age of Shakspeare was at once the most wise and lively, the most dancing, rural, and manly period of our English history. It is a confusion of ideas to think that these are the luxuries which announce the downfall of nations. It is bad taste of all sorts, and not good, which belongs to such a period of disease and imbecility;—gaudiness, gross intemperance, submission to ignorant tyranny, frivolous disputation,—a forsaking of real art and nature, not a love of them. The swords, with which Harmodius and Aristogeiton slew the Grecian tyrant, were braided with myrtle.
The principal original poem in this collection is founded on that beautiful mythology, which it is not one of the least merits of the new school to be restoring to its proper estimation. It was one of the frigid mistakes of
[Page 21]
the French school of wit and satire, who pretended nevertheless to a great taste in ancient poetry, to see nothing but school-boy inexperience in making use of the gods and goddesses; or what is worse, to use them themselves, with the customary bad compliment at the bottom of their gallantry, as a set of toys for the ladies. The goddesses in their hands, compared with the Grecian ones, cut much about the same figure, as the perking shepherds and shepherdesses did on their mantle-pieces, compared with Theocritus. It was the mistake of men deficient in sentiment, and in a feeling for natural beauty. Yet Quinault, whom Boileau so much ridiculed, might have taught him better; and so might a common French ballet; thought it appears to be the highest pitch of mythological taste to which his lively countrymen have arrived. They are a nation quick to see the superficial part of grace, but too easily satisfied perhaps to go deeper, unless the late revolution and their encreased intimacy with
[Page 22]
other countries have begun, as is probable, to render their sprightly egotism a little more thoughtful. Boileau ridiculed Quinault, and was insensible to his merits; but our English wits, which was worse, ridiculed Boileau and fell into his faults; and to complete this chaos of mythological mistake, Johnson could justly ridicule Prior for his comparisons of Chloe to Venus and all that , and yet take pains, in his criticisms on Milton, to shew that he had no taste for Venus in all her beauty. Certainly, with every due sense of it's merit in other respect, it was a very “periwig-pated” age in all that regarded poetry, from Waller down to the Doctor inclusive; and their heads were not the better even for the periwigs themselves. A bad and shapeless costume is one of the instinctive artifices, by which dullness can authorize or suppress what associations it pleases.
Shakspeare, and the rest of our great school of poetry, saw farther into the beauty of the
[Page 23]
Greek mythology. Spenser, Ben Johnson, Beaumont and Fletcher, evidently sparkled up, and had their most graceful perceptions upon them, whenever they turned to the fair forms and leafy luxuries of ancient imagination. Shakspeare, in particular, though he did not write so much about them as Spenser and Fletcher, was in this as in every thing else, a remarkable specimen of the very finest poetical instinct; for though not a scholar, he needed nothing more than the description given by scholars, good or indifferent, in order to pierce back at once into all the recesses of the original country. They told him where they had been, and he was there in an instant, though not in the track of their footing;—
Battendo l'ali verso l'aurea fronde— Petr.
Beating his wings towards the golden bough.
The truth is, be felt the Grecian mythology not as a set of school-boy common-places which
[Page 24]
it was thought manly to give up, but as something which it requires more than mere scholarship to understand,—as the elevation of the external world and of accomplished humanity to the highest pitch of the graceful, and as embodied essences of all the grand and lovely qualities of nature. His description of Proserpine and her flowers in the Winter's Tale, of the characteristic beauties of some of the gods in Hamlet, and that single couplet in the Tempest,
You Nymphs called Naiads, of the wandering brooks,
with your sedged crowns and ever harmless looks ,
are in the deepest taste of antiquity, and shew that all great poets look at themselves and the fine world about them in the same clear and ever-living fountains.
The taste lingered a little, though become too Ovidian, with Cowley, who with all the conceits of the inferior Italian school then succeeding
[Page 25]
to that of Petrarch and Tasso, had nevertheless quite poetry enough as well as amiableness to relish
The golden fruit that worthy is
Of Galatea's purple kiss:—
but Milton, the last of our greater poets, was the last to maintain the dignity and beauty of natural and ancient taste;—the Hesperian gardens were shut;—and in strange company with “the mountain-nymph sweet Liberty,” in came the Dragon Phantom Calvinism, whose breath even affected him for a while;—
And in he came, with his eyes of flame,
   The fiend to fetch the dead;
And all the place with his presence glowed,
   Like a fiery furnace red.
Southey's Witch of Berkeley.
Milton, when he was young and happy, wrote Grecian mythology in his Lycidas and Comus; and hung, as it were, in the ears of antiquity those two exquisite jewels, the Pensicroso and
[Page 26]
L'Allegro. In his old age, there is good reason to suspect that he was, at any rate, not bigoted; and in the meantime, allusions to romance and to Greek mythology, which he never could prevail on himself give up, are the most refreshing things in his Paradise Lost and Regained, next to the bridal happiness of poor Adam and Eve. They are not merely drops in the desert;—they are escapes from every heart-withering horror, which Eastern storms and tyranny could generate together. The light shed by Apollo's bow to the Argonauts, when they were benighted, is trivial refreshment to them. 2
And here, while speaking of the original part of the book before us, I may as well make an explanation or two, which I should
[Page 27]
otherwise have thrown into the from notes. They are merely, that a few of the pieces have appeared in print before; that the Epistles were originally written under the signature of Harry Brown, for a whim which is not worth explaining; and that the allusion in one of them, at p. exi, is under the notion of a fanciful relationship to the once celebrated author Sir Thomas Brown. Of this singular person, who wrote the greatest and saddest nonsense with an air of the subtlest and most contented sense, I will also take an opportunity, not altogether misplaced, of saying a few words. He was author of the treatise on Vulgar Errors, in which he betrayed curious instances of what he refuted,—of another on Urn Burial, some of it very eloquent, intense, and earthy,—and of the Religio Medici, in which he undertakes to give an account of a layman's faith. In this work he expresses a wish that the human race could be continued without the aid of the other sex, the
[Page 28]
necessity for whom, with an exquisite coxcombry of the serious, he affects to think painful and mortifying,—forgetting, with the usual absurdity of ascetics, all the sentiment and social tenderness which a right sense of the sexual intercourse is calculated to produce. In the same book, he tells us, that in his opinion there are “not impossibilities enough in religion for an active faith;” and that it was his solitary recreation to pose his apprehension with these involved riddles and enigmas of the divinity, with incarnation and resurrection. I love, says he, “to lose myself in a mystery, to pursue my reason to an Oh Altitudo!” His writing are of a piece with announcement, —credulous or not, just as his education inclines him, speculative to the last degree both of subtlety and sick fancy,—shewing himself abstractedly as liberal and humane as a virtuous wisdom could make him, and yet giving himself up, at a moment's notice from a dogma, to all crual exclusivenesses of
[Page 29]
bigotry. He seems to have had the marvellous possession of the acuteness and fancifulness of melancholy without the uneasiness of it; unless, which is probable, he makes himself out to be happier than he was, because he wished to be so; for his greatest quality at last, is an extraordinary egotism, not of a gross or contemptible kind, but the pride, while he thought himself most free from it, of raising himself on pinnacles of aspiration, and pretending to subject every particle of his virtue and even his wish for future happiness to the will of a superior being. The whole truth seems to be, that he was metaphysical to excess, and either from morbidity or a singular self-possession in the hypochondriacal region, literally pursued his impossible enquiries for their own sake, and for the enjoyment they gave him of his own subtlety, and not for any thing celestial which they contained. But he has great power of language, and a rapid succession of ideas amounting to
[Page 30]
the multitudinous: and when he gets out of his dogmas, we follow his guesses into the other world with something approaching to reverence. In general we seem not be hearing a mere man talking to us, but a spirit condemned to a state of doubt, or the soul of a saturnine Spaniard, or a Sybil not well awake; and are sometimes inclined to say to him as Falstaff did to his mistress, “Pr'ythee don't take to me like a death's-head.”—Sir Thomas made amends afterwards for his heterodox coyness about the ladies, by taking courage and a wife. Let us hope (not however with any fears for him, if he did not) that he made amends for his bilious theology, by not taking the Supreme Being for a Dæmon,— which is the sum and substance of all these swarthy bigotries.
The Translations in the present work are in the same spirit as the original poems;—that is to say, they were written from the same love of nature, and in the same cause of cheerfulness.
[Page 31]
I should except those from Homer, which are rather an experiment, how far I could give the intelligent reader, who is no scholar, a stronger sense of the natural energy of the original, than has yet been furnished him. This may be done, certainly, without arrogating the praise of coming up to it; and our Teutonic language, I fear, though it is rich and powerful, and it's genius has more in common with the Greek perhaps than any other, is of too monosyllabical a cast ever to pretend to re-echo the long organic music of Homer. Yet Chapman, whose translation contains more of his spirit than any other, seems to have purposely roughened it, in despair of being strong enough;—Cowper's poetical vigour, on the other hand, in this as in his other works, was spoiled by the other timidity of his constitution (which bigotry frightened into madness);—and pope, in that elegant mistake of his in two volumes octavo, called Homer's
[Page 32]
Iliad, turns the Dodonæan oak of his original into such smooth little toys as these;—
Rise, son of Peleus! rise divinely brave:
Assist the combat, and Patroclus save !
I pretend to be no great scholar myself; but what I do read, I read closely and with a due sense of what the poet demands; and it is impossible for any studier of Homer's words, and their infinite varieties of meaning, not to be struck with the gratuitous and vague talking which prevails in translations like these.
Of the other pieces I am more confident; yet I doubt whether the general reader will like them so well, at least those in blank verse; and the Anacreontics, I fear, are worth little, except a few lines at intervals;—it is so difficult to transplant those delicate Greek flowers into rhyme, without rendering them either languid and diffuse, or too much cramping them up. The pieces from the pastoral poets however,
[Page 33]
of whose real genius and character the public have hitherto had no idea whatsoever given them by the translators, I resolved, at all events, to write in blank verse, as their great charm is sentiment, and a perfectly unshackled simplicity; and I think I may venture to say, that the reader who does not feel something pathetic in the Cyclops, something sunny and exuberant in the Rural Journey, and even some of the gentler Greek music in the Elegy on the Death of Bion, would not be very likely to feel the finer part of it in the originals. All however that I answer for is, that I have felt them myself, like the summer atmosphere which they resemble.
I need not apologize to such readers as I address, for the plain-speaking in the translation of Atys. I think that voluptuousness, in the proper sense, is rather an ill-used personage; but grossness I abominate; there is neither in this poem; and he would be guilty of the real grossness, the essence of which is
[Page 34]
inapplicability and degradation, who should not see that all other associations in it are overcome by its gravity and awefulness. It comes among the other pieces indeed, like a spectre at noon-day; yet it is not unsuited to the general disposition of the work; still less is it a mere tale of horror, easy to imagine, or with excitement only for exhausted or callous nerves. It is one of the most striking lessons ever thrown out against a gloomy and ascetic enthusiasm, whatever fantastic sacrifice it may think fit to make, or whatever may be it's notion of a tyrannical deity.—The refreshing Nuptial Song of Julia and Manlius follows, and closes the door.
It is reasonably supposed by the commentators, that this poem of Atys was a translation from the Greek. It has internal evidence to that effect, in the genius of the composition as well as the subject. Catullus was one of the very few Romans that appear to me to have had an original talent for poetry; and even he degraded
[Page 35]
it as much at one time by a grossness perfectly loathsome, as he does it justice at another by a singular grace and tenderness. But Lucretius, I suspect, was the only Latin writer who could have produced Atys; and Lucretius came out of the groves of Epicurus. The literary genius of the Romans in general, besides being a copier from the Greeks, was inexpressibly cold and critical; and the people themselves appear to me, in the comparison, a nation of gladiators.
It has been well said by a German critic, that “the Greeks invented the poetry of gladness.” But it is very ill advised by the same German, that we should imitate their poetry of a different complexion;—I mean the spirit of their tragic drama, in which they have contrived to concentrate all that was fiery and unjust in their mythology. It is Ætna among the fields of Sicily. M. Schlegel, with a great deal of talent, not uninstructed perhaps by an eminent German scholar of our own, has also,
[Page 36]
like the Knight of the Rueful Countenance before mentioned, a sickly imagination. He loves to get into the void atmosphere out of the pale of sunlight, and to sit staring through the darkness, upon fancied “Gorgons, Hydras, and Chimeras dire.” M. Schlegel, I am afraid, owes a sort of grudge to cheerfulness, because he thinks it possessed by the French; yet he can enjoy Aristophanes, especially where the sceptic Euripides is cut up; and the glad poetry he speaks of, as well as Shakspeare whom he so well appreciates, might have relieved his philosophy from any responsibility on that score. The best excuse for his melancholy vagaries is his fondness for whatever he writes upon, always excepting, however, the French and Euripides, with whom he seems to agree in nothing but sneering at women. But he this as it may, he fairly doats upon the shocking plots and catastrophes of the Greek tragedy, and wishes to make out that the tragic spirit of Shakspeare owes it's
[Page 37]
grandeur to the same use of the idea of destiny, —a position certainly not made out by facts, and wholly incompatible with the universality as well as cheerfulness of the poet's philosophy 3 Shakspeare may or may not have believed in destiny; I believe he did, just about
[Page 38]
as much as he believed in the contrary. But whatever he might have thought of it's use in a play or so, as connected with popular superstition, he knew well, that utility of some sort or other, though not the mere mechanical idea of it, was the only test of truth within the limits of the human understanding; and therefore he would extract from the idea of destiny all that was necessary for human charity or kindness, being certain that so far he was realizing something with it: but beyond that, he would anticipate the inevitable ignorance to which the rest of the question would lead him; and much more would he refuse to look at the question diseasedly; and because there is evil mixed with good, blaspheme the obvious beauty of nature, and have chimney-corner fears about “a great Sphinx who will eat you up, if you do not discover her secret.” The body of the German people, though it had a good shake given it by the French revolution, and produced some sprightly children in Wieland
[Page 39]
and others, does not seem to have recovered yet from the nightmares of it's old eating and drinking habits, and it's sedentary school-divinity. But I am forgetting the object of this part of my conclusion.—All I meant to say was, that one melancholy vein in their poetry was necessary perhaps for the lively Greeks in order to keep sentiment alive among them, and prevent their happiness from running into mere levity; but with us of the north, the vicissitudes of climate supply this wholesome counteraction quite enough; we should be sufficiently admonished by “the skyey influences,” even if we made the most (which we certainly do not) of our green fields and our firesides; and he, in my opinion, wishes his countrymen most good, who would see fair play between their real wants and a cheerful leisure.
NOTES
1 It is curious to see how circumstances influence every thing. It may appear a joke if not a paradox, to say that Pope would have been a better poet, had he had a stouter pair of legs; yet this nevertheless I believe to be very true. Not that delicacy of organization is incompatible with the poetical temperament; perhaps it is necessary to it's reception of vivid impressions; but health and a proper strength are other matter; and Pope, whom I consider a much greater poet by nature than he became from circumstances, was shut up by his bodily infirmities within a small and artificial sphere of life. He saw little or nothing of nature and natural manners. When he went out, he rode, and he was even carried into his boat in a sedan-chair. Thus he is always common-place in passion and description, except where he was personally touched by the living, or drew from his own grotto by the Thames or his youthful recollections of Windsor Park. One of the most pathetic passages he ever wrote, as well as best pieces of description, (for most of the beauties of Abelard and Eloisa are in the original Latin letters), is a few lines which he enclosed in a letter to Lady Mary Montague, comparing a lover in a grotto to a bleeding stag.
2 See this and other beautiful imaginations, particularly the passage of the same God by the sea-shore, and the apparition of Sthenelus, in the Argonautics of Apollonius Rhodius, whom Virgil thought better of than the critics,— which is just as it should be.
3 It is a striking instance of the exquisite good sense of Butler, which shared the palm with his wit, that notwithstanding his great book-learning and the unpoetical nature of his class of poetry, both of which might be supposed to give him a leaning to the prejudices of the French school, he would not hear of servile adherences to rules, much less of imitating the gratuitous horrors of Greek tragedy. Among his posthumous works, which ought to be more known (they are luckily in Chalmers's Poets) is a set of verses upon “Critics who judge of modern plays precisely by the rules of the ancients.” There is as warm a feeling of Shakspeare and Fletcher in them, as if he had written imagination all his life instead of satire; and as to M. Schlegel's pet sphinx Destiny, he cuts a series of exquisite jokes against the system, by which some god or dæmon Chances to have piques Against an ancient family of Greeks, That other men may tremble and take warning How such a fatal progeny they're born in.
$$$
