Preface
Author: Newman, Francis William.
Publication info: The Odes Of Horace . xix, 250 p. London: John Chapman .., 1853.

Preface [in, The Odes of Horace; Translated into Unrhymed Metres, with Introduction and Notes. By F. W. Newman ...]
[Page ]
PREFACE. More than three centuries ago, the Greek and Latin classics began to be studied with great zeal, for the sake of their literature, which was then the most valuable in the world, and the only medium for attaining the highest cultivation of the day. That stage of progress is past, never to return. Modern European literature has now eclipsed the ancient; and among those who still study Greek and Latin as languages for grammatical objects, fewer and fewer can afford the time and effort of studying the literature. When commercial England attains a higher mental culture, it will not be that of Oxford and Cambridge, but that of Germany and America combined. Already Greek is as impossible an attainment as Sanscrit to numbers of educated men; Latin is acquired perhaps at school, but imperfectly mastered, so that even Latin literature is unstudied in later life. I do not say this
[Page iv]
as blaming or deploring the result: on the contrary, when it rises out of the preoccupation of the mind with deeper truths and purer beauty than was given to the ancients to attain, I cannot but rejoice. At the same time I conceive that every educated man who feels it inexpedient to encounter the effort of learning two difficult dead languages and exploring their literature, must desire to know whatever may be known in English concerning those master minds of the ancients, who have so affected the European intellect; and this gives a great value to select Translations. Undoubtedly a great poet can never be fully translated from a more powerful into a less powerful language; it is as impossible as to execute in soft wood the copy of a marble statue. Yet some approximation may be attained, which gives to the reader not only a knowledge of the substance, but a feeling of the form of thought, and a right conception of the ancient tone of mind. Hitherto our poetical translators have failed in general, not so much from want of talent or learning, but from aiming to produce poems in modern style , through an excessive fear that a modern reader will endure nothing else. I have been assured, that it is impossible to induce Englishmen to read poems in new metres. It may be so. But if so, I think it is equally impossible to induce them to read ancient poetry at all ,—in any metres,— or in prose translations. Dickens and Thackeray are,
[Page v]
I suppose, more amusing than Tennyson or Wordsworth, and leave to many men of business no time to read Milton or Thomson, or Virgil, or Æschylus. I avow myself to despair of finding readers among those who seek solely for amusement. I bespeak for myself a thoughtful and serious reader, anxious for instruction. I assume in him no knowledge whatever of ancient languages or literature, except to have read Homer in a translation; and I endeavour to afford whatever is subsidiary to full intelligence,—whatever will aid him to that close insight into men and times, which nothing but contemporary literature can ever give.
It must not be inferred from my selecting Horace to translate, that I appreciate him as a genius of the first rank. He was perhaps weaker in his own line than his immediate predecessor Catullus, a man whose disgusting impurity has marred half his poems, and who probably did not live to attain his own full perfection. But I select Horace, as the Latin poet of next note to Virgil,—the poet of whom it next concerns an English reader to know something,–whose writings bring one into immediate contact with the celebrated Augustan age, when Roman taste ripened to perish,—finally, who is so compact in magnitude and so various in metre and in subject, as to give the best chance of succeeding somewhere in an attempt so novel. If the public ear becomes attuned to some
[Page vi]
of my metres, the problem will be virtually solved. Others will invent metres still better adapted to the Greek Tragedians, and our language will be acknowledged capable of reproducing the forms of ancient beauty to an extent hitherto unbelieved. While such is the ulterior hope, which has excited me to this experiment, it will readily be conceived that I do not undervalue Horace himself. I hardly know that it is a recommendation of his poetry to remark, that in past generations the sermons of half our divines might seem to have been borrowed from it; but I take this opportunity of pointedly saying, that I have striven to make this book admissible to the cabinet of the purest-minded English lady, and could never consent to add adornment to a single line of corrupting tendency. It exhibits, no doubt, mournful facts concerning the relation of the sexes in Augustan Rome,—facts not in themselves so shocking, as many which oppress the heart in the cities of Christendom; and this, I think, it is instructive to perceive. Only in a few instances, where the immorality is too ugly to be instructive, have I abruptly cut away the difficulty. In general, Horace aimed at a higher beauty than did Catullus or Propertius or Ovid, and the result of a purer taste is closely akin to that of a sounder morality.
While I profess to write for the unlearned English reader, yet I must necessarily be judged by classical scholars on the question of fidelity and correctness;
[Page vii]
and there are several points on which explanation is needed.
First I must speak of the arrangement of the Odes here exhibited. An erudite and very competent judge, Dean Milman , referring to the recent attempts by learned Germans to fix the order of their composition, pronounces that the great variety of opinion indicates the impossibility of arriving at truth. I bow to the verdict, and have no intention at all of contesting it. In regard to a large number of the odes,—a majority indeed,–I do not profess to have attained a true , but only a possible order; while the common arrangement is impossible: and my general plan forced me to abandon it.
For, inasmuch as many allusions to historical events are found, which absolutely require elucidation, the attempt to expound them involves the reader in hopeless confusion, if these odes are not presented in chronological order. Nothing but the fact that Horace is chiefly read at school , and for the mere language, with great unconcern as to the historical allusions, can make the existing malarrangement endurable. Yet if these odes,—say, a quarter of the whole,–be presented chronologically, what else can a translator possibly do with the rest, but drop them into such positions as seem to him most probable, or at any rate possible? And this, I trust, is a sufficient excuse, when I can give no convincing reason for my arrangement.
[Page viii]
Indeed in many cases I have allowed one ode to go along with another solely because they stand together in the common editions: and the entire series from Book II. 13 to Book III. 7, is left by me undisturbed.
The Lyrical poetry of the ancients made the individuality of the poet so prominent, that fully to comment upon it is in some sense to exhibit a biography, and even a sketch of the contemporaneous history, if the poet stands in close relation of mind to the political events of his day. I could not think of undertaking what has been so elaborately and ably performed by others,—to work out a biography of Horace himself; still, when the poetry, or the translator's reproduction of it, is feeble, I am not without hope that an interest may be found in its historical aspect. This is most needed in the later odes, which Horace seems to have composed unwillingly, if we judge by his first Epistle to Mæcenas, whose request for an ode he distinctly declines.
I had rested in an opinion strongly advocated by Franke, and adopted by Dillenburger, that the three first books were published as they now stand in the opening of the year B.C. 23 at latest; and in part, I have determined the position of others by this postulate. But when at last I came to write the introduction to Book II. Ode 9, I found the internal evidence,—on surveying the course of the history
[Page ix]
from B.C. 30 to B.C. 20 in connection with this particular ode,–to overpower me. I now adopt Doering's interpretation, that it alludes to the expedition of Tiberius Cæsar to Armenia, in B.C. 20.
That I have wholly discarded rhyme, is not from undervaluing that elegant ornament, but because the attempts of the ablest versifiers convince me that it is impossible to translate a classical poet into English rhymed metre without a great sacrifice of the poet himself and a most undesirable intrusion of that which is not the poet's. I have endeavoured to adopt Stanzas of similar tone and feeling, and proportionate compass to those of the original; but by no means to imitate the original metres. The notions current concerning Metre are so vague and confused, that, before I proceed to state why I hold that to be impossible, and the attempt absurd, some general introductory remarks are by no means superfluous.
Poetry was once written to be sung . The Greeks, whom the Romans afterwards imitated, sang their verses, at first to the lyre, then to a tune. While this was habitual, the time occupied by syllables was the most influential force in metre. Moreover, in the Greek and Latin tongues the vowels are so distributed among the consonants, that the syllables without difficulty can be referred to two classes, Long and Short; and, when the music or recitative so required, (as happened in the simplest tunes,) every
[Page x]
long syllable might be sounded in the same time as any other long syllable, and every short syllable in the same time as any other short syllable. In the Epic verse, (which was in Duplicate time,) one long syllable was equivalent to two short. Such was the old principle of Musical measures. In it, the accent of words was passed by, as wholly or almost unimportant to metre.
It is not here requisite to prove what has been stated. No one can open a Greek or Latin poet without evidence of the main fact obtruding itself, however difficult it may be to us to conceive of metres dependent on Time alone. But to those who are so incredulous of it, as in preference to set up violent hypotheses, it may be of interest to be informed that the Magyar poetry, to this day, is constructed on the principle of Time 1 and is independent of Accent.
By Accent, an Englishman understands a superior stress of the voice placed on one syllable; thus the need of oratorical emphasis will often give an accent to pronouns (I, me, you, him, etc.) which ordinarily are unaccented. Nevertheless, it would seem that Englishmen add to the accent a musical elevation (probably of full half a tone) in all states of feeling; and in lively arch speaking still more. The word Whó ? when it is an interrogative, not only has a
[Page xi]
stress, but also a very marked musical elevation, distinguishing it from the unaccented relative Who . This is closely analogous to a known phenomenon of the interrogative τίς in Greek: yet the Greek accent in modern times, (and no doubt of old likewise,) gives higher musical elevation to ordinary syllables than we hear in English. On the contrary, the Scotch depress musically every accented syllable.
Since we now read , and no longer sing , poetry, Accent is naturally more prominent to the ear than Time; especially in languages which have syllables of every sort of length, and not easy to be distributed into Long and Short. In consequence, we have (almost unawares) changed the meaning of many metrical words which we have adopted from the old Greeks. Thus an Iamb with them meant a foot of two syllables, the former short, the second long: and a Trochee was the reverse, the former long, the second short. But English writers mean by an Iamb a dissyllabic foot “ accented on the second” syllable; and by a Trochee a dissyllabic foot “ accented on the first” syllable. The words are thus used by analogy only; and if we desire to obviate mistake, we sometimes need to say, “an accentual Trochee,” “an accentual Iamb.” Want of attention to this continually leads to confusion, even with learned writers. People confound long syllables with accented syllables. Yet Accent is so far from lengthening, that it even tends
[Page xii]
to shorten syllables; as may be seen in the first syllable of fémale . Indeed the English voice cannot dwell on an accented syllable without seeming to drawl.
German translators of Greek and Latin poetry often profess to reproduce the very metre of the ancients, when in fact they do but invent a totally new and accentual system, having only a certain analogy to that from which it is derived. Such a scheme may have merit; but it has to be proved and accepted on its own basis, and cannot claim to be received as the real original. In fact it is generally found to bear a different character,–perhaps, to be light, tripping or humorous, where the original is grave and stately. I therefore regard it as a fundamental mistake to wish to obtain in general such an imitation, though I do not deny that certain of the ancient lyric metres suggest elegant imitations in English.
Our (accentual) Iambics and Trochaics have no small similarity to the ancient measures so called; though each system has also marked peculiarity of its own, especially in regard to the Cæsuras, or divisions of the verse. But we have nothing that really answers to the Dactylics and Anapæstics of the ancients.
The lyric poetry of Horace is generally grave or tender. When it is playful, bombastic or bantering, the jocosity is subtle and subdued, never funny or boisterous. For these reasons our (accentual) Anapæsts
[Page xiii]
or Dactyls seem to me scarcely endurable in Horace; for unless the subject is grand and vehement, this metre is liable to degenerate into doggrel. Except in one sort of line, no dactyl is here admitted; and many readers (I fear) will think that even this exception ought not to have been made.
I have adopted the principle, that each Latin metre should have one and only one English representative. The English stanza, for instance, which replaces the Horatian Sapphic in one ode, replaces it in all , and is never used for any other metre than the Sapphic. The ability to fulfil this condition seemed to me an important test of my stanza being really suitable. Moreover, if several English substitutes were allowed, the translator would be tempted to use his freedom beyond what was necessary; and the effect to the reader would be impaired, nearly as though a translator of Homer were to render different books into a different metre. Altogether I am convinced, that to work under the pressure of immoveable conditions, if they be not unreasonable ones, produces in the long run the chastest result.
Our poetry, being oratorical and not musical, not only does not insist on equal musical time between the successive beats, but does not endure it for a permanence Variety requires both that the times should vary, and also the strength of the beats; and this is especially true in the more majestic line which has
[Page xiv]
five feet, or at least five accents. The more popular metres, adapted to Ballads, retain more of the old musical or epic element,—are more appropriate for simple utterances, and also more liable to degenerate into doggrel. Long, Latinized or compound words, which have two accents on them, are more appropriate in the line of five beats; and in it such words are necessary to break monotony. When two accents fall on the same word, not only is one of them weak, but the time between them is shortened: and this gives variety. To convince the reader how antagonistic is modern poetry to the ancient principle of Equable Times, I give one instance:
   O´h Piérian máid! whose toúch
Swéetly módulates the gólden lýe;
   Whó, at pléasure, canst bestów
Swánlike mélody on físhes múte;—
In the trisyllable words the second accent is necessarily feebler and hurried; so also canst , the auxiliary, is weakly accented, in close proximity to its verb bestow : but these very things add to the freedom and flow of the lines. Now let us bring the accents more nearly into musical time, as follows:
   Oh Pierian maid! whose touch
Tunes the golden harp to utterance sweet;
   Thou who canst at pleasure grant
Notes of plaintive swan to fishes mute;—
The rhythm of every one of the last lines is separately
[Page xv]
good, yet in combination they are less good. And this will explain the following summary of principle: —“English metre is ruled by Accent, without any regard to its equability: nevertheless, the SWEETNESS of the verse depends on that equability, as well as on the ease of utterance,—that is, on the intrinsic softness of the words to be sounded; while the ENERGY depends on the very opposite qualities,— unequable accents and strength of sounds.”
Equability and Smoothness furnish the sweet, and their opposites the strong, much as Concord and Discord in music; but neither of the two determine the metre in its mechanical or material aspect . On the contrary, to Greek and Latin metre Equable Time furnished the most essential part of the definition, and in it Oratorical considerations were often wonderfully sacrificed, as indeed in English singing.
These considerations show me that the peculiar Choriambic or Asclepiad line, (Trochaic with a Dactyl in the second foot,) which I have retained in two metres, can never be reconciled with the genius of English poetry, except for short pieces, and those in which the singing principle predominates.
The reader must occasionally be requested to suspend his judgment concerning the Cæsuras or divisions of the lines. While a metre is new to the ear, we are seeking for the recurrence of sounds, and we demand a certain uniformity; but after a while, the
[Page xvi]
ear becomes more delicate, and requires variations which at first may seem harsh.
Finally, I may observe how unfair the readers of poetry are apt to be towards the versifier, and how much more docile are the players of music towards the composer. The musician is glad to be directed by such words as Maestoso, Allegro, Amoroso, Tenuto, Staccato, etc., and is well aware that the best composition is spoiled, if it be executed in a spirit opposed to that of the design; and this, though the musical notation already gives exact information as to the length and pitch of the notes. On the contrary, written words do not dictate their own pitch, and often neither their length nor their accent: yet English readers most unreasonably resent it as an impertinence, if a poet give them special information how to read his lines. Original poets are too modest, it seems, or too proud, to exhibit anxiety that their lines be rightly read: but as I am only a translator, and am introducing metres not previously familiar, I think it well occasionally to indicate what sort of reading is desirable, and what words peculiarly need an accent. In fact our oratorical, but unmusical, tongue often admits with equal propriety of several modes of enunciation, with a slight difference of sense; and it is really a defect of our orthography not to denote this. To write an accent does but supply this defect.
NOTES
1 This information I received from my accomplished friend Mr. Pulszky, a native Magyar.
$$$
