Prose
Author: McDermott, Mary.
Publication info: My Early Dreams . 228 p. Belfast: D. Finlay, 1832.

Prose [in, My Early Dreams] Front matter [Title Page and Credits] MY
EARLY DREAMS.
By M. McDermott
BELFAST:
PRINTED BY F. D. FINLAY.
CA LENDAR-STREET.
1832.
[Page [NA]]
[Page [NA]]
TO THE MARCHIONESS OF BRISTOL.
MADAM,
I DEDICATE this little volume to your Ladyship, with sentiments of the liveliest gratitude, for the kindness with which you have deigned to accept this first offering of an humble and unpractised hand. Among the many voices that are raised to bless your noble house, mine would come but as a whisper: yet, feelings are not always less deep, when they are most feebly uttered. It is, therefore, that I offer to your Ladyship this simple expression of long-cherished gratitude.
I am, Madam,
With truest respect,
Your Ladyship's most obedient and humble servant,
MARY M'DERMOTT.
[Page [NA]]
[Page [NA]]
Preface THE Author of the following pages sends them, her first production, before the public, without any sanguine hopes as to the success which may await them. She launches her little bark from the quiet and sequestered creek, in which its frail and light architecture was first planned, and its gossamer sails woven by the careless fingers of youthful fancy, and bids it take its way over the wide sea that lies stretched before it. She is well aware, in sending it forward, among the glittering myriads of its compeers—the creations of brighter imaginations than her's—that she can scarcely hope its course will be marked by any eye, save her own; yet, as the vessel silently drops down the tide, unheeded by the many, there may be at least a few kindly hearts who will smile upon the little wanderer, and to them she consigns it, relying on that liberality and gentleness, which is more willing to give credit for any accidental excellence, however trifling, than harsh in censuring all that may appear defective: to those of her own sex, she would more especially appeal, for this tenderness towards the work of a sister's fancy. And now, go "MY EARLY DREAMS:" the voice which has called you from the silence in which you
[Page 6]
had lain, was not, perhaps, the sweetest; and the hopes which attend you, are not among the brightest. But go; the voice must be obeyed; and the fate which may await you is in the hands of a higher power.
With thankful acknowledgments to her Subscribers, and lively feelings of gratitude to her friends, the Author presents them with the volume they have so generously patronised .
Killileagh Glebe, January 31, 1832.
[Page [NA]]
SUBSCRIBERS' NAMES.
HER ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUCHESS OF KENT.
Anglesey, his Excellency the Marquis of, 4 copies.
Alexander, Lord Viscount, Caledon .
Acton, Miss, Tunbridge .
Atkinson, Esq. C. C. Newtonlemavady .
Bristol, the Marquis of, 5 copies.
Bateson, Sir R., M.P. 2 copies.
Bruce, Sir J. Bart. Downhill , 2 copies.
Bruce, Miss, Ditto .
Beresford, Miss, Brook-Hall .
Banks, the Rev. L. New Ross .
Browne, Rev. J. Raphoe .
Browne, Miss, Londonderry .
Burke, J. Esq.
Bell, the Misses, Castlerea .
Boyle, Mr. Muff .
Colville, Mrs. Clontarf , 2 copies.
Cromie, J. Esq. Portstewart , 2 copies.
Caulfield, Miss, Mullenteen .
Carr, the Rev. H. Fannet .
Clarke, Mrs. Upperlands .
Crossley, A. Esq. Chief Magistrate, Elphin .
Crossley, W. Esq. C. C. Maghera .
Clifford, Miss, Silverfield .
Colville, Mrs. Dublin .
Clarke, Mrs. Maghera .
Cuddy, W. Esq. Colerain .
Downshire, Marquis of, 2 copies.
Derry, late Lord Bishop of
Domville, Compton C. Esq. Santry .
Domville, Miss, Ditto .
Domville, Miss L. Ditto .
Domville, Miss E. Ditto .
De Salis, W. Esq. Oxford .
Dillon, M. D. Elphin .
Dawson, Lieutenant, Ex. P., Kilrea .
Daffron, J. D. Esq. Magherafelt .
Dunlop, D. Esq. Colerain .
Duncan, J. F. Esq. T. C. D.
Evans, J. M. D. Buncrana .
Evans, R. M. D. Magherafelt .
Eames, W. Esq. Londonderry .
Freeman, Mrs. London .
Finney, Rev. T. H. Dunlear .
Flood, J. Esq. jun. Dublin .
Fox, A. K. Esq. C.C. King's-court .
Gwynne, Rev. J. Carrickfergus .
Gwynne, Mrs. Ditto .
Gilmore, Mrs. P. Londonderry .
Gregg, Mrs. J. Ditto .
Gillespie, J. Esq. Ditto .
Greaves, W. Esq. Castledawson .
Galt, C. Esq. Colerain .
Given, J. Esq. Ditto .
Griffen, J. L. Esq. C. C. Hillsborough .
Gillespie, — , Esq. Ramelton .
Greer, J. Esq. Armagh .
Gibbon, Esq. X. P. 2 copies.
Galway, J. Esq. Belfast.
[Page 8]
Hervey, Lady Augusta
Hervey, Lady Georgiana
Hervey, Lady Sophia
Hervey, Lord Arthur
Horner, Rev. R. Dungannon .
Hobson, Rev. R. J. Connor .
Hunter, R. Esq. Jackson Hall .
Harvey, Miss, Dublin .
Hill, G. Esq. St. Columbs .
Holland, J. Esq. T.C.D.
Henry, Mrs. Fair-View .
Henry, Miss, Castledawson , 2 copies.
Hampton, J. Esq. Maghera .
Hazlett, J. H. Esq. Carnisk .
Hay, J. Esq. Millford .
Jermyn, Earl of, 2 copies.
Jermyn, Lady Catherine
Jones, Captain, R.N. M.P. 6 copies.
Jones, J. H. Esq. Mullenbro '.
Jones, Mrs. Dunmore .
Jones, W. Esq. C.C. Cavan .
Joyce, J. Esq. Strabane .
Knox, Hon. Mrs. W. Brighton .
Knox, Rev. J. Spencer, Maghera , 2 copies.
Knox, Rev. William, Clonlough .
Knox, Mrs. J. S. Maghera , 2 copies.
Knox, Miss F. Brighton .
Knox, Miss H. Ditto .
Knox, Miss E. Ditto .
Knox, Miss Barbara, Maghera .
Knox, Mrs. Colonel Prehen
Knox, S. W. Esq. Colerain .
Kennedy, Mrs. T. Londonderry .
Kennedy, Miss, Dublin .
Kennedy, Miss M. Ditto .
Kelly, E. M. D. Castlerea .
Kelly, L. M. D. Ditto .
Kelly, Edmond, Esq. Ditto .
Kelly, William, Esq. Spotfield .
Kidd, Esq. Armagh .
Londonderry, Marchioness of
Lorton, Lord Viscount, 6 copies.
Leslie, Very Rev. Dean, Carrick .
Lowrie, Mrs. Clontarf , 2 copies.
Lapenotier, Lieutenant, R.N.
Lapenotier, Mrs. Castledawson .
Lawrence, John, Esq. Colerain , 2 copies.
Lawrence, Mrs. S. Ditto .
Lecky, Mrs. Londonderry .
Lavins, J. Esq. Millford .
Maturin, Rev. H. Tannet .
Mauleour, Rev. W. Tynan .
Minchin, Rev. A. C. Dungiven .
M'Causland, Rev. Marcus, Ennis .
Motherwell, Rev. M. C. Cottage .
Murray, Rev. M. Skerries .
Macky, Mrs. Elagh , 2 copies.
Macky, Miss, Ditto , ditto.
Macky, Miss A. Ditto , ditto.
M'Causland, Mrs. Dublin .
M'Causland, Mrs. Greencastle .
Major, Rev. Alexander, Portstewart .
Major, Alexander, Esq. Ditto .
M'Clusky, —, Esq.
Moncrief, William, Esq. Colcrain .
Moore, —, Esq. Dervock .
M'Kee, J. Esq. Markethill .
M'Cay, Mrs. Ramelton .
M'Cay, R. Esq. Fern-Hill .
Monsell, Mrs. Colerain .
Napper, Rev. W. Hervey-Hill .
Napper, Miss, Ditto .
Nevil, Miss, Ditto .
Newport, Sir J. Waterford .
Newport, Mrs. J. Ditto .
[Page 9]
Newport, Miss, Waterford .
Ogilby, A. Esq. Pelipar , 3 copies.
Ogilby, J. Esq. Ditto , ditto.
O'Grady, F. Esq. Taverna .
O'Grady, J. Esq.
O'Grady, Richard, Esq. Carabeg .
O'Grady, Martin M. M.D. Swords .
O'Grady, R. Esq. jun. Ditto .
O'Grady, Miss, Ditto .
O'Kane, Lieutenant G. Ex. P. Newtown .
Plampin, Mrs. Tunbridge Wells , 2 copies.
Pomeroy, Rev.A. Desertmartin .
Paul, Mrs. Aughadowey .
Plunket, Captain R. 2 copies.
Plunket, C. Esq. Local Inspector, Garvagh .
Pollock, William, Esq. Newtown .
Porter, Rev. J. Scott, Belfast .
Roulston, S. Esq. Castlegay .
Reynolds, R. Esq. Ballyshannon .
Ramus, Mrs. Cheltenham .
Singleton, Hon. Mrs.
Scott, Mrs. Clifton .
Scott, Miss, Ditto .
Scott, Miss J. Ditto .
Scott, Major, Willsboro'.
Scott, Rev. George, Balteagh .
Scott, Richard, Esq. Dublin .
Scott, Mrs. R. Ditto .
Stothard, Lieutenant, Royal En.
Sankey, Miss, Rutland-Square, Dublin , 2 copies.
Sterling, Major, Wallworth .
Sampson, Arthur, Esq. Newtown .
Scales, J. Esq. Newcastle-on-Trent .
Scales, J. Esq. jun. Ditto .
Steel, Lieutenant, Ex. P. Londonderry .
Steel, Mrs. Ditto .
Skipton, Pitt, Esq. Ditto .
Sproules, S. Esq. Ramelton .
Sharpe, R. Esq. Colerain .
Sanelford, J. Esq. Derry .
Sunderland, O. Esq. C. C. Garvagh .
Smith, Rev. S. Carnmoney .
Shannon, Miss, New Buildings , 2 copies.
Templeton, Lord Viscount
Torrens, Mr. Chief Justice, 2 copies.
Thackery, Rev. Thomas, Dundalk .
Tympson, Mrs. Wexford .
Temple, William, M. D. Monaghan .
Vesey, Rev. George, Maghera .
Wheeler, Rev. George, Tetbury, Gloucestershire .
Ward, W. P. Esq. Oxford College .
Williams, R. Esq. Ditto .
Wright, Captain, Royal Engineers.
Wade, W. Esq.
Warren, Mrs. Londonderry .
Waddy, Miss, Kilrea .
Welch, T. H. Esq. Ex. P.
White, Rev. T. J. Arboe .
Willcocks G.Esq. Stewartstown .
[Page [NA]]
Contents Dedication, 3
Preface, 5
The Sleeper, 13
To the Crocus, closing its leaves beneath the clouded Sun, 15
The Parting, 16
The Minstrel, 17
A Woman's Prayer, 20
The Light of Memory, 22
The Watcher, 23
The Constitution of Great Britain, in the year 1829, 28
Summer Clouds and Dews, 30
TO ———, 31
To ———, with a Branch of Wild Honey Suckle, 33
Matilda, Queen of Denmark, 35
Thoughts by the Sea side, 44
The Captive Heart, 45
The Magic Harp, 47
The Minstrel's Song , 49
The Seaman's Song , 55
On the Beauty and Dignity of Faithfulness and Consistency, 59
The Hour of Silence, 61
The Last Look, 63
Reflections, induced by Reading, in the first volume of The Rambler, a paper, entitled, "The unhappiness of Women, Single or Married,'' 64
To the Rev. W.N., on the Anniversary of his Birth-day, 71
The Young Musician, 73
The Sailor and his Mother, 121
The Vision, 125
On a Friend proposing to plant a Rose, for a token of Remembrance, 128
The Parting of Friends, 129
Lines written at the request of my Father, on a Thrush, which was killed by the same shot that brought fate to a Magpie, ib.
To ———, 131
A Song to Hope, ib.
On the Death of Julius Caesar, 135
The Summer Breeze, 137
On Slavery, 139
Peace, 144
On the Picture of a beautiful young Girl, 145
The Hours after the Funeral, 146
On the Early Flower of Spring, 150
Stanzas for Music, 151
The Deceived, 152
The Duellist: a Tale, 155
The Last of the Brothers, 161
To the Memory of the unfortunate Admiral Byng, 164
Moon-Light, 167
Our Sister Land, 169
To a Friend, 170
The distinction which may be drawn between the Words loneliness and alone, as applied to persons, 171
Come back again, 173
The Grecian and her Daughter, 175
The Widow, 201
On being asked, " If there was any Pleasure that did not leave a Sting behind?" 203
The Convict and his Sister, 206
The Altered Look, 214
Come back, my Brother, 215
The Parting Lovers, 216
The Mother and her only Child, 220
Hymn, 222
Hymn, ib.
Hymn, 223
The Condemned Cell, 224
To "My Early Dreams." 226
[Page 11]
[Page 12]
Main text Matilda - Queen of Denmark "WHAT unblessed things are ill assorted Marriages; what untold sorrows do they produce: untold, because, though their evil consequences are, in general, only too glaring; yet, the worst are those that lie hidden deep within the the heart, unbreathed of and unseen." I was deeply struck with these thoughts, while reading the historical account given us of the Princess Matilda, sister of our ever beloved and lamented monarch, George the Third. Great, indeed, were her sufferings, springing from such a cause; and the world looked upon them and wondered; but not those which were most apparent had caused the deepest wound. She was wedded to one she could neither respect nor love, if she had continued to share the throne of Denmark and its regal splendour. If she had no enemies to endeavour to cast a blight on her fair name, to conspire against her, and to thrust her, at last, under false pretences, into confinement and danger, the world's sympathy would not have been excited; it would have shed for her no pitying tears; still she would have been unhappy; still would the worm, though unseen, have gnawed at the core; and though the Queen might smile, and the regal ornaments deck her brow, yet would the woman's bosom have heaved in sadness beneath the royal mantle, and fondly sighed
[Page 36]
for those brighter gems—the affections of a worthier, a nobler-minded husband.
Matilda, ere she had quite attained the age of fifteen, left England, to become the wife of Christian, King of Denmark; a marriage (as is often the fate of royalty) only entered into for the sake of expediency. She was lively and intelligent; of quick and [illeg.] affections. She had rather too promptly yielded her [illeg.] to this ill-omened union; and, though it afterwards cost her many a pang, when she contemplated the prospect it laid before her, of leaving her beloved England, and still more beloved brother. She was too tenaciously honourable to retract her promise; and her sanguine mind would sometimes allow her to hope, that in Denmark she would find a home, and in its monarch a husband, though not possessed of shining qualities, yet such as would, in some degree, compensate for all she would leave behind. Alas! this hope was vain. Her arrival was, indeed, greeted with all the honour due her high rank and destination; but this was but an idle display, a flash of unwarming light, which quickly passed away, leaving the dark brow of her fate as cold and unilluminated as ever.
The King, her husband, was abjectly mean; a passive slave to the will of others; and could be said only to reign in name. The designing and ambitious Queen mother, Julia Maria, had usurped the whole management of the kingdom, over which she proposed soon to place her youngest and favourite son. As she looked on Matilda as one chief obstacle to this design, she imbibed towards her an unnatural hatred, of which she was soon made the victim.
The King loved his young wife as much as a nature like his would permit: but her heart, though it would have bounded to return the affections of an object worthy of it, often turned
[Page 37]
away, sickening from the caresses of a being, weak both in mind and body; and under the dominion of follies and vices too low even to be recorded. Yet he did love her, and would willingly have made her happy: and such was the generosity of her nature, that she even accused herself of ingratitude and injustice for not feeling affection towards him. But there is nothing so vain or fruitless, as the endeavour of pure and amiable minds to love where they cannot respect. All the miseries which the hapless Matilda afterwards endured, from the malice and machinations of her enemies, had not a more withering and wasting influence upon her, than her constant anxiety to bring her mind to what she considered the regard due to her husband. But the tide with which her forced affections would rush back, continually refusing to flow in such an uninviting and unlovely course, made every such attempt fail. Oh! no; there can be no fellowship between light and darkness. In vain will the reptile wind itself around the flower; it can extract no honey from the closing leaves; it but dims and destroys the bloom and the beauty over which it passes, with the hateful slime it leaves behind.
It is, indeed, a sad thing, when the social affections must remain unshared, within the fountains that give them birth, or lose all their loveliness and buoyancy, as we force them on slowly and murmuringly to flow through some ill-chosen channel. As some beautiful spring, which had sent forth its waters, sparkling and playing in the bright sunshine, pursuing their joyful course, through verdant meadows and flowery banks, to which their own sweet influence had imparted fresh luxuriance; should they be turned back, and pent up at their source, or forced to mingle their waters with some muddy and polluted stream, will they not soon become dim and stagnated; the
[Page 38]
spring itself be choked with weeds, and the current no longer flow on a gladsome and sunny way, giving and receiving beauty?
But Matilda was allowed one channel through which the tide of her affections could flow without revulsion; and this was towards her children. Oh! who can tell what delight it is to a woman's ardent heart, to have some object on which she can be stow the purity of her love: and yet it is often the mercy of heaven that gives a check to those who are too apt to make idols; for though such are often the most amiable, and even in this, their very weakness, exciting more than our admiration; yet sooner or later this propensity will bring its own punishment, when we find our idols are but clay.
The time now approached when her enemies were to complete her ruin. Matilda had fulfilled, as usual, the tenderest of maternal duties to her infant daughter; and retired to rest, to return, most likely, on the wings of contemplation, and wrap herself in the loveliness of vanished days. To her the silence and loneliness of the night was precious. In such hours she could put off the irksome smile that but wearied her to wear: she could turn to the sweetness of memory, those night flowers of her spirit, that closed all their fragrant leaves in the noisy day. But if her dreams were of happiness, the delusion was soon harshly broken; and, ere the morning dawned, she was awakened to receive the King's order to retire from court, to one of his castles in the country. It was not that she regretted leaving the splendours of a palace, which had for her nothing but empty show; nor could it be sorrow, at retiring from a society, where she, for the most part, had been treated with harshness and indignity, that made the young Queen feel so poignantly: no, it was that she immediately perceived it was
[Page 39]
no common danger that threatened her. All those who had most befriended her, had already fallen a sacrifice; and what reason was there for her to hope, that she should not also fall, and expiate, with her blood, the crime of having given birth to other heirs to the throne, than those for whom her ambitious mother-in-law had designed it? She rushed from her bed to seek the presence and protection of her husband: mean and slavish as he was, surely he wonld be aroused to defend the mother of his children. But the first ill-omened face that met her, as she entered the apartment, was that of Count Rantzan, one of her bitterest enemies. The sarcastic smile, that curled in derision on his scornful lips, recalled, in some degree, the recollections of her disordered appearance, and she hastily withdrew to arrange her dress. But in this interval her fate was sealed. Her enemies well knew, that were she permitted to see the King, and exert her influence over him, the tide of ruin would be instantly rolled back on themselves. It was to prevent this, that, when she would have returned, she found an officer placed to impede her progress. She, however, overcame this obstacle: but again, on arriving at the anti-chamber, she was stopped by two soldiers, who crossed their weapons at the door. Her spirit, which had been hurried out of its composure, now resumed all its wonted dignity; and, struck with this new insolence and barbarity, she would have turned away without deigning to sue to the menials of her persecutors; but, that she thought, "I have come here to demand my rights, and they shall not prevent me." She then, addressing the centinels with great dignity, said—"Soldiers! let your Queen pass: those who have placed you there, have no right to fetter my steps! They are my subjects, and not your King! Men! if you have any regard to your honour, cease to raise your arms against
[Page 40]
a woman!" The soldiers, instantly struck with a feeling of pity and respect for suffering majesty, dropped their arms, and, ashamed of their office, saluted her as their rightful sovereign. But her efforts were unavailing. Ere she had reached the King's apartment he had been removed: the seal was set on her face. She now found herself surrounded by enemies, far from my friends that might have aided her. She, therefore, determined to resign herself as became a Queen; and, though she was treated with the utmost insolence and cruelty, she bore it all with firmness and patience. Their cruelty they might make her feel, but not their insolence—she was exalted above it. Matilda was confined for four months in the castle of Cronsburgh; at the end of which time her release was procured by the determined interposition of her brother; had that not been prompt and spirited, there is every reason to believe that her life would have been forfeited to the dark hatred and ambition of Julia Maria.
During her confinement in this fortress, she had one sweet source of comfort in her little daughter, some few months old, the companion, but, happily, not the sharer of her mother's misery; for it was watched with all a mother's love and tenderness, and cradled on the warmth of her bosom. Happy little innocent; a young bud of immortality just dawning into life, and unconsciously wreathing its sweetness around the bough, that, shivering itself in the icy blast, yet fondly spread its shelter to screen it from the chilling winds that had early blighted its own verdure and bloom.
The only liberty granted the unfortunate Matilda, was permission to walk on the battlements of her solitary prison. The cold winds swept over the dark tide that dashed round the rocky promontory on which it was situated; the wild breeze
[Page 41]
fluttered her garments, as she listened to the hoarse dashing of the northern billows, and thought of the bright and peaceful ripples that kissed the far and sunny shores of England. Then she would sigh even but for one glance from those eyes, that ever beamed on her the light of affection; but for one token from that beloved brother, the companion of those happy hours, when the steps and hearts of childhood were free and unfettered, and the bright sunshine of youthful joyousness illuminated into beauty all that surrounded them. And he; he did not forget her, or leave her to perish forsaken and alone: no, for kindness and affection were among the chief characteristics of his noble nature; and one came to Matilda, bearing the message of his love. What can be more affecting, than the statement of the manner in which this messenger was received. When the English Minister, at Copenhagan, had, after great exertions, procured an order for her liberation, on producing before her this unexpected intelligence, she burst into a flood of tears, and, flinging her arms round his neck, embraced him with transports of gratitude and joy. Oh! well, when the calling forth such emotions are the reward, well may it be said, that it is
"The sweetest, holiest draft of power,
When it can say, with Godlike voice,
Arise sad virtue and rejoice."
But it seemed as if the cup of joy was never destined long to be the portion of this hapless Princess; and she found, that on obtaining her liberty, she must resign the darling object of her affections, who had been the solace of all her miseries and loneliness. It was not without the greatest difficulty that she could be prevailed on to accept of freedom which must be bought at such a price. As the ship bore her away, she sat on deck, looking back with tearful eyes to those towers which contained her favourite treasure (then just recovered, from the measles, through which she
[Page 42]
had been her only nurse): the night came down and hid them from her view; but the blessed morning light again revealed them, (as is dawned on her waking and watching eyes,) faintly traced in the far distance: a few minutes' strained and anxious gaze, and they were lost to her for ever. She was conducted to the castle of Zell, on the banks of the Allen, prepared for her, and furnished, with an honourable household, by the liberality of her brother. Here she lived for a while, in the peacefulness of retirement, and in as much of pleasure as England's monarch could bestow. He gave her all he could—a haven in which to rest, and shelter her storm-tossed bark; and the sunshine of his love to illuminate the wreck of her existence. He could do no more; for it requires a higher power than that of earthly kings to heal the broken heart. They may often be the instruments employed; but, unless the medicine comes down from heaven, it will be found superficial. Day by day, this unfortunate victim of an ill-chosen marriage, settled down into deep, though gentle sadness. She was neither gloomy nor morose; but the hand of sorrow had rudely torn every chord that had once, within her young bosom, vibrated to the tones of gladness. She now lived as an isolated being—far from all she most loved. This was but ill suited to one who seemed formed to live in the very atmosphere of love!
She obtained from Denmark the pictures of her children, which, though they afforded her great delight in contemplating, only made her long the more for the living forms and the close embrace. But these were not granted her; and the heart of the mother pined away, until, at the early age of twenty-four, she died in the blighted spring-time of her years: retaining, in all their first warmth, the ardour of her affections, the rude storms of an unfeeling world had, indeed, blown bitterly upon
[Page 43]
them, and wrenched their fairest blossoms; but they were unable to destroy their fragrance, which seemed, the more they were bruised and scattered, only to send forth richer sweetness. But peace to her hallowed memory; the dear and noble sister, of so dear and noble a brother; the day of both was darkly overclouded: one was shortened by misery—the other lengthened out in the chilly shadows of gloominess and age; but the same sacred radiance shines round the memory of both—the deep-rooted love and reverence of all who can estimate true loveliness, goodness, and majesty. Bright be the rest of both: they are gone, where, we trust, they shall wear everlasting crowns.
I AM aware that there have been many aspersions thrown on the character of Matilda; and that, of late, some writers have treated her memory with harshness. But, in Adolphus's History of George the Third, (from which I have chiefly drawn my conclusions,) it is stated, "That the articles supposed to be proved against this princess, were sent to London, and submitted to the examination of the most eminent civilians, who, though consulted separately, unanimously declared, that the evidence, far from amounting to legal conviction, did not sanction a presumption of guilt; and they added, they did not only refuse credit to the facts as lawyers, but were obliged to disbelieve them as men." I also know that Akin, writing of the same time, takes a similar view. Even were this not the case, our hearts would involuntarily pronounce her innocent, when we contemplate her youth, her persecutions, and her sufferings; and saw how she retained, through all, 1 that matchless tenderness and beautiful devotion of a mother's love. This, of itself, might be sufficient to exculpate her in the eyes of all
[Page 44]
those who can estimate the purity of such feelings: they will readily believe, that the coarser passions could not have fellowship with any thing so amiable.
[Page 59]
On the Beauty and Dignity of Faithfulness and Consistency THERE is something so intrinsically beautiful in faithfulness and consistency; they are virtues which so universally command respect and admiration; and we look on those who possess them with so much reverence and delight, that it seems strange we should so often be found to be careless of their culture in our own minds, when we must feel that all may, in a greater or less degree, attain to them. But it is too often the case, that we will trace out for ourselves a path, where consistency would be impracticable, and faithfulness almost folly; and this is, when we allow ourselves to be entangled in the labyrinths of the world, turning off from the straight course, which a clear conscience would have pointed out to us, to be whirled about in its giddy mazes: then, indeed, we must, of necessity, bid adieu to steadiness of principle. If we choose to tread in its winding ways, we will soon find that we must also put on its chamelion garb. Would we seek to deck ourselves with that, robe of beauty and harmony, the mantle of faithfulness and consistency, we must try another path. Not of a nature suitable to such scenes, it would become wearisome to us, and, piece by piece, we would seek to rid ourselves of it, until, clipt and mangled, the tattered garment would hang about us so shorn of all its gracefulness, that it would excite the derision alike of the wise as the unthinking. Let us look even to many of the Heathen world, and see, amidst the darkness
[Page 60]
that surrounded them, how bright, through the long lapse of time, do they still shine out, who have kept, undeviatingly, that course which their conscience had told them was one of rectitude. And the Christian's heart, enlightened with the bright beans of knowledge from above, will dwell with admiration on those virtues, which might have adorned a happier age; and sigh to think, that such noble and exalted firmness is not more frequently exhibited in times more worthy of it, and in causes less questionable.
The fountains from whence flow the treasures of faithfulness, are laid deep within the heart, and fed by reflection, that calm and gentle [illeg.] whose silent influence expands the blossoms of the mind into maturer loveliness, setting before us the perfection of excellence in Him, who keepeth his promise for ever, leads us on from admiring to imitate, as far as our poor nature will permit. It is thus that the Christian retains his consistency; it is by this, that, when age may have furrowed our brows, and the clouds of sorrow darkened over the fair sunshine that had once illuminated our early way, and the frostiness of an unkindly world nipt those flowers that we had most fondly cherished, we may still, through the gathering gloom, look back over life's changeful ocean, and feel a noble pleasure in recollecting, that we have pursued our course with a steady sail; that the flowery islands and enchanting climates by which we have past, had not power to allure us from our rightful way, or make us wish, for one moment, to dash from our remembrance the home from which we steered; that, amidst the storms which we there enountered, and the darkness which often hung around us, we still pressed forward, guided by the same magnet which had directed our course, when gliding over the clear, unruffled waves of summer; that, though torn
[Page 61]
and shivered, our sails were still stretched to the one beloved shore. It is by the heart, the heart alone, that the full beauty of faithfulness and consistency can be estimated. They are twin sisters, on whose unwrinkled brows time writes no changes; in the symmetry of whose features there is dignity softened by tenderness, and a harmony of expression so perfect, that it admits not of being counterfeited. But they can tell, who have tasted in their bitterness, the fruits of fickleness and inconstancy; they can tell, who dwell in the possesssion of enduring truth and unshaken fidelity.—Each of these alike can tell how far beyond the power of language it is, to describe the beauty and dignity of faithfulness and consistency.
Reflections - Induced by Reading - in the First Volume of the Rambler - a Paper - Entitled - the Unhappiness of Women - Single or Married WHILE wandering amidst the varieties of the long admired Rambler, my eye was attracted by this startling title to some of its pages—"The unhappiness of Women, Single or Married." It could not be, but I would peruse, with deep interest, that which seemed to bear an impress of such gloomy and extended
[Page 65]
meaning. Reading it over and over, I endeavoured to discover if the author meant it to be understood in a limited sense: or, if the whole community of women, with some few exceptions, (which, according to the maxim, only go to establish a general rule,) were to be included in the dark picture which he has there given of their lives. Having been forced to come to this latter conclusion, I would venture to dispute a few of those opinions, which I cannot but think couched in much too general terms, to bear the strict stamp of truth, and which are calculated to impress the mind of the reader with ideas far from favourable to those, who were meant by their great author to possess a large share in the esteem of the proud lords of the creation. If we were to judge from these pages, The Rambler must, indeed, have trodden over a very wild and thorny ground, in his search after female character, where no roses were scattered in his way, whose gentle fragrance might breathe of something that would be like happiness; no amiable quality which might throw a lingering light over the thousand evils with which he has crowded the path of our hapless sex. He has given no picture of woman as she ought to be. He has, indeed, often lavished on her that outward loveliness of face and form, the decoration of the scentless tulip: but, beside the bloom of a cheek, or the lustre of an eye, or the passing symmetry of; a form, there is nothing on which the heart could dwell with a moment's pleasure. If he has here given a real picture of our female ancestors, they were, indeed, not much to be envied; and we may cease to look back to them with that respect and veneration with which we have hitherto invested their memory. But no; that cannot be; and we will not brook to think, that the gentle ones who have gone before us, by their own conspiracy with the world against themselves, have been "almost excluded
[Page 66]
from content," in whatever state they pass their lives. Did The Rambler take that word in its full meaning, when he stated that women were so excluded? Did he know himself the blessing of contentment? Did he ever feel what it was to be bereaved of it? If he did, surely he could not calmly have dwelt on the idea, that so many human beings had never tasted of its heaven-sent sweets. We will not believe so of him; we will rather think, that when he made the assertion, it was with a sorrow equal to the extent of the misery which he proclaimed, and which, by every art in his power, he would have sought to alleviate.
I hope I may be pardoned for saying, that the whole character of an individual, of the female sex, can seldom be known, but on intimate acquaintance; and that men in particular, whose opportunities of seeing her are, in general, in mixed society, cannot know the depths of her heart, or have much idea, save of the superficial parts of woman's character. I do not mean to imply, that she wears a disguise which prevents her being known; but, that often the pliability and gaiety of her manners in youth, gives her an easy power, sometimes a necessity, of becoming, for the time, apparently of the same stamp with those in whose company she may be seen. We look on the surface of the water, as it lies expanded beneath our view; we see, that it reflects the flowers and trees scattered along its margin; we can, alike, behold what it bears on its waves, either of beauty or deformity; whether they lie calm through the glowing hours of summer, or whether the storm clouds come down upon their brightness, and the cold harsh winds of winter have broken their serenity; still, it is only the surface which we look on, and they alone who have descended into its secret chambers, can know what lies hidden there. And be
[Page 67]
assured, that thus it is with the mind; and this should lead us to be more tender and less precipitate in passing judgment. The thoughtlessness of a moment, may lead us to say many things which may be misconstrued, and which our soberer mind may disapprove; and it may often happen, that, by this means, a woman's character is stamped, when, perhaps, if she were better known, it would be found, in reality, quite different.
Old maids, The Rambler seems to think, are a race of beings deservedly held in very low estimation; and that "they give those who frequent their conversation, no very exalted notions of the blessings of liberty." Be this as it may, I, at least, must, in justice, say, that I have known them amiable and happy; and, without any "angry feelings" towards those who had chosen a different course from their own, or "appearing to have some great or incessant cause of uneasiness." With respect to the impatience which he speaks of ladies discovering while they remain unmarried, it may, perhaps, be felt by those, who, from want of proper employment for their minds, feel that vacuity and listlessness which make them weary of themselves, and anxious for anything that would break the drowsy dullness of their lives; but, surely, he does not believe what, however, he states as the received opinion, that "the generality of those who remain in a single state, do so, only because they are not invited out of it." A very slight acquaintance with women, would have taught him to contemn this, as without foundation; and, after all, it is but a small compliment to his own sex, to say, that they would link themselves with those, who would have been equally willing to receive any other, the first that offered. And last and worst of all, he alleges that, "when the virtue and tenderness of parents have saved their daughters from a
[Page 68]
forced marriage, he has seldom seen that they made, great advantage of their liberty; that, at last, their choice was regulated by motives, "trifling as those of a girl, or mercenary as those of a miser." Alas! and were his observations so sadly confined to the worthless part of the female world: or, has it so far improved in the course of one generation, that his picture of it seems so untrue; or, are we to suppose, that while we see around us rumerous instances of women preferring worth and a true hear to all else, giving the palm to wit and genius, though they be not clothed in the garb of wealth and power; and even from the vortex of fashionable life, daring to come forth and choose goodness for its own sake; when we see her resisting the allurements of elegant manners and graceful person, when she has reason to think that the heart is not right, are we to suppose that this is a mere semblance, and that she regulates her "choice by motives, trifling as those of a girl, or mercenary as those of a miser." But I have done with quotations from this paper; much that is useful may be gathered from it; and it would be well, if any among us to whom it may apply, would look into its dusky mirror, and see there what an unlovely picture they make.
Its chief objection is its generality . The skilful surgeon will probe the wounded part, and cut off the infected limb; but must the whole body be subject to the operation, and will it be sufficient to probe and not to apply some healing balm?
But we will now take leave of The Rambler—peace to his ashes. We women will not, however harshly as he has sometimes spoken of us, seek to displace one laurel from his brow. To our bosoms, the grave of genius is ever hallowed. He sought for our reform, and we thank him for it; and if it is given to departed souls to revisit this earth, his may enjoy the
[Page 69]
pleasure of a benevolent spirit, in witnessing the happiness of thousands of women in the bosoms of their families. It is true that she is, far more than man, subject to pain and sickness; but such do not always bring sorrow: it may dim the sunshine of her mirthfulness, and cast a shadow around her; but it may be as the twilight comes down over the brightness of summer's evening, so gently, so tenderly, that it only calls forth more sweetness and fragrance. It is woman's peculiar province to attend upon a sick bed. It may be said, surely there is no happiness in this. To look on the fading cheek and languid eye, and to be witness of the sufferings of those we love—though this, indeed, may be heart-rending enough— yet, think of the delight she feels, when she can smooth their pillow; when God allows her, in some happy moment, to be the instrument of affording them relief; and when she sees them, through His mercy, beneath her care, returning to life and health again; this, surely, is happiness, which the warm soul of woman would not resign for all the heartless enjoyments of the world. But, more than all, sickness has often the heavenly effect of bringing us nearer to God; of making Him more dear to us. I have known persons in the very moments of agonizing suffering, declare themselves happy, because they felt more closely than ever the presence of their merciful Father. No one can be so foolish as to suppose, that there is not much, alas! too much to be reformed in woman, which, were it happily effected, would assuredly render her more happy. But God never meant her sex "to have no choice, but of dangers equally formidable:" on the contrary, he has strewed her path thick with flowers, if she would not trample on and scorn them; if she will not tear them up, and, in their stead, plant weeds, which may, indeed, strike the eye with their brilliant
[Page 70]
colours; But which will breathe no gentle fragrance around her, or her memory. No; she will find her truest happiness in the cultivation of those talents, which are often liberally bestowed upon her; in the exercise of those duties which are assigned her by Providence, in being the gentle minister of goodness and kindness to all; in endeavouring to be, as it were, a beacon, to [illeg.] over the wild and stormy ocean of life, a cheering and guiding light: to sum up all, in taking that religion for her constant guide, which has raised her from a state of degradation and misery, to hold a high rank in society; this, by rendering her more pure, would render her more beloved; and let others say what they may about her cold vanity and pride of admiration, this is the reward that is dearest to a woman's heart—this is the spell that acts on her most powerfully.
Before I finish, let me again entreat less precipitation in our judgment of women; they are not always the giddy, unmeaning things they are supposed by some to be: beneath a lighter guise in the breast of most of them, are warm, and deep, and enduring feelings; and it would be well, if, instead of the nonsense which men too often pour into their ear, as, perhaps, believing them incapable of enjoying any thing more intellectual, they would, by ceasing from such, show that they wished them to have a taste for better; and if their minds are shallow and uninformed, not, at least, be the means of making them satisfied with their own ignorance. In the sphere of giddy life woman can never shine with her loveliest light. The circle in which she moves is necessarily more bounded than that of man; but it contains, within its hallowed precincts, the gems of life; it is the circle of the heart, of home, that concentration of all that is dearest. It is there she should walk in all her beauty, and call forth all her attractions, not to render herself
[Page 71]
dazzling in the eyes of the world, but loved and honoured by the good and amiable. She would then, indeed, like her own sweet emblem, the rose, be not only beautiful in the hours of youth's freshness and bloom, but should still retain, long after the blighting touch of time had past over those charms, an intrinsic loveliness, which, like the fragrance still breathing from those withering leaves, would make us forget the loss of her outward brightness, in the beauty which flowed from within.
I have been carried farther than I intended, when I commenced writing on this paper; and cannot but feel I have attempted much, when I ventured to call in question the authority of The Rambler. But oh! may it be, that He, the gentle teacher from heaven, will guide us in the right and perfect way, and give us, in whatever station we may be placed, to find our happiness in Him, and to wear the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, until we shall be called to put on the robes of immortal beauty and joy.
The Young Musician THE story of Emma M'Donald, a young female musician, of other days, may not be found altogether devoid of interest. She was the daughter of a respectable farmer, of the higher class, in Scotland. Of six children, she was the eldest but one, a boy then at sea, serving as midshipman. She was the only daughter —the darling of her father, who spared no expense in her education; giving her all those accomplishments which add so
[Page 74]
much grace to the female character. Emma's attainments, in many of them, was by no means trivial. Her proficiency in music was indisputable, even by those who could listen to her sweet and brilliant touches, with more of envy than delight. Emma was, about the time my story commences, one of the happiest girls in all Scotland. Her father's house and farm lay on the beautiful banks of the Leven, where the rich meadows and luxuriant trees were contrasted with the wild enchantment of mountain scenery, that rose not far distant from its side, as you take your way by the road that leads from Dumbarton to Loch Lomond. As I have said, Emma was one of the happiest girls to be found in Scotland, she had all she wished for, and a mind that, like hers, delighted in the grand and beautiful of nature, could seldom find many hours pass heavily, amid such scenes as daily met her eye. For though, if once looked upon, they never could be effaced from the memory; yet, they are such as grow more beautiful and dear, the more familiar we become with them. As in our journey through life, we sometimes meet with those whose brightness will, indeed, attract as soon as seen, but who hold within their heaven taught mind, "treasures untold," charms that come forth, as it might seem, with each succeeding day of our acquaintance, ever new and ever unfading. But to return. Emma had arrived at the age of sixteen, when, what might be called the first cloud, appeared in her summer sky. It was dark and awful: the thunderbolt that burst from it, blasted, for a time, much of her happiness. Her father, the dupe of his own folly, in allowing himself to become security for one with whose character and circumstances he was not sufficiently acquainted, became suddenly involved in debt, which he had not the means of answering: he was betrayed by him he had assisted, till, from
[Page 75]
affluence, he was reduced to a miserable pittance. His house and farm had to be sold, and the verdant banks of the Leven were no longer to be trod by him; the fairy shouts of his happy children were no more to be wafted down its still blue waters.
It was on the evening preceding the departure of his family from their beloved home, that poor M 'Donald went out to walk by the river side. It was a soft summer evening; the sun had disappeared behind the hills: the rising moon was flinging her silver beams over the soft clouds that lay, as it were, asleep, along the eastern horizon. A little bright-haired boy, his youngest son, ran up to him as he walked slowly and moodily along— oh! father, said the child, in a mournful tone, must we leave home to-morrow? Oh! why did you give away our home and our rich meadow, where we used to play, and Emma's garden, and all the nice things we have here? I am sure we shall not be half so happy any where else. This was too much for M 'Donald. He walked away in great agitation; but soon again, turning back, said hastily to the little Alfred, I, at least, will not leave this to-morrow. The happy little one waited for no more, but instantly ran away, to tell his play-fellows that they might yet have another day to spend together. Emma and her mother were seated at a window, looking out on that scene which had long been witness of their happiest hours. Though somewhat sad, Mrs. M 'Donald's heart was not broken down. She was not, like Emma, of that ardent temper, whose whole soul rose almost, at one spring, into love and hate. No; she was one of those, over whom the troubles and joys of this life pass lightly, or make but slight impression; not because religion had taught her the folly of fixing the affections on things here, but because she was of that luke-warm, indifferent sort of character, to whom it was never given to feel the extremes of joy
[Page 76]
or sorrow. Such was Mrs. M 'Donald; the very opposite of her husband and daughter. He was one of those fiery spirits that are impetuous in every thing; easily won by kindness, but proudly resentful of an injury; yet, he could even now have brooked the [illeg.] that was cast on him, by many of those who had bowed to him in his hours of prosperity, but for the thought, that by his own folly, he deserved it. And what, said he, as he walked [illeg.] along; must I live to be pointed and laughed at, by fools and knaves, to see my children grow up to beggary. No, Walter M 'Donald, thy spirit never could brook this.
The clock had now struck ten; the little Alfred, with his brothers, was forgetting, in sleep, the toils and sports of the day. Mrs. M 'Donald had also retired to rest, leaving Emma, alone, at the window. Ten had struck, and eleven came: where was her father? She watched, with eager anxiety, as the full moon rode higher and higher in the heavens; her lonely meditations were far from being of a happy or enlivening nature; and she felt an unaccountable heaviness stealing over her, as the clock again told that another hour had passed. Still she could not resolve to retire from the window, while her father continued thus strangely absent. But sleep, at length, overcame her, even where she sat. She had scarcely closed her eyes, when a ghastly figure appeared before her: it was her father's: but what a countenance; pale and livid, with horror painted on every feature, looking on her fixedly, with an unearthly expression of countenance. He pointed thrice down the course of the river, and then disappeared, with a look that froze her with horror. She awoke, and, looking out of the window, she saw the moon, clear and cold as ever, riding over the peaceful sky, while the earth seemed as happily reposing beneath
[Page 77]
her beams, and the river gliding along like a stream of silver light. What could have called up such an apparition, amid such loveliness, she knew not? But sleep again, notwithstanding her agitation, closed her eyes, and again the same horrid vision presented itself. She awoke in an agony of terror, and, rushing wildly from the house, flew towards that part of the river to which the apparition had pointed. As she approached, she heard a voice cry out, in a tone that seemed inspired by hell's darkest demons of despair—"Now, heaven and earth, I plunge to my eternal ruin." The speaker leaped off the bank, and would, in an instant, have sunk in the depths of the clear cold waters, had not Emma, with a swiftness and strength that seemed supernatural, reached him, and, throwing herself down on the bank, laid hold on his arm, ere he sunk. It would almost seem impossible, that a creature such as Emma, could have had strength to drag a man, like M 'Donald (for he was no other,) up the steep bank of the river. But despair and love are mighty in their workings, as the poet hath said—
"What will not woman dare, whom love and pity leads?"
By her single arm she accomplished it. There are scenes in nature, which, though full of meaning and speaking to our very souls, in a language the most thrilling, and which we understand with an instant and instinctive feeling of sympathy, yet which baffle our fond attempts to give them another tongue than their own. And there is also language of the spirit, so deep and powerful, that it can almost tear asunder the very fibres of the heart, and throb throught every pulse and vein, with a wild and resistless force, and to which it would be equally vain to attempt to give another utterance. Of such was the scene that followed, and such was the language, that, with a tremendous power, echoed in hollow murmurings
[Page 78]
through the troubled bosom of the wretched M 'Donald. The deep silver stillness which had settled down upon every thing, was unbroken, except by those fitfully low and gentle sounds, that sometimes come stealing, as it were, from the soul of midnight, and which fancy would almost say, were the very offspring of silence. As, hushed and motionless, but without sharing in the bright and delicious serenity which seemed to be the [illeg.] spirit of all that surrounded them, the only human beings to be seen in that midnight solitude, stood Emma and her father. On his countenance was depicted, in strong and livid hues, that awful conflict of horrors, which the soul must endure, when she would desperately rush, against nature and herself, into the dim and dismal portals of a dread eternity, when she would seek to pass through the valley of the shadow of death, with far other guides than those with which, of old, a holy one could serenely contemplate his journey through its paths of gloom. Not the rod and the staff of comfort; not the sweet beamings of celestial love, shed down upon it, until even its very shadows themselves became dear; not such are the companions that await to guide the frantic footsteps of the self-destroyer, on his course of utter darkness. He is lashed from the world which he curses, from that temple of God which he would deface and destroy, by the scorpions of passion and despair; and, while he plunges headlong into that black and unknown abyss, in the wild hope that it will be one of forgetfulness, finds that it is not only haunted with all the miseries he thus vainly attempted to fly, but with thousand, thousand others, infinitely more dreadful and more appalling. But heaven's mercy was yet in store, even for one who had so awfully insulted and defied its decrees; and the stillness and beauty which surrounded him, began to have a very powerful
[Page 79]
influence, in gradually imparting a share of its own calm, to the dark and stormy billows, that tossed to and fro, the spirit of M 'Donald. There was nothing then present to taunt him with a voice of scorn. The heavens that spread above him, were one vast expanse of tranquillity, and harmony, and tender light. The voice which they "uttered forth," was a glorious one; and hardened, indeed, must have been that heart, that could have resisted its pleadings. His laughter, the best beloved of all his beloved ones, was beside him; and she had whispered, "My father, come back, come back with me to our rest and our home." The magic of that voice; so dear, so tender, so eloquent, had power to expel the demon from the bosom of M 'Donald. The thunder cloud, which had loured so red and fearfully upon his brow, melted away; dissolved by the touch of heaven, into those precious drops, that come down to renew the scorched and blighted spirit. He felt the big tears starting to his eyes, and the haughty and the guilty one wept and prayed. Perhaps, this was the first time in his life, that M 'Donald did really and fervently pray, and humble himself before his God; for, though always a moral, he was far from being a religious character, and knew but little, very little, of that humility with which the Christian spirit should ever be enrobed. To such, the merely moral man is a stranger; and the eye of the worldly cannot perceive its beauty. Nevertheless, true humility is one of the noblest and mightiest of virtues. It alone can overcome that arrogance and selfishness, which is so deeply rooted in our fallen nature, and plants in her stead, that beautiful generosity and benevolence, which, like the glorious sun, as be ascends still higher and higher in his own pure heavenward course of light, sheds down upon all, even the meanest works of his Creator, only more warmly and brightly
[Page 80]
his beams of life and love. Even so it is with the humility of a Christian. It makes him think neither unjustly nor meanly of himself or of others; but, clearing away from his eyes the mists of prejudice and selfish pride, it bids him go forth in a purer atmosphere, to be a minister of heaven's mercies to all with whom it has taught him to feel the link of fellow-being; and, in proportion as he [illeg.] to the zenith of that perfection, will his heart expand more and more, into the loveliness and benignity of universal benevolence. He wraps not his mantle around him, to tread the earth alone: no, that beautiful robe of charity with which God himself has clothed him, in its wide and ample folds, like the rich mantle of the noon-tide sunshine, was given to be spread out over all his creatures. But M 'Donald prayed silently, but fervently: he now felt, for the first time, the insufficiency of his own righteousness, and the awful purity of that God, before whose tribunal he would have dared to appear, with the fearful passions and the indelible stain of the dark suicide upon his guilty forehead. Poor Emma, the [illeg.] of her excitement had now subsided into a dead and unnatural calm: her face was lividly pale, and she seemed as if fixed to one spot, without motion or recollection. Her father looked upon her: he saw in that statue-like form of distress, his own work; and he shuddered, as the thought passed over his mind, contrasting the beautiful animation and joyousness, which, till now, had ever illuminated that countenance; but, drawing her arm gently within his, he led her faultering footsteps towards the house. He kissed her cold cheek, and, without any exchange of words, each retired to their separate apartments. Poor Emma, exhausted by fatigue of body and agony of mind, sunk down on her pillow, in a deep sleep. But, ere M 'Donald laid him down, he again addressed himself to the throne of
[Page 81]
grace, and, through the mercy of God, that hour which had promised to strike the knell of his eternal ruin, came with new light and life to his soul.
The morning came, and Mrs. M 'Donald arose to prepare for their departure, from their ancient home, ignorant of the events of the preceding night. These remained long, long after, a secret to all but Emma and her father. Mournful was the adieu of the young family, as they cast a lingering look, for the last time, over the scenes of their earliest enjoyment. But the varieties they experienced on their journey, and the wonder and curiosity excited in their young minds, by an introduction to the city of Glasgow, by degrees, almost banished the regrets of the little Alfred and his brothers. It has been truly said, by the immortal poet of their own country,
"The tear down childhood's cheek that flows,
Is like the dew-drop on the rose.
When the first summer breeze comes by,
And shakes the bush, the flower is dry."
The affectionate Emma tried to conceal her grief, and wear a happy smile, lest she might recall painful thoughts to the heart of her father: indeed, she was rather pleased, that he was now leaving a scene, which, to him, must henceforth be fraught with agonizing remembrances.
The little cottage, their future abode, was situated near the city of Glasgow, on the banks of the Clyde. The scenery was pleasing and peaceful; and Emma felt her days pass by here not altogether uncomfortably: but then they were all in great poverty; and her numerous brothers had no means of forwarding their education. This weighed more heavily than all beside on the mind of their sister. If, thought she, they could be educated, I do not fear of their making their own way through the world, with credit to themselves; but without that great foun
[Page 82]
dation, [illeg.] is but little hope of their ever rising beyond the humbleness of their present condition. From day to day, these thoughts were continually visiting the mind of Emma. At last she began to reflect. I have received an education equal, perhaps superior to my former rank. Let me endeavour to profit by it. The thought had no sooner occurred, than she determined [illeg.] act upon it. She had, some time ago, received an invitation from a distant relative, to visit her in London. Thither, therefore, she resolved to repair; and, obtaining the consent of her parents, she set about preparing for her journey, with all expedition. Her simple wardrobe was soon adjusted. Placing herself under the care of a lady, who was to travel the same way, she took her seat from Glasgow in one of the London coaches. Emma's intention, which, however, she did not mention at home, was to endeavour to obtain employment in some respectable family, as a teacher of music. The lady to whom she was now going, was a wealthy old widow, without children. Many, in Emma's case, would have endeavoured to live on the bounty of such a person, and insinuate herself into the promise of a good legacy. But her spirit disdained being a dependant on the caprice of another; and deemed it more honourable to exert her own talents, whatever they might be, for the assistance of her family, and her own support. Mrs. Barrington, her relative, was a very good natured sort of old lady; exceedingly fond of gaiety. She frequented all kinds of parties, whether of cards, or music, or dancing; and, although, except in the first-mentioned of these, she could not be said to take a very conspieuous part: still, as her circumstances enabled her, and her inclination led her, to give many splendid entertainments, she was generally among the first invited to the fetes of all those of her own circle. She was truly gratified by Emma's
[Page 83]
visit; and welcomed her most affectionately; and to do honour to her young friend, a few days after her arrival, she gave a ball, in order that she might introduce her at once to the gay circle of her acquaintance. Ball after ball, and party after party, followed this in rapid succession. A life so different from what Emma had been accustomed to, at first amused and delighted her. At length, she began to grow weary of it: not so Mrs. Barrington. She was delighted to have some one to introduce, and, perhaps, the more so, as she could easily perceive that her young visiter was capable of attracting no inconsiderable share of attention, even among the most brilliant assemblage.
At last, among all these revels, there came one which offered to Emma a very favourable opportunity of making herself known to the musical world; and she gladly availed herself of it. It was an amateur concert, at which she was particularly requested to assist.
The evening of performance arrived; the doors of a spacious and splendid saloon were thrown open; and it was quickly crowded with the nobility and fashion of London. Emma felt almost stunned, as she looked around on the glare of light and brilliancy. She had never witnessed such an assembly before. She felt herself in the presence of many of the mighty of the land. Great ones were there, whose names had brightened the annals of their country; proud ones, who had trod, with a conqueror's step, the blood-red field of victory; but, who had come back to the "happy homes of England," to live in her peacefulness, and to listen to her songs; and there was many a bright eye, and many a lovely cheek, and many a polished and noble brow, whereon sat the beautiful dignity of the English matron. On these Emma looked, and felt herself re-assured; for she was not one of those, who tremble and sink below
[Page 84]
themselve, in the presence of those who are greater than they, and of whom, perhaps, they had spoken but slightingly when unawed by their presence. No; she had an elegant and discerning mind, and knew what it was to yield respect where it was justly due, without descending to the servility of fear, notwithstanding, she was very diffident as to her own powers. How was the little girl, that used to play by the banks of the Leven, and [illeg.] her mild voice to the rippling of its waters, where none were to listen but her brothers, or some other lighthearted playfellow; how was she to let that voice be heard, by so many, whose ears were accustomed to the rich melodies of Italian minstrelsey, though her performance was always extolled in her own circle, and even in that in which she had mixed since her arrival in London? How different might be the reception awaiting it there. These thoughts passed and repassed a thousand times over the heart of the young musician. But now the instruments were all tuned and in readiness; and the opening of a grand concert, of Mozart's, burst on every ear, and engaged every thought. The deep booming of the bass, mingled in solemn grandeur with the harmony of the other instruments, and the rich and varied tones of the pianoforte, and the silvery melody of the flute. It was rather a long piece of music; but so exquisite was the performance, and so enchanting the sounds, that, to the auditors, it seemed scarcely to occupy half the time engaged in the execution of it. While the room yet resounded with the applause, justly called forth by this beautiful opening, the next performer that took his seat at the piano-forte, was a gentleman, somewhat celebrated in the musical world. He had chosen, for his part, a much-admired Rondo Brillante of that day, and he played without an accompaniment. But wo to the hapless instrument that groaned
[Page 85]
under the chastisement of his ponderous strokes. There is a vulgar saying, but an apt one, "We cannot see the wood for trees." In this instance, it might be said, we could not hear the music for the sound. The piano-forte shook; the notes rang through the apartment; but, it almost seemed as if the fine instrument resented the total neglect of its piano, in the overwhelming predominance which was given to its forte, and sent forth its vehement sounds, loud, harsh, and hurried. No one could deny the brilliancy of the execution; but where were the soft touches, and the whispering sounds, which fall so beautifully upon the ear, when judiciously intermixed with the louder and more spirited passages to which the contrast gives fresh beauty and interest, and which, perhaps, we might best compare to the fitful sighing with which the tempest sometimes sinks down—just heard, and no more; murmuring, as if in tenderness, among the branches which it had just swept, and, in another moment, rising again to sweep yet more wildly than before? Of such, this gentleman's performance was entirely devoid: however, he was greeted with much applause; and, since those days, I have heard that such a bravura style is the most fashionable. But, "[illeg.] said, and I believe the tale," that music had most power, when she was allowed to breathe out ber own lovely soul, in all her rich variety of feeling and expression. After this followed one or two other pieces, in which most of the accompaniments joined; and then this part of the entertainment was closed by a solo on the piano, performed by our young heroine. Emma would have felt considerably more embarrassed, at this display, but that she turned to the thoughts of home; and, wrapping herself, as it were, in her family circle, endeavoured to forget, in the hopes of being useful to them, that stranger eyes were upon
[Page 86]
her: it seemed as if the motive had hallowed the task, for never was music more rapturously received, or more justly praised. Vocal music followed, in which Emma had taken several parts; but that which seemed to elicit the greatest praise, was her singing to the harp, some of her own most ancientnational airs. Though, at first, her voice was so low and tremulous, that many of her rivals on the piano-forte began to thing that here, at least, she would be excelled. She again wrapt herself in the dream of home, and breathed out the melody of her native land, with such a sweet and touching expression, that no one listened to it unmoved. But there was one that "felt the strain, deepest of any." A young gentleman, who stood near her, and whom she had seen once before, at a party of Mrs. Barrington's. His name was Lindsay. When the performance was closed, and the crowd had withdrawn, he still lingered behind, to escort Mrs. Barrington and Emma to their carriage. Next day he called on them, and, afterwards, became rather a frequent visiter.
But Emma found that it would be necessary for her to set about, immediately, to get the employment she had purposed, before her mind would be carried away by the gaieties which now surrounded her. Happening to mention her intention to young Lindsay, he replied, with great animation—"My sisters are, at this very time, looking out for a teacher: they were so delighted with your performance, at the concert last week, that I feel convinced, nothing would please them more, than to have it in their power to profit by your instructions. If you permit me, I will mention the circumstance to them, and bring you their answer.'' Such a situation, in a respectable family like this, was exactly what Emma had wished for. She, accordingly, received Mr. Lindsay's intimation with pleasure.
[Page 87]
Next morning, he made his appearance at breakfast, delivering a polite note from his mother to Mrs. Barrington, excusing herself for not then visiting her, but requesting that she and Miss M 'Donald would dine with her next day. To this, Lindsay was made the bearer of an answer, in the affirmative; and, with the pleasing prospect of soon again meeting the interesting young musician, he took his leave.
Charles Lindsay was the only son of a family who prided themselves on their high birth and ancient descent, which they could trace from a branch of those Lindsays, who had once borne the rank of nobility. His mother was a widow. She was haughty and proud at heart, though polished and condescending in her manner. She had two daughters. The eldest, Georgiana, exceeded her mother in pride, without possessing her affability. The youngest, Anna, was all life and reckless spirits. When she spoke or laughed, her eyes sparkled and danced in very mirthfulness. Warm hearted and thoughtless, she cared not what was thought of her: so those whom she loved, loved her. She almost idolized her brother, by whom she was sincerely beloved in return. He was, indeed, worthy of her tenderness. Most amiable in personal and intellectual endowments; open-hearted and generous, without the least affectation or conceit; and yet he, too, could not altogether overcome something of that foolish pride of birth, which, strange as it may seem, is often indulged in by minds that are otherwise noble, as if "birth could bequeath minds to the mindless, virtue to the knave" I grant that there is a noble and generous feeling of pride, if pride it should be called, which will glow within the heart, when contemplating, as they remain hallowed through the lapse of time, the great or good actions of those from whom we have sprung. This is not only
[Page 88]
[illeg.] but it seems as if the heart would be dead to the nobler sentiments of our nature, if it could coldly turn back over the annals of buried greatness, and say, such were the deeds of my fathers, and yet feel no kindling emotion glow within.
The fortune of Lindsay was moderate; but he lived within it; and it was sufficient for him. The proposal of Emma having me with a very favourable reception, in a short time she became an inmate in the house of Mrs. Lindsay, and commenced, on a handsome allowance, to complete her daughters in the several branches of music.
Emma was not what is generally called a beauty; though it would be injustice to her to set down her features as a rule by which to measure her loveliness. Her figure was tall and slight; perhaps too thin for symmetry. She had a fine complexion: the hue of health glowed richly on her cheek: her eyes were enlightened with the beams of a cheerful and innocent mind; and the expression of her countenance was interesting to a degree far beyond what is usually met with. If this could be called beauty, she might certainly lay claim to no small share of it.
The winter had passed away, and spring was coming on, in all her beauty, "with all her reckless birds upon the wing." Emma, who had spent more than six months in London, now determined on visiting, for a short time, the humble cottage on the banks of the Clyde. She had now become a great favourite with her young pupils and their mother, who bestowed on her many marks of kindness; and all joined in telling her, that they would be impatient for her return. However it might be with the others of the family, during her absence, the course of that time did not certainly seem swift, to young Lindsay. Emma's
[Page 89]
sweet melody had become almost necessary to his ear and her lively intelligence and artless manners, he thought but ill supplied by the polished insipidity of the city fashionables.
Emma's visit to her family was hailed by them as an event, the happiest which could befall. Indeed, what can be more delightful than the return of beloved ones, to fill the vacant space, "by board and hearth," which had looked so dim when they were absent. When the wanderer comes back again; when we feel that we do, indeed, stand in the very presence of those, to whom our thoughts had ever fondly and faithfully recurred through the chill of absence and of time: is it not like the returning glow of summer, spreading over nature so bright and beautiful a colouring, that even the rudest scene puts on a smile, and decks itself with flowers, as if to welcome a presence so longed for and so dear? During Emma's stay at the cottage, all was pleasure and merriment. Her father thought it quite enough of happiness to look upon her, and to hear the sweet tones of her voice, once again. Her mother was always contented; and her brothers, she joined with them in all their little sports, which added zest to them unknown before. But hours like these soon pass by: they are hours of happiness; and such ever have the swiftest wing. However, before she took leave of them, she placed two of her brothers at a respectable school; and she also took a much better house, with a few acres of land attached to it, and a comfortable garden, where her father could have amusement in resuming his old occupations. What a pleasure to a generous mind, to behold the happy fruits of its own exertions; how infinitely must Emma's pleasure, in receiving the blessings of a grateful family, of an affectionate father, have risen in that hour, superior to any thing which she could have enjoyed, had she
[Page 90]
contented herself with remaining in idleness, or the mere dependant on the bounty of another. It was with more of pleasure than regret that Emma could now bid adieu to her family. She had left them in much better circumstances than she had found them. That which had enabled her to do so, was, therefore, worthily looked upon by her as a source of pleasure. But the little ones were almost inconsolable; and, as in most other cases of the kind, the promise of return was found the only balm capable of allaying the pain of parting.
The day after Emma's return, was a bright day at Oakleyvale; a beautiful country-seat, about seventy miles from London, whither the Lindsay's had retired to spend the summer months. It was her son's birth-day; a day always held as a high festival by Mrs. Lindsay. The house was filled with company, and mirth and joy were alone to preside on that auspicious day. The arrival of Emma seemed to throw an additional gaiety over every member of the family, if we except Miss Georgiana, whose reception of her was somewhat cold. But Anna kissed her twenty times, in the joy of her young heart; and the countenance of Charles was sufficient to show, that he was not the one who felt least pleasure at her return.
Emma had not a heart that would not give back, with interest, all the kindness with which she was received; and her spirit now bounded with pleasure, and her bright and expressive countenance beamed with the sunshine of her heart. She could look on those around her with delight; and she could think on those she left behind, with feelings of no less satisfaction and pleasure. We may guess she was not the least energetic and alert in celebrating the birth-day of young Lindsay. There was a beautiful lake, about a quarter of a mile distant from the house. Thither some of the party repaired, to row
[Page 91]
over its glassy surface. The luxury of a summer day's beauty was upon every thing. The fine old beeches that grew on the side of the little hill, that sloped down towards the lake, spread out their broad leafy branches in unruffled quiet. The glossy foliage lay in perfect stillness, unless, sometimes, when it was shaken, for a moment, by the fluttering of the wren or robin, that came to pour out its wild song from the luxuriant shade. In such an hour, and amid such scenes, how are the sweetest and purest sensations of the heart awakened. Cold, indeed, and unworthy must be that bosom, that, surrounded by such beauty and brightness, yet feels no emotion of gratitude arise to the bountiful giver.
The "fairy boat," with its happy freight, was launched upon the shining water, whose ripples broke into a thousand gems of light, as they flew onward, at each dip of the oar. There was no one who would not have wished for music to complete the enchantment; and Emma's sweet voice floated along like a spirit of melody and delight. No one could well have been happier than the minstrel herself; not even those gay and brilliant damsels, who illuminated that evening's ball with their jewelled splendour. But both with her and Charles, this happiness was like the intense brightness of sunset, soon to be followed by the gathering shadows of night. Charles could no longer hide from himself, that his heart was in the keeping of Emma M 'Donald, a farmer's daughter, who, whatever her other endowments might be, certainly had not that of high birth to recommend her. To himself, this appeared an obstacle of no trifling moment, in the way of making himself happy, by obtaining her hand. To his mother's proud heart, he knew it would be the most insuperable that could present itself. He, therefore, formed the notable resolution of banishing the
[Page 92]
idea altogether, and looking on Emma only in the light of most amiable and interesting person, whom he might cherish as a friend,but not as a wife. But this resolution was much easier made than kept. It has been said, and truly, that,
"He who stems a stream with sand,
Or fetters flame with flaxen band;
Has yet a harder task to prove,
By firm resolve to conquer love."
When absent from Emma, Charles felt as if the growing passion might be subdued: but, whenever he came into her presence, his heart whispered to him, that she alone, of all he had ever met, seemed fitted to make him happy. Georgiana was the first to perceive, that there was something of a tender nature, mingling in the sentiments entertained by her brother, for Miss M 'Donald; and yet, she could hardly allow her mind to give place to a thought so painful. How could the heir of such a family, through the veins of whose ancestors noble blood had flowed, and who had worn their titled honours, think of degrading himself so far, as to have the most distant sentiment of love for the daughter of a mere farmer. One day, however, she went so far as to mention her suspicions to Anna. But she only laughed at her, and said, she believed them quite groundless; though, added she, even if Charles did love her, I would not wonder at it: she is a dear, delightful girl. This was but little comfort to the suspicious and haughty heart of Georgiana. A look of the most supreme contempt was her only answer. An ill-represt burst of indignation, testified how little she could brook such subject to be lightly treated.
In the mean time, Emma herself was not quite at ease. Young Lindsay, notwithstanding all his resolution, had not power to disguise, as he should have done, his affection from
[Page 93]
the object of it; and, in her heart, she could not but feel, that it was answered. This knowledge brought with it more of pain than pleasure; for she was well aware of Mrs. Lindsay's pride, and Georgiana's coldness daily increased, till, at length, it settled into downright dislike. Emma saw this, and determined, whatever it might cost her, to give up her present situation, since she could no longer retain it, with the kindly and confidential feelings which, at first, had rendered it so agreeable to all. Her best mind pointed out this course to her; and that she should lose no time in pursuing it; though, while, she resolved on giving up, as soon as possible, her residence at Oakley, her heart whispered, that the place in which Charles Lindsay dwelt, would always have had brightness enough for her, however others might conspire to make it gloomy.
One evening she was joined by him, on her return from a ramble through the demesne. "Well, Miss M 'Donald, (he said, as he offered her his arm,) is there not something very pleasing in the stillness and beauty of this scenery, when contrasted with the wearisome din and bustle of the metropolis? They talk of winter being tedious and dull, when spent in the country. It may be so; but in my mind, the palm of weariness should be yielded to a summer in the city."
"There is (said Emma) something in the present scene, that recalls to my memory, almost too forcibly, the thoughts of other days. Those old trees, that stretch but their luxuriant branches, are so like those, beneath which my little brothers used to play, that I could almost fancy I heard their joyous shouts, and saw their bright faces again, as I used to see them before they were driven from the banks of the Leven; but memories of a darker colour, force themselves with these, and make me turn away to any thing that will chase them from my mind."
[Page 94]
The thought of a midnight scene, which she once had witnessed there, rushed across her mind, and threw a death-like paleness on her cheek. Lindsay observed this; and, supposing it proceeded from the thoughts of her altered circumstances, and that she had felt, at that moment, more poignantly than usual, the inconveniences of her present condition, addressed her in the most gentle and soothing manner. "Dear Miss M'Donald, I can very well believe, that to you, the contrast of other days with the present, must, indeed, be painful; and yet you have told me, that you felt quite happy here. Has any thing, of late, occurred, to render you otherwise?"
Emma could not answer; she could not reveal the secret, the recollection of which had, at that moment, made her shudder through every nerve; and, besides, that there were other thoughts, half pleasing, half painful, which, while they rendered her residence at Oakley less agreeable than it had been, she was equally resolved to keep locked within her heart.
After a moment's pause, he went on: "I have asked you a foolish question; for, why should we expect that the current of our happiness will always run on unchecked and unbroken: none have ever yet found it so; and, for my own part, I know, that the waves of pleasure have already ebbed with me."
"Is that the case (said Emma)? This is a sad world: but I cannot help thinking, that our own misfortunes are much easier borne, than the knowledge that grief has overtaken the heart of a friend."
"Do you give me that name" said Lindsay?
Emma coloured deeply. She knew she had said but little; but she also knew how much, how far beyond her words, she had felt.
"If you do," he continued, as he looked at her, while her cheek glowed and her eye beamed, with conscious feeling, beneath
[Page 95]
the long dark lash that overhung it, "I consider it the proudest, the dearest title which I could wear; and believe me, Emma, that Charles Lindsay would do much, how much, to insure you happiness."
Emma could not speak, for her heart was too full: but one silent, though bright answer, came back from that shrine of affection, and melted in the tenderness of a tear.
Lindsay saw it as it started into her eye, and fell upon her cheek; and his memory was haunted by it for ever.
Unluckily, at this moment, who should approach but the suspicious Georgiana. It would be impossible to describe the look of anger and contempt with which she passed on, refusing her brother's invitation to join them. As this was too apparent to pass unnoticed, it would have been most unpleasantly felt, had they not immediately after been met by Anna, who had no objection, whatever, to make a third in their party. While she was happily imparting the influence of her own innocent gaiety and cheerfulness to the minds of her brother and her friend, Georgiana brooded alone, in all the vexation and disappointment of a little mind. For the gratification of a selfish vanity, she would not have hesitated, at that moment, to dash to the earth the sweetest cup of happiness that could have presented itself to the lips of a brother, whom she pretended to love. Though a union with Miss M'Donald were to have insured him every blessing that was consistent with the lot of humanity, she would have scorned it, and chosen for him any other, no matter how galling, so that it would have been but splendid.
The time of Emma's sojourn in the house of young Lindsay was now soon accomplished. Georgiana lost no opportunity to excite the suspicion and alarm the pride of her mother.
[Page 96]
And, accordingly, Mrs. Lindsay soon after took occasion to intimate to her, though in a very polite manner, that her services should be no longer required. Emma received this with dignity and gentleness, and prepared, without delay, to bid adieu to Oakley. But, though her presence was no longer there, to enliven the scene, over which it had once cast, as it were, a spell, her influence, in the heart of Charles, remained undiminished; and Anna's feelings were always in sympathy with his.
Time sped away; and when winter shook the leaves and withered the blossoms at Oakley-vale, it was deserted for the city. In the connexions between man and man, how often has it been the same. When the spring-time of joyousness is gone, and the heart is seared, and the flowery crown of youth is faded, how few are there to remain with the desolate one, even though he had once been dear.
The family of the Lindsays returned to London, early in the beginning of winter. Among the many new acquaintances which they formed, during that season of gaiety, was the Marquis de Bantum, who soon became the favoured admirer of Miss Lindsay. He was one of those anomalous beings, who might be said to form something of a connecting link between the man and the monkey. His figure was slight, and somewhat below the middle size, which answered very well, as he could the more easily frisk it about at pleasure. His countenance, in its animal vivacity, bore a ridiculous similarity to the last-mentioned; and being nearly overgrown, with the luxuriance of whisker and mustachio, he had, indeed, a striking and rare appearance. It has been said, women "often meet monkey-like men." Was it ever known that they loved them? I would venture to say no; that by the decree of nature, to
[Page 97]
love such, were impossible. But, alas! I cannot say, that they do not sometimes devote themselves to objects as little worthy of their affections, wealth and splendour. Of this, Georgiana Lindsay soon furnished an instance. The Marquis de Bantum, in his own person, could not be said to possess one prepossessing quality. His ignorance and foppery continually exposed him to derision: while his high rank and splendid equipages only served to raise him into more contemptible notoriety. But Georgiana was resolved to have a title, at whatever price it might be purchased; and, notwith-standing the regret of her family, and the earnest remonstrances of her brother, who knew well how very little her real respectability was advanced by such a connexion, she gave her hand to the Marquis, and her heart to his possessions. The splendour of her bridal equipment was dazzling. But where was the brightness of the heart? Surely the pride of the Marchioness must have been humbled by the feelings of the woman. However, these could be but momentary, as the dissipation into which she was immediately carried, left no room for the whisperings of sentiment. And, now, let us leave her, for a while, to enjoy the splendour she so dearly prized, and follow upon an humbler pathway, the footsteps of others.
On leaving Mrs. Lindsay, Emma had returned to the banks of the Clyde. But she had not been there long, when she received a proposal from a very amiable young lady, whom she had known in London, to accompany her, as travelling companion, to Florence, where she was going for the re-establishment of her health. Emma willingly accepted the offer. She felt that, while she remained in her present situation, unemployed, her heart was gradually growing more and more engrossed with the thoughts of Charles Lindsay, and that, to say
[Page 98]
the least, his memory was to her the dearest and most sacred of all earthly things, the fountain from which she drank deepest and must greedily. She, therefore, hastened to obey the summons of Miss Danby, hoping that the occupation it would afford her, would, in time, banish the dangerous fondness which had already wound itself around her imagination. Miss Danny's father also accompanied her. He was a man of a most [illeg.] and highly enlightened mind, and one of those happy characters who, with the strictest sense of religion, blend a cheerfulness and urbanity which makes them beloved in whatever circle they may move. With him, religion was no secondary thing; it was the first principle of all his actions; and this consistency gave him an influence over the minds of others, which is seldom attained by those who do not make it the constant rule by which to measure their lives.
It was in this society that Emma first learned, that the beauty of holiness did not consist in mere outward correctness; but that, far down in the wilderness of the human heart, it was to expand the blossoms of heavenly wisdom, and breathe over its flinty soil, till it yielded back again, in softness, the sweet fruits of peace and love.
Emma remained with her kind friends at Florence, for the space of two years; during which time, she had heard nothing of the Lindsays. She did not think that Charles, at least, had altogether forgotten her: but she did believe, unless she might also hope to except Anna, that the other members of the family had consigned her memory to that oblivion, which they would only think due to one of such low birth. Notwithstanding "the hallowed form which first love traced," still haunted her heart, and a settled shade of gentle melancholy seemed now to be the prevailing expression of her countenance; but every day
[Page 99]
seemed to add new graces to her mind, and endeared her still more to those with whom she was connected. Miss Danby had nearly recovered from her indisposition, and they were thinking of returning to England: she and Emma had walked out to some distance from the city, to enjoy the luxuriant and glorious prospect, which every where surrounded it. The sun was skirting along the unclouded horizon, and streamed a rich radiance over the myrtle and orange groves. Embosomed in one of these, was an elegant little cottage, over the white walls of which the vine hung in luxuriant and graceful clusters. It seemed to possess all the neatness and comfort of an English villa, with the richer adornments of which, nature is so lavish in that land of the sun. They had often admired this beautiful little residence, and now determined to pursue the path which led to it. As they approached, the sounds of music struck upon their ear; and, as they listened, Emma thought that the tones and the melody were quite familiar to her. At last, she distinctly heard the words of a song which she herself had composed, to an old and well-known Scotch air. She had given them to Anna Lindsay, on the evening before her departure from Oakley. They were as follows:—
SONG.
Oh! think of me at evening's close,
When the sun has left the sky;
When the gleams of light still haunt the west,
Like a dream of days gone by.
Oh! think of me at that calm hour,
When the ocean lies at rest;
When the azure hues of summer heaven
Are on its tranquil breast.
[Page 100]
For we have loved in early youth,
To wander by its side;
To gaze in pon the mighty sweep
Of its billows free and wide;
And we our youthful hearts have twined
Together in that hour;
When the twilight dews in softness fell
On every leaf and flower.
Then think of me, tho' far away
My wandering steps may be;
When stillness comes o'er earth and heaven,
Oh! think ye then on me:
And oh! when evening spreads her wings,
Like peace along the sky,
Ye'll gather round my heart, my friends,
In the dream of days gone by.
Emma could not restrain her feelings; and, as the last sounds of the song died away, she burst into tears. Miss Danby had herself been much touched by the harmony which seemed well suited to the stillness of the scene. But she was rather at a loss to know why it should have affected her companion so powerfully.
"And is it possible," exclaimed Emma; "and do I hear those sounds again, and linked with those words? Oh! Anna, Anna, if I could but think that they were, indeed, breathed by you, what happiness. But no; it is only a dream; an idle fancy; and I am nothing now to you. That sweet illusion could not last."
She had scarcely spoken, when she found herself wrapt in the warm embrace of her whom she had thus been apostrophizing. Anna Lindsay was, indeed, the minstrel, and no
[Page 101]
other. So sudden and unexpected was the meeting, that each could scarcely believe, that the other was, indeed, the very person that she appeared: however, the warmth of youthful affection soon assured them. Anna insisted on Miss Danby coming into the cottage; and she was too much delighted to behold the satisfaction of Emma at this meeting, to allow herself to be any impediment to her full enjoyment of it.
Mrs. Lindsay received her unexpected guests with particular politeness and civility. She seemed really much pleased to meet Emma. "This is, indeed, a gratification, Miss M'Donald," she said, " to meet with so old and esteemed a friend in this distant country. We have been here only for a few weeks. My son's health was so declining, that he was advised to try a warmer climate; and Anna and I decided on accompanying him."
The cheek of Emma assumed a still paler hue, at this mention of Young Lindsay. Anna had gone in search of him, and they now entered the room. The glow of pleasure which animated his countenance at the moment, prevented her perceiving any material change in it; but when that had subsided, she was surprized to see how altered and how very pale it appeared.
Some very happy weeks were spent in the interchange of frequent and friendly visits, between the two families. But the time had now arrived, in which the former had determined on leaving Florence; and it was with sincere regret, that each party looked forward to the separation.
Some days before that on which they had fixed for their departure, they had agreed to make an excursion together, to the neighbourhood of a beautiful waterfall, which lay some miles distant. The day was bright and beautiful; but the heat was almost insupportable, even under the thick shade of
[Page 102]
the sylvan scene, to which the party had repaired. When the coolness of evening came on, they lingered, still roving about, perhaps, longer than prudence would have warranted. But then there was an enchantment upon every thing, which, perhaps, to some of the party, partook of the tenderness which had birth in their own hearts. There was no doubt but that Charles Lindsay and Emma were still lovers. They had parted and met as such, although not acknowledged; and now they were about to part again, with sentiments of attachment, perhaps, more deep than ever, though still unspoken. But even though love's "best interpreter be a sigh," it is still one of sweetness, if it arises from the pure affection of a young and amiable heart, towards a kindred bosom. Indeed, love has no existence but with kindred hearts. With them, the spark has been kindled from heaven, and, therefore, will endure, even though its roses should be exchanged for the cypress 2 wreath.
It was late when the party thought of returning on their way home. Anna complained of a severe pain in her head and chest, which increased to so great a degree, that when they reached the cottage, she was unable to walk, and had to be carried to her chamber by her brother. Emma and Miss Danby remained with her for some time; but when they rose to return home, she entreated, with so much earnestness, that Emma should remain, that she could not think of leaving her. She sat up with her through most of the night, during which time she became, by fits, delirious. Medical advice was procured, which at once pronounced her in a dangerous fever. However, nothing would frighten Emma from being her nurse and attendant. As Mr. Danby could not lengthen his stay at
[Page 103]
Florence beyond another week, it was agreed, that if Miss Lindsay did not show evident symptoms of recovery, before the expiration of that period, that Emma should remain at the cottage, until some favourable opportunity would offer for her return to England.
Anna showed no signs of amendment; but, on the contrary, each day became more alarmingly ill, until it was feared her disorder would prove fatal. The affliction of her family was indescribable: poor Emma's was no less deep. But she watched by her day and night, and, by this means, greatly lightened the burthen which would otherwise have fallen exclusively on Mrs. Lindsay. To her, indeed, it must have been an unspeakable comfort, to have found such a friend. At such a time of need, it would have been strange, indeed, if such conduct as that of Emma should not have won upon her heart. And it did do so: for though so proud on one point, she was a woman of very warm and lively feelings, and any kindness she might receive, was always taken by her as a boon, and not as a debt, for which she had nothing to return.
During the remainder of Mr. Danby's stay, he was unremitting in his attentions at the cottage. There was a charm of mate goodness in all his words and actions, which never failed to produce a happy effect. By his conversations with her at that critical period, when the mother's heart was trembling for her beloved child, she was much affected, and was led, in a great degree, to perceive the nothingness of worldly distinctions, and to place a value on those which the world despises. In the society of Emma she found real consolation. She felt for her, and sympathized with her; and, at the same time, gently taught her, that there was a heavenly bosom yet more sympathizing and tender, on which she was invited to repose all her griefs.
[Page 104]
It was long before Anna showed any symptom of recovery; and then so slowly and doubtfully, that it required the sanguine heart of love to discover it to be really such. But Providence had blessed the means which were used, and she was, in time, restored to her fond and longing friends. When she was so far recovered as to be able to sit up, she had the pleasure of having them to tea in her own apartment. This was, perhaps, the happiest evening that the little circle had spent, since the celebration of Charles's birth-day, at Oakley. The windows of the room were partly open, and the delicious breathings of the myrtle flowers came in on the quiet and sun-lit air; and all their hearts were united in the harmony of thankfulness and love; and it seemed to them, as if the universal robe of nature was one of delight and repose.
Emma had now completely entwined herself round the hearts of all at the cottage; and the idea of parting with her seemed to them quite insupportable. The health of young Lindsay had greatly improved; and it was not hard for his mother to guess, that there were other causes for so rapid and happy a change, than the mere salubrity of the air. With her consent, and to the unbounded delight of Anna, he asked and obtained the hand of Emma M'Donald—the heart was his long before.
Emma's next visit to the banks of the Clyde was the happiest of all. It was in the autumn: the lands were smiling in the luxuriance of plenty. In the pride and gratitude of his heart, her father showed her all his fine fields of grain, and the different improvements that he had made. Her eldest brother, Stewart M'Donald, had returned from sea. By his gallant behaviour, in more than one bloody engagement, he had got himself promoted to the rank of Lieutenant. This young man had all the lively and engaging manners of his sister, and invariably
[Page 105]
succeeded in gaining the esteem of all who knew him. He had a handsome and manly countenance; but was rather taller than suited a sailor. Every tiling conspired to give delight to the scene; and the young musician deserved the happiness which she felt. Anna Lindsay had accompanied her; and in a few days, Charles was to follow them; and there, in the presence of all who were most dear to her, she was to be united to him whom she had so long and so justly loved.
The happy day arrived, and, with her parents, her brothers, and her beloved friend by her side, the lovely bride breathed her geutle vows, acknowledged and sealed by her heart, and registered in heaven. After they had all breakfasted at the the cottage, the wedded pair, accompanied by young Lieutenant and little Alfred M'Donald, and Miss Lindsay, set off on a tour round the most beautiful parts of Scotland; and happy was Emma Lindsay, as she pointed out the beauties of the enchanting scenery to the admiring view of her delighted husband; and told him, in the innocent gladness of her young heart—it is my own country. Charles determined on fixing his permanent residence at Oakley-vale, as he knew that would be most pleasing to Emma. Thither they were accompanied by young Stewart M'Donald and Alfred; and there they were promised soon to have a visit from Mr. and Mrs. M'Donald.
To superficial observers the life of Charles and his young bride would have appeared monotonous; but those who have tasted the most real happiness, have tasted it in homes like theirs, where the beauty was gathered from the heart, "and the smiles that there had birth," from pure and elegant minds united in the tenderest ties of love and friendship. Surely there is no weariness by such hearth; the voice of gladness and song; the smiles of delight are in its bright circle. No; go to
[Page l06]
the brilliant assemblies that drive over the tediousness of a winter in the city, where they tell you all is mirth and splendour; where the courtly and graceful form is decked in the extreme of fashion and expense. Listen to the oft repeated and unmeaning conversations, and the thousand discordant sounds that break the stillness of the night, while the streets resound with the din of man an unseemly revel. Then turn you and come back to the social hearth: see the bright faces gathered there; the neat and simple dress; no borrowed shine of jewellery to cheat the eye with a show of splendour; but the brightness of cheerfulness and intelligence, and the gay flashes of wit, answered by the light-hearted and innocent laugh. Look on these; listen to these; and compare them, and then say, in which lies the weariness, or monotony.
Lady de Bantum now residing in London, had thought proper to invite Anna to spend some time with her there. Anna considered it right to accept the invitation, though, at the same time, she did so with much regret. Oakley seemed now to her more than ever a paradise; the very abode of happiness: and Emma, like the Angel of Peace, shedding the spirit of her gentleness on all around. There was nothing of this in the domestic circle of her titled sister. She rolled along in much outward splendour; and, perhaps, received the homage of empty hearts; and this gratified her pride, such as it was. But the nobler feelings of a woman's heart, when she looks on him whom she calls her own, to whom she has linked herself to be his, through good and ill; the generous sensations that awaken in her heart, when she sees him a being respected, not merely for his rank or his wealth, but for his own intrinsic worth; when she can look up to him as her guide, her supporter, and her honour. Such hallowed feeling as then has birth in her
[Page 107]
spirit, could not brighten the cheek of Georgiana, when she looked on her husband. In the domestic circle, l.e sunk into a cypher; in mixed society, he was the object of secret ridicule. A constant round of trifling amusements was all that Georgiana could afford her sister. Is it to be wondered at, that she found herself relieved and happy, when she again returned to Oakley?
"I shall not be in a hurry to leave you again, Emma," said she, as she drew her chair towards the fire, beside her. "I have lost all taste for a city life; and this seems to me the happiest place in the world."
"I will tell you the reason," said Alfred M'Donald, who stood looking out of the window, at his brother Stewart, who, with Lindsay, was employed in pruning some trees; "It is because Stewart and Emma are here. I remember when they used to come to us, no matter how dull we were before, we always grew merry and happy, and every thing looked beautiful."
"You are right, my little Alfred, so far as you go," said Anna; a slight blush brightened her complexion. "But do you give Charles and my mother no credit for any share of this enlivening influence?"
More than a year of uninterrupted happiness had rolled over at Oakley. It was in the month of December. The rain was beating without. Emma, in the joy of a young mother, was playing with her little cherub babe. Anna and her brother Stewart were amusing themselves at the piano-forte, while Charles was romping with Alfred. Amid this varied scene of amusement, the post-bag was brought in. Among its contents, was a letter for Lindsay, dated from Madrid. It ran as follows:
"I write to you, my dear Lindsay, on a bed of sickness, from which I am told not to hope for recovery. Indeed,
[Page 108]
I feel that such hope would be vain; and am now endeavoring to unbind myself from every earthly tie, which may, perhaps, be found the more easy, as the things round which I would fain have riveted the links most closely, have, one by one, slipt from me, or make but unwilling stay. The only love I ever possessed, is long since gone down to the grave. The friendships after which I panted, were not mine to share—I have trod the earth alone. A being whose fate, but not his nature, has shut him out from the loveliness of her social circles; and, now in a land of strangers, old and friendless, I lay down my grey hairs on a pillow from whence they shall not be removed, till death has laid his grasp on the hand that now writes to you. There are many longings in my heart; the task of unbinding it, even from the few remaining things to which it had clung, is not so easy as it should be. The feelings of human nature force themselves on me, when I think, that perhaps in a few short days I shall be thrown into a nameless grave by the rude hands of menials and strangers. Farewell! my dear Charles, for ever! I can write no more—my eyes grow dark. Farewell! until we meet in a better world!
"Your friend,
"FREDERICK HOWARD."
"This melancholy letter is from a very old and respected friend, Emma," said Charles, as he reached it for her perusal.
She read it; and then turning to him, said, in a calm and decided tone of deep feeling—"There may yet be time, and every feeling of humanity should urge, should impel you, to fly and endeavour to soothe the last hours of your friend. Think not of me: I am not sick, nor in a strange land. Let nothing prevent your going to-morrow. Stewart will accompany you. Surely, you cannot choose but go. It is impossible
[Page 109]
for your heart to speak otherwise.
"When heaven teaches it through you, it is impossible," said Charles; " and, therefore, to-morrow's dawn shall see me on my way."
"It is right, it is right," said Emma; "and I knew it was not in you to pause to ask another question."
This should be the first, the last, the only one which should decide us. To do what is right, is always expedient, and the capability is seldom, if ever wanting.
The next morning, Lindsay, accompanied by young M'Donald, set forward on his journey, to Madrid. In their rapid course, there was nothing to excite any particular interest. The weather turned out pretty favourable, and it was not long ere they arrived at the Spanish capital.
At the hotel de Santa Isabel, from whence Howard's letter had been dated, they found him, still alive; though it was evident that death was fast approaching. He had justawaked out of a short sleep, as Charles and Stewart were shown into his apartment. He looked round at them, without knowing either; but he recognized their faces as English; and the glow of pleasure which lit up his withered and emaciated countenance, testified how dear to the human heart are the faces of our native land. How dear to the sickening exile is any thing that bears the stamp of home!
"Heaven bless you," said the old man, in a trembling voice. "May that heaven bless you, that has sent you here on an errand of mercy, to close the dying eyes of a countryman, and to see that his remains are not dishonoured."
"My dear, my honoured friend," said Lindsay, as he stooped over him.
"Surely," said Howard, as his dim eyes rested upon him "that face and voice are not unknown to me?"
[Page 110]
"No," said Charles, "I am one on whom your kindness has often been bestowed, and who now comes to seek you in your distress."
"It is Charles Lindsay,"said Howard, gazing intently at him, while he grasped his hand with a convulsive eagerness.
There is, perhaps, in this chequered world, but little of enjoyment, which we can compare to that of looking on the face of a kind friend. But there are circumstances which this delight, to a degree that render it beyond the power of language to describe. When the heart is sick and weary; when it has long sighed in vain for some tone of sympathy; when the sufferer has turned him to die, alone and desolate: then, how welcome would be heard the voice of friendship: oh! who could tell the sweetness of its balm,
"When the worn soul that wakes in fear,
From fevered visions hovering near,
Meets some loved smile, whose angel power
Had soothed and graced a gayer hour:
Still, still its magic light is there.
Though touched by pity's softest air;
And dear to love, to memory dear—
It brightens through the starting tear,
Like the glad bow, by fancy drest,
That gleams on Evening's watery vest."
It was thus that the parting hours of poor old Mr. Howard were illuminated. Lindsay and his companion were unremitting in their care of him; and he could scarcely suffer either of them to be a moment out of his sight. But the hand of death will not be stayed by the watchfulness of love or friendship He stops not to lay his withering grasp upon the dearest and the loveliest, while they are watched by eyes that cannot sleep, for very tenderness and anxiety; while they are pillowed on bosoms that would gladly shed for them their own life blood; [illeg.]
[Page 111]
comes, and, in the very arms that are flung fondly but vainly around them, freezes the springs of life. Did I say vainly? Oh! no; it is not surely a vain thing to the parting spirit, that the eyes of its loved ones should be watching over it: it is not a vain thing to the struggling soul, that there is one voice, though low and mournful, that it will yet speak of better things to come. It was no vain thing to poor Howard, as he closed his eyes in death, that his head was reclined on the bosom of a freeman and a friend.
About a fortnight after Lindsay's arrival, the good old man expired, in calm and trusting hope. It was the wish of his friends, to have his remains brought to England. But this, for many reasons, was found impracticable: and, after seeing him, with all due honour, laid in his foreign grave, they set off on their return to the British shores.
Emma had continued, by engaging herself in many elegant and useful occupations, to make the time of Lindsay's absence less tedious that it might otherwise have appeared: and now she had received a letter from him, written a few days before his embarkation, on board the Albion packet; and she was happy in the prospect of a speedy meeting. The days and hours were counted, in which she thought it possible that he might arrive. While, at times, to her anxious and ardent heart, their course seemed so slow, as to be almost insupportable.
My tale must pass on more swiftly. On the 16th of January, it blew one of the most tremendous storms that had ever been witnessed. Through the night, the hurricane increased to such a degree, that many of the old trees about Oakley were blown down. The angry blast, as it swept along, seemed to bear desolation on its wings, and to howl the funeral knell of those hapless aud unsheltered wanderers, who might be exposed
[Page 112]
to its [illeg.]. Sleep, on this night, had not visited the eyes of Emma. She did not know but that, perhaps, even then, her treasures were upon the stormy waters.
"Oh! that blast," said she to Anna, who was sitting along with her, while the little Caroline lay sleeping in its cradle: how fearfully it roars amid the old trees. There is a dark and awful terror forces itself on me; and you look so deadly pale, that I see your feelings are in sympathy with my own."
"I fear," replied Anna, " they are but too much so; and yet, how often have I listened, when, in the dark hours of midnight, the storm has swept fiercely and proudly over the earth and heaven. I have loved to hear the dash of the thundering billows, when the blackness and the spirit of the tempest was upon them. I have felt my sensations almost arising to rapture, while I gazed upon nature, in her stormy grandeur: but I did not then think with what different aspect and voice might come the tempest to the mother, the sister, or the wife, whose only stay in life was, perhaps, even then, the victim of its fury. When this is brought home to ourselves, how soon are we taught to have another feeling than that of delight at such a time."
Anna and her sister remained watching together till morning, and endeavouring to soothe the anxiety of each other. And when the sun arose, and flung his mantle of light over the dying tempest, as it sunk down, by degrees, into stillness, their terrors gave way before its bright influence, and the quiet hand of sleep closed their weary eyes.
We leave. them happy, for a while, in their unconscious slumbers. Their terrors were not groundless. That very night had seen the little vessel, in which Lindsay and M'Donald were returning, made a wreck. The force of the waves and winds
[Page 113]
had wholly swept away the rudder, and shivered the masts. They were driven before the blast, till, at last, the vessel struck on the coast of France, some miles below Rochelle. Of the crew and passengers, not more than four reached the shore alive; and to the intrepid courage and exertions of M'Donald, did these, of whom Charles Lindsay was one, owe their escape. He had succeeded in detaching a small boat from the sinking vessel, only a few minutes before she struck. In this frail bark, by his skill, he managed to stem the waves, and reach the shore, thankful for life, although left almost entirely without clothing or money, in a strange land. The only thing which Lindsay had saved from the wreck, was a small box, given him by Mr. Howard, a short time before his decease, which he had desired should remain unopened till they reached England. It was to a young French woman—one among the few that were saved—that they were now indebted for the means of pursuing their way. A diamond ring and gold chain of great value, which she had on her person, she freely devoted for the benefit of the little ship-wrecked community; and they were pawned at Rochelle, for a sum sufficient, to give each ample means of proceeding. She was a very young and interesting girl, and had been returning from a visit to some of her relations, in company with a friend, who was, unfortunately, not of the number that escaped. M'Donald and Lindsay felt that, in common humanity, they could not do less than see her safely returned to her family, who lived at Paris. Accordingly, they all journied thither together.
It was but a short time after the storm, when the news of the shipwreck reached London, and from thence it was immediately conveyed to Emma, in a letter from Lady de Bantum. [illeg.]
[Page 114]
was the first she had ever received from her; and it was no happy [illeg.]. It began thus:—
"What dreadful news! The papers state, that on the night of the last storm, the Albion was wrecked in the Bay of Biscay, and every soul on board perished!"
The unfortunate Emma could read no more; but sunk down, to [illeg.] appearance, as lifeless as if every pulse had been frozen in [illeg.] chill of death, and might never again be called into action. The letter, which dropt from her hand, soon communicated the fatal news to all around.
"They are gone, they are gone," said Anna, in an agony of mental sorrow —" And all my fairy hopes are gone with them. But, alas! there are other hearts will be yet greater sufferers than mine." She turned to afford her assistance to Emma, over whose lifeless form her poor old father was bending, in all that misery, which, since the breath of woe first passed over the earth, never yet found a tongue. It was a scene that might have awakened the fountains of pity in the coldest heart that ever disowned the throbbings of humanity. As they stood beside the sufferer, using every means to restore her to animation. she awoke, with a convulsive throb: she awoke, indeed, almost from the grasp of death; but to what? Alas! that thunderbolt of sorrow had blasted the fair light of reason. It had come as an earthquake will, burst amid the fairest scenes of sunshine and beauty, engulphing, in one awful moment, within its black and ruinous depths, all that had bloomed there beneath the sweet light of heaven. The wild and vacant stare; the dismal roll of the once brightly expressive eye; the sudden start and the unnatural laugh; all told the dreadful, the heart-rending tale, that madness had usurped the dominion of her brain.
I will not insult the feelings of those who may read this, by
[Page 115]
attempting to describe things, in themselves, indescribable. Oh, no: the real mourner wraps himself in the shroud of his sorrows, and retires from every eye. In the depths of his own dark thoughts, and amid the wreck of his blighted enjoyments, he finds himself a covering, through whose black folds the eye of the passing world dare not, cannot penetrate.
At Oakley, there was desolation and loneliness by the once gay hearth. The voice of joy was hushed within its walls. The only sound that was heard there, and that alone by the ear of God, was the low murmuring voice of prayer, that would sometimes force an utterance from the breaking heart, till, at times, a wilder voice would break upon the gloomy silence; wild, but full of exquisite sweetness, as now and then some melancholy strain would gush from the lips of the wildered minstrel. Her poor, father could almost have borne any thing but to hear this. Her voice had always the power of reaching the heart, and calling forth its sympathies with whatever tone she touched on. But now, who could calmly listen to that soul of melody and sadness, that came by fits, as if from some wandering spirit.
It was about the fourth day after the arrival of Georgiana's fatal letter, that one from Charles, dated from Paris, reached Oakley.
"It is his writing; it is from my brother," said Anna, as almost frantic, with eagerness, she grasped at the letter; and found, from its contents, that her brother and her friend were still alive, and, perhaps, even then not far from her embrace. It would not be easy to judge of her eestacy, even then, though chastened down by a black remembrance, at this sudden burst of joy, illuminating, in one bright moment, the darkness that, but a moment before, seemed to have gathered so deeply
[Page 116]
around her. She had heard poor Emma, during one of her fits, murmuring the name of Mr. Danby. She now proposed to her mother to write for him. She knew him to be very dear to the poor sufferer, and she thought that, perhaps, his presence might have a good effect. Mrs. Lindsay, accordingly, wrote to him. It was, indeed, afflicting news to the benevolent heart of Mr. Danby; but he lost not a moment's time in preparing to obey the [illeg.]. His presence was, indeed, as it always had been, a sweet cordial to the mourning spirit. On being introduced to Emma's apartment, she instantly knew him, and, flying to embrace him, exclaimed—
"Oh! you are a bright messenger! There has been some gloominess over me for this long time past. I cannot tell why, but my heart has ached and throbbed so to the very brain, that I felt glad to go to the window, and let the cold breeze blow on my forehead. Ah! dear Mr. Danby, that is a stormy blast: do you hear it now? Do you see the black clouds gathering over the sky. There, it will soon be midnight. Oh! how I dread the night."
"No, my love," said Mr. Danby, kissing her pale cheek; that cloud will soon pass away, and it will be sunshine again. And, why should you dread the night? Will not the sweet moon come out, and light up the blue heavens with its calm beauty?"
"Yes, yes," said Emma, "I knew you were a happy messenger: I knew you would chase away the darkness that has been closing me in like midnight. Yes, speak to me of calmness and beauty: it is long since I have seen it calm."
With all his persuasive gentleness and kindness, did Mr Danby endeavour to soothe the wounded bosom of his young friend; and, though at times, a wild shriek and start would
[Page 117]
tell that some frightful vision had passed across her brain, she grew gradually much calmer and more placid.
Some nights after the arrival of Mr. Danby, as the family were retiring to rest, they heard a loud knocking at the door: it instantly flashed through the mind of Anna, that it was the returning wanderers. She was not deceived, for, in a few moments, she received them in her arms. The blissfulness of this meeting was, however, in some degree, soon overclouded; and the eager inquiries after the unseen and beloved Emma, were only answered by tears; until Mr. Danby acquainted them, that she had not been well, and that it was considered necessary that she should remain in perfect quiet, and without any excitement. Charles, however reluctant, was obliged to submit to the propriety of not seeing Emma for another day, nor was it till the next morning, that Mr. Danby acquainted him with the real nature and cause of her disorder. Poor Lindsay! Day after day rolled heavily by, as he sought his accustomed walks, and met not there the light step and the glad smile of her who used to shed her spirit of enchantment around him. The lovely little Caroline was, indeed, a source of comfort to him; and it was but seldom that he allowed her to be from him.
A month had now passed away since his return, and, though Emma had given some tokens of a calmer and more collected mind, they were but transient.
It was one of those lovely evenings, which sometimes come in the early spring-time, warm and beautiful, as if sent to give a foretaste of the bright hours of summer, which are soon to follow. Mr. Danby and Anna were sitting together in the room with their patient, when she thus addressed them:—
"This stillness comes over my heart, like a dream from heaven. Oh! how much I would like now to hear music. If Anna were hear, she would sing to me."
[Page 118]
"She is here," said Mr. Danby, "and will sing to you if you wish [illeg.]."
"Is it possible?" said Emma. "They told me she was dead; they told me every one I loved was dead; but I knew that was false, the instant I saw you. And is this Anna, my own Anna," she said, approaching her, and looking in her face with great earnestness: "I always thought so, she was so kind and gentle."
Poor Anna had to turn away to conceal her emotion; and then kissing her, commenced singing a very sweet and plaintive air, which she had once been taught by her.
When she had finished, Emma turned calmly to her and said— "I feel happier now than I have done this long, long time. That song reminds me so much of Charles; and though I know I shall not see him again, I love to hear any thing that speaks of his memory."
Since her illness, Emma had not before mentioned the name of any of her family; and her speaking of them now was hailed as a very happy omen.
Before leaving her room, Mr. Dauby said to her—"Perhaps you might see Charles again."
"I know I will," she replied, hurriedly; "but it will be in a world where we shall not again be parted."
He only answered by a smile.
The poor sufferer had not enjoyed sweeter or calmer sleep since her illness, than she did that night; and, in the morning, she awoke quite refreshed and tranquil. Her recollection of Anna still remained.
"I have," she said, "been dreaming all night, so pleasantly: about my little baby and my father: tell me Anna, are they still alive—might I see them?"
[Page 119]
It was not long till she beheld these objects of her affection. She took the little Caroline in her arms, and burst into tears. They were the first she had shed since the fatal hour that bereft her of her reason; and they came to her withering brain "like dew to the parched flower"—calling up its drooping leaves into life and beauty again. She did not speak, but looking alternately on her babe and her father, who wept along with her, her tears flowed without measure.
From this time, she grew rapidly better; and was soon able to go out and enjoy with Anna, and her ever watchful attendant, Mr. Danby, the freshness of the pure air. She now, very often talked of her husband and brother; and in one of their rambles, Mr. Danby ventured to hint to her that they were still alive, and within her reach. She stopt to gaze at him, and fixed her eyes, as if she would read his very heart.
"If they are still living," she said, "be not afraid to tell me; the tempest that had racked and torn this brain, has past away, and it is now settled into a waveless calm. Oh! let the sunshine arise upon it, and let your voice be the herald that comes with the promise of returning day. If they still live, be not afraid to tell me, the thought has forced itself on me, sleeping and awake; in my dreams in every hour, I hear [illeg.] voice, that tells me they yet live."
"That voice has told you truly," said Mr. Danby, perceiving that now was the moment for communicating this intelligence.
"I knew it," said Emma, struggling to retain her calmness, "where are they?"
"You shall soon see them," said Anna, as she flung her arms about her neck, in a transport of delight.
That same evening, did Emma Lindsay embrace her husband
[Page 120]
and her brother; the tide of happiness that long had darkly ebbed, flowed [illeg.] again to Oakley, and the voice of gladness and praise ascended to the listening ear of Heaven. There the happy beings of another sphere, might have delighted to wander, and view a little paradise below,
"Where heart met heart, reciprocally soft, Each other's pillow to repose divine."
In the box which Lindsay had saved from the wreck, he found now, on opening it, for the first time, the will of Mr Howard, dividing his large fortune equally between himself and Lieutenant M'Donald. The latter, after having amply supplied his brothers with the means of embracing whatever professions were most congenial to their taste and talent, purchased a beautiful estate, nearly adjoining that of Oakley: there he brought his father and mother, with his younger brother, Alfred, to reside along with him. But, though these were, indeed, dear and cherished, there was another, whose smile could have thrown a richer brightness amid his halls: need I say it was that of Anna Lindsay?
When the rich breath of May had past along in its honied sweetness; when the leaves were green upon the boughs, and the hawthorn gave its treasures of odour to the soft gale; when the stream strayed along, as blue and limpid as if winter might never again arrest its bright career—there was a lovely sight in the halls of Oakley; there, where all around her were beloved and honoured, was the hand of Anna Lindsay united to that of the gallant young British sailor, Stewart M'Donald. Miss Danby acted as bride's maid.
This took place a year after Emma's recovery, from the effects of Lady de Bantum's cruel letter. Of her, we have nothing more to say. She was one on whom the mind delights not to
[Page 121]
dwell. With those who formed the circle at Oakley, it would always find pleasure and improvement.
Farewell! gentle minstrel! Sweet peace, and melody, and happiness, float along your memory and your spirit. Farewell!
[Page 139]
On Slavery WHO would be a slave? If the question could, at one moment, be put to every individual in this land of freedom; and if they could, at one moment, and with one mouth, reply; would not the simultaneous answer, unmingled with one dissenting voice, come from every bosom? we would not be slaves; we count our freedom our richest and dearest treasure; and let none dare to deprive us of it! Even such, may we be persuaded, would be the proud answer, rolled back from the united voice of a free and glorious people. Oh! then, prizing, as they do, the delights of freedom, let them extend the cup to all within the reach of their sway. He that would make another wear the chains of slavery, does not himself deserve to be free; nor can he feel, as he ought, the value of that blessing he enjoys. We pity the wretched and houseless beggar, that wanders, from door to door: he has no home, no covering; poverty and want are his companions, and often disease; but still he has freedom; in his own expressive language, the world is before him, though he may not possess dominion there; he is free to follow his own path. He looks on the bright, blue, sun-lit sky: it alike belongs to him, as to the proudest, to receive the warmth of its beams, and delight himself in the softness of its dews; and to know, that far beyond its shining portals, there may await him a home of boundless, endless, perfect freedom. He looks upon the broad earth: whose steps more free than his to tread over its green surface? He can screen himself beneath its stately
[Page 140]
and spreading trees, from the heat or from the storm. He looks upon the [illeg.] spread waters; they are free to him, to lave in their freshness, his worn and wearied limbs. Yes, though he is poor and forlorn, nature is his, and her freedom comes not back to his heart, to reproach him with the name of slave: he still possesses that bright flower, that gives to "fleeting life its [illeg.] and perfume." But the wretched negro slave; what has he to [illeg.] the bitter draught of life go down? Nothing but a [illeg.], turn him as he will; he has nothing but a chain, and is nothing but a slave. What is it to him, though the glorious life-giving sun shines down? It but scorches him, as he toils beneath its fiery heat. What is it to him, that the heavens are so bright and blue above him; how seldom has he any interest there, but to curse those beams that fall so fiercely upon his broiling forehead? What is it to him, that the rich earth teems with luxuriance beneath his feet? No portion of it belongs to him; he has no leisure to rest beneath its verdant foliage, and taste the tenderness of a dewy hour: the refreshing waters flow not for him. To what purpose is it, that he can feel the affection of a human being? If he does, they only add fresh pangs to his misery. What matter, though the winds of heaven sweep round him in their joyous freedom? He is a slave; a slave to his fellow men; a slave to the spiritual tyrants of darkness; a slave, of necessity, to vice, to ignorance and death. Yes; the negro slave lies down grovelling in the earth, often lower than the very reptiles that crawl over its surface. There is no human being has any right to lay on another such chains as these. Some may say, that their fetters of ignorance and vice spring from other causes and circumstances, and are not imputable to those who are called their oppressors. But, even granting this to be the case, (though it is much to be
[Page 141]
questioned,) are we not bound, by every tie of human fellowship, not only not to forge for them such chains; but when, unhappily, they are bowed beneath their yoke, to use every means in our power to strike them off? In ancient times, wise men made it a law, that he who stood by, and saw his fellowcitizen's life in danger, or threatened, without affording him assistance, to the utmost of his power, should be considered as guilty of the same crime, as he who would take away his life: and do we not count life as nothing, without freedom. Let the negro slave-master answer to his own conscience, and to God, if his system is calculated to loose, or to strengthen the bonds of wickedness. To this there can be but one reply—it rivits them. For even, if the wretched victim could have the spirit to think of shaking them off, it puts it almost entirely beyond his power, except in some very rare instances, to effect it. Oh! then, King, whose glory it is to rule over a free and noble people, let not the brightness of your sceptre be sullied by the breath of a single slave, as he groaneth out his existence beneath the rod of the oppressor; let this happy line be traced in your history; it will long brighten over your memory. "He loosed the bonds of slavery, and bade the glad song of freedom be poured through the most distant corners of his dominions." Queen! who art exalted over a nation, whose daughters are proverbial, throughout the world, for their delicacy, tenderness, and refinement, lend your influence to lift so many of your sex from the degradation into which they are plunged. Warriors! who have fought, and would have shed your dearest blood in the cause of freedom, turn, with indignation, from those who would rob, even the meanest of their fellow-creatures, of so dear a prize. Let every one who has a soul, raise their voice against slavery! Surely, it is the part of Christians to undo the heavy
[Page 142]
burthens, and let the oppressed go free; and to loose the bands of [illeg.]. When the last trumpet shall gather all nations, and [illeg.], and people before the tribunal of heaven, then shall the slave, as well as his proud master, stand in that great assembly; and he who came to preach deliverance to the captive, and set at liberty those who were bruised, shall be the judge between them: and if the ignorant slave suffer condemnation what will be the awful sentence pronounced on those, who knew his soul to be destitute and hungry, and filled with the most loathsome disease of sin, and not only offered him no garment, no food of life, no healing draught, but left him, and fettered him in his darkness and misery? Alas! I know not; but let us beware; from those to whom much is given, will much be required. In this point, our nation stands the foremost. Let us, therefore, hasten to remove from her every stain, that she may spread forth her beautiful wings as a dove, and ever bear along with her to all, heaven's messages of freedom and of peace.
"Behold the eye o'the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that put their trust in his name."
PSALM 33, VERSE 19.
OH! God, how blissful 'tis to think,
Where'er our pathway lie,
It cannot be one moment hid
From thine all-seeing eye:
'Tis this that makes those spirits glad,
That only trust in thee;
How should they feel a doubt or fear,
If thou their guardian be?
[Page 143]
What tho' the night clouds round us lour,
And the vain world looks cold;
Tho' faithless ones their vows forget,
Thou wilt thy promise hold:
The hopes that deck, like gems of light, the brow of other years
Should they be vanished, one by one, or darkly turned to tears.
The splendour of life's summer hours, should all their glow be o'er;
The beautiful that we have loved, should they be ours no more,
Oh! there is yet that thought of bliss, the world can never chill,
That thou, the God of Peace and Love, dost watch our pathway still.
If love and friendship fling their spell around our happy way,
And the bright flowers they call to life, breathe round where'er we stray;
If sunshine, like a mantle, clothe our home in bliss and light,
And every floating gale be filled with fragrance and delight;
Should music mingle with our dreams, its softest, holiest tone,
Giving life's gliding waves a voice of magic like its own;
Should hope in brightness float along upon her rosiest wing,
To leave her charmed and honied drop in youth's untroubled spring;
Oh! it is not that thought that gives to all their deepest charm;
A glow of something more than earth, calm, bright, enduring, warm,
That whispers in the sunny breeze, and blends with music's voice:
Tis God whose spirit breathes thro' all, and calls thee to rejoice.
The Hours After the Funeral WHAT dreariness and blankness do we often find in those hours that follow even a temporary parting from those we love. The farewell look and greeting is given—the door is closed— the carriage drives off; and it may be long, perhaps, ere the same face shall smile upon us again. It is but a few moments since he stood beside us, and now he is gone. There is a vacancy and listlessness, and we feel that that which gave the
[Page 147]
zest to our pleasures, is removed from us. But most far, most of all, are those hours dreary and desolate, that follow that in which we have consigned to their last low dwelling, the being who was, perhaps, the most dear to us on earth. It is not while attending the sick bed of a beloved husband or son, that the wife or mother experiences that waste of weariness, that lone and dreary feeling, whose whisperings fall so heavily upon her ear, telling her that the once fair world is now a blank to her. Oh! no; the wife sits by his painful bed to whom in her hours of youthful happiness she had given her devoted heart, her plighted vows, to be his alike in sickness as in health. It is true, there is many an aching throb, as she watches, hour by hour, while the night rolls darkly by; it is true, there is many a bitter pang as she looks on his manly cheek and brow, blenching beneath the cold touches of disease, and sees that eye, whose looks of affection were her fairest sunshine, rolling dim and sleeplessly. But still here is no blank; the heart is full to overflowing; that beloved being, who is, as it were, her world, is still with her. She looks upon him; she hears his whisperings of tenderness and gratitude; she can press her lips to his fevered brow; she can clasp his hand in her's; and when, at length, she wins, by every art of anxious gentleness, short sleep to visit his weary eyelids, she can hear his breathings; and all this is happiness, which she would not resign for any other that could be offered, in which he was not to be a sharer.
She can pray for him; she can pour out her spirit and wrestle with her God, in deep, deep, soul-breathing prayer; and she can hope, and will hope, even in the very face of despair, that yet again she shall see that cheek glowing with the hues of returning health, and that eye bright as it was before.
[Page 148]
Her hopes are blasted—the dear, dear eye is closed at last in death—the [illeg.] and lips grow fixed in ashy paleness—the spirit has gone forth, and its last low breathings were of peace and love to her and to its God.
She looks upon the cold, cold clay. She knows that now her sun of earthly happiness is set, not to arise any more with its gladdening beams over her. But still the blank is not yet; the mortal part yet [illeg.] before her; she can yet clasp his hand in her's, though [illeg.] return not the grasp; she can yet fling herself upon that bosom, though it beats not to her's again. She can do all this; and there is a sort of wild and melancholy happiness in it, which only those who have experienced, can estimate. We see the bright sun sink down deeply in the cold dark ocean; but, till the last faint hues of his farewell light have vanished from our view, we do not feel that it is, indeed, night. The morning comes, and all death's solemn show is in readiness; the stiffened limbs are enclosed in their last case of mortality; the sable pall, and the dark tall plumes are waving in the morning breeze: slowly and sadly the procession moves on, and now the green boughs that overhang the way, have screened the last lingerer's step from the mourner's eyes.
It is over—that dark and dread excitement has passed by: the conflict of sorrow and hope has died into dismal certainty, and now comes the wretchedness. The house is wrapped in unnatural stillness and gloom; sorrow that has no tongue is the worst of sorrow. The poor heart-broken mourner sits apart: she converses with none; she looks on none; she would hardly know them, even though they stood before her. The room in which she now sits, had often been hallowed by his presence; its lonely dimness tells her he is gone—she leaves it, and wanders through every apartment of the desolate mansion; its blighted
[Page 149]
aspect tells her the same tale. There stands the harp, to whose tones of melody their voices were so often blended; silent and tuneless it stands, its screws reversed; like the heart of the mourner, it could now give back no touches of music, or joy, to the hand that would seek to awaken it. The poetic and historic page, which but lately had been so delightful a source of improvement and pleasure, and had made even the swift wings of the joyous hours pass more swiftly, now lie unopened; or, if looked upon, tell the same heart-blighting tale—he is gone! His step is heard no more in the hall; there is a vacant space by the evening hearth; the voice, whose slightest tone had touched on her heart with a thrill of gladness and delight, is heard no longer. Death, death hath laid his grasp on all: all that she looks on, speaks of death: the flowers and the green grass, that wave so brightly to other eyes, but say to her, he lies low, where we shall soon spring above him. And now farewell! farewell to ye mourners; yours is the blank which it is, indeed, the lot of mortal hearts to feel, but which mortal pen, or pencil, never yet could paint.
Days and years may roll on; and other flowers may spring brightly around you; and there may be light steps in your halls, and glad smiles around your hearths; and some faint breathings of pleasure may pass over the calm deep tide of your sorrow and waft away much of its present gloom: the long sweep of time may bring you this, the tenderness of kindly hearts; but more than all, the watchful care of Him, who never afflicts, but in mercy. But the memory, the memory of the loved one, when will it be rooted out? Never. And they who would rob you of it, would seek to tear the sweetest blossom, whose lonely hues bloom over the wreck of days gone by, and whose perfume breathes farthest and loveliest over the desert of blighted enjoyments.
The Distinction which may be Drawn Between the Words Loneliness and Alone - as Applied to Persons How different are the ideas which the mind will attach to the word loneliness, and one which is, notwithstanding, often used to convey a similar meaning, "alone." The word loneliness appears to bear, in its meaning, a kind of desolateness, which is not linked with the other. We feel as if that being, to whom the term might be applied, was one shut out from all the soft influences of social life. We know that there is a loneliness, which may be felt in the gayest and most crowded scenes of the busy world; a cold and dreary voice, which comes whispering to us—"There are none here that care for you; none for you to love. You are in the world, the wide, wide world; but you are by yourself. Your sympathies may slumber; there are none that ask them from you; none that would return them. You tread amid earth's myriads companionless, unallied." This is, indeed, loneliness; and, oh! how the heart, the social heart, turns from it, and sickens. But to be alone, has another meaning. It is, perhaps, when we are so, that we enjoy the moments of most exquisite pleasure. If our life is a happy one, it is then that we can call into review, and place before us, in the magic glass of memory, all that had made it so. The bright and the beautiful; the delights which had been
[Page 172]
scattered at distances along our way, are there gathered into one knot of happiness: the looks, the voices, the smiles of those we love, come around us in all their vivid beauty; and we feel, that to be alone, is to dwell in a paradise of gathered sweets. We collect all our better thoughts from the rich stores where they had lain hushed and slumbering, during the common intercourse of the day, and send them forth on the wings of contemplation not vainly to float over the billows of a dark and turbulent world; but, from their high and heavenward flight, to return again to the ark of their repose, bearing back new treasures. Though it is true, that "sorrow, like a stream, grows less by being divided into many channels;" and that, when we are alone, we are apt to brood over that which grieves us: still, if we are alone with God; if we seek, in the silence and solitude of our chambers, to commune with Him, we will find that the outlines of our sorrow become less harsh, when they are not brought into contrast with the light, but brilliant hues, which deck the scene, where the many and the gay are gathered, whose thoughts are not in unison with our own. The heavenly communion which we can there enjoy with Him, who is present every where, flings over the clouds of our sorrow, not a mere outward shine, such as may be caught for a passing moment in the festal hall, but which only serve to render the gloom within, of a deeper and darker hue. But that soft illumination, which pours down calm, but warm, dissolving, by its gentle influence, the gloomy vapours that had gathered around us, not merely gilding the edge of the cloud, and leaving the rest as dark and as cheerless as ever; but softly and silently illuminating and pervading the whole, until it floats along the horizon of our memory; a shadow, indeed, but a soft and tender one; one that has been smiled into beauty by
[Page 173]
the light of heavenly love. Even thus may we be alone, alone to the eye of others; but, dwelling in that rich and rare enchantment of the soul, where the treasured sweets that had been stored up from the past, are mingling their fragrance with the breathings of hope's rosy flowers; the harmonious bendings of the lights and shadows, all combining, in sweet society, to give interest to the present hour. Oh, no; this is not loneliness; this is not that desolation and abstraction of the spirit from all that surrounds it, which gives us the idea of a withered leaf, the child of a former spring, hanging, in its blighted loneliness, on the forest bough, amid the luxuriant and glossy foliage of the present summer, lingering on, long after the blast of winter had swept away the leaves that had come out with itself, and decked with verdure, in other days, the same branch, on which, of all it now remains, a solitary thing, withered and dried up; the dew and the sunshine alike descending in vain for it, the lonely among thousands; around it is the luxuriance of another spring, in which it has not, never can have, a part.
This, perhaps, may be too fanciful a distinction between the words loneliness and alone: but so have I dreamed it.
The Grecian and Her Daughter DURING the late struggles, in which the faintly reviving spirit of Greece broke through, in some degree, the chains which the hand of despotism had riveted upon her, very many of our brave brothers early went forth to enroll themselves under the banners of her patriotism, and to lend the aid of British courage to ensure the triumph of liberty. Near the town of Missolonghi, a regiment was quartered, whose officers were almost wholly Englishmen. There had lately been several desperate engagements, in which they had gloriously signalized their valour; and now, a very large body of the enemy was approaching, and, on the next day, it was expected that a bloody engagement would be commenced.
Farewell, said Captain Alton; may the God of hosts protect you, as he strained, in a close embrace, his beautiful wife, and still more beautiful daughter; and rushed from the apartment, to drown, in the fierce excitement of war, the softer emotions that came thronging over his mind.
Captain Alton was the youngest son of a noble English family, of great wealth and power; but, having married a Grecian girl, whose only dower was extreme beauty, and the few
[Page 176]
Gems which formed her bridal ornaments, he was left, by his proud relatives, to make his way, as he best could, to fortune and to fame. For the former, there was very little prospect that he ever should reach to it, as his liberality almost amounted to thoughtless extravagance. But if fame were to be acquired by valour, thare beat not in the ranks of war, a braver heart than that of Alton. Iu the society and fond caresses of his wife and daughter he found sufficient happiness; and a sigh for fortune's favours never intruded, unless it were when he would have wished, as now, to secure the future comforts of those most dear to him against the chances of war.
In the form and face of the youthful Hesperia, was blended all that exquisite beauty peculiar to her mother's land, with all the graces which a good education can alone bestow. To look on her, you would think there was nothing wanting to her finished loveliness; to know her, you would say that the amiability and goodness of her disposition could not easily be excelled.
Of the regiment to which Alton belonged, Colonel Wallace was the commander. He was a most gallant officer—one of Scotland's bravest sons, and a descendant of the hero whose name he bore. All under his command, even the very lowest, he considered in the light of immortal beings committed to his charge, and ruled them as much by a parental as a military authority. There was not in the regiment a finer or a more soldier-like looking person; and in action his conduct did not belie his appearance. There he was ever seen to display the coolest and most enduring courage.
Mingled with the anxiety of filial fondness in the bosom of the young and lovely Hesperia, was another feeling, perhaps not less powerful, though to herself less definable; and when,
[Page 177]
on the fearful day of battle, her warm aspirations went up to heaven for the safety of her father, there mingled with them a prayer for that of Colonel Wallace, not less ardently breathed. For him, she had long nourished, in secret, a romantic love, which, by degrees, had into something of that which she might have felt for a superior being. She had read, again and again, the matchless deeds of his great ancestor, and her warm imagination had enrobed his descendant in all the glory of departed greatness. There is a love that is raised so far above earthly passion, that in its own purity it lives and is nourished, 3 like that plant which, if attached to some lofty tower, would ask nothing but the airs of heaven to breathe around it, and it would shoot out all its young fibres and leaves into freshness and beauty. Such was the love of Hesperia Alton for Colonel Wallace. It was, indeed, a devoted love, and bestowed on none but him. But it had no food, save that of dwelling upon the thoughts of him, and the happiness of beholding him. He had seen her grow up from the merest childhood; and, until very lately, had not thought of looking on her in any other light. But she was now fast blushing into woman; and the graces of her person, as well as mind, were beginning to pass from their early spring time, into the deeper glow of approaching summer.
I am not conversant with battle scenes; nor could I describe them here, even if I were. It is enough for me to say, that on the present occasion, victory was on the side of freedom. The field was won from the oppressors, and the trumpet note resounded far and wide, bearing the glorious tidings. The city was becoming thronged with the returning victors; but hour after hour passed on, and only a few stragglers from the regiment
[Page 178]
ment of Colonel Wallace had appeared among them. By these, it was reported that he was still in pursuit of the enemy. These were agonizing hours to the heart of Hesperia and her mother. Would Alton, would the brave Wallace yet return; or were they "left behind on glory's bed?" and must they linger out a night that would be like a long drawn age, before they could know the certainty? It was not so. In a short time they were informed by one who had fought beside him, that Captain Alton [illeg.] fallen on the field of victory, covered with honour and glory.
Alas! it is but cold consolation to hearts that throb in the first paroxysm of anguish, over the newly made wreck of their delights and love; it is but cold consolation to them, that honour has woven the shroud;
"The finger of glory may point where they lie,"
But her most glowing beams cannot rekindle one pulse of all that death has stilled around her crimson shrine. It would be vain to tell the misery which now engulphed, with its black billows, the bosom of the wretched Mrs. Alton. He was taken from her by one relentless stroke, in whom she concentred the love of her burning heart. He had been her worshipped one; but, alas! like all other idols, what was he now but clay—nothing but cold, cold mouldering clay. The grief of Hesperia, though deep and bitter, was less maddening than that of her unhappy mother; but, at that moment, she knew herself incapable of offering any consolation, and felt that each could best obtain it in silence and in tears; therefore, hastily withdrawing to her own chamber, she gave full vent to the anguish of her mind. She knew well, that for their future support, they had now but little to look to but the cold hand of charity, and, at best, this is but an unfriendly world, in which the destitute are too often
[Page 179]
regarded as mere cumberers of the soil; but she also felt convinced that there was one Almighty eye that would not fail to regard, with compassion, the cause of the fatherless and the widow. Her tender and affectionate heart could not bear to dwell on the thought, that the best and kindest of parents now lay exposed in his bloody shroud, to the vile carrion birds, and, worse than all, perhaps to those human vultures, which, more remorseless still, too often roam amid those scenes of death. As this thought continued to force itself on her mind, it almost distracted her, till, at length, unable to bear the intensity of such horrid imaginings, she started up from the couch on which she had flung herself, with the wild but fixed resolution of seeking him out, ere another hour should pass by. To aid her in the execution of this scheme, she applied to Sergeant Stanley. He had been an old and faithful follower of her father's, and had stood near him when he fell. When she communicated her design to the old soldier, he endeavoured, all in his power, to dissuade her from so dangerous an undertaking; but in vain: her resolution was fixed, and her feelings elevated to such a strong pitch of excitement, that she faucied the course she was about to pursue, as one imperatively imposed upon her by the voice of duty. She, therefore, wrapped her mantle closely around her, and, shading her now pale, but still exquisitely beautiful countenance with her veil, she pursued her way, in company with Stanley, to the scene of the late action, which lay distant little more than two miles.
"Do, Miss Alton," said the soldier, still endeavouring to persuade her; "let me entreat you to return; this is no suiting business, no scene for you. I myself will undertake the search, and doubt not but I shall succeed."
"I cannot, I cannot return,"she said: "it is impossible: a
[Page 180]
spell is upon [illeg.] that urges me forward. I feel as if the spirit of my lost father was impelling me. Oh! Stanley, who more fit than his own child to see that his cold remains be not dishonoured?"
It was well for Hesperia that night had come down, ere they reached me bloody plain, and that the faint moonlight, which now rose in the east, but dimly discovered the fearful scene. It was indeed, too dreadful for woman's eye to rest upon; yet
"War thou hast thy fierce delight,
Thy gleams of joy intensely bright."
And even the heart of the softer sex can understand what is the noble spirit that animates
"The mass of living valour rolling on the foe,
And burning with high hope,"
In freedom's cause. But the hour soon comes, when the gleams intensely bright, grow, in proportion, as deeply dark; when we look at eve upon the foughten field; "Battle's magnificently stern array" has past over it; the mighty waves have retreated; and the cold wrecks that they have made in their fearful play, alone remain behind.
Hesperia and her companion stopped for a moment; a cold shuddering seized upon her, as she found herself now obliged to make her way over the mangled corpses that lay thickly around. It was fearful footing for one so young and tender, and she had almost determined on relinquishing her pursuit. A dead silence reigned over the field, except when the hoarse croaking of some bird of prey struck upon the sickening ear, telling that it gloated over its human feast. The waning moon now cast a gleaming light through the fleecy clouds by which it was surrounded. They looked along the field: there was something like a human figure, which moved rapidly along, enveloped in
[Page 181]
a black mantle: in one hand seemed to be a naked poinard— in the other a dark lanthorn. It was not long until it approached a part of the field where death seemed to be most triumphant; and, quickly taking from under his cloak, a large wallet, this human vulture commenced stripping the dead, of every thing which he could find on their persons, of any value. This demon was attended by another, much less in stature, and who seemed to tread with more feeble and irresolute steps, than his dark companion.
"We will make a good night's work of it," said the latter, as he hurried on from heap to heap. "I have already bagged ten good watches, and many other valuables. But, ha! what have we got here?" he added, as they stood by a little stream, that murmured on, in unconscious beauty, through the scene of horror. "A sister of our trade, I'll engage. Come, woman, you seem to have found a great treasure; but you won't get leave to keep it all; you must go shares. What! you will not? Then we must see how we can make you."
Hesperia and Stanley still concealing themselves, had instinctively drawn nearer; and there they now beheld a female form bending over that of a dead soldier, whom she seemed to be supporting in her arms. She stood up, as the ruffians came near to rifle the body; and, placing herself between it and them, said, in a voice rendered majestic by despair—"Approach not another step, I command, I charge, by all that is sacred in heaven or in earth."
They paused for a moment, as if awe-struck, by the unexpected vision of beauty and dignity which stood before them. But it was only for a moment; and, in the instant that Hesperia, by the dim and distant light, had recognized in the stranger guardian of the fallen warrior, the lovely features of her own
[Page 182]
mother she beheld the ruthless monsters snatch her up, and hurry her away into the recesses of a thick grove, which grew on the opposite side of the stream. Stanley rushed forward; and the frantic Hesperia remained not behind. But in his anxiety to overtake the spoilers, the old soldier missed his footing, and fell amid some heaps of broken armour, which lay scattered around. Ere he could recover himself, the objects of his pursuit were entirely lost from their view, in the distance and the gloom into which they had plunged. They were, however, pursued by a fleeter foot. The favourite dog of Alton had followed his mourning mistress, her only guardian and companion, as she took her desolate and bewildered way scarce knowing how or where she went, until she found herself, on that now dim and silent field, from whence, in the morning, she had heard the sounds of victory so proudly borne. With him, she had wandered on from one mangled heap to another, until, by the brink of the little stream already mentioned, the quick instinct and sharpened senses of the faithful animal had discovered where lay the beloved one. After a few lightening bounds, he overtook the fugitives, who were bearing along the almost lifeless form of Mrs. Alton. He seized, with such fury, on one of them; as to make him let go his hold of the prey. His companion, however, proceeded on with redoubled pace, probably aware that he was pursued. While the faithful Banco struggled with his adversary, Stanley got up to him: the strife then, for a few moments, became desperate; but the villain was far superior to Stanley in gigantic stature, and, besides, well armed. Having disengaged himself from the fangs of the dog, he instantly drew his dagger, and stabbed the noble animal to the heart.
"Wretch," exclaimed Stanley, "thou hast taken life from a
[Page 183]
heart that had far more of the throbbings of humanity than thine own."
"Old dotard," he replied, "wert thou not still more unworthy my weapon, I would take thine also. But look here, before we part, I will show thee that mine aim is sure. Dost thou see yon figure moving like a shadow yonder and so indistinct thine old eye can hardly perceive it? Well; look now." He raised his carbine; the ball was sped in an instant; a faint shriek was heard; it had reached its mark; the brain of Stanley reeled; he staggered a few paces back from his antagonist, who now cooly turned from him to pursue his path through the wood. He knew from the direction in which he pointed, that this last victim could be no other than Hesperia. A frenzy of indignation and grief now strung his arm and gave speed to his step, as he sprung after the assassin, and, suddenly wrenching his blood-stained weapon from his side, exclaimed, "fiend of hell take thy due," and plunged it deep in his fierce and remorseless heart.
"And to his long account and last,
Without a groan, dark Oswald past."
With feeble and painful steps and dizzy head, the veteran retraced his way. It is a fearful thing, in any way, to see the human soul pass into eternity; but, oh! it is doubly awful when it parts, loaded with the full measure of its crimes, in all their black accumulation. When the transition from guilt to that final state, in which there is no repentance, is sudden and instantaneous, then, indeed, it is a most fearfully awful sight: and so felt Stanley, when he reflected upon the deed he had done, and wished that he had not been the avenger. But it was now too late; he could not recall the "spirit from its dread abode." He hastened to seek Hesperia. The ball which
[Page 184]
had been winged for her, had indeed struck her, but not on any vital part. Her left arm was much injured, and had bled profusely; but she had contrived to bind it up; while with the other, she had raised upon her lap the head of the fallen warrior which had so lately rested upon the bosom of her mother. "Oh! Stanley," she said, as he approached her, "there is yet life in this form, and it is my father's. But, alas! in finding one parent, I fear there is much danger that I have lost another. Come here; put your hand on his bosom; do you not think it heaves a little? I washed his face with the waters of the stream, and I thought I could perceive a slight motion in his eyelids when I did so."
The soldier stooped down and laid his ear to the bosom of Captain Alton; he, too, fancied he could perceive some tokens of life there, though but slight and uncertain. "Heaven knows, Miss Alton, what we shall do," he said, addressing her. "For myself, I might be able to roll my cloak round the Captain, and carry him along, but you, Miss, you would not be able to support yourself for a quarter of a mile, let alone the distance we would have to go before we reached any habitation that would afford us shelter."
Hesperia arose, declaring that she should be perfectly well able to proceed: but she had hardly gone a few steps for the purpose, as she intended, of convincing him, when her strength gave way, and she fell senseless to the ground.
This was a fearful and hopeless dilemma for poor Stanley. He looked around him in utter bewilderment and despair. There was nothing to be hoped for from his remaining there; and if he left it to seek for assistance, where it might be found, the consequences might prove even worse. In this moment of distress, a distant sound, as of trampling horses,
[Page 185]
struck upon his ear. He hastily made his way towards the road, in the direction from which the sound seemed to come, and reached it just as the foremost horsemen were passing. He halloed to them, and they stopped: it was part of the regiment of Colonel Wallace, headed by himself, and only now returning from their pursuit of the enemy, having stopped to refresh themselves and their horses at a little village a few miles distant; they brought with them a great number of prisoners. Stanley soon made known to the Colonel the subject of his distress, and was as speedily assisted. He dismounted, and hastened, with several of his soldiers, to the place pointed out by him.
"And is this my brave and noble comrade?" he said, as he stooped down, and pressed, in his friendly grasp, the clay cold hand of Alton. "Alas! this day, with all its triumph and victory, has, nevertheless, been a mournful one." The manly cheek of Wallace blenched, as he looked around him, on the countless victims which that day's deeds had sacrificed; and it grew still paler, when he looked on Hesperia, the last and loveliest, whose fate had been involved in so dark a destiny.
During Stanley's absence, she had, in some degree, recovered, and had replaced herself by the side of her father. Her head rested upon her hand, and, until he spoke, she was unconscious of the presence of Colonel Wallace. But the instant that his voice met her ear, it seemed to reanimate her. A slight tinge crossed her cheek, as she slowly raised her beautiful eyes to his, and withdrew them more hastily, as they met his look of tender compassion, which she almost felt in that moment, had half repaid her for the sufferings she endured.
Under the directions of Wallace, Captain Alton was borne along by some of the soldiers, in the gentlest manner possible,
[Page 186]
while he took Hesperia under his own more immediate care. As soon as they reached the town, he hastened to procure the best surgical aid. Alton still lay in a stupor, so nearly approaching to death, that there appeared, indeed, very little hope that he ever should revive. But his wounds were now carefully examined and [illeg.] and, while there is life there is hope, be it ever so [illeg.] There was nothing wanting, which the devotion of his daughter, or the warm friendship of Colonel Wallace could [illeg.] Although Hesperia's wound occasioned her much pain, she would not rest any where but by the couch of her father. There she might watch for every awakening pulse that reanimated his bosom.
It is now time to return to the hapless Mrs. Alton. Colonel Wallace had lost no time in making every exertion to discover what had been her fate. Having heard that a person, answering to her description, had been seen, in company with some others, on the way to the Turkish encampment, he determined on sending thither an embassy, to propose a ransom for some of the principal captives. By this means, he hoped to learn if she had really been taken there as such, and if so, to procure, if possible, her immediate enlargement. The embassy soon returned, with the tidings, that the Turkish commander was anxious that a truce might be concluded, for a few days, in order to allow time for their dead to be intered, and that he would be willing to treat with Colonel Wallace for the ransom or exchange of some of the prisoners. The truce was agreed to, and concluded without delay. As soon as it was arranged, Colonel Wallace equipped himself, and, with a few of his brave followers, fearlessly took his way to the enemies camp, which lay about two leagues distant. The object of his search had, indeed, been carried thither by the ruffian who tore her
[Page 187]
from the side of her fallen husband. Struck by her uncommon beauty, it appeared that he and his companion had deemed that no small profit would be acquired, by disposing of her to some of the Sultan's officers, who might be willing to establish themselves in his favour, by bestowing upon him a gift so beautiful and precious.
It was towards the evening of the next day, after that fatal night, whose horrors had gone well nigh to deprive her of existence, that Mrs. Alton found herself entering the precincts of the Turkish camp. Until then, she had been half unconscious of every thing around her. During the most part of the day, and the preceding night, she had lain in a soft and deep slumber, into which her captor had lulled his victim, by administering some drug, lest her beauty might have been too much impaired by the anguish of her waking thoughts. But now her scattered senses had returned to her with a vehemence that almost stunned her. She turned to look on her companion. There was nothing in his fiendish visage to reassure or support her. She looked around, but she met not one friendly face: all were strangers, and she plainly saw she was a captive, in the hands of her country's deadliest foes. Her life-blood almost froze within her; but she knew there was none there to pity, and, struggling against her fears, and wrapping herself, not in the weakness, but in the loftiness of her despair, she was brought into the presence of one of the Turkish officers, who, it was deemed, would, in all probability, become her purchaser. Her veil was drawn over her face, and partially shaded her beautiful features; a large shawl, of a light texture, hung loosely over her shoulders, displayed, rather than concealed, her noble and graceful form. She stood alone, in the presence of her foes, a figure of such magestic and dignified
[Page 188]
beauty, and yet so stilled in all her motions, that she seemed most like some statue, which the long-buried genius of past ages had all [illeg.] called into life.
"Thou art a Grecian maiden," said the officer, approaching her, after having communed, for some time, apart with her captor.
"A widow," was the reply.
"Well, widow or maiden I care not; thou art now mine."
"I am not [illeg.]," she replied firmly. "Think not that any fellowship can exist between me and thee."
"Nevertheless, I have bought thee with a price, and thou art now my slave."
"Proud Infidel!" she said, as the spirit of her forefathers rushed into her veins; "I scorn thee and thy power. No; though thy cursed race have trodden down my country, and made of her a land of slaves, of blood, and of shame; though they have trampled upon her altars, and polluted her with a false and fatal worship; though they have made of a people, that were once the most glorious upon earth, a mean, and degenerate, and ignorant crowd; though they have done all this. thou can'st not make of me any thing but what I am—a free and wretched woman."
While she spoke, the turbaned chieftain looked upon her with a haughty and inquiring glance. He was himself, one in whom a strange character was developed; I should rather say concealed; for there was that in his demeanour, that repelled observation. Stern, high, and relentless of purpose, his keen dark eyes, retired beneath his strongly marked brows, sent their penetrating glances at once into the thoughts of others, while his own remained unseen. Yet those who dared to contemplate his countenance, might perceive, that at times, it be
[Page 189]
trayed some lingering traits of a softer and better feeling, though such were but transient, and quickly gave place to an expression of bitter scornfulness. "Knowest thou," he said, addressing her, who still stood immoved before him; "knowest thou, that I am mighty in the land; and that it is in my power to make of thee a great one; a Sultan's bride, aye, and the queen of all his brides? Were not this splendour for thee, that thou never could'st have dreamt of? Would'st thou call this wretchedness; and such I could make of thee? Thou should'st be arrayed in magnificence the most costly, and be served by many a kneeling slave."
"And be myself a slave of slaves," she answered. "No; I have already told thee, that thy power could not alter my destiny: that is fixed by a mightier hand than thine. I would not be thy bride, nor yet thy monarch's, wert thou to make me queen of a thousand worlds. They that are once wedded in heart and soul, are wedded for ever, and make no second ties. Thou need'st not to force thy splendours upon me, for such I have no ambition."
"Well, then, thou shalt be mine own, proud woman. I deemed of thee, that thou wert but like thy sex; but thou dost show a spirit they but seldom share; and, therefore, art thou worthy of an honour, which none beside thee may partake."
"I thank thee," she said, while her large dark eyes flashed proudly with the keenness of her wounded feelings; "I thank thee for the honour which, nevertheless, I despise. Have I not told thee this before; and wherefore insult me yet further? Death cannot dissolve the ties that bind me to him, who now, alas! lies in his cold embrace, with his good sword red with the blood of thy hated nation."
"Thou art bold of speech, to one in whose power thou dost
[Page 190]
so completely stand Notwithstanding, once for all, I ask thee to choose between which thou wilt be—my bride or my slave; for I swear, by our blessed Prophet, that one or other thou shalt be. I am one that brooks not to be thwarted; the will of the Sultan has given way to mine; what I have said I will perform. If thou cost consent to my proposal, I will make thee greater than a queen; if not, thou knowest the alternative."
"Then I will [illeg.] while earth hold s a grave for thee or me," she replied, solemnly raising her eyes to heaven, while the glow of virtuous indignation burned through her transparent cheek. "It is true my life is in thy power; but there is one far mightier than thou, before whom thou art less than a worm; even the King of Kings; and to him I commit my cause."
A stern smile curled the lip of the Mussulman, as lie called his attendants, and ordered them to convey the captive to a place of security. She now made no resistance. It seemed as if her meeker spirit had obtained the mastery over those excited and fiery feelings which had but lately prompted her replies, and as if she had, indeed, committed her cause to "Him that judgeth the right."
When she was withdrawn from his presence, and that he was left alone, the Pacha paced slowly up and down the apartment. Some lingering feelings of humanity were yet within his bosom, though quenched too often by passion and overwhelming pride. In Mrs. Alton, he thought he had beheld the most perfect model of female beauty that had ever been presented to his eye; and the very loftiness of the manner with which she had treated him, had the effect of inspiring him with a greater degree of admiration, than he had ever believed he could have felt for any of her sex. "That woman must have a soul," he repeated seve
[Page 191]
ral times. "How proudly it. kindled through her eyes and cheek. She is not one of those tame slaves that daily meet my eye, on whose fair faces there is nothing but a changeless calm. No; in every moment, something of new and varied loveliness brightened the intelligence of ner noble brow. She is, indeed, a prize for which I would give much. But I talk foolishly. Is she not already mine? Have I not purchased her; aye, and that at a rare price, too? Yet," he shook his head, "there is a spell around her, which repells me, and through which I cannot break. Would that I could make her mine, by means that my better mind could sanction." His sohloquy was interrupted by the announcement of the Greek embassy, headed by Colonel Wallace. "Admit them," he said, resuming his usual stern deportment, which, for a moment, had been laid aside. He received them, as they entered, with a coldness and reserve, which, no doubt, was by the bitterness of the recollection, that but lately he had fled before their conquering arms.
But the manners of Colonel Wallace were well calculated to soften this feeling of asperity. He was no less than he with whom he had now to deal—an acute observer of human nature: but then, he viewed it through a happier medium, and was always willing to give credit for the sincerity of any good quality which might appear. He was, besides, a real Christian, and endued with a spirit of benevolence, which shone through every word and action of his life. He soon succeeded, in a great measure, in establishing himself in the good opinion of the Turkish General; and the terms for the exchange of many of the prisoners were speedily settled. All things had gone on smoothly, until it came to be understood, that he was also expected to part with the beautiful captive, which he had but so lately become master of.
[Page 192]
The brow of the [illeg.] contracted to a dark frown; while he sullenly declared, that he could not agree to any terms for her ransom: she was now his own private property, and did not at all stand in the same circumstances with prisoners made on the field.
Colonel Wallace at once perceived, that if there was any way left of obtainig the freedom of Mrs. Alton, it was by working on the feelings of humanity and generosity, which he could see had yet a place in the heart of his opponent; and deeming nothing could have a surer effect, than simply to relate her story, he did so, with all the eloquence of a heart most deeply interested in her cause. During the narrative, many changes were visible on the countenance of him to whom it was addressed. But when he heard the manner of her capture; the ardour of her attachment towards her husband, which had been the cause of throwing her into that perilous situation, from which she had fallen into his hands; and when Colonel Wallace concluded his heart-touching appeal, by saying, that Captain Alton, although unknown to her, yet lived, rescued from the very fangs of death by a daughter's hand, he exclaimed, while a noble burst of feeling illuminated his manly countenance— "Then he shall not live in vain; they shall not be separated by me: Colonel Wallace, you have persuaded me: I feel that I never could possess her affections, and I will not take from her the happiness which I cannot give. I restore her freely, and without ransom to her husband and to you, who have so well pleaded her cause. I will order her to be conveyed, under your escort, without further delay. I would not look upon her matchless grace again, lest it might shake my better purpose."
Colonel Wallace warmly pressed his hand, while he said—
[Page 193]
"The sacrifice of her happiness would, indeed, have been a dreadful one, which, I am persuaded, you never could hereafter have looked upon but with remorse: that of your own present gratification will never be remembered by you, but with a noble pleasure; or by her, for whose sake you have made it, without the deepest gratitude." The General silently returned his grasp; and all things being now arranged, he withdrew, to give the necessary orders for the removal of Mrs. Alton.
To a truly generous mind, there is no pleasure more exquisite, than that which arises from being the instrument of happiness to others. It has been said by heavenly lips, that "it is more blessed to give than to receive;" and surely our hearts testify to the truth of this divine saying. There is, indeed, a peculiar blessedness returning back to us, from that which we bestow upon others, which, perhaps, has less of the alloy, of earth, than is ever infused in any other cup of our enjoyments. Such was the rich reward of the generous Colonel Wallace, when he replaced the all but lost one, in the arms of her adoring husband. In that moment, all her sorrows and fears were forgotten; or, if remembered, only served to render the present hours more intensely bright.
It is not my purpose to draw out this sketch through a long detail. I will, therefore, hasten on to say, that after many months of doubt and danger, Captain Alton did, at last, recover; but so enfeebled by the sufferings which he had undergone, that he was obliged to repair to his native country, in order to recruit his exhausted strength. Of late, whatever hours Colonel Wallace could possibly spare from his duty, were spent in his society. It was with sorrow, not the less deep, because concealed, that Hesperia contemplated the idea of resigning the happiness thus afforded her. She had heard of the
[Page 194]
delights of England—its refinements and its beauty; but would these brighten to her the social circle, as it had been brightened by the presence of Colonel Wallace? It was a bitter thought. She was now to leave him, in the midst of dangers; to say farewell, in all probability, for ever!
The evening befor their departure, she had been a good deal employed in making reparations for their journey. Exhausted by this, and, perhaps much more so, by the thoughts that,in spite of herself, [illeg.] over her mind; she had seated herself at an open window, which commanded a view of some beautiful woodland scenery. She had not been in England since she was quite a child; and could she have disengaged her affections from the objects round which they had almost involuntarily been twined, her heart would have bounded at the idea of revisiting that country, with which she had learned to link the thoughts of all that was great and noble—the birth-place of her father. But it was in vain that she sought to picture to herself the pleasures that there awaited her. One object yet dearer than all it could offer, which now she must resign, still presented itself to her mind—
"She only knew she loved in vain;
She only felt farewell, farewell!"
She had become so wholly engrossed with these reflections, tha this very idol of her romantic attachment, had entered the room unperceived, and now stood by her side. She started, as she looked up. How could he have approached so silently? A crimson blush spread deeply over her countenance for a moment, and then gave place to a delicate paleness, to which the blue winding of the veins added yet a more transparent beauty. Colonel Wallacé had not then spoken; but Hesperia well knew that he came to take leave. She looked upon him; in every
[Page 195]
line of his noble countenance, how many traces of goodness and feeling did she ever discover: but now there was mingled with these a deep tenderness of expression, which beamed through his speaking eyes, as they rested upon her, tha was more, far more to her, than all beside. That one look, had revealed to her how deeply he had participated in her own feelings; and this knowledge brought with it such a new and unlooked-for sensation of delight, that it thrilled through her inmost heart, and made her forget every thing but its own enchantment.
"Oh! blame her not, when zephyrs wake.
The aspin's trembling leaves must quake;
When beams the sun thro' April's shower.
It needs must bloom the violet flower;
And love, howe'er the maiden strive.
Must with reviving hopes revive."
It was a scene and hour of deep enchantment, m which loves purest spirit might most have delighted to shed his sweet influence. The western skies were just faintly tinged with the last lingering streaks of sunset, melting, by degrees, into the silvery grey of twilight; and there was that rich balminess and lulling stillness in the air, which diffuses itself so softly through the senses, and instills into the soul a portion of its own sweetness and repose, while far off from the distant shade, came the first faint notes of the nightingale, as she began to send up her evening hymn,
"So calm, the waters scarcely seemed to stray,
And yet they glide, like happiness, away."
Hesperia and Wallace had each deeply felt the influence of the hour. But few words passed between them; and these, except by their tone, spoke nothing of love's language. Captain and Mrs. Alton soon joined them, and the short remaining
[Page 196]
time they had to spend together, quickly passed away. The warm grasp on the hand, and the looks that told what words must leave unspoken, were exchanged; and they parted to meet again, perhaps never; at least not for a long, long time.
"Yet potent sea,
How placidly thy moist lips speak, even now,
Along yon sparkling shingles?
Who can be
[illeg.] as to feel no gratitude;
That power and grandeur can be so serene,
Soothing the home-bound navy's peaceful way;
And rocking even the fisher's little bark,
As gently as a mother rocks her child."
Hesperia Alton was an ardent admirer of nature; and such musings as these soothed and filled her mind, as the vessel, in which she was now embarked, glided in quiet majesty over the calm and beautiful bosom of the Mediterranian. It was early morning, and the rosy flood of light came down upon the waters, and kindled them into smiles, as they encircled, with their azure stillness, the summer isles;
"The Edens of the Eastern wave."
But these were soon left behind; and, after a short time, the happier, though less glöwing, shores of England greeted their view.
"Thine are the free and happy homes: welcome to thee, my own glorious country," said Captain Alton, as, leaning over the vessel's side, with a sensation of pride and pleasure, amounting to rapture, he looked towards his native land—"Though long an alien from thy bosom, I hail thee as my mother; and oh! how much I glory in feeling myself a free-born child of thine." It was now more than ten years since he had bid adieu to those shores, after a fruitless effort to reconcile himself to his family. He had not since heard from any member of it; and he was
[Page 197]
now quite uncertain as to whether they knew or cared ought concerning him. On his arrival at the metropolis, he learned that many changes had taken place with them since his departure. His mother was some years dead; and, a few months before his return, his elder brother had been killed by a fall from his horse. The old Ëarl, his father, was left alone, in enfeebled and declining health. Though Alton would inevitably have succeeded to the estates and title, being the next heir, he did not reckon that it would be of any value to him, unless he were able to procure the blessing and forgiveness of his only surviving parent. He, therefore, wrote to him, intreating, in terms the most affectionate and anxious, that he might be permitted to behold him again, and that, after long years of absence and danger, he might be greeted by a father's welcome to his native home. The delight of the old man, on receiving this unexpected letter, was unbounded. It needed not much to persuade him to recall his now only son. Too happy to think that he had such remaining, he welcomed the lost one with all the ardour of parental affection. As soon as he received this happy call, not a moment was lost by Alton in speeding his way to the mansion of his forefathers, accompanied by his wife and daughter. The meeting was, indeed, most affecting.
"Thank heaven," said the old man, from whose tall and upright figure, and high bare forehead time had not been able to efface the many traces of dignity; "thank heaven that thou [illeg.] yet spared to me; that I have yet a child."
"Yes, my father," he replied, "a child and children more worthy of you than what I have been," as he drew [illeg.] attention towards Hesperia and her mother.
"Aye, these are mine, too," he said, as he kissed them tenderly; "aye, they are beautiful," and he fixed his [illeg.] upon
[Page 198]
them. "Alton, how much I wronged you; I said you had thrown yourself away, when you might have wedded with the noblest of the land, with wealth and power; but you judged well: treasures like these are worthier of you, and you deserve the happiness which such can bestow. Henceforth, my children, your father's house, home, and fortune are yours."
Amid the beautiful scenes of his boyhood, and the princely halls of his ancestors, was now made the happy abode of Captain Alton, [illeg.] still more to his heart by the bright presence of those two beloved beings, for whose sake he had so long been made an exile. In the high circles in which she now moved, Hesperia was looked upon, as she was, in truth, a finished model of female beauty. It would be slight exaggeration to say, that hundreds of suitors daily sighed for the hand of Lord ———— 's beautiful and wealthy heiress. The dowry bestowed upon her by her grandfather was immense; but it needed not this to procure for her the homage of all hearts, wherever she appeared. Yet love's most ardent vows were unheard or unheeded by her. The wealth and grandeur which were daily proffered at her feet, were disregarded. There was no softness in the tones, no charms in the splendour; all, all fell short to her of the exquisite and dignified tenderness which had once beamed over her, from eyes, and in scenes from which nothing could separate her memories. In the midst of all love's incense that was offered at her shrine, there was nothing which she could compare with that one dear and unforgotten look, which, with its silent eloquence, revealed to her the love of that heart which she had prized far more than any that earth held beside. Surely, it could scarcely be called an earthly passion, that could thus live on long remembrance; that could thus burn on in undying and gentle radiance, kept
[Page 199]
within the heart as a holy light, which might not be extinguished; and such it was, and such it remained through many a long year.
Five summers had rolled over her, amid the brilliant scenes with which she was surrounded, where all seemed conspiring to make her pathway rich with flowers, and redolent with delight.
"Yet, from her face,
No charm the speeding years have snatched,
But left it ripening every grace
In perfect loveliness unmatched
By what she was when young and shy,
Her timid graces shunn'd the eye."
Whenever opportunity offered, her father and Colonel Wallace corresponded. From his patriotic services in Greece, the latter had been recalled to join his regiment, destined for the West Indies. Having struggled with the climate for two years, he found it necessary, on account of his health, to leave it, and seek one more suited to his constitution. His native hills arose fondly to his recollection, and thither he bent his way. Among the first who welcomed his return, was the grateful and affectionate Alton. Immediately on hearing from him of his arrival, he set off to Scotland to visit him. It was with real delight that these two friends again entered into each other's society. Alton was the same generous open-hearted soldier that he had ever been; and the high and noble-minded Wallace was unaltered, except in his outward appearance, which was much worn by toil and sickness.The same inestimable qualities which had shone so conspicuously in his character, still remained to adorn it with all their heaven-touched beauty. After remaining with him for some weeks, Alton found means (perhaps with very little difficulty) of persuading him to accompany
[Page 200]
him back to England, to spend some time at his country residence in Somersetshire. I need not attempt to describe the feelings that thrilled through the bosom of Hesperia, on again beholding him; and his were not less delightful, as he looked upon her, ripened into all the maturity of perfect beauty—"the mind, the music breathing from her face;" the lovely soul that spoke in every graceful movement.
There is a sympathy in lovers' hearts that soon reveals them to each other. It was impossible for Wallace not to perceive that he had some interest in that of Hesperia. Notwithstanding the gay crowd of devotees that worshipped at her shrine, he ventured to lay the offering of his heart at her feet. Need we say how that offering was accepted? There never were two beings more formed to make each other happy; there never was a love more true, more enduring, or bestowed on worthier objects, than that which glowed in the bosom of each. Sad, indeed, would it have been, if the fates of earth had torn apart, two that heaven had thus united. No cold or selfish views interfered on the side of the brave Alton. He was a soldier, and a soldier claimed his daughter's hand. Who more worthy than the deliverer of her mother, to receive that precious gift? As for her old grandfather, the thoughts of it made him quite young. He heaped rich presents and costly jewels on the lovely young bride, whose nuptials, to gratify him, were conducted with the utmost splendour. But the excelling brightness was within the fond hearts that were then for ever linked together.
And now having arrived at this happy conclusion, I have little more to say. The old Earl continued to live many years after this event, and had the happiness, which all do not enjoy, of wearing his titles and honours to an old age, without exciting
[Page 201]
the impatience of his successor. But more than all, the gentle Hesperia was, indeed, the evening star, that shone sweetest over his closing day, and lit his pathway up to heaven. Her mind was deeply imbued with the beauty of those Christian principles which she ever made her guide. She loved her grandfather devotedly, and he almost idolized her. She knew, in the course of nature, that he must soon pass to another world, and thither she tried to raise his affections: nor was the effort vain. Her sweet voice was raised in prayer beside him; her sweet lips breathed out in his listening ear the words of heavenly love. Such deeds were blest by Him who inspired them, and failed not to obtain their end.
NOTES
1 Coxe's Travels in Poland, book ix. chap. 1.
2 "Ah! why with eypress dost thou twine thy bower,And make thy best interpreter a sigh?
3 A species of the aloe, which grows with no other nourishment than the air.
$$$
