Publishers' Circulars and Literary Advertisements for 1854
Author: Masson, David.
Publication info: The British Quarterly Review ; Edinburgh  : [25] p. Edinburgh (1855)

Art. VI.—Publishers' Circulars and Literary Advertisements for 1854 [in, The British Quaterly Review ...]
[Page 157]
Art VI.— Publishers' Circulars and Literary Advertisements for 1854. Some one has calculated that if all the talk of a moderately garrulous person during one whole day were printed off as spoken, it would fill an ordinary octavo volume. At this rate, the inhabitants of Great Britain are capable of producing upwards of seven billions of printed octavo volumes every year; and even this number might be increased by encroaching on the still remaining realm of silence, and compelling every one to articulate a greater proportion of all that passed through his head. We have not just yet reached this limit. It is still but a small percentage of the aggregate talk of the community that passes into the form of authorship. Yet, as all know, our authorship at the present day has attained a bulk that passes all measure, and bewilders all sober contemplation. What with the increase among us of the faculty of syntax, on the one hand, and what with the corresponding extension of the faculty and taste for reading, on the other, the quantity of printed matter that now issues from the press, and passes through the shops of booksellers to the public, is something totally unprecedented. In Horace's time it was a complaint that there were too many writers; in the days of Shakspeare and in those of Pope, the intolerable number of gentlemen who thought they could write was a perpetual subject of jest;
[Page 158]
and as late as thirty years ago, a cynical tourist, meeting Sir Walter Scott in a stage-coach, and being charmed with his conversation during the journey, expressed his delight that at last he had fallen in with a sensible man who had never published a book. What would the critics of those times say now? Nor, so far as appears, are we near the end yet. The faculty of syntax is spreading, spreading; there is not a lady in the land that cannot pen an epistle in good idiom, only wanting the stops; the husbands, though less fluent, are not far behind; our private soldiers on foreign service and our emigrant mechanics send home capital descriptive letters; even the dustmen's circular at Christmas is a model of elegant composition. The demand keeps pace with this power of supply. I read, thou readest, he reads; we read, ye read, they read. The appetite for printed paper is morbid and universal. And only just fancy what we shall come to when the art of the printer and the profession of the publisher shall have acquired those further improvements of which both are believed to be susceptible—when the composing machine, played like a piano, shall enable authors actually to think into type, without any intermediate stage of manuscript; when these composing machines, placed at the termini of our telegraphic lines, shall throw off impressions of the same composition simultaneously all over the island, and in places beyond it; and when literature shall be produced and carried about in bales and tons. Why, we are already within sight of that period when every man, woman, and child in the census may be an author, and when we shall be a population of authors, reading and criticising each other's books.
All this is suggestive of strange reflections. What are the prospects of our literature? What are its tendencies? Shall we continue, in any proper sense, to have a literature at all—a literature in the same sense as previous generations have had a literature; or shall literature be extinguished and buried by the very multiplication of books and writers? Where all write, who shall be the authors? Who shall be the gods, the immortals, out of the vast crowd? Nay, shall there be any such; and, if so, in what relation shall they stand to the huge remainder? It is clear, in short, that all the 'relations of literature have been revolutionized—that none of our old phrases respecting literature in its social bearings are any longer descriptive, and that they require revision. To us, casting a superficial glance at the subject, and founding our reflections on the facts as they are patent to all, the following remarks suggest themselves:—
I. True or High Literature .—There is now, as there ever has
[Page 159]
been, and as there ever will be, let books and authors increase as they may, a true or genuine literature, holding the same high place as ever in human regards, and in relation to social uses. This is apparent to all. There are at the present day certain authors whom the instinct of the community places apart, and, as it were, on an elevation, regarding them as the national writers, and not distracted in their vision of them as such, by all the contemporaneous bustle of writing and printing that is going on under the name of literature. The number of men occupying this elevation is not constant. Some drop off, and are replaced by new men, or by men promoted from the lower ranks; nay, between the lower and the higher ranks there is no abrupt separation, but rather a perpetual exchange and intercourse. It depends, therefore, on what point in the upper slope of the national Parnassus we arbitrarily or purposely select as that at which we are to make the section, how many authors or how few we shall include in the supreme grade, as the artists or practitioners of true and high literature.
What point ought we to select at which to make this demarcation on the side of the national Parnassus? In other words, what are the characteristics, now as always, of true or genuine literature?
‘How shall we our true love know,
From another one?’
Of course,
‘By his cockle-hat and staff,
And by his sandal shoon,’
—the discrimination of which in authorship constitutes the true art of the critic. But there are so many kinds of authorship, that one has to know specifically what is the ‘cockle-hat,’ &c. in each case.
Attending, first, to that great department of literature which consists of works whose primary intention it is to address the understanding—that is to say, to works of disquisition, exposition, or thought, in the more restricted sense of the word—we believe the test of what constitutes true or genuine literature in this department is to be found in a casual remark made by De Quincey in the preface to the collected edition of his writings. Mr. De Quincey, referring to that class of his papers which are distinguished from the rest by having a purely didactic purpose, or by being addressed chiefly to the understanding, and therefore properly coming under the designation of essays, claims for himself at least this merit, that he has never been one of those who have imagined that merely thinking soundly and well on any subject formed any title to write upon it, unless one had also something
[Page 160]
novel to say. This little remark is to us very pregnant with meaning. Give effect to the remark, impose it as a rule on literature, and you would at once asphyxiate and destroy nineteen -twentieths of all that appears and pretends to be literature in this department. The radical vice of our disquisitional literature, in all its varieties, from the treatise to the political article in a newspaper, is that we are overrun with the trite. The number of people who think sensibly and well on all sorts of topics is vast; and the fault is that these people do not see that, by reason of their very number, the necessity for their all printing their sensible and good thoughts is taken away. So long as one has nothing to say on a subject but what hundreds of people around him are thinking as well as he, that is a sign that there is no call upon him to publish his thoughts. When a common-place occurs to one, either in conversation or in writing—as, for example, when one feels inclined to utter such a very true and sensible observation as ‘Extremes meet,’ or ‘Things find their level, sir,’ or ‘The exception proves the rule,’ or ‘We must not argue against the use of a thing from the abuse of it,’ or any other such time-honoured phrase—one's bounden duty is not to utter the observation, to suppress it even when it is on the lips, to draw it back into the mind, and there consume it in a splendid flash of silence. One is not entitled to speak or write unless when one can contribute a new element to what is going on, so as to make it not go on in precisely the same manner. If one is simply agreeing with what all around are thinking as well as himself, why, it is silence that gives consent; and the use of speech is something different—it is to put forth new views, to suggest what is overlooked, to trouble the stagnant opinion of the company, to cause ripples and currents in the common thought, to indicate intellectual difference. The moment a thing is very generally thought, there is no necessity for any one in particular taking the trouble to say it. ‘When you have nothing to say,’ said Lord Chesterfield, ‘say it;’ and his meaning was the same as De Quincey's. Extend the remark to literature, and what a blank it would create in the whole department of didactic and expository writing. Nineteen-twentieths of all contemporary writing in this department consists of commonplace, excellent or foolish. It has, indeed, always been so. In the times of the Scriblerus Club, it was chiefly against this sin of the trite that the ridicule of those famous critics was directed. Swift, in particular, made persevering war against the trite, which always figures in his writings as a minor species of that which he hated most—cant. In his satirical paper, entitled A Tritical Essay upon the Faculties of the Mind , he has given a capital specimen of the trite, as it presented itself in the literature of his days. Here is a part of it:—
[Page 161]
‘Philosophers say, that man is a microcosm, or little world, resembling in miniature every part of the great: and, in my opinion, the body naturally may be compared to the body politick: and if this be so, how can the Epicurean's opinion be true, that the universe was formed by a fortuitous concourse of atoms? which I will no more believe, than that the accidental jumbling of the alphabet could fall by chance into a most ingenious and learned treatise of philosophy. Risum teneatis amici? (Hor.) This false opinion must needs create many more; it is like an error in the first concoction, which cannot be corrected in the second; the foundation is weak, and whatever superstructure you raise upon it must of necessity fall to the ground. Thus men are led from one error to another, until with Ixion they embrace a cloud instead of Juno: or, like the dog in the fable, lose the substance in grasping at the shadow. For such opinions cannot cohere; but like the iron and clay in the toes of Nebuchadnezzar's image, must separate and break in pieces. I have read in a certain author, that Alexander wept because he had no more worlds to conquer; which he needed not have done, if the fortuitous concourse of atoms could create one; but this is an opinion fitter for that many-headed beast the vulgar to entertain, than for so wise a man as Epicurus; the corrupt part of his sect only borrowed his name, as the monkey did the cat's claw to draw the chesnut out of the fire. However, the first step to the cure is to know the disease; and though truth may be difficult to find, because, as the philosopher observes, she lives in the bottom of a well, yet we need not, like blind men, grope in open daylight. I hope I may be allowed among so many far more learned men to offer my mite, since a stander-by may sometimes perhaps see more of the game than he that plays it. But I do not think a philosopher obliged to account for every phenomenon in nature, or drown himself with Aristotle, for not being able to solve the ebbing and flowing of the tide, in that fatal sentence he passed upon himself, Quia te non capio tu capies me . Wherein he was at once the judge and the criminal, the accuser and executioner. Socrates, on the other hand, who said he knew nothing, was pronounced by the oracle to be the wisest man in the world. But to return from this digression, I think it is as clear as any demonstration in Euclid, that nature does nothing in vain; if we were able to dive into her secret recesses, we should find that the smallest blade of grass, or most contemptible weed, has its particular use: but she is chiefly admirable in her minutest compositions; the least and most contemptible insect most discovers the art of nature, if I may so call it, though nature, which delights in variety, will always triumph over art: and, as the poet observes,
‘Naturam expellas furca licet, usque recurret.’ — Hor .’
This parody is as true to the life now, as it was in Swift's time. Take up any piece of disquisition—a treatise, an essay, or a newspaper-article—and the chances are twenty to one that it consists of commonplaces expressed in sentences more or
[Page 162]
less neat. It is all ‘Extremes meet,’ ‘Things find their level, ‘The exception proves the rule,’ ‘We must not argue against the use of a thing from the abuse of it.’ From Dan to Beersheba almost all is platitude. Rarely is there the relief of one new thought, one original and stimulating remark. All this, therefore—except in a sense and for a function afterwards to be indicated —ought to pass as so much syntax printed on paper, but not as real literature. De Quincey's remark supplies the canon for testing what is real literature in this department. The expression of sound and correct thought upon a subject is not literature, if that thought is also trite and usual. General opinion, indeed, recognises this canon. There are not a few men among the writers of the present day who owe the distinction accorded to them precisely to the circumstance that their writings are one remove above commonplace. They may be hazy, they may be feeble; but if they have this merit of not being absolutely trite, their authors win a certain reputation—the public appreciating one remove from the commonplace, even should it also be one remove from the clear. There are, however, among us, men of a still higher order—true literary men in the department of the expository and the didactic. The essays of De Quincey himself, tried by the canon deducible from his own remark, take a high rank in this department of our national literature; and one has only to look around in order to make out a list of some seven or eight men in Great Britain at present all magnates in the same department. In our periodicals, and in our best newspapers, we have frequently beautiful specimens of disquisition put forth anonymously. Going back into the past of our own country, we at once single out Coleridge and Bacon as representatives of height and greatness in this department; and, passing beyond our own country and into the ancient world, we see the majestic figure of Plato, illustrating to all time that not in poesy itself can genius deport itself more grandly and royally than in the literature of prose speculation. In such cases, too, we see how abstinence from the trite is not necessarily a perverse quest of the singular. It is, indeed, the duty of all who mean really to be national teachers in their writings, purposely to avoid the common and the superficial, and, on every occasion, when they find themselves with nothing to say except what is being said already, firmly to close their lips and keep the platitude in. And thus writers, even of moderate capacity, may, by self-discipline, acquire the habit, so to speak, of subsoil-ploughing, and so really contribute to the ideas of their time. Twelve repressed platitudes may issue in a sentence of some worth and pith. But true speculative genius requires not
[Page 163]
this conscious abhorrence from the trite. It comes not near the trite even by chance; it moves and has its being in an atmosphere of principles and generalizations which the million do not breathe; and though, in its literary appearances, it spends care and labour in combining and systematizing these so as to give them force and form, it cannot even babble at random without being original. Above all, such genius, in its highest kinds, takes its stand in some solution or other of the highest of all problems, that of the relation of this world and all this is on it to what is ulterior, invisible, and, though ever thought of, always unimaginable; it sees all things physical against this background of the metaphysical; it has a habit of surveying all things, as it were, not alone outwards in the direction of, but also inwards from, the mystic perimeter. Such was the genius of Plato, and such, more or less, is the genius of all who in speculation have moved the soul of the world. Sometimes we see such a mind imparting to its conclusions, by the habit and necessity of its structure, all the additional impressiveness that lies in the most exquisite literary form. In the guise of poesy itself, we sometimes have noble expressions of what in essence is high speculation. In the In Memoriam of Tennyson, we have an example, hardly paralleled, of what is extreme in thought, rolled forth in rhythm and ordered bursts of music. This it is that makes that book, even in the department with which we are now concerned, so perfect a specimen of the highest and truest literature.
Passing to another great department of literature—that of History in all its varieties—here, too, we find no difficulty in recognising what is true, and admirable, and high. ‘He who calls what has vanished back again into being,’ says, Niebuhr, ‘enjoys a bliss like that of creating.’ The man who uttered these words was himself a living example of what power of mind there must be in the true historian. The true historian, and the historical compiler, are easily distinguishable. All that is demanded of the latter is that he shall read conscientiously certain authorities on the subject on which he is to exercise his craft and reproduce their matter in his own form. Quite apart from this class of functionaries are the historians properly so called, men like Herodotus, Thucydides, Tacitus, and Gibbon. Extremely different as are our associations with these names, we yet feel that all of them owe their renown to real merit and labour of an extraordinary kind, and that the form of literature which they represent is one in which a great and fine mind may find congenial scope. With such men in our thoughts, we do not feel any incongruity in speaking of the historian in that high abstract sense in which
[Page 164]
we speak of the poet, the orator, the statesman, and the like. Consider what qualifications must meet in a great historian. There must be laboriousness in seeking and collecting the original materials of his history, so that he may be sure he has placed himself as close as possible to the transactions he is to narrate. This labour of research, this examination of the original materials by and for himself, is the first distinction of the true historian from the historical compiler. Then there must be the shrewdness to detect, and the conscientiousness to reject what is false—the practised historical śense or understanding, discerning at a glance what is sound and what is mythical, and the stern integrity not to re-issue the most pleasant anecdote that does not rest on credible evidence. A writer who, with these qualifications, possessed even a moderate amount of general faculty otherwise, and could tell a plain story agreeably, would deserve some distinction in literature. In a great historian, however, we find much more—enthusiasm and imagination enabling him to apprehend and body forth what has vanished, and out of scattered facts to educe a whole; large culture, that he may find nothing uninteresting to him that could be interesting to others; a deep and fixed philosophy of men and things, that he may give a unity of significance to his story and make it illustrative of what is wise and good; and, lastly, an art of his own, made up as well as the poet's, of numberless acquired devices, whereby the story is evolved in pleasant form and sequence. In short, history is a form of literature affording scope for genius, for high moral purpose, for original views and inventive power, equally with any other. Not only may history be, but infallibly every true history is, impregnated with the spirit of the historian, in all its force, and all its peculiarity. History is, and can be nothing else, than the past represented by the present; what the representation, therefore, in any case, is, depends partly no doubt on the facts to be represented, but infinitely more on the power which represents. The greatness of any individual as an historian, or the greatness of the historical literature of any period, depends on the general richness of the human nature which the individual or the period brings to the investigation of the past. And hence it is that, just as when speaking in a high abstract sense of the poet, the orator, or the statesman, we have but a few illustrious individual examples in view, so neither can we refer to many names answering to our notion of the true historian. With all his defects, Gibbon is still the greatest example of a historian on the large scale of which our literature can boast. Hume still keeps his place as the only general historian of England; and, notwithstanding Lord John Russell's advertisement, we see no likelihood that he will soon be superseded. But in our present literature, we have
[Page 165]
men really great in the historical department. Grote, Macaulay, and others that might be named, both in History proper, and in the kindred departments of Biography and works of Travel, are in these departments representatives of true and high literature whom we need not blush to compare with their famous British predecessors of any age.
On imaginative literature, as distinct from the literature of speculation and from history, our remarks may be brief. We have no difficulty in knowing what constitutes high genius in this kind of literature—whether in the form of prose fiction, or in that of poetry proper. Nor do we find that, in either form, is our age deficient. If in prose fiction we have no man so colossal, and with such a natural facility in the antique, as Scott, we have in Dickens, Thackeray, Kingsley, and others, men of extraordinary powers—each too with a peculiar vein—in whom nothing but the fact of their being contemporaries can prevent any one from recognising the successors and coequals of the Fieldings, and Smolletts, and Goldsmiths of former times, destined to similar honour from the generations that are to come. In Douglas Jerrold, a man almost unique among his contemporaries for clear and flashing wit, we see sustained the reputation of our comic drama, and of much that is akin to it in literature. Nor if, on the whole, in respect of poetry, we are not so rich as some previous generations have been, are we, by any means, the least rich of British generations. Wordsworth is gone; but in Tennyson we have a genius as noble, and deep, and exquisite as has ever lived in English song; while in Browning and others, coeval with him, we have poets truly worthy of the name. At present, too, is there not rising among us a younger generation of poets, to whose future we look with no uncertain hope?
II. Wholesome popular Literature .—We have hitherto been considering only our high national authorship—glancing, so to speak, at the summit of our British Parnassus, to see how and by whom its highest slopes are occupied. The literature of which we have thus taken account, under the name of true and high literature, is distinguished by this, that it is literature interesting to the select and most cultured minds of the nation—addressed to them generally in the first place, and by them appropriated and appreciated. Looking lower down the hill, however, we see below this zone of the highest and most dignified authorship, another, and much broader, and more busy zone—that of wholesome literature for the instruction and the amusement of the mass of the people. Let us not be mistaken; we do not mean that the highest and best national authorship does not find its way down among the people, and command the popular interest.
[Page 166]
The highest original works in speculative literature, indeed, are, by their very nature, suited only for the narrow constituency of the select and cultured; but there may be high original historical works in which the many as well as the few shall find pleasure and interest; and, though there may be poetry and prose fiction of such a kind that the ‘audience fit, though few,’ is required to do it justice, yet we do find poems and prose-fictions at once admired by the refined and highly educated, and relished to the uttermost by all ranks of the people. Perhaps, indeed, those poems which thrill the universal emotions, which touch the general pulses of humanity, and are, therefore, popular at once with all, are in their nature the greatest. At all events, we see many instances in which poems and fictions, while they delight the most fastidious and strong minds, command the widest popularity. Such are the songs and poems of Burns; such is Goldsmith's masterpiece; such are the novels of Scott; and if Shakspeare himself is not equally appreciable by all, all find something in him that they can appreciate. Thackeray requires a rather select audience to do him justice, but even he has elements of general popularity; and while there is no man so high as not to find something truly poetic and delicious in the imaginations of Dickens, his novels circulate at all firesides, and promote mirth and morality everywhere. When, therefore, we distinguish wholesome popular literature from true or high authorship, we do not mean that the highest minds in the nation are exclusively the constituency of the truly national authors; we mean only that, besides the share which the people generally have in that true and high authorship which the best minds make classic by their approbation, there is an extensive popular literature expressly prepared for the people, fulfilling all its function among them, and vanishing when that function has ceased. The existence of a wholesome literature of this kind is interesting to the select minds, but personally, they do not rank among its readers.
There is a wholesome popular literature of exposition; there is a wholesome popular literature in the historical department; and there is a wholesome popular literature of fiction and verse. In the department of the expository we have popular treatises and essays without number, and on all subjects—geology, political economy, politics, and what not; such expository authorship aiming at working down the truths and generalities of the various sciences to the apprehension of the public. Such authorship, in fact, is a species of industry greatly in request, and in which an intelligent and conscientious workman may respectably and honourably earn a livelihood. The trite is here, to a great extent, allowable—as, in fact, what is trite in the judgment of the select may still have
[Page 167]
force and novelty to thousands. And so, in this department of literary industry, the painstaking workman is not to be debarred from our time-honoured saws and maxims about the meeting of extremes, the tendency of things to find their level, the impropriety of arguing against the use from the abuse of a thing, and the glorious security of the golden mean. We dare say there was a time when even the sentiment of Horace's
‘Æquam memento rebus in arduis
Servare mentem,’
and even the logical affirmation, apart from the exquisite expression, in the same poet's
‘Pallida mors æquo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas
Regumque turres,’
were more original than they now are; and if there is any portion of the community to which such reflections are still strange, why should they not trickle down thither? Originality, therefore, depth, subsoil-ploughing, are not necessary in the case of the popular expositor, as they are to constitute a claim to high speculative authorship. Clearness and precision are the requisites; and altogether the workman, though he works never so neatly, is to be distinguished from the true author in this department. So also in history. Historical compilation is a kind of industry, for which there is a great demand, and in which a man of talent may honestly and profitably find employment for his life. It is well that the people should have brief and interesting accounts of the great transactions and the notable men of the past—that they should know something of the ancient Egyptians, more of the Greeks, and more of the Romans and the Middle Ages. It is well that they should have sketches of the lives of Alexander, Cæsar, Charlemagne, William the Conqueror, Cromwell, and Napoleon; and those who will conscientiously and carefully supply their wants in this respect merit all credit. A vast literature of historical compilation, as well as of compiled geographical and other such information, is required for the steady educational purposes of each generation—books of this class soon wearing out of date, and requiring to be superseded. Moreover, as we see in the case of the present war, the passing events and emergencies of the time are ever pointing the curiosity of the public in new directions—to the shores of the Black Sea, to the steppes of Central Asia, and so on; and the light brigade of compilers are ever on the alert to go on errands of exploration in these directions, and present the public with the information which they require. Such industry, we repeat, is useful and honourable, and even men of truly superior faculty may find it convenient to engage in it; but in itself it is to be distinguished from that high
[Page 168]
historical authorship, on the characteristics of which we have already dilated. Finally, there is a wholesome literature of popular fiction, both in prose and verse, to which, while we respect its social function, we must refuse the dignity we accord to the higher literature of imagination. It is well that people should be amused in winter evenings by interesting narratives, produced as it were to order, and abounding with incidents either natural to real life, or remote from it; it is well, also, that the public should have a supply of sentiment, expressed in sounding stanzas, and adapted for either quotation in the family circle, or the higher purposes of household song. Nor is that a dishonourable calling which purveys for this taste of the public, by constructing honest stories according to all the various patterns in fashion—the tale gloomy and romantic, the tale sentimental, or the tale comic; and by bending pleasant words and fancies into artificial shapes of rhyme. It is literary manufacture; but it is not true or high authorship.
The extensive and ever-increasing demand that exists for wholesome popular literature of all the kinds mentioned, is met, in part, by the scattered efforts of individuals who live by popularizing science, compiling history, and weaving tales of fiction, and who regulate their operations by the state of the market. But, as all know, this trade has been organized; and the task of providing for the literary recreation and instruction of the public has, of late, been undertaken by firms. It is not much more than thirty years ago since this Cheap-literature movement, as it is called, had its origin. At or about that time, the Messrs. Chambers, of Edinburgh, Mr. Charles Knight, and others, began their admirable labours for the dissemination of a wholesome literature among the people; and since that time a great quantity of capital has taken this form of investment, so that the production and distribution of cheap literature have become a regular branch of British commerce. The number of firms now engaged in this commerce is very large. Now, one result of this commercial organization of the industry employed in the production of popular literature is that, while the demands of the public are more rapidly, regularly, and cheaply supplied than they could otherwise be, and while an immense educational stimulus has been given to the country, the effects of which are visible in an improved tone of popular taste, and a more highly-informed condition of the popular intellect, the relations of authors to the public have been greatly altered. It is the capitalists embarked in this species of commerce that watch the market; the authors are but their workmen, receiving their orders, and producing the required article according to pattern. Thus, while publishers of
[Page 169]
the old school still act as the middlemen between authors and the public, delivering over to the public books produced by individual authors according to their own tastes and methods, there is growing up an entirely new race of publishers, occupying a very different position, and determining what kind of literature shall be called into existence. The entire effect of this revolution in the book trade has not yet developed itself. Already, however, it has had the effect of making the demarcation between high authorship and hack authorship more distinct and obvious. In fact, it has made authorship more than ever a profession. Hundreds, perhaps thousands, of persons who before would have distributed themselves through the other professions, have flocked into the new mode of livelihood that has been created by the change, and without any aim much higher than that of having a respectable and honest means of existence, have become authors. At the same time, this has to be taken into account—that such authorship to order affords a convenient means of livelihood to many who have the faculty and the ambition to be authors in the higher sense. It is a known fact, that not a few of our best minds, of the minds that rank highest in our literature, have made and now make ‘writing for the press’ their occupation, reserving their leisure for literary efforts of their own. Nay, more, it would be unjust to our higher purveyors of popular literature, to shut our eyes to the fact that, as far as possible, they have, in their dealings with the public, combined the commercial with the true literary feeling. In our popular periodicals, as we have already said, we often find—under the unpretending form of a popular exposition, a popular historical sketch, or a tale for family reading—a piece of writing which, by virtue of its real excellence, might well be transferred to the zone of true and independent literature. The Messrs. Chambers, of Edinburgh, for example, have found that, in order to keep pace with their readers, they have had themselves gradually to elevate the style and standard of the contents of their Journal , till now, in reality, that periodical must draw its contributions from men capable of addressing readers of high taste and intelligence. And in Mr. Dickens's Household Words , we have an example of a man of high literary genius finding it practicable, even as a commercial speculation, to put forth his own artistic compositions in the guise of literature specially purveyed for the people. It would be wrong, with such instances before us, to fancy that cheap literature must necessarily be inferior literature. Still, the commercial organization to which literature has been subjected since the rise of the cheap system, has, on the whole, been injurious to individuality in authorship. Mr. Dickens can write as he likes in Household Words , the periodical being his own; but fancy Mr.
[Page 170]
Dickens writing under the fear of a publisher-proprietor. The thousands of gentlemen who write for the press write under this sense of moral servitude.
III. Trash and Garbage .—Again glancing at our national Parnassus, we find that, just as below the zone of true and high authorship there is a zone of useful popular literature, so, beneath this zone, and reaching to the base of the mountain, there is a zone of trash and garbage. Of course, even in what is intellectually and artistically the highest authorship, and also in the best popular literature, there may be vicious elements. Intellectual and moral poison may be insinuated where all seems right, and dignified, and respectable. But vicious literature of this kind is quite distinct from that express literature of trash and garbage which we now have in view, and which subsists in virtue of its adaptation to the lowest order of literary taste and appetite. That there is such a literature, even on this side of the literature of Holywell-street, though shading off into it, every one knows; and perhaps, could we make the estimate, it employs most of the steam-power of our printing presses.
This literature of trash and garbage may likewise be classified under the three heads of the didactic, the historical, and the fictitious. The characteristic of trash in the didactic department is unmitigated platitude—error and superstition being distinct ingredients, not so characteristic in their nature. What we would call historical trash is unconscientious historical compilation—a nuisance than which there is none greater and none more common. No one who is not acquainted by actual experience with the historical compilations now doing service throughout the community, could believe what worthless rubbish the majority of them are, and what scandalous unconscientiousness they reveal. Take almost any three historical compilations, bearing no certificate in the name of their author, and they will be found to be three different dilutions of some fourth compilation, which, again, in its turn, may be the third dilution of some substantial book. Of fictitious trash, what need of any definition? Si definitionem quœras, circumspice . From many of the three-volume novels with which even our respectable publishing firms find it worth while to supply the circulating libraries as fast as they are wanted, down to those tales of horror, and worse, with which our lowest periodicals pander to the tastes of the classes by whom they are read, there is a regular gradation of garbage. Judging from the supply, the demand must be enormous.
This literature of trash has, also, in this country, passed through a process of organization. There has always been such a literature; and there has always been a class of authors occupied
[Page 171]
in producing it. The memory of many yet alive can go back to the days of our Chap-literature hawked about the country by pedlers and others, and can recollect the sort of material of which it was composed—weather-almanacks; books of magic, and the interpretation of dreams; stories of witchcraft, ghosts, and diabolic appearances; woful ballads; lives of notorious highwaymen, with their last speeches on the scaffold; and coarse collections of jests and facetiæ. A very rich and highly-seasoned literature it was. In country districts, we have no doubt, this venerable literature is still in circulation, forming, along with an occasional newspaper, the sole literary pabulum of many village households. In France, as we have recently been informed, there is an equivalent cottage-literature, supplied till now by the colporteurs , or hawkers, over the whole length and breadth of the country, and consisting of certain stock-publications, many of which have been in circulation among the French peasantry since the first invention of printing, and have never lost their popularity. So far as appears, however, the original low literature of this country has been, to a greater extent than in France, dispossessed by the encroachments of an organized literature addressed to the same classes, and serving the same purpose. In the towns, at least, the old literature has all but vanished.
There is, as all know, a great deal of capital and of commercial enterprise embarked, in this country, and especially in the large central towns, in the production of a degenerate species of cheap literature, to meet the demands of the million. The following description of the process of much of this literary manufacture appeared not long ago in a London weekly newspaper—the Weekly News and Chronicle —and it deserves wide publicity as a just exposure of a growing evil.
‘A man proposes for himself the business of a publisher. He obtains premises and stock in trade; that is to say, a printing-office, printers, type, a steam-engine, and a few assistants. Then he announces libraries, series, journals, and magazines. These are to be all highly moral in their tone; they are to be written in the spirit of the age; they are to spread a love of knowledge, and lead the popular mind to a familiarity with topics hitherto only discussed among the superior classes. All this flourish is succeeded by a cloud of first numbers, which are advertised, and placarded, and praised in country papers, and forced into circulation by all the tricks that trade commands. Has this anything to do with literature? Have ‘literary men’anything to do with it? Not to the slightest extent. The organization necessary for a publication of the kind we allude to is as follows:—1. A steam-engine; 2. Sufficient reams of paper; 3. A chest of old woodcuts; 4. A batch of French books; 5. Two or three men, who are neither
[Page 172]
printers nor clerks, but who can ‘get up’ so many ‘sheets’ a day, as fuel for the steam-press. Then the work commences; the names of the wood-cuts are altered, the dates of old authors are changed, a ransacking search is made for ‘materials,’ and as each ‘illustration’ is ‘worked off,’ an ‘article’ is made ready to be appended to it. Thus the popular mind is stored with all kinds of instruction. For instance, say that an Oriental costume turns up, which has been used in some French series of dramatic characters. That the ‘Editor’ marks ‘A Ceylonese Chief.’ What books have we on Ceylon? Here is one, dated 1704, and its ‘facts’ are neatly dove-tailed into the little margins of type that surround the ‘cut.’ ‘The Dutch have lately issued a decree that no one shall give lodging to a native priest. It is to be hoped that this illiberal spirit, so inconsistent with the character of the present century, will shortly give way to a more enlarged view of those sentiments and principles,’ &c. &c. Further on in the same piece of ‘useful information’ the Dutch are forgotten, since the editor goes for ‘manners’ to a later book. ‘Although the English have been so long masters of Ceylon, traces of Dutch influence are still perceptible in the customs and even in the costumes of the people.’ Since the war, there has been a good deal of this jugglery practised with respect to places and individuals newly known to fame. When the ‘Valley of Sweet Waters’ is not likely to attract, a coup de main changes it into ‘A Bivouac in the Crimea.’ Any Eastern warrior does service for some Pacha recently distinguished, and many a ‘good ship’ of the fleet has found its measurement by chance, according to the ‘Editor's’ notions of things nautical.’
As a pendant to the foregoing, and as showing what classes of the community are the principal consumers of our cheapest and most trashy literature, and what function it serves among them, let us take Mr. Mayhew's account of the literature of the costermongers, as given in his papers on ‘London Labour and the Poor.’
‘It may appear anomalous to speak of the literature of an uneducated body, but even the costermongers have their taste for books. They are very fond of hearing any one read aloud to them, and listen very attentively. One man often reads the Sunday paper of the beershop to them, and on a fine summer's evening a costermonger, or any neighbour who has the advantage of being ‘a schollard,’ reads aloud to them in the courts they inhabit. ∗   ∗   One intelligent man considered that the spirit of curiosity manifested by the costermongers as regards the information or excitement derived from hearing stories read, augured well for the improvability of the class. Another intelligent costermonger who had recently read some of the cheap periodicals to ten or twelve men, women, and boys, all costermongers, gave me an account of the comments made by his auditors. They had assembled after their day's work, or their rounds, for the purpose of hearing my informant read the last number of some of the penny publications.
[Page 173]
‘The costermongers,’ said my informant, ‘are very fond of illustrations. I have known a man, who couldn't read, buy a periodical what had an illustration, a little out of the common way perhaps, just that he might learn from some one who could read what it was all about. Look you here, sir,’ he continued, turning over a periodical, for he had the number with him, ‘here's a portrait of ‘Catherine of Russia.’ ‘Tell us all about her,’ said one man to me last night; ‘read it; what was she?’ When I read it,’ my informant continued, ‘another man to whom I showed it, said, ‘Don't the cove as did that know a deal?’ for they fancy—at least a many do—that one man writes a whole periodical or a whole newspaper. Now here,’ proceeded my friend, ‘you see, is an engraving of a man hung up, burning over a fire, and some costers would go mad if they couldn't learn what he'd been doing, who he was, and all about him. Here's one of the passages that took their fancy wonderfully,’ my informant observed.
“With glowing cheeks, flashing eyes, and palpitating bosom, Venetia Trelawney rushed back into the refreshment-room, where she threw herself into one of the armchairs already noticed. But scarcely had she thus sunk down upon the flocculent cushion, when a sharp click, as of some mechanism giving way, met her ears; and at the same instant her wrists were caught in manacles, which sprang out of the arms of the treacherous chair, while two steel bands started from the richly carved back and grasped her shoulders. A shriek burst from her lips—she struggled violently, but all to no purpose—for she was a captive and powerless! We should observe that the manacles and the steel bands which had thus fastened upon her, were covered with velvet so that they inflicted no positive injury upon her, nor even produced the slightest abrasion of her fair and polished skin.”
“Here all my audience,’ said the man to me, ‘broke out with ‘Aye! that's the way the harristocrats hooks it. There's nothing o'that sort among us; the rich has all that barrikin to themselves.’ ‘Yes; that's the way the taxes goes on!’ shouted a woman. Anything about the police sets them a talking at once. This did when I read it:
“The Ebenezers still continued their fierce struggle, and from the noise they made seemed as if they were tearing each other to pieces, to the wild roar of a chorus of profane swearing. The alarm, as Bloomfield had predicted, was soon raised, and some two or three policemen, with their bulls'-eyes and still more effective truncheons, speedily restored order.’
“The blessed crushers is everywhere!’ shouted one. ‘I wish I had been there to have a shy,’ said another. And then a man sung out, ‘O, don't I like the Bobbys!’ ‘If there's any foreign language which can't be explained, I've seen the costers,’ my informant went on, ‘annoyed at it—quite annoyed. One article—here it is—finishes in this way:
“The social habits and costumes of the Magyar noblesse have almost all the characteristics of the corresponding ones in Ireland. This word noblesse is one of wide signification in Hungary, and one may with great truth say of this strange nation, that ‘ qui n'est point noble n'est rien .”
“I can't tumble to that barrikin,” said a young fellow; ‘it's a jaw-breaker. But if this here—what d'ye call it, you talk about—was like the Irish, why they was a rum lot.’ ‘ Noblesse ,’ said a man that's
[Page 174]
considered a clever fellow; ‘blessed if I knows what he's up to.’ Here there was a regular laugh.’
‘From other quarters I learned that some of the costermongers who were able to read, or loved to listen to reading, purchased their literature in a very commercial spirit, frequently buying the periodical which is the largest in size. Tracts they will rarely listen to; but if any persevering man will read tracts, and state that he does it for their benefit and improvement, they listen without rudeness, though often with evident unwillingness. ‘Sermons or tracts,’ said one of their body to me, ‘gives us the 'orrors.’ Costermongers purchase, and not unfrequently, the first number of a penny periodical, ‘to see what it's like.’ The tales of robbery and bloodshed, of heroic, eloquent, and gentlemanly highwaymen, or of gipsies turning out to be nobles, now interest the costermongers but little, although they found great delight in such stories a few years back. Works relating to courts, potentates, or ‘harristocrats,’ are the most relished by these rude people.’
A literature similar to that which Mr. Mayhew found so much in demand among the costermongers is manufactured and distributed every week in tons by certain houses driving this particular trade. Far beneath such periodicals as Dicken's Household Words , and Chambers's Journal , and commanding an infinitely larger sale, are some five or six other periodicals, with the very names of which the higher class of readers are not acquainted. Every Saturday evening the news-shops in the poorer quarters of our large towns dispense these cheap periodicals by the gross to their customers. The circulation of some of them is said to be upwards of 200,000 copies every week. The contents of such periodicals are various. Scraps gathered often without acknowledgment from newspapers and other periodicals; medical receipts; jests and anecdotes; answers to the questions of correspondents; these and other varieties of matter make up a medley showing a knack in selection which the editors of many more dignified publications might acquire with advantage. Let any reader take up one of those closely printed papers, and he will find its columns of miscellanea far from uninteresting. Their staple, however, is what may be called the ‘stunning’ fiction. Two or three tales, constructed after the Eugene Sue fashion, are carried on simultaneously by instalments, ‘To be continued in our next.’ Always highly seasoned, these tales are by no means always seasoned with ‘improprieties.’ Some of the cheapest periodicals are sufficiently careful in this respect; others are not, and in addition to the ordinary attractions of a thrilling narrative, avail themselves of that kind of interest which Paternoster-row deputes to Holywell-street.
Of late, we are sorry to say, the literature of trash has been creeping upwards through the book-trade, and encroaching on
[Page 175]
the domain of more respectable authorship. Our railway system had already brought into being a new variety of cheap literature, and new arts and appliances of publication. It is still an unaccountable popular delusion, that it is possible and pleasant to read in a railway-carriage; and at no moment of one's life is one so weak for every species of small expenditure as when waiting at a railway-station either for or in a train. It is as if, realizing then more fully than at other times the truth that life is but a pilgrimage, we took less note of gold, or, at least, of silver. These two things, therefore, going together—an unusual alacrity in parting with shillings and sixpences, and an absurd notion that it could be pleasant to have a book to read in the carriage— railway travellers always have been a class of the community whom booksellers have found it worth while to cater for specially. Hence that extraordinary feature in our civilization—the bookstalls at all our railway-stations, renting for large sums from the companies the privilege of selling publications to travellers. At first, the railway booksellers used books already in stock; and even yet, at the larger stations, one sees extensive assortments of really superior books—including, for example, Macaulay's Essays, Tennyson's Poems, and other volumes of the highest authorship. For newspapers and the current numbers of established periodicals, the demand at stations was of course at once large. It was found, however, that a special class of books was wanted over and above books of high reputation, and newspapers, and periodicals—namely, books of very light literature, at a very low price. Cheap re-issues of books of light literature, alreading existing, served for a time; but soon there was a demand for new ones, manufactured expressly for the purpose. Hence our railway-libraries, and our multitudinous shilling volumes, in their red, blue, green, and white paper covers. These volumes, of course, are meant to be constructed, both as regards matter and mechanical getting-up, on the principle that it is he that ‘runs that is to ‘read;’ though, certainly, our experience is, that most railway publishers have, in the mechanical department of their trade, forgotten this principle—the type in the shilling volumes sold at railway-stalls being generally so small that, to read it at rest, is far from pleasant, and to read it running is wholly out of the question. Letting alone the mechanical getting-up of the cheap railway volumes, and attending to the effect of the railway demand on the literary manufacture of the country, we certainly find that, hitherto, this demand has stimulated the manufacture of trash. Perhaps it is because people, while labouring under the delusion that they ought to take books with them into railway carriages, yet feel that only
[Page 176]
a very low order of books will do, and that, in fact, the nearer to trash a book is, the more it will suit that semi-comatose state of the faculties which the inside of a railway-carriage induces. Even those who would disdain to trifle anywhere else, feel that dulce est desipere in loco -motive. But though the circumstance of having had to purvey for that semi-comatose state of mind induced by railway-travelling may have, of itself, tended to increase the manufacture of literary trash, there can be no doubt that another cause has helped greatly towards the same result. The astounding success of Uncle Tom's Cabin has constituted an era in the history of the publishing trade. Here was a book which, partly from its own merit, partly from the interest of its subject, but partly, also, by reason of the deftness of publishers, absolutely went the round of our planet in a few months. What deftness had done once, deftness could surely do again! So it occurred to publishers that, by stimulating the manufacture of an article which, like Uncle Tom's Cabin , could be sold by tons and tens of thousands in a week, they might speedily make their fortunes. Hence, not content with a legitimate traffic in old copyrights of standard books of fiction, some of them have actually become contractors on a large scale for the production of new novels for the million. The American book-trade, in particular, has sent out not a few works of fiction, got up in this way, and intended to go round the world, in the wake of Uncle Tom , without having any of the real merit to which that novel owed its popularity.
Having thus cursorily surveyed the present state of our literature, and illustrated the fact that, in our national Parnassus, three zones are at present visible—the zone of true and high authorship, that of wholesome popular literature, and that of trash and garbage for the million—it remains to add some words by way of practical inference and recommendation. Is the survey we have given calculated to excite hope, or to produce despondency? Above all, what reflections ought the sight of such an enormous literature of trash as is now in circulation, to suggest in thoughtful minds, and what are the duties of society in regard to it?
Very recently, a man of eminent name in this country has broached this very question. Cardinal Wiseman, in a lecture on the ‘Home Education of the Poor,’ delivered in St. Martin's Hall not long ago—as one of a series in connexion with the Educational Exhibition, held there under the auspices of the Society of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce—propounded some views which provoked much public comment. After describing the
[Page 177]
nature of the literature circulated by the colporteur -system throughout the agricultural districts of France, to the extent of eight or nine millions of volumes annually, the Cardinal thus called attention to a bold scheme of the Government of Louis Napoleon for the reform of this literature:—
‘On the 30th of November, 1852, a commission was issued by M. Maupas, the Minister of Police, with powers to call in and examine every book that was circulated by means of the colportage; and with a view to secure this, an order was made that, in future, besides the hawker's licence, it should be necessary that every book carried by a hawker should have a stamp of permission upon it. The publishers of these different works were invited, consequently, to send in their various publications that they might be examined, and approved or discarded. The number of works that thus came in amounted to 7500. The commission, on the 21st of July, last year, upon the suppression of the ministry of police, was transferred to the home department, and there has continued its sittings weekly; and I have given you the return of books up to the present time. Out of this multitude of works which thus came before the commission, and which were accurately examined in every part with the greatest scrupulousness, three-fourths were rejected, and not allowed to be carried any longer into circulation.
∗   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗    ‘Now what an immense void was necessarily created by the withdrawal suddenly of this large number of works from circulation. The next question, therefore, was, how was it to be filled up. The booksellers, of course, were immediately put to their wits, and in the lapse of a few weeks sent almost a sufficient quantity of new works to replace the rejected ones. But the greater part of these have not been admitted; and an important problem—the very problem to which I wish to call your attention here—is at this moment being solved in France. The government at first trusted to the public exigency, to the demand, for creating a supply. That did not come, and the question has now been entertained, whether the government itself should supply the want, or, at least, should instigate, and by rewards animate, persons of real genius and learning to prepare simple series of works for the people—histories, books on agriculture, elementary chemistry, and such other works as may be useful for them in the discharge of their homely but proper duties. This, as yet, has not been decided, because it was considered dangerous for the government to take upon itself a function like this, and so to enter into competition with the ordinary book trade. It has been wished to avoid this difficulty, which indeed is the one now under consideration. M. Billault, the present Minister of the Interior, has acceded to the general suggestion made by the commission, that the only chance of supplying the people with a sound and sufficient literature is by creating it expressly with the assistance, at least the concurrence, of the government. But we must wait probably some time longer before this difficulty is overcome.
[Page 178]
‘Now my object in mentioning what was done in France was to prepare a parallel—an analogy. It would be quite out of the question to pretend to attempt to deal with the literature of the day for the poor, however pernicious, by the summary process which was sufficient in France. What, however, is analogous to it—it is certainly, I think, of importance that the public eye should be upon what is gradually forming, by necessity, the character of the people. It is important that those publications which at present creep—which I may say rather crawl—in their own slime on the surface of the earth, and like the venomous serpent at the beginning of the world, insinuate themselves into the peaceful and happy domestic circle, and there introduce pain, and ruin, and death, and taint the whole of a rising family—it is important, I say, that those reptiles should be seen and watched in their course; and therefore, if it is not in our power utterly to destroy them, we ought at least to provide to the utmost the antidote against their venom. If I were a person in a sufficiently public or political station to propose, with the certainty of success, such a measure, I do think that a parliamentary inquiry into the state of the literature now furnished to the poor would be a most saving and a most important measure. If a commission were appointed, which could not only call before it individuals conversant with the subject, but which by means of those appliances which a wealthy government possesses, could contrive to bring within its grasp, and under its eye, every single work that is issued for distribution among the poor; if such a commission were to have those works examined, analysed, reported upon, classified; then for the first time I believe the public attention would be called to the great necessity of the period—I think almost a necessity, if not greater than, equal to, that of educating the young among the poor— the necessity of seeing that wholesome intellectual nourishment is furnished to those classes that can least help themselves.’
In a second lecture on the same subject, the Cardinal goes on to indicate various ways in which he thinks the Government might directly interfere, so as to counteract the influence of the trashy literature in circulation, and gradually supersede it. He thinks the Government might employ superior literary talent in the production of works adapted for the people; and he specifies the departments of literature to which it would be best particularly to direct the talent so employed. Among these are History, Scientific Exposition, and, above all, Poetry and Song. He thinks that the Chancellor of the Exchequer might find it even economical at the present time, to employ the best poetic talent in the composition of patriotic and martial songs, to be distributed, in thousands of copies, through our towns, and among our peasantry.
We will venture to say on this delicate topic, that we have no objection, but quite the contrary, to the appointment of a Parliamentary Commission to inquire into the state of our popular
[Page 179]
literature, and to collect and systematize its statistics. The knowledge that would be thus acquired would be most interesting and most useful for practical guidance. Such a commission would be one of the most important ever appointed. We should look with suspicion on any direct effort of the Government, growing out of such a commission for the production, under their own auspices, of works intended for the education of the public intellect and the cultivation of the national taste. Government assuredly might choose to employ and pay authors for the production of new manuals of history, science, and the like; or they might buy up good copyrights of existing books and turn publishers. If the nation were agreeable, Mr. Gladstone might make a vote for war-songs an item of expenditure in his next budget. We shrewdly suspect, indeed, that Government, in all this, would find itself beyond its province. But we would not object to a trial on a small scale, if only for the verification of the belief in the futility of such trials. Should Government, however, go far in such a direction; should it attempt to convert literature into a mere arm of the public service, to centralize authorship as it does other functions of the body-politic, to Erastianize literature, as an ecclesiastical polemic would say— then we should feel called upon to protest. It is curious, indeed, that an ultramontanist Cardinal should have broached a proposal which would, in fact, if logically carried out, end in a subjection of the spiritual to the temporal authority in a community. We have heard a facetious scheme of church reform propounded, the purport of which was, that Government should select some really able man and splendid writer as Archbishop of Canterbury, employ him to produce a sermon or essay weekly, adapted to the passing phase of public feeling, and then distribute printed or manuscript copies of this sermon among a clergy composed of the best elocutionists that could be got, each clergyman or elocutionist being bound to read it in his parish. Thus, all parts of the nation would have the same ideas simultaneously administered to them, and all would be kept in intellectual unison. We do not suppose that Cardinal Wiseman would agree to such a proposal— unless, indeed, provisionally in a Protestant country, he might see a useful capability in it; but, certainly, some might say it was but a development of his own notion that Government should purvey intellectual pabulum for the people.
As regards the notion that Government, besides instituting an inquiry into the state of our popular literature, and besides trying to remedy its evils by stimulating an authorship of counteractive tendency to what is bad in that literature, should also have recourse to the restrictive policy of a censorship, as in France—a notion to which, though Cardinal Wiseman professes to abstain
[Page 180]
from recommending it, we cannot but think he is in his heart friendly—we have not words strong enough to express our dissent. Whatever, indeed, in literature as in anything else, transgresses the police laws, to that let Government apply its restraining and punishing hand. Let Holywell-street be prevented from offending the public eye by its characteristic wares. But above this line, even within the zone of garbage, let there be perfect freedom. Whatever ugly features there may be in the present aspect of our literature, we would express our final and complete opinion as to what is to be done in the matter, in the phrase of an American friend of ours—‘Let it develop.’ Let there be the fullest and freest competition in literature—Government itself entering the lists or not, as may be determined. Nay more, in order that there may be such competition, let all present fiscal restrictions on literature, all taxes on knowledge, be repealed. Such a measure, though purely negative in its character, would be the best service Government could render to literature.
For, in the first place, vile as we think much of our literature for the masses, we do not think it so uniformly vile that the task of determining what of it should be stamped for preservation and what rigorously suppressed, could with safety be entrusted to any Government office or any body of men. We do not, with the Cardinal, think the strong politics of the cheap newspapers such rank poison. There is a strong hearty genius in the politics of the people with which the genius of the highest minds is often more sympathetic than with the politics of the commercial classes. So in literature. In the home-made literature of the people, there is a rich vein of force and humour, often breaking out in products in which dilettanti might take interest. Whence have we got our songs, our ballads, our legends? We have not seen M. Nisard's analysis for the French Government of the books called in from the colporteurs; but Cardinal Wiseman himself admits that among these books were some rare literary curiosities; and we know that, in our own old chap-literature, composed of strange odds and ends as it was, there was a fund of interest of a quaint kind, for which we look in vain in more pretending authorship. Indeed, the true origin of every national literature is to be sought for in these rude strivings of the popular mind after literary expression; and the home-made literature of the people is but the ancient minstrelsy continued into modern times. The literature purveyed for the masses by commercial firms is, indeed, altogether a bastard literature, without any such title to respect as we have to accord to their own home-made literature, and having less real power over rude hearts. But, where good and ill are so mixed, even though the proportion of good is small, how shall
[Page 181]
they be separated? We would not trust any commission that could be appointed in this country with the task of determining which of the ballads the people chant, which of the venerable jocosities they laugh at, and which of the stories they read, should be given to the flames. We should always feel that possibly the best had been burnt. Rabelais, the man of greatest, if not of most moral and regular genius, in the whole literature of France, began by writing weather almanacks for the good people in and about Montpellier.
Again, the literature of trash, even when it is altogether trash in the eyes of the judicious, is trash only relatively. The natural supply meeting a natural demand, it fulfils a social function. The reading of trashy fiction is a better form of excitement than dram-drinking, and much else that it takes the place of, or helps to reduce in amount. It also prepares for something higher. The Messrs. Chambers and others find that the lower periodicals, so far from interfering with the sale of theirs, create fresh readers for them, by breaking ground that would not otherwise be touched The taste for reading once communicated to a new class of th community, that class is open to the encroachments of a superior popular literature.
Meanwhile, high and true authorship keep its place. We are glad to see a reaction in certain directions against the excessive mania for cheap literature. Some of our most respectable publishing-houses are finding it their interest to keep up a certain standard in the appearance of their volumes as to type, binding, and the like; and the cheap system is gradually, by its own blunders, discovering its true limits—that is to say, is gradually discovering in what cases the cheapening of a good article increases the demand for it, and in what case this does not and cannot happen. Reprints are, perhaps, the most favourable field for speculation of this kind in high literature; and Mr. Bohn's admirable series of volumes is an example of how much may be done in it. The appearance of highly-embellished reprints of our best authors is also to be noted as a good sign. With Mr. Ruskin, we think a gorgeous book one of the most pleasing forms of art; and, with him, we should regard the prosecution of this vein of art—say in the preparation of elaborately illustrated and ornamented editions of a few of our poets—as peculiarly fitted to keep up a high standard of natural taste. A forthcoming edition of Tennyson's poems, with designs by Eastlake, Millais, Rosetti, and other artists, will doubtless show what may be done in this style of art.
$$$
