
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



i 



THE RUSHES 



1 1 1 1 1 1 M 1."/ '^K .^MlllflUlllIlUlllI I . 



LLEN RATNE 





1 



v^ 



(^mm of tfie ^niffts 



21 HMt o( tbt VRthfy (Bovmttp 



By 



» -- 



A LLEN RAIN R ^^ 

Author of ''A fVeUh Singer, " " Tom SoOm. " 
"On tU IVingi of the Wind." oie. 



V f 




PHILADELPHIA 

GEORGE W. JACOBS St CO. 

PUBLISHERS 



CvC> 



(f^tieen o{ tfie IBMiffts 



9 Zait o( tbt VSeteb (Sottntrp 



A LLEN RAP « p^^ ^"^ 

AuAar tf "A WdA Singer. " " Tom Sai$, " 
"On l&e ITAifi o/ Ifte Wind." tie. 



"\ 




PHILADELPHIA 
GEORGE W. JACOBS * CO. 

PUBLISHERS 

Ijok 



"<< I 



K 



THE NKW YORK "" 
TITBITC TJBRAUY 

AJ^nn, rwox AND 
Ji 19M I, 



' ^^fiW\l;tfW^5f^ May, 1906, by 

Brgb W. Jacobs & Company^ 
Published September, /pod 



: ■ F 



CONTENTS 

CHAPTER I 

THE BOY-MASTIR • • . 7 

CHAPTER II 

THE OLD STOREHOUSE ....•••••••« 24 

CHAPTER III 

GWENIFER 42 

CHAPTER IV 
hezek's patient 61 

CHAPTER V 

THE "ULIWEN" 82 

CHAPTER VI 

BRYNZION . « 98 

CHAPTER VII 

A FAISING 112 

8 



r 



4 Contents 

CHAPTER VIII 

A BOWL OF BUTTERMILK I30 

CHAPTER IX 

THE REVIVAL MEETING 149 

CHAPTER X 
"rotten at the cx)Re" 167 

CHAPTER XI 

THE EVANGEUST I86 

CHAPTER Xn 

UPLIFTINGS 205 

CHAPTER XIII 

MALDRAETH 2l8 

CHAPTER XIV 
"on your peril!" 237 

CHAPTER XV 

SEA WRACK 261 

CHAPTER XVI 

THE INQUEST 282 



Contents 5 

CHAPTER XVII 

INSIDE THE RED GATE 298 

CHAPTER XVIII 

THE FIRE 314 

CHAPTER XIX 

A FACE AT THE WINDOW 33^ 

CHAPTER XX 

BETSY'S FLANS ••• 357 

CHAPTER XXI 

THE JOY OF THE MOOR 379 



GLOSSARY 

Ach y m Exclamation of distaste. 

Anwyl, anwl Dear I 

Bachgen or 'machgeni. ., . .Lad, or my lad. 

Bore da chi Good-morning. 

B*t shwr Certainly 

Bendigedig! Blessed I 

Bwthin Hut. 

Caton Pcnvb! Save us all I 

Cawdel Muddle. 

Croten , Homely name for lass. 

Cloes Wooden shoes. 

Clds Farmyard. 

Crydd Cobbler. 

Cwrw Ale. 

Diwygiad Reformation, the Revival. 

Hen Gymru Wen! Dear old Wales! 

Hiraeth Longing, home sickness. 

Lodes, los Girl, or lass. 

Mishteer Master. 

'Merch^i My daughter, my dear. 

Nos da chi Good-night. 

'Nwncwl (my) Uncle. 

PensHf Obstinate. 

Stafell Bride's possessions. 

Set vawr Big seat, deacon's pew. 

Tan Fire. 

Vach, fach Little or dear. 

Whintell Willow basket. 

6 



QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

CHAPTER I 

THE BOT-MASTEB 

It had always been a matter of great annoyance 
to Jonathan Rees of Scethryg that the sea made a 
deep curve into the middle of his farmlands, forming 
a miniature bay which divided his two best fields from 
the rest of his property, thus obliging him and his 
laborers to make a circuit of the little creek when- 
ever work had to be done in the further fields. 
Rather than make this addition to the day's labor 
they would often cross the intruding tide in Old 
Jerri Jenkins's boat ; and on the morning of the day 
on which our story opens, accompanied by his band of 
reapers, Jonathan had done this, grumbling as usual 
at the inconvenience of the crossing. 

They had worked all day in the sunshine, where 
the yellow wheat was taking a rich red tinge and the 
oats were beginning to shed their grain, and in the 
diat and jollity of the harvest field he had forgotten 
his ill-humor. At sunset he was returning with his 
laborers towards the boat which was waiting for them. 
On the other side of the cove a child stood looking 
at them with a happy smile on her lips and in her 

7 



8 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

brown eyes, for the boat which she was watching with 
such interest held all that was dear to her upon earth 
— the mother for whom she had waited all day and 
for whom she had laid the tea-things before she had 
left the house; the kettle was even now singing its 
song of welcome on the cosy hearth. 

She heard the laughter and jokes of the reapers 
as they stepped into the boat, hustling each other 
with good-humored roughness, their sickles gleaming 
in the sunset light. 

It was a small boat for so large a party, and she 
noticed that it was rather heavily laden, for little 
Gwenifer Owen was thoughtful beyond her years, 
and of a rather anxious, nervous temperament. How- 
ever, she forgot her fears in listening to the merry 
talk and laughter which drew rapidly nearer, when 
suddenly the boat listed heavily, there was a rush 
to the other side, a lurch, a plunge, and, while the 
child looked on, it capsized, and a moment afterwards 
all its occupants were struggling in the water; and 
in that calm sunset hour the tragic event occurred 
that stirred the whole countryside to sympathy and 
compassion, for out of the eight reapers who entered 
the boat four only reached the shore in safety. 

Few of the peasantry even on the sea-coast can 
swim, and for those wht) could not, on this occasion 
there was small chance of life, for the little bay ran 
deep between its craggy shores. For a time they 
tried to keep afloat by clinging to the upturned boat, 
but one by one thej^ad loosened their grasp and 



THE BOY-MASTER 9 

sunk into the tide, while the frantic villagers ran 
hither and thither, unable to do more than weep and 
wring their hands ; for Jerri's was the only boat their 
tiny strand possessed, and that was lying keel up- 
wards right in the golden pathway made by the set- 
ting sun. 

Two of the younger villagers swam out and helped 
to rescue four of the boatload, and succeeded in right- 
ing the boat; but four had already sunk, amongst 
them little Gwenifer's mother. Two were strangers 
who had asked and obtained a day's work and wage 
in the harvest field, while the fourth was no other 
than Jonathan Rees himself, the owner of the most 
unkempt farm in the parish. The few thatched cot- 
tages which stood perched each on its own hillock 
above the shore also belonged to him, their occupiers 
looking up to him as their " mishteer " as well as their 
friendly neighbor. 

He had been a good landlord on the whole, seldom 
refusing their labor on the farm in lieu of any deficit 
in their small rents of thirty shillings or two pounds 
a year. 

Standing on the rocks alone, watching the ap- 
proach of the crazy boat, the child Gwenifer had been 
an eye-witness of the tragedy, and it was some time 
before the villagers found her lying unconscious on 
the ground. 

She remained in this state for many hours, awak- 
ing at last only to the delirium of fever; and the 
sorrowful sympathy of the villagers reached its cli- 



10 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

max when it was discovered that not only had the 
cheerful, buxom mother lost her life in those shining 
waters, but that the sight of the disaster had de- 
prived her child of the power of speech. 

Long little Gwenifer hung between life and death, 
nursed by a neighbor who, having no household ties 
of her own, consented to take up her abode in poor 
Jinni's cottage until the child should recover or die; 
and Gwenifer lived, grew well and strong again, but 
her power of speech did not return. She was not 
alone in her bereavement, for at Scethryg the sudden 
death of the head of the family had plunged his home 
into confusion as well as sorrow. Being a widower, 
there was no one left to take on the management of 
the farm except his only son, Gildas, a boy of six- 
teen, who had hitherto, under the somewhat grudging 
and strict surveillance of his father, shown but little 
aptitude for farming. The sudden tragic manner 
of his father's death seemed to overwhelm the lad with 
sorrow, and he called to mind his past misdoings with 
a poignancy of regret that magnified his small de- 
linquencies into serious faults, and he awoke from the 
stupor of a first grief with a strong determination 
to do better, and to master the adverse fate which 
seemed to his youthful imagination to have cruelly 
deprived him of help and counsel just when he was 
most in need of them. His father's irritating and 
niggardly ways were all forgotten, and only his acts 
of kindness and his seasons of tenderness were re- 
membered. 



THE BOY-MASTER n 

With all his carelessness and his headstrong ways, 
Gildas had fine traits in his character, and the sad 
occurrence which had deprived him of a parent seemed 
in the mysterious dispensation of Providence to be 
the very thing calculated to call out these good traits. 
His dark eyes lost a little of their sparkle perhaps, 
and his lips took a firmer curve as he turned to the 
duties of his farm life. His first important step 
was to take his father's half-brother to live with him 
as steward and manager; and although there had 
been much shaking of heads and forebodings of evil 
in the village, when the boy first declared his in- 
tention of keeping on the upland farm in his own 
hands, the news of this first step met with general ap- 
proval, and old Jerry the boatman was heard to 
declare that " perhaps the lad would behave^ if he 
can only keep that hot, proud spirit of his in order ! " 

" Proud spirit ! " said Ebben the carpenter. " I'd 
like to see the man or the spirit that Gildas couldn't 
master." 

Jerry deliberately cut a fresh quid for his cheek 
before he answered : " I'm not denying that the boy is 
strong, but he may manage the devil himself and yet 
not be able to master his own spirit ; that's what I'm 
saying, man ! " and with a shove of his oar he thrust 
his boat from land. 

The few thatched cottages that bordered the creek 
were known by the high-sounding name of Tregildas 
— Gildas town or home. Who this Gildas had been 
nobody knew with any certainty, but tradition averred 



1« QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

he was an ancestor of the Scethryg family — a man 
of proud and overbearing spirit, who kept not only 
his own dependents under his despotic sway, but car- 
ried his raids and cruelties into the surrounding dis- 
tricts, until his name became a terror to the neighbor- 
hood. Jonathan Rees treated this tradition with a 
show of incredulity; but when his son was bom he 
had christened him Gildas, and as the boy grew up 
he bid fair to emulate his fierce ancestor in the bold- 
ness and determination of his character, though those 
traits were counterbalanced by a warmth of heart 
that was probably wanting in the first of the name. 
His father was often heard to declare, " There's a 
fool I was to call him Gildas; as sure as Fm alive, 
I believe the name puts things into his head and makes 
him penstif." However that might be, it was evident 
that after his father's death the lad seemed to have 
taken upon himself not only the management of his 
own headstrong self, but of all those who came in 
contact with him. Up early and late, he and n'wncwl 
Sam tilled and hoed and planted, and compelled the 
hitherto bare and badly farmed fields to yield their 
full meed of produce, until at last his neighbors said : 
" There's a good farmer is Gildas Rees ! Dei anwl ! 
Old Jonathan would stare to see the farm so tidy; 
but fair play to him, he gave the boy good schooling." 
" Yes indeed ! " said another, " but 'tisn't that, I 
am thinking; because there's our Ben has had the 
same schooling, but Gildas knows how to put his 
schooling into the farm, seems to me." 



THE BOY-MASTER 13 

" That's it, that's it. Got a good heart loo, the 
bachgen! See how he was feeling for the los'ach 
Gwenifer, and wouldn't let her be sent to the work- 
house." 

" No, but in my deed Pm thinking we'll repent 
that. What will we do with a girl that can't speak 
a word? She'll be no use for dairy or field ! " 

"Well, I dono," said the first speaker, laughing, 
" perhaps 'twill be a good thing to have one woman 
amongst us who won't clabber and jabber. Poor 
thing! when she's well she can come to us to mind 
the geese and turkeys for a bit." And so Gwenifer's 
fate was settled for her, and when at last she was con- 
sidered well enough to leave the cottage where she 
had spent her happy childhood, the bits of furniture 
were sold and old Jerri Jenkins, taking the child by 
the hand said, " Don't she cry, 'merch-i ! She shall 
come and mend the nets, and row the boat across for 
me sometimes." 

. He had meant it kindly, but the girl had dragged 
her hand away with a scream and run into the empty 
cottage, where all that remained of the " bits o' duds " 
that had made the place habitable was the framework 
of an old bedstead, which, being built on one side into 
the mud wall, was not removable. Upon its bare 
boards Gwenifer had sprung and crouched in the 
furthest comer, her little brown fingers clasped round 
her knees, her eyes glistening with the tears which 
she restrained with difficulty. One by one the vil- 
lagers who had gathered to the sale had tried to en- 



14 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

tice her from her corner, but blandishments, entreaties, 
and even threats were all in vain. Not even the 
storm of wind that rose at sunset had the effect of 
moving her from the comer of the bed, where she had 
often slept, her head upon the bosom which those 
shining yellow waters had cruelly hidden from her 
for ever. 

At Ifiwt, as the storm increased in fury, the villagers 
wearying of their importunities began to look at one 
another in puzzled annoyance. 

" I told you we should have trouble with her," said 
one. " My advice is, lock the door and let us go 
home. No harm can come to her, and perhaps in 
the morning she'll have come to her senses." 

" Listen to me," said Jerri, who was always con- 
sidered to be a man of strong sense (especially by 
himself), and with a turn of his quid and a shrewd 
wink, he continued : " Who brought this bother upon 
us? Wasn't it Gildas himself, refusing to let her be 
sent to the workhouse? Well, then, let him manage 
the girl. We'll lock the door and go straight up to 
Scethryg and tell him about her, and let him settle the 
matter. After all, 'tis no business of ours, eh? " and 
thinking that Jerri had solved the difficulty discreetly, 
two or three of them accompanied him up to the 
farm, locking the door on the willful child, who sat 
on the bare bedstead with the look of a frightened 
animal who seeks in the faces of those around it for 
some explanation of its trouble. 

At Scethryg the fury of the storm was felt more 



THE BOY-MASTER 16 

than in the hut, which was somewhat sheltered by a 
rising of the moor. 

In the cosy kitchen, lighted up by the blaze of the 
logs which nVncwl Sam had just brought in, Gildas 
sat with a knitted brow jotting down his " counts '* 
in a leather-bound volume, in which his father and 
grandfather had recorded their losses and gains, to- 
gether with the births, deaths, and marriages, and 
other events of importance in the family. 

He had just written " Oction at poor Jinni Owen's 
today. * Moelen ' had a fine red bull calf," when 
the thumb latch w€is raised to admit Jerri and his 
followers. 

" Jari ! here's a sudden storm ! Look here, mish- 
teer, what are we to do? 'Tis Gwenifer Owen won't 
move from her mother's bed, not for kind words, nor 
threats, nor sweets, nor nothing. What will we do? " 

The lad looked up from his writing, with a flush 
of annoyance. "How do I know?" was his first 
hasty answer. 

**Well, we've done our best with her, whatever," 
said Jerri, "but we didn't like to carry her out by 
force without asking you, 'machgen-i, because, of 
course, you see 'tis to you she belongs." 

** Oh, I see," said Gildas, with a sudden intuition, 
** you are throwing her upon me because I wouldn't 
let her go to the workhouse," and he laughed with 
a little flash of sarcasm. " All right ! go home all 
of you to your beds, and leave the key here ; I'll see 
to the child." 



16 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

The men were profuse in their denials of his sug- 
gestion. 

" No indeed, mishteer ! nothing could be further 
from my thoughts," said Jerri. " FU go at once 
and carry her up here, with your leave, kick and 
scream she ever so much." 

" No, no, go you home," said Gildas ; " I'll manage 
her." 

" ril manage her! " scoffed one of the men, as they 
fought their way home through the wind ; " that 
boy thinks he can manage the world ! " 

**Well, indeed! he is doing very well with his 
world," said Jerri, but the wind carried his voice 
away. 

In the farm kitchen the lad continued to bend over 
his diary, n'wncwl Sam rearranging the logs on the 
hearth, till the old room glowed with their blazing 
light, and every pot and pan shone out, and every 
quaint brown stool threw its shadow on the floor. 
Het clumped in and out in her wooden shoes, and Ben 
Stable came in from the yard carrying his lantern, 
which blinked and sparkled through its numerous 
eyes. 

"Don't put it out," said the boy-master, seeing 
that Ben had inflated his cheeks in readiness for the 
pufi^: " I'm going out." 

No one was surprised, as it was his nightly custom 
to inspect the animals in their sheds before drawing 
the clumsy wooden bolt for the night; but n'wncwl 
Sam called out as he struggled with the wind at the 



THE BOY-MASTER 17 

door, " rd see to the horses first if I was you. Leave 
the * croten ' in the dark a bit, and she'll be ready 
enough to come." 

Without answering, Gildas closed the door and 
turned to the yard, carefully inspecting the sheds, 
and, last of all, looking into the barn, to be sure that 
the beggar whom he had permitted to sleep there was 
not smoking, and so endangering the safety of the 
place. 

All was safe and in order, and, drawing the string 
latch behind him, he turned towards the moorland 
side of the hill, where Jinni's cottage stood. The 
wind had risen to a gale, rushing up against him from 
the sea, and lifting the clumps of heather and furze 
in his path as if it would tear them from their roots. 
The cows, who loved the short herbage on the moor, 
were lying here and there under the shelter of the 
blackthorn bushes; they raised their heads a moment 
in wonder as the lantern flashed by them, and a for- 
lorn sheep who had lost her lamb woke up, and, 
reminded of her loss, bleated out her sorrow to the 
stormy night. Gildas pressed on with that curious 
look of set purpose in his face that hid so completely 
from others the feelings that prompted his actions. 
It must be confessed that there was much annoyance 
mixed with the generous pity that incited him to 
brave the elements on such a night. ^^ Bother the 
chit!" he muttered as his lantern swung round, and 
his cap flew skywards behind him ; for in spite of the 
pity he had felt for little Gwenifer Owen, when his 



18 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

own heart was softened by the same loss that had 
brought such disaster to her, and though he had 
firmly opposed the idea of sending her to the work- 
house, his kindness had gone no farther, and he had 
almost forgotten her existence while she had been 
laid up fighting so hard a fight with fever and death. 

During that time he had found himself and his own 
tangled affairs a hard enough problem to grapple 
with; but the sale at Jinni's cottage had recalled the 
tragedy to his mind, and he had determined as he 
hoed the turnips that day to inquire for the child and 
do something to help her if possible, for he had rather 
an exalted idea of his responsibility as a landlord. 

Perhaps this accounted for his apparent willing- 
ness to take upqn himself the burden which he saw 
the villagers were thrusting upon him. At all events, 
here he is at the door of the hut, which under the 
driving clouds, and beaten by the storm wind, looks 
desolate in the extreme. 

He knocked at the door, then at the tiny window, 
but no sign of life appeared in the cottage. 

" Hai! Gwenifer! " he called at last. " Gwenifer 
Owen, dost hear, then? " But no sound reached his 
ears except the roaring of the wind as it rushed up 
from the north, and bent the scrub and heather on 
Its way. 

*^ I am going to unlock the door and bring a light 
in, child, so don't thee be frightened ; ^ and in another 
moment the perforated lantern shed its dancing pat- 
terns upon the bare whitewashed walls and earthen 



THE BOY-MASTER 19 

floor of the cottage — upon the figure of a child also, 
who sat crouched up in an empty bed, her hands 
clasped round her drawn-up knees, her dark hair 
hanging disheveled and tumbled over her shoulders, 
her lustrous brown eyes looking at the newcomer 
with the terror and helplessness of a hunted animal. 
Gildas had felt nothing but annoyance and impatience 
as he had fought his way over the moor ; for girls and 
children were but insignificant objects in his prospect 
of the world, and Gwenifer was just the age that 
made her less than nothing to the boy full of new- 
bom plans and projects. Nevertheless, the sight of 
that forlorn creature, looking up at him with fear and 
distrust, touched something deep down in his heart, 
and some manly feeling of protection rose in his na« 
ture. 

" Come, child,'* he said. " Thee must not stay 
longer here in the dark. 'Tis autumn, and the nights 
are cold. Thou seest the furniture is all gone, and 
it is not fit for thee to sleep here alone. Come, get 
thee down.** 

But the child only shook her head slowly. 

**Wilt not come with me, and sleep with Het in 
the loft at Scethryg to-night? ♦♦ 

Another shake of her head was her only answer, 
and in vain did Gildas coax, command, and even 
threaten; the child grew. firmer, and continued to 
shake her head. Her obstinacy, however, only moved 
the lad's own unyielding temper, and laying hold of 
her hand he endeavored to draw her towards him; 



jeo QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

but she screamed and struggled so much that he de- 
sisted suddenly, and said in an altered tcme of voice: 

" Gwenif er, listen ! Thou art ten years of age, 
and I have heard thou hast sense beyond thy years. 
Knowest thou that I am thy mishteer? Knowest that 
I came down through the storm because I was sorry 
for thee, and could not sleep in my bed, knowing that 
thou wert here in the dark and the lightning? Yes, 
it does lighten! Dost remember that I, too, am an 
orphan since that red siinset? Art not sorry for me 
too?'' 

Now he had touched the chords of tender memories 
and love, and the brown fingers were unclasped from 
the knees. Slipping on to the ground, she drew 
nearer to Gildas, and, leaning her cheek on his rough 
coat, sobbed heavily, the tears dropping slowly down 
her cheeks. 

^^ That's a brave maid ! " said Gildas encourag- 
ingly. " Why, thee and I ought to be good friends 
if any one ought. Come, trust to me ! " and opening 
the door, they were met by a furious gust of wind 
which blew over the lantern and left them in the dark. 
Locking the door, he took her by the hand once more, 
and, she yielding to his guidance with no further 
demur, they turned towards the open moor, where the 
blast blew up behind them, hurrying Gildas's pace into 
a run, and almost tearing the girl from his grasp. 
" Seems to me I had better carry thee," he said, 
stooping and gathering the little thin form into his 
arms. 



THE BOY-MASTER 21 

Scarcely feeling her weight and helped on by the 
gale, he made good progress, and Gwenifer sobbed 
with her cheek on his breast. Gradually her tears 
ceased, and she lay still, and more content than she 
had been since her mother's death. 

Reaching a gap in the hedge, Gildas rested a mo- 
ment, leaning on the bank to recover his breath, and 
looking down at his light burden saw that she had 
fallen asleep, her long, dark eyelashes resting on 
her pale cheek, on which tears glistened. " Here," 
he cried, entering the farmhouse door, where n'wncwl 
Sam was waiting for his supper — " here, Het, here's 
a new shepherdess come to Scethryg!" And he 
dumped his burden on the floor with the awkward 
unintentional roughness of a boy. 

Het drew near, looking rather scared as the rudely 
awakened brown eyes looked round the comfortable 
kitchen. 

"Diwedd anwl! What am I to do with her?" 
she asked, not in the most gracious of tones ; and in- 
stantly detecting the reluctance in her manner, the 
sensitive child turned again to Gildas, who, rather 
tired of the whole affair, was already sitting down to 
the table. 

** Why, a basin of bread and milk and a good 
warm by the fire, and then off to bed with thee," he 
said, " 'tis full time ; " and Het knew by the tone of 
command that further demur would be useless, so she 
thrust the roiind-backed oak stool towards the hearth, 
and gently pushed Gwenifer into it. 



22 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

Before many minutes the girl was hungrily sup- 
ping her bowl of barley-bread and milk, for she had 
scarcely tasted food that day, the sale having occu- 
pied every one's attention too much to allow them to 
think of the silent child, who had crouched behind 
the garden hedge, her heart bursting with feelings 
that she was unable to express. No wonder that the 
large tears rolled down her cheeks, as she hid there 
in the shadow — no wonder that a little wail broke 
from her dumb lips, as one by one the few rough 
articles of furniture were brought out and sold. It 
had been a bitter experience, one to be ever remem- 
bered, and the long day of endurance had been light- 
ened only by Gildas's kind though firm tones; but 
when the lad's strong arms had enfolded her and 
borne her safely through the wind and storm, the 
sorely tried child had sunk into trustful slumber, and 
from that moment he had taken his place as her 
master and her owner. 

Unconscious of this, the matter-of-fact Gildas, as 
soon as he had ordered her in Het's safe keeping 
to bed, dismissed the subject from his mind, and was 
soon arranging with n'wncwl Sam for the threshing 
next day. 

" And what'st going to do with that dumb girl? " 
said the latter, when the subject of the threshing had 
been settled. " Mark my words ! she'll be a burden 
upon thee for ever ! " For although Gildas often 
sought and followed his advice in matters of farming 
experience, yet he felt that he was generally controlled 



THE BOY-MASTER S3 

and dominated by his willful nephew, and he consoled 
himself for this by systematically objecting to every- 
thing that the younger man proposed. 

" Didn't you say Twm had grown careless, and 
had given notice three times this month ? " 

" Pouf ! I don't take no notice of him, not I ! " 

"But I do," said Gildas. "Let him go. This 
child will be well soon ; she can take his place. Let's 
to bed." 

N'wncwl Sam put his pipe away, and followed 
Gildas up the crooked stairs, still grumbling to him- 
self — " Mark my word, thou'lt see then ! As true 
as there's rain after wind, thou'lt repent ! " 

They had reached the turning in the stairs when 
both stopped and looked at each other, for above the 
roaring of the storm they heard a timid but distinct 
knocking at the door. 

" Who can it be this time o' night? " said Gildas. 

** Be bound 'tis some tramp ; let him be ! " an- 
swered n*wncwl Sam, but without replying, his nephew 
went down and unbarred the door. 



CHAPTER II 

THE OLD STOREHOUSE 

When he opened the outer door, Gildas's first en- 
counter was with the stormy wind, which blew out his 
candle before he had more than a moment's glance at 
the visitor who knocked at his door so late. 

That glance, however, was sufficient to reveal the 
figure of Hezekiah Morgan, an old man who for two 
years had been permitted to occupy a loft over the 
storehouse, paying a small rent for this poor refuge 
from the storms of life. 

He had once filled a responsible position as master 
of " Bryn Austin," one of the best schools in South 
Wales; but now, broken in health and spirits, he 
was thankful to find a shelter in the old loft, which 
had before his advent been used as a receptacle for 
old boards, broken harness, rusty tools, and many 
other unconsidered trifles connected with farm life. 

" Hezek ! " exclaimed Gildas in surprise. " Come 
in, man; while I light my candle and hunt for your 
key. In the dear's name! where have you come 
from in such a storm, and so early in the year? Is 
Nance with you?" 

" Yes," said the old man in a gentle voice, which 
trembled a little from the stress of the wind with 

Hi 



THE OLD STOREHOUSE 25 

which he had battled. ^^Yes, here she is;" and he 
drew aside the folds of his shabby brown cloak, dis- 
closing the figure of a child, who clung to him closely 
and looked out from her hiding-place with laughing 
blue eyes and a dimpled roguish face. 

" She has only played hide-and-seek with the wind 
under my old cloak. It has buffeted me sorely, but 
everything is fun to Nance. 

" We were on the Wildrom Mountains when we 
heard of the calamity which has befallen thee and 
deprived me of a good friend. Gildas, my heart 
aches for thee, lad; and so I returned, thinking per- 
haps I might be of some service to thee. The herb 
o' gold has not ripened yet, and the moon-wort was 
only beginning to seed; but I could stay no longer 
after I had heard of thy sore loss. One of the serv- 
ants at the farm where we lodged brought a news- 
paper home from the fair and lent it to me, and in 
that I read of the accident." 

** Here is the key," said Gildas, finding it between 
the plates on the dresser^ where he had been fumbling, 
partly to hide his awkwardness, for a lad of sixteen 
shrinks from speaking of his sorrow. 

" Will I put the * cawl ' on again? " he asked ; *' a 
bowl of it would warm you before you go." 

** No, no," said the old man. " I have all we want 
in my wallet, and little Nance will soon kindle a fire 
and put things straight. Good-night, my lad; I see 
thine eyes are heavy with sleep." 

"Good-night," said Gildas, unbarring the door 



S6 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

again ; and as the old man went out, a bright round 
face peeped smilingly from under his cloak. The 
wind caught them at the doorway, and a peal of 
merry laughter from the child reached the lad's ear 
with the swirling blast. However, neither laughter 
nor wind prevented his falling into a heavy dreamless 
sleep as soon as he had thrown himself upon his bed, 
while out in the " old storws," as it was generally 
called, the old man and his grandchild spread their 
simple supper in the light of the fire of wood which 
they had soon kindled. In its warmth and bright- 
ness, Hezek — or, to give him his proper name, Heze- 
kiah Morgan — lost the tremble in his voice some- 
what, and regained his usual placid demeanor. 

His had been a life of strenuous efforts, ending in 
the failure and disappointment that generally attend 
the man who allows himself to be led captive by 
a headstrong passion. As a schoolmaster he had been 
very popular, so much so that to have been a pupil 
of Hezekiah Morgan was considered the best step- 
ping-stone to success in life; but in a weak moment 
he had given way to a foolish fancy and had married 
a beautiful but uneducated peasant girl. 

This was the commencement of his reverses; for, 
finding, to his disappointment, that he could not raise 
her to his standard of grace and refinement, he be- 
came dissatisfied and depressed, and turned for solace 
more and more to his own desultory and curious 
studies, interesting himself much in astrology as well 
as astronomy, and, most of all, devoting himself to 



THE OLD STOREHOUSE 27 

his favorite study of botany ; for in the herbs of the 
field he believed was to be found a cure for every 
ailment to which humanity is liable. 

Gradually he lost interest in his school, the num- 
bers of his pupils dwindled away, and his wife, keenly 
alive to her own shortcomings, sank into ill-health and 
died at the birth of her first child, leaving her ec- 
centric husband and his helpless ofi^spring to face 
the journey of life without her. This child — a girl 
— had grown up somehow, and married early a well- 
to-do farmer, who had willingly taken her old father 
also to live with him, as out of his former earnings 
he still possessed sufficient to pay his son-in-law for 
bis board and lodging. But misfortune had not done 
with Hezekiah Morgan; for his daughter, inheriting 
her mother's malady, died soon after the birth of her 
first child. 

For the next six years the old man lived on at the 
farm, feeling himself, as his small savings diminished 
more and more, an unwelcome encumbrance. 

He was devotedly attached to his little grand- 
daughter, and upon him fell the chief care of the 
child, her rough father taking no interest in her, 
although she was an attractive little creature, full 
of sportive and enticing ways. It was convenient to 
feel, when the harvest, the sowing, the corn-grinding 
called all hands to work, that the child needed no 
care or nursing while " Dacu," or in English pro- 
nunciation, ** Dakee,'* was ready to watch over her 
and gU€Lrd her from every danger. And so it came 



28 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

to pass that every day, and in every season of the 
year, the old man and the child might be seen roam- 
ing about the farm lands, sunning themselves on the 
gold-starred hedges, or sheltering behind the hay- 
stacks; anywhere away from the house where they 
were both made to feel that they were only in the way. 

At last there came a day when the hard-fisted 
and hard-hearted farmer announced his intention of 
bringing home a new mistress to the farm, and Heze- 
kiah, who was now generally known as " old Hezek, 
the herbalist," had said, " Then perhaps you will not 
want to keep me here 'any longer? " 

His voice trembled, and his hands closed and opened 
nervously, for he felt that banishment from the t:hild 
would mean death to him. 

The farmer had seen his anxiety and at once taken 
advantage of it. 

" Well," he said, " most like, look you^ a second 
wife won't care to see the first wife's father here. 
'Twill be enough for her to have another woman's 
child to 'tend." 

" No doubt, no doubt," said the old man, his 
tongue cleaving to his parched mouth. 

" You wouldn't let the little one come with me, 
would you? " To him the favor seemed too great to 
expect. 

" You know," he continued eagerly, " I have still 
enough to keep me in food and lodging. You have 
the capital, and for Nance's sake you would send me 
the interest regularly. I would go back to Tregildas 



THE OLD STOREHOUSE 29 

to end my days in my old neighborhood, I think.** 

" Ten shillings a week," said the fanner grudg- 
ingly. ** Tan-i-marw ! His a fine thing to have money 
and nothing to do! But, look here. If you make 
your will to her, and sign it before you go, you may 
take the child. 'Twill be a great bother, but I'll send 
the interest regular. You'll take care of Nance, will 
you?" 

" Yes, yes ! " said Hezek, " and whoever wants, she 
diall not." 

" Very good," said the farmer. " This day week 
Pll be bringing my wife home." 

Before the day was over he had written out the 
simple document, and the old man had signed it with 
trembling fingers, trembling not in sorrow at having 
to leave the house where he had had little love or 
tenderness shown him, but in fear lest his son-in-law 
might change his mind, and refuse to let him take 
the child away with him. 

"When can I go?" he asked, standing with his 
old battered hat in his hand. 

** That is as you will," answered the farmer. 
** There is no hurry for a day or two." 

" Well, 'tis a fine day," said the old man, " I had 
better start at once ; you will want to see little Nance 
smnetimes, so we will come here on our rounds, per- 
haps, eh?" 

" Very good," said the farmer, reaching down his 
biU-hook, and turning towards the door m if tired of 
the conversation. 



80 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

^* Good-bye, then," the old man called after him, 
for he had already reached the gate of the close. 

" Oh, fForwel ! " said the farmer, stopping ; " I 
didn't think you were going so soon. And here," he 
continued, returning slowly with his hand in his 
pocket, " give her this — this shilling," he said with 
a burst of generosity. " 'Tis better for me not to see 
her. Perhaps she'll cry, and not be willing to go. 
And mind you, I wouldn't be willing to let her go, 
only I know you'll treat her well, and if I kept her 
here she'd worry our lives out fretting after you." 

" Yes, yes ! b't shwr," said Hezek, " and I thank 
you for your kind consideration. Good-bye ! " 

Once more " fforwel " from the farmer, and he was 
gone to " trash " his hedgerows and give a general 
tidy up, in preparation for the new wife who was to 
arrive so soon. 

Hezek had never felt much affection for his son- 
in-law, nevertheless he felt sad and sorrowful as he 
tied up his few belongings in his knapsack, for, alas ! 
his heart was warm and tender, and therefore open 
to many a wound that one more callous would have 
escaped. " Come, dear heart ! " he said, affecting a 
jocose and lively mood which he was far from feeling, 
" come, tie up thy bundle. We are going to run 
away together to-day, thou and I, as we have often 
planned. Come! and we will travel over the blue 
hills to where the sea is tossing and frothing; I will 
show thee the white-winged ships that sail over it to 
far-off lands, and the sea-pinks grpwing on the rocks. 



THE OLD STOREHOUSE 31 

and the white sea-gulls that float through the air. 
I will show thee the house where I was born, and we 
will find a lodging somewhere near, and live there." 

" Yes, for ever and ever, Dakee," said the child, 
executing a whirling dance around him, and flipping 
her tiny pink fingers. " Oh ! there's happy we'll be ! 
and father and the new mistress won't ever find us." 

" No, no, 'merch-i." And with his first week's al- 
lowance in his pocket, the old man set forth with a 
glow of hope in his heart which had long been a 
stranger to it, Nance tripping beside him, her little 
blue bundle hung over her shoulder, and her shilling 
tied up in the comer of her pocket-handkerchief. 

Leisa, the servant, had filled a capacious wallet 
with suflScient food for two or three days. " Well, 
in my deed," she said, " I don't know what will we 
do without you, when we are sick." 

'' Thou art never sick, Leisa, so thou wilt not miss 
me," answered Hezek, with a gentle smile, and he 
bade the girl " good-bye " with real regret in his sim- 
ple old heart. " But surely," he thought as he 
trudged along behind Nance, who fluttered like a but- 
terfly from side to side of the mountain road, " surely 
there are kind hearts in the world somewhere still, 
and where if not in my old neighborhood? " His step 
became lighter and his voice more firm, as visions of 
his old home rose before him and old memories awoke 
within him. 

" I'll go straight to Scethryg," he thought ; "Jon- 
athan and I were good friends long ago, perhaps 



32 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

he'll find us lodging,'* and with this vague prospect 
reviving his spirits, he journeyed on over moor and 
fell, ever like the wounded deer, drawing nearer and 
nearer to his old home. 

" Tell me about the sea," Nance would say, when, 
tired of her fluttering, she would return to the old 
man's side, and, nestling her hand into his, would 
walk soberly for a few minutes. 

" The sea! Oh, it is broad and shining, stretching 
as far as we can see. The sea-pinks grow on the cliffs 
above it, and shells, pink, white, brown, and yellow, 
crowd in the chinks of the rocks around its edge." 

" Shells and sea-pinks? Oh, Dakee!" and Nance 
would look up at him with wondering blue eyes, and 
again ejaculate, "Oh, Dakee!" And so they wan- 
dered on together side by side, often hand in hand, 
the child oblivious to all but the present happiness, the 
old man rejoicing in the feeling that at last his dar- 
ling was all his own. 

It was late on the second day when they reached 
Tregildas, Hezek weary and footsore, but Nance still 
brimming over with vivacity and excitement, for here 
in very truth was the broad blue sea that she had 
dreamt of; here were the cliffs, the white-sailed ships, 
and here the sea-pinks growing on the bare grey 
rocks. Here, too, were the ruined lime-kilns which 
Hezek had told her of, at the curve of the inlet which 
in his youth had glowed like two fiery eyes looking out 
to sea, and when, on the strand, she picked up shells, 
real shells! her delight was unbounded, and she shed 



THE OLD STOREHOUSE 88 

some petulant tears and pouted her red lower lip when 
the old man turned from the shore toward the higher 
lands of Scethryg. 

" Don't cry, dear heart," he said. " But a little 
way further and we'll be at the end of our journey." 

" But I don't want to go further," said the willful 
child. " Go you, and leave me to pick up shells." 

" To-morrow, my little one ; to-morrow thou shalt 
play all day on the shore." But Nance still sulked 
and lagged behind, until suddenly out of the gloam- 
ing a dark-faced boy came up to them dangling a 
bundle of fish. In a moment Nance was eagerly in- 
terested, and while Hezek inquired the way she danced 
round the silver mackerel and clapped her hands with 
pleasure. 

"Did you come from the sea, too?" she asked. 
" Oh, there's pretty things are in it. Will I carry 
them for you, boy? " 

" No," said the boy rather curtly ; " but if you are 
going to Scethryg I daresay you will have them for 
supper: that is where I live." 

"And that is where I want to go," said Hezek. 
" Jonathan Rees no doubt is your father, 'machgen-i ; 
have you ever head him speak of Hezekiah Morgan? " 

" Yes, I think," answered the boy, slackening his 
pace a little. " There is Scethryg," he said, pointing 
to an old farmhouse of grey stone. 

** Yes, yes, I know it well, my boy ; I asked the way 
because that new bit of road puzzled me ; now we're on 
the moor I know every step of it — och-i, och-i ! " 



34 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

Jonathan Recs, waiting in the farmyard for the re- 
turn of his son, was not in the best of humor for 
granting favors when Hezek, preceded by Gildas, 
arrived. 

" So thee'st seen fit to come hime ^ at last, idle- 
pack ! " were his first words of greeting, words which 
his son took no notice of as he passed into the kitchen 
and delivered his fish to be cooked for supper. 

"You don't know me, Jonathan Rees?" said 
Hezek, with outstretched hand. 

" No, I don't," said the farmer ; " but coming so 
late, you must be wanting a lodging, and there are 
two tramps in the bam already — so — " 

" No, no, I am no tramp ; but indeed I thought per- 
haps you would give us a lodging — just for to- 
night, at any rate. Don't you remember Hezekiah 
Morgan ? " 

" Caton pawb ! Where did you come from this 
time of night? Of course I remember you now;" 
and he took the proffered hand, but with no warmth 
of greeting. " Come in," he added grudgingly, pre- 
ceding his visitor into the comfortable farmhouse 
kitchen, where Hezek proceeded to explain the reason 
of his advent and to make his request known. " I 
had a longing, you see, to end my days in my old 
neighborhood," he said, when, after many hums and 
has, Jonathan seemed inclined to make room for him. 

"Couldn't he have the old storehouse?" said the 
brown-skinned boy, who was watching Het frying 
the fish. 



THE OLD STOREHOUSE S6 

" Of course I will pay whatever you like to charge 
me, in reason," said Hezek. 

" And if Dakee hasn't enough, I have a shilling," 
said Nance, who thought it was time to suggest some- 
thing definite, for the warm glow of the fire was 
pleasant and the smell of the frying fish appetizing. 

Jonathan Rees took no notice of the child's remark, 
but, seeing a chance of turning the old storehouse to 
some account, agreed to his son's proposal ; and find- 
ing that the old man made no demur to his rather 
exorbitant charge, added in an effusive manner, 
" Well, look you ! You're an old friend, so I'll throw 
in the vegetables for your cawl into the bargain ; and 
I daresay you and your grandchild will weed the 
garden in return." 

" That we will, indeed," said Hezek ; and so it was 
settled. And feeling that he had made a good bar- 
gain, Jonathan waxed more amiable, and over their 
supper the two men vied with each other in recalling 
old memories, though the farmer was ten years 
younger than his guest, until at last Nance fell asleep, 
and was carried by Het up to the only spare bed the 
house possessed. Here Hezek, following soon, sank 
upon his pillow with a heart full of gratitude; for 
although he had not been received with the warmth 
and friendliness which he had associated with a re- 
turn to his old neighborhood, he was used to coldness 
and rebuffs, and was thankful that Jonathan Rees 
had agreed to his request, though grudgingly. 

And so he and Nance settled down to the rude but 



86 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

safe shelter of the " old storws," where Hezek was to 
end his days and the child to grow up to womanhood. 

" Maldraeth ! Maldraeth ! When will we go to 
Maldraeth?" she cried impatiently next morning, 
when the old man, assisted by Gildas, was endeavoring 
to bring some order into the confusion that reigned in 
the loft. 

" By-and-by, by-and-by," said Hezek, trying to 
pacify the willful girl, who stamped her little foot 
and grumbled while the others worked. 

" By-and-by ! " said the lad irritably, for children, 
especially girls, were to him simply impedimenta to be 
ignored and avoided as much as possible. " By-and- 
by, if I was your grandfather, Td give you a whip- 
ping ! " 

Nance stood still a moment to stare at him in 
astonishment before she answered, her eyes flashing, 
her cheeks burning. " You my grandfather ! " and 
pointing her finger at him she continued disdainfully, 
" You, indeed ! There's a fine grandfather you^d 
make! Not if you put on Dakee's spectacles, and 
carried his wallet of herbs, you wouldn't look wise! 
Tush ! I don't care that for you ! Grandfather, in- 
deed ! " and she snapped her fingers derisively ; but 
Gildas was too busily occupied to notice the little irate 
fairy. He was entering into the business of domicil- 
ing the newcomers with real zest, and his father, who 
presently came to see how the work was progressing, 
said, with a little sarcasm in his voice, ^^ Oh, yes ! 
Come to Gildas for anything but the farm work ! '* 



THE OLD STOREHOUSE S7 

a»d he turned away before the boy, coloring hotly, 
had time to defend himself. 

At last everything was arranged to his satisfaction. 
"And I'll come to-morrow to board off the end for 
the two little bedrooms for you," he said, preparing 
to leave the scene of his operations for a time, when 
he was surprised to hear a sob from Nance, who was 
standing with her pinafore to her eyes. 

** What is it then, dear heart? " said the old man, 
with tender pity. 

** I want to make friends with him," answered the 
child, looking at the brown-faced boy. 

" Oh yes, you must forgive her," said the old man. 

** Alreit, alreit ! " he said, turning towards the 
door; but Nance, with her face to the wall, wept 
aloud. 

*' Give me a kiss, then," she cried, for that was the 
only form of reconciliation she knew of. 

** Ach ! no," said the boy, " I can't bear kissing." 
Then, seeing another wail was imminent, he hastily 
dived his hand into his pocket and extracted a screwed 
paper of sweets. 

*^ Here ! " he said, thrusting them into the child's 
hand. 

Nance smiled and accepted the peace-offering. 
" You shall be my grandfather, if you like," she said, 
sucking her sweets; but Gildas showed scarcely as 
much gratitude as she expected, for he was off at 
once and running down the ruinous flight of stone 
steps that connected the loft with the farmyard. 



38 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

In the afternoon, however, he returned, full of 
interest and energy, having collected from all sorts 
of odd nooks and comers, and eked out by a small 
outlay in the village shop, a sufficient assortment of 
articles for the primitive menage. A few cups, 
plates, and bowls ranged on a shelf which he himself 
had fixed on the wall, a crock for the cawl, a kettle, 
and a tea-pot, and behold Hezek and Nance settled 
in their new abode and quite content with its arrange- 
ment! 

Once more, as the sun was setting, the child began 
to reiterate her cry for Maldraeth, a lonely cove under 
the cliffs; an^ he set out not unwillingly to gratify 
her desire, for it had been a favorite resort of his boy- 
hood and often in his mind of late. 

He had laid the scene of most of his legends and 
** stories " on Maldraeth, stories that had beguiled 
many an hour when he and Nance had roamed about 
the fields of Penwem together, and for this reason she 
was now impatient to see it for herself. So over the 
moor and down the rugged path they made their way, 
even the excitable child consenting to " hold tight on 
Dakee's hand " as she looked over the dizzy height 
to the shore below. And when at last they reached 
the pebbly strand her voluble tongue was silent, and 
her little hand clung to his In a solemn awe as she 
saw the tall crags towering over the lonely beach, 
which even at noontide looked dark and forbidding. 

" See here ! " said Hezek, pointing to the bisink of 
seaweed, driftwood, and starfish left by the tide on 



THE OLD STOREHOUSE 89 

the sand. " 'Twas here most likely that Gwrgan 
found the chain of gold with which he bought his 
freedom long ago, as I told thee. And then in that 
cave, perhaps, the white lady lived, who came out 
every night when the moon was shining, and sang 
so sadly and so sweetly that the shepherds on the 
hills would weep when they heard her. Dost remem- 
ber? I have found wonderful things on this shore 
myself, for here comes everything in from the sea; 
the tide sweeps in here and leaves its treasures, be- 
cause the rocks close round it." 

Nance, however, refused to stoop over the gar- 
landed shore, turning even from the shells that lay 
scattered under her feet; and when at last the sun 
went down like a fiery red ball behind the grey 
sea, she began to whimper, " Come home, Dakee ! 
Ach! I am not liking Maldraeth," and the old man 
was never afterwards troubled by the petulant cry of 
** Maldraeth, Maldraeth ; I want to go to Mal- 
draeth!" 

Day in, day out, they roamed the fields, the 
moor, and Tregildas sands together — Hezek with 
bent shoulders and peering eyes, ever seeking for 
herbs and flowers, the child tripping about and mak- 
ing little excursions on her own account whenever 
a brighter flower or butterfly attracted her attention ; 
and his expostulating cry of " Come back, dear 
heart ! " made no more impression upon her than did 
the sea-wind whistling over the moor, until, tired 
out, she returned of her own free will, and nestling 



40 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

her hand into his, looked up into his face with such 
bewitching contrition that she seldom heard the word 
of reproof which she knew she deserved. The other 
village children seemed but little attracted by Nance's 
volatile ways, and left her rather severely alone, while 
she seemed inclined to shrink disdainfully from their 
stolid manners. Little Gwenifer Owen alone seemed 
to take to the stranger, who was of the same age as 
herself. They soon became much attached to each 
other, and Gwenifer was almost as close an attendant 
upon old Hezek the herbalist as his own grandchild, 
taking far more interest in his collection of herbs than 
did Nance, who was much too busy with her own af- 
fairs to waste her time upon " old plants that smell 
nasty, and haven't got flowers on them." 

To Hezek the peace and safety of the old loft was 
as a haven of refuge from the storms of life which 
had buffeted him so sorely, and he thankfully settled 
down to his uneventful life. In autumn he made 
excursions inland, to some locality where the plants 
he required bloomed more freely than in the keen sea- 
air, and it was during one of these pilgrimages that 
he had learnt from the shepherd of a mountain farm 
the history of the disaster which had befallen his old 
friend Jonathan Rees. As we have seen, he hurried 
back to Scethryg, and, after a journey of many days, 
reached there on the stormy night when Gildas and 
n'wncwl Sam had been suddenly disturbed on their 
way to bed. 

How they rejoiced in the shelter of the old loft 



THE OLD STOREHOUSE 41 

when Nance had kindled the fire ! How Hezek backed 
m its light! How Nance laughed at the spluttering 
and crackling of the wood! And when they spread 
on the board the simple fare which they had had the 
precaution to bring with them, what simple happiness 
was theirs! What sweet content! 



CHAPTER III 

GWENIPER 

Eight years have passed away when we next see the 
little village of Tregildas — years that have made but 
little difference to its outward appearance, and none 
to its craggy heights. A few roofs of slate, straight 
and bare and ugly, replaced the soft brown thatch of 
former years ; but the gates that had been out of re- 
pair when Hezek Morgan first took possession of the 
old storehouse still hung loose upon their hinges, or 
upon one hinge, as the case might be. Jerri's crazy 
boat still crossed the tide occasionally, and the acci- 
dent which had invested him and his boat with a tragic 
interest had been almost forgotten. 

Above the village the grey walls of Scethryg still 
stood in apparent confusion, though, approached 
more closely, it was evident that not one ivy-covered 
gable, not one flight of stone steps, not one door, but 
had a good reason for being there. Use or comfort 
only had been considered, as a shed had been added 
here or a dairy there, and the result was a dwelling- 
house both beautiful and comfortable. The lichen 
stains on the roof were a little yellower perhaps, the 
ferns round the horse-pond a little thicker and greener 
than when we saw them last. Certainly the fields and 

42 



GWENIFER 43 

hedges showed more signs of care and cultivation, for 
the master of Scethryg was energetic and thrifty, and 
had the reputation of being the best farmer on the 
coast. 

On the human beings whose acquaintance we have 
made in these pages the years have left their impress. 
The aged stooped more as they crossed the fields to 
plough or harvest; there were a few more wrinkles 
round the eyes, a little less vigor in the step. With 
the young time had been busy too, imperceptibly but 
surely leading the youth into full manhood, the girl 
into womanhood, so that when we next meet Nance 
Ellis it is difficult to recognize in the buxom young 
woman, the little elf -like child who had trotted by 
the old man's side all the way from an inland county 
to the sea-girt cliffs of Tregildas. There was still 
the same sparkle of fun and mischief in the blue eyes, 
the same crown of golden hair; and Nance was called 
a ** purty girl," in spite of her irregular features and 
a suspicion of coarseness in the square build and 
bright complexion. The nose was too short, the 
mouth rather too wide ; but why seek out the flaws in 
Nance's face? for it was never the same for an hour 
together, and if her pretty, pouting ways did not 
please her swains to-day, depend upon it to-morrow 
her smiles and jokes would lead them captive. 

The day had been dark and lowering, brooding 
clouds hanging over the sea with the persistent gloom 
of a November day; but suddenly, towards evening 
the weather seemed to remember it was March, and 



44 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

began to storm and bluster. Over the leaden sea 
came fitful gusts that curled the tips of the waves into 
little white streaks, scarcely distinguishable from the 
seagulls that were settling down on the surface in 
expectation of what the north wind might bring 
them. 

Around Scethryg it swirled and eddied, blowing the 
straw about in the farmyard and making the old 
thomhedge round the horse-pond sway and creak. 
Gildas Rees, grown tall and broad and manly, taking 
advantage of a momentary lull, went round his bams 
and outhouses to see that no doors or gates were 
swinging open. 

At the further comer of the yard he reached the 
flight of stone steps leading up to the storehouse, and, 
looking through the gathering twilight at the closed 
door at the top, stood for a moment as if debating 
within himself whether he should mount the steps or 
not. 

. It was unusual for him to hesitate long, and it was 
not many seconds before he had run up the rude ap- 
proach and knocked at the red-painted door. 

Having knocked, he did not wait for an answer, 
but raised the thumb latch, and entered in a swirl 
of wind, turning to close the door at once. 

" Only to see how you are here," he said. " I 
have been to Caermadoc to-day, and just come home. 
Are you frightened of the storm? " 

"Frightened? No, not a bit," answered Nance, 
coming forward with a smile. " If it was not getting 



GWENIFER 45 

dark I would go out and play with it. See ! Dakee 
is asleep through it all ! " 

At that moment the wind seemed to wake from its 
momentary calm, and hurl itself against the door 
with a roar and a rattle that awoke the old man and 
set Nance laughing defiantly. She shook her fist at 
the door, and, with a gesture that had clung to her 
from childhood, ended up with a snap of her fingers. 

** I don't care that for his blustering ! " she said, 
as another furious gust clamored for admittance. 

** Dear anwl ! 'tis strong up here," said Gildas, 
looking with an amused smile at the girl who pitted 
herself so recklessly against the powers of Nature 
without. 

" We are going to have tea, Dakee and I," she 
said. ** Let him whistle out there, and stop you with 
us, mishteer, and have a cup of tea. Be bound Het 
is not ready for you." 

** Yes, indeed she is whatever," said Gildas. ** Tea 
is ready and n'wncwl Sam waiting, so I must not 
stop; only I thought perhaps the wind would be 
frightening you up here with these shaky doors and 
windows." 

"Oh, twt! A fig for the storm!" said the girl, 
helping him to close the door ; and Gildas went across 
the stubble, his head bent against the blast, and bear- 
ing in his mind a distinct picture of the scene he had 
just left: the quaint old raftered room, its white- 
washed walls all aglow in the firelight, the simple 
cooking utensils hanging each on its nail round the 



46 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

hearth, the rude oak furniture, Nance's rounded figure 
moving up and down amongst them, and the old man 
dozing by the cheerful blaze. 

Hezek, awaking, looked round at the cosy bright- 
ness with a glow of content, and turned to the rough 
table which Nance carried up to the hearth, pursing 
up her full red lips and mocking the whistle of the 
wind. 

** Thou art a brave little lass," said the old man, 
who seemed never to realize that his pet was no longer 
a child ; " but thou art forgetting, 'merch-i, that the 
storm-wind is sure to bring trouble, if not sorrow, to 
somebody. What about the poor sailors out at sea 
to-night?" 

" Well, of course I would be sorry for them if I 
could see them," said Nance, as she cut the bread-and- 
butter; " but look now, Dakee: it can't bring tis any 
trouble whatever. We have no one belonging to us 
at sea. Let the old wind roar and howl its best — 
it can't come in here. So there's your nice hot tea, 
and there's your herring frizzled up as you like it; " 
and Nance made it a cosy merry meal, in spite of the 
noise and bluster of the storm raging so relentlessly 
without. 

" Gildas might have stopped to tea with us," she 
said, with a little pout on her lips that was so pretty 
and provoking. " One thing I know, he'll be older 
when I ask him next ; that he will ! " 

She had scarcely spoken when a loud knocking 
startled them both, the knocking being followed by 



GWENIFER 47 

a rough shaking of the door.^ Recalling her vaunted 
bravery, she rose, calling out, " Who is there ? " 

At that moment there came a slight lull in the 
storm, and a voice answered, " Nance Ellis ! Open 
the door for the dear's sake ! Here's a man has been 
hurt, and wants to see Hezek." 

Before he had ended his request, the door was 
opened and two men entered, almost hurled in by the 
wind. One of these Nance recognized as John Da- 
vies, the mate of the LUmen. The door closed, and 
for a few moments there was a comparative calm, dur- 
ing which the visitor began to account for his sud- 
den arrival. " Hezek, man ! 'Tis to you we are 
coming for help ; this is Cap'n Jack — you've often 
heard me talking 'bout him. Well, he has had an 
accident to his hand, and I tould him, if any one 
would cure him, 'twould be Hezek Morgan." 

Captain Jack had sunk on the chair which Nance 
brought him, his face white and drawn, while her 
grandfather, gently unwrapping the outheld hand, 
examined its injuries. 

" Ts, ts ! " ejaculated Nance as she caught sight 
of the crushed fingers. "How did it happen?" 

" Oh ! 'twas this deuce of a wind," said the mate, 
" coming on so sudden ; loosened something in the 
hold, and the cap'n and me, we was trying to right 
it, when down come Joshua Jones wife's tombstone, 
slap on his hand. Bringing it home for him from 
Liverpool we were, and, Dei anwl! I thought the 
cap?n was gone, so white he was till I moved the 



48 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

weight off him; then he soon came round; and now, 
you see what you can do for him. Well, Nance 
lass! " he added, suddenly turning to her, and grip- 
ping her hand, " how art thou? In my deed PU soon 
be failing to know thee, growing prettier and prettier 
and taller and taller every time I come home." 

Nance blushed and laughed a little, as much as she 
dared while her grandfather was probing and exam- 
ining the injured hand. 

" You have broken your fingers, lad," said the old 
man, " besides a nasty wrench of the wrist. There's 
a good doctor at Caermadoc; what d'ye think? Will 
you rather trust to me or get Gildas to drive you 
there in the car? " 

" Oh, go on," said the captain, speaking for the 
first time. " All the way to Caermadoc and this in- 
fernal pain to bear all the time? Not I!" 

Nance, at a sign from her grandfather had already 
mixed a glass of hot brandy and water, and now held 
it towards the stranger, who raising his eyes to hers 
stared for a moment at her piquante face. 

" Well," he said, " your permission, doctor? Well, 
then, here's to a continuance of our acquaintance and 
a little Dutch courage to me. Now, heave ahead," he 
added when he had gulped down the steaming potion. 

"Come you then, mate, and hold his hand," said 
Hezek, who was already in his element sorting out his 
herbs and bottles. " Nance, go you out of sight a 
bit, 'merch-i," and the girl, who had paled a little, 
turned away and shut herself into her tiny bedroom. 



GWENIPER 49 

laying her head on the bed and drawing the quilt over 
her ears. 

She need not have done so, however, for the 
stranger, though shrinking at the prospect of pain, 
was brave enough under its actual endurance to bear 
it with stoical firmness. 

At last a long-drawn " There ! " from Hezek, fol- 
lowed by an " Ah ! " of satisfaction from the patient, 
proclaimed the dressing over, and Nance was called 
upon for a sling, as well as for its proper adjustment, 
during which operation the captain was sufficiently 
recovered to make very good use of his eyes; eyes 
of the lightest shade of blue, which looked out from 
a face of sunburnt brown with a very striking effect 
of contrast. They were eyes that could dance and 
sparkle with fun and mischief, or flash with dare-devil 
recklessness, but they were also capable, in their own- 
er's infrequent moments of seriousness, of expressing 
a strangely wistful sadness. Nance seemed not to 
dislike their appearance, for she smiled and blushed 
under their gaze, as she helped her grandfather to 
put away his herbs, his oils, and his pipkins, very 
well satisfied with the result of his dressing of the 
injured hand. 

" There, my lad," he said: "a good job, and well 
done, though I say it myself. 'Twill heal for certain, 
though not at once, mind you. You must let me see 
it every day at first." 

" Of course," answered Captain Jack, " the two 
John Davieses will be here again to-morrow right 



50 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

enough," and answering Hezek's look of inquiry, he 
added, laughing, " We are both John Davies, d'you 
see — I and the mate, and that's why they call me 
Captain Jack." 

" Oh, that's it. Well, well ! " said Hezek. " Lem- 
me see. Aren't you a son of Davies Rhiwgollen?" 

" To be sure. His only son. He's dead these two 
years." 

^^ So indeed ! an old pupil of mine he was long ago, 
in Bryn Austin School." And Hezek sighed as he 
recalled his past importance. 

" Well indeed ! " exclaimed the patient, evidently 
not unwilling to prolong the interview, but he was 
interrupted by his mate. " Excuse me, cap'n," he 
said, pointing towards the window which rattled in its 
frame, while outside the wind roared and blustered 
with increased violence, "there's the little LUiwen 
waiting for us, and I think we're going to have a 
rough night, so the sooner we're aboard the better 
for us." 

" What do I owe you, doctor? " said the captain, 
diving into his pocket with his left hand, " for I 
must go, I suppose, since the mate calls the Captain 
to order." 

" Nothing, nothing, till your hand is well," said 
Hezek. " You can pay me a trifle then if you like." 

Nance wished them a smiling good-night, which 
the Captain evidently appreciated, for when they 
reached the stubble yard he shouted to his mate, " You 
never told me old Hezek had a pretty daughter. 



GWENIFER 51 

man ! " but John Davies's answer was carried away by 
the wind. 

** He speaks like a gentleman, Dakee," said Nance, 
returning to the interrupted meal. " Ach y fi ! this 
tea is quite cold ; wait till I make some fresh." When 
the brown teapot had been refilled and they had sat 
down again, she returned to the same subject, her 
grandfather looking thoughtfully into the fire. 

" Dakee ! Cap'n Jack speaks like a gentleman, 
doesn't he? Is he a gentleman? " 

" No, 'merch-i," answered Hezek, with more de- 
cision than usual. " His father was a gentleman, an 
old pupil of mine, Nance, and the best fellow in the 
whole school; so straightforward he was, so merry, 
and with it all so warm-hearted. 'Twas a pity he 
had a son like him who has just been here; he spent 
his money, and he broke his heart. I remembered the 
whole story as soon as he said his father was dead. 
He tried everything to bring this lad to his senses, 
but nothing would sober him. A drinking, idle ras- 
cal, until at last he ran away from his uncle's office 
(a lawyer he was in Merthyr) and left his debts for 
his father to pay. So there's your gentleman ! " 

" Ts, ts," said Nance, turning her cup round, and 
looking at the tealeaves at the bottom. " Well, he 
seemed all right to-night whatever. Perhaps he has 
turned over a new leaf." 

"Perhaps indeed, 'merch-i. I have heard that 
since he went to sea he is not so wild. The ship is 
his own, you see ; only his uncle and the mate have 



68 QUEEN OP THE RUSHES 

a few ounces in her ; so that will make him look to his 
ways better, perhaps." 

" Pwr fellow ! " said Nance. 

" Yes, yes, we must be kind to him, for his father's 
sake. His hand will get well before long, and then 
we won't see any more of him. I wouldn't like him 
to be coming here often, mind you, and Gildas 
wouldn't, I'm sure. He has heard all about him no 
doubt." 

" Gildas ! " said Nance, with a little willful set of 
the lips, " what has he to do with it, I would like to 
know?" and — yes, undoubtedly, though uncon- 
sciously, she snapped her fingers in the folds of her 
blue gown. 

" Well, he is our * mishteer ' whatever, and so kind 
he is, we wouldn't like to offend him, 'merch-i." 

"No," said the girl laughing. "Oh! anwl, how 
he would knit those black eyebrows, and how his eyes 
would flash ! I know him ! " 

"He is never cross to thee, Nance?" 

"Cross to me? No, indeed. What for? He'd 
better not, too ! " 

The old man muttered something about a woman's 
tongue, while Nance hummed about her work. At 
last she lighted a candle, and Hezek, putting on his 
spectacles, began to sort the herbs he had gathered 
in the morning, tying them up in separate bunches, 
which he hung on the rafters to dry; and without, 
while they chatted and worked in the warm lighted 
storehouse, the storm wind still roared, and the LUi- 



GWENIFER 68 

wen, riding at anchor in the bay, bowed her tall mast 
and creaked and strained under the blast. 

At the other end of the irregular block of walls and 
gables called Scethryg stood the farm kitchen, more 
sheltered from the wind than the old storehouse, and, 
like that, aglow with light and warmth. NVncwl 
Sam and the master of the house were sitting at their 
evening meal under the wide chimney. Gildas 
seemed to have returned from Caermadoc in a 
thoughtful mood; he stirred the glowing logs aim- 
lessly ; at last, opening the door and looking out into 
the darkness, he asked, " Is Gwenif er here ? " 

" No," said Het, who was always touchy on that 
point. " She's in her old hut, I suppose. In my 
deed I don't know what draws her to it so much." 

" 'Tis very natural," said Gildas ; " 'twas her home 
once, and home is very — " 

" That's what I say," interrupted n'wncwl Sam, 
who ever since he had been saved by his nephew from 
the penury of his home, was always hankering after 
it, or persuading himself that such were his senti- 
ments. " Nothing will make up for the loss of 
home." 

Gildas's black brows contracted as he turned to the 
discontented old man. " Why talk nonsense about 
it, though?" he said. "You know very well you 
would not like to go back to yours." 

" No, no, caton pawb, no ! I wasn't thinking of 
such a thing, but thinking of Gwenifer I was, out 
there on the hillside in such a wind as this." 



64 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

" Oh, I see,*' said Gildas with an incredulous 
smile ; *' but I daresay she has a good fire, and the 
little bwthin is fast bolted and barred. Gwenifer 
knows how to make a bright hearth, and to turn the 
blackest weather into light." 

" Dear anwl ! " said Het. " Couldn't be a brighter 
fire than you have here to-night ! and I'm sure no one 
could set on the table a better meal than you have had. 
The fish you brought home fried as brown as dried 
bracken, and the bread that I baked to-day! But 
some people are never satisfied, and you may — " 

" Hsht ! enough, woman ! " said Gildas, " or out I 
go. The storm wind is better than a woman's 
tongue ! " 

Thus it will be seen that while without the north 
wind raved, within the house, too, there were elements 
of discord; and perhaps it was due to this that 
Gildas went out in such inclement weather, turning 
his face toward the black moor and crossing it with 
difiiculty, so strong was the wind. Across its broad 
expanse he saw in a momentary gleam of moonlight 
the little brown hut which Gwenifer Owen still called 
home, although her daily work took her often away 
from its rude shelter. She spent most of her time 
at Scethryg, and her life was a busy one, and full of 
interest in spite of the spell of silence which held her 
in its thrall; for Gwenifer had never recovered the 
power of speech and the girl was still as silent as the 
sphinx. Like the sphinx, too, her dark eyes seemed 
to hold within their depth the memory of thoughts 



GWENIFER 66 

and feelings born of her long silence alone on the hills 
and moors. 

Frosts had whitened, harvests had ripened, the 
years had come and gone, but Gwenifer was still con- 
demned to silence, and seemed to stand alone, looking 
calmly on at the follies and unrest of the world ; and 
it was to this solitary and thoughtful creature that 
Gildas Rees, with his practical rustic outlook, ex- 
pressed in the bright black eye, the firm tread, the 
rather loud voice, and the powerful limbs, was mak- 
ing his way through the wind and storm. 

** She's not blown away whatever," he thought 
when he caught sight of a glimmer from her two- 
paned window ; and while he fights his way across the 
moor, we will leave him and relate how Gwenifer came 
to be still living in the hut in which she was bom. 
Ever since that stormy night, eight years ago, when 
Gildas had carried her home in his arms, she had 
quietly succumbed to his strong will, and taken her 
place in the household with complete self-surrender, 
and with a feeling that in his strength and his imperi- 
ous ways, lay the safest shelter for her imperfect life. 
The child could not have given expression to this feel- 
ing even had her lips been unsealed, neither had it 
ever dawned upon the boy-master that she had so com- 
pletely transferred to him the loyal fidelity which she 
had once given her mother only. Absorbed in the 
work of his farm, he was much too busy to notice the 
little silent waif who went in and out amongst them, 
attracting as little attention as possible, effacing her- 



66 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

self entirely and seeking only to serve the master who 
had conquered her warm impulsive heart. 

Jinni's old cottage far up the mountain-side had 
fallen much into decay, and Gildas, generally more 
neat and thrifty than his neighbors, surprised them 
all by leaving it unrepaired. 

** Pull it down, master," said Ebben the carpenter, 
^^ and build a nice stone house with a slate roof and 
two chimneys, and a square wall round the front. 
That's how they do now." 

" Let be, let be," said Gildas. " 'Tis not wanted 
up here so high. Nobody but Gwenifer would live 
in it " ; and the girl, who had listened anxiously, heard 
the words with relief, for the old cottage was dear to 
her, and she spent every hour that she could spare 
within its walls, decorating the empty shelves with 
shells and broken crockery, where once her mother's 
much-prized jugs and plates stood in bright array. 
Or sometimes, sitting in the open doorway, she gazed 
over the broad shimmering sea that stretched beyond 
the moor, often until the sun had set and the stars 
came out and crowded the dark blue vault above 
her. No wonder that as she grew older her dark eyes 
seemed to see more than was visible to those around 
her, for to her many a sight and sound unseen by the 
denizens of the busy world were familiar as the broad 
noontide. The falling stars that shot at midnight 
across the zenith, the pallid bow that sometimes spans 
the sky at night, the quivering rosy light that spreads 
from out the deep mysterious north* the lambent 



GWENIFER 57 

flicker on the rippling tide — Gwenif er knew them all. 
She had spread upon the old oak frame a bed of sweet 
dried heather ; and it had become an understood thing 
that after supper she should steal silently away, 
and be no more seen until the sunrise called her once 
more to her duties. 

" Let her be," Gildas would say when Het or nVn- 
cwl Sam complained ; ^^ the child has sorrow enough ! 
And do thou, Het, take her a blanket and quilts from 
the Cist.'' 

"And can't milady sleep with me, then.?" Het 
would answer, " when I have widened my bed for her, 
and given her a box to keep her clothes in ? " 

" Let her be ! " was Gildas's reply ; and she was left 
in undisturbed possession of the hut, whose thatched 
eaves came down low over door and windows. Here 
she would often play at housekeeping, alone and 
silent, but with a face full of smiling interest. 

Once when a shadow passed the window and a firm 
step crossed the threshold, she stood expectant, shy, 
and frightened; for it was Gildas who stood before 
her, his young face set in the unnatural seriousness 
that had fallen upon him since he had become Master 
of Scethryg. He was still young enough to remem- 
ber his own boyish games, but for a girl's foolish fan- 
cies he had nothing but contempt. He took in the 
scene at a glance: the bits of broken crockery, the 
bread and cheese — her daily provision for her moun- 
tain lunch — the little tin jug of whey all spread as 
if for a feast, while in the tiny grate flamed and 



68 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

crackled a branch of dried furze. " Silly child," he 
said, with a frown which he thought due t6 his posi- 
tion as the mishteer, " art pretending to have com- 
pany ? ** And Gwenif er, who stood convicted, could 
only say, " Yes; are you angry? " and Gildas had no 
difficulty in understanding her, for though deprived 
of the power of speech, she was still able to communi- 
cate her thoughts with ease to those around her, most 
of whom had become as familiar with her signs and 
gestures as she was herself. For every person in her 
small circle of acquaintance she had an unmistakably 
descriptive sign; and though it would be wearisome 
here to detail her repertoire of signs and motions, yet 
they were to her, and to those accustomed to them, as 
real and intelligible a medium of communication as a 
written or oral language is to others. 

" Angry ? " said Gildas, who after all was but a boy, 
in spite of his masterful ways, " not I b*t shwr ! 
What do I care where thou eatest thy food?" and 
sitting down on the edge of the old oak bedstead, he 
drew from his pocket the hunch of barley-bread and 
cheese which he was carrying with him for his own 
lunch. 

Delighted and happy, Gwenifer began to drink her 
whey and attack her bread and cheese as the frown 
relaxed on the mishteer's face. 

" Thou art an odd girl," he said, looking round at 
the bare walls and the heather-spread bedstead. 
" What wilt thou do when I pull down this hut and 
build it up afresh?" 



GWENIFER 59 

In a moment Gwenifer's face altered — a shadow 
fell upon it like the shadow of a cloud upon a sunny 
landscape. Her eyes filled with tears, but rising from 
her mimic table she stood before the autocrat with 
her hands crossed on her breast, endeavoring with a 
little wintry smile to adapt herself to her master's 
wishes, unconsciously taking upon her the look of a 
martyr. It was self-effacement beyond the lad's com- 
prehension, but it stirred within him the nobler feel- 
ings which lay at the foundation of his dogged reso- 
lution to fill worthily the place of master. 

" Twt, twt! lass," he said, " I was but joking; thee 
can'st have the old hut if thee likest, I will not take 
it from thee. I have told Het to bring thee a quilt 
and blankets. Go fetch the brown mare from the 
long meadow for me; I am going to Treberwyn." 
And off ran Gwenifer, content and happy. 

After this Gildas would often turn in to the cottage 
to eat his frugal fare, and as they both grew older 
he would sit beside the girl on the heather, watching 
with her the white-winged ships that crossed the bay, 
they knew not whence nor whither — often, too, con- 
sulting her in his difficulties, always sure of a sympa- 
thetic listener and a wise counselor, but noticing lit- 
tle how the childish ways were laid aside as the years 
went on, nor how in their fleeting course they had 
changed the thin and rather plain child into a maiden 
of rare beauty. 

Let it not be thought that during this digression 
Gildas had been kept waiting at the cottage door ; on 



60 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

the contrary, it had been opened to him at once, for 
scarcely ever did a stranger cross the moor. Some- 
times Hezek, his shoulders bent and his eyes peering 
on the ground, would pass that way, and sometimes 
Nance would run across between the heather mounds ; 
but in the storm and wind Gwenifer recognized the 
mishteer's step at once. 

^^ Didn't I say," he said as he came in and helped 
her to close the door — " didn't I say to n'wncwl Sam, 
* Gwenifer knows how to make a bright hearth, and 
how to turn the darkest night to light and cheer ! ' 
Well ! who would think," he added, looking round the 
tiny hut, its whitewashed walls all aglow in the fire- 
light, and recognizing the air of peace and comfort 
reigning over everything, " who would think this was 
the hut they wanted me to pull down? I came to see 
if thou wast blown over the rhos, lass." 

The girl, smiling, shook her head and placed a 
chair for him, drawing from the comer a rush stool 
for herself, though all in perfect silence. 



CHAPTER IV 

hezek's patient 

There were two faces that Gwenifer Owen read like 
an open book — the face of Nature and that of the 
man who had just entered at her cottage door, and 
was now sitting opposite her in the firelight. It re- 
quired not a word to tell her that behind those dark 
eyes some new and powerful feeling was kindling, but 
she asked no questions with the quick and expressive 
gestures which sometimes made her face and figure 
alive with interest, but waited patiently until her vis- 
itor should choose to enlighten her. 

What was it that moved the mishteer so? What 
brought that light into his eyes and that curve of 
content upon his lips? It was surely no disquiet- 
ing thought, so she tried to ignore it and to turn 
the conversation to the ordinary channels of sea- 
coast events. 

Holding her apron up by one comer, she made 
her companion (well accustomed to her signs) at once 
aware that she meant, " There is a ship.** As quick 
a thought, certainly quicker than she could have ex- 
pressed the thought in writing, she drew an imaginary 
wavy line horizontally before her eyes, and thus said 
« The bay.** 

61 



6ft QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

**A ship, IS there?" answered Gildas. "What is 
she?" 

Again Gwenifer held up her apron, this time mak- 
ing the two comers stand up like two sails side by 
side, then turning to the windowsill she drew from a 
little box of treasures a scrap of red ribbon and flut- 
tered it in the air. 

" A schooner? '* said Gildas, " with a red pennon? 
And not known to Gwenifer. Must be a stranger, 
lass. Well, she is having a rough welcome to the 
bay ; but she'll outride this if she is a sound craft ; I 
think we've reached the worst of the storm; 'twill go 
down before morning." A nod from Gwenifer dis- 
missed the subject, and Gildas, gazing into the fire, 
seemed to have returned to his first subject of con- 
templation, from which raising his eyes to the girl's 
form, a sudden appreciation of her beauty startled 
him* The firelight threw its glamor over a face and 
figure that required no enhancement of their charms, 
for in the long silent years Nature seemed to 
have been lavish in her gifts of outward beauty to 
the human being whom Fate had smitten so sorely. 
When Gildas, looking at her so suddenly, saw the 
slender shape, the pure oval of her face, the look of 
almost angelic patience that sat upon her brow and 
lips, he was filled with a warm glow of admiration, and 
with rustic simplicity of manner exclaimed, " Dear 
anwl, Gwenifer ! thou hast grown into a beautiful crea- 
ture while we have been busy sowing and reaping and 
fishing." 



HEZEK'S PATIENT 68 

A flash of pleasure swept over her face and she 
smiled even while she shook her head. " No? *' said 
Gildas ; " I say * Yes,' then. Come sit thee down, 
Gwenifer, I have something to tell thee; something 
that I thought perhaps thou would'st have seen for 
thyself, though in my deed I have done my best to 
hide it ; but thine eyes, or something within thee, seem 
to see further than most people. Well," — and the 
strong man seemed strangely moved. " Hark to the 
storm," he interpolated. " Well, Gwenifer, there's 
not much comfort on the hearth at Scethryg. 
N'wncwl Sam and Het are both as prickly as hedge- 
hogs sometimes ; and I — well, I am hard and obsti- 
nate, I daresay," and he paused a moment as if recall- 
ing some subject of dispute. ^^ But, lass ! I am 
never hard and cross to thee, am I now.'* Come! 
thee'lt say that for me? " 

Gwenifer shook her head emphatically, and her 
deep brown eyes seemed to grow humid with the 
warmth of her denial. 

" No indeed ! how could I when we've been together 
so much, and thou hast listened to all my grumbles 
without losing patience with me? In my deed I don't 
know what would the world be like without thee, 
Gwenifer." 

" And now," he continued, " thou'lt wonder per- 
haps that I am not satisfied with such close friendship 
as thine and mine. I think I ought to be too; but 
I'm not. I want a wife to share my home with me, 
to brighten the hearth, to make it cosy as thou hast 



64 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

made this, Gwenif er. Tell me, lass ! dost understand 
me and see the reason in it ? '* 

She bowed her head, and all the feelings which 
through the long silent years had been suppressed 
and stifled sprang into life that could never be ex- 
tinguished. 

" Yes ? I knew thou would'st. 'Tis a pleasure to 
talk to a sensible woman. Now I expect Het and 
n'wncwl Sam will be dead against it," and he laughed 
as if he rather liked the prospect of their opposition. 

Gwenifer's hands lay clasped on her lap, her eyes 
fixed upon them, the long dark lashes outlined on her 
cheek, while her bosom rose and fell with every flutter- 
ing breath. 

The fire in the grate leaped up and died down 
again, but Gildas remained silent for some time. At 
last he roused himself, and, as if dallying with a pleas- 
ant thought, smiled, as he asked, " Can'st not guess, 
Gwenif er? Well, indeed,! have been clever to hide it 
even from thee, lass." 

A blinding flash of lightning startled them both. 
It was followed by a loud peal of thunder, which 
seemed to burst over their heads and roll away over 
the moor. The wind dropped for a moment, and in 
the silence all nature seemed to be waiting for the 
next crash. 

" Come," said Gildas, suddenly awaking to the 
necessity for hurrying home ; " come, lass, be quick ; 
put out the fire; we will run after the next flash"; 
but Gwenifer shrank a little, and trembled strangely. 



HEZEK'S PATIENT 65 

"Come," he said in an authoritative voice, " 'tis not 
a fit night for thee to be here alone," and obediently 
she reached her cloak, and drawing the hood over her 
head was ready to accompany him over the moor. It 
came again, the scathing flash, and as its reverberat- 
ing peal rolled away in the distance they went out into 
the darkness and ran before the wind. 

To steady her footsteps, Gildas laid hold of her 
arm, and was surprised to find bow it trembled. 

" Don't be frightened, 'merch-i," he said ; " we'll be 
in Scethryg before the next flash." 

'Merch-i! It was spoken kindly, almost tenderly, 
and at any other time would have called the respon- 
sive color to the girl's cheeks and a smile to her lips ; 
but the spirit of the storm seemed to have suddenly 
cast its shadow over her : the roar of the blast, the roll- 
ing thunder, the booming sound of the breakers on 
Maldraeth — all seemed to hold the very atmosphere 
under a spell. 

When they entered at the farmhouse door, she ap- 
proached the hearth, where the fire had burnt down 
to a few dying embers; raking them together, and 
adding a fresh log, she soon brought warmth and 
light into the darkened kitchen, while Gildas barred 
the door and lighted the lamp. 

It was really only nine o'clock, but they kept early 
hours at Scethryg and she was not surprised to find 
that n'wncwl Sam and Het had gone to bed. 

" Come, lass, sit down," said Gildas, lighting his 
pipe, and appearing to prepare for a long talk. The 



66 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

logs spluttered, the clock ticked, and Gwenifer sat 
silently looking into the fire. 

" Here's peace and quietness at last ! *' — " inside 
the house at least," he added as another flash lighted 
up every corner of the room. 

" Tan-i-marw ! seems to me there's something in the 
weather against me speaking to-night," and he 
laughed with that sparkle in his eyes that made the 
charm of his rugged face. " Well ! I was going to 
tell thee, Gwenifer, what I have been trying to hide 
for so long, and I don't know why would I hide it, 
only that I suppose I was not sure whether Nance 
would have me; and I am not sure now, for the mat- 
ter of that, for I know I am not good enough for her 
and I'm afraid of startling her, and so I came to thee, 
as I always do when I'm in a puzzle. Dost think I 
dare ask Nance Ellis to have me?" 

While he spoke the timid hopes, the happy 
thoughts, that had for a moment blinded Gwenifer to 
the truth, took wing, and left her filled with a heavy 
sense of loneliness. Never before had she been glad 
that she was dumb, now she was thankful that only 
a bend of the head was required of her. Gildas, in 
his new-found enthusiasm, took all the rest for 
granted, and launched into the usual panegyrics of a 
lover, his companion listening with what patience she 
could. 

" Hezek sits late over his herbal," he said, when, 
having recounted all his reasons for choosing Nance, 
he rose from the hearth, and with many directions to 



HEZEK'S PATIENT 6T 

Gwenifer to get warm and dry, moved towards the 
door. " I will go to the storws for an hour or two," 
he said, " but, say once that thou art approving ! for, 
on my word ! if thou art not, 'twill spoil everything ; 
eh, Gwenifer? dost think I am wise? " 

Disturbed by so direct an appeal, she rose, and 
following him a few steps, laid her hands on his arm 
and looked searchingly into his face. 

"What art asking me? Am I sure what I want? 
Yes, indeed, I want Nance " ; and his face lighted up 
with that rare smile which so completely altered its 
expression. 

For answer, Gwenifer only waved her hand towards 
the door with a placid smile of consent, as though she 
said, " Go, Gildas, and God bless thee." That was 
the meaning he put into her action, and he went out 
with a pleased look and a firm step. 

When he was gone, she returned to the hearth, and 
stood for some time looking into the fire, which had 
humt up brightly, and was bringing into relief all 
the old familiar furniture — the stools, the brass pans, 
the benches. She looked round at them all, and won- 
dered why everything looked so different. 

Outside, the lightning still flashed occasionally and 
the thunder rolled over the moor, but Gwenifer, stand- 
ing there and gazing into the fire, scarcely heard 
them, so absorbed was she in her own thoughts. 

wPT^^. sjnw^y up the stairs and sought 



AHTr>K. L«HOX AND 
« L 



hei plsEbflbUnr 1lMftK^l^< > grumbled a little at being 

"V^ Of THl^ ^/^ 

KW-VORK 



68 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

Not so Gwenifer, who, lying awake, listened to the 
storm, and thought the next hours were the longest 
she had ever passed. She seemed to see the warmth 
and glow of the old storehouse, Hezek bending over 
his herbs, Nance, fresh and buxom, moving about in 
the light and shadow. There is a knock at the door, 
a finger on the latch, a dark-faced man enters, and 
she buries her face in her pillow and tries to shut out 
the picture that follows. She hears the distant thun- 
der of the breakers on Maldraeth, she pictures vividly 
the foam that falls at intervals against the cliffs, she 
hears the creaking of the thorn-hedge by the horse- 
pond, but nothing effaces the vision of a well-known 
face changed and softened by a new and overmaster- 
ing emotion. 

At length she hears the opening and closing of the 
outer door, a footstep mounts the stairs, stops out- 
side her door, and Gildas speaks in a low voice. 
" Gwenifer, lass, I thought thou wouldst like to know 
His da right.*' 

An acknowledging tap on the wall from Gwenifer, 
and the happy lover passes on to his loft in the 
further gable. Het tosses in her sleep, and Gwenifer 
— lies still and waits for the dawn. 

It comes at last, with a blush of rose in the east and 
a sense of life astir everywhere. The clouds break up, 
the wind sinks down, the waves dance joyfully on the 
bay, and the daffodils on the garden hedge nod ap- 
provingly, as Gwenifer, rising before the other mem- 
bers of the household, takes her way to the hillside 



HEZEK'S PATIENT 69 

with her milking-pail. Afterwards, instead of re- 
turning as usual to breakfast at the farm, she turned 
towards the dewy moor and the little brown cottage, 
where she would be free to think, to wonder, to weep 
perhaps. She dreaded to hear a happy call at the 
window, to see the door open to admit Nance, bloom- 
ing and fresh; to be called upon to listen again to 
the story of Gildas's love, to rejoice with her friend 
over the bright prospects opening out before her as 
mistress of Scethryg. Her fears on this score, how- 
ever, were needless, for Nance seemed in no wise anx- 
ious to share her news with any one. In the old store- 
house she moved about her work in a strangely ab- 
sorbed and silent mood, tossing the logs on the fire, 
pushing the clumsy furniture roughly into their 
places, clattering the cups and saucers so noisily that 
Hezek looked up and grumbled a little. " Such a 
noise, Nance ! Thee'lt break the things, Vm afraid." 

" Well," said the girl crossly, " it wouldn't matter 
much if I broke the whole cracked lot of them." 

" Ah, well ! " said the old man, " they've served us 
very well. Thou'lt have better things in Scethryg. 
I'm afraid thou'lt be too proud to peep into the old 
storws then ! " 

" Oh, Scethryg ! Nonsense," said Nance, tossing 
her head; " that's a long time to come yet; perhaps 
never ! " 

" Oh yes, 'twill come," said Hezek encouragingly, 
and in his voice there was a tone of the pride which 
he deprecated in his granddaughter. " I hope those 



i 



70 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

lads won't be late to-night," he added ; " I must see 
that hand before I go to the prajer-meeting. Art 
coining, 'merch-i, or art going to wait at home for 
Gildas?" 

" Pm not going to wait for him or any man,*' said 
Nance. " Besides, he never comes in till late, so I 
will go with you." 

They were interrupted by the arrival of the two 
men whom they had expected, Captain Jack assuring 
them that his hand was getting on " first rate," and 
that Hezek was a " slap-up doctor and no mistake.'* 
He spoke with the broad, rough accent of the sailor- 
ing folk around him, for Captain Jack found no diffi- 
culty in adapting himself to the manners and lan- 
guage of the company ^n which he happened to find 
himself, but, on the contrary, rather enjoyed doing so, 
and was often heard to boast that it would be hard to 
find any class of men with whom he had not been 
at home at some time of his adventurous life, al- 
though he was as yet barely thirty years of age. His 
rough manners were, however, only a cloak put on at 
the promptings of an innate refinement of feeling, 
which forbade his appearing in any way superior to 
those amongst whom his lot was cast. At a moment's 
notice he could drop that cloak, and in better company 
could at once take his place as a man of gentlemanly 
behavior and educated speech and manners. 

Perhaps it was this underlying refinement that, with 

all his rough ways, lent charm to his personality — a 

^ charm that was felt by every one who was acquainted 



HEZEK'S PATIENT 71 

with him, more especially by every woman, though she 
herself might be rough and ignorant. 

Nance was sympathetic as Hezek examined the 
crushed fingers, and Captain Jack, though making lit- 
tle of his injury, was not ill pleased with the interest 
it created in her. 

" Oh, don't you look at it," he said, as he saw both 
Nance and the mate were peeping over the old man's 
shoulder. ** The mate and me, we're used to rough 
sights, but I wouldn't like you to remember me with a 
shudder. That's a good ointment of yours, whatever, 
doctor," he continued, " wonderful soft and healing." 

" Yes," answered Hezek, " 'tis made from the flow- 
ers of the marigold. Ah, 'tis a rare herb for healing. 
Gildas lets me grow a bed of it in the garden. You 
tell him what good it has done you ; for he doesn't be- 
lieve much in my herbs and flowers. Well, well, 
there's never anything the matter with him, so he has 
no need of any * weeds,' as he calls them." 

" I'll tell him, you bet," said the captain, as Hezek 
finished the dressing and Nance refitted the sling. " I 
don't know him. As far as I can remember I've never 
had a word with him yet, but he looks a mariy what- 
ever they say." 

" I never heard say anything bad about him," said 
the mate, " except that he's proud and hard, and cold 
as a stone." 

"That'si plenty bad enough," laughed Nance; 
" he's very kind to us, whatever." 
"Well, of course, what else could he be to you?" 



72 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

said the captain, smiling, and raising those wonderful 
ejes of his to her blushing face. 

" He's all that a man ought to be," said Hezek, a 
little irritably. He was annoyed and disturbed at 
the condition of secrecy upon which alone Nance had 
given her consent to be married — a stipulation which 
Gildas had been only too glad to agree to, for he car- 
ried his reserve and pride to a morbid extent in his 
dislike of being talked about. To be the subject of 
gossip would have been an ordeal which he would have 
shrunk from, as he said, " like fire on my skin " so 
Nance carried her point, and Hezek was obliged to 
keep the news of which he was so proud to himself. 

" Well," he said, when he had put away his pots 
and bottles, " we are going to the meeting in Brynzion 
to-night. Will you come with us ? " 

" Yes, will I indeed," said the mate. " I hear 
there's a grand revival about here now. Come on, 
cap'n; be bound there'll be good singing." 

" Oh, diwss anwl ! " said the captain. " Not I. I 
haven't been to a prayer-meeting these years. Go 
you and sing * Hallelujah ' ; I'll wait for you outside. 
Are you going? " he asked, turning to Nance. 

" Yes, I suppose," she answered. " They are all 
going to the prayer-meetings here lately, though in- 
deed I don't see any difference in them from the old 
meetings, except that they are longer." 

" I've heard my father tell about the last Revival," 
said Captain Jack. " He was a boy then, and he 
went to chapel, like all the rest, to see what was going 



HEZEK'S PATIENT 73 

on; and a woman sitting near him, getting warmed 
up, took off her hat and threw it up, shouting * Ben- 
digedig ! ' and all the others shouted too. Then she 
began to look for her hat, crying and singing at the 
same time, and whispering like, between the shouting, 
*0A, dear anwl! whereas my hat? — Bendigedig!' 
* Hallelujah ! — What was it like? ' whispered another 
woman. * Black with red Ivnmg — Praise the Lord ! ' 
and somebody pushed it into her hands." 

Nance and the mate laughed, but Hezek looked 
grave. 

" Well, look you, my boys," he said, as he turned 
the key in his old cupboard door, " I don't hold myself 
to be a good old man — no, indeed — but if you 
knew my inner self, the spirit inside this body, you 
would see that it has never been the same since that 
old Revival. Before that I lived with my eyes closed 
as it were ; since then I have always been wide awake 
to see what was right, though I have not always fol- 
lowed it, d'you see? So I can't join in your laugh, 
my boys, though I could tell you a good many funny 
stories about those times too. Come, Nance, put thy 
hat on, 'merch-i." 

When they reached the village they found the long 
windows at Brynzion ablaze with light, and the con- 
gregation beginning to assemble. Nance and Cap- 
tain Jack had loitered a little, so Hezek and the mate 
waited for them, the latter looking somewhat di^ 
turbed as they emerged from the darkness into the 
light that streamed through the doorway. He was 



74 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

divided between his desire to attend the meeting and 
hear the singing and his habit of keeping watch over 
his friend. "You won't come in then, Cap'n?" he 
asked in an undertone. 

" No," said the other, " I'll go and have a smoke on 
the kiln." 

Packed in the narrow seat in a comer of the chapel, 
John Davies's thoughts often went out to his friend. 
At all events Nance was safe beside him in the chapel, 
and this was satisfactory. The strong friendship ex- 
isting between these two men was a psychological puz- 
zle, for it would have been scarcely possible to find 
two more opposite natures : the one careful and wary, 
the other headstrong and rash; the one incapable as 
he would have been unwilling to diverge from the nar- 
row groove in which his ancestors had walked before 
him, the other ready to welcome any breeze of amuse- 
ment or romance that would fill his sails and waft him 
pleasantly over the sea of life. In spite of this, from 
their earliest boyhood John Davies had constituted 
himself Jack Davies's guardian, and seemed to hold 
himself responsible for all that young man's follies 
and eccentricities. Over and over again had Jack as 
a boj' been punished for companying with the black- 
smith's son, a common street boy! and one, too, who 
had the reputation of being self-willed and bold, as 
his father had been before him ; but, in defiance of all 
restrictions, the two boys we^re often together shoot- 
ing, fishing, hunting. Few pleasures were perfect to 
Jack unless John Davies were somewhere near to watch 



HEZEK'S PATIENT 75 

his exploits, to help him out of his scrapes, to carry 
his gun, to hold his horse ; in fact, the humblest office 
was gladly accepted by John Davies if it only brought 
him into touch with Mr. Jack. Later on, when Jack 
was sent to school and afterwards to college, there to 
run a reckless course of dissipation and folly, John 
Davies went to sea, and thus lost sight of his friend 
for several years ; until at last Jack, fallen from his 
high estate, lighted upon John Davies once more, and, 
following his advice, embarked on a seafaring life. 
Here, finding himself in the position for which he had 
always had a hankering, he tried to patch up his 
broken fortunes by plodding steadily at his work, soon 
proving himself to be well fitted for his duties ; and, as 
we have seen, he was now captain of the Liliweriy with 
John Davies for mate. 

As he turned from the door of the chapel, having 
seen his mate elbowing his way through the fast- 
gathering crowd, he laughed and shrugged his shoul- 
ders. " On my word," he said, " not even for the sake 
of sitting by Nance would I go into that stifling 
place," and he turned towards the old disused lime- 
kiln which stood but a short distance from the chapel, 
its crumbling wall making a convenient seat for the 
village gossips, and thus giving a sociable appearance 
to the little mound on which it was built. It was the 
general rendezvous of the village, where the latest bit 
of news was retailed and the affairs of the world 
(the Tregildas world) were discussed. Here the men 
loved to smoke their last pipe when plough, or boat, 



76 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

or tools were done with for the day. Here, on the 
moss-covered wall, a few men were sitting in conclave 
as Captain Jack turned from the chapel door. They 
were the flotsam and jetsam of the coast who had not 
yet been drawn within the influence of the Revival, 
but liked to sit near and pass remarks upon those 
who attended the meetings. One woman sat there a 
little apart, in a crouching position, her two elbows 
on her knees, her lined and rugged face lit up by the 
red glow of the setting sun at which she was staring 
intently. 

" Na, na," she muttered to herself ; " the wind does 
not blow through the closed door, the tide can't flow in 
where the rocks stand high against it, and the Spirit 
won't flow into Brynzion while the hard * black rock ' 
prevents it." But nobody listened to her; they were 
too interested in the subject of their conversation, 
their figures outlined against the crimson sky. 

" Tell you I saw him myself," said one. " Cap'n 
Jack, of the LUmeny and John Davies; and the 
cap'n's hand was in a sling. Going down to Mal- 
draeth they were, and across to the ship. They say 
he won't be able to use his hand for a month, though 
Hezek dressed it beautiful." 

" A good thing too," answered another. " Keep 
him out of mischief, perhaps. A regular scamp he 
was, and owing a lot of money, they say, till his father 
paid his debts." But there was a sudden silence, as 
out of the twilight came the figure of Captain Jack 
himself. There was a general shifting of seats to 



HEZEK'S PATIENT 77 

make room for him on the low wall, and many of the 
men touched their hats respectfully. 

Captain Jack accepted the proffered seat, looking 
round at the company with a genial " Nos da chi." 

" Going to the meeting, sir? " said one of the men. 

" No, no," answered the newcomer. "It's not 
much in my line. I haven't been to one for years, 
and I might do something out of the way, d'you see ; 
might stand up when I ought to sit down, or some- 
thing," and he laughed as he struck a light for his 
pipe. 

"You might do worse," said Jerri the boatman. 
" There's powerful prayers in there, I can tell you." 

" Go in, man," said the old woman ; " the Spirit 
might come to you." 

" And why don't you go in? " asked Captain Jack. 

The sun was gone down, and in the dim light she 
looked a strange, weird figure. " Ah, well ; you see," 
she answered, " I am waiting to see will it be any use 
to go." 

At that moment a man, who was evidently taking 
a short cut across the green, approached the kiln and 
walked rapidly on towards the chapel door, which his 
figure darkened for a moment as he entered. The 
woman, watching him, rose from her seat, and with a 
curious motion of her hands, half comical, half de- 
spairing, turned away. 

" Not I," she called back as she went. " The 
Spirit won't come to Brynzion while the * black rock ' 
stands against it." 



78 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

" What does she mean ? " asked Captain Jack, as 
his eyes followed the figure passing in through the 
lighted doorway. " Who was that? . Wasn't it Gil- 
das Rees?" 

" Yes, 'twas mishteer," said Jerri. " He might 
have given us a * Nos da ' in passing." 

" He was in a hurry," said another. "Late for 
chapel, you see." 

" He's a grand man, whatever," said the captain. 
" Make a fine soldier." 

" Oh yes, that he would," said Jerri ; " and it's my 
belief he'd walk straight into the middle of the bullets 
and never bend his head. But, mind you, bullets are 
all very well; but when it comes to opposing the 
Spirit," — and he shook his head gravely. 

" The Spirit ! Diwss anwl ! what are you all talk- 
ing about? " said the captain, looking round the com- 
pany. " You're rather creepy, with your Spirit ; 
what d'you mean by it? " 

" Well," said Jerri, " there's somethmg comes to 
the meetings for certain. Not here yet; but at 
Moriah, at Beulah, and at Graig they've all felt it. 
Here we're as dry as the sand yet, but if prayers will 
bring it 'twill visit us soon. I wouldn't be outside 
here to-night if it wasn't for Joseph ; the shop's cart- 
load of goods expected, and I've promised to help him 
with the horse." 

Here a full tide of harmony swept out through the 
open chapel door, filling the night air with the rise 
and fall of its music. Again and again the refrain 



HEZEK'S PATIENT 79 

was repeated before the second verse was begun : the 
old well-known tune that had soothed the cradle of 
their ancestors and accompanied them to their graves ! 
the words that their mothers had often sung them to 
sleep with! 

Who could refuse to join in those swelling tones? 

Not Captain Jack, certainly ; for with all his wild 
and headlong ways, the memories entwined round his 
boyhood's home, and the love of his mother, had al- 
ways the power to reach his heart ; and as the refrain 
began again he hummed the tune in a musical voice, 
Jerri joined with his quavering bass, and the other 
four men came in in correct harmony, until the 
night air was full of music. Many times the hymn 
was sung in the chapel, and answered by the voices on 
the kiln. 

It was a strange and new experience to Captain 
Jack, and he enjoyed it all: the swinging rhythm of 
the chorus, the soft night sky, where one bright star 
hung over them like a lamp. 

At last the singing ceased, and was followed by the 
sound of a voice, that rose sometimes into a paean of 
rapture, sometimes fell into the depths of sorrow. 

" How much longer will they go on? " said Captain 
Jack, beginning to grow weary. " I think PU go 
down to the Ship Inn for a glass. Come on, all of 
you, and I'll treat you to a * blue,' to wash the salt out 
of your throats." 

Jerri drew his hand over his lips. It was a tempt- 
ing offer, and one that two months earlier he would 



80 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

have readily accepted ; but to-night he shook his head. 

" No, thank you, sir," he said ; " we're most of us 
totlers about here." 

" No? Well, tan-i-marw," said Captain Jack. 
" You're a strange lot about here, with your spirits, 
and your prayers, and your — " He paused as an- 
other figure appeared in sight. A girl this time — 
slender, silent, beautiful. She approached, and Cap- 
tain Jack stood transfixed with admiration. 

What was Nance's buxom beauty? what was any 
woman he had ever seen compared with this simple, 
graceful child of the hills, as she stood a moment be- 
fore turning to the chapel door ? 

" Thou'rt very late, 'merch-i," said Jerri. " First 
prayer and first hymn is over; perhaps thee can slip 
in unnoticed though." But she was gone and already 
entering the chapel. 

" Didn't I say you were a strange lot here? " said 
Captain Jack, starting from a dream. " Who's that? 
Is that the Spirit you've been expecting? In my 
deed, I don't think there's any woman living so — 
so — " 

" So silent," said one of the men. " No, you're 
right there, cap'n — 'twould be a good thing if they 
were. That's Gwenifer." 

"Gwenifer?" 

" Yes, Gwenifer Owen, the dumb girl. Her mother 
was drowned before her eyes, when she was a child, 
and she fell down like one dead, and she's dumb ever 



HEZEK'S PATIENT 81 

** Well, well ! " said Captain Jack, sitting down 
again as if the better to grasp the idea. " Dumb ! 
What a cruel fate ! " he said to himself, unconsciously 
dropping the broad Welsh accent which he generally 
affected. "Poor thing! poor thing! And such a 
beautiful creature, too." 

Beautiful creature? Well indeed! She's only 
Gwenif er ; nobody's taking much account of her about 
here. She's quite used to her silence by now, and I 
don't think it's troubling her at all ; she's speaking as 
well with her hands and eyes as most people do with 
their tongues." 

" Dear, dear I " was all Captain Jack's answer, and 
he fell into a brown study in which he heard as if in 
a dream the bursts of harmony which came occasion- 
ally through the chapel door. The men puffed at 
their pipes, the waves broke on the shore with their 
recurring rush, and Captain Jack watched the lighted 
doorway closely for another glance at Gwenif er; but 
when at last the black mass of people emerged into 
the night air, he saw only for a moment the slim fig- 
ure of a girl who passed quickly through the crowd 
and took her way alone towards the hillside above the 
village. 



CHAPTER V 

THE ** LILIWEN ** 

In the bright afternoon sunlight the sea, smooth and 
green, rose and fell gently round the side of the LUi- 
men as she rode at anchor in the bay ; the tide flowed 
slowly by, carrying on its surface little beady wreaths 
of bubbles ; overhead the sky was blue and cloudless, 
in the rigging a soft west wind was singing, the cabin 
boy sat humming at the prow, his keen eye marking 
every movement on the shore. He saw the fishermen 
who slouched into the Ship Inn, the cows that grazed 
on the uplands, and Gildas Rees who worked steadily 
at his plough in the field across the cove. John Da- 
vies down in the stuffy cabin was stooping over a let- 
ter, through which he toiled with apparently less ease 
than did Gildas at his furrows. He was writing to 
the " owners '* of the LUiwen, explaining the cause of 
her detention in the bay ; the " owners " in reality con- 
sisting only of Captain Jack, his uncle, and the mate 
himself, who owned a humble " ounce " in her, just 
enough to make him scan her graceful proportions 
with pleasure, just enough to make him love the tink- 
ling of her anchor chain, the swelling of her sails. 
" There ! " he said at last, with a stretch of satisfac- 
tion, "there! 'tis finished, thanks be," and he read 

8S 



THE " LILIWEN " 83 

it over to himself, afterwards carrying it with him up 
the narrow cabin steps to the deck, where he found the 
captain leaning over the rail and smoking. 

" Done? " he asked, taking the letter from the 
mate's hands and conning it over rapidly. " First 
rate, couldn't have done it better myself ; we'll post it 
to-night on our way to see Hezek," and slipjSing his 
hand out of its sling, he examined it as though he 
could see the injury through the wrappings. " 'Tis 
pretty painful to-day, I don't know the reason why," 
he said ; but as the sight of the white bandage did not 
enlighten him much he slipped it back into its sling 
and both men leaning over the rails continued to 
smoke in silence, gazing over the undulating green 
wat^s towards the land, where every path and hedge 
and furrow showed distinctly in the clear spring sun- 
light. 

At last the mate, knocking the ashes out of his pipe, 
said, " Diwss anwl ! we'll turn into jelly-fish if we stop 
here until your hand is well." 

" Well, old Hezek says it must be dressed once a 
day for a fortnight or three weeks if it's to heal, and 
I don't want to lose my right hand." 

" No, no;. there's nothing for it but patience, I sup- 
pose. The owners know the reason, and the cargo 
won't spoil with keeping. Do'no what Joshua Jones 
will say, though." 

" A tombstone won't spoil, man," said the captain. 

" No, but he's in a hurry," answered the mate. 
" I've always noticed when a man's in a hurry to put 



84 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

a tombstone on his wife's grave, he's going to be mar- 
ried again. That's human nature, d'you see," he 
added ; " it's kind of honorable to pay her the last 
compliment before he begins again ! You bet, you'll 
hear he's going to be married soon." 

" Well, if he's in a hurry," said the captain, " he'd 
better send a cart for it ; 'tis only twenty miles as the 
crow flies, and we might land it here." 

Again silence, broken only by the creaking of the 
mast and the liplapping of the sea against the side of 
the ship. 

" Going to have a spell of fine weather, I think," 
said the mate at last. 

" Good thing for me, being crippled like this," 
answered the captain. 

" Oh, as for that, if rough weather came, I'd take 
your place, and get Jim Craddock to take mine." 

" If it wasn't for this confounded hand wanting 
dressing every day we could do that now," said the 
captain, " and set Joshua Jones at ease to marry 
again if he likes. Ach-y-fi! there's something mean 
in that marrying again, to my mind. Whatever my 
faults are, I'd be faithful to the memory of my love." 

For answer the mate broke into a loud peal of 
laughter, his tarry hands holding his sides, his broad 
shoulders shaking with merriment. " Oh, good lor ! " 
he said at last, " and where's Jinny Pritchard in Bris- 
tol, and Ellen the Mill at Trebowen? and Miss Jones 
the Post Office at Cardiff? and the little widow that 
made your new shirts? and Jane Lewis and — " 



THE " LILIWEN " 86 

"Oh, taw! hold thy tongue," said the captain; 
"they're where we left them, I suppose: I didn't 
care a cockleshell for one of them." 

" No, no. Like Joshua Jones is going to do, you 
put a tombstone on every one as soon as you saw the 
other." 

The captain was silent, gazing across the land at 
Gildas Rees still ploughing, and the cows still grazing 
in the sunshine. 

"What's that.^" he asked suddenly, pointing up 
the hillside ; " I thought it was a rock, but I see now it 
is a hut." 

" 'Tis Gwenifer's cottage," said the mate. 

" Gwenifer ! the dumb girl.? " 

" Yes. Lives there alone." 

"Alone! that young creature, and silent always! 
Dear anwl! the girl who lives alone up there must 
have a — a — " 

" A what? " said the mate. 

" Well, she must be different to thee and me." 

" Mh ! She's used to it, d'ye see." 

The captain was not sure what he was going to say 
when he was interrupted — a clear conscience, a clean 
heart, a good record, perhaps. 

Any way, he kept it to himself, for what had he to 
do with any of these ? Instead, he asked, " Are 
Nance and she friends ? " 

" Oh, first-class," said the mate. 

" Perhaps we'll see her in the storws some night. 
I think there's something moving behind those broom 



86 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

bushes. Dash it! I can't hold the spy-glass steady 
with my left hand." 

" What do you want to see? " asked the mate, turn- 
ing to look at him ; " what's the great concern you 
take in Gwenifer? Look you, cap'n," he said, with 
an altered look, " she's not like other girls, and 
'twould be a blackguard shame to try any of your 
enticing ways upon her." 

" Hisht, man," said the captain, turning upon him 
suddenly. " Confound thee ! Keep thy coarse 
tongue quiet, and let me go my own way." 

"Oh, heave away, then," said the mate; "but look 
here, cap'n, steer clear of Gwenifer Owen." 

The subject of their conversation was at that mo- 
ment sitting on the grassy bank that encircled her 
little garden, her eyes fixed on the fluttering pennon 
of the LUiwen as she rocked on the gently flowing tide. 
Her hands had fallen listlessly on her coarse blue 
skirt, her whole attitude was one of deep abstraction. 
What was she thinking of as she sat there in the 
afternoon sunlight, the Scethryg flocks spread over 
the plain before her? Was she counting up her small 
wages to see whether she could afford to buy a rib- 
bon for her bare neck? or did her thoughts travel 
back to the sun that had set so long ago upon her 
happy childhood? or did she count the seagulls that 
floated on the sea? We cannot tell, for Gwenifer's 
thoughts, whatever they were, were hers alone. 

Suddenly through a gap in the bank a sturdy fig- 
ure entered, Gildas fresh from the plough, his strong 



THE "LILIWEN" 87 

hands stained with the brown upland earth, his neck 
bared to the sea breeze. Gwenifer turned towards 
him with a smile of greeting, and climbing up the 
rough bank he sat down beside her, between the broom 
brushes. 

" I saw thee from the field, lass, and came up as 
usual to tell thee what is in my mind,'' he said with a 
laugh, in which lurked no discontent, no doubts, no 
worry — but only the fulness of happy life that 
seems by right to belong to the tiller of the ground. 

" Hast seen Nance yet? " he asked. " I mean, 
has she told thee our plans? " 

Gwenifer shook her head. 

" Well, indeed ; she's careful as I am to keep the 
villagers from talking. That suits me well, for all 
my life I have hated to have my name on every old 
woman's tongue. Dear anwl ! I think I could bear to 
be murdered if I could keep it all to myself, or to be 
married/* he added, with another laugh; " but to be 
talked about, ach-y-fi ! 'twould be like fire on my skin ; 
I couldn't stand it." 

Gwenifer laughed too, aiid pointing to her lips, with 
a shake of her head seemed to say, " / won't talk 
about thee." 

" No, no ; but listen then ; 'tis this I want to ask 
thee," and he plucked at the grasses, biting oflp the 
ends, as he continued, " 'Tis this way now. Nance is 
slow to make up her mind, and there again she pleases 
me ; a forward girl I can't bear ; I like them modest 
and — and — like thee, Gwenifer. But when a man 



88 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

has made up his mind to be married, he likes to make 
haste about it, eh, lass? " 

Gwenifer nodded. 

" Well, I want thee to help Nance to make up hers, 
ni give her leave to tell thee ; no doubt she has waited 
for that, poor little thing; and thee'U advise her, 
Gwenifer, to do as I wish? " 

The girl bowed her head, her eyes fixed intently 
on the sea beyond. 

" Yes ; everything's ready, thee see'st ; and there's 
no reason to wait. NVncwl Sam is going to live in 
the storws with Hezek. Nance will be able to tend 
them both there, and the two old men will be company 
for each other. There's Flower and Rattler getting 
restless, I must go back to my ploughing; and now, 
lass, I'll leave it to thee. Persuade Nance to be mar- 
ried next month, wilt, Gwenifer? " 

Again Gwenifer bowed her bead, and Gildas slipped 
down the bank on to the moor, adding as he turned 
away, " There's the LUizven^ idling her time, like me. 
A bad job the captain hurting his liand like that; 
but in my deed, I think Hezek's herbs will cure him. 
I believe in them, mind thee, though I do plague him 
a bit about his weeds." 

He took two or three steps towards the cliff, but 
turning back said, " Oh, Gwenifer ; thee wast at the 
meeting last night. Well, did'st ever see such a 
thing? Old Marged Jones crying and moaning! and 
Jossi Fenian sobbing and praying in another comer! 
In my deed, if a man has got to make a fool of him- 



THE « LILIWEN '' 89 

self like that before he is forgiven, then Gildas Rees, 
Scethryg, can never be saved." 

As he walked away over the moor, Gwenifer looked 
after him thoughtfully, and sighed as she returned to 
her weeding ; the west wind blowing in from the sea 
echoed her sigh, and fluttered the LUiwen^s red 
pennon. 

It was not till the next afternoon that she got a 
chance of advising Nance, whom she had of late seen 
less of than usual, for the latter's time had been taken 
up, not only by Gildas's frequent calls, but also by 
her grandfather's patient and his mate. 

They were frequent visitors to the old storehouse, 
more especially the captain, who generally arrived 
about teatime, and stayed till the clock in the corner 
struck seven, when he was careful, as he said, " to 
clear out and make room for his betters." Seeing 
that Gildas's visits were pretty regular and punctual, 
he had guessed the state of affairs, and one evening 
had laughingly questioned Nance on the subject. 

" Come, lass," he had said, for he had grown very 
familiar with the girl, " you might tell a poor man 
how the land lies, for fear he may be shipwrecked be- 
fore he knows it. Gildas is courting thee, 'tis plain 
to see; come now, how soon is the wedding? " 

Nance's color came and went, and a little hardness 
came into her voice. 

"Well, indeed, perhaps he is courting me; but 
when the wedding is to be is another thing; he wants 
it to be soon." 



90 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

" Of course he does, and small blame to him. I 
can understand that, lass ; Fd want it to be soon my- 
self ! " and his light blue eyes sought hers j which 
drooped before them. " But there ! " he added, 
" that is life : some men get nothing but fair weather, 
full sails, and gentle breezes, while others toss about 
amid the rocks, and have to sail alone over stormy 
seas." 

Nance made no answer, but continued to pleat up 
the hem of her apron. 

" Well," said the captain, changing his tone and 
manner, "I must * wish you joy'; and I tell you, 
Nance, I think Gildas is a lucky man. Come, he 
wouldn't grudge you walking with me to the gate, 
that is only friendly." 

This conversation had all been carried on in an 
undertone, while Hezek at the farther end of the long 
room was stooping over his books. 

Nance only too readily yielded to the suggestion, 
and with a nod of acquiescence slipped out of the 
door, and ran down the steps to the yard; Captain 
Jack following caught her up by the horse-pond, and 
side by side they walked not only as far as the gate, 
but down the lane and over the fields. 

To Captain Jack the little episode of a flirtation 
with Nance meant no more than had a score of other 
such experiences; why, she was all but a married 
woman, and therefore safe to joke and flirt with! 

But Nance's erratic, willful heart had been given 
all too readily to the handsome sailor; and as she flew 



THE « LILIWEN " 91 

back over the moor to meet her affianced husband, 
she felt the first pangs of the guilt and barbed un- 
rest which were never to die out, for she still meant 
to keep her hold upon Gildas Rees, and be mistress 
of Scethryg, although had Captain Jack asked her 
to marry him, she would have thrown Gildas's love to 
the winds. 

He was already waiting for her when she reached 
the storws, Hezek seizing the opportunity for dilat- 
ing upon the virtues of his herbs. 

" There's that lad's hand," he said, " 'twas as bad 
a crush as you ever saw, but 'tis getting well rapidly, 
and he'll be able to sail when he likes, I think." 

But Gildas scarcely heard, be was looking round the 
room expectantly ; " Where's Nance.? " he asked. 

" Well, gone to look for Gwenif er, seems to me," 
said the old man ; " she went out when I was dressing 
Cap'n Jack's hand, I suppose. Girls can't bear that 
sort of thing, you see. She'll be back soon, depend 
on't," and while he was speaking the latch was raised 
and Nance entered, heated with running, flustered, 
and, if the truth must be told, a little cross. 

" Here she is ! " exclaimed Gildas. " In my deed, 
lass, the old storws looked empty without thee. 
Where hast been? with Gwenif er? " 

" No," said Nance. " I have been as far as Pen- 
sam looking for Jinni the sewing girl." 

" Ha ! " said Gildas, well pleased. " To make thy 
wedding dress, I hope; for I tell thee, Nance, I am 
going to have it settled to-night. Come, put on thy 



92 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

shawl, and let us walk down Maldraeih; the moon- 
light is bright as day, and no one will disturb us 
there." 

" Ach, no," said Nance, " not to Maldraeth ; I hate 
the dark old shore." 

"Dark?" laughed Gildas, "no place would look 
dark to me if thou wert there, lass; but where thou 
pleaseth," and he turned towards the thorn-hedged 
lane, where but half an hour earlier Nance had lis- 
tened to Captain Jack's merry talk and banter. 
There had been no love in it, of this her womanly in- 
stinct assured her; and if she married Gildas Rees, 
Captain Jack would flirt as merrily with the next 
woman he met. And here beside her was one who 
loved her with all his honest heart; why, why, could 
she not love him in return? Nance's false and 
fickle heart was torn with restless longings. But 
through it all she adhered to her determination to be 
mistress of Scethryg, and hold her head high above 
the village girls. 

When on reaching the edge of the cliff they looked 
down over its dizzy height to the shore below, Gildas 
pointed to the sands lying smooth and white in the 
moonlight. " See," he said, " where is the darkness 
there? 'Tis light as day; we can see the blue of the 
sea; and there's white when the waves break on the 
shore." 

But Nance shivered a little as she looked over the 
edge. 

"Art cold, 'merch-i? We must go in then," and 



THE " LILIWEN '' 93 

he drew her red shawl a little closer round her shoul- 
ders. 

" No," she answered, " I am not cold, but ach-y-fi 
I am not liking Maldraeth ; ever since I was a little 
girl I am afraid of it." 

Gildas laughed loud and heartily, for to him no 
comer in the realm of nature held anything to dread 
or shrink from, and as for the deep mysterious fears 
that haunt the minds of the learned and the doubt- 
ing, why, he had never heard of them, never dreamt 
of their existence; and so. he laughed, the healthy, 
whole-hearted laugh of a strong man to whom there 
was a God in heaven, who having created man was not 
above taking an interest in him and his concerns. He 
was not a religious man perhaps, except in as far 
as every honest, truthful man to whom duty is a law 
IS religious. Indeed of late, since the strange wave 
of fresh spiritual life had begun to flow over the land, 
Gildas had been called irreligious. ^* Ach-y-fi," said 
one, " what wonder Brynzion is passed over, with 
mishteer sitting there so hard and stiff, and never an 
Amen nor a prayer from him ! " 

" Don't I tell you," said Nelli Amos, the old woman 
who had crouched on the kiln when Gildas had en- 
tered the chapel, " don't I tell you the Spirit won't 
come where the * black rock ' stands up against it." 

"We can't turn him out, whatever," said Jerri, 
"because he's our mishteer you see. I don't lay the 
blame on him altogether, mind you; not altogether, 
because Evan Roberts has never been here; if he 



94 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

would come just once, to open the door like, and bring 
the Spirit down, perhaps we could keep him here, in 
spite of mishteer." 

" One thing I advise you," said Nelli Amos; " get 
rid of the * black rock.' " 

She was not a tenant of Gildas Rees's, but lived in 
a hut which her grandfather had built and thatched, 
so she was not afraid to speak her mind, and often to 
give herself the airs of a landed proprietor. 

Meanwhile Gildas and Nance had roamed back to 
the thom-bordered lane, and he was well pleased, for 
he had extracted from her a promise that as soon as 
the banns were " out " she would marry him. In the 
shadow of the thorn bushes they parted, and she had 
returned to the old storehouse looking strangely pen- 
sive and sad. " As well then as ever ! and what do I 
care ? " she exclaimed, as she took off her red shawl 
and flung it on the bed. 

Next day, in the Scethryg fields, she sought out 
Gwenifer, calling over the moor and startling the 
birds from their nests in the stunted thorn bushes, un- 
til at last Gwenifer came through a gap in the hedge, 
clasping to her bosom, throbbing with pity, a 
wounded rock pigeon which she had rescued from the 
hawk. With little cooing sounds of tenderness she 
smoothed the ruffled plumage and soothed the terrified 
creature, more frightened than seriously hurt. 

"What is it?" said Nance, drawing near, "Oh, 
an old rock pigeon ! Let him go, lass, n'wncwl Sam 
would wring its neck pretty soon. Let him fly, and 



THE " LILIWEN " 95 

come thou and hear my news." And side by side the 
two girls sat upon the heather, the broad bay stretched 
before them, the sea-crows calling overhead, the 
Scethryg herds browsing audibly around them. 

The pigeon, getting over its fright, fluttered its 
wings, and Gwenif er, raising her two hands above her 
head, gave it a helpless toss, and straight as an arrow 
away it flew to its nest on the side of the rugged cliffs. 
Then the girl turned to her companion with that smile 
upon her lips which spoke so much of chastened and 
patient endurance — a smile that Nance did not re- 
turn, as she sat there, silent awhile and almost sullen, 
her eyes fixed on the sea, where the LUmen rested like 
a bird on the waters. 

'* Thee can smile at such trifles ! " she said at last. 

"Yes," nodded Gwenif er. "Why this sadness?" 
she added, raising her eyebrows inquiringly, and put- 
ting on the mournful expression which she observed on 
Nance's face. 

For answer Nance only pointed to the graceful 
schooner that seemed as immovable as a painted ship 
before them. 

" The Liliwenf " queried Gwenif er in astonishment ; 
and it was Nance's turn to nod this time without hav- 
ing recourse to words. She followed up her nod by a 
silence, in which her full lips fell into the little pout 
which had been so fascinating in her childhood. Sud- 
denly she drew herself up, and, as if forcing her 
thoughts into another groove, said, " Listen, then, 
lass; what dost think? I am going to be married. 



96 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

Yes indeed then,*' she added, with a natural pride, her 
face brightening a little as she thought how much not 
only Gwenifer, but every giri in Tregildas, would 
envy her. 

" Yes, indeed, and who to, dost think? *' 

Again Gwenifer's inquiring eyebrows. 

" Why, to Gildas, the mishteer himself, and I will 
be mistress of Scethryg — there's for thee; and thy 
mistress, too. Ah, well, I won't be hard on thee, 
Gwenifer, because we're friends these many years now. 
What will Leisa Owen say? and Jane Bryncelyn? I 
would have told thee sooner, but thou know'st how 
Gildas can't bear to be talked about, and 'twas only 
last night he gave me leave to tell everybody, for 
our banns will be out on Sunday." 

She had been too absorbed in the news she had to 
impart to notice that her companion had paled a little, 
and that her fingers had nervously plucked quite a 
little heap of heath blossoms. 

At last she took Nance's hand in her own and 
pressed it warmly, with a look which required no word 
to wing its message of love. 

" Yes, I knew thee'd be glad," continued Nance, 
" but, Gwenifer, lass ;" and she pointed to the LUiwenp 
on whose deck they could see the captain leaning over 
the rail and looking straight towards the Scethryg 
fields. Again Nance pointed towards him, and, turn- 
ing her finger to her own heart, she pressed her hand 
upon her bosom, using Gwenifer's own sign of appre- 
ciation or love. 



THE " LILIWEN " 97 

Into the latter's face the blood rose slowly, as she 
questioned within herself what this might mean. But 
of this her companion did not leave her long in doubt, 
for none were afraid to tell Gwenifer their secrets. 
** Yes, indeed," she said, " he is handsome and pleas- 
ant as no words can tell, and I love him, Gwenifer; 
yes, indeed then, and if he only called to me I would 
go to him as his dog runs to him when he whistles.'' 

Gwenifer started to her feet, flinging from her 
Nance's hand, which had rested on her lap ; the blood 
rushed through her veins, and unable to repress her 
burning feelings, she wrung her hands as she tried to 
control her indignation. 

" What's the matter, lass? " said Nance, laughing. 
" Well, in my deed, 'tis no wonder the boys in the vil- 
lage call thee * Queen of the Rushes.' Sit down again, 
and fear nothing, for I tell thee, lass, he doesn^t care 
a cockle-shell for me, so it'll be all right when I am 
married to Gildas; and perhaps Captain Jack will be 
sorry then. Yes, yes, I'll be a stupid old married 
woman very soon, going to chapel every Sunday with 
my hymn-book and my pocket-handkerchief in my 
hand. Fear nothing, Gwenifer ; it's all right." 



CHAPTER VI 

BEYNZION 

611.DAS Rees of Scethryg was not the man to let the 
grass grow under his feet when he had once made up 
his mind to a course of action. 

Thus, his marriage with Nance was a thing of the 
past when we next see him at work on his farm. 

The hay harvest of another year was ripening fast. 
In the brilliant sunshine of a May day he had hoed 
his roots and sown his com, with the happy satis- 
faction of a man who knows he is working for his 
own home. 

A year had passed since he and Nance had settled 
down as man and wife in the old farm where he and 
his ancestors had lived and died before Kim, and Hezek 
Morgan*s sorrow at the loss of his little lass had been 
considerably lessened by the knowledge that she was 
not far removed from him, and moreover was " Mes- 
tress of Scethryg." 

In the course of the day she paid frequent visits to 
the old storehouse, where nVncwl Sam had also settled 
down more contentedly than he ever had in the farm- 
house itself. He took much interest in Hezek's col- 
lection of medicinal plants, and would often accom- 
pany him on his rambles in search of some rare herb. 

98 



BRYNZION 99 

In the evening, when the door stood open to admit 
the sea breeze and the sunset light, the two old men 
busied themselves with the many small jobs that form 
part of the routine of farm life. They wove the 
round potato baskets, or fashioned the long wooden 
spikes for haystack or thatch, so that their time was 
fully occupied, though none of their work was com- 
pulsory. Generally, after sunset, they found their 
way into the house, and smoked the last hour away 
with Gildas, under the chimney, while Nance moved 
about at her work in the background. She had de- 
veloped into a famous housekeeper, and had taken 
up her duties as mistress with a zest and interest which 
bad, in a great measure, banished the discontent she 
had felt upon her first betrothal to Gildas. For ever 
on the alert, she dusted, and swept, and cleaned, until 
not a speck or a spot was there to be seen on shelf or 
.table. 

She routed out the corners which had harbored 
many a cobweb before her advent, and Het, who was 
at first inclined to rebel, had been obliged to adapt 
herself to the ways of her energetic mistress; for 
Nance was resolute and sharp of tongue, and ruled her 
household with a rod of iron. 

Even Gildas had perforce to submit to her rule, and 
when called to order, would laughingly return to the 
door to shake off the lumps of brown earth which 
clung to his shoes. Sometimes he would pull his 
forelock with mock humility, and ask, " Please, mes- 
tress, may I take a few breaths of air to keep me 



12G:^'^^B 



100 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

alive? " and they would laugh together, Nance blush- 
ing a little at the rebuke implied in her husband's 
tone. 

That is not to say that her little willful ways did 
not sometimes disturb the even tenor of their domestic 
lives ; for as the months went by and she seemed every 
day to grow more shrewd, more sharp, and overbear- 
ing, and to rule her household more vigorously, Gil- 
das began to look grave sometimes, his dark eyebrows 
lowering, and his lips falling into that firm set which, 
had Nance been wise, would have warned her from 
trying him further, but that was just what Nance 
was not. 

Returning from his work on the hedge-bank one 
day, he entered the farm kitchen with a light step and 
a cheerful countenance, which broadened into a smile 
H8 he saw Nance sitting on the hearth holding up for 
inspection a new hat which she had trimmed for her- 
self. 

" Ho ! Well done," he exclaimed, " a sign thou 
art coming with me to the fair to-morrow, I hope? '* 

" The fair? Not I,'» said Nance. " There's a meet- 
ing at Brynzion at seven to-night, and to-morrow at 
Graig ; seems to me thou'st a good memory for every- 
thing but thy meetings, Gildas." 

"Well, there's so many here lately, 'merch-i, 'tis 
hard to remember them all. Come now ! I'll go to 
Brynzion with thee to-night, and thou wilt come with 
me to the fair to-morrow! Remember 'tis our wed- 
ding day, and I met Jones Bryndu to-day, and he 



BRYNZION 101 

asked would we go in and have tea with his mestress 
on our way home if we went to the fair? " 

" Well, I don't see why we should neglect our 
meetings because we were married this time last year,'* 
said Nance, as she laid away the hat and sat down to 
the tea-tray. 

" Oh! is the hat for the meeting, then? " said Gil- 
das with a look of amused annoyance. 

" Well, yes, it is, then," said Nance, with a willful 
set of the mouth, and an extra sparkle in her eye. 
" Fve been to plenty of meetings in the same old hat ; 
'tis full time for me to have a new one. There's 
Mary Thomas has had two new hats lately, and I go- 
ing on and on with the same." 

" Indeed thou art very careful, 'merch-i," said Gil- 
das, " and 'twould please me well to see thee in a new 
hat. But surely thou can'st spare one evening from 
these prayer meetings to go with thy husband to see 
a friend." 

" And to a fair," said Nance. 

" Well, yes ; to the fair, too — why not? Seems to 
me all these meetings are making thee too anxious and 
careful, 'merch-i. Put all thy cares aside for one 
day, and come with me for a little jaunt." 

" Oh, I daresay I am all wrong," said Nance, with 
a pout on her lips and a frown on her brow, " and I 
daresay I am a very poor wife for thee, and per- 



" Stop, stop, Nance ! " said Gildas, " thee'rt a very 
good wife; I haven't a word to say against thee, 



102 QXJEEN OF THE RUSHES 

except perhaps thou'rt a little too much given up to 
these prayer meetings." 

" Oh, say what thou please'st about me,*' said 
Nance, " only I won't hear a word against the prayer 
meetings. There's a Master who has more right to 
our service than even a husband." 

There was a little break in her voice as though the 
tears were not tar off. 

" Stop, Nance ! " said Gildas again ; " are we going 

to have our first quarrel about such a trifle ? " 

He was going to say ^^ as a hat," but Nance had taken 
the bit between her teeth, and rushed headlong on her 
way. 

" Trifle indeed ! Trifle, are you calling a prayer 
meeting? I'm not calling it so whatever; and let me i 

tell thee, Gildas, 'tis paining me to hear how the peo- | 

pie are blaming thee. * Never,' they say, * netfer will j 

the Spirit visit Brynzion while Gildas Rees is there.' j 

And in my deed 'tis no wonder they are thinking so, 
because thou hast turned so cold and hard against 
religion I am quite ashamed of thee." 

While Nance had poured forth her harangue, Gil- 
das had sat looking across the tea-table through the 
open doorway to the moor, which stretched away be- 
yond the farm lands till its hazy outline merged into 
the blue of the sea, while the foreground was gay 
with bushes of gorse and broom ; but the sunny land- 
scape on which he gazed did not lift the shadow that 
had fallen over his face. He was silent for some 
moments, looking flxedly at the scene. At last rising. 



BRYNZION lOS 

he said, " Well, 'tisn't often I have been to chapel 
lately, b't shwr, and 'tis only for company to thee 
that I go at all ; for I tell thee, Nance, I don't like 
these wild ways they have got into lately. My mother 
was a good woman, but I never heard her crying 
aloud about her sins; but there, I'll say no more, 
thou shalt do as thou please'st — thou art mistress 
here. Only one thing, 'merch-i (but I know I need 
not tell thee that) — thou'lt never make me ashamed 
of myself and thee as Owen Davies must have been 
last week when Laissabeth made such a fool of her- 
self. Tan-i-marw! I could never bear that," and 
passing over to the fire he lighted his pipe and puffed 
away in silence, while Nance with a good deal of 
clattering washed up the tea-things and gave her 
orders to Het. 

At last Gildas, knocking the ashes out of his pipe, 
said, " Come, 'merch-i ! put on thy pretty new hat, 
and we will go to chapel together." 

Nance tossed her head a little angrily while she 
dressed, but Gildas, taking no further notice of her 
petulance, endeavored as they crossed the moor to 
smooth over the little disagreement by chatting on the 
everyday occurrences of the neighborhood. When 
they entered the chapel it was already packed almost 
to suffocation, the heat but little tempered by the 
fresh sea breeze that blew in at the wide-open doors. 

One of the occupants of the sfet vawr with energetic 
gestures invited Gildas to join the deacons seated 
there; but ignoring the invitation, he followed his 



104 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

wife to the Scethryg pew, where they found them- 
selves just in time for the opening hymn, which a 
white-haired laborer gave out, and began to sing, the 
whole congregation joining in. 

The mellow tones of the middle-aged, the fresh 
young voices of the lads and lasses, and the clear 
ringing strains of the children filled the chapel with a 
volume of harmony. Over and over again the hymn 
was repeated, with ever-increasing warmth, until at 
last the old man raised his hand, and the singing was 
discontinued. One after another, old men and young, 
old women and young, followed one another in earnest 
prayers, alternating with the fervid hymns which had 
come down to them from their forefathers, and which 
seemed to express their own feelings as no spoken lan- 
guage could have done. 

In full, rich harmony they sang, swaying with the 
rhythm, and visibly affected by their long tension of 
expectancy, for Brynzion had been for a whole 3^ear 
alternately buoyed up with hope and sunk in despair 
by the absence of the religious fervor which in other 
places had attended the revival services. True, Ebben 
Lloyd, the carpenter, had " taken the pledge " and 
kept to it, thus changing the miseries of a drunkard's 
home into an earthly Paradise. True, also, Jerri the 
boatman had become a sober man and a shining light 
in the congregation. The Sunday school was well 
attended by pupils whose ages ranged from eighty 
downwards. The quarrels and bickerings of the little 
village had disappeared — in fact, Tregildas had be- 



BRYNZION 106 

come a pattern village in its great desire for the com- 
ing of the Holy Spirit ; but all this did not satisfy 
Brjnzion, for there had been none of the excitement 
and uplifting that had marked the meetings at the 
other chapels in the neighborhood. 

"There must be something wrong," said Jerri; 
" 'tis we are in fault, not the Spirit," and old Nelli 
Amos had not hesitated to lay the blame on Gildas 
Rees — ^^ the black rock " as she continued to call him ; 
so that when they saw Gildas, instead of taking his 
place amongst the deacons, follow his wife into the 
Scethryg pew, there had been a flutter of mixed feel- 
ings in the hearts of the elders of the congregation, 
while Nelli Amos was distinctly elated, and put an 
extra ring in her voice as she led the refrain of the 
hymn. Towards the close of the service, a stranger 
entered, and quietly placed a paper in the hand of 
the preacher, who had taken but a very modest part 
in the proceedings of the evening. When he 
rose from his seat and spread the missive on the open 
Bible before him, there was a dead silence in the 
chapel; one might have heard a pin drop, and the 
crackling of the paper seemed full of import. Gravely 
and slowly, and with a tremble of eagerness in his 
voice, he read aloud the short message. 

" Evan Roberts will visit Brynzion one day in the 
present month. What day, the Spirit has not yet 
revealed to him. 

" Signed Robekt Owens, Deacon, Tregarreg.** 



106 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

There was a moment's silence, ending in an outburst 
of song, which seemed the only fitting expression far 
the tide of jubilant gratification that swept over the 
congregation like a strong south wind. From every 
comer of the chapel came ejaculations of praise and 
prayer. 

In the pew in the comer Nance had risen to her 
feet, her excitable nature moved to its very depths by 
the strong emotion of the moment. She clasped her 
hands and joined in the exultant refrain; and when 
the first verse was ended it was her voice that led on 
to the second without a break, Gildas sitting beside 
her calmly observant of all that passed ; and naturally 
reserved and sensitive, fearing lest she might lose 
control over her feelings, he laid his hand quietly on 
her arm, but with an impatient jerk she flung it fronn 
her and continued to sing in a kind of ecstasy. Hymn 
after hymn was sung, prayer after prayer was out- 
poured, until the clock on the front of the gallery 
pointed to half -past nine; and the meeting was 
brought to a close at last in a scene of enthusiastic 
congratulations. Evan Roberts was coming! and 
doubtless with him would visit them the Spirit for 
which they had so long prayed. 

Gildas looked at his watch impatiently, and whis- 
pered, " Time to go home, 'merch-i, follow me close,'* 
and, though a little reluctantly, Nance took his ad- 
vice, and followed close behind her stalwart husband, 
as the quickest means of reaching the doorway. 

After a few breaths of the pure fresh air, she said 



BRYNZION 107 

in great excitemeiit, " There's a grand meeting it was, 
Gildas! Wasn't it wonderful to hear little Jane the 
Mill praying like that? In my deed, I felt something 
rising up in my heart, that I could almost fall down 
and pray myself.*' 

" Caton pawb, Nance ! " said Gildas. " Never, 1 
hope, before strangers like this. Thou'st got to keep 
a strong guard on that heart of thine, 'merch-i; 'tis 
warm and true, I know, but 'tis too ready to blaze up 
like the dried furze on the mountain; 'tis the slow- 
burning peat lasts longest, and warms the hearth and 
cheers our hearts ; this blaze of prayer and noise will 
soon die away." 

"Die away?" said Nance. "No indeed, Fm not 
believing thee, Gildas, and I can't think how thou 
could'st hold up so straight and stem, when the old 
hymns were filling the chapel ! I was looking at thee, 
and thou wert as cold and hard as a stone, and old 
Dafi Lewis praying too! " 

They were walking over the short grass of the 
moor. A light in the Scethryg kitchen gleamed 
through the soft gloom, the May night was heavy 
with the sweet perfume of the earth and the gorse, 
the landrail called from the lower hayfields. The stars 
were hidden by a mist that came upon the wind which 
bore with it also a distant threatening murmur. 

Gildas was silent for a time, some strange weight 
oppressed him. The mysterious upheaval in the 
spiritual life of those around him disturbed him; it 
seemed to hold for him a foreboding of evil, against 



108 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

which his own spirit rebelled. Not from any antag- 
onism to real religion, but because his blunt and honest 
nature, and his instinctive reticence, made him shrink 
from the publicity given at the revival meeting to 
the most secret feelings of the heart. As usual when 
he was deeply moved he answered in a calm voice. 

" I am not saying, Nance, that the old tune did not 
touch me; 'twas because of that I looked so straight 
and hard perhaps. 'Twas a hymn my mother used 
to sing when I was a boy, and, Nance, I am not the 
hard man thou seem'st to think me ; but to wail and 
cry, to shout Hallelujah, and to tell all the people 
that I am a sinner — ach-y-fi ! 'tis not the way I think 
of religion. Wasn't it the Lord Jesus who said, 
" Enter into thy chamber, and when thou hast shut 
to thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret ' ? 
No, Nance, I would rather die than show my heart 
to strangers. Come, 'merch-i, we won't speak any 
more about it, for 'tis plain to me that on this matter 
thou and I will not agree." 

" We must disagree then, I suppose," said Nance, 
with a toss of her head, which in the darkness Gildas 
felt rather than saw, " for I will never desert the 
prayer meetings. I will ask them to pray for thee, 
Gildas, that the spirit may come and soften thy 
heart." 

" Pray for me? in public ! " said Gildas, recoiling in 
horror. " Nance, lass, thou wovM^st not do a thing 
that would anger me so much." He paused with his 
fingers on the door latch and stood in a listening atti- 



BRYNZION 109 

tnde, while on the still night air came the sound of a 
booming threatening thud which seemed to reverber- 
ate in the ground under their feet. 

" What is that? " asked Nance, listening also. 

" 'Tis the sea breaking on Maldraeth," said Gildas, 
" and 'tis a sign we are going to have a storm. The 
wind changed when we were in Brynzion. I thought 
indeed the air was heavy," and he drew a long breath 
as if oppressed by something. 

" On Maldraeth ! " said Nance, with a little shiver, 
"'tis gloomy always there, but 'tis worse with that 
thundering noise. There it is again! Ach-y-fi! I 
never heard it before^" 

" No," said Gildas, entering the house before her, 
"most like not; 'tis very seldom the wind blows 
straight from that point, but when it does the sea 
feels it down there I can tell thee. Come in, 'merch-i, 
let us blaze the fire and shut the door on the storm and 
darkness — it need not come near thee and me ;" and 
he tried to close the door, but stopped as he felt a 
slight resistance. " Gwenifer ! " he exclaimed, as a 
slender girlish figure entered. " What ! hast been to 
the meeting and we never saw thee there? Come in, 
lass, and have supper with us." 

Nance, too, was pressing in her invitation; and 
gathered round the homely table, they chatted as eas- 
ily and as unrestrainedly as though Gwenifer were 
able to express herself in the same manner as them- 
selves. 

" A storm coming? " said Gildas in answer to a 



110 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

sign from her, which they had no difficulty in under- 
standing. ** Yes, and a bad one. Hast heard the 
thundering on Maldraieth? " 

The girl nodded, and in her own picturesque way 
said, ^^ Far out in the bay there is a ship tossing 
badly." 

" A ship ? A schooner? " asked Gildas. 

" No." 

"A smack?" 

" Yes, far out ; 'tis very rough." 

" Yes," said Gildas, " and we have only the swell 
of it yet, before midnight 'twill reach us. Thou must 
go before it comes, Gwenif er." 

Nance was rather silent ; and as she ate her supper, 
the pout on her lips was very pronounced. 

Gwenifer, sensitive and tender, noticed it at once, as 
well as the little shadow of vexation on Gildas's face. 

" What did'st think of the meeting? " the latter 
asked. " Dost like all that fever and confusion ? 
Mestress and me, we are not quite agreeing about it. 
Dost like it, Gwenifer? Is that religion? Out there 
alone, so many years in the silence, thou must know 
if any one does. Come, tell me, lass, is this pleasing 
to the Almighty and to thee? " 

It was some little time before Gwenifer answered; 
she seemed troubled at the difficulty of explaining 
herself as she rarely was. At last, with a smile, she 
pointed upwards and bowed her head, then wringing 
her hands with an expression of misery on her face, 
she shook her head. 



BRYNZION 111 

"What dost mean, lass? That, that part of it 
that comes from above pleaseth thee, and the noise 
and the excitement thou dost not like. Is that it? " 

" Yes/' nodded the girl. 

" I knew that would be thy thought. Well, Nance 
shall have her way, and go to as many meetings as she 
likes ; she goes with it heart and soul, but for me, I am 
not liking it." 

Gwenifer glanced swiftly from one to the other; 
and by some mysterious instinct which had grown 
upon her in her years of silent seclusion, she felt the 
tnutterings of a storm which was gathering round 
Gildas's head. And as she ran over the moor through 
the fitful moonlight she heard again the booming 
thunder of the waves on Maldraeth, and in some un- 
accountable manner seemed to connect the threatening 
sounds with the shadow on Gildas's face; and she 
trembled as she heard the recurring boom which spoke 
of resistless power, more forcibly than the foam 
and roar of the breakers would have done, and of the 
heavy impact of waters which the south wind was driv- 
ing against the cliffs of Maldraeth. 



CHAPTER VII 

A FAIEIN6 

All night the storm continued to rage, and to Gwen- 
ifer, lying awake in her lonely cottage, the sound of 
the night wind rushing by, the roar of the breakers, 
seemed like a threatening of trouble to Gildas. Why 
to Gildas she could not tell, and the early hours of 
dawn found her still awake, and disturbed in spirit. 
The sun rose bright and clear, and in his slanting 
rays the sea turned to gold and the moor became re- 
splendent with the purple and yellow of heather and 
furze. 

On the bay, no ship with snowy sail or flaunting 
pennon could be seen, only the great wild waste of 
water stretching to the horizon. 

Gwenifer's thoughts flew to the tiny bark which she 
had seen the night before tossing dangerously 
amongst the breakers. What had become of her? 
she wondered. Had she reached some port of safety ? 
Had she folded her sails and dropped her anchor in 
some sheltered haven? or had that wild storm wreaked 
its fury upon her, and compassed her destruction ? 

She knew from experience it would be useless to try 
to sleep, so she dressed herself and prepared her sim- 
ple breakfast, and while she did so her thoughts re- 

118 



A FAIRING 113 

turned persistently to that frail craft which she had 
seen but for a moment through the twilight haze. 
What had happened to her, and what was she? Not 
the LUiwen, she knew ; smaller, and with but one mast, 
her sails unfurled, the seas breaking over her — her 
chance of safety was small indeed. But as the sun 
rose higher and higher, brightening the moor and 
gilding the sea, the depression and the gloom fled from 
her heart. 

" Perhaps the little ship was safe in port ! " and as 
she rused the latch, and saw the Scethryg cows lying 
safe in the shelter of the furze bushes, she was light- 
ened of her burden; and although she did not sing 
aloud, in her heart rose a paean of youth and life and 
health. 

What a foolish girl she had been ! was her thought 
as she ran over the moor, every cow rising as she 
passed and clumsily following to the milking-yard. 
What had the booming thunder on Maldraeth threat- 
ened after all? Nothing worse than this boisterous 
storm, which could not reach the cosy hearth in the 
old farm kitchen, or the loft where Gildas lay sleep- 
ing; what mattered anything else? " No, too ready 
IS my heart to fear," she thought ; " the storm will 
pass, the world is beautiful, and the cows are coming 
home to be milked." 

Yes, Gwenifer, the world is beautiful, the cows will 
be milked, and in due time the storm will die away ; 
but far out upon that stormy sea are floating a few 
spars and broken boards, all that remain of the ship 



114 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

that had so persistently haunted Gwenif er's thoughts. 
Many fathoms deep under those foaming billows the 
captain, the mate, and alas ! the young wife who had 
accompanied her husband are lying; no trace of them 
remains to tell the tale of their sad fate. 

Surely Gwenif er's forebodings of trouble for Gildas 
were groundless; at all events they seemed to have 
taken flight for the time, as she carried her pail to 
meet the cows in the farmyard. 

A little later and the whole Scethryg household was 
astir, for under Nance's energetic rule none were al- 
lowed to waste the early morning hours in sleep ; so 
that when Gwenifer returned from the milking she 
found the plain but plentiful breakfast already pre- 
pared: the brown teapot sitting close on the embers, 
the flat loaf lying on the table, with the butter as yel- 
low as the cowslips that decked the Scethryg fields, 
while over the fire Nance held the spluttering pan that 
was filling the kitchen with its savory odor. Gildas 
entering upon this scene, required no pressing to draw 
his chair up to the table at once, with a cheerful 
" Well, I'm ready ! " He was not ill pleased that the 
strong wind shook the windows in their frames, that 
" Ben Stable " took out his red pocket-handkerchief 
and tied his hat down over his ears, for it all went 
to prove that Nance could not go to the fair, although 
doubtless (as he wished to believe) she would have 
accompanied him had it been a fine day. 

*^ No, indeed, this is not a day for new hats and 
ribbons," he said as he proceeded with his breakfast, 



A FAIRING 116 

" but I must go, and sell that horse. I will be home 
early and bring thee a fairing." 

He shrank from saying anything about the meet- 
ing in the evening, and Nance was apparently as 
anxious as he was to avoid the subject. 

" Gk)od-bye, 'merch-i ! " he called out, as he 
mounted his horse at the door, where ." Ben Stable " 
joined him, riding the horse that was to be sold. 

Down in the village he passed Brynzion, which, in 
spite of the wind, two or three people were busily 
engaged in cleaning and adorning. A burly sea cap- 
tain perched on a ladder was cleaning the windows, 
Jerri the boatman polished the brass thumb latch, 
while another stalwart sailor weeded the path that sur- 
rounded the walls. 

" Preparing we are you see, mishteer," said Jerri, 
" and tidying the place up a bit against Evan Roberts 
comes, because no doubt there'll be some strangers 
coming, too." 

''Like enough," said Gildas, passing on without 
any further remark. An unreasoning feeling of an- 
tagonism was growing in his heart towards the chapel 
and everything connected with it, for he attributed 
all Nance's altered ways to her devotion to it, and to 
its services ; and as he rode into the town, his thoughts 
returned to his rugged old home with an aching dis- 
satisfaction. He made a bad bargain over his horse, 
and came home not in the most equable frame of 
mind ; but still, his just and honest nature prevented 
him showing any signs of his discontent to Nance« 



116 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

The storm still raged, the whole bay tossing as if in 
a ferment of boiling anger. The booming thunder 
on Maldraeth was no longer heard, for the air was 
full of the rattle and the roar of the wind. 

" I told thee 'twas not over,'' said Gildas, entering 
the kitchen, where Nance already seated at the tea- 
table awaited his coming, while in the background 
Gwenifer stood holding up a quilt of brilliant color- 
ing, the work of her clever fingers. Her dark eyes, 
bent down on the quilt, were raised inquiringly to 
Gildas's face as he entered, and, as if in answer to her 
question, he said, ^^ I got on pretty well, though in 
my deed that road goes straight in the teeth of the 
wind to-day — 'twas hard sometimes to keep on the 
saddle." 

" 'Tis a beautiful patchwork, lass," said Nance. 
" Take it up to the coffer, and come thou down and 
have tea with us before thou goest;" but Gwenifer 
shook her head and showed she was going a-milking. 

"Oh, I thought Het had milked," said Naiice, 
dismissing Gwenifer and the quilt from her mind. 

" Come, Gildas," she said in her managing brisk 
tones, " come, sit thee down ; 'tis getting late for tea." 

" WeU," said Gildas, doing as he was bid with an 
indulgent smile, " I am ready for my tea, too, but 
thou dost not ask me who I saw in the fair to-day." 

"Who?" said Nance, with but little interest, for 
her mind was full of the prayer meeting. 

"Well, first I met Jones Bryndu, and he asked 
would we go and have tea with his mestress on Mon- 



A FAIRING 117 

day. Wilt come, 'merch-i? Jones and I we are old 
friends, and I like to please him." 

" Yes will I," said Nance ; " on Monday there is no 
meeting." 

** Right. Well, then, who should I meet but 
Cap'n Jack ! and for a wonder without John Davies." 

** Cap'n Jack ! " exclaimed Nance, with a strange 
flutter in her breast, a flutter of uneasiness as well as 
pleasure. To do her justice she was thoroughly in 
earnest in her devotion to what she considered the 
claims of religion, but this was a sudden strain upon 
her courage and steadfastness which she was unpre- 
pared for. 

" Yes, Cap'n Jack," continued Gildas, " with his 
voice as pleasant and his eyes as wonderful as ever! 
Pve been asking him Is it true what they say, that he 
can see twice as much as other people? ^' 

"What did he say then?" asked Nance, with 
curiosity. 

" Oh, he laughed as usual, and says he, ' That de- 
pends upon what I am looking at.' The LUiwen has 
been badly damaged, a collision in the Channel, and 
she's in Cardiff undergoing repairs; and 'twill be a 
long undergoing, I am thinking, by what the captain 
tells me of her condition. He's coming to stop with 
John Davies's aunt in Tregildas, old Marged Jones." 

" Oh ! " was all Nance could say. 

" Yes, and I told him to come up to Scethryg as if 
he was at home, and we would be glad to see him, eh, 
Nance?" 



118 QUEEN OP THE RUSHES 

" Yes, of course," she said, and in silence went on 
with her tea, Gildas also doing full justice to the loaf 
of " plank '* bread, occasionally interrupting his meal 
with little items of news which he thought might in- 
terest her. 

But she seemed strangely silent and preoccupied, 
and at last when tea was over rose rather hurriedly, 
calling to Gwenifer, who had returned from milking, 
** Come, Gwenifer, and take my place with these tea- 
things, for 'tis late and I must go to the meeting.'* 

" Stop a minute, 'merch-i," said Gildas, who had 
reserved what he thought would be his crowning bit of 
news till the last, " I have brought a fairing for thee. 
What dost thou think it is? " and he rose to search 
in the pocket of his greatcoat for a little green box 
which he laid on the table, looking at Nance with a 
smile. " 'Tis something I heard thee say thee 
wouldst like to have," he said, "what is it then? 
Guess." 

" Oh, I can't wait," said Nance impatiently, " I 
must go and dress." 

" Well, then, here it is," he said, raising the lid and 
displaying a brooch, which at another time Nance 
would have received with delight. 

" Oh, a brooch," she said, " well, indeed, 'tis pretty, 
Gildas, and I did say I wanted one; but after all, I 
have the one thou gavest me before we were married, 
and what do I want with two? Put it there on the 
shelf, and when I come back I will look more at it. 
Thanks to thee, bachgen ! Look at it, Gwenifer," and 



A FAIRING 119 

she hurried up the bare stairs to the loft, where they 
could hear her moving briskly about on the uncar- 
peted boards. 

The pleasure in Gildas's face died out, and an 
impenetrable look of hardness seemed to veil his eyes. 

Gwenifer, alive to every change in his face, felt 
aggrieved at Nance's coldness, and longed to be able 
to soften its bitterness to Gildas. 

"Nance likes it," she sighed, "only — ^* and she 
waved her hand towards the door. 

" Yes, yes," said Gildas, " she wants to go to the 
meeting. Indeed, lass, I am afraid I am not fit to be 
the husband of such a religious woman ! " 

To this Gwenifer made no answer, but looking down 
at the old oak table, drew imaginary figures on it with 
her forefinger. Her dark lashes lay upon the smooth 
ivory of her cheeks, the red lips had fallen into a 
curve of sadness. 

" To tell thee the truth," said Gildas, rising, " I am 
getting to hate these meetings; they are changing 
Nance entirely. Well," he added, " I will go to the 
stable and see to the horses," and Gwenifer looked 
after him with a depth of pity in her eyes, for she 
thought the revival had made no change in Nance, 
but that it was her real nature which her husband was 
now discovering. For the first few months of their 
married life Nance had succeeded in hiding from him 
the faults of temper and character of which she was 
dimly conscious, and now, under the influence of a 
new excitement, she was growing more careless in her 



120 QUEEN OP THE RUSHES 

endearon to conceal them. Wbat ccfoid Gwenifer 
do? should she speak to Nance? To Gildas? Ah, 
no! too much she feared lest she might reveal the 
secret which she had kept so safely hidden in her 
heart; and Gwenifer did what Nance never did, she 
reasoned the matter out, and came to the conclusion 
that the wisest course for her would be not to inter- 
fere. She clasped her hands, as she had a habit of 
doing when strong emotions surged up within her, and 
called in vain for wOTds. ** Oh, Gildas, Gildas ! ^ was 
her thought. "Oh, would thou wert happy! then 
I would be content." 

Half an hour later Nance was crossing the moor 
with her grandfather. 

" The storm is nearly spent, Dakee," she said. 
** There's odd now that Gildas would not come to 
the meeting. Ach-y-fi ! 'T^s a shame to see how hard 
he is; they are all talking about him being so cold 
in Brynzion.'* 

" Nance ! " said the old man, " wilt take my advice 
in this matter? leave Gildas alone, 'merch-i. I have 
great faith in him. He*s all right, Nance. He does 
not talk about religion, but we see the fruit of it, in 
my deed, so fret not about him, but let him go his 
own way ; 'tis very kind of him to let thee go thine." 

" Kind indeed I " said Nance, " I don't see it then ; 
'twould be more kind of him to come with his wife to 
the meeting." 

**Nay, Nance, thou wilt never alter Gildas Rees; 
he's as firm as the strong oak." 



A FAIRING 121 

" Yes," said Nance, " and as hard as the black 
rocks, as Nelli Amos says.'^ 

" Come, Nance, fach," said the old man gently, 
" the Diwygiad should teach thee to have kinder feel- 
ings towards thy husband." But she walked on in 
silence, with the little pout on her lips which had been 
so charming in the child, but was not so becoming to 
the face of the woman. 

Old Hezek too seemed lost in thought, till reaching 
the chapel door they were soon absorbed in the 
crowded congregation. 

Thus Nance continued to attend her meetings, while 
Gildas gradually withdrew himself from them more 
and more. His lips took a hard firm set, the smile 
that used to lighten up his countenance so much, sel- 
dom visited it, and he grew more silent — " as silent 
almost as Gwenifer," Nance would say sometimes, at 
which remark he would rouse himself and join bois- 
terously in the laugh or the joke, soon relapsing into 
silence, however. 

His changed appearance began to be noticed by the 
villagers without securing their sympathy, but rather 
arousing their anger. " Only a year," they would 
say, " since he married the purtiest girl round about 
here ; and now see his serious face ! and never coming 
to chapel ! Pwr thing ! ach-y-fi, 'tis a shame ! " 

Gwenifer saw it of course, and longed to- chase away 
the gloom; but Nance, if she saw it, seemed indiffer- 
ent, and continued to go her own way. Two or three 
times in the week the hearth at Scethryg was bare 



1«« QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

and empty in the evenings when Gildas, tired with his 
day's work, returned to it for cheer and rest; for 
Nance was at the prayer meetings, where nightly the 
spiritual influence which they awaited seemed increas- 
ingly felt, and she grew more and more wedded to 
the services of the chapel. 

It was late one night in June when, returning from 
one of these services with her grandfather, she heard 
a voice that startled her, and in another moment a 
figure approached whom she recognized as Captain 
Jack. 

With a little flutter of excitement and pleasure, she 
took his outstretched hand, with the usual Welsh 
greeting, " Well, indeed ! " and she was thankful that 
the darkness hid the blushes that rose to her face at his 
sudden appearance. Old Hezek was delighted to meet 
his former patient. 

" Well, where did you come from so sudden? " said 
Nance as they turned towards the moor together. 

" The LUiwen has got a crack in her side, and I 
have left her in Cardiff docks for repairs." 

" Oh, yes ! Gildas told me ; and you are stopping in 
the village." 

" 'Tis an ill wind that blows no one any good," said 
Hezek. " 'Tis a good chance for us to see you 
again," and he once more shook hands warmly with 
the captain. 

" Yes, you can shake as hard as you like," said the 
latter, laughing, " you made a good job of my hand, 
doctor, 'tis stronger than ever now," 



A FAIRING 128 

"You'll come up to Scethryg, and have supper 
with us — eh, Nance? " said the old man. 

" Yes, of course," said Nance, seconding his invita- 
tion. " Gildas will be glad to see you," and they 
walked on through the gloaming. The air was laden 
with the scent of the hayfields, the sunset light still 
lingered in the sky, the bats flitted by them in the 
darkness, and Nance, poor Nance, walked on in a 
kind of dream. 

When they reached Scethryg, it was with a strange 

nervousness that she ushered the guest into the old 

kitchen, where Gildas was sitting alone by the hearth. 

He rose at once when he saw the newcomer, and 

welcomed him with true hospitality. 

" Glad to see you, cap'n," he said. *^ I told mes- 
tress you would turn up some day." 

" Well, you see," said the captain, " I am stopping 
with Marged Jones, John Davies's aunt, and I will be 
glad to come up here sometimes to see you all." 

" As often as you can," said Gildas. " We are 
hay-making to-morrow ; will you give us a hand? " 

** Yes, indeed," said the captain, " though 'tis long 
since I worked at the hay." 

" Come, sit you down," said Gildas ; " we are going 
to have supper, aren't we, Nance? " 

" Well, yes, at once," and she set the chairs to the 
table. 

" Come, Het," called Gildas, " we'll try thy last 
brewing." 
**Het's brewings are always good," said Captain 



124 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

Jack, setting the rush chair for Nance. " There's 
glad I am to have a sight of you both, and of my 
old doctor here. Well, you've treated the mestress 
well, whatever; her roses are blooming as fresh as 
ever." 

" Oh, yes," said Nance, laughing, " there's not 
much the matter with me, I think." 

" Is the singing as good as ever in Brynzion ? " he 
asked, turning to Nance, and under his gaze her heart 
fluttered again. She remembered the walks in the 
moonlight, she remembered the kiss by the thorn bush, 
and wondered whether he had forgotten ; but turning 
' to her duties as hostess she answered as calmly as she 
could. 

"Yes, better than ever; but come, here's the sup- 
per. 'Tis but plain, but I hope you won't mind 
that." 

" Dear anwl no," said Captain Jack, " I am so 
hungry I could eat a brick; and with a glass of this 
sparkling ale, too, why, 'tis a first-class supper ! And 
how's all in the village?" he continued as he drew 
his chair to the table. " Dafi Pengaer as fond of a 
drop as ever? " 

" No," said Nance, " never a drop does he touch, 
and Leisa, poor thing, is having a happy life, what 
she never knew before. That's what the Diwygiad 
has done for her, whatever," and she cast a swift 
glance at her husband, which the captain's keen in- 
stinct interpreted rightly as being a rebuke of some 
sort. 



A FAIRING 126 

" Well, well," he said, " if the Diwygiad has done 
that, 'tis wonderful indeed." 

" Yes," said Gildas, " that is the strange thing 
about it! I can see many good things it has done, 
and 'tis beyond me to understand ; but I will not be- 
lieve there is any good in crying, and moaning, and 
shouting ; d'ye call that religion, captain ? " 

" Perhaps," said Captain Jack, " 'tis the Spirit of 
God poured into earthen vessels." 

Nance looked up well pleased, Gildas somewhat in 
surprise, while Captain Jack himself seemed strangely 
disturbed. He had spoken on the impulse of the 
moment, and had unconsciously enunciated a great 
truth. Such a subject was not one upon which he was 
accustomed to bestow a thought, or to venture an 
opinion, so, a little confused, he tried to change the 
subject. 

But Gildas added, " The mestress and me don't 
agree about it you see; she is heart and soul for it, 
and I, well, I am not against it, exactly, but I don't 
hold with their ways down there at Brynzion. She 
shall have her own way about it, and go to all the 
meetings if she likes, dear heart." 

" Well, I have never been to one yet," said Captain 
Jack, " tis time for me to begin, I think. 'Tis how 
you take it, I suppose, this Diwygiad," he added 
carelessly, and the subject dropped. 

** Come," said Gildas at last, turning to the hearth 
where the logs were spluttering cheerfully, " a smoke 
before you go, for I see you looking at your watch." 



126 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

" Well, one pipe before I start. *Tis a good 
stretch to the village, and 'twas late to come up here ; 
but I wanted to see you all, and to thank the doctor 
here for curing my hand so well." 

And under the wide open chimney they chatted on 
all the events that looked so big and important to the 
country eye, and seemed so small and insignificant to 
the outer world. 

" Well, I will be here to the hay to-morrow," said 
the sailor, at last rising to go. " * Nos da ' to you all. 
There's snug and cozy you look here ! I'll be think- 
ing about this bright hearth when I am trudging 
along; 'tis enough to make me long to be married 
myself ! " and as they closed the door after his de- 
parture, they heard him humming cheerfully, as he 
began his way across the dark moor. 

For two or three hundred yards he walked on almost 
unconsciously, so busy were his thoughts with the 
bright hearth he had just left: n'wncwl Sam sitting 
stolidly silent, old Hezek's bent shoulders and grey 
beard, Nance's trim figure moving about her house- 
hold duties, the little imperious ways which seemed 
to have grown more pronounced, the shadow of care 
or vexation on Gildas's face — nothing was lost upon 
Captain Jack, he was alive to it all. Nance's dim- 
pled charms, the embarrassment with which she had 
received him, the drooping eyelids, the changing color 
— these too Captain Jack noted. Suddenly he was 
recalled to himself by finding he had reached the edge 
of the cliff. 



A FAIRING 127 

" Jari ! " he said, " Pve got wrong ; lost my way 
somehow, and no compass to set me right. Where am 
I, I wonder? I thought I knew my way into the vil- 
lage," and with a shrug and a laugh he turned round, 
but again took a wrong path. When he had followed 
it for a quarter of a mile or so, he came upon a tiny 
thatched cottage, through whose diminutive window 
gleamed a beacon light. No front garden or 
" cwrt " separated it from the grassy moor, which 
reached right up to its whitewashed walls. Only a 
little bareness before the doorway showed it was ever 
trodden by human footsteps. Captain Jack ap- 
proached noiselessly over the grass, and knocking at 
the low door, which stood open, called out, " Hoi ! is 
there anybody in who'll show me the way to Tre- 
gildas?*' 

In answer to his call a girl appeared, who seemed 
surprised but not startled at seeing a stranger. The 
light from the inner chamber, faint though it was, 
revealed her fully against the surrounding gloom — - 
her gown of dark red frieze set close to her slender 
form, her dusky hair crowning her head with many 
coils, her bare neck and arms, smooth as satin, though 
tinged by sun and wind. 

Captain Jack for a moment stood surprised at 
something unusual in the girl's appearance. 

It was Gwenifer, who, having stayed late over her 
quilting at Scethryg, was now preparing her own 
supper of bread and milk. Here was a wonderful 
thing, a visitor in the midst of the moor — away from 



128 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

Tregildas, away from Scethryg ! She was not at all 
frightened, no thought of danger entered her head; 
on the contrary, it was pleasure only that she would 
have wished to express. But the stranger, unac- 
quainted with her signs and gestures, seemed at first 
puzzled by her silence; recalling, however, what he 
had heard, it flashed upon him that this was Gwenifer 
the silent girl, whom he had thought of so often since 
that night when she had appeared to him for a mo- 
ment in the glow of the sunset. She smiled a pleasant 
greeting, raising her eyebrows inquiringly, and this 
at least Ciaptain Jack understood. 

" I am John Davies," he said, " captain of the LUi- 
wen. About here they call me Captain Jack,'* and at 
once Gwenifer, remembering Nance's infatuation, 
could not help showing her change of feelings in her 
expressive face. » 

" Ah ! " he said, " you have heard no good of me. 
But you are Gwenifer, and I have heard nothing but 
good of you. Will you direct me to Tregildas? " 

Instantly she was alive to his wishes, and anxious 
to help. Taking down a cloak which hung on the 
boarded wall, she flung it hastily over her, and, 
drawing the hood over her head, came out into the 
darkness. 

" Oh, no, no," said Captain Jack, " you shall not 
come, 'tis late and the dew is heavy ; " but she only 
waved a laughing rejection of his reasons, and contin- 
ued to walk beside him over the moor. 

Conversation was impossible, and the sailor could 



A FAIRING 129 

od]j follow his guide in silence. Once she turned 
to him as the moon peeped out from behind the 
clouds, and without the slightest embarrassment laid 
one hand on his arm, and with the other pointed 
to where the moonlight made a silver path across 
the sea. 

" Yes," said Captain Jack, " beautiful indeed," 
and he looked, not on the path of silver, but on the 
girl's face which the moon shone full upon. She 
however, seemed quite unconscious of his admiration, 
and arriving at a diverging pathway pointed to it 
and stopped. 

" Yes, yes, I see," said the captain. " How stupid 
I was to lose my way ! But in my deed I'm glad I 
did, because I have wanted to speak to you ; and now 
we are friends, aren't we? " 

She bowed her head, smiling in that proudly gra- 
cious manner which made the boys of the village call 
her "Queen of the Rushes." There was no excuse 
for lingering, so Captain Jack had perforce to follow 
the path which she pointed out. 

" Good-bye," he said, " and thank you, and ^" 

He was longing to tell her how sorry he was for her 
affliction, but suddenly stopped in confusion, feeling 
that it would be an insult to do so ; but Gwenif er had 
caught the meaning of his sudden hesitation and laid 
her finger on her lips.. 

" My silence, yes," and again she bowed her head, 
and Captain Jack as he turned away took off his cap 
with an unfeigned and almost reverent admiration. 



CHAPTER VIII 

A BOWL OP BUTTERMILK 

The weeks slipped by, unmarked by any special 
events other than the gathering of the hay harvest, 
which was rich and plentiful. 

Captain Jack had become a regular attendant at 
Brynzion, drawn there simply by a feeling of sociabil- 
ity and his love of music, for Brynzion was famed 
for its good singing even in that neighborhood, where 
choirs and singing-classes were the mainstay of every 
congregation. He enjoyed the swinging rhythm of 
the old hymns, though with a little sense of awkward- 
ness at finding himself inside a place of worship — 
an experience which he had eschewed for many years. 

Nance saw him from her pew in the opposite comer , 
and rejoiced. Why she so rejoiced it would be diffi- i 
cult to say. It does not do to look too closely into 
the motives and sentiments of the human heart. At 
all events, she thought her joy was over the saving of 
his soul. 

Poor Nance ! She was ill at ease, and had lost the 
buoyancy and spirit which had been her chief charm. 
Her face had lost some of its fresh coloring, too, and 
there were dark rings under her eyes ; for though the 
mind may not be deep enough for harassing thoughts, 
180 



A BOWL OF BUTTERMILK 181 

the heart may still lie open to the ravages of stormy 
passions and insidious temptations. 

To do her justice, it had not been without a strug- 
gle that she had allowed her infatuation for the rov- 
ing sailor once more to enter her heart. Gildas she 
thought was hard, and callous to the religious wave 
that was bringing life into services that had grown 
somewhat timewom and spiritless. 

Here was a man who felt it all as she did, who 
attended every meeting, and who as regularly walked 
home with her and her grandfather, ever ready at stile 
or streamlet to help her over, with the little nameless 
attentions to which she was not much accustomed in 
her rough country life,. 

A perverse stubbornness seemed daily to be growing 
stronger within her against Gildas who was hard and 
proud she thought — not towards her, it was true, 
but towards the wave of the Spirit which to her and 
to her friends meant religion, and therefore it was 
right that she should show her disapproval, and that 
she should be more faithful than ever to Brynzion. 

Gildas, meanwhile, showed no diminution of kind- 
ness and care towards her, though he had become more 
reserved and less cheerful than he used to be, letting 
her go her own way, and calmly taking his own to 
field and market; but towards Brynzion and the re- 
vival he showed a cold and stolid front, taking no in- 
terest in the meetings, and receiving Nance and 
Hezek's glowing accounts of fresh conversions with 
indifference. 



132 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

No suspicion of her feelings towards Captain Jack 
had entered his mind. As ready as ever to greet 
him with hospitable warmth, to drive him to market or 
fair, to smoke with him under the big chimney, he 
wondered why he so seldom appeared at Scethryg. 
" What is the matter with him, Nance? " he asked one 
day, when the sailor had sat for an hour with Hezek 
in the old storehouse, and had then returned to the 
village without entering the house. " Has the revival 
altered him, too?" he wondered; but he kept his 
thoughts to himself, for he had got into the way of 
avoiding that subject as one on which it pained liim 
to disagree with Nance. 

" What is the matter with him? How do I know? 
Nothing, I should think,*' she answered, turning to 
the dairy with the look of irritability which was set- 
tling down upon her face. 

" Well, indeed, perhaps I am fancying it. They're 
drawing the net to-night on Tregildas sands ; there'll 
be plenty of fish — will I ask him to come and have 
supper with us? Wilt come down thyself to the 
shore, 'merch-i ? " 

There was an eager tremor in the man's voice, and 
a melting tenderness in his eyes, as he asked the ques- 
tion ; but at Nance's reply every sign of eagerness was 
repressed, and the flash of light that had for a mo- 
ment made him look like the Gildas of old died away. 

" Caton pawb ! " was her answer. " How can I go 
down to the shore when it's churning-day and all ! " 

" Gwenifer is going to help thee, isn't she? and she 



A BOWL OF BUTTERMILK 133 

is coming to see the nets drawn. There will be plenty 
of time when the churning is over." 

"Oh! let Gwenifer go then; I am too busy, what- 
ever." 

" So! " said Gildas, a fliish of annoyance dyeing his 
face. For a few minutes he was silent, but rose at 
last and followed Nance into the dairy, where in the 
shaded light she was busy over her cream-pans. She 
looked very pretty and young with her tucked-up 
skirt and bare arms, a shaft of sunlight streaming in 
through the latticed window catching her yellow hair. 
Scarcely noticing Gildas, she continued to pour the 
golden cream into the chum, but when he closed the 
string-latched door behind him, and approached her 
more closely, she raised her eyes inquiringly, and it 
would have been no wonder if they had rested admir- 
ingly upon him; for as he stood there in his rough 
grey working coat, his blue shirt loosened at the col- 
lar, showing the manly brown throat, his red tie hang- 
ing loosely on his breast, his strong hand grasping 
the sickle which he was carrying to his work — he 
made a striking picture of rustic comeliness and 
strength. Nance noticed nothing of this, or if she 
did she made no sign; but she saw the look of de- 
termination in his set lips and flashing eyes, and her 
own hot temper rose at once defiantly in opposition to 
what she thought was ill-temper on his part. 

" Not so near the chum, Gildas," she said, " there 
are hay-seeds on thy coat." He did not withdraw, 
however, but stood still a moment, looking at her not 



134 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

with anger, but with a wistful seriousness which she 
had never seen in him before. 

In that moment's gaze, while the thick cream flowed 
softly into the chum, he seemed to read her very soul; 
and, alas! Nance was beginning to harbor feelings 
that would not bear such close scrutiny. 

" Dear anwl ! What is it, then ? " she asked at last, 
when her eyelids were beginning to droop a little un- 
der his steadfast look. 

" 'Tis this, then," he said. " Listen to me! Art 
coming with me to Jane and John's wedding to-mor- 
row? Thou knowest I have promised for us both." 

^^ Jane and John's wedding I and me in the middle 
of clearing up the work after the haymaking ! How 
can'st expect me, Gildas? No, indeed! I am not 
coming." 

There was another silence, during which the man's 
broad chest heaved a little, while, with folded arms, he 
stood looking out through the lattice bars, as though 
he took counsel from the shimmering sea that gleamed 
through the ivy leaves outside. 

" Nance ! " he said at last. " Nance ! Listen to 
me, merch-i, for I mean every word I say. Of late 
thou hast refused me every trifle I have asked of thee, 
though I have never refused thee anything. Once 
more, Nance, wilt come with me to the wedding? If 
not " — and lie paused for a moment — *^ if not, then 
I wUl never ask thee anything more! " 

A peal of laughter was Nance's answer. 

** Well, indeed I " she said, when she had recovered 



A BOWL OF BUTTERMILK 1S5 

her breath. "Well, indeed! I thought something 
dreadful was coming. Is that all, then? Thou wilt 
never ask me anything more;" and she laughed 
again, with one hand to her side, while the other still 
held the dripping cream pot. 

" Yes, that is all," he said, and slowly turned away 
sickle in hand. 

She expected a last reproach, but it did not come; 
on the contrary, Gildas seemed to have forgotten the 
matter as he passed out through the kitchen. He 
stopped at the doorway and called back in his usual 
manner, " 'Tis a hot day ; Dai and Ben will be glad 
to have their lunch: wilt remind Het of it, Nance? " 

"Yes, yes, Fll send it at ten as usual; 'tis only 
half -past nine yet." 

" Right," said Gildas, and was gone. 

In the lane that led to the fields two men were 
sauntering towards him, enjoying the cool shade of 
the overarching thorn hedges, and Gildas recognized 
Captain Jack and his mate who had arrived the pre- 
ceding day. 

"Well, well! I was asking Nance this morning 
what had become of you, cap'n ! and I am glad to see, 
mate, that you've not forgotten your way to 
Scethryg." 

" No, no, not likely! And how's the mestress? " 

" Oh, quite well," said Gildas ; " she's in the house. 
Go you in and sit a bit ; 'tis as hot as noon already." 

" 'Tis that," said Captain Jack, and his light blue 
eyes, whose long black lashes seemed to throw quite a 



186 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

shade over them, flickered and drooped under GUldas's 
straight, clear gaze; and the latter wondered what 
had disturbed the light-hearted sailor. 

" Any hay to make? " asked John Davies. 

" No ; 'tis all in, as the captain here can tell you." 

** We are bringing you news," continued the mate. 
" Evan Roberts is coming this week. He's to lodge 
with John Parry and his wife, and there's to be a 
grand meeting at Brynzion to prepare for him," 

" So indeed ! " was all Gildas's answer, while Cap- 
tain Jack said nothing, but reached up to the pale 
June roses that trailed over the hedgeside. 

" Well, he has been long waited for," said Gildas at 
last. " The mestress will be glad of the news. I must 
go to the fields, so good-day to you both," and he 
went on his way down the shady lane. 

" Dei anwl ! There's a fool I was to say anything 
about it to him," said the mate. " Did you hear how 
dry he answered? * So indeed,' says he, as if I had 
only told him the wind had changed. Well, he was 
always as cold and hard as a stone. I wonder how is 
poor little Nance getting on with him ? " 

"A grand man, I call him," said Captain Jack; 
^^ as straight as a line and as honest as the day ! If 
every body was like Gildas Rees there would be no 
need of any Diwygiad." 

" Oh yes, he is all that, no doubt," assented the 
mate, and in the silence that so often marks the com- 
panionship of old and tried friends they passed up 
the lane to the farmyard, where the sunshine was 



A BOWL OF BUTTERMILK 137 

glistening on the straw, and in the shade of the cow- 
sheds a few of the cows and horses stood ruminating 
and lazily switching their tails at the flies. 

Outside the farmhouse door the temperature was 
almost tropical, and from this great heat the two men 
entered very gladly into the interior of the cool 
kitchen. 

How refreshing the breeze blowing straight through 
the house from front door to back ! how suggestive of 
coolness, too, was the swishing sound of the frothing 
cream in the churn ! 

" Pouff ! " exclaimed both the men as they entered, 
to find Nance busily preparing the ten o'clock lunch, 
which Ben and Dai were already waiting for under 
the shadow of the hedge in the turnip-field. 

She pulled down her sleeves and smoothed her ruffled 
hair with a shy embarrassment, and her face lighted 
up with the old sparkle and brightness, which had 
been absent too often of late. 

With a great many " dear anwls " and " well in- 
deeds" she greeted the new-comers warmly, fetched 
two horsehair-covered chairs from the " parlwr,'* and 
placed before them a brown jug filled with foaming 
new beer, pressing them to drink, " for 'tis so warm 
to-day, and you must be thirsty." 

" 'Tis warm, and no mistake," said Captain Jack. 
" We would not come up so early, only the mate here 
thought you would like to hear the news we're bring- 
ing you." 

" Yes," chimed in the mate ; " we're bringing you 



188 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

good news, whatever! Evan Boberts is coming to 
Tregildas very soon." 

"Very soon?" exclaimed Nance. "Oh, there's 
glad I am ; " and all the interest and excitement that 
was wanting in Gildas's reception of the news was 
evident in her face and voice. Her color came and 
went, there was a flutter in her breath and a restless- 
ness in her movements which the mate had never no- 
ticed before. 

" Now," she said, " I hope we will have the same 
grand things happening in Brynzion as they have 
had in Graig and other places. Well indeed, there's 
a good thing you are telling me." Her hand trem- 
bled as she held the sparkling ale towards Captain 
Jack, who, however, declined it, saying laughingly, 
" No, no, give it to the mate — he can never refuse 
a glass; but for me — a drink of buttermilk, if you 
please ; I'm thirsting for it, with that swishing sound 
in my ears." 

" Oh, well, you can have plenty of that ; 'tis Gwen- 
ifer churning in there ; I will fetch you a jug of it : " 
But before she could prevent him he had started to his 
feet, and had pushed open the dairy door, where the 
sound of the swishing was growing less continuous, 
saying, " No, no, I will fetch it myself." 

In the shaded light Gwenifer was standing peering 
into the churn, while Het stood expectant at the han- 
dle. " Is it come? " she asked. Gwenifer smiled and 
nodded, and, raising her eyes, saw that Captain Jack 
had entered the dairy, and was looking at her with 



A BOWL OF BUTTERMILK 139 

that strange gaze of wonderment and admiration com- 
bined which would have embarrassed most girls, but 
to her it seemed only the natural expression of those 
wonderful eyes — so light in color, yet so deeply 
shaded. 

Therefore there was nothing but pleased surprise 
in the look with which she greeted him as he drew 
nearer. 

" I've come to beg a drink of buttermilk," he said. 
" If the taste of it is as good as the sound, this hot 
day, 'twill be better than all the cwrw in the world." 

Evidently this was the girl's own opinion, for she 
nodded emphatically as she turned to a high shelf 
that ran round the dairy walls. Reaching down a 
wooden bowl, she filled it from the churn and held it 
towards him, her slender, girlish figure showing its 
graceful lines against the whitewashed walls; and 
Captain Jack took the rude drinking-cup from her 
hands with a respectful, almost a deferential air, which 
Gwenifer seemed to accept quite naturally. 

" Here's to our further acquaintance, then, Gwen- 
ifer," he said, and, raising the bowl to his lips, he took 
a long and refreshing draught before he returned it 
to her with the same respectful manner. 

Standing there in the green light that filtered in 
through the screen of ivy growing over the window, 
surrounded by the snowy milk-pans, and white-scoured 
dairy utensils, she seemed to him the embodiment of 
purity and innocence, and in her presence the reckless 
sailor felt a strange and wistful longing for — some- 



140 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

thing — he knew not what, which she alone could give 
him. 

Her neck was bared to the cool breeze, and her 
round smooth arms rivaled the cream iii their sun- 
kissed whiteness. 

He lingered a moment, turning his cap in his 
hands as if with the intention of speaking ; but Gwen- 
ifer interrupted him by laying her finger on her red 
lips, with the usual shake of her head, as though she 
said, ** I would remind you that I cannot answer what 
you have to say," and she turned to the chum where 
the butter was floating in yellow crumbs on the face 
of the frothing buttermilk. 

" Yes," he said, " I know I ought to go, but I want 
to tell you first how much I wish those beautiful lips 
could speak." As soon as he had spoken, he was 
filled with fear lest his words had offended her; a sense 
of refinement, which perhaps he owed to his early life 
and education, told him that it had been bad taste to 
allude to her affliction, and he left the dairy in an un- 
easy frame of mind, for this silent girl had some 
strange attraction for him, and as he entered the 
kitchen he seemed lost in thought, and left the dairy 
door ajar. As a consequence Gwenifer, looking after 
him, could see Nance, who was sitting in her direct line 
of vision, and her brown eyes were arrested by some- 
thing in that picture seen between the heavy black 
door and its clumsy frame. What was it that made 
her stand so still with that brimming platter of butter 
dropping its cream into the chum? " 



A BOWL OF BUTTERMILK 141 

Nance was sitting in the full light of the window, 
her knitting fallen on her lap, John Davies slowly 
winding up the ball of worsted which had rolled on to 
the floor, when Captain Jack appeared, and over 
Nance's face came that change of expression which 
had arrested Gwenifer's attention. 

The changing color, the drooping eyes, the con- 
scious smile of greeting — where had these been when 
Gildas had entered — Gildas, who had chosen her to 
be his wife, to share his hearth with him, when she, 
Gwenifer, ofttime^ had closed the door upon them 
and taken her solitary way over the moor? How 
often at such times had she envied Nance as she looked 
back through the darkness and saw the cheerful light 
in the Scethryg window ! How her heart had rebelled 
at the thought of Nance's happiness, and her own 
silent loneliness ! And now, what was the meaning of 
that altered expression in Nance's face? of that beam- 
ing smile? that blushing embarrassment? Och-i, 
och-i! she saw it all. She called to mind the foolish 
infatuation that had prompted the words — " Gweni- 
fer, I love him, lass, and if he called me I would go 
to him as his dog runs to him," and in one swift flash 
of intuition she realized that Gildas was supplanted 
in Nance's heart by this roving sailor. Gildas de- 
spised, forgotten ! To her it seemed terrible and al- 
most impossible. The very thought of it sent the 
blood surging through her veins and dyed her cheeks 
with the hot blush of shame. She could hear the 
merry talk in the kitchen, the captain's bantering 



142 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

jokes and Nance's laughing repartees, and her heart 
ached with an intolerable sense of wrong done to Gil- 
das. What could she do to help him? She, the silent 
one, who could not even tell him how she pitied him. 
Pity him? Pity Gildas, the strong, the firm man, who 
to her seemed the embodiment of all that was brave 
and powerful! 

She finished her work like one in a dream, her 
thoughts as busy as her deft hands, as she cleared the 
dairy of every sign of the churning, except that row 
of golden pats ranged on the cool stone slab prepared 
for them. How white, how pure, how sweet every- 
thing looked! Why was her heart so full of dark 
misgivings? She must go, she must fly to the lonely 
moor, where the west wind could whisper peace to her, 
where the rushes would bow, and the wild flowers 
would nod and tremble as if they understood the feel- 
ing which she was unable to express. 

It was noon before the two men rose to go. " Are 
you sure you won't stay and have your cawl with us? " 
asked Nance, as the captain stood hesitating a mo- 
ment, cap in hand. 

" Oh, diwedd anwl, no ! " exclaimed both, " not for 
the world; Peggi Jones would never forgive us, she 
thinks she makes the best cawl in Tregildas. One mo- 
ment, mestress," added the captain, and he entered the 
dairy where Gwenifer was putting the finishing 
touches to her work. " Good-day," he said, " we are 
going now, and thank you again for the buttermilk." 
She looked up surprised, not accustomed to such at- 



A BOWL OF BUTTERMILK 148 

tention, and waved a depreciation of his thanks with 
the smile which was so ready to come to her lips, but 
with a cloud of sorrow in her eyes that the captain 
saw at once, and pondered over as he caught up his 
companion in the shady lane. 

"What you been doing so long in the dairy, 
cap'n ? " asked the mate as they walked on together, 
and there was a sly twinkle in his eye, though there 
was a note of more serious warning in his voice. 
"No courting with Gwenifer allowed; 'tis hands off 
her, mind you." 

" Hush, fool," said the captain, turning upon him 
for once with real anger. " Would'st joke with an 
angel who came down to walk on earth for a time ? " 

" Well no, / wouldn't, b't shwr," answered the mate, 
with the bantering twinkle still lurking in his eyes. 
But Captain Jack seemed disinclined to follow up the 
subject ; on the contrary, an occasional remark on the 
heath was all that passed between them, until they 
reached the village and sat down to Peggi Jones's 
cawl. 

When the shadows of evening fell over the sea, Tre- 
gildas made a sudden start into life and action. The 
lapping of the wavelets on the sands, the soft grey 
atmosphere, instead of soothing, aroused the inhabit- 
ants to a new sensation. There was something to 
do! Something to call them out from their cottages 
where the odor of the culm fires hung heavily. They 
earned enough for their simple mode of life, and 
therefore preferred to rust out rather than to wear 



144 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

out. But when the net that had hung undisturbed 
for a month over the rafters in Jerri's cottage had 
been dragged from its place, by a sudden burst of 
energy that had seized two or three men simultane- 
ously; when it had been carried out a few hundred 
yards from the shore; when a second boat had borne 
one end across the little bay, and the calling and the 
hurrying assured them that it was really about to be 
drawn in — then Mari and Sara and Marged and 
Ann began to bestir themselves, for there would be 
fish, b't shwr, without any exertion on their part, and 
if they were there in good time they would share in 
the haul. 

So they reached down a special jug from the top 
shelf on the dresser — the very jug in which their 
mother or grandmother had hoarded up her savings | 
— and picking out a few coppers, proceeded to the 
shore, where, in the fast falling darkness, they found 
a goodly company of friends and neighbors. They 
greeted each other with an unusual seriousness, if not 
solemnity; for were they not on the eve of an im- 
portant event, which should bring salvation to their 
souls and glory to Brynzion? 

At last the two boats neared the shore, drawing 
closer and closer together, and entrapping the silver 
mackerel that had shoaled in the bay all day. 

Gildas was in one of the boats, his hands busy with 
the oars, while his heart was burning with a bitter 
sense of anger. When he arrived on the shore, he 
had been greeted respectfully by the assembled vil- 



A BOWL OF BUTTERMILK 145 

lagers with the usual " Nos da chi, mishteer," and he 
had not at first observed the coldness in their manner ; 
but as they drew near the surf and launched their 
boats there fell upon Gildas a curious sense of isola- 
tion. There was no direct insult offered him — they 
dared not insult the man who owned their cottages — 
but a sort of silent aloofness seemed to shut him 
out of the free comradeship which generally reigned 
on such occasions. He had been slow to recognize the 
fact, but at last it dawned clearly upon him that his 
attitude towards the revival meetings was embittering 
the feelings of his neighbors towards him, and his 
hot, proud spirit filled him with a defiant independ- 
ence. What did it matter ? - He could live without 
their friendship ; he could turn them out homeless on 
the bare shore to find new homes where best they 
could. 

These were the thoughts that rose within him when 
for the first time in his life he felt himself avoided 
and insulted ; but, bending to his oar, with the peace 
of the sea around him, and only the sound of the oars 
in the rowlocks breaking the silence, he saw the dark 
blue sky of night above him where the stars were 
beginning to show through the haze, and in his heart 
a nobler spirit than that of revenge took the place of 
his first turbulent feelings of indignation. " They 
know me better than to fear me, and so they venture 
far," he thought, and with a scornful smile he helped 
m the work of drawing in the net. Again he found 
nimself left alone on the rocks, while the rest of the 



146 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

company ran eagerly towards the spot where the 
silvery, flapping haul had been emptied on the beach. 

" Jari ! I must go, too, if I want any fish for sup- 
per," he thought, and the smile of scorn changed to 
one of amusement as he followed more leisurely across 
the shore. A little heap of the best fish had been laid 
aside for him. 

" Will I carry them up to Scethryg for you, mish- 
teer?" said Jerri; but he declined in a voice that 
sounded perhaps a little colder and harder than usual. 

Here a silent, slim figure with a creel on her shoul- 
ders appeared in the gloom, and, laying her hand on 
his arm, pointed to the fish and then to her creel. 

^^ Gwenifer, lass, is it thou indeed? How dost find 
out always when thou art wanted? Art sure the fish 
will not wet thy neck? '* But she showed him the sea- 
weed laid thick at the bottom of the basket, and slip- 
uing the creel over her shoulder they turned to leave 
the shore. 

" I'm glad, after all, that Nance did not come 
down," said Gildas ; " 'tis rather chilly and damp to- 
night." As he spoke he stumbled over a woman, who 
crouched behind a rock counting her fish. 

" Nelli Amos ! " he exclaimed, " what in the name of 
the dear! art doing here, with thy rheumatism so 
bad? Go home, out of the damp." 

" What am I doing here? Well, I don't know ; 'tis 
too damp for me; but FU tell you what I am not 
doing, Gildas Rees," she said rising and straightening 
herself: " I am not opposing the Holy Spirit ; I am 



A BOWL OF BUTTERMILK 147 

not turning my back upon the chapel where my par- 
ents worshipped before me ; and I am not leaving my 
young wife to come to chapel alone and to walk home 
with a stranger." 

"Well done, Nelli; thy words flow like the mill- 
stream," laughed Gildas ; but his laugh covered a flood 
of disturbing thoughts, and a crowd of dark imagin- 
ings sprang into life within him as he turned away 
and followed the path to the moor. 

" Only two fish she had in her basket, whatever, 
poor thing! Thou canst slip two more on her table 
as we pass; she will not know who did it," he said 
kindly. 

" Yes," nodded Gwenif er, and she made A little de- 
tour from the path round Nelli's cottage. 

They had reached the uneven ground that bordered 
the moor ; the stars crowded the sky above them, and 
Gildas stood still awaiting Gwenifer's return. 

Suddenly on the night breeze came a light laugh, 
then voices, followed by the appearance of two figures, 
who ran down the hillside together ; and Gildas recog- 
nized Nance and Captain Jack as they emerged from 
the gloom. " Nance," he exclaimed, and for a mo- 
ment she seemed embarrassed, but quickly regained 
her self-possession. 

" Dear anwl ! Gildas," she answered. " What ! 
coming home? Are we too late, then? There's a 
pity." 

"Well, there," said the captain, "I was afraid 
'twas rather late ; but when I saw the boats going out, 



148 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

I thought 'twas a pretty sight, and a pity the mes- 
tress should not be there." 

" Yes, you are too late," said Gildas ; " the fish 
have been divided, and the net is drawn up to the 
grass. I thought you were too busy to come, Nance," 
he added. " You have changed your mind." 

" Yes, I changed my mind," said Nance, with a 
bold front. " I suppose I have a right to do that if 
I like." 

" Was it a good haul? " asked Captain Jack. 

" Yes, very. Gwenifer is carrying some up in her 
creel. Come you and the mate to supper with us." 

" The mestress has been asking me already," said 
the captain. " 'Tis kind of you both, but we have 
promised to go and have supper with Jones the 
preacher to-night." 

" Oh, well ; some other night, then. Good-night 
now. My clothes are too wet to stand longer.'* And 
he turned towards Scethryg ; but Nance stood still. 

" Go you home, Gildas," she said, with an air of 
bravado. " Gwenifer will give you your supper. I 
am going to see Nelli Amos." 

Without a word Gildas turned up the hillside, soon 
joined by Gwenifer, who had returned just in time 
to hear Nance's last words. She lingered a moment 
with her; but Nance had dismissed her impatiently, 
and Gwenifer, when she caught Gildas up in the lane, 
saw by his silent abstraction that he was troubled and 
ill at ease. 



CHAPTER IX 

THE EEVIVAI, MEETINa 

When Gildas reached Scethryg he found old Hezek 
seated alone on the settle, the little round table, on 
which stood a dip candle, drawn up at his elbow; by 
the dim light, he was poring over the weekly news- 
paper, which found its way to the farm with the 
groceries every Thursday evening. 

Laying it down as Gildas entered, " Dear, dear ! *' 
he said, " 'tis wonderful what power that young man 
has over the hearts of the people ! Evan Roberts, I 
mean; 'tis very plain God's blessing goes with him, 
eh, Gildas? What think you about it? " 

Gildas drew his chair to the table rather wearily. 
" I am tired,*' he said, " and hungry. Come, Gwen- 
ifer, lass, let's have some fish fried. Where is Het? " 

" She's gone to the prayer meeting at John Par- 
ri's," said Hezek, and while Gwenifer moved about the 
hearth the old man returned to the subject of the re- 
vival. " Why are you against it, Gildas? " 

" I am not against it ; may be 'tis wanted ; but I 
am against these wild ways — people showing their 
hearts to the world, and crying out that they are sin- 
ners ! There's no need to shout that, 'tis plain enough 
when you come to deal with them; and d'ye think, 

149 



160 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

Hezek, 'tis pleasing to God that a woman should leave 
her house empty, and her husband lonely, for any 
prayer meeting in the world? 'Tis a small job get- 
ting her -husband's supper, I know; but if it's the job 
she ought to be doing, that is how she will be serving 
Grod best at that moment, and that's my opinion plain 
for you ! " 

*' And you are about ri^t, I dare say. Nance, 
where is she? " asked Hezek« 

" Down in the village," said Gildas. " There is 
something strange about her lately. I cannot under- 
stand her at all." 

" Dear anwl ! " said the old man uneasily. " I have 
seen a change in her myself, but she cannot be ob- 
stinate to you, Gildas, who are so kind to her," and 
he rose to open the door and to peer out into the dark- 
ness. 

" Where can she be? " he said, returning. 

" With Nelli Amos," said Gildas. « She keeps the 
chapel, so I daresay she is busy to-night; but what 
Nance wants there I cannot see." 

" But, 'machgen-i," said the old man, " can't you 
share in her feelings about it? " 

" No, I cannot," and Gildas turned to the table, on 
which Gwenifer was laying the supper. When she 
had finished, she bade him good-night in her usual 
manner, by laying her fingers on his arm and nod- 
ding. 

" Art going? Good-night, then, and, Gwenifer, I 
thank thee, lass." 



THE REVIVAL MEETING 151 

^'Here she is!" exclaimed Hezek, as a light step 
was heard in the yard and Nance entered. 

"Well indeed, I am hungry," she said, sitting 
down. " 'Tis helping Nelli Amos I have been to dust 
and clean the chapel." 

" And dost think, 'merch-i," said Gildas, " there 
was more call for thee to do that, than to come home 
with me?" 

" Yes," said Nance curtly. " 'Tis working for the 
Lord!" 

" That is not my opinion, then," said Gildas; " and 
I tell you, Nance, if you are going to follow the path 
on which you have started, you and I will drift far 
apart." 

" You and I ! " She should have noticed the drop- 
ping of the familiar " thee and thou," but, full of 
her new-found zeal, she heeded not the cloud that low- 
ered over Gildas's face. 

He finished his meal in silence, and at last rising, 
said, " Well, good-night, I am rather cold after my 
wetting." 

When he had gone, Hezek turned to the hearth, and 
drawing Nance to a chair beside him, began to lay 
before her the danger of offending her husband. 
" He's a stem man, Nance, though just and true; be- 
ware how thou dost anger him, dear heart." But 
Nance listened impatiently, and the pout on her lips 
grew more pronounced. 

" Dakee," she said, " I have felt the power of the 
Diwygiad, I have given myself to it, and if Gildas 



152 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

turns his back upon It I go not with him.*' And when 
she rose to put out the lights, the old man felt, as he 
had often done in the days of her childhood, that his 
words had made no impression upon her, and he mut- 
tered something about a " willful woman " as she let 
him out before bolting the door. 

Thus, in spite of her grandfather's warning, each 
day, as it drew to a close, found her rounding off her 
household duties with a view to being ready for the 
meetings at Brynzion. And Gildas, quietly accept- 
ing the ineyitable, would take his sickle, his hoe, or his 
rake, and turn straight away from his meals to his 
work. But it was not without a pang that he noted 
the empty hearth and Nance's little rush chair vacant 
in the evenings. 

In the first months of his married life, when the 
work of the day was over, he had been accustomed to 
turn to that hearth for cheer and companionship. 
Now, how changed was everything, he thought, and 
he looked rather wistfully round the comfortable old 
kitchen as he passed out to the farmyard, for it is a 
mistaken idea that the longing for the peaceful joys 
of home life is reserved for women only to feel. On 
the threshold, however, the shadow that had fallen 
on his face lightened a little as he caught the sound 
of a woman's voice. Loud and clear it came on the 
evening air, and Gildas, listening, recognized the tune 
as an ancient Welsh drinking-song to which had been 
set the words of a modern hymn. It was Nance's 
voice, and as he listened the singer came out of the 



THE REVIVAL MEETING 168 

** boidy," carrying on her hip a pail of frothing milk. 

The sinking sun shone straight into her eyes, so that 

she saw not where her husband stood still to look at 

her. The tune was in a minor key, like much of the 

Welsh music, and she sang its mournful cadences with 

a strong realization of the self-abasement which they 

expressed. 

Oh, wretched that I am. 

Adrift upon the sea! 
Oh, fill my sails with heavenly airs. 

And waft me home to Thee. 

As she finished the verse she stopped, and leaning her 
pail on a low wall stood silently musing, her eyes fixed 
on the ground. Her full, round mouth had taken a 
curve of sadness, there were lines between her eye- 
brows which should have no place on the face of a 
young and happy wife. 

With a deep sigh, she took up her pail again and 
passed on to the house, and Gildas, both pained and 
softened by the look of sorrow on the young face, 
turned aimlessly towards the moor. 

There was no work to do there, and it was almost 
unconsciously that he turned his steps that way. But 
not for Gwenifer only did that great open tract of 
moorland bring a message of peace and solace ; no one 
could tread its lonely paths or breathe its pure air 
without a feeling of the insignificance of things seen, 
and the overwhelming reality of the unseen. 

Even sights and sounds that recalled to the senses 
the realm of nature around, seemed but to impress 
the mind more vividly with a sense of the immanence 



164 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

of a spiritual power behind and beyond it. To Gil- 
das, as he walked further and further away from the 
house, and at last sat down where nothing was in 
sight save the moor below and the sky above, there 
came those soft influences which we so sedulously ban- 
ish by our devotion to the cares and pleasures of the 
world. 

The lines smoothed out of his face, the shadow 
lifted from his brow, and a great wave of pity swept 
over him for the woman whose clear voice still rang 
in his ears. " Oh wretched that I am ! " Poor little 
Nance! so young, so warm-hearted, so anxious to be 
good. Had he been selfish and cruel in opposing her 
devotion to the Diwygiad? From a furze-bush near 
him came a waft of sweet odor that seemed to say, 
" Love her, Gildas, and forgive her." From the sea 
came a western breeze that whispered, " Thou art 
strong, oh, Gildas, and she is weak; forgive her and 
love her ! " " In my deed," he exclaimed, as he rose 
hurriedly to his feet, " I believe they are right, and 
I am a hard man. Poor little Nance ! " And he 
wheeled round and strode back towards Scethryg, tak- 
ing a short cut which he had avoided before, and 
which led him by Gwenifer's cottage. 

" Hoi, Gwenif er, lass ! " he called out as he caught 
sight of her in her garden ; " I haven't seen thee all 
day ; where hast been ? " She opened the little wat- 
tled gate and looked round. She was standing in the 
middle of her garden in the full glow of the sunset 
light; in her arms she held a large bundle of scarlet 



THE REVIVAL MEETING 156 

poppies which she had just weeded out; they trailed 
round her skirt, they clung to her shoulders, reflect- 
ing the crimson light like sparks of fire. Drawing 
nearer the gate, she looked over her bundle of bril- 
liant coloring at Gildas, with the clear calm eyes that 
always reminded him of the brown pool in the little 
river that brawled down through the alders to Tre- 
gildas sands; pointing to her glowing flowers, she 
raised her eyes to his with so much meaning that he 
understood. 

" Yes, beautiful," he said ; " 'tis pity they are so 
troublesome." As he spoke and looked at her — a 
recognition of her beauty swept over him, and with 
it a pang of regret. Regret of what he scarcely 
knew, and he had no time to consider, for he must 
return to Scethryg. He would show Nance that he 
at least was not changed ; he would lighten her heart, 
and she should never more say, " Oh, wretched that I 
am." 

" I am going to Brynzion," he said to Gwenifer, 
" so I mustn't stop ; perhaps I have been hard to poor 
Nance. Good-bye, lass ; " and he hurried on, bearing 
with him, however, an impression of a fair face that 
rose above a crowd of red flowers. Facing the east, 
he saw the moon rising clear and round over the land- 
ward hills, though at the right dark clouds were rising 
too. " Dear anwl ! " he said, as he hurried on, " the 
moon reminds me of Gwenifer — so far above us, so 
silent, so fair, the storms of life do not touch her in 
the least." 



166 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

Drawing nearer home, he heard a loud boyish voice 
calling to him. Ben Stable, standing on the garden 
hedge, made a sign to his master to hurry, and long 
before Gildas reached him he had shouted his news. 
Rattler had hurt his foot — sprained it, Ben feared ; 
and Gildas hastened to the stable to examine the in- 
jured limb and to apply the necessary remedies, so 
that his arrival at the farmhouse door was delayed 
a full half-hour. 

He was not surprised, therefore, to find that Nance 
had already left the house. Well, he would follow; 
and hurrying through his change of clothes, he was 
soon tramping over the moor to the village. The sky 
had darkened with gathering clouds ; like threatening 
hosts of gloom they spread from the south towards 
the rising moon, and the long line of golden haze in 
the west was all that remained of the sunny day that 
had passed away. 

The air was heavy and murky as Gildas reached 
the village ; no human being was in sight, no lounging 
smokers round the kilns. 

" Thunder, most like," he said to himself. " Caton 
pawb! Where are the people? All in the meeting, 
I suppose ; '* but, looking towards the chapel, he was 
surprised to see no light in the long windows. All 
was darkness, and no singing came surging out 
through the open doors. Entering a cottage, he 
found the only occupant a crippled woman, sitting 
alone by the fire. 

"Heflo, Fani!'' he said. "What, all alone? 



THE REVIVAL MEETING 167 

Where's Deio and Maggi? What's become of all the 
people?" 

" In chapel, of course," answered Fani, and her 
pale face grew reproachful and indignant ; " where 
I would be myself if I could only crawl there." 

"But there is no meeting," said Gildas, ignoring 
her angry looks, though he was quite aware of them ; 
" there's no light, no singing." 

" No," she answered, swaying backwards and for- 
wards, " they are often praying in the darkness to 
save the lights, but they are all there; and go you, 
too, Gildas Rees — go you in and take your place by 
your wife's side, and if the Spirit does not move you 
to offer up a prayer, at least breathe an * Amen ' 
sometimes to warm the meeting. I am sitting here 
alone and watching, and I am seeing many things, 
mishteer; you at home instead of in chapel; mestress, 
pwr thing, going alone ; and — come here, man, let 
me whisper to you, Walk home with her yourself over 
the moor o' mghts.^^ She pressed her hand upon his 
arm, and then straightening herself, continued to look 
at him with meaning in her eyes, but Gildas turned 
abruptly away. " I have no time for gossip to- 
night," he said, and passed out through the doorway, 
a hot flush dyeing his face — a flush that faded and 
left his countenance set and hard as a white mask as 
he approached the chapel door. 

Outside, the closing dusk and a rising wind that 
sighed through the thorn-bushes — inside, darkness, 
lighted only by the moon that shone full through the 



168 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

long windows, and only one voice that rose and fell in 
hushed accents of prayer and penitence : old Bensha's, 
the shepherd on the next farm to Scethryg, a man 
whose blameless life and gentle disposition were pro- 
verbial. Gildas recognized it at once. " Well in- 
deed," he thought, " Old Bensha's prayers come from 
a good heart, whatever ; " and he prepared to edge his 
way through the packed congregation to the Scethryg 
pew, when he was startled by a familiar voice that, 
breaking in upon the old man's prayer, burst into a 
fervid petition for mercy. It was Nance's voice ! and 
Gildas, astonished and angry, stood still to listen, 
scarcely believing his own ears. Nance to raise her 
voice alone in an assembled multitude ! Nance to lay 
her feelings bare before this crowd ! It was intoler- 
able to the proud man, whose idea of womankind had 
been formed upon the retiring modesty of Gwenif er's 
character. Such, too, he had thought, was Nance; 
but now her confessions of sin, her fervid prayers for 
forgiveness, her rapt uplifted countenance, all failed 
to awaken in his heart the tender pity that had turned 
his footsteps so hurriedly from the moor. The ten- 
derness died away, and only strong disapproval re- 
mained. Already Fani's words were rankling and 
kindling a fierce jealousy — of whom, of what, he 
scarcely stopped to ask himself. The words, " Oh, 
wretched that I am ! " returned to his mind again, but 
only to increase his resentment of this publicity. 
Nance knew his feelings well ; how dared she thus defy 
his wishes ! " Ach-y-fi," he muttered to himself, ** I 



THE REVIVAL MEETING 159 

never dreamt that she would be raising her voice before 
people like this." 

But Nance was quite oblivious to the crowd around 
her. Alone in a whirlwind of stormy passions, she 
was pouring out her soul in a fervid appeal for help. 
Oh for an anchor to hold on to in the sea of unrest 
on which she was tossing! Oh for a breath from 
Heaven to fill her sails, and waft her to rest and peace ! 
And as her voice rose in excited tones, a chorus of 
" Amens " and " Bendigedigs " arose from the assem- 
bled throng around her, and Gildas grew hot and cold 
by turns with a shrinking sense of shame. 

Again there was a chorus of " Amens." Nance's 
voice grew more impassioned, and what were these 
words that reached his ears through the darkness? 
Oh, God! he could not bear It. For Nance, carried 
away by the enthusiasm of the crowd, had embarked 
upon another wave of prayer : " And yet another 
petition I make to Thee; hear me, O Lord. Dear 
friends, lend me the wings of your prayers to aid my 
own. My husband. Lord ! he who is so near to me, so 
far estranged from Thee ; save him, O Lord ! Save 
him wow, wherever he is, whether on the moor, or in 
the field, or in the house. Touch his heart tww, and 
let him no longer oppose Thy Holy Spirit in this 
place. Bend his proud head, O Lord, and soften his 
hard heart!" 

Here she had given voice to the general feeling; 
now at last she had expressed the thoughts that had 
surged through the whole neighborhood for weeks, 



160 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

and a hundred voices joined in her prayer. " Save 
him now^ O Lord. Touch his hard heart : humble it, 
break it, if need be, but bring him to his knees." 
And a chorus of " Save him, Lord ! save Gildas Rees ! " 
burst from the whole congregation, while Nance 
sobbed and swayed in an ecstasy of fervor. 

Just within the chapel door the subject of their 
prayers was standing straight and white, as if turned 
to stone. A few of those around him had, of course, 
recognized him at once on his entering the chapel, 
and, seeing his look of dumb misery, one man made 
room for him on the bench upon which he was sitting; 
but Gildas took no notice. He heard the ejaculations 
and pleadings that rose from every corner of the 
building, and, with a strange feeling of being over- 
powered by some mysterious influence that seemed 
to fill the darkness, Gildas, the practical and clear- 
headed, looked around him in bewildered astonish- 
ment. Was that old Bensha the shepherd's face? 
Was this Nelli Amos who prayed so loudly beside him, 
" Humble his proud heart? " And yet another voice 
rose above the sea of praise and prayer — a boy's 
voice clear and ringing, a voice as familiar to him al- 
most as Nance's ! But whence came this flow of elo^ 
quence — these fervid utterances, expressed in lan- 
guage that surely emanated from some other source 
than the heart and lips of an ignorant farm laborer? 
Could this be Ben Stable? And, as he listened, Gil- 
das's own heart seemed to bum within him. His 
head throbbed, his pulses quickened, and for a mo- 



THE REVIVAL MEETING 161 

ment he was in danger of losing his self-control ; for 
what was this strange power that seemed to hold him 
in its grip, and to constrain him to cry aloud, " God 
forgive me, for I am a sinner? " 

But only for a moment was his firmness shaken. 
Every instinct of his strong and rugged nature rose 
up in arms against this feeling of coercion ; and where 
a man of less strength of will would have succumbed, 
and added another to the number of " conversions," 
Gildas Rees refused to yield to the mysterious power 
that seemed to palpitate through the darkness around 
him. 

" Yes," he thought, " I am a sinful man ! " and 
never had he realized it more acutely that at the pres- 
ent moment. But was there not the wide moor, the 
fields, the bam in which he could pray aloud if he 
desired? Was not his own heart wide enough for 
repentance, for reformation, for bitter thoughts and 
wounded feelings? Yes, he felt the power of the 
Diwygiad; but he held firmly to his convictions that 
the fervor and excitement around him were unneces- 
sary adjuncts to the simple communion between a man 
and his God. 

Gildas Rees had not thought much about these 
things. He had been too busy with his reaping, his 
sowing and his mowing; but, while he had toiled in 
the pure, keen moorland air, they had unconsciously 
dawned upon him and had become ingrained Into his 
nature. 
Great beads of perspiration stood upon his fore- 



162 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

head ; he clenched his hands tightly as he stood there 
proud and defiant, while all around him surged the 
sounds of sobs and prayers, " Save Gildas, Gildas 
Rees ! Save him now^ O Lord ! " 

Slowly he turned towards the door, endeavoring to 
reach it through the throng that pressed around him ; 
and shocked, almost awe-struck, at the obduracy of 
the unrepentant sinner, they shrank back and made 
way for him to pass out into the darkness. Once in 
the open air, he seemed to regain at a bound his usual 
decision and firmness, and to shake off the strange 
sense of compulsion that had weighed upon him. 
Reaching the kiln, he sat down on its low wall, feeling 
more exhausted than he had ever done before. 

The dusky night was falling over moor and sea, 
the air was full of the soft splashing of the waves 
upon the shore, like the sound of a mother hushing 
her babe to sleep. Yes, here was peace and rest — 
the peace in which Gildas's honest nature had grown 
and thriven, and to which he returned with the natural 
satisfaction of a boy who throws off the restrictions of 
school for the freedom of home. Rising, he turned 
his back on the kilns, and made his way towards 
Scethryg, for he thirsted for the solitude and freedom 
of the moor. 

He was filled with a bitter sense of indignation 
towards Nance ; but the hotter the feelings that raged 
within him, the keener the dart that wounded him, 
the deeper did Gildas Rees bury them all under that 
mask of stony hardness that had fallen over his face. 



THE REVIVAL MEETING 168 

When Nance returned from Brynzion that night, 
she expected an angry reception from her husband; 
for she had heard of his presence in the chapel, and 
knew that she hfiwi wounded his tenderest feelings and 
offended his proud, reserved nature irretrievably; so 
she came prepared with angry retorts and self -justifi- 
cations, for the fervor of religious feelings that filled 
her within the chapel took wing when the meeting 
broke up, and her real nature asserted itself once more 
with more or less power. 

In some cases, the renewed warmth of feeling, 
the zeal, the awakened conscience remained to 
strengthen and mould the remainder of life ; but not so 
with. Nance. Her heart was aflame with a host of 
conflicting feelings : with fear of the material hell-flre 
which she had been brought up to believe in, with re- 
pentance, with longing for peace and purity, but, 
above all, with the guilty love which she had now 
ceased to make any efl^orts to banish from her heart. 
The thought of Gildas, whom until to-night she might 
have drawn to her with a smile or a caress, had become 
distasteful to her, and henceforth she thought, as she 
drew near the glimmering light in the farm kitchen 
window, she would be justified in hating him: for had 
he not turned his back upon the Holy Spirit, and dis- 
dainfully cast from him the prayers of the congrega- 
tion? 

She had walked home alone over the moor, for 
Hezek had often of late turned in to Fani's cottage 
to read to her or to refresh her with an account of 



164 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

the fervor of the meetings which she was unable to at- 
tend. 

Where was Captain Jack? Nance wondered, and her 
lonely walk had not tended to smooth her ruffled 
feelings. 

She was not prepared for the quiet scene that met 
her eyes as she entered the house, and the calmness 
and homely comfort only added fuel to the fire of un- 
rest that was burning within her. She looked round 
and called loudly for Gwenif er. 

The bread and cheese, the jug of buttermilk, were 
still on the table, though it was long past supper-time, 
and Gildas, sitting at the old bookcase-desk, was bend- 
ing over his accounts. The face which he raised as 
Nance entered was that of a man ten years older than 
the Gildas who had hurried through the farmyard a 
few hours earlier, intent on winning back the love and 
confidence of his young wife. 

Every vestige of color had left his face as he looked 
up from his accounts; there were lines between the 
black eyebrows, and the bright flashing eyes looked 
dull and sunken. 

There was no trace of anger in his voice, however, 
nor indeed of any feeling, as he answered : " Gweni- 
f er is gone home ; it was getting late for her to cross 
the moor alone," and turned again to his accounts. 

"Cross the moor? Dear anwl! Nobody cares 
how often I cross it alone, seems to me," said Nance, 
drawing her chair to the table. To this Gildas made 
no reply, but, closing his account book, rose and 



THE REVIVAL MEETING 165 

bolted the door before he turned to the stairs which 
opened into the kitchen. 

Nance began her supper, a little subdued by her 
husband's unexpected calmness. Soon bringing her 
simple meal to an end, however, her mood seemed to 
change. She clattered the plates and dishes and 
swept up the stone floor with many thumps and 
thrusts against the clumsy furniture, which for- 
tunately was strong and solid enough to bear its 
rough treatment without injury. As she worked she 
sang, and at last, flinging another log on the Are, sat 
down before the blaze ; and opening her hymn-book of 
large Welsh print, with all the tunes in sol-fa nota- 
tion, began the repertory of revival hymns which had 
become so popular in the neighborhood that every 
ploughboy shouted them up and down the furrows, 
and every milkmaid sang them over her pail. 

The clock had long struck eleven, and still the weird 
and mournful hymns continued, Nance turning leaf 
after leaf of her hymn-book in a kind of feverish ex- 
citement. Upstairs Het slept through everything, 
but Gildas, sleepless and restless, heard it all, and 
longed for peace. 

" Seems to me no one cares how often I cross the 
moor alone ! " The words had recalled to his mind 
Fani's warning. 

" Walk home with her yourself over the moor o' 
nights ! " 

What had she meant? Who had been Nance's 
companion in her frequent walks from the meetings? 



166 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

But he was not of a suspicious nature, and above all 
things hated village gossip ; so, with a weary sigh, he 
turned his head on his pillow, and cast from him the 
thought as of no consequence. 

Midnight! and the old clock seemed to throb with 
indignation at the unusual sound of singing at such 
an hour. As the ringing echo of its last stroke died 
away, Nance closed her hymn-book and began her 
way up the old crooked stairs. 



CHAPTER X 



On the higher reaches of the moor, towards the up- 
lands, where the peat was black and the cotton-grass 
trembled in the breeze, where the rushes stood in com- 
panies round the pools as if to guard their solitude, 
where the bog pimpernel grew in patches of delicate 
pink, and the blue-black whortleberries spread their 
neglected dainties over rock and fell — there the little 
river Erva had cut for itself a deep furrow through 
the soft ground, and, having reached a pebbly bottom, 
babbled and laughed over the stones as if in perfect 
content. It must have carried with it from the up- 
land plains, the seedlings which had taken root and 
flourished on its banks in clumps of alder and hazel ; 
under their leafy branches it ran its course towards the 
sands of Tregildas, there to find the natural death of 
a streamlet by mingling with the blue waters of the 
bay. 

Over the crest of the moor the solitary figure of a 
man suddenly appeared, looking in the distance no 
bigger than a fly, but stepping out so smartly that 
ere many minutes had elapsed he had approached 
near enough to be recognized as Captain Jack. 
Slung over his shoulder he carried a bundle, which 

167 



168 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

was evidently a heavy one, for he occasionally lowered 
it to the ground, taking off his cap and baring his 
heated forehead to the cool breeze. 
I At a curve of the mountain road he came upon the 
streamlet hurrying on its way through the bog. 
Loosening his bundle once more, he sat down, and, 
watching the brown waters as they curved and eddied 
by their banks, fell into a fit of musing, unconsciously 
plucking the luscious whortleberries that grew in pro- 
fusion within reach of his hand — a brown, shapely 
hand, which bore on the back the sailor's emblem, a 
tatooed anchor. 

His light blue eyes roamed dreamily over the 
stream, the moor, the hazy distance, his look of ab- 
straction showing how far his thoughts had wandered 
from the scene around him. The shadow of the low 
bush under which he lay had been gradually withdraw- 
ing its cool relief, until at last the hot sun shone full 
upon his face, and with a start Captain Jack awoke 
to the fact that it was nearly noontide, and rising to 
his feet he shouldered his bundle once more. At this 
point the stream grew narrower, the bushes meeting 
overhead, and he saw he must lose the company of his 
babbling friend, or follow it into its covert under the 
bushes. 

He was wearing his sea-boots, and did not hesitate 
long, as he felt the scorching sun on his head, to slip 
into the stream and wade ankle deep along its course. 
There, under the overarching bows, the Erva seemed 
to talk to him ; it whispered in the rushes, " Come 



"ROTTEN AT THE CORE*' 169 

here, and listen to my secrets ; " it laughed and sang 
over the shingle, " Oh, foolish man, to let care dwell 
within your heart ! " What wonder that that fairy 
avenue east its glamor over him, and filled him with 
dreams and fancies ! 

It glided softly under its canopy of green, saying 
as plainly as streamlet can say, " Come, follow me ; 
further, further, through the water-lilies, past the 
swaying ferns; come on and on and see what I have 
to show you." And, smiling at his own childishness, 
he went; but the smile left a wistful seriousness, as 
such smiles often do. For thus had he waded as a boy 
in the little river that ran through his father's hay- 
fields, John Davies splashing after him ; the memory 
of the old days came strongly upon him as he crunched 
the brown shingle under his feet, and many a prank 
and boyish escapade returned to his mind. Yes, those 
were happy days; but the years that followed he 
would gladly have forgotten ; and as usual when any 
unwelcome thought pressed in upon him with too 
great persistence, the careless sailor tried to whistle it 
away. Perhaps his merry notes disturbed some bird 
within the alders; there was a flutter, a rustle, and 
pushing his way through the bushes he came suddenly 
upon a fairy pool, where the streamlet widened under 
its screen of greenery, and where upon a miniature 
beach of golden gravel a girl was standing, her eyes 
fixed expectantly upon the rustling branches. 

"Gwenifer!" exclaimed Captain Jack, and his 
heart thumped under his Cardigan jacket. " Well, 



170 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

in mj deed, the stream was right. * Come on,' it said; 
* come on, follow me, and I will show you something 
beautiful.' * Yes'U I,' said I ; and I waded down the 
stream, and here's what it had to show me. Gwen- 
if er ! there's glad I am," and he slipped his bundle on 
to the grassy bank. 

" Come, let us sit and rest," he said, " for I am 
tired, whatever." 

Gwenifer raised her eyebrows inquiringly as she 
sat down beside him. 

" Where have I been? I aip getting to understand 
you quite well, you see. Well, to Tregarreg. 
Marged Jones's sister in * the Works ' has sent her a 
present, and it has been three days at the station, so 
I offered to fetch it ; but, in my deed, if I had known 
how heavy it was I would have hired a trap to bring 
it ; must be a ham, I think ; since a mile or two from 
the town, it has been getting heavier and heavier every 
minute." 

" Yes, I know," signed Gwenifer, with two or three 
emphatic nods, and she drew out from the thicket be- 
hind them a bundle which she too had carried. 

"You too? Well indeed! Why didn't you ask 
me to bring it for you, Gwenifer? The heavier it 
was the better pleased I would be." 

But she shook her head, while she unfolded a square 
of gaudy calico, at last displaying a roll of brown 
and blue linsey. 
. " Oh ! going to Jinni the seamstress? " 

Gwenifer nodded, while she hung the material in 



" ROTTEN AT THE CORE '' 171 

folds over her arm, and held it up for the sailor's 
approval. 

" For me,'' she said, pointing to herself, and look- 
ing at him inquiringly. " Do you like it? " 

Evidently a new gown was a matter of importance 
to Gwenifer, and she looked well pleased when Cap- 
tain Jack said, " Oh, 'twill suit you first-class ! 
Brown with a dash of blue in it, there's nice you will 
look! But, in my deed, lass, if your gown was of 
grey tatters you would look like a queen." 

" Queen of the Rushes ! " laughed the girl, tearing 
a handful of her subjects from the river brink, and 
holding one in her hand like a sceptre. 

Captain Jack had heard the term " Queen of the 
Rushes " used by the villagers in derision of Gweni- 
fer's proud manner, and his brown face flushed with 
annoyance at having suggested the thought to her 
mind. 

"Well I don't know about the rushes," he said, 
" but queen over everything to my mind." 

He was longing to tell her of his love, but in her 
presence the rash headlong sailor was humble and 
diffident as a boy in his teens. His word seemed to 
have made no impression upon the girl, for she tied 
up her bundle again, with a look of abstraction that 
showed her thoughts were more concerned with her 
new gown than with anything Captain Jack had said. 
They had become very friendly and even familiar, for 
he had sought every opportunity of meeting her, and 
had haunted Scethryg with a persistence that was 



172 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

quite misunderstood by Nance, for it had never 
dawned upon her that the lively sailor could be at- 
tached to the silent Gwenifer. 

The latter, meanwhile, had grown more at her ease 
in his company ; she liked his merry sallies, and, more- 
over, had the comfortable assurance that while she 
could engross his attention she was keeping him safely 
away from Nance. That her companionship could 
have in it any danger to Captain Jack, never entered 
her mind ; she, the dumb, the silent one ! Therefore 
there was absolutely no awkwardness or self -conscious- 
ness in her manner when she met him under the shade 
of the hazel and alders. 

" Now stop you there," he said, addressing his 
bundle and thrusting it under the ferns on the river 
bank ; " I will fetch you by-and-by. I am going to 
carry your bundle," he added, and refusing to be de- 
nied he hoisted it on his shoulder, and, leaving the 
water-course, they walked together over the moor to- 
wards Jinni Seamstress's cottage. 

As they neared the door he delivered up his " pack," 
saying, " Now I will wait here till you have finished 
with Jinni." 

But she shook her head with decision, and pointing 
to the sun, drew her finger down to the west, where 
the sea was glistening like a sheet of silver. 

" You mean you won't go home till sunset? Dear 
anwl! I didn't know it would be such a long job to 
fit a new gown. But, indeed, I have seen Jinni Seam- 
stress fitting the mestress at Scethryg. * A little bit 



" ROTTEN AT THE CORE " 173 

by-here to take in,' and * a little by-there to let out.' 
Oh, I know her." 

And laughing heartily at the sailor's imitation of 
the dressmaker's tugs and pinches, Gwenifer took her 
parcel, and disappeared into the p€issage which opened 
into Jinni's workroom, a black-raftered, yellow-washed 
room littered about with scraps and snippets -of dress 
material. 

" Well, I will come back and fetch you then? " Cap- 
tain Jack called after her, ignoring the girl's vigorous 
signs of protest. 

They had neither of them noticed that over the 
brown moor a man had been approaching as they 
walked and chatted together, for Captain Jack was 
becoming quite an adept in Gwenifer's mute language 
of signs. 

Now he was startled to find that almost before he 
had got over her abrupt dismissal, Gildas Rees himself 
was coming lip with him. 

" Well, in my deed," said the sailor ; " when you 
want to meet your friends, go over Scethryg moor. 
First Gwenifer, and now you ! " 

And looking at Gildas, he was surprised to see how 
pale and haggard he looked. He had not been at the 
meeting the night before, but Marged Jones had not 
failed to acquaint him with Nance's wifely concern 
for her husband's spiritual welfare, and with Gildas's 
shocking irreverence in leaving the chapel. 

" 'Tis enough to make his father turn in his cof- 
fin ! " she said. " He was deacon in Brynzion for 



174 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

thirty years, and a godly man! A good thing he 
died before his son brought shame on him. Ach-y-fi ! 
how is he going to gather his harvest, I wonder? 
'Tisn't many will be willing to work for him and help 
him out." 

"Well! 'tisn*t much I know about such things,'* 
said Captain Jack, " but seems to me now, Gildas Rees 
is the best man in the whole of Tregildas." But he 
said no more, for he saw by his landlady's lowering 
brows and her constrained manner, that he had roused 
the narrow bigotry of the ordinarily gentle woman, 
and realized that henceforth the comfort of his bed, 
the favor of his cawl, and the lightness of his bread 
would be very uncertain; so he hastened at once to 
make amends by offering to fetch the delayed parcel 
from the ten-miles-distant station. 

As for Gildas Rees, it was very evident that whereas 
a month earlier no man in the whole parish had been 
held in more high esteem, now, even between one sun- 
set and the next, he had fallen from his pinnacle of 
honor, and it might take many a long year to rein- 
state him in the good opinion of his neighbors; for 
high and low the news had spread of his disaffection 
and open withdrawal from the church of his fathers, 
and when he caught up Captain Jack on the moor a 
glance sufficed to show the latter that the " mishteer " 
of Scethryg was fully aware of the disrepute into 
which he had fallen. He saw the dark rings round 
the eyes, the hard set lips, and knew that the man 
whom he held in such high esteem was sufFeringy 



« ROTTEN AT THE CORE '' 176 

though he held his head as high and walked with as 
firm a step as ever. 

" Well," he said, answering the sailor's first remark, 
" b't shwr, I didn't expect to see you up here." 

"On my way home from Tregarreg I am," said 
Captain Jack. " I started this morning before sun- 
rise, thinking to be back before the sun got very hot ; 
but he caught me up before I got there even, and all 
the way back he has been roasting me." 

" Where did you meet Gwenifer? " asked Gildas. 

" Well, when I lyached the little Erva I thought it 
would be cooler to walk in the stream, and so I did till 
I met her doing the same thing as me, I expect, hiding 
from the sun." Thinking that Gildas still looked 
dissatisfied, he continued, " She was taking her new 
gown to Jinni the seamstress, so I came back a little 
way and carried her bundle for her. In my deed ! I 
am glad to meet you here by yourself, because I can 
speak to you about something that has been in my 
mind to tell you, these days. 'Tis about Gwenifer." 

Startled, Gildas turned to look at him. "What 
about her? " he asked. 

" Well," said Captain Jack, and in his eagerness he 
forgot the broad accent which he generally affected, 
and dropped into the refined manner of speaking that 
was really more natural to him. 

" Well, then, in plain words, with your consent, I 
want to marry her — if she will have me," he added 
humbly. 

To say that Gildas was surprised would be but 



176 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

faintly to describe his feelings. He was astounded, 
and came to a standstill to turn round and look at the 
sailor. 

" Marry her ! '' he gasped. " Gwenifer ? My con- 
sent? Man! what are you talking about? D'ye re- 
member she is dumb? '* 

" And if she were blind also it would make no 
difference to me," said Captain Jack. 

" Gwenifer ! " exclaimed Gildas again. " Marry 
Gwenifer? " and through his mind and in his heart 
a host of bitter thoughts ran riot. 

Who was this man of whom an hour ago he had 
felt a rankling jealousy, though he had been too proud 
to confess it even to himself? What were these terri- 
ble words that he had heard ? Words that threatened 
to rob him of a light which he had unconsciously 
turned to in every event of his life. Live without 
Gwenifer! See that brown cot on the mountain-side 
in the grey of the twilight, and the blue of the dawn, 
and know that it was empty, that on a stranger's 
hearth that familiar form was sitting, and on a 
stranger those serene, beautiful, brown eyes were 
shining ! 

" Never! ** And in the strength of his repugnance 
to the idea, the word escaped his lips unconsciously, 
though with great vehemence. 

The suspicion that the man before him was he who 
had captured Nance's capricious heart had not taken 
deep root in his mind, so it was easily put to flight by 
the sailor's last words, but in its place a flame of bitter 



« ROTTEN AT THE CORE " 177 

anger leapt up, as be realized the import of those 
words. 

His love for Nance had received a shock that stifled 
and crushed his tenderest feelings, and was bringing 
out the hard antagonism which undoubtedly lay hid- 
den somewhere in his proud nature. 

Nance had wounded him, had insulted him ; if she 
had ever cared for him, her love had vanished. Then 
let her go! He would live his life without her! 

Indignation and distrust were laying a heavy hand 
upon his heart, with a weight that in a nature like his 
was not likely ever to be removed, though time might 
change it to a smouldering anger. 

Captain Jack, startled by his sudden exclamation, 
stood still to stare at him in his turn. 

" Never? " he repeated, coloring hotly. " I know 
I am not good enough for Gwenifer — who is? But, 
Gildas Rees, I am not what you think me, I am not 
what I was ; since I have been here, and in Gwenif er's 
company, and since I have been to Brynzion ^" 

" You have been converted, I suppose,'' said Gildas, 
with a laugh that was full of bitterness and contempt 
as well. 

"Well, no," said the sailor, "I am not much to 
boast of as a convert; but I am not ashamed to say 
that my eyes are opened to see that a man can do 
better with his life than I have done with mine. Con- 
verted! Diwss anwl, no! I don't want any one to 
think that of me, but if I can persuade Gwenifer 
to ^^ 



178 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

^^ Does she know that jou are thinking like this 
about her? " interrupted Gildas. 

" No; I thought I had better ask you first, as in a 
way she belongs to you." 

" Belongs to me ! What sense is there in that ? 
No, she is as free as the birds in the air. Go and 
ask her, and, if she likes, she is free to marry you. 
But, listen you. Captain Jack, if she did belong to 
me I would never give her to you ; never, never! ** 

"Why not?" 

" Because you are not good enough for her — you 
have led a wild life, and the little good that is in you 
now you got at the Diwygiad, and it will pass away 
like that, before another com harvest; and — you are 
a gentleman. You have cast in your lot with the 
sailoring and farming folk, but d*ye think we can't 
see the gentleman through all your rough ways? 
*Tis in your voice, 'tis in your talk, 'tis in your walk." 

" And how can I help that? God knows Fve done 
enough to cast off the gentleman; and I must have 
more grace in me than I thought I had if any of it 
clings to roe. Not that I want it — I have done with 
that part of my life ; but that's my business : I don't 
want to talk about that, but just about Gwenifer." 

" Gwenifer ! " said Gildas hotly ; " leave her out ! 
She belongs to the moor and the sheep and the sea- 
wind. Queen of the Rushes! What do you want 
with her? She's not for you, man ! " 

" I'll not take your word for it, whatever," said 
Captain Jack. " Before another sun goes down I 



" ROTTEN AT THE CORE '» 179 

will ask her herself. I am sorry now I asked you at 
all; but I thought it would be — more honorable 
like." 

"Honorable!** said Gildas, and, looking his com- 
panion straight in the face, he added, "Honorable! 
Are you an honorable man, Captain Jack, or not? I 
am not quite sure about you.*' 

This direct appeal had a strange effect upon the 
sailor. Every fault of his nature, every sin he had 
committed, every wild prank and every spree, rose in 
black array before him, amongst them his flirtation 
with Nance, which six months earlier he would have 
recalled without a qualm of compunction; now, re- 
called by Gildas's own words, it rose before him deep- 
dyed as any crime, rousing a sense of resentment 
against Gildas, who had thus disturbed his usually 
good-natured equanimity. To do him justice, he had 
not realized at first that his banter, his smiles, and 
the glances of his attractive eyes would make a deep 
impression upon the young wife ; and being ignorant 
of her feelings towards him when she married another 
man, he was startled and somewhat taken aback when 
he found his compliments and glances so acceptable 
to her. 

Latterly he had tried his best to correct the mis- 
chief he had done ; nevertheless her too-evident predi- 
lection for his company flattered his vanity — and in 
a woman's presence it was impossible for Captain Jack 
to be otherwise than complimentary and pleftsing. 
His first feeling of attraction towards Nance had soon 



180 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

changed into one of indifference and even disapproval, 
which, however, he had not sufficient strength of pur- 
pose to show plainly to Nance, who, her whole mind 
and character thrown off its balance by her complete 
surrender to the excitement of the revival, seemed 
less and less able to control her feelings, and she 
sought his company with an infatuation which she 
took little trouble to conceal. Thus he had drifted 
into the familiar intercourse with her which to him 
meant nothing more than a pleasant acquaintanceship, 
but to her was fraught with deadly peril. 

Latterly the interest of the revival meetings, the 
pathos of the singing, the mystery of the dark meet- 
ings, had drawn them together a little more seriously ; 
and Captain Jack put off the evil day when he should 
break off his friendship with the Mestress of Scethryg, 
and show her plainly that it was Gwenifer, and not 
she, whom he sought for on moor and cliff and shore. 

Suddenly confronted by Gildas's keen black eyes, 
he stood self-convicted, and in a flash of temper an- 
swered hastily : " I would have too much honor what- 
ever to turn upon a man as you have done, when he 
came to you with a civil question. What is the matter 
with you? What can I help if you have chosen an 
apple that is rotten at the core? " 

He would have given worlds to recall his words, 
but it was too late; they had been spoken in a mo- 
ment of uncontrollable irritation, and he felt he had 
irretrievably alienated Gildas Rees, who, wounded to 
the quick, suddenly drew over his face the mask of 



« ROTTEN AT THE CORE " 181 

coldness and hardness that hid so much and deceived 
so many. 

They had unconsciously reached the middle of the 
moor, and, here coming to a standstill, Gildas pointed 
to a narrow sheep-path that wound its way between 
the clumps of heather. 

" Here is your way to the village, captain,'' he 
said. " Seems to me we have wasted a lot of words. 
Bore da chi." 

Captain Jack muttered a " dyMa chi " in return, 
and Gildas, taking a path to the right, was soon out 
of sight behind the furze bushes. 

The bees hummed over the heather bloom, and in 
their murmur he seemed to hear the strange words, 
" rotten at the core '* ; a lark rose almost under his 
feet, singing as she soared into the sunshine, and 
through her song the same words ran; the sound of 
his footsteps on the dry heather seemed to beat into 
his brain the same hateful words, " rotten at the core." 
It was not the heat of the sun that brought those 
beads of sweat upon his forehead, neither was it weari- 
ness of body that made his steps so slow and heavy 
as he drew near the home to which he had never be- 
fore returned without a warm glow of pleasure at his 
heart. 

His crops had generally been good, his harvests 
plentiful, and his modest account at the Caermadoc 
bank had shown a steady increase. He was a striving, 
healthy farmer, than whom no king need be happier. 

But to-day, how different seemed everjrthing ! 



182 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

Catching the first sight of the Scethryg chimneys, 
he turned his eyes hastily from them to the hazy blue 
bay, and wished he had gone to sea when a lad, and 
had never taken on the farm at his father's death; but 
crossing the " clos," he was obliged to look round as a 
trim little figure emerged from the farmhouse door. 
It was Nance, dressed in her Sunday gown and hat; 
and as she approached over the shining straw, she 
picked up her skirts, displaying her neatly shod feet 
and slim ankles, and Gildas drew his tongue over his 
dry lips as he essayed a casual remark in passing. 

" You are going out in the hottest part of the 
day," he said, and still the words that Captain Jack 
had spoken seemed to bum in his brain. 

" Yes, to the village," she answered. " Evan Rob- 
erts is arrived by now, and Nelli Amos has sent to 
fetch me. Gwenif er will give you your * cawl.' " 

With a wave of her hand she tripped lightly on her 
way, soon breaking forth into one of the favorite 
hymns at Brynzion, which, with all its solemn words, 
bore the inappropriate title of " The Bottle Song.'* 

Her cheeks were flushed, her eyes had an unnatural 
sparkle, and there was a flighty buoyancy in her step 
that made Gildas look after her with surprise as well 
as annoyance. Behind the thorn hedge the sound of 
the old tune died away, and a look of contemptuous 
anger passed over his face. 

" Revival, indeed ! " was all he said ; but he passed 
into the cool shade of the kitchen with a strong feel- 
ing, confessed to himself for the first time, that his 



« ROTTEN AT THE CORE '» 188 

marriage had been a mistake, that he was nothing to 
Nance — nay, more, that she was nothing to him, 
that she was " rotten at the core." 

The misery that this awakening brought him was 
expressed in the attitude in which he sat down to his 
dinner. With his elbows on the table, his hands over 
his ears, he stared down at the seamed and time-worn 
board as if he hoped to read in it some explanation of 
his troubles. 

His old proud spirit was not yet crushed, however ; 
for as Het laid before him the simple fare, he drew 
himself up, and said in his ordinary tones, 

" 'Tis a hot day, and no mistake." 

" Yes indeed," said Het ; " but why are you going 
so far afield before the sun goes down? Ach-y-fi ! I 
am not liking to see the dinner about in the after- 
noon." 

" 'Tis the turnip-field wants hoeing, and I went up 
to John Ty-rhyd's about it," said Gildas. 

'' So it does, so it does. Well? " 

" Well, he can't come. A fimeral at Tref os." 

" But there's Jenkin Owen not half a mile further 
on." 

" He's cutting peat for Davies Llettyroen." 

" H'm ! " said Het, setting her arms akimbo, and 
looking critically at Gildfw. " H'm, yes, that's it, 
you see. And listen you to me, mishteer: if this 
house were afire, one man would be busy cutting the 
peat, the other would be mending his * does,' and the 
other would be trashing the hedges; but not one 



184 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

would throw down his tools and run to help Scethryg." 

"What dost mean, woman?" said Gildas angrily. 
" Scethryg is not on fire, nor likely to be " ; but deep 
in his heart there lurked a feeling that her words 
might be true. 

" Here's what I mean," she said, " that no one will 
help the man who scorns the revival. I am telling the 
truth; no one would bring a bucketful of water! 
Except perhaps Gwenifer," she added as she turned 
away. 

Gildas finished his meal in silence, and at last rose 
and went out, turning towards the moor, where at 
least there would be peace and solitude ; and as he trod 
the soft, crisp turf, a host of strange fancies assailed 
him. 

Was the world turning against him? Was he go- 
ing to be shunned by his neighbors and his own ten- 
ants, hated by his own wife? His black eyebrows 
knitted till they met in a dark line across his face ; his 
square jaw seemed more pronounced than ever, and, 
as he walked under the hot sun with folded arms and 
lowering brow, another fear rose up and cast its 
shadow upon him. " Except Gwenifer," Het had 
said; but would she be left to him? The sound of 
the sea softened by distance fell soothingly on his ear, 
a breeze swept over its surface and reached his heated 
brow, the bees hummed musically over the heath — 
every sound, every sight, pressed home upon his simple 
rustic nature the presence of the immanent God ; and 
coming to a standstill on the solitary moor, the strong 



"ROTTEN AT THE CORE" 185 

man recognized that Presence, and opened his heart 
to the comforting thought. 

" God help me ! Qod help me ! " was all he said ; 
but his brow cleared, his step grew firmer, and, rais- 
ing his head, he unclasped his arms and squared his 
chest, and there was almost a triumphant smile on his 
lips as his steps took him more briskly on until, like 
a little brown mushroom, Gwenifer's cot stood before 
him on the heather, and, looking at it, Het's words 
returned to his mind : " Except perhaps Gwenifer ! " 

Yes, except perhaps Gwenifer! And the brave 
smile was still on his lips as he pressed the thumb 
latch, calling her name loudly. "Gwenifer!" But 
there was no answer; the little cottage was empty. 
" Why, of course," he thought, " she has not come 
hack; there's moidered I am to-day! In my deed, 
Gildas, I am ashamed of thee ! " And entering fur- 
ther into the cottage, he saw the peat fire burnt out, 
the bowl of curds and whey half eaten; lying near 
it, a red ribbon which he had often seen on Gwenif er's 
neck. 

He took it up and looked at it pensively, smoothing 
the creases out with his hard brown fingers. 

And was it the fear of losing her bucketful of water 
that made him sigh as he laid it down almost tenderly 
before going out once more to the sunshine? 



CHAPTER XI 

THE EVANOELIST 

Captain Jack was little less disturbed in mind than 
Gildas when they parted on the moor, the one to re- 
turn to his farm, the other to follow the path to the 
village, still shouldering his bundle, which did not 
grow lighter as the journey lengthened and the noon- 
tide heat increased. 

His first feeling was regret for what he had said. 
"I have a devil of a temper, and no mistake!" he 
thought, " or else I would never have spoken as I did 
to Gildas Rees. Will he think I meant Nance, I won- 
der? Well! I didn't exactly; I was thinking of 
Gwenifer, and how much beyond his reach she was, 
while he had to put up with something much less 
worth having — tliat was my thought ! " And Gildas 
was not the only one under that midday sun whose 
peace of mind was disturbed by the words ** rotten at 
the core.*' Why had he spoken them? "Why 
didn't I bite off my tongue sooner than say it to 
Gildas Rees? But he was nasty too," and his 
thoughts ran into another groove. 

" What made him turn upon me like that? In my 
deed, I think he's fond of Gwenifer himself, and per- 
haps poor Nance has more cause than we think for 
'186 



THE EVANGELIST 187 

her discontent. Anyway, what they say about him is 
quite true ; he's as hard and cold as a stone." 

When he reached the village he was surprised to 
see several knots of people gathered here and there at 
the doorsteps. " Well, everybody's in the road," he 
said to himself, " except Fanny, and Jinni Jones's 
new baby. What's the matter?" he asked as he 
passed one group. 

" Evan Roberts has come," said the man, taking a 
few steps towards him, and speaking in a solemn tone, 
" Evan Roberts has come, and he's in John Parry's 
house." 

Captain Jack made no answer, but hurried into his- 
lodgings, on reaching which he at once slipped his 
heavy bundle on to the table, which was ominously 
bare of any preparations for his midday meal. The 
large cawl-crock full of water hung over a fire, a 
piece of bacon, and a fowl making occasional visits to 
the surface, as the water boiled round and round. 
But where were the leeks, the white-hearted cabbages, 
the carrots, the potatoes? Captain Jack took the 
wooden ladle and turned it disconsolately in the crock. 
Nothing was there but the fowl and the bacon, and 
this would not satisfy a Welshman, so he went to the 
little sandy garden at the back of the house, and re- 
turned with a basketful of vegetables well washed 
in the spout at the back door. Flinging them into 
the crock and adding the oatmeal which he found 
ready mixed with water on the table, he waited impa- 
tiently for his hostess's return. With a sailor's deft- 



188 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

ness he soon laid the table in the usual simple fashion, 
and when a few minutes later Marged Jones entered 
the house she was full of compunction and excuses. 

" Well, in my deed," she said, " this never happened 
to me before ; and you so kind bringing this * pack ' 
home for me ! But 'tis Evan Roberts you see arriv- 
ing so sudden at twelve o'clock, and nothing ready at 
John Parry's; for Mari, poor old beetle, is always 
behindhand, and then at the last, running about every- 
where but the right way." 

While she spoke her fingers were busy with the 
bundle, which upon being untied disclosed a large 
ham. 

" Well," said Marged Jones, as though she were 
bringing a long argument to a close, " it is no use to 
talk — the Almighty does watch over us ; there's me 
now, vexing myself to death because there was nothing 
at John Parry's for the evangelist but tea and bread- 
and-butter, and now, you see, here's this ham, just 
in time to fry for him. I thought it was a gown my 
sister was sending me, but this is much better — I 
couldn't cut that in slices," and she laughed gleefully 
as she cut a plateful of ham, and carried it hurriedly 
into John Parry's house. When she returned she sat 
down to her dinner perfectly oblivious of the fact that 
she had neither made the cawl nor laid the table. 

It was not only Marged Jones who seemed excited 
by the event of the day, but every man, woman, and 
child in the village; and as it was now three hours 
since the evangelist had arrived, the news had been 



THE EVANGELIST 189 

spread abroad into the surrounding districts as well. 
Captain Jack did not wait for sunset before he 
went to meet Gwenif er, but sat for full two hours in 
the cool shade of the hazels and alders on the banks 
of the Erva. Here was the fairy pool on whose 
strand Gwenif er had stood when he came upon her 
through the branches, her brown eyes looking expec- 
tantly for the approaching disturber of that sylvan 
retreat. 

How beautiful she looked! What a fool he had 
been to let the precious moments slip by without tell- 
ing her how he loved her, and how it was his dearest 
wish to make her his wife ! 

** That's me exactly ; " he thought, " with a foolish 
girl or a silly woman that I don't care a cockleshell 
for, I can talk or laugh by the reel ; but here where 
my whole heart hangs on her answer, I haven't a 
word to say, I am dumb as a dog." 

He listened eagerly as a light step brushed the 
grass on the river bank, and, emerging into the sun- 
shine, he intercepted Gwenifer herself as she came 
down the moor; astonished, she raised her hands and 
her eyebrows. 

" Yes, 'tis I," he said. ** Here's your old seat 

under the branches ; won't you come and rest awhile? " 

But she shook her head, and waving her hand 

towards the side of the moor where Scethryg lay, she 

imitated the action of milking. 

""Ks not milking-time yet," said Captain Jack, 
** and I have something to say to you, Gwenifer — 



190 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

in my deed I have, something that is here, like a fire 
in my breast, lass, something that is ready to burst 
up into a beautiful flame, or else to turn into a ravag- 
ing fire that will bum my life out." 

She turned to look at him as Gildas had done, with 
utter surprise. 

"Are you surprised, Gwenifer? " he said. "Are 
you asking what I am saying? Well, let me tell you, 
lass; let me tell you how much I love you. Na, na, 
Gwenifer! don't shake your head, but listen to me. 
I love you, lass ; my heart went out to you that first 
night I saw you by the kiln, and whenever I have seen 
you since, I have loved you more and more — until 
now morning, noon, or night, I am thinking of you; 
walking, resting, or talking, you are in my thoughts. 
What are you saying, pointing to your lips like that? 
You are silent, you are dumb — what does that matter 
to me? If you were blind it would be all the same; 
you are everything to me, and if you will not have 
me, Gwenifer, there will be a miserable man on board 
the Liliwen,^* 

Now, without invitation, the girl sat down upon the 
heather, and Captain Jack sat down beside her. She 
seemed strangely troubled. Disturbed as he had 
never seen her before, she looked round fit the sea and 
sky, pointed to her lips, and clasped her hands, as if 
in deep distress. 

"What is it?" he said, "are you wishing you 
could speak to me? " 

" Yes," she nodded, and her eyes filled with tears. 



THE EVANGELIST 191 

" If you could speak, Gwenifer, would you tell me 
that you loved me? " 

" No, no, no," she said. 

" Do you hate me, then? " 

" Oh no," still more emphatically. 

" You like me, Gwenifer? " 

" Yes," she nodded, and smiled through her tears. 

" Then marry me, lodes ; I will make you love me 
in time; you shall have everything, Gwenifer, that 
my heart can devise for you. See that pretty new 
house that John Lloyd has begun, and can't afford 
to finish. I will buy it, and furnish it for you. 
Gwenifer, I will return from my voyages to our happy 
home, faithful and true to you." 

But still the girl shook her head more and more 
emphatically, though apparently with sorrowful re- 
gret. Once she raised her closed hand against him, 
and turned her head away as though bidding him 
cease his pleading ; but he only seized the little brown 
liand, and carried it to his lips. She withdrew it 
ruthlessly, and again pointing to her lips, shook her 
head pitifully. 

"No?" said Captain Jack; "won't you ever say 
'yes'?" 

" No," said Gwenifer. 

" Why not ? What have I done so very bad that 
you can't forgive me? I ask you to marry me, lass, 
and I come to you for my answer. Come ! " he said, 
" tell me, is there some one else between us ? Then I 
have no chance. Gwenifer, tell me the truth." He 



192 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

fixed his light blue eyes upon her, and she felt con- 
strained under their magnetic gaze to lift her own to 
his. He had often been conscious of a compelling 
power in his eyes, but had never exercised it with any 
intention or interest; his life had been too headlong 
and too adventurous for such useless problems. But 
now, with the eager desire to know her real feelings 
towards him, he looked fixedly at Gwenifer, and read 
the secrets of her heart. 

For a moment a crimson glow dyed her face, but it 
faded out under that earnest and anxious gaze, and 
left her white to the lips, with a feeling that those 
compelling blue eyes were extracting from her the 
secret which she had hitherto kept so safely locked 
in her own bosom; and with a cry as if of physical 
pain, she hid her face in her hands. " Oh, shame ! 
shame ! " was her thought. " He knows what I 
supposed no one but God would ever know." 

Captain Jack understood it all ; he read the mean- 
ing of the crimson blush, the pain of the blanched 
lips, and filled with pity, he thrust from him his own 
bitter disappointment, and set himself at once to 
soothe the unrest which he had brought into the girl's 
life. Her secret was no longer one to him, but she 
should never know that he had discovered it. 

" Gwenifer," he said, taking her hand again, and 
somehow this time she let it rest in his. " Don't cry, 
lass, because you cannot speak. I tell you it makes 
no difference to those who love you, unless, indeed, it 
makes them love you more. Forgive me that I have 



THE EVANGELIST 198 

troubled you; you say you cannot love me, but at 
least you do not hate me. I will never trouble you 
more ; when the LUvwen comes into the bay, I will sail 
away from Tregildas. Come, cheer up, 'merch-i ; let 
it be as if I had never said a word to you. But if 
you change your mind, Gwenifer, remember that I 
will always be hoping for that ; and when I cross the 
bay I will be looking towards Scethryg moor to see 
if a little blue handkerchief is fluttering from that 
mountain ash in the comer of your garden. I will 
know then that you have changed your mind, and 
that you are calling me back, and I will come to you, 
lass, as quick as the wind will carry me over the waves ; 
but," .he added with a sigh, " I don't expect such hap- 
piness as that will ever be my share. So good-bye, 
lass, our paths are parting here ; and, Gwenifer, when 
you are saying your prayers, remember the captain of 
the LUiwen.*^ 

The tears had been slowly chasing each other down 
her face, appearing to well up under the long black 
lashes that were cast down on her cheeks. She longed 
to be able to say " Good-bye, kind friend, it pains me 
that I cannot love you," but she could only sit on 
silently looking after Captain Jack's retreating 
figure, as he seemed to walk right into the golden haze 
of the sunset. Then rising, she turned her face 
towards Scethryg and walked rapidly over the moor, 
for milking-time was past, and there was no room or 
time in Gwenifer's life for useless regrets. 

When Captain Jack reached the beaten track to the 



194 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

village he was surprised to find himself continually 
overtaken by groups of country people, who, having 
heard of the evangelist's arrival, were trooping into 
Tregildas in the hope of a " meeting " at Brynzion. 
Square-faced farmers in their best frieze coats, tanned 
sailors, buxom wives in good homespun, farm lads in 
their Sunday suits, country girls dressed in town 
fashions, aged men and women, the halt, and the 
blind! Captain Jack found himself walking in a 
procession of them all, and soon began to converse 
with his fellow travellers. " Yes, he has come for 
certain," he said, " he was there when I left the vil- 
lage at noon." 

" Well indeed," said his companion, his curiosity 
roused at once, " 'twas something important no doubt 
that made you go away just then?" 

To this Captain Jack made no answer. 

" Are you a stranger here ! " 

« Not quite that." 

" Well indeed ; your ship is in port no doubt, be- 
cause I see you are a sailor." 

" Yes, yes," said Captain Jack curtly. 

" What chapel do you go to? " 

" Brynzion." 

" Are you a member? " 

" No." 

" Ts, ts, you haven't been converted then ? " 

" Diwss anwl ! no, man leave me alone," said Cap- 
tain Jack irritably, for he was in no mood to be ques- 
tioned, and his answer had the desired effect. 



THE EVANGELIST 196 

" No indeed, so I see ! " said his companion, hastily 
tacking himself on to another member of the group, 
and leaving the sailor to his thoughts, which were 
none of the happiest. He scanned the horizon anx- 
iously, hoping for a sight of the LUiwen riding at 
anchor, for the mate had been gone some days with 
the intention of bringing her to Tregildas to pick up 
her captain before sailing up the Mediterranean to 
Algiers. " What keeps him, I wonder.? " mused the 
captain, " she must be here to-day or to-morrow un- 
less the wind changes. I want to be gone. I have 
made a * cawdel ' of everything on land — I wish I 
had never come, and yet *^ And his eyes trav- 
elled over the broad moor, now growing grey in the 
twilight, to where a thatched cottage stood, scarcely 
distinguishable from the burnt heather around it ; and 
though he said nothing more, it was with a sigh that 
he turned again to the village track. Reaching Tre- 
gildas, he found it alive with an eager throng, who 
swarmed around Brynzion chapel like bees round the 
hive. " I want my tea, whatever," he said, turning 
in at Marged Jones's door, which was wide open, and 
the kitchen enrtpty. But this time his hostess had evi- 
dently thought of him, and prepared for his wants ; 
the tea-things were laid, and the kettle was singing 
on the hearth, so it was not long before the handy 
sailor had prepared and partaken of his simple meal. 
Truth to tell, he was not very hungry ; for beyond the 
tea-tray, and the little deep-set window, and through 
the subdued murmur of the crowd in the roadway, he 



196 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

seemed to see Gwenif er's brown eyes raised to his al- 
most beseechingly, as his earnest gaze drew from her 
the secret of her life, and he seemed to hear Gildas 
Rees's reproachful tones as he flung back, with scorn, 
the one word " honorable." 

Leaving the house after his solitary meal, he found 
the crowd had moved away from the chapel to swarm 
round John Parry's house. A murmur of disap- 
pointment rose from them as the twilight darkened 
and the moon rose clear above the moor, and still the 
chapel doors were closed. 

" He can't come ; the Spirit forbids," passed from 
mouth to mouth, and as Captain Jack edged his way 
between them he heard sighs, and saw almost tears of 
disappointment. 

In humble tones they asked each other what could 
be the reason that the Spirit still withheld its presence 
from them. 

" There's something wrong," said Jerri the boat- 
man: " are we all at peace with each other? " 

" Yes, so far as I know," said Ebben Jones. 
" John the cooper and Reuben the miller made up 
their quarrel of three years last night, and you know 
I forgave you the three-and-six you owe me since last 
fair." 

" Yes, yes," said Jerri hurriedly, " and I told you 
I would pay you at harvest-time, so it isn't we are at 
fault whatever ; and," he added thoughtfully, " Gil- 
das Rees is not coming near us now, so it isn't he is 
the cause of it." 



THE EVANGELIST 197 

"What are you talking nonsense about?" said 
Nelli Amos, thrusting her shrivelled face between 
them. "What is the distance of a mile, a rough 
moor, or a few fields, to hide things from the Spirit? 
D'you think He can't see Gildas Rees up there at 
Scethryg, setting his face as hard as iron against us ? 
And the poor mestress^ doing her best to turn him 
from his ways. Ach-y-fi ! I wish he was gone from 
the country, then we might hope for some answer to 
our prayers." 

**Well indeed, perhaps she's right," said Ebben, 
but a sudden silence fell upon the crowd as the upper 
half of John Parry's window was lowered, and a fig- 
ure appeared at it leaning his arms upon the window- 
sash and speaking in a clear, pleasant voice that was 
heard by all. 

The evangelist himself, his face but indistinctly 
visible in the dim twilight, though the rays of the 
rising moon shone full upon it. 

" Dear friends," he said, and in the silence that fol- 
lowed the surging crowd held their breath to listen. 
The corncrake's cry came up from the meadows, the 
sound of the sea filled the air, until at last the evan- 
gelist spoke again. " Thank you, kind friends, for 
the warm welcome, but it is not for me, I hope, but 
for Him whose messenger I am. You have been ex- 
pecting Him long, but He still forbids me to enter 
Brynzion ; to-morrow at this time I will come ; go you 
to your homes to-night, and pray for the Spirit ; but 
before you go let us sing together," and with a mu- 



198 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

sical voice he began the first notes of an old hjmn, 
which was known to be a favorite of his. 

In a moment the whole crowd had taken it up, and 
were singing with heart and soul in the words and 
melody, so that the corncrake's cry was drowned, the 
rush of the sea was hushed, and the whole air was filled 
with harmony — the voice of a multitude who had but 
one desire, namely, a blessing on the young evangelist, 
and the presence of tKe Holy Spirit. 

Captain Jack, who had edged his way through the 
crowd, stood near the window, and, looking up at the 
face of the evangelist, felt strangely drawn towards 
him. A young face, a simple manner, a buoyant 
spirit, had ever a power to influence the impression- 
able sailor ; and with the stirring refrain of the hymn 
in his ears, a new and strange enthusiasm awoke 
within him, as he joined in the singing through which 
every human heart in that surging throng seemed 
pouring forth its eager longing. It was his voice 
even that led the oft-repeated refrain, until at last 
the evangelist's eyes, roaming over the crowd, caught 
his earnest gaze. With a smile and a pleasant 
" Thank you," he waved his hand in recognition of 
the sailor's fervor, and, joining himself in the singing, 
such a volume of harmony went out upon the moon- 
lit air, that the lonely fisherman on the sea heard it, 
and the cows on Scethryg moor raised their heads in 
wonderment. To Gildas Rees, too, as he crossed the 
stubble yard, the night breeze bore the swelling tones, 
awaking within him a restless longing for the happi- 



THE EVANGELIST 199 

ness and peace of mind which seemed to have gone 
out of his life. 

The evangelist's glance of greeting and his brief 
word of acknowledgment sank deeply into Captain 
Jack's heart; it was just the touch of human sym- 
pathy that was needed to lead him captive. The 
preacher's earnest face, the swaying throb of the 
music, the picturesque setting of the whole scene, 
made an indelible though unconscious impression 
upon him ; it soothed the feelings that had been sorely 
wounded by Gwenifer's refusal, and when at last the 
evangelist withdrew from the window, Captain Jack 
experienced a strange sense as of personal loss, and 
was filled with an eager longing to see and hear him 
again. 

The enthusiastic crowd still sang on, their voices 
carried over moor and mountain; the moonlight 
flooded the valley with its silver beauty, the whisper- 
ing sea and the purling brook filled up the pauses in 
the music. The moon rose higher and higher, the 
wind grew cooler, and still the swaying harmony con- 
tinued, while inside that open window the evangelist 
knelt in prayer, and wrestled with the mysterious 
Power called by him and his followers " the Spirit," 
and which, whatever we may call it, bore without 
doubt a message from the spiritual world, a message 
to man of love, of warning, and of reproof. 

Kneeling there, he continued wrapt in trance-like 
musings, while outside the singing still rose and fell, 
and the yellow moonlight streamed in. 



200 QUEEN OP THE RUSHES 

An hour passed, and still he did not move, until at 
last with a sigh he rose, and waving his hand towards 
the window said: 

" Bid them go now. To-morrow night I will speak 
to them ; to-night I want rest — and sleep,*' he added 
doubtfully, for it was well known that many a wake- 
ful night fell to the share of the evangelist. 

When John Parry appeared at the window, there 
was a pause in the singing, and such a silence that 
again the sound of the sea and the trickle of the Erva 
were plainly audible. 

" He cannot come," said the old man simply. " Go 
you home, all of you, and pray for him, that he may 
have rest and sleep ; to-morrow night at Brynzion he 
will speak to you." 

There was a murmur of disappointment as the 
crowd dispersed, and breaking up into separate 
groups they took their way over moor, field, and 
mountain, singing as they went, and the refrain of the 
evangelist's favorite hymn came back upon the air, 
filling the moonlit valley with music. 

As the crowd dwindled away, a slim dark figure 
passed by in the moonlight, and Captain Jack recog- 
nized Gwenifer, who had lingered a moment, looking 
over the silver sea and listening to the singing as it 
died away in the distance. 

Suddenly she saw Captain Jack, and almost uncon- 
sciously swerved a little from her path, and hurried 
on towards Scethryg; he saw her avoidance of him, 
and with a throb of pain turned towards his lodgings. 



THE EVANGELIST 201 

" She might have given me a * Nos da,' " he thought, 
but he was startled by a touch on his sleeve. 

" Dear anwl ! '* said Nance, coming up with him, 
"you're walking the other way so quick, I will be 
afraid to ask you to come home with me over the moor. 
Ach-y-fi! I am never liking to cross it by myself.*' 

" Mestress ! " exclaimed Captain Jack, and there 
was pleasure in his voice, for his heart was sore, and 
it was soothing to feel that here was somebody who 
cared for him. " Why, of course ! I didn't know 
you were here ; but in my deed I am glad to see you ; 
these people are all strangers to me. Come, then," 
he added, " this is the shortest path; though it Is over 
the bog, 'twill be dry now." 

"Yes," said Nance, wondering why he chose the 
shortest path. 

"Where's Hezek?" he said, as they began their 
homeward way. 

" Dakee.^ Didn't you know? He's gone away 
this fortnight," said Nance, " to the Wildrom moun- 
tains to look for some strange herb ; he's always going 
this time of year. If he was at home there would be 
no need for me to trouble you to * send ' me." 

" Trouble, Nance ! " he said. " What are you talk- 
ing about? Isn't it a pleasure for me, a sailor on 
shore, where there's nothing to do. Yes, and an 
^ onnore ' too to take care of the Mestress of Sceth- 
ryg, caton pawb! I am proud and glad to do it. 
Where is the mishteer to-night? " he added in an in- 
tentionally careless tone. 



«0« QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

" At home," said Nance, and there was a tremble in 
her voice that touched the tender-hearted sailor's feel- 
ings, for was he not feeling lonely and sore himself? 
" Bending over his 'counts most like," continued 
Nance. " There's pity he didn't hear that beautiful 
singing! perhaps it would soften his hardness." 

" Perhaps it would indeed," said Captain Jack. 
" No doubt he is a hard man, but upright, Nance, and 
honest and true — that is what I have always thought 
him, whatever ; but I can easily believe that his words 
are wounding you sore sometimes. 'Tis pity he didn't 
hear the singing. It nearly made a fool of me, 
whatever ; seemed to carry me away from all care and 
trouble, you know." 

" You are wanting to be away ? " asked Nance anx- I 

iously, but Captain Jack did not detect the eager 
tremble in her voice. 

" Well indeed ! " he answered, " I am looking out 
for the LUiwen every day, 'tis time for me to be off." 

" Oh, no, no, no ! " said Nance, " oh, don't say that 
indeed. What will I do here by myself? Dakee 
away, and Gildas so cross to me," and bursting into 
tears she forgot everything but her love for the man 
who was about to leave her. " Don't go," she sobbed, 
** I shall never see you again, and I am so lonely, so 
lonely." 

Captain Jack was taken aback by this sudden out- 
burst, and looking at the girlish figure, her golden 
hair catching the moonbeams, her smart hat hanging 
neglected over her arm, a wave of pity filled his heart. 



THE EVANGELIST 203 

"Nance, Nance !^ he said, "don't cry, 'merch-i,** 
and he drew her arm through his, as her footsteps 
swerved a little with her sobs. " Don't cry ; you will 
see me again right enough, for I tell you, when I am 
far away on the sea, my thoughts will be constantly 
turning to Tregildas, and when I come next 'twill be 
all right between you and the mishteer." 

" All right ! Ach no ! " she said, growing more ex- 
cited, " I can't bear to think of it, I hate him," and 
she stamped her foot on the heather. " I never cared 
for him when I married him, and I have got to hate 
him now. Oh, what will I do, what will I do? " and 
she drooped and swayed so much that Captain Jack 
was obliged to support her with his arm. 

" Hush, Nance, hush ! " he said, " we are not far 
from Scethryg now, and somebody may hear you," 
and he drew his hand pitifully over the golden head 
which was now leaning on his shoulder. 

" I don't care," said Nance, throwing all prudence 
to the wind, " I will sail away with you on the Lili- 
teen ; I will never stay in Scethryg when you are gone. 
Take me with you, Jack anwl, take me with you. I 
can't stay here." 

"Nance," cried the sailor, now fully alive to his 
embarrassing position, " Nance, hush, hush ! for your 
own sake, 'merch-i; I hear a footstep coming down 
the lane. Good-night, good-night ; you are safe now, 
cheer up, and you shall come on board the Liliwen for 
a sail." 

" Shall I, shall I? " whispered Nance eagerly, and 



204 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

slowly relinquishing his supporting arm, " shall I 
then — indeed, indeed? " 

" Yes, indeed then," said the sailor, trying to get 
away. 

" Where will we go then ? " she asked excitedly. 

" Oh, wherever you like," he said, retreating hastily 
into the darkness. Before he had taken many steps in 
the direction of the village, he heard behind him 
Nance singing in loud shrill tones the refrain of the 
evangelist's hymn ; and as he hurried on his way, and 
her voice died away in the distance, he shook his head, 
as he said to himself, " There's something wrong 
there, and no mistake." 



CHAPTER XII 

UPLIFTINGS 

The next day was one of cloudless sunshine — a day 
on which the busy farmers worked hard amongst 
their green crops, so as to have their hands free for 
the harvest which was fast approaching, a day on 
which the sailors set their sails to welcome the breeze, 
a day on which the crisp waves danced and the sea- 
gulls called to each other on the bay; but a day at 
Tregildas when a spell of silence seemed to have 
fallen upon everything, a sort of Sabbath stillness 
which no footsteps on the dusty road disturbed, no 
trundling cart, no straying horses; only the spar- 
rows cheeped and the swallows twittered under the 
eaves. Sometimes an adventurous pig would escape 
from his unwonted durance, and trot down the village 
road, wondering most likely, what had become of the 
friends whom he was accustomed to rub ears with. 
But he was quickly followed and shooed back to his 
sty. Truth to tell, the day had been an irksome one 
to the animals and the children, as also to Captain 
Jack, who was tired of looking out through his win- 
dow at the deserted road and listening to Marged 
Jones's continual singing. One after another, and 
all in a minor key, she went through her whole reper- 

805 



206 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

tory of hymns, until at last, irritated beyond endur- 
ance, her lodger took refuge in the sandy garden, 
and from thence, stepping over the low hedge of 
southernwood, roamed down to the breezy cliffs, from 
which he searched the horizon in vain for a sight of 
the LUiwen. 

He was afraid to turn his steps towards the moor 
lest he should meet Nance, for her strange conduct 
of the night before had disturbed and startled him. 
" Poor Nance,'* he thought, " what has come over 
her? 'Tis folly to think she could prefer me to such 
a man as Gildas Rees, and he her husband too. What 
has come over her? I have been joking too much, 
and talking too much nonsense with her! I think 
she'd give up everything, to sail away with me in the 
LUiwen. Poor thing. Her heart is sore, and so is 
mine: what if we did sail away together? No one 
would have a right to grumble. Gildas has turned 
against her, Gwenifer will have none of me. If it 
was Gwenifer now ! " and he sighed as he strolled up 
and down the cliff, with his hands in the pockets of 
his wide trousers. " Poor Nance," he thought again, 
" I can't be harsh to her." His eyes strayed over the 
moor to the little brown cot, whose whitewashed walls 
the evening sunlight was beginning to gild. Gwen- 
ifer ! If she would only listen to his suit ! What a 
different man he would be! and he sat down on the 
heather, to think out what he would be. Well — 
happy, content, and — oh strong, like Gildas Rees, 
and then he laughed at his own childishness. ^^la 



UPLIFTINGS a07 

my deed," he said, " though I am such a hulking fel- 
low, I believe I am only a child after all, else why 
would I be so restless, so easily led to any nonsense, 
as my mother used to say. Ach-y-fi, I am tired of 
myself! Yes, if any one wants the Diwygiad, 'tis 
Jack Davies, captain of the Liliwen/' 

Down below the cliffs the sea splashed over the 
hard rocks, flinging its spray up into the sunset light; 
the breeze swept gently by him, he heard the seabirds 
calling over the water, and, throwing himself back on 
the soft grass, in a few minutes fell into a deep sleep. 
No wonder that he slept, for kind Mother Nature 
lulled him to rest with her soothing song of wind and 
wave. In all the crystal clearness of that evening air, 
no sign was there of any watcher over him; yet, rid- 
ing hard upon the wings of destiny, powerful and 
fateful influences were reaching out towards Captain 
Jack. The lark rose singing from her nest beside 
him, and yet he slept; the grasses bent and brushed 
his face, still he slept on — until at last with a start 
he awoke and sat up, to see the sun just sinking be- 
hind the sea, leaving a shining path of gold upon the 
waters, at which he stared in bewilderment. The bark 
of a dog reached his ears, " Cardi," Jerri's dog, he 
knew it well! And siu^ely there was the sound of a 
horse and cart. Hurriedly he looked at his watch, 
and seeing it was eight o'clock, realized that he had 
slept long, that Evan Roberts was to preach at Bryn- 
zion, and that he must hasten there if he was to gain 
an entrance. 



808 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

On reaching the village he found the roadway 
thronged, as it had been the night before, with hun- 
dreds of eager men and women who had thought it no 
trouble to walk many miles from their homes with the 
chance of being able to hear Evan Roberts, or at 
least to catch a glimpse of him. 

The chapel was full to overflowing, the courtyard 
too, and the surrounding slope. It was impossible 
for any one to hear the evangelist, except those who 
were inside the chapel; but they could join in the 
singing, and perhaps the Spirit would visit them in 
the open air! So they adjourned to the flat on 
which the kiln stood, and there in the twilight they 
held their prayer meeting, with only the pale blue sky 
of evening over them. 

When the singing from the chapel swept out on 
the breeze they joined their voices to the swelling 
strains, and the evangelist, standing in the pulpit, 
caught the sound through the open doorway, and was 
cheered and uplifted into a fervor of spiritual warmth 
which spread to the crowd around him. His clear 
earnest eyes scanned the throng of eager faces, he 
saw the rough hands clasped in nervous tension, and 
with the spiritual intuition of a " Sensitive," he seem- 
ed to feel the unrest of their souls, to hear the cry of 
their most secret longings ; and moved to the heart by 
their expectant faces, he set himself to answer their 
call. 

Outside, Captain Jack, having arrived at the door- 
way, found himself firmly wedged in the crowd, and 



UPLIFTINGS 209 

almost despaired of gaining an entrance into the 
chapel ; but when he desired anything, be it good or 
bad, he was not easily turned from his purpose, so by 
dint of sheer determination he thrust himself sideways 
through the human mass, and made his way into the 
center of the building, where he was content to stand 
in the crowd, rejoicing to find himself near enough to 
see and hear with ease. Amongst the sea of human 
faces turned towards the pulpit, his would not have 
been noticeable had it not been for the determined 
manner in which he had worked his way through the 
crowd ; but this seemed to have attracted the notice of 
the preacher, who, as soon as the sailor had come to a 
standstill, caught sight of the eager face, the bronzed 
skin, the light blue eyes so deeply shaded by their 
long lashes, and remembered the man who had led the 
refrain in the moonlight. 

There was a flicker of recognition in his eyes; it 
was only momentary, but Captain Jack caught it as 
he stood there, his eyes fixed earnestly upon the evan- 
gelist. The look of recognition was followed by a 
smile, and the same wave of the hand with which he 
had shown his appreciation of the singing of the 
iiight before. A fleeting smile, a transient look, per- 
haps, but one that laid hold of the sailor's warm im- 
pressionable heart. " He knows me! He remembers 
Die!'* he thought, and during the ensuing two hours' 
service those blue eyes never wavered in their fixed 
and serious gaze; that restless heart never lost its deep 
interest in the simple words with which the evangelist 



210 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

riveted the attention of his hearers, holding them 
spellbound by his power. 

Often had they heard more fervid eloquence, more 
ardent appeals, from that pulpit. What was it, then, 
in the plain unadorned language of this simple son 
of the soil that spoke to their inner consciousness, and 
seemed to call to his hearers with a voice of awakening 
power? What but the Spirit of God, that poured it- 
self into this earnest prayerful soul, and sent through 
him its message of love to the sad, the struggling, the 
sinning denizens of this lower world. What if the 
words in which that message was clothed by the Im- 
perfect human medium sometimes grated on ears 
sophisticated and tastes refined ! What if they spoke 
of a narrow creed, a crude theology! How should 
this affect the heavenly message which burnt in the 
evangelist's heart? 

Leaning over the pulpit, he did not preach, but 
spoke to his listeners — one human soul conversing 
with his fellow travelers on the road of life, clothing 
his thoughts in simple words and graphic similes. His 
sympathetic voice reached every comer of the chapel, 
and spoke to every heart as though it spoke to it 
alone; his dear magnetic gaze compelled the atten- 
tion, and seemed to read the very thoughts of those 
who hung so hungrily upon his words. 

" Friends," he said, ** have any of you seen, as I 
have, a balloon, just ready to commence its aerial 
flight? It has been made for that flight; every cord, 
every yard of silk, has been joined, and fitted to- 



UPLIFTINGS 211 

gether, for that purpose. It was the design of its 
maker that it should soar above the earth, should rise 
to higher altitudes than ours, to purer air, to clearer 
skies. And see! Though it is still bound to the 
ground, it begins to answer to its maker's designs, for 
a cord or two have been loosened ! It rocks ! it sways ! 
it rises! but falls again to earth; and why? Because 
one cord still keeps it bound, one rope remains un- 
severed; and so that wonderful machine, with ita 
graceful curves of use and beauty, remains attached 
to the earth, a useless object, a thing that does not 
fulfill the intentions of its maker! Alas, how sad! 
But see! The last cord is cut! the last restraining 
bond is broken ! and lo ! now it strains, it trembles, it 
rises, it soars above the clouds of earth, away, away 
towards the light. Do you see the simile, dear 
friends? Do you understand why the sight of that 
balloon bore in upon my heart the thought of you, of 
me, of all poor sinbound creatures? Intended by our 
Maker to rise above the sordid cares, the gloom, the 
sorrows of earth, but fast bound to it by cords that 
keep us swaying between earth and heaven. Some- 
times we rise a little, we feel the heavenly breezes, we 
reach towards the clear blue sky ; but still we linger 
on attached to earth. Perhaps we have cut away and 
cast from us some of the cords that bound us, some of 
the sins that kept us groveling on earth ; and still we 
do not rise above the world, and why? Because one 
cord remains unsevered — one secret sin, the hardest 
of all, to overcome ! Sever it ! cut that cord ! fling it 



218 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

from you, and behold! how you spurn the sordid 
things of earth! You rise above them, and away, 
away you soar, to clearer air, to bluer skies. God 
speed you on your way ! " And kneeling down, the 
evangelist broke into passionate pleadings, which 
seemed to reach the very hearts of his hearers. The 
upturned faces flushed and worked with some strong 
yearning; and as if with one impulse the whole con- 
gregation burst into a volume of song, drowning the 
prayers of the evangelist, who rose from his knees and 
joined his voice to the impassioned harmony, in one 
of the old soul-stirring hymns which have so strong 
a hold upon the emotions of the Welsh; and as he 
sang with /deep feeling, he looked round upon the 
crowd, and once again his eyes and Captain Jack's 
met in a long and searching gaze — a look that on 
the one hand seemed to ask, " Friend, what is wrong 
with you?" and on the other to answer, "I don't 
know, but all is wrong with me; give me peace and 
give me happiness ! '* while the singing still went on, 
each verse repeated twice and thrice with increasing 
fervor. 

At last it ceased, and a breathless silence fell upon 
the meeting — the very air seemed full of a throbbing 
expectation ; until from some mysterious depths there 
floated in upon their consciousness a pomer^ cm influ- 
ence^ indescribable, but strongly felt as if an invisible 
presence were amongst them. The Spirit I for whose 
advent they had prayed so long. The Spirit! who 
had raised so many of their friends from sin to right- 



UPLIFTINGS 218 

eousness, from darkness to light, had come; and 
Brynzion was no longer despised and rejected! 

Suddenly the spell of silence was broken, cries of 
penitence, songs of rejoicing, shouts of joy filled the 
air; and in their midst Captain Jack stood transfixed, 
bewildered, moved to his very soul. What was this 
mysterious influence that flowed in upon the roving 
sailor's heart? compelling him with irresistible power 
to turn away from the darkness of the past, and set 
his face towards the light, the peace, the purity which 
the words of the evangelist revealed. With a cry, as 
if of physical pain, Captain Jack succumbed to the 
strange power that fell upon his spirit ; and although 
those who stood round him saw nothing of it, nor 
heard his cry of pain in that tumultuous sea of excite- 
ment, yet to him that single moment was the turning 
point, the climax, in his life of recklessness. They 
saw only his pale and haggard face, the look of 
startled anxiety, the beads of sweat upon his fore- 
head; and recognizing the signs of a spiritual up- 
heaval, they endeavored to make way for him, and to 
help him to reach the large square pew below the pul- 
pit reserved for the newly converted. As yet it was 
empty, save for the presence of the evangelist, who 
had descended into it, and now stood looking at the 
moving mass of people. In a quiet voice that some- 
times changed to one of almost anguished persuasion, 
he spoke of Him who stood waiting for them even 
now; whose tender voice was calling to them, whose 
feet had trod the rough roads of Judea, who had lain 



214 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

sleepless under the starry sky of night, and had pour- 
ed forth His soul in prayers and vigils for the sinful 
and sorrowful. Almost Captain Jack could 8ee the 
face of heavenly beauty, could hear the pleading 
tones, " Come unto me • • . and I will give you 
rest." 

But it was not to reach the evangelist that he was 
making such strenuous efforts. In the sailor's heart 
a strong reaction had set in, a tide of opposing feel- 
ings which made him shrink from the publicity of the 
" set fawr." Yes, he thought, he would turn from his 
evil ways, he xewuld change his life, but he would not 
be forced into a public confession of his sins; and 
with a wrench he broke away from this strange 
" power " that was painting his past in such lurid 
colors, and drawing him, with bands that were Irre- 
sistible, away from his old familiar moorings. He 
struggled, almost fought his way through the close- 
packed congregation, and, at last reaching the door- 
way, staggered out into the cool night air. A few 
moments he stood panting and inhaling long breaths 
of the pure sea-breeze, then, turning his face towards 
the moor, he hurried away, to be alone under the 
stars, where he could face this mysterious power that 
was holding his heart in its grip. But it was only to 
find that, walk he never so far, nor so fast, neither 
moor nor mountain, nor time, nor distance, could 
bear him away from the cry of an awakened con- 
science; and so absorbed was he in his self-commun- 
ings that he had not observed that his steps had taken 



UPLIFTINGS 216 

him close to Gwenifer's cottage, and he started when 
he beheld the small glimmer of light in her tiny 
window. 

Gwenif er ! Oh for a touch of her little brown hand 
upon his forehead! Oh for a look into her calm 
brown eyes! Never had he longed so much for her 
presence, never had he felt so unworthy of it. No! 
he would not even approach the window, nor seek one 
glance at her face untU — when, he knew not, for, as 
he turned towards the bay, he caught sight of a light 
that rose and fell with the heaving tide, and, peering 
through the starlight at the black hulk, recognized 
the LUiwen and her mast light. " Thank God ! " he 
exclaimed aloud. " Out there on the sea I shall be 
safe. No more loitering on land for me, for it is full 
of pitfalls and temptations for a fool of a sailor ; " 
and running down to Maldraeth, he scrambled round 
the base of the crags to avoid passing through the 
village, and, reaching Tregildas beach, unmoored 
Jerri's boat, and springing into it sculled towards the 
wavering light, with a feverish longing to leave the 
land behind him. When he reached the silent ship, 
he shouted " Hoi, Hoi ! '* and hearing the mate's an- 
swering " Halloa," felt more like himself than he had 
for some time. There was no further greeting than 
a smiling, " Well, cap'n," from the mate, and an an- 
swering, " Well " from the captain, as he climbed on 
board; but later on, they descended to the cabin to- 
gether, cuid by the light of the tallow candle discussed 
their business affairs -^ the cost of repairs, the nature 



216 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

of the cargo, etc., etc. Suddenly John Davies looked 
critically at his friend. 

" Well indeed, cap'n, you are not looking first- 
class. That's what I say ; it's no good being too long 
on land. It's all right for a bit, but dei anwl ! when 
I have been a fortnight ashore, I can't sleep, and I 
can't eat, and I'm quite ready for the ropes and the 
sails again." 

" That's it," said the captain. " I haven't slept 
well this week past; what with the dogs barking at 
night and the cocks crowing in the morning, 'twas 
impossible." 

" And how's the Diwygiad getting on at Tregildas? 
'Spose you haven't been converted yet, cap'n? " said 
the mate, with a twinkle in his eye. 

" Converted, no ! " said Captain Jack, " I am the 
same bad lot as ever, I'm afraid! Hark ye, mate, 
there*8 something in it. As sure as I am sitting here, 
there's something comes into those meetings besides 
the people." 

" Well, so I suppose," said the mate, who was an 
observant and by no means callous man, in spite of 
his boisterous manner ; " they've been praying so long 
for the Spirit that they've got an answer perhaps — 
if not, where's the sense of praying? stands to rea- 
son." But the captain seemed disinclined for further 
conversation. 

"Will I scull in and take Jerri's boat in tow?** 
said the mate at last, seeing that his friend had what 
he called one of his " moods " upon him. 



UPLIFTINGS 217 

" Yes, go you, and PU go to bed, and see if I can 
sleep on sea, whatever," said the captain ; " if I fail 
'twill be the first time in my life," and with scant 
ceremony he " turned in." But in spite of the famil- 
iar lapping of the waves on the ship's side, and the 
soothing sound of the breeze in the rigging, he lay 
awake in his bunk, and the pale dawn was beginning 
to grow rosy beyond the brown Scethryg moor before 
he fell asleep. 



CHAPTER Xra 

MALDKAFiTH 

In Scethryg farmyard the milking^hour was always 
a sociable one, or had been until Nance had become 
so wrapt up in the chapel functions. The mishteer 
would saunter in to look over his herd, 'n'wncwl Sam 
would stand leaning over the gate with his pipe in 
his mouth, and often Hezek came home that way from 
his rambles over the hills, knowing that tea-time was 
near. Sometimes Nance Jierself would come out, with' 
a bit of needlework in her fingers ; even " Juno," the 
sheep-dog, and " Betsen," the old tabby cat, managed 
to be on the spot when the milk came frothing into 
the pails, and there was a chance of their pannikins 
being filled. But to-night neither the mishteer nor 
mestress was present. The former had gone to a 
hillside fair, and had not yet returned, and Nance 



" Oh, well ! " said Het, " of course we can't expect 
her, because, you see, she's stopping with Nelli Amos 
^ say good-bye to the preachers when they go back 
to Tregarreg!" 

For answer, Gwenifer raised her finger with a lis- 
tening air, as over the moor came the sound of a 



woman's voice, singing. 



218 



MALDRAETH 819 



tt ' 



'Yes, 'tis the mestress,'' said Het. "There's 
plenty of hymns she knows. Anwl! She^s a good 
woman sure as I am a sinner," and she rambled on 
as she milked, not ill-pleased that Gwenifer was 
silent. 

" I wish the meeting had lasted to twelve last night, 
instead of ending at ten. In my deed, I was just be- 
ginning to feel something fluttering here," and she 
pointed to the region of her heart," and I thought I 
was going to be seized like Mari Jones by my side; 
but no! not a tear would come to my eyes, no more 
than if I was sitting here milking. Ach-y-fi, there's 
hard I am! and I'm no singer, so, in my deed, I'm 
afraid the Diwygiad will pass me by ! Oh, she's got 
a book!" she continued in a disparaging tone, 
" there's nothing in that ! I could do it myself if I 
had a voice ! There's pretty she is ! " and she looked 
admiringly at her mistress as she stepped lightly over 
the stubble, her yellow hair shining like gold in the 
sunset light, her cheeks and eyes aflame with the fire 
of religious excitement which was consuming her. 

Captain Jack's conduct of the night before had 
much disturbed her. Had he been converted? she 
wondered; then, indeed, her prayers had been an- 
swered, and he was hers — now nothing could come 
between them, neither distance, nor doubt, nor death 
itself could part them. But where was he, why had 
he fled from the chapel like one bereft of his senses? 
as those who were nearest to him had told her. Had 
he heard of the arrival of the Liliweny and hurried on 



aao QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

board to return soon to the woman whose prayers had 
saved him? and she entered the house with her heart 
full of restless questionings. 

But when the evening hours passed on and still he 
came not, her anxiety increased, and she could scarce- 
ly control herself sufficiently to answer n'wncwl Sam 
when he returned from the village, where he had 
lingered longer than usual to see the last of the evan- 
gelist. 

" The LUiwen is still in the bay," he said, and 
Nance nodded, for her parched tongue refused to 
speak. 

"The mate's been in to pay Marged Jones; he's 
sleeping there to-night, and going back to the ship 
with the dawn, for they are sailing to-morrow to for- 
eign parts.*' 

, Nance started to her f ^et, and looked around as if 
she sought some means of escape. 

She heard Gildas arrive in the farmyard, and as 
she caught the sound of the mellow voice, and the 
firm footstep, a strange look came over her face, so 
marked as even to disfigure it. 

She threw back her head a little, and her eyelids 
drooped into • a narrowing gleam of hatred, which 
however, she managed to hide from the man who en- 
tered from the farmyard, carrying a parcel which he 
deposited on the table. 

" 'Tis something Mrs. Jones Bryndu is sending 
you, Nance," he said in a pleasant voice, and with 
something like his former manner. " They are grow- 



MALDRAETH 221 

ing in her garden, and she says if you boil them and 
cut them in slices " 

** Ach-y-fi ! '* interrupted Nance : " old beetroots ! 
I am not liking them," and pushing them aside, she 
proceeded with her tea-making. 

A hard and dour shadow fell again over Gildas's 
face, as he drew his chair to the table ; and during the 
meal he spoke little, but showed no further sign of 
annoyance at his cold reception. 

Nance seemed quite content with his silence, for she 
was too absorbed in her own thoughts to take much 
account of anything that was passing around her. 

She went aimlessly in and out of the dairy, and 
stood long at the doorway, her eyes fixed on the sea, 
where a ship with a red pennon dipped gracefully to 
the rising tide. 

More than once Gildas had asked her a question 
concerning his plans for the coming harvest ; but she 
had not heard him, her gaze still fixed upon the glow- 
ing bay, her fingers working nervously in the folds of 
her gown. 

" D'ye hear, Nance? " he said, his anger roused at 
last. ** Can't you turn your thoughts or your eyes 
to your own business? What is it so wonderful on 
the sea?" 

For answer Nance turned round slowly with a look 
of defiant anger in her eyes ; she spoke not a word, 
but turned to the clumsy staircase which opened up 
from the kitchen, and Gildas, as if regretting that he 
had shown his discomposure, calmly lighted his pipe 



288 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

and went out to the farmyard to pat Cprwen's sleek 
sides, to rub Pinken's curly forehead, and to stand a 
moment by Gwenifer's fast-filling pail. 

" Best cow of the lot," he said, looking proudly 
round his herd, and Gwenifer nodded as she rose and 
rested the pail on her hip. 

Gildas looked into the calm eyes raised to his, and 
felt inclined to open his heart to her — to ask what 
was the meaning of the cruel unrest that had come 
into his life, to complain of Nance's trying ways; 
more, even to confess to her that he had mcide a mis- 
take, and that he rued the day when he had made 
Nance Ellis his wife ! But it was only for a moment 
that this temptation assailed him ; and he turned away 
with the now familiar pain gnawing at his heart, and 
the firm resolve to suffer in silence. What ! complain 
like a child that his life was a miserable failure, tell 
another woman of his wife's faults and failings, even 
though that woman was Gwenifer, the silent, the 
tender, the true ! And he was ashamed of having har- 
bored the thought. 

As he passed down the lane to the meadows his 
thoughts were still of Nance and her absorbing devo- 
tion to the revival. Was it that which had changed 
her so completely? No, he knew now, as well as 
though she had told him In plain words, that her 
heart was aboard the LUirven; and the knowledge no 
longer wounded but only angered him, for his love 
had died out, the love that had never been founded on 
respect. He despised her for her falseness, and 



MALDRAETH 223 

cursed his own folly In marrying her. What further 
harm could befall him? She had already held his 
name up to public contempt at the revival meetings, 
and a red flush of anger dyed his face as he seemed 
to hear again the words, " Save Gildas Rees,'* as they 
surged around him in that bitter hour at Brynzion. 
What if she should bring further shame upon him, 
disgrace on the name he had always been proud of? 
" In my deed I must guard her and myself," he said, 
turning round and retracing his steps, urged on by 
suspicions and fears that were quite foreign to his 
nature. 

Meanwhile, Gwenifer had finished her milking and 
carried her pail into the dairy. The clumsy door 
stood half open, and through the chinks by the hinges 
the old kitchen was visible, lighted up by the blazing 
fire which was always generously replenished with 
logs as the evening drew on. 

Raising her eyes, she was surprised to see Nance 
take off her shoes, and, carrying them with her, ap- 
proach the stairs on tip-toe. Had it been Het she 
would not have wondered, as it was a frequent custom 
to leave the shoes at the bottom of the stairs if soiled 
by walking in the garden or yard ; but for the mes- 
tress to do so, and walk on tip-toe, was unusual, and 
Gwenifer was further puzzled by the noiselessness of 
her movements upstairs, where the bare, uncarpeted 
boards generally made every footstep audible. 

The suspicions and fears which had only just 
gained an entrance into Gildas's heart had for some 



a«4 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

time haunted Gwenlfer, for latterly she had seen more 
of Nance than her husband had, and had frequently 
been puzzled by her " moods.*' The curious mixture 
of religion and levity which Nance's actions evinced 
was new and alarming to her simple, straight-for- 
ward nature, and she kept a close watch over her mis- 
tress, fearing she knew not what, but at all events de- 
termined if possible to shield Gildas from further 
trouble. 

The incident of the prayer meeting had wounded 
her quite as deeply as it had him, and she was earn- 
estly desirous of preventing Nance's too frequent in- 
tercourse with Nelli Amos. It was for this reason 
that she stood perfectly still in the dairy when Nance 
had disappeared up the dark stairs. She heard the 
slow opening of a drawer, the careful raising of a 
creaking lid followed by a slight sound of soft foot- 
steps, and she watched intently when by-and-by Nance 
descended carrying with her a small bundle. What 
could it mean? Her heart beat loudly, her face 
flushed as she saw the mestress, after putting on her 
shoes, pass silently out into the farmyard. 

Where was she going? Should she follow and 
watch? She hated to do it, but to save Gildas a pang 
and Nance from a foolish action she would have dared 
much, so she crossed to the kitchen window, where in 
the deep recess Nance's knitting still lay, the bright 
needles crossing each other as if just dropped from 
the fingers. 
" Oh, Nance ! " thought the girl, " we have been 



MALDRAETH 226 

friends so long! Where have you gone? what are you 
doing? Indeed, indeed I must follow you, I must find 
you, for much I fear there is something wrong.*' She 
could not have told what her fears pointed to — she 
had no time to think to-night, while the evening shad- 
ows were falling so rapidly, while Nance's blue figure 
was already disappearing through the gap into the 
moor; so gliding noiselessly after her, she crouched 
behind the hedge. Where was Nance going? To 
the village again to have her mind poisoned against 
her husband? No! rather would Gwenifer have fol- 
lowed her, have thrown her arms around her, and im- 
plored her for the sake of their old friendship to turn 
back to Scethryg. She watched eagerly while in the 
darkening twilight Nance approached the spot where 
the paths divided; one turning away over the moor, 
the other to the village, and the third leading straight 
down to Maldraeth. She stopped a moment and then 
took the path to Maldraeth. 

To Maldraeth ! VHiat did that mean? And catch- 
ing sight of the LUmen*8 tall mast against the sky, 
Gwenifer felt her heart stand still, as she saw Nance 
stoop down and thrust something under a furze bush, 
and then turning, come swiftly back towards Sceth- 
ryg. Gwenifer had scarcely time to withdraw further 
within the thorn hedge; she held her breath as the 
flying figure ran through the gap, almost brushing 
her in passing, but she need not have feared discov- 
ery, for Nance was too excited to have noticed her. 

Over the stubble yard she once more picked her 



826 QUEEN OP THE RUSHES 

way, and Gwemfer following entered the house to 
find the mestress sittmg at the hearth with her knit* 
ting in her hand. 

" Thee are stopping late to-night, Gwenifer," she 
said, with a little angry gleam in her eye, " thee canst 
go home now," and Gwenifer went out into the soft 
twilight with her hands crossed on her bosom, and 
her head bent with shame and sorrow ; over the moor, 
and along the path to Maldraeth, where under a furze 
bush she found the bundle which Nance had secreted 
there. Her hat, her jacket! oh! what could it mean? 
and she hurried on through the darkness, determined 
to hide herself in one of the caves on Maldraeth, and 
to watch till dawn, if need be, if so she might save 
Gildas from trouble and Nance from folly. 

She had scarcely left the house when Gildas en- 
tered, and with a casual remark concerning the busi- 
ness of the farm, sat down to the supper of milk 
broth and brown bread which lay on the table in 
readiness for him. 

" Not coming to supper? " he asked, as Nance re- 
mained sitting on the hearth with her hand to her 
cheek. 

" No, my tooth is aching shocking," she said, and 
he saw she had wrapt her face in a band of red 
flannel. 

" Hast caught cold? '' he asked, a little tender pity 
for her pain inducing him to return to the more inti- 
mate " thee " and " thou." 

" Most like," she said, and continued to sit bj the 



MALDRAETH 287 

hearth, rocking herself to and fro, until Gildas re- 
tired to bed. 

"I would think bed would be the best place for 
thee, Nance," he said, looking back with his foot on 
the first stair. 

"Yes, yes, but go you; I will sleep with Het to- 
night, then I won't be afraid of disturbing you with 
my toothache.'* 

" Well, good-night," said Gildas as he turned away. 
He heard her close and bolt the door more noisily 
than usual, he heard Juno's last barking run round 
the premises, he heard Nance's step going up the stair 
to Het's room, and then he disposed himself to rest, 
but in vain. 

He was careworn and heartsick; and to those who 
stand most in need of her, sleep often refuses her 
soothing presence, and Gildas Rees, who used to lose 
consciousness as soon as his head lay on its pillow, 
tossed from side to side, restless and sleepless. The 
hours passed on; ten o'clock struck, eleven, and still 
he lay wide awake. It was close upon the stroke of 
twelve; and he sat up listening, for surely he had 
heard a creaking stair; then all was silence, and he 
threw himself back on the pillow. But again he lis- 
tened intently, for surely there was a soft footfall. 
Again a long silence, and then a cautious and almost 
noiseless drawing of a wooden bolt — the door is 
opened, it is closed again carefully and softly; but 
Gildas's keen ear is no longer deceived, and rising to 
the window he peers through the gloom and sees a 



^ 



288 QUEEN OP THE RUSHES 

silent figure that posses out tfarougfa the doorwsLj and 
crosses the stubble yard towards the moor. 

In a moment he is dressing hurriedly, a terrible 
fear, an instinctive certainty, clutching at his heart * 
and coursing through his veins. It is Nance! and be 
hastens after her across the stubble yard, possessed 
by the overpowering desire to save her and himself 
from the shame and disgrace which he sees threaten- 
ing them. 

When he reached the turning of the paths, she had 
already begun her way down the rugged cliff track to 
Maldraeth, and as Gildas followed swiftly, a host of 
bitter thoughts and memories rushed through his 
mind. How often had he met her here, when love I 

was young and fresh and sinless ! " Oh Grod ! what 
does it mean that Nance should be thus fleeing from 
me, that I should be seeking her through the dark- | 

ness? " 

Across the moor, down the rocky paths, and on to I 

the pebbly strand he went, shoeless, and treading care- 
fully, anxious to reach the truant without alarming | 
her. I 

Arrived on the shore, Nance stood awhile uncertain. i 

Was Jerri's boat there as usual? Yes, in the star- 
light she caught its outline; moored safely, with its 
keel already swaying on the edge of the full tide. | 

With one hurried glance around, she prepared to draw 
it nearer through the surf, when a footstep crunched 
the gravel, a hand grasped her arm, and in the dark- 
ness Gildas stood before her. 



MALDRAETH SSO 

The hushed silence was only broken by the plash 
of the waves, and his hard breathing. Frightened 
and speechless, Nance loosed her hold on the rope ; but 
at once regaining her courage, she was the first to 
speak. 

"What is it.? Why do you follow me into the 
night? Can I never shake you off? " 

" Nance," said Gildas, his voice trembling. " Where 
are you going, woman? what is the meaning of all 
your follies? Come back with me, come home to 
Scethryg, and this black night shall be as though it 
had never been. Come, Nance, be wise, 'merch-i," and 
for a moment she faltered in her purpose, and whim- 
pered a little as Gildas continued : " Come home and 
let us begin our lives again ; perhaps I have been hard 
to you. Come, Nance, and I will forgive and no one 
will ever know of this your folly. Have you forgot- 
ten everything? the sunny day when the little bell at 
Pemnwnten church rang out so merrily when we turn- 
ed home to Scethryg together, so innocent, and so 
happy." 

In his eagerness he had clutched her arm once 
more, but she tore herself away. 

" So innocent, and so happy ! " she cried. " Not 
me, not me ! I tell you, man, I was miserable ! I have 
been miserable ever since, and I cannot bear it any 
longer. Let me go! " 

** Miserable ! " said Gildas, and all the tenderness 
died out of him, and a hot tide of bitter anger filled 
his heart and barbed his tongue. 



280 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

" False vilanes ! Have you no shame? D'ye think 
I have not seen your wickedness, your smiles, your 
blushes? and all because a roving villain has crossed 
your path; and you a wife! Och-i! The wife of 
Gildas Rees! oh, shame upon you!" and clutching 
her arms firmly he turned her round, and made her 
face him in the starlight. 

" D'ye think, woman, I could love you now, or care 
one cockleshell what in your mad folly you would do? 
although I would still harbor you in my house, and 
hide your faithlessness if possible, for my own name's 
sake. Come, choose! this is the last time you shall 
ever have the chance. Yes, by God ! you shall dioose 
between me and that devil Cap'n Jack." 

His angry tones, his firm grip, had roused in Nance 
a fierce daring which rose in arms against her ac- 
cuser. 

" Choose, woman," he cried, but with a sudden 
wrench Nance loosened herself from his grasp. 

"Cap'n Jack, then," she cried, nay, almost scream- 
ed, so loud and excited were her tones. " Cap'n Jack 
I choose, I choose," and she broke into a shrill, mirth- 
less laugh, that Gildas shuddered to hear. 

It woke up the echoes in the silent cove, and from 
the craggy heights around, it still returned and seem- 
ed to fill his ears and smite upon his brain. He turned 
away without a word, and reaching the rocky path 
walked steadily upwards without casting a look be- 
hind ; Nance, as if spellbound, watching him, until he 
disappeared over the edge of the moor and she ww 



MALDRAETH 831 

left standing alone by the surf, only the soft gurgling 
of the tide in the clefts of the rocks breaking the 
silence. The hours were passing, the tide was full: 
she must hurry and leave these taunts and troubles 
behind her — away, away, on earth, sea, or sky, she 
cared not where as long as she might escape. And, 
lost to all sense of faith or honor, she turned eagerly 
to unmoor the boat; but once again a restraining hand 
was laid upon her arm, and she turned round fiercely 
to find Gwenifer facing her. She had hidden behind 
the rocks until she saw that Gildas's persuasions were 
vain, and until he was out of sight beyond the edge 
of the cliff; then she had slipped out from her 
hiding-place, longing as she had never longed before 
for words in which to clothe her entreaties. She could 
only seize hold of Nance, however, and try to draw 
her away from the boat ; but not succeeding in this, 
she flung her arms around her neck, she kissed her 
and grasped her hands, wetting them with her tears, 
and pressing them on her heart to show how wildly it 
was beating. But all in vain, for Nance was no longer 
open to the call of reason or affection ; her hot temper 
was up in arms, and, swayed only by the fierceness of 
her unbridled passions, she turned upon Gwenifer in 
a fury of resentment. 

" Away, thou dumb fool ! " she cried. " Go back 
to thy cows and thy sheep; I go to the man whom my 
prayers have saved,** and she sprang into the boat 
and tried to loosen its prow from the strand. Its stem 
was already afloat, and in another moment would have 



232 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

cleared the surf. In that moment Gwmifer, light and 
agile, had sprung in after her, and with a lurch the 
boat floated on the tide, though it still remained close 
to the rocks ; and the two girls stood up confronting 
each other, with only the lapping sea around them, and 
the silent night sky above them. They could see only 
each other's outlines in the starlight, but that was 
enough to show that one was approaching the other 
with appealing hands. 

In Nance's tortured heart a spirit of fierce anger 
had awoke, and with a cry of fury she sprang upon 
Gwenifer, overbalancing her, so that with a cry of, 
" Oh, dear God," she fell over the side of the boat, 
striking her head on the rocks with such violence that 
she lost all consciousness, and remained still and white 
while Nance took the oars and rowed herself out into 
the darkness. 

In a few moments Gwenifer had so far recovered 
as to sit up and stare at the dark, heaving sea, and 
wonder what had become of Nance, for all around her 
was silent as though Nance and her boat had never 
been. 

Her experienced eye, however, soon detected a black 
speck upon the waters, in which she knew too well 
Nance was hastening to her fate. " And what a fate, 
oh, what a fate ! " thought Gwenifer, as the boat was 
lost to view in the darkness ; and kneeling there upon 
the rocks she raised her clasped hands to the starry 
sky, the tears streaming down her cheeks, her eyes 
fixed upon the spot where she knew the LUiwen was 



MALDRAETH «88 

riding at anchor. Suddenly, while she prayed, her 
memory awoke more clearly, the blood rushed to her 
heart, and flooded her face as a new and eager thought 
arose in her mind. Had she heard her own voice as 
she fell from the boat? Had she cried aloud, " Oh, 
dear Grod? " And so intensely eager was her longing 
that it might be true, that she dreaded to put the 
question to the test, lest she might find it was a dream, 
and that she was still the dumb and silent Gwenifer! 
Should she dare to try? With her hands clasped and 
her eyes still fixed upon the glittering stars, she 
breathed softly the words that came most naturally 
to her lips, " Oh, dear Grod." Yes ! she heard her own 
voice! Again, more loudly, and again she repeated 
the same words, and realized that mysteriously, as it 
had left her so many years ago, her speech had re- 
turned, and she was able to articulate freely and eas- 
ily. When at last the blessed truth shone in upon her, 
in a full tide of overpowering joy and gratitude, she 
burst into a fit of wild sobbing; not only sobs of joy 
in the present, but also of self-pity for the long si- 
lence to which she had been condemned in the past. 
The long-restrained feelings, the serene patience, gave 
way under the excess of happiness ; and she sobbed on, 
until quite exhausted she stretched herself on the rocks, 
her head on a pillow of seaweed, to rest, to recover her 
self-control, and at last to rise, her heart throbbing 
with happiness in spite of the clouds that overshad- 
owed her. Her first act of calm consciousness was to 
kneel and stretch her hands towards the night sky, to 



284 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

breathe a prayer of gratitude, in words that no longer 
died upon her tongue, but reached her ears in the 
music of the human voice. 

Turning to leave the shore where she had failed so 
miserably in her attempt to save Nance, she strciined 
her eyes for a last look towards the ship, whose sails 
were beginning to catch the light of the rising mooiif 
continuing to use her new-found powers of speech, 
fearing lest she might have lost them again. ^^ Gildas, 
Gildas! Oh! Nance, come back to him,'* she mur- 
mured. 

A solemn stillness reigned over the sea — a silence 
that was suddenly broken by a distant scream, fol- 
lowed by another, and another, and Gwenifer shud- 
dered with horror at she knew not what, stretching out 
helpless hands towards the waste of waters. Help- 
less hands, and useless sobs ! for Nance was gone be- 
yond the power of love to recall. 

A faint hope still remained to her that the mis- 
guided woman had returned to Scethryg while she her- 
self had lain unconscious, and climbing up the cliff 
path she determined to go to the farm and find out. 
Not to tell Gildas of her recovered speech — oh no, 
not now! Joy for her and sorrow for him? No, she 
would keep her joy to herself as she had kept her sor- 
row for so long, and wait at least until the first pang 
of his grief had passed ; and she ran up the cliff still 
murmuring, " Gildas, Gildas ! Sorrow for you and 
joy for me. Oh, how that spoils my happiness ! No, 
I will not tell you to-night.'* 



MALDRAETH 235 

She made up her mind, too, not to tell Het, or Ben, 
until the next evening, hugging her happy secret to 
her heart. 

When after her hurried walk up the cliff she reached 
Scethryg, she saw by the light that streamed out 
through the open doorway that Gildas was still up; 
and through the window, as she passed, she saw him 
pacing up and down with restless steps. Hearing 
her footsteps on the stubble, he hastened to the door, 
and with both hands outstretched called " Nance ! ^ 
There was relief, forgiveness, and pity in his voice; 
but he started back when Gwenif er entered. 

"Gwenifer!** he exclaimed, "what dost here so 
late? »» 

She pointed to the candle and to the light that 
streamed out through the doorway. 

" Oh," he said, " thou saw'st the light and won- 
dered what we were doing so late; well, 'tis Nance, 
thou seest ; she has gone away somewhere, and I don't 
know in the world where. I'm thinking perhaps she's 
gone home to her father's house; she threatened it 
many times lately." 

Gwenif er nodded, and looked sadly Into the dark- 



" Did'st hear a scream, Gwenifer, three times over? 
What was it? " 

Pointing upwards, she flapped her hands like the 
^ngs of a bird. 

"The seagulls, and at night? No, no! I cannot 
think it ; go thou home and sleep, lass." 



286 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

She shook her head emphatically, but Gildajs was 
nnn* 

" Thee*ll do what I ask thee, I know," he said ; " His 
my wish that thou should'st go and close thy door, and 
sleep.** 

For he thought the wanderer might return, and to 
see Gwenifer there would but add to her humiliation. 
She bent her head, as usual acquiescing in Gildas's 
wishes, and passed out into the farmyard, leaving the 
restless man still pacing up and down the stone floor. 



CHAPTER XIV 

" ON YOUR PEEIL, ! " 

Meanwhiue, what had become of Nance? When 
Gwenifer had fallen on the rocks, and had lain so still 
and white where she fell, Nance, in a frenzy of excite- 
ment, had seized her opportunity and, leaving her 
without pity, had sprung into the boat and rowed 
swiftly into the darkness away from M aldraeth and to- 
wards the VUvwen^ which was beginning to show like a 
ghost in the moonlight. 

Over the dark waters her strong arms rowed the 
little boat, with only one idea in her mind — that 
taunts and misery were behind her, and happiness and 
rest before. In a short time she had reached the black 
hulk of the ship, where Captain Jack, leaning over the 
rail, had heard the sound of the oars in the rowlocks, 
and stood watching with great surprise the black 
speck approaching. 

" Hoi, mate ! " he called out, " what's the matter? *' 
but there was no answer from the fast-nearing boat. 

" I thought you were stopping in the village to- 
night,'* cried the captain ; but again there was no re- 
ply, for Nance's courage had failed her, and she 
found no voice to answer. The moon was rising 
above the moiOr, and by her faint light Captain Jack 

9sn 



288 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

saw It was a woman who had rowed so straight and 
swift over the dark sea, and a wild hope arose within 
him, Gwenifer! could she have relented? Was she 
coming to him for help of any kind? With eager 
hands he threw down the ship's ladder, and saw a 
woman grasp it and quickly climb up towards him; 
he stretched out his hands to help her, and in a mo- 
ment she had stepped on board. Captain Jack recog- 
nized his midnight visitor and his heart sank like a 
stone. 

" Nance," he cried, " you here? What is the mean- 
ing of this?" 

" Yes, yes, Jack anwyl," Nance answered, her heart 
beating almost to suffocation, " 'tis me, Jack ; I have 
come ; I told you I would. I am coming to sail with 
you, to be your servant, your slave, only to be with 
you. Jack — oh ! say you are glad to see me. Why 
do you stand aside like that? Hasn't the Lord given 
us to each other? I prayed for you by night and day, 
and He has heard my prayers, and given you to me, 
and me to you, to be together for ever and ever, in 
this world and the next; never, never to part from 
each other." 

" Nance ! " said Captain Jack, " what do you mean? 
Where is your husband, Gildas, that noble man, that 
neither you nor I are worthy of? He flung the word 
* honorable ' in my teeth; and in my deed, if I did this 
wicked thing, he would be right ; but bad as he thinks 
me, I will not. Nance, go back to him, to him to 
whom you owe your love and honor. Why have you 



"ON YOUR PERIL!" 289 

done this foolish thing? Oh, Nance! Why have 
you come? " 

** Why have I come? " said Nance, her arms drop- 
ping at her side, her face white, her eyes flashing. 
" Why have I come? Because I love you. Jack, be- 
cause I cannot live away from you, and because " — 
and she grasped his hands between her own, and bent 
her face upon them — " because. Jack, you love me — 
yes, yes, I have heard it in the watches of the night, 
I have heard it in your voice, and seen it in your eyes 
when you came up so often to Scethryg; all the time 
I knew it was because you loved me. Jack ! and because 
I loved you, and prayed for you." 

** Good God I " said Captain Jack, " I haye done 
wrong! N«uice, Nance, come, be brave, *merch-i! 
Remember you are a wife, and Gildas Reese's wife, 
too." A scornful smile was all Nance's answer, and 
the sailor saw that to be kind he must first be cruel, 
and to awaken Nance to a sense of duty he must show 
her the futility of her mad passion. 

** 'Twas never you," he said — " 'twas Gwenif er I 
sought; 'twas Gwenif er I loved, and though she re- 
fuses me 'tis Gwenif er I will love for ever ! " 

For one moment Nance seemed dazed and stunned 
by this sudden revelation. Gwenifer the dumb, the 
silent one, to dare to come between her and the man 
who had been given in answer to her prayers ! " No 
no!" and she burst into a loud, shrill laugh that 
startled the sailor; so fierce it was, so mirthless. 
" Come," he said, " you must get back, Nance. 'Tis 



«40 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

a dream, a fancy, that you have taken Into your head. 
I, the roving sailor, to be preferred to Gildas Rees; 
and he your wedded husband in the sight of God and 
man! Oh, Nance, cast from you such dishonor. I 
know to-morrow when you awake you will be sorry 
for this wild freak ; but no one knows it, save you and 
me, and no one ever shall ; I swear it, Nance. No one 
shall ever know what has happened to-night if you will 
go back to Scethryg; the boat is ready, I will help 
you down the side." 

" I will not gOt" she cried, " I will not go; never, 
never ! '* and her voice rose into a frenzy of passion. 
" 'Tis false, 'tis false that you love Gwenif er ! " 
Then her mood changed, and in tender, sorrowful ac- 
cents she pleaded, ^^ Oh, Jack, my heart is breaking; 
it is burning in my breast like a heavy burning stone ! 
And in my head a burning, too. Oh, Jack, say one 
kind word to me to heal me of my pain.'* 

" Poor Nance," said Captain Jack, touched by the 
sorrowful appeal, " your heart is sore ! / know that 
heavy stone, that burning heart. Come, I will help 
you into the boat ; the path of duty is hard sometimes, 
no doubt, but I believe 'twill bring us peace at Idst 
They say so, Nance, whatever." 

" Peace? " said Nance, with a scornful laugh, " in 
my deed, no ! Have you no word of kindness for me, 
when I have borne so much, and dared so much for 
you?" 

" Not one word, Nance! Gro back you must! At 
once I The moon is rising fast, we shall be seen, and 



" ON YOUR PERIL ! " 241 

you will lose your character for ever ! " and laying 
hold of her hand he endeavored to draw her towards 
the gangway, but her mood had changed again, and 
she struggled violently. 

*' Never, never, never ! " she cried, and scream after 
scream rent the night air. Flinging her arms round 
his neck, she clung to him with mad tenacity ; he tried 
to loosen her frantic grasp, but she burst into a loud 
peal of laughter again, laughter that made the sailor's 
blood run cold. Suddenly her grasp relaxed, and she 
fell into a fit of hysterical sobbing mingled with 
screams and laughter ; she sank at last exhausted upon 
the deck, and Captain Jack seizing his opportunity 
lifted her tenderly, and with a sailor's deftness climbed 
down the ladder, and laying her down gently took the 
oars and rowed rapidly back towards M aldraeth. 

When he reached the shore he raised her in his arms 
once more, and wading through the surf carried her 
safely beyond the reach of the tide, and set her gently 
on the sand. 

" Now, mestress ! " he said In a firm though not 
harsh tone. " Awake ! be brave ! There's the path. 
Go home, and think no more of this dark night ! '* 

She stood a moment as if dazed before she turned 
towards the dangerous cliff path; and Captain Jack 
shuddered as he saw her walk increase into a run, and 
dreaded lest a false step might hurl her to her death. 
But on and on she ran without a look behind, up where 
the steepness made the heart beat hard and the breath 
come quickly, up where the crooked track edged the 



248 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

scarped rocks, up to the very summit, and out of si^t 
beyond the highest ridge. Here, when she reached 
the moor, she cast but one glance towards Scethryg, 
then turned, and fled as if for very life. 

Away, away towards the cold grey hills that 
stretched eastward beyond the moor. The moon rose 
higher, the hours went by, but long after Captain 
Jack had reached the Liliwen^ and thrown himself dis- 
tressed and anxious into his bunk, Nance's face was 
still towards those bare grey hills, and on the wings of 
the night wind she was still speeding on. Away, 
away, she cared not where, for in her brain some cord 
seemed to have snapped, and all she thought of, all 
she desired, was to reach the Wildrom mountains where 
Dakee would pity her and comfort her. 

The sun had scarcely arisen next morning when 
Gwenifer rose and went out in search of the cows. 
She had obeyed Gildas so far as to stretch herself on 
her bed, but not to sleep ; the events of the preceding 
night had touched her so deeply that it was no wonder 
if her heart and mind and soul shared in the upheaval 
that had come into her placid life. Several times dur- 
ing the night she had risen, and peered through her 
tiny window at a tall familiar figure who paced up and 
down on the edge of the cliff. Full well she recog- 
nized Gildas's restless steps, and longed to join him 
even as she shared in his anxiety; but she waited in 
obedience to his wish until the sun rose, before she went 
out to call the Scethryg cows, where the heath tufts 
and the golden broom were just catching the glint of 



« ON YOUR PERIL ! »* j24S 

the sunrise. She knew it was not milking-timey so she 
turned from her path to join Gildas as he stood in 
deep thought looking out over the bay where the LU- 
iwen no longer flaunted her red pennon in the breeze. 
Her light footsteps made no sound on the dewy grass, 
so that when she laid her hand upon his arm as usual, 
he started violently. 

" Caton pawb ! Gwenif er, thou cam'st like a spirit 
over the moor. Didst do my bidding and go to bed 
and rest last night? " 

"Yes." He started back two or three steps at 
the sound of the voice. 

" What? *' he said as if bewildered. 

" Gildas, I can speak/' she said, with a light and 
happiness in her eyes that not even her sympathy with 
him could quench. 

" Speak ! " he exclaimed, " speak ! " and drawing 
near her, he clasped both her hands within his own. 
"Lodes, what does it mean?" and a light and color 
overspread his dark face that had been absent for 
many a long day. " Gwenifer, I did not think that 
God would ever send such a gleam of light to brighten 
my darkness; but this, Gwenifer! 'tis more than I 
could ever hope for! I am glad indeed! indeed! I 
don't know what to say! Tell me, lass, how did it 
happen?" 

" 'Twas last night," said Gwenifer, " only I 
wouldn't tell you when you were so troubled, mishteer. 
I was very unhappy, and suddenly I found I could 
speak. I cannot tell you more than that, mishteer." 



244 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

*^ No needy no need ! Gwenif er can speak, so Sceth- 
ryg is not quite accursed ! " 

" No, no, no indeed ! " said Gwenif er. She would 
like to have told him that this was a dark and sinful 
suggestion, but her words still came with a little hes- 
itancy, and moreover she knew that though speech is 
silver, yet sometimes silence is golden. 

" 'Tis cruel to throw a shadow over thy happiness, 
lass, but I cannot help it. Nance has never come 
back, and now it is too late. I will go to Scethryg 
and to my work, and forget her, Gwenif er, as though 
she had never been. Keep this all to thyself; but I 
needn't tell thee now any more than when thy lips 
were sealed. I will go home, and to my work; but 
Gwenifer, thou knowest me of old, the things I can- 
not speak about are here all the time," and he pointed 
to his broad chest. ^^ Joy for thee, lodes, and thank- 
fulness indeed! Art coming to the milking?" 

She nodded, and they turned towards Scethryg to- 
gether. 

When after breakfast Het and Gwenifer entered the 
turnip field, the mishteer and Ben were already bend- 
ing over their work. 

Gildas had eaten a hurried breakfast, and Het had 
attributed his silence to annoyance at having failed to 
procure laborers to help in the hoeing — an impres- 
sion that Gwenifer did not attempt to correct, being 
thankful that as yet she had not discovered the true 
cause of his depression. 

She had succeeded also in diverting Het's attention 



« ON YOUR PERIL ! '' 246 

at breakfast-time from the mestress's empty chair, by 
launching her on the favorite topic of her own sinful- 
ness and hardness of heart. 

" Yes, in my deed ! " she said. " Evan Roberts will 
have to knock pretty hard at the door of my heart 
before 'twill open ! although, mind you, I'm doing my 
very best to be converted ! 'Tis an odd thing, what- 
ever. But come on, the weeds are growing while we 
are talking. There's late the mestress is to-day ! " she 
added, as she went out, Gwenifer following with a 
heavy heart, for she had not failed to see Gildas's 
troubled looks. 

A sleepless night and a wounded spirit had left their 
marks upon his face ; there were dark rings round his 
eyes, and his lips were set and bloodless. 

" Dear anwyl, there's ill he looks ! " said Het, as 
he passed them in the field. . " Yes, yes, the conscience 
is a troublesome customer to deal with! Oh, you 
may look black, 'merch-i ! but depend upon it, 'tis his 
behavior in Brynzion is weighing on him." . 

Both she and Ben were under the impression that 
they had left the house to the care of the clever mes- 
tress, who would soon set all in order, and bring out 
their ten-o'clock lunch to the fields, as usual ; ignorant 
of what Gwenifer and Gildas knew only too well — 
that the bustling housewife's place on the hearth and 
at the board was vacant, and would never more be 
filled by her. To Gildas, as he bent over his work, 
that sunny morning was so fraught with gall and 
wormwood that not only his mind and heart were ach- 



M6 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

ing, but his very flesh seemed weighed down with a 
mortal sickness, which darkened the fair scene around 
him and made him often pause in his work and lean 
upon his hoe for rest. It was not wounded love that 
was torturing him, so much as burning shame and 
wounded pride; for his love had died out in bitter 
anger and contempt, every scene in the tragedy of the 
night before having increased that contempt and 
crushed his love more completely. But the disgrace, 
the dishonor, the stain upon his honest name, remained 
as a thorn in his flesh from which he tried in vain to 
free himself. 

What should he say when the terrible questicMi was 
asked? "Where is the mestress?" What but the 
truth could be the answer to that? " She is gone, 
gone for ever, from a happy home to shame and dis- 
grace and misery." 

His first impulse was to answer thus, to face the 
worst, to stand up alone, and defy Fate, that had al- 
ready been so cruel to him, to do its worst, for there 
was nothing more, he thought, of misfortune or dis- 
aster that could be heaped upon him! Poverty! 
How well he could have endured it, had he only been 
able to keep his name untarnished ! But shame ! Did 
not the old proverb say, " Gwell angau no chwylidd? " 
" Better death than disgrace." Yes, indeed, a hun- 
dred times ; and under the brilliant morning sunlight 
there was darkness, black as night, in his heart 
Gwenifer, working near, watched him from under her 
white sunbonnet, with cheeks as white and eyes as 



" ON YOUR PERIL ! " 247 

dark-ringed as his own. Oh, how her heart ached 
and bled for him ! 

It was nearing ten o'clock ; she knew it by the look 
of the sky, by the special flowers that waited for that 
hour to open, by the length of her shadow on the 
leaves; oh no! no need of watch or clock to tell her 
how the day was speeding. So, being near the gap 
into the lane, she passed out unnoticed, and hurrying 
back to Scethryg prepared the lunch of tea and bread- 
and-butter and packing it in the usual basket car- 
ried it into the turnip field. 

Gildas had just looked at his watch; yes, it was 
ten o'clock, and he must face the question, " Where is 
the mestress? " But raising his eyes from his hoe, 
they lighted upon Gwenifer coming through the gap 
in the hedge. Straight and slim, and strong of limb, 
she carried the round basket poised on her head, and 
he blessed the welcome sight, thankful for an hour or 
two's reprieve. She lowered her basket, and Het and 
Ben drew near, flinging away their hoes as they came ; 
but Gildas went on working until Gwenifer went up 
to him and laid her hand on his arm as of old. He 
turned his dark face toward her, its expression so al- 
tered that her lips trembled nervously as she said, 
"Will I go and prepare the cawl? " and she pointed 
to Het and Ben. 

" Yes, they will be wanting their dinner; and Gwen- 
ifer, lass, I am not forgetting thy new happiness, 
though I am so silent, thou know'st me — * the hard 
log ' as people call me." 



248 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

^^ I know much better than that, mishteer," said 
Gwenifer. 

Gildas looked at her a moment with a wondering 
gaze. 

" I think the fairies have been teaching thee in thj 
long silence : thy words are slipping from thy tongue 
like music ! " he said. 

As a matter of fact, Gwenifer's speech had returned 
to her without the rough country burr; there was a 
little hesitancy, sometimes followed by a rapid flow 
of retarded words, and the soft tones seemed to have 
caught somewhat of a foreign accent. But of this 
Gwenifer was unconscious; she reveled in her new- 
found power, and while she worked at her hoe she con- 
tinued to murmur softly the words of some quaint old 
hymn, or a rhyme which had impressed her in the 
past. 

" Go thou, and leave the turnips,*' said Gildas. 

She turned away at once, but he called after her, 
and she waited while he took a few steps towards her. 
" Remember ! Nance is gone away, but I don't know 
where, no more dost thou." 

She bowed her head slowly as she turned away. It 
would be long before she could avail herself freely of 
her restored gift of speech ; indeed, she never entirely 
lost the habit of using her expressive eyes and eye- 
brows, as well as her hands in conversation. 

** Well, in the dear's name what's become of Gweni- 
fer? " said Het, shaking the crumbs off her apron as 
she sought her hoe again. "Perhaps the mestress 



" ON YOUR PERIL ! '» 849 

wants her," she muttered to herself, " for its Gweni- 
fer, Gwenifer, from morning till night! Well, we'd 
better set to work, Ben and me, for it seems to me this 
farm is going to be left pretty well to us two ! " 

When noontide arrived, the cawl hung over the fire 
bubbling cheerfully; the bare table was laid with its 
blue plates and basins, and Gwenifer, hearing foot- 
steps approaching over the stubble, hastily filled the 
basins from the big crock, and set the bacon at the 
end of the table. Through the open window came the 
scent of the gorse, borne in on the sea-wind, which had 
risen into a playful gale, tossing the spray into the 
sunshine, and racing the wavelets after each other, as 
though it said, " See what a happy day we are hav- 
ing ! " The smell of the seaweed, the odor of the 
brine, came in too, mingled with the sunshine through 
that open window, striking Gildas Rees, entering at 
the doorway, with an almost bitter sense of its purity 
and freshness, so different to his present state of mind 
and feeling that he almost turned away from the quiet 
calm of the old kitchen with loathing. But he must 
bear it somehow. 

He cast one look round the table where Het and 
Ben were already seated, Gwenifer hovering around 
them. A glance at the vacant chair, one deep breath, 
and Gildas had conquered his weakness and taken his 
seat naturally before the dish of steaming bacon. 

" Where is mestress? " asked Het between the sups 
of her cawl. " Caton pawb! I have not seen her 
since tea-time yesterday ! " 



250 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

^^ She is gone/' answered Gildas slowly, as though 
he counted the words. 

"Gone? Where?" asked Het, whUe Ben stared 
open-mouthed. 

" I don't know," was all Gildas's answer, and Het 
turned to question Gwenifer. 

" Well, bendigedig ! " she said, " was ever such a 
thing? What has become of her? In my deed, 
mishteer, what will we do? Is she lost? She must be 
somewhere ! " 

Again Gildas's bare " I don't know where she is," 
and nothing more. He felt he had a right to say this, 
as when he saw her last Nance had been standing on 
the shingle at Maldraeth, as if undecided what to do, 
and he had yet a gleam of hope that she might have 
changed her mind and turned to NelH Amos's for a 
night's lodging, that she might still return and so save 
her name and his from disgrace. It was only a faint 
hope and one that had in it but little comfort, never- 
theless he felt it justified him in asserting that he was 
(ignorant of her whereabouts, and tlmt for her own sake 
he had better keep his fears to himself for at least 
another day. He had shaken from him the cowardice 
(as he considered it) which had overpowered him at 
first, and was quite prepared to face the talk and gos- 
sip of the neighborhood; so that wlrcn Het followed 
up her fruitless questioning with a proposal that when 
work was over she should go down to the village and 
ask Nelli Amos if she had seen the mestress, he was 
able to answer calmly, " Yes, perhaps thee'dst better 



"ON YOUR PERIL!'' 861 

do that," and the meal proceeded in silence except for 
Het's continued speculations, some of them so ridicu- 
lous that Gwenifer, with all her anxiety, could not 
help smiling. Could the mestress have got shut up in 
one of the outhouses, and failed to make herself 
heard? Could she have met the Ladiwen that was 
said to haunt the moor, and swooned away in terror? 
In her deed, she would go round by the moor, and 
look for her, Ladiwen or not ! And when she returned 
to her hoeing with the rest of the household, she con- 
tinued her rambling suggestions until evening. 

Gildas hoed on silently, only occasionally straight- 
ening himself to direct Ben, or remind him of a duty 
that he wished performed. 

The lad seemed strangely absorbed and silent, keep- 
ing as near his master as his work permitted ; once or 
twice helping him by picking up the hoe which had 
fallen out of his band in a fit of abstraction. 

" Mishteer ! " he said at last, and Gildas looked up 
as though he scarcely knew him. He had liked Ben 
when he had been a careless, whistling farm-boy only, 
but lately, since the " revival " a change had come 
over him; and recalling that he had been present at 
Brynzion on the night when he had been insulted, as 
he considered, by the whole congregation, he had not 
felt so kindly towards the lad, although he had been 
too just to let any change be seen in his manner. For 
Ben was more punctual and steady in the performance 
of his duties than he used to be, and he had certainly 
been more truthful of late. Gildas started when he 



ftSU QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

beard him a second time call, ^^ Mishteer, how far is it 
to Penwcrn? " 

"To Penwem? Thirty miles- What of that?" 
said Gildas. 

" Oh ! then mestress will be a good while away. 
Because I suppose she's gone there. She told me last 
week that she thought she would go one day and see 
her old home." 

"Did she? Told thee? How came that about, 
then? " said Gildas, catching at a straw. 

" Yes," continued Ben. " She was telling me about 
the land over there, so flat and even, and the crops so 
rich, and I asked her, didn't she want to see the place 
sometimes. * Yes,' says the mestress, * and some day, 
soon, I'll take my pack on my back and walk there, 
to meet Dakee, and see the old place again ! ' So no 
doubt she's gone, mishteer." 

" Very like ! *' was all Gildas's answer ; and in his 
heart he knew that the lad meant to throw a gleam of 
light upon his darkness. 

" Perhaps," he thought, " Ben's suggestion is the 
real explanation of Nance's absence. Perhaps in a 
hasty moment she has set off alone to her old home; " 
but then came the memory of the words, " I choose 
him, then ; I choose, I choose Captain Jack ! " 

When the shadows lengthened, and supper-time ar- 
rived, Het hurried through her meal, looking often at 
the old clock in the comer, whose loud ticking seemed 
to resound through the house, so silent were they who 
sat at the table. " Will I go, mishteer? " she said at 



" ON YOUR PERIL ! " 253 

last, ^^ and ask Nelli Amos if she has seen the mes- 
tress? '» 

Gwenifer shrank with repugnance from the 
thought; but Gildas answered, with quiet firmness, 
" Yes, go, if thou pleasest, and tell them all." 

" I tell thee she's gone to Perwem ! " said Ben hotly. 
" No need to ask in the village. Didn't she tell me 
she was going ! '* But Het was not to be delayed, for 
had not mishteer said, " tell them all if thou pleasest? " 
Here was license indeed! And she was not going to 
be balked of the pleasure of being the bearer of such 
news by Ben's foolish suggestions; so as soon as the 
supper was cleared away she set off, at first crossing 
the yard with leisurely steps, but no sooner had she 
gained the lane than her sedate walk changed into a 
run, which brought her quickly to the village, where 
in five minutes she was surrounded by a gaping crowd, 
who thoroughly appreciated her feast of gossip, in 
spite of the pity expressed on all sides for the mes- 
tress. " Pwr thing, f ach ! To think it had come to 
this! To think Gildas Rees could be such a villain 
that she had to leave her home ! Well indeed ! " 

" Didn't I tell you," said Nelli Amos, " that he was 
a cruel, hard man? You'll believe me now. Ach- 
y-fi ! The sooner he clears out from here the better. 
But tell again, Het, where is she gone to? " 

" He says he doesn't know," said Het, " and Gweni- 
fer doesn't know, so there for you ! " 

" But I know," said Ben, suddenly making his ap- 
pearance among them. " Didn't she tell me her 



264 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

own self about a week ago that she was going soon 
to Penwem to see the old place, and to meet her Da- 
kee? 'Tis there she's gone, of course! There^s no 
need for Het to clabber, nor for the mishteer to vex, 
pwr fellow ! " 

"Pwr fellow?" said Nelli Amos, her eyes gleam- 
ing vindictively. " Pwr fellow indeed ! The man 
who drives his young wife away from home, and re- 
sists the Holy Spirit openly — * Pwr fellow,' dost call 
him? and thou, Ben Penpit, converted and all! Ach- 
y-fi ! Come away from Scethryg, my lad, before Gil- 
das Rees turns thee to his wicked ways ! " 

"Wicked ways?" said Ben indignantly. "'Tis 
wicked ways to hound down a good man as thou art 
doing, Nelli Amos. I tell thee if every man was as 
upright as mishteer, there would be no need of being 
converted, and if thou hadst been truly converted thou 
wouldst know better what a good man is." 

At Ben's words, spoken with burning cheeks and 
flashing eyes, a moment's silence fell upon the group, 
a silence of shocked surprise. Could this be Ben Pen- 
pit — who had prayed so eloquently at BrynzicHi, who 
had been looked upon as the flower of the revival, a 
brand snatched from the burning? Was he now go- 
ing to prove himself an apostate? 

" Gildas Rees indeed ! " cried Nelli Amos again, 
bringing her excited face close to Ben's. " A good 
man, dost say? I am ashamed of thee! Wilt ask 
him a few questions for me? Ask him when he was 
last in a place of worship? Ask him what hQ has done 



" ON YOUR PERIL ! '* 255 

with his wife? and ask him, how is he going to get 
his harvest in? There's three nice questions for thy 
good man." And she laughed maHciously, but Ben 
only whistled as he turned away. Was he forgetting 
the Diwygiad, or was he putting its best principles 
into practice? However that might be, nothing 
availed to assuage the storm of indignation which 
Het's news had aroused. All Tregildas was moved, 
and in every one of its fifteen houses the mestress's 
disappearance formed the supreme topic of conversa- 
tion for many days to come, the women without ex- 
ception attributing her flight to her husband's hard- 
ness and cruelty. Some of the men more lenient in 
their judgment, thought probably there were faults 
on both sides, and strongly advised non-interference, 
as the quarrels of a young married couple were soon 
made up, and no doubt the mestress would return 
when she had " stopped a bit in her old home." 

Meanwhile, Gildas, when supper was over, had 
lighted his pipe at the wood fire, and leaving the house 
had turned away towards the moor, where a fresh 
wind was blowing from the sea, that tossed and foamed 
with the boisterous glee of a nor'-wester that has not 
its usual serious intentions. " I mean no harm to- 
day ! " it seemed to say : " only a game of play with 
the waves and the seagulls ! " and Gildas, well ac- 
quainted with every sound and sight of the broad bay, 
understood what the wind was saying, but only looked 
out to sea with never a smile on his stem set lips. 
With his hands thrust deep in his pockets he passed 



256 QUEEN OP THE RUSHES 

over tne springy turf, unconscious whither his steps 
were leading him, until at last the deep channel of the 
little Erva stopped him where it fell over the cliffs to 
the sands below. He gazed a moment at its swift- 
flowing waters before he turned and retraced his steps. 
Up and down, backwards and forwards, he continued 
to pace, until the sun had long set and the moor was 
growing grey in the^ twilight, unconscious of all but 
his anger and his bitter thoughts; until suddenly 
catching sight of Gwenifer's brown cot, he stopped to 
look at it, for there was Gwenifer herself returning 
from the farm and lifting the latch of her door. He 
pictured her entering the empty cottage, kindling the 
fire of furze knots, turning gloom to brightness, and 
drawing the old oak stool to the cosy hearth. Oh 
for a few words of cheer and comfort from her! 
Should he follow her to the quaint low-browed chim- 
ney, and ask her help and guidance in his difficulties? 
No, he mtist not, he could not, he dared not seek the 
comfort of a word from her, for deep within his heart 
some secret instinct forbade his disclosing to Gwenifer 
the faults and sins of the woman whom he had chosen 
for his wife. 

It would be an act of disloyalty, from which he 
shrank with distaste. " Not until I am certain, what- 
ever,*' he thought ; and even then, how could he sully 
this white-souled creature with the recital of such a 
story ! No, he must bear his trouble alone. His face 
grew darker, his eyes flashed, his jaw showed out more 
square than ever, and, as if coming to a sudden detei^ 



" ON YOUR PERIL ! " 267 

mination, he turned round and walked hurriedly to- 
wards Scethryg. 

Into the old kitchen, lit up now by its big log fire, 
where n'wncwl Sam sat by the hearth enjoying his 
evening pipe, Het returned from the village, clatter- 
ing in and out of the dairy as of old. It was a bright 
and glowing scene, but Gildas saw nothing of it, as he 
went straight towards the old bookcase desk and 
opened the lid. 

" Caton pawb! " said n'wncwl Sam, " what is this 
I hear, that Nance has gone away ? Where, then, in 
the dear's name? " 

** I know nothing in the world," said Gildas, " but 
stop a bit till I finish here, and I will talk to you," and 
sitting down to the desk, he drew pen and paper to- 
ward him, and began to write; nVncwl Sam having 
perforce to be satisfied with his own ejaculations and 
guesses, aided by Het's rambling remarks. 

Writing a letter was not a simple affair to Gildas 
Rees, although he was by no means an ignorant or il- 
literate farmer. He read his weekly newspaper with 
interest and pleasure, forming his own opinions upon 
its political and religious views ; but he generally sat 
long with his pen in his hand, gazing at nothing, be- 
fore he was able to tackle a letter. This evening, 
however, he seemed to find no difficulty, but dashed 
straight into the subject. 

" You villain ! you villain ! " he wrote. 

" These few lines from Gildas Rees, Scethryg, to 
tell you what he thinks of you, and to bid you beware 



«68 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

of coming into his presence, or on his lands again — 
on your peril. Do you hear? on your peril." 

GiLDAS R££S." 

He folded and addressed it in his round plain hand- 
writing to — 

Captain John Dames^ 

Of the " LUiwen,'' 

Cardiff Docks. 
and hurried out to Ben's sleeping-room, a mere cup- 
board, boarded off from the hay-loft, where he was 
startled to see a light twinkling through the gaping 
boards. Ben was supposed to retire with the sun, or 
if later, to undress in the dark, for a light was not 
allowed so near the hay-loft; the glimmering spark 
therefore must be extinguished at once, and Gildas 
approached over the hay, his footsteps unheard by 
Ben. He stopped a moment where the crack in the 
boards gave a full view of the tiny room. What could 
the lad be doing? He was sitting on the edge of his 
rough wooden bedstead ; in his left hand he held an old 
blacking-bottle, in which a candle was stuck, by the 
light of which he was reading a Bible, with a serious, 
earnest face. The mishteer, astonished at the sight, 
stood still to watch, while the lad who had had the rep- 
utation of being the " wickedesl in the parish " read on 
apparently with interest and pleasure. " The revi- 
val ! " was Gildas's first thought, and with it came 
the wave of resentment which the memory of the 
Brynzion prayer meeting always roused within him. 

But surely that placid, calm face, that changed look 



** ON YOUR PERIL ! " 259 

of *' sweet reasonableness," instead of the careless 
inanity which used to be the expression of Ben's face, 
spoke of some strange alteration in the lad. Prom 
Gildas's sore, embittered heart the contempt and 
hatred faded away, and he continued to watch the 
boy, his face showing both interest and surprise. 

An instinctive feeling told him that, " revival, or no 
revival," here was the real thing! the changing of a 
wild and reckless youth into an earnest, thoughtful 
man. Could this be Ben — the roystering, drunken 
blackguard of the fairs and markets? Closing has 
book at last, he blew out his candle; but the little 
room was not altogether dark, for the rising moon 
shone in upon the truckle bed and upon the lad's face 
as he knelt down for a few moments before getting 
into bed. 

For the life of him Gildas could not disturb him, 
but waited silently, while a few simple ejaculations 
rather than prayers expressed Ben's inmost feelings. 
The last of these reached the mishteer's ear through 
the rough bare boards, and fell with a soothing spell 
upon his troubled spirit, as though his mother's hand 
had touched his forehead. 

" And oh, Gk)d ! help the mishteer ! " asked Ben ; 
" because he's in sore trouble, and I know it's not his 
fault!" 

Then, after a moment's silence Gildas knocked 
softly in the darkness before entering. 

" Ben ! Wilt dress, and go down to the village 
for me? " he asked, and Ben started up in bed. 



260 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

''BH ahwr*, mbhteer. What for?" he asked, 
jumiHng out. 

" To carry this to the poet. And I don't want any 
one to know the letter is from me, remember, or else 
I would go myself. Here it is, on the window board. 
I can trust thee, Ben." 

"Well, b't shwr!" said Ben, shuffling into his 
clothes ; and Gildas went backwards down the hay-loft 
ladder, well knowing that in a few minutes his letter 
would be safe in the postbox in the village and beyond 
recall. He remembered the forbidden light which 
Ben had held so near the hay, but he said not a word 
of reproof, nor ever let Ben know that he had watched 
him through the partition. 



CHAPTER XV 

SEA WBACK 

On a sunny morning in the following month, when 
the barley was ripe in the field beyond the creek, Gil- 
das Rees, with a small band of reapers, crossed the 
shining water in Jerri's boat, as his father had done 
before him, so many years ago. Jerri himself was 
one of the reapers, having dared to defy the ill-will 
of his neighbors, in his desire to help the mishteer, for 
he had a heart somewhere under that sea-stained old 
blue jersey; and that organ had warmed up latterly 
in an unusual degree towards the man whom everybody 
else had turned against. Moreover, the strong, almost 
sacred, claims of the harvest had appealed to him 
as they had to the rest of the villagers, though with 
them the distrust and suspicion with which they looked 
upon Gildas had outweighed every other consideration. 
They risked the danger of being turned out of their 
homes rather than help the man who had willfully 
opposed and rejected the more sacred claims of the 
revival and he had come very near being left with- 
out hands to gamer the crops, which Nature seemed 
to have lavished upon him with even more generosity 
than ever before. 
" Look at the barley, woman ! " Jerri had said one 
S61 



262 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

morning on the kiln, where Nelli Amos was basking 
in the sun. ^' And the wheat-field next to it. Didst 
ever see such a crop? And if the Lord is willing to 
give him such a harvest, surely we can help to gather 
it in." 

" Why art so angry with the mishteer? '' said Ben, 
stopping on his way to the blacksmith's. " What has 
he done to thee? Dost not remember how kind he 
was to thee last winter when thou wert sick?" 

" Oh, yes ; I remember the bits of scraps and the 
shilling he sent me ; and wouldn't I pay it back now in 
harvesting, if he had behaved himself? I have a good 
memory, thank God, and I remember, too, how his 
father turned my mother out of the house one day, 
because she spoke her mind to him about the path 
through the cornfield which he wanted to shut up. 
Oh, yes ! I remember it all." 

" Why, Gildas was only two years old then," said 
Jerri. " What could he help that ? " 

** Two years old ! I don't care if he was twenty." 

Ben turned away impatiently, but Jerri continued: 

" Come on, Nelli fach, fetch thy sickle, and leave it 
between the mishteer and his conscience what he has 
done with his wife." 

What he has done with his wife ! It had come to 
that in the village, for Gildas's continued silence had 
roused all sorts of suspicions, and he had come to be 
looked upon as a man of dark deeds, whom it was bet- 
ter to shun as much as possible; so that when he 
stooped his tall shoulders to enter the low-browed door- 



SEA WRACK 263 

ways, in search of his usual complement of laborers, 
they had one and all refused, not openly and flatly, 
but with well-feigned excuses and looks of distrust. 

Gildas saw it all, but was too proud to urge his re- 
quest, or even to show that he suspected the truth. 

"Well, b't shwr!" he said, "if that is the case, 
you can't come," and he had been prepared to at- 
tack the barley-field with only Ben and Het and Gwen- 
ifer to help him, until Jerri, shipping his oars, spat 
in his hands, and declared his intention of joining the 
reapers. 

" Will you have me, mishteer ? '' he said ; " I*m bet- 
ter at the boats than in the fields, I know, but " 

" Yes, yes," said Gildas ; " FU be glad of thy help." 
And they had begun their way from the rocks to the 
field, when a loud " Hoi, hoi ! " from the other side 
of the creek made them halt and turn round. 

"Who can they be?" said Jerri, in astonishment, 
and Gildas felt a strong sense of relief when he saw 
two men evidently waiting to be rowed over. 

" 'Tis Jones Bryndu and Seth his servant," cried 
Ben joyfully. 

" Jari ! so 'tis," said Jerri, pushing off^ from the 
rocks. "Well, there's somebody don't think so bad 
of you, whatever, mishteer ! " 

** Stop, I'll come across with you," said Gildas, step- 
ping into the boat. ** And what do the others think 
of me?" he asked suddenly, and somewhat to Jerri's 
confusion. 

** Now, truth, Jerri ! " he added, ** thou know'st I 



264 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

hate a lie! What evil do they think of me? Make 
haste, or we*ll be across." 

" Well, then, mishteer, to tell the truth, they think 
you have been hard and cruel to your wife, because 
you didn't like the revival, and she did; and thej 
are all saying that it's very strange what has became 
of her, and " 

"There's enough!" said Gildas. "What matter 
what they say?" 

" Well ! If you can stop their mouths with a word, 
mishteer, why not say it? That's what I am thinking. 
'Tis plain Jones Bryndu isn't thinking so bad of 
you, though ! " 

" Think so bad of me? What dost mean, man? " 

" Well, that you have got rid of the mestress some- 
how, but in my deed I'm not believing them, what- 



ever 



I" 



" Good God ! Do they think I have done her any 
harm? that I have murdered her? " 

For the first time he realized the suspicions that 
hung over him, the dark thoughts that lurked in men's 
minds; and for a moment the shock unnerved him, 
and his strong arm trembled on the oar. 

Before they reached the rocks on the other side of 
the creek, however, the sturdy independence of his 
nature reasserted itself, and the strong antagonism 
which the boycotting he had been subjected to had 
aroused in him awoke in full force in his heart. 

He had done nothing wrong. Should he lay poor 
Nance's sins before these malicious gossips, and ex- 



SEA WRACK 265 

pose his own disgrace for their contempt? Never! 
And he stepped ashore firmly determined to keep his 
own counsel, and let Tregildas say what it would. 

** Well, in my deed, this is kind ! '' he said, laying 
his hand upon Jones Bryndu's shoulder. " What will 
I say? Only that Ben and I will be ready, sunlight 
or moonlight, to help with Bryndu harvest." 

** Twt, twt," said Jones, stepping into the boat, fol- 
lowed by his man. ** 'Twas hearing what heavy 
crops you had this year made me think of it, and the 
mestress saying, * Gro, of course. Will ! for Gildas 
Rees is always ready with a helping hand.' Well, 
well ! " he exclaimed as they landed under the barley- 
field, and looked up at its waving gold. " Here's a 
crop ! Indeed, I never saw a better ! " and doffing 
their coats, he and his man were ready to set to, as 
soon as it was settled who should be leader, and strike 
the first blow at the ripe com — this point being al- 
ways considered important in the harvest proceedings. 

" Wilt thou, Seth, be leader? " said Gildas, in def- 
erence to the man's greater age and experience. 

Seth accepted the honor with due seriousness, and, 
under their gleaming sickles, the field was soon marked 
with lines of fallen grain. 

They were too busily occupied during the first few 
hours for any conversation —• moreover, Gildas and 
his friend worked somewhat apart; but when the 
morning waned a little, and Gwenifer appeared 
through the gap with her well-filled basket of provi- 
sions poised on her head, while from her right hand 



266 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

hung a bright tin can of steaming tea, the reapers 
were nothing loth to drop their sickles and draw to- 
wards the shade of the hedge where she was already 
spreading the food. 

" Hello, Gwenif er ! '' said Jones Bryndu, " how art, 
'merch-i? There's glad we are, Betsy and me, to hear 
thou canst talk now like any other woman '* ; for the 
news of Gwenifer's restored powers had spread like 
wildfire through the neighborhood. " On my word, 
lass, thou'rt the prettiest. flower amongst the barley! 
Eh, Gildas?" 

Gwenifer smiled, and blushed a rosy red, wonder- 
ing why so many people praised her beauty now, 
when her heart was full of pain and sorrow, whereas 
no one had noticed her in the days of old, when she 
had roamed the hills and fields of Scethryg content 
and happy, though silent. She knew not that every 
sorrow patiently borne adds a fresh grace to the hu- 
man face ; and so she wondered as she spread her sim- 
ple store in the shade of the hedge. 

She had been quick to notice that when Jones of 
Bryndu, in his rustic fashion, had drawn Gildas's 
attention to her by his " Eh, Gildas? " the latter had 
fixed his eyes upon her absently, and as if his thoughts 
had been preoccupied ; but she had not seen how the 
hard, set look on his lips had softened as she turned 
away. 

" I don't see much change in her," he said, as he 
and his friend stretched themselves in the shadow of 
the high hedge and watched the girl as she left the 



SEA WRACK «67 

field. *^Gwemfe^ is like the sky above us, always the 
same." 

" Always the same ! " laughed Jones. " No indeed, 
then; the sky is very changeable with us in these 
parts, whatever." 

" Oh, Gwenif er has her shadows too, and her show- 
ers sometimes, I expect," answered Gildas, smiling at 
his own bad simile ; and they set to at the simple meal 
with appetites that are often absent from richer re- 
pasts. 

The brown bread and butter, the hunches of cheese, 
the well-made tea, were all that they ought to be ; but 
as the meal proceeded both men became silent and 
preoccupied, for in the minds of both the subject of 
Nance's disappearance was uppermost. 

** Come ! " said Jones at last, " let us go to the 
shade of the thorn yonder, and let us have a talk about 
this strange thing that has happened." And he be- 
gan the way to the one tall bush in the edge, Gildas 
following slowly. 

" It is no use talking," said the latter, flinging him- 
self down beside his friend. " I have nothing to say 
to you, only what I have said a score of times. Nance 
is gone, and I don't know where she is." 

" But, for sure, you have some guess, man ! " 

Gildas plucked at the dandelions and made no reply 
to this, and Jones continued, " Most like you don't 
know how the whole parish is fermenting and talking 
about it, and a word from you would stop the talk; 
because, hark you, Gildas Rees, nothing that they 



268 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

can saj will make me believe what they are hinting, 
that you have got rid of your wife in some bad way 
— drowned her or pushed her over the cliflF or stran- 
gled her! What know they?'* 

" Do they think that of me? '' said Gildas, " and 
do you, William Jones?" And he sat up suddenly, 
leaning on his elbows. 

^^ Caton pawb, no ! Betsy and I we know you too 
well, man. Haven't we been friends since we were 
boys in school, you and me? Don't I tell you, I 
wouldn't believe if you told me yourself that you had 
been cruel to her. Ach-y-fi! Shame that any man 
should think such a thing! But, look you, Gildas, 
'tis enough to make strangers and enemies think bad 
of a man when he won't say anything to clear him- 
self but * I don't know, I don't know ! ' If you can't 
tell them where your wife is, tell them where you think 
she is." 

"Let people think what they like of me," said 
Gildas, his face falling into the set hard lines that 
had become habitual to it of late. " I will never say 
more than Nance is gone away from Scethryg, and 
I don't know where she is. Look you, friend ; I will 
say one thing to you that I won't to any one else. I 
have done nothing wrong in this matter." 

" That I know right well, without your word for 
it," said Jones. " But haven't you left something 
v/ndone? Have you tried to find her? Have you 
caused search to be made for her? " 

" No," answered Gildas. 



SEA WRACK 269 



U ' 



Diwss anwl, man! Why not, then? Don't you 
want her to come back to you? " 

^^ No," said Gildas again, still plucking at the 
flowers. 

"Ts, ts! Well, in my deed, 'tis pity! Well, 
there's no use asking you, I see ; so when Betsy asks 
me what did you say I can only answer, * Nothing, 
and I believe you are right in your guess, Betsy, as 
you always are.' I believe sometimes Betsy is * hys- 
bys,' you know, she is so clear-sighted. * Tell you 
what I think, Will,' says she ^" 

" Don't tell me what she said ! " answered Gildas, 
standing up and taking his sickle, as if to end the 
conversation. " / daresay she is rights but I will 
never say a word against Nance. So there's an end 
of it, Jones, and if people like to talk, Well indeed, 
let them ; 'tis no concern of mine ! " 

" But, 'machgen-i," said Jones, as they drew near 
the other reapers, " they'll make it your concern if 
they go to Oliver, the lawyer, about it! " 

Gildas only stooped to his barley, but after a few 
strokes of his sickle he straightened himself again, 
and said slowly: 

" I am thankful to you, my dear friend, for your 
kindness. I will never forget it, but don't ask any 
more questions ; 'twill be of no use." 

" Only this one," said Jones. " Are you sure she 
is not at her father's house, away in Glamorgan? " 

" She may be," said Gildas. " That is what I am 
thinking sometimes, but I know nothing." 



270 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

" Know nothing! Know nothing! " said Jones, los- 
ing his patience a little. " Are you mad, man? For 
God's sake say something to clear this up. You are 
doing yourself a lot of harm ; perhaps you are twist- 
ing a rope that will hang you ! " 

Again that hard, mirthless laugh from Gildas as he 
answered : " Well indeed ! Perhaps Gildas Rees, 
Scethryg, will hang from the gallows in the end! I 
wouldn't wonder! " 

" Well," said his friend, " I always used to think 
you had twice my sense, Gildas ; but now, in my deed, 
I think I have double yours." 

An unusual silence had fallen on the barley-field, 
where laughter and jollity generally lightened the 
work, and only the stroke of the " crymans " broke 
the stillness, as swathe after swathe of the ripe com 
fell before the reapers, for every one's heart was filled 
with doubt, if not suspicion. Jones Bryndu tried in 
vain to dispel the gloom with a joke or a merry repar- 
tee, but in vain, and the blue cornflowers and the 
golden marigolds fell with the barley in solemn silence. 

When at last the shadows lengthened and the long 
day was drawing to a close, Gildas straightened him- 
self, and, looking towards the blue hills that lay away 
beyond the moor, said, " Who is this coming down 
through Pare melin?" and every questioning face 
turned to the north, and watched while a brown stoop- 
ing figure drew nearer and nearer. Now it had 
reached the moor, and was crossing it with bent shoul- 
ders and lagging gait. 



SEA WRACK 271 

** 'Tis Hezek,'' cried Ben ; and every eye was turned 
upon Gildas to see how he would take this new de- 
velopment in the mystery that was exercising their 
minds so much. 

" Hezek? So it is, in my deed ! " said JoneslJ look- 
ing also at Gildas, who stood watching the old brown 
figure with a white troublejj face. 

" 'Tis Hezek ! " he said, as the old man turned into 
the harvest-field. Conscious that the reapers were all 
watching him, he yet forgot for a moment that he 
was not alone. "Poor old man! How will I tell 
him? " he said half to himself, and thrusting back his 
hat he wiped his heated forehead with his red hand- 
kerchief. " Fd rather than fifty pounds if I was 
through with the job of telling him." 

** Will I go and break the news to him ? " said Jones, 
eager to help, seeing how hard a task it was for his 
friend. 

" No, no; I wouldn't like him to hear it first from a 
stranger," answered Gildas. " He is fond of me, 
poor fellow ; I must tell him myself." And throwing 
away his sickle he advanced towards the old man, who 
had now reached the middle of the field. 

"Fond of him? Yes, be bound!" said Jones. 
" The warmest heart that ever beat has Gildas Rees ! 
Don't I know him since he was this height; how ever 
he has got into this muddle ! But listen you now be- 
fore he comes back, friends. Whatever has hap- 
pened, he's not to blame ! " 

** Why doesn't he speak plain, then? " was the only 



J87« QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

anBwer as they bent to their sickles, and that came 
from Jerri. 

^' Here they come! " he added, as the two figures 
approached. 

" Wb heart has failed him,*' thought Jones ; " he 
could not tell the old man." For though the latter 
came very slowly towards them, leaning heavily upon 
Gildas's arm, his face was wreathed in smiles and wore 
a jaunty look, as though he had just heard something 
pleasant, if not amusing. 

" Well, well ! '' he said. ** Reaping begun ! And 
how are you all? Pll bring my cryman to-morrow; 
but to-night Fm tired, and will go home to bed. And 
so Nance is away, and the harvest begun! Well, 
well, she'll be home to-morrow, no doubt! Oh yes, 
she'll be home ! She'll be home to-morrow ! " he said, 
with a laugh that ill suited his drawn face and the 
hectic flush of excitement that reddened his cheeks. 
^^ And Gildas doesn't know where she is ! Naughty 
little lass to frighten him so ! But we'll go down to 
Maldraeth to-morrow, 'machgen-i, and we'll find her 
looking for shells on the beach. Yes, yes, we'll find 
her there." 

" Come, then," said Gildas, ** we'll go home to the 
storws; n'wncwl Sam is lonely without you, and you 
shall go to bed after tea, for I'm sure you are tired." 
And they turned away together, Hezek still leaning 
heavily on Gildas's arm and continuing to mutter to 
himself, " Yes, yes, she'll come home to-morrow ! '* 

When Gildas had done all he could for him, Hie oU 



SEA WRACK 273 

man fell asleep, still muttering to himself, ^^ She'll be 
home to-morrow ! " 

"Poor old fellow! he's badly hit!" said Jones 
Bryndu, when Gildas returned to the field. 

** Yes," answered Gildas, " but I don't think he Is 
quite understanding his trouble, though I tried to tell 
him carefully. It seems as if a cloud was over his 
mind." (" And indeed, 'tis the best thing that could 
happen to him," he thought.) 

" Come on, 'tis supper-time," he said ; and they all 
followed into the big Scethryg kitchen, where the red 
sun was making flickering patterns on the stone floor 
of the ivy leaves that trailed over the window. Gwen- 
ifer had laid the supper on the long bare table, and 
now waited to serve the tired reapers. She had been 
startled an hour earlier by Gildas's sudden appear- 
ance at the door. 

" Gwenifer," he said, " the old man has come home, 
very tired and foot-sore. He won't have any supper, 
and I have helped him to his bed. Wilt take him a 
cup of tea? — perhaps thou canst persuade him to 
drink it. I have told him Nance has gone, but he is 
dazed like, and says, ^ Never mind, she'll come home 
to-morrow.' Poor old man ! " 

" Hezek come back ! Oh, poor old man ! Yes, Pll 
go to him, mishteer," she answered, while she poured 
out the tea already made for herself; and she hurried 
out to the storehouse, to find the old man stretched on 
his bed, the pink quilt spread over him by Gildas's 
careful hands. He was looking at n'wncwl Sam, who 



874 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

sat smoking by the hearth, repeating continually, 
" Never mind, she'll be back to-morrow ! " and he re- 
ceived Gwenifer as though he had never left the old 
storehouse. " Tea, 'merch-i? " he said, as she lifted 
him into a sitting posture. 

" Yes, and this nice bread-and-butter,'* said Gweni- 
fer; and the old man showed no surprise at her re- 
stored speech. 

" Well indeed ! I suppose it is tea-time, and I have 
had no dinner. The little lass will be home to-morrow 
to tea. Eh, 'merch-i?" 

N'wncwl Sam, who had taken his cue from Grildas, 
answered for Gwenifer. " B't shwr, b't shwr. She'll 
be home to-morrow ! " and Gwenifer, to hide her tears, 
hurried out to refill the empty cup. When the men 
came in from the fields she scarcely dared to look at 
the mishteer, for well she realized how Hezek's return 
must have put an end to his hopes that Nance was at 
her father's house, and must have brought home the 
fact that she was lost to him for ever. 

The reapers were loud in their expressions of pity 
for the old man, and Jones Bryndu said as he took 
his departure: 

" Let him be to-night, Gildas ; sleep will make him 
either clearer in his head to-morrow, or else more 
dazed and contented ; " and so he was left to himself 
for the night, though once in the moonlight a slender 
figure crossed the moor and crept up the storehouse 
steps, and after a long look at the wrinkled, sleeping 
face, retreated noiselessly down the crooked steps and 



SEA WRACK 275 

turned towards the cottage on the moor which she 
called home. 

In the brilliant light of the full moon the sea 
showed blue beyond the moor, where every little blade 
of grass and sprig of heather held its silver drop of 
dew; only the roar of the surf on Maldraeth broke 
the silence; and as she walked alone over the broad 
stretch of moorland it was no wonder that she fell 
into a deep reverie, one of the fits of musing which, 
in her silent past, had taken the place of social com- 
munion with her fellow-beings. What had become of 
Nance? was a question that continually haunted her. 
Was it possible that Captain Jack, who had asked her 
to be his wife, could have intentionally lured Nance 
away from her home? No, she could not believe it. 
Her pure mind refused to harbor such a thought — 
and yet Nance had rowed away in the darkness ! And 
what — oh, what meant those terrible screams? And 
she lay long awake that night looking at the round 
moon that sailed through the dark blue sky attended 
by one bright star, and they had passed across her 
tiny window before sleep had at last fallen upon her. 
She awoke again before many hours had gone by, and 
before the lark had risen from her nest she was out 
with her milking-pail, for there was Hezek to be cared 
for before she began her day's work. He slept late, 
according to Scethryg calculation, for it was near 
eight o'clock when he awoke and sat up with a 
pleased smile and a contented look on his gentle face. 

** Nance is coming to-morrow ! " he said as he rose 



276 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

and began to dress himself ; and when he had eaten his 
breakfast, Gwenif er attending to his wants with extra 
tenderness, he shouldered his wallet and set off as 
usual in search of herbs, returning in the evening ap; 
parently quite content with his empty bag, and the 
happy prospect of Nance's return " to-morrow." 

It was the second day of the harvest, and the labor- 
ers were beginning to look at their watches and to dry 
their foreheads, for the afternoon was waning and 
supper could not be far off. 

Jones Bryndu and his man had come again to help 
Gildas, and had promised to come till the harvest was 
over, as Bryndu crops were quite a fortnight later 
than Scethryg's. " Well, well ! ** he said, his eyes 
fixed on the moor. " Here's somebody else coming to 
help us. 'Tisn*t old Hezek again. Who can it be? 
There's more than one ; they're running ! One, two, 
three, four. What can they want? " And he saw, as 
the line of moving figures advanced, that they were 
headed by Nelli Amos, who seemed to have regained 
the agility of youth, as she outstripped the others and 
came down the harvest-field, her grey hair blown about 
by the sea wind, her eyes flashing, her finger pointing 
at Gildas. 

"What are you doing here?" she said, while the 
villagers who followed her crowded round with excited 
faces. " What ! you gathering your harvest in, and 
your poor wife lying dead on Maldraeth? Come 
down, for shame, and tell us what are we to do with 
the body ! Ach-y-fi ! you villain ! Ach-y-fi ! " 



SEA WRACK «77 

"The body?" gasped Gildas. "What do they 
mean, Jones? I — I — I am rather moidered, I 
think," and he sat down on the hedge-side, drawing 
his handkerchief over his white face. " What do they 
mean?" 

"What do they mean?" screamed Nelli Amos. 
" Come down to Maldraeth and see, man ! Isn't your 
poor wife lying there? what the sea and the fish have 
left of her ! Her blue gown torn to ribbons and her 
beautiful yellow hair spread out on the sand ! Och-i, 
och-i ! That my eye should see such a sight ! Come 
down, man, and tell us how she got into the water, 
or we'll see if the crowner can make you speak." 

" Yes, I will come," said Gildas, rising slowly and 
stiffly, " I will come, b't shwr ! " and he began to put 
on his coat with hands that trembled. 

" I will come with you," said Jones, throwing down 
his sickle. " What is the meaning of this noise? " he 
added, turning to the excited villagers ; " is this the 
way you bring such a terrible piece of news to a neigh- 
bor? Shame upon you! Is this the way you show 
your Diwygiad?" 

For a moment they seemed abashed, but Nelli Amos 
soon recovered herself. ** We don't show it by con- 
sorting with men who get rid of their wives in the 
night, and then say they don't know where they are ! " 
she said. 

"Come," said Gildas, recovering his firmness. 
"Come on and let them talk. Poor Nance, poor 
Nance ! " and drawing his hat over his eyes, he began 



278 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

his way towards the rocks, going down to the creek 
and rowing across the tide to the village, where, on 
the beach, they saw a group of people awaiting them. 
Jones Bryndu was a man much respected amongst 
them, so that when they saw he was Gildas's compan- 
ion, they received them with a more sympathetic man- 
ner than they were prepared to accord to Gildas, if he 
had come alone. 

" This is a shocking thing," he said, as he stepped 
ashore, " and I am sure you will all sympathize with 
an old friend and neighbor in his trouble ! '' 

There was a slight murmur of condolence from 
some of the group, as Gildas leaped out of the boat, 
but the greater number drew back as if afraid of 
committing themselves. 

" *Tis a dreadful thing, indeed," said one, " and we 
want to know how it happened. A young and happy 
wife (or ought to be happy) to be lost all at once, 
and then to be found a month after on the sands, 
drowned and sodden ! Dear anwl ! Such a thing has 
never happened at Tregildas before. Well, we have 
done what we could; we have sent for the crowner, 
and Ebben the carpenter has offered the cof&n which 
he had ready for Jane Lewis's daughter; and we'd 
better take his offer, I'm thinking, for the mestress 
is lying on Maldraeth, poor thing, and we want to 
know where to take her." And they crowded round 
Gildas with curious eyes, in which there was no spark 
of sympathy. 

" Yes, that will be best," said Jones. " Go jon 



SEA WRACK 279 

home to Scethryg, 'machgen-i. I will see to all for 

Gildas thankfully took his advice, and in less than 
an hour all that remained of the storm-tossed body 
was borne to Scethryg and laid in the big barn, for, 
as there was only one living-room in the farmhouse, 
and the stairs were narrow and crooked, Jones Bryndu 
had decided, for sanitary reasons also, that this was 
the best arrangement. 

It would be useless to try to describe Gildas Rees's 
feelings as he sat on his darkened hearth. The dread 
of shame and disgrace he was getting accustomed to, 
as it had hovered over him, waking or sleeping, for 
weeks; it was now giving place to pity and sorrow 
for Nance's sad fate, and to indignation against the 
neighbors who could suspect him of having compassed 
the death of his wife. 

He was quite alone, not even Gwenifer hovered 
about, for, fearing to intrude upon his hours of 
mourning, she withdrew as much as possible to the 
solitude of her own cottage, where alone and undis- 
turbed she thought over the strange events that had 
come into her once placid life. 

Meanwhile at Scethryg the next day had dawned, 
a day which Gildas never recalled without a shudder. 

The inquest was to be held at ten o'clock, the 
funeral as soon after as practicable, presumably be- 
fore sunset. Soon after breakfast he saw that the 
farmyard was filling with a somber throng, gathered 
together from the remotest parts of the parish, for 



280 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

the talc oi Nance's disappearance and the suspiciom 
of foul play connected with it had spread far and 
wide. 

That hour was one of extreme bitteniess to the 
proud, reserved man, who sat on the hearth in his best 
clothes, looking gloomily into the burning logs. 

In his loneliness he longed for Gwenif er's soothing 
presence, but remembered with a groan that her heart, 
too, had gone forth to the sailor, and a longing for 
vengeance burnt up red-hot within him. He was 
roused by a knock at the door, which Het, dressed in 
the blackest of black clothes and with a suitable ex- 
pression of countenance, opened to admit Mr. Bowen, 
the coroner, who, with his clerk, had driven n(»selessly 
over the stubble yard. Gildas started to his feet as 
he entered, and the coroner shook hands with him in 
his usual friendly manner. 

"I suppose the jury have not come yet — I am 
rather early," he said, sitting down on the settle op- 
posite Gildas. ^* This is a sad thing, Rees," he said, 
sympathetic but guarded. 

They were interrupted by the arrival of the jury, 
who, in fact, had been waiting an eager half -hour in 
the lane. 

The coroner looked at his watch. "Ten o'clock; 
we had better adjourn to the bam. You will have 
to identify the body," he said — ^^ a trying ordeal, of 
course, but necessary " ; and, leading the way, he was 
followed by Gildas and the jurymen. 

In the old dim bam, resting on its trestle, stood the 



SEA WRACK 281 

long yellow bo^, so strange, yet so familiar, to us all. 
On the closed lid lay a wreath of harebells ; and, with 
a pang, Gildas remembered they had been Nance^s 
favorite flowers, and how often in the days of his 
wooing he had told her that their color was that of 
her own eyes. Gwenifer, surely, must have placed 
them where they were ! 

On the further side the big bam door was closed 
and bolted, but it seemed as if the sunshine wished 
to enter and gild that somber scene, for through the 
ftnger-hole a blue shaft of light poured in, shedding 
a golden radiance over the coffin and sparkling on its 
metal ornaments. 

There was a little shuffling of feet as the lid was 
removed, and the gruesome wreck of humanity within 
was disclosed. One by one the jurymen approached 
and cast one glance upon the body; and, when his 
turn came, Gildas too drew near with a firm step and 
a face over which he had drawn that cold, impene- 
trable mask which so often hid his deepest feelings. 

And when at last the whole gathering returned to 
the big kitchen, and the coffin lid was screwed down 
upon all that had been saved from the sea, Gildas re- 
turned with the others, thankful that hitherto at least 
he had been able to endure in silence. 



CHAPTER XVI 

THE INQUEST 

When Gildas found his old familiar kitdien filled with 
strange faces — the coroner sitting at the long table, 
his clerk beside him — he made his way to the hearth 
like a man in a dream. Everything seemed unreal 
to him, and, strange to say, it affected him little more 
than a dream would have done. He saw the blue busi- 
ness papers on the table, and beard the coroner's open- 
ing remarks without realizing their import, so busy 
was his mind with the problem of how to speak the 
truth, and yet conceal Nance's folly. A tender pity 
for her filled his heart, but not even this could rekindle 
the love which had turned to ashes. He saw that his 
own name had already been hopelessly blackened, but 
he was doggedly determined that no word of his 
should smirch Nance's reputation. " Poor Nance ! " 
He repeated the words over and over again and again 
to himself. 

" You have seen the body lying in your barn. Do 
you identify it as that of your wife, Anne Rees?" 
asked the coroner. 

Gildas looked at him as if dazed. " Yes, sir; but 

the face " 

288 



THE INQUEST 888 

** The face, of course, is injured beyond recogni- 
tion. Have you therefore any doubt? " 

^' Oh no, no doubt ; it is poor Nance. I recognized 
her hair and her gown. Oh yes, 'tis her, poor thing. " 

" Have you any idea how she got into the water? " 

"No, indeed I have not," said Gildas firmly, be- 
ginning to awake to his surroundings. 

" Now on Monday, August 14th, the day she dis- 
appeared, where did you see her last? " 

" On Maldraeth shore, about ten o'clock at night." 

** Rather a late hour to be on the shore. Did you 
go down together? " 

"No; I followed her." 

" Had you had any misunderstanding with your 
wife that day?" 

" Not more than usual." 

" Did you object to the interest she took in the re- 
vival?" 

" No, sir, not that exactly ; but I wasn't willing for 
her to go so often to the meetings." 

" And did that cause a little friction — a little dis- 
agreement between you? " 

"Yes." 

" Did this seem to depress or grieve her? " 

" No, she was very high-spirited." 

" Had you any idea that she might put an end to 
herKfe?" 

** No indeed." 

" What made you follow her down to Maldraeth? " 

" Because it was so late," 



284 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

** Was there anything that might take her dawn so 
late?" 

** Well, we had a lobster pot down there. If it 
had been mocmlight, she might have gone there to 
look at it." 

** But it was a dark night. The moon did not rise 
till late? " 

" No." 

•* And when you reached her, what passed between 
you?" 

" I asked her to come home. I said it was too late 
for her to be on the shore." 

" And what was her answer? " 

^ She bade me go home myself. She said I had no 
business to follow her, and she would stay as long as 
she liked." 

" In fact, you had a quarrel about it? " 

To this Gildas made no reply, so overpowered was 
he by memory of that night ; and the coroner pressed 
the question. 

"Did you and your wife quarrel on the shore?" 

" We had a few words. She was very excited." 

" And you were quite calm? " 

" No, I was not." 

" Was she standing on the same, or on the rocks?" 

** On the rocks, close to the water." 

" And did you touch her? Did you lay your band 
upon her at all?" 

" Not to hurt her. Good God, man ! do you think 
I would hurt my wife? " 



THE INQUEST 285 

*' Never mind what I think, but answer me. Did 
you struggle with your wife ? *' 

** I tried to draw her away with me, but she would 
not come." 

** And then what happened? " 

** I changed my mind and left her suddenly, and I 
went home alone." 

" Now, might she not have slipped into the water 
during that struggle, or when you suddenly loosed 
your hold of her? " 

" She might perhaps, but she didn't," said Gilda^, 
beginning to lose patience. " I saw her still standing 
there when I was going up the cliff path." 

" On such a dark night? " 

" Yes, 'twas not too dark to see her figure." 

** And do you think she threw herself into the 
water? " 

** I know nothing about that." 

" Have you ever seen your wife alive since that 
night?" 

" No." 

Here there was a movement of surprise and disap- 
proval. 

'* All this month you have missed her and made no 
attempts to find her? " 

To this again Gildas made no answer, and one or 
two of the jurymen shook their heads solemnly. 

The coroner pressed the question, but failing to get 
any further information from Gildas, he was asked to 
stand aside while Ben was examinedL His evidence. 



«86 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

though meant, to exonerate the mishteer from all 
blame, did his cause much harm, for it went far to 
prove that Nance had of late been an exasperating 
member of the family, and to have got rid of her 
would have been a distinct gain to Gildas. 

He withdrew well satisfied, however, feeling that he 
had proved to everybody that Gildas Rees had been 
the best husband in the parish, 

Het was the next witness, and very communicative. 
She had seen the mestress crying sometimes, and she 
and the mishteer did not live happily together of late. 
" Caton pawb, no ! it was easy enough to see that." 
She had seen the mishteer go down to Maldraeth on 
the night when mestress was last seen. She and Nelli 
Amos had wondered what he wanted there so late, and 
had waited to see him come back. She would take 
her Bible oath that he had come back alone. 

When asked if her master had shown any distress 
at his wife's disappearance, she said he looked black 
and sulky enough ; " but I didn't see any signs of 
sorrow in him, not I." 

This and much more was easily extracted from Het. 

After her, Nelli Amos was called ; her evidence be- 
ing much the same as Het's, except that towards 
the end of her deposition she drew from her pocket a 
small gold brooch, which she said she had picked up 
under the seaweed near to where the body of the 
drowned woman had been found. Gildas, recalled, 
identified the brooch as one he had given to Nance 
some weeks earlier. The sight of it seemed to affect 



THE INQUEST 287 

him strongly, for it recalled to him vividly the even- 
ing when he had brought it home from the fair, when 
Nance had received it so coldly. He realized with 
bitterness of spirit that she had worn it on the night 
of her disappearance, not to adorn herself for his 
eyes, but for the sailor's. 

'* Then that settles the identity," said the coroner 
to him. 

'' Yes, yes," said Gildas, sitting down wearily on 
the settle. 

Hitherto, all the evidence pointed to the fact that 
Gildas Rees and his wife had latterly lived at variance 
with each other, that she had disappeared suddenly, 
and that her husband had neither made any attempt 
to find her nor had he shown any grief at her absence ; 
and there was little doubt that the jury had been im- 
pressed unfavorably towards Gildas. 

One comer of the spacious Scethryg kitchen, well- 
hidden by the settle, was given up to the storage of 
firing; not only logs for the hearth stood there, but 
also piles of brushwood and dried bracken, golden and 
brown from the side of the hill. On the day of the 
inquest, Gwenifer had hidden behind this pile of 
bracken hstening with bated breath to the evidence, 
which seemed to point to Gildas with incriminating 
finger. 

Oh! when would they call her? and how dared she 
appear before so many people? and how could she 
clear Gildas without exposing Nance? for she felt she 
would die rather than do this, as long as it was evi- 



288 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

dently Gildas's desire to shield her memory from 
blame. 

Suddenly she heard her name called, and she 
emerged from behind the screen of bracken and took 
her place at the table. 

Every eye was turned upon her ; for the dumb girl, 
whose speech had been so miraculously restored, was 
an object of interest to the whole country-side. 

The coroner settled his gold glasses on his nose, the 
clerk looked up from his papers, and the policeman 
from Caermadoc edged a little nearer; while Gwenifer, 
gathering courage, answered the preliminary ques- 
tions quietly and calmly, the coroner's inquiries being 
put in a more gentle tone than those addressed to 
Gildas. There was a slight hesitancy in her speech, 
due to her long disuse of her vocal organs ; but it was 
in no wise unpleasant — on the contrary, it had a 
quaint and piquant effect. 

" You are, I believe — a — you helped Mrs. Rees 
in her work?" asked the coroner. 

" Yes, sir. I am the Scethryg dairymaid." 

" Do you remember the 14th of August, the day on 
which Mrs. Rees disappeared? " 

" Yes, quite well ; because it was my birthday." 

" You have lived always at Scethryg, I think. Did 
you ever see or hear anything wrong in Gildas Rees's 
conduct towards his wife? " 

" No, never." 

** Nor in hers towards him? " 

** She was rather excitable of late." 



THE INQUEST 289 

** Did they quarrel sometimes? " was the next ques- 
tion put to her. 

" No, not quarrel exactly ; they disagreed a little 
sometimes," 

" Did you ever see any reason to think she might 
put an end to her life?" 

For a moment Gwenif er hesitated, then, looking up, 
answered firmly: " No; but since the revival she was 
rather strange," 

"In what way?" 

" Singing very loud and neglecting h^r work." 

" Neglecting her home and her husband? " 

Here Gwenif er's head bent low; she was silent, and 
the tears gathered in her eyes. 

" She was my friend," she said at last. 

" Now, on the 14th you saw her frequently during 
the day. Did she appear depressed or different to 
her usual manner? " 

"Yes; rather excited," 

" Now tell us how you saw her last." 

" I saw her in the house after tea ; then, when my 
work was finished, I went down to Maldraeth." 

"But it was dark. What did you want there so 
late? " 

" I often go there at night — the sea is beautiful 
at night." 

"Well?" 

" Then I heard a step crossing the shingle, and I 
saw it was Nance." 

At the words Gildas turned a startled look upon 



290 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

Gwenif er, and listened in silent surprise while she con- 
tinued , " I knew her by her walk/' 

" Did she see you? " 

" No ; I was hidden by the rocks. I was just going 
to speak to her, when I heard another footstep on the 
shingle, and I saw it was the mishteer." 

A little movement of sensation followed this remark. 

"And what then?" 

" Then he went up to her and begged her to come 
home ; but she would not listen." 

" Did he speak harshly or kindly ? " 

" Very kindly." 

" Did he lay hands upon her, or was there a strug- 
gle between them ? " 

" He took hold of her hands, and then her shoul- 
ders, and tried to turn her towards him ; but she was 
angry, and would not listen — she shook herself free, 
and suddenly he let her go, and he turned away." 

" Now, did she fall into the water? " 

**No: she stood still and looked after him as he 
went." 

"And what then?" 

" Then I went and tried to persuade her to go home; 
but she was very angry, and pushed me aside vio- 
lently. I fell and knocked my head on the rocks, 
and for a moment I didn't know anything." 

" For how long, do you think? " 

" I don't know — not for long." 

*^ And when you came to yourself, where was Mrs. 
Rees?" 



THE INQUEST 291 

" I looked around but she was nowhere to be seen." 

" Might she have thrown herself into the sea? " 

" No, I don't think so," said Gwenif er — " but oh ! 
whatever she did she didn't know what she was do- 
ing." And quite overcome by her memories of that 
fateful night, she stopped and covered her eyes with 
her hands. 

"Now listen, Gwenifer Owen," said the coroner. 
" Do you really mean you consider that * the mes- 
tress,' as you call her, was not accountable for her 
actions? I mean, was her mind a little unhinged — 
was she * not wise,' as they say? " 

For a moment Gwenifer fixed her eyes upon Gildas 
as she answered slowly : 

"That is what I am thinking, whatever. I am 
thinking that her head had been a little wrong for 
some time." 

Here a movement of surprise and interest swept 
over the meeting, Gildas himself rising from his seat 
and fixing a glance of keen inquiry upon the girl. 
Gwenifer threw her head back and said firmly: 

" That's what Fm thinking, and that's what I'm 
9wre, whatever, that Nance did not know what she was 
doing, and that God will not call her to account for 
anything she did that night or for a long time be- 
fore.*» 

The coroner looked up with fresh interest. 

" And what do you think had caused her derange- 
ment — what had touched her brain ?'• he said, put- 
ting it more simply. 



298 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

Again Gwenifer seemed to take counsel with her 
own heart before she answered. 

^^ I think the Diwygiad touched her heart so deep 
her mind was not strong enough to bear it." 

This threw a different aspect upon the case. To 
Gildas it brought a sense of relief and gratitude for 
the words which were beginning to throw a gleam 
of light upon Nance's strange ways. Her faults, her 
weaknesses — yes, her sins! — in this new light he 
could bear to think upon with tender pity ; but by the 
jury the evidence was heard with different feelings 
than any heretofore. 

There were few present who had not come into 
touch in some degree with the strong wave of spiritual 
awakening which was passing over the country, and 
there were few therefore who could not understand its 
possible effect upon a weak and excitable mind. To 
them the evidence seemed plain and reasonable; but 
those who had touched only the froth and foam of the 
wave, joining in the frenzied prayers and cries of 
shallow excitement, the suggestion that ^* the mes- 
tress " had been injured by her interest in the revival 
seemed like irreverence and blasphemy ; but even they 
were impressed by the air of truthfulness with which 
Gwenifer gave her evidence. 

Further questioning elicited the fact that she had 
made her way up to Scethryg when sufficiently re- 
covered from her momentary unconsciousness, that 
upon approaching the doorway Gildas had appeared 
at it stretching out both hands and calling out 



THE INQUEST 293 

•* Nance ! " and that he had seemed much disappointed 
at seeing Gwenif er, 

" Did you ask him what had become of his wife? " 

" No, sir/* 

"Why not?" 

^^ I did not like to make him ashamed." 

" And what then? " 

"He told me to go home and go to bed, and I 
went," 

" And neither you nor your master made any en- 
deavors to find your mistress? " 

" No, I didn't, whatever, because the mishteer had 
told me to go to bed ; but I couldn't sleep, so I rose 
and looked out through the window several times be- 
fore dawn." 

" And what did you see? " 

" I saw Gildas walking up and down on the cliffs, 
and looking behind every bush and over the sea; he 
went down to Maldraeth twice, and he was calling 
' Nance, Nance ! ' I heard him do this many, many 
times." 

" And did you go out to him? " 

" Yes, but not until the sun was rising." 

" Did he tell you what he was looking for? " 

" Oh yes, and I was thinking 'twas very sore his 
heart was. IVfany times since then I have sought for 
Nance on the cliffs and called to her on the shore, 
hoping she would come back, but she never came. 
And now I see why." 

With Gwenifer^s depositions the inquest ended, and 



S94 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

no one was at all surprised when the jury completely 
exonerated Gildas from all blame whatever in the un- 
fortunate affair. 

Nelli Amos alone was disappointed, for she had 
fully hoped that Gildas would not have passed 
through the ordeal of the inquest without danger to 
his liberty, if not his life. 

It was late in the afternoon when the funeral at 
last started on its way to the little churchyard high 
up on the bleak hillside, where the countless grassy 
mounds and weather-stained headstones showed that, 
however strong had been the prejudice of the parish- 
ioners against the church during their lives, yet they 
loved to bring their dead to rest under the shadow 
of her ancient walls. 

The mystery surrounding Nance's death had at- 
tracted one of the largest gatherings that had ever 
been seen in the parish, and among the women there 
was scarcely a dry eye when the Brynzion choir com- 
menced the solemn hymn commonly sung at Welsh 
funerals. 

As the coffin was raised high on the shoulders of the 
bearers it was visible to all the crowd. Every voice 
joined in the wailing melody, and as the procession 
wound its way up the rugged mountain road the 
mournful strains fell on the ear, and reached the 
heart, with unspeakable sadness. 

Gildas, walking behind the coffin with old Hezek 
beside him, felt every rise and fall of the music; but 
his face showed no sign of emotion, and many a fur- 



THE INQUEST 295 

tive glance of disapproval was cast upon him as he 
passed on his way. 

" So high-headed, so hard ! " they whispered to 
each other. " What will bring his head down if this 
won't?" 

Quite unconscious of their comments, Gildas found 
it all he could do to withstand the heart-searching 
strains of the music, and to bear unflinchingly the 
memory of the day when he had led Nance home from 
the little church, along the mountain road which they 
two were traversing now, with such a world of sepa- 
ration between them. But though the tones of that 
swaying hymn awoke sad memories and regrets, they 
brought with them no remorse. 

"No, thank God!" was Gildas's secret thought. 
" This dark day is none of my bringing." 

Hezek's was the only happy face in the long pro- 
cession. 

Gwenifer had great difficulty in persuading him to 
leave his wallet at home. " This is Nance's funeral 
day," she had said, endeavoring to make him under- 
stand in some degree the solemnity of the occasion; 
but he had only smiled and said, " Twt, twt, no ! 
Nance will be home to-morrow " ; so she had led him to 
Gildas's side with due injunctions that he was not to 
stray from him until they had returned safely to 
Scethryg. Nevertheless, he had scandalized the as- 
sembly as they drew near the churchyard by making 
a sudden swerve and gathering a flower which struck 
him as something uncommon. However, finding he 



296 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

was mistaken, he returned to his place with a penitent 
look. 

There had been a change in the weather the night 
before, and, as they entered the churchyard, a spark- 
ling shower fell upon them, though the sun was still 
shining ; and as the solemn service proceeded, and the 
coffin was lowered into the grave, the raindrops fell 
upon it like a glittering shower of golden beads, while 
a robin perched on a neighboring headstone sang so 
blithely that many a tearful eye turned towards it. 
Gwenifer even smiled through her tears upon the lit- 
tle feathered songster, who seemed to have come there 
to remind that sorrowful company that there was still 
love and light beyond the gloom of the present. Even 
into Gildas's sadness that sweet song had penetrated, 
and he turned away from Nance's grave with its echo 
in his ears and its gentle solace in his heart. 

There were not wanting in that mournful com- 
pany some whom pity had softened a little, and who 
would have wished to express their sympathy with the 
man whom they had suspected and condemned; per- 
haps even they had heard that tender bird-song and 
been unconsciously moved by it, for nothing is too 
small or insignificant to bear the messages of the Most 
High. Gildas, however, gave no one the opportunity 
of speaking to him, for, on returning to Scethryg, he 
passed straight into the house, and through the dairy 
door made his way to the moor, where the evening 
sun was gilding the raindrops on furze and heather, 
where the passing shower had freshened up the dry 



THE INQUEST 297 

grass, and where the pearly grey sky opened out in the 
west to the shine of the sunset, and the broad illim- 
itable sea seemed to speak of the peace and rest which 
his sore-stricken spirit longed for. Bitterly wounded 
by tbe events of the day, he was indignantly hurt by 
his neighbors' attitude towards him, and his proud 
spirit rebelled against the idea of receiving their con- 
dolence or sympathy. 



CHAPTER XVII 

INSIDE THE BED GATE 

The harvest all over the coast hills that year had been 
one of unusual fulness and beauty — of almost un- 
broken sunshine all day, and brilliant moonlight at 
night, the latter being no small factor in the ripening 
of crops, according to the farmers; at all events, it 
had added much to the beauty of the season. It was 
past now — the heavy crops of golden grain, the song 
and shout of the harvesters, the swish of the scythes, 
and the clash of the " crymans " — and the soft grey 
days of St. Michael's summer had come. 

Gildas Rees had good reason to be grateful to Jones 
Bryndu, for he had given him daily and unceasing 
help until the Scethryg crops were safely garnered; 
while Betsy Jones had made him feel, without a ward 
spoken, but by her kindly grip of his hand, that he 
had her confidence as completely as he had her hus- 
band's. One thing had grievously upset her — why 
had she not been called at the inquest? 

" In my deed. Will," she said, " I could have made 
everything plain to the coroner in two minutes. I 
could have told him what I know, and then he woiiH 
have seen that Gildas Rees, instead of being a wicked 

298 



i 



INSIDE THE RED GATE »99 

man, is the most long-suffering, and the kindest, and 
the bravest," 

" Stop, stop ! Where do I come in? " laughed her 
husband. 

" Of course, in the right place, at the top ! But 
why wasn't I called? " 

"Nonsense, 'merchri! What facts hadst thou to 
mention?" 

"Facts!" said Betsy Jones, with supreme con- 
tempt. " Facts ! What does a woman want with 
facts when she knows? Tell me that, Will ! Don't I 
know that Nance Rees was fond of Captain Jack? 
Well there, then ! 'Tis plain enough why Gildas Rees 
got to look so dark and sad. And don't I know, as 
well as if she had told me so, that she sailed away in 
the LUixeen with him that night on Maldraeth, when 
Gildas tried to persuade her to go home with him? 
Yes, yes, I know it all ! And then Captain Jack got 
tired of her and cross to her, and at the first port she 
ran away again, and roamed back to Tregildas cliffs, 
and then she fell from there in the dark, or perhaps, 
indeed, she threw herself over. Why, you men must 
be as blind as moles not to see it yourselves! And 
if you had only let me speak at the 'quest I would 
have settled it all in a moment, and there would have 
been no need of a 'quest at all." 

"Well, too late now, merch-i! Come to supper," 
and Jones Bryndu sat down to the table thoughtfully, 
pondering over Betsy's suggestions, for, in spite of 
her disregard for facts, he had often found that his 



800 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

wife's mind reached a correct conclusion with a sort 
of kangaroo leap, while he waded slowly to the same 
point, to find her standing triumphantly on the rock 
of verified intuition, with a patronizing " didn't I tell 
you? '* to greet him with. " And I guess she is right 
about this," he thought. 

At the same time Gildas was at work in one of his 
fields. Spade in hand, he dug and delved, and mended 
the gap that the brindled cow had made in the hedge, 
in one of her mischievous raids upon the clover in the 
next field. The passing weeks seemed to have brought 
some measure of peace and rest into his life ; his face 
had regained much of the color and spirit that be- 
fore the trouble of his unhappy marriage had made 
it so pleasant to look upon, in spite of its rugged 
features; the sparkle in his eye returned sometimes, 
when Juno forgot her dignity in a sudden excitement 
over a rabbit or a rat, or when Hezek told some mar- 
velous tale of mysterious adventure in his mountain 
rambles. 

He could not shake himself free from the conviction 
that not only Nance had been contaminated by Cap- 
tain Jack's company, but that Gwenifer too had given 
her heart to the roving sailor. Was it possible, he 
asked himself sometimes as he watched her cross the 
moor or stoop to her pail, that that sweet face could 
blush and that pure heart could beat faster for one 
so unworthy? and his own heart answered yes, for he 
knew from his own experience that Love could hide 
the blackest sins, until one day Time and Truth 



INSIDE THE RED GATE 301 

joined hands and tore away the blinding folds, and the 
idol was seen in its true colors. 

For the time he forgot his bitter memories of 
Nance, his wounded pride, his indignant resentment 
at his friends and neighbors' treatment of him; for 
the murmur of the sea was in his ears, the smell of 
the fresh earth was in his nostrils, the sense of all-con- 
quering work nerved his arm, and almost Gildas Rees 
was the strong, the energetic, the hardy farmer of old. 

The peaceful calm of the autumn days flowed in 
upon his spirits, and stooping, he picked up a tiny 
blue flower of which he had seen a bunch at Gwenif er's 
neck the day before. He added another and another ; 
perhaps she would like a posy! and he looked with a 
smile at the tiny nose-gay. But a sudden change 
came over his face — his lips took a hard curve, his 
black eyes flashed, and with a scornful gesture he 
flung the flowers over the hedge, and went on with his 
work, digging hard and fiercely into the forget-me- 
nots, and turning them ruthlessly face downwards on 
the broken gap. 

While he turned up the soil, he fell to thinking of a 
project which had been no stranger to his mind of late. 
He would let Scethryg, he would leave the land of his 
forefathers where he had been so badly treated. It 
would be better for him to spend his energies in some 
other country, where he could forget the past, his old 
home, and his unhappy marriage. Gwenifer would 
look after his interests for him ; in time she would re- 
gain her peace of mind, would forget the unworthy 



302 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

sailor, for surely she would not marry the man who 
had brought so much misery to Scethryg. 

Raising his eyes over the edge of the bank between 
the wind-worn grasses, he saw the silvery grey of the 
sea, and as he stood a moment to rest, and gaze upon 
it, round the horn of the bay there came into sight 
a fair ship, ploughing the waters bravely and flinging 
the white spray from her prow like showers of snow. 
Gildas needed not to ask what name was written on 
her stern — for well he recognized that streaming 
pennon of red which fluttered at her masthead. An 
indescribable change came over the face of the man 
who watched those graceful lines, those swelling sails. 
His eyes positively flashed with anger, his hands closed 
on his spade handle with a fierce clutch, and, turning 
his back upon the bay, he began to dig again with an 
energy which gradually seemed to relieve his feelings, 
and enable him to subdue and control his passion; so 
that when at noon he returned to Scethryg, and found 
the dinner laid, Ben and nVncwl Sam and Hezek al- 
ready sitting on the bench drawn up to the table, 
while Gwenifer moved about between them and the 
hearth, he was able to sit down calmly to his meal, 
although in his lowered eyes and in his heart burnt a 
fire of fierce resentment. 

" What'st think ! " said n'wncwl Sam, with the first 
sups of his cawl. " What'st think ! the Liliwen is in 
the bay. In my deed Fm glad. We'll be bearing 
some of the cap'n's stories of foreign parts again.*' 

Gildas made no answer, but, looking towards Gwen- 



INSIDE THE RED GATE 808 

if er, saw a crimson tide of color rise suddenly into 
her face, and as quickly recede, leaving her features 
blanched and pinched. What was this storm of feel- 
ing? What should disturb her placid countenance? 
What meant those drooping eyes and white lips, if not 
love ? His food seemed to choke him, a hot unreason- 
ing anger rose within him, and he scarcely heard 
n'wncwl Sam's platitudes and Hezek's conjectures, 
but finished his meal in silence, brooding over a crowd 
of suspicions and an eager desire for revenge; while 
Gwenifer, instinctively conscious that he had seen her 
sudden blush, fumbled awkwardly with the bowls and 
platters. But Gildas saw no more, for he had quickly 
finished his meal and was already striding across the 
field to the damaged gap, where he attacked the clods 
once more with renewed energy. 

" We'll have to hang a plock round Seren's neck," 
cried Ben, who passed on his way to his own work; 
** there's no hedge will stand against her, and Corwen 
and Folant are beginning to learn her bad tricks," 
and he whistled as he went, leaving his master to his 
work and his angry thoughts. 

The day wore on, the afternoon light was fading, 
for a bank of heavy cloud was rising seawards; the 
crows and seagulls returned from their inland expedi- 
tions to the shelter of the cliffs, the young geese in 
the stubble fields clacked and cried as they flew over 
the hedges, feeling the strength of their growing 
wings; but Gildas dug on unconscious of them all, 
until wearied with his exertions he stood up and 



804 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

stretched himself. Flower, the brown mare, was graz- 
ing in the foreground. Beyond, the field sloped up 
to the moor. The whole landscape had grown grey 
and somber, the red gate in the opposite hedge being 
the only bit of color in the scene, and on this Gildas's 
eyes rested vacantly. 

Suddenly the pupils dilated, his face, his figure, be- 
came rigid with interest, as the red gate slowly opened 
and a familiar figure entered the field — a man above 
the middle height, supple and strong-looking, though 
of slimmer proportions than Gildas ; he walked with a 
free swinging step, the step of the sailor ashore, and 
Gildas recognized his enemy Captain Jack. There 
was no indecision in his gait, but he walked like a 
man who had something to say to the other, who 
awaited him with a fierce look of anger in his eyes, 
the muscles of his hand upon his spade quivering. 
" That devil," were his thoughts, " on my land, in my 
field! How dare he?" But Captain Jack evidently 
dared with intention, and advanced steadily; he had 
already reached Flower, who raised her head to look 
at him, when Gildas called " Halt ! No nearer ! " but 
still the sailor walked on unheeding. 

" Back, man," shouted Gildas, advancing a step or 
two in a threateninjg attitude, " or I swear I will dash 
your brains out." All the savage instincts of the 
primitive man awoke within him ; his reason and con- 
science seemed to swoon under the strength of his 
wrath, and Gildas Rees for a moment was a dangerous 
foe, conscious only of an eager desire for revenge. 



INSIDE THE RED GATE 805 

*' Strike, if you like," said Captain Jack. " I am 
ready ; but I will not strike in return." 

** Coward ! Hound ! " cried Gildas, whose blood 
seemed boiling in his veins ; his voice was hoarse witli 
passion, his white lips parched, and as the sailor 
moved still a step towards him, blinded with fury he 
brought his ponderous spade down with a crash. Un- 
consciously he had allowed for a shrinking aside on 
the sailor's part, and, answering to his instinctive 
impulse, the spade had fallen a little to the left, strik- 
ing the man's arm only, and leaving him still standing 
erect and firm. 

A moment's silence fell on the two men, who looked 
at each other with a stem, unflinching gaze, while 
through the soft evening air there came the sound of 
peaceful rustic life: Flower's grazing, crisp and 
regular, the whirr of a covey of partridges, the tinkle 
of a sheep-bell, the neighing of a horse — they heard 
them all, and mingled with them, and distinct from 
all, the sound of a girlish voice came down from the 
moor, a voice that called the cows to the quiet milking, 
" Corwen and Cochen and Seren, Trwdy , f ach ! come 
home, come home " ; and the clear tones seemed to fall 
like a spell on the two men. 

All this passed in a moment, but in that moment 
Gildas had realized what he had done and what he 
had failed to do. A hot flood of shame sufl^used his 
face. ** A murderer ! " and the soft, clear voice that 
came down the mountain-side seemed to call to him 
" Shame, Gildas ; for shame ! " With a strong swing 



806 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

of his arm he flung the spade away from him, and 
drew his hand over his dark face. " Now," he said, 
advancing close to the sailor, " we are equal ; defend 
yourself " ; but Captain Jack stood immovable. 

" You may strike if you like, Gildas Rees," he said 
again, " but I tell ]^ou I will never strike you in re- 
turn." 

"Not strike! Coward, you must!" said Gildas, 
exasperated beyond measure at the other's calmness, 
and with furious passion he struck at his foe ; but the 
sailor, supple and strong and lithe of action, grasped 
his arms in the act of striking, and, holding them as 
in a vice, looked steadily into the fiery gleam of his 
antagonist's eyes. 

Balked of his immediate revenge, Gildas stood as^ 
tounded and overpowered by the sailor's unshaken 
demeanor, so different from his own mad passion ; hh 
arm fell nerveless at his side, and in the moment's 
silence that ensued he seemed to awake from a fit of 
frenzy, and though he still trembled with anger he 
became calmer and more reasonable. 

"And what of Nance? " he asked hoarsely, and he 
pointed to the side of the hill, where the whitewashed 
walls of the little church showed clear against the grej 
sky. " Carried up from the sea to that lonely church- 
yard, her heart broken, her name blackened, and sill 
through you — villain ! How dare you stand before 
me? Take your cursed blue eyes off me; keep their 
uncanny looks to draw some poor weak woman from 
her home again, but don't try them on me." 



INSIDE THE RED GATE 807 

** Gildas Reesy my eyes are as the Almighty made 
them ; but in my deed I am glad if they have power to 
make you listen to me, for I tell you, man, you may 
strike me, you may kill me, but you will be killing an 
innocent man. Listen, then, for I think what I have 
to say may be of some comfort to you." 

" Comfort? Yov, to speak to me of comfort? 
Didn't you get my letter that I sent after you to 
Cardiff? " 

" Letter? No," said the sailor, " I have had no 
letter from you ; no doubt 'tis waiting for me." He 
raised his left hand, and for the first time Gildas saw 
that blood was dropping slowly from the sleeve of 
the other. "As God is my witness," he said, "I 
knew nothing of your wife's sad death until I rowed 
in from the LUiwen to-day. I sailed into the bay this 
morning, and my eyes turned at once to Scethryg and 
the moor. I hoped to find you all at peace and happy 
as you were when I first met you." 
' An exclamation from Gildas interrupted him, but 
he held up his hand and went on. " I sculled into 
Maldraeth and climbed that sheep-path up the hill, 
and over the hill to Gwenifer's cottage. You know, 
for I have told you, why I went there; I found her 
in her garden, but she charged me with having lured 
your wife away from you, with having turned her 
adrift, with having compassed her death by some foul 
means, and for the first time, Gildas, I heard of her 
sad end. It was long before I could persuade Gwen- 
ifer to listen to me, but she did at last. She believes 



808 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

me, and so must you, when I tell you what happened 
on that black night. She agreed with me, too — 
and that is what I think will comfort you — that your 
wife was not right in her head, Gildas; for a long 
time I am sure her mind had been unhinged. Gildas, 
she was * not wise,' as we say, and so was not account- 
able for her actions.'* 

He stopped a moment as if considering. 

" Go on," said Gildas sternly. " You are forget- 
ting your sailor tongue; but I think I understand 
you " — for in his excitement the sailor had dropped 
his sea brogue, and was speaking in the refined tones 
that were more familiar to him. 

Near them stood one of the many grey boulders 
that strewed the upland fields, and, sitting down upon 
it, Captain Jack continued. 

" When first I went to Scethryg I saw Nance Ellis 
in the old storws before you were married. She was 
a bonny lass and full of fun and life; we had some 
jokes and laughter together, a little flirting, a little 
nonsense, but nothing more, I swear to you, Gildas 
Rees. I cared no more for Nance Ellis than I did 
for Het or Jenni the seamstress, and when I heard 
she was going to marry you I was glad, because that 
would leave me free of her. At Scethryg, after you 
were married, I got to like her better, as a friend; 
and though I am willing to confess now that I was 
too free and foolish in my talk and jokes with her, 
'twas only to hide my liking for Gwenifer, and an ex- 
cuse for going often to Scethryg ; and I was surprised 



INSIDE THE RED GATE 309 

and shocked one day when I saw that Nance was fond 
of me, and not ashamed to show it. Then, Gildas, I 
tried to draw back, to show her how wrong, how fool- 
ish, she was; but very gently, because, though I am 
but a rough sailor, my heart is very tender with 
women, and I could not be harsh with her, when I 
felt I had been so much to blame myself. I am afraid 
my love for Gwenifer made me selfish, and I scarcely 
noticed nor cared that Nance was getting more wild 
and excited, less anxious to hide her fancy for me.'* 

He stopped again, for he wished to hide Nance's 
folly as much as possible from her husband. " 'Twas 
the night after the revival meeting when I sailed away 
from Tregildas. Gwenifer would have nothing to do 
with me ; and that night I saw plainly the best thing, 
and the right thing for me to do, was to keep away 
from Scethryg. And out on the bay, in the dark 
and the silence, many things became clear to me, many 
things that had pressed on my heart in the Diwygiad 
meeting, and seemed too sharp and strong for me to 
bear. Well! the next night we were sailing. I had 
seen Gwenifer and begged of her if she ever changed 
her mind to send word to me or let me know; and I 
was leaning over the rails, and thinking of this. The 
mate had gone into Tregildas to settle up for me with 
his old aunt, and the cabin boy was spending his last 
hours with his mother, so I was alone. Well, my 
thoughts were full of Gwenifer, when I heard the 
sound of a boat coming out from Maldraeth. I won- 
dered why the mate didn't row out from Tregildas, 



310 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

and then a strange thought came into my mind — 
could it be Gwenifer? Had she changed her mind? 
(Have patience!) The boat came nearer, and I saw 
a woman in it, and I was fool enough to believe it was 
Gwenifer. I called out, but there was no answer; I 
threw down the ship's ladder, and she climbed up ; I 
helped her on deck, and then I saw it was Nance, and 
my heart sank like a stone — it was very dark, but I 
had lighted a lantern, and then ^" 

"And then?" echoed Gildas, with intense eager- 
ness, for as he had listened to the captain's story an 
instinctive belief in its truth had taken possession of 
him. 

"And then — how can I tell you, Gildas ReesP 
Isn't it enough to tell you that your poor wife did 
not know what she was saying — I saw I had better 
tell her the truth, that I loved Gwenifer, that it was 
her I had always sought for at Scethryg, and that I 
had no other love in my heart. Gildas, she was quite 
mad, she screamed terribly, and fell to the ground 
in a kind of fit, and before she came to herself I had 
lifted her into the boat and rowed her back to Mai- 
draeth; she was quite calm then, only rather be- 
wildered. I pointed to the path, and bade her make 
haste home to her husband, and I watched while she 
went up and up ; and at last, when I lost sight of her 
over the edge of the cliffs, I had no doubt she would 
go back to Scethryg and no one would know of her 
folly. I rowed back to the LUiweiij and with the first 
streak of dawn we sailed away, and to-day for the 



INSIDE THE RED GATE 811 

first time I heard of your dreadful trouble. Poor 
thing! Poor thing! Forgive her, Gildas, for no 
doubt the tremendous truths that the Revival pressed 
In upon her conscience were too strong for her, and 
unhinged her mind. Forgive mCy Gildas, for my folly 
and my nonsense." 

** Has Gwenifer forgiven you?" said Gildas, with 
parched lips, though his passion was dying out. 

*' Yes, she has forgiven me ; but she will not have 
me. How can I expect her? And when next I sail 
away you will never see the LUiwen in the bay again." 
*'And will you forgive yourself?" said Gildas 
sternly, " Out there on the bay, man, will it be as noth- 
ing to you that your foolish jokes and nonsense have 
led a woman to such a fate? " 

" No," answered Captain Jack ; " the wind may 
blow, the waves may race, the ship may sail, but I 
can never leave behind me the memories of Scethryg. 
Rest satisfied, Gildas, if it will be any comfort to you 
to know, that I am a miserable man." 

" 'Twill be no comfort to me," said Gildas ; " but 
it Is as it ought to be, I think. I am not wishing you 
ill, Cap'n Jack, and I believe now that if poor Nance's 
mind had been all right her heart would have been 
truer to me, so good-bye to you." 

** Will you shake hands with me before we part? " 
said Captain Jack. 

" Shake hands with you? No," said Gildas. " Do 
you think, man, such wounds as mine can be healed 
and mended by a little talk like this? Will it bring 



312 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

the cheer and brightness back to my hearth? Will it 
restore to old Hezek his little lass tliat he loved so 
much? No, you may be telling the truth — I think 
you are, and you are less to blame in this matter than 
I thought you were; but I cannot shake hands with 
you, and I wish only never to see you again." 

*^ I am going," said Captain Jack, and as he 
moved Gildas saw a little pool of blood had dropped 
from his sleeve. 

" I have wounded you sore, I'm afraid; 'tis of God's 
mercy that my spade swerved, and I am not a mur- 
derer." 

" Twt, twt, that is nothing," said Captain Jack. 
" The mate has a wonderful salve for a cut. I will 
go back to the Liliweriy if I may take Ben from that 
field to scull for me? " 

Gildas nodded. 

" And when I sail away in a few days, you will 
never see me more in Tregildas bay, and that is why 
I wanted to shake hands with you. But if you 
won't — well, good-bye! I would have done much 
to be friends with you, Gildas Rees, but it is not to 
be, it seems, sq good-bye." 

" Good-bye," said Gildas, and Captain Jack walked 
away towards the field where Ben was at work, while 
Gildas turned back to his spade, and dug at the 
brown clods more vigorously than ever. 

The shadowy night drew on apace ; the sun set in a 
bar of golden haze, underlying the leaden bank of 
clouds that had lifted from the horizon. 



INSIDE THE RED GATE 81S 

Strange as it may seem, his interview with Captain 
Jack, a meeting which he had dreaded, and yet de- 
sired with a vengeful anger, had in a great measure 
lightened his trouble ; and even as that heavy bank of 
grey was lifting from the west, so, as he turned home- 
wards through the hawthome lane, a renewal of life 
and hope flowed in upon him, and led him onwards, 
with a feeling that for him too, in the future, there 
might be a golden haze beyond the heavy clouds that 
had of late darkened his life. 



CHAPTER XVni 

THE FISE 

A FEW days later in the same week, a bright log fire 
was burning on the Scethryg hearth, for it was sup- 
per-time, and the mishteer was just home from his 
work. 

The leaping flames lighted up every comer of the 
quaint old room, and showed up the glittering pans 
and platters of an earlier generation which were 
ranged above the wide-browed chimney. Inside, in 
the full blaze of the fire, hung the cranks, the cranes, 
the ladles, and the bellows in a friendly company, the 
two broad settles flanking the walls beneath them. 

Here sat n'wncwl Sam and Hezek, each in his cor- 
ner, waiting for his supper which was evidently cook- 
ing in the large crock hanging down from the chim- 
ney. 

Cawl, is it? No, for the table Is laid with plates 
and knives and iron forks. 

On the middle of the board stands a giant jug of 
butter-milk, while the end of the table bears a large 
platter of roof beef, salted and dried under the raft- 
ers and boiled in the day-bef ore's cawl. Hard it Is, 
no doubt, but not too hard for Gildas's strong white 

314 



THE FIRE 815 

t^eihy nor yet for the girPs, who takes her portion and 

arranges the plates on the table. 

Now she lifts the lid from the steaming crock, and 

pours into a huge wooden bowl the mealy potatoes, 

bursting through their grey jackets; the brown bread 
and cheese is added, and they draw round the board 
with healthy appetites. Gwenifer sits at the side; 
she is losing the quaint, pretty break in her speech, 
but Gildas still thinks there is something unusually 
musical in her voice. " 'Tis as though the thrushes 
are talking soft in the evening sometimes," he had 
said one day, and he thought so to-night, as she re- 
coimted her simple tale of the day's work and events 
— the red cow's persistent attempts to get into the 
garden, Juno's frivolous games with the gander, the 
little brown lamb that had grown into a sheep all too 
soon, the simple things that make up the life of a 
farm; and Gildas listened with a pleased smile as he 
ate his salt beef. 

Yes, poor Nance was sharing the fate of many a 
better woman : her hearth and her board knew her no 
more ; her husband's heart was closing over her loss, 
and was opening out to a new happiness that seemed 
to glide into it with the simple joys of his home life — 
the glowing light on the hearth, the pleasant, cozy 
meal, which Gwenifer was clearing away, his seat in 
the firelight, the puff^s of blue smoke that curled up 
from his pipe. It was all very pleasant, and he 
stretched out his feet to the blaze and laughed at the 
old men's gossip as they talked across the fire. 



816 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

" Yes, in my deed, then, if you are not believing 
me," said n'wncwl Sam, " 'tis as true as I am sitting 
here ; so John * Crydd ' told me, whatever. 'Twas the 
shepherd of Voel was looking for a sheep that had 
strayed down here to the moor, and coming he was 
towards Gwenifer's cottage, and he saw it plainlj 
crossing his path in the moonlight; it went out of 
sight between the bushes, and he says he will swear 
that he heard a sigh on the other side of the broom 
bush." 

"Tush," said Gildas, "»twas the wind," and he 
blew a fresh puff from his pipe. 

" Most like," said Hezek, looking into the burning 
logs, " though Phil is a truthful man." 

" Was it the wind, then," said n'wncwl Sam dog- 
gedly, " that Michael Brynderw saw in the church- 
yard one night about a fortnight ago walking in be- 
tween the graves? He's a bold man, is Michael, and 
he followed it across the churchyard, but it disap- 
peared under the yew-tree, and when he went there, it 
was gone ; ach-y-fi," and he shuddered as he knocked 
the ashes out of his pipe. 

" Nonsense! " said Gildas. " There's no such thing 
as a ghost; those are all superstitions and old wives' 
fables, come down from the past — • we are wiser now. 
What d'ye say 'bout it, Hezek? You've got more 
learning than we." 

"A ghost?" said Hezek, holding his thin fingers 
to the blaze and turning his dreamy eyes upon Gildas. 
" Well, I don't know about ghosts ; but * spirits,' " he 



THE FIRE 817 

said, " I don't know why spirits would not be seen 
sometimes." 

** Twt, twt ! " laughed Gildas again ; and as Gweni- 
fer passed he laid hold of her sleeve. " Here's one 
now ought to tell us all about it if any one can ; so 
many long years alone on the moor with only her 
thoughts for company ! Come, Gwenif er ! tell us, lass, 
what does think about It? '' 

"Yes, Gwenif er knows very likely," said Hezek, 
the far-away look in his eyes brightening for a mo- 
ment» 

" Say, Gwenif er, come! Hast ever seen a spirit? " 

" No, indeed," said Gwenif er, " I have never seen 
one. But I think there is more in the silence and soli- 
tude than we know of ; it is full of spirits to me." 

"Caton pawb!" said Gildas, laughing, "'tis all 
nonsense, lass, and superstition." 

'* Look you now," said Hezek, " you are too hard 
on superstition, as you call it. Hark you, boys ! there 
is much to be said for superstition." His eyes bright- 
ened, his figure straightened, as in fancy he addressed 
his " boys " at St. Austin's school, and Gildas listened 
with a smile as he harangued his imaginary class. 
" Mind you, boys, I wouldn't have you believe every 
marvel, every ghost story, every old legend ; sift them 
out, find the truth, let the light in upon them, and 
cast away all that is foolish and baseless; but, after 
all, keep a place In your hearts for the spiritual side 
of life, for there is much that your dictionaries and 
your mathematics cannot explain. And as for poor 



S18 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

old Superstition, I don't want her back, boys! She 
had her folhes and weaknesses; but she's dead and 
gone, and we have buried her with scant ceremony." 

N'wncwl Sam and Gildas could only listen in silence, 
the latter with an indulgent smile on his lips and a 
twinkle in his eyes, while Gwenifer sat down and 
waited, for well they knew how impossible it was to 
stop the old man's flow of speech when he addressed 
his boys. 

" Yes, yes ! " he continued. " We have buried her 
safe ; the parson, the lawyer, the doctor, have all had 
their say about her, and the school-board master has 
clapped a tombstone upon her, and there's an end of 
her, they think ; but mind you, boys, now that she's 
gone, don't you think we've hustled her away too 
hastily ? " and he pointed his finger at n'wncwl Sam, 
who sat about the middle of his imaginary class. 

" Mind you," repeated Hezek impressively ; and 
n'wncwl Sam moved a little nervously, and uncon- 
sciously dropped his pipe into Hef s clothes-basket, 
which stood beside him on the settle. 

" Superstition was not all bad," continued Hezek, 
" and when we got rid of her so hastily and so un- 
ceremoniously I am not at all sure that she did not 
carry away with her in the folds of her grey robes, 
much of the romance and poetry that made life full 
of beauty and interest in the past ; and remember you 
too, boys, she was first cousin to Faith, and I, for one, 
have still a tender place in my ho^rt for what they 
cM superstition," 



THE FIRE 319 

N'wncwl Sam broke the thread of his argument by 
exclaiming, " Dei caton pawb ! You can preach like 
a parson, man, but I don't know what's it about." 

The light died out of Hezek's eyes, his hand fell to 
his side, and looking round as if dazed he sat down, 
and, filling his pipe, bent over the hearth with his 
usual placid far-away look. 

** Well, in my deed ! " said Gildas indulgently. 
" You are a clever speaker, Hezek, and you make us 
have more respect for our old grandmother's stories." 

Hezek made no answer, looking silently into the 
fire; but n'wncwl Sam, thinking the argument had 
turned in his favor, said triumphantly, " Well there, 
then, that's all I said ; that the shepherd of Voel saw 
the * ladiwen,' or the * ladilwyd,' running across his 
path like a mountain cloud." 

** Well indeed ! " said Gwenif er, " I saw something 
strange on the moor one night when I was going late 
from here; 'twas something crossing my path like 
what Phil y Voel saw ; but it might be the grey heifer 
from Wern, she's always straying." 

" 'Twas that most like," said Gildas ; " I shooed 
her last night from the turnip-field." 

" 'Tis a still night," said n'wncwl Sam; " I wonder 
will the LUiwen sail before dawn? " 

A crimson blush dyed Gwenifer's cheeks, which she 
was careful to hide by stooping over the fire, while a 
little constraint came into Gildas's voice. 

" What is he stopping for? " he asked. 

" Oh, waiting he is for the Speedwell ; she is bring- 



320 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

ing him something from Milford, some iron ^oods 
they are taking to Spain. What for didn't he come to 
see us this time, I wonder? First-class man is Captain 
Jack." 

" Yes," said Gildas ; " I have nothing to say 
against him." 

" Caton pawb, no ! " said nVncwl Sam. " What 
dost think of him, Gwenifer? " 

Confused and startled, she could only answer, ^' I 
don't know — yes, indeed, I think." 

" * Yes, indeed,' * I don't know,' and * nothing 
against him!' In my deed, if that's the way my 
friends speak of me behind my back I'd rather be 
without them," blurted out the old man. 

Both Gwenifer and Gildas tried to laugh away his 
indignation, but the spell was broken, the cheerful 
sociability of the evening had departed. 

" 'Tis getting late," said Hezek, rising from his 
comer. 

"Art going home, Gwenifer?" asked Gildas. 
" Will I come with thee over the moor? Art afraid, 
perhaps?" 

"No, no," said Gwenifer; "I am sleeping here 
to-night, for 'tis churning to-morrow morning. I am 
waiting for Het — she is not home yet from the meet- 
ing; here she is on the word!" and Het arriving, 
n'wncwl Sam, with a " Nos da " to all, followed Hezek 
out to the old storehouse. 

Soon after, the lights were put out, and darkness 
and sleep fell over all at Scethryg. 



THE FIRE 821 

Out on the bay, the LUiwen rising and falling slow- 
ly with the lapping tide lulled John Davies and the 
cabin boy, each in his bunk below, more soundly into 
the land of dreams. The captain should have been 
sleeping too, for, safe anchored in the bay, there was 
no need of watch or compass; but a throbbing pain 
in his shoulder, added to the restlessness of his mind, 
had banished sleep, and he had risen to pace up and 
down in the darkness where the only sound was the 
Up-lap of the sea under the ship's keel. 

When he entered the bay he had hoped to find the 
usual domestic happiness restored to the inmates of 
Scethryg; now he was full of troubled thought as he 
recalled his meeting with Gwenifer, and later with 
Gildas. 

As his ship had ploughed her way through the 
green waters his longing desires had far outstripped 
her speed, and he had ventured to hope that time 
might have softened Gwenif er^s disinclination for him, 
but now — he had had his answer; and there was 
nothing for him but to sail away, and bid good-bye 
for ever to the sight of the humble thatched cottage 
where his strange, erratic heart had at last cast an- 
chor. 

In a rift between the clouds he caught a glimpse 
of the moon, and in her light he saw the little white 
cot with its thatch of brown on the edge of the moor, 
and the grey walls of Scethryg with their dark clumps 
of ivy at the shoulder of the hill ; but only for a mo- 
ment, for the thick bank of clouds had obscured the 



82« QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

moon again and the familiar landscape was lost to his 
sight. 

Suddenly he stared eagerly through the gloom, for 
what was that pale cloud that rose over Scethryg? 

A grey cloud curling into billows of yellow and 
brown, and tinged now with red. He called hastily 
to the mate and the cabin boy, and in an incredibly 
short time they were rowing towards Maldraeth, their 
eyes on the billowy smoke that rose without doubt 
from the walls of Scethryg. The mate and the boy 
rowed hard, the captain, with his disabled arm, steer- 
ing straight into the little cove where Gildas and 
Nance had quarreled and parted. 

**-Make haste to Tregildas! *' said Captain Jack to 
the lad, " call them all up, bid them bring pails and 
follow us to Scethryg,** and the boy ran with his heart 
in his throat, calling as he went, " TSn! Tan! " till 
the villagers roused from their sleep, came out to their 
doorways, and, seeing the glow in the sky, hurried up 
to the old farmhouse. 

Het's prophecy, " No one will come to help Sceth- 
ryg,*' was not verified, for, as the grey smoke burst 
out into flames, and showers of sparks rose up into 
the night sky, there were scores of busy helpers. 
Every man bore his pailful from the rushing spout or 
horse-pond in the yard, and, amidst cries and shouts 
of encouragement, the fire fiend was attacked and 
fought by willing hands, urged on by eager hearts; 
for through the whole neighborhood the tide of public 
feeling had turned, and there was scarcely one in the 



THE FIRE 883 

parish who did not regret the bitterness with which he 
had resented Gildas Rees's objection to the excitement 
of the Diwygiad, for already that feverish excitement 
was passing, and cahner and more reasonable senti- 
ments were taking its place. 

After all, they argued, every man had a right to 
his own opinions, and no doubt Gildas Rees had seen 
cause to fear the effect of the Diwygiad upon his poor 
wife's mind. And they rushed at the fire with an 
energy bom of regret and remorse, which before long 
began to tell upon those leaping flames. 

Foremost amongst the workers were Captain Jack 
and the mate. There was no time for conjecture or 
questions. They could only rush from the house to 
the spout and back again; while the flames towered 
high through the gaping roof, and the roar and the 
crackle of the sparks filled the air. 

Suddenly a hand clutched the captain's sleeve, and 
Gwenifer's face, lighted up by the glow, was full of 
anxiety. " Gildas," she cried, " where is he? " 

" Oh, somewhere at work," said Captain Jack. 

" No, no," said Gwenifer excitedly ; " he is not here. 
I thought he was getting the horses out of the stable, 
but he is not there. Oh, Captain Jack, where is he? " 

"Not here?" said Captain Jack. "Has nobody 
seen him? " 

" No, no ; nobody." 

" Then God help him ! he must be still in his bed. 
A ladder, Gwenifer! — a ladder up to his window! " 
And in a moment Gwenifer had brought the ladder. 



324 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

and together they stood under the smoke-blackened 
walls. Captain Jack catching at her shawl wrapped 
it round his head, and climbed up the rungs as a sailor 
only can climb. It would have been impossible to 
reach the room in the usual way, for the fire seemed 
to have started in the center of the house, and the 
rickety old staircase had burnt completely away, 
while the outside walls were as yet intact. An open- 
ing in the roof made a furious draught, towards 
which the force of the flames seemed to converge. 

In the red light the surging crowd watched Captain 
Jack's brave attempts to enter the house — attempts 
which they feared were doomed to be fruitless, for no 
sooner had he opened the window than a cloud of 
smoke rushed out. Blinded and almost suffocated, 
but undaunted, he thrust himself through the small 
aperture, for Scethryg windows were made to open 
only half-way. 

The crowd below stood watching breathless while 
he disappeared, and a cry of dismay escaped them as 
a long, lithe flame leaped out through the kitchen 
window and licked the rungs of the ladder. 

Within the smoke-clouded room Captain Jack, hold- 
ing his breath, reached the bed, only to find it empty. 
Thank God ! Gildas has escaped ! And he returned 
to the window, where shouts and groans reached him 
from below, and where he saw the ladder was already 
charred by the flames. Realizing his danger, he turn- 
ed in despair to the doorway. Here the small crooked 
landing was full of choking smoke; the old stairway 



THE FIRE 826 

had already fallen to the ground — a heap of charred 
wood. 

That way, escape was impossible, but crossing the 
landing he stumbled blindly into a little doorway 
which led into the cheese room, from which he remem- 
bered a few steps led down to the dairy. He hurried 
across the room almost suffocated, but stumbled again 
over something that lay in his way ; he stooped, and 
found it was Gildas himself. Roused by the smoke 
and the cries of the villagers, he had awoke, half stu- 
pefied by the fumes of the fire, and, being dazed and 
alarmed, he had started up and realized at once what 
had happened. 

The house was on fire ! Some enemy had done this, 
and the pang caused by this thought was more sharp 
and cruel than the scorch of the long flame that reach- 
ed him as he rushed out, to find the stairs ablaze. He 
turned towards Het's room, for had not Gwenifer 
said, "Pm sleeping here to-night?" What if she 
had slept to her death ! But no ! the room was empty 
of all but smoke. He staggered out again, blinded 
and choking and overcome by the fumes, and fell 
heavily on the floor at the top of the little flight of 
steps leading down to the dairy. 

Here Captain Jack found him, unconscious but liv- 
ing; for he groaned as the sailor lifted him and with 
almost superhuman strength carried him down 
through the dairy to the stable-yard, where the crowd, 
soon learning the good news of his safety, gathered 
round him. 



826 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

It was Gwenifer who had first remembered the 
little-used dairy door, " 'Twas there I thought I 
heard the mishteer calling us," she said, " and I 
thought he was safe down here ; but Het and I climbed 
down the elder tree which grows so near our window, 
and in the hurry we forgot the dairy door ; '* and she 
ran round the house to find her hopes realized, and 
Gildas lying safe on the stubble with Captain Jack 
bending over him, bathing his face and holding a 
flask to his lips. 

" He will cough," he said, quietly, looking up at 
Gwenifer. 

True, Gildas did cough, and opened his eyes; and 
Gwenifer, assured of his safety, quietly drew back, 
leaving the two men together. 

" They will make friends better alone," she thought, 
" and Gildas will know who saved him." 

Mingling with the crowd, she was soon aiding their 
endeavors to extinguish the fire, which was now giving 
way to their vigorous exertions. The flames were 
dead, the smoke was lessening, the air was clearing, 
the fire fiend was conquered. 

In the stubble yard Gildas was rising to his feet and 
steadying himself by a hand on his rescuer's shoulder. 
It was his wounded shoulder, but he did not wince; 
he would have borne much more for the sake of that 
friendly pressure. 

" 'Tis the arm I hurt, too," said Gildas. 

" Caton pawb! I had forgotten it! " said Captain 
Jack, laughing outright. " 'Tis you will have to 



THE FIRE 887 

wear the sling now, for I saw your sleeve flaming on 
your arm/' 

'* Yes, and if it wasn't for you I'd have been flam- 
ing all over by now, I expect. You have saved my 
life, captain ;" and he held out his hand, with a smile 
of meaning which the sailor understood. He grasped 
the hand, and a warm pressure spoke for Gildas more 
than any words could have done. 

" Come, then," he said, " help me to the other side ; 
there's surely something we can do ; " and with the 
sailor's help he walked, though unsteadily, towards 
the group of workers, who were still busily engaged 
in extinguishing the small flames that continued to 
burst out here and there from the smoldering debris. 
*' Thank you, kind people," he said, appearing 
amongst them. " Caton pawb ! I didn't know I had a 
friend in Tregildas ! " 

" There's your mistake," said Owen Hughes, one 
of the deacons at Brynzion. " You must forgive our 
zeal for religion ; it has made us over hasty, lad. We 
forgot that * the wind bloweth where it listeth' ; and 
though it blow like a gale over Brynzion, it may whis- 
per like a still small voice in the heart. Yes, yes, you 
have friends; to-night has shown you that." 

" It has shown me I have enemies, too," said Gildas 
bitterly. « Who lighted this fire, think you? " 

" That question," said Owen Hughes, " came into 
my mind when I first heard the cry of * Tan ! ' I am 
troubled sore," said the old man, looking down at the 
ground. " I had hoped that the pure flame of the re- 



888 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

vival spirit had burnt out every stain of malice from 
our midst ; but I'm afraid — I'm afraid," he added, 
shaking his head again sorrowfully, as he turned away 
and left Gildas standing alone watching the ruin af 
his house. A group of women stood near, looking on, 
like himself, at the scene of devastation. " Dear, 
dear ! " said one ; " there's a pity ! In my deed, I am 
sorry for Gildas Rees. How did it happen, I won- 
der!" 

"'Tis the arm of the Lord," said Nelli Amos. 
^^ 'Tis plain to see nothing but trouble has followed 
him since he turned against the Diwygiad." 

" Twt, twt," said the first speaker, " his harvest 
was the fullest in the parish, his bams are bursting 
over with grain ; the Lord has blest him there, what- 
ever, and I am thinking 'tis some man, or woman per- 
haps, who has done this wicked deed, and not the Lord. 
With Het and Gwenifer so careful, it couldn't be an 
accident." 

"It might be an accident," said Nelli Amos, " and 
yet be the hand of the Lord. Well, it's put out now, 
whatever, and I am going home to bed." And she 
turned away in the darkness towards the village. 
Soon afterwards Gwenifer came up to Gildas, and, 
laying her hand on his arm with her old habit, said: 
" 'Tis put out now, mishteer, and Het and I have 
made up a bed for you in the storws. Go you and lie 
down ; we will watch here till the morning, for fear a 
fresh flame may burst out. You can trust us." 

He could see her face in the faint moonlight, and, 



THE FIRE 829 

looking into the dark brown eyes, he said : " Yes, I 
can trust thee, Gwenifer. But listen, lass ; come here 
and let me tell thee my thoughts and my troubles, as 
I used to do when I was a lad. It has long been in 
my mind, Gwenifer, and to-night's work has settled 
me in my plans. I will leave the old country — I will 
let Scethryg. Will Jones would be glad to take it 
and farm it with Bryndu; I can trust him, too. I 
will go away and work in some foreign land, Gweni- 
fer, where I can forget my troubles and the hatred of 
my enemies. Dost hear.^ dost understand.'^ " he added, 
finding she made no answer. 

" Yes,'* she said at last, and the darkness hid the 
signs of sorrow in her face. 

" Thou wilt keep watch over Scethryg for me ; and 
out there perhaps, with hard work calling for all my 
strength, some day these bitter things will pass out 
of my life. I don't want to be a hard, gloomy man ; 
in my deed I believe the world is full of brightness 
still. The earth smells sweet, the grass grows green, 
the birds sing blithely, and the good God is over all ; 
but somehow, lass, I have missed it all. If you take a 
wrong step His hard to find the right path again; 
but if there is a right pathy I wiU find it in spite of 
my enemies. Who, dost think, did this cruel thing? " 

" Oh, Gildas ! " said Gwenifer, steadying her voice 
and gulping down her sobs. " One person only in 
the whole parish would do this evil deed." 

" Nelli Amos? " he asked. 

" Yes. I am sure the fire was safe ; I put out the 



880 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

last log and I swept up the hearth. Go, Gildas, to 
bed ; Til get Hezek to come to look at your arm." 

He turned away towards the storehouse, feelin^^ for 
the first time in his life overwhelmed by his troubles. 
Hitherto he had held his grip on the rudder, and had 
felt the power to steer between the rocks of danger to 
a safe anchorage ; but now he was shaken and storm- 
tossed, and sought the shelter of the old storehouse in 
a frame of mind which was quite new to him. Rest, 
sleep, oblivion, had become desirable things to the 
man who had always sprung to meet difficulties and 
toils, and had enjoyed the struggle. He sighed as he 
reached the steps, and looked up at the red door, 
which he called to mind had been the portal through 
which he had passed to meet misfortune. 

He heard the talk and the calls of the neighbors, 
who still worked at the smoldering embers, but felt 
too weary and sick at heart to join in their exertions. 

" Caton pawb, Gildas Rees ! *' he said to himself. 
" Art going to be beaten at last? *' and in sheer ex- 
haustion he sat down on the bottom step ; the bum on 
his arm, though not a serious one, beginning to make 
itself felt more acutely. 

" I wish I had asked Gwenifer to see to it,'* he 
thought, " but, dear anwl, I must learn to do without 
her, too. She will change her mind and marry the 
captain after all ; he will persuade her, I am sure, for 
I think she likes him now. Well, he's a straight man 
and a kindly, after all ; yes, I believe that," were his 
thoughts, as he sought and found n'wncwl Sam's 



THE FIRE 831 

greasy candlestick. " If he was foolish and wild — 
well, I believe he is changed. Yes, yes; I know very 
well, as Owen Hughes said,' that * the wind bloweth 
where it listeth/ and although I don't like the smoke 
and the glare of the Diwygiad, I know what the flame 
of the Spirit can do." And, lighting his candle, he 
sat down in Hezek's chair to await Gwenif er's return. 
** I must learn to do without her; but can I? It 
will be like tearing the life out of me ! " And he fell 
into a fit of somber musing, from which he awoke 
with a start, as he heard footsteps coming up the 
steps. " I have been a fool," he said, " and now I 
must bear my punishment." 

Gwenifer came, ere long followed by Hezek, whose 
sympathy was almost outweighed by his satisfaction 
at having Gildas, the sceptical, as a patient, and 
eagerly requesting a soothing salve. 

When the arm was bandaged and the old man's 
remedy had begun to lessen his pain, he turned to 
Gwenifer. " Go thou now, lass," he said, " and can 
diolch. I will try to sleep, for in my deed I don't 
know myself in this weak plight." And Gwenifer ran 
back to the scene of the fire. The pale dawn was be- 
ginning to brighten the sky in the east, and throwing 
a cold, weird light upon the groups of busy helpers 
who still stood round the smoldering debris, convers- 
ing together in subdued tones. The consensus of 
opinion was that " an enemy had done this thing," 
and though no name was mentioned, yet suspicious 
looks were cast towards Nelli Amos's cottage, whose 



838 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

chimneys came just in sight above the sloping path to 
the village. 

"We must see to this/' said Ebben the carpenter. 
" A righteous indignation is one thing, but a bitter 
malice is another. You understand, friends, we must 
see to this in Brynzion." And they lingered round 
the still smoking house until every vestige of danger 
had disappeared. 

When Gwenifer returned from the storehouse she 
was met in the yard by Captain Jack and his mate. 
In the pale grey dawn the former looked haggard and 
white, his arm once more adjusted in its sling. 

" Dear, dear, is it burnt? " said Gwenifer. " There's 
a pity ! Come you then at once, and Hezek's herb oil 
will cure you.'* 

" Twt, twt! " said Captain Jack, while he called to 
mind vividly the blustering night when be and his 
mate first entered that ill-omened red door. " Caton 
pawb, no ! We must sail in half an hour." 

" Well," said the mate, " I will leave you to say 
• good-bye,' captain, while I run down to Maldraeth 
to see is the boat there, because we were in too great 
a hurry to fasten it safe. Fforwel to thee, Gwenifer; 
we will bring thee a ribbon from foreign parts when 
next we come into Tregildas bay." 

" They don't want me," he thought, as he hastened 
down the moor. " I have long seen how the wind lies 
in that quarter. 'Tisn't the slopes of Tregildas nor 
the friendship of Scethryg that is drawing the cap- 
tain so often to this bay. 'Tis Gwenifer; and in my 



THE FIRE 883 

deed, if there's a maid in the world is good enough 
for my captain, 'tis the sweet * queen of the rushes,* 
as they used to call her." 

When he had disappeared the two persons in ques- 
tion were left alone in the dim, dawning light. The 
sun was approaching, for behind the highest edge of 
the moor a rosy flush was spreading, which lighted 
up Gwenifer's face with a faint color as she looked 
sadly at Cap'n Jack. 

" Gwenifer," said the sailor, holding out his left 
hand, " if it must be * good-bye,* let it be soon over, 
lass. Must it be?** 

The girl*s eyes fllled with tears. 
" Yes, indeed it must be,** she said, " and 'tis sorry 
I am in my heart that you have set your love upon 
me. *Ti8n't that I don't value it, Captain Jack. 
From the first day I saw you I liked you, and I wish 
— oh, I wish — you were my brother. But I can 
never marry you, never ; so put me out of your mind, 
if you can*t feel to me as a brother." 

'' Tush ! *' said Captain Jack, with an impatient 
gesture. " If you can't love me, Gwenifer, I want 
nothing else." 

She shook her head, while the tears that had gath- 
ered in her eyes stood on her cheek, and she placed 
her hand in his. 

" Fforwel, lass," he said, " I have lost something 
here at Tregildas ; but I have gained something too. 
Good-bye ; may God bless thee ! One thing I will al- 
ways remember with gratitude. Gildas Rees has 



884 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

shaken hands with me; tell him, Gwenifer, how glad 
I am. Where is he? " 

" He's sleeping in the storws," said Gwenif er — 
" quite tired and worn out." 

" 'Tis no wonder he is worn out. Well ! Irid him 
* ff orwel • for me. Ff orwel to you, lass.*' And with a 
warm pressure of her hand he dropped it suddenly, 
and turned away down the path to Maldraeth. 

It was a pathetic, lonely figure that Gwenifer 
strained her eyes to watch through the morning mist. 

Perhaps she was unstrung by the events of the 
night and the previous days ; perhaps she was wearied 
in body; perhaps in her tender heart the sailor had 
held a warmer place than she was aware of. At all 
events, she sought the dim grey garden, and, finding 
a secluded corner, buried her face in her hands and 
cried silently. 

She heard the bustle and the talk in the yard, where 
the neighbors and helpers were gradually dispersing; 
she heard the songs of the birds, and, drying her eyes, 
returned to the stubble-yard, where she found Het 
preparing for the milking, and washing her pails 
under the spout. 

" For seems to me," she said, " everything will 
smell of smoke after this night. Ach-y^ ! " 

Gwenifer called the cows as usual ; but it could not 
be " Corwen " or " Seren " that she was thinking of 
as she said with a sigh, *^ Poor fellow! poor feDow!" 

The milk frothed into the pail, the sun rose higher 
above the moor, and, looking over the bay, she saw 



THE FIRE 886 

that the rosy beams were catching the white sails of a 
ship. 

Through the clear air she heard the cHnk of the 
anchor-chain, she saw the red pennon flutter as the 
vessel answered to the swelling breeze and sailed away 
into the golden haze which hid the horizon. 

A fresh breeze rose, the clouds parted, the sun 
shone out bright and strong, and into the golden haze 
the LUiwen sank, Gwenifer watching the last glimpse 
of her sails with tearful eyes. 



CHAPTER XIX 

A PACE AT THE WINDOW 

The month which followed the fire was one of dull 
inaction at Scethryg. For a time Gildas Rees seemed 
stunned by the catastrophe, a fresh proof, as he con- 
sidered it, of the unrelenting anger of his neighbors. 

Ere long, however, he began to revive, to recall his 
old powers of resistance, his dogged determination to 
fight and to conquer the mishaps that seemed to crowd 
round his path. 

" I think I'll rebuild Scethryg,'' he said, as Jones 
Bryndu and he stood looking at the debris of the fire. 
" After all, 'tis only the old stairs that are gone and 
the roof at the top where the laths caught fire. The 
stairs were shocking rotten, and now we can have a 
handrail to go up, like Bryndu." 

" Yes, you are right," said Jones. ** You can let 
the house, and I will take the land off you if you are 
determined to go; but, indeed, Gildas, 'twill be strange 
here without you for Betsy and me, and I think we 
will have to come after you." 

" Well, come ! " said Gildas, ** we'll work hard out 
there together, and make our fortunes, and come back 
here to end our days in our old homes; that is my 

936 



A FACE AT THE WINDOW 887 

plan, whatever, though 'tis hard to leave the old 
country." 

Will Jones looked soberly down at his earth-clogged 
shoes. " Well indeed/' he said, " I'm thinking such 
jobs as this fire are punished in this world, without 
waiting for the next. There's Nelli Amos — shrivel- 
ed up, a bag of bones ! She took to her bed the night 
she was turned out of the seiet, and Peggy Hughes 
had her place as chapel-keeper, and Nelli has never 
got up since." 

"What did they turn her out for?" said Gildas, 
** because no one saw her do this ; only Ben saw her 
peeping over the garden hedge late that night; but 
she was on her way from Voel, she said, and Jerri the 
boatman saw her arriving home with a heavy bag of 
potatoes on her shoulders." 

" Well," said Jones, " they had other things against 
her: she didn't keep the chapel so clean as she used to, 
and her tongue is too rough and bitter for Brynzion. 
But in truth, 'twas the burning of Scethryg was the 
real cause of her being turned out, and she knows it 
well, the old hag." 

" I suppose she did it," said Gildas, looking at the 
charred and blackened heap ; " I can't believe any one 
else would do it, bitter as they are against me." 

" No one, no one ; if it wasn't an accident." 

" Couldn't be ; Gwen and Het are so careful of 
fire." 

Here they were joined by n'wncwl Sam and Hezek, 
who spent much of their time in strolling round the 



888 QUEEN OP THE RUSHES 

ruins, speculating upon the origin of the fire, and 
suggesting alterations when the rebuilding began. 

" Tom Williams and Dafydd Jones Penrhiw will 
be here to begin on Monday, no doubt," they said, 
" for we must make haste to get the work done before 
the frost comes," and so the event had at least brought 
a fresh interest into the lives of the two old men. 

" Come here ! " shouted Jones Bryndu, who had 
crossed to the center of the pile and was raking away 
at the ashes. " 'Twas here it began, I'm thinkin^r — 
'twas just here the stairs went up." 

" Yes," said Gildas, drawing near. " What have 
you found? The cupboard under the stairs was where 
you are standing." 

^* Well, somebody hcul been smoking his pipe in the 
cupboard, I suppose, for look you here ! " and be held 
up a short clay pipe. 

" In my deed, 'tis n'wncwl Sam's ! " said Gildas. 
^^ Did you hide in the cupboard to smoke that night, 
n'wncwl? or did you throw your pipe in there? See, 
'tis your pipe that you bought in the fair, with a 
woman's face on the bowl ; 'tis burnt whiter than ever, 
but not a crack in it." 

N'wncwl Sam approached, ahd taking the pipe in 
his fingers, examined it narrowly ; and while he looked 
at it at arm's length, close to his eyes, through his 
spectacles, and over them, he went through an ex- 
haustive list of ejaculations. 

" Jan ! so 'tis ; there's the face quite plain ! In my 
very deed, 'tis mine. Well, well ! Caton pawb ! there's 



A FACE AT THE WINDOW 889 

an odd thing ! In my deed, I never saw such a thing! 
'Tis my pipe and no mistake ! " 

" 'Tis your pipe, Fm thinking, set the house on 
fire," said Gildas, " but how did it get under the 
stairs?" 

" Stop you a bit now," said n'wncwl Sam, " There's 
nothing like using your senses." 

" When you have got any," interpolated Hezek. 
" Look you here now," continued n'wncwl Sam, 
** call you Het and Gwenifer here, and I will make a 
confession. Dear anwl ! how one's sins find one out ! " 
"What's the man talking about?" said Jones 
Bryndu impatiently. " Did you set the house afire? " 
Nevertheless he shouted for Het and Gwen, and they 
both came out of the bam together^ 

" Come you here," said n'wncwl Sam, *' and listen 
to me. Mind you, I haven't passed through the 
Diwygiad without learning my duty ; and now that I 
see my pipe, my conscience won't let me rest till I've 
told you everything," and again he held the pipe close 
to his eyes, and ejaculated, " Howyr bach ! " 

" D'ye remember the night of the fire we were sit- 
ting together round the hearth? " 

" Not me! " said Het, " don't bring me into your 
fire or pipe, if you please." 

" Taw, fool ! and listen. I was sitting on the settle, 
and smoking my pipe as innocent as a child unborn, 
and Hezek there was preaching about the * ladiwen ' ; 
and all of a sudden he pointed his finger at me, and 
sort of frightened me, and I dropped my pipe into a 



840 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

basket of clothes that was standing on the settle by 
my side ; and look you, Gildas ! I was meaning to look 
for it before I went, but Hezek's preaching put it out 
of my mind ; and as sure as my name is Samuel Wat- 
kins, I never thought of my pipe from that moment 
till now. I had an older one in my pocket that I 
liked better, and so I forgot the new one ; and on my 
word, Gildas, there's the whole truth for you. For- 
give me, 'machgen-i, thou know'st 'tis the fault of an 
old man's memory." 

" Yes, yes, I see that," said Gildas, " but how did 
the pipe get under the stairs? " 

" Caton pawb ! " said Het, " I don't know anything 
about it; but of course, when I came in from chapel 
and saw the clothes-basket on the settle, I knew the 
folded things would get too dry for ironing, so I 
whisked it away at once to the cupboard under the 
stairs; and I suppose they'll be turning me out of 
chapel now, and whispering everywhere that I set fire 
to Scethryg." 

" Nonsense, Het," said Gwenifer. " Art not glad 
that the truth is plain and that poor Nelli Amos will 
be cleared ? " 

" Poor Nelli Amos? — umph, umph," said Het ; " I 
don't know but she deserves what she's got, turning 
my sweetheart against me, and talking to him about 
Laissabeth Penlan ! " and she tossed her head as she 
turned away. 

" This clears up everything," said Gildas. " Well 
indeed, I'm glad; though it won't pay for repairs,** 



A FACE AT THE WINDOW 841 

and he moved on with Jones of Bryndu, to take a 
last look at the filly in the field, which was soon to be 
transferred to the Bryndu pastures. 

N'wncwl Sam climbed up to the storehouse, still 
ejaculating, and treasuring his pipe as if it had been 
some trophy of a well-won victory. 

That night the long windows of Brynzion chapel 
were once more ablaze with light, for within a service 
was being held. There had been earnest prayers and 
fervid singing, but none of the extravagant expres- 
sions of penitence, the cries and groans which had 
marked the first advent of the revival; for the flame 
and smoke had died out, and given place to the calm, 
steady glow of true religious feelings, which, as time 
went on, made Brynzion and its congregation a shin- 
ing light in the religious world. 

Outside, the waves fell with the same monotonous 
plash that had beaten time on the shore for centuries ; 
a host of brilliant stars crowded the sky. Up from 
the village, and from the grey hills, the congregation 
were dropping in one by one, amongst them a man 
from the moor, stalwart and tall, broad-shouldered, 
and firm of step. Without hesitation or pause he en- 
tered and walked straight across to the Scethryg pew, 
where nVncwl Sam was already sitting in solemn soli- 
tude. He stared in astonishment as Gildas entered, 
and although no outward sensation marked the event, 
a flutter of interest passed through the entire congre- 
gation. 

" Had he seen the error of his ways and returned 



342 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

to the church of his forefathers? Well indeed, God's 
ways were wonderful ! " 

And while they marveled and rejoiced, Gildas bent 
his face over his hat in the orthodox fashion, and hung 
it up on the rail at the back of the seat, as though 
nothing unusual had happened in the weeks that had 
passed since the last time be and Nance had sat there 
together. 

One of the deacons rose in the " set fawr " and 
spoke the customary words : " There will be a * seiet ' 
after the service.'* The preacher mounted the pulpit 
stairs, and a hymn was sung with evident feeling and 
appreciation of the words. 

Everybody listened with rapt attention, an earnest 
reverence pervaded the whole congregation, every face 
was alive with fervor and interest; but there was an 
entire absence of the tumultuous excitement which had 
characterized the earlier gatherings. 

With true Christian humility the preacher, who had 
willingly effaced himself, and gladly consented to 
take a subordinate place during the religious crisis, 
now with praiseworthy readiness took up his work 
once more, never resenting the greater popularity and 
success which had attended the efforts of the younger 
and more gifted teachers. Once more he looked down 
upon the upturned faces of the flock to whom he had 
ministered for thirty long years without any visible 
signs of success, thankful to see the awakening fire 
for which he had hoped and prayed so long, although 
kindled by others' hands. 



A FACE AT THE WINDOW 843 

Gildas, sitting in the comer pew under the gallery, 
noted the temperate tone of the meeting. 

" Dear anwl," he thought, " if it had always been 
like this I would have been saved much trouble. 
But there, that is passed. 'Tis no use thinking about 
that'' 

The words were easily said, but not so easy was it 
to banish the memory of the painful events which had 
caused him to absent himself so long from the place 
of worship witli which his earliest recollections were 
entwined. 

He remembered his father and his mother as they 
led him by the hand to the old seat in the comer. In 
later years how proud he had been to see Nance in all 
her buxom beauty sitting beside him in the same old 
pew! And while the familiar service went on, a host 
of bitter thoughts and memories passed through his 
mind, and so embittered had he been by all that had 
passed, that he longed for the closing hymn which 
should set him free to turn his steps away from the 
chapel and once more reach the open moor. 

** No," he thought to himself, " not yet can I come 
back to Brynzion; but when things that are passed 
are not so fresh in my mind then I will join the old 
chapel again. After all, a man's life doesn't seem 
complete without some place of worship to go to." 

When the service was over and the congregation 
dispersed some remained for the seiet, amongst them 
the Mishteer of Scethryg; he listened patiently while 
a knotty point of church discipline was discussed and 



844 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

settled^ after which the deacon asked the usual ques- 
tions. 

" Does any one feel inclined to make any remark? *' 

" Yes," said Gildas Rees, rising to his feet, " I do,'* 
and there was a furtive glancing towards him. 

" Very good," said the deacon, " we will listen with 
pleasure to anything you have to say ; and I will take 
this opportunity of telling you that I am sure there 
is no one in this meeting to-night who is not gratified 
and thankful to welcome our brother amongst us once 
more. What have you to say? " 

" Well," said Gildas, " I have ventured to come 
amongst you to-night, because as far as I have heard 
you have not formally cut me off from membership 
of this congregation." 

" No, no, no," said the preacher, rising hastily, 
" Certainly not ; welcome back, 'machgen-i." 

" I have* come to ask you a favor," said Gildas. 
" I hear you have turned out Nelli Amos from her old 
place in your midst, and I am thinking that perhaps 
the story I have to tell you may make you inclined to 
change your minds about her. I know nothing about 
your reasons for expelling her, but when you have 
heard what I have to say perhaps you will reconsider 
the matter," and he recounted the finding of the burnt 
pipe in the center of the charred and calcined wreck 
of the Scethryg stairs, and nVncwl Sam's explanation 
of the matter. 

" It is quite plain, you see," said Gildas, " there 
can't be any doubt about it. N'wncwl Sam dropped 



A PACE AT THE WINDOW 846 

his pipe into the basket, and forgot to take it out 
again; well, Het came home from chapel, and says 
she carried the basket to the cupboard under the 
stairs ; the pipe was smoldering in it all the time, no 
doubt. I am not very fond of Nelli Amos ; but she's 
an old woman and lonely, and I do not like her to be 
wrongly suspected on my account." 

"Dear, dear!" exclaimed the deacon. "Thank 
the Lord it has been made so plain, so that no inno- 
cent persons may be wrongly suspected ! You, Gildas 
Rees, I must say have acted towards the old woman in 
a more Christian spirit than she has shown to you." 

" Now comes my favor," said Gildas. " Will you 
take Nelli Amos back to your midst? " 

There was a short consultation between the grey- 
headed deacons and their minister, during which Gil^ 
das Rees stood up in his pew. 

" Yes, 'machgen-i," said the leading deacon, " glad- 
ly we agree to your request; and thank God you 
have shown us reason for reconsidering the matter. 
Nelli Amos shall be restored to her place. Let us 
pray, and thank Gk)d for clearing our path," and the 
old man knelt in the sSt fawr, and spoke out his 
thanks to his Maker with the simple earnestness of a 
child. There were many ejaculations of " Amen " as 
he brought his prayer to a close; and Gildas Rees, 
without hurry or disrespect, was yet the first to 
emerge from the heated atmosphere of the chapel to 
the cool night air, where the stars were still glittering 
in the sky, and the waves still breaking on the silence 



846 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

of the night. With the satisfied air of a man who 
had gained his point, he turned his face towards the 
moor, and strode on over the springy turf where the 
rising moon was beginning to throw long shadows 
from the furze bushes. 

There was always a glow and cheer in the old store- 
house which made it a pleasant place to return to from 
a night's walk, and Gildas hurried homewards with a 
brisk, light step. He had forgotten Nelli Amos, for- 
gotten the fire, too, for his mind at every spare mo- 
ment turned to the plans and projects which had lat- 
terly dawned upon him, of life and work, and per- 
haps success, far away in the woods of Canada. 

He had reached the middle of the moor. Gaunt 
thorn bushes here and there stood up in the heather 
as if to defy the sea-wind which whistled through 
their branches and bent their round shoulders towards 
the east ; but so wrapt was Gildas in his own thoughts 
that he saw nothing of his surroundings, until sud- 
denly in the dimness of the cloudy moonlight a grey 
figure stood before him straight in his pathway. 

Was it Gwenifer going so late to the village? and 
he called aloud with a pleasant ring in his voice, and a 
feeling of welcome in his heart. 

" Gwenifer, lass, is it thou ? " The grey figure 
made no answer; like a shadow it passed behind the 
thorn bush, and Gildas stood still, uncertain what to 
do. " Why, follow of course," he said, " if I want 
to find out,'* so he swerved to the left and walked 
round the bush ; but in vain. Nothing was there save 



A FACE AT THE WINDOW 847 

the wind from the north bearing tales of far-away 
frost and snow; nothing but the grasses waving on 
the ground, and in the sky the grey clouds chasing 
each other across the moon. 

Gildas stood in surprise. "No one here? In my 
deed there was somebody ! " and turning to look round, 
he saw the same mysterious form — or was it an- 
other?. — disappear swiftly into the shadow of the 
furze. "What! Is the place full of witches?" 
thought Gildas, a little annoyed; but before he had 
taken many strides further, his mind had returned to 
its former groove, and he was steering his boat over 
some lonely lake or felling down trees in the tangled 
forest of a strange country. Life and energy were 
in his brain and in his strong arm ; but deep down in 
his heart a tender regret refused to be stifled. 

Suddenly he stopped again, for surely behind him 
there was a sigh on the air, a footstep that brushed 
the grasses; or was it the wind coming up from the 
sea? and turning round he thought he saw the same 
grey figure disappear in the winding path through 
the furze. 

Now for the first time he remembered the tales he 
had heard of the ghost that so many of the villagers 
declared they had seen of late on the moor, and he 
laughed at his own fancies, as he turned once more 
and looked over the many sheep-paths that wound 
through the heather. " Perhaps it was a rabbit ! " 
and he kicked at a clump of scrub and fern ; but no ! 
no white-tailed rabbit scuttled away, and he advanced 



848 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

a few steps, but stopped to listen as a long low wa3 
caught his ear like that of some creature in pain or 
distress. ^' In my deed/' he said taking off his hat and 
rubbing up his hair, " there's something here besides 
the wind and the heather ! We must find it out or else 
nobody will cross the moor in the darkness; but it's 
too late to-night," and at last he went on his way, 
though frequently stopping to look back in puzzled 
curiosity and to listen, soon, however, forgetting the 
whole subject in his desire to reach the old storehouse 
and smoke his pipe in the blaze of the hearth. 

When he reached the red door it was opened by 
Het, for Gwenifer, she said, had gone home; " gone 
home to that old bwthin, if you please, instead of 
sleeping with me in the hay-loft. Ach-y-fi! and she 
not fit to be by herself." 

"Why that?" said Gildas, sitting down to his 
supper, " she is used to being by herself." 

" Yes," said Het, " but I don't know what was the 
matter with her to-night. She went out after tea 
with a bunch of flowers from the garden — and there 
are not many left there now — and went up to the 
churchyard like she is used to do ; and when she came 
back, she was as white as a sheet, and wouldn't stop 
to taste the ewd or the cawl, or anything. Ask you 
Hezek, then," and she pointed her thumb at the old 
man, who was bending over his herbs. 

** Yes indeed ! " he said, " 'tis quite true. Gwenifer 
is always pale, but she's not white, as she was to- 
night. Look you here now, there are many shades of 



A FACE AT THE WINDOW 849 

iv-hite in nature ; now, the snowdrop and the hawthorn 
are both white; but — ^*' 

" Oh, never mind them," said Gildas impatiently. 
" Was Gwenifer sick, d'ye think? " 

" Yes, I am thinking, indeed," said nVncwl Sam, 
** there was something odd about her ; perhaps she'd 
seen the ghost." And Gildas remembered the grey 
figure that had flitted round him on the moor; he 
could imagine its frightening a girl, and he finished 
his supper hurriedly. 

" I'll go and see what is the matter with Gwenifer," 
he said, turning to the red door; "perhaps she has 
been frightened." 

** Well, in my deed," said Het, " I wouldn't won- 
der! up there in the churchyard by herself and the 
ghost so often appearing on the moor." 

" Foolishness all ! " said Gildas scornfully as he 
went out ; but as he heard the wind that came sighing 
up from the sea he recalled what he had seen on his 
way home from the meeting, and wondered whether 
Gwenifer had seen the same mysterious figure. 

When the twilight was falling, she had made her 
way, as was her frequent custom, to the little church- 
yard on the side of the hill, to place a few flowers on 
Nance's grave. 

Up there on the bleak shoulder of the hill the wind 
blew with a steady force, rushing through the little 
belfry, sweeping by the old porch, and whispering in 
the yew-trees — like some living creature, Gwenifer 
thought, as she entered the churchyard, and sought a 



350 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

shelter from the blast in the quiet corner where 
Nance's grave lay. 

She drew the flowers out separately from her hasti- 
ly gathered bunch, and with a very pensive face laid 
them gently on the grave; only the common flowers 
of the country garden — southernwood, wallflowers, 
primulas, roses, and lilies — but Gwenifer laid them 
down reverently and with a sigh whispered " Poor 
Nance" as she turned to retrace her steps to the 
churchyard gate. Raising her eyes to the narrow 
window which overlooked closely the spot where Nance 
was buried, she saw a sight that seemed to freeze the 
blood in her veins, that chained her footsteps to the 
ground, and riveted her eyes on the long church win- 
dow, for within it she saw dimly but distinctly a white 
face, with hollow eyes, that looked down upon her 
where she knelt. 

For a moment she saw it, plainly visible in the 
gloom ; but even while she looked the phantom seemed 
to fade, or to recede into the background. Slowly 
she moved away, and her courage returned, as, pass- 
ing the porch, she saw the church door was open. 
" Perhaps, then, some one had entered, had climbed 
to the high windowsill, and looked down upon her. 

Yes, it must be so, and yet, and yet ^* and she 

hurried on in the twilight. 

** Could it be? oh, surely no,** and with some mys- 
terious fear clutching at her heart, she ran the rest of 
the way back to Scethryg, to bid Het not expect her 
to supper, and then home over the moor, the wind in 



A FACE AT THE WINDOW 351 

her ears whispering its weird and mournful secrets; 
but Gwenifer ran with her heart beating fast to the 
shelter of home, where she bolted her weatherworn 
door, and sat on the fire bench to recover her breath 
and her courage. 

She pressed her hand on her throbbing side, for a 
terrible fear had darted through her mind at the sight 
of the pale face at the window — a suspicion that re- 
fused to be banished, even by the shelter of home and 
the glow of the bracken which she soon kindled in the 
little grate. 

She bustled about with her tea-things, she lighted 
her candle and tried to forget her fears; but ah! 
when she looked towards her tiny window, which had 
never known a blind, there was the face! more terrible 
far in the quiet of home; for here it pressed close 
against the pane, and, as if grown more bold, stared 
in at Gwenifer with lack-lustre, meaningless eyes. 
Again that terrible thought! and Gwenifer hid her 
face in her hands and trembled like a leaf. 

She who had lived alone with Nature so long was 
now overwhelmed by nervous dread; but it was not 
the foolish fear of the ghost, the blind terror of the 
ignorant, that had overcome her, but the power of 
that strange thought that had darted through her 
mind in the churchyard, and that now with double 
force took possession of her. What should she do? 
She must open her door and let the phantom enter if 
such was its desire ; she must open her heart and wel- 
come it there too ! " O God, give me strength,** she 



S62 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

cried, and looking again at the window, she sa,w the 
white face still there, the hungry eyes still fixed upon 
her; and burying her face once more in her hands, 
she sat down to try to grasp the terrible idea. Yes, 
gaunt and hollow-eyed though it was, she recognized 
the face of Nance, and felt instinctively that it was 
neither ghost nor spirit that haunted the moor of 
Scethryg, but Nance herself returned in the flesh; 
and into her mind came rushing the thought of all it 
would mean for Gildas and for her, and in her heart 
too she felt that between her and him once more there 
stood a strong barrier that nothing could bridge over. 

Turning her eyes again to the window, she saw- 
that the ghastly face had disappeared, and then a 
fresh tide of feeling swept in upon her — Nance, her 
friend! the playmate of her childhood, the unhappy 
one who had strayed through tangles and briars and 
found her way back again to the old home. From 
such a one she had turned away ! had allowed her to 
drift once more to the wild moor and the bleak grey 
hills ! Oh, shame ! 

She went to the door, and throwing it wide open 
waited silently within, in the hope that the wanderer 
might enter. She listened intently, and on the night 
air came the sound of a step that approached on the 
soft grass. Surely she was coming ! and every thought 
of self died out in Gwenifer's heart, while she waited 
there to welcome and comfort the woman who could 
bring nothing but disappointment and cruel tension 
into her own life. 



A FACE AT THE WINDOW 868 

The step drew nearer, firm and steady; no ghost 
or phantom this, and Gwenifer, agitated and per- 
plexed, saw Gildas enter. 

" Mishteer ! " she exclaimed in astonishment, " so 
late!" 

" Yes, so late, and thy door so wide open ! Who 
wast waiting for, lass? Didst think I would come 
when I heard thou wast sick? " 

" Oh, no, indeed," said Gwenifer in dire confusion. 
•*I don't think such a thing, mishteer; but thinking 
I was that I heard a step on the heather, and waiting 
to see who it was." 

"Art disappointed then, lass?" he said laugh- 
ing, and taking the seat placed for him in the ingle 
nook. " There's glad I am to see thou art well and 
hearty ; Het and the two old men made me think there 
was something the matter with thee, so I came to see 
what it was ; but on my word thou art better than 
ever, I think. What was it, then, Gwenifer?" and 
he puffed at his pipe and stretched his feet to the blaz- 
ing hearth. 

" In my deed," he said, " there's no one knows how 
to make a comfortable hearth like Gwenifer," and he 
looked around the tiny room with pleased enjoyment. 
" But come, lass, sit thee down, and tell me what was 
the matter." 

" Oh, nothing ! " said Gwenifer ; " only frightened 
I was, at something passing quick through the twi- 
light — nothing at all only that, mishteer ; " and 
while she spoke, glancing towards the bare window, 



864 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

she saw again, though a little withdrawn into the dark- 
ness, the face that had startled her before. Every 
vestige of color, which excitement had brought to her 
cheeks, faded out, and left her deadly pale — so white, 
so stricken, that Gildas observed the change. 

"What is it, lodes?" he said, rising to his feet; 
" thou art not a girl to have foolish fancies. Where 
is it, then, this creature that is frightening thee? 
Was it the grey thing they call the ghost, Gwenifer? " 
She made no answer, for she still saw the white face 
faintly marked against the gloom. 

Following the direction of her eyes, Gildas looked 
too and thought he saw a faint shadow flit away. In 
a moment he was at the door. 

" Ghost or not," he said, " Hwill have to give an ac- 
count of itself to me. Caton pawb! Are you to be 
haunted on your own hearth? Let me go, Gweni- 
fer ! " for she had placed herself between him and the 
doorway. " Art thou become a coward? or am I a 
child once more ? Art afraid the bwcci will have me ? " 
and he laughed, with the ringing heartiness of earlier 
days ; and still determined, he gently thrust her aside, 
and made straight for the door ; but Gwenifer was as 
determined as he was. What ! let him go out into the 
darkness, to meet face to face the woman who he 
thought was dead and buried! No! she must detain 
him at any cost, and she grasped his arm, and clung 
to him desperately, at last flinging her arms round 
him and looking up into his face with such beseeching 
eyes, that for very shame he desisted in his struggle. 



A FACE AT THE WINDOW 866 

and grasping her hands in his, held them pressed to 
his breast, while he returned her imploring look with 
one full of something that she had never seen there 
before. 

" Gwenifer, lass," he pleaded, and there was a pas- 
sionate tremble in his voice, ** put thine arms round 
me again, and tell me thy heart is mine ;" but with a 
sudden wrench she drew her hands from his grasp, and 
turned away her face, no longer pale, but blushing 
like the dawn. 

" No, no," she said, ** I cannot, I must not, Gildas ; 
you must not say that to me," for even while his words 
made her heart bum with happiness, she remembered 
the face at the window that might even now be looking 
in upon them, and she drew herself away and left 
Gildas standing as if stunned. 

For a moment, while he had felt the warm clasp of 
her arms, and held the little brown hands in his own, 
his face had lighted up with the fire and energy that 
had marked it of old, his eyes had flashed, the old 
merry smile had curved his lips; but when Gwenifer 
had turned away from him so resolutely, had wrenched 
her hands from his grasp so ruthlessly, an angry flood 
of color had risen to his face, but had receded and left 
him white and still, his lips set in the old hard curve. 

" Thou must forgive me, Gwenifer," he said ; " I 
forgot myself, lass, and I did not know it was so with 
thee, but I remember now. I will never offend thee 
again ; thou know*st me, that I always keep my word, 
so thou need'st not fear me." 



866 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

Gwenifer had seated herself on the old oak stool by 
the fire. She was faint and torn with conflicting feel- 
ings; the hope of her life had been fulfilled, and at 
the same moment she was called to resign it. She 
tried to speak, but her lips refused to utter a word ; 
and Gildas, looking down at her, seemed equally un- 
able to express his feelings. 

At last turning to the door he stopped with his hand 
on the latch, and trying to throw off the silent embar- 
rassment that had faUen upon both, he asked in his 
ordinary 'voice, " Would'st not like to come home to 
Scethryg to-night if thou art frightened? " 

She bent her head to hide the tears that had gath- 
ered in her eyes. 

" No, mishteer,*' she said, " I will stop here to- 
night." 

" As thou pleasest," he answered. " Grood-night, 
then," and without another word he walked out into 
the darkness. 



CHAPTER XX 

Betsy's plans 

Thebe was no sleep for Gwenlfer that night. It 
was not only the strange discovery that Nance was 
still alive in the flesh that disturbed her, but underly- 
ing it was a secret sorrow which she tried hard to stifle. 
She opened the door wide, and, leaving a friendly 
light in the window, went out over the moor, and cliffs, 
calling softly, " Nance ! Nance f ach ! is it thou in- 
deed ? " but in vain she called, and strained her ears 
to listen. There was no answer on the night wind, 
no sign of the grey figure flitting between the furze 
bushes. Many times in the long hours between night 
and dawn she went out and roamed about, herself like 
a wandering ghost ever calling in persuasive tones, 
" Nance, Nance ! Come home, 'merch-i, come home ! " 
But when the night was spent and the sky began to 
lighten in the east, and still there had been no response 
to her call, she returned to her cottage, and throwing 
herself on her bed, intending to rest a few minutes, fell 
asleep, and did not awake until the sun had risen high 
in the sky; until the sea was sparkling and dancing 
under his beams; until the little sea-crows and the 
guUs were already winging their way to an inland 
reedy river-bank. 

867 



868 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

She started up, and, dressing hurriedly, ran out 
into the bright morning air. " Oh anwl ! " she cried, 
racing over the grass. " Dear, dear ! What is the 
matter? Everything seems upside down to-day: 
sleeping so long, and Het milking the cows for me." 

Breathless she entered the kitchen, where Gildas sat 
at his morning meal. 

" Oh, mishteer ! '* she cried, trying to speak natu- 
rally. " Dear anwl ! I have overslept myself." 

" Never mind," he answered ; " Het has milked for 
thee." He finished his breakfast, and made his ar- 
rangements for the day's work as usual, and at last 
went out to the barn, apparently unmoved by any dis- 
turbing memories. 

" 'Twas a dream ! " said Gwenif er to herself, as she 
turned to her work in the dairy ; but, as she skimmed 
the wrinkling cream, and cleansed every speck and 
spot from the stone slabs, her heart contradicted the 
words, crying with every beat, " Not a dream, not a 
dream ; but, Gwenif er, thou must forget it ! " 

In the afternoon a round red sun shone through the 
autumn haze upon Gildas, working in the field beyond 
the creek ; and his hand was not less steady, the long 
furrows none the less straight, because in his mind 
there remained the memory of a glowing hearth, of 
his own momentary loss of self-control, of a girl who 
turned away from him and wrenched her hand from 
his grasp with cruel firmness. " Well, doubtless she 
had given her promise to the sailor, and there was 
nothing more to be said about it." 



BETSY'S PLANS 359 

" Yes," he soliloquized, being quite alone in the 
broad ploughed field, with no one to hear him but the 
crows and seagulls who followed closely at his heels. 
** Yes, in my deed, I have loved her all my life — when 
I was a boy, and played with her on the shore ; when 
I was a man I loved her too ; and now it is all over. 
Gee up. Flower ! Come up. Darby ! " 

The plough did not swerve from its line, and the 
green sward grew smaller and smaller as the afternoon 
waned. Turning the comer, he heard a loud call 
from the hillside, where two figures were rapidly ap- 
proaching the Scethryg fields. His face lighted up 
with pleasure, as he raised his hand in welcome; and 
a few minutes later Jones Bryndu, accompanied by 
his wife, came in at the gap, and skirted the field to- 
wards Gildas. 

" Here she is ! *' he cried, jerking his head back- 
wards towards his wife, who was plodding after him 
through the upturned clods. " She would come with 
me. I don't know is she welcome or not." 

" Twt, twt," said Betsy, waving her rough brown 
hand. " I'll take my chance of that, and we'll come 
home to tea with you, Gildas." 

"Well, b't shwr," said the toiler. "Wo, Flower! 
We'll be glad indeed to see you, if you don't mind tea 
in the old storws, for you know we are not back in 
Scethryg yet." 

" No, no," said Jones ; " we know that. Go you 
on with your ploughing, and we'll go on to the storws 
to tell them we're coming." 



860 QUEEN OP THE RUSHES 

" Yes," laughed Betsy, " and that you will be in 
soon to your tea ; for I see you'll have done the field 
in half an hour." 

" Yes, yes, go you on," said Gildas. " 1*11 soon be 
at home ; " and Flower and Darby were again set go- 
ing, and the keen bright plough with its red handles 
went on cleaving the sods. 

When Het from the vantage ground of the store- 
house steps, saw the two figures enter the field where 
her master was ploughing she was plunged into a 
whirl of excitement. " Diwss anwl ! here's Jones 
Bryndu and his wife coming — coming to tea, be 
bound ; and we in the old storws without a cup or a 
plate in the place it ought to be; and everything so 
nice in Bryndu. Ach-y-fi! Gwenifer gone out to 
the milking, too! What will I do?" and she rushed 
about at railway speed, until she had hunted out the 
best tea-things and laid them on the table — had hid- 
den away the old brown teapot, and brought out the 
brilliant china one which she had recently bought at 
the fair. 

The kettle was boiling and the tea-cakes were toast- 
ing when Betsy Jones reached the top of the steps. 
"Well, tan-i-marw!" said Het, as the visitors came 
in at the red door. " Well, who'd think to see you 
here, Mr. Jones and Mrs. Jones? There's a good 
thing now that I've got the tea all ready for 
mishteer. Not expecting company I was, so every- 
thing's very plain on the table, Mr. Jones and Mrs. 
Jones. I wonder now Juno did not bark, or some- 



BETSY'S PLANS 861 

thing to show me you were coming; but you must take 



** Oh, everything is first-rate, Het,'' said Betsy 
Jones, " and the mishteer will be home in half an 
hour." Her face was set in a sedate company look, 
for she had on her best gown and hat ; but she smiled, 
and very broadly within herself, at Het's pretences. 
As plainly as if she had been present, she saw in her 
mind's eye the scuffling and hurrying that had pre- 
ceded this triumph of festal array. 

« Well indeed ! " said Jones. " Who would think 
you could be so comfortable in the old storws? But 
there, Het, you and Gwenifer are very good managers. 
How's the dun cow getting on ? " and the conversation 
fell into a pastoral strain ; the pigs, the sheep, the fod- 
der, filled up the time of waiting for the mishteer and 
the tea. He came at last, followed by n'wncwl Sam, 
always punctual at meal-times, and always in a hurry 
to get out again, as if the whole work of the farm de- 
pended upon him. Gwenifer, too, came in from the 
dairy, but Hezek was absent, " roaming after those 
old smelling weeds," Het said ; and they sat down to 
as good a meal as could have been served in palace or 
farmhouse; the thick golden cream, the brown bread 
and butter, the new-laid eggs, the ham, and the tea- 
cakes ; and, crowning all in Het's opinion, the brilliant 
china teapot. Gwenifer stared a little at the unaccus- 
tomed display. 

Mrs. Jones made the tea and Het waited. 

Betsy's mind, like nature, abhorred a vacuum, and 



86« QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

while she had followed her husband to Scethryg that 
day she had evolved a " plan *' in her mind which 
should restore peace and happiness to Gildas Rees's 
household. It was entirely without foundation, bom 
of her own busy thoughts and kindly instincts — but 
what did that matter to Betsy Jones? 

As she sat at the tea-table, she felt she had " man- 
aged " more unlikely affairs, and brought them to a 
successful issue. She looked at Gwenifer's downcast 
eyes, she saw the blush that dyed her cheek when Gil- 
das spoke to her and her keen insight was aware at 
once of some constraint in his manner. Something 
had passed between these two, and what more fitting? 
She must " manage ** it ; and she chattered cheerfully, 
and filled up the teacups with thorough enjoyment, 
not only of the pleasant meal, but of the prospect of 
"business" before her. 

Under the genial influence of the fragrant cup, 
with its accompaniment of chat and laughter, Gildas 
grew more cheerful, more like his old self, and dis- 
cussed with his friend his preparations for leaving the 
old country. 

" I met Oliver the lawyer on the road yesterday," 
he said, " and he will have the papers ready before 
long; I told him I wasn't going till the spring." 

** What's the hurry about the papers? " said Betsy, 
^^ perhaps you will change your mind, man ! Indeed, 
there's foolish you are ; take my advice now, and stop 
where you are. There's no man in the whole neigh- 
borhood more honored and respected than you are. 



BETSY'S PLANS 863 

whatever you may think," but Gildas shook his head 
emphatically. 

" No," he said, " I would be better away from here, 
for a few years at least; I want to forget the past, 
and begin again. I have plenty of work in me, and 
dear anwl, don't think I am going to break my heart. 
No, no, if the clouds are ever so dark, the sun is shin- 
ing behind them, and perhaps it will shine upon me 
in another land ; certainly I have not seen much of its 
light lately. That's what I think, Jones, a man 
makes his own fate, and I have begun wrong. I'll try 
again in another country." 

" And why not here? " said Betsy. ** Look round 
you, man, and see for yourself ; some people miss the 
flowers at their feet by looking over the distance." 

But Gildas only shook his head soberly. 

" Well," said Betsy, " you'll go your own way, 
of course, like every man ; but remember you, Gildas, 
/ am dead against it, and somehow or other I often 
get my own way." 

" True enough," said her husband parenthetically. 

" Well yes ; and we'll talk about this again when 
it's nearer the spring," continued Betsy, without heed- 
ing the interruption. " Well indeed, these tea-cakes 
are nice, there's eating I am! And here's Gwenifer 
now ! Time for her to be looking out for a husband, 
for she's got a tongue now, to give him a trimming 
sometimes. What d'ye think, Gildas ? " 

" Well," said the latter, " Pm thinking she knows 
her own mind on that point ; " and Gwenifer rose 



864 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

hastily to help Het in the waiting, and to hide her 
confusion. 

" Oh, no doubt,'» said Betsy. " When I know his 
name, 'merch-i, FU wish him joy from the bottom of 
my heart; for I think he'll be a lucky man." 

" Yes, in my deed," said Jones jocosely. " If it 
wasn't for Betsy here, now, I'd try my luck myself; 
but she stops the way, you see. Would I have a 
chance — eh, Gwenifer?" 

"Well yes; Fm thinking, indeed a very good 
chance," laughed the girl, taking the joke in good 
part, and glad to have an excuse for her blushes. 
The laugh went round the table, Gildas alone being si- 
lent ; a fact that was not lost upon the shrewd Betsy. 

They were, to all appearances, a merry and light- 
hearted company, when suddenly they heard Hezek's 
voice somewhere from the stubble-yard, conversing 
as he walked, or, rather, soliloquizing, for there was 
no answer to his remarks. " Come on ! come on, then, 
dear heart! We are nearly there now. Up these 
steps, and we are at home." And they heard him 
ascending, and, with his, another footstep, slow and 
lagging. In another moment he appeared at the 
doorway, leading by the hand — a girl, a woman, a 
wraith? What was she? Clad in rags, bent with 
fatigue ; yet, altered as she was, they recognized in the 
tattered figure, Nance — the lost, the drowned. 

Had a thunder-bolt fallen in their midst, they could 
not have been more startled and alarmed. Betsy 
Jones dropped her tea-cake and stared open-mouthed 



BETSY'S PLANS 865 

at the strangers; Gwenifer started up and covered her 
eyes with her hands ; Het screamed and ran into hiding 
somewhere, Jones Bryndu rose to his feet, bewildered ; 
Gildas alone sat on immovable — as if turned to stone, 
he stared at the unkempt waif before him. Amaze- 
ment, horror, were in his gaze; but no joy, no greet- 
ing. 

" Didn't I tell you " said Hezek, breaking in upon 
the silence ; " didn't I tell you the little lass would 
come home? She was lost between the bushes on the 
hillside, but I found her ; and here she is now, all ready 
for her tea." 

Only for a moment was Gwenifer overcome by the 
unexpected sight. Before Hezek had finished speak- 
ing, she had hastened to the forlorn-looking creature, 
who stood there like a stranger, her eyes fixed on the 
table. With a cry as if of pain she stretched her 
hands toward the food, tottered, and would have fallen 
had not Gwenifer caught her, and, with the help of 
Betsy Jones, who had now recovered her senses, placed 
her in a chair. 

" Starving, poor thing ! " she cried. " A cup of 
tea, Gwenifer, and some bread-and-butter." They 
held the cup to her lips, and she drained it eagerly, 
but turned her head away from the more solid food. 
The refreshing meal that had so often been longed for 
had come too late. 

Meanwhile, Gildas had sat on at the table as if 
stunned, his eyes fixed on the busy group and the un- 
happy object of their care. 



366 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

Suddenly starting to his feet he cried out excitedly : 

" Stand aside ! " They obeyed ; and drawing 
nearer he stood straight and tall and unbending be- 
fore the wreck of humanity which he had once called 
wife. 

" Nance ! " he cried — and there was a tremor of 
suppressed feeling in his voice — " Nance ! Do you 
hear? Do you know me? " But there was no answer 
from the blue lips, no sign of recognition in the va- 
cant eyes. 

Gwenifer, who stood behind her, held one of the 
wasted hands towards him, thinking such was his de- 
sire ; but he made no answering movement to take it, 
and she laid it down again on the ragged gown. 

" Nance ! " cried Gildas again ; " listen, 'merch-i. I 
am Gildas Rees, of Scethryg — your husband. Look 
at me, if you can, and say do you know me? " But 
the eyes still roamed vaguely ; from her lips came only 
a little moan, a little gibbering; and with a shudder 
Gildas turned away. 

" Thank God ! " he said, as Jones Bryndu tried in 
his clumsy fashion to show his sympathy. " Yes, 
thank God, Jones! since this is His will, that I find 
her like this. If she were in her right senses, knowing 
me and able to talk to me, I am afraid I could never 
forgive her ; but now like this, I can say, * Poor thing! 
poor thing!' and— -I can try to forgive her." 

Hezek sat enjoying his tea in perfect content; he 
had found a rare and long-sought-for herb that day, 
and in seeking for it had lighted upon his little lass. 



BETSY'S PLANS 867 

the wretched condition in which he found her making 
no impression upon his unbalanced mind ; for had he 
not brought her safely home? And he was the only 
member of that little company who was undisturbed 
by the wanderer's return. 

Gildas had not even glanced at Gwenif er ; nor had 
it struck him that Nance's return would in any way 
affect their relations to each other, for the girl's firm 
repulse of the night before had thrown him back upon 
his proud and defiant nature. He would forget that 
he had been a fool, he would live his life alone, and 
no one should know of his weakness. Nevertheless, 
his very soul was disturbed and upheaved as he sat by 
the hearth, and looked at the woman who had brought 
such misery into his life. He could not lay all the 
blame of her strange deviation from the path of 
wifely duty to the excitement of the Revival, for he re- 
membered that she had married him without love, had 
deceived and humiliated him ; and as he looked at the 
lack-luster eyes, the meaningless smile, he could only 
be thankful that he was able to say, " Poor thing, 
poor thing." 

Meanwhile Betsy Jones had been thrown into a tur- 
moil of mixed feelings : thankfulness that she had been 
present on such an eventful occasion; that she could 
say to her friends, " I was there, I saw it myself ; " 
sorrow for the trouble that she saw was weighing upon 
Gildas ; and pity for the unhappy creature who had 
thus been cast upon their hands. 

What will we do with her? was already a pressing 



868 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

question. " Go you out,'* she said to the men, with a 
wave of her hand, getting rid of them as the first step 
in the rearrangement of her flustered ideas. " Caton 
pawb ! we can do nothing while the men are maunder- 
ing about! Now they're gone, better settle what 
we're to do with her. Put her to bed, of course, poor 
thing! But where? There's no room here." 

" No, " said Gwenifer; " but we have made up the 
beds in Scethryg, thinking to go back there to-mor- 
row ; now, 'tis a good thing, we can put her in her own 
bed, and I can sleep with her and tend her ; " and 
with Ben's help they bore in the helpless, almost inani- 
mate form ; and thus did Nance, the bold and bloom- 
ing, recross the threshold of her husband's home. 

Where she had spent the weary weeks, since on that 
dark night at Maldraeth she had climbed the rugged 
path to the top of the cliff, and then with clouded 
brain and aching heart had turned towards the bare, 
grey northern hills, they never discovered with any 
certainty; they could only conjecture that she had 
suffered much, from her rambling and incoherent 
words when, returned to her old home, she lay ex- 
hausted on her bed, and when neither care nor tender- 
ness availed to recall her from that bourne on whose 
banks she had arrived. 

Sometimes the watchers, bending over her, tried to 
catch her indistinct mutterings. " 'Tis cold o* nights 
on the Wildrom mountains ! " they heard her say. 
" The paths are long and rough." Once she cried 
with a shudder, " The shepherds have fierce dogs on 



BETSY'S PLANS 869 

the WUdrom mountains! " And Gwenifer's eyes were 
full of tears as she tried to soothe and reasisure the 
way-worn wanderer. 

By night and day she was unremitting in her atten- 
tion to the invalid, and, helped by Betsy Jones, she 
soothed the last hours of the ruined life. To Gildas 
these last days of lingering sickness were a severe or- 
deal. He roamed for hours about the cliffs and moor, 
often returning to ask for news of the sufferer, but 
never entering the room ; for he shrank with an un- 
controllable aversion from the sight of his unhappy 
wife. He impressed upon Het and Gwenifer, how- 
ever, his wish that everything possible should be done 
for her comfort ; " and if she comes to herself," he 
said, " call me at once ; but, like this, to see her would 
do no good to her or me." 

But there was no reawakening to consciousness for 
poor Nance, no return of reason; and when at last 
the flickering spark of life went out, nothing but pity 
filled the hearts of those who watched beside her. 

Hezek alone was still untouched by care. " The. 
little lass had come home ; she was tired, she was rest- 
ing in bed with Gwenifer to nurse her," so he set out 
on a long ramble with a happy smile on his placid 
face ; and when he reappeared at Scethryg, Nance had 
been a fortnight in her grave. Her return had al- 
ready slipped out of the old man's memory, and he con- 
tinued to solace himself with the words, " she'll be 
home to-morrow." 

The news of the unexpected event which had so 



870 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

much disturbed the Scethryg household had spread 
like wild-fire through the neighborhood. 

Betsy Jones had taken care to return home by the 
village, although it was quite out of her way, for such 
an opportunity for reproving the Brynzion deacons 
was not to be lost. She was fortunate enough to 
meet the whole congregation just emerging from a 
prayer meeting. *^ You see ! " she said, haranguing 
a group who were standing outside the diapel, ^' how 
you have all wronged Gildas Rees — almost calling 
him a murderer; for in spite of the 'quest and the 
crowner, you still suspected he had got rid of his wife 
by some foul means; and here she is come back to 
Scethryg and her senses gone." 

" The mestress come back ! " they gasped. " Caton 
pawb! is that true? '* 

" True as the sun is shining! *' said Betsy ; ** I was 
there myself. Will and me ! " 

" Yes indeed," said her husband more calmly, ** His 
quite true poor Nance has returned." 

"Come back?" they exclaimed again. "Where 
has she been all this time, then? " 

" Oh, the Lord knows ! Roaming the world over, 
I should think by her shoes; and her clothes in gib- 
bets and her senses gone, poor thing! Don't you see, 
John Parry? " she said, turning to the chief deacon. 
" Don't you see? Gildas Rees knew what he was 
about when he tried to keep her from the Diwygiad 
meetings. Didn't he see the excitement was too much 
for her? And there she is in bed, with Gwenifer to 



BETSY'S PLANS 871 

nurse her, and poor Gildas telling them to give her 
everything she wants, and walking about the cliffs he 
is, like a man demented. He must have suffered a lot ! 
between the loss of his wife, and your black thoughts, 
for of course he knew them all." 

" Yes indeed," said the preacher, who had joined 
them in the roadway. ** This is a strange happening, 
and it behooves us to confess our fault, Mrs. Jones ; 
we were too hasty, and we must ask his pardon." 

" Well yes," said Betsy ; " but some other time. 
Now he is too upset with a wife that he thought was 
drowned and buried, coming back to him suddenly 
when we were all at tea." 

There was a chorus of " Dear anwls ! " and *' Caton 
pawbs ! " during which Betsy Jones and her husband 
left, the former delighted with the sensation she had 
created. 

Her departure was followed by the question " Who, 
then, did we bury and hold the 'quest upon? " But 
such an event as this was not wholly unknown where 
the wild sea was ever rushing up against the rugged 
coast, and where Maldraeth's curved bay was ever the 
trap which caught so much of the wrack and refuse of 
the angry waves; and they agreed 'twas some poor 
creature drowned at sea, who by a happy chance had 
had a Christian burial in a quiet grave. 

Gwenif er called to mind the little storm-tossed ship 
which she had seen one evening in the twilight, and 
felt secretly convinced that the presentiment of 
danger to Gildas which it seemed to threaten and 



872 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

which had haunted her so persistently had been ful- 
filled in the mistaken identity of the body found on 
Maldraeth, and she never forgot when she laid her 
simple flowers on Nance's grave to scatter a few also 
upon that of the unknown woman. Hitherward Gil- 
das's footsteps never turned. He accompanied the 
funeral up the stony mountain road, his face set in 
that impenetrable mask which hid his feelings so com- 
pletely, but though no one said he had shown any 
signs of sorrow, yet no one remarked upon his callous- 
ness, and that was all that he desired. 

As the weeks sped on, and winter set in with frost 
and snow and storm winds from the bleak north, the 
outdoor work on the farm had perforce to be discon- 
tinued, but that did not mean an idle time for the in- 
mates of Scethryg. Het clattered in and out in her 
wooden shoes as vigorously as ever, the two old men 
worked at the beehives and " whintell " baskets, clump- 
ing in through the snow in the evening, to finish their 
day with a smoke before the blazing logs. 

Gildas was busy with his preparations for depar- 
ture in the spring, though it must be confessed that as 
the time drew nearer, the stronger seemed the cords 
that bound him to the old home and the old country ; 
and any dreams of success and riches which he might 
sometimes indulge in drew their chief charm from the 
prospect of their happy climax in a speedy return to 
the land of his birth, and a peaceful rest at the end of 
his days in Scethryg. 

There were visits to the tailor and the shoemaker 



BETSrS PLANS 373 

to fill up his time, new garments to be stowed away in 
the big box, strong shoes to be dried under the rafters, 
and, above all, tools of every kind and fashion to be 
collected and packed in an iron-clumped chest, which, 
to judge from its appearance, might already have 
crossed the Atlantic many times. 

Gwenif er was often absent from the household circle. 
She attended to her duties as regularly as ever, but 
when the day's work was over she generally took her 
way over the moor to her cottage, whose brown thatch 
only showed above the soft white mantle of snow. 
There, sitting alone by her tiny hearth, where, how- 
ever, the peat and furze crackled and blazed cheer- 
fully, she sat and wove her dreams and fancies, as she 
had been accustomed to do when her lips were sealed 
and silent. 

She hummed to herself as she knitted, or worked at 
her bright patchwork, and surely there must have been 
some pleasant thought behind that calm and even 
frame of mind, that happy smile, and the tender luster 
of her dark eyes. Yes, she was very happy ; for in 
her heart a new and eager project was forming, in her 
mind a forceful purpose was daily gathering strength. 
It required much planning, much consideration, and all 
must be done in secret, and by her alone ; so it was no 
wonder that her thoughts were busy while her needles 
clicked, no wonder that she hummed and crooned her 
simple old hymns and mountain lays, for plans, anx- 
ieties, and dreams were all pointing to a bright and 
successful issue. The wind might blow keen from the 



874 QUEEN OP THE RUSHES 

north, the snow might fall in whirling flakes, her path- 
way to the farm might be hidden under the drifts; 
but still in Gwenifer's heart, in spite of wind and 
storm, a bird of summer sang its song of hope and 
cheer. 

As the days grew shorter and darker and the year 
grew nearer to its close, the old farm kitchen seemed 
to Gildas to have lost something, he could not tell 
what, but something that had brightened the fire- 
glow, that had sweetened the laughter, and lightened 
the gloom. 

He scarcely realized that it was Gwenifer's absence 
which made this blank in his home-life; but when at 
evening she crossed the farmyard on her way to her 
cot for the night, his eyes followed her with regret, 
and when morning brought her again his face light- 
ened, and he went to his work with content. 

" And yet " — he thought one day as he went out 
to see how the sheep had fared in the night — " and 
yet he was going to leave it all. Gwenif er ! he would 
miss her sorely ! But, dear anwl ! was he a woman to 
grieve and fret over a slip of a girl who had shown 
him plainly that he was nothing to her — nothing but 
the mishteer? Once to be a fool was enough, then; 
for surely, ere long, a bright red pennon would again 
flutter against the grey sea, the sailor would return, 
the timid half promise would be changed into a 
plighted troth, and Gwenif er would marry him ! " 

There was gall and wormwood in the thought. 

" Well," he said, leaning over the hurdles and for- 



BETSY'S PLANS 875% 

^tting the sheep, ** let me be gone first. Let the sea 
roll between me and that wedding day! Perhaps 
'twill be nothing to me when I come back here some 
day in the future." 

Jones Bryndu and Betsy came often to the farm 
in the afternoons, when Het, no longer taken un- 
awares, had the china teapot always ready, the tea 
cakes in the oven, and sometimes the lightcakes on the 
griddle to greet them; and drawing round the fire 
when the meal was over, the wind roaring in the chim- 
ney, they chatted and laughed and sometimes sang to- 
gether — for Jones and his wife were good singers, 
and Gildas's voice had a mellow ring in it that added 
to the fulness of the harmony. What pleasant times 
they were! Hours to be remembered, the latter 
thought, when he was working hard on some lonely 
farm in Canada. Yes! the clouds were lifting from 
his life, in spite of one secret regret. 

" Where is Gwenifer? " said Betsy Jones, who had 
once more begun to evolve her little plans. " Indeed, 
'tis not like Scethryg without her. Where is she, 
then?'* 

** Gone home, I think," said Gildas, looking after 
the blue cloud which he was puffing up the chimney. 
** She goes home early now the days are so short." 

" Yes," said Het from the background. " And 
what do you think she is doing there? I followed her 
one night and peeped through the window — why, 
sorting out new clothes, she was ! In my deed, I think 
she must be going to be married. Captain Jack will 



876 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

be in tlie bay soon, I suppose, for I think he is the 
man!»» 

" Captain Jack ! '* exclaimed Betsy — and through 
her mind darted a host of arguments, pro and con — 
*^ why, of course! Hadn't he been always ready to 
talk about her? But then, wouldn't he look higher 
tlian Gwenifer? and wasn't he rather * wild? ' And 
yet, hadn't he once said he had never seen a woman to 
compare with her? And now that it was proved that 
he had notliing to do with Nance's disappearance — 
why, of course, it must have been Gwenifer whom he 
was always looking for at Scethryg!" 

All tliis passed throu^ her mind as she turned in- 
quiringly to Gildas« 

*' Captain Jack ! Is there anything in that? " 

** Yes, I suppose," said Gildas ; " but indeed I don't 
know — they have never told me." 

*^ Well, well, dear anwl ! I suppose it would be a 
good thing for her, for they say he's saving money, 
and he has turned very steady lately." 

And not even Betsy ^s keen eyes detected the shrink- 
ing pain which Gildas hid under his quiet answer. 

" No doubt, then, thou art right, Het," continued 
Betsy, " and she's beginning to prepare her stafell. 
Well indeed, he's a lucky man, too. I couldn't think 
what he was asking John Lloyd about his half-finished 
house for; no doubt Hwas for Gwenifer to live in, 
and slie*ll ha%'e to leave her little bwthin now." 

** Stop, stop, 'merch-i ! " said her husband, with a 
laugh* **Thou art building tog much upon Het's 



BETSY'S PLANS 877 

fancies; the house that's built without a strong 
foundation is apt to fall into ruins." 

" Oh yes ; thou should'st have been a preacher, 
Will ; seems to me quite plain. Dost think she wouldn^t 
have him? " 

" She would never marry him," said her husband. 
" I am certain she doesn't care for him." 

"Where are thy reasons, thy facts, then? as thou 
art always saying to me." 

" Oh, I haven't got any," said Jones, laughing, 
" but, like thee sometimes, 'merch-i, / know! ** 

" Not marry him ! " said Het indignantly. " The 
girl who was as dumb as a post for all those years, and 
who nobody looked at luitil her tongue was loosened ; 
and now everybody is flattering her up and calling 
her pretty! Pretty, indeed, with her apple face! 
Yes, she'd take Captain Jack, and be thankful." 

"Would you be willing, Gildas? because in a way 
she belongs to you," asked Betsy. 

" Dear anwl, no ! " he answered. " She doesn't be- 
long to me. Captain Jack's a brave man, and saved 
my life in the fire ; I have nothing to say against him." 

" I have, then," said Jones. " Nobody would ask 
me, I daresay ; but if they did I would never be will- 
ing." 

" Caton pawb, thou indeed!" was all Betsy could 
ejaculate. She was flustered and annoyed at having 
been so blind to what had been happening around her ; 
moreover, she had always asserted that her husband 
could not see further tlian his nose. As that was a 



878 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

very short one, his range of vision must have been 
very limited, but in this case Jones could see further. 

** WeU," he said, rising and stretching his gaitered 
legSy ** we must go. Seems to me there's more snow 
coming. Come, 'merch-i, the moon is calling us. 
The new year is close upon us, so perhaps we won't 
meet again this year.'* 

" Well," said Gildas, ** if we don't, a happy new 
year to you both ! " 

** The same to thee, 'machgen-i," said Jones, with a 
warm grip of the hand, for they had been friends 
from childhood ; " and the wish of ^thy heart in the 
n6w year — Nos da!" 



CHAPTER XXI 

THE JOT OF THE MOOB 

The winter was over and gone, and the spring had 
come with its chorus of blackbirds and thrushes, and 
the song of the lark was thrilling over the moor. 

Awakening life was everywhere, and beauty over- 
flowing, in field and garden and hedgerow; even the 
sea seemed to share in the joy of the spring-time, 
sparkling and dimpling, and reflecting the blue rifts 
in the clouds. The lambs frisked about on the hill- 
side, the ploughboy whistled at his work. Yes, no 
doubt spring had come ! but Gildas Bees still lingered 
at home, and acknowledged to himself that it would 
have been better to have left the old country in the 
autumn when the days were shortening, the leaves fad- 
ing, and when the moor was bleak and bare. Now it 
was decked with beauty, the furze was already bloom- 
ing, the blackthorn spread its white mantle over the 
crags, the primroses peeped out between the heather, 
and in the hollow the bluebells were braving the wind. 

As for the Scethryg garden, it was entrancing in its 
early budding charms ; on the sunny side of the hedge 
the bees were humming round their straw hives, the 
brown earth was cracking and bursting with the ten- 
der seedlings that thrust up their little green hands to 
879 



880 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

greet the sunshine; the daffodils were growing up 
everywhere, and standing, as their old Welsh name 
suggests, like gold-crowned kings, surrounded by 
their spearmen. 

Het and Ben worked busily between the bushes, and 
Gildas sauntered through in the evenings, when the 
setting sun sent his slanting beams to gild the scene. 

The apple-trees were rosy with buds, the goose- 
berry bushes, like green lace-work, were crowded with 
tiny* fringed berries; the wallflowers, golden and 
brown, mingled their fragrance with the southernwood 
and ribes. All was tenderly alluring to the man 'who 
had grown up in their midst, and was now about to 
break the cords that had bound him so long to his old 
home. He heard the big clock in the kitchen strike 
seven, with its loud metallic ring ; he heard Ben's voice 
in the stubble-yard, and Het's wooden shoes in the 
dairy. In the clear evening air every sound fell dis- 
tinctly on his ears, and, as he sauntered there in the 
gloaming, seemed strangely appealing — awaking in 
his mind a question that had long lain there hidden. 
He had hot hitherto looked at it closely, because he 
was somewhat ashamed of it, but now he let it find 
expression. 

Was he obliged to go? that was the question that 
had awoke within him; and as he stood in that old 
garden, listening to "the sounds so familiar to his 
ear," his feelings seemed to change, the former bitter- 
ness and anger against Brynzion died out, and his 
determination to leave his home and seek forgetfulness 



THE JOY OF THE MOOR 881 

across the seas presented itself to his mind in a new 
aspect. 

The sun went down, the moon like a silver boat 
-sailed through the sky, the soft grey shades of even- 
ing gathered round himj the. stars came out one by 
oney and yet he paced up and down the time-worn 
paths, filled with restless thoughts and longings. 
" Hiraeth," that sad-eyed visitant, so ready to take up 
its abode in the heart of a Welshman, stalked by his 
side, and he knew would still be with him when he 
crossed the sea. 

What had happened to alter his feelings so com- 
pletely — to make the project of emigration, which 
had been a consoling thought to him a few weeks 
earlier, now appear in the light of a duty only? 
What had filled him with restlessness and indecision? 
To-night he faced the question, and in his honest 
rustic mind he saw, - the answer clearly written. 
Gwenifer! it was she alone who- held him back: from 
her, therefore, he must fly. And when at last he 
heard ^the old clock striking eight, he turned towards 
the upland field, where he continued to walk and med- 
itate for full another hour. 

When at last he drew under the shadow of the big 
chimney, and let his musings follow the smoke from 
the kindling logs, he was still unsettled, still in the 
clutches of unrest and discontent, and he rose the next 
morning after a sleepless night, unrefreshed. 

" Caton pawb ! " he said as he hurried to his work, 
** what has come to me I can't think! ** and he dug 



888 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

fiercely at the sods with but little consciousness of what 
he was doing. 

Late in the afternoon when he returned to his tea 
he found Jones Brjndu and his wife already seated on 
the settle. 

" Up from the village we have come," said Betsy, 
" and there we have been hearing wonderful news, and 
I thought I would come and tell Gwenifer about it." 

" But why tell her? said Jones; " what is it to her 
more than to all of us? We are all proud when a 
Welshman does a grand thing. 'Tis Captain Jack 
— " But he wasn't allowed to proceed further, for 
Betsy had come with the express intention of seeing 
how Gwenifer would take the news. The latter en- 
tered the house at the moment, carrying in one hand a 
bunch of daifodils, in the other a bowl of eggs from 
the hay-loft. 

"Hast heard the news, Gwenifer?" she asked; 
" there's a piece as long as my arm in the paper about 
Captain Jack." 

" Thy finger, 'merch-i," interpolated Jones, with a 
smile. 

" Twt, twt — finger, then," said Betsy, and she 
gazed at the girl with a smile of satisfaction, for over 
her face a conscious blush had spread — a tell-tale 
blush, Gildas thought. As a matter of fact, it had no 
tale to tell, except of the interest which a tender 
woman seldom loses in the man who has offered her 
his love. 

" Listen," said Betsy, « I have brought it with me," 



THE JOY OF THE MOOR 

and she drew from her pocket a Welsh newspaper 
from which she read the following : — 

" During the late severe gale which swept so dis- 
astrously over the Irish coast, a crowd of people was 
gathered on the pier at Ballenport, watching, with 
distressed faces, a derelict bark which the storm was 
driving in upon the rocks outside the harbor. The 
lifeboat was launched, but owing to the jagged rocks 
it was found impossible to reach the Ill-fated ship. 
There was no living creature to be seen on board, ex- 
cept one small black figure, that of a child, who was 
seen to run distractedly from one side of the half-sub- 
merged hulk to the other. The sea was running 
mountains high, and there seemed no hope for the sol- 
itary child, until a sailor standing among the crowd 
seemed suddenly to make up his mind. Taking off 
his outer garments, and supplied with a life-belt he 
dashed into the foaming breakers and literally fought 
his way to the rescue of the terrified child and brought 
him safe to land. 

" There is a romantic sequel to this tale of heroism, 
for, finding that the boy was a friendless orphan, the 
sailor resolved to adopt him, and take him with him 
on board his own ship, which happened to be in port. 
The boy, Robert Owen by name, is a bright and in- 
telligent lad of twelve. The unfortunate vessel, 
whose captain and mate were lost, was the Andronica^ 
of South Shields. 

" It will further interest our readers to learn that 
the brave sailor who thus -imperiled his life to save 



884 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

a lonely boy was none other than our well-known and 
popular friend Captain John Davies of the LUiwen, 
oVf as he is generally called. Captain Jack. Hir oea 
iddo!" (Long life to him!) 

" There for you ! *' said Betsy Jones. 

** Well indeed ! " said Gwenifer, who had conquered 
her blush, ** I am very glad ; I knew he was a brave 
man ; '' and placing her daffodils in a glass on the 
table, she carried her bowl of eggs into the dairy. 

" So the shipwreck was a lucky thing for the boy 
after all,*' said Het. " I suppose he'll be bringing 
him here with him next time he comes." 

« No doubt," said Gildas. « Well, he's a brave 
man, and no mistake." 

" No denying that," replied Jones, " but 'twasn't to 
talk about Captain Jack I came here to-day, but to 
tell you Reuben my brother is coming here next week 
to look at the house if it is convenient." 

"Well, b't shwr; 'tis full time." 

" 'Tis only for a year he wants it, while his house 
is building; but that will give us time to look around 
for another tenant. And here's the paper from that 
shipping place that I sent for; plenty of ships, and 
all the cost marked plain ; but ach-y-fi ! I am hoping 
still you'll change your mind." 

Gildas took it with a word of thanks, thrusting it 
into his pocket. " I'll look over it to-night," he said, 
" and I'll come up to Bryndu to tell you what Pve 
settled one of these days." 

Het was already hunting for the china teapot, bat 



THE JOY OF THE MOOR 886 

Betsy Jones was firm in her resolve to go *' straight 
home at once ; because I am not easy in my mind about 
the new cow ; she was not chewing her cud when I left. 
No, Will ! we must go straight home. And come you 
back, 'merch-i," she called to Gwenifer with a mis- 
chievous smile, " I am going, and there won't be any 
one to tease you any more about Cap'n Jack when 
I've left." 

There was a general laugh, which, however, Gweni- 
fer evaded by keeping still in the dairy. 

" Too shy to come out you see," said Betsy, with a 
knowing wink, pointing towards the dairy door, at 
which, however, Gwenifer suddenly appeared. 

" Indeed, there's nonsense you are talking, Mrs. 
Jones ! " she said. " My blushes are coming and go- 
ing when they like without asking me ; I wish I could 
stop them. But they don't mean anything, you can 
believe me." 

" Yes, yes, we know all about that," said Betsy. 
" Good-bye, 'merch-i, thou art a lucky girl, I think.. 
Though I had other plans for the Queen of the 
Rushes, Will," she added, as they crossed the clos to- 
gether; " 'tis at Scethryg I'd like to see her." 

" Well, stick to thy plans, 'merch-i," said her hus- 
band, " they generally turn out right." 

That evening it was rather a silent, preoccupied 
group who sat down to tea together at the farm. Het 
bustling about had most of the conversation to her- 
self. 

" There's a funny woman Betsy Jones Bryndu is," 



886 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

she said, ^^ with always a joke, and a merry word ; 
but she's talking a lot of nonsense sometimes.'' 

" Well, when people talk a great deal, some of it is 
bound to be nonsense," said n'wncwl Sam pointedly, 
for between him and Het there were wordy encounters 
sometimes. 

"Betsy's a fine woman," said the mishteer; '* she 
knows more about the farm than Jones does himself, 
and she's a good wife, whatever." 

Gwenifer said nothing, and finished her meal in 
silence. 

The sun was in the west, but an hour from his set- 
ting, as they could see by the slanting rays on the 
table. 

" There's a fine bed of leeks sown," said n'wncwl 
Sam. " Ben and me we've been trashing the hedge a 
bit, to let the sun shine more upon it." 

Gildas made no answer, but rising went out into 
the stubble-yard, and from there to the moor, to which 
from childhood he had resorted whenever his will 
seemed unduly thwarted. If a stolen holiday was dis- 
covered and punishment was imminent, a lesson too 
long neglected required special study, if his father 
forbade a visit to the fair — there was solace for 
everything on the moor ; so now, when the experiences 
of life seemed intricate or disquieting, it was natural 
to him to turn to that broad expanse. 

To-day his mind was disturbed ; he was dissatisfied 
with himself — indeed, he was dissatisfied with every- 
thing; and as he walked at the edge of the cliffs, he 



THE JOY OF THE MOOR 887 

felt he must put an end to this state of indecision so 
foreign to his natuure. Stretching himself face down- 
wards on the grass he drew from his pocket the paper 
which Jones Bryndu had given him, and leaning on 
his elbows set himself to study its contents. " The 
Livonia^ the Campania^ the Prudentia; why not the 
LivoniUy — yes, that would do." He drew his brown 
finger over the lines, and for the next ten minutes his 
face looked like hard thinking. 

At last rising he set out for the creek, and the 
fields beyond; this led him by Gwenifer's cottage. 
But the door was closed, no smoke curled from the 
chimney, so he knew she was still at Scethryg dairy ; 
perhaps when he returned she would have come home, 
and he could tell her of his final decision. But why 
tell her, what was it to her? what was it to any one 
that he was tearing himself away from the land he 
loved. And why.? Simply because in a moment of 
anger he had determined to do so — and was Gildas 
Rees going back on his word? And besides this, he 
confessed to himself, there was the underlying dread 
of seeing Gwenifer married and borne away to a 
stranger's hearth. No, that thought was intolerable, 
and he walked restlessly on. He would have a look 
at the dear old farm, its bare craggy knolls and its 
grassy uplands. The sea stretched out before him 
smooth and opal-tinted to where the sky was already 
hanging its curtains of purple and gold for the red 
sun that was hastening to his rest. 

In the golden light of the day's last hour, the fields 



888 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

and moor were glowing with an unearthly splendor, 
like the beauty of a dream, and Gildas's face lighted 
up with pleasure as he gazed at the scene. Turning 
his face homewards, he soon came in sight of Gweni- 
fer's cottage, and saw that she had returned, for there 
was the blue smoke rising up from the chimney ; and 
there was the girl herself sitting on the garden hedge 
bank, and looking out over the sea to the gorgeous col- 
oring which was spreading over the west. Was she 
thinking of a white sail which might come into the 
sunset? Banishing this thought, Gildas drew nearer, 
and climbing up the bank sat down beside her amongst 
the daffodils. She started a little with surprise, for 
lost in thought she had not heard his footsteps on the 
grass. 

" Dear anwl ! " she exclaimed as he suddenly ap- 
peared. " Mishteer, I wasn't thinking to see you." 

" No," he said, " thy thoughts were far away, I 
could see that. Where were they, Gwenif er ! " 

Ah, where were they? In dire confusion she bent 
her head and Gildas's heart sank, but he continued 
quietly. 

" But there, I have no right to ask that ; and what- 
ever they were, they were just right. I have finished 
packing my tools, in that box in the bam, and my 
clothes thou hast packed for me. I thank thee, lass ; 
thou hast been very kind and ready to help in every- 
thing." 

"Well indeed," she said, "you haven't asked me 
to come with you, mishteer." Her eyes were fi^ced 



THE JOY OF THE MOOR 889 

upon the setting sun, not in abstraction, but in the 
eager desire of impressing him with the earnestness of 
her purpose; so she did not see the statt with which 
he had heard her words, nor the color that reddened 
his dark face. There was a moment^s silence while 
both looked out over the sea, and when Gildas at last 
spoke there was a tremor in his voice, and he uncon- 
sciously crushed the daffodil which he held in his 
hand. "Come with me? What dost mean?" 

" Yes, come with you," said Gwenifer, turning her 
face towards him, and clasping her hands. " Yes in- 
deedy I am coming," and once the ice was broken, she 
poured out the flood of reasons and arguments which 
she had prepared in many a day's musing and many 
a night's vigil. 

** Oh, let me come, Gildas ! You will want a serv- 
ant. You cannot do things for yourself like many 
men ; you couldn't sew a button or mend a hole ; you 
can only do a man's work. You will hire a servant 
as soon as you go out there ; let me come, then — hire 
me now, and let me come with you. I will do all the 
work and live upon whatever food is cheapest there. 
Do you think, Gildas, that after being with you all my 
life I could let you go over that far sea and stop 
here after you were gone? No, no indeed, that I 
could never bear. I have got all my clothes ready; 
I am your servant, and belonged to you ever since 
my mother died. Don't turn me off now, when you 
want me more than ever." 

He had turned to stare at the beautiful face look- 



890 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

ing up at him, the imploring gestures, the pleading 
eyes, and his whole being was flooded with a sense of 
some strange awakening. What did this mean? 
Gwenifer! whom he had thought beyond his reach! 
from whom he was tearing himself away with the 
hard-won victory over his tenderest feelings! 

Was he dreaming, or was she fooling him? and 
there was a hard, almost harsh, tone in his next ques- 
tion. ** What dost mean, lodes? Art asking to come 
to a foreign land as my servant? ** 

" Yes." 

" Art willing to leave thy home and thy friends? *' 

" Yes. Haven't I always been your servant? '' 

"^0, never/* said Gildas emphatically. "Thou 
hast been my sister, my friend, but never my servant, 
lass; and that thou canst never be." 

"Why, then?" 

" Why? " said Gildas, starting to his feet. " Be- 
cause I love thee, lass; because I cannot bear to be 
near thee unless thou wilt promise to be my wife." 

"Gildas!" 

" Gwenifer! " and there was a pause of conscious 
silence between them, during which he sprang down 
the hedge-bank <m to the moor, and turning held both 
his hands towards her. She took one timid step down 
the bank, but Gildas, raising his hand as if to forbid 
her coming nearer, said, " Art coming as my wife, 
then ? If so, trust thyself to me. Art coming, Gwen- 
ifer? " and he looked up at the slender form that wat- 
ered a little in the sea-wind. 



THE JOY OF THE MOOR 891 

** As my wife, Gwenif^r? " he repeated once more. 

" Yes, then, Gildas," she said, and stooping took 
the upstretched hands. She sprang, and was caught 
in his strong arms. 

" Mine for ever, Gwenifer? " he questioned, as she 
slipped to his side, her head upon his breast. 

" Yes, Gildas, for ever and ever,'' she whispered. 

He passed his arm round her waist, as he had done 
that night in the cottage when she had repulsed him 
so firmly. 

" Thou wilt not turn away from me as thou didst 
that dark night, Gwenifer? That night that had 
cost me so many uneasy hours. It has kept me awake 
at night, lass, and followed me to my work by day." 

They were walking now towards the cliffs, bathed 
in the sunset light, their long shadows following them 
on the green-gold grass. 

" Come, tell me, lass, what made thee turn away 
from me as if thou hatedst me ? " 

" Oh, Gildas ! " she said, " the ghost ! The face at 
the window ! I knew thy wife was living, was look- 
ing in at us." 

" What art saying, Gwenifer? " he exclaimed. 
" That grey ghost ! Was it Nance, then, that 
haunted the moor, that stood before me in the twilight, 
so near ! " and he shuddered visibly. " But not my 
wife, Gwenifer ! that she was never as thou wilt be — 
the wife of my soul, as well as the wife of my heart. 
Is it true that all that dark time has passed and gone 
for ever? And Cap'n Jack, what of him? Dost 



89«. QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

know, lass, how I have dreaded to see his ship in the 
baj?'* 

" Well, what about him, Gildas? Why are people 
always bringing his name before me? Poor Cap'n 
Jack ! You have no need to fear the sight of bis red 
pennon." 

" Is it true, then, what I am hoping now — that he 
is nothing to thee?" and holding her face between 
his hands he raised it to his, and looked into the 
clear brown eyes. 

" Nothing, Gildas." 

" And is it true that I am everything to thee? ** 

" Everything." 

" Come then, lass, and let me tell thee what thou 
art to me." 

And together they walked into the sunset light, all 
rosy and golden like their hopes. 

How many questions had he to ask! How much 
had she to tell of the long silent years, when, in spite 
of her sealed lips, his name was familiar and beloved ! 

Yes, they had much to say to each other, as lovers 
always have; but when the sun had set, and the twi- 
light gathered round them, they turned towards home 
together, and it was plain to see that every cloud had 
vanished, every doubt had been set at rest; and 
Gwenifer, as if forgetting that Gildas had been the 
mishteer, had already fallen naturally into the familiar 
" thee " and « thou." 

One subject they had both avoided — the long 
voyage before them, the banishment from their native 



THE JOY OF THE MOOR 898 

,Iand. Once, when she had alluded to it, he had by a 
very simple but effectual method sealed her lips. 
** Hush, lass ! '' he said, ** let us leave that till to- 
morrow; to-night the world looks too beautiful, the 
sky is too dear, and the moon is too bright to talk 
of anything but joy." 

" Yes, but, Gildas, I mean to make it happy for 
thee out there too," she answered. 

" Happy? Yes indeed, if thou art there, Gwenifer," 
and the glow on his dark face and the light in his eyes 
reminded her of the Gildas of old. 

It would never have done for them to return to the. 
farm together — all' the rustic proprieties would have 
been outraged; so in the lane where the hawthorns 
were growing thick and green they parted, he to 
return to Scethryg, and she to run back to the little 
brown cot which had never sheltered so happy a being 
before. 

And what a different world was that upon which 
the sun rose next day ! To Gildas, as he went out to 
his plough, it seemed as if the lightness and zest of 
his boyhood had returned. He looked at the broad 
blue sea that scintillated under the morning sunbeams, 
and no longer dreaded to see a red pennon on the 
horizon; he looked at the brown furrows which the 
tender blades were already tinging with green; he 
saw the wide purple moor where he had found his 
happiness, the tiny cot to which his eyes had always 
turned with interest — and surely over all there was 
some light more golden than the sunlight, more crys- 



894 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

tal than the sky, a ^ light that never was on sea or 
land " ; and through it all he heard a woman singing 
in a soft low voice, and knew it was Gwenifer, who 
was bringing the early lunch down the hawthorn lane. 

He saw her enter the gap and spread the contents 
of her basket in a sheltered nook ; he saw Ben and Het 
draw near; but he did not see the conscious look of 
love which Gwenifer directed towards him as he 
ploughed in the further comer of the field. Perhaps 
he felt it, for he whistled at his work, and his eyes 
followed her with a benison as she withdrew through 
the lane without approaching him« It b^ooved them 
to be careful now, and keep their happy secret to 
themselves, for Gildas had not lost his horror of 
being talked about; and so they spent their days 
apparently apart, but ever conscious of each other's 
presence. 

When the moon rose, however, and flooded the up- 
land fields with her silver radiance, two figures might 
be seen who walked together in the moonlight, tlieir 
shadows blended into one, their voices sometimes low 
and tender, sometimes raised in merry laughter, for 
surely never were man and maiden more happily be- 
trothed than these two whom fate, and the blindness of 
one, had so nearly separated for ever. 

Hark to Gildas's hearty laugh! "Well, in my 
deed," he says, " I can give a different answer now 
when people say, * Gwenifer belongs to you.' There's 
angry I used to be; now I can say, * Yes, she does 
belong to me!' But listen, lass, I have something 



THE JOY OF THE MOOR 896 

else to ask thee to-night. Thou hast shown thy love 
to me by being so willing to give up thy home and 
everything for me, and proud I am of that; but 
harken thee, I have another boon to ask." 

" 'Tis granted indeed," she answered, " but what is 
it, then?" 

" Wilt stay at home with me, Gwenifer? " 

" What? " she said, turning to look at him in 
amazement. 

The moon shone full upon her, and Gildas might be 
excused for thinking it could not shine upon a fairer 
face. 

" What, Gildas? Stay at home with thee? Not 
go across the sea? Not leave old Scethryg and the 
moor? Is that what thou art saying? " And the 
look of rapture that illumined her face needed no 
words to express its delighted consent. 

" Yes indeed, that is my thought; why would I go 
when every dark cloud has rolled away, when I have 
gained the prize for which I was always hankering? 
Yes, since I was a boy! Why would we go when 
the reason for going is cleared away? In my deed, 
Gwenifer, I think a man may show his firmness some- 
times as much in changing his mind as in keeping a 
useless resolve; the world has changed for me since 
last night. Will I be a fool, then, and give up this 
happy home and leave * hSn Gymry wen ' just because 
I said I would? No; let them laugh and say, ^ Gildas 
Rees is a reed shaken by the wind ' — very well, what 
the worse will Gildas and Gwenifer be of that? 'Tis 



896 QUEEN OF THE RUSHES 

only Jones Bryndu and Betsy who know how full I 
was of going, and they will rejoice with us. Art glad 
as I am, Gwenifer? for thou art very silent"; but 
when she turned to him in the moonlight, he saw her 
eyes were full of tears. 

" Oh, Gildas,*' she said, " tis only now I know how 
hard it was to go, and how thankful I am to stay; 
and Gildas, when I am happiest, then I am silent." 



The crops are gathered, the air is crisp and fresh, 
and laden with the scent of autumn; the grain, the 
apples in the orchard, the blackberries on the hedges, 
the odor of the sea-breeze, all add their sweetness to 
the subtle fragrance. 

Once more we enter the old grey farm with its 
uneven gables, and its ivied chimneys, but little altered 
by the fire and the subsequent restoration. 

*Tis Sunday morning, a few days after Gwenifer 
and Gildas's marriage. A bright' fire blazes on the 
hearth, the simple breakfast is laid, and Gwenifer 
moves about from hearth to table, from table to 
dresser, with little careful touches adding to the com- 
fort of the old room, and evidently waiting for some- 
body, who comes at last down those new stairs, berailed 
and polished, which have risen from the ashes of the 
old staircase — Gildas, his dark face full of life and 
energy, his black eyes bright and sparkling as of old ! 
no shadow of care or trouble there, but full content 
and happiness. Dressed in his best, he looks, as he 



THE JOY OF THE MOOR 897 

« 

descends into the old living-room, with his firm st«p 
and open countenance, a husband to be proud of, and 
so Gwenifer thinks as she greets him with a little 
raillery. 

" Dear anwl, Gildas ! " and she raises her hands as 
if in amazement, *^ dear anwl, there's smart thou art! 
Art going to be married, then? " 

" Yes, if thou pleasest ! I wouldn't mind a dozen 
times if thou wert the bride, lass! Thou art very 
smart, too, Gwenifer! That black with the yellow 
spots is suiting thee well indeed ; but everything suits 
thee, even thy red petticoat and thy little white hood. 
In everything thou art like a queen ! " 

" Oh yes. Queen of the Rushes ! " laughed Gwenifer. 
" But where art going, indeed, Gildas ? " 

** Oh, to Brynzion, of course," he said, attacking his 
breakfast. " Isn't it Sunday morning? And don't 
husband and wife always go to chapel together? Art 
not going, Gwenifer? " 

" Well, of course, if thou art." And when half an 
hour later she appeared in her new white hat, with 
gloves and scarf to match, Gildas thought no lovelier 
woman ever walked by her husband's side. 

We have followed them through the shadows and 
rough places on the road of life, and now, we must 
leave them as they walk together into the sunshine; 
for darkness has fled away, and from henceforth it 
seems as if the wheel of fortune has turned — flowers 
lie in their path, hope and joy dwell in their hearts. 



o 



\ s "- 



\ \ 



'wf* 



•■i'M'' 



i 



\ 






^^ 



niiiijjif a^l, m mwmvm.u*vm.\.^i vfmfimt^miA^i 



> 

f 



'\ 



-n 



f . V 



V 



\. 



